Veterinary
Office
Practices
2nd Edition
Vicki Judah
小尾巴宠物健康中心http：//ttahc.taobao.com
This is an electronic version of the print textbook. Due to electronic rights restrictions,
 some third party content may be suppressed. Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed
content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. The publisher reserves the right
to remove content from this title at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it. For
valuable information on pricing, previous editions, changes to current editions, and alternate
formats, please visit www.cengage.com/highered to search by ISB N#, author, title, or keyword for
materials in your areas of interest.
Veterinary
Office
Practices
Second Edition
Vicki Judah
DELMAR
CENGAGELearning'
Australia· Brazil ·Japan· Korea· Mexico· Singapore·Spain ·United Kingdom ·United States
DELMAR
CENGAGE Learning
Veterinary Office Practices,
@ 2004, 2012 Delmar, Cengage Learning
Second edition
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright
Vicki Judah
herein may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in any form or by
Vice President, Editorial: Dave Garza
any means graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including but not limited to
 Director of Learning Solutions:
information networks, or information storage and retrieval systems, except
Matthew Kane
as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright
Senior Acquisitions Editor: Sherry Dickinson 
Act, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
Managing Editor: Marah Bellegarde
Editorial Assistant: Scott Royael
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at
Vice President, Marketing: Jennifer
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-8o0-354-9706
Ann Baker
For permission to use material from this text or product,
 Marketing Director: Deborah Yarnell
submit alrequests online at www.cengage.com/permissions.
 Marketing Manager: Erin Brennan
 Further permissions questions can be e-mailed to
permissionrequest@cengage.com
 Senior Production Director: Wendy Troeger
Senior Content Project Manager:
Example: Microsoft @ is a registered trademark of the Microsoft Corporation.
Betsy Hough
 Senior Art Director: David Arsenault
Library of Congress Control Number: 2011927909
Cover Image Credits:
ISBN-13: 978-1-111-13900-1
Ergonomic keyboard: @ Peng Wu/iStockphoto
ISBN-10: 1-111-13900-8
 Dog at the veterinarian:
Fuse/Getty Images
Delmar
Reviewing medical files: @spxChrome/
5 Maxwell Drive
iStockphoto
Clifton Park, NY 12065-2919
USA
Med Tech on phone: @DenGuy/iStockphoto
Background image (dog biscuits in jar):
@ Paige Worth, MwDesign
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning solutions
with office locations around the globe, including Singapore, the United 
Kingdom, Australia, Mexico, Brazil, and Japan. Locate your local office at:
 international.cengage.com/region
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by Nelson Education, Ltd.
To learn more about Delmar, visit www.cengage.com/delmar
 online store www.cengagebrain.com
Notice to the Reader
Publisher does not warant or guarantee any of the products described hereinor perform any independent
analysis in connection with any of the product information contained herein. Publisher does not assume.
and expressly dislaims. anyobligationto obtain and includeinformationotherthan that provided to itby
the manufacturer. The reader is expressy warned to consider and adopt all safety precautions that might be
indicated by the activities described herein and to avoid allpotential hazards. By following the instructions
contained herein, the reader wilingly assumes allrsks in connection with such instructions. The publisher
makes no representations or warranties of any kind including but not limited to, the warranties of fitness
for particular purpose or merchantability, nor are any such representations implied with respet to the
material set forth herein, and the publisher takes no responsibility with respect to such material. The
publisher shalnot beliable for any special consequential orexemplary damages resulting in whole or pat.
from the readers' use of. or reliance upon, this material.
Printed in the United States of America
1 2345671514131211
Copyright 201l Cengage Learning. AllIRights 
nt rights re strictions require it
For Don and Dorene Curry
Who have the strength and beauty of the great
forests and for being the most steadfast anchors
in the Sea of Cortez
Thank you
Copy right 2011 Cengage 
quire i
Contents
Preface
Xi
PART 1
The Veterinary Office
1
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to Veterinary Practice
3
Objectives   3
Key Terms 3
Introduction 4
Staffing the Practice  4
The Role of the Veterinary Staff in Practice Management  7
Orientation7
Cross-Training10
Office Policies and Procedures  11
Summary 12
Scenario  12
Review13
Online Resources 14
CHAPTER 2
Care and Maintenance of the Veterinary
Practice Facility
15
Objectives15
KeyTerms 15
Introduction  16
Maintaining a Safe Facility  16
Housekeeping and General Cleaning 16
Safety Hazards 21
Preventing Accidental Injury 22
Controlling Infection and Spread of Disease 24
Osha Guidelines  25
Right-to-Know Station 26
Office Equipment and Maintenance 27
Repairs and Troubleshooting  27
Materials and Supplies  29 
Want Lists 29
Inventory Management 30
Summary 32
Scenario  32
Review 33
Online Resources 33
Copy right 2011 Cengage L
require it
vi
CONTENTS
CHAPTER 3
Front Office and Receptionist Duties
35
Objectives  35
Key Terms 35
Introduction  36
Record Keeping  36
Purpose of Medical Records 36
Creating Medical Records 39
Organizing Medical Records40
 Maintaining, Retaining, Purging, and Releasing Medical Records 42
Business Records and Logbooks  47
Filing   51
Filing Equipment and Supplies  51
Filing Systems  51
Making Filing Efficient
53
Admissions and Discharges  53
Admitting a Patient 54
Discharging a Patient 55
Forms and Certificates  57
Screening and Processing Mail  58
Incoming Mail  58
Outgoing Mail 59
Handling Mail Problems59
Summary  60
Scenario  60
Review  61
Online Resources 
61
CHAPTER 4
Computers
63
Objectives  63
Key Terms 63
Introduction  64
Computer Components  64
Veterinary Software 65
Commonly Used Programs  66
Computer Networks  67
The Veterinary Practice Web Site  69
Summary  70
Scenario  70
Review  71
Online Resources  71
PART 2
Communication and Professional Growth
73
CHAPTER 5
Interpersonal Communication
75
Objectives  75
Key Terms 75
Copy right 2011 Cengage
for eChapte r(s).
CONTENTS
vii
Introduction 76
The Communication Process  76
Traits for Positive Interpersonal Relations 77
Interacting with Clients and Co-Workers  80
Speaking with Clients 80
Listening   81
Observing  82
Paraphrasing  84
Showing Respect 86
Telephone Manners87
Your Body Language 88
Handling Angry Clients 90
Veterinary Team Communication  91
Discrimination   95
Improving Your Speech  96 
Volume, Pitch, and Tone 98
Enunciation and Pronunciation 98
Additional Tips100
Summary 101
Scenario 101
Review 102
Online Resources 
103
CHAPTER 6
Interacting with Clients
105
Objectives  105
KeyTerms 105
Introduction   106
Telephone Management 106
The Telephone Personality 106
Screening Calls 108
Making Appointments over the Phone111
Taking Messages
111
Coordinating Calls 112
Outgoing Calls 115
Collection Calls 115
 Off-Hours Phone Coverage
117
Making Appointments
118
Scheduling Appointments
118
Types of Scheduling
118
Reminders 119
The Appointment Book 119
Organizing Appointments122
Scheduling House Calls 123
Greeting Clients
123
First Impressions 124
Professional Appearance 126
Interpersonal Behavior 127
Copy right 2011 Cengage L
vili
CONTENTS
Handling Delays 128
Euthanasia 129
Common Client Concerns 130
Scheduling the Appointment 131
Grief 132
Summary134
Scenario  134
Review135
Online Resources 
140
CHAPTER 7
Stress
141
Objectives  141
KeyTerms 141
Introduction142
What Is Stress? 142
Causes of Stress on the Job  142
Burnout144
Coping with Stress 144
Coping Strategies
144
Defense Mechanisms145
Time Management 147
Summary 149
Scenario  149
Review 150
Online Resources   151
CHAPTER 8
Ethics
153
Objectives 153
Key Terms 153
Introduction 154
Putting the Needs of the Patient First 154
Right to Choose Clients and Patients 155
Emergency Care 155
Obeying the Laws  155
Misrepresentation 156
Lending Credibility to the llegal Practice of Veterinary Medicine156
Responsibility to the Veterinary Profession 156
Duty to the Veterinary image156
Duty to Professional Colleagues157
Duty to Society157
Confidentiality 157
Maintaining a Clean Mind, Body, and Spirit 157
The Veterinarian-Client-Patient Relationship158
Prescriptions 158
Termination of the VCPR158
Summary 159
Copy right 2011 Cengage L
CONTENTS
Scenario 159
Review 160
Online Resources 160
PART 3
Financial Matters
161
CHAPTER 9
FeeCollection Procedures, Billing, and Payroll 
¥163
Objectives 163
KeyTerms 163
Introduction   164
Fee Collection Procedures164
Understanding Veterinary Fees165
The Costs Behind the Fees
165
Payment Planning 166
Adjusting or Canceling Fees
171
Billing Clients
172
Sending Statements
173
Collecting Past Due Accounts
173
Forced Collection 175
 Payroll Accounting
176
Form 1-9 176
Employee Compensation 176
Taxes Withheld177
Unempioyment Insurance
180
Summary 180
Scenario180
Review
181
Online Resources 181
Glossary
183
Bibfiography
188
Index
189
or eChapte r(s).
Copy right 2011 Cengage 
quire i
Preface
Veterinary Office Practice is a required course for all students enrolled in an
AVMA (American Veterinary Medical Association) accredited program lead-
 ano se iunn ose si i aon Ara u aaap e on 
designed for veterinary assistants and veterinary receptionists. This course
covers the business and professional aspects of a veterinary practice, including
ethical and legal considerations, client communications, scheduling, record
keeping, and stress management. The book provides an overview of the duties
and responsibilities of the veterinary team members needed to provide the
most professional care not only for the clients who bring their companion
       i d  n s
Organization of the Text
a more in-depth discussion of the defined roles, duties, and responsibilities of
the veterinary team members. There is a greater emphasis on cross-training
and interpersonal communication skills. There is more information on health
and safety including the potential risk of zoonotic diseases and interpreting
basic animal behaviors, both essential to the welfare and safety of all veterinary
staff and members of the public. Multiple applications of computers in the
practice are explained with many new examples and in greater detail. Sample
       i   s
required and how they are used to benefit both the practice and the client,
and in some instances, the legal requirements within the practice. Many of the
photographs and illustrations are new to more accurately reflect the moderm
practice and material discussed in the various chapters. This book has been
dlesigned for those students seeking employment in a veterinary practice and
acquiring the skills needed to become a valuable team member; it is about the
belief that success, both personal and professional, comes from knowledge.
teamwork, empathy, and compassion.
Veterinary Offce Practices is divided into three parts that address different
practice environments, the veterinary team members, and issues that comple-
ment the standard curriculum of a course in veterinary office practices.
Part I addresses the practice environment, specifc members of the veteri-
nary team, and their roles. Various types of practices are presented along with
health and safety concerms for all employees. Duties of staff members, such as
  e se  e sna p a
of the computer systems are also discussed. Every practice has a variety of forms
Xi
Copy right 2011 Cengage
xii
PREFACE
and brochures which the student will need to become familiar with and many
of those are presented here. Part II focuses on the individual and the meth-
ods to develop personal communication skills, interactions with clients on the
telephone and in person, and how to manage, prevent, and cope with stress.
It also includes the ethical and legal responsibilities, the duty to society, con-
fidentiality, and the veterinarian-client-patient relationship. Part III addresses
fnancial concerms such as payroll accounting, taxes, and unemployment insur-
ance, but the "business of the business" has not been addressed in the second
 n sn n      e sni s 
front-office staff and are, in most practices, dealt with by the practice owner, an
Features
Veterinary Offce Practices has been organized to provide current information
and to facilitate study and review with features such as:
nies each chapter to help them understand what they should learn and
where to focus their attention.
 Key Terms. The most important terms in each chapter are identifed in a
ade isny Aau uum adi pioq u payui uu pue iasino ai ie i
in text.
 Chapter Summaries. A brief synopsis is included at the end of each
chapter, representing the main points and helping students to tie the
material together.
 Review Questions. Each chapter includes a list of review questions that
i o   r n no s ss in
how well they understand what they read.
· Scenarios. Students learn better when they can apply concepts explained
 in a text to a real-world setting. With this in mind, scenarios exhibiting
 the practical application of instructions and information supplied in
each chapter have been included to aid students' comprehension.
with search wordls for specific topics addressed in the text and related
content.
New to this Edition
 Information on zoonotic disease potential
Duties of all staff members redefined and expanded to include all
professional organizations and requirements
Discussion of the orientation period and what could be expected
 Discussion on how to approach and handle substance abuse
The use of more appropriate terminology in describing tasks
Expanded discussion on the use and application of computers in the practice
Photographs and diagrams to reflect the moderm veterinary facility
Copy right 2011 Cengage L
 and/or eChapte r(s)
PREFACE
xiii
 A more in-depth discussion of the euthanasia process and coping
with grief
 New material has been added to reflect the issue of veterinary ethics
 The addition of situational ethics regarding practicing veterinary
medicine without a license and the duty to the veterinary profession
 A discussion of treating and possession of wildlife
 Information on specific duties of the front-office management team
 Additional and updated online resources at the end of each chapter
Instructor's Manual
Also offered with this book is an Instructor's Manual to Accompany Veterinary
Offce Practices,a chapter-by-chapter companion with classroom aids, featuring:
 answers to scenario study questions
answers to review questions
classroom exercises
 test bank questions and answers
About the Author
Vicki Judah is a licensed veterinary technician (Ret.) with 45 years of experience
in animal care with a special interest in exotic animal medicine. Vicki is retired
curriculum for a program in Companion Animal Science that was approved
by the State Board of Education with endorsements to teach Animal Care and
Science, Veterinary Assisting and Technology. Equine Science, Level l & 2,
Agricultural/Livestock Care and Management, and Aquatics, Level 1 & 2. Vicki
is now dedicated to developing educational material, writing and is involved in
animal health, education, and rescue projects in Baja, Mexico.
Acknowledgments
 Thanks are due to the many people who contributed to the revision of this
text: Kathy Nuttall, Jordan Applied Technology Center, for her contribution of
 many new photographs and access to her teaching notes and material; Martin G.
Orr, DVM, and his front-office staff Draper, Utah; Eric L. Malaker, DVM, and
the staff of Rochelle Veterinary Hospital, Rochelle, Illinois; Todd Bessendorfer,
DVM, and his outstanding front-office team at Riverton Veterinary Hospital,
Riverton, Utah. Also to Steve Wilton, SV Ocean Blue II, "the computer guy"
who restored the fles and countless other technical concerms encountered
during this project including reviewing the chapter on computers, to Diana
Ferraro for her help in loading a photo disk from multiple fles, to Connie
McWilliam-Schultz for her generous use of Intermet time and friendship, and
to Chris Bordato of LawDepot.com and of course to Benjamin Penner and
Marah Bellegarde... My heartfelt thanks to all of you
Copy right 2011 Cengage
nd/or eChapte r( s)
xiv
PREFACE
The author and Delmar wish to thank the following reviewers for their
time and content expertise:
Steven W. Formey, MBA
 Program Director of Skills and Trades Training
 Coastal Carolina Community College
Jacksonville, NC
Sheryl Keeley, CVT
Veterinary Technology Program
 Northwestem Connecticut Community College
Winstead, CT
Susan Kopp, DVM
Professor, Veterinary Technology Program
LaGuardia Community College
Long Island City, NY
Stuart Porter, VMD
 Program Director, Professor of Veterinary Technology
Blue Ridge Community College
Weyers Cave, VA
Connie Maedke, CVT
Instructor, Veterinary Technology Program
Moraine Park Technical College
Fond du Lac, WI 54936
Rose Manduca, DVM
 Professor, Veterinary Technology Program
 Miami Dade College, School of Health Sciences
Miami, FL
Heather Wipijewski, CVT
Instructor, Veterinary Technician Program
Madison Area Technical College
Madison, WI
eChapters
PART 1
The Veterinary Office
Copy right 2011 Cengage 
quire i
PART1
The Veterinary Office
Introduction
Practice management is a critical factor in the success or failure of any veteri
nary practice. Sound management techniques are necessary in every veterinary
d p  e rs n s e s ln aa 
tice with multiple veterinarians, or a livestock practice with one veterinarian
who makes farm calls
When you think of a veterinary practice, you usually think frst of the veteri-
nary health care team who provide medical care to small animals: dogs, cats, and
sometimes birds and exotics, or perhaps the familiar "vet truck" on country roads
tending to horses and large animals on the farm. Veterinary care may be dlelivered
in a clinic or hospital, a client's living room, in an outdoor enclosure, or even an
 open field. However, provicding medlical care is only one aspect of what is involved
 nnd au jo siad A ae arau ad a pyssn e u
have to function with coordinated teamwork in order for veterinarians and their
(-I ani) u go ppp aeo peuissand aul apnd o ae aq oi es
Coordination and efficiency of this teamwork is basically a definition of
    r    d 
team are involved in practice management issues, although "practice manager'
 may not be part of their title or job description.
Staffing the Practice
Who are the individuals involved in a veterinary practice? The first person
who comes to mind is the veterinarian, a doctor who specializes in animal
 medicine. Veterinarians may be general practitioners who see most species of
Rivert
Nuttall
than assisting the veterinarian with medical care.
Copy right 2011 Cengage
m the e Book and/or eChapte r( s).
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to Veterinary Practice
animals, large and small. Some may specialize in internal medicine or ortho-
pedic surgery, for example, while others prefer to work with zoos, wildllife
parks, and aquaria. He or she is responsible for diagnosing illnesses, vaccinat-
wounds. They may also be involved in preventative medicine and active in
issues concering public health. Veterinarians are also employed in industry
and research.
To become a veterinarian, a person must earn a degree (Doctor of
Veterinary Medicine (DVM), or University of Pennsylvania grants a VMD)
from an accredited college of veterinary medicine associated with the cam-
pus of a state university Acceptance into a school of veterinary medicine
    a  n s e    aa 
 a specifc pre-veterinary curriculum or a science degree in a related feld.
Upon graduation, the veterinarian must pass a state examination in order
to obtain a license to practice. Continuing education is required for veteri-
narians to maintain their licenses. Many veterinarians are members of the
American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA), a professional asso-
ciation dedicated to advancing the feld of veterinary medicine and all of its
related aspects. Many veterinarians also belong to their state association, for
example, OVMA, Oregon Veterinary Medical Association.
Most veterinary practices employ at least one certifed, registered, or
licensed veterinary technician who works very closely with the veterinarian
in providing medical care. The veterinary technician is a trained professional,
much like a nurse in human medicine. Veterinary technicians must also attend
  e    e     o  
nician (two years) or as a veterinary technologist (four years). They must also
pass a state board examination to practice and to use the terms recognized and
implied by obtaining a formal education and a successful examination result.
 The terms certijfied, registered, and licensed are not interchangeable but depend
on the state laws goverming veterinary technicians and which title is used by
that particular state. Veterinary technicians and veterinary technologists are
required to attend continuing education classes.
The technician is responsible for many aspects of the practice, includ-
ing client education, advising on nutrition, and treating patients within the
and give injections. They take medical histories and perform patient examina-
tions. Additionally, they perform diagnostic tests with blood samples, analyze
fecal and urine specimens, and calibrate the equipment used in the labora-
tory (Figure l-2). Veterinary technicians also assist in surgery and/or deliver
and monitor anesthesia. They also are responsible for taking and developing
patient radiographs. All veterinary technicians are involved to some degree in
practice management, depending on the size and organization of the clinic or
hospital. They also have their own organization, the National Association of
    (    
e pe n arn y an od 'a ria po si
the veterinary technology profession. As with the AVMA state associations for
veterinarians, there are also state associations for veterinary technicians
Most practices also employ veterinary assistants who assist veterinary
technicians and veterinarians. A veterinary assistant may be asked to restrain
Copyright 20ll Cengage Learning. All Rights Re
PART 1
The Veterinary Office
FlGuRE 1-2One of the duties of a credentialed veterinary technician is to perform
various laboratory tests.
an animal while the veterinarian or technician performs a physical examina-
tion or draws a blood sample, or to assist in the nursing care of hospitalized
animals. Often, too, veterinary assistants are responsible for the cleanliness,
exercise, and feeding of hospitalized patients. An important part of their job
may be to assist in surgery by opening surgical packs, gowning and gloving
the surgeon, and assisting the technician or anesthetist. Their role is important
in cleaning surgical instruments, sterilizing and preparing the surgical packs
Additionally, veterinary assistants answer the telephones, schedule appoint-
ments, and help to keep the practice clean. Veterinary assistants. generally
attend a school offering a veterinary assistant program, or enroll in a distance
learning opportunity which would provide a certifcate of completion. Most
often, they are trained on the job by a veterinarian or a veterinary techni-
cian. Veterinary assistants are not eligible for licensing or certification at this
time, and most states regulate the duties a veterinary assistant may or may not
perform; for example, it may be unethical or illegal for a veterinary assistant
      d  1  s
 no national organization dedicated to bringing recognition and respect to the
veterinary assistants' career; however, many state chapters of NAVTA welcome
and support veterinary assistants as members.
Technicians and assistants provide a great deal of patient care and treat-
ment but it must always be directed by and under the supervision of a veterinar-
ian. Only the veterinarian can diagnose medical conditions, prescribe medications,
and perform surgery.
Copy right 2011 Cengage L
[ eChapter(s)
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to Veterinary Practice
In addition to those individuals delivering medical care, a veterinary clinic
they enter, coordinates the scheduling of patient appointments, and otherwise
oversees the workings of the front
desk area
. There may be one designated
head receptionist and other members of staff who are able to fill in as needed.
Receptionists have a very important role in the professionalism and percep-
tion of the practice. Often, it is the
eptionist who has the first contact with
a client either on the telephone
111
1 person. First impressions are lasting
importance of being friendly (
 and welcoming cannot be overstated
 on staff a CVPM, a Certified Veterinary
Practice Manager, a person
pecihc
 education and experience are in
the area of veterinary practice
become a CVPM are cdifferent from those
 on the medical team as their focus is
business associated, dealing with human resources, fnance, marketing. legal
compliance, and ethics within the practice.
They are responsible for employ-
ment issues, hiring and fring of staff, and employee evaluations and payroll.
Anyone who desires to become a CVPM must, at first, have a minimum of three
 years working directly with practice management. An applicant must also obtain
 18 semester hours (college credits) in courses related to business and manage-
ment, and an additional 48 hours of continuing education directly related to
management issues. It is necessary to pass an examination for certification. In
     e   e  
the credentialed technician, but receptionists and veterinary assistants as well.
Their professional organization is the Veterinary Hospital Managers Association
The Role of the Veterinary Staff in Practice Management
As a veterinary technician, receptionist, or veterinary assistant, your role in the
management of the offce will vary dramatically from practice to practice. You
may have no occasion to write an invoice or complete a transaction with a client.
 You may never be asked to keep track of the office supplies used in your prac-
 n         p d   
 activities of the practice where you work. You may be assigned to cover the front
desk, answer the telephone, and be expected to fle medical records that have
to work with animals because they don't want to work with people. This is an
impossible approach to having a successful career in the veterinary field because
interaction with any animal also involves working with people and working to
benefit the practice as a whole. It shouldn't matter how mundane the task may
the success of the practice and the welfare of its patients. (Figure l-3).
Orientation
o e a  n s  qf mu e  s m r a
information there is to learm and assimilate. One thing to keep in mind is that
PART 1
The Veterinary Office
FIGURE 1-3 Some tasks may seem mundane, but keeping fles in order is essential to
the smooth running of the office.
there are usually many applicants for any position in a veterinary clinic. When
you begin to feel overwhelmed remember that you have been selected to fll
your ability to get along well with others, your confidence, cheerful attitude,
and willingness to learm. No one will expect you to know everything and it
Apeai ane nok ieqi 1aqei inq op nok jeql eapi aul inafoid oi jou jueiodu s
to leam.
You will probably be assigned to “shadow" an experience member of
staff who will ease you into the daily routine, demonstrate the duties and
01 eapi poog e si il uaul yoeoidde oi isaq mou pue 'noA jo paioadxa sysel
carry a small notebook and write down things you don't understand or other
questions which may arise dluring the day.
After a general tour of the facility and a chance to meet the other staff on
 duty, one of the first things to approach in becoming acquainted with a veteri-
nary practice is to learn how time usually flows throughout the day and what
the routine for a typical day is like and the services that are offered. You must
become comfortable with the important details of time management within
 a  , n ae aq ia p ad a 
chaos if the staff are not flexible when the unexpected occurs: emergency
patients, other staff missing work, a doctor delayed because of surgery, or a
computer "crash."
To help you get acquainted with the daily flow of activity, your mentor
and now team member will provide many of the answers for questions you
   a       si  s  'ssn 
These issues and other terms of employment would have been addressed at
your time of hire or subsequently explained to you by the CVPM. Under no
Copy right 2011 Cengage L
CHAPTER 1
tntroduction to Veterinary Practice
circumstances should you discuss salary, hourly pay, or benefts with any
other staff member.
 Introducing a new staff member to the routines of the clinic is usually
based on sequential information: the what, where, why. and how of things
so that they may be more easily learmed and retained. During this period of
orientation, you will be provided with a lot of information and the answers to
many of your questions:
· The hours the practice is open to see clients and patients
 The priority in which patients are seen: emergency, scheduled
appointments, and walk-in clients
 Telephone protocol, exactly how a staff member should answer the
telephone. Listen carefully to how the telephone is answered and how
callers are responded to.
 Are surgical and dental procedures scheduled for certain days or is a
certain amount of time blocked off every day for these procedures?
 The method of the filing system or systems will be explained. You
may in fact be asked to do some filing, either pulling files for the day's
appointments or dealing with files which have been completed and
need to be re-filed.
The telephone system will be explained, the policy regarding putting
callers on hold and how to transfer incoming calls and taking messages
 The use of the computer system will be introduced to you as well as the
printer and fax machine
 Most veterinary clinics and hospitals have a retail section—a selection
of food and products which are provided as an additional service to
clients. Take the opportunity to explore this area of reception and
become familiar with the products available
 During these sessions, there will undoubtedly be incoming calls, client
visits, and retail sales. Watch and listen closely regarding how these
situations are handled
uiens aq oi paau sauizeaeu aui sdeuad snonaqo aul op pue dn dans
ened up, or there is a litle bit of spot cleaning that needs to be done but
above all, greet everyone who comes in with a welcoming smile. You are
now a member of the team!
As the day progresses you will learn more about the scheduling of
patient appointments, how they are scheduled, and who schedules them. It
  a  se s ia     n
a clear understanding of how appointments are scheduled. Consider the fol-
lowing questions:
· If a client asks for a particular veterinarian in a multidoctor prac-
tice, how is it determined when the doctor is available to see
patients and avoid a conflict with surgery or being unavailable for a
particular day?
What should the client be advised of in preparing an animal for
surgery (i.e., time to arrive, withholding food from the patient for
 ns jo iaq e au aiexdde ue pue a aenddde ue
ed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
10
PART 1 
The Veterinary Office
will telephone regarding the surgery and advise when the patient may
go home)?
 Exactly what paperwork is necessary to acdmit a patient? Which forms
and releases must be completed and signed by the client?
d as u iid e es  srd al e 
every surgery is discharged by the veterinarian or a technician after a
consultation with the owner. Sometimes the receptionist or veterinary
 e  a o  oi s   aa r n
responsible for the discharge.
How long are the time slots for appointments (i.e., 10 minutes, 15
scheduling page.)
How many time slots are set aside for a client bringing in more than one
pet (i.e., to determine how many patients a client will be bringing in
and schedule accordingly).
What about "catch up" time during the day for the doctor to write
medical records, return phone calls, perform procedures on in-house
 patients, and deal with the demands of a busy practice.
cluties. All details of the telephone conversation must be entered into the
patient record even if there was no answer or a message has been leff.
 If the veterinarian receives a call from a client, how should you
advise the client regarding when the doctor may be available to
retum the call?
Should the veterinarian be interrupted for a telephone call while she is
with a client? It is important to determine what circumstances would
apply and these are usually very specific situations. It is not normal
protocol to interrupt a client visit unless specific instructions are
given. These may be, for example, a family emergency, or a consulta-
tion with another veterinarian on a critical case. The veterinarian will
usually advise the staff of any important calls he is expecting. Unless
directed otherwise, the caller should be politely requested to a leave a
 message for the veterinarian who will returm the call at his/her earliest
Kunoddo
Cross-Training
and versatility of every member of the veterinary health care team. Cross-
training provides the skills necessary for you not only to do your own job.
but to learn other staff members' duties so that you can perform their jobs
if needed. This technique increases the flexibility of each staff member. It
also increases the comfort level of staff members if one person gets tied up
doing a particular task, is on vacation, oris called out of the offce unexpect-
edly. Cross-training also makes your own job more interesting by providing
variety and learning new skills. All of this will come in due time, when you
gain experience in your own job and are comfortable with your required
duties (Figure l-4). Most veterinary practices find that having staff members
Copy right 20ll Ce ngage Lea
CHAPTER 1
introduction to Veterinary Practice
11
 benefits of a new drug to the receptionist who will be better prepared to answer a
client's questions.
   s   d n 
stress, and boosts personal morale.
Office Policies and Procedures
Most veterinary practices have a document that outlines the policies for the
d i r pd ai se in p a sn i 
manual addresses issues such as attendance, dress code/appropriate attire,
vacation, sick leave, codes of conduct, and multiple other issues which need
to be clearly understood and adhered to by all members of the staff. These
 policies outline the employer's expectations and providle a basis of consistency
 in how practice issues are handled.
There is also a procedures manual, a separate document, or manual.
information about the daily activities in the practice. Examples of the informa-
tion covered in a procedures manual include:
opening and closing procedures for the facility
 how patients will be admitted and discharged
 what to do in case of fre, emergency, attempted robbery, client or staff 
 injury, and dealing with an extremely angry or difcult client.
 how the phone is to be answered (every practice has its own preference
and style)
Copy right 2011 Cengage
 eChapter(s)
12
PART 1 
The Veterinary Office
 how receipting and invoicing should be handlled
 information about accepting credlit cards and handling client requests
for credit
the basics about the computer system, including end-of-day procecdures,
and closeout, or the shutting down of the system
The procedures manual outlines, in detail, the day-to-day workings of the
cies and procedures, to know where to look in the manuals for clarification
and to be aware of any additions or changes in the manual. The personnel
policies and procedures manual provide a foundation for office management
with specifc standards that every one should follow, as all of these are very
important to the well-being of everyone and the success of the practice. You
 e s an p s  o o , o  a m q 
your signature is a recorded (and legal) recognition that you have read and
understood what is required of you.
SUMMARY
In addition to the veterinarian, veterinary practices also employ veteri-
d   d 'se  s As
each of whom plays a vital role in the day-to-day functioning of the offce.
d   d  sn a e sn
Other important members of the veterinary team are the veterinary assistants
and receptionists. There is also usually a practice manager whose focus is on
the administrative end of the business. Veterinary assistants, however, fall
somewhere in between, aiding the medical practitioners and fulflling a variety
of office duties.
Veterinary care is provided in a variety of settings, including indi-
vidual and group practices, veterinary specialty hospitals, on farms and
in open fields, in zoos, aquaria, and research facilities. Regardless of the
setting, as a member of the veterinary team you need to understand what
is expected of you and be able to perform as needed. Be aware of how the
practice does business, and become familiar with the policy and the pro-
cedures manuals.
SCENARIO
CJ arrived for her first day on the job as a veterinary assistant. She arrived a
few minutes early, laid her coat on a bench in the waiting room, and nervously
took a seat next to the receptionist, awaiting dlirection and instructions.
They sat and talked about the practice for a few minutes, and then
 iq d aun  n on p sid an pn
ring and as the receptionist was still busy with the clients, CJ decided to
answer the phone:
Copy right 2011 Cengage
or eChapte r(s)
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to Veterinary Practice
13
"Um, hello?"
"Is this Clear Creek, what number is this? I am trying to reach the vet's
office?"
"Yes this is Clear Creek. Can I help you?"
a op a raq au nea aui Xepon nude ue paau I 'sn,
to get up. She was fine when my son took her out earlier."
"Hmmm... She probably just twisted something when she was out
running and playing. Dogs do that a lot. I bet she'll be fne in a few days."
"'d really need to have her seen. I need an appointment, the earliest
available."
"I don't know. I guess you could bring her by"
"What time?"
*I don't really know, I just started here and I'm not the receptionist.
Could you call back later? Maybe in a half hour or so?"
"No, I can't. I need an appointment!
"Um... I'll see if I can put you on hold."
o i  p i p o i a i p as rno 
her. When the receptionist asked CJ who had called, she had no idea. Within
 the hour a very upset and angry client arrived with her golden retriever. (As
q e pamoms Aeupie pe aop an uderon e Aq paeaan rae
 green, and very slimy tennis ball.)
What could CJ have done to better handle the situation?
 What could the receptionist have done to make things more
comfortable for CJ and avoid the entire situation?
·What should CJ have been doing the morming of her frst day on
the job?
q  sn  au nr d po p m 
REVIEW
 Indicate whether statements l-5 are true or false and if false, what is needed
to make the statement true.
1. A veterinary assistant may be responsible for performing diagnostic
analysis of blood samples.
 2. The veterinary assistant is solely responsible for discharging patients after
surgery.
Sd p sd e rn  s n n  
laboratory tests.
4. A veterinary assistant may be responsible for administering anesthesia or
other medications during surgery.
Copyright 201l Cengage L
nd/or eChapte r( s)
14
PART 1
The Veterinary Office
5. Appropriate dress requirements for the practice in which you work will
be outlined in the procedures manual.
6. List five policies of the practice that you will need to know if you will be
 scheduling appointments.
ONLINE RESOURCES
American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA)
The offcial AVMA site features news articles, links to professional publica-
tions, educational resources, govermment regulations, notifications of disease
concerms, a veterinary career center, and member discussions.
<http://www.avma.org>
National Association of Veterinary Technicians in America
(NAVTA)
The NAVTA Web site features information on promoting veterinary techni-
cians, career building and credentialing information, listings of state represen-
tatives and student chapters, the veterinary technician code of ethics, and links
to related sites.
<http://www.navta.net>
Employer-Employee.com
This Web site focuses on issues faced in many office settings, including issues
of policy and procedure, management, team building, and improving lines of
communication.
http://www.employer-employee.com/
Veterinary Hospital Managers Association
This Web site provides greater detail about the organization, history, and cre-
dentialing requirements.
Copy right 2011 Cengage
for eChapters
16
PART1
The Veterinary Office
Introduction
The general maintenance of a veterinary practice could be a full-time job.
d e A a nn o iou 'sd ia ae i siads  ae a
functions, but for the health and safety of the staff, clients, and patients. The
cleanliness of the facility is critical, not only to ensure delivery of high-quality
care to patients, but also to communicate to clients the quality of service deliv-
ered. Plans must be in place to deal with the unexpected breakdown of an
essential piece of equipment, whether medical such as an anesthesia machine
or nonmedical such as the air-conditioning unit or the furmace.
All veterinary practices are required to comply with the Occupational
Health Administration (OSHA), which provides job safety and health pro-
tection for workers by promoting safe and healthy working conditions.
Most veterinary practices have identified specifc strategies to help their
employees prevent injuries. You may be required to read and understand a
safety manual in addition to the personnel manual and the procedures man-
ual. There are also safety precautions that must be taken to help minimize
  p ps  n d  a s oi s
 jo ids jd ue si ra in id ao  ai eia e
pital care and maintenance.
You must also be aware that some diseases have zoonotic potential.
humans. The causative agent may be bacteria, virus, fungus, protozoan,
or a parasite. Common routes of transmission include inhalation, direct
contact, exposure to urine and fecal material, contaminated food/water
bowls, handling dead or diseased animals and their body fluids and tissues.
Methods of transmission can be as variable as each disease causing organ-
ism. Table 2-l lists some of the common zoonotic disease and their routes
of transmission.
 Washing your hands between patients and the items associated with their
pe aseas po peads aui suad oi udi un sudu Aianxa si a
decreasing zoonotic potential (Figure 2-l). There may also be situations in
which disposable gloves should be worn, for example when cleaning cat litter
trays and handling other animal waste.
Maintaining a Safe Facility
Housekeeping and General Cleaning
If it smells clean, then it must be clean.
These words address one of the most important aspects of the general care
and maintenance of the veterinary practice: odor control. It is impossible to
achieve adequate odor control in any veterinary facility without making clean-
liness a priority. A clinic may look clean, but if there is a constant odor, either
Copy right 2011 Cengage
and/or eChapte r( s)
CHAPTER 2
Care and Maintenance of the Veterinary Practice Facility
17
TABLE 2-1 S
Safe Practices
· Exotics should not be allowed to roam freely. This especially applies
to reptiles.
 Reptiles should be provided with dedicated tubs for soaking. not
placed in the bathtub or sink.
 No animal should be in or near food preparation areas.
Animals should only be fed from dishes reserved exclusively for them;
never from hands or allowed to take food from a human mouth, to
lick dinner plates and other utensils.
 All animal food and water dishes should be disinfected and washed
separately, not placed in a dishwasher.
Animal food and water bowls should not be exchanged between
species (e.g.. the snake bowl should not be used to provide water for
the family dog)
 All soiled bedding and fecal material should be handled with latex
gloves and disposed of in tied plastic bags. It should not be used as
garden mulch!
Hands should AlwAyS be thoroughly washed with soap and water
-uoo ansoua puo quawdinba jowjuo jowjuo Auo bupuoy laa
tact, even if wearing disposable latex gloves.
Latex gloves should be pulled off so they are inside-out, tied at the
wrist. and disposed of in a plastic bag.
Hands should be washed between handling other animals.
 In cleaning cages that are very dirty, a disposable face mask should 
be worn.
When handling a diseased animal, protective eye wear should also
be won.
FIGURE 2-1  Washing
your hands is one of
WARNING
the simplest methods
of reducing disease 
transmission.
AVOID
CONTAMINATION
WASH YOUR
HANDS
Del
Copy right 2011 Cengage Lea
Editorial re
it rights re strictions require it
18
PART1
The Veterinary Office
musty (a soiled mop left in a bucket of dirty water) or it smells of animals, then
 general cleanliness is not receiving enough attention
the facility. The service provides floor cleaning and polishing, washing down
the walls and a window cleaning service. The schedule of a professional clean-
ing service will vary with the needs of the practice. A high-volume practice
 may have the cleaning service come in every night after the clinic is closed.
while another practice may have professional cleaning done weekly or monthly.
Whether or not your office uses a cleaning service, it is essential that every staff
member contribute to the cleanliness of the practice.
It is everyone's responsibility to help keep the practice clean on a constant and
consistent basis. For many veterinary assistants, the job description includes
 cleaning cages and feedling, watering, exercising, and bathing animals, all of
which relate to keeping the practice clean. You will need to learm what cleaning
products are used in the clifferent areas of the facility. A chemical that works
well on the floor and cuts grime in high traffic areas might actually cause harm
to an animal if it were used inside a cage, a dog run, or on a stainless steel table
in the examination room. If you are not sure whether a product is safe to use
in a particular area, ask! Industrial cleaners can have very harmful effects on
humans and animals if used improperly
you can to the overall housekeeping of the practice. You will probably
A u saand pe se u idid o do ai a
different areas of the practice and you will become aware of the specific
cleaning needs in different areas of the hospital, for example, the surgical
room may require different and daily routines whereas the storage areas and
supplies cupboard may be dusted on a weekly basis. Most cleanliness issues
no uaum au punon no aam yeq shuai sund sua Aids s
are fnished using them, and cleaning an area after a procedure. It is very
  1h 1n  o      an  o r
the next person who enters the room (Figure 2-2). Every work station and
exam room should have a bottle of disinfectant spray cleaner. These spray
 inod paadde an y pai pue uap iday aq ose pinous soq
the purpose. It is essential to clean up immediately when a patient soils the
floor or a male dog “cocks his leg" and urinates on the wall or furmiture in
the waiting room.
 Most veterinary practices want to minimize cleanup of animal waste
which is not only a source of odor, but a source of spreading dlisease among
   so  o  s h sn  on   s
walked outside in an exercise area on a regular time schedule so that they may
empty their bowels and bladders. It is a natural behavior of dogs not to soil
where they eat and sleep and most of them have been housetrained and rec-
 ognize that urinating and defecating inside is unacceptable. Be aware of their
comfort by providing them with adequate exercise and elimination opportu-
nities. You will enjoy the additional benefits of decreased cleanup in the ken-
nel and cage area, decreased risk of offensive odors, and, most importantly.
decreased risk of disease transmission within the veterinary facility. It is also
CHAPTER 2
Care and Maintenance of the Veterinary Practice Facility
19
FIGURE 2-2  The exam room should be sparkling clean and all evidence of
the previous patient should be removed and the trash emptied.
very important that the outside exercise and elimination area is kept clean, the
feces collected, bagged, and disposed of correctly. Many facilities make use
of a footbath, a small shallow tub which contains a disinfectant and helps
to prevent possible transmission of disease from the outside area to inside
the hospital. This is a good preventative measure to help stop the spread of
giardia, a microscopic parasite which is transmitted in feces and through
contaminated grass. Giardia is zoonotic and causes severe stomach pains and
explosive, bloody diarrhea in humans.
 ds n  s  sd  a si   
preventing undesirable odors and diseases. Most veterinary facilities have a
moming and evening routine that involves scooping cat litter pans, chang-
ing the water, and feeding. Regardless of the routine established, litter boxes
should be cleaned whenever they become soiled. Many feline patients often
curl up or sit in their litter box in preference to other bedding provided. They
s a      aas id o i o s
cage. Whenever a litter box is cleaned you should always wear disposable
a -ou e aisn nd si r a f ( anii) s
sometimes wearing a paper mask is also appropriate. The gloves should be
removed by pulling them off so that they are inside out, one inside the other,
and disposed of in the designated waste container (Figure 2-4). Use a sepa-
rate pair of gloves for each patient and always wash your hands thoroughly.
Pregnant women should not clean liter boxes because of the zoonotic potential of
toxoplasmosis, a microscopic parasite. Exposure to toxoplasma gondii can cause
birth defects.
Copy right 2011 Cengage L
for eChapter( s).
Editoria
20
PART1
The Veterinary Office
FIGURE 2-3 Keeping cages and lifter trays clean is an important part of
the job in a small animal practice. When cleaning cat lifter trays, gloves 
should be worn.
FIGURE 2-4 Gloves should be removed by pulling them off so that they are inside out and disposed of in the 
designated waste container.
Copy right 2011 Cengage Lea
CHAPTER 2
Care and Maintenance of the Veterinary Practice Facitity
21
If canned food is fed to cats, be sure to remove any uneaten portions and
note which patient did not eat. Uneaten canned cat food can produce quite an
unpleasant smell and it is the perfect place for the growth of mold and bacte-
ria. Cleanliness also directly affects cats, which are very clean and particular
animals. Cats will often refuse to use a litter pan when there is an accumulation
'I s si ids ia a  Si i e fn d  n  sm j
you want to do all you can to encourage a healthy environment. Keeping a cat's
cage clean is a good beginning.
 Look around you throughout the day and ask yourself, "If my animal were
staying here, would I be happy with the environment?" This is a good way to
stay in touch with how comfortable and clean the animals are at any time.
Safety Hazards
 In any veterinary practice, the potential is great to encounter a wide variety
of safety hazards. Many of these hazards are unique to the veterinary profes-
sion. Animals may bite or scratch. There are needles, scalpel blades, and other
sharp objects to dispose of properly. Chemicals, animal urine and feces, and
the discharge from infected wounds can pose a health risk to humans if not
handled properly. Within the veterinary facility, there may also be equipment
that can cause injury.
-das e u p si 'un ae sax u u ere aun aono
rate room which is lead-lined. If you have occasion to assist in taking a
radiograph, you will be provided with a lead apron, gloves, and a throat
(thyroid) shield to further prevent exposure to X-rays. Each member of the
eq asp e   s  u sd oa 
Dosimitry badges measure an individual's exposure to scatter radiation
 They are easily clipped on to the front of a garment or the lead apron being
worm. Periodically, these badges are replaced with new ones and the exposed
badges are sent to a company which measures and reports radiation expo-
belongs to another member of staff and equally important that you do not
participate in taking a radiograph without this personal monitor. There will
 also be a bold sign on the door to the radiology room and a warming to preg-
o no o o  o   aq  o m s
advise your supervisor if you know that you are pregnant or even think that
you might be.
 Lifting is another common source of injury. It is very important to know
how to lift correctly whether it is a large dog or a bag of food. Always ask for
help and do not attempt to lift heavy items or patients on your own.
Some of the medications used in a veterinary practice can also pose a
variety of health risks. For example, a common antibiotic used in animals
is amoxicillin, a relative of penicillin. It comes in a powdered form and it is
mixed with water. Just inhaling some of the powder can cause a severe aller-
 e  d n     d s   
where you work treats cancer patients, you will be given instruction on how
aq Ae nok pue snp Adenauouauo juaiod oi annsodxa jeuapioe pioae oi
restricted entirely from the area when these drugs are being handled and used
to treat a patient. There are also special safety regulations that now apply to the
use of lasers during a surgical procedure
Copyright 201l Cengage Lea
22
PART 1
The Veterinary Office
On very rare occasions, there may a be leak in an anesthesia delivery system
or an animal that is induced (the start of the anesthesia process) in one area is
transferred to another delivery system and the first anesthesia system has been
left open; for example, animals are usually induced and *prepped" for surgery
in a separate area from the operating room.
In the rush to get the animal "on the
table," the first system is inadvertently left running.
g. There are different types of
inhalent anesthesia agents, those
 are breathed in, but all are liquid and
are turmed into gas by the presence (
of oxygen. Each of these agents has a dis-
tinctive odor which you need to recognize.
 Your immediate action should be to
     n n  s  n  s
and report it immediately to the veterinary technician. It is unlikely that you
will receive training in the delivery of anesthesia, but you should know which
valves will turm off the supply
ofthe
sthetic agent and the oxygen flow to
the machine. Anesthesia delivery
 are precisely calibrated and this is not
something you should guess about
"fddle with"
-ask for instruction before
a situation like this arises. If you
1 know that a particular system has not been
used and you suspect a leak, contas
Jour supervisor immediately
Preventing Accidental Injury
The most common injuries in veterinary practices are bite wounds from ani-
san nun n ou op iq isy  on aoo n sio p so s
rabbits, birds, and reptiles can all inflict serious injuries as well. All animals
Can and will bite. Most bite injuries are preventable if animals are approached
and handled correctly It is important to learm the body postures of animals
dxa yn u nu op noa  sads i sads  se si pu
handlling and restraining animals in a hospital or clinic, you will be taught the
various methods of restraint and handling. It is in everyone's interest and safety
that patients are under control at all times. The sweet little dog that arrived in
the morning may have transformed into a growling, snapping patient. Most
of these aggressive behaviors are fear based: of being away from the owner.
of being confined in a strange environment with multiple other animals and
scents, and being approached, “cormered" in a cage. Never, ever believe an
o yn si aop ineah v  paress isnfsaus 'aa iuom aus, shes oum saumo
likely to bite and with very little provocation. Handling animals safely takes
practice (Table 2-2).
TABLE 2-2 
 Short list of Common Zoonotic Infectious Agents
and Source Groups
Bacteria
Source
Salmonella 
All animals
Aeromonas
Reptiles
Mycobacterium
Mammals, reptiles
 C. psittaci
Birds
Listeria 
Amphibians
 continued
Copyright 201l Cengage Lea
Editorial re
nt rights re strictions require it
CHAPTER 2
Care and Maintenance of the Veterinary Practice Facitity
23
Table 2-2 (continued)
Tularemia
Mammals (especially rabbits)
Leptospirosis
Mammals
Campylobacter
Reptiles
Enterobacter
Reptiles
 Streptobacillus
Mammals
 Pasterurella 
Mammals, birds
Colibacilla
Birds
Yersinia pestis
 Mammals (rodents and fleas)
Tuberculosis
 Mammals, birds
Staphylococcus
Mammals. birds
Viral
LCM (lymphocytic
Mammals
choriomeningitis)
Rabies
 Mammals (rarely reported in birds of prey)
Monkey Pox
 Potentially any mammal
Yeast
Candida
Reptiles
Fungal
Dermatophytes (ringworm)
Mammals
Cryptococcus
Birds
Protozoan
Giardia
All species potential
Coccidia
All species potential
 First, you will be taught how to handle the animals that are not stressed
a sniq una si ydde uoi iendsou aia e u q q
cages and returm them safely after exercise or an exam, restrain them for physi-
cal examinations, take them outside to eliminate, or move them from one pen
tures, vocalizations, and facial expres
ns that animals use to communicate
their attitudes. Constantly obser
handled by experienced staff so
1 to interpret when an animal will
allow you to do what needs to l
without a struggle, and when it would
be best to call for an extra hand
 Most of the animals encountered in a veterinary practice are companion
animals and are used to being handled
The frst rule of restraint is “least is
best" as many animals will react aggre
 if the restraint technique is too
harsh for the circumstances
animal, ask for advice before you attempt
to approach and restrain the animal.
It is critical that clients are not allowed to handle or restrain their animals while the
animals are under the care of the veterinary practice. If a client is injured by his
own animal during the course of a procedure, the veterinary practice is held
lgally liable. As tempting as it may be to allow the owner to hold and reassure
Editorial revie
te nt rights re strictions require it
24
PART 1 
The Veterinary Office
FIGURE 2-5 The leash
should be placed around
 the dog's neck before fully
opening the cage door.
FIGURE 2-6  The patient
should be allowed to walk
 out on its own from a
cage at floor level.
his or her frightened pet, it is simply not worth the risk of the client being
[euosiad ion insmel e ul paaloau fuaq jens pue jendsoy aui pue painful
injury and negligence.
During cleanup procedures, be alert for needles or scalpel blades that have 
 not been placed into the appropriate sharps container. These containers are
made of heavy plastic with a lid that can be permanently sealed. When the
container is full, the lid is sealed and the container is picked up by a service
licensed to dispose of hazardous waste materials. When you find an unlabeled
container, bring it to the attention of a senior member of staff immediately. By
remaining alert to your surroundings. you usually can avoid circumstances
that might otherwise lead to accidental injuries.
Controlling Infection and Spread of Disease
 It is especially important, when working in a veterinary facility, to be aware
uo uo 'usueio Susnen aseasp Aue 'suasoned Sussed jo sysu aul jo
animal to another. Most animals are admitted to a veterinary hospital because
Copy right 2011 Cengag
[ eChapter(s)
CHAPTER 2
Care and Maintenance of the Veterinary Practice Facitity
25
they are sick or injured. Their immune systems are often compromised from
the stress of their illness or injury, and they are more susceptible to disease.
The last thing a veterinarian, or any member of staff, wants is one sick animal
serving as the source of illness for another. Animals in the hospital for surgical
-dassns a uu fu rnsn u ssans ao auadxa sanand
 tible to a pathogen if the veterinary staff are not vigilant.
For disease containment, like many other aspects of patient care, common
sense will often help you make wise choices when you are handling patients.
Animals suffering from infectious diseases should be kept in isolation ward
their daily maintenance, like feeding and watering, tended to after the healthy
animals. This decreases the risk of carrying a disease from the isolated patients
to the other patients. Always wash your hands between handling each patient.
Change into a clean smock (scrub top) whenever you have handled an ill ani-
mal or if the scrub top has been soiled with urine, stool, blood, pus, or other
-  im a nn don s as an rm nan s Ao
cating animals that you wore while cleaning cages. A separate apron should
 also be used for bathing animals. It is also extremely important to never eat
or drink anything in any of the animal treatment or laboratory areas. There
is usually a staff lounge and you should only eat your lunch or sit to rest and
have something to drink in the designated area.
 You must learm and be comfortable with all procedures outlined by your
veterinarian for reducing the risks of transmitting disease from one animal
patient to another. If you come upon a situation with which you are not famil-
 iar, or if you are unsure how to proceed, you should always seek out a senior
 member of staff and ask for guidance
s si s s  e  sii a  n
in the facility's isolation ward. You may or may not be authorized to handle
that particular case. Every practice has its own requirements, and it is your
responsibility to do all you can to keep the patients of the practice safe from
unnecessary risk.
Osha Guidelines
All employers are required to abide by the Occupational Safety and Health
Act of 1970. Commonly referred to as OsHA, it provides for safe and healthy
working conditions for all employees. The guidelines were created by the U.S.
Department of Labor. The employer is required to inform all employees of
potential hazards in the workplace so that the employees understand how
best to keep themselves safe. OSHA regulates many aspects of businesses in
all industries in the United States. Examples of safety regulations that must
be adhered to include the following. which require veterinary practices and
hospitals to:
·keep the location clean, safe, and dry
 provide easy access to clearly marked, aclequately sized, unobstructed exits
 ensure that oxygen tanks are secured and contained only in green cylinders
· follow strict safety guidelines when handling hazardous chemicals
26
PART 1
The Veterinary Office
 require the use of proper protection for eyes, face, skin, feet, respiratory
system, hands, and any other body part in situations posing an
environmental, chemical, situational, radiological, mechanical, or any
other form of physical hazard
 maintain a readily accessible eye-wash station
 provide toilet facilities and clean water
maintain operating fre extinguishers, sprinkler systems, and other
fire extinguishing systems (requirements can vary by location, type of
business, materials involved, etc.)
include protective guards or covers for machinery
keep electrical equipment free of hazards
 providle information to employees regarding all potential hazards of
using equipment, hazardlous materials, chemicals, and all materials con-
tained within the facility.
This is only a small sampling of some general OsHA rules and guidelines
Your employer will have more information about the specific regulations that
must be followed in the practice or hospital. Additional information about
OSHA regulations is available online at <http://www.osha.gov>. OSHA can
also be reached at l-800-321-OSHA (6742), or via mail at U.S. Department
of Labor, Occupational Safety & Health Administration, 200 Constitution
Avenue, Washington, D.C. 20210.
While this information is provided and readily available elsewhere,
employees should not contact OSHA directly regarding a situation or concerm
about their place of employment unless all other avenues have been explored
to resolve the issue. Your immediate contact should be your supervisor who
will take the proper steps to rectify the situation and resolve your concern.
Filing a complaint with OsHA is only a last resort and it will be taken very
seriously and investigated by OSHA.
Right-to-Know Station
n- e    'd  no e    
u e si l a  s  ie ios ee oads e n i
book or binder containing the safety information that applies to that particu-
lar practice. Contained in the safety notebook will be material safety data
sheets (MSDS), which are published by the manufacturers of the various
products used by the practice. Read and understand this information to be
aware of any special handling requirements of the products or any restrictions
product used by the practice.
 The safety notebook should contain (l) evacuation plans in the event of an
 emergency; (2) the locations of gas and water valves for rapicd shut off; (3) the
locations of fre extinguishers; and (4) emergency telephone numbers for the
police, the fire department, and companies that service the facility's heating.
ventilation, and air-conditioning units. All chemicals, disinfectants, and other
products that are used within the practice will be labeled by your employer
with any appropriate hazardous considerations. In addition, personal safety
Copyright 201l Cengage L
and/or eChapte r( s)
CHAPTER 2
Care and Maintenance of the Veterinary Practice Facility
27
dns aq pinous sinidea pue 'saao xaiei 'sasse Aapes a suadba
by your employer.
Your employer, the veterinarian, or the designated safety officer within
the practice will show you where the safety information and safety equip-
ment are kept. It is your responsibility to read and understand the practice's
safety manual, to know how to use the required personal safety equipment,
aouon aq on Aiqisudsan non ose si li l asn Ane on uun pue
reading MSDS for appropriate precautions. You must take the initiative to
remain alert to potential hazards you encounter within the practice facility
and then bring them to the attention of the appropriate individual. Safety is
everyone's business.
In order to avoid losses from preventable injuries, most veterinary employ-
ers have developed strategies to help their workers anticipate potentially haz-
the steps to take in the event that you witness or are involved in an injury at
       s     d 
client, or visitor sustains a personal injury, regardless of how minor it may
 od n o o odn o   n md Ai '
the practice who oversees safety issues. Failure to report an accident or injury
 can result in a violation of legal requirements and could delay the processing
of appropriate insurance claims and benefits.
Office Equipment and Maintenance
Repairs and Troubleshooting
da aun ada saa aos uu A Aria e di po ie
ment, both medical and nonmedical, in good working order. It is unlikely
that you will be called upon to repair any of the equipment, but it is your
responsibility to learn the appropriate use of any equipment or tools that are
 ad u d  i ou si a i d u jo Aad 
prepare you to use the equipment in the practice, seek out a supervisor who
is able to demonstrate correct usage. You may also be asked to participate
   a d e n    
maintenance might include:
 replacing paper in printers, photocopiers, and fax machines
replacing ink or toner cartridges in printers, photocopiers, and fax
machines
Ho pue uo juadnba jo aaid yea uni Aadod oi moy fua
lou ane noA suaudinba pue Aiauuu aiado oi mou fuun
familiar with
 learming how to identify technical problems
Most veterinary practices are now computerized, and you will be working
with a computer station and keyboard as part of your job. Although you are
probably at least somewhat familiar with computers, you may not be skilled
in using the specific veterinary programs used in the offce. You will be given
Copyright 201l Cengage Lea
28
PART 1
The Veterinary Office
training in the use of these specic veterinary programs so you can use the
entire systems correctly and effectively. (Computers and software are dis-
cussed in greater detail in Chapter 4.)
puo Aueu asn pue puy on jnadxa ueo noA 'sianduos on uope u
(sometimes complex) pieces of office equipment. Sophisticated telephone sys-
tems for the veterinary practice allow multiple phone lines to come into a
single reception area, and many systems have built-in voice mail and pag-
 dn e  a    ad   
 s o         e 
program the system to receive calls each day at the end of business hours. A
fax machine, now common in veterinary offices, may be a stand-alone piece
 a multifunction machine, incorporating a printer, fax machine, copier, and/or
scanner.
You will be instructed on the policy and use of the receipts drawer or a
na aeisod e pue 'aieos seisod e 'iossoid pieo iparo e 'xoq doip yse
The practice may use audiovisual equipment for client education or staff-
training purposes. There may be a TV/VCR/DVD for use at the facility. No
responsibility is to become very familiar with how to use, care for, and manage
 it—and whom to contact if something unusual happens.
best adlvantage, you need to learm to perform basic maintenance and trouble-
shooting. For instance, you should know how to load paper into the printers
'iaf aqnq e si raud aui jn nua si ssid au siind ai oi piueie
laser, or dot-matrix type. Paper tapes in the credit card processing unit must
also be replaced when they run out.
  d    o i    q  
 e Aidua 1o nauoi ystuadai oi paau Ae noA diaidoooqd e seu aoed
toner receptacle. You will want to become familiar with reflling the paper
             s
 ment paper is stored.
Although you may not be required to repair equipment in the practice,
you will need to know the person in the practice to contact if there is a mal-
function. Most likely, you will report a problem with front-office equipment,
 like the photocopier or the fax machine, to the office manager or reception-
na nos e 'd a no sre r p a a  
technician may be responsible for the equipment. Be aware of the optimal
temperature in different areas of the practice facility, so that you will notice
any sudden changes. Be alert to hear the furmace making strange noises or an
exhaust fan failing
u o ian nou no neui saue Aue odan pnous non
-louqe guuouny si jeun suaudinba Aue asn iou op 'ageup iauny funsne
lu e Buoun Ag uom 1ou si 1ed e 1ei aess e Bupus si 1o A
problem, it is likely to become a major one. You may be asked to contact the
i oi ssaooe seu aoend aui u oum no iday si aldoad oddns asoul po is e
information
CHAPTER 2
Care and Maintenance of the Veterinary Practice Facitity
29
Materials and Supplies
Veterinary facilities use many clifferent types of materials and supplies. You
would expect to find some of these in any office setting. Others, very specifc
to the veterinary profession, require detailed record-keeping techniques and
many of the inventory records may be maintained through the use of a com-
puter program.
 p q   a a e diu r ss 
the acdministrative area of the practice. Most often, the lead receptionist or
the practice manager is in charge of keeping an acceptable inventory of those
 supplies. An up-to-cdate inventory keeps track of the quantity of each item
on hand so there is always an adequate supply available without running
 out or creating a surplus. Supplies for the offce area of the practice include
sd sd (ui o yu) s ad ded id rded ado
markers, telephone message books, and anything else that is necessary for a
smoothly functioning offce. You will need to be familiar with the storage area
for various office supplies in case you are working at the reception desk and
fnd, for example,that the copy machine is out of toner. You should also know
exactly who to talk to when you need to order more, and the requisition pro-
 cess, if applicable.
Another category of veterinary practice supplies includes the capital equip-
ment-equipment that has a fairly long life expectancy and contributes to the
daa e ua pde ao sdos pe d 
include anesthesia delivery systems, an X-ray machine, and surgical instruments.
A third category of supplies necessary for the smooth functioning of a
veterinary practice is medical supplies. This category incluces items like
bandaging and suture material, intravenous fluids, needles, syringes, X-ray
film, and chemicals that are used in the laboratory. These items, used in the
everyday functioning of the practice, help the veterinarians and veterinary
a are sindns ira se rd se anbn sof u op su
pharmaceuticals, the drugs and other medications used in the practice as
well as those dispensed to clients from the practice pharmacy. You would
not expect to find vaccines among the pharmaceuticals in the drug cabinet as
these require refrigeration as do some other medications. You should become
nd o Aa A sn se pdn p a jo in aun y r
to practice; some prefer to have the drugs organized by category, while others
 prefer alphabetical order (Figure 2-7). There will be no narcotics or scheduled
a separate cabinet.
Want Lists
Few things are more frustrating in any work situation than to be in the middle
ofa project or procedure and suddenly run out of needed supplies to fnish the
l   a  os s us p e u r ne ii
is critical for all staff members to know the procedure used to avoid shortages
of practice inventory, a complete and accurate list of supplies and quantities
Copy right 2011 Cengage L
30
PART 1
The Veterinary Office
FIGURE 2-7 The drug cupboard should be well stocked and kept in an orderly
manner.
 ing appropriate levels of products and supplies that should always be available.
One very useful tool is the want list—a list posted in a notebook, on a
clipboard, or on a white board at a specific location in the practice for all to
see and use. When you retrieve a particular medication or supply from the
e oi paddop seu Aiunb guua au ieul aou pue Arouaaui aod
low level, it is time to enter that item on the want list. Most practices have a
minimum quantity of commonly used products that is to remain on hand. At
regular intervals, the person in charge of ordering practice materials retrieves
the want list and uses it as a guide in purchasing items for a particular time
period—whether ordering is done on a weekly, monthly, or quarterly basis.
Some practices use separate want lists for medlical supplies and for office
supplies. Breaking it down further, you may find a want list for the front-office
area, another for the pharmacy, and yet another for the treatment/surgery area
 of the practice.
Invenfory Management
usuoind ym isisse i siss ianduon an sedsou pue sannd sns
decisions. If the inventory for the practice is entered into the computer sys-
tem accurately and tied into the invoicing function of the practice program.
any inventory items entered on an invoice will automatically be removed
  d  a d  d an 
u uaum sseuoind Aresssau aussns odau e aieisuaa on passre ao
Copy right 2011 Cengage
and/or eChapte r( s).
CHAPTER 2
Care and Maintenance of the Veterinary Practice Facility
31
ordered supplies arrive, each item and quantity is entered into the computer
to update the inventory.
d a asai usid as e s ad i e n
orders for inventory items whether or not a computer is used in the purchas-
ing process. That person may be the offce manager, the practice manager,
or the practice owner. A one-person system helps avoid duplication. It also
avoids confusion—for example, one staff member may think that another per-
son had placed an order--leaving the order undone. One of your jobs will be
to record, in a timely fashion on the appropriate want list, any items that you
  s      o     
the person involved with ordering
Although you may not be involved directly in ordering, it is highly likely
When an order is received, the frst step is to be sure that there has been no
damage to the package. If a shipment arrives damaged, you should follow what-
Aareo pue aia io ds sued al puy 'aexoed au uado oi si oi das
examine the contents to be sure that all items listed are present. This should be
-ds au iui sieiun ais no se Aaanp aui n furuis oi nod au
ment was received, with all appropriate contents and in acceptable condition.
 nndns aun ieui os raq ns aiedodde ui oi saaeous Aue od
be notified. At this time, you should also record any listed product's expiration
date. This procedure allows the person entering information about the order
 e sd o  s      e s
that will not be used up before their expiration date. This procedure gives the
contact the company about an exchange as well as any shortages
 nd si an a  aa in sn ae n 
you have recordled the expiration dates of products when appropriate, put
tests require refrigeration or freezing. These should be checked in immediately
 and then stored in the refrigerator or freezer as necessary before moving on
to the remainder of the delivery. Remember to rotate the inventory as you put
 o    sd on n   s
shelves to the front and placing newer items behind—ensures that products
are used by the practice or sold to the clients in the order in which they were
received. Rotation cuts down on the risks that products will become outdated
before they can be used or sold.
Occasionally, even with the most accurate computerized inventory records,
you will be asked to assist with a physical inventory. This means counting every
single inventory item in the practice and making a notation of the quantity on
an inventory list. You may find that the list for office supplies is kept separately
from the medical supplies list. The pharmaceuticals may be on their own list as
well. Many practices conduct a physical inventory at the end of its fiscal year,
which may not be the same as the calendar year. Some practices perform a
      n   p  n  n 
quantities in the computer remain as accurate as possible. This also helps to
make each person aware of how great the inventory actually is.
 from the e Book and/or eChapte r(s).
32
PART 1
The Veterinary Office
SUMMARY
Cleanliness, safety, the containment of infectious disease, and the general
maintenance of a healthy facility are responsibilities of all persons involved
 in a veterinary practice. Each member of the veterinary staff must be involved
in identifying and correcting hazards and potential contamination, and be
responsible for maintaining sanitary conditions for the animals in your care
 To maintain a safe working environment, all members of the veterinary
staff should comply with OSHA regulations and use common sense in daily
activities. If something is too heavy to lift alone, ask someone to help. If a piece
Buiado am uones pue aes sn oi ans aq 'piezeu e sasod Aiau jo
it, and do so only after being adequately trained.
Office equipment, materials, and supplies are also important to the smooth
functioning of a veterinary practice, and the use of want lists helps with inven-
tory management, ensuring that when something is needed, it is available and
 in optimal condition. The overall care of a veterinary facility is essential to the
 delivery of excellent medical services.
SCENARIO
 aes a sunu noopno aui ui shop aui Susiaxa panaldoo isnl peu T
through the kennel access door and pulled off his boots replacing them with
the sneakers he had left on a bench near the exit. He went through to front
office and the receptionist mentioned that the lab had just called to let them
know they were faxing over the results of a patient's blood work.
AD noticed that there was no fax coming through, then checked the
machine and realized that it was out of toner. Going to the supply closet, he
picked out a new cartridge and put it into the machine so the fax would print.
Then, he boxed up the old one to be recycled and aclded a fax toner cartricdge
to the front office want list
 Next, he went dlown the line of cages in the back, feeding each animal and
 clearing out waste. A small white dog sat in the back of one cage, shivering.
When AD opened the cage door, the little dog raised his lip in a snarl. Leaning
in, he patted him on the head and the litle dog snapped at him, raking the
back of AD's hand with his teeth. AD quickly closed the cage and went to clean
 the wound. Thankfully, the wound was not deep but the skin had been bro-
ken. To be safe, he checked with the veterinarian to see if there was anything
else he should be concermed about.
How did AD act proactively to create and maintain a clean, safe, and
functional work environment?
Buoe sugouied peaids oi padiaq aaeu uaruu sue sav jo yum
the animals in his care?
What preventive measures could AD have taken to avoid the dog bite?
Copy right 2011 Cengage L
and/or eChapte r( s)
CHAPTER 2
Care and Maintenance of the Veterinary Practice Facitity
33
REVIEW
1. List the potential problems with leaving uneaten portions of canned cat
food in a cat's cage.
2.1
  a da o an  n  sis i a i
3.
What should you do if you notice that an exhaust fan in a kennel area is
making an unusual noise?
4. List five potential safety hazards for employees in a veterinary
practice.
 5. List three precautions you can take to minimize the risk of injury by
animals.
 6. List five OSHA requirements for ensuring safety in the veterinary
practice.
7. What can you learn from material safety data sheets (MSDS)?
8.
List four types of information, other than MSDs, included in the safety
9.1
 List the protective items for use in radiology.
10. I
 List five examples of capital equipment used by veterinary practices.
11.
What purpose does rotating the inventory serve?
 12. Name two categories of drugs that will not be found in the pharmacy
cupboard.
13.
 List four zoonotic diseases, the source animal, and the method of
transmission.
14. What are the steps you should take in processing orders when they
arrive?
ONLINE RESOURCES
Veterinary Information Network (ViN)
VIN, an online service for veterinary professionals, offers a reference center,
 dsiaq An Aiaa al o sss pe ' vo
 free for students at sponsored universities.
<http://www.vin.com>
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OsHA)
- Xnfun juaad oi si uoiss sHso roqeT jo suda S'n an jo jd
ness, and death in the workplace. The Web site offers information on safety
regulations, programs, services, and other resources related to workplace safety
<http://www.osha.gov>
Copy right 2011 Cengage
for eChapte r(s)
34
PART 1
The Veterinary Office
VetGuide.com
VetGuide is the illustrated buyer's guide to new equipment and supplies for
 the veterinary facility, offering links to a wide variety of veterinary products for
both the doctor and the front veterinary office. This is good resource for leam-
ing about some of the capital equipment used in the hospital.
<http://www.vetguide.com>
Animal Care Equipment & Services (AcES)
This site features numerous types of animal care and handlling equipment, and
 includes images of various cages, protective devices, safety vests, and veteri-
  e   i  i aa e in os 
<http:/ /www.animal-care.com>
36
PART 1
The Veterinary Office
Introduction
Although the specific duties of a veterinary assistant, technician, or any
 member of staff assigned to the front offce will vary slightly from practice
to practice, you will undoubtedly be called upon to perform many clerical
functions, such as maintaining and filing medical records, obtaining signed
consent forms, admitting and discharging patients, sending reminder cards.
and dealing with the mail.
-ans au uo aupu iq e waas A saqisudsan asaul jo aos
face, but they are vital functions that ensure the successful operation of a
B  sd  s sn s d 
the veterinarian and provide specific facts about clinical signs of medical
   o    's '
ian would be working without a complete history which could contribute
greatly to a diagnosis and treatment plan. Correct admission and discharge
practices help to ensure that all concerns and issues are addressed before the
patient is admitted or before the patient is discharged and the client leaves.
Sorting and handling of the incoming mail ensures that important commu-
effcient offce management practices, a veterinary facility would be unable
 to function effectively.
Record Keeping
Purpose of Medical Records
Medical records are important documents that record the sequence of events
each time an animal is seen by the veterinarian. They are also legal documents
that contain pertinent information on each patient, as well as on each client,
and should be treated with the same confidentiality as the medical records of
 a human being.
to the client, and the resolution of issue
les which may arise. Each record is a
benchmark for measuring the improvement or decline of a patient's condition.
The medical record provides for continuity of care by reminding the vet-
erinarian what she has seen on the physical evaluation of a patient, and of the
patient's history, the tests that have been done and their results, the diagnosis.
the treatment that has been initiated, and all comments and recommendations
made to the client.
A medical record also provides continuity when multiple doctors are
involved in a single patient's care. It allows any other veterinarian to quickly
become informed of the patient's medical history, the current problems, and
what treatment plans and options have been discussed with owner. Another
 way to think of the medical record, in this context, is as a summary of an
animal's life from the perspective of its health, wellness, or chronic or acute
 disease and injuries.
Another important purpose of medical records is to facilitate rapid
retrieval of information about patients. For example, the medical record allows
Copyright 201l Cengage Lea
CHAPTER 3
Front Office andReceptionist Duties
37
 a veterinarian to review the patient's major medical problems, its medical
history, and behavioral history. A veterinarian can scan easily for episodes of
illness, review the diagnostic and treatment plans, and leam the outcome of
         
medical record, all the wellness issues that have been addressed, including
sda s Ae p  q s sisn  s
by the owner on previous visits (Figure 3-1).
u po adxa ue se panado uaq se on sin po jed ps au
  r a sy  n p y   s   jo e
 recorded as such, leaving no question that an area might have been overlooked
should a problem arise at a future date.
 The upper part is usually completed
 at the front desk when the client arrives. The veterinarian can then pull up the
entire form on the computer terminal in the examination room and record all
d aq ar adon e sano e sy ponai sed aun ou aa suu
for the client
As a review, the top part of the patient history includes current owner
tion for the patient. The second part of the form records the patient's exami-
nation and generates a history (documentation) of the initial visit and will
be referred to in all future visits. As an example of the kind of information
contained, it has been completed with the findings of what would be a typical
wellness check or an incident of concerm to the owner
The medical record also provides rapid retrieval of information about a cli-
ent and should include current, confrmed information regarding address and
telephone number (including cell phone numbers), information about where
the client works, and how he or she may be reached during the day. Quick
access is especially important when an animal is in the hospital and a decision
d   d e ie   q i
 po uonunop aprond oi si spoan peopa jo asodnd pin v
medical decisions from a legal perspective. Medical records are legal docu-
 ments and must be handled as such. You should record all pertinent informa-
tion completely, accurately, and as soon as the information is available. In the
event of any dispute, medical records provide clarification of what was done
and why. They protect the veterinarian and staff by providing complete and
accurate documentation
 Because of the legal nature of medical records, all information should be
written legibly and in black ink—never in pencil. If a mistake is made, a single
 line should be drawn through the mistake and initialed (this indicates that an
error was made rather than suggesting that information was changed). Then,
the correct information should be entered immediately following the error.
Do not erase, scratch out, or "whiteout" mistakes. Medical records should be
       i o  p
o oi suea aul apoid oi st spionan peoipa jo asodand iauoue ian
information about certain illnesses. For instance, how many cases of canine
heartworm were detected in the practice within a certain time period or if
there has been a sporadic outbreak of another communicable disease within a
B          
Copyright 20ll Cengage Learning. All Rights R
38
PART 1
The Veterinary Office
FIGURE 3-1 A
APPLE CREEK VETERINARY HOSPITAL
Client ID:
PATIENT ID
Client Name
Patient Name
Client Address
Breed:
Telephone number
Species
Exam Date:
Weight
DVM:
Birthdate
Gender_
S or N
FIGURE 3-1 B
Temperature: (Normal) Temperature is 101.2
Weight: (Normal) body weight is within the range expected for this type of this breed 37.2 pounds
Appearance: (Normal) BAR
Eyes: (Normal) Eyes are bright and clear. The pupils are normally responsive to light
Ears: (Abnormal) Left earhas reddish discharge, odor. Yeast infection confirmed on microscopic examination
Mouth and Teeth: Normal )Gums and teeth appear healthy. There is no significant buildup of tartar
Skin and Hair Coat: (Normal) Healthy coat and skin. There are no signs of parasites, irritation or areas
of alopecia
Abdomen and Abdominal Organs: (Normal) Abdominal organs/abdomen are palpably normal with no
pain or tendermess noted
Lymph Nodes: (Normal) All lymph nodes appear normal on palpation
Gastrointestinal: (Normal) There is no reported history of vomiting or diarrhea. Appetite normal.
Cardiovascular: Normal )strong, healthy heart sounds, valve sounds normal and without murmers Pulse
rate/rhythm normal
Respiratory: (Normal ) Respiration normal, lungs clear. Trachea appears normal
Mucous Membranes: (Normal) Healthy, pink CRT normal
Musculoskeletal: Normal) Normal gait, no evidence of limping or joint pain, no heat or swelling. Patient
is well muscled as typical of breed and excerise/activity level
Urogenital: (Normal): Palpation of bladder and kidneys is normal. There is no swelling, redness,or discharge
Subjective, Objective, Assessment, Plan: Owner concermed about reddish discharge and odor from
left ear, head-shaking and scratching, sometimes crying when scratching. Laboratory results confirmed
Malassezia (yeast) infection. Dispensed YXZ, 5 drops affected ear, BIDX10. Technician demonstrated how
to perform ear cleaning, administer drops. Recommend patient is kept out of the water until infection has
cleared and the use of “Swimmers' Solution” to help prevent further occurrence.
FIGURE 3-1 Properly kept medical records will provide a complete history of the patient. This sample form is typical
oou isnu jueod o inogo uoouou! lio 'ssaipnbea eiy letnauoo au ui punoy asoul ot lollwis aa aou puo
exactly.
Copy right 2011 Cengage
or eChapter(s)
CHAPTER 3
Front Office and Receptionist Duties
39
information about the profle of the overall patient base by utilizing medi-
cal records, determine the demographics of the practice and even the average
number of pets per household.
Creating Medical Records
 Each medical record must contain a certain minimum amount of information.
For instance, the record should include the client's name, address, and tele-
phone number, as well as the client's employer and work number, cell phone
number, and the best way to reach the client during the day. Pertinent patient
 information includes the animal's name, species, breed, age, gender, reproduc-
 tive status, color, and if the patient is a cat, it often includes hair type: long hair
be completed on the frst visit. It also includes patient signalment and clearly
 defines the authorization and terms of services provided.
A standard client form and authorization like this goes a long way to
clearly define the terms of service and prevent any misunderstanding. This
form is placed in the permanent client/patient fle.
io e y ni a e si rn pn p rndod so a
Asea Aiaa si uisap si aeid ui saed you-i1 Aq -o piou oi doi aui 1e d
to use, whether making additional entries or retrieving information. There
are different ways to identify the client and the patient on the outside of the
folder. It is standard practice to print a client information label that adheres to
oml isny aul ind on pue napioy aui po apisino aui uo iaos pueu al naddn au1
letters of a client's last name on the right hand edge of the folder. These letters
are bold, color coded, and make retrieval and re-filing easier. As with the client
information labels, others are created for each of the owner's pets. These can
 all be created through the computer program in use at the practice.
 Other notations can be included, but never write anything personal about
to anyone handling the patient or speaking with a client. For example, if a dog
is known to be aggressive and a potential biter, a small red dot is often placed
             
might suggest caution and a black dot should always be added to a patient's
label if the pet is deceased.
With each visit, all information should be confirmed that is still current
 and that the owner still has all the patients on fle with the practice.
Much information, both subjective and objective, is contained in medical
records. Objective information includes factual, measurable data, such as an
 animal's weight (Figure 3-3), body temperature, heart rate (HR), and respira-
tion rate (RR)
 Subjective information is an entry that describes the animal's overall atti-
tude at the time of the examination. “Bright, alert, and responsive" (BAR) is a
comment often included in this section of a medical record. Subjective informa-
tion about a patient is not measurable, but observable. The subjective entries
s on puodsan suned aun saop mo, pue aao sued aui saop moh, se
environment?
Copy right 2011 Cengage L
and/or eChapte r( s)
40
PART 1
The Veterinary Office
FILE #
Owner (s)
Spouse
Address:
City/State & Zipcode
Main Phone #
Other phone/Cell#
Spouse's #
Work Phone #
Driver's License#
If recommended, by whom:
PET INFORMATION
Name:
Dog, Cat, Other
Breed
Color:
 Different Marking(s), Tattoo, or Microchip #:
Approximate Age:
DOB:
Sex: Female/Spayed female or
 Male/Neutered male
Where was your pet spayed or neutered?
Reason for visit:
AUTHORIZATION:
PAYMENT DUE AT TIME OF SERVICE
WE DO NOT BILL!
I understand that payment is required at the time services are rendered or upon release of the ani-
pe sia uy 'sisoo jno pue sial saoe aqeusn le Aed oi aane I idsou aul o ie
commission of fifty percent that will be assessed to us by XYZ Recovery Services, retained to pursue
 nd d j auo pu a jo an an ie sn Aed oi a r I a sn u
(eighteen percent per year).
a
Signature:
Date:
Spouse Signature:
Date:
D
The assessment of a patient, as well as formulation of the diagnostic and
treatment plans, revolves around the careful compilation of subjective and
objective data about the patient. These assessments are referred to as SOAP, an
acronym for subjective, objective, assessment plan.
Organizing Medical Records
There are two primary ways medical records are organized: the source-oriented
medical record and the problem-oriented medical record. Regardless of
Copy right 2011 Cengage
and/or eChapte r( s).
CHAPTER 3
Front Office and Receptionist Duties
41
HGURE 3-3  An animal's weight is an example of objective information that should be
included on the patient's medical record.
an u j an  u   isq  nl ' nd a
chronological order, with the most recent information on top, where it is most
readily available.
The source-oriented medical record, also called the conventional format,
can vary dramatically in size and detail. Data is entered as acquired, in chrono-
 e sd   sin a r s  o  pi
in a single folder. Data for the different animals may be recorded on a single
sheet, simply dated to indicate when each individual has been seen. This for-
n pd      ss  sn r
However, compared to the problem-oriented system, it lacks the detailed
documentation of procedures and their results, and it makes retrieving infor-
mation more diffcult. Maintaining adequate communication and legal protec-
tion is more challenging with source-oriented medical records. In contrast,
the problem-oriented medical record format provides a complete, accurate,
detailed chart on each and every patient. It offers a comprehensive review of
 the patient, including:
● the patient's history
 the patient's medical problems
 procedures or treatments that have been performed and the results
· a detailed plan for the patient's future
            i
improves communication among staff caring for the animals, as well as among
Copy right 2011 Cengage
and/or eChapte r( s)
42
PART 1 
The Veterinary Office
doctors in a multidoctor practice. In addition, more of the patient's history
[elal apoid pue burued ases joddns oi aqeieae Aeai ane eiep iauo pue 
protection if a claim arises.
The problem-oriented medical record usually includes several stan-
dard sections. The frst is the master problem list (Figure 3-4). Any
 issue requiring medical attention should be included on the problem list.
Entries on the problem list might include an abnormality that the owner
has noticed, an unusual laboratory fnding. or a diagnosis. You can also
think of the problem list as the medical history in brief or as an index to
the rest of the medical chart. The problem list should also include the dates
of inoculation, results of heartworm tests, drug allergies, ongoing medical
conditions, and other information, depending on the standard practice of
the office or hospital.
0l aeid e puy on joadxa Aeu nos 'is uaqoid iaiseu aui oi uoppe u
record a comprehensive history, a form for recordling the results of a physical
examination, inserts for the results of laboratory analyses or special proce-
dures, and progress notes (Figure 3-5). Progress notes are divided into four
sections represented by the acronym SOAP:
S—subjective
O—objective
A—assessment
P—-procedure or plan
B  e  s   ,  d 
any other veterinarian involved in an animal's care should be recorded in the
progress notes.
The key to organizing medical records efficiently is to learn the format
used in the practice where you work, become familiar with the details of
the record-keeping system that is in place, and do all you can to help main-
tain the consistency of medical record keeping. This consistency ensures
that each animal gets the best care by keeping all pertinent information
about patients readily available for review. With the use of a computer sys-
tem, the recording of all patient and client information has become much
easier and more efficient. Patient notes are often entered directly into the
  a n a  n  d n  
practice
It is important to remember that both the hard-copy file and the computer
fles are exactly the same in the notes and comments entered. Ideally, we think
of “going paperless" yet in practicality it is not always feasible to enter data
directly into a computer file.
Maintaining. Retaining. Purging. and Releasing
Medical Records
critical that each medical record always reflects up-to-the-minute information
Copyright 201l Cengage Lea
CHAPTER 3
Front Office and Receptionist Duties
43
CITY ANIMAL HOSPITAL
Master Problem List
OWNER INFORMATION
Owner Name Mr.Miss Ms.
Mrs.
Patient/Pet's Name
Address
City/State/Zip
Home Phone
 Business Phone
PATIENT/PET INFORMATION
Chart #
Patient
Species
Breed
Color
Sex
FMN
Birth Date 
Vax History
Weight
IMMUNIZATION/PREVENTATIVE RECORD
DATE
RABIES
DA2PL
FVR-CP
FELV
FECAL
PROBLEM LIST
 PROBLEM
DATE ENTERED
DATE RESOLVED
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
6eb
12.
13.
 FIGURE 3-4 All issues and concerns need to be accurately recorded on the master problem list. This often travels
with the patient fle during the exam and treatment and updated into the computer file.
44
PART 1 
The Veterinary Office
CITY ANIMAL HOSPITAL
Progress Notes
OWNER INFORMATION
Owner Name Mr. Miss Ms.
 Mrs.
Patient/Pet's Name
Address
City/State/Zip
Home Phone
Business Phone
PATIENT/PET INFORMATION
Chart #
Patient 
Species
Breed
Color
Sex
FMN
Birth Date
Vax History
Weight
CURRENT PROBLEMS
Date
Soap
Month 
Day
Year
Time
Format
 Progress Notes 
Fee
S
Subjective Data
0
Objective Data
A
Assessment
P
Procedure for Diagnosis and Treatment
buiu
FIGURE 3-5 Sample progress notes information sheet.
CHAPTER 3
Front Office and Receptionist Duties
45
about a patient and a client. Here are some simple strategies for keeping medi-
cal records current:
●Ask each client who comes into the clinic if the adldress and telephone
number recordled in the medical record are still correct.
Ask the client about animals not seen in a while (another reason to
always mark a patient as deceased to avoid what may seem to a client,
an insensitive question)
 The veterinarian will record information in the medical record after
seeing the patient and when completed, the fles will be returmed to the
front offce to be re-fled. The day an animal is presented to the practice,
what is observed and what is done, as well as any assessments and
plans, will be recorded in the medical chart.
· Front office and receptionists should also enter and record telephone
conversations with clients in the medlical record, even if a message
had been left, noting the date and time.
·All sheets in the record should be organized with the most recent
 information on top.
 The master problem list to serves as an index or table of contents for
the rest of the record.
soi an aeoi n 'd oi ad ai io ras si il as
of animals that are no longer active patients. Purging the inactive files reduces
the amount of medical records in the fle shelving by removing the charts
of animals that have died, whose owners have moved, or that are no longer
served by your practice—all creating better use of the fling system and avail-
able space. When a medical record has been removed from the active patient
files, it should be marked as inactive and stored separately from the active files.
Medical records should not be destroyed and must legally be retained for a
 period of seven years.
auop Aua si in inq fund uo Aod umo sii seu ad A
            
    s r r a sd s e e p
years is considered an active patient. Sometimes the time frame is as short as
18 months. The only way to do this is to look at each file, beginning at one
end and by working through them “a letter at a time" until each file has been
checked, a task that can be easily divided between staff members to work on
during downtime.
 If a patient has died or the owner has moved away, the fle can be removed
 an oi use Ae ra si ai a u ad   paos
 ie i uaas uaq iou s As iad a  ase ai no ee aui oe
the medical record is usually considered inactive. Inactive files are best stored
 id s   oi sau  ai n n aq ea o  a
perhaps a new one back to the practice for medical care.
 Prior to inactivating a medical record, most practices contact a client by
phone or in writing about an animal that has not been seen for a certain period
of time. A contact letter might read as shown in Figure 3-6.
A letter like this gives a client a chance to respond. The animal may
have died or the owner has moved away. Often these contact letters are
Copyright 201l Cengage Lea
46
PART 1
The Veterinary Office
CIty PARK ANImaL CliNIC
2765 Park Center Dr.
City Park, WA
Dear
We are currently updating our fles and noticed that we
have not seen
(pet's name) since
(date). we would appreciate just a few moments of your time to
help us keep your pet's medical records current. Please contact
us with any concerns you may have or how we may be of
assistance to you. 1-800-555-4344
Thank you, (signature),
Receptionist
 FIGURE 3-6  A contact leter may be sent to a client before inactivating 
a patient's record.
returmed as undeliverable which indicates that the client no longer lives at
the address on file
Another method of client contact is to send reminder cards, preprinted
post cardls that remind owners when yearly vaccinations are due. These can usu-
ally be generated by the computer system and sorted by the month prior to when
the vaccination are due. A simpler and more cost-effective method would be to
contact clients via e-mail. If your practice does not ask for an e-mail address, it
would be a good thing to considler adding to the client information sheet.
A veterinary medical record is a confidential document. The record is
 owned by the veterinary practice, not by the owner of the animal. Most
practices require a signed authorization form from the owner (or an autho-
rized agent) before any information from the medical record is released to
another veterinarian, a third party, or even to an insurance company. The
attending veterinarian is usually the only person authorized to release infor-
mation from the medical record. Figure 3-7 is an example of a medical
disclosure form.
Occasionally a request will come from a public agency, such as a local ani-
mal control offce or the police for the vaccination status of an animal that has
01 uondanxa judu ue si stui ueny e oi Anui alq e u paanoaui uaq
the general rule barring the release of confidential veterinary medical informa-
end e u spionai ep useaai ne sunb Aue aau noa  u
situation, consult the veterinarian.
When the medical record is being transferred to another veterinarian, it
should be sent directly to him or her. The original medical record is never
Copy right 2011 Cengage L
and/or eChapte r( s).
CHAPTER 3
Front Office and Receptionist Duties
47
CONSENT TO DISCLOSURE OF MEDICAL RECORDS
I, (name of owner or authorized agent), the (owner or
agent) of (name and breed of animal), understand that the
information contain in (name of animal's) medical records is
confidential. However, I specifically give my consent for (name
of practice) to release all medical records concerning (name
 of animal) to (name of the party to whom information is being
released).
The medical records are to be disclosed for the specific
purpose of
It is further understood that the information disclosed may
stated above.
earf
Signature of owner or authorized agent
Cer
Delmar/
Date
FIGURE 3-7It is essential to complete a medical disclosure form. It is a waiver
of confidentiality and be completed before the release of any information.
released—only copies. When the transfer of a medical record is requested.
 that request should be recorded in the original medical chart. Clients may
moving out of the area. Part of the patient's history may include radiographs
and with these too, only copies of the films should be provided. Generally
there is no charge to the client for paper copies of medical records; however,
Ae-x ue jo Ados peuoissaoid e Sueu u paaioaui asuadxa aul jo ssnesi
 film, many practices charge a nominal fee to the client.
Business Records and Logbooks
  e i  a a a e  s s s
medical records, although there is a bit of overlap in some cases. For instance.
veterinary-specific software now links invoicing to the medlical record and history.
Most, if not all, practices keep business accounts with a computer program that
is separate from their management of meclical information and client invoicing
Computerized business records save time and provide an enormous vol-
 s i oi ad e d   sn n a
the practice, track client purchasing choices, control inventory, and evaluate
Copy right 2011 Cengage
k and/or eChapte r(s)
48
PART 1
The Veterinary Office
income versus expenses. Although you may be asked to learn to generate
invoices for individual transactions with clients, most business records are
attended to by the practice manager.
 Unless there are extraordinary circumstances, almost all practices now oper-
 pidae s iei yau u e ro p ia e Aq ro y u ae aq a
the use of a check verification system. This *no credit policy' not only saves time
by not having to send monthly statements to clients but saves money as there is
 rrd a ci ssn r s a d s sd o
are also credit cards available which are specifically limited to use for veteri-
 nary fees. Your practice may or may not participate in one of these programs.
but if so, the application process is conducted through the practice manager or
head receptionist. This application is confidential and the telephone application/
approval process must be concducted away from the front offce and in private.
 In most circumstances, this specific credit application will either be granted or
denied within minutes. Do not discuss the application when other clients are
 present. It is best to use an available exam room for privacy. Never offer credit to
a client, regardless of how well known the person may be to you personally or
to the practice. Extending credit or account privileges is solely at the discretion
 of the veterinarian or practice owner.
Part of the business recordl-keeping system in any veterinary practice con-
sists of various logbooks, where medicine and business overlap. Logbooks of
any type are maintained as hard copies. One example of a logbook used in veteri-
 nary medicine is the X-ray logbook (Figure 3-8), which includes the following
information:
·client's name
 patient's name
?
date
 patient ID number
body part to be radiographed
view(s) taken
 measured thickness of the body part(s) radiographed
X-ray machine settings used for each view
 comments regarding the quality of the films: too light, too dark, or
background contamination, in short, any abnormality of the flm
quality should be noted.
The X-ray logbook is maintained by the technician taking the radiographs and
is normally kept in the radiology room. The diagnosis or significant findings
al rua m om uia ue a A pan pue paea ae
information into the patient's medical records.
Another example of record keeping is the anesthesia record sheet. This
 d (sad a s e sd ae a a si
the routes of administration, heart and respiration rates, blood levels of oxy-
gen saturation, the duration of the anesthesia, including time of induction and
the length of the procedure, and the names of the surgeon(s) and anesthetist
 sssan   a   sno n o pnous is a
event occurs.
CHAPTER3
Front Office and Receptionist Duties
6t
X-RAY LOGBOOK
Thickness
X-ray
Case
Patient's
Client's
Body
View(s)
of Body
Machine
Date
Number
Name
Name
Part
Taken
Part
Setting
Comments:
50
PART 1
The Veterinary Office
The anesthesia record sheet is maintained by the anesthetist and recorded
anesthesia. This very important document details minute by minute, along with
continual monitoring by the anesthetist, the entire sequence of the anesthesia
spective of preventing and/ or alerting the veterinarian to the potential of human
d   a s s si a   
tial drug abuse by staff or anyone having access to the controlled drug cabinet
The law requires accountability for the amount of drugs ordered and the amounts
dispensed. Because some of the drugs l
used in veterinary medicine have the poten-
branch of the federal government.
. The DEA has the authority to perform random
inspections, including examination of the controlled substance log, the matching
up of inventory on hand against recorded dispensed amounts, the method in
which these drugs are secured, and who has access to the controlled drug supply.
All details of controlled substances must be recorded in the controlled
substance logbook. First, the delivery of an unopened order to the central sup-
ply of the practice's pharmacy is recorded in one part of the log. Then, when a
container is opened to dispense medication to a patient, that action is recordled
on a dlifferent page of the log. Every tablet, capsule of every controlled sub-
stance must be accounted for in the logbook. Every milliliter of a controlled
injectable medication must also be recordled
The controlled substance logbook should include the following five items
1. drug dispensed
2. date, client's name, and patient's name
3. amount dispensed and the amount remaining
4. name of veterinarian authorizing the use of the medication
 5. the individual actually handling the medication
aul u funuan unoe aul pue 'siean omi Aiaaa paban si Aonuau
logbook must agree with the amount in the controlled substance cabinet.
Medical record entries should also agree exactly with the information in the
controlled substance log. Controlled substances are to remain locked up at all
times in a secure cabinet that should be mounted permanently in the practice
and separately from the general pharmacy cupboard. Usually, the only staff
members of the practice who should have a key to the controlled substance
cabinet are the veterinarians involved in the practice as ultimately, they are
responsible under the law.
Most veterinary facilities have a rule: "If you use it, you log it." This rule
          n n s 
a controlled substance for dispensing purposes or for use on a hospitalized
 patient, you are the one who is to record that event in the controlled substance
 n s     n    
the use of these medications. Falsifying the controlled substance log or improperly
using any controlled substance is a federal offense.
The final example of a logbook used in veterinary practice is the laboratory
      p s  s a 
Copyright 201l Cengage Lea
CHAPTER 3
Front Office and Receptionist Duties
51
ordered. At the very least, the date, client and patient names, the technician
performing the tests and whether the tests are run in-house or sent to an out-
side laboratory, the date and the lab to which the samples were sent are all
recorded in the laboratory logbook
This logbook is kept in the laboratory area and the person handling the
 p u anre n asds si sisi a furd n sads
information. While you may not be performing the test yourself, any sample
 you take to the lab should be recorded and initialed by you. The technician
can check through the logbook and see which tests are pending.
Filing
Filing in a veterinary office is much like fling in any other offce setting. The
 ae sid e  ad i d  as  si
 Related materials (medical records, for example) are fled in the same loca-
tion. For easy retrieval and re-filing, they are usually in the front office in the
vicinity of the receptionist's desk. They must not be housed in an area that is
available to the public. The invoices for products and materials purchased by
the practice, as well as other expenditures, are filed in a different location than
the medical records--most likely in the practice's business offce. Client infor-
mation and handouts are usually fled in a different location, perhaps in a fle
drawer in the front desk or in lateral file cabinets (refer to file systems, below).
Filing Equipment and Supplies
items that need to be filed. For instance, if medical records are kept in manila
ado aq m aan (saed youi1 Aq -o pioy oi pauaisp) spioy qei-pua
 shelving to accommodate the fles. If the medical records are kept in hanging
 pocket folders, there will be cabinets with pull-out drawers.
In order to maximize the usable space within a reception area, fle cabinets
 e jo  a  ( aii p  ae s   
fle is pulled out, it does not take up as much room as a standard fle cabinet
      ais ii ais  e l ae s a 
The fling supplies found in a veterinary office will vary as well, depending
on the filing needs of the particular practice. Most medical records are identified
on the outside of the folder or pocket using letters, numbers, or a combination
of the two. There should be a supply of blank folders (usually with end tabs) or
hanging pockets, rolls of number stickers, and rolls ofletter stickers. In addition,
there should be a supply of side-tab manila folcders for more conventional fling.
The manila foldlers may rest directly in a file drawer, or they may be inserted into
hanging files. There will be stickers for identifying the manila folders.
Filing Systems
You may encounter different filing systems, depending on the practice where
you work and what kind of information retrieval systems the practice has
developed. Medical records are usually filed in one of two ways: numerically
Copy right 2011 Cengage L
k and/or eChapte r(s)
52
PART 1
The Veterinary Office
FIGURE 3-9  An example of neatly organized client/ patient fles using a lateral
fle cabinet.
or alphabetically. A numerical filing system can work in one of two ways:
either each client is assigned a number, or each individual patient is assigned
 s e Aq pusad si 'h yn o  '  rqu e
The colors on the records then vary, depending on the number that has been
assigned to a particular client or patient.
As an example, a practice using numerical filing of medical records might
use end-tab folders and apply the colored numbers to the end (or bottom) of
the folder. Usually a single sticker with the last two dligits of the year is applied
on the bottom edge of the same tab. Then the medical records are filed on
open shelves with the end tabs, complete with numbers, visible to the recep-
tionist. It is easy to see at a glance if there are files out of sequence. Tabbed
Bu es  sn r i  ri a ae s
sequences. This system is time consuming as frst the client name has to be
located in order to retrieve the correct number.
 For medical records fled using the alphabetic filing system, the concept
is very similar to numerically sequenced medical records. Each letter of the
alphabet is assigned a color, and the first two or three letters of the last name
are attached to the right side tab of the folder: for example JONES would be
designated JO while Mc Whitten would receive three letters, McW
The practice where you work will probably have fling systems in place
client education handouts that are frequently used in the practice. There will
Copy right 2011 Cengage
CHAPTER 3
Front Office and Receptionist Duties
53
also be various forms and certificates, which are used throughout the prac-
aau ol si Aaies auo puy oi Asea pue paziueaio iday aq isnu ieun ao
hanging files organized by topic, and then, within the hanging fles, to have
manila-tabbed folders organized alphabetically. This system allows related
information or paperwork to be stored in the same place and to be organized
and accessed easily
All the forms that are used and reproduced within the clinic should have
one file containing all the master sheets for making additional copies. If a
will prevent the last copy from being used, acts as a reminder to print more
copies and the yellow highlighter will not be visible on the new copies.
Making Filing Efficient
When you are getting ready to replace files in their appropriate places, use
your time as efficiently as possible. The first step is to separate the fles into
 their appropriate groupings. For instance, gather the medical records together,
the client education handouts together, and so forth. Next, be sure that all the
pertinent and updated information is in each of the fles. You should check
to be sure that all appropriate entries have been made in the medical records
before they are returmed to their shelves.
When you are confident that updating is complete, you are ready to begin
 r e sin  p  ae n f ssd  a
the appropriate order, either numerically or alphabetically, before filing them.
One time-saving trick when retrieving a fle folder from open shelving is to
pull out the adjacent file a short distance. This simple technique marks the
location from which you have retrieved the fle and makes it easier to return.
It is best to re-file medical records frequently throughout the day to eliminate
clutter and to make the records easy to locate if they are needed later
Admissions and Discharges
Admissions to and discharges from the veterinary practice are usually completed
by a veterinary technician or the receptionist. Front offce staff are there to
greet the clients and to acdmit the patient, either for a drop-off examination or
surgery that day. Discharges are similar but usually follow a consultation with
the veterinarian. You should know the procedures for admitting and discharg-
soeid ison qof ano jo jed sueodu pue jeau ue si siul se siuaned gu
have clearly outlined procedures to follow—usually a step-by-step process
that includes specifc paperwork (Figure 3-10). It is important to document all
procedures that are to be performed on an animal, as well as any medication
the animal is to receive upon admission for a procedure.
An important part of the admission process is having written consent to
proceed with diagnostic procedures, surgery, or with a treatment plan. Upon
discharge, it is equally important to have written discharge orders with clear fol-
low-up instructions when the patient leaves the hospital. This allows the client to
s  p s  e a an  pn q s as a 
t0 prevent any confusion from inaccurate recollection of verbal instructions.
Copy right 201l Cengage Lea
54
PART 1
The Veterinary Office
FIGURE 3-10  Proper documentation is important for both
admissions and discharges.
Admitting a Patient
Animal patients are admitted to a veterinary hospital for many reasons
 The client may be unable to stay for a procedure that would normally
be performed on an outpatient basis
 The pet may be scheduled for a wellness examination, or perhaps
paeiap ia o no iop sueodu Aleadsa si iI panu io yis si 1!
information from the client when pets are “dropped off." You must
know exactly why the animal is being admitted, the procedures
scheduled, and especially how to contact the client during the day
 The animal may be admitted for a period of supervised care while the
client is out of town.
The patient is being acdmitted for a surgical or dental procedure.
e Hueu pue iedsou Areuanan u ne urieoq si eue au sdeu
medical or surgical procedure done during its stay
d sn   a n  s  
on an outpatient basis while the client waits.
Regardless of the reason, it is important to know precisely why the animal is
being admitted and have all required paperwork completed before the client
leaves.
It is critical that you get all the relevant information from the client
u ynoou e an oi ans aq isn noy oisse a jo a al 1e
accurate history. Record all concerms or questions the client has and con-
firm how and when the client may be reached. Record telephone or pager
numbers in case the client must be reached to answer questions, to give
consent for additional procedures, or simply to be updated about the
patient's condition.
 An animal should never be left at a veterinary practice without a written,
signed consent form in the medical record. By reading and signing the form.
p q oi saannd aul rn ssoo pan ru no su saa n u
Copy right 2011 Cengage
or eChapter(s)
CHAPTER 3
Front Office and Receptionist Duties
55
and acknowledges the potential risks. Most hospitals use either preprinted
fill-in-the-blank forms, or they have prepared consent forms, loaded into the
computer system, that may be personalized with specific client and patient
information. Most forms tend to have fairly standard consent language. You
 will need to become very familiar with the forms used by the veterinary practice
where you work, because you may be asked to answer clients' questions about
giving their consent.
You should be able to explain, step by step, each section of a consent
form and without going into surgical details have some basic knowledge of the
procedure listed. For example, a surgical consent form may include possibili-
Bo Adeaun pin snouau se yns Aains aun bunp nooo Ae jeui sa
veterinarian recommends and why.
e consent form is signed, the client
gets a copy for his or her own records, and the original goes into the medical
nt may also be a separate, signed document
which is as straightforwardl and simple as the following (Figure 3-1l).
cine workup), the veterinarian will list on the consent form all procedures she
 anticipates doing. Sometimes, the form uses general language like “appropriate
laboratory tests." Once again, the client gets a copy of the signed consent form,
and the original is inserted into the medical record
Discharging a Patient
Often, the veterinarian will meet with the owner before the discharge of a
patient. This may be after a period of hospitalization in order to review with
 the client test results, surgical fndings, postoperative care, or recommended
follow-up instructions (Figure 3-12). After the consultation, the client and
patient complete the dlischarge procedure at the front desk.
SEDATIVE /ANESTHESIA CONSENT
You are to use all reasonable precaution against injury, escape,
or death of y pet. I understand that all anesthesia involves some
on.
minimal risk to my pet, but you will not be held liable or respon-
sible in any manner whatever or under any circumstances
in connection therewith as it is thoroughly understood that I
assume all risks.
I have read the foregoing and agree.
Owner or Responsible Party
Date
FIGURE 3-11 An example of a consent form
Copyright 201l Cengage Le
56
PART 1
The Veterinary Office
CITY HOSPITAL
ANY STREET
ANYTOWN, SS 00000
FOLLOW-UP INSTRUCTIONS FOR HOME CARE AFTER SURGERY
pue leou uun pa aow headde ae ad anon eisaunsaue leauaa jo siaa aun on ana
possibly a little uncoordinated. This is to be expected, and the grogginess should disappear in a
day or two, at the latest.
· To prevent vomiting due to excitement upon arriving home, do not give your pet food or
water for an hour after returning home. Feed the regular diet lightly today, then return to
normal feeding tomorrow.
the veterinary hospital immediately.
· Discourage your pet from licking or chewing the stitches or incision. Call us if licking or
chewing persists.
· Check the incision site twice a day for any redness, swelling, pain, or drainage. Report any of
these immediately.
● Limit exercise for a week following surgery. (No running or jumping)
excessively wet or dirty.
FUTURE TREATMENT
 Please make an appointment for a recheck in _
days/weeks.
  Please make an appointment for suture removal in _
days.
'p - u! leaowau do ahueuo ahepuea loy suawuiodde ue aeu aseald 
  Remove bandage at home in.
_days.
ADDITIONAL INSTRUCTIONS:
Copy right 2011 Cengag
 eChapter(s)
CHAPTER 3
Front Office and Receptionist Duties
57
The practice may use standard written discharge instructions to follow
what are considered routine procedures such as a spay or neuter. These
instructions may be stored in the computer to be personalized for each patient.
or they may be preprinted forms. Most discharge orders have blanks which are
 flled in and most include comments about the following:
 prescribed medications, including the drug name, the dosage, and how
often it is to be given
 dietary modifications
 the patient's recommended activity level
bathing or being in water, playing with other pets, or the level of
necessary confinement
 care of an incision and when the sutures should be removed
 specific instructions about what to look for and when to call if a
 problem arises
●scheduled follow-up visits
When the client has reviewed the discharge instructions and has had his
ya sao un sros pauis aul po Adoo e panasue suosanb au 1o
the client and the original remains in the medical record. At the time of dis-
charge, the client often receives a copy of any laboratory analyses that have
been performed.
Forms and Certificates
There are many different forms and certificates in use at a veterinary practice.
Become familiar with all of these in case you are asked to fll one out or to
answer a client's questions.
We discussed, in the previous section, consent forms and discharge
       e n      s
to prove that the animal is no longer sexually intact. This proof may allow the
dlient to get a discount on the pet's license and may be required for the client to
fulfll his or her obligation to a shelter from which the animal has been adopted.
Vaccination certificates are usually prepared each time an animal has
received an inoculation. Rabies certificates are handwritten on county issued
forms, printed in triplicate, and numerically sequenced. With each certificate,
a numerically matched metal tag is issued to the owner and most counties
require the tag to be clearly visible and attached to the pet's collar. A licensed
e d ind saed  pau aq  s u
receives a vaccination. Computer linking can also generate future reminder
cards for inoculations, as well as help identify a lost animal by matching the
number of the rabies tag to the owner's name and adldress.
Health certificates are more complex forms that are required for inter-
state and intermational transport of an animal. The veterinarian is the only
person authorized to sign a health certificate.
Copyright 201I Cengage Lea
or eChapte r( s)
PART 1 
The Veterinary Office
 Most of the certificates used in veterinary practice require a veterinarian's
signature. If the form is not required to be filled out by only a veterinarian, then
id al am no a po pe aien a adad oi pie aq  no
 n   n      n s an  
to the veterinarian for his or her signature when the information contained on
it is as complete as possible. If the patient has been hospitalized, you may be
 xo pei   no y s an  a u aed oi p
uais rop Apeai wop aui aey oi paxse aq Aids Ae noA 1o xoq essa
at the front desk when the veterinarian escorts the client to the reception area.
a nn  q i  a A e s ad A
that record keeping. certificates, and other appropriate paperwork are handled
 un  in i sn ln  aine pe 'a  e 
of how things are done at the practice where you work.
Screening and Processing Mail
It will no doubt be a part of your front offce tasks to handle the practice's mail.
both incoming and outgoing. You need to know how the mail is sorted and
 delivered to the appropriate person. If unsure, always ask for the specifics as
Incoming Mail
You will need to know the preferred process for screening the incoming mail
in your practice. Be prepared to be able to answer the following questions:
 Is the mail delivered to the practice facility by a mail carrier, or must it
be picked up at the local post office?
 Is collecting the incoming mail the specific responsibility of one person
 in the practice, or is it a shared job?
What time of day is the mail delivered, or by what time can you count
on the mail to be ready in the post offce box?
What time can you expect altemative deliveries like UPS or Federal
Express?
is e aba ni sd no p po sap o uis A o
 Undoubtedly, there will be a plethora of supplier catalogues, professional
journals, and magazine subscriptions for clients and children to enjoy while in
the waiting room. All professional jourmals should be delivered to the veteri-
s au ee udai a u  aau an s a u aed io ue
should be placed in the reception area, removing the older copies and replac-
ing them with the new issues
 Next, sort the mail by addressee (recipient), and then place each piece into
 the appropriate receptacle. The practice may have trays marked with each staff
 member's name for depositing phone messages and mail. Who receives envelopes
adressed to the practice (the practice owner, the clinic manager, or someone else)?
You must also learn the process for accepting deliveries of medical or offce
d a ie ae   o so ai  aru d ai  s
Copyright 201l Cengage L
CHAPTER 3
Front Office and Receptionist Duties
59
Who is responsible for unloading shipments of medical supplies? Is there any
as a o ds ued an umn Aq raa usad jei isisse u no Aem
 that everything has arrived or by helping to put things away and rotating the
Every practice has its own ways of dealing with incoming mail and pack-
 ages and once you have learned the established routine you will become
very proficient and helpful to everyone. You should never open mail that is
 addressed to a specific person no matter how inconsequential it may appear.
Outgoing Mail
When dealing with outgoing mail, the frst step is to classify it for postage and
shipping preferences. First-class letters receive dlifferent postage than remincder
 postcards dlirected to clients. Packages are often sent though delivery compa-
 and a telephone numbers to call for pickup. You will need answers to the fol-
lowing questions:
 How is postage for the outgoing mail handled?
 Is there a postage scale in the practice for weighing mail and
 dletermining the appropriate postage?
 Is there a postage meter in the practice for applying postage without
using stamps and without having to take the mail to the local post
office?
Do iaes peisod au Aq anoed aul ne dn paid pu uoino aui si
does it need to be taken to the local post office?
Which person in the practice contacts UPs, Federal Express, or other
altermative carriers for a pickup?
idnoid 1oi saaexed fuoino anedaid oi pazuoune aq noA 1
Handling Mail Problems
Different types of problems with letters, packages, and carrier services some-
times occur. For instance, if a letter or a reminder postcard to a client is
retumed because the address is no longer correct, you need to know how to
track down the new address and amend the information in the client's fle.
both the hard copy and in the computer. Sometimes the forwarding order has
sspe mau aui oi p uaap iau ou si aias peisod au pue padxa
after it has been sent to the previous address. Very often, however, there is
a sticker on the front of the card or envelope that lists the new address. It is
easy to update the computer record and client file at that time. Sometimes a
client receives mail at a post offce box rather than at a physical address. This
problem is relatively easy to avoid by carefully filling out the client information
form or computer screen when the client frst comes into the practice. Most
new clients dlistinguish between the physical adldress and the mailing address.
raq  oi oa no ionid e ps i ard an ye si 
aul apueu oi mou mou oi paau no 'dn i yid oi u dois oi sualuaauooui si i
and what cannot? How are medicines packaged? How are the clients charged?
Copy right 2011 Cengage L
60
PART 1 
The Veterinary Office
Most problems with postal or package services can be resolved easily and
by knowing which member of staff is most likely to have the answers to the
 problem. You need to know who has the authority to make decisions about
incoming and outgoing mail and packages. You will then be in a position to
[ jo saun aiel an Sussad u pyda isou q ues no moy mou
 that pass through the veterinary office.
SUMMARY
Medical records are the single most important tool a veterinarian has, providing
him or her with the patient's medical history, wellness examinations, and vac-
cination history. They provide documentation relating to clients, their animals,
tests and procedures, and medications, and they are essential from the stand-
points of health, efficiency, and legality. Veterinarians rely on their office man-
Aadd are soun pe soan pa in ansua oi ai nu
labeled, fled, and organized in an efficient, easy-to-uncderstand manner.
The office procedures within the veterinary practice is, in many ways. just
as important as the medical procedures. As a staff member, you will likely be
responsible, at least in part, for maintaining client invoices, medical records
and logbooks, forms and certificates, admitting and discharging patients, han-
 dling incoming and outgoing mail. While these duties may seem tedious at
times, even the slightest error can have far-reaching consequences, so it is
  d  s     a 
SCENARIO
A client of several years has brought her 6-year-old, long-hair cat in for an
appointment after realizing that the cat was vomiting almost daily. She said that
the "vomit was the same color as her cat food—only hairy" She was greeted
by the front office staff and as the client's file had already been pulled, she was
n nn an    n  n   o n
in the room and have all the information ready to meet with the veterinarian.
A veterinary assistant held and petted the cat while the veterinarian
 reviewed the fle and asked the client some questions about the cat's recent
health and behavior. The veterinarian who had not seen this patient before
read in the fle that this cat had been brought in one month ago for a similar
problem.
By reading the history and asking several questions of the cat's owner, the
veterinarian was able to determine that this was a repeat episode of hairballs.
due to the cat's normal grooming behavior and ingestion of loose hair. He
explained the situation to the client who then remembered the other episode
eoaq pazionode uaun pue gun jo jos aes aui sem stun ieun paane pue
she hadn't been brushing the cat or giving it the recommended treatment as
often she probably should have. The problem was easily addressed and the
client reassured, without blame, that this is a fairly common problem with
long-haired cats.
Copy right 20ll Ce ngage L
CHAPTER 3
Front Office and Receptionist Duties
61
 How did the use of medical records play into this scenario?
 What might have happened if the medical record had not been
 available?
How did proper filing aid the front offce staff in this situation?
REVIEW
Indicate whether statements l-7 are true or false. If false, what would be
required to make them true?
1. Medical records provide for rapid retrieval of client information as well
as patient information in case of an emergency.
2. Medical records allow a veterinarian to track certain medical trends
within the patient population.
 3. All information in a medical record should be written in pencil in case
important changes need to be made.
4.A
 After the client signs the consent form, the original should be given to
the client, and a copy should stay in the medical record.
5.1
 Upon acdmission of his or her animal, a client can give verbal consent for
the staff to proceed with diagnostic procedures and treatments.
6. A surgical consent form should include an explanation of the risks of
anesthesia
 7. When sorting mail, you should open all envelopes with a letter opener,
including personal or confidential mail.
8. List l0 components of a medical record.
9. Who is authorized to release information from a medical record?
10.H
 How long should inactive medical records be stored?
the controlled substance logbook.
12. What are the two systems commonly in use for filing medical records?
13. What different types of medical records are mentioned in the text?
14. List three ways to make filing more efficient.
15. List fve considerations for a patient that a discharge form might address.
16. What are two important types of certifcates that require the signature of
a veterinarian, and describe their purpose.
17. List three questions you should ask to learn the procedure for screening
incoming mail.
18. List two altermatives to the U.S. Postal Service for picking up outgoing mail.
ONLINE RESOURCE
This Web site offers a variety of preprinted forms, labels, and fling system
products designed specifically for the veterinary office.
http://www.ancom-filing.com
Copy right 2011 Cengage
 and/or eChapte r(s)
Copy right 2011 Cengage 
quire i
64
PART 1
The Veterinary Office
Introduction
Veterinary offices, like other medical practices and hospitals today, rely on
computers for scheduling, organizing data, tracking patient information,
accounting and billing, messaging. and the daily organization of the prac-
  m a   d n  
you may not have had exposure to specifically designed veterinary programs.
 Different practices may vary in the computer program used but all of the vet-
erinary software programs, those that dlirect the operation of the computer.
ul iaa ol pazisno Aea aq Ae pue asn jo 3sea ion paiean uaaq aa
1 'anq rnd e pas au aa no f d end e jo sa
may seem a little intimidating at frst. Computers and computer programs
are not designed to be cliffcult but rather to make life easier. Once you have
developed a basic understanding of computers, you will find it much easier to
use one efficiently. New employees are given extensive training in how to use
0 moq uea pue aed on Addo Aiaaa uai pe ando ao au
 pe  ss  ssn e a
 There is a wide variety of computers and computer programs available yet
they all have basic similarities. On the job, you will learn to use your employ-
er's particular software programs and you will be expected to understand some
general facts about computers and their components.
Computer Components
The setup of all computer systems is basically the same. The computer sys-
tem in a veterinary practice usually consists of a central processing unit
(CPU) with a hard drive, CD-ROM or CD-R drive, a monitor, mouse, key-
board, and at least one printer. It may also include a modem (if your office
has Intermet access), a scanner, extermal storage devices such as a UsB flash
 drive (*"thumb drive"), and a digital camera station. The physical compo-
nents of a computer system are known collectively as hardware. Figure 4-1
shows the components of a computer system.
 m no se juaa jo aid u Aads ue si raud 
using it to print reports, client information sheets, reminder cards, statements,
copies of patient medical records, invoices, and receipts. You will need to
- auon aui aueuo e*uef nded, e eap pe iaded aun pei oi mou mou
tridge and drum, or printer ribbon, and become proficient with printer main-
tenance and to troubleshoot problems which may arise. In addition, many
(-t ani) uoi xn pue s on Ae a ar mou sid
Experienced staff will provide you with the training and practice you need to
 perform all these functions.
Generally you would not need to know a great deal about the hardware
beyond turming everything on and off correctly. Most of the training you
receive will be for the sofrware programs used with the computer system.
 Software may include the operating system, word processing programs,
Intermet and e-mail applications, and the specifc veterinary programs used
 in the practice.
Copy right 2011 Cengage
or eChapters
CHAPTER 4
Computers
65
Software
Software
Input Devices
Output Devices
Mouse
Monitor
Keyboard
 Printer
lar/Lengage
 Scanner
Modem
 Central Processing Unit 
FIGURE 4-1  Various components of a system.
Veterinary Software
Computer software can simplify most of the tasks in a veterinary office or
n  sd rnd ia jo ru e a a s 
 market today, used for a variety of purposes, including:
 organizing medical records
 scheduling
 inventory management
marketing
 generating performance evaluation reports
 time card processing
 posting account ledgers for inventory and clients 
 merging new fles into an alphabetical or numerical fling system
creating invoices
 formatting. storing, and printing form letters, mailing labels, payroll
summaries, paychecks, charts, graphs, bank statements, telephone
directories, and other data
Copy right 2011 Cengage L
m the e Book and/or eChapte r( s).
we nt rights re strictions require it
66
PART 1
The Veterinary Office
Hospital,
FIGURE 4-2  Modern office equipment often combines printer, scan, and fax
capabilities into one compact machine.
The ease of performing these tasks on a computer explains why most recep-
tionists and veterinary assistants feel fortunate to work in a computerized
office.
CommonIy used Programs
-o Aaaa uo puy m non jeui mond pienuis Asnui aus ou si aa
puter, but here are some common types of programs and examples of each:
operating system: Microsoft Windows, Mac OS
general word processing: Microsoft Word, WordPerfect
 general database management: Microsoft Access, Corel Paradox
general spreadsheet: Microsoft Excel, Corel Quattro
 general communication (including e-mail): Microsoft Outlook,
Windows Live Mail
Web browser: Intermet Explorer, Mozilla Firefox, Google Chrome
Your office will probably use a combination of several of the programs and
may update sites and preferences occasionally. All staff will receive training.
often from a representative of the new program, explaining fully how to use 
the system, its features, and benefits.
Copy right 2011 Cengage
or eChapter(s)
CHAPTER 4
Computers
67
Computer Networks
Unless you work in a very small practice, there will likely be more than one
computer in the office. Veterinary hospitals and practices with multiple com-
 puter stations often employ a computer network system that links the com-
   s  e    s
1. Intraner. An intranet is a computer network that links only the
computers in a single offce or building. Only authorized computer users
in the building can access the intranet, using an assigned user name and
 password. Each computer on the network is called a workstation. Each
workstation is wired into a central hub, which allows the workstations
to “talk" to one another. When there are more than a few computers
in the office, there may be a central server, a computer dedicated to
managing network traffic and resources. The server might be used to store
and manage common files, process print jobs for shared printers, and
maintain a shared Intemet connection.
 2. Extranet. An extranet serves essentially the same function as an intranet,
 but allows limited access to people off-site. A user name and password
a firewall, software or hardware designed to limit access to the server.
 Extranets are most often used by large companies with employees who
need to share information. Extranet use is usually accessed via the Intermet.
 3. Interner. The Intermet is an enormous worldwide series of computer
networks that allows indivicdual computer users to access innumerable
 personal or business servers. Although a user name and password is
 required to gain access to the Intermet through your Internet service
sso ci ssao uea oi au paau nou op Aag no (asi apod
sites (Web pages) available through the Intermet. However, many sites do
have subscription-based services or areas on their Web sites which require
registration and limit access to certain people, for example, veterinarians
or members of the organization who maintain the Web page (Figure 4-3)
Why would a veterinary hospital or practice use a computer network? Common
uses include:
File sharing. The most common use of a computer network is fle shar-
ing. All files that several people may need access to can be stored in a
single location and pulled up as needed. This feature is especially useful
when a change is made. For example, if you update a document and
 save it, everyone from that point on will have the most up-to-date ver-
sion, whereas in the past, each individual person would have to make
the same update (Figure 4-4).
 Printer sharing. Most offices do not have separate printers for every
computer, so a network can be used to share a printer among various
 sid jo sad s aea oi pasn aq osie uo in so
   d  e  s e d r n 
white and a graph or color-coded chart on a color inkjet.
Copyright 201l Cengage Lear
68
PART 1
The Veterinary Office
FIGURE 4-3  Some
professionalwebsites
may require registration
and limit access to 
veterinarians.
FIGURE 4-4 If entered into the computer. this data would be quickly available to al
those who needed it.
Copyright 2011 Cengage
CHAPTER 4
Computers
69
 Sharing database access. A database is a special type of file that contains
uniform pieces of information organized into an accessible system. For
example, your practice might have a client database with individual
fields for the client's name, the patient's name, an address, phone
number, and other information. Because databases are often updated
 frequently, shared access allows each user to have the most up-to-date
information.
 File transfers. In the past, when you had a file on your computer that you
wanted to give to someone else, you had to put it on a disk and transfer it
physically Many fles are too large for disks, and you might not have access
to a USB flash drive or a CD-writer (CD-R). By using a computer network,
sd nae o rndo nnoa  aty e Adoo  u no
 Communication. An intranet can also be used to facilitate communication
between veterinary employees, especially in larger hospitals or offices
and when each person has his or her own workstation or computer
Peterson, the lab results are back and ready for your review.") can be
 p p sss n -a po  an un iu i e j
recipient will see them.
 Sharing Internet access. If your practice is large enough to have a com-
puter network, it most likely also has a broadband Intermet connec-
tion, which is a connection that is constantly on and, with the help of
the network, can be shared by any or all computer users at the same
 e p  ae   d s o  
up connection via the telephone and the connection through broadband
is much quicker.
The Veterinary Practice Web Site
It is becoming more and more common for veterinary practices and hospitals
-q na so a n qm e po  a  asd iai  a 
ness Web sites, it contains basic information such as the name of the practice.
the address and phone number, office hours, a brief description of the practice,
and the names and credentials of the veterinarians and other staff. Common
 components of a veterinary Web site might include:
· driving directions and a map
 an e-mail link so that visitors may ask questions
 links to related sites, such as general animal-interest sites, information
about particular breeds, veterinary news sites
 an online library of articles, defnitions, common ailments
a s a pm a s ne n
information into a form and requesting a certain day and time to come
in, and then having a member of the staff contact them to verify or
change the appointment
Copyright 201I Cengage Lea
and/or eChapte r(s)
70
PART 1 
The Veterinary Office
prescription refill information and online request forms
Aeia iains is o se yns sis Aeads o u
dentistry) and explanations of what is involved
 general pet health and care information
clinics, or other events, such as National Veterinary Technician Week or
a heartworm clinic in the spring
employment opportunities
Aaisusa aui pauise aq uai no as qi e seu aod anoa f
of checking and answering client e-mails and contacting clients confrming
online appointment and prescription refll requests. If so, you need to incor-
porate these duties into your daily routine, checking the e-mail each morning
when you come in, and at designated points throughout the day. You should
returm e-mails and other online communications in as timely a manner as you
would respond to a telephone call orletter. Responding quickly and effectively
to online requests reflects positively on the practice and shows that the staff are
 caring and professional.
SUMMARY
Computers have become an important part of veterinary practice management
and it is essential that all staff learn how to use them. The physical components
of a computer are called hardware, andl the programs used on the computer are
called sofrware. There are a number of dlifferent types of computer programs
 that are used for cdifferent purposes, inclucding word processing, database man-
agement, e-mail and Web browsing, as well as specialized veterinary software
used for medical record organization, scheduling, and multiple other func-
 tions from inventory control to staff management.
Interconnected computers are called a network. Most practices that use
computer networks use an intranet, which allows users to share informa-
tion and fles, communicate on line, and share printers and Internet access.
Your practice might also have a Web site, which may allow clients to request
prescription refills and schedule appointments on line. If so, you might be
responsible for keeping track of such online requests and communicating with
 clients in a timely and professional manner.
SCENARIO
MJ is a veterinary assistant employed as a receptionist for a busy animal clinic.
One of her daily responsibilities is to check the e-mail each morming to see if
any clients have sent in questions, prescription refill requests, or to schedule
tion refills and sets the note aside to pass along to the veterinary technician
 ose au  al A pe j udsd an  l om
Copyright 2011 Cengage L
and/or eChapte r(s)
CHAPTER 4
Computers
71
Ue aaey oi fuse guuno snonand aul oe:o1 1e isanban e un suas y in ie
pu au , unou aus peq oi, uoue jxau ayn ooiz ne suadde 
only e-mailed earlier, I would have been able to fit him in." Unfortunately
Mrs. B called yesterday aftermoon asking to come in at the same time, and the
appointment was given to her. MJ replied to Mr. A's e-mail sending a list of
available times, and then logged off.
 How did MJ use the computer to aid in her work?
 How could MJ have prevented the scheduling conflict?
 How else could MJ have used the computer to make her job go easier
and faster?
· How should MJ use the computer again today? Why?
REVIEW
Indicate whether the following statements are true or false. If false, indicate
how the statement could be made true.
1. The best way to learn how to use a computer is to read.
2.
 The computer monitor is considered a piece of software.
3. The computer keyboard is a type of hardware.
4. A laser printer uses toner instead of a ribbon.
 5. Microsoft Windows is a popular word processing program.
 6. If a veterinary practice has a computer network, it will most likely be an
intranet.
 7. Veterinary computer programs can only be used to diagnose medical
conditions.
 8. Broadband connections are faster than dial-up connections.
9. A computer network can be used to share printers and files.
10. A Web site can be used both to provide information to clients and
to facilitate communication.
ONLINE RESOURCES
Webopedia
 This site is an online dictionary of computer and Intermet terms. Visitors may
search by keyword or category, review the latest addlitions, the top 15 terms,
or the “term of the day."
<http://www.webopedia.com>
MyVetOnline Directory of Veterinary Web sites
Use this site to locate veterinary practice Web sites all over the country.
<http://www.myvetonline.com>
Copy right 2011 Cengage
or eChapter(s)
72
PART 1
The Veterinary Office
Microsoft
Microsoft is the manufacturer of the Windows operating systems and the
Microsoft Offce suite of applications. This site features information regarding
the latest releases, free updates, and driver downloads.
chttp://www.microsoft.com>
Apple
Apple is the manufacturer of the Macintosh series of computers and operat-
 ing systems. This site features information regarcding the latest releases, free
updates, and driver downloads.
<http://www.apple.com>
Corel
Corel is the manufacturer of the WordPerfect suite of office applications. This
site features information regarding the latest releases, free updates, and driver
downloads.
http:/ /www.corel.com
Spectrum Management Systems
Software designed specifically for veterinary practices.
<http://www.vetsystems.com>
Veterinary Practice Management System
Veterinary Practice Management System provides links to VCA Antec, Abaxis,
Heska, and Idexx
http:/ /www.viainfosys.com
AVl Mark Veterinary Management Software Systems
This software system offers "Webinars.," monthly tutorials on various topics to
increase user knowledge of the system. It also has blogs, a Yahoo group, and
AviMark forum for user discussions. It is integrated with all VetScan laboratory
equipments.
<http://www.Avimark.net>
Copy right 2011 Cengage
nd/or eChapte r( s)
PART2
Communication and Professional Growth
Copy right 2011 Cengage 
quire i
76
PART 2
Communication and Professionaf Growth
Introduction
We communicate with each other all the time by sharing thoughts with
spoken words, written words, and body language; we exchange information
by communication. However, not all of our communication is effective. For
instance, did you ever try to have a conversation with someone who for some
reason or another was not listening to you? Or have you ever tried to read a
Su l ipuisiun oi noA io ood coi uam no inoy ooi sm ien nl
 frustrating when the lines of communication are not completely open.
As a member of the offce management team, you will rely heavily on
-n n m a s ne ss n sdn no
 on      n  od   
successfully with office staff and clients. You will handle incoming and out-
going telephone call, schedule appointments, and greet clients. In order to
be successful, you need to develop and understand good interpersonal com-
munication skills
In this chapter, you will learn how to communicate verbally with clients.
both in the offce and over the telephone. You will also learn how to interpret
nonverbal communication—-body language, eye contact, appearance—so you
can make sure the nonverbal messages you are sending to clients are positive.
However, before you leam about interpersonal communication, it is important
 to understand how communication works.
The Communication Process
The communication process has four essential elements:
1. message
2. sender
3. channel
4. receiver
01 ssoioe paa oi siuem (rapus au) uosiad auo ieul eapi ue si aoessa y
ticular channel of communication whether it be written, spoken, or even a
meaningful glance. This is known as the communication process (Figure 5-1).
 The receiver can send a return message, which is called feedback. The whole
process is then reversed—the receiver becomes the sender, and the sender
becomes the receiver.
a u su A sad ads e al spunos i rnoi ua
with a person's message, for example, all senders and receivers have their own
sss p pe ssadxa a mo aip re sd n
Education, experience, social and cultural barriers, and religious beliefs are
some of the most significant reference points in our lives. So, even though you
-a pies aau no em adi A ju e ia si sessu inon yu
ently because of his or her reference points.
Other factors can interfere with effective communication. Outside noises
or actions may distract both the sender and the receiver. In writing, the author's
Copy right 2011 Cengage
 eChapters
CHAPTER 5
Interpersonal Communication
INTERFERENCE
BY
SENDER'S
RECEIVER'S
SENDER
REFERENCE
REFERENCE
RECEIVER
POINTS
POINTS
MESSAGE
MESSAGE
MESSAGE
MESSAGE
W-
FEEDBACK LOOP
POSSIBLE SOURCE
OF INTERFERENCE
FIGURE 5-1  The communication process
a Ae napean aul no 'rood aq Ae umu aun gusnuon aq Ae ais
 Good communicators adapt their speech to the listener's needs, expecta-
tions, and ability to comprehend. In your position, you must be able to “read"
pue puisapun Aau siessa aun puas uen no os Anb adoad rao
appreciate. For example, some clients will have little or no knowledge of vet-
pu no sn aue aup sme pus no os opouan pea ea
 syads un piae 'ia aaq no uu uim yeads non uum an ol
terms and jargon altogether. By contrast, other clients may be very well aware
 'snssi iea pue ya siad nui noe iep ie e pusun pue 
clients might be offended if they perceive that you are talking down to them.
Traits for Positive Interpersonal Relations
Think of someone you enjoy talking to. Chances are the two of you have some
things in common, that you relate to each other in some way. It is just as
no um m as  ui s oi an on n pous no  s
 i od i     e  n s o 
diffcult; you already share some things in common, your concerm and love
for animals. You will relate to some of your clients without even trying. With
others, however, you may have to work at it a bit. Developing the following
 personality traits will help you relate to all of your clients:
patience
tact
kindness
courtesy
empathy
Copy right 2011 Cengage
 eChapter(s)
78
PART2
Communication and Professional Growth
To have patience means to deal with diffcult situations calmly and with-
out complaint, annoyance, or losing your temper. In a veterinary offce, you
 na jo ne n si nn pse  jd aq o 
  m  s  n   m n s 
for appointments. Others bring their pets into the office unrestrained, even
am e ui auo yseal e sn oi Aaieadan aul paxse au Ar no ynol
clients will even blame you for things beyond your control, such as the length
of time they have to wait to see the veterinarian or the amount of their bill. You
need great patience to deal with people like this, and it is important for you to
resist the temptation to react. Consider the following examples:
pe Ausiaa ue jeun ine A jou st in inq Xos uI udu
l e im oi aaeq noA pue juaodde nnoA anojq isn!
I no rn Ae e pa sq a an i Aos i 
know you are busy too. Would you like to wait or would you like to
 au s rn  if    ide  
the wait is likely to be.
as quickly as possible. Each visit needs to be a positive, welcoming experience
for them, not leaving them feeling like they have been in a rushed assembly
line. It also helps to offer some refreshment such as coffee, tea, or even a glass
of water.
Kindness means being helpful, compassionate, and friendly. It means
treating others as you would want to be treated if the situation were reversed.
Insensitive: Hi,have a seat.
Kind: Good morming. It's nice to see you and your little friend again.
 How have you been? (Pause for response from client) Let's just get your
fle updated, a quick weight check and the doctor will be ready for you.
Tact means doing and saying the right things at the right time. If you
are tactful, you are diplomatic and skilled in dealing with potentially sensi
tive issues. You can maintain good relations with others and avoid offense.
Sometimes, to avoid potential communication problems a nonverbal cue such
as a posted sign or directive can eliminate misunderstandings that could lead
staff need to be perceptive and understand their own feelings and those of oth-
ers. Oftentimes, it is not what is said but how it is said that causes offense. For
instance, a client is very late for an appointment:
 isn lnoA mon oe sai 1t sm juadde nnon ss
to wait until we can fit you in. It may be a while.
Tactful friendly greeting: Hello. We were getting a little concermed. Is
everything alright? (The client has a chance to respond and reports
that the roads are terrible and there was a major accident on the main
street.) Why don't you have a seat for a few minutes. Can I get any-
thing for you? We will try and get you in just as soon as possible.
Copyright 201l Cengage Lea
CHAPTER 5
Interpersonat Communication
79
on,
示
FIGURE 5-2 Not all communication is verbal. Here, α sign
requests that all dogs should be leashed. Also note that for
client compliance, leashes are available.
You also need to be tactful when you tell clients that their animals or their
children are disrupting the reception area.
Tactless: Will you please stop your dog from barking!? He's so loud that
I cannot hear the person on the telephone.
Tactful: Excuse me, but Rex is so excited I have a problem hearing the
person on the phone. It will be about l0 minutes yet for the doctor to see
 aas u diu pue iq a e in apisn xa aen nou Aum nos
Tactless: Kids, stop running around and making all that noise.
Tactful: Chilcdren, would you like to have some magazines and color-
ing sheets? You can use that little table in the cormer.
 o r aq adoad nao po saau a ud su sso
od e uo ssu le jeann pinous non guaia pue funus gueiadoon sueau
professional, and impartial basis. Please, thank you, you're welcome, exruse me,
and how may I help you? should become standard phrases in your vocabulary.
You must be careful not to play favorites; do not do special favors for one client
that you would not do for another or make a big fuss over one pet and ignore
the others. To the owner, every pet is special.
Copy right 2011 Cengage
08
PART 2
Communication and Professional Growth
Empathy means being able to feel and understand what another person is
feeling. When you empathize with your clients, you show that you understand
what they are feeling.
CulENT: I've never felt so exhausted in my life. Housebreaking a puppy is
hard work.
l ne sai nnon uo Suaq fu Aiaa aq uo ui-asno :isnii
-ads ym ao rydiu Aiaa e si li s A suie juaad oi al
a al e il a di   a   s i
Interacting With Clients and Co-Workers
Speaking with Clients
During an average day, veterinary staff could answer more than a hundred
 si    n  pds   h s
tions and giving them advice about pet care. Sometimes, it can be frustrating.
Clients will ask you the very questions that you have just finished answering.
Other times, you may feel clients' questions are irrelevant, unnecessary, or a
 rushed or iritated. Answer all questions patiently and tactfully.
One way to help clients with their questions is to give them written instruc-
tions along with your verbal instructions
STAFF: The name of the drug and directions for giving these tablets are
right here, on the bottle: one pill, with food, three times a day It helps to
 ci   no o aa a ai   sn pads e a
have any questions at all.
A good technique to use is the “echo" technique to make sure clients
understand directions. To do this, ask the client nicely to repeat the directions
Aaa uasi 'uaui d supuisiapunsu ou ae aiau ans axeu ot, noA on yoeq
     e    s
 a on m  o oqe sub   no o cs
medication?
 pooy yim Kep e aaui siaa aus pies no :ina
STAFF: Perfect.
Because you work in an animal hospital, clients will often ask your advice about
their pet's medical problems. You must never discuss dlifferent types of treat-
ments with clients, suggest a diagnosis or possible outcome. Never interject
your own personal experiences with your own pet's problems or those of a sim-
ilar case. Tactfully advise the client to discuss all concerms with the veterinarian.
CllENT: Do you think this lump on Millie's head could be cancer?
nq snoixue ane nok 1eul pueisapun I mou luop Aleai I Xios uI :avis
the doctor will examine it and help you with your questions.
Copyright 201l Cengage
and/or eChapter(s
CHAPTER 5
Interpersonat Communication
81
CllENt: If it is cancer, do you think there is a cure?
 STAFr: I'm sure the doctor will be able to answer all of your questions once
she has made a diagnosis.
When you are interacting with clients, make sure your feedback is
appropriate. That is, the feedback you give should be a true reflection of
your concerm and understanding of the message. For example, if the staff
Yseq e u asuodsan nau paddeus pey aldexa snonad aul u naq
voice, the client would sense impatience and annoyance behind the words.
However, if she used a pleasant voice, made eye contact, and punctuated
her words with a comforting smile, the client would sense the genuine care
staff member shown in Figure 5-3 is projecting a positive, upbeat image to
the client.
Listening
Picture this scene: You have just shown a client into an exam room and when
you turm to leave , see that she is leaning over her l2-year-old Irish setter hold-
 ing her head in her hands. Concermed, you ask, "Are you okay? Can I get you
something?" The client looks up. but does not look you in the eye when she
answers, "Yes, I'm fine. I'm just a little bit tired." However, when you look at
her, you see that she is crying. She tells you with words that she is fine, but the
rest of her says she is very upset. The client is sencling mixed messages that can
put you at a loss for words.
FIGURE 5-3  Eye contact and a smile are strong interpersonal communication tools.
Copy right 2011 Cengage
or eChapter(s)
82
PART 2
Communication and Professionaf Growth
Listening to what others say is an important part of the communication
process but listening is not complete without observation. Keep in mind that
listening involves the eyes as well as the ears. Good listeners hear exactly what
xa suosd ui m sess in ae Aan pue ses uiad re
sions and body language, the gestures and mannerisms that help a person
communicate.
putting your idleas into words, only to be frustrated all the more by someone
else jumping in and filling up the silence during which you were thinking?
Use short periods of silence to allow clients time to collect their thoughts.
Look for nonverbal cues if the silence has gone on too long and is causing
anxiety. If a person is fdgeting or rubbing his or her temples, it is time
break the silence.
N3ISIT OI MOH
Prepare yourself to listen. Stop all other activity and focus your attention on
what is being said
Make eye contact with the speaker.
Concentrate on what is being said.
 Do not allow distractions of any kind to intefere with your listening.
Listen with empathy.
Listen not only to what is being said but also to how something is being said 
Silence at inappropriate moments can sometimes be a sign of hostility or
mental disturbance. Once in a while, you may meet a client who is so upset
about his or her pet's illness or death that he will only speak to the veteri-
narian. In this type of situation, you need to know when not to push things
(Figure 5-4).
In communication, listening is generally more important than talking.
From The Job Survival Instruction Book
Observing
As you just leamed, you need to pay attention to people's body language as
well as their words. In order to be a good communicator, you need to be able
nonverbal behaviors is not always easy. In fact, interpreting nonverbal cues
can be complicated
-noo jeqiaauou isou inq 'aaap aos oi senuel Apoq nno poos u
nication is not always under conscious control. Many of us have habits—nail
biting, finger tapping, hair twisting—that reveal our nervousness or boredom.
Jo sadi 1o Au anq aziugonai oi Iaiasqo ue ioj Asea ae shqey snoain
Copyright 201l Cengage L
CHAPTER 5
Interpersonal Communication
83
FIGURE 5-4  Understanding body language is an important part of communication.
The client clearly does not want to speak with this member of staff.
nonverbal cues are not so obvious. In fact, the same gesture or facial expres-
 is na j 'adxa n s n rs jo a   s
your arms folded over your chest, it could mean you are:
 trying to protect yourself from somebody or something
 hugging yourself as a form of comfort
 conscious about your physical appearance
 cold and trying to warm up
Also, keep in mind that nonverbal behaviors do not mean the same thing
to everyone. For instance, in North America a nod of the head means yes and
  o s o  s    o s   j  
shake means yes.
You should not jump to any conclusions about the meaning of any par-
ticular nonverbal communication. If you are dealing with a client and wish to
understand a certain nonverbal message, you might discuss your observations
with him. Ask the client about his or her feelings. Just remember that your
observation should never be stated rudely or seem judgmental. Use tact, by
au Aeqd jou o au aul 1e anendondde pue suau si ieum Sues pue Buiop
d sn i  n ssd nies
Copy right 2011 Cengage
[ eChapter(s)
8
PART 2
Communication and Professionat Growth
 will not hurt your puppy
noA ju neu aui dn umi on Addey aq pnom I aqeojuos nok ary rmi 
are cold.
Observing and interpreting nonverbal behavior is especially important
when the individuals body language contradicts his or her words. In these
cases, the individual may be expressing through nonverbal communication
what he is unwilling or afraid to say out loud. For instance, look at the exag-
senu Apoq shu aui s ieum Ss anl u ioeuaq rqiauu paieig
saying? How does the nonverbal communication contradict the client's words?
 Despite his words to the contrary it is clear from his body language that the
client in Figure 5-5 is reluctant to hand his cat over to the staff member, even
though he says he will. In this instance, she should try to reassure the client
 that his cat will be just fne with her. Her words and her actions—-removing
the barrier of the front desk by coming around to the client, and giving the cat
some extra attentionwill most likely ease the client's fears.
Paraphrasing
   d s i  
ea e si 'eapi aes ai ssardxa oi siom suana fusn no fursde
way to develop listening skills. When you paraphrase, you listen to a speaker
and then repeat his or her message in your own words without changing the
meaning.
We'rereadyfor
Here she is.
Fluffynow.
FIGURE 5-5 An extreme example of body language. The client's body language does not
agree with what he is saying.
Copyright 2011 Cengag
eChapter(s)
CHAPTER 5
Interpersonal Communication
58
SPEAkEr: I work so hard all year long. It doesn't seem that I'd be out of line
jam Asn oml  naueam poo pue sueore saap ioadxa oi
LisTENer: Sure, it's part of what you're looking forward to on a vacation and
you want to be able to enjoy all of it, including good weather and a nice
place to stay.
Repeating the speaker's words verbatim (word for wordl) does not have the
repeating what you hear and don't really care or understand what you heard.
Besides, clients are apt to get annoyed with you if you are always saying exactly
what they say. But saying what they mean is a dlifferent matter. When you do
this, clients feel that you are really paying attention to them and that you are
Aes oi aa Aan jum pue u yn paaeua a
 In addition, by paraphrasing. you can test whether you heard the message
correctly and understand the speaker's intentions. Hearing their own words
reflected back to them by a member of staff also helps clients. People do not
Aq ln u Aan sod an pss noa j u An ium Ax Aes s
Aes on sueau Aiean Aaui jeum Aueo uaun pue Susyded nnon
VETERINARY AssisTANT: Could you describe Muffin's problems for me?
CliENT: She isn't eating, and she's throwing up a lot
VETERINARY AssisTANT: So Muffin doesn't want to eat, and she vomited this
moming?
as uae ius as pue Aiaisan dn mar aus nioe m inn
then.
Paraphrasing can also enhance a client's willingness to talk. Consider the
scenario with the client and her 12-year-old Irish setter. Remember that she
lasdn Aisnonaqo saus yanoui uaaa pain saus non pioi isnf seu
You: Are you sure you're all right?
CllENT: Well, now that you mention it, I am really worried about Daisy
ll e jou uu us piee u pue uonado ue aaeu on pasoddns saus
You know, she's getting really old.
a Xom oi iou Ann inq uaouo inoA puisipun kquenan ueo I :non
d  I sa Ae aai a Aa po ae  Aa an  n
you with or would you like to have a little time with the doctor before
leaving Daisy with us? I promise, we will call you just as soon as Daisy is
out of surgery
pue dn uado oi iau iaa oi aqe aiam no 'ssudsai s nuo au susudened Ag
discuss what was really bothering her—her fear of losing her dog. Just with
 this extra compassion, the client was comforted and reassured that Daisy was
in caring hands.
Copyright 201l Cengage Lea
nd/or eChapte r( s)
98
PART 2
Communication and Professional Growth
Showing Respect
As a member of the office management team, you will be dealing with clients
and co-workers of different cultures and races. Treat people equally, as indi-
viduals, no matter what personal feelings you have about their social class.
skin color, sexual orientation, physical challenge, or any other differences
 from yourself.
 Occasionally. you might have to communicate with a client from another
 Country. If this is the case, he might have trouble understanding the language
Hns non juenod os si ln Aum uosei auo sh siui Auno nno jo anino pue
every human being.
 Clients with disabilities may present the need for improving your profes-
sional skill, care, and judgment. It is important to remember in dealing with
these clients that although they may have a handicap, they are not a handicap.
They are total persons, just the same as you or anyone else.
You will likely come in contact with clients who may be blind, deaf, or
physically disabled. Some might have certain mental or emotional disadvan-
tages that other people possess and take for granted. You should never judge.
 label, or stereotype clients. If you feel awkward around them, you will make
them feel uncomfortable. Treat all clients as people first. You should certainly
make allowances for whatever disabilities they have, but you should never
identify these clients only by their handicaps or disabilities. If you do, you will
be gearing your entire approach to them based on what they lack rather than
on what they have.
TIPS FOR TREATING CLIENTS WELL
make eye contact as you greet them.
Treat all clients equally, with respect and honesty.
Address clients by their names and tile: for example, use Mrs., Ms, Mr.
children or adults who ask you to
Try to relieve clients' fears regarding their pets' care by carefully explaining
all procedures to them
Exolain medical terms if it seems that the client does not understand what
you are saying. Many people are reluctant to 
ask what a word or phrase means.
Be sure that the reception area is kept tidy and comfortable for clients.
If any patients have an *accident, clean it promptly and cheerfully to 
orevent the client from being embarrassed.
 Offer assistance if you observe a client experiencing difficulty with a door
chair, or the animal's carrier or any other situation which may arise.
Respecting others requires you to understand your own beliefs and
do nd a le am  s id a ea  i 
Copy right 2011 Cengage L
the e Book and/or eChapte r(s)
CHAPTER 5
Interpersonal Communication
87
andl biases. We are all partial to some things and not to others. It can be dliffcult to
eu aas Aaul sneaq saipnfand se siseia pue suoudo uno ano aziuaooaa
to us. Because of this, most people do not even realize how their personal preju-
dices affect the way they treat others. Waiters and waitresses often place the bill in
front of a man without asking who will be paying. People often call a veterinarian
*"he'" without even thinking she might be a woman. Clients are often expected to
 be Caucasian if their names do not fit what we might think are ethnic stereotypes.
taking individual differences into account. Stereotyping lumps groups of people
anfad jo adi e si udioas dnoig oua io peos ua e oi fuoq
People who really respect individual differences and who really care about other
-d no eun ans aq isn nos seniun gaq nou op-aldoad neadoad
 sonal beliefs or prejudices do not interfere with your ability to provide equal,
objective professional care to each and every client. If you learm all you can
about the cultural groups in your community, it will help you avoid offending
people who have clifferent cultural practices than you do, and you will earn their
respect and confidence in the process. This does not mean you should ques-
 tion clients about their beliefs or something you may have heard about dlifferent
 cultural events, but to be open and listen and participate in your community.
PREJUDICES THAT AFFECT CLIENT/STAFF RELATIONSHIPS
Racial or ethnic prejudices
Gender prejudices (discrimination against women:*man bashing")
Religious prejudices
Prejudice against those who do not speak English or those who speak it
poorly
Perceived sexual orientation
Hidden prejudices:
dislike of children
dislike of the elderly
dislike of overweight people
dislike of people on public assistance
dislike of the mentally or physically challenged
dislike of people with tattoos and/or body piercings
Telephone Manners
 ai  o a io ai   i   i a a si 
 ap iadsan pue ane nadoid aui anp si yns se pu uosaad gioe e s
any client. Here are a few points to remember when speaking on the phone:
sn e un n nse ci ans q su ad an u mu
amount of time. Generally speaking, you should answer before the third ring
Greeting. Always use an appropriate greeting when answering the
telephone. You should identify the name of the practice or veterinarian,
give your name, and then ask how you may help the caller. This ensures
Copyright 201l Cengage Lea
Editoria
88
PART 2
Communication and Professional Growth
the person calling that he has dialed the correct number, explains who
he is talking to, and invites him to make his or her request. Refer to the
staff manual for the preferred method of answering the telephone for
 your clinic or hospital.
 Listen. Just as you would with a person you were speaking to face.
to-face, you should be sure to listen to what the caller is saying, and
answer promptly and courteously Do not do other things while
  A aq  ln dn ui  as m 
you and to the caller. This not only includes trying to attend to another
client at the front desk at the same time, but eating. drinking. or
chewing gum.
 m    n      s
in person. “Please," "thank you," and "you're welcome" show respect for
the person you are speaking with and portray you, and by extension,
 the practice, as professional.
Avoid putting callers on hold. When a caller is put on hold, he can
ai dn uo aq  noA ynoi uaa poun a b
information he is requesting. Never “rattle off" something like
*Veterinarycliniccanyouholdplease"- clunk- without giving the caller to,
at the very least, state the reason for the call. It could be an emergency!
Take notes. Keep a pad by the telephone to take notes when anyone
calls. Write down the client's name, telephone number, and the nature
of the call. This helps recduce the number of times you need to ask
the person to repeat the information, and shows that you are paying
 n  n   e  o      s
 is an un on psd si i dn s As j ui no oi
immedliately with an apology.
 Know why you are calling. If you are the person placing the call, know
1 o uea oi adou noA jeum pue leo aui fue ane noA uosean au
p uo pau nur noA jeui sny no uon aue aay oi ans a
while making the call to avoid delays. You do not want to waste the
time of the person you are calling any more than you would want a
caller to waste your time.
Your Body Language
You already know that you need to observe your clients' nonverbal messages
in order to understand what they are feeling, but, what about your own non.
verbal communication? You are also sending out messages to clients. You need
to be aware of your nonverbal messages, and make sure they are positive. The
way you dress, your facial expressions, your eye contact, and your body movements
cll say something about you and your relationship to the client and to the practice.
Earlier, you learmed how important it is to convey a professional image
 When you take pride in your appearance, you send clients a message that
you are a professional who is in control and willing to be of service to them
e e a a a p ad se sid  e
dress appropriately.
Copyright 201l Cengage Lea
CHAPTER 5
Interpersonal Communication
68
 s  e    s i 
nseo, os 'suodu ane suoissnd isny ieun 'uanoun 'pu u daay A
ad siedsou pue sru Aena le iso  addois, ua nou sao
scrub tops or polo shirts with the clinic logo. Use these and make sure they
are spotless. Avoid wearing a lot of jewelry which can present a safety hazard
to both you and to the patient. A sensitive issue is that of visible tattoos. Many
people fnd tattoos in poor taste and have certain judgmental or preconceived
idleas about people with tattoos, just as discussed with the other issues of prej-
udices. This concem should be addressed with an employee by the practice
 manager should it ever arise.
Another obvious positive nonverbal message is a smile. All members of the
veterinary team should be quick to smile when interacting with clients. A com-
forting, sincere smile can go a long way toward relieving anxieties. However,
be careful not to force a smile; you do not want clients to feel you are faking
your hospitality. When a client is deeply troubled, be especially careful to
sitive or flippant. Your facial expression should always be appropriate to the
tone of the message you are sending or receiving. But do not frown. If you look
glum, you will only add to the nervousness of clients whose animals are sick
or in pain.
GOOD BODY LANGUAGE FOR THE VETErINARY OFFICE ASSISTANT
Face the client and really look at them, maintaining friendly eye contact.
Stand straight, keep your posture erect but not rigid 
Stay approximately one arm's length away from the client.
Always wear professional, clean attire.
Aways practice good hygiene.
Keep a relaxed, open facial expression.
Speakin a moderate and clear tone of voice.
Wear a name tag.
Eye contact is a very important nonverbal method of communication.
When you look someone in the eye, in effect, you are saying, “I am interested
in speaking with you and hearing what you have to say." Do not look away
from people when they are talking to you, or they will feel that you are not
interested in them. But do not stare intently, either, or you will communicate
If you make eye contact when you speak, clients will sense that you are
open and honest. If you do not make eye contact with clients, they may
perceive you as being uncertain of what you are doing and that what you
have to say may not be valid or trustworthy information. Eye contact gives
you a good idea of what might be going on inside someone's head. You can
usually tell whether clients have understood your messages by the look in
their eyes.
Copyright 201l Cengage Lea
90
PART 2
Communication and Professional Growth
Your gestures (body movements) can also enhance your interactions with
clients. A welcoming or parting handshake is a powerful gesture that is a sign
of friendship. A comforting touch on the shoulder or a pat on the back at an
appropriate moment can make a client feel secure. However, some people
do not like to be touched by strangers, so do not approach every client in
e on paue ansa Au auu e aq oi seu ynoi ai em aes a
apnous aui uo pueq non nd ugu no aouisui iog ssauaso jo juou
of a child whose dog is sick or hurt
Handling Angry Clients
Occasionally a client may become angry. More often than not, this anger is
directed at front office staff. Frequently, the attack comes so suddenly that you
feel shocked, assaulted, and frustrated. The situation will be easier to deal with
if you realize that the person is in a highly emotional state and the anger is not
directed at you personally.
  aod  non en  ou si a n
you know the person very well, you might be able to fgure out the source of
anger and then deal with it. The real source of anger may be dlifferent from
clients well enough to do anything except listen and that is a very important
 first step in trying to resolve the problem.
l0 ^suons adoad oi puodsan oi Anl 'st jeui apne aaisod e da
eqiauou anon iog sao ie shem aaau uun iauu asod ui sioaao 
messages too: make them positive. Remember, a frown shows disapproval
u i o  i  n  n 
behaviors:
 A mumbling tone of voice shows lack of respect.
Fidgeting or turming away from the client shows a lack of warmth or a
desire to escape.
 Evasive eye contact indicates insincerity.
 Pointing a fnger, shaking your fist, or speaking in a loud voice sends a
confrontational message.
Instead of these negative nonverbal behaviors, use positive head nods, devote
your full attention to the speaker, paraphrase what is being said, be honest,
look the speaker in the eye, and use a natural tone of voice
Here are some additional tips to help you cope with an angry client:
  no q mus e  si sn e ii aou no m 
a private area such as an examining room, an office, or some other less-
 public spot.
attentively.
 At no time should you place any blame for the problem or accept
aul jo jeno Suuue Aes jou o uoens Aue non Aiqisuodsan
veterinarian or any other staff member. Do not say anything the client
might interpret as being critical.
Copy right 2011 Cengage L
nd/or eChapte r( s)
CHAPTER 5
Interpersonal Communication
91
 Keep yourself under control, no matter what the angry client says.
 At all costs, avoid arguing.
 Apologize for any misunderstanding.
 Assure the client that the matter will be resolved and that any conflict
will be avoided in the future
Angry people often say things they regret later, so do not take personal
offense at anything an angry client says. If the client raises a reasonable objec-
tion to an error made by someone in the office, do not get defensive and try
to justify the error. The client's complaint will be handled by the veterinarian,
 So you should say nothing to indicate that the conflict will be resolved in any
certain way. If you treat an angry client with tact and understanding. you
could save the veterinarian's reputation from the damage a disgruntled client
can cause.
Anytime you argue with a customer, you lose. Even if you win, you lose.
From The Job Survival Instruction Book
Veterinary Team Communication
By now, you know you need good interpersonal communication skills to com-
municate with clients. You also need to use your interpersonal communication
skills when you interact with the veterinarian and your co-workers. The veteri-
nary staff is a team working together. Although you will probably be assigned
 specific duties, keep in mindl that you are a team member and you need to be
flexible. “That is not my job" is one expression that you should eliminate from your
vocabulary. You also must be careful not to overstep your boundaries. There is
a dlifference between pitching in and taking over.
As you can see from the employee evaluation form in Figure 5-6, the abil-
need to be cooperative, dependable, polite, and patient with your co-workers.
even though your co-workers may differ from you in their personality traits,
beliefs, values, and work habits. You must be above pettiness and moodiness.
Everyone gets down in the dumps or irritated sometimes, but the compe-
tent and professional staff member dloes not bring a bad mood into the office.
 Never let your personal problems interfere with your professional interactions,
before your personal feelings.
The veterinarian is the leader of the veterinary team. If you work for a
small private practice, you may be the only assistant and perform both office
management and clinical duties. In this case, a good relationship with your
[ p s ia n n  nd a aa si d
hospitals. But regardless of where you work, a good working relationship with
Employees who are helpful and easy to get along with are valued more than
diffcult people with better skills.
From The Job Survival Instruction Book
Copy right 2011 Cengage L
and/or eChapte r( s)
92
PART 2
Communication and ProfessionafGrowth
Employee Evaluation
Date of Evaluation:
Evaluator:
 Employee Name:
Date Hired:
Position:
How Long in Present Position:
Supervisor:
Employee's Job Description:
Employee Performance Review
The object of this evaluation is to assess the employee's performance in his current position and to
assess his commitment to. This evaluation should highlight the employee's strengths and successes
and identify areas for improvement.
In each of these sections the employee is measured on a numerical scale from l to 5 as follows:
Consistently exceeds expectations
5
Frequently exceeds expectations
4
Meets and/or occasionally exceeds expectations
3
Occasionally does not meet expectations
2
Frequently fails to meet expectations
1
This evaluation is divided into the following sections:
1. Communication
2. PersonalMotivation
 3. Interpersonal Skills
4. Knowledge/Skills
5. Career Development
Section I: Communication
 consistently meets expectations in this category.
Comments by Evaluator:
FIGURE 5-6 A sample of a good employee evaluation form, which also provides space for an employee's
comments
eChapter(s
CHAPTER 5
Interpersonal Communication
93
(continued)
Section 2: Personal/Motivation
 consistently meets expectations in this category.
Comments by Evaluator:
Section 3: Interpersonal Skills
 consistently meets expectations in this category.
Comments by Evaluator:
Section 4: Knowledge/Skills
 consistently meets expectations in this category.
Comments by Evaluator:
Section 5: Career Development
 consistently meets expectations in this category.
Comments by Evaluator:
Section 6: Overall Rating
20  25 points
Superior performance. Exceeds overall expectations.
15 19 points
Fully competent. Meets the performance expectations of the job.
0  14 points 
 Development required to meet expectations.
has scored the following:
Communication
3
Personal/Motivation
3
FIGURE 5-6  (Continued)
t6
PART 2
Communication and Professional Growth
(continued)
 Interpersonal Skills
3
Knowledge/Skills
3
Career Development
3
has a total of 15 points. Overall, he is fully competent
and meets the performance expectations of the job
Section 6: Employee Comments
Section 6: lmprovement Plan
We have read and discussed this evaluation:
Date
FIGURE 5-6 (Continued)
CHAPTER 5
Interpersonal Communication
95
 n s ras i is ia al  e r
veterinarian by his or her professional name.
VETERINARY AssisTANT: Good morming, Dr. Masterson. It looks like you have
a full day.
VETERINARY AssisTANT: Please make yourself comfortable, Mr. Levine
Dr. Masterson will be with you in a few moments.
The veterinarians you work for are entitled to your loyalty. They are highly
regardled professionals working in an often physically and emotionally stress-
ful position. Although you might not agree with a particular behavior, action,
or outcome, you should be careful not to assume the cause is a lack of skill.
kmowledge, reliability, or professionalism. Veterinarians generally work to the
best of their abilities, with the best interests of the client and patient at heart.
This does not mean that you or the clients will always agree with a veterinari-
an's recommendations. However, even if you feel strongly that the veterinarian
has done something wrong. you should not express this to clients, co-workers,
or any member of the general public. Never say or do anything that would cast
-qod e uuaadxa ane no j uondau iu no s uo ju aqun ue
lem with a veterinarian, speak to your supervisor in private.
Discrimination
 In the section “Showing Respect," you leamed about discrimination in regard
pue saonfand umo nno auaona on mou paue noA shu noa ol
insensitivities. But what do you do if the discrimination is directed toward
you? By law, employers are not allowed to discriminate based on race.
color, national origin, religion, sex, family status, handicaps, or age. If you
feel you have been dlenied a job or have lost a job for any of these reasons.
contact the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) or the
Canadian Labour Relations Board. However, if you are the victim of a more
subtle discrimination—say. a co-worker makes offensive comments about
 your weight, or you feel a client is harassing you-then you will have to use
interpersonal skills to handle the situation
GUIDEliNES FOR VETERINARY TEAM MEmBERS
Be sensitive to the people you work with
Make adjustments to cooperate with fellow employees
Show interest.
Do not take personal problems into the office.
Express appreciation to teammates.
Be courteous.
Be open to new methods and concepts.
Be honest with yourself and others.
(confinued)
Copy right 201l Ce ngage Le
 and/or eChapter(s
96
PART 2
Communication and Professional Growth
(confinued)
Hl ayot 'saogdua uo jo usoo b aaoy hoA y islonu poaids ou oa
directly to that person.
not even your spouse or your best friend
Admit your mistakes
 Accept constructive criticism graciously
VETERINARY AssisTANT: Mary, thank you for your concern, but I have heard
enough comments about diet programs and exercise videos.
VETERINARY AsssTANT: Mr. Sterm, as I have told you, I simply do not date
clients. Please do not make any more personal advances.
In some situations, confronting the discrimination may be risky business.
What if your employer, an employer's relative, or a favored employee is doing
the discriminating? In these instances, reporting the situation may result in
your termination or even in a messy legal proceeding. You will have to judge
for yourself whether to turm your back, resign, ask for a transfer, or confront
 no i ues Aq us e io di u noA 'uo us s
uncomfortable working in an environment in which unfair practices are going
on but you must be committed and be able to back up, with specifics, the
issues of concerm .Otherwise it becomes just a vague threat which could lead to
even great problems. Employers may be sued by employees who are harassed.
Improving Your Speech
A person's speech can interfere with his or her message. For instance, if a per-
son speaks too quickly or mumbles, you might miss some of what was said.
 noA ‘1eun iood sosn pue ^Aos ooi ^kimos con seads uosiad e J 
lose interest.
When you speak to clients and co-workers, try to speak at a moderate rate
 an ee  as 'ir  p a pe e yes
can understand.
The use of correct grammar and pronunciation, and speaking in a pleas-
 ant tone of voice also contributes to the effectiveness of what you are saying.
poog e si suaaidl spaau in j as oi ana nnoA jo paads aui suzaieu
exercise.
eadai oi noA yse uao adoad oa veads noA op Amois io Ainh mo
Pnous anoa nnon zaes non eum u pasnauun was Aaui oa ju e
sound *natural." If you have a natural tendency to be a fast tallker, slow dlown.
Ifyou speak too slowly, speed up. An average rate of speech should be approx-
imately 120 words per minute. You can measure your rate of speed by reading
the passage in Figure 5-7 out loud, taking time to pause where you would if
Copy right 2011 Cengage
and/or eChapte r(s)
CHAPTER 5
interpersonal Communication
6
COMMUNICATION BARRIERS
While there are many barriers to effective communication, Thomas Gordon, an expert on inter-
pers are almost guaranteed to block the flow of communication between individuals, and can even
end friendships! How many do you recognize?
Criticizing. Making a negative evaluation of the other person's actions or atitudes. “You brought it on
u uuue op no iue, io u ano ssa au oj aenq oi aspa Apoqou o ano asino
"What a dope!" or "Just like a woman,”" or "You're really dumb."
 Diagnosing. Analyzing why a person's behaving a certain way; playing amateur psychiatrist.
"You're just dloing that to irritate me," or "I know just what's wrong with you," or "Just because
you went to college, you think you're better than I am."
really true. "You're perfect," or "You're the best typist in the world ," or *I've never seen anything
like that report, really fabulous."
op on noA qum I, sup aae oi sum noA iem op oi uosiad iao au uu unapio
this report right now. Why? Because I said so!" or "Get these letters out right now and take your
break later.'
Threatening. Attempting to control the actions of others by warming of negative consequences.
"If we don't get along better, I'm going to tell Mr. Smith about you" or "You'll fnish that report
tonight or else!" or "Just come in late again and see what happens.'
dd ao uu si aaq nn m ud n op ci nm d e i 
 on nuno no, ao ua aui oi uaddu m ieum noqe yuun a e iag unus non 
A11 noA j ieqi ueul iahaq yonu op ues no, 1o (Xios ainoA uu
Bully questioning. Asking questions that are often conversation stoppers because the response
Mou oi pasoddns noA 1uaiam 'aM, 1o .ill pip nof Auos noA ary, ou 1o saA paaiop e aq isnu
that before you attended the meeting?"or "You mean you didn't take the report with you?
 Urwelcome advising. Giving the person a solution to a problem even when the person didn't
ask for one. "If I were you, I'd sure tell her off!" or "That's an easy one to solve; frst you . . . *" or
"What you need to do is go to night school."
on it, Sarah; let's talk about something more pleasant," or "You think you've got it bad—let me tell
you what happened to me!"
facts or logic without knowing the factors involved. “Look at the facts: if you hadn't left work early
the other aftermoon, we would have fnished the report, and Ms. Smith wouldn't be upset," or "By
devoting 20 minutes to opening the mail in the morming and concentrating on getting all your
typing done before lunch, you should be able to spend every afternoon changing the fles over.
Am nuo, suoa aa uaa  uosiad o au dois oi u dssnn 
it's always darkest before the dawn," or "It will all work out okay in the end." or "There's no point
in crying over something that you can't do anything about."
FIGURE 5-7 Read aloud this passage of 600 words to check your rate of speaking.
Copyright 201l Cengage Lear
86
PART2
Communication and Professionaf Growth
twice to familiarize yourself with the words. Time yourself. When you finish,
divide 6o0 by the number of minutes it took you to read. Do not round off
to the nearest minute, but to make the math easier, round off to the nearest
15 seconds. For instance, ifit takes you 5 minutes and 15 seconds, divide 600
by 5.25. If it takes you 51/2 minutes, divide by 5.5. If it takes you 5 minutes
I aads yo  s e y s  's  a ss t p
 take approximately 5 minutes.
So, how did you do? Do not worry if the rate at which you speak is less
than perfect. Remember the old adage. "practice makes perfect.
Volume, Pitch, and Tone
its highness or lowness of sound. Ione communicates mood or feeling: your
voice can sound soff, rough, sweet, harsh, excited, or bored. The volume,
pitch, and tone of your voice will vary according to circumstances. Listen to
someone who is excited about something. That person's voice will have a high.
louder-than-usual quality to it. Or, listen to someone giving a speech over a
microphone; the tone will usually be lower and richer.
m sa sri un sa An r i os yds adod a
o o  e i      e o os  
trate on either type of voice. Of course, there are times when shouting and
whispering are the appropriate speaking volumes. But do you shout or whis-
 per when you speak in normal conversation?
Although it is good to maintain a moderate volume, pitch, and tone in
the office, moderation should not be taken so far that it becomes a monotone.
Speaking in a monotone voice—one that does not show a change in feeling or
 si i    ds oi a  nnd oi  h e si
pleasant to hear than a constant humming sound. Raise and lower your voice
as you speak. This variety makes you appear more interesting and people are
more likely to listen to what you have to say. Use a pleasant tone of voice that
shows enthusiasm and warmth. Remember that your voice represents your
 i m sna  a aad s i a  na p
 aas sadod u som an ino uq un auud aui iauouan ui u
people who speak at a moderate-level volume in face-to-face conversation will
use the telephone like a bullhorm. Others speak as if the phone wires amplified
their voices. Since a significant part of the veterinary assistant's job includes
answering the phone and making calls, you should have a friend critique your
telephone use. Arrange with someone to receive your call and place one to
you. Have your friend note your volume, pitch, and tone.
Enunciation and Pronunciation
The way you form or articulate your words is called enunciation. To
enunciate clearly. you must use your lips, teeth, jaw, and tongue to form
 o d o n sm  ro  so i
Copy right 201l Cengage Lea
CHAPTER 5
Interpersonal Communication
66
Aeld pue 'piom yoea uo Sueuasuoo 'iapionai adei e oiul pnoi ino peai
back your recording to hear how you sound. Avoid the following common
mistakes:
Do not sound a silent h.
heir
honor
heiress
honest
 honorable
Be sure to sound the h in each of these words.
 wharf
when
where
which
while
whip
whiz
why
Distinguish between the sound of em and the sound of ren.
 southern
western
 northern
eastern
children
brethren
 Do not confuse pre with per.
 perform
persist
 perhaps
pretend
prevent
prescription
aul a pieu il axeu jou op pue 'i onuo aueu iou op inq s jeuy aui punos
g in grunt.
 sitting
playing
dancing
sing
ring
thing
Copy right 2011 Cengage L
100
PART 2
Communication and Professional Growth
Do not run words together.
Give me (not gimme)
Saw her (not saw r)
Let me (not lemme)
Catch them (not ketch em)
Don't you (not don't cha)
+
Going to (not gonna')
and especially important, *vetrinary" instead of veterinary.
TONGUE TWISTeRS
I you practice each of the following tongue twisters, you will improve your pronun-
Aom buseaui uo ui auot puo yotd inon buoinpo Ai youon 
Are our oars here?
2. 
Bring me some ice, not some mice.
 Suddenly seaward swept the squall
He saw six, long. slim, slender saplings.
Amos Ames, the amiable aeronaut, aided in aerial enterprise at the age of 88
Six thick thistle sticks, six thick thistles stick.
A big black bug bit a big black bear
8.
Geese cackle, caffle low, crows caw, cocks crow
Additional Tips
You might enjoy taking speech, oral communication, or acting classes to
 improve your oral communication skills. But you can also become more artic-
ulate simply by keeping your ears and eyes attuned to language. Here are some
suggestions:
Listen attentively to those who speak correct, effective English. Pattern your
speech after theirs. You might ask a friend who speaks well to call your
attention to any errors you make. Avoid the use of double negatives.
 iap poog e paa oi jou suem luop noA, se yons
To train your ear imitate a favorite radio or television announcer. Be sure to
choose an announcer with perfect enunciation. Listen to this announcer
 whenever possible, paying close attention to his or her speech patterns.
1 Aed pue iaponai aden e oiui yeads 'uaned yoaads stu fui
back so you can analyze your progress.
 Listen to recordings of popular books. Tape recordings of books are
narrated by excellent speakers, and most books are written in
Standard English. Be aware that dialogue in fiction is often written
in colloquial or local dialect. Picking out the differences between
aaodul o Aem pooa e si sioaleip snouea aui pue ysua piepuns
your language skills.
Copy right 2011 Cengage L
for eChapte r(s).
CHAPTER 5
Interpersonal Communication
101
Acquire the dictionary habit. You will hear, and discover in your reading.
 yooT Xq no ssed spom mau ial nou o spnom neun A
 pe 'und uds n anon Ar ui u dn
 aoniq n ni s  s sno as e si n n
active part of your daily vocabulary.
SUMMARY
Effective interpersonal communication is an important aspect of working in
the feld of veterinary medicine. You have to know how to get your message
across clearly and appropriately in a variety of situations. Communication
involves listening, speaking, and being aware of body language, that of yours
and of those who are speaking with you. You must always be respectful when
speaking with clients, in person and on the telephone, even when they are
 angry. Interpersonal communication skills are also vital to your interactions
with the veterinary team. Attentive, respectful interactions make for a stronger
and more enjoyable working environment.
non gues aie noA jeum se juodu se uao si yeads non Aem a
should always speak clearly, with proper enunciation and correct pronuncia-
tion, and ensure that the tone, pitch, and volume of your voice match the mes-
sage you are trying to convey
SCENARIO
q sn on n  je si r r pe s n
in tow. She checked in, with AD the receptionist, and then took a seat with
  an p  na p sq a am den  o i 
mother quietly tried telling them to sit still, obviously embarrassed by their
behavior, and clutching the cat a bit too tightly as she spoke to them.
The receptionist was not very fond of young children, and wanted to yell
 at them and tell them to quiet cdown, but he knew it was not his place. He was
 also concerned about the way the client was holding her cat, which was now
starting to fidget and mew loudly.
 s 'a snoxi, pae au 'iauo an puraq  xoq e ino u
Do you think the boys would like to color? We have some crayons and animal
safety coloring books that I am sure they would enjoy.
Accepting his offer gratefully, the harried mother came up to the counter
and handed each child a coloring book and some crayons. The boys quickly
took them back to their seats and began coloring enthusiastically, but quietly.
The receptionist also offered her the use of a light leash to clip onto the collar
 o os  o s 1 pe   ian  s, i a jo
relax and read a magazine while you wait for the doctor."
The client thanked him again and clipped the leash to her cat's collar. She
was able to sit comfortably and read while the cat climbed up to sit on the
window sill in the sun.
Copy right 2011 Cengage L
r eChapters
102
PART 2
Communication and Professionaf Growth
 How did the receptionist exhibit the traits for positive interpersonal
relations and use them to dliffuse the situation?
How and when did he deal with his own prejudice?
What might have happened if he had not intervened?
REVIEW
Match each of the six terms related to the communication process with its
correct definition on the right.
1. message
a. form of communication such as
writing or speaking
2. sender
b. characteristics such as education
3. channel
and experience that determine
4. receiver
how someone expresses and
understands messages
 5. feedback
 c. the idea that one person wants to
 6. reference points
 get across to another person
d. a retum message
e. the person who frst initiates a
message
f. the person listening to a message
Select the best, most appropriate response for the staff on duty in reception to
say in each situation.
7a. We all forget our checkbooks once in a while, sir, but payment is
still due on the day services are rendered.
7b. Do not worry about forgetting your checkbook, Mr. Jones. You can
drop off the check later or put it in the mail today I can give you a
self-addressed, stamped envelope if you like.
8a. I am sorry to hear about your kitten getting run over. You must be
heartbroken. Cats are always running off to do their own thing. I am
a dog person myself.
8b. I am sorry to hear about your kitten. It is heartbreaking to lose a pet.
9a. We would appreciate it if you would not smoke, Mr. L. We have
oxygen in use and the smoke travels through the ventilation system
to the patient wards.
9b. Of course we do not have an ashtray, Mr. L. Didn't you see the No
 Smoking sign?
Copy right 2011 Cengage
or eChapter(s)
CHAPTER 5
Interpersonal Communication
103
Incdicate whether the following statements are true or false. If false, what would
be needed to make them correct:
 10. Sitting with your arms crossed over your chest always means you
 are cold and trying to warm up.
1l. To paraphrase, you repeat what someone said, word for word.
12. To provide the best possible care for the client and his or her pet,
 a staff member should attempt to determine the message behind
nonverbal communication.
13. Body language always reinforces or agrees with the spoken message.
Paraphrase each of the following client's statements.
14. Client: My dog is sick. He will not eat, and he sleeps too much
15. Client: My kitten has a cold. Her nose is running and her eyes are
all watery.
Fill in the blanks with the correct answer.
16. The gestures and mannerisms a person uses to communicate are
called
17. When dealing with an angry client, you should try to keep a
attitude.
18. Preconceived ideas about a group of people made without taking
 individual differences into account are called
Consider the following scenario: A client is shouting at the receptionist because
    n s n s    s s
ds ney A jou st ii '., 'yq snous pue ‘itue su au Aq pauuis
screaming at me.
19. What did the receptionist do wrong?
20. List six barriers to effective communication
What is wrong with her pronunciation of the word in quotation
marks?
ONLINE RESOURCES
Communicating in the Culturally Diverse Workplace
(from Jobweb)
This article addresses the issue of cultural diversity in the workplace, including
different styles of communication and how to implement effective channels of
intercultural communication.
Copy right 2011 Cengage
for eChapter( s)
104
PART2
Communication and Professionaf Growth
chttp://www.jobweb.com>
Search Terms: Resources; Library; Workplace; Culture; Communications
 Memiam-Webster Online Dictionary
Merriam-Webster offers this online version of its popular dictionary, includ-
 ing audio pronunciations to help visitors hear and understand how the word
should sound.
http:/ /www.webster.com
106
PART 2
Communication and Professional Growth
Introduction
Whatever your position is within the veterinary practice, when you commu-
nicate with a client, you are representing the entire veterinary team and it is
 You will fnd yourself interacting with clients for a variety of reasons, includ-
ing making appointments, greeting people as they enter, answering questions.
and addressing other concerms. You should be seen by clients as a knowledge-
able, helpful professional. When telephoning a client or answering a call from
-unuon oi Mou pue Aes oi jou 1eum Xes on jeum Mou Pinous noA 'quao e
cate in a friendly and effective manner. When speaking with clients in person
and understand how your appearance affects your interaction. It is especially
important to know what to do when discussing very serious matters such as a
 debilitating injury, illness, or euthanasia. Knowing how to interact with clients
in a variety of situations is one of the most important parts of your career.
Telephone Management
-u e sm aui saa aai uo ssnou aul ou pad  s i Aep ao
siderable amount of blood coming from the injury. Mr. M did not hesitate to
call his veterinarian's office to advise them he was coming straight in with an
    s s  n  
 in a disinterested voice, "Hallo, can ya hold."
Before Mr. M could reply, he was put on hold. After a few minutes of
 a p a ru n  pn   a raa m
unidentified voice say, between obvious chews of food, "Can I help ya?"
"Is this the Animal Care Hospital?"
"Yup." replied the voice on the telephone.
"This is Mr. M. My cat is bleeding and it looks like her leg is broken. I
called to let you know that I need to bring her in right now and I want to know
if there is a doctor available."
"Why dinnit you say it was an emergency? I wouldn'ta put you on hold!
Bring it in," the unidentified staff member said and hung up the telephone.
 This, of course, is a lesson in how not to treat a client. If you were treated
 S0 rudely. you would probably take your pet-care business elsewhere.
The Telephone Personality
The telephone is often the frst line of communication between the veteri-
narians and their clients, and it is where frst impressions are made. As trite
as it may sound, the reality is that first impressions are lasting impressions.
Everyone who answers the telephone or makes outgoing calls must develop a
aexa a u a au d udan esd pe reissd
above broke every rule of telephone etiquette. As you read the following seven
rules for developing a professional telephone personality, determine all the
things the person who took the call did wrong.
A s me ie pa si aod ui iei ans a d a 1
to answer on the frst or second ring and try not to let the phone ring
Copy right 2011 Cengage
or eChapters
CHAPTER 6
Interacting with Clients
107
         n  
available to step up and take incoming calls. Every staff member should
 be aware of the telephone when it rings.
 2. Identify yourself. Immediately give the name of the animal hospital or the
veterinarian's name, for example, "Good morming, Dr. Gs offce. This is
Kim; how may I help you?"
3.
 Speak pleasantly. Avoid extremes. Do not speak too softly or too loudly.
m pue Aousp spnom nnoA aounouond Xpiden ooi no Aimois col
expression; that is, do not sound mechanical, like a robot. Speak
naturally, as you would when speaking to someone in person so that your
 friendly personality comes through in your voice.
4.1
 Be courteous. In addition to being polite (please, thank-you, pardlon me)
give the caller your full attention. Never try to tallk to a caller and someone
else at the same time, whether it is the veterinarian or a client checking in
for an appointment. Courtesy also calls for using plain language not the
medical jargon you will learn while working in a veterinary office.
5. Explain interruptions. If you must leave the telephone to get information
 or put the caller on hold to answer another line, explain why and give
 e u r adoad ss pdsn oi a e rn a
is thoughtless to assume they can. Always thank a caller for waiting.
Remember, a client's time is valuable too.
6.
 Use the telephone correctly. Place the receiver firmly against your ear and
speak dlirectly into the mouthpiece (Figure 6-1). Never eat, drink, chew
gum, smoke, or put anything in your mouth, like a pen or pencil while
you are talking on the telephone.
Dy
Jfic
clearly heard and understood as well as what the caller is saying.
Copy right 2011 Cengage L
 and/or eChapte r(s).
108
PART 2
Communication and Professional Growth
7. Conclude courteously. Usually the caller has the option of ending the
conversation. So, if you telephone, you would be the one to end
the conversation. Always be polite and allow the caller to end the
conversation first. You should always conclude your own telephone
call with the same amount of courtesy.
BE PREPARED
Have an organized area for receiving and making calls. Include:
Pens or sharpened pencils
saiou buyot oy adod doos io pod ouaa
Telephone message pads
Aphabetized, μp-to-date telephone index of frequently called numbers
A specific place for telephone messages (a spindle, a file.
uoboid anduoo aut ui abod abossa s,juaidloal aul jo Aot n
your employer, and the client. Do not try to force yourself or it will not feel
comfortable and your voice will sound stilted and rehearsed and the client
doad iai ssdsi no jo as ae ro Aas  noa i in 
as though you value and appreciate them and it will become natural to you.
Keep your main goals in mind: to provide excellent service to clients and their pets
and reflect the excellent standards of the practice.
Review the earlier example and identify what was done incorrectly
1.
 The person let the phone ring seven times, which is at least four times too many.
 2. The veterinary offce was not identifed nor was a personal name offered
u m aui paean pe a jn iapum o o a au
3. When the call finally was answered, the caller heard an unpleasant, rude
person speaking in a hurried voice as if the call was a major interruption.
The grammar was lazy and inappropriate: *hallo" instead of *hello," *yup'
instead of "yes," "ya" instead of "you," and "dinnit" instead of didn't.
4. The person answering the telephone was discourteous, telling the caller to
hold without giving him a chance to respond.
 5. The client was not thanked for waiting.
6. There was no explanation or apology as to why the caller was put on hold.
7. The call was ended very discourteously by implying that the caller was
responsible for the delay.
8. The caller was told to bring "it" in instead of referring to the owner's cat.
9. The caller should have been the one allowed to conclude the call.
Screening Calls
The specific method of screening (handling) incoming calls will vary accordl-
ing to your employer's wishes. It is important to fnd out to what extent the
veterinarian wants you to screen his or her telephone calls. For instance, one
Copy right 2011 Cengage L
k and/or eChapte r( s)
CHAPTER 6
Interacting with Clients
109
veterinarian might trust your judgment in deciding which matters need imme-
diate attention and another might want all the details, minus any interpreta-
Auiaa ue inoqe len e se Aem aes au paipueq iou si dnyoauo aunoi e
It is a good idea to work out a pattern for screening calls. A routine will
help you obtain the information you need in a minimum amount of time while
 A (i ai)  s a  e  no
the conversation—politely-
y—you can redirect any tendency the client might
have to ramble and digress from the real purpose of the call.
First, you always need to know who is calling so that you can screen or
"feld" the caller if necessary. Most veterinarians accept calls from other veteri-
narians and immediate family members, no questions asked. In most offices,
these calls will be transferred as soon as possible. If the caller dloes not volun-
teer a name, you should politely ask, "May I have your name, please?" or "May
I ask who is calling, please?"
 Next, you need to know why the person is calling so that you can take
the appropriate action; screen the call, transfer it, take a message, or make
band wants to speak to her, it would be irresponsible not to ask why a com-
plete stranger wants to. Usually a dloctor prefers to accept only emergency or
urgent calls from clients. Other calls will be returned when the doctor has time
 between patients or at the end of the workday.
aph
otogr
FIGURE 6-2 While speaking with a client, maintain a warm, friendly
and interested manner.
Copy right 2011 Cengage L
and/or eChapte r( s)
110
PART2
Communication and Professional Growth
 Some clients call to ask the doctor for information or services that you
could just as easily provide. If you do not immediately know why someone is
calling. you can waste a good deal of time, as in the following conversation.
"Good aftermoon, Dr. D's office, MJ speaking. How may I help you?"
"This is Tom G. Let me speak to the doctor, please."
"I'm sorry, the doctor is with a client right now."
"Well, I need to talk to her."
a no uan ue noioop aul os 'sessa e aaeal oi a no pinom.
"Just tell her I need an appointment tomorrow morming for my parrot."
If the veterinary assistant or receptionist had transferred the call to the
veterinarian, it would have been transferred right back so that the caller could
make an appointment. Some callers simply want to talk to the veterinarian and
give no indication of their purpose. You can usually prompt these callers along
by saying. *The veterinarian is with a client right now. May I help you?" If they
 still hesitate, you might ask if they would like to make an appointment, or
's  n a  nad a  ss     
the more specific the caller will be in answering.
-ad ueo noA iqi si uo si auoauos Aum mou oi uosea poog auou
pare yourself for whatever action you need to take. For example, if you know
 that Mr. G wants an appointment, you can have your pen and appointment book
l mou non  enond ando au uo sed uauos aul uado no Ape
A     s o   n    se  e
pull the fle or check the patient's records in the computer. A well-organized
member of staff can handle the average call in less than three minutes.
Now you know how to screen a veterinarian's calls, but what do you say
when the veterinarian is busy, but not with a patient? Or what if the veterinar-
ian is not in the offce during regular office hours? Avoid the following state-
ments, even if they are true
She is not in yet.
He went home for the day.
She went out to lunch.
He is playing golf all afternoon.
The doctor is busy
Sh noop aui, no ruao aul ie un nou si oioop aui, ^es Adus 'peais
oi nop au ie I A, Aes pue aess e aen ot iao uau caan
Pus n a d e on p si ia a r in 
never give clients a list of numbers to call in an effort to fnd the veterinarian.
However, if the problem is urgent, you must try to reach the veterinarian or
the designated emergency standby and assure the client of this fact.
Occasionally. you will answer the phone to fnd out that the caller clialed
a wrong number. The caller may seem confused or insist you are the hardware
 Au e proae on sn pi aa na ynoui ua ao
tion, you should politely clarify things by saying something like, “I am sorry, but
  ss s a     a asis
 purpose of alerting the caller to the mistake and keeping her from repeating it.
It is also worth remembering that this may be a client who has dialed the clinic
by mistake or it could be a potential client. Always remain cheerful and helpful
Copyright 201l Cengage Lea
CHAPTER 6
Interacting with Clients
111
Making Appointments over fhe Phone
pue shude u jds a m ud au uo  non jo nn
susanb Suse i uned e doaap no jn iinb pue iasea sooq 1
Surprisingly, a number of clients do not volunteer such basic information as
their name, the reason for their call, or a convenient time for them to see the
g uoe doad yns idd Auioa inq fd oi qof no si ln rio
instance, after asking the client's name, if a client does not specify a time, you
could ask one of these questions:
· Do you prefer moming or aftemoon?
Could you come tomorrow at three o'clock?
When would you like to come in?
 oi r I, d sodo al ss si a s n
the veterinarian today at ten." If the schedule allows, you should accommo-
date the client's wishes. However, when the veterinarian is heavily booked
already. you must make that clear while making the client feel wanted. “I am
 sorry, the only time Dr. T. has available today is 4 o'clock. Can you come
in then?"
Sometimes the schedule is booked for a week or more in advance, and
clients become upset because they cannot get a prompt appointment. In such
- e si a j n n oi Add a Im noA ieun es iuru no ^sas
lation. In emergency situations, you should never offer to make an appoint-
ment, but advise the client to come in immediately regardless of what the
 appointment schedule looks like. Veterinarians and veterinary technicians
should be alerted that an emergency is on the way in and relay to them the
d  s s      p a
  a a n n o     s s 
           s
and veterinary assistants should be immediately summoned to assist. As the
lou op 'ind Aeis, pinous no ysp juo aun non aisuodsan naqa l
the all paperwork that will be needed. Many practices have a clearly stated
policy regarding the order in which patients are seen. This is usually posted
on the wall behind the receptions desk or in a sturdy frame on the reception
counter. For example, patients will be seen in this order: emergencies, appoint-
ments, and walk-in.
Walk-in clients should never be treated as if they are a nuisance or made
s a l  n d n n dx  i rn a  
as quickly as possible and if you can, suggest an approximate wait time. Never
forget that they are there, acknowledge them often, and have them start com-
pleting client/patient information sheets. Be very aware that an emergency
arriving unannounced is not the same thing as a walk-in client!
Taking Messages
Most offices have standard message forms for you to jot down the date, time,
the name of the caller, return telephone number, and message (Figure 6-3).
You should also include your own name or initials, especially in a large practice
Copyright 201l Cengage Lea
ook and/or eChapte r( s)
112
PART 2
Communication and Professional Growth
To: Dr. Morgan
To: Dr.Brown
A.M.
(A.M.)
Date: 5/12Time: 12:30 (PM)
Date: 5/12 Time: 9:30
P.M.
WHILE YOU WERE OUT
WHILE YOU WERE OUT
Mrs. Thompson
Mr.RichardJackson
Of:theHumane Society
of:
client
 Phone:
 Phone:
555-0000
555-1111
Need to confirm that Dr. Morgan
Regarding date and time for a
will be their guest speaker.
kennel visit and now has a pup
with possible abscess
eL
FIGURE 6-3 It is important to obtain as much information as possible when taken a message.
n    n   o p   p  
tant, and to minimize confusion, follow these guidelines:
Write down every instruction clearly, to leave no room for misunder-
standing.
  n e sss a a  n  e p
it down and confirm the telephone number where the caller can be
reached.
 Establish clearly whether the message must be clelivered immediately or
acted on by a certain time or date.
Consider the “"what-if' situations that could arise if the message is not
-ds xa  dis n nq i e aq o s a u  pa
pose the veterinarian is out when a client calls describing signs or a condition
that you recognize as dangerous for an animal. What if the veterinarian does
           n
designated to take calls? Should you (not the client) try to track down the
veterinarian? An important aspect of your job is to make judgment calls about
how to handle "what-if' situations.
Coordinafing Calls
Unless the office has a number of people answering phones, you are likely
 aues aui ie ss ao no omi auoon jo uqoid an an ol
  n pe a adi ao  a a so ia iso
Copy right 2011 Cengage
 eChapter(s)
CHAPTER 6
Interacting with Clients
113
yourself juggling calls while you are greeting incoming clients, accepting
payment from others, and pulling or returming files. Handling several lines
while performing other duties takes a bit of coordination—-mental as well as
Jo asn aui suais Aq Auoos uoens aul ipu unn non ing teisud
your call director.
A call director is a telephone unit with stations that allow as many call
to come in as there are open lines to receive them. The call board has but-
tons that represent the stations in your office. Station lights tell you how to
respond to the call director. With some telephone systems, a slowly blink-
' fuou ue oi nok siae gu auoqdaai e Kq paueduose u u
 am p uo si (n) us e s n  a e
steady light indicates a station (line) in use. When a button lights up and
au dn yid no aiofq umop unq uens au ysnd suu auoudaan aul
receiver and answer with your standard greeting. If you do not push the sta-
tion button first, you could interrupt other calls in progress or the line will
keep ringing
What do you do when you are talking on one station and another call
 comes in on the call director? The procedure is really easy:
1. Politely ask the person you are talking with to hold. (Give the person a
chance to respond in case she cannot hold.)
2. Push down the HOLD button, which is usually red
 3. Push down the station button that is blinking.
4.
 Answer politely, find out who is calling and why, and then ask the second
caller to hold.
 5. Push down the HOLD button again.
6. Go back to the first station, thank the person for holding, and fnish the
call as quickly as possible without sounding hurried or offending the frst
caller.
 7. Retum to the second station, thank the caller for holding, and proceed
with the call.
To make certain your memory does not fail you, it is a good idea to jot down
the name of the caller on hold
Of course, this procedure can vary slightly, depending on the circum-
stances. For example, when the second caller is another doctor or your
employer's spouse, you might transfer the call instead of placing the caller on
hold. Each office has different policies for transferring calls. You will learn the
standard procedure for your office during your training period.
J anpanoid piepueis inoA sueuo oi aeq jugiu noA eun pu ui daay
one of the calls you are juggling will take a long time to handle. For example.
suppose that the second caller wants an appointment, and the first caller wants
a summary of all the immunizations an allergy-ridden puppy has received in
the last year. You will have to locate the first caller's fle and spend several
more minutes on the phone. In such a case, you may take the frst caller's
 n    s  s     
Copyright 201l Cengage L
nd/or eChapte r( s
114
PART 2
Communication and Professional Growth
Or you might ask the first caller to hold while you quickly schedule the second
caller's appointment. If, however, you are away from any caller for a length
of time, it is polite to returm every so often with, "Mr. J, I am checking your
records" or “I will be with you in a moment." Or ask if it would be convenient
to call the client back with the information requested. The client may also have
follow-up questions that need to be answered.
de in  a as ul ne sa a o l a s
follow the same procedure outlined for two calls. Simply ask each new caller
to hold while you promptly complete the one in progress. You should gener-
ally handle calls in the order they come in but urgency or time considerations
could justify a change in the order that they are handled. It is always better to
 fnish one conversation at a time rather than switch back and forth between
lines. This can be very annoying for the callers and difficult for you to keep
things straight.
Sometimes people take a less personal view of veterinary care and, as
with any other service, they shop around for what they perceive to be the
"best deal." As above, you may quote fees for vaccinations and routine pro-
 cedures. Callers who are simply price shopping may often say, “But Dr. X
Bxa  as ad r    e s s ssa ri e si
everything that is included in the fee, perhaps a free nail trim or health exam.
HOW TO HANDLE COMMON CAllS
If the caller wants ...
You should ..
information about a bill
retrieve the client's fle, either the hard copy or the computer fle and
answer the questions yourself.
information about fees
follow office policy. In most veterinary offices, you can quote set fees,
such as those for vaccinations and routine procedures such as a spay
or neuter without complications. Usually you can give a range for fees
that may vary slightly but always explain the reason why there may be
a variation in the fee. Make sure, in these instances that the amount is
oiw noa 'sauawos alonb p tou puo alwsa uo so uaai saomi
nave to explain that the veterinarian needs to examine the pet before
determining a fee for other services.
to report on satisfactory prog-
take a message and say. *Thank you very much for the update. I will
ress or treatment
make sure Dr. -- gets this information."
to report on unsatisfactory
take a message and advise the client that either you or the veterinar-
 progress or treatment
ian will return her call as soon as possible.
 to request test results
with the veterinarian's permission, give favorable results, but also be
prepared to answer questions and explain what each test reflects. If
yOu are uncertain, transfer the call to a veterinary technician. Never try
to bluff your way through. If the results of tests are unfavorable, the vet-
erinarian will call the client so the patient's treatment plan and options
can be further discussed.
to complain about care or
explain all the points you can, or offer to call back affer you have
fees
checked the chart.If you cannot satisfy the client easily it is best to 
have the veterinarian or the office manager return the call to the client.
Copy right 2011 Cengage Le
CHAPTER 6
Interacting with Clients
115
fully, and professionally
Outgoing Calls
Answering the telephone and responding appropriately is only one part of
acquiring excellent telephone skills. The other is the ability you also have to
Yn s i ssusnq nauo no suo oi s uono eid oi doaa
 requires all the courtesy and tact of receiving telephone calls.
First, you should be organized. If there is more than one item that needs be
discussed, you should write down a checklist to be sure each item is addressed.
Time is also a consideration, not only the time of day but also the amount
of time you have available to speak without interruptions. The time of day is
important for clients as well; be considerate and plan outgoing calls that are
  o  e a  i n s i i   
ing children off to school. If you are placing a call to order supplies, it should
Ask another member of staff to cover the front desk while you place the order
on another extension where you are likely to not be disturbed
 Frequently. you will make outgoing calls to clients or another veterinar
s si a  s s un m non o S no n 
ward. You could say something like, *This is MJ from Dr. D's offce, returning
 Mr. Gs call" If the person is not expecting the call, you might say something
like “Good morning, this is MJ calling for Dr. D. She would like to speak to
P pioy oi uosiad au xse m no uaui  sinsai isai isael solo inoqe no
the doctor.
You might also make calls to:
remind clients when boosters for vaccinations are due although these
reminders are often sent to clients as reminder cards
 confrm appointments made far in acdvance
 advise clients that the veterinarian has an emergency, and ask them if
they are able to come in a little later in the day or if they would prefer to
reschedule their appointment.
Sometimes, you will be asked to relay messages from the veterinarian. For
example, you might call to reassure a client that a pet is recovering well after
surgery or an illness. Or if there is no offce manager in the practice where you
work, you might have the unpleasant assignment of calling clients to remind
them to pay past cdue accounts.
Collecfion Calls
Most veterinary practices expect payment when services are rendered, but
sometimes when credit is extended to a client it can become difficult to col-
lect payments on the account. Some management consultants strongly advise
inopportune time or embarrass the client in front of others present. Sometimes
Copyright 201l Cengage Lea
116
PART 2
Communication and Professional Growth
however, collction calls are unavoidable. Some clients may feel that promising
ou m s s Au dn moo no ssun Xessanu si ien ne si Aed oi
put the check in the mail
You should never take it upon yourself to handle past due accounts with-
out your employer's approval. Always advise your employer of any problems
that develop. Never make a collection call within earshot of others, especially
clients in the reception area. Not only is this in poor taste, but it could lead to
a lawsuit against your employer. There are also criminal statutes andl telephone
 company rules which you must be aware of and not violate. Violations of these
statutes include the following:
calls placed at odd hours
repeated calls (considlered harassment)
calls to debtors' friends, relatives, employers, or children
 calls making threats
calls falsely asserting that credit ratings will be hurt
calls demanding payment for amounts not owed
 calls that frighten, abuse, torment, or harass another person
 People frequently react in a hostile manner when reminded about a past
due account, so try to approach the subject with sensitivity. Always speak
 directly to the person responsible for the bill. You should not leave a message
with another person or on a telephone answering machine giving any details
of the reason you are calling.
Telephone marketing and solicitation has become such a nuisance that
a adod uum i nu, a po s a pandd s i
 receive unsolicited telephone calls, they may register their numbers on the
national no-call list. Repeat offenders are subject to fines. Because of this,
many telephone companies now offer a service that screens incoming calls
uas sies iu sess ppron e re Ae non rqu aad e on
similar to this:
This number does not accept unsolicited calls. If you are a solicitor,
hang up now— if you are not a solicitor, please press 1
By following the voice instructions, your call will be put through normally
Trying to collect past due accounts is not a pleasant task, but you can make
it easier when you begin the conversation by identifying yourself in a clear and
friendly manner with no suggestion of confrontation or aggressiveness. Avoid
"small talk" asking questions such as *How are you doing?" and "How did you
  i nm o e n d     r  
on you, assuming it is the beginning of yet another telephone solicitor's spiel.
 pue Apua aq oi si yoeode isaq a
Bman uaaq aa no jeui fes Aq uissnos aun uado Ae non
-Aed ou 'st ien aaoeun uaq seu junonne niaun eun pue auuisino shunos
ment has been received since. (Here, add the date of the last payment or when
the client initially had the credit line extended.) You can usually avoid offendl-
ing the person by assuming that the nonpayment is due to an oversight and
say that you are calling as a reminder of the payment cdue and the amount
that the client is not deliberately avoiding his or her obligation.
Copyright 201l Cengage Lea
CHAPTER 6
Interacting with Clients
117
You: Your payment record with us has always been very good and we
appreciate it. We were concerned, not having heard from you, and would
like to discuss the status of your account.
Allow the client to respond, do not interrupt the client when an answer or
'e e siis no ds sed sn ai i ia q si u
listen carefully. paraphrase the problem and when the client agrees with what
has been said, promise that you will dliscuss the matter with your employer.
Never show irritation in your voice or appear to be scolding the client. You
q s n  d a n s  a  i p o nm 
q A an ss Ksnond aa A noA sis an oi ssudsn ou
extraordinary circumstances about which you would have no knowledge, such
as a death in the immediate family or a debilitating illness. Never assume a cli-
ent is just trying to avoid paying the bill.
 ao aui ieui aieipui no ji aieiadoo oi ide ao a lm uosid a
be flexible in a payment plan. For example, you can suggest a partial payment,
 a n d s aq a r sd a s  po
promises to pay, ask when you can expect to receive the payment. End the
conversation on a friendly note and be sure to thank the client for his or her
time. Always follow up on the telephone conversation with a brief letter to the
client confirming the details of payment that were dliscussed.
Documentation is very important when calling clients about outstanding
accounts. You should always write down the date and time of the call and the
date that the client has agreed to send a payment. The details of the conversa-
tion and verbal agreement should be entered into the client's fle. In this way.
aa ue daay Asa ao u noA 1nq (i) pau peaal e a Auo jou no
on problem accounts. Most people are as good as their word, but occasion-
ally follow-up calls may be necessary Use a fickler file to follow up on the
commitment dates. A tickler fle is like an appointment book, only it has slots
o aul no sep Aq pazuno ane ieu iss auouan pue p no
Reminders are placed in the file on the day of the month concermed. Your
 d n pe u a d oe  arms rnd
will generate these reminders—to you—to follow up on accounts outstanding.
Tickler files should be checked daily
Remember that the goal of a collection call is to receive payments and clear
outstanding accounts without losing or offending the client. An uncollected
Addeuun ue mo insan us jeu sep ai on panedon susyuisi si l
or offended client. Word of mouth spreads criticism faster than praise.
Off-Hours Phone Coverage
Someone must be available at all times to answer the telephone. Veterinarians
Ss as a s  sm 'si se s so 
client calls according to the veterinarian's orders. The last thing that should
be done when the clinic closes for the night is to call the service and tell them
that the clinic is closing and the calls will be transferred to them. One of the
first tasks of the morning is to call the service and acdvise them that someone is
now on duty in the clinic and will take the calls.
Copyright 201l Cengage Lea
om the e Book and/or eChapte r(s5)
118
PART 2
Communication and Professional Growth
 Instead of a service, some veterinarians use their own answering machine
or a voice mail system in which clients can leave messages for the doctor or
staff to handle directly. It may your responsibility to record the veterinarian's
message on the answering machine
Sample message: Hello. You have reached the Animal Care Hospital. We are
sorry we cannot take your call right now. If you have a medical emergency.
please call Dr. M. at 555-4321. If you would like to speak with Dr. T. or
 make an appointment, please call back tomorrow between the hours of
 8:30 A.M. and 5:00 p.m. Thank you for calling the Animal Care Hospital
Making Appointments
Scheduling Appointments
One of the most important duties of office management is scheduling appoint-
his or her preferences. Schedule too many patients, and the result is chaos
Schedule too few, and the offce loses profts. Your goal is to schedule the day
so that no one's time is wasted, the clients are happy, the patients are well
cared for, and the offce prospers.
Types of Scheduling
To review, there are three general types of appointment scheduling.
1. Wave scheduling. With wave scheduling, the total number of patients to
an n 'adxa noh  as al ie pas si ns   s aa
average time for each patient is 15 minutes, four patients are scheduled
for each hour and are seen in the order of arrival. You might schedule four
patients for the hour from 10 A.M. to ll A.m. This method helps to adjust
for any deviations from the schedule such as no-shows, late arrivals, or
walk-ins. Although some patients may be seen later than scheduled, each
hour is usually started and fnished on time.
2. Flow scheduling. Using flow scheduling. patients are scheduled for
 de r   e sn n 
method usually results in the best control of scheduling and in a shorter
waiting time for clients and patients. However, once you are behind
schedule, it is almost impossible to catch up.
3. Fixed offce hours. Clients come to announced fixed office hours with
their pets whenever they wish. On arrival, they register or sign in and
their pets are seen in the order in which they arrive. Obviously, with this
system, it is difficult to control the flow of patients and make efficient use
of resources and staff.
Whatever the type of scheduling. you always need to consider the time
necessary for the examination or procedure and the availability of examination
or treatment rooms
Copyright 201l Cengage L
nd/or eChapte r( s)
CHAPTER 6
Interacting with Clients
119
Reminders
 Many clients like to receive a reminder when it is time for vaccination
boosters. Reminders are usually sent about a month before a pet's vac-
cinations are due.
 Some offices use telephone reminders. A call saves postage; and even
better, it guarantees that the client gets the message and may make the
sent via e-mail so it is a good idea to ask about their preferred method
of contact. Client e-mail addresses should be entered into the client
information file with their telephone numbers. Remember too, that not
everyone has an e-mail address and some may wish to keep it private.
Whether you remind by mail, e-mail, or telephone, always check the
a  r   o s    a   a sis
owner has notified you of the pet's death.
The Appointment Book
Even though most hospitals and clinics now use computer scheduling
(Figure 6-4), there are still many styles of appointment books available for use
in animal hospitals and you should become familiar with both methods. These
are designed with enough space for the number of appointments that can be
FIGURE 6-4 With the use of computers, appointments may be made from any station
within the facility.
Copy right 2011 Cengage
eChapters
120
PART 2
Communication and Professionaf Growth
DAY
MON
DATE
6/23
00
Julie S, 555-0001; Persian; Amos; Eye Infection
15
30
ea
abeb
45
FIGURE 6-5An example of a written appointment book entry.
 ns ie ni (-a ai   red e  p
space for the following information:
 client's name and phone number
pet's breed and name
a brief notation for the reason of the visit
-au nl yanoun o pinous non yooq suauuodde aui dn gus uaum
diately and block off the times when the veterinarian will not be available
H aui ieui os uad no uad pai asn (9-g anai) sude 1oj
stands out and appointments are not scheduled during times set aside for
surgery or when the doctor will be out of the office. Unavailable times might
include:
holidays
vacations
personal appointments
Sundays
lunch breaks
surgery
days off 
evenings
This advanced preparation of the appointment book is sometimes called
establishing the matrix.
The following suggestions should help you keep an accurate, effective
appointment book:
mix-up. "We will see you at 9:30 A.M., Monday, May 9th."
 Confirm appointments the day before if they are longer than
15 minutes. This helps avoid lost time and revenue due to missed
appoin tments.
Copy right 2011 Cengag
Chapter(s)
CHAPTER 6
Interacting with Clients
121
mONDAy, mAY 9
TUESDAY, MAY 10
00
00
8
15
15
30
30
45
AcCDuntaRt
45
00
00
15
6
15
D
30
30
45
45
00
00
10
15
10
15
30
30
45
45
00
00
11
15
11
15
30
30
45
45
00
00
12
15
12
15
Lunch
a6eb
30
30
45
15
FIGURE 6-6 Remember to block off times when the veterinarian will not be available for appointments
Ask clients to please call if they are unable to keep the appointment or
need to reschedule.
 i i o  i   a oi s r s m a
and arrive late. If your office maintains its own Web page, advise them
that there is a map and directions on the Web site.
 Be aware that walk-ins can become long-term clients and treat
them accordingly, with the same courtesy as you do other clients
( ) ssd    
 Keep the doctor aware of waiting clients and patients, especially when
appointments are running behind schedule.
 Record no-shows and cancellations on the patients' charts and call
or send notices to these clients asking them if they would like to
reschedule
 For cancellations, neatly draw a line through the original appoint-
ment information and give the time to another patient, writing the new
appointment above the old. The appointment book can serve as a legal
dlocument if a client should sue the veterinarian, and erasing or whiting-
same notations should be entered for electronic appointment scheduling
Copy right 2011 Cengage
eChapter(s)
122
PART 2
Communication and Professionaf Growth
ANIMAL CARE HOSPITAL
Fido
HAS AN APPOINTMENT ON
DAY:Tuesday
MONTH: June
DATE: 27
AT
A.M..
4:30
P.M.
Please telephone in advance if you
are unable to keep the appointment.
Telephone 555-0000.
Del
FIGURE 6-7An example of an appointment card.
Organizing Appointments
The scheduling program in the computer is very similar to using the appoint-
ment book; the spaces for information and the data to be entered are the same.
If the appointment scheduler, either book or computer fle, has slots for four
appointments every hour, should you schedule a patient every 15 minutes? Not
necessarily. Appointments are schecduled according to the purpose of the visit,
availability of examination and treatment rooms, and time the appointment will
s m e is o sn n a i e rd n n
for a vaccination to an hour or more if testing and radiographs are involved.
ne sa a a  sd  sd  a
is not necessary, for example, while waiting for test results or a radiograph to
be taken and developed. In those
s, you can schedule short appointments
within the time frame of the longer one.
You might also want to block off an
occasional free period of 15 minutes to allow for any spillovers in the schedule.
Sometimes clients request a specifc veterinarian, and other times an appoint-
ment can be made for a veterinary technician for suture removal, for example.
To make the best possible use of the veterinarian's time, you should know
how long each type of appointment usually takes and take it into consideration
e a as n 
t. If you schedule carelessly—making
d e  e p    n d  se
type of appointment takes, you will probably end up with a full waiting room.
This leads to clients who are dissatisfed, an unhappy employer, and increased
levels of stress for all staff.
To make scheduling easier, take notes for yourself about the time it usu-
ally takes to complete different types of appointments. In this way, until you
become familiar with the amount of time that needs to be allocated for specific
Copy right 2011 Cengage L
 and/or eChapte r(s).
Editoria
CHAPTER 6
Interacting with Clients
123
Ae ue ui azaanbs ue no j aul e ie i u no siuadde jo sadi
shot for a cat in the aftermoon, or if you will need to contact another client with
a morning appointment to see if it can be rescheduled because an emergency
has arrived. Veterinarians, like all of us, work at dlifferent paces, so you will
 cated for differing situations.
Scheduling House Calls
 Clients usually bring their pets into the offce for treatment. However, some
clients may be unable to come in or to transport several dogs from a breed-
ing kennel to the clinic. Many veterinarians have long-standing relationships
with breeders and other facilities where house calls are more appropriate and
time effcient. Another situation that can occur is when the owner prefers
and requests that a beloved pet is euthanized at home. Scheduling a house
call should always be made in consultation with the veterinarian concermed.
Remember too, that in most instances, a veterinary technician will also be
 accompanying the veterinarian to the house call
 Most clinics or hospitals usually have a general policy in regard to home
visits but you should always take a detailed message with the following infor-
mation so that the veterinarian can schedule a time for the house call.
· full name of client
● name, breed or species of animal, and number of animals to be seen
+ address, with clear directions to the owner's property
 phone number
 reason for the visit
As soon as you know when the veterinarian will be able to make the visit, call
to let the client know. If, by chance, there should be more than one house call
 on the same day, the appointments should be arranged whenever possible to
provide the most efficient route and travel time to the various locations. It is
essential to get exact dlirections and telephone numbers from the clients.
Greeting Clients
 In addition to making appointments and becoming proficient in the use of the
telephone, another important aspect of the job is reception, welcoming clients.
which is far more than sitting behind the desk and saying hello to clients. It is
of the other tasks you may be dealing with at the time. It takes but a second to
 n a   s   e o p i  
know that you are very aware that he or she has arrived and will be taken care
of as soon as possible.
A os   an o ad a so  sa po ru A
scheduled. A seemingly routine ailment might turm out to be complicated and
 e a on a  an ps a r a  
  ia a  a e  om a ae 
might get held up in traffic. No matter what the cause, you need to learn to
Copyright 201l Cengage L
124
PART 2
Communication and Professional Growth
be flexible and to accommodate the unexpected. Regardless of the unexpected
 p n n rn pu n as sde al i s
to greet clients and patients and to soothe those in distress. In short, you are
-oe peuoissaond pue peios poog e guuuie pue buean ng aqisuodsn
sphere in the reception area of the veterinary office.
First Impressions
Would you buy groceries at a store with old, torm advertisements in dirty
windows if you could go to a store with bright, new ads on sparkling clean
windows? If you are like most people, you will assume that the old ads and
dirty windows mean the groceries will be old and dirty too. Based on your
first impression of the outside, you will pick the clean, neat store. The same
applies to veterinary offces (Figure 6-8). A carelessly kept waiting room and
reception desk suggests to clients that the veterinarian and staff are also care-
less (Figure 6-9). Who would want to trust their beloved pets to a seemingly
uncaring veterinary practice? If the offce is not kept clean, neat, and odor-free
the practice will lose business.
The receptionist's dluty starts before the frst patient arrives and continues
until after the last one leaves. You should arrive early enough to make certain
the reception area is clean, neat, and odor-free, in addition to your other early
morming duties. The frst thing you should do is contact the answering service
to let them know that someone is in the office to receive calls. Then you should
have a good and careful look around the reception area; straighten up the
magazines and make sure that allthe refuse has been discarded and waste bas-
si dn yid pe isnp daams aed u sieq au ysa yim Ada are si
FIGURE 6-8 The entrance to the practice should be clean and inviting
Copy right 2011 Cengage
 eChapter(s)
CHAPTER 6
Interacting with Clients
125
ogra
FIGURE 6-g  An uncluttered and organized reception desk reflects professionalism
and allows client and patient needs to be readily met.
 as needed. Tables and other furmiture should be wiped down each morming
The receptionist on duty should check the waiting area after every few patients
ny Aiaa aui iog aq pinous il se Anexa Apn pue ueap si le ieui ainsua pue
client. If this seems extreme, remember that every client—even the last one of
the day—expects the office reception area to be clean and inviting. Even the
most well-trained pets are likely to have “accidents" if they are scared and ner
no Asnq Aiaua ane no j inq dnuea ioy aqisuodsai si auokiaa snoa
should call another member of staff to step in and help. Many clinics employ
 kennel staff to help clean up messes and tend to the cages, but you should
never refuse to do it citing, "It's not my job." There are no circumstances which
justify leaving urine, feces, blood, or vomit and not cleaning it up immediately
It may be unpleasant, but it should always be done cheerfully and without
 blaming the client or patient in any way.
A good start to the day can be with a thorough airing of the offce. If there
 is no air conditioning, tum on ceiling fans or open screened windows (if you
 do not want to offer any opportunities for wild animals to enter or for pets to
escape). This will help ventilate the area and remove stale air. The conservative
 pors a inq sa us ne aul daay di unn siazp jo asn
be used to cover up odors. They should be air-neutralizers, not have strong
scent of their own and be safe to use for pets, including birds. There are many
specialized odor neutralizers available and you should only use the product
Copy right 2011 Cengage
r eChapters
126
PART2
Communication and Professional Growth
chosen specifically for that purpose. Heat not only magnifes odors but makes
clients and patients uncomfortable when the reception area is crowded. The
waiting room thermostat should be set for no higher than 68°F or 20°℃
 First impressions are not limited to the offce itself and your appearance
is just as important. When you greet clients, you should be just as pleasant
and charming in person as you are on the telephone. No member of staff
 would try to irritate or offend clients, yet it happens. How do you ensure that
you will make a favorable frst impression when there is no way to tell what
everyone all the time but you can do your job best by focusing on two areas
professional appearance and good interpersonal skills. Always be neat and
spotlessly clean, take pride in your personal hygiene, including clean hair and
 neatly trimmed nails. Do not use personal colognes or scented aftershaves as
they can be just as cloying as an over-done air freshener and can cause many
people to have adverse reactions. Keep a toothbrush at work and use it dur-
 ma no oa s  us s  r  an 
or suck on candy!
Professional Appearance
After the initial phone contact, when a client frst meets you he or she will
aq Aeu uosaidu isiy peq e pue ayoo noA eum ieadde no mou anou
Most veterinarians ask their staff to wear some sort of uniform. It might be a
scrub top worm over your street clothes, a combination of top and slacks, or
a polo shirt with the clinic or hospital logo embroidered on it. Whatever your
clothing requirements are, always make sure that your clothes are clean, neat,
and in good condition.
Suppose you have taken a family member to a physician's offce. How
would you expect the staff to be dressed? Would you feel confident if you
- aq noA pinoM ihsu pue doi Ads e ur uom e Aq paiaana aam
fortable being treated by a doctor wearing jeans and a T-shirt? While these
outfits might be fashionable at certain times and in certain social circles, they
Aia e nu tus pepa eusssod e ui aidodde iaasu ae
s e io un e au io sao ad a ei aisi li and
code, but if there isn't one, use common sense when choosing your attire. It
should be practical, easy to clean, and fit loosely enough for you to do your
job. Casual does not mean sloppy. If uncertain, pay attention to the cloth-
ing other staff members wear and ask for their advice. You cannot refuse to
do something just because it might ruin your clothes or get covered in pet
 si  si    a    
pose a danger to yourself and the patient; shiny dangling earrings might also
Pus nk sq adsa ‘sd aos non ioen e udn on ad
Buq no dn une u jo peuaod au se ym Amaf Aue rm n
ear, nose, lip, and eyebrow—are frowned upon and do not present a profes-
     q  q     
danger to you and to the patients.
Copyright 201I Cengage Lea
CHAPTER 6
Interacting with Clients
127
Aside from your attire, people also will notice if you are a smoker. Smoking
offends many people and it is a known health hazard. Veterinary offces ban
smoking in or near the building because, aside from the other more personal
concerms, oxygen is in use on the premises.
Think of every detail ofyour appearance and consider what kind of impres-
sion you make. Something as seemingly insignificant as your shoes could send
 an unfavorable message. For example, spike heels might suggest to a client
 that a woman is impractical and ineficient. A shirt unbuttoned to the waist
noA jn nq ‘ey iou si i sdeqad ieuoissaodun si ue e jeun isagns 
The care you take in presenting a clean, neat, efcient appearance will go a long way
Inferpersonal Behavior
-adde euissaond e aau pue auouan aui uo aqeusid punos sur non
o ne 'adxa ng n e uo ussd ns nood e a s inq '
have to do is ignore someone who has just arrived. Put yourself in the client's
situation and imagine how annoying it is to arrive on time, only to be com-
pletely ignored when you enter the office. Empathy—the ability to understand
 i ne rn nn n r e  
The very first thing you should do when a client arrives is to acknowledge
him or her. Even if you are on the phone or busy with something, acknowl-
edge the client with a wave or a smile. If your duties require you to leave the
reception area for a brief time when there is no one in the reception area.
q e no q e A s a udo oi noo an nn Ai a u
to announce that the office door has been opened. You should immediately
returm to the front desk to greet the person who has just entered. As soon as
 you returm to the reception area, offer a personal greeting.
RECEPTloNist: Hello, Mr. J. I am sorry to keep you waiting. Would you like
to sit down? Dr. T. will be with you in just a few minutes. Would you like
to help yourself to some coffee?
For clients who have not been to the office in some time, verify their
addresses, telephone numbers, and any other necessary information when
they arrive and update all changes that need to be made on the client file and
 in the computer record.
both the client's and the patient's name in the appointment schedule.
REcEPTloNist: Hello, are you Mrs. S and Rocky? It is nice to meet you. I'm
MJ. I see Rocky is here for vaccinations. Let's just get some more informa-
tion for your records and the doctor will see you shortly
d aui s ea som as aul asn oi aa nou op no 'non jo
tant thing is to be natural, friendly. polite, and genuine. Reception is an oppor-
tunity to establish a positive relationship with both clients and their pets.
Copyright 201l Cengage Lear
128
PART2
Communication and Professional Growth
            s
relaxed setting and more enjoyable for clients, patients, and other employees.
The receptionist needs to always be aware of clients and other visitors
who are in the reception area and the reason for their visit. Often, sale repre-
sentatives from pharmaceutical and supply companies will drop in on the off
chance that the veterinarian is available. They should be greeted in the same
friendly manner as any other visitor to the clinic, but under no circumstances
 n  ,    n  e  d   s
a minute of Dr. J's time" or "I just wanted to catch up with her about the latest
and is unavailable and ask if they would like to leave their product information
 Or a catalogue with a personal note for the veterinarian.
 Clients and patients should always be seen in the order of their appoint-
ment times (or, in the case of patients who are a little late, their order of arrival)
but there are exceptions. (Emergencies always take precedence.) Clients who
   id    r r      o 
ation. You do not want the client to get angry, but neither do you want to
    d  n n n n r s r 
offering another time.
REcEpTloNist: I am sorry that your car broke down, Ms. B., Dr. T is in sur-
gery now and we are fully booked for aftermoon appointments. Could you
possibly bring Felix in at nine tomorrow morming?
Clients whose pets are very ill or potentially contagious should be escorted to
an examination room as soon as possible.
Handling Delays
Another important factor in a client's frst impression of a veterinary offce is
the length of the wait. Waiting with animals can be uncomfortable for both
the clients and their pets. It can also present a safety issue when a mix of
 ds   e    s   so 'so 
a client makes an appointment for 2:o0 p.m., she expects to see the veterinar-
ian at 2:00 p.M. An important part of a good relationship with clients is hon.
esty about delays. Most people understand a 5- or l0-minute delay and will
        n   d 
when the wait will be considerable and why an emergency for example. Offer
the client the option of waiting, rescheduling, or perhaps leaving the pet for
  xa   i   i   s   
sed o dorp, non pabai aa lm yoadd pe inq 'aars 
Clients who will have the longest wait should be informed of the delay frst.
 And, as you learmed earlier, clients with later appointments appreciate your
calling to inform them about delays of a half an hour or more.
Never be vague or noncommittal about how long a wait could be. If uncer-
tain, check with the veterinarian so you will at least be able to give a reasonable
estimate
Copyright 201l Cengage Lea
CHAPTER 6
Interacting with Clients
129
Ps au Ans Aa  s I ia ' r 1q Ao I :ii3i
it might be another 40 minutes to an hour.
If the client chooses to wait, you should offer whatever you can to make the wait
 id s     r     
stroll around the back of the building. provide a water dish for their pet, and
offer the client refreshments. Clients appreciate a personal touch, which can
make them feel recognized and valued not only as clients, but as individuals.
 In adldition to helping clients, your personal touch will make your own work
easier, more pleasant, and more rewarding. For instance, if the office is always
behind schedule, the front office staff shouled analyze the situation. Perhaps the
scheduling is too tight and enough time is not being allocated to complete each
appointment or maybe the veterinarian has trouble staying on schedule. Once
the problem is iclentifed, the staff can take steps to resolve it. Staff meetings
present the best opportunity for brainstorming and problem solving.
Euthanasia
Euthanasia is a word derived from Greek. A literal translation is "good death'
(eu means good and anasia refers to death). In veterinary medicine, the word
 means to end an animal's life humanely and painlessly. There are many rea-
sons for euthanasia, for example, when an animal is suffering from a painful.
incurable disease, has been severely injured, or perhaps when a beloved pet
has become so old, weak, and frail that it is unable to eat and loses control over
bodily functions. Euthanasia in these circumstances is most often considered
a kindnes, a gentle release from pain and suffering. However, there are many
other reasons for euthanasia; the pet may be no longer wanted or the owners
can no longer afford to care for it or the family situation has changed.
It is extremely important for all veterinary staff to understand the process
of euthanasia, including those in office management as they are an important
part of the team who talk to clients trying to face this dliffcult time. Staff
must always approach these discussions with compassion and respect for the
client and patient. You should never attempt to influence a client's decision
 a  a i i a sq uo  ia n
own informed decision. With your help and ability to answer their questions.
understand their fears and doubts, it will be the first step in accepting the real-
Ada pue aro a n si a o ou i iad nun non yap jo A
 more important. The veterinarian, most likely, will have discussed euthanasia
with the client, perhaps as a treatment option, but people—your clients also
 need comfort from others, reassurance, understanding, and kindness.
 There are various methocds used to humanely perform euthanasia but the
 most common method for companion animals is by injection of a barbiturate
S s inoud us si pasn q au ua e ou a
isae Aioiendsan Aq pamoon 'ssausnoisuooun turnpun isrg Aq Aidei sie
(when breathing stops), and then cardiac arrest (when the heart stops beating)
Death can occur within a matter of seconds. (Note: Sodium pentobarbital is
a barbiturate and is a controlled substance. It should always be stored in the
locked drug cabinet.)
Copyright 201l Cengage Le
nd/or eChapte r( s)
130
PART2
Communication and Professional Growth
Common Client Concerns
It is normal for clients to be frightened and confused, uncertain and hesitant
when it comes to euthanasia, even if they have accepted that it is the best pos-
sible option for their animal companion. To make the situation a little easier, it
is important to understand the concerms they have, and honestly discuss their
Bu p nn n nn p d  n s
have this discussion at the front desk. Always take the client to a separate room
where you are both able to sit with each other. There should be no physical
barriers between yourself and the client, such as an examination table or desk.
What Happens to the Body? A veterinary hospital usually has a contract
with a licensed company that specializes in the disposal of animal bodies. Most
often, the bodies are cremated as a group but the option for private cremation
is usually available. In this case, the ashes of the pet will be returmed to the
veterinary hospital, presented in a small wooden box or an um a client may
choose. The ashes are held in the clinic or hospital for the client to collect.
Reassure the client that the company whose service you use is of the highest
ethical standard and great care will be given to ensure that the correct ashes
are returned. Perhaps suggest to the owners that other clients have chosen a
i aq  ae a ji e a ad oi y n aa no sd pas
Some clients may wish to take the body with them for home burial and this
should be gently discouraged. There are many regulations and laws that pro-
hibit burying pets even on private property. (It is your responsibility to be
aware of whatever laws apply in a given area.) There may also be a private pet
cemetery in your area. As a part of excellent client care, you should already
know if there is one, where it is located, the person to contact, and how the
client can proceed in arranging a burial in a pet cemetery.
Being Present during Euthanasia. Clients may choose to be present during
euthanasia. Some find it comforting to be there, both for themselves and the
pet. Others feel the moment would be too much for them to bear. The option
of being with their pet should be offered to the owner but the decision is madle
sd q i s i a   a si s   a  
then you must explain what may also likely occur; sometimes there is what's
known as an “excitement phase." This is a physiological reaction due to the
drug and it does not indicate that the animal is afraid or is in pain but the pet
may vocalize for a short second. At the time of death, it is also normal for the
bladder and bowels to empty. When a client decides to be present, usually the
patient is sedated frst to allay even greater anxiety for the client or to reduce
the potential of having difficulty restraining the pet for the injection. No one
wants the last memory of a beloved pet to be one of struggling or to seemingly
h sd aun ssd aq oi o si nu e ua ansn  yeq uy, aa
 taken to the treatment room where a catheter is placed in a vein in the rear leg.
This access, or port, allows the owner to be close to the patient without inter-
fering with the restraint and injection. Always cover the table with fresh, clean
towels. Clients often bring a favorite blanket or bed for the comfort of their
 pet. If so, the clinic towels should line the bed and be gently removed from
under the body and taken from the room. The owner should be given time to
spend a few quiet moments alone with their pet after it has clied.
Copy right 20ll Ce ngage L
CHAPTER 6
interacting with Clients
131
Where the Futhanasia Will Take Place. Companion animals are usually
h a s as iq o n pso ia  u pi
to have the euthanasia performed at home. Before agreeing to this, you must
check with the veterinarian to determine when it can be done. It should be
 handled in the same manner as any other request for a house call appointment.
Scheduling The Appontment
Appointments for euthanasia should be made during the quietest times of
the day or you may need to block as much as one hour in the appointment 
book. It could be during the last hour of opening or, if the practice closes for
aul 'aqissod iust isnf juauodde au iannb, e fn oo uiem papmoio e
owner and patient arriving for euthanasia should be promptly taken to a quiet
a iel aise ios on ms e a mou snd A ere aieds pe
 not resemble a clinical examination room but has been arranged with fumiture
and framed pictures that offer comfort. As difficult as it is in these situations,
you still need to discuss the fee and method of payment and obtain a signed
euthanasia consent form (Figure 6-l0). The signed consent form should be
EUTHANASIA CONSENT FORM
VETERINARIAN
HOSPITAL NAME
ADDRESS
 Client Name
Client Number
Pet's Name
 Identification Number
Breed
Description
Owmers/ Agent Driver License
 Number
State
 I, the unclersigned, confirm that I am the owner or authorized agent of the
owner of the above described animal.I hereby unconcitionally release the above
animal for euthanasia.
earning.
Date:
afi
OWNER OR AGENT SIGNATURE
Witness
FIGURE 6-10An example of a euthanasia consent form.
Copy right 2011 Cengage
or eChapter(s)
Editoria
132
PART 2
Communication and Professionaf Growth
 e aos uo uia an iel os ay nud al jo iu al oi pae
glance that the form has been signed and that this is the correct patient. The
 payment should be completed prior to the veterinarian meeting with the cli-
ent. It is thoughtless to expect a client who has just euthanized a pet to have to
stop and check out at the front desk
Euthanasia Consent Form. Forms vary slightly depending on the practice
but at the very least must all contain the above information. There may be an
 o  n  o    n  s ds n s
ashes after cremation. Sometimes it may be difficult to determine who is a des
ignated “agent" and can legally sign the consent form. It is a good idea when
discussing an appointment for euthanasia to determine if the owner will bring
in the pet or has made arrangements with another family member or friend to
bring in the pet.
Sympathy cards should be mailed the same day. Many hospitals also
arrange to have a single rose delivered to the home of the client. These exten-
Bpuadaa ep auo ueun nalun nal aq iou pinous Auedus pue aen jo suois
 si on n  e u n adn e  a y ds an uon
how you are doing." The call should express genuine concerm, not one of a
routine call-back. Always say "we are (thinking of you) concermed about how
should reflect the care and sympathy of the entire practice.
Grief
Clients normally experience pain, sadness, and grief at the loss of a pet. In
many situations, the animal was regarded as a member of the family, and its
loss is felt just as deeply. Being in such a powerful state of sorrow can also
bring back other sad memories, making a person feel even more depressed. As
    e    n   i n  
 s  a  a Aisa sd e jo  an ao 
 n ps ai  aq s y a n s
When someone loses a pet, whether through euthanasia, illness, or an
accident, it produces strong emotions and different stages of grief which can
be no different to losing a human family member or friend. It is normal and
mentally healthy to work through the grief process.
panod e  nnsi nou saop iad e po ssi an 's Au u ous
illness, but can be due to a severe injury, short-term illness, accident, or
a completely unexpected event. In these situations, people rarely have
pu Ae pue 'iad aul jo ssol ul no saasul aedad oi au aue
themselves unable to accept the death of the pet immediately. They are
 in shock, trying to process the information and accept it as real.
 Denial. Shock can lead to denial, not truly believing that their pet and
a A uum unod ss au pa adoad as pep si u
home, and only then, when they are not greeted, do they accept that
their pet is gone.
 uq pue A Ae eina uey ae oum su suua
God or other spiritual beliefs in order to spare the life of the pet. It is a
Copy right 20ll Ce ngage Lea
CHAPTER 6
Interacting with Clients
133
psychological method of trying to keep hope alive. Clients might make
promises to the pet or to themselves regarding the pet's care, food, or a
promise of other special times together
u ul Aue ooaq 0i adoad aos nop uooan pu e st l nou
midst of a traumatic event. A client might be angry with the veterinarian
1  d an iad an as i ae  iou  is a pu
P   n  o   d      
 the dog to run into the street or any number of people including himself.
 Sorrow. The clients you deal with will feel sad over the loss of their pets.
 This reaction is natural and normal; it is often accompanied by tears
and you may shed a few of your own. While your instinctive reaction
will be to try and comfort the person, be careful about touching clients.
It is better to offer soothing words or condolences, and to listen if there
is something the client wants to say Be sure to keep a box of tissues
available for grieving clients
 Depression. While it is normal to feel sad after the loss of a pet, some
people enter such a strong state of grief that they fall into a depression.
Anyone still feeling an overwhelming sense of sadness and loss over an
extended period of time should speak with a professional counselor.
This can be very dliffcult to assess as everyone processes grief dlifferently
 Guilt. Sometimes people feel guilty. thinking that there might have been
something they could have done to prevent the pet's death, or that the
choice to euthanize was wrong. Left unresolved, feelings of guilt can
prolong the grief recovery process.
You should be prepared to deal with a client expressing any or several of
these emotions before, during, and after euthanasia. Try not to take any cli-
    n       s  s 
thing you can do is listen and empathize.
Dealing with Grief. As with any other emotionally traumatic event, it takes
time to get over the loss of a beloved animal. How long the recovery pro-
cess takes cliffers from person to person. Helpful strategies that aid recovery
include:
·Talking about the loss with a close friend or other family members
 Talking with other people who have lost pets. Support groups exist
in many areas, and your practice or hospital should have information
about local resources. If not, do a little research and compile a list of
 local support groups, grief counselors, and online resources.
·Allowing themselves time to recover.
 Taking proper care of themselves, including eating right, and getting
adequate amounts of exercise and rest. Illness can cause the grief period
to last longer.
 Remembering the pet and what it meant to their lives.
u  iad ma e se e siaan d a  iad r 
a person to recover from the loss of a previous pet. The question of
h nmsue an 'sisi A un pe 'uosiad on uosad  saa uua,
"never."
134
PART 2
Communication and Professional Growth
Professional grief counselors are available in many areas. The local Humane
Society often has grief support groups. There are also a number of books about
 coping with the loss of a pet, as well as online support groups. The online
resources at the end of this chapter may also prove helpful to you and to your
clients.
SUMMARY
When you answer the telephone in a veterinary office, you become the
m yeads oi paau no pua iauo au uo uosad aui oi anod aul jo ai
no jn reau oi inadxa pnom no eun wisid pue ioadsn as a
o an a  i  no l an  d an 
method of screening calls, making appointments, and taking messages.
When it comes to telephoning others, be sure you understand why you are
calling, have all the information you might need to answer questions, and
always be respectful, whether you are reminding a client about an appoint-
 ment, asking a question, or requesting payment on a bill.
When making appointments, you should know whether your offce uses
wave scheduling. flow scheduling. or has fixed offce hours, and utilize the
 there is a record of exactly who is coming in when and why. Be aware of how long
each type of appointment usually lasts, to avoid long waits for other patients.
When there are delays, be sure the veterinarian knows patients are waiting, and
 let the patients know approximately how long a wait they can expect.
The reception area should be kept neat and clean, and you should always
maintain a professional appearance.
 Euthanasia is a medical procedure that requires all the staff to be profes-
sional, tactful, and compassionate. Special arrangements may need to be made
 when a patient is to be euthanized. Clients have strong emotional bonds with
 Aia aq u iad e jo yeap aun ym sua nn pue siad na
and painful for them. The offce management team needs to know the range
of emotions that the client might experience. Pet loss information and support
 group information should be made available to clients.
SCENARIO
uou ao auud u paiamsue ao sa i ie Anp uo isudanan au
"Good morning, Dr. B's office. ST speaking, How may I help you?"
"Hello, this is Mr. M. I'd like to make an appointment for my iguana."
"Okay, how is Stilson doing?" (Important: the receptionist addresses the
pet by name)
"Oh, he's fne, it is just time for his annual checkup."
"That's good to hear" replied the receptionist, while checking the appoint-
ment schedule for availabilities. "Do you prefer mormings or afternoons?
Copy right 20ll Ce ngage L
nd/or eChapte r( s
CHAPTER 6
Interacting with Clients
135
"Aftermoons are much better for me, thank you."
"Can you come in Thursday at 2:30?
"That would be fne."
"Okay, I've got you dlown for Thursday, at 2:30" she replied, filling in his
e au non ie mous sponau no u, anaus judde aui u a
Did you receive a copy of the bill?"
"Oh my I forgot all about that! Can I bring a check with me when I come
in on Thursday?
"That would be fne, thank you. We look forward to seeing you again."
"Okay, see you Thursday"
"Goodbye, Mr. M."
the specific information she was looking for as quickly and completely
as possible?
Was it appropriate for her to bring up the outstanding bill while making
the appointment?
Which form of scheduling does this office most likely use?
REVIEW
1. Based on the following conversation that ocurred at ll:45 A.m., fll out
a  n o al s ii  a   ss e
today's date.
RECEPTioNist: Dr. M's offce. Anne speaking. How may I help you?
CAller: This is M. Jones. I would like to speak with Dr M. about my cat.
RECEPTioNist: Oh, yes, Mrs. J. How is Tabby doing after her surgery?
CAllER: She has had a bit of bleeding around her stitches. I would like to
talk to the doctor about it.
RECEPTloNisT: Dr. M is with another patient right now, but I will tell her as
soon as she is free and have her call you. May I have your phone number,
Mrs. J.?
CAllEr: Yes, it is 555-l234. Please tell her Tabby bleeds whenever she
moves.
RECEPTIoNist: When did the bleeding start, Mrs. J.?
CALlEr: Eight this morming. When can I expect the doctor to call?
REcEPTloNist: She will call you as soon as possible. For now, try to keep
Tabby from jumping up on anything or going outside. If the bleeding gets
worse, please call again immediately.
Copyright 201l Cengage L
136
PART 2
Communication and Professionaf Crowth
CAller: Thank you. I'm really concerned.
l J ' s Add os s sn un o no y :IN
bleeding continues, please, don't hesitate, just bring Tabby in. We don't 
want you to have to worry. OK?
CAller: You are so kind. Thank you. I will watch her carefully and wait for
Dr. M to call. Goodbye.
To:
A.M.
Date:
Time:
P.M.
WHILE YOU WERE OUT
Phone:
Telephoned
Please Call
口
Came to See You
Will Call Again
口
Wants to See You
Rush
口
Ret'd Your Call
Called Again
口
Message
Signed
2. While the above two examples represent positive client/staff interaction,
the person taking the telephone call in the following conversation makes
mistakes in every response. Fill in what you think should be said. Make
up any details you think are needed.
STAFF: Hello, please hold.
STAFF: (After three minutes) Yes, can I help you?
r eChapters
CHAPTER 6
Interacting with Clients
137
CAllER: I'd like to make an appointment.
STAFF: Just a minute. (Puts caller on hold for two more minutes.)
：
STAFF: Okay What dlid you say your name was?
d.
CAllER: I didn't. It's John Doe
STAFr: How is next Friday at three?
He's got some deep puncture wounds I really think the vet should see
him today.
STAFF: Oh, an alley cat on the prowl? Well, bring him in anytime, then.
Mr. Doe. What did you say his name was?
CALLER: Tiger.
STAFF: Well, that figures! See you later. (Hangs up, laughing.)
g
3. The staff member in reception also makes mistakes in each of the
aop io pies aq pinous yuan non jeum am suons umo
a. An incontinent elderly dog just had an accident on the waiting room
floor. The person on duty in reception says to the client, “I am sorry.
but could you please clean up the mess? The boy who usually does it
is on break."
138
PART 2
Communication and Professional Growth
b. The receptionist is on the phone and pays no attention to the line of
clients and pets waiting to check in.
C.
 The veterinarian has been unavoidably delayed for one hour, but the
office staff chat with each other and say nothing to the waiting clients.
d. A client comes into the office to complain about a bill and yells at the
receptionist who responds by getting angry and defensive and says.
"If you cannot afford to keep your pets healthy, you should not be
allowed to have them."
 4. Create a log like the one that follows and enter the listed appointments
from the doctor's schedule.
Office opens 8:00 A.M.
Surgical procedures in the early morming
Lunch from l:00 p.M. to 2:00 p.M.
Personal appointment from 2:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.M.
Rounds to check on hospitalized animals from 4:00 p.M. to 5:00 p.M.
00
8
15
30
45
00
9
15
30
45
00
10
15
30
45
00
11
15
30
45
(continwed)
CHAPTER 6
Interacting with Clients
139
(Continwed)
00
12
15
30
45
00
15
30
45
00
2
15
30
45
00
3
15
30
45
00
15
30
45
00
5
15
30
45
Indicate whether the following statements are true or false. If false, indicate
what is needed to make them true.
5. When a patient is euthanized, the client is required to take the remains.
 6. Only medical personnel may be present during euthanasia.
7. Shock is a normal reaction to the loss of a pet from an accident.
 8. A prolonged state of sorrow and grief might indicate a state of
depression.
9.1
 For most people, talking about the loss of a pet only makes grief worse.
 10. Proper nutrition and exercise are important to the grief recovery
process.
140
PART 2
Communication and Professionaf Growth
ONLINE RESOURCES
Mastering Telephone Etiquette (from Dummies.com)
m sesn aud ndod rn sdn so o a  ae s
making and receiving calls, and when dealing with angry callers.
<http://www.dummies.com/>
Search Term: Telephone Etiquette
Pet Loss Support Pages
<http://www.petlossandgrief.com>
Association for Pet Loss and Bereavement (APLB)
<http://www.aplb.org>
142
PART2
Communication and Professional Growth
Introduction
You work in a very busy animal hospital and suppose you have just been called
in to work on your day off. Three of your co-workers are out sick with the flu.
and two of the veterinarians are running a half an hour behind schedule. You
 e  l aa ue aii  m o u s o aa a
ent is rushing in with a dog that has been hit by a car. The dog is bleeding and
the owner is hysterical. You are just about to instruct her on how to stop the
 bleeding when a German shepherd goes after another client's cat in the waiting
is a ua omi sssia pe ia si ss i  o
and the whole of the office seems in chaos. Unlikely? Not really, every hospital
and clinic will have days similar to this.
When you start your new job, you should expect to fnd yourself in a simi-
ena e asnen sn a suons ieun nqnop ou si aiaui ep auo unes ie
deal of stress and being able to cope with stress is not only an important part
of a job but for your own wellness too.
What Is Stress?
Stress is the cause of the physical and psychological changes that occur in your
body as a result of a change in your environment. Stress can be mental, emo-
tional, or physical tension that results from frightening, exciting, challenging.
confusing, endangering. or irritating circumstances—good or bad. Stress causes
-spun usn uapns e anssd pooa ui asu e se yns saur geonoisrd
tion, stomach pain, constipation or diarrhea, frequent colds and flu, headaches,
 s sn    r  s   ' p s
crying, shouting, and becoming angry. Many diseases have stress as a root cause
illnesses: real physical symptoms resulting from an emotional and physiologi-
cal response to stress. As a member of the offce management team, you must
learm to deal with stress from all directions: from your clients, your co-workers,
your patients, and your own stress that comes from experiencing all of this. You
may feel bombarded with everything and feel you just “cannot do this anymore ."
 Not all stress is bad for you. Many people perform job duties and other
tasks at a higher level when they feel some pressure or stress. "Good" stress
gives you the energy and desire to reach for goals and solve problems. A dead-
line can be a positive source of stress. Then again, if it is an impossible dead-
line, the stress can become overwhelming. The stress of reaching for a goal
is positive when the mission is achievable, and you feel good when you have
fnished something. Failure to reach a goal can result in feelings of frustra-
yourself. Set goals and time frames that are realistic and achievable.
Causes of Stress on the Job
According to "Stress...At Work," a report issued by the National Institute
for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOsH), the federal agency
 responsible for conducting research and making recommendations for the
Copy right 2011 Cengage
k and/or eChapte r(s).
CHAPTER 7
Stress
143
prevention of work-related illness and injury, the following job conditions
can lead to stress:
 Design of tasks, including too much work, too few breaks, working too
pue ssodind al aaeu ieqi sysen uo siseudua yn oon pue guo
underutilize workers' skills and abilities.
when making decisions, poor communication, and a lack of family-
friendly policies.
 Interpersonal relationships, including a lack of cooperation and support
among co-workers and managers.
·Work roles, including unrealistic or unclear job expectations, and
handled.
 Career concerns, including a lack of job security, little opportunity for
 professional advancement, and sudden changes without providing time
for workers to properly prepare.
 Environmental conditions, inclucing unpleasant or dangerous physical
conditions.
Animal hospitals are not the easiest places to work. The demands of the job
mean that you will have to interact with clients, co-workers with cdifferent
personalities, and animals of all different types and behaviors. Some of the
 personality types of your co-workers will be diffcult to deal with. Animals do
not get sick on schedule—critical cases and emergencies always seem to hap-
l  aas pq ane no num ' adoun iso al ne ud
veterinarian is not available
Your desire to work in a veterinary hospital or clinic is because you
 i e     n   io 
your personal stress is in having to deal with the harsh reality that one is
often faced with in veterinary medicine and these very traumatic situations
sometimes can be very diffcult. Some of the situations you will be faced
with involve animal abuse and cruelty, animal abandonment and starvation.
animals being rescued from a "crack house.," and intentional drug exposure.
It is not unusual, either, to arrive in the morming to open the clinic and fnd
 a carton at the front door with yet another litter of unwanted puppies or
kittens. Dealing with situations like this can be diffcult and cause a great
re-habilitate and find good homes for them but this is not always possible
a aund a pue Aad sa u nnsan so pu
animal down. Participating in euthanasia, the death of an animal, has its
own level of stress. These issues are best handled with co-workers who care
for and support each other, understand and empathize with each other, and
Aeuaia jo jed e si ooi sui ieun aq ues i se inoyp se 'idae oi uea
medicine.
 In order to cope with your job, you need to learm to be flexible, to pri-
oritize and face the tasks one at a time not worrying too much about keeping
everything under control at once. Realize that there are some things you can
control and other things that you cannot. Recognizing the dlifference between
ss y adon oi u u dns jd Aa e si omi a
Copy right 2011 Cengage L
e e Book and/or eChapter(s)
144
PART 2
Communication and Professionaf Growth
Burnout
Burnout is a term used to describe a condition that results from too much
stress over an extended period of time. In veterinary medicine, this can hap-
pen over months or years. Among all veterinary staff, burmout can result
from feeling overwhelmed or becoming too involved with clients and their
 pets. For example, sometimes your care and concerm is rewarded by a client
complimenting the veterinarian instead of you personally and you take it as
a personal criticism rather than praise for the entire practice and everyone
involved in a patient's care. Or, you may totally over react emotionally to
d a dxa si o a d a pe sid e po ynp a
ally stressful events occur again and again a feeling of overwhelming anxi-
q no 'e il  adon ri ou s non ii  e sdp Aa
bumed-out.
  po p  e a    o di
circumstances. They feel that no matter what they do, they cannot change
 things. The problem is chronic; that is, it will not go away. In attempting to
a      a d s o
fear, anxiety, depression, with decreased energy and productivity and often
 feel ill or actually become ill because of the real physiological changes stress
produces.
Coping With Stress
Coping Strategies
Work off stress with 20 minutes of physical exercise.
From The Job Survival Instruction Book
There can be a very high turmover of staffin veterinary practices and a primary
Aofua pue Moia oi jueM noA ‘1no uinq oi juem jou op noK "inouinq sI uoseal
your new career and become successful. Fortunately, there are ways to avoid
burmout with simple things like getting enough rest, eating healthy foods.
exercising and learning to “turm-off," and having quality time for yourself. The
following are some coping strategies that really work:
ss i en poo e i e isd a t i
Maintain good eating habits. A healthy diet with balanced nutrition helps
lessens your susceptibility to stress.
Deal directly with the source of the stress. Do not let feelings build
up inside of you, because this can actually amplify the effects
of stress.
 Sow down. Try to limit mental and physical pressures. Do not become
the source of your own stress.
 Relax periodically. Everyone needs to take a break, have a “time-out"
even if it is only a quiet 15 minutes. We are all human, and we all
become physically and mentally fatigued.
Copy right 2011 Cengage L
and/or eChapte r( s)
Editoria
CHAPTER 7
Stress
145
Buudxa are oum adoad auo ym uiei dnis uoddn p uf
difculties with stress can be very therapeutic.
Discuss problems with a trusted friend. “Keeping things bottled up" will
only lead to further stress.
Volunteer. Volunteering for even one day can be a very rewarding
personal experience. Physical activities for outdoor projects, say a river
cleanup or renewing a children's park, can be enormously satisfying and
it does not have to be related to your work.
 Learn to socialize. Suggest social, casual times when everyone can meet
 for a pizza or invite another practice to join yours for a softball game
 and a picnic.
n ooi non x yoib e se saians bundo aaeau 3sn adoad aos
stress. Naturally, this usually makes things worse. Negative coping strategies
include:
Calling in sick to “punish" the boss. This only serves to punish your
co-workers, the clients, and yourself
 Putting litle effort into work. Rather than reduce your stress level, this
strategy is likely to increase it as your supervisor and co-workers will
be dissatisfied with your performance, and you will generally end up
making more work (and stress) for yourself.
 Alcohol and/or drug use. Alcohol and drug abuse can have very serious
consequences in your professional, personal, and social life. It could
also lead to dismissal from your job, become a danger to yourself and
others and in some cases, to criminal prosecution.
Stress and burmout are serious problems that cannot always be avoided but by
 developing coping strategies, stress levels and the potential of burmout can be
reduced and managed more effectively
Defense Mechanisms
Psychologists and psychiatrists have identifed a number of defense mech-
anisms, adjustments we make in our behavior, usually unconsciously, to
help us deal with the experiences or feelings that cause psychological stress.
Although you should never act the role of amateur psychiatrist, recognizing
and understanding defense mechanisms can help you deal with clients and
co-workers more easily
 Repression. Socially unacceptable or painful desires or impulses are
pushed out of the active and thinking area of the brain into the uncon-
 aq uaa ro   al jo jd a aae ss
of it. They are stillthere and may crop up in dreams or subtle behaviors.
of being beaten as a child, but she winces with pain every time her
husband clears his throat the way her abusive father used to.
Displaceiment. Emotions about one person, idea, or situation are
transferred to another, more acceptable or easier target. For example
Copy right 201l Cengage Lea
k and/or eChapte r( s)
146
PART 2
Communication and Professional Growth
a man hates having to work for a woman supervisor, but he cannot do
anything about it at work, so he is a tyrant with his wife and children
at home.
 Projection. One's own ideas, feelings, or attitudes are attributed to
someone else. For example, you convince yourself that someone else is
 to blame so you will not have to take responsibility and feel guilty The
man does not feel he is a tyrant with his wife and children; it is her fault
that he has to crack dlown when he gets home because she is too weak
and does not keep the kids under control.
Rationalization. Actions are attributed to logical reasons without
looking at the true motives of behavior. Suppose a man (or woman) has
been trying to quit smoking, but after there is a blowup with the spouse
01 Aeyo st lil os Aep le alanean e peu iuaaeu I, 'sAes us 1o au sp pue
have one now."
Intellecfualization. Again, reasoning is used to avoid the truth, as a
 i Aos q   s s  po 
dlifficult to accept. Instead of admitting to herself and to others that she
is unhappily married, the woman chatters on and on about how well
'angeal a suuoeos ie si au poog mou 'yqiom ne Buop si pueqsnq iau
and how much they are all looking forward to going on vacation.
 Sublimation. An instinctual desire or impulse is diverted into a socially
acceptable activity. For example, a woman wishes she could see her old
high school sweetheart, but instead she takes her kids to the beach a lot
and reads romance novels.
 Temporary withdrawal. Ways are found to avoid dealing with a
painful or difficult situation: a woman, for example, may watch a lot of
television or another person may stop at a lot of bars.
 Malingering. Deliberately pretending to be sick enables someone to
s    g  s e   
word with a co-worker that he cannot go to his supervisor's dinner
party because he has a stomachache, and then he orders a pizza with
everything on it.
 Denial. To avoid accepting and dealing with a traumatic, stressful
situation, the person refuses to admit or acknowledge that the situation
exists. For example, the woman who was beaten as a child is in dlenial
that she was abused, and the smoker is in denial that he or she is
addicted to cigarettes.
 Regression. During times of high stress, we may returm to an earlier
 mental or behavioral level. When someone is experiencing regression,
the person returns to behaviors and seeks things, often food, which was
enjoyed in an earlier, more pleasant time as a method of coping with
depression.
You will probably recognize some of these defense mechanisms in yourself
or in someone else. They are not usually a cause for great concerm as these
behaviors are a normal way of coping with stress. However, habitual use of
defense mechanisms can indicate a need for counseling. Chronic dependence
on defense mechanisms can point to interpersonal communication problems
that might be solved if they were faced and analyzed.
CHAPTER 7
Stress
147
KNOW YyoUrSelF
Before you can understand others, you must understand yourself. This quiz will
 help you take a good hard look at your interpersonal skills. Answer each question
as it applies to you.
1. Do you find it easy to start a conversation?
 2. Are you able to hold up your end of a conversation?
 3. Do you ask good questions? Good questions are open-ended, requiring 
detailed answers instead of just yes or no.
4. Are you able to talk about things other than yourself?
 5. Do you listen without interrupting the speaker?
6. Do you use body language when speaking?
8. Do you avoid exaggerating facts when speaking to others?
 9. Do you remember names of people when introduced?
10. Do you avoid using dialect, bad grammar slang. clichés, or jargon in 
professional or formal situations?
11. Do you enjoy learning about people, their interests, hobbies, and ideas?
12. Do you keep others interested in what you are saying?
13. Do you give others an opportunity to express their views?
14. Are you able to discuss controversial matters without getting angry or upset?
15. Do you pay attention to the conversation without having your mind wander?
If you answered yes to at least 10 questions, your interpersonal skills are probably
SaMsun ou ebuoyo uoo noA IpuI os soeId yoeM Auo uo yoM ot AI Ing 'poo6 atnb
to yes.
PROBLEM SOLVING
 Here are some problem-solving steps that you can use and pass on to others:
 What is the problem? To identify the real problem, it helps to list the actual
2.
be addressed. Books, counselors, and selfhelp groups are all good sources of
information
3.
 What would the outcome be if you did X, Y, or Z? To think through the possible
outcome of various decisions, be logical and creative. It also helps to write 
things down.
 Test alternatives. Begin with what seems to be the best course of action and
continue down the list of options until a possible solution presents itself.
Time Management
One of the most common sources of stress is not having enough time in the
'Aep aul oi a ao ppe oi anqissod si in ssneoag duqiiaaa op oi Aep
ssd yom s pe al as oi sm pu oi si is isq al
Copyright 2011Cengage Lea
m the e Book and/or eChapte r( s).
ue nt rights re strictions require it
148
PART 2
Communication and Professional Growth
The following are some suggestions for improving and managing your time
at work:
 Reducing clutter In any practice, records, fles, memos, and other papers
can pile up quickly, making it dliffcult to find what you need when you
need it. To fight clutter, keep yourself organized as you go. Returm med-
ical records and other files to their proper location immediately after
they are no longer required. Set aside a separate tray for mail, memos.
and other forms of correspondence. Whenever possible, use the com-
 puter to reduce the amount of paper used in the offce (Figure 7-1).
 Prioritizing. Each day, make a list of what needs to be dlone, and then
prioritize the tasks, tendling to the most important items first and
leaving the less important tasks for later in the day If you run into
difficulties or emergencies throughout the day, the items on your list
that do not get dlone were the least important. This also helps you to
avoid procrastination.
 Time tracking. When you are working on an involved project, it is easy
to become engrosed in your work and not notice how much time has
guqaos uo pauuend noA ueql anl aou fupuads pioae oi passd
 po e ai o i p edsm oa 1e y s e da
at it periodically to note where you stand. Time tracking helps to keep
you “on track" with the day's schedule
· Awareness. It is important to be aware of what is happening in the
 practice or hospital. Is there something being worked on elsewhere that
FIGURE 7-1 By reducing clutter and learning to prioritize, you become more efficient
'dn alld
Copy right 2011 Cengage
or eChapter(s)
CHAPTER 7
Stress
149
will be passed along to you to complete or work on? Is there something
aeme uaa uaqoid e ou moia pnos iul oi papuai uiaq iou si iel
aedad oi no sdiu uuua yom ano ui uuaddeu si jum jo
for and prevent future timing difficulties
da An om nu op au p sas ss An noA   a
1 uop puads noA sun yonu mou pue Aep yoea op noA jeum jo yoenl
noA jeum pedaou e uo umop iof oi suauou e aen Xep aul inoqanonu
just did and how long it took you. At the end of the day, review your
Buop au puads noA pip jeuM su snoA quads nok moq aas oi sanou
that you did not need to do, or should have spent less time doing?
This simple form of time audit can help you to identify areas in which
improvement is needed.
SUMMARY
Working in a veterinary offce can be stressful at times, especially when deal-
ing with worried clients, the clifference in staff personalities, and the concem
suis aul azuonan in uodi si i suad paendsou pue panu nao
of stress and develop effective coping strategies to help avoid burmout. It is
also helpful to recognize defense mechanisms that help people deal with the
effects of stress, both in yourself and others. They may be simple, temporary
needs to be addressed.
Time management can be an effective tool in reducing stress. Using meth-
ods such as reducing clutter, prioritizing, time tracking, awareness, and time
audits can help you to make better use of your time.
SCENARIO
The receptionist was reviewing and purging old client fles. She had just come
Aq sy au jo ipuai a ynu i oi udou sem pue yun oi y
saaq paee pu aus ui rui yn uei sm i p ai o pua a
the day was turming out to be very busy, with three emergency calls and two
wall-ins, in addition to the regular workload.
One of the veterinary assistants came over and asked her for a specific cli-
1 1aa noA iues Au, pies pue asdn Aiaa aeaq isuondanan aui ay sua
 anything yourself? I don't have time to do your job, too!
The technician replied calmly, "I'm sorry. but I saw that you were going
through the fles and I didn't want to mess up your system. Are you okay?
I know today's been a little hectic. I could give you a hand if you're getting
stressed out."
The receptionist replied sharply, *I'm not stressed out! I'm just trying to
get this work done and people keep interrupting me!"
Copy right 2011 Cengage
 eChapter(s)
150
PART 2
Communication and Professional Growth
"I'm sorry. Ill get out of your way."
"No, wait, I'm the one who's sorry You're right, it's really busy today and
dod A os are a p p n  os sa ssas ap  
coming in, I just don't know what to do."
"Do all of these files really need to be purged today?" asked the
technician
*No, not really, I was just hoping to get them all done, but it's really not
that important. I'll do what I can today, and take care of the rest tomorrow."
"That's a good icdea. Sometimes even two or three letters of the alphabet
is all you can get through in a day It is time consuming but not worth getting
stressed over, OK?"
"Thanks. I just feel so much pressure sometimes, like I should be able to
get through something and just can't."
What conditions contributed to the receptionist's stress?
What signs of stress do you think the technician noticed in her
co-worker?
What defense mechanisms did the receptionist employ to deal with her
stress?
sas po paa i aai ci ps sis do aa mo
How could time-management techniques have reduced the stress level?
REVIEW
Match each of the l0 terms with its correct defnition on the right.
l. bumout
a. pretencling to be sick to escape a
 2. defense mechanism
stressful situation
3. displacement
b.(
 diverting instinctive impulses into
4. malingering
socially acceptable activities
 5. projection
C. making logical excuses to avoid the
truth
6. psychosomatic illness
d. attributing one's own feelings to
7. rationalization
someone else
8. repression
e.t
 transferring emotion from the real
9. stress
target to another
10. sublimation
 pushing painful or unacceptable
thoughts into the unconscious
 g. unconscious behavioral adjustment
h. physical symptoms with a
psychological root
i. bodily or mental tension
 j. withdrawal caused by too much
job-related pressure
Copy right 2011 Cengage L
and/or eChapte r( s)
Editoria
CHAPTER 7
Stress
151
Incdicate whether the following statements are true or false. If false, what would
be needed to make the statement true?
ll. Not having enough time to do your job can cause stress.
12. Organizing as you go helps to increase clutter.
13. When prioritizing, put the least important tasks at the top of your list
and do them first.
14. When doing a time aucdit, you should list each task you performed
during the day by its level of importance.
ONLINE RESOURCES
The American Institute of Stress
The organization's offcial Web site, dedicated to advancing people's under-
standing of the role of stress in health and illness.
<http://www.stress.org>
Time Management (from Careers-Portal)
This article explains the importance of time management, suggests strategies
for managing time better, and gives a short quiz to help determine if a person
needs to manage time better.
<http://www.careers-portal.co.uk>
 Search Term: Time management
Veterinary Technician Journal
The official publication of NAVTA, it has archived articles you can access on a
variety of topics. One is “Stress, An Occupational Hazardl.'
http://www.veterinarytechnician.com
Copy right 2011 Cengag
or eChapters
Copy right 2011 Cengage 
quire i
154
PART2
Communication and Professional Growth
Introduction
All members of the veterinary team, including the veterinarians and support
staff must adhere to and promote the highest standards of ethical behavior.
This chapter presents a general overview of ethics-the rules of moral con-
duct that all members of the veterinary staff should follow.
Putting The Needs of the Patient First
The veterinarian's job, frst and foremost, is to relieve an animal's suffering.
illness, or disability. The primary obligation of the staff is to aid the veterinar-
ian in fulfilling this duty in the care and welfare of all animals. The AVMA
(American Veterinary Medical Association) has developed standards of ethical
guidelines which are defned in the Veterinary Practice Act. State veterinary
medical licensing boards have the ability to review complaints of unethical
behavior and have the authority to suspend a veterinarian's license to practice
if the complaints are justifed. In extreme cases, such as consistent complaints
of animal abuse, the veterinarian's license may be revoked. State organizations
for credentialed veterinary technicians have also developed standards of ethi-
cal behavior and have the same authority over complaints regarding veterinary
technicians—that is, to suspend or revoke the credentials (license, certifica-
tion, or registration) of a veterinary technician.
A behavior that is unethical doesn't necessarily mean it is illegal. Consider
the following scenario:
 A veterinarian has a long-standing relationship with a client who breeds, for
Example, Great Danes. It is the client's dream to produce a show champion and
 establish a breeding line. At nine weeks, the litter is brought in for ear-cropping
 as required by the American Kennel Club breed standard. The veterinarian
performs the legal procedure. At nine months, the client returms with the "pick
is one “small problem": the permanent upper incisor teeth are crooked. The cli-
ent has noticed this with a littermate but as she doesn't intend to show the dog.
it doesn't matter. During the examination, the veterinarian confirms that the
alignment of the teeth is a problem but that the teeth might be realigned with
orthodontic care, for example, the use of dental "braces.," no different to those
for children. The client is very enthusiastic about the procedure and the veteri-
narian agrees to consult with a friend who is an orthodontist. The client then
makes an offer to the veterinarian: "If this works, I will make you a fnancial
excited about the possibility of orthodlontic treatment. In due course, with the
orthodontist attending, braces are fitted to the dog's teeth. Some months later
ad pai aq oi Apeai are Aaun sarq aui isnan oi sis nao y
nently. The dog now had perfectly aligned incisors and went on to win several
s pand undr, s  pas rn asn a s dsud
 pups, three of which had the same genetic problem with the incisor teeth.
While the veterinarian did not break any laws in changing the appearance
of the teeth, he clearly violated several ethical standards. First, by altering
Copy right 201l Ce ngage Lea
CHAPTER 8
Ethics
155
pue uiauaa aniny e oi uo passed sem ieun aqoid onaus e (gursinasi)
secondly. by agreeing to the partnership arrangement with the client. The cli-
ent is also violating the ethics involved in breeding and promoting an animal
dusnaued e fuao Aq pue spiuis Suanf aul ia aaeq iou pinom ieu
to the veterinarian. It could be construed as collusion in unethical behavior
 Professional ethics is not governed by law but by doing what is right.
Righf fo Choose Clients and Pafients
A veterinarian may choose to accept or decline any client or patient at any
time, as long as the refusal of such service does not pose an immediate threat
to the patient's life and does not result in prolonging the animal's suffering.
However, once a person becomes a client the veterinarian, and by extension,
the veterinary staff, must provide service. It is unethical and never acceptable
to neglect the care of patients.
Emergency Care
Veterinarians, and only veterinarians, are allowed and required to provide
essential services when an animal's life is at stake. Licensed veterinarians have
-ns sil aan oi no al see ue aaes o anno apod o Ainp io e
ing. Credentialed veterinary technicians may, with the direct orders of a vet-
erinarian begin medical care in an emergency, such as placing a catheter for
the delivery of fluids, applying pressure bandages to stop the bleeding, or to
give an injection for pain or sedation with the exact dosage ordered by the
 d  a in    i  
 in the facility or on the telephone with the veterinary technician. A veterinary
technician should never begin medical treatment without direct orders from
the veterinarian. When the veterinarian is not available, you should direct the
  p i  d i i al  
treatment can be provided. Give the client exact directions to the other prac-
tice and provide the name and telephone number for the practice. You should
keep the business cards of the nearest facilities readily available to give to the
client and call the receiving clinic to alert them that an emergency willbe arriv.
Aq  a Aes pnoo no ua jo ad an an n 'aisod j u
car) or “sudden collapse" but you should never offer your own assessment or
diagnosis of the condition to the client or to the receiving emergency hospital
Obeying the Laws
 It is ilegal for a veterinarian or his or her staff to knowingly be in violation
of the laws in the jurisdiction in which they practice veterinary medicine, to
defraud clients or be deceitful in any way. No matter what your role is as a
 member of the veterinary staff, you should always be honest and fair in your
professional relationships and know the laws which apply to the practice of
veterinary medicine
One example of obeying the law is with regard to wildlife. It is illegal for
 any member of the public (which here includes veterinarians and their staff)
to harbor wildlife—orphaned, injured, or otherwise captive, that is, “found"
Copyright 201l Cengage L
156
PART2
Communication and Professionaf Growth
unless that person is a licensed wildllife rehabilitator. Many times, wildlife is
brought in to the veterinary facility by a member of the public who has some-
how acquired or *rescued" an injured bird or mammal. By law, the veterinar-
ian is only allowed to acdminister immediate life-saving care, to stabilize the
bird or animal for movement to a licensed rehabilitation facility, or to perform
euthanasia if, in his or her professional judgment, the animal or bird cannot
be released back into the wild because of the nature of the injuries received.
The exception to this, of course, would be if the veterinarian is also a licensed
wildlife rehabilitator. Members of the veterinary staff are not permitted to take
any wildlife home to feed and care for unless they are also licensed wildlife
rehabilitators. The possession of different species is regulated by both state
and federal laws. Every practice should have a list of wildlife rehabilitators in
their area and maintain a professional relationship with them which includes
 further treatment and assistance if requested by the rehabilitator.
Misrepresentation
 Veterinarians and veterinary staff should never professionally identify them-
selves as members of any organization by which they have not been licensed or
certifed. It is unethical for a veterinary technician, veterinary assistant, practice
 manager, or other members of the veterinary staff to misrepresent themselves
and their qualifcations. Veterinary technician, by definition, implies a certain
level of education and credentialing by the examination board. If a veterinary
assistant refers to himself or herself as a *tech," that is a misrepresentation of
qualifications which could have serious legal complications
Lending Credibility to the Illegal Practice
of Veterinary Medicine
It is unethical for a veterinarian or any member of his or her staff to promote
an illegal or unethical product or service offered by a nonprofessional organi-
zation, group, or individual. If you are aware of any illegal activities, including
narian, you should first discuss the situation with the veterinarian who should
contact the appropriate authorities. For example, a friend of yours tells you
-e ls iean pue siad an oi sn ssnou sae oum uosiad e inone
-om o auaadxa jo peap ier e se na aa, e iou si uosad s se
ing in a pet store. He can get “shots and things" at a discount so it dloesn't cost
as much as the clinic where you work. Ethically and legally you are required
to report this person who is practicing veterinary medicine without a license.
Responsibility to the Veterinary Profession
Duty to the Veterinary Image
Veterinarians and their staff members have a responsibility to enhance and
colleagues, clients, and the general public. You should always act in an honest.
courteous, compassionate, and professional manner, and remember that your
appearance and behavior reflect directly upon the veterinarians you work for.
Copyright 201l Cengage L
CHAPTER &
Ethics
157
Duty to Professional Colleagues
It is both unethical and unprofessional to slander fellow veterinarians, regardlless
of your personal opinions. All members of the veterinary staff should refrain from
making any negative remarks or implications about other veterinarians, veteri-
 e  s oe s ss an  d 
comments about any of the veterinarians for whom you work and other staff
members. Conversations regarding any personal disputes with a veterinarian
should be held in private, out of earshot of clients, co-workers, and the public.
Enhancing and Improving Veterinary Knowledge
and Skills
Veterinarians, just as any other health professionals, are required to attend
continuing education seminars in their feld and should collaborate with their
 colleagues to share and expand their knowledge. Continuing education is also
required for veterinary technicians, and is recommended for veterinary assis-
 n           
able you will be to serve your patients and clients.
Duty to Society
Veterinarians and their staff benefit when they become involved in the com-
munity. There are many opportunities to contribute to public health efforts
that relate to veterinary medicine, pet care, and animal welfare. The members
of the veterinary staff should be available and willing to provide assistance as
needed when public health is threatened.
Confidentiality
Every member of the veterinary team, regardless of the position held, has the
 responsibility of protecting client and patient information. The release of any
          
seem is a violation of confidentiality. This breach of confidentiality could
also be in violation of the law, result in a lawsuit, and the loss of your job
Maintaining a Clean Mind, Body, and Spirit
If you suspect that a veterinarian or any other member of staff is under the
influence of alcohol, drugs, or other substances that affect judgment, it is your
 aq u in am is jo iaq nus iso al oi in jodn oi Ainp ie
very difficult issue to deal with, it is a very serious issue and is cannot be taken
lightly or ignored. You need to be l00 percent positive of your facts and be able
It is not a situation you should deal with on your own or take it upon your-
self to advise the person to seek treatment. You should not discuss what your
suspicions are with other staff members, but ask for a confidential meeting
with another veterinarian or the practice manager who may also be aware or
suspect that there is a problem. If you are uncertain about whom to approach
Copy right 2011 Cengage
e e Book and/or eChapter( s)
158
PART 2
Communication and Professional Growth
and how, call a substance abuse hotline .Your call will be anonymous and
confidential and these groups will be able to give you acdvice and guidelines
from the office, but from the privacy of your own home. You do not want this
discussion to be overheard and create the potential for an even bigger prob-
lem. Anyone attempting to function with impaired judgment is particularly
affect every member of the veterinary team, and the care of patients.
The Veterinarian-Client-Patient Relationship
The veterinarian-client-patient relationship (VCPR) is the professional
   e       s
relationship is established, it is an understood agreement that the veterinary
practice is there to provide appropriate, adequate veterinary health care, and that
the client should follow the veterinarian's instructions for the patient. It should
 also be understood that the veterinary staff support and assist the veterinarian in
A  s sd p    sd n   
 the veterinarian. As part of this agreement, the practice must keep and maintain
medical records for each patient. The veterinary staff must properly update, fle,
and protect these records to facilitate optimal care and maintain confidential-
ity. The information must be kept confidential unless the owner of the patient
consents to its release or a court orders the release of the information. While
these medical records concerm the patient, they are the property of the practice.
However, said records should never be copied, distributed, or removed from
the practice without the knowledge and written consent of the patient's owner
Prescriptions
A VCPR is required for a veterinarian to prescribe medication. Veterinarians
should never write a prescription for an animal that is not a patient, nor should
cially controlled substances, without a prescription from the veterinarian.
Only a veterinarian may write out a prescription. It is important that requests
for refills are approved by the prescribing doctor. If, for example, a prescribed
antibiotic doesn't appear to be working, the patient should be reexamined by
the veterinarian. Any request for a refill of a controlled substance should be
carefully checked for the amount dispensed and the date the prescription was
 e a  ns g iid ai si e  
Termination of the VCPR
If there is no ongoing medlical condition, the veterinary practice must notify
the VCPR can only be terminated if the client is directed to another veterinar-
ian for care. The veterinary practice must provide care until the transition is
  n a a  dn an n  si nd
and without notification.
Copyright 201l Cengage Le
nd/or eChapte r( s
CHAPTER &
Ethics
159
SUMMARY
As medical practitioners, veterinarians must adhere to a strict code of ethics.
So too must all the members of the veterinary staff. Each person should behave
in a professional manner, and not allow any outside influences to affect the
way the practice functions and offers veterinary care. The clients and patients
-od ie aupuo pue iradsai ses au anp ae d Aruaa e jo
ple are due in human health care.
SCENARIO
RJ was sitting in for the receptionist and was sorting the mail at the front desk
when a woman burst through the front door, carrying a small dog that was
bleeding badlly.
"You have to help me, my dog is hurt!
tell me what happened."
"I was walking my dog at the park, when this other big dog came along
and they started fghting!" she replied. "We were able to get away. but he's
hurt...we need to see a vet NOW!
"She's bleeding prety badly," RJ said, handing the woman a towel. “Use
this to apply pressure on the wound. She's going to need stitches, and prob-
ably a tetanus shot."
"Okay, but I need to see a vet!"
"I'm sorry, but there are no doctors available right now. I'm writing down
  p  i nxa a   iaa a i i sa
ahead to let them know you're coming. They're not as good as our doctors, but
they should be able to help you.'
 i a i in I  a r as iay e o o ,
"Ma'am, there's nothing I can do"
'Do something!"
"Ma'am, I cannot help you. Your dog needs to see a veterinarian, and there
 e ao n p s I mou   ao iu
sure to that wound and take your dog to the emergency clinic."
"I can't believe you won't help me!" she replied, walling out the door.
"Fine, I'll go somewhere where people care!
a  l s o Siae 
What should he not have done?
What could he have done to handle the situation in a more ethical
manner?
Copy right 2011 Cengage
 eChapter(s)
160
PART 2
Communication and Professionaf Growth
REVIEW
Indicate whether the following statements are true or false. If false, indicate
 s   n   n 
1. Veterinarians may only provide emergency treatment to their own
patients.
2. Veterinary technicians should never identify themselves as veterinarians.
 3. Veterinarians are morally and ethically required to treat each and every
patient that requests medical care.
 4. It is acceptable to question the ability of other veterinarians, but not the
veterinarians that you work for.
5. Veterinarians, veterinary technicians, and veterinary assistants should all
take ongoing education courses, attend appropriate seminars, and avail
 themselves of other educational opportunities.
 6. It is acceptable to share patient information because veterinary patients 
are animals, not people.
7. A court order is always required for the release of patient records.
 8. Veterinary team members should hold themselves to the same ethical
standards as veterinarians.
 9. Clients may end the VCPR at any time under any circumstances.
10. Veterinarians may end the VCPR at any time under any circumstances.
ONLINE RESOURCES
AVMA Principles of Veterinary Medical Ethics
This page contains the full text of the complete 1999 revision of the “Principles
of Veterinary Medical Ethics" statement from the American Veterinary Medical
Association.
http:/ /www.avma.org
Search Term: Medical ethics
NAVTA Code of Ethics
Ethical standards for veterinary technicians, adopted by the National Associa-
tion of Veterinary Technicians in America.
http:/ /ww.navta.net
Search Term: Code of ethics
Copy right 2011 Cengage
require it
PART 3
Financial Matters
Copy right 2011 Cengage 
quire i
164
PART 3
Financiat Matters
Introduction
One of the tasks in veterinary office management is requesting and accept-
ing client payments. It is important to understand the way the billing process
works, when fees should be adjusted or cancelled, and what to do when an
account is past due. Another fnancial matter you should be aware of is payroll
accounting, including what forms you need to fill out, what forms you should
expect to receive, and when. Veterinary finances are an important area of prac-
  a r s -r   p a a
 the veterinary team if mishandled. As in any small business, the bottom line is
profit. For a veterinary practice to thrive and grow, each staff member needs
to be responsible and accurate in the financial management of the practice
Fee Collection Procedures
While generally the job of the receptionist, collcting payments from the cli-
ent may be handled by any member of the veterinary team who has received
the proper training. Before the patient's file is taken to the examining room
with the client, there should be a charge form attached to the file. This form
lists all the procedures, vaccinations, and treatments which are provided by
 the practice. This form is sometimes also referred to as an encounter form or
travel sheet; it "travels" with the file so that each treatment or procedure can
be checked off as it is completed and no fees are lost. This form also serves as a
statement of services for the client. The veterinarian marks the form to incicate
the services rendered, and the client or veterinarian returms the form to the
front desk to proceed with checkout and fee collection. If the veterinarian did
not state different charges, then yo
1 enter the predetermined standard fees for
the procedures that are checked. Whe
transaction is completed, give one
copy of the statement to the cus
accounting purposes. Almost all p
e computer programs which
allow the veterinarian to enter the billing charges directly into the client's file
on the computer terminal in the exam room. This not only cuts down on the
 paper travel sheet, there is a greater likelihood that an item may be checked off
in error or charges missed completely
from the exam room terminal to the front desk terminal where it is printed out
 for the client as a receipt. In this way
 the patient's file is completely updated
and there is no chance of misplacing the hard copy
As with all your personal contacts with clients, you should be polite.
will have no problem. However, some customers have other things on their
 mind after an appointment and forget to stop and pay the bil. You should
not assume they are trying to skip payment. Nor should you let the bill go
uu ane sas  an ie iued sanba ao no jn piedun
Politely call to the client, "Excuse me, Mr. P., could you come back for a
     ,     ' 
visit, please," and present the statement. Never shout across the waiting
room, "Hey. you forgot to pay!
Copyright 201l Cengage Lea
CHAPTER 9
Fee Cotfection Procedures, Bilting, and Payrott
165
Understanding Veterinary Fees
Although you accept the money, the veterinarian sets the amount of payment
for services rendered. Some veterinary offices follow a strict payment schedule
of posted rates that are available to clients. Others have a range of fees that
depend on the amount of time spent with the patient and the complexity of
the dliagnosis and treatment. The fee structure depends in large part on the
types of services provided. For example, anesthesia for a surgical procedure
s e a i u e  h no a a Aq p q n
fee, and treatment for an injury might include a combination of fee structures
When setting fees, the veterinarian must also consider the costs of maintain-
ing the offce and staff. Local veterinary associations and veterinary practice
 management firms can provide veterinarians with information about the fees
An i sse pue eae peio aes au u  sad res
This information is known as a fee profile.
a no auo nou q o on as aa e a l no 's Aue u
ing the client's bill, but also in answering the questions that clients may ask
 about the costs. Clients, understandably, wish to know what their pets' medi-
cal treatment will cost and how the fees are determined. You should have a
interpersonal skillsto discuss what can be an awkward subject. When com-
plicated procedures are involved, fee estimates are usually provided by the
veterinarian and discussed with the client beforehand.
 Clients who may be wondering about the cost of treatment are not always
 a id n e n s    e 
to the offce, ask a simple question such as, “Do you have any questions about
any of our office policies?" This presents an opportunity for them to ask about
fees without feeling embarrassed
On occasion, clients may be unhappy with fees and do not want to talk to
you about the issue or they may complain loudly when presented with the state-
ment. The amount of the bill should never come as a surprise to the client. You
should be patient with these clients and never argue or make demands. If there
is a difficult situation, offer to have the veterinarian discuss the billing fees with
them privately. The client may agree to this or realize that the amount charged
is appropriate for services rendered. If the person persists, politely return the cli-
 n            
The Costs Behind the Fees
It is important that all staff understand the high cost of setting up and main-
taining a veterinary practice, which directly affect the amount of the bill.
Operational costs often include:
ment and diagnostic supplies, surgical table, lights and anesthesia
thousands of dollars, and patient cages and isolation units can range
from hundreds to thousands of dollars. Computers and software can
166
PART3
Financiat Matters
easily cost a practice more than $l0,0oo, and each piece of furmiture or
fixture in the practice can cost several huncdred dollars. An average prac-
 tice may spend several hundredl dollars each month just on cleaning
and disinfecting supplies and offce maintenance services.
Mortgage or lease. The space in which the practice is located must be
paid for, in the form of lease or mortgage payments. If the property is
leased, then the rent probably increases on an annual basis, and if the
practice owns the building. property and water taxes must also be paid.
These costs can run into tens of thousands of dollars per year.
 Staff salaries. The salaries of the employees working at a veterinary
practice can range from $20.000 to $80.000 or more. There is also the
cost of staff benefits such as health insurance, vacation pay, and uniforms.
Veterinary fees cover the services provided not only by the veterinarian,
but also those of technicians, assistants, receptionists, and kennel staff.
Veterinary fees are the primary source of the practice's income.
 Iraining and education. The frst thought that may come to mind when
considering education costs is the veterinarian's cost of repaying student
  n ia p a   si  s
education is required for veterinarians and veterinary technicians and
this is an additional expense. There are also considerable costs related
to training new employees in all aspects of their jobs. Clients come to a
 p s a  xa r  d i
they receive take time and money to develop and maintain
 Miscellaneous. There are numerous other costs such as professional jour-
nals and memberships, magazine subscriptions for the waiting room,
advertising costs, telephone bills, professional liability insurance which
of tissues on the receptionist's desk, the paper that is wasted and all the
pens that disappear as if by magic
When you consider the many costs incurred by a veterinary practice, the
n n  na si i   sed ad as e o 
that the practice is not out to overcharge clients, but rather to cover its own
costs in order to operate, make a profit, and continue providing veterinary
care. Although you will not need to explain this to the client who is complain-
ing about a bill, understanding the costs related to running a veterinary prac-
tice helps you to understand the cost of procedures and that, in turm, makes it
easier for you to request payment when necessary.
Payment Planning
 s   si d a a a s  
extended. The extension of credit is usually a very short time (minutes).
because most clients pay their bills when they leave the office. But when the
surgery—credit is necessary to a greater extent, and a deposit for prolonged,
expensive procedures is often required.
 n  so  p d        s
own pocket unless they have purchased a pet insurance policy which covers the
Copyright 201I Cengage Lea
CHAPTER 9
Fee Cotfection Procedures, Bilting, and Payrott
167
medical treatment neecded. As part of the office managerment team, you can help
ease the fnancial worries of these clients by preparing a cost estimate and with
 the approval of the veterinarian work out a payment plan that is reasonable for
both parties. A common method is to make a fairly large initial payment to be fol-
 lowed by smaller monthly payments if approved credit is extended to the client.
Credit Bureaus. Before extending credit, especially for a significant amount, the
bureaus collect information from various sources and provide information for a
fee. Veterinarians can check the credit standing of their clients with other creditors.
A bureau may contact the office about the status of a client's account. If a credit
   ssd a  ien s nsn i n si n
l aui  sanan s aa pnous no pue ss al aq saeme iou e si
 before releasing any information. If the client confirms and has given permission
for a credit check you may provide certain information to the credit bureau: the
date the account was opened, the current balance, and the highest balance at any
time. You should not answer any personal questions about the client's character
 or paying habits nor should you volunteer any further information. It is often
dlifficult to ascertain whether these calls are legitimate or not and it would best be
handled by the practice manager who has the skills, education, and knowledge
of the laws relating to the release of client financial information.
extends credit to one client, then it must extend credit on the same terms
aul wony Aed oi Aiqe suosiad e sapnf oi aqe aq Ae nos Xed oi Aqeu
employment information on the client's registration form, which may also
serve as an initial credit application in many offices. An employment history
might be a good place to start, but circumstances change, sometimes rapidly
    a n  n n an   a 
as a credit application may not ask the applicant's sex, race, color, religion, or
natural origin. It may not ask for the applicant's age (but it may ask for the date
 of birth). The application may request marital status as “married," “unmarried,"
 pamopm, io abus, paoioap, sual aul asn jou Ae il anq panenedas, 10
 You may be responsible for giving the credit application to the client, but it
is not your responsibility or decision to determine if credit will be extended.
Explain to the client that the application will be given to the offce/practice
manager and attach it, facedown, to the client's fle. You should not stand at the
front desk reading the application as it puts the client in a very uncomfortable
and often embarrassing situation. Always be discrete; a credit application is not
only confidential but contains personal and often sensitive information.
h    i       u 
Trade Commission, a veterinary practice, the same as any other busines, must
disclose the amount of fnance charges to clients with whom you have an
  s    n d   s
 ou a  j aa ( aii) pan a o sa i
charges. The form must be signed by the client and kept on file in the veterinary
Copy right 20ll Ce ngage Lear
168
PART 3
Financiat Matters
offce for two years. This law applies only when you bill the client each month
for the amount of the payment due, not for the full amount owed. When the
client is billed each month for the full amount owed and the client instead
sends in partial payments each month, interest to the outstanding balance
cannot be added after the fact. Every client who is extended credit, for any
amount, should sign an interest disclosure statement.
Credit Cards. Most veterinary practices accept credit cards, not only to give
customers more payment options, but also to avoid the sticky problem of
extending credit and possibly having to collect delinquent accounts. Credit card
Sandra Smith, V.M.D.
100 Main Avenue
Anytown
Phone 555-5555
FEDERAL TRUTH IN LENDING STATEMENT
 For professional services rendered
Customer
Address
Patient
1. Cash Price (fee for service)
$
2. Cash Down Payment
8
3. Unpaid Balance of Cash Price
$
4. Amount Financed
$
 5. Finance Charge
$
6. Finance Charge Expressed as Annual Percentage Rate
$
7. Total of Payments (4 plus 5)
$
8. Deferred Payment Price (l plus 5)
$
"Total payment due" (7 above) is payable to
at above office address in
monthly installments of $
The frst installment is payable
on
20
 and each subsequent payment is due on the same day
 of each consecutive month until paid in full.
Date
Signature of Customer
FIGURE 9-1  Truth in Lending Statement.
Chapter(s)
CHAPTER 9
Fee Coffection Procedures, Bilting, and Payroff
169
Will you take A check?
· A veterinary practice is a business. When accepting checks from
clients the same procedures and policies used in any other busi-
ness can guarantee that the check will be honoured and the
payment received. Check verification machines are almost uni-
versal: in grocery stores, gas stations, retail stores, and, in short, any
business that accepts checks in payment including a veterinary 
practice. Affer checking all the details below, the check is *swiped"
through the machine and the check will be verifed electronically.
If it is approved, a verification number will appear on the screen 
and you should write the number down on the reverse side of the
check. Sometimes, the verification will be declined. There can be 
several reasons for this: perhaps the account has been closed.
the checkbook has been reported stolen, or there are insufficient
funds in the account. The check verification machine will not give
any other information than the verification number (approved)
or the word *Declined :" lf the check is declined. quietly advise the
client that it has been declined and request another form of pay-
ment. It is a criminal offense to write *bad checks" and the majority
of people would never intentionally do so. Never assume that it is
deliberate and a way to avoid payment.
Make sure the check is signed and completed correctly with
the day's date and amount and that the numerical and writen
amounts are the same. Do not accept post-dated checks.
The office procedures policy manual will define the type of identi-
fication required prior to accepting a check, a driver's license for
example. If so, compare the signatures and write the details of the
*ID" on the reverse of the check. DL, for Driver's License, the number
of the license, state, and expiration date.Accept out-of-state checks
only with the approval of the office manager or veterinarian.
Do not accept a third-party check, one that is made out to the cli-
ent by someone unknown to you.
Do not accept a check with corrections on it.
Do not accept a check with *Payment in Full" written on it unless
of course the entire account really is paid in full. If you accept the
check and the amount is less than the total balance of the account
at the time, then the customer will not be legally liable to pay the rest
of the balance. It is ilega! for you to cross out the words *paid in full'"
As soon as you receive a check, stamp the back with the ofce's 
deposit endorsement so that no one else can cash the check if it
is lost or stolen. Doing so will remind you to look on the back of the
check for notations such as *Payment in Full"
Do not accept postal money orders with more than one endorse-
ment because then your endorsement will be the third, and two is
the limit honoured by the postal service
Do not accept any check for more than the amount due. Some
clients may ask you to take a check for more than the amount
due so you will give them change. Do not do this for any client
even a friend who is well known to you. If the check is returned for
insufficient funds, the office has lost the income not only for the
billed amount but also the extra amount given out as cash.
Copyright 2011 Cengage Lea
From the e Book and/or eChapte r( s).
que nt rights re strictions require it
170
PART 3
Financiat Matters
 company fees to the business may be as high as 8 percent of the total amount
charged, but veterinary offices may not increase fees for customers who use
credit cards.
o ia e a m au 'sed peo ia sidaooe ao na j
machine. During your training period your will learm how to process credit
cards. The process involves the following steps:
 1. Clear the machine. Check that the machine is ready to process a payment.
To be sure, press the *clear" button.
2. Enter the transartion amount. When the machine is ready, punch in the
amount of the charge (being sure that the decimal point is in the correct
place—you may need to add two zeros to the end if it is an even dollar
ai ssand ueo no ayis e ae no fn  ua, ssand uaul pue (auoe
"clear" button and start again.
3. Enter the credit card number. Most machines have a “"swiper" like those
sis iuadp pue sanis Aiaon Au un iisiaai aui ie aas no ie
It allows you to physically swipe the card through the slot, letting the
 machine run the card automatically If the machine will not read the card,
pn ia au u adi no en uu aui raua oi pau no
number and press “enter." You will then be asked for the card's expiration
date, which is also keyed in. Press "enter" again and the machine will
process the transaction.
4. Approval. If the card is approved, an approval number will appear on
the screen. Most machines have a built-in printer that prints out the
  ssd a o   a  n e 
with an imprint machine. The imprint machine uses standard forms in
duplicate that are laid into the open face of the imprinter producing a
carbon copy of the card on the transaction slip. What this method will
 not do is produce an approval number or decline the card, it is simply an
imprint of the details of the card, the clinic account name and number,
and an area for writing the details of the charge and the client's signature
Verify the client's signature and the expiration date of the card. As these
forms are universal for most credit cards, you will also have to check on
which type of card it is, for example, Mastercard, Visa, and so on. Finally
ensure that your office accepts the type of credit card presented. If using
a manual imprinter, the office policy manual may state that you call the
credit card company for verification.
 ds dn  nd a   n  i 
client signs the transaction slip on the appropriate line. After signing. the
client receives the bottom copy and the top copy is placed in the cash
drawer. You should keep credit card transaction slips separate from the
checks and cash
 In addition to the credit card machine, some offices are now using com-
puterized credit card programs that allow you to fllin the entries on the com-
puter and then transmit them using a secure Intermet connection. Regardless of
h so p i un d ao an pe sa n
Copyright 201l Cengage Lea
CHAPTER 9
Fee Cotfection Procedures, Bilting, and Payrott
171
payment, or if the decimal point is in the wrong place, the client may be over-
charged or undercharged.
Adjusfing or Canceling Fees
not be adjusted as a way to avoid turming over an account to a collection agency.
Fees should not be written off when the treatment has had poor results or if the
patient died, a reason sometimes given by clients who ignore statements and
 e   i   s   s   s
this sort of fee waiver or adjustment from the legal perspective. To some people.
writing off the fee for this reason does not look like thoughtfulness and gener-
osity; it looks like an admission of malpractice. However, the veterinarian may
 aui u si lljl aa au paindsp se oum s e a aa aui isle Ais
interest of both to do so but only if the client is disputing the charges and not
disputing the treatment. This offer should be made in writing, using the words
"without prejudice" to give the veterinarian the right to reinstate the full charge
if the customer does not pay the reduced fee within the specified time limit.
hardship. If so, a collection agency will be no more effective than you are in
collecting the amount due. The veterinarian may decide to waive or reduce
the fee in some cases. Payment must be dliscussed up front because it is always
 pay. Most veterinarians willingly provide service to a limited number of pet
 owners in these circumstances. However, a veterinary practice is a business,
 and no business can afford to provide unlimited free services to everyone who
Uni oi Suaeu jo uoens aul ui josinoA puy noA j Aed oi pioe jouun
away a client, you should never turn them away without first helping them
locate other veterinary care. You should maintain a list of the animal shelters
and other organizations in your area that provide low cost or subsidized vet-
erinary care for clients who just do not have the funds to pay. Recognize that
n i ssi ou si udon ie nl  a ii s p aa n
clients who may be better off financially.
The client and the veterinarian should have an agreement in writing detail-
ing the terms of the reduced fee before services are rendered. When the client
undergoes unexpected financial hardship in the middle of an animal's treat-
ment, the veterinarian may also choose to reduce the fee. In this case, the
full amount should be entered on the billing charge and when the client has
paid the agreed-on amount, the rest can be written off as an adjustment. This
invoicing method should be explained to client and included in the written
 Buunsiapunsu Aue pioae on suauaane
Another reason for fee adjustment is professional courtesy. Veterinarians
ple, a veterinarian may need a consultation with a specialist or to call in
d        a  
 a visiting veterinarian owns an exotic pet or bird and takes his animal to the
medical care and medications for their employees' pets either without charge
or at a discounted rate as a part of the employee benefit package.
Copy right 201l Cengage Lear
172
PART 3
Financiat Matters
Billing Clients
Most veterinary practices have a policy that states that payment is clue at the time
services are rendered. For routine office visits and relatively inexpensive pro-
cedures, it is reasonable to ask for payment at the time of service. Occasionally
it is sometimes necessary to extend credit, for example, when the treatment is
 prolonged and intensive or the surgical costs are high. When credit is extended
for a client you may be responsible for sending monthly statements. For some
pue Aai q au uo Aed Aaui pue ynoua iapuuai si au aui sua
promptly. Other clients may not be so conscientious and when at the end of 30
days no payment has been received, a statement should be sent to the client.
Statements also need to be sent every 30 days to clients whose account has a
debit or credit balance of one dollar or more. If a client has a credit balance,
that is, money which has been overpaid to the account, the money is usually
applied to the client's next visit. If there is a small amount outstancding, say less
than $lo, it makes very little fnancial sense to continue to send statements
when the cost of postage soon meets the amount of money outstanding. For
accounting purposes, small amounts are usually written off as a loss.
 Every veterinary office has established guidelines for bill collection, includ-
 ing when it is acceptable to extend credit, when payments are due, how the cli-
ent is billed, what procedures are followed in collecting delinquent accounts.
 and how long a delinquent account will be carried before it is tumed over to
 a collection agency.
 Thanks to the proliferation of computers and easy-to-use accounting soft-
 ae ss p u o rea ae sonan n 's
directly from the client files. The entire account history should have all the
same information that you would have on a hard copy for each client: name,
adldress, pet's name, and so on.
The benefit of computer accounting is its versatility. Software has been
designed to perform almost every fnancial function. If all charges and pay-
ments are entered correctly in the computerized fle a current balance for
each client is available at the touch of a button. While the computer con-
tains a client's complete fnancial records as well as his or her pet's clinical
o a Auo sud oi no moe lm aos an u noid an 'soa
aoaun peuluo aui saonpoid il se isnf sasodnd gurq roj paau no uo
for a client's visit.
 There are several ways to locate a client's fle. Veterinary software pro-
grams provide access to files either by entering the account number or the
client's name. When you know the name of the client the easiest method is an
alpha search, or typing in the frst few letters of the client's last name.
 'sana ss m i s jo isl e an m n an u
 a ia a dn d  d an pe a  an s n
this, you can make whatever changes are needed and print the statement
 directly from the fle. Computer programs can be set up to age accounts and
 sort them so that statements can be prepared for only those accounts you wish
-ao ane ieun sonoe al jo sood aul aai ose snoid 3saui 'q 0i
rent, 30 days past due, over 60 days past due, and so on.
d aq ueo in ieui sI isy os yom ueo iaindon e suosei au jo auo
grammed to accept brief codes. For instance, the computer software may be
Copy right 2011 Cengage L
CHAPTER 9
Fee Cotfection Procedures, Bilting, and Payrott
173
programmed to recognize abbreviations. Once programmed, the computer
recognizes the code and automatically produces the entire word. Brief codes
can also be programmed to indicate the method of payment: for example cash.
C, check, CK, credit card, CC. The codes used by a specific practice may differ
slightly from those used in another type of practice but all use standard medi-
 cal terminology abbreviations.
Computers also eliminate the possibility of making a mathematical error,
providing of course, that there are no typing errors. You should proofread
 any entry you make before saving and updating the fle. Mistakes found later
 can still be corrected, but the original entry is retained as a safeguard against
potential embezzlement—stealing money from an employer through fraudu-
lent accounting practices. For example, no one can enter a transaction, then
delete it and keep the money.
Sending Statements
s ai ie ss aia  j d Ad o  a e s
al e sq uun n ne Aed Aq adoad iso se  na a
same time. “Bill paying day" usually coincides with their own paychecks. Also.
 rn ss    an r sis i  i rh ai
ou uaaq seu noiqap aun ssaun sep aay uul aro Aq Aea nouo siunose
Aaun ieqi os yiuo Aaaa jo yisz aui Aq sia h oi eapi poo e si in 'yu
are received at the appropriate time. If there many statements to send, there
issod ms si i ep aues au uo e u aedad oi ynoua a aq nou Ae
 e sn         n  o
that is often used where accounts are grouped alphabetically and divided into
 is     s  n   s n  
two days a month for billing. you could send statements to clients with names
beginning with A through M on the 1Oth, and N through Z on the 25th. Or.
if billing three days a month, you could mail A through F around the lOth of
the month, G through M around the 2Oth, and N through Z the last day of the
month
Collecting Past Due Accounts
Ads ae a a o snne u ed oi n s jo seiad s 
negligent; they lose track of time and let their bills go until they get a reminder
-uuy jo asnenaq aed oi aqeun ane aos suanbunp si junonne aui eu omi no
cial difficulties and a few others are just not willing to pay. A veterinary office
is doing pretty well if its accounts receivable ratio is less than two months.
That means that the total of all accounts receivable should equal no more than
two months' worth of gross charges. (However, in offices that extend credit
extensively, a ratio of up to three months may be acceptable.) When the ratio
gets higher than desirable, it is time to become more aggressive with account
collection procedures.
 The accounts receivable ratio can be calculated by using the following
formula:
Current Accounts Receivable Balance
Accounts Receivable Ratio =
Average Gross Monthly Charges
Copyright 201l Cengage Lea
from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
174
PART 3
Financiat Matters
Example:
Annual Gross Charges
$144.000
Average Monthly Charges
12.000
($144.000 ÷ 12 months)
Current Accounts Receivable Balance
$18.000
Accounts Receivable Ratio
1.5 months
($18.000 + $12,000)
In this example, the accounts receivable ratio is one and a half months
The average monthly charges are $12,000, and the current amount outstand-
ing is $18,000. If the current accounts receivable were $24,000, which is the
would be two months ($24,000 + $12,000 = 2).
It is important to try to collect on all accounts receivable for several
reasons. The veterinary practice is a business that must bring in income to
pay expenses and continue to provide services. Delinquent accounts also
 negatively affect the clients who owe the money, because they may be embar-
really need it.
Aging Accounts Receivable. Analyzing accounts that are past due is called
aging accounts receivable. Aging begins on the frst day of billing, which
Aep aui no paaui sem as Ap aul aq a i as u ui u spuad
of the first mailed statement. Always keep track of all accounts receivable so that
considered current and require no additional attempts at collection. A bill that
has been outstanding for 60 days is past due and merits a tactful and friendly
reminder.
Telephone Reminders. A telephone call, if made at the right time and in the
right manner, is often the most effective method of debt collection. (See the
section on collection calls in Chapter 7.)
Written Reminders. A reminder can also be put in with the statement either
in the form of a sticker or note attached to the statement, or a printed-out form
'essu mnor auno on prisod e usn Aq Ared su au pea
and do not mark the outside of the envelope with a notation such as "overdue
notice." When writing a reminder or collection letter, avoid using phrases
such as “You forgot/neglected/failed to pay your bill" or condescending language
such as “I am sure you just overlooked this bill." Each practice will have its own
preferred reminder letters to send
Copyright 201l Cengage L
nd/or eChapte r( s)
CHAPTER 9
Fee Coffection Procedures, Billing, and Payrotf
175
When a bill is 90 days past due, you should give a second reminder. Your
computer program can probably be set to alert you when invoices are 60, 90. or
 90+ days overdue. Most clients, after receiving one or two friendly reminders,
will contact you to explain why they were not able to pay sooner or to set up a
su in 'sep +o anp ised si sunonoe ue auo und juaed aqeaae Aen
become a collection problem and more persuasive collection techniques must
be used.
Forced Collection
It is important to follow up on early friendly reminders with more forceful.
though still tactful, reminders. Most offces use a series of three, four, or five
 in  un  n aq r sn ad no sia
payment. After 90 days,it may be office policy to send a "fnal notice" indicat-
ing that unless the account is paid by a specifed date, it will be tumed over
to a collection agency or, less often, that a lawsuit will be fled in small claims
court. Even if you have used the telephone for prior communications, the
fnal notice must be in writing and it should be sent by certifed mail so that
a pue juas sm in ieui saaid aiais aui il io uiis oi seu juaidinan au
ered. You should never send this notice unless the veterinarian has instructed
you to do so. It should not be an idle threat; the practice owner/veterinarian
must be prepared to follow through on any warning of further action that will
be taken. Idlle threats may be considered harassment and the client may be
able to sue.
Turming an account over to a collection agency is not a pleasant task, but
it is usually the wisest solution providing that the client has had every reason-
sunoe juanbu uaued io aue io q au Aed oi Auoddo ae
should be turmed over to professional bill collectors on the date stated in the
fnal notice. Consider the law of diminishing retums: Beyond a certain point,
the odds of recovering the debt drop lower and lower, and the time that is
spent in debt collection will not be worth whatever funds, if any, that the prac-
tice receives. A reputable collection agency may be able to collect on a higher
percentage of these accounts, but if the client genuinely has no money. the
collection agencies will have no better success than the efforts of the veterinary
practice. If payment is successful through a collection agency, the fee that is
charged for their services is usually 20 percent to 50 percent commission on
the amount collected.
When an account is considered a l00 percent loss and all other methods
have failed, yet the client can clearly afford to pay, another option the veteri-
Aso os si  r e  a oi si nis A 
and time-consuming that most veterinarians are more likely to write off the
account as a bad debt than to take the client to court. Any legal recourse must
 be exercised within the statute of limitations, the time limitation dictated
by state law.
 Finally, this point is so important that it bears repeating: Your employer
has specific policies regarding bill collection. Always follow office policy and
protocol for billing and collections.
Copy right 20ll Ce ngage Lea
176
PART 3
Financiat Matters
USING A COLlECTION AGENCY
When the veterinarian decides to turn an account over to a col-
lection agency the agency will need the following information:
Debtor's full name
Name of debtor's spouse or any other person who might be
responsible for the bill 
Last known address
Full amount of debt
Date of last credit or debit on the client's account
Mark the client fle to indicate that the account has been turned
over to the collection agency and make no further attempts to
collect it yourself If the client contacts you about the account.
refer him or her to the collection agency and do not enter into
any discussion about the account or agree to accepting direct
payments. Client fles that have been turned over to a collection
agency should be fled separately.
Payroll Accounting
Wage and salary records provide employers with information pertaining to a
calculate the federal, state, and local tax obligations of the business. Employers
comply with tax laws. It is unlikely that members of the veterinary office team
(employees) will become involved in the complicated paperwork and tax con-
cerns of the practice but being aware of this aspect of the business may help you
undlerstand the reason why an employee must complete specific forms upon hire.
Form 1-9
Before anyone can be officially hired, all employees must complete the
Employment Eligibility Verification Form, or Form I-9, to ensure that they
are authorized to work in the United States (Figure 9-2). You must submit two
proofs of eligibility (such as a valid driver's license and a social security card)
to your employer, who will then fll out the remainder of the form and fle it
accordingly.
EmployeeCompensation
The Fair Labor Standards Act, or Wages and Hours law, requires employers to
maintain comprehensive records for each employee, including the employee's
name, social security number, address, occupation (job tile), rate of pay, basis
for wage payment (per hour or salary), hours worked, wages at regular rate, over-
time premium, addlitions to wages or deductions from wages, net payment, and
date paid. Many veterinary offices use standard forms for indivicdual employee
payroll records but today, almost all payroll records are kept in a computer fle.
Copy right 2011 Cengage
or eChapte r( s)
CHAPTER 9
Fee Cotfection Procedures, Bilting, and Payrott
177
OMB No. 1615-0047; Expires 08/3 1/12
Form I-9, Employment
Department of Homeland Security
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services
Eligibility Verification
Read instructions carefully before completing this form. The instructions must be available during completion of this form.
Section1.EmployeeInformation and Verification(To becompleted and signed by employee at the time employment begins.)
Print Narme: Last
First
Middle InitialMaiden Name
Address(Street Name and Number)
Apt.#
Date o Birth (month/day/year)
City
State
Zip Code
Social Security #
I am aware that federal law provides for
J attest, μnder penally o perjury, that l arm (check one o the followimg):
A citizen o the United States
imprisonment and/or fines for false statements or
use of false documents in connection with the
A noncitizen national o the United States ( see instructions)
completion of this form.
A law[ul permanent resident (Alien #)
An alien authorized to work (Alien # or Admisson #)
mtil (expiration date, il applicable - monfh/day/year)
Employees Signature
Date (month/day/year)
FIGURE 9-2 Form I-9 (Source: Department of Homeland Security, U.s. Citizenship and Immigration Services.)
Gross Pay. Gross pay is the total amount eamed before payroll dleductions.
The simplest method of determining an employee's gross earnings is by defining
ada aui ioy Aed jo aei ai yseisa oi pue pied aq oisi aaoida ue mo
A salary is a fixed amount of payment per month or year, regardless of the
number of hours worked. The most frequently used method of determining
gross earmings is by the hourly rate. Gross pay equals the amount earmed per
hour multiplied by the number of hours worked. The Fair Labor Standards
Act sets minimum hourly wages.
. By law, a minimum rate of one and one-half
times the regular hourly rate must be paid for all hours worked in excess of
, often twice the base rate, can also be paicd as a
As nrs e uo saoda ai on Adde ou o siuan Ad
Net Pay. Net pay is the amount received after payroll deductions, which may
 include agreed-on deductions such as medical and dental insurance premiums,.
voluntary savings or investment plans. Social security contributions and
income taxes, both state and federal, will also be deducted.
Taxes Withheld
Each week, a certain portion of your wages will be withheld from your check
to go toward your income taxes. At the end of the year, this total amount
withheld is reported on a W-2 form, which you submit with your income tax
returm. If too much money has been withheld throughout the year, you will
receive a tax refund. If not enough has been withheld, you will need to send
payment to make up the difference.
Copyright 201l Cengage L
nd/or eChapte r( s)
178
PART 3
Financiaf Matters
Federal Income Tax Withholding.
 The amount of federal tax income withheld
the employee has claimed. The most common of these withholding allowances
are exemptions claimed for 2
oyee and an employee's spouse and
 a certain amount of an employee's
also be claimed for a dependent
who is 65 or older, or if the employee
or dependent spouse is blind
lo
claimed, the employee must fill out an Employee's Withholding Allowance
Certificate, better known as the Form W-4 (Figure 9-3)
The amount of federal income tax withheld from an employee's gross
wages is determined by the Federal Wage-Bracket Withholding Table
Separate tables are available for weekly,
, biweekly, semimonthly, monthly.
s who are married and for persons
who are unmarried. Using this table,
.t
the
e employer checks the number of
exemptions claimed on employee's W-4 form to locate the employee's wage
bracket to determine how much tax should be withheld. Almost all payroll
 and deductions are calculated by fnancial software in the computer program
when an employee's details have been entered in the computer at the time
of hire.
FICA Tax Withholding. In addition to income taxes, employers must withhold
taxes levied under a law called the Federal Insurance Contribution Act
(FICA)——social security taxes. These FICA taxes are imposed, in equal amounts,
u uo de e si aiui pue 'aiei xel ul sauseisa ssanauo xen oued e
amount of wages subject to the FICA tax. Social security benefits are based on
W-4
Employee's Withholding Allowance Certificate
OMB No. 1545-0074
Form
2010
Whether you are entitled to claim a certain number of allowances or exemption from withholding is
Type or print your first nae and middle initial.
Last name
2Your social
urity number
Home address (number and stret or rural route)
Note. If marred, but egally sepa
City ortown, state, and ZIP code
check here. You must call 1-800-772-1213 for a repl
nt card.
5
 Total number of allwances you are claiming (from line H above or from the applicable worksheet on page 2)
5
B
 Additional amount, if any, you want withheld from each paycheck 
6$
7
● Last year I had a right to a refund of all federal income tax witheld because I had no tax liability and
+ This year I expect a refund of allfederal income tax withheld because I expect to have no tax liability.
If you meet both conditions, write “Exempt" here
▼
Employee's signature
( uis n sen  jo si )m
Date 
(Sdl a4l o1 bupues J Auo 0l pue 8 saul aalduoo JaAodu3) ssappe pue aweu s,JaAoldu3 
9 Office code (optonal)10
For Privacy Act and Paperwork Rerduction Act Notice, see page 2.
Cat. No. 10220Q
Form W-4 (2010)
FIGURE 9-3 Employee's Withholding Allowance Certificate (Source: Department of the Treasury. Internal Revenue Service.)
Copy right 2011 Cengage Le
CHAPTER 9
Fee Coffection Procedures, Billing, and Payrotf
179
 the average earmings of the worker cluring the years of employment. To keep
track of gross earmings and FICA taxes withheld, each employee must have a
nine-digit social security number (application forms are available from local
Social Security offices, Intermal Revenue offices, and post offices)
State and Local Tax Withholding.I
In addition to federal income taxes and
FICA taxes, employers in most states and some cities must also deduct state and
city income taxes from their employees' earnings. The amount to be withheld is
based on an employee's gross wages and, in some states, claimed exemptions.
 Ad isn onda aun ra au  s pisp  zm wo
payroll taxes and employee withholdings to the proper agencies. Within
one month after the end of a calendar year, the employer must furmish each
employee with a Wage and Tax Statement, or Form W-2, which shows the
amount of wages earned and the amounts of FICA, federal, state, and local
income taxes that were withheld during the preceding year (Figure 9-4).
Form947.
. The veterinarian, as an employer, must fle an Employer's
Quarterly Federal Tax Return.
. The employer must furmish information
pertaining to total wages subject to withholdling, the amount of federal income
22222
jagwnu Aungss leloos s,ssoldw3 2
111-11-111
OMB No. 1545-0008
Employer identication number (EIN)
1 Wages, tips, other compensation
2  Federal income tax withheld
24-02060310
10,400.00
821.60
 Employer's nane, address, and ZiP code
3 Social security wages
4  Social security tax witheld
Robert Barton, V.M.D.
10,400.00
795.60
4401 Birch Street
5 Medicare wages and tips
Newport Beach, CA 92663
7 Social secunty tips
8 Allocated tips
9 Advance EIC payment
10 Dependent care benefits
Employee's first name and initial
Last name
Suff.11 Nonqualified plans
12a
Mary H.Blatt
22 Elm Street
13
口
12h
Newport Beach, CA 92663
12d
f Employee's address and ZIP code
15 Sate  Employer's state ID number
16 State wages, tps, tc
17 State inoome tax
18 Local wages, tps, atc.
20  Locality na
CA
10,400.00
228.80
10,400.00
104.00
Newport
Beach..
W-2
Wage and Tax
2010
Department of the Treasury—Internal Revenue Service
Statement
Copy 1 -For State, City, or Local Tax Department
Copy right 2011 Cengage L
for eChapte r(s).
180
PART 3
Financiat Matters
tax withheld from the employees, the total wages subject to FICA taxes, and
the combined amount of employees' and employer's FICA tax.
Unemployment Insurance
The Social Security Act of 1935 provided for temporary benefits for those who
become unemployed as a result of economic conditions beyond their control
Unemployment insurance benefits are paid and administered by individual
state departments of unemployment. States liffer in regard to the types of cov.
ered employment and the number of workers an employer must have before
o saoida uo xen nied e Aq pasin are spuny rapah paaal st xen a
qualify.
SUMMARY
Collecting payment from clients is an important part of veterinary offce
practices. You will need to be patient, respectful, and discreet when requesting
 payment. Oftentimes, you will also need to handle questions and complaints
about fees, although the veterinarian sets the fees, not the veterinary staff.
When services are provided prior to payment, credit is being extended to
the client for the duration of the offce visit but require payment at the time
circumstance, the veterinarian may extend credit to a client for a longer period
of time with a credit application and agreement of terms.
Most offces use computer accounting programs for billing and statements.
These programs make it easier to locate, enter, and retrieve information.
Monthly statements should be sent to clients with a balance of one dollar
or more, to remind them that payment is due. When a bill is 60 days overdue.
 naua 'sa as pus oi piau lm n os ap ised panpi si i
the phone or through the mail, remembering to be respectful, but firm. Bills
aq Au pue suanos uaqoid paiapisun aie anp ised sep o iaao ae eul
 turmed over to a collection agency, which will take 20 percent to 50 percent of
the amount collected. It is also possible to take the person to court, but that can
be time-consuming and expensive. You need to be familiar with your office's
own billing and collections policies, as they can differ from practice to practice.
SCENARIO
 It was the 25th of the month again, and the receptionist was reviewing client
accounts to identify any aging accounts receivable. He noticed that Mrs. P.
Aans sapod iau ioy pamo aueq oots auureuai aul pied ou peu ls 
n no rn  nq  e n pi au os snd s o
amount due.
A week later, payment had not arrived, so he gave her a call. Unfortunately
he got her answering machine, and left a message asking her to call back. She
never dlid. Several follow-up calls gamered the same result.
Copy right 2011 Cengage
or eChapte r(s)
CHAPTER 9
Fee Cotfection Procedures, Bilting, and Payrott
181
A second statement marked "final notice" and warming that the invoice would
be turmed over for collection if not paid went out on the 25th of the next month.
and more calls were made, but to no avail. The bill was finally turmed over to the
collection agency, and within two weeks, payment had been made (less 25 percent
for their fee). A week later, Mrs. P. sent an angry letter to the office, complaining
oeq aq iou pinom jad rau pe aus ien aueiun pue susseeu nos
Which fee collection guidelines did the receptionist follow?
Was Mrs. P's complaint of harassment justified?
REVIEW
For items I-l0, choose the correct term in each group.
 Fees are determined by the (veterinary office assistant/veterinarian)
2.
 An encounter form is designed for (large fees/several purposes).
 3. (Written reminders/telephone calls) least invade a customer's privacy in
attempting to collect fees due to a veterinarian.
 4. You (should/should not) attempt to provide cost estimates for customers
who request them.
5. On credit applications you may not ask for the applicants (date of birth/sex)
 6. You must complete a federal Truth in Lending statement only for those
customers who (are paying fnance charges/have agreed to pay in a certain
number of installments).
7.
 Adjusting a fee is unwise when the patient (has died/is a veterinarian)
8. What is cycle billing?
 9. What information should you provide to a collection agency?
ONLINE RESOURCES
How to Collect Client Debt
This article explains how to collect on past due invoices while keeping clients.
ranging from the gentle reminder to collection options, all the way to litiga-
au po jed 'dio aioos aui jo jed e si pue u-uais oi iasn aui saban il uon
How-To on-line network.
http://www.score.org
 Search Terms: Client debt; Workshops
How to Get Paid On Time
Also from Entrepeneur.com, this article provides suggestions and strategies for
 getting paid on time.
http://www.entrepreneur.com
Search Terms: Collecting: Payments; Your business
Copy right 2011 Cengage
for eChapte r( s)
Copy right 2011 Cengage 
quire i
Glossary
account history The computerized version of a client
call board  The component of the call director, containing
 account, containing client information and transaction
buttons representing the different stations in the office.
history.
call director  A telephone unit with stations that allow
accounts receivable  The total amount of payments
 several calls to come in at once.
outstanding or money owed by clients.
capital equipment Equipment that has a fairly long life
accounts receivable ratio The number of current
expectancy and contributes to the generation of practice
accounts receivable compared to the average gross
revenues.
monthly charge
CD-R A CD-ROM that allows a user to write data to the
admitted  A patient who has been accepted into the
disk with the use of a disk drive. A CD-R can only be
hospital to receive treatment or a surgical procedure.
written to once as a “read only" file and cannot be edited
aging accounts receivable
The process of determining
Another type of CD-ROM, the CD-RW, allows the user to 
 the amount of time accounts outstanding have not been
overwrite and/or edit the information repeatedly.
paid.
central processing unit The *brains" of the computer;
alpha search
1 Searching a computer database by typing in
the component of a working computer that houses the
the first few letters of the client's last name.
hard drive and other built-in components depending on
 alphabetic filing A filing system based on the client's last
the features of computer
name; each letter of the alphabet has its own color-coded
clean as you go
The practice of putting things back
stickers for easier retrieval and filing
where they belong after use, cleaning up an area alter
American Veterinary Medical Association  (AVMA)
a procedure, clearing counters that have become
 The professional association dedicated to advancing
unnecessarily cluttered, and maintaining a clean, clear
the field of veterinary medicine and all of its related
workspace.
aspects.
anesthesia record sheet  A minute by minute
communication process  Relates to the four elements
handwritten document recording the entire time an
of communication: message, the information to be sent;
animal is anesthetized. Notations are made by the
the person sending the message; channel, the method
 anesthetist regarding heart and respiration rates,
through which the message is sent; and the receiver
 percentage of anesthetic gas delivered, and additional
confidentiality  Maintaining the privacy of client personal
 medications and events which occur during the period of
information, including financial status or a patient's
anesthesia.
medical records.
consent form  A written legal document signed by the
B
client stating that he or she gives his or her informed
body language  The gestures and mannerisms that help
consent for the procedures to be performed and
people communicate.
acknowledges the potential risks.
broadband  A high-speed Internet connection that
controlled substance logbook  A written record of the use
allows another type of signal to travel over the same
of controlled substances that containsthe date, clients name,
yano papioid uao si ssassy Kisnoauenuis aul
patients name, the amount dispensed, the amount remaining.
television cable companies. DSL service provided over
the name of veterinarian authorizing the use of the
the telephone line is also a form of broadband Internet
medication, and the individual dispensing the medication
access
conventional format  Another term for the source-
burnout A term used to describe a condition that results
oriented medical record which contains the patient's
Irom too much stress over an extended period.
medical history in a chronological order.
183
Copyright 20ll Cengage Learning. All Rights Re5
Editorial re
te nt rights re strictions require it
184
GLOSSARY
cost estimate An approximation of fees, in writing.
Employment Eligibility Verification Form  Form I-9;
detailing the charges for proposed procedures and 
the form that must be Filled out with the government
tests related to medical treatment. The cost estimate is
to ensure that the person is authorized to work in the
provided before treatment is provided.
United States
courtesy Being polite, showing good manners and respect
encounter form A billing document or travel sheet that
credit application A form filled out by a client seeking services
contains basic client information and spaces to indicate
with the understanding that the client will pay for them later
procedures performed during the visit.
Applications inquire about employment history, current and
past creditors, other orms of income, and references
words.
credit bureau  An organization that colcts credit
establishing the matrix  The advanced preparation of
information about individuals and provides reports to
the appointment book.
potential creditors, usually with a score or credit rating
ethics  Rules of moral conduct.
based on a persons previous repayment history.
euthanasia
 The practice of ending an animals life
cross-training
 Learning other peoples duties to the level
humanely and painlessly.
that you can perform their jobs if needed.
exemptions
Withholding allowances, generally for the 
cycle billing   A billing method in which accounts are
employees spouse, children, or other dependants.
grouped alphabetically and then divided into groups
extranet 
A computer network that allows limited access
according to the number of statements that need to
to off-site users. A user name and password is required to
be sent. Each group of statements is sent out on a
gain access.
predetermined date each month.
D
Federal Insurance Contribution Act, FICA The
database A collection of information organized into easily
law that requires contributions to be paid by both the
searchable computer files.
employer and the employee for social security.
defense mechanisms
Adjustments we make in our
Federal Wage-Bracket Withholding Table
The chart
behavior, usually unconsciously, to help us deal with the
used by employers to determine the amount of federal
ssains jeioousd asneo jeun suaaj io sauaiadxa
denial  Refusing to admit or acknowledge that a traumatic,
tax that needs to be withheld and subtracted from an
employees paycheck.
stressful situation exists in order to avoid dealing with it.
fee profile  A breakdown of average lees charged by
digital camera station   The docking port for a digital
veterinary practices and hospitals for similar services in a
camera; the device used to transfer data and photographs
 particular geographical area.
from the camera to a computer file.
fee structure
The way a practice charges for its services.
discharge  To formally release a patient from the care of a
The fee structure may be a flat fee per procedure, or
veterinary hospital.
it may be based on the amount of time spent with the
displacement 
t  Transferring emotions from one situation to
client, or a combination of these methods.
another, to make a difficult situation easier to accept and
feedback
 The return message in the communication process
deal with.
firewall  A device or program used to limit access to a server.
dosimitry badge
A badge worn by staff working in the
fixed office hours  A scheduling practice in which office
radiology room. It absorbs scatter radiation so that the
hours are set, rather than making appointments. With the
 badges can be read by a dosimitry service to determine
exception of emergencies, clients and patients are seen in
the amount of accumulated exposure to radiation for an
the order of arrival.
individual over a set period of time.
flow scheduling Scheduling patients for segments, based
E
 on the amount of time an average appointment lasts.
footbath  A shallow tray of water containing a disinfectant
empathy  The ability to feel and understand what another
that people step into to avoid tracking potential
 person is feeling.
 Employee's Withholding Allowance Certificate
Form
pathogens from one area to another.
W4; the form completed for the number of tax
G
exemptions claimed by an employee.
Employer's Quarterly Federal Tax Return
Form 941;
 giardia
A microscopic intestinal parasite which is easily
a tax return that must be Filed by the employer four times
transmitted from animal to animal, including humans.
a year, stating the total amount of wages paid and the
lloked aiojaq pauiea junoue aul Aed ssoub
amount of taxes withheld
deductions.
te nt rights re strictions require it
GLOSSARY
185
H
listening Paying attention to what is being said, how it is
being said, and the nonverbal messages (including body
hard drive  The computer component that drives or
language) being sent.
 manages an inserted disk.
sainpaoond uo spionai uam paleia soogiol
hardware
The physical components of a computer.
 relating to radiology, anesthesia/surgery, and controlled
health certificate A certificate required for interstate 
substances.
and international transport of an animal which must be
signed only by the veterinarian after a health exam.
M
avoid work or a situation that causes anxiety.
induced
The first period of anesthesia delivery.
 master problem list  A general health record indicating
inhalent Any substance that is breathed in, such as an
 problems the patient is experiencing, as reported by the
anesthetic gas.
client or observed by a member of the veterinary team;
intellectualization Using reasoning to avoid the truth,
 contains dates of inoculation, results of all tests, drug
 as a way of denying strong feelings that may be socially
allergies, and ongoing medical conditions.
unacceptable or dificult to accept.
material safety data sheets (MSDS)
 Published by the
Internet  The global network of computer networks
 manufacturers of each product used by the practice, these
that allows millions of computer users to exchange
 sheets convey special handling requirements and user
 information. There is no central server or single primary
restrictions
 Internet source. Each individual server on the Internet
medical records
s The documentation that provides a
can be used to send and receive information. Access to the
detailed description of medical concerns, treatments/
Internet is obtained through an Internet service provider.
procedures, and progress notes. It is also a legal
 Internet service provider  A company that provides
 document that provides a complete and accurate history
Internet access through its servers. Most offer monthly
of each visit.
subscriptions and require a user name and password that
medical supplies
 Items used in providing medical care
allow the subscriber to browse the World Wide Web and
 such as: bandaging and suture material, Hluids, syringes,
access e-mail providers.
and needles. In short, everything required to administer
interpersonal communication skills 
The art of
medical care.
communicating with other people.
message
The information sent or received in
intranet An internal computer network used in a single
communication
location. A user name and password is required to access the
modem
A device that allows the computer user to connect
intranet, and a firewallis used to block unauthorized users.
 to another computer, network, or the Internet.
inventory The products and supplies a veterinary practice
monitor
The computer screen.
has on hand
monotone
Not showing a change in feeing or pitch while
speaking.
mouse
The device used to manipulate the cursor or
 pointer on the screen.
jurisdiction  The area in which a governing body has the
legal power to administer and enforce the law
N
K
National Association of Veterinary Technicians in
America  (NAVTA) An organization of veterinary
keyboard An input device that allows the user to enter letters,
 numbers, and symbols into various computer programs.
technicians dedicated to fostering high standards of
kindness Being helpful, compassionate, and friendly, and
veterinary care, promoting the health-care team, and
 advancing the veterinary technology profession.
treating others how you would want to be treated if the
 National Institute for Occupational Safety and
situation were reversed.
Health
h  (NIOSH) The federal agency responsible for
conducting research and making recommendations for
the prevention of work-related disease and injury.
laboratory logbook Provides a synopsis of the laboratory
net pay
 The amount of earnings received after payroll
tests requested and performed. It includes the date, client 
deductions.
and patient names, tests performed in-house or sent to an
network
Two or more computers connected to one
outside laboratory.
another.
186
GLOSSARY
neuter or spay certificate A certificate required to prove
 psychosomatic illness  Real physical symptoms resulting
 that an animal is no longer sexually intact.
from an emotional or mental condition.
1o sjuae yea uo paseq wisis su v bu leawnu 
lasuol ou aie reyi saly nuaed pue juan anoual ol ahind
patient's assigned number, rather than the name
active. These must be retained in a separate area for a.
 period of at least seven years.
0
objective information Factual, measurable data, such as
R
an animals weight.
radiology
Refers to the use of X-rays.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration
rationalization Attributing one's actions to logical reasons.
(OSHA) Provides guidelines created by the U.S.
 receptionist  The person in a practice who is responsible
 Department of Labor for safe and healthy working
lor answering the phone, seting appointments, greeting
conditions.
clients as they enter, and any other front desk duties.
 operating system
1 The program that runs the computer
reference points  Factors that determine how messages
and all of its other software applications. The most
 are expressed and understood; may include education,
common operating systems are Microsoft Windows
experience, social and cultural barriers,and religious belies.
and Mac OS
regression  Returning to an earlier mental or behavioral
P
state during times of high stress.
relate The facilitation of communication by having
something in common with the other person.
pathogen  Any disease causing organism.
 reminder cards Postcards that are sent to clients
patience  The ability to bear trials calmly without
reminding them of vaccination due.
complaint.
repression  Socially unacceptable or painful desires or
pa yroll tax
The employer's share of FICA taxes
impulses are pushed out of the conscious mind into the
personnel manual  Document that outlines the
unconscious mind.
employers expectations and provides a basis of
right-to-know station
 Houses the practices safety
consistency in how practice issues are handled.
information.
pharmaceuticals Medicines including vaccines,
antibiotics, sedatives, ointments, and other dispensed
S
drugs.
pitch
The highness or lowness of sound in a person's voice.
 safety manual Policies and instructions about minimizing
practice manager  A person in a veterinary practice
the risks of accidents and injuries.
responsible for overseeing and coordinating the behind-
Klyaam e uo aakoldua ue Kq paurea Kauou aul Aneles
the-scene tasks and duties that allow the ellicient delivery
monthly, or annual basis.
of medical care to patients and the accommodation of
scanner
An imaging device used to make a digital image of
clients.
a document or photograph, so that it can be transferred
prejudice
Preconceived biases and opinions.
to a computer file for storage or transmission.
printer
The equipment that prints out text or images from
 screening
1 Handling or directing incoming calls according
the computer.
to the nature of the call.
prioritize
To list tasks by importance, with the most
server  A computer or device that manages network resources
important at the top and the least important at the
sharps container  A heavy plastic container with a lid that
bottom.
can be permanently sealed, used for the safe disposal of
 problem-oriented medical record 
dOrganizing a
hypodermic needles and scalpel blades.
medical record in detail for each patient and the problem
 signalment Details of the patients breed, color, sex, age,
or concern that is presented.
and reproductive status.
 procedures manual  Information detailing the practice
slander A verbal statement that harms a persons image or
 policies, a *how to" manual for each different aspect of
reputation, either intentionally or unintentionally.
the practice.
 SOAP Progress notes in a problem-oriented medical record
professional courtesy  Providing professional services
divided into Subjective, Objective, Assessment, and
to another professional person or veterinarian at a
Procedure sections.
lower fee.
social security number  The number assigned to
projection
One's own ideas, feelings, or attitudes are
American citizens by the Social Security Administration.
attributed to someone or some thing else.
All employees must have a social security number.
GLOSSARY
18 7
software Computer programs.
source-oriented medical record  Organizing medical
USB flash drive  A smal(approximately 2 inch) data
records in each patients file in chronological order
 station Individual unit of a call director telephone system,
 torage device used to download and transport Files from
in which a call can be taken while other calls are coming
computer to computer. Also called a thumb drive.
in simultaneously.
statute of limitations
The amount of time in which
V
a practice can take legal action against a client for
vaccination certificate  The document that states the
nonpayment.
vaccination status of an animal.
stereotype
Preconceived ideas about a group of
verbatim  Word for word
people made without taking individual difference into
veterinarian  An individual licensed to practice veterinary
account.
medicine; the member of the veterinary health team
stress The physical and/or psychological changes that
ultimately responsible for diagnosing, prescribing
occur in the body as a result of a change and or continued
treatments, and performing surgery.
mental pressure in the environment.
veterinary assistant
tThe person responsible for assisting
subjective information  Nonmeasurable data that
the veterinary technician and veterinarian as needed;
describes an animals attitude.
duties range from providing a limited degree of medical
 sublimation  Diverting an instinctual desire or impulse
care to the clerical duties of the front desk and reception.
into a socially acceptable activity.
veterinarian-client-patient relationship (VCPR)  The
 substance abuse The overuse, inappropriate use, or
relationship between the veterinarian and the client and
illegal use of drugs, alcohol, or other potentially harmful
patient.
substance.
veterinary technician  A trained professional who
directly assists the veterinarian in the administration of
T
health care to patients.
volume Degree of loudness.
tact  Doing and saying the right things at the right time.
telephone reminder  A telephone call to a client to
W
remind him or her of a balance due on an account.
temporary withdrawal  Finding ways to avoid dealing
Wage and Tax Statement  Form W-2, a statement of
with a painful or difficult situation.
the total amount earned by an employee and amount
thumb drive see USB Flash drive.
withheld for taxes.
tickler file A file similar to an appointment book, with
want list Place to make notes of medications or supplies
 slots for mail and telephone messages, organized by days
that have dropped to low quantities.
of the month.
wave scheduling  Scheduling the number of patients that
time audit 
  A method of time management that
can be seen in an hour's worth of segments.
involves noting all the tasks performed throughout
Web site
A virtual location on the World Wide Web
the day and how much time is spent on each task.
word processing program  Software that replaces the
This helps to recognize time use patterns, which helps
use of a typewriter, and includes additional features such
to develop strategies for more efficient use of time
 as spell check, automatic formatting, and the ability to cut
available.
and paste text and images.
time tracking
1 Keeping track of time as you work, in order
workstation
1 An individual computer on a network.
to prevent yourself from spending too much time doing
 written reminder
01 jualn e oi iaal e io juaa
something to the exclusion of something else.
remind him or her of a balance due on an account.
tone  Vocal quality that expresses mood or feeling.
toner A special kind of dry, powdered ink used in laser
X
printers and photocopiers. Toner generally comes in long
X-ray logbook A written record of each radiograph that
 cartridges specifically designed for individual printers or
is taken. It includes patient information, views taken, and
copiers.
settings used to produce the X-ray.
toxoplasmosis   A zoonotic coccidian parasite in the
 intestine of all cats, including domestic pets.
Z
travel sheet A preprinted form attached to a patient's
file used to record each aspect of care received and to be
zoonotic, zoonose
A disease that is transmitted from
billed
animals to humans.
que nt rights re strictions require it
Bibliography
Ballard, Bonnie and Rockett, Jody, Restraint and Handling for Veterinary Technicians and Assistants,
 Delmar, Cengage Learning, 2009.
Blood, D.C. Stoddert and Saunders, VP, Comprehensive Veterinary Dictionary, 2nd ed., WB
Saunders, l999.
 Judah, Vicki and Nuttall, Kathy, Exotic Animal Care & Management, Delmar, Cengage Learning.
2008.
McCurrin, Dennis M. and Bassert, Joanna M., Clinical Textbook for Veterinary Technicians, 2nd ed.,
Mosby, 2002
Sirois, Margi, Principles and Practice of Veterinary Technology, 2nd ed., Mosby, 2004.
http://www.avma.org (accessed February 18, 2010)
http://www.aplb.org (accessed January 14, 2010)
http://www.LawDepot.com (accessed February 18, 2010)
http://www.navta.org (accessed November 14, 2009; July 12, 2010)
http://www.osha.gov (accessed January 31, 2010)
http://www.veterinarytechnician.com (accessed November 16, 2009)
http://www.vhma.org (accessed August 30, 2009)
188
Index
A
C
Accepting or declining clients or patients, 155
Call board, 113
Accidental injury, preventing, 22-24
Call director, 113
Account history, 172
Calls, coordinating, 112-115
Accounts receivable ratio, 173-174
Canadian Labour Relations Board, 95
Addressee, 58
Capital equipment, 29 
Administrative duties. See Front ofhce and receptionist
CD-R, 64
duties
CD-ROM, 64
Admitting patient, 54-55
Central processing unit (CPU), 64
Aging accounts receivable, 174
Certihcates, 178
Alphabetic hling system, 52-53
 Charge slip. See Transaction slip
Alpha search, 172
"Clean as you go" attitude, 18
American Veterinary Medical Association
Cleaning the facility, 16-21
(AVMA), 5
Clinic manager, 58
Anesthesia record sheet, 48, 50
Clutter, 148
Anger, 133
Colleagues, duty to, 156-157
Angry client, 90-91
Collection agency, 175-176
 Animal hospital, 65
Collection calls, 115-117
Appearance, 126-127
Communication
Appointments, 9
through ofhce intranet, 67
Appointment book, 119-122
See also Interpersonal communication
appointment card, 121-122
Computerized billing, 172-173
house calls, 123
See also Billing clients
making, 111
Computers,27-28, 63-71
organizing, 122-123
computer components, 64
scheduling, 118-119
computer networks, 67-69
hxed ofhce hours, 118
veterinary practice Web site, 69-70
flow scheduling, 118
veterinary software, 65-66
wave scheduling, 118
Conhdentiality, 157
Awareness, 148-149
Consent form, 54-55
Controlled substance logbook, 50
B
Conventional format medical record, 41
Billing clients, 172-180
Coping strategies, 144-145
collecting past due accounts, 173-175
effective, 144-145
aging accounts receivable, 174
negative, 145
telephone reminders, 174
Cost estimate, 167
written reminders, 174-175
Costs of operating practice, 165-166
computerized billing, 172-173
equipment and supplies, 165-166
forced collection, 175-176
miscellaneous costs, 166
sending statements, 173
mortgage or lease, 166
Bite wounds, 22
staff salaries, 166
Body language, 82-84, 88-90
 training and education, 166
Broadband connection, 69
Courtesy, 79
Burnout, 144
Credit. See Payment planning
Business records, 47-51
Cros-training, 10-11
 See also Logbooks
Cycle billing, 173
189
Copyright 20ll Cengage Learning. All Rights Re
Editorial review
we nt rights re strictions require it
190
INDEX
D
needs of patient come hrst, 154-155
obeying the laws, 155-156
Database, 69
prescriptions, 158
sharing access, 69
right to choose clients and patients, 155
Defense mechanisms, 145-147
responsibility to veterinary profession,
denial, 146
156-157
displacement, 145-146
substance abuse issues, 157-158
intellectualization, 146
termination of VCPR, 158
 malingering, 146
veterinarian-client-patient relationship
projection, 146
(VCPR), 158
rationalization, 146
Euthanasia, 129-134
regression, 146
appointments for, 13l-132
repression, 145
 common client concerns, 130-131
sublimation, 146
temporary withdrawal, 146
consent form, 132
Delays, handling, 128-129
grief, 132-134
Exemptions, 178
Denial, 132, 146
Extranet, 67
Depression, 133
Digital camera station, 64
F
 Discharging patient, 36, 53
Fair Credit Billing Act, 173
Discrimination, 95-96
Fair Labor Standards Act, 176-177
Disease containment, 25
 Federal income tax withholding, 178-180
Displacement, 145-146
Federal Insurance Contribution Act (FICA), 178
Doctor of Veterinary Medicine (DVM), 5
Federal Wage-Bracket Withholding Table, 178
Dosimitry badge, 21
Fee collction procedures, 163-180
 Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA), 50
adjusting or canceling fees, 171
E
 costs behind the fees, 165-166
Education, 76, 166
explaining veterinarians' fees, 165-167
Emergency care, 155
 payment planning, 166-171
Empathy, 80
See also Billing clients
Employees Withholding Allowance Certihcate, 178
Feedback,76
 Employers Quarterly Federal Tax Return,
Fee profle, 165
179-180
Fee structure, 165
Employment Eligibility Verihcation Form, 176
FICA tax withholding, 178-179
See also Form I-9
File
Encounter form, 164
sharing, 67
Enunciation, 98-100
transfers, 69
Equal Credit Opportunity Act, 167
Filing, 51-53
 Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
efhcient, 53
(EEOC), 95
equipment and supplies, 51
Equipment, 165-166
systems,51-53
 See also Ofhce equipment and maintenance
alphabetic, 52-53
Establishing the matrix, 120
numerical, 51-52
Ethics, 153-159
Firewall, 67
con hdentiality, 157
First impressions, 124-126
duty to professional colleagues, 157
Fixed offce hours, 118
duty to society, 157
Flow scheduling, 118
 duty to veterinarian image, 156
Footbath, 19
emergency care, 155
Form 941, 179-180
 enhancing and improving veterinary knowledge and
Form I-9, 176
skills, 157
Form W-2, 179
illegal practice of veterinary medicine, 156
Form W-4, 178
misrepresentation, 156
Forms, 57-58
Copyright 20ll Cengage Learning. All Rights R
Editorial review
ent rights re strictions require it
IN DEX
191
Front ofhce and receptionist duties
Incoming mail, 58-59
admissions and discharges, 53-57
Induced anesthesia process, 22
admitting patient, 54-55
Infection control, 24-25
discharging patient, 55-57
 Inhalant, anesthesia system, 22
fling, 51-53
Intellectualization, 146
efhcient, 53
Interacting with clients, 105-134
equipment and supplies, 51-53
euthanasia, 129-134
systems, 51-53
greeting clients, 123-128
forms and certihcates, 57-58
making appointments, 118, 123-124
record keeping, 36-51
telephone management, 106-118
business records and logbooks, 47-51
Intermet, 67
creating medical records, 39-42
sharing access, 69
 maintaining, retaining, purging, and releasing
Internet service provider (ISP), 67
medical records, 42-47
Interpersonal behavior, 127-128
organizing medical records, 40-42
Interpersonal communication, 75-101
 purpose of medical records, 36-39
communication process, 76-77
screening and processing mail, 58-60
discrimination, 95-96
handling mail problems, 59-60
enunciation and pronunciation, 98-100
 incoming mail, 58-59
 improving oral communication skills, 100
 outgoing mail, 59
volume, pitch, and tone, 98
improving your speech, 96-101
G
 interacting with clients and coworkers,
Gestures, 82,90
80-91
Giardia, 19
 body language, 88-90
Greeting clients, 123-129
 handling angry clients, 90-91
Frst impressions, 124-126
listening, 81-82
handling delays, 128-129
observing, 82-84
 interpersonal behavior, 127-128
paraphrasing, 84-85
 professional appearance, 126-127
showing respect, 86-87
Grief, 132-133
speaking with clients, 80-81
dealing with, 133-134
telephone manners, 87-88
emotions expressed
traits for positive interpersonal relations,
anger, 133
77-80
bargaining, 132-133
veterinary team communication, 91-95
denial, 132
Intranet, 67
depression, 133
Inventory, 29
guilt,133
management, 30-31
shock, 132
sorrow, 133
Gross pay, 177
Jurisdiction, 155
Guilt, 133
K
H
Keyboard, 64
Handicap, clients with, 86
Kindness, 78
Hard drive, 64
Knowledge and skills, improving, 157
Hardware, 64
Health certihcate, 57-58
L
House calls, scheduling, 123
Laboratory logbook, 50-51
Housekeeping, 16-21
Lease, 166
Leash, use of, 24
Lifting injuries, 21
 llegal practice of veterinary medicine, 156
Listening, 81-82
Image, veterinary, 156
Local tax withholding, 179
192
IN DEX
Logbooks, 47-51
Neuter certihcate, 57
anesthesia record sheet, 48-50
Nonverbal communication, 82-84
controlled substance, 50
Numerical hling system, 51
laboratory, 50-51
0
x-ray, 48-49
Objective information, 39
M
Observing, 82-84
Mail, 58-60
Occupational Safety and Health Administration
handling problems, 59-60
(OSHA), 16
incoming, 58-59
guidelines, 25-26
outgoing, 59
Odor control, 16, 18-19, 125-126
Malingering, 146 
Off-hours phone coverage, 117-118
Master problem list, 42-43
 Ofhce equipment and maintenance, 27-28
Material safety data sheets (MSDS), 26
repairs and troubleshooting, 27-28
 Materials and supplies, 29-31
 Ofhce supplies, 29
 inventory management, 30-31
 Operating system, 64
want lists, 29-30
Outgoing calls, 115
Matrix, establishing, 120
 Outgoing mail, 59
Medical care, 4
P
Medical records, 36-51
creating, 39-40
 Paraphrasing, 84-85
 maintaining, retaining, purging, and releasing, 42-47
Past due accounts, collecting, 173-175
organizing, 40-42
Pathogens, 24
purpose of, 36-39
Patience, 77-78
Medical supplies, 29 
Payment planning, 166-171
Medications, as health risks, 21
credit applications, 167
Message, 76
credit bureaus, 167
taking, 11l-112
credit cards, 168-170
Misrepresentation, 156
truth in lending, 167-168
Modem, 64
using credit card machine, 170-171
Monitor, 64
Payroll accounting, 176-180
Monotone voice, 98
 employee compensation, 176-177
Monthly statement, 172
gross pay, 177
 Mortgage, 166
net pay, 177
Mouse, 64
[ederal income tax, 178-179
FICA, 178-180
N
Form 941, 179-180
 National Association of Veterinary Technicians in America
Form I-9, 176-177
(NAVTA), 5
taxes withheld, 177-180
 National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
Form W-2, 179
(NIOSH), 142-143
Form W-4, 178
Net pay, 177
state and local, 179
Network system, computer, 67
unemployment insurance, 180
common uses, 67-69
Payroll tax, 178
communication,69
Personnel manual, 1l
 fle sharing, 67
Personnel policies, 12
 file transfers, 69
 Pharmaceuticals, 29
printer sharing, 67
Physical inventory, 31
sharing database access, 69
Pitch, 98
sharing Internet access, 69
Policies, ofhce, 1l-12
extranet, 67
 Posting transactions, 65
internet, 67
Practice manager, 7
 intranet, 67
Prejudices, 86-87
ent rights re strictions require it
INDEX
193
Prescriptions, 158
Sorrow, 133
 Printer, 64
Source-oriented medical record, 40-41
sharing, 67
Spay certihcate, 57
 Prioritizing tasks, 148
 Speaking with clients, 80-81
 Problem-oriented medical record, 40-42
Stafhing the practice, 4-7
 Procedures manual, ll-12
Statements, sending, 173
Procedures, ofhice, 1l-12
State tax withholding, 179-180
 Professional courtesy, 171
Stations, call director, 113
 Progress notes, 42, 44
Statute of limitations, 175
Projection, 146
Stereotypes, 87
 Pronunciation, 98-100
Stress, 141-149
 Psychosomatic illnesses, 142
burnout, 144
 Purging medical records, 42-47
coping with, 144-149
defense mechanisms, 145-147
R
strategies, 144-145
Radiology, 21
tire management, 147-49
Rationalization, 146
dehined, 142
Receiver, 76
job-related, 142-143
Receptionist, 7
Subjective data, 44
 Relerence points, 76-77
Sublimation, 146
Regression, 146
Substance abuse, 157
Relating to people, 77
Supplies, 165-166
Reminder cards, 36
Repression, 145
T
Respect, showing, 86-87
Tact, 78
Right-to-know station, 26-27
Telephone management, 106-118
S
collection calls, 1l5-117
coordinating calls, 112-115
Safe facility, maintaining, 16-21
 making appointments over phone, 118
controlling infection and spread of
off-hours phone coverage, ll7-118
disease, 24-25
outgoing calls, 115
housekeeping and cleaning, 16-21
screening calls, 108-110
 preventing accidental injury, 22-24
taking messages, 1ll-112
Safety hazards, 21-22
telephone personality, 106-108
Salaries, staff, 166, 177
Telephone manners, 87-88
Scanner, 64 
 Scheduling appointments, 118 
Temporary withdrawal, 146
Thumb drive, 64
types, 118
Tickler fle, 117
Screening calls, 108-110
Sender, 76
Time audit, 149
Time management, 8, 147-149 
Server, 67
 Setting of practice, 12
Time tracking, 148
 Sharps container, 24
Tone, 98
Toner, 64
Shock, 132
Toxoplasmosis, 19
Signalment, 37
Training, 166
Slander, 157
Transaction slip, 170
SOAP, 42
Social security number, 179
Travel sheet, 164
Truth in Lending Act, 167-168
Social security taxes, 178
Society, duty to, 157
U
Software, 64-66
veterinary, 72-74
Unemployment insurance, 180
 commonly used programs, 66
USB lash drive, 64
194
INDEX
Veterinary technologist, 5
Volume, 98
Vaccination certihcate, 57
Verbatim repetition, 85
W
Veterinarian
Wages and Hours law, 176
dehned, 4-6
Wage and Tax Statement, 179
responsibilities, 6
Want lists, 29-30
Veterinarian-client-patient relationship
Wave scheduling, 134
(VCPR), 158
Web site, veterinary practice, 69-70
 prescriptions, 158
Word processing, 64
termination of, 158
Workstation, 67
Veterinary assistant, 6-7
X
role in practice management, 7-10
cross-training, 10-11
X-ray log book, 48, 49
orientataion, 7-10
7
time management, 8-9
Veterinary technician, 5-6
Zoonotic disease, 16