RADIOGRAPHY OF
THE DOG AND CAT
Guide to Making
and Interpreting
Radiographs
M.C. Muhlbauer & S.K.Kneller
WILEY-BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
Radiography of
the Dog and Cat
Guide to Making and Interpreting Radiographs
Radiography of
the Dog and Cat
Guide to Making and Interpreting Radiographs
M.C. Muhlbauer, DVM, Ms, DAcVR
S.K. Kneller, DvM, Ms, dAcVR
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Publication
This edition first published 2013 @ 2013 by John Wiley & Sons. Inc.
Editorial ofces: 2121 State Avenue, Ames. Iowa 50014-8300, USA
The Atrium, Southern Gate. Chichester. West Sussex, PO19 8SQ. UK
9600 Garsington Road. Oxford. OX4 2DQ. UK
For details of our global editorial offices. for customer services and for information about how to
apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.
wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
Authorization to photocopy items for intermal or personal use, or the intermal or personal use of
ai oi Aap pied si aaf aseg aui ieyi papoid suushana laela Aq paiu si 'sa sypads
Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive. Danvers. MA 01923. For those 0rganizations that
have been granted a photocopy license by CcC. a separate system of payments has been arranged.
The fee codes for users of the Transactional Reporting Service are ISBN-13:
978-1-1185-4747-2/2013.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All
brand mames and product names used in this book are trade mames. service marks. trademarks or
registered trademarks of their respective owmers. The publisher is not associated with any product or
vendor mentioned in this book.
The contents of this work are intended to further general scientific research. understanding. and
discussion only and are not intended and should not be relied upon as recommending or promoting
The publisher and the author make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties. including without 
'yheasir uouo po mata ui asodand renned e iof ssauy po saueem padu Aue woe
equipment modifications, changes in governmental regulations, and the constant flow of
information relating to the use of medicines. equipment. and devices. the reader is urged to review
and evaluate the information provided in the package insert or instructions for each medicine.
equipment, or device for, among other things. any changes in the instructions or indication of usage
and for added warnings and precautions. Readers should consult with a specialist where appropriate.
The fact that an organization or Website is referred to in this work as a citation and/or a potential
source of further information does not mean that the author or the publisher endorses the
information the organization or Website may provide or recommendations it may make. Further.
readers should be aware that Internet Websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared
between when this work was written and when it is read. No warranty may be created or extended
by any promotional statements for this work. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for
any damages arising herefrom.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Muhlbauer, Mike C
 Radiography of the dog and cat : guide to making and interpreting radiographs /
Mike C. Muhlbauer, Steve Kneller.
uo : d
Includes bibliographical references and index
ISBN 978-1-118-54747-2 (cloth : alk. paper) - ISBN 978-1-118-59266-3 - ISBN 978-1-118-
59268-7 - ISBN 978-1-118-59269-4 (eMobi) - ISBN 978-1-118-59270-0 - ISBN 978-1-118-59274-8
Handbooks, manuals, etc. 3. Cats-Diseases-Diagnosis-Handbooks, manuals, etc. I. Kneller, Steve.
II. Title.
[DNLM: I. Radiography-veterinary-Handbooks. 2. Cat Diseases-radiography-Handbooks
3. Diagnosis. Differential-Handbooks. 4. Dog Diseases-radiography-Handbooks. SF 757.8]
SF757.8.M84 2013
636.7'089607572-dc23
2012048117
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print
may not be available in electronic books.
Cover design by Nicole Teut
Set in 9/12 pt Meridien by Toppan Best-set Premedia Limited
10z1
To my father, Dr. Karl C. Muhlbauer, whose uncommon good sense and endur-
ing example continue to inspire me personally and professionally. He was a
lifelong teacher, author of several educational textbooks, and a man to whom
obstacles were only momentary distractions. We had many great adventures
together, and I felt his presence quite often during the creation of this book.
Mike Muhlbauler
To Dr. Robert E. Lewis, who introduced me to this wonderful diagnostic tool we
call radiology. Not only did he open the door to the most interesting playground
in veterinary medicine, but as a mentor through veterinary school as well as my
initial radiology training. he imparted a simple, straightforward method and
thinking processes that have had a profound influence on my professional life.
teaching philosophy, and general outlook. I owe any meaningful concepts that
I have to his guidance.
Steve Kneller
Contents
About the Companion Website, ix
Spine, 268
Skull, 271
Acknowledgment, xi
Pharynx and larynx abnormalities, 273
Introduction, xiii
Chapter 5: Thorax, 275
Chapter l: Interpretation of Radiographs. 3
Normal radiographic anatomy. 277
Musculoskeleton, 4
Thoracic wall, 277
Thorax, 12
Diaphragm, 279
Abdomen, 27
Pleura and pleural space, 279
Chapter 2: Making Quality Radiographs, 43
Mediastinum, 280
Production and use of diagnostic x-rays. 44
Esophagus, 282
Positioning guide, 59
Heart and major vessels, 284
Interpreting radiographs, 82
Trachea, 290
Scope of diagnostic imaging. 85
Bronchi,290
Lungs. 291
Chapter 3: Contrast Radiography. 87
Diseases and disorders, 294
Indications for contrast radiography. 88
Thoracic wall, 294
Types of contrast media, 88
 Diaphra gm, 297
Adverse effects associated with contrast media, 89
Pleura and pleural space, 299
Contrast radiography procedures, 91
Mediastinum, 304
Chapter 4: Musculoskeleton, 123
Esophagus. 306
Normal radiographic anatomy. 125
Heart and major vessels, 312
General, 125
Trachea and bronchi, 335
Bone development, 128
Lungs. 341
Sesamoid bones, 130
 Differential diagnoses, 356
Variable ossification centers, 132
Thoracic wall, 356
Joints, 133
Diaphragm, 357
Skull, 146
 Pleura and pleural space, 358
Diseases and disorders, 152
Mediastinum, 360
Bone production, 152
Esophagus, 362
Bone loss, 156
Cardiac silhouette, 364
Benign conditions, 157
Major vessels, 368
Fractures, 16l
Trachea, 369
Hypertrophic osteopathy (HO). 171
Lungs. 371
Osteomyelitis, 171
Osseous neoplasia, 174
Chapter 6: Abdomen, 377
Soft tissues, 177
Normal radiographic anatomy. 379
Appendicular skeleton, 180
Peritoneal and retroperitoneal spaces, 379
Axial skeleton, 232
Liver, 380
Differential diagnoses, 264
Gall bladder/biliary system, 381
General bone, 264
Spleen, 381
Joints, 267
Pancreas, 383
vii
Contents
Gastrointestinal tract, 383
Differential diagnoses, 436
Urinary tract, 388
Abdominal cavity, 436
Adrenal glands, 390
Abdominal wall, 440
Male genital system, 391
Gastrointestinal tract, 441
Female genital system, 393
Liver, 447
Diseases and disorders, 393
Spleen, 448
Peritoneal hernia, 393
Pancreas, 449
Liver, 394
Urinary tract, 450
Gall bladder/biliary system, 396
Male genital system 455
Spleen, 397
Female genital system 455
Pancreas, 398
Glossary. 457
Gastrointestinal tract, 399
Urinary tract, 415
Bibliography, 473
Adrenal glands, 427
Index, 475
Male genital system, 429
Female genital system, 433
vili
About the Companion Website
This book is accompanied by a companion website:
www.wiley.com/go/muhlbauerradiography
The website includes:
·Review questions
·A positioning guide
● Powerpoints of all figures from the book for downloading
·A PDF of the Glossary from the book for downloading
Acknowledgment
The authors gratefully acknowledge the pioneering work
understanding of radiographic findings in various diseases
by Drs. Jerry Owens and Darryl Biery in their wonderful
and disorders. It is upon the foundation laid by such an
book Radiographic Interpretation for the Small Animal Clinician.
important work that we are able to build and advance practi-
Their use of conceptual illustrations and concise descriptions
cal understanding in veterinary radiology. Many thanks to
provided the reader with a practical reference and valuable
 Drs. Jerry and Darryl for their inspirational vision.
Introduction
The purpose of radiography is to lessen uncerrainry.
most common diseases expected to cause the observed
abnormalities. Detailed lists of differential diagnoses are pro-
When you perform a radiographic examination, you usually
vided in chapters 4 through 6.
have a question that needs to be answered. There was a
reason you made the radiographs. To help you and other
Halfthemagic ofa radiologistis having quality radiographs onwhich
   n   id 
we can see things.
answers to those questions, we have created this guide that
we hope will be a valuable reference for you.
 II. The second chapter is "Malking Quality Radiographs." (A
 The volume of material appropriate for a guide to radiog-
o  e n  a  o s n 
raphy is extensive and must be organized in a useful and
with high-quality images.) In this section, you will find
practical format. In some learning or clinical situations, all
illustrations and detailed descriptions of proper patient
that is needed is a simple checklist to avoid overlooking
positioning in veterinary radiography. There is also a review
 un a s  r s n
of basic information regarding the production and use
mation is required about a particular disease, disorder, or
of medical x-rays and the various types of imaging receptors
radiographic finding. We determined that presenting the
(detectors) currently available. Both analog (film) and digital
material in a linear fashion would bore some folks and over-
systems are addressed, and helpful tips are provided regard-
whelm others. Therefore, we decided on the following
ing use and care of radiography equipment. At the end of
layout:
that chapter is a detailed outline which addresses complete
 I. We begin with "Interpretation of Radiographs." In this
radiographic interpretation.
section, the reader is encouraged to list all of the abnormali-
III. The third chapter thoroughly describes contrast radi-
ties in size, shape, opacity, margination, position, number.
 ao pue siual isuoo po sad suu udo
and function as seen on radiographs, without regard to spe-
25 contrast procedures with indications, contraindications.
cific etiology.
complications, techniques, dosages, pitfalls, and radiographic
findings.
Many clinicians tend tosee what they want on a radiograph,whether
it is there or not
You must know normal to recognize abnormal.
It is well known that preconceived expectations are notori-
IV-VI. The next three chapters, "Musculoskeletal," "Thorax,"
ous for inventing or overlooking radiographic abnormalities
  n   , 
Valuable information often is available, if one is willing to
detail regarding each major part of the body. Each chapter
deliberately and systematically review the images. This
begins with a section titled "Normal Radiographic Anatomy,"
first chapter is divided into musculoskeletal, thoracic, and
describing basic, unique, and sometimes confusing radio-
abdominal sections, each with checklists for evaluating radio-
graphic appearances of numerous structures.
graphs and descriptions of radiographic findings.
History is not necessary to read radiographs, but it is necessary to
interpret radiographs.
The next section in each of these three chapters is titled
Once the radiographic findings have been recognized, the
radiographic findings. and differential diagnoses for many
radiographs are reviewed a second time in light of pertinent
conditions. The final section in each chapter provides
clinical and laboratory findings and a prioritized list of dif-
exhaustive lists of differential diagnoses for many radio-
ferential diagnoses is created. In this chapter are listed the
graphic findings and diseases.
xii
Introduction
VI1. Finally. there is an extensive glossary with a great
 Periosteal response is an attempt to heal bone, not a reac-
many definitions and explanations covering a variety of
tion to disease. Understanding the physiology behind a peri-
osteal response aids in understanding the disease process.
older and not used in this guide.
For example, periosteal new bone never grows outward
from the cortex; it is formed perpendicular to the periosteum
to fill the space created by separation of the periosteum from
What is different about this book?
the cortex. Recognizing a periosteal response and determin-
ing whether the lesion is active or inactive, aggressive or
Readers may recognize familiar figures in this guide, many
nonaggressive is vital to providing the best patient care. Sup-
from Radiographic Interpretation for the Small Animal Practitioner
portive diagnostic tests are required in most situations to
by Drs. Jerry Owens and Darryl Biery (the "Purina book,"
establish the etiology. but accurate reading of radiographs
often dictates the need for further diagnostics.
and methods of interpretation rather than represent standard
Sunburst patfern, ground-glass appearance, and similar terms
radiographs that the reader is expected to memorize. Remem-
rarely are useful by themselves in modern radiography. Clas-
ber, diseases don't always present with the classic appear-
sically, a sunburst periosteal response was used to describe
ance depicted on many textbook radiographs.
a bone tumor. However, we now know that other diseases.
Also, in this guide you will find language that differs from
such as osteomyelitis, can create a similar radiographic
some of the classic radiography terms. We hope this to be a
appearance. Ground-glass appearance has been used to describe
fresh approach using simple correlation with physics, physi-
indistinct or obscured margins, a confusing term at best.
ology. and pathology. Advances in diagnostic imaging reveal
Looking for a specific type of lesion or radiographic appear-
the inaccuracies in some commonly used terms—terms that
ance often interferes with describing what is actually there.
were pertinent when radiologists were beginning to under
Prominent is not a roentgen sign. If a structure is "promi-
stand the radiographic appearances of disease, but that are
nent" on a radiograph, there is a reason. It may be enlarged
currently inadequate.
or there may be a change in opacity interfaces. For example.
It is important to patient care to accurately describe what you see on
enlarged or mineralized or if the lung is well inflated.
radiographs.
Radiopacity is relative. ALL materials block x-rays to some
there is free gas in the abdominal cavity. It is important to
degree, even air. To state that a material is radiopaque or
describe what you are seeing to provide the best patient care.
radiolucent provides little useful information. For example.
Alveolar lung disease is a misnomer. Alveoli are air spaces.
cystic calculi that are not visible on survey radiographs
The lining of the alveoli is considered part of the interstitium
are commonly called radiolucent. However, when these
on radiographs. Essentially, lung disease is either interstitial,
same calculi are seen on a pneumocystogram, they are con-
vascular, or bronchial. Diseases that produce mostly a cel-
sidered radiopaque. Opacity of a material is always relative
lular response and little fluid result in interstitial thickening.
to the adjacent material. Since this guide is dedicated
Diseases that produce more fluid (edema, pus, hemorrhage)
to radiography and radio- is a given, we will use the term
often result in filling of air spaces. Lung patterns can be
opacity to describe the characteristic of a material to block
summarized as interstitial thickening, altered vascular size.
x-rays. Remember, it's all about relative opacity and opacity
bronchial thickening. and alveolar filling. Recognizing the
interfaces.
predominant lung pattern and making follow-up radiographs
 Detail on radiographs, as in photography, has nothing to
to monitor progress and response of disease aids in providing
do with the subject and everything to do with how the
the best pa tient care
image was created (e.g., exposure technique, type of film or
 More of these discussions are presented throughout the
detector, method of processing). It is important to determine
text. We are not just trying to be different or "buck the
whether indistinct margins on a radiograph are due to poor
system." We have found during our years of teaching vet-
detail or a clinical condition. When you describe ill-defined
erinary students, interns, residents, and practitioners that
 some of the classic terminology frequently causes confusion
that the radiograph is a poor-quality image. Pathology
and laborious memorization. We believe a simpler, more
may or may not be present on a poor-quality image. In the
 straightforward approach will help you make more accurate
abdomen it's all about opacity interfaces (between soft
radiographic diagnoses with less consternation. Enjoy!!!
tissue, fat, and gas) and it is important to state accurately
what you are seeing. When you think about radiography in
M.C. Muhlbauer
these correct terms, you will find it easier to understand
S.K. Kneller
what you are seeing and why you are seeing it.
xiv
Radiography of
the Dog and Cat
 Guide to Making and Interpreting Radiographs
Interpretation of Radiographs
Musculoskeleton  4
Trachea   19
 Evaluation of bone
4
Lungs  21
 Margination
4
 Patterns of lung disease  21
Opacity  4
Abdomen  27
Geometry  6 
 Effects of age, body condition, and conformation 27
Lesion distribution  6 
Extra-abdominal structures  27
 Evaluation of joints  6 
 Peritoneal and retroperitoneal spaces  27
Alignment of bones  6
Peritoneal fluid and gas 28
Joint space width  6
Retroperitoneal disease  29
Evaluation of soft tissue  8
Lymph nodes  31
Evaluation of axial skeleton  9
Liver  31
Spine   9
Gall bladder/biliary system  34
Head and neck 9
Spleen   34
Thorax  12
Pancreas  35
 Effects related to age, body condition,
Gastrointestinal tract   35
and conformation   12
Stomach  35
Thoracic wall  12
 Small intestine   36
Diaphragm  13
Large intestine  37
 Pleura and pleural space  13
Urinary tract  38
Peural effusion   13
 Kidneys and ureters  38 
 Pneumothorax  15
Urinary bladder  39
Hydropneumothorax  16 
Urethra   40 
 Peural masses and nodules  16 
Adrenal glands  40
Mediastinum  16 
Male genital system (prostate gland)  40
Cardiac silhouette (heart)   17
 Female genital system  41
Radiography of the Dog and Cat: Guide to Making and Interpreting Radiographs. First Edition. M.C. Muhlbauer and S.K. Kneller.
oul 'suos g Aa[m uor Aq EIoz Pausqnd oul 'suos g Aam uqor eioz @
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
 1. More detailed information is available in the Musculo-
Margination
skeleton, Thorax, and Abdomen chapters (chapters 4 through 6).
The less distinct the bone margin, the more active and
a. Normal radiographic anatomy is described in chapters
aggressive the disease process.
4 through 6.
 b. Possible etiologies for radiographic findings described
below are listed in the Differential Diagnoses section in
Sharpness of bone margin is not the same as shape of bone
border. An irregular border does not equal an ill-defined
chapters 4 through 6.
margin and a smooth border does not equal a well-defined
c. Clinical correlations and radiographic findings are
more thoroughly discussed in the Diseases and Disorders 
margin. Assess how easily the bone margin can be traced 
with a pencil to determine its sharpness.
section in chapters 4 through 6.
2. A glossary is available for definitions and quick information.
Opacity
Musculoskeleton
√ At least 30%-50% of bone must be altered before a
change is visible on radiographs.
"Bone is deposited and removed according ro the stresses placed on the
√ Active bone destruction may be visible in 5 to 7 days on 
frame"(Wolff's Law).
radiographs.
Evaluation of bone
V Active bone production may be visible in 10 to 14 days,
1. Different bone diseases commonly present with similar
possibly sooner in rapidly growing. immature animals.
radiographic findings.
2. Diagnosis usually requires information in addition to
1. Decreased bone opacity (bone loss):
radiographs (e.g., complete blood count, cytology. histopa-
a. Osteopenia (radiologic term for "too little bone").
thology).
1) Bone to soft tissue contrast is poor.
3. Current disease may be obscured by preexisting condi-
2) Cortices become thin and faint.
tions (i.e., degenerative joint disease).
3) Corticomedullary contrast is poor.
4) Trabeculae in cancellous bone appear larger and
more porous ("coarse trabecular pattern") due to loss
of fine boney structures.
Box 1.1 Checklist for interpreting orthopedic
5) A "double cortical line" may be visible due to intra-
radiographs.
cortical resorption of bone.
6) May be general (i.e., systemic disease) or regional
√ At least two orthogonal radiographs
V Radiographs are those of the animal being evaluated 
(i.e., disuse atrophy of a limb).
7) General osteopenia (e.g..
√ Technique:
hyperparathyroidism,
 nutritional deficiency) typically affects vertebrae first.
Exposure
followed by mandible and then long bones.
 Positioning 
8) Regional osteopenia (e.g., limb immobilization) tends 
√ Animal's age, body condition, and conformation
V Bones:
to be more severe in distal portion of limb.
√Margination
b. Osteolysis
√Opacity
1) Pattern of osteolysis reflects aggressiveness of disease
√Geometry
process.
√ Lesion distribution
 b) Moth-eaten pattern (more aggressive).
√ Joints:
c) Permeative pattern (most aggressive).
√Alignment
 width of joint space
2) Osteolytic pattern is assessed by several criteria
 Periarticular findings
(Table 1.1):
 Lesion distribution
a) Size, number, and location of lesions.
b) Margination (less distinct margin = more aggres-
√ Soft tissues:
sive disease process).
√Thickness
√ Opacity
c) Zone of transition between normal and diseased
bone (longer and less distinct zone = more aggres-
√ Reassess based on clinical, physical, and laboratory findings
sive disease).
√ Prioritize list of differential diagnoses
 d) Rate of change on subsequent radiographs (greater
V Make follow-up radiographs (assess rate of change)
change = more aggressive).
CHAPTER 1 Interpretation of Radiographs
Table 1.1 Patterns of osteolysis
 Pattern 
Geographic
Moth-eaten
Permeative
Radiographic
appearance
Figure 1.1 Mixed pattern of
Size, number of
Large, 5olitary (over 10 mm)
 Small, multiple 
Tiny, numerous (1-2 mm)
osteolysis. An aggressive disease
lesions
(3-10mm)
process causing peripheral permeative
Margination
Vell-defined
 Poorly-defined
Ill-defined 
osteolysis with an inner mmoth-eaten 
pattern and central geographic
Zone of transition
Short, well-defined 
Long, poorly-defined Diffuse, nondefined
pattern (latter due to coalescence of 
Cortical
Normal or thinned 
Irregular thinning.
Thin, indistinct, often disrupted 
moth-eaten osteolysis).
remodeling 
 sommetimes disrupted 
Osteosclerosis
May surround lesion 
 Absent 
Absent
Type of lesion 
 Benign, nonaggressive
Aggressive
Very aggressive
Examples
 Bone cyst, pressure 
Tumor, osteomyelitis 
 Malignant tumor, severe
remodeling
 osteomyelitis
3) Mixed patterns of osteolysis are common, espe-
1) Whenever periosteum is separated from cortex
cially with aggressive diseases. As long as disease is
(and maintains blood supply) it will produce mineral
active and unchecked, bone destruction will continue
in an attempt to fill the subperiosteal space. Mineral
and bone margins will remain ill-defined.
is produced perpendicular to periosteum (Stages of 
a) Aggressive diseases typically begin as a perme-
periosteal response are described in the Diseases and
ative pattern of osteolysis and progress to moth-
Disorders section of chapter 4) .
eaten and a central geographic pattern (Figure l.1).
2) Margin of periosteal response reflects activity of
4) Some diseases may not present with visible osteoly-
disease process (less distinct margin = more active
sis on intitial radiographs (e.g., rib tumors). Serial
disease process).
radiographs aid in characterization of disease process.
3) In addition to margination, periosteal new bone is
2. Increased bone opacity (bone production):
assessed for:
a. Osteosclerosis (hardening or increased density of bone).
a) Size and shape.
1) May be localized (e.g.. degenerative joint disease)
b) Maturity (more organized bone = more chronic
or diffuse (e.g., osteopetrosis).
disease process).
 2) Localized osteosclerosis typically appears as a thin
c) Rate of change on serial radiographs.
rim of increased opacity adjacent to a lesion (as body
4) If periosteum is only mildly elevated, as may occur
attempts to wall-off disease) or subchondral near a
with a benign process (e.g. bone bruise, stable healing
joint surface.
fracture) or in early stages of disease, mineral deposits 
3) Osteopetrosis results in thickened long bone corti-
quickly fill the subperiosteal space.
ces and a narrowed medullary space.
a) New bone appears smooth-bordered and even
b. Periosteal response:
in shape (Figure 1.2).
b) Disease process may be active (ill-defined margins)
or inactive (well-defined margins; Figure 1.3).
 Periosteal response is an attempt to heal bone, not a reaction
5) With a more aggressive disease process (e.g., neo-
to disease.
plasia, severe osteomyelitis), periosteum is continu-
ously pushed away from cortex and there is insufficient
5
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 1.2 Active mild or early periosteal
Figure 1.3 Inactive periosteal response due to
Figure 1.4 Active periosteal response with
response. Smmooth but ill-defined new bone
benign disease. Smmooth new bone production is 
aggressive disease. lrregular new bone is visible
production is visible along right cortex of long
visible along right cortex of long bone diaphysi5;
along right cortex of long bone diaphysis;
bone diaphysis; margins of new bone are hazy
margins of new bone are well-defined (easy to
margins are ill-defined. Mixed pattern of
and il-cdefined (difficult to trace with a pencil.
trace with a pencil.
 osteolysis is present in adjacent bone.
time for mineral deposits to fill the subperiosteal
5. Sites and extent of lesions provide clues to underlying
space; margins remain irregular, ill-defined, and often
etiology (see Differential Diagnoses in chapter 4).
are disrupted (Figure l.4).
6) As long as disease is active, mineral deposits remain
Evaluation of joints
ill-defined, forming perpendicular to periosteum.
Alignment of bones
 a) When disease becomes less active and healing can
1. Subluxation is partial loss of contact between articular
proceed, mineral deposits become more opaque, bet-
surfaces (i.e., partial dislocation).
ter defined and begin to blend with cortex (Table 1.2).
2. Luxation is complete loss of contact between articular
b) Over next few weeks (if disease remains inac-
surfaces (i.e., dislocation).
tive) mineral deposits continue to mature into
organized, woven bone with a trabecular pattern
Joint space width
and a well-defined margin.
1. On radiographs. joint space width typically represents thick-
c) Normal stresses can then act to gradually remodel
ness of articular cartilage as opposed to volume of joint fluid.
new bone to eventually resemble parent bone.
2. Widened joint space in non-weight-bearing images may
result from joint effusion, intra-articular mass, or loss of
Geometry
subchondral bone.
1. Alterations in shape, length, angulation, and diameter
3. Narrowed joint space most commonly results from loss
may result from numerous etiologies (see Differential Diag-
of articular cartilage.
t iaideuo ui siapiosia pue saseasia pue sasou
4. Joint space width is most accurately assessed with animal
2. Normal anatomic variations must be differentiated from
weight-bearing and x-ray beam directed perpendicular to joint.
 pathology. Knowledge of normal anatomy, comparison radio-
a. Distribution of lesions:
graphs of contralateral limb (or a known normal limb), and
1) Single joint (monarticular).
references (books, anatomic models, box of bones) aid in
2) Multiple joints (oligoarticular = 2 to 5 joints, poly-
diagnosis.
articular = 6 or more joints).
3) Unilateral or bilateral.
Lesion distribution
4) Pelvic limbs only.
1. Monostotic (all in same bone) or polyostotic (multiple
5) Tarsi and/or carpi only.
bones affectedy.
6) One limb only.
2. Unilateral or bilateral.
7) Symmetry (bilateral lesions may be symmetrical or
3. Symmetrical or asymmetrical.
asymmetrical) .
4. Epiphyseal, physeal, metaphyseal, diaphyseal
b. Periarticular findings:
6
CHAPTER 1 Interpretation of Radiographs
Table 1.2 Activity and aggressiveness of bone disease
Lesion 
Active and Aggressive
Active and Nonaggressive
 Active and Chronic
Inactive and
Nonaggressive
Radiographic
Appearance
Margination
ll-defined
Ill-defined 
Ill-defined
Well-clefined
 Size and shape of
Large: irregular
 Mediumm; srnooth or irregular 
 Organized (maturing)
 Small; smooth 
new bone*
Osteolysis
Often severe:; ill-cefined 
Well-cdefined or absent 
Well-cdefined or absent 
Usually absent 
 Appearance of cortex
Destructive rernodeling
 Displaced, thinned, or normal 
 Normal, displaced, or thinned 
Normal
Soft tissue swelling
Moderate to Severe
Mild
 Mild or absent
Absent
Rate of change
Rapid
Slow
 Minimal 
None
Zone of transition
Long and poorly demarcated 
 Indistinct but visible
 Well-cdefined 
Well-cdefined 
Osteosclerosis
 Absent
Ill-cdefined
Vell-cdefined
Vell-defined
Examples
 Malignant neoplasia, severe
Healing fracture, low grade
 Healing fracture, low grade
Healed fracture
 osteomyelitis 
 osteomyelitis 
osteomyelitis 
* NOTE: All lesions start small, but active and aggressive lesions tend to grow quickly, while active and chronic lesions tend to enlarge slowly over a
long period of timne.
l) Osteophytes and enthesophytes are common with
chronic disease (Figure 1.5):
a) Appear as well-defined, sharply marginated.
bony projections ("bone spurs").
b) Osteophytes form at peripheral margins of artic-
ular cartilage, in non-weight-bearing areas.
c) Enthesophytes occur at damaged attachment
sites of tendons, ligaments, joint capsules, or fascia.
forming in direction of natural pull.
d) Osteophytes and enthesophytes are slow to
change, but will grow over time.
e) Conditions that may be mistaken for a bone
spur:
1) Normal prominence of bone (especially in
Figure 1.5 Osteophytes and enthesophytes. A. Normal joint. B.
chondrodystrophic breeds, usually bilateral).
Degenerative joint dlisease with osteophytes (o) forming at periphery of
2) Normal bony protrusion at attachment site of 
articular cartilage and enthesophytes (E) forming at attachments of joint
tendon or ligament.
capsule.
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Box 1.2 Radiographic signs of joint disease.
●Malalignment of bones (may be mimicked by poor positioning)
●Joint capsule distension (e.g., joint effusion, synovial
thickening)
●Altered width of joint space (widened or narrowed)
Osteophytes (form at edges of articular margins)
· Enthesophytes (form at attachment sites)
Subchondral osteosclerosis or osteolysis
·Soft tissue mineralization (periarticular or intra-articular)
● Intra-articular gas (vacuum phenomenon)
Figure 1.6 Degenerative joint disease. Joint space is narrowed due to
lo5s of articular cartilage. A. Subchondral bone is increased in opacity
(osteosclerosis). B. Focal osteolysis (cystlike lesions) in subchondral bone
Box 1.3 Neoplasia vs. osteomyelitis*: General
due to erosion. Normal joint is depicted in Figure 1.5A.
tendencies regarding osseous remodeling.
●Neoplasia tends to be more destructive (osteolytic) than
C. Alterations to subchondral bone (e.g., osteosclerosis.
osteomyelitis.
osteolysis/erosions, cystic lesions; Figure 1.6).
● Osteomyelitis tends to be more productive (larger periosteal
d. Soft tissue abnormalities (see Differential Diagnoses in
response) than neoplasia.
chapter 4):
● Neoplastic periosteal response tends to be more irregular and
1) Swelling
less defined than osteomyelitis.
a) Intracapsular (e.g., joint effusion, tumor) is con-
· Cortical destruction tends to be more severe with neoplasia
fined to limits of joint capsule.
than with osteomyelitis
b) Extracapsular (e.g. ligament damage, hema-
● Codman's triangle tends to be more common with neoplasia
 toma, tumor) extends beyond limits ofjoint ca psule.
than with osteomyelitis.
c) Combination of both.
●Neoplasia tends to remain local while osteomyelitis often
2) Atrophy may be present due to disuse (compare
spreads along length of bone.
with contralateral limb).
●Sequestrum formation tends to occur with osteomyelitis but is
3) Mineralization
 rare with neoplasia.
a) May be intra-articular or extra-articular.
Aalelan leaa ot puat (senau! ep-O) sydeope leuas *
b) Possible etiologies include bone or cartilage frag-
little change with osteomyelitis and more significant change
ment, chronic inflammation, or tumor
with neoplasia.
4) Emphysema may be caused by penetrating wound.
* Cytology/histopathology is necessary for definitive diagnosis.
infection with gas-producing organism, or vacuum
phenomenon.
b. Absence of swelling near a suspect bone lesion sug-
Evaluation of soft tissue
 gests normal anatomic variation or inactive disease.
1. Alterations in soft tissues are useful to characterize bone
c. Localized, well-defined, soft tissue swelling may rep-
lesions and differentiate normal anatomy from pathology
resent a mass.
(see Differential Diagnoses in chapter 4).
1) Most soft tissue masses cannot be differentiated on
2. Soft tissue abnormalities usually accompany and often
survey radiographs.
precede bone disease.
2) Fatty masses (e.g., lipoma, liposarcoma) are an
3. Musculoskeletal disorders (e.g., pain, lameness) may be
exception because they are less opaque than soft tissue.
limited to soft tissues (e.g. sprain, strain, bruise, inflamma-
6. Decreased thickness (deficit):
tion).
a. Disuse atrophy (e.g, pain, immobilization, paralysis)
4. Comparison radiographs of contralateral limb often aid
is common with many bone diseases.
in recognition of soft tissue anomalies.
b. Absence of tissue occurs with severe tra uma or surgery.
5. Increased thickness (swelling):
7. Abnormal opacity:
a. Swelling accompanies most active bone diseases (due
a. Mineralization may result from chronic inflammation,
to inflammation, hemorrhage, edema, tumor, etc.) and
trauma, tumor, metabolic disease, or presence of foreign
displaces and obscures fascial planes.
material.
CHAPTER 1 Interpretation of Radiographs
b. Gas (emphysema) may be present at site of a penetrat-
c. Altered opacity may be general (e.g., osteoporosis.
ing wound, injection, fistulous tract, or due to infection
osteopetrosis) or local (e.g., tumor, infection).
with gas-producing organism.
5. Dorsal spinal articulations:
a. These are synovial joints that are subject to degenera-
Evaluation of axial skeleton
tive joint disease.
Spine
b. Dorsal articular facets normally are smooth, well-
Technique
defined, and similar between vertebrae.
1. Proper positioning is essential for accurate interpretation.
c. Width of intervertebral joint spaces should be similar
a. Lateral radiograph:
between adjacent vertebrae.
1) Transverse spinal processes are superimposed.
6. Spinal canal:
2) Intervertebral foramina are superimposed.
a. Normal widening occurs at cervical and lumbar
3) Rib heads are superimposed.
intumescence.
4) Ilial wings are superimposed.
b. Abnormal widening may result from pressure remod-
b. Ventrodorsal (VD) radiograph:
eling (e.g., spinal cord tumor).
C. Abnormal narrowing may represent stenosis (congen-
bodies.
ital or acquired).
2) Equal distance from dorsal spinous processes to
d. Ventral aspect of spinal canal normally is smooth
lateral body walls).
and continuous (NOTE: vertebrae move slightly to allow
3) Ilial wings are symmetrical.
bending of spine).
e. Increased opacity may occur with herniated disc
Evaluation of spine
material.
1. See Diseases and Disorders and Differential Diagnoses
7. Intervertebral disc spaces:
sections in chapter 4 ("Musculoskeletal") for specific condi-
 a. Spaces normally appear similar in width to adjacent
tions.
spaces (see Normal Radiographic Anatomy in chapter 4).
2. Alignment of vertebrae:
(NOTE: disc spaces at periphery of x-ray beam commonly
a. Poor positioning may mimic altered alignment.
appear narrowed due to distortion.)
b. Scoliosis = lateral curvature (TIP: "Snake like").
b. Increased opacity most commonly is caused by min-
c. Lordosis = ventral curvature (TIP: rhymes with "low,"
eralized intervertebral disc.
"carrying a Load").
c. Decreased opacity may result from vacuum phenom-
d. Kyphosis = dorsal curvature (TIP: rhymes with "high."
enon.
"mountain peak K2").
8. Soft tissues are examined dorsal, ventral, and lateral to
e. Fracture/subluxation/luxation.
spine for alterations in thickness and opacity.
3. Number of vertebrae:
a. Altered number usually is without clinical significance.
Head and neck
b. Important to consider when identifying anatomic land-
1. Although CT and MRI are used extensively for skull
marks used in surgical and advanced imaging procedures.
imaging. radiography is still useful.
c. Altered number of vertebrae may represent a true
increase/decrease or an apparent change.
Technique
l) True alterations are not uncommon in some
1. Radiography of the skull requires high-quality images
animals (such as cats and Dachshunds with 6 or 8
and careful evaluation.
lumbar vertebrae).
2. Exposure may need to be adjusted for different thickness
2) Apparent alterations are common due to presence
of skull or to adequately visualize soft tissues.
of congenital vertebral anomalies:
 3. Symmetry and absence of rotation are important because
a) Absence of ribs on Tl3 appears as 12 thoracic
and 8 lumbar vertebrae.
one side of skull usually is compared with the other. If
b) Riblilke structures on Ll appears as 14 thoracic
correct positioning is not possible, take malpositioning into
account.
and 6 lumbar vertebrae.
d. Four sacral vertebrae are sometimes present.
4. Shape, margination, and opacity of each vertebra.
Evaluation of skull
a. Normal variations in shape exist along each spinal
1. Considerable variation exists in normal appearance of
region (see Normal Radiographic Anatomy in chapter 4) .
skull among the many dog and cat breeds.
b. Altera tions in shape of vertebrae may represent devel-
2. Reference materials such as anatomy and radiology
opmental anomalies (e.g., hemivertebrae, transitional
textbooks, bone specimens, and normal radiographs aid in
vertebrae) or acquired disease (e.g., fracture, tumor).
interpreta tion.
6
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
3. Due to superimposition of many bones and extensive
d. Region IV
compartmentalization, a systematic approach is essential
1) Soft tissues: skin, subcutaneous, muscles of head.
when evaluating skull radiographs:
2) Soft palate.
a. Region I (Figure 1.7):
3) Nasopharynx, oropharynx, pharynx
1) Mandibles: horizontal and vertical rami, condyloid
4) Retropharyngeal space.
process, temporomandibular joints (TMJ), teeth, alve-
5) Larynx: hyoid bones, laryngeal cartilages.
olar bone, symphysis.
6) External auditory canals.
2) Maxillae: hard palate, teeth, alveolar bone.
7) Cervical spine.
 3) Zygomatic arch: zygomatic bone, squamous termpo-
ral bone, retroglenoid process of TMJ.
Nasal cavity and frontal sinuses
b. Region II (Figure 1.8):
1. Evaluated for alterations in opacity and bony structures
 1) Nasal cavity and turbinates.
(Figure 1.10).
2) Vomer bone (nasal septum).
a. Increased opacity may result from presence of foreign
3) Ethmoturbinates and cribiform plate.
material, fluid, or mass, which also tend to obscure
4) Frontal sinuses and supraorbital process.
normal turbinate patterns.
5) 0rbit.
b. Decreased opacity usually is caused by osteolysis.
c. Region I (Figure 1.9):
2. Adjacent structures may be involved (e.g., frontal sinuses.
1) Cranial vault: frontal, parietal, occipital, temporal
frontal and maxillary bones, cranial vault, teeth, soft tissues).
bones.
3. Findings often are nonspecific but aid in determining
2) Petrous temporal bone (inner ear).
location and extent of lesion(s).
3) Osseous bullae (middle ear).
4. Aggressive lesions (e.g., neoplasia, severe osteomyelitis):
4) Occipital condyles and foramen magnum.
a. Commonly present with increased soft tissue opacity
in turbinates and sinuses due to edema, inflammation,
 tumor cells, or/and accumulation of fluid.
b. Destruction of nasal turbinates causes loss of fine
boney pattern (easiest to see on open mouth ventrodorsal
ra diograph).
c. Nasal septum may be deviated due to expanding tumor
mass.
d. May see osteolysis of overlying nasal, maxillary. or
 frontal bone(s), often with periosteal response.
e. External soft tissue swelling or mass may be present.
f. In general, unilateral aggressive lesions are more likely
to be neoplastic and bilateral lesions are more likely to
represent chronic inflammation, but this is not always
Figure 1.7 Region I for systematic evaluation of skull radiographs.
the case (cytology/histopathology usually is necessary for
A. Lateral radiograph. B. DV/VD radliograph
definitive diagnosis).
3
Figure 1.8 Region ll for systematic evaluation of skull radiograph5.
Figure 1.9 Region ll for systematic evaluation of skull radiographs
A. Lateral radiograph. B. DV/D radliograph.
 A. Lateral radiograph. B. DVVD radiograph
10
CHAPTER 1 Interpretation of Radiographs
C
Figure 1.11 Nasopharyngeal mass in a cat (lateral radliograph). Arrow
points to increased opacity in nasopharynx, caudal to molar teeth
(Adapted fror Owens and Biery, Radiographic Interpretation for the
Smaff Animal Clinician, 2nd ed. Baltimore: Williars & Wilkins, 1999.)
a. Increased opacity may be caused by presence of swell-
ing. mass, or foreign material.
Figure 1.10 Nasal cavity lesions (open-mnouth VD radiographs).
 b. Retropharyngeal disease may displace larynx ventrally.
A. Normal. B. Unilateral diffuse increase in opacity in left nasal cavity.
C. Focal increase in opacity in left nasal cavity. D. Osteolysis in left nasal
c. As a rough estimate, normal distance between dorsal
cavity.
edge of cricoid cartilage and ventral aspect of C2 is
approximately equal to length of C3 on a properly posi-
tioned lateral radiograph (Figure 1.12).
5. Masses or foreign objects may be visible in nasopharynx
(Figure 1.ll), caudal to last maxillary molar tooth (true lateral
radiograph). Exposure may need to be increased for ade-
quate visualization, and opening the mouth aids in detection
(rotates vertical mandibular away from area of interest).
Teeth
1. Congenital and acquired anomalies of teeth (e.g., size,
shape, number) are common in dogs and cats and may or
may not be clinically significant.
2. Congenital anomalies are more common in brachyce-
phalic breeds.
3. Abnormal number of teeth may be symmetric or
asymmetric.
Pharynx and larynx
 1. These areas often are included on radiographs of the head.
 2. Pharynx and larynx are visible when they contain air.
3. Poor positioning (e.g. flexed neck, rotation) can displace 
Figure 1.12 Normal width of retropharyngeal space (lateral
Jo ynpi yoau ot albue asel Aatewixoudde s! peah (ydennoipe
larynx and distort size and opacity of retropharyngeal space.
retropharyngeal space (w) is measured from dorsal edge of cricoid 
Suspected abnormalities should be confirmed with a well-
cartilage to ventral plane of C2. Normal width should not exceed the
 positioned and properly exposed lateral radiograph.
length of C3 (L). (Acapted frorm O'Brien, Radliographic Diagnosis of
4. Pharynx and larynx are evaluated for opacity, position.
1861 shapunes 8m ediapelyd 1e pue bo0 ayt u siaposa jeuwopgs
size, and shape.
p. 124. Special thanks to Dr. T. R. O'Brien.)
11
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
 8. Lung opacity in heavily muscled animals may appear
Thorax
increased.
9. Wet or dirty hair coat may mimic intrathoracic lesions.
"Radiography does supplement,not supplant,physical examination."
10. Bronchointerstitial markings commonly are increased in
- Peter Suter, DVM
older animals.
 Effects related to age, body condition,
Thoracic wall
and conformation
1. Evaluated for symmetry, width, and opacity.
1. Obesity may create the appearance of increased lung
 2. Widening may be general (e.g. obesity, edema) or local
opacity, cardiomegaly, and widened mediastinum.
(e.g., lipoma, tumor).
2. Emaciation may mimic overinflated lungs and microcardia.
3. Alterations in opacity may be due to presence of gas.
3. Immature animal hearts are relatively large in relation to
mineral, metal, or superimposition of adjacent structure (see
size of thoracic cavity.
lists of Differential Diagnoses, chapter 5).
4. Lungs in immature animals may normally be increased
4. Ribs are assessed for number, size, margination, opacity.
in interstitial opacity.
position, and spacing.
5. Thymic tissue may be visible in cranial mediastinum of
a. Alteration in number of ribs usually is congenital and
dogs up to 6 months of age and in cats up to 2 years of age.
incidental; however, lysis caused by infection or tumor
6. Cardiac silhouettes of deep-chested dogs are more upright
must be ruled out.
and narrow.
b. Expansile remodeling may occur with healing rib frac-
7. Cardiac silhouettes of barrel-chested dogs are more
ture, tumor, or infection.
rounded and wide, with a more dorsally positioned trachea.
c. Rib margins may be indistinct due to motion artifact
or active remodeling.
d. Abnormal rib opacity may be caused by fracture, oste-
olysis, or/and periosteal response.
e. Position and spacing of ribs may be altered by trauma.
Box 1.4 Checklist for interpreting thoracic
mass effect, expansion of thorax, or muscle contractions.
f. Costal cartilages begin to mineralize at a few months
radiographs.
of age and can present with a variety of patterns, often
√ At least two orthogonal radiographs
nonuniform in appearance (Figure l.l3). Normal costo-
√ Radiographs are those of animal being evaluated
chondral junctions can become quite large and may be
√ Technique:
mistaken for pathology (also see Normal Radiographic
√Exposure
Anatomy in chapter 5).
√ Positioning
√Inspiration
 Motion artifact
V Animal's age, body condition, and conformation
√ Extrathoracic structures:
√ Caudal cervical region and thoracic inlet
 Subcutaneous tissues
√Cranial abdomen
Thoracic limbs
 Thoracic wall(including spine, sternum, and ribs)
√Diaphragm
√ Pleura and pleural space
 Mediastinum
Esophagus
√ Cardiovascular structures
√ Trachea and mainstem bronchi
√Lungs
Figure 1.13 Normal costochondral junctions. A. Soft tissue opacity 
V Reassess based on clinical, physical, and laboratory findings 
costal cartilage in an irmmature animal. B. Mineralization of cartilage.
√ Prioritize list of differential diagnoses
shouaoaay ano ' 'ahe jo shruou may e ie suibag yao y
 Serial radiographs to monitor progress and response to 
 pattern of age-related mineralization. D. Large costochondral junction 
therapy
that may be mistaken for pathology. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 
1999.)
12
CHAPTER 1 Interpretation of Radiographs
g. Detection of rib lesions can be difficult, and altering
Pleura and pleural space
one's viewing perspective may help:
Pleural effusion
1) Oblique/tangential radiographs can be used to
1. Type of pleural fluid cannot be distinguished on radio-
image lesions in profile.
 graphs (see Differential Diagnoses in chapter 5).
2) Orient radiographs upside down or sideways to
2. Interlobar fissure lines (pleural fissure lines) are earliest
draw attention to ribs.
'un se readde pu ads land un pi ssaxa jo uis
3) Invert black and white scale on digital images to
curved, soft tissue opacity lines between lung lobes (Figures
highlight ribs.
1.15 and 1.16).
4) Serial radiographs may document periosteal response
a. Fluid creates fissure lines that are wider peripherally
that was not evident on initial study
and taper toward the hilus (Figure l.17).
5. Sternum is assessed for shape, alignment, opacity, and
b. Pleural thickening creates lines that are uniform in
margination.
thickness and do not taper.
a. Abnormal shape may be congenital (e.g., pectus exca-
c. Fat (obese animals) can fill interlobar fissures and
vatum) or acquired (e.g., fracture, luxation).
create lines that are wider centrally and taper peripher-
b. Alignment may be altered by trauma, mass effect, or
ally ("reverse fissure lines").
overstretching the animal during positioning for
d. Mineralized costal cartilages may be mistaken for
radiography.
pleural fissure lines (especially in cats).
C. Altered opacity and margination typically is caused by
3. Detection of small pleural effusions may be easier on a
tumor or infection (Figure l.14).
VD radiograph or on radiographs made during expiration.
d. Common aging changes along sternum include
Horizontal beam radiography can also aid in detection.
bone spurs at edges of sternebrae and mineralization of 
4. Radiographic findings with increasing volume of pleural
intersternebral cartilages (more common in large breed
fuid (Figure 1.18):
dogs).
a. Lung borders retract from thoracic wall, spine, sternum.
6. Vertebrae are assessed for alterations in shape, alignment,
and diaphragm (Figure 1.20).
 opacity, and margination (see chapter 4, "Musculoskeletal,"
 b. With large effusions, lung lobes will be small and may
for discussion).
appear leaflike.
c. Vascular and bronchial markings do not extend to
Diaphragm
thoracic wall.
1. Evaluated for margination, position, and shape.
2. Margin may become indistinct or obscured by hernia.
pleural fluid, mediastinal disease, or caudal lung disease.
3. Shape and position of diaphragm are affected by
animal's position during radiography and pathology in
 abdominal or thoracic cavity (see lists of Differential Diag-
noses, chapter 5).
MR
Figure 1.15 Pleural fissure lines (lateral radiograph). White lines indicate
interlobar fissures; (1) between cranial and middle lung lobes, (2)
Figure 1.14 Sternal lesion (lateral radiograph). White arrow indicate5
between cranial and caudal lobes, (3) between midldlle and caudal lobes;
local soft tissue swelling and osteolysis of 4th sternabra. Intrathoracic soft 
tissue swelling is evident. Such lesions may result from tumor or infection.
and Biery 1999.)
13
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
小
CrV
1
T
I
Cay
Figure 1.16 Pleural fissure lines (DV/VD radliograph). White lines
Figure 1.17 Types of interlobar fissure lines. (1) Fat between lung lobes
 indicate interlobar fissures; (1) between right cranial and mniddle lung
anssy asaaai, palln sauauos) Aeayduad sadet pue Aeuan apm s!
lobes, (2) between right caudal and micddle lobes, (3) between cranial
line"). (2) Fluid in pleural space creates lines that are wide peripherally
and caudal segments of left cranial lobe, (4) between left cranial and caudal 
oun ane ieyl saull satean buuaaiyn leinald (e) Aeuan jadet pue
lobes. CrV = cranioventral medliastinal reflection; CaV = caudoventral 
and thin (may be indistinguishable from small pleural effusion). (Adapted 
fromm Owens and Biery 1999.)
10
E
Figure 1.18 Pleural effusion. A. Lateral radiograph, a large volume of pleural fluid obscures the heart and other intrathoracic soft tissues; air-filled 
trachea and large bronchi remmain visible. B. VD radiograph, bilateral pleural effusion is visible in interlobar fissures and between lung and thoracic wall
(Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
d. Increasing opacity in thoracic cavity.
i. Cranial mediastinum may appear widened due to
e. Costophrenic angles become rounded and indistinct.
summation with adjacent fluid.
f. Caudolateral lung margins appear blunted.
j. Cardiac and diaphragmatic borders become obscured;
g. Ventral lung margin becomes scalloped and outlined
diaphragm may be caudally displaced.
by fluid (dorsal to sternum).
5. Rounding of lung lobe borders suggests pleural fibrosis.
h. Cardiac silhouette and trachea are dorsally displaced
which restricts lung expansion and can lead to lung rupture
(depending on volume of fluid).
during rapid re-expansion.
14
CHAPTER 1 Interpretation of Radiographs
Figure 1.19 Pheumothorax. Lung borders are retracted from thoracic wall and gas opacity is present in pleural space. Lungs are increased in opacity
cue to partial atelectasis and heart is dorsally displaced away from sternum. A. Lateral radiograph. B. DV radiograph. (Acdapted from Owens and Biery
1999.)
6. Asymmetric or unilateral pleural effusion occurs with
A
B
C
inflammatory conditions, which obstruct mediastinal fenes-
trations and may cause a mediastinal shift away from fluid.
7. Removal of pleural fluid and repeating radiographs aids
in detection of lesions.
 8. Lung parenchyma may appear increased in opacity due
recumbency. fluid is dependent and "up" lung is better
inflated): however, pulmonary vessels remain well-defined
with pleural fluid and are obscured by parenchymal disease.
9. See Pleural Effusion in the Diseases and Disorders section
of chapter 5 for additional discussion.
Figure 1.20 Pleural space; L = lung. (A) Norrmal; lung borders extend
Pneumothorax
to thoracic wall. (B) Pleural effusion; lung border is retracted and fluid
1. Lung borders are retracted from thoracic wall and gas
opacity is present in pleural space. (C) Pneumothorax; lung border i5 
' i u bi' i s ads d un ssad s o
separated from thoracic wall by ga5. (Adapted from Owens and Biery
2. Vascular and bronchial markings do not extend to tho-
1999.)
racic wall.
expand.
8. Diaphragm may be caudally displaced and flattened
4. Variable separation of cardiac silhouette from sternum,
(depending on volume of pleural gas).
 depending on volume of pleural gas.
9. Cranial margin of diaphragm usually is sharper due to
 5. Ventral lung border may appear thin or scalloped (dorsal
contrast with pleural gas.
to sternum}.
10. Detection of a small pneumothorax may be easier on
 6. Thoracic cavity may be expanded and decreased in
dorsoventral (Dv)  radiograph  and  on  radiographs  made
opacity (may require lower exposure technique to produce
during expiration. Horizontal beam radiography also aids in
quality images).
detection.
7. Mediastinum becomes more movable and may be dis-
1l. See Diseases and Disorders in chapter 5 for further dis-
placed (mediastinal shift).
cussion of pneumothorax.
15
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
 12. Tension pneumothorax is an emergency situation:
B
C
a. Thoracic cavity is greatly expanded.
b. Lung lobes are collapsed to a very small size and often
are abnormal in shape.
C. Heart and caudal vena cava appear small.
d. Severe caudal displacement of diaphragm ("tented" or 
"scalloped" diaphragm on DV/VD radiograph}.
e. If unilateral, mediastinum is shifted away from tension
pneumothorax.
13. Conditions that mimic pneumothorax are included in
Differential Diagnoses in chapter 5.
a. In cases of "pseudo-pneumothorax," lungs are not col-
lapsed and pulmonary markings extend to thoracic wall.
Figure 1.22 Pleural lesions. (A) Loculated pleural fluid. (B) Pulmonary
mass adjacent to thoracic wall. (C) Extrapleural mass with periosteal
Hydropneumothorax
response on rib, extrapleural sign, and extrathoracic mineralized ma55.
1. Both fluid and gas are present in the pleural space.
(Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
2. Soft tissue structures in dependent hemithorax ("down"
side) tend to be obscured by fluid, while those in nondepen-
dent hemithorax ("up" side) are outlined by gas.
Mediastinum
1. Mediastinum is evaluated for position, width, and opacity.
Pleural masses and nodules
 2. Altered position of mediastinum (mediastinal shift, Figure
1. Localized soft tissue opacity structures in pleural space.
1.23):
2. Usually easiest to see when x-ray beam is tangential to
a. Lateral displacement (toward right or left side) results
base of mass.
from asymmetric lung volume. pleural disease, or an
3. Pleural fluid is common and frequently obscures lesions
in trathoracic mass.
(repeat radiographs after removing fluid).
b. Mediastinal shift is a common physiologic occurrence
4. "Extrapleural sign" occurs with masses on thoracic wall
 during radiography due to recumbent atelectasis of depen-
(Figure 1.21):
dent (down) lung.
a. Mass bulges into thoracic cavity and displaces (indents)
c. Diaphragm usually is asymmetric:
adjacent lung.
1) Cranial displacement of hemidiaphragm results
b. May be caused by rib lesions, pleural masses, or
from poor lung inflation on that side.
trapped pleural fluid (Figure 1.22).
c. Margins of extrapleural mass taper cranially and cal-
dally to blend with thoracic wall.
d. Pleural fluid is absent unless mass breaks through
pleura into pleural space.
In
Extrapleural
Lung
11
Figure 1.23 Mediastinal shift (VD radliograph). Cardiac silhouette is
 (extrapleural) bulges into thoracic cavity; margins of mnass blend with
 slightly displaced to the right and right hemidliaphragr is further cranial
thoracic wall. Nodule in lung on right side; margins of nodule forrm acute
than left. Increased opacity in right lung is due to partial collapse
angles with thoracic wall.
(Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
16
CHAPTER 1 Interpretation of Radiographs
RA
RV
Figure 1.24 Pheumomediastinum (lateral radiograph). Free gas in
Figure 1.25 Positions of heart chammbers inferred by long and short
mediastinum outlines outer tracheal wall, cranial vena cava, and aorta.
cardiac axes (lateral radiograph). Long axis line extends from tracheal
enhancing their visibility. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
bifurcation to cardiac apex. Short axis line is perpendicular to long axi5.
near junction of caudal vena cava. RA = right atrium, LA = left atriumn,
RV = right ventricle, LV = left ventricle, Ao = aorta, CvC = caudal vena 
cava. (Adapted from Owen5 and Biery 1999.)
2) Caudal displacement of hemidiaphragm may be
caused by large intrathoracic mass or severe unilateral
pleural effusion/pneumothorax.
3. Altered width of mediastinum:
a. Obesity is most common cause of mediastinal widen-
ing.
2. Appearance is influenced by breed, age, phase of respira-
1) As a rule of thumb, cranial mediastinum should not
tion, position at time of radiography, and body condition
be wider than width of thoracic wall at same level
(see Normal Radiographic Anatomy in chapter 5).
(VD/DV radiograph).
3. Radiographs made while animal is healthy can provide a
b. Widened mediastinum can be caused by mass, fluid,
standard to compare with future radiographs of that animal.
or esophageal enlargement.
4. Heart disease must be differentiated from heart failure.
c. Free pleural fluid adjacent to mediastinum may mimic
5. Positions of cardiac chambers can be inferred from cardiac
widening.
axes (Figure 1.25).
4. Altered opacity of mediastinum:
6. Cardiac silhouette is evaluated for size, shape, position,
a. Decreased opacity most commonly is due to pneumo-
margination, and opacity.
mediastinum (Figure l.24).
7. Abnormal size and shape of cardiac silhouette:
1) Mediastinal structures not normally visible become
a. Vertebral heart size is objective means of roughly eval-
well-defined.
lating size of cardiac silhouette (Figure l.26).
 2) Free gas in mediastinum often extends into cervical
b. Enlargement may result from increased size of one or
fascia and subcutaneous tissues.
more cardiac chambers, excess pericardial fluid, or pres-
 b. Increased mediastinal opacity may result from inflam-
ence of herniated viscera or mass in pericardial sac.
mation or fluid.
1) Vertebral heart size is greater than 1l.0 in dogs and
c. Esophageal content may alter mediastinal opacity.
greater than 8.0 in cats.
1) Normal caudal esophagus often is visible on left
2) Trachea is dorsally displaced.
lateral radiographs as a horizontal band of soft tissue
3) Specific heart chamber enlargement occurs at
opacity between aorta and caudal vena cava.
known locations and creates a predictable shape to
cardiac silhouette (Figure l.27; see Diseases and Dis-
Cardiac silhouette (heart)
orders, chapter 5).
1. Cardiac silhouette represents pericardial sac and its
4) Radiographically evident cardiomegaly most often
con tents.
is due to right ventricular or left atrial enlargement.
17
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
c. Small cardiac silhouette typically results from hypovo-
8. Abnormal position of cardiac silhouette:
lemia:
a. Lung volume determines position 
ofcardiac
1) Pulmonary vessels, caudal vena cava, and aorta
silhouette.
usually are small.
b. Enlargement of mediastinal structures can cause dis-
sad) o u asaa aq a si (
placement (e.g.. megaesophagus)
lung pattern).
c. "Heart follows sternum":
1) Errors in positioning may be mistaken for displace-
hemoabdomen).
ment or abnormal shape of cardiac silhouette.
2) As little as 5-degree rotation can significantly alter
appearance of cardiac silhouette.
9. Indistinct cardiac silhouette margins:
a. Margin of cardiac silhouette normally is well-defined
due to air in adjacent lungs.
b. Indistinct or obscured margin may be due to motion
artifact, excess pericardial fat, pleural fluid, or adjacent
lung disease.
10. Abnormal opacity of cardiac silhouette:
a. May result from gas, fat, or mineralization in heart or
pericardial space.
1) Gas may be present due to displaced GI structures
 or pneumopericardium.
3) Mineralization is uncommon:
a) Heart valve mineralization tends to be small.
sharp. and linear.
b) Coronary artery mineralization tends to be cur-
vilinear.
1l. Pericardial disease:
Figure 1.26 Vertebral heart size (VHS, lateral radiograph). Length (L) of
cardiac silhouette (long axis) and width (w) of cardiac silhouette (short axis)
a. Fluid in pericardial space generally causes a globoid
are transposed along thoracic spine, beginning at cranial edge of T4. Number
 appearance to cardiac silhouette.
of vertebral bodies along each measurement is estirmated to 1/10 vertebra
1) Type of fluid cannot be distinguished on radio-
and acdded together to give VHS. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
graphs.
Ao
RA
PA
enlargerment. Ao = aorta, LA = left atrium, LV = left ventricle, RV = right ventricle, PA = pulmonary artery, RA = right atrium. (Adapted from Owens and
Biery 1999.)
18
CHAPTER 1 Interpretation of Radiographs
2) Cardiac tamponade (compression of heart by peri-
4. Abnormal position of trachea:
cardial fluid) can lead to right heart failure, depending
a. Trachea is fixed in position at larynx and base of heart
on rate and volume of fluid accumulation.
but is flexible and easily displaced in between (displace-
b. Abnormal content in pericardial sac (e.g., tumor,
ment may be dorsal, ventral, or to the right; aortic arch
abdominal viscera) may alter size, shape, and opacity of
prevents displacement of the caudal trachea to the lefty.
cardiac silhouette.
c. Thickening of pericardium (e.g., constrictive pericar-
ditis) may decrease size of cardiac silhouette.
Trachea
1. Trachea is examined for alterations in diameter, posi-
tion, opacity, and margination (easiest to evaluate on lateral
radiograph).
 2. Radiographic findings may not correlate with clinical signs.
3. Abnormal diameter of trachea:
a. Tracheal ratio compares tracheal width to width at
thoracic inlet (Figure 1.28):
A
-   o o  0   
ZB
brachycephalic dogs.
 2) Brachycephalic breeds: tracheal ratio should be
0.16 or greater.
3) Bulldogs: tracheal ratio should be 0.10 or greater.
b. Narrowing of trachea may be uniform (e.g., tracheal
hypoplasia) or segmental (e.g., tracheal collapse, stric-
ture, mass).
c. Tracheal collapse syndrome often is a dynamic condi-
tion, requiring both inspiratory and expiratory radio-
Figure 1.28 Tracheal ratio (TR: lateral radiograph). Width of trachea (B)
 gra phs for detection (Figure 1.29).
i5 dlivided by width of thoracic inlet (A) to give TR. A = distance between 
d. Trachea may appear falsely narrowed due to orienta-
cranioventral edge of T1 and craniodorsal edge of first sternebra
tion to x-ray beam and superimposition of dorsal tracheal
(M = manubrium). Normal TR: ≥0.20 (nonbulldog brachycephalic breeds)
membrane (Figure 1.30, Dr. Kichang Lee).
TR ≥0.16; bulldogs: TR ≥0.10). (Adapted from Owen5 and Biery 1999.)
Figure 1.29 Intrathoracic tracheal collapse syndrome (lateral radiographs). A. During inspiration trachea and mainstem bronchi are normal in diameter.
B. During expiration and increased intrathoracic pressure, caudal thoracic trachea and mainstem bronchi narrow (collapse). (Adapted from Owens and
Biery 1999.)
19
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
凸
B
pano Ayas si eayoe (smoe) yanoan buised sex y (yeiai eayoe jo ae leuoas so 'v ayoel jo bumoeu asiee oe anai
and is not uniform in width to x-ray bearm. B. Depiction of trachea as seen on lateral radiograph with lower black part of lumen below due to
5ummation of more air and lighter gray part of lurmen above (due to less summation of air and which may create false imnpression of narrowed tracheal
lumen). (Adapted from irnage by Dr. Kichang Lee, with perrnission and special thanks to Dr. Lee). C. Lateral radiograph of normal trachea with false
narrowing in cervical region.
b. Flexion of head and neck shortens distance between
6. Abnormal margination of trachea:
larynx and heart, causing trachea to bend dorsally and
a. Enhanced visualization of outer tracheal wall is due
to the right. The trachea is least confined in the cranial
to presence of adjacent gas:
thorax, allowing deviation. (Figure 1.31). Repeat radio-
1) Tracheal stripe sign: Intraluminal air in both esoph-
 graphs with head and neck extended to confirm position-
agus and trachea allows visualization of a thick, well-
ing artifact.
defined dorsal tracheal margin ("tracheal stripe") due
c. Trachea may be displaced by large mediastinal struc-
to summation of ventral wall of esophagus summates
tures (e.g., cardiomegaly, megaesophagus, mass; see Dif-
with dorsal wall of trachea. (Figure 1.32).
ferential Diagnoses, chapter 5).
2) Pneumomediastinum: outer margins of trachea
5. Increased opacity of trachea:
and other mediastinal structures (e.g., aorta, esopha-
a. May result from superimposition of esophagus or
gus. cranial vessels) appear sharp and well-defined
longus coli muscles, narrowing of tracheal lumen (false
(Figure 1.24).
or true narrowing). intraluminal foreign material, or
3) If only the "dorsal outer tracheal margin" is visible,
mural growths. Cartilagenous tracheal rings may
gas is present in esophagus (e.g., megaesophagus).
mineralize.
4) If both dorsal and ventral outer margins of trachea
are visible, gas is in mediastinum (pneumomediastinum).
b. Loss of visualization of tracheal margins may result
from rupture, collapse, severe inflammation,
Or
hemorrhage.
Figure 1.32 Tracheal stripe sign (lateral radiograph, collimated to heart
aueleadde ayl sateain eaype.t pue snbeydosa u jle leuiunjeul (aseg
Figure 1.31 Tracheal displacement caused by flexion of head and neck
of a thick, well-defined dorsal tracheal margin (white arrow), caused by
(lateral radiograph).
 5umnmation of ventral esophageal wall and dorsal tracheal wall
20
CHAPTER 1 Interpretation of Radiographs
Figure 1.33 Normal pulrnonary vessels. A. Right cranial artery (A) and vein (V) on left lateral radliograph. B. Right caudal pulrnonary vessel on VD radiograph;
vessel should be no widler than the 9th rib where they cross (summation of vessel and rib should make a square or "vertical" rectangle, not a *horizontal" rectangle.)
Lungs
Patterns of lung disease
1. Lungs respond to pathology in only a limited number of
 1. Lung patterns rarely are pathognomonic and frequently
ways: therefore, different pulmonary diseases can produce
are mixed.
 similar radiographic findings.
2. Pattern types are used to describe part of lung that is
2. Lung diseases tend to be dynamic. progressing and
predominately affected at the time; pulmonary vasculature.
regressing over time. Remember, radiographs represent only
bronchi, air spaces (alveoli), or lung intersitium.
a single instant in a disease process.
3. Serial radiographs aid in monitoring changing lung pat-
terns, progression of disease, and response to therapy.
1. Alterations in size, shape, distribution, or number of pul-
4. Lung lesions should be identifed on at least 2 orthogonal
monary vessels result from increased or decreased volume
radiographs and described by:
of blood or turbulent blood flow.
a. Predominant radiographic pattern:
2. Most common etiologies include congestive heart failure.
1) Vascular.
 hypovolemia, and heartworm disease (see Differential Diag-
2) Bronchial.
noses in chapter 5).
3) Alveolar.
3. Right cranial lobar vessels are evaluated on a left lateral
4) Nodular interstitial.
radiograph (Figures 1.33A and 1.34).
5) Unstructured interstitial.
4. Enlarged pulmonary vessels result from overcirculated
b. Distribution:
(hypervascular) lungs.
1) Local (confined to a single lung lobe).
a. Right cranial lobar vessels are wider than narrowest
2) Lobar (lung lobe margin is visible).
part of 4th rib on left lateral radiograph.
3) Diffuse (involving two or more lobes).
b. Caudal lobar vessels are wider than 9th rib where
4) General (involving all lung lobes).
vessel and rib cross on DV/VD radiograph.
5) Unilateral or bilateral.
6) Symmetrical or asymmetrical.
extend further into lung periphery (this finding is signif-
7) Hilar, central, or peripheral.
cant only if vessels are actually enlarged).
 8) Cranial or caudal, dorsal or ventral.
d. Enlarged pulmonary vessels may increase lung opacity
c. Opacity:
due to added soft tissue opacity.
1) Gas, fat, soft tissue, mineral, or metal.
5. Small pulmonary vessels result from undercirculated
2) Homogeneous or heterogeneous.
(hypovascular) lungs.
d. Nodules are described by:
a. Vessels are smaller than expected and cannot be fol-
1) Number (solitary, multiple, numerous).
lowed as far peripherally as normal.
2) Margination (well-defined or ill-defined)
b. Lungs may seem to be hyperinflated and less opaque.
3) Shape (rounded or irregular).
c. Cardiac silhouette, caudal vena cava, and aorta often
4) Opacity (soft tissue or mineral).
are small.
21
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 1.34 Vascular patterns (right cranial pulrnonary vessels as seen on left lateral radliograph). (A) A = normal artery; V = vein. (B) Artery larger
 than vein (heartworm disease). (C) Vein larger than artery (left heart failure). (D) Indistinct vascular margins (parenchymal lung disease.)
6. Enlarged arteries with normal-size veins most commonly
3. Normal bronchial walls are thin and not well visualized
result from heartworm disease.
in peripheral lung felds unless thickened, mineralized, or 
7. Enlarged veins with normal-size arteries usually is due to
surrounded by excessive fluid or contain secretions.
left heart failure.
a. Newer, high-quality digital radiography systems may
8. Indistinct or obscured vascular margins is due to increased
 a   n a n
opacity in lung parenchyma.
ticular imaging characteristics helps avoid errors in
9. Absence of visualization of vascular margins is due alveo-
interpreta tion).
lar filling and loss of air in adjacent lung.
4. Bronchial walls normally are visible near tracheal bifur-
 cation because they are larger (may be mistaken for thick-
ened bronchi).
Box 1.5 Findings with vascular lung pattern.
5. Thickened bronchi viewed on-end appear as thick rings
("donuts"; Figure 1.35).
●Abnormal size of pulmonary arteries, veins, or both 
6. Thickened bronchi often do not taper normally, appear-
● Asymmetry in size of paired pulmonary vessels 
●Blunted, irregular, or curved shape of vessels
ing as parallel lines in profile ("tram lines" or "railroad
●Vascular margins may be obscured due to perivascular leakage
tracks").
pim↓ Jo
a. Paired blood vessels can be mistaken for thickened
bronchial walls, and therefore "donuts" are a more reli-
able finding with bronchial disease.
Diseases of bronchi (bronchial tung pattern)
7. Outer bronchial margins may become indistinct due to
 1. Alterations in wall thickness, lumen diameter, or opacity
n nd    ne u a
of bronchi may result from inflammation or infiltrative
trates ("peribronchial cuffing": Figure l.36).
disease.
8. Vascular margins usually remain sharp and well-defined
2. Most common etiologies include asthma, tracheobron-
if lung disease is confined to bronchi.
chitis, tracheal/bronchial collapse syndrome (see Differential
9. Bronchi with enlarged diameters and irregular shapes
Diagnoses in chapter 5).
(bronchiectasis) typically result from chronic inflammation.
22
CHAPTER 1 Interpretation of Radiographs
1. Air normally present in alveoli may be displaced by fluid.
cells, or collapse of alveoli.
2. Most common etiologies include pulmonary edema.
pneumonia, hemorrhage, neoplasia, and atelectasis (see Dif-
ferential Diagnoses in chapter 5).
3. Absence of alveolar air results in loss of visualization of
pulmonary soft tissues:
a. Blood vessels and adjacent borders of heart and dia-
phragm no longer are visible.
b. Soft tissue pulmonary masses and nodules may be
obscured.
4. Alveolar filling or collapse initially presents as fluffy, ill-
defined areas of soft tissue opacity. As filling or collapse
progresses, these areas spread and coalesce until all air is
displaced from a lung lobe.
5. Lobar margination occurs when alveolar filling or collapse
reaches the edge of a lung lobe and is blocked from further
Figure 1.35 Bronchial lung pattern (lateral radiograph). Peripheral
spread by pleura. The result is a well-defined soft tissue border
bronchial walls are thickened and increased in opacity appearing a5
that is sharply distinct from adjacent air-filled lung (Figure 1.37).
"donuts." In addition, lungs are hyperinflated; diaphragm is flattened;
6. Air bronchograms are a classic feature of alveolar patterns:
caudal lung lobes are less opaque due to air trapping. (Adapted from
Owens and Biery 1999.)
a. Appear as linear, gas opacity, branching structures that
are sharply distinct from nonaerated, soft-tissue-opacity lung.
b. Caused by air remaining in bronchi after alveoli are
filled (Figure 1.38).
c. Present in less than 25% of cases because bronchi may
also fill with fluid or cells.
d. Less common in cats than in dogs.
e. Air alveolograms resemble tiny air bronchograms and
represent retained air at ends of airways.
f. Normal bronchi with blood vessels on either side may
be mistaken for air bronchograms, but close inspection
will reveal vascular margins (vessels are obscured with
an alveolar pattern).
7. Acute alveolar filling may cause a mottled lung pattern
resembling ill-defined pulmonary nodules (usually more
severe centrally and fading peripherally).
 8. Mediastinum may or may not shift:
a. Lung collapse may result in a shift toward diseased lung.
b. Neoplastic infiltrates may cause a shift away from dis-
eased lung.
c. Usually no shift occurs with pneumonia or pulmonary
Figure 1.36 Bronchial disease. (A) Normal bronchus. (B) Thickened bronchial
hemorrhage.
jo aueeadde hupean sapeu leuouqad () pedo paseaui yam siem
thickened bronchial wall with indistinct margins. (D) Bronchiectasis.
Box 1.7 Findings with alveolar lung pattern.
Box 1.6 Findings with bronchial lung pattern.
· Soft tissue opacity in lungs
●  Pulmonary vessels are obscured 
● Increased bronchial markings in peripheral lung fields
●Air bronchograms
("donuts")
·Lobar margination
· Loss of normal bronchial tapering
●Border of cardiac silhouette or diaphragm is obscured 
●Uneven and varying bronchial diameters 
· Rapidly changing pattern
 C ardiovascular structures remain well-defined
●Pulmonary soft tissue lesions may be obscured
23
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 1.37 Alveolar pattern with prominent air bronchograms and lobar margination (lobar sign) in the right cranial and middle lung lobes. A. Lateral
radiograph. B. VD radiograph. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
Figure 1.38 Air bronchogram. Alveolar filling (white) adjacent to an
air-filled bronchus creates an air bronchogram. The bronchial wall is 
thickenedl; however, the wall would not be visible adjacent to the soft 
tissue in the alveoli Interstitial thickening in the lower right.
9. Alveolar patterns tend to change rapidly over short
Figure 1.39 Pulrmonary mass. A solitary, well-clefined, soft tissue opaque
periods of time.
mass in dorsocaudal lung field. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
Diseases of lung parenchyma (interstitial lung patterns)
1. Interstitial tissue is increased or abnormal accumulations
2. Most common etiologies include neoplasia, mycotic
of fluid or cellular debris are present.
infection (see Differential Diagnoses in chapter 5).
2. May appear as discrete structures (nodular interstitial
3. At least two orthogonal radiographs are needed to accul-
pattern) or a general increase in lung opacity (unstructured
rately diagnose a pulmonary nodule.
interstitial pattern).
 4. Lesions in right lung are better seen on left lateral radio-
graph and lesions in left lung are better seen on right lateral
Nodular lung pattern (structured interstitial lung pattern)
radiograph (see chapter 2).
(Figures 1.39-1.42)
5. Pseudo-nodules are discrete soft tissue or mineral opaci-
1. One or more abnormal, discrete opacities in pulmonary
ties that mimic pulmonary nodules (see Diseases and Disor-
interstitium (see Diseases and Disorders in chapter 5).
ders in chapter 5).
24
CHAPTER 1 Interpretation of Radiographs
well-cdefined, soft tissue opacity nodules are distributed throughout the
Figure 1.42 Pulmonary microlithiasis. Multiple small mineral opacity
lungs. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
nodules (less than 3 mm in size), predominately distributed in ventral lung
fields. Also called pulrmonary osteomas or heterotopic bone formation,
this finding typically is incidental. Healing granulomas may create a
similar radiographic appearance (but some granulomas usually will be
larger than 3 mm). (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
it represents focal mineralization or end-on visualization
of a vessel (Figure l.43).
Unstructured or general interstitial lung paftern
some degree, making this the most common and least spe-
cific lung pattern.
usually is made after eliminating other lung patterns.
3. Unstructured interstitial patterns commonly precede and
follow alveolar patterns because the separation between
alveoli and interstitium is weak. Both patterns may appear
concurrently (Figure 1.44).
Figure 1.41 Metastatic pulmonary neoplasia. Numerous small, soft
● Interstitial and alveolar patterns differ only in degree of opacity
tissue opacity nodules scattered throughout the lungs ("snowstorm
●Alveolar pattern is only lung pattern that can produce soft
pattern"). Mycotic infection may produce a sirmilar appearance (due to
tissue opacity in lungs and completely obscure pulmonary
numerous granulomas). (Adapted from Owen5 and Biery 1999.)
 soft tissue structures
a. Summation artifacts (e.g., end-on visualization of pul-
monary vessels).
4. Interstitial lung patterns have been described as "dirty
b. Superimposed structures not in lung (e.g., cutaneous
lungs" because margins of intrathoracic structures (e.g. pulmo-
nodule, nipple, costochondral cartilage).
nary vessels, cardiac silhouette, diaphragm, caudal vena cava)
c. Heterotopic bone formation (i.e., pulmonary osteomas).
remain visible, but are less distinct ("blurred" or "smudged"),
d. Neoplastic pulmonary nodules rarely mineralize. If a
similar to looking at lungs through "ground glass" or "bath-
nodule is more opaque than nearby vessels of same size.
room glass" (Figure 1.45).
25
Figure1.43 Pulmonary pseucdonodule; end-on visualization of blood vessel. A. VD radiograph. B. Close up highlighting end-on vessel that appear5
mineral opaque due to surnrmation (endl-on vessel is similar in size to adjacent vessel).
A
B
Figure 1.44 Dynamics of lung parenchyma disease. Ilustration depicts 
fluid or cellular material infiltrating lung parenchyma. Normal lung is on 
upper right side of image. progressing to interstitial disease, and finally
severe alveolar filling on lower left (A = artery, B = bronchus, V = vein).
As alveoli fill, vascular margins are obscured and air-filled bronchus
Figure 1.45 Unstructured interstitial lung pattern (lateral radiograph).
becomes more distinct as an air bronchogram. Interstitial and alveolar
Lungs are diffusely increased in opacity resulting in a hazy, blurred, or
patterns differ only in degree of opacity and confluence
pue suamo woy paidepy) sainns Aeuond ot anueneadde ,Ap,.
Biery 1999.)
26
CHAPTER 1 Interpretation of Radiographs
5. Air bronchograms are not present with interstitial pat-
Effects of age, body condition, and conformation
terns, but air in bronchi may have greater contrast against
1. Obesity commonly causes abdominal distention.
increased interstitial opaciry.
2. Emaciation results in indistinct serosal margins due to
6. Lung volume may be smaller because alveoli are unable
lack of fat:soft tissue interfaces.
to fully expand against interstitial infiltrates.
3. Positions of abdominal viscera may be altered by amount
7. Interstitial connective tissues commonly thicken and
of intra-abdominal fat.
become more opaque, creating fine, indistinct, linear mark-
 4. Immature animals have relatively larger liver and kidneys 
than adults.
a. As interstitial disease resolves or becomes chronic
5. Wet or dirty hair coat may mimic intra-abdominal lesions.
and less active. reticular markings become thinner
and more distinct and vascular margins become better
Extra-abdominal structures
defined.
1. Subcutaneous tissues are assessed for thickness and opacity.
2. Musculoskeletal structures (body wall, spine, pelvis, pelvic
limbs) are examined for integrity, continuity, opacity.
3. Diaphragm is evaluated for position and margination.
Box 1.8 Findings with generalized interstitial
Iung pattern.
4. Included thorax is examined for abnormalities associated
with pleural, pulmonary, or cardiovascular structures.
●Diffuse increase in lung opacity ("dirty lungs")
 Pulmonary vessels remain visible, but margins are indistinct
Peritoneal and retroperitoneal spaces
 Cardiac and diaphragm borders are visible
1. Soft tissue margins are visible only when adjacent to a
Increased interstitial markings (reticular or lacey pattern of lines)
different opacity:
●No patches of soft tissue opacity caused by alveolar filling
a. Usually, fat provides the opacity interface for abdomi-
nal viscera, but also gas or contrast medium.
b. Indistinct or obscured serosal margins may be due to:
1) Insufficient body fat for opacity interface (emacia-
Abdomen
tion, cachexia; Figure 1.46).
a) Evaluate body fat status in other parts of animal.
b) Abdomen often appears tucked.
2) Immature animal; fat is present, but it is soft tissue
Box 1.9 Checklist for interpreting abdominal
opacity (i.e., "brown fat").
radiographs.
a) Growth plates are open in immature animals.
3) Increased opacity in abdominal cavity that obscures
√ At least two orthogonal radiographs
fat (effusion, inflammation, infiltrative disease).
paenjeaa buiag lewue jo asoui ane sydeaboipey 
a) Abdomen often appears distended.
√ Technique:
√Exposure
c. Enhanced visualization of serosal margins occurs with:
1) Abundant fat in abdominal cavity (Figure l.47):
√ Positioning
however, excessive fat causes more scatter radiation,
√ Motion artifact
V Effects of age, body condition, and conformation 
√ Extra-abdominal structures:
√ Subcutaneous tissues
√ Musculoskeleton (body wall, spine, pelvis, pelvic limbs)
Diaphragm
√ Caudal thorax
√ Peritoneal and retroperitoneal spaces
√ Liver and area of gall bladder (hepatobiliary system)
 Spleen
√ Gl tract (stomach, area of pancreas, small intestine, large 
intestine)
V Urinary tract (kidneys. area of adrenal glands, urinary bladder.
urethra)
√ Genital system (penis, prostate, area of uterus and ovaries)
V Reassess based on clinical, physical, and laboratory findings
√ Differential diagnoses
lot ret Apog suainsui ot anp suibiew jesoias iusipul it'l anai
opacity interface (lateral abdominal radiograph).
27
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 1.47 A. Well-defined serosal margins due to intra-abdominal fat (lateral abdorminal radliograph). B. Gas in colon lumen allows visualization of
mucosal margin (white arrow), and fat in peritoneal space allows visualization of serosal margin (black arrow)
which fogs the image and makes serosal margins less
2. Type of fluid cannot be determined on radiographs
distinct.
(blood, urine, or peritoneal effusion are most common; see
2) Free gas in abdominal cavity (e.g.. pneumoperito-
Differential Diagnoses in chapter 6).
neum).
3. Small volumes of fluid present with:
2. When soft tissues overlap, their opacities are added or
a. Linear or wispy soft tissue opacities in intra-abdominal
summated, which may mimic an intra-abdominal mass (e.g..
fat ("fluid streaking of fat").
overlap of kidneys on lateral radiograph, Figure 1.48). Soft
b. Localized hazy or mottled appearance with indistinct
tissue opacity is relative, depending on thickness and adja-
serosal margins (Figure 1.49).
cent structures (which is why not all "soft tissue" structures
4. Large volumes of fluid create:
are same opacity).
a. More uniform increase in opacity throughout abdomi-
3. Peritoneal and retroperitoneal spaces normally are similar
nal cavity.
in opacity and definition.
b. Serosal margins are obscured.
4. Disease in one space usually does not involve the other
c. Gas-filled bowel loops float to top of fluid and tend to
(i.e., peritoneal effusion will obscure peritoneal serosal
localize in center of abdominal cavity.
margins, but margins of kidneys remain distinct).
Peritoneal fluid and gas
 1. Free fluid in peritoneal space is an important radiographic
diagnosis.
Figure 1.48 Summation. Overlap of kidneys produces increased opacity
due to added soft tissue of both kidneys.
Figure 1.49 Local peritoneal effusion due to splenic hemnorrhage (arrow).
28
CHAPTER 1 Interpretation of Radiographs
d. Retroperitoneal space often is spared and kidney
c. Postoperative peritoneal gas is difficult to differentiate
margins remain visible (if adequate fat is present).
from gastrointestinal perforation and is a common
e. Abdomen usually is distended and diaphragm may be
dilemma faced after GI surgery.
cranially displaced.
d. Abnormal distention of stomach or intestine may indi-
5. Free peritoneal fluid may be difficult to distinguish from
cate rupture, severe inflammation, or obstruction.
other conditions that result in indistinct or obscured serosal
7. In addition to gas in peritoneal space, gas may appear
margins (e.g., emaciation, immature animal, severe inflam-
within wall or parenchyma of an organ (e.g.. splenic or
ma tion, disseminated neoplasia/carcinomatosis).
hepatic abscess, emphysematous metritis/cholecystitis/cysti-
tis, pneumatosis coli):
Pneumoperitoneum
a. Often is easier to detect with obliqued or horizontal
1. Free gas in peritoneal space may result from penetrating
beam radiographs.
abdominal wound, ruptured stomach or bowel, or infection
with gas-producing organism (see Differential Diagnoses in
Retroperitoneal disease
chapter 6),
1. Increased opacity and loss of visualization of serosal
 2. Pneumoperitoneum decreases opacity in peritoneal space
margins in retroperitoneal space typicaly results from
and enhances visualization of serosal margins
abnormal accumulation of fluid (urine or blood) or inflam-
3. Small volumes of gas produce well-defined, triangular or
mation (Figure l.51).
linear areas of decreased opacity (gas bubbles), which com-
2. Enlargement of retroperitoneal space displaces central
monly collect between bowel loops.
and caudal abdominal viscera ventrally.
a. Free gas may be diffcult to differentiate from intralu-
A
minal intestinal gas, but gas in bowel tends to appear
more rounded and flowing.
b. Horizontal beam radiographs aid in diagnosis of slight
 pneumoperitoneum:
l) Position animal in left lateral recumbency for 5
minutes (right lateral is not recommended because air in
 gastric fundus can be confused with free peritoneal gas).
2) X-ray beam is directed across table (horizontal) to
make a VD radiograph, centered at cranial right abdomen.
3) Decrease kVp by 15% to increase gas-to-soft-tissue
con tra st.
4) Free gas commonly collects in upper part of peri-
toneal space, between diaphragm and right lateral
liver lobes (Figure 1.50).
4. Larger volumes of gas tend to coalesce into bigger bubbles
in highest point of peritoneal space, usually caudal to dia.
phragm and ventral to hypaxial muscles.
5. Iatrogenic pneumoperitoneum is common and must be
excluded as an etiology (e.g., laparotomy, abdominocentesis).
a. Normal postoperative gas may persist up to 3 weeks.
B
but in most cases gas is no longer evident within a week.
Pneumoperitoneum: f no one has "been" there, someone
needs to "go" there.
6. Inflammation or free fluid often accompanies pneumo-
peritoneum, which makes interpretation of radiographs
Figure 1.50 Pneumoperitoneum. A. Free gas (arrow) is visible dorsally
more difficult.
between liver and dliaphragm (lateral radiograph). B. Horizontal beam
a. Serosal margins may be obscured.
radiography documents free gas (arrow) between liver, diaphragm, and
b. Additional images may be helpful, including VD/DV.
body wall (VD radiograph with animal in left lateral recumbency)
opposite lateral, and horizontal beam radiographs.
(Adapted from Owens and Biery, 1999.)
29
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
1) Ventral margins of L3-4 normally are indistinct due
to attachments of diaphragm and should not be con-
fused with disease.
d. Primary vertebral pathology can produce a periosteal
 response along ventral aspect of vertebral bodies (e.g.
spondylitis, trauma, osseous neoplasia).
4. Gas in retroperitoneal space is uncommon.
a. May result from extension of pneumomediastinum,
penetrating wound, or infection with gas-producing organ-
ism.
 b. Enhances visualization of renal and hypaxial muscle
margins (lateral radiograph).
c. Severe pneumoretroperitoneum can progress to pnell-
moperitoneum.
Intra-abdominal mass
Figure 1.51 Retroperitoneal disease (lateral radiograph). Increased
1. A local area of increased opacity that displaces adjacent
opacity and swelling of retroperitoneal space with indlistinct renal margins
organs and may obscure adjacent serosal margins (Figure
(arrow)
1.53).
a. Differentiation of a mass and localized peritoneal fluid
or inflammation may be difficult; however, close inspec-
a. Opacity dorsal to displaced organs may be soft tissue
tion often reveals serosal margins associated with mass.
(mass or fluid) or fat (obese animal or lipoma).
 2. Mass may represent organomegaly, tumor, abscess, gran-
3. Periosteal response along ventral borders of lumbar ver
uloma, hematoma, cyst, or hyperplasia.
tebrae may result from retroperitoneal disease (e.g., neopla-
3. To be reliably detected on survey radiographs, small
sia, inflammation/infection):
 masses must measure at least twice the width of surrounding
a. Response differs from spondylosis in that it occurs
small intestine.
along middle of vertebral body (spondylosis occurs at
4. Clues to origin of a mass lie in displacement and/or oblit-
ends) and margins tend to be less distinct.
eration of normal structures (Figure l.54).
b. Tumors typically affect L5-7 due to metastasis to sub-
a. Altered positions of abdominal viscera may also result
lumbar lymph nodes, most commonly from prostatic or
from loss of body wall integrity (e.g., hernia) or congeni-
cystic neoplasia (Figure 1.52).
tal anomalies (e.g., ectopic kidney).
c. Migrating plant awns commonly follow diaphragm to
affect L3-4.
Figure 1.53 Peritoneal mass (lateral radiograph). A well-defined soft
Figure 1.52 Periosteal response along caudal lumbar vertebrae and 
tissue opaque mass is visible in the mnid-abdominal cavity, resulting in
eatel) eiseldoau yeisod seseiau ot anp siad jo suibeu leluenn
jo juawaneldsip lejueis pue sausaiu! jo juawaneldsip lepnen pue esiop
radiograph). A urethral catheter and pneumocystogram are visible.
transverse colon and stomach.
30
CHAPTER 1 Interpretation of Radiographs
B
Liver
Gallbladder
Gastricpylorus
Pancreas
V
Spleen
Duodenum
Transverse colon
Lymph nodes
K
个
√
Rightkidney
R
Left kidney
Adrenal gland
Ovary
Adrenal gland
→
Duodenum
K
Ovary
KSmall7
Spleen
colon
intestine
V
Mesentery
Descending
Kidneys
Ureters
K
colon
Ureters
Ksapou
Lymph
Lymph n
K
个
iver
个
Pancreas
Colon
个
Transverse colon
Intestines
Uterus
Urinarybladder
Duodenum
Mesentery
↑
Urinary bladd
Colon
Gastric pylorus
Lymph nodes
Gall bladder
Uterus
Spleen
Lymph nodes
rostate
Figure 1.54 Intra-abdominal mass effects. Enlargement of abdominal
easshovntvpically cisplaces nearbvstructuresincirections incicateo
by arrows. A. Lateral abdominal radliograph. B. VD abdominal radiograph.
Lymph nodes
dylosis may signal specific neoplastic or infectious
1. Lymph nodes are not visible on survey radiographs unless
disease (Figure l.52).
enlarged or mineralized.
3. Mineralization of lymph nodes:
 2. Enlargement of lymph nodes:
a. Usually dystrophic secondary to necrosis.
a. May be caused by neoplasia or infection (see Differ-
b. Oily contrast agents used for lymphangiography may
ential Diagnoses in chapter 6).
persist in lymph nodes as areas of increased opacity.
 b. Visceral lymph nodes rarely enlarge enough to be seen
on survey radiographs.
1) Moderate to severe enlargement of mesenteric or
Liver
colic lymph nodes creates a midabdominal mass effect
1. Liver is evaluated for size, shape, margination, position,
and displaces adjacent intestines (Figure 1.55).
and opacity (Figure 1.57: see Differential Diagnoses  in
2) Enlarged groups of lymph nodes tend to blend
chapter 6).
together resulting in an ill-defined, soft tissue opacity
2. Abnormal size of liver:
ma ss.
a. Position of gastric axis aids in evaluation (see Normal
c. Medial iliac lymphadenomegaly presents with increased
Radiographic Anatomy in chapter 6).
 soft tissue opacity in caudal retroperitoneal space (gener-
1) If stomach is not visible, consider adding a small
ally ventral to L6-7).
amount of air or barium.
1) May be large enough to ventrally displace terminal
b. Enlarged liver (hepatomegaly: Figures 1.58 and 1.59):
colon and rectum (Figure 1.56).
 1) Gastric axis is angled further caudally (pylorus is
2) When present, nearby bones should be examined
displaced caudally) .
for abnormalities. Bone production other than spon-
2) Hepatic margins become rounded.
31
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
UB
Figure 1.55 Normmal abdorninal viscera; L = liver, S = stomach, RK = right kidney, LK = left kicdney, Sp = spleen, Sl = small intestine, C = cecum,
AC = ascending colon, TC = transverse colon, DC = cescendling colon, UB =
: Urinary bladder. A. Lateral radiograph. B. VD radiograph. (Adapted from
(666l Aalg pue suamO
Figure 1.57 Diagrarm depicting area of enlargement of medial iliac
lymmph nodes (dark shading) resulting in ventral displacement and 
Figure 1.56 Mesenteric lymphadenomegaly (lateral radiograph). A
 compression of descending colon. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
 pue Aiebawoiedan (eane atym) alqisn s! loaya ssewu leuiwopgepiu
splenormegaly also are present (lymphoma).
palpate further caudal than costal arch. A liver
extending just caudal to costal arch on radiographs
3) Caudal border of liver extends beyond costal arch
most likely will not be palpable and may be normal.
(lateral radiograph).
Rounding of hepatic margins is a more reliable
a) This finding should be interpreted with caution.
indicator of hepatomegaly.
The concept of liver size in relation to costal arch
c. Small liver (microhepatia; Figure l.60):
is based on palpation. It should be noted that skin.
1) Gastric axis is angled cranially (pylorus is closer to
subcutaneous tissue, and muscle causes fingers to
diaphra gm).
32
CHAPTER 1 Interpretation of Radiographs
B
Figure 1.60 Microhepatia. Smalliver (shaded area) results in cranial
Figure 1.58 General hepatomegaly. Liver enlargement (dark shading)
displacement of stormach. A. Lateral radliograph. B. VD radiograph.
 presents with rounded hepatic margins and caudal dlisplacemment of
(Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
 stommach. A. Lateral radiograph. B. VD radiograph. (Adapted from Owen5
and Biery 1999.)
2 intercostal spaces.
3) Caudal border of liver does not extend to costal
arch (lateral radiograph).
3. Abnormal shape and margination of liver:
a. Rounded margins result from general or local hepato-
megaly.
b. Small liver with irregular margins most commonly is
due to chronic cirrhosis.
1) Peritoneal fluid often is present with cirrhosis and
obscures liver margins.
B
c. Normal to large liver with irregular margins may be
 caused by nodules on or near surface of liver (e.g., neo-
plasia, parasites, hyperplasia ).
d. Gall bladder enlargement may create a bulge along
ventral border of liver (lateral radiograph) .
e. Fluid-filled gastric pylorus may be mistaken for hepatic
mass (make left lateral radiograph to position gastric gas
in pylorus and confirm identification).
4. Altered position of liver:
a. Cranial displacement may be caused by an abnormal
diaphragm (e.g., eventration, hernia) or a large intra-
abdominal mass.
b. Caudal displacement is due to an expanded thoracic cavity.
c. Ventral displacement may result from weak abdomi-
nal muscles or hernia.
d. Dorsal displacement due to obesity (fat engorged fal-
ciform ligament).
Figure 1.59 Localized hepatomegaly due to liver mass. Liver
 5. Abnormal opacity of liver:
enlargerment (dark shading) presents with rounded hepatic margins and 
a. Mineralization in liver (uncommon) may represent
variable displacement of nearby structures. A. Lateral radiograph with a
biliary calculi or dystrophic calcification.
ventral hepatic mass extendling caudal to stomach and displacing small
intestine caudally. B. VD radliograph with left hepatic mass displacing
b. Gas opacity in liver is rare and may be caused by infec-
stomach and bowel medlialy, left kidney and spleen caudally. C. VD 
tion with gas-producing organism, reflux of gas from GI
radiograph with right hepatic mass displacing pylorus and duodenum 
tract, or emphysematous cholecystitis (latter most often
medially and right kidney caudally. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
occurs with diabetes mellitus).
33
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
 Gall bladder/biliary system
3) In some cases of bone marrow insufficiency, spleen
 1. Biliary structures (gall bladder, bile ducts) are not visible
is responsible for production of red blood cells and
 on survey radiographs unless they contain mineral or gas.
undergoes compensatory enlargement (removal of
in which case they may be seen in right cranial or cranio-
ventral area of liver.
4) Pathology includes neoplasia, hematoma, inflam-
a. Mineralization may represent calculi or dystrophic
mation, venous congestion.
mineralization.
5) May be associated with immune mediated hemo-
1) Biliary calculi vary in opacity, size, and shape
lytic anemia/thrombocytopenia or cardiac arrhyth-
2) Branching mineralization typically is associated
mias (mechanism for development of these conditions 
with bile ducts and may represent choledocoliths or
is poorly understood).
chronic inflammation and dystrophic mineralization.
b. Enlargement may be general or local (see Differential
3) Gall bladder wall may mineralize due to chronic
 Diagnoses in chapter 6).
inflammation
c. Splenic margins become rounded.
4) Costochondral junctions may be mistaken for
1) Edges of spleen no longer form acute angles.
biliary mineralization.
2) Lack of rounded margins suggests spleen is not
b. Gas in gall bladder (emphysematous cholecystitis)
generally enlarged.
usually is associated with diabetes mellitus; tends to
d. Splenomegaly frequently is overdiagnosed, especially
conform to shape of bladder.
when a long portion of spleen is visible or tail of spleen
2. An enlarged gall bladder may create a bulge along ventral
is positioned near urinary bladder.
border of liver, especially in cats (lateral radiograph).
 3. Altered position of spleen may or may not be associated
with pathology:
a. Spleen is more cranial in deep-chested dogs.
Spleen
b. Size of liver and stomach affects position of spleen.
1. Spleen is evaluated for enlargement, position, shape.
c. Displacement of stomach (spleen follows stomach due
margination, and opacity.
to gastrosplenic ligament).
2. Enlarged spleen (splenomegaly: Figures 1.6l and 1.62):
d. Intra-abdominal mass may displace spleen in variety
a. A subjective assessment that may or may not be associ-
of directions.
ated with pathology (see Differential Diagnoses in chapter 6).
e. Splenic torsion typically results in ventral displace-
 1) Commonly enlarges during sedation or anesthesia
ment (Figure 1.63), but spleen may become quite large
due to smooth muscle relaxation and passive congestion.
and occupy much of the peritoneal space.
2) Relatively larger in some breeds (e.g.. German
4. Shape and margins of spleen may be altered by enlarge-
shepherd dog. greyhound, Scottish terrier).
ment, infiltrative disease, mass, or torsion.
Figure 1.61 Generalied splenomegaly (dark shading) with rounded
pue suaiew papunou yam (bupeys yep) sew sjuaids zg'l anai
margins and displacerment of intestines. A. Lateral radiograph. B. VD
displacement of bowel. A. Lateral radiograph. B. VD radiograph
radiograph. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
(Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
34
CHAPTER 1 Interpretation of Radiographs
Figure 1.63 Splenic torsion (dark shading on lateral radiograph). Spleen
shape resemmbles a reverse capital letter 'C'. (Adapted frorm Owens and 
Biery 1999.)
5. Altered opacity of spleen (mineralization or emphysema)
Figure 1.65 Pancreatitis (VD radiograph). Swelling of pancreas causes
is uncommon but may result from neoplasia or abscessation 
widening of gastroduodenal angle (arrows), and inflarmmation obscures
(Figure 1.64)
serosal margins in right cranial abdominal quadrant. Gas may persist in
6. Peritoneal effusion is common with many splenic disor-
proximal duodenum and transverse colon on serial radliographs due to
ders and may initially present as fluid streaking of intra-
adjacent inflarnmation and localized ileus. (Adapted from Owens and 
abdominal fat
Biery 1999.)
4. Mineralization of pancreas is rare but may result from
chronic inflammation, neoplasia, or fat necrosis.
Gastrointestinal tract
Stomach
1. Stomach is evaluated for position, size, shape, content,
and margination.
2. Position of stomach:
a. Cranial and caudal displacement of stomach most
Figure 1.64 Splenic abscess (dark shading on lateral radliograph). Spleen
often is associated with size and position of liver, but
contains multiple foci of gas. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
cranial displacement may result from a large intra-
abdominal mass.
Pancreas
b. Identification of pylorus is important in determining
1. Normal pancreas rarely is visible on survey radiographs.
gastric orientation (i.e., gastric dilatation and volvulus) and
2. May be visible in overweight cats as a poorly-defined, soft
may require a variety of patient positions and multiple
tissue opacity structure within triangle formed by stomach.
radiographs to take advantage of gravity-dependent
spleen, and left kidney.
movements of gastric fluid and gas (Figure l.66, Table 1.3).
3. Pancreatic disease may affect appearance of adjacent tissues:
1) Air in gastric lumen rises to nondependent (up)
a. Serosal margins become indistinct due to regional
part of stomach and fluid pools in dependent (down)
peritonitis (typically in right cranial abdorminal quadrant).
areas (pattern is dependent on volume of gas and fluid
b. Duodenum may be displaced ventrally and right later-
in stomach at time of radiography)
ally by pancreatic enlargement.
3. Size and content of stomach are extremely variable:
C. Gastroduodenal angle may widen due to swelling of
a. Largely distended stomach containing mostly fluid
pancreas (Figure 1.65).
and gas is suggestive of an outflow problem.
d. Stomach and transverse colon may be separated by
1) Borders of an extremely dilated stomach may not
pancreatic enlargement.
be immediately recognized on survey radiogra phs. Gas
e. Peristalsis in stomach, duodenum, and transverse
bubble in fundus may be mistaken for size of stomach.
colon may be altered by pancreatic inflammation.
2) Frequently with gastric outflow problems, tiny.
f. Gas may persist in proximal duodenum or transverse
sandlike mineral opacities will accumulate in depen-
colon on serial radiographs (static gas pattern) due to
dent portion of stomach due to sedimentation of
inflammation and localized ileus.
heavier food particles (Figure l.67).
35
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
B
Figure 1.67 Gastric outflow obstruction (lateral radiograph). Stomach is
 greatly distended with fluid and gas (borders of an extremely dlilated
(sydennopen Aauns uo pazjunonau Aateipau aq tou Aeuu yoewons
Figure 1.66 Locations of gastric fluid and gas vary with positioning of
Accumulation of multiple small, sandlike mineral opacities is due to
the animal. (A) In right lateral recumbency fluid is in pyloric antrum and 
gas is in body and fundus; right dliaphragmatic crus is cranial. (B) In left 
and Biery 1999.)
piny pue (wnuaponp u! pue) wunuque suod u! s! seh Auaqwunsal leatel
is in body and fundus; left diaphragmatic crus is cranial. (c) In dorsal
recumbency (VD radiograph) gas is in body and fluid is in fundus; pyloric
antrum contains gas and/or fluid; dliaphragm has three hummps. (D) In
4. Small intestine normally fills spaces not occupied by
ventral recumbency (DV radiograph) fluid is in body and gas is in pyloric
other structures or fat.
antrum and fundus; dliaphragm has one hump. (Adapted from Owen5
a. Majority of small bowel typically is positioned to right
and Biery 1999.)
of midline.
b. Excessive intra-abdominal fat causes small intestine to
"bunch together" in right ventral mid-abdominal cavity
(may be mistaken for linear intestinal foreign material) .
Table 1.3 Locations of gas and fluid in stomach
c. Bowel loops are readily displaced by intra-abdominal
masses and organomegaly: pattern of bowel displacement
 Recumbent Position 
Fundus
Body
 Pylorus
provides clues to origin of mass-effect.
 Right lateral 
Ga5
Ga5
PInH 
5. All small bowel loops should be similar in width, with
 Left lateral 
PInId 
pind 
Ga5
no segment measuring more than twice the size of other
 Dorsal (VD radiograph)
PInI 
Ga5
Gas/Fluid 
se grments.
Ventral (DV radiograph)
Ga5
 PInId 
525
 a. Intestinal width (serosa to serosa) greater than 2 times
the height of the body of L5 indicates abnormally enlarged
(distended) bowel (Figure l.68).
 b. Enlargement of small intestine may be due to increased
diameter of lumen or less likely thickening of bowel wall
Small intestine
(see Differential Diagnoses in chapter 6). Remember to
1. Small intestine is evaluated for position, size, pattern, and
check for dilated fluid-filled bowels, which may not be
content.
as obvious as gas-filled bowels.
2. Abdominal radiographs depict appearance of small intes-
c. Ileus due to partial or complete physical blockage of
tine at a single moment in time, but normal bowel loops are
bowel lumen (obstructive ileus) is characterized by abnor-
constantly in motion. True lesions of small bowel will be
mal distention of one or more bowel segments and more
repeatable on serial radiographs.
normal-sized intestine distal to obstruction (Figure 1.69).
3. Small intestine containing gas is readily visible on survey
d. Ileus due to vascular or neuromuscular disease (para-
radiographs, but fluid-filled bowel is not as apparent. Fluid-
lytic ileus) typically presents with more uniformly dis-
filled bowel should be purposefully examined to complete
tended bowel segments, most of which tend to be gas
the evaluation of intestinal pattern.
filled.
36
CHAPTER 1 Interpretation of Radiographs
e. Linear foreign material in small intestine causes bowel
to bunch together in a tight, plicated pattern with irregu-
lar shaped pockets of gas (comma- or crescent-shaped gas
bubbles) and tight turns (Figure l.70).
f. Bowel wall thickness cannot be reliably assessed on
survey radiographs.
1) Fluid and gas in bowel lumen may mimic bowel
wall thickening (Figure 1.71).
2) Fluid obscures mucosa margins, and since it is same
opacity as bowel wall, intra-luminal fluid may give
false impression of wall thickening.
6. It is unusual to see significant quantities of ingesta in
small intestine:
Figure 1.68 Smmall intestine width (serosa to serosa) norrmally should not
a. When present, serial radiographs are recommended to
Exceed the height of the body of L5 (double-headed arrow in shaded 
monitor transit and emptying.
vertebral body). Bowel widths greater than twice L5 body height are likely
b. Gastric content should be evaluated because it will
to be obstructed. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
eventually progress into small intestine.
7. Contrast radiography (e.g., upper GI study) aids in evalu-
ating bowel wall thickness, mucosal irregularities, peristaltic
activity, intestinal content, and transit time.
Large intestine
1. Large intestine is evaluated for position, size, shape.
content, and opacity.
2. Colon wall thickness and mucosal margination cannot
be reliably assessed on survey radiographs. Endoscopy (pre-
ferred) or barium enema is recommended.
3. Descending colon typically is left of midline but may be
positioned right of midline due to a large urinary bladder.
ingesta in small intestine, intra-abdominal fat, or redun-
dancy (latter is a normal anatomic variation most often
reported in cats and large breed dogs).
Figure 1.69 Small intestinal obstruction (lateral radiograph). Bowel
4. Width of colon usually is 2 to 3 times width of small
proxirmal to obstruction is abnormally dilated and gas filled; bowel distal
intestine and should not exceed 3 times width of small
(66h Aaia pue suamg woy paideps) yrpim ui leou s! uonsgo a
bowel or 1.5 × length of L7.
B. Small intestine is bunched together (plicated) with hairpin turns and irregular margins. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
37
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
2. Normal appearance of kidneys does not rule out renal
disease.
A
3. Size of kidneys:
a. Visualization of kidneys depends on amount of retro-
peritoneal fat:
 1) Kidneys generally are more visible in cats and over-
weight dogs.
2) Superimposed intestinal content often obscures
B
kidneys.
3) Right kidney lies in renal fossa of liver and gener-
ally is not well seen; caudal pole of right kidney may
be visible.
b. Small kidneys result from hypoplasia or renal fibrosis:
1) May be difficult to identify, especially in animals
with little body fat.
C
2) Dog kidneys measure less than 2.5 x length of L2.
3) Cat kidneys measure less than 2 x length of L2.
4) In cats, hypoplasia of kidneys may occur with early
neutering.
c. Enlarged kidneys (renomegaly):
1) In dogs. length of kidney(s) is greater than 3.5 x
D
length of L2.
2) In cats, length is greater than 3 × length of L2
a) Feline kidneys tend to enlarge in width more
than in length, resulting in a more rounded appear-
Figure 1.71 Evaluation of small intestinal wall thickness. Left side
images depict a bowel loop as seen end-on. Right side images depict the
ance.
samme bowel loop in profile (longitudlinal). Radiographic appearance of
small intestine is dependent on volume of gas and fluid in the lumen:
nal cavity (retroperitoneal) .
(A) gas filled, (B) mostly gas filled, (C) mostly fluid filled, (D) fluid filled.
a) Right renomegaly displaces proximal duode-
Unless the bowel lurmen is commpletely filled with gas, intestinal wall
num, ascending colon, and small intestine crani-
thickness cannot be accurately evaluated on survey radiographs. (Adapted 
ally, ventrally, and to the left (Figure l.72).
from O'Brien 1981, 293. Special thanks to Dr. T. R. O'Brien.)
b) Left renomegaly displaces small intestine and
proximal descending colon ventrally, caudally, and
toward the right (Figure 1.73).
4) Renomegaly may be caused by inflammation,
5. Large intestine contains variable amounts of gas, fluid,
obstruction, infiltrative disease, or cystic disease (see
and fecal material.
lists of Differential Diagnoses, chapter 6).
a. Ingesta in colon (feces) typically is heterogeneous or
5) Older, intact male cats commonly have slightly
granular-appearing soft tissue opacity with finely dis-
larger kidneys.
persed gas pattern.
4. Shape of kidneys may be altered by obstruction, infiltra-
b. Feces that is more voluminous or more opaque than
tive disease, cystic disease, or inflammation (acute or
normal suggests constipation or megacolon.
chronic).
c. Diffuse, homogeneous soft tissue opacity in colon may
 5. Abnormal position of kidneys may be congenital or due
represent fluid (diarrhea).
to mass effect.
d. Persistence of a local soft tissue opacity in colon may
a. Excessive retroperitoneal fat (obesity. lipoma) is a
represent a mass or intussusception.
common cause of ventral and cranial displacement.
6. Narrowing of pelvic canal by more than 50% frequently
b. Loss of body wall integrity can affect position of
leads to colon obstruction.
kidney(s).
6. Abnormal opacity of kidneys:
Urinary tract
a. Mineralization may occur with renal calculi or dystro-
Kidneys and ureters
phic calcification.
1. Kidneys are evaluated for number, size, shape, margin-
b. Fat in renal pelvis causes decreased opacity (common
ation, position, and opacity (see Differential Diagnoses in
in overweight cats). which can be mistaken for
chapter 6).
pathology.
38
CHAPTER 1 Interpretation of Radiographs
B
Figure 1.72 Right renomegaly (dark shading). A. Lateral radiograph;
Figure 1.74 Distended urinary bladder (dark shading) commonly
enlargement of right kidney may ventrally displace proximal duodenum,
displaces smmall bowel cranially and cdescending colon dorsally. A. Lateral
 2scending colon, and smallintestine (depending on degree of
radiograph. B. VD radliograph. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
enlargemment). B. VD radiograph; enlargement may medially displace
2scending colon and small intestine. (Adapted from Owens and Biery
1999.)
B
C
D
Figure 1.75 Abnormal shapes of urinary bladder. (A) Small urachal
diverticulum in vertex. (B) Large urachal diverticulum in vertex. (C)
Mucosal hernia along ventral margin. (D) Rounded shape due to
inflarnmmation or infiltrative disease (may also be a normal variant)
Figure 1.73 Left renomegaly (dark shading). A. Lateral radiograph;
enlargement of left kidney may ventrally dlisplace descending colon and
3. Altered position of urinary bladder usually results from
small intestine. B. VD radiograph; enlargement may medlially displace
pathology in a nearby structure.
 srmall intestine and descending colon. (Adapted from Owens and Biery
a. In dogs. neck of bladder normally is less than 2 cm
1999.)
cranial to pubis.
b. In cats, bladder neck is longer (often confused with
urethra), commonly extending up to 3 cm cranial to pubis.
Urinary bladder
4. Abnormal shape of urinary bladder may result from
1. Urinary bladder is evaluated for size, position, shape.
indentation by adjacent organ or mass, rupture, tumor, or
margination, and opacity.
diverticulum (Figure 1.75).
 2. Abnormal size of urinary bladder is subjective assessment:
5. Bladder wall thickness cannot be reliably assessed on
a. Full bladder normally does not extend cranial to level
survey radiographs.
of umbilicus (Figure 1.74).
6. Abnormal opacity of urinary bladder:
b. Overdistention of bladder may result from obstruction
a. Mineralization commonly represents calculi, but can
or neurologic disease.
be associated with neoplasia.
c. Empty bladder sometimes is located within pelvic
b. Gas in urinary bladder often is iatrogenic (e.g., cysto-
canal and may not be visible on survey radiographs.
centesis, catheterization) but can be caused by infection
39
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
with gas-producing organism (emphysematous cystitis.
2. Abnormal size of prostate gland:
usually associated with diabetes mellitus).
a. Prostatomegaly occurs to some degree in most pros-
7. Contrast radiography is commonly used to evaluate
tatic diseases (Figures 1.77 and 1.78).
urinary bladder (see chapter 3 for method):
1) Easiest to recognize on lateral radiographs.
a. Excretory urogram.
2) Normal height of prostate gland should not exceed
b. Positive contrast cystogram.
70% of diameter of pelvic inlet.
c. Negative contrast cystogram (pneumocystogram).
a) Greater than 70% is abnormal enlargement.
d. Double contrast cystogram.
b) Greater than 90% suggests a mass.
e. Positive contrast urethrogram (voiding or retrograde).
 a  aq a as rg (
abdominal cavity.
Urethra
1. Urethra usually is not visible on survey radiographs due
B
to its small size and similar opacity to adjacent tissues.
2. Contrast radiography generally is required to assess ure-
thral size, position, and integrity.
3. Urethral calculi (Figure 1.76) may be obscured by super-
imposed pelvic bones or pelvic limbs, requiring altered posi-
tioning of animal for visualization (see chapter 2, "Making 
Quality Radiographs")
Figure 1.77 Prostatomegaly (dark shading). A. Lateral radiograph:
Figure 1.76 Penile urethra and os penis with urethral calculi (white:
enlargement of prostate gland displaces urinary blacdder cranially and
lateral radiograph). (From Owens and Biery 1999.)
descending colon dorsally. B. VD radiograph: prostate is visible cranial to
brirm of pelvis through pelvic canal. (From Owens and Biery 1999.)
Adrenal glands
1. Adrenal glands are not visible on radiographs unless
greatly enlarged or mineralized.
2. Enlargement can be caused by tumor or hyperplasia.
a. Adrenomegaly may displace a kidney caudally and/or
medially.
b. Adrenal masses can grow larger than a kidney and may
 be mistaken for a mass in another organ (i.e., splenic mass).
3. Mineralization of adrenal glands can occur with neoplasia
but may be idiopathic:
a. Neoplastic mineralization tends to be unilateral, ill-
defined, and patchy.
 b. Idiopathic mineralization is age related and most often
reported in cats.
1) Typically bilateral
 2) Appears as small, well-defined, mineral opacities.
B
 sometimes dumbbell shaped.
Figure 1.78 Prostatomegaly (close up lateral radiograph). (A) Enlarged 
ol anp uojeuweyu! Aq pasnen s! suibieuu pauyap-ll! ylm pueo aersoud
Male genital system (prostate gland)
 infection or neoplasia. (B) Prostatomegaly with focal mineralization most
1. Prostate gland is evaluated for size, shape, margination,
commonly is caused by neoplasia but may result fro chronic inflarnmation 
and opacity.
or benign hypertrophy and calculi. (From Owens and Biery 1999.)
40
CHAPTER 1 Interpretation of Radiographs
4) Typically causes cranial displacement of urinary
place small intestine cranially and dorsally (Figure 
bladder and dorsal displacement of rectum (urinary
1.79).
bladder can be displaced dorsally, ventrally, or laterally
b) On VD/DV radiograph, an enlarged uterine horn 
if there is asymmetric prostatomegaly) .
may resemble a kidney.
b. Opacity of prostate gland:
b. Abnormal location of uterus may result from hernia
1) Mineralization most often is due to neoplasia but can
or mass effect.
result from chronic inflammation or presence of calculi.
c. Alterations in uterine opacity may be due to normal
2) Gas in prostate may result from reflux during
 or abnormal pregnancy, infection, or tumor.
pneumocystogram or infection with gas-producing
organism.
3. Diseases of testicles, scrotum, and penis are better evalu-
ated by clinical inspection and ultrasonography than with
B
radiography.
Female genital system
1. Ovaries normally are not visible on survey radiographs.
a. Area of ovaries is examined for mass effect or change
in opa city.
 2. Uterus is evaluated for size, position, and opacity:
a. Size of uterus varies with age, body size, and previous
pregnancies.
1) Normal, nongravid uterus is less than 1.5 cm wide
and rarely visible on survey radiographs.
2) Mild uterine enlargement is difficult to distinguish
from nearby small intestine:
a) Uterine width must be at least twice that of
small bowel to be reliably detected.
3) In obese animals, uterine body sometimes is visible
as a linear soft tissue opacity between rectum and
urinary bladder (lateral radiograph).
Figure 1.79 Enlargement of uterus (dark shading). A. Lateral
4) Enlarged uterine horns commonly produce convo-
radiograph;: uterus is partially superimnposed over urinary bladder and
luted, tubular, soft tissue opacity structures in caudo-
displaces smmall intestine cranially. B. VD radiograph; uterus in caudal
ventral abdominal cavity:
abdominal cavity, superimposed over or displacing srmall bowel. C. Lateral
a) On lateral radiograph, uterine horns typically
radiograph; a cervical mass displacing urinary bladder ventrally and
are dorsal and cranial to urinary bladder and dis-
descending colon dorsally. (From Owens and Biery 1999.)
41
Making Quality Radiographs
Production and use of diagnostic x-rays  44
Distortion   58
X-rays  4
Contrast 58
X-ray machine  44
Fogging   58
X-ray production  44
Geometry of radiographic image  59
X-ray tube care  45
Positioning guide  59
kvp and mAs 45
General considerations  59 
Heel effect 45
Thoracic radiographs  62
Focal spot  45
General   62
Scatter radiation   45
Lateral thoracic radiograph  62
Grids  46
Dorsoventral (DV) thoracic radiograph  
63
 Film:screen systems  46
Ventrodorsal (VD) thoracic radiograph  64 
X-ray film  46
Supplemental radiographs  64 
Intensifying screens  47
Abdominal radiographs  66 
Types of film:screen systems 47
General   66
Film processing  48 
Lateral abdominal radiograph  67
Radiograph identification  48 
Ventrodorsal (VD) abdominal radiograph  67
 Storage and retention of radiographs  48 
Dorsoventr al (DV) abdominal radiograph  68
Digital radiography   49
Supplemental abdominal radiographs 68
Computed radiography (CR)  49
 Musculoskeletal radiographs  68
Direct-read radiography (DR)
49
General   68
The digital radiograph  49
Thoracic limb  69
 Picture Archiving and Communication System (PACs)  50
Pelvis  72
Digital Imaging and Communication in Medicine (DlcOM)  51
Pelvic limb  73
Artifacts in digital radiography   51
Vertebrae  75
Opacity (radiopacity)   52
Head and neck 
Technique chart  54 
Interpreting radiographs  82
 Making a technique chart  54
General   82
Thorax   5
Skeleton  55
Checklists 83
mAs table  55
Roentgen signs (radiographic findings)  84 
General guidelines for selecting proper exposure settings
Scope of diagnostic imaging  85
(art of radiography)  56 
Ultrasonography  85
Radiation safety   56 
Computed tomography (CT) 86
Qualities of film radiographs  57
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 86
 Density (radiographic density)   57
Scintigraphy (nuclear medicine)   86  
Detail (definition)   57
Fuoroscopy  86
Radiography of the Dog and Cat: Guide to Making and Interpreting Radiographs. First Edition. M.C. Muhlbauer and S.K. Kneller.
@ 2013 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
43
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
light bulb, but emitting electrons instead of visible light).
Production and use of diagnostic x-rays
As filament heats up. electrons are "boiled off" and form a
"cloud" near the filament.
X-rays
3. Filament is cathode (negative) side of x-ray tube. Target
1. X-rays were discovered in 1895 by Wilhelm Conrad
is anode (positive) side.
 Roentgen (German physicist, won first Nobel Prize in Physics 
4. As voltage is applied to x-ray tube via a separate circuit.
for his discovery).
cathode becomes more negative and anode becomes more
2. Roentgen named the "mysterious rays" he discovered
positive. Negatively charged electrons are accelerated away
"X"-rays to indicate an unknown type of radiation (then and 
from filament (cathode) and toward target (anode).
now, x-rays are also called Roentgen Rays).
5. Speed of electrons (electron energy) is determined by
3. X-rays are a type of electromagnetic radiation (form of
applied voltage known as kilovolt peak or kilovolt potential (lkVp).
energy with wavelike behavior that travels at speed of light).
6. When electrons strike the target, their energy is con-
Visible light, microwaves, and radio waves are other types
verted to heat (99%) and x-rays (1%).
of electromagnetic radiation.
7. A single exposure can heat a metal target to over 1800°F.
4. Short wavelength and high frequency allow x-rays to
s  a a  'n  s aa 
 penetrate many objects and to be useful for medical imaging.
5. X-rays are ionizing form of radiation and are carcino-
genic; exposure to x-rays should always be as low as reason-
ably achievable (ALARA).
X-ray machine
1. Consists of an x-ray tube, a high-voltage generator, and
a control panel (Figure 2.1).
 2. A movable or floating table top malkes it easier to position
animals for imaging.
3. X-ray tube is mounted above table, preferably on a pivot
and slide to simplify positioning and to enable angled and
horizontal beam radiography.
X-ray production
1. X-rays are produced in a glass-enclosed vacuum tube
by bombarding a metal target with high speed electrons
(Figure 2.2).
2. Electrons are provided by passing an electric current
across a filament (similar to the filament in an incandescent 
Figure 2.1 Standard x-ray machine.
 Protective Housing 
Rotating Anode
Anode
Cathode
Motor
Electric
Current
Glass Envelope
Filament
1111
Target
ElectronBeam
Collimator-
了1111
111]/
Window
X-ray Beam
Figure 2.2 X-ray tube with protective housing.
44
CHAPTER 2 Making Quality Radiographs
metal alloys and mounted on rotors spinning at over 3000
b. Controls contrast (number of shades of gray) on film
rpm. Rotating targets produce a larger area to dissipate heat
radiographs (not on digital images).
(rotor should be spinning at full speed prior to exposure).
c. Increasing kVp by 20% doubles radiographic density
8. X-rays produced in this manner vary in energy from near
(same effect as doubling mAs, but without increase in
zero to equal to the energy of the electrons (kVp).
exposure time).
9. Low energy x-rays are of no diagnostic value and present
d. Decreasing kVp by 16% cuts radiographic density in
harmful radiation to patient and nearby personnel, as well
half (same effect as decreasing mAs by 50%).
as decrease image quality. Filters, commonly made of alu-
2. Quantity of x-rays in x-ray beam is primarily related
minum, are placed in path of x-ray beam near x-ray tube to
to mAs.
absorb low energy x-rays.
a. Determines number of x-rays produced.
10. X-rays are emitted in all directions from the target. A pro.
b. Affects blackness of film radiographs (different with
tective housing limits x-ray tube emissions to a small window.
digital images).
1l. Collimators placed near the small window further
3. Most small animal veterinary practices need at least a
restrict size and shape of x-ray beam. Collimation helps
300 mA x-ray machine capable of at least 120kVp at 300mA
reduce scatter radiation, protecting nearby personnel and
(exceptions may include practices with smaller patients, i.e..
improving image qua lity.
feline exclusive).
12. Number of x-rays produced is directly proportional to
   sa a - 
number of electrons provided.
less variable x-ray beams than do single phase units (at same
a. Number of electrons is determined by strength of
kVp settings). High frequency machines generally are smaller
electric current (milliamperage or mA) and length of
than single phase machines and may improve performance
time current is on (seconds). Product of mA and time
 of digital radiography systems. In some cases, x-ray machines
(expressed as milliamperage seconds or mAs) deter-
marketed as high frequency technically are medium fre-
mines number of x-rays produced.
quency, which may be confusing.
b. Alterations in kVp cause a small change in number
of x-rays by removing electrons more quickly from fila-
Heel effect
ment area (desaturating the cloud of electrons).
1. Anode side of x-ray tube absorbs a portion of x-rays
generated, resulting in cathode side emitting more radiation
(known as the heel effect or anode heel effect).
X-ray tube care
2. Difference in x-ray emission between cathode and anode
1. X-ray tubes generally are the most expensive part of an
sides can be as great as 40%.
l ae  n  si a d a a
3. Whenever possible, thickest part of animal should be
of an x-ray tube.
positioned on cathode side. Most x-ray tube housings are
2. Sudden increases in heat can damage a cold x-ray tube.
marked "Anode" and "Cathode." (Memory tip: cathode has 
Whenever x-ray machine has been idle more than 6 hours.
more letters and more x-rays come from cathode side.)
x-ray tube should be warmed up prior to use. Warm up
4. Heel effect is most noticeable when using a small focal
procedure:
spot, a low exposure technique, or a large field of view.
a. 60kVp. 100mA, and 1/10 second (a relatively long
exposure time).
Focal spot
b. Close collimator (for safety) and make an exposure.
1. Point on target that is struck by electrons (and where
c. Wait 30 seconds and make anther exposure using the
x-rays are generatedy.
same settings.
2. Size of focal spot influences number of x-rays that can be
d. Tube is now warmed up and ready for use.
 produced and image quality.
3. Do not exceed 80% of maximum number of heat units
3. Focal spots range from 0.6 to 2.0 mm. Most x-ray tubes
x-ray tube can withstand (as listed in x-ray tube rating
have two focal spots, a small one and a large one.
chart). Heat unit = kVp X mAs.
a. Smallfocal spot (0.6 to 1.0mm) produces better radio-
4. Rotor bearings are subject to deterioration and rotor
graphic detail but cannot tolerate heat generated by high
boost or prep time should be minimized (wait at least 30
seconds between starts of the rotor).
exposures; they are used to image structures less than
10 cm thick.
 b. Large focal spots (2.0 mm) tolerate higher exposures
kVp and mAs
and are used to image structures greater than lo cm thick.
1. Quality of x-ray beam is related to kVp.
a. Determines maximum energy (penetrating power)
Scatter radiation
of x-rays (affects number of x-rays that can penetrate
1. X-rays travel in straight lines until they interact with a
patient to reach film or detector).
material of sufficient density to absorb them.
45
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
2. Absorbed x-rays cause emission of secondary (lower
4. Some useful x-rays are absorbed by grids; therefore, more
energy} x-rays.
x-rays are required to create an image (most grid techniques
3. Secondary x-rays scatter in new and unpredictable
require at least twice the mAs of non-grid technique).
directions.
5. Grid ratio is height of a lead strip divided by distance
4. Scattered x-rays do not provide useful radiographic infor
 between adjacent strips.
mation but rather increase grayness and decrease contrast
a. Grid ratio of at least 8:l is recommended for most
and detail on radiographs, as well as expose patient and
veterinary practices.
nearby personnel to unnecessary radiation.
b. Higher grid ratios will block more scattered x-rays
5. Scattered x-rays can be minimized by:
but also absorb more useful x-rays (requires higher
a. Collimation: limiting size of x-ray beam to area of
exposure).
interest reduces available tissue where scattered x-rays
6. Grid frequency is number of lead strips per centimeter
are produced.
(or per inch).
b. Grid: placed between subject and detector blocks scat-
a. Frequencies range from 40 to 70 lines per cm (l00 to
tered x-rays from reaching detector.
170 lines per inch).
c. Air gap: increasing distance between subject and
b. Higher frequencies eliminate visible lines ("grid lines")
detector allows dissipation of scattered x-ray (but pro-
on film radiographs and reduce aliasing on digital images.
duces magnifica tion).
c. Medium frequency (50 to 60 lines per cm or 120 to
 150 lines per inch) is recommended for most veterinary
Grids
practices.
1. Grids consist of alternating strips of lead and fiber.
7. Grid focal distance is determined by angulation of lead
designed to allow useful x-rays to pass through and block
strips.
scattered x-rays (Figure 2.3).
a. Focused grids are designed for standard 90- to 100-crm
2. Configuration of lead strips may be parallel, tapered and
(40-inch) focal film distance. The focal range is typically
focused to x-ray beam, or arranged in a cross-hatched
marked on the grid front.
pattern.
 b. General purpose grids with lower ratio are commonly
3. Grid is positioned between animal and x-ray film or
used in portable radiography (focal range is larger, 80 to
detector, commonly placed under the x-ray table in a device
1 30 cm).
called a Bucky. Bucky can be configured to move rapidly
8. Grids are recommended whenever body part thickness
(Potter-Bucky diaphragm) to blur grid lines if grid ratio or
measures more than 1l0 cm.
grid frequency is low.
Film:screen systems
X-ray film
1. X-ray film consists of a transparent plastic sheet (base)
coated with an emulsion containing silver halide crystals
(Figure 2.4).
2. Crystals exposed to x-rays are activated and create a
latent image (image is latent because it is not visible until
film is developed). Crystals can also be activated by visible
light, heat, and pressure.
3. Development is a chemical process that converts acti-
X-ray Beam
vated crystals to metallic silver particles, which blacken film
to create a final image.
Box 2.1 Basic steps in radiography.
Develop:
Production of radiographs
Scattered x-ray
Display:
Radiographs are available for interpretation.
Detect:
Lesions on radiographs are noted.
Diagnose:
 Prioritized list of differential diagnoses
Grid
Distribute: Images are available to colleagues, specialists, clients.
Document: Images are part of medical record, archived, and stored.
Film
NOTE: Traditional film radiographs provide one product for all of 
Figure 2.3 Schematic showing a grid allowing incident x-rays to pass to
 these steps. Digital radiography systems separate each step.
filmn and blocking scattered x-ray5.
46
CHAPTER 2 Making Quality Radiographs
cassette
X-ray Beam
FINE
scroens
Figure 2.5 A. Number on outside of cassette. B. Number as it appears 
on radiograph
米
Intensifying Screen
+
Emulsion
1
6. Screens should periodically be inspected with a black 
light (Wood's lamp) in a darkened room to identify any
Film Base
artifact producing defects, dirt, or stains.
Emulsion
7. Screens and cassettes can be numbered to aid in identify-
ing and correcting problems. Use permanent marker to write
Intensifying Screen
a number on an inconspicuous edge of the screen (e.g., near 
identification label) and write same number on outside of
Cassette
cassette. This can also be used with CR cassettes and plates
Figure 2.4 A piece of double ermulsion x-ray filrm is sandwiched 
(Figure 2.5).
between two intensifying screens in a light-proof cassette. X-rays striking
the screens create visible light that activates crystals in x-ray filrn ermulsion
Types of film:screen systems
to produce blackened areas on filmn. X-rays striking the ernulsion also 
1. X-ray film and intensifying screens vary in speed, detail.
create black areas.
contrast, and latitude. (film:screen systems should be
matched for these factors and wavelength of light).
4. Degree of film blackening is related to number of acti-
2. Speed is a measure of the sensitivity of a system to x-rays
vated crystals that are developed, which is influenced by
and light.
quality and quantity of x-ray beam, density and thickness
a. Medium speed is 200 (called par speed).
of subject, and time and temperature of developing process.
b. 400 speed is twice as fast (twice as sensitive) as par
speed and therefore requires one-half x-ray exposure to
Intensifying screens
achieve same degree of film blackness.
1. Primary purpose of intensifying screens is to reduce x-ray
c. Speed is directly related to size of crystals in screen
exposure by enhancing effect of x-rays on film. Lower
phosphor layer, thickness of phosphor layer, and size of
exposures allow shorter exposure times. Shorter times help
crystals in film emulsion.
minimize motion artifacts, and lower exposures decrease
1) Fast-speed screens have larger phosphor crystals
radiation to patient and personnel and help prolong life of 
that emit more light per x-ray interaction (thus requir-
x-ray tube.
ing fewer x-rays to expose film).
2. Intensifying screens consist of plastic sheets coated with
 2) Fast flm has larger emulsion crystals that produce
rare earth phosphors. They are mounted inside a lightproof
bigger black areas on film, (thus requiring fewer acti-
cassette.
vated crystals to blacken film).
3. Phosphors convert x-rays to visible light (Figure 2.4).
 s  d s   (
X-ray film is many times more sensitive to light than to
less detail (similar to producing a digital image with
x-rays (in most situations, less than 5% of film exposure is
fewer, larger pixels).
due to direct interaction with x-rays; over 95% is caused by
4) Slow-speed screens and film (detail or fine speed
light).
systems) have smaller phosphor and emulsion crystals
4. Intensifying screens emit light in specific wavelengths
(produce better detail. but require greater x-ray
(usually blue or green) and x-ray film is designed to be
exposure).
3. Detail is inversely related to speed.
 intensifying screens with correct type of x-ray film).
a. Slow speed systems produce greater detail than fast
5. Intensifying screens should be cleaned at least monthly
systems, due to smaller crystals (similar to using more
with a gentle antistatic cleaner and a soft lint-free cloth
pixels per inch to create a digital image).
(stand cassette on end while screen is drying so dust doesn't
b. Slow speed (detail) film:screen systems require higher
accumulate).
x-ray exposures.
47
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
4. Latitude refers to number of shades of gray a film:screen
system is capable of displaying.
Box 2.2 Information to be permanently
a. Wide latitude systems produce more shades of gray
included on radiograph.
and lower contrast.
 5. For most veterinary practices using film:screen systerms a
● Name of veterinarian or veterinary hospital/clinic
●Name of animal
400-speed, rare earth system is recommended. A 100-speed
·Name of owner
system can be added for extremity radiography if deemed
Date radiograph was made
feasible.
 Initials of persons making radiograph 
●Body markers (R, L)
Film processing
1. Final radiographic
image is produced by  chemical
processing.
2. X-ray film can be processed manually or with an auto-
matic processor.
a. Processing times are shorter with automatic processors
because they operate at higher temperatures. which
speed up chemical reactions.
b. Chemicals in automatic processors are designed for
use at high temperatures.
3. Basic steps in film processing:
H
a. Developer converts activated silver halide crystals to
二
black metallic silver.
b. Fixer dissolves unexposed halide crystals and hardens 
film to preserve the image.
c. Washing in water removes dissolved crystals and elim-
inates remaining chemicals.
J
d. Film is dried for viewing and storage.
4. Disposal of processing chemicals must be in accordance
with environmental protection rules and regulations (com-
panies and equipment are available for reclaiming used
122:027
silver from fixer, rinsing solutions, and processed x-ray
.
filmy.
5. Manual processing tips:
a. Keep developer and fixer tanks covered to reduce
Figure 2.6 Radiograph identification should be clearly visible and
evaporation and chemical breakdown.
 permanent.
b. Maintain proper temperature of solutions (aquarium
heater in water bath is helpful).
c. Be sure chemicals are thoroughly mixed prior to each
4. Optional information that may be useful to include on
Lse.
radiographs:
d. Agitate film for a few seconds in each tank to bring
a. Animal's age, gender, breed.
film in contact with solution and remove air bubbles or
b. Breed registry number.
surface water.
c. Address and telephone number of hospital/clinic.
e. Do not allow solution to drain from film back into
d. Time of day radiograph was made (especially useful
tank for more than 2 seconds.
with contrast studies and sequential radiographs).
f. An exhaust fan should be installed in darkroom and
Used (OSHA requirement).
Storage and retention of radiographs
1. Radiographs are part of medical record and must be
Radiograph identification
stored in a safe, secure, and readily accessible location.
1. Every radiograph should be labeled for identification
 2. Typically veterinarians are required to keep medical records
(Figure 2.6).
for 3 to 5 years after final patient examination or treatment
2. Most veterinary practice laws in United States require
(some regulations require records be kept for 7 years).
proper medico-legal documentation.
3. When deciding how long to keep patient records, consid-
3. Labeling must be made permanent in film emulsion by
eration must be given to statute of limitations for malprac-
using lead markers or photo flashing equipment.
tice suits.
48
CHAPTER 2 Making Quality Radiographs
Digital radiography
The digital radiograph
1. Digital radiography is becoming commonplace in veteri-
1. Computer processing of electronic signals produces the
nary practices.
digital radiograph.
2. There are two basic types of digital systems:
a. Preprocessing calibrates overall digital system perfor-
a. Computed radiography.
mance and corrects irregularities.
b. Direct-read radiography.
b. Image processing modifies raw data to determine how
     s  h 
each individual pixel will be displayed, based on body
 of digital systems. just as they are with film:screen radiog-
part selected. A program called a look-up table (LUT)
raphy: only difference is form of image receptor (detector) .
configures pixels for thorax, abdomen, extremity, etc.
Image processing permanently alters data and has great-
Computed radiography (CR)
est effect on final image quality.
 1. Also called cassette radiography.
c. Postprocessing allows user to manipulate the final
2. CR was invented in early l980s and utilizes cassettes that
image, including changing size, brightness, contrast, and 
are similar in size, look, and feel to cassettes used with con-
shades of gray on the radiograph. Postprocessing does not
ventional film:screen systems.
permanently alter the image; any changes made can be
3. Instead of film, CR cassettes contain a phosphor-coated
undone.
imaging plate. Exposing the plate to x-rays activates phos-
2. Signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is the primary determinate of
phor crystals that create a latent image (similar to film:screen) .
image quality in digital radiography. Signal refers to useful
4. Used cassette is fed into a scanner where it is opened
information (i.e., x-rays received by detector) and noise is 
in a light-tight environment, and a laser beam reads the
nonuseful information (e.g. scatter radiation, background
exposed plate. Laser stimulates activated crystals to emit
electrical interference).
light, which is converted to electronic signals and sent to a
a. Low SNR results in poor radiographic quality (image
computer for processing and display. Laser simultaneously
appears grainy and mottled with poor contrast) and is
erases the plate so it can be used again.
caused by insufficient x-rays reaching the detector or to0
 5. CR cassettes can be placed on table top, in Bucky, or used
much background noise.
for positional radiography such as horizontal beam studies.
3. Detective quantum efficiency (DQE) is the measure of a
With proper care, CR cassettes and plates can be used thou-
 digital system's ability to produce quality radiographs when
sands of times.
sufficient x-rays are presented to the detector (DQE may
6. Exposure techniques with CR systems usually are similar
serve as a method of comparison between various digital
to those with film:screen systems.
systems).
4. Pixels (short for "picture elements") are building blocks
Direct-read radiography (DR)
of digital images.
1. Other names: DDR, digital radiography.
a. Each pixel can produce a shade of gray.
2. DR systems use flat panel detectors to convert x-rays into
 b. The number of shades of gray that a pixel can produce
electronic signals which are used to create digital images. DR
is 2, where N is pixel depth or bit depth (N is determined 
systems may directly convert x-rays to electronic signals or
by the manufacturer of a particular digital system).
indirectly. by first converting x-rays to light and then to
1) Example: if pixel depth is 8 (N = 8), then that pixel
electronic signals.
can produce any one of 2 or 256 shades of gray. If
3. DR detectors are commonly mounted under x-ray table
pixel depth is 12, pixel can produce any of over 4,000
shades of gray.
manent, but some detectors can be removed for positional
c. Humans can discriminate approximately lo0 different
radiography.
shades of gray on an image. However, computers can
4. DR systems require less user intervention than CR or
display those 1o0 shades anywhere among the numerous
film:screen systems, which allows higher patient throughput
shades of gray that pixels can produce. The process of
and increased productivity.
changing visible shades of gray on an image is called
5. Images are rapidly available for viewing on DR systems.
windowing. and it allows structures with different opaci-
often in less than l0 seconds.
ties to be displayed on one radiograph.
6. DR systems may require higher exposure techniques
5. Spatial resolution refers to radiographic detail (ability to
than with conventional film:screen systems.
 separate and define two adjacent structures on an image)
7. Charged coupling device (CCD) systems are a type of DR
and is measured in lines per millimeter (lpm). The more
system. CCD systems utilize a digital camera to record images
visible lines per millimeter, the better the resolution.
created by x-rays interacting with a fluorescent screen.
a. Traditional film radiography can resolve 7 to 10 lpm.
Image quality varies, depending on type of camera lens and
Current digital systems are capable of 2 to 5lpm
available megapixels.
resolution.
49
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
b. Spatial resolution is influenced by number, size, and
(example: lateral radiograph of stifle may underexpose
spacing of pixels (smaller pixels with tighter spacing
pelvis, but both areas can be displayed by altering window
allows more pixels to fit in the image which increases
levely.
spatial resolution).
 8. Digital radiography separates development, display, dis-
1) Pixel pitch refers to space or distance between pixels
tribution, and storage of radiographs into individual steps.
and can be as small as lo0 to l60 microns in current
each of which requires multiple services to be in place and
high-quality digital systems (human eye can distin-
compatible with each other. The digital system is only as
guish about 25 microns; width of a human hair is
good as its weakest link.
about 40 microns).
a. Development requires a high-quality detector and an
 2) Smaller pixel size and pitch results in better detail
x-ray machine capable of producing sufficient exposures.
but requires higher x-ray exposure.
b. Displaying of images is done at workstations and
6. Amount of information contained in a digital image is
viewing stations.
determined by number of pixels (i.e., digital matrix) and
 1) Workstations are sites where data can be entered.
expressed in bytes (1 byte = 2*bits of data; 1 kilobyte = 1,024
images previewed, and patient information can be
bytes).
linked to the radiographs.
a. Example: a 256 × 256 matrix has 256 columns with
2) Viewing stations, usually remote from the radiol-
256 pixels in each column and contains 256 × 256 = 64
ogy suite, are sites where images can be reviewed.
kilobytes of data.
interpreted, and shared. Postprocessing software is
b. Digital radiography images commonly range from 10
used at the viewing stations.
to 20 MB in size (or larger).
-opi [eip e Aeldsip oi pasn nouou jo adai au (t
7. Dynamic range refers to minimum and maximum x-ray
graph is a vital link to image quality. Minimum
b e anpoid oi idae u wass ue u sainsodxa
requirements for monitors include resolution of 1600
radiograph (Figure 2.7).
X 1200 pixels, brightness of 50 foot-lamberts, and con-
a. Digital systems have a much wider dynamic range
than conventional film:screen systems (100 times greater)
a common weak link in digital radiography systems.
and therefore are much more forgiving of inappropriate
C. Distribution of radiographs relies on appropriate soft-
exposures.
ware and network connections. Programs must be com-
b. Large dynamic range of digital systems allows visual-
patible with practice management systems and be able to
ization of both thin and thick structures on one image
tation, and to storage sites.
d. Storage and archiving must be configured to preserve
radiographic studies for both short and long terms. Ready
digital
 dancy to data storage via a remote, offsite backup is
ilm
recommended.
Picture Archiving and Communication
ndino
System (PACS)
1. System or network of computers used to accomplish
many services required in digital radiography:
P Pictures made available for viewing. interpretation,
reporting, and consultation from multiple modalities
(radiology, ultrasound, CT, MRI, etc.).
A Archiving and storage of imaging studies for both short
and long terms.
(100:1)
C Communication with local and remote computers.
10000:1
professionals, and consultants to manage work flow and
A
share information.
log relative exposure
S System coordination and integration to work with
Figure 2.7 Dynarmic range. Film has a lirmited cynarmic range (A-B).
radiology information systems (RIS), hospital informa-
A minimum exposure is needed (A) to produce an image, and exposure
tion systems (HIS). and others to enable a paperless
greater than B totally blackens the filrn. Digital radiography has a much
environment.
wider range (100 times that of film) and is more forgiving of
1) RIS coordinates, manipulates, distributes, and stores
inappropriate exposures.
diagnostic imaging data.
50
CHAPTER 2 Making Quality Radiographs
2) HIs involves all aspects of hospital information (e.g.-
6. Radiograph appears underexposed:
administration, financial, clinical).
a. Caused either by a LUT error or severe underexposure
(latter will include quantum mottle).
Digital Imaging and Communication in
b. Appears as an image that is too white and may be
Medicine (DICOM)
mottled and with poor contrast.
1. Preferred method for storing digital radiography images
a Apns bueadan no ini ausnie Aq panoa "j
(DICOM is not a type of image but rather a specific file
proper exposure.
format, such as JPEG or TIFF).
7. Radiograph appears overexposed:
2. DICOM files contain information specific to patient, type
a. Caused either by a LUT error or severe overexposure
of digital equipment, image transmission, and pixel data.
(latter will include saturation artifact).
These files can be viewed only with a DICOM viewer.
b. Appears as an image that is too black and, if overex-
3. Radiographs stored as DICOM files are safeguarded to
posed, cannot be brightened enough to visualize any
prevent permanent altering of images.
stru ctures.
4. Intent of DICOM was to standardize digital radiographs
c. Corrected by adjusting the LUT or repeating the study
aq u s ii auo au uo aa n ue i os
with proper exposure.
viewed on any other digital system, without loss of quality
8. Aliasing or moire pattern:
DICoM conformance currently is voluntary in veterinary
a. Caused by inadequate sampling of x-ray signal and
medicine with no official testing or oversight.
low frequency grid lines.
 b. Appears as a series of repeating lines superimposed on
Artifacts in digital radiography
the image.
1. Artifacts can mimic disease, impair image quality, and
c. Corrected by using a higher frequency grid.
obscure abnormalities.
9. Planking:
2. Although digital radiography is more tolerant of inap-
a. Caused by overexposure and saturation of detector.
propriate exposures than conventional film:screen systems,
which reveals nonuniformities in the imaging plate.
technical errors (e.g., malpositioning. motion artifact, double
b. Appears as broad dark bands, usually at periphery or
exposure) still occur, and artifacts caused by hardware, soft-
edge of image.
ware, or operator error commonly arise.
c. Corrected by repeating study with proper exposure.
3. Quantum mottle:
10. Halo effect (AKA rebound artifact, Uberschwinger
a. Caused by too few x-rays reaching detector or to0
artifact):
much noise (low SNR).
a. Caused by an error in image processing: commonly
 b. Appears as a nonuniform, grainy, mottled, or textured
 n a    u
pattern on radiograph.
image contrast.
c. Corrected by increasing kVp. If background is also
b. Appears as a dark zone or black halo adjacent to a
mottled, increase mAs. Reduce scatter radiation by col-
oi   iq o i s a
limating the x-ray beam. Correct any processing errors.
adjacent to a metal implant.
4. Clipping:
c. Corrected by turning off the processing algorithm
a. Caused by a look-up-table (LUT) error (a processing
and viewing image as raw data.
error) in which pixel data is lost.
11. Contouring (AKA onion skinning):
b. Appears as black areas where tissues should be visible.
a. Caused by variable output of x-rays (heel effect) or
Usually involves thinner and peripheral areas, such as
insufficient pixel depth.
extremities. More dense tissues (i.e., bone) are visible.
 b. Appears as multiple regions of slowly varying con-
but less dense soft tissues are lost. Images cannot be
trast across the image.
brightened enough to restore lost information.
c. Corrected by increasing exposure.
c. Corrected by adjusting the LUT settings.
12. Ghost image:
5. Saturation (AKA picture burnout, pixel dropout):
a. Caused by reusing an imaging plate too quickly, per-
a. Caused by too many x-rays reaching detector and
 sistence of a previous overexposure, or failure of erasure
overwhelming the pixels, rendering them incapable of
mechanism. A residual image remains because plate has
responding to additional input.
not lost all of its charge.
b. Pixel dropout also refers to damaged, nonfunctional
b. May also
result from
operator 
error (double
pixels.
exposure).
C. Appears as a black area on radiograph. Image cannot
c. Appears as a double image (includes current image
be brightened enough to visualize any structures in these
and an image from previous study)
areas.
d. Corrected by repeating current study (usually only a
few minutes are needed to allow the plate to recover).
51
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
13. Uneven exposure:
Opacity (radiopacity)
a. Caused by faulty calibration of detector plate.
1. Other names: density, radiodensity, attenuating ability.
b. Appears as repeatable, paired, white and black struc-
ture on the image.
c. Corrected by recalibrating the plate (plates should
Density is an old term for opacity and is not used in this context
be calibrated at least monthly and sometimes weekly.
in modern radiology. Density today refers to radiographic
depending on use).
density. which is the overall blackness of an image. Some
14. Zipper artifact:
 people stillsubstitute density for opacity in diagnostic radiology.
a. Caused by rapid minor movements of the patient
 Part of the confusion lies in the fact that the physical density
(such as trembling or shalking) against the imaging plate.
-nojun Xipedo plydeaboipen sl! ol paielan s! lellarew e jo
b. Can be caused by a nearby radiofrequency interference.
nately, density continues to be used in computed tomography
C.
 Appears as multiple repeating lines on the image.
to describe opacity.
d. Corrected by moving plate away from patient or
identifying source of radiofrequency interference.
e. Artifact often occurs intermittently, making identiff-
2. Refers to quality of a material to be opaque to x-rays (i.e..
ca tion of interference difficult.
15. Line(s) across image:
ability to attenuate, absorb, block, or prevent passage of
a. Caused by poor calibration of imaging plate, or grid
x-rays).
lines, or a faulty/loose data cable.
3. In context of this book, radio (x-ray) is a given, and opacity
will be used to describe x-ray attenuating ability of a
b. A single white line on a CR image may be caused by
defective laser beam scanner.
material.
c. Appears as parallel or perpendicular white lines
4. Amount of x-rays a material can block is based on atomic
 across the image.
number and thickness. Compactness of a material (such as
d. Corrected by recalibrating the plate or repairing the
bone that is cancellous or corticalj will also have an effect.
cable.
a. Probability (P) of x-ray attenuation is proportional to
e. When switching from film:screen to digital, the grid
atomic number cubed (A'):
 may need to be modified.
16. Pixilated image:
a. Caused by excessive magnification or using a low-
Pα A3
quality monitor.
b. Appears as a grainy image consisting of pixels that
 are too large.
b. Materials with large atomic numbers will block signifi-
c. Corrected by adjusting image processing or switching
cantly more x-rays than those with small atomic numbers.
to a higher quality monitor.
c. Since body tissues are composites of many different
17. Processing algorithm errors:
molecules, they are given an effective atomic number
a. Caused by preprograrmmed processing algorithms
(Table 2.1).
that affect the way pixels are displayed.
 5. All materials are opaque to x-rays to some degree:
b. Appears as an image that is too blurry or hazy. has
a. Bone, metal, and contrast media block many x-rays 
too much contrast, or is too grainy.
and appear white on radiographs (few x-rays are able to
c. Corrected by adjusting processing algorithms. Current
image can be viewed as raw data and postprocessing can
 be used to manipulate the image.
Table 2.1 Body tissues and effective atomic numbers
18. CR system artifacts:
a. CR cassettes are always "on" and continuously receive
Tissue
 Effective Atomic Number
background radiation, which can cause fogging. Cassettes
that have not been used in 24 hours should be fed
Air/gas
1.8
through the scanner to be erased prior to making
Fat
6.5
radiogra phs.
Water
7.5
Muscle 
b. CR cassettes are built to be used for thousands of
7.6
Bone
12.3
exposures but can crack or bend with rough handling.
lodine 
51.0
 n r s rad i si  
Barium 
56.0
white areas on image.
Lead 
82.0
c. Dirt, hair, or debris in cassette will create white areas
 on the image.
52
CHAPTER 2 Making Quality Radiographs
X-rays
Gas
Fat
Soft
Tissue
Bone
Metal
T?TTTTTTTTTTTT
LessOpaque
MoreOpaque
Figure 2.8 The five basic opacities and their abilities to block x-rays (Adapted from Owen5 and Biery 1999.)
penetrate and blacken the film): these have classically
X-RAYS
been called radiopaque.
b. Gas (air) blocks very few x-rays and appears black on
radiographs (many x-rays are able to penetrate and
blacken the film); gas has classically been called
radiolucent.
c. Terms radiolucent and radiopaque provide relatively
little information and become confusing as structures
change from radiolucent to radiopaque. Examples of
    n  
less opaque, mineral opacity and gas opacity.
Figure 2.9 Summation. Schematic showing effects of summation on
6. Five basic opacities can be distinguished on medical
 opacity with materials of samme and different physical densities.
radiographs (Figure 2.8):
(Black represents ga5, gray is soft tissue, and white is bone.)
a. Gas (air) is least opaque and blocks very little of the
x-ray beam (appears black on radiographs).
(summation; Figure 2.9); example: overlapping kidneys
b. Fat is more opaque than gas. but less than soft tissue
on lateral radiograph.
(appears relatively dark gray on radiographs).
8. Relative opacity:
C. Soft tissue (e.g., muscle, liver, heart) and fluid (e.g..
a. The five basic opacities do not produce specific shades
blood, urine, water) are indistinguishable in opacity and
of gray on an image.
are more opaque than fat, but less than bone (appear
lighter gray on radiographs).
d. Bone is much more opaque than soft tissue and blocks
much of the x-ray beam (appears almost white on
Opacity is always relative to known structures or materials.
radiographs).
e. Metal (includes
6 positive contrast media) is most
opaque and blocks most of the x-ray beam (appears
b. Shade is affected by radiographic technique, summa-
bright white on radiographs).
tion, thickness, and other factors.
 7. In addition to density, thickness of a material will affect
c. Fat and gas can produce similar shades on a radio-
its opa city.
graph (Figure 2.10). but gas is distinguished from fat
a. Compared with thinner material of same density.
because of location (inside a bowel or lung rather than
thicker material will block more x-rays and appear more
where fat would be expected).
opaque.
d. Whether a material is soft tissue, fat, etc. is determined
b. Overlapping materials of same density will also block
by relating its appearance to adjacent structures of known
dao jo ar un abdo ao radde pu six ao
opa city.
53
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Technique chart
d. Grid type (ratio and lines per inch).
1. An accurate technique chart is essential to making con
e. Processing method (manual or automatic).
sistent, high -quality radiographs.
 1) Processing chemicals should be in good condition
2. Must be customized to each radiography system, whether
and well mixed.
digital or conventional film:screen.
2. Select an animal that is typical type seen at your clinic or
hospital (usually a medium-sized dog [20kg] that is not
Making a technique chart
overweight).
1. Following factors must be standardized prior to making
3. Since abdomen is body part with most soft tissue opaci-
technique chart:
ties, it is used as the starting point. Settings determined for
a. X-ray machine: in good working order with dedicated
abdominal radiography can then be increased for orthopedic
radiography and decreased for thoracic radiography.
reduces variable output caused by power fluctuations).
b. Source to image distance (SID): distance between
Abdomen
source of x-rays (S) and image detector (D), usually 40
1. Starting kVp = (abdomen thickness in cm × 2) + (SID in
inches (90 to 100 cm).
inches). Example: abdomen measures 15 cm and SID is 40
1) Longer SID produces better image detail but
 inches; starting kVp = (15 × 2) + 40 = 70kVp.
requires greater x-ray output.
2. Make three lateral radiographs using starting kVp and
n iq idio Ax ssa s  a (
mAs settings of 5, 7.5, and 10.
detail decreases due to edge blurriness. NOTE: Shorter
3. Process and dry each radiograph prior to selecting image
with best technique (Figure 2.1l).
chines, such as portable units.
4. Underexposed film radiographs (too white):
c. Film:screen system or digital system type and speed.
a. If background of radiograph is black (where there
is no animal), mAs is sufficient and kVp needs to be
increased (at least 15%). Test blackness of background by
sliding your hand between radiograph and view box:
your fingers should barely be visible
b. If background is not black enough, then increase mAs
(at least double) . This is limited by the size of the machine.
If exposure time over 1/30 second is required, increasing
mAs will not be fruitful.
5. Overexposed film radiographs (too dark):
a. Cut mAs in half (reduce time by half). If still overex-
EAT
posed, cut mAs in half again.
6. Make adjustments to exposure technique until desired
GAS
quality is achieved.
7. Once ideal exposure for this abdomen thickness is deter-
mined, a technique chart can be made for all other abdo-
mens (Table 2.2).
iu Aene po apers ui seis seae omi iedo aeat oi'z ani
are determined to be fat and gas opacity because of their shade relative
a. For every l cm change in thickness, add or subtract
to surroundling items and knowledge of anatomy and physiology
2kVp (up to 80kVp).
Figure 2.11 Trial abdominal radliographs. A. Underexposed. B. Proper technique. C. Overexposed
54
CHAPTER 2 Making Quality Radiographs
Table 2.2 Technique chart with variable kVp
Thickness
Thorax
Abdomen
Skeleton
cm
kVp
mAs
kVp
mAs
kVp
mAs
1
50
2.5
42
5.0
36
10
2
52
2.5
44
5.0
38
10
3
54
2.5
46
5.0
40
10
56
2.5
48
5.0
42
10
5
58
2.5
50
5.0
44
10
6
60
2.5
52
5.0
46
10
1
62
2.5
54
5.0
48
10
8
64
2.5
56
5.0
50
10
9
66
2.5
58
5.0
52
10
10
68
2.5
60
5.0
54
10
Use grid
11
70
5.0
62
10
56
20
12
72
5.0
64
10
58
20
13
74
5.0
66
10
60
20
14
76
5.0
68
10
62
20
15
78
5.0
70
10
64
20
16
80
5.0
72
10
66
20
17
83
5.0
74
10
68
20
18
86
5.0
76
10
70
20
19
89
5.0
78
10
72
20
20
92
5.0
80
10
74
20
21
95
5.0
83
10
76
20
22
98
5.0
86
10
78
20
23
89
10
89
10
80
20
24
92
10
92
10
E8
20
25
78
10
78
20
74
40
26
80
10
80
20
76
40
27
83
10
83
20
78
40
28
86
10
86
20
80
40
29
89
10
89
20
68
40
30
92
10
92
20
86
40
31
95
10
95
20
89
40
32
98
10
98
20
92
40
b. Between 80 and 100kVp. add or subtract 3kVp for
 2. Abdomen mAs is decreased by 50% for thoracic radiog-
every l cm change in thickness.
raphy (Table 2.2).
c. Above 100 kVp. add 4kVp for every 1 cm change in
3. Decreasing mAs alone may yield quality thoracic radio-
thickness.
 graphs, but kVp may need to be slightly increased or decreased
 8. If required kVp exceeds capability of x-ray machine,
(start with 10% changes in kVp).
decrease kVp by l6%, double the mAs, and continue filling
in technique chart. (See Table 2.2, Thorax, at 23 cm thick-
Skeleton
ness for an example of decreasing kVp and increasing mAs.)
 9. When abdomen thickness exceeds 10 cm, a grid is used
1. Abdomen mAs is doubled for orthopedic radiography
(Table 2.2).
and mAs is doubled (for 8:l grid ratio).
Thorax
mAs table
1. Thoracic cavity is mostly air filled, and thoracic radiographs
 1. Aids clinician and technician in selecting shortest expo-
require less x-ray exposure than abdominal radiographs.
sure times.
55
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
b. Decrease contrast (less black and white, more shades
Table 2.3 mAs chart 
of gray in between): cut mAs in half and increase kVp by
Time (secs.)
50mA
100 mA
200mA
300 mA
20% (may need to repeat).
1/60 (0.016)
0.83
1.67
3.33
5.00
6. If no technique chart is immediately available, exposure
1/30 (0.033)
1.67
3.33
5.00
10.00
techniques can be roughly approximated using following
1/20 (0.050)
2.50
5.00
10.00
15.00
formulas:
1/15 (0.066)
6.67
13.30
20.00
a. kVp = (body part thickness in cm x 2) + SID in inches.
1/10 (0.100)
5.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
Example: abdomen measures 12cm and SID is 40 inches:
2/10 (0.200)
10.00
20.00
40.00
60.00
starting kVp = (12 × 2) + 40 = 64kVp.
(OOE'O) 0 L/E
15.00
00:0E
60.00
90.00
b. mAs = 1 + (0.1 mAs ×body weight in Ibs). Example: animal
4/10 (0.400)
20.00
40.00
80.00
120.00
weighs 22 lb; estimated mAs = 1 + (0.1 × 22) = 3.2 mAs.
1/2 (0.500)
25.00
50.00
100.00
150.00
c. General estimations for mAs based on body weight
3/5 (0.600)
30.00
60.00
120.00
180.00
(kg):
4/5 (0.800)
40.00
80.00
160.00
240.00
1) Less than 10kg: 2.5 to 5 mAs.
1 (1.000)
50.00
100.00
200.00
00:000
2) 10 to 25kg: 5 to 10 mAs.
3) Over 25kg: 10 to 15 mAs.
Radiation safety
2. Lists all available mA settings across top and all available
time settings (in seconds) down left side (Table 2.3).
1. X-rays are a type of ionizing radiation and can damage
DNA, either by direct interaction or secondarily through
 General guidelines for selecting proper exposure
creation of free radicals. Actively dividing tissues are most
settings (art of radiography)
sensitive to damage from x-rays (e.g., reproductive organs.
1. Minor adjustments to technique chart may be needed
intestinal epithelium, blood-forming tissues, eyes).
depending on practice situation and as a variety of animals
2. There is no safe dose of x-rays. No threshold exists below
and disease conditions are presented for radiography.
which it is safe to be exposed to x-rays. Any amount of x-ray
a. For example, thoracic chart settings may be config-
exposure can result in tissue damage. In addition, effects of
ured with higher kVp and corresponding lower mAs to
radiation are cumulative and may not become apparent
decrease contrast and exposure times.
until later in life.
2. Changes in exposure should be at least 10% in kVp or
3. Radiology facilities must be clearly marked with radiation
25% in mAs.
warning signs (Figure 2.12).
a. To effect a change in contrast, a 15%-20% change in
4. X-ray machines in veterinary practices commonly are
 kVp is required, with a corresponding doubling or halving
inspected every 3 years by state department of health. Inspec-
of mAs.
tions frequently are random and unannounced.
 b. Always use shortest exposure time possible to reduce
5. X-rays are invisible, travel at the speed of light, have no
motion artifact.
mass, no charge, and cannot be felt. They can only be
3. Conditions that may require greater exposure:
detected indirectly.
a. Obesity (thorax).
6. Radiation detection badges, called dosimeters, are the
b. Body cavity effusion (e.g., ascites, pleural fluid).
most common method of documenting exposure to x-rays.
c. Positive contrast studies.
d. Radiographs 
made through
bandaging
cast
 inside a protective plastic case. The film is periodically pro-
or
material.
4. Conditions that may require lower exposure:
a. Emaciation.
CAUTION
b. Immaturity.
c. Pneumothorax.
d. Negative contrast studies.
e. Compression radiography.
5. Radiographic contrast can be altered by changing kVp
and mAs.
a. Increase contrast (more black and white, fewer shades
RADIATION
of gray in between): double mAs and decrease kVp by
Figure 2.12 Standard radiation warning sign, generally printed in
16% (may need to do this at least two times).
yellow and purple colors.
56
CHAPTER 2 Making Quality Radiographs
Box 2.3 Factors that limit x-ray exposure
dose.
Shielding (barriers, protective clothing)
 Distance from source of x-rays 
Time spent in presence of x-ray production
 Quantity and quality of x-rays being used
1D
cessed to measure the amount of x-ray exposure it has
2D
received. Other types of dosimeters include electronic, ther-
moluminescence, and optically stimulated luminescence
devices. Dosimeters should be worn outside of protective
Intensity=
 clothing by all personnel worlking with or around x-rays.
D
7. No one under the age of l8 or pregnant should be
3D
exposed to x-rays in a veterinary practice.
Figure 2.13 Newton's inverse square law. Doubling the distance (D)
 8. The Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) has set limits
frorn the source of x-rays decreases the x-ray beam intensity (l) by a
for the maximum allowable dose of radiation a person can
factor of four.
receive in a year. Limits are expressed in units called rems
or Sieverts.
b. Lower exposures are possible with fast film:screen
a. Medical personnel are allowed up to 5 rem or 50 mil-
liSievert (msv) per year.
systems or sensitive digital detectors.
c. Minimize retakes by using an accurate technique
b. Nonmedical personnel and the general public should
 chart, adequate animal restraint, and proper positioning
receive no more than 0.l rem (1 mSv) in a year.
9. Exposure to x-rays should always be as low as reasonably
(every retake multiplies exposure to personnel: 1
retake = 2x exposure, 2 retakes = 3x exposure).
achievable (ALARA).
10. Shielding: materials designed to block passage of x-rays.
Qualities of film radiographs
a. Barriers made of dense materials (e.g., lead, concrete).
b. Protective clothing (e.g. aprons, gloves, glasses.
Density (radiographic density)
 1. Refers to overall blackness of radiograph (i.e., amount of
thyroid shields) with at least 0.5mm lead equivalent
silver precipitated on film).
(NOTE: Clothing is only protective when it is worn).
1) Protective clothing is designed to protect against
2. Density is determined by measuring amount of light that
scatter radiation only (not primary x-ray beam).
is transmitted through film (high density = low transmission
of light).
1l. Distance from x-ray source:
 3. If quality of well-positioned radiograph is not ideal, change 
a. X-rays travel in straight lines and diverge as they
in density is primary correction needed (if fogging is not an
move away from the source.
issue):
b. Inverse square law: as distance increases, intensity of
a. Underexposed radiographs need more density.
S pu  ir e iaao p s  a-x
b. Overexposed radiographs need less density.
(doubling distance will decrease x-ray intensity by a
factor of four, Figure 2.13).
12. Time spent in presence of x-rays:
a. Damaging effects of x-rays are cumulative.
poob sey 'pauollsod liam s! 1eyl yde yboipey e ay!l l,uop noA Hl
b. Rotate medical personnel to avoid excessive expo-
detail, and is not fogged, think density first. If you fix the
sure to any individual.
density. you will probably like the radiograph. If not, THEN
c. Only personnel necessary to the procedure should be
consider contrast.
in x-ray room.
d. Manual restraint of animals should be avoided when-
ever possible (sedation, positioning aids, and/or restraint
devices are recommended to position animals).
Detail (definition)
13. Quality and quantitiy of x-rays:
1. Refers to edge sharpness of structures on a radiograph.
a. Exposures should be as low as possible to achieve a
2. Visualization of fine structures, such as bony trabeculae
diagnostic quality image.
and pulmonary vessels, requires high detail.
57
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
3. Higher detail often is achieved at expense of higher
exposures.
Box 2.4 Darkroom safelight test.
4. Motion artifact is most common cause of poor detail in
●Place unused piece of x-ray film on countertop in darkroom.
veterinary radiology (short exposure times minimize motion
Cover half of film with a piece of cardboard.
artifact).
● Leave film exposed to safelight for 2 minutes.
·Process film
Distortion
Two halves of radiograph should be equally exposed.
1. Refers to altered size or shape of a subject as seen on a
●If not, there is safelight fog.
radiograph.
2. Caused by magnification or malpositioning of subject (see
Geometry of Radiographic Image).
Contrast
1. Refers to degree of black and white distinction on a
radiograph.
2. High-contrast radiographs contain few shades of gray
between black and white (highest contrast is all black and
white with no shades of gray).
3. Low-contrast radiographs contain many shades of gray
(darkest shades are not as black and lightest shades are not
as white as on high contrast images).
a. Radiographs with low contrast are not as visually striking
as high contrast images, but many shades of gray are useful
s d a a u s 
4. Best contrast varies depending on tissues being
radiographed:
a. High contrast is more desirable for orthopedic
radiography.
b. Medium contrast is used for abdomen.
Figure 2.14 Static electricity. Branching black artifact on radiograph
 caused by visible light frorn static electricity
c. Low contrast is needed to evaluate lungs.
5. Settings for kVp and mAs affect contrast:
a. High kVp and low mAs reduces contrast (more shades
of gray).
b. Low kVp and high mAs increases contrast (fewer
shades of gray, more black and white).
6. Scatter radiation (fogging) is most common cause of
unacceptably low radiographic contrast.
Fogging
1. Refers to nondiagnostic blackening ("graying") of a film
radiograph.
2. May result from scatter radiation, light, heat, chemicals
or pressure.
a. Scatter radiation fogging is reduced with collimation,
grids, and storing film and cassettes away from scattered
x-rays.
Figure 2.15 Crescent-shaped artifact on radiograph (right) caused by
b. Light fogging is reduced by eliminating light leaks in
rough handling that resulted in a crease in the undeveloped film (left)
darkroom, using correct safelight wattage and filter, and
storing unused film in a lightproof container.
film on end instead of flat (weight of film produces pres-
1) Static electricity produces light and creates black,
sure fogging on lower sheets).
irregularly branching artifacts or multiple blackened
1) Bending or creasing film results in thin, black,
foci and smudges on radiographs (Figure 2.14).
crescent-shaped artifacts (commonly called thumb
c. Pressure fogging is reduced by avoiding rough han-
nail artifacts, Figure 2.15).
dling of undeveloped film and storing unused boxes of
2) Pushing on film creates dark, hazy smudges.
58
CHAPTER 2 Making Quality Radiographs
d. Heat fogging is eliminated by storing film below 60°F.
detector (Figure 2.l7) decreases penumbra but
e. Chemical fogging is reduced by not storing film near
requires greater exposure (inverse square law; Figure
cleaning agents, ammonia, hydrogen peroxide, formalde-
2.13).
hyde, and other chemicals. Outdated film can also become
a) NOTE: Standard distance in most veterinary
chemically fogged as film "self-develops" over time.
 practices is 40 inches (90 to 100 cm).
3) Shorter distance between subject and imaging
Geometry of radiographic image
detector (Figure 2.l8) produces less magnification
1. Radiographic appearance of a subject is influenced by its
and less penumbra. If magnification is desired, use 
position and orientation relative to the imaging detector.
small focal spot and move subject further from the
(NOTE: Many effects of geometry can be demonstrated using
detector (place subject on foam block or cardboard box).
a flashlight and observing the shadow cast by an object, such
4) Penumbra size dependents on ratio between dis-
as the observer's hand.)
tance from focal spot to detector and distance from
subject to detector.
3. Distortion:
Geometric unsharpness and magnification are controlled by
a. Geometric distortion results from unequal magnifica-
focal spot size and the ratio of the distance from the subject
tion of subject (part of subject is positioned closer to focal
(object) to the receiver and the source to the receiver (ORD/
spot than other parts; Figure 2.19).
SID).
b. Positional distortion may result from improper align-
 ment of subject with x-ray beam and imaging detector.
 Subjects not perpendicular to center of x-ray bearm are
2. Penumbra (geometric unsharpness):
altered in size or shape on radiographs (Figure 2.20):
a. X-rays do not originate from a single point but are
 normal structures at periphery of radiograph may appear
generated over a small area (focal spot).
abnormal (e.g., false narrowing of intervertebral disc
b. As x-rays pass from either side of focal spot across the
spaces, false enlargement of cardiac silhouette).
edge of a subject, they create partial outer shadows
(Figure 2.16).
c. These partial shadows are called penumbra and cause
 Positioning guide
blurring of edges and loss of detail.
d. Conditions that minimize penumbra and increase detail:
General considerations
1) Small focal spot produces less penumbra but limits
1. Animals in distress must be stabilized before making
exposures.
radiographs.
2) Larger distance between focal spot and imaging
2. At least two orthogonal radiographs (9o° to each other)
detector with static distance between the subject and
are required for complete evaluation.
Small Focal Spot
Large Focal Spot
Figure 2.16 Focal spot size. Small focal spot produces smaller penumbra and sharper detail, but limits x-ray exposure
59
Focal Spot
Focal Spot
Penumbra
gnuad ssal aim sapa ladiees pue uoenyuneuu sal satean anueisi jahuon anursip wly on rods ienos zi'z anoi
FocalSpof
Figure 2.18 Magnification. Short distance between focal spot and subject or long distance between subject and filrn results in magnification and larger penumbra.
Focal Spot
FFocalSpot
Figure 2.19 Distortion. One side of subject is closer to focal spot, resulting in unequal magnification and loss of true shape.
60
CHAPTER 2 Making Quality Radiographs
FocalSpot
Focal Spot
Figure 2.20 Alignment. Subject is not perpendicular to center of x-ray beam and is distorted on radiographs.
SandBag
Ties
Figure 2.21 Positioning aids for radliography. Nonmanual restraint is recornmended whenever poible. Types of restraint devices include ties (rope.
tape, gauze, etc.), sandbag5. foarm wedges, towel5, and troughs
3. Adherence to radiation safety protocols is mandatory.
4. Animal restraint must be adequate to minimize move-
ment and avoid repeat radiographs. Sedation of animal may
be less stressful than struggling with an animal, and often
yields superior radiographs.
CRANIAL
CAUDAL
5. Known large volumes of pleural or peritoneal fluid
should be removed prior to imaging.
6. Quality radiographs require proper positioning of animal.
 accurate centering of x-ray beam, appropriate collimation.
and correct exposure factors.
7. Positioning aids include foam wedges, towels, sand bags.
troughs, and tie-downs (Figure 2.2l).
8. Primary  x-ray beam  should be centered on area of
CRANIAL
CAUDAL
interest.
CRANIAL
CAUDAL
DORSAL
PLANTAR
9. Collimate primary x-ray beam to area of interest.
CORSA
PALMAR
10. Use as short an exposure time as possible.
PROXIMAL
11. Measure thickest portion of body part being imaged (use
DISTAL
grid when greater than 10 cm).
Figure 2.22 Anatomic nomenclature. Terms used to describe direction
12. Making opposite lateral and comparison radiographs
of x-ray beam and locations of radiographic findings in veterinary practice
often aids in detection of lesions.
(Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
61
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Thoracic radiographs
12. Exposure technique used to examine lungs may not
General
allow critical evaluation of bony structures. Supplemental
1. Left lateral and dorsoventral (ventrodorsal) radiographs
radiographs with altered exposure, positioning. and center
are standard.
ing of x-ray beam may be needed. (NOTE: Higher exposures
2. Adding a right lateral radiograph aids in evaluation of
increase potential for motion artifact).
unilateral disease and in screening for pulmonary metastatic
13. Superimposed extrathoracic structures 1
 may  mimic
disease.
intrathoracic lesions. Orthogonal radiographs and physical
3. If neither dorsoventral nor ventrodorsal radiographs are
examination aid in localizing questionable lesions; however.
possible, make both right and left lateral radiographs. Rather
when uncertainty remains, superficial thoracic structures
large lung lesions can be hidden on a single lateral radio-
should be marked with a small amount of barium and radio-
graph because the "down" lung may collapse, causing edge
 graphs repeated.
 effacement in that lobe.
 4. Widest part of thorax usually is over liver at level of
Lateral thoracic radiograph (Figure 2.23)
xyphoid (same as abdomen).
1. Animal is in left or right lateral recumbency.
5. Exposure time should be 1/60 (0.017) second or less to
2. Thoracic limbs are pulled cranially to avoid superimposi-
minimize motion artifact.
tion over thoracic cavity.
6. Use high kVp and low mAs technique to reduce exposure
3. Pelvic limbs are pulled caudally. (NOTE: Avoid over-
time and produce radiographs with many shades of gray.
stretching the animal, which can distort shape of thorax and 
a. Fine pulmonary structures are more visible on radio-
compress heart and lungs: especially with cats and small
graphs with many shades of gray (sometimes described
(ssop
as "long scale of contrast" or "wide latitude" radiographs).
4. Spine and sternum should be same distance from film or
7. Expose radiographs at peak inspiration:
 detector (sternum may need to be elevated with foam wedge
a. Maximizes contrast between gas-filled lung and soft
or towel to eliminate rotation, especially important with
tissue pulmonary structures (enhance lesion detection
deep-chested dogs).
and vessel evaluation).
a. Rotation of sternum separates mainstem bronchi and
b. Better separates intrathoracic structures and reduces
may mimic left atrial enlargement or a heart base mass.
summation artifacts.
5. Nondependent (up) lung is better inflated (more venti-
c. Eliminates artifactual increase in lung opacity which
lated) and less perfused than dependent (down) lung due to
 occurs during expiration
8. If dog is panting. try temporarily holding its mouth
closed, bring x-ray tube rotor to full speed, release dog's
mouth, and allow a deep inspiration prior to exposure.
Box 2.5 Good-quality thoracic radiographs.
9. Primary x-ray beam is centered over heart (landmarks
● Background of radiograph (where there is no animal) is black.
include caudal edge of scapula or between 4th and 6th
·Primary x-ray beam is centered on heart.
intercostal spaces or at point of maximum intensity of
+
 Entire bony thorax is included.
heartbeat).
Absence of rotation.
10. Collimate x-ray beam to minimize scatter radiation and
 Absence of motion artifact.
enhance detail.
●Made at peak inspiration.
11. Field of view includes entire thorax (thoracic inlet,
●Heart and lungs adequately exposed for evaluation.
spine, sternum, and last pair of ribs).
Figure 2.23 Lateral thoracic radiograph. X-ray beam is centered on heart or caudal edge of scapula; thoracic limbs are pulled cranial; foamm wedge
under sternum to correct rotation; collination includes entire bony thorax; exposure is made at peak inspiration
62
CHAPTER 2 Making Quality Radiographs
Si hun hai uagnau leael hu ui jee ym shu yog jo ma  yosal a se x uy uoeui hun huanuada-e tz'z ana
down and therefore less inflated, resulting in poor visualization of lesion in right lung. Lesion in left lung is more visible. B. View of one lung with animal
in ventral recumbency. Ventral part of lung is less inflated, resulting in poor visualization of lesion in ventral lung. Dorsal part of lung is better inflated 
and dorsal lesion is more visible. Caudal lobe vessels are easy to see. C. View of one lung with animal in dorsal recumbency. Dorsal part of lung is less
inflated, resulting in poor visualization of lesion in cdorsal lung and caudal lobe vessels. Ventral part of lung is better inflated and ventral lesion is more
visible.
Box 2.6 Good-quality lateral thoracic
radiograph.
Cranial thoracic vertebrae are underexposed due to overlying
shoulders.
●Dorsal spinous processes are faintly visible through scapulae.
●Ribs are faintly visible where they overlie the cardiac
silhouette.
Costochondral junctions are at same level.
●Ribs do not extend dorsal to (above) spine.
·Made at peak inspiration:
● Cranial lung borders extend to first ribs.
· Cardiac silhouette and diaphragm are separated by lung.
with little or no contact.
●Caudal vena cava is horizontal or parallel with spine.
● Lumbophrenic angles are open (angles tend to be caudal to
T11-12 in average nonbrachycephalic dog)
    si    n s
Figure 2.25 Dorsoventral (DV) thoracic radiograph. X-ray beam is 
inflated than up lung. Soft tissue structures in up lung are
centered on heart or caudal edge of scapula (be careful not to center
better visualized (higher tissue-to-air contrast; Figure 2.24).
too far caudally and mmiss cranial thorax); spine and sternum are
(NOTE: Loss of inflation in down lung can occur in less than
superimposed; limbs are in crouching position; head is straight;
5 minutes).
 collimation includes entire bony thorax; exposure is made at peak
6. Left lateral radiograph is preferred for:
inspiration.
a. Visualization of lesions in right lung.
b. Evaluation of cranial pulmonary vessels (NOTE: Right
 a are a  ae d nu
2. Elbows and stifles are in slight abduction and pelvic limbs
positioned for evaluation without superimposition of other
are in a crouching position for animal's comfort.
structures and are best seen on left lateral radiograph).
3. Sternum and spine are aligned and superimposed to
7. Right lateral radiograph is preferred for:
avoid rotation.
a. Visualization of lesions in left lung.
a. Even slight obliquity (5° rotation) can alter appear-
ance of cardiac silhouette.
Dorsoventral (DV) thoracic radiograph
b. Dorsal spinous processes should not extend beyond
(Figure 2.25)
edges of vertebral bodies on images.
1. Animal is in ventral recumbency and x-ray beam enters
4. Animal's head is positioned on midline to avoid curving
 dorsal surface and exits ventral surface.
the spine.
63
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Box 2.7 Good-guality Dv/VD thoracic
radiograph.
Vertebral bodies are visible over cardiac silhouette.
Intervertebral spaces are underexposed over heart but visible 
cranial to heart.
 Spine and sternum are superimposed .
 Dorsal spinous processes do not extend beyond lateral edges
of vertebral bodies.
Distance from center of spine to lateral thoracic wallis equal
on both sides.
●Made at peak inspiration:
+
● Cranial lung borders extend to first ribs
 Cardiac silhouette and diaphragm are separated by lung.
with little or no contact (VD).
· Costophrenic angles are open (caudal to 1oth rib in
average nonbrachycephalic dog)
●Diaphragm cupula is caudal to T8 (VD radiograph in
Figure 2.26 Ventrodorsal (VD) thoracic radiograph. X-ray bearm i5
 average nonbrachycephalic dog).
centered on heart or caudal edge of scapula; spine and sternum are
superimposed; thoracic limbs are pulled cranially (avoid overstretching):
collimation includes entire bony thorax; exposure is made at peak
4. VD radiograph is preferred for:
inspiration.
a. Ease of positioning (VD view often is easier to make
than DV view, especially in cats).
5. Take care to not position x-ray beam and detector too far
b. Detection of small pleural effusions.
caudally and miss cranial thorax.
c. Evaluation of mediastinum, caudal vena cava, and
6. DV radiograph is preferred for:
accessory lung lobe.
a. Animals in distres (e.g., shock, severe dyspnea).
d. Visualization of heart and lungs when pleural fluid is
b. Detection of small pneumothorax.
present.
c. Evaluation of structures in dorsal thorax:
1) Dorsocaudal lung lesions.
Supplemental radiographs
2) Caudal pulrmonary vessels.
a. Oblique radiograph (Figures 2.27 and 2.28):
3) Hilar lymph nodes.
1) Used to rotate overlying structures (e.g., heart, spine)
4) Esophagus.
away from area of interest (e.g., mediastinum).
5) Trachea.
2) Used to evaluate lesions of thoracic wall and pleura
6) Left atrium and auricle.
(i.e., primary x-ray beam is tangential or perpendicular
d. Cardiologists often prefer DV radiograph to evaluate
to lesion instead of en facey.
cardiovascular structures.
b. Horizontal beam radiography (Figures 2.29 and 2.30):
1) X-ray beam is directed horizontal (across table) to
Ventrodorsal (VD) thoracic radiograph
 make VD or lateral radiograph.
(Figure 2.26)
2) Animal may be in lateral, dorsal, or ventral recum-
1. Animal is in dorsal recumbency and x-ray beam enters
bency, standing. or held erect (vertical).
ventral surface and exits dorsal surface.
3) Must use correct focal spot-to-detector distance.
2. Sternum and spine are aligned and superimposed to
 4) Aids in detection of free fluid or gas in thoracic cavity.
avoid rotation.
5) Used to reposition pleural fluid to improve visualiza-
a. Distance from spine to lateral thoracic wall is equal on
tion of an intrathoracic mass.
both sides.
6) Helps demonstrate gas:fluid interface (e.g., fluid-filled
b. Right and left ribs are same length. The sternum will
cyst, bowel in thoracic cavity).
be on the side with the longest ribs.
c. Expiratory phase radiograph:
3. Thoracic limbs are pulled cranially and pelvic limbs are
1) Increases contrast between lung and a gas-filled lesion
pulled caudally (NOTE: Avoid overstretching the animal.
(e.g., bulla, cyst).
 r s  x no adu n u 
2) Improves detection of small amounts of pleural fluid
lungs, especially with cats and small dogs).
or gas.
64
CHAPTER 2 Making Quality Radiographs
 Figure 2.27 VD oblique thoracic radiograph. Sternum is rotated away
Figure 2.28 VD tangential thoracic wall radiograph. Sternum is rotated 
 frorn side of interest and x-ray beam is centered on lesion.
away from sidle of interest and x-ray beam is centered on thoracic wall at 
site of lesion
Cassette/Detector
X-rayBeam
Figure 2.29 Horizontal beam lateral radiograph. Animal is in dorsal recumbency with cassette propped up alongside and x-ray bearm (arrow) directed
across table perpendlicular to cassette (must use correct focal spot-to-cdetector distance).
Cassette/Dectector
3) Aids in diagnosis of tracheal collapse (when combined
with an inspiratory radiograph) .
4) Used to investigate emphysema (lung volume is
unchanged during inspiration and expiration).
d. VD thoracic radiograph with thoracic limbs pulled cau-
dally (Figure 2.31):
1) Sometimes called the human view.
2) Used to rotate scapula and associated muscles away
X-rayBeam
from cranial thorax.
3) Aids in evaluation of cranial thorax (mediastinum,
lungs, pleura}.
e. Cervical radiographs (Figures 2.3l and 2.32):
Figure 2.30 Horizontal beam VD radiograph. Animal is in lateral
1) Aid in evaluating larynx, proximal trachea, and soft 
recumbency with cassette propped up behind and x-ray beam (arrow)
 cirected across table, perpendicular to cassette (must use correct focal
tissues of neck.
 spot-to-detector distance).
     a s i (
ization of thoracic inlet and caudal cervical region.
f. Craniodorsal-caudoventral (skyline) radiograph of trachea
(Figure 2.32):
65
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
1) Used to visualize cervical trachea in cross-section
5. Whenever possible. GI tract should be empty (many
2) Aids in documenting collapse, stenosis, or hypoplasia
abdominal studies are rendered useless due to ingesta
of tra chea.
masking structures).
3) Excessive tension on neck can distort shape of trachea.
a. 12-hour fast to empty stomach.
b. 18- to 24-hour fast to empty intestinal tract.
 Abdominal radiographs
c. Cleansing enema(s) 2 to 4 hours prior to radiography
General
(use cool water and mild soap solution to stimulate
1. Right lateral and VD radiographs are standard.
expulsion of gas).
2. Adding a left lateral radiograph often aids in evaluation
d. Phosphate enemas are contraindicated in cats and
of GI contents (due to gravity-dependent movements of GI fluid
small dogs due to potential for toxicity.
 and gas) and in visualization of intra-abdominal margins.
6. Animals with acute abdominal pain, vomiting. or pal-
a. Commonly. fluid in the gastric pylorus mimics a
 pable abnormality are not fasted or given an enema prior to
mass on right lateral radiographs. On left lateral radio-
ra diography.
graphs, gastric gas usually moves into pylorus to make
 7. Encourage voiding to empty urinary bladder.
the distinction.
8. Hair coat should be dry and clean.
3. If neither VD nor DV radiographs are possible, make both
9. When sedation is required, avoid agents that affect GI
right and left lateral radiographs.
motility or may cause gastric distention (e.g., xylazine).
4. Stomach may be best examined with VD, DV, right, and
10. Widest part of abdomen usually is over liver at level of 
left lateral radiographs to take advantage of gas-soft tissue
xyphoid (often same as thorax).
interfaces in various parts of stomach.
11. Center primary x-ray beam on last rib or midway
between diaphragm and pelvic canal.
12. Field of view includes diaphragm (8th rib), spine, greater
trochanters, and body walls.
13. Exposure is made at end of expiration, when there is a
normal pause in breathing (helps reduce motion artifact).
14. Adding air to stomach or colon aids in identifying their
positions.
Box 2.8 Good-quality abdominal radiographs.
+
Background of radiograph (where there is no animal) is black.
● Lumbar spine is underexposed, but vertebral trabeculae are visible.
·Primary x-ray beam is centered on midabdomen.
+
Absence of rotation
 Absence of motion artif act
●Pelvic limbs are pulled caudally (lateral view) but abdomen is
Figure 2.31 VD thoracic radiograph with thoracic limbs pulled caudal
not stretched
(elirninates superirmnposition of scapulae over cranial thorax)
A
X-ray Beam
Figure 2.32 Craniodorsal-caudoventral radliograph (skyline view) used to evaluate cross-sectional appearance of trachea. A. Anirmal in ventral
recumbency with thoracic limbs extendled and head and neck pulled caudally. X-ray beam is centered at thoracic inlet. B. Radiograph with trachea 
in cross-section (arrow).
66
CHAPTER 2 Malking Quality Radiographs
Figure 2.33 Lateral abdominal radiograph. X-ray beam is centered just caudal to last rib; pelvic limbs are pulled caudally; foam wedges under sternum
 and between stifles are used to correct rotation; collimation includes entire abdomen (diaphragm to pelvic inlet); exposure is made during pause at end of 
expiration.
Lateral abdominal radiograph (Figure 2.33)
1. Animal is in right or left lateral recumbency.
2. Pelvic limbs are pulled caudal to avoid superimposition
over caudal abdomen.
3. Thoracic limbs are pulled cranial to aid in positioning.
(NOTE: Avoid overstretching the animal, which can distort
shape of abdomen and cause visceral crowding.)
4. Foam wedge or towel is placed between femurs to make
them parallel and correct rotation (Figure 2.49). Lumbar
transverse processes should be aligned with each other and
ilial wings should overlap.
5. Foam wedge may be needed under sternum to correct
rotation of cranial abdomen.
6. Larger animals may require splitting of abdomen onto
two radiographs (when two radiographs are required, make
overlapping images with diaphragm on one and pelvic inlet
on the other).
7. Right lateral radiograph:
a. Gas in stomach rises to fundus (Figure l.67 and Table
1.3).
b. Fluid (including contrast media) moves to pylorus.
c. Fluid-filled gastric pylorus may mimic a round cranio-
ventral mass.
d. Kidneys often are better separated.
e. Spleen tends to be more conspicuous.
f. Hepatic margins often are better visualized.
g. Preferred over left lateral for diagnosis of gastric dilata-
tion and volvulus (GDV).
8. Left lateral radiograph:
a. Gas in stomach rises to pylorus (Figure l.66 and Table
1.3).
 b. Fluid (incuding positive contrast agents) moves to fundus.
c. Duodenum may fill with gas.
d. Spleen often is summated with other viscera in midab-
Figure 2.34 VD abdominal radiograph. X-ray beam is centered just
 dominal cavity.
caudal to last rib;: animal is placed in a trough to facilitate positioning:
 collimation includes entire abdomen (diaphragm to pelvic inlet and lateral
Ventrodorsal (VD) abdominal radiograph (Figure 2.34)
walls); exposure is made during pause at end expiration.
1. Animal is in dorsal recumbency.
 2. Sternum and spine are aligned and superimposed (trough
 aids in positioningy.
67
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
b. Commonly used to displace overlying structures (e.g..
small bowel, colon) from area of interest (e.g. kidney.
urinary bladder, suspected lesion).
c. May be used to view lesion in profile instead of en face
(i.e., tangential radiograph), especially when investigat-
ing body wall lesions (e.g., hernia, mass).
2. Horizontal beam radiography (Figures 2.29 and 2.30):
a. Uses gravity to reposition fluid, gas, or viscera toward
or away from an area of interest.
b. X-ray beam is directed horizontally (across table) to
make VD or lateral radiograph.
c. Animal may be in lateral, dorsal, or ventral recum-
bency, standing. or held erect (vertical).
d. Must use correct focal spot-to-detector distance.
e. Used to detect free fluid or gas is in abdominal cavity
(fluid will be dependent and gas will be uppermost).
f. Aids in demonstrating gas:fluid interfaces (e.g., intes-
tinal ileus, fluid-filled cyst).
3. Compression radiography (Figure 2.36):
a. A low-density plastic paddle or wooden spoon is used
to gently compress the abdomen and displace overlying
Figure 2.35 DV abdominal radiograph: not routinely recommended
structures from area of interest (i.e., displace bowel to
unless unable to position animal in dorsal recumbency or need to
better visualize a more stationary structure such as 
reposition gas/fluid in Gl tract.
kidney, urinary bladder, colon, or uterus).
b. Radiographic exposure is reduced (decrease time by
3. Lumbar dorsal spinous processes do not extend beyond
50% or kVp by 16%) to compensate for reduced body
lateral edges of vertebral bodies.
thickness under compressed area.
4. Ilial wings are symmetrical.
c. Contraindicated in animals with pain, tense abdomen,
5. Gas in stomach rises to body region (Figure l.66 and
or peritoneal effusion.
Table 1.3).
4. Urethra radiograph (Figure 2.37):
6. Fluid and contrast medium localize in fundus and pylorus.
a. Flexed lateral radiograph of caudal abdomen.
7. Spleen tends to be more conspicuous than on DV
b. Pelvic limbs are pulled cranially to evaluate proximal
radiograph.
urethra in male dogs.
Dorsoventral (DV) abdominal radiograph
Musculoskeletal radiographs
(Figure 2.35)
General
1. Not routinely made because does not provide optimum
1. Lateral and craniocaudal/caudocranial or dorsopalmar/
visualization of abdominal viscera.
dorsoplantar radiographs are standard.
a. Recommended when animal cannot be placed in
2. Supplemental radiographs (may or may not be needed
 dorsal recumbency.
for complete evaluation}:
 b. Can be used to reposition GI gas or contrast medium.
a. Obliqued.
c. Preferred over VD for diagnosis of GDV.
b. Flexed or extended.
2. Animal is in ventral recumbency.
c. Weight bearing.
3. Elbows and stifles are in slight abduction and pelvic limbs
d. Stressed or compressed.
are in a crouching position for animal's comfort.
e. Traction or torsion/rotation (e.g., supination, pronation).
4. Sternum and spine are aligned and superimposed.
f. Tangential, skyline, or tunnel radiographs.
5. Gas in stomach rises to fundus and pylorus (Figure 1.66
3. Sedation or anesthesia may be necessary for adequate
and Table 1.3).
positioning.
6. Fluid localizes in body region of stomach.
 4. Use smallest focal spot possible (helps reduce penumbra
and edge unsharpness).
Supplemental abdominal radiographs
5. Low kVp and high mAs techniques increase radiographic
1. Oblique radiograph:
contrast (more black and white).
a. Animal in dorsal recumbency and rotated to right or
6. Radiographs of long bones should include joints proximal
left.
and distal.
68
CHAPTER 2 Making Quality Radiographs
Figure 2.36 Lateral abdominal radliograph with commpression. A low-density paddle (typicaly a plastic or wooden spoon) is used to gently cormpress
the caudal abdomen, displacing easily movable structures (colon, smallintestine) to enhance visualization of more stationary structures (urinary bladder.
uterus).
Figure 2.37 Lateral radiograph of pelvis with pelvic lirmbs pulled cranial.
 Used to evaluate urethra in male dog5.
7. Radiographs of joints should include entire joint and
portion of adjacent bones.
Figure 2.38 Stressed craniocaudal radiograph of elbow. A. Without
 8. Lateral radiographs are made with limb of interest down
stress. B. With a lateral to medial stress applied to cocument medial
(closest to film or detector).
instability.
9. Avoid rotation of joints (may mimic subluxation and
obscure soft tissue fascial planes).
10. If possible, isolate joints away from other body parts to
avoid superimposition artifacts.
Thoracic limb
1l. Center x-ray beam on joint or bone of interest.
Shoulder
12. Stressed radiographs of joints are made by stabilizing
1. Lateral and caudocranial radiographs are standard.
bones proximal and distal to joint and applying a medial-to-
2. Lateral radiograph (Figures 2.39 A and B):
lateral, lateral-to-medial, or orthogonal force (Figure 2.38).
a. Limb of interest is down (closest to detector).
a. Used to detect joint instability or subluxation.
b. Head and neck are extended away from shoulder
b. Comparison radiographs of normal limb aid in
(135° to thoracic spine).
evaluation.
C. Opposite (up) limb is pulled caudally until in straight 
13. Follow-up radiographs (made in 10-14 days or sooner
line with neck.
if clinically indicated ):
1) A common error is to pull the up limb more dor-
a. Document dynamic nature of bone.
sally, thus projecting the upper shoulder musculature 
b. Aid in detecting lesions not previously evident.
over the shoulder of interest.
c. Help characterize known bone disease.
d. Down limb is perpendicular to line of neck and up
14. Soft tissue abnormalities (e.g., swelling. atrophy, miner-
alization) provide valuable information about bone disease
trachea, sternum, and other structures.
(exposure may need to be reduced from bone technique).
e. X-ray beam is centered on scapulohumeral joint.
69
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 2.39 Shoulder, lateral radiograph. A. Limb is fully extended to avoid superimmposition artifacts; opposite limb is pulled caudally until in line with
neck; x-ray bearm is centered at scapulohumeral joint. B. Line drawing to cdepict correct alignment for lateral radliograph of shoulder.
Figure 2.41 Elbow, lateral radiograph.
1) Used to visualize bicipital groove.
d. Lateral radiographs with and without applied traction
Figure 2.40 Shoulder and scapula, caudocranial radiograph. Limb is
(with and without pulling on limb):
fully extendled; sternum is rotated 30° toward opposite linb; x-ray bearm
1) Used to assess shoulder instability.
is centered on scapulohumeral joint.
2) A significant change in joint space width between
no-traction and traction suggests medial shoulder
3. Caudocranial radiograph (Figure 2.40):
 joint instabilitry. (May need to compare with the oppo-
a. Animal is in dorsal recumbency with limb of interest
site limb).
fully extended (pulled cranially).
b. Sternum is rotated 30° toward opposite limb.
Etbow
c. X-ray beam is centered on scapulohumeral joint.
1. Lateral and craniocaudal radiographs are standard.
d. Also used to evaluate scapula (center x-ray beam on
2. Lateral radiograph (Figure 2.41):
scapula).
a. Limb of interest is down (closest to detector).
4. Supplemental radiographs of shoulder:
b. Avoid rotation and superirmposition of adjacent
a. Craniocaudal radiograph with thoracic limbs pulled
structures.
caudally along thorax (Figure 2.31).
c. X-ray beam is centered on elbow.
b. Lateral radiographs with limb in slight pronation and
3. Craniocaudal radiograph (Figure 2.42):
then in slight supination:
 a. Animal in ventral recumbency with limb of interest
1) Used to visualize
 caudal articular margin 
of
extended.
humeral head.
b. X-ray beam is centered on elbow.
 2) Aids in search for osteochondrosis lesions.
4. Extreme flexed lateral radiograph (Figure 2.43):
c. Skyline
radiograph
(craniodistal-cranioproximal
a. Eliminates superimposition of medial humeral epicon-
flexed, caudoproximal-craniodistal flexed):
dyle on anconeal process.
70
CHAPTER 2 Making Quality Radiographs
X-ray Beam
Figure 2.44 Elbow, craniolateral-caudomedial oblique radliograph. X-ray 
 anueyua ot (moue) jeuwixodopnen ot lersipouen aoz pajbue s! weag
visu alization of joint space.
Figure 2.42 Elbow, craniocaudal radiograph.
Figure 2.45 Carpus, lateral radiograph.
Figure 2.43 Elbow, extreme flexed lateral radiograph.
b. Lesions associated with many elbow diseases initially
develop on anconeal process and may be obscured by
overlying medial epicondyle.
5. Craniolateral-caudomedial oblique radiograph (Figure
2.44):
a. Used to visualize medial coronoid process in profile.
b. X-ray beam may be angled 20° craniodistal to caudo-
proximal to enhance visualization of joint space.
Carpus
1. Lateral and dorsopalmar radiographs are standard.
2. Lateral radiograph (Figure 2.45):
a. Limb of interest is down (closest to detector).
b. Avoid rotation and superimposition of adjacent
stru ctures.
c. X-ray beam is centered on carpus.
Figure 2.46 Carpu5, dorsopalmar radliograph.
71
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 2.47 Carpus, stressed dorsopalmar radiograph. Carpus i5
stabilized and a medial-to-lateral force is being applied to evaluate joint 
laxity.
Figure 2.48 Compression radliographs of digits. A low-density plastic or
Jewjedosiog 'v 'shlbip ssauduon Apuan ot pasn s! uoods uapoom
 Commpression to stabilize foot and dligits. B. Lateral compression to
 separate dligits.
Figure 2.49 Pelvis, lateral radiograph. A foam wedge or towel is placed between stifles to correct rotation of pelvis. A. Lateral view. B. Caudal to
cranial view.
3. Dorsopalmar radiograph (Figure 2.46):
Digits(metacarpus/metatarsus/phalanges)
a. Animal is in ventral recumbency with limb of interest
1. Lateral and dorsopalmar/dorsoplantar radiographs are
extended.
standard.
b. X-ray beam is centered on carpus.
2. Supplemental radiographs:
4. Supplemental radiographs:
a. Oblique lateral.
a. Obliqued.
b. Compression radiographs (Figure 2.48 A, B):
b. Flexed lateral.
1) A low-density plastic paddle or wooden spoon is
c. Extended lateral.
used to gently compress the foot to separate the
d. Skyline (flexed proximodorsal-distodorsal):
digits.
1) Used to evaluate dorsal margins of carpal bones.
e. Standing (weight-bearing evaluation of joint space).
Pelvis
f. Stressed (Figure 2.47):
1. Lateral and VD radiographs are standard.
1) Used to demonstrate ligament damage or joint laxity.
2. Lateral radiograph (Figure 2.49 A, B):
2) Elbow and metacarpus are stabilized and a force
a. Animal is in right or left lateral recumbency.
or
b. Place a foam block or folded towel between stifles to
orthogonal,
make femurs parallel to table top and correct pelvic
rotation.
 aid with interpretation.
c. X-ray beam is centered on coxofemoral joints.
72
CHAPTER 2 Making Quality Radiographs
+
Figure 2.51 Pelvis, VD flexed ("frog legged") radiograph. Anirnal is
 placed in a trough to facilitate positioning.
6. PennHIP (Figure 2.53):
a. Method of making distraction and compression radio-
graphs to investigate joint laxity. (see discussion of hip
dysplasia in chapter 4 under Pelvis and Coxofemoral
Figure 2.50 Pelvis, VD extended radiograph. Stifles are temmporarily
Joints).
bound together to keep femmurs parallel (arrow).
b. A custom-designed distraction device is used to posi-
tion the hips (Synbiotics Corporation, San Diego. CA;
Figure 2.53A).
c. Animal is in dorsal recumbency:
d. Femurs are positioned between 10° of flexion and 30°
3. VD with hips extended radiograph (Figure 2.50):
of extension, 10° to 30° of abduction, and 0° to 10° of
a. Animal in dorsal recumbency with pelvic limbs
external rotation to approximate a neutral stance (Figure
extended and parallel.
2.53B).
b. May be easier to position by first flexing the pelvic
e. A compression radiograph is made with femoral heads
limbs and bringing the stifles together before extending
fully seated in acetabular fossae.
the pelvic limbs to their final position.
 f. A distraction radiograph is made using the distraction
c. Temporarily binding the stifles together (e.g., tape.
device to create maximal lateral displacement of femoral
rope, velcro, tourniquet) aids in positioning. especially
heads (Figure 2.53C).
with large, muscular dogs.
7. Dorsal acetabular rim radiograph:
d. Field of view includes tips of ilial wings and patellas.
a. Can be used to assess acetabular depth.
4. VD with hips flexed ("frog-legged") radiograph (Figure
b. Animal is in ventral recumbency with lumbosacral
2.51):
 spine and hips flexed.
a. Animal in dorsal recumbency with pelvic limbs flexed
c. Tarsi are positioned cranially and elevated 5 cm above
and abducted.
the table.
b. Used to assess acetabular depth and coxofemoral
d. X-ray beam passes through long axis of pelvis from
fit.
cranial to caudal.
c. Aids in detection of femoral head and neck
e. Normal acetabular rim is pointed and its slope is
fractures.
horizontal. Displacement of femoral head lateral to
5. Half-axial radiograph (Figure 2.52):
dorsal acetabular rim is abnormal (hip laxity, shallow
a. Used to investigate hip laxity (see discussion of hip
acetabulum).
dysplasia in chapter 4 under Pelvis and Coxofemoral
Joints}.
Pelvic limb
 b. Femurs are parallel and partially extended.
Stifle
c. Fulcrum is placed between femurs (e.g.. rolled up
 1. Lateral and caudocranial or craniocaudal radiographs are
towel, 2-lb roll of cotton, handmade fulcrum). Must be
standard.
proximal to stifles. May need pressure distally to keep in
2. Lateral radiograph (Figure 2.54):
pla ce.
a. Stifle of interest is down (closest to detector).
d. Hips are distracted when tarsi are moved together due
b. Opposite limb is abducted and positioned out of field
to fulcrum (Figure 2.52B).
of view.
73
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
B
Figure 2.52 Pelvis, half-axial radiograph. A. Pelvic lirmbs are partially extended (N = neutral, E = extended). B. Pelvic limbs are extended and parallel. A
fulcrum is placed between femurs and tarsi are moved together (solid arrows). Fulcrum causes cdistraction at coxofemoral joints (dashed arrows). C. VD
pelvic radiographs without fulcrum on let and with fulcrum on right, cocumenting widening and cranial wedging of coxofernoral joints with fulcrum
(i.e., hip laxity).
Figure 2.53 PennHiP. A. Custom-madle distraction device. B. Animal in dorsal recumbency with pelvic lirnbs positioned to approximate a neutral stance.
C. VD pelvic radiograph documenting subluxation of coxofemoral joints.
c. Down limb is slightly rotated to move patella toward
1) Used to document cranial displacement of proximal
detector and avoid rotation.
tibia in relation to distal femur (i.e., cranial drawer
d. X-ray beam is centered on stifle.
movement):
3. Caudocranial or craniocaudal radiograph (Figure 2.55):
2) Stifle is flexed 90° and tarsus is maximally flexed
a. Animal is in ventral or dorsal recumbency with limb
(metatarsus is parallel to femur).
of interest extended caudally.
b. Skyline (cranioproximal-craniodistal) can be used to
b. Avoid rotation of limb.
visualize trochlear groove and patellar alignment.
c. Center x-ray beam on stifle.
c. Lateral with stifle in flexion or extension.
4. Supplemental radiographs:
a. Flexed lateral radiograph with tibial compression
(Figure 2.56):
1. Lateral and dorsoplantar radiographs are standard.
74
CHAPTER 2 Making Quality Radiographs
Figure 2.56 Stifle, flexed lateral radliograph with tibial compression.
Figure 2.54 Stifle, lateral radiograph. Limb of interest is down and 
slightly rotated (curved arrow) to move patella closer to cletector and 
Stifle is flexed 90° and tarsus is mnaximnally flexed (curved arrow), which 
avoid rotation. Opposite limb is abducted and positioned out of field of
 creates cranial displacement of proximal tibia.
view using tape.
Figure 2.57 Tarsus, lateral radiograph. Limb of interest is down and
extendled caudally; opposite limb is abducted out of the field of view.
Figure 2.55 Stifle, caudocranial radiograph. Animal in ventral
recumbency with limb of interest extended caudally and x-ray beam
c. Standing lateral (weight bearing to evaluate joint
centered on stifle. Alternatively, a craniocaudal radliograph can be mmade
spa ce).
with animal in dorsal recumbency and limb of interest extendled caudally.
d. Flexed dorsoplantar (skyline) (Figure 2.59):
1) Used to better visualize tibiotarsal joint by eliminat-
ing superimposition of tuber calcis.
2. Lateral radiograph (Figure 2.57):
2) Aids in detection of osteochondrosis lesions.
a. Limb of interest is down (closest to detector) and not
3) Tarsus is elevated (placed on top of a wooden or
rotated.
cardboard box) to maintain flexion.
 b. Opposite limb is abducted or pulled out of the field of 
4) Detector (cassette) is placed under tarsus.
view.
5) X-ray beam is centered on tarsus, perpendicular to
c. Center x-ray beam on tarsus.
tibiotarsal joint.
3. Dorsoplantar radiograph (Figure 2.58):
6) Focal spot to detector distance may need to be
a. Animal is in ventral recumbency with limb of interest
adjusted.
extended cranially and slightly laterally.
b. X-ray beam is centered on tarsus.
Vertebrae
4. Supplemental radiographs:
1. Vertebrae are complex structures requiring high-quality
a. Flexed lateral.
radiographs for accurate assessment.
b. Obliqued (medial and lateral dorsoplantar oblique).
2. Lateral and VD radiographs are standard.
75
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
3. Spine should be parallel to imaging plate and not allowed
to sag (Figure 2.60). Low-density materials (such as foam
wedges or towels) can be used to support areas that sag.
4. Thoracic limbs and pelvic limbs should be parallel. Sand
bags. foam cushions, or towels can be placed between pairs 
of limbs to avoid rotation (Figure 2.49B).
5. All spinal regions that may be a cause for the clinical signs
should be examined.
a. X-ray beam must be centered on area of interest to
avoid beam divergence.
b. Collimate to region of spine being studied.
c. Intervertebral spaces at periphery of radiographs often
appear falsely narrowed.
6. Cervical spine:
a. X-ray beam is centered on C3-4.
b. Field of view includes base of skull and first few tho-
racic vertebrae.
C. Lateral radiograph (Figure 2.61):
1) Place foam wedge or small towel under neck to
eliminate sagging (Figure 2.60B).
2) Pull thoracic limbs caudally.
 3) Minimize rotation of head.
Figure 2.58 Tarsus, dorsoplantar radiograph. Anirnal is in ventral
d. VD radiograph (Figures 2.62, 2.65):
recumbency with limb of interest extended cranially and slightly laterally.
1) Animal is in dorsal recumbency with thoracic limbs
pulled caudally or cranially.
2) In dorsal recumbency, cervical intervertebral disc
spaces slope caudally (Figure 2.63). X-ray beam can
4
be angled 20° caudoventral-craniodorsal to improve
visualization of intervertebral disc spaces.
7. Thoracic spine:
a. X-ray beam is centered on T6-7.
b. Field of view includes last few cervical and first few
lumbar vertebrae.
c. Lateral radiograph (Figure 2.64):
 1) Foam wedge is placed under sternum to correct
Figure 2.59 Tarsus, flexed dorsoplantar (skyline) radliograph. A. Tarsu5 
of interest is placed on top of a cardboard or wooden box with cassette
rotation.
(detector) underneath the foot and tarsus flexed. X-ray beam (arrow) is
2) Pelvis is moved ventrally to straighten thoracic
perpendlicular to tibiotarsal joint. B. Radiograph of tibiotarsal joint
spine.
without superirmposition of tuber calcis.
d. VD radiograph (Figure 2.65).
B
Figure 2.60 Positioning for lateral radiograph of spine. A. Cervical and lumbar spinal regions normally sag in lateral recumbency. B. Low-density
materials such as foarn wedges (dark shading) can be used to support areas where spine sags to align vertebrae and reduce artifacts.
76
CHAPTER 2 Making Quality Radiographs
8. Lumbar spine:
a. X-ray beam is centered on L3-4.
b. Field of view includes last few thoracic and the sacral
vertebrae.
c. Foam wedge or towel is placed between stifles to keep
femurs parallel and correct pelvic rotation (Figure 2.49).
d. Foam wedge is placed under middle lumbar region to
eliminate sagging (Figure 2.60B).
e. Lateral radiograph, Figure 2.64.
f. VD radiograph, Figure 2.65.
9. Additional spinal radiographs centered on a specific area
may be needed for clarification of a suspected lesion (e.g..
Figure 2.61 Lateral radiograph of cervical spine. Thoracic lirnbs are
thoracolumbar junction, lumbosacral junction).
pulled caudally; x-ray bearm is centered at C3-4; collimation is restricted 
to cervical vertebrae.
+
Figure 2.62 VD radiograph of cervical spine. Thoracic limbs are pulled
 caudally; x-ray beam is centered at C3-4; collimation is restricted to 
cenvical vertebrae.
Figure 2.63 Cervical intervertebral disc spaces slope caudally in dorsal
recumbency. X-ray bearn can be angled 20° caudoventral-craniodorsal 
(depicted with vertical lines) to improve visualization of intervertebral disc
spaces.
Figure 2.64 Lateral radiograph of thoracic and lumbar regions. Foam wedges are placed under sternum and between stifles to correct rotation. X-ray
 bearm is5 centered at T5-6 for thoracic vertebrae and L3-4 for lumbar vertebrae; collirnation is linited to the vertebrae of interest.
77
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
 Figure 2.66 Lateral radiograph of skull. Foam wedge is placed under
nose to make parallel to detector; x-ray beam (arrow) is centered at level
of eye. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
+
Figure 2.67 DV radiograph of skull. X-ray bearm (arrow) is centered at
level of eyes. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
Head and neck
Skull
1. Skull is complex structure with many bones and exten-
sive compartmentalization.
2. Symmetry and detail are important for interpretation:
a. Sedation/anesthesia often is necessary to achieve
proper positioning.
b. Small focal spot and tight collimation can improve
detail.
Figure 2.65 VD radiograph of spine, depicting fields of view for
3. May need to alter exposure techniques to adequately
cervical, thoracic, and lumbar regions. Animal is placed in a trough with
image portions of skull with different thicknesses.
limbs extended to facilitate positioning. X-ray beam is centered at C3-4
4. Lateral and Dv/VD radiographs are standard for all radio-
for cervical (C), T5-6 for thoracic (T), and at L3-4 for lumbar (L): spine 
 graphic studies of the head.
and sternum are superimposed; collimation is limited to the vertebrae of
5. Lateral radiograph (Figure 2.66).
interest.
a. Nose should be parallel to table (foam wedge can be
used to support nose).
10. Supplemental radiographs:
 b. Avoid rotation. Hard palate should be perpendicular
a. Obliqued radiographs:
to the detector.
1) Used to reduce or alter superimposition of adja
c. Thickness is measured across widest part of skull later-
cent structures.
ally (midway between eye and ear).
2) Vertebral borders not seen on standard radio-
d. X-ray beam is centered at level of eye.
 graphs may become visible.
6. DV/VD radiograph (Figure 2.67).
b. Flexion and extension lateral radiographs:
a. DV may be easier to position than VD (animal is in
 1) Aid in documenting spinal instability and spinal
ventral recumbency with head resting on horizontal rami
cord compression (e.g. atlantoaxial subluxation, cer-
of mandible).
vical spondylopathy. cauda equina syndrome).
 b. Thickness often is similar to measurement for lateral
2) Must be performed cautiously to avoid more
radiograph.
severe injury.
c. Hard palate should be parallel to detector.
78
CHAPTER 2 Making Quality Radiographs
7. Open-mouth VD radiograph (Figure 2.68).
a. Animal is positioned for VD radiograph of skull.
b. Hard palate is parallel to detector and mouth is open
(open mouth may be supported with tape, gauze, or
speculum).
c. Tongue and endotracheal tube are moved away from
area of interest.
d. X-ray beam is angled so it is parallel with mandible
(typical angle is 20° rostroventral to caudodorsal).
Figure 2.68 Open-mouth VD radiograph of skull. Mouth is supported
8. Rostrocaudal radiograph (Figure 2.69 A, B).
open with tape or gauze, x-ray bearm is angled 20° rostral to caudal
(arrow); aicds in visualization of nasal cavities and maxilla. (Adapted from
a. Animal is in dorsal recumbency with nose pointed
Owens and Biery 1999.)
toward x-ray tube.
 b. When in correct position, frontal sinuses will project
2 humps in the shadow created by collimator light.
(Figure 2.69B)
c. Measure thickness from medial canthus of eye to
caudal part of head.
d. Used to evaluate frontal sinuses, zygomatic bone, and
orbits.
9. Rostrocaudal 20° ventral oblique radiograph (Figure
2.70).
a. Animal is in dorsal recumbency with nose pointed
toward x-ray tube.
Figure 2.69 A. Rostrocaudal radiograph of skull; aids in visualization of
b. Nose is angled ventrally 20°.
frontal sinuses, zygomatic bone, and orbits. B. Shadow produced by
collimator light passing across tops of frontal sinuses should resemble 2
c. Measure thickness from medial canthus of eye to
humps (arrows). (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
caudal part of head.
d. Used to evaluate foramen magnum (may need to
overexpose radiograph for visualization).
10. Open-mouth rostrocaudal radiograph (Figure 2.71).
a. Animal is in dorsal recumbency with mouth open
toward x-ray tube.
b. Measure thickness from corner of mouth to caudal
part of head.
c. Avoid rota tion.
d. Move endotracheal tube away from area of interest.
e. Used to evaluate tympanic bullae or odontoid process
(dens):
Figure 2.70 Rostrocaudal oblique radiograph of skull. Nose is angled 20e
1) Odontoid process (Figure 2.7lA): x-ray beam is
ventrally; x-ray beam (arrow) is centered between eyes; aids in visualization 
centered in middle of open mouth.
(666l Aaia pue suamo woy paidep) wnuaeu uaeoy to
Figure 2.71 Open-mouth rostrocaudal radiograph of skull. A. X-ray beam is centered in open mouth to visualize cdontoid proces (dens). B. X-ray
beam is centered on uvula; nose is only slightly tipped dorsaly. C. Shadow produced by collimator light across nose and frontal sinuses should resemble
3 humps of equal height (looks like sun setting between two mountains). (Adapted frorm Owens and Biery 1999.)
79
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
 o   a ax   (
c. X-ray beam may be angled 20° to enhance visualiza-
nose is only slightly tipped dorsally (Tip: shadow pro-
tion of area of interest.
duced by collimator light across nose and frontal sinuses
[Figure 2.7lC] should resemble 3 humps of equal height
Temporomandibular joint (TMJ)
[looks like sun setting between two mountains]}
1. Lateral, DV, and lateral oblique radiographs are standard.
11. VD 10° dorsal oblique radiograph (Figure 2.72).
2. Lateral radiograph, Figure 2.66.
a. Animal is in dorsal recumbency, mouth closed and
3. DV radiograph, Figure 2.67.
nose tilted dorsally.
4. Lateral oblique radiograph (Figure 2.76).
b. Measure thickness from corner of mouth to caudal
a. Dogs are placed in lateral recumbency with nose tilted
part of head.
up or down:
c. X-ray beam is centered at level of ears.
1) Raising the nose 20° allows visualization of down
d. Used to evaluate tympanic bullae in cats.
(dependent) TMJ (Figure 2.76B).
12. Lateral oblique radiograph (Figure 2.73).
2) Lowering the nose 20° projects up (nondependent)
a. Animal is in lateral recumbency with head propped
TMJ through masseter fossa of contralateral mandible
up on a low-density material (i.e., foam wedge) and
(Figure 2.76C). Up TMJ will be magnified.
 obliqued.
b. Cats are placed in lateral recumbency with head
b. X-ray beam is centered at level of frontal sinuses or
rotated approximately 20° ventral and nose raised 10°.
on a mass.
Down TMJ is visible ventral to other bones.
c. Used to evaluate frontal sinuses or to visualize a mass
in profile.
13. Intraoral radiographs (Figures 2.74 and 2.75).
Teeth
a. Animal is in dorsal or ventral recumbency, depend-
1. Lateral, Dv/VD, and lateral oblique radiographs are
ing on whether mandible or maxilla is being studied.
standard.
b. Cassette (detector) is placed inside mouth. Corner of
2. Lateral radiograph, Figure 2.66.
detector can be placed in mouth to image a larger area.
3. DV radiograph, Figure 2.67.
Figure 2.74 DV intraoral radiograph of maxilla and nasal cavities.
(A) Direction of x-ray bear (20° rostrodorsal-caudoventral oblique) to
Figure 2.72 VD 10° dorsal oblique radiograph of feline skull. Head is
evaluate rostral maxilla and nasal cavity. (B) Direction of x-ray bearn 
woy paideps) aellng piuedu jo uoiezilensia u! pie ot Alesiop pa 
 (perpendicular) to evaluate maxillary incisor teeth and rostral nasal cavity.
Owens and Biery 1999.)
(Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
Figure 2.73 Lateral 20° oblique radiograph of skull. Head, resting on a
Figure 2.75 VD intraoral radiograph of rostral mandible. X-ray beam is
foam wedge, is obliqued to separate frontal sinuses or to visualize a ma55s 
 angled 20? (rostroventral-caudodorsal) to evaluate rostral mandible.
en profile. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
(Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
80
CHAPTER 2 Making Quality Radiographs
+
Figure 2.76 Lateral oblique radiograph of skull. A. Nose is raised using foarm wedge. B. Nose tilted up: anatomic representation of x-ray beam (vertical
black line) passing through joint space of dependent TMJ. C. Nose tilted down; x-ray bearm passes through joint space of nondependent TMJ. (Part A is
adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
Figure 2.77 Lateral oblique radiograph of skull for maxilla. Ventral
Figure 2.79 Bisecting angle maxilla. Arrow indicates approximate
(lower) maxillary dental arcade is in profile without superimposition of
direction of x-ray bear for bisecting angle technique of premolar and 
adjacent structures. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.).
molar teeth in maxilla. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
 Figure 2.78 Lateral oblique radiograph of skull for mandible. Dorsal
Figure 2.80 Bisecting angle mandible. Arrow indicates approximate
(upper) mandibular dental arcade is in profile without superimposition of
direction of x-ray bearm for bisecting angle technique of prermolar and
adjacent structures. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
(666l Aala pue suamo woy paideps) alqipueuu ui yiaat jejou
4. Lateral oblique radiograph (Figures 2.77 and 2.78).
e. Dental arcade in profile (right or left) is labeled with
a. Animal is in lateral recumbency with mouth open.
a right or left marker (regardless of which side of head is
b. Head is obliqued to visualize right or left side of maxilla
down). To avoid confusion, consider marking both right and
or mandible.
left dental arcades with appropriate right and left markers.
c. Used to evaluate dental arcade without superimposi-
5. Individual teeth may be examined using bisecting angle
tion of adjacent structures.
technique.
1) More ventral (lower) positioned maxillary arcade
a. Position detector as close as possible to parallel with
is in profle.
long axis of tooth.
b. Direct x-ray beam is perpendicular to tooth and detector.
is in profile.
c. If perpendicular is not possible, direct x-ray beam along
d. Tongue and endotracheal tube are moved away from
a line that bisects the angle formed by the long axis of the
area of interest.
tooth and the surface of the detector (Figures 2.79 and 2.80).
81
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Pharynx and larynx
graph made with animal in right lateral recumbency
1. Lateral and VD radiographs are standard; VD oblique may
(x-ray beam passing from left side to right side) is com-
be required.
monly called a right lateral radiograph, even though the
2. If possible, endotracheal tube should be removed prior to
technical name would be left-to-right lateral radiograph.
making radiographs.
c. For extremities, a "lateral" view is technically medio-
3. Lateral radiograph:
lateral in most cases.
a. Mouth is closed and x-ray beam is centered over
8. Normal radiographic anatomy is essential knowledge.
larynx.
a. You must know normal to recognize abnormal.
b. Head and neck should be in neutral position (135°
 b. Reference materials should be available for consulta-
angle between spinal canal and horizontal rami of
tion (e.g., textbook images, anatomical models, box of
mandibles).
bones).
c. Avoid rotation (palpate transverse processes of first
c. A file with normal radiographs can be useful when
cervical vertebra to assess rota tion).
interpreting other studies and when explaining abnor-
4. Obliqued VD radiographs may be preferable to straight
malities to clients.
VD radiograph to eliminate superimposition of skull and
1) Film radiographs can be physically placed into a
i i     s
"normal file" and their locations noted in the patient's
record.
Interpreting radiographs
a computer.
9. Roentgen signs (radiographic findings) are the abnor-
General
malities in size, shape, opacity, or number that are seen on
1. Radiographs should be examined in a quiet room, free of
radiographs.
distractions, where full attention can be given to studying
a. Roentgen signs may represent disease, normal varia-
the images.
tion, or artifact.
2. Room should be adequately darkened to allow good illu.
b. A systematic approach is necessary to detect all
mination of radiographs.
abnormalities.
3. Viewing flm radiographs is best done with at least two
To find an abnormality,one must frst look forit.
view boxes and a bright light illuminator ("hot light") to
To recognize an abnormality, one must know about it.
enhance dark areas.
4. Viewing digital radiographs requires sufficient quality.
size, and number of monitors (multiple images displayed at
once) and software for image manipulation.
Box 2.9 Radiography "Rules of Two."
5. Orientation of radiographs:
● 2 dimensions: Radiographs are 2-dimensional images of
a. Consistent orientation improves lesion detection.
 3-dimensional subjects.
b. Lateral radiographs (right or left) are displayed with
2 views: At least 2 orthogonal radiographs (made at 90° to
head of animal (cranial or rostral part) toward the observ-
each other).
er's left and dorsal part of animal toward the top (up).
+
 2 opacities: A structure must be adjacent to a different
c. VD and DV radiographs are displayed with animal's
opacity to be visible.
head toward the top and animal's left side on the observ-
· 2 appearances: A lesion should be visible on at least 2
er's right.
radiographs to be "real."
d. Extremity radiographs are displayed with proximal
 2 studies: Make follow-up radiographs to monitor progress
 portion of limb up or toward the observer's right.
 and response to therapy.
6. Orthogonal radiographs:
 2 subjects: Compare suspected lesion with known normal
a. At least two perpendicular radiographs are necessary
 anatomy.
for meaningful interpretation.
+
2 extremities: Make comparative radiographs of contralateral
b. Radiographs are two-dimensional images of three-
limb.
dimensional subjects.
· 2 joints: Include joints above and below a long bone.
7. Radiographic projections or views:
 2 tissues: If bone lesion, examine soft tissues: if soft tissue
a. Radiographs are described based on the direction of
lesion, examine bone.
q s an n sssd i 5 q ai-x a
 2 reads: By same person at 2 different times or radiologist 
Example: in ventrodorsal radiograph, x-ray beam enters
consultation.
animal's ventral surface and exits the dorsal surface.
· 2 perspectives: Review whole radiograph and radiograph as
b. Right or left lateral radiographs commonly describe
a whole.
the animal's position during radiography. Example: radio-
82
CHAPTER 2 Making Quality Radiographs
Systematic approach to radiographic
9) Bandaging or casting material.
interpretation
10) Tissue drains.
1. Each radiograph is examined completely and in a deliber-
11) ECG leads.
ate, consistent manner.
12) Metal projectiles.
2. Anatomic structures are evaluated for changes in posi-
13) Sutures.
tion, size, shape, number, opacity, and margination.
14) Implants.
   n      
5. Body condition of animal is assessed (e.g., obese, emaci-
methods:
ated, deep chested):
a. Inventory (or organ) approach: a consistent predeter-
a. Borders of anatomic structures are only visible when
mined order is used to examine each anatomic structure
outlined in whole or in part by a different opacity (such
on the radiograph (exarmples for abdomen, thorax, and 
as fat outlining soft tissues).
extremities are given in Tables 1.3 through 1.5).
b. Emaciated animals have insufficient body fat to create
b. Method of expanding circles (inside out or outside in):
opacity interface, resulting in indistinct or invisible peri-
begin in center of radiograph and worlk outward in ever-
toneal serosal margins.
expanding circles. Or begin with outer structures and
c. Fat in immature animals is similar in opacity to soft
work inward in ever-tightening circles.
tissue ("brown fat") and does not result in an opacity
c. Left to right method (or cranial to caudal method):
interface with soft tissues (poor visualization of serosal
start at upper left part of radiograph and proceed toward
margins).
the right and lower areas.
d. Obese animals produce more scatter radiation and
attenuate more x-rays, often creating radiographs that
Checklists
appear underexposed, hazy. and with poor contrast.
1. Identify images as those of animal and body part being
e. Examine fat stores in other body areas to determine
evaluated.
whether body condition is responsible for a radiographic
2. Orthogonal radiographs (at least two) should be
finding.
available.
6. Inspiration or expiration (important when evaluating
 3. Diagnostic quality:
thoracic radiographs):
a. Properly exposed.
 a. Lateral inspiratory radiograph:
b. Centered on area of interest.
1) Heart and diaphragm are separated by lung and
c. Entire body part is included.
have little or no contact.
d. Collimation is appropriate.
2) Lumbophrenic angles are open and located caudal
e. Positioning is correct.
to T1l-12 (average dog).
f. Animal has been properly prepared (e.g., empty GI
3) Diaphragm is relatively flat (diaphragm is more
tra ct).
rounded during expiration).
 g. Images are of satisfactory density, contrast, and detail.
4) Caudal vena cava is horizontal and parallel with
4. Artifacts must be recognized (may mimic disease, impair
spine.
image quality, or obscure abnormalities):
5) Cranial lung borders are even with, or cranial to.
a. Fogging (due to scatter radiation, light leaks, or
first ribs.
pressure).
b. Dv/VD inspiratory radiogra ph:
b. Hair or debris in cassette (creates white lines and
1) Cupula (dome of diaphragm) is located caudal to
 shapes on radiography.
T8 (average dog).
c. Processing artifacts (e.g., rough handling of film, dark-
2) Heart and diaphragm are separated by lung with
room problems).
little or no contact.
d. Digital radiography artifacts (see Digital Radiography
3) Costophrenic angles are open and caudal to l0th
section).
rib (average dog).
e. Motion unsharpness (e.g., panting, struggling).
7. Animal's
position
during
radiography
should be
f. Superimposed structure:
confirmed:
1) Collar/harness.
a. Determine right and left sides of animal (right/left
2) ID/vaccination tags.
markers may not be present or accurate). but normal
3) Microchip.
anatomic landmarks aid in orientation (rarely do condi-
4) Wet or dirty hair coat.
tions exist in which viscera develop in a mirror image to
5) Skin nodules, masses, defects.
normal; examples include situs inversus and dextrocar-
6) Blanket/sweater.
dia). Normal anatomic landmarks include:
7) Stretcher.
1) Air in gastric fundus is on left side (VD/DV
8) Positioning devices.
radiograph).
83
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
2) Triangular-shaped head of spleen is in left cranial
abdominal quadrant.
Box 2.10 Thoracic anatomy checklist.
3) Caudal vena cava is on right side (VD/DV
√ Extra-thoracic soft tissues
radiograph).
√ Thoracic limbs
4) Dependent (down} hemi-diaphragmatic usually is
√ Caudal cervical region
more cranial in position (lateral radiograph).
√ Thoracic inlet
5) Stomach gas rises to fundus in right lateral recum-
√ Spine
bency and to pylorus in left lateral recumbency.
√ Sternum
 b. Note errors in positioning or exposure prior to inter-
√Diaphragm 
pretation, but always review poor-quality radiographs
√ Cranial abdomen 
prior to disposing of them (occasionally a lesion will be
 Thoracic wall
Ribs
radiograph,.
√ Pleural space
8. Checklist should be used to ensure every visible anatomic
√ Mediastinum
structure is evaluated on each radiograph (personal prefer-
√Area of esophagus
ence will determine order; examples of checklists for thorax.
√ Heart
abdomen, and extremities are provided in Boxes 2.10
√ Pulmonary vessels
through 2.12).
√Aorta
9. Prepare for unexpected findings, including lesions not
√ Main pulmonary artery
suggested by patient's history or clinical data.
√ Caudal vena cava
10. Do not stop searching after finding a lesion; finish sys-
√  Trachea and mainstem bronchi
tematic examination of entire radiograph.
 1l. Repeat occurrences of a lesion on multiple radiographs
√ Lungs 
should be evident; if a lesion does not repeat, rule out
artifact.
12. Reevaluate radiographs in light of patient history and
Box 2.11 Abdominal anatomy checklist.
results of physical examination and laboratory tests. History
√ Extra-abdominal soft tissues
is not necessary to read the radiographs, but it is necessary
√ Caudal thoracic cavity
to interpret radiographs (thank you, Dr. Debra Baird).
√Diaphragm
13. List of differential diagnoses is formulated after considering
all lesions and based on patient history and results of labora-
√ Body wall
V Spine, ribs, pelvis 
tory testing (list is ranked from most lilkely to least likely).
√ Pelvic limbs
14. Written report for each radiographic study should be
√ Peritoneal space
included in the animal's record.
√ Retroperitoneal space
15. Consultations with board-certified radiologists provide
√ Liver
expert opinion and recommenda tions for additional imaging
√ Area of gallbladder
studies to further establish a diagnosis and guide treatment.
√ Spleen 
Diplomates of the American College of Veterinary Radiology
√ Stomach
in private practice and in veterinary teaching hospitals
√ Area of pancreas
provide these services.
√ Small intestine
Roentgen signs (radiographic findings)
√ Large intestine 
√Kidneys
1. Anatomic structures are evaluated for position, size,
√ Area of adrenal glands
shape, margination, number, opacity, and function.
√ Urinary bladder
a. Altered position:
√ Prostate/uterus
1) Mass effect pushing or pulling away from its normal
loca tion.
2) Twisting or rotating on its axis or on the mesenteric
4) Edema.
axis.
5) Neoplasia.
3) Congenital ectopic location.
6) Obstruction.
b. Increased size:
c. Decreased size:
1) Hypertrophy.
1) Atrophy.
2) Hyperplasia.
2) Congenital
3) Inflammation.
hypopla sia).
84
CHAPTER 2 Making Quality Radiographs
8) Osseous metaplasia.
Box 2.12 Extremity checklist.
9) Foreign material.
10) Positive contrast media.
√ Bones
 g. Decreased radiopacity:
√ Periosteum
1) Emphysema (e.g. puncture wound, rupture of gas-
√Cortex
containing structure).
 Medulla
2) Cavitary lesion (e.g., cyst, bulla).
√ Soft tissues
3) Infection with gas-producing organism.
 Muscles
4) Osteolysis (e.g., neoplasia, infection).
√ Fascial planes
√ Skin surface
5) Trauma.
6) Atrophy (e.g., osteopenia).
√Joints 
7) Nutritional disease.
√ Alignment
8) Metabolic disease.
V Joint space width
9) Negative contrast study.
√ Osteophytes
h. Abnormal function (e.g., GI tract, urinary tract):
 Enthesophytes
1) Obstruction.
√ Subchondral lysis
2) Inflammation.
√ Subchondral sclerosis
3) Trauma.
√ Contralateral limb
4) Neuromuscular disease.
5) Congenital anomaly.
6) Developmental anomaly.
3) Fibrosis.
4) Hypovolemia.
Scope of diagnostic imaging
5) Prior surgery.
d. Altered shape or margination:
1. Diagnostic imaging is used to evaluate normal and abnor-
1) Abnormal development.
mal anatomy. recognize and diagnose many diseases,
2) Tra uma.
monitor therapy. and provide an alternative to more inva-
3) Hypert rophy.
sive procedures, such as surgical exploration.
4) Hyperplasia.
2. Radiology is the major imaging modality in most small
5) Neoplasia.
animal practices. Ultrasound, endoscopy, computed tomog-
6) Infection/inflamma tion.
raphy (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), fluoros-
7) Localized atrophy.
 copy, and scintigraphy (nuclear medicine) are increasingly
8) Necrosis.
available to veterinarians, with more sophisticated and
9) Ulceration.
expensive modalities offered at nearby specialty practices.
10) Loss of turgor (e.g., bowel ileus).
veterinary teaching hospitals, and medical imaging centers.
11) Cystic disease.
3. Selection of an imaging modality is based on cost effec-
12) Prior surgery.
tiveness, availability, ease of performance, and ability to
e. Abnormal number:
quickly obtain results. Financial constraints imposed by
1) Congenital or developmental anomaly (e.g., aplasia.
owners often affect choice of procedure and/or extent of
duplication, supernumerary teeth or digits).
 diagnostic imaging performed.
2) Surgical procedure (e.g., removal of structure.
renal transplant).
Ultrasonography
3) Accessory ossification center.
f. Increased opacity:
evaluate soft tissue architecture and function with real-time
1) Trauma.
dynamic imaging (evaluation of function includes gastroin-
2) Degenerative change.
testinal motility, cardiac motility, fetal viability, etc.).
3) Infection.
2. Use of ultrasonography has reduced the need for many
4) Neoplasia
contrast radiography procedures and aids in guiding sam-
5) Fluid, debris, or mass occupying a normally gas-
pling for cytology, histopathology. culture, and sensitivity.
filled or fatty structure.
3. No ionizing radiation or other known safety hazard is
6) Lithiasis (formation of calculij.
present with diagnostic ultrasonography.
7) Mineralization 
dystrophic,
metastatic,
4. Value of ultrasonography is highly user dependent,
neoplastic).
relying on the sonographer's patience, skill, and experience.
85
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Many sources of error are possible when interpreting ultra-
 s  in rs s  ls s r s
sound, images and numerous artifacts and pitfalls must be
with far better contrast resolution.
recognized to prevent misdiagnosis.
6. No harmful effects are known with MRI.
5. Sound waves used during an ultrasound examination are
 7. MRI commonly is used to study central nervous system,
generated in a transducer, which converts electrical energy
 joints, and all internal organs.
into brief pulses of high-frequency waves.
6. Sound waves are sent into the animal's body, where they
Scintigraphy (nuclear medicine)
interact with tissues and create echos as they bounce off
1. Radioisotopes are given internally to provide functional
structures. Returning sound waves are converted by trans-
information about an organ or body part.
ducer (now functioning as a receiver) back into electrical
2. Drugs that emit gamma radiation (radiopharmaceuticals)
signals that are sent to a computer for processing and display.
are administered to the animal and localize in specific tissues
7. Sound waves are transmitted less than l% of the time.
(depending on type of drug).
with more than 99% spent waiting for and detecting return-
3. Gamma cameras (external radiation detectors) are used
ing echoes
to image the biodistribution of the radiopharmaceutical and
8. Ultrasonography utilizes various frequencies. Higher fre-
produce 2-D images that reflect physiologic and pathologic
quencies (7.5 to 10 MHz) provide better spatial resolution
and better detail but cannot penetrate deeper tissues. Lower
processes.
4. Unlike radiography, CT, MRI, and ultrasound, which pri-
q 'sass adaap ai uo (z s ol 5') saua
marily give anatomic information, scintigraphy provides
produce less resolution.
functional information.
5. Scintigraphy is very sensitive in detection of disease, but
Computed tomography (CT)
not very specific as to etiology.
1. X-rays are used to create thin-slice, cross-sectional images
6. Positron emission tomography (PET) and single photon
of various areas of the body.
emission computed tomography (SPECT) use gamma camera
2. Superimposition of overlying structures is eliminated.
data from multiple projections to create cross-sectional
3. CT images have inherent high contrast, enabling distinc
images of physiologic function. These images can be com-
tion of tissues with less than a 1% difference in physical
 bined with anatomic data from CT or MRI to optimize diag-
density.
nostic information.
4. Data from CT studies can be reconstructed to create 3-D
ima ges.
 5. During a CT examination, animal is positioned on a
Fluoroscopy
motorized table that moves through a circular opening in
1. X-rays and a fluorescent screen are used to create real-
the CT machine. The source of x-rays rotates around the
time radiographic movies of anatomic structures.
animal, transmitting a thin x-ray beam through the body to
 2. Fluoroscopy commonly is used to evaluate swallowing.
detectors on the opposite side. This process is repeated many
GI motility, dynamic respiratory diseases (e.g., tracheal or
times as the animal is slowly passed through the CT unit.
bronchial collapse), movements of the diaphragm, and in
6. Computers are used to reconstruct and display the
interventional studies (e.g., directed aspirates or biopsies.
imaging data.
placement of catheters for angiography).
7. CT commonly is used to image brain, nasal and sinus
3. Components of a typical fluoroscopy system include:
cavities, orbit, mediastinum, lung. liver, adrenal glands, and
a. Fluoroscopic x-ray tube: produces continuous x-rays
many skeletal structures including skull, spine, and joints.
 that are passed through the animal
b. Fluorescent screen: converts x-rays to light.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRl)
c. Image intensifier: amplifes light to create a real-time
1. Powerful magnetic fields and radio waves are used
image.
t0 produce cross-sectional images with superior anatomic
d. CCD video camera: captures image for display.
detail.
e. Monitor: allows viewing of real time images.
2. Magnetic fields used are thousands of times stronger than
f. Recording device: saves study as video or as static
that of the earth and temporarily alter protons in water
images on film.
molecules, aligning them with the magnetic field.
4. Major disadvantage of fluoroscopy is relatively high radi-
3. When magnetic field is turned off, protons gradually
ation exposure to personnel and animal.
return to normal. During transition back to normal, protons
5. Fluoroscopic studies should always be done with an
emit radio waves, which are detected by coils placed around
image intensifier and only when specifically indicated
the animal.
(preferably by a veterinary radiologist or similarly trained
4. Radio wave data is collected, analyzed, and reconstructed
person who is knowledgeable about radiation protection
by powerful computers.
and equipment).
86
3
Contrast Radiography
Indications for contrast radiography88
 Pneumopericardiography   102
Types of contrast media  88
Venous portography  102
Barium sulfate  88
Respiratory   102
 Organic iodinated compounds  8 
 Bronchography and tracheography  102
lonic iodinated contrast media  88 
Musculoskeletal  103
 Nonionic iodinated contrast media  89 
Joints  103
Adverse effects associated with contrast media  89
Arthrography 103
Gas 89
Skull (head)  104
Barium  89
Dacryocystorhinography
　104
lodinated compounds  90 
Otic canalography  104
Contrast radiography procedures  91
 Rhinography
104
Alimentary  91
 Sialography
104
 Enema with contrast 91
Spine 105
Esophagography  93
Discography   105
 Gastrography  94 
Epidurography
105
 Upper gastrointestinal study  96
Myelography
106
Body cavity 99
Soft tissue 110
 Peritoneography  99
Fistulography  110
 Pleurography
100
Urogenital   111
Cardiovascular  100
Cystography 111
 Angiography 100
Excretory urography (intravenous urography, intravenous
 Selective angiography   100
 pyelography [IVP]}
115
 Nonselective angiography  100 
Urethrography 118
Lymphography/Lymphangiography
101
Vaginography (vaginourethrography) 121
Radiography of the Dog and Cat: Guide to Making and Interpreting Radiographs. First Edition. M.C. Muhlbauer and S.K. Kneller.
@ 2013 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
28
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
 8. In addition to being biologically inert, barium prepara-
Indications for contrast radiography
tions may have some therapeutic effects on alimentary tract,
including a protective coating action, binding of bile acids.
1. Needed information 
1is not available
on
survey
toxins, bacteria, and reduction of gas.
radiographs.
2. Enhance visualization of an organ or structure that is
inadequately seen on survey radiographs.
Organic iodinated compounds
3. Determine size, shape, position, and contour of an organ.
1. Positive contrast 
agents
commonly
used to study
4. Evaluate luminal contents, mucosal surface, or wall of a
intravascular, intrathecal, intra-articular, and soft tissue
hollow viscus.
structures.
5. Provide some assessment of organ function.
2. Available as ionic (hypertonic) or nonionic (isotonic)
6. Aid in determining appropriate therapy, such as whether
preparations (see discussion below).
surgery is indicated.
3. Characteristics include low molecular weight, low lipid
solubility, low protein binding. and reach maximum plasma
levels immediately after injection.
4. Primarily excreted through kidneys by glomerular filtra-
A contrast study is indicated only if it will provide information
 tion (98%) and through small intestinal mucosa and biliary
not available on survey radiographs and will assst the clinician
system (2%).
in managing the case or in developing a diagnosis without
a. Compounds with high protein binding can be used to
harming the animal.
    s  
tially excreted through the biliary system.
b. Clearance from central nervous system is slower than
from vascular system:
Types of contrast media
1) May diffuse back across blood-brain barrier into
 capillary bed.
2) May flow from cerebrospinal fluid into venous
1. Negative contrast media absorb very few x-rays and are
circulation.
less opaque than soft tissue or fat:
3) May be actively transported away via choroid
a. Carbon dioxide.
plexus.
b. Nitrous oxide.
5. Nonionic, isotonic preparations can be used to evaluate
c. Oxygen.
the alimentary tract and may be preferred over barium in
d. Room air.
some situations:
2. Positive contrast media absorb many x-rays and are more
a. Suspected GI perforation or leakage (fear that extrava-
opaque than soft tissues:
sated barium can cause a severe and potentially fatal
a. Barium sulfate.
inflammatory response).
b. Iodinated compounds (ionic and nonionic)
b. Need for immediate information (iodinated com-
pounds pass through the GI tract more rapidly than does
Barium sulfate
 barium, especially hypertonic preparations).
1. Positive contrast medium with high degree of opaciry.
c. When surgery or endoscopy is planned (barium inter-
2. White crystalline powder, micropulverized and in
feres with mucosal visualization).
suspension.
 d. If ultrasonography is planned (barium will attenuate 
3. Adheres well to suspending agents such as carboxymethyl-
ultrasound waves; iodine compounds do not).
cellulose, enabling it to efficiently coat mucosal surfaces.
6. Concentration of iodine in a preparation is listed as
4. Commonly used to study lumen and mucosa of alimen-
number of iodine molecules per volume (mgI/mL). Higher
 s o  nl 
concentrations provide greater opacity but also carry increased
5. Very safe in alimentary tract because barium is not
risk of adverse reactions.
metabolized, absorbed, or hypertonic.
6. Premixed commercially available suspensions are pre-
paxu aq isn siapaod iapaod wueq dn iaao pana
Ionic iodinated contrast media
with water and tend not to remain in suspension, resulting 
1. Water-soluble, tri-iodinated derivatives of benzoic acid.
in an overall inferior study).
2. In solution, these compounds dissociate into two ions:
7. Concentration of barium sulfate in a preparation is listed
anion (diatrizoate or iothalamate), which contains iodine.
as a percentage weight-to-volume (w/v) or weight-to-
and cation (sodium or meglumine), which provides biologic
weight (w/w) ratio, or sometimes as specific gravity.
 stabilization.
88
CHAPTER 3 Contrast Radiography
tricle and prevent embolization of pulmonary outflow
Table 3.1 0smolality
tract).
b. Animal may need to remain in this position for up to
Blood and cerebrospinal fluid 
00E
60 minutes to allow gas to be absorbed.
Nonionic contrast 
400-750
lonic contrast
1400-1800
c. With severe respiratory distress or persistent hypoxia.
administer l00% oxygen and intubate.
d. If circulatory collapse has occurred, external cardiac
compression may help disperse air from right heart
veins.
e. Fluid therapy and beta-adrenergic agents may be
3. Ionic media are hyperosmolar (hypertonic) and have a
indicated.
higher potential for adverse side effects. They are rapidly
absorbed, quickly diluted, and irritating to tissues (latter
Barium
results in faster transit through the GI tract).
1. Barium produces few direct adverse effects, unless depos-
ited outside of alimentary tract.
Nonionic iodinated contrast media
2. May obscure visualization of mucosal surfaces during
1. Water soluble, but do not dissociate into ions.
endoscopic or surgical procedures.
2. Most commonly used for myelography (e.g., iopamidol.
 3. Blocks ultrasound waves and may hinder ultrasonogra-
iohexol), but can also be used in urography, angiography.
phy examinations.
and in studies of the alimentary tract.
4. Allergic reactions to barium sulfate or another ingredient
3. Compared to ionic media, they are lower in osmolality
in a preparation are rare.
(similar to plasma; Table 3.l). less toxic, and cause fewer
a. Vomiting has been reported in people as a rare side
adverse reactions.
effect of oral administration.
4. May be more expensive than ionic agents, but tend to
5. Large amounts of barium in peritoneal cavity, mediasti-
produce fewer side effects.
num, or pleural space:
a. Can cause a severe inflammatory reaction and may
become an emergency situation.
Adverse effects associated with
b. In severe cases, death can occur within 24 hours.
contrast media
c. Animals that survive peritonitis often develop exten-
sive adhesions and granulomas.
Gas
d. Barium studies are not recommended during first 24
1. Gas embolism is major complication and can result in
hours after endoscopy or during first week after GI
death if gas gains acces to vascular system during or after
surgery (if contrast study is required, nonionic iodinated
completion of the procedure.
media are preferred).
2. More soluble gases, such as carbon dioxide and nitrous
6. Barium in trachea or lungs:
oxide, are preferred over room air to minimize risk of an
a. May result from:
embolism.
1) Aspiration during oral administration.
a. Has
been reported during
 pneumo-cystography
2) Incorrect placement of orogastric or nasogastric
(hematuria creates increased risk).
tube.
3. Symptoms of gas embolism develop immediately (sever-
 3) Secondary to an esophageal fistula.
ity is related to volume and extent of embolism):
b. Small amounts of barium in respiratory tract usually
a. Dyspnea.
are benign:
b. Tachycardia.
1) Most barium is cleared by ciliary system of bron-
c. Hypotension.
chioles or alveolar macrophages.
d. Altered mentation.
2) Barium may localize in tracheobronchial lymph
e. Circulatory shock.
nodes.
f. Sudden death.
 3) Barium may persist in alveoli or terminal bronchi-
g. Abnormal heart sound (described as a rumbling)
oles for long periods of time, but rarely causes clinical
sometimes is present.
signs.
4. Treatment
 of a suspected gas embolism must begin
4) Large volumes of barium in the respiratory tract
immedia tely:
can lead to airway obstruction, hypoxia, and respira-
a. Place animal in left lateral recumbency and elevate
tory distress. In these cases the barium should be
removed by endotracheal suction.
89
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
3) Lowered threshold for ventricular arrhythmia
A large volume of barium in the peritoneal space is likely to
4) Temporary decrease in myocardial contractility.
cause the dire situation described above. However, a small
5) Tachycardia.
volume of barium in the peritoneal space or mediastinum
6) ECG changes may include depressed S-T segment
has been shown to produce no more severe response than
and prolonged Q-T interval.
equal amounts of ingesta without barium. If perforation has
7) Capillary endothelium can be damaged, resulting
Occurred, gas leaks from the Gl tract as easily if not easier than
in leakage and thrombus formation.
do liquids or suspensions. when perforation is suspected, non-
8) Red blood cell deformation and increased rigidity
a'll seb aauy paiap oi papuauuonan s! Ayde boipen ise luon
due to osmotic desiccation (damage to blood cells
beip aul 'paaiap s! seb aait l (hyde sboipey weag leluoziou
may lead to increased viscosity and blockage of
nosis is confirmed. If no free gas is detected, leakage most 
capillaries).
likely is absent or very small. At this point, barium is as safe as
9) Fluid overload and hypertension may result from
iodinated contrast agents, and barium is more likely to demon-
osmotic hypervolemia.
strate a leak.
c. Central nervous system:
1) Increased permeability of blood-brain barrier.
2) Cerebral edema and seizures or syncope.
d. Urinary (intravenous administration):
1) Nausea and brief retching or vomiting is common.
      (
lodinated compounds (Box 3.2)
administra tion.
1. Adverse reactions are rare and depend on:
 b) Probably caused by a vasovagal response.
a. Type of procedure being performed.
2) Persistent vomiting is uncommon and requires
b. Specific contrast agent used (e.g., osmolarity, volume,
treatment.
concen tration).
3) Osmotic diuresis.
c. Route of administration.
4) Acute renal failure is rarely reported in dogs and
d. Rate of administration.
cats unless there is preexisting disease.
e. History of prior reactions in this animal.
a) May be caused by direct tubular toxicity, renal
f. Current health status of animal.
vasoconstriction, and/or hypotension.
2. Hyperosmolality (hypertonicity) and chemical toxicity
b) On radiographs, acute renal failure is recognized
are primary causes of adverse reactions.
3. Nonionic agents produce fewer adverse reactions than
 a e    o  as
ionic agents.
pelvic or ureteral opacification (treatment includes
4. Adverse reactions cannot be predicted by administering
intravenous fluid therapy).
a test dose to an animal.
e. Respiratory:
5. Preexisting conditions that may predispose to an adverse
1) Aspiration
1 or inadvertent tracheal injection of
reaction:
hypertonic contrast agent may cause:
a. Renal disease.
a) Pulmonary edema.
b. Diabetes mellitus.
b) Bronchospasm.
c. Multiple myeloma.
2) Anaphylaxis.
d. Proteinuria.
f. Other adverse effects (described in people):
e. Dehydration.
1) Metallic taste in mouth.
f. Hypertension.
2) Shivering (chills).
6. Possible adverse reactions vary with type of procedure
3) Fever.
and body system being studied:
4) Headache
a. Alimentary:
5) Sneezing.
1) Bitter taste and reluctance to accept oral dosing.
6) General discomfort.
2) Osmotic diarrhea and dehydration can occur
7. Treatment of adverse reactions to iodinated contrast
with hypertonic (ionic) preparations and may be
  sn ro  aq     
severe (especially in immature, aged, or compromised
and transient, requiring no specific therapy.
animals).
a. Moderate to severe reactions may require specific
b. Cardiovascular:
treatment depending on the clinical signs present. Intra-
1) Peripheral vasodilation and bradycardia due to
venous fluid therapy, oxygen, corticosteroids, atropine,
heightened parasympathetic activity.
epinephrine, valium, or antihistamines are administered
2) Hypotension from bradycardia and vasodilation.
according to standard therapeutic protocols.
90
CHAPTER 3 Contrast Radiography
2. Quality radiographic studies are made by proceeding in
Box 3.1 Minimizing adverse reactions to
a systematic manner:
iodinated contrast media.
a. Proper preparation of animal (e.g., empty GI tract,
clean and dry hair coat).
1. Use minimum effective dose.
b. Correct exposure settings.
2. Nonionic agents produce fewer adverse effects than ionic
C. Appropriate type and volume of contrast medium.
agents.
d. Accurate positioning of animal.
3. Warm contrast solution to body temperature prior to
e. Appropriate imaging intervals.
administration.
 3. Survey radiographs always are made prior to a contrast study:
4. Maintain proper patient hydration throughout procedure.
a. Determine whether contrast study is needed.
5. Patient sedation/anesthesia may reduce adverse reactions 
b. Confirm proper preparation of the animal.
during some procedures (i.e., intravenous urography).
c. Establish correct settings for kVp and mAs.
6. Pan in advance for adverse reactions and possible medical 
d. Detect abnormalities that may be masked by contrast
emergencies.
medium.
e. Provide a baseline from which to interpret the contrast
study.
4. Exposure techniques usually need to be adjusted between
survey and contrast radiographs:
Box 3.2 Types of adverse reactions to
a. Positive contrast studies generally require double the
iodinated contrast media.
exposure (double mAs or increase kVp by 15%).
1. Mild
 a. Nausea and brief retching or vomiting 
 b. Peripheral vasodilation 
Try to keep kVp as close to 70 as possible. 70kvp is "Kk-edge"
c. Skin erythema 
of most positive contrast agents and results in maximum dis-
d. Osmotic diuresis
tinction between contrast medium and soft tissue.
e. Local irritation at injection site
2. Moderate 
 a. Persistent vomiting
b. Negative contrast studies generally require half the
b. Facial swelling 
exposure (decrease mAs by 50% or reduce kVp by 20%).
5. Obese animals may require lower dose of contrast
c. Laryngeal edema
d. Tachycardia or bradycardia
that animal).
e. Hypertension
3. Severe
6. Sedation/anesthesia may or may not be required.
 a. Cardiac arrhythmias 
7. A plan of action should be in place for any medical emer-
b. Hypotension
gencies that may arise from an adverse reaction to a contrast 
c. Pulmonary edema
agent.
d. Vascular collapse
Alimentary
e. Acute renal failure
f. Cerebral edema, seizures, syncope
Enema with contrast
g. Death
1. A positive, negative, or double contrast radiographic eval-
lation of the large bowel.
2. Due to relatively low yield of diagnostic information with
 contrast enema and increasing availability of endoscopy, this
study is rarely performed.
Contrast radiography procedures
3. Colon is not adequately evaluated after oral administra-
tion of contrast medium because it is not sufficiently
1. The following descriptions are guidelines for various
distended.
contrast radiography studies. Modifications may be needed.
4. Rectum and anal canal are not examined with a barium
depending on:
enema.
a. Specific reason for study.
b. Available equipment.
Indications
c. Status of animal.
1. Identify position of large intestine.
d. Experience of clinician.
2. Differentiate gas- or fluid-filled small intestinal loops
e. Radiographic findings during the study.
from large bowel.
91
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
3. Endoscopy is not available or limited.
8. Tape catheter to animal's tail.
4. Investigate inability to pass an endoscope.
9. Contrast medium:
5. Assess size, shape, and mucosal margins of colon.
a. Barium solution (20% w/v) is used.
6. Aid in diagnosis of suspected large bowel disease:
b. Dose:
a. Ileocolic intussusception.
1) Dogs: 10 to 15 mL/kg.
b. Cecal inversion.
2) Cats: 7 to 10 mL/kg.
c. Mechanical or functional obstruction (e.g., stricture.
10. Double exposure technique over survey radiographs.
 mass, foreign material)
11. Warm contrast medium to body temperature prior to
d. Mucosal lesion (e.g., colitis, tumor, ulcer).
administra tion.
e. Mass lesions (intrinsic or extrinsic).
12. Fill an enema bag or 500 mL container with appropriate
f. Chronic or recurrent colitis.
dose and allow gravity flow to slowly infuse barium into
g. Infiltrative bowel disease.
large bowel.
h. Fistula.
a. May also use large, catheter-tipped syringes to slowly
i. Perforation.
administer barium.
j. Hernia.
13. After approximately half of barium has been adminis-
k. Clinical signs that may be attributable to large intes-
tered, make DV abdominal radiograph to assess filling (if 
tine disease:
available, fluoroscopy can be used).
1) Diarrhea with red blood (hematochezia) or mucus.
14. If large bowel is not sufficiently distended, additional
2) Tenesmus or dyschezia.
barium is administered and radiographs repeated.
3) Abnormally shaped feces (small-diameter, ribbon-
15. Clamp tubing when finished to avoid spillage of barium.
like stools).
In some cases an anal purse string suture may be required
7. Postoperative
evaluation of large intestine
(e.g.
to contain barium in colon.
anastamosis).
16. Final set of radiographs should include DV, VD, right
and left lateral, and VD oblique.
Contraindications
a. In a hollow viscus. gravity affects distribution and
1. Any contraindication to general anesthesia
appearance of contrast media.
2. Know sensitivity or allergic reaction to contrast media.
b. After completing lengthy preparations for this study.
3. Young or debilitated animal with severe fluid imbalance.
make all necessary images.
17. When finished, return animal to left lateral recumbency.
Complications
elevate cranial half, and allow barium to drain back into
1. Portosystemic shunt (air embolism may occur during
enema bag (bag is placed on floor). Massaging the abdomen
pneumocolography).
may aid in emptying the colon.
2. Perforation of the colon during performance of a contrast
18. Deflate and remove catheter.
enema is rare but may occur with a diseased bowel wall or
due to faulty technique.
Double contrast barium enema
3. Inadvertent filling of the distal small bowel may obscure
1. Provides better outline of mucosal margin than barium
visualization of the large bowel.
 enema alone.
4. Colon spasms may result from infusion of cold solutions
2. May reveal small lesions that were masked by barium.
or due to irritation of the colon wall caused by the catheter.
3. Perform barium enema as described above.
rectal examination, or enema.
 4. After draining barium from colon, leave catheter in place.
5. Slowly infuse 10 mL/kg of air or gas, sufficient to redis-
Technique (contrast enema)
tend the colon.
Barium enema
6. Periodically make DV radiographs to assess colon disten-
1. Animal is fasted 24 to 36 hours prior to radiography.
tion (or use fluoroscopy if available).
2. Colon is evacuated using oral laxatives and cleansing
7. Rotate animal several times to coat mucosa and reduce
enemas (6 hours prior to radiography).
pooling of contrast medium.
3. Animal is properly hydrated.
8. Make DV, VD, right and left lateral, and VD oblique
4. Make and evaluate survey abdominal radiographs.
radiographs.
5. General anesthesia is required.
9. Return animal to left lateral recumbency between radio-
6. Position animal in ventral recumbency (DV radiograph)
 graphs to minimize potential effects of gas emboli (may
and elevate pelvis with a towel or foam pad.
occur if mucosal barrier is damaged).
7. Insert a balloon-tipped catheter (e.g., Swan Ganz, Foley)
10. When finished, deflate and remove catheter. Massaging
cranial to anal sphincter and inflate balloon to completely
abdomen with catheter in place aids in emptying of the
occlude anal canal.
colon.
92
CHAPTER 3 Contrast Radiography
Negative contrast enema (pneumocolon)
3. Persistent vomiting not diagnosed with abdominal
1. Used to verify position of colon when not evident on
investigation.
survey radiographs.
4. Suspected esophageal foreign material or stricture.
2. Cleansing enemas are optional.
5. Vomitus containing red blood.
3. Anesthesia or sedation usually is unnecessary. unless a
6. Investigate questionable findings on survey radiographs.
balloon catheter is used.
 7. Determine position of esophagus relative to a mass (e.g.
4. Insert a soft catheter or dose syringe into rectum and
cervical, mediastinal).
 slowly infuse a small volume of air into descending colon.
8. Evaluate esophageal motility (best done with fluoroscopy)
a. Dose:
1) Dogs: 1 to 3mL/kg.
Contraindications
2) Cats: 20 to 30 mL.
1. Lesion is identified on survey radiographs.
 5. Make lateral and VD radiographs as needed.
2. Dysphagia or inability to swallow.
6. If position of colon is not clear with pneumocolon, a
3. Known sensitivity or allergic reaction to contrast media.
small volume of barium can be substituted for air and radio-
graphs repeated.
Confrast media
1. Room air:
Radiographic findings (barium and double
a. Negative contrast esophagram is a simple, rapid means
ontrast enema)
of assessing location of esophagus and luminal contents.
1. Normal colon is uniform in width with a smooth, con-
2.Barium:
tinuous mucosal margin.
a. Barium paste (45% to 100% w/v) is recommended to
2. Abnormal dilation of colon usually is evident on survey
evaluate esophageal mucosa.
radiographs and may be caused by obstruction, severe
b. Liquid barium suspension (20%-30% w/v) is used to
inflammation, or neurologic disease (see Differential Diag-
assess size of esophagus (i.e., suspected megaesophagus.
noses section of chapter 6).
c. Food soaked in barium (l cup dry kibble mixed with
3. Narrowing of colon may represent peristalsis, spasm.
20 mL of barium) can be used when liquid barium study
stricture, or compression by adjacent mass (e.g., prostate.
is equivocal.
sublumbar mass).
3. Iodinated contrast agents:
4. Irregular mucosal margin or thickening of colon wall can
a. Nonionic media are preferred, 240-300mgI/mL (ionic
be caused by inflammation or neoplasia.
compounds cause more severe pulmonary edema should
5. Out-pouching of colon wall or extension of barium
aspiration occur).
beyond border of colon may represent deep ulcer, diverticu-
 b. Preferred over barium when endoscopy is planned to
lum, or perforation.
follow esophagography (barium will obscure mucosa).
6. Filling defects can be caused by feces in lumen (may or may
 4. If esophageal perforation is suspected, nonionic iodinated
not be adhered to mucosa), tumors, granulomas, or polyps.
contrast media may be preferred over barium. However.
7. Displacement of colon may result from redundancy, full
iodinated media do not coat mucosa as well as barium and
urinary bladder, or adjacent mass.
esophageal leaks are more difficult to detect with iodinated
8. Shortening of colon sometimes occurs with chronic
media. Barium generally is more accurate in identifying
colitis.
esophageal perforations, and small amounts of barium in
9. Barium may cling to mucous at sites of inflammation and
mediastinum reportedly cause no more severe reaction than
excess production, creating a mottled, heterogeneous pattern
equal amounts of ingesta or iodinated agents.
called flocculation.
5. If oral administration of barium is complicated or contra-
10. Lymph follicles in normal colon appear as tiny spicules
indicated, a bolus of barium can be infused via oroesopha-
or focal projections along mucosa and may mimic small
geal or nasoesophageal tube cranial to a suspected lesion.
ulcers (endoscopy may be required for diagnosis).
11. Abdominal compression can be used to displace adja-
Technique (esophagram)
cent structures or slightly alter width of colon.
1. Make and evaluate survey radiographs of cervical and
thoracic regions.
Esophagography
2. Stomach should be empty of ingesta (no food 4 to 6 hours
A positive or negative contrast radiographic evaluation of
prior to examination).
esophagus.
3. Sedation and anesthesia are not recommended due to
their effects on esophageal motility.
Indications
a. When sedation is required, phenothiazine tranquiliz-
1. Regurgitation.
ers are recommended.
2. Gagging.
4. Animal is in sternal recumbency.
93
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
B
Figure 3.1 Positive contrast esophagramm in a normal dog (lateral radiographs) with parallel mucosal folds outlined by barium. A. Head and neck are
flexed, accentuating normal ventral displacement of esophagus near thoracic inlet (pseudodiverticulum). B. Head and neck extended straightens out 
esophagus. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
5. Contrast medium is given orally by syringe into the
buccal pouch.
6.Dose:
a. Barium preparations: 15-30 mL in dogs and 5-7 mL in
cats.
b. Iodinated compounds: 10-15 mL in dogs and 5-10 mL
cats.
 7. Double exposure technique over survey radiographs.
  n n    m o
administration.
9. Allow animal to swallow two to three times to ensure
coating of esophagus.
10. Make lateral and DV/VD oblique radiographs:
a. DV/VD radiographs are oblique 15° to 30° to avoid
 superimposition of spine.
b. DV radiograph may be preferred because contrast
medium may have passed into stomach before VD
radiograph can be made.
c. Center x-ray beam on cranial thorax with field of
Figure 3.2 Positive contrast esophagram in a normal cat (lateral
view including pharynx and stomach.
radiograph) with longitudinal mucosal folds in cranial esophagus and
transverse folds in caudal portion (herringbone pattern). (Adapted from 
1l. Additional doses of contrast medium are administered
Owens and Biery 1999.)
when repeat radiographs are needed to verify suspected lesions.
Radiographic findings (esophagram)
1. Contrast medium normally is transient and not retained
in esophagus.
3. Normal feline esophagram (Figure 3.2):
2. Normal canine esophagram (Figure 3.1):
a. Mucosal folds in proximal two-thirds of esophagus are
a. Parallel, longitudinal lines (mucosal folds) extend
longitudinal, similar to dogs.
entire length of esophagus.
b. In distal third of esophagus (from carina to cardia)
b. Mucosal folds may appear wavy and irregular at tho-
mucosal folds are transverse or oblique (herringbone
racic inlet due to mild redundancy of esophagus, espe-
pattern} (see Normal Radiographic Anatomy in chapter 5).
cially in brachycephalic breeds (pseudo-diverticulum).
l) Flexion of head and neck causes a significant
Gastrography
ventral deviation of esophagus at level of first and
A positive, negative, or double contrast radiographic evalu-
second rib which may mimic a true diverticulum).
ation of the stomach.
94
CHAPTER 3 Contrast Radiography
Indications
b. Pass a lubricated orogastric tube into stomach (may
1. Identify gastric contents (e.g., foreign material, tumors).
want to use a mouth speculum).
2. Determine position of stomach (e.g., volvulus, adjacent
c. Confirm proper tube placement by injecting 3-15 mL
mass, diaphragmatic hernia).
of water through the tube (coughing indicates abnormal
3. Evaluate abnormal shape or margination of stomach on
tube placement in trachea).
survey radiographs.
d. When finished, clear the orogastric tube with air and
4. Assess stomach wall thickness and presence of mural or
block the end before removing it.
intramural lesions.
7. Positive contrast gastrogram:
 5. Suspected gastric outflow problem.
a. Double exposure technique over survey radiographs.
6. Investigate causes of:
b. Warm contrast medium to room temperature prior to
a. Chronic or persistent vomiting.
administration.
b.Hematemesis.
c. Infuse a volume of barium (20%-30% w/v) sufficient
c. Cranial abdominal pain.
to fully distend stomach.
d. Anorexia.
d. Dose:
e. Chronic weight loss.
1) Small and medium dogs: 8-12mL/kg.
f. Melena.
2) Large dogs: 5-7 mL/kg.
g. Chronic bloating.
3) Cats: 8-10mL/kg.
h. Cranial abdominal mass.
e. Make DV, VD, right and left lateral radiographs of
 7. Evaluate gastric motility and contractility.
 cranial abdomen to visualize contrast medium in all parts
of stomach
8. Negative contrast gastrogram (pneumogastrogram):
Contraindications
a. Position animal in left lateral recumbency to trap any
 1. Known sensitivity or allergy to contrast medium.
gas emboli in right atrium, should they occur.
2. Lesion is evident on survey radiographs.
b. Decrease exposure technique by half (reduce kVp 20%
3. Fear of barium leaking into peritoneal space (see text box
or mAs by 50%) compared with survey radiographs.
under Barium Adverse Effects).
c. Infuse a volume of gas (usually room air) sufficient to
4. If surgery or endoscopy is planned, barium will inhibit
distend stomach.
visualization of the mulcosa.
1) Dose:
5. Availability and feasibility of endoscopy.
a) 20 mL/kg via orogastric tube.
b) Air can be blown through orogastric tube until
Technique (gastrogram)
stomach is visibly distended or animal becomes
1. GI tract should be empty (12- to 24-hour fast and cleans-
uncomfortable.
ing enemas as neededy.
2) A smaller volume of air (2mL/kg) can be used to
2. Appropriate laboratory tests to rule out GI parasites, fecal
locate stomach or outline a gastric foreign object.
Occult blood, uremia, and Addison's disease.
3) Carbonated beverages are an effective means of
3. Make and evaluate survey abdominal radiographs.
adding gas to stomach without gastric intubation:
4. Sedation/anesthesia is not recommended.
a) Estimated dose is 5mL/kg per os.
a. When sedation is required, acepromazine in dogs and
 b) Variable volume of gas forms in gastric lurmen.
ketamine/diazepam in cats have relatively little effect on
4) Effervescent tablets and granules are commercially
GI motility:
available to add gas to stomach.
1) Dogs: acepromazine, 0.25-0.5mg/kg IV, 3 mg max
d. Make Dv, VD, right and left lateral radiographs of
IV; or 0.1-0.25 mg/kg IM.
cranial abdomen.
2) Cats: ketamine and diazepam (ketamine 5mg/kg
9. Double contrast gastrogram:
IV, diazepam 0.2-0.5 mg/kg IV).
a. Infuse concentrated barium (60%-100% w/v) into
b. Anticholinergic drugs and opiates are avoided because
 Stomach via orogastric tube:
they inhibit GI motility.
1) Dose:
c. If gastrography is performed only to evaluate stomach
a) Small and medium dogs: 2mL/kg.
morphology. anesthesia or heavy sedation may be accept-
b) Large dogs: 1 mL/kg.
able (caution of aspiration of gastric contents),
c) Cats: 6 mL
5. If available, fluoroscopy can be used to aid in detecting
b.After adding positive contrast, infuse gas (usually
lesions.
room air} sufficient to fully distend stomach:
6. Intubate the stomach:
1) Dose (estimated): 20 mL/kg.
a. Determine length of tube needed (measure from
c. Carefully roll animal 2 or 3 times to coat gastric
corner of mouth to loth rib).
mucosa.
95
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
d. Make DV, VD, right and left lateral radiographs of
1) Dogs: acepromazine (0.25-0.5 mg/kg IV, 3mg max
cranial abdomen.
IV; or 0.1-0.25mg/kg IM).
e. Add more air to stomach as needed (some air will be
2) Cats: ketamine and diazepam (ketamine 5mg/kg
lost by regurgitation).
IV, diazepam 0.2-0.5mg/kg IV).
f. Glucagon (0.10 to 0.35mg/kg IV) has been used to
4. Drugs that affect GI motility (e.g., narcotics, anticholin-
 decrease gastric motility, facilitate gastric distention, and
 ergic drugs. opiates) should be discontinued at least 24 hours 
delay gastric emptying for about 15 minutes. Glucagon is
prior to contrast study (48 to 72 hours is preferable).
uncommonly used and is contraindicated in patients with
5. Contrast medium:
uncontrolled diabetes mellitus or pheochromocytoma.
a. Administration via gastric intubation generally pro-
vides more complete filling of stomach and small intes-
Upper gastrointestinal study
tine and with less aerophagia than oral administration.
A positive contrast radiographic study of the stomach and
b.Barium (20%-30% w/v):
small intestine.
1) Preferred contrast medium.
2) Dose:
Indications
a) Small and medium dogs: 8-12 mL/kg.
b) Large dogs: 5-7 mL/kg.
sive to therapy.
c) Cats: 8-10 mL/kg.
2. Blood in vomitus (hematemesis) or feces (melena).
c. Iodinated contrast media (300 mgI/mL):
3. Acute abdominal pain with questionable findings on
1) Produce poor mucosal detail compared with barium.
survey radiographs.
2) Nonionic or ionic agents may be used:
4. Suspected partial or complete small bowel obstruction
a) Nonionic is preferred but may be more
(e.g., foreign material, neoplasia, intussusception) with
expensive.
questionable findings on survey radiographs.
 b) Ionic is hypertonic and pulls fluid into GI tract 
 5. Chronic weight loss with intermittent or recurrent GI
(animal must be properly hydrated) 
signs (e.g., vomiting. diarrhea).
c) Ionic is irritating to mucosa (results in rapid
6. Investigate possible causes of anorexia.
transit through GI tracty.
7. Differentiate intra-abdominal masses of GI tract origin
3) If available contrast medium is more concentrated
from lymph nodes and other organs.
than 300 mgI/mL, dilute it with water to make proper
8. Assess size, shape. position, and motility of stomach and
concentration.
small intestine
4) Dose:
9. Evaluate mucosal margins of stormach and small intestine.
a) Dogs: 2.0-3.0 mL/kg.
10. Postoperative assessment of GI tract motility and
b) Cats: 1.0-2.0 mL/kg.
integrity.
6. Intubate the stomach:
 a. Determine length of tube needed by measuring frorm
Contraindications
corner of mouth to l0th rib.
1. Diagnosis is made clinically or on survey radiographs
b. Pass a lubricated orogastric tube into stomach (may
2. Known sensitivity or allergic reaction to contrast media.
want to use a mouth speculum).
3. Hypertonic contrast agents are not recommended in
c. Confirm proper tube placement by injecting 3-l5mL
some situations:
of water through the tube (coughing indicates abnormal
a. Hypovolemia (e.g., dehydration, anemia, Addison's
tube placement in trachea).
disease).
 7. Double exposure technique over survey radiographs
b. Very young or debilitated animals.
 d n  n   m o
4. Barium is not recommended in some situations:
administration.
a. Pneumoperitoneum without recent history of surgery
9. Infuse appropriate dose of contrast medium sufficient to
(GI perforation is suspected) .
completely distend the stomach.
b. Surgery or endoscopy is planned.
10. Clear orogastric tube with air and block the end before
removing it.
Technique (upper GI study)
11. Make sequential abdominal radiographs:
1. GI tract should be empty (12- to 24-hour fast, cleansing
a. Barium:
enemas 2 to 4 hours prior to study).
1) Dogs:
2. Make and evaluate survey abdominal radiographs.
a) 5 minutes (VD, DV, right and left lateral
3. Sedation or anesthesia is not recommended.
radiographs).
 a. When sedation is required, the following drugs produce
b) 15 minutes (VD, DV, right and left lateral
less effect on GI motility:
radiographs}.
96
CHAPTER 3 Contrast Radiography
c) 30 minutes (VD and lateral radiographs).
tion, or restraint). In these cases, emptying generally
d) 60 minutes (VD and lateral radiographs)
will proceed in a normal manner after the animal is
e) Hourly VD and lateral radiographs until
allowed to calm down for 30 minutes. Delayed empty-
barium has reached large intestine and most of
ing after 30 minutes suggests pathology.
barium has cleared small intestine.
2) Cats:
Technical errors on an upper GI study
a) 5 minutes (VD, DV, right and left lateral
1. Failure to make survey radiographs to:
ra diogra phs).
a. Assess patient preparation.
b) 15 minutes (VD, DV, right and left lateral
b. Determine correct exposure factors.
radiographs).
c. Identify the lesion and eliminate need for a contrast
c) 30 minutes (VD and lateral radiographs).
study.
d) Every 30 minutes VD and lateral radiographs
2. Ingesta in GI tract (due to poor patient preparation):
  a   s  
a. Alters GI transit time.
of barium has cleared small intestine.
b. Creates filling defects.
b. Iodinated contrast media (ionic agents pass through
c. May mimic or obscure foreign material.
GI tract more rapidly):
d. Compromises evaluation of mucosal surfaces.
1) Dogs:
3. Incorrect exposure technique:
a) 5 minutes (VD, DV, right and left lateral
a. Generally need to double technique over survey
radiographs).
radiographs.
b) Every 30 minutes VD and lateral radiographs
b. Keep kVp near 70 if possible to take advantage of
until contrast has reached large intestine and most
"K-edge."
of barium has cleared small intestine.
4. Incorrect centering of x-ray beam:
2) Cats:
a. Entire abdomen should be included on each image.
a) 5 minutes (VD, DV, right and left lateral
 b. Split abdomen onto two radiographs for large animals
ra diogra phs).
(include diaphragm with cranial part, pelvic inlet with
b) Every 15 minutes VD and lateral radiographs
caudal part and overlap the center).
until contrast has reached large intestine and most
 5. Orogastric tube not in stomach:
of barium has cleared small intestine.
a. Kinked tube in pharynx or esophagus.
12. Sometimes a lesion in the stomach or small intestine
b. Tube in trachea and contrast medium deposited in
will be masked by contrast medium but becomes visible after
lungs:
 majority of contrast has cleared.
1) Test placement of tube with small volume of water.
13. Make both right and left lateral radiographs when pre-
2) Clear tube and block the end before removing it.
sented with questionable findings. especially while most of
6. Insufficient volume of contrast medium in stomach:
contrast medium is in stomach.
a. Underdosing.
14. Average GI transit times are listed in Table 3.2.
b. Vomiting after administration.
a. An initial delay in gastric emptying can occur in
c. Per os administration instead of via gastric intubation
stressed animals (due to anxiety, fear, rage, pain, intuba-
(may lose contrast medium and prolongs process, allow-
ing stomach to empty).
 7. Inadequate number or sequence of radiographs may:
Table 3.2 Average Gl transit timmes with bariurn sulfate in normnal anirnals
a. Prevent evaluation of some parts of the GI tract.
b. Preclude detection of foreign material, soft tissue
Dog
Cat
masses, and ulcers.
c. Compromise assessment of GI transit times.
Stomach begins to empty 
15 min.
10 min.
 8. Overdiagnosis based on a single or a few images:
 Contrast in duodenum 
15 min.
10min.
a. Suspected lesions must be confirmed on multiple
The Dog and Cat data
30 min.
20-30 min.
 radiographs.
 Appearance of contrast in duodenumn
 20-30min.
 b. Normal peristalsis may mimic disease.
in an excited animal
30 min.
 Reach jejunum
30 min.
15-20min.
 Filljejunum and reach ileum 
60 min.
30-60 min.
90-120 min.
30-60 min.
Radiographic findings (upper GI study,gastrogram)
 Reach colon (ilocecal junction)
 Stomach empty
1-4 hours
-
Stomach
 Small intestine empty 
sunoy S-E
1-3 hours
1. Positive contrast medium pools in dependent portions of
Stomach and gas rises to upper regions (positioning of animal
determines distribution of contrast medium, Figure 3.3).
6
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 3.4 Gastric lesions produce persistent filling defects on barium
gastrograrm (VD radiographs). A. Thickened wall along lesser curvature
with a well-cdefined ulcer. B. Local thickening of wall of pyloric antrum
due to neoplasia. C. Thickening along greater curvature due to neoplasia.
 D. Severe thickening of lesser curvature due to neoplasia. (Adapted from
Owens and Biery 1999.)
Figure 3.3 Distribution of gas and fluid (barium) in gastric lumen
dependling on position of animal at time of radiography. A. Right lateral
recumbency: Fluid (white) in pyloric antrum and gas (dark) in body and 
 fundus (right diaphragmatic crus is cranial). B. Left lateral recumbency:
Gas in pyloric antrum and duodenumn, fluid in body and fundus (left
c. Animal's disposition (e.g., calm, anxious).
diaphragmatic crus is cranial). C. Dorsal recumbency (VD radiograph): Ga5
d. Current medications, drugs, sedation/anesthesia.
in body and fluid in pyloric antrum and fundus (three humps diaphragm).
e. Type, temperature, and consistency of contrast
D. Sternal recumbency (DV radiograph): Fluid in body and gas in pyloric 
medium.
antrum and fundus (one hump diaphragm). (Adapted from Owens and 
f. Presence of pathology.
Biery 1999.)
g. Rapid gastric emptying often is without clinical signiff-
cance, but may be caused by inflammation.
h. Delayed gastric emptying (more than 4 hours) may
2. Foreign material and masses within gastric lumen typi
result from insufficient gastric content to stimulate emp-
cally present as persistent filling defects (less opaque on
tying (too little contrast medium), drugs. psychogenic
positive contrast studies and more opaque on negative con-
factors, obstruction, inflammation, infiltrative disease,
trast studies: Figure 3.4).
metabolic disease, or gastric malpositioning (see Differ-
3. Mucosal ulcers are craters along inner gastric wall and
ential Diagnoses in chapter 6).
ing away from lumen and into stomach wall (endoscopy is
Small intestine
preferred for detecting gastric ulcers).
1. Normal small bowel appears uniform with a flowing
4. Normal peristaltic contractions produce transient,
pattern and without sharp turns.
smooth, symmetrical indentations along gastric borders.
2. Slight variations in normal bowel width result from peri-
which vary in appearance between serial radiographs.
stalsis and are transient.
5. Gastric rugal folds often are outlined by contrast medium
3. Fimbriation is the normal, hazy, slightly irregular-
and normally appear as even, bandlike, curvilinear filling
appearing mucosal margin produced by contrast medium
defects, similar in height and thickness to width of contrast-
 outlining intestinal villi (numerous, tiny spicules projecting
filled space between folds.
into bowel lumen), and is more common in immature and
6. Small and diffuse foreign materials (e.g., cloth) may ini-
young animals.
tially be hidden by positive contrast medium but often
4. Pseudoulcers are normal, contrast-filled out-pouchings
become visible as majority of contrast leaves the stomach
along mucosal margin of descending duodenum (caused by
with some remaining in gastric lumen adhered to foreign
thinning of mucosa over submucosal lymphoid follicles and
material.
most often seen in immature and young dogs (Figure 3.5B).
 7. Rate of gastric emptying is affected by:
 5. "String of pearls" in cats describes a normal pattern of
a. Volume of gastric contents.
circular, segmental peristalsis along descending duodenum
b. Type of gastric content.
(Figure 3.5A).
98
CHAPTER 3 Contrast Radiography
5. Known sensitivity or allergic reaction to contrast media.
6. Barium is not used in this procedure.
Complications
1. If diaphragm is not intact, a pneumothorax will be created
during a negative contrast study.
2. Infections (e.g.. peritonitis, abdominal abscesses) may be
disseminated by this procedure.
Technique (peritoneogram)
1. Not a commonly performed procedure.
Figure 3.5 Proximal duodenum on barium upper Gl study (VD
2. Make and evaluate survey abdominal radiographs.
 3. GI tract and urinary bladder should be empty.
radiographs). A. Normal cat with pattern of segmental peristalsis ("string
of pearls"). B. Normal dog with contrast filled out-pouchings extending 
4. Anesthesia or sedation is preferred.
away from lummen (pseudoulcers). C. Infiltrative disease of duodenum with 
5. Insert a needle or catheter into peritoneal space, lateral
irregular mucosal margins and numerous indentations (*thumb
to midline and caudal to umbilicus.
imprints").
6. Perform a test aspiration to be sure no organ or vessel
has been punctured.
7. Remove peritoneal fluid if present.
Positive contrast peritoneography
6. Filling defects are less opaque areas in contrast medium,
1. Contrast medium:
which may be caused by:
a. Barium is never be used for this procedure, only iodin-
a. Peristalsis (transient; more evident when bowel is
ated compounds.
hypermotile, e.g., inflammation).
b. Nonionic agents are preferred (200-400 mgI/mL).
b. Food particles.
c. Dose:
c. Foreign material.
1) Dogs and cats: 1.l mL/kg.
d. Intestinal masses (luminal or mural).
2) If peritoneal fluid remains after abdominocentesis.
e. Parasites.
dose may be doubled (2.2 mL/kg).
7. Ulcers produce persistent, contrast-filled out-pouchings
2. Carefully roll animal 360° to distribute contrast medium
that extend away from the lumen and into bowel wall.
throughout peritoneal space.
8. Rapid passage of contrast medium (faster transit time)
3. Elevate caudal aspect of animal for 5 minutes to better
may be caused by ionic iodinated agents or inflammation
outline diaphra gm.
(see Differential Diagnoses in chapter 6).
4. Abdominal radiographs include VD, DV, right and left 
9. Delayed passage of contrast medium (slower transit) may
lateral radiographs.
result from drugs. obstruction, or inflammation (see Differ-
5. Horizontal beam radiographs may be helpful (position
ential Diagnoses in chapter 6).
questionable area "down").
Body cavity
Negative contrast peritoneography
Peritoneography
1. Position animal in left lateral recumbency to trap any gas
A positive or negative contrast radiographic evaluation of
emboli in right atrium, should they occur.
the peritoneal space.
2. Contrast medium:
a. Nitrous oxide or carbon dioxide is preferred over
Indications
 oxygen or room air because they have increased solubil-
 1. Determine integrity of diaphragm or abdominal wall.
ity and less risk of harmful gas embolism.
 2. Evaluate congenital or acquired hernias or defects.
 b. Infuse sufficient gas to fully distend the abdomen.
 3. Assess intra-abdominal masses.
c. Monitor heart rate and respiration during procedure.
d. If diaphragm integrity is in doubt, use positive contrast
Contraindications
medium to prevent iatrogenic pneumothorax.
1. Availability of less invasive modalities (e.g., ultrasonog-
3. Make VD, DV, right and left lateral radiographs. Horizon-
raphy, computed tomography).
jou) leiauduad suenieaa u pie Aeu Aydeisopeu wueaq [el
2. Hypovolemia.
, i r  ad s (
3. Severe respiratory distress where abdominal distention
4. If room air was used, it should be removed at end of
may further compromise the animal.
procedure (nitrous oxide and carbon dioxide are rapidly
4. Severe peritoneal effusion.
absorbed and usually do not require removal).
66
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Pleurography
a. STOP injection immediately if respiratory distress
 A positive or negative radiographic evaluation of the parietal
develops.
and visceral pleural surfaces.
10. Gently roll animal several times to distribute contrast
medium.
Indications
11. Make 
VD，
DV, right and left lateral t
thoracic
1. Differentiate pleural and extrapleural masses from pul-
radiographs.
monary masses.
12. Contrast medium normally is absorbed via the pleura
2. Further delineate a mass lesion in mediastinum or at
 and lymphatics within 30 minutes.
heart base.
3. Diagnose pleural adhesions and obscure diaphragmatic
Cardiovascular
hernias and tears.
Angiography
Selective angiography
Contraindications
A positive contrast radiographic evaluation of the cardiovas-
1. Availability of less invasive and more diagnostic modali-
cular system.
ties (e.g., CT, ultrasound).
 Selective angiography is performed by advancing an intra-
2. Inexperience with this procedure.
vascular catheter to a point as close to a suspected lesion as
3. Debilitated or compromised animal.
 possible and then injecting contrast medium under high
4. Known sensitivity or allergic reaction to contrast media.
pressure.
5. Barium is not used in this procedure.
Specialized equipment is required, including custom cath-
eters, high pressure injector, rapid film recording device, and
Technique(pleurography)
fluoroscopy.
1. Not a commonly performed procedure, largely replaced
by ultrasonography and CT.
2. Make and evaluate survey radiographs of thorax.
 Nonselective angiography
3. General anesthesia is recommended but not required.
A positive contrast radiographic evaluation of the cardiovas-
4. Contrast medium:
cular system.
a. Iodinated contrast media (200-400 mgI/mL), nonionic
is preferred.
Indications
1) Dose:
1. Echocardiography is unavailable.
a) Cat or small dog: 0.5-1.0mL/kg.
2. Evaluate size and shape of cardiac chambers.
b) Large dog: 0.25-0.5 mL/kg.
 3. Aid in differentiating some types of feline cardiomyopathy.
b. Lidocaine commonly is mixed with the contrast agent
4. Detect right to left shunts.
(0.5-1.0 mL per 10mL of contrast medium).
 5. Identify cardiacmasses (e.g., tumor, intracardiac thrombi).
1) Lidocaine is not needed if animal is anesthetized.
6. Diagnose a large pericardial effusion.
c. Gas can be used but is not recommended (carries
7. Evaluate aorta, main pulmonary arteries, and cranial or
increased risk to animal and is more difficult to
caudal vena cava for displacement or occlusion caused by
interpret).
thrombosis, embolus, mass, or stricture.
1) Dose:
a) 50 mL for a small dog or a cat.
Contraindications
b) 100 mL for a medium dog.
1. Expert echocardiography is available
c) 200 mL for a large dog.
5. Exposure technique may need to be modified over survey
2. Serious respiratory or cardiac disease (e.g.. heart failure.
life threatening arrhythmia).
radiographs.
 3. Infection involving cardiovascular or respiratory systerm.
a. Double exposure for positive contrast study.
 b. Decrease exposure by half for negative contrast study.
 4. Inadequate indication for this procedure.
6. Warm contrast medium to body temperature prior to
5. Lack of experience with this procedure.
 6. Known sensitivity or allergy to contrast media.
administration.
7. Aseptically place an indwelling catheter into pleural
7. Barium is not used in this procedure.
space (prefill needle and extension set with contrast medium
to avoid air bubbles).
Technique (nonselective angiography)
8. Make a test injection (0.5 mL): if cough develops, reposi-
1. General anesthesia is recommended; however, sedation
tion the catheter.
may be acceptable in some cases, depending on status of
9. Slowly inject contrast solution into pleural cavity over a
animal and indication for the study.
period of 20 to 30 seconds.
2. Make and evaluate survey thoracic radiographs.
100
CHAPTER 3 Contrast Radiography
3. Contrast medium:
Technique
a. Ionic or nonionic iodinated contrast medium can be
used (200-400 mgl/mL).
1. Make and evaluate survey radiographs of limb of interest).
b. Dose: 400mgl/kg.
2. General anesthesia is required.
1) Maximum volume per injection is 90mL.
3. Isolate a peripheral lymphatic vessel by injecting 0.25-
2) Maximum dose per patient is 1000 mgl/kg.
1.5mL of a dilute vegetable dye, such as 2%-3% Evan's
3) Contrast medium may be diluted with sterile saline
blue, into an interdigital space.
or sterile water to create sufficient volume to opacify
4. Wait 10 to 20 minutes for dye to be absorbed and then
portions of cardiovascular system being studied.
surgically expose a blue stained lymphatic vessel.
4. Double exposure technique over survey radiographs.
a. Lymphatics commonly are found along dorsal aspect 
5. Warm contrast medium to body temperature prior to
of metatarsus or metacarpus.
administration.
b. Vessels may be more visible proximally (near saphe-
6. Place indwelling 14- to 18-gauge catheter into a periph-
nous vein in tarsus or near accessory cephalic vein in
eral vein.
carpus).
a. A cephalic or jugular vein is used to evaluate cranial
5. Preplace two sutures around lymphatic vessel and can-
vena cava and heart.
nulate with a 25- to 30-gauge needle.
b. A pelvic limb vein (saphenous or lateral metatarsal) is
6. Contrast medium:
used to evaluate caudal vena cava.
a. Ionic or nonionic iodinated contrast media (240-
7. Make a test injection and radiograph to ensure correct
300mgI/mL}
catheter placement.
b. Dose: 100 mgl/kg mixed with 0.25 mL/kg sterile saline.
8. Rapidly inject contrast medium into vein as a bolus (total
7. Double exposure technique over survey radiographs.
injection time of 1-3 seconds).
 8. Warm contrast medium prior to administration.
9. Make a lateral radiograph immediately at end of injec-
 9. Injection is made by hand or through an infusion pump
tion, followed by serial radiographs every l to 3 seconds
(Caution: excessive injection pressure can rupture lymphatic
(make radiographs as quickly as cassettes can be exchanged.
vessel).
if cassettes are being used).
10. Extension tubing may be used and should be prefilled
10. Use of a rapid film changer or cassette tunnel allows
with heparinized saline.
multiple radiographs to be made over a short period of time.
11. Make serial radiographs of the limb and associated lym-
a. A cassette tunnel can be constructed from two wooden
phatic draining regions (abdomen, pelvis, or cranial thorax).
 strips (2x2's) with a sheet of wood or plastic and using
  i   a 
a push-stick to move cassettes through the tunnel.
graphs varies depending on rate of lymphatic filling).
1l. Make additional injections of contrast medium if more
12. Lymphatics in a pelvic limb may become visible follow-
radiographs are required to complete the study (total dose
ing direct injection of contrast medium into ipsilateral pop-
to animal not to exceed 1000 mgl/kg),
liteal lymph node.
12. Reposition animal for orthogonal radiograph and make
additional injections as needed (again, total dose to animal
Mesentericlymphangiography {used to evaluatecisternachyliand
is not to exceed 1000mgl/kg).
(horacic duct)
1. Make and evaluate survey radiographs of thorax and
Lymphography/Lymphangiography
abdomen.
A positive contrast radiographic evaluation of the lymphatic
 2. Perform exploratory laparotomy to isolate a lymph node
vessels and the lymph nodes.
near cecum and inject lymph node with 0.5-l.0mL of meth-
ylene blue to improve visualization of the lymphatics. Can-
Indications
nulate a mesenteric lymphatic vessel with a 22-gauge
1. Congenital or acquired edema of the extremities.
catheter.
2. Investigate causes of chylothorax (e.g., traumatic rupture.
3. Alternatively, the cisterna itself can be cannulated directly.
 obstruction, lymphangiectasia).
4. Contrast medium:
3. Assess effectiveness of surgical ligation of thoracic duct.
a. Ionic or nonionic iodinated contrast medium (240-
300 mgI/mL).
Contraindications
b. Dose: 300-400 mgl/kg mixed with 0.5mL/kg sterile
 rs  l      i
saline.
injecting contrast media).
 5. Double exposure technique over survey radiographs.
2. Any contraindication to general anesthesia.
6. Warm contrast medium prior to administration.
3. Known sensitivity or allergy to contrast media.
7. Make lateral abdominal radiographs every 5 minutes
4. Barium is not used in this procedure.
until there is adequate filling of thoracic duct.
101
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Pneumopericardiography
3. Contrast medium:
A negative contrast radiographic evaluation of the pericar-
a. Only iodinated contrast medium (200-400 mgl/mL),
dial sac and epicardium.
may be ionic or nonionic.
b. Dose: 400 mg1/kg.
Indicafions
1) Maximum volume per injection is 90 mL.
1. Ultrasonography/echocardiography is not available.
2) Total dose to animal should not exceed 1000 mgl.
2. Evaluate cause of pericardial effusion.
4. Double exposure technique over survey radiographs.
3. Diagnose epicardial, pericardial, and heart base masses.
5. Warm contrast medium to body temperature prior to
administra tion.
Contraindications
6. Inject contrast medium into spleen or a mesenteric vein.
1. Ultrasonography/echocardiography is available.
2. Infection associated with the pericardium or adjacent
Splenoportography
1. Contrast medium is aseptically injected directly into spleen.
tissues.
 2. Injection is made percutaneously or via laparotomy.
3. Patient is unstable.
a. When available, ultrasound guidance is recommended
for percutaneous injection.
Technique (pneumopericardiogram)
 3. Lateral and VD abdominal radiographs are made shortly
1. Not a commonly performed procedure (largely replaced
after injection
by ultrasonography)
4. Make additional radiographs as needed to evaluate portal
2. Sedation or anesthesia is recommended but may not be
circulation.
required.
5. Compared to mesenteric venography, splenoportography
3. Aseptically place an indwelling catheter into pericardial
is less accurate and associated with greater morbidity.
sac at right 5th or 6th intercostal space.
 4. Remove as much pericardial fluid as possible.
Mesenteric venography
5. Contrast medium:
-d    n  xa o "1
a. Room air or carbon dioxide.
temic venous shunt.
b. Dose: volume of gas equal to 75%-l00% of fluid that
2. If no shunt is identified, an 18- to 20-gauge catheter is
was removed from pericardial sac.
placed in a jejunal vein.
6. Decrease exposure technique by half from survey
3. If animal must be moved for imaging. attach an extension
radiographs.
set to catheter and close the abdomen, leaving extension
7. Inject gas and make right lateral, left lateral, DV, and VD
tubing outside the body.
radiographs.
4. Position animal in lateral recumbency and make a small
Venous portography
placement.
A positive contrast radiographic evaluation of the portal
 5. Contrast medium is rapidly injected as a bolus into jejunal
venous system.
vein (caution: too much pressure may dislodge catheter or
rupture vein}.
Indicafions
6. Make serial radiographs, beginning at end of injection
1. Confirm a suspected portosystemic vascular shunt.
and continuing until vascular system is visualized (timing and
2. Differentiate intrahepatic from extrahepatic portosys-
number of radiographs depends on size and location of shunt).
temic shunt.
7. Repeat injection and serial radiographs with animal in
dorsal recumbency (VD radiograph).
Contraindications
Respiratory
1. Any contraindication to general anesthesia.
 Bronchography and tracheography
2. Clinically unstable encephalopathy.
Positive contrast radiographic evaluations of the trachea and
3. Known sensitivity or allergy to contrast media.
bronchi.
4. Barium is not used in this procedure.
5. Ultrasonography and scintigraphy are noninvasive
Indicafions
imaging modalities that can be used to investigate portosys-
1. Diagnose partial or complete airway obstruction (e.g..
temic shunts.
tumor, foreign material, stricture).
2. Identify tracheal or bronchial fistulas, abscesses, cysts.
Technique
 parasites (e.g. Filaroides osleri) and other mural or intralu-
1. Make and evaluate survey abdominal radiographs.
minal lesions.
2. General anesthesia is required.
3. Evaluate severity and extent of bronchiectasis.
102
CHAPTER 3 Contrast Radiography
Contraindications
d. Joint capsule.
1. Availability of less invasive imaging procedures (com-
e. Intra-articular ligaments and tendons.
puted tomogra phy).
3. Identify osteochondrosis lesions.
2. Inexperience with tracheography and bronchography.
4. Determine whether fragments (free or attached) are
3. Any contraindication to general anesthesia.
present within a joint.
4. Known sensitivity or allergy to contrast media.
5. Debilitated or compromised patient.
Confraindications
 6. Hypertonic solutions (ionic iodinated contrast agents) are
1. Infection in periarticular soft tissues (may introduce
not used.
disease into joint).
2. Any contraindication to general anesthesia or heavy
Technique (bronchogram)
seda tion.
1. Not a commonly performed procedure (CT is less invasive
 3. Known sensitivity or allergic reaction to contrast media.
and provides more detailed information).
4. Barium is not used in this procedure.
2. Make and evaluate survey radiographs of thorax.
3. Animal is anesthetized and intubated with affected side
Technique (arthrogram)
down.
1. Make and evaluate survey radiographs, including com-
4. Contrast medium:
parison radiographs of contralateral joint.
a. Sterile barium suspension (50%-60% w/v).
2. General anesthesia usually is necessary.
n     n s  (
3. Contrast medium:
ated in the lungs.
 a. Nonionic iodinated contrast media are preferred (e.g..
2) A mild reaction may occur which usually subsides
iohexol, iopamidol).
within a few days.
b. Ionic contrast media are not recommended because
3) Most barium is eliminated by ciliary-mucous trans-
they are irritating to synovium (produce inflammation).
port system.
rapidly diluted, and quickly absorbed.
4) Some barium may become 
"alveolarized"
and
c. Dilute contrast medium is used to avoid masking
collect in regional lymph nodes.
lesions.
 5) Barium is not well cleared by a diseased lung.
l) Use sterile water or sterile saline to make final
b. Dose: 1 to 4mL, infused to effect (fluoroscopy is
concentra tion 140-280 mg1/mL.
recommended).
d. Dose: 1.5-4.0mL.
 5. Double exposure technique over survey radiographs.
e. Negative contrast media can be used (typically room
6. Warm contrast medium to body temperature prior to
air, but nitrogen and carbon dioxide are more rapidly
administration.
absorbed) at same dose, but often are more difficult to
7. Place catheter through endotracheal tube and advance
interpret.
into trachea or bronchus to level of lesion (fluoroscopy or
 4. Double exposure technique over survey radiographs.
endoscopy aids in accurate positioning).
5. Warm contrast medium to body temperature prior to
 8. Only one lung is studied at a time and that lung is depen-
administration.
dent (down).
6. Perform
 aseptic articular puncture and remove as
9. Make lateral, VD, and oblique radiographs (keep diseased
much joint fluid as possible (analysis of synovial fluid is
lung down as much as possible).
recommended).
10. Radiographs made during inspiration and expiration
7. Injection of 0.2 mg epinephrine into joint may improve
may aid in diagnosis.
quality and duration of arthrogram.
8. Positive contrast arthrograms generally provide more
Musculoskeletal
information than negative contrast studies.
Joints
9. Double contrast arthrography is not recommended due
Arthrography
to numerous artifacts created by air bubbles.
A positive or negative contrast radiographic evaluation of a
10. Make a test injection using a small volume of contrast
joint.
medium to document correct needle placement (lateral
radiograph).
Indications
11. Slowly inject contrast medium into joint (injection
1. Investigate causes of lameness and joint pain.
should last 10-20 seconds).
2. Evaluate joint abnormalities associated with:
12. After injection, remove needle and manipulate the joint
a. Articular cartilage.
to ensure uniform flling.
b. Meniscal cartilage.
13. Immediately make lateral, caudocranial, and lateral
c. Bursal extensions.
 oblique radiographs.
103
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
14. Repeat radiographs in 10 to 15 minutes (after contrast
Technique
medium has been partially absorbed) to see subtle defects
1. Make and evaluate survey radiographs of the head.
that may have been masked by the initially more opaque
con tra st.
3. Contrast medium:
a. Iodinated contrast medium (240-300mgl/mL): non-
Skull (head)
ionic is preferred.
Dacryocystorhinography
1) Dose: 2-5mL.
A positive contrast radiographic evaluation of the nasolacri-
4. Double exposure technique over survey radiographs.
mal duct.
5. Warm contrast medium to body temperature prior to
administra tion.
Indications
6. Infuse contrast medium into ear canal.
1. Chronic, recurring. or intractable conjunctivitis and
7. Make VD and open-mouth rostrocaudal radiographs of
dacryocystitis.
the head.
2. Abnormal drainage of tears.
3. Diagnose obstruction of nasolacrimal duct (e.g., stricture).
Rhinography
4. Evaluate alterations in size or course of nasolacrimal duct
A positive contrast radiographic evaluation of the nasal cavity.
(as may result from a nasal/paranasal mass or disease).
Indications
Contraindications
1. Suspected obstruction of nasal cavity or nasopharynx.
1. Any contraindication to general anesthesia.
 2. Aid in diagnosis of nasal discharge, reverse sneezing. pha-
2. Known sensitivity or allergy to contrast media.
ryngeal discharge, or upper airway obstruction.
3. Barium is not used in this procedure.
3. Survey nasal radiographs and endoscopy are inconclusive.
Technique
Contraindications
1. Make and evaluate survey radiographs of nasal region.
1. Any contraindication to general anesthesia.
2. General anesthesia is required.
 2. Known sensitivity or allergy to contrast media.
3. Position animal with side of interest up and nose tilted
down.
Technique
4. Contrast medium:
1. Not a commonly performed procedure; largely replaced
a. Iodinated contrast media (240-300 mgI/mL), nonionic
by cross-sectional imaging (e.g., CT, MRI), which provides
is preferred.
 superior anatomic detail.
1) Dose: 0.5-2.0mL.
2. Make and evaluate survey radiographs of nasal cavity
5. Double exposure technique over survey radiographs.
and nasopharyngeal region.
6. Cannulate superior or inferior lacrimal puncta with a
3. General anesthesia and intubation are required.
23- to 27-gauge lacrimal needle.
4. Contrast medium:
7. Flush duct with sterile saline.
a. Iodinated contrast media (240-300 mg1/mL).
8. Slowly inject contrast medium until several drops appear
b. Barium (20%-30% w/v).
in external nares (nose tilted down will prevent contrast
c. Dose: 1 mL/5 kg body weight.
medium from flowing retrograde into nasal cavity).
5. Double exposure technique over survey radiographs
9. Make lateral, VD/DV, and oblique radiographs of the
6. Warm contrast medium prior to administration.
head.
7. Position animal with side of interest down (dependent).
8. Infuse contrast medium into ventral nasal meatus.
Otic canalography
9. Elevate nose approximately 15° to encourage caudal flow
A positive radiographic evaluation of the external auditory
of contrast medium.
canal.
10. Make lateral and open-mouth VD radiographs of the
head, centered on nasal passages and nasopharyngeal regions.
Indication
1. Diagnose a ruptured tympanic membrane.
Sialography
2. Aid in locating a tympanic membrane that cannot be seen
A positive contrast radiographic evaluation of the salivary
directly.
ducts and glands.
Contraindications
Indications
1. Known sensitivity or allergy to contrast media.
1. Aid in diagnosis and evaluation of salivary mucocoele.
2. Barium is not used in this procedure.
2. Confirm or exclude rupture of salivary gland or duct.
104
CHAPTER 3 Contrast Radiography
3. Investigate suspected salivary duct obstruction (e.g., stric-
5. Cross-sectional imaging (e.g., CT, MR) provides superior
ture, mass, sialolith).
anatomic detail and is less invasive.
Contraindications
Technique (discogram)
 1. Any contraindication to general anesthesia.
1. Not a commonly performed procedure.
 2. Known sensitivity or allergy to contrast media.
2. Make and evaluate survey radiographs of spine.
3. Barium is not used in this procedure.
3. Note any congenital anomalies or degenerative changes
that may interfere with needle placement.
Technique
4. General anesthesia is required.
 1. Make and evaluate survey radiographs of head and neck.
5. Position animal in lateral recumbency.
6. Aseptically insert a spinal needle through interarcurate
2. General anesthesia is required.
3. Avoid use of atropine and other parasympatholytic agents
ligament and spinal canal into disc.
beca use they inhibit salivary secretion, making it difficult to
7. Contrast medium:
cannulate the salivary duct.
a. Only nonionic, iodinated contrast media are used
4. Position animal with affected side up.
(200-400 mgI/mL).
b. Dose:
5. Contrast medium:
1) 0.25-3.0 mL, with a maximum dose of 3.0 mL
a. Iodinated contrast media (200-400mgI/mL). may be
8. Double exposure technique over survey radiographs.
ionic or nonionic.
b. Dose:
9. Warm contrast medium to body temperature prior to
1) Cats and small dogs: 0.1-0.3 mL.
administration.
10. Slowly inject contrast medium into disc. If resistance is
2) Large dogs: 0.5-1.0 mL.
6. Double exposure technique over survey radiographs.
encountered, reposition needle tip.
 7. Warm contrast medium prior to administration.
a. A normal disc will accommodate a volume of
0.2-0.3 mL.
8. Cannulate the appropriate salivary duct using a 23- to
27-gauge lacrimal needle.
b. Abnormal discs may accept a much larger volume.
 depending on severity of disease.
9. Inject contrast medium and make lateral and VD radio-
11. Make lateral, flexed lateral, extended lateral, and DV/
 graphs of head immediately after injection.
10. Oblique radiographs may be needed to complete the
VD radiogra phs.
study.
Epidurography
 A positive contrast radiographic evaluation of the epidural space.
Spine
Discography
Indications
A positive contrast radiographic evaluation of an interverte-
1. Assess cauda equina and proximal portions of spinal
bral disc.
nerve roots for compression or displacement (e.g., constrict-
ing lesion, tumor, disc protrusion/extrusion).
Indications
2. Epidurography is only performed if there is intent to do
 1. Evaluate size and shape of central cavity of an interver-
surgery, should a surgical lesion be found.
tebral disc (most commonly at lumbosacral junction).
 2. Determine location and amount of herniated nuclear disc
Contraindications
ma terial.
1. Any contraindication to general anesthesia.
3. Investigate an annular rupture.
2. Known sensitivity or allergy to contrast media.
4. Discography most often is performed in animals with cauda
3. Animals in which surgery is not an option.
equina syndrome because needle can be more accurately
4. Barium and ionic iodinated contrast media are not used
positioned in this part of spine. Fluoroscopy usually is needed
in this procedure.
 for accurate needle positioning in other spinal regions.
5. Epidurograms are difficult to interpret because the epi-
dural space is not clearly defined.
Contraindications
6. Cross-sectional imaging (e.g., CT, MR) provides superior
1. Any contraindication to general anesthesia.
anatomic detail and is less invasive.
2. Known sensitivity or allergy to contrast media.
3. Barium and ionic iodinated contrast media are not used
Technique
in this procedure.
1. Make and evaluate survey spinal radiographs.
4. Discography should only be performed if there is intent
2. General anesthesia is required.
to do surgery, should a surgical lesion be found.
3. Position animal in sternal or lateral recumbency.
105
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
4. Contrast medium:
5. Apnea can result from a rapid injection in cervical region.
a. Only nonionic, iodinated contrast media are used
6. Death can occur if spinal cord is penetrated during a
(250-300 mgI/mL; e.g., iohexol, iopamidol).
cervical myelogram.
b. Dose:
1) Small and medium dogs: 2-4mL.
Technique(myelogram)
2) Large dogs: 4-8 mL.
 1. Make and evaluate survey spinal radiographs.
3) Cats: 2-4mL.
2. General anesthesia is required.
 5. Double exposure technique over survey radiographs.
3. Contrast medium:
6. Warm contrast medium to body temperature prior to
a. Only nonionic iodinated contrast media are used
administration.
(250-300 mg1/mL; e.g., iohexol, iopamidol).
7. Aseptically insert 22-gauge spinal needle to floor of
b. Warm contrast medium prior to injection to lower
spinal canal at sacrocaudal junction (lumbosacral junction is
viscosity, improve mixing with cerebrospinal fluid, and
usually avoided because a lesion may be present at this site).
minimize adverse reactions.
8. Slowly inject contrast medium into epidural space.
c. Dose:
9. Remove needle and immediately make lateral, flexed
1) To opacify only cervical or lumbar region: 0.30 mL/kg.
lateral, extended lateral, and VD/DV radiographs.
2) For entire spine: 0.45 mL/kg (usually injected at
lumbar site).
Myelography
4. Contrast is injected into subarachnoid space by aseptic
A positive contrast radiographic evaluation of the spinal
spinal puncture in cervical or lumbar region, depending on
canal and spinal cord.
clinical localization of lesion.
Indications
Cervical myelogram
 1. Confirm presence and extent of a suspected spinal lesion
1. Position animal in lateral recumbency with head flexed
seen on survey radiographs.
and nose parallel to table.
2. Aid in diagnosis of spinal disease (pain, paresis, paralysis)
2. Aseptically insert 22-gauge spinal needle with stylet into
when no lesion is evident on survey radiographs.
subarachnoid space at atlantoccipital junction.
3. Help assess whether animal is likely to benefit from surgery.
a. Landmarks are wings of atlas and external occipital
4. Myelography is only recommended when surgical inter
protuberance of skull.
vention is planned, should a surgical lesion be found.
b. Needle is inserted in center of a triangle formed by
these landmarks.
Confraindications
3. Needle is advanced until a pop is felt as it penetrates the
1. Any contraindication to general anesthesia.
strong atlanto-occipital ligament and enters the cerebellom-
2. Animals in which surgery is not an option.
edullary cistern (cisterna magna).
3. Myelography has limited or no value for diagnosing dis-
 a. Patient may jerk slightly as dura is penetrated.
seminated myelopathies, meningopathies, or nerve root
b. Stylet is removed and cerebrospinal fluid (CsF) should
lesions.
flow into needle hub.
4. Known sensitivity or allergic reaction to contrast media.
1) Some CSF should be collected for analysis.
5. Barium and ionic iodinated contrast media are not used
2) Rarely. CSF flow will be absent with correct place-
in this procedure.
ment of needle.
6. If available, cross-sectional imaging (e.g., CT, MR) pro-
c. Needle placement requires considerable practice
vides superior anatomic detail and is noninvasive.
 because "feel" will vary between patients.
1) Resistance from dorsal ligaments may be evident in
Complications:
some patients and not in others.
1. More likely with cold contrast medium and rapid rate of
2) The pop may not be felt in some animals (especially
infusion.
small dogs)
2. Clinical signs of spinal disease may increase in severity
3) Use caution to avoid advancing needle too far, as
following a myelogram.
puncture of brainstem can cause paralysis or death.
3. Seizures may occur during recovery (less common with
4) Stylet should periodically be removed to check for
newer contrast media)
fluid, being very careful to not wiggle or inadvertently
4. Inadvertent injection into central canal can cause severe
advance needle while checking for fluid.
paresis or paralysis:
5) Be sure stylet is replaced correctly before advancing
a. Depends on quantity of contrast medium injected.
needle further.
b. More common with lumbar puncture performed
4. Contrast medium is slowly injected (no faster than 1 mL/
cranial to L5.
second}.
106
CHAPTER 3 Contrast Radiography
a. If CSF flow is present, administer full dose and proceed
with radiography.
b. If needle placement is in doubt, make a small test
injection (0.5-1.0 mL) followed by a lateral radiograph to
evaluate needle placement (be careful not to inadver-
tently move a correctly placed needle).
5. Make a lateral radiograph immediately following injection:
a. Needle can remain in place or be removed for this
initial radiograph.
b. If needle remains in place, take care not to move head
and neck.
6. Needle is removed prior to making VD and any addi-
tional radiographs (e.g., DV, oblique, extended lateral, flexed
lateral).
Figure 3.6 Normal myelograrn (lateral radliograph). Contrast medium
in subarachnoid space outlines spinal cord (arrows point to dorsal and
7. Cranial end of animal may be raised to improve flow of
contrast medium caudally. If contrast does not flow well,
ventral contrast columns). (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
cranial portion of neck can be flexed and released, which
will sometimes change dynamics and allow flow (exercise
caution because extreme flexion can increase severity of
clinical signs).
Lumbar myelogram
1. Position animal in lateral or sternal recumbency with
spine flexed.
2. Aseptically insert 22-gauge spinal needle (with stylet)
into space between lamina of L5-6 in dogs or L6-7 in cats.
a. If insertion at L5-6 or L6-7 is unsuccessful, L4-5 can
be used.
Figure 3.7 Normal myelograrm (VD radiograph). Contrast mmedium in
b. Insertion cranial to L4 is not recommended due to
subarachnoid space outlines spinal cord (arrows point to right and left
lateral contrast columns). (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
increased risk of spinal cord injury.
3. Needle is advanced through spinal cord into ventral sub-
arachnoid space.
8. Needle is removed prior to making VD and any supple-
a. Pelvic limbs may jerk as the dura is penetrated.
mental radiographs (e.g., DV, oblique, extended lateral,
4. Remove stylet and check needle hub for CsF flow.
flexed lateral).
a. Significantly less CsF appears in lumbar region than
9. Caudal end of animal may be raised and cranial end
in cervical region.
lowered to improve cranial flow of contrast medium.
b. Lack of CsF flow does not necessarily indicate incor-
rect needle placement.
Radiographic findings (myelogram)
5. As with cervical myelography, correct needle placement
Normal myelogram (Figures 3.6 and 3.7)
requires practice.
1. Positive contrast medium in subarachnoid space creates
a. Usually a pop is felt as needle enters spinal cord.
thin, well-defined, smoothly marginated columns of metal
b. Needle is then gently advanced until it touches bone
 opacity adjacent to a soft tissue opacity spinal cord.
(ventral spinal canal).
2. Contrast columns are paired and nearly parallel to each
c. Stylet is withdrawn and CSF is expected to flow; if no
other:
 a. Dorsal and ventral columns on lateral radiograph.
for flow.
b. Right lateral and left lateral columns on VD
d. Blood in needle hub indicates needle is in venous
radiograph.
sinus (too deep).
3. Columns diverge slightly around cervical and lumbar
 6. A small test injection followed by a lateral radiograph aids
n  a p dn  pue saus
 in documenting proper needle placement.
equina, where subarachnoid space ends as dural sac.
7. Slowly inject contrast medium (over a period of 5-10
a. Spinal
cord
is wider
atcervicaland
lumbar
seconds) and make a lateral radiograph immediately follow-
intumescences.
ing injection (needle can remain in place if patient is not
4. Dorsal column is wider than ventral column along most
moved).
of the spinal canal (widest at Cl-2 due to cisterna magna).
107
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 3.8 Normal mnyelogram (lateral radiograph). Ventral contrast 
column is indented dorsal to each intervertebral disc space (arrow) due
Figure 3.9 Extradural lesion on myelogram (lateral radiograph).
to normal thicker tissues in these area5.
Extrusion of intervertebral disc material dorsally displaces spinal cord and
compresses subarachnoid space; ventral and dorsal contrast columns are
(666l Aala pue suamo woy paidepv) atis uoisal ie pamoeu 
5. Ventral column is wider in caudal cervical region.
6. Spinal cord terminates near L6 in dogs and near Sl in
cats, but contrast-filled dural sac extends further caudally.
7. In cats and small breed dogs the spinal cord is relatively
larger compared with size of spinal canal, and contrast
columns are thinner than in larger dogs.
 8. Small concave filling defects indent the ventral contrast
column dorsal to each intervertebral disc space due to
normal thicker tissues in these areas (Figure 3.8):
a. Especially evident in cervical region.
b. Ventral contrast column normally narrows over these
intervertebral spaces.
Figure 3.10 Extradural lesion on myelogram (VD radiograph). Spinal
c. Spinal cord and dorsal contrast column remain normal
 cord is widened due to dorsal displacement and compression by ventral
in size and margination.
extrusion of intervertebral disc material; right and left lateral contrast
columns are narrowed at lesion site. (Adapted from Owens and Biery
Myelogram lesions
1999.)
1. Flow and distribution of contrast medium is dependent
on gravity (i.e., patient positioning) and viscosity of contrast
agent.
c. Contrast columns are narrowed at site of compression.
2. Poor or absent filling and opacification of subarachnoid
d. Spinal cord is displaced away from lesion and com-
space may be due to obstruction to flow or lack of gravity-
pressed; cord generally appears narrow on one radio-
dependent movement.
graph and wide on the orthogonal radiograph.
3. Make every effort to opacify subarachnoid space cranial
e. Most common etiology is intervertebral disc protrl-
and caudal to a suspected lesion:
sion or extrusion (see Differential Diagnoses in chapter 4).
a. Raise or lower cranial or caudal end of animal.
f. Acute lesions (type I intervertebral disc disease) may
b. Make a second injection at other end (lumbar or cervi-
cause extensive swelling of the spinal cord and poor
cal sitey.
filling of the subarachnoid space along several vertebral
4. Obstruction to flow may be caused by altered position,
segments cranially and/or caudally.
size, or shape of spinal cord or space occupying mass in
g. Lesions that encircle and compress the spinal cord can
subarachnoid space.
produce an hourglass appearance on the myelogram.
5. Lesions commonly cause narrowing of contrast columns:
7. Intradural-extramedullary lesion (Figures 3.1l and 3.12):
a. Greater than 50% narrowing is significant; less than
a. Located within subarachnoid space (within a contrast 
50% is equivocal.
column).
6. Extradural lesion (Figures 3.9 and 3.10):
b. Lesion causes a widened filling defect in a contrast
a. Located outside of dura mater.
column:
b. Lesion causes compression of spinal cord and sub-
  a     
arachnoid space.
end ("golf tee" sign).
108
CHAPTER 3 Contrast Radiography
Figure 3.11 Intradural-extramedullary lesion on mmyelogram (lateral 
Figure 3.13 Intrarmedullary lesion on myelogram (lateral radiograph).
enot pue iajap buy sateann aeds piouypeegns u ssen (ydenoipe!
Spinal cord is widened with narrowing of dorsal and ventral contrast
widening in ventral contrast column; spinal cord is dorsally displaced and
columns. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
 compressed; dorsal contrast column is narrowed. (Adapted from Owens
and Biery 1999.)
Figure 3.12 Intradural-extramedullary lesion on myelogram (VD
Figure 3.14 Intramedullary lesion on myelograrn (VD radiograph).
e Aq uoissaiduon lesiop ol anp pauapm s! pion jeuids (ydeiboipe.
Spinal cord is wicdened with narrowing of right and left lateral contrast
ventral mass in subarachnoid space; right and left lateral contrast 
columns. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
columns are narrowed. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
c. Opposite contrast column is narrowed due to spinal
f. Normal widening of spinal cord at cervical or lumbar
cord displacement and compression away from lesion.
intumescence may be mistaken for pathology.
d. On orthogonal radiograph, compressed spinal cord
 9. Increased opacity of spinal cord:
appears widened and contrast columns are narrowed.
a. May result from inadvertent injection of contrast
e. Typically caused by a tumor in subarachnoid space
medium into spinal cord.
(see Differential Diagnoses in chapter 4) .
b. Myelomalacia appears as a diffuse increase in opacity
f. Iatrogenic air bubbles (introduced during injection of
due to leakage of contrast from subarachnoid space into
contrast medium) may mimic intradural-extramedullary
damaged spinal cord parenchyma.
lesions, but tend to change in size and location on serial
10. Spinal cord lesions that may not be visible on a myelo-
radiographs.
gram include:
8. Intramedullary lesion (Figures 3.13 and 3.14):
a. Ischemic myelopathy.
a. Occurs within spinal cord and causes swelling of cord.
b. Degenera tive myelopathy.
b. Affected part of spinal cord is uniformly and sym-
c. Fibrocartilaginous embolization.
metrically widened on all radiographs.
c. All contrast columns are thinned at lesion site, gradu-
Myelogram artifacts and technicalerrors
ally returning to normal size cranially and caudally.
1. Air bubbles in subarachnoid space:
d. Severe swelling results in total absence of contrast columns.
a. Iatrogenic, caused by injection of air in syringe.
e. Swelling may represent edema, hemorrhage, inflam-
b. Appear as rounded, I-3 mm, filling defects.
mation, or infiltrative disease (see Differential Diagnoses
c. Change in size and position on serial radiographs.
in chapter 4).
d. May be confused with pathology.
109
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
2. Leakage of contrast medium into soft tissues dorsal to
a. May be due to spinal cord malacia or can result from
injection site:
inadvertent injection into spinal cord.
a. Common and rarely compromises interpretation of
b. Creates persistent, patchy, irregular areas of increased
radiographs.
opacity within spinal cord.
3. Poor distribution of contrast medium within subarach-
c. If due to inadvertent injection, prognosis for patient
noid space:
survival is volume dependent.
a. Creates an uneven and heterogeneous appearance of
7. Contrast medium within central canal:
contrast columns.
a. May be iatrogenic or result from spinal cord
b. May be caused by:
pathology.
1) Insufficient dose of contrast medium.
b. Iatrogenic
c is more likely to occur with injections
2) Injecting too slowly.
cranial to L5.
3) Failure
to
warm
contrast
medium prior to
c. Creates a thin, uniform line of increased opacity in
injection.
center of spinal cord.
4. Subdural injection (or leakage of contrast into subdural
d. Central canal width less than 2 mm is normal size and
space):
opacification may be due to:
 a. Results in a mostly dorsal distribution of very opaque
 1) Leakage through needle tract made during spinal
con trast medium.
puncture.
 b. Inner margin of opacified tissue is quite irregular.
2) Spinal cord malacia.
c. Severely compromises interpretation of study.
e. Central canal width greater than 2mm is abnormal
5. Epidural injection (or leakage of contrast medium into
and opacification may be due to:
epidural space):
1) Inadvertent injection into central canal (iatrogenic
a. Results in wide, irregular, and incomplete contrast
distention).
columns.
2) Congenital anomaly (e.g., hydromyelia).
b. Columns have a scalloped appearance caused by
draping of contrast medium over intervertebral disc
Soft tissue
spaces and adjacent venous sinuses (Figure 3.15).
Fistulography
c. Nerve roots often are outlined by contrast medium as
A positive, negative, or double contrast radiographic evalu-
they exit the spinal canal.
ation of fistulous tracts, sinus cavities, or draining wounds.
d. Contrast may be visible in lumbar vasculature, lym-
phatics, and lymph nodes.
Indications
e. Compromises assessment of subarachnoid space and
1. Determine origin, depth, and extent of a draining wound
 spinal cord.
adiau ienains io lepau oi papuodsau nou seu ie
f. Compression of jugular veins may increase pressure
2. Aid in detecting suspected foreign material not visible on
in choroid plexus in the hope of increasing CSF produc-
survey radiogra phs or sequestered bone fra gment.
tion to help "wash out" epidural contrast medium.
 g. Caudal to cranial angulation of needle rather than
 perpendicular will decrease odds of epidural injection
(Figure 3.16).
1) Bevel should be ventral.
2) A short bevel needle is also helpful.
6. Intramedullary contrast medium (contrast medium
within spinal cord):
CORD
EPIDURAL
Figure 3.16 Placerment of spinal needle for rnyelography.
A. Perpendicular needle is more likely to extend into epidural space (left)
while angled needle is more likely to remain in subarachnoid space (SA;
Figure 3.15 Epidural injection during myelography (lateral radiograph).
right). B. Short-bevel needles (left) are less likely to extend into epidural
Ventral contrast column has a scalloped appearance, causing confusion in
am saaau aaul aa (uu) saaau jaa ue ae
interpretation of the myelograrn.
"sharper" and penetrate easier.
110
CHAPTER 3 Contrast Radiography
3. Evaluate abnormal communication between two hollow
4. Abnormal urine (e.g., hematuria, pyuria, crystalluria).
stru ctures.
5. Abnormal urination (e.g. stranguria, dysuria, pollaki-
4. Procedure is only done if surgical intervention is planned,
uria, incontinence).
should a surgical lesion be found.
6. Suspected cystic calculi not seen on survey radiographs.
7. Chronic or recurrent urinary bladder infection.
Contraindications
8. Suspected neoplasia of urinary bladder.
1. Infection (may be disseminated by injecting contrast
9. Caudal intra-abdominal mass that may be associated with
media under pressure)
urinary bladder.
2. Large sinuses or cavities (may not be adequately evalu-
10. Determine location of urinary bladder (e.g.. pelvic
ated due to pooling of contrast medium).
bladder, hernia, regional masses, trauma).
 3. Known sensitivity or allergy to contrast media.
11. Identify abnormal communications between urinary
4. Barium is not used in this procedure.
bladder and adjacent structures.
Technique (fistulogram)
Contraindications
1. Make and evaluate survey radiographs of area of
1. Known sensitivity to contrast medium.
interest.
2. Barium has been used for cystography, but is not recom-
2. Clean and shave the area to aid in removing spilled or
mended because it is insoluble.
leaked contrast medium and eliminate superimposition
3. Negative contrast cystography (pneumocystography) is
artifacts.
not recommended if:
3. Contrast medium:
a. Bladder rupture is suspected (gas leaking into abdomi-
a. Undiluted iodinated contrast medium is used (240-
nal cavity is not easily detected).
300 mgl/mL); nonionic is preferred, but ionic can be
b. Hematuria is present (risk of fatal gas embolism).
used.
b. Gas (room air) can be used, but is more difficult to
Complications
interpret.
1. Iatrogenic trauma to urinary bladder or urethra.
c. Dose: 10-20mL (sufficient to fill the tract and/or
2. Secondary bacterial infection of urinary bladder.
cavity).
3. Kinked or knotted catheter (may ca use procedure to fail).
4. Double exposure technique over survey radiographs
(for a positive contrast study).
Selection of appropriate study
5. Warm contrast medium prior to administration.
6. Gently insert a sterile catheter into sinus or fistula, being
1. Positive contrast cystography:
careful not to create a new tract.
a. Pros: evaluate bladder wall integrity and bladder
7. Use of a balloon tip catheter or placement of a purse
position.
string suture around the catheter minimizes leakage at cuta-
b. Cons: contrast medium may obscure mural masses
and tiny calculi.
neous margin.
 8. For longer tracts, advance catheter as far as possible and
2. Negative contrast cystography:
then slowly withdraw it while infusing contrast medium.
a. Pros: simple, rapid, and inexpensive method of local-
9. Make orthogonal radiographs beginning immediately at
izing bladder; can be used to assess bladder wall thick-
end of injection.
 ness, mural lesions, and to visualize most calculi.
10. Metal opacity markers or sterile needles can be used to
b. Cons: does not provide good mucosal definition; con-
traindicated with hematuria.
identify landmarks and pattern of the tract.
l1. Additional injections of contrast medium may be
3. Double contrast cystography:
required, especially when using hypertonic solutions which
a. Pros: yields best mucosal definition; commonly used
 are quickly diluted and absorbed.
to detect and evaluate mucosal lesions, mural masses.
and calculi.
Urogenital
b. Cons: more time-consuming procedure.
Cystography
4. Ultrasonography provides a rapid, noninvasive means of
1. A positive, negative, or double contrast radiographic eval-
examining urinary bladder and aids in detection of calculi
lation of the urinary bladder.
regardless of their composition and opacity.
Indications
Technique (cystography)
1. Nonvisualization of urinary bladder.
1. Evacuate colon and rectum with cleansing enemas.
2. Abnormal-appearing bladder on survey radiographs.
2. Make and evaluate survey abdominal radiographs.
 3. Suspected rupture or leakage associated with urinary bladder.
3. Sedation or anesthesia is preferred.
111
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
4. Aseptically catheterized and empty urinary bladder
3. Palpate bladder during infusion to avoid overdistension.
(submit urine for analysis, culture, and sensitivity as needed).
4. Decrease exposure technique from survey radiographs
5. Flush and remove blood clots and debris if present
(decrease kVp 15% or mAs 50%).
6. Straining caused by bladder distention can be reduced by
5. Make lateral and VD oblique radiographs of the caudal
infusing 3 to 5mL of 2% lidocaine into bladder lumen.
abdomen.
7. Volume a normal urinary bladder can accept:
6. Infuse additional gas as needed to adequately distend the
a. Dog: 5-10 mL/kg body weight.
bladder and repeat the radiographs.
b. Cat: 2-5 mL/kg.
c. Chronic inflammation and fibrosis of urinary bladder
Double contrast cystography
may significantly decrease volume it can accept (may be
1. Preferred procedure for evaluation of bladder wall and
reduced to as little as l mL/kg or less).
intraluminal disease (including calculi).
d. Infusion of contrast medium should be terminated if
2. Perform a negative contrast cystogram and then add a
bladder feels firm and adequately distended as evidenced
small volume of positive contrast.
by external palpation or back pressure on syringe plunger.
3. Positive contrast medium:
e. Tip: Moderate distention of urinary bladder is pre-
a. Undiluted, sterile ionic or nonionic iodinated media
ferred because full distention may hide subtle mucosal
can be used.
and mural lesions by stretching bladder wall.
 b. Warm contrast medium prior to infusion.
c. Dose:
Positive contrast cystography
1) 1-3mL for a small dog (less than 12kg).
1. Contrast medium:
1  ) 5 1  (
a. Sterile ionic or nonionic iodinated contrast media
3) 0.5-lmL for cats.
diluted with sterile saline or sterile water to a 20%
4. Roll the animal 360° to coat entire bladder mucosa with
solution.
contrast medium.
b. Dose:
5. Make lateral and VD oblique radiographs of caudal abdomen.
1) Dog: estimated dose is 5 mL/kg.
6. Infuse additional gas to adequately distend bladder and
2) Cat: estimated dose is 25mL.
repeat radiographs as needed.
2. Double exposure technique over survey radiographs.
7. Alternate method: if positive contrast medium is infused
3. Warm contrast medium to body temperature prior to
before pneumocystogram, it will better coat the mucosa
administration.
(without need to rotate the animal), but more gas bubbles
4. Palpate bladder during infusion to avoid overdistension.
may form (gas bubbles can interfere with interpretation).
5. Make lateral and VD oblique radiographs of caudal
abdomen.
Radiographic findings with cystography
6. As needed, infuse additional contrast medium to ade-
(urinary bladder)
quately distend bladder.
1. Normal contrast-filled urinary bladder mucosa is smoothly
7. Bladder wall integrity is best evaluated by making radio-
marginated (Figure 3.17).
 graphs during infusion:
 2. Bladder wall thickness normally is about 1 mm
a. Extravasated ionic contrast medium needs to be
3. Incomplete bladder distention may mimic bladder wall
detected quickly because it is rapidly diluted and absorbed.
thickening and mucosal lesions.
b. Nonionic agents persist longer. If a leak is not identi-
4. Bladder wall is best evaluated with double contrast
fied, make follow-up radiographs after finishing infusion.
cystogra phy.
1. Position animal in left lateral recumbency (to trap any
gas emboli in right atrium, should they occur) .
2. Contrast medium:
a. Gas (e.g., room air, nitrous oxide, carbon dioxide) is
Used.
 b. More soluble gases are preferred over room air, espe-
cially if hematuria is present (due to risk of harmful air
embolism).
c. Dose: volume sufficient to moderately distend urinary
bladder.
B
1) Dog: estimated dose is 5 mL/kg.
Figure 3.17 Normal urinary bladder. A. Pneumocystogram. B. Positive
2) Cat: estimated dose is 25mL.
contrast cystograrn. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
112
CHAPTER 3 Contrast Radiography
A
B
B
Figure 3.18 Cystitis on positive contrast cystograrm. A. Diffuse smooth 
thickening of bladder wall. B. Diffuse irregular thickening of bladder wall.
C
D
(Adapted from Owen5 and Biery 1999.).
Figure 3.19 Double contrast cystogram. A. Normal bladder with
positive contrast puddle in center surrounded by gas. B. Calculi causing 
filling defects in contrast puddle. C. Air bubbles collecting at periphery of
contrast puddle. D. Blood clots in variable locations. (Adapted from
Owens and Biery 1999.)
B
★
Figure 3.20 Cross-section of urinary bladder during contrast cystography. A. Double contrast cystogramm: positive contrast medium puddles in 
 cependent portion with calculi most dependent and air bubbles floating at periphery. B. Positive contrast cystogram: Air bubbles float in uppermost part
 of bladder and appear centrally located on radliographs. Calculi in clependent (lower) part of blader are masked by contrast medium.
5. Thickening of bladder wall (greater than 1 to 2 mm) may
    a n d a
be focal or diffuse:
c) Positive contrast medium added before gas
a. Chronic cystitis and fibrosis (Figure 3.18)
during double contrast cystogram.
b. Trauma (resulting in hemorrhage or edema).
4) On positive contrast cystogram, air bubbles are in
C. Neoplasia.
center of bladder lumen.
d. Muscular hypertrophy caused by chronic urinary
5) On double contrast cystogram, air bubbles are at
ol tflow obstruction.
periphery of contrast puddle.
6. Filling defects in urinary bladder (intraluminal and mural):
      g
a. Caused by anything that alters normal filling of bladder
pattern.
lumen.
d.Blood clots:
b. Less opaque on positive contrast studies and more
1) Generally have irregular shapes and indistinct
opaque on negative contrast studies.Figure 3.19
borders.
C. Air bubbles (Figure 3.20):
2) May be located anywhere in bladder lumen, either
1) Freely movable with smooth, round, distinct borders.
attached to bladder wall or freely movable in lumen
2) Change in size and location on serial radiographs.
(may float in positive contrast medium).
3) May be caused by:
e. Calculi (Figure 3.21):
a) Fluid remaining in bladder lumen prior to inject-
1) Usually freely movable, but can become attached
ing air.
to bladder wall.
113
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
B
Figure 3.22 Urinary bladder neoplasia on positive contrast cystogram.
 A. Tummor in neck of bladder resulting in thickened walls with iregular 
 mucosal margins. B. Tumor in vertex of bladder. (Adapted from Owen5
and Biery 1999.)
Figure 3.23 Local urinary bladder lesions on positive contrast 
 Cystograrn. A. Polyp and diffuse mild thickening of bladder wall due to
chronic cystitis. B. Tumor near trigone area with local thickening of
Figure 3.21 Cystic calculi (lateral radiographs). A. Mineral opacity
bladder wall.(Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
calculi are visible in urinary bladder on survey radiograph. B. Double
contrast cystogram: same anirnal as in (A) but cystic calculi produce
less-opaque-appearing filling defects in contrast puddle because of
decreased relative opacity to contrast medium.
f. Cellular debris (e.g., mucous plugs, sediment):
1) May be mineral opacity or soft tissue opacity.
2) Vary greatly in size and number.
2) Tends to precipitate along dependent bladder wall.
3) May be round or irregular in shape with distinct or
aid
in
indistinct margins.
detection.
 4) Nonattached calculi commonly localize in center of
g. Foreign material:
bladder lumen.
1) Uncommon in urinary bladder.
5) Small calculi may be obscured by large volumes of
2) May be any opacity (e.g., metal projectile, catheter
positive contrast media.
fra gment).
3) Usually freely movable and change in position on
 serial radiographs.
h. Mural hematomas:
With a double contrast cystogram, a small volume of positive
1) Protrude into bladder lumen.
contrast medium is used to create a thin layer or "puddle" in 
2) Smoothly
marginated,
thickened areas along
dependent portion of bladder, surrounded by gas. Even mineral
bladder wall.
wnipaw ise sjuos ueul anbedo ssal ane Ajenidkt 1najen Aipedo
3) Often iatrogenic, secondary to cystocentesis or
and will produce filling defects in center of puddle. Soft tissue
catheterization.
opacity calculi are not visible in urine, but will produce filling 
i. Neoplasms (Figure 3.22):Figure 3.23
defects in small volumes of positive contrast media.
1) Usually fixed in position (commonly in neck of
bladder or in cranioventral region).
114
CHAPTER 3 Contrast Radiography
9. Extravasation of contrast medium (outside urinary
bladder lumen):
a. Rupture of bladder.
b. Submucosal dissection through a damaged bladder
wall (e.g, trauma, iatrogenic).
c. Vesicoureteral reflux (contrast appears in ureter or
kidney).
d. Patent urachus.
e. Diverticulum (e.g., urachal, traumatic).
f. Fistula (e.g., rectal, vaginal).
Excretory urography (intravenous urography,
 intravenous pyelography [IVP])
 Positive contrast radiographic evaluation of the kidneys.
ureters, and urinary bladder.
Indicafions
Figure 3.24 Nephrograrm phase of norral intravenous urograrm (VD 
1. Abnormal kidney size or shape.
uoenynedo ui snoauabowoy pue woun ane shaupiy yog (ydenoipel
2. Poor visualization of one or both kidneys on survey
radiographs.
3. Intra-abdominal mass that may involve or displace a
2) Margins often are irregular.
kidney.
3) Adjacent bladder wall is thickened.
4. Retroperitoneal fluid or mass.
j. Polyps (Figure 3.24):
5. Abnormal urine (e.g. hematuria, pyuria, proteinuria.
1) Project into bladder lumen from focal, peduncu-
crystalluria).
lated attachments along bladder wall.
6. Abnormal urination (e.g., dysuria, stranguria, pollaki-
2) Margins usually are smooth.
uria, incontinence).
3) May be solitary or multiple.
7. Suspected renal or ureteral calculi not evident on survey
4) May change in size and number on serial
radiographs.
radiographs.
8. Evidence of trauma/rupture associated with a kidney or
k. Ureterocele:
Ureter.
1) Round, well-defined, peripheral filling defect in
9. Suspected ectopic ureters.
trigone region
10. Inability to catheterize urinary bladder for cystography
2) May be located adjacent to or within bladder wall.
(contraindicated with urethral obstruction).
3) Represents a focal, cystlike dilation of a terminal
1l. Provide a crude measurement of renal function.
ureter.
12. Postoperative assessment of the urinary tract.
1. Pseudo-filling defects:
l) Caused by adjacent structures (usually bowel)
 pushing on bladder wall.
Contraindications
2) Appear as smooth indentations with gradually
1. Anuria.
sloping borders.
2. Severe dehydration.
3) More often occur when bladder is incompletely
3. Severe uremia (uremia is not a true contraindication, but
distended.
4) Usually
eliminated by adding more contrast
lar filtration).
medium to fully distend bladder.
4. Urethral obstruction.
7. Ulcers along urinary bladder mucosa:
 5. Known sensitivity or allergic reaction to contrast medium.
a. Appear as clumps of contrast medium adhered to
6. Barium is not used in this procedure.
bladder wall.
b. Usually associated with blood clots.
Complicafions
c. May result from chronic cystitis or neoplasia.
1. Urine specific gravity will be increased for next 24 hours.
8. Diverticula:
2. Contrast medium in urine may inhibit bacterial growth
a. Contrast-filled out-pouchings extending beyond
and may affect appearance of urine sediment.
mucosal border.
3. May inhibit thyroid uptake of I-131 during radioisotope
b. Margins are smooth or slightly irregular.
therapy.
115
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Technique (excretory urogram)
f. If contrast excretion is delayed, continue malking VD
1. Serial radiographs document opacification of:
radiographs every 30 minutes, up to 2 hours.
a. Renal vasculature (vascular phase).
g. VD oblique radiographs of the caudal abdomen,
b. Renal parenchyma (nephrogram phase).
made at 5 to 10 minutes, aid in visualizing the distal
c. Renal collecting system (pyelogram phase).
ureters and ureterovesicular junctions.
d. Ureters and urinary bladder (ureteral phase, contrast
15. Compression of caudal abdomen can be used to increase
medium is excreted by kidneys into ureters and urinary
filling and opacification of renal collecting system and proxi-
bladder).
mal ureters (delays drainage of con trast into urinary bladder).
2. Empty the GI tract (12- to 24-hour fast, appropriate
a. After 5-minute radiographs, apply circumferential
cleansing enemas).
belly band (tightly wrapped elastic bandage) around
3. Water can be available ad libitum unless anesthesia is planned.
caudal abdomen and leave in place for l to 2 minutes.
4. Animal should be well hydrated and renal function
 b. Make VD and lateral radiographs immediately after
should be known prior to contrast study.
releasing compression.
5. Make and evaluate survey abdominal radiographs.
c. Compression tends to be most successful with animal
6. Sedation/anesthesia of animal aids in positioning. mini-
sedated or anesthetized.
mizes adverse reactions, and simplifies applica tion of abdom-
d. Contraindicated with caudal abdominal mass, full
inal compression.
urinary bladder, and concurrent pneumocystogram.
7. Intravenous catheter is placed in a peripheral vein (e.g..
16. If an ectopic ureter is suspected, a concurrent pneumo-
jugular, saphenous, cephalic).
cystogram enhances visualization of distal ureters and ure-
8. Position animal for VD abdominal radiograph.
terovesicular junctions because positive contrast medium is
9. Contrast medium:
allowed to move away from neck of urinary bladder.
a. Sterile ionic or nonionic iodinated contrast medium is
Used.
Radiographic findings with excretory urography
b. Dose: 880 mgl/kg body weight (dog or cat).
1. Vascular phase:
1) If uremia is present, the dose can be increased 10%
a.  Radiograph made during rapid bolus infusion of con-
to 50%
trast medium.
2) Maximum dose in a dog is 90 mL.
 b. Aorta, renal artery, and interlobar arterial branches
3) Maximum dose in a cat is 15mL.
may be visible.
10. Double exposure technique over survey radiographs.
C.
 Two or more renal arteries is an anatomic variation.
11. Warm contrast medium to body temperature prior to
usually without clinical significance.
administration.
d. An overall increase in abdominal opacity is common
12. Contrast medium is injected as rapidly as possible into
during this phase.
peripheral vein via catheter.
 2. Nephrogram phase:
a. If vascular phase of study is not important, contrast
Contrast medium in renal tubules opacifies renal
can be injected more slowly (helps minimize adverse
parenchyma (Figure 3.24).
rea ctions).
b. Degree of opacification is related to dose of contrast
b. In large dogs requiring rapid administration, two
medium (plasma concentration), glomerular filtration
catheters can be placed in peripheral veins. Dose of
rate, and renal tubular osmolarity.
contrast medium is divided in half and injected simul-
C.
 Nephrogram opacity is not affected by hydration of
taneously into each catheter.
animal.
13. Maintain intravenous fluid therapy throughout this
d. Normal kidneys should opacify within 7 to 10
procedure.
seconds.
14. Sequence of radiographs (beginning after half of con-
e.
 Kidneys should be of equal size, shape, and homoge-
trast medium has been injected):
neous opacity.
a. 15 seconds (arteriogram): make VD radiograph of
f.
 Renal opacity normally diminishes over time.
abdomen.
g.
 Nephrogram is not a reliable test of renal function.
b. 1 minute (nephrogram): make VD radiograph and
h.
 Absence of nephrogram in one kidney may be due
then lateral radiograph.
to absence of kidney. loss of blood supply. or severe
c. 5 minutes (pyelogram: kidneys and ureters): make
parenchymal disease  (see Differential  Diagnoses in
VD and lateral radiographs.
chapter 6).
d. 15 minutes (ureteral phase: ureters and urinary
1.
Absence of nephrogram in both kidneys may result
 bladder): VD and lateral radiographs.
from insufficient dose of contrast medium or severe
e. 40 minutes (urinary bladder): make VD oblique and
parenchymal disease (see Differential Diagnoses in
lateral radiographs.
chapter 6).
116
CHAPTER 3 Contrast Radiography
j. Increasing or persistent renal opacity after a normal
3. Pyelogram phase:
or poor initial nephrogram and without contrast medium
a. Contrast medium in renal collecting system (renal
in renal collecting system, ureters, or bladder is abnormal
diverticuli, pelvic recesses, and renal pelvis) and ureters 
and suggests acute renal failure (see Differential Diagno-
normally is visible l minute after injection and may
ses in chapter 6).
persist for several hours (Figure 3.26A).
k. Poor initial nephrogram opacity with decreasing
b. Degree of opacification depends on concentration of
renal opacity may result from inadequate dose of contrast
contrast medium in urine and volume of urine in collect-
medium or poor renal function.
ing system and ureter.
1.
Heterogeneous nephrogram with filling defects in
c. Pyelogram is not a reliable test of renal function:
kidney may be caused by obstruction, severe inflamma-
1) Poor opacification is not always associated with
tion, or space-occupying lesions (see Differential Diagno-
abnormal renal function.
ses in chapter 6).
2) Normal opacification can be seen with diseased
m. Thin, peripheral rim of renal opacification is caused
kidneys.
by severe hydronephrosis (with a dilated or nonopacified
d. Both renal pelves should appear equal in size, shape.
and degree of opacity.
normal).
e. Normal renal collecting system occupies central one-
n. Peripheral rim of renal nonopacification is due to
third of each kidney.
subcapsular fluid accumulation (e.g.. perirenal pseudo-
"(1x so'o) apim z Alaiexoidde s 1l 'sop ui (1
cyst [Figure 3.25]. hematoma).
f. Caudal abdominal compression temporarily blocks
flow of urine and increases filling of collecting systems
and ureters (Figure 3.26B).
g. Pelvic recesses (diverticuli) normally appear as thin,
radiating. parallel lines extending from renal pelvis toward
renal cortex (approximately 1 mm wide or 0.02 x L2).
h. Abnormal dilation of renal collecting system may
result from obstruction or inflammation (see Differential
Diagnoses in chapter 6; Figure 3.26C, Figure 3.27).
i. Distortion or filling defects in renal pelvis or pelvic
recesses may be caused by inflammation, obstruction, or
space-occupying mass such as tumor or calculus (Figures
3.26D and 3.28; see Differential Diagnoses in chapter 6).
A
B
4. Ureteral phase
Figure 3.25 Feline perirenal pseucdocyst. A. Enlarged kidney on survey
a. Contrast medium in ureters (Figure 3.26B).
radiograph. B. Intravenous urograrm with less opaque perirenal
b. Ureteral peristalsis normally is rapid and prevents
 pseudocyst surrounding kidney. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
opacification of entire ureter.
C
Figure 3.26 Pyelogram phases of intravenous urograms (VD radliographs). A. Normal. B. Mildly dllated renal collecting system due to caudal abdominal 
compression. C. Abnormal dilation of pelvic recesses due to pyelonephritis. D. Distorted renal collecting system due to infiltrative disease (neoplasia)
117
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
A
B
Figure 3.29 Normal ureters on intravenous urogram (lateral radiograph).
 Urinary bladder is moderately dlistended with positive contrast medium.
c. Normal diameter of ureters in dogs is approximately
2 to 3 mm at renal hilus (0.05 to 0.09 x L2).
 n   r a  s i
bladder before curving back (cranially) to enter ure-
C
D
terovesicular junction (described as a shepherd's crook
shape) (Figure 3.29).
Figure 3.27 Hydronephrosis on intravenous urograms (VD radiographs).
e. Ureteral mucosal normally is smoothly marginated.
A. Norrmal kidney. B. Mildly dlilated renal pelvis and recesses. C. Moderate
f. Use of temporary caudal abdominal compression
dilation of renal pelvis with blunting of pelvic recesses. D. Severe dilation 
 of renal pelvis; pelvic recesses no longer are distinguished. (Adapted from
increases filling of ureters.
Owens and Biery 1999.)
g. Concurrent pneumocystogram enhances visualization
of vesicoureteral junction (recommended when investi-
gating possible ectopic ureters).
h. Local dilation of ureter may be due to abnormal
narrowing (e.g., stricture, accidental ligation, external
compression). luminal mass (e.g.. calculi, tumor) or
inflammation (see Differential Diagnoses in chapter 6).
i.
 General dilation of ureter usually is caused by obstruc-
tion but may result from severe inflammation (Figure
3.30; see Differential Diagnoses in chapter 6).
j. Lack of ureteral opacification may be due to insuff-
cient dose of contrast medium, obstruction, or nonfunc-
tional kidney (see Differential Diagnoses in chapter 6):
k. Filling defects in ureter or irregular ureteral margins
as calculi, tumors, or polyps (see Differential Diagnoses
in chapter 6).
1. Abnormal position of ureter may represent ectopic
ureter (Figures 3.31 and 3.32), avulsion, or displacement
A
B
by an adjacent mass.
Figure 3.28 Distortion of renal pelvis on intravenous urograms (VD
radiographs). A. Dilated renal collecting systerm due to inflammation. B.
Urethrography
Compression of renal pelvis by tumor in caudal pole of kidney. (Adapted
A positive or negative contrast radiographic evaluation of
from Owens and Biery 1999.)
the urethra.
118
CHAPTER 3 Contrast Radiography
Figure 3.32 Ectopic ureter on intravenous urogram with
pneumocystograrm (lateral radliograph). Contrast-filed ureters (brightened
for this figure) are visible dorsal to urinary bladder and do not empty
ay ui juasaid s! wnipaw jseuon jo junoue llewis  auobun ie Ajlewou
the bladder to fall away frorm the trigone region
Technique(urethrogram)
Figure 3.30 Severe dilation of ureter (hydroureter) on intravenou5
1. Evacuate colon and rectum with cleansing enemas.
urogram due to dlistal obstruction (VD radliograph)
2. Make and evaluate survey abdominal radiographs.
a. Male dogs require a lateral radiograph of perineal and
penile regions with pelvic limbs pulled cranially to visual-
ize penile urethra.
3. Sedation or anesthesia is preferred.
4. Contrast medium:
a. Sterile ionic or nonionic iodinated contrast medium is
diluted with sterile saline or sterile water to make a 20%
solution.
b.Dose:
1) Dogs: 10-20 mL.
2) Cats: 5-10mL.
5. Double exposure technique over survey radiographs.
6. Warm contrast medium to body temperature prior to
Contrast-filed ureters are visible dorsal to urinary bladder, ermptying into
administration.
7. Male dogs:
vagina. A srmall armount of contrast medium is present in the urinary
bladder and kidneys are faintly opacified.
a. A moderately distended urinary bladder (with urine.
sterile saline, or contrast medium) may enhance disten-
tion of urethra (especially prostatic portion).
Indicafions
b. Infusion of 2mL of 2% lidocaine into urethra may
1. Abnormal urination (e.g., stranguria, hematuria, dysuria).
reduce straining and spasms.
2. Difficulty or inability to catheterize urethra.
c. Prefill a balloon tip catheter (e.g., Swan Ganz, Foley)
3. Suspected urethral obstruction.
with contrast solution to prevent injection of air bubbles.
4. Suspected urethral rupture (e.g., trauma, iatrogenic).
d. Place catheter in most distal portion of urethra
5. Determine size, shape, and position of urethra (e.g., adja-
and inflate balloon. For assessment of prostatic urethra.
cent mass, trauma).
advance catheter to level of ischial arch.
6. Aid in diagnosis of prostatic disease.
e. Contrast medium is rapidly infused into urethra (ret-
7. Evaluate a congenital anomaly.
rograde infusiony.
f. Make lateral radiograph of perineal region during
Contraindications
injection of final 2 or 3mL (while urethra is distended
1. Known sensitivity or allergic reaction to contrast media.
with contrast medium). Pull pelvic limbs cranially to
2. Barium is not used in this procedure.
enhance visualization of urethra.
119
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
g. Repeat contrast
tinfusion for VD and oblique
radiographs.
h. Urethrography can be performed after cystography by
withdrawing catheter to level of ischial arch or further
distally.
8. Female dogs:
a. A voiding or antegrade urethrogram can be performed
after a cystogram by applying gentle pressure to urinary
bladder using a low-density plastic paddle or wooden
spoon.
b. A retrograde urethrogram can be performed using one
of following techniques:
1) Following a positive contrast cystogram and with
urethral catheter still in place, inject 5 to 10mL of
undiluted contrast medium while pulling catheter
caudally. Make a lateral radiograph during injection.
2) Place a balloon tip catheter (e.g., Swan Ganz, Foley)
into distal urethra, inflate balloon, and inject 5-10 mL
of undiluted contrast medium. Make a lateral radio-
 graph near end of injection (repeat retrograde infusion 
Figure 3.33 Normal urethrograrm in a male dog (VD oblique radiograph).
for VD and oblique radiographs).
c. Vaginography may opacify urethra (vaginourethrog-
c. Margins may be smooth or irregular.
raphy, see description below).
d. Usually a short zone of transition between lesion and
9. Cats (male or female):
normal urethra.
a. Retrograde urethrography is difficult to perform due
e. Possible etiologies include:
to small urethral size.
1) Inflammation.
b. A balloon tip catheter may be used as described in dogs.
2) Granulomatous disease.
c. Antegrade (voiding) urethrography can be performed
3) Neoplasia.
by filling bladder with contrast medium and then making
4) Fibrous or scar tissue from previous surgery or
lateral and/or oblique radiographs while gently com-
trauma.
pressing caudal abdomen and urinary bladder with a
5) Polyps.
plastic paddle or wooden spoon (using caution to avoid
5. Extramural lesions:
rupturing the bladdery.
a. Compression of urethra by an adjacent mass (e.g.
tumor, abscess).
Radiographic findings (urethrogram)
b. Urethral
margins
are
smooth
and
usually
1. Normal urethra is a homogenous.
. smooth-bordered,
well-defined.
contrast-filled column (Figure 3.33).
c. Edges of lesion are even and tapered
2. Lesions create intraluminal, mural, or extramural filling
6. Narrowing of urethra:
defects (latter is caused by compression from outside urethra).
a. Normal peristalsis.
3. Intraluminal filling defects:
b. Urethral spasm (common in prostatic urethra).
a. Air bubbles are freely movable, round to oval in shape.
c. Stricture:
smoothly marginated with distinct borders, and do not
1) Chronic inflammation.
distend the urethra.
2) Neoplasia.
b. Calculi appear as mineral or soft tissue opacity, with
3) Trauma (e.g., calculi, surgery, catheterization).
smooth or irregular margins, variable size and shape, and
d. Prostatic disease:
may distend the urethra.
1) Tumor.
c. Blood clots tend to be indistinct with irregular margins
2) Inflammation.
and may or may not be attached.
3) Hypertrophy or hyperplasia.
d. Tumors usually are fixed in location and vary in size.
e. Extramural lesion compressing urethra.
with smooth or irregular margins and may distend the
7. Displacement of urethra:
urethra.
a. Adjacent mass (e.g., tumor, abscess).
4. Mural lesions:
b. Pulled by a displaced urinary bladder (e.g., hernia).
a. Project into lumen from urethral wall.
c. Asymmetric prostatic disease (e.g., cyst, abscess,
b. May cause widening or narrowing of urethra.
neoplasia).
120
CHAPTER 3 Contrast Radiography
8. Extravasation of contrast medium (outside urethra):
3. Determine size, shape, position, and integrity of female
a. Prostatic refux (normal back flow into prostatic
urethra.
ducts) .
4. Congenital urogenital anomalies (e.g., ectopic ureter, rec-
b. Urethral rupture (most often reported at ischial arch):
tovaginal fistula).
1) Fractures of pelvis or os penis.
2) Iatrogenic (e.g., faulty catheterization).
Contraindications
c. Prostatic disease (e.g., cystic hyperplasia, neoplasia,
1. Any contraindication to general anesthesia.
abscess).
2. Known sensitivity or allergic reaction to contrast media.
d. Congenital or acquired fistula (e.g.. urethrorectal.
3. Barium is not used in this procedure.
urethrovaginal).
e. Ectopic ureter.
Technique
f. Urethrocavernous reflux (contrast medium enters
1. Make and evaluate survey radiographs.
adjacent vasculature).
2. General anesthesia is required.
9. Prostatic urethra:
3. Aseptically catheterize and empty urinary bladder (analy-
a. Normally widest in middle of prostate and tapers
sis of urine is recommended).
slightly at either end.
4. Remove urinary catheter and place balloon tip catheter
b. Urethral spasm is common in normal dogs and causes
(e.g., Swan Ganz, Foley) into vestibule (tip of catheter distal
narrowing of urethra (anesthesia or/and infusion of lido-
to balloon should be cut as short as possible to prevent it
caine may be necessary to eliminate spasm).
from entering the vagina).
C. Refux of contrast medium into prostatic ducts is
 5. Inflate balloon to prevent leakage of contrast medium (a
normal (produces thin, well-defined, linear opacifica-
plastic clamp also may be needed to seal vaginal orifice
tion): however, infiltration into prostatic parenchyma is
tightly around catheter).
abnormal and results from tissue destruction (produces
6. Contrast medium:
diffuse, indistinct opacification).
a. Undiluted sterile ionic or nonionic iodinated contrast
d. Not all prostatic lesions communicate with urethra and
medium (240-300 mgI/mL).
a lack of prostatic opacification does not exclude disease.
b. Dose (volume sufficient to fill vagina):
1) Dog: estimated dose is 10-30 mL.
2) Cat: estimated dose is 5-10 mL.
Vaginography (vaginourethrography)
7. Double exposure technique over survey radiographs.
A positive contrast radiographic evaluation of vagina, cervix.
8. Warm contrast medium to body temperature prior to
 and urethra.
administration.
9. Contrast medium fills vagina first and then refluxes into
Indicafions
urethra and urinary bladder.
1. Suspected
extraluminal, intramural, or intraluminal
10. Make a lateral radiograph of pelvis and caudal abdomen
vaginal mass.
near end of injection (while vagina is distended with con-
2. Investigate suspected vaginal tear, stricture, or fistula.
trast medium).
121
Musculoskeleton
Normal Radiographic Anatomy  125
Nasal cavity and frontal sinuses 148
General   125
Teeth148
Types of bone  126
Tooth development 150 
Shapes of bones 126
Salivary glands  151
Parts of long bones 126
 Pharynx and larynx  151
Bone development 128
Diseases and Disorders 152
 Fetal skeletal mineralization   130 
Bone production  152
Sesamoid bones  130
Periosteal response 152
Stifl   130 
 Osteophytes and enthesophytes 155
Shoulder  131
Osteopetrosis 155
Elbow  131
Bone loss  156
Carpus  131
Osteopenia  156
Tarsus 131
Osteolysis   157
Digits 131
Benign conditions 
157
Variable ossification centers132
Bone cyst
157
Accessory caudal glenoid ossification center 132
Enchondroma  158 
Clavides 132
Osteochondroma 159
 Medial coronoid process 
 Synovial osteochondroma
159
Pelvis 133
Osteoma 160
Os penis 133
Chondroma 160
Joints 133
Multilobular tumor of skull  160
Synovial joints (diarthrodial joints) 133
Fractures  161
Fibrous joints (synarthrodial joints) 134 
Types of fractures  161
Cartilage joints (synchondroses)  134
Fracture healing  164 
Shoulder  135
 Fracture complications  164 
Elbow  135
Delayed union  166
Carpus 137
 Nonunion fracture
166
Digits (meta carpus/metatarsus/phalanges)138
Malunion fracture  167
Pelvis  139
Pseudoarthrosis  167
Stifle140
 Sequestrum 168
Tarsus  141
Physeal injuries  168 
Vertebrae (spine)  142
Hypertrophic osteopathy (HO) 171
Skull 146
Osteomyelitis  171
Cranial vault 147
Leishmaniasis  173
Temporomandibular joint (TMJ)  148
Neosporosis  174
Radiography of the Dog and Cat: Guide to Making and Interpreting Radiographs, First Edition. M.C. Muhlbauer and S.K. Kneller.
@ 2013 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
123
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
 Osseous neoplasia  174
Elbow 202
Primary malignant bone neoplasia  174
 Specific elbow disorders-dysplasia   203
Metastatic malignant bone neoplasia  175
Fractures  206
Parosteal osteosarcoma  176
Incomplete ossification of humeral condyle  206
 Digital neoplasia  176
Luxation  207
Giant cell tumor  176
Subluxation   207
Bone infarcts  177
Medial epicondylar spur  207
Soft tissues 177
Patella cubiti  208
Soft tissue swelling or mass  177
Carpus  208
Soft tissue emphysema  178
 Degenerative joint disease  208
 Soft tissue mineralization 
178
Luxation/subluxation  208
Chondrocalcinosis  179
Fractures  209
Foreign objects in soft tissues  179
Stenosing tenosynovitis (abductor pollicis 
Arteriovenous fistula  180
longus)  209
Lymphadenopathy  180
 Digits (metacarpus/metatarsus/phalanges)  210
Lymphedema 180
 Fracture/luxation  210
 Appendicular skeleton  1
180
Digital neoplasia  211
 Congenital and developmental anomalies 
180
Osteomyelitis  211
Alterations in number of bones  180 
Intraosseous epidermoid cyst  212
Chondrodysplasia  181
Other conditions  212
C ongenital hypothyroidism 
183
 Pelvis and coxofemoral joints  212
Growth arrest lines 184
Registry groups-hip dysplasia certification  216
Hyperparathyroidism   184
Fractures  219
Hypertrophic osteodystrophy (HOD) 185
Luxations  220
Mucopolysaccharidosis  185
Neoplasia  221
 Osteogenesis imperfecta  186
Stifle   221
Retained enchondral cartilage in distal ulna 187
 Degenerative joint disease  21
Rickets 187
 Cranial cruciate ligament injury 
222
Panosteitis 187
 Caudal cruciate ligament injury  Z
223
Lead poisoning 188
Avulsion fractures 223
 Pyruvate kinase deficiency
188
Luxation   225
Joint disease 188
 Ruptured patellar ligament  227
 Congenital and developmental malformations  189
Neoplasia  227
Degenerative joint disease (DJD) 189 
Osteochondritis dissecans (OCD)  227
Osteochondroses  191
Multipartite patella  228
Joint soft tissue swelling
192
Tarsus  228
Arthritis 193
Common calcanean (Achilles) tendon injury  228
Infectious  193
Degenerative joint disease (DJD)  229
Noninfectious, nonerosive, immune-mediated 
194
Fractures 229
 Noninfectious, erosive, immune-mediated 196
Luxation/subluxation  230
Neoplasia of joints  197
Osteochondritis (OcD)  231
Diseases and disorders of specific joints 198 
 Premature closure of distal tibial physis  232
Shoulder 
198
Axial skeleton  232
Degenerative joint disease  198
Vertebrae  232
Fractures 198
Developmental abnormalities  232
Scapulohumeral luxation 
198
Atlantoaxial subluxation   232
 Osteochondritis dissecans 
199
Block vertebrae  232
Osteochondromatosis  200 
Hemivertebra   233
Biceps tendinopathy  200
Transitional vertebra  233
 Supraspinatus and infraspinatus 
Mucopolysaccharidosis 235
tendinopathy   201
Sacrocaudal dysgenesis 235
Shoulder dysplasia  202
Spina bifida  235
124
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Spinal cord disorders 236
Neoplasia associated with teeth  257
Calcinosis circumscripta 236
Periodontal disease  259
Cervical spondylomyelopathy  236
Tooth root abscess 259
Degenerative joint disease of spine  238
Salivary glands and nasolacrimal duct 260
Discospondylitis  238
Sialolithiasis  260
Disseminated Idiopathic Skeletal Hyperostosis  239 
Sialocele 260
Dural ossification   239
Salivary duct fistula  260
 Fractures and luxations of the spine  240
Salivary gland neoplasia  261
Hypervitaminosis A  241
Nasolacrimal duct abnormalities  261
Intervertebral disc disease (IvDD)  242
 Pharynx and larynx 261
Contrast radiography (myelography)  243
Pharynx  261
Lumbosacral disease  243
Larynx  262
Neoplasia of spine  244 
Hyoid bones 
263
Osteochondritis (OcD) of spine  245
Differential Diagnoses  264 
 Osteochondromatosis  246
General bone  264
Schmorl's node  246
Distribution of bone lesions  264 
Spondylitis  246 
Neoplasia of bone  264 
Spondylosis deformans  247
 Opacity abnormalities of bone
264
Head and neck 248 
Shape abnormalities of bone  266 
Cranial vault 248
Soft tissue abnormalities  266
Craniomandibular osteopathy (CMO)  248
Joints  267
Cranial hyperostosis  249
 Alignment abnormalitie instability or
 Fractures of cranial vault  249
incongruity)  267
Hydrocephalus  249
Joint space abnormalities 267
Neoplasia of cranial vault  250
Opacity abnormalities of bone-joint disease 267
Occipital dysplasia  251
Spine  268
 Osteomyelitis of cranial vault  252
 Alignment abnormalities 
268
 Otitis (externa, media, and interna)
252
Discospondylitis  268 
Nasal cavity and frontal sinus 253
Intervertebral disc space 269
Fractures of face and frontal area
253
Lumbosacral disease  269
 Frontal sinus mucocele  253
Myelogram lesions  269
Inflammation/infection of nasal cavity  253 
Neoplasia associated with spine  270
 Neoplasia of nasal cavity
254
Opacity abnormalities of vertebrae  270
Temporomandibular joint (TMJ)
255
Shape abnormalities of vertebrae  270
Dysplasia of temporomandibular joint  255
Size abnormalities of spinal canal  271
 Subluxation/luxation of temporomandibular joint 255 
Skull  271
Teeth  255
Cranium abnormalities  271
 Dental calculus 255
Frontal sinus abnormalities 272
Dental caries  256
Nasal cavity abnormalities  272
Feline odontoclastic resorptive lesion  256
Teeth abnormalities  272
Fractures of teeth 257
 Temporomandibular joint (TMJ) abnormalities  273
Metabolic disease affecting teeth  257
 Pharynx and larynx abnormalities  273
NORMAL RADIOGRAPHIC ANATOMY
a. 50 vertebrae.
b. 26 ribs.
General
c. 8 sternebrae.
d. 4l skull bones.
1. Average number of bones in dogs is 320 and in cats, 244.
e. 9 hyoid bones.
2. Bones in dogs include:
f. 45 bones in each pectoral limb.
125
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
g. 48 bones in each pelvic limb.
h. l os penis.
3. Bone is approximately one-third organic matrix (osteoid)
and two-thirds inorganic (mineralized) material. Only the
mineralized portion is visible on radiographs.
Types of bone
1. Cortical or compact bone:
D
a. Forms outer layer (cortex) of most bones (including
all long bones).
b. Radiographic
appearance is dense, opaque, and
homogeneous.
c. Makes up 80% of total bone mass.
CB
2. Cancellous or trabecular bone:
a. Found in ends of long bones, in vertebrae, and in flat
bones.
b. Radiographic appearance is trabeculated, spongy. or
porous.
Figure 4.1 Normal immature canine femur. A = apophysis.
c. Makes up 20% of total bone mass.
E = epiphysis, P = physis, M = metaphysic, D = cliaphysis, CBZ = cut back
d. Bony trabeculae are surrounded by blood.
zone.
e. Provides nearly l0 times the surface area of cortical
bone.
f. Capable of high rates of remodeling. especially during
growth and disease.
Shapes of bones
8
1. Long bones: in limbs (e.g., humerus, femur, radius, tibia).
2. Short or cuboidal bones: in carpi and tarsi.
3. Flat bones: in head and limb girdles (e.g., scapula, pelvis).
4. Irregular bones: vertebrae, skull, and pelvis.
5. Sesamoid bones: located near freely moving joints.
Parts of long bones (Figure 4.1)
1. Physis (growth plate, epiphyseal carilage, or epiphyseal
plate):
a. Present only in immature animals.
b. Separates metaphysis from epiphysis or apophysis.
c. Composed of hyaline cartilage (appears as a less
opaque band).
d. In mature animals, the physis is absent and the
metaphysis and epiphysis blend together.
2. Diaphysis ("between physes"):
Figure 4.2 Normal shoulder epiphysis. (Lateral view on left; CaCr
view on right.) A = proximal humeral epiphysis (humeral head).
a. Middle portion or shaft of a long bone.
 b. Consists of cortical bone surrounding a less opaque
B = supraglenoid tubercle, C = accessory caudal glenoid ossification
center.
medullary cavity.
3. Metaphysis ("next to physis"):
a. Wider portion located at either end of diaphysis.
a. Rounded end that supports articular cartilage.
b. Contains cancellous bone.
b. Composed of cancellous bone and a layer of dense
c. Functions as a zone of transformation where cancel.
subchondral bone.
lous metaphyseal bone becomes cortical diaphyseal bone
5. Apophysis ("away or apart from physis"):
(called the cut back zone).
a. A nonarticular epiphysis.
4. Epiphysis ("upon physis"; Figures 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6.
b. Provides a prominence of bone for attachment of
4.7, and 4.8):
tendons and ligaments.
126
FC
Figure 4.6 Normal stifle epiphyses. (CaCr view on left; lateral view on 
right.) FC = dlistal femnoral epiphysis (fermoral condyles), T = proximal tibial 
epiphysis (tibial plateau), TT = tibial tuberosity, F = proximal fibula.
Figure 4.3 Normal elbow epiphyses. (Left to right: CaCr view, lateral
view, flexed lateral view.) A = distal hummeral epiphysis (humeral condyle).
 B = proximal radial epiphysis, C = proximal ulnar epiphysis (olecranon 
tuber), D = anconeal process, E = medial humeral epicondyle.
R
R
Figure 4.7 Normal tarsal epiphyses. (Dorsoplantar view on left; lateral
view on right.) F = distal fibular epiphysis (lateral malleolus), T = distal 
tibial epiphysis (mmedlial malleolus), C = calcaneal epiphysis (tuber calcus).
Figure 4.4 Normal carpal epiphyses. (Dorsopalmar view on left; lateral
view on right.) R = distal radial epiphysis, U = distal ulnar epiphysis.
M
M
Figure 4.8 Normal metacarpophalangeal/metatarsophalangeal 
Figure 4.5 Normal coxofemoral epiphyses. C = proximal fernoral
epiphyses. D = proximal epiphysis of proxirnal phalanx of dewclaw (first 
epiphysis, G = greater trochanter, L = lesser trochanter T = ischiatic 
dligit), M = distal metacarpal/metatarsal epiphysis. (1) Proximal epiphysis 
tuberosity.
of first phalanx, (2) Proximal epiphysis of second phalanx.
127
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
c. Examples: femoral greater trochanter, tibial tuberosity.
6. Long bones grow circumferentially by producing subperi-
humeral greater tubercle.
osteal new bone and longitudinally by mineralizing cartilage
6. Periosteum:
at centers of ossifica tion.
a. Completely covers all long bones (except articular
a. Primary centers of ossification develop in diaphyses,
areas that are covered by cartilage).
growing and lengthening as cartilage mineralizes.
b. Consists of two layers:
b. Secondary centers of ossification develop in epiphyses
1) Inner layer (cambium) produces bone via osteo-
(contribute to length of bone) and apophyses (contribute
 progenitor cells.
to shape of bone).
2) Outer layer is fibrous connective tissue.
c. Accessory centers of ossification form sesamoid bones
c. Attached to cortex by Sharpey's fibers.
and create foci of mineralization near joints (NOTE:
d. Blends continuously with tendons and ligaments at
Accessory centers can be mistaken for chip fractures or
their attachments.
osteophytes).
e. Supplies nerves and blood vessels to underlying bone.
      a  
f. Responsible for circumferential growth of immature
lous bone is actively remodeling to thinner diaphyseal
long bones.
cortical bone. (NOTE: Margins of actively remodeling bone
 g. Provides healing response when bone is damaged.
 aq a    ra rd u
7. Endosteum:
 a. Lines medullary cavities of bones.
myelitis, or trauma; however, soft tissue swelling is absent 
b. Similar to periosteum but thinner.
during normal growth.)
 8. Physes are highly susceptible to injury and when damaged
can lead to limb deformity.
Bone development
a. Early diagnosis is vital to successful treatment.
b. Comparison radiographs of contralateral limb
(or a
1. Most bones form in a cartilage frame (endochondral
known normal limb) and serial radiographs aid in detec-
ossifica tion).
tion of physeal damage.
2. Some bones (especially those of the skull) develop in
c. Distal ulnar physis is especially vulnerable to injury
sheets of connective tissue (intramembranous ossification;
due to its unique conical shape.
NOTE: This is also the method by which most bones heal).
9. Long bones cease growing when cartilage growth stops.
3. Osteoblasts deposit bony matrix and are responsible for
 Ossification from metaphysis and epiphysis gradually closes
ossifica tion.
the physis, leaving a thin sclerotic line (physeal scar). Physeal
4. Osteoclasts dissolve bone mineral and matrix (an osteo-
clast can resorb 8 times amount of bone produced by an
to remodel and eventually blend together.
osteoblast}
10. Closures of physes occur at predictable times but vary
 5. Osteocytes help maintain calcium homeostasis and
between breeds and species. Average times of appearance
mechanical properties of bone.
and closure in dogs and cats are listed in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1 Epiphyses and apophyses: ages at appearance and fusion
Site
Appearance
Fusion (Dogs)
Fusion (Cats)
Scapula
 Supraglenoid tubercle 
7-9 weeks
4-7 months 
s -
Humerus
Greater tubercle
 2-3 weeks 
4 months (to humeral head)
Proximal epiphysis (hurmeral head)
2 week5 
10-13 months
18-24 months
 Distal epiphysis (humeral condyles)
(See condyles.)
6-8 mmonths (to dliaphysis)
Lateral condyle
 2-3 weeks 
6 weeks (to medial condyle)
3-4 months
 Medial condyle
3-6 week5
6 weeks (to lateral condyle)
3-4 months
 Medial epicondyle
7-9 weeks 
6 months (to medlial condyle)
3-5 months 
 Radius
Proximal epiphysis
3-5 weeks
5-11 months
6-7 months
Distal epiphysis
2-4 weeks
6-12 months
13-21 months
128
Table 4.1 (Continued)
Site
Appearance
Fusion (Dogs)
Fusion (Cats)
Ulna
Olecranon (tuberosity of olecranon)
7-9 weeks
6-10 months
8-12 months
Anconeal process
12 weeks 
 4-5 months 
Distal epiphysis
7-8 week5
7-12 months
13-24 months
Carpus
 Radial carpal bone
3-4 weeks
Ulnar carpal bone 
4-5 weeks
Central carpal bone
4-5 weeks
Intermediate carpal bone 
2-4 weeks
Accessory carpal bone (body)
2 weeks
Accessory carpal bone (epiphysis)
7 week5
3-6 months
First-fourth carpal bones 
3-4 weeks
Sesamoid bone
16 weeks
 Metacarpus/metatarsus
Distal epiphysis (MC I)
5-7 weeks 
6-7 months 
 Distal epiphysis (MC II-V)
4-5 weeks
5-7 months
6-10 months
Phalanges
 Proximal epiphysis
6-8 weeks 
4-6 months
 Dorsal sesamoids
 4-5 months
 4-5 months
Volar sesammoids
3-4 months
Pelvis
lleum
Birth 
4-6 months
 Ischium 
Birth 
4-6 months 
Acetabulum
7-11 weeks
 4-6 months 
Tuber ischii
3-5 months
8-10 months
Syrnphysis pubis
5-12 months
60 months (5 years)
Ischial arch 
6 months
12 months 
Illiac crest
16 week5
1-2 years (may remmain open permanently)
Femur
 Proximal epiphysis (femoral headl)
2-4 week5
8-12 months
7-10 months 
Greater trochanter (major)
5-8 week5
6-11 months
7-9 months
Lesser trochanter (minor) 
5-10 weeks
8-13 months
8-10 months
Distal epiphysis
2-3 weeks 
8-11 months (to dliaphysis)
12-18 months
 Medial and lateral condyles
2-3 weeks 
3 months (rmedial to lateral condyle)
 Patella
7-9 week5
Tibia
 Lateral and mmedial condyles
 2-3 weeks
 6 weeks (rmedial to lateral condyle)
Tibial tuberosity
7-9 weeks 
6-8 months (to condyle)
12-18 months
8-12 months (to diaphysis)
Proxirnal epiphysis
3-8 weeks
8-12 months
12-18 months
Distal epiphysis
2-4 weeks 
8-11 months (to diaphysis)
9-12 months
 Medial malleolus
11-13 weeks
5 months
Fibula
Proximal epiphysis
7-10 weeks 
8-12 months
13-17 months
Distal epiphysis
4-7 weeks
 7-12 months
Tarsus
Calcaneus
1 week
Talu5
1 week
 Intertarsal bones (central, I-V)
3-4 weeks
Tuber calcis (calcanean tuber)
6-8 weeks 
3-8 months
7-12 months
Tarsal bones (central, -V)
2-4 week5
Sesamoids
Patella 
7-9 weeks
Fabellae (stifle)
12 week5
2-5 months
Popliteal (stifle)
12 week5
 4-5 months
 Dorsal dligits 
20 week5
 Plantar dligits
8 week5
Phalanges
Proximal epiphysis (l-V) 
6-7 months
 Distal epiphysis
129
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Fetal skeletal mineralization
than in dogs), a condition which must be differentiated
1. Fetal ossification becomes visible on survey radiographs
from patellar fracture (fracture usually is accompanied by
at predictable times:
soft tissue swelling).
a. Dogs: 42-45 days of gestation.
f. Patellar ligament: portion of quadriceps tendon
b. Cats: 35-39 days of gestation.
between patella and tibial tuberosity.
2. Identification of bony structures in developing fetus aids 
2. Fabellae (two sesamoid bones):
in estimating time to parturition (Table 4.2).
a. Located caudal to femoral condyles in lateral and
medial gastrocnemius tendons.
b. Lateral fabella usually is larger.
Sesamoid bones
c. Medial fabella may be located distal to lateral fabella
(can be mistalken for an avulsion fracture).
1. Small, smooth, rounded structures that form where
tendons pass over a joint.
2. Serve to reduce friction, increase mechanical effect,
 Table 4.2 Ossification times prior to parturition.
protect and stabilize the tendon.
3. Usually only one surface is articular.
 Radiographic Finding
Days to Parturition 
4. Periosteum is lacking (periosteal response will be absent).
Bitch
Queen 
Stifle (Figure 4.9)
1. Patella (kneecap):
Uterine enlargement 
30-35
44-46
a. Largest sesamoid bone.
 Skull, vertebral column, ribs 
18-22
21-27
b. Located cranial to distal femur in quadriceps tendon.
 Scapula, humerus, fermur 
12-15
20-22
 Radius, ulna, tibia
10-12
13-15
c. Ovoid in dogs and distally tapered in cats (resembles
Metacarpals. rmetatarsals
10-12
13-15
a baseball cap in cats).
 Fhalanges, sternum 
5-10
10-12
d. Articular cartilage is present on caudal surface.
 Caudal vertebrae
5-10
10-12
e. May develop from two (bipartite) or more (multipar-
Teeth
8-E
5-7
tite) centers of ossification. Centers sometimes do not
fuse (usually an incidental finding. more common in cats
ICE
Figure 4.9 Normal stifle sesamoid bones. P = patella, F = fabellae, Ps = popliteal sesarmoid bone, ICE = intercondylar emninence (normally centrally
positioned in relation to femoral condyles), IF = infrapatellar fat pad, A. Lateral radliograph (M = meniscus), B. Craniocaudal radliograph (L = lateral
fernoral condyle, M = medlial femoral condyle, T = tibia). (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
130
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
d. One or both fabellae may develop from multiple
Carpus
centers of ossification (bipartite or multipartite): usually
1. Sesamoid bone frequently is present medial to carpo-
not symptomatic, but must be distinguished from frac-
metacarpal joint, located in tendon of abductor pollicis 
ture. (NOTE: Multipartite fabella have smooth, rounded 
longus muscle, near its insertion on proximal aspect of frst
borders and do not change in appearance on subsequent
metacarpal bone (Figures 4.3 and 4.12).
radiographs.)
2. May have a sesamoid bone medial to distal radius in
e. Fabellae may fail to ossify and not be visible on radio-
radiocarpal ligament (Figure 4.8).
graphs (more common with medial fabella).
3. Sesamoid bones usually are bilateral when present, but
3. Popliteal sesamoid:
not always.
a. Located near lateral condyle of tibia, in tendon of
popliteal muscle.
Tarsus
b. May fail to ossify (especially in cats and small dogs).
1. Plantar sesamoid bones may be present in tarsometatarsal
fibrocartilage (dogs, Figure 4.13).
2. When present, they tend to be located:
Shoulder
a. Laterally in approximately 50% of dogs.
1. Sesamoid bone may be present near greater tubercle.
b. Medially in approximately 30% of dogs.
located in tendon of deltoid or supraspinatus or infraspina-
tus muscle (Figure 4.10).
Digits
a. These sesamoids are difficult to distinguish from dys-
1. Three
sesamoid
bones
trophic mineralization in same area.
are
present
at
each
2. Clavicles also are present near the greater tubercle.
metacarpophalangeal/metatarsophalangeal joint of digits 2
a. May be small or absent in dogs.
through 5; a single dorsal sesamoid bone dorsally and two
palmar/plantar sesamoid bones.
b. Larger and curvilinear in cats (Figure 4.16).
2. Multipartite digital sesamoids are a common incidental
finding in dogs (Figure 4.14), appearing as variable-sized.
Elbow
1. Sesamoid bone often is present near craniolateral aspect
 of radial head, located in tendon of supinator muscle or in
annular ligament (Figure 4.11).
2. Commonly seen in cats and in larger breeds of dogs.
3. Usually bilateral when present.
 Figure 4.10 Normal canine shoulder with sesamoid (lateral radiograph)
Figure 4.11 Normal canine elbow (craniocaudal radiograph) with
in tendon of infraspinatus muscle (straight arrow) and tendon of
[eatelouenn uo alsnu jopeuidns jo uopuat ul (moe) auog plouesas
Aew eaue s!ul ul saqedo (eauin (moue paunn) ajpsnuu sneuidseidns
 sicde of elbow. R = radial head, C = medial coronoid process of ulna,
also result from dystrophic calcification caused by trauma or chronic
M = medial hummeral epicondyle, L = lateral humeral epicondyle,
 inflarnmation. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
(666l Aala pue suamo woy paidepy) uouealo = 0
131
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
MCP
IF
DIP
P3
B
Figure 4.14 Normal canine digits (dorsopalmar radiograph)
Figure 4.12 Normal canine carpus (dorsopalmar radiographs).
A. Anatomy: M = medial palmar sesarmoid bone, L = lateral palmar
A. Sesamoid bone (arrow) in tendon of insertion of abductor pollicis
 5esamoid bone, D = dorsal sesamoid bone, McP = metacarpophalangeal 
longus mmuscle on medial side of carpus. B. Sesammoid bone in medial 
joint, PIP = proximal interphalangeal joint, DIP = distal interphalangeal
radiocarpal ligament in canine carpus (arrow). (Adapted from Owen5
joint. B. Close-up view of paired palmar sesamoid bones: (A) normal.,
and Biery 1999.)
(B) fractured sesamoid bone, (C) congenital bipartite sesamoid.
(D) congenital tripartite sesamoid bone. (Adapted from Owens and Biery
1999.)
smooth, rounded mineral opacities that do not change in
appearance on subsequent radiographs (digits 2 and 5 are
most often affected).
Variable ossification centers
1. Other names: accessory ossification centers, ossicles.
2. May occur in many locations, usually adjacent to joints 
 Or embedded within the joint capsule.
3. Generally represent normal variants that need to be clini-
cally and radiographically differentiated from pathology
(such as fractures and osteophytes).
Accessory caudal glenoid ossification center
(Figure 4.6)
1. Other names: incomplete ossification of the caudal
glenoid.
2. Occurs on caudal aspect of scapular glenoid (Figure 4.15).
3. More often seen in medium- to large-breed dogs.
4. Failure of this ossification center to unite may contribute
to shoulder pain and lameness.
 5. Arthroscopy is useful for further evaluation.
Clavidles
1. Located just cranial and medial to each proximal humerus.
Figure 4.13 Normal canine tarsus (dorsoplantar radiograph) with lateral
2. Common in cats (Figure 4.16).
 and medial plantar sesamoid bones (arrows). L = lateral, M = medial.
3. Usually only faintly mineralized or nonmineralized in
(Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
dogs.
132
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Medial coronoid process
4. Tendon of psoas minor muscle may have an ossification
1. Develops as an accessory ossification center in ulna of
center cranial to iliopubic eminence (Figure 4.18). most
some dogs.
often reported in Greyhounds.
2. Incomplete mineralization of this process is associated
5. Mineralization in tendon of gluteal muscle (Figure 4.19):
with elbow dysplasia and commonly leads to elbow instabil-
a. Not a true ossification center.
ity and secondary degenerative joint disease (Figure 4.12).
b. Commonly
seen proximal 
to femoralgreater
trochanter.
Pelvis
c. Usually an incidental finding.
1. Acetabular rim: craniodorsal margin may not completely
fuse (Figure 4.17).
Os penis
2. Wing of the ilium: crescent-shaped ossification center
1. May develop from multiple centers of ossification.
along craniodorsal border may or may not fuse with the
2. Incomplete union of centers may mimic fracture or ure-
ilium.
thral calculus (most often occurs at the proximal end).
3. Tendon of the iliopsoas muscle may have an ossification
center medial to lesser trochanter of femur (Figure 4.18).
Joints
1. Joints consist of two or more bones united by cartilagi
nous, fibrous, or elastic tissue.
2. Three main types of joints (based on tissues that connect
the bones):
a. Synovial joints (diarthrosis).
b. Fibrous joints (synarthrosis).
C. Cartilaginous joints (synchondrosis).
3. Some joints are combinations, such as the sacroiliac and
tibiofibular joints, which consist of synovial and fibrous
types.
Synovial joints (diarthrodial joints) (Figure 4.20)
1. Provide the greatest range of moverment.
2. Allow diverse motions such as flexion, extension, adduc-
tion, abduction, circumduction, and rotation.
3. Include ball and socket, hinge. condylar, and pivot
Figure 4.15 Accessory caudal glenoid ossification center (arrow) on
[eateq Aensn (ydesope! eyael) piouaj6 jejndes jo u5euu epne)
configurations.
o paidepa) shop paang-aniel at -nipau ui luasaid uao isouu pie
4. All have a joint cavity, joint capsule, synovial fluid, and
 Owens and Biery 1999.)
articular cartilage.
Figure 4.16 Normal feline clavicle. A. Lateral radiograph (white arrow). B. Caudocranial radiograph: paired clavicles are visible medial to each proximal
humerus.
133
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 4.20 Typical synovial joint. AC = articular cartilage, JC = joint
Figure 4.17 Ossicle on dorsal acetabular rirm of canine pelvis (arrow).
 capsule with synovial fluid (black) in joint space.
woy paidepy) <(ydeunoipeu (A) shop paaiq-abuel ol -wnipauu ui Allensn
(666 1 Auag pue suamo
5. Some contain a meniscus and ligaments (e.g., stifle, tem-
poromandibular joint).
6. Joint capsule has an outer layer of fibrous tissue with an
inner synovial membrane.
7. Ends of articulating bones are dense and covered with
hyaline (articular) cartilage.
8. Examples of synovial articulations:
a. Joints of the extremities (e.g., shoulder, stifle, elbow,
tarsus).
b. Articular facet joints of the vertebrae.
c. Atlantoaxial joint.
d. Articulations between the ribs and thoracic vertebrae
(costovertebral joints).
e. Articulations between the costal cartilages and sterne-
brae (sternocostal joints).
f. Temporomandibular joint.
Sesamoid bone in tendon of iliopsoas muscle (curved arrow) and
sesammoid bone in tendon of psoas minor adjacent to the iliopectineal
Fibrous joints (synarthrodial joints)
erninence (straight arrow). (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
1. Least movable bony unions.
2. Often not visible on survey radiographs (may appear as
a thin, less opaque line when central x-ray beam is perpen-
dicular to joint).
3. Fibrous joints lack a joint cavity and are characterized by
three types:
a. Suture type joins flat bones of the skull.
 b. Syndesmosis type includes a large amount of interven-
ing connective tissue and is found at attachment of hyoid
 bones to petrous temporal bone, proximal and distal tib-
iofibular articulations, and interosseous ligament between
radius and ulna.
c. Gomphosis type is formed by periodontal ligament
and attaches cementum of each tooth to alveolar bone
(not visible on survey radiographs).
Cartilage joints (synchondroses)
Figure 4.19 Mineralization (arrow) in tendon of gluteal muscle (VD
1. Consist of two or more bones united by hyaline cartilage
radiograph). (Adapted from Owen5 and Biery 1999.)
or fibrocartilage.
134
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
2. Hyaline cartilage joints include long bone physes in
Elbow (Figures 4.26, 4.27, 4.28, 4.29, 4.30, 4.31,
immature animals, costochondral junctions, and various
and 4.32)
parts of fetal slkeleton.
1. A composite, hinged, synovial joint, consisting of two
3. Fibrocartilage joints (amphiarthroses) contain an inter-
articulations:
 sso n  n   '  d 
a. Humeroradial joint (humeral condyle with radial
mandibular symphysis. pelvic symphysis, intervertebral
head).
discs, and along sternum).
 1) Transmits most of weight supported by limb.
2) Freely communicates with main part of elbow
Shoulder (Figures 4.21, 4.22, 4.23, 4.24, and 4.25)
joint.
1. A ball and socket, synovial joint.
3) Allows rotation of antebrachium.
2. Able to move in virtually any direction, but primarily in
b. Humeroulnar joint (humeral head with trochlear
flexion and extension.
notch of ulna).
3. Sesamoid bone is sometimes present near greater
1) Stabilizes elbow, restricting movement to sagittal
tubercle, in tendon of deltoid or supraspinatus muscle
 plane.
(Figure 4.10).
c. Both joints share a common joint capsule.
B
Spine
Acromion
Humeral head
Supraglenoid tubercle
Supraglenoid
tuberosity
Greater tubercle
Greater tubercle
Glenoid cavity
Coracoid process
Acromion
Bicipital groove
Glenoid cavity
Humeralhead
Spin
 Figure 4.21 Canine shoulder with normal anatomic landmarks. A. Lateral radiograph. B. Caudocranial radiograph. (Adapted from Owens and Biery
1999.)
Deltoid
Joint capsule
Coracobrachialis
Biceps
Supraspinatus
Infraspinatus
neral
&Triceps
Teres minor
ligament
Joint capsule
Triceps
Joint capsule
Pectoralis
Brachialis
Triceps
Coracobrachialis
Figure 4.22 Normal canine shoulder (lateral radiograph) with
Figure 4.23 Normal canine shoulder (lateral radliograph) with
suamo woy paidepy) ainsden juio! pue suawen joy satis juawyoee
attachment sites for muscle tendons. (Adapted from Owens and Biery
and Biery 1999).
1999).
135
Figure 4.24 Normal canine shoulder at 1 month of age (lateral
Figure 4.27 Ununited anconeal process of ulna (lateral radiograph)
radiograph).
 A line of decreased opacity (arrow) is present at the base of the anconeal
 process. (Adapted from Owen5 and Biery 1999.)
Olecran
Anconeal
Medial
Core
noid
Figure 4.28 Ulnar processes. Lateral image of a proximal ulna
identifying the three processes: olecranon, anconeal, and medial coronoid 
 processes, identified with arrows.
Figure 4.25 Normal canine shoulder at 3 mmonths of age (lateral
radiograph).
Collateralligament
Annularligament
Joint capsule
Figure 4.26 Canine elbow with normal anatomic landmark5.
AP = anconeal process, E = medial humeral epicondyle, O = olecranon,
R = radial head, C = medial coronoid process (arrow). A. Lateral
Figure 4.29 Normal canine elbow with attachment sites for ligarments
radiograph. B. Caudocranial radliograph. (Adapted from Owens and Biery
and joint capsule (lateral radliograph). (Adapted from Owens and Biery
1999.)
1999).
136
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
B
Anconeus
Extensors
Flexors
Extensor carpi radialis
Triceps
Pronatorteres
Pronatorteres
Ulnaris lateralis
Extensors of the
carpus and digits
Flexorcarpiulnaris
Collateralligament
Flexors of carpus
Lateral
Medial
and digits
collateral
collateral
Supinator
ligament
ligament
Biceps and Brachialis
Interosseousligament
Abductorpollicislongus
Deep digital flexor
Figure 4.30 Normal canine elbow with attachment sites for muscle tendons. A. Lateral radiograph. B. Craniocaudal radliograph. (Adapted frorm Owen5
and Biery 1999).
2. A sesamoid bone may be present, cranial and lateral to
proximal radius.
3. Anconeal process is a normal secondary center of ossifica-
tion on proximal ulna.
a. Radiographically apparent at approximately 1l weeks 
of age.
b. Normally fuses with ulna by 20 weeks of age (22
weeks in German Shepherd Dog).
c. Failure of anconeal process to unite with olecranon
commonly leads to elbow instability and secondary
degenerative joint disease (Figure 4.27: see Elbow Displa-
sia discussion in Diseases and Disorders section).
d. Occasionally in some cats and small dogs, anconeal
 process may develop as an extension of proximal ulnar
Figure 4.31 Normal canine elbow at 1 month of age (lateral
radiograph).
metaphysis and not as a separate center of ossification.
Carpus (Figures 4.33, 4.34, and 4.35)
1. A composite synovial articulation consisting of:
a. Antebrachiocarpal joint between distal radius/ulna
and proximal row of carpal bones.
b. Middle carpal joint between two rows of carpal bones.
c. Carpometacarpal joint between distal row of carpal
bones and proximal metacarpus.
d. Intercarpal joints between individual carpal bones.
2. Movement (flexion and extension) of carpus primarily
occurs at antebrachiocarpal and middle carpal joints (little
movement at carpometacarpal joint).
red pue uouan roxag Aq paodns si sndie '
Figure 4.32 Normal canine elbow at 3 months of age (lateral
fibrocartilage (no collateral ligaments span all three major
radiograph).
carpal joints).
137
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
BC
Figure 4.33 Normal canine carpus. U = distal ulna, R = distal radiu5.
RC = radlial carpal bone, UC = ulnar carpal bone, AC = accessory carpal
bone, 1-4 = numbered carpal bones, 5 = sesarmoid bone.
Figure 4.35 Normal canine carpus at 3 months of age (dorsopalrmar
MC = metacarpal bones (numbered 1 through 5). A. Lateral radiograph
radiograph).
(66hh Aaa pue suamo way paidep) ydenopen needosioa a
5. A sesamoid bone often is present at medial aspect of
carpometacarpal joint, usually bilateral.
Digits (metacarpus/metatarsus/phalanges)
(Figure 4.36)
l. Feet of most dogs and cats have five digits and
four metacarpal/metatarsal bones (first digit has only
phalanges).
2. Each metacarpal/metatarsal bone is formed from two
ossification centers, one in diaphysis and another in distal
epiphysis.
3. Digits are numbered 1 through 5. from medial to lateral
(axial to abaxial).
4. Three phalanges are present in digits 2 through 5.
5. Digit 1 (dewclaw) is variably developed, usually with
Figure 4.34 Normal canine carpus at 1 month of age (dorsopalmar
only two phalanges.
radliograph).
6. Each phalanx develops from a single ossifcation
center.
 7. Three sesamoid bones are present at each metacarpo-
4. Carpal bones are cuboidal or short bones. Named from
phalangeal and metatarsophalangeal joint: a single dorsal
medial to lateral (Figure 4.33):
sesamoid and paired palmar/plantar sesamoids. Palmar/
a. Radial carpal bone is largest and occupies medial posi-
plantar sesamoids are numbered 1 through 8. from medial
tion in proximal row.
to lateral.
b. Ulnar carpal bone is lateral to radial carpal bone (in
 8. Metacarpophalangeal/metatarsophalangeal and inter-
proximal row).
phalangeal articulations are "saddle"-type synovial joints.
c. Accessory carpal bone (pisiforme) is palmar to ulnar
9. Interphalangeal joints have thick dorsal capsules that
carpal bone.
unite with the extensor tendons.
d. Distal row of carpal bones includes first, second, third,
10. Flexor tendons fuse with palmar/plantar portions of the
and fourth carpal bones.
interphalangeal joint capsules.
138
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Short radial collateral ligarment
Palma.r radioca.rpal ligament
Palmarulnocarpal ligament
Radioulnar ligamer
Dorsal radiocarpal ligament
Short ulnar collateral ligamen
 Callateralligament of
Collaterai ligaments of proximal
 metacarpophalangeal joint-
nterphalangeal joint
Collateral ligament of proximal
Collaterat ligaments of distal
interphalangeal joint-
interphalangeal joint
Collateral ligarmcnt of dislal-
interphalangeal joint
Figure 4.36 Ligaments of left manus. A. Lateral aspect. B. Palrmar aspect. (From Evans 1993, 242.)
wn!
LS
IW
schium
S
IB
Acetabular-
bone
Pubis-
Figure 4.37 Juvenile pelvis. Left o5 coxae of a young dog (lateral
aspect). (From Evans 1993, 199.)
IsA
Pelvis (Figures 4.37 , 4.38, 4.39, and 4.40)
Figure 4.38 Normal canine pelvis (VD radiograph). LS = lumbosacral
1. Pelvis consists of two halves (hemipelves), each consist-
junction, S = sacrum, IsA = ischial arch. Paired structures include:
ing of an ilial, ischial, acetabular, and pubic bone.
IC = iliac crest, IW = ilial wing, IB = ilial body, A = acetabulum,
2. Each acetabulum is formed by union of these four bones
Is = ischium, O = obturator forarmen, P = pubis, Sl = sacroiliac joint,
(bones normally fuse at 4-6 months of age, Figure 4.37).
CF = coxofemoral joint, Gr = greater trochanter, Ls = lesser trochanter,
 3. Caudal margin of ischium often is irregular, especially in 
FN = fermoral neck (cervical region). (Adapted fromn Owens and Biery 1999.)
immature dogs.
4. Sacroiliac articulation is a combination of synovial and
cartilaginous joints (ilial and sacral wings are covered with
b. Joint is highly mobile, primarily providing flexion and
cartilage and united by a thin joint capsule).
extension of limb.
5. Coxofemoral joint (hip):
c. Femur is anchored to acetabular fossa by an intracap-
a. A ball and socket synovial articulation formed by
sular ligament (called round ligament, teres ligament, or
femoral head and acetabular fossa.
ligament of femoral head).
139
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 4.39 Normal canine pelvis at 1 month of age (VD radiograph).
Figure 4.41 Normal canine stifle. P = patella, F = fabellae,
 PS = popliteal sesamnoid, IF = infrapatellar fat pad, ICE = intercondylar
erninence, M = medial fermoral condyle, L = lateral femmoral condyle.
T = tibial plateau. A. Lateral radiograph. B. Craniocaudal radiograph
(Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
Quadric
Popliteus
Patellar
ligament
ateralcollaterallig
Medial collateral lig
Long digital
extensor
Figure 4.40 Normal canine pelvis at 3 months of age (VD radliograph)
d. Round ligament originates on a flattened area of
Figure 4.42 Normal canine stifle with ligaments (lateral radiograph).
femoral head (fovea capitus). (NOTE: Fovea capitus
should not be mistaken for pathology.)
6. Secondary and accessory centers of ossification include:
f. Greater trochanter (one or more rounded structures
a. Ischiatic tuberosities (appear as small rounded
proximal to trochanter).
structures).
1) Easiest to see on a ventrodorsal radiograph.
b. Caudal pubic symphysis (triangle-shaped bone at
2) Most often occur in large dogs.
caudal ischial arch).
3) Develop in gluteal muscle tendons.
c. Ilial wings (crescent shaped and located along cranio-
4) Usually clinically insignificant.
dorsal margin of each ilium).
1) Fusion times are highly variable and ossification
Stifle (Figures 4.41, 4.42, 4.43, 4.44, and 4.45)
center may remain separate for many years.
1. A condylar synovial articulation consisting of femoro-
d. Acetabulum (tiny triangle of bone at craniodorsal rim;
tibial and femoropatellar joints.
Figure 4.38).
2. Infrapatellar fat pad (or fat body) is a triangular-shaped
e. Lesser trochanter (rounded structure in iliopsoas
fat opacity structure located in cranial aspect of femoropatel-
muscle tendony.
140
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Gastrocnemius
Quadricep
Long digital
Collateralligaments
extensor
opliteus
Cranial
Cruciate
CaudalCruciate
Biceps femoris
Lateral collateral lig
Medial collateral lig
Quadriceps
Sartorit
oxInter
Grac
DistInter
MT
T-MT
Semitendinosis
Figure 4.43 Normal canine stifle with attachment sites for tendons
(lateral radiograph).
Figure 4.46 Normal canine tarsus. F = fibula, L = lateral malleolu5.
M = meclial malleolus, TCJ = tarsocrural joint, Calc = calcaneus,
TC = tuber calcis, T = talus, C = central tarsal bone, 1-4 = numbered 
tarsal bones, Prox Inter = proxirnal intertarsal joint, Dist Inter = distal 
intertarsal joint, T-MT = tarsometatarsal joint, MT = metatarsu5,
I-V = metatarsal bones. A. Lateral radiograph. B. Dorsoplantar
radiograph. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
distal femur and proximal tibia). Femorotibial joint effusion
can partially or completely obliterate the fat pad.
3. Four sesamoid bones are present in each stifle: patella,
lateral fabella, medial fabella, and popliteal.
4. Intercondylar eminence of tibia normally is centered on
or between femoral condyles on properly positioned lateral
and craniocaudal radiographs.
Tarsus (Figures 4.46, 4.47, 4.48, 4.49, and 4.50)
Figure 4.44 Normal canine stifle at 1 month of age (lateral radiograph).
1. A composite synovial articulation consisting of:
a. Tibiotarsal joint (other names: tarsocrural joint, talo-
crural joint, ankle).
b. Intertarsal joint (with proximal and distal portions).
c. Tarsometatarsal joint.
2. Most movement in tarsus occurs at tibiotarsal joint.
3. Talus (tibial tarsal bone) is medial and articulates with
  i     on  
medial malleoli.
4. Calcaneus (fibular tarsal bone) is largest and longest
tarsal bone and lateral to talus.
a. A large process extends proximally from calcaneus
(tuber calcis or calcanean tuber) and serves for attach-
ment of common calcanean tendon (Achilles tendon).
b. Common calcanean tendon consists of distal gastroc-
nemius tendon (calcanean tendon) and tendons from
semitendinosis, gracilis, and biceps femoris muscles.
5. Central tarsal bone is distal to talus and articulates with
all other tarsal bones.
Figure 4.45 Normal canine stifle at 3 months of age (lateral
6. Fourth tarsal bone is distal to calcaneus and spans both
radiograph).
proximal and distal intertarsal joints.
141
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
 Figure 4.48 Normal canine tarsus at 3 months of age (lateral
Figure 4.47 Normal canine tarsus at 1 month of age (lateral
radiograph)
radiograph)
short part
igament
long part
Distal extensor
retinaculum
MEDIAL
LATERA
Figure 4.49 Ligaments of left tarsus—lateral and medial views. (Fromm Evans 1993, 254.)
7. First digit (hallux) often is absent in dogs.
11. Plantar ligaments extend between calcaneus and proxi-
8. Plantar sesamoid bones may be present in tarsometatarsal
mal metatarsus.
fibrocartilage (usually lateral).
9. Medial collateral ligament spans medial malleolus and
first tarsal/metatarsal bones.
Vertebrae (spine)
10. Lateral collateral ligament spans lateral malleolus and
1. Each vertebra develops from primary and secondary
fifth metatarsal bone.
centers of ossification (Figures 4.5l and 4.52):
142
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
a. Vertebral bodies develop from one or two primary
ossification centers.
b. Vertebral arches, which form the spinal canal, develop
from primary ossification centers.
Fibule
c. Vertebral epiphyses and processes (dorsal, transverse.
and articular processes) develop from secondary centers.
retinaculum
Tibiofibular ligament
d. All ossification centers normally fuse during the first
year of life.
Lateral collateral ligament
2. Vertebral column is divided into five regions:
Sustentaculum tali
a. Cervical: 7 vertebrae (Cl-7).
retinaculum
b. Thoracic: 13 vertebrae (Tl-13).
c. Lumbar: 7 vertebrae (Ll-7).
d. Sacral: 3 vertebrae (S1-3).
e. Caudal (formerly coccygeal): varies in number from 6
Tarsal fibrocartilage
to 20 vertebrae (Cdl-20).
3. Cervical vertebrae:
a. Cl is the "Atlas" ("holds up the head"):
1) No dorsal spinous process.
DORSAL
VENTRAL
2) Transverse (or lateral) spinous processes are large.
Figure 4.50 Ligaments of left tarsus—dorsal and ventral views. (From
commonly called wings.
Evan5 1993, 252.)
B
Transverseprocess
A
Cranial
Dorsalspinousprocess
Cranial
articular process
articularprocess
Cranialendplate
epiphysis
Caudal articular
Dorsal spinous
process
process
Cranialendplate
Caudalendplate
epiphysis
Caudal endplate
epiphysis
epiphysis
Caudalarticular
Transverseprocess
process
Figure 4.51 Secondary vertebral ossification centers. A. Lateral radiograph. B. VD radiograph. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
A
Intervertebral
Accessory
Dorsal
foramen
Articular
process
process
facets
Articularfacets
Pedicle
tebralbody
Vertebral
Intervertebral
body
disc space
process
Figure 4.52 Normal vertebral anatomic landmark5. A. Lateral radliograph. B. VD radiograph. (Adapted from Owen5 and Biery 1999.)
143
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
3) Articulation with skull forms atlantoccipital joint,
e. Accessory vertebral processes begin at Tll and pro-
which allows up and down movements of head (the
gressively become larger moving caudally to L6. Processes
"yes" joint).
overlie intervertebral foramen and may be mistaken for
b. C2 is the "Axis" ("rotates the head"}:
herniated disk material on a lateral radiograph.
1) Dorsal spinous process is large (partially overlaps
5. Lumbar vertebrae:
C1).
a. Dorsal spinous processes are short and transverse pro-
2) Odontoid process or dens projects along ventral
cesses are large.
 spinal canal onto floor of Cl.
b. L3-4 are sites of diaphragm attachments: ventral
3) C2 articulates with Cl to form atlantoaxial joint.
margins of these vertebral bodies are slightly irregular
which allows side to side and rotational movements
and less distinct than other lumbar vertebrae (may be
of head (the "no" joint),
mistaken for periosteal response, such as occurs with
c. C3 body is shorter than bodies of other cervical
plant awn migration and osteomyelitis).
vertebrae.
c. L6 body is shorter than bodies of other lumbar
d. C6 transverse processes are large and project ventrally
vertebrae.
(sometimes called ventral lamina). (NOTE: Ventral lamina
 d. In cats, lumbar vertebral bodies are relatively longer
may be mistaken for esophageal foreign objects.)
than in dogs.
e. C2-3 and C7-Tl intervertebral spaces normally are
e. Lumbar spine tends to curve ventrally (lordosis) in
narrower than adjacent spaces.
cats and tends to be straight or curved dorsally (kyphosis)
f. Spinal canal normally widens from C4 to T2 to accom-
in dogs.
modate larger diameter of spinal cord (due to brachial
6. Sacral vertebrae:
plexus) and is called the cervical intumescence.
a. Sacrum consists of three fused vertebrae without
4. Thoracic vertebrae:
intervertebral spaces.
a. Large dorsal spinous processes.
b. One or more sacral vertebrae may not fuse with others
b. Each pair of ribs articulates with cranial aspect of same
as a normal anatomic variation.
numbered thoracic vertebra (i.e., first pair of ribs joins
7. Caudal vertebrae (formerly coccygeal vertebrae):
cranial part of Tl; Figure 4.53).
a. Variable in number due to breed characteristic or cos-
c. Tll is transitional segment of thoracolumbar spine
metic tail amputation.
(called the anticlinal vertebra) (Figure 4.54). Dorsal
b. Hemal arches (or "chevron bodies") are small, well-
spinous processes cranial to Tll are oriented caudally
defined V- or Y-shaped bony structures located ventral to
(slant backward) and those caudal to Tll are oriented
first few caudal vertebrae.
cranially (slant forward). Dorsal spinous process at Tll
8. Associated spinal structures:
is nearly perpendicular to the vertebral body. (NOTE:
1. Intervertebral foramen serves as exit point for spinal
Rarely, anticlinal site is located at Tll-12.)
nerves.
d. Tlo-ll Intervertebral space normally is narrower
than adjacent intervertebral spaces.
T1
T2
0
sassanoid snouids jesioa , eganan euee, aur s! lll ts't aniis
cranial to T11 are oriented caudally (slant backwardl) and those caudal to
T11 are oriented cranially (slant forward). Dorsal spinous process at T11 is5
nearly perpendicular to the vertebral body. T10-11 intervertebral disc
Figure 4.53 Each pair of ribs articulates with cranial aspect of
 space normally is narrower than adjacent intervertebral spaces. A. Lateral
samme-numbered thoracic vertebra.
radiograph. B. VD radiograph.
144
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Figure 4.56 Normal canine lumbar spine (lateral radliograph). Spinal 
canal widens at L3-5 due to lumbar intumescence
Figure 4.55 Cross-sectional image of intervertebral disc with nucleus
pulposus (N) and annulus (A).
Pia Mater
Subarachnoid
a. Normally shaped like a horse head or Scotty dog
Space!
Arachnoid
(with nose pointing cranially).
Membrane
b. Foramen size and opacity should be similar between
Dura Mater
adjacent vertebrae (appearance often is affected by
overlying structures such as ribs).
Epidural
Space
c. C2-3 and L7-S1 foramina normally are wider.
2. Dorsal articular processes form synovial joints between
Figure 4.57 Cross-section of spinal cord showing rmeninges (pia mater,
adjacent vertebrae and are subject to degenerative joint
arachnoid membrane, dura mater) and potential spaces (subarachnoid 
space and epidural space).
disease.
3. Intervertebral discs are located between vertebral
bodies at every intervertebral space except Cl-2 and in
c. In cats and small breed dogs. spinal cord is rela-
the sacrum.
a. Make up one-fourth of spinal column length.
medium and large dogs. (NOTE: Intervertebral disc
b. Act as shock absorbers along spine.
 protrusion tends to produce more severe clinical signs
c. Form cartilaginous joints which allow slight move-
in small dogs).
ment of vertebral bodies.
d. Spinal intumescences are enlarged parts of spinal
d. Annulus is tough outer layer of fibrocartilage that
cord where peripheral nerves originate.
attaches to vertebral body endplates and helps hold
1) Cervical intumescence (C5-7) is largest portion
vertebrae together (Figure 4.55). Annulus is thinner
of spinal cord.
 dorsally, making dorsal disc protrusion easier than in
2) Lumbar intumescence (L3-5) is shown in Figure
other directions.
4.56.
e. Nucleus pulposus is gelatinous material in inner
3) Vertebral canal is widened at these sites to
portion of each disc.
accommodate larger size of spinal cord.
4. Dorsal longitudinal ligament runs between vertebral
e. Central canal is a narrow space along length of
bodies along floor of spinal canal from dens of C2 to
spinal cord that is filled with cerebrospinal fluid and
caudal vertebrae. It is thicker in cervical region and
communicates with ventricular system of brain.
thinner in thoracolumbar area.
f. Spinal cord is surrounded by membranes, fluid.
5. Ventral longitudinal ligament runs along ventral
and fat (Figure 4.57):
aspect of spine, attaching to each vertebral body from C2
1) Pia mater is thin layer that covers spinal cord
to Sl. It is thickest in caudal thoracic and lumbar regions.
and is impermeable to fluid.
6. Intercapital ligaments pass between each pair of rib
2) Subarachnoid space surrounds pia mater and
heads, ventral to dorsal longitudinal ligament and dorsal
contains cerebrospinal fluid.
to each intervertebral disc (from T2 to Tl0 in dogs and
3) Dura mater (pachymeninges) is tough outer
T2 to T9 in cats). Ligaments create resistance to dorsal
layer that encloses cerebrospinal fluid.
intervertebral disc protrusion.
4) Arachnoid mater connects dura mater to pia
7. Spinal cord begins at foramen magnum and ends near
mater.
L6.
5) Subdural space is below dura mater (may
a. In large dogs, spinal cord may end cranial to L6
enlarge following trauma) .
(sometimes at L4).
6) Epidural space (extradural space) surrounds
b. In cats and small dogs. cord may end caudal to L6
dura mater and contains spinal nerve roots, lym-
(sometimes at Sl).
phatics, blood vessels, and fatty tissue.
145
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Sphenoid,
Frontal,
,Parietal
Lacrima
-Occipital
Zygomatic
(cut)
Palatine
iPterygoid
C
Lecrimal cana
Presphenoid
Frontalprocess
Pterygoid
Parietal
Zygomaticproc
Temporalline
Sagittal cres
Nuchalcr
Ext.
Occipital
Occipita
Figure 4.58 Bones of the skull. A. lateral aspect (zygomatic arch and mandible removed). B. dorsal aspect. C. ventral aspect. (From Evans 1993, 130.)
4) Cranium is dome shaped.
Skull
5) Frontal sinuses are small or absent.
6) Occipital protuberance is small.
1. Considerable variation exists in normal appearance of
7) Soft palate often is thickened.
skull (Figure 4.58) among dog and cat breeds.
8) Excessive submandibular tissues displace hyoid
2. In dogs, there are three basic skull conformations:
apparatus caudally.
a. Doliocephalic:
3. Cat skulls are less variable than dogs (Figures 4.59, 4.60.
1) Nasal cavity is longer than cranium.
4.6l, and 4.62);: distinctive features include:
2) Occipital crest is prominent.
a. Relatively large cranium.
3) Examples: Collie, Irish Setter.
b. Prominent osseous tentorium.
 b. Mesaticephalic:
C. Large tympanic bullae, each divided into two portions 
1) Nasal cavity is approximately equal in length to
by an inner bony shell.
cranium.
 4. Tympanic bullae are air-filled cavities of the middle ear
2) Examples:
German
Shepherd
Dog.
Labrador
and form ventral parts of temporal bones. Bullae communi-
Retriever.
cate with nasopharynx via the auditory tube.
c. Brachycephalic:
5. Petrous temporal bone is densest bone in body and
1) Nasal cavity is considerably shorter than cranium
most opaque. It is located medial and dorsal to tympanic
(e.g.. Bulldog).
bulla.
2) Maxilla is short with a relatively long mandible.
6. Occipital crest (occipital protuberance, sagittal crest) is
3) Teeth often are crowded and displaced.
most dorsocaudal portion of skull. It may be quite promi-
146
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Figure 4.59 Normal canine skull (lateral radiograph). (1) nasal cavity.
(2) ethmoid turbinates, (3) frontal sinus, (4) cranial cavity and calvarium,
(5) tympanic bulla, (6) temporomandibular joint, (7) zygomatic arch.
Figure 4.61 Normal feline skull (lateral radiograph). (1) nasal cavity.
(8) coronoid process of mandible, (9) mandible, (10) nuchal crest.
(2) ethmoid turbinates, (3) frontal sinus, (4) cranial cavity, (5) tentorium 
N = nasopharynx, 0 = oropharynx. (Adapted from Owens and Biery
cerebelli, (6) petrous temporal bone and tympanic bulla, (7) coronoid
1999.)
process of mandlible, (8) horizontal ramus of mandible. (Adapted from 
(6661 Aalg pue suamo
Figure 4.60 Normal canine skull(dorsoventral radiograph). (1) external
nares, (2) nasal cavity. (3) frontal sinus, (4) mandible. (5) zygomatic
process, (6) temporomandibular joint, (7) petrous temporal bone and
Figure 4.62 Normal feline skull (dorsoventral radiograph). (1) external
tymnpanic bulla, (8) external audlitory canal, (9) occipital condyle.
nares, (2) maxilla, (3) nasal cavity, (4) frontal sinus, (5) temmporomandibular
(Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
joint, (6) petrous termporal bone and tymmpanic bulla, (7) external auditory
canal, (8) zygomatic process. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
   a   n  r
Cranial vault
 phalic animals.
1. Cranial vault (cranial cavity, calvarium) is formed by 14
7. Foramen magnum is opening near base of skull that
bones; 4 paired and 6 unpaired (frontal, parietal, occipital,
allows passage of spinal cord. It is easiest to see on a rostro-
temporal, sphenoid, basioccipital, and cribiform plate of
caudal radiograph.
ethmoid bone; Figure 4.58).
147
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
2. Brain and organs of hearing/equilibrium are contained in
4. Nasal cavity is filled with turbinates (or conchae) which
resemble fine, somewhat parallel, thin mineral opacity lines.
bone).
Maxillary turbinates are cranial and ethmoid turbinates are
3. Frontal, parietal, occipital, temporal, sphenoid, and basi-
caudal.
occipital bones and cribiform plate of ethmoid bone are
5. Four primary air passages (each called a meatus) exist in
joined together by sutures.
nasal cavity:
4. In some breeds, bones of cranial vault are relatively thick-
a. Dorsal meatus: between nasal bone and dorsal
ened (e.g., Pit Bull Terrier).
turbinates.
5. Calvarium more accurately refers to upper portion (roof
b. Middle
meatus:
between
dorsal
and ventral
or cap) of cranial vault, formed by frontal, parietal, and part 
turbinates.
of occipital bones.
c. Ventral meatus: dorsal to hard palate.
d. Common nasal meatus: on either side of nasal septum.
Temporomandibular joint (TMJ)
6. Four paranasal sinuses are adjacent to nasal cavity:
1. A synovial articulation between condylar process of man
a. Frontal sinuses are dorsal to orbits (eyes) and com-
dible and mandibular fossa of temporal bone (Figures 4.59.
municate with nasal cavity.
4.60, and 4.62).
b. Maxillary sinuses are ventral to orbits.
2. Joint is bounded caudally by retroarticular process of
1) Maxillary sinuses are actually recesses rather than
temporal bone and rostrodorsally by articular eminence.
true sinuses.
3. Cats have a tighter TMJ than dogs due to their large
7. Shape of nasal cavity and frontal sinuses vary between
retroarticular process.
breeds and species:
4. Mandibular symphysis is a cartilage joint that permits
a. Frontal sinuses are relatively larger and more promi-
mandibular rami to move independently and allows TMJ to
nent in cats and large-breed dogs (especially Saint
luxate without fracturing.
Bernard, than in small-dog breeds.
b. Frontal sinuses frequently are absent in brachyce-
Nasal cavity and frontal sinuses
phalic breeds
1. Nasal cavity extends from external nares to cribiform
c. Doliocephalic breeds have long nasal cavities (e.g..
plate (Figures 4.63 and 4.64).
Collie).
2. Cribiform plate separates nasal cavity from brain.
d. Brachycephalic breeds have short nasal cavities (e.g..
3. Nasal septum divides nasal cavity into right and left com-
Boston Terrier).
partments (symmetrical).
e. Vomer bone may be slightly curved in brachycephalic
a. Rostral portion of nasal septum is cartilaginous.
dogs and in cats.
b. Caudal and ventral portion is osseous, formed by
vomer bone, which is located along floor of nasal cavity.
Teeth
1. All teeth are similar in structure but differ in size and
shape (Figure 4.65).
2. Crown is exposed part of tooth (above gumline).
Figure 4.63 Normal canine nasal cavity (open-mouth VD radiograph).
(1) palatine fissure, (2) maxillary turbinates, (3) ethmoid turbinates, (4)
Figure 4.64 Normal feline nasal cavity (open-mouth VD radiograph).
vommer bone, (5) maxillary sinus, (6) frontal sinus. (Adapted from Owens 
(1) palatine fissure, (2) nasal turbinates, (3) ethrmoid turbinates, (4) vomer
and Biery 1999.)
bone, (5) maxillary sinus. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
148
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Box 4.1 Dental formula for dog.
C
ICP
N
313
Deciduous: 2x
=28
PS
313
R
LD
(Some authors refer to the last upper and lower premolar teeth
as the molars.)
AF
ICPM
Permanent: 2 X
314
2
=42
3143
Figure 4.65 Normal tooth. C = crown (exposed part of tooth),.
N = neck, R = root, E = enamel, P = pulp cavity, D = dentin,
 PS = periodontal space (radiolucent), LD = lammina dura (thin radliopaque
line adjacent to periodontal space), AF = apical forarmen, A = alveolar 
Box 4.2 Dental formula for cat.
bone. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
ICP
3. Root is part of tooth located below gumline (number of
313
Deciduous: 2x
roots varies from one to three).
=26
312
4. Cervical or neck region is area between crown and root
portions of tooth.
ICPM
5. Enamel is thin, hard, calcifed tissue covering crown of
313
Permanent: 2×
1
=30
tooth. It is hardest substance in body and most opaque part
3121
of tooth.
6. Dentin is calcified bonelike material that supports the
enamel (slightly less opaque than enamel) and composes
Right
Left
most of the substance of a tooth.
Maxillary
Incisors
Incisors
Maxillary
7. Pulp cavity is center of tooth and contains nerves, blood
101201
102
vessels, and connective tissue (less opaque than dentin).
202
103
203
8. Cementum covers root(s) of tooth and serves as attach-
ment for periodontal ligaments, which anchor tooth to
Canine
Canine
underlying bone.
9. Alveolar bone is cancellous bone found in mandible and
104
204
maxilla.
105
205
a. Interradicular bone lies between adjacent teeth
106
206
b. Furcation bone lies between tooth roots (furcation is
Premolars
107
207
Premolars
point at which roots branch from crown).
108
208
c. Alveolar crest is the surface bone between teeth.
 10. Periodontal space surrounds tooth roots and appears
109
209
thin, less opaque than bone.
Molars
Molars
110
210
1l. Lamina dura is dense layer of alveolar bone located
 Figure 4.66 Modified Triadan numbering 5ystem for maxillary teeth in
 adjacent to periodontal space (appears as a thin, well-defined 
sclerotic line).
dogs. The first dligit indicates the quadrant (1 is upper right, 2 is upper
left). The second and third digits denote the tooth position in that
12. Carnassial teeth are relatively large teeth that are
quadrant. Nummbering always begins on midline. (Special thanks to
 adapted for shearing and are represented by maxillary fourth
 Dr. David A. Crossey, on whose original artwork this irmage is based.)
 premolars and mandibular first molars.
13. Dental formulas:
a. Normal number of teeth in immature and adult dogs
1) Each tooth is identified with a three-digit number,
and cats are listed in Boxes 4.l and 4.2.
beginning on midline on maxilla and moving to the
 b. Modifed Triadan numbering system (depicted in
right:
Figures 4.66, 4.67, 4.68, and 4.69) is designed to be a
 a) First digit indicates quadrant:
consistent method of identifying teeth across all animal
1) 1 is right maxillary.
species.
2) 2 is left maxillary.
149
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
411
311
410
310
Molars
Molar
409
309
Molar
Molars
408
308
409
309
Premolars
Premolars
407
307
408
308
Premolars
407
307
>Premolars
406
306
Canine
404
304
Canine
405
305
404
304
303
302
401301
Right
Incisors
Left
Canine
Canine
Incisors
Mandibular
Mandibular
403
303
402
302
Figure 4.69 Modified Triadan numbering system for mandibular teeth
401301
Right
in cats. The first dligit indicates the quadrant (3 is lower left, 4 is lower 
Incisors
Incisors
Left
Mandibular
Mandibular
right). The second and third digits denote the tooth position in that
quadrant. Numbering always begins on midline. (Special thanks to
Figure 4.67 Modified Triadan numbering system for mandibular teeth 
 Dr. David A. Crossley, on whose original artwork this irmage is based.)
in dogs. The first dligit indicates the quadrant (3 is lower left, 4 is lower 
1e4l ul uoisod yiool ayl arouap slbip pu4l pue puonas aul (1yb!!
quadrant. Numbering always begins on midline. (Special thanks to
A
Dr. David A. Crossley, on whose original artwork this image is based.)
a
C
Right
Incisors
Left
Maxillary
Incisors
Maxillary
101201
102
202
Canine
103
203
Canine
C
104
204
106
206
Premolars
107
207
Premolars
108
：
208
Molar
109
602
Molar
B
Figure 4.68 Modified Triadan numbering system for maxillary teeth in
cats. The first dligit indicates the quadrant (1 is upper right, 2 is upper
left). The second and third digits denote the tooth position in that
quadrant. Numbering always begins on midline. (Special thanks to
Dr. David A. Crossley, on whose original artwork this irmage is based.)
Figure 4.70 Effect of age on appearance of teeth in dogs. A. Pulp
3) 3 is left mandibular.
 cavity decreases in size and lamnina dura becomes less distinct over time
4) 4 is right mandibular.
(a) 4 months old, (b) 1 year old, (c) 3 years old, and (d) 10 years old.
b) Second and third digits denote tooth position.
B. Deciduous teeth. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
Tooth development (Figure 4.70)
a. Teeth in female dogs often erupt earlier than in males.
1. Deciduous (primary) teeth usually erupt between 3 and
b. Large-breed dogs have earlier eruption times than
6 weeks of age in dogs and cats.
small breeds.
2. Permanent teeth generally begin to erupt by 3 months
c. Deciduous teeth normally are shed as permanent
of age.
teeth erupt.
150
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
3. Permanent teeth:
c. Mandibular glands.
a. Develop as a bud from deciduous tooth precursors.
d. Sublingual glands.
b. Usually are erupted by 7 months of age (and decidu-
3. Multiple smaller salivary glands also are present (dorsal
ous teeth are lost).
and ventral buccal glands).
C. Initially have large pulp cavities with prominent root
4. Sialography (see chapter 3 for method) aids in visualizing 
canals and an open apical foramen.
salivary ducts and glands.
d. Over the next several months, the tooth root length-
ens and its apex closes.
Pharynx and larynx (Figure 4.72)
e. With increasing age. the pulp cavity and root canal
1. Pharynx extends from level of orbit (eye) to level of C1-2
gradually narrow.
and is associated with both respiratory and digestive systems.
f. In older animals the pulp cavity and root canal are
2. Nasopharynx is space caudal to hard palate and dorsal to
nearly nonexistent.
soft palate.
4. Normal aging changes include:
3. Oropharynx is ventral to soft palate, berween tongue.
a. Lamina dura becomes less distinct.
tonsils, and larynx.
b. Alveolar bone becomes more sclerotic and densely
4. Larynx is located at level of Cl-2:
trabeculated.
a. Extension of head and neck pulls larynx cranially and
closer to spine.
Salivary glands (Figure 4.71)
b. Flexion of head and neck pushes larynx caudally and
1. Normal salivary glands are not visible on survey
ventral to spine.
radiographs.
5. Structures visible on survey radiographs:
2. Four pairs of salivary glands are present in dogs and cats:
a. Dogs: epiglottis, lateral ventricles, arytenoid cartilage.
a. Parotid glands.
b. Zygomatic glands.
soft tissue opacity, must be mineralized to be visible).
Location of palatine tonsil
Parotid duct,
Temporal m.
Parotid gland
Zygomatic arch
,Pterygoideus med. m.
,Palatine glands
Orbitaligament
Lacrimal gland
Zygomaticgland
Orifice ofmajorzygomaticduct
Orificeofparotidduct
'Orificeof mandibular duct
Orifice of sublingual duct
Sternothyroideusm
Sublingual gland(polystomatic part）
Cricothyroideus ml.
'Mylohyoideus m.
Sternohyoideus m.
'Digastricus m.
Mandibular gland
'Sublingual gland (monostomatic part)
Thyrahyoideus m.
'Stylohyoideus m.
Figure 4.71 Normal canine salivary glands and ducts. (From Evans 1993, 386.)
151
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
e. All bones are paired except basihyoid, which is trans-
verse in relation to other bones.
f. Tympanohyoid is cartilaginous and articulates with
tympanic bullae (not visible on survey radiographs).
 9. Retropharyngeal space (Figure 4.232) is located between
pharynx and spine and normally is uniform soft tissue
C2
opacity.
a. Dorsoventral dimension of retropharyngeal space
 should not exceed length of C3 on a properly positioned
lateral radiograph.
10. Brachycephalic and obese dogs commonly have excess
CC
tissue in cervical and pharyngeal regions, which may
obscure pharynx and displace larynx further caudally and
ventrally.
DISEASES AND DISORDERS
Figure 4.72 Normal canine pharynx and larynx. N = nasopharynx.
O = oropharynx, Ph = pharynx, TB = tympanic bullae, SP = soft palate,
Bone production
5 = styelohyoid bone, e = epihyoid bone, C = ceratohyoid bone.
h = basihyoid bone, t = thyrohyoid bone, LV = lateral ventricle,
1. Bone development is described in Normal Radiographic
TC = thyroid cartilage, CC = cricoid cartilage, E = epiglottis, T = trachea.
Anatomy section of this chapter.
C2 = second cenvical vertebra, esoph = gas-filled esophagu5.
2. Periosteal response is formation of new bone by osteo-
 blasts along inner layer of periosteum.
3. Endosteal response is similar to periosteal response, but
b. Cats: epiglottis is only laryngeal structure consistently
occurs along inner lining of medullary canal (more difficult
visible.
to see on radiographs due to overlying cortical bone).
c. Vocal folds are not visible in dogs or cats.
4. Osteosclerosis refers to increased mineral deposits within
6. Epiglottis is located a few millimeters caudal to basihyoid
bony matrix.
bone.
5. Soft tissue mineralization:
a. Cranial tip of epiglottis may be positioned dorsal.
a. Dystrophic mineralization occurs in damaged tissue.
ventral, or end-on to soft palate or located on floor of
b. Metastatic mineralization occurs in normal tissue due
oropharynx (depending on stage of respiration and
to metabolic disease.
swallowing)
c. Neoplastic mineralization occurs in bone-producing
b. Epiglottis often is partially mineralized in older dogs.
tumors.
7. Laryngeal cartilages begin to mineralize at 2 to 3 years of
d. Osseous metaplasia.
e. Cartilage ossification occurs in degenerative joint
a. Mineralization in cats is rare.
disease.
b. Cricoid cartilage tends to be most visible.
c. Absence of mineralization may prevent identification
Periosteal response
of laryngeal structures.
1. Whenever periosteum is separated from cortex (and
d. Mineralization due to aging is well-defined, confined
 maintains blood supply). a healing response will ensue to
to borders of cartilage, and may be focal or diffuse.
fill the resulting space with bone (Table 4.3).
e. Pathologic mineralization tends to be excessive and
heterogeneous (e.g., neoplasia).
 Periosteal response is an attempt to heal bone, not a reaction
8. Hyoid bones:
to disease.
a. Provide suspensory apparatus for tongue and larynx
b. Readily identified on most laryngeal radiographs.
C. Angle of bones is variable, depending on position of
head and neck.
 Shape of new bone does not equate to definition of new
d. Names of visible hyoid bones (cranial to caudal)
bone.
are stylohyoid, epihyoid, ceratohyoid, basihyoid, and
● Irregular does not necessarily mean ill-defined.
thyrohyoid (memory tip: "Students enjoy canning bad
● Smooth does not necessarily mean well-defined.
teachers").
152
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Table 4.3 Stages of periosteal respon5e
Stage
Appearance
Description
Bone injury or disease causes separation of periosteum from cortex
 Separation may result from subperiosteal accumulation of blood, edema, purulent material.
or tumor cells.
 Blood vessels and Sharpey's fibers extend from cortex perpendicular to periosteum
IV
Mineral deposits are laid down along these fibers and blood vessels, perpendicular to
periosteum.
paily s! aneds leaisoadgns jiun anuuon slisodap jeyauin 
VI
When disease process stops. mineral deposits can mature into more organized and
homogeneous bone.
Vll
 New bone continues to rermodel and develop more well-cdefined margins.
Vl
Remodeling gradually creates trabeculation and new bone begins to resemmble parent bone
IX
Normal stresses on bone gradually return it to normal shape.
2. Margination of periosteal response:
2) Margins are well-defined with inactive disease and
a. Sharpness (definition) of new bone margins reflects
ill-defined with active disease (Figure 4.74).
current activity of disease process (Figure 4.73).
3) Cortex remains intact.
b. Well-defined margins suggest inactive disease (i.e..
4) Shape of new bone is even and smooth.
damage to bone has stopped).
b. Multilayered new bone production (lamellar, lami-
c. Ill-defined margins occur with active diseases (i.e.,
 nated, or "onion skin" appearance):
periosteum continues to be pushed away from cortex and
1) Occurs with intermittently growing diseases (new
a well-defined margin cannot be established).
bone is laid down in layers between growth episodes
3. Pattern of periosteal response (Table 1.2):
of disease).
a. Smooth new bone production:
2) Outer margin is well-defined if disease is inactive
1) Occurs with slow growing. nonaggressive lesions
at time of radiography (Figure 4.75) and ill-defined if
(periosteum is only mildly separated from cortex).
disease is active.
153
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
'yoows 'a xanon yrm spuala pue pauyap-liam ing adeus ui seinhaui si auog mau asuodsau leaisouad aoeui ' asuodsan jeatsouad ee't annoi
pauapill sl uiheu ing 'adeus us aaa si auog mau asuodsan peatsoad ane
Figure 4.74 Periosteal response with a srnooth, even shape and
well-defined rmargin. New bone production appears multilayered.
suggestive of intermittently growing dlisease
Figure 4.75 Irregular-shaped periosteal response with well-clefined
margin, no cortical destruction, and absence of soft tissue swelling 
(inactive, nonaggressive disease process). Between periosteal new bone
 and cortex is a zone of decreased opacity due to subperiosteal
3) Cortex usually is intact (unless disease process
hemorrhage (bone bruise).
becomes aggressive).
4) Shape of new bone tends to be even and smooth.
c. Uneven or irregular-shaped new bone production:
disease processes.
2) If periosteal separation occurs along a broad
expanse of cortex, mineralization tends to be perpen-
dicular to cortex.
a) In early stages, new bone resembles hairs on end
or bristles of a brush (described as "brush border")
b) Later, when disease is less active or is inactive.
new bone matures into regular, short projections
resembling tiny columns (described as columnar or
Figure 4.76 Irregular-shaped periosteal response with ill-cefined
palisade).
 margins, cortical destruction, and soft tissue swelling (active and
idsi aq uo iq ii s as xai (o
aggressive disease process)
3) Diseases that originate at a single site (e.g.. tumor)
tend to grow and expand in all directions and push
periosteum away in all directions (Figure 4.76).
d. Amorphous ("without form"} new bone production:
a) Periosteum forms perpendicular new bone that
1) Occurs with rapidly growing. very aggressive
 may appear to radiate from center of lesion as numer-
disease processes.
ous bony spicules ("sunburst" in appearance).
2) Periosteum is ruptured and discontinuous, result-
b) Remember, mineralization originates from inner
ing in unorganized new bone, which forms in many
layer of periosteum and grows toward cortex in an
directions (perpendicular to deranged periosteum).
attempt to fill subperiosteal space.
Appears as multiple foci of mineral opacity, usually
c) The further the periosteum is separated from the
further away from cortex than most periosteal
cortex, the more aggressive the disease process.
responses.
d) Cortical destruction is common with these types
3) Margins of new bone are ill-defined due to active
of disease processes.
disease process.
4) The more ill-defined the margins, the more active
4) Cortical destruction is common and usually
the disease process.
aggressive.
154
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Figure 4.77 Codrman's triangle (arrow), a well-defined wedge-shaped
area of new bone at periphery of an active, aggressive lesion. Underlying
cortex is lytic but visible. A. Wide view. B. Close-up view.
e. Codman's triangle :
1) Occurs at periphery of rapidly growing disease pro-
Figure 4.78 Osteopetrosis. A. Normal bone. B. Thickened, dense bone
cesses (Figure 4.77).
due to abnormal osteoclastic activity in growing animal
2) Results from lifting of periosteal new bone (perios-
teal new bone results from lifting of periosteum).
3) Appears as a small, solid, wedge-shaped area of
mineralization at periphery of lesion, usually on
Differential diagnosis for bone spurs:
diaphyseal side.
1. Normal prominence of bone in chondrodystrophic dogs
4) Margins are well-defined.
(usually bilateral).
5) Cortex underlying Codman's triangle is intact.
 2. Normal bony protrusion at a specific site of attachment
6) NOTE: Codman's triangle is well-defined and may
for a tendon or ligament.
appear inactive, but this is not the true character of
the disease.
Osteopetrosis
Clinical correlations:
 1. Other names: generalized congenital osteosclerosis, ivory
Osteophytes and enthesophytes
bones, marble bones, challk bones, osteosclerosis fragilis gen-
Clinical correlations:
eralisata, Albers-Schonberg disease (in humans).
1. Other names: bone spurs.
2. Congenital metabolic bone disease in which endochon-
2. Osteophytes:
dral ossification continues, but bone absorption is decreased
a. Develop at peripheral margins of articular cartilage in
(due to abnormal osteoclastic activity).
nonweight bearing areas.
b. Caused by damage to cartilage which leads to miner-
3. Rare in dogs and cats; may be hereditary in Basenjis
alization of cartilage and development of a periarticular
(pyruvate kinase deficiency).
4. Contributing factors may include excess vitamin D or
bony spur.
dietary calcium, myelofibrosis.
C. A specific sign of degenerative joint disease.
5. Bones become thick, dense, and brittle (Figure 4.78):
3. Enthesophytes:
pathologic fractures are common.
a. Occur at attachment sites of tendons, ligaments, joint
6. Medullary canal size can be
significantly decreased,
capsules, or fascia.
b. Caused by chronic abnormal tension or trauma to the
resulting in anemia. (NOTE: Osteoclasts are necessary for
formation of bone marrow.)
attachment, leading to mineralization of the fibrous
7. Clinical signs include pain and lameness (pathologic frac-
tissue and formation of a bony spur.
tures), anemia, and frequent infections.
sn  p si pue so u u a ss ao 
from trauma, degenerative joint disease, or normal aging
Radiographic findings with osteopetrosis:
process.
1. Diffuse increase in bone opacity (bones may appear
5. Clinical signs vary from none to pain and lameness.
challky: Figure 4.79).
2. Bone length and shape are relatively normal.
Radiographic findings with bone spurs:
3. Cortices are thickened along all axial and appendicular
1. Well-defined, sharp, bony projections that develop near
bones.
a joint (see chapter l, Figure l.5).
4. Marrow cavities frequently are narrowed.
2. Osteophytes form at edges of articular cartilage.
 5. Corticomedullary contrast may appear decreased due to
3. Enthesophytes occur at attachment sites of ligaments.
thickened, overlying cortices.
tendons, or joint capsules (located farther from joint than
6. Trabeculae in cancellous bone may appear coarse or may
osteophytes) and develop in direction of natural pull.
be obscured by increased mineral.
4. Bone spurs are slow to change but will grow over time.
7. Pathologic fractures are common.
155
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 4.79 Osteopetrosis in a cat. A. Lateral thoracic radliograph; vertebrae, sternebrae, and ribs are increased in opacity ("chalky bones").
B. Caudocranial radiograph of right thoracic limb; humeral cortices are thickened and increased in opacity.
Differential diagnoses for osteopetrosis:
1. Feline leukemia virus (can produce osteosclerosis with a
nonregenerative anemia).
2. Neoplasia (generalized osteosclerosis can be part of a
 para-neoplastic syndrome).
Bone loss
Osteopenia
Clinical correlations:
1. Decrease in amount of bone may result from osteoporosis
Figure 4.80 Osteopenia. A. Normal bone. B. Decreased bone mass and
or osteomalacia.
thin cortices due to an immbalance between bone formation and bone
2. Osteoporosis is bone loss due to an imbalance between
resorption.
bone formation and bone resorption.
a. Other names: bone atrophy, porous bone disease.
b. Ratio of mineral to osteoid remains constant (bone is
"good quality, bad quantity").
3. Osteomalacia is bone loss due to faulty mineralization of
C. Generalized osteoporosis affects the entire skeleton
osteoid.
-diaday se yons asas oiansas e aq pasni st pue
a. Other names: rickets (in young dogs).
thyroidism or calcium deficiency (see Differential Diag-
b. Ratio of mineral to osteoid is decreased (bone is "bad
noses section, this chapter).
quality, good quantity").
d. Regional osteoporosis may affect a single limb and
c. Caused by vitamin D deficiency or renal tubular
most often results from disuse atrophy (an immobile limb
disease (i.e., Fanconi syndrome).
has decreased muscle activity, which diminishes blood
d. Bone is soft, but orthopedic clinical signs often are
flow and leads to loss of bone).
absent in dogs and cats.
e. Osteoporotic bones are thin, weak, and prone to
4. Clinical signs include weakness, lethargy. pain, and
pathologic fractures (Figure 4.80).
lameness.
156
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Radiographic findings with osteopenia:
c. Osteosclerosis may surround the lesion.
1. Affected bones are decreased in opacity.
d. Short zone of transition between normal and diseased
2. Contrast between bone and soft tissue is decreased.
bone.
3. Cortices become thin and faint (corticomedullary con-
e. Cortex may be thin or expanded outward but rarely
trast is decreased).
 disrupted.
4. May see a double cortical line due to intracortical resorp-
f. Occurs with benign, nonaggressive disease (e.g.. bone
tion of bone.
cyst, pressure remodeling).
5. Bony trabeculae in cancellous bone appear larger and
5. Moth-eaten pattern:
more porous due to resorption of fine bony structures
a. Multiple, focal areas of bone loss (3-l0mm in size).
(described as a coarse trabecular pattern).
b. Margins are less-defined.
6. Growth deformities and pathologic fractures may be
c. Zone of transition between normal and diseased bone
present (especially with nutritional secondary hyperpara-
 is long and poorly-defined.
thyroidism)
d. Geographic osteolysis may be present near center of
7. Systemic disease typically presents with changes in ver-
lesion.
tebrae first, followed by mandible and long bones.
e. Cortex often is irregular and thin, and sometimes
8. Regional osteoporosis (disuse atrophy in a limb) tends to
disrupted.
 more severely affect distal portion of limb (e.g., epiphyses.
f. Occurs with more aggressive disease (e.g., neoplasia,
cuboidal bones).
osteomyelitis).
9. Osteoporosis and osteomalacia appear very similar on
6. Permeative pattern:
radiographs, and histopathology usually is necessary to dis-
a. Numerous tiny areas of bone loss (l-2 mm in size).
tinguish the two. An exception is in immature animals with
b. Margins are ill-defined.
rickets, in which physeal widening and metaphyseal fraying
c. Zone of transition is diffuse with no clear demarcation
are characteristic of osteomalacia.
between normal and diseased bone.
d. Cortex becomes thin and indistinct, usually disrupted.
Differential diagnosis for osteopenia:
e. Occurs with very aggressive disease (e.g., malignant
 1. Osteogenesis imperfecta.
neoplasia, severe osteomyelitis).
2. Conditions that may mimic osteopenia:
7. Different patterns of osteolysis may be present concur-
a. Overexposed radiograph.
rently (mixed pattern).
b. Decrease in overlying tissues.
8. One pattern may change to another over time (serial
radiographs aid in evaluation).
Osteolysis
9. See discussion of osteolysis in chapter l, under Evalua-
Clinical correlations:
tion of Bone.
 1. Abnormal localized area of active bone resorption caused
by disease
2. Possible etiologies are in Differential Diagnoses section.
Benign conditions
 3. Clinical signs vary with the underlying etiology. but these
 often include pain and lameness.
1. Include slowly changing bone lesions, such as cysts,
benign tumors, and exostoses.
Radiographic findings with osteolysis:
2. Less common than malignant tumors.
1. Localized area of decreased bone opacity. (NOTE: Active
3. Can undergo malignant transformation.
bone destruction typically requires at least 5 to 7 days to
 4. Affected animals often are asymptomatic but may have
become visible on radiographs.)
a deformity at lesion site.
2. Lesions may be solitary or multifocal, monostotic or
5. Clinical signs develop when lesion interferes with limb or
polyostotic.
joint movement or a secondary complication occurs (e.g..
3. Aggressiveness of disease process is assessed by:
pathologic fracture, compression of spinal cord).
a. Sharpness of lesion margins (less distinct margin =more
aggressive disease process).
Bone cyst
b. Zone of transition between normal and diseased bone
Clinical correlations:
(longer and less distinct zone = more aggressive disease).
1. A cavity within bone, often filled with fluid.
c. Rate of change on subsequent radiographs (more
2. Simple bone cyst (unicameral, solitary):
rapid change = more aggressive disease).
a. Cyst is filled with straw-colored fluid.
4. Geographic pattern:
b. Usually develops following trauma and formation of a
a. Single, large area of bone loss (over l0mm in size).
hematoma.
b. Margin is well-defined.
c. May be idiopathic.
157
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
3. Aneurysmal bone cyst:
9. Zone of transition between normal and abnormal bone
a. Cyst contains fibrin and blood.
is short and well-defined.
b. Results from arteriovenous shunting and expansile
10. Pathologic fracture may occur, resulting in a disrupted
 osseous remodeling.
cortex and periosteal response.
4. Odontogenic bone cyst:
11. In spine, cysts are more common in dorsal spinous
a. Associated with devitalized, malformed, impacted, or
process than in vertebral body.
unerrupted teeth.
5. Bone cysts are rare in dogs and cats.
Differential diagnosis for a bone cyst:
6. Most often reported in young (less than 18 months of
1. Giant cell tumor (usually older animals).
age) large-breed dogs. but can occur in older animals.
2. Fibrous histiocytoma.
7. Males are more commonly affected than females.
3. Fibrous dysplasia.
8. Clinical signs often are absent, but swelling. pain, and/or
4. Osteoblastoma.
lameness may be present.
5. Osteosarcoma.
9. Pathologic fractures can occur but are uncommon.
6. Osteoma.
10. Vertebral bone cysts may cause neurologic signs.
Enchondroma
Radiographic findings with a bone cyst (Figure 4.81):
Clinical correlations:
1. Well-defined, expansile area of osteolysis in affected
1. Other names: osseous enchondromatosis, dyschondro-
bone.
plasia, Ollier's disease.
2. Many cysts are septated.
2. Benign cartilaginous tumor that develops from displaced
3. Usually located in diaphysis or metaphysis of a long bone
growth cartilage.
(often in distal radius or ulna).
 3. Cartilage continues to grow and expand but fails to ossify.
4. Slow growing and rarely crosses growth plate (serial
4. Bone is weakened and pathologic fractures can occur.
radiographs reveal little change).
5. May be solitary or multiple (multiple enchondroma is
5. Typically monostotic, but can be polyostotic.
called enchondromatosis).
6. Cortical bone may be thinned or displaced but remains
6. Rare in dogs. more commonly affecting large breeds.
intact.
7. Many affected animals are asymptomatic (lesion is an
7. Periosteal response is rare.
incidental radiographic finding).
8. Soft tissue swelling is minimal or absent.
8. When present, clinical signs include pain and swelling.
Radiographic findings with enchondroma (Figure 4.82):
1. Expansile, well-defined area of decreased opacity in med-
ullary cavity of a long bone.
2. Usually in metaphysis or diaphysis.
3. Most often reported in short bones of a foot.
4. Center of lesion may contain bony trabeculae and/or be
 decreased in opacity.
5. Cortex often is thin but remains intact.
Figure 4.81 Benign bone cyst (lateral radiograph). A well-cdefined area
of decreased opacity is present in dlistal metaphysis of a radius without
periosteal response or soft tissue swelling. Cyst is septated. (Adapted 
 Figure 4.82 Enchondroma in proximal fibula (arrow) (lateral
from Owens and Biery 1999.)
radiograph)
158
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
6. Soft tissue swelling is uncommon.
7. Multiple lesions may be present and multiple bones may
be involved (enchondromatosis).
8. Pathologic fractures can occur.
Differential diagnoses for enchondroma:
1. Neoplasia.
2. Bone cyst.
Osteochondroma
Clinical correlations:
1. Other names: osteochondromatosis, multiple cartilagi-
nous exostosis, multiple hereditary exostosis, diaphyseal
aclasis, hereditary chondrodysplasia.
Figure 4.83 Osteochondromatosis in metacarpal bones (dorsopalmar
2. Abnormal differentiation of physeal cartilage leads to
radiograph). Expansile bony masses involve 3rd and 5th mmetacarpal
development of a bony mass near the physis (mass can
bones. (Adapted from Owen5 and Biery 1999.)
 develop away from physis if fragment of physeal carilage
breaks off and remains in place as bone grows and physis
moves).
8. Bone masses tend to be more organized in long bones
3. Masses usually stop growing at skeletal maturity. but
than in flat and irregular bones.
malignant transformation to chondrosarcoma or osteosar-
9. Vertebral osteochondroma most commonly involve the
coma can occur.
cervical or thoracic spine.
4. Multiple osteochondroma is called osteochondromatosis
 10. Tracheal involvement has been reported.
or multiple cartilaginous exostosis.
11. Symmetrical, annular osteochondroma 
lesions may
5. Most often reported in young. actively growing. large-
cause limb shortening or deformity.
breed dogs (e.g., Great Dane, Saint Bernard, Hounds). May
be hereditary.
Differential diagnoses for osteochondroma:
6. Rare in cats, more often reported in older animals:
1. Neoplasia.
a. In cats, tumors are more likely to continue growing
2. Osteomyelitis.
and can appear aggressive.
 3. Mild mucopolysaccharidosis Type IV.
b. May be associated with feline leukemia virus or feline
4. Hypervitaminosis A.
sarcoma virus.
7. Clinical signs often are absent, but may result from com-
Synovial osteochondroma
pression of adjacent nerves, tendons, or ligaments (causing
Clinical correlations:
pain and lameness).
1. Other names: synovial chondromatosis.
8. Respiratory distress has been reported with tracheal
2. Characterized by nodular proliferation of synovial mem-
involvement.
brane possibly from fragments of articular cartilage.
 3. Proliferating synovium can extend into surrounding soft
Radiographic findings with osteochondroma:
tissues.
1. Bony masses can develop in any bone that arises from
4. May involve multiple joints.
cartila ge:
5. Nodules can break off and become free fragments in joint,
 a. In dogs, lesions typically develop in metaphysis of long
which may grow and mineralize.
bones (e.g., femur, tibia) or in a rib.
6. Cats are more often affected than dogs.
b. In cats, lesions usually occur in flat or irregular bones
7. Affected cats usually are mature animals (frequently
(e.g., pelvis, vertebrae, skull).
reported in Burmese) with stifle, elbow, shoulder and/or
2. Masses vary in size and usually are expansile, extending
digits most often involved.
away from bone (Figure 4.83).
8. Affected dogs usually are larger breeds with hip. stifle.
3. Lesions tend to appear heterogeneous with irregular
and/or elbow most often involved.
 borders and well-defined margins.
9. Clinical signs usually are absent, but some affected
4. May be monostotic or polyostotic.
animals exhibit lameness or a stiff, distended joint.
 5. No osteolysis or periosteal response is evident.
6. Soft tissue swelling is minimal.
Radiographic findings with synovial osteochondroma:
1. One or more small, well-defined, mineralized fragments
ing cortex (may resemble calcinosis circumscripta).
in affected joint(s) (Figure 4.84).
159
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Differential diagnoses for osteoma:
1. Early stages of malignant neoplasia.
2. Healing fracture.
 3. Craniomandibular osteopathy.
Chondroma
Clinical correlations:
1. Benign, slow-growing tumor of cartilage.
2. Rare in dogs, usually affecting younger animals.
3. Clinical signs often are absent, but large tumors may
Figure 4.84 Synovial osteochondromatosis. A. Srmall mineral opacity
impinge on adjacent structures.
 structure in the cranial compartrent of the femorotibial joint (arrow).
B. Larger mineral opacity in the stifle. (Adapted from Owens and Biery
Radiographic findings with chondroma:
1999.)
1. Flat bones (scapula, pelvis, ribs) more often are affected
than long bones.
 2. Well-defined, expansile mass is present (less opaque than
2. Fragments may be round or irregular in shape, with
surrounding bone).
 smooth, well-defined margins.
3. Size varies, depending on duration of tumor.
3. Often bilateral (radiographs of contralateral limb are
 4. Periosteal response is absent or presents with smooth and
recommended).
well-defined margins.
4. Usually, no site of origin or "bed" for a fracture fragment
5. Soft tissue swelling is minimal.
is identified; however, concurrent osteochondrosis may be
present.
Differential diagnoses for chondroma:
5. Most often reported in stifle, especially in older cats.
 1. Early stages of chondrosarcoma.
6. Soft tissue swelling and joint effusion are absent.
2. Bone cyst.
Multilobular tumor of skull
Differential diagnoses for synovial osteochondroma:
Clinical correlations:
1. Degenerative joint disease
2. Meniscal calcification.
1. Other names: multilobular osteoma and chondroma of
3. Periarticular mineralization.
the skull, chondroma rodens, juvenile calcifying aponeu-
4. Avulsion fracture.
rotic fibroma.
 5. Neoplasia (e.g., chondroma, osteoma, chondrosarcoma.
2. Slow-growing primary bone tumor that develops from a
focal area of abnormal periosteal activity.
osteosarcoma).
3. A common benign bone tumor in dogs.
6. Mild mucopolysaccharidosis Type IV.
7. Hypervitaminosis A.
4. No breed or gender predilection.
 5. Most often reported in young adult, medium- to large-
breed dogs.
Osteoma
Clinical correlations:
6. Large tumors may involve frontal sinus, orbit, temporal
1. Benign, slow-growing osseous neoplasm that protrudes
or zygomatic bone, or affect underlying brain.
from surface of bone.
7. Clinical signs include a firm mass associated with the
head and sometimes rhinitis, neurologic signs, exophthal-
2. Usually occurs in the head.
3. Rare in dogs and cats, more often reported in younger
mia, or difficulty opening the jaw.
animals.
Radiographic findings with multilobular tumor of skull
4. Other than firm swelling. most affected animals are
(Figure 4.209):
asymptomatic.
1. Well-defined, irregular or nodular shaped, bony mass
5. Clinical signs develop if tumor impinges on an adjacent
arising from part of skull.
stru cture.
2. Tumor size typically varies from 1 to 10 cm.
3. No osteolysis.
Radiographic findings with osteoma (Figure 4.208):
4. Soft tissue swelling is minimal.
1. Very opaque, bony mass arising from surface of bone.
 5. May see bone deformity.
2. Most common in skull (e.g., cranial vault, sinus.
mandible).
Differential diagnoses for multilobular fumor of skull:
3. Mass has smooth and well-defined margins.
1. Ossifying fibroma (originates in the oral cavity).
4. No evidence of osteolysis.
2. Healing fracture.
5. Soft tissue swelling is mild.
3. Other neoplasia.
160
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Fractures
Clinical correlations:
1. Break or discontinuity in bone caused by a physical force
that exceeds bone's structural capacity or by disease that
weakens the bone.
2. Fracture lines usually are less opaque than adjacent bone.
but some are more opaque (e.g., compression fracture.
folding fracture, overlying fracture fragments).
3. Soft tissue swelling usually is present at acute fracture
sites.
4. Subcutaneous emphysema may be present (e.g. open
fracture, skin abrasions).
Figure 4.85 Incommplete fractures. A. Greenstick. B. Torus. (Adapted 
from Owen5 and Biery 1999.)
Radiographic interpretation of fractures:
1. Knowledge of normal anatomy is essential regarding
locations of sesamoid bones, accessory ossifcation centers,
nutrient foramens. growth plates, and shape of bones.
2. Textbooks, anatomical models, and normal radiographs
can serve as references.
3. Comparative radiographs of contralateral limb frequently
aid in diagnosis.
4. Follow-up radiographs made in 7 to 10 days (sooner if
clinically indicated) aid in detecting incomplete, nondis-
placed, or stress fractures because fracture lines widen
 during healing and periosteal new bone becomes evident.
5. Joints above and below an extremity fracture are included
to assess articular involvement and fracture rotation.
6. Radiographic technique may need to be reduced to ade-
quately evaluate soft tissues.
Types of fractures
1. Incomplete fracture:
a. Only one side of cortex is broken and bone is not in
B
A
C
complete discontinuity.
Figure 4.86 Complete fractures. A. Short oblique. B. Transverse.
b. Greenstick fracture (hairline fracture):
C. Spiral long oblique. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
1) Cortex is broken on the convex side (Figure 4.85A).
2) Most often seen in immature animals.
c. Folding fracture (torus or buckling fracture):
1) Cortex is broken or buckles on the concave side
2) Often not apparent on initial radiographs, but may
(Figure 4.85B).
be seen on a follow-up study.
2) Commonly
seen
with
osteomalacia
and
f. Compression fracture (impaction fraction):
osteoporosis.
1) Ends of bone fragments are impacted into each
d. Fissure fracture:
other.
1) A fracture line extending from another fracture.
2) Bone is shortened or collapsed.
2) May be associated with a fragment that resulted
 d 5 o   a a  
 from a complete fracture (described as a longitudinal
adjacent bone, or indistinct.
fissure fracture).
4) Most often reported in vertebral bodies and cuboid
3) May become a complete fracture (e.g.. during
bones.
reduction and fixation) .
2. Complete fracture:
e. Stress fracture (fatigue fracture):
a. Fracture extends through entire bone.
1) Caused by repetitive cycling that damages bone at
b. Simple fracture consists of one fracture line and two
a faster rate than it can heal.
fragments (Figure 4.86):
161
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
3) Type III c—major reconstruction is needed and
arterial damage is present.
f. Type IV: near amputation of limb.
5. Pathologic fracture:
a. Occurs in bone that has been weakened by an under-
lying disease or developmental defect.
b. Bone is less opaque at or near fracture site (fracture
often occurs at periphery of diseased bone).
c. May see a periosteal response at time of radiography
(earlier than expected for fracture healing).
d. May result from systemic disease (e.g., osteoporo-
sis, osteomalacia) or local disease (e.g., tumor, cyst).
 Possible etiologies are listed in Differential Diagnoses
section.
6. Depression fracture:
a. Fracture fragment is located below normal bone
surface.
b. Most often occurs in skull.
7. Abrasion or shearing fracture:
a. Results from severe friction or glancing trauma (e.g.
A
B
animal dragged on pavement).
 b. Fracture is open and there is loss of overlying soft
Figure 4.87 Multiple fractures. A. Segmental with multiple fragments
tissue and bone.
(66hh Aaa pue suamo woy paidep) leuaas '8
8. Articular fracture:
a. Fracture line extends to joint surface.
9. Avulsion fracture:
1) Transverse fracture line is perpendicular to long
a. Occurs at attachment of a ligament, tendon, or joint
axis of bone (90°).
capsule (Figure 4.88).
2) Short oblique fracture line is 45° to 90° to long axis.
b. Piece of bone is pulled away from main bone.
3) Long oblique fracture line is 0° to 45° to long axis.
c. Origin of avulsed fragment ("bed") may be visible as
4) Spiral fracture line wraps around long axis (caused
a similar-sized defect in bone.
by rotational trauma).
d. Commonly involves an apophysis.
c. Multiple fractures consist of two or more noncontinu-
10. Physis fracture (Salter-Harris fracture):
ous fracture lines (Figure 4.87):
a. Occurs in immature animals with open growth
1) Comminuted fracture: multiple fracture lines that
pla tes.
communicate at a single point, resulting in three or
b. May be a T- or Y-shaped fracture (Figure 4.89).
more fragments (more than five fragments is consid-
c. Classified according to degree of epiphyseal, physeal,
ered highly comminuted).
and metaphyseal involvement.
2) Butterfly fragment: wedge-shaped bone fragment
d. Fractures are ranked by increasing probability of a
in a comminuted fracture
growth deformity during healing (Figure 4.90).
3) Segmental fracture: multiple fracture lines that do
l) Salter-Harris type I: fracture through physis
not communicate (results in an isolated segment of
only.
long bone).
2) Salter-Harris type II: fracture involves physis and
3. Closed fracture:
metaphysis.
a. Overlying skin and soft tissues are intact.
 3) Salter-Harris type II: fracture includes physis and
4. Open fracture:
epiphysis (fracture is articular).
a. Skin and soft tissues overlying bone are perforated.
4) Salter-Harris type IV: fracture involves physis.
 b. Subcutaneous emphysema is common.
 metaphysis, and epiphysis (fracture is articular).
c. Type I open fracture: less than lcm skin defect at
5) Salter-Harris type V: compression or impaction
fracture site.
fracture of physis.
d. Type II open fracture: skin defect is greater than l crm.
6) Salter-Harris type VI: involves only a portion of
e. Type Ill open fracture: severe bone fragmentation:
physis, either by compression or peripheral bridging:
1) Type II a—-no soft tissue reconstruction needed.
unaffected portion continues to grow, commonly
2) Type Il b—soft tissue reconstruction is needed.
resulting in angular limb deformity.
162
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Figure 4.88 Avulsion fractures with mmild soft tissue swelling. A. Avulsion of scapular tuberosity with mild swelling. B. Avulsion of humeral greater
tubercle. C. Avulsion of acromion and spine of scapula. Caudocranial view. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
A
B
C
D
F
G
B
Figure 4.90 Salter-Harris Classification of fractures. A. Normal. B. Type
Figure 4.89 Condylar fractures. A. Medial condylar fracture of femur.
I (physis only). C. Type Il (physis and metaphysis). D. Type Il (physis and
B. Intercondylar and supracondylar fracture of fernur (*"Y" fracture).
epiphysis). E. Type IV (physis, metaphysic, and epiphysis). F. Type V
(Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
(commpression of physis). G. Type Vl (bone bridging or partial compression 
of physis). (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
c. Fracture line extends from one articular surface to
the other (if fracture involves only one articular surface,
1l. Chip fracture:
it is called a chip fracture).
a. Descriptive term meaning "knocking off a corner."
13. Conditions that may mimic a fracture:
b. Usually involves a cuboid bone (i.e., short bone in
a. Normal physis (immature animal).
carpus or tarsus) and is, therefore, articular.
b. Nutrient foramen.
c. Results in a small fragment that must be differen-
c. Superimposed structure:
tiated from normal sesamoid bones and accessory ossi-
1) Fascial plane.
fication centers. (NOTE: Soft tissue swelling is present
2) Skin fold.
with a fracture and absent with normal anatomy.)
3) Wet or dirty hair coat.
d. Site of origin or bed for fracture fragment may be
4) Grid line.
evident.
5) Mark or scratch on viewbox or viewing screen.
e. Comparative radiographs of contralateral limb often
6) New bone production (creates relative decreased
aid in diagnosis.
opacity in adjacent bone).
12. Slab fracture:
d. Digital arifact (Uberschwinger artifact).
a. Descriptive term meaning "knocking off a chunk."
e. Mach line (an optical illusion created by overlying
b. Usually involves a cuboid bone and is articular.
structures).
163
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Fracture complications
Box 4.3 Radiographic description of fracture.
Clinical correlations (factors that affect healing):
1. Animal's age (young animals typically heal faster than
1. Type of fracture (e.g., complete, open, chip. slab).
older animals).
 2. Number of fracture lines (e.g. simple, segmental,
 2. Nutrition (must have an adequate supply of calcium and
comminuted)
phosphorous).
3. Name of bone affected (e.g.. humeral, femoral, vertebral).
 4. Location of fracture (e.g.. diaphyseal, metaphyseal,
3. Animal's general state of health.
4. Available blood supply:
epiphyseal).
a. Depends on viability of adjacent tissues.
5. Direction of fracture line (e.g.. spiral, transverse, oblique).
6. Involvement of a joint (e.g., articular, nonarticular).
b. Reduction or removal of hematoma can alter blood
supply.
 7. Position of fragments (distal/unfixed fragment is described 
c. A bone fragment without a viable blood supply can
lo paneinbue 'paneidsip se luawbas paxtlewixoid oi alela
become a sequestrum.
overriding)
 8. Rotation of fragments (amount of twisting about bone's
5. Fracture location:
a. Metaphyseal fractures heal faster than diaphyseal
longitudinal axis; more easily assessed when joints above and 
fractures.
below are included)
9. Alterations of soft tissues (e.g., swelling. defects,
b. Some bones heal more slowly (e.g., distal radius and
ulna, distal tibia).
emphysema, presence of debris).
6. Configuration of fracture fragments:
10. Abnormal bone opacity (e.g.. pathologic fracture)
a. At least 50% bone contact is desirable for efficient
healing.
b. Spiral and oblique fractures tend to heal faster than
transverse fractures.
Fracture healing
c. External forces pulling fragments may delay healing
Clinical correlations:
(e.g., calcaneus, olecranon, rib).
1. Fractures heal by formation of periosteal and endosteal
d. More stable fracture fixations tend to heal more
new bone.
quickly (motion at fracture site is most common cause of
2. Hematoma initially forms at fracture site.
delayed healing).
3. Increased blood flow leads to active remodeling of frac-
e. Intramedullary implants may disrupt endosteal blood
ture margins.
supply and slow healing.
4. Granulation tissue develops and begins to mineralize.
7. Factors that delay fracture healing include:
forming a callus between fragments.
a. Severe damage or loss of tissues surrounding fracture
 5. Callus matures to bone and gradually remodels over time
site.
as normal stresses restore damaged bone to original shape
b. Loss of blood supply.
and contour.
c. Poor apposition of fragments.
d. Movement (instability) of fragments.
Radiographic findings with fracture healing (Table 4.4):
e. Infection in bone (osteomyelitis) or in adjacent
1. Initial radiographs document alignment of fracture frag-
tissues.
ments and positions of implants.
f. Debilitating disease.
2. Serial radiographs are made with same exposure tech-
nique unless soft tissues are decreased (e.g., reduction of
swelling. disuse atrophyy.
Radiographic findings with fracture complications:
3. Healed fracture is determined by:
1. Abnormal callus formation:
a. Fracture line is no longer visible.
a. Absence of callus:
b. Continuity of the cortex.
1) Usually due to loss of blood supply.
c. A complete ossified bridging callus.
2) May be normal with rigid stabilization and excel-
4. Removal of internal or external fixation device can be
lent anatomic reduction.
considered when there is radiographic evidence of bridging
b. Excessive new bone production:
bony callus.
1) Stripping of periosteum (e.g., trauma, surgery).
5. Fractures in membranous bone (e.g., skull, nose) produce
2) Instability and motion at fracture site.
minimal callus.
3) Infection (osteomyelitis).
6. Young animals with adequate fracture stabilization often
4) Presence of a bone graft.
have radiographic and clinical evidence of bone healing
 2. Change in position of fracture fragments (usually due to
within 6 to 8 weeks.
inadequate stabiliza tion ).
164
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Table 4.4 Fracture healing
Time
Appearance
Description
0 days
● Initial fracture
● Soft tissue swelling
5-10 days
+ Active bone remodeling results in widening of fracture line and fracture margins become less distinct.
+ Soft tissue swelling decreases.
+ Subcutaneous emphysemma (postoperative) resolves
10-20 days
● Endosteal and periosteal callus becomes visible.
● Gap between fracture fragments narrows.
● Fracture ends become less opaque due to bone resorption.
30 days
● Fracture lines gradually disappear.
● Callus increases in opacity and becomes smmoothly marginated
sAep 06
 Callus continues to mature and develops trabeculation.
● Medullary cavity gradually is reestablished.
 Cortical margins become more distinct
3. Osteolysis at fracture site:
5. Decreased opacity around a fixation device:
a. Infection (osteomyelitis).
a. Movement/loosening of implants.
b. Pathologic bone (e.g., neoplasia, bone cyst).
 b. Infection/osteomyelitis (typically produces an uneven 
4. Widening of gap between fracture fragments:
and irregular zone of lysis).
a. Instability at fracture site.
c. Bone necrosis from a high-speed drill.
b. Infection (osteomyelitis).
d.Electrolysis or "metallosis" (local adverse reaction to
c. Soft tissue between fracture fragments (e.g., muscle,
metallic implants).
fat).
e. Digital radiography artifact (e.g. "halo" artifact).
165
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
6. Persistent soft tissue swelling (posttraumatic swelling
typically resolves in 7 to 10 days):
a. Inflammation/infection.
b. Hemorrhage.
c. Edema.
7. Alterations in regional structures:
a. Soft tissue (muscle) atrophy (due to disuse or neuro-
logic injury).
b. Mineralization in soft tissues:
1) Preexisting condition.
2) Presence of a bone graft.
3) Chronic hematoma (dystrophic calcification).
4) Isolated bone fragment(s).
5) Osteomyelitis.
6) Neoplasia (e.g.. pathologic fracture)
 7) Foreign material.
c. Narrowed joint space (due to chronic loss of motion
and joint contracture).
d. Bone or limb deformity (due to physeal damage and
 premature closure of a growth plate).
8. Neoplastic transformation (rare):
a. Also called implant-associated sarcoma.
b. Occurs at site of a bone implant or where complex
healing has occurred.
Figure 4.91 Delayed union fracture of femur. Callus is visible but less
c. May not be evident until years later.
than normal, and fracture line remains distinct. Healing is expected to
 occur, but in a delayed time frame. (Adapted from Owens and Biery
1999.)
Delayed union
Clinical correlations:
Nonunion fracture
1. Fracture fragments do not unite within expected period
Clinical correlations:
of time, but healing is believed to eventually occur.
1. Fracture healing ceases before a complete union has
2. No definite timetable exists, but if bridging callus is not
occurred.
evident within 6 to 8 weeks, bone union can be considered
2. Generally, if there is no activity after 6 months and no
delayed.
 progression of healing is expected (unless intervention
3. Factors that may contribute to delayed union include:
occurs), fracture is considered to be a nonunion.
a. Instability and motion at fracture site.
3. Factors that may contribute to nonunion include:
b. Separation or poor apposition of fragments.
a. Instability and motion at fracture site.
c. Compromised blood supply.
b. Loss of blood supply.
d. Infection (in bone or adjacent tissues).
c. Presence of infection or foreign material.
e. Older animal.
d. Tissue interposed between fracture fragments (e.g.-
f. Fracture location (i.e., distal radius, ulna, and tibia
muscle, fat).
tend to heal more slowly).
e. Loss or removal of a large bone fragment.
g. Diseased bone (e.g., neoplasia, osteoporosis).
4. A pseudoarthrosis (false joint) may form at nonunion
h. Poor nutrition.
i. Concurrent systemic disease.
fracture site
a. Fibrocartilage flls fracture gap creating a fibrous
j. Disuse.
capsule that fills with serum.
k. Large intramedullary pin.
b. May allow animal to have use of the limb.
Radiographic findings with delayed union:
Radiographic findings with nonunion fracture:
1. Similar to normal fracture healing. but in a delayed time
1. Serial radiographs document lack of progression of a
frame.
healing callus.
2. Fracture line persists on serial radiographs (Figure 4.91),
2. Hypertrophic nonunion:
3. Minimum periosteal response with incomplete bridging
a. Caused by chronic instability and failure of initial
callus.
callus to bridge fracture site.
166
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Figure 4.92 Nonunion fracture of femmur. A mass of srnooth, well-
Figure 4.93 Malunion fracture of femmur. Bone is healed but abnormally
cefined bone is visible at each fragment end, sealing the medullary canal.
angulated. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
 Fracture healing ha5 ceased. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
Malunion fracture
Clinical correlations:
b. Smooth, dense, well-defined mass of new bone forms
1. Fracture has healed, but there is abnormal bone
at ends of each fragment (Figure 4.92).
geometry.
c. New bone seals medullary canal and creates a rounded
2. Factors that may contribute to malunion include:
end to each fragment.
a. Improper reduction of fracture.
d. Rounded ends are sometimes described as resembling
b. Instability and movement of fracture fragments during
an elephant foot or horse foot in appearance, depending
healing.
on amount of new bone produced.
c. Premature removal of fixation device (before fracture
e. Adjacent ends of bone may become contoured, one
has completely healed.
convex and the other concave.
3. Normal function of limb may be compromised, resulting
f. A pseudoarthrosis may develop.
in an abnormal gait or lameness.
3. Atrophic nonunion
a. Occurs
with
chronic
separation
of
fracture
Radiographic findings with malunion fracture:
fragments.
1. Fracture appears healed, but bone is abnormally short-
b. No callus formation is seen.
ened, malaligned, angled, or rotated (Figure 4.93) 
c. Ends of fragments remodel and taper to become thin,
2. Comparative radiographs of contralateral limb may aid in
rounded, and less opaque.
determining degree of deformity.
d. Diffuse osteopenia is common, due to disuse of limb.
3. An abnormal fusion with adjacent bones (synostosis) can
e. Most often reported in small breeds of dogs.
occur.
4. Necrotic or dystrophic nonunion
4. Malunion may cause a proximal or distal joint to be more
a. Caused by loss of blood supply to one or both
flexed or extended than normal.
fragments.
b. Ends of bone remain sharp. well-defined, and often
Pseudoarthrosis
pointed.
Clinical correlations:
5. Nonviable nonunion
1. Other names: false joint.
a. Results from a diminished blood supply.
2. A fibrous capsule, filled with serum, forms at site of a
b. Bone ends become smooth, rounded, and sclerotic.
long-term nonunion fracture.
167
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
3. May also develop at a chronic dislocation (e.g.. coxo-
2. When in bone, fragment often is surrounded by a less
femoral luxation) or at a congenital or developmental
opaque pocket of soft tissue or fluid.
anomaly.
3. Osteosclerosis (involucrum) may surround the soft tissue.
4. May allow animal to have use of the affected limb.
4. A draining tract (cloaca) may extend from involucrum to
 slkin surface (fistulography aids in diagnosis).
Radiographic findings with pseudoarthrosis:
1. Discontinuity between fracture fragments or bones of
joint at pseudoarthrosis site.
Physeal injuries
2. No bridging callus is visible.
Clinical correlations
3. Ends of bones may appear tapered, expanded, or be
1. Any physis of any bone can be affected and may lead to
remodeled to "fit together."
limb deformity.
4. Fracture line or joint luxation remains visible.
2. Degree of limb deformity will depend on age of animal
5. Osteoporosis may be present if animal is non-weight
at time of injury, physis affected, elapsed time since injury.
bearing.
and severity of damage.
3. Condition may be unilateral or bilateral; if bilateral, may
Sequestrum
or may not be symmetrical.
Clinical correlations:
4. Possible etiologies include:
1. A fragment of bone that has lost its blood supply and is
a. Trauma (most common): traumatic incident may or
no longer viable.
may not be known.
2. May result from infection (osteomyelitis), neoplasia, or
b. Developmental anomalies (e.g.. chondrodysplasia,
severe trauma.
retained cartilaginous core, severe hypertrophic oste0-
3. Sequestrum may be sterile or infected and usually is sur-
dystrophy).
rounded by necrotic tissue.
c. Acquired disease (e.g., hypertrophic osteodystrophy.
4. A draining tract is sometimes present.
osteomyelitis).
5. Clinical signs are variable depending on underlying cause.
d. Internal fracture repair.
location, and severity of disease.
5. Percentage of long bone growth at proximal and distal
Radiographic findings with a sequestrum:
physes varies during development:
1. A well-defined, sharply demarcated, sclerotic bone frag-
a. During early stages, each physis contributes approxi-
ment (Figure 4.94) that may be located in, or separated
mately 50%
from, its bone of origin.
b. As animal matures, proximal physis contributes pro-
gressively smaller percentages to bone growth (40%.
30%, 20%, 10%, etc.).
c. Greatest difference between proximal and distal
physeal growth occurs in ulna, where distal physis con-
tributes approximately 90% to overall growth.
6. Joint subluxation is common sequela, especially when
paired bones are involved (i.e., radius/ulna, tibia/fibula)
because these bones must grow synchronously.
7. Distal ulnar physis is highly susceptible to damage due to
its unique conical shape.
8. Clinical signs tend to be more significant in young large
and giant breeds of dogs (due to greater and faster bone
growth).
9. Affected animals may have pain at their joints due to
secondary subluxation and/or degenerative joint disease.
10. Asynchronous growth of radius and ulna is a relatively
common characteristic of chondrodystrophoid breeds (e.g.
Bassett Hound, Dachshund).
Radiographic findings with physeal injuries:
Figure 4.94 Bone sequestrum. A sclerotic fragment of bone
1. Common findings include abnormal bowing. shortening.
(sequestrum) is surrounded by a less opaque zone (involucrum) within a
 or angulation of limb, secondary joint subluxation, and
bone. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
degenerative joint disease.
168
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
2. Comparative radiographs of contralateral limb may aid in
diagnosis and determine whether there is bilateral involve-
ment and symmetry of lesions.
3. Affected physis usually appears thin (either a partial or
) o     
 obliteration of physis indicates physeal growth has stopped).
(NOTE: Complete cessation of growth is not necessary to
produce deformities, merely a differential or asynchronous
rate of growth between paired bones.)
4. Salter-Harris fracture may be present (may involve
epiphysis or metaphysis).
 5. Bone deformity may be evident, frequently affecting the
joint proximal or distal (type of deformity depends on physis
involved, as described below).
6. Secondary degenerative joint disease is common.
7. Features to be evaluated with asynchronous growth of
radius and ulna:
a. Length of each radius and ulna.
b. Width of joint spaces at either end of shortened
bone.
c. Direction of diaphyseal bowing.
A
B
d. Angulation at carpus.
Figure 4.95 Premature closure of distal ulnar physis (lateral
e. Relationship of ulnar coronoid process to proximal
radiographs) A. Normal radius and ulna. B. Shortened ulna, cranial 
radial articular surface.
bowing of radius, humeroulnar subluxation, and indistinct distal ulnar
f. Extent of degenerative joint disease at elbow and
padeps) sisyd eun lesip re yonh eouge yim suatsisuon sisyd
carpus.
from Owens and Biery 1999.)
8. Premature closure or retarded growth of distal ulnar
physis (Figures 4.95 and 4.96):
a. May affect one or both limbs.
 b. Physis is partially or completely obliterated.
c. Ulna is abnormally shortened.
d. Ulnar styloid process is proximally separated from
carpus (radiocarpal joint subluxation).
e. Humeroulnar joint space is widened and wedge
shaped (elbow subluxation).
f. Medial coronoid process is distal to proximal articular
surface of radius.
g. Radius is bowed cranially and medially (radius curvus)
Figure 4.96 Humeroulnar subluxation (lateral radiograph). A. Joint
with cortical thickening along concave side (latter due to
space between humerus and ulna is widened and wedge shaped.
stress remodeling).
B. Normal alignment between proximal radius and ulna on left and 
h. Humeroradial joint can become subluxated (lateral
stair-step between radius and ulna caused by abnormal shortening of
displacement of radial head).
ulna. (A adapted from Owens and Biery 1999)
i. Distal radius may be craniomedially subluxated from
radial carpal bone.
 j. Lateral deviation of foot (valgus pes deformity) is
1) Radiocarpal
1joint  space  is  widened (carpal
common (more severe cases can result in supination of
subluxation).
the foot).
k. Anconeal process may be more proximally angulated.
3) Humeroradial joint space is widened (elbow sub-
remain ununited, or become fractured (due to abnormal
luxation, Figure 4.98).
stresses).
4) Medial deviation of foot (varus pes deformity) is
9. Premature closure of distal radial physis (Figure 4.97):
common.
a. May be unilateral or bilateral.
5) Humeroulnar joint space may be widened.
b. Damage to entire physis results in abnormal shorten-
c. Partial damage to physis results in abnormal growth
ing of radius.
at distal radius (Figure 4.99).
169
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
R
Figure 4.97 Premature closure of distal radial physis (lateral radiograph).
Figure 4.99 Partial damage to distal (R) radial physis resulting in valgus
Radius is shortened and humeroulnar joint is subluxated. Normal radius
limb deformity at distal antebrachium (craniocaudal radiograph). Lateral 
and ulna are illustrated in Figure 4.95A. (Adapted from Owens and Biery
0 sanuuon uouod lepau alum humo pasean sey sisyd jo uood 
1999.)
grow.
humeroradial joint space. C. Normal alignment between proxirmal radlius and ulna on left and stair-step between radius and ulna caused by abnormal
shortening of radius. (A and B adapted from Owens and Biery 1999)
l) Radius becomes bowed (convex side is toward
d. Humeroulnar and humeroradial joints can become
unaffected, faster-growing side of physis).
subluxated (joint spaces are widened).
2) Antebrachiocarpal joint on damaged side of physis
10. Premature closure of proximal radial physis:
is subluxated.
a. Radius is abnormally shortened (may be bilateral).
3) Deviation of foot is toward damaged side of physis
b. Humeroradial joint space is widened (elbow
(valgus or varus pes deformity).
subluxation)
170
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
ll. Premature closure of both distal radial and distal ulnar
physes:
a. Both radius and ulna are abnormally shortened
b. Elbow and/or carpus may be subluxated.
12. Normal differential rate of growth may be mistaken for
premature closure of a physis (sometimes a physis appears
thinner in one leg than in contralateral limb).
Hypertrophic osteopathy (Ho)
Clinical correlations:
1. Other names: hypertrophic pulmonary osteopathy.
hypertrophic  pulmonary  osteoarthropathy.
pulmonary
osteoarthropathy, Marie's disease.
2. New bone forms on long bones in response to a mass
or mass effect in thoracic or, less likely, abdominal cavity
(precise mechanism is unknown, but increased blood flow
and an overgrowth of vascular connective tissue in distal
limbs is thought to produce periosteal responses).
3. Possible etiologies are in Periosteal Response section of
 Differential Diagnoses.
4. Most often reported in middle-aged to older dogs. but can
occur in any age, breed, or gender.
5. Clinical signs include lameness, stiffness, pain, and swell-
ing in distal limbs.
Figure 4.100 Hypertrophic osteopathy. lrregular, well-defined periosteal
6. May have other symptoms related to disease in thorax or
response involving dlistal ulna, metacarpal bones, and phalanges
(dorsopalmar radiograph). (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
 abdomen.
 7. If primary lesion is rermoved, bone lesions will gradually
resolve.
2. Possible etiologic agents include bacterial, mycotic, and
Radiographic findings with hypertrophic osteopathy
protozoal organisms.
(Figure 4.100):
3. Most often affects areas of bone that have sluggish blood
1. Periosteal responses occur along diaphyses of long bones.
flow (i.e., metaphyses in immature animals, vertebrae and
2. Typically begins in digits and progresses toward axial
ribs in older animals).
skeleton.
 3. Initially, abaxial margins of digits are more severely affected.
Clinical correlations:
4. New bone may appear nodular, spiculated, or palisading
1. Bacterial osteomyelitis:
with smooth or irregular ("lacy"), ill-defined or well-defined
a. Localized infection is most common:
margins (depending on severity and chronicity of disease),
1) May result from direct introduction (e.g. open
5. Cortices remain intact without evidence of osteolysis
fracture, bite wound, surgery) or extension of adjacent
6. Soft tissue swelling usually is present.
infection (e.g., periodontal disease, rhinitis, otitis media.
 7. Lesions tend to be bilateral, symmetrical, and progressive.
paronychia).
often involving all four limbs (eventually all long bones in
2) Occurs
 site
ofinjury
(uncommon 
all legs will be affected).
metaphysis).
8. Occasionally, other bones are involved (e.g., carpi, tarsi.
3) Usually develops in a single limb, but can involve
vertebrae, pelvis), usually symmetric.
multiple bones in that limb.
9. Articular margins are not involved, but osteophytes may
b. Diffuse bacterial osteomyelitis is less common:
form.
1) Typically results from systemic infection and hema-
10. Bone lesions commonly regress if mass lesion is removed.
togenous spread.
2) More often reported in immature animals.
Osteomyelitis
3) Tends to involve multiple bones in multiple limbs
( polyostotic).
1. Osteomyelitis is inflammation of bone and may be caused
4) Metaphyses frequently are involved due to their
by acute or chronic infection.
rich blood supply.
171
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
c. Affected animals may develop a fistulous tract (espe-
4) Disseminated disease may occur in dogs (espe-
cially with chronic infections).
cially German Shepherd Dog).
d. Clinical signs include fever pain, swelling. and
5) Frontal sinus osteomyelitis and discospondylitis
leukocytosis.
are most common infections.
2. Mycotic osteomyelitis:
3. Protozoal osteomyelitis (hepatozoonosis):
a. Most common in endemic regions (see descriptions
a. Other names: American canine hepatozoonosis.
below).
b. Tick-borne disease caused by Hepatozoon americanum
b. More often affects young adult, large-breed dogs.
(North America).
c. Immunocompromised animals are at increased risk.
1) Hepatozoon canis is found in the rest of the world.
d. Uncommon in cats.
c. Uncommon in dogs and rare in cats.
e. Usually hematogenous in origin and polyostotic in
d. Most cases in United States have been diagnosed in
distribu tion.
the south (Texas, Oklahoma, and Louisiana), but disease
f. Monostotic infections are uncommon but do occur,
is spreading north and east from the Gulf Coast.
especially  in metaphyseal and epiphyseal  locations
e. Organism can infect many tissues (e.g., bones, liver.
(where they are indistinguishable from neoplasia).
spleen, muscles, bowel, myocardium).
g. May involve other organ systems (e.g.. respiratory
f. Infection occurs after ingestion of protozoan-infected
tract, lymph nodes, skin, eyes).
tick (not from tick bite).
h. Clinical signs tend to be nonspecific, including fever.
g. Clinical signs include fever, inappetence, weight loss,
lethargy, weight loss, poor appetite, chronic cough, ocular
bloody diarrhea, myositis, lameness, muscle atrophy.
inflammation, CNS symptoms, swollen joints, pericardial
ocular discharge, and debilitation.
 effusion, pain, and lameness.
h. Infection is lifelong with frequent relapses and can be
i. Skin lesions often are the most common finding in
fatal.
infected cats.
Radiographic findings with bacterial and
j.Coccidioides immitis:
mycotic osteomyelitis:
1) Other names: valley fever, San Joaquin Valley fever.
1. Acute osteomyelitis:
2) Endemic in southwestern United States and north-
a. Earliest stages of infection usually produce no bone
ern Mexico.
abnormalities, only soft tissue swwelling.
3) Bone lesions tend to involve distal appendicular
b. Within 7 to 14 days, a periosteal response develops.
skeleton.
typically irregular in shape with ill-defined margins
k.Blastomyces dermatiditis:
(Figure 4.101)
1) Endemic in midwestern United States and parts of
1) Bacterial
infections tend to stimulate
greater
Canada.
response than mycotic infections or neoplasia.
2) Most often reported in young. male, large-breed
 2) A line of decreased opacity may separate periosteal
dogs.
  nd   x   
 3) Bone lesions tend to be solitary and located distal
 subperiosteal space preventing mineraliza tion.
to elbow and stifle, but can be multifocal.
1.
Histoplasma capsulatum:
1) Found worldwide, endemic in midwestern United
States.
2) Lungs and thoracic lymph nodes are usual sites of
 primary infection.
3) Gastrointestinal disease is often present.
m. Cryptococcus neoformans:
1) Worldwide distribution and found throughout
United States.
 2) Present in soil that has been contaminated by bird
excrement.
3) Typically causes a generalized disease process.
n. Aspergillosis spp.:
1) Common throughout United States.
2) Often seen in areas where other fungal diseases
Figure 4.101 Osteomyelitis of tarsus (dorsoplantar radiographs).
are not endemic.
A. Irregular and ill-cefined periosteal response along lateral margins of
distal calcaneus, fourth tarsal, and proximal fifth metatarsal bones with
passages and sinuses.
 adjacent soft tissue swelling. B. Normal right tarsus for comparison.
172
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Table 4.5 General considerations comparing primary bone neoplasia vs. bacterial osteomyelitis vs. mycotic osteomyelitis
Neoplasia
Bacterial Osteomyelitis
Mycotic Osteomyelitis
Lesion size 
Focal;:
Focal or diffuse:
Focal:
Location
usually metaphysis
 anywhere in bone
 usually metaphysis
Nurnber of bones affected
 Usually monostotic
Typically monostic, but can be 
 Often polyostotic
polyostotic
Signalment
Usually older. larger dog5 
 More common in immature animals 
Usually irnmature animals:
 outdoor animals at increased risk 
 Soft tissue swelling 
Local
Diffuse 
Local 
Bone remodeling
More destructive
 More productive
 More productive
 Periosteal response
Smaller:
Larger;:
Larger:
 usually active 
± active
usually chronic
Codman's triangle
 Possible
Rare
Bone lysis
 Possible
 Possible, with 
osteosclerosis
 Cortical destruction
 Possible (usually later in disease process)
Rare
Sequestration
Rare
Common
Uncommon
Rate of change on serial
Rapid (days)
Rapid early:
Slow (weeks)
radiographs
 Slow later
c. Joints are rarely involved.
3. Any bone can be involved, but long bones are most com-
d. Bacterial infections tend to spread proximally and dis-
monly affected.
tally along diaphyses of long bones and may involve
4. Lesions have not been reported in the skull.
entire diaphysis (if unchecked by host defenses or appro-
priate therapy).
e. Mycotic infections rarely involve entire diaphysis
Differential diagnosis for osteomyelitis:
because body defenses tend to block progression of disease.
1. Trauma.
f. If disease remains active, osteolysis occurs (may extend
2. Neoplasia (Table 4.5).
into medullary bone).
3. Protozoan osteomyelitis.
g. A bone abscess may develop, appearing as a focal.
sharply marginated, area of decreased opacity.
2. Chronic osteomyelitis:
Leishmaniasis
a. Osteosclerosis surrounds lytic areas as body attempts
Clinical correlations:
to wall off infection.
1. Other names: dumdum fever.
 b. Sequestrum may be present (often in an involucrum.
2. Worldwide zoonotic disease caused by Leishmania infan-
Figure 4.94}.
(um (protozoan parasite).
c. An active periosteal response may or may not be
3. Primarily spread by sand flies (transmission by ticks and
present.
direct dog-to-dog may occur).
d. Mineral or metal opacity foreign material may be
4. Endemic in Central and South America, Africa, India.
 Europe (Mediterranean Basin) and in parts of United States 
identified.
e. Contrast radiography (fistulography) often aids in
and Canada
 delineating a draining tract or soft tissue opacity foreign
 5. Most often reported in Foxhounds in North America, but
ma terial.
other breeds can be affected.
6. Rare in cats.
Radiographic findings with protozoan osteomyelitis:
7. Clinical signs may not develop for years.
1. Bone lesions are polyostotic and aggressive.
8. Affected animals present with fatigue, exercise intoler-
2. Periosteal response results from inflammation in adjacent
ance, anorexia, and weight loss.
muscles and varies from smooth laminar thickening along
9. Skin lesions are common and swollen joints with lame-
cortex to marked irregular bony prolifera tions.
ness may be seen.
173
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Radiographic findings with Leishmaniasis:
1. Smooth or irregular periosteal response involving mul-
tiple bones, primarily long bone diaphyses, vertebrae, and
flat bones (e.g., pelvis).
2. Intramedullary sclerosis may be present.
3. Osteolytic joint disease has been reported.
4. Secondary degenerative joint disease is common.
Differential diagnosis of Leishmaniasis:
1. Trauma.
2. Neoplasia.
3. Bacterial or mycotic osteomyelitis.
Neosporosis
Clinical correlations
1. A neuromuscular disease caused by Neospora caninum. a
parasite with worldwide distribution.
2. Transmission is from mother to pups or following inges-
tion of raw, contaminated beef.
3. Disease causes an ascending paralysis with gradual
atrophy and stiffness of extremities.
4. Pelvic limbs are more severely affected.
5. Affected animals develop rigid muscle contracture and
Figure 4.102 Prirmary bone tumor in proximal humerus (lateral
joint deformity.
radiograph). Permeative and moth-eaten osteolysis is extensive and 
6. Puppies less than 6 months of age are most susceptible.
cortices are thin and interrupted. Periosteal response is ill-defined and
but dogs of any age can be infected.
armorphous. Diffuse soft tissue swelling is present.
7. Clinical signs in puppies develop at 3 to 9 weeks of age
and include hind limb paresis or paralysis, forelimb weak-
ness, and cranial nerve deficits. A single puppy or an entire
2. Other primary bone tumors are listed in Differential Diag-
litter may be affected.
noses section.
 8. Older animals may develop myositis, weakness, dermati-
3. Most often reported in older large- and giant-breed dogs.
tis, megaesophagus, and dysphagia.
4. Clinical signs of pain and lameness may be acute or have
a gradual, progressive onset.
Radiographic findings with neosporosis:
1. Rigid hyperextension of stifle and/or tarsus; stifle may
Radiographic findings with primary bone fumors:
bend backwards (genu recurvatum).
1. Osteosarcoma:
2. May be unilateral or bilateral.
a. Usually a solitary lesion with an aggressive pattern of
3. Angular limb deformity may develop.
bone remodeling (Figure 4.l02).
b. Variable soft tissue swelling is present.
Differential diagnosis for neosporosis:
C.1
 Both osteolytic and osteoblastic activity are common.
1. Trauma.
d. Periosteal response is ill-defined, irregular, and some-
2. Intervertebral disc disease.
times amorphous.
3. Toxoplasmosis.
1) Classic sunburst pattern occurs in approximately
4. Poisoning (e.g., botulism).
one-third of osteosarcomas.
5. Distemper.
2) A few osteosarcomas will present with osteolysis
6. Congenital neuropathy
only.
e. Wide zone of transition between normal and diseased
bone.
f.(
Cortical destruction is common.
Osseous neoplasia
g.
Codman's triangle frequently is present.
 Primary malignant bone neoplasia
h.1
Pathologic fracture may be present (Figure 4.103).
Clinical correlations:
i.
Metastasis to lung or other bones can occur.
1. Osteosarcoma is most common primary bone tumor in
j.
dogs and cats (over 80%).
in medullary opacity.
174
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Differential diagnosis for primary bone fumors:
1. Osteomyelitis.
2. Secondary (metastatic) tumor.
3. Trauma.
4. Ischemia.
5. Hypertrophic osteodystrophy.
Metastatic malignant bone neoplasia
Clinical correlations:
1. Other names: secondary bone tumors.
2. Any malignant neoplasm can spread to bone, but it is rare
in dogs and cats.
3. No breed or gender predilection.
4. Most often reported in older animals (range is 3 to 17
years, average age of 9 years).
5. Affected animals usually present with concurrent metas-
tases in other organs (e.g. lung).
6. Common tissues of tumor origin include mammary, pul-
monary, prostatic, or osseous.
Figure 4.103 Pathologic fracture of femmur (lateral radiograph). An
7. Malignant neoplasia of prostate, urinary bladder, or
ill-clefined area of osteolysis is present in the mmid-dliaphysis, most evident
pelvic canal can metastasize to sublumbar lymph nodes and
in the distal fragrnent.
involve caudal lumbar vertebrae.
8. Soft tissue tumor invading adjacent bone is more common
than metastatic spread:
a. Examples include squamous cell carcinoma (in man-
k. Primary bone tumors rarely involve joints or adjacent
dible or digits), synovial cell sarcoma, and fibrosarcoma.
bones.
b. Soft tissue tumor may cause pressure remodeling or a
1.Advanced neoplasia may produce a periosteal
periosteal response without directly invading bone.
response on adjacent bone, but much less severe than at
9. Clinical signs vary depending on locations and aggres-
primary site and usually without cortical destruction.
siveness of lesions, but commonly include of pain and
m. Site predilections for osteosarcoma:
lameness.
1) Commonly "away from elbow and toward knee.
2) Proximal humerus.
Radiographic findings with metastatic bone tumors:
3) Distal radius.
1. Lesions usually are multicentric and may involve appen-
4) Distal femur.
dicular or axial skeleton (Figure 4.104).
5) Distal ulna.
2. Can occur anywhere in bone, but diaphyseal and meta-
6) Proximal tibia.
physeal regions are most commonly affected.
7) Distal tibia.
   s rd  s 
2. Primary tumors of appendicular skeleton:
and osteoblastic activity.
a. Tend to develop in metaphysis, rarely originating in
4. Cortical destruction is common.
diaphysis or epiphysis.
 5. Periosteal new bone production may become severe.
b. Physis commonly blocks spread of tumor into epiphy-
but early metastatic lesions frequently cause small smooth-
sis (immature animals).
bordered periosteal responses (especially in ribs).
c. In older animals, tumor eventually extends into
6. Zone of transition between normal and abnormal bone
epiph ysis.
is long and ill-defined.
3. Primary tumors of axial skeleton:
7. Lymphoma can produce multiple foci of increased
a. May be purely osteolytic, purely osteoblastic, or a
    s   o 
combination of both.
neoplasia.
b. More frequently affect skull, ribs., and pelvis than
8. Metastatic carcinoma from urinary bladder, urethra, or
vertebrae.
prostate can cause a smooth or irregular periosteal response
4. Multiple myeloma and lymphoma:
along lumbar, sacral, or caudal vertebral bodies:
a. Polyostotic bone tumors.
a. Affects ventral middle aspects of vertebral bodies; dif-
b. Create multifocal osteolytic lesions with little or no
ferent from spondylosis, which involves ends of vertebral
periosteal response.
bodies.
175
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
3. Margins may be well-defined or mildly indistinct.
4. Little or no osteolysis is present.
5. Predilection sites:
a. Dogs: near stifle.
b. Cats: humerus or femur.
c. May occur in frontal bone or ramus of mandible.
6. With time, mass may invade cortex and extend into med-
ullary cavity.
 7. Pulmonary metastasis may eventually occur.
Differential diagnosis for parosteal osteosarcoma:
1. Trauma.
2. Osteosarcoma.
3. Osteomyelitis.
Digital neoplasia
Clinical correlations:
Figure 4.104 Metastatic neoplasia involving distal femur and proximnal
1. Other names: subungual tumor.
tibia (lateral radiograph). Multiple sites of decreased opacity are present
2. Tumors affecting digits may originate in bone or soft
with indlistinct margins. (Adapted frorm Owens and Biery 1999.)
tissue (see Differential Diagnoses section, this chapter).
3. Most often reported in older large-breed dogs with black
hair coats.
b. Periosteal response may involve bones of pelvis or
4. Uncommon in cats.
femur.
5. Usually only one digit is involved, but multiple digits on 
one or more feet can be affected.
Differential diagnosis for metastatic bone tumors:
6. Clinical signs include lameness and swelling of digit(s).
1. Primary bone tumor.
 7. Histopathology is necessary for definitive diagnosis.
2. Osteomyelitis (especially mycotic infections).
3. Previous trauma (e.g., old single rib fracture).
Radiographic findings with digital fumors:
 4. Discospondylitis along caudal lumbar vertebrae.
1. Soft tissue swelling or mass associated with a digit.
2. Bone remodeling is primarily osteolytic and usually con-
 Parosteal osteosarcoma
fined to third phalanx.
Clinical correlations:
3. Lesions rarely cross a joint and tend to produce little or
1. Other names: juxtacortical osteosarcoma.
no periosteal response.
2. Slow-growing. osseous neoplasm that arises from bone
4. Conditions that may mimic osteolysis of a digit:
surface instead of intramedullary (most osteosarcomas are
a. Overexposed radiograph.
intramedullary).
3. Rare in dogs. most often reported in large and giant
breeds.
Differential diagnosis for digital neoplasia:
4. Second most common primary bone tumor in cats (after
1. Osteomyelitis.
2. Pododermatitis.
osteosarcoma).
3. Bone cyst.
5. Males are more often affected than females (2:1).
4. Nail bed infection.
6. Usually occurs in long bones, but can affect skull.
7. Clinical signs include swelling, abnormal gait, pain, and
lameness.
Giant cell tumor
8. Parosteal osteosarcomas have a better prognosis than do
Clinical correlations:
intramedullary osteosarcomas.
1. Other names: osteoclastoma.
 2. Usually benign and can occur in either appendicular or
Radiographic findings with parosteal osteosarcoma:
axial skeleton.
1. Smooth-bordered, nonaggressive, bony mass arising from
3. Rare in dogs and cats.
surface of bone.
 4. Most often reported in younger anirmals.
2. Mass is slow growing and tends to be lobulated and
 5. Clinical signs may be absent or nonspecific (e.g. poor
sclerotic.
appetite, weight loss, lethargy).
176
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Radiographic findings with giant cell tumor:
1. Expansile, osteolytic lesion with a multiloculated, sep-
Box 4.4 Primary bone tumor vs.
tated appearance.
osteomyelitis: general tendencies.
2. Bone margin usually is well-defined.
 1. Signalment of animal:
3. In some cases, tumor appears more aggressive with a
a. Neoplasia tends to affect older, larger animals.
variable zone of transition between normal and diseased
b. Osteomyeitis tends to affect younger animals.
bone.
 2. Location in bone:
 4. Most often found in epiphyses and metaphyses of long
 a. Neoplasia tends to arise in metaphysis, rarely in diaphysis or 
bones, especially distal ulna.
 epiphysis.
 5. Periosteal response usually is absent (if bone production
b. Osteomyelitis often affects the diaphysis.
is seen, rule out osteosarcoma).
c. Neoplasia tends to be monostotic and rarely crosses the
Differential diagnoses for giant cell fumor:
joint.
1. Bone cyst (cysts usually do not cross growth plate).
d. Osteomyelitis frequently is polyostotic and may invade
 2. Benign and malignant fibrous histiocytomas (sometimes
joints.
called giant cell tumors) appear similar to osteoclastomas.
 3. Soft tissue swelling:
but often are more aggressive.
 a. Swelling tends to be localized with neoplasia.
b. Osteomyelitis tends to produce more diffuse swelling.
3. Other tumors usually produce wider, less-defined zones
of transition and significant changes on serial radiographs
4. Bone remodeling:
(e.g., fibrous histiocytoma, fibrous dysplasia, osteoblastoma.
 a. Neoplasia tends to be more destructive than osteomyelitis.
 osteosarcoma, osteoma).
 b. Osteomyelitis tends to produce a larger periosteal response
than neoplasia.
Bone infarcts
c. Neoplastic periosteal responses tend to be more irregular
Clinical correlation:
and less-defined.
1. Foci of osteonecrosis caused by decreased blood supply
d. Cortical destruction tends to be more severe with
to intramedullary bone.
neoplasia.
2. May be caused by primary bone tumor (most common
e. Codman's triangle tends to be more common with
 etiology), trauma, vasculitis, or embolism; has been reported 
 neoplasia.
following total hip arthroplasty.
 f. Serial radiographs tend to reveal more change with 
3. Most often reported in Schnauzers, but can occur in any
 neoplasia than with osteomyelitis.
breed.
 5. Sequestrum can occur with osteomyelitis but is not seen with
4. Clinical signs usually are absent (primary tumor may
neoplasia.
cause clinical signs).
Radiographic findings with bone infarcts (Figure 4.105):
1. Multiple small areas of increased medullary opacity
(similar in opacity to cortical bone).
 2. Usually distinct with well-defined but irregular margins.
3. One or more bones may be affected; long bones are most
commonly involved (especially distal to elbow and stifle).
4. May also affect diploe (spongy internal part of the
cranium}.
Differential diagnosis for bone infarcts:
1. Feline leukemia virus infection (cats).
2. Erythrocyte pyruvate kinase deficiency (Basenjis).
Soft tissues
Soft tissue swelling or mass
Clinical correlations:
1. Swelling may be localized or diffuse.
2. Common etiologies include inflammation, edema, and 
Figure 4.105 Bone infarcts. Multiple, irregular-shaped foci of increased
hemorrhage (other possible etiologies are in Differential
opacity are present in medullary cavity of radlius and ulna. (Adapted from
Diagnoses section, this chapter).
Owens and Biery 1999.)
177
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
3. Soft tissue masses include abscess, granuloma, hema-
b. Mineralization is abnormal bioprecipitation or impreg-
toma, and tumor.
nation of inorganic substances (such as calcium) into
organic tissue (includes petrification and fossilization).
Radiographic findings with soft tissue swelling:
c. Ossification is process of creating new bone by osteo-
 blasts (NOTE: Calcification occurs during ossification, but 
1. Type of soft tissue mass cannot be differentiated on survey
radiographs.
reverse is not true).
2. Affected tissues are increased in thickness and may be
d. Heterotopic ossification occurs in extraskeletal loca-
ill-defined.
tions and may be idiopathic or result from trauma, fibro-
3. Normal fascial planes are displaced and often indistinct
dysplasia, or neurologic disease (e.g., tetanus, paralysis).
or obliterated.
2. Mechanisms of soft tissue mineralization are indistin-
4. Mild swelling or small masses may not be detected, espe-
guishable on radiographs (histopathology is necessary for
cially if within muscle.
differentiation).
5. Subperiosteal hemorrhage usually is not evident until
3. Clinical signs usually are absent unless secondary com-
mineralization occurs (7 to 10 days).
plications occur (e.g., ulceration, infection).
6. Fatty masses (e.g., lipoma, liposarcoma) are less opaque
4. Dystrophic mineralization:
than soft tissue and commonly develop within fascial planes.
a. Occurs in damaged, degenerating. or dead tissue.
7. Conditions that may mimic swelling:
 b. Localized to specific area of tissue damage.
a. Positioning aid causing bunching of skin.
c. Serum calcium and phosphorous are normal.
b. Superimposed skin fold.
d. Possible etiologies include:
1) Trauma.
Soft tissue emphysema
2) Neoplasia.
3) Inflammation/infection.
Clinical correlations:
4) Abscess.
1. Abnormal presence of gas in subcutaneous, interfascial.
5) Hematoma.
or intramuscular tissues.
5. Metastatic calcification:
2. May be caused by:
a. Occurs in tissues away from disease site.
a. Penetrating injury (e.g., bite wound, gunshot wound,
b. Most often due to abnormal calcium/phosphorous
recent surgery, injection).
metabolism:
b. Infection with gas-forming bacteria (e.g., Clostridia).
1) Hyperpa rat hyroidism.
c. Leakage from lung. trachea, or a GI structure
2) Hyperadrenocorticism.
d. Other trauma (e.g., facial bone fracture).
3. Clinical signs vary depending on cause and severity of 
3) Chronic renal disease.
4) Vitamin D toxicosis.
emphysema.
6. Myositis ossificans:
 4. Infection commonly produces fever and pain and heat at
the affected site.
a. Occurs in muscle.
b. Usually secondary to trauma.
 5. Severe ermphyserma presents with crepitus and a palpable
7. Ossifying tendonitis/enthesopathy:
crackling under the skin.
a. Occurs at insertion sites of muscles (e.g.. gluteal
tendon attachment on the trochanter major of femur;
Radiographic findings with soft tissue emphysema:
Figure 4.19).
1. Localized or generalized gas opacity in soft tissues.
b. Usually secondary to chronic inflammation or repeti-
2. Skin may be displaced away from the body (with large
tive trauma.
 gas accumulations).
8. Calcinosis cutis:
3. Localized infections typically produce multiple small
a. Calcium deposits in skin.
bubbles of gas.
b. May involve dystrophic, metastatic, idiopathic, or iat-
4. Conditions
that
may be mistaken for soft
tissue
rogenic causes of cutaneous calcification.
emphysema:
c. Common in animals with hypercorticosterism.
a. Positioning aid causing bunching of skin.
9. Calcinosis circumscripta/tumoral calcinosis
b. Fat opacity may be mistaken for gas opacity.
a. Subcutaneous depositions of calcium in firm, well-
circumscribed, tumorlike nodules (Figure 4.106).
Soft tissue mineralization
b. Occurs on limbs, under foot pads, and over bony
Clinical correlations:
prominences (e.g., spinous processes, shoulder).
1. Types of mineralization include:
c. Lesions in foot pads may be painful.
a. Calcification is the normal or abnormal deposition of
d. Uncommon in dogs and rare in cats (German Shep-
calcium salts into soft tissues.
herd Dogs are overrepresented).
178
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
2. Calcinosis cutis:
a. Linear or granular mineral opacities in subcutaneous
tissues, usually near skin surface.
b. Commonly occurs along dorsum of thorax or abdomen.
3. Calcinosis circumscripta (Figure 4.l06):
a. Rounded clusters of inhomogeneous mineralization in
an area of soft tissue swelling.
b. Usually adjacent to bone, but not involving bone.
c. No periosteal response or evidence of osteolysis.
4. Superimposed
structures may mimic
　soft tissue
mineralization:
a. Wet or dirty hair coat.
b. Medication on skin or hair.
c. Dirt on imaging plate, film cassettes, or screens.
d. Skin growth (e.g., nipple, nodule).
e. Positioning aid (e.g. sand bag. foam wedge).
Differential diagnoses for soff tissue mineralization:
1. Fractured or avulsed bone fragment.
2. Foreign material.
Figure 4.106 Calcinosis circumscripta (dorsopalmar radiograph).
3. Neoplasia.
 Hos jeabueleydodleneiau aul ui juasad s! uogezjelauu snoydloun
tissues, but it does not involve bone. (Adapted frorm Owens and Biery
1999.)
Chondrocalcinosis
Clinical correlations:
1. Other names: pseudogout, calcium pyrophosphate depo
sition disease.
e. Usually idiopathic, but can result from trauma, renal
 2. Disease of unknown etiology that results in articular or
failure, or iatrogenic causes.
periarticular deposition of calcium pyrophosphate crystals.
f. Most often reported in young (less than 2 years of
3. Rare in dogs, most often reported in older animals.
age), rapidly growing. large-breed dogs.
4. Clinical signs include swelling and pain in affected
10. Vascular mineralization:
joint(s), lameness, and fever.
a. Develops in walls of vessels.
b. Usually idiopa thic.
Radiographic findings with chondrocalcinosis:
C. Dogs: most often reported in abdominal aorta and its
1. Variable sized areas of mineralization in or near a joint.
major branches.
2. Lesions are slow growing. well circumscribed, and may
d. Cats: most often reported in thoracic aorta (usually
be lobulated.
older cats).
3. Usually only a single joint is affected.
e. May occur with systemic or endocrine disease:
4. Most often reported in lower extremities (e.g., carpus,
1) Hypothyroidism.
metatarsophalangeal joints).
2) Hyperpa rat hyroidism.
3) Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's syndrome) .
Foreign objects in soft tissues
11. Idiopathic soft tissue calcification:
Clinical correlations:
a. May be hereditary in some dog breeds (e.g.. German
1. Common in dogs and cats (e.g., needles, bullet fragments.
Shepherd Dog. Great Dane).
gravel, glass, wood, plastic, plant material).
12. Iatrogenic soft tissue calcification:
2. Clinical signs vary from none to inflammation, infection,
a. Reaction to suture material (e.g., polydioxanone).
and a draining tract.
b. Drug reaction (e.g.. progesterone).
3. Other lesions may be concurrent (e.g., fracture caused by
c. Tissue damage at site of surgery.
a projectile).
d. May develop at site of an injection.
1. At least two orthogonal radiographs (perpendicular to
Radiographic findings with soft tissue mineralization:
 one another) are required to localize foreign material.
1. Range from disorganized to highly organized mineral
2. Metallic foreign objects usually are readily identified
opacity areas within soft tissues.
(e.g., projectiles, needles).
179
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
3. Glass, wood, and many plastic objects are soft tissue
Lymphedema
opacity and often not distinguished on survey radiographs.
Clinical correlations:
4. Soft tissue swelling may or may not be visible.
1. Soft tissue swelling due to abnormal accumulation of
5. Signs of trauma may be present (e.g., fracture caused by
lymph fluid.
a projectile, emphysema).
2. May result from a congenital malformation, trauma.
6. Contrast radiography (e.g., fistulogram) may aid in locat-
venous stasis, infection, or neoplasia.
ing foreign material, if a draining tract or site of entry is
3. Congenital lymphedema is caused by hypoplasia or
found.
aplasia of peripheral lymph nodes and lymphatic vessels
(most often reported in Bulldogs and Poodles). Clinical signs
Arteriovenous fistula
are noticeable at birth or within several months.
 4. Affected animals have nonpainful swelling and pitting
Clinical correlations:
edema, which begins distally and progresses proximally
1. Abnormal communication between an artery and vein.
2. May be acquired (more common) or congenital.
 along affected limbs.
3. Can result from a traumatic incident (e.g., blunt force
injury. previous surgery. vascular puncture, perivascular
Radiographic findings with lymphedema:
1. Soft tissue swelling involving distal portion of a limb or
injection of irritating chemicals).
entire limb (swelling is extracapsular).
4. Most often reported in limbs, but may occur in ear, head.
2. One or more limbs may be affected.
neck, or internal organs (e.g., liver, lung. and bowel).
3. Osseous involvement is not usually seen (unless edema
5. Limb fistulas present as warm, soft tissue swellings that
is secondary to trauma).
may or may not be painful.
6. A continuous bruit may be present at the site.
4. Contrast radiography includes lymphangiography (not
commonly done).
7. Rarely, a fistula may become large enough to cause sec
ondary congestive heart failure.
Differential diagnosis for lymphedema:
1. Cellulitis.
Radiographic findings with arteriovenous fistula:
2. Hemorrhage.
1. Local soft tissue swelling at fistula site.
3. Vasculitis.
2. Periosteal response may be present.
3. Cortical bone may be thinned or disrupted (pressure
remodeling, osteolysis).
Appendicular skeleton
 4. Selective angiography documents the fistula.
 Congenital and developmental anomalies
Alterations in number of bones
Lymphadenopathy
Clinical correlations:
ECTRODACTYLY
Clinical correlations:
1. Generally
refers
to
lymph
node
enlargement
1. Other names:
split hand deformity.
lobster-claw
(lymphadenomegaly).
syndrome.
2. Usually associated
1with inflammatory or neoplastic
2. Includes a variety of congenital malformations in bones
disease.
of a limb, usually unilateral.
3. Most commonly affects metatarsal or metacarpal bones.
than in adults.
4. No breed or gender predisposition.
4. Peripheral lymph node enlargement may be palpable
5. Clinical signs depend on severity of deformity: may see
an abnormal gait and lameness.
Radiographic findings with tymphadenopathy:
1. Knowledge
of
normal
lymph node
locations
Radiographic findings with ectrodactyly (Figure 4.107):
important.
1. One or more central digits are absent or reduced in size.
2. Soft tissue nodule or mass displaces adjacent fascial
 2. Metacarpal or metatarsal bones often are further sepa-
planes or fat.
rated than normal or may be fused.
3. Normal peripheral lymph nodes may be visible when
3. Elbow subluxation or luxation may be present.
surrounded by fat.
4. Enlarged peripheral lymph nodes are more likely to be
HEMIMELIA
visible.
Clinical correlations:
5. Contrast radiography includes lymphangiography (not
1. Congenital absence (partial or complete) of a normally
commonly done; see chapter 3 for method).
paired bone.
180
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
3. Development of extra digit(s) may be partial or
complete.
SYNDACTYLY
Clinical correlations:
1. Bony or soft tissue fusion of two or more digits.
2. May be heritable (variable modes of inheritance).
3. Clinical signs tend to be minimal or absent.
Radiographic finding with syndactyly:
1. Two or more digits blend together (bony fusion) or are
immediately adjacent to one another (fibrous fusion).
CANINE LEUKOCYTE ADHESION DISORDER
Clinical correlations:
1. Other names: canine leukocyte adhesion protein defi-
ciency, canine granulocytopathy syndrome.
2. Rare inherited condition that impairs function of
granulocytes.
3. Affected animals have stunted growth and recurrent
severe bacterial infections.
4. Disease is invariably fatal, with most animals dying at a
Figure 4.107 Ectrodactyly. Abnormal limb development with separation
few months of age.
of the metacarpal bones and dligits with digit aplasia. (Adapted from
5. Reported in Irish Setter, Irish Red and White Setter.
Owens and Biery 1999.)
Doberman Pinscher, and Weimeraner.
6. Clinical signs include fever, anorexia, weight loss, gingi-
vitis, lymph node enlargement, and impaired wound healing:
2. Most commonly involves radius/ulna or tibia/fibula.
bacterial infections respond poorly to antibiotic therapy.
3. Affected animals have moderate gait abnormalities.
Radiographic findings with canine leukocyte
Radiographicfindingswith hemimelia:
adhesion disorder:
1. Usually, either radius or tibia is partially or completely
1. Periosteal response develops along mandible (may resem-
absent.
ble craniomandibular osteopathy).
2. Less commonly. ulna or fibula is affected.
2. Frontal sinuses are increased in opacity.
3. Existing bone of affected pair has a larger diameter and
3. Metaphyses often are flared (widened) and stippled
thicker cortices than normal.
(heterogenous).
4. Joints proximal or distal often are subluxated or luxated.
4. Osteomyelitis may be present.
POLYDACTYLY
Chondrodysplasia
Clinical correlations:
Clinical correlations:
 1. Other names: hyperdactyly.
1. Other names:
dwarfism，（
osteochondral dysplasias,
2. One or more extra digits, usually adjacent to frst digit.
achondrodysplasia.
3. Common in cats and in some dog breeds (e.g. Great
2. Inherited skeletal deformity caused by abnormal endo-
Pyrenees).
chondral ossification.
4. Inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with a variety
3. Can result in numerous abnormalities:
of expressions.
a. Stunted growth with forward slanting of body.
5. Usually asymptomatic. but propensity for traumatic
b. Asynchronous growth of radius and ulna results in
injury of the supernumerary digit(s).
lateral bowing of thoracic limbs with lateral deviation of
paws and carpal enlargement.
Radiographic findings with polydactyly:
c. Hemivertebrae.
1. Greater than normal number of digits, usually on medial
d. Subluxation of elbows and patellas.
side of foot.
e. Stenotic nares and elongated soft palate.
2. Most often involves metacarpal and/or metatarsal bones
4. Formation of ossification centers and physeal closure
 and sometimes phalanges.
times often are similar to nonchondrodystrophic animals.
181
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
5. Chondrodysplasia can result in proportionate dwarfism
b. Predominately affects distal appendicular skeleton
(all bones equally affected) or disproportionate dwarfism
(i.e., tarsi, carpi, metatarsals, metacarpals) and is more
(variable effects on a number of bones).
severe in pelvic limbs.
6. Some animals have been selectively bred to be chondro-
c. Characterized by short deformed limbs. a short
dysplastic (e.g., Dachshund, Basset Hound, Bulldog, Pug.
inflexible tail, overgrowth of nails.
. and partial
Pekinese, Lhasa Apso, Welsh Corgi, Munchkin cats).
deafness.
7. When chondrodysplasia is not characteristic for the
d. Affected animals exhibit difficulty standing. abnor-
breed, it is commonly referred to as dwarfism. Breeds fre-
mal gait, and lameness.
quently affected with dwarfism include Alaskan Malamute.
15. Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia (pseudochondrodyspla-
Akita, Australian Shepherd, Beagle, Bedlington Terrier,
sia):
Cocker Spaniel, Doberman Pinscher, English Pointer, English
a. Disproportionate dwarfism reported in Beagles and
Springer Spaniel, German Shorthaired Pointer, Great Pyre-
Miniature Poodles.
nees, Irish Setter, Labrador Retriever, Newfoundland, Saint
b. Affected animals have shortened limbs, spinal kypho-
Bernard, Shetland Sheepdog, Scottish Terrier, Norwegian
sis, and enlarged joints.
Elkhound, Samoyed, and domestic shorthaired cats.
c. Clinical signs usually are recognized by 2 to 3 weelks
8. Clinical signs include abnormal gait and lameness.
 of age and include poor growth, difficulty standing, and
9. Pituitary dwarfism:
abnormal gait.
a. Proportionate dwarfism due to inadequate growth
16. Ocular-skeletal dwarfism in Samoyed:
hormone.
a. Disproportionate dwarfism inherited with concur-
b. Affected animals are diminutive in stature, slow to
rent ocular defects.
 grow, and tend to retain juvenile hair coats (though sym-
b. Thoracic limbs tend to be shorter than pelvic limbs
 metrical alopecia and hyperpigmentation often develop
and typically present with varus (inward) deformity at
later).
 elbows and valgus (outward) deviation of distal limbs.
c. Concurrent anomalies may include patent ductus
c. Prominent doming of forehead is typical.
arteriosus, megaesophagus, and hypothyroidism.
d. Affected animals exhibit lameness, retinal detach-
d. Most often reported in German Shepherd Dog. Min-
ment, and cataracts.
iature Pinscher, Spitz, and Covelian Bear Dog.
17. Skeletal-retinal dysplasia in Labrador Retrievers (ocular
e. Clinical signs usually are absent unless other anoma-
chondrodysplasia ):
lies are present.
a. Disproportionate dwarfism inherited with skeletal
10. Chondrodysplasia of Great Pyrenees:
and ocular defects (latter includes retinal dysplasia,
a. Disproportionate dwarfism resulting in shortened
retinal detachment, and cataract formation).
limbs and shortened bodies, but a normal size skull.
b. Body length is normal, but limbs are abnormally
b. Thoracic limbs tend to be shorter than pelvic limbs.
shortened.
1l. Chondrodysplasia (dwarfism) of Alaskan Malamutes:
c. Affected animals exhibit impaired vision, valgus limb
a. Disproportionate dwarfism inherited as a simple
 deformity, and hyperextended hind legs.
altosomal recessive trait.
18. Tibial metaphyseal dysplasia:
b. Limbs are short and bowed, but body length, spine.
a. Disproportionate dwarfism due to abnormal devel-
and skull size are normal
 opment of distal tibial metaphysis.
C. A macrocytic, hemolytic anemia may be present.
b. May be unilateral or bilateral.
12. Dwarfism of Norwegian Elkhound:
c. Results in pes varus, an inward curving of the foot
a. Disproportionate dwarfism similar to dwarfism of
(only lateral aspect of foot touches ground) .
Alaskan Malamutes, but body tends to be shorter.
d. Reported in Dachshunds as an inherited defect.
13. Enchondrodystrophy (dysostosis):
e. Affected animals commonly
develop lameness
a. Disproportionate dwarfism reported in English
between 2 and 6 months of age.
Pointers.
b. Thoracic limbs tend to be more severely affected than
 pelvic limbs.
Radiographic findings with proportionate dwarfism:
C. Abnormal movements (such as bunny-hopping gait)
 1. All bones are smaller than normal but proporionate in
usually are evident by l0 weeks of age.
size.
14. Feline osteodystrophy (chondrodysplasia of Scottish
2. Ossification centers may be delayed in appearance.
Fold Cats}:
 3. Physes commonly appear widened and irregular.
a. Disproportionate dwarfism inherited in "fold ear"
 4. Epiphyses may be inhomogeneous and incompletely ossi-
ca ts.
fied (epiphyseal dysplasia).
182
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
10. Vertebrae may be normal or abnormal depending on
type of chondrodysplasia. Abnorrmal vertebrae affect body
length and commonly appear shortened with irregular
incompletely ossified endplates with delayed fusion to ver-
tebral body.
11. Ribs may appear flared (widened) and cupped at costo-
 chondral junctions.
12. Retained enchondral cartilage is sometimes present in
distal ulnar metaphysis.
13. Development of coronoid process.
. medial humeral
condyle, and anconeal process may be delayed or
incomplete.
14. Chondrodysplasia of Scottish Fold Cats
a. Predominately affects metatarsal, metacarpal, and
phalangeal bones.
b. Often accompanied by new bone production along
a  su pu sad jo sadse rd pu rud
Figure 4.108 Epiphyseal dysplasia involving a tibia (lateral radiograph).
to ankylosis}.
Epiphyseal ossification is delayed, physes are wide and irregular, and 
C. Osseous remodeling may appear aggressive in some
metaphyses are flared and increased in opacity.
cats, with punctate osteolysis in carpal and tarsal bones.
15. Tibial metaphyseal dysplasia
a. Tibia is abnormally shortened and often curved.
b. Secondary deformity of fibula is common.
Radiographic findings with disproportionate dwarfism:
c. Lateral trochlear groove of tibia is shallow, often
1. Epiphyseal dysplasia is present in variable degrees of
leading to subluxation of tibiotarsal joint.
severity:
d. A beak-shaped exostosis may be present on medial
a. Epiphyses appear mottled and ossification is delayed
aspect of distal tibial metaphysis.
(Figure 4.108):
1) Usually evident between 3 weeks and 3 months of
Congenital hypothyroidism
age.
Clinical correlations:
2) After 4 months epiphyseal lesions may be difficult
1. Other names: cretinism.
to recognize due to ossification.
2. Low levels of thyroid hormone during growth results in
b. Most common in humeral condyles, carpi, and tarsi.
disproportionate dwarfism.
but may involve femurs. metacarpi/metatarsi, and
3. May be caused by hypoplasia or aplasia of thyroid gland,
vertebrae.
defective thyroid hormone synthesis, or iodine deficiency.
2. Bones of extremities are abnormally shortened; thoracic
4. Uncommon in dogs: most often reported in Boxers (also
limbs tend to be more severely affected (especially radius
Affenpinscher, Giant Schnauzer, Great Dane, and Scottish
and ulna).
Deerhound).
3. Physes often are wide and irregular.
 4. Metaphyses appear flared, flattened, and increased in
5. Affected animals have short, bowed limbs, long necks
and trunks, kyphosis, a broad and short skull, and delayed
opa city.
dental eruption.
5. Carpal and tarsal bones may be misshapen.
6. Clinical signs include lethargy. constipation, juvenile hair
6. Asynchronous growth of radius and ulna is common,
coat, anemia, hypercholesterolemia, and signs related to
resulting in radius curvus and valgus pes deformity.
hypothyroidism.
7. With maturity. physeal and metaphyseal abnormali-
7. Concurrent hydrocephalus may be present.
ties often regress; however, long bone deformities are
8. If hypothyroidism occurs after cessation of bone growth,
permanent.
 no dwarfism or skeletal changes develop.
 8. Secondary degenerative joint disease is common (many
 affected animals have hip dysplasia).
9. Skull usually is normal (may see doming of calvarium
Radiographic findings with congenital hypothyroidism:
with ocular-skeletal dwarfism in Samoyed or mandibular
1. Epiphyses 
appear mottled and are delayed in
prognathism with enchondrodystrophy).
ossifica tion.
183
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
2. Proximal tibia, distal femur, and distal humerus are most
3. May mimic pathology. but no soft tissue swelling or active
severely affected.
bone remodeling is present.
3. Closure of physes is delayed, resulting in wide and irregul-
lar growth plates.
Differential diagnoses of growth arrest lines:
4. Skull is shorter and broader than normal due to delayed
1. Panosteitis.
closure of fontanelles and shortened facial bones.
2. Fracture (e.g., stress, folding. compression).
5. Carpal and tarsal bone ossification is delayed.
6. Long bones are shortened, bowed, and have thick
Hyperparathyroidism
cortices
Clinical correlations
7. Increased medullary opacity is common, especially in
1. Abnormal, excessive production of parathormone by
radius and ulna.
parathyroid glands.
8. Vertebrae usually are abnormally shaped and shortened
 2. More commonly seen in dogs than cats.
o readde ael eisedsap aieua lqaa on a
3. Types of hyperparathyroidism:
shaped); spinal kyphosis is a frequent result.
a. Primary hyperparathyroidism is caused by disease in
9. Secondary degenerative joint disease is common.
one or more parathyroid glands (e.g., adenoma, carci-
noma, adenomatous hyperplasia).
Growth arrest lines
b. Secondary hyperparathyroidism is caused by hypocal-
Clinical correlations:
cemia, which stimulates parathyroid glands to produce
1. Other names: stress lines, growth retardation lines.
extra parathormone (hypocalcemia may result from
2. Caused by changes in rate of bone growth in immature
nutritional deficiency or chronic renal disease).
animals.
c. Pseudo-hyperparathyroidism  is associated with a
3. May be caused by dietary changes or systemic illness.
malignant neoplasm (tumor causes hypercalcemia, pos-
4. Clinical signs are absent in adult animals.
sibly due to ectopic secretion of a parathormone-like
substance).
Radiographic findings with growth arrest lines:
1) Parathyroid glands are normal.
1. Thin, well-defined, horizontal lines of increased opacity
2) No skeletal metastases are present.
in a long bone diaphysis (Figure 4.109)
3) Has been reported with:
2. Most common in femur and usually bilateral.
a) Lymphoma.
b) Adenocarcinoma (anal gland, mammary gland.
thyroid).
c) Multiple myeloma.
d) Interstitial cell tumor (testicle).
e) Squamous cell carcinoma (stomach).
4. Immature animals with hyperparathyroidism develop
growth deformities (usually permanent); extreme cases can
result in fibrous osteodystrophy.
5. Clinical signs include hypercalcemia, weakness, anorexia,
vomiting. bradycardia, polyuria, and polydypsia.
Radiographic findings with hyperparathyroidism:
1. Generalized decrease in bone opacity which affects entire
skeleton (osteoporosis).
2. Cortices become thin and faint with decreased bone to
soft tissue contrast.
 3. Coarse trabecular pattern.
 4. Growth deformities (immature animals) and pathologic
fractures are common.
 5. Loss of dental lamina dura is an early sign of disease; in
advanced cases, teeth appear to float in soft tissue due to
severe bone loss (fibrous osteodystrophy).
Figure 4.109 Growth arrest lines in femoral diaphysis (lateral
Differential diagnosis of hyperparathyroidism:
radiograph). Thin, well-defined, horizontal lines of increased opacity in a
1. Rickets.
femnoral diaphysis. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
2. Osteogenesis imperfecta.
184
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Hypertrophic osteodystrophy (HOD)
a. Physis is not involved.
Clinical correlations:
b. A narrow zone of osteosclerosis may develop next to
1. Other names: metaphyseal osteopathy, skeletal scurvy.
line of decreased opaciry.
Moller-Barlow's disease.
c. Adjacent soft tissue swelling is common.
2. Systemic disease of unknown etiology that results in sub-
d. Mild metaphyseal flaring may be present.
 periosteal hermorrhage and transient defect in metaphyseal
4. With progression, subperiosteal hemorrhage begins to
mineralization.
mineralize, producing a cuff or sleeve of new bone along
3. Primarily affects long bone metaphyses: rarely involves
metaphyses (Figure 4.lloC). This cuff may be separated
mandible, cranium, and/or ribs.
from underlying cortex by remaining subperiosteal hemor-
4. Contributing factors may include:
rhage (which is soft tissue opacity).
a. Canine distemper virus.
5. Later, periosteal responses develops in an attempt to heal
b. Imbalance of dietary calcium and phosphorus.
lesions (Figure 4.1l0D).
c. Infection, possibly with a link to respiratory disease.
6. During resolution, when disease is no longer active, peri-
d. Nutritional oversupplementation.
osteal bone cuffs gradually remodel and become smaller.
e. Vitamin C deficiency
7. Rarely, periosteal responses become severe and can bridge
5. Most often reported in rapidly growing large- and giant-
physes (may affect bone growth) or extend proximally along
breed dogs.
diaphysis (Figure 4.1l0E).
6. Affected  animals usually present  with clinical signs
 8. Lesions occasionally involve other parts of skeleton (e.g..
between 3 and 6 months of age.
mandible, cranium, ribs).
7. Metaphyses become swollen, warm, and painful to palpa-
9. Distal rib ends may appear widened, increased in opacity.
tion (often confused with joint swelling).
and concave in shape.
8. Signs include reluctance to stand or walk, fever, depres-
10. Conditions that may mimic HOD:
sion, anorexia, diarrhea, anemia, leukocytosis, foot pad
a. Normal growth at metaphyseal cutback zone in
hyperkera tosis.
immature animals.
9. Disease tends to be self-limiting. often resolving after a
Differential diagnosis of HOD:
few weeks.
1. Atypical craniomandibular osteopathy (craniomandibu-
10. Severe disease can result in bridging of physes and lead
lar osteopathy may be a form of HOD).
to angular limb deformities.
2. Canine leukocyte adhesion disorder.
11. In very severe cases, death can occur due to concurrent
3. Cranial hyperostosis (reported in Bullmastiffs): presents
septicemia (pneumonia).
with excessive bone growth in calvarium and frontal sinuses 
and may produce appendicular changes similar to HOD.
Radiographic findings with HOD:
4. Lead poisoning.
1. Any long bone metaphyses can be affected, but lesions
tend to be most severe in distal radius and ulna.
Mucopolysaccharidosis
2. Lesions usually are bilateral and symmetrical.
Clinical correlations:
3. Initially. a line of decreased opacity develops parallel to
1. Group of inherited diseases characterized by accumula-
the physis (described as double physis sign: Figure 4.1l0B).
tions of mucopolysaccharides (MPs) in various tissues.
Figure 4.110 Hypertrophic osteodystrophy. A. Normal distal radius. B. Line of decreased opacity develops parall to physis. C. Subperiosteal
hemmorrhage begins to mineralie, forming a cuff of new bone around metaphysis. D. Periosteal response in an attermpt to heal the lesion. E. Severe
185
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
2. MPS are long chains of sugar molecules, also called
glycosaminoglyca ns.
3. Degradation of MPs by lysosomal enzymes is necessary
for normal growth.
 4. Accumulation of MPS results in progressive and perma-
nent damage to musculoskeletal, ocular, neurologic, and
circulatory systems.
5. Affected animals lack sufficient quality or quantity of
lysosomal enzymes.
6. Disease is uncommon
1 in dogs and cats, most often
reported in Siamese cats.
7. A variety of abnormalities are possible, depending on
type of enzyme deficiency.
a. Type I has been reported in Plott Hounds and domestic
cats.
Figure 4.111 Feline mucopolysaccharidosis (lateral radiographs).
b. Type II has been reported in Pointers and cats.
A. Normal lumbar spine. B. Vertebral bodies are shortened and irregular
c. Type VI has been reported in Siamese cats, Miniature
Pinscher, and Welsh Corgi.
Owens and Biery 1999.)
d. Type VIl has been reported in both dogs and cats.
8. Clinical signs:
a. Depend on type and severity of disease and may not
12. Vertebrae may be fused, shortened, and/or misshapen
be apparent at birth.
(cuboid in appearance), especially along cervical and lumbar
 b. Signs progress as animal ages and range from normal
spine (Figure 4.1l1).
in appearance
to short-legged dwarfs
with
facial
13. Vertebral body endplates usually are sclerotic and
dysmorphism.
degenerative
changes
may
sp uoe uasad aq 
c. Disproportionate dwarfism usually is evident by 8
articulations.
weeks of age.
14. Odontoid
 process (dens} may  be  hypoplastic
d. Facial dysmorphism appears as a large head, depressed
fra gmen ted.
nasal bridge. increased distance between eyes (hyper-
 15. Hip dysplasia and coxofemoral joint luxation is common.
telorism), undersized jaw (micrognathism), short neck,
 16. Many affected anirmals have mild to severe, generalized
and stubby malformed teeth.
Osteoporosis.
e. Vertebral anomalies can lead to spinal cord compres-
sion and neurologic signs, which often appear as paresis
Osteogenesis imperfecta
 ui padal a jo suu  on t q eadid 1o
Clinical correlations:
VI cats).
1. Rare, generalized defect in collagen production which
f. Joints may be swollen and stiff.
results in fragile bones.
g. Corneas often are clouded.
2. Inherited in Beagle, Bedlington Terrier, Collie, Golden
h. Cardiac anomalies and hydrocephalus may be present.
Retriever, Norwegian Elkhound, and Poodle.
3. May be concurrent with other similar disorders (e.g..
Radiographic findings with mucopolysaccharidosis:
dentinogenesis imperfecta ).
1. Epiphyseal ossification is delayed and incomplete, result-
4. Affected animals present with dwarfism, deformed limbs.
ing in a mottled, granular appearance to ends of long bones
blue sclera, thin skin, brittle and discolored teeth (often
2. Metaphyses appear widened and flared.
pink), and occasionally deafness.
3. Many appendicular joints appear deformed.
5. Pathologic fractures are common and may be multiple.
4. Secondary degenerative joint disease is common.
5. Midfacial bones and nasal turbinates are shortened.
Radiographic findings with osteogenesis imperfecta:
6. Maxillary and incisive bones appear short and appear
1. Diffuse, generalized osteoporosis.
flattened.
2. Pathologic fractures are common.
7. May see aplasia or hypoplasia of frontal sinuses.
3. Limbs may be deformed and in various stages of fracture
8. Pectus excavatum often is present.
healing.
9. Long bone diaphyses usually are enlarged.
4. Malunion fractures are frequently present.
10. Clavicles may be widened.
 5. Rib cage typically is small and may compress intrathoracic
11. Ends of ribs tend to be flared (described as oar shaped).
viscera.
186
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Differential diagnosis for osteogenesis imperfecta:
4. Rarely, valgus limb deformity may be a secondary com-
1. Hyperparathyroidism.
plication, more often seen with irregular-shaped cartilages
that extend to the cortex, and may result in radius curvus
Retained enchondral cartilage in distal ulna
and secondary degenerative joint disease.
Clinical correlations:
5. Retained cartilage can occur in distal radius or lateral
 1. Other names: retained cartilage core.
femoral condyle (uncommon).
2. Temporary or permanent presence of hypertrophied car-
tilage in distal ulnar metaphysis.
Rickets
3. Has also been reported in distal radius and lateral femoral
Clinical correlations:
condyle.
1. Other names: juvenile osteomalacia.
4. May be a form of osteochondrosis.
 2. Softening and weakening of bones due to vitamin D
5. Other diseases may be concurrent (e.g. hypertrophic
deficiency
osteodystrophy).
3. Rare in dogs and cats.
6. Most often reported in young (6 to 12 months old).
4. May be caused by feeding homemade diet insuffcient in
rapidly growing. large- and giant-breed dogs (e.g., Great
vitamin D or failure to absorb vitamin D due to hepatobiliary
Dane, Saint Bernard, Setters).
disease.
7. May be unilateral or bilateral.
5. Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism and bone
 8. Usually a self-limiting. incidental finding without clinical
deformities are common.
signs.
6. Clinical signs include deformed limbs, abnormal gait,
9. Uncommonly. retention of cartilage will delay ulnar
pain, and lameness.
 growth, resulting in valgus limb deformity.
Radiographic findings with rickets:
Radiographic findings with retained cartilage in ulna:
1. Physes are widened and have delayed ossification.
1. Triangular-shaped area of decreased opacity in distal
2. All physes are affected, but changes tend to be most
ulnar metaphysis (also described as cone shaped or candle
severe in distal radius, ulna, and tibia.
flame shaped), widest at physis and tapering into metaphysis
3. Metaphyses appear flared and have concave (cupped)
(Figure 4.112)
margins with pointed edges.
2. May be bilateral (make radiographs of contralateral limb) .
4. Epiphyses are normal (unlike most dysplasias).
3. A thin zone of osteosclerosis may surround decreased
5. Long bone deformities are common.
opacity area.
6. Soft tissue swelling is minimal or absent.
Panosteitis
Clinical correlations:
1. Other names: enostosis, eosinophilic panosteitis.
2. A self-limiting. myelosclerotic disease of long bones.
3. Etiology is unknown, but panosteitis does not appear to
be a true inflammatory disease.
4. May be associated with:
a. Genetics.
b. Viral or bacterial disease.
c. Transient vascular diseases.
d. Metabolic disease.
e. Endocrine dysfunction.
5. Most commonly affects large- and giant-breed dogs
(greater than 20kg).
6. German Shepherd Dogs and Bassett Hounds appear
predisposed.
 7. Usually affects dogs between 4 and 12 months of age, but
Figure 4.112 Retained enchondral cartilage in distal ulna (lateral
months to 7 years).
radiograph). A well-defined, triangular shaped area of decreased opacity
8. Males are more often affected than females (4:1).
is present in the distal ulnar metaphysis. The physes and epiphyses are
9. May involve a single limb, or several limbs may be simul-
normal. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
taneously or sequentially affected.
187
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
4. Growth anomalies (less opaque areas surrounded by
more opaque bone have been reported in the distal radius
and ulna of asymptomatic young Newfoundland dogs and
may mimic panosteitis).
Lead poisoning
Clinical correlations:
1. Other names: Plumbism.
2. Acute or chronic ingestion of lead-containing material.
3. Lead in a joint (e.g., bullet fragment) can result in lead
poisoning.
4. Rare in dogs and cats.
Figure 4.113 Panosteitis. A. Increased medullary opacity in distal
humerus and proximal ulna, panosteitis often begins near a nutrient
5. Clinical signs include vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain,
forammen (arrow). B. Panosteitis in femoral mnid-cdiaphysis and proximal
and seizures or dementia.
tibia. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
6. Chronic lead poisoning (plumbism) causes more vague
GI signs, weight loss, and anemia.
10. Clinical signs include lameness, pain upon deep palpa-
Radiographic findings of lead poisoning:
tion of long bones.
1. Metallic foreign material in GI tract (if recent lead inges-
and sometimes eosinophilia.
tion} or in a joint.
1l. Lameness commonly shifts between legs and may be
2. In most clinical cases, survey radiographs are
 protracted over several months.
unremarkable.
 3. Rarely, thin transverse sclerotic bands develop in metaph-
Radiographic findings with panosteitis:
yses of immature animals (parallel to growth plates); most
1. Radiographic findings may not correlate with severity of
often reported in distal radius/ulna and in vertebrae.
clinical signs.
4. Osteopenia is sometimes present.
2. Lesions commonly begin near a nutrient foramen and
appear as patchy, irregular, and ill-defined areas of increased
medullary opacity (Figure 4.113)
Pyruvate kinase defciency
Clinical correlation:
3. Intramedullary trabecular bone pattern becomes hazy
 1. Other names: erythrocyte pyruvate kinase deficiency.
and sclerotic.
4. Corticomedullary contrast is decreased at lesion sites.
2. An inherited erythrocyte enzyme deficiency.
5. Lesions may be solitary or multiple, small or large, and
3. Marrow cavities of all bones fill with fibrous connective
may affect one or more bones.
tissue and new bone.
6. Usually seen in larger long bones (e.g., humerus, radius.
4. Reported in Basenji, West Highland White Terriers, and
ulna, femur, tibia), but metacarpal and metatarsal bones are
other breeds
 5. Has been reported in cats.
occa sionally involved.
7. Soft tissue swelling is absent.
6. Clinical signs are those of anemia (e.g., lethargy. exercise
8. Lesions often are bilateral but not symmetrical (make
intolerance).
radiographs of contralateral limb).
9. In severe cases, lesions can progress to occupy most of
Radiographic findings with pyruvate kinase deficiency:
the diaphyseal medullary cavity.
1. Increased medullary opacity in affected bones.
10. A thin, smooth-bordered periosteal response sometimes
2. All bones are affected (skull, spine, long bones).
further increasing medullary opacity.
Joint disease
11. During recovery, narrow, transverse, sclerotic lines may
1. Joint disease may result from congenital, developmental,
persist in diaphysis (resemble growth arrest lines).
metabolic, degenerative, traumatic, inflammatory. or neo-
12. With time, bone resumes a normal appearance.
 plastic processes.
2. Diagnosis is based on clinical history, physical fndings.
Differential diagnosis of panosteitis:
laboratory data (including joint fluid analysis), and radio-
1. Growth arrest line.
graphic evaluation.
2. Summation of a periosteal response.
3. Radiographic findings frequently are nonspecific and
3. Bone infarct (usually better-defined than panosteitis
vary according to length and severity of underlying
lesions).
disorder.
188
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
 Congenital and developmental malformations
Clinical correlations:
the most common and specific radiographic finding with
1. Malformation is caused by arrested, delayed, or misdi-
DJD.
rected development which results in abnormal conforma-
d. Joint effusion and instability produce stress at attach-
tion.
ments of joint capsule and ligaments, leading to forma-
 2. Deformity may be congenital or acquired and usually is
tion of enthesophytes. Enthesophytes are less specific for
permanent.
 DJD and may result from a single episode of joint damage
3. May result from trauma, nutritional deficiency, meta-
Or degenerative change.
bolic disorder, or be associated with genetics (e.g.. hip
4. Primary DJD is idiopathic with no known specific or
dysplasia}.
predisposing cause (more common in middle-aged to older
4. Examples of malformation and abnormal conformation:
 animals and may represent an aging change due to normal
a. Valgus deformity: distal portion of limb turns outward
wear and tear).
(toes point lateral). (Memory tip: vaLgus toes point
5. Secondary DJD results from a known acquired or
Lateral.)
developmental disorder (e.g., trauma, osteochondrosis, hip
b. Varus deformity: distal portion of limb turns inward
dysplasia, elbow dysplasia, inflammation, infection) and
(toes point medial).
typically represents end result of these disorders.
c. Genu varum (knock-kneed): stifles angle inward
6. Affected animals are stiff upon rising but tend to improve
(touch each other) and tarsi are separated.
with activity.
d. Genu valgum (bow-legged): pelvic limbs bow outward
7. Clinical signs include lameness, reluctance to jump or
(stifles do not touch when tarsi are together)
 climb stairs, decreased range of movement, and reduced
e. Genu recurvatum: stifle bends backwards (hyperex-
activity.
tension due to muscle contracture).
 8. Osseous changes associated with DJD are irreversible, but
5. Ehler-Danlos syndrome: inherited disorder resulting in
progression may be slowed with appropriate therapy.
greater elasticity of connective tissues and increased joint
laxity.
Radiographic findings with DJD:
6. Malformations can create abnormal joint stress which
1. Early in disease, joints may appear normal on survey
may lead to an abnormal gait, lameness, and degenerative
radiographs.
joint disease. Many affected animals are asymptomatic.
2. Joint effusion is common, resulting in variable distention
of the joint capsule (severe effusion may widen joint space).
Radiographic findings with joint malformations:
(NOTE: Radiographic appearance of joint space width rep-
1. Bones may be abnormally shaped and/or joints may be
resents thickness of opposing surfaces of articular cartilage
abnormally angulated or subluxated (i.e., valgus or varus
rather than volume of joint fluid.)
limb deformity).
3. Osteophytes usually are first radiographic sign of DJD
2. Epiphyses may be hypoplastic or aplastic.
(Table 4.6)
3. A carpal or tarsal bone may be absent.
a. More often seen in dogs than in cats (osteophytes in
4. Vertebral anomalies include hemivertebrae, block verte.
cats are notable).
brae, and transitional vertebrae.
b. May be radiographically evident as early as 2 weeks
5. Secondary degenerative joint disease is common.
following joint instability.
6. Poor positioning may mimic malformation.
c. Increasing size and number of osteophytes on serial
radiographs aids in assessing progression of DJD.
Degenerative joint disease (DJD)
4. Enthesophytes are common due to joint capsule disten-
Clinical correlations:
tion and joint instability.
1. Other names: osteoarthritis, arthritis, osteoarthrosis.
5. Progressive loss of articular cartilage leads to narrowing
2. Most common arthropathy in dogs and cats.
of joint space.
3. Development of DJD (Table 4.6):
6. Subchondral osteosclerosis (eburnation) develops with
a. Damage to articular cartilage leads to joint effusion,
chronic wearing and osseous remodeling (NOTE: A rim of
instability, and loss of cushioning.
compact bone normally is present near joint surface and
b. Over time, weight-bearing articular cartilage progres-
should not be confused with osteosclerosis due to disease).
sively thins due to fibrillation, subjecting underlying
7. In severe cases, erosions or cystlike areas may form in
bone to increasing stress. Microfractures can develop in
subchondral bone.
subchondral bone, leading to osteosclerosis and, in severe
8. Mineralization associated with DJD may represent:
cases, erosive lesions.
a. Dystrophic mineralization of intra-articular and peri-
c. Peripheral (non-weight-bearing) articular cartilage
articular soft tissues (more common in cats than in dogs
proliferates in an attempt to stabilize the joint and even-
and may present as synovial osteochondromatosis).
189
Table 4.6 Degenerative joint disease
Development of degenerative joint disease
Normal joint.
· Injury to joint, caused by age-related wear and tear or other damage, alters joint fluid and leads to decreased lubrication.
● Swelling and pain result in dininished joint motion and altered weight distribution, leading to insufficient pumping action of joint fluid, lack of
nutrition to articular cartilage, and subsequent cartilage degeneration.
· Degenerating cartilage responds differently depending on degree of weight bearing. but degeneration commonly affects all cartilage
simmultaneously.
Weight-bearing articular cartilage
· Weight-bearing articular cartilage thins due to fibrillation.
·Joint space narrows.
Subchondral osteosclerosis (eburnation) develops due to loss of protective cartilage
+ Subchondral osteolysis may occur due to microfractures in the bone.
 Peripheral (non-weight-bearing) articular cartilage
 Peripheral cartilage hypertrophies
Vascular invasion of hypertrophied peripheral cartilage leads to mnineralization (formation of osteophytes)
 Osteophytes are most common radiographic sign of degenerative joint disease.
 Enthesophytes developed at attachmment sites of joint capsule, ligarments, and tendons due to swelling (joint effusion)
 and joint instability.
· Enthesophytes are nonspecific and may result from degenerative joint disease or joint trauma.
190
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
ize, synovial osteochomdroma. commonly called a joint
Table 4.7 Osteochondrosis and Osteochondritis dissecan5
mollse}.
Osteochondrosis
 Osteochondritis Dissecans
5. Can occur in any synovial joint, but most common in
● Thickened cartilage develops
● Fissure develops between
shoulder, elbow, stifle, and tarsus.
(mmay be necrotic)
thickened cartilage and 
6. May be predisposed by:
subchondral bone
a. Genetics: elbow osteochondrosis is heritable
in
 Resulting cartilage fragrment may
some breeds (e.g. Labrador Retriever, Golden Retriever.
partially or completely separate
Bernese Mountain Dog. Newfoundland).
● Epiphysis retains normal
 Epiphysis may be normal or
b. Rapid rate of growth (may be related to nutrition,
contour
abnormal in shape 
hormones, or genetics).
● Clinicaly not painful 
· Clinically painful due to
c. Trauma can incite or perpetuate cartilage damage at
inflammation (synovitis)
vulnerable sites (i.e., extension of shoulder results in
● Lirmb growth is not irnpaired
● Limb growth is not imnpaired
added stress from scapula to caudal aspect of humeral
● May heal or progress to
· Healing depends on lesion 
head, which can damage weakened cartilage).
osteochondritis dissecans
location; cartilage defect fills 
7. Most often reported in young. rapidly growing large- and
with fibrous tissue
giant-breed dogs.
● Secondary degenerative joint
 disease is common
8. Males are more often affected than females (2:1).
9. Lesions usually are bilateral; however, clinical signs may
only be apparent in one leg.
10. Affected animals have weight-bearing lameness which
typically is more severe after exercise.
b. Mineralized fragments of articular cartilage (some-
1l. Pain often is evident with extension and flexion of joint.
times called joint mice)
 12. If blood supply to cartilage is reestablished, endochon-
dral ossification can resume and clinical signs may not
develop.
Osteochondroses
1. A group of disorders in which a defect in endochondral
Radiographic findings with OCD:
ossification is the suspected underlying etiology:
1. Flattened or concave defect develops on articular margin
a. Osteochondritis dissecans (Table 4.7).
of affected bone (Figure 4.120).
b. Ununited anconeal process.
 2. Defect may appear lytic or sclerotic, depending on dura-
C. Ununited (fragmented) medial coronoid process.
tion and severity.
d. Traction apophysitis of tibial tuberosity (Osgood-
3. Possible lesion sites include:
Schlatter disease).
a. Shoulder (most common): caudal aspect of humeral
 2. These disorders develop during growth; therefore, clinical
head (Figure 4.114A).
Z 01 syuou t) swue sunoa un ieadde Aquowmo suis
b. Elbow (second most common): humeral condyle.
years of age).
anconeal process, or coronoid process (Figure 4.ll4B).
c. Tarsus (third most common): trochlea of talus.
d. Stifle (uncommon): femoral condyles (Figure 4.114C).
OSTEOCHONDRITIS DISSECANS (OCD)
e. Vertebrae (uncommon): lumbosacral junction (espe-
Clinical correlations
cially sacrum); may be part of cervical spondylomy-
1. Other names: osteochondritis, osteochondrosis, chondro-
elopathy.
dystrophy. (NOTE: Osteochondritis is a misnomer; when
4. Lesions usually are bilateral (radiographs of contralateral
disease was frst described in 1888. inflammation was
limb are recommended).
thought to be a major component and although this has not
5. Joint effusion is common.
been proven, the name persists.)
6. When present, mineralized cartilage flap appears as a thin 
2. Abnormal blood supply to epiphyseal bone disturbs
structure adjacent to (or covering) the articular defect.
endochondral ossification, resulting in thickened cartilage
7. May see mineralized structures in joint space.
that fails to ossify.
 8. Secondary degenerative joint disease is cormmon.
3. Repeated concussion from daily stress causes softening.
9. Vacuum phenomenon may occur (presence of intra-
necrosis, and eventual collapse of abnormal cartilage.
articular gas):
4. A flap of cartilage may develop at damaged site (dissecans
a. Caused by pulling on limb while positioning for
   d  s, s
radiography.
dissolve, or become a free fragment in the joint (a free frag-
b. Negative pressure allows nitrogen gas to emerge from
  m    q  '
joint fluid.
191
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 4.114 Osteochondrtis dissecans; gray shaded areas depict common sites of occurrence. A.In shoulder on caudal aspet of humeral head
(ossified free fragment is present ventral to humeral head). B. In elbow on medial aspect of humeral condyle or medial coronoid process (arrows)
C. In stifle on femmoral condyles.
c. Has been reported in shoulder, between vertebrae.
6. Clinical signs include swelling. decreased range of move-
and between sternebrae.
ment, pain, and lameness.
d. Not directly indicative of disease, but more commonly
 seen when degenerative changes are present.
Radiographic findings with joint soft tissue swelling:
1. Intracapsular soft tissue swelling (i.e., joint effusion) is
focal (restricted by joint capsule) and displaces fascial planes
Differential diagnosis of OCD:
away from joint.
1. Secondary ossification centers
2. Extraca psular swelling may be localized, but more diffuse
2. Normal developing epiphyses.
than joint effusion, often masking fascial planes.
3. Joint space may be widened.
4. Bones may be malaligned (subluxation or luxation).
 Joint soft tissue swelling
5. Osteoporosis, muscle atrophy, bony remodeling. and sec-
Clinical correlations:
ondary degenerative joint disease are common with chronic
 1. Enlargement of soft tissues near a joint may result from
or neglected cases.
damage to bone, cartilage, or supporting structures (e.g.
6. Positioning joint in flexion, extension, or under stress
muscles, ligaments, tendons, joint capsule) and may involve
may aid in demonstrating ligamentous damage. joint insta-
intracapsular tissues, extracapsular tissues, or both.
bility, or subluxation.
2. Damage to supporting structures ranges from overstretch-
 7. Chronic hemarthrosis leads to narrowed joint space (due
ing to complete tearing.
to erosion of articular cartilage) and irregular, sclerotic sub-
a. Sprains involve ligaments.
chondral bone.
b. Strains involve muscles or tendons.
8. Synovial proliferation (i.e., villonodular synovitis):
3. Hemarthrosis (bleeding into a joint) may result from
 a. Typically occurs at chondrosynovial junctions.
trauma or coagulopathy.
b. May appear nodular.
a. Repeated episodes of hemarthrosis damages articular
c. Thickened synovium may cause pressure remodeling
cartilage and subchondral bone and can lead to villon-
of adjacent bone cortices, resulting in smooth, bordered
odular synovitis.
concave defects (Figure 4.l15).
4. Villonodular synovitis is characterized by inflammation
d. Articular cartilage and subchondral bone usually are
and abnormal proliferation (hyperplasia) of synovial tissues.
normal.
a. May result from trauma (previous injury or repeated
insults) or may be a variant of benign fibrous histiocy-
Differential diagnosis of joint soft tissue swelling:
toma.
1. Neoplasia (e.g., synovial cell sarcoma); serial radiographs 
b. Rare in dogs and cats; most often reported in stifle.
 document significant changes with neoplasia.
coxofemoral joint, or carpus.
2. Osteochondromatosis.
5. Diagnosis is confirmed with synovial biopsy.
3. Rheumatoid arthritis.
192
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
3. Mycotic arthritis:
a. Causative agents include:
1) Aspergillus terreus
2) Blastomyces dermatiditis
3) Coccidioidomycosis immitis (cats)
4) Cryptococcus neoformans
5)Histoplasmosis (cats)
6) Sporotrichum schenckii
b. Infection produces a granulomatous synovitis, which
may be monarticular or polyarticular.
c. Fungal agents can enter a joint via:
1) Hematogenous spread (e.g., secondary to a respira-
tory infection).
2) Extension of osteomyelitis.
d. Dogs are more often affected than cats.
e. Most often reported in young to middle-aged animals.
Figure 4.115 Villonodular synovitis in stifle (craniocaudal radliograph). A
especially large-breed hunting dogs. (NOTE: Neoplasia
concave area of decreased opacity caused by pressure remodeling of
tends to affect older animals.)
bone is visible at edge of joint (arrow).
f. Affected animals may have systemic disease (e.g..
pneumonia, fever, lymphadenopathy).
Arthritis
g. Draining tracts often are present.
Infectious
4. Viral arthritis:
Clinical correlations:
a.A transient
arthritis that occurs after a viral
1. Joint inflammation caused by an infection of synovial
infection.
membrane and joint fluid.
 b. Affected animals may have fever and polyarthropathy
2. Bacterial arthritis.
with inflammatory joint fluid.
a. Common organisms include Streptococcus, Staphylococ-
c. Disease usually is self-limiting (often resolves in 1
Cus,Corynebacteria,Pasteurella,Salmonella, and Brucella
week) without any residual joint disease.
(zoonotic disease).
d. Coronavirus (feline infectious peritonitis) and feline
b. Usually monoarticular, commonly affecting a larger
calicivirus (primarily kittens) have been reported to cause
joint (e.g., shoulder, stifle, elbow, carpus, tarsus).
lameness in cats.
c. Routes of transmission:
5. Rickettsial arthritis:
1) Hematogenous spread (more common in younger
a. Most common etiologic agents include Rocky Moun-
animals).
 tain spotted fever (R. rickettsi) and ehrlichiosis (E. canis, E.
2) Extension of an adjacent infection (e.g., abscess.
equi, E. risticti, and E. sennetsu).
osteomyelitis).
b. Organisms are transmitted through tick bites.
3) Direct joint trauma (e.g., bite wounds.
:gunshot
c. A polyarthropathy may occur as part of the systemic
injury).
illness.
4) Postoperative complication
(especially
in older
6. Mycoplasma and L-form bacterial arthritis:
animals).
a. L-form bacteria are gram negative bacteria that do not 
5) Intra-articular
injections
(therapeutic
or
have a cell wall.
dia gnostic).
b. Organism usually is transmitted via a bite wound.
d. May be associated with disease in other areas:
c. Usually causes a systemic infection involving multiple
1) Umbilical infections (omphalophlebitis) in puppies
joints (polyarticular).
and kittens.
d. Reported in cats (e.g. feline tuberculosis) and some-
2) Infection in oral cavity, lung. heart (endocarditis).
times in dogs (e.g..（
Greyhounds with mycoplasma
genitourinary tract, vertebrae (discospondylitis), skin
spumans).
in older animals.
e. Affected
 animals may develop fistulous draining
e. Clinical signs include varying degrees of fever, lame-
tracts.
 ness, anorexia, and lethargy.
f. More common in immune-compromised or debili-
f. Diagnosis is aided by arthrocentesis with cytology.
tated animals.
culture, and sensitivity.
7. Spirochetal arthritis (Lyme disease):
g. Immune-mediated disease more commonly affects
a. Caused by Borrelia burgdorferi
smaller joints in the distal extremities.
b. Organism is transmitted by tick bites.
193
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
c. Infected animals may be asymptomatic.
c) Represents about 25% of all idiopathic
d. Arthropathy can be monarticular or polyarticular.
polyarthritis.
e. Joint fluid is usually inflammatory with many poly.
d) Affected animals are lame and have a concur-
morphonuclear neutrophils.
rent infection involving lungs, tonsils, oral cavity.
8. Leishmaniasis may also affect joints (see pagel73)
eyes, ears, urogenital tract, or skin.
e) Leishmaniasis, ehrlichiosis, anaplasmosis, bor-
reliosis, and bacterial endocarditis may cause infec-
Radiographic findings with infectious arthritis:
tious arthritis and/or immune-mediated arthritis.
1. Radiographs often are normal early in disease.
f) Treatment of infection usually resolves lameness
2. Joint effusion is common, resulting in variable distention
without need for corticosteroids.
of joint capsule and displacement of fascial planes away from
3) Type III idiopathic polyarthritis:
the joint (severe effusion may widen joint space).
a) Other names: enteropathic form, hepatopathic
3. Intracapsular gas may be present due to a penetrating
form.
wound or a gas-producing organism.
b) Associated with disease in intestinal tract or
4.With
progression,
there
is
subchondral
bone
liver.
destruction.
c) Damaged bowel has increased permeability, allow-
5. Osteomyelitis may be present.
ing toxins to escape and stimulate production of
6. Secondary degenerative joint disease is common with
immune complexes (which are deposited in joints).
chronic disease.
d) Chronic active hepatitis and cirrhosis interfere
with liver's ability to phagocytize antigenic material
that escapes from bowel.
Differential diagnosis for infectious arthritis:
e) Clinical signs include vomiting. diarrhea, and
1. Immature animal (wide joint space and irregular bony
lameness.
margins due to incomplete endochondral ossification may
4) Type IV idiopathic polyarthritis:
be mistaken for disease, but joint effusion is absent).
a) Other names: paraneoplastic form.
2. Neoplasia.
b) Associated with neoplasia that does not involve
joints.
c) Usually produces mild polyarthritis and a mild
Noninfectious, nonerosive, immune-mediated
lameness.
Clinical correlations:
d) Reported with squamous cell carcinoma, leio-
1. Inflammation caused by deposition of immune com-
myoma, mammary carcinoma. lymphoma, and
 plexes in joints.
with myeloproliferative disease (cats).
 2. Usually affects multiple joints (polyarticular).
4. Vaccine-induced polyarthritis:
 3. Idiopathic polyarthritis:
 a. Occurs following an initial or booster vaccination.
a. Includes all noninfectious arthritis that cannot be clas-
 b. Usually self-limiting (most cases spontaneously resolve
 sifed into any other group.
in less than a week).
b. Etiology often is unknown, but arthritis commonly is
c. More severe disease has been described in Weimera-
associated with disease in another part of the body (e.g.
 ner and Akita puppies.
GI tract, liver, neoplasia).
d. Vaccines containing canine distemper virus and calici-
c. Four subcategories:
virus have been implicated.
1) Type I idiopathic polyarthritis:
e. Puppies develop clinical signs within 30 days of
 a) Other names: uncomplicated form.
vaccination.
b) Most common type (accounts for about 50% of
f. Kittens may develop signs within 5 to 7 days of a
all idiopathic polyarthritis).
primary vaccination.
c) Affected dogs usually have lameness as the only
g. Affected animals present with bilateral joint pain.
clinical sign.
symmetrical swelling of joints, stiff gait, shifting leg lame-
d) No predisposing factor or disease association can
ness, reluctance to rise, and fever.
be detected.
 h. Subsequent episodes of vaccine-induced polyarthritis 
e) Closely resembles rheumatoid arthritis (might
are unlikely.
be earlier or milder form of rheumatoid disease).
i. An accurate
vaccination history is important in
2) Type II idiopathic polyarthritis:
diagnosis.
a) Other names: reactive form.
 5. Drug-induced polyarthritis:
b) Associated with infections remote from the
a. Adverse drug reaction leads to inflammation and
affected joints.
destruction of blood vessels.
194
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
b. Antibiotics most often are incriminated (e.g..
C. Also reported in cats.
sulfonamides, lincomycin, erythromycin, cephalosporin,
d. In addition to polyarthritis, affected animals have
penicillin).
spinal pain (usually neck pain), fever, stiffness, and some-
c. Reported in both dogs and cats (Doberman Pinschers
times neurologic signs.
9. Sjogren syndrome:
increased risk).
a. Characterized by leukocyte destruction of exocrine
d. Clinical signs may appear 2 to 20 days after drug
 glands. predominately glands that produce tears and
exposure and include swollen and painful joints, lame-
saliva.
ness, and lymphadenopathy.
 b. Polyarthritis may be nonerosive or erosive (resemble
e. Affected animals may develop concurrent disease (e.g..
 rheumatoid arthritis).
glomerulonephritis, focal retinitis, polymyositis, skin
c. Affected animals have keratoconjunctivitis sicca and
lesions, fever, anemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia).
xerostomia
(dry
mouth}
and
may
suffer from
f. Clinical signs are present while animal is receiving
polymyositis.
drug and rapidly improve after drug withdrawal.
d. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) can be associated
6. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE):
with this syndrome.
a. Chronic disease in which nonspecific autoantibodies 
10. Chinese Shar-Pei fever syndrome:
are produced against multiple organ systerms (including
a. Other names: familial renal amyloidosis in Chinese
skin, joints, kidneys. and other organs).
Shar-Pei dogs, swollen hock syndrome, familial shar pei
b. Etiology is uncertain, but may involve a viral infection
fever, shar pei hock.
or drug reaction.
 b. Inherited disease characterized by recurring episodes
c. Can affect any breed of dog or cat (German Shepherd
 of fever and swelling of tarsi.
Dog may be genetically predisposed).
c. One or both tarsi may be affected and occasionally
d. Affected animals often develop autoimmune hemo-
other joints are involved, to0.
lytic anemia (AIHA), thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, glo-
d. Clinical signs of polyarthritis begin in young dogs
merulonephritis, dermatitis, polymyositis, pleuritis, and
(less than 18 months of age) but may occur in older
central nervous system disease.
dogs as well.
e. Carpi, tarsi, metatarsi, stifles, and elbows tend to be
e. Episodes usually resolve within 2 days but then
most severely affected.
recur, usually in 4 to 6 week intervals.
f. Affected animals may have skin lesions (especially
f. Amyloidosis is common, often leading to renal or
mucocutaneous and oral), lymphadenopathy, hepato-
hepatic failure (sormetimes in animals as young as 6
splenomegaly, heart murmur, and altered behavior.
years of age).
g. A waxing and waning course is common, with symp-
11. Heritable polyarthritis of the adolescent Akita:
toms changing over time.
a. Rare polyarthritis that affects young Akitas (usually
h. Nonerosive form of feline polyarthritis is sometimes
less than I year of age).
called feline systemic lupus erythematosus.
 b. Clinical signs include polyarthritis, peripheral lymph-
7. Polyarthritis/polymyositis complex:
 adenopathy, fever, lethargy. and anorexia.
a. Etiology is unknown, but polyarthritis is complicated
c. Meningitis or other organ involvement may be
by chronic myositis.
concurrent.
b. No disease is detected in other body systems.
12. Polyarteritis nodosa:
c. Most often reported in young to middle-aged Spaniel
a. Other
names:
stiff
beagle disease,
juvenile
breeds.
polyarthritis.
d. Affected animals present with symmetrical swelling of
b.A rare,
multisystemic,
.inflammatory disease
of
multiple joints, bilateral muscle atrophy, and muscle
unknown etiology. but associated with vasculitis of
contracture.
small- and medium-sized arteries.
e. Clinical signs include fever, lameness, joint pain, and
c. Mainly reported in young Beagles (6 months to 2
myalgia (muscle pain).
years of age)
f. Prognosis is guarded; some animals make a complete
d. May involve kidneys. skin, mucous membranes.
recovery while others have permanent stiffness or chronic
adrenal glands, meninges, gastrointestinal tract, connec-
relapse.
tive tissue, myocardium, and peripheral nervous system.
8. Polyarthritis/meningitis syndrome:
e. Affected animals often suffer meningitis, polyarthri-
a. Polyarthritis is complicated with spinal pain.
tis, and slkin ulcerations.
b. Reported in the Weimeraner, German Shorthaired
f. Clinical signs tend to be episodic and include fever.
Pointer, Bernese Mountain Dog. Boxer, Newfoundland.
inappetence, stiffness. joint pain, spinal pain, and
and Akita.
depression.
195
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
g. With proper treatment, disease usually is self-
6. Etiology is of rheumatoid arthritis is unknown (canine
limiting.
 distemper virus may be involved in dogs).
13. Clinical signs associated with polyarthritis commonly
7. Affected animals develop a symmetrical polyarthropathy
include:
with bilateral lameness.
a. Lameness (varies from vague stiffness to inability to
8. Carpi and tarsi are most often affected, followed by meta-
wall or stand).
carpi and metatarsi.
b. Shifting leg lameness.
9. Clinical signs include variable degrees of lameness and
C. Lethargy, fever, and inappetence.
 joint stiffness, fever, lethargy, and inappetence.
d. Bilaterally thickened or swollen joints.
10. Diagnosis is made by serum rheumatoid factor (positive
e. Muscle atrophy (secondary to disuse).
in approximately 75% of cases), synovial fluid analysis, and
f. May or may not have signs of systemic disease.
 synovial biopsy.
14. Diagnosis of noninfectious (immune-mediated) polyar-
thritis is based on:
Radiographic findings with rheumatoid arthritis
a. History.
(Figure 4.116):
b. Clinical signs.
1. Initially there is periarticular soft tissue swelling and joint
C. Radiogra phic findings.
effusion.
d. Negative bacterial cultures.
 2. Joint capsule becomes distended and joint space often is
e. Pathologic features.
widened.
f. Positive response to immunosuppressive therapy.
3. With progression, joint space narrows (due to destruction
g. Elimination of other causes of polyarthritis.
 of articular cartilage) and articular margins become irregular
(due to osteolysis).
4. Subchondral bone cysts develop. appearing as small,
Radiographic findings with nonerosive
"punched out," less-opaque defects along articular border.
noninfectious arthritis:
 5. In severe or chronic cases, marked destruction of epiphy-
1. Radiographs often are normal in early or mild disease.
ses may be present.
2. With progression, periarticular soft tissue swelling or joint
6. Osteolysis often develops at attachment sites of ligaments
effusion develop.
(leads to increased joint laxity)
3. No erosive changes are seen (radiographs aid in differen-
 7. Joint subluxation or luxa tion are common with advanced
 n s    
disea se.
4. Secondary degenerative joint disease is common.
8. Bone atrophy (osteopenia) results from disuse and
 5. Hepatosplenomegaly may be present (e.g., SLE).
inflammation (most evident in epiphyses).
9. Calcification of periarticular ligaments or joint capsule
may occur.
Differential diagnosis for nonerosive
10. Secondary degenerative joint disease is common
noninfectious arthritis
1. Degenerative joint disease (may be indistinguishable
from nonerosive, immune-mediated arthritis).
Noninfectious, erosive, immune-mediated
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS (Table 5.4)
Clinical correlations
1. Severe, progressive, and destructive polyarthritis caused
by circulating auto-antibodies against IgG (positive RF
factor).
2. Causes degradation of joint capsule and supporting liga-
ments, which leads to joint laxity, subluxation/luxation, and
angular deformities.
3. Uncommon in dogs and cats.
4. Most often reported in middle-aged (2 to 6 years) small-
POL
breed dogs, especially Poodle and Shetland Sheepdog.
Figure 4.116 Erosive arthritis in a carpus (dorsopalmar radiograph).
5. A similar condition is reported in cats (called feline
Subchondral bone erosion, decreased joint space width, and periarticular
chronic progressive polyarthritis).
5oft tissue swelling are present. (Adapted frorm Owens and Biery 1999.)
196
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
REITER'S DISEASE
4. Carpi and tarsi most often are involved; stifles, elbows.
Clinical correlations:
shoulders, and hips may be affected.
1. Other names: reactive arthritis, Reiter's syndrome.
5. Joint spaces eventually become narrowed due to loss of
2. Erosive polyarthritis secondary to infection in another
articular cartilage.
part of the body (frequently in urogenital tract).
6. Osteopenia, sometimes with secondary pathologic frac-
3. Reported in cats, but rarely in dogs.
tures, is common.
4. Clinical signs are similar to feline polyarthritis and include
7. In advanced cases, subchondral bone erosion may be
progressive stiffness and lameness.
marked with joint subluxation and destruction of bone at
attachment sites of ligaments.
Radiographic findings with Reiter's disease:
1. Marked periosteal response that extends beyond the con-
Differential diagnosis for feline polyarthritis:
fines of the joint.
1. Other erosive arthritides (e.g., Reiter's disease).
2. Lesions are most severe in tarsi and carpi, but may involve
elbows and stifles.
POLYARTHRITIS OF GREYHOUNDS
3. Bone destruction and bone proliferation are common at
Clinical correlations:
attachment sites of ligaments and tendons.
1. Other names: Felty's syndrome.
2. Uncommon, slowly progressive, severely erosive joint
FELINE NONINFECTIOUS POLYARTHRITIS
disease of unknown etiology.
Clinical correlations:
3. May be associated with Mycoplasma spumans infections or
 1. Other names: feline polyarthritis, feline chronic progres-
be a complication of long-standing rheumatoid arthritis.
sive polyarthritis, periosteal proliferative polyarthritis.
4. First reported in Australia and now seen in United
2. Progressive, erosive or nonerosive polyarthritis with or
Kingdom and United States.
without bone proliferation.
 5. Usually affects young dogs between 3 and 30 months of
a. Erosive form without bone proliferation is rheumatoid-
age.
factor positive (sometimes called feline rheumatoid
6. Clinical signs have an insidious onset and include pro-
arthritis).
 gressive lameness, splenomegaly, and neutropenia.
b. Erosive
periosteal
proliferation
7. Joint
fluid
analysis
indicates
 nonsuppura tive
rheumatoid-factor negative.
polysynovitis.
c. Nonerosive form is sometimes called feline systemic
lupus erythematosus.
Radiographic findings with polyarthritis of Greyhounds:
3. May be associated with an infection (e.g., Mycoplasma.
1. Marked destruction of articular cartilage and narrowed
L-form bacteria, feline leukemia virus, feline syncytium-
joint spaces.
forming virus).
2. Affects multiple joints.
 4. Most often reported in young. male cats (1 to 5 years of
 3. Splenomegaly frequently is present.
age).
 5. Clinical signs include fever, stiffness, lethargy. anorexia.
Neoplasia of joints
joint swelling. severe joint pain, and regional lymphade-
Clinical correlations
nopathy. Signs may progress to generalized stiffness and
1. Tumors are uncommon in joints of dogs and cats.
ankylosis.
2. Synovial cell sarcoma:
6. Subluxations and luxations may be present in older
a. A malignant neoplasm arising from cells of synovial
cats.
membrane (including those lining joints, bursae, and
tendon sheaths).
Radiographic findings with feline polyarthritis:
b. Uncommon in dogs and rare in cats.
1. Initial findings are nonspecific and include joint effusion,
c. Can occur at any age, but more common in middle-
thickened and distended joint capsule, and widening of joint
aged animals.
spa ce.
d. Most often reported in medium to large breed dogs
2. Within a few weeks, periarticular new bone forms.
(Flat Coated Retriever and Golden Retriever are
ranging from minimal to extensive. New bone can bridge
overrepresented).
smaller joint spaces and may lead to ankylosis in chronic
e. Usually involves larger joints (stifle is most common,
cases.
elbow is second most common). but any joint can be
3. With progression, subchondral bone erosion and bone
affected.
cysts may slowly develop. but erosive changes are not always
f. Tumors
tend to be slow growing and locally
present.
aggressive.
197
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
g. May metastasize to regional lymph nodes and lungs.
Diseases and disorders of specific joints
h. Clinical signs include lameness and nonpainful swell-
Shoulder
ing of affected joint.
Degenerative joint disease
3. Primary bone tumors:
Clinical correlation:
a. Osteosarcoma is most common.
1. May be primary (idiopathic) or secondary (e.g. previous
b. Other
tumors:
fibrosarcoma,
 chondrosarcoma.
trauma, OcD, infection, immune-mediated disease; see
hemangiosarcoma.
earlier discussion about DJD.)
c. Clinical signs include soft tissue swelling and
2. Affected animals have varying degrees of lameness
lameness.
4. Metastatic tumors:
Radiographic findings with shoulder DJD:
a. Rarely involves joints.
1. Lesions often are easiest to see on lateral radiograph.
b. Feline lymphosarcoma can extend into synovial joints.
2. Osteophytes commonly develop along caudal and some-
times medial aspects of humeral head, glenoid cavity, and
Radiographic findings with joint neoplasia:
bicipital groove (Figure 4.118).
1. Tumor types cannot be differentiated on survey
3. Caudocranial radiograph documents medial osteophytes.
radiographs.
2. Joint space may be widened due to growing tumor or
Differential diagnosis for shoulder DJD:
joint effusion.
1. Accessory caudal glenoid ossiffcation center.
 2. Normal appearance of the scapular glenoid in chondro-
3. Extracapsular swelling often is present.
4. Synovial sarcomas commonly present with osteolysis in
dystrophic dogs.
multiple bones (affecting both sides of the joint); lysis may
3. Bicipital tenosynovitis.
be extensive and severe, usually without osteosclerosis or
Fractures
significant new bone production (Figure 4.ll7). Tumors in
Clinical correlations:
stifle frequently displace patella cranially.
1. Trauma to shoulder can cause an avulsion fracture.
5. Primary bone tumors usually begin in metaphysis and
2. In immature animals, fractures commonly involve a
rarely extend into the joint. Tumors tend to produce a
mixture of aggressive osteolysis and ill-defined periosteal
physes.
3. Clinical
1 sign is acute onset of non-weight-bearing
new bone.
lameness.
6. Hazy, punctate, or linear streaks of calcification are some-
times present in the joint.
Radiographic findings with shoulder fractures:
 7. Thoracic radiographs are recommended to investigate
1. Soft tissue swelling is common, both intracapsular and
possible pulmonary metastatic disease.
extraca psular.
2. Avulsion fractures (Figure 4.88):
a. Scapular tuberosity.
b. Greater tubercle of humerus.
c. Acromion.
3. Fractures of scapula (blade or spine) often are difficult to
recognize and may be best appreciated on a caudocranial
radiograph of shoulder with limb extended and sternum
slightly rotated away from affected side.
Differential diagnoses for shoulder fractures:
1. Secondary ossification centers (i.e., accessory caudal
glenoid ossification center).
2. Synovial osteochondroma.
3. Fragments from OCD.
 Scapulohumeral luxation
Clinical correlations:
1. Traumatic scapulohumeral luxation:
a. Usually unilateral.
 b. Associated with tearing of infraspinatus tendon, joint
Figure 4.117 Synovial cell sarcoma in elbow (lateral radiograph).
Concave osteolytic defects involve distal humerus. proximal ulna and 
capsule, gleno-humeral ligaments, and disruption of sub-
radius. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
scapularis muscle.
198
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
eindens pue peay leauny jo suibieuu jeine jepnen uo saydoaiso v (ydenopen jelaiel) aseasip iuio! aneiauabap lapinous sll't ana
glenoid. B and C. Osteophytes along bicipital groove (lateral and skyline radiographs). Bicipital groove articular cartilage is highlighted in C skyline view
with arrow pointing to osteophytes. (A and B adapted from Owens and Biery 1999)
c. Medial displacement of humerus usually occurs in
small-breed dogs.
d. Lateral displacement of humerus is more common in
large-breed dogs
e. Cranial displacement is sometimes seen.
f. Caudal luxations are very rare.
2. Congenital scapulohumeral luxation:
a. Generally bilateral.
b. Reported in small-breed dogs (e.g., Yorkshire Terrier.
Miniature Poodle, Miniature Schnauzer, Japanese Spitz,
Pomeranian).
c. Caused by laxity in medial joint capsule and underde-
velopment of medial labrum of glenoid.
d. Anomalous bone development usually prevents any
successful reduction.
3. Affected shoulder is painful on palpation and crepitus
may be present.
Radiographic findings with scapulohumeral luxafion
(Figure 4.119):
1. Scapulohumeral joint space is narrowed or not visible
(lateral radiograph).
Figure 4.119 Scapulohumeral luxation (caudocranial radiograph).
2. May see overlap of humerus and scapula.
Humeral head is displaced medially. (Adapted from Owens and Biery
3. Soft tissue swelling may be visible.
1999.)
4. Caudocranial radiograph determines medial or lateral
displa cement.
5. Some luxations will spontaneously reduce while posi-
Osteochondritis dissecans
tioning for radiographs.
Clinical correlations:
6. Scapular glenoid may appear flattened and underdevel-
1. See page 191.
oped (congenital luxation).
2. Clinical signs include:
 7. Chronic luxations undergo progressive bone remodeling
a. Lameness that is worse after exercise.
due to abnormal joint stresses.
b. Pain with extension and flexion of shoulder.
8. Secondary degenerative joint disease is common.
c. Shortened stride.
199
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
7. Secondary degenerative joint disease is common.
Box 4.5 Differentials for shoulder
8. Intra-articular gas bubble sometimes is present (due to
mineralization.
vacuum phenomenon); gas bubble is not directly indicative
of pathology but is more common with degenerative joint
· Degenerative joint disease
disease.
Osteochondrosis
9. Contrast radiography (positive contrast arthrography)
● Tendon calcification
- ao       s
Accessory ossification center
lage flap and intra-articular free bodies (latter appears as
 Miner alized joint fragment 
filling defects in contrast medium); availability of arthros-
 Avulsion fracture
 copy has largely replaced need for arthrography.
 Synovial osteochondroma
· Sesamoid bone
Differential diagnosis for shoulder OCD:
1. Normal anatomy can be mistaken for mineralized
fra gmen ts:
a. Sesamoid bone in tendon of deltoid muscle (smooth
borders and usually bilateral).
b. Sesamoid bone in tendon of supraspinatus muscle.
c. End-on visualization of caudal circumflex humeral
artery; when surrounded by fat, vessel appears increased
lateral radiograph.
d. Accessory caudal glenoid ossification center.
2. Osteoarthritis.
3. Synovial osteochondroma.
4. Mineralization of bicipital tendon or tendon sheath.
5. Avulsion fracture.
Osteochondromatosis
Clinical correlations:
1. Other names: synovial chondrometaplasia.
2. Chronic irritation of synovium leads to nodular cartilagi-
 Figure 4.120 Osteochondritis dissecans in proximal hummerus (lateral
nous metaplasia in scapulohumeral joint or bicipital tendon
radiograph). Flattened area is present along caudal articular margin of
bursa.
humeral head (arrow).
3. Nodules may remain adhered to synovium or break off
to become free fragments.
4. Reported in large-breed dogs. ranging in age from l to
d. Affected leg often is held in a slightly abducted
1l years.
position.
 5. May also involve tarsi, stifles, elbows, and carpi
3. Diagnosis may be facilitated with arthroscopy.
6. Affected animals present with chronic and progressive
lameness of several months' duration.
Radiographic findings with shoulder OCD:
7. Manipulation of shoulder elicits pain.
1. Flattened or concave defect (less opaque than adjacent
bone) develops along caudal articular margin of humeral
Radiographic findings with osteochondromatosis:
head (Figure 4.120).
1. One or more intra-articular nodules may be visible
2. Subchondral osteosclerosis may surround the defect
(nodules vary in opacity).
3. Lateral radiographs with slight pronation and supination
2. Mineralized nodules in scapulohumeral joint typically
often aid in lesion detection.
collect in caudoventral compartment (Figure 4.121).
4. Lesions frequently are bilateral (radiographs of both
3. Secondary degenerative joint disease is common.
shoulders are recommended).
5. Cartilage flap may appear as a thin, linear, mineralized
Biceps tendinopathy
structure near lesion.
Clinical correlations:
6. Mineralized intra-articular fragments sometimes 
are
1. Tendon damage may result from acute or repetitive
present (tend to localize in caudal joint compartment or in
trauma, inflammation (tenosynovitis), or entrapment of free
bicipital tendon sheath).
fragments in joint.
200
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
B
Figure 4.122 Bicipital tendinopathy (lateral radiographs). A. Focal
mineralization in the bicipital groove. B. Thin curvilinear mineralization
associated with biceps tendon is visible at greater tubercle. (Adapted 
from Owens and Biery 1999.)
Figure 4.121 Shoulder osteochondromatosis (lateral radiograph).
Well-defined mineral opacity, intra-articular fragmments are present in the
3. Chronic inflammation often produces an irregular tendon
caudoventral aspect of the scapulohumeral joint (arrow).
border.
4. Nonmineralized, intra-articular fragments create flling
defects in contrast medium (must differentiate from gas
bubbles).
2. Damage ranges from partial to complete rupture of the
tendon, usually near the musculotendinous junction.
Differential diagnosis of biceps tendinopathy:
3. More common in middle-aged, large-breed dogs (espe-
1. Calcifying tendinopathy involving supraspinatus or infra-
cially Labrador Retriever and Rottweiler).
spinatus (skyline radiograph of scapulohumeral joint aids in
4. Affected animals have chronic, intermittent, weight-
differentiation).
bearing lameness.
2. Osteophytes along bicipital groove may be mistaken for
5. Clinical examination reveals pain during palpation of
mineralized fra gments or mineralization in tendon or tendon
biceps muscle proximal to elbow or during flexion and pal-
sheath.
pation of shoulder.
Supraspinatus and infraspinatus tendinopathy
Radiographic findings with biceps tendinopathy:
Clinical correlations:
1. Initially, radiographs are normal (unless there is avulsion
1. Tendon injuries usually result from trauma or chronic
fracture of supraglenoid tubercle).
inflamma tion.
2. In chronic cases, focal mineralization may develop in
2. These tendons are very short and tend to tear at muscu-
tendon or along intertubercular (bicipital) groove (Figure
lotendinous junctions.
4.122). usually near greater tubercle on lateral radiograph
3. Supraspinatus inserts
on medial
aspect
ofgreater
(skyline radiograph aids in visualization of bicipital groove.
tubercle.
Figure 4.118C).
4. Infraspinatus inserts on lateral
aspect
of
greater
3. Supraglenoid tubercle margin may be irregular or develop
tubercle.
enthesophytes.
5. Injuries most often are reported in middle-aged, large-
4. Secondary degenerative joint disease is common. (NOTE:
breed dogs (e.g., Rottweiler).
Bicipital groove is lined with articular cartilage, and osteo-
6. Clinical signs include variable degrees of lameness.
phytes that form here can be misinterpreted as bicipital
tendon mineraliza tion.)
Radiographic findings with tendinopathy:
1. Lesions are easiest to see on lateral radiograph.
Contrast radiography (arthrography):
 2. Caudocranial radiograph is included for complete evalu-
1. Aids in documenting abnormalities of biceps tendon and
ation and to rule out other disease.
bursa (scapulohumeral joint communicates with bicipital
3. Focal, rounded areas of decreased opacity may develop
tendon sheath).
in greater tubercle (in area of tendon insertion, Figure 4.23).
 2. Fibrosis or synovial hyperplasia may prevent filling of
4. Dystrophic mineralization of tendon may occur near
bursa.
proximal aspect of greater tubercle.
201
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
5. Skyline radiograph aids in localizing mineralized struc-
tures relative to bicipital groove.
B
Differential diagnosis of tendinopathy:
1. Normal sesamoid bones (usually bilateral and have
smooth borders, Figure 4.10).
2. Degenerative joint disease.
3. Synovial osteochondroma.
4. Mineralization of bicipital tendon or tendon sheath.
5. Avulsion fracture.
Shoulder dysplasia
Clinical correlations:
1. Developmental malformation due to abnormal ossifica-
tion of scapulohumeral joint.
2. Results in excessive joint laxity.
3. Reported in Dachshunds and Bassett Hounds.
4. Affected dogs have variable degrees of lameness.
Figure 4.123 Elbow cdegenerative joint dlisease. A. Lateral radiograph,
Radiographic findings with shoulder dysplasia:
 osteophytes are present at articular margins. B. Craniocaudal radliograph,
1. Humeral head is flattened, smaller than normal, and
pue apuosida leauny lepau buoje saydosayrua pue saydoaiso
 sloped caudodistally.
medial coronoid process (paired arrows) and lateral aspect of the joint
2. Glenoid fossa is shallow.
(single arrow). (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
3. May see subluxation of scapulohumeral joint.
Elbow
DEGENERATIVE JOINT DISEASE OF ELBOW
c. Fragmented medial coronoid process.
Clinical correlations:
d. Osteochondrosis of humeral condyle.
1. Primary elbow degenerative joint disease is associated
e. Ununited medial humeral epicondyle.
with normal aging.
 2. Possible etiologies for disorders of elbow dysplasia include:
2. Secondary degenerative joint disease may result from
a. Abnormal development of proximal ulna (trochlear
disorders associated with elbow dysplasia (most common).
notch) resulting in elbow incongruity.
trauma, inflammation, or infection.
b. Osteochondrosis (thought by some to be underlying
3. Both elbows usually are affected.
cause of many elbow disorders).
4. Clinical signs include variable degrees of lameness.
c. Genetics (elbow dysplasia may be an inherited disease
with polygenetic factors).
d. Asynchronous growth of radius and ulna resulting in
Radiographic findings with elbow DJD:
elbow malalignment and abnormal loading forces on
1. Osteophytes and enthesophytes develop on radial head
anconeal and medial coronoid processes.
and along lateral and medial humeral epicondyles (Figure
3. International Elbow Working Group (IEWG) was formed
4.123).
in 1989 and established a grading scale for classification of
2. Articular margins may appear irregular and subchondral
elbow dysplasia. Scale is based on thickness of new bone
osteosclerosis may be present (chronic DJD)
formation on anconeal process.
3. Soft tissue swelling or joint effusion may be present.
a. Grade 0 (normal): smooth, well-defined anconeal
margin with no new bone.
ELBOW DYSPLASIA
b. Grade 1 (mild): minimal new bone (less than 3mm
1. Abnormal development of the elbow resulting in mal-
thick).
formation, instability. and progressive degenerative joint
c. Grade 2 (moderate): fair amount of new bone (3-5 mm
disease. Elbow dysplasia includes several disorders, which
thick), subchondral osteosclerosis may be present along
may occur independently or in conjunction with one
ulnar trochlear notch.
another:
d. Grade 3 (severe): larger amount of new bone (greater
a. Elbow incongruity.
than 5mm thick), often with osteophytes and entheso-
b. Ununited anconeal process.
phytes on distal humerus and proximal radius.
202
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Clinical correlations associatedwithdisordersof
Differential diagnosis for elbow incongruity:
elbow dysplasia:
1. Asynchronous growth of radius and ulna.
1. Most often reported in young medium- to large-breed
2. Degenerative joint disease from other causes (e.g..
dogs.
trauma, infection ).
2. Males are more often affected than females.
3. Clinical signs:
a. Typically develop between 4 and 18 months of
UNUNITED ANCONEAL PROCESS
Clinical correlations:
age.
b. Some affected dogs remain asymptomatic for years.
1. Anconeal process develops from a separate ossification
c. Usually bilateral, but signs may only be apparent in
center in most medium- and large-breed dogs and normally
one leg.
fuses with proximal ulna before 20 weeks of age (22 weeks
d. Affected dogs have varying degrees of lameness, elbow
in German Shepherd Dogs).
pain, muscle atrophy. decreased range of motion, pal-
2. Failure of process to unite may be caused by:
pable swelling. and crepitation at elbow.
a. Abnormal development.
e. Lameness tends to be worse after exercise
b. Elbow incongruity.
f. In severe cases, thoracic limbs may rotate inward and
c. Asynchronous growth of radius and ulna.
elbows rotate outward.
d. Trauma (physeal fracture).
3. Breeds commonly affected include German Shepherd
Dog. Great Dane, Bassett Hound, and Gordon Setter.
Specific elbow disorders-dysplasia
4. Disorder is bilateral in 20%-35% of affected animals.
ELBOW INCONGRUITY
Clinical correlations:
1. Distal humerus and trochlear notch of ulna do not fit
1. Anconeal process is easiest to see on an extreme flexed
properly due to abnormal development of proximal ulna
lateral radiograph.
or humeral condyle (typically. ulnar trochlear notch is too
a. Overlying physis of medial epicondyle can be mis-
small) .
taken for ununited anconeal process (Figure 4.l24).
2. Most often reported in large breeds (e.g., German Shep-
b. Epicondylar physis remains open until 9 months of
herd Dog, Retrievers, Bernese Mountain Dog).
age.
3. Incongruity is a distinct elbow disorder that differs from
c. Extreme flexed lateral radiograph eliminates superim-
asynchronous growth of radius and ulna. Elbow incongruity
 position of medial epicondyle.
can cause fragmented medial coronoid process or ununited
2. A partial or complete line of decreased opacity between
anconeal process and must be recognized if treatment for
anconeal process and proximal ulna is abnormal in dogs
either condition is to be considered.
over 22 weeks of age. (NOTE: If process appears virtually
fused near 22 weeks, repeat radiographs in 1 to 2 weeks.)
3. Ununited anconeal process may or may not be
Radiographic findings with elbow incongruity:
displaced.
1. Changes are easiest to see on a true lateral radiograph.
2. Humeroulnar joint space is widened distally and nar-
rowed proximally.
Differential diagnosis for ununited anconeal process:
3. "Stair-step" may develop along curved radio-ulnar
1. Fracture of anconeal process may be mistaken for
articular margin (greater than 2mm displacement is
ununited anconeal process. Fracture may result from trauma
signifi cant).
or disproportionate growth of radius and ulna.
4. Anconeal process may be angled proximally or ununited
2. Degenerative joint disease from other causes (e.g..
(due to abnormal stresses).
trauma, infection ).
5. Medial coronoid process may be fragmented.
6. Ulnar trochlear notch may be more elliptical in shape
   
FRAGMENTED MEDIAL CORONOID PROCESS
7. Subchondral osteosclerosis may be present along ulnar
Clinical correlations:
trochlear notch.
1. Most common disorder with elbow dysplasia.
8. Secondary degenerative joint disease is common a
and
2. Reported most often in Bernese Mountain Dog. Labrador
progressive.
Retriever, Golden Retriever, Rottweiler, Newfoundland.
 9. Lesions may be bilateral (radiographs of both elbows are
German Shepherd Dog. Chow Chow.
recommended) .
3. Diagnosis may be confirmed with arthroscopy or com-
10. Poor positioning may mimic elbow incongruity.
puted tomography (CT).
203
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
E
Figure 4.124 Ununited anconeal process. Ulna and humeral medlial epicondyle outlined on lower A and B immages. A. Normal lateral radiograph with
medial epicondyle (*) superimposed over anconeal process. B. Normal extreme flexed lateral radliograph eliminates superimposition of medial epicondyle.
C. Flexed lateral radiograph documents line of decreased opacity at base of anconeal process.
Radiographic findings with fragmented medial
coronoid process:
1. Actual fragment seldom is visualized on survey radio-
graphs due to:
a. Summation of adjacent structures obscures
the
fragment.
b.Failure
of
fragment
tomineralize
(remains
cartilaginous).
c. Fragment may not be displaced.
2. Medial coronoid process may appear blunted, rounded.
and/or irregular in margination.
3. Visualization of process is easiest on a craniolateral-
caudomedial oblique radiograph.
4. New bone production on proximal, nonarticular border
of anconeal process is most common finding (Figure 4.125).
a. New bone results from elbow instability and stretching
of olecranon ligament (i.e., enthesopathy).
 b. In some dogs irregularity along anconeal process is a
Figure 4.125 Elbow dysplasia (flexed lateral radliograph). Smooth-
normal anatomic variation (Figure 4.126).
bordered new bone production on the proximal, nonarticular margin of
5. Secondary degenerative joint disease is common, with
the anconeal process (two black arrows) is a common finding with elbow
osteophytes developing on medial humeral epicondyle and
(apuoida leau uo nds auog sateui mae anum) eiseds
cranial margin of radial head.
(Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
a. Degenerative changes are progressive and may be
evident as early as 7 months of age.
6. A small, concave defect may be present on medial articul-
lar margin of humeral condyle, immediately opposite the
medial coronoid process.
204
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Figure 4.127 Osteochondrosis (craniocaudal radiograph). A subchondral
defect is present on the medial articular margin of the humeral condyle
(arrow). (Adapted frorm Owens and Biery 1999.)
Figure 4.126 Anconeal process specirmen, lateral views. In sorme dog5.
Differential diagnosis for OCD of humeral condyle:
a normal small bump of bone is present on the anconeal process which
1. Fragmented medial coronoid process (focal defect on
may mimnic enthesopathy and elbow dysplasia. Top irmage is of dog ulna 
humeral condyley.
with bump and bottom of dog ulna without bump.
2. Degenerative joint disease from other causes (e.g..
trauma, infection}.
3. Normal sesamoid bone at lateral aspect of elbow (may
mimic a mineralized joint fragment).
a. Defect is commonly called a kissing lesion.
b. Closely resembles defect that occurs with elbow osteo-
UNUNITED MEDIAL HUMERAL EPICONDYLE
chondrosis (Figure 4.127).
Clinical correlations:
7. Lesions usually are bilateral (radiographs of both elbows
1. Failure of part of medial epicondyle to unite with humerus 
are recommended).
(fusion normally is complete by 6 months of age)
2. May represent a form of osteochondrosis or an aberrant
Differential diagnoses for fragmented medial coronoid
ossifica tion center.
process:
3. Most often reported in Labrador Retriever, German Shep-
1. Degenerative joint disease from other causes (e.g..
herd Dog. and English Setter, but can occur in other breeds.
trauma, infection).
too.
4. May be unilateral or bilateral.
OSTEOCHONDRITIS (OCD) OF HUMERAL CONDYLE
5. Concurrent elbow disease may be present (e.g., elbow
1. Caused by a disturbance in endochondral ossification.
incongruity.
 fragmented
medial
coronoid
 process,
2. Most commonly seen in rapidly growing. large-breed
osteochondrosis).
dogs.
6. Clinical findings include varying degrees of lameness and
3. Considered to be an inherited disease in Bernese Moun-
elbow pain (affected dogs may be asymptomatic).
tain Dog. Labrador Retriever, Golden Retriever.
7. Secondary degenerative joint disease may or may not
develop.
Radiographic findings with OCD of humeral condyle:
1. Focal, concave defect on medial articular margin of
Radiographic findings with ununited medial humeral
humeral condyle (Figure 4.127),
epicondyle (Figure 4.128):
2. Lesion is easiest to see on a craniocaudal radiograph.
1. Lesion is easiest to see on a craniocaudal radiograph.
3. Rarely, a mineralized flap or mineralized fragments are
2. Mineral opacity(s) is present on medial aspect of elbow.
present.
3. Site of origin or "bed" for a fracture fragrment is not
4. Lesions frequently are bilateral (radiographs of both
evident.
elbows are recommended).
4. Soft tissue swelling often is absent.
205
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Incomplete ossification of humeral condyle
Clinical correlations:
1. Humeral condyle is incomplete, weak, and predisposed
to fracture due to failure of medial and lateral centers of
ossification to unite.
 2. Most often reported in small, chondrodystrophic breeds
and in Spaniels.
3. May be heritable in purebred and crossbred Spaniels
(Cocker Spaniel, Brittany Spaniel) .
4. Males are more often affected than females.
 5. Usually both elbows are affected; however, only one leg
may be symptomatic.
6. Affected animals typically present with an acute onset of
lameness during normal activity.
Figure 4.128 Ununited medial humeral epicondyle (craniocaudal
Radiographic findings with incomplete humeral condyle:
radiograph). A mineralized structure is present medial to the elbow
1. Distal humeral ossification centers are visible by 3 weeks
without soft tissue swelling. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
of age; centers normally fuse by l2 weeks of age.
2. Incomplete ossification presents as a vertical, curvilinear
line of decreased opacity between lateral and medial por-
tions of humeral condyle (easiest to see on a craniocaudal
5. Secondary degenerative joint disease (osteophytes) may
radiograph, Figure 4.129A).
or may not be present.
3. Physes in other long bones are already closed.
4. Supratrochlear foramen may be absent.
Differential diagnosis for ununited medial
5. Fracture of distal humeral condyle may be present (Figure
humeral epicondyle:
1.129B), fracture may be Y or T shaped.
6. Smooth-bordered periosteal response sormetimes devel-
1. Dystrophic calcification in origins of flexor tendons.
2. Avulsion fracture at origin of flexor tendons (recent or
ops on lateral and caudal aspects of distal humerus (epicon-
previous injuryy.
dylar region} due to bone instability or a nondisplaced
fracture.
7. Summation of olecranon may mimic a line of decreased
Fractures
opacity in condyle.
Clinical correlations:
1. Usually caused by trauma (e.g., blunt force injury, animal
suspended by its limb).
2. May result from a developmental anomaly (i.e., incom-
plete ossification of humeral condyle).
Radiographic findings with elbow fractures:
1. Common types of fracture include:
a. Lateral fracture of humeral condyle (most often
reported in Spaniels).
b. Medial fracture of humeral condyle (rare).
c. Distal humeral epiphyseal fracture (Salter-Harris type
I; rare).
d. Y-fracture of distal humerus (commonly seen in
Spaniels).
e. Monteggia fracture: fractured proximal ulna (may be
articular) and cranial luxation of radial head (Figure
4.130).
Figure 4.129 Incomplete ossification of humeral condyle (craniocaudal
f. Olecranon fracture:
radiograph). A. A line of decreased opacity is visible between medial and
1) May be articular or nonarticular.
lateral portions of humeral condyle (arrow). B. Fractured humeral condyle
  ld a  d o(
secondary to incomplete ossification. (A is adapted from Owens and Biery
muscle.
1999).
206
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Differential diagnosis of incomplete humeral condyle:
4. Congenital elbow luxations present with one of three
1. Traumatic fracture.
types:
a. Type I: caudolateral luxation of radial head with little
Luxation
or no displacement of ulna.
Clinical correlations:
b. Type II: severe rotational luxation of ulna with lesser
1. Acquired dislocation of elbow:
displacement of radial head.
a. Usually unilateral.
c. Type Ill: both the ulna and radial head are luxated.
b. Most often caused by trauma (e.g.. blunt force injury.
d. Radial head may appear rounded (due to lack of
animal suspended by its limby.
normal joint forces).
c. Medial and lateral collateral ligaments are damaged.
5. Secondary degenerative joint disease is common.
2. Congenital dislocation of elbow:
a. Usually bilateral.
Subluxation
b. No history of trauma.
Clinical correlations:
c. May be associated with abnormal growth of the distal
1. Partial dislocation of elbow most commonly results from
ulna.
asynchronous growth of radius and ulna, but may represent
d. Most often reported in small dogs (e.g. Miniature
elbow incongruity.
Poodle, Pekingese, Pug) and in cats.
2. Asynchronous growth may be a breed characteristic (i.e..
3. Clinical signs include acute lameness (acquired luxation)
chondrodystrophism) or result from physeal trauma or
or a chronic abnormal gait and intermittent lameness (con-
retained cartilaginous core.
genital luxation).
 3. May be unilateral or bilateral; if bilateral, may or may not 
be symmetrical.
Radiographic findings with elbow luxation:
4. Damage to supporting structures (i.e., ligament trauma)
1. Orthogonal radiographs may be necessary for diagnosis.
may result in elbow instability.
2. Acquired luxations often are accompanied by fractures;
5. Clinical signs include an abnormal gait and lameness that
often small avulsion or chip fractures due to ligament
varies from chronic intermittent to acute.
injuries.
3. Monteggia fracture (Figure 4.130) is a cranially displaced
Radiographic findings with elbow subluxation:
humeroradial luxation with a concurrent fracture of proxi-
1. Premature closure or retarded growth in distal ulnar
mal ulna (fracture in ulna may be articular).
physis results in shortening of ulna, distal subluxation (wid-
ening) of humeroulnar joint, remodeling or fracture of
anconeal process, and carpal valgus (Figure 4.96).
2. Premature closure or retarded growth in distal radial
physis leads to shortening of radius, proximal subluxation
(narrowing) of humeroulnar joint, distal subluxation (wid-
ening) of humeroradial joint, remodeling or fracture of
medial coronoid process (Figure 4.98).
3. Medial coronoid process may be distal to radial head (a
than 2mm is significant).
4. May be bilateral (radiographs of both elbows are
recommended).
 5. Stress radiographs aid in documenting ligamentous
damage and elbow instability (see chapter 2, Figure 2.38).
Differential diagnosis for elbow subluxation:
1. Elbow incongruity.
 Medial epicondylar spur
Clinical correlations:
1. Other names: flexor enthesopathy.
2. New bone formation at site of attachment of flexor
Figure 4.130 Monteggia fracture (lateral radliograph). The proximal ulna
tendon along distal humerus.
is fractured and there is a concurrent humeroradial luxation. (Adapted 
3. May result from trauma or osteochondrosis.
from Owens and Biery 1999.)
4. Most often reported in large-breed dogs.
207
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
5. May be unilateral or bilateral.
2. Separated portion is patella shaped (thus the name of the
6. Frequently an incidental finding. but occasionally results
condition).
in mild lameness.
3. The term patella cubiti is also used to describe ectopic
sesamoid bones associated with elbow.
Radiographic findings with medial epicondylar spur:
4. Reported in Doberman Pinschers.
1. A well-defined bone spur (enthesophyte) extends distally
5. May be unilateral or bilateral.
from caudal border of medial epicondyle (lateral radiograph,
6. Affected dogs are less active and have a stiff gait, with
Figure 4.131).
affected limb held in partial flexion.
2. May see focal mineralization in deep tendon medial and
distal to medial epicondyle.
Radiographic findings with patella cubiti:
1. Patella-shaped bony structure(s) located caudal to distal
Patella cubiti
humerus and distinctly separate from ulna.
Clinical correlations:
2. Proximal ulna is misshapen.
1. Rare congenital condition in which proximal ulnar
epiphysis and metaphysis (olecranon) are separated from
Differential diagnosis of patella cubiti:
diaphysis and distracted by triceps pull.
1. Old fracture (through proximal ulnar physis or semilunar
notch).
Carpus
 Degenerative joint disease
1. Primary degenerative joint disease occurs in older animals
as an aging change.
2. Secondary degenerative joint disease may result frorm
trauma or chronic inflammation.
3. Rheumatoid arthritis has a predilection for carpi and tarsi
and usually is bilateral.
4. Osteodystrophy of Scottish Fold Cats may affect carpi but
is more severe in tarsi.
5. Polyarthritis in cats predominately affects carpi and tarsi.
6. Chinese Shar-Pei fever syndrome usually affects tarsi and
rarely involves carpi.
Radiographic findings with DJD:
1. Osteophytes and enthesophytes are common.
2. Lesions are described elsewhere in this text with their
Figure 4.131 Bone spur (enthesophyte) on medial humeral epiconcdyle
 specific etiologies.
(lateral radiograph) with mineralization in the deep tendon. (Adapted 
from Owens and Biery 1999.)
Luxation/subluxation
Clinical correlations:
1. Subluxations are more common than luxations.
2. Possible etiologies of carpal instability include:
Box 4.6 Differentials for elbow
a. Acute trauma.
mineralization.
b. Repetitive low-grade injuries.
c. Angular limb deformity (e.g., asynchronous growth of
· Sesamoid bone
radius and ulna).
● Degenerative joint disease
d. Chronic
 inflammation
re.g..
immune-mediated
Osteochondrosis
arthritis).
· Ununited anconeal process
 3. Collateral ligament damage results in medial or lateral
●  Fragmented medial coronoid process
instability.
● Tendon calcification
 4. Hyperextension (i.e.. jumping from a height) can tear
●Mineralized joint fragment 
palmar and accessory carpal ligaments, resulting in plantar
 Synovial osteochondroma 
instability.
●Avulsion fracture
5. Aged,
overweight,
large-breed
dogsmay
be
●Epicondylar spur
predisposed.
208
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Figure 4.133 Fractured ulnar styloid process with adjacent soft tissue
swelling (dorsopalmar radiograph). (Adapted from Owens and Biery
1999.)
Figure 4.132 Subluxation of radliocarpal joint (lateral radiograph) with
wicdening of radiocarpal joint space and mild soft tissue swelling.
(Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
Radiographic findings with carpal fractures:
1. Soft tissue swelling is present at fracture site (usually
6. Affected animals exhibit varying degrees of lameness;
intraca psular and extracapsular).
onset of clinical signs can be insidious.
2. Carpal fractures frequently are chip. slab, or avulsion
types.
Radiographic findings with carpal luxation/subluxation:
3. Fractures may involve distal radial or ulnar styloid process
1. Soft tissue swelling is present, may be intracapsular and/
(Figure 4.133), intercarpal bones, 0r proximal metacarpus.
or extracapsular.
4. Identification of fractures may require obliqued and
 2. Bones are malalignment and joint spaces may be widened
skyline radiographs.
(Figure 4.132).
 5. Stress radiographs with carpus in flexion, extension, or
 3. Articular or periarticular fractures may be present (e.g..
rotation may aid in identification of fractures and assess-
avulsion, compression, chip).
ment of joint laxity.
4. Degenerative joint disease is common in chronic cases.
6. Accessory carpal bone (AC) fractures include five types
 5. Stressed radiographs help document joint instability and
(Figure 4.134):
degree of luxation.
a. Type I occurs at distal base, between AC and ulnar
6. Comparison radiographs of contralateral limb may aid in
carpal bone.
diagnosis (NOTE: Subluxation may be bilateral).
b. Type II involves proximal base, between AC and the
7. Positioning artifact may mimic subluxation. Knowledge
radius and ulna.
of normal anatomy is essential for diagnosis.
c. Type Il involves caudodistal aspect of AC, where
metacarpal ligament inserts.
Fractures
d. Type IV occurs at proximocaudal aspect of AC where
Clinical correlations:
flexor tendon attaches.
1. Usually caused by trauma and often associated with soft
e. Type V is a comminuted fracture of the accessory
tissue injuries (e.g. ligamentous damage).
carpal bone.
2. Radial carpal bone fractures may result from incomplete
fusion during development (reported in Boxer and may be
 bilateral); radial carpal forms by fusion of three ossification
Stenosing tenosynovitis (abductor pollicis longus)
cen ters.
Clinical correlations:
3. Accessory carpal bone fractures most often occur in ath-
1. Chronic inflammation resulting in fibrosis and restriction
letic dogs (racing Greyhounds develop fractures in right foot
of tendon movement.
due to countercloclkwise running).
2. Probably
caused by overuse (low-grade
repetitive
4. Clinical signs include varying degrees of swelling. pain.
injuries).
and lameness.
3. Most often reported in large-breed dogs.
209
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 4.135 Stenosing tenosynovitis involving tendon of abductor
Figure 4.134 Accesory carpal bone fractures (lateral radiograph)
 pollicis longus (dorsopalmar radiograph). Enthesophyte (arrow) on medlial
(l) distal base, (ll proximal base, (ll) caudodistal at attachmnent of
aspect of distal radlius with mild localized soft tissue sweling.
metacarpal ligamment, (iv) proxirnocaudal where flexor tendon attaches.
(Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
3. Summation of digits on lateral radiograph may compro-
mise critical evaluation (compression radiography aids in
4. Affected animals have variable lameness and a firm
separation and visualization of individual digits).
swelling at medial aspect of carpus.
4. Fractures may be articular.
5. Lameness is more severe after rest and following strenl-
5. Subcutaneous emphysema may be present (e.g., open
ous exercise.
fracture, penetrating wound).
6. Flexion of carpus may cause pain and demonstrate
6. Positioning artifact may be mistaken for subluxation (if
restricted mobility.
not seen in profle, a normal digit can appear displaced or
dislocated).
Radiographic findings with stenosing tenosynovitis:
1. Focal soft tissue swelling at medial aspect of carpus.
Differential diagnosis of digital fractures and luxations:
 2. Well-defined new bone production (enthesophyte) on
1. Superimposed structure (e.g., surface debris, wet hair
dorsomedial aspect of distal radius (Figure 4.135).
coat, margins of foot pads).
SESAMOID BONE FRACTURES
Digits (metacarpus/metatarsus/phalanges)
Clinical correlations:
Fracture/luxation
1. Usually caused by hyperextension of digits.
Clinical correlations:
2. Palmar sesamoid bones 2 and 7 most often are affected.
1. Trauma to digits may cause subluxation, luxation, or
3. Typically occur in heavy large-breed dogs.
fracture.
4. Racing greyhounds commonly injure right front foot
2. Racing Greyhounds are prone to subluxation of digit 5
(due to counterclockwise running).
(predominately in right front foot due to counterclockwise
5. In young Rottweilers, palmar metacarpal sesamoids may
running).
appear fragmented:
3. Subluxations may spontaneously reduce during radiog-
a. No known trauma.
raphy (soft tissue swelling remains).
b. Most often involves bones 2 and 7.
4. Clinical
signs include
variable
degrees
of acute
c. May be caused by abnormal ossifcation.
lameness.
d. Metatarsal sesamoids rarely are involved.
Radiographic findings of digital fractures and luxations:
Radiographic findings with sesamoid bone fractures:
1. Soft tissue swelling at site of injury.
1. Variable soft tissue swelling at site of injury.
2. Orthogonal radiographs are needed to adequately assess
 2. One or more fracture lines may be present.
fractures and luxations.
3. Fracture fragments may or may not be displaced.
210
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
P3
C
Figure 4.136 Digital sesamoid bones (dorsopalmar radiograph).
Jeed jepa =  'auog pioesas neied leael =t jip jeon s
sesamoid bone, D = dorsal sesamoid bone, P1 = first phalanx,
P2 = second phalanx, P3 = third phalanx. B. Detail area: (A) Normal
sesarmoid bones. (B) Sesamoid bone fracture with irregular margin5.
(C) Bipartite lateral sesamoid bone. (D) Multipartite lateral sesarmoid
bone. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
yos pazenon (ydeboipen jewjedosiop) eiseidoau jbia 2el't aunbis
tissue swelling and osteolysis of a third phalanx are present; the more 
proxirnal phalanges are not involved. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
4. Fragments may develop osteonecrosis.
Radiographic findings with digital neoplasia:
5. Must be differentiated from multipartite sesamoid bones
and superimposed structures:
(Figure 4.137).
a. Multipartite sesamoids are smoothly marginated, do
2. Usually only one digit is affected, but several digits on
not change in appearance on serial radiographs, and soft
one or more feet can be affected.
tissue swelling is absent (Figure 4.136).
3. Bone lesion is primarily osteolytic and usually confined
b. Superimposed foot pads, wet hair, or dirt may create
to third phalanx, rarely crossing the joint.
lines that mimic fractures, but close inspection reveals
4. Minimal or no periosteal response is evident (osteomy-
that lines extend beyond limits of sesamoid bones.
elitis often produces a more severe periosteal response).
5. Overexposed radiograph may mimic osteolysis.
Digital neoplasia
Clinical correlations
Differential diagnosis for digital neoplasia:
1. Other names: subungual tumor.
1. Osteomyelitis/ nail bed infection.
2. Pododermatitis.
2. Tumors affecting digits may originate in bone or adjacent
3. Bone cyst.
soft tissues.
3. Frequently occurs in dogs; uncormmon in cats.
Osteomyelitis
4. Most often reported in older large-breed dogs with black
Clinical correlations:
hair coats (e.g., Labrador Retriever, Standard Poodle).
1. Other names: paronychia.
5. Squamous cell carcinoma is most common in dogs (over
2. Inflammation of digit, usually caused by infection.
50% of reported cases).
3. Infection may result from penetrating wound or foreign
a. Arises from nonpigmented tissue near nail bed.
material.
6. Melanoma is second most common in dogs.
4. May involve one or multiple digits and joints.
a. Arises from pigmented areas near nail bed.
5. Clinical signs include swelling and pain.
7. Fibrosarcoma is most common in cats.
8. Metastatic disease from bronchial adenocarcinoma to
Radiographic findings with digit osteomyelitis:
digits occurs in cats.
1. Soft tissue swelling or mass at affected digit.
9. Osteosarcoma can involve digits.
2. An active periosteal response is common and may cross
10. Clinical signs include swelling in digit and lameness.
the joint space.
211
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
3. Erosive arthritis of distal interphalangeal joint is fre-
4. Most often reported in immature toy and small-breed
quently seen.
dogs (e.g. Yorkshire Terrier, Toy Poodle, Pomeranian. Chi-
4. Mineral or metal opacity foreign material may be visible.
huahua, Jack Russell Terrier, West Highland White Terrier.
5. Subcutaneous emphysema may be present.
Cairn Terrier, Manchester Terrier, Pug. Dachshund).
5. Heritable in Toy Poodle, Yorkshire Terrier, and West High-
Differential diagnosis of digit osteomyelitis:
land white Terrier.
1. Neoplasia.
6. Usually unilateral (less than 15% are bilateral).
 7. Clinical signs appear at 4 to 10 months of age and tend
Intraosseous epidermoid cyst
to be progressive.
Clinical correlations:
a. Initially a mild weight-bearing lameness and pain with
1. Other names: pseudotumor.
abduction of limb.
2.A
cystlilke
structure
forms
in
third
phalanx
b. Severe or chronic lameness leads to disuse muscle
(uncommon}.
atrophy.
3. May be congenital, traumatic, or iatrogenic in origin.
8. Lesions can heal (fibrovascular tissue) and clinical signs
4. Usually only one digit is involved
abate, but femoral head remains misshapen.
5. Similar cysts have been reported in skull and vertebrae.
6. Affected animals may have soft tissue swelling and pain.
Radiographic findings with avascular necrosis of
femorathead:
Radiographic findings with intraosseous cyst:
1. Viewing both extended and flexed ventrodorsal pelvic
1. Soft tissue swelling may or may not be present.
radiographs aids in lesion detection.
2. Well-defined focal osteolysis is seen in ungual process.
2. Radiographs may be normal during early stages of
3. Adjacent osteosclerosis may be present.
disease.
 4. Periosteal response is absent unless cyst becomes infected
3. Initially, increased opacity is present in femoral head
or fractured.
(rarely seen because radiographs usually are not made at
this early stage).
Differential diagnosis of intraosseous cyst:
4. With progresion, a faint, heterogeneous decrease in
1. Neoplasia.
opacity develops in proximal femoral epiphysis and metaph-
2. Osteomyelitis.
ysis (Figure 1.138).
5. Coxofemoral joint space widens and femoral head
Other conditions
becomes misshapen (flattened and irregular),
1. Foreign material (mineral and metal objects usually are
6.Acetabulum becomes abnormal in shape (flattened or
readily identified; fistulogram may aid in localizing foreign
flared}.
material that invokes a draining tract).
 7. Osteosclerosis may be present in femoral metaphysis.
2. Emphysema (caused by penetrating wound or gas-
8. Disuse muscle atrophy occurs in more severe or chronic
producing bacterial infection).
ca ses.
3. Polydactyly (congenital, possibly hereditary in some
9. Varus deformity of fermoral neck may develop during
breeds).
osseous remodeling.
4. Osteodystrophy of Scottish Fold Cat.
10. Secondary degenerative joint disease is common.
5. Hypertrophic pulmonary osteopathy.
11. Pathological fractures may occur in weakened femoral
6. Calcinosis circumscripta.
neck.
12. Concurrent medial patellar luxation may be present.
Pelvis and coxofemoral joints
AVASCULAR NECROSIS OF FEMORAL HEAD
Differential diagnosis for avascular necrosis of
Clinical correlations:
1. Other names: ischemic necrosis of femoral head, aseptic
femoral head:
necrosis of femoral head, Legg-Calves Perthes disease.
1. Traumatic fracture of femoral head and neck.
2. Loss of blood supply to developing femoral head results
2. Epiphyseal dysplasia.
in bone necrosis and collapse.
a. In immature animals the only blood supply to femoral
DEGENERATIVE JOINT DISEASE (DJD) OF HIPS
head is through joint capsule.
Clinical correlations:
b. In adult animals a blood supply is also available via
1. Most commonly results from hip dysplasia.
the medullary cavity.
2. Usually bilateral.
3. Loss of blood supply may be idiopathic. genetic, or tral-
3. Affected animals exhibit variable degrees of stiffness.
matic in origin.
reluctance to rise, and lameness.
212
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Figure 4.138 Avascular necrosis of fernoral head (ventrodorsal radiographs). A. Increased opacity of the femoral head. B. Demmineralization of femoral
head. C. Collapse of femoral head.
Figure 4.139 Degenerative joint dlisease in hips (ventrodorsal radiograph). A. Coxofermoral subluxation without visible osteophytes or enthesophytes;
physeal scar (P). B. Osteophytes (O) on fermoral neck; physeal scar (P). C. Enthesophytes at attachment of joint capsule (arrow).
Radiographic findings with DJD of hips:
4. Enthesophytes form at insertion of joint capsule, creating
1. Osteophytes develop along dorsal acetabular rim, creat-
a curvilinear line of increased opacity along caudal femoral
ing an irregular bony margin.
neck (sometimes called Morgan's line, Figure 4.139C).
2. More commonly. osteophytes form along femoral neck
5. Remodeling of femoral heads and necks occurs in
(Figure 4.139B), creating a thin, transverse line of increased
advanced cases.
6. Pelvic limb muscles may be small (atrophied) due to
inside joint capsule).
disuse.
3. Articular margins of acetabular fossae appear irregular
7. Coxofemoral subluxation is not part of DJD, but fre-
with subchondral osteosclerosis (Figure 4.140).
quently is present due to hip dysplasia.
213
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
11. Animals with severe hip dysplasia may exhibit signs
at less than l year of age (lameness may initially present
with periods of stiffness and reluctance to rise which seems
Fovia
Acetabular
Osteophytes
to improve but returns as degenerative joint disease
Capitus
p
progresses).
Acetabular
12. Hip dysplasia usually is bilateral but can be unilateral.
Notch
13. Unilateral hip dysplasia is found more commonly along
some genetic lines:
a. Seems to repeatedly involve same hip (right or left)
in that line.
 b. Incidence of unilateral disease is independent of rate
of hip dysplasia in that breed.
Figure 4.140 Degenerative joint disease in hips (ventrodorsal
c. Left hip predominates in Akita, Golden Retriever.
radiograph). A. Normal coxofermoral joint; fovea capitus is normal
Labrador Retriever, and Newfoundland.
flattened area on femoral head for attachment of round ligament and
d. Right hip is more frequently affected in Rottweiler.
normal acetabular notch. B. Osteophytes within acetabular notch
e. Either hip can be affected in German Shepherd Dog.
14. Diagnosis is tentatively based on history, clinical signs.
and palpation, but is confirmed on radiographs.
8. Conditions that may mimic osteophytes and entheso-
15. During estrus and pregnancy, hip laxity may be greater:
phytes on femoral neck:
therefore, hips should be examined at least l month before
a. Physeal scar leaves a line of increased opacity near
 or 1 month after estrus, or 1 month after weaning a litter.
femoral head (young animals).
16. Prolonged periods of physical inactivity may increase
9. Shape of femoral head may form a positive Mach band
hip laxity (e.g., illness, confinement, weather conditions).
(optical illusion created by superimposition of curved struc-
Radiographic findings with hip dysplasia:
   s n a e   i
1. Radiographic findings may not correlate with severity of
head (common in chondrodystrophic breeds and Boxers).
clinical signs.
2. Coxofemoral subluxation
HIP DYSPLASIA
a. Commonly assessed on a well-positioned, extended
Clinical correlations:
ventrodorsal pelvic radiograph.
1. Abnormal development of coxofemoral joints.
2. Most common cause of hip degenerative joint disease in
b. Margins of femoral head and cranial acetabular rim
dogs and cats.
between articular surfaces (Figure 4.141).
 3. Etiology involves multiple genes and environmental
factors:
c. A wedge-shaped cranial joint space indicates a "loose
fit" or subluxation.
a. Rapid growth rate.
d. NOTE: Only the cranial portion of the joint space is
b. Large body size.
evaluated; other areas are not used to evaluate sublux-
c. High plane of nutrition, including excessive calories.
ation due to normal irregularities in the joint (such as
protein, and/or calcium.
d. Insufficient exercise or excessive exercise.
fovea capitus and acetabular notch).
4. Environmental factors alone will not cause hip dysplasia:
affected animals are genetically predisposed
NORMAL
LAXITY
5. Hips usually appear normal at birth and become dysplas-
tic over time.
6. Coxofemoral joint laxity is considered to be the earliest
change (femoral head is not well seated in acetabulum) and
results in abnormal wearing. which leads to bone remodel-
ing and degenerative joint disease.
7. Any breed of dog or cat can be affected.
 8. Highest incidence is in large- and giant-breed dogs and
in purebred cats (Maine Coon).
9. Clinical signs include an abnormal gait, low exercise
Figure 4.141 Diagram of coxofemoral joint "fit" illustrating normal
tolerance, reluctance to rise or climb stairs, and muscle
joint with even joint space cranially (image on left) and subluxated hip
a trophy.
with wedging of the dorsolateral joint space (image on right). Concave
10. Many affected animals remain asymptomatic for years.
 area on left edge of femoral head represents normal fovea capitus.
214
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
e. Coxofemoral joints with excessive laxity may not be
3. Developmental abnormalities 
detected if femoral head is in normal position at time of
a. Acetabular fossa may be shallow and flared.
radiography.
b. Femoral heads may be misshapen in severe cases.
c. Angle of femoral neck may be abnormal (Figure
4.143).
l) Care must be taken in making this interpretation.
Anything that is loose can be radiographed in the normal or
Rotation of the femur easily creates the erroneous
abnormal position.
appearance of coxa valga.
4. Degenerative joint disease (as described on pages 
212-214).
l) Stress radiographs can be used to more accu-
rately detect subluxation (see Positioning Guide in
chapter 2).
"Flattening of femoral heads" is a misnomer, erroneously
2) Half-axial radiograph:
used to describe the appearance of the femoral head caused
a. Developed in early 1970s (SKK) to reduce
by extensive osteophyte formation on the femoral neck
torque and stretching of joint capsule (which
(Figure 4.144). Describing femoral heads as flattened is
 occurs during positioning for extended ventrodor-
pasn uaag sey wial s!ul buisnjuon s! l! asnerag pabeanorsip
sal radiograph) and visually document Ortolani
 often, yet many who are looking for flattening will find it at 
sign.
the normal fovea capitus and end up making an erroneous 
 b. Femurs are parallel and partially extended with
diagnosis. True flattening of the femoral head rarely occurs.
a fulcrum between femurs (examples of a fulcrum
A more accurate approach to evaluating hips is to look for
include rolled up towel or 2 lb roll of cotton). A
evidence of joint laxity and osteophyte formation. If 
capital I-shaped wedge can be handmade for this
degenerative changes are severe enough to make the
purpose from 2-inch-thick wood (Figure 4.142B).
femoral head appear less rounded, then the diagnosis is
c. Fulcrum produces distraction at hips when tarsi
established.
are moved together.
d. Normal coxofemoral joints do not subluxate
during distraction, and distance between femoral
5. Secondary muscle atrophy due to disuse.
heads varies less than l cm between neutral and
6. Most common findings in cats with hip dysplasia are
distracted (Figure 4.142).
subluxation  and  osteophytes  on  dorsal  acetabular  rim
3) Compression-distraction radiographs (PennHIP)
(osteophytosis on femoral neck are less common in cats than
described on pages 217 and 218.
in dogs).
Figure 4.142 Half axial radiograph used to document coxofemoral subluxation (ventrodorsal radiograph). A. Without distraction (on left), and with
distraction (on right; femoral heads are laterally displaced and coxofemoral joint spaces are wedged cranially). B. Positioning block; this general outline
can be used to cut from wood a fulcrum which is placed between the pelvic limbs to produce distraction radiographs (blocks can be made in several 
sizes).
215
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
B
C
Figure 4.143 Angle of fermoral neck (ventrodorsal radiograph)
Aleouge s! albue :een exo 'a (oe1 Aatewixoidde) albue (ewon *
acute. C. Coxa valga: angle is abnormally steep. (Adapted from Owen5
and Biery 1999.)
 Figure 4.145 Properly positioned extended ventrodorsal pelvic
radiograph for evaluation of hip dysplasia.
elbows. eyes, thyroid, and others (http://www.offa.org/
index.html).
2. Extended ventrodorsal pelvic radiograph was adopted by
AVMA in 1961 for detection of hip dysplasia and is used by
OFA and many countries throughout world for grading hips.
a. Well-positioned radiograph is essential for accurate
interpretation (Figure 4.145):
1) Sacrum, two most caudal lumbar vertebrae, pelvis.
Figure 4.144 Severe hip dysplasia with advanced degenerative joint
femurs, and stifles are included.
disease (ventrodorsal radiograph). Extensive new bone production on
2) Pelvis and femurs are symmetrically positioned.
fernoral necks creates impression of flattening of fermoral head (arrow).
3) Both ilial wings are equal in width.
4) Obturator foramina are equal size.
7. Errors in positioning may mimic hip dysplasia:
5) Femurs are extended and parallel to each other and
a. Rotation of pelvis on ventrodorsal radiograph makes
parallel to ilia.
one acetabular fossa appear shallow (side with wider
6) Patellas are superimposed on midline of each
ilial wing). and other acetabular fossa will appear deep 
femur.
(side with bigger obturator foramen (Memory tip: wider 
3. Each radiograph is independently reviewed by three vet-
erinary radiologists and a consensus opinion is provided to
owner and referring veterinarian.
Registry groups-hip dysplasia certifcation
4. Dogs that are at least 2 years of age will receive one of
1. Several groups exist to collect data and certify animals
seven grades, based on radiographic appearance of hips as
regarding coxofemoral joint conformation and presence or
compared to other dogs with similar signalment (Figure
lilkelihood of developing hip dysplasia. These groups are
4.146; Table 4.8).
described in the following text.
a. Excellent: superior conformation; characterized by
a well-formed, C-shaped acetabulum, a deeply seated
ORTHOPEDIC FOUNDATION FOR ANIMALS (OFA)
femoral head with greater than 75% coverage by dorsal
1. OFA was established in 1966 as a hip registry for dogs
acetabular rim, and a uniform, thin, and congruent joint
(and now for cats, too). In addition to hips, OFA evaluates
space.
216
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
b. Good: characterized by a well-formed, C-shaped ace-
ing. or (3) technique artifacts. Radiographs usually are
tabulum, 60% to 75% coverage of femoral head, and a
repeated in 6 to 8 months.
well-seated, congruent joint.
e. Mild hip dysplasia: slight joint incongruity. partial
c. Fair: minor irregularities and a slightly incongruent
subluxation, slight flaring of acetabulum (less C shaped):
joint, but no evidence of subluxation; dorsal acetabular
only 40% to 50% coverage of femoral head; joint space
rim may have a slightly concave shape (normal in Chinese
is widened, and early or mild degenerative joint disease
Shar-Pei and Poodle): at least 50% coverage of femoral
is present.
head.
f. Moderate hip dysplasia: significant joint incongruity
d. Borderline: no clear consensus for a grade due to (1)
and subluxation; shallow acetabular fossae with only
nonspecific or questionable findings. (2) poor position-
25% to 40% coverage of femoral head, and moderate
degenerative joint disease.
g. Severe hip dysplasia: severe subluxation or luxation,
acetabular fossa is very shallow with less than 25% cov-
erage of femoral head, and there is a large amount of
secondary degenera tive joint disease.
PENNHIP
1. Pennsylvania Hip Improvement Program was developed
in 1980s (http://www.pennhip.org/) .
2. Ventrodorsal radiographs of pelvis are made with hips
compressed and then distracted to provide an objective.
I
quantitative measurement of hip laxity (distraction index;
see chapter 2, Figure 2.53).
3. Veterinarians who want to use this technique must be
specially trained and certified.
4. All radiographs are submitted to PennHIP Analysis Center
for evaluation.
5. Distraction Index (DI) compares amount of laxity in each
hip between compression and distraction radiographs.
C
a. Measurements are made on distracted radiograph
D
(Figure 4.147).
Figure 4.146 Grades of canine hip dysplasia. A. Normal hip. B. Mild.
b. Distance between center of femoral head and center
 5ubluxation. C. Moderate subluxation, shallow acetabulum, and thickened 
 of acetabulum is divided by radius of femoral head to give
femoral neck. D. Severe luxation, shallow acetabulum, secondary 
the DI.
degenerative joint disease. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
c. DI range is between 0.0 and 1.0 (lower numbers indi-
cate tighter hips).
Table 4.8 Hip dysplasia registry grading scales (approximate)
OFA
FCI
BVA
SV
 PennHIP
Norberg
(European)
(UK/Australia)
(Germany)
DI
Angle
 Normal 
 Excellent
A-1
0-4
Normal
<0.3
≥105°
poog
A-2
5-10
 Normal 
Transitional
Fair
B-1
11-18
Normal
100°-105
Borderline
B-2
19-25
Fast Normmal
 Dysplastic
Mild 
C-1 
26-30
Noch Zugelassen
>0.3
100°
C-2
31-35
 Moderate 
D-1
36-45
Mittlere 
90°-100
D-2
46-50
Severe
E-1 
51-70
Schwere
≤90°
E-2
71-106
217
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
B
FHC
DI = d/r
[eoat jo (p) anueisip uoeedas huunseau Aa pauiuaiap s! (ia) xapui uoesa a ydehoipel jesiopouan paineisia v diuuad tl't ainei
head center (FHC) from acetabular center (AC) and dividing by radius of femoral head (r). (B is adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
d. DI of 0.3 or less is considered normal.
e. DI greater than 0.4 suggests a higher probability of
developing secondary degenerative joint disease.
Norberg
6. Evaluations can be done in puppies young as l6 weeks
of age.
Angle
FEDERATION CYNOLOGIQUE INTERNATIONALE (FCI)
1. Group of more than 80 national kennel authorities in
Europe, Russia, South America, and Asia that provide evalu-
ations of hip conformation in dogs.
2. Criteria used to evaluate hips include:
a. Norberg angle.
b. Degree of subluxation.
c. Shape and depth of the acetabulum.
Figure 4.148 Norberg angle (ventrodorsal radiograph). A line connects
d. Signs of degenerative joint disease.
the centers of each fernoral head. Another line extends from each
3. Norberg angle is a numerical assessment of joint laxity
paoy albue ayl 'wu leingeiane jesopouen sli ot jatuan peay jeiowat
made on an extended ventrodorsal pelvicradiograph (Figure
by the intersection of two lines is the Norberg angle (arrows).
4.148).
a. Draw a line connecting centers of femoral heads.
b. Make another line extending from center of each
5. Dogs must be at least l year of age and are given one of
femoral head to cranial edge of acetabular rim.
five possible grades:
c. Norberg angles are described by intersections of lines
a. A: normal.
at femoral heads.
b. B: near normal:
1) Greater than 105° is normal.
1) Congruent hips with a Norberg angle less than 1059
2) Between 90° and 105° is borderline.
or
3) Less than 90° is abnormal.
2) Hips have slight incongruity with a Norberg angle
d. Angle is directly related to degree-of-fit of coxofemo-
of 105°.
ral joint.
c. C: mild hip dysplasia:
e. Measurement is not affected by slight rotation of
1) Hips are incongruent with a Norberg angle near
pelvis.
100%.
4. Radiographs are evaluated by one scorer (no certification
2) Craniolateral acetabular rim is flattened (shallow).
required).
3) Mild degenerative joint disease.
218
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
d. D: moderate hip dysplasia:
1) Hips are obviously incongruent and subluxated.
2) Norberg angle is 90° to 100°.
3) Acetabular fossae are flattened (shallow).
4) Degenerative joint disease is present.
e. E: severe hip dysplasia:
1) Hips are distinctly subluxated or luxated.
2) Norberg angle is less than 90°.
3) Deformed femoral head (flattened or mushroom
shaped).
4) Advanced degenerative joint disease.
BRITISH VETERINARY ASSOCIATION/KENNEL CLUB
(BVA/KC)
 1. Hip grading method used in Britain, Ireland, Australia.
and New Zealand.
2. Hip scores are based on nine criteria:
a. Five deal with acetabular shape and depth.
b. Two for hip laxity/subluxa tion.
c. Two for degenerative changes in the joints.
Figure 4.149 Pelvic fractures (ventrodorsal radiograph). (1) wing of
3. Each criterion is graded between 0 (ideal) and 6 (worst).
ilium, (2) body or shaft of ilium, (3) cranial rarmus of pubic bone.
(4) shaft of ischium, (5) greater trochanter of femur, (6) sacroiliac
4. The final score ranges from 0 to 53 for each hip (0 to 106
for both hips)
luxation, and (7) pubic symphyseal separation. (Adapted from Owen5
and Biery 1999.)
5. Scoring is done by three panelists from a group of radiolo-
gists or surgeons.
3. In cats, etiology may be unknown (feline capital physeal
Fractures
dysplasia syndrome must be considered).
Clinical correlations:
4. Affected animals present with acute, non-weight-bearing
1. Generally associated with blunt trauma.
lameness.
 2. May have concurrent injuries to urethra, urinary bladder.
rectum, or sciatic or pelvic nerves.
3. Affected animals present with acute, non-weight-bearing
Radiographic findings with fractures of femoral neck
lameness.
(Figure 4.150):
4. Displaced pelvic fractures or subsequent narrowing of
1. May be unilateral or bilateral.
pelvic canal can create problems with defecation and
2. Intracapsular fractures involve femoral neck or capital
parturition.
physis (Salter-Harris type I or II).
a. All capital physeal fractures are intra-articular.
Radiographic findings with pelvic fractures:
3. Extracapsular fractures occur in distal femoral neck.
1. Obliqued and flexed radiographs may be necessary to
4. Acetabular fractures commonly allow medial displace-
identify all fractures.
ment of femoral head.
2. Usually more than one pelvic bone is involved (if only
 5. Fractures may be minimally displaced or inapparent on
one bone is fractured, a concurrent sacroiliac luxation
one radiograph (orthogonal radiographs are necessary for
usually is present; Figure 4.149).
accurate interpreta tion).
3. Nondisplaced or overlapping fractures may create lines of 
6. A flexed ventrodorsal pelvic radiograph ("frog-leg" posi-
increased opacity.
tion) may aid in diagnosis. Periarticular tissues tend to relax
4. Other injuries may be present (e.g., caudal vertebral frac-
in this position, allowing distal femoral fragment to rotate
ture, retroperitoneal hematoma).
away from epiphyseal fragment (Figure 4.151).
5. Contrast radiography (e.g., urethrocystography, intrave-
7. Other trauma may be present (e.g. fractures in other
bones, subcutaneous emphysema ).
(especially animals with hematuria or peritoneal effusion).
8. Older fractures present with bone
resorption along
femoral neck ("apple core" appearance).
FEMORAL HEAD AND NECK FRACTURES
Clinical correlations:
 1. Other names: capital physis fracture, slipped epiphysis.
Differential diagnosis for fracture of femoral head/neck:
2. Frequently results from trauma.
1. Avascular necrosis of femoral head.
219
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Radiographic findings with feline capital physeal
dysplasia syndrome:
1. Fracture involves proximal femoral (capital) physis.
2. May be unilateral or bilateral.
 3. Fragments may be minimally displaced or appear reduced
on one radiograph.
4. A flexed ventrodorsal radiograph often aids in detection
(Figure 4.151).
5. Older fractures present with bone resorption along
Luxations
COXOFEMORAL LUXATION
Clinical correlations:
C
1. Hip is most commonly luxated joint in dogs and cats.
Figure 4.150 Fermoral head and neck fractures. A. Capital physi5
2. May result from hip dysplasia or blunt trauma (e.g.
(intracapsular). B. proximal cenvical (intracapsular). C. micddle cervical
motor vehicle accident).
(extracapsular). D. low cervical (extracapsular). E. Bone resorption along 
 3. Affected animals typically present with non-weight-bear-
femnoral neck ("apple core" lesion; arrow, ventrodorsal radiograph). (A-D
ing lameness.
adapted from Owens and Biery 1999).
4. Limb usually is held adducted and externally rotated.
 5. Evidence of trauma may be present at other sites (e.g..
pelvis, urethra, urinary bladder, rectum, diaphragm, ribs).
6. Closed reduction of a luxated hip may be impeded by:
a. Hematoma formation.
b. Damaged joint capsule.
M
c. Inapparent fracture.
Radiographic findings with coxofemoral luxation
(Figure 4.152):
1. Orthogonal radiographs often are needed to identify the
luxa tion.
2. Most hip luxations are cranial and dorsal.
3. Caudoventral luxations are less common.
4. Medial luxation is often associated with acetabular
Figure 4.151 Feline capital physeal dysplasia 5yndrome (flexed
fracture.
ventrodorsal pelvic radiograph). Bilateral capital physeal fractures are
 5. Lateral oblique and flexed ventrodorsal radiographs may
present with the capital epiphyses (C) appearing to rotate caudally away
aid in detecting fractures (e.g., acetabular, femoral head/neck).
frorn fernoral neck (N).
6. Avulsion fracture may occur at insertion of ligament on
fovea capitus (small bone fragment commonly is present in
acetabular fossa ).
FELINE CAPITAL PHYSEAL DYSPLASIA SYNDROME
 7. Avulsion fracture may occur at insertion of gluteal tendon
Clinical correlations:
 on greater trochanter (must be differentiated from incidental
1. Other
names:
proximal
femoral
metaphyseal
tendon mineralization}.
osteopathy.
2. Osteonecrosis of femoral neck leads to pathologic fracture
SACROILIAC LUXATION
at capital physis.
Clinical correlations:
3. Etiology is unknown, but trauma is rarely reported.
1. Usually caused by trauma.
4. Can occur in any breed of cat, but 
Siamese are
 2. Other traumatic injuries may be present in the pelvis or
overrepresented.
adjacent tissues.
 5. Most often reported in young (less than 2 years old) male
3. Cats are especially susceptible.
cats, especially overweight animals.
6. May be unilateral or bilateral; if unilateral, contralateral
Radiographic findings with sacroiliac luxation:
limb often is affected within 6-12 months.
1. Normal sacroiliac arch is continuous and smooth bor-
7. Clinical sign is an acute onset of lameness, usually
dered along medial margin of ilium and caudal margin of
without history of trauma.
sa crum.
220
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
 Figure 4.152 Coxofemmoral luxation. A. Lateral radiograph with craniodorsal displacement of femmoral head (arrow). B. Ventrodorsal radliograph with
craniolateral displacernent of left fernoral head (arrow).
2. Sacroiliac luxation interrupts the arch, creating a
"stair-step” due to cranial displacement of ilium (see
Figure 4.149).
3. Luxations may be unilateral or bilateral; if unilateral.
other pelvic fractures are common.
4. Other evidence of trauma may be present:
a. Other pelvic fractures.
b. Subcutaneous emphysema.
c. Ruptured urinary bladder.
5. Errors in positioning may be mistaken for sacroiliac
luxation.
a. Slight rotation of pelvis (ventrodorsal radiograph) may
highlight a normal separation at sacroiliac joint; however.
close inspection will reveal that no interruption of sacro-
iliac arch exists.
Neoplasia
Clinical correlations:
1. Pelvic tumors are uncommon in dogs and cats.
Figure 4.153 Pelvic neoplasia (ventrodorsal radiograph). Extensive
2. Types of neoplasia include:
a. Osteochondroma (young dogs. often in an ilial
osteolysis and a diffuse, ill-cdefined periosteal response are visible in the
Ieft ischiurn (arrow).
wing).
b. Chondrosarcoma (predisposition for flat bones).
c. Multiple myeloma (pelvis is a predilection site).
Stifle
d. Osteosarcoma.
 Degenerative joint disease
e. Fibrosarcoma.
Clinical correlations:
3. Clinical signs include variable swelling. pain, and
lameness.
1. Other names: osteoarthritis, arthritis, osteoarthrosis.
2. Most commonly results from damage to cranial cruciate
ligament (which leads to secondary DJD).
Radiographic findings with petvic neoplasia
3. May also result from osteochondrosis, patellar luxation,
(Figure 4.153):
previous trauma, or primary DJD (aging change).
1. Osteolysis tends to predominate with variable periosteal
4. Most often reported in larger dogs.
response and soft tissue swelling.
5. Usually bilateral.
2. Most commonly involves ilium.
6. Clinical signs include varying degrees of lameness.
221
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 4.154 Stifle degenerative joint dlisease. Locations of osteophytes
 and enthesophytes are highlighted in white. A. Lateral radliograph
B. Craniocaudal radiograph.
Radiographic findings of stifle DJD:
1. Osteophytes are most common and specific sign of DJD
Figure 4.155 Stifle joint effusion (lateral radiograph) Increased soft 
opacity is present in the femorotibial joint space with partial obliteration
(Figure 4.154):
of infrapatellar fat pad (white arrow) and caudal dlistention of joint pouch
a. First appear along trochlear ridges, patella, and exten-
(black arrow). F = fat, caudal to patellar ligarment and in fascial plane
sor fossa.
adjacent to gastrocnemius muscle.
b. Later develop on epicondyles, fabellae, popliteal sesa-
moid bone, and proximal tibia.
2. Joint effusion and/or synovial thickening may be present
as increased soft tissue opacity in femorotibial joint space
and reduction of infrapatellar fat pad.
Radiographic findings with cranial cruciate
3. Small subchondral cysts (focal, round, areas of decreased
ligament injuries:
 opacity) may develop in femoral intercondylar fossa (more
1. Stifle joint effusion is characteristic (Figure 4.155):
common with chronic disease).
a. Increased opacity in femorotibial joint space.
b. Displacement or partial obliteration of infrapatellar
Cranial cruciate ligament injury
fat pad (fat pad appears reduced in size on lateral
Clinical correlations:
radiograph).
1. Most common cause of stifle lameness and degenerative
c. Caudal distention of joint capsule (fascial plane is call-
joint disease in dogs and cats.
dally displaced).
2. Injury to ligament may result in partial or complete
2. Proximal tibia may be cranially displaced in relation to
tearing and joint instability.
distal femur (drawer sign):
3. May present with acute onset or as chronic, progressive.
a. Easiest to see on lateral radiograph with tibial com-
or intermittent condition.
pression (see chapter 2, Figure 2.56). A true lateral radio-
4. Contributing factors to ligament injury include hip dys-
graph is required for accurate interpretation (usually.
plasia, aging. obesity, abnormal stifle conformation (e.g..
patella needs to be slightly rotated toward detector during
patellar luxation. genu valgum, genu varum), excessive
positioning).
activity, and immune-mediated disease affecting stifle.
b. Normally, the intercondylar eminence is centered on 
5. "Cranial drawer sign" is diagnostic (proximal tibia can be
the femoral condyles (Figure 4.156).
manually displaced cranially in relation to distal femur).
3. Popliteal sesamoid may be displaced caudally and
(NOTE: Inability to displace tibia does not rule out cranial
distally.
cruciate ligament damage.)
4. Secondary degenerative joint disease is common.
6. Clinical signs include variable degrees of pain and
5. Avulsion fracture at insertion of cranial cruciate ligament
lameness.
may be present (uncommon):
7. May be unilateral or bilateral; when bilateral, stifle
a. Occurs in young animals (less than 18 months) when
disease may mimic hip or intervertebral disc disease.
ligament is stronger than epiphyseal bone.
222
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Differential diagnosis for caudal cruciate
ligament injury:
1. Cranial cruciate ligament injury.
2. Osteochondrosis.
3. Neoplasia (e.g., synovial cell sarcoma, osteosarcoma).
4. Meniscal injury.
5. Primary degenerative joint disease.
Avulsion fractures
Clinical correlation:
1. Usually associated with trauma.
2. May be unilateral or bilateral.
3. Avulsions involve muscle tendons originating near stifle:
(true lateral radliograph). Black dots designate centers of fernoral condyles
a. Gastrocnemius:
and intercondylar eminence of tibia. A. Normal alignment. B. Severe
1) Injuries are less common at origin than at insertion
cranial displacement of tibia secondary to damaged cranial cruciate
on tuber calcis.
ligarment (*"tibial thrust" or "cranial drawer sign") with displacement of 
2) Affected animals have a plantigrade stance with
 popliteal sesarmoid bone caudally and distally.
tarsus in hyperflexion.
b. Long digital extensor:
 1) More often reported in large, immature dogs.
c. Popliteal muscle:
b. Fragment originates from tibial plateau and typically
1) May be associated with injury to cranial cruciate
 is located in intercondylar region of distal femur.
ligament.
c. Difficult to differentiate from avulsion of deep digital
flexor tendon.
6. Concurrent stifle disease may be present (e.g., osteochon-
1. Soft tissue swelling is present at site of injury.
drosis, patellar luxation, meniscal tear).
2. Gastrocnemius tendon avulsion Figure 4.157):
a. Soft tissue swelling at caudodistal aspect of femur.
Differential diagnosis for cranial cruciateligamentinjury
b. Affected fabella is distally displaced (best seen with
(and stifle DJD):
tarsus flexed}.
1. Osteochondrosis.
c. Enthesopathy often develops at site of injury.
2. Neoplasia (e.g., synovial cell sarcoma, osteosarcoma).
d. During healing. fabella may become thickened and 
3. Primary degenerative joint disease.
irre gular.
4. Meniscal injury.
 5. Caudal cruciate ligament injury.
Caudal cruciate ligament injury
Clinical correlations:
1. Rare in dogs and cats.
a) s a o   os  z
collateral, cranial cruciate),
3. "Caudal drawer sign" is diagnostic (absence of this sign
does not rule out the diagnosis).
4. Clinical signs include variable degrees of pain and
lameness.
Radiographic findings with caudal cruciate
ligament injury:
1. Femorotibial joint effusion.
2. Proximal tibia may be caudally displaced in relation to
distal femur (caudal drawer sign).
Figure 4.157 Avulsion of lateral branch of gastrocnemius tendon.
3. Mineralized fragment sometimes is present in caudal
Lateral fabella (white arrow) is dlisplaced distally. Medlial fabella
joint compartment (origin of fragment may be difficult to
(black arrow) is smaller and in normal position. A. Lateral radiograph.
identify, may or may not represent avulsion fracture).
B. Craniocaudal radiograph.
223
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 4.158 Avulsion of long digital extensor tendon (lateral
Figure 4.159 Avulsion of origin of popliteal muscle (lateral radiograph)
radliograph). Avulsed fragment (arrow) is displaced distally from lateral
 Popliteal sesammoid bone is dlisplaced distally (arrow). (Adapted from
aspect of lateral femmoral condyle. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
Owens and Biery 1999.)
e. Dystrophic mineralization sometimes develops in
5. Incomplete avulsion may result from overuse or low-
adjacent soft tissues.
grade repetitive trauma and is called traction apophysitis
3. Long digital extensor tendon avulsion (Figure 4.158):
(Osgood-Schlatter disease in humans) .
a. Soft tissue swelling and/or joint effusion at affected
6. Clinical signs include sudden onset of lameness, swelling.
stifle.
and pain over the tibial tuberosity.
b. Avulsed bone fragment may be located:
l) Distal to extensor fossa, near lateral femoral
Radiographic findings with tibial tuberosity avulsion:
condyle.
1. Soft tissue swelling is present, which is an important
2) Laterally. in cranial compartment of femorotibial
finding to differentiate fracture from normal anatomy
joint.
(Figure 4.160).
c. Extensor fossa (bed for avulsed fragment) usually is
2. Comparison radiographs of contralateral limb (or with a
enlarged.
known normal limb) often aid in diagnosis.
4. Popliteal tendon avulsion (Figure 4.159):
3. Tuberosity fragment is proximally displaced to varying
a. Soft tissue swelling at caudodistal aspect of femur
degrees.
(usually mild}
4. Fragment may be rotated in a clockwise direction.
b. Popliteal sesamoid is distally displaced.
 5. Patella is usually displaced proximally and patellar liga-
c. Osseous defect (decreased opacity) in caudolateral
ment may be thickened.
aspect of lateral femoral condyle.
6. Fracture of proximal tibia may be present:
a. Frequently involves physis and metaphysis (Salter-
Harris type I1) .
AVULSION OF TIBIAL TUBEROSITY
b. Epiphysis often is only slightly displaced (caudally).
Clinical correlations:
c. Physis may appear widened, narrowed, uneven, or
1. Tibial tuberosity avulsion is a Salter-Harris type I
 indistinct (compare with contralateral limb).
fracture.
 7. With traction apophysitis, soft tissue swelling may be
2. Typically results from hyperflexion of stifle in an imma-
 only finding.
ture dog or cat.
a. Tuberosity margins may be more irregular.
3. May be idiopathic (reported in Greyhound, English Bull
b. May
see  fragmentation of tuberosity ossification
Terrier, and Staffordshire Terrier).
center.
4. Usually unilateral, but sometimes bilateral.
8. Secondary osteochondritis dissecans has been reported.
224
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Figure 4.160 Avulsion fracture of tibial tuberosity. A. Lateral radliograph with tibial tuberosity displaced proximally and slightly rotated clockwise and
soft tissue sweling (arrows). B. Lateral radliograph of normmal contralateral lirnb for comparison. C. Craniocaudal radliograph with asymmetrical width of 
proximal tibial physis (arrows) due to minimally displaced fracture. D. Craniocaudal radliograph of normal contralateral limb.
Differential diagnosis for tibia tuberosity avulsion:
2. Typically results from severe trauma and rupture of col-
1. Normal anatomy in an immature animal may be mis-
lateral and cruciate ligaments.
taken for pathology (soft tissue swelling is absent).
3. Damage may also involve menisci, joint capsule, popliteal
artery, and perineal nerve.
PREMATURE CLOSURE OF PROXIMAL TIBIAL PHYSIS
4. Integrity of vascular and neurologic function is limiting
Clinical correlations:
factor to treatment.
1. Other names: tibial plateau deformans.
Radiographic findings with stifle luxation:
2. Usually caused by trauma (Salter-Harris fracture).
1. Femorotibial joint is malaligned.
3. Most often reported in West Highland White Terrier and
2. Soft tissue swelling is common (usually both intracapsul-
Rough Coated Collie.
lar and extracapsular).
4. In severe cases, animals are unable to extend stifle and
3. Luxation may only be visible on one radiograph (orthog-
have a crouching rear leg stance.
onal radiographs are necessary for accurate interpretation).
5. Abnormal bone growth may result in genu varum (bow
4. Stress radiographs sometimes are needed to demonstrate
joint instability and luxation.
injury.
5. Other signs of trauma may be present (e.g., fractures,
subcutaneous emphysema).
Radiographic findings with premature closure of
proximal tibiat physis:
PATELLAR LUXATION
1. Tibial plateau may slope caudodistally due to abnormal
Clinical correlations:
growth.
1. Usually a congenital anomaly, but can result from trauma.
2. Bowing of fibula sometimes occurs.
2. Patellar luxation is a clinical diagnosis and radiographs
3. Femorotibial joint effusion may be present.
are made to document secondary changes and concurrent
4. Secondary degenerative joint disease is common.
disease (e.g., limb deformity).
3. Predisposed by:
Differential diagnoses for premature closure of proximal
a. Abnormal femoral neck angles.
tibial physis:
b. Genu varum (bow-legged, lateral bowing. and down-
1. Normal anatomy in chondrodystrophic breeds.
ward rotation of femur) 
2. Secondary osseous remodeling due to chronic cranial
c. Hypoplastic medial femoral condyle.
cruciate ligament rupture.
d. Displacement or rotation of tibial tuberosity.
e. Shallow trochlear groove of distal femur.
Luxation
f. Varus limb deformity (medial deviation of foot).
Clinical correlations:
g. Tight quadriceps muscles.
1. Dislocation of stifle occurs occasionally in cats and rarely
h. Abnormal length of patellar ligament.
in dogs.
i. Obesity.
225
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
4. Medial patellar luxation:
a. Much more common than lateral luxation (80% of
reported cases are medial).
b. Most often reported in small dogs, especially toy and
miniature breeds.
c. Less common
in cats (Devon Rex may
be
predisposed).
d. Frequently bilateral.
e. Often present with ischemic necrosis of femoral head.
5. Lateral patellar luxation:
a. More common in large breed dogs (e.g., Great Dane,
Irish Wolfhound, Saint Bernard).
b. Usually seen later in life, but may affect animals as
young as 5 or 6 months of age.
c. Often associated with genu valgum (knock-knees).
d. Usually bilateral.
6. Concurrent disease may be present and may or may not
be related to patellar luxation:
a. Hip dysplasia.
b. Cruciate ligament injury.
c. Chondromalacia of the patella.
7. Patellar luxations are graded by palpation:
Figure 4.161 Medial patellar luxation (craniocaudal radiograph). Patella
a. Grade O: normal, patella does not luxate.
is displaced medial to fernur. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
b. Grade l: patella can be manually luxated but imme-
diately returns to normal position.
c. Grade 2: manually luxated patella remains displaced
until manually reduced.
d. Grade 3: patella is luxated most of the time.
8. Clinical signs vary with degree and chronicity of
luxation(s) and presence of concurrent disease:
a. Immature animals with severe luxation may have
abnormal leg function from the time they start walking.
b. Young animals with moderate luxation typically have
 an abnormal or intermittently abnormal gait all their lives
(e.g., skipping. bunny-hopping) and present when the
 problem symptomatically worsens.
c. Older animals with mild luxation may exhibit sudden
lameness due to breakdown of the supporting soft tissues.
minor trauma, or worsening pain from degenerative joint
disease.
Radiographic findings with patellar luxation:
1. Luxation often is intermittent and position of patella may
be normal at time of radiography.
2. Medial or lateral patellar displacement is most easily seen
on a craniocaudal radiograph (Figure 4.161).
3. Hip and proximal tibia should be assessed for evidence of
deformity.
Figure 4.162 Effect of rotation of stifle on appearance of patellar
a. Errors in positioning may mimic deformity of distal
 groove and shape of femur and tibia (craniocaudal projection).
femur or proximal tibia (Figure 4.162).
4. Patella may be superimposed over femoral condyles on
lateral radiograph.
5. Skyline radiograph (with stifle flexed) aids in assessing
depth of trochlear groove.
226
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Box 4.7 Differentials for stifle mineralization.
Intra-articular:
● Bone fragment (avulsion fracture, chip fracture)
●Dystrophic mineralization (involving meniscus, ligament, or
infrapatellar fat pad)
●Osteochondritis dissecans
◆Synovial osteochondromatosis (especially in cats)
●Mineralized cartilage fragment
●Neoplasia (e.g., synovial sarcoma)
·Pseudogout
 Periarticular:
· Sesamoid bone
●Multipartite fabella 
●Fracture fragment (avulsion, chip. or comminuted)
● Degenerative joint disease
●Calcifying tendinopathy (e.g.. quadriceps muscles,
gastrocnemius muscle)
Figure 4.163 Ruptured patellar ligarment (lateral radiograph). Patella is 
●Hypervitaminosis A
displaced proximally, patellar ligament is thickened, and adjiacent soft
●Dystrophic mineralization (e.g. tumor, chronic hematoma,
tissues are swollen. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
abscess)
e. Fibrosarcoma.
6. Secondary degenerative joint disease is common.
f. Chondrosarcoma.
7. May have other concurrent disease (e.g., cranial cruciate
2. Development of neoplasia may be predisposed by chronic
ligament injury, avascular necrosis of femoral head).
inflammation (i.e., cranial cruciate ligament injury and
ongoing synovitis).
Ruptured patellar ligament
3. Most often reported in medium- to large-breed, older
Clinical correlations:
dogs (e.g., Rottweiler, Golden Retriever).
1. Results from blunt trauma or hypercontraction of quad-
4. Clinical signs include swelling and lameness.
riceps muscles.
2. Sometimes associated with a patellar fracture.
Radiographic findings with stifle tumors:
3. Affected animals exhibit acute lameness and inability to
1. Osteolysis tends to predominate, often with an aggressive
extend stifle.
pattern.
2. Variable periosteal response.
Radiographic findings patellar ligament rupture:
3. Joint effusion is common.
1. Soft tissue swelling at site of injury and thickening of
4. Soft tissue mass may be visible, often with lobulated
patellar ligament (two may blend together; Figure 4.163).
margins.
2. Patella is displaced proximally, especially with stifle
flexed.
Differential diagnosis for stifle neoplasia:
3. Comparison radiographs of contralateral normal limb
 1. Advanced degenerative joint disease.
may aid in diagnosis.
4. Infrapatellar fat pad is caudally displaced by swelling
Osteochondritis dissecans (OcD)
5. Patella may be fractured.
Clinical correlations:
1. Disturbance in endochondral ossification of femoral
Neoplasia
condyle.
Clinical correlations:
2. OCD is not as common in pelvic limbs as in thoracic
1. Possible tumors include:
limbs.
a. Synovial cell sarcoma.
3. Most often reported in young. rapidly growing large-
b. Osteosarcoma.
breed dogs.
C. Histiocytic sarcoma (may be associated with systemic
4. Males are more often affected than females.
disease).
5. Lesions often are bilateral, but clinical signs may be
d. Synovial myxoma.
unilateral.
227
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
6. Lameness is aggravated by exercise.
Multipartite patella
7. In some dogs, lameness is minor and cartilage lesion heals
Clinical correlations:
spontaneously.
1. Uncommon condition in which patella develops from
8. Secondary degenerative joint disease is common (may
multiple ossification centers that fail to unite.
still occur even if lesions resolve).
2. May be unilateral or bilateral.
3. More often reported in cats than in dogs.
Radiographic findings with stifle OCD:
4. Usually an incidental finding without clinical signs, but
1. Femorotibial joint effusion is common.
must be differentiated from fracture.
2. Flattened or circular defect (decreased opacity) develops
 5. Rarely, may be painful and cause lameness.
on articular margin of distal femur.
a. Most often located on medial aspect of lateral femoral
Radiographic findings with mulitipartite patella:
condyle (Figure 4.164)
1. Two or more smooth-bordered, rounded opacities in area
b. Occasionally occurs on medial femoral condyle.
of patella (Figure 4.165).
c. Rarely involves lateral trochlear ridge.
2. Soft tissue swelling is absent.
3. Osteosclerosis may surround the defect.
4. Lesions are easiest to see on lateral oblique and cranio-
Differential diagnosis for multipartite patella:
caudal radiographs.
1. Patellar fracture (fracture is accompanied by soft tissue
5. Mineralized fragments may be present, often located
swelling).
in suprapatellar pouch or in cranial or caudal joint
2. Nonunion patellar fracture.
compa rtmen ts.
3. Osteochondrosis.
6. Mineralized cartilaginous flap is rarely seen in stifle.
7. Secondary degenerative joint disease is common.
Tarsus
 Common calcanean (Achilles) tendon injury
Differential diagnosis for stifle OCD:
Clinical correlations:
1. Normal anatomy mistaken for OCD lesion:
1. Other names: calcanean tendon injury. Achilles tendon
a. Extensor fossa of long digital extensor tendon (located
injury.
on craniolateral margin of lateral femoral condyle).
2. Types of injuries:
b. Normal irregular margin of immature bone.
a. Type I: overstretching.
c. Aberrant
torigin of cranial
cruciate
ligament
b. Type II: partial tearing.
(uncommon)
c. Type IIl: complete tearing or avulsion.
 2. Cruciate ligament injury.
3. Primary degenerative joint disease.
4. Neoplasia (e.g., synovial cell sarcoma).
5. Meniscal injury.
Figure 4.165 Separated patella (lateral radliograph), which may be due
to fracture or mnultipartite patella. Fracture is initially accompanied by soft
Figure 4.164 Stifle osteochondritis dissecans on medial aspect of lateral
tissue swelling and often leads to bone remnodeling and degenerative
fermoral concdyle (arrow and darkened area). A. Lateral radliograph
changes. Multipartite patella rarely changes in appearance on serial
B. Craniocaudal radiograph.
radiographs. (Adapted from Owen5 and Biery 1999.)
228
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
3. Acute damage typically is associated with trauma:
Degenerative joint disease (DJD)
a. Impact causing avulsion.
Clinical correlations:
b. Sharp wound (laceration).
1. Other names: osteoarthritis.
c. Hyperflexion of tarsus (often with concurrent hyper-
2. May be an aging change (primary DJD) or secondary to
extension of stifle).
disease:
4. Chronic injury results from degeneration of tendon:
a. Osteochondrosis.
a. Most often reported in active, middle-aged, large-
b. Previous trauma.
breed dogs (e.g., Labrador Retriever, Doberman Pinscher.
c. Immune-mediated arthritis:
German Shepherd Dog).
1) Rheumatoid arthritis (usually bilateral, also affects
b. Overweight animals are more susceptible.
carpi).
C. May be bilateral.
2) Feline
polyarthritis
(tarsi
and
carpi
are
5. Clinical signs include
swelling. bruising.
.pain, and
predisposed).
lameness.
3) Osteodystrophy of Scottish Fold Cat (lesions tend
6. Affected animals may have a dropped hock (type III
to be especially severe in tarsi).
injury) or a claw foot if superficial digital flexor tendon
4) Chinese Shar-Pei fever.
becomes contracted.
3. Clinical signs include swelling and pain at tarsus.
4. Often an incidental finding in older, large dogs (normal
Radiographic findings with damage to Achilles tendon
aging change).
(Figure 4.166):
Radiographic findings with tarsal DJD:
1. Tendon is thickened and margins may be indistinct.
1. Variable soft tissue swelling (may be intracapsular or
2. Soft tissue swelling is present at site of injury. usually
extraca psular).
near tuber calcis.
2. Osteophytes and enthesophytes most commonly form on
3. Dystrophic mineralization or avulsed bone fragments
dorsal aspects of central and third tarsal bones (Figure
may be proximal to tuber calcis.
4.167).
4. A cap of proliferative new bone may develop on tuber
calcis (enthesopathy).
Fractures
Clinical correlations:
Differential diagnosis for Achilles tendon damage:
1. Usually caused by trauma.
1. Lateral luxation of superficial digital flexor tendon (pro-
2. Lateral or medial malleolar fractures often are accompa-
 duces swelling at tuber calcis).
nied by luxation of tibiotarsal joint.
a. Predisposed
by
developmental
flattening
of
3. Fractures of central tarsal bone and calcaneus are most
calcaneus.
common in racing Greyhounds.
b. Tendon is laterally displaced due to tearing of its
a. Caused by extreme compression and shear forces.
medial attachment.
 b. Right leg is more often affected (due to counterclock-
c. No osseous anomalies result from luxation of superfi-
wise racing).
cial digital flexor tendon.
4. Clinical signs include swelling and lameness at tarsus.
Figure 4.166 Common calcanean tendon injuries (lateral radiographs). A. Acute injury resulting in thickening of tendon near insertion on tuber calcis.
B. Chronic injury with dystrophic mineralization in tendon and new bone production (enthesopathy) on tuber calcis. (Adapted from Owens and Biery
1999.)
229
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 4.169 Fractured tuber calcis with proximal displacement and
 5oft tissue swelling (lateral radiograph). (Adapted from Owens and Biery
1999.)
Figure 4.167 Degenerative joint disease of tarsus. Osteophytes appear
4. Calcanean fractures may be simple or comminuted.
a5 well-cefined bone spurs along peripheral margins of joints. A. Lateral
a. Fragment(s) usually is proximally displaced due to
radiograph. B. Dorsoplantar radliograph. (Adapted from Owens and Biery
traction from Achilles' tendon (Figure 4.169).
1999.)
b. Fracture may be articular.
c. Concurrent central tarsal bone fracture may be
present.
Luxation/subluxation
Clinical correlations:
1. Tibiotarsal dislocations often are accompanied by malleo-
lar fractures.
 2. Subluxations occur when one malleolus and its attached
collateral ligament are distracted.
3. Intertarsal and tarsometatarsal dislocations result from
trauma or degeneration of plantar ligaments (e.g., rheuma-
toid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus).
4. May be unilateral or bilateral.
 5. Obese, middle-aged dogs are more commonly affected.
6. Most often reported in Border Collie, Collie, Rough
 Collie, Samoyed, Shetland Sheepdog.
7. Clinical signs include tarsal swelling and lameness.
Figure 4.168 Fractured central tarsal bone with dorsal displacement
(arrow) and soft tissue swelling (lateral radliograph). (Adapted from
Radiographic findings with tarsal luxation:
(6661 Aag pue suamo
1. Bones may be displaced (Figure 4.170).
2. Soft tissue swelling is present (usually both intracapsular
and extracapsular) .
Radiographic findings with tarsal fractures:
3. Intracapsular swelling at tibiotarsal joint (joint effusion)
1. Soft tissue swelling is present (may be both intracapsular
commonly presents as a well-defined, convex, soft tissue
and extracapsular).
opacity extending caudally into the normally less opaque
2. Stress radiographs aid in detecting subluxation.
space between distal tibia and calcaneus (lateral radiograph).
3. Five types of central tarsal bone fractures:
Cranial periarticular fat is displaced away from the joint
(l) Nondisplaced dorsal slab fracture.
(Figure 4.171).
(2) Displaced dorsal slab fracture (Figure 4.168).
4. New bone production may be present on plantar aspect
(3) Sagittal fracture (uncommon).
of tarsus.
(4) Combination of (2) and (3) (most common).
 5. Stress radiographs aid in demonstrating instability or
(5) Severely comminuted fracture.
subluxation.
230
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Box 4.8 Differentials for tarsal mineralization.
 Osteochondrosis
·Avulsion fracture
● Old trauma (dystrophic mineralization)
 Chronic inflammation 
·Mineralized fragment in joint
· Foreign object
Figure 4.170 Tarsocrural luxation with caudal dlisplacerment of talus
(lateral radiograph). (Adapted from Owen5 and Biery 1999.)
Figure 4.172 Osteochondrosis of tarsus (dorsoplantar radiograph).
Medial portion of tibiotarsal joint space is widened and mmedial ridge of
talus is flattened (arrow). (Adapted frorm Owens and Biery 1999.)
Figure 4.171 Tibiotarsal joint effusion with increased soft tissue opacity
 and distention of joint capsule (arrow; lateral radliograph). (Adapted from
6. Clinical signs usually are evident by 6 to 12 months of
Owens and Biery 1999.)
age, though some dogs may be older:
a. Varying degrees of tibiotarsal swelling.
b. Progressive lameness that is aggravated by exercise.
6. Articular fractures may occur in conjunction with
c. Painful during flexion and extension of tarsus.
dislocation.
d. Affected dogs often hold their tarsi in a hyperextended
position.
Osteochondritis (OcD)
Clinical correlations:
Radiographic findings with tarsal OCD:
1. Caused by a disturbance in endochondral ossification.
1. Multiple radiographs may be needed to make diagnosis.
2. Third most common location for osteochondritis disse-
including lateral, flexed lateral, dorsoplantar, dorsoplantar
cans lesions.
oblique (right and left obliques) and flexed dorsoplantar
3. Most often reported in large-breed dogs (Rottweiler, Lab-
(slkyline).
rador Retriever, Golden Retriever, English Bull Terrier, Staf-
2. Joint effusion is common (easiest to see on lateral radio-
fordshire Terrier).
graph; Figure 4.171).
4. May be associated with poor conformation and hyperex-
3. Flattening or osseous defect (decreased opacity) develops
tension of tarsocrural joint.
on trochlear ridge of talus (Figure 4.172):
5. May be unilateral or bilateral; males are affected more
a. Flexed dorsoplantar radiograph often aids in detection
often than females.
(see chapter 2, Figure 2.59).
231
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
b. Articular margin of talus appears irregular and may be
6. Animals with congenital disease usually develop clinical
misshapen.
signs at less than l year of age.
c. Medial trochlear ridge is most often affected.
7. Clinical signs may be acute, chronic, or episodic (depend-
d. Lesions on lateral trochlear ridge are less common and
ing on degree of subluxation). varying from mild cervical
more difficult to detect (lateral ridge lesions are most
pain to spastic paraparesis and tetraplegia.
often reported in Rottweilers).
4. Tibiotarsal joint space may be widened, especially at
Radiographic findings with atlantoaxial subluxation:
lesion site (usually medially).
1. NOTE: Caution must be exercised during cervical manip-
5. Secondary degenerative joint disease is cormmon.
ulation because flexion of neck can accentuate spinal cord
6. Mineralized fragments may be present in tibiotarsal joint.
compression and cause further injury or death.
7. Fragmentation of medial malleolus is uncommon, but
2. Angulation between C2 and Cl is abnormal during sub-
has been reported in Rottweilers.
luxation (may not be evident without some degree of cervi-
cal flexion}.
Premature closure of distal tibial physis
3. Dens may be absent (Figure 4.173), small, or fractured.
Clinical correlations:
a. Dens is easiest to see on VD, lateral oblique, or open
1. Usually caused by trauma (often Salter-Harris type VI
mouth rostrocaudal radiograph with x-ray beam cen-
tered at Cl-2.
fracture}.
4. Degree of subluxation is best assessed on lateral radio-
2. Tends to be more severe at lateral aspect of physis.
 graph; space between dorsal border of C1 and dorsal spinous
3. Tarsal valgus ("cow-hocked" conformation) may develop
as animal grows.
process of C2 is widened (subjective assessment, Figure
4.174).
4. Some breeds may be predisposed to this injury (i.e..
 5. An intact, dorsally displaced dens typically results from a
Rough Collie).
damaged or absent transverse ligament.
Radiographic findings with premature closure of distal
Block vertebrae
tibial physis:
Clinical correlations:
1. Valgus angular limb deformity (toes point lateral), cen-
 1. Other names: congenital synostosis.
 tered at distal tibia.
 2. Partial or complete fusion of adjacent vertebrae due to
abnormal segmentation.
3. May cause abnormal curvature of spine, but rarely pro-
Axial skeleton
duces clinical signs.
4. More commonly seen in cervical and lumbar regions.
Vertebrae
5. May predispose to intervertebral disc disease due to
 Developmental abnormalities
increased stresses near the anomaly
Atlantoaxial subluxation
6. Sacrum represents normal block vertebrae.
Clinical correlations:
1. Instability between first two cervical vertebrae (Cl-2).
which can lead to spinal cord compression by odontoid
Radiographic findings with block vertebrae:
1. Two or more adjacent vertebral bodies are partially or
process (dens).
2. Possible etiologies include:
completely fused together (Figure 4.175)
a. Abnormal development of odontoid process (e.g..
2. Each fused vertebrae is normal in length.
 3. Intervertebral disc space is absent or only partially devel-
agenesis, hypoplasia, malformation).
b. Failure of odontoid process to fuse with C2 (normally
oped between vertebrae.
occurs by 7 to 9 months of age).
4. Bony margins are smooth and well-defined without evi-
 dence of remodeling.
c. Absence of transverse ligament (e.g.. congenital
anomaly, traumatic rupture).
5. May see abnormal angulation of spine or stenosis of
d. Traumatic fracture of odontoid process.
 spinal canal.
3. Most often reported in young miniature and toy breed
dogs (e.g., Yorkshire Terrier, Chihuahua, Toy Poodle, Pekin-
Differential diagnosis for block vertebrae:
ese, Pomeranian, Maltese).
1. Chronic collapse of intervertebral disc space and osseous
4. Congenital abnormalities of dens have been reported in
remodeling:
large-breed dogs (e.g., Rottweiler, Doberman Pinscher).
a. Previous trauma.
5. Concurrent malformation of atlantoccipital joint may be
b. Chronic intervertebral disc disease.
present.
c. Previous infection (e.g., discospondylitis).
232
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Figure 4.173 Absence of dens (ventrodorsal radiograph). A. Norrmal dens (arrow). B. Dens is absent (arrow).
4. More common in "screw-tail" breeds (e.g., English
Bulldog. French Bulldog. Pug. Boston Terrier).
5. May be inherited in German Short-haired Pointer, York-
shire Terrier, and Manx cat.
Radiographic findings with hemivertebrae:
1. Vertebrae are wedged shaped:
a. Dorsal hemivertebrae (ventral portion is narrowed)
can cause kyphosis (Figure 4.176A).
Figure 4.174 Atlantoaxial subluxation (lateral radliograph). Dorsal space
b. Ventral hemivertebrae (dorsal portion is narrowed)
 between atlas and axis is wider than normal (arrow).
can cause lordosis.
c. Lateral hemivertebrae (right or left side is narrowed)
can cause scoliosis.
d. "Butterfly vertebra" (central portion does not form,
resulting in a cleft through vertebral body and triangular-
shaped ends that appear butterfly-shaped on VD radio-
graph; Figure 4.176B).
2. Angulation of spine varies from minimal to severe.
3. Thoracic vertebrae (especially T8) and caudal vertebrae
(tail) are most often affected.
4. Intervertebral disc spaces tend to be normal in width but
conform to abnormal shape of vertebrae.
Figure 4.175 Block vertebra (lateral radliograph). Two vertebral bodie5
5. Vertebral end-plates usually are smooth and normal in
are fused with no intervertebral disk space. Each vertebral body is normal
thickness.
 in length. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
6. Rarely, hemivertebrae will compress spinal cord (myelog-
raphy or cross-sectional imaging is necessary to confirm
extradural compression).
Hemivertebra
Clinical correlations:
1. Characterized by partial formation of vertebral body.
Transitional vertebra
2. Probably caused by a compromised blood supply during
Clinical correlations:
development.
1. Affected vertebrae exhibit anatomic characteristics of two
 3. Rarely produces clinical signs, but may result in abnormal
adjacent spinal regions.
curvature of spine.
2. Common in dogs and cats, but rarely cause clinical signs.
233
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
B
developed in central portion, resulting in a cleft in the vertebral body (ventrodorsal radliograph). C. Scoliosis seconcdary to hernivertebra (ventrodorsal
radiograph). (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
3. May create errors in anatomic localization (important in
surgery and advanced imaging).
4. May result in angulation of spine (may interfere with
positioning for radiography).
5. Lumbosacral transitional vertebrae may predispose
animal to lumbosacral degenerative disc disease and cauda
equina syndrome (especially if rotational malalignment is
present) or degenerative joint disease of ipsilateral hip.
Radiographic findings with transitional vertebrae:
1. Usually occur at junctions of spinal regions (e.g.. lumbo-
sacral, thoracolumbar) .
Figure 4.177 Thoracolumbar transitional vertebra (VD radliograph)
2. "Sacralization" of last lumbar vertebra (L7):
"Lumbarization " of T13 with absence of right rib. (Adapted from Owen5
a. Fusion of last lumbar vertebra and sacrum (may be
and Biery 1999.)
partial or complete).
 b. May create appearance of 6 lumbar vertebrae.
c. Transverse process of L7 fuses with sacrum and may
articulate with ilium (may be unilateral or bilateral).
3. "Lumbarization" of first sacral vertebra (Sl):
a. Failure of first two sacral vertebrae to fuse.
b. May create appearance of 8 lumbar vertebrae.
c. Transverse process may develop on Sl (unilateral or
bilateral).
4. Lumbarization of last thoracic vertebra (Tl3: Figure
4.177):
a. Agenesis or hypogenesis of a rib on Tl3 (may be uni-
lateral or bilateral).
b. Often a thin, linear, mineral opacity (partial rib)
remains in the soft tissues.
c. May create appearance of 8 lumbar vertebrae.
Figure 4.178 Lumbosacral transitional vertebra (VD radiograph).
5. Sacralization of first caudal vertebra (Cdl; Figure 4.178):
"Sacralization" of 7th lurmbar vertebra with absence of left transverse
a. Fusion of last sacral and first caudal vertebrae (may
 process. Left side of L7 is partially fused with pelvis and forms a portion
be partial or complete).
of left sacroiliac joint.(Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
234
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
6. Thoracoization of first lumbar vertebra (L1):
a. Rib development on Ll (may be unilateral or
bilateral}.
b. May create appearance of 6 lumbar vertebrae.
7. "Cervicoization" of first thoracic vertebra (Tl):
a. Absence of rib on Tl (may be unilateral or bilateral).
b. May create appearance of 8 cervical vertebrae
8. Thoracoization of last cervical vertebra (C7):
a. Rib development on C7 (may be unilateral or
bilateral).
9. "Occipitalization" of Cl (atlas):
a. Fusion of Cl with caudal skull (may be partial or
complete).
Figure 4.179 Sacrocaudal dysgenesis (lateral radiographs). A. Normal
feline lumbosacral spine. B. Sacrocaudal dysgenesis with absence of
Mucopolysaccharidosis
caudal vertebrae and caudal portion of sacrum. (Adapted from Owen5
Clinical correlations:
and Biery 1999.)
1. A group of inherited lysomal storage diseases that cause
a variety of abnormalities (see page 185).
2. Most often reported in cats with Siamese ancestry: rare
in dogs.
3. Clinical signs usually are present by 8 weeks of age (e.g..
2. Other developmental vertebral anomalies may be present
dwarfism, facial deformities, pectus excavatum, stiffness and
(e.g., hemivertebra, transitional vertebra, shortened cervical
luxation of joints, paresis, paraplegia).
vertebrae, fusion of lumbar vertebrae).
Radiographic findings with mucopolysaccharidosis:
Spina bifida
 1. Shortened and/or misshapen vertebrae, primarily in cer-
Clinical correlations:
1. Other names: split spine, cleft spine.
vical and lumbar regions (Figure 4.1l1).
2. Failure of lateral vertebral arches to fuse dorsally results
2. Vertebrae may be fused.
in absence or incomplete development of a dorsal spinous 
 3. Osteoarthrosis of dorsal vertebral articulations.
4. Spondylosis deformans.
process ("cleft spinous process").
3. Other anomalies may be present (e.g. hemivertebra.
5.Odontoid
Ae (suap) ssaod
be hypoplastic
or
tethered or malformed spinal cord).
fragmented.
4. May occur anywhere along spine, but most often reported
in lumbar, sacral, and caudal regions.
Differential diagnosis for mucopolysaccharidosis:
5. More common in screw-tail breeds (e.g., English Bulldog.
1. Hypervitaminosis A.
French Bulldog. Pug. Boston Terrier) and in Manx cats; may
be heritable in Bulldogs and Manx cats.
Sacrocaudal dysgenesis
6. In Manx cats, sacrocaudal dysgenesis usually is concur-
Clinical correlations:
rent with spina bifida (results in characteristic absence of a
1. Other names: anury (taillessness), Manx syndrome.
tail or stumpy-tail appearance).
2. One or more vertebrae of tail and sacrum are absent.
7. Types of spina bifida:
3. Spinal cord abnormalities are common (e.g., meningo-
 a. Spina bifida occulta is characterized by a srmall, asymp-
cele, myelocele, myelomeningocele, syringomyelia, shorten-
tomatic split in a vertebra with a normal spinal cord.
ing of spinal cord, absence of cauda equina).
b. Spina bifida manifesta presents with a larger vertebral
4. Affected animals lack a tail.
defect and a saclike protrusion (herniation) that contains
 5. Condition is an autosomal dominant trait in Manx cat.
 spinal cord, meninges, or both.
6. Clinical signs vary depending on extent of defect and
1) Myelocele: sac contains spinal cord.
presence of other bony and neurologic abnormalities; may
2) Meningocele: sac contains meninges.
include gait abnormalities, limb paresis or paraplegia, fecal
3) Meningomyelocele: sac contains meninges and
spinal cord or nerve roots.
8. Clinical signs may or may not be present; when present.
Radiographic findings with sacrocaudal dysgenesis:
signs usually are evident when animal begins to walk and
1. Absence of one or more caudal and sacral vertebrae
include rear limb ataxia and paresis, fecal and urinary incon-
(Figure 4.179).
tinence, perineal analgesia, and flaccid anal sphincter.
235
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
b. May be congenital or acquired from trauma or previ-
ous surgery.
4. Disorders of spinal cord are best diagnosed with cross-
sectional imaging (MRI, CT).
Radiographic findings with spinal cord disorders:
1. Survey radiographs often are unremarkable.
2. Occipital dysplasia may be visible as enlargement of
foramen magnum on rostrocaudal radiograph.
Contrast radiography (myelogram):
1. Syringomyelia: cavities appear as contrast-filled areas
within spinal cord parenchyma.
2. Hydromyelia: central canal is widened and contrast filled,
Figure 4.180 Spina bifida (VD radiograph). The dorsal spinous proces5
with smooth or saccular margins.
is not fused and is seen as a midline cleft (arrow). (Adapted from Owen5
3. Arachnoid cysts: "cysts" fill with contrast medium and
and Biery 1999.)
produce abrupt dilations of subarachnoid space; most often
occur in dorsal aspect of cervical region.
Calcinosis circumscripta
Radiographic findings with spina bifida:
Clinical correlations:
1. Affected dorsal spinous process is absent or appears split
1. Other
names:
tumoral calcinosis,
 apocrine cystic
(VD radiograph, Figure 4.180).
calcinosis.
2. Vertebral body. vertebral arch, or entire vertebra may be
2. Amorphous calcium deposits in subcutaneous tissues and
incompletely fused (appear partially separated).
skin (see page 178).
3. Spinal canal often is widened at affected vertebra (lateral
3. Etiology is unknown.
radiograph).
4. Most often reported in large-breed dogs (especially
4. Cross-sectional imaging (e.g., CT, MRI) and myelography
German Shepherd Dog. also Great Dane, Vizsla, Rottweiler.
provide a more detailed evaluation.
and Saint Bernard).
5. Uncommon in cats.
Spinal cord disorders
6. Affected animals usually are less than l year of age.
Clinical correlations:
7. Clinical signs are rare but can include spinal cord
1. Syringomyelia:
compression.
a. Characterized by fluid-filled cavities (called syrinx) in
spinal cord parenchyma due to obstruction of cerebrospi-
Radiographic findings with vertebral calcinosis
nal fluid flow.
circumscripta:
b. Cavities can expand over time, causing progressive
 1. Well-circumscribed area of heterogeneous mineralization
damage to spinal cord.
located adjacent to vertebrae, frequently near a transverse
c. Cavalier King Charles Spaniel and Weimeraner are
 spinal process.
overrepresented.
2. Mineralization is in soft tissues and does not involve
d. Commonly associated with caudal occipital malforma-
vertebrae.
tion (occipital dysplasia or Chiari-like malformation).
3. Osteolysis is absent.
e. Clinical signs include neck pain, scratching the neck,
and neurologic symptoms.
Differential diagnosis for calcinosis circumscripta:
2. Hydromyelia:
1. Myositis ossificans.
a. Abnormal dilation of central canal in spinal cord.
2. Ossified hematoma.
b. Caused by increased cerebrospinal pressure.
3. Foreign material.
c. May result from congenital or acquired disease (e.g..
hydrocephalus, infection, trauma, neoplasia).
Cervical spondylomyelopathy
d. Neurologic signs may or may not be present.
Clinical correlations:
3. Arachnoid cysts:
1. Other names: wobbler syndrome, cervical malformation-
a. Cystlike structures develop in subarachnoid space (not
malalignment syndrome, cervical vertebral instability, caudal
true cysts).
cervical spondylopathy, spondylolisthesis.
236
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Figure 4.181 Cervical spondylopathy (lateral radiographs). A. Normal cervical spine, C2-T1. B. Body of C6 is mmalforrned and rnisaligned with C5;
intervertebral disc 5pace at C6-7 is narrowed. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
2. Disease resulting in spinal cord compression with even-
tual demyelination and myelomalacia.
3. Possible etiologies include:
a. Abnormal development of vertebral body and articu-
lar facets.
1) Most often reported at C3-7.
2) As animal grows, there is progressive narrowing of
spinal canal.
3) Clinical signs usually appear by l or 2 years of age.
b. Malformation 
 of  vertebral
arch
and
vertebral
Figure 4.182 Cervical spondylopathy (lateral radliograph) with
instability:
narrowing of intervertebral disc space at L6-7 (arrow) and spondylosis at
1) Most often reported at C4-7.
this site.
ligaments (ligamentum flavum). which eventually
displace and compress spinal cord ventrally.
5. Affected animals hold their neck ventrally and resist ele-
3) Most common in young Great Danes (5 months to
vation of the head.
2 years of age).
c. Vertebral instability and chronic degenerative disc
Radiographic findings with cervical spondylomyelopathy:
disease:
1. Survey radiographs often are normal (Figure 4.18lA).
1) Most often reported at C5-6 and C6-7.
2. May see flattening of cranioventral aspect of one or more
2) Dorsal annulus becomes hyperplastic and protrudes
vertebral bodies (frequently C5, C6, or C7).
into spinal canal, causing compression of spinal cord.
3. Signs of intervertebral disc disease may be present (Figure
3) Cranial aspect of vertebral body may displace dor-
4.182):
sally and further compress spinal cord.
a. Narrowing of intervertebral disc space.
4) Flexion of neck relieves compression by stretching
b. Mineralization of intervertebral disc.
dorsal annulus.
c. Disc protrusion/extrusion.
5) Intervertebral disc protrusion may be present.
4. Spinal canal stenosis sometimes is present:
6) Most common in middle-aged and older Doberman 
a. Narrowing of dorsoventral or lateral spinal canal
pinchers.
dimension.
d. Circumferential compression of spinal cord:
b. Wedge- or funnel-shaped spinal canal (narrows
1) May occur at any level along cervical spine.
at cranial aspect of affected vertebrae on lateral
2) Hypertrophy of ligamentum flavum ventrally dis-
radiograph).
places and compresses spinal cord.
c. Medial deviation of lateral aspects of vertebral arch or
3) Hyperplasia of annulus dorsally displaces and com-
pedicles (ventrodorsal radiograph).
presses spinal cord.
 5. Malalignment or subluxation of one or more vertebrae
4) Thickening of articular facets laterally compresses
(Figure 4.181B):
spinal cord.
a. Slight dorsal rotation or tipping of vertebral body.
 5) Most common in young Great Danes (less than 2
b. Small "stair-step” between vertebrae along ventral
years old).
spinal canal.
4. Clinical signs include a wobbly gait, intermittent or
6. Articular facets often appear thickened and irregular with
chronic neck pain, generalized ataxia, and weakness.
proliferative new bone (latter may extend into spinal canal).
237
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
7. Spondylosis deformans and vertebral end-plate sclerosis
are common.
8. Survey radiographs are not sufficient to assess degree of
spinal cord compression.
a. Caution: hyperflexion or hyperextension of neck may
 increase severity of clinical signs.
9. Cross-sectional imaging (e.g., CT, MRI) provides superior
ana tomic detail and is noninvasive.
Contrast radiography (myelogram):
1. Site of lesion may be different from area suspected on
survey radiographs.
Figure 4.183 Degenerative joint disease of spine involving interarticular
2. Lesion is extradural and may be dynamic (e.g. ligamen-
sueoap sisopuods huug ym (dot uo smoue paun) sianes
tous hypertrophy):
(straight arrows; lateral radiograph). (Adapted from Owens and Biery
a. Supplemental radiographs may be needed for detec-
1999.)
tion (extension, flexion, traction)
b. Hyperextension of neck can increase spinal cord
annulus.
4. Routes of infection include:
c. Ventroflexion or traction of cervical spine frequently
a. Hematogenous spread (e.g., endocarditis, dental dis-
lessens spinal cord compression.
ease, urogenital infection).
3. Static lesions may be detected without manipulation of
b. Postopera tive complication.
cervical spine (e.g. herniated disc, stenotic spinal canal.
c. Migrating foreign material (e.g.. plant awn):
proliferation at articular facets).
 5. Immunosuppression predisposes to infection.
6. Some breeds are overrepresented (German Shepherd
Degenerative joint disease of spine
Dog, Basset Hound, Airedale Terrier).
Clinical correlations:
7. Blood and urine cultures may help identify causative
1. Other names: osteoarthritis, osteoarthrosis, spondyloar-
agent, but sampling at affected site often is necessary (bru-
thropa thy, osteoa rthropathy.
cellosis must be ruled out due to zoonotic potential) .
2. Primary or secondary degenerative disease involving
 8. Clinical signs depend on location and extent of infection
synovial joints of spine.
but include fever, anorexia, pain, stiffness, and spinal
3. May be predisposed by osteochondrosis or congenital
hyperesthesia.
hypoplasia of articular facets, conditions that may not be
9. Severe infections may lead to lameness, paresis, or
recognized without advanced imaging (CT or MRI).
 paralysis.
4. More often reported in older animals.
5. Affected animals usually are asymptomatic; performance
Radiographic findings with discospondylitis:
animals may exhibit decrease in ability.
1. Radiographic findings commonly lag behind clinical
si gns.
Radiographic findings with DJD of spine:
2. Lesions typically are not visible until disease involves
1. Most common in cervical and lumbar spinal regions.
endplates of vertebral bodies (Figure 4.184).
2. Similar to DJD in other synovial joints, osteophytes and
a. Irregular, ill-defined, osteolytic areas develop in one
subchondral osteosclerosis develop at dorsal intervertebral
or both endplates.
articulations (Figure 4.183).
b. Endplates become sclerotic.
3. Spondylosis deformans is common.
c. Intervertebral disc space initially widens, but later
narrows or collapses during healing.
Discospondylitis
d. Vertebral bodies may or may not fuse during healing.
Clinical correlations:
3. Spondylosis is common at affected sites.
1. Inflammation in intervertebral disc and often involving
4. More than one intervertebral disc space may be affected
adjacent vertebral bodies.
(make radiographs of entire spine).
2. Usually caused by bacterial or mycotic infection (possible
5. Serial radiographs aid in identifying lesions and monitor-
etiologic agents are listed in Differential Diagnoses section,
ing response to therapy. (NOTE: radiographic findings may
this chapter)
worsen even with appropriate treatment and clinical
3. May affect one or more disc spaces, which may or may
improvement because radiographic findings tend to lag
not be adjacent.
behind clinical signs).
238
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Figure 4.184 Discospondylitis (lateral radiographs). A. Irregular osteolysis involves vertebral body endplates with widening of the intervertebral dlisk
space (arrow). B. Chronic healing discospondylitis with narrowed intervertebral disk spaces due to endplate destruction and bone remodleling:
(hh 1 Aaig pue suamo woy padeps) suasad ane sueojap sisopuods pue sisoalotso
6. Lesions are considered inactive if no change is seen on
two or more serial studies.
7. Cross-sectional imaging (e.g., CT, MRI) provides superior
anatomic detail.
Differential diagnosis for discospondylitis:
1. Spondylosis deformans.
2. Epiphyseal dysplasia (immature animals).
Disseminated Idiopathic Skeletal Hyperostosis
Figure 4.185 Disseminated idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH; lateral
Clinical correlations:
radiograph). Bridging spondylosis along cranial lumbar vertebrae and 
1. Other names: Forestier's disease, ankylosing hyperosto-
pseudoarthrosis along dorsal spinous processe5.
sis, hyperostotic spondylosis, (Baastrup's disease).
2. Bridging
new
bone
production
along
multiple
vertebrae.
e. Sclerosis and ankylosis of sacroiliac joints and at pubis.
3. May also
occur at sites of tendon and ligament
f. Mineralization of soft tissue attachments near long
 attachments.
bone joints, including enthesopathy at tuberosities and
4. Etiology is unknown; may be a form of degenerative joint
trochanters.
disease.
 5. Reported in young large- and giant-breed dogs (especially
Differential diagnosis for DISH:
Boxer, Great Dane, and Bulldogy.
1. Severe spondylosis deformans.
6. Condition is progressive and may be associated with
2. Spondylitis.
hyperthyroidism, hyperthyrocalcitoninism, or hyperpara-
3. Syndesmitis ossificans (described as extensive ossification
thyroidism.
of ventral longitudinal ligament, but may be form of DISH;
7. Clinical signs usually are absent.
reported in young Boxers).
4. Baastrup's disease in people (term has been used in vet-
Radiographic findings with DISH:
erinary medicine to describe bony proliferation between
1. Resembles extensive spondylosis 
deformans(Figure
dorsal spinous processes, especially in Boxers, but may be
4.185).
form of DISH).
2. Diagnosis is based on identifying four or more of the fol-
lowing signs:
Dural ossification
a. Flowing and bridging new bone production along
Clinical correlations:
ventral and lateral aspects of three or more contiguous
1. Other names: dural osseous metaplasia, ossifying
vertebral bodies.
pachymeningitis.
b. Intervertebral disc spaces are normal in width.
2. Degenerative process resulting in formation of bony
c. Osteophytes are present at dorsal articular facets.
plaques on inner surface of dura mater.
d. Pseudoarthrosis between bases of dorsal spinous
3. Etiology is unknown, but generally considered an inci-
processes.
dental finding without clinical signs.
239
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 4.187 Cormpression fracture of a lumbar vertebra (lateral
Figure 4.186 Dural ossification (lateral radiograph) is seen as thin
radliograph). (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
mineral opacity lines along spinal canal (thick arrows). Spondylosis 
deformans produces smmooth-bordered new bone along ventral vertebral
borders (thin arrows). (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
4. Advanced imaging modalities (e.g., myelography, CT,
MRI) frequently provide a more complete diagnostic and
prognostic assessment.
4. Usually occurs in cervical and lumbar regions.
5. Most spinal luxations and fractures occur at junctions of
5. Most often reported in older dogs. especially larger
mobile and relatively immobile areas of spine:
breeds.
a. Atlantooccipital.
b. Atlantoaxial.
Radiographic findings with dural ossification:
C. Cervicothoracic.
1. Thin, mineral opacity lines in spinal canal (usually along 
d. Thoracolumbar.
ventral aspect of spinal canal; Figure 4.186)
e. Lumbosacral.
2. Easiest to see at intervertebral foramina.
6. Vertebral body fracture:
3. Dural ossification outlines the spinal cord.
a. Spine is abnormally angulated on one or more radio-
graphs (often an abrupt angulation).
Differential diagnosis for dural ossification:
b. Vertebral body lacks continuity along lateral, ventral.
1. Mineralization of intervertebral disc.
or dorsal margin and may be altered in length or shape
2. Lateral spondylosis deformans superimposed on spinal
(compare with adjacent vertebrae) (Figure 4.187).
canal.
c. Articular facets may be separated or avulsed.
3. Mineralization of dorsal longitudinal ligament.
d. Fracture may cause narrowing or widening of inter-
vertebral disc space.
 Fractures and luxations of the spine
e. Chip fractures most often occur at ventral or dorsal
Clinical correlations:
margins of vertebral bodies.
1. Usually result from trauma.
f. Swelling is common in adjacent soft tissues or retro-
2. Pathologic fractures may be caused by neoplasia, nutri-
peritoneal space.
tional deficiency, severe infection.
7. Epiphyseal fracture:
3. Spinal cord may suffer concussion and/or compression.
a. Occurs in immature animals (Salter-Harris-type
4. Clinical signs depend on severity of injury and degree of
fra ctures).
instability.
b. Fracture may be complete or partial (Figure 4.188).
c. Damaged physis may be widened and irregular
Radiographic findings with spinal fractures:
(compare with adjacent vertebrae).
1. CAUTION: If severe spinal trauma is suspected, minimal
d. Epiphysis may be displaced dorsally or ventrally
movement of animal is recommended (Figure 4.19l).
(depends on whether injury was caused by hyperflexion
a. Consider horizontal beam radiography (animal in
or overextension).
lateral recumbency and x-ray beam directed horizontally
 8. Dorsal spinous process fractures:
across table to make ventrodorsal radiograph; see chapter
a. Most commonly seen along thoracic or lumbar
2, Figures 2.29 and 2.30).
vertebrae.
2. When able, orthogonal radiographs aid detecting evi-
b. Fractures usually are horizontal, multiple, and sequen-
dence of spinal trauma.
tial (Figure 4.189).
3. Depending on initial findings, additional radiographs may
9. Transverse process fractures:
be required for complete assessment (animal may need to
a. Often unilateral and longitudinal (Figure 4.190).
be anesthetized).
b. Frequently multiple and sequential.
240
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
B
Figure 4.188 Epiphyseal fractur
rsal portion of epiphysis of C3; chip fragment is displaced dorsally and
 cranially. B. Fracture involving ventral p
 Figure 4.189 Dorsal spinous process fractures involving three
Figure 4.191 Lumbar vertebral fracture and luxation with severe ventral
consecutive thoracic vertebrae (lateral radliograph). (Adapted from Owen5
and cranial displacerment. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
and Biery 1999.)
4. Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism often is
concurrent.
5. Affected cats develop a crippling and degenerative disease
that includes lameness, depression, poor appetite, dull hair
coat, scoliosis, rigidity of spine, muscle atrophy, and cervical
hyperesthesia.
Radiographic findings with hypervitaminosis A:
1. Generalized osteoporosis.
2. Large periosteal responses predominately affect verte-
brae, long bones, and joints.
Figure 4.190 Transverse spinous process fracture of the lumbar vertebra
3. Cervical and cranial thoracic parts of spine are more
(ventrodorsal radiograph). (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
severely affected, with lesions seldom occurring in more
caudal vertebrae.
4. Vertebral lesions resemble severe ventral and lateral
c. Concurrent intra-abdominal or intrathoracic trauma is
 spondylosis with prolific new bone formation at dorsal ver-
common.
tebral articulations.
 5. Periosteal responses typically appear layered or larminar
Hypervitaminosis A
along all long bones.
Clinical correlations:
6. Ankylosis is common at limb joints (e.g., shoulder, elbow.
1. Other names: vitamin A toxicosis, deforming cervical
hip, stifle).
spondylosis, nutritional osteodystrophy.
2. Proliferative bone disorder caused by an excessive intake
Differential diagnosis for hypervitaminosis A:
of vitamin A.
1. Mucopolysaccharidosis.
 3. Most often reported in cats fed a primarily liver diet.
2. Advanced polyarthritis.
241
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
3. Hypertrophic osteopathy.
c. More common in older nonchondrodystrophic breeds.
4. Severe spondylosis.
d. Also associated with cervical spondylopathy and lum-
bosacral instability.
Intervertebral disc disease (IVDD)
8. IVDD is most common in middle-aged (3 to 6 years)
Clinical correlations:
chondrodystrophic dogs (disc degeneration begins as early
1. Other names: ruptured disc, prolapsed disc, slipped disc.
as 2 months of age and often is complete by 1 year of age).
disc herniation.
Predisposed breeds include Dachshund, Basset Hound.
2. Extrusion or protrusion of disc material into spinal canal,
Beagle, Cocker Spaniel, Shih-Tzu, Lhasa Apso, Corgi.
Pekinese).
rological disease.
9. In nonchondrodystrophoid dogs. disc degeneration
3. Most commonly results from degenerative disc disease,
occurs more slowly and clinical signs are typically seen later
but may be caused by trauma.
in life (8 to 10 years of age). Often reported in German
4. Pathophysiology of degenerative disc disease:
Shepherd Dog. Labrador Retriever, Doberman Pinscher.
a. Can occur in any disc.
10. Clinical signs are related to degree of spinal cord damage
b. Dehydration of nucleus pulposus leads to replacement
and include pain with or without paresis/paralysis.
of gelatinous material with cartilage or fibrous tissue.
11. Obesity  increases likelihood of  intervertebral disc
resulting in loss of disc pliability.
disease.
c. Nucleus may mineralize, resulting in further loss of
compressibility.
Radiographic findings with IVDD:
d. Annulus fibrosis also degenerates and weakens, allow-
1. Survey radiographs may be normal.
ing disc material to protrude or extrude into spinal canal
2. Findings tend to be more evident with type I herniation
(dorsal part of annulus is thinnest; Figure 4.l92).
than with type I1.
e. Disc material may be gelatinous, fbrous, or mineral-
 3. Persistent narrowing of intervertebral disc space on mul-
ized and can damage the spinal cord.
tiple radiographs is characteristic (compare with adjacent
5. Common sites of disc protrusion or extrusion include:
spaces; Figure 4.193).
a. Thoracolumbar junction (Tl2-Ll)
a. Narrowing may or may not be uniform.
b. Cervical spine (especially C2-3, C3-4).
b. Dorsal narrowing or wedging of disc space may result
c. Lumbar spine.
from rupture of dorsal portion of disc while ventral
d. Thoracic spinal cord is less likely to be affected because
portion remains intact).
intercapital and conjugal ligaments, which line ventral
4. Intervertebral foramen may be altered in size, opacity.
spinal canal, provide an additional barrier.
 and/or shape.
6. Hansen type I disc herniation:
5. Space
between
dorsal articular processes often is
a. Complete extrusion of nucleus pulposus into spinal
narrowed.
canal.
 6. Increased opacity in spinal canal may represent extruded
b. An acute condition that tends to be clinically more
disc material (may be soft tissue or mineral opacity). In
severe than type II.
chronic cases, extruded material may have sharp margins.
c. More common in chondrodystrophic breeds.
7. Mineralized intervertebral discs may be heterogeneous
7. Hansen type II disc herniation:
(appear to be brealking up) or resemble a shell of mineralized
a. Protrusion (or bulging) of disc into spinal canal
material.
without rupture of annulus.
 b. Often a more gradual and progressive disease process.
Figure 4.193 Intervertebral disk herniation (lateral radiograph).
Lateral
Dorsal
Normal
Intenvertebral dlisk space is narrowed and intervertebral forarmen is smaller
 and increased in opacity at the affected site. The joint space between
Herniation Herniatiton
articular facets is also narrowed (arrow). (Adapted from Owens and Biery
Figure 4.192 Dorsal and lateral intervertebral disk herniation.
1999.)
242
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
a. Intervertebral disc spaces at periphery of radiographs
appear narrow due to distortion.
b. Normal anatomy: intervertebral disc spaces normally
are narrowed at C2-3 and Tl0-ll.
Contrast radiography (myelography)
1. Used to document or confirm lesion prior to surgery.
2. Protruding intervertebral disc or extruded material
creates an extradural lesion (see chapter 3) and spinal cord
is displaced away from disc or material.
3. Swelling of spinal cord (due to edema or hemorrhage)
A
creates an intramedullary lesion that may extend along
B
C
several vertebrae cranially and/or caudally.
Figure 4.194 Intervertebral disk disease (lateral radiograph).
a. Cord swelling may be present with or without a visible
A. Heterogeneous disc mineralization without extrusion. B. Cormplete
extradural lesion.
mineralization of nucleus without extrusion. C. Extrusion of mineralized
4. Cross-sectional imaging (e.g. CT, MRI) has largely
dlisc into spinal canal and narrowing of intervertebral disc space.
replaced contrast radiography because it provides superior
(Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
anatomic detail and is noninvasive.
Differential diagnosis for IVDD:
1. Previous intervertebral disc disease, no longer clinical.
Lumbosacral disease
Clinical correlations:
1. Other names: lumbosacral instability, cauda equina syn-
6
drome, lumbosacral stenosis, lumbosacral malarticulation.
2. Characterized by compression of caudal spinal nerve
roots (cauda equina).
3. May be congenital or acquired (latter is often a degenera-
tive condition).
Figure 4.195 Intervertebral disc disease (lateral radiograph) Increased
4. Most often reported in large-breed dogs (e.g., German
opacity is present at the L3-4 intervertebral forarmen (arrow), consistent
Shepherd Dog. Greyhound).
with extrusion of disc mnaterial. Mineralized intervertebral discs are visible
5. Cats also are affected.
at L2-3, L3-4, and L5-6.
6. Possible etiologies are listed in Differential Diagnoses
section of this chapter.
7. Transitional vertebrae at lumbosacral junction may pre-
dispose to condition.
a. Mineralization in intervertebral disc space indicates
8. Affected animals commonly exhibit pain during palpa-
degenerative disc disease, but not necessarily disc protru-
tion of lumbosacral region.
9. Clinical signs vary depending on severity and duration of
sion or extrusion (Figure 4.194).
 b. Mineralized in situ discs often are incidental findings
nerve root compression.
without clinical significance.
10. Signs may be unilateral or bilateral and include abnor-
 8. Absence of mineralization in an intervertebral disc space
mal gait, hyperesthesia, difficulty rising. muscle atrophy.
along a series of mineralized discs suggests herniation (Figure
pelvic limb lameness or weakness, decreased anal tone, and
4.195).
urinary and/or fecal incontinence.
9. Chronic intervertebral disc disease results in collapse of
the intervertebral space and sclerosis of vertebral body
Radiographic findings with lumbosacral disease:
endplates.
1. Survey radiographs may be normal.
10. Spondylosis deformans is common at affected sites.
2. Spondylosis deformans is common along ventral and
11. Errors in positioning may mimic intervertebral disc
lateral aspects of lumbosacral junction and may or may not 
disease (e.g., rotation or sagging of spine).
be clinically significant.
12. Errors in interpretation may lead to false diagnosis of
3. Lumbosacral intervertebral disc space may be narrowed
IVDD:
or wedged.
243
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 4.196 Lumbosacral instability (extended lateral radiographs) A. Normal canine lumbosacral spine for comparison. B. During extension, S1 is
ventrally dlisplaced relative to L7, resulting in narrowing of the lumbosacral canal. Spondylosis is present ventrally. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
Contrast radiography:
1. Myelography opacifes subarachnoid space and dural
sac; however, in some dogs these structures do not extend
far enough caudally to accurately assess lumbosacral
region.
 2. Epidurography may document compression or displace-
ment of cauda equina, but normal filling defects tend to
 compromise image interpretation
a. Extended and flexed lateral radiographs aid in docu-
menting dynamic compression of cauda equina associ-
B
ated with ligamentous hypertrophy.
3. Discography of L7-Sl space is sometimes used to dem-
onstrate ruptures of annulus and disc protrusion into spinal
canal.
4. Cross-sectional imaging studies (e.g., CT, MRI) have
largely replaced contrast radiography due to superior ana-
tomic detail and noninvasive technique.
Differential diagnosis for lumbosacral disease:
Figure 4.197 Lumbosacral instability. A. On extended lateral
1. Hip dysplasia.
radiograph, sacrum is slightly ventrally dlisplaced in relation to last lummbar
2. Stifle degenerative joint disease (e.g., chronic cranial cru-
vertebra, resulting in narrowing of the spinal canal and dorsal wedging of 
ciate ligament injury).
the intervertebral disk space. B. On neutral lateral radliograph, sacrum
3. Polyarthropathy.
and last lumbar vertebra are in alignment and disk space is uniform.
4. Myopathy.
5. Myasthenia gravis.
6. Thrombosis of distal aorta and iliac arteries.
7. Fibrocartilaginous emboli.
4. Sacrum may be ventrally displaced (subluxated) in rela-
tion to last lumbar vertebra, creating a "stair-step" at lum-
bosacral junction (Figure 4.196).
Neoplasia of spine
5. Functional subluxation (instability) may be demonstrated
Clinical correlations:
using flexed and extended lateral radiographs (Figure 4.197).
1. Tumors can arise in spinal cord, meninges, vertebrae, or
s xa ue an sq raad ud aq sdu puaag
adjacent soft tissues.
by pulling limbs cranially.
2. See Differential Diagnoses section for specifc etiologies.
6. May see narrowing of lumbosacral spinal canal (decreased
3. Clinical signs vary, depending on tumor location and
dorsoventral dimension) due to congenital malformation or
degree of spinal cord compression.
new bone formation at vertebral facets.
4. Signs often mimic intervertebral disc disease (pain, lame-
7. Vertebral endplates may be sclerotic.
ness, paresis/paralysis).
8. Discospondylitis, fracture, or congenital vertebral anom-
5. Cross-sectional imaging (CT, MRI) provides superior ana-
aly may be present.
tomic detail and is noninvasive.
244
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Figure 4.198 Vertebral neoplasia. A. lrregular osteolytic lesion with il-cdefined periosteal response in right side of a lummbar vertebral body, extending
frorm pedicle into transverse process (ventrodorsal radiograph). B. Irregular osteolysis of dorsal spinous process (lateral radiograph). (Adapted from Owen5
and Biery 1999.)
Radiographic findings with spinal neoplasia:
1. Tumors of spinal cord, spinal nerves, and meninges:
a. Usually
no
abnormality
isseen
on
survey
radiographs.
b. Spinal canal may enlarge due to expansile pressure
remodeling, erosion of lamina, or erosion of a pedicle.
c. Nerve root tumors may enlarge intervertebral foramen
(right and left lateral oblique radiographs aid in compar-
ing size and shape of each intervertebral foramen).
2. Benign vertebral tumors:
a. Osteoma: usually a well-circumscribed bony mass.
Figure 4.199 Metastatic neoplasia involving caudal lummbar vertebrae 
b. Osteochondroma: often expansile and smoothly mar-
ginated with a sclerotic border; rarely produces an active
caudal lumbar vertebrae, sacrum, and pelvis (arrows). Osteolysis is absent
periosteal response.
and intervertebral dlisc spaces are not affected. (Adapted from Owen5
3. Primary malignant vertebral tumors:
and Bieny 1999.)
a. Usually involve only one vertebra.
b. Appear aggressive with osteolytic, osteoblastic, or
a. Intramedullary compression = spinal cord tumor.
mixed changes (Figure 4.198).
 b. Intradural and extramedullary compression = nerve
c. Rarely involve intervertebral disc space.
root tumor.
d. Swelling may be present in adjacent tissues.
c. Extradural compression = vertebral tumor, meningio-
e. Pathologic fractures can occur, resulting in collapse
mas, metastatic tumors.
and shortening of vertebral body.
4. Metastatic vertebral tumors:
Osteochondritis (OcD) of spine
a. Usually involve more than one vertebra (commonly
Clinical correlations:
affect other bones, too).
1. Caused by a disturbance in endochondral ossification (see
b. May be osteolytic, osteoproductive, or both.
page 191).
c. Carcinomas originating in pelvic canal (e.g., prostatic.
2. Uncommon in spine, most often reported at lumbosacral
cystic, urethral, rectal) spread via lymphatics to sublum-
junction.
bar lymph nodes and cause an ill-defined periosteal
3. More common in large-breed dogs. especially young
response along ventral aspects of caudal lumbar and
German Shepherd Dogs.
sacral vertebral bodies (in middle of vertebrae, not at
4. Clinical signs are similar to lumbosacral instability and
endplates, Figure 4.199). Pelvis and femurs may also be
cauda equina compression.
involved.
Radiographic findings with spinal OCD:
Contrast radiography (myelography):
 1. Typically an irregular osseous defect is present on a ver-
1. Aids in determining type and degree of spinal cord
tebral endplate, most often involving craniodorsal aspect of
compression:
first sacral vertebra (Figure 4.200).
245
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 4.200 Osteochondritis dlissecans of the sacrum (lateral
Figure 4.201 Schmorl's node (lateral radiograph). Well-defined.
radiograph). A small defect is present on the craniodorsal aspect of the
srmooth-bordlered osseous defects are centrally located in opposing 
body of the sacrum with a sirmilar sized bone fragment (arrow) displaced
endplates of lumbar vertebrae. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
away fromm the defect. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
2. Defect usually is surrounded by osteosclerosis.
3. May be associated with fibrocartilaginous emboli and
3. Fragment of bone may be present near defect.
ischemic myelopathy.
4. Affected vertebra may appear shortened.
4. May result from trauma (often mild), weakened vertebral
endplate (due to metabolic disease), or an incompletely ossi-
Osteochondromatosis
fied vertebral endplate.
Clinical correlations:
 5. Uncommon in dogs and cats.
1. Other names: multiple cartilaginous exostoses.
6. Most often reported in large-breed dogs (especially
2. Abnormal differentiation of physeal cartilage develops
German Shepherd Dog).
into bony masses in axial and appendicular skeleton.
7. Clinical signs usually are absent, but some animals will
3. Masses may be monostotic (osteochondroma) or polyos-
have pain at the affected site.
totic (osteochondromatosis).
8. Surgical removal of intravertebral disc material may
4. Lesions usually are evident before l year of age.
relieve pain.
5. Most often reported in Yorkshire Terrier, German Shep-
herd Dog. and Alaskan Malamute.
Radiographic findings with Schmorl's node:
6. Lesions generally stop growing at skeletal maturity (some
1. Well-defined, concave defect in a vertebral body endplate
may continue to grow in cats).
(Figure 4.201).
 7. Rarely, bony masses will compress spinal cord, producing
a. May be central or more peripheral (bladder is some-
neurologic signs.
times called a limbus vertebra).
2. Most often reported at lumbosacral junction.
Radiographic findings with osteochondromatosis
3. Osteosclerosis frequently surrounds the defect and a dis-
(Figure 4.166):
continuity may be present in the endplate (creates a fish-
1. Lesions may be solitary or multiple bony masses; mono-
shaped disc space).
stotic or polyostotic in distribution.
 4. Intervertebral space commonly is narrowed and vertebral
2. Bony mass appears smooth, spherical, and nonaggressive.
body may be shortened.
often with sclerotic margins.
5. Spine may be slightly malaligned or angulated.
3. Mass develops near a vertebra, most commonly involving
6. Vacuum phenomenon is sometimes present (gas in inter-
a dorsal spinous process.
vertebral space).
4. Initially. mass appears separate from underlying bone
(resembles calcinosis circumscripta).
Differential diagnosis for Schmorl's node:
5. Cervical and thoracic vertebrae are most commonly
1. Inflammation such as discospondylitis and osteomyelitis
affected.
(inflammation usually produces more extensive lesions with
less-defined margins).
Schmorl's node
2. Osteochondrosis.
Clinical correlations:
1. Other names: Schmorl's nodule, intravertebral disc
Spondylitis
herniation.
Clinical correlations:
2. Extrusion of intervertebral disc material into an adjacent
1. Vertebral inflammation, usually caused by infection.
vertebral body.
2. Possible etiologic agents:
246
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
a. Bacterial (most common cause).
Spondylosis deformans
b. Mycotic
(e.g..
a ctinomycosis,
coccidiomycosis,
Clinical correlations:
aspergillosis).
1. Other names: spondylosis.
c. Protozoal (e.g., Hepatozoon).
2. New bone formation along ventral and lateral aspects of
d. Parasitic (Spirocerca Iupi, commonly involves thoracic
spine.
vertebrae).
3. May be response to vertebral instability caused by degen-
3. Routes of infection:
eration of intervertebral discs.
a. Direct extension
from an adjacent soft tissue
4. Often associated with:
infection.
a. Chronic intervertebral disc disease.
b. Secondary to a regional infection (e.g., kidney disease).
b. Cervical spondylomyelopathy (wobblers' disease).
c. Penetrating wound or surgical complication.
c. Intervertebral disc fenestration.
d. Migrating foreign body (e.g. plant awn):
d. Discospondylitis.
1) Aspirated grass awn migrates through lungs and
e. Congenital vertebral anomalies (e.g., hemivertebrae).
diaphragm along path of least resistance to attachment
f. Healing vertebral fractures and luxations.
5. Common, noninflammatory, age-related condition affect-
 s   d ao  (
ing both dogs and cats (usually older animals, but may
paraspinal tissues.
develop as young as 2 years of age).
3) Ingested foreign material penetrates bowel wall
6. Generally considered an incidental finding. but severe
and migrates along mesenteric root to reach paraspi-
spondylosis may affect flexibility of spine.
nal tissues.
7. New bone may compress emerging spinal nerve roots
4) Most often seen in medium- and large-size dogs.
(rare).
especially outdoor animals.
4. Infection may spread to vertebral body or intervertebral
Radiographic findings with spondylosis:
space, causing osteomyelitis or discospondylitis.
1. Bone spurs form at ventral and lateral margins of verte-
5. Clinical signs include fever and pain.
bral body endplates, often at attachment sites of ventral
6. Uncommon condition except in western United States
longitudinal ligament (Figure 4.203).
where foxtail awns can be inhaled.
2. Margins of new bone are smooth and well-defined.
3. Spondylosis may develop at one or multiple sites, most
Radiographic findings with spondylitis:
commonly along lumbar, lumbosacral, and midthoracic
1. An active, proliferative, ill-defined periosteal response
 involving one or more vertebral bodies, especially along the
spine.
4. Bone spurs vary in appearance from small, curved, beak-
ventral margins (Figure 4.202).
like exostoses to large, solid, bony proliferations and increase 
2. Osteomyelitis or discospondylitis may be present.
3. Retroperitoneal swelling may be seen with lumbar
in number, size, and extent as animal ages.
5. Interdigitation of large adjacent bone spurs can create
spondylitis.
solid bony bridges between two or more vertebrae.
6. Superimposition of lateral spondylosis over intervertebral
Differential diagnosis:
space or spinal canal can mimic mineralization in these
1. Spondylosis deformans.
2. Metastatic carcinoma.
areas.
7. Vertebral body endplates remain normal with smooth.
3. Atypical hypertrophic osteopathy.
well-defined margins and without evidence of osteolysis or
4. Disseminated idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH).
active remodeling.
8. Spondylosis does not cause narrowing of intervertebral
disc spaces.
Differential diagnosis for spondylosis:
1. Intervertebral disc disease.
2. Degenerative joint disease.
3. Spondylitis/discospondylitis (inflammation causes indis-
tinct bony margins).
个
4. Metastatic neoplasia (neoplasia results in new bone alone
Figure 4.202 Sponcdylitis (lateral radiograph) causing osteolysi5 of
ventral middle vertebral body).
vertebral body endplates and irregular new bone production along ventral
5. Hypervitaminosis A.
borders (arrows). (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
6. Osteochondroma tosis.
247
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
板
Figure 4.203 Spondylosis deformans. Well-defined, smooth-bordered bone production is present along ventral and lateral margins of lumbar vertebral
bodies. A. Lateral radiograph. B. Ventrodorsal radiograph
Head and neck
1. Contrast radiography procedures are referenced in the
following discussion, but cross-sectional imaging (e.g., CT.
 MRI) provides superior anatomic detail, is noninvasive, and
has largely replaced the need for contrast radiography of the
 head and neck.
Cranial vault
Craniomandibular osteopathy (CMO)
Clinical correlations:
1. Other names: temporomandibular osteodystrophy, man-
dibular periostitis.
2. Proliferative, nonneoplastic disease that affects cranium
and mandibles (and occasionally long bones)
Figure 4.204 Craniomandibular 05teopathy (lateral radiograph).
3. Etiology is unknown, but a hereditary predisposition is
 Extensive, irregular periosteal new bone production is present along the
suspected.
 mandible (arrow), beginning near the angular process.
4. Most often reported in terriers (West Highland White.
Scottish, Boston, Cairn).
5. Has been reported in Labrador Retriever, Doberman Pin-
scher, German Shepherd Dog. and Boxer.
Radiographic findings with CMO:
6. Clinical signs typically appear at 3 to 8 months of age and
1. Extensive, irregular periosteal new bone production
include pain when opening mouth, mandibular swelling.
drooling, difficulty prehending food, and fever.
petrous temporal bone, and occasionally parietal, frontal, or
7. Disease is self-limiting and clinical signs regress at skeletal
maxillary bones (Figure 4.204).
maturity.
2. Calvarium usually is thickened without disruption of
8. Radiographic abnormalities and impaired function may
inner or outer bony tables.
persist.
3. Tympanic bullae may become thickened.
248
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
4. Bony proliferation can extend to temporomandibular
joints, resulting in ankylosis
making detection difficult (oblique and tangential radio-
5. Changes usually are bilateral but may not be
graphs may aid in visualizing fracture lines).
asymmetrical.
5. Overlapping fractures may present lines of increased
6. Rarely, a periosteal response develops along a long bone
opa city.
  i    o   
6. Follow-up radiographs often document a periosteal
hypertrophic osteodystrophy).
response (callus formation).
Cranial hyperostosis
Differential diagnosisforfractures of cranialvault:
Clinical correlations:
1. Normal sutures or vascular channels, especially in imma-
1. Similar to craniomandibular osteopathy, but confined to
frontal areas of skull.
and soft tissue swelling is absent).
2. Etiology is unknown (may be a form of CMO).
3. Reported in Bullmastiff puppies.
Hydrocephalus
4. Clinical signs regress at skeletal maturity and lesions may
Clinical correlations:
or may not persist.
1. Abnormal excessive accumulation of fluid in ventricular
Radiographic findings with cranial hyperostosis:
system of brain.
2. May
be
congenital
or  acquired,
obstructive
1. Thickening and osteosclerosis of parietal bones.
nonobstructive.
Fractures of cranial vault
a. Obstructive
 or noncommunicating hydrocephalus
Clinical correlations:
(more common form) is caused by ventricular obstruc-
1. Usually caused by blunt trauma.
tion resulting from congenital anomaly, trauma, infec-
2. Calvarial fractures are less common than maxillary and
tion, parasite migration, or neoplasia.
b. Nonobstructive or communicating hydrocephalus
mandibular fract ures.
(less common form) is caused by failure of arachnoid villi
3. Central nervous system involvement and neurological
to absorb cerebral spinal fluid at an adequate rate.
signs may result from fracture displacement, brain contu-
3. Both males and females are equally affected; may occur
sion, extradural hemorrhage, or subdural hemorrhage.
in animals of any age.
4. Congenital hydrocephalus is more common in small, toy.
Radiographic findings with cranial vault fractures:
1. Soft tissue swelling is present at fracture site (Figure
and brachycephalic dogs (e.g., Yorkshire Terrier, Chihuahua,
4.205).
Maltese, Toy Poodle, Boston Terrier, English Bulldog. Peking-
2. Subcutaneous emphysema is common (especially when
ese, Lhasa Apso, Pug. Pomeranian, Cairn Terrier).
nasal cavity or frontal sinus is involved).
5. In cats, hydrocephalus is less common than in dogs (may
be hereditary in Siamese cats), and it may be associated with
3. Fractures may be simple or comminuted and fragment(s)
feline infectious peritonitis.
may or may not be depressed.
6. Other neural anomalies may be present (e.g., spinal cord
dysgenesis, cerebellar ataxia).
7. Clinical signs include an enlarged, dome-shaped cranium
with open fontanelles; visual and auditory deficits; vocaliza-
tion; and an abnormal gait.
Radiographic findings with hydrocephalus:
1. Survey radiographs are insensitive for diagnosis of
hydroce phalus.
2. Congenital hydrocephalus tends to produce more altera-
tions to the skull:
a. Calvarium is enlarged and dome shaped with a thin
cortex (Figure 4.206).
b. Fontanelles and sutures often remain open longer
than normal.
Figure 4.205 Fracture of frontal bone (lateral radiograph). Dorsal soft
c. Inner border of calvarium is smooth and uniform;
tissue sweling and subcutaneous erphysema are present at the fracture
normal convolutional markings (created by brain) are
site. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
diminished or lost due to pressure remodeling.
249
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 4.206 Hydrocephalus (lateral radiograph). Cranial cavity i5
enlarged with thinning of the calvarium.
d. Cranial cavity may appear homogeneous and hazy
Figure 4.207 Osteosarcoma of skull(lateral radiograph). Osteolysis and
(described as "ground glass" or "bathroom glass" in
ill-cefined periosteal response involve rostral aspect of frontal bone with
appearance).
adjacent soft tissue 5welling. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
3. Skull may appear normal in early stages of hydrocephalus
or when disease is acquired and ossification of skull is
complete.
4. Contrast radiography (e.g., ventriculography, pneumov-
entriculography) has largely been replaced by ultrasonogra-
phy and cross-sectional imaging (e.g., CT, MRI).
Neoplasia of cranial vault
Clinical correlations:
1. Skull tumors are uncommon in dogs and cats.
2. May involve nasal passage, oral cavity. brain, or cranial
vault.
 3. Osteosarcoma is most common malignant tumor.
M
2
4. Osteoma is most common benign tumor.
Figure 4.208 Osteoma of skull(lateral radiograph). A srnooth-bordered,
5. Other tumors include chondrosarcoma, osteochondroma,
osteosclerotic thickening involves the frontal bone with litle soft tissue
and multilobular osteoma/chondroma (chondroma rodans).
 5welling. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
6. Metastatic neoplasia
rarely
affects skull (multiple
myeloma is exception).
7. Soft tissue tumors may invade skull by direct extension
(e.g., fibrosarcoma, squamous cell carcinoma, malignant
Radiographic findings with cranial vault fumors:
melanoma).
1. Osteosarcoma (Figure 4.207):
8. Tumors are most common in middle-aged and older
a. Often more osteoblastic (sclerotic and productive) and
animals.
better-defined than in long bones.
9. Clinical signs are related to size and location of tumor:
b. Tends to be more lytic in facial bones and mandible.
a. An external mass or enlargement of the head may be
2. Osteoma (Figure 4.208):
visible.
a. Slow-growing tumor with smooth, sclerotic, and well-
b. Intracranial tumors often cause seizures and visual
defined margins.
deficits.
b. Usually arises from mandible, cranial vault, or sinuses.
c. Pituitary tumors create endocrinologic changes (e.g..
3. Multilobular osteoma (Figure 4.209):
polydypsia, polyuria).
a. Well-defined, locally invasive lysis of bone.
d. Vestibular signs may be present (e.g., head tilt, tremor.
b. Lobulated soft tissue mass with diffuse amorphous or
ataxia).
gran ular mineraliza tion.
e. May
see
 nasal
discharge
or
upper
airway
c. Usually arise from parietal crest, temporooccipital
obstruction.
regions, or zygomatic bone.
10. Cross-sectional imaging (e.g., CT, MRI) provides supe-
4. Soft tissue tumors of maxilla and mandible (Figures 4.210
rior anatomic detail.
and 4.211):
250
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton 
Figure 4.209 Multilobular osteorma/chondroma of skull (lateral
Figure 4.212 Multiple myelomma (lateral radiograph). Several osteolytic
radiograph). There is an invasive lobulated lytic lesion with diffuse 
lesions ("punched-out areas") are present in the bones of the cranium.
anorphous calcification of the frontal and parietal regions. (Adapted 
(Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
 from Owens and Biery 1999.)
Figure 4.213 Meningioma (rostrocaudal radiograph) causing thickening
and increased opacity (hyperostosis) of calvarium (arrow). (Adapted from 
Figure 4.210 Soft tissue tumor infitrating maxilla (dorsoventral
Owens and Biery 1999.)
 radiograph). Severe soft tissue sweling and maxillary osteolysis are
pue suamo woy paideps) subueu Auog pauyap-ll yhm (mome) juasaid
Biery 1999.)
a. Primarily lytic with little or no periosteal response.
b. Bone adjacent to teeth may be lytic, but teeth are not 
invaded or destroyed.
c. Teeth commonly are displaced by enlarging tumor or
may fall out.
5. Metastatic malignant tumor (Figure 4.212):
a. Generally cause numerous focallytic lesions ("punched
out" areas, e.g., multiple myeloma).
6. Brain tumors (primary and metastatic):
a. Usually are not visible on survey radiographs.
b. Some meningiomas will mineralize (Figure 4.213).
c. May see increased opacity of the calvarium caused by
tumor located immediately adjacent to the bone.
Occipital dysplasia
Clinical correlations:
Figure 4.211 Soft tissue tumor invading tympanic bulla and causing
1. Incomplete ossification of occipital bone results in an
 osteolysis (close-up of lateral radiograph). (Adapted from Owens and 
enlarged foramen magnum.
Biery 1999.)
2. Most often reported in toy and miniature dog breeds.
3. Frequently accompanied by other anomalies (e.g., hydro-
cephalus, shortening of frst cervical vertebra, atlantoaxial
malformation, occipital hypoplasia).
251
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
region (open-mouth ventrodorsal and rostrocaudal radio-
 graphs may aid in detection).
Otitis (externa, media, and interna)
Clinicalcorrelations:
A
B
1. Inflammation involving external, middle, and/or inner
Figure 4.214 Occipital dysplasia (rostrocaudal radiograph). A. Normal
ear.
appearance of foramen magnum. B. Enlarged, dorsally projecting,
2. May be caused by bacterial infection (most common).
forarmen magnum characteristic of occipital dysplasia. (Adapted from
polyps, trauma, or neoplasia (e.g., osteosarcoma, squamous
Owens and Biery 1999.)
cell carcinoma, ceruminous carcinoma, adenocarcinoma,
fibrosarcoma).
3. Otitis media and otitis interna often result from extension
4. Clinical signs often are absent unless there is herniation
of infection in another area (e.g., chronic otitis externa
of brain stem or cerebellum.
(most common), oral cavity, nasopharynx, systemic disease).
5. An enlarged foramen magnum may be a normal varia-
4. Polyps are nonneoplastic and may cause or result from
tion in some brachycephalic dogs.
otitis. They are more common in cats than in dogs (espe-
 o     i  
Radiographic findings with occipital dysplasia:
Polyps can arise from auditory tube or middle ear and may
extend into external ear canal, tympanic bulla, or nasophar-
rostrocaudal radiograph (rostrodorsal 20° caudoventral, see
'aeuos ieseu anpoid Au sdalod iessureudosen xu
chapter 2, Figure 2.70).
sneezing. or stridor.
2. Enlargement of foramen magnum varies from slight to
 5. Clinical signs vary with etiology. duration, and severity
marked.
of disease.
3. Major portion of enlargement extends dorsally (Figure
6. Computed tomography is more sensitive in diagnosing
4.214).
Otitis.
Differential diagnosis for occipital dysplasia:
1. Chiari-like  malformation  (abnormal  development  of
Radiographic findings with ofitis:
occipital bone).
1. Survey radiographs often are normal with acute otitis.
a. Other
 names:
caudal
occipital
malformation
2. External auditory canal may be narrowed or obscured
syndrome.
due to presence of fluid, exudate, or debris in lumen or
 b. Usually accompanied by syringomyelia.
thickening of ear canal lining (Figure 4.215A)
c. Reported in Cavalier King Charles Spaniel and other
 3. External auditory canal may mineralize (especially with
small and toy breed dogs.
chronic disease).
d. Radiographs are not diagnostic; MRI is the preferred
a. Mineralization in auditory canal is a normal aging
diagnostic modality.
 change, which can be mistaken for pathology.
b. Age-related mineralization produces thin, well-
Osteomyelitis of cranial vault
defined rings in lumen of canal.
Clinical correlations:
4. Tympanic bulla on affected side may be thickened (due
1. Inflammation/infection involving bones of cranial vault.
to periosteal irritation and new bone formation) and
2. May result from a sinus infection, penetrating wound, or
increased in opacity (due to presence of exudates, polyp. or
surgery.
sclerosis).
3. Bacterial and mycotic nasal infections can extend into
5. Osteolysis of tympanic bulla may be caused by severe
cranium via cribiform plate, resulting in central nervous
infection of neoplasia.
system disease.
6. Nasopharyngeal polyp may be visible as a soft tissue mass
in the caudal nasopharynx (lateral radiograph, see chapter
Radiographic findings with osteomyelitis:
1, Figure l.11}.
1. Soft tissue swelling is common.
2. Variable degrees of osteolysis and periosteal response at
site of infection.
Differential diagnosis for otitis:
3. Fracture fragment or sequestrum may be present.
1. Normal, age-related mineralization.
4. Osteomyelitis can extend through ethmoid bone, creat-
 2. Congenital absence of ear canal.
ing increased opacity in nasal cavity, frontal sinus, or ethmoid
3. Previous surgical ablation and/or bulla osteotomy.
252
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Figure 4.215 Chronic otitis. A. Dorsoventral radiograph with increased opacity in right petrous temporal bone, tympanic bulla, and external auditory
canal; linear dystrophic mineralization associated with the auditory canal is secondary to chronic otitis externa. B. Open-mouth rostrocaudal radiograph
with increased opacity in left petrous temporal bone (1) and tympanic bulla (2). C. Close-up lateral radiographs of right and left tympanic bulla with
normmal air-filled bulla (1) and fluidl-filled bulla with thickened walls (2). (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
Nasal cavity and frontal sinus
Fractures of face and frontal area
Clinical correlations:
1. Facial fractures frequently are open fractures.
2. Multiple bones usually are involved.
3. Asymmetry of facial area may be evident.
Radiographic findings with facial fractures:
R
L
1. Soft tissue swelling at fracture site.
Figure 4.216 Frontal sinus mucocele (rostrocaudal radiograph)
 2. Subcutaneous emphysema, especially when nasal cavity
Increased soft tissue opacity in left frontal sinus (arrow) without evidence
or frontal sinus is involved (Figure 4.205).
of osteolysis. A similar appearance may result from neoplasia or
inflarnmation in the sinus. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
3. Fra ctures may be minimally or nondisplaced (oblique and
 tangential radiographs often aid in detection).
4. Overlapping bone fragments create increased opacity at
fracture sites.
3. Acute infection usually is caused by viral infection (i.e.,
Frontal sinus mucocele
an inhaled foreign body (e.g. plant awn); acute disease is
Clinical correlations:
less commonly caused by a primary bacterial infection (e.g..
1. Benign, cystlike mass that forms following obstruction of
Bordatella bronchiseptica).
draining duct from frontal sinus.
4. Chronic infection usually includes a bacterial component
2. May be caused by trauma (fracture of nasal or frontal
     s  )
bone), mass in caudal nasal cavity (commonly a tumor).
fungal infection, tumor, foreign material, oronasal fistula, or
 chronic infection or inflammation, or a mucous plug.
trauma.
3. Uncommon in dogs and cats.
5. Paranasal sinuses often are involved with diseases of
nasal cavity.
Radiographic findings with frontal sinus mucocele:
6. Cats with chronic viral rhinitis frequently develop hyper-
1. Increased opacity in frontal sinus (Figure 4.216).
plastic mucosa.
2. Usually unilateral.
7. Rhinitis and sinusitis are more common in young dogs.
3. May see thinning of frontal bone due to expansion of
especially dolichocephalic breeds.
mass and pressure remodeling.
8. Clinical signs include sneezing. unilateral or bilateral
nasal discharge, and pawing at nose (latter especially with
Differential diagnosis for frontal sinus mucocele:
foreign material) .
1. Neoplasia.
9. Histopathology often is needed for diagnosis.
2. Infection (rhinitis involving frontal sinus).
Radiographic findings with nasal cavity
Inflammation/infection of nasal cavity
inflammation/infection:
Clinical correlations:
1. Survey radiographs may be normal during acute
1. Inflammation may be caused by inhaled irritant, foreign
infections.
material, or allergy.
2. Multiple projections aid in lesion detection, including
 2. Infection may be acute or chronic due to a viral, bacterial.
lateral, dorsoventral, open-mouth ventrodorsal, rostrocall-
or mycotic agent.
dal, and intraoral (dorsoventral) radiographs.
253
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
3. One or both nasal cavities may be increased in opacity.
c. Margins of nasal turbinates become blurred.
4. Frontal sinus may be increased in opacity (unilateral or
d. Bone sclerosis may be present, usually localized and
bilateral,.
with smooth borders.
5. Osteolysis may be present due to neoplasia, mycotic
infection, or chronic, neglected rhinitis.
Differential diagnosis for nasal cavity inflammation:
6. Nasal septum usually is intact (unless inflammation is
1. Neoplasia.
caused by neoplasia or severe infection).
7. Soft tissue swelling and facial deformity is rare but can
Neoplasia of nasal cavity
be caused by tumor or advanced mycotic infection.
Clinical correlations:
8. Superimposition of tongue or endotracheal tube may
1. Most nasal tumors are slow growing and slow to
mimic increased opacity in nasal cavity.
meta sta size.
9. Mycotic rhinitis:
2. More often reported in dogs than in cats (highest inci-
a. Tends to begin in rostral one-third of nasal cavitry.
dence in dolichocephalic dogs).
b. Focal areas of osteolysis may be present in turbinates
3. Adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma are most
(Figure 4.217).
common in dogs.
c. Cryptococcus usually is nondestructive and produces
4. Lymphosarcoma is most common in cats.
a hyperplastic rhinitis.
 5. Other primary nasal cavity tumors include chondrosar
d. Aspergillosis often causes osteolysis, creating multiple
coma, fibrosarcoma, osteosarcoma, and hemangiosarcoma.
punctate areas of decreased opacity that may be sur-
6. Clinical signs include unilateral or bilateral nasal dis-
rounded by thickened bone (increased opacity): however.
charge, with or without epistaxis.
erosion of nasal septum is uncommon.
10. Foreign objects:
Radiographic findings with nasal cavity neoplasia:
a. May
lodge
anywhere
in
nasal
cavity
 1. Early in disease, findings are nonspecific and may mimic
or
nasopharynx.
infection.
b. Mineral or metal objects usually are visible, but may
 2. Nasal cavity is increased in opacity, usually unilateral, but
be obscured by overlying bone.
can be bilateral (Figure 4.219A).
C. Soft tissue material (e.g., plant awn) generally is not
3. Tumors tend to originate in caudal or middle one-third
evident on survey radiographs (a soft tissue mass or
of nasal cavity (at level of carnassial tooth).
localized fluid accumulation may create a detectable
4. An irregular-shaped soft tissue opacity may be present in
increase in opacity).
nasal cavity and/or frontal sinus.
11. Chronic infection:
5. Osteolysis of nasal turbinates, septum, vomer bone, and/
a. Typically causes local or general increased opacifica-
or cortical bone is common as neoplasia progresses (Figure
tion of nasal cavity (Figure 4.218).
4.219B}
b. May be unilateral or bilateral and may involve frontal
6. Nasal septum may be displaced or deviate away from
sinus.
neoplasm.
Figure 4.217 Fungal rhinitis (open-nouth ventrodorsal radiograph).
Osteolysis of nasal turbinates in rostral portion of left nasal cavity and
Figure 4.218 Chronic rhinitis (open-mouth ventrodorsal radiograph).
increased soft tissue opacity in caudal portion with ethmoid turbinates.
Increased opacity in both nasal passages without evidence of bone
(Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
destruction. (Adapted frorm Owens and Biery 1999.)
254
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
R
R
Figure 4.219 Nasal neoplasia (open-mouth ventrodorsal radiograph). A. Increased soft tissue opacity throughout right nasal cavity with osteolysis of
the inner nasal septumn (nid-vomer bone, arrow) and indistinct turbinate margins. B. Mass in right nasal cavity causing osteolysis and left lateral deviation 
(66hl Aala pue suamo woy paideps) wndas lesewatui jo
7. Tumor can extend caudally through cribiform plate and
 Subluxation/luxation of temporomandibular joint
into cranial vault.
Clinical correlations:
 8. Soft tissue mass may be visible in nasopharynx, immedi-
1. May result from trauma or dysplasia.
 ately caudal to maxillary dental arcade (lateral radiograph).
2. Higher incidence in cats due to shorter jaw length and
9. Nasal cavity or frontal sinus may enlarge, resulting in
less movement at mandibular symphysis.
facial deformity. missing teeth, and external soft tissue
3. Clinical signs include unilateral or bilateral malocclusion,
swelling.
inability to fully close mouth, and palpable instability of
temporomandibular joint.
Differential diagnosis for nasal cavity fumor:
4. Often, mandible is shifted rostrally and displaced toward
1. Infection (rhinitis).
contralateral side (may not be evident if mandibular body is 
fractured).
Temporomandibular joint (TMJ)
Radiographic findings with luxation of TMJ:
Dysplasia of temporomandibular joint
1. Dislocation is easiest to see on properly positioned dor-
Clinical correlations:
soventral and lateral oblique radiographs.
1. Rare congenital or developmental bony malformation.
2. Rostrodorsal luxation is most common (mandibular
2. Reported in Bassett Hound, Dachshund, and Irish Setter.
condyle is displaced rostrally. Figure 4.220). Caudal or lateral
3. May be an asymptomatic anomaly in Spaniels, Pekingese.
luxations can occur.
and Dachshund.
3. Temporomandibular joint space is widened.
4. Can be unilateral or bilateral.
4. Concurrent fracture of mandibular ramus or symphysis
5. Clinical signs include brief to extended periods of inter-
may be present.
mittent open-mouth locking of mandible (usually after
5. Retroglenoid process may be fractured (especially with
hyperextension of jaw as in yawning!
caudal luxation, Figure of 4.221).
6. Mandible may be shifted toward opposite side of dysplas-
6. Other signs of trauma may be present (e.g., fractures.
tic TMJ.
swelling, subcutaneous emphysema).
7. Computed tomography (CT) provides superior anatomic
Radiographic findings with TMJ dysplasia:
detail.
1. Easiest to see on a properly positioned dorsoventral
radiograph.
Teeth
2. Mandibular condyle has an abnormal angle and appears
Dental calculus
flattened.
Clinical correlations:
3. Mandibular fossa of temporal bone is shallow.
1. Other names: tartar.
 4. Retroarticular proces is abnormal in shape.
2. Hardened dental plaque caused by accumulation of
5. Temporomandibular joint space is widened
and
mineral deposits in saliva.
irre gular.
3. Common in dogs and cats.
255
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 4.220 Luxation of termporormandlibular joint (TMJ; lateral oblique radiographs). A. Normal TMJ for comparison (arrow). B. Rostrodorsal luxation
of TMJ (arrow).
B
Figure 4.222 Dental caries. Areas of decreased opacity (defects) are
visible in the tooth enamel. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
Figure 4.221 Fracture luxation of TMJ (close-up lateral oblique
3. Uncommon in dogs and rare in cats, most often reported
 radiograph). A. Normal TMJ for comparison. B. Caudal subluxation of
 TMJ with chip fracture of retroarticular process. (Adapted from Owen5
in carnassial and molar teeth.
and Biery 1999.)
4. Caused by bacteria that change carbohydrates on teeth
into an acid.
5. Clinical signs include pain at affected tooth and reluc-
4. Probably related to type of diet.
tance to chew.
5. Causes irritation and inflammation of gingiva and leads
6. May extend into pulp cavity and adjacent bone, resulting
to periodontal disease.
in a tooth root abscess.
Radiographic findings with dental calculus:
Radiographic findings with dental caries:
 1. Radiographs are relatively insensitive for detecting dental
1. Defects (areas of decreased opacity) develop in enamel
calculus.
and/or dentin of tooth (Figure 4.222).
2. Mineralized plaque may be visible above gingival crest or
 2. Variable degrees of enamel erosion may be present.
on tooth root.
3. May lead to tooth root abscess (Figure 4.231).
3. Tooth surface may appear roughened and irregular.
4. Most often involves buccal surfaces of carnassial teeth in
Feline odontoclastic resorptive lesion
dogs.
Clinical correlations:
1. Other names: feline oral resorptive lesion, neck lesion,
Dental caries
cervical line lesion, feline caries (caviry).
Clinical correlations:
2. Hard tissues in teeth are destroyed by odontoclasts.
1. Other names: dental decay, tooth cavity.
3. Etiology is unknown, but lesions are progressive and lead
2. Demineralization of enamel leading to development of
to loss of cementum, dentin, and penetration of pulp cavity:
holes in one or more teeth.
enamel and alveolar bone are involved in later stages.
256
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
Figure 4.223 Feline odontoclastic resorptive lesions. A. Normmal feline tooth. B. Areas of decreased opacity are present in the tooth roots (stage 1).
C. Crown is absent and tooth root fragments remain (stage 5). (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
4. Common in cats (over 50% of adult cats are affected).
5. Purebred cats may be more susceptible (e.g., Siamese.
Persian).
6. Clinical signs include mouth pain (due to exposed dentin),
reluctance to chew, anorexia, weight loss, and tooth frac-
ture. Erosions develop on surface of tooth at gingival margin
(mandibular third premolar is most often affected). Gingiva
becomes hyperplastic and inflamed (may mask tooth
lesions).
Figure 4.224 Fractured tooth. Crown of tooth is absent. (Adapted from
(666l Aalg pue suamO
Radiographic findings with feline odontoclastic resorptive
lesions (Figure 4.223):
1. Variable defects (areas of decreased opacity) develop in
Radiographic findings with fractures of teeth:
teeth, described in stages:
1. Small, linear cracks or fissures may be visible in affected
a. Stage l: Lesions appear on surface of root enamel and
teeth.
cementum, but periodontal space is normal.
2. Portion of tooth commonly is missing (Figure 4.224).
b. Stage 2: Destruction of root enamel and cementum
3. Fractures may extend to involve portion of tooth below
with loss of periodontal space, but pulp cavity is spared.
gingiva.
c. Stage 3: Lesions extend into pulp cavity, but without
extensive damage to crown.
Metabolic disease affecting teeth
d. Stage 4: Includes extensive crown and root damage.
Clinical correlations:
e. Stage 5: Crown is absent, root fragments may remain
1. Diseases that affect calcium metabolism lead to bone loss.
2. Location of lesions are one of two types:
especially in mandible and maxilla (commonly called rubber
a. Type I lesions arise in cervical area of tooth and extend
jaw).
inward, leaving relatively normal-appearing tooth roots.
 2. Hyperpara thyroidism (primary or secondary) is a common
b. Type II lesions (more common) begin below gingiva
cause.
and resorb roots of teeth.
3. In advanced disease there may be generalized deminer-
3. Secondary osteolytic lesions may develop in furcation
alization and softening of skull, spine, and long bones.
bone.
4. Pathologic fracture may be present with advanced disease.
Radiographic findings with metabolic disease:
1. Loss of lamina dura is earliest finding.
Fractures of teeth
2. In untreated cases, there is progressive loss of alveolar
Clinical correlations:
and cortical bone.
1. Typically caused by chewing on hard objects or external
3. Osteoporosis appears as a diffuse, uniform decrease in
tra uma.
bone opacity with decreased bone-to-soft tissue contrast.
2. Canine teeth are most commonly affected, followed by
4. Alveolar bone is eventually replaced by less opaque
carnassial teeth and incisors.
fibrous tissue (teeth appear to float in soft tissue, Figure
3. Exposure of pulp cavity allows infection to enter the
4.225).
tooth root and may lead to apical abscess.
4. Affected animals often are reluctant to chew on side with
Neoplasia associated with teeth
damaged tooth.
Clinical correlations:
 5. Clinical signs may not be apparent until secondary infec-
1. Oral cavity is common site for malignant and benign
tion occurs.
neoplasms in dogs and cats.
257
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
A
B
Figure 4.227 Adamantinoma in rostral maxilla (open-mouth 
ventrodorsal radiograph). Expansile osseous lesion in left incisive bone 
Figure 4.225 Secondary hyperparathyroidism (lateral oblique
with displacement and loss of incisor teeth. (Adapted from Owens and 
:algipueu ayt jo sisoodoaiso aaaas ' (algipuew ayl jo sydeiaoipe
Biery 1999.)
teeth appear to float in soft tissue opacity. B. Normal mandible for
comparison.
 Figure 4.228 Acanthomatous epulis in mandible (open-mouth
pauyap-l! 'enhau yhm uoisal alsuedxi (ydenopen leuanosion
 periosteal response and osteolysis in left hemirnandible, adjacent to
Figure 4.226 Squamous cell carcinoma in rostral maxilla (open-mouth 
 canine tooth. (Adapted frorm Owens and Biery 1999.)
ventrodorsal radiograph). Osteolytic lesion with ill-cdefined mmargins in left
incisive bone with loss of an incisor tooth. (Adapted from Owens and 
Biery 1999.)
b. Osteolysis is common, usually aggressive with irregu-
lar and ill-defined margins.
c. Periosteal responses range from none visible to very
2. Tumors may originate from dental elements, adjacent
active new bone formation.
bone, or soft tissue (see Differential Diagnoses, this chapter).
d. Tumors may extend into alveolar bone, involving one
3. Cysts are benign but can mimic tumors, both clinically
or more teeth.
and radiogra phically.
e. Pathologic fracture may occur if osteolysis is
extensive.
Radiographic findings with oral tumors:
5. Ameloblastoma and adamantinoma (Figure 4.227):
1. Tumor types cannot be distinguished on radiographs.
a. Tend to be expansile and slow growing. producing
2. Squamous cell carcinomas frequently involve rostral
osteolysis in adjacent bone.
mandible in dogs (Figure 4.226).
 b. Lesion may appear solid or cystic.
3. Dental tumors commonly resemble osteomyelitis and
c. One or more teeth may be involved.
cysts.
d. An adjacent soft tissue mass may be present.
4. Nonodontogenic malignant tumors:
6. Acanthomatous epulis (Figure 4.228):
a. Arise from soft tissue (e.g. gingiva, hard palate) or
a. Tends to be locally aggressive and may mimic a malig-
bone (e.g., mandible, maxilla).
nant tumor.
258
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
V
Figure 4.229 Dentigerous cyst. A. Well-defined expansile osteolytic lesion in left incisive bone and rostral mmaxilla (open-mouth ventrodorsal
radiograph). B. Cyst in rostral mandible (arrows; lateral oblique radliograph). (A is adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
7. Odontoma:
a. Expansile, osteolytic lesion usually with smooth
borders.
b. Osteolytic areas often contain foci of mineralization
8. Dentigerous cyst (Figure 4.229):
a. Benign, expansile lesion with well-defined margins.
b. Forms around an unerupted permanent tooth (decid-
lous teeth rarely are affected).
c. May involve one or more teeth.
d. Cysts continue to grow due to fluid secretion (size at
Figure 4.230 Periodontal disease. A. Widening of periodontal space i5
diagnosis is extremely variable).
early radiographic finding with periodontal disease. B. Progressive disease
e. Large cysts predispose to mandibular fracture.
results in thinning and loss of lamina dura and tooth root resorption.
Differential diagnosis for oral tumors:
Radiographic findings with periodontal disease:
1. Osteomyelitis (especially
in cats where periosteal
1. Lesions usually are visible only in later stages of disease.
responses can be prolific and ill-defined).
2. Furcation bone becomes less-defined and less opaque.
3. Alveolar crest progressively regresses and develops irreg-
Periodontal disease
ular margins.
Clinical correlations:
4. Periodontal space widens (Figure 4.230).
1. Inflammation surrounding teeth (e.g., gingivitis, vasculi-
 5. Lamina dura becomes faint or is lost, usually beginning
tis, periodontitis).
at alveolar crest.
2. Most common dental disease in dogs and cats, especially
6. Teeth often are absent.
in older animals.
7. Pathologic fracture of tooth root or adjacent bone may
3. Usually caused by a bacterial infection (e.g., streptococ-
occur.
cus, actinomycosis).
4. Predisposing factors include:
Tooth root abscess
a. Type of diet.
Clinical correlations:
b. Nutritional deficiencies.
1. Other names:
    
c. Amount of dental calculus.
infection.
d. Crowding of teeth.
2. Purulent material in bone adjacent to apex of a tooth
e. Chronic systemic disease (e.g., nephritis).
root.
5. Commonly leads to tooth loss, often without clinical evi-
3. Usually caused by a bacterial infection in pulp cavity.
dence of pain.
4. Possible etiologies include:
6. Secondary complications include osteomyelitis, patho-
a. Periodontal disease.
logic fractures, and oronasal fistula.
b. Fracture of tooth or alveolar bone.
259
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
c. Dental or oral tumor.
Radiographicfindings with sialolithiasis:
d. Hematogenous infection.
1. Small, rounded or linear mineral opacity structure in area
e. Developmental anomaly (e.g., dens invaginatus)
of salivary gland or its duct.
5. Infections involving maxillary fourth premolar frequently
2. May be solitary or multiple.
extend into maxillary sinus and cause facial swelling and an
3. Soft tissue swelling or mass effect may be present.
externally draining fistulous tract on affected side.
Sialocele
Radiographic findings with tooth root abscess:
Clinical correlations:
1. Initially, periodontal space widens at apex of tooth root.
1. Other names: salivary cyst, salivary mucocele, ranula
2. With progression, osteolysis creates a halo of decreased
 2. Fluid-filled sac caused by an abnormal accumulation of 
opacity around root tip (Figure 4.231A).
saliva.
3. Osteosclerosis may surround osteolytic area.
3. Sac is surrounded by inflammatory granulation tissue
    n  n n 
(not a true cyst).
 4. May result from damage caused by chewing, swallowing.
and infection can extend into the tooth, causing enlarge-
ment of pulp cavity and eventual death of the tooth (Figure
migrating foreign material, blunt force, or an obstructed
4.231B).
salivary duct (e.g., sialolith).
 5. Usually involves a sublingual salivary gland.
5. Osteomyelitis in adjacent bone may progress to form a
large abscess, weakening the bone and predisposing to path-
6. Most often reported in young male dogs. especially
ological fra cture.
German Shepherd, Greyhound, and Poodle.
7. Rare in cats.
Differential diagnosis for tooth root abscess:
 8. Affected animals present with a slow growing. nonpain-
1. Apical cyst, which develops from epithelial cells trapped
ful, fluctuant swelling in ventral submandibular region.
in periodontal ligament (appears as an area of decreased
9. Occasionally swelling is sublingual (ranula) or develops
opacity surrounded by a sclerotic margin).
in pharyngeal region.
10. Large sialoceles can interfere with eating. swallowing.
Salivary glands and nasolacrimal duct
or breathing.
Sialolithiasis
Radiographic findings with sialocele:
Clinical correlations:
1. Survey radiographs may be normal.
1. Formation of calculi in salivary glands.
2. Nonspecific soft tissue swelling or a mass effect may be
2. Rare in dogs and cats, and usually associated with chronic
present, usually submandibular.
inflammation.
3. Mass may displace air from pharynx or displace the
3. Most often reported in parotid salivary duct and in sub-
pharynx.
lingual gland.
4. May cause obstruction of duct, resulting in swelling and
4. Mineral opacity may be present (due to sialolith or dys-
trophic mineralization in chronic cases).
sialocoele.
 5. May see periosteal response or osteolysis on adjacent
bone (caused by an infected sialocele).
6. Contrast radiography (sialography) may demonstrate
rupture of salivary gland or duct.
Salivary duct fistula
Clinical correlation:
1. Abnormal opening or communication involving a sali-
vary gland.
2. Rare in dogs and cats, most commonly involves parotid
salivary duct.
3. May result from trauma (e.g., bite wounds), previous
surgery, tumor, or severe infection.
4. Clinical signs include swelling and a draining tract.
Radiographic findings with salivary duct fistula:
Figure 4.231 Tooth root abscess. A. Periodontal space is widened at
1. Nonspecific soft tissue swelling at lesion site.
apex of tooth root with decreased opacity and resorption of the tooth
2. Contrast radiography:
root. B. Enlargement of pulp cavity in right canine tooth a root abscess in
a. Sialography aids in determining patency of salivary
this sarme tooth. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
duct.
260
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
b. Fistulography helps document communication with
2. Swelling may impair respiration or swallowing.
 salivary gland.
3. Oral examination often provides most direct assessment
of pharynx and tonsils.
Salivary gland neoplasia
Clinical correlations:
Radiographic findings with pharyngeal swelling:
1. May be primary (carcinoma and adenocarcinoma are
1. In many instances, no radiographic abnormality is visible.
most common) or secondary, invading salivary glands from
2. Pharyngeal space may appear smaller, narrower. or
adjacent tissues (e.g., fibrosarcoma, lymphoma).
absent due to displacement of pharyngeal air.
2. Rare in dogs and cats, most often reported in older
3. Mass effect may be visible near pharynx.
animals (greater than l0 years of age).
4. Mineral and metal opacity foreign material usually is
3. Poodles and spaniel breeds may be predisposed.
readily identified.
4. Parotid and mandibular glands are most often affected.
 5. Subcutaneous emphysema or gas may be present due to
5. Primary tumors can metastasize to regional lymph nodes
penetrating wound or infection with gas-producing bacteria
or lungs.
(Figure 4.232).
6. Clinical
signs include firm, nonpainful,
localized
6. Soft palate may be elongated, a condition frequently
swelling.
associated with other airway abnormalities (e.g. stenotic
7. Large masses may cause dyspnea or dysphagia
nares, hypoplastic trachea).
Radiographic findings with salivary gland neoplasia:
PHARYNGEAL AND RETROPHARYNGEAL MASSES
1. Nonspecific soft tissue swelling at tumor site.
Clinical correlations:
2. Osteolysis involving adjacent bones is sometimes present.
1. Includes tumors, abscesses, hematomas, lymphadenopa-
 3. Contrast radiography (sialography) aids in demonstrating
thy, cysts, and polyps.
displacement or infiltration of salivary gland.
2. May involve tonsils, retropharyngeal lymph nodes, man-
dibular or parotid salivary glands, epiglottis, or soft palate.
Nasolacrimal duct abnormalities
3. Masses can arise within or adjacent to nasopharynx or
Clinical correlations:
oropharynx.
1. Congenital abnormalities include imperforate punctum
4. Neoplasms:
(absence of punctum), atresia or stenosis of the duct, and
a. Soft palate: melanoma, fibrosarcoma.
facial malformations (i.e., animals with shortened muzzles)
b. Pharyngeal wall: sarcoma, extension of tonsilar
a. Reported in American Cocker Spaniel, English Bulldog.
carcinoma.
and Bedlington Terrier.
c. Tonsil: squamous cell carcinoma, lymphosarcoma.
2. Acquired obstruction of nasolacrimal duct may result
5. Abscesses:
from inflammation, tumor, trauma, or cyst formation.
a. May involve pharynx, salivary glands, or adjacent 
3. Clinical signs include epiphora.
 lymph nodes.
b. Possible etiologies include foreign body and local or
Radiographic findings with nasolacrimal duct disease:
systemic infection.
1. Survey radiographs often are normal.
2. Increased soft tissue opacity may be present in maxilla,
nasal cavity, or orbit.
3. Osteolysis sometimes occurs.
4. Contrast radiography (dacryocystorhinography) aids in
determining patency of nasolacrimal duct and documenting
sites of obstruction, displacement, dilation, or rupture.
Pharynx and larynx
Pharynx
PHARYNGEAL SWELLING
Clinical correlations:
 1. May result from inflammation, edema, or hemorrhage.
a. Inflammation due to oral or systemic illness, often
involves tonsils and regional tissues.
b. Edema due to trauma (ingested foreign material),
allergic reaction (insect bite), or severe dyspnea.
Figure 4.232 Retropharyngeal gas (lateral radiograph). Linear region5 of
c. Hemorrhage due to trauma or coagulopathy.
gas opacity are visible in the soft tissues ventral to the cenvical vertebrae.
261
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
6. Retropharyngeal lymphadenopathy:
DYSPHAGIA AND CRICOPHARYNGEAL ACHALASIA
a. Inflammation/infection.
Clinical correlations:
b. Malignant oral tumors.
1. Functional disorders t
that interfere with normal
c. Thyroid carcinoma.
swallowing.
d. Lymphosa rcoma.
 2. Often caused by neuromuscular disease (achalasia means
e. Nasal tumors.
"failure to relax"), e.g., polymyositis, hypothyroidism, myas-
7. Pharyngeal polyps:
thenia gravis, brain stem pathology.
a. Can originate in nasopharynx.
3. May also result from stricture, foreign material, trauma.
b. May extend into pharynx from middle ear (more
neoplasia, or inflammation.
common in cats).
4. Clinical signs include difficulty swallowing. hypersaliva-
8. Mucous gland retention cysts:
tion, gagging. excessive mandibular and head motion during
a. Occur in oropharynx, near base of epiglottis.
eating. and dropping food from mouth.
9. Clinical signs include dysphagia, respiratory distress, and
5. Dysphagia is more common in middle-aged and older
hypersalivation (signs vary depending on etiology. location,
animals.
and size of the massy.
6. Cricopharyngeal achalasia is more common in young
10. Endoscopy aids in diagnosis.
dogs.
Radiographic findings with cricopharyngeal achalasia:
Radiographic findings with pharyngeal and
 1. Usually no abnormality is seen on survey radiographs.
retropharyngeal masses:
1. Pharyngeal masses:
2. May see foreign material or mass in pharynx or retropha-
ryngeal region.
a. Commonly reduce size of pharynx and may caused
3. Bronchopneumonia may be present (secondary to
displacement.
 2. Retropharyngeal masses (e.g.. lymphadenopathy, abscess.
aspiration).
 4. Contrast radiography (barium swallow with fluoroscopy)
tumor):
is used to document absence or incoordination of one or
a. Increase width of retropharyngeal space (distance
more oropharyngeal phases of swallowing.
from dorsal edge of cricoid cartilage to ventral border of
 a. During attempts to swallow, barium may be aspirated
C2 is greater than length of C3).
into larynx or refluxed into nasopharynx.
b. Ventrally displace dorsal pharyngeal wall and larynx
b. Cricopharyngeal achalasia is characterized by inade-
(Figure 4.233).
quate relaxation of cricopharyngeal muscle during swal-
c. Decrease width of pharynx.
 lowing (may be difficult to differentiate frorm pharyngeal
d. Pharyngeal wall may be laterally displaced by asym-
dysfunction).
metrical masses.
3. Contrast radiography (barium swallow with fluoroscopy)
Larynx
aids in evaluating oropharynx and nasopharynx and docu-
 1. Laryngeal obstruction causes respiratory distress and may be 
physical (e.g., mass) or functional (e.g., aryngeal paralysis).
B
Figure 4.233 A. Pharyngeal mmass. B. Retropharyngeal swelling.
262
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
2. Laryngeal masses may be intraluminal, mural, or
3. May see a soft tissue or mineralized mass adjacent to
extraluminal.
larynx.
 3. Trauma may result in physical obstruction due to second-
4. Laryngeal cartilage may be displaced or be abnormal in
ary scarring and stenosis of larynx (e.g., bite wounds, diffi-
shape.
cult intubation).
 5. Large masses can partially occlude larynx or block laryn-
4. Clinical signs include hoarseness, altered vocalization,
geal opening.
noisy respiration (which worsens during exercise), and cough
6. Aspiration pneumonia may be present.
(sometimes paroxysmal). Inspiratory stridor is common in
 7. Severe respiratory distress can cause neurogenic pulmo-
animals with fixed upper airway obstruction (e.g.. laryngeal
nary edema.
tumors).
8. Pulmonary metastatic lesions may be present.
 5. Definitive diagnosis often involves radiographic examina-
tion, visual inspection (laryngoscopy). and laryngeal biopsy
LARYNGEAL PARALYSIS
Clinical correlations:
LARYNGEAL HYPOPLASIA
1. Loss of innervation to intrinsic muscles of larynx results
Clinical correlations:
in failure of vocal folds and/or arytenoid cartilage to abduct
1. Congenital narrowing of laryngeal lumen due to soft.
during inspiration.
underdeveloped cartilage.
2. May be congenital or acquired (possible etiologies are in
2. Laryngeal abductor muscles may not function properly.
Differential Diagnoses section, ahead).
3. Most often reported in brachycephalic breeds (e.g..
3. Most often reported in large-breed dogs (e.g.. Labrador
Bulldog, Boston Terrier).
Retriever, Golden Retriever, Newfoundland, Saint Bernard).
4. Clinical signs are those of respiratory distress.
4. May be heritable in Bouvier des Flandres, Siberian Husky.
5. Degree of hypoplasia is best assessed by laryngoscopy.
English Bulldog, and Dalmatian.
5. Rare in cats.
Radiographic findings with laryngeal hypoplasia:
6. Clinical signs usually develop in older animals but can
1. Dorsoventral dimension of larynx is narrowed (lateral
appear as young as 2 to 6 months of age. Signs include
radiograph)
coughing and gagging after eating or drinking. voice change.
2. Pharynx is smaller than normal.
harsh barking. noisy breathing. excessive panting. exercise
3. Soft palate often is thickened and elongated.
intolerance, and dyspnea.
LARYNGEAL MASSES
Clinical correlations:
Radiographic findings with laryngeal paralysis:
1. Radiographs of larynx and cervical trachea often are
1. Laryngeal tumors are rare in dogs and cats (squamous
cell carcinoma is most common).
unremarkable.
2. Pharynx may be dilated.
2. Polyps are benign masses, often indistinguishable from
neoplasia without cytology.
3. Lateral ventricles normally are elliptical in shape but may
3. Laryngeal cysts are uncommon congenital developments.
become more rounded or may not be visualized.
which may involve vocal cords, epiglottis, arytenoid carti-
4. Severe inspiratory difficulty may result in:
 a. Narrowing of cervical portion of trachea and widening
lage, and/or thyroid cartilage.
of intrathoracic portion.
a. Reported in 5-month-old Golden Retriever, 1-year-old
b. Hyperinflation of lungs.
Basset Hound, and 4-year-old cat.
b. Fine needle aspirate of cyst yielded
c. Inward bulging of intercostal muscles.
_acellular
d. Neurogenic pulmonary edema.
transudate.
c. Surgical excision has been curative.
5. Aspiration pneumonia may be present.
6. In chronic cases, lungs may appear small and dense due
 4. Lymphadenopa thy.
5. Abscess
or granuloma (usually caused by foreign
to compromised inspiration and failure to inflate.
material).
6. Granulation tissue.
Hyoid bones
7. Clinical
signs
include
dyspnea
and
difficulty
Clinical correlations:
swallowing.
1. Fractures and luxations are most common pathology.
usually caused by trauma (e.g., leash injury, bite wound).
Radiographic findings with laryngeal masses:
2. Tumors (e.g., osteosarcoma) are rare.
 1. Variable-sized, soft tissue opacity mass in larynx.
3. Pathology may involve larynx.
2. Tumor growth usually is advanced at time of
4. Clinical signs are related to problems with breathing and
radiography.
swallowing.
263
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Radiographic findings with hyoid bone pathology:
c. Osteochondrosis.
1. Soft tissue swelling.
d. Osteoarthritis.
2. One or more hyoid bones may be fractured, displaced, or
e. Avascular necrosis.
malaligned.
9. Physeal:
3. Osseous remodeling may be present (e.g., irregular peri-
a. Trauma.
osteal response, osteolysis).
b. Developmental anomaly (e.g., chondrodystrophism).
c. Rickets.
d. Infection.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
10. Metaphyseal:
General bone
a. Neoplasia.
b. Bone cyst.
Distribution of bone lesions
c. Infection/inflammation.
1. Local:
d. Retained cartilaginous core.
a. Trauma.
e. Hypertrophic osteodystrophy.
b. Neoplasia.
11. Diaphyseal:
c. Infection/inflammation.
a. Trauma.
d. Disuse atrophy.
b. Neoplasia.
e. Developmental anomaly.
c. Bone cyst.
2. Diffuse:
d. Osteopenia.
a. Metabolic/endocrine disease.
e. Infection/inflammation.
b. Nutritional deficiency.
f. Hypertrophic osteopa thy.
c. Chronic drug therapy.
12. Periosteal, cortical, medullary, or articular.
d. Hereditary disease.
3. Multifocal:
Neoplasia of bone
a. Polyarthritis.
1. Primary bone tumors:
b. Neoplasia.
a. Osteosarcoma (most common).
c. Infection/inflammation.
b. Fibrosarcoma (uncommon, occurs in mandible, ribs,
4. Monostotic (all lesions in same bone):
vertebrae).
a. Trauma.
c. Chondrosarcoma (common in flat bones such as skull
b. Neoplasia.
and ribs, less malignant than osteosarcoma).
c. Infection/inflammation.
d. Hemangiosarcoma (rare, most often reported in
d. Disuse atrophy.
younger dogs).
e. Developmental anomaly.
e. Malignant histiocytoma.
5. Polyostotic (multiple bones affected):
f. Lymphosarcoma (more common in cats).
a. Systemic disease (e.g., metabolic disorder, nutritional
g. Myeloma.
deficiency).
h. Liposarcoma.
b. Developmental anomaly (e.g., chondrodystrophism).
2. Secondary bone tumors:
c. Immature
animal
1 (e.g.. panosteitis,
hypertrophic
a. Any malignant neoplasm can spread to bone.
osteodystrophy).
3. Digital neoplasia:
d. Neoplasia
(e.g-,
multiple
myeloma,
sarcoma,
a. Squamous cell carcinoma (most common in dogs).
carcinoma}.
b. Melanoma (second most common in dogs).
e. Inflammation/infection (e.g. polyarthritis.
fungal
c. Fibrosarcoma (most common in cats).
osteomyelitis) .
d. Metastasis from bronchial adenocarcinoma (cats).
6. Unilateral or bilateral:
e. Osteosarcoma.
a. Developmental disease (bilateral, e.g., elbow dyspla-
sia, hip dysplasiay.
Opacity abnormalities of bone
7. Symmetrical:
1. General decrease in bone opacity (osteopenia):
a. Systemic disease (e.g., metabolic disorder, nutritional
a. Metabolic/endocrine disease:
deficiency)
1) Primary hyperparathyroidism.
b. Infection (hematogenous spread).
 2) Renal secondary hyperparathyroidism.
c. Developmental anomaly.
3) Hyperthyroidism (especially ca ts).
8. Epiphyseal:
4) Hypercorticosterism (iatrogenic or adrenal) .
a. Developmental anomaly (e.g., chondrodystrophism)
5) Diabetes mellitus.
b.Trauma.
6) Liver disease (hepatic osteodystrophy).
264
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
7) Pregnancy/lacta tion.
c) Malignant soft tissue tumor (e.g., synovial cell
8) Acromegaly (cats).
sarcoma).
b. Nutritional deficiency:
d) Enchondromatosis.
1) Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism.
2) Osteomyelitis:
2) Hypervitaminosis A (usually with nutritional hyper-
a) Bacterial infection.
parathyroidism and pain-induced disuse atrophy).
b) Mycotic infection.
3) Vitamin D insufficiency (e.g., rickets, osteomalacia).
c) Protozoal infection.
4) Protein deficiency (e.g., starvation, malabsorption).
3) Avascular necrosis of femoral head and neck.
5) Trace element deficiencies (e.g., copper, manga-
4) Feline femoral neck metaphyseal osteopathy.
nese, zinc).
5) Pressure atrophy (due to an adjacent soft tissue
c. Neoplasia:
mass).
1) Multiple myeloma.
c. Developmental disease:
 2) Pseudohyperpa rathyroidism.
1) Hypertrophic
osteodystrophy
(metaphyseal
d. Chronic disease:
osteopathy).
1) Chronic renal failure.
2) Retained cartilaginous core.
2) Malabsorption syndromes.
3) Fibrous dysplasia (rare developmental condition,
e. Drugs (chronic therapy):
either monostotic or polyostotic, that may have con-
1) Anticonvulsants (primidone, phenytoin, pheno-
current fractures).
barbital}.
d. Cystlike lesions:
2) Glucocorticosteroids.
1) Bone
cyst
(uncommon, 1
may
single
or
f. Hereditary diseases:
multiple).
1) Mucopolysaccharoidosis.
2) Aneurysmal bone cyst (results from a vascular
 2) Osteogenesis imperfecta.
anomaly in bone).
3) Fibrous osteodystrophy (characterized by excessive
3) Intraosseous epidermoid cyst (rare, reported in
osteoclastic resorption).
distal phalanges and vertebrae).
4) Fibrous dysplasia.
4) Bone abscess (rare).
g. Toxins (e.g, lead poisoning).
e. Bone implants (e.g., loosening of implant, stress pro-
h. Conditions that may mimic osteopenia:
tection at the end(s) of a bone plate).
1) Overexposed radiograph.
f. Mucopolysaccharoidosis (especially cats).
2) Decreased overlying soft tissues (e.g., atrophy.
g. Retained cartilaginous core.
emaciation).
h. Conditions that may mimic local loss of bone (espe-
2. Regional decrease in bone opacity (osteoporosis):
cially fracture):
a. Disuse atrophy in a limb:
1) Growth plate (immature animal).
fracture,
2) Nutrient foramen.
osteoarthritis).
3) Superimposition artifact:
2) Immobilization (e.g. cast, splint, rigid bone plate).
a) Gas (e.g., subcutaneous emphysema, GI content)
3) Long-term paraplegia, tetraplegia, or paralysis.
b) Fascial plane.
3. Local decrease in bone opacity:
c) Skin fold.
a. Fracture:
d) Grid line.
1) Trauma.
e) Mark or scratch on viewbox or viewing screen.
2) Pathologic:
f) New bone production (creates relative radiolu-
a) Neoplasia.
cency in adjacent bone).
b) Bone cyst.
4) Mach line (an optical illusion created by overlying
c) Osteoporosis/osteomalacia.
structures).
d) Osteopetrosis (bone is more opaque).
4. Increase in bone opacity (osteosclerosis):
e) Hyperparathyroidism ( primary or secondary) .
a. Normal subchondral bone.
f) Incomplete ossification of humeral condyle
b. Periosteal response:
(Spaniels).
1) Trauma:
g) Bone biopsy.
a) Healing fracture.
b. Osteolysis
b) Blunt force injury.
1) Neoplasia:
c) Low-grade repetitive injury.
a) Primary bone tumor (e.g., multiple myeloma.
d) Surgery (i.e., elevation of periosteum).
lymphoma, osteosarcoma).
2) Infection (e.g..l
bacterial, mycotic, protozoal,
b) Secondary (metastatic) bone tumor.
mycoplasma).
265
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
3) Neoplasia (primary or metastatic).
b. Fracture (traumatic, pathologic).
4) Subperiosteal
hematoma
(e.g..
trauma,
c. Premature closure of physis (bone may become abnor-
coa gulopa thy).
mally straight or develop abnormal bowing).
d. Tension due to asynchronous growth of paired bones
a) Primary or metastatic pulmonary neoplasia
(e.g., radius/ulna, tibia /fibula).
(most common).
e. Loss of blood supply and collapse.
b) Other pulmonary mass (e.g., abscess).
f.
Chondrodysplasia.
c) Severe bronchopneumonia.
g. Rickets.
d) Cardiomegaly (e.g.. congestive heart failure.
h. Congenital hypothyroidism.
heartworm disease).
i. Contracted soft tissues producing tension on the bone
e) Megaesophagus.
(e.g., quadriceps contraction).
f) Mycotic infection.
j. Hemimelia (absence of one of a normally paired set of
 g) Intrathoracic foreign body.
bones).
h) Spirocercosis.
 2. Abnormal angulation or alignment:
i) Rib chondrosarcoma.
a. Trauma (e.g., folding fracture, soft tissue damage).
j) Hepatic or renal mass.
b. Pathologic fracture.
k) Urinary bladder mass.
c. Healed malunion fracture.
l) Large or numerous cystic calculi.
3. Abnormal expansion:
6) Craniomandibular osteodystrophy.
a. Neoplasia (e.g., osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma).
7) Hypertrophic osteopathy.
b. Osteochondroma.
8) Hypervitaminosis A (cats).
c. Enchondroma.
9) Mucopolysaccharoidosis (cats).
d. Bone cyst.
c. Panosteitis.
e. Osteomyelitis.
d. Myelosclerosis.
f. Enthesopathy.
e. Bone spur (osteophyte, enthesophyte, accessory ossi-
g. Disseminated idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH).
fication center).
h. Hypertrophic osteodystrophy.
f. Bone infarcts.
g. Osteopetrosis.
Soft tissue abnormalities
h. Lead poisoning.
1. Local swelling/soft tissue mass:
i. Growth arrest lines.
a. Trauma (e.g., hematoma).
j. Fracture with overlapping. folding. or compressed
 b. Joint effusion/synovial thickening:
fragments.
1) Trauma.
k. Hypertrophic nonunion fracture.
2) Ligamentous
injury
(e.g..
cranial
cruciate
1. Spondylosis.
ligament).
m.Disseminated skeletal hyperostosis (DISH).
3) Osteoarthrosis.
n. Idiopa thic osteodystrophy.
4) Infection.
0. Hypervitaminosis A (especially cats).
5) Idiopathic.
p. Vitamin D excess.
6) Immune-mediated disease.
q. Immature animal (metaphyseal condensation reported
7) Iatrogenic (drug or vaccine reaction).
in Newfoundland).
8) Osteochondrosis.
r. Mucopolysaccharoidosis (cats).
9) Hemarthrosis.
s. Feline leukemia virus.
a) Trauma.
t. Eburnation.
b) Coagulopathy:
u. Conditions that may mimic osteosclerosis:
1) Warfarin poisoning.
1) Underexposed radiographs.
2) Hemophilia.
2) Increased overlying soft tissues.
3) Von Willebrand's disease.
3) Debris on hair or skin.
4) Deficiency in a blood clotting factor.
4) Normal subchondral bone.
5) Liver disease.
10) Neoplasia.
Shape abnormalities of bone
1l) Villonodular synovitis.
1. Abnormal length:
12) Synovial cyst.
a. Normal variant in chondrodystrophic breeds (e.g..
13) Joint capsule fbrosis.
Bassett Hound, Bulldog, Dachshund); commonly have
c. Infection (e.g., abscess, lymphadenopathy).
prominent apophyses.
d. Neoplasia (e.g., tumor, lymphadenopathy).
266
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
e. Granuloma.
3) Vacuum phenomenon:
f. Cyst.
a) Sudden traction on joint releases nitrogen gas
g. Lipoma (fat opaque).
that was dissolved in joint fluid.
2. Diffuse soft tissue swelling:
b) Reported in shoulder, intervertebral disc space,
a. Inflammation.
and between sternebrae.
b. Infiltrative disease.
c) Most often seen with osteoarthritis or interver-
c. Edema.
tebral disc disease.
d. Hemorrhage.
d. Conditions that may mimic decreased soft tissue
3. Deficit in soft tissues:
opacity:
a. Disuse atrophy:
 1) Overexposed radiograph.
1) Pain (e.g., osteoarthritis, fracture).
2) Soft tissue atrophy.
2) Immobilization (e.g., splint, cast).
3) Paresis/paralysis.
Joints
b. Trauma (e.g., bite wound, vehicular trauma).
4. Increased soft tissue opacity:
 Alignment abnormalities (instability or
a. Mineralization.
incongruity)
1) Chronic
inflammation
and
dystrophic
1. Tearing or stretching of supporting ligaments.
calcifi cation.
2. Abnormal bone development (e.g., hip dysplasia, elbow
2) Osteochondroma.
dysplasia).
3) Synovial osteochondroma.
3. Conditions that may mimic abnormal joint alignment:
4) Meniscal calcification.
a. Poor positioning (e.g., rotation).
5) Osteochondrosis.
6) Joint mouse (calcifed fragment of joint surface).
1 pyrophosphate deposition
Joint space abnormalities
7) Pseudogout (calcium
1. Narrowed joint space
disease).
a. Loss of articular cartilage:
8) Idiopa thic.
fistulogram,
1) Degenerative joint disease.
b. Positive
contrast
medium
(e.g..
arthrogram).
2) Erosive joint disease (e.g.. rheumatoid arthritis.
c. Conditions that may mimic increased soft tissue
septic arthritis).
b. Muscle contraction (e.g., infraspinatus at the shoulder.
opacity:
 1) Underexposed radiograph.
quadriceps at the stifle).
2) Debris on skin or hair coat.
C. Periarticular fibrosis.
d. Conditions that may mimic narrowed joint space:
3) Foreign object (e.g.. bullet fragments),
1) Poor positioning (x-ray beam not aligned with joint
4) Separate center of ossification.
5) Fracture fragment.
spa ce) .
2. Widened joint space
6) Superimposed structure:
 a. Joint effusion/synovial thickening.
a) Cutaneous nodule.
b) Nipple.
b. Subluxation/ligamentous instability.
c) Surgical implant (e.g., Penrose drain).
C. Osteoarthritis.
 5. Decreased soft tissue opacity:
d. Septic arthritis.
e. Neoplasia.
a. Emphysema:
f. Hemarthrosis.
1) Trauma
(e.g
 penetrating/open wound, joint
luxation).
1) Rheumatoid arthritis.
2) Epiphyseal dysplasia (e.g., chondrodysplasia).
2) Recent surgery.
 3) Infection (e.g.. gas-producing organism).
g. Conditions that may mimic abnormal widening of joint 
4) Fistulous tract.
space:
b. Fat:
1) Immature animal.
2) Joint placed in traction.
1) Fascial plane.
2) Intra-articular fat (e.g. infrapatellar fat pad in
stifle).
Opacity abnormalities of bone-joint disease
3) Fatty mass (e.g., lipoma, liposarcoma).
1. Osteopenia associated with joint disease:
c. Intra-articular gas:
a. Disuse atrophy.
1) Postarthrocentesis or postarth roscopy.
b. Epiphyseal dysplasia.
2) Negative contrast arthrogram.
c. Osteochondrosis.
267
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
d. Avascular necrosis.
e.
 Septic arthritis.
Spine
Osteomyelitis
(bacterial.
fungal,
mycoplasma,
Alignment abnormalities
protozoal).
1. Congenital malformations:
g.
 Neoplasia (e.g. digital carcinoma. synovial cell 
a. Hemivertebrae.
sarcoma).
b. Transitional vertebrae.
h.
 Rheumatoid arthritis.
c. Block vertebrae.
i.
Chronic hemarthrosis.
d. Functional scoliosis caused by a spinal cord anomaly:
j.
Villonodular synovitis.
1) Aplasia, hypoplasia, or myelodysplasia.
k.
 Subchondral bone cyst.
2) Hydromyelia (accumulation of fluid within an
 Leishmaniasis.
enlarged central canal).
m. Mycoplasma polyarthritis.
3) Syringomyelia (accumulation of fluid within spinal
n.
 Feline metastatic digital carcinoma.
cord parenchyma).
0.
Feline tuberculosis (Mycobacterium sp.).
4) Cerebellar hypoplasia and hydrocephalus (Dandy-
p.
 Conditions that may mimic bone loss near a joint:
Walker Syndrome).
1) Immature
2animal(incomplete endochondral
ossifcation).
5) Spinal
 dysra phism
(may
be
genetic
in
Weimeraner).
2) Overexposed radiogra phs.
2. Acquired malalignment of vertebrae:
3) Decreased overlying soft tissue (e.g., atrophy).
a.
Effects from adjacent tissues:
4) Summation of new bone (adjacent normal bone
1) Muscle contraction or spasm.
appears relatively radiolucent).
2) Abdominal pain (cause arching of back or
5) Superimposition of subcutaneous emphysema.
kyphosis).
2. Osteosclerosis associated with joint disease:
3) Back pain (e.g.. intervertebral disc disease,
a. Primary degenerative joint disease (aging change).
discospondylitis).
 b. Secondary osteoarthritis:
4) Weakening of fibrous tissues that support the ver-
1) Hip dysplasia, elbow dysplasia.
tebrae (usually causes lordosis):
2) Osteochondrosis.
a) Old age.
3) Trauma.
b) Overweight.
4) Ligamentous
damage
(e.g..
cranial
cruciate
c) Hypercorticosterism (Cushing's syndrome).
ligament).
b.
 Trauma:
5) Postsurgery
1) Vertebral subluxa tion, luxation, or fracture.
6) Chondrodysplasia.
2) Healed malunion vertebral fracture.
7) Angular limb deformities.
C.
 8) Repeated episodes of hemarthrosis.
 Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism.
c. Bone spur (e.g., osteophyte, enthesophyte).
e.
 Metabolic disease:
d. Neoplasia (e.g., osteoma, parosteal osteosarcoma).
1) Hyperparathyroidism (e.g., juvenile osteoporosis).
e. Disseminated idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH).
2) Hypercorticosterism (Cushing's syndrome).
f. Synovial osteochondroma.
f.
 Atlantoaxial instability.
g. Stress rermodeling.
g.
 Lumbosacral instabilitry.
h. Systemic lupus erythematosus.
i. Hypervitaminosis A (cats).
h.
Calcium phosphate deposition (Great Dane).
i.
Hypervitaminosis A (cats).
j. Mucopolysaccharidosis (cats).
j.
 Mucopolysaccharidosis.
3. Mixed bone production and bone loss with joint
k.
 Neoplasia.
disease:
1.
Osteomyelitis.
a. Septic arthritis.
m. Scoliosis: lateral curvature (memory tip: Snakelike).
b. Avascular necrosis.
n.
 Lordosis: ventral curvature (memory tip: carrying a
c. Soft tissue neoplasia.
Loady.
d. Rheumatoid arthritis.
0.
 Kyphosis: dorsal curvature (memory tip: mountain
e. Chronic hemarthrosis.
peak K2).
f. Leishmaniasis.
 g. Villonodular synovitis.
Discospondylitis
h. Feline noninfectious erosive polyarthritis.
1. Staphylococcus (most common).
i. Feline tuberculosis.
2. Brucella canis (zoonotic potential).
j. Reiter's disease.
3. Streptococcus.
268
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
4. Escherichia coli.
Lumbosacral disease
5. Mycotic infection (e.g., aspergillosis).
1. Congenital stenosis.
6. Mycobacterium.
2. Vertebral malformation (e.g., spina bifida).
7. Also pasteurella, proteus, nocardia,
actinomycosis,
3. Thickening of vertebral arch and pedicles.
corynebacterium.
4. Subluxation, luxation, or fracture of a vertebra.
5. Intervertebral disc degeneration or protrusion.
 Intervertebral disc space
6. Osteochondrosis.
1. Normal variations in disc space width:
 7. Hypertrophy/hyperplasia of interarcuate ligament.
a. Narrowing at anticlinal space (Tlo-ll).
8. Diskospondylitis.
b. C2-3 often appears narrowed in relation to adjacent
9. Primary neoplasia (e.g., osteosarcoma, hemangiosar-
spa ces.
 coma. fbrosarcoma, meningioma. peripheral nerve sheath
c. Lumbar intervertebral spaces are wider than thoracic
tumor).
intervertebral spaces.
10. Metastatic neoplasia (e.g., prostatic carcinoma).
d. Lumbosacral space often is wider than the cranial
11. Inflammation in spinal canal (e.g., neuritis, empyema).
spa ces.
2. Narrowed disc space:
Myelogram lesions
a. Absence of intervertebral disc:
1. Extradural lesion:
1) Prior surgery (e.g., laminectomy. fenestration).
a. Intervertebral disc protrusion or extrusion (most
2) Protruded or extruded disc.
common).
b. Hemivertebra.
b.
 Hypertrophied ligaments:
c. Chronic diskospondylitis.
1) Cervical spondylomyelopathy.
d. Cervical spondylomyelopathy (wobbler syndrome).
2) Lumbosacral instability.
e. Advanced spondylosis.
C.
 Neoplasia.
f. Vertebral neoplasm.
d.
 Fracture.
 g. Fracture or luxation involving intervertebral space.
e.
Luxation.
h. Incomplete block vertebra.
f.
Healing fracture.
i. Schmorl's node.
g-
 Degenera tive changes.
j. Conditions that may mimic narrowing of interverte-
h.
 Hemorrhage or hematoma (e.g., secondary to trauma,
bral space:
coa gulopa thy).
1) Spine not parallel to imaging plate.
i.
Subarachnoid cyst.
j.
 Discospondylitis.
3. Widened disc space:
k.
 Infection (e.g., bacterial, fungal, parasitic).
a. Hemivertebra.
1.
 Epidural scarring (e.g., following laminectomy).
b. Acute diskospondylitis.
m. Hypervitaminosis A and new bone production 
c. Neoplasia.
(cats).
d. Fracture or luxation involving intervertebral space.
n. Calcinosis circumscripta (young German Shepherd
e. Schmorl's node.
(ssop
f. Conditions that may mimic narrowing of interverte-
0. Migrating foreign object.
bral space:
2. Intradural-extramedullary lesion:
1) Positioning artifact (patient in traction).
a. Primary tumor, primary or metastatic (see spinal neo-
4. Increased opacity of disc space:
plasia, earlier).
 a. Mineralized intervertebral disc (partial or complete).
b. Hemorrhage
or
hematoma
(e.g..
trauma,
b. Presence of contrast medium (e.g., "discogram").
coa gulopa thy).
c. Conditions that may mimic increased opacity of inter-
C.
 Subarachnoid cyst.
vertebral space:
d. Conditions that may mimic intradural-extramedullary
l) Superimposed structure (e.g.. spondylosis.
rib,
lesion:
transverse process, wet or dirty hair coat).
1) Air bubbles (iatrogenic).
2) Poor positioning (e.g., rotation, divergence of x-ray
3. Intramedullary lesion:
beam).
 a. Spinal cord edema or hemorrhage:
5. Decreased opacity of disc space:
1) Trauma.
a. Acute diskospondylitis.
2) Intervertebral disc herniation.
b. Vacuum phenomenon (uncommon):
3) Tumor.
1) Gas bubble develops in disc space due to traction
4) Coagulopathy.
on vertebral column.
5) Parasite migration.
269
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
b. Neoplasia (e.g., astrocytoma, glioma, lymphoma).
g. Spondylitis.
1) Most often reported at cervicothoracic and thora-
h. Vertebral endplate sclerosis:
columbar junctions.
1) Collapsed intervertebral disc space.
C. Granulomatous meningoencephalitis.
2) Hemivertebrae.
d. Ischemic myelopathy (may not be visible on a
3) Osteochondrosis.
myelogram).
4) Osteoporotic vertebral body.
e. Fibrocartilaginous embolization/infarct (rarely causes
 2. Generalized increase in opacity:
spinal cord swelling)
a. Osteopetrosis (Basenji).
f. Hydromyelia (especially in Chiari malformation).
b. Medullary sclerosis associated with feline leukemia
g. Syringomyelia.
virus (cats).
h. Dermoid or epidermoid cysts.
C. Conditions that may mimic increased vertebral opacity:
 i. Conditions that may mimic intramedullary lesion:
1) Underexposed radiograph.
1) Normal widening of spinal cord at cervical or
 2) Summated structure (e.g.. cutaneous mass, debris
lumbar intumescence.
on hair or skin).
 l  si      (
3. Focal decrease in opacity:
a. Superimposition artifact.
Neoplasia associated with spine
b. Osteomyelitis.
1. Spinal cord tumors:
c. Neoplasia (e.g., osteosarcoma, multiple myeloma).
a. Oligodendroglioma (dogs).
d. Fracture.
b. Lymphoma (cats).
e. Vertebral body endplate disease such as:
c. Glial cell tumors (e.g., astrocytoma, ependymoma).
1) Diskospondylitis.
d. Meningioma.
2) Schmorl's node.
e. Nerve
sheath
tumor
(e.g..
neurofibroma.
3) Neoplasia.
neurofibrosarcoma).
 4. Generalized decrease in opacity:
f. Metastatic tumors (uncommon).
a. Osteoporosis (e.g., hyperparathyroidism, hypercorti-
2. Vertebral tumors:
costerism).
a. Primary malignant tumors (more common types):
 b. Congenital hypothyroidism.
1) Osteosarcoma.
c. Hyperthyroidism.
2) Chondrosarcoma.
d. Diabetes mellitus.
3) Fibrosarcoma.
e. Osteogenesis imperfecta.
4) Hemangiosarcoma.
f. Senile osteoporosis (older cats).
5) Plasma cell myeloma.
g. Hypervitaminosis A (ca ts).
b. Secondary (metastatic) tumors:
h. Mucopolysaccharidosis (cats).
1) Carcinoma:
i. Conditions that may mimic decreased vertebral
a) Prostatic (most common).
opacity:
 b) Mammary, lung. urinary bladder, urethral, and
 1) Overexposed radiograph.
perianal tumors.
2) Obesity.
2) Lymphosarcoma.
3) Superimposed opacity (e.g., subcutaneous emphy-
 3) Hemangiosarcoma.
sema, bowel or lung air).
4) Multiple myeloma.
5) Osteosarcoma.
c. Benign tumors:
Shape abnormalities of vertebrae
1) Osteoma.
1. Normal anatomic variations:
2) Osteochondroma (solitary or multiple).
a. C7 and L7 are shorter than adjacent vertebrae.
 b. Tll is the anticlinal vertebra and has a perpendicular
Opacity abnormalities of vertebrae
spine.
1. Focal increase in opacity:
c. L3 and L4 have hazy ventral margins due to diaphrag-
a. Spondylosis deformans.
matic attachments.
b. Osteomyelitis.
2. Congenital and developmental anomalies:
c. Neoplasia.
a. Hemivertebrae.
d. Compression fracture.
 b. Transitional vertebrae.
e. Healing or healed fracture.
c. Block vertebrae (fused vertebrae).
f. Diskospondylitis.
d. Butterfly vertebrae.
270
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
e. Incomplete fusion of sacral vertebrae.
f. Sacrocaudal dysgenesis (cats).
Skull
g. Spinal dysraphism; failure of parts of the vertebra to
Cranium abnormalities
unite (e.g., spina bifida).
1. Decreased opacity of calvarium:
h. Fused dorsal spinous processes.
a. Normal radiolucent lines (e.g.. sutures, vascular
i.Anomalies of the odontoid process (dens) (e.g., agen-
channels).
esis, dorsal angulation,.
b. Hyperparathyroidism (especially secondary to renal
j.
Osteochondrosis.
disease).
k. Cervical spondylomyelopathy (wobbler syndrome).
c. Fracture.
1.
 Pituitary dwarfism.
d. Osteomyelitis.
m. Congenital hypothyroidism.
e. Neoplasia.
3. Acquired anomalies:
 2. Increased opacity of cranium:
a. Fractures:
a. Periosteal reaction.
1) Traumatic.
b. Craniomandibular osteopathy.
2) Pathologic:
c. Healing trauma.
a) Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism.
d. Foreign body.
b) Osteolytic tumor (e.g., multiple myeloma).
e. Osteomyelitis.
c) Bone cyst.
f. Neoplasia.
b.
Prior surgery (e.g., laminectomy).
g. Overlap of fracture fragments.
C.
Infection.
h. Meningioma (especially cats):
d.
 Neoplasia (may be benign, malignant, or metastatic) .
1) Increased bone opacity may occur adjacent to the
e.
Spondylosis deformans.
brain tumor.
f.
Spondylitis.
2) Tumor may calcify.
Diskospondylitis.
3. Mineralization of external auditory canal:
h.
 Disseminated idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH) .
a. Normal, age-related change (appears as thin, smooth-
i.
Syndesmitis ossificans.
bordered, well-defined calcification that encircles the
 Baastrup's disease (bony proliferation between the
1.
canal)y.
dorsal spinous processes).
b. Sclerosis of petrous temporal bone in older animals.
k. Bone cyst (aneurysmal).
C. Chronic inflammation.
1.
Schmorl's node.
d. Neoplasia.
m. Hypervitaminosis A (cats).
e. Foreign body.
n. Mucopolysaccharidosis (cats).
f. Otolith.
4. Narrowing or loss of external auditory canal:
Size abnormalities of spinal canal
a. Underexposed radiograph.
1. Widened spinal canal:
b. Congenital absence of ear canal.
a. Normal at cervical and lumbar intumescence (C5-7
c. Previous surgical ablation.
and L3-5).
d. Occlusion by wax, debris, or purulent material.
b. Neoplasia
(e.g, astrocytoma, ependymoma, lym-
e. Occlusion by polyp or neoplastic mass.
phoma).
f. Compression by adjacent mass or swelling.
c. Hydromyelia (especially at C2).
5. Increased opacity of tympanic bulla:
d. Syringomyelia (spinal arachnoid cyst).
a. Summation artifact.
2. Narrow spinal canal:
b. Otolith.
a. Congenital
or
 developmental
anomaly
(e.g.
c. Granuloma.
hemivertebrae).
d. Cholesteatoma
(benign
growth
associated with
 b. Cervical spondylomyelopathy.
eardrum).
c. Expansile lesions of adjacent bone.
e. Craniomandibular osteopathy (usually bilateral) .
d. Healing vertebral fracture.
6. Decreased opacity of tympanic bulla:
e. Lumbosacral stenosis.
a. Previous bulla osteotomy.
f. Thoracic stenosis (narrowing at T3-6).
b. Neoplasia.
1) Reported in Doberman Pinchers, usually without
c. Severe inflammation/infection.
 compression of spinal cord.
7. Otitis
g. Calcium phosphate deposition disease (Great Dane
a. Bacterial infection (most common).
puppies).
b. Polyps (nasopharyngeal or auricular).
271
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
c. Trauma.
c. Trauma.
d. Neoplasia:
d. Inflammation/infection:
1) Osteosarcoma.
1) Viral infection (most common):
2) Squamous cell carcinoma.
a) Cats: herpes virus, caliciviruses.
3) Ceruminous carcinoma.
b) Dogs: distemper, adenovirus, influenza.
4) Adenocarcinoma.
2) Fungal infection (endemic areas):
5) Fibrosarcoma.
a) Cryptococcus (cats).
b) Aspergillus (dogs).
c) Blastomycosis.
Frontal sinus abnormalities
d) Penicillium.
1. Frontal sinus is not visualized:
3) Bacterial infection (e.g., Bordatella, Pasteurella).
a. Normal breed variation (e.g.. brachycephalic, small
4) Parasites (e.g., Cuterebra).
breed dog).
5) Allergy (e.g., pollen, dust, mold).
b. Aplasia.
6) Inhaled irritants (e.g. smoke, foreign body).
c. Mucopolysaccharidosis (cats).
7) Neoplasia.
2. Increased opacity in nasal cavity and/or frontal sinus:
a. Underexposed
8) Lymphoplasmacytic rhinitis.
radiograph
(bilateral
increased
9) Dental disease (e.g., tooth root abscess).
opacity).
10) Trauma.
b. Recent nasal flush.
c. Inflammation/infection:
1) Bacterial.
Teeth abnormalities
2) Mycotic (e.g., cryptococcosis, aspergillosis).
1. Displacement of teeth:
3) Viral.
a. Fracture.
4) Allergic.
b. Neoplasia.
5) Dental disease.
c. Osteomyelitis.
d. Foreign body (often unilateral).
d. Hyperparathyroidism ("rubber jaw").
e. Neoplasia (soft tissue or osseous origin).
e. Developmental anomaly.
f. Hemorrhage (e.g., trauma, coagulopathy).
2. Decreased number of teeth:
g. Kartagener's syndrome.
a. Congenital/genetic (without systemic disease):
h. Parasites (e.g., capillariasis) (rare).
1) Hypodontia (absence of one or a few teeth).
i. Thickening of overlying bone:
2) Oligodontia (absence of multiple teeth).
1) Healing fracture.
3) Anodontia (absence of all teeth, rare without other
2) Hyperparathyroidism with fibrous osteodystrophy.
associated abnormalities).
 3) Craniomandibular osteopathy.
b. Developmental (failure of a tooth to erupt):
4) Canine leukocyte adhesion disorder.
1) Mechanical obstruction (e.g. adjacent tooth blocks
5) Acromegaly (cats).
eruption).
j. Mucocele (frontal sinus).
2) Abnormal periodontal ligament.
3. Decreased opacity in nasal cavity and/or frontal sinus:
3) Trauma.
a. Overexposed radiograph (bilateral decreased opacity).
4) Systemic disease (e.g. hyperparathyroidism).
b. Congenital defect of the hard palate.
c. Acquired:
c. Previous rhinotomy.
d. Viral rhinitis (cats).
1) Previous extraction.
2) Trauma.
e. Lysis of overlying bone:
3) Periodontal disease.
1) Neoplasia
ie.g.
carcinoma,
osteosarcoma,
4) Neoplasia.
lymphoma ).
5) Osteomyelitis.
2) Osteomyelitis.
3) Nasal polyp.
6) Hyperpa rathyroidism.
3. Increased number of teeth:
4) Mycotic infection (e.g., aspergillosis).
a. Retained deciduous teeth:
5) Chronic foreign body.
1) Cormmon in toy breeds (e.g. Miniature Poodle.
Yorkshire Terrier, Maltese, Miniature Schnauzer,
Nasal cavity abnormalities
Pomeranian).
1. Altered opacity of nasal cavity:
2) May cause displacement and crowding of perma-
a. Neoplasia.
nent teeth and malocclusion.
b. Foreign material.
b. Polyodontia (supernumerary teeth).
272
CHAPTER 4 Musculoskeleton
4. Abnormal tooth shape:
Temporomandibular joint (TMJ) abnormalities
a. Developmental anomaly (Gemini tooth = tooth with
1. Poor visualization of TMJ:
a conjoined or divided crown).
a. Poor positioning.
b. Fracture.
b. Underexposed radiograph.
c. Abnormal wear (e.g., chewing on rocks).
c. Fracture.
d. Partial extraction (e.g., crown removed, but roots
d. Luxation/subluxation.
remain,.
e. Healing fracture (e.g.. zygomatic arch).
e. Periodontal disease.
f. Degenerative joint disease.
f. Adjacent mass.
1) Trauma.
g. Large teeth may
/ cause crowding and periodontal
2) Dysplasia.
disease later in life.
 3) Contralateral mandibulectomy.
5. Malocclusion of teeth:
g. Craniomandibular osteopathy (CMO).
a. Abnormal tooth or bone development.
h. Canine leukocyte adhesion disorder, young Irish
b. Retained deciduous teeth.
Setters.
C.
Abnormal positions of teeth.
i.
Osteomyelitis (e.g., extension from ear).
d. Temporomandibular luxa tion or dysplasia.
j. Neoplasia.
e. Fracture or callus of the mandible or maxilla.
k. Ankylosis due to trauma, CMO, chronic otitis media.
f. Craniomandibular osteopathy.
1. TMJ dysplasia.
g. Mass causing mechanical obstruction.
6. Abnormal tooth radiopacity:
a. Fracture.
Pharynx and larynx abnormalities
b. Dental caries.
c. Wide pulp cavity:
1. Displacement of larynx:
1) Immature tooth.
a. Severe dyspnea (e.g., laryngeal paralysis).
2) Dead tooth (adjacent teeth have narrow pulp
b. Hyoid bone pathology.
cavities).
c. Trauma.
3) Inflammation.
d. Lymphadenopathy.
d. Genetic malformation.
e. Sialocele.
 7. Abnormal radiopacity adjacent to teeth:
f. Tumor.
a. Periodontal disease.
g. Hematoma.
b. Neoplasia (e.g., epulis, odontogenic tumors).
h. Abscess.
c. Hyperparathyroidism (primary or secondary).
i. Thyroid gland enlargement.
8. Neoplasia associated with teeth:
j. Retropharyngeal
swelling
(calses
ventral
a. Dental origin tumors:
displacement):
1) Ameloblastoma.
1) Mass
2) Ameloblastic fibroodontoma.
2) Hemorrhage.
3) Odontoma.
3) Edema.
 b. Nonodontogenic malignant tumors:
k. Conditions that may mimic laryngeal displacement:
1) Squamous cell carcinoma (common).
l) Positioning artifact (fexion of head and neck,
2) Fibrosarcoma (especially larger breed dogs: Golden
rotation).
Retriever)
2) Normal breed variation (e.g., brachycephalic).
3) Malignant melanoma (especially small-breed dogs.
2. Laryngeal paralysis etiologies:
uncommon in cats).
a. Idiopathic (most common).
4) Acanthomatous epulis.
b.Trauma.
c. Benign oral tumors:
c. Inflammation.
1) Dentigerous cyst (especially young small-breed dogs).
d. Neoplasia.
2) Fibromatous epulis.
e. Myasthenia gravis.
3) Ossifying epulis.
f. Hypothyroidism.
 4) Viral-induced papilloma.
g. Polyneuropathy.
d. Cysts (benign, but can mimic tumors):
3. Increased opacity in pharynx, larynx, or retropharyngeal
1) Odontogenic inflammatory cyst.
space:
2) Developmental cyst.
a. Brachycephalic breed:
3) Odontogenic keratocyst.
1) Excessive soft tissue.
4) Primordial cyst.
2) Brachycephalic obstructive syndrome.
273
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
b. Thickened soft palate.
7) Mucous gland retention cysts (oropharynx, near
c. Diffuse increase in opacity:
base of epiglottis).
1) Hemorrhage.
8) Nasopharyngeal polyp.
2) Edema.
9) Abscess or granuloma (often caused by foreign
d. Local increase in opacity (mass):
object).
1) Pharyngeal tumor:
e. Retropharyngeal disease:
a) Soft palate: melanoma, fibrosarcoma.
f. Conditions that may mimic increased pharyngeal
b) Pharyngeal wall: sarcoma, extension of tonsillar
opacity:
carcinoma.
 1) Underexposed radiograph.
c) Tonsil: squamous cell carcinoma, lymphosar-
2) Obesity.
coma.
4. Mineralization in larynx:
2) Laryngeal tumor:
a. Normal, age-related change in laryngeal cartilages or
a) Squamous cell carcinoma (most common).
epiglottis.
b) Lymphoma (more often in cats).
b. Hyoid bones.
c) Leiomyoma.
C. Calcified mass (e.g., tumor, abscess, hematoma).
d) Rhabdomyosarcoma.
d. Neoplasia (extensive, heterogeneous mineralization).
e) Secondary invasion by thyroid or tonsillar
e. Foreign body.
carcinoma.
f. Sialolith.
3) Polyp.
5. Dilation of pharynx:
4) Lymphadenomegaly:
 a. Pharyngeal paralysis.
a) Inflammation/infection.
b. Respiratory obstruction and dyspnea.
b) Malignant oral tumors.
 6. Narrowing of laryngeal airway:
c) Thyroid carcinoma.
a. Hypoplasia.
d) Lymphosarcoma.
b. Neoplasia (carcinoma in dogs, lymphoma in cats).
e) Nasal tumors.
c. Cyst (rare congenital development).
5) Granulation tissue.
d. Granuloma/abscess (secondary to foreign body).
6) Pharyngeal polyp (nasopharynx or extension from
middle ear).
274
Thorax
Normal Radiographic Anatomy  277
Mediastinum  304
Thoracic wall  277
Mediastinal mass  304
 Diaphragm  279
Mediastinal widening (diffuse)  306
Pleura and pleural space  279 
 Pneumomediastinum  306 
Mediastinum  280
Esophagus  306
Esophagus  282
Esophageal diverticulum  306
Heart and major vessels  284
 Esophageal inflammation (esophagitis)  307
Cardiac chambers  286
Esophageal foreign objects  308
Clock face analogy   286
Esophageal neoplasia  308
Normal heart size  287
Esophageal stricture 308
 Pericardium  289
Gastroesophageal intussusception  309
Trachea  290
Megaesophagus  309
Bronchi  290
Spirocercosis  311
Lungs 291
Vascular ring anomalies 311
Pulmonary vessels  291
Heart and major vessels  312
Diseases and Disorders  294
Abnormal size and shape of heart  312
Thoracic wall  294
Cardiomegaly  312
Congenital anomalies of bony thorax  294 
Microcardia  313
Pectus excavatum 295
Left atrial enlargement  313
Pectus carinatum  295 
Left ventricular enlargement  314 
Sternal dysraphism  295
 Right atrial enlargement 314
Rib lesions  296
Right ventricular enlargement  315
 Sternal lesions  296
Alterations of major vessels 315 
 Thoracic wall masses
297
Aorta  315
 Diaphragm  297
Caudal vena cava 315
Diaphragm masses 297
Main pulmonary artery  315
 Eventration of diaphragm 
298
Congenital heart disease  316
Hiatal hernia 298
Atrial septal defect (ASD)  316
 Traumatic diaphragmatic hernia  298
Aortic stenosis (As)  316
Pleura and pleural space 299
Peural effusion  299 
valve)  318
Peural thickening  301
Endocardial cushion defects  318
 Pneumothorax   301 
Endocardial fibroelastosis  318
Tension viscerothorax  303
 Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) 318
Radiography of the Dog and Cat: Guide to Making and Interpreting Radiographs, First Edition. M.C. Muhlbauer and S.K. Kneller.
@ 2013 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
275
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Reverse patent ductus arteriosus  319
Eosinophilic (allergic) pneumonia  345 
Pulmonic stenosis (Ps)  320
Interstitial pneumonia  345 
Situs inversus  321
Mycotic pneumonia  345 
Tetralogy of Fallot 321
Aspergillosis  345
Vascular ring anomalies  321
Blastomycosis  346 
Ventricular septal defect (VSD)
Coccidioidomycosis (Valley Fever)  346 
Acquired heart disease  322
Cryptococcosis  347
Cardiomyopathy  322
Histoplasmosis  347
Canine dilated cardiomyopathy  322
 Pneumocystis  348 
Canine hypertrophic cardiomyopathy  3
323
 Parasitic pneumonia  348 
 Feline dilated cardiomyopathy  324
Aelurostrongylus  348 
 Feline hypertrophic cardiomyopathy  325
Paragonimus  348
Feline restrictive cardiomyopathy  326
Toxoplasmosis  348
Endocarditis/myocarditis  327
Visceral larva migrans  349
Endocardiosis  327
Viral pneumonia  349
Heartworm disease 327
Pulmonary edema  349 
Heartworm disease in cats  327
 Pulmonary nodules and masses 
351
Mitral valve insufficiency  329
 Pulmonary abscess 
352
Tricuspid valve insufficiency   329
 Pulmonary granuloma  352
Tumors of heart 330
Pulmonary hematoma  353
Heart base tumor 330
 Pulmonary cavitary lesions (bullae, blebs, cysts) 353
Myocardial tumor  30 
 Pulmonary thrombosis and thromboembolism  354 
Congestive heart failure  331
Pulmonary neoplasia  354
Pericardial disease  332
Primary pulmonary neoplasia  355
 Peritoneal-pericardial diaphragmatic hernia 
Metastatic pulmonary neoplasia 355
(PPDH)332
Differential Diagnoses  356
Pericardial effusion   333
Thoracic wall  356
Constrictive pericarditis 333
 Bony abnormalities of thoracic wall 
356
 tee unpuesadounaud 
 Opacity abnormalities of thoracic wall  356
 Pericardial masses 335
Width of thoracic wall  357
Trachea and bronchi 335
Diaphragm 357
 Tracheal collapse syndrome 335
 Position abnormalities of diaphragm  357
Tracheal hypoplasia   36
 Shape abnormalities of diaphragm 
Endotracheal masses and foreign material  337
(rregular margination)  358
 Tracheal rupture  337
Pleura and pleural space  358 
Tracheal stenosis  337
Decreased opacity of pleural space  358
Tracheobronchial parasites  338
Increased opacity in pleural space and pleura 359
Tracheobronchitis  338
Mediastinum  360
Bronchiectasis  338
 Position abnormalities of mediastinum 
Bronchial obstruction 
339
(mediastinal shift)  360
 Feline bronchial asthma  340
Opacity abnormalities of mediastinum  360 
Lungs  341
Width abnormalities of mediastinum  361
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDs)  341
General widening of mediastinum 
361
 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
 Local widening of mediastinum
(COPD. asthma)  341
(mediastinal mass)  361
Collapse of lung (atelectasis)
341
Esophagus 362
 Pulmonary Emphysema  342
 Position abnormalities of esophagus  362
Lung lobe torsion  343
 Opacity abnormalities of esophagus  362
 Pneumonia  343
 Size abnormalities of esophagus  363
 Aspiration pneumonia 343
Cardiac silhouette  364
Bacterial pneumonia   344 
Abnormal position of cardiac silhouette  364 
Actinomycosis and nocardiosis  344 
Abnormal size of cardiac silhouette  364
Tuberculosis  345
Cardiomyopathy   366
276
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
Congestive heart failure  367
Opacity abnormalities of trachea   369
Right heart congestive failure  367
Margination abnormalities of trachea  370 
Left heart congestive failure  367
Width abnormalities of trachea  370 
Endocarditis/myocarditis  367
Tracheobronchitis  370 
Neoplasia of heart  367
Bronchial obstruction  371
Pericardial effusion   368
Lungs 371
Pericardial masses 368
Opacity abnormalities of lungs  371
Pericarditis (constrictive)  368
Patterns of lung disease  372
 Pneumopericardium  368
Alveolar pattern  372
Major vessels 368
 Bronchial lung pattern  374
Aorta  368
Nodular interstitial lung pattern  374 
Caudal vena cava 368
Unstructured interstitial lung pattern  375
Main pulmonary artery  369
Vascular lung pattern  376
Trachea  369
 Position abnormalities of trachea  369 
NORMAL RADIOGRAPHIC ANATOMY
Thoracic wall
1
1. Bony thorax is formed by rib cage. sternum, and
vertebrae.
T2
2. Ribs typically number 13 pairs with head of each rib
articulating with cranial aspect of same numbered vertebra
(i.e., first pair of ribs joins cranial aspect of Tl; Figure 5.1).
3. Sternum consists of 8 sternebrae.
a. First sternebra (manubrium) is relatively elongated.
b. Last sternebra (xyphoid) extends caudoventral to fal-
ciform fat.
c. Between sternebrae are cartilaginous discs (similar to
intervertebral discs) .
Figure 5.1 Rib articulations (ventrodorsal radiograph). Head of each rib
 articulates with cranial aspect of same nummber vertebra. First, second,
4. Costal cartilages extend from distal end of each rib to
lyal pue jybu aul yaim buoje palagel ane eiganan pieioul pul pue
sternum (Figure 5.2).
second and third ribs.
a. Carilage frorm first 8 ribs joins intersternebral discs.
b. Caudal cartilages attach at xyphoid or join adjacent
cranial cartilage.
c. Costal cartilages begin to mineralize at a few months
of age.
1) Appear stippled or granular and become more scle-
rotic and irregular with age.
 2) May not be uniform, sometimes appearing in short
segments.
3) Mineralization at costochondral junctions may
become quite large (especially in chondrodystrophic
and older large breed dogs: Figure 5.3).
4) Transverse lines of increased or decreased opacity are
 5) Mineralized costal cartilage may be mistaken for
Figure 5.2 Mineralized costal cartilages (lateral radliograph). Sternabrae
blood vessels. pleural fissures. rib lesions. or
and costal cartilages are highlighted. Costal cartilages begin to mineralize
pulmonary/pleural masses.
within a few rnonths of age.
277
 Radiography of the Dog and Cat
5. Soft tissues of thoracic wall include skin, fat, muscle.
a. Ribs curve outward at spine, then inward, then
blood vessels, nerves, and parietal pleura.
outward, and finally inward again to join sternum
6. In obese animals, extracostal muscles are outlined by fat and
(creates a double C shape in cross-section; see CT images,
a ppear as curvilinear soft tissule opa cities along thoracic wall.
Figure 5.4).
7. Ribs in chondrodystrophic dogs curve inward and indent
b. On ventrodorsal radiographs, inward curving ribs
lungs at level of costochondral junctions (e.g., Bassett Hound,
 create soft tissue opacity along inner thoracic wall, which
Dachshund).
may mimic pleural effusion (Figure 5.4).
B
 Figure 5.3 Mineralization at costochondral junctions may become quite large and minic pathology (arrows). A. Lateral radiograph. B. Ventrodorsal
radiograph. Easily mnistaken for lung lesions on VD view.
Figure 5.4 Inward curving of ribs. A. Cross-sectional CT image of average canine thorax depicting typical outward curving of ribs. B. Cross-sectional CT 
irmage of Bassett Hound thorax with inward curving of ribs at level of costochondral junctions (arrow). (C) Ventrodorsal thoracic radiograph of Bassett
Hound with soft tissue opacity along inner thoracic wall (arrows)
278
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
beam, and whether abdominal or thoracic disease is
Diaphragm
present (Figure 5.5).
b. Cats and small dogs have less variable diaphragm posi-
1. Diaphragm is muscular and fibrous structure that physi-
tions than larger dogs.
cally and mechanically separates abdominal and thoracic
C. On lateral radiographs, cupula is cranioventral and
cavities.
crura are dorsocaudal in position. Weight of abdominal
2. Movement of diaphragm provides nearly 50% of force
viscera pushes dependent crus cranial.
needed for respiration.
1) In right lateral recumbency:
3. Cupula is central fibrous or tendinous part of diaphragm
a) Right crus is dependent and moves further
(sometimes called dome or body of diaphragm).
cranial than left.
a. Bulges cranioventrally with most cranial aspect just to
b) Caudal vena cava is visible between cardiac sil-
right of midline (DV/VD radiograph).
 houette and diaphragm, but not caudal to dia-
4. Crura (left and right crus) are muscular portions of dia-
phragm (blends with right crus).
phragm that anchor cupula to lumbar vertebrae (sometimes
c) Crura usually are parallel.
called legs of diaphragm).
2) In left lateral recumbency:
5. In cats, cupula and crura are less distinct components.
a) Left crus is dependent and moves further cranial
6. Diaphragm attachments:
than right.
a. Lateral (costal) portion to ribs 8 through 13.
b) Gastric fundus is caudal to left crus.
b. Ventral (sternal) portion to sternum.
c) Caudal vena cava extends caudal to left crus and
c. Dorsal (lumbar) portion to ventral aspects of L3
blends with right crus.
and L4.
d) Crura usually cross.
7. Diaphragm openings (3):
d. In dorsal recumbency (VD radiograph):
a. Aortic hiatus (dorsal) accommodates aorta, azygous
1) Crura are pushed cranial by abdominal viscera.
vein, and thoracic duct.
2) Less air is present in dorsocaudal lungs.
b. Esophageal hiatus (central) accommodates esophagus
3) Three diaphragm humps are visible: cupula in
and vagal nerve.
center and a crus on either side.
c. Foramen for caudal vena cava (ventral to esophageal
4) If x-ray beam is centered caudally, diaphragm will 
hiatus and right of midline).
appear as a single hump.
8. Landmarks associated with diaphragm:
e. In ventral recumbency (DV radiograph):
a. Caudal vena cava emerges from right hemidiaphragm.
1) Cupula is most cranial and crura are further caudal.
 b. Gastric fundus is caudal to left hemidiaphragm (usually
2) Diaphragm appears as a single hump.
identified by a gas bubble that most often is visible on
right lateral and DV radiographs).
appear as three humps.
C. Lumbophrenic angle is junction of diaphragm with
 f. With severe caudal displacement, diaphragm attach-
spine in dorsocaudal thorax (lateral radiograph): nor-
 mally wedge shaped and filled with lung.
from border of diaphragm (DV/VD radiograph). com-
d. Costophrenic angle is junction of diaphragm with rib
 monly called tenting or scalloping of diaphragm.
cage along caudolateral thorax (DV/VD radiograph); nor-
mally wedge shaped and flled with lung.
9. Lymphatics from abdomen pass through diaphragm to
Pleura and pleural space
sternal lymph nodes allowing intra-abdominal disease to
spread to mediastinum and pleural space (lymph flow is
1. Pleura are thin coverings that help protect and cushion
unidirectional, only from abdomen to thorax).
the lungs.
10. Margins of diaphragm:
a. Parietal pleura lines thoracic wall, mediastinum, and 
a. Should be smooth, uniform, and well-defined.
diaphragm.
b. Thoracic margin is visible due to opacity interface with
b. Pulmonary pleura (or visceral pleura) covers the
adjacent lung air.
lungs.
c. Caudal or abdominal margin is not visible because it
c. Parietal pleura folds back on itself at root of lungs to
blends with soft tissue opacity liver.
become pulmonary pleura.
d. Caudoventral margin often is visible due to opacity
2. Pulmonary pleura receives blood from pulmonary circula-
interface with falciform fat.
tion and parietal pleura is supplied by systemic circulation.
11. Position of diaphragm:
3. Pulmonary and parietal pleura are in virtual contact, with
a. Depends on animal's body shape, position at time of
only a small amount of lubricating fluid between them (fluid
radiography. phase of respiration, centering of x-ray
is not visible on radiographs).
279
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 5.5 Appearance of diaphragm based on positioning at time of radiography. A. In right lateral recumbency: right crus is further cranial than left;
caudal vena cava not visible caudal to dliaphragmn; crura tend to be parallel; gas is present in the gastric fundus. B. In left lateral recumbency: left crus is
further cranial and right; caudal vena cava extends caudal to left crus and blends with right crus; crura usually cross. C. In dorsal recumbency (VD
radiograph): three humps are visible, tubular in center and a crus on either side. D. In ventral recumbency (DV radiograph): only one hump is visible; gas
is in the gastric fundus.
2. Extends from thoracic inlet (first pair of ribs) to
diaphragm.
3. Mediastinum is fenestrated (incomplete) in most dogs
and cats.
 4. Heart separates mediastinum into three divisions:
a. Cranial mediastinum (between thoracic inlet and
heart).
b. Middle mediastinum (contains heart).
c. Caudal
mediastinum
(between
heart
and
diaphra gm).
 5. For descriptive purposes, mediastinum is divided into
dorsal and ventral portions:
a. Dorsal portion (above trachea) is an open space located
on midline.
Figure 5.6 Hypaxial muscles in cats displace dorsocaudal lung margins
b. Ventral portion (below trachea) is positioned to left of
[eatel uo ping leinald joy uazeisiuu aq Aeuu pue (moue) Ajenuan
midline.
radliographs.
6. Mediastinal structures normally visible on survey radio-
graphs include heart, trachea, caudal vena cava, aorta, and
occasionally esophagus and thymus.
4. Pleural fluid is continuously produced by parietal pleura,
a. Other structures normally are too small or have insuf-
released into pleural space, and resorbed by pulmonary
ficient difference in radiopacity to be identified on survey
pleura (75% turnover every hour).
radiographs (i.e., cranial vena cava, caudal vena cava,
5. Pleura and pleural space are not visible on radiographs.
brachiocephalic trunk, left subclavian artery. azygous
except at mediastinal reflections.
vein, lymph nodes, thoracic duct, and phrenic nerves).
6. In most dogs and cats, mediastinum is fenestrated (incom-
b. Caudal vena cava is only mediastinal structure located
 plete). which allows pleural fluid to freely move between
in the right hemithorax.
right and left hemithoraces.
7. Mediastinal communications:
7. Ribs of chondrodystrophic dogs bow inward and may
a. Cranially with cervical fascia (via thoracic inlet).
mimic pleural effusion.
b. Caudally with retroperitoneal space (via aortic hiatus
8. Hypaxial muscles in cats displace dorsocaudal lung
in diaphragm).
margins ventrally and may be mistaken for pleural fluid on
c. Centrally with lung (via hilus of lung).
lateral radiographs (Figure 5.6).
d. Between right and left pleural spaces.
e. Communications allow fluid, gas, and disease to move
between right and left hemithorax and between medias-
Mediastinum
tinum, cervical fascia, lung. and retroperitoneal space.
8. Width of mediastinum (assessed on DV/VD radiograph):
1. Central space in thoracic cavity, bordered on either side
a. Dogs: less than twice the width of a thoracic vertebral
by pleura, ventrally by sternum, and dorsally by spine.
body.
280
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
radiograph, normal thymus is highlighted in cranial mediastinum, appearing as a triangular-shaped soft tissue opacity projecting to the left of mmidline.
Normal in young animals.
b. Cats: less than the width of one thoracic vertebral
body.
c. In obese animals, mediastinum is wider due to exces-
sive fat (Rule of thumb: width of mediastinum should not
exceed thickness of thoracic wall at same level).
9. Thymus (Figure 5.7):
a. Dogs: present in puppies, but rapidly involutes after a
few months of age. (typically after shedding of deciduous
teeth). Rarely seen in dogs older than 6 months.
b. Cats: present in kittens, but doesn't diminish in size
until 2 years of age.
C. On VD radiograph, appears as a triangular-shaped, soft
tissue opacity in cranial mediastinal refection, pointing
left and caudally (commonly called the "sail sign").
d. On lateral radiographs, presents as an ill-defined, soft
tissue opacity in cranial ventral mediastinum (may par-
tially obscure cranial border of cardiac silhouette).
e. More evident on VD radiographs in puppies and on
lateral radiographs in cats.
Figure 5.8 Locations of major intrathoracic lymph nodes on a lateral
10. Mediastinal lymph nodes occur in groups and commul-
radliograph (represented by white cots). Cranial medliastinal lymph nodes 
nicate with each other:
 along ventral trachea. Sternal lymph node is dorsal to second sternabra.
a. Cranial mediastinal lymph nodes:
Tracheobronchial (hilar) lymph nodes are dorsal and ventral to tracheal
1) Located adjacent to large blood vessels and ventral
bifurcation.
to trachea.
pue saop ul sapou ydukl oml no auo Auo Aensn (z
2) Vary in size and number.
one in cats.
3) Receive lymphatics from neck, abdomen, heart.
3) Receive lymphatics from the abdomen.
esophagus, thymus, and thoracic wall.
c. Tracheobronchial (hilar) lymph nodes:
b. Sternal lymph nodes (Figure 5.8):
1) Located lateral to mainstem bronchi at tracheal
l) Located in cranioventral mediastinum, dorsal to
bifurcation.
2nd or 3rd sternebrae.
2) Receive lymphatics from lungs and bronchi.
281
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
1
CrV
Cal
Figure 5.9 Medliastinal reflections and pleural fissure lines (white lines). CrV = cranioventral medliastinal reflection; CaV = caudoventral medliastinal
reflection. A. Lateral radiograph with pleural fissure lines between cranial and middle lung lobes (1), between cranial and caudal lobes (2), and between
middle and caudal lobes (3). B. DV/VD radiograph with pleural fissure lines between right cranial and midle lung lobes (1), between right caudal and
midle lobes (2), between cranial and caudal segments of left cranial lobe (3), and between left cranial and caudal lobes (4).
d. Caudal mediastinal lymph nodes:
a) Formed by accessory lung lobe extending across
1) Located between heart and diaphragm, near esoph-
midline, displacing mediastinum to the left.
agus, and dorsal to caudal vena cava.
b) Only visible on DV/VD radiograph, extending
2) Rarely enlarge and are not visible on radiographs.
from apex of heart to middle of left hemi-diaphragm
11. Mediastinal reflections (mediastinal folds):
(sometimes confused with cardiophrenic ligament).
a. Points of contact between mediastinum and adjacent
3) Caval reflection:
lung.
a) Surrounds caudal vena cava and is not visible
b. Represent sites where mediastinum deviates from
on survey radiographs.
midline.
12. Longus coli muscles are located in dorsal mediastinum,
c. Serve as reservoirs for fat (reflections widen in obese
ventral to spine, and extend from neck into thorax as
animals).
smooth, bordered, soft tissue opacity structures.
d. Appear on radiographs as thin, curved, soft tissue
13. Trachea is located in mediastinum, anchored at laryn-
opacity lines (Figure 5.9).
geal and hilar regions, and freely movable along its midsec-
e. Three mediastinal reflections are present:
tion. Shortening the distance between larynx and hilus (i.e.
1) Cranioventral reflection:
flexing the neck) will cause trachea to deviate dorsally and
a) Formed by right cranial lung lobe extending
to the right.
across midline, pushing mediastinum to the left.
b) Thymus is located in this reflection.
C) DV/VD radiograph: extends from T1 or T2 to left
cranial edge of cardiac silhouette (at 1 to 2 o'clock
Esophagus
s  d u jo a un ood
d) Lateral radiograph: located between left and
1. A muscular tube extending from pharynx to stomach
right cranial lung lobes, cranial to heart and ventral
through the mediastinum.
to trachea. Excessive fat in this reflection com-
2. Usually collapsed and not visible on survey radiographs.
   n   
3. Located dorsal to trachea in cervical region, left and
cranial lung lobe, which may mimic a gas-filled
ventral to trachea at thoracic inlet, dorsal to trachea in tho-
pulmonary lesion.
racic cavity, and continues slightly left of midline and right
2) Caudoventral reflection:
of aorta to diaphragm.
282
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
4. Passes through left crus of diaphragm to cardia of stomach,
10. In dogs., full length of esophagus is composed of striated
where it terminates at gastroesophageal junction.
muscle (Figure 5.11).
5. Cranial and caudal aspects are fixed in position, but
11. In cats, proximal portion of esophagus is striated muscle,
middle is quite movable and distensible.
but distal third consists of smooth muscle. In this area, the
6. Two sphincters are present: cranial cricopharyngeal and
mucosa forms a series of transverse or oblique lines on a
caudal esophageal.
positive contrast study (commonly called a herringbone
7. A slight redundancy is present caudal to thoracic inlet
pattern; Figure 5.12).
(exaggerated in brachycephalic breeds), called a pseudo-
12. Tracheobronchial lymph nodes are located between
diverticulum (Figure 5.10).
esophagus and tracheal bifurcation (Figure 5.8).
8. Caudal esophagus often is visible as a faint, horizontal
soft tissue opacity between aorta and caudal vena cava
(common on left lateral radiograph).
9. Esophageal wall is thinnest in thoracic region.
Figure 5.10 Pseudo-diverticulum of esophagus (lateral radiograph). On 
a barium esophagram, normal slight fold or redundancy is visible in
eophagus, just caudal to thoracic inlet (arrow). (Adapted from Owen5
and Biery, Radiographic Interpretation for the Small Animal Clinician, 2nd 
Figure 5.11 Normal canine esophagus (lateral radiograph, barium
ed. Baltirnore: Williams & Wilkins, 1999.)
esophagram). (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
B
Figure 5.12 Normal feline esophagu5. A. Lateral radiograph, barium esophagram. Caudal esophageal musculature is smmooth muscle, and
mucosa forms a series of transverse or oblique lines on a positive contrast study (*"herringbone pattern"). B. Gross appearance of feline esophagu5
(A is adapted from Owens and Biery 1999).
283
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
b. Hyperinflation of lungs creates a larger thoracic cavity
Heart and major vessels
and a smaller-appearing cardiac silhouette (decreased
cardiac-to-thoracic ratio).
1. Cardiac silhouette is composite of:
7. Dog cardiac silhouette, normal appearance (Figure 5.13):
a. Heart.
a. Oval or elliptical in shape (has been described as a
b. Pericardium.
"lopsided egg").
c. Fluid (blood, pericardial fluid).
b. Typically extends from 3rd to 8th thoracic vertebrae
d. Origins of major vessels.
(DV/VD radiograph),
e. Fat (pericardial and mediastinal).
c. Width on lateral radiograph is 2.5 to 3.5 intercostal
2. Heart is obliquely positioned in thoracic cavity:
spaces.
a. Lateral radiograph: long axis is approximately 45° t0
d. Width on DV/VD radiograph is less than 2/3 width of
 perpendicular.
thoracic cavity.
b. Ventrodorsal radiograph: long axis is approximately
e. Caudal trachea normally curves slightly ventrally at
30° to spine.
heart base.
3. Base of heart is located at 5th or 6th intercostal space.
8. Cat cardiac silhouette, normal appearance (Figure 5.14):
a. Includes atria, ascending aorta, portions of pulmonary
a. Thinner than in dog with a more pointed apex.
trunk, and cranial vena cava.
b. Tapers at cranial and caudal ends (lemon-shaped or
b. Tracheal bifurcation (carina) is dorsal to base of
almond-shapedy.
heart, approximately 70% of distance from sternum to
c. Position of apex is more variable than in dogs, usually
spine.
located on or left of midline, but sometimes right of
4. Apex of heart is formed by interventricular septum:
midline.
a. Lateral radiograph: apex is angled caudoventrally.
d. Width on lateral radiograph is 2 intercostal spaces.
b. Ventrodorsal radiogra ph: apex is slightly left of midline.
e. Width on ventrodorsal radiograph is 1/2 width of tho-
5. Caudal border of cardiac silhouette may be adjacent to or
racic cavity.
superimposed over diaphragm, depending on phase of res-
f. Caudal trachea does not bend ventrally at heart base
piration (greater overlap during expiration).
(unlilke in dogs).
6. Phase of respiration may affect appearance of cardiac
 g. In older cats, cardiac silhouette is more horizontal in
silhouette:
position (more parallel with sternum).
 a. During expiration, cardiac silhouette appears larger in
9. Aorta:
relation to size of thoracic cavity (increased cardiac-to-
a. Arises from middle of heart base.
thoracic ratio). with greater sternal contact and more
b. Becomes aortic arch as it makes a U-turn dorsocaul-
dorsal positioning of trachea.
dally and to the left.
Figure 5.13 Normal canine cardiac silhouette A. Lateral radiograph. B. Ventrodorsal radiograph. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
284
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
Figure 5.14 Normal feline cardiac silhouete. A. Lateral radiograph. B. Ventrodorsal radiograph. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
Figure 5.15 Normal appearance of cardiac silhouette in aged cat. A. Lateral radiograph: cardiac silhouette is more parallel to sternum and descending 
aorta is more tortuou5. B. Ventrodorsal radiograph: aortic arch is visible a5 a rounded bulge at cranial aspect of cardiac silhouette (arrow). (Adapted from 
Owens and Biery 1999.)
c. Descending aorta continues caudally as linear, soft
3) Descending aorta appears more tortuous, wavy. or 
tissue opacity structure, just left of spine on properly
redundant (lateral radiogra ph).
positioned DV/VD radiograph.
a) NoTE: hypertension can also result in a more
d. In older cats, elasticity of aortic wall decreases, result-
tortuous descending aorta.
ing in altered appearance to cardiovascular structures
10. Coronary arteries are not visible on survey radiographs.
(Figure 5.15):
11. Main pulmonary artery segment (pulmonary trunk):
1) Heart moves more parallel to sternum.
a. Arises near heart base, left of aorta.
2) Aortic arch becomes more prominent (described as
b. Not often identified on lateral radiographs (blends
"kinked" or "knuckled") and may be mistaken for a
with adjacent cardiovascular structures).
canial mediastinal or pulmonary mass (Dv/VD
c. Right pulmonary artery commonly appears as a
radiograph).
rounded soft tissue opacity ventral to tracheal bifurcation
285
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
(may mimic lymphadenopathy or a pulmonary mass:
c. Phase of cardiac cycle may affect size of vena cava, but
Figure 5.16).
this is rarely evident on survey radiographs.
12. Caudal vena cava:
d. Normal width:
a. Only mediastinal structure located in right hemithorax.
1) Less than 1.5 times aortic width (measured at same
b. Visible between right hemidiaphragm and cardiac sil-
intercostal space).
houette in caudal mediastinum.
2) Less than length of 6th thoracic vertebra.
3) Wider at height of inspiration, when intrathoracic
 pressure is low.
e. Cranial vena cava normally is not visible on survey
ra diographs.
Cardiac chambers
1. Cardiac chambers (Figure 5.17) are not distinguished
on survey radiographs; however, their locations can be
Ao
inferred using imaginary lines on a lateral radiograph
(Figure 5.18).
LPA
a. Long axis line (cardiac length) extends from tracheal
bifurcation to cardiac apex, dividing heart into right
CVC
chambers cranially and left chambers caudally (generally
with a 3:2 ratio).
RPA
b. Short axis line (cardiac width) is perpendicular to long
axis at level of caudal vena cava and divides heart into
atria dorsally and ventricles ventrally.
Clock face analogy
1. Borders of cardiac chambers can be estimated using
number positions from the face of a clock as reference points
Figure 5.16 Normal appearance of major pulmonary vessels on lateral
(Figure 5.19).
thoracic radiograph. LPA = left pulmonary artery (rmay mimic left atrial 
enlargerment, lymphadenopathy, or heart base mass); RPA = right
2. Lateral radiograph:
Ae uouind sjuu Aeu pue uo-pua paoalond s Aate) Aae Aue uouiind
a. Aorta: 10 to ll o'clock.
nodule or enlarged lyrnph node). Ao = aorta, Cvc = caudal vena cava,
b. Main pulmonary artery: 9 to 10 o'clock.
T = trachea. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
c. Right auricle: 9 to 10 o'clock.
al 'ydenopen lesiopoua  leay yal 'ydenaoipen leaten a eay nyau ydenoipen lenaien ' leay auiuen jo Aoeue leon 2h's annai
heart. A = descending aorta, AA = aortic arch, AV = azygous vein, BT = brachycephalic trunk, CavC = caudal vena cava, CrvC = cranial vena cava,
LA = left atrium, LPA = left pulmonary artery, LS = left subclavian artery, LV = left ventricle, MPA = main pulmonary artery, PV = pulrmonary veins,
ra = right auricle, RA = right atriumn, RPA = right pulrmonary artery, RV = right ventricle. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
286
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
d. Junction of right atrium and right ventricle: 9 o'clock.
h. Left atrium: 12 to 2 o'clock.
e. Right ventricle: 5 to 9 o'clock.
i. Junction of left atrium and left ventricle: 2 o'clock.
f. Junction of right and left ventricles: 5 o'clock.
3. DV/VD radiograph:
g. Left ventricle: 2 to 5 o'clock.
a. Aorta: ll to l o'clock.
 b. Main pulmonary artery segment: 1 to 2 o'clock.
c. Left atrium is located within cardiac silhouette and
normally does not contribute to outer heart border
(located near tracheal bifurcation in dogs. further left and 
cranial in cats).
d. Left auricle: 2 to 3 o'clock.
e. Left ventricle: 2 to 6 o'clock (dogs): 3 to 6 o'clock (cats).
f. Right ventricle: 6 to ll o'clock.
g. Right atrium: 9 to 1l o'clock.
h. Left caudal lobar artery extends from pulmonary
CVC
trunk past left heart border (approximately 4 o'clock).
i. Right caudal lobar artery extends from pulmonary
RA
trunk past right heart border (approximately 8 o'clock).
j. Left caudal lobar vein enters left atrium (approxi-
RV
mately 5 o'clock).
k. Right caudal lobar vein enters left atrium (approxi-
mately 7 o'clock).
Normal heart size
Figure 5.18 Locations of cardiac charmbers inferred by long and short
1. Techniques used to evaluate heart size include:
axes of cardliac silhouette. Long axis (cardiac length) extends from
a. Vertebral heart size.
tracheal bifurcation to cardliac apex, dividing heart into right chammbers
b. Number of intercostal spaces occupied by cardiac
cranially and left charmbers caudally. Short axis line (cardiac width) i5
perpendicular to long axis at level of caudal vena cava and divides heart
silholette.
into atria dorsally and ventricles ventrally. Ao = aorta, RA = right atrium,
c. Position of trachea on lateral radiograph.
LA = left atrium, CvC = caudal vena cava, LV = left ventricle, RV = right
d. Subjective assessment based on experience.
ventricle. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
e. Comparison with previous radiographs.
RA
PA
Figure 5.19 Clock face analogy of canine cardiac silhouette. Curved white lines indicate direction of chammber enlargerment. A. Lateral radliograph.
 B. Ventrodorsal radliograph. Ao = aorta, LA = left atrium, LV = left ventricle, RV = right ventricle, PA = pulrmonary artery, RA = right atrium, LAu = left 
auricle. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
287
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Table 5.1 Vertebral heart size
Dog
183
 Normal range
8.5-10.6
6.8-8.1
Average
9.7 ± 0.5
7.5 ± 0.3
 Mild enlargerment
11-11.9
8.2-8.5
W
Moderate
12-12.9
8.6-8.9
Severe
13-14+
9-10+
Table 5.2 Vertebral heart width (cats)
Average
3.4 ± 0.25
 Normal range
2.9-4.1
Figure 5.20 Vertebral heart size (VHS). L = length of cardiac silhouette
 Mild enlargernent
4.2-4.4
(long axis), W = width of cardliac silhouette (short axis). L and w are
Moderate
4.5-4.9
transposed along thoracic spine beginning at cranial edge of T4, and the
Severe
5+
number of vertebral bodlies along each measurement is estimated to the
nearest 1/1 0.
2. Vertebral heart size (VHS):
1) Measure widest part of cardiac silhouette (perpen-
a. Heart size is correlated to body size using thoracic
dicular to long axis).
vertebrae as units of measure (Figure 5.20).
2) This measurement is transposed to the thoracic
b. Length (L) and width (W) of cardiac silhouette are
spine on the lateral radiograph.
measured:
3) Number of vertebral bodies (v) is estimated to
1) L is a line from ventral border of tracheal bifurcation
nearest 1/l0 v, beginning at cranial edge of T4.
to cardiac apex (with left atrial enlargement, L begins
4) Normal range is 3.2v to 4.0v; values greater than
at ventral border of elevated left mainstem bronchus).
 4.1v suggest cardiomegaly.
4. Number of intercostal spaces (lateral radiograph):
dicular to L.
a. Phase of respiration affects size of intercostal spaces
3) L and W are each transposed onto spine beginning
and must be considered when using this method.
at cranial edge of T4.
b. Dogs: normal width of cardiac silhouette is 2.5 to 3.5
4) Number of vertebral bodies (v) along L and W are
intercostal spaces.
estimated to nearest 1/l0 v and then added together
1) Narrow, deep-chested dogs (e.g., setters, collies.
to calculate VHS (Table 5.1).
c. Obese animals have excessive pericardial and medias-
(approximately 2.5 intercostal spaces wide; Figure
tinal fat and close inspection is required to accurately
5.21).
determine true cardiac borders.
2) Wide, shallow-chested or barrel-chested dogs
d. Dogs: normal VHS range is 8.5 to 10.6; values greater
(e.g., chondrodystrophoid breeds, bulldog) have wider
than 11.0 suggest cardiomegaly.
hearts (3 to 3.5 intercostal spaces) with greater sternal
e. Cats: normal VHS range is 6.8 to 8.l; values greater
contact (Figure 5.22).
than 8.2 indicate cardiomegaly.
c. Cats: cardiac silhouette is approximately 2 intercostal
f. VHS may be most valuable when comparing sequen-
spaces wide (Figure 5.14A).
tial radiographs of an individual because it provides an
 5. Tracheal position (lateral radiograph):
objective evaluation of changes in heart size.
a. Tracheal bifurcation is located at 5th or 6th intercostal
3. Vertebral heart width (Table 5.2):
space, approximately 70% of distance from dorsal edge
a. Not used in dogs.
of sternum to ventral edge of spine.
b. In cats, evidence of cardiomegaly often is easiest to see
b. Trachea in dogs deviates slightly ventrally near the
 on DV/VD radiographs.
heart base (not seen in cats).
288
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
F
Figure 5.21 Normal appearance of cardiac silhouette in dogs with narrow, deep thoracic conformation. A. Lateral radliograph, cardiac silhouette
appears more upright and narrow. B. Ventrodorsal radiograph, cardiac silhouete appears more rounded. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
F
H
Figure 5.22 Normal appearance of cardliac sihouette in dogs with wide, shallow thoracic conformation. A. Lateral radiograph, cardiac sihouette
appears wider and trachea is closer to spine. B. Ventrodorsal radliograph, cardliac silhouette appears wider with a larger right heart. (Adapted from 
Owen5 and Biery 1999.)
c. Cardiomegaly, especially left atrial enlargement, dor-
Pericardium
sally displaces the tracheal bifurcation (pushes it closer to 
1. Pericardium is a thin, double-walled sac that surrounds
spine, which decreases angle between trachea and spine)
heart and origins of major blood vessels (aorta, pulmonary
and often straightens the caudal ventral deflection.
artery, and vena cavae).
d. Trachea in chondrodystrophicbreeds, and other barrel-
 2. Inner layer of pericardium (visceral pericardium) joins
chested dogs. normally is closer to spine and straighter.
epicardium.
289
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
3. Outer layer of pericardium (parietal pericardium) is
tough and fibrous with strong attachments at heart base and
at diaphragm (includes pericardiophrenic ligament).
4. Pericardial space lies between two pericardial layers and
normally contains a small volume of fluid (l to l5mL in
dogs) that is not visible on radiographs.
5. Function of pericardium:
11
a. Lubricate normal heart movements.
D
b. Protect against infections and adhesions.
W
c. Maintain heart's position in thoracic cavity.
d. Regulate stroke volume between ventricles.
e. Limit cardiac dilatation.
Trachea
1. Trachea is an air-filled tube located in neck and cranial
mediastinum.
2. Extends from cricoid cartilage of larynx to bifurcation
Figure 5.23 Tracheal ratio (TR) is calculated by measuring distance
near base of heart at 5th or 6th intercostal space.
(D) between cranioventral ecdge of T1 and craniodorsal edge of first
3. Trachea and cervical spine are nearly parallel, with
sternebra (manubriumn, M) and width (W) of trachea at same level.
trachea closest to spine at thoracic inlet.
TR = W/D. Normal tracheal ratios: nonbrachycephalic dogs ≥ 0.20;
4. Spine angles dorsally away from trachea in thoracic
brachycephalic breeds (other than bulldogs) ≥ 0.16; bulldogs ≥ 0.10.
region.
5. Thoracic portion of trachea is positioned just right of
midline (properly positioned DV/VD radiograph).
6. Carina is site at which trachea divides into two mainstem
6) Normal TR:
bronchi (primary bronchi).
a) Nonbrachycephalic dog breeds: TR ≥ 0.20.
7. Mainstem bronchi form a sharp 60° to 90° angle where
b) Non-bulldog brachycephalic breeds: TR ≥ 0.16.
they diverge caudolaterally (resembles an inverted capital
c) Bulldogs: TR ≥ 0.10.
letter V on properly positioned DV/VD radiograph).
d) TR is slightly smaller in young dogs (less than 1
8. Hilus (or hilum) is area where mainstem bronchi enter
year of age).
lungs.
b. Another method to evaluate tracheal size: normal tra-
9. Approximately 35 cartilaginous rings line the trachea
cheal width should be approximately 3 times width of
and help maintain a patent airway. Rings are C-shaped with
proximal 1/3 of 3rd rib.
open end facing upward or dorsally.
c. In cervical region, tracheal width usually is slightly less
10. Tracheal rings are soft tissue opacity in immature
than width of larynx at level of cricoid cartilage.
animals and normally mineralize over time, often at a young
d. Trachea can vary slightly in diameter with phase of
age in chondrodystrophic breeds.
respiration (due to changes in intraluminal and extralu-
11. Dorsal tracheal membrane is a band of muscular tissue
minal air pressure),. but these variations are not evident
that extends along entire length of trachea, between dorsal
on radiographs of normal animals.
 ends of each tracheal ring.
13. Trachea is fixed in position at larynx and heart and
12. Size of trachea
remains flexible and easily displaced in between. Flexion of
a. Tracheal ratio (TR):
head and neck shortens distance between larynx and heart.
1) Comparison of tracheal width to width of thoracic
resulting in deviation of trachea dorsally and to the right
inlet (Figure 5.23),
(may mimic cranial mediastinal mass) .
2) Measurements are made on lateral radiograph.
14. Trachea normally appears deviated in some breeds (e.g..
3) TR = tracheal width
terriers, chondrodystrophic breeds) 
width of thoracic inlet
4) Tracheal width is distance from mucosa to mucosa
(internal width).
Bronchi
5) Width of thoracic inlet is distance from ventral edge
 of first thoracic vertebra to craniodorsal edge of first
1. Air-filled tubes that branch and decrease in size as they
sternebra (manubrium).
extend peripherally (Figure 5.24).
290
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
LC
Figure 5.24 Normal bronchial anatommy. A. Lateral radiograph. B. DV/VD radiograph. Tracheal bifurcation (white arrow) normally forms an acute angle
(60° to 90°). rc = right cranial lobe, or = cranial segment of left cranial lobe, ca = caudal segment of left cranial lobe, rm = right mmiddle lobe,
A = accessory lobe, RC = right caudal lobe, LC = left caudal lobe, LA = left atrium. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
2. Bronchial walls are thin and become thinner and less
3. Interstitium surrounds pulmonary air spaces and is not
visible peripherally.
normally visible on radiographs.
 3. Right mainstem bronchus divides into four lobar (second-
4. Alveoli essentially are spaces filled with air.
 ary) bronchi:
5. Lungs are divided into specific areas to describe radio-
a. Right cranial bronchus is first to branch from trachea
graphic findings (Figure 5.25):
(near 5th intercostal space) and commonly appears as a
a. Hilar area is near carina and includes heart, origins of
radiolucent circle near the carina (lateral radiograph).
major blood vessels, and primary bronchi.
b. Right caudal bronchus arises at carina.
b. Central or middle area includes visible pulmonary
c. Right middle bronchus originates from ventrolateral
vessels and larger lobar bronchi.
aspect of right caudal bronchus, a few millimeters caudal
c. Peripheral area is at lung edges where there is mostly
to carina. Ventral position of this bronchus makes it espe-
air and vascular and bronchial markings fade (though
cially vulnerable to deposition of aspirated material
moreare visible with modern, high-qua lity, digital images).
d. Accessory bronchus originates from right caudal
d. Cranial is toward the head.
bron chus.
e. Caudal is toward the diaphragm.
4. Left mainstem bronchus has two divisions:
f. Dorsal is above trachea.
a. Left cranial bronchus is second branch from trachea
g. Ventral is below trachea.
and quickly divides into cranial and caudal segments to
6. Six lung lobes are present in dogs and cats (Figure 5.26):
left cranial lung lobe.
a. Right lung consists of four lobes: cranial, middle.
b. Left caudal bronchus arises at carina.
caudal, and accessory.
b. Left lung consists of two lobes: cranial (with cranial
and caudal segments) and caudal.
Lungs
Pulmonary vessels
1. Paired lungs (right and left) are largest organs in thoracic
 1. Air-filled lungs are the only organs in which arteries and
cavity.
veins are visible on survey radiographs.
2. Lung parenchyma consists of air filled spaces (alveoli and
2. Three vascular beds are present in lungs:
bronchi) and non-air containing interstitium (blood vessels,
a. Pulmonary arteries: carry venous blood from heart to
lymphatics, nerves, and connective tissue).
lungs.
291
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
RCr
LC
M
Figure 5.25 Lung zones: hilar (H), central (C), peripheral (P). A. Lateral radiograph with tracheobronchial lymmph nodes: right lymmph nodes (R), left
lyrnph nodes (L), middle lymmph nodes (M). B. DV/D radiograph with tracheobronchial lyrnph nodes: right cranial lymmph nodes (RCr), left cranial lymph
nodes (LCr), middle lymph nodes (M). (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
a
RC
Figure 5.26 Margins of lung lobes. A. Lateral radiograph. B. DV/VD radiograph, lung lobe margins dorsal to trachea. C. DVVD radiograph, lung lobe
margins ventral to trachea. Acc = accessory lung lobe, Ca = caudal lung lobe, Cr = cranial lung lobe, LCa = left caudal lung lobe, LCr = left cranial lung 
lobe, M = mniddle lung lobe, RCa = right caudal lung lobe, RCr = right cranial lung lobe, RM = right middle lung lobe. (Adapted from Owens and Biery
1999.)
b. Pulmonary veins: carry arterial blood from lungs to
 5. Blood vessels normally can be followed further into lung
heart.
periphery than can bronchi.
c. Bronchial arteries: supply arterial blood to lungs (too
6. Pulmonary arteries and veins are paired with a bronchus
small to be seen on survey radiographsy.
in between (Figure 5.27).
3. Pulmonary vessels are tubular, soft tissue opacity struc-
a. Paired vessels are similar in size, shape, and course.
b. Veins are central and ventral to arteries.
4. Vessels have smooth margins and branch evenly (in
1) Veins are medial to arteries on Dv/VD radiographs.
linear fashion). without appearing irregular, curved, or
2) Veins are caudoventral to arteries on lateral
blunted.
ra diographs.
292
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
PT
A
Figure 5.27 Normmal pulmonary vasculature. Arteries are white, veins are black. A. Lateral radiograph. B. DV/VD radiograph. A = artery, B = bronchu5.
V = vein: PT = pulmonary trunk, LPA = left pulmonary artery, RPA = right pulmonary artery, LA = left atrium. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
b. Caudal arteries and veins cannot be differentiated on
lateral radiographs.
c. Left main pulmonary artery often is visible as a curved
soft tissue opacity dorsal to tracheal bifurcation (may
mimic a heart base mass or left atrial dilation; Figure
5.16).
d. Right main pulmonary artery commonly presents
end-on as a rounded, soft tissue opacity ventral to tra-
cheal bifurcation (may mimic a pulmonary nodule or
lymph node; Figure 5.16).
8. DV/VD radiograph:
a. Caudal pulmonary vessels are easiest to see on DV
radiographs.
Figure 5.28 Right cranial lobar artery (A) and vein (V). highlighted on
1) Extend caudolaterally from midcardiac region,
left lateral radiograph.
 gradually tapering into periphery.
 2) Often visible over cardiac silhouette and diaphragm.
 aq a e d n  (
c. Bronchi between vessel pairs may not be visible unless
cardiac border at 4 o'clock position.
walls are thickened or mineralized.
4) Right caudal pulmonary artery extends beyond
7. Lateral radiograph:
right cardiac border at 8 o'clock position.
a. Cranial lobar vessels are easiest to see on left lateral
5) Vessel widths should not exceed width of 9th rib
radiograph (Figure 5.28).
where vessel and rib cross (the summated rib plus
1) Vessels extend cranioventrally from base of heart.
vessel should be square-shaped; Figure 5.29).
2) Located ventral to trachea with right pair posi-
6) Arteries are located lateral to veins.
tioned ventral to left pair.
7) Pulmonary veins may be visible as they enter atria
3) Vessel widths at 4th intercostal space should not
over heart base (veins are central or medial to corre-
exceed width of proximal 1/3 of 4th rib.
sponding arteries).
4) Artery is craniodorsal to vein with less opaque
b. Cranial pulmonary vessels are not well visualized on
bronchus in between.
survey DV/VD radiographs.
293
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 5.29 Normal size pulmonary vessel on ventrodorsal radiograph.
Right caudal pulrnonary vessel and 9th rib highlighted; vessel should not
be larger than the rib where they cross. The overlap should be square or
a vertical rectangle, but not a horizontal rectangle.
DISEASES AND DISORDERS
Radiography does supplement,not supplant,physica! examination.
Figure 5.30 Supernumerary rib on C7 (arrow)
—Peter Suter, DVM
Thoracic wall
Congenital anomalies of bony thorax
5. Extra ribs
1. Variations in number, size, or shape of vertebrae, sterne-
a. Other names: rudimentary, vestigial, or supernumer-
brae, and/or ribs are common, but seldom cause clinical signs.
ary ribs.
2. Anatomic variations may affect appearance of thoracic
b. Commonly occur on C7 or Ll and may be unilateral
cavity, positions of intra-thoracic structures, and locations of
or bilateral (Figure 5.30).
anatomic landmarks used during surgical and advance
6. Fewer ribs
imaging procedures.
a. Usually occur on Tl or Tl3 and may be unilateral or
3. Transitional vertebra
bilateral.
a. Vertebra with anatomic characteristics of two adjacent
b. Must differentiate between absent ribs and ribs that
spinal regions (e.g. thoracic and lumbar, lumbar and
were destroyed by disease.
sacral).
c. Transitional vertebrae often are concurrent.
b. Affected vertebrae may be symmetric or asymmetric
 7. Flaring and fusion of rib ends
in shape.
a. Uncommon; usually occurs at Tl-T2.
c. Ribs and/or lumbar vertebrae may appear increased or
b. Most often reported in chondrodystrophoid dogs.
decreased in number.
c. Frequently associated with other congenital anomalies
d. Shapes of ribs and lateral spinal processes may be
(e.g., hemivertebrae, block vertebrae).
abnormal.
8. Bipartite ribs
e. May be clinically significant or simply affect interpre-
a. First pair of ribs (Figure 5.31).
tation of other structures.
9. Inward curving of ribs
4. Hemivertebra (see chapter 4, Figure 4.176 A, B)
a. Common in chondrodystrophic breeds (e.g., Bassett 
a. Vertebra with partially developed body.
Hound, Dachshund).
b. Common in "screw tail" dog breeds.
b. Also occurs with pectus excavatum.
c. Ribs appear crowded and to radiate outward from
c. Creates soft tissue opacity along inner thoracic wall,
hemivertebra (resembling spokes in a bicycle wheel on
which may mimic pleural effusion on DV/VD radiographs
DV/VD radiograph).
(see Normal Radiogra phic Anatomy section, this chapter).
294
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
Figure 5.32 Pectus excavatum (lateral radiograph). Caudal part of
euanpnen ol anueeadde aneruon e bueano Aiesiop saeiap wnuans
thorax. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
Figure 5.31 Bipartite first pair of ribs (arrows).
b. Congenital anomaly of unknown etiology.
Pectus excavatum
c. Thorax is narrowed and dorsoventrally flattened and
Clinical correlations:
legs are spread to the sides.
1. Other names: congenital chondrosternal depression,
d. Affected animals are unable to stand.
funnel chest, sunken chest.
e. Most often reported in puppies between 2 and 4 weeks
2. Affected animals have a concave appearance to ventral
of age.
thorax.
f. With appropriate therapy, many puppies recover fully
3. Usually asymptomatic, but severe deformities can com-
with normal conformation and use of their legs.
 a  s   
tachypnea, and weakness.
Pectus carinatum
4. Severe inspiratory effort can draw sternum inward
Clinical correlations:
 1. Other names: pectus galinatum, pigeon breast, chicken
and puppies).
chest, keel chest.
2. Sternum protrudes outward (ventrally).
Radiographic findings with pectus excavatum:
 3. Usually asymptomatic.
 1. All or part of sternum deviates dorsally, creating a concave
4. Can result from severe cardiomegaly (typically a congeni-
appearance to ventral thorax (Figure 5.32).
tal heart condition).
2. Dorsoventral dimension of thoracic cavity is decreased.
 ass r  a  s e  
Radiographic findings with pectus carinatum:
inward protrusion of sternum.
1. Sternum deviates ventrally or caudoventrally.
4. Sternebrae commonly are superimposed over ventral
2. Dorsoventral dimension of thoracic cavity is increased.
portion of cardiac silhouette (lateral radiograph).
3. Cardiac silhouette may appear more upright.
 5. Ventral rib ends and costal cartilages are extremely curved
as they join sternum.
Differential diagnoses for pectus carinatum:
 6. Severe deformity may produce mediastinal shift to right
1. Previous trauma.
or left side.
Sternal dysraphism
Differential diagnoses for pectus excavatum:
Clinical correlations:
1. Previous trauma.
1. Usually asymptomatic.
 2. "Flat puppy syndrome" ("swimmer puppy." "turtle pup"):
2. May be associated with peritoneal-pericardial diaphrag-
a. Appears similar to pectus excavatum, but is not true
matic hernia (due to abnormal ventral attachment of dia-
pectus excavatum.
phragm to sternum).
295
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Radiographic findings with sternal dysraphism:
1. Xyphoid and/or other sternebrae are split into two halves
(appear duplicated).
2. May be difficult to see on DV/VD radiograph due to
superimposition of spine; easier to see on lateral or VD
oblique radiograph.
A
D
Rib lesions
Clinical correlations:
1. Fractures typically are caused by blunt trauma and
usually involve multiple ribs.
2. Flail chest is an emergency situation:
a. Occurs with segmental fractures involving at least two
Figure 5.33 Rib fractures. A. Normmal rib. B. Transverse nondisplaced
adjacent ribs
fracture. C. Transverse fracture with slight displacement. D. Segrmental
b. Middle rib segments are functionally free from remain-
fracture. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
 der of thoracic wall and move inward during inspiration
and outward during expiration (paradoxical respiratory
movements).
c. Condition quickly becomes life threatening due to
e. Pathological fractures usually are accompanied by
ineffective respiration and fatigue.
osteolysis and variable periosteal response (neoplasia
d. Affected animals are unable to cough, which allows
and osteomyelitis cannot be distinguished on survey
secretions and blood to obstruct bronchi.
radiographs).
e. Pain and splinting of thorax may hide paradoxical wall
f. Healed rib fractures typically have a smooth bridging
movements.
callus that creates an expansile appearance at the site of
3. Pathological rib fractures are uncommon but may result
injury.
from neoplasia or severe osteomyelitis (latter may result
g. Respiratory motion during healing may result in exul-
from penetrating wound or severe pyothorax).
berant callus formation.
4. Expansile rib lesions may represent healing fractures or
h.Malunion or nonunion of old rib fractures is
early neoplasia. Neoplasia must be ruled out, especially
common.
when there is no history of trauma and radiographic find-
4. Primary rib tumors
ings are not typical of trauma. Follow-up radiographs aid in
a. Frequently occur near costochondral junctions.
distinguishing active and inactive lesions.
b. Caudal ribs tend to be more often affected.
c. Tumors can become large and may contain foci of
Radiographic findings with rib lesions:
calcification (popcorn appearance).
1. Orthogonal radiographs are necessary to evaluate most
d. Radiographs made with x-ray beam tangential to base
rib lesions.
 of tumor may enhance visualization.
2. Detection of rib lesions can be difficult and altering one's
5. Metastatic rib tumors
viewing perspective may help:
a. Typically involve shafts of ribs (not costochondral
a. Orient radiographs upside down or sideways.
junctions).
 b. Invert black and white scale on digital images.
b. Lesions tend to be small and difficult to see (may ini-
3. Fractures (Figure 5.33)
tially appear as healed fractures). (NOTE: A single appar-
a. Usually transverse or oblique and tend to involve mul-
ently healed rib fracture warrants monitoring with serial
tiple ribs (often sequential).
radiographs and palpation until proven benign.)
b. Segmental fractures involving at least two adjacent
c. High-contrast radiographs (low kVp. high mAs) may
ribs can result in flail chest.
aid in detection.
c. Nondisplaced fractures
may
immediately
evident:
Sternal lesions
1) 0blique
e or tangential
 radiogra phs
may
aid in
Clinical correlations:
detection.
 1. Sternal fractures and luxations are uncommon.
2) Serial
radiogra phs
often
document
callus
a. Typically caused by bite wounds or blunt trauma.
formation.
b. More common in cats, small-breed dogs, and in young
d. Other signs of trauma frequently are present (e.g., soft
animals.
tissue swelling. subcutaneous emphysema, pneumotho-
c. Infection and neoplasia are possible underlying etiol-
 rax, pleural hemorrhage. pulmonary contusions).
ogy if no history of trauma.
296
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
2. Sternal masses may result from trauma, infection, or
5. Primary rib tumors are uncommon in dogs and cats (most
neoplasia (see Differential Diagnoses section, this chapter).
aaiaq 'raxog se yons saop paaiq-aiel ui paodai uao
3. Active bone remodeling may result from inflammation/
2 and ll years old).
infection, trauma, or neoplasia.
6. Metastatic neoplasia commonly affects ribs in dogs: rarely
4. Osseous changes associated with aging tend to be more
in cats.
evident in large-breed dogs.
7. Cartilaginous exostosis (osteochondroma) is a benign
5. Complications associated with sternal lesions include
bone tumor.
 subcutaneous emphysema, pneumothorax, pleural effusion,
a. Multiple tumors are called enchondromas.
 and loss of thoracic wall integrity.
b. Etiology is uncertain; a viral etiology is suspected in
cats and may be hereditary in dogs.
Radiographic findings with sternal lesions:
c. Tumors usually are first noticed in young adults (l to 3
1. Often easiest to see on lateral and VD-oblique radiographs.
years of age) as masses protruding from a rib or vertebra.
2. Bone spurs:
d. Tumors generally stop growing at skeletal maturity.
a. Normal aging change (resermbles spondylosis defor-
but some will continue to grow unchecked (may appear
mans along spine).
malignant on radiographs).
b. Occur at cranial or caudal margins of sternebrae.
8. Soft tissue masses include abscesses, granulomas, hema-
c. Soft tissue swelling is absent.
tomas, tumors, and cysts.
d. Intersternebral cartilages may mineralize.
a. May result from trauma or foreign material.
3. Fractures/luxations:
b. Neoplasms include hemangiosarcoma and neurofibro-
a. Soft tissue swelling is present with acute trauma.
sarcoma.
b. Displacement of sternebrae usually is dorsal or ventral.
    
c. Concurrent fractures of costal cartilage often are
definitive diagnosis.
present but may be difficult to identify.
9. Clinical signs vary, depending on underlying etiology.
d. Other signs of trauma may be present (e.g., fractured
Radiographic findings with thoracic wall masses:
ribs, subcutaneous emphysema, pneumothorax, pulmo-
1. Localized widening of thoracic wall.
nary contusions).
2. Widest part of mass usually is at site of attachment to
e. Congenital malformation of sternum may mimic luxa-
tion, but soft tissue swelling is absent.
thoracic wall.
4. Active bone remodeling:
3. Opacity of mass varies from fat (e.g., lipoma) to soft tissue
(e.g., neoplasia, fluid, blood) to mineral (e.g., dystrophic
a. Variable degrees of osteolysis and periosteal response.
calcification).
often with expansile remodeling.
 4. Pleural effusion is absent unless mass has broken through
b. Soft tissue swelling is present.
c. Lesions may resemble diskospondylitis.
pleura.
d. Summation of adjacent structures may mimic osseous
5. Masses that do penetrate pleura often appear ill-defined
remodeling. but soft tissue swelling is absent.
or irregular due to surrounding fluid.
5. Sternal masses:
6. Extrapleural sign refers to convex inner border of a mass 
as it bulges into thoracic cavity and displaces adjacent lung
a. Vary in opacity from fat (e.g., lipoma) to soft tissue to
mineral.
(see chapter 1, Figure 1.2l). Borders of mass taper cranially
and caudally and become concave as they merge with inner
b. Masses that grow into thoracic cavity tend to be
neoplastic.
surface of thoracic wall.
7. Intercostal space may be widened.
c. Masses that grow outward tend to be abscesses or
8. Involvement of adjacent ribs leads to periosteal response
granulomas (commonly caused by penetrating wounds
or foreign material).
and/or osteolysis, often with an expansile remodeling of rib.
Thoracic wall masses
Diaphragm
Clinical correlations:
1. Can arise from any osseous or soft tissue structure in
Diaphragm masses
thoracic wall.
Clinical correlations:
2. May be benign or malignant.
 1. Tumors of diaphragm are uncommon (e.g. rhabdomyo-
3. Most masses enlarge into thoracic cavity rather than
sarcoma).
outward (i.e., most masses are not palpable).
2. Abscesses and granulomas usually result from peritonitis
4. Subcutaneous injections (e.g., fluid administration) may
or migrating plant material.
produce temporary localized swelling. sometimes with sub-
3. Most diaphragm masses develop on peritoneal surface
cutaneous emphysema
and extend into abdominal cavity.
297
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Radiographic findings with diaphragm masses:
9. Clinical signs include esophagitis, vomiting. regurgita-
1. Masses on abdominal border of diaphragm often are not
tion, hyperptyalism, dysphagia, and dyspnea.
apparent on survey radiographs.
10. Paraesophageal hernia may cause compression and
2. Masses extending into thoracic cavity create an extra-
obstruction of esophagus.
pleural sign that merges with border of diaphragm.
Radiographic findings with hiatal hernia:
Differential diagnoses for diaphragm masses:
1. Esophageal hiatal hernia is most common.
1. Diaphragmatic hernia.
2. Soft tissue mass (portion of stomach and/or esophagus)
2. Mass on diaphragm or in lung or pleural space
is present in dorsocaudal aspect of thoracic cavity. located
between caudal vena cava and aorta (usually left of midline
 Eventration of diaphragm
in area of esophagus and caudal mediastinum).
Clinical correlations:
3. Mass tends to be semicircular or oval in shape and may
 s   d n   
 blend with diaphragm.
atrophied and replaced by fibrous tissue.
 4. Pulmonary vessels are visible as they cross the mass.
2. Congenital disorder of unknown etiology.
5. Stomach is variable in size, usually abnormal in shape.
3. Usually unilateral, but can be bilateral.
and often cranially displaced.
4. Abdominal contents push thin and weakened portions of
6. May or may not see gas bubble in gastric fundus.
diaphragm cranially.
 7. Stomach can become gas-distended while in thoracic
5. Usually asymptomatic, but breathing can be compro-
cavity (resembling a large cystlike structure).
mised in severe cases.
8. Cranial esophagus may be normal, mildly dilated, or
completely dilated.
Radiographic findings with eventration of diaphragm:
9. Aspiration pneumonia is frequently present.
1. Diaphragm is asymmetrical with one part protruding
10. Contrast radiography (e.g., esophagram, gastrogram) aids
further cranial than the rest.
in localization of gastroesophageal junction and gastric fundus.
2. Margin of diaphragm usually remains smooth and well-
11. Sliding or dynamic hiatal hernias are intermittent and
defined
variable in appearance (may not be present on serial
3. Protruded portion may mimic a caudal intrathoracic mass.
radiographs).
4. No evidence of trauma.
5. Pleural effusion is absent.
Differential diagnoses for hiatal hernia:
1. Esophageal mass or foreign material.
Differential diagnoses for eventration of diaphragm:
2. Caudal pulmonary or pleural mass.
1. Diaphragmatic hernia.
3. Gastroesophageal intussusception.
2. Mass on diaphragm or in lung or pleural space.
4. Diaphragm mass.
3. Phrenic nerve paralysis.
5. Caudal mediastinal lymphadenopathy.
Hiatal hernia
Traumatic diaphragmatic hernia
Clinical correlations:
Clinical correlations:
1. May be congenital or acquired.
2. Affects both dogs and cats (may be hereditary in Chinese
1. Diaphragm usually tears along its costal attachment
shar pei).
(along rib cage), but central portion may be involved.
3. Usually seen in younger animals (congenital form is more
2. Displacement of abdominal viscera into thoracic cavity is
common).
variable.
4. Hernia occurs through a normal opening (hiatus) in
3. Paracostal hernia: abdominal viscera extend between soft
 diaphragm.
tissue layers of thoracic wall.
5. May be para-esophageal, para-aortic. or paravenous
4. Clinical signs depend on degree of visceral displacement
(adjacent to caudal vena cava).
and effect on organs involved.
6. Frequently the hernia is "sliding" (herniated viscera are
a. Many affected animals are subclinical.
 b. GI signs include vomiting. regurgitation, ptyalism
only intermittently present).
(drooling)
7. Most commonly, abdominal portion of esophagus or part
of stomach protrudes into caudal mediastinum through
c. Dyspnea and muffled heart sounds may be present.
esophageal hiatus.
8. Sometimes gastric fundus protrudes through esophageal
Radiographic findings with diaphragmatic hernia:
hiatus to lie adjacent to caudal thoracic esophagus (gastro-
1. Border of diaphragm is interrupted or not visible on one
esophageal junction remains normal).
or more radiographs (Figure 5.34),
298
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
2. Possible etiologies of pleural effusion are listed in Differ-
ential Diagnoses section (this chapter)
3. Most dogs and cats have a fenestrated (incomplete) medi-
astinum, which allows pleural fluid to freely move between
right and left hemithoraces.
4. Mediastinal openings may be obstructed due to:
a. Congenital anatomic variation.
 b. Severe inflammatory or fibrin-producing disease (e.g.
chylothorax, pyothorax, hemothorax, neoplasia).
c. Diaphragmatic hernia.
d. Lung lobe torsion.
5. Clinical signs depend on rate of fluid accumulation and
animal's ability to adapt to underlying pathology: affected
animals may have tachypnea, dyspnea, cough, fever, leth-
argy, and weight loss.
6. Thoracocentesis and fluid analysis are usually necessary
for diagnosis.
7. Rapid removal of pleural fluid and reinflation of lung
Figure 5.34 Diaphragmatic hernia (lateral radiograph). Caudal portion
lobes that are covered with fibrin can result in rupture of
of cardiac silhouette is partially obscured because liver and stommach are
the lung and a pneumothorax.
herniated into thoracic cavity. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
Radiographic findings with pleural effusion:
1. Fluid usually is freely movable, conforming to shape of
intrathoracic structures (e.g. lung, mediastinum, diaphragm.
2. Abdominal viscera (e.g., liver, spleen, intestine) are crani-
thoracic wall).
ally displaced or malpositioned.
2. Distribution of fluid depends on patient positioning and
3. Abnormal increased opacity in thoracic cavity, usually
effect of gravity.
inhomogeneous due to variable opacities of displaced viscera
3. Volume of fluid (or gas) is difficult to quantify on survey
(may appear as extrapleural mass near diaphragm).
radiographs.
u  a  a  si   
a. Estimate at least l0 mL/Kg must be present to be reli-
viscera.
ably detected.
5. Intestines in thoracic cavity appear as tubular gas patterns
b. Reported minimal volumes required for visualization:
and gastric rugal folds may be visible, if sufficient gas is
1) 50 mL in a cat or small dog.
present in stomach.
2) 100 mL in a medium-size dog.
6. Abdomen may appear empty due to decreased viscera in
4. The type of pleural fluid cannot be distinguished on
peritoneal cavity.
radiographs.
7. Pleural effusion is common and may be unilateral or
5. Interlobar fissure lines (pleural fissure lines) are earliest
bilateral (removal of fluid and repeating radiographs aids in
sign of excessive fluid in pleural space (Figure 5.9).
identifying displaced structures).
a. Appear as thin, curved, soft tissue opacity lines
8. Pneumothorax is sometimes present.
between lung lobes.
9. Ascites is uncommon.
 1) On lateral radiographs, a fissure line may be visible 
10. Other evidence of trauma frequently is present (e.g..
between caudal and middle lung lobes, often superim-
subcutaneous emphysema, rib fractures).
11. Contrast radiography: upper GI study aids in locating
2) On DV/VD radiographs, fissure lines may be visible 
and identifying stomach and intestines.
bilaterally between cranial and caudal lung lobes.
3) Interlobar fissures sometimes are visible in normal
animals when x-ray beam is parallel to plane of fissure
Pleura and pleural space
(usually evident on only one radiograph).
 b. Differentiating types and causes of pleural fissure lines:
Pleural effusion
1) Fluid lines are wider peripherally and taper toward
Clinical correlations:
hilus.
1. Excess fuid in pleural space can be caused by primary
2) Pleural thickening lines are uniform in thickness
pleural disease, but usually results from disease elsewhere
and do not taper (may be indistinguishable from small
in the body.
effusion).
299
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 5.35 Cros5-sectional (CT images of thorax dlepicting gravity-dependent movement of pleural fluid. A. In ventral recumbency (DV view
radiograph), fluid (arrow) accumulates ventrally along midline and blends with medliastinal structures. B. In dorsal recumbency (VD radliograph), fluid
accumulates dorsally between lungs and thoracic wall and is more visible peripherally.
3) Lines produced by interlobar fat are wider centrally
7. Radiographic findings with increasing volume of pleural
and taper peripherally.
fluid (see chapter l, Figure l.18):
4) Mineralized costal cartilages may be mistaken for
a. Lung borders retract from t
thoracic wall, spine.
pleural fissure lines:
sternum, and diaphragm.
a) Cartilage is bilaterally symmetrical (fissure lines
b. Vascular and bronchial markings do not extend to
usually are asymmetrical).
thoracic wall.
b) Cartilage usually can be traced to the respective
c. Increasing opacity in thoracic cavity.
rib.
d. Costophrenic angles become rounded and indistinct.
6. Detection of small pleural effusions:
e. Caudolateral lung margins appear blunted.
a. VD radiograph is more sensitive than DV because in
 f. Ventral lung margin becomes a scalloped line outlined
dorsal recumbency, fluid moves with gravity to accumu-
by fluid (dorsal to sternum).
late between lungs and thoracic wall, while in ventral
 g. Cardiac silhouette and trachea are dorsally displaced.
recumbency, fluid accumulates along midline and blends
h. Cranial mediastinum appears widened due to summa-
with mediastinal structures (Figure 5.35).
 tion with adjacent fluid (especially on VD radiograph; less
b. Expiratory radiographs result in a smaller thoracic
evident on DV radiograph).
cavity and a relatively greater volume of pleural fluid.
 i. Cardiac and diaphragmatic borders become obscured.
which may aid in detection.
8. Radiographic findings with large pleural effusions:
C. Horizontal beam radiography can be used to detect
a. Lungs appear leaflike due to increased separation of
 small effusions by placing animal in lateral recumbency
lobes by pleural fluid.
or held erect and making a VD radiograph (fluid moves
b. Lung lobes are unable to expand and are variably col-
with gravity to most dependent position). (NOTE: Hori-
lapsed (cranial lung lobes tend to be more severely
zontal beam radiography can also be used to reposition
affected).
pleural fluid and enhance visualization of parts of tho-
c. Diaphragm and liver are displaced caudally.
racic cavity.)
d. Border of diaphragm is obscured by fluid.
300
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
e. Intrathoracic soft tissue structures become obscured
radiograph); see Normal Radiographic Anatomy section,
by fluid (trachea and mainstem bronchi often remain
this chapter. (NOTE: Edge of soft tissue opacity is wavy.
visible).
corresponding to shape of ribs, and not straight, as is seen
f. Thorax may be expanded (barrel-chested appearance
with pleural fluid).
with ribs more perpendicular to spine).
b. Thickened pleura in older animals and in animals with
9. Chronic or recurrent pleural effusions may result in a
previous pleural disease may mimic minimal pleural
fibrinous membrane covering the lungs (pleural fibrosis or
effusion.
"pleural peel"). Pleural fibrosis restricts lung expansion, and
c. Obese animals with excessive fat along sternum, in
 lung lobe margins commonly appear rounded. (NOTE: Rapid
pericardial sac, and in mediastinum (NOTE: Fat is less 
reinflation of lobes with pleural fibrosis can lead to rupture
opaque than fluid).
of lung.)
d. Cats have hypaxial muscles in dorsocaudal thorax that
10. Asymmetric or unilateral pleural fluid may cause a
cause lung to deviate ventrally (lateral radiograph) and 
 mediastinal shift away from fluid (occurs with inflammatory
may be mistaken for pleural fluid (see Normal Radio-
conditions which obstruct mediastinal fenestrations).
graphic Anatomy section, this chapter).
11. Removal of pleural fluid and repeating radiographs aids
in detection of lesions (see Differential Diagnoses section for
 Pleural thickening
possible etiologies for pleural effusion).
Clinical correlations:
-aau oi ap Aedo u paseaun eadde  stui i
1. Thickening of pulmonary or parietal pleura is a nonspe-
ing pleural fluid (Figure 5.36):
cifc reaction to a variety of conditions and may result from
a. In lateral recumbency. fluid moves to dependent
current or previous disease (see Differential Diagnoses
(down) part of thoracic cavity. and nondependent
section, this chapter).
(up) lung is better able to expand (remains more
2. Pleural thickening often precedes pleural effusion and
inflated).
 may remain after effusion has cleared.
b. Blood vessels in up lung extend to thoracic wall, and
3. May be seen in older animals due to previous disease.
retraction of lung borders may not be evident.
usually without clinical significance.
c. Summation of dependent pleural fluid with inflated
up lung may be mistaken for parenchymal disease;
Radiographic findings with pleural thickening:
however, vascular margins in up lung remain distinct.
1. Interlobar fissure lines that are uniform in thickness and
while parenchymal disease blurs vascular markings.
do not taper.
d. Orthogonal radiographs aid in diagnosis.
13. Conditions that may mimic pleural effusion:
Differential diagnoses for pleurat thickening:
a. Inward curvature of ribs in chondrodystrophic dogs
1. Small pleural effusion.
(e.g. Bassett Hound, Dachshund) create soft tissue
2. Normally fissure line (usually visible on only one
opacity along lateral aspects of thoracic cavity (Dv/VD
radiograph).
Pneumothorax
Clinical correlations:
1. Presence of free air or gas within pleural space leads to
increased pressure and lung collapse (latter due to natural
elasticity of lungs).
2. Possible etiologies are listed in Differenctial Diagnoses
section, this chapter (trauma is most common).
3. Simple pneumothorax:
a. Air in pleural space is less than or equal to atmospheric
pressure.
4. Closed pneumothorax:
a. Simple pneumothorax caused by rupture of lung.
mediastinum, or esophagus.
b. Thoracic wall is intact.
Figure 5.36 Cro55-sectional (CT) image of thorax depicting gravity-
c. Small ruptures tend to seal rapidly and air is resorbed
dependent movement of pleural fluid while in lateral recumbency. Pleural
within 48 hours.
fluid (black arrow) accumulates in dependlent portion of thoracic cavity.
5. Open pneumothorax (sucking pneumothorax):
Nondependent (up) lung (white arrow) is better inflated with vascular
a. Simple pneumothorax caused by opening in thoracic
markings extending to the thoracic wall.
wall.
301
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
alleied suopuo snouen buunp wnuas woy Aeme ananouls epie jo fuauanedsp bunidap xeou jo sabew! (i) leuoas-sso Ze's ainb!
white lines indicate degree of dlisplacement. A. Normal position of cardiac silhouette with lungs well inflated. B. Collapse of dependent (down) lung with
ylm bop patsays-daaa  apis (umop) suapuadap puemot aanoulis seipien jo juawaneldsip ui buninsau bunl (dn) suapuadapuou jo uoeu!
hyperinflated lungs resulting in increased distance between cardiac silhouete and sternum (a simmilar appearance may occur with microcardia)
D. Pneumothorax causing collapse of lung lobes and allowing cardliac silhouette to fall toward dependent (down) side.
6. Tension pneumothorax:
 Aiqeu oi anp Aiedo u paseaun ieadde Ae saui 't
     d  s s
expand against pleural gas.
spheric pressure during both inspiration and expiration.
4. Variable dorsal displacement of cardiac silhouette depends
b. Usually an emergency situation
on volume of pleural gas.
c. Caused by lung injury that acts like a one-way valve.
5. Separation of cardiac silhouette from sternum occurs in
allowing air to enter pleural space on inspiration but
conditions other than pneumothorax (Figure 5.37):
preventing air from escaping during expiration.
a. Laterally recumbent deep-chested dogs.
d. Thoracic wall is intact and pleural air pressure increases
b. Animals with a mediastinal shift.
with each breath.
c. Conditions resulting in hypovolemia.
e. If unilateral, there is a mediastinal shift away from the
d. Unlike with pneumothorax, these conditions do not
affected side.
result in retraction of lung borders from thoracic wall and
7. Clinical signs depend on severity of condition and include
gas is not present in pleural space.
 rapid, shallow breathing, gasping. open-mouth breathing. a
6. Ventral lung border may appear thin or scalloped and
barrel-chested appearance, and muddy or cyanotic mucous
outlined by gas (dorsal to sternum).
membranes.
7. Interlobar fissure lines usually are absent (if visible, they
will be less opaque than lungs.
Radiographic findings with pneumothorax:
8. Thoracic cavity may be expanded and decreased in
1. Lung borders are retracted from thoracic wall and gas
opacity is present in pleural space (see chapter l, Figure
quality images).
1.19).
9. Mediastinum becomes more movable and may be dis-
2. Vascular and bronchial markings do not extend to tho-
placed (mediastinal shift).
10. Diaphragm may be caudally displaced and flattened
brightened digital images, or decreased exposure technique).
(depending on volume of pleural gas).
302
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
Figure 5.38 Cross-sectional (CT) images of thorax depicting gravity-dependent moverment of gas (arrows) in pleural space. A. In ventral recumbency
(DV radiograph), gas rises dorsally to accumulate between lungs and thoracic wall. B. In dorsal recumbency (VD radiograph), gas rises toward sternum
 and accumulates along midline where it is obscured by mediastinal structures.
1l. Cranial margin of diaphragm usually is sharper due to
e. If unilateral, mediastinum is shifted away from tension
contrast with pleural gas.
pneumothorax.
12. Detection of a small pneumothorax:
14. Conditions that mimic pneumothorax are included in
a. DV radiograph is more sensitive than VD because in
Differential Diagnoses section.
ventral recumbency gas rises dorsally to accumulate
a. NOTE: In cases of pseudo-pneumothorax, lungs are
between lungs and thoracic wall, while in dorsal recum-
not collapsed and pulmonary marlkings extend to thoracic
bency, gas rises to sternum and accumulates along midline
wall.
where it is obscured by mediastinal structures (Figure
5.38).
b. Expiratory radiographs result in a smaller thoracic
Tension viscerothorax
cavity and a relatively greater volume of pleural air, and
Clinical correlations:
lungs are more opaque duringexpiration ( which increases 
1. Abdominal viscus (usually stomach) protrudes through
lung-to-pleural gas contrast), which may enhance detec-
diaphragm defect and into thoracic cavity where it becomes 
tion of small pneumothorax.
markedly distended with air.
c. Horizontal beam radiography can be used to detect
2. Predisposed by diaphragmatic hernia (congenital or 
small pneumothorax by placing animal in lateral recum-
acquired).
bency and making a VD radiograph.
3. Clinical signs include dyspnea and labored breathing.
13. Tension pneumothorax is rapidly progressive emer-
gency situation:
a. Thoracic cavity is greatly expanded.
Radiographic findings:
b. Lung lobes are collapsed to a very small size and often
1. A large. gas-filled abdominal viscus (usually stomach) is
are abnormal in shape.
displaced into thoracic cavity:
c. Heart and caudal vena cava appear small.
2. Usually unilateral and most common in left hemithorax.
d. Diaphragm is "tented" or "scalloped" due to severe
3. Lung on affected side is compressed.
caudal displacement (Dv/VD radiograph).
4. Mediastinum is shifted to opposite side.
303
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
5. Decreased
viscera in abdominal cavity
("empty
Radiographic findings with mediastinal masses:
abdomen").
1. Cranioventral mediastinal mass (common):
6. Differentiate from unilateral pneumothorax because dia-
a. Increased opacity in cranioventral aspect of thoracic
phragm border is indistinct or absent and intrathoracic gas
cavity with loss of normal air-filled lung cranial to heart
opacity area has well-defined margins.
(Figure 5.39).
7. Horizontal beam lateral radiograph may demonstrate
 b. Cranial border of cardiac silhouette may be indistinct
fluid:gas interface in displaced viscera.
or obscured.
8. Contrast radiography (e.g., upper GI study) aids in iden-
c. Widened cranial mediastinum with cranial lung lobes
tification of viscera.
not extending to thoracic inlet
d. Variable displacement of trachea dorsally and to the
right (depends on size of mass).
Mediastinum
e. Large masses may displace tracheal bifurcation caudal
to 6th intercostal space.
Mediastinal mass
f. Pleural effusion may obscure margins of cardiac sil-
Clinical correlations:
houette, but air-filled trachea and mainstem bronchi
1. Common in dogs and cats.
usually remain visible.
2. May be congenital or acquired.
g. Sternal lymph node enlargement creates an isolated.
3. Origin of mediastinal mass:
convex, soft tissue opacity structure protruding dorsally
a. Mediastinal structure (e.g., thymus, lymph node,
near 2nd or 3rd sternebra (lateral radiograph; Figure 5.40).
heart, esophagus).
h. Sternum may be involved with variable osteolysis and
b. Extension of disease from adjacent tissues (e.g., lung.
periosteal response.
diaphragm, thoracic wall).
 i. Intra-abdominal organomegaly and sublumbar lymph-
C. Systemic disease (e.g. lymphoma, fungal infection).
adenopathy may be present (e.g.. lymphoma).
4. Lymphadenopathy is a common mediastinal mass (may
2. Craniodorsal mediastinal mass (uncommon):
involve cranial, sternal, or tracheobronchial [hilar] lymph
a. Increased opacity in craniodorsal aspect of thoracic
nodes).
cavity.
 5. Intra-abdominal disease may spread to sternal lymph
b. Trachea is displaced ventrally.
node via lymphatics.
c. Cranial mediastinum is widened.
6. Thymoma:
d. Esophagus frequently is involved and commonly is
a. Uncommon in dogs and cats (usually older animals)-
dilated (with air or ingesta).
b. Labrador Retriever and German Shepherd Dog are
3. Hilar mediastinal mass (common):
overrepresented.
a. Increased opacity in hilar region, near base of heart
c. May be invasive or noninvasive (latter is well encap-
(Figure 5.41).
sulated) and often is cystic.
b. Margins of hilar mass often are obscured by adjacent
d. May be associated with myasthenia gravis, hypercal-
structures or concurrent lung disease.
cemia, aplastic anemia, and hypogammaglobulinemia.
c. Larger, more dorsal hilar masses (e.g., lymphadeno-
7. Branchial cyst:
megaly, esophageal lesions) displace caudal trachea and
a. Congenital, but rarely large enough to be detected in
mainstem bronchi ventrally, resulting in an exaggerated
young animals.
ventral curvature of caudal trachea.
b. Gradually enlarges over time (cyst fills with fluid).
d. Large ventral hilar masses (e.g. heart base tumor)
c. Usually asymptomatic. but larger cysts can cause
displace trachea dorsally and may straighten caudal trachea.
dyspnea, dysphagia, and voice change.
e. Mineralization in hilar region may occur during
d. Cystic fluid tends to be clear and acellular with specific
healing phase of disease (i.e., histoplasmosis; Figure 5.42).
gravity of 1.000.
f. End-on visualization of right pulmonary artery may
8. Clinical signs usually develop later in course of disease.
mimic a hilar mass ventral to tracheal bifurcation (Figure
9. Affected animals may have voice change, respiratory dis-
5.16).
tress, exercise intolerance, regurgitation, vomiting. cough,
 g. Adjacent pulmonary masses are distinguished from
decreased appetite, or Horner's syndrome, depending on
mediastinal masses by their sharper margins and position
mass location and tissue of origin.
on orthogonal radiographs.
10. Many animals are asymptomatic for long periods
4. Caudal mediastinal mass:
of time.
a. Increased opacity near midline in caudal aspect of
ll. Cats with cranial mediastinal masses often have
thoracic cavity.
decreased compressibility of cranial thorax (may be palpable
b. May blend with diaphragm or appear to extend into
during physical examination).
cranial abdominal cavity (e.g., diaphragmatic hernia).
304
Figure 5.39 Cranioventral mmediastinal mass. A. Lateral radiograph: soft tissue opacity mediastinal mass displaces trachea dorsally and partially obscures 
cranial bordler of cardliac silhouette. B. Ventrodorsal radiograph: cranial medliastinum is widened and cranial lung lobes do not extend to thoracic inlet.
(Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
Figure 5.40 Sternal lymphadenomegaly (lateral radiograph). Well
defined extrapleural mass in cranioventral aspect of thoracic cavity, dorsal 
Figure 5.41 Hilar lymphadenopathy (lateral radiograph).
to the second sternabra in area of sternal lyrmph node. (Adapted from 
Tracheobronchial lymph nodes are enlarged, creating increased hilar 
Owen5 and Biery 1999.)
opacity and compression of caudal trachea. (Adapted from Owens and
Bieny 1999.)
305
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
4. Trachea may be displaced or narrowed (displacement
usually is dorsal and to the right).
5. Megaesophagus is a common etiology and aspiration
pneumonia may be concurrent.
6. Pleural effusion may be present.
7. Signs of trauma may be evident (e.g., rib fractures, sub-
cutaneous emphysema).
Pneumomediastinum
Clinical correlations:
1. Free air or gas in mediastinum.
2. Gas commonly extends into cervical fascia and subcuta
neous tissues, resulting in a bloated appearance to the animal
and characteristic"crackling" of skin during palpation (NOTE:
Subcutaneous and deep cervical emphysema may also result
from penetrating neck wounds and tracheal rupture).
3. Clinical signs vary depending on underlying etiology and
severity of emphysema. Affected animals may have dyspnea,
Figure 5.42 Chronic histoplasmosis (lateral radiograph).
coughing. depression, poor appetite, sternal pain, and a
pazjeaui Alejed pue pabieua ane sapou ydwl leouogoauoe
reluctance to be handled.
There are multiple mineralized pulrmonary nocdules. (Acapted from Owens
4. Small pneumomediastinum is a common incidental
and Biery 1999.)
finding secondary to cervical venipuncture.
5. Pneumomediastinum without complication usually is 
self-limiting and often resolves in 2 to 10 days.
c. Esophagus frequently is involved. (NOTE: Transient
fluid in caudal esophagus is common, especially on left
Radiographic findings with pneumomediastinum:
lateral radiograph).
1. Gas in mediastinum varies from subtle, patchy areas of
d. Caudal mediastinal lymph nodes may be involved
decreased opacity to marked outlining of mediastinal struc-
(uncommon).
tures (see chapter l, Figure l.24).
e. Concurrent pulmonary disease may be present (e.g..
 2. Borders not normally visible become well-defined (e.g..
aspiration pneumonia).
esophagus, external tracheal wall, large cranial blood vessels.
f. Contrast radiography (e.g., esophagram, upper GI
aorta).
study) aids in differentiating masses that displace, obstruct,
 3. Mediastinal widening often is not apparent, and pnell-
or invade esophagus and in identifying hiatal hernia.
momediastinum may not be evident on VD/DV radiographs.
g. Masses in adjacent lung, pleural space, or diaphragm
4. Emphysema is common in deep cervical fascial planes
often are identified on orthogonal radiographs.
and subcutaneous tissues.
5. Mediastinal gas may dissect around aorta and extend
Mediastinal widening (diffuse)
into retroperitoneal space (abdominal radiographs aid in
Clinical correlations:
diagnosis).
1. May be caused by inflammation or an excessive accumu-
6. Cardiac silhouette may be dorsally separated from
lation of fluid or fat.
sternum (lateral radiograph).
2. Common in obese animals.
7. If pneumothorax is concurrent, it may be secondary to
 3. Clinical signs vary, depending on etiology. but include
pneumomediastinum (i.e., investigate cause for pneumome-
lethargy, dyspnea, dysphagia, and alterations in vocalization.
diastinum).
8. Pneumopericardium may occur following severe trauma
Radiographic findings with diffuse mediastinal
(rare).
enlargement:
1. Entire mediastinum is wider and usually more opaque
than normal.
Esophagus
2. Borders of mediastinal structures are indistinct (including
cardiac silhouette).
Esophageal diverticulum
3. May see fluid or fat between lung lobes, extending from
Clinical correlations:
mediastinum toward thoracic wall (pleural fissure lines or
1. Sac or pouch that extends outward from esophagus.
"reverse fissure lines"; see chapter 1, Figure 1.17).
2. May be congenital or acquired.
306
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
3. Uncommon in dogs and cats.
2. Diverticulum presents as a contrast filled out-pouching.
4. Congenital diverticuli result from developmental thin-
extending away from the lumen (Figure 5.43).
ning and weakness of esophageal wall (most often reported
3. Esophageal lumen usually is normal size but deviates
in small- to medium-breed dogs).
ventrally or laterally.
5. Acquired diverticuli are caused by increased intraluminal
4. Congenital diverticuli most often occur in cranial esopha-
pressure or an external adhesion.
gus, usually near thoracic inlet where they must be differ-
a. Increased pressure (from obstruction, stricture.
or
entiated from pseudo-diverticuli (Figure 5.l0). Lateral
      
radiographs made with neck extended and then with neck
wall, creating an out-pouching (pulsion or epiphrenic
flexed aid in differentiation: pseudo-diverticuli will diminish
diverticulum}
during extension of neck.
b. External adhesions to esophagus can pull wall to
5. Pulsion diverticuli commonly occur in distal esophagus.
       
6. Traction diverticuli may develop anywhere and often
(traction diverticulum).
have thickened walls.
6. Pseudo-diverticulum is normal redundancy in esophagus
at thoracic inlet, which may mimic a true diverticulum
Esophageal inflammation (esophagitis)
Clinical correlations:
7. Many affected animals are asymptomatic.
1. Inflammation of esophagus, which may be localized or
 8. Clinical signs may develop with large diverticuli and
generalized.
include dysphagia, regurgitation, intermittent anorexia, and
2. May be caused by swallowed caustic or foreign material
lethargy.
or gastroesophageal regurgitation or reflux.
9. Presence of a diverticulum may interfere with passage of
3. Severe or chronic inflammation may lead to erosion and
ulceration of mucosa.
an orogastric tube.
4. Chronic esophagitis can result in scarring, stricture, and
Radiographic findings:
partial or complete obstruction.
1. Survey radiographs often are normal.
5. Clinical signs vary with extent and severity of inflamma-
2. Air or ingesta may be present in diverticulum pouch
tion and may include dysphagia, regurgitation, excessive
salivation, extension of head and neck during swallowing.
Contrast radiography (barium esophagram):
and avoidance of food.
1. Obliqued VD/DV radiographs eliminate superimposition
6. Esophagitis is best assessed by endoscopy and biopsy.
7. Complicating factors may include:
of spine and sternum.
a. Other causes of esophageal stricture (e.g., vascular
ring anomaly, trauma).
b. Esophageal tumor.
c. Neuromuscular disease (e.g., myasthenia gravis).
Radiographic findings with esophagitis:
1. Survey radiographs of thorax and cervical region often
are normal.
2. May see persistent increased opacity in caudal thoracic
esophagus (due to fluid accumulation and more common
with reflux esophagitis).
3. Esophageal dilation usually is localized but may be
generalized.
4. Aspiration pneumonia is common (resulting in alveolar
filling in dependent lungs).
5. Esophageal perforation results in widening and increased
opacity of mediastinum, often with pneumomediastinum
 and sometimes pneumothorax developing.
Contrast radiography (barium esophagram):
Figure 5.43 Esophageal diverticulum (lateral radiograph, barium
1. Esophageal wall may appear thickened 
(subjective
Bophagram). Local enlargement of distal thoracic esophagus due to
evaluation}.
epiphrenic esophageal diverticulum. Care must be taken to not
2. Mucosal margins often are irregular.
misinterpret a bolus of contrast rmedlium caught in transit as a
3. Mucosal ulcerations appear as barium-filled focal
diverticulum. (Adapted from Owen5 and Biery 1999.)
out-pouchings along mucosal border. Superficial ulcers
307
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
usually are not evident on radiographs (best seen with
 2. Complete or severe obstruction results in dilation proxi-
endoscopy).
mal to lesion.
4. Adherence of barium to esophageal mucosa suggests
3. Incomplete obstruction presents with a filling defect at
erosion or ulceration.
site of foreign object
5. Esophagus may be dilated.
4. Esophagram may document leak or fistula (e.g., esophago-
6. Narrowing of esophageal lumen occurs with stricture.
 bronchial, esophago-tracheal).
7. Muscular dysfunction (e.g. spasms) can occur at site of
Differential diagnoses for esophageal foreign object.
inflammation and mimic a stricture (more often in caudal
esophagus due to reflux esophagitis).
1. Esophageal mass (e.g., tumor, abscess, granuloma).
8. Diffuse esophageal hypomotility may be present (better
2. Hiatal hernia.
3. Normal swallowing (transient condition).
assessed with fluoroscopy).
9. Normal contrast study does not exclude a diagnosis of
Esophageal neoplasia
esophagitis.
Clinical correlations:
1. Tumors of esophagus are uncommon in dogs and cats
Esophageal foreign objects
(see Differential Diagnoses section, this chapter),
Clinical correlations:
2. Granulomas from Spirocerca lupi can transform into fibro-
1. Usually bones or objects with irregular or sharp edges
sarcoma or osteosarcoma.
(e.g., wood fragments, sewing needles, fish hooks).
3. Clinical signs include progressive regurgitation, dyspha-
2. May result in complete, partial, or no obstruction.
 gia, weight loss, and anorexia.
3. Perforation of esophagus results in mediastinitis.
4. Diagnosis usually is made with endoscopy and biopsy.
4. Esophageal stricture, diverticulum, or fistula is potential
complication, especially in neglected cases.
Radiographic findings with esophageal neoplasia:
5. Clinical signs vary depending on size, shape, location.
1. Soft tissue opacity mass in cervical area or mediastinum.
and duration of foreign object and include regurgitation,
2. Variable esophageal dilation cranial to mass (often an
anorexia, dysphagia, and ptylalism.
accumulation of air in lumen).
3. Pulmonary metastasis may be present.
Radiographic findings with esophageal foreign objects:
 4. Malignant transformation of parasitic nodules to osteo-
1. Common sites where most foreign objects lodge:
sarcoma may mineralize.
a. Cranial cervical region.
5. Large esophageal masses can cause hypertrophic
b. Thoracic inlet.
 osteopa thy.
c. Heart base.
6. Aspiration pneumonia is common.
d. Immediately cranial to diaphragm.
 7. Difficult on survey radiographs to distinguish esophageal
2. Metal and mineral opacity objects usually are readily
masses from other masses in neck, mediastinum, or acces-
identified.
 sory lung lobe.
3. Soft tissue opacity objects may mimic a cervical or medi-
Contrast radiography (esophagram):
astinal mass.
 1. Localized thickening of esophageal wall or filling defect
4. Small objects must be outlined by gas or contrast medium
 in esophageal lumen.
to be visible.
5. Complete obstruction results in dilation of esophagus
2. Tumor may be intraluminal, mural, or extraluminal.
cranial to foreign object (lumen may be distended with air.
3. Spirocerca lupi lesions typically occur along dorsal mucosal
fluid, or ingesta).
margin.
6. Esophageal perforation can occur, leading to mediastini-
4. Ulceration of mucosa presents as contrast-filled out-
tis, widening of mediastinum, and pneumomediastinum.
pouchings. extending away from lumen.
 5. Margins of esophageal wall may be irregular.
 7. Aspiration pneumonia may be present.
6. Obstruction results in esophageal dilation (with contrast
8. After removal of foreign object, esophageal motility, mar-
gination, and opacity may remain abnormal for a period of
medium) cranial to the tumor.
time.
Differential diagnoses for esophageal neoplasia:
1. Other masses in esophagus (e.g., foreign material, abscess.
Contrast radiography (esophagram):
 granuloma).
1. Iodinated contrast media may be preferred if esophageal
rupture is suspected (barium in mediastinum can cause a
Esophageal stricture
Clinical correlations:
provide poor mucosal detail and are rapidly diluted, which
1. Abnormal narrowing of esophagus (see Differential Diag-
may compromise diagnosis.
noses section, this chaptery.
308
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
2. Clinical signs vary depending on severity and extent of
stricture and include dysphagia and regurgitation.
3. Affected animals often tolerate liquid meals better than
solid meals.
4. Aspiration pneumonia is common.
5. Intraluminal esophageal strictures are best diagnosed by
endoscopy.
Radiographic findings with esophageal stricture:
1. Survey radiographs often are normal, especially if diam-
eter of esophagus is not significantly narrowed.
2. Severe strictures result in esophageal dilation cranial to
the lesion (lumen is distended with fluid, gas, or ingesta).
Contrast radiography (esophagram):
1. Esophageal lumen is narrowed at lesion site.
 2. Small strictures may not be identified with liquid barium
or iodinated contrast media (barium mixed with food may
aid in detection).
Figure 5.44 Gastroesophageal intussusception (lateral radliograph).
Thoracic esophagus is mnoderately dlilated with gas. A gas-filled portion of
Gastroesophageal intussusception
stommach is displaced into the lumen of the distal esophagus. Gastric rugal
Clinical correlations:
folds are visible. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
1. Protrusion or invagination of stomach into esophagus.
2. Usually results in esophageal obstruction and an emer-
gency situation.
7. Gas-distended bowel loops frequently are displaced into
3. Stomach may or may not be accompanied by other abdom-
area of stomach.
inal organs (e.g., duodenum, spleen, pancreas, omentum).
4. Etiology is unknown (genetic component is suspected):
Contrast radiography (esophagram):
may be predisposed by concurrent megaesophagus.
1. Esophagus is dilated cranial to intussusception.
5. Uncommon in dogs and cats (German Shepherd Dog is
2. Large, intraluminal filling defect is present in caudal
overrepresen ted).
esophagus.
6. Most often reported in young dogs (less than I year of age).
3. Restriction to flow of contrast medium into stomach
7. Males are more commonly affected than females
 4. Barium in gastric lumen will outline rugal folds; however.
8. Clinical signs include persistent regurgitation which may
barium often is unable to enter stomach.
progress to hypovolemic shock and death.
9. Endoscopy can make or confirm the diagnosis and aid in
Megaesophagus
ruling out other esophageal masses such as foreign object.
Clinical correlations:
tumor, abscess, or granuloma.
1. Abnormal dilation of esophagus due to a motility
disorder.
Radiographic findings with gastroesophageal
2. Most common cause of regurgitation in dogs and cats
intussusception:
(regurgitation must be differentiated from vomiting, expec-
1. May be transient and difficult to document on
toration, and dropping of prehended food, Table 5.3).
radiographs.
3. May be congenital or acquired, generalized or localized,
 2. Well-defined, homogeneous or heterogenous soft tissue
idiopathic or associated with other disease (see Differential
mass in caudal mediastinum.
Diagnoses section, this chapter).
3. Esophagus is dilated (usually with gas) cranial to lesion
4. More often reported in dogs than in cats.
(Figure 5.44).
5. Congenital disease becomes evident at weaning.
4. Gastric fundus may not be visible, abnormal in shape, or
6. Acquired disease usually develops in middle-aged animals
displaced into thoracic cavity (if displaced, stomach may
(ranging from 7 to 15 years).
blend with caudal mediastinal mass).
7. Clinical signs include regurgitation, weight loss (with a
5. Rugal folds may be visible in intussuscepted portion (if
normal or decreased appetite), cough, fever (secondary to
suffcient luminal gas is present).
aspiration pneumonia). and nasal discharge (secondary
6. Spleen may not be identified.
rhinitis).
606
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
8. Associated functional disorders:
4. Esophageal distention with air is most common and may
a. Achalasia (nonopening or inappropriate opening):
be difficult to recognize on survey radiogra phs (Figure 5.45A):
l) Failure of muscles of alimentary tract to relax.
a. Esophageal walls are outlined on both sides, by air in
2) Achalasia at terminal esophagus can result in
esophagus and air in lungs.
megaesophagus.
b. Caudal esophageal walls appear as a pair of thin, soft
 3) Chalasia is a failure to close (resulting in persistence
tissue opacity lines that converge caudally toward the
 of a patent passage).
diaphragm.
b. Cardiospasm: muscular dysfunction at cardia of
c. Dorsal esophageal wall may be visible as a thin soft
stomach (may be accompanied by megaesophagus).
tissue line ventral to longus coli muscles, extending from
thoracic inlet to approximately T5 or T6.
Radiographic findings with megaesophagus:
d. Summation of ventral esophageal wall and dorsal tra-
1. Appearance of esophagus depends on volume of con-
cheal wall creates a prominent soft tissue band (tracheal
tents, duration of condition, and age and size of animal.
wall appears twice as thick) extending from thoracic inlet
2. Entire thoracic esophagus and variable portions of cervi-
to tracheal bifurcation (called tracheoesophageal stripe
cal esophagus are abnormally distended with air, fluid, or/
sign). (NOTE: Tracheoesophageal stripe sign involves
and ingesta.
 dorsal wall only, whereas pneumomediastinum results in
3. No narrowing is evident (differentiate from vascular ring
both dorsal and ventral walls of trachea becoming sharply
anomaly and strictures).
visible.)
e. Horizontal beam radiography can be used to docu-
ment gas:fluid interface in dilated esophagus.
 5. Distal (terminal) esophagus may or may not be narrowed
Table 5.3 Vomiting versus regurgitation 
at diaphragm.
Vomition
Regurgitation
6. Trachea usually is displaced ventrally and to the right.
 7. Heart base often is displaced ventrally (cardiac silhouette
 Onset after eating 
 Delayed 
Irnmediate 
appears short).
pH
Acid
8. Gastric distention (with air, fluid, or ingesta) may be
Same as food
present (due to gastric outflow problem).
Appearance
 Partially digested
Tubular, undigested
 9. Aspiration pneumonia is common.
food 
food
 Retching
Yes
No
Contrast radiography (esophagram; Figure 5.45 B, C):
 Salivation (nausea)
Ye5
No
1. Only indicated if diagnosis cannot be made on survey
radiographs
 2. Contraindicated if esophagus is grossly distended.
Figure 5.45 Megaesophagus. A. Lateral survey radiograph: esophageal margins are visible a5 a pair of thin lines that converge caudally toward the
diaphragm. B. Lateral barium esophagram: esophagus is moderately distended with contrast medium. C. Ventrodorsal barium esophagramm. With severe
dilation, anatomnic slightly narrow area at base of heart may be evident. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
310
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
3. Sufficient barium must be administered to visualize entire
8. Complications of esophageal or aortic rupture include
esophagus (partial filling of generalized megaesophagus
mediastinitis, pneumomediastinum, and hemothorax.
 can mimic localized esophageal disease, such as vascular ring
anomaly).
Contrast radiography (negative or positive contrast
4. Relatively dilute barium suspension is used.
esophagram):
1. Negative contrast esophagram is easy, rapid, and may
Spirocercosis
enable visualization of nodules.
Clinical correlations:
2. Esophageal wall commonly
appears thickened and
1. Other names: esophageal worm, park worm.
irre gular.
2. Infections caused by nematode Spirocerca lupi.
3. Nodules create filling defects along dorsal mucosal
 3. Has been reported in southern United States and in most
margin, ranging in size from less than 1 cm to over 4cm.
4. Ulceration of mucosa creates contrast-filled out-pouchings
tropical and subtropical regions worldwide (including Africa.
Europe, and South America).
that project away from lumen.
4. Incidence of disease may be quite high (85 %) in endemic
5. Partial obstruction results in contrast dilation of esopha-
areas.
gus cranial to lesion.
5. Most often reported in young, large-breed.
.male
Differential diagnoses for spirocercosis:
dogs.
1. Esophagitis.
6. Transmission is via ingestion of an intermediate host
2. Neoplasia.
(e.g., beetle). Larvae enter blood stream from stomach and
migrate via aorta to esophagus.
Vascular ring anomalies
7. Reactive nodular granulomas form in distal esophagus
Clinical correlations:
and in cardia of stomach.
1. Congenital malformations of aortic arches can entrap
8. Granulomas can undergo malignant transformation to
esophagus (described in Vascular Ring Anomalies section
osteosarcoma or fibrosarcoma.
under Congenital Heart Disease, this chapter).
9. Migrating parasites can cause aortic aneurysm, aortic
2. Esophagus usually is compressed between aorta and
scarring. and thrombus formation.
trachea, resulting in a functional stenosis.
10. Aberrant migration of parasites may involve muscle.
3. More common in dogs than in cats.
joint, spinal cord, kidney, or lungs
4. Great Dane, German Shepherd Dog. Irish Setter, Boston
 11. Many affected animals are asymptomatic during early
Terrier may be predisposed.
sta ges.
5. Most common clinical sign is regurgitation of solid food
12. Clinical signs include difficulty swallowing. regurgita-
shortly after weaning.
tion, vomiting. ptyalism, fever, respiratory difficulty, and
6. Aspiration pneumonia is a frequent complication
weight loss.
13. Acute death may occur following rupture of an aortic
Radiographic findings with vascular ring anomalies:
aneurysm.
1. Esophagus cranial to stenosis (heart base) is dilated (may
 14. Diagnosis is confirmed by endoscopy or finding eggs in
be filled with fluid, air, or ingesta).
feces (eggs are shed intermittently).
2. Trachea is displaced ventrally and to the right.
3. Cardiac silhouette is normal in size and shape, but base
Radiographic findings with spirocercosis:
of heart may be displaced ventrally.
1. Characteristic feature is new bone production along
4. Cranial mediastinum may be widened and increased in
ventral margins of caudal thoracic vertebrae (caudal thoracic
opa city.
spondylitis and spondylosis). but this finding is not always
 5. Caudal esophagus is normal unless there is concurrent
present.
megaesophagus (latter due to interference with normal
2. Nodules (granulomas) most commonly develop in caudal
esophageal motility or a congenital anomaly).
esophagus, along dorsal wall.
6. Descending aorta may be positioned on right side (due to
3. Large nodules may be visible on survey radiographs, but 
anomalous development) .
smaller ones will not be evident.
7. Trachea may be positioned left of midline (if dextro-aorta
4. Malignant transformation to osteosarcoma may lead to
is present).
mineralization.
 8. Aspiration pneumonia present with alveolar filling in
 5. Aspiration pneumonia may be present.
dependent lungs.
6. Pulmonary metastatic lesions may develop (due to malig-
nant transformation).
Contrast radiography (esophagram):
7. Large intrathoracic
masses can cause hypertrophic
1. Esophagus is dilated proximally and narrowed at site of
osteopathy.
compression (Figure 5.46).
311
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
jo aseg on leuenn wnueg yrm patep s! snbeydos3 (weiheydosa wunueg) yoe yoe ynoy ruou juaisisad ot anp Aeuoue huu neinsse gt's ainoi
heart and trachea is ventrally displaced (dotted line). Caudal esophagus is normal. A. Lateral radiograph. B. Ventrodorsal radiograph. (Adapted from
Owens and Biery 1999.)
2. Narrowing typically occurs near 4th intercostal space or
b. Concentric hypertrophy is inward thickening of myo-
base of heart.
cardium caused by increased cardiac afterload (e.g., aortic
3. Contrast medium may or may not fill esophagus distal to
or pulmonic stenosis, hypertension) and often is difficult
lesion, depending on severity of the stricture.
to detect on survey radiographs.
4. Conditions that may mimic vascular ring anomaly:
c. Dilated chambers are stretched beyond normal
a. Pseudo-diverticulum (normal esophageal redundancy
dimensions.
at thoracic inlet, which is exaggerated in brachycephalic
d. (NOTE: Doubling thickness of a heart wall rypically
dogs and when head and neck are flexed; Figure 5.1l).
increases size of cardiac silhouette by only a small
b. Some cases of generalized megaesophagus (entire
amount, whereas doubling volume of a heart chamber
esophagus should be examined with contrast medium).
usually causes a significant increase in size of cardiac
C. Cranial mediastinal mass (e.g., thymoma, lymphoma).
silhouette.)
2. Possible etiologies are included in Differential Diagnoses
Differential diagnoses forvascularringanomaly:
section, this chapter.
1. Generalized megaesophagus (entire esophagus is dilated
without narrowing near heart base).
2. Esophageal stricture near base of heart (e.g., trauma.
Radiographic findings with cardiomegaly:
 chemical irritant, tumor).
1. Cardiac silhouette increases in length (apex-to-base
3. Foreign object in esophagus.
dimension) and/or width (transverse dimension; Figure
5.47).
Heart and major vessels
2. Vertebral heart size is greater than ll.0 in dogs and
greater than 8.0 in cats (see Normal Radiographic Anatomy
Abnormal size and shape of heart
at the beginning of this chapter).
Cardiomegaly
3. Trachea is dorsally displaced.
Clinical correlations:
4. Cardiac borders become more rounded and move closer
1. Enlarged heart due to hypertrophy or dilation of one or
to thoracic walls.
more cardiac chambers.
5. Contact between cardiac silhouette and sternum usually
 a. Eccentric hypertrophy is outward thickening of myo-
is increased.
cardium caused by increased cardiac preload (e.g., mitral
6. Cardiac apex often is displaced (usually left and caudally.
or tricuspid valve insufficiency, PDA).
but may be displaced toward right in cats).
312
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
Figure 5.47 Cardiomegaly. A. Lateral radiograph: cardliac silhouette is increased in length and width, trachea is displaced dorsally and loses the caudal
spuedxa juauanieua peay han ienuon jeuats paseanui ui shinsan uawaheua jeay laiy deana wbeyde pue aanoulis neipie aunn leuaa
o asop pue paunau aiou ane sapiog sepien 'ypim ui paseainui s! aanoulis neipien ydenopei ona 'a alanouis nepien jo japiog lepnes
thoracic wall. Cardiac apex and caudal medliastinal reflection often are displaced toward the left (arrows). (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
7. Conditions that may mimic cardiomegaly:
Left atrial enlargement
a. Pericardial
l   disease  (e.g..  pericardial
 effusion,
Clinical correlations:
perica rdial-diaphragmatic hernia }.
1. Enlargement usually is due to dilation.
b. Obesity (excess pericardial and mediastinal fat).
2. Possible etiologies are included in Differential Diagnoses
c. Expiration (increased cardiac-to-thoracic ratio).
section, this chapter.
Microcardia
Clinical correlations:
Radiographicfindingswithleft atrialenlargement:
1. Small heart, usually due to hypovolemia.
1. Lateral radiograph (Figure 5.57A):
2. Possible etiologies are included in Differential Diagnoses
a. Bulge along dorsocaudal cardiac border (enlargement
section, this chapter.
at 12 to 2 o'clock).
b. Cardiac silhouette is widened at heart base and
Radiographic findings with microcardia:
tapers toward apex (ice cream cone shape).
1. Cardiac silhouette is smaller and narrower with less
c. Caudal heart border is straighter
and
more
sternal contact and a more pointed apex (Figure 5.48).
vertical (may slope caudodorsally with severe atrial
 2. Transverse cardiac dimension decreases more than apex-
enlargement).
to-base dimension.
d. Increased opacity at heart base (may mimic a hilar
3. More lung is visible between heart and diaphragm (heart
mass).
 appears to shift cranially).
e. Trachea is dorsally displaced and loses the caudal
4. Pulmonary vessels, caudal vena cava, and aorta usually
ventral bend (dogs).
are small.
f. Mainstem bronchi become separated (or split) with
5. Lungs are decreased in opacity (due to decreased pulmo-
dorsal displacement of left bronchus.
nary vasculature and less soft tissue opacity in lungs).
g. Left bronchus may be narrowed due to compression
6. Conditions that may mimic microcardia:
by large left atrium.
a. Emaciation.
h. In cats, caudal trachea may be dorsally displaced, but
b. Deep-chested thoracic conformation.
splitting of mainstem bronchi and bronchial compression
C. Hyperinflated lungs (decreased cardiac-to-thoracic ratio).
are not seen.
313
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 5.48 Microcardia. A. Lateral radiograph: cardliac silhouette is small and more vertical in position. Pulmonary vessels, aorta, and caudal vena cava
are smmall; lungs are underperfused. B. Ventrodorsal radiograph: cardiac sihouette is small and rounded, pulmonary vessels and caudal vena cava are
srmall. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
i. Severe, disproportionate left atrial enlargement can
Radiographic findings with left ventricular enlargement:
result in a kidney-shaped cardiac silhouette (more often
1. Lateral radiograph (Figure 5.57A):
seen in cats)
a. Bulge along caudal cardiac margin (enlargement at 2
2. DV/VD radiograph (Figure 5.57B):
to 5 o'clock}
a. Left atrium is caudal to tracheal bifurcation (between
b. Caudal cardiac border becomes straighter and more
mainstem bronchi), and when it dilates it creates a double
vertical.
 border along caudal margin of cardiac silhouette.
c. Elongation of cardiac silhouette in apex-to-base
b. Dilation of left atrium widens the angle between
dimension.
mainstem bronchi (normal bifurcation angle is 60° to 90°
d. Widening
of
cardiac silhouette
in craniocaudal
and resembles an inverted capital letter V, but with left
dimension.
atrial enlargement the bifurcation is wider and more
e. Concurrent left atrial enlargement is common.
rounded (becomes an inverted U), called the bow-legged
f. Caudal thoracic trachea is dorsally displaced and may
cowboy sign).
lose its caudal ventral curvature (dogs), especially with
c. Left mainstem bronchus may be compressed by large
concurrent left atrial dilation.
left atrium.
2. DV/VD radiograph (Figure 5.57B):
d. Enlargement of left auricle (left atrial appendage)
a. Bulge along left caudolateral cardiac border (enlarge-
creates a bulge along left side of cardiac silhouette (2 to
ment at 3 to 5 o'clock).
3 o'clock in dogs. 1 to 3 o'clock in cats).
o oi sson pue puo ao si un au t q
e. In cats, left atrial enlargement widens the heart base.
racic wall.
creating a triangular or valentine heart-shaped cardiac
C. Cardiac silhouette is wider and elongated in apex-t0-
silhouette. Concurrent right atrial enlargement may occur.
base dimension.
 or right atrium may be displaced laterally by the dilated left
d. Cardiac apex is displaced further to the left (in cats,
atrium, creating a bulge along right cranial cardiac border.
cardiac apex may shift further right) .
Left ventricular enlargement
Clinical correlations:
Right atrial enlargement
1. May be due to dilation or hypertrophy (either eccentric
Clinical correlations:
or concentric hypertrophy).
1. Enlargement usually is due to dilation.
2. Possible etiologies are included in Differential Diagnoses
 2. Possible etiologies are included in Differential Diagnoses
section, this chapter.
section, this chapter.
314
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
Radiographic findings with right atrial enlargement:
e. Concurrent right atrial enlargement is common.
1. Radiographically visible right atrial enlargement is
f. Left heart may be concurrently enlarged.
uncommon.
2. Lateral radiograph (Figure 5.58A):
Alterations of major vessels
a. Enlargement along craniodorsal border of cardiac sil-
Aorta
houette (10 to 1l o'clock).
Clinical correlations:
b. Increased
craniocaudal
dimension
of
cardiac
 1. Aortic enlargement may result from stenosis, shunt, or
silhouette.
aneurysm (see Differential Diagnoses section, this chapter).
c. Trachea may be dorsally displaced as it passes over
 2. Small aorta may occur with hypovolemia or low cardiac
right atrium (cranial to hilus). but the caudal ventral
output.
bend in the trachea is retained or accentuated (dogs).
d. Dilation of right atrium can exceed size of right ven-
Radiographic findings with enlargement of aorta and
tricle by several fold.
aortic arch:
3. DV/VD radiograph (Figure 5.58B):
1. Lateral radiograph:
a. Enlargement along right craniolateral border of cardiac
a. Bulge along craniodorsal cardiac border (enlargement
silhouette (9 to 11 o'clock).
at 1l to 12 o'clock).
b. Severe dilation may extend into cranial mediastinum.
b. Cranial cardiac waist is diminished or lost.
c. Concurrent right ventricular enlargement obscures
c. Cardiac silhouette may be elongated in apex-to-base
right atrial enlargement.
dimension.
d. Descending aorta may appear wavy or tortuous (e.g.
Right ventricular enlargement
hypertension, aging change).
Clinical correlations:
e. In older cats, aortic arch is longer and more vertical,
1. May be due to dilation or hypertrophy (either eccentric
 better visualized, and cardiac silhouette is more inclined
or concentric hypertrophy).
toward sternum (Figure 5.15).
2. Possible etiologies are included in Differential Diagnoses
2. DV/VD radiograph:
section, this chapter.
a. Bulge along cranial cardiac border (enlargement at 1l
to l o'clock).
1) Aortic stenosis causes enlargement at ll o'clock.
Radiographic findings with right ventricular enlargement:
2) Patent ductus arteriosis causes enlargement at l
1. Lateral radiograph (Figures 5.51A and 5.56A):
 o'clock, extend into descending aorta.
a. Right heart border bulges cranially (enlargement at 5
b. Cardiac
silhouette
elongates
in
apex-to-base
to 9 o'clock}.
dimension
b. Increased craniocaudal dimension of cardiac silhou-
c. Prominent aortic arch ("aortic knob") may mimic cranial
ette (ratio of right heart to left heart is greater than 3:2).
mediastinal or pulmonary mass (especially in older cats).
C. Cardiac silhouette is more rounded.
d. Trachea is dorsally displaced but retains its caudal
Caudal vena cava
ventral bend (dogs).
Clinical correlations:
e. Increased cardiac to sternum contact:
1. Interpretation of caudal vena cava size is subjective.
1) More than 2.5 sternebrae in deep-chested dogs.
2) More than 3.5 sternebrae in barrel-chested dogs.
f. Caudal vena cava may be displaced dorsally.
Radiographic findings with abnormal size of
caudal vena cava:
g. Hypertrophy of right ventricle creates a more convex
1. Increased diameter on multiple radiographs suggests
ventral cardiac border with focal sternal contact and ele-
vation of cardiac apex (Figure 5.56).
enlargement (larger than 1.5 times width of aorta, measured
at same intercostal space, or larger than length of 5th or 6th
2. DV/VD radiograph (Figures 5.51B and 5.56B):
 a. Bulge along right caudal cardiac border (enlargement
thoracic vertebra). Enlargement most commonly is caused
at 5 to 9 o'clock).
by right heart insufficiency.
b. Right margin of cardiac silhouette is closer to thoracic
2. Hypovolemia results in a smaller caudal vena cava.
wall.
c. Severe enlargement results in a more convex right
Main pulmonary artery
cardiac border that resembles a backward capital letter D
Clinical correlations:
with widest part near 9 o'clock position.
1. Main pulmonary artery enlargement may result from
d. Cardiac silhouette is more rounded and cardiac apex
stenosis or heartworm disease (see Differential Diagnoses
is shifted to the left.
section, this chapter).
315
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Radiographic findings with enlargement of main
a. Many affected animals are asymptomatic.
pulmonary artery:
b. Signs appear early in cats (less than 6 months of age)
1. Pulmonary trunk normally is not visible on survey
but usually later in dogs.
radiographs.
c. Large defects result in exercise intolerance, syncope.
2. Lateral radiograph (Figures 5.5lA and 5.56A):
tachypnea, arrhythmias, and right heart failure.
a. Bulge along craniodorsal cardiac border at 10 to ll
 7. In severe cases, animals have stunted growth and may
0'clock (may be difficult to recognize unless severe).
develop congestive heart failure by 6 weeks of age.
b. Left main pulmonary artery appears as a soft tissue
 hump dorsal to tracheal bifurcation (may mimic enlarged
tracheobronchial lymph nodes).
Radiographic findings with ASD:
c. Right main pulmonary artery presents an ovoid soft
1. Radiographs usually are normal with small defects
tissue opacity ventral to tracheal bifurcation (may mimic
2. Moderate defects present with mild, generalized, nonspe-
 pulmonary nodule or hilar lymphadenopathy).
cific cardiomegaly.
3. DV/VD radiograph (Figures 5.51B and 5.56B):
3. Larger defects result in:
a. Bulge along left cranial cardiac border at l to 2 o'clock
a. Right atrial and right ventricular enlargement due to
("pulmonary knob")
left-to-right shunting of blood (Table 5.4).
b. Degree of enlargement does not correlate with sever-
b. Rounded and sometimes globoid appearance to cardiac
ity of disease.
silhouette.
c. In cats, main pulmonary artery enlargement does
c. Enlarged pulmonary vessels due to overcirculation.
 s   s qo   q 
d. Increased lung opacity due to hypervascularity.
becomes very large.
d. Concurrent enlargement of right ventricle and right
atrium is common.
Aortic stenosis (AS)
Clinical correlations:
1. Congenital narrowing or partial obstruction of left ven-
Congenital heart disease
tricular outflow tract.
Clinical correlations:
 2. Second most common congenital heart defect in dogs:
1. Congenital cardiac disease is less common than acquired
fourth most common in cats.
heart disease in dogs and cats.
3. Stenosis is caused by small nodules or a fibrous band.
2. Most congenital cardiac defects have a confirmed or
which results in resistance to blood flow, poststenotic tur-
strongly suspected genetic basis, often with a variable
bulence, aortic dilation, and concentric left ventricular
expression (affected animals should not be used for breeding
hypertrophy.
and littermates should be screened).
4. Location of stenotic area is variable:
3. Clinical signs depend on type and severity of defect, pres-
a. Subvalvular (subaortic) is most common.
ence of concurrent anomalies, and the animal's size and age.
b. Valvular is second most common.
4. Many affected animals are asymptomatic.
c. Supravalvular is rare.
5. Heart murmur may or may not be present (PMI = point
5. AS often is progressive because stenotic area fails to grow
of maximal intensity).
with the animal.
6. Hereditary in Newfoundland.
Atrial septal defect (ASD)
7. Concurrent congenital heart diseases may be present
 1. Abnormal communication between atria resulting in left-
(e.g., pulmonic stenosis, PDA).
 to-right, intracardiac shunt (blood flows from slightly higher
8. Systolic heart murmur is loudest over aortic valve (PMI:
 pressure in left atrium to lower pressure in right atrium).
left 4th or 5th intercostal space; but may be equally loud on 
 2. Uncommon; reported more often in cats than in dogs.
right side and often radiates into neck).
3. Defect usually is low in septum (ostium primum) but can
9. Secondary
 mitral valve insufficiency
is
frequent
be high (ostium secundum) or craniodorsal (sinus venous
complication.
defect).
10. Animals with mild stenosis may remain asymptomatic
4. Concurrent congenital heart defects are common (e.g.
 and have normal life expectancy.
pulmonic stenosis, tricuspid dysplasia, ventricular septal
11. Moderate stenosis frequently causes exercise intoler-
defect).
ance and syncope.
5. Systolic heart murmur may be absent or soft over left
12. Severe stenosis leads to excessive left ventricular hyper-
heart base.
trophy, cardiac arrhythmias, marked exercise intolerance.
6. Clinical signs depend on size of defect and presence of
 syncope, and may progress to left heart failure or sudden
other abnormalities:
death.
316
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
Table 5.4 Characteristic findings with congenital heart defects 
Right
Right
Left
Left
Aortic
 Pulmonary
 Pulmonary
Atrium
Ventricle
Atrium
Ventricle
Knob
Knob
Vessels
PDA
土
AS
PS
VSD
ASD
MD
TD
ToF
+
 NOTE: Enlargement +, reduction -:; PDA = patent ductus arteriosus, AS = aortic stenosis, PS = pulmonic stenosis, VSD = ventricular septal defect,
ASD = atrial septal defect, MD = mitral valve dysplasia. TD = tricuspid valve dysplasia. ToF = Tetralogy of Fallot.
 Figure 5.49 Aortic stenosis. A. Lateral radiograph: cardliac sihouette is wide, especially at heart base, resulting in a more triangular-shaped appearance.
Aortic arch enlargemment causes a cranial bulge in cardiac silhouette (arrows). B. DV/VD radiograph: left ventricular border is enlarged and rounded.
Aortic arch is enlarged and extends cranially into the medliastinum (arrows). (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
Radiographic findings with AS (Table 5.4, Figure 5.49):
4. Severe aortic enlargement widens the cranial mediasti-
1. Aortic arch is dilated due to turbulent blood flow:
num and may be mistaken for right atrial enlargement or a
a. Cranial bulge on cardiac silhoulette at ll to l2 o'clock
mediastinal mass (especially in cats).
position.
5. Left atrial dilation may be present (due to secondary
b. Commonly called aortic knob.
 mitral valve insuff ciency).
2. Left ventricular enlargement may or may not be evident
6. Pulmonary vessels are normal (unless left heart failure
(enlargement is due to concentric hypertrophy).
occurs).
3. Cardiac silhouette may appear wide at the base and elon-
7. Severe right atrial dilation may mimic an enlarged aortic
gated, resulting in a triangular shape.
arch.
317
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Atrioventricular valve dysplasia (mitral and
2. Larger defects result in right ventricular enlargement and
tricuspid valve)
a more rounded appearance to cardiac silhouette.
Clinical correlations:
3. Pulmonary vessels are normal to large in size due to
1. Malformation of mitral or tricuspid valve leaflets.
overcirculation.
2. Common congenital heart defect in cats; uncommon in
4. Lungs may have increased opacity due to increased
dogs.
vasculature.
3. Other cardiac anomalies may be present (e.g., PDA, VSD,
 5. Right and/or left atrium may be enlarged, depending on
ASD).
 degree of atrioventricular valve involvement.
4. Males are more often affected than females.
5. Systolic heart murmur is left sided with mitral dysplasia
Endocardial fbroelastosis
and right sided with tricuspid dysplasia.
Clinical correlations:
6. Clinical signs vary from asymptomatic to heart failure as
1. Characterized by diffuse endocardial thickening and
early as 6 months of age.
varying degrees of dilation and hypertrophy of left
7. Affected animals may have secondary myocardial disease,
heart.
2. Other congenital heart diseases are absent.
tachypnea, and dyspnea.
3. More prevalent in cats (heritable in Burmese and
Siamese), but also reported in Weimeraner.
Radiographic findings with tricuspid valve dysplasia:
4. Animals with mild disease may reach maturity. but most
1. Cardiac silhouette is enlarged, rounded, and has a smooth
die shortly after birth.
con tour.
5. Congestive heart failure usually develops at less than 5
2. Right atrium is largely dilated due to pressure and volume
months of age and rapidly progresses to terminal disease
overload.
(sudden death is frequent).
3. Pulmonary vessels usually are normal, but may be small
6. Clinical signs may include tachycardia, heart murmur.
(due to low right ventricular output).
arrhythmias, respiratory distress, and cyanosis.
4. May lead to right heart failure.
 7. Onset of clinical signs often is preceded by a respiratory
infection.
Radiographic findings with mitral vatve dysplasia
(Table 5.4):
Radiographic findings endocardial fibroelastosis:
1. Marked and excessive left atrial dilation is typical.
1. Mild to severe cardiomegaly. especially involving left
2. Left auricle may be enlarged (bulge at 3 o'clock).
ventricle and left atrium.
3. Left ventricle is only moderately enlarged (less than
2. Cardiac silhouette may have a rounded appearance.
expected with such severe left atrial dilation).
3. May lead to heart failure (right or left, depending on
4. Lung fields and pulmonary vessels are normal, unless left
defect).
heart failure develops.
5. May lead to left heart failure.
Differential diagnoses for endocardial fibroelastosis:
Endocardial cushion defects
1. Myocarditis (e.g., viral infection).
2. Other congenital heart disease (e.g., PDA, VSD, mitral.
Clinical correlations:
valve dysplasia).
1. Other names: persistent atrioventricular canal, atrioven-
3. Cardiomyopathy.
tricular defect.
2. Abnormal development of division between atria and
ventricles (endocardial cushion).
Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)
3. Complete defects allow persistent communication
Clinical correlations:
 between all four cardiac chambers.
1. Most common congenital heart defect in dogs, second
4. Incomplete defects create various anomalies that resem-
most common in cats.
ble mitral or tricuspid valve dysplasia.
2. Ductus arteriosus normally closes within first week of
5. Mitral and/or tricuspid valves are involved to variable degrees.
life.
6. Rare in dogs: more common in cats.
3. Failure of ductus to close allows continuing blood
7. Clinical signs include stunted growth, lethargy. poor body
 flow between aorta and pulmonary artery (high pressure
condition, exercise intolerance, and respiratory disease.
to low pressure or left-to-right shunting of blood), creating
turbulent blood flow, aortic dilation, and overcirculation of
Radiographic findings with endocardial cushion defects:
lungs.
1. With small defects, cardiomegaly is mild, generalized, and
4. Females more often are affected than males (greater
non specific.
than 2:1).
318
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
5. Concurrent heart defects may be present (e.g.. pulmonic
4. Main pulmonary artery segment is enlarged ("pulmo-
stenosis, aortic stenosis).
nary knob") due to turbulent left-to-right shunting of blood
6. Secondary mitral regurgitation is common.
and volume overload (may be difficult to see in cats).
7. Heart murmur is continuous (systolic and diastolic)
5. Left ventricle enlarges due to volume overload and
"machinery type," usually evident by 6 to 12 weeks of age and
loudest at left heart base (PMI: left axilla or thoracic inlet).
to-base dimension).
 8. Puppies often are asymptomatic; kittens tend to be more
6. Left atrium and left auricle are variably enlarged due to
severely infected.
9. In older animals, left heart failure is common (cough.
7. Presence of cardiac bulges at l o'clock (ductus bump).
exercise intolerance, dyspnea).
2 o'clock (pulmonary knob). and 3 o'clock (left auricle) is
10. Diagnosis is confirmed with echocardiography.
considered pathognomonic for PDA (tends to be more
ll. Many cases are surgically treatable by ligation of ductus
obvious in dogs than in cats).
a  s i n s nu l a
8. Pulmonary vessels are normal to large in size (depending
within a few years).
on degree of lung overcirculation).
12. Occasionally. pulmonary hypertension develops and
9. Caudal vena cava is normal size.
leads to increased right heart pressure and a right-to-left
s on a as aq a o  o
shunt (reverse PDA).
pattern, venous congestion, or left-sided congestive heart
failure and pulmonary edema.
Radiographic findings with PDA:
1. Depend on severity of lesion and animal's age at time of
Reverse patent ductus arteriosus
radiography.
Clinical correlations:
 2. Cardiac silhouette is moderately to severely enlarged.
1. Other names: hypertensive PDA.
 3. Proximal descending aorta is dilated ("ductus bump") due
2. Pulmonary hypertension and increased right heart pres-
to turbulent blood flow (Figure 5.50).
sure in an animal with a PDA leads to right-to-left shunting
a. DV/VD radiograph: aorta bulges to the left at l to 2
of blood, from pulmonary artery to aorta.
o'clock position.
3. Uncommon development.
b. Lateral radiograph: increased opacity near tracheal
4. Differential cyanosis is characteristic; cranial mucous
bifurcation (10 to 12 o'clock position).
membranes are normal (e.g.. lips. gums) and caudal
H
Figure 5.50 Patent ductus arteriosus. A. Lateral radiograph: left ventricle and left atrium are enlarged. Pulmonary vessels are enlarged due to
overcirculation. B. DV/D radiograph: proximal descending aorta is dlilated (black arrow), main pulmonary artery segment is enlarged (pulmonary knob,
large white arrow), left auricle is enlarged (small white arrow at 3 o'clock position), left ventricle is enlarged. Overcirculation to lungs results in increased
size of pulmonary vessels. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
319
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 5.51 Pulmonic stenosis. A. Lateral radiograph: cardliac silhouette is wicdened width with increased sternal contract; trachea is dorsally displaced.
B. DV/VD radiograph: main pulmonary artery segrment is enlarged (pulmonary knob, arrow), right ventricle is enlarged and rounded. (Adapted from
Owens and Biery 1999.)
membranes are cyanotic (e.g., genital mucosa, unpigmen ted
Pulmonic stenosis (PS; Figure 5.51)
toenails).
Clinical correlations:
5. Affected dogs often are older at time of diagnosis (more
1. Congenital narrowing or partial obstruction of right ven-
than 5 years of age).
tricular outflow tract.
6. Heart murmur usually is absent.
2. Leads to concentric right ventricular hypertrophy, turbu-
7. Clinical signs include hind limb weakness, exercise intol-
lent blood flow, and dilation of main pulmonary artery.
erance, dyspnea, tachypnea, tachycardia, lethargy. and
3. Third most common congenital heart defect in dogs: rare
syncope.
in cats.
8. Secondary polycythemia is common (due to renal perfu-
 4. Location of stenotic area is variable:
sion with hypoxemic blood).
a. Valvular is most common (over 80% of reported
9. Diagnosis may be confirmed with echocardiography.
cases): due to pulmonary valve dysplasia.
10. Surgical treatment is contraindicated; periodic phlebot-
b. Subvalvular or infundibular is second most common:
omy is commonly done to reduce packed cell volume (main-
due to muscular anomaly (may be associated with double
tain PCV less than 65%).
right ventricle).
c. Supravalvular stenosis is rare.
5. PS often is progressive because stenotic area fails to grow
Radiographic findings with reverse PDA:
with the animal.
1. Generalized enlargerment of cardiac silhouette.
6. Hereditary in beagle and probably in other breeds, to0.
 2. Right heart enlargement may predominate (due to right
7. Generally an isolated defect, but may occur with other
ventricular hypertrophy).
congenital anomalies (e.g., tetralogy of Fallot, ventricular
3. Main pulmonary artery segment is enlarged (pulmonary
septal defect, atrial septal defect).
knob).
 8. Systolic heart murmur is loudest over pulmonic valve
4. Aorta is normal size (no ductus bump).
(PMI: left cranial sternal border near 3rd intercostal space)
5. Left atrium and left ventricle are normal size or only
and may radiate up neck. (NOTE: Intensity of heart murmur
mildly enlarged.
does not correlate with severity of disease).
    ls   s  a
9. Clinical signs depend on severity of stenosis, animal's age.
to hypoperfusion).
and presence of concurrent cardiac defects:
7. In some cases, a reverse PDA will maintain radiographic
a. Many affected dogs are asymptomatic.
appearance of a left-to-right shunt.
b. Moderate stenosis leads to exercise intolerance and fatigue.
320
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
c. Severe stenosis can cause syncope and right heart
c. Position of heart is abnormal (mediastinal shift) due
failure.
to pulmonary or pleural disease.
10. Excessive right ventricular hypertrophy can result in
 arrhythmias and sudden death.
Tetralogy of Fallot
Clinical correlations:
Radiographic findings with PS:
1. A right-to-left, intracardiac shunt characterized by four
1. Main pulmonary artery segment is enlarged (pulmonary
cardiac abnormalities:
knob) due to turbulent blood flow (Table 5.4, Figure 5.51B).
a. Ventricular septal defect (high in septum).
b. Pulmonic stenosis (usually subvalvular or valvular).
Degree of enlargement does not correlate with severity of
c. Right ventricular hypertrophy (acquired and progres-
disease.
2. Mild to moderate cardiomegaly, predominately right ven-
sive due to pulmonic stenosisy.
d. Dextropositioning of aorta (aorta is "overriding" due
tricular enlargement due to hypertrophy.
3. Trachea is dorsally displaced but usually maintains its
to high VSD}.
caudal ventral deviation (dogs).
2. Uncommon in dogs and cats.
4. Pulmonary vessels usually
 are normal in size and
 3. Inherited in keeshond and probably in other breeds as
well.
distribu tion.
a. Rarely. a severe Ps leads to low right ventricular
4. Systolic heart murmur is due to pulmonic stenosis (PMI:
left heart base).
 5. Tricuspid valve insufficiency is a secondary complication
5. Severity of condition depends on:
and causes varying degrees of right atrial enlargement.
a. Degree of pulmonic stenosis (usually progresses as
6. May lead to right heart failure.
animal grows).
b. Size of ventricular septal defect.
c. Systemic vascular resistance (usually progressively
ventricular enlargement (heart follows sternum).
increases).
6. Clinical signs include stunted growth, cyanosis, weak-
Situs inversus
ness, exercise intolerance, tachypnea, tachycardia, polycy-
Clinical correlations:
themia, and syncope (usually evident by 3 to 6 months of 
1. Thoracic and/or abdominal viscera develop in reversed
age and increase in severity as animal grows).
positions (mirror images to normal locations).
2. Rare condition of unknown etiology.
3. Usually an incidental radiographic finding.
1. Cardiac silhouette may be normal or only slightly enlarged.
4. Affected animals are asymptomatic unless other anoma-
2. With larger defects, right ventricular enlargement pre-
lies are present.
dominates due to volume overload and hypertrophy.
5. May be associated with primary ciliary diskinesia or Kart-
3. Left atrium and left ventricle are normal or small due to
 agener's syndrome (latter is a triad that includes situs inver-
low blood return.
sus, sinusitis, and bronchitis).
4. Aortic arch may be enlarged (aortic bulge) due to turbu-
lent blood flow.
Radiographic findings with situs inversus:
5. Pulmonary vessels are small due to hypoperfusion (blood
1. Thoracic and/or abdominal viscera are reversed in posi-
 n so   d sss
tion, easiest to see on Dv/VD radiograph.
6. Lungs appear decreased in opacity due to decreased
2. Common anomalies include:
vasculature.
a. Cardiac apex is on right side.
b. Caudal vena cava is on left side
Vascular ring anomalies
C. Accessory lung lobe originates on left side.
Clinical correlations:
d. Gastric fundus is on right side and pyloric antrum is
1. Blood vessels arising from aortic arch develop abnormally
on left.
and encircle esophagus, causing an abnormal narrowing of
e. Left kidney is more cranial in position than right kidney.
esophageal lumen.
f. Head of spleen is on right side.
2. Types of vascular ring anomalies:
3. Kartagener's syndrome includes situs inversus and ciliary
a. Persistent right fourth aortic arch (most common,
diskinesia, a heritable condition.
95% of reported cases).
4. Conditions that may be confused with situs inversus
b. Aberrant right or left subclavian artery.
include:
c. Double aortic arch (may also cause narrowing of
a. Radiograph is mislabeled right versus left.
trachea).
b. Position is rotated.
d. Persistent right ductus arteriosus.
321
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
e. Aberrant intercostal arteries.
8. Clinical signs vary with severity of defect and may include
f. Persistent right dorsal aorta.
exercise intolerance.
cough, tachypnea, and dyspnea.
3. Persistent right fourth aortic arch occurs when aorta
Syncope is rare.
arises from right side instead of left and esophagus becomes
9. Eisenmenger's complex (rare) includes a large VsD, pul-
 ' an o  si   
monary hypertension, and right ventricular hypertrophy
arteriosum (on the left), and heart (ventrally).
(clinically similar to tetralogy of Fallot).
4. More often reported in dogs than in cats.
5. Clinical signs are related to esophageal compression, not
Radiographic findings with VSD:
cardiovascular disease.
1. With small vsD, cardiovascular structures often appear
6. Regurgitation begins when the puppy or kitten is weaned
normal on survey radiographs.
to solid food (usually before 3 months of age).
2. Larger defects result in variable degrees of generalized
7. Affected animals have stunted growth, ravenous appe-
ca rdiomegaly.
tite, and poor body condition.
 3. Right ventricular enlargement (due to volume overload
8. Coughing. nasal discharge, and respiratory distress com-
and hypertrophy) usually predominates and creates increased
monly result from aspiration pneumonia.
cardiac-to-sternum contact.
a. NOTE: Hypertrophy of right ventricle (as opposed to
dilation) frequently presents as a more focal contact
Radiographic findings with vascular ring anomalies:
1. Also see Esophagus.
between cardiac silhouette and sternum, with dorsal dis-
2. Cardiac silhouette is normal in size and shape.
placement of cardiac apex on lateral radiograph.
3. Esophagus is dilated cranial to base of heart, resulting in
4. Lungs are overcirculated due to left-to-right shunting of
increased opacity in cranial mediastinum and at thoracic inlet.
 blood and present with variable degrees of pulmonary vessel
4. Trachea and base of heart may be displaced ventrally.
enlargement and increased lung opacity.
5. Caudal esophagus usually is normal (rarely, concurrent
5. Left ventricular enlargement is mild (less than with PDA).
megaesophagus can occur).
Acquired heart disease
6. Trachea may be positioned to left of midline (if dextro-
Cardiomyopathy
aorta is present).
7. Aspiration pneumonia creates an alveolar pattern in
Clinical correlations:
dependent lungs.
1. Heart muscle disease resulting in functional, structural,
or morphologic pathology.
2. Most common cardiac disease in cats.
Contrast radiography (esophagram):
3. Second most common acquired heart disease in dogs
1. Variable dilation of cranial thoracic esophagus from base
(after endocardiosis).
of heart into cervical region (Figure 5.46).
4. May be primary (no known cause) or secondary (etiology
2. Esophagus rapidly narrows near fourth intercostal space.
is known; see Differential Diagnoses section, this chapter).
dorsal to base of heart.
A genetic component is suspected in many cases.
5. Diagnosis often is confirmed by echocardiography.
Ventricular septal defect (VSD)
 6. Clinically important to differentiate dilated and hypertro-
Clinical correlations:
phic forms of cardiomyopathy.
1. Abnormal communication between ventricles resulting
7. Disease frequently progresses to systolic and/or diastolic
in a left-to-right, intracardiac shunt (high pressure to low
dysfunction leading to arrhythmias, heart failure, or sudden
pressure).
death.
2. Third most common congenital heart disease in cats (after
mitral and tricuspid insufficiency).
 Canine dilated cardiomyopathy
3. Volume of shunted blood usually is less than with PDA.
Clinical correlations:
4. Size and location of interventricular defect are variable.
 1. Other names: congestive cardiomyopathy.
but most are small and high in the septum.
2. Primary or secondary heart disease characterized by
5. May be associated with other congenital cardiac anoma-
dilated chambers, poor contractility. and inability to effi-
lies (e.g., tricuspid dysplasia, pulmonic stenosis, aortic insuf-
ciently pump blood (systolic dysfunction).
ficiency, atrial septal defects, and/or mitral regurgitation).
3. Most often reported in purebred, large-breed, and giant-
6. Hereditary in keeshond and probably in other breeds.
breed dogs.
too.
4. Affects males more often than fermales.
7. Systolic heart murmur often is bilateral (PMI: right cra-
 5. Age range is 6 months to 14 years (average is 4 to 6
 nioventral thorax);: intensity of murmur is not proportional
years).
to size of defect or volume of blood shunted.
6. Systolic heart murmur may be present.
322
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
7. Cardiac arrhythmias are common (e.g., premature con-
c. Males and females are equally affected; age range is 2
tractions, atrial fibrillation).
to 9 years (average is 8 years).
8. In giant-breed dogs. atrial fibrillation may be present
d. Systolic heart murmur is due to mitral regurgitation.
without radiographic evidence of atrial enlargement.
e. Clinical signs include cough, exercise intolerance.
9. Cardiomyopathy secondary to taurine deficiency results
acute dyspnea, and sudden death.
from feeding a restricted diet (reported in American Cocker
f. Cardiomyopathy is a less common cause of left heart
Spaniel, Golden Retriever, Dalmatian).
failure in these dogs than endocardiosis and mitral valve
10. Juvenile form of cardiomyopathy occurs in Portuguese
insu fficiency.
water dogs (probably genetic), developing at 1 to 7 months
 g. Affected dogs may respond to taurine and L-carnitine
of age and often resulting in death
supplementation (may require weeks of therapy).
11. Clinical signs include dyspnea, cough, exercise intoler-
h. Diagnosis and response to therapy may be aided by
ance, syncope, and abdominal distension (latter with right
echocardiography.
heart failure}
 12. Doberman Pinscher cardiomyopathy:
Radiographic findings with canine dilated
a. Severe form of dilated cardiomyopathy most often
cardiomyopathy:
reported in middle-aged, male dogs.
1. Cardiac silhouette is enlarged and usually rounded in
b. Arrhythmias are common (ventricular
 premature
appearance.
con tra ctions}
 2. Left atrial dilation often is prominent.
c. Tachyarrhythmias may result in syncope or sudden
3. Disease commonly progresses to left or right congestive
death.
heart failure (Figure 5.52).
d. Systolic murmur is present due to mitral valve
4. Biventricular failure is uncommon (more often reported
insufficiency.
in giant-breed dogs) but results in pulmonary edema, pleural
e. Affected dogs typically exhibit acute clinical signs of
effusion, and ascites.
coughing or dyspnea (due to pulmonary edema).
5. Doberman Pinscher cardiomyopathy:
f. Prognosis is poor; most dogs die within 6 to 12 months
a. Left atrial dilation predominates.
of diagnosis.
b. Left ventricular enlargement may or may not be
13. Boxer cardiomyopathy:
evident.
a. Other names: Boxer arrhythmogenic right ventricular
c. In severe cases, cardiac silhouette may be generally
cardiomyopathy.
enlarged and rounded.
b. Hereditary heart muscle disease of Boxers, with vari-
6. Boxer cardiomyopathy:
able expression.
a. Cardiac silhouette may be normal or only mildly
C. Three categories of disease have been described:
enlarged (nonspecific cardiomegaly).
1) Concealed form: asymptomatic with arrhythmias
7. Cocker Spaniel cardiomyopathy:
(e.g., ventricular premature contractions).
 a. Mild to moderate cardiomegaly, often biventricular.
2) Overt form: episodes of weakness or syncope
b. Left atrial enlargement usually predominates.
without congestive heart failure.
c. Congestive heart failure is usually left sided.
3) Myocardial dysfunction: arrhythmias and conges-
tive heart failure.
Differential diagnoses for canine dilated cardiomyopathy:
d. Males are more commonly affected than females.
1. Endocardiosis with chronic mitral and tricuspid valve
e. Age range is 6 months to 15 years (average is 7 to 9
insufficiency.
years).
2. Pericardial effusion.
f. Arrhythmias are common (ventricular
premature
3. Congestive heart failure due to:
con tra ctions,
 paroxysmal
or sustained
ventricular
a. Myocarditis/endocarditis.
tachycardia).
b. Congenital heart disease.
 g. Systolic heart murmur is due to mitral regurgitation.
C. Myocardial neoplasia.
h. Disease usually progresses to congestive heart failure;
d. Heartworm disease.
sudden death may result from ventricular arrhythmias
e. Fibroelastosis (rare, affected animals are usually less
(Category II).
than I year old).
i. DNA testing is available to identify dogs at risk.
14. Cocker Spaniel cardiomyopathy:
Canine hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
a. Typically begins as left ventricular disease and pro-
Clinical correlations:
gresses to biventricular failure.
1. Heart disease characterized by abnormal thickening of
b. Reported in American and English Cocker Spaniels
ventricular walls, decreased size of ventricular lumen (con-
(possible familial predisposition).
centric hypertrophy). and diastolic dysfunction.
323
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 5.52 Canine dlilated cardliomyopathy and heart failure. A. Lateral radliograph: cardiac silhouette is generally enlarged with severe left atrial
dilation. Increased lung opacity is present in the hilar region. There is mild pleural effusion, consistent with combined left and right heart failure.
B. DV/D radliograph: generalized cardliomegaly results in increased lung opacity (pulmonary edema), which partially obscures caudal border of cardiac
silhouette. Pleural effusion is present bilaterally, resulting in visualization of pleural fissures and retraction of lung borders from thoracic wall. Caudal vena
(666l Aala pue suamo woy paidep) pabieua s! eae
2. Rare condition of unknown etiology, most often reported
3. Etiologies include:
in German Shepherd Dog. Rottweiler, And Dalmatian.
a. Taurine deficient diet (historically common, but
3. Usually involves left ventricle.
current incidence is low).
4. Males are more often affected than females.
b. May be genetic in Siamese, Abyssinian, and Burmese
5. Systolic heart murmur is due to turbulent left ventricular
cats.
outflow or mitral regurgitation.
4. Age range is 5 months to l6 years (most cats are older
6. Many affected dogs are asymptomatic. but cardiac
than 2 years).
arrhythmia may be present.
5. No gender predilection.
7. Clinical signs include weakness, syncope, and coughing.
6. Clinical signs are variable and nonspecific, including
8. Sudden death may result from arrhythmia.
anorexia. dyspnea, lethargy. and vomiting: syncope is
Uncommon.
Radiographic findings with canine hypertrophic
 7. Cardiac changes often resolve with taurine supplementa-
cardiomyopathy:
tion, if deficiency was the cause.
 1. Concentric hypertrophy of ventricle may or may not be
evident on survey radiographs.
Radiographic findings with feline dilated
 2. Left atrium is variably enlarged, depending on degree of
 mitral valve insufficiency.
cardiomyopathy:
 3. Cardiac silhouette may appear wide at heart base and
1. Moderate to severe, generalized cardiomegaly with
rounding of cardiac silhouette (Figure 5.53),
elongated, tapering toward the apex (i.e., triangular in shape
2. Left atrial enlargement may predominate.
due to dilated atria and concentric hypertrophy of ventricles).
 3. Cardiac silhouette may appear more upright in thoracic
4. May progress to left or right congestive heart failure.
cavity with less sternal contact (lateral radiograph).
Feline dilated cardiomyopathy
4. May lead to right or left heart failure.
Clinical correlations:
1. Other names: feline congestive cardiomyopathy.
Differential diagnoses for feline dilated
2. Primary or secondary heart disease characterized by thin-
cardiomyopathy:
ning of ventricular walls, poor cardiac contractility (systolic
1. Pericardial effusion.
dysfunction), and dilation of heart chambers.
 2. Peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia.
324
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
altanoulis reipien :ydeiboipel OvAa 'a papunou pue pabiejua s aanoulls pepien ydeboipel jelaten 'v AyredoAwoipien patep aullad es's aunbi
is enlarged and rounded and the caudal vena cava is dilated.
3. Congenital heart disease (e.g., VSD, mitral or tricuspid
 a. May result from vascular endothelial damage, sluggish
valve dysplasia, aortic stenosis).
blood flow, and increased blood coagulability.
4. Endocarditis.
b. Clinical signs depend on site of embolization, degree
and duration of obstruction, and collateral circulation.
Feline hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
c. Emboli most commonly lodge caudally at aortic trifur-
Clinical correlations:
cation and iliac arteries.
1. Primary or secondary heart disease characterized by:
d. Other sites include renal, mesenteric, brachial, coro-
a. Abnormal t
thickening of  myocardium,  papillary
nary, and cerebral arteries.
muscles, and interventricular septum.
e. Paresis or paralysis may be the only clinical sign in a
b. Decreased size of ventricular lumen.
cat with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
c. Increased myocardial stiffness.
d. Diastolic dysfunction.
Radiographic findings with feline hypertrophic
2. Most common heart disease in cats, most often reported
cardiomyopathy:
in male domestic shorthair.
1. Radiographic findings often do not correlate with clinical
3. Age range is 5 months to 17 years (usually middle-aged
severity of disease.
and older cats).
2. Cardiac silhouette may appear normal in size and shape
4. Hyperthyroidism is common etiology:
(due to concentric hypertrophy).
a. Causes chronic volume overload, systemic hyperten-
3. Left atrial enlargement is common and ranges from mild
sion, and high sympathetic tone.
to severe (Figure 5.54).
b. Thickening of myocardium is compensatory and may
4. Right atrial enlargement can occur; however, severe left 
resolve after successful treatment for hyperthyroidism.
atrial dilation may displace right atrium laterally, creating an
 5. Affected cats may present with gallop rhythm, low-grade
impression of right atrial enlargement.
systolic murmur, arrhythmia, weak femoral pulses, and/or
5. Classic shape of cardiac silhouette is a wide heart
cold extremities.
base that tapers toward the apex, creating a triangular
6. Clinical signs include tachypnea, tachycardia, anorexia.
shape (also described as valentine heart or ice cream cone
vomiting, dyspnea, weakness, exercise intolerance, panting.
shaped).
pain, and vocalization.
6. Cardiac silhouette usually maintains oblique position
7. Disease often leads to heart failure.
7. Left auricular enlargement ranges from mild to marked
cardiomyopa thy.
(bulge at 3 o'clock on DV/VD radiograph).
325
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 5.54 Feline hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Cardiac silhouette is enlarged and elongated (increased in apex-to-base dimension). A. Lateral
radiograph. B. DV/VD radiograph
B
Figure 5.55 Feline hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and heart failure. A. Lateral radiograph: cardiac silhouette is enlarged, especially at the heart base.
and rounded. Pulmonary vessels are enlarged and lungs are increased in opacity, resulting in indistinct and partially obscured vascular margins. B. DV/VD
radiograph: cardiac silhouete is enlarged, especially at the heart base, resulting in a triangular or valentine heart shape. Increased lung opacity
(pulrmonary edema) and mild pleural effusion are present, resulting in indistinct cardiovascular margin5.
8. Pulmonary veins may be enlarged and can appear
Feline restrictive cardiomyopathy
tortuous.
Clinical correlations:
9. May lead to left heart failure (Figure 5.55).
1. Primary heart disease characterized by ventricular wall
stiffness and poor (restricted) filling of ventricles.
Differential diagnoses for feline hypertrophic
2. Etiology is unknown, but endocardium and/or myocar-
cardiomyopathy:
dium are thickened with fibrotic, inflammatory, or immune-
1. Obesity: excessive pericardial and mediastinal fat deposits
mediated infiltrates.
can overlap the heart and mimic cardiomegaly (especially
3. Diastolic function is impaired, but systolic function is
on Dv/VD radiograph).
normal or near normal.
2. Other forms of feline cardiomyopathy.
4. Disease is less common than hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
326
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
5. Age range is 8 months to 19 years.
3. Most common acquired heart disease in dogs: uncom-
6. No breed or gender predilection.
mon in cats.
7. Cardiac arrhythmias often are present.
4. Etiology is unknown, but genetics and mechanical stresses
 8. Clinical signs usually are absent until heart failure causes
may be involved.
acute dyspnea, lethargy. and abdominal distension.
5. Highest incidence in small- to medium-size dog breeds.
9. Prognosis is guarded to poor for long-term survival.
6. Males are more often affected than females (l.5:1).
7. Valvular changes begin at l to 2 years of age and increase
Radiographic findings with restrictive cardiomyopathy:
in incidence and severity over time.
 1. Mild to moderate generalized cardiomegaly.
a. Mitral valve is most commonly affected.
2. Left atrial dilation often is marked, resulting in a trian-
b. Tricuspid valve is sometimes involved.
 gular or valentine heart shape to cardiac silhouette
c. Aortic and pulmonic valves are rarely affected.
3. May lead to heart failure with pulmonary edema and
8. Systolic heart murmur is common; occurs on left side
pleural effusion.
with mitral disease and right side with tricuspid disease.
9. Clinical signs usually are absent until cardiac decompen-
Endocarditis/myocarditis
sation occurs, resulting in tachypnea, exercise intolerance.
Clinical correlations:
lethargy, cough, weight loss, dyspnea, arrhythmias. and
1. Inflammation involving inner lining of cardiac chambers.
syncope.
 heart valves, and/or cardiac muscle (may be acute, subacute.
or chronic)
Radiographic findings with endocardiosis:
2. Uncommon in dogs and rare in cats (see Differential
1. Associated with affected valve as described below.
Dia gnoses section).
3. Most often affects mitral and aortic valves (tricuspid and
Heartworm disease
pulmonary valves rarely involved).
Clinical correlations:
4. Growths or nodules may develop on valve leaflets ("veg-
1. Adult parasitic nematodes (Diroflaria immifis or Angio-
eta tive" endocarditis).
strongyius vasorum) invade pulmonary arteries, and some-
 5. Increased risk in animals with immune deficiency. pre-
times right atrium and right ventricle.
existing or congenital heart disease, and in those with
2. Presence of worms leads to inflammation, vascular occlu-
damaged heart valves.
sion, pulmonary hypertension, thrombosis, infarction, or
6. Affected animals commonly develop valvular insuffi-
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).
ciency and may progress to congestive heart failure.
3. Diroflaria are transmitted by mosquitoes and occur
 7. Clinical signs depend on severity of valvular lesions and
worldwide in areas where mosquitoes are endemic.
presence of disease in other body systems (e.g., infection,
4. Angiostrongylus (French heartworm) are transmitted by
thromboembolism).
an intermediate host (slugs and snails) and found in Europe,
Canada, South America, and Africa.
Radiographic findings with endocarditis:
5. Animals living outdoors in endemic areas are at greater
 1. Thoracic radiographs usually are normal during acute
risk for infection.
infection.
6. Males are more often affected than females.
2. Chronic
infection  results  in  nonspecific
cardiac
7. Disease occurs in animals older than 6 months of age.
enlargement.
8. Clinical signs range from asymptomatic to cough, exer-
 3. May see focal alveolar filling and interstitial pneumonia
cise intolerance, dyspnea, lethargy. and weight loss (four
(due to thromboemboli or septicemia).
classes of heartworm disease are described in Box 5.1).
4. May lead to right or left heart failure, depending on
9. Marked radiographic changes may be present in animals
which parts of heart are affected.
without detectable microfilaria.
10. Aberrant worm migration or embolization to the brain
Differential diagnoses for endocarditis:
may cause neurological signs (more often reported in cats).
1. Endocardiosis.
 2. Mitral valve insufficiency.
Heartworm disease in cats
 3. Aortic valve insu fficiency.
1. Infections are less common than in dogs and tend to be
self-limiting.
Endocardiosis
2. Worms typically are fewer and smaller than in dogs and
Clinical correlations:
have shorter lifespans.
1. Other names: chronic valvular heart disease.
3. Affected cats seldom cough, but frequently have asthma-
2. Slowly progressive. noninflammatory (myxomatous)
like signs and respiratory distress (referred to as heartworm-
degeneration and deformation of atrioventricular valves.
associated respiratory disease, or HARM).
327
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
4. Vomiting is common in affected cats.
Box 5.1 Classes of heartworm disease.
 5. Radiographic differential diagnoses includes asthma
 Class I - Mild or occult form of disease
Radiographic findings with hearfworm disease:
· Animals are usually asymptomatic.
1. Radiographs often are normal with early or mild
● Thoracic radiographs are normal or only mild cardiovascular
infections.
abnormalities.
2. Persistent infection leads to progressive enlargement of
ClassIl - Moderate form of disease
right ventricle (due to hypertrophy: Figure 5.56).
● Occasional coughing. mild exercise intolerance, and 
3. Pulmonary arteries progressively enlarge, more severe
sometimes fever
Adqe iadei oi pue shono readde Aaun un aeuxoid
· Moderate cardiovascular abnormalities on thoracic
(vessels are described as "blunted" or "pruned" in advanced
radiographs:
cases).
● Enlarged pulmonary arteries (especially in right caudal 
a. Caudal pulmonary arteries tend to be most severely
Iung).
affected (especially on right side).
●Right ventricular enlargement.
b. All pulmonary arteries eventually will enlarge.
·Pulmonary knob may or may not be present.
c. Very large, blunted arteries may be mistaken for pul-
Class Ill - Severe heartworm disease
monary nodules.
·Dyspnea, frequent cough, weight loss, lethargy. hemoptysis,
 4. Main pulmonary artery segment enlarges (pulmonary
abdominal distention.
knob).
● Severe cardiovascular abnormalities on thoracic radiographs:
 5. Lung pattern is predominately vascular, but a local or
● Enlarged and tortuous pulmonary arteries that taper
 general interstitial and/or alveolar pattern may develop due
abruptly.
 to eosinophilic pneumonia, thromboembolic disease, or pul-
·Significant right heart enlargement.
monary infarction.
·Prominent pulmonary knob.
6. May lead to right heart failure.
· Lung disease (interstitial to alveolar pattern).
7. Thromboembolic disease may present with similar radio-
·Right heart failure (hepatomegaly, ascites, pleural fluid,
graphic findings.
dilated vena cava)
8. Cats:
Class IV - Caval syndrome, extremely severe disease 
a. Vascular changes tend to be more dynamic; central
● Clinical signs as in Class Ill plus hemoglobinuria
and peripheral pulmonary arteries may enlarge, subse-
· Cardiovascular abnormalities same as in Class Ill, but more
quently reduce in size, and then enlarge again.
severe.
b. A nonspecific, generalized interstitial lung pattern
often develops (often indistinguishable from asthma on
ra diographs).
c. Rarely leads to right heart failure.
Figure 5.56 Heartworm disease. A. lateral radiograph: right heart is enlarged due to ventricular hypertrophy, which results in focal increased sternal
contact and dorsal displacement of cardiac apex fromm sternum (arrow). Pulrnonary arteries are dilated, tortuou5, and taper abruptly. B. DV/VD
Aae Aeuond uie al au puemoi xade nepien pue em pieiou aun ot laso japiog ueay iyu au buou paieua s! alpuan uou ydeaoe
 segment is enlarged (arrow) and pulmonary arteries are dlilated, tortuous, and taper abruptly.
328
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
Mitral valve insuffciency
3. Left auricle enlarges in more severe cases.
Clinical correlations:
4. Left ventricle is variably enlarged depending on duration
1. Other names: chronic mitral valve disease, mitral valve
 and severity of insufficiency.
regurgitation, or incompetence.
5. Concurrent tricuspid valve insuffciency may lead to right
2. Mitral valve is unable to maintain unidirectional blood
ventricular enlargement.
flow between left atrium and left ventricle.
6. May lead to left heart failure.
3. Results in volume overload in left atrium and eccentric
7. Severe dilation of left atrium can result in tearing of atrial
hypertrophy of left ventricle.
wall and hemorrhage into pericardial space (pericardial
 4. Ultimately progresses to left-sided congestive heart failure 
effusion).
(and sometimes right-sided heart failure).
8. Acute, severe mitral valve insuffciency (e.g., ruptured
5. Most common valvular disease in adult dogs of all breeds
(older than 5 years of age).
cardiac silhouette but severe pulmonary edema (emergency
6. Acquired mitral valve insufficiency is uncommon in cats.
situation).
7. Endocardiosis is most common etiologies
 9. Serial thoracic radiographs aid in monitoring progression
8. Systolic heart murmur (PMI: left 5th or 6th intercostal
of heart disease (frequency may be annual or more often as
space) increases in intensity over time but may not correlate
clinically indicated) .
with severity of hemodynamic changes. Tricuspid valve
Differential diagnoses for mitral valve insufciency:
insufficiency may be concurrent.
1. Mitral valve stenosis (rare).
9. Clinical signs usually are absent unless left heart failure
2. Endocarditis.
occurs, resulting in moist cough, tachypnea, restlessness at
night, panting. exercise intolerance, dyspnea, and syncope.
Tricuspid valve insuffciency
10. Cough may be caused by bronchial compression (due to
Clinical correlations:
enlarged left atrium) rather than by heart failure.
1. Other names: tricuspid regurgitation.
11. Animals with ruptured chordae tendinae or papillary
2. Tricuspid valve is unable to maintain unidirectional blood
muscle present in acute cardiac decompensation.
flow between right atrium and right ventricle.
3. Common in older dogs: uncommon in cats.
Radiographic findings with mitral valve insufficiency:
4. Usually occurs secondary to mitral valve insufficiency
1. Left atrial enlargement often is only finding with early or
(isolated tricuspid insufficiency is rare).
mild insufficiency.
5. Systolic heart murmur often is bilateral due to concurrent
2. Over time, left atrium can become largely dilated (Figure
mitral insufficiency, but may be loudest over tricuspid valve 
5.57).
(PMI: right 3rd to 5th intercostal space).
Figure 5.57 Mitral valve insufficiency. A. Lateral radiograph: left atrium is enlarged and trachea is dorsally displaced. Cranial lobar veins are enlarged
and increased lung opacity is present in hilar area, fading into peripheral lungs (mixed interstitial and alveolar pattern). B. DV/VD radiograph: left
ventricular border is enlarged and rounded with a bulge at the 3 o'clock position (area of left auricle, white arrow). Enlarged left atrium creates a double
cardiac border (black arrows). Caudal pulmonary veins are enlarged. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1 999.)
329
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 5.58 Tricuspid insufficiency resulting in enlargement of the right atrium. A. Lateral radiograph: cardiac silhouette is widened with a bulge along
the cranial bordler. B. DV/D radiograph: right cranial border of cardliac sihouette is enlarged, expanding into the right cranial thoracic quadrant.
(Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
6. Clinical signs usually are absent unless right heart failure
a. Arises from chemoreceptor tissues in aorta.
occurs. resulting in distended abdomen (hepatomegaly
b. Usually benign, slow growing. and slow to metastasize.
and ascites), exercise intolerance, and dyspnea (pleural
C. Can spread to heart, lungs., liver, and other organs.
effusion).
d. Most often reported in brachycephalic dogs; rare in cats.
2. Higher incidence in males and spayed females.
Radiographic findings with tricuspid valve insufficiency:
3. Average age at diagnosis is l0 years.
1. Enlargement of right atrium causes cranial border of
4. Pericardial effusion is common and can lead to right heart
cardiac silhouette to bulge  forward (lateral  radiograph)
failure (cardiac tamponade).
and expansion of right cranial cardiac border (Dv/VD radio-
5. Clinical signs include muffled heart sounds, cough,
graph) (Figure 5.58)
dyspnea, anorexia, weight loss, vomiting. weakness, and
2. Mitral valve insufficiency usually is concurrent, resulting
abdominal distention (latter caused by right heart failure).
in variable left atrial and left ventricular enlargement.
3. Right ventricle enlarges in more advanced cases, resulting
Radiographic findings with heart base fumor:
in generalized cardiomegaly.
1. Trachea may be dorsally displaced and may or may not
4. Right heart failure is rare unless more severe disease
retain the caudal ventral deviation.
is present  (e.g.. heartworm disease, cardiomyopathy.
 2. Mass effect may be evident near aorta, pulmonary artery.
endocarditis).
right or left atrium (Figure 5.59):
3. Large heart base masses typically displace trachea toward
Tumors of heart
the right (Figure 5.59B).
1. Cardiac neoplasia is rare but can involve myocardium.
4. Pericardial effusion is common with heart base masses
endocardium, epicardium, or develop near base of the large
(Figure 5.61):
vessels.
a. Cardiac silhouette is enlarged and globoid in
2. May cause cardiac arrhythmias, compromise chamber
appearance.
filling, or obstruct cardiac output.
b. Margins of mass are obscured.
3. Pericardial effusion is common and may compress the
c. Pulmonary vessels and aorta may be small due to low
heart (cardiac tamponade).
venous return and low cardiac output.
4. Hemangiosarcoma and chemodectoma are most common
d. Right heart failure may result from tamponade.
cardiac tumors.
5. Pulmonary metastatic lesions may be present.
5. Clinical signs include anorexia, exercise intolerance, and
weight loss.
Myocardial tumor
Clinical correlations:
Heart base tumor
1. Tumors occurring in walls of heart.
Clinical correlations:
2. Usually malignant (see Differential Diagnoses section,
1. Chemodectoma (aortic body tumor) is most common:
this chapter).
330
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
Figure 5.59 Heart base mass. A. Lateral radiograph: trachea is dorsally displaced at the heart base. Pericardial effusion is common with heart base
masses and often obscures the margins of the mass (pericardial effusion is not present in this case). B. DV/D radiograph: trachea is displaced toward
the right by heart base ma5s. (Adapted from Owen5 and Biery 1999.)
3. Hemangiosarcoma is most common and may invade
2. Heart disease is not the same as heart failure. Cardio-
right atrium, right auricle, and/or atrioventricular junction
megaly often is present in both, but heart failure results in
(German Shepherd Dogs are predisposed).
passive venous congestion, which leads to pulmonary edema
4. Lymphoma is more common in cats than in dogs.
or body cavity effusion (i.e., heart disease is distinguished
 5. Metastatic tumors usually involve left heart.
from heart failure by presence or absence of pulmonary
6. Benign cardiac tumors are uncommon.
edema, pleural effusion, or ascites)
7. Clinical signs depend on location and extent of disease
3. Right heart congestive failure is caused by insufficient right
and include exercise intolerance, weakness, collapse,
ventricular output, which decreases heart's ability to accept
syncope, or seizures.
returning systemic blood and leads to increased venous pressure
and fluid accumulation in thoracic and abdominal cavities.
a. Clinical signs of right heart failure include exercise intol-
Radiographic findings with myocardial fumors:
erance, abdominal distention (due to ascites and hepato-
1. Variable enlargement of cardiac silhouette; may have an
megaly), and labored breathing (due to pleural effusion).
unusual or irregular shape.
2. Pericardial effusion is common and creates a globoid
4. Left heart congestive failure is caused by insufficient left
appearance to cardiac silhouette.
ventricular output, which compromises heart's ability to accept
 3. Tumors inside a heart chamber rarely cause enlargement
blood from lungs. Lungs can accommodate up to two times
of cardiac silhouette.
their normal blood volume before increased capillary pressure
forces fluid to leak from pulmonary veins into lung interstitium.
4. May lead to right or left congestive heart failure.
a. Clinical signs of left heart failure include:
5. Intra-abdominal organomegaly may be present (due to
1) Tachypnea, labored breathing (due to pulmonary
metastatic disease or right heart failure).
edema).
6. Peritoneal effusion may be caused by intra-abdominal
tumor rupture (hemoabdomen) or right heart failure.
2) Lethargy. exercise intolerance (due to low cardiac
7. Pulmonary metastatic lesions may be present.
output and pulmonary edema).
3) Cough, often more severe at night and sometimes
paroxysmal; cough may yield pink frothy fluid. (NOTE:
Differential diagnoses for myocardial tumor:
Cardiomegaly may induce cough by physical compres-
1. Cardiomyopathy.
sion of mainstem bronchus, without presence of con-
2. Endocardiosis.
 gestive heart failure).
4) Syncope.
Congestive heart failure
Clinical correlations:
Radiographic findings with right heart failure:
1. Inability of heart to maintain adequate circulation at
1. Fluid in peritoneal cavity (more common in dogs than in
normal venous pressure.
cats).
331
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
2. Variable volume of pleural effusion (more common in
 2. Peritoneal-mediastinal diaphragmatic hernias can also
cats than in dogs).
occur.
3. Hepatomegaly (due to venous congestion).
3. Liver, falciform fat, gall bladder, small intestine, and/or
4. Caudal vena cava enlargement.
stomach commonly are displaced.
5. Pulmonary vessels may be normal or small in size.
4. Hernia is congenital and nontraumatic, never acquired
6. Right ventricular enlargement.
(no direct communication exists between peritoneal and
7. Right atrial enlargement may or may not be visible.
 pericardial cavities after birth).
8. Pericardial effusion commonly leads to right heart failure
5. May be hereditary, especially in long-haired cats (litter-
and typically presents with a globoid appearance to cardiac
mates should be examined).
silhouette.
6. Weimeraner is overrepresen ted.
9. Pulmonary knob may be present (e.g., heartworm disease.
7. Often an incidental finding (more than half of cases are
pulmonic stenosis).
asymptomatic).
8. Heart sounds usually are muffled or displaced.
Radiographic findings with left heart failure:
9. Secondary chylothorax has been reported.
1. Pulmonary
veins are larger
than
 corresponding
10. Affected animals may have gastrointestinal disease
arteries.
(more common in dogs)  or respiratory disease (more
2. Pulmonary edema is present in variable degrees of
common in cats).
severity:
11. Potential exists for cardiac tamponade or strangulation
a. Initially, leakage of fluid causes blurring of vascular
of bowel or liver.
 margins (perivascular infiltrates) and increased intersti-
12. PPDH may be accompanied by:
tial lung opacity.
 a. Umbilical hernia.
b. Fluid entering small bronchioles leads to local atelec-
b. Abnormal swirling of hair on ventral abdomen.
 tasis and peribronchial cuffing.
c. Sternal anomalies (e.g. pectus excavatum, incomplete/
c. Fluid that can no longer be contained in interstitial
 absent sternebrae, fused sternebrae).
space spills into alveoli, creating ill-defined alveolar
d. Cardiac defects (e.g., VSD).
 pattern, sometimes with air bronchograms.
e. Pulmonary vascular disease.
3. In dogs, pattern of ederma usually is bilateral and sym-
f. Hydrocephalus.
metrical, most severe in hilar and central lung fields, and
less severe in peripheral lungs.
Radiographic findings with PPDH:
4. In cats, edema tends to be patchy and asymmetrical,
1. Cardiac silhouette is enlarged and rounded or irregular
 mostly involving perihilar and peripheral lung fields.
in shape (Figure 5.60).
5. Right lung may be more severely affected (due to varia-
2. Trachea is dorsally displaced but usually retains the
tions in lymphatic drainage).
caudal ventral curvature (dogs).
6. Asymmetric pulmonary edema in dogs often indicates a
3. Cardiac silhouette is heterogeneous in opacity due to
complication (e.g., pneumonia, lung collapse, thromboem-
presence of fat, gas, or both in pericardial space.
bolic disease) or may occur in dogs that have been laterally
4. Intra-abdominal viscera are cranially displaced and/or
recumbent.
diminished ("empty abdomen").
7. Left atrium and ventricle usually are enlarged; left auricle
5. Cranioventral margin of diaphragm is poorly visualized
may be enlarged.
or absent
8. Trachea is dorsally displaced and loses the caudal ventral
6. Borders of diaphragm and cardiac silhouette usually
deviation (dogs).
blend together without overlap.
9. Left mainstem bronchus may be narrowed due to com-
7. Deformities of sternum may be present (e.g., sternal
 pression by large left atrium.
dysra phism).
 10. Pleural effusion is uncommon in dogs. but is common
8. Pleural effusion may result from secondary chylothorax
in cats with left heart failure.
or right heart failure.
9. Umbilical hernia may be present.
Pericardial disease
10. In cats a thin, horizontal line may be visible between
 Peritoneal-pericardial diaphragmatic hernia
heart and diaphragm, representing a peritoneal-pericardial
(PPDH)
mesothelial remnant (lateral radiograph).
Clinical correlations:
1. Developmental anomaly in which a persistent com-
Differential diagnoses for PPDH:
munication between pericardial space and peritoneal
1. Pericardial effusion (e.g., neoplasia, idiopathic).
2. Cardiomyopathy.
cardial sac.
3. Diaphragmatic hernia.
332
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
Figure 5.60 Peritoneal-pericardlial diaphragmatic hernia. Cardiac silhouette is enlarged, rounded, and heterogeneous in opacity with curvilinear fluid
and gas-filled segrments of small intestine in the pericardial space. A. Lateral radiograph: trachea is dorsally displaced. B. DV/VD radiograph. (Adapted
from Owens and Biery 1999.)
Pericardial effusion
2. Type of fluid cannot be determined on survey radio-
Clinical correlations:
graphs (all fluid is same opacity).
1. Abnormal accumulation of fluid in pericardial space.
3. Pericardial fluid surrounds heart on all sides except at
2. Etiology may no longer present at time of diagnosis and
heart base, resulting in a globoid appearance to cardiac sil-
effusions often are classified as idiopathic (see Differential
houette (Figure 5.61).
Diagnoses section, this chapter).
4. Trachea is dorsally displaced, but less than with left atrial
 3. Most often reported in male dogs. greater than 6 years of
enlargement and usually retains the caudal ventral curva-
age and more than 20 kg in weight.
ture (dogs).
4. Hermorrhagic effusions may result from neoplastic
5. Cardiac silhouette may be irregular in shape due to:
erosion, trauma, coagulopathy. or severe dilation and
a. Right atrial tumor (bulge along right cranial cardiacborder).
rupture of left atrium (latter most often is reported in smaller
b. Severe left atrial dilation and rupture.
dogs such as Dachshund, Poodle, Cocker Spaniel).
C. Pericardial mass (e.g., cyst, granuloma, abscess).
5. Benign, idiopathic effusions have been reported in
d. Heart base tumor (increased opacity and dorsal eleva-
 Golden Retriever and German Shepherd Dog.
tion of tracheal bifurcation).
6. Clinical signs depend on type of fluid, volume, and rate
6. Acute, rapid pericardial effusion may not affect appear-
of accumulation:
ance of cardiac silhouette and can produce tamponade.
a. Mild pericardial effusion usually is asymptomatic.
7. Pulmonary vessels may be small due to low venous blood
b. Moderate, slowly accumulating effusions gradually
return.
compress the heart, eventually causing right heart failure
8. Pericardial effusion commonly leads to right heart failure.
(lethargy, weakness, dyspnea, exercise intolerance, exer-
9. Differentiating pericardial effusion from cardiomegaly
tion syncope, and abdominal distension).
may be challenging (Table 5.5).
c. Severe, rapid fluid accumulation results in an acute
Differential diagnoses for pericardial effusion:
decrease in cardiac output (severe weakness, collapse.
1. Generalized cardiomegaly (e.g. cardiomyopathy. advanced
and sometimes sudden death).
 7. Affected animals may have jugular pulse (due to systermic
endocardiosis}.
 2. Peritoneo-pericardial diaphragmatic hernia.
venous hypertension).
8. Heart sounds usually are muffled.
Constrictive pericarditis
Clinical correlations:
Radiographic findings with pericardial effusion:
1. Other names: restrictive pericarditis.
1.  Variable enlargement of cardiac silhouette (degree of 
 2. Thickening, fibrosis, and scarring of pericardium caused
enlargement is proportional to volume and rate of accumu-
by a chronic or recurring inflammatory process (frequently
lation of pericardial fluid).
involves myocardium too).
333
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
1
Figure 5.61 Pericardial effusion. Cardiac silhouette is enlarged and globoid in appearance. Pulmonary vessels are small and caudal vena cava i5
 enlarged. A. Lateral radliograph. B. DV/VD radliograph. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
3. Inciting etiology often is no longer evident at time of
Table 5.5 Differentiating pericardial effusion and cardiormegaly
diagnosis and most cases are considered idiopathic (see Dif-
ferential Diagnoses section, this chapter).
 Pericardial
 Generalized 
4. Pericardial effusion is common, but volume of pericardial
 Effu sion
 Cardiomegaly
fluid is inversely related to degree of pericardial thicken-
Cardliac shape
Globoid 
Rounded
ing (i.e., less fluid is present with greater pericardial
thickening).
 Cardliac margin
Smooth, sharp
Contours of heart
 5. Clinical signs are due to restriction of cardiac function
(absence of cardiac
 chambers diminished 
and include weakness, fatigue, weight loss, and right heart
motion blur)
but still recognizable 
failure (latter includes abdominal distention and dyspnea).
 Left atrium
 Usually normal size 
Commonly dilated 
6. Heart sounds may be muffled, but not as severe as with
Heart failure
 Right sided 
 Usually left sided 
pericardial effusion.
 7. Venous hypertension is common and a jugular pulse may
 Pulmonary edema 
Absent
Often present
be present (easier to see in short-haired animals).
 Pleural effusion
 May be present
Usually absent
Veins often are
Radiographic findings with constrictive pericarditis:
 Pulmmonary vessels
 Normal to smmall in size 
 enlarged 
1. Cardiac silhouette is normal to small in size and does not
change in appearance on serial radiographs.
Caudal vena cava
 Often dilated
 Normal size
Aorta
Small
Norrmal size
dial thickening. pericardial nodules (e.g., abscesses, granu-
Greater dorsal
lomas). or pockets of trapped fluid.
Trachea
 Mild dorsal elevation
Retains caudal ventral
 elevation 
3. Often leads to right heart failure.
curvature
 Loses caudal ventral
curvature
Pneumopericardium
Clinicalcorrelations:
1. Gas in pericardial sac (uncommon in dogs and cats).
2. Typically caused by rupture of alveoli and migration of
air along perivascular sheaths to lung hilum, middle medi-
astinum, and into pericardial space.
3. Rapid influx of air into pericardium can result in tam-
ponade (emergency situation)
334
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
4. Animals with small pneumopericardium or gradual accu-
3. Etiology is unknown; may be congenital (possibly genetic)
mulation of air often remain asymptomatic.
or acquired.
4. Most often reported in older toy and miniature breed
Radiographic findings with pneumopericardium:
dogs (e.g.. Yorkshire Terriers, Poodles. Chihuahuas.
1. Vary with volume of gas in pericardial space.
Pomeranians).
2. Typically, a thin, curvilinear gas opacity is present between
5. Rarely seen in cats and large-breed dogs.
heart and pericardium (repeatable on serial radiographs).
6. Clinical signs usually develop around 6 to 7 years of age
 3. Concurrent lung disease or signs of thoracic trauma may
but can be seen as young as l year of age.
be present.
7. Many affected animals are asymptomatic.
4. Superimposed structures may mimic pneumopericar-
8. Most common clinical sign is chronic, nonproductive.
dium:
honking cough ("goose honk" cough), which is easily induc-
a. Skin fold.
ible during tracheal palpation, when pulling against a collar,
b. Subcutaneous emphysema.
or with excitement. Cough can become paroxysmal.
c. Pneumomediastinum.
9. Other signs include inspiratory or expiratory dyspnea.
d. Pneumothorax.
wheezing. chronic bronchitis, exercise intolerance, cyanosis.
and syncope.
Pericardial masses
10. Signs often progress with age and are aggravated
Clinical correlations:
by obesity. environmental irritants (i.e., secondhand
    n a ss l 
smoke), cardiomegaly (especially left atrial dilation), and
pericardial effusion.
bronchitis.
2. Large masses may interfere with normal cardiac
movement.
3. Heart sounds usually are mufled.
Radiographic findings with tracheal collapse syndrome:
4. Clinical signs are due to pericardial effusion and include
1. Often a dynamic condition, requiring both inspiratory
weakness, lethargy. collapse, and right heart failure (latter
and expiratory radiographs for detection (see chapter 1,
includes distended abdomen and dyspnea).
Figure 1.29}.
2. Collapse of cervical trachea tends to occur during inspira-
Radiographic findings with pericardial masses:
tion (due to decreased intraluminal pressure).
1. Variable enlargement of cardiac silhouette, depending on
3. Thoracic tracheal collapse tends to occur during expira-
volume of pericardial fluid.
tion (due to increased extraluminal pressure).
2. Small masses (e.g., chemodectoma) with small effusions
4. Greater than 50% narrowing of tracheal lumen is abnor-
cause little change to size and shape of cardiac silhouette.
mal (Figure 5.62).
3. Large effusions create a globoid appearance (e.g., hem-
5. Trachea may expand or balloon in cervical region during
angiosarcoma, mesothelioma) 
expiration as increased intraluminal pressure pushes dorsal
4. Cardiac silhouette may be irregular in shape due to peri-
tracheal membrane outward.
cardial mass effect.
6. Skyline radiograph made at thoracic inlet may docu-
5. Heart base masses tend to displace trachea dorsally and
ment "flattened circle" or "crescent-shaped" cross-sectional
to the right.
appearance of trachea (normal trachea is round or oval in
6. Pulmonary nodules may be present due to metastatic
cross-section}
lung disease.
7. Degree and location of tracheal collapse is variable, but
7. Disease commonly leads to right heart failure
typically occurs in caudal cervical region or at tracheal bifur-
 8. Intra-abdominal organomegaly may result from meta-
cation and sometimes in both locations.
static disease or right heart failure and venous congestion.
8. Collapse of mainstem bronchi may also be present,
usually at carina during expiration.
9. Masses near heart base (e.g., left atrial dilation, lymph-
Trachea and bronchi
adenopathy) can compress caudal tracheal and bronchi.
aggravating collapse syndrome.
Tracheal collapse syndrome
10. Dorsal border of trachea may appear blurred due to
Clinical correlations:
inflammation and exudates.
1. Weakness in tracheal cartilage results in outward flaring
1l. Tracheal margins may be irregular due to uneven or
of tracheal rings. elongation of dorsal tracheal membrane.
deformed tracheal rings.
and flattening of trachea.
12. May see a double dorsal tracheal wall due to obliqued
 2. Mainstem bronchi may also be affected, usually collaps-
position of flattened trachea (see chapter 1, Figure l.30).
ing near the carina.
Ventral tracheal margin remains straight and well-defined.
335
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 5.62 Tracheal collapse (lateral radiograph). Tracheal lumen
Figure 5.63 Tracheal hypoplasia (lateral radiograph). Entire trachea i5
narrows near thoracic inlet. Narrowing often is dynamic, increasing
narrowed and tracheal wicdth does not change between inspiration and
during expiration and decreasing during inspiration. (Adapted from
expiration. (Adapted frorm Owens and Biery 1999.)
Owens and Biery 1999.)
13. Thickening of bronchial walls is common.
future problems; follow-up radiographs are recommended
14. Compensatory right heart enlargement or cor pulmo-
in immature animals to document hypoplasia.
nale may be present.
Radiographic findings with tracheal hypoplasia:
15. Superimposed shoulder muscles, fat, or longus coli mus-
1. Trachea is narrowed on all radiographs (Figure 5.63).
cles may be mistaken for tracheal collapse (dorsal tracheal
2. Tracheal ratio is less than 0.20 (less than 0.16 in brachyce-
border remains visible during superimposition).
phalic breeds and less than 0.10 in Bulldogs: Figure 5.23).
16. Hyperextended head and neck may artifactually narrow
3. Tracheal diameter does not change between inspiration
tracheal lumen.
and expiration.
4. Usually involves entire trachea (larynx to carina). but can
Differential diagnoses for tracheal collapse syndrome:
be segmental.
1. Redundant dorsal tracheal membrane.
5. Tracheal wall may be thickened and ill-defined due to
2. Hypoplastic trachea.
3. Tracheal stenosis.
inflammation.
6. Mainstem bronchi may be larger than trachea, but occa-
4. Tracheal mass.
sionally they, too, are hypoplastic.
7. Cross-sectional shape of tracheal lumen often is more
Tracheal hypoplasia
rounded than the elliptical shape common with tracheal
Clinical correlations:
1. Congenital defect in development of tracheal carilage
collapse syndrome (easiest to see on slkyline radiograph, see
chapter 2, Figure 2.32).
resulting in closed or nearly closed tracheal rings.
8. Thickening of bronchial walls is common.
2. Dorsal tracheal membrane is virtually absent and tracheal
9. Aerophagia is common and may be severe.
lumen is abnormally narrowed.
10. Aspiration pneumonia may be present.
3. Other congenital anomalies may be present (e.g., ste-
1l. Concurrent megaesophagus may be present.
notic nares, elongated soft palate, megaesophagus, cardiac
12. Conditions that may mimic tracheal hypoplasia:
defects).
a. Superimposition artifact (e.g.. esophagus, shoulder
4. Most often reported in brachycephalic breeds (e.g., English
muscles, fat, longus coli muscles).
Bulldog. Boston Terrier, Boxer), but also occurs in Bull Mastiff
b. Hyperextended head and neck.
and occasionally Labrador Retriever, Golden Retriever.
German Shepherd Dog. Weimeraner, and Bassett Hound.
Differential diagnoses for tracheal hypoplasia:
5. Males are more often affected than females (2:l).
1. Redundant dorsal tracheal membrane (dorsal border of
6. Clinically more severe in animals with multiple congeni-
trachea is visible above redundant membrane).
tal defects.
2. Severe tracheitis (can cause thickened tracheal wall and
7. May be
well tolerated in animals without other
excessive exudates, resulting in a narrowed tracheal lumen;
anomalies.
more often reported in young animals),
8. Clinical signs include continuous respiratory distress,
3. Tracheal collapse syndrome (lateral radiographs made
coughing. recurrent tracheitis, recurrent pneumonia, aspira-
during inspiration and expiration aid in documenting
tion pneumonia, and decreased exercise tolerance.
dynamic narrowing)
9. In some dogs. growth of trachea may be temporarily
4. Stenosis of trachea (usually local narrowing as opposed
delayed, without evidence of disease or development of
336
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
Endotracheal masses and foreign material
4. Clinical signs include hemoptysis, wheezing. dyspnea.
Clinical correlations:
stridor, swelling in neck and thorax.
1. Masses include granuloma, abscess, polyp. neoplasm, or
5. Tracheobronchial
ruptures 
are
best
assessed by
thickened mucosal fold.
tracheoscopy.
2. Granuloma or abscess typically results from foreign mate-
 rial but may be caused by parasites or be iatrogenic (e.g.
Radiographic findings with tracheal rupture:
rough intubation, overinflated endotracheal tube cuff.
1. Site of rupture usually is not evident on survey
tracheostomy).
radiographs.
3. Neoplasia is uncommon in tracheal lumen of dogs and
2. Tracheal tear may appear as a thin line of increased
cats.
opacity where tracheal ends overlap.
4. Foreign objects typically lodge at tracheal bifurcation, but
3. Trachea may be displaced or torn ends may be widely
       s 
 separated.
chus (right caudal bronchus is most commonly affected).
4. Adjacent soft tissues are swollen.
 5. Clinical signs vary depending on size, location, and asso-
5. Emphysema develops in deep cervical fascia and medias-
ciated inflammation:
tinum (pneumomediastinum).
a. Tracheal sensitivity is increased.
6. Subcutaneous emphysema can be severe and extensive,
b. Cough is common, usually nonproductive and unre-
involving most of thorax and abdomen.
sponsive to antibiotics.
7. Air in mediastinum may extend to retroperitoneal space
c. Inspiratory and expiratory distress develop if lesion
( pneumoretroperitoneum).
obstructs lumen.
8. Pneumothorax may occur
with tearing of pleura
d. Foreign objects cause an acute onset of respiratory
or lung.
distress.
9. Evidence of thoracic wall trauma may be present (e.g
6. Endotracheal masses are best diagnosed with endoscopy.
rib fractures).
Tracheal stenosis
Radiographic findings with endotracheal masses:
Clinical correlations:
1. Most foreign objects are visible because they are sur-
1. Congenital or acquired abnormal narrowing of tracheal
rounded by air.
lumen.
2. Masses may appear as irregular defects or bulges along
2. Usually involves only a segment of trachea.
inner tracheal margin.
3. Congenital form is more common in small-breed dogs.
3. Small masses (less than 3 to 4mm diameter) may not be
4. Acquired stenosis generally is caused by trauma (e.g., bite
identified due to adjacent exudate.
wounds, foreign bodies, overinflated endotracheal tube cuff.
4. Large masses may narrow the tracheal lumen.
prolonged intubation) .
 5. Parasitic infections most commonly involve caudal dorsal
5. Narrowing can also result from chronic inflammation and
trachea and typically cause diffuse wall thickening and loss
fibrosis.
of mucosal definition. Small nodules (less than l cm in size)
 6. Clinical signs may not be apparent unless there is greater
 may be visible as they protrude into tracheal lurmen.
than 80% reduction in size of tracheal lumen.
6. Superimposed structures may mimic a tracheal
1mass
7. Affected animals may have exercise intolerance, dyspnea.
(e.g., esophageal content, pulmonary nodule, rib lesion).
stridor on inspiration, and coughing that is worse with
excitement.
Differential diagnoses for endotracheal mass:
1. Tracheal stricture.
Radiographicfindings with tracheat stenosis:
2. Tracheitis.
1. Segmental narrowing of tracheal lumen, usually involv-
ing only one or a few tracheal rings (Figure 5.64).
2. Tracheal rings may be misshapen and deformed.
Tracheal rupture
3. Hyperextension of head and neck during positioning for
Clinical correlations:
radiography may cause tracheal narrowing at thoracic inlet
1. Most ruptures occur in cervical trachea, typically caused
and mimic tracheal stenosis (especially in cats).
by trauma.
2. Subcutaneous emphysema is common and may be
Differential diagnoses for tracheal stenosis:
severe, resulting in palpable "crackling" of skin tissues
1. Intramural or intraluminal mass.
during palpation.
2. Tracheal collapse syndrome.
3. Rupture can lead to pneumomediastinum, pneumoretro-
3. Adjacent mass compressing trachea.
peritoneum, and/or pneumothorax.
4. Segmental tracheal hypoplasia.
337
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
 2. Bronchial walls often are thickened and increased in opaciry.
3. Nodules occasionally are visible along caudal inner tra-
cheal margin (near bifurcation) or in mainstem bronchi, but
most are too small to be seen on radiographs
4. Granulomas may form in lungs (mimic pulmonary
neoplasia).
5. Rarely, obstructive nodules in trachea will cause a recur-
rent pneumothorax.
Tracheobronchitis
Clinical correlations:
Figure 5.64 Tracheal stenosis (lateral radiograph). Focal narrowing of
1. Other names: kennel cough.
tracheal lumen near thoracic inlet, which does not change between 
2. Inflammation of trachea and bronchi, which may be acute
inspiration and expiration or with extension/flexion of head and neck.
or chronic (see Differential Diagnoses section, this chapter).
(Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
3. More common in middle-aged and older, small-breed
dogs (greater than 5 years of age).
Tracheobronchial parasites
 4. Severe inflammation can lead to pulmonary edema
Clinical correlations:
5. Chronic inflammation causes excessive mucus produc-
1. Parasites that cause respiratory disease can reside in lung
tion, accumulation of exudates, and proliferation of mucosa
or migrate through pulmonary tissue (latter includes larval
and submucosa.
migrans from intestinal parasites).
6. Tracheobronchial changes may be irreversible.
2. Nematodes are most common invaders of trachea and
7. Regardless of etiology. cough is most cormmon clinical
bronchi, typically involving mucosal or submucosal tissues.
sign, ranging from occasional dry cough and gagging to
3. Oslerus osleri (formerly Filariodes osleri) is most common
severe episodes of paroxysmal coughing.
respiratory parasite in dogs.
8. Productive cough and bronchopneumonia may develop
a. Found worldwide.
in severe or neglected cases.
b. Infections most often are reported in young dogs (less
9. Radiographic differential diagnoses include interstitial
than 2 years of age).
pneumonia.
c. Granulomatous nodules form in caudal trachea.
d. Nodules can become large enough to obstruct air flow
Radiographic findings with tracheobronchitis:
(uncommon).
1. Radiographs frequently are normal, but help rule out
 4. Other tracheal parasites include:
other causes of cough.
a. Crenosoma vulpis (affects dogs in North America and
2. Tracheobronchitis is not excluded in animals with char-
Eurasia}.
acteristic clinical signs and radiographically normal lungs
b. Oslerus rostratus (affects cats in United States, Europe,
 and cardiovascular structures.
Middle East).
3. A nonspecific increase in interstitial lung opacity may be
c. Oslerus pararostratus (affects dogs in Mexico).
present ("dirty lungs").
d.Eucoleus aerophilus
(formerly
Capillaria aerophilia;
 4. Bronchial walls often are thickened, may be increased in
affects dogs and cats).
opacity (Figure 5.65).
5. Parasitic infections often are subclinical but may become
apparent after stress (e.g., boarding at a kennel) or in immu-
infiltrates.
 nocompromised animals.
6. Tracheal margins sometimes are indistinct or irregular
6. Clinical signs include
chronic, dry.
nonproductive
 due to inflammation and increased secretions.
cough that may be induced by tracheal palpation or exercise.
 7. Severe or chronic disease can lead to thickening of tra-
Cough is nonresponsive to treatment and may become
cheal wall (sometimes with narrowing of tracheal lumen)
productive in neglected patients (due to secondary bacterial
 and bronchiectasis.
infection).
7. Diagnosis can sometimes be made via fecal examination
Bronchiectasis
for parasite ova, but endoscopy and cytology are often
Clinical correlations:
required.
1. Abnormal, irreversible, dilation of bronchi.
2. Uncommon in dogs and rare in cats (American Cocker
Spaniel and Siamese cat may have higher incidence).
1. Nonspecific, patchy, interstitial to alveolar lung pattern is
3. Most often reported in middle-aged and older animals.
common due to inflammation and fibrosis.
but can occur at any age.
338
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
Figure 5.65 Tracheobronchitis (lateral radiograph). Bronchointerstitial
Figure 5.66 Bronchiectasis (lateral radiograph). Major bronchi are
 lung pattern with thickening and increased opacity of bronchial walls
dlilated and tortuous (an irreversible change). (Adapted from Owens and
("donuts"). (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
Biery 1999.)
4. Acquired
bronchiectasis
results
from
chronic
5. Peripheral bronchial walls generally are thickened and
inflammation.
more opaque due to inflammation and fibrosis.
5. Congenital bronchiectasis may occur with:
6. Lungs tend to be hyperinflated and decreased in opacity
a. Primary ciliary dyskinesia (reported in Rottweiler.
due to air trapping (less air is exhaled).
Newfoundland).
 7. May see interlobar fissure lines due to pleural thickening
b. Kartagener's syndrome.
caused by inflammation.
c. Bronchial hypoplasia or dysplasia.
8. Secondary pneumonia is common.
6. Affected animals often have recurrent respiratory infec-
tions, which only temporarily respond to treatment.
Bronchial obstruction
7. Clinical signs include productive cough (sometimes par-
Clinical correlations:
 oxysmal), retching, and labored breathing.
1. May be acute or chronic. partial or complete (see Dif-
 8. Bronchoscopy often is required for diagnosis.
ferential Diagnoses section, this chapter).
2. Clinical signs include cough (can be paroxysmal), gagging.
panting, hemoptysis, and vomiting.
Radiographic findings with bronchiectasis:
3. Signs may temporarily respond to therapy, but recur and
1. Lungs may appear normal.
become more severe (may progress to pneumonia, absces-
2. With more severe disease, bronchial enlargement may
sation, or fistula formation).
become evident, either local or diffuse (Figure 5.66).
a. Local enlargement more often results from neoplasia
Radiographic findings with bronchial obstruction:
or pneumonia.
1. Initially. lungs may appear normal (due to collateral
 3. Cylindrical bronchiectasis affects larger, central bronchi:
ventilation).
a. Enlarged bronchi have irregular margins and do not
2. Over time, secretions accumulate and block air flow.
taper normally.
resulting in local or lobar pulmonary consolidation (alveolar
b. Bronchial ends are blunted and terminate in atelec-
pattern; Figure 5.67).
tatic lung.
3. Mineral and metal opacity foreign objects usually are
4. Saccular
bronchiectasis
affects
intermediate
sized
identified; soft tissue opacity foreign material may be masked
bronchi:
by secretions and inflammation.
a. Ends of bronchi enlarge into rounded or ovoid shapes
4. If obstruction is caused by tumor, pulmonary nodules
that resemble air-filled clusters of grapes.
339
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 5.67 Feline bronchial asthma. A. Lateral radiograph: lungs are hyperinflated and decreased in opacity. Bronchial markings are accentuated
Diaphragm is caudally displaced and flattened. B. DV/VD radiograph: right middle lung lobe is small and increased in opacity (due to partial collapse
caused by bronchial obstruction). Compensatory hyperinflation of right cranial and caudal lobes prevents a mediastinal shift in this case. (Adapted from
(666l Aalg pue suamO
5. Total bronchial obstruction leads to lung collapse, often
 5. Etiology is uncertain but may involve enhanced immune
with a mediastinal shift toward the collapsed lung (com-
reaction to inhaled allergen.
6. Airflow (AF) through a bronchial lumen is proportional
shifty.
to its radius (r): AF αx r4. A 50% reduction in bronchial diam-
6. Rarely, affected lung lobe becomes hyperinflated due to
eter results in a sixteen fold increase in resistance to airflow.
a "check valve" effect, which is caused by a partial obstruc-
Therefore, even mild increases in size of bronchial lumen can
tion that allows air to pass during inspiration (due to slight
significantly increase airflow and lessen clinical signs.
dilation of bronchus) and blocks release of air during expira-
 7. Affected cats are unable to exhale completely, leading to
tion (when bronchus narrows)
air trapping. hyperinflation of lungs. and a barrel-chested
7. Pleural effusion may be present with some etiologies
appearance.
(e.g.. lung lobe torsion, pneumonia).
 8. Clinical signs range from intermittent coughing to severe
respiratory distress, including episodes of acute dyspnea and
prolonged, forceful expiration.
Differential diagnoses for bronchial obstruction:
9. Peripheral eosinophilia may be present.
1. Aspiration pneumonia.
2. Chronic bronchitis.
Radiographic findings with feline asthma:
3. Bronchial neoplasia.
1. Lungs may appear normal, which does not exclude the
diagnosis.
 Feline bronchial asthma
2. Acute inflammation may cause a diffuse increased in
Clinical correlations:
in terstitial lung opacity.
1. Other names: feline asthma, feline allergic bronchitis.
3. More severe or chronic disease results in a generalized
feline lower airway disease.
thickening and increased opacity of bronchial walls (Figure
2. Inflammation of lower airways leads to narrowing of
5.67A).
bronchial lumina.
4. Bronchial margins may be indistinct due to excessive
3. Narrowing is caused by hypertrophy and constriction of
endobronchial and peribronchial secretions.
smooth muscles, excessive mulcous production, edema, and
5. Lungs tend to be hyperinflated and less opaque (due to
cellular infiltrates.
trapping of air).
4. Common respiratory disease in cats, most often reported
6. Expanded lungs may flatten and caudally displace
in young to middle-aged animals.
diaphragm.
340
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
7. Cardiac silhouette may appear small relative to size of
Differential diagnoses for ARDS:
thoracic cavity.
1. Heart failure (cardiac silhouette usually is large).
8. Collapse of right middle lung lobe is common, due to
2. Other causes of noncardiogenic pulmonary edema.
exudates and mucus obstructing bronchus (Figure 5.67B).
3. Severe pneumonia.
4. Pulmonary hemorrhage.
Differential diagnoses for feline asthma:
5. Pulmonary thromboembolism.
1. Pneumonia.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
2. Heartworm disease.
(COPD, asthma)
3. Heart failure.
Clinical correlations:
1. Other names: asthma (cats), chronic bronchial disease.
2. Persistent inflammation of lower airways that results in
Lungs
obstruction to air flow through lungs.
3. Ventilation and perfusion are mismatched in lungs.
1. Serial radiographs aid in monitoring changing lung pat-
leading to chronic hypoxemia.
terns, progression of disease, and response to therapy. With
4. Air flow is obstructed by:
proper therapy. lung disease may radiographically improve
a. Thickening of bronchial walls (due to edema or cel-
within hours (e.g.. pulmonary edema, hemorrhage),. a few
lular infiltration).
days (e.g., acute pneumonia), or may persist (e.g.. granulo-
matous disease, fibrosis, neoplasia).
c. Spasticity of bronchial smooth muscle.
2. Other considerations for most diseases and disorders are
d. Interstitial fibrosis.
included in Differential Diagnoses section, usually under the
5. Most often reported in cats (feline asthma) and in mature.
predominant lung pattern expected for that condition.
 small-breed dogs.
6. Affected cats exhibit panting. gagging. and periodic epi-
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDs)
sodes of wheezing and labored expiration; cyanosis and
Clinical correlations:
syncope occur in severe cases.
1. Other names: shock lung. adult respiratory distress syn-
7. Dogs exhibit dry, harsh cough (may be worse at night or
drome, post-traumatic pulmonary insufficiency.
after excitement), wheezing. decreased exercise tolerance, cya-
2. Sudden, rapidly progressive, respiratory failure caused by
nosis, and labored expiration. Cough may end with gagging.
severe inflammation and fluid accumulation in lungs.
3. Clinical signs are related to underlying disease and may
Radiographic findings with COPD:
include hypoxemia, tachypnea, cough, nasal discharge.
1. Obstructive and nonobstructive bronchitis appear similar
on survey radiographs.
fever, cyanosis, and/or extreme dyspnea.
 2. Bronchial lung pattern is common.
4. Symptorms may mimic heart failure but are progressive
3. Severe cases present with bronchiectasis and may prog-
and unresponsive to oxygen therapy and supportive care.
5. An emergency medical situation (by the time the syn-
ress to emphysema.
4. Lungs often are hyperinflated with focal or diffuse areas 
drome is recognized, disease is usually irreversible and fre-
 of decreased opacity (due to air trapping or emphysema).
quently results in death).
5. Bronchial occlusion (with excessive mucous or exudate)
leads to lung lobe collapse (lobar atelectasis); right middle
Radiographic findings with ARDS:
lobe is most frequently affected, especially with feline asthma.
6. Unstructured interstitial pattern is common due to
phase of disease.
chronic inflammation and fibrosis.
2. Soon an unstructured interstitial pattern develops due to
7. Intercostal muscles may bulge outward (concave) due to
inflammation and early pulmonary edema.
increased expiratory effort and respiratory fatigue.
3. As edema progresses, peribronchial infiltrates and an ill-
8. Sometimes sternebrae deviate ventrally due to chronic.
 defined, patchy alveolar pattern develop.
exaggerated, expiratory effort (mimic pectus excavatum).
4. Lesions are symmetrical and eventually affect all lung
9. Right heart enlargement may develop due to cor
fields.
pulmonale.
5. As alveolar pattern becomes more widespread, there is
less pulmonary air and lung volume decreases (lungs remain
Collapse of lung (atelectasis)
small during inspiration).
Clinical correlations:
6. Intrathoracic trachea may dilate and intercostal muscles
1. Collapse of part or all of a lung due to loss of alveolar air.
may bulge inward due to increased inspiratory effort.
2. May be caused by bronchial obstruction, loss of blood
 7. Cardiovascular structures are normal to small in size.
supply, or inability of lung to expand.
341
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
3. Airway obstruction leads to atelectasis within minutes or
7. Ribs on affected side may be closer together (smaller
hours, depending on degree of obstruction.
intercostal spaces).
4. Loss of blood supply results in atelectasis within 24 hours.
8. Signs of trauma may be present (e.g., fractured ribs.
5. Positional atelectasis occurs in dependent (down) lung
pneumothorax, pulmonary contusions, pleural effusion).
within a few minutes (i.e., during anesthesia ) but is reversible.
9. Serial radiographs aid in monitoring lung reinflation;
6. Obstruction of right middle lobe bronchus is common
persistence of atelectasis suggests a complication, such as
in cats with asthma due to accumulation of bronchial
pneumonia.
exudates.
10. Errors in positioning (rotation) may mimic mediastinal
7. Clinical signs are related to underlying etiology and may
shift (heart follows sternum).
include pain, cough, tachypnea, dyspnea, or hemoptysis.
Differentiat diagnoses for tung collapse:
Radiographic findings with lung collapse:
1. Increased opacity in affected lung, typically a homoge-
1. Pneumonia.
neous alveolar pattern.
2. Pulmonary contusion/hemorrhage.
3. Trapped pleural fluid.
2. May affect one lobe or an entire lung: right middle lung
lobe is predisposed (Figure 5.67B).
3. Air bronchograms may develop with partial atelectasis
 Pulmonary Emphysema
but are absent with complete atelectasis.
Clinical correlations:
4. Collapsed lung has reduced volume, commonly resulting
1. Abnormal increase in size of air spaces (alveoli) distal to
in a mediastinal shift toward the affected side and cranial
terminal bronchioles.
displacement of ipsilateral hemidiaphragm (Figure 5.68).
 2. May be focal or diffuse, congenital or acquired.
a. Compensatory hyperinflation
ofadjacent
lung
3. Congenital lobar emphysema results from aplasia or
 lobes may prevent displacement of mediastinum and
hypoplasia of bronchiolar cartilage (reported in Pekingese.
diaphragm.
Shih Tzu, and Jack Russell Terrier).
5. Cardiac silhouette may be dorsally displaced away from
 4. Acquired emphysema is caused by chronic obstructive
sternum (Figure 5.37B)
lung disease that irreversibly expands alveoli or destroys
6. Collapsed lung lobe borders tend to be concave and irreg-
alveolar walls.
ular in shape.
 5. Clinical signs depend on initiating disease; labored expi-
ration is common.
6. Affected animals may exhibit cough, tachypnea, barrel-
chested appearance, and muffled heart sounds.
Radiographic findings with pulmonary emphysema:
1. One or more lung lobes may be involved.
2. Affected lung is less opaque and does not change in
appearance between inspiration and expiration.
3. Thoracic cavity may appear expanded (barrel-chested)
during both inspiration and expiration, with ribs more per-
pendicular to spine.
 4. Cardiac silhouette commonly appears small in relation to
size of thoracic cavity.
5. Diaphragm generally is flattened, caudally displaced, and
has relatively little movement between inspiration and
expiration
6. Costal attachments of diaphragm may be visible as
sharp projections 
extending cranially
("tenting"
of
diaphra gm).
7. Distance between heart and diaphragm is increased.
 8. Bronchial lung pattern may be present.
Figure 5.68 Lung lobe torsion (ventrodorsal radiograph). Right middle
lung lobe is collapsed and increased in opacity. Pleural fluid is present.
9. Severe emphysema in one lobe can compress adjacent
lobes and create inhomogeneous lung opacity.
Cardiac silhouette is shifted toward the right and right hemmidliaphragm is 
 cranially displaced. Left lung is hyperinflated as a comnpensatory response.
10. With unilateral disease, mediastinum may shift away
(Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
from diseased lung.
342
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
11. Bullae may be present (pneumothorax can result from
c. Pleural fluid and compensatory lung lobe hyperinfla
a ruptured bulla).
tion may prevent a mediastinal shift.
11. Removal of pleural fluid and repeating radiographs aids
Lung lobe torsion
in detection of collapsed lobe (or other etiology for pleural
Clinical correlations:
fluidy.
1. Other names: lung volvulus.
12. Pneumothorax/pneumomediastinum can result from
2. Rotation of a lung lobe along its long axis; usually occurs
bronchial rupture.
at hilus.
13. In chronic cases (survivors of lung lobe torsion) the
3. Twisting obstructs bronchus and vein, but artery contin-
affected lung lobe is small and fibrotic with compensatory
les pumping blood, resulting in an engorgement and leakage
hyperinflation of other lobes.
of hemorrhagic fluid into pleural space.
4. May occur spontaneously or secondary to pleural
effusion, trauma (e.g., diaphragmatic hernia). or after
Differential diagnoses for lung lobe torsion:
thoracotomy.
1. Thoracic trauma with pulmonary contusions and
hemothorax.
5. Torsed lobe gradually shrinks and becomes necrotic.
6. Most often reported in large, deep-chested dogs (e.g..
2. Pneumonia.
Afghan, Borzois), but also in Miniature Poodle, Dachshund.
3. Pulmonary neoplasia.
4. Atelectasis/bronchial obstruction (e.g.. foreign object,
Shih Tzu, Yorkshire Terrier, Pekinese, Pug.
7. Uncommon in cats.
exudate).
8. Complications include chylothorax, pneumonia,
5. Diaphragmatic hernia.
and
torsion of a second, different lobe
6. Pleural mass or encapsulated pleural fluid.
9. Clinical signs are nonspecific and include progressive
7. Thromboembolic disease.
dyspnea, coughing. (
 decreased appetite.
vomiting.
and
diarrhea.
Pneumonia
10. Bronchoscopy and ultrasonography aid in diagnosis, but
Clinical correlations:
thoracotomy confirms the lesion.
1. Inflammation of lung: may be acute or chronic.
2. Typically caused by infection or aspiration of foreign
Radiographic findings with lung lobe torsion:
material (see Differential Diagnoses section, this chapter).
1. Pleural effusion is common (often it is not possible to
3. Radiographs are made to confirm or reject suspected
determine whether pleural fluid was present prior to torsion
pneumonia and to determine location and extent of
 or developed as a result of torsionj.
disease.
2. Initially, torsed lobe is swollen and borders are convex
4. Serial radiographs aid in monitoring progression, response
due to engorgement with blood.
to therapy, and in identifying underlying disease.
3. At time of radiography. however, torsed lobe usually
is small, nonaerated soft tissue opacity and borders are
con ca ve.
Aspiration pneumonia
4. In many cases, torsed lobe is obscured by pleural fluid
Clinical correlations:
and not identified.
1. Inhalation of liquid or particulate matter.
5. Right middle lung lobe most commonly is involved
2. May be acute (one-time event) or chronic (repetitive
(Figure 5.68).
occurrences).
 6. Cranial segment of left cranial lobe is next most common
 3. Conditions and types of material involved with aspiration 
(especially in Pugs).
pneumonia:
 7. Less commonly, right cranial lobe is involved; caudal lung
a. Vomiting or regurgitation (food, gastric contents).
lobe torsions are rare.
b. Weak, debilitated, recumbent, or comatose animals.
8. May
see
abnormal
orientation of affected
lobe
C. Force feeding.
d. Oral administration of medication or contrast medium.
hilusy.
e. Mineral oil (during treatment for constipation).
 9. Air bronchograms sometimes are present early in course
f. Complication of anesthetic recovery.
of disease, but not later.
g. Near drowning (fresh or salt water).
10. Mediastinal shift may or may not be present:
h. Swallowing disorder.
a. Initially, mediastinum is displaced away from swollen
i. Anatomic abnormality (e.g., cleft palate, esophagotra-
lung lobe.
cheal fistula)
b. Later, mediastinum shifts toward collapsed lobe due
j. Hydrocarbons (e.g., petroleum distillates, kerosene).
to decreased lung volume on that side.
k. Foreign material.
343
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
4. Severity depends on type, quantity. and distribution of
Radiographic findings with bacterial pneumonia:
aspirated material.
1. Initially. an ill-defined interstitial to alveolar pattern
5. Aspirated gastric acid can cause alveolar collapse, bron-
develops in peripheral lung felds.
choconstriction, pulmonary edema, and systemic hypoten-
2. With progression, lung pattern spreads inward (toward
sion.
hilar region) and becomes more uniform and increases in
6. Inhaled particulate matter may cause airway obstruction
opacity.
(depending on size and amount of inhaled particles).
3. One or more lung lobes may be involved (right middle
7. Infection is common after aspiration (may occur imme-
lobe is most frequently affected)
diately or at a later time): tends to be more severe when
4. Part or all of a lung lobe may be affected.
accompanied by chronic bronchitis, trauma, or prolonged
 5. Lung pattern usually is asymmetric with dependent areas
anesthesia.
more severely affected (due to gravity).
6. Pleura commonly stops progression of disease, resulting
in a well-defined border between diseased lung lobe and
Radiographic findings with aspirafion pneumonia:
adjacent air-filled lobes (lobar sign; see chapter l, Figure
1. Alveolar lung pattern is common and usually evident
1.38).
within 6 to 24 hours of aspiration.
 7. Air bronchograms are common
2. Lesions tend to follow bronchial tree and air broncho-
8. Concurrent bronchial lung pattern may be present.
 grams often are prominent.
3. May involve a single lobe or an entire lung.
Actinomycosis and nocardiosis
4. Heavier aspirated materials typically move into middle
Clinical correlations:
lung lobe(s) while lighter inhaled irritants more commonly
1. Opportunistic bacteria that can cause pulmonary or sys-
affect caudal lung lobes.
temic disease
5. Dependent lungs usually are most severely affected (due
2. Bacteria are found worldwide, but infection is uncom-
to gravity). but distribution is variable, depending on ani-
mon in dogs and cats.
 mal's position at time of aspiration (standing generally leads
3. Most often reported in young adult, outdoor male dogs
to symmetrical distribution, primarily affecting middle and
and immunocompromised animals.
ventral lung fields, while animals in lateral recumbency tend
4. Routes of infection include:
to present with unilateral distribution).
a. Inhalation or ingestion of plant material that migrates
to lungs (e.g. grass awn).
gastric distention, mediastinal mass, or pharyngeal disease.
b. Bite or puncture wound (actinomycosis).
7. Cardiovascular structures usually are normal in size and
 5. Pyogranulomatous lesions develop in lungs. skin, or
shape.
abdominal viscera.
8. Lipid pneumonia (aspiration of mineral oil) commonly
6. Infection with nocardia or actinomyces often resembles
causes multifocal lesions (granulomas) in hilar region.
a mycotic infection.
9. Aspirated foreign material often lodges in a caudodorsal
 7. Body cavity effusions are common and may contain firm,
lung lobe (usually only one lobe).
yellowish, sulfur granules.
8. Clinical signs include
paroxysmal cough, tachypnea,
Bacterial pneumonia
dyspnea, fever, lymphadenopathy. lethargy. and weight loss.
Clinical correlations:
9. Hemoptysis. collapse. and sudden death have been
1. Typically occurs as a secondary complication to another
reported with nocardiosis.
disease process:
10. Cutaneous lesions may be present, often with draining
a. Infection caused by other agents (e.g., viral, mycotic.
tracts.
parasitic).
b. Chronic inflammation (e.g., tracheobronchitis).
Radiographic findings with actinomycosis
c. Aspiration or inhalation of toxin or irritant.
and nocardiosis:
d. Neoplasia.
1. Pleural effusion and pleural thickening (pleuritis) are
e. Immunosuppression
(e.g..
chemotherapy.
drugs.
common.
stress, malnutrition).
 2. Often a patchy alveolar pattern in lungs.
2. Clinical signs include cough (often productive), mucopu-
 3. Solitary or multiple nodules or masses (granulomas or
rulent nasal discharge. exercise intolerance, tachypnea.
abscesses) may be present in pleural space, mediastinum, or
dyspnea, fever, lethargy. anorexia, and weight loss.
lungs.
3. Neutrophilic leukocytosis is common.
4. Transtracheal wash or bronchoalveolar lavage may yield
(especially with nocardiosis).
samples for cytology, culture, and sensitivity.
5. Hepatomegaly and/or splenomegaly may be present.
344
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
Tuberculosis
4. Lungs may be hyperinflated, with caudal displacement
Clinical correlations:
and flattening of diaphragm.
1. Rare, contagious, and zoonotic disease found in many
5. Patchy alveolar patterns occur in more severe cases.
coluntries.
6. Pulmonary nodules sometimes develop. usually widely
2. Caused by infection with Mycobacterium fuberculosis in
scattered and ranging from ill-defined to well-defined focal
dogs; M. bovis or M. avium in cats and dogs.
soft tissue opacities.
3. Inhalation is most common route of infection in dogs.
7. Bronchial lung pattern is common with chronic disease
aq a opi uosd paau ue on op oi uards ua
 or repeated episodes.
first member of family to be diagnosed with tuberculosis).
8. Eosinophilic granulomatosis (caused by dirofilariasis)
4. Cats usually are infected after ingesting contaminated
presents with large pulmonary nodules (up to 2 cm in size).
milk or an infected bird.
hilar lymphadenopathy, and cardiovascular changes typical
5. Infection primarily involves respiratory and gastrointes-
of heartworm disease.
tinal tracts.
6. Clinical signs tend to be respiratory associated in dogs
Interstitial pneumonia
(cough, dyspnea, lethargy) and GI associated in cats (vomit-
Clinical correlations:
ing. diarrhea, weight loss).
1. Pulmonary infammation involving lung interstitium
more than air spaces (alveoli).
Radiographic findings with tuberculosis:
2. Usually associated with a generalized, systemic illness (see
1. Variable numbers of small, ill-defined, soft tissue opacity
 Differential Diagnoses, Unstructured Interstitial Lung Pattern).
nodules in lungs.
3. Frequently complicated by bacterial infection.
2. Nodules often calcify and may cavitate.
4. Clinical signs include fever, depression, anorexia, dry
3. Pleural effusion is common in dogs but less common and
cough, variable degrees of dyspnea, tachypnea, and exercise
less severe in cats.
intolerance.
4. Hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy may occur in
dogs but are uncommon in cats.
 5. Patchy, ill-defined alveolar lung pattern develops in more
Radiographic findings with interstitial pneumonia:
severe disease.
1. Diffuse, nonspecific, interstitial lung pattern, often widely
and evenly distributed (see chapter l, Figure 1.45).
2. Inhaled irritants tend to affect caudal lung lobes, espe-
Eosinophilic (allergic) pneumonia
cially adjacent to bronchi ("peribronchial cuffing").
Clinical correlations:
3. Alveolar filling is absent unless complicated by bacterial
1. Other names: pulmonary infltrates with eosinophilia
infection or edema.
(PIE), allergic lung disease.
2. Hypersensitivity reaction that results in eosinophilic infil-
trates in lung.
Mycotic pneumonia
3. May be caused by parasites, but often idiopathic (see Dif-
Clinical correlations:
ferential Diagnoses, Unstructured Interstitial Lung Pattern).
1. Other names: fungal pneumonia, pneumomycosis.
4. Eosinophilia is found in bronchial aspirates or washes
2. Most often reported in endemic areas, but owners and
and in peripheral blood.
pets are increasingly mobile (knowledge of mycoses and
5. Clinical signs include wheezing. lethargy, anorexia, and
good patient history are important).
3. Most infections occur in young and immunocompro-
weight loss.
6. Dogs with chronic disease often cough and cats com-
mised animals.
monly sneeze.
4. Cats have greater natural resistance and are less often
7. Fecal exam may identify parasite ova or larva.
infected than dogs.
8. Diagnosis may be confirmed by bronchial lavage, fine
 5. Failure to respond to appropriate therapy for pneumonia
needle aspirate, or lung biopsy.
or chronic respiratory disease should raise suspicion for
mycotic infection.
Radiographic findings with eosinophilic pneumonia:
1. Depend on type of hypersensitivity reaction, amount of
Aspergillosis
antigen in lung, rate of disease onset, and duration.
Clinical correlations:
2. Lungs may appear normal. especially with
1initial
1. Pneumonia caused by infection with Aspergillus fumigatus
occurrences.
(sometimes A. terreus)
3. General, unstructured interstitial lung pattern is typical
2. Organisms are found worldwide, but infection in dogs
but is not specific (see chapter l, Figure l.45).
and cats is uncommon.
345
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
3. Usually opportunistic and tends to infect immunocom-
d. Solitary pulmonary mass, generally with ill-defined
promised animals.
margins due to adjacent inflammation or edema.
4. Inhalation is primary route of infection, affecting nasal
e. Reticulonodular pattern (multiple, small, ill-defined
cavity, paranasal sinuses, or lungs.
nodules and lines).
 5. Disseminated disease can ocur (German Shepherd Dogs
2. Nodules (granulomas) are more common with chronic
may be predisposed).
disease and rarely calcify or cavitate.
6. Clinical signs depend on organs involved and may include
3. Pleural effusion is common, especially with local exten-
lethargy poor appetite, weight loss, and fever.
sion of pulmonary lesions.
4. Hilar lymphadenopathy may occur, but less severe than
Radiographic findings with aspergillosis:
with histoplasmosis, lymphoma, or coccidiomycosis (com-
1. General
unstructured
 interstitial
lung
pattern
pression of mainstem bronchi is uncommon).
typical.
5. Mediastinal masses have been reported but are rare.
2. Multiple small nodules (granulomas) may be scattered in
6. Secondary bronchopneumonia may develop.
lungs.
7. Disseminated infections can involve bone (especially
3. Solitary pulmonary mass is sometimes present.
distal appendicular skeleton).
4. Osteolysis in nasal passages is common.
5. Disseminated infections may involve skeleton (e.g. ver-
Coccidioidomycosis (Valley Fever)
tebrae, sternebrae).
Clinical correlations:
1. Other names: Valley Fever, San Joaquin Valley fever.
Blastomycosis
2. Pneumonia caused by infection with Coccidioides immitis.
Clinical correlations:
 3. Endemic in hot, arid regions of southwestern and western
1. Pneumonia caused by infection with Blastomyces
United States and in parts of Central and South America.
dermatitidis.
4. More common in dogs than in cats (50:l).
2. Endemic in southeastern and eastern parts of United
 5. Young, outdoor dogs are at increased risk.
States (e.g., Mississippi, Missouri, and Ohio River valleys).
6. Inhalation is most common route of infection.
mid-Atlantic states, and in parts of Canada.
 7. Clinical signs may develop shortly after exposure or years
3. Much more common in dogs than in cats (loo:1).
la ter.
4. Most often reported in young adult, large-breed, male
 8. Most infected animals are asymptomatic or have only a
dogs.
mild, self-limiting disease.
5. Infection occurs via inhalation (most common). skin
9. Infections can involve skeleton, liver, spleen, kidney.
lesions, or penetrating wounds.
heart, or central nervous system (Boxers and Doberman
6. Pyogranulomatous inflammation is characteristic and
Pinschers may be predisposed to more severe infection).
may involve liver, spleen, lymph nodes, skeleton, brain,
 10. Clinical signs depend on severity of infection and organs
eyes, and/or skin.
involved:
7. Clinical signs range from inapparent infection to severe
a. Lung infection may produce cough, fever, weight loss.
disease, depending on which organs are involved:
b. Osteomyelitis may result in lameness, back pain.
a. Respiratory infections may produce dyspnea and
c. Cardiac disease is due to pericarditis.
coulgh.
d. Cutaneous lesions may be present.
b. Peripheral lymphadenopathy sometimes is present.
c. Depression, weight loss, and fever are common
d. Eye and skin problems may be present.
Radiographic findings with coccidioidomycosis:
e. Infections frequently are diagnosed in late summer or
 1. Diffuse increase in interstitial and peribronchial lung
early fall.
opacity is typical.
 2. Less common is a diffusely scattered, micronodular inter-
Radiographic findings with blastomycosis:
 stitial lung pattern.
1. A variety of lung patterns can occur, including:
 3. Lesions tend to progress from hilar region to peripheral
a. Diffuse, nonspecific bronchointerstitial pattern.
lungs.
b. Numerous nodules widespread throughout 
lungs
 4. Lung lesions can develop within 2 to 3 weeks of exposure
I  'i d s nd ,)
(clinical signs may or may not be apparent).
1) Thickenedwalls ofnumerous small bronchi (donuts)
5. In more severe cases, an ill-defined alveolar pattern may
commonly are included in snowstorm pattern.
develop in perihilar and peripheral lungs.
c. Alveolar pattern with focal or multiple amorphous
6. Hilar lymphadenopathy is common but may be obscured
lung opacities.
by increased lung opacity.
346
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
a. Mainstem bronchi often are ventrally displaced and
9. Radiographs of head may reveal increased soft tissue
compressed by enlarged lymph nodes.
opacity in nasal passages and frontal sinuses (usually without
b. Lymphadenopathy usually resolves with successful
osteolysis).
therapy.
 7. Secondary bronchopneumonia may be present.
Histoplasmosis
 8. Pleural thickening and/or pleural effusion may be present
Clinical correlations:
due to local dissemination.
1. Other names: Ohio Valley disease, Darlings disease, Maria
9. Pulmonary nodules (granulomas) are more common with
fever.
 chronic disease and may cavitate, but rarely mineralize.
2. Pneumonia
caused by infection with Histoplasma
10. Bronchial walls may mineralize.
capsuiafum.
3. Most frequent mycosis of dogs in North America and
Cryptococcosis
second most common in cats.
Clinical correlations:
4. Organism is found worldwide in temperate and subtropi-
1. Other names: torulosis, European blastomycosis.
cal regions.
2. Pneumonia caused by infection with Cryptococus
 5. Endemic in midwestern and southern United States (e.g..
neoformans.
Ohio, Mississippi, and Missouri river valleys): has been
3. Organism is found worldwide, especially in temperate
found in 3l states.
regions (California, Australia), and is more prevalent in
6. Especially prevalent in areas with excessive bird drop-
 areas with excessive bird droppings.
pings and bat guano.
4. Most common mycotic infection in
1 cats (especially
7. Young adult dogs are most often infected, usually after
outdoor males); uncommon in dogs.
inhaling fungal spores.
5. Can affect any age or breed of cat, but Siamese are
8. Many affected animals are asymptomatic and disease
overrepresented.
may be self-limiting.
6. Infection occurs via inhalation or through a skin lesion.
9. Severe disseminated infections can occur and may be
7. Disease may localize in respiratory tract or spread to
fatal.
central nervous system, skin, or eyes.
10. Clinical signs vary greatly depending on organs affected
8. Chronic rhinitis is common and may result in nasopha-
and severity of infection.
 ryngeal obstruction due to pyogranulomatous infection and
 11. Signs can persist for years and may include nonproduc-
lymphadenopathy.
tive cough, dyspnea, recurrent diarrhea, lymphadenopathy.
9. Clinical signs depend on site of infection:
weight loss, lethargy, and fluctuating fever.
a. Nasal cavity infections may produce sneezing and
nasal discharge (unresponsive to antibiotics) and facial
Radiographic findings with histoplasmosis:
deformity (especially bridge of nose).
 1. General unstructured and nodular interstitial lung pat-
 b. Central nervous system infection may result in depres-
terns are typical.
sion, ataxia, seizures.
2. Pulmonary nodules (granulomas) can be numerous
c. Ocular infections may lead to anterior uveitis and
("snowstorm pattern," see chapter 1, Figure l.41).
blindness.
a. Range in size from miliary to medium (usually 5 to
d. Skin lesions may develop.
15mm).
b. May be indistinguishable from metastatic neoplasia.
Radiographic findings with cryptococcosis:
c. Commonly calcify during healing.
1. Lungs often appear normal.
d. Rarely cavitate.
2. May see a generalized increase in interstitial and peri-
3. Lymphadenopathy is common in dogs but uncommon in 
bronchial lung opacity.
cats (Figure 5.41).
3. Sternal lymphadenopathy is common but nonspecific
a. Hilar lymph nodes can become very large.
(also occurs with lymphoma and other infections).
b. Mainstem bronchi may be ventrally displaced and
4. Hilar lymphadenopathy may be present but is less severe
compressed.
than with other fungal infections.
c. Lymph nodes often calcify during healing.
5. In some cases, multiple miliary to small nodules (granu-
d. Sternal and mediastinal lymphadenopathy are occa-
lomas) develop in lungs.
sionally seen.
6. A few larger pulmonary granulomas have been reported
4. Secondary bronchopneumonia may occur (patchy alveo-
in some animals.
lar pattern in one or more lung lobes).
7. Pleural effusion sometimes is present.
5. Pleural effusion and peritoneal effusion usually are
 8. Secondary bronchopneumonia may develop.
absent.
347
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
6. Hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, and/or an intra-abdominal
3. Small pulmonary nodules (2 to 6 mm in size) may be
mass may be present.
present, usually peribronchial.
7. Pulmonary nodules (granulomas).
4. Nodules initially are ill-defined but become well-defined
8. Calcifed nodules resemble pulmonary osteomas but
later in course of disease.
are more variable in size and larger (most exceed 3mm
5. Lesions are most severe in caudal lung lobes (due to
in size).
parasitic migration through diaphragm)
6. Hilar lymph nodes may be enlarged.
7. Mild pleural effusion is sometimes present.
Pneumocystis
Clinical correlations:
Paragonimus
1. Pulmonary inflammation caused by infection with Pneu-
Clinical correlations:
mocystis carini.
1. Caused by Paragonimus kellicotfi, a lung fluke endemic to
2. Uncommon in dogs and cats; most often reported in
North America (especially east of the Rockies), Africa, and
Miniature Dachshunds, Cavalier King Charles Spaniels, and
eastern Asia
Yorkshire Terriers.
 2. Infects both dogs and cats via ingestion of an intermediate
3. Organism is found in respiratory tracts of normal
host (e.g., snail, crustacean).
animals.
 3. Adult flukes invade lung parenchyma and lower airways
4. Most infections occur in young immunocompromised
through diaphragm, causing variable degrees of pulmonary
animals.
inflammation, emphysema, and obstruction.
5. Clinical signs include cough, tachypnea, and exercise
 4. Clinical signs range from asymptomatic to chronic cough
intolerance.
and weight loss.
 5. Acute dyspnea results from rupture of a lung lesion and
pneumothorax.
Radiographic findings with pneumocystis:
 6. Diagnosis is made by finding parasite ova in feces or in a
1. Lung patterns range from diffuse bronchointerstitial to
tracheal aspirate.
severe alveolar (latter may resemble bacterial pneumonia or
neoplasia}
Radiographic findings with paragonimus:
2. Multiple, ill-defined, focal, alveolar infiltrates may be
1. Initially, one or more ill-defined nodules develop in lungs
present (resemble pulmonary nodules).
(nodules contain parasites).
3. Lymphadenopathy is uncommon.
2. Nodules rupture as parasites leave and fill with air.
4. Right heart enlargement may develop due to cor
forming pneumatocysts.
pulmonale.
a. Pneumatocysts are thin walled and septated.
b. Inner margins are smooth and well-defined.
Parasitic pneumonia
c. Outer margins tend to be irregular and ill-defined (due
Aelurostrongylus
to granulomatous response in adjacent tissues).
Clinical correlations:
d. Enclosed parasite may be outlined by air ("signet ring"
1. Caused by Aelurostrongylus abstrusus, a lung worm of cats
pattern).
with worldwide distribution, prevalent in Europe, Southeast
e. Cysts commonly remain as bullae
United States, and Australia.
3. Nodules, pneumatocysts, and bullae may be present con-
2. Most often reported in young cats (l to 3 years of age).
currently (Figure 5.69).
usually hunting animals.
4. Caudal lung lobes are preferentially involved (due to
3. Infection is via ingestion of an intermediate or transport
parasite migration through diaphragm).
host.
5. Increased interstitial and peribronchial lung opacity often
 4. Clinical signs range from asymptomatic, self-limiting
develops due to inflammation.
infection to coughing, gagging, sneezing. wheezing, dyspnea,
6. Pneumothorax can result from a ruptured pneumatocyst.
oculonasal discharge, anorexia, and chronic wasting.
5. Diagnosis is made by identifying larvae in feces or in a
Toxoplasmosis
tracheal aspirate.
Clinical correlations:
1. Caused by Toxoplasma gondii and distributed worldwide.
Radiographicfindingswith aeturostrongylus:
especially in warm climates.
1. Nonspecific generalized interstitial and bronchial lung
2. More common in cats than in dogs (cats are both inter-
 patterns are typical.
mediate and definitive hosts).
2. More severe infection can cause a patchy alveolar
 3. May present as an acute infection or as a chronic, relaps-
pattern.
ing disease.
348
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
2. Unstructured interstitial lung pattern may be present.
3. Occasionally, tiny nodules (2 to 5 mm in size) develop in
caudal lung lobes, but tend to be subpleural and rarely large
enough to be detected on survey radiographs (may be found
on computed tomography images).
Viral pneumonia
Clinical correlations:
1. Viral infections of lower respiratory tract include:
a. Dogs: influenza (highly contagious), distemper, ade-
novirus 2, parainfluenza.
b. Cats: immunodeficiency virus (FIV), calicivirus, herpes
(rhinotracheitis).
2. Canine influenza ranges from mild disease to severe
pneumonia:
a. Most infected dogs have mild disease with low-grade
fever and soft cough (may persist up to 30 days).
b. Some dogs will have a dry hacking cough (mimics
Figure 5.69 Paragonimus infection. Multiple pneumatocysts and a
kennel cough).
nodule are present in lungs (lateral radiograph). (Adapted from Owen5
c. Severe pneumonia presents with high-grade fever.
and Biery 1999.)
moist cough, tachypnea. dyspnea, purulent nasal dis-
charge, and anorexia.
Radiographic findings with viral pneumonia:
4. Clinical signs include fever, malaise, weight loss, anorexia,
A m l si u u i aa 
and variable degrees of dyspnea (neurologic and GI signs
lungs and indistinct vascular margins (see chapter 1.
develop with chronic disease)
Figure 1.45).
2. Alveolar pattern can quickly develop when disease is
Radiographic findings with toxoplasmosis:
complicated by bacterial infection or pulmonary edema.
1. Findings usually are nonspecific.
3. Pleural effusion may be present with severe infections.
 2. Unstructured interstitial lung pattern is common, usually
bilateral, but not symmetrical
Differential diagnoses for pneumonia:
3. Patchy. ill-defined alveolar pattern may develop (due to
1. Pulmonary edema (e.g. left heart failure).
thromboemboli).
2. Neoplasia (primary or metastatic).
 4. Bronchial lung pattern often is concurrent.
3. Hemorrhage (e.g., coagulopathy, trauma).
4. Atelectasis (e.g., recumbency).
Visceral larva migrans
5. Conditions that may mimic pneumonia:
Clinical correlations:
a. Underexposed radiograph.
1. Pulmonary disease caused by nematodes penetrating and
b. Poor inflation of lungs (e.g. expiration, abdominal
migrating through lung tissue.
distention, pain).
2. Roundworms. Toxascaris. and Toxocara are most com-
c. Obesity.
monly involved and are widely distributed throughout
d. Rotated positioning (creates asymmetricallung opacity).
North America.
e. Thick thorax (e.g., muscular animal, subcutaneous 
3. Both dogs and cats can be affected.
fluid}.
4. Respiratory infection often is asymptomatic and may be
f. Old age (lung fibrosis).
termporary or self-limiting.
5. Clinical signs, when present, include coughing and GI
Pulmonary edema
disease (e.g., diarrhea, weight loss).
Clinical correlations:
6. Diagnosis is supported by identifying parasite
 1. Abnormal accumulation of fluid in lungs.
ova
in feces.
2. Fluid initially accumulates in interstitial tissue (interstitial
edema) due to inability of lymphatics to maintain adequate
Radiographic findings with visceral larva migrans:
drainage.
1. Lungs
often appear normal or with nonspecific
3. When fluid no longer can be contained in interstitium, it
findings.
spills into alveoli (alveolar flooding).
349
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
4. Chronic pulmonary edema predisposes to infection and
7. Pulmonary veins become larger than corresponding
secondary pneumonia.
arteries.
5. Pulmonary edema may be cardiogenic or noncardiogenic
 8. Vascular margins appear hazy due to perivascular leakage
(see Differential Diagnoses section, this chapter).
of fluid (interstitial edema}.
a. Cardiogenic pulmonary edema results from increased
9.Animals with acute left heart failure may lack visible
capillary hydrostatic pressure that causes fluid to leak
cardiomegaly but present with severe edema (e.g., severe
 from pulmonary blood vessels into lung parenchyma.
arrhythmia, electrocution, ruptured chordae tendinae).
b. Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema is due to changes
10. Serial thoracic radiographs aid in monitoring progres-
in hydrostatic or osmotic pressure or altered capillary
 sion of edema and response to therapy.
permeability, which leads to fluid accumulation in lungs.
a. Cardiogenic pulmonary edema tends to improve quickly
6. Clinical signs include moist cough (sometimes with a
 on radiographs (few hours) with appropriate therapy.
frothy pink expectorant), tachypnea, dyspnea, unrest, and
b. Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema may require a few
reluctance to lie down.
days to improve.
Radiographic findings with cardiogenic pulmonary edema:
Radiographic findings with noncardiogenic
1. Cardiomegaly usulally is present, with moderate to severe
pulmonary edema:
enlargement of left atrium and left ventricle (Figure 5.70).
1. Variable interstitial and/or alveolar lung pattern, fre-
2. Dogs commonly present with symmetrical distribution of
quently asymmetrical in distribution.
interstitial and alveolar lung patterns, more severe in hilar
 2. Tends to predominately involve caudodorsal and periph-
and central lung fields ( peripheral lungs usually are spared).
eral lung fields (Figure 5.7l).
3. Cats tend to present with diffuse, patchy, asymmetrical
 3. Right lung may be more severely affected (due to varia-
distribution of interstitial and alveolar patterns in hilar and
tions in lymphatic drainage).
peripheral lung fields, especially ventrally.
4. Cardiac silhouette usually is normal in size.
4. Pleural effusion may occur in cats with cardiogenic pul-
a. Cardiomegaly may result from iatrogenic fluid
monary edema, but it is rare in dogs.
overload.
5. Edema may be unilateral if animal is in prolonged lateral
5. Pleural effusion usually is absent
recumbency (hypostasis).
6. Lung patterns tend to change rapidly in type, extent, and
6. Right caudal lung lobe may be the only, or most severely.
location (serial radiographs aid in monitoring progression
affected part of lungs.
and response to therapy).
Figure 5.70 Cardiogenic pulmonary edema due to left heart failure. A. Lateral radiograph: left atrium and ventricle are enlarged and trachea is dorsally
displaced with splitting of mainstem bronchi Increased lung opacity is present in hilar region and partially obscures margins of left atrium. Right cranial
pulmonary vein is enlarged and indistinct. B. Dorsoventral radiograph: left ventricle and auricle are enlarged. Pulmonary veins are enlarged. Increased
opacity is present in central lung field and partially obscures margins of cardiovascular structures. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
350
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
Figure 5.71 Noncardiogenic pulrmonary edema. Cardliac sihouette is normal size. Diffuse increase in lung opacity with an alveolar pattern in caucdal
lung lobes. Pulmonary vessels are not enlarged. A. Lateral radiograph. B. Dorsoventral radiograph. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
7. Acute, severe noncardiogenic edema generally affects
Pulmonary nodules and masses
all lung fields. progressing from diffuse. patchy alveolar
Clinical correlations:
filling to more uniform soft tissue opacity, often with air
 1. One or more abnormal, discrete structures or growths in
bronchograms.
lung interstitium.
8. Endogenous toxins (hematogenous in origin) typically
2. Possible etiologies are included in Differential Diagnoses,
 cause symmetrical edema involving entire lungs.
Nodular Interstitial Lung Pattern (this chapter).
9. Edema secondary to upper airway obstruction and
inspiratory distress often is accompanied by dilation of intra-
Radiographic findings with pulmonary nodules
thoracic trachea and inward protrusion  of  intercostal
and masses:
muscles.
1. At least two orthogonal radiographs are needed to diag-
10. Neurogenic pulmonary edema predominately affects
nose a pulmonary nodule.
middle and peripheral lung fields, and usually clears within 
2. Lesions in right lung are better seen on left lateral radio-
24 to 48 hours after resolution of neurologic condition
graph and vice versa.
11. Inhalation of irritants may initially present with
3. Nodules rypically present as solid or nearly solid soft tissue
increased interstitial and peribronchial lung opacity, but
structures, distinct from surrounding lung parenchyma:
radiographs made 24 hours later frequently document a
a. May be single or multiple, rounded or irregular
more severe alveolar pattern, predominately in caudal lung
shaped, homogeneous or heterogeneous.
lobes.
b. May mineralize or cavitate (cavitated nodules may fill 
12. Allergic pulmonary edema predominately affects periph-
with gas or fluid).
eral lungs.
c. Gas (air) in a nodule may result from communication 
13. Edema caused by iatrogenic fluid overload typically
with an airway or central necrosis.
resembles left heart failure with cardiomegaly. dilated left
4. Detection of pulmonary nodules depends on size, number.
atrium, and enlarged pulmonary vessels.
location, opacity, volume of lung air, and presence of con-
14. Distribution of pulmonary edema, regardless of etiology.
current disease.
can be affected by position of animal (gravity and uneven
a. Most nodules must be at least 4-5mm in size to be
lung inflation).
recognized.
15. Persistence of lung lesions in the face of appropriate
b. Smaller nodules may be visible if they are numerous
therapy for pulmonary edema suggests a complication
 or superimposed over heart or diaphragm.
(e.g., pneumonia, abscessation, acute respiratory distress
c. Mineralized nodules are easier to see because of
syndrome).
greater contrast.
351
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
d. Positioning of animal during radiography affects
a) Costochondral junction.
volume of lung air (dependent lung contains less air and
b) Rib tumor (accompanied by osseous remodeling
is more opaque, making nodule detection more difficult).
and soft tissue swelling)
e. Disease in adjacent lung or pleural space may obscure
c) Healing rib fracture.
nodule(s).
5) Mediastinal structure:
5. Size of nodules:
a) Mass (e.g., cyst, tumor, lymph node)
a. Micronodules are l to 2mm in diameter ("miliary"
b) Thymus (immature animal).
because they are size of millet seeds).
C) Esophageal content (e.g., ingesta, fluid, foreign
b. Small nodules range from 3 to 5 mm in diameter.
body, mass).
c. Medium-size nodules are 5 to 10 mm in diameter.
6) Pleural lesion.
d. Large nodules are 10 to 30mm in diameter ("cannon-
c. When doubt remains, mark any suspicious surface or
ball lesions").
palpable structures with a small amount of positive con-
e. Nodules greater than 3-4cm in diameter are consid-
trast medium (barium) and repeat radiographs.
ered masses.
6. Nodules with indistinct borders typically represent a
Pulmonary abscess
more active disease process (e.g., inflammation, hemorrhage.
Clinical correlations:
edema) ora growing nodule that compresses adjacent tissues.
1. Necrosis of pulmonary parenchyma that develops into a
7. Pseudo-nodules are summation or superimposition arti-
cavitary lesion filled with purulent material.
facts that mimic pulmonary nodules.
2. Usually occurs in younger animals.
 a. End-on visualization of pulmonary vessels:
l) Summation along length of vessel creates a near
Radiographic findings with pulmonary abscess:
mineral opacity (see chapter 1, Figure 1.43).
1. Rounded, soft tissue opacity nodule or mass in lung.
2) More evident in hilar and central
1 lung fields,
 2. Usually greater than 2cm in diameter and often larger
smaller and less numerous in periphery.
than 4cm.
 3) End-on vessel is similar in size to adjacent vessels.
 3. May be solitary or multiple, well-defined or ill-defined.
 which present in lateral profile
4. Frequently located in perihilar or peripheral region.
4) A bronchial ring (end-on bronchus} of similar size
5. Can involve an entire lung lobe.
may be adjacent.
6. May cavitate and contain air (Figure 5.72).
b. Pulmonary osteomas:
7. Pneumothorax can result from a ruptured abscess.
1) Other names: heterotopic bone, pulmonary micro-
lithiasis, osseous metaplasia.
Pulmonary granuloma
 2) Small, irregular-shaped, mineral opacities diffusely
Clinical correlations:
distributed throughout lungs.
1. Local response to a chronic, low-grade irritation caused
3) Measure 3mm or less in size.
by infectious or noninfectious agent.
4) Subpleural in location and more numerous in
 2. Etiology may reach lung via airways or hematogenous
ventral lung felds
spread.
5) Etiology is unknown, but commonly associated
3. May involve other organs in addition to lung (e.g., bone.
with aging.
liver, spleen, eye).
6) More often reported in Collie, Shetland Sheepdog.
4. More often reported in younger animals.
and Boxer, but many breeds are affected.
 5. Clinical signs vary depending on etiology and extent of
7) Commonly mistaken for pulmonary
metastatic
 disease; many anirmals are asymptomatic.
lesions or healing granulomas:
a) Mineralization of lung tumors is uncommon.
Radiographic findings with pulmonary granuloma:
b) Granulomas often exceed
4mm
in
size
1. Solitary
or
multiple. round
or  irregular-shaped
(histoplasmosis).
pulmonary nodule(s) (see chapter 1, Figures 1.39 through
b. Superimposed structures commonly are identified on
1.41).
orthogonal radiographs.
 2. Usually occur in perihilar and peripheral regions.
1) Cutaneous growths are sharply marginated beca use
3. Nodule margins initially are ill-defined (due to adjacent
they are surrounded by air (e.g., skin nodule, nipple.
inflammation and fbrosis) but become better-defined and
engorged tick).
 smaller during healing.
2) Debris, fluid, or medication on skin or hair.
4. Nodules may cavitate and fill with fluid or air and often
3) Subcutaneous nodule.
mass, or site of an
calcify during healing (especially histoplasmosis)
injection.
 5. Hilar and/or mediastinal lymphadenopathy may be
4) Thoracic wall structure:
present.
352
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
Figure 5.72 Pulmonary abscess (lateral radliograph). Large, rounded soft 
Figure 5.73 Pulmonary bullae. Three well-defined, rounded areas of
tissue opacity mass with less opaque central portion located in
o paideps) (smoue anum) shunl aul u juasaid ane Aiedo paseainap
dorsocaudal lung field. Differential diagnoses for a cavitary pulmonary
Owen5 and Biery 1999.)
mass include abscess, neoplasia, cyst partially filled with fluid, and 
(666l Aaia pue suamo woy paidep) aseasp yiseied
3. Signs of trauma are common (e.g., rib fractures, subcu-
taneous emphysema.).
as local, ill-defined, interstitial or alveolar patterns near site
6. Mild pleural effusion sometimes occurs.
of injury.
7. Pneumothorax can result from a ruptured granuloma.
 5. Serial radiographs document resolution of hematomas
8. Mycotic granulomas tend to be numerous, poorly-
(most no longer are radiographically visible within a few
defined, and irregular in shape (snowstorm pattern).
9. Hematogenous disease typically progresses from central
weeks): occasionally a hematoma will persist as a well-
defined rounded or spindle-shaped soft tissue opacity.
to peripheral lung fields.
   a  a  
lympha denopat hy.
Pulmonary cavitary lesions (bullae, blebs, cysts)
Clinical correlations:
Pulmonary hematoma
1. May be congenital or acquired.
Clinical correlations:
2. More common in dogs than in cats.
1. Abnormal, local collection of blood in lung. most often
3. Bronchogenic cyst:
caused by a focal laceration.
a. Developmental anomaly that results in a greatly
2. Usually resolves in several days (rarely persists longer
dilated bronchus or bronchiole.
than a few weeks).
b. Most often reported in young animals.
3. Lung scarring is occasionally seen as a sequela.
c. May contain gas or fluid.
4. Secondary infection is uncommon but may result in
4. Pulmonary cyst:
abscess.
a. Located in lung parenchyma (not part of a
 5. Clinical signs depend on severity of trauma.
bronchus).
6. Lung lacerations that fill with air are called pneumato-
b. Usually results from mycotic or bacterial infection.
celes (may be concurrent with hematomas).
c. Can occur following a parasitic infection (e.g.. para-
gonimus, hydatid cyst).
Radiographic findings with pulmonary hematoma:
5.Bulla:
1. Well-defined, round to oval, soft tissue opacity nodule.
 a. Well-defined area of pulmonary ermphyserma.
usually less than 4cm in size (see chapter 1, Figure l.39).
b. Caused by dilation, destruction, and merging of adja-
2. Rarely involves an entire lung lobe.
cent alveoli.
353
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
c. Usually results from trauma or chronic obstructive
8. Cavitary abscess or cavitary granuloma:
pulmonary disease.
a. Usually younger animals.
d. Congenital in some animals.
b. Walls are thick and may be well-defined or indistinct
6. Bleb:
(depending on condition of adjacent lung).
a. Accumulation of air under pleura (subpleural cavitary
c. Commonly contain multiple, irregular gas opacities
nodule).
and fluid (Figure 5.72).
b. Air from ruptured alveoli dissects to surface of lung to
9. Cavitated tumor:
form bleb.
a. Older animals (greater than 8 years of age).
7. Pneumatocele:
b. Thick walls
a. Other names: pseudocyst, traumatic cyst.
c. In cats, cavitary pulmonary nodules frequently are
b. Traumatically induced gas-filled space in lung paren-
neoplastic.
chyma (i.e., lacerated lung).
10. Cyst:
c. May be single or multiple.
a. Thin-walled gas opacity structure.
d. Resembles a large bulla but is transient (usually disap-
b. May be located anywhere in lung.
pears within a few weeks).
c. Tend to be relatively large.
8. Cavitated pulmonary nodules may fill with gas:
1l. Pneumatocele:
a. Abscesses and granulomas.
a. Well-defined margins.
b. Thromboembolic lesions.
 b. Rapidly changes in appearance on serial radiographs
c. Necrotic neoplasms:
and does not persist.
1) Primary lung tumor.
c. Often accompanied by signs of trauma (e.g., fractured
2) Metastatic mammary tumors.
ribs, subcutaneous emphysema).
3) Carcinomas.
9. Clinical signs usually are absent as long as lesion remains
Pulmonary thrombosis and thromboembolism
intact; abnormal respiration and clinical disease can result if
Clinical correlations:
lesion enlarges, becomes infected, compromises lung infla-
1. Obstruction of pulmonary artery by blood clot or migra-
tion, or ruptures and causes pneumothorax.
tion of emboli.
2. Emboli typically are fragments of blood clots but can be
Radiographic findings with cavitary lung lesions:
bacteria, air, fat, parasites, or foreign objects (e.g., intrave-
1. Orthogonal radiographs are necessary for accurate
nous catheter).
diagnosis.
 3. Small thromboemboli usually are asymptomatic, except 
 2. Local, well-defined area of decreased opacity in lung.
in severely debilitated animals.
3. Vascular markings are not present in cavitary lesions but
4. Clinical
signs include
depression,
weakness,
and
may be superimposed.
tachypnea
4. Expiratory radiographs enhance visualization of gas-filled
5. Severe cases present with acute dyspnea, which responds 
lesions (due to greater opacity interface between lung and
poorly to oxygen therapy and supportive care.
lesion).
6. Definitive
diagnosis
requires
advanced
imaging
5. Cavitary lesions may be partially fluid filled, appearing
(e.g..  computed tomography. pulmonary 
 an giography.
-u Aoedo ses auos ya sanpou Aoedo anss jos 5e
ventilation:perfusion scan).
zontal beam radiography can be used to demonstrate a fluid
level).
Radiographic findings with pulmonary thrombosis and
6. Pneumothorax may result from a ruptured cavitary
thromboembolism:
lesion.
 1. Lungs may appear normal, even with severe clinical signs.
7. Bullae and blebs:
 2. Vascular obstruction results in small or absent peripheral
a. Round, well-defined lesions with a thin, indistinct
pulmonary vessels and decreased opacity in that area of
wall (Figure 5.73).
lung.
b. Often small and difficult to visualize.
 3. Proximal portion of affected artery may be enlarged and
c. Adjacent lung may be normal or emphysema may be
 then taper abruptly.
present.
4. Right heart enlargement may develop due to cor
d. Blebs usually are less than 2 cm in size, subpleural, and
pulmonale.
in lung periphery.
 5. Mild pleural effusion sometimes is present.
e. Bullae may be large or multiple and can be located
anywhere in lung.
 Pulmonary neoplasia
f. With pneumothorax, blebs may resemble soap bubbles
Thoracic radiographs are an important, but rather insensi-
on lung surface.
tive, diagnostic tool for detecting pulmonary neoplasia. Pro-
354
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
gression of neoplasia has been described by number of times
9. Skeletal lesions may be present due to metastatic disease
a tumor doubles in size. Lung tumors usually become visible
or hypertrophic osteopathy.
on survey radiographs after 27 to 30 doublings. Most animals
10. Bronchogenic carcinomas tend to be well-defined or
die after approximately 40 tumor doublings. In many cases,
lobar shaped. Small bullae may be associated.
nearly two thirds of course of disease has elapsed before
11. Lymphoma commonly produces a diffuse, symmetrical,
tumors are radiographically evident.
 a  d   
hilar region).
Primary pulmonary neoplasia
a. Miliary or reticulonodular infltrates may be present.
Clinical correlations:
b. Hilar, sternal, and/or mediastinal lymph node enlarge-
1. Most often reported in older dogs and cats (greater than
ment is common (dogs more than cats).
6 years of age).
c. Pleural effusion and/or pulmonary edema may be
2. Commonly metastasize to other parts of lung. pleural
present.
space, and to extrathoracic sites.
d. Intra-abdominal organomegaly and sublumbar lymph-
3. Tend to destroy lung tissue and infiltrate adjacent air
adenopathy frequently are present.
 spaces (unlike metastatic tumors).
4. Clinical signs include coughing and weight loss.
Differential diagnoses for primary tung tumors:
5. Many affected animals are asymptomatic for long periods
1. Mycotic infection.
of time.
2. Metastatic neoplasia.
6. Hypertrophic osteopathy has been reported with large
3. Other lung mass (e.g., abscess, granuloma, fluid-filled cyst).
pulmonary masses.
4. Tuberculosis.
Radiographic findings with primary lung tumors:
Metastatic pulmonary neoplasia
1. Nodular interstitial pattern is most common, usually a
Clinical correlations:
solitary nodule or mass (see chapter 1, Figure l.39), but
1. Other names: secondary lung tumors.
sometimes multicentric (Figure l.40).
2. Occur more frequently than primary lung tumors.
2. Solitary lesions most commonly arise in right caudal lobe.
3. Most often reported in older animals (greater than 6
but may occur anywhere in lung (usually in central part of
years of age).
affected lobe)
4. Neoplasms with high rates of lung metastases include
a. Often larger than 4cm in size and may compress adja-
osteosarcoma, hemangiosarcoma, thyroid carcinoma, and
cent bronchi.
mammary carcinoma.
b. Margins tend to be irregular, with hilar border
 5. Neoplasms associated with head and intestines typically
smoother and better-defined than peripheral border.
n   jo o    on 
c. Affected lung lobe may be enlarged and borders
produce a solitary nodule.
convex.
6. Many pulmonary nodules are caused by thromboemboli
d. Mediastinum may shift away from diseased lung.
and inflammation rather than tumor growth alone.
3. Multicentric lesions may appear as either discrete soft
7. Clinical signs are variable, depending on location and size
tissue nodules or a diffusely disseminated unstructured
of primary tumor and extent of metastases. Respiratory signs
interstitial pattern and may represent:
often are minimal.
a. Multiple origins of a primary lung tumor.
b. Solitary tumor that already metastasized to other parts
Radiographic findings with metastatic lung tumors:
of lung.
1. Multiple, discrete, rounded, soft tissue opacity nodules.
c. Metastatic lesions from another primary tumor
usually in all lung fields.
site.
2. Nodules that are all similar in size suggest a massive
4. Hilar lymphadenopathy is unusual (common with lym-
shower of metastases over a relatively short time span.
phoma and mycotic infections).
3. Variably sized nodules occur with slower rates of metasta-
5. Pleural effusion may be present.
ses (i.e., tumors reach lung over an extended period of time).
6. Nodules may cavitate and fill with fluid or gas.
4. Metastatic tumors usually are smaller than primary
a. Cavitation results from drainage of necrotic center
tumors and rarely cavitate or mineralize.
into adjacent airway.
5. Tumors that spread via lymphatics frequently generate
b. Metastatic nodules rarely cavitate.
large numbers of small nodules with indistinct borders (i.e..
7. Nodules can mineralize (over 80% of mineralized pulmo-
epithelial neoplasms) .
nary nodules in cats are neoplastic).
6. Hematogenous route of metastasis tends to produce low
 8. Alveolar pattern (usually without air bronchograms) may
numbers of well-defined nodules (i.e., mesenchymal
be present.
neoplasms}.
355
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
7. Hemangiosarcoma often metastasizes in a diffuse
b. Trauma (e.g., muscle tear, rib fracture).
pattern with numerous interstitial nodules (3 to 10 mm in
C. Mass effect (e.g., hematoma, lipoma, tumor).
diameter).
d. Uneven lung inflation (e.g. pleural disease, intratho-
8. Presence of an alveolar pattern usually indicates a compli-
racic mass).
cating factor (e.g., pneumonia, lung necrosis, hemorrhage).
e. Post-thoracotomy.
9. Occasionally a linear interstitial pattern is caused by
f. Expansion
of
thorax
(e.g..
emphysema,
metastases to lymphatics or alveolar walls (reported with
pneumothorax).
mammary adenocarcinoma) .
g. Hemivertebrae (result in crowding of proximal ribs).
h. Anomalous curvature of spine or sternum (e.g., scolio-
Differential diagnoses for metastatic lung tumors:
sis, pectus excavatum).
1. Infection (e.g., mycotic, bacterial, parasitic).
i. Conditions that may
 mimic abnormal intercostal
2. Granulomatous disease.
spacing:
3. Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).
1) Poor centering of x-ray beam.
4. Pseudo-nodules.
2) Breed conformation (e.g., barrel chested).
3) Positioning artifact.
4. Sternal anomalies (altered shape. position, opacity.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
margination):
a. Congenital condition (e.g. sternal dysraphism).
Thoracic wall
b. Sternal spondylosis (older dogs, resembles vertebral
spondylosis).
Bony abnormalities of thoracic wall
c. Trauma (e.g., fracture, luxation).
1. Vertebral anomalies (altered shape, position, opacity.
d. Osteomyelitis (e.g., puncture wound, foreign object).
margination):
e. Neoplasia.
a. Spondylosis deformans.
5.Sternal mass:
b. Trauma (e.g., fracture, luxation).
a. Trauma (e.g., hematoma, abscess, granuloma).
C. Spondylitis (e.g.. Spirocerca lupi).
b. Inflammation.
d. Osteomyelitis.
c. Infection (bite wound or foreign material developing
e. Neoplasia.
 into an abscess or granuloma).
f. Congenital anomaly (e.g., hemivertebra, transitional
d. Foreign material (e.g., abscess, granuloma).
vertebra).
e. Tumor
(e.g-
chondrosarcoma.
osteosarcoma,
2. Rib abnormalities (altered shape, position, opacity.
fibrosarcoma).
margination):
f. Osteomyelitis (e.g. bite wound, foreign material).
a. Trauma
(e.g..
fracture, luxation, torn intercostal
muscles).
Opacity abnormalities of thoracic wall
b. Healing fracture.
1. Decreased opacity of thoracic wall:
C. Osteomyelitis.
a. Subcutaneous emphysema:
d. Primary tumor:
l) Iatrogenic (i.e., subcutaneous injection or fluid
1) Chondrosarcoma (most common).
administration).
2) Osteosarcoma (usually distal rib).
2) Lacerations.
3) Fibrosarcoma.
3) Puncture wounds.
4) Multiple myeloma (multiple areas of decreased
4) Extension of pneumomediastinum.
opa city).
 5) Infection with gas-forming organism.
e. Secondary or metastatic tumor (usually lytic):
b. Excess fat:
f. Cartilaginous exostosis (osteochondroma).
1) Obesity.
g. Congenital anomaly (e.g., supernumerary, vestigial,
2) Lipoma (localized fat opacity).
flaring).
2. Increased opacity of thoracic wall:
h. Conditions that may mimic a rib abnormality:
a. Calcified nodule (e.g., mammary tumor).
1) Poor technique (overexposed or underexposed).
b. Calcinosis cutis.
2) Breed conformation
(e.g..
chondrodysplasia,
C. Dystrophic calcification.
brachyce phalic).
d. Foreign material:
3) Expanded thorax (e.g., lung hyperinflation, tension
1) Projectile (e.g., BB, air rifle pellet, bullet fragment).
pneumothorax).
 2) Other foreign object (e.g., wire fragment, wood.
3. Alterations of intercostal spacing:
glass).
a. Muscle contractions (e.g. pain, struggling).
3) Microchip.
356
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
e. Conditions that may mimic increased opacity of tho-
b. Edema.
racic wall:
c. Cellulitis.
1) Superimposed fluid, debris, or medication on skin
d. Hemorrhage.
or in hair coat.
e. Subcutaneous emphysema (e.g., ruptured trachea).
3. Extrathoracic conditions that may mimic intrathoracic
f. Subcutaneous fluid administration.
lesions:
a. Dirty or damaged cassette, screen, or imaging detector.
b. Hair coat that is wet, dirty, or contains medication.
C. Subcutaneous swelling (e.g., tumor, lipoma, injection
Diaphragm
site).
d. Subcutaneous emphysema.
Position abnormalities of diaphragm
e. Cutaneous nodule:
1. Loss of visualization of diaphragm:
1) Nipple (usually bilateral, ventral, and within one
a. Pleural effusion (common}.
intercostal space of each other).
b. Diaphragmatic hernia (common).
2) Mammary gland tumor.
c. Adjacent pulmonary disease (e.g.. alveolar pattern,
3) Engorged tick.
mass).
f. Superimposed lines (extend beyond borders of tho-
d. Caudal mediastinal mass.
racic cavity).
e. Extrapleural mass adjacent to diaphragm.
1) Skin folds.
2. Cranial displacement of entire diaphragm:
2) Sca pulae.
a. Poor inflation of lungs:
g. Medical equipment:
1) Expiratory phase of respiration.
1) ECG leads.
2) Obesity.
2) IV tubing.
3) Lung collapse or atelectasis.
3) Bandaging material, blanket, or stretcher (similar
4) Pleural adhesions.
pattern present in background).
5) Pulmonary fibrosis.
h. Superimposition of animal's paw or human fingers.
6) Severe pain (e.g., pleuritis, trauma, peritonitis).
i. Foreign material (e.g., metal projectile, debris, glass.
b. Abdominal distension:
needles).
1) Obesity.
j. Microchips.
2) Peritoneal effusion.
3) Intra-abdominal masses.
Width of thoracic wall
4) Organomegaly (e.g.. hepatomegaly).
1. Localized thickening of thoracic wall:
5) Gastric distention (e.g., bloat, GDV).
a. Rib lesion (e.g., fracture, tumor, infection, healed
6) Pregnancy.
fracture).
7) Severe pneumoperitoneum (e.g., postlaparotomy).
b. Trauma (e.g., recent surgery, bite wound).
c. Bilateral diaphragmatic hernia.
c. Lipoma (fat opacity).
d. Phrenic nerve paralysis:
d. Soft tissue tumor (e.g., hemangiosarcoma, neurofibro-
1) Phrenic neuropathy.
sarcoma)
2) Trauma.
e. Cartilaginous exostosis (osteochondroma).
3) Severe pneumonia.
f. Foreign object.
4) Myopathy.
g. Hematoma.
e. Eventration of diaphra gm.
h. Abscess.
f. Conditions that may mimic cranial displacement of
i.Cyst.
diaphragm:
j. Sternal lesion (e.g., fracture, osteomyelitis).
 1) Summation of adjacent soft tissue opacity:
k. Paracostal hernia.
 a) Diaphragmatic tumor.
1. Pleural/extrapleural mass (e.g., abscess, tumor, encap-
b) Pleural effusion.
sulated fluid}.
3. Caudal displacement of entire diaphragm:
m. Recent injection/subcutaneous fluid administration.
a. Hyperinflation of lungs:
n. Conditions that may mimic thoracic wall mass:
1) Deep inspiration (dyspnea, struggling).
1) Prominent costochondral junction (e.g., chondro-
2) Manual ventilation (anesthesia).
dystrophic breeds).
3) Asthma (cats).
 2. Generalized thickening of thoracic wall (usually extracos-
4) Pulmonary emphysema.
tal, i.e., outside of ribs):
5) Shock.
a. Obesity.
6) Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
357
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
b. Severe disease in thoracic cavity:
 Shape abnormalities of diaphragm
1) Large pleural effusion.
(irregular margination)
 2) Large intrathoracic mass.
l. Hernia:
3) Large pneumothorax (i.e., tension pneumothorax).
a. Hiatal.
c. Decreased abdominal content:
b. Peritoneo-pericardial.
1) Emaciation.
c. Acquired (traumatic).
2) Body wall hernia.
2. Severe caudal displacement exposing scallop-shaped dia-
4. Unilateral
(asymmetric)
cranial
displacement
of
 phra gm attachments.
hemidiaphra gm:
3.Eventration.
 a. Unilateral intrathoracic disease:
4. Adhesions.
1) Lung collapse (e.g., positional atelectasis, airway
 5. Mass or nodules on diaphragm (e.g., neoplasia, abscess.
obstruction).
granuloma}.
2) Severe pleural disease (e.g, pleuritis).
 6. Paralysis of hemidiaphragm.
3) Pulmonary embolism.
7. Muscular hypertrophy.
4) Absence of a lung:
 8. Congenital absence of part of diaphragm.
a) Lung lobectomy.
9. Conditions that may mimic abnormal shape of diaphragm:
b) Lung agenesis or hypoplasia.
a. Summation with adjacent soft tissue opacity:
5) Lung lobe torsion (chronic).
1) Pulmonary/pleural mass.
b. Unilateral diaphragm disease:
2) Caudal mediastinal mass.
1) Eventration of diaphragm.
3) Esophageal mass or foreign object.
2) Diaphragmatic hernia.
4) Gastroesophageal intussusce ption.
 3) Phrenic nerve paralysis (fluoroscopy can be used to
5) Trapped fluid.
confirm).
b. Cupula deformed by pressure from heart (common
4) Adhesions (e.g. postsurgical, trauma, inflammation)
during expirationy.
c. Unilateral abdominal disease:
1) Gastric distension (e.g., bloat, aerophagia).
 2) Intra-abdominal mass adjacent to diaphragm:
Pleura and pleural space
a) Abscess or granuloma.
b) Hematoma.
Decreased opacity of pleural space
c) Tumor.
1. Pneumothorax:
d. Pain and splinting of thorax.
a. Trauma (common):
e. Spinal or sternal deformity:
1) Perforation of thoracic wall.
1) Pectus excavatum.
2) Ruptured lung or airway.
2) Pectus carinatum.
3) Tear in pulmonary pleura.
3) Scoliosis.
4) Ruptured esophagus.
f. Conditions that may mimic unilateral cranial displace.
b. Iatrogenic:
ment of diaphragm:
1) Thoracocentesis.
1) Rotated positioning.
2) Lung aspirate.
2) Lateral recumbency (dependent crus is positioned
3) Thoracotomy.
more cranial)
4) Aggressive CPR.
  on      i 
 5) Transthoracic biopsy of liver.
DV radiograph).
c. Extension of pneumomediastinum (see etiologies below).
4) Summation artifact:
d. Spontaneous pneumothorax:
a) Pleural effusion.
1) Idiopathic.
b) Mass on diaphragrm.
2) Rupture of cavitary mass (e.g., bleb, bulla, cyst).
5. Unilateral
(asymmetric)
caudal
displacement
of
3) Complication from:
hemidiaphra gm:
a) Pulmonary mass (e.g., abscess, neoplasm).
a. Unilateral intrathoracic disease:
b) Parasitic disease (e.g.. paragonimus., oslerus.
 1) Large mass (e.g. pulmonary, pleural, mediastinal).
dirofilariasis) .
2) Tension pneumothorax.
c) Bacterial pneumonia.
3) Pleural effusion.
d) Pleural adhesions.
 4) Bullous emphysema or pulmonary cyst.
e. Conditions that may mimic pneumothorax (NOTE:
b. Extrapleural mass.
Lungs are not collapsed, pulmonary vessels extend to
C. Abdominal adhesions.
thoracic wall):
358
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
1) Superimposed axillary skin folds.
2) Neoplastic erosion (e.g., hemangiosarcoma).
2) Overexposed radiograph.
3) Coagulopathy (e.g., rodenticide).
 3) Rotated DV/VD radiograph (peripheral lung may
4) Autoimmune disease.
appear less opaque).
5) Heartworm disease (erosion through vessel).
4) Deep-chested body
conformation (heart "falls
6) Spirocercosis (erosion through vessel).
away" from sternum on lateral radiograph).
c. Pyothorax or empyema (fluid is exudative with large
5) Hypovolemia (small heart may be separated from
numbers of neutrophils):
sternum on lateral radiograph and lungs are decreased
1) Systemic infection (most common).
in opacity):
a) Bacterial.
a) Shock.
b) Viral.
b) Dehydration.
c) Mycotic.
c) Addison's disease.
d) Nocardiosis.
6) Superimposed subcutaneous emphysema.
e) Tuberculosis.
7) Pneumomediastinum.
2) Foreign material.
 8) Gas-filled abdominal viscera in thoracic cavity (e.g..
3) Pneumonia.
diaphragmatic hernia).
4) Lung abscess.
9) Tension viscerothorax.
5) Autoimmune disease.
10) Hyperinflation of lungs (e.g., anesthesia, dyspnea) .
a) Systemic lupus erythematosus.
11) Thin thoracic wall (e.g., emaciation).
b) Rheumatoid arthritis.
d. Chylothorax (fluid appears millky due to chylomicrons
Increased opacity in pleural space and pleura
[small fat globules] and lymphocytes):
1. Pleural effusion:
 1) Thoracic duct rupture is most common (e.g., iatro-
a. Transudate/modified transudate (Transudate fluid is
genic, trauma, idiopathic).
thin and clear with low specific gravity, low protein, low
2) Thoracic duct blockage (e.g., neoplasia, thrombosis.,
fibrin, and low cell count (results from pressure filtration
fibrosis, congenital malformation).
without capillary damage). Modifed transudate fluid is
3) Lymphangiectasia.
serous to serosanguinous, may contain a variety of cell
4) Heart failure (cats).
types (often inflammatory), and can lead to restrictive
5) Cranial vena cava obstruction (e.g., thrombosis).
pleuritis or unilateral pleural effusion.):
6) Lung lobe torsion.
1) Hypoproteinemia (common cause of transudate):
7) Heartworm disease.
a) Nephrotic syndrome (glomerulonephritis).
8) Fungal infection.
b) Protein-losing nephropathy.
9) Neoplasia.
c) Protein-losing enteropa thy.
10) Diaphragmatic hernia (especially in cats).
d) Hepatic insu fficiency.
e. Pseudo-chylous
effusion
(fluid
issterile
and
2) Iatrogenic fluid overload.
inflammatory):
3) Congestive heart failure.
1) Idiopathic (dog).
a) Right ventricular failure.
2) Lymphosarcoma (cat) .
b) Pericardial effusion.
3) Cardiomyopathy (cat).
4) Lymphatic obstruction.
f. Pyogranulomatous effusion (fluid is thick, viscous.
a) Neoplasia (e.g., lymphoma).
straw colored, exudative with very high protein, high
b) Fibrosis.
specific gravity, relatively few inflammatory cells, and
c) Adhesions.
fluid may clot):
5) Diaphragmatic hernia.
1) Feline infectious peritonitis (most common).
6) Pneumonia.
2) Neoplasia (e.g., mesothelioma).
7) Lung lobe torsion.
 g. Unilateral or asymmetric pleural effusion:
8) Sterile foreign object.
1) Functionally complete mediastinum.
9) Thromboembolism.
2) Severe pulmonary disease and altered lung
10) Pancreatitis.
compliance.
11) Feline hyperthyroidism.
3) Trapped fluid (unequal distribution, but moves
12) Idiopathic.
with gravity).
b. Hemothorax (fluid resembles peripheral blood, but it
4) Encapsulated fluid (does not move with gravity and
may not clot and is rapidly resorbed [autotransfusion]
retains its shape).
unless impeded by disease, such as restrictive pleuritis).
5) Loculated fluid (small effusion held in a pocket by
1) Trauma.
adhesions).
359
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
h. Conditions that may mimic pleural effusion:
7) Diaphragm
lesion (e.g. eventration, tumor,
1) Underexposed radiograph.
granuloma).
2) Body conformation:
8) Esophageal mass (e.g., foreign object, granuloma,
a) Chondrodystrophic breeds (e.g., Bassett Hound,
neoplasm).
Dachshund,
b) Cats (epaxial musculature in dorsocaudal thorax
on lateral radiograph).
3) Obesity (excessive fat along sternum, in mediasti-
Mediastinum
num, and between lung lobes).
4) Pleural thickening (e.g.. previous pleural disease.
Position abnormalities of mediastinum
 older animals).
(mediastinal shift)
5) Thick thoracic wall (e.g., heavily muscled animal,
May be displaced toward or away from diseased side by
subcutaneous fluid}.
unilateral pleural fluid or gas (depending on volume of fluid
6) Mineralized costal cartilages.
or gas in pleural space).
7) Wet or dirty hair coat.
1. Displacement toward pathology:
2. Pleural thickening:
a. Lung collapse (atelectasis):
a. Previous pleural disease/aging change.
1) Bronchial obstruction (e.g., foreign object, mass,
b. Pleural inflammation (pleuritis):
mucous plugy.
1) Systemic disease (e.g. septicemia, viral infection).
2) Feline asthma (usually right middle lobe)
2) Local disease (e.g. pneumonia, trauma, parasitic
3) Recumbency (e.g., anesthesia, debilitation, aged 
infection, mediastinitis).
animal).
c. Pleural fibrosis ("pleural peel"), scarring. or adhesions:
4) Faulty intubation (endotracheal tube in one
1) Exudative pleural effusion (e.g. pyothorax, chylo-
bronchus).
thorax, hemothorax).
b. Pain and splinting of thorax.
2) Chronic or recurrent pleural effusion.
c. Thoracic wall trauma.
d. Pleural edema:
d. Lung lobe torsion.
1) Acute heart failure.
e. Lung lobectomy.
2) Sudden trauma.
f. Lung agenesis or hypoplasia.
e. Conditions that may mimic pleural thickening:
 g. Unilateral phrenic nerve paralysis resulting in poor
 1) Mineralized costal carilage.
lung inflation.
2) Obesity.
h. Pleural adhesions (secondary to trauma or inflamma-
3) Small pleural effusion.
tion).
3. Pleural mass:
i. Radiation-induced pulmonary fibrosis.
a. Diaphragmatic hernia (common pleural mass).
 2. Displacement away from pathology:
b. Primary neoplasia (e.g., mesothelioma).
a. Pulmonary mass.
c. Secondary neoplasia (metastatic carcinoma).
b. Pleural mass.
d. Abscess or granuloma (foreign object, parasites.
c. Diaphragmatic hernia.
chronic inflammation).
d. Unilateral tension pneumothorax.
e. Hematoma (trauma, coagulopathy).
e. Severe unilateral pleural effusion.
f. Mineral or metal opacity (projectile, nodular fat necro-
f. Increased lung volume:
sis or "Bate's body").
1) Emphysema.
g. Trapped fuid (may mimic a pleural mass (pleuritis.
 2) Large or multiple pulmonary cysts.
lung inflammation ).
g. Early lung lobe torsion (while lobe is engorged).
h. Extrapleural lesions:
3. Conditions that may mimic mediastinal shift:
1) Rib tumor (e.g., osteochondroma, osteosarcoma.
a. Rotated positioning (heart follows sternum).
chondrosarcoma).
b. Skeletal deformity (e.g., pectus excavatum).
2) Osteomyelitis of ribs, sternum, or vertebrae.
c. Dextrocardia (heart is located further right than
3) Thoracic wall mass
(e.g.. abscess,
 granuloma.
normal).
hematoma, tumor).
4) Thoracic wall lipoma (fat opacity).
Opacity abnormalities of mediastinum
5) Healing rib fractures.
1. Decreased opacity of mediastinum:
6) Lymphadenopathy
(e.g-
cranial
mediastinal,
a. Megaesophagus (congenital or acquired, see Esopha-
sternal).
gus below).
360
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
b. Pneumomediastinum:
6) Aortic valve calcification (craniodorsal area of
1) Penetrating trauma to neck or oral cavity (e.g., bite
cardiac silhouette).
wounds).
7) Superimposed structures may mimic mediastinal
2) Interstitial emphysema (air dissects through lung to
mineralization:
 reach hilus and enter mediastinal space):
a) Costal cartilage.
a) Trauma (e.g., vehicular trauma).
b) Thoracic wall lesion.
b) Severe dyspnea and exaggerated respiratory
c) Debris on skin or hair coat.
efforts.
c) Ruptured bulla, bleb, or other cavitary lesion.
Width abnormalities of mediastinum
d) Lung lobe torsion.
General widening of mediastinum
e) Parasitic infection (Oslerus osleri).
1. Generalized widening (often with increased opacity):
3) Iatrogenic:
a. Obesity (most common).
a) Jugular venipuncture.
b. Megaesophagus.
b) Faulty intubation or overly distended tracheal
c. Inflammation (mediastinitis):
cuff.
1) Trauma (e.g., penetrating wound).
c) Neck surgery.
2) Tracheal rupture.
d) Transtracheal wash or aspirate.
3) Esophageal rupture.
e) Tracheostomy.
4) Infection (e.g., feline infectious peritonitis).
f) Hyperinflation of lungs (ruptured bronchus or
5) Pleuritis.
lung during anesthesia or resuscitationy.
6) Pneumonia.
g) Complication of thoracocentesis or pulmonary
d. Fluid in mediastinum:
aspirate.
1) Hemorrhage (e.g., trauma, coagulopathy, neoplasia)
h) Endoscopy
complication
(i.e.,
ruptured
2) Transudate.
esophagus).
3) Chyle.
4) Tracheal rupture (e.g., trauma, tumor necrosis).
e. Edema:
5) Esophageal rupture (e.g., foreign material, tumor,
1) Congestive heart failure.
swallowed toxin paraquat).
2) Hypoproteinemia.
3) Trauma.
racing Greyhounds).
4) Neoplasia.
7) Mediastinal infection with gas-forming organisms.
8) Extension of retroperitoneal gas (rare).
Local widening of mediastinum (mediastinal mass)
9) Idiopa thic.
1. Cranioventral mediastinal mass:
10) Conditions that may mimic pneumomediastinum:
a. Tumor:
a) Swallowed air in esophagus (transient, small
1) Lymphoma.
volume}.
2) Thymoma.
b) Subcutaneous emphysema (orthogonal radio-
3) Malignant histiocytosis.
graphs aid in localizing gas).
4) Ectopic thyroid or parathyroid tumor.
c) Pneumothorax (lung borders and pulmonary
5) Fibrosarcoma.
vessels do not extend to thoracic wally.
b. Thymus (dogs less than 6 months of age, cats less than
d) Emaciation.
2 years old).
e) Obesity (Excess fat may enhance visualization
c. Branchial cyst.
of mediastinal structures, but fat is more opaque
d. Lipoma.
than gas. NOTE: Evaluate animal's other fat stores.).
e. Hematoma
(e.g., trauma, coagulopathy, neoplasia,
2. Increased
opacity of
mediastinum (usually
with
spirocercosis).
widening):
f.
Abscess or granuloma (e.g., foreign object).
a. See causes of general widening (below).
g. Sternal lymphadenopathy:
b. Mineralization in mediastinum:
1) Spread of peritoneal 
disease (e.g.. neoplasia,
1) Esophageal content.
inflammation).
2) Lymph node mineralization.
2) Mediastinal infection (bacterial or mycotic).
3) Foreign material.
h. Fluid in mediastinum:
4) Nodular fat necrosis (Bate's body).
1) Hemorrhage (e.g., trauma, coagulopathy).
5) Aortic calcification (linear or heterogenous miner-
2) Inflammation (mediastinitis).
alization along aortic wall).
3) Infection (e.g., bacterial, mycotic).
361
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
i. Esophageal diverticulum.
3) Granuloma or abscess.
j. Sternebral tumor or infection.
4) Diverticulum.
k. Conditions that may mimic a cranioventral mediasti-
 5) Gastroesophageal intussusception.
nal mass:
b. Hiatal hernia.
1) Flexed head and neck causing dorsal displacement
c. Mass
on
diaphragm
(e.g..
tumor,
abscess,
of trachea.
granuloma).
2) Breed
conformation
(e.g..
 brachycephalic,
d. Granuloma or abscess in mediastinum (e.g., foreign
chondrodystrophic).
object migration).
3) Obesity (excess fat in mediastinum).
e. Mediastinal cyst.
 4) Excessive mediastinal fat in older small-breed dogs.
f. Conditions that may mimic caudal mediastinal mass:
 5) Superimposition of thoracic limbs.
1) Mass in adjacent lung lobe.
6) Summation with pleural fluid.
2) Thoracic wall mass.
7) Cardiovascular enlargement (e.g., aortic knob,
3) Diaphragmatic hernia.
right atrial dilation ).
4) Fluid in esophagus.
8) Adjacent pulmonary mass.
5) Eventration of diaphragm.
9) Pneumonia in adjacent lung.
2. Craniodorsal mediastinal mass:
a. Megaesophagus (e.g., vascular ring anomaly, general
Esophagus
megaesopha gus).
b. Esophageal mass (e.g., foreign object, abscess, granul-
Position abnormalities of esophagus
loma, tumor).
1. Mediastinal shift (e.g.. pneumothorax, atelectasis).
c. Ectopic thymoma.
2. Hernia (e.g., diaphragmatic, hiatal).
d. Abscess/granuloma
(e.g..
foreign object, bacterial
3.Adjacent mass.
infection, spirocercosis).
4. Conditions that may mimic esophageal displacement:
e. Hematoma (e.g.. trauma, coagulopathy. neoplasia.
a. Rotated positioning (mediastinum follows sternum).
spirocercosis}.
f. Vertebral lesion:
1) Neoplasia.
Opacity abnormalities of esophagus
2) Osteomyelitis.
1. Gas in esophagus:
3) Severe spondylosis.
a. Swallowed air
(transient, small volume, usually
4) Adjacent tumor (rare, e.g.. neurogenic tumor,
near cranial sphincter, at thoracic inlet, or over heart 
hemangiosarcoma).
base).
g. Aortic aneurysm (rare, e.g. Spirocerca lupi).
b. Aerophagia due to struggling or excitement (usually
3. Hilar or perihilar mediastinal mass:
air in GI tract, too).
a. Hilar lymphadenopathy
(e.g.. neoplasia,
.mycotic
c. Dilation associated
1  with anesthesia/sedation (may
infection, granulomatosis).
mimic megaesophagus).
b. Heart base tumor (e.g., chemodectoma).
d. Megaesophagus (see above).
c. Esophageal mass (e.g., foreign object, abscess., granu-
2. Gas adjacent to esophagus:
loma, tumor).
a. Pneumomediastinum (ruptured esophagus or trachea ).
d. Conditions that may mimic hilar mediastinal mass:
b. Pneumothorax.
1) Cardiovascular enlargement:
c. Hyperinflated lungs.
a) Left atrium (common).
d. Superimposition artifact (subcutaneous emphysema).
b) Right atrium.
3. Increased esophageal opacity (homogeneous or hetero-
c) Aorta (e.g., aortic stenosis, PDA, aneurysm).
geneous, local or general):
d) Main pulmonary artery (e.g., pulmonic stenosis,
a. Megaesophagus (see above).
hearrworm disease).
b. Vascular ring anomaly (cranial to heart base).
2) End-on view of right pulmonary artery (lateral
c. Stricture.
radiograph).
d. Inflammation:
3) Localized pulmonary edema.
1) Gastroesophageal regurgitation or reflux.
4) Adjacent pulmonary mass.
2) Infection (e.g., bacterial, mycotic, parasitic).
4. Caudal mediastinal mass:
3) Passage of foreign material or other irritant.
a. Esophageal mass:
e. Esophageal mass:
1) Foreign object.
1) Foreign material.
2) Tumor.
2) Granuloma (e.g., Spirocerca lupi).
362
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
3) Abscess.
1) Severe or chronic inflammation.
4) Primary esophageal tumor:
2) Foreign object.
a) Squamous cell carcinoma.
3) Trauma.
b) Osteosarcoma or fibrosarcoma secondary to
4) Neoplasia.
Spirocerca lupi.
5) Abscess.
c) Leiomyoma.
6) Granuloma.
d) Leiomyosarcoma.
7) Parasites (Spirocerca lupi).
e) Adenocarcinoma.
2. Abnormal dilation of esophagus:
5) Secondary esophageal tumor (rare):
a. Anesthesia or heavy sedation (temporary condition).
a) Bronchogenic adenocarcinoma.
b. Severe dyspnea and aerophagia (e.g. upper airway
b) Gastric carcinoma.
obstruction).
c) Thyroid carcinoma.
c. Congenital megaesophagus:
d) Mammary adenocarcinoma.
1) Genetics (hereditary in Miniature Schnauzer and
e) Squamous cell carcinoma.
Wirehair Fox Terrier) .
f) Thymic tumors.
2) Canine glycogen storage disease (Lapland dogs).
g) Heart base tumors.
3) Congenital myopathy ( Labrador Retriever).
6) Gastroesophageal intussusception.
4) Canine giant axonal neuropathy (German Shep-
f. Esophageal diverticulum.
herd Dog).
g. Hiatal hernia.
5) Familial predisposition (Irish Setter, Chinese Shar
h. Conditions that may mimic increased esophageal
Pei, Great Dane, Newfoundland).
opacity:
 6) Mucopolysaccharoidosis or glycogen storage disease
1) Normal caudal esophagus (commonly visible on
(Siamese cat).
left lateral radiograph).
d. Acquired megaesophagus:
2) Normal swallowing (transient, small amount of
1) Idiopathic.
fluid).
2) Chronic esophagitis:
3) Superimposed structures may mimic increased
a) Gastroesophageal reflux disease.
esophageal opacity:
b) Hiatal hernia.
a) Extrathoracic (e.g., subcutaneous mass, dirty or
3) Obstruction:
wet hair coat)
a) Distal esophageal mass or foreign object.
b) Pulmonary mass or focal disease.
b) Gastric dilatation and volvulus (GDV).
c) Mediastinal mass.
c) Gastric outflow problem (e.g., foreign object,
4. Mineralization of esophagus:
pyloric canal dysfunction).
a. Foreign object (e.g.. bone).
4) Metabolic disease:
b. Trapped ingesta (e.g., vascular ring anomaly).
a) Hypoadrenocorticism.
C. Medication (e.g., Pepto-Bismol tablet).
b) Hypothyroidism (questionable).
d. Contrast medium.
c) Diabetes mellitus.
e. Osteosarcoma (malignant transformation from Spiro-
d) Hyperinsulinism (insulinoma).
cerca lupi).
e) Uremia.
f. Superimposed 
1structures may mimic esophageal
f) Other causes of electrolyte disturbances.
mineralization:
5) Immune-mediated diseases:
1) Costal cartilage.
a) Polyneuritis.
2) Calcified lymph node.
b) Polymyositis (most often reported in large-breed
3) Cutaneous structure, debris, contrast medium.
dogs).
c) Systemic lupus erythematosus.
d) Thymoma.
Size abnormalities of esophagus
6) Toxins:
1. Abnormal narrowing of esophagus:
a) Heavy metal poisoning (e.g., lead, zinc, cadmium,
a. Compression by an adjacent mass:
thallium).
1) Thyroid tumor (carcinoma).
b) Organophosphates.
2) Lymphadenopa thy.
c) Chlorinated hydrocarbons.
3) Heart base tumor.
d) Herbicides.
4) Abscess/granuloma.
e) Botulism.
b. Vascular ring anomaly (narrowing near heart base).
f) Snake venom (e.g., Australian tiger snake).
c. Mural and intraluminal lesions:
g) Tetanus.
363
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
7) Thoracic trauma.
e. Obesity (displacement is due to pericardial or medias-
8) Canine distemper.
tinal fat).
9) Central nervous system disease (e.g., meningitis.
f. Pectus excavatum.
neoplasia, trauma).
g. Left lateral recumbency (mild displacement).
10) Impaired function of autonomic nervous system
 h. Deep-chested dog in left or right lateral recumbency.
(Dysautonomia in cats, Key-Gaskell syndrome): rare.
5. Lateral displacement:
idiopa thic.
a. Lung collapse (e.g., recumbent atelectasis, bronchial
1l) Corticosteroid-induced polymyopathy.
obstruction).
12) Hypertrophic muscular dystrophy.
b. Pneumothorax.
13) Dermatomyositis.
c. Pulmonary or pleural mass.
14) Neosporosis (parasite, especially in puppies).
d. Pleural effusion.
15) Thiamine deficiency.
e. Cardiomegaly.
e. Transient megaesophagus:
f. Large thoracic wall mass.
1) Aerophagia (e.g., dyspnea, excited, struggling)
g. Dextrocardia (most of heart is in right hemithorax,
2) Anesthesia or heavy sedation.
cardiac apex is right of midline).
3) Inflammation (e.g., esophagitis, severe tracheo-
1) Levocardia is normal left side position of heart.
bronchitis, systemic infection) .
h. Situs inversus (abdominal viscera may also be
4) Sliding hiatal hernia.
reversed).
f. Esophageal obstruction:
i.
 Spinal lordosis.
1) Foreign object.
j. Pectus excavatum.
2) Tumor.
k. Conditions that may mimic lateral displacement of
3) Granuloma or abscess.
heart:
4) Stricture.
1) Rotated positioning (heart follows sternum).
5) Vascular ring anomalies.
6) Gastroesophageal intussusception.
7) Hiatal hernia.
Abnormal size of cardiac silhouette
g. Neuromuscular disease (e.g., myasthenia gravis).
1. Microcardia:
 h. Achalasia at gastroesophageal junction.
a. Hypovolemia (most common):
1) Shock.
2) Dehydration.
3) Hypoadrenocorticosterism (Addison's disease).
Cardiac silhouette
4) Anemia, blood loss.
 5) Decreased lung perfusion.
Abnormal position of cardiac silhouette
b. Compromised venous return (e.g. GDv, vena cava
1. Caudal displacement (caudal to 6th intercostal space):
thrombus).
a. Cranial mediastinal mass.
c. Pneumothorax (especially tension pneumothorax)
2. Cranial displacement (movement is restricted by tapering
d. Some forms of cardiomyopathy (more often in
of thorax):
cats).
a. Abdominal distention with forward bulging 
of
e. Constrictive pericarditis.
diaphragm.
f. Emaciation/cachexia.
b. Atelectasis of cranial lung lobes.
g. Post-thoracotomy.
c. Diaphragmatic hernia.
h. Atrophic myopathy.
3. Ventral displacement (usually only heart base is dis-
i. Conditions that may mimic microcardia:
 placed; sternum restricts ventral movement):
1) Deep-chested conformation.
a. Megaesophagus (most common).
2) Hyperinflated lungs (decreased cardiac-to-thoracic
b. Large mediastinal mass (dorsal to heart).
ratio):
c. Spinal lordosis (also causes left or right lateral
a) Deep inspiration (e.g., struggling. fear, stress).
displacement).
b) Asthma.
4. Dorsal displacement (separated from sternum):
c) Emphysema.
a. Pneumothorax.
d) Manual ventilation during anesthesia.
b. Mediastinal shift.
3) Emaciation.
c. Cranioventral mediastinal mass.
4) Displacement of heart (e.g., megaesophagus, medi-
d. Large pleural effusion.
astinal shift).
364
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
2. Generalized cardiomegaly:
2) Myocardial infarction.
a. Athletic heart (e.g., Greyhound).
3) Myocarditis/endocarditis.
b. Primary cardiac disease:
4) Concentric hypertrophy without dilation:
1) Cardiomyopathy.
a) Severe aortic stenosis.
2) Chronic atrioventricular valve  disease (e.g..
b) Severe pulmonic stenosis.
endocardiosis}.
c) Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
3) Congenital cardiac disease (e.g., ventricular septal
5) Constrictive pericarditis.
defect).
6) Neoplasia of myocardium.
4) End-stage left heart failure.
7) Electrolyte disturbances.
5) Bradycardia (e.g., sick sinus syndrome).
3. Left atrial enlargement:
6) Inflammation/infection (myocarditis) :
a. Mitral valve insuffciency:
a) Viral (e.g.. parvovirus, distemper).
1) Endocardiosis
(especially
older,
small
Bop
b) Bacterial (e.g., Streptococcus, brucellosis).
breeds).
c) Fungal (e.g., histoplasmosis, Cryptococcosis).
2) Bacterial endocarditis.
d) Parasitic (e.g., Bartonellosis, Trypanosomiasis).
3) Ruptured chordae tendinae or papillary muscle.
e) Protozoal (e.g., Lyme disease).
b. Cardiomyopathy (e.g., dilated, hypertrophic, restric-
7) Infiltrative disease:
tive, arrhythmogenic).
a) Neoplasia (e.g.. lymphoma).
c. Hyperthyroidism (cats) .
b) Amyloidosis.
d. Hypertension.
c) Lipidosis.
e. Congenital heart disease:
d) Mucopolysaccharidosis.
 1) Mitral valve dysplasia.
8) Ischemic myocardial disease.
2) Patent ductus arteriosus.
c. Secondary cardiac disease:
3) Mitral valve stenosis (rare).
1) Hypertension
(e.g
chronic
renal
disease,
 f. Conditions that may mimic left atrial enlargement:
idiopa thic).
1) Rotated lateral radiograph (separates mainstem
2) Metabolic disease:
bronchi).
a) Hyperthyroidism (generally older cats).
2) Heart base tumor.
b) Hypercorticosterism.
3) Hilar mass or lymphadenopathy (tends to push ter-
c) Diabetes mellitus.
minal trachea ventrally).
d) Acromegaly (more often in cats).
4) Pulmonary mass adjacent to hilus (trachea is not
3) Chronic anemia.
displaced).
4) Nutritional deficiencies:
4. Left ventricular enlargement:
a) L-carnitine.
a. Mitral valve insuffciency.
b) Taurine.
b. Cardiomyopa thy.
5) Immune-mediated disease (e.g., rheumatoid).
d. Hyperthyroidism (cats) .
6) Toxicity:
e. Congenital heart disease (e.g., patent ductus arterio-
a) Cytotoxic drugs (e.g., doxorubicin).
sus, aortic stenosis).
b) Heavy metals (e.g., lead, mercury).
d. Hypervolemia (e.g., fluid overload).
7) Neuromuscular disease.
e. Aortic insufficiency.
d. Iatrogenic:
f. Chronic anemia.
1) Fluid overload (hypervolemia).
 g. Peripheral arteriovenous fistula.
2) Bradycardia caused by anesthesia, sedation.
h. Chronic renal disease.
e. Conditions that may mimic cardiomegaly:
i.
 Systemic hypertension.
1) Expiratory radiograph (increased cardiac-to-tho-
j.
 Coarctation of the aorta (rare).
racic ratio).
k. Myocarditis.
2) Obesity (excessive fat mimics cardiomegaly).
1. Neoplasia.
3) Pericardial disease (difficult to distinguish from car-
m.Aneurysm.
diomegaly on survey radiographs):
n. Conditions
that
may
mimic
left
ventricular
a) Pericardial effusion.
enlargement:
b) Peritoneopericardial dia phragmatic hernia.
1) Sternum rotated to left on DV/VD radiograph
f. Severe cardiac disease can exist without cardiomegaly:
(heart follows sternum).
1) Cardiac electrical disturbance (e.g., arrhythmias.
 2) Obesity (pericardial fat mimics cardiomegaly).
tachycardia).
3) Pericardial effusion.
365
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
4) Right ventricular enlargement with cardiac apex
f. Myocarditis.
displaced to left.
g. Neoplasia.
5. Right atrial enlargement (usually dilation):
h. Arteriovenous fistula.
 a. Tricuspid valve insufficiency:
i.1
High altitude disease.
1) Endocardiosis.
j. Thoracic deformity (e.g.. pectus excavatum).
2) Right ventricular dilation/failure.
k. Aneurysm.
3) Endocarditis.
Conditions
that
may
mimic
right
ventricular
4) Ruptured chordae tendinae.
enlargement:
b. Cardiomyopathy.
1) Sternum rotated to right on DV/VD radiograph
c. Right-atrial tumor.
(heart follows sternum)
d. Cor pulmonale (e.g., dirofilariasis).
2) Expiratory radiograph (increased cardiac sternal
e. Congenital heart disease:
contact and dorsal positioning of trachea).
1) Pulmonic stenosis.
3) Obesity (pericardial fat may mimic cardiomeg-
2) Tetralogy of Fallot.
aly).
3) Tricuspid valve dysplasia.
 4) Pericardial effusion.
4) Tricuspid valve stenosis (rare).
5) Atrial septal defect (left-to-right shunt).
f. Arteriovenous fistula.
Cardiomyopathy
g. Superimposed structures may mimic right atrial
1. Primary cardiomyopathy (idiopathic):
enlargement:
a. Dilated or congestive cardiomyopathy.
1) Pulmonary mass or consolidated lung (right cranial
b. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
or middle lung lobe).
c. Restrictive cardiomyopathy.
2) Cranial mediastinal mass.
d. Unclassified cardiomyopathies:
3) Lymphadenopathy (hilar/tracheobronchial).
1) Indeterminate.
4) Heart base tumor.
2) Arrhythmogenic.
5) Main pulmonary artery dilation.
2. Secondary cardiomyopathy (known etiology: D = dilated
6) Enlargement of aortic arch.
changes; H = hypertrophic changes):
6. Right ventricular enlargement:
a. Genetics.
a. Tricuspid insufficiency:
b. Endocardiosis (valvular insufficiency).
1) Endocardiosis.
c. Congenital heart defects.
2) Endocarditis.
d. Hypertension due to renal disease (H).
 3) Ruptured chordae tendinae.
e. Idiopathic systermic hypertension (H).
b. Myocardial disease:
f. Tachycardia or bradycardia (D).
 1) Dilated cardiomyopathy.
g. Metabolic/endocrine disease:
2) Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy
1) Diabetes mellitus (D).
(Boxers).
2) Hyperthyroidism (H) .
3) Secondary
toleft heart disease (e.g., mitral
3) Hypothyroidism (D).
insu fficiency).
4) Uremia (D}
c. Cor pulmonale (pulmonary heart disease):
5) Acromegaly (H).
1) Heartworm disease.
6) Pheochromocytoma (H).
2) Pulmonary hypertension.
h. Electrolyte imbalance.
 3) Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
i. Infiltrative disease:
4) Pulmonary thromboembolism.
1) Mucopolysaccharidosis (D).
 5) Obesity (Pickwickian syndrome).
2) Neoplasia (lymphoma).
6) Brachycephalic
s8op
with
chronic
airway
3) Amyloidosis.
obstruction.
i.
 Nutritional deficiency:
d. Congenital heart disease:
1) Taurine deficiency (D).
1) Pulmonic stenosis.
2) L-carnitine deficiency (D).
 2) Left-to-right intracardiac shunt:
3) Vitamin E or selenium deficiency (D).
a) Patent ductus arteriosus.
k. Hypoproteinemia.
b) Ventricular septal defect.
1. Infectious myocarditis (D):
c) Atrial septal defect.
1) Lyme disease (borreliosis).
3) Tetralogy of Fallot.
2) Bartonellosis (cat scratch fever).
e. Pulmonary valve insufficiency.
366
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
4) Mycotic (e.g., aspergillosis).
c. Ventricular septal defect.
5) Viral (e.g, parvovirus, distemper, herpes).
d. Mitral valve dysplasia.
6) Protozoal (e.g., toxoplasmosis, trypanosomiasis) .
e. Atrial septal defect.
m. Inflammation/noninfectious myocarditis (D)
6. Myocardial disease 
ie.g-.
 inflammation,
ischemia,
n. Trauma (blunt force to thorax) (D).
neoplasia).
0. Heat stroke (D).
7. Severe cardiac electrical disturbance.
p. Electrocution (D).
8. Aortic valve insufficiency.
q. Drugs (e.g., doxorubicin, catecholamines).
9. Increased cardiac demand (e.g., overexertion, anemia,
r. Toxins (e.g., heavy metals).
pregnancy).
 10. Cardiac silhouette may appear normal if heart failure is
due to:
Congestive heart failure
a. Arrhythmia.
Right heart congestive failure
b. Infarction.
1. Secondary to left heart failure.
c. Inflammation.
2. Pericardial disease (e.g., effusion, inflammation).
d. Concentric hypertrophy.
3. Hearrworm disease e.g., dirofilariasis, angiostrongylus).
 4. Tricuspid valve insufficiency:
e. Neoplasia.
a. Secondary
tomitralvalve
insufficiency
(most
common).
Endocarditis/myocarditis
b. Endocardiosis (e.g., endocardiosis, dysplasia).
1. Bacterial infection (most common).
c. Cor pulmonale (e.g., heartworm disease, pulmonary
2. Viral infection (e.g. distermper, hepatitis, parvovirus).
thromboembolism).
3. Toxoplasmosis.
d. Endocarditis (less common in tricuspid than in mitral
4. Leptospirosis.
and aortic valves).
5. Pneumonia.
e. Ruptured chordae tendinae or papillary muscle.
6. Immune-mediated disease (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis).
5. Tricuspid valve dysplasia.
7. Parasitic infection (rare).
6. Cardiomyopathy.
8. Rickettsial infection (rare).
 7. Severe left-to-right intracardiac shunting of blood.
 8. Pulmonary thromboembolism.
Neoplasia of heart
9. Pulmonic stenosis.
1. Myocardial tumors:
10. Severe cardiac electrical disturbance.
a. Primary neoplasms:
1l. Arteriovenous fistula.
1) Hemangiosarcoma (most common):
12. Myocarditis/myocardial infarction.
2) Fibrosarcoma.
13. Endocardial fibroelastosis.
 14. Cardiac silhouette may appear normal if right heart
3) Lymphoma (more often reported in cats).
4) Myxosarcoma.
failure is due to:
5) Chondrosarcoma.
a. Arrhythmia.
b. Metastatic tumors (usually involve left heart):
b. Infarction.
1) Adenocarcinoma
(from
lung
c. Inflammation.
or
mammary
gland).
d. Concentric hypertrophy.
2) Melanoma (can extend to heart).
e. Pericarditis.
f. Neoplasia.
c. Benign cardiac tumors (uncommon):
1) Fibroma.
2) Myxoma.
Left heart congestive failure
3) Rhabdomyoma.
1. Mitral valve insufficiency
2. Heart base tumors:
a. Endocardiosis (most common).
a. Chemodectoma
(aortic body
tumor)ismost
b. Endocarditis.
common.
c. Ruptured chordae tendinae.
b. Lymphoma.
2. Cardiomyopa thy.
C. Ectopic thyroid carcinoma.
3. Hyperthyroidism (especially cats).
d. Ectopic parathyroid carcinoma.
4. Systemic hypertension.
e. Conditions that may mimic heart base tumor:
5. Congenital heart disease:
1) Left atrial enlargement.
a. Patent ductus arteriosus.
2) Heartworm disease with severely dilated main pul-
b. Aortic stenosis.
monary arteries.
367
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
3) Right atrial hemangiosarcoma.
Pneumopericardium
4) Mass near tracheal bifurcation:
1. Blunt force thoracic trauma.
a) Lymphadenopathy.
2. Severe coughing.
b) Esophageal mass.
3. Iatrogenic (e.g. pericardiocentesis).
c) Esophageal diverticulum.
d) Cranial mediastinal mass.
e) Adjacent pulmonary mass or infiltrates.
Major vessels
Pericardial effusion
Aorta
1. Transudate:
1. Enlargement of aorta and aortic arch:
a. Congestive heart failure (cardiomyopathy, right heart
a. Aortic stenosis (poststenotic dilatation).
failure).
b. Coarctation of aorta (rare congenital narrowing of
GI, or hepatic
aorta).
disease).
c. Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA).
d. Aneurysm (e.g. Spirocerca lupi infection, idiopathic).
c. Peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia.
d. Uremia.
e. Congenital hypothyroidism.
e. Toxemia
f. Persistent right aortic arch (vascular ring anomaly).
f. Trauma.
g. Conditions that may mimic aortic enlargement:
g. Neoplasia (obstructing flow of lymph or blood).
1) Breed conformation (brachycephalic dogs normally
h. Idiopathic (usually benign).
have prominent aorta).
2. Hemorrhage:
2) Aging change (loss of elasticity results in a more
a. Neoplasia (more common in dogs than in cats),
prominent aortic arch).
1) Right atrial or auricular hemangiosarcoma.
3) Dilated right atrium.
2) Heart base tumor (e.g., chemodectoma).
4) Heart base mass.
3) Mesothelioma.
5) Cranial mediastinal mass.
4) Lymphoma (more common in cats).
2. Decreased size of aorta:
b. Severe dilation and rupture of left atrium.
a. Hypovolemia:
c. Trauma (e.g., gunshot wound)
1) Shock.
d. Iatrogenic (e.g., complication from pericardiocentesis).
2) Dehydration.
e. Coagulopathy (e.g., rodenticide, DIC).
3) Anemia.
f. Idiopathic.
4) Hypoadrenocorticism.
 b. Proximal aortic stricture (decreased size of descending
3. Exudate:
a. Infection (e.g., bacterial, mycotic, actinomycosis, coc-
aorta).
cidiomycosis, tuberculosis).
c. Severe
heart
disease resulting in low cardiac
b. Feline infectious peritonitis.
output.
3. Aortic calcification (rare):
c. Sterile foreign object.
d. Steatitis.
a. Lymphoma.
b.Renal failure.
e. Idiopathic.
c. Primary or secondary hyperparathyroidism.
d. Arteriosclerosis.
Pericardial masses
e. Hypercorticosterism (Cushing's syndrome).
1. Neoplasia (e.g., mesothelioma, heart base tumor).
f. Parasites (e.g., Spirocerca lupi).
2. Abscess.
g. Hypervitaminosis D.
3. Granuloma.
h. Inflammation.
4. Cyst (congenital or acquired).
i. Idiopathic.
Pericarditis (constrictive)
Caudal vena cava
1. Bacterial infection (e.g., Nocardiosis)
1. Large caudal vena cava:
2. Mycotic infection (e.g.. Coccidiomycosis, actinomyco-
a. Right side congestive heart failure.
sis).
 b. Tricuspid valve insufficiency.
3. Tuberculosis.
c. Heartworm
disease
ie.g.
dirof lariasis,
4. Foreign material (e.g.. gunshot pellet, grass awn).
angiostrongylus) .
5. Neoplasia (e.g., heart base tumor, mesothelioma).
d. Pulmonary hypertension.
6. Hemorrhagic pericardial effusion.
1) Thromboembolic disease.
368
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
2) Chronic pulmonary disease.
d. Abscess or granuloma (e.g., foreign object).
3) Idiopa thic.
e. Hematoma.
e. Pericardial disease.
f. Bone tumors of spine (e.g., osteochondroma).
1) Pericarditis.
2. Thoracic trachea displaced ventrally:
2) Pericardial effusion.
a. Megaesophagus (most common).
3) Pericardial tamponade.
b. Vascular ring anomaly (causes esophageal dilation).
f. Neoplasia of right ventricle, right atrium, or caudal
c. Esophageal mass (e.g., foreign object, tumor).
vena cava.
d. Dorsal cranial mediastinal mass.
g. Thromboembolism.
e. Enlarged tracheobronchial lymph nodes.
h. Stenosis of caudal vena cava.
f. Aortic dilation (e.g., aneurysm).
2. Small caudal vena cava:
g. Large vertebral mass or severe spondylosis.
a. Hypovolemia:
3. Thoracic trachea displaced to the right:
1) Shock.
a. Megaesophagus.
2) Dehydration.
b. Cranial mediastinal mass (e.g., lymphadenopathy.
3) Anemia.
tumor).
4) Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease).
c. Heart base tumor.
b. Tension pneumothorax.
d. Pulmonary mass.
C. Positive pressure ventilation (during anesthesia).
e. Mediastinal shift (e.g. atelectasis, large intrathoracic
mass).
Main pulmonary artery
4. Thoracic trachea displaced to the left:
 1. Enlargement of main pulmonary artery:
a. Limited by aorta.
a. Heartworm
disease
(e.g..
dirofilariasis,
b. Mediastinal shift.
angiostrongylus).
5. Thoracic trachea displaced dorsally:
b. Pulmonic stenosis.
a. Cranial mediastinal mass (e.g. lymphadenopathy.
c. Large left-to-right intracardiac shunt:
tumor, cyst).
l) Patent ductus arteriosus.
b. Cardiomegaly
(generalized, right, or left heart
2) Atrial septal defect.
enlargement).
3) Ventricular septal defect.
c. Heart base tumor.
d. Pulmonary
hypertension
(e.g-.
pulmonary
d. Pectus excavatum.
thromboembolism).
6. Conditions that may mimic tracheal displacement:
e. Pulmonary arterial stenosis (rare).
a. Flexion of head and neck.
f. Idiopathic enlargement of main pulmonary artery
 b. Expiratory phase of respiration (heart and lungs move
(right ventricle is not enlarged).
cranially).
g. Conditions that may mimic main pulmonary artery
c. Rotated DV/VD radiograph.
enlargement:
d. Obesity.
 1) Lateral radiograph:
e. Normal anatomic variation (e.g., Bulldog. Yorkshire
a) Aortic enlargement.
Terrier).
b) Right atrial dilation.
c) Heart base mass.
Opacity abnormalities of trachea
 2) DV/VD radiograph:
1. Increased tracheal opacity:
a) Sternum rotated to right (heart
tfollows
a. Foreign object in tracheal lumen.
sternum).
b. Endotracheal mass:
b) Mediastinal mass.
1) Granuloma (e.g. parasite, diffcult intubation.
c) Pulmonary mass.
tracheostomy).
2) Abscess (e.g., foreign material).
3) Polyp.
Trachea
4) Tumor:
a) Benign (e.g., chondroma, osteoma, osteochon-
 Position abnormalities of trachea
droma).
1. Cervical trachea displacement (ventrally and/or laterally):
b) Malignant (e.g., squamous cells carcinoma, lym-
a. Tumor (thyroid carcinoma is most common).
phosarcoma,
osteosarcoma,
chondrosarcoma.
b. Esophageal dilation (e.g. megaesophagus, foreign
adenocarcinoma).
bodies).
C. Aspirated material (e.g., contrast medium).
c. Enlarged retropharyngeal lymph nodes.
d. Parasitic nodule(s).
369
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
e. Dystrophic calcification due to chronic inflammation
b. Upper respiratory obstruction:
or hypercorticosterism.
1) Laryngeal edema.
f. Conditions that may mimic increased tracheal opacity:
2) Laryngeal paralysis.
1) Underexposed radiograph.
3) Foreign object.
2) Superimposition artifact (e.g., esophageal content,
4) Tumor.
cutaneous mass, pulmonary mass).
C. Adhesions adjacent to trachea.
d. Some breeds 
have a relatively  large-diameter
(normal in young chondrodystrophic dogs. large-
trachea in relation to size of thoracic cavity (e.g..
breed dogs, and in older animals).
Poodles).
 2. Narrowing of trachea:
Margination abnormalities of trachea
a. Mucosal thickening:
1. Well-defined outer tracheal margin:
1) Inflammation (i.e., tracheitis).
a. Pneumomediastinum (all margins of trachea).
2) Allergic response.
b. Megaesophagus (dorsal tracheal margin only. "tra-
3) Hemorrhage
(e.g..
tra uma,
an ticoagulant
cheal stripe sign").
poisoning).
c. Emaciation.
b. Hypoplasia of trachea (general narrowing).
2. Ill-defined tracheal margins:
c. Stenosis of trachea (local narrowing).
a. Tracheal
inflammation (tracheal  wall may be
d. Tracheal collapse syndrome.
thickened}.
e. Compression caused by an adjacent mass (e.g., esoph-
b. Tracheal hemorrhage (tracheal wall may be thickened).
ageal, mediastinal, hilar) .
c. Exudates in tracheal lumen.
f. Aging change due to loss of tracheal ring rigidity
d. Tracheal collapse syndrome.
(especially in small dog breeds).
e. Mediastinal
disease
(e.g..
inflammation,
fluid
 g. Conditions that may mimic tracheal narrowing:
accumulation).
1) Superimposed structure (common along dorsal
f. Conditions that may mimic disease that obscures tra-
cervical trachea and at thoracic inlet; dorsal tracheal
cheal margins:
border remains visible):
1) Underexposed radiograph.
a) Dilated esophagus.
2) Excessive overlying tissues (e.g.. obesity. heavily
b) Longus coli muscle.
muscled animaly.
c) Fat.
3) Superimposed
adjacent
structure
(e.g-.
d) Figure 5.62.
megaesophagusy.
2) Hyperextension of head and neck during position-
3. Irregular tracheal margins:
ing for radiography.
a. Tracheal collapse syndrome.
b.Trauma.
c. Tracheal hypoplasia.
Tracheobronchitis
d. Infiltrative disease (e.g., neoplasia, parasites).
1. Idiopathic (most common).
e. Foreign material involving trachea.
2. Infection:
f. Stricture of trachea.
a. Viral (e.g., distemper, parainfuenza, adenovirus, her-
4. Loss of visualization of tracheal margins:
pesvirus, calicivirus).
a. Tracheal rupture:
b. Feline infectious peritonitis.
1) External blunt trauma (with or without rib fractures).
C. Bacterial (e.g., bordatella).
2) Bite wound.
d. Mycotic.
3) Foreign object.
e. Parasitic
(e.g., larva migrans, aeleurostrongylus,
4) Iatrogenic (e.g.. jugular venipuncture, transtracheal
dirofilariasis}.
wash, faulty
 intubation, overinflation of endotracheal
f. Toxoplasmosis.
tube cuff).
3. Allergies/asthma.
 5) Conditions that may mimic tracheal rupture:
4. Inhaled irritants (e.g., smoke, dust, hot or irritating gases.
 a) Poor radiographic exposure.
foreign material, gastric contents).
b) Superimposition artifact.
5. Tracheal collapse syndrome.
6. Compression of bronchi by enlarged heart or hilar lymph
Width abnormalities of trachea
nodes.
1. Dilation of trachea:
7. Primary ciliary diskinesis.
a. Tracheal collapse syndrome.
 8. Tracheal hypoplasia.
370
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
Bronchial obstruction
e. Conditions that can mimic decreased lung opacity:
1. Inhaled foreign bodies (e.g.. plant awn, marble, pebble)
1) Overexposed radiograph.
2. Mucus plug (e.g., feline asthma).
3. Neoplasia (e.g., lymphoma, bronchogenic carcinoma).
lucent lung).
4. Lung lobe torsion.
3) Thin thoracic wall (e.g., weight loss, emaciation).
5. Granuloma/abscess.
4) Overinflation of lungs (e.g., deep breath, manual
6. Parasites (e.g., Oslerus osleri).
ventilation).
5) Pneumothorax or pneumomediastinum.
6) Megaesophagus.
Lungs
3. Focal or multifocal increase in lung opacity:
a. Neoplasia (primary or metastatic).
Opacity abnormalities of lungs
b. Pneumonia (e.g., lobar, foreign object, aspiration,
1. Generalized increase in lung opacity:
hematogenous spread).
a. Poorly inflated lungs:
c. Cardiogenic pulmonary edema in cats.
1) Abdominal distention (e.g., ascites, pregnancy).
d. Atelectasis (e.g., focal, lobar, lung lobe torsion).
2) Recumbent atelectasis.
e. Hemorrhage (e.g., hematoma, contusion).
3) Obesity.
f. Abscess/granuloma (e.g. foreign object, bacterial/
4) Sedation/anesthesia.
fungal infection).
b. Pulmonary edema (cardiogenic or noncardiogenic) .
g. Fluid-filled cyst.
c. Pneumonia (e.g., infection, allergic).
h. Infarct (e.g., diroflariasis, thromboembolism).
d. Hemorrhage (e.g., coagulopathy, DIC).
i. Aspiration (e.g., foreign object, mineral oil, contrast
e. Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).
medium).
f. Neoplasia (e.g.., lymphoma).
j. Parasitic disease (e.g., heartworm, toxoplasmosis),
g. Pulmonary fibrosis
(e.g
 chronic inflammation.,
 k. Conditions that can mimic focal increased lung opacity:
hypercorticosterism).
1) Blood vessel seen end-on.
h. Inhaled irritants (e.g., smoke, dust, pneumoconiosis).
2) Heterotopic
 minera liza tion
(e.g.
osteomas,
i. Hypervascular lungs.
microlithiasis}.
 j. Pulmonary thomboembolic disease.
3) Superimposed structure:
k. Metabolic
disease
(e.g..
pancreatitis,
lremia,
a) Cutaneous opacity (e.g., skin growth, nipple.
hypercorticosterism).
engorged tick).
1. Toxins (e.g., herbicide paraquat).
b) Subcutaneous nodule or mass.
m. Conditions that can mimic increased lung opacity:
c) Debris or medication on hair or skin.
1) Underexposed radiograph.
d) Materials on thorax (e.g., bandages, blanket,
2) Expiratory phase of respiration.
ECG leads}.
3) Motion unsharpness (e.g., panting, struggling).
e) Rib lesion, costochondral junction, or healed rib
4) Thick
thoracic
wall
(e.g-
 obesity.
heavily
fracture.
muscled).
f) Adjacent pleural lesion.
5) Large lipoma.
g) Thymus (cranial thorax).
6) Wet or dirty hair coat.
h) Mediastinal mass.
 7) Superimposed structure (e.g. bandaging material.
i) Esophageal content (e.g., ingesta, fluid, foreign
blanket, forelegs).
object, mass)
8) Age-related change:
4. Focal or multifocal decrease in lung opacity:
a) Immature lungs have higher water content.
a. Bulla, bleb.
b) Old-age changes.
b. Pneumatocoele (usually secondary to trauma).
2. Generalized decrease in lung opacity:
C. Cyst (e.g, parasitic, congenital).
a. Hypovascular lungs (e.g., shock, dehydration).
d. Cavitarymass (e.g., mycoticgranuloma, tumor, abscess).
b. Air trapping (inability to exhale completely: e.g..
e. Dilated bronchus (bronchiectasis).
upper airway obstruction).
f. Focal emphysema.
c. Emphysema.
g. Hypoperfused area of lung (e.g. thromboembolism,
d. Absence of a lung lobe with compensatory
infarct).
hyperinflation of remaining lobes (e.g..1
lobectomy.
h. Conditions that can mimic decreased lung opacity:
congenital
lung lobe agenesis, severely atelectatic
1) Summation artifact created by curvilinear lines of
lung lobe).
vessels, bronchi, ribs, or costal cartilages.
371
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
2) Superimposed gas:
d. Neoplasia.
a) Subcutaneous emphysema.
e. Atelectasis.
b) Air in esophagus.
 2. Secondary bacterial pneumonia:
c) Small pneumothorax.
a. Viral
infection
(e.g..  canine
distemper, feline
d) Pneumomediastinum.
calicivirus).
e) Diaphragmatic hernia with gas-filled viscera in
b. Chronic tracheobronchitis.
thoracic cavity.
c. Aspiration of toxin or irritant (e.g. gastric contents,
5. Mineralization in lung (may be localized or diffuse):
food, medication):
a. Idiopathic (often an incidental finding).
1) Megaesophagus.
b.Heterotopic
mineralization
ie.g".
osteomas,
 2) Dysphagia.
microlithiasis).
 3) Force feeding.
c. Granuloma,H
healing stage (e.g., mycotic infection,
4) Administration
of
medica tion
or
contrast
foreign material, parasites).
medium.
d. Chronic
inflammation/infection
with
dystrophic
d. Inhaled foreign object (e.g., plant awn).
calcification.
e. Neoplasia.
e. Neoplasia (primary or secondary).
f. Fungal infection.
f. Metabolic
disease
(typically results  in diffuse
g. Parasitic infection.
mineralization):
h. Bronchiectasis.
1) Hypercorticosterism.
i.
Ciliary dyskinesia.
2) Hyperpara thyroidism.
 Immunosu ppression
ie.g..
chemotherapy.
drugs.
3) Chronic uremia
stress, malnutrition).
g. Alveolar microlithiasis ("pumice lung").
k. Mycoplasma.
h. Broncholithiasis.
1. Bordatella bronchiseptica (kennel cough).
i. Mineralization
of
 peribronchial
mucus
glands
m. Rickettsial infection (e.g., Rocky Mountain spotted
(cats).
fever).
j. Inhaled material (e.g., barium sulfate).
n. Babesiosis.
k. Hypervitaminosis D (cats) .
0. Toxoplasmosis.
 1. Conditions that can mimic lung mineralization:
3. Pulmonary edema:
1) Blood vessel seen end-on.
a. Cardiogenic pulmonary edema (heart failure):
      
1) Left heart failure (presents with cardiomegaly):
related change).
a) Chronic mitral valve insufficiency.
3) Superimposed structure:
b) Cardiomyopathy.
a) Cutaneous opacity (e.g., calcified skin tumor or
c) Ruptured chordae tendinae.
nipple).
d) Severe left-to-right intracardiac shunt.
b) Debris on hair or skin.
 2) Cardiogenic edema without cardiomegaly:
c) Costochondral junctions/healed rib fractures.
a) Electric shock.
d) Materials on thorax (e.g., bandages, blanket,
b) Trauma.
monitoring equipment).
c) Severe
cardiac
electrical
disturbance (i.e.,
e) Esophageal content (e.g., foreign object, calci-
tachyarrhythmia, heart block).
fied mass).
d) Myocardial depressants (exogenous or endoge-
f) Cranial
l mediastinal structure (e.g. calcified
nous in originy.
lymph node or tumor).
e) Some cases of cardiomyopathy.
 g) Pleural calcification.
b. Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema:
h) Necrotic tissue (i.e., nodular fat necrosis or
1) Neurologic disease:
 Bate's body, often with a less opaque center).
a) Seizure (post-ictal).
i) Mineralization of aortic valve (rare).
b) Head trauma.
j) Arteriosclerotic plaque (rare).
c) Electric shock/electrocution.
d) Strangling.
Patterns of lung disease
e) Brain tumor.
Alveolar pattern
f) Encephalitis.
1. Most common etiologies:
2) Inhaled irritant (e.g., smoke, dust, oxygen).
a. Pneumonia.
3) Iatrogenic fluid overload (resembles congestive left
b. Pulmonary edema.
heart failure, but hematocrit and plasma protein con-
c.Hemorrhage.
centration are usually decreased).
372
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
4) Pulmonary infection:
f) Compensatory lung hyperinflation (following
a) Viral.
lobectomy).
b) Mycoplasma.
4.Atelectasis (e.g..b
bronchial(
obstruction,
prolonged
c) Leptospirosis.
recumbency).
5) Allergic response.
a. Bronchial obstruction:
6) Aspirated irritant (e.g., iodinated contrast medium,
1) Iatrogenic (faulty placement of endotracheal tube).
gastric acid).
2) Excessive bronchial exudates (e.g., feline asthma).
7) Airway obstruction.
3) Foreign object.
a) Foreign object.
4) Mass (e.g., neoplasia).
b) Laryngeal paralysis.
5) Lung lobe torsion.
c) Tracheal collapse syndrome.
b. Loss of blood supply (e.g., thromboembolic disease).
d) Breed conformation (e.g., Bulldog)
c. Inability of lung to expand:
e) Strangulation.
1) Prolonged recumbency (e.g., sedation, anesthesia,
f) Laryngeal edema.
debilitating illness) .
 8) Adverse reaction to:
2) Severe pleural effusion.
a) Blood transfusion.
3) Severe
pneumothorax
(especially
tension
b) Drugs
ie.g
theophylline,
sulfonamides,
pneumothorax).
cyclophosphamide).
4) Large thoracic wall mass.
c) Contrast media (intravenous or aspirated).
5) Chronic inflammation with scarring or adhesions.
d) Hypersensitivity reaction.
6) Traumatic lung damage.
9) Toxin:
7) Severe pain and shallow breathing.
a) Snake or spider venom.
 8) Loss of pulmonary surfactant and alveolar collapse:
b) Alpha-naphthyl thiourea (ANTU).
a) Infection.
c) Herbicides (e.g., Paraquat).
 b) Inhalation of a toxic substance.
10) Drowning or near drowning (pulmonary edema
C) ARDS.
may occur hours later).
d) Pancreatitis.
1l) Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).
e) Congenital condition.
12) Shock.
 ie (s)aqo u jo uoisudxa aadoui (6
13) Hilar mass (e.g., lymphadenopathy, neoplasia)
5. Hemorrhage (e.g., trauma, coagulopathy).
14) Acute pancreatitis.
6. Neoplasia.
15) Chronic uremia.
7. Lung lobe torsion.
16) Pulmonary thrombosis.
8. ARDS.
17) Disseminated
intravascular
coagulation
a. Shock.
(DIC).
b. Severe infection.
18) Pulmonary hypertension
(pulmonary
venous-
c. Severe trauma (thoracic or nonthoracic).
occlusive disease).
d. Pneumonia (infection or aspiration).
19) Obstruction to lymphatic flow (e.g.. lymphoma.
e. Inhaled irritants (e.g., smoke, chemicals).
interstitial metastasis).
f. Oxygen therapy.
20) Radiation.
g. Complications
associated
with
mechanical
21) Fat emboli (secondary to extensive fractures).
ventilation.
22) Toxoplasmosis.
h. Near drowning.
23) High-altitude disease.
i.
 Postcardiac arrest and resuscitation.
24) Rapid expansion of atelectatic lung (reexpansion
j. Iatrogenic overhydration.
edema).
k. Drug interactions.
a) Postoperative repair of diaphragmatic hernia.
1.
 Pancreatitis.
b) Rapid withdrawal of pleural fluid or air.
m. Ingested toxins (e.g. paraquat).
25) Unilateral pulmonary edema can be caused by:
 n. Disseminated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC).
a) Prolonged lateral recumbency (hypostasis).
0. Increased intracranial pressure.
b) Tra uma.
p. Extreme thermal burns.
c) Unilateral thromboembolism.
q. Severe babesiosis.
d) Unilateral emphysema (contralateral lung has
9. Near drowning.
edema).
10. Thromboembolism/pulmonary infarct.
e) Local venous or lymphoid obstruction (e.g..
11. Toxin (e.g., paraquat).
lymphadenopat hy).
12. Uremic pneumonitis.
373
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
13. Eosinophilic granulomatosis.
d. Trauma.
14. Heartworm disease
e. Neoplasia (e.g., lymphoma, metastatic disease).
f. Heart disease (cardiomyopathy, valvular regurgitation,
 Bronchial lung pattern
endocarditis).
1. Allergy/asthma.
g. Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).
2. Chronic inflammation (e.g., tracheal collapse syndrome,
h. Metabolic disease:
tracheobronchitis).
1) Renal disease (nephrotic syndrome, amyloidosis).
3. Inhaled irritants (e.g., secondhand smoke).
2) Hyperadrenocorticism.
4. Infection (e.g., bacterial, viral, parasitic).
3) Diabetes mellitus.
5. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
4) Hyperlipidemia.
a. Chronic bronchitis.
i. Inflammation/infection:
b. Emphysema.
1) Pancreatitis.
c. Bronchiectasis.
2) Pneumonia.
d. Tracheal and bronchial collapse syndromes.
3) Pyothorax.
e. Chronic exposure to allergens and pollutants (e.g..
4) Sepsis/abscessation (nonrespiratory).
secondhand smoke).
5) Inflammatory joint disease.
f. Tracheal hypoplasia.
6) Fever of unknown origin.
g. Tracheal stenosis.
j. Immune disease:
h. Compression of airways by a mass or enlarged
1) Immunocompromised patients (e.g., drug therapy).
heart.
2) Immune mediated hemolytic anemia.
i. Upper airway obstruction (e.g., foreign object, mucous.
7. Aspiration (e.g., mineral oil, contrast medium).
polyp, neoplasia).
8. Parasitic disease (e.g., paragonimus, toxoplasmosis).
6. Aspirated material.
9. Hemorrhage (e.g., hematoma, contusion).
7. Foreign material.
10. Abscess:
8. Conditions that may mimic a bronchial lung pattern:
a. Bacterial bronchopneumonia.
a. Normal larger bronchi in central lung fields can be
b. Foreign object bronchial obstruction.
 mistaken for bronchial pattern.
c. Neoplasia
b. Age-related change (especially in chondrodystrophoid
d. Trauma (e.g., hematoma, pneumatocoele).
breeds) (NOTE: Bronchial walls remain thin, well-defined
e. Parasitic infection (e.g., paragonimus).
rings as opposed to thicker, less distinct donuts seen with
f. Bronchiectasis.
pathology).
g. Emboli (e.g., dirofilaria, bacterial, fungal).
1l. Granuloma:
 Nodular interstitial lung pattern
a. Migrating grass awn (especially in outdoor and
1. Primary neoplasia:
working dogs).
a. Bronchogenic carcinoma (most common in dogs).
 b. Inhaled foreign material (e.g., mineral oil).
b. Adenocarcinoma (most common in cats, may be asso-
C. Mycotic infection (e.g., histoplasmosis).
ciated with metastases to one or more digits).
d. Bacterial infection (e.g., mycobacterium).
c. Bronchiolar-alveolar cell carcinoma.
e. Eosinophilic pneumonia.
d. Squamous cell carcinoma.
f. Tuberculosis.
e. Small cell carcinoma.
g. Parasitic infection (e.g., heartworm, toxoplasmosis.
 f. Malignant histiocytosis (most often reported in middle-
para gonimus).
aged, large-breed, male dogs (Bernese Mountain Dog.
h. Chronic or recurrent allergic reaction.
Rottweiler, Golden Retriever, and Flat-coated Retriever
12. Fluid-flled cavitary lesion (e.g., cyst, bulla).
are overrepresented).
13. Heterotopic
mineralization
(e.g..
osteomas,
2. Secondary or metastatic neoplasia.
microlithiasis).
3. Hematogenous pneumonia (e.g., bacteria, mycotic).
14. Smooth-bordered, well-defined nodules:
4. Allergic lung disease (e.g., feline asthma, eosinophilic
a. Neoplasia (primary or metastatic).
pneumonia).
b. Abscess.
5. Granulomatous pneumonia (e.g., eosinophilic, lymphoid).
c. Granuloma.
6. Infarcts (e.g., thromboemboli):
d. Fluid-containing bulla.
a. Heartworm disease (most common, both before and
15. Nodules with indistinct borders:
after therapy).
a. Inflammation.
b. Recent surgery.
b. Hemorrhage.
c. Prolonged immobiliza tion.
c. Edema.
374
CHAPTER 5 Thorax
d. Actively growing nodule.
8) Esophageal content.
e. Increased opacity in adjacent lung.
9) Pleural lesion.
16. Numerous nodules scattered throughout lungs (snow-
storm pattern):
a. Metastatic neoplasia.
Unstructured interstitial lung pattern
b. Infection (especially mycotic).
1. Pneumonia:
c. Pulmonary lymphoma.
a. Viral infection.
d. Eosinophilic pneumonia.
b. Septicemia.
c. Inhaled irritant (e.g., smoke, dust, oxygen).
Nodules and masses in lungs
d. Heartworm disease (e.g.. dirofilariasis, aeleurostron-
1. Multiple small pulmonary nodules (2-5mm):
gylus).
a. Pulmonary osteomas (mineral opacity. less than
e. Thromboembolic disease.
3mm).
f. Migrating parasitic larvae.
b. Pulmonary fibrosis (older animals).
2. Pulmonary edema (cardiogenic or noncardiogenic, see
c. Mycotic infection (endemic areas).
Alveolar Pattern above).
d. Metastatic neoplasia.
3. Allergy (eosinophilic pneumonia):
e. Bacterial infection.
a. Idiopathic (allergen is not identified).
f. Inhaled foreign material (pneumoconiosis).
 b. Heartworm disease (may cause eosinophilic granulo-
g. Parasitic nodules (often calcified).
matosis).
2. Multiple medium-sized pulmonary nodules (5-l0 mm):
c. Other
pulmonary   parasites  (e.g..  paragonimus.
a. Metastatic neoplasia.
toxoplasmosis).
b. Pulmonary lymphoma.
d. Inhaled allergen.
c. Acute pulmonary edema (ill-defined nodules),
e. Secondary to infection (e.g., bacterial, mycotic).
d. Hematomas.
f. Secondary to neoplasia (primary or metastatic).
e. Mycotic infection (granulomas or abscesses).
g. Drug reaction (e.g., contrast medium).
f. Primary neoplasia.
4. Lung fibrosis.
g. Inhaled foreign bodies (granulomas).
5. Metabolic disease (e.g., hypercorticosterism, pancreatitis,
h. Parasitic granuloma.
uremia}.
i. Bacterial granuloma or abscess.
6. Hemorrhage.
3. Multiple large nodules (1l-30mm):
7. Inhaled irritants.
a. Metastatic neoplasia.
8. Neoplasia (e.g., lymphoma).
b. Abscessation.
9. Immune-mediated disease.
c. Primary neoplasia.
10. Idiopathic.
d. Mycotic infection.
11. Conditions that may mimic a generalized interstitial
e. Granulomas.
lung pattern:
4. Pulmonary masses (larger than 3-4cm):
a. Underexposed radiograph.
a. Neoplasia.
b. Expiratory phase of respiration.
b. Abscess.
C. Motion artifact (e.g., panting, struggling).
c. Cyst.
d. Obesity.
d. Hematoma.
e. Age-related change:
e. Thromboembolic disease.
1) Immature animal (lungs have higher water content).
f. Inflammation.
2) "Old dog lung."
5. Pseudo-nodules:
f. Poorly inflated lungs:
a. End-on visualization of pulmonary vessels.
1) Abdominal distention (e.g., ascites, pregnancy).
 b. Pulmonary osteomas (mineral opacity, less than 3 mm
2) Recumbent atelectasis (e.g., sedation, anesthesia.
in size}.
debilitation).
c. Superimposed structure:
3) Upper airway obstruction.
l) Cutaneous nodule.
4) Obesity.
2) Nipple.
5) Sedation/anesthesia.
3) Engorged tick.
g. Superimposed opacity:
4) Debris or medication on skin or hair coat.
1) Wet or dirty hair coat.
5) Subcutaneous nodule, mass, or site of injection.
2) Bandaging material.
6) Costochondral junction.
3) Blanket.
7) Rib remodeling (e.g., fracture, tumor, infection).
4) Forelegs.
375
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
5) Thick thoracic wall (e.g., heavily muscled, subcu-
3. Enlargement of pulmonary veins more than arteries:
taneous fluid, edema).
a.Left
heart  failure (e.g..  mitral  insufficiency.
6) Large lipoma.
cardiomyopathy).
7) Pleural fluid.
b. Iatrogenic fluid overload.
c. Left atrial obstruction (e.g., neoplasia, thrombus).
Vascular lung pattern
d. Right-to-left intracardiac shunt (e.g.. tetralogy of
1. Enlargement of both pulmonary arteries and veins:
Falloty.
a. Iatrogenic fluid overload.
e. Occasionally with left-to-right intracardiac shunt.
b. Left-to-right intracardiac shunt (e.g., PDA, VSD, ASD).
4. Decreased size of pulmonary vessels:
c. Feline cardiomyopathy.
a. Hypovolemia:
d. Pulmonary congestion (precedes pneumonia)
1) Shock.
e. Left heart failure.
2) Dehydration.
f. Chronic anemia.
3) Anemia.
g. Hyperthyroidism.
4) Hypoadrenocorticosterism (Addison's disease).
h. Arteriovenous malformation.
b. Low cardiac output (e.g.. pericardial effusion,
i. Upper airway obstruction.
cardiomyopathy).
2. Enlargement of pulmonary arteries more than veins:
c. Severe congenital heart disease (e.g.. tetralogy of
a. Heartworm disease.
Fallot, pulmonic stenosis).
b. Large left-to-right intracardiac shunt (due to septal
5. Mineralization of pulmonary vessels:
defects).
a. Hypercorticosterism (e.g., Cushing's syndrome).
c. Thromboembolic disease.
b. Chronic renal failure.
d. Pulmonary hypertension.
c. Hypertension (cats).
e. Chronic lung disease.
d. Toxins (e.g., cholecalciferol poisoning).
f. Peripheral arteriovenous fistula.
376
Abdomen
Normal Radiographic Anatomy 379
Gastrointestinal tract 399
 Peritoneal and retroperitoneal spaces 379
Stomach 399 
Liver 380
Gastric dilatation and volvulus (GDV) 399
Gall bladder/biliary system 381
Gastric foreign material 401
Spleen 381
Gastric inflammation (gastritis) 402
Pancreas 383
Gastric neoplasia 402
Gastrointestinal tract 383
Gastric outflow obstruction 403
 Stomach 383
Gastric ulcers 404
Small intestine 386
 Small intestine 405
Large intestine 387
 Intestinal ileus 405 
Urinary tract 388
Inflammation of smmall intestine (enteritis) and 
 Kidneys and ureters 388
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) 408
Urinary bladder 390
Intussusception 408 
Urethra 390
Intestinal ischemia 410
 Adrenal glands 390
Mesenteric volvulus 410
Male genital system 391
Neoplasia of small intestine 411 
 Testicles 391
Perforation of small intestine 411
Penis 393
Large intestine 412
Female genital system 393
Atresia ani 412
Diseases and Disorders 393
Cecal inversion 412
 Peritoneal hernia 393
 Constipation and obstipation 413
Liver 394
Inflammation of colon (colitis) 413
Hepatomegaly 394
Megacolon 414
Microhepatia 395
 Colon torsion 414
Gall bladder/biliary system 396
Neoplasia of large intestine 414 
Cholecystitis 396
 Perineal hernia and rectal diverticulum 415
Cholelithiasis 396
Urinary tract 415
 Parasitic disease 397
Kidneys 415
Spleen 397
 Congenital renal diseases 415
Splenic mass 397
 Fanconi syndrome 417
Splenic rupture 398
Polycystic kidney disease (PKD) 417
 Splenic torsion 398
Telangiectasia 417
Pancreas 398
 Renal calculi 417
Pancreatitis 398
Renal cysts 418
Pancreatic masses 399
 Feline perirenal cysts 419
Radiography of the Dog and Cat: Guide to Making and Interpreting Radiographs, First Edition. M.C. Muhlbauer and S.K. Kneller.
@ 2013 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
377
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Hydronephrosis 419
Lateral view of abdomen 436
 Renal inflammation (nephritis and pyelonephritis) 419
Ventrodorsal view of abdomen 437
Renal neoplasia 420
Peritoneal space 438
 Rupture of kidney 420 
Opacity abnormalities of peritoneal space 438 
Ureters 421
Peritoneal hernia 439
Ectopic ureter 421
Retroperitoneal space 439
Ureterocele 421
 Enlargement (swelling) of retroperitoneal 
Urinary bladder 422
space 439
 Congenital anomalies 422
Opacity abnormalities of retroperitoneal space 439 
 Cystic calculi 422
Abdominal wall 440
Cystitis 423
Gastrointestinal tract 441
Emphysematous cystitis 424
 Stomach 441
Fistula involving urinary bladder 424 
Size abnormalities of stomach 441
Neoplasia of urinary bladder 424
Opacity abnormalities of stomach 441
Pelvic bladder 425
 Position abnormalities of stomach 441
 Rupture of urinary bladder 425
Neoplasia stomach 442
Urethra 426
Ulcers of stomach 442
Urethral calculi 426
 Transit time abnormalities related to stomach 442
Urethral fistula 426
 Small intestine 442
Inflammation of urethra (urethritis) 426
Size abnormalities of small intestine 442
 Urethral neoplasia 427
 Opacity abnormalities of small intestine 443 
 Urethral rupture 427
 Position abnormalities of small intestine 444 
Adrenal glands 427
 Inflammation of small intestine (enteritis and 
 Adrenomegaly 427
inflammatory bowel disease, IBD) 444 
Hyperadrenocorticosterism 428
 Perforation (rupture of small intestine) 444 
Hypoadrenocorticism 428 
Transit time abnormalities in small intestine 444 
Mineralization of adrenal glands 428
Large intestine 445
 Pheochromocytoma 429
Size and shape abnormalities of large intestine 445 
 Male genital system 429
Opacity abnormalities of large intestine 445
 Prostate gland 429
Position abnormalities of large intestine 446
Benign prostatic hypertrophy (BPH) 429
Inflammation of colon (contributing factors) 446
Inflammation of prostate gland (prostatitis) 429
Neoplasia of colon 446
 Mineralization of prostate gland 430
Liver 447
Neoplasia of prostate gland 430
 Size and shape abnormalities of liver 447
 Paraprostatic cyst 431
 Position abnormalities of liver 447
Testicles 432
 Opacity abnormalities of liver 448 
Cryptorchidism 432
Spleen 448
Orchitis/epididymitis 432
 Size abnormalities of spleen 448
 Penis diseases 432
 Position abnormalities of spleen 449
 Female genital system 433
 Shape abnormalities of spleen 449 
Ovary enlargement 433
 Opacity abnormalities of spleen 449
Uterine enlargement 433
Pancreas 449
Gravid uterus 433
 Urinary tract 450
 Non-gravid uterine enlargement 435
 Kidneys 450
Uterine masses 435
Abnormal number of kidneys 450
Vaginal diseases 435
Size and margination abnormalities of kidneys 450 
 Hermaphroditism 436
 Opacity abnormalities of kidneys 451
Differential Diagnoses 436
Position abnormalities of kidneys 451
 Abdominal cavity 436
Abnormal findings on excretory urogram 452
 Adrenal glands 436
Ureters 452
 Lymph node enlargement 436 
Size abnormalities of ureters 452
Intra-abdominal mass effect 436
 Abnormal findings on excretory urogram 453 
378
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
Urinary bladder 453
Male genital system 455
 Size and shape abnormalities of urinary bladder 453
Prostate gland 455
 Opacity abnormalities of urinary bladder 453
Size and shape abnormalities of prostate gland 455
 Position abnormalities of urinary bladder 454
 Opacity abnormalities of prostate gland 455 
Inflammation (cystitis;: predisposing factors) 454
Female genital system 455
Neoplasia of urinary bladder 454
Uterus 455
 Ruptured urinary bladder 454
Size abnormalities of uterus (enlargement) 455 
Urethra 454
 Opacity abnormalities of uterus 456
 Opacity abnormalities of urethra 454
Vaginal diseases 456
Rupture of urethra 455
Dorsal
NORMAL RADIOGRAPHIC ANATOMY
Aorta
Vertebra
Peritoneal and retroperitoneal spaces
1. Abdominal cavity consists of peritoneal and retroperito-
Vena cava
neal spaces.
Left kidney
2. Boundaries of abdominal cavity are diaphragm cranially.
Right kidney
 abdominal wall muscles laterally and ventrally, sublumbar
Rib
musculature (psoas muscles) dorsally. and pelvic canal
Mesentery
caudally.
Parietal
Peritoneal
3. Peritoneal space is lined with peritoneum, a thin serous
peritoneum
cavity
membrane (Figure 6.1).
a. Parietal peritoneum covers diaphragm and abdominal
Visceral
peritoneum
wall, and separates peritoneal and retroperitoneal spaces.
b. Visceral peritoneum partially or completely covers
Abdominal organ
intra-abdominal organs.
c. Connecting peritoneum is associated with mesentery.
Ventral
omentum, and intra-abdominal ligaments.
4. Retroperitoneal space lies dorsal to peritoneal space.
Figure 6.1 Cross-sectional representation of abdomen with peritoneum,
a. Extends from diaphragm to anus.
mesentery, and peritoneal cavity. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999:
originally from Anderson and Anderson 1994, 608.)
b. Bordered ventrally by parietal peritoneum and dor-
sally by sublumbar muscles.
c. Communicates with mediastinum and pelvic canal.
5. Intra-abdominal soft tissue structures are only visible
when surrounded in whole or in part by less opaque mate-
rial (most commonly this is fat).
b. Artery branches from aorta at 90-degree angle and is
6. Retroperitoneal structures include kidneys. adrenal
visualized end-on (summation creates a near-mineral
glands, ureters, urinary bladder, prostate gland, aorta, caudal
opa city).
vena cava, cisterna chyli, and sublumbar lymph nodes.
c. Often mistaken for an abnormal mineral opacity (e.g..
a. Kidneys and prostate protrude into peritoneal cavity
ureteral calculus).
and are only partially covered by peritoneum.
8. Intra-abdominal lymph nodes are grouped anatomically
b. Sublumbar lymph nodes (renal, medial 
iliac, and
according to their drainage patterns:
sacral) vary in number and location and normally are to0
a. Visceral lymph nodes are located in peritoneal space.
small to be seen on survey radiographs.
1) Drain liver, spleen, pancreas, stomach, intestines,
7. Deep circumflex iliac artery:
and cranial abdomen.
a. Commonly seen on lateral radiograph as focal area of
2) Empty into cisterna chyli.
increased opacity ventral to caudal lumbar vertebrae
3) Cranial mesenteric nodes are largest, located near
(Figure 6.2) .
root of mesentery.
379
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
b. Parietal lymph nodes are retroperitoneal:
1) Drain spine, adrenal glands, kidneys, caudodorsal
Liver
abdomen, pelvis, and pelvic limbs.
2) Develop inconsistently and sometimes are absent.
1. Largest solid organ in abdominal cavity.
3) Medial iliac lymph nodes are largest and most con-
2. Located in cranial abdomen, between diaphragm and
sistent in number and location (positioned ventral to
stomach (Figure 6.3).
L5-7 near aortic trifurcation).
3. Six liver lobes (Figure 6.4):
a. Left lateral and medial lobes are located left of spine
(VD/DV radiograph).
b. Right lateral and medial lobes are located right of
caudal vena cava (VD/DV radiograph).
c. Quadrate lobe is positioned ventrally between caudal
vena cava and midline.
d. Caudate lobe, with caudate and papillary processes, is
positioned dorsally on midline.
4. Gall bladder is located between quadrate and right medial
liver lobes. In cats, right medial lobe contains gall bladder.
5. Falciform ligament attaches liver to diaphragm and to
ventral abdominal wall and serves as a storage reservoir
for fat.
6. Liver size is assessed by evaluating position of gastric axis
(stomach is empty):
a. Gastric axis is represented by a line extending from
middle of gastric fundus to pyloric antrum.
Figure 6.2 Deep circumflex iliac artery commonly produces a focal area
b. On lateral radiograph, gastric axis is somewhere
of increased opacity ventral to caudal lummbar vertebrae on lateral
between parallel to ribs (most dogs and cats) and perpen-
radiographs (arrow).
dicular to spine (deep-chested dogs: Figure 6.5).
B
Figure 6.3 Normal liver (cdark shading). L = liver, S = stomach, RK = right kicdney, LK = left kicdney, Sp = spleen, SI = small intestine, C = cecum,
AC = ascending colon, TC = tansverse colon, DC = cescending colon, UB = urinary bladder. A. Lateral radiograph. B. Ventrodorsal radiograph. (Adapted 
from Owens and Biery 1999.)
380
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
c. Lobar edges form acute angles (less than 90°) and
Leftmedial
extend to costal arch or slightly beyond.
lobe
d. Ventral and caudal hepatic borders are formed by left
Quadrate
lateral and right medial liver lobes.
Rightmedial!
lobe
e. Most dorsocaudal border is formed by caudate lobe
lobe
Leftlateral
and is adjacent to cranial pole of right kidney (cranial
GB
lobe
border of right kidney is only visible when surrounded
by fat}
f. Ventral border of liver is separated from abdominal
Papillary
wall by falciform (degree of separation depends on
Rightlater
obe
process
amount of fat in falciform).
ofcaudate
lobe
g. Spleen adjacent to liver may be mistaken for part
of liver, and separated liver lobes may be mistaken for
spleen.
-Hepaticducts
h. Cranial border of gastric fundus is adjacent to left
Caudateprocess
lateral liver lobe.
ofcaudatelobe
Bileduct
9. VD/DV radiograph:
Cysticduct
a. Only caudolateral margins of right and left lateral
hepatic lobes are visible.
Figure 6.4 Liver lobes, gall bladder, and hepatic ducts: visceral aspect.
 b. Empty stomach typically is positioned between llth
(Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999; originally from Evans 1993, 456.)
and 12th intercostal spaces.
c. In cats, right side of liver normally appears larger than
left side (liver tends to be more symmetrical in dogs).
10. Cranial
hepatic
border
conforms
toshape
of
diaphragm.
11. Proximal duodenum is located near junction of right
lateral and quadrate lobes.
Gall bladder/biliary system
1. Biliary structures (gall bladder, common bile duct, hepatic
ducts, cystic duct, small bile ductules, and canaliculi) are not
visible on survey radiographs unless they contain gas or
mineral.
2. Gall bladder is located in right cranioventral aspect of
liver (Figures 6.4 and 6.6).
3. Distended gall bladder may be seen as a rounded, convex.
soft tissue opacity protruding from ventral liver margin
Figure 6.5 Normal range for size of liver; orientation of gastric axis on
(lateral radiograph, especially in anorectic animals).
lateral radiograph is somewhere between parallel to ribs and
 perpendicular to spine.
Spleen
c. On VD/DV radiograph, gastric axis is perpendicular to
1. Relatively flat and elongated, homogeneous soft tissue
end is angled slightly caudally.
opacity structure with smooth, well-defined margins.
 7. Immature animals normally have relatively large livers
in relation to their body size.
to overlapping borders (spleen itself is not triangular shaped).
8. Lateral radiograph:
3. Edges of spleen form acute angles cranially and
a. Liver generally is easiest to evaluate on lateral
caudally.
radiographs.
4. Spleen is variable in size and position (Figure 6.7):
b. Triangular in shape with smooth, sharp margins and
a. Head of spleen (dorsal or proximal extremity) is
uniform, soft tissue opacity.
anchored by gastrosplenic ligament.
381
Figure 6.6 Normal gallbladder (dark shading). GB = gallbladder, L = liver, 5 = stomach, RK = right kidney, LK = left kicdney. Sp = spleen, Sl = small
intestine, C = cecum, AC = ascending colon, TC = transverse colon, DC = descendling colon, UB = urinary bladder. A. Lateral radiograph. B. Ventrodorsal 
radliograph. (Adapted from Owen5 and Biery 1999.)
P
Figure 6.7 Normal spleen (dark shading). L = liver, S = stommach, RK = right kidney, LK = left kidney, Sp = spleen, Sl = smallintestine, C = cecum,
AC = ascending colon, TC = tansverse colon, DC = cescending colon, UB = urinary bladder. A. Lateral radiograph. B. Ventrodorsal radiograph. (Adapted 
from Owen5 and Biery 1999.)
382
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
b. Body (midsection) and tail (ventral or distal extrem-
3. Right (descending) limb of pancreas lies medial to
ity) are more variable in position.
descending duodenum.
c. Tail may vary in position from just caudal to liver to
4. Body (central portion) of pancreas is in caudal space
just cranial to urinary bladder.
between gastric pylorus and proximal duodenum (within
5. Lateral radiograph:
gastroduodenal angley,
a. Head of spleen is craniodorsal to kidneys (only visible
5. In obese cats, pancreas sometimes is visible in left cranial
when outlined by fat).
abdominal quadrant as a poorly-defined soft tissue opacity
b. Tail of spleen is ventral and may be positioned any-
in triangle formed by stomach, spleen, and left kidney.
where between just caudal to liver and just cranial to
urinary bladder.
6. VD/DV radiograph:
Gastrointestinal tract
a. Spleen appears as a triangular-shaped soft tissue
opacity structure in left cranial abdominal quadrant.
Stomach
adjacent to gastric fundus.
1. Located in cranial aspect of abdominal cavity, caudal
b. Body and tail commonly extend caudally along left
to liver, and within margins of rib cage (Figure 6.1l). Unless 
lateral body wall.
distended, stomach normally does not extend caudal to
c. When stomach is empty and liver is small, proximal
last rib.
spleen may lie adjacent to left hemidiaphragm.
2. Major areas of stomach (Figure 6.12):
a. Cardia: attached to esophagus.
e. Points of a triangle are formed by gastric fundus, head
b. Fundus: left portion that accumulates gases and stores
of spleen, and cranial pole of left kidney (Figure 6.8).
Undigested food.
7. Cats: spleen is proportionately smaller and thinner than
c. Body: middle and most distensible portion.
in dogs.
d. Pylorus: distal or lower part:
a. Spleen is less variable in size and position than in dogs
1) Pyloric antrum: continuation of gastric body.
b. On lateral radiographs of cats, head of spleen is visible
 2) Pyloric canal: connects stomach to duodenum.
craniodorsally but rarely seen along ventral abdomen
3) Pyloric valve/sphincter: smooth muscle ring at end
(unless enlarged).
of pyloric canal that regulates flow of ingesta from
Stomach to duodenum.
3. Rugal folds are located predominately in gastric fundus
Pancreas
and tend to be larger and more numerous in dogs than in cats.
4. Position of stomach is estimated by gastric axis (a line
1. Rarely seen on survey radiographs because of small size
extending between fundus and pyloric antrum, as described
and similar opacity to adjacent tissues.
with liver on page 38l). Determination of gastric axis is a
2. Left (transverse) limb of pancreas lies between greater
subjective assessment that varies with size and shape of
curvature of stomach and transverse colon (Figures 6.9 and
stomach, body conformation, breed, and species.
6.10).
a. Dogs: pylorus is right of midline and fundus is left of
midline (Figure 6.13).
b. Cats: stomach has a J shape, with pylorus on midline
(or slightly to right of midline) and body and fundus left
of midline.
c. Barrel-chested dogs: stomach tends to curve more
caudally (U-shaped appearance) with pylorus closer to
midline.
d. Immature dogs: stomach is more J shaped, with
pylorus closer to midline and fundus and body left of
midline.
5. Appearance of gas and fluid in stomach is somewhat
predictable, but depends on volume of gas/fluid at time of
 radiography and effects of gravity. Air in gastric lumen rises 
to nondependent (up) side and fluid pools in dependent 
(down) areas (see chapter 1, Figure l.66):
Figure 6.8 Gastric fundus (S). head of spleen (Sp). and cranial pole of
 a. Lateral radiograph:
left kidney (Lk) form points of a triangle in the left cranial abdominal 
1) In right lateral recumbency gas is in fundus and
quadrant (ventrodorsal radiograph). TC = transverse colon.
body, fluid is in pylorus.
383
Deepleaf
Bile duct
Pancreatic duct
 Major duodenal papilla
Accessory
pancreatic duct
Stomach
Minor duodenal papilla-
Left lobe of
Right lobe of pancreas
pancreas
covering right kidney
Transverse colon
Ascending colon~
Mesenteric
Spleen
lymph nodes
jejunum(cut)
Descending colon
Left kidney
lleum (cut)
Root of mesentery (cut)
Figure 6.9 Abdominal viscera: ventral asp
iery 1999: originally from Evan5 1993. 435.)
Figure 6.10 Norrmal pancreas (dark shading). L = liver, S = stomach, RK = right kidney, LK = left kidney, Sp = spleen, Sl = smallintestine, C = cecum,
AC = ascending colon, TC = tansverse colon, DC = cescending colon, UB = urinary bladder. A. Lateral radiograph. B. Ventrodorsal radiograph. (Adapted 
from Owens and Biery 1999.)
384
Figure 6.11 Normal stomach (dark shading). L = liver, S = stomach, RK = right kicdney, LK = left kidney, Sp = spleen, Sl = smallintestine, C = cecum,
AC = ascending colon, TC = transverse colon, DC = cdescending colon, UB = urinary bladder. A. Lateral radiograph. B. Ventrodorsal radiograph. (Adapted 
from Owens and Biery 1999.)
Esophagus
Pyloric canal,
Pylorus,
Cardiacosti
Bile duct-
Hepatic ducts
Pyloric canal
Gastric folds
Angular
Intramuralportionofduct
ncisu
Major duodenal papilla
Pancreatic ducts
Minorduodenalpapilla
Body
Figure 6.12 Longitudlinal section of stomach and proximal portion of duodenum. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999; originally from
Evan5 1993, 437.)
385
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
B
Figure 6.13 A. Normal canine stomach. B. Normal feline stomach
Figure 6.14 Small intestine (lateral radiograph). Small bowel width 
normally should not exceed the height of the body of the fifth lumbar
C = cardia, F = fundus, B = body, PA = pyloric antrum, PC = pyloric canal
(Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
vertebra (dark-shaded vertebra with white arrow). (Adapted from Owen5
and Biery 1999.)
  's i i s  lii   (
a. In thin animals, small intestine can extend from liver
in body and fundus.
to pelvic inlet.
3) Pylorus is ventral in position and fundus is dorsal.
b. In obese animals, intra-abdominal fat confines small
b. VD/DV radiograph:
intestine to ventral midabdomen, between stomach and
1) In dorsal recumbency (VD radiograph) gas is in
urinary bladder (bowel may appear bunched).
 body and fluid is in fundus; pylorus may contain gas
c. Sizes of colon, urinary bladder, and uterus affects
or fluid.
bowel distribution.
2) In ventral recumbency (dorsoventral radiograph)
4. On VD/DV radiographs, majority of small intestine
 gas is in fundus and pylorus, fluid is in body.
usually is located right of midline, (especially in obese
6. Size and shape of stomach varies with content.
animals).
     s n    
5. All small bowel loops should be similar in width, with no
        
loop measuring more than twice the size of other loops.
disease in the pyloric canal.
a. Dogs: bowel width should not exceed height of 5th
8. Distention of stomach increases fundic diameter, creates
lumbar vertebral body (L5; Figure 6.14).
a convex caudal gastric margin, displaces the fundus and
1) Bowel width equal to 1.5 to 2 times height of L5 is
body caudally, and increases diameter and length of pylorus.
 abnormally distended.
9. Gastric wall thickness can only be reliably evaluated
         
when stomach is moderately distended with gas or positive
suggests obstruction.
con trast medium.
3) Also in dogs: bowel width should be less than twice
10. In overweight cats. a line of decreased opacity may be
width of a rib.
present in gastric wall due to submucosal fat (may mimic
b. Cats: bowel should be less than two times height of
gas in wall of stomach).
L5 body.
11. Rugal fold height and width varies with degree of gastric
 1) Also in cats, bowel width should measure less than
distention, but should not exceed the distance between
12mm.
folds.
c. Bowel width is distance between outer (serosal) margins.
d. Duodenum is slightly wider than jejunum and ileum.
Small intestine
6. Duodenum is proximal portion of small intestine:
1. Includes duodenum, jejunum, and ileum.
a. Exits gastric pylorus near right caudal border of liver.
2. Appears as continuous, smooth-bordered, curving or flow-
b. Proximal part is relatively fixed in position by hepato-
ing tubes with homogeneous soft tissue opacity segments and
duodenal ligament.
gas-filled segments (in fasted animal with empty stomach).
c. Gastroduodenal angle contains pancreas and may
a. In dogs, small intestine commonly contains 30% to
become widened during pancreatic disease (gastroduode-
60% gas.
nal angle in cats is smaller and closer to midline than in
 b. In cats, small intestine usually contains little or no gas.
dogs).
3. Small intestine is uniformly distributed in peritoneal
d. Descending duodenum runs parallel to right abdomi-
space, filling areas not occupied by other viscera or fat.
nal wall (on lateral radiographs, it is located in middle
386
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
of abdominal cavity, midway between ventral body wall
b. Cecum in cats (Figure 6.17B):
and spine).
1) Very small and not normally visible on survey
e. Caudal duodenal flexure is located at level of tuber
radiographs.
coxae in right caudal abdomen.
2) Shaped like a cone and rarely contains gas.
f. Ascending duodenum extends cranially to caudal
3) Noncompartmentalized and only ileocolic valve is
border of stomach and then continues as jejunum.
present.
7. Jejunum represents majority of small intestine; ileum is
3. Colon is a thin walled, distensible tube with ascending.
terminal portion that connects to colon.
transverse, and descending portions.
 8. Jejunum and ileum cannot be differentiated on radio-
a. Position of colon is readily altered by intra-abdominal
graphs, except at ileocolic junction (midabdomen), where
 masses and distention of nearby organs.
ileum crosses from left to right to join colon.
b. Width of colon:
1) Typically two to three times width of small intestine.
Large intestine
2) Should be less than 1.5 times length of L7.
1. Includes cecum, colon, rectum, and anal canal (Figure
3) Should not exceed three times width of small
6.15).
bowel.
2. Cecum is a diverticulum of the colon (Figure 6.16).
c. Ascending colon extends from junction with cecum
a. Cecum in dogs (Figure 6.17A):
cranially and right of midline to right colic (hepatic)
l) Commonly contains gas.
flexure. where it ends and transverse colon begins.
2) Located in right dorsal aspect of abdominal cavity
 Nearby structures include duodenum, right limb of pan-
(usually at level of L2-3).
creas, right kidney, mesentery, and small intestine.
3) Appears semicircular, corkscrew, comma, spiral, or
d. Transverse colon passes from right to left across
C-shaped in mature dogs.
midline (near level of Tl2-13) to left colic (splenic)
4) Relatively straight in young dogs.
flexure, where it ends and descending colon begins.
5) Compartmentalized with ileocolic and cecocolic
Nearby structures include stomach, left limb of pancreas,
 sphincters.
liver, mesentery, and small intestine.
B
Figure 6.15 Normal large intestine (dark shading). A. Lateral radiograph. B. Ventrodorsal radiograph. L = liver, S = stomach, RK = right kidney.
LK = left kidney, Sp = spleen, Sl = smmallintestine, C = cecum, AC = ascending colon, TC = transverse colon, DC = descending colon, UB = urinary
bladder. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
387
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Transverse colon
Ascending colon
lleocolicorifice
Cecocolic orifice
Descending colon
Cecum
Antimesenteric
ileal artery
Ileum
Figure 6.16 Relationship of ileum, cecum, and colon. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999; originally fromm Anderson and Anderson 1994, 660.)
B
1) Redundancy of descending colon is a normal,
asymptomatic, anatomic variation:
a) Most often reported in cats and large-breed dogs.
b) Allows for considerable variation in positioning.
2) Descending colon may be displaced to right of
s u eisu 'iapea Aen siel Aq au
intestine, intra-abdominal fat, or redundancy.
f. Rectum is located on midline between floor of pelvic
canal and ventral border of sacrum and ends at anal
canal. Nearby structures include urinary bladder, urethra.
cervix, vagina, prostate, and lymph nodes.
Urinary tract
R
AC
AC
Kidneys and ureters
Figure 6.17 A. Normal canine large intestine. B. Normal feline large 
1. Kidneys are retroperitoneal in dorsocranial abdominal cavity.
intestine. C = cecum, I = ileum, A = ascendling colon, T = transverse
2. Both kidneys are similar in size and shape and smoothly
colon, D = descending colon, R = rectum, AC = anal canal. (Adapted
marginated.
from Owens and Biery 1999.)
3. Kidneys are homogeneous soft tissue opacity: however.
fat may be visible near renal pelvis (Figure 6.18).
e. Descending colon is longest portion of large intestine.
a. On radiographs, fat produces wedge-shaped areas of
It extends caudally, dorsally, and left of midline to level of
decreased opacity in area of renal pelvis, commonly
 L5-6 and then toward midline to pelvic canal, where it ends
visible in overweight cats.
and rectum begins. Nearby structures include left kidney.
4. Positions of kidneys are somewhat variable (Figure 6.19):
Uterus, urinary bladder, mesentery, and small intestine.
a. Long axis of each kidney is approximately parallel to spine.
388
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
b. In obese animals, kidneys tend to be more vertical and
7. Structures near right kidney include descending duode-
ventral in position.
num, right limb of pancreas, and ascending colon.
c. In deep-chested dogs. kidneys are more cranial and
8. Structures near left kidney include spleen, left limb of
may blend with liver and spleen (may be poorly
pancreas, and descending colon.
visualized).
9. Kidneys commonly overlap on lateral radiographs:
d. Left kidney usually is located caudal and slightly
a. Right renal caudal pole superimposed over left renal
ventral to level of right kidney.
cranial pole.
5. In dogs. kidneys are bean shaped:
 b. Overlap tends to be greater during inspiration.
a. Cranial pole of right kidney is adjacent to liver at level
c. Area of overlap is increased in opacity and may be
of T13-L1.
mistaken for a mass.
b. Cranial pole of left kidney is at level of L2-4 (left
d. Kidneys are further separated in right lateral recum-
kidney is more loosely attached and variable in position).
bency (lef kidney may be closer to midabdomen).
6. In cats, kidneys are relatively shorter, more rounded, and
10. Size of kidneys is assessed on VD radiographs by com-
more mobile than in dogs:
paring length and width of each kidney to length of second
a. Right kidney at level of Ll-4.
lumbar vertebra (L2) (Box 6.1).
b. Left kidney at level of L2-5.
11. Ureters:
Cranialpole
Fat in renal sinust
Box 6.1 Normal kidney length and width.
Renalartery
Dogs:
Length: 2.5 to 3.5 × L2
Renal pelvisr
JRenalvein
Width: 2 × L2
MedullaD
Renal
Cats:
Length: 2 to 3 × L2 (4.0 to 4.5 cm)
hilus
Width: 3.0 to 3.5 cm
Ureter
 Neutered cats often have slightly smaller kidneys.
 Older intact male cats may have slightly larger kidneys.
Caudalpolep
Normal dog and cat kidneys may measure outside these
Figure 6.18 Kidney normal anatommy. (Adapted from Owens and Biery
ranges, but both kidneys should be similar size.
1999; originally from Evans and Christensen 1993, 497.)
B
Figure 6.19 Normal kidneys (dark shading). A. Lateral radiograph. B. Ventrodorsal radliograph. L = liver, S = 5tommach, RK = night kidney.
LK = left kidney, Sp = spleen, Sl = smmallintestine, C = cecum, AC = ascending colon, TC = transverse colon, DC = descending colon, UB = urinary
bladder. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
686
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
a. Transport urine from renal pelves, through retroperi-
a. Neck of bladder is long and narrow in cats and may
toneal space, to urinary bladder.
be mistaken for urethra.
b. Usually not visible on survey radiographs because of
b. Body of feline bladder often is 2 to 3cm cranial to pubis.
small size and similar opacity to adjacent tissues.
Urethra
Urinary bladder
1. Not usually visible on survey radiographs.
2. Entire urethra functions as a sphincter to control outflow
1. Retroperitoneal
in
caudoventral
abdominal cavity
of urine from urinary bladder.
(Figure 6.20).
2. Loosely attached, very distensible, and partially covered
3. Urethra in males is a tubular structure subdivided into
three regions:
by peritoneum.
a. Prostatic urethra is widest portion and extends from
3. Nearby structures include abdominal wall ventrally, small
intestine cranially, descending colon and uterus dorsally, and
neck of bladder to caudal border of prostate gland. Pros-
prostate gland and pelvic canal caudally.
tate gland completely encircles urethra.
b. Mermbranous or pelvic urethra extends from caudal
4. Size and position of urinary bladder varies with volume
border of prostate to ischial arch in dogs and to bulbo-
of urine contained in lumen.
urethral gland in cats. Caudal portion of membranous
a. Full bladder should not extend cranial to level of
umbilicus (Figure 6.21).
region is narrowest part of urethra.
c. Penile urethra extends from caudal edge of pelvis
b. Empty bladder contracts and may be located within
pelvic canal (may not be visible on survey radiographs).
(ischial arch) to tip of penis. Os penis partially surrounds
distal penile urethra in dogs but not in cats.
c. Bladder neck extends cranial to pubis no more than 1
to 2 cm in dogs and no more than 3cm in cats.
4. Urethra in females is shorter and wider than in males.
extending from neck of bladder to external urethral orifice
5. For descriptive purposes, urinary bladder is divided into
on floor of vagina.
vertex (cranial portion),. body (middle portion). and neck
(caudal portion) (Figure 6.22).
6. In dogs. urinary bladder typically is pear shaped or tear-
Adrenal glands
drop shaped and may be more oval shaped in females.
7. In cats, urinary bladder is more rounded and located
1. Located in dorsal retroperitoneal space, cranial and
further cranial than in dogs:
medial to each kidney (Figure 6.23).
B
 Figure 6.20 Normal urinary bladder (dark shadling). A. Lateral radiograph. B. Ventrodorsal radliograph. L = liver, S = 5tommach, RK = night kidney.
LK = left kidney, Sp = spleen, Sl = smallintestine, C = cecum, AC = ascending colon, TC = transverse colon, DC = descending colon, UB = urinary
bladder. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
066
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
Figure 6.21 Distended urinary bladder. A. Lateral radiograph. B. Ventrodorsal radiograph. Enlarged urinary bladder displaces 5mall bowel cranially and
cescending colon dorsally. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
    i   (
hypertrophied (intact dogs) or when pulled cranially
C.1
by a large bladder.
3) Bordered dorsally by rectum and ventrally by
pubis.
4) Feline prostate gland is not visible on survey
radiographs.
b. Shape of prostate gland is bilobed and rounded with
smooth margins.
1) On lateral radiographs, cranial and ventral margins
of prostate gland usually are visible due to adjacent
triangular-shaped fat pad along ventral abdominal
wall, between prostate and urinary bladder. Dorsal
Figure 6.22 Urinary bladder divisions: V = vertex, B = body, N = neck.
prostatic margin usually blends with ventral rectal
(Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
wall.
2) On VD/DV radiograph, prostate gland may be
visible on midline as a symmetrical, convex soft tissue
2. Not visible on survey radiographs unless greatly enlarged
opacity structure projecting slightly cranial to pubis
or mineralized.
(may be obscured by overlying feces in rectum).
c. Size of prostate gland in intact dogs varies with age:
1) Height should be less than 70% of diameter of
 Male genital system
pelvic inlet (measured from ventral border of sacrum
to tip of pubis on lateral radiograph).
1. Includes prostate gland, testicles, and penis.
-ou "a'a) sse e 5isa8sns %06 ueun 1a1ea13 1uaiah (7
2. Prostate gland is uniform soft tissue opacity structure:
plasia, abscess, cyst).
a. Located caudal to urinary bladder in retroperitoneal
space (Figure 6.24).
Testicles
l) Usually within pelvic canal in immature and cas-
1. Located extra-abdominally in scrotum.
trated dogs (may not be visible on radiographs)-
2. Poorly evaluated with radiography.
391
Figure 6.23 Normal adrenal glands (dark shading). A. Lateral radliograph. B. Ventrodorsal radiograph. A = adrenal gland, L = liver, S = stomach.
RK = right kidney, LK = left kidney. Sp = spleen, Sl = small intestine, C = cecum, AC = ascending colon, TC = transverse colon, DC = descending colon,
UB = urinary bladder. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
Figure 6.24 Normal prostate gland (dark shading). A. Lateral radliograph. B. Ventrodorsal radiograph. P = prostate gland, L = liver, 5 = stomach.
RK = right kidney, LK = left kidney, Sp = spleen, Sl = small intestine, C = cecum, AC = ascendling colon, TC = transverse colon, DC = descending colon,
UB = urinary bladder. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
392
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
3. Undescended testes usually are not identified on survey
e. Nongravid uterus is uniform, soft tissue opacity.
radiographs unless greatly enlarged (e.g., neoplasia or torsion).
f. Size of nongravid uterus varies with animal's age.
body size, and previous pregnancies.
Penis
g. Normal uterus usually is less than 1.5 cm wide and
1. A bone is present in penis of dogs (os penis or baculum).
 rarely visible on survey radiographs.
but is absent in cats.
h. Mild uterine enlargement is difficult to distinguish
2. May develop from separate ossification centers (some-
from nearby small intestine:
times mistaken for fracture).
1) Uterine width must be at least twice that of small
bowel to be reliably detected.
2) In cats, sublumbar musculature (iliopsoas) outlined
Female genital system
by fat on VD/DV radiograph may mimic uterine
enlargement.
1. Includes ovaries, uterus, and vagina.
2. Ovaries are caudal and ventral to each kidney, in dorsal
middle aspect of peritoneal space.
DISEASES AND DISORDERS
3. Ovaries are not visible on radiographs unless greatly
enlarged (e.g., cyst, neoplasia).
Peritoneal hernia
4. Uterus is Y shaped, with two horns (bicornuate). a body.
and a cervix (Figure 6.25):
Clinical correlations:
a. Each horn extends between uterine body and respec-
1. Protrusion of abdominal viscera or fascia through weak-
tive ovary.
ened muscular or tendinous lining of abdominal caviry.
b. Body of uterus is between descending colon and
2. May be congenital or secondary to trauma (see Differen-
urinary bladder.
tial Diagnoses section, this chapter).
c. Body extends caudally through pelvic canal as uterine
3. Clinical signs depend on organ(s) involved, severity of
neck or cervix.
incarceration, and degree of organ dysfunction.
d. Uterus ends at vagina.
4. Affected animals may or may not be painful.
Figure 6.25 Normal uterus (dark shading). A. Lateral radiograph. B. Ventrodorsal radiograph. U = uterus, L = liver, S = 5stomach, RK = right kidney.
LK = left kidney, Sp = spleen, Sl = small intestine, C = cecum, AC = ascending colon, TC = transverse colon, DC = cescending colon, UB = urinary
bladder. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
393
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 6.26 Normal abdomen. A. Lateral radiograph. B. Ventrodorsa radliograph. L = liver, 5 = stomach, RK = night kidney, LK = left kidney.
Sp = spleen, Sl = smmallintestine, C = cecum, AC = ascending colon, TC = transverse colon, DC = cescending colon, UB = urinary bladder. (Adapted from 
Owens and Biery 1999.)
Contrast radiography:
1. Depending on location of hernia and suspected organ
7
involvement, one or more contrast procedures may aid in
diagnosis:
a. Upper GI study.
b. Urethrocystography.
c. Excretory urography.
d. Pneumoperitoneography (uncommonly performed,
contraindicated if diaphragmatic hernia is suspected).
e. Celiography (positive contrast peritoneography).
Figure 6.27 Common locations for abdominal hernias: (1) dorsal
diaphragm; (2) ventral diaphragm: (3) normal openings in dliaphragm 
'smpey leabeydosa sneyy poe ie uaopge pue xeou aul uaamiag
Liver
and vena cava forammen; (4) umbilicus; (5) femoral; (6) inguinal;
(7) perineal. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999; originally from
Hepatomegaly
Anderson and Anderson 1994, 583.)
Clinical correlations:
1. Liver enlargement may be general or local (see Differen-
Radiographic findings with peritoneal hernia:
tial Diagnoses section, this chapter).
1. Common locations are illustrated in Figure 6.27.
2. Hepatic lipidosis (fatty liver disease):
2. Fatty tissue usually enters a hernia first and may be
a. Predisposed by obesity and sudden weight loss.
accompanied by an organ.
b. Common in cats, uncommon in dogs.
3. Herniated organs (e.g., uterus, liver, bladder) create soft
c. Reported in young toy breeds (Yorkshire Terrier, Chi-
tissue masses located outside of peritoneal space.
huahua, and Fox Terrier).
4. Gas-filled bowel loops may create less opaque, curvilinear
3. Caudal vena cava obstruction (post caval syndrome or
 structures extending beyond limits of peritoneal space.
Budd-Chiari syndrome) may result from diaphragmatic
5. Internal hernias (e.g., mesenteric hernia) may present
hernia, heartworm disease, large intrathoracic mass, or
with obstructive ileus.
thrombosis.
394
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
 n n  n a s  
a. May be congenital or acquired, intrahepatic or
solitary masses, most often reported in older cats, and can
extrahepa tic.
become quite large.
b. Abnormal connections between portal vein and sys-
 5. Clinical signs vary with etiology and severity of hepatopa-
temic circulation cause blood from portal vein to bypass
thy but may include polyuria. polydypsia., poor appetite.
liver and directly enter systemic circulation.
weight loss, and ascites.
c. Congenital shunts are more often reported in pure-
bred dogs (e.g., Miniature Schnauzer, Yorkshire Terrier,
Radiographic findings with generat hepatomegaly:
Irish Wolfhound).
1) Intrahepatic congenital shunt is more common
1. Liver margins are rounded (see chapter 1, Figure l.58).
Edges of liver lose normal acute angles.
in large-breed dogs (e.g., Irish Wolfhound, Golden
2. Stomach is displaced caudally and dorsally (gastric axis is
Retriever) and often includes a persistent ductus
 angled caudally due to caudal displacement of pylorus).
venosus.
3. Gastric fundus and pylorus may be closer to midline.
2) Extrahepatic congenital shunts are more common
4. Caudoventral hepatic border extends beyond (caudal to)
in cats and small-breed dogs and may develop between
portal and azygous veins or between portal vein and
costal arch.
caudal vena cava.
5. Variable caudal displacement of spleen, small intestines.
3) Microvascular dysplasia is an unusual type of intra-
and right kidney (depend on size of liver).
6. Infiltrative diseases (e.g., lymphoma, hemangiosarcoma)
hepatic shunt in which no gross vascular anomaly can
 be found (most often reported in Cairn Terrier).
may cause concurrent splenomegaly and lymph node
d. Acquired shunts result from diffuse liver disease and
enlargement.
7. Abdomen is distended by enlarged liver, peritoneal fluid.,
typically affect multiple blood vessels (more often
or loss of muscle tone.
reported in older animals).
3. Chronic inflammation (see Differential Diagnoses section,
8. Peritoneal fluid causes indistinct or obscured serosal
 margins (e.g., right heart failure, neoplasia).
this chapter):
9. In obese cats, falciform ligament tends to be very large
a. May lead to scarring and fibrosis of liver (hepatic
and laden with fat, which displaces liver dorsocaudally and
cirrhosis).
b. Regenerative nodules often develop in damaged
may mimic hepatomegaly.
hepatic parenchyma.
4. Clinical signs may include anorexia, lethargy, vomiting.
Radiographic findings with local hepatomegaly:
 diarrhea, polyuria, and polydypsia.
1. Variable displacement of adjacent viscera, depending on
 5. Many animals remain asymptomatic until liver failure
liver lobes involved and degree of enlargement (see chapter
has occurred.
1, Figure l.59).
6. Signs of neurologic disease (hepatic encephalopathy)
a. Left hepatomegaly displaces gastric fundus, small
may develop and include seizures, head pressing. disorienta-
intestine, and spleen caudally and may push fundus
tion, and temporary blindness.
closer to midline.
7. Concurrent lower urinary tract disease is sometimes
b. Right hepatomegaly displaces duodenum and gastric
present due to abnormal liver metabolism and formation of
pylorus medially and dorsally.
ammonium urate crystals.
c. Caudate lobe enlargement displaces right kidney
8. Diagnosis of a portosystemic shunt may be confirmed
caudally.
with ultrasonography, contrast radiography, scintigraphy. or
2. Peritoneal fluid may be present.
cross-sectional ima ging.
3. Splenomegaly or/and lymphadenomegaly may occur
with infiltrative disease.
Radiographic findings with microhepatia:
4. A pedunculated hepatic mass can extend caudal to
1. Findings are more apparent when entire liver is small and
stomach and mimic a splenic mass.
less obvious when only a portion of liver is affected.
5. Fluid-filled gastric pylorus may be mistaken for hepatic
2. Distance between stomach and diaphragm is decreased
mass (pylorus fills with fluid on right lateral radiograph and
fills with air on left lateral radiograph).
to less than two intercostal spaces (see chapter l, Figure l.60).
3. Gastric axis is more vertical (lateral radiograph) and often
slanted cranially (pylorus is closer to diaphragm)
Microhepatia
4. Caudoventral hepatic border does not extend to costal
Clinical correlations:
arch.
1. Small liver usually is associated with a vascular shunt or
 5. Hepatic margins tend to be smooth and better-defined
chronic inflammation.
with portosystemic shunts than with hepatic cirrhosis
2. Portosystemic vascular shunts:
(margins often are irregular with cirrhosis).
395
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
6. Kidneys commonly are large with congenital shunts.
7. Peritoneal effusion often occurs with cirrhosis.
8. Renal or cystic calculi may be present.
9. Conditions that may mimic microhepatia:
a. Deep-chested body conformation.
b. Diaphragmatic hernia with liver displaced into tho-
racic cavity.
c. Peritoneal-pericardial diaphragmatic hernia.
Contrast radiography (portography, see Chapter 3
for method):
1. Used to detect shunting vessels.
2. Portosystemic shunts cranial to Tl3 frequently are
intrahe pa tic.
3. Shunts caudal to Tl3 tend to be extrahepatic.
4. Intrahepatic vessels may be faint or not visualized with a
shunt.
5. Acquired shunts often present with numerous, tortuous
vessels in the mesentery.
Gall bladder/biliary system
Cholecystitis
Figure 6.28 Emphysematous cholecystitis (lateral radiograph). Ga5
Clinical correlations:
opacity is present in cranioventral aspect of liver (area of gallbladder).
1. Inflammation of gall bladder.
(Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
2. Most often caused by bacterial infection, typically second-
ary to intestinal reflux or hematogenous spread).
3. Hepatic abscess with emphysema.
3. Infection with gas-producing bacteria causes emphysema-
4. Mineralized hepatobiliary mass (e.g., neoplasia, chronic
tous cholecystitis (usually associated with diabetes mellitus).
hematoma).
4. Chronic inflammation can weaken gall bladder wall or
result in mineralization.
Cholelithiasis
5. Rupture of gall bladder (e.g., necrotizing cholecystitis)
Clinical correlations:
usually causes peritonitis.
1. Other names: gallstones, gall bladder calculi.
6. Clinical signs include
e vomiting. anorexia, abdominal
2. Often an incidental finding in dogs and cats, but may lead
pain, and jaundice.
to cholecystitis.
 3. Miniature Schnauzers, Poodles, and Shetland Sheepdogs
Radiographic findings with cholecystitis:
are predisposed.
1. Survey radiographs usually are normal.
4. May be caused by inflammation/infection, biliary stasis.
2. Gall bladder enlargement may present as a convex soft
or neoplasia
tissue opacity projecting from ventral border of liver (lateral
 5. Clinical signs are absent unless obstruction or infection
radiograph).
occurs.
3. Emphysematous cholecystitis produces foci of decreased
6. Affected animals may present with vomiting. anorexia.
 opacity (gas bubbles) in right cranial or cranioventral aspect 
abdominal pain, and jaundice.
of liver (Figure 6.28). Gas is contained in bladder wall or
lumen and conforms to shape of gall bladder.
Radiographic findings with cholelithiasis:
4. Mineralization of gall bladder wall may 
result from
1. Biliary calculi may be mineral opacity (composed of
chronic inflammation and varies from focal and unstruc-
calcium) or soft tissue opacity (cholesterol or bilirubin),
tured to solid and shell-like.
2. Calculi vary in size and shape and usually are located in
right cranioventral aspect of liver (Figure 6.29). Calculi may
Differential diagnosis for cholecystitis:
only be faintly visible, especially in obese animals.
1. Cholelithiasis.
3. Choledocoliths (calculi in biliary ducts) typically appear
2. Focal liver mass.
as linear, branching mineral opacities.
396
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
A
3. Hepatomegaly and ascites may be present (e.g., heart-
worm disease with right heart failure).
Spleen
Splenic mass
Clinical correlations:
1. Masses associated with spleen are common in dogs and
cats (see Differential Diagnoses section, this chapter).
2. Hemangiosarcoma more often is reported in large-breed
dogs (e.g., German Shepherd Dog. Golden Retriever, Great 
Dane, Boxer}
a. May metastasize to liver, lung. or heart.
b. Metastasis to heart commonly leads to pericardial
effusion and right heart failure.
3. Nodular hyperplasia is a nonspecific reaction to red blood
cell destruction (common in dogs).
4. Malignant histiocytosis is most often reported in Bernese
Mountain Dog. Flat-Coated Retriever, Golden Retriever, and
Rottweiler.
5. Rupture of splenic mass is a frequent occurrence, usually
resulting in hemoperitoneum.
Figure 6.29 Mineralization associated with biliary 5ystem (lateral
6. Clinical signs include abdominal distension, palpable
lien ui juasaid ane nien Aiedo jeauiuu sisennalou v (sydennoe
intra-abdominal mass, weakness, and anemia (latter if hem-
bladder. B. Choledocholithiasis: small mineral opacity calculi are present 
orrhage has occurred).
in intrahepatic bile ducts. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
7. Affected animals may suffer acute or chronic dissemi-
nated intravascular coagulation (DIC).
4. Superimposed structures (e.g., costochondral junction)
Radiographic findings with splenic mass:
 may be mistaken for choleliths.
1. Splenic enlargement maybe general or local and is
extremely variable in size and shape (see chapter l, Figure
Parasitic disease
1.61}.
Clinical correlations:
 2. Masses generally are visible in ventral aspect of abdormi-
1. Parasite infection and/or migration can result in hepato-
nal cavity (if not obscured by fluid) (see chapter 1, Figure
biliary disease.
1.62).
2. Liver flukes (e.g. Platynosornum concinnum, Amphimerus
3. Splenic masses can become extremely large, resulting in
pseudofelineus) are found in North and South America (prin-
marked displacement of adjacent viscera.
cipally Hawai, Florida, and Caribbean) and infect cats fol-
4. Differentiation of benign and malignant splenic masses is
lowing ingestion of an intermediate host (e.g., lizard, toad).
not possible on radiographs.
Larvae migrate to gall bladder or bile ducts and may cause
5. Splenic margins may be smooth or irregular.
fibrosis or obstructive disease of liver and pancreatitis.
6. Masses in head of spleen displace stomach cranially, left 
 3. Heartworms can lead to right heart failure and secondary
kidney caudally, and small intestine caudally, dorsally, and
hepatic venous congestion.
toward the right side.
4. Migrating intestinal parasites (e.g.. Toxocara) can cause
7. Masses in tail of spleen are more variable in position and
hepatitis or cholecystitis.
may displace small intestine toward the right or left side.
5. Diagnosis is confirmed by finding ova on a fecal
8. Peritoneal effusion is common with both benign and
examination.
malignant lesions (often nonclotting blood) and may obscure
spleen and mass.
Radiographic findings with parasitic disease
9. Gas-filled small intestine may be asymmetrically dis-
affecting liver:
 s  a on sl ss as e aq 
1. Survey radiographs often are normal.
position with peritoneal fluid and no mass).
2. Gall bladder may be distended, creating a bulge along
10. Concurrent hepatomegaly and/or lymphadenopathy
ven tral hepatic border.
may be present.
397
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
11. Pulmonary nodules/masses may occur with metastatic
disease.
1. Emphysema (due to infection with a gas-forming
bacterium) appears as a mottled or foamy area of
decreased opacity in spleen (see chapter 1, Figure l.64).
12. Signs of trauma may be present (e.g., fractured ribs.
subcutaneous emphysema).
13. Right heart failure may be present (due to a heart base
mass and pericardial effusion).
14. Fluid-filled gastric pylorus may mimic splenic mass
 (make left lateral radiograph to move gastric air into pylorus 
and aid in identification).
Figure 6.30 Splenic torsion (lateral radiograph). Spleen is enlarged with
rounded margins and a reverse letter C shape. (Adapted frorm Owens and 
Differential diagnosis for splenic mass:
Biery 1999.)
1. Pedunculated hepatic mass located caudal to stomach.
2. Pancreatic or GI mass.
3. Lymphadenopathy
5. If untreated, blood clots develop in splenic blood vessels,
4. Localized peritoneal effusion.
resulting in necrosis.
6. Acute splenic torsion can lead to hypovolemic shock.
Splenic rupture
Radiographic findings with splenic torsion:
Clinical correlations:
1. Spleen is moderately to severely enlarged (may become
1. Typically caused by abdominal trauma or splenic mass;
many times original size).
may result from splenic torsion.
2. Typically, spleen is displaced toward right and middle
2. Clinical signs vary with severity of rupture, but include
aspects of abdominal cavity.
abdominal
distension (hemoabdomen). weakness, and
3. Splenic shape characteristically is that of a reverse capital
anemia.
3. Slow bleeds may not be clinically evident during early
letter C on a lateral radiograph (Figure 6.30).
4. Emphysema may develop in spleen (mottled or foamy
stages.
pattern of decreased opacity).
4. Intra-abdominal mass may be palpable.
 5. Peritoneal effusion is common and may obscure splenic
margins.
Radiographic findings with splenic rupture:
6. Hemoabdomen results from splenic necrosis or rupture.
1. Peritoneal effusion, which may be local or diffuse.
2. Serosal margins of spleen and other organs are partially
or completely obscured.
Pancreas
3. Small effusions typically create soft tissue (fluid) streak-
ing of intra-abdominal fat (see chapter 1, Figure 1.49). Often
Pancreatitis
most evident along cranioventral aspect of abdominal cavity
Clinical correlations:
(lateral radiograph). but may require underexposed radio-
1. Inflammation of pancreas (may be acute or chronic; see
graph to appreciate.
 Differential Diagnoses section, this chapter).
4. Splenomegaly or a splenic mass may be visible.
2. Some breeds may be predisposed (e.g., Miniature Schnau-
zer, Dachshund, Yorkshire Terrier, Silky Terrier)
Splenic torsion
3. Chronic or repeated inflammation can lead to formation
Clinical correlations:
of a pancreatic abscess or pseudocyst.
1. Rotation of spleen around its axis (torsion) restricts
 4. Clinical signs include anorexia, lethargy, vomiting, weak-
venous blood flow, but often allows arterial flow to continue.
ness, abdominal pain, dehydration, and diarrhea.
resulting in venous congestion and severe splenomegaly.
 5. Diagnosis involves correlating history, clinical signs, and
2. Often associated with gastric dilatation and volvulus, but
results of laboratory tests.
may occur independently.
3. Most often reported in large, deep-chested dogs.
Radiographic findings with pancreatitis:
4. Clinical signs tend to be nonspecific, including palpable
1. No single sign or group of signs is pathognomonic for
splenomegaly, anorexia, vomiting. abdominal pain, and
pancreatitis; survey radiographs may be normal, which does
anemia.
not exclude pancreatitis.
866
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
2. Increased opacity and indistinct serosal margins in right
5. Abdominal distension (due to peritoneal effusion) may
cranial abdominal quadrant is characteristic (see chapter 1,
be present.
Figure 1.65}.
6. A cranial intra-abdominal mass may be palpable.
3. Variable displacement of adjacent viscera, depending on
degree of pancreatic enlargement:
Radiographic findings with pancreatic mass:
a. Pyloric antrum may be displaced toward midline.
1. Often similar to those of acute pancreatitis.
b. Proximal descending duodenum may be displaced to
2. Mass effect and indistinct serosal margins may be visible
the right.
in cranial aspect of abdominal cavity.
c. Gastroduodenal angle is widened.
3. Large masses may widen gastroduodenal angle, displac-
d. Transverse colon may be displaced caudally (further
ing pylorus to the left and duodenum to the right.
separated from stomach).
 4. Peritoneal effusion may be present (due to inflammation
4. Localized peritonitis may be present:
or carcinomatosis).
a. Can alter peristalsis in stomach, duodenum, and trans-
5. Stomach may be distended due to gastric outflow problem
verse colon.
secondary to severe inflammation of infiltrative disease.
b. Gas may persist in proximal duodenum or transverse
colon on serial radiographs (static gas pattern or "sentinel
Contrast radiography (upper GI study):
sign").
1. Opacifies GI structures for localization.
5. Focal mineralization in pancreas occasionally develops 
2. Duodenal or gastric wall may become infiltrated by
with chronic inflammation due to fat saponification
disease.
6. Visceral crowding (right cranial abdominal quadrant
Gastrointestinal tract
:(Apns 1 aoddn unupq) Aydnubopnu ispuuo
1. Aids in visualizing right lateral displacement of proximal
 duodenum and left lateral displacement of pylorus.
Stomach
Gastric dilatation and volvulus (GDV)
2. Serial radiographs document fixed position and shape of
descending duodenum.
Clinical correlations:
1. Other names: bloat, stomach torsion, twisted stomach.
2. Stomach is acutely dilated and twisted around its longi
Differential diagnosis for pancreatitis:
tudinal axis
1. Bowel obstruction.
a. Stomach may twist and then dilate or dilate and then
2. Gastrointestinal mass.
twist.
3. Gastroenteritis.
b. Rapidly becomes an emergency and life-threatening
4. Pancreatic mass.
situation.
3. Stomach most commonly rotates in a cloclkwise direction
Pancreatic masses
(viewing animal from caudal to cranial):
Clinical correlations:
a. Pylorus moves ventrally and to the left across midline.
1. May represent tumor, abscess, or cyst (see Differential
past body and fundus, and then dorsally along left
Diagnoses section, this chapter).
abdominal wall, ending near esophagus.
2. Tumors of pancreas may be benign or malignant:
b. Fundus moves dorsally and to the right across midline
a. Metastatic neoplasia to pancreas is rare.
and then ventrally.
b. Adenocarcinoma tends to be aggressive with early
c. Spleen is pulled with gastric fundus (due to gastro-
metastasis to regional lymph nodes, stomach, duodenum.
splenic ligament) and may become torsed.
and liver (may result in carcinomatosis).
d. Stomach may rotate up to 360° in a clockwise
c. Tumors can obstruct gastric outflow tract and/or
direction.
common bile duct.
e. Counterclockwise rotation is uncommon and limited
d. Insulinomas usually are too small to be seen on
to 90%.
radiographs.
f. Cloclkwise rotation greater than 180° causes twisting
3. Abscesses and pseudocysts usually result from chronic
inflammation.
(accumulating gastric gas cannot be removed).
 ss go un u a uo pudp sis lu 
4. Most often reported in large deep-chested dogs (e.g..
may include vomiting. anorexia, depression, weight loss.
Great Dane, Weimeraner, St. Bernard, Gordon Setter, Irish
and fever.
Setter, Standard Poodle, Doberman Pinscher, Rottweiler).
665
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
5. Uncommon in cats and small dogs.
d. In left lateral recumbency. pylorus fills with fluid
6. Affected animals usually are middle-age (2 to l0 years):
(pylorus is displaced to the left) and gas rises to fundus
no gender predilection.
(displaced to the right) (Figure 6.31B).
7. Factors that contribute to development of GDV are in
6. DV radiograph may aid in confirming displacement of
Differential Diagnoses section.
pylorus to the left (Figure 6.3lC).
8. Severe distention of stomach causes:
a. Compression of caudal vena cava and decreased blood
return to heart.
b. Compression of portal vein and impaired liver
function.
c. Diminished blood supply
to stomach
(gastric
ischemia).
d. Systemic hypotension and shock.
9. Clinical signs include restlessness, distended abdomen,
nonproductive retching. hypersalivation, painful abdomen,
dyspnea, and shock.
Left Down
Radiographic findings with GDV:
1. Animal must be stabilized prior to making radiographs.
2. Typically, stomach is greatly distended with mostly gas
and variable amounts of fluid and ingesta.
3. Pylorus tends to be gas filled and displaced dorsally and
to the left (clockwise rotation).
4. Fundus usually is displaced ventrally and to the right.
5. Right lateral radiograph is made first because it tends to
be most diagnostic:
a. In right lateral recumbency. gas rises to pylorus (which
is now on the left) and fluid moves into fundus (which
RightDown
is now on the right; Figure 6.31A).
b. Identification of gas-filled pylorus in dorsal abdomen
confirms dia gnosis.
Figure 6.32 Appearance of the normal gastric pylorus depending on
c. Pylorus often is narrower and more tubular than
 positioning at time of radliography. A. Left lateral recumbency allows 
remainder of stomach (pylorus must contain gas to be
 gastric pylorus to fill with stomach gas (arrow). B. Right lateral
visible).
recumbency. gastric pylorus filled with stomach fluid (arrow).
A
B
C
VD
R
s! snod pay-sen ydenhoipen leatel lyai 'v ping pue seh ym papuasip Aieain s! ynewos jenidl sninalon pue uoeiep sse ke'g aunoi
 visible dorsally (black shadled area) and commonly creates appearance of two gas-filled compartrments stacked on top of each other. B. Left lateral
p-se ydeoe euaaoso  Apog rse papuas Apean wo pausnusip iou pue pal pin s! snod paneds Ajeael al uderoe
pylorus is visible dorsally and left laterally (black shacded area). D. Ventrodorsal radiograph: dorsally displaced pylorus is fluid fild and not visible as a
separate structure frorm greatly distended and fluid-filled gastric body. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1 999.)
400
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
a. Pylorus must be filled with gas to be visible and often
appears narrower and more tubular than remainder of
Stomach.
7. If diagnosis is not confirmed with right lateral and DV
radiographs, it is usually because stomach is not totally dis-
tended or there is insufficient gas or fluid to document GDV.
a. Left lateral and VD radiographs or contrast radiogra-
phy may be required.
8. Goal in diagnosis of GDV is to determine position of
pylorus.
a. If there is no volvulus, pylorus and fundus remain in
B
normal positions.
9. Gastric rotation causes stomach to fold in on itself, creat-
Figure 6.33 Soft tissue opacity foreign object lodged in pyloric antrum
ing a soft tissue band between fundus and pylorus
(ventrodorsal radliograph). A. Negative contrast gastrogramm. B. Positive
contrast gastrograrm (barium study). (Adapted from Owens and Biery 
a. Fundus and pylorus commonly fill with gas, creating
1999.)
two distinct gas-flled compartments ("compartmental-
ization of the stomach"); key is to identify pylorus, which
is smaller part of stomach. (Figure 6.31).
10. Small intestine is caudally displaced by enlarged stomach
and often dilates with gas (latter due to reflex paralytic
ileus).
Radiographic findings with gastric foreign material
11. Spleen generally is displaced to the right and may or
(Figure 6.33):
may not be enlarged.
1. Mineral and metal opacity objects usually are easily
a. Splenomegaly is common (due to passive congestion,
identified:
infarction, or concomitant splenic torsion).
a. Bones and bone fragments.
b. Splenic mass may initiate gastric rotation (gastro-
b. Rocks, stones, pebbles.
splenic ligament).
c. Dense rubber.
c. Normal-size spleen may not be visible in animals
d. Some types of glass.
with severe gastric distention.
2. Soft tissue opacity objects may be visible if surrounded
12. Esophagus frequently is dilated with gas (visible in
by air:
caudal thoracic cavity).
a. Wood.
13. Cardiovascular structures usually are small (due to low
b. Fruit pits.
venous return and hypovolemia).
c. Plastic.
14. Aspiration pneumonia may be present.
d. Fabric, cloth, carpet.
15. Necrosis of stomach wall may lead to pneumoperito-
e. String.
neum, gas in stomach wall (gastric pneumatosis). or gas
f. Corn cob (cross-hatched appearance).
entering liver via portal venous system.
g. Phytobezoar (accumulation of grass or fiber).
h. Trichobezoar (accumulation of hair).
3. Oral medications (products containing bismuth or kaolin)
Differential diagnosis for GDV:
may be mistaken for foreign material but typically become
1. Gastric bloat /gluttony bloat (pylorus and fundus are in
smaller or disappear on serial radiographs.
normal positions).
4. Barium from previous contrast study may persist in
gastric lumen if adhered to foreign material or to damaged
Gastric foreign material
mucosa or if reingested (coprophagia).
Clinical correlations:
5. Chronic partial gastric outflow obstructions:
1. Common in dogs and cats.
a. Stomach is largely distended with mostly fluid and gas
2. May or may not be clinically significant (foreign objects
opacities.
may be incidental findings in some dogs).
b. Border of stomach may be missed because it extends
3. Most often reported in young animals, but can occur at
 much further caudally than expected and may be indis-
any age and in any breed.
tinct from abdominal viscera.
4. Metal objects in stomach raises possibility of lead or zinc
c. Numerous tiny, sandlike mineral opacities commonly
toxicosis.
accumulate at site of obstruction due to sedimentation of
5. Clinical signs may be acute or chronic; vomiting and
heavier, indigestible pieces of ingesta (see chapter 1,
anorexia are most common.
Figure 1.67}.
401
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
6. Serial radiographs aid in evaluating retained gastric
content, GI transit of gastric contents, and ability of stomach
to empty (animal should not be allowed to eat or drink
between radiographs).
7. On right lateral radiograph, normal fluid-filled pylorus
may be mistaken for a foreign object. On left lateral radio-
graph, gastric air moves into pylorus, confirming the
iden tity.
 8. Superimposed structure may mimic foreign object in
stomach (e.g., wet or dirty hair coat, costochondral junction).
Contrast radiography (posifive contrast or negative
A
contrast gastrogram) :
1. Survey radiographs are made first (barium can obscure a
visible foreign object).
2. Soft tissue opacity foreign objects create decreased opacity
filling defects on positive contrast studies and may be out-
lined by gas on negative contrast studies (Figure 6.33).
3. Fabric or other porous material (e.g., hair) may retain
positive contrast medium and become more visible after
most contrast medium has exited the stomach.
Gastric inflammation (gastritis)
Clinical correlations:
1. Acute gastritis typically results from:
Figure 6.34 Gastritis. Gastric rugal folds are prominent and gastric wal
is thickened. A. Lateral radiograph. B. Ventrodorsal radiograph. (Adapted 
a. Ingestion of an irritating substance (e.g., rancid food,
foreign object, cleaning agents, petroleum products).
fromm Owens and Biery 1999.)
b. Drugs (e.g., aspirin, corticosteroids, nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs or NSAIDs).
2. Chronic gastritis results from repeated episodes of inflam-
mation, causing atrophy or hypertrophy of gastric mucosa
3. Mucosal margins may be irregular and ulcerated (best
(many cases are idiopathic).
assessed with endoscopy).
3. Eosinophilic gastritis is caused by allergic, parasitic, or
a. Mucosal ulcers appear as persistent, variable sized out-
immune-mediated disease.
pouchings of contrast medium, extending away from
4. Clinical signs of acute gastritis include frequent vomiting.
lumen.
lethargy. dehydration, and abdominal pain.
4. Rugal folds may be thickened and irregular or decreased
5. Signs of chronic gastritis include chronic intermittent
in size and number.
vomiting. hematemesis or melena (if ulceration has occurred).
5. Findings with eosinophilic gastritis commonly include
anorexia, and weight loss.
mucosal nodules or masses and gastric wall thickening.
6. Gastritis is best diagnosed with endoscopy and biopsy.
6. Intragastric masses present as persistent filling defects
(mass should be visible on multiple radiographs to be
Radiographic findings with gastritis:
confirmed).
1. Survey radiographs usually are normal.
2. Mineral or metal foreign material may be visible in
Gastric neoplasia
stomach or intestine.
Clinical correlations:
3. Gastric wall or rugal folds may appear thin (atrophied),
1. Stomach tumors are uncommon in dogs and cats (may
thickened, or irregular (subjective assessment; Figure 6.34).
be benign or malignant).
4. Fluid in stomach obscures mucosal margins and can be
2. Benign tumors are rare:
mistaken for gastric wall thickening.
a. Polyps are pedunculated nodules of mucosal prolifera-
tion (rare in dogs and very rare in cats) that result from
Contrast radiography (gastrogram):
chronic inflammation. They are usually solitary but can
1. Gastric emptying often is delayed but may be very rapid.
be numerous and can obstruct the gastric outflow tract.
2. Gastric wall may be thickened (local or diffuse). usually
b. Leiomyomas are tumors of smooth muscle, variable in
resulting in loss of distensibility.
size and distribution, most commonly occurring at gas-
402
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
troesophageal junction (usually in older dogs). Tumor
Gastric outflow obstruction
frequently grows outside of the stomach, with only a
Clinical correlations:
1. Other names: pyloric outflow obstruction.
obstruct cardia or pyloric canal).
2. Obstruction may be congenital or acquired, partial or
c. Adenomas are glandular tumors that may become
complete, acute or chronic.
malignant over time.
a. Congenital obstruction is due to smooth muscle
3. Malignant gastric tumors:
hypertrophy and stenosis of pyloric canal (most often
a. More often reported in dogs than in cats.
reported in brachycephalic dogs such as Boston Terrier.
b. Males are more often affected than females (7:1).
Bulldog. and Boxer, and in Siamese cats).
c. Breed predispositions include Belgian Shepherd.
b. Acquired obstruction is caused by foreign material,
Collie, Chow Chow, Rough-Coated Collie, and Welsh Collie.
severe inflammation, or infiltrative disease (see Differen-
 so   o s  
tial Diagnoses section, this chapter).
occurring in pylorus, but may be diffuse. Metastasis to
1) May be focal, multifocal, or diffuse.
liver, duodenum, lymph nodes, or mesentery is common.
2) Most frequently reported in middle-aged, small
Average age of affected animals is 8 years.
breed dogs.
e. Lymphoma is most common in cats and may be diffuse
c. Chronic obstruction with abnormal retention of fluid.
or localized.
gas, or ingesta can lead to gastric atony.
4. Tumors can alter gastric motility and may lead to mucosal
3. Clinical signs include vomiting. weight loss, and abdomi-
ulceration, blood loss, and anemia.
nal distension.
5. Clinical signs are nonspecifc and include vomiting.
4. Vomiting is often projectile (usually undigested food) and
anorexia, and weight loss.
 e    ie  
6. Diagnosis is best made with endoscopy and biopsy.
5. Puppies with congenital disease typically begin vomiting
shortly after weaning.
Radiographic findings with gastric neoplasia
6. Endoscopy often aids in diagnosis.
(Figure 6.36):
1. Survey radiographs may be normal.
2. Local or diffuse gastric wall thickening may be present
Radiographic findings with pyloric ouffow obstruction:
1. Stomach size varies from normal to very large, depending
(tumors can develop in any area of stomach).
on degree and duration of obstruction.
3. A mass lesion may be visible on stomach wall, or stomach
2. Gastric contents tend to be mostly fluid with a small
may be abnormal in shape.
volume of gas.
4. Stomach largely distended with fluid and gas suggests a
a. NOTE: Recent ingestion of a large volume of water
gastric outflow problem.
may create similar appearance.
3. Fluid adjacent to gastric mucosa may mimic stomach wall
Contrast radiography (gastrogram—positive contrast or
thickening.
doubte contrast study):
4. A very large. fluid-filled stomach often is not readily
1. Localized or generalized thickening of stomach wall.
identified on survey radiographs because it is homogenous
2. Affected portion of stomach often appears fixed and stiff 
on serial radiogra phs.
caudally than expected.
3. Gastric lumen may be distorted.
a. A pocket of gas surrounded by fluid in the greatly
4. Rugal folds may appear interrupted with loss of normal
distended gastric lumen may be mistaken for a normal-
pattern.
size stomach (must look for serosal margin of stomach).
5. Larger mass lesions produce repeatable flling defects.
5. Multiple tiny, sandlike mineral opacities may accumulate
6. Gastric ulcers may be present.
proximal to site of chronic obstruction.
7. Gastric emptying frequently is delayed and pyloric
6. Partial outflow obstructions allow some gas to exit
outflow may be partially or completely obstructed.
stomach into duodenum, but with complete obstructions.
 8. Conditions that may mimic disease of stomach:
no gas enters duodenum.
a. Insufficient barium in stomach (stomach does not
empty within normal time frame).
b. Ingesta in stomach (creates filling defects).
Contrast radiography (barium gastrogram,
upper GI study):
Differential diagnosis for gastric neoplasia:
1. Fluid in stomach should be removed to avoid severe dilu-
1. Chronic hypertrophic gastritis.
tion of barium.
2. Eosinophilic gastritis.
2. Gastric emptying is delayed with most barium retained
3. Mycotic infection (e.g., phycomycosis).
in stomach longer than 4 hours.
403
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 6.35 Pyloric canal obstructive disease (ventrodorsal radiographs,
bariurn upper Gl stucy). A. Normmal pyloric canal for cormparison. B. Persistent
narrowing creating a pointed or beakike appearance to pyloric canal. C.
Bulge along lesser curvature of pyloric antrum (arrow) during muscle
contraction. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
Figure 6.36 Gastric wall neoplasia (ventrodorsal radiographs, barium
upper Gl study). A. Mucosal thickening along lesser curvature of stomach
with a well-cdefined filling defect caused by an ulcer (arrow). B. Localized 
thickening of wall of pyloric antrum. C. Mucosal thickening along greater
curvature of stomach. D. Severe focal mucosal thickening along lesser
3. Circumferential narrowing of barium-filled pyloric canal
curvature of stomach. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
is abnormal when persistent and repeatable on serial radio-
graphs (Figure 6.35B).
a. Normal gastric contractions may be mistaken for
a pyloric lesion (true lesions repeat on multiple
radiographs)
b. Pyloric antrum may bulge around a narrowed pyloric
3. Deep gastric ulcers may allow swallowed air to enter
canal during gastric contractions (Figure 6.35C).
gastric wall
or circulation (can lead tohepatic
4. In some cases, liquid barium readily passes through
emphysema).
pyloric canal, but barium mixed with food does not (latter
may be used to document prolonged gastric retention).
Contrast radiography (barium studies):
5. Filling defects in barium may be caused by foreign mate-
1. Ability to identify an ulcer depends on size and location,
rial, mucosal hypertrophy, polyp, or mass.
type of contrast study, and direction of x-ray beam.
6. Delayed gastric emptying may also result from:
2. Double-contrast gastrogram is more sensitive than barium
a. Animal is stressed (try repeating radiographs in 15 to
alone in detection of ulcers (barium-filled stomach may
30 minutes after allowing animal to calm downy.
mask ulcers}.
b. Insuffcient volume of barium in stomach to stimulate
 3. Larger, more chronic ulcers tend to have adjacent mucosal
gastric emptying (e.g., inappropriate dose, vomited most
thickening.
of barium).
4. Ulcer margins may be smooth or irregular and sometimes
appear squared off.
Gastric ulcers
5. Appearance of ulcer is affected by alignment with x-ray
Clinical correlations:
beam:
       s 
a. When seen en face and located along dependent
erosions to deep, indurated depressions.
(down) gastric wall, ulcer may resemble a bulls-eye:
2. May be caused by harmful substance in gastric lumen or
ulcer fills with barium and thickened adjacent wall pro-
loss of local protective mechanisms (see Differential Diagno-
duces a less opaque rim that is outlined by barium.
ses section, this chapter).
b. When seen en face and along nondependent (up)
3. Clinical signs include chronic vomiting. hematemesis.
gastric wall, ulcer may contain gas rather than barium
melena, abdominal pain, anorexia, and weight loss.
(especially on a double contrast gastrogram) and appear
 4. Gastric ulcers are best diagnosed with endoscopy.
as a less opaque filling defect in stomach wall.
c. When seen tangentially, barium-filled ulcer projects
Radiographic findings with gastric utcers (Figure 6.36):
outward, away from gastric lumen, and adjacent thick-
1. Survey radiographs usually are normal.
ened and irregular mucosa projects into the lumen.
 2. Gastric perforation results in free fluid or gas in peritoneal
6. Ulcers are persistent and repeatable lesions that are visible
cavity.
on multiple radiographs.
404
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
Small intestine
Intestinal ileus
Clinical correlations:
1. Failure or inability of intestinal contents to pass
normally.
2. May be due to obstruction or functional disorder.
3. Obstructive ileus:
a. Other names: dynamic ileus, mechanical ileus.
b. Physical blockage of small intestine.
c. May be partial or complete and can occur anywhere
along intestinal tract.
d. Common etiologies include:
1) Ingestion of foreign material (e.g., corn cob, fruit
pit, string).
2) Mural mass (e.g.. tumor, abscess, granuloma.
hematoma, polyp).
3) Intussusception.
4. Functional ileus:
Figure 6.37 Corn cob lodged in srmallintestine (arrows; lateral
a. Other names: paralytic ileus, adynamic ileus.
radiograph).
b. Decreased or absent peristalsis (bowel lumen remains
patent; no physical blockage).
c. May be caused by vascular or neuromuscular disease
6. Proximal intestinal obstructions:
(see Differential Diagnoses section, this chapter).
a. If only a few intestinal segments are persistently
5. Clinical signs may be acute or chronic and commonly
dilated, a proximal obstruction or a local functional ileus
include vomiting. anorexia, diarrhea, lethargy, and abdomi-
(such as pancreatitis) may be present.
nal pain.
b. Proximal obstructions (i.e., involving duodenum) may
not be evident on survey radiographs because gas and
fluid move back into stomach and are vomited.
Radiographic findings with intestinal ileus:
c. Descending duodenum often is not dilated, but fre-
1. Small intestine is abnormally distended with fluid, gas.
quently is medially displaced.
or ingesta.
d. Chronic duodenal obstruction may lead to persistent
a. Small bowel width exceeds 2 × height of body of L5
gastric distention and atony.
(in cats, width exceeds 12 mm).
7. Foreign material in intestinal tract:
 2. Distended loops may appear stacked or layered, especially
a. Mineral and metal opacity foreign material usually is
with obstructive ileus (see chapter 1, Figure 1.70). Stacking
readily identified.
becomes more conspicuous over time as bowel continues to
 b. Soft tissue opacity material is only visible if uneven in
dilate in a confined space.
texture (e.g.. corn cob) or outlined by gas (Figure 6.37).
3. Dilated bowel tends to have squared-off ends and abrupt
c. Cloth or fabric typically creates a mottled, linear, or
curvatures or tight turns.
streaked gas pattern (due to incomplete absorption of
4. Obstructive ileus is characterized by:
fluid; Figure 6.38).
a. Abnormal distention of multiple segments of bowel
 d. Linear foreign material commonly causes plication of
proximal to obstruction.
affected bowel, with small irregular-shaped luminal gas 
b. Distal to obstruction, bowel usually is more normal in
pockets (see discussion below).
size (unless functional ileus has developed).
8. Sentinel loop:
c. Sedimentation of tiny, sandlike, indigestible food
a. A persistent local dilation of a portion of small intes-
stuffs may occur just proximal to site of a chronic partial
tine that repeats on serial radiographs.
obstruction.
b. Occurs at sites of inflammation (i.e., pancreatitis) or
d. Some partial or incomplete obstructions, including
partial obstruction.
those caused by linear foreign material, may not result in
 9. Serial radiographs:
abnormal bowel distention.
a. Used to document movement (or lack thereof) of a
5. Functional ileus is characterized by:
suspected foreign object.
a. More uniform intestinal dilation, mostly with gas.
 b. Aids in assessing changes in intestinal patterns.
b. Distention with obstructive ileus tends to be larger
c. Persistence of abnormal-appearing bowel over a 24- t0
than with functional ileus.
48-hour period is highly suggestive of obstruction.
405
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 6.38 Fabric foreign material lodged in small intestine. A. Lateral radiograph. B. Close-up showing typical striated pattern.
B
Figure 6.40 Smmall intestinal obstruction caused by rounded soft tissue
opacity foreign object (barium upper Gl study). A. Complete obstruction
with barium-filled dilation of bowel proximal to foreign object and 
absence of flling caudal to object. B. Partial obstruction with barium-
Figure 6.39 Lateral horizontal beam abdominal radiograph depicting
filled dilation of intestine proximal to obstruction and normal-sized bowel
fluid and gas levels in abnormally distended segment of small intestine
distal to obstruction. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
10. Peritoneal serosal margins may be indistinct due to
c. Recent consumption of large amount of food or water
inflammation or effusion.
(serial radiographs document passage of ingesta).
11. Pneumoperitoneum may be present with bowel rupture
or recent laparotomy.
Contrast radiography for obstructive ileus
12. Horizontal beam radiography can be used to demon-
(upper GI study):
strate fluid:gas levels in distended bowel.
1. Clinician and owner must consider stress to animal, time
a. Distended bowel with variable levels of gas-capped
commitment, and expense of a contrast radiography proce-
fluid lines suggests obstructive ileus (Figure 6.39).
 dure versus exploratory laparotomy. To be meaningful. a
b. Fluid lines that are all at the same level are more
contrast procedure must be performed properly (see chapter
typical of functional ileus.
3 for method}.
13. Conditions that may mimic intestinal obstruction:
2. If ileus is significant, contrast radiography may not be
a. Colon mistaken for dilated small bowel:
useful due to ineffective peristalsis (contrast medium will
1) Instilling a small volume of air or barium in colon
not progress through GI tract).
is a simple, rapid procedure that may help differenti-
3. If obstruction is diagnosed on survey radiographs, con-
ate dilated small bowel from normal colon.
 trast radiography is not indicated.
2) Retained, desiccated ingesta in small intestine
4. Passage of con trast medium through intestines usually is
may resemble feces in colon.
delayed (long transit time).
b. Severe aerophagia (bowel is not abnormally dis-
5. Contrast medium fills dilated bowel proximal to obstruc-
tended, abundant gas in GI tract dissipates on serial
tion unless gas, fluid, or ingesta prevents contrast medium
radiographs).
from reaching obstruction (Figure 6.40).
406
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
payoung sieadde uawopgenw ui ausatu! llews sydeinopen Aans uo 'v (sydenopen jeate leatew ubiaioy jeau leusatu! llews lr'g aanbi
together. B. On a barium upper Gl study, proximal smmall bowel is plicated with tight turns and irregular margin5.
6. With functional ileus, affected bowel segments tend to be
a. Shapes of bubbles have been likened to triangles, tear
uniformly distended with contrast medium, and peristalsis
drops, crescents, or commas.
is decreased or absent.
 b. Bubbles usually are more peripheral (eccentric) than
7. Persistent filling defects in positive contrast medium may
the rounded, elongated gas patterns associated with
be caused by intraluminal foreign material or mass (repeat-
 normal bowel.
able on multiple radiographsy.
2. Affected intestinal segments become tightly bunched
a. Filling defects are decreased opacity.
together in midabdomen (Figure 6.4l). Appearance of
b. Ingesta in an improperly prepared GI tract can create
bowel has been described as plicated, pleated, corkscrew, or
filling defects.
accordion-like.
8. Local intramural lesions may present in a variety or com-
a. Bowel distention is variable (mostly fluid and some
 bination of patterns:
gas).
a. Unilateral wall thickening creates narrowing along
b. Margins of bowel tend to be irregular.
one side of bowel lumen.
c. Excessive intra-abdominal fat (obese animals) confine
b. Circumferential thickening narrows entire intestinal
bowel to central abdomen and may mimic intestinal
lumen.
bunching (but bowel margins are smooth, without tight 
c. Ulceration may cause local enlargement of lumen and
turns, and luminal gas pattern is normal).
irregular margins.
3. Peritoneal serosal surfaces may be indistinct due to
9. Linear foreign material typically causes plication of
inflammation or peritoneal effusion.
affected bowel, but only partial obstruction without abnor-
4. Perforation of bowel results in free gas and/or fluid in
mal bowel distention (see further discussion below).
peritoneal cavity.
a. Small pneumoperitoneum often produces irregular-
LINEAR FOREIGN MATERIAL
shaped pockets of gas between bowel loops (may be dif-
Clinical correlations:
ficult to distinguish from intraluminal intestinal gas).
1. Common in dogs and cats (e.g., thread, string. carpet
 b. Free gas usually is present in other areas of peritoneal
fibers, dental floss).
cavity.
2. Proximal end of foreign material may be fixed in position
c. Horizontal beam radiography aids in diagnosis.
(wrapped around base of tongue or anchored in stomach)
and distal portion in small intestine.
Contrast radiography with linear intestinal foreign
3. Peristalsis causes bowel to "climb up" along fixed foreign
material (upper GI study):
material, resulting in partial or complete obstruction.
1. Affected intestine is plicated and tortuous, with tight 
a. Continued peristalsis creates a sawing action by foreign
turns.
      
 2. Foreign material sometimes creates a linear filling defect
bowel wall, resulting in life-threatening peritonitis.
in contrast medium.
4. Clinical signs depend on duration and severity of obstruc-
3. In cats, a normal mucosal fold in proximal duodenum
tion and on complicating factors (such as bowel perforation):
may cause a linear filling defect that mimics foreign material
vomiting and abdominal discomfort are common.
("pseudo-string sign").
Radiographic findings with linear intestinal
Differential diagnosis for linear intestinal
foreign material:
foreign material:
1. Focal, irregular-shaped gas bubbles develop in affected
1. Adhesions
associated with  intestine
may
caulse
portions of intestine:
bunching.
407
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
2. Intestinal parasites (such as ascarids) may create linear
Contrast radiography (barium upper GI study):
filling defects on a positive contrast study. but there is no
1. Contrast study usually is not indicated but can be used
bowel plication.
to rule out obstructive disease and evaluate bowel wall
thickness and mucosal margins.
Inflammation of small intestine (enteritis) and
2. Contrast medium usually moves quickly through GI tract
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
(short transit time).
Clinical correlations:
3. Peristalsis is frequent or hyperactive (usually requires
1. Enteritis is inflammation of small intestine (see Differen-
fluoroscopic observation).
tial Diagnoses for possible etiologies).
 4. Mucosal margins may appear irregular or indented (latter 
2. Inflammatory bowel disease is a group of immune-
resembles thumb imprints in clay. see chapter 3. Figure
mediated inflammatory conditions that may involve small
3.5C).
intestine, stomach, and/or large intestine.
 a. NOTE: Normal peristalsis produces smooth, symmetri-
a. May be acute or chronic, ulcerative or nonulcerative.
cal, and transient indentations along bowel.
b. In cats, IBD is a leading cause of chronic vomiting and
b. In cats, a normal pattern of circular, segmental peri-
diarrhea.
stalsis commonly occurs along descending duodenum
c. In dogs. breed predispositions include Basenji. Soft-
("string of pearls" sign, chapter 3, Figure 3.5A).
Coated Wheaton Terrier, German Shepherd Dog. and
c. In young dogs, normal barium-filled out-pouchings
Chinese Shar-Pei.
may be present along descending duodenum, caused by
d. Clinical signs usually develop at middle age or older.
thinning of mucosa over submucosal lymphoid follicles
but may occur at any age.
(pseudoulcer sign common, chapter 3, Figure 3.5B)
 e. Diagnosis is by biopsy (type of IBD is based on cellular
5. Barium may appear flocculated (mottled or cobblestone
infiltrate):
pattern) due to an irregular mucosal border and/or excessive
1) Lymphocytic-plasmacytic enteritis (most common).
mucous in bowel lumen (Figure 6.42).
2) Eosinophilic enteritis.
 6. Ulcers in intestinal mucosa present as persistent, barium-
3) Granulomatous enteritis (similar to Crohn's disease
in humans).
4) Neutrophilic enteritis.
Differential diagnosis for enteritis:
5) Histiocytic enteritis (predominately affects young
1. Neoplasia (e.g., lymphoma).
Boxers).
2. Mycotic infection (e.g., histoplasmosis, phycomycosis)
3. Hemorrhagic gastroenteritis is characterized by sudden
3. Duodenal pseudoulcers.
onset of bloody diarrhea.
a. Most often reported in young (2 to 4 years old) small
Intussusception
breed dogs, but can affect any age or breed.
Clinical correlations:
4. Mycotic enteritis usually is advanced at time of diagnosis.
 1. Segment of intestine telescopes or invaginates into lumen
presenting with thickened bowel walls, pyogranulomatous
of an adjacent segment (usually proximal), causing partial
lesions, lymphadenopathy, and palpable intra-abdominal
masses.
5. Clinical signs depend on etiology but commonly include
chronic or intermittent vomiting and diarrhea, malabsorp-
tion, anemia, malnutrition, and weight loss.
A
Radiographic findings with enteritis and IBD:
1. Survey radiographs may be normal.
2. Usually, little or no ingesta in GI tract, but small intestine
often contains more fluid than expected (diarrhea).
B
3. In cats, small bowel may contain more gas than normal.
4. Small intestine is not abnormally distended but may be
more turgid with increased tonus.
5. Bowel wall thickness cannot be reliably assessed on
survey radiographs:
C
a. Intraluminal bowel fluid and gas may mimic intestinal
Figure 6.42 Small bowel mucosal defects (barium upper Gl study). A.
wall thickening (see chapter 1, Figure l.71).
Ulceration with localized wall thickening. B. Pseudoulcers without wall
b. Upper GI study or ultrasonography is necessary to
thickening. C. Localized, smooth-bordered mucosal thickening. (Adapted 
evaluate bowel wall thickness.
fromm Owens and Biery 1999.)
408
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
(l) suaidisnssniu! ayn suawbas buianal aul uurim paneldsp s! (z) wnidansnssnui jo juawbas pateuibeaui aul uodansnssnul etg auno
(Courtesy of and with the permission of T.R. O'Brien, as originally published in O'Brien 1978, 314.)
or complete bowel obstruction and compromised blood
 supply.
2. Invaginated segment is "intussusceptum" and receiving
segment is "intussuscipiens" (Figure 6.43).
3. Can occur anywhere along GI tract, but most commonly
in jejunum and at ileocolic or cecocolic junction.
4. More common in dogs (especially German Shepherd
Dog) than in cats.
5. Most often reported in young animals (less than l year
 of age), but can occur at any age.
6. May result from irritated, hypermotile bowel (see Dif-
ferential Diagnoses section, this chapter).
7. Clinical signs include vomiting. abdominal pain, anorexia.,
lethargy, and diarrhea.
Figure 6.44 Intussusception (lateral radliograph). Crescent-shaped ga5
shadow surrounds intussusceptumn, revealing a smooth-bordered soft 
 8. A tubular mass may be palpable in abdominal cavity.
 9. Many affected animals have a previous history of GI
tissue opacity within a distended bowel (arrow)
disease.
10. With increasing duration of intussusception, bowel
becomes more edematous and degree of obstruction
increa ses.
Contrast radiography (upper GI study or
Radiographic findings with intussusception
barium enema):
(Figures 6.44 and 6.45):
1. Upper GI study:
1. Often cannot be differentiated from other causes of
a. Dilated bowel proximal to obstruction fills with con-
 obstructive ileus on survey radiographs.
trast medium, unless progression of contrast medium is
2. Bowel loops are variably distended with gas and fluid
blocked by gas, fluid, or ingesta.
(depending on location, duration, and completeness of
b. With complete obstruction, contrast medium ends
obstruction).
abruptly, but with partial obstruction, a thin line of con-
3. A soft tissue mass may be visible in midabdomen.
trast may opacify narrowed lumen of intussusceptum
4. Sometimes a crescent-shaped gas shadow surrounds
(Figure 6.45).
intussusceptum, revealing a smooth-bordered soft tissue
2. Barium enema:
opacity within a distended bowel (Figure 6.44).
a. Often more sensitive in detection of ileocolic or colo-
5. If intussusception is ileocolic, gas may be absent from
colic intussusceptions.
cecum and ascending colon.
b. Filling defect in colon usually represents intussuscep-
6. Peritoneal serosal margins may be indistinct due to
tum (may resemble a tube within a tube).
inflammation oreffusion.
c. Barium may accumulate between folds of intussus-
7. Bowel perforation results in free gas and/or fluid in peri-
ceptum and intussuscipiens, creating a coiled spring
toneal cavity.
appearance.
409
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 6.45 Intussusception (barium upper Gl study). A. Lateral radiograph: Bowel is largely distended with barium and gas (arrows). B. Ventrodorsal
radliograph : a thin line of barium is present in the narrowed lumen of the intussusceptum (arrow).
Differential diagnosis for intussusception:
1. Other causes of intestinal obstruction (e.g., foreign object,
tumor).
2. Infiltrative bowel disease (e.g.. neoplasia, mycotic
infection).
Intestinal ischemia
Clinical correlations:
1. Other names: mesenteric thrombosis.
2. Acute interruption of blood flow to small or large
intestine.
3. Uncommon in dogs and cats.
4. Typically caused by thrombosis or embolism in mesenteric
artery or vein, may result from blunt force abdominal trauma.
5. Clinical signs include fever, severe abdominal pain, vom-
 Figure 6.46 Intestinal ischemia (ventrodorsal radiograph, barium upper
iting. diarrhea.
penon seadde pue jeinhaui ane suiieu lamoa pata (pns 1 
Radiographic findings with intestinal ischemia:
1. Affected bowel segment(s) are persistently distended
with gas (local functional ileus).
Mesenteric volvulus
2. Bowel margins may be irregular and appear indented or
Clinical correlations:
corrugated (Figure 6.46).
1. Other names: mesenteric torsion.
3. Gas may be present in bowel wall (pneumatosis).
2. Twisting of intestine around root of mesentery, which
4. Peritoneal serosal margins may be indistinct due to
compromises blood supply and leads to functional ileus.
inflammation and/or effusion.
3. Uncommon in dogs and cats, but often fatal when it
occurs.
Differential diagnosis for intestinal ischemia:
4. Most often reported in young. male, medium- to large-
1. Aerophagia (gas dissipates on serial radiographs).
breed dogs (German Shepherd Dog and English Pointer are
2. Other causes of ileus.
overrepresented).
3. Intussusception with irregular margins.
 5. Has been reported in a cat and in small-breed dogs.
410
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
6. Small intestine, large intestine, or both may be involved.
7. Etiology is unknown, but may be predisposed by inflam-
 mation or infiltrative disease of bowel (see Differential Diag-
noses section, this chapter).
 8. Clinical signs include an acute onset of progressive hema-
A
tochezia, retching. vomiting. abdominal pain, abdominal
distention, depression, and shock.
Radiographic findings with mesenteric volvulus:
1. Early in disease, radiographs may be normal.
2. With progression there is severe gas distention of major-
ity of small intestine (due to functional ileus).
3. Distended segments of bowel tend to be similar in size
and appear stacked or layered.
4. Stomach and descending colon usually are not dilated.
5. Peritoneal effusion is common.
6. Pneumoperitoneum results from bowel rupture.
Differential diagnosis for mesenteric volvulus:
1. Severe aerophagia (bowel loops are large but not abnor-
mally distended).
 2. Other causes of functional ileus (see Differential Diagno-
ses section, this chapter).
Neoplasia of small intestine
Figure 6.47 Small intestinal neoplasia with variable degrees of luminal
Clinical correlations:
obstruction (barium upper Gl study). A. Annular mural tumor. B. Eccentric 
1. Common in dogs and cats (see Differential Diagnoses
mural tumor. C. Nonobstructive eccentric mural tummor. D. Partially
section, this chapter).
 obstructive eccentric mural tumor. (Adapted from Owens and Biery
2. Tumors may be benign or malignant, primary or meta-
1999.)
static, intraluminal, mural, or extraluminal and may cause
partial or complete obstruction.
3. Clinical signs depend on tumor location and degree of
bowel obstruction, but may include vomiting. weight loss.
3. Mural masses typically produce smooth, rounded protru-
and diarrhea.
sions that extend into the lumen.
Radiographic findings with small intestinal neoplasia:
4. Intraluminal masses cause filling defects or local areas of
1. Survey radiographs often are normal, especially if tumor
bowel wall thickening and narrowing of lumen.
is small and obstruction is absent or partial.
5. Mucosal ulcers create persistent, contrast-filled out-
2. Soft tissue mass may be visible in midabdomen
  m a  od
3. Bowel loops may be abnormally distended with gas and
fluid (depending on location, duration, and completeness of
Differential diagnosis:
obstruction)
1. Foreign material lodged in bowel.
4. Peritoneal serosal margins may be indistinct due to
2. Mycotic infection of intestine.
inflammation or effusion.
3. Stricture.
5. Bowel perforation results in free gas and/or fluid in peri-
4. Abscess.
toneal cavity.
 5. Inflammatory bowel disease.
6. Severe enteritis.
Contrast radiography with small intestinal tumors
(upper GI study) :
Perforation of small intestine
1. Contrast medium fills bowel proximal to obstruction,
Clinical correlations:
1. Loss of bowel wall integrity (rupture of small intestine).
fluid, or ingesta.
2. Caused by penetration or erosion of bowel wall (see Dif-
2. Diffuse infiltrative lesions (such as adenocarcinoma)
ferential Diagnoses section, this chapter).
may create annular constrictions, sometimes with irregular
3. Clinical signs depend on severity and location of perfora-
tion and degree of peritonitis.
411
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Radiographic findings with intestinal perforation:
3. Uncommon in dogs and cats; most affected animals are
1. Serosal margins become indistinct or obscured due to
younger than 4 years of age, but older dogs can be affected.
peritoneal inflammation and free fluid in peritoneal space.
4. Inverted cecum may become edematous, congested,
2. Pneumoperitoneum is common.
hemorrhagic, and progress to necrosis with adhesions to
a. Unless abdominal cavity has been purposely entered.
colon.
GI perforation should be considered most lilkely diagnosis
5. May lead to ileocolic intussusception.
with free gas in peritoneal space.
6. Predisposing factors include parasite infection (e.g., Trich-
b. Small volumes of free gas in peritoneal cavity may be
uris vuipis), inflammatory bowel disease, or a weak ileoce-
difficult to detect:
cocolic ligament.
1) Gas tends to accumulate between margins of liver
7. Clinical signs depend on degree and duration of obstruc-
and diaphragm.
2) Horizontal beam radiography often aids in detec-
to soft stools, tenesmus, vomiting, and weight loss.
tion: animal is positioned in left lateral recumbency
 8. An intra-abdominal mass may be palpable and is often
and a ventrodorsal radiograph is made, centered on
painful.
right cranial abdominal quadrant.
c. Larger volumes of gas decrease opacity in abdominal
Radiographic findings with cecal inversion:
cavity and enhance visualization of serosal margins of
1. Absence of gas-filled cecum on survey radiographs.
bowel and other viscera.
2. Soft tissue opacity mass may be visible in area of cecum.
3. Diaphragm may appear as a sharp, thin line outlined by
3. Peritoneal serosal margins may be indistinct due to
gas in peritoneal cavity and air in lungs.
inflammation or mild effusion.
Contrast radiography (barium enema):
Large intestine
1. Cecum is not visualized in its normal position.
Atresia ani
Clinical correlations:
2. Inverted cecum creates filling defect in ascending colon
1. Other names: imperforate anus, atresia recti, anal atresia,
(Figure 6.48).
 3. Ileocolic intussusception may be present.
rectal agenesis.
2. Rare congenital malformation of rectum in which anal
4. Retained feces may produce filling defect (difficult to
 distinguish from pathology).
membrane fails to open or rectum ends blindly proximal to
anus.
3. Fistula may be present betwween rectum and vagina.
Differential diagnosis for cecal inversion:
1. Neoplasia.
urinary bladder, or urethra.
2. Foreign object.
4. Clinical signs depend on magnitude of defect and may
include inability to defecate or defecation through an abnor
mal orifice (e.g., vagina, urethra).
Radiographic findings with imperforate anus:
1. Lateral radiograph with caudal aspect of animal elevated
may allow gas in descending colon to move into rectum
and permit visualization of distance from rectum to anal
membrane.
2. Large intestine will be distended with feces (may be
severe) if rectum or anus is obstructed.
Contrast radiography:
1. When possible, pneumocolon may enhance visualization
of rectum.
2. Infusion of iodinated contrast medium into urethra,
vagina, or rectum may document fistula or malformation.
Cecal inversion
Clinical correlations:
1. Other names: cecal intussusception.
Figure 6.48 Cecal inversion (ventrodorsal radiograph, barium enema).
 Colon is moderately distended with barium; cecum is not visualized and a
causing a partial or complete obstruction.
filling defect is present in the ascending colon (arrow)
412
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
3. Intussusception.
4. Regional lymphadenopathy (right colic lymph nodes),
Constipation and obstipation
Clinical correlations:
1. Constipation is infrequent or difficult passage of feces
with subsequent fecal retention.
2. Obstipation is mechanical obstruction to passage of feces.
3. Numerous etiologies are possible (see Differential Diag-
noses section, this chapter).
4. Clinical signs include tenesmus, inappetence, lethargy.
vomiting, and diarrhea.
5. Abdominal palpation often reveals abundant firm fecal
Figure 6.49 Colitis (barium enema). A. Mild irregularity and thickening
material in colon.
of colonic mucosa. B) More severe mucosal thickening and irregular
margination. (Adapted from Owen5 and Biery 1999.)
Radiographic findings with constipation:
1. Large amount of fecal material in descending colon and
rectum.
CHRONIC COLITIS
2. Feces has greater opacity than normal (may be mineral
Clinical correlations:
opa city).
1. Other names: ulcerative colitis, inflammatory bowel
3. Stomach and small intestine usually are empty.
disease, eosinophilic colitis, canine histiocytic ulcerative
4. An atonic colon will be largely distended with feces and
colitis.
rectum will be empty.
 2. Severe, chronic inflammation of colon (often immune
5. Lesions may be present in spine or pelvis, which may
mediated)
con tribute to constipation.
3. Characterized by variable infiltrations of lymphocytes.
plasma cells, eosinophils, and neutrophils in colon wall.
Inflammation of colon (colitis)
 4. Ulcerative or granulormatous lesions along colon mucosa
ACUTE COLITIS
are common.
Clinical correlations:
5. Most often reported in young purebred dogs (especially
1. Inflammation of colon that appears within a few hours
German Shepherd Dog)
 or days after irritation.
6. Histiocytic ulcerative colitis is a severe form of colitis that
2. Multiple factors may contribute to development of acute
is specific to Boxer dogs.
colitis (see Differential Diagnoses section, this chapter).
7. Multiple factors may contribute to development of
3. Typhlitis is inflammation of cecum.
chronic colitis (see Differential Diagnoses section. this
4. Clinical signs include diarrhea (often with red blood or
chapter).
 mucus), tenesmus/dyschezia, abnormally shaped feces (e.g..
8. Clinical signs include increased frequency of defecation,
small diameter), abdominal pain, fever, and lethargy.
diarrhea (usually with fresh blood and mucus), tenesmus.
 5. Some affected animals present with vomiting.
painful defecation, variable abdominal pain, weight loss, and
dehydration.
Radiographic findings with acute colitis:
9. Diagnosis is based on clinical signs, biopsy, and exclusion
1. Survey radiographs usually are normal.
of specific diseases (colonoscopy is diagnostic modality of
2. Colon contents vary and may include only gas, only fluid.
choice).
gas and fluid, or heterogenous material ranging from granu-
lar in appearance to opaque foreign material.
Radiographic findings with chronic colitis:
1. Survey radiographs often are unremarkable.
Contrast radiography (barium enema):
 2. Colon may appear narrowed, shortened, or deformed.
1. Often no abnormality is visible.
3. In other cases, colon may appear atonic and gas-dilated.
2. Intestinal spasms may occur or increased tonus may be
4. Colon wall may be thickened and sometimes spastic.
evident.
 5. Concurrent lymphadenopathy or splenomegaly may be
3. Variable thickening of mucosa may be present locally or
present.
more general, frequently with irregular margins (due to
mucosal edema or infiltrate; Figure 6.49)
Contrast radiography (barium enema):
4. Small mucosal ulcers may be present (more common 
1. Lesions may be localized or generalized.
with chronic colitisy.
2. Mucosal surface often is irregular and thickened.
413
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
3. Feces has greater opacity than normal (may be minera)
opacity).
4. Stomach and small intestine often are empty.
5. Aganglionic megacolon typically presents as a largely
dilated colon that tapers abruptly at junction with rectum;
rectum and anal canal appear normal.
6. Spine and pelvis are carefully examined for lesions that
 may contribute to megacolon.
Colon torsion
Clinical correlations:
1. Other names: volvulus of colon.
2. Colon twists around its mesenteric axis (long axis).
3. Rare in dogs and cats (less common than small intestinal
torsion).
4. Most often reported in large-breed dogs.
 5. Clinical signs include abdominal distention, tenesmus.
anorexia, abdominal pain, lack of feces, and vomiting.
Figure 6.50 Ulcerative colitis (ventrodorsal radiograph, barium upper Gl
Radiographic findings with colon torsion:
 study). Barium-filled out-pouchings are present along colon muco5a
1. Part or all of colon is greatly distended (usually with gas
(arrows).
and/or fluid}
2. Peritoneal effusion is common.
3. Ulcers frequently are present, appearing as persistent,
Neoplasia of large intestine
barium-filled out-pouchings that extend beyond mucosal
Clinical correlations:
margins (Figure 6.50).
1. Tumors of large intestine often are malignant.
4. Colon may appear rigid and shortened.
2. Benign tumors are uncommon, most frequently occur-
5. Strictures and incomplete filling of colon may occur in
ring in rectum.
severe cases. Annular strictures ("napkin ring" lesions) most
3. Tumor growth results in progressive narrowing of colon
often develop in terminal colon.
and frequent attempts at defecation, producing only small
amounts of thin fecal material.
Differential diagnosis for chronic colitis:
4. Straining to defecate may cause rectal prolapse (usually
1. Infiltrative disease of colon (e.g. neoplasia, mycotic
only partial prolapse).
infection).
5. Clinical signs depend on tumor type, size, location, and
degree of obstruction
Megacolon
6. Affected animals may exhibit tenesmus, dyschezia, con-
Clinical correlations:
stipation, intermittent bloody diarrhea (hematochezia), and
1. Colon is abnormally dilated due to a physical or func-
sometimes megacolon.
tional problem.
7. Endoscopy usually provides diagnosis more easily than
2. Multiple etiologies are possible (see Differential Diagno-
radiography.
ses section, this chapter.
3. Aganglionic megacolon (Hirschsprung's disease) is a con-
Radiographic findings with large intestine tumors:
genital deficiency in nerve cells resulting in loss of normal
1. Survey radiographs often are unremarkable.
function to portion of colon (usually terminal colon).
 2. Soft tissue mass may be visible, involving portion of colon.
 4. Clinical signs include tenesmus, inappetence, lethargy.
3. If lesion causes obstruction, colon proximal to lesion
vomiting, and diarrhea.
Usually is distended.
5. Abdominal palpation often reveals large amount of firm
4. Metastatic disease commonly involves iliac and sacral
fecal material in colon.
lymph nodes.
Radiographic findings with megacolon:
Contrast radiography (barium enema,
1. Part or all of colon is abnormally distended.
double contrast enema):
 2. Large amount of fecal material usually is present in
1. Large bowel wall may be thickened, rigid, and irregular
affected portions.
at lesion site.
414
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
3. Hernia may contain rectum, small bowel, urinary bladder.
prostate gland, uterus, fluid, and/or fat. Retroflexion of
urinary bladder into hernia can result in urethral
obstruction.
4. Most often reported in older, intact male dogs and cats;
uncommon in females.
5. Breed predispositions include Australian Kelpie, Boston
Terrier, Boxer, Collie, Dachshund, Old English Sheepdog.
Pekingese, and Welsh Corgi.
6. In cats, perineal hernia or rectal diverticulum often
occurs secondary to megacolon or perineal urethrostomy.
7. Clinical signs include perineal swelling. dyschezia, and
constipation
8. Digital rectal examination may reveal deviation rectum,
diverticulum, or laxity in perineal region.
Radiographic findings with perineal hernia and
rectal diverticulum:
1. Large amount of heterogenous material in rectum (fecal
impaction).
 2. Soft tissue mass in perineal region, ventral and lateral to
Figure 6.51 Rectal stricture secondary to annular neoplasm
tail.
(ventrodorsal radiograph, barium enema). The lumen of the rectum i5
 3. Lateral deviation of rectal content (VD radiograph).
 markedly narrowed with only a thin line of barium passing through.
4. Urinary bladder may not be identified on survey
radiographs.
2. Lesions may be annular or invade only one side of colon
wall.
Contrast radiography:
3. May see a localized stricture or narrowing of colon or
1. Barium enema can be used to document rectal deviation
rectum (Figure 6.51).
or diverticulum (NOTE: Inflated bulb of catheter may
4. Mucosal ulcers are common (persistent, barium-filled
obscure lesions in anal canal and distal rectum).
out-pouchings extending away from lumen).
2. Pneumocolon may identify location and shape of colon.
5. Irregular-shaped filling defects along mucosal margin
3. Retrograde urethrocystogram can be used to establish
suggests a mass.
position of urethra and urinary bladder.
a. Retained feces in an improperly prepared colon will
create filling defects.
6. Multiple filling defects that protrude into colon lumen
Urinary tract
are typical of lymphoma.
7. Adenocarcinomas tend to be solitary and often cause an
Kidneys
annular constriction ("napkin ring" lesion},
Congenital renal diseases
1. Renal defects present at birth may be familial (breed
Differential diagnosis:
related), inherited, or developmental.
1. Chronic colitis.
2. Granulomatous colitis.
RENAL APLASIA
3. Cecal inversion.
Clinical correlations:
4. Stricture of colon (secondary to trauma, scar tissue)
1. Complete failure of a kidney to develop.
5. Histoplasmosis.
2. Right kidney more often is absent.
3. Affected animals are asymptomatic unless disease occurs
Perineal hernia and rectal diverticulum
in remaining kidney.
Clinical correlations:
1. Weak pelvic diaphragm leads to lateral displacement and
Radiographic findings with renat aplasia:
herniation of rectum (often toward the right side).
1. Nonvisualization of a kidney.
2. Chronic rectal displacement may damage rectal wall and
2. Remaining kidney usually is enlarged (due to compensa-
allow mucosa to protrude through muscular wall, creating
tory hypertrophy) but normal in shape and smoothly
a diverticulum.
marginated.
415
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Differential diagnosis for renal aplasia:
Contrast radiography (excretory urography):
1. Kidney is present but not visible (see Differential Diag-
1. Rounded or irregular filling defects in nephrogram
noses section, this chapter).
(caused by tumors).
2. Renal pelvis may be distorted and irregular in shape.
RENAL AMYLOIDOSIS
Clinical correlations:
Differenfial diagnosis for cystadenocarcinoma:
1. Rare disorder of protein metabolism which results in
1. Pyelonephritis
deposition of insoluble protein (amyloid) in glomeruli and
2. Renal adenoma.
interstitium of kidneys (and also in other organs).
3. Renal cyst.
2. Hereditary in some breeds (familial), but may be acquired
4. Other neoplasia (primary or metastatic).
secondary to chronic inflammation or infection
3. Cat breeds: Abyssinian (familial): Asian shorthair, and
RENAL DYSPLASIA/HYPOPLASIA
Siamese (predisposed).
Clinical correlations:
4. Dog breeds: Chinese Shar-Pei (Shar-Pei fever syndrome).
1. Abnormal development of kidney(s).
Akita (cyclic fever and episodic polyarthropathy), and Collie
2. Often hereditary and may be unilateral or bilateral.
(gray Collie syndrome).
 3. Renal tissues do not differentiate normally (may involve
5. Shar-Pei fever syndrome often progresses to renal failure
renal tubules and/or glomeruli}.
by 6 years of age; affected animals have cyclic fever and
4. Affected animals may or may not exhibit clinical signs.
swollen hocks.
5. Hypoplastic kidneys may be associated with early neuter-
6. Clinical signs depend on organs affected, duration and
ing (especially cats).
severity of disease.
6. Renal dysplasia commonly progresses to renal failure:
7. Many affected animals die within months of onset of
a. Most often reported in Shih Tzu and Lhasa Apso (clini-
clinical signs.
cal signs of renal disease commonly develop at less than
8. Diagnosis is confirmed with biopsy.
5 years of age).
b. Less severe disease has been reported in Bull Terriers
Radiographic findings with renal amyloidosis:
1. Kidneys may be normal during early and mild stages of
(proteinuria develops between l and 8 years of age).
c. Also reported in Cocker Spaniel, Chow Chow, Dober-
disease.
man Pinscher, Miniature Schnauzer, Rottweiler, Standard
2. With progression, kidneys enlarge but remain smoothly
Poodle, and Wheaton Terrier.
marginated.
d. Affected
animals
may
develop
secondary
3. Kidney size may decrease during end stages of disease.
hyperpa rathyroidism.
4. Usually, both kidneys are affected.
e. Animals with mild dysplasia can remain asymptomatic
throughout their lives.
Contrast radiography (excretory urography):
7. Glomerular
atrophy
(Samoyed
hereditary
1. Nephrogram may persistent longer than normal and
glomerulopathy):
 pyelogram may be delayed or absent (indicates renal failure).
a. Inherited, noninflammatory disease in Samoyeds.
b. Often progresses to renal failure.
CYSTADENOCARCINOMA
c. Males tend to be more severely affected than females.
Clinical correlations:
d. Clinical signs of proteinuria, glucosuria, and an inabil-
1. Inherited disease of German Shepherd Dogs in which
ity to concentrate urine generally develop at less than 1
     d  a
year of age and progress to renal failure.
nodules form on skin.
e. Many affected dogs die at less than 2 years of age.
2. Cutaneous nodules (nodular dermatofibrosis) most often
"(do susad aq oi spuan) saai pue pau uo radde
3. Females are more often affected than males
Radiographic findings with renal hypoplasia:
4. Uterine tumors are common (leiomyomas.
usually
1. Kidneys are abnormally small:
multiple).
a. Dog kidneys measure less than 2.5 x length of L2.
5. Clinical signs of hematuria and renal failure develop in
b. Cat kidneys measure less than 2 x length of L2.
dogs older than 5 years of age.
2. Renal margins may be irregular.
Radiographic findings with cystadenocarcinoma:
Confrast radiography (excretory urography):
1. Kidneys are enlarged and abnormal in shape (may appear
1. Vascular and nephrogram phases are prolonged.
lumpy).
2. Renal cortices are thin (corticomedullary ratio is
2. Both kidneys are affected.
decreased).
416
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
3. Renal collecting system is normal but may appear large
in relation to reduced renal parenchyma. Pelvic recesses
extend further peripherally than expected.
Fanconi syndrome
Clinical correlations:
1. Inherited disease resulting in renal tubular dysfunction.
2. Most often reported in Basenjis and Norwegian Elk-
hounds (also Shetland Sheepdogs and Schnauzers).
renal cystic disease, heavy metal poisoning. adverse drug
reaction, or multiple myeloma.
4. Affected animals are unable to concentrate urine and
have impaired resorption of glucose, phosphate, electrolytes.
A
B
protein, and uric acid.
Figure 6.52 Polycystic kidney disease (ventrodorsal radiograph).
5. Clinical signs usually develop between 3 and 8 years of age.
A. Irregular renal contour due to presence of peripheral cysts.
6. Glucosuria with normal blood glucose is highly sugges-
B. Normal-appearing renal contour; cysts are centrally located and do not
tive of Fanconi syndrome.
distort renal margins. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
 7. Disease is progressive and can lead to renal failure.
Radiographic findings with Fanconi syndrome:
Telangiectasia
 1. Kidneys often appear normal in size and shape.
Clinical correlations:
2. May be small with irregular margins.
1. Characterized by multifocal vascular malformations in
kidneys (and often in other organs such as liver).
Contrast radiography (intravenous urography):
2. Can lead to hydronephrosis.
1. Normal nephrogram and pyelogram, but kidneys may be
3. Reported in Welsh Terriers.
small and irregular in shape.
Radiographic findings with telangiectasia:
Polycystic kidney disease (PKD)
1. Radiographs usually are normal unless hydronephrosis
Clinical correlations:
has developed.
1. Inherited, progressive disease characterized by multiple.
2. Hydronephrosis causes renomegaly with smooth margins.
fluid-filled cysts in both kidneys.
2. Cysts are present at birth but are very small and slowly
Contrast radiography (excretory urography):
increase in size over time.
1. Vascular phase may document anomalous vascular
3. Most often reported in Persian and Persian-mix cats (also
formations.
domestic long-haired cats, Cairn Terriers, and Beagles).
2. Hydronephrosis causes variable dilation of renal pelvis,
  n  n    s i 
depending on duration and severity of obstruction.
(average age is 7 years) and can progress to renal failure.
 5. Many affected animals remain asymptomatic.
Renal calculi
6. Ultrasonography is a sensitive diagnostic test in detection
Clinical correlations:
of renal cysts.
1. Other names: nephroliths, uroliths, ureteroliths, kidney
stones.
Radiographic findings with PKD:
 2. Concretions or crystal aggregations that form in one or
 1. Kidneys appear normal in size and shape while cysts are
both kidneys.
small.
3. Common calculi include:
2. As cysts grow, kidneys enlarge and may become distorted
a. Dogs: calcium oxalate, struvite, ammonium urate,
(depending on size, number, and location of cysts).
mixed, and calcium phosphate.
3. Kidneys with centrally located cysts tend to remain
b. Cats: calcium oxalate, matrix, calcium phosphate,
smoothly marginated while those with peripheral cysts
mixed, and struvite.
usually develop irregular borders (Figure 6.52).
4. Breed predispositions include Miniature Schnauzer, Min-
iature Poodle, Lhasa Apso, Bichon Frise, Cocker Spaniel,
Contrast radiography (excretory urography):
Yorkshire Terrier, and Shih Tzu.
1. Multiple round, well-defined filling defects in nephrogram.
5. Clinical signs include pain, vomiting, recurrent urinary
 2. Renal pelvis may be distorted and irregular in shape.
tract infections, and hematuria.
417
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
6. Hydronephrosis or hydroureter may result from
Renal cysts
obstruction.
Clinical correlations:
1. Fluid-filled cysts in kidney parenchyma may be congeni-
Radiographic findings with renal calculi:
tal or acquired.
1. Orthogonal radiographs are essential to accurate
2. Cysts can be single or multiple, unilateral or bilateral,
diagnosis.
 sterile or infected.
2. Renal calculi vary in opacity:
3. Most cysts are idiopathic, but some result from inflam-
a. Calculi that contain mineral: calcium phosphate.
mation or tubular obstruction.
calcium oxalate, and struvite (magnesium ammonium
 4. Solitary and unilateral cysts rarely produce clinical signs.
phosphate) are mineral opacity.
unless very large.
b. Calculi that do not contain mineral: cystine, urate, and
 5. Multiple cysts can lead to renal failure (i.e., polycystic
xanthine are soft tissue opacity.
kidney disease).
c. Soft tissue opacity calculi may become visible with
6. Ultrasonography aids in diagnosis.
con trast radiography.
3. Calculi vary in size and may be solitary or multiple, uni-
Radiographic findings with renal cysts:
lateral or bilateral.
 1. Small cysts usually do not alter kidney size or shape.
4. May be located anywhere in renal collecting system.
2. Larger or multiple cysts may cause unilateral or bilateral
5. Large calculi may conform to shape of renal collecting
kidney enlargement and smooth or irregular margins.
system ("staghorn" shaped; Figure 6.53).
depending on location and number of cysts (Figure 6.54).
6. Concurrent cystic and/or urethral calculi may be present.
3. Localized, asymmetric enlargement of a kidney may
7. End-on visualization of deep circumflex iliac artery
result from a large, solitary cyst.
(lateral radiograph) may be mistaken for a ureteral calculus
ventral to caudal lumbar spine (Figure 6.2).
Contrast radiography (excretory urography):
 8. Superimposed structures may mimic renal calculi (e.g.
1. Nephrogram reveals well-defined, rounded, filling defects
GI content, skin debris, skin).
in renal cortex.
2. Filling defects (cysts) typically are variable in size and number.
Contrast radiography (intravenous urography):
3. Renal parenchyma may become thin adjacent to cyst(s)
1. Radiographs may appear normal if calculi are small or
due to pressure atrophy.
soft tissue opacity.
4. Renal pelvis may be normal or distorted, depending on
2. Larger calculi create filling defects in contrast-filled renal
size and location of cysts.
pelvis or ureter.
3. Obstruction leads to variable dilation of renal pelvis and
Differential diagnosis for renal cyst:
ureter (hydronephrosis).
1. Tumor (primary or metastatic).
2. Abscess.
Differential diagnosis for renal calculi:
3. Hematoma.
1. Chronic renal disease with dystrophic calcification.
2. Osseous metaplasia.
A
B
A
B
Figure 6.54 Renal cyst (ventrodorsal radiograph). A. Iregular renal
Figure 6.53 Renal calculi (ventrodorsal radiograph). A. Large mineral
sal e yam weihoun Aotanxi 'a yde.nopeu Aains e uo uaas se inotuon
opacity calculus in renal pelvis (staghorn calculus). B. Small, round mineral 
opaque filling defect caused by cyst in peripheral part of kidney. (Adapted
opacity calculi in renal pelvis. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
from Owens and Biery 1999.)
418
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
Feline perirenal cysts
Hydronephrosis
Clinical correlations:
Clinical correlations:
1. Other names: perinephric pseudocyst, renal capsular cyst,
1. Dilation of renal collecting system caused by partial or
capsulogenic renal cyst, perirenal hygroma, capsular hydro-
complete obstruction of ureter or renal pelvis.
nephrosis, retroperitoneal perirenal cyst.
 2. May be congenital or acquired, unilateral or bilateral.
 2. Accumulation of fluid in a cystlike mass surrounding one
3. Pressure atrophy of renal parenchyma is common and
 or each kidney.
progressive, depending on duration and completeness of
3. Fluid may be subcapsular (located between renal capsule
obstruction
and cortex) or extracapsular (outside renal capsule).
4. Clinical signs depend on degree and duration of
4. Etiology is unknown.
obstruction:
 5. Most often reported in male cats greater than 8 years of
a. Acute hydronephrosis may produce severe pain.
age.
b. Chronic disease may be relatively asymptomatic until
6. Affected cats have progressive abdominal enlargement.
animal is in renal failure.
7. Renal dysfunction may or may not be present.
c. Complete obstruction may destroy function of a
8. Intra-abdominal mass in area of kidney(s) often is pal-
kidney within four days.
pable and nonpainful.
Radiographic findings with hydronephrosis:
Radiographic findings with perirenal cyst:
1. Appearance of kidney(s) depends on location, degree.
1. Large, rounded soft tissue opacity mass in area of one or
and duration of obstruction.
each kidney.
2. Kidneys often appear normal with early or mild
2. Mass(es) may be very large and are smoothly marginated.
hydronephrosis.
3. Progressive disease causes renomegaly. usually with
Contrast radiography (excretory urography):
smooth margins.
1. Nephrogram reveals a normal appearing.
.uniformly
4. Rarely. a partial, intermittent, or chronic obstruction
opacified kidney surrounded by nonopacified fluid (Figure
(without renal backflow) can lead to renal atrophy and a
6.55). Volume of fluid may be quite large.
small, irregular-shaped kidney.
2. With chronic renal perirenal cyst, kidney may become
small and irregular in shape.
Contrast radiography (excretory urography):
1. Nephrogram
usually
is
normal
with
mild
Differential diagnosis for perirenal cyst:
hydronephrosis.
1. Lymphoma.
2. Pyelogram documents mild to severe dilatation of renal
2. Hydronephrosis.
collecting system.
3. Polycystic kidney disease.
3. Severe or advanced hydronephrosis (see chapter 3.
4. Tumor.
Figure 3.27):
5. Amyloidosis.
a. Renal pelvis is markedly dilated and distorted (renal
collecting system is no longer identifiedy.
b. Pressure atrophy progressively thins renal cortex until
only a thin rim of functional renal tissue remains.
fication (if function remains).
d. Kidney may be nonfunctional.
Differential diagnosis for hydronephrosis:
1. Renal neoplasia.
2. Acute inflammation.
3. Perirenal cyst (cats).
4. Compensatory renal hypertrophy.
5. Subcapsular hematoma.
A
B
Renal inflammation (nephritis and
Figure 6.55 Feline perirenal pseudocyst (ventrodorsal radiograph).
pyelonephritis)
wenon Aoainxi a ydennopen Aauns e uo uaas se Aaupi panelua 'v
Clinical correlations:
with perirenal pseudocyst appearing less opaque than renal parenchyma.
1. Inflammation of kidney and renal collecting system (one
(Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
or both kidneys may be affected).
419
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
2. Most commonly caused by ascending infection from
c. Most common in cats is lymphosarcoma (usually
lower urinary tract (usually bacterial infection).
bilateral).
3. May also result
tfrom
 systemic
infection
or
3. Metastatic renal tumors are more common than primary
nephrolithiasis.
tumors.
4. Certain drugs may be contributory (e.g.. penicillin, ceph-
4. Benign renal tumors are rare.
alexin, aspirin, sulfa drugs).
5. Renal cystadenocarcinoma produces tumors in kidneys
5. Chronic disease can lead to renal failure.
and uterus (see page 416).
6. Diagnosis usually involves nonradiographic methods.
6. Clinical signs are nonspecific, including weight loss,
such as blood chemistry and urine examinations.
anorexia, and abdominal distension.
7. An intra-abdominal mass may be palpable.
Radiographic findings with pyelonephritis:
8. Polycythemia may develop secondary to primary renal
1. Radiographic diagnosis is difficult.
carcinoma.
2. During acute disease, kidneys usually are normal or only
9. Involvement of both kidneys often leads to renal failure.
slightly enlarged.
3. With chronic disease, affected kidney(s) may become
Radiographic findings with renal neoplasia:
small and irregular in shape.
1. One or both kidneys may be involved.
4. Renal calculi may be present, usually in renal pelvis
2. Affected kidney(s) often are enlarged and irregular in
5. If one kidney has significantly reduced function, other
 shape but may appear normal.
kidney may enlarge (compensatory hypertrophy).
3. At time of diagnosis, many primary tumors are large and
occupy most of a renal pole, compressing and invading adja-
Contrast radiography (excretory urography):
cent renal tissue.
1. Acute nephritis or pyelonephritis:
 4. Mineralization may be present due to tumor necrosis or
a. Nephrogram usually is normal.
 osseous meta plasia.
b. Pyelogram often is normal or renal pelvis may be
5. Lymphoma commonly causes bilateral, symmetrical
mildly dilated.
renomegaly with smooth, rounded margins.
c. Pelvic recesses may be slightly irregular, asymmetric.
or poorly filled.
Contrast radiography (excretory urography):
d. Ureteral phase is normal or ureter may be mildly
1. Nephrogram may be absent or display filling defects
   d   n 
(latter caused by tumors).
inflammation and atony or "ileus" of ureter).
 2. Renal margins usually are irregular.
e. If pelvis and pelvic recesses are dilated but proximal
3. Renal pelvis and recesses may be distorted.
 4. Contrast medium may persist in tumor after nephrogram
2. Chronic nephritis or pyelonephritis:
phase.
a. Nephrogram opacity may be patchy and irregular.
b. Renal pelvis often is distorted and irregular, with or
Differential diagnosis for renal neoplasia:
without pelvic dilation (see chapter 3, Figure 3.28).
1. Cystic kidney disease.
c. Pelvic recesses may appear widened, blunted, or irreg-
2. Abscess.
ular (see chapter 3, Figure 3.26)
3. Hematoma.
d. Filling defects in renal collecting system may be caused
4. Hydronephrosis.
by presence of exudate.
e. Proximal ureter may be dilated (hydroureter).
 Rupture of kidney
f. Renal infarcts create wedge-shaped filling defects in
Clinical correlations:
 peripheral renal parenchyma.
1. May result from trauma, tumor erosion, or cyst rupture.
g. Renal cortex may atrophy or appear uneven.
 2. Damage may involve renal parenchyma, collecting
system, or blood supply.
Renal neoplasia
 3. Clinical signs include pain, hematuria, vomiting.
Clinical correlations:
1. Kidney tumors may be primary or metastatic, benign or
Radiographic findings with kidney rupture:
malignant, unilateral or bilateral.
1. Kidney may be displaced.
2. Primary renal tumors usually are malignant:
 2. Renal contour usually is distorted and indistinct.
a. May be bilateral due to simultaneous occurrence or
3. Hemorrhage or leakage of urine enlarges retroperitoneal
metastasis to contralateral kidney.
space and obscures serosal margins.
b. Most common in dogs is adenocarcinoma (usually
a. Expansion of retroperitoneal space displaces intestines
unilateral).
ventrally (see chapter 1, Figure 1.52).
420
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
4. Other evidence of trauma may be present (e.g., rib frac-
4. Intramural defect: ureter enters bladder in normal loca-
tures, subcutaneous emphysema).
tion but tunnels through bladder wall and bypasses trigone
(most common form in dogs).
Contrast radiography (excretory urography):
5. Extramural defect: ureter completely bypasses bladder
1. Contrast medium accumulates beneath renal capsule (if
and enters urethra directly (less common in dogs. more
capsule remains intact) or in retroperitoneal space.
common in cats).
2. Rupture of renal pelvis or ureter leads to extravasation
6. Ureteral
obstru ction
can
occur,
resulting
in
of contrast medium into renal parenchyma or retroperito-
hydronephrosis.
neal space.
7. Breed predispositions include Bulldog. Fox Terrier, New-
3. Renal
parenchyma
is
heterogeneous
during
foundland, Siberian Husky, West Highland White Terrier.
nephrogram.
Miniature and Toy Poodles.
4. Margins of kidney usually are irregular.
       m
5. Renal pelvis may appear distorted due to adjacent hema-
incontinence and vaginitis from urine scalding.
toma or blood clot.
Radiographic findings with ectopic ureter:
6. If renal artery is torn or compromised, no renal outline
 or nephrogram will be visible.
1. Survey radiographs usually are normal.
2. Kidneys may be small or misshapen or can be large due
Ureters
to hydronephrosis.
Ectopic ureter (Figure 6.56)
3. If ureters are bilaterally ectopic, urinary bladder com-
Clinical correlations:
monly is small due to disuse (hypoplastic bladder).
1. Congenital defect in which one or both ureters empties
Contrast radiography (excretory urography,
abnormally into urethra or vagina.
pneumocystogramy :
2. May be unilateral or bilateral.
1. Visualization of vesicoureteral junction is enhanced by
3. More common in dogs than in cats; females are more
performing a pneumocystogram concurrent with intrave-
often affected than males.
nous urography (see chapter 3 for methods).
2. Temporary caudal abdominal compression increases filling
of ureters.
3. Obliqued VD radiographs eliminate superimposed struc-
tures and enhance visualization of ureters.
4. Presence of contrast medium in a structure other than
urinary bladder confirms diagnosis (see chapter 3, Figure 3.31).
5. One or both ureters may partially or completely empty
into abnormal location.
A
6. Ureter(s) may be dilated and/or tortuous due to inflam-
mation, distal obstruction (stricture), or concurrent ureteral
anomaly.
7. Hydronephrosis may be present with dilation of renal
pelvis.
8. Horizontal beam radiography (lateral radiograph made
with animal standing or in ventral recumbency) can be used
to position abdominal viscera ventral to ureters.
9. When available, fluoroscopy aids in diagnosis.
B
10. Vaginogram or vagionourethrogram may provide a ret-
rograde urethrogram:
a. Ectopic ureter is identified if contrast medium flows
from urethra or vagina into ureter.
b. Kidneys are not opacified using this technique.
c. Complications include ascending kidney infection if
retrograde reflux occurs.
C
Ureterocele
Figure 6.56 Ectopic ureters (lateral radiograph). A. Normal ureters.
Clinical correlations:
B. Ectopic ureter into urethra. C. Ectopic ureter into vagina. (Adapted 
1. Anomalous development of distal ureter resulting in a
from Owens and Biery 1999.)
cystic dilation.
421
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
2. Intravesicular ureterocele is located in urinary bladder
5. An acquired diverticulum may be caused by trauma that
wall or lumen.
results in protrusion of mucosa through a damaged muscu-
3. Ectopic ureterocele is associated with an ectopic ureter
lar layer.
and located in neck of urinary bladder neck or in urethra.
4. Uncommon in dogs and rare in cats; females more often
Radiographic findings with urachal diverticulum:
affected than males (3.5 to 1).
1. Survey radiographs often are normal.
5. May be unilateral or bilateral.
2. May see a small bulge protruding from cranial border of
6. Clinical signs include repeated episodes of cystitis, incon-
urinary bladder (Figure 1.76).
tinence, dysuria, stranguria, pollakiuria, hematuria, and/or
abdominal pain. Ureteral obstruction can occur.
Contrast radiography (positive contrast cystogram):
7. Some affected anirmals remain asymptomatic.
1. Contrast medium fills out-pouching. extending cranio-
8. Cystoscopy aids in identifying ureterocele.
ventrally from bladder vertex toward umbilicus.
2. Size of diverticulum is variable (most are small).
Radiographic findings with ureterocele:
3. Contrast-filled diverticulum is convex in shape, with
1. Survey radiographs often are normal.
smooth or only slightly irregular margins.
2. Obstruction leads to hydronephrosis and variable
renomegaly.
PERSISTENT OR PATENT URACHAL LIGAMENT
Clinical correlations:
Contrast radiography:
1. Remnant of urachus that maintains tension between
1. Positive contrast cystography: a rounded, smoothly mar-
urinary bladder and umbilicus.
ginated filling defect may be outlined by contrast medium
 2. May prevent complete filling and emptying of urinary
in area of trigone.
bla dder.
2. Excretory urography: a dilated ureter with a spherical.
3. Ligament may or may not be patent (communication
contrast-filled structure may be visible in trigone region
 between bladder and umbilicus may or may not exist).
(described as resembling a cobra head).
4. Affected animals may suffer chronic or recurrent cystitis.
3. An ectopic ureter may be present.
Radiographic findings with patent urachal ligament:
Urinary bladder
1. Urinary bladder appears elongated with a pointed vertex.
Congenital anomalies
2. Patent ligament may be smooth or have an irregular
URACHAL CYST
margin.
Clinical correlations:
1. Fluid-filled cavity in urachal ligament.
Contrast radiography (positive contrast cystogram):
2. Cyst is not patent; it is a separate sealed structure.
1. When patent, a contrast-filled channel may be visible
3. Usually asymptomatic.
 between urinary bladder and umbilicus.
Radiographic findings with urachal cyst:
Cystic calculi
1. Stationary, soft tissue opacity nodule near ventral abdom-
Clinical correlations:
inal wall, located between urinary bladder and umbilicus.
1. Other names: uroliths, vesical calculi, bladder stones.
2. Formation of concretions and aggregates is common in
Contrast radiography (positive contrast cystogram):
urine of dogs and cats.
1. Usually unremarkable because cyst does not communi-
3. In dogs, calculi most often result from bacterial infections
cate with bladder or umbilicus.
in urinary tract.
4. In cats, calculi usually form without a urinary tract
URACHAL DIVERTICULUM
infection.
Clinical correlations:
5. Types of cystic calculi include:
1. Urachus is a fetal structure allowing communication
a. Calcium oxalate: common in cats and small-breed
between urinary bladder and umbilical cord (normally closes
dogs (e.g., Miniature Schnauzer, Lhasa Apso, Shih Tzu,
at birth}.
Bichon Frise): most common urolith in male dogs.
2. When urachus closes at umbilical end and remains open
b. Calcium phosphate: most often reported in dogs
at urinary bladder there is a small out-pouching or diverticu.
with hypercalcemia (predisposed breeds may include
lum along cranial portion of bladder wall.
Yorkshire Terrier, Miniature Schnauzer, Cocker Spaniel).
3. May cause recurrent cystitis and calculus formation due
c. Cystine: generally associated with a metabolic
 to retention of urine in diverticulum.
anomaly: most often reported in male Dachshunds and
 4. Most affected animals are asymptomatic.
English Bulldogs.
422
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
d. Silicate: may be associated with diet; possible breed
b. Air bubbles in urinary bladder lumen:
predispositions include German Shepherd Dog, Golden
1) Round with smooth, well-defined margins.
Retriever, Labrador Retriever.
2) Located at periphery of contrast puddle on double
e. Struvite (triple phosphate): common in cats and small-
con trast cystogram.
breed dogs (e.g., Miniature schnauzer, Bichon Frise.
3) Tend to decrease in size and number on serial
Cocker Spaniel); most common urolith in female dogs.
radiographs.
f. Urate: most often reported in Dalmatians and in
animals with liver disease (e.g. portovascular shunts.
Differential diagnosis for cystic calculi with contrast studies:
chronic hepatic insufficiency).
1. Blood clots: irregular in shape with indistinct margins.
g. Xanthine: most common in Dalmatians receiving allo-
may or may not be attached.
purinol therapy.
2. Tumor: attached to bladder wall; adjacent bladder wall
h. Mixed composition.
often is thickened.
6. Clinical signs include hematuria, stranguria, dysuria, pol-
3. Polyp: attached to bladder wall; margins are smooth.
lakiuria, and inappropriate urination.
 7. Many affected animals are asymptomatic.
Cystitis
Clinical correlations:
Radiographic findings with cystic calculi:
1. Inflammation of urinary bladder.
1. Orthogonal radiographs are essential to avoid erroneous
2. Most commonly caused by bacterial infection.
interpretation.
3. Interstitial cystitis (sterile recurring cystitis) is not caused
 2. Compression radiography can be used to displace overly-
by infection.
ing bowel and improve visualization of bladder.
4. Multiple factors may predispose to cystitis (see Differen-
 3. Calculi vary greatly in size, shape, margination, number.
tial Diagnoses section, this chapter).
and opacity.
 5. Nephritis or pyelonephritis may be concurrent.
4. Type of calculi cannot be reliably differentiated on
6. Clinical signs include hematuria, dysuria, and increased 
radiographs.
frequency of urination (pollakiuria).
a. Mineral opacity calculi include: struvite, calcium
oxalate, calcium phosphate, and silicate.
Radiographic findings with cystitis:
b. Soft tissue opacity calculi include: cystine, urate, and
1. Survey radiographs often are unremarkable.
xanthine.
2. Urinary bladder is normal to small in size.
5. Calculi may be concurrent in kidneys, ureters, or urethra .
3. Cystic and/or renal calculi may be present.
6. Effects of gravity are important; tiny sandlike calculi may
be easiest to see along dependent bladder wall using hori-
Contrast radiography (double contrast cystography):
zontal beam radiography.
1. Mucosal margin often is irregular; severity varies from
7. Postoperative radiographs are 1
recommended to docu-
a fine, brush border to a more irregular cobblestone-like
ment removal of calculi:
pattern.
a. Important 
for
patient
care
and
medico-legal
2. Bladder wall thickening is common with chronic cystitis
purposes.
(see chapter 3, Figure 3.18):
b. Failure to remove all uroliths occurs in a substantial
a. May be local or general, mild or severe.
number of cases.
b. Wall thickness can vary from 3 to 20 mm, depending
on severity and duration of disease.
Contrast radiography (cystography) (see chapter 3
c. Local thickening predominately occurs along cranio-
for method):
ventral aspect of bladder wall, gradually becoming thinner
1. Dilute positive contrast medium is recommended to
toward bladder neck.
avoid masking calculi.
d. Polypoid cystitis is characterized by diffuse bladder
2. Pneumocystogram or double contrast cystogram may be
wall thickening and multiple polyps projecting into
preferred.
lumen from mucosa (polyps create filling defects in con-
3. Calculi usually localize in central, dependent portion of
trast medium, typically l to 3mm in size).
urinary bladder lumen (see chapter 3, Figure 3.21).
e. Inadequate distention of urinary bladder may mimic
4. May see thickening of bladder wall and an irregular
or accentuate wall thickening.
mucosal margin (due to chronic cystitis).
3. Distensibility of bladder may be limited by thickened wall 
5. Conditions that may mimic cystic calculi (see chapter 3.
or muscle spasms (latter due to pain).
Figure 3.19):
4. Cystic calculi or intraluminal blood clots may be present.
a. Superimposed structure (e.g., nipple, prepuce, colon
5. Mucosal ulceration may occur, appearing as clumps of
content).
contrast medium adhered to bladder wall.
423
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
6. Congenital anomalies may be present (e.g.. urachal
2. Acquired fistulas are more common, usually secondary
diverticulum).
to trauma or previous surgery.
3. Rare in dogs and cats (may be heritable in English Bulldog).
Differential diagnosis for cystitis:
 4. Affected animals may have recurrent urinary tract infec-
1. Neoplasia (tumors tend to be locally extensive and pro-
tions, hematuria, and dysuria.
trude into bladder lumen as irregular, filling defects).
Radiographic findings with urinary bladder fistula:
Emphysematous cystitis
1. Survey radiographs often are normal
Clinical correlations:
2. Urinary bladder may be unusual in shape.
1. Accumulation of gas within urinary bladder lumen or
wall.
Contrast radiography (positive contrast cystogram):
2. Most commonly results from infection with gas-forming
1. Contrast medium appears simultaneously in urinary
bacteria, (e.g., Escherichia coli, Proteus, Aerobacter).
bladder and in vagina, uterus, or rectum.
3. Animals with diabetes mellitus and glucosuria are
2. Fistula may be identified as a smooth-bordered extension
predisposed.
of contrast medium beyond urinary bladder wall.
Radiographic findings with emphysematous cystitis:
Neoplasia of urinary bladder
1. Gas appears as linear or mottled patterns of decreased
Clinical correlations:
opacity that conform to shape and location of urinary
1. Urinary bladder tumors may be malignant or benign.
bladder (Figure 6.57).
primary or metastatic.
2. Gas may dissect through bladder wall and localize in
2. Malignant tumors are more common than benign tumors.
adjacent broad ligaments and perivesicular fat.
3. Transitional cell carcinoma is most common (accounts for
3. Hepatomegaly may be present (due to(
diabetes
over 80% of malignant bladder tumors) and can metastasize
mellitus).
to medial iliac lymph nodes, lungs, kidney, urethra, prostate 
4. Kidneys may be enlarged.
gland, uterus, spine, pelvis, or long bones.
5. Superimposition of adjacent gas may mimic gas in urinary
4. Dogs are more often affected than cats, especially older
bladder (e.g., intestinal gas, subcutaneous emphysema)
female dogs.
5. Higher incidence in dogs may be related to metabolism
Differential diagnosis for emphysematous cystitis:
of tryptophan.
1. Iatrogenic gas in bladder lumen (e.g., previous catheter-
a. In dogs. tryptophan is metabolized into aromatic
ization, cystocentesis).
amines, which are carcinogenic and excreted in urine.
b. Metabolism of tryptophan in cats does not result in
Fistula involving urinary bladder
production of aromatic amines.
Clinical correlations:
6. Metastatic tumors to urinary bladder are rare (typically
1. Abnormal communication between two structures (e.g..
originate in prostate gland or urethra).
urinary bladder and vagina, urinary bladder and uterus,
 7. Tumor can cause obstruction at ureterovesicular junction
lrethra and rectum); may be congenital or acquired.
or in urethra.
8. Clinical signs include hematuria, stranguria, and painful
or inappropriate urination.
9. Hypertrophic osteopathy has been reported secondary to
large bladder tumors.
Radiographic findings with urinary bladder tumors:
1. Survey radiographs often are normal.
2. Bladder may be enlarged due to urethral obstruction.
3. Shape of bladder may be irregular due to distortion by
tumor.
4. Metastasis to medial iliac lymph nodes may occur:
a. Sublumbar mass develops ventral to L5-7.
b. Active periosteal response or osteolysis may develop
B
along ventral borders of caudal lumbar vertebrae.
Figure 6.57 Enphysermatous cystitis (lateral radliograph). A. Ga5
c. Metastasis also may involve pelvic bones.
bubbles in bladder wall. B. Gas bubbles in bladder wall and lumen
5. Dystrophic calcification may develop in tumor or bladder
(Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
wall.
424
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
Figure 6.58 Neoplasia of urinary bladder (lateral radiographs). A. Excretory urogram documents multiple rounded peripheral filling defects in urinary
 bladder caused by mmural tumors. Ureter is dilated and tortuous due to obstruction at urinary bladder trigone. B. Negative contrast cystograrm with
urethral catheter present, revealing thickened and irregular bladder mucosa (highlighted on this image).
Contrast radiography (cystography or
3. Caudal portion of bladder may appear blunted.
doubte contrast cystography):
4. When distended, bladder moves more cranially and may
1. Tumor causes variable-sized filling defect along bladder
appear normal.
mucosa (Figures 6.58).
 2. Filling defect protrudes into bladder lumen with smooth
Differential diagnosis for pelvic bladder:
or irregular margins (see chapter 3, Figures 3.22, 3.23).
1. Chronic cystitis (urinary bladder usually is small).
 3. Tumors typically have a broad, sessile base that gradually
2. Hypoplasia of urinary bladder (bilateral ectopic ureters),
tapers into bladder wall.
3. Vestibulovaginal stenosis.
4. Bladder wall thickening is common and may be local or
diffuse.
Rupture of urinary bladder
 5. Ulcera tion of mucosa causes clumping of contrast medium
Clinical correlations:
along bladder wall.
1. May result from blunt force trauma or penetrating
6. Carcinomas generally occur in trigone region of bladder.
wound.
 7. Vesicoureteral reflux is common with tumors in trigone
 2. A distended urinary bladder is most susceptible to rupture.
region.
3. Most ruptures occur along ventral bladder wall.
4. Hematoma, fistula, or diverticulum may develop in
Differential diagnosis for urinary bladder fumors:
bladder wall.
1. Chronic cystitis with irregular thickening of bladder wall.
5. Clinical signs depend on severity of trauma.
2. Polypoid cystitis.
6. Affected animals may exhibit hematuria, abdominal dis-
3. Blood clots adhered to bladder mucosa.
tension, abdominal pain, dysuria, or anuria.
Pelvic bladder
Radiographic findings with rupture of urinary bladder:
Clinical correlations:
1. Caudal serosal margins become indistinct due to leakage
1. Other names: intra-pelvic bladder, short urethra
of urine or hemorrhage.
syndrome.
2. Variable degrees of intestinal ileus may be present (due
 2. Associated with congenital shortening of urethra.
to urine peritonitis).
3. More common in dogs than in cats.
3. Avulsion of bladder from urethra may result in cranial
4. Most often reported in young. intact female dogs. but can
 displacement of an apparently intact urinary bladder.
occur in males or females, intact or neutered.
4. Other signs of trauma may be present (e.g. pelvic frac-
5. May or may not result in urinary problems.
tures, subcutaneous ermphysema).
6. Clinical signs include urinary incontinence, stranguria.
and recurrent cystitis.
Contrast radiography (cystography):
1. Positive contrast cystography is preferred over pneumo-
Radiographic findings with pelvic bladder:
cystography because small amounts of air leaking into
1. Urinary bladder is positioned further caudal in pelvic
abdominal cavity are difficult to detect.
canal than normal.
2. Radiographs are made immediately prior to end of infu-
2. Neck of urinary bladder is caudal to pubis.
sion of contrast medium.
425
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Figure 6.59 Srnall tear in urinary bladder (lateral radliograph, excretory
Figure 6.60 Calculi in distal penile urethra, lodged within os penis
urogramm). A srmall volumme of extraluminal contrast medium is visible at 
(arrow; lateral radiograph).
the bladder vertex and ventrally along the bladder wall.
3. With small ruptures (0.5cm). bladder commonly is
5. Accessory ossification centers in os penis may be con-
distended.
fused with mineral opacity calculi.
a. Small amount of contrast medium may be visible near
site of rupture (Figure 6.59).
Differential diagnosis for urethral calculi:
b. Serial radiographs may be required to document leakage.
1. Blood clots (clots are irregular in shape with indistinct
4. With larger ruptures (2 cm). bladder does not distend and
margins, may or may not be fixed in position).
 con trast medium diffuses into abdominal cavity.
2. Mural lesion (thickened urethral wall projects inward with
a usually distinct margin; margin may be smooth or irregular).
Urethra
3. Extramural lesion (inward displacement of urethral wall
Urethral calculi
with smooth tapering edges).
Clinical correlations:
1. Abnormal concretion or aggregate in urethra.
Urethral fistula
2. Frequently cause obstruction to urethra.
Clinical correlations:
3. Affected animals often exhibit urethritis and cystitis.
1. Abnormal, persistent communication between lumen of
4. Clinical signs include hematuria, dysuria, stranguria, or
urethra and lumen of rectum, vagina, or uterus.
anuria.
2. May be congenital (developmental defect of fetal cloaca)
or acquired (secondary to trauma or chronic inflammation).
Radiographic findings with urethral calculi:
3. Affected animals void urine from both urethral and anal
1. Mineral opacity calculi often are visible, but may be
 or vaginal openings.
obscured by pelvic bones.
2. Obliqued radiographs often aid in visualization of calculi
Radiographic findings with urethral fistula:
in pelvic urethra.
1. Survey radiographs usually are normal
3. Lateral radiograph with pelvic limbs pulled cranially aids
in detection of calculi in penile urethra by eliminating super-
Contrast radiography (positive contrast retrograde
imposition of pelvic limbs (Figure 6.60).
urethrogram):
4. Concurrent cystic calculi are common.
1. Contrast medium flowing simultaneously into urethra
and rectum, vagina, or uterus documents presence and loca-
Contrast radiography (positive contrast
tion of fistula and provides some information about size of
retrograde urethrogram):
fistula.
1. Calculi create filling defects of variable size, shape, and
number.
Inflammation of urethra (urethritis)
2. Most urethral calculi are round or slightly irregular in shape.
Clinical correlations:
3. Concurrent urethritis may be present, creating an irregu-
1. May be infectious or noninfectious.
lar mucosal margin.
a. Infectious urethritis most often is associated with
4. Air bubbles in urethra may mimic calculi, but bubble
infection in urinary bladder, prostate gland, or vagina.
 margins tend to be more distinct and bubbles change appear-
b. Noninfectious urethritis may result from trauma (e.g.
ance and location on serial radiographs.
faulty catheterization, calculi) or neoplasia.
426
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
2. Granulomatous urethritis is a rare condition that mimics
urethral neoplasia.
3. Chronic inflammation may result in a stricture.
4. Clinical signs include dysuria, stranguria, and urinary
incontinence.
Radiographic findings with urethritis:
1. Survey radiographs usually are normal.
2. May see mineral opacity calculi.
Contrast radiography (positive contrast
retrograde urethrography):
1. Urethral mucosa may have an irregular margin
Figure 6.61 Urethral neoplasia (positive contrast urethrocystograrm).
 2. Narrowing of urethral lumen may result frorm:
A. Urethral tumor extending proximally into neck of urinary bladder
a. Transient peristalsis.
B. Distal urethral neoplasm. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
b. Urethral spa sm.
c. Stricture.
Differential diagnosis for urethral neoplasia:
1. Granulomatous urethritis.
Differential diagnosis for urethritis:
2. Severe or chronic urethritis.
1. Neoplasia.
2. Soft tissue opacity calculi.
Urethral rupture
Clinical correlations:
Urethral neoplasia
1. Caused by trauma and results in urine leaking into adja-
Clinical correlations:
cent tissues.
1. Tumors of urethra may be primary or metastatic.
2. Clinical signs include swelling. pain, stranguria or anuria.
2. Uncommon in dogs and rare in cats.
fever, and anorexia.
3. Females more often affected than males, usually mature
3. Secondary urethral scarring or fistula formation may occur.
animals.
4. Tumors tend to arise in distal urethra of females and in
Radiographic findings with ruptured urethra:
prostatic urethra of males.
1. Swelling develops at site of rupture, commonly in ischial
5. Transitional cell carcinoma is most common and may
region.
metastasize to local lymph nodes, lung. other parts of uro-
2. Loss of opacity interfaces in pelvic canal and in swollen area.
 genital system, or to skeleton.
3. Other evidence of trauma may be present (e.g. pelvic
6. Other carcinomas may involve urethra (e.g., squamous
fractures, subcutaneous emphysema).
cell, prostatic).
4. Urinary bladder margins may be indistinct or obscured
7. Clinical signs include chronic dysuria, hematuria, and
by adjacent urine leakage and inflammation.
urinary incon tinence.
5. With complete transection of urethra, urinary bladder
Radiographic findings with urethral tumors:
normal in size and shape).
1. Urinary bladder may appear normal or distended, depend-
ing on degree of urethral obstruction.
Contrast radiography (positive contrast
2. Rectum may be displaced dorsally by enlarged urethra or
retrograde urethrography):
a periurethral mass (e.g. prostatic tumor).
1. Extravasation of contrast medium into periurethral tissues.
Contrast radiography (positive contrast
retrograde urethrography):
Adrenal glands
1. Urethral wall commonly is thickened with irregular
mucosal margins (Figure 6.61).
Adrenomegaly
2. Filling defects of variable size and shape are present in
Clinical correlations:
urethral lumen.
1. Adrenal gland enlargement may be unilateral or bilateral.
3. Lumen may be narrowed due to mural thickening. stric-
2. Adrenomegaly may be caused by tumor or hyperplasia.
ture, or periurethral mass.
a. Adrenal tumors can directly invade aorta or vena cava.
4. Contrast medium may extravasate into adjacent tissues
b. Tumors may metastasize to liver, lymph nodes, lungs.
or into tumor due to urethral necrosis or fistula formation.
and/or kidneys.
427
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
3. Adrenal glands may become hyper-secreting. produc-
5. Breed predispositions include Poodles, Dachshunds.
ing excessive amounts of cortisol, catecholamines, or sex
Boston Terrier, Boxers, and Beagles.
hormones.
6. Clinical signs include polydypsia, polyuria, polyphagia.
4. Clinical signs depend on etiology of adrenomegaly and
excessive panting. pendulous abdomen, overweight, and
type of hormones produced.
symmetric hair loss.
5. Ultrasonography or cross-sectional imaging (CT) aids in
7. Iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome results from administra-
diagnosis.
tion of exogenous corticosteroids.
Radiographic findings with adrenomegaly:
Radiographic findings with Cushing's syndrome:
1. Mild or moderate adrenomegaly usually is not evident on
1. Abdomen appears distended/pendulous, but peritoneal
survey radiographs.
serosal definition is good (peritoneal fluid is absent).
2. Severe enlargement of left adrenal gland displaces gastric
 2. Generalized hepatomegaly is characteristic, with round-
fundus cranially, transverse colon caudoventrally, and left
ing of liver margins.
kidney caudolaterally.
3. Adrenal glands are not identified unless enlarged or
3. Severe right adrenomegaly displaces right kidney call-
mineralized.
dolaterally and duodenum laterally and ventrally.
 4. Mineralization of adrenal glands is rare but highly sug-
4. Signs of hypercorticosterism may be present (e.g., hepa-
gestive of neoplasia when present.
tomegaly, distended abdomen).
5. Bronchointerstitial lung pattern is common (due to pul-
monary fibrosis).
Contrast radiography:
6.Areas of cutaneous calcification may be present (i.e.,
1. Intravenous urography:
calcinosis cutis).
a. Vascular phase may opacify adrenal circulation and
 7. Osteoporosis may occur in advanced cases.
outline adrenal gland.
b. Cranial pole of kidney on affected side may be indented
Hypoadrenocorticism
by enlarged adrenal gland.
Clinical correlations:
2. Pneumoperitoneography (rarely performed):
1. Other names: Addison's disease.
a. Adrenal glands may be visible on lateral and DV
2. Loss of adrenal cortical tissue results in decreased produc-
radiographs.
3. Caudal vena cava venography (rarely performed):
tion of cortisol and often a deficiency of both glucocorticoids
a. Right adrenal tumors may invade or displace adjacent
and mineralocorticoids.
3. Uncommon in dogs and very rare in cats.
cava.
4. Breeds at increased risk include Great Danes, Rottweilers.
Differential diagnosis for adrenomegaly:
Portuguese Water Dogs, Standard Poodles, West Highland
White Terriers, and Wheaton Terriers
1. Enlargement or mass associated with spleen, pancreas, GI
5. Clinical signs include weakness, lethargy. bradycardia.
structure, lymph node, or kidney.
2. Other cranial intra-abdominal mass (e.g., abscess, granl-
and gastrointestinal symptoms (e.g., vomiting. diarrhea,
loma, hematoma).
inappetence).
6. Affected animals may present with electrolyte distur-
 bances (e.g., hyperkalemia, hyponatremia) and azotemia.
Hyperadrenocorticosterism
Clinical correlations:
Radiographic findings with Addison's disease:
1. Other names: Cushing's syndrome, hypercorticosterism.
1. Survey abdominal radiographs usually are normal.
2. Excessive production of endogenous corticosteroids by
2. Adrenal mineralization is rare.
adrenal cortex.
 3. Hypovolemia is common resulting in small cardiovascu-
3. Common endocrine disease in dogs, but rare in cats.
 lar structures (e.g., microcardia, small pulmonary vessels.
4. Caused by pituitary gland disorder or adrenal gland
small caudal vena cava).
tumor:
4. Megaesophagus may be present.
a. Pituitary  hypersecretion 
of
 adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH) is most common cause (80%-90% of
reported cases) and results in bilateral adrenocortical
Mineralization of adrenal glands
hyperplasia.
Clinical correlations:
b. Functional adrenal tumor (e.g., adenoma, adenocarci-
1. Idiopathic adrenal gland mineralization occurs in older
noma) is less common (l0%-20% of reported cases).
cats but is rare in dogs.
Adenocarcinomas can metastasize to liver, lymph nodes,
a. Usually an incidental finding without clinical signs.
kidney, or lungs.
b. Adrenal glands remain normal in size.
428
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
2. Adrenal tumors can mineralize:
a. Usually unilateral, but can be bilateral.
Male genital system
b. Adrenal mineralization in Cushingoid dogs most often
is due to neoplasia.
Prostate gland
Benign prostatic hypertrophy (BPH)
Radiographic findings with adrenal mineralization:
Clinical correlations:
1. Mineralization may appear punctate, amorphous, or solid.
1. Other names: prostatic cystic hyperplasia.
2. Located cranial and medial to cranial pole of one or both
2. Enlargement of prostate gland caused by androgenic
kidneys.
stimulation or an altered testosterone/estrogen ratio.
3. Soft tissue mass or mass effect may be present in area of
3. Most common cause of prostatomegaly in intact male
adrenal gland(s).
dogs older than 5 years.
a. Tumors tend to cause more severe adrenomegaly and
4. Progresses with age.
but most affected dogs are
displacement of adjacent viscera.
asymptomatic.
 4. Superimposed structure may mimic adrenal mineraliza-
5. May lead to cystic hyperplasia, development of variable
tion (e.g., GI content, nipple).
sizes and numbers of cysts in prostatic parenchyma.
6. Severe prostatic enlargement causes tenesmus and hema-
Pheochromocytoma
turia (latter may be persistent or intermittent).
7. Prostate gland usually is nonpainful on palpation and
Clinical correlations:
symmetrically enlarged.
1. Rare neuroendocrine tumor of adrenal gland.
8. Other prostatic disease may be concurrent (e.g. prostati-
2. May be unilateral or bilateral; functional, nonfunctional.
tis, abscess, neoplasia).
or episodic.
3. Characterized by excessive production of catecholamines
Radiographic findings with BPH:
(epinephrine and norepinephrine).
1. Prostate gland is symmetrically enlarged with smooth,
4. Usually benign and slow growing. but can become locally
well-defined margins:
invasive (may involve caudal vena cava, aorta, liver, or renal
a. Urinary bladder is cranially displaced (Figure 6.62).
vessels).
b. Rectum may be dorsally displaced and compressed.
5. Malignant tumors can metastasize to liver, regional
2. On VD radiograph, enlarged prostate gland is superimposed
lymph nodes, or lungs.
over pubis on midline (may be obscured by colon content).
6. In cats, tumors may develop in tissues outside adrenal
glands.
Inflammation of prostate gland (prostatitis)
 7. Affected animals usually are older (average age is ll years).
Clinical correlations:
 8. Clinical signs often are vague and intermittent and may
1. Caused by ascending urinary tract infection, hematoge-
include weakness, collapse, polyuria, polydypsia, vomiting
nous spread of bacterial infection, or neoplasia.
and diarrhea, abdominal distention, and systemic hyperten-
2. May be acute or chronic and can become suppurative.
 sion. Many tumors remain clinically inapparent.
leading to abscessation.
9. Signs associated with metastatic disease or invasion of a
3. Inflammation can extend through prostatic capsule to
large blood vessel may occur.
involve adjacent tissues.
10. Rupture of tumor may cause retroperitoneal hemorrhage.
4. Clinical signs include fever, lethargy, tenesmus, dysuria.
hematuria, and pyuria.
Radiographic findings with pheochromocytoma:
Radiographic findings with prostatitis:
1. Survey radiographs frequently are normal.
1. Variable degrees of prostatomegaly.
2. May see soft tissue mass in retroperitoneal space, imme-
2. Shape of prostate gland may be symmetrical or asym-
diately cranial to kidney.
metrical, depending on severity and duration of inflamma-
3. Most tumors are unilateral, but may be bilateral.
tion and presence of abscessation.
4. Perirenal or retroperitoneal structures may be indistinct
3. Prostatic margins often are ill-defined or may be obscured
or obscured (due to hemorrhage).
by inflammation in adjacent tissues.
5. Dystrophic mineralization of adrenal gland occasionally
4. Severe prostatomegaly suggests abscessation or neoplasia.
occurs.
5. Mineralization of prostate gland can result from chronic
inflammation but is more common with neoplasia.
Differential diagnosis for pheochromocytoma:
1. Other adrenal gland tumor.
Contrast radiography (positive contrast urethrography) :
2. Adrenal gland hyperplasia.
1. Prostatic urethra may be narrowed or dilated.
3. Idiopathic adrenal gland mineralization.
2. Reflux of contrast medium into prostatic tissue is common.
429
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
nnanuaon bupuansap pue Aeiuenn lappeig Aeuun saneldsip puele atesoid jo juawaneue (eae papeus yep) Aehaoieisoid zg'g anoi
dorsally. A. Lateral radiograph. B. Ventrodorsal radliograph. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
a. NoTE: Reflux into prostatic ducts may occur in a
teal response along ventral aspects of caudal lumbar
normal prostate gland.
vertebrae.
6. Calculi in prostatic urethra may be mistaken for prostatic
Mineralization of prostate gland
mineralization (cystic calculi often are concurrent with ure-
Clinical correlations:
thral calculiy.
1. Generally associated with neoplasia, but may result from
 7. Superimposed structures may mimic prostatic mineral-
chronic inflammation.
ization (e.g., debris on skin or hair coat).
a. Prostatic mineralization in neutered dogs most often
is due to neoplasia
Contrast radiography (positive contrast
b. Mineralization in intact dogs may be associated with
retrograde urethrography):
inflammation or other disease.
1. Any abnormalities would be associated with underlying
2. Prostatic calculi can form in prostatic ducts.
disease rather than due to mineralization.
3. Prostatic and paraprostatic cysts sometimes will calcify.
2. Urethral mucosa may be smooth or irregular.
4. Clinical signs depend on underlying etiology and dura-
 3. Filling defects within prostatic ducts may be opacified by
tion of disease.
reflux of contrast medium.
Radiographic findings with prostatic mineralization:
Neoplasia of prostate gland
1. Mineral opacities in prostate gland may be single or
Clinical correlations:
multiple.
1. Tumors of prostate gland occur in both intact and cas-
2. Neoplasia tends to create multifocal, irregular-shaped.
trated dogs but are rare in cats.
amorphous or linear mineral opacity (however, a similar
2. Metastasis may involve medial iliac nodes, lumbar spine.
pattern can occur with chronic inflammation).
 pelvis, or lung.
3. Calculi typically are spherical and located in urethra or
3. Clinical signs include tenesmus, hematuria, dysuria (with
in small, cystlike cavities in prostate gland.
thin, ribbonlike stool), tense abdomen, and lameness.
4. Mineralization of prostatic cysts tends to occur peripher-
 ally, along border of cyst.
Radiographic findings with prostatic neoplasia:
5. Prostatic neoplasia frequently metastasizes to medial iliac
1. Variable prostatomegaly which may be symmetric or
lymph nodes, creating a caudal sublumbar mass and perios-
asymmetric.
430
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
Figure 6.63 Prostatic neoplasia (lateral radiographs, negative contrast cystogram). A. Urinary bladder is moderately cistencded with gas, and multiple
 gas-filled areas are present within the prostate gland (latter is due to extension of neoplasia into the urethra). Periosteal response is present along the
 caudal lumbar vertebrae. B. Urinary bladder is mildly dlistended with gas and is cranially displaced by an enlarged, ill-defined prostate gland. Iregular and
ill-cdefined periosteal response is present along the caudal lummbar vertebrae, pelvis, and proximal femnur.
2. Prostatic margins often are indistinct due to adjacent
inflammation, abscessation, or extension of tumor through
prosta tic capsule.
 3. Prostatic mineralization frequently occurs.
4. Metastasis to medial iliac lymph nodes creates a caudal
sublumbar mass (Figure 6.63):
a. Colon may be displaced ventrally.
b. Ill-defined, palisading or smooth periosteal response
may develop along middle ventral borders of caudal
lumbar vertebrae (typically L5-7). Must be differentiated
from spondylosis, which is better-defined and occurs at
ends of vertebral bodies.
 s     s 
sacrum, and coccygeal vertebrae.
C
D
Contrast radiography (positive contrast retrograde
urethrocystography):
Figure 6.64 Appearance of prostatic urethra with various conditions
 1. Prostatic urethra may be dilated, irregular, or narrowed
(positive contrast urethrogramm). A. Norrnal urethra with srmooth mmucosal
margins. B. Normal reflux of contrast medium into prostatic ducts.
(stricture; Figure 6.64).
 2. Contrast medium may reflux into prostatic parenchyma
C. lrregular extension of contrast medium into the prostate gland due to
destruction of urethra. D. Urethral neoplasia with extension of contrast 
and into tumor.
medium into the prostate gland. (Adapted from Owens and Biery 1999.)
a. Reflux of contrast medium into prostatic ducts can
occur in a normal prostate gland.
3. Extension of tumor into urethra creates filling defects
6. Prostate gland may be enlarged (due to benign hypertro-
along urethral mucosa.
phy or inflammation).
7. Clinical signs usually are absent unless cyst becomes large
 Paraprostatic cyst
enough to compress adjacent viscera or becomes infected.
Clinical correlations:
 1. Cyst forms adjacent to prostate gland but retains a pros-
Radiographicfindings with paraprostatic cyst:
tatic attachment.
 1. Variable-sized soft tissue opacity mass in caudal aspect of
2. May be single or multiple and can become very large.
abdominal cavity.
3. Arises from prostatic tissue or from retained embryonic
2. Mass may be similar in size and shape to urinary bladder
tissue (e.g., uterus masculinus, Muellerian or mesonephric
(appears to be a duplicate bladder) (Figure 6.65).
ducts).
3. Usually mass is caudal to urinary bladder, but large
a o so si u a  sop u  
masses may extend cranial, ventral, dorsal, or lateral to
in older, intact dogs).
bladder.
 5. Usually sterile, but can become infected (abscess) or may
4. Dystrophic mineralization of cyst wall may occur, pro-
contain blood (hemocyst).
ducing a thin, peripheral rim of mineral opacity.
431
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
B
7. Possible complications associated with intra-abdominal
testicle include:
a. Neoplasia (higher incidence than with a scrotal
testicle):
1) Sertoli cell tumor (most common and frequently
causes feminization).
2) Fibroma.
3) Teratoma (may calcify).
PC
b. Torsion (rotation of spermatic cord leads to thrombo-
sis, infarction, pain, and fever).
UB
8. Signs of feminization include gynecomastia. pendulous
prepuce, atrophy of contralateral testicle, alopecia, and
hyperpigmentation of skin.
Radiographic findings with retained testicle:
1. Retained testicle often is not identified on survey radio-
 graphs unless very large.
a. Testicle must be at least twice diameter of small intes-
tine to be detected.
2. Most common locations include caudal abdominal cavity.
Figure 6.65 Paraprostatic cyst. A. Lateral radliograph: large paraprostatic
inguinal canal, and subcutaneous tissues near inguinal area.
cyst (PC) displaces urinary bladder (UB) ventrally. Cyst resemnbles urinary
3. Compression radiography may aid in detection.
bladder in size and shape. P = prostate, C = descendling colon.
 4. Neoplasia or torsion causes retained testicle to enlarge.
B. Ventrodorsal radliograph: paraprostatic cyst (dark shading with white
 a. Appears as variable sized, ill-defined soft tissue opacity
letters PC) displaces urinary bladder (U) to the right side. C. Lateral
radiograph, negative contrast cystogram: large soft tissue opacity mass
mass.
dorsal to and ventrally compressing urinary bladder. (A and B adapted 
b. Enlarged testicle tends to gravitate toward ventral
from Owens and Biery 1999.)
abdominal cavity.
Orchitis/epididymitis
Clinical correlations:
Contrast radiography (retrograde urethrocystography)
1. Inflammation of one or both testicles.
1. Aids in differentiating caudal intra-abdominal masses
2. May be caused by trauma, infection (bacterial, mycotic,
such as urinary bladder, paraprostatic cyst, and enlarged
or viral), or testicular torsion.
prostate gland.
a. Brucella canis is a zoonotic disease that must be elimi-
 nated as possible etiology.
Differential diagnosis for paraprostatic cyst:
3. Clinical signs include pain and swelling of testes, epididy.
1. Prostatomegaly.
mus, and/or scrotum.
2. Prostatic abscess.
4. Other causes of scrotal swelling include hydrocele (col-
3. Tumor.
lection of fluid in scrotum) and inguinal hernia.
4. Retained testicle.
5. Enlargement of uterus masculinus.
Radiographic finding with testicular inflammation:
1. Testicular disease is poorly evaluated with radiography.
Testidles
 2. Dystrophic mineralization of testicle can occur.
Cryptorchidism
 3. Prostatomegaly may be present.
Clinical correlations:
4. Animals with testicular infections (especially with Bru-
1. Other names: undescended testicle, retained testicle,
cella canis) may have concurrent vertebral osteomyelitis or
empty scrotum.
discospondylitis.
2. Congenital absence of one or both testicles from scrotum.
3. May be heritable (affected animals should not be bred).
Penis diseases
4. Retained testicle may be located anywhere along its
Clinical correlations:
intended path of descent, from caudal aspect of kidney to
1. Infections and neoplasms of penis are best evaluated by
scrotum.
physical examina tion.
5. Many affected animals are asymptomatic.
2. Penile tumors may arise from urethra, adjacent soft
6. Testicle may be palpable in inguinal region.
tissues, or os penis.
432
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
3. Fractures of os penis are caused by trauma (e.g., strenu-
4. Peritoneal effusion may be present, especially with carci-
ous breeding activity).
nomatosis or peritonitis.
4. Clinical signs vary with etiology, duration, and severity
of disease.
Contrast radiography (intravenous urography):
5. Affected animals may exhibit swelling. pain, dysuria.
1. Aids in locating kidneys and in differentiating some
hematuria, and stranguria.
stru ctures.
Radiographic findings with diseases of penis:
Differential diagnosis for ovarian enlargement:
1. Soft tissues in penile region are poorly evaluated with
1. Renomegaly.
radiography.
2. Lymphadenomegaly.
2. Diseases of os penis (e.g., osteomyelitis, fracture, neopla-
3. Intestinal mass.
sia) often are easiest to see on lateral radiograph and may
4. Splenic mass.
include osteolytic or osteoproductive lesions.
3. Fractures of os penis must be differentiated from urethral
 Uterine enlargement 
calculi and accessory centers of ossification.
Gravid uterus
Clinical correlations:
Contrast radiography (urethrography):
 1. In early pregnancy, abdominal palpation and ultrasonog-
 1. Used to evaluate urethral integrity.
raphy are more sensitive than radiography for confirming
2. May see filling defects caused by urethritis, thrombi,
Uterine enlargement.
calculi, neoplasia, or compression from adjacent swelling or
hematoma.
Radiographic findings with gravid uterus:
1. Normal uterus usually is not visible before 25 to 30 days
Female genital system
gestation.
2. At 30 to 40 days. gravid uterus appears segmented with
Ovary enlargement
symmetrical, spherical, soft tissue opacity enlargements
Clinical correlations:
(uterine horns are not parallel).
 3. After 40 days, appearance of uterus is more uniforrm and
1. Ovaries are not visible on radiographs unless enlarged or
mineralized.
smoothly tubular.
a. Ovarian enlargement may be caused by:
4. Enlarged uterus displaces small intestine craniodorsally
1) Cyst.
and colon dorsally.
 5. Uterus may compress or be superimposed over urinary
2) Abscess.
3) Neoplasia:
bladder.
a) Granulosa cell tumor.
6. Fetal skeletons begin to ossify at approximately 42 to 45
days in dogs and 35 to 39 days in cats (Figure 6.66).
b) Adenocarcinoma.
c) Teratoma (may mineralize or contain enamel).
7. Number of fetuses can be determined by counting fetal
 2. Many ovarian tumors are malignant and can metastasize
skulls or spines.
to regional lymph nodes.
3. An intra-abdominal mass may be palpable.
Radiographic findings with ovarian enlargement:
 1. Enlargement less than twice diameter of small bowel may
not be evident.
2. Ovaries are peritoneal (not retroperitoneal) and when
very large, may move with gravity to ventral abdominal
cavity, sometimes pulling kidney on same side.
3. Large ovarian masses that remain caudal to kidney may
displace adjacent viscera:
a. Kidney on same side is displaced cranially and some-
times laterally.
b. Small bowel is displaced ventrally.
c. Duodenum may be displaced toward midline by a
right ovarian mass.
d. Descending colon may displaced toward midline by a
left ovarian mass.
Figure 6.66 Normal canine terrn pregnancy (lateral radiograph)
433
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
a. On film radiographs, circle each skull with a wax pencil
3. Fetal factors leading to dystocia include:
and mark it with a number.
a. Oversized fetus (common with one or a few fetuses).
b. On digital images use computer annotation to mark each
b. Abnormal fetal presentation (e.g., head or limb bent
skull.
backwards}.
8. Fetuses should be similar in size and degree of ossification
c. Fetal developmental anomalies.
(see chapter 4. Table 4.2 for ossification times prior to
d. Death of fetus.
parturition).
4. Clinical signs include prolonged parturition, depression,
9. Normal fetal position is neutral, partially flexed or C
 abdominal pain, and hemorrhagic vaginal discharge.
shaped with the mandible resting on the
 sternum and all
limbs in flexion (a comfortable position).
Radiographic findings with dystocia and fetal death:
10. Mineralization of fetal digits occurs shortly before
1. Survey radiographs aid in evaluating number, position,
parturition.
shape, and age of fetuses and in detecting pelvic canal defor-
mities, strictures, and masses.
DYSTOCIA AND FETAL DEATH
2. Fetal size is evaluated for ability to pass through pelvic
Clinical correlations:
canal.
1. Dystocia is abnormal or difficult birthing and may result
3. If no fetus is positioned at pelvic canal, uterine inertia
in fetal death.
may be present.
2. Maternal factors leading to dystocia include:
 4. Findings associated with fetal death may require at least
a. Primary
uterine
inertia
(failure
of
uterine
24 hours to develop:
con tra ctions).
a. "Uncomfortable” position of fetus: straightening
b. Secondary uterine inertia (uterine contractions stop
(hyperextension) of body with abnormal angulation of 
before birthing is complete).
spine and extension of limbs (Figure 6.67A, B).
c. Uterine torsion.
 b. Gas within uterus or in any part of fetus (Figure 6.67C,
d. Hernia containing uterus.
Dy.
e. Vaginal or pelvic mass resulting in obstruction.
c. Overlapping of bones of fetal skull (usually frontal and
f. Narrowed pelvic canal (e.g.. healed pelvic fracture,
parietal bones).
juvenile pubic symphysodesis).
d. Lysis of fetal skeleton.
Figure 6.67 Fetal death. A and B. Lateral and ventrodorsal radliographs: "uncomfortable" position of fetus with straightening (hyperextension) of body
(short white arrows) with abnormal angulation of spine and extension of limbs (black arrows). C and D. Gas is present in fetuses (long white arrows)
434
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
5. Fetal mummification: small, abnormally shaped fetus
4. Splenic mass.
with contraction of the skeleton.
5. Mass associated with intestine, mesentery. lymph node
6. Ectopic pregnancy: prominent, tightly curled fetal skel-
(e.g., abscess, granuloma, cyst).
eton that is not associated with a tubular uterus.
Uterine masses
Differential diagnosis for fetal death:
Clinical correlations:
1. Small skeleton in GI tract (ingestion of fetus or small animal) 
1. Masses associated with uterus may or may not be patho-
logical (see Differential Diagnoses section, this chapter).
Non-gravid uterine enlargement
2. An intra-abdominal mass may be palpable (transabdomi-
Clinical correlations:
nally or rectallyy.
1. Pyometra is a purulent uterine infection.
3. Clinical signs depend on underlying etiology.
a. Affected animals commonly present with clinical signs
4. Uterine stump and cervical masses may compress urinary
4 to l0 weeks after estrus.
bladder and cause urinary incontinence or dysuria.
b. Clinical signs may include polydypsia, polyuria, fever.
anorexia, and dehydration.
Radiographic findings with uterine mass:
c. Vaginal discharge may or may not be present (depend-
1. Soft tissue opacity mass in caudal or middle aspect of
ing on whether cervix is open or closed).
abdominal cavity (see chapter 1, Figure 1.79).
2. Cystic endometrial hyperplasia is characterized by thick-
2. Uterine enlargement should be greater than two times
ening of endometrium and increased mucus within uterine
diameter of adjacent small bowel to be reliably detected.
3. Adjacent intestine is variably displaced, depending on
lumen.
a. Caused by an inappropriate uterine response to
size of uterine mass.
progesterone.
4. Descending colon and urinary bladder may be separated
b. Commonly associated with aging.
by tubular soft tissue opacity (compression radiography
c. Can lead to hydrometra, mucometra, and/or pyometra.
 often aids in visualizing uterus).
1) Hydrometra is serous fluid within uterus.
5. Uterine stump mass creates a soft tissue opacity between
2) Mucometra is mucinous fluid in uterus.
rectum and neck of urinary bladder (lateral radiograph).
3. Other possible etiologies of uterine enlargement 
6. Mass commonly compresses bladder ventrally and dis-
are
included in Differential Diagnoses section, this chapter.
places colon /rectum dorsally.
7. Severe compression at bladder neck can obstruct outflow.
Radiographic findings with uterine enlargement:
resulting in a largely distended urinary bladder and eventual
1. Uterus is greater than l.5cm in width (width should be
hydronephrosis.
 at least twice that of small intestine to be reliably detected).
2. Lateral radiograph findings with uterine enlargement:
Contrast radiography:
a. Tubular, often convoluted, soft tissue opacity structure
 1. Urethrocystography localizes urinary bladder and urethra
in caudoventral aspect of abdominal cavity (see chapter
and documents compression.
1, Figure 1.79}
2. Vaginography aids in determining location of vagina in
b. Small intestine is cranially and dorsally displaced.
relation to mass.
c. Descending colon and urinary bladder are separated.
3. Pneumocolon or barium enema localizes colon/rectum
d. Bladder may be ventrally compressed or laterally
and documents compression.
displa ced.
Differential diagnosis for uterine mass:
3. VD radiograph findings with uterine enlargement:
1. Bowel mass.
a. Soft tissue opacity structures in caudolateral aspects of
2. Mesenteric mass.
abdominal cavity. left of descending colon and right of
3. Splenic mass.
small intestine.
b. Small intestine is displaced toward midabdomen
Vaginal diseases
C. An enlarged uterine horn may be mistaken for a kidney.
Clinical correlations:
4. Gas in uterus (physometra) is caused by uterine infection
1. Diseases of vagina are better evaluated by clinical inspec-
with gas-forming bacteria.
tion and endoscopy than with radiography.
5. Gentle use of compression radiography may aid in visual-
2. Clinical signs depend on type and severity of disease.
izing uterus (see chapter 2, Figure 2.48).
Radiographic findings with vaginal diseases:
Differential diagnosis for uterine enlargement:
1. Survey radiographs may be normal.
1. Pregnancy.
2. Mass in vagina may displace rectum dorsally.
2. Fluid-filled segments of small intestine.
3. Urinary bladder may be large if vaginal lesion signifi-
3. Uterine mass.
cantly compresses urethra.
435
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
Contrast radiography (vaginography):
3) Pheochromocytoma.
1. Aid in determining location, size, and assessing margins
4) Myelolipoma.
of vagina.
5) Aldosteronoma.
2. Mural filling defects may result from mass lesion(s).
b. Hyperplasia.
3. Contrast medium projecting away from vagina or filling
2. Mineralization:
rectum may indicate a fistula.
a. Neoplasia:
1) Carcinoma.
Hermaphroditism
2) Adenoma.
Clinical correlations:
b. Idiopathic (older cats, asymptomatic) .
1. Other names: intersex.
2. Characterized by discrepancies between external and
Lymph node enlargement
internal genitalia.
1. Lymphoma.
3. True hermaphrodites (25% of intersex cases) have both
2. Metastatic neoplasia:
ovaries and testicles.
a. Tumors in pelvic region commonly spread to medial
4. Pseudohermaphrodites (75% of cases) are either male or
iliac lymph nodes:
female but have external genitalia that resemble the oppo-
1) Rectal or perianal carcinoma.
site gender:
2) Prostatic or urinary bladder carcinoma.
a. Male
pseudohermaphrodites have normal testes
3) Urethra, cervical, or testicular neoplasms.
(either in scrotum or undescended). no ovaries, and
4) Tumors originating from caudoventral abdominal
external genitalia that resemble a female.
wall or rear legs.
b. Female pseudohermaphrodites have normal ovaries.
3. Severe infection (e.g., enteritis, peritonitis).
no testes, and external genitalia resembling that of a male.
a. Medial iliac lymphadenomegaly may result from
5. Hermaphroditism can affect any breed of dog or cat.
pelvic, caudal abdominal, or perianal infections.
6. May be heritable (Miniature Schnauzers, Poodles, and
4. Conditions that may mimic caudal sublumbar lymph
Pekingese may be predisposedy.
node enlargement:
7. Affected animals usually are infertile.
a. Obesity (excessive retroperitoneal fat displaces colon
8. Most common anomaly is female pseudohermaphroditism:
ventrally).
a. External genitalia ranges from an enlarged clitoris to
 b. Superimposition of rear leg musculature.
a normal-appearing penis.
b. May or may not have a prostate gland.
Intra-abdominal mass effect
c. Uterus masculinus commonly is present (which may
Lateral view of abdomen
become cystic, infected, or fluid filled).
1. Craniodorsal intra-abdominal mass effect (Figure 6.68.
region A}:
Radiographic findings with hermaphroditism:
a. Liver.
1. Female pseudohermaphrodites often lack an os penis
b. Stomach (fundus).
bone but may have an os clitoris.
C. Spleen (head of spleen).
2. Disease of uterus masculinus creates a variably sized.
fluid-filled mass in caudal abdominal cavity.
Contrast radiography (urethrocystography):
1. Aids in localizing urethra and urinary bladder.
2. Occasionally a fluid-filled uterus masculinus will com-
municate with urethra and fill with contrast medium during
a retrograde urethrogram.
C
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
F
B
Abdominal cavity
Q
Adrenal glands
1. Enlargement (adrenomegaly):
a. Neoplasia:
 Figure 6.68 Lateral view of abdomen divided into regions A through F
1) Adenoma.
 Possible origins for an intra-abdominal mass effect in each of these
2) Adenocarcinoma.
regions is described in the text.
436
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
2. Cranioventral intra-abdominal mass effect (Figure 6.68.
region B}:
a. Liver.
b. Gall bladder and bile duct.
B
C. Stomach (body, pylorus).
d. Pancreas.
e. Duodenum.
f. Transverse colon.
C
D
g. Lymph nodes.
h. Fluid-filled gastric pylorus may mimic a round cranio-
ventral mass (especially on right lateral radiograph; on
left lateral radiograph pylorus filled with gastric gas).
E
3. Dorsal middle intra-abdominal mass effect (Figure 6.68,
region C):
a. Kidney.
b. Ureter.
C. Adrenal gland.
d. Ovary.
Figure 6.69 Ventrodorsal view of abdomen divided into region5 A
e. Retroperitoneal mass.
jo ypea ui ioaya ssewu jeuiwopge-eui ue jot suibio alqissod '3 yonouy
 intra-abdominal
mass effect (Figure 6.68,
 these regions is described in the text.
4. Middle
region D):
a. May be difficult to distinguish due to summation of
adjacent structures.
b. Spleen.
C. Pancreas.
f. Lymph node.
d. Left kidney.
g. Transverse colon.
e. Ovaries.
2. Left cranial intra-abdominal mass effect (Figure 6.69,
f. Small intestine.
region B):
g. Large intestine.
a. Liver.
h. Uterus.
b. Stomach (fundus).
i. Omentum and mesentery.
c. Spleen (head of spleen).
j. Lymph nodes (e.g., mesenteric, colic, renal).
d. Pancreas.
k. Retained testicle.
e. Transverse colon.
5. Caudodorsal intra-abdominal mass effect (Figure 6.68.
3. Right middle intra-abdominal mass effect (Figure 6.69.
region E}:
region C):
a. Lymph node.
a. Right kidney.
b. Retroperitoneal mass.
b. Right adrenal gland.
c. Distal ureter.
c. Right ovary.
d. Terminal colon and rectum.
d. Duodenum.
6. Caudoventral intra-abdominal mass effect (Figure 6.68.
e. Ascending colon.
region F):
f. Small intestine.
a. Urinary bladder.
g. Lymph node.
b. Prostate gland.
h. Mesentery.
c. Retained testicle.
i. Spleen.
d. Uterus.
4. Left middle intra-abdominal mass effect (Figure 6.69,
region D):
Ventrodorsal view of abdomen
a. Left kidney.
1. Right cranial intra-abdominal mass effect (Figure 6.69,
b. Left adrenal gland.
region A):
c. Left ovary.
a. Liver.
d. Spleen.
b. Gallbladder.
e. Descending colon.
c. Stomach (pylorus).
f. Small intestine.
d. Pancreas.
g. Lymph node.
e. Duodenum.
h. Mesentery.
437
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
5. Caudal intra-abdominal mass effect (Figure 6.69, region
3) Immature animal.
E):
4) Emaciation/cachexia (abdomen usually is tucked).
a. Urinary bladder.
5) Obesity (excess scatter radiation produces fog on
b. Colon.
radiograph).
c. Uterus.
6) Superimposition of adjacent opacity (e.g., wet or
d. Prostate.
dirty hair coat, blanket).
e. Lymph node.
2. Local increase in peritoneal opacity (with indistinct
serosal margins):
Peritoneal space
a. Trauma (e.g., bleeding, inflammation).
Opacity abnormalities of peritoneal space
b. Bowel perforation walled off by mesentery.
1. General increase in peritoneal opacity (with indistinct or
c. Pancreatitis (right cranial abdominal quadrant).
obscured serosal margins):
d. Neoplasia.
a. Free fluid (abdomen usually distended):
e. Abscess.
1) Blood (e.g., trauma, neoplasia, coagulopathy).
f. Mesenteric lymphadenopathy.
2) Urine (ruptured kidney, ureter, or urinary bladder).
g. Prostatitis.
3) Bile (ruptured gall bladder).
h. Foreign material (e.g. retained surgical sponge).
4) Ruptured/perforated GI structure (e.g., ulceration,
i.
 Conditions that may mimic local increase in peritoneal
obstruction, tumor).
opacity:
5) Peritoneal effusion:
1) Superimposed extra-abdominal mass or debris.
a) Transudate: clear fluid with low protein and
2) Visceral
crowding
(summation
of
 adjacent
low cell count.
structures}.
b) Modified transudate: cloudy fluid with moder-
 3. Mineral or metal opacity in peritoneal space:
ate protein and cell count.
a. GI content:
c) Exudate: turbid fluid with high protein and
1) Food stuffs.
high cell count.
2) Bone fragment.
d)  Right heart failure (modified transudate).
3) Oral medications (e.g., bismuth compounds, ampi-
 Hypoproteinemia (transudate):
cillin, amoxicillin, sulfa drugs).
i.Liver disease.
4) Foreign material.
ii. Kidney disease (protein-losing nephropathy).
b. Prior surgery (e.g., metal sutures, suture granuloma).
ili. Intestinal disease (protein-losing enteropathy).
c. Pregnancy (e.g., fetal ossification, ectopic fetus).
f)
 Neoplasia (modified transudate or exudate).
d. Nodular fat necrosis (Bate's body): well-defined,
g）
 Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP).
smooth-bordered, rounded, cystlike structure with less
h)
 Pancreatitis (modifed transudate or exudate).
opaque center. May be positioned anywhere in abdomi-
i)
Steatitis (modified transudate or exudate).
  u  no a no    l
j）
 Portal hypertension (modified transudate)-
serial radiographs. Typically results from previous episode
k) Venous obstruction (caudal vena cava, hepatic
of inflarmmation (e.g., pancreatitis).
veiny.
e. Contrast medium (contained in viscera or leaked into
Chylous effusion due to lymphatic obstruction
abdominal cavity).
(modified transudate or exudate).
f. Foreign material (e.g., metal projectiles).
m) Torsion of liver lobe or spleen (modified tran-
g. Calculi:
sudate or exudate).
1) Uroliths (cystic, renal, ureteral).
n)  Intra-abdominal foreign material or walled-off
2) Choleliths (intrahepatic or extrahepatic).
abscess (modified transudate).
3) Enteroliths (intestinal tract).
6) Iatrogenic (e.g., peritoneal lavage, dialysis).
h. Dystrophic calcification:
b. Inflammation (peritonitis):
1) Neoplasia.
1) Pancreatitis
 2) Chronic inflammation:
2) Recent surgery.
3) Chronic hematoma or abscess (e.g., kidney, liver,
3) Steatitis (especially cats).
spleen).
C. Carcinomatosis (disseminated neoplasia).
4) Hyperpa rathyroidism.
d. Conditions that may mimic increased peritoneal
5) Hypercorticosterism.
opacity:
6) Uremia (e.g.. gastric wall mineralization).
1) Underexposed radiograph.
7) Toxin (e.g., cholecalciferol).
2) Low radiographic contrast (e.g., kVp too high.
8) Hypervitaminosis D.
excess scatter radiation).
9) Mesenteric or omental cyst (cat).
438
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
i. Granuloma:
7) Gas in intestinal wall (pneumatosis coli/intestinalis
1) Parasitic (e.g., Toxocara).
or emphysematous bowel).
2) Mycotic infection (e.g., histoplasmosis).
8) Gas in uterus (e.g.. fetal death, physometra/
j. Vascular calcification (may involve iliac, celiac, or
emphysematous metritis).
mesenteric artery or aorta):
C. Intra-abdorminal abscess (e.g., spleen, liver, mesentery).
1) Idiopathic.
d. Excessive intra-abdominal fat (obesity).
2) Atherosclerosis.
e. Intra-abdominal lipoma.
3) Hyperparathyroidism (e.g., renal disease).
4) Thyroid disease.
Peritoneal hernia
k. Benign osseous metaplasia (reported in liver, kidney.
5. Congenital anomaly:
pancreas, and mesentery).
a. Umbilical hernia.
1. Neoplastic bone formation (e.g., extraskeletal osteo-
b. Inguinal (or femoral) hernia.
sarcoma, teratoma).
c. Peritoneal-pericardial diaphra gmatic hernia.
m.Conditions that may mimic peritoneal mineral or
d. Scrotal hernia.
metal opacity (superimposed structures often are identi-
6. Trauma (acquired hernia):
fied on orthogonal radiography:
a. Diaphragmatic hernia.
1) Dirty hair coat.
b. Ventral or lateral abdominal wall hernia.
2) Mineralized skin lesion (e.g.. calcinosis cutis.
c. Mesenteric hernia.
mammary tumor).
3) Prepuce, os penis (VD radiograph).
Retroperitoneal space
4) Topical medication or contrast medium.
Enlargement (swelling) of retroperitoneal space
5) Subcutaneous projectile (e.g., BB, pellet, shotgun
1. Excessive fat (visualization of kidneys, blood vessels,
pellets).
lreters, and sublumbar musculature is normal or enhanced).
6) Subcutaneous microchip.
a. Obesity.
7) Skin sutures.
b. Lipoma.
4. Decreased opacity in peritoneal space:
 2. Fluid accumulation (indistinct or obscured serosal margins):
a. Pneumoperitoneum:
a. Hemorrhage (e.g., trauma, neoplasia, coagulopathy).
1) Penetrating wound (e.g.. bite wound, gunshot,
b. Urine leakage (e.g., trauma, obstruction, tumor).
motor vehicle accident).
3. Renomegaly:
- saa e o z isad A sea) Aains sa (z
a. Mass (e.g., tumor, abscess, cyst).
lowing laparotomy) .
b. Obstruction (hydronephrosis).
3) Ruptured bowel or stomach (e.g., perforated ulcer.
c. Infiltrative disease (e.g., lymphoma, amyloidosis).
foreign material, abnormal distention,
 penetrating
d. Perirenal cyst.
wound).
4. Adrenomegaly:
4) Ruptured
urinary
bladder
following
a. Tumor
(e.g-.
adenocarcinoma,
adenoma,
 pneumocystogram.
pheochromocytoma ).
5) Abdominocentesis (usually only a small amount of
 b. Adrenal hyperplasia.
air).
5. Lymphadenopathy:
6) Leakage around an abdominal drain or feeding tube.
a. Lymphoma.
7) Infection with gas-producing organism.
b. Prostatic or urinary bladder carcinoma.
8) Following peritoneal dialysis.
c. Rectal or perianal tumor.
 9) Pneumoperitoneogram.
d. Neoplasia involving pelvic canal, pelvic bones, rear
b. Excess gas accumulation within abdominal organs:
legs, or tail. (e.g., lymphoma, prostatic carcinoma).
1) Severe aerophagia.
6. Abscess.
2) Intestinal ileus.
7. Neoplasia (e.g., hemangiosarcoma).
3) Gastric dilatation and volvulus.
 8. Inflammation (concurrent loss of definition):
4) Gastric bloat.
a. Migrating foreign object.
5) Emphysematous cholecystitis.
b. Penetrating wound.
6) Gas in urinary bladder:
c. Complication
from
previous
surgery
(e.g..
a) Recent catheterization
or negative contrast
ovariohysterectomy).
procedure.
b) Emphysematous cystitis due to infection with
Opacity abnormalities of retroperitoneal space
gas-producing bacteria (usually with diabetes
1. Increased opacity in retroperitoneal space (with indistinct 
mellitus) .
or obscured serosal margins):
439
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
a. Fluid accumulation:
f. Gastric dilation (e.g., bloat, GDV).
1) Hemorrhage (e.g., trauma, neoplasia, coagulopathy)-
 g. Small intestine obstruction.
2) Urine leakage (e.g., trauma, obstruction, tumor).
h. Severe constipation.
b. Inflammation.
i. Urinary bladder outflow obstruction.
c. Neoplasia.
j. Enlarged uterus (e.g..
 pyometra,
hydrometra,
d. Spinal disease:
pregnancy).
1) Trauma (hemorrhage or inflammation in ventral
k. Intra-abdominal lipoma.
tissues).
2. Inward displacement of abdominal wall (tucked abdomen.
2) Inflammation/infection.
concave ventral abdominal wall ):
3) Neoplasia.
a. Emaciation/cachexia.
e. Conditions that may mimic increased retroperitoneal
b. Absent or displaced intra-abdominal contents (e.g.
opacity:
diaphragm hernia, peritoneopericardial hernia).
1) Underexposed radiograph.
,    n n  
2) Wet or dirry hair coat.
abdomen.
3) Emaciation.
d. Severe dyspnea.
4) Immature animal.
e. Defect in the body wall (congenital or acquired).
2. Gas in retroperitoneal space (pneumoretroperitoneum):
3. Mass associated with abdominal wall:
a. Extension of pneumomediastinum.
a. Umbilical hernia.
b. Penetrating wound.
b. Inguinal hernia.
c. Infection with gas-producing organism (e.g., sublum-
c. Trauma (rupture of body wall).
bar abscess).
d. Surgical dehiscence.
d. Conditions that may mimic pneumoretroperitoneum:
e. Abscess.
1) Superimposed opacity (e.g., intestinal air, subcuta-
f. Hematoma.
neous emphysema).
g. Granuloma.
2) Excessive fat.
h. Neoplasia.
3. Mineralization in retroperitoneal space:
i. Lipoma (fat opacity).
a. Renal or ureteral calculi.
4. Increased opacity of abdominal wall (with or without
b. Renal infarct, tumor, or abscess.
thickening):
c. Chronic hematoma.
a. Edema (e.g., trauma).
d. Age-related adrenal gland mineralization (cats) .
b. Hemorrhage (e.g. trauma, coagulopathy).
e. Mineralized adrenal tumor (especially dogs).
c. Cellulitis.
f. Lumbar vertebral periosteal response.
d. Neoplasia.
 g. Conditions that may mimic mineralization in retro-
e. Calcinosis cutis (nodular or linear mineral opacities,
peritoneal space:
usually dorsal in location).
1) Superimposed structure (e.g., GI content, extra-
f. Metallic object (e.g. projectile, microchip, sutures.
abdominal structure).
staples).
 2) End-on visualization of deep circumflex iliac artery.
g. Healed laparotomy.
h. Subcutaneous injection or fluid administration.
i.
 Conditions that may mimic increased abdominal wall
opacity:
Abdominal wall
1) Wet or dirty hair coat.
2) Topical medication.
1. Outward displacement of abdominal wall (abdominal
3) Microchip.
distention, convex ventral abdominal wall)}:
5. Decreased opacity of abdominal wall:
a. Obesity.
a. Fat (e.g.. lipoma, obesity).
b. Decreased muscle tone:
b. Emphysema:
1) Hypercorticosterism.
1) Penetrating wound (e.g.. laceration, abrasion,
 2) Immature animal.
recent surgery).
 3) Old age (decreased muscle tone).
2) Migration of subcutaneous air.
C. Peritoneal effusion (e.g., ascites, hemoabdomen).
3) Infection with gas-producing organism.
d. Organomegaly (e.g. hepatomegaly, splenomegaly).
c. Hernia with displaced gas-filled bowel (tubular or
e. Intra-abdominal mass (e.g., tumor, abscess, gran-
round pockets of gas).
loma, cyst).
d. Dissecting pneumomedia stin um.
440
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
1) Hypotonia.
Gastrointestinal tract
2) Pyloric dysfunction.
i. Inability to eructate due to dysfunction of gastro-
Stomach
esophageal sphincter.
Size abnormalities of stomach
j. Pyloric obstruction (e.g. foreign object, stenosis,
1. Abnormal distention of stomach:
tumor).
a. Gastric outflow problem (food is retained longer than
k. Laxity in supporting ligaments (hepatoduodenal or
12 hours}:
 gastrohepatic li gaments).
1) Foreign object (in stomach or duodenum) .
1.
 Genetic predisposition.
2) Gastric dilatation and volvulus (GDV; see contribut-
3. Diffuse thickening of stomach wall (may represent
ing factors ahead).
edema, hemorrhage, hypertrophy, or infiltrative disease):
3) Neoplasia (e.g., benign or malignant tumor, polyp).
a. Persistent vomiting.
4) Severe inflammation/infection (e.g.. pancreatitis,
b. Chronic inflammation.
parvovirus).
c. Eosinophilic gastritis.
5) Chronic inflammation:
d. Neoplasia (e.g., lymphoma, pancreatic tumor).
a) Immune-mediated disease.
e. Hyperplastic gastropathy.
b) Hypertrophic gastritis (usually
small-breed
4. Focal thickening of gastric wall:
'(ssop
a. Stomach wall contraction (transient finding: usually
c) Excessive gastrin secretion.
seen with an empty stomach).
6) Pylorospa sm.
b. Neoplasia
(e.g..
adenocarcinoma.
lymphoma
7) Stenosis (e.g., trauma of foreign material, previous
leiomyosarcoma).
surgery).
C. Granulomatous disease.
8) Pyloric muscular or mucosal hypertrophy.
d. Eosinophilic gastritis.
9) Hypertrophic gastritis.
e. Mycotic infection (e.g., phycomycosis).
10) Fibrosis (e.g., scar tissue in pylorus).
f. Focal hyperplastic gastropathy.
1l) Ulceration.
g. Pyloric muscular or mucosal hypertrophy.
12) Granuloma.
b. Gastric dilatation and volvulus.
Opacity abnormalities of stomach
c. Gluttony bloat.
1. Mineralization of stomach wall:
d. Drugs (e.g., anticholinergics, sedatives).
a. Chronic inflammation (dystrophic mineraliza tion).
e. Severe aerophagia:
b. Neoplasia.
1) Dyspnea.
c. Chronic renal failure (thin, linear mineralization).
2) Pain.
d. Toxicity (e.g., cholecalciferol).
3) Stress.
e. Conditions
that
may
mimic
gastric
wall
4) Struggling.
mineralization:
5) Esophageal disease.
1) Superimposed structure (e.g., wet or dirty hair
6) Passage of an orogastric tube.
coat, hepatobiliary mineralization) .
 7) Erroneous placement of endotracheal tube (tube in
2) Foreign object in stomach lumen (especially linear
esophagus}
structures}.
2. Gastric dilatation and volvulus (GDV: contributing
2. Gas in stomach wall:
factors):
a. Gastric ulcer.
a. Severe vomiting.
b. Trauma with partial perforation of stomach wall.
b. Trauma.
c. GDV and necrosis of wall.
c. Type of diet and frequency of feeding:
d. Secondary to pancreatitis.
1) Excessive ingestion of food and/or water.
e. Conditions that may mimic gastric wall emphysema:
 2) Bacterial fermentation of carbohydrates (e.g. peas.
1) Obese cats with fat in gastric wall.
beans).
d. Severe aerophagia (e.g., pain, hyperventilation, severe 
Position abnormalities of stomach
dyspnea).
1. Nonvisualization of stomach:
e. Stressed, excitable, or fearful animal.
a. Empty stomach
f. Gas anesthesia.
vomiting).
g. Recent abdominal surgery.
b. Insufficient intra-abdominal fat for contrast (e.g..
h. Abnormal gastric motility (delayed gastric emptying):
immature animal, emaciation).
441
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
c. Peritoneal
inflammation
(e.g..
pancreatitis,
C. Aspirin.
peritonitis).
d. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS).
d. Peritoneal effusion/ascites.
6. Altered gastric blood flow:
2. Caudal displacement of stomach:
a. Hypotension or shock.
a. Liver enlargement (most common).
b. Sepsis.
b. Expanded thoracic cavity (results in caudal displace-
C. Thromboembolism.
ment of diaphragm):
7. Metabolic disease:
1) Pneumothorax.
a. Renal failure.
2) Severe pleural effusion.
b. Liver disease.
3) Hyperinflated lungs.
8. Neoplasia.
3. Cranial displacement of stomach:
a. Adenocarcinoma.
a. Decreased liver size (e.g., cirrhosis, portosystemic shunt).
b. Lymphosarcoma.
b. Hernia:
c. Systemic mast cell tumor (mastocytosis).
1) Diaphragmatic hernia.
9. Infection (e.g., helicobacter).
2) Peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia.
3) Hiatal hernia.
Transit time abnormalities related to stomach
C. Gastroesophageal intussusception.
1. Rapid gastric emptying (subjective assessment):
d. Large caudal intra-abdominal mass (e.g., mesenteric
a.
 Usually without clinical significance.
mass, colon mass).
e. Advanced pregnancy.
b. May occur with inflammation (gastritis).
2. Delayed gastric emptying (more than 4 hours):
4. Right lateral displacement of stomach:
 Insufficient gastric content to stimulate emptying
a. Splenic enlargement.
(too little contrast medium).
b. Enlargement of left liver lobes.
b.
 Solids and dry foods empty more slowly than liquids
c. Gastric mass.
(up to 12 hours in normal dogs).
5. Left lateral displacement of stomach:
C.
Drugs (e.g., atropine, isoproterenol, narcotics, seda-
a. Enlargement of right liver lobes.
tives, anesthetic agents).
 b. Pancreatic enlargerment/mass.
d.
Nervous inhibition (e.g., stress, fear, pain, rage).
c. Gastric mass.
e.
Obstruction (pyloric or small intestinal).
f.
Ulceration (gastric or duodenal).
Neoplasia stomach
g.
 Inflammation (e.g, pancreatitis, gastritis, peritonitis).
1. Benign stomach tumors:
h.
 Infection (e.g., parvovirus, panleukopenia).
a. Polyps
(pedunculated
nodules
of
mucosal
1.
Recent gastric surgery (e.g.. gastropexy).
proliferation).
j.
Gluttony bloat.
b. Leiomyoma (tumor of smooth muscle).
k.
Gastric dilatation and volvulus (GDV).
c. Adenoma (glandular tumor, may become malignant
1.
Gastric neoplasia.
over time).
m. Electrolyte disturbances (e.g.. hypokalemia).
2. Malignant gastric tumors:
n.
Uremia.
a. Adenocarcinoma (most common malignant tumor in
0.
Hypothyroidism.
dogs).
p.
 Hepatic encephalopathy.
 b. Lymphoma (most common malignant tumor in cats).
q-
 Dysa utonomia.
c. Leiomyosarcoma.
r.
 Idiopathic primary gastric motility disorder (defect in
d. Fibrosarcoma.
myoelectric activity).
e. Other tumors may metastasize to the stomach (e.g..
pancreatic carcinoma).
Small intestine
Ulcers of stomach
Size abnormalities of small intestine
1. Inflammation (acute or chronic gastritis).
1. Abnormal dilation of small intestine (with fluid, gas, or
2. Mechanical trauma (foreign object).
ingesta):
3. Ingestion of irritating chemicals (e.g., cleaning agents.
a. Obstructive (mechanical) ileus:
 petroleum products).
1) Foreign object ingestion (e.g., corn cob, fruit pit,
4. Chronic stress.
string).
5.Drugs:
2) Mural mass:
a. Corticosteroids.
a) Abscess.
b. Phenylbutazone.
b) Granuloma.
442
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
c) Hematoma.
10) Drugs (e.g., atropine, narcotics, other parasympa-
d) Polyp.
tholytic agents).
e) Malignant tumor:
1l) Neurologic injury (e.g., spinal cord trauma).
(i)
Adenocarcinoma (most common in dogs).
12) Electrolyte imbalance (e.g., hypokalemia).
(ii)
Lymphoma (most common in cats).
13) Dysfunction of  autonomic 
 nervous
 system
(ii) Leiomyosarcoma.
(dysautonomia).
(iv)  Mastocytoma.
c. Conditions that may mimic abnormal small bowel
(v)
Osteosarcoma (uncommon).
dilation:
(vi)  Fibrosarcoma (uncommon).
1) Colon mistaken for small bowel.
(vii) Hemangiosarcoma (uncommon).
2) Summation artifact (e.g., adjacent bowel loops, spleen).
f) Benign tumors:
2. Thickened small intestinal wall (cannot be reliably
(i)
Leiomyoma.
assessed on survey radiographs):
(ii) Adenomatous polyps (most often reported
a. Inflammatory bowel disease.
in duodenum of cats, especially Asian breeds).
b. Neoplasia (e.g., lymphoma, adenocarcinoma).
3) Intussusception:
C. Severe enteritis.
a) Parasites
(e.g-
hookworms,
whipworms,
d. Mycotic infection (e.g, phycomycosis).
roundworms).
e. Lymphangiectasia.
b) Infection:
f. Conditions that may mimic thickened bowel:
(i)
Bacterial (e.g., salmonella).
1) Summation artifact (intraluminal fluid obscures
(i) Viral (e.g. parvovirus, canine distemper).
mucosal margin).
(ii) Protozoal (e.g., giardiasis).
c) Foreign bodies (e.g., bones, plastic, rubber).
Opacity abnormalities of small intestine
d) Sudden dietary changes.
1. Loss of visualization of small intestine serosal margins:
e) Intestinal mass (e.g., tumor, polyp).
a. Underexposed radiographs.
f) Recent intestinal surgery.
b. Immature animal.
g) Hypermotile gut.
c. Emaciation (abdomen is tucked).
h) Idiopa thic.
d. Peritoneal effusion (abdomen is distended).
4) Extraluminal mass compressing intestine.
e. Inflammation (peritonitis).
5) Scar tissue/adhesion/stricture.
f. Carcinomatosis.
6) Constipation.
2. Enhanced visualization of small intestine serosal margins:
7) Enterolith.
a. Pneumoperitoneum:
8) Parasites.
1) Recent laparotomy.
9) Internal or external hernia (e.g., mesenteric, dia-
2) Penetrating abdominal wound.
phragm, body wall).
3) Ruptured hollow viscus.
10) Volvulus of small bowel.
4) Infection with gas-producing organism.
b. Functional (paralytic) ileus:
b. Abundant intra-abdominal fat (excessive fat obscures
1) Severe inflammation (e.g., enteritis, pancreatitis,
margins due to scatter radiation).
peritonitis).
3. Abundant gas in small intestine lumen with normal
2) Infection (e.g., parvovirus).
bowel diameter:
3) Gastric dilatation and volvulus (GDV).
a. Aerophagia (abundant gas also in stomach).
4) Chronic physical obstruction.
b. Recent enema.
5) Mesenteric volvulus (predisposing factors):
C. Inflarmmation (e.g., enteritis, peritonitis).
a) Neoplasia (e.g., ileocolic carcinoma).
d. Partial obstruction.
b) GDV.
e. Debilitated, recumbent animal.
C) Pancreatic disease.
f. Intussusception.
d) Enteritis.
g. Linear foreign object (usually an irregular luminal gas 
e) Inflammatory bowel disease.
pattern).
f) Intussusception.
4. Gas in small intestinal wall (pneumatosis intestinalis):
g) GI foreign bodies.
a. Necrotizing enterocolitis.
h) Blunt abdominal trauma.
b. Volvulus and ischemic necrosis.
6) Intestinal ischemia (mesenteric thrombosis).
C. Trauma (e.g., foreign object migration).
7) Recent surgery.
d. Bacterial
infection
(usually
animal
S
 8) Intra-abdominal hernia and strangulation of bowel.
immunocompromised).
9) Bowel infarction (e.g., trauma).
e. Repeated enemas.
443
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
5. Abundant fuid in small intestine with normal bowel
f. Enlargement of a kidney.
diameter:
g. Loss of lateral body wall integrity.
a. Enteritis (diarrhea).
h. Body wall mass (e.g., abscess, hematoma, tumor).
b. Thickened bowel wall (e.g., IBD, lymphoma).
i. Lipoma (intra-abdominal or in body wall).
6. Mineral or metal opacity material in small intestine:
4. Ventral displacement of small intestine:
a. Ingested food stuffs (e.g.. pet vitamins).
a. Excessive intra-abdominal fat (e.g., obesity).
b. Contrast medium.
b. Distended colon (e.g., constipation, megacolon).
c. Medications (containing bismuth, calcium, magne-
c. Enlarged uterus (e.g.. pregnancy, pyometra).
sium, etc.).
d. Enlargement of a kidney.
d. Foreign object.
e. Swelling of retroperitoneal space (due to a mass or
e. Cat litter (clay-based material).
fluid).
f. Small gravel.
f. Dorsal intra-abdominal lipoma.
g. Dystrophic mineralization:
5. Bunching of small intestine:
1) Renal
disease
and uremia
(thin
line
of
a. Excessive intra-abdominal fat (especially in obese cats).
calcification).
b. Linear foreign material.
2) Hypercalcemia.
C. Adhesions.
3) Toxicity (e.g., cholecalciferol).
d. Inflammation.
h. Conditions that may mimic material in small bowel
e. Prior surgery.
(superimposed structures often are identified on orthogo-
nal radiographs):
Inflammation of small intestine (enteritis and
1) Feces in colon.
inflammatory bowel disease, IBD)
2) Renal, ureteral, or cystic calculi.
1. Infection:
3) Skin or hair debris.
a. Bacterial (e.g., salmonella, E. coli. Staphylococcus,
4) Medication on skin.
Rickettsia).
5) Cutaneous growth (e.g., mammary tumor, nipple).
b. Viral (e.g., parvovirus, rotavirus, coronavirus).
C. Mycotic (e.g. histoplasmosis, Cryptococus, pythiosis)
Position abnormalities of small intestine
uncommon in dogs and cats, but should be considered in
1. Cranial displacement of small intestine:
endemic regions.
a. Deep-chested body conformation (bowel may be adja-
d. Protozoal.
cent to diaphragm).
2. Parasites (e.g., giardiasis, roundworms, hookworms).
b. Hernia or loss of cranial body wall integrity:
3. Food allergy.
1) Diaphragmatic hernia.
4. Dietary indiscretion.
2) Peritoneal-pericardial diaphragmatic hernia.
5. Overgrowth of intestinal bacteria.
c. Small liver.
6. Infiltrative bowel disease.
d. Caudal intra-abdominal mass effect:
7. Idiopathic.
1) Distended urinary bladder.
 8. Genetics (dog breed predispositions include Basenji. Soft-
2) Constipation.
Coated Wheaton Terrier, German Shepherd Dog. and
3) Enlarged uterus (e.g., pyometra, pregnancy).
Chinese Shar-Pei).
4) Tumor.
 5) Intra-abdominal lipoma.
2. Caudal displacement of small intestine:
Perforation (rupture of small intestine)
a. Distended stomach.
1. Intestinal foreign object.
b. Enlarged liver.
2. Penetrating abdominal wound (e.g.. stab wound,
c. Empty urinary bladder and colon.
gunshot).
d. Hernia or loss of caudal body wall integrity.
3. Neoplasia.
1) Inguinal hernia.
4. Obstruction.
2) Perineal hernia.
5. Vascular compromise (e.g., mesenteric torsion, thrombus).
3. Lateral displacement of small intestine:
6. Recent surgery.
a. Animal in prolonged lateral recumbency.
b. Obesity (bowel is conspicuously positioned right of
Transit time abnormalities in small intestine
midline).
1. Rapid passage of contrast medium through small
c. Distended colon (e.g., constipation, megacolon).
intestine:
d. Asymmetric enlargement of liver.
a. Ionic iodinated contrast media (hypertonic and irritat-
e. Splenic enlargement.
ing to intestinal mucosa, resulting in hyperperistalsis).
444
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
b. Inflammation (enteritis).
22) Congenital anomaly:
c. Shortened bowel syndrome (e.g.. previous surgery.
a) Imperforate anus (rare).
congenital anomaly).
b) Manx cats (e.g.. sacrococcygeal agenesis,
d. Malabsorption syndrome (usually with decreased or
myelodysplasia).
absent peristalsis and a narrow bowel lumen).
c) Spina bifida.
 2. Slower passage of contrast medium through small intes-
23) Idiopathic.
tine (longer transit time):
b. Megacolon:
a. Sedation/anesthesia.
1) Idiopathic.
b. Partial obstruction (e.g., foreign object, mass).
2) Neurologic disease:
c. Inflammation
(e.g..
pancrea titis,
enteritis,
a) Aganglionic megacolon (Hirschsprung's disease).
peritonitis).
b) Spinal pathology (e.g., trauma, cauda equina
d. Inflammatory bowel disease.
syndrome, spina bifida).
e. Infiltrative bowel disease (e.g.. lymphoma, mycotic
c) Dysautonomia.
infection).
3) Chronic constipation/obstipation (see above).
f. Functional (paralytic) ileus.
4) Postsurgical fibrosis (e.g.. following ureterocolic
diversion)
Large intestine
5) Chronic inflammation:
Size and shape abnormalities of large intestine
a) Colitis (e.g., parasites).
1. Abnormal dilation of large intestine (local or general):
b) Genitourinary tract disease (e.g.. prostatitis,
a. Constipation/obstipation:
cystitis).
1) Lack of opportunity to defecate.
6) Psychogenic (prolonged inhibition of defecation
2) Psychogenic factors:
reflex; more common in older animals).
a) Refusal to defecate indoors or in a cage.
c. Severe, chronic inflammation:
b) Altered environment of animal with well-
1) Ulcerative colitis (canine histiocytic colitis).
established evacuation patterns.
2) Peritonitis.
3) Old age.
3) Parasites (e.g., whipworm).
4) Diet (e.g., ingestion of bones).
d. Idiopathic.
5) Megacolon (see below).
2. Abnormal narrowing of colon:
6) Abdominal pain or painful defecation.
a. Peristalsis (transient appearance).
7) Narrowed
pelvic canal
(greater
than
50%
b. Spasm (transient appearance).
narrowing):
C. Stricture (e.g., neoplasia, scar tissue, trauma to colon 
a) Pelvic fracture (acute, healing. or healed).
wall y.
b) Tumor.
d. Compression by extraluminal mass (usually also dis-
c) Abscess.
places colon}.
d) Hematoma.
 3. Abnormal shape and margination of large intestine:
e) Lipoma.
a.
 Adhesions (e.g., chronic inflammation, trauma).
8) Prostatomegaly.
b. Chronic colitis (may result in shortening of colon).
9) Uterine enlargement (e.g., pregnancy. pyometra).
C. Intussusception.
10) Urinary bladder distention.
d. Foreign object.
11) Caudal sublumbar mass (e.g.. lymphadenopathy.
e. Narrowing of colon lumen with adjacent dilation:
tumor, abscess).
1) Stricture.
12) Perineal hernia.
2) Neoplasm.
13) Rectovaginal fistula.
3) Spasm.
14) Foreign material in colon.
4) Compression
an
adjacent
mass
(e.g.
15) Ingestion of hair (excessive licking, trichobezoar
prosta tomegaly) .
formation).
f. Previous surgery.
16) Stricture of rectum or distal colon.
17) Drugs (e.g., narcotics, diuretics, antihistamines,
 Opacity abnormalities of large intestine
antacids).
1. Large volume of gas in colon:
18) Hypercalcemia (nutritional secondary hyperpara-
a. Severe aerophagia.
thyroidism in cats).
b. Cleansing enema.
19) Hypothyroidism.
c. Rectal examination prior to radiography.
20) Electrolyte imbalances (e.g., hypokalemia)
d. Vigorous abdominal palpation.
2l) Lead poisoning.
e. Inflammation (e.g., enterocolitis, parvovirus).
445
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
f. Parasites (e.g..7
Trichuris vuipis or whipworm)
h. Pancreatic mass (mass in right limb displaces ascend-
infection.
ing colon toward midliney.
g. Diarrhea.
i. Duodenal dilation (displaces ascending colon toward
h. Cecal inversion.
midline).
i. Intussusce ption.
 j. Asymmetric liver enlargement (right or left lobes).
j. Neoplasia.
 k. Uterine enlargement (e.g. pregnancy, pyometra, tumor).
k. Volvulus or torsion.
1.
Congenital anomaly (large bowel may fail to rotate
2. Gas in colon wall (pneumatosis coli; linear or mottled
during development and remains left of midline).
pattern):
4. Caudal displacement of transverse colon:
a. Infection with gas-producing organism.
a. Stomach distention.
b. Ulcerative colitis.
b. Liver enlargement.
c. Ischemia (e.g., mesenteric thrombosis).
c. Pancreatic mass (in left limb).
d. Mucosal perforation:
d. Expanded thoracic cavity (caudal displacement of dia-
1) Iatrogenic (e.g., rectal exam, enema, endoscopy)
phragm and liver).
2) Foreign object.
5. Displacement of rectum (lateral, dorsal, or ventral):
3) Neoplasia.
a. Mass in pelvic canal, associated with:
3. Increased opacity in colon:
1) Urethra.
a. Ingested bone.
2) Prostate gland.
b. Foreign object.
3) Uterus.
C. Constipation/obstipation.
4) Lymph nodes.
d. Megacolon.
5) Vagina.
e. Mineralization of colon wall (e.g., metastatic disease,
6) Pelvic bone (e.g., tumor, infection, fracture).
dystrophic calcification .
7) Other
tissues (e.g.
lipoma.
tumor,
abscess,
f. Superimposed structures may mimic increased colon
hematoma).
opa city:
b. Perineal hernia.
1) Small intestine content.
2) Urinary bladder calculi or mineralized mass.
Inflammation of colon (contributing factors)
 3) Adjacent granuloma (e.g.. uterine suture reaction).
1. Acute colitis:
4) Mineralized intra-abdominal cyst (e.g., nodular fat
a. Dietary indiscretion (e.g., abrasive foreign material) .
necrosis).
b. Infection (e.g., bacterial, viral, mycotic).
C. Parasites (e.g.. Trichuris vulpis).
Position abnormalities of large intestine
d. Food hypersensitivitry.
1. Ventral displacement of colon:
e. Food poisoning.
a. Excessive retroperitoneal fat (e.g., obesity, lipoma).
f. Antibiotic therapy.
b. Sublumbar mass (e.g. lymphadenomegaly. tumor.
g. Constipation.
abscessy.
h. Obstipation.
c. Retroperitoneal effusion (e.g., hemorrhage, urine).
i. Iatrogenic (e.g., enema, colonoscopy).
d. Enlarged kidney(s).
2. Chronic colitis:
e. Severe spondylosis.
a. Breed predisposition.
2. Dorsal displacement of colon:
b. Immune-mediated disease.
a. Large urinary bladder.
c. Bacterial infection.
b. Splenomegaly (e.g., tumor, hematoma, torsion).
d. Mycotic infection (e.g., histoplasmosis, phycomycosis).
C. Uterine enlargement (e.g. pregnancy, pyometra, tumor).
e. Allergies (e.g., food hypersensitivity).
d. Other large intra-abdominal mass (e.g., mesenteric
f. Psychological factors (e.g., stress).
mass).
 g. Repeated episodes of foreign object ingestion.
3. Lateral or medial displacement of colon:
h. Recurrent parasite infections.
a. Normal redundancy in descending colon.
i.Polyps.
b. Obesity.
j. Neoplasia.
C. Large urinary bladder.
d. Splenomegaly or splenic mass.
e. Kidney enlargement.
Neoplasia of colon
f. Large adrenal gland mass.
1. Malignant tumors:
g. Mesenteric mass (e.g.. lymphadenopathy. tumor,
a. Adenocarcinoma.
abscess).
b. Lymphosarcoma.
446
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
c. Leiomyosarcoma.
2. Local enlargement of liver (hepatic mass):
2. Benign tumors:
a. Neoplasia:
a. Polyps.
1) Hepatoma.
b. Leiomyoma.
2) Carcinoma.
3) Metastatic tumor.
b. Nodular hyperplasia.
C. Abscess.
Liver
d. Granuloma.
e. Hematoma.
Size and shape abnormalities of liver
f. Cyst:
1. General enlargement of liver (hepatomegaly):
1) Hepatic cyst.
a. Endocrine disease:
2) Biliary cyst (congenital dilation of bile duct).
1) Hypercorticosterism.
3) Biloma (encapsulated bile in peritoneal space).
2) Hypothyroidism.
4) Biliary pseudocyst (associated with bile duct disease).
3) Diabetes mellitus.
g. Liver lobe torsion.
b. Hepatic lipidosis (cats).
h. Hepatic regeneration.
c. Neoplasia (primary or metastatic):
i. Arteriovenous fistula.
1) Lymphoma.
j. Conditions that may mimic hepatic mass:
2) Hemangiosarcoma.
1) Fluid-filled gastric pylorus (make left lateral radio-
3) Carcinoma.
graph to move gastric air into pylorus and facilitate
4) Mastocytosis.
identifica tion).
d. Venous congestion:
2) In cats, right side of liver normally appears larger
1) Right heart failure.
than left (VD/DV radiograph).
2) Caudal vena cava obstruction.
3. Decreased size of liver (microhepatia):
e. Severe nodular hyperplasia:
a. Portosystemic vascular shunt:
1) Idiopa thic.
2) Chronic hepatitis.
2) Infection (e.g., viral, leptospirosis).
f. Inflammation/infection:
3) Toxins.
1) Cholangiohepa titis.
4) Copper storage disease.
2) Leptospirosis (zoonotic potential).
5) Immune mediated.
3) Mycosis.
6) Idiopa thic.
4) Feline infectious peritonitis.
b. Hepatic cirrhosis.
g. Malignant histiocytosis (Bernese 
Mountain Dog.
c. Idiopathic hepatic fibrosis (reported in young German
Golden Retriever,
and Flat-Coated
Retriever
are
Shepherd Dogs).
overrepresen ted).
d. Conditions that may mimic microhepatia:
h. Cholestasis.
1) Deep-chested conformation: stomach tends to be
i. Amyloidosis.
more vertically oriented and caudal hepatic border
j. Lymphocytic cholangitis (cats).
may not extend to costal arch.
k. Conditions that may mimic hepatomegaly:
2) Excessive falciform fat (especially overweight cats).
1) Rotated positioning (liver may be accentuated and
   al  i  (
stomach may appear displaced).
compared to right lateral recumbency due to more
2) Summation with adjacent spleen.
 cranial position of diaphragm).
3) Immature animal (liver is relatively large in rela-
4) Expiratory phase of respiration (diaphragm and
tion to body size).
liver move cranialy.
4) Breed conformation: in wide-chested dogs stomach
5) Diaphragmatic hernia (portion of liver displaced
tends to be more caudally positioned and caudal
into thoracic cavity).
hepatic border may extend beyond costal arch.
5) Obese cats (very large, fat-laden falciform displaces
Position abnormalities of liver
liver dorsocaudally) 
1. Cranial displacement of liver:
6) Increased volume of thoracic cavity (diaphragm
a. Diaphragmatic hernia or rupture.
and liver are displaced caudally):
b. Peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia.
a) Hyperinflated lungs.
C. Large intra-abdominal mass.
b) Severe pleural effusion.
d. Severe peritoneal effusion.
c) Severe pneumothorax.
e. Advanced pregnancy.
447
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
2. Caudal displacement of liver:
e. Reflux from duodenum:
a. Weak abdominal muscles (e.g., Cushing's syndrome,
1) Abnormal sphincter of Oddi.
old age).
2) Chronic bile duct obstruction.
b. Expanded thoracic cavity:
f. Necrosis of stomach wall (gas enters portal system
1) Hyperinflated lungs.
creating linear, branching areas of decreased opacity that 
 2) Pulmonary emphysema.
appear similar to air bronchograms):
3) Severe pleural effusion.
1) Gastric dilatation and volvulus.
4) Large intrathoracic mass.
2) Gastric ulcer.
c. Chondrodystrophic breed conformation.
3) Trauma (e.g., foreign object, penetrating wound).
3. Dorsal displacement of liver:
4) Recent surgery.
a. Ventral mass (associated with falciform or body wall):
g. Conditions that may mimic gas in liver:
1) Abscess.
1) Superimposed subcutaneous emphysema.
2) Granuloma.
2) Pneumoperitoneum.
3) Hematoma.
4) Seroma.
5) Tumor.
b. Excessive falciform fat (obesity).
Spleen
Opacity abnormalities of liver
Size abnormalities of spleen
1. Mineralization in liver:
1. General enlargement of spleen (splenomegaly):
a. Cholelithiasis (focal mineral opacities in right cranio-
a.
Sedation or anesthesia.
ventral aspect of liver).
b.
 Physiologic stress response.
b. Bile duct mineralization (linear, inhomogeneous mineral
C.
Venous congestion:
opacities extending peripherally from area of gall bladder):
1) Right heart failure (often with hepatomegaly).
1) Choledocolithiasis.
 2) Portal hypertension (often with hepatomegaly).
2) Bile duct carcinoma.
3) Gastric dilatation and volvulus.
c. Gall bladder wall mineralization:
4) Splenic torsion
1) Carcinoma
5) Splenic thrombosis.
2) Cholecystitis.
d.
 Neoplasia (most common etiology in cats).
3) Cystic mucinous hyperplasia.
e.
Nodular hyperplasia.
d. Dystrophic mineraliza tion:
f.
 Inflammation/infection:
1) Chronic inflammation (e.g. gall bladder, liver).
1) Septicemia (e.g. pyometra).
2) Hepatic necrosis (e.g., tumor, abscess).
2) Feline infectious peritonitis (cats).
3) Neoplasia (e.g., extraskeletal osteosarcoma).
3) Bacterial infection.
4) Hematoma (chronic).
4) Mycotic infection.
5) Granuloma (chronic).
5) Toxoplasmosis.
6) Parasitic cyst (e.g., echinococcus in endemic areas).
6) Brucellosis.
7) Idiopathic (age-related hepatic mineralization is
7) Mycoba cteriosis.
reported in older Yorkshire Terriers).
8) Leishmaniasis.
e. Superimposed
structures
may
 mimic hepatic
9) Ehrlichiosis.
mineralization:
10) Babesiosis.
1) Costal cartilage/costochondral junction.
1l) Hemobartonellosis.
2) Debris or medication on skin or hair coat.
12) Infectious canine hepatitis.
3) Cutaneous calcification.
g.
 Extramedullary hema topoiesis.
4) Skin growth.
h.
Hemolytic disorders.
5) Pulmonary mineral opacity.
1.
Systemic lupus erythematosus.
6) Gastric content.
j.
Amyloidosis.
2. Gas in liver:
k.
Chronic anemia.
a. Abscess (typically an irregular or mottled pattern of gas).
1.
Toxins.
b. Emphysematous cholecystitis (gas bubbles in
or
m. Hypereosinophilic syndrome (cats) .
around gall bladder and conforming to shape of gall
n.
Conditions that may mimic splenomegaly:
bladder; most often in animals with diabetes mellitus).
1) Normal breed variation (spleen tends to be rela-
c. Penetrating wound.
tively larger in German Shepherd Dog, Greyhound,
d. Infection with gas-producing organism.
and Scottish Terrier).
448
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
2) Unusual position of spleen (splenic margins are not
3. Hepatomegaly pushes spleen caudally.
rounded).
4. Distended stomach (e.g., bloat, GDV) displaces spleen
2. Local enlargement of spleen (splenic mass):
caudally and into central or midabdomen (spleen is con-
a. Hematoma (common in dogs).
 nected to fundus by gastrosplenic ligamenty.
b. Primary neoplasia:
5. Intra-abdominal mass may displace spleen in a variety
1) Hemangioma.
of directions.
2) Hemangiosarcoma.
6. Hernia (spleen is outside normal confines of perito-
3) Fibrosarcoma.
neal space}.
4) Leiomyosarcoma.
5) Leukemia.
Shape abnormalities of spleen
6) Lymphoma.
1. Abnormal shape and margination of spleen:
7) Malignant histiocytosis.
8) Multiple myeloma.
a. Splenomegaly (rounded margins):
9) Systemic mastocytosis.
1) Splenomegaly (variety of etiologies).
b. Irregular margins:
c. Secondary (metastatic) neoplasia:
1) Carcinomas.
1) Trauma (recent or old).
2) Hemangiosarcoma.
2) Neoplasia.
3) Nodular hyperplasia.
3) Lymphoma.
4) Mass (e.g., abscess. granuloma, hematoma).
4) Mast cell tumor.
d. Nodular hyperplasia:
5) Fibrosis.
1) Inflammation/infection.
2) Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia.
Opacity abnormalities of spleen
3) Heinz body hemolysis.
1. Abnormal opacity of spleen:
4) Idiopa thic.
 a. Mineralization:
e. Abscess or granuloma (uncommon).
1) Dystrophic calcification (chronic conditions):
f. Conditions that may mimic a splenic mass:
a) Hematoma.
l) Fluid-filled gastric pylorus (make left lateral
b) Abscess.
radiograph to move gastric air into pylorus for
c) Neoplasia.
identifica tion}.
2) Histoplasmosis.
2) Summation of adjacent structures such as bowel
3) Extraskeletal osteosarcoma.
loops (opposite lateral radiograph or compression
4) Superimposed
 structures may mimic splenic
radiography may aid in diagnosis).
mineralization:
3. Small spleen:
a) Debris or medication on skin or in hair coat.
a. Normal anatomic variation.
b) Cutaneous nodule.
b. Severe hypovolemia (e.g., dehydration, shock).
c) GI content.
c. Radiation therapy.
b. Gas in spleen (emphysema):
d. Surgery.
1) Infection with gas-producing organism:
a) Splenic torsion (most common; bacteria enter
spleen via portovenous circulation).
Position abnormalities of spleen
2) Conditions that may mimic splenic emphysema
1. Nonvisualization of spleen:
(superimposed structures often are identifed on
a. Immature animal.
orthogonal radiographs):
b. Emaciation.
a) GI content.
c. Peritoneal inflammation.
b) Subcutaneous emphysema.
d. Peritoneal fluid.
e. Abnormal location of spleen (e.g. diaphragmatic
hernia).
f. Previous splenectomy.
Pancreas
g. Small spleen (especially cats).
h. Underexposed radiograph.
1. Pancreatitis (predisposing conditions):
i. Spleen tends to be less visible on left lateral radiograph.
a. Idiopathic.
2. Altered position of spleen:
b. Diet (i.e., fatty foods).
1. Spleen is more cranial in deep-chested dogs.
c. Dietary indiscretion.
2. Microhepatia allows spleen to move cranially.
d. Obesity.
449
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
e. Drugs:
Size and margination abnormalities
1) Anticholinesterase.
of kidneys
2) Calcium.
1. Normal kidney size with smooth margin:
3) Aspirin.
a. Normal animal.
4) Aza thioprine.
b. Acute inflammation (e.g., nephritis, pyelonephritis.
f. Hypercorticosterism.
glomerulonephritis).
 g. Hyperlipidemia.
c. Acute toxicity (e.g., ethylene glycol, gentamicin, cis-
h. Recent surgery.
platin, snake venom).
i. Trauma.
d. Early stages of various diseases.
j. Anesthesia.
e. Familial renal disease (e.g., amyloidosis).
k. Parasites (Amphimerus pseudofelineus, a liver fluke of
2. Normal kidney size with irregular margin:
cats in North and South America).
a. Renal infarct.
1. Toxoplasmosis (cats).
b. Abscess.
2. Pancreatic mass:
c. Chronic
inflammation(e.g,
 glomerulonephritis.
a. Abscess.
pyelonephritis).
b. Neoplasia:
d. Polycystic kidney disease.
1) Adenoma.
3. Unilateral large kidney with smooth margin:
2) Adenocarcinoma.
a. Compensa tory hypertrophy.
3) Insulinoma.
b. Congenital hydronephrosis:
c. Nodular hyperplasia.
1) Abnormal position of kidney (torsed or kinked
d. Focal inflammation (pancreatitis).
ureter).
e. Pseudocyst.
2) Stenosis or atresia of lower urinary tract.
 3) Aberrant blood vessels causing constriction of
urinary outflow.
Urinary tract
4) Ureterocele obstructing distal ureter.
5) Ectopic ureter.
Kidneys
c. Acquired hydronephrosis:
Abnormal number of kidneys
1) Urinary calculi.
1. Absence of a kidney (e.g., agenesis, nephrectomy).
 2) Accidental ligation of ureter.
2. Congenital renal duplication (rare).
3) Tumor (commonly at urinary bladder trigone or
3. Renal transplant (extra kidney, more often in cats).
distal ureter)
4. Nonvisualization of kidney(s):
4) Retroperitoneal mass.
a. Underexposed radiograph.
5) Chronic inflammation (e.g., pyelonephritis).
b. Summation with adjacent structure (e.g., liver).
6) Adhesions from previous trauma or surgery.
c. Superimposed structure (e.g., intestines).
7) Parasitic disease (Dioctophyma renale).
d. Immature animal.
8) Radiation therapy.
e. Insufficient body fat (emaciation, cachexia).
d. Primary renal neoplasia:
f. Retroperitoneal disease:
1) Adenocarcinoma (most common in dogs. usually
1) Fluid accumulation (blood or urine).
unilateral).
2) Inflammation.
2) Lymphosarcoma (most common in cats, usually
3) Infiltrative disease (neoplasia).
bilateral).
g. Severe peritoneal effusion (may obscure all intra-
3) Transitional cell carcinoma (uncommon, usually
abdominal structures).
affects renal pelvis).
h. Absence of a kidney (remaining kidney usually is large
e. Metastatic neoplasms (more common than primary
due to compensatory hypertrophy):
tumors):
1) Prior nephrectomy.
1) Osteosarcoma.
2) Congenital aplasia or agenesis.
2) Hemangiosarcoma.
i. Very small kidneys:
3) Lymphosarcoma.
1) Hypoplasia.
4) Melanoma.
2) Chronic renal disease and renal fibrosis (end-stage
5) Mast cell tumor.
kidneys).
f. Benign renal tumors (rare):
 j. Ectopic kidney (usually asymptomatic developrmental
1) Adenoma
anomaly; kidney may be located in retroperitoneal space,
2) Papilloma.
abdominal cavity, pelvic canal, or in thoracic cavity).
3) Lipoma.
450
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
4) Hemangioma.
Opacity abnormalities of kidneys
5) Embryonal nephroblastoma.
1. Diffuse increase in renal opacity:
g. Renal cystadenoma/cystadenocarcinoma:
a. Contrast medium in kidney.
h. Neoplasia (primary or secondary).
b. Nephrocalcinosis (mineralization of renal paren-
i. Acute inflammation (e.g., nephritis, pyelonephritis,
chyma, usually bilateral):
glomerulonephritis).
 1) Hypera drenocortici sm.
j. Large renal cyst.
2) Hyperpara thyroidism.
k. Perirenal cyst (especially cats).
3) Hypercalcemia.
1. Perinephric abscess.
4) Ethylene glycol poisoning.
m. Subcapsular hematoma.
5) Renal tubular defects.
4. Unilateral large kidney with irregular margin:
6) Hypervitaminosis D.
a. Cyst or perirenal cyst.
7) Chronic
renal
disease/failure
(e.g..
b. Abscess.
glomerulonephritis).
C. Neoplasia (prirmary or secondary).
8) Nephrotoxic drugs (e.g. Gentarmicin, Amphoteri-
d. Hematoma.
cin B, Cisplatin).
5. Bilateral large kidneys with smooth margins:
9) Toxins/poisons (e.g., cholecalciferol rodenticide).
a. Acute nephritis or pyelonephritis.
10) Renal telangiectasia (Corgis).
b. Polycystic kidney disease.
1l) Idiopathic.
c. Lymphoma (especially cats).
2. Focal increase in renal opacity:
d. Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP).
a. Renal calculi (predisposing conditions):
e. Neoplasia (primary or secondary).
1) Current or previous renal infection.
f. Perirenal cyst or pseudocyst (especially cats).
2) Type of diet.
g. Amyloidosis.
3) Medications.
h. Hydronephrosis (uncommon, usually unilateral) .
4) Genetic predisposition.
i. Subcapsular fluid accumulation (rare, e.g., hematoma
b. Dystrophic mineraliza tion:
or urine}
1) Neoplasia.
 j. Congenital portosystemic vascular shunt.
2) Chronic abscess, hematoma, or granuloma.
k. Parasite infection (Dioctophyma renale).
3) Chronic inflammation, infection, or infarction.
6. Bilateral large kidneys with irregular margins:
4) Previous trauma.
a. Lymphoma.
c. Contrast medium in kidney.
b. Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP).
d. Parasitic granuloma (e.g.. Toxocara canis).
c. Polycystic kidney disease (PKD).
e. Osseous metaplasia.
d. Neoplasia (primary or secondary).
f.
Mineralized cyst.
e. Hereditary cystadenocarcinoma (German Shepherd
 g. Calcification of blood vessels (usually older animals).
Dog).
h. Conditions that may mimic increased renal opacity:
7. Decreased kidney size (unilateral or bilateral, smooth or
1) Summation artifact (overlap of kidneys on lateral
irregular margins):
radiograph).
a. Chronic or severe inflammation leading to end-stage
2) Superimposed structure:
kidney disease (older animals, irregular renal margins).
a) Debris on skin or hair coat.
1) Glomerulonephritis.
b) Skin nodule or nipple.
2) Pyelonephritis.
c) GI content (use compression radiography to dis-
3) Interstitial nephritis.
place bowel).
b. Renal infarction (irregular renal margin).
3. Decrease in renal opacity:
c. Congenital renal hypoplasia or dysplasia (young
a. Normal fat in renal pelvis.
animals, smooth renal margin):
 b. Infection with gas-producing bacteria.
1) Glomerular atrophy (Samoyed).
C. Vesicoureteral reflux (e.g. emphysematous cystitis.
d. Fanconi syndrome:
pneumocystogram).
1) Congenital.
d. Traumatic influx of air from intra-abdominal or extra-
2) Acquired:
abdominal source.
a) Toxins (e.g., lead, mercury).
b) Adverse drug reaction (e.g., aminoglycosides.
Position abnormalities of kidneys
cephalosporin, tetracycline) .
1. Altered position of kidney(s):
c) Renal cystic disease.
a. Excessive retroperitoneal fat (ventral and cranial
d) Neoplasia (e.g., multiple myeloma).
displacement):
451
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
1) Obesity.
6. Thin, peripheral rim of renal opacification:
2) Lipoma.
a. Severe hydronephrosis (with a dilated or nonopacified
b. Phase of respiration (cranial or caudal displacement).
pyelogram) .
c. Diaphragmatic hernia (cranial displacement).
b. Renal hypoplasia (pyelogram usually is normal).
d. Hepatomegaly (caudal displacement).
 7. Peripheral rim of renal nonopacification:
e. Microhepatia (cranial displacement).
a. Subcapsular fluid accumulation (e.g., perirenal pseu-
f. Stomach distention (caudal displacement) .
docyst, hematoma).
g. Adjacent mass (originating from adrenal gland, liver.
8. Abnormal dilation of renal collecting system:
or spleen).
a. Abdominal compression (dilation is mild and bilater-
h. Loss of body wall integrity (trauma).
ally symmetrical).
i. Ectopic kidney.
b. Fluid administration/diuresis (dilation is mild and
bilateral).
c. Hydronephrosis (degree of dilation depends on dura-
Abnormal findings on excretory urogram
tion and severity of obstruction).
1. Absence of nephrogram in one kidney:
d. Ectopic ureter (dilation is due to obstruction at distal
a. Absence
of kidney(renal
aplasia
orprior
ureter or ascending infection).
nephrectomy).
e. Calculus in renal pelvis (may be obscured by contrast
 b. Renal artery obstruction or avulsion.
medium).
c. Severe renal parenchymal disease.
f.  Inflammation (e.g.. pyelitis, pyelonephritis).
d. Severe hydronephrosis.
g. Neoplasia.
e. Extensive neoplasia.
 9. Distortion or filling defects in renal pelvis or pelvic recesses:
f. Large abscess.
a. Neoplasia.
2. Absence of nephrogram in both kidneys:
b. Compression by an adjacent mass (e.g., cyst, abscess.
a. Insufficient dose of contrast medium.
tumor).
 b. Severe parenchymal disease.
c. Hydronephrosis.
c. Extensive neoplasia.
d. Renal calculi.
d. Extrarenal disease (e.g., heart failure).
e. Blood clot (e.g.. coagulopathy, trauma, neoplasm,
3. Increasing or persistent renal opacity after a normal or
idiopathic).
poor initial nephrogram and without contrast medium in
f. Chronic inflarmmation (e.g. pyelitis, pyelonephritis).
renal collecting system, ureters, or bladder, is abnormal:
 g. Inflammatory debris.
a. Systemic hypotension (prior to or as a result of con-
h. Ascending gas bubbles from pneumocystogram.
trast medium administration).
i.1
 Renal hypoplasia (pelvis and recesses appear large
b. Acute renal failure.
next to thin renal cortex).
c. Acute tubular necrosis.
d. Adverse reaction to contrast medium.
Ureters
e. Renal ischemia.
Size abnormalities of ureters
f. Primary glomerular dysfunction.
1. Local dilation of ureter:
g. Severe generalized renal disease:
a. Ureteral calculi.
1) Acute postrenal obstruction.
b. Mass adjacent to and compressing distal ureter.
2) Renal vein thrombosis.
c. Retroperitoneal fbrosis.
4. Poor initial nephrogram opacity with decreasing renal
d. Ureteral stricture.
opa city:
e. Ureteral mass (e.g., tumor, polyp).
a. Inadequate dose of contrast medium.
f. Ureterocele.
b. Poor renal function.
g. Diverticulum.
5. Heterogeneous nephrogram with filling defects in kidney:
h. Localized inflammation.
a. Hydronephrosis.
i. Accidental ligation
b. Renal tumor(s).
ovariohysterectomy).
c. Polycystic kidney disease (usually bilateral with well-
2. General dilation of ureter:
defined, rounded defects).
a. Caudal abdominal compression.
d. Renal cyst or abscess (irregular or round filling defect).
b. Heavy diuresis.
e. Renal infarction (typically a wedge-shaped filling
c. Obstruction at trigone:
defect).
1) Neoplasia.
f. Severe nephritis or chronic pyelonephritis.
2) Calculus.
g. Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP).
3) Inflammation.
452
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
4) Ureterocele.
b. Outflow obstruction:
5) Ectopic ureter.
1) Tumor.
d. Inflammation (ureteritis) resulting in ureteral atony.
2) Stricture.
e. Fibrosis (creates an irregular mucosal margin).
3) Calculus.
f. Ectopic ureter.
c. Neurologic pathology:
g. Accidental ligation of ureter.
1) Damage to brainstem, spinal cord, or cauda equina.
2) Congenital neurogenic atony (e.g., spina bifida).
Abnormal findings on excretory urogram
d. Overdistended bladder due to chronic urine retention.
1. Lack of ureteral opacification:
3. Small urinary bladder:
a. Insufficient dose of contrast medium.
a. Recent voiding of urine.
b. Renal pelvic obstruction caused by:
b. Ruptured bladder or ureter.
1) Neoplasia.
c. Short urethra (bladder located in pelvic canal, "pelvic
2) Calculus.
bladder")
3) Blood clot.
d. Decreased or absent urine production (renal failure,
c. Nonfunctional kidney.
anuria).
d. Renal failure.
e. Nondistensible urinary bladder:
e. Ureteral rupture (usually from trauma).
1) Severe chronic cystitis.
2. Filling defects in ureter or irregular ureteral margins:
2) Neoplasia of bladder wall.
a. Ureteroliths.
f. Hypoplasia of urinary bladder (disuse due to bilateral
b. Tumor.
ectopic ureter).
c. Polyp.
g. Fistula formation (urethrorectal or urethrovaginal
d. Stricture.
fistula).
e. Compression by external mass.
4. Altered shape of urinary bladder:
f. Ascending gas bubbles from pneumocystogram.
a. Indentation by adjacent viscera or extraluminal mass.
3. Abnormal position of ureter:
b. Rupture of bladder.
a. Ectopic ureter (often associated with the vagina).
c. Neoplasm involving bladder wall or serosa.
b. Trauma (e.g., avulsion).
d. Urachal diverticulum.
c. Displacement by adjacent mass.
e. Chronic obstruction and loss of bladder tone.
f. Protrusion of bladder mucosa through torn muscular
layer.
Urinary bladder
 g. Previous bladder surgery with subsequent scar forma-
Size and shape abnormalities of urinary bladder
tion or adhesion.
1. Nonvisualization of urinary bladder:
h. Congenital diverticulum.
a. Underexposed radiograph.
 i. Paraprostatic cyst (adjacent cyst may be mistaken for
b. Obscured by superimposed structures (e.g., hind limb
bladder).
musculature, feces in colon).
j. Spasm of bladder wall (caused by severe trauma.
c. Indistinct or obscured serosal margins:
usually subsides after a few days).
1) Effusion (e.g., hemorrhage, ascites).
2) Inflammation (peritonitis).
Opacity abnormalities of urinary bladder
3) Immature animal.
1. Increased opacity of urinary bladder (focal, multifocal, or
4) Insufficient body fat (emaciation, cachexia).
diffuse):
d. Ruptured bladder (intra-abdominal effusion usually
a. Cystic calculi.
present).
b. Amorphous crystalline debris (standing horizontal
e. Small bladder size (as described above).
beam radiography aids in diagnosis).
f. Displaced urinary bladder:
c. Dystrophic mineralization (e.g., chronic inflamma-
1) Perineal hernia.
tion, neoplasia).
2) Inguinal hernia.
d. Iodinated contrast media (eliminated through urinary
3) Loss of body wall integrity.
tract).
4) Short urethra (bladder in pelvic canal).
e. Foreign material in bladder lumen (e.g., metallic pro-
2. Large urinary bladder:
jectile, catheter fragment).
a. Voluntary retention of urine:
f. Superimposed structure may mimic increased urinary
1) Housebroken.
bladder opacity:
2) Anxiety, stress, nervousness.
1) Preplce.
3) Painful urination.
2) Nipple.
453
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
3) Skin growth.
Inflammation (cystitis; predisposing factors)
4) Intestinal content.
1. Urine retention:
5) Suture or suture granuloma (from previous
a. Urinary tract obstruction.
ovariohysterectomy).
b. Neurologic disease (e.g., spinal trauma, spina bifida).
6) Debris on skin or hair coat.
C. Defect in bladder wall (e.g. diverticulum, patent
2. Decreased opacity of urinary bladder (focal, multifocal,
urachus).
or diffuse):
d. Abdominal pain or painful urination.
a. Iatrogenic introduction of gas:
e. Psychogenic factors (i.e., stress, reluctance to urinate
1) Cystocentesis.
in unfamiliar surroundings).
2) Urethral catheterization.
 2. Diabetes mellitus and glycosuria.
3) Pneumocystogram.
3. Prostatic disease.
b. Emphysematous cystitis (due to infection with gas-
4. Vaginitis.
producing organism, usually associated with diabetes
5. Cystic calculi.
mellitus).
6. Neoplasia.
c. Conditions that may mimic decreased urinary bladder
7. Polyps.
opa city:
8. Interstitial cystitis (sterile recurring cystitis; i.e., not
1) Superimposed structure (e.g.. overlying bowel,
caused by infection).
pelvic limb fascial planes).
a. Trauma.
2) Superimposed gas (e.g., subcutaneous emphysema.
b. Stress.
pneumoperitoneum, pneumoretroperitoneum).
c. Chronic renal disease.
d. Calculi.
e. Intraluminal mass (e.g., tumor, polyp).
Position abnormalities of urinary bladder
f. Congenital anomalies of urinary tract.
1. Ventral displacement of urinary bladder:
9. Most common etiology is bacterial infection (e.g., E. coli.
a. Distended colon.
Pseudomonas sp.,Proteus sp., Streptococcus sp.,Staphylococcus sp.).
b. Inguinal hernia.
c. Loss of ventral body wall integrity.
Neoplasia of urinary bladder
d. Retroperitoneal
enlargement
fluid
1. Malignant tumors:
(e.g..
mass,
accumulation).
a. Transitional cell carcinoma (most common):
2. Dorsal displacement of urinary bladder:
b. Rhabdomyosarcoma.
a. Intra-abdominal mass.
c. Squamous cell carcinoma.
b. Thickening of caudoventral body wall (e.g., ederma.
d. Adenocarcinoma.
inflammation).
e. Lymphosarcoma.
f. Leiomyosarcoma.
3. Cranial or cranioventral displacement of urinary bladder:
a. Obesity (especially cats).
g. Hemangiosarcoma.
b. Enlargement of colon or rectum (e.g. mass, megaco-
2. Benign tumors:
lon, constipation).
a. Papilloma.
C. Prostatic enlargement (e.g., tumor, cyst, infection.
b. Leiomyoma.
c.Hemangioma.
hypertrophy).
d.Fibroma.
d. Uterine enlargement
(e.g. pregnancy.
pyometra,
lterine stump mass).
e. Myxoma.
I or pelvic mass (e.g. abscess, hematoma.
f. Chemodectoma.
e. Urethral
tumor, bone disease).
Ruptured urinary bladder
f. Avulsion of bladder from urethra (trauma).
1. Blunt force abdominal trauma.
 g. Caudal sublumbar mass (e.g. medial iliac lymphade-
2. Penetrating abdominal wounds (e.g., bullet, air rifle pellet).
nopathy, tumor).
 3. Bone fragments from a fractured pelvis.
4. Caudal displacement of urinary bladder:
4. Chronic urethral obstruction.
a. Obesity.
5. Faulty catheterization.
b. Empty bladder.
6. Overzealous abdominal palpation.
c. Short urethra.
d. Hypoplastic bladder (due to bilateral ectopic ureters
Urethra
and disuse).
Opacity abnormalities of urethra
e. Perineal
hernia
(caudal
1 displacement mayH
be
1. Increased urethral opacity:
intermittent).
a. Mineral opacity calculi.
f. Large intra-abdominal mass.
b. Contrast medium.
454
CHAPTER 6 Abdomen
c. Conditions that may mimic increased urethral opacity:
4. Asymmetrical prostatomegaly:
1) Separate center of ossification in os penis (may be
a.Abscess.
mistaken for urethral calculus at proximal or distal
b. Neoplasia.
endy.
c. Prostatic cyst.
2) Presence of vestigial os penis (reported in her-
d. Paraprostatic cyst.
maphrodite and pseudohermaphrodite dogs).
5. Decreased size or nonvisualization of prostate gland:
 2. Decreased urethral opacity (gas in urethra):
a. Immature dog.
a. Urethral catheterization.
b. Castrated dog.
b. Trauma (e.g., penetrating wound).
c. Chronic inflammation and fibrosis.
C. Infection with gas-producing bacteria.
d. Caudal displacement (e.g., perineal hernia).
  s     a
Rupture of urethra
1) Underexposed radiograph.
1. Blunt force trauma (e.g., motor vehicle accidents).
2) Superimposed pelvic limbs or colon.
2. Pelvic fractures.
3. Fractured os penis.
Opacity abnormalities of prostate gland
4. Faulty catheterization.
1. Mineralization of prostate gland:
5. Overzealous infusion into urethra while attempting to
a. Neoplasia (most common).
dislodge a calculus.
b. Urethral calculi.
c. Prostatic calculi.
d. Chronic inflammation and dystrophic calcification.
e. Cyst (prostatic or paraprostatic).
 Male genital system
f. Abscess.
g. Contrast medium (reflux into prostate gland during
Prostate gland
urethrography).
Size and shape abnormalities of prostate gland
2. Gas in prostate gland:
1. Increased size of prostate gland (prostatomegaly):
a. Iatrogenic reflux during pneumocystogram.
a. Intact male with benign hypertrophy or cystic
b. Infection with gas-producing organism.
hyperplasia.
c. Conditions that may mimic gas in prostate gland:
b. Inflammation (prostatitis):
1) Superimposed
structure
(e.g..
 subcutaneous
1) Ascending urinary tract infection.
emphysema, fascial plane).
2) Hematogenous spread of bacterial infection.
3) Neoplasia
c. Neoplasia:
 Female genital system
1) Adenocarcinoma (most common).
2) Transitional cell carcinoma.
Uterus
3) Leiomyosarcoma.
Size abnormalities of uterus (enlargement)
d. Abscess.
1. Generalized uterine enlargement:
e. Cyst.
a. Pregnancy (cannot be distinguished from pathology
f. Paraprostatic cyst.
until fetal calcification).
g. Androgen-producing tumor (e.g., testicular tumor).
b. Postpartum uterus (uterus commonly remains large
h. Orchitis.
and visible for a week or more).
i. Conditions that may mimic prostatomegaly:
c. Pseudocyesis (false pregnancy).
1) Cranial displacement of normal prostate gland:
d. Pyometra.
a) Full urinary bladder.
e. Hydrometra.
b) Weakened ventral abdominal wall (e.g. aging
f. Mucometra.
change, hypercorticosterism),
g. Hematometra (blood in uterus).
2. Prostatomegaly with smooth margins and symmetrical
h. Uterine torsion.
shape (suggests benign or slow-growing lesion):
i. Neoplasia (often causes hydrometra).
a. Benign prostatic hypertrophy or cystic hyperplasia.
j. Cystic endometrial hyperplasia.
b. Inflammation.
k. Uterine adenomyosis (proliferation of uterine glands).
c. Neoplasia.
1. Hydrocolpos (congenital vaginal blockage).
3. Prostatomegaly with irregular or ill-defined margins
2. Localized uterine enlargement (uterine mass):
(suggests acute or aggressive disease):
a. Early pregnancy.
a. Severe inflammation.
b. Small number of fetuses.
b. Neoplasia.
C. Neoplasia(e.g., carcinoma, leiomyoma,leiomyo-sarcoma),
455
Radiography of the Dog and Cat
d. Localized pyometra, mucometra, or hydrometra (in
c. Physometra (infection with gas-forming organisms).
one horn}
d. Emphysematous pyometra.
e. Uterine stump granuloma, abscess, or pyometra.
e. Iatrogenic (e.g.. attempts to catheterize cervix,
f. Endometritis.
abdominocentesis).
g. Cystic endometrial hyperplasia.
f. Conditions that may mimic uterine emphysema:
h. Uterine adenomyosis.
1) Summation artifact (e.g., overlying bowel, subcu-
i. Cystic uterine remnant.
taneous emphysema).
Opacity abnormalities of uterus
Vaginal diseases
1. Mineralization of uterus:
1. Inflammation (vaginitis).
a. Normal pregnancy and ossified fetal skeletons.
2. Prolapse.
b. Fetal mummification.
3. Polyps.
c. Mineralized uterine cyst or tumor.
4. Vaginal edema, hyperplasia, or hypertrophy.
d. Conditions that may mimic uterine mineralization:
1) Superimposed
 intestinal
content
(e.g
bone
transmissible venereal tumor).
fragments).
6. Rectovaginal fistula.
2. Gas in uterus:
7. Lacerations.
a. Fetal death (fetal emphysema)
b. Uterine torsion and ischemia.
456
Glossary
abscess: An accumulation of purulent material in an
aliasing: On digital radiographs, an artifact that appears as
abnormal cavity surrounded by a wall and typically associ-
a series of repeating lines superimposed on the image.
ated with inflammation. May be caused by infection or
alveolar filling: Refers to replacement of air in normally
presence of foreign material.
air-filled spaces in lung by fluid (e.g., blood, edema) or cells
achondroplasia: "without cartilage formation": a genetic
(e.g., neoplasia, purulent material). Any solid area of soft 
disorder of bone growth that results in disproportionate
tissue opacity in the lung that is not vessel, nodule, or mass
dwarfism. Appendicular bones are short and thick, metaph-
is alveolar filling.
 yses are cupped and flared, and physes are irregular. Some dog
alveolar pulmonary patterm: A radiographic appear-
breeds normally are classified as achondrodysplastic (e.g..
ance that occurs when air normally present in alveoli is
Bulldog) (a term that often is used interchangeably with
displaced by fluid, cells, or collapse of the alveoli. Appears 
chondrodystrophic).
as soft tissue opacity in the lung that obscures the margins
air bronchogram sign: Associated with an alveolar lung
of adjacent soft tissue structures (e.g., blood vessels, pulmo-
nary nodules, diaphragm, cardiac silhouette). The air bron-
pattern, this sign refers to air retained in a bronchus that
appears as a tubular, branching. less opaque structure sur-
chogram sign is characteristic of an alveolar pattern but is
not necessary for diagnosis of an alveolar pattern. Common
of contrast between the air-filled bronchus and soft tissue-
causes include pneumonia, hemorrhage, neoplasia, edema.
filled alveoli depends on the degree of alveolar filling (i.e.
more complete filling = more contrast). Air bronchograms
alveolar filling and can only be estimated due to decreased
are the classic sign of an alveolar pattern but do not occur
lung size causing a mediastinal shift.
with all alveolar patterns (in addition to the alveoli, the
angiocardiography: A radiographic contrast study of the
bronchi may become filled or collapsed).
heart and great vessels.
air gap: Distance between patient (subject or object) and
angiography: A radiographic contrast study of blood
image detector; increasing the air gap allows scattered x-rays
vessels.
to dissipate but results in magnification of the image.
Anode:
Positive terminal in x-ray tube. Anode attracts
ALARA (as low as reasonably achievable): The over-
electrons from cathode (negative terminal). Anode contains
riding principle of radiation safety. Understanding that some
a tungsten target made of metal with a high melting point
radiation exposure is necessary. it must be demonstrated
to withstand the intense heat generated by the electron
that further reducing the exposure would be grossly dispro-
beam.
portionate to the benefit gained; that is, the medical benefit
anode heel effect: See heel effect.
must be worth the exposure risk when using radiation.
Factors influencing the degree of exposure to radiation
apophysis:
 Essentially, a non-weight-bearing epiphysis: a
include amount of shielding, distance from source of x-rays.
normal bony projection that serves for the attachment of
time spent in presence of x-rays, and quality/quantity of x-rays.
tendons or ligaments (e.g. greater trochanter, tibial tuberosity):
@ 2013 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
457
Glossary
a secondary ossification center that contributes to the shape
block vertebra: A congenital defect caused by failure of
of a bone but does not contribute to overall bone length.
one or more vertebral bodies to segment normally during
development. Vertebrae appear fused, but each vertebral
appendicular: Pertaining to the limbs.
body maintains normal length.
arteriovenous fistula: An abnormal communication
bone cyst: A cavity within bone, often filled with fluid.
between an artery and a vein.
Usually well-defined margins and may be septated.
arthritis: Inflammation of a joint; may be caused by
bone infarcts: Foci of necrosis caused by decreased blood
trauma, infection, or immune-mediated disease. Term often
is erroneously used for degenerative joint disease.
areas of increased medullary opacity.
arthrography: A radiographic contrast study of a joint.
bone sclerosis: An increase in opacity of bone; eburna-
Arthrogram.
tion is a type of bone sclerosis.
artifact: A false lesion. Commonly caused by (l) technical
 bone spur: A well-defined bony projection. Term is used
problems associated with film, screens, grid, development,
to describe osteophytes (occur along non-weight-bearing
exposure, cassettes, x-ray table, etc., or (2) patient-related
articular margins) and enthesophytes (occur at sites of attach-
ment to bone, e.g., ligaments, tendons, joint capsules).
ous or subcutaneous structures. Artifacts can mimic disease.
border effacement: Occurs when two structures of same
impair image quality, and obscure abnormalities.
asynchronous growth: Refers to the disproportionate
longer distinguishable where they touch. The margin of a
rate of growth between paired bones (e.g., radius/ulna.
structure is only visible when it is adjacent to a different
tibia/fibula). typically caused by damage to a physis and
opacity (i.e., opacity interface). Other names: edge efface-
commonly resulting in an angular limb deformity and joint
ment, silhouette sign/effect.
subluxa tion.
brachycephalic: Refers to the shape of a skull in which
atelectasis: Incomplete expansion of part or all of a lung
the nasal cavity is considerably shorter than the cranium.
Also, the cranium commonly is more dome shaped, frontal
(i.e., partial or complete lung collapse). May result from
sinuses tend to be small or absent, and the occipital protu-
disease of lung or pleural space. Common with animals
 berance often is small. Examples: English Bulldog., Pug.
positioned in lateral recumbency.
bronchial cuffing:
: Thickening of the peribronchial inter-
avascular necrosis of the femoral head: A loss of blood
stitial tissues due to accumulation of fluid, cells, or fibrosis;
supply to the developing femoral head that results in bone
 a sign of a bronchial pulmonary pattern.
necrosis and eventual collapse. Condition may be idiopathic.
genetic, or traumatic.
bronchial pulmonary pattern: A radiographic appear-
ance in which bronchial walls are thickened and/or increased
axial: Pertains to the median line of the body. a limb, or
in opacity (latter includes mineralization of bronchial walls).
other structure. Axial skeletal structures include vertebral
Commonly caused by proliferation or infiltration of collag-
column, skull, hyoid bones, ribs, and sternum.
enous and cartilaginous tissues and associated mucous
barium sulfate: A positive contrast medium with a high
glands. May also result from accumulation of peribronchial
degree of opacity. Consists of a white crystalline powder.
interstitial fluid or cellular material. The size and shape of
micro-pulverized and in suspension. Adheres well to sus-
the bronchial lumen may be altered.
pending agents, enabling it to efficiently coat mucosal sur-
bronchiectasis:
 Abnormal and permanent dilation ofbronchi
faces. Barium is not metabolized or absorbed.
or bronchioles with loss of normal branching and tapering.
barium enema: A radiographic contrast study of the
bronchitis:  Inflammation of the bronchi
colon using barium sulfate.
bronchography: A radiographic contrast study of the
beak sign: Occurs when contrast medium fills only the
major airways.
entrance of the pyloric sphincter; commonly associated with
bronchopneumonia: Inflammation of the lungs that
pyloric stenosis.
usually begins in the terminal bronchioles.
beam direction: Path of x-rays as they enter and exit a
buccal:
 On the side that faces the cheek; used to describe
structure (e.g., dorsoventral, dorsopalmar; Figure 2.22).
lesions associated with the mouth.
bezoar: A concretion of fibrous material commonly found
Bucky: A device that holds a grid within the x-ray table.
in the stomach or intestine.
The Bucky (Potter-Bucky diaphragm) moves the grid rapidly
458
Glossary
during exposure to blur the grid lines. Modern grid lines are
central beam: X-ray photons in the middle of the x-ray
very thin and only faintly visible; therefore, a Bucky may
beam.
not be necessary with modern equipment.
cervical spondylopathy: Refers to deformity of vertebral
calcification: The normal or abnormal deposition of
bodies, narrowing of the vertebral canal, vertebral instabil-
calcium salts in soft tissues.
ity, and/or malarticulation with varying degrees of spinal
cord compression in the neck.
calcinosis:
Abnormal deposition of calcium salts in various
tissues.
cholangiography: A radiographic contrast study of the
● calcinosis cutis: Calcium deposits in the skin, often second-
bile ducts.
ary to hypercorticosterism.
·calcinosis circumscripta (tumoral calcinosis): Deposits of
calcium in subcutaneous, tendinous, ligamentous, or mus-
study of the gall bladder and bile ducts.
cular tissues as firm, well-circumscribed, tumorlike nodules;
cholecystography: A radiographic contrast study of the
typically occurring on limbs, over bony prominences, and
gall bla dder.
under foot pads.
cholelith: A concretion in the gall bladder.
calvarium: The upper, domelike part of the skull, formed
by the frontal, parietal, and occipital bones; the encasement 
choledocolith: A concretion in a bile duct.
for the brain.
chondrodysplasia: Inherited deformities of the bony
cancellous bone: The trabeculated, spongy or porous bone 
skeleton caused by abnormal cartilage development. Affected
found in ends of long bones, in vertebrae, and in flat bones.
animals are characterized by a normal-sized trunk with
canine leukocyte adhesion disorder (CLAD): Rare
abnormally shortened limbs.
inherited condition of abnormal granulocytes resulting in
chondrodystrophic: Refers to an animal exhibiting
mandibular periosteal response and metaphyseal flaring.
chondrodysplasia (e.g. Dachshund, Bassett Hound). Term
carcinomatosis:  Widespread  distribution  of  neoplasia
often is used interchangeably with achondrodysplastic.
throughout a body cavity: commonly used to describe diffuse
chondroma: A benign, slow-growing tumor of cartilage.
implantation of tumor nodules within the peritoneal space
more often occurring in flat bones (e.g., scapula, pelvis, ribs)
(e.g., pancreatic carcinoma).
and appearing as a well-defined, expansile mass that is less
cardiac silhouette: Outline of the pericardial sac and its
opaque than surrounding bone. A chondroma may contain
contents as seen on a thoracic radiograph.
mineralized components.
   s   o  
cartilage or fibrocartilage (e.g.. costochondral junctions.
often secondary to rupture of the thoracic duct.
pelvic symphysis).
chylous effusion: Accumulation of chylous fluid in the
cassette: A light-tight, semirigid container used to house
pleural space, may be associated with heart failure, medias-
tinal neoplasia, or mediastinitis.
imaging plate during exposure and transport to processing.
cineradiography (cineflurography): The making of a
cathode: The negative terminal in the x-ray tube. Cathode
video record directly from a fluorescent screen (i.e., record-
(filament) emits electrons, which are attracted to the anode
ing of real-time radiographic imaging.)
(positive terminal). Current flows from cathode to anode. In
x-ray tubes, the cathode commonly consists of a helical tung-
clock face analogy: Technique used to approximate the
 sten flament, behind which is a molybdenum refector cup
locations of cardiac chambers by mentally superimposing
used to focus the electron emission toward the anode target.
the numbers of a clock face over the cardiac silhouette on a
lateral or ventrodorsal/dorsoventral thoracic radiograph.
caudal: Toward the tail or hind part of the body. Also used
to designate the flexor side of a limb proximal to the carpus
Codman's triangle: Occurs when aggressive soft tissue
and tarsus (Figure 2.22).
opacity material wedges between a mineralized periosteal
caudocranial: Refers to the path of the x-ray beam (x-rays
response and the underlying cortex. The periosteal response
may appear solid, well-defined, and homogeneous in this
enter the caudal aspect of the body part and exit the cranial
area, giving the erroneous appearance of a benign, inactive
aspect).
lesion (which is not the true nature of the disease process).
celiography: A radiographic contrast study of the perito-
Codman's triangle develops at the periphery of a rapidly
neal space.
growing disease process, usually on the diaphyseal side.
459
Glossary
coin lesion: A descriptive term referring to a pulmonary
costophrenic angle: Junction of the thoracic wall (rib
nodule approximately l cm in diameter.
cage) and diaphragm at the caudolateral aspect of the tho-
racic cavity on a ventrodorsal or dorsoventral radiograph.
collirmation: Process of restricting the size and shape of
Angle normally is sharp and well-defined, but it becomes
the x-ray beam to the area of interest. Collimation helps
rounded when pleural fluid is present.
reduce scatter radiation, which improves image quality and
reduces radiation exposure to nearby personnel.
cranial: Toward the head. Opposed to caudal. (Figure
2.22.)
collirmator: 
An adjustable device used to restrict the size
and shape of the x-ray beam and which is attached near the
craniocaudal: Refers to the path of the x-ray beam (x-rays
x-ray tube.
enter the cranial aspect of the body part and exit the caudal
aspect}.
comparison radiographs: Images made of the side oppo-
site to the one being investigated or images of a similar
cretinism  (congenital  hypothyroidism):  Dispropor-
subject (e.g., littermate) or known normal subject, used to
tionate dwarfism caused by abnormal development of the
aid in distinguishing normal from abnormal.
thyroid gland, defective thyroid hormone synthesis, or
iodine deficiency.
compression radiography: Technique used to (l) dis-
place relatively movable structures to improve visualization
cut back zone: Refers to the area in a long bone where
of more fixed structures (i.e., displacement of overlying
the wider metaphysis is actively remodeling to become the
intestine to better visualize kidney, urinary bladder colon.
more-narrow diaphysis. The bony margins in the cut back
e o Aydeioi lunp sp aui aieiedas () ro (sain o
  q    rd u 
foot. A low-density plastic paddle or wooden spoon is used
to gently compress the abdomen or foot. Abdominal com-
trauma).
pression is contraindicated in animals with pain, tense
abdomen, or peritoneal effusion. X-ray exposure usually is
cystography:
 A radiographic contrast study of the urinary
decreased to accommodate thinner body thickness.
 bladder. Cystogram. Pneumocystogram.
computed tomography (CT): A diagnostic imaging proce-
dacryocystorhinography: A radiographic contrast study
dure that creates cross-sectional views of a body part using
of the nasolacrimal duct.
x-rays and computers. The source of x-rays rotates around the
decubitus: Position assumed when lying down. Opposed
patient, transmitting a thin x-ray beam through the body part
to erect or standing.
to detectors on the opposite side. CT images have inherent high
degenerative joint disease (DJD): The most common
consolidation: Refers to pathology of the lung in which
joint disorder in dogs and cats, characterized by degradation
alveolar air has been replaced by organized cellular exudate
of articular cartilage and subchondral bone (also called
osteoarthritis and osteoarthrosis). May result from trauma.
or by invasion of neoplastic cells.
infection, age-related wear, overuse, developmental anoma-
contralateral: Pertaining to the opposite side.
lies, immune-mediated disease, and other causes. The most
common radiographic sign is osteophyte formation.
contrast media: Compounds or materials used to increase
or decrease opacity to create an opacity interface between
definition: Refers to the margination of a lesion and is
an examined structure and the adjacent tissues.
affected by the degree of activity and aggressiveness of a
disease process. Definition should not be confused with (1)
contrast study: A radiographic procedure using a positive
detail, which is affected by technical factors, (2) shape.
or negative contrast agent to enhance visualization of an
which may be smooth or irregular, or (3) opacity interfaces.
 organ or structure that is inadequately seen on survey radio-
which are affected by patient's body condition, presence of
graphs. A contrast study is only indicated if it will provide
effusion, etc.
information not available on survey radiographs and will
Examples:
assist the clinician in managing the case or in developing a
· A well-defined periosteal response is inactive; an ill-
diagnosis without harming the patient.
defined periosteal response is active.
● Well-defined osteolysis is less aggressive; ill-defined oste-
contusion: A local area of hemorrhage or bruising.
olysis is more aggressive.
cortical bone: The dense, homogeneous bone that forms
· A well-defined pulmonary nodule is more likely to be a
the shaft of long bones and the outer layer of small and
tumor; an ill-defined lung nodule is more typical of an
cuboidal bones.
abscess or mycotic granuloma.
460
Glossary
delayed union fracture: The bone fragments do not
discography: A radiographic contrast study of the central
unite within the expected period of time, but healing is
portion of an intervertebral disc.
believed to eventually occur.
discospondylitis: Inflammation or infection of an inter-
density: Radiographic density refers to the degree of black-
vertebral disc (other names: intradiscal osteomyelitis.
ening of a radiograph. Physical density refers to the charac-
diskitis).
teristic of a material to block x-rays. Previously. the term
disseminated
idiopathic
skeletal
hyperostosis
density was used synonymously with opacity. Density is still
(DISH): Flowing mineralization along contiguous verte-
used to describe opacity on CT images.
bral bodies. DISH resembles severe spondylosis deformans.
detail: Refers to the edge sharpness of structures as seen
Other names: Forestier's disease (human medical term).
on a radiograph. Detail is affected by technical factors such
distal: Away from the center of the body. Opposed to
as exposure settings, motion artifact, type of film:screen
proximal (Figure 2.22).
system, focal spot size, etc. It is one of the four quality char-
distortion:
(l) Geometric distortion occurs when one part
acteristics of a radiograph (density. detail, distortion, con-
of the patient (subject or object) is positioned further from
trast). Detail has nothing to do with the patient and
the detector than other parts, creating uneven magnifica-
everything to do with how the radiograph was created.
tion. (2) Positional distortion refers to errors in positioning.
Detail should not be confused with (l) definition, which is
affected by activity and aggressiveness of a disease process
such as rotation of the sternum on a ventrodorsal radiograph
or placing a structure of interest at the periphery of the field
or (2) opacity interfaces, which are affected by patient's body
of view, which can falsely alter the normal appearance.
condition, presence of effusion, etc. Detail is enhanced by
using a small focal spot, tight collimation, larger distance
diverticulum: A pouch or sac extending outward from a
between focal spot and detector, and a shorter distance
hollow organ or structure (e.g., stomach, intestine, esopha
between subject and detector. A slow-speed film:screen
gus, urinary bladder)
system or a digital system with high spatial resolution will
donut sign: Refers to the end-on visualization of a bron-
provide better detail. Other factors that increase detail
chus with a thickened wall, increased endobronchial secre-
include using a grid to reduce scatter radiation and avoiding
tions, or peribronchial infiltrate. Characteristic of a bronchial
patient motion.
pulmonary pattern.
dolichocephalic: Refers to the shape of a skull in which
image. A detector may be film (conventional radiography)
the nasal cavity is longer than the cranium. The occipital
or a phosphor plate (digital radiography). X-rays that pass
crest tends to be prominent in animals with this type of
through the patient to the detector form the latent image.
skull. Examples: Collie, Greyhound.
Other names: image detector, image receptor.
 dorsal: Toward the back or spine. Opposed to ventral. Also
development of x-ray film: Refers to the chemical
refers to the top. front, or extensor surface of limbs (at or
process that converts activated silver halide crystals to metal-
 below the carpus and tarsus) and the top of the head (Figure
lic silver particles. Silver particles blacken the film to create
2.22).
the final image. Development may be accomplished manu-
dorsal recumbency:
ally or using an automatic film processor.
Animal is positioned lying on its back.
dorsopalmar/plantar:
 Describes the path of the x-ray
diaphysis: "Between physes": the middle portion or shaft
beam (x-rays enter the dorsum of the limb and exit the
 of a long bone; the area between the metaphyses; a primary
palmar/plantar surface ).
center of ossification of a long bone.
dorsoventral (DV) radiograph:
 The x-ray beam enters
DICOM (Digital Imaging and Communication in Med -
the dorsal surface of a body part and exits the ventral surface.
icine): A specific file format (such as jpeg or tif) used to
store digital images and which contains information specific
to the patient, type of digital equipment used, image trans-
therapy or a specific procedure.
mission, and pixel data. DICOM files are safeguarded to
double contrast: A radiographic contrast study using
prevent permanent altering of images and can only be
negative (e.g.. gas) and positive contrast media (e.g., barium,
viewed with a DICOM viewer.
iodinated agents).
dirty lungs: Refers to an interstitial lung pattern; vascular
double physis sign: Refers to the line of decreased opacity
and bronchial margins become partially obscured and appear
within the metaphysis parallel to the physis in animals suf-
hazy due to increased interstitial opacity.
461
Glossary
dural ossification:  A degenerative condition of unknown
esophagography: A radiographic contrast study of the
clinical significance in the dog. characterized by osseous
esophagus. Esopha gram.
metaplasia of the dura mater.
excretory urography (EU): A radiographic contrast
dysplasia: Refers to the abnormal development or growth
study of the kidney and ureters. Other names: intravenous
of a structure (e.g. hip dysplasia, elbow dysplasia).
urography (old term: intravenous pyelogram or IVP).
dystrophic mineralization: The abnormal, localized
exostosis:  A bony growth that projects outward from the
precipitation of inorganic material in damaged, degenerat-
surface of a bone. The term is nondescript, and any exostosis
ing, or dead tissue.
 should be investigated and further described as to origin
(e.g., periosteal response, osteophyte, enthesophyte).
eburnation: Subchondral osteosclerosis,
commonly
occurs after articular cartilage has been lost.
extension:
 The straightening of a limb or other body part.
Con trast flexion.
ectrodactyly: A congenital malformation in which one or
more central digits are absent or reduced in size.
extrapleural sign: Refers to lesions arising outside the
parietal or mediastinal pleura; commonly originating from
edge enhancement:S
See Mach band.
the thoracic wall, diaphragm, or mediastinum. Presents as a
elbow incongruity: A distinct disorder in which the distal
mass bulging into the thoracic cavity, displacing (indenting)
the adjacent lung. Margins of the mass taper cranially and
humerus and trochlear notch of the ulna do not fit properly
caudally to blend with the thoracic wall, diaphragm, or
due to abnormal development of the proximal ulna or
mediastinum.
humeral condyle; elbow incongruity is associated with
       
feline polyarthritis: A progressive, noninfectious, erosive
description of asynchronous growth of the radius and ulna.
or nonerosive inflammation of multiple joints with or
without bone proliferation.
emphysema: The abnormal accumulation of gas in a
tissue (e.g., subcutaneous emphysema, emphysematous cys-
feline capital physeal dysplasia syndrome: A condi-
titis). Also, the overinflation of a lung(s) (see pulmonary
tion of unknown etiology in which osteonecrosis of the
emphysema)
femoral neck leads to pathologic fracture at the capital
physis. May be unilateral or bilateral (if unilateral, the con-
enchondroma: A benign cartilaginous tumor that devel-
tralateral limb often is affected within 6 to 12 months).
ops from displaced growth cartilage. Tumor continues to
grow and expand but fails to ossify. Appears on radiographs
fibrous joint: A bony union with little mobility and lacking
as an expansile, well-defined area of decreased opacity in
a joint cavity (e.g., sutures of the skull, attachment of hyoid
the medullary cavity of a long bone (usually in the metaphy-
bones to petrous temporal bone, attachment of tooth to alveo-
sis or diaphysisy.
lar bone). Other names: synarthrodial joint, synarthrosis.
endochondral ossification: The formation of bone in a
field of view: Area of the body through which the primary
cartilaginous framework.
x-ray beam passes. Field of view should be restricted to the
area of interest by collimating the x-ray beam. Restriction
endosteum: Similar to periosteum but lines the medul-
of the field of view helps maximize image quality, minimize
lary cavities of bones.
scatter radiation, and decrease distortion.
enthesophyte: A bony growth or spur projecting outward
filament: A thin, threadlike conducting wire with a high
from a site of joint capsule, tendinous or ligamentous attach-
melting point that forms the cathode (negative) part of the
ment; mineralization of said attachments.
X-ray tube. It is the source of electrons.
epidurography: A radiographic contrast study of the
filling defect: Anything that prevents contrast medium
cauda equina and associated nerve roots.
from occupying a hollow organ or space. Presents as a less
epiphysis: "Upon the physis." the rounded end of a long 
opaque area(s) on a positive contrast study and a more
opaque area(s) on a negative contrast study. May be caused
fication center at the proximal or distal end of most long
by pathology or artifact.
bones. In immature animals, the epiphysis is separated from
film:screen system: Refers to a conventional radiogra-
the metaphysis by the physis.
phy set up with a piece of x-ray film sandwiched between
-n       o
erect: Position in which the animal is vertical (frequently
held upright and usually standing on its hind legs); x-ray
ca sse tte.
beam commonly is directed horizontally.
fissure line::
 See pleural fissure line.
462
Glossary
fistulography: A radiographic contrast study used to
· compression fracture: The ends of the bone fragments are
investigate a fistulous tract or draining wound. Fistulogram.
impacted into each other, resulting in a shortened or col-
flail chest: Refers to instability of the thoracic wall caused
lapsed bone.
● depression fracture: A fragment of a broken bone is located
below the normal bone surface.
of the chest wall becoming functionally detached. Flail chest
● fissure fracfure: An incomplete break in a bone that extends
is an emergency situation that results in paradoxical respira-
from another fracture.
tory movements (detached portion is pulled inward during
·folding fracture (torus or buckling fracture): The cortex is
inspiration and pushed outward during expiration).
broken on the concave side.
flexion: The bending of a limb or body part. Contrast
· greenstick fracture (hairline fracture): An incomplete linear
extension.
break on the convex side of a bone.
fluoroscopy: A radiologic procedure using x-rays and a
● incomplete fracture: A partial break in a bone; the bone is
fluorescent screen to create real-time radiographic movies
not in complete discontinuity: appears on radiographs as a
break in only one side of the cortex.
of anatomic structures. Fluoroscopy commonly is used to
evaluate swallowing. GI motility, dynamic respiratory dis-
· open fracture: The overlying skin and soft tissues are
eases, movements of the diaphragm, and for interventional
perforated.
● segmental fracrure: Multiple breaks in a long bone that do
tively high levels of radiation. Modern fluoroscopy systems
  o     o
allow images to be viewed via electronic intensification,
fragment.
which enhances visibility and decreases exposure.
fragments.
fluid level: The interface between fluid and gas, demon-
● stress fracture (fatigue fracture): A break in a bone caused by
strated by using a horizontal x-ray beam (e.g., standing lateral
damage from repetitive cycling.
radiograph, erect ventrodorsal radiograph). Gas must be present
· pathologic fracture: A break in a bone that has been weak-
to document the fluid level (need to see gas-fluid interface).
ened by underlying disease or a developmental defect.
focal spot: The area on the anode target of an x-ray tube
· Shearing fracture (abrasion fracture): An open break or loss
that is struck by electrons and from which x-rays are emitted.
of bone secondary to severe friction or glancing trauma.
● slab fracture: The edge of a bone is broken and the fracture
focal film distance (FFD): The distance from the focal
line extends from one articular surface to the other.
spot to the film or detector. Other names: source-to-image
detector distance (SID), focal-receptor distance (FRD}-
fogging: Refers to the nondiagnostic blackening (or
stomach. Gastrogram.
graying) of a film radiograph. May be caused by scatter
gram: Years ago, radiographs were also called radiograms.
radiation, visible light, pressure, heat, or chemicals.
Currently. gram is used to describe contrast studies (e.g..
foreign material: Any object or matter that is not normal
esophagram, cystogram): for example, cystography is per-
to the place where it is found. Sometimes the terrm foreign
formed to produce a cystogram.
body is used; however, a body is the physical structure of an
granulorma: A mass or nodule of chronically inflamed
organism.
tissue with granulations (small, rounded masses of tissue
fracture: A break or discontinuity in bone caused by a
that form during healing). usually associated with an infec-
physical force that exceeds the structural capacity of the
tious process.
bone or by a disease that weakens the bone.
● articuiar fracture: A break in a bone that extends to a joint
graph: In imaging terminology. this term refers to an
image. Practically the term has come to mean a survey or
surface.
● avuision fracture: A break in a bone that occurs at an attach-
noncontrast image: a radiograph.
ment site (e.g., ligament, tendon) and results in a piece of
gravel sign: Refers to the accumulation of tiny, sandlike
bone being pulled away from the main bone.
mineral opacities immediately proximal to the site of a
· chip fracture: A corner or edge of a bone is broken.
gastric or intestinal obstruction.
● closed fracture: The overlying skin and soft tissues are intact.
·comminuted fracture: Multiple breaks in a bone that
grid:
An x-ray filtering device consisting of interspaced
communicate at a single point; results in three or more
metal strips (usually lead) designed to block (absorb) sec-
fragments.
ondary or scatter radiation. Grid is positioned between the
● complete fracture: A break in a bone that extends through
subject (patient) and image detector (e.g., film, phosphor
the entire bone.
plate).
463
Glossary
ground-glass appearance: Refers to a homogenous
HIS (hospital information system): Term to include all
aspects of hospital information (e.g., administration, finan-
cial, clinical).
growth arrest lines: Refers to thin, well-defined, hori-
zontal lines of increased opacity in a long bone diaphysis
horizontal beam radiography: Technique in which the
(most common in femur). May be caused by dietary changes
x-ray beam is directed horizontally (i.e., across the x-ray
or systemic illness during growth.
table) to make a radiograph. Animal typically is standing or
in lateral recumbency. Technique may be used to document
heel effect: Refers to the variation in intensity of the
soa on 'aeds Apoq e u seo no p aa no aouasaid
x-ray beam between cathode and anode sides of the x-ray
fluid to better visualize obscured structures, or when minimal
tube. Because the target is angled (to create a smaller effec-
movement of the patient is required.
tive focal spot), the bottom or "heel" of the focal spot absorbs
some of the radiation. Absorption of some radiation on the
hyperparathyroidism: A systemic condition in which
anode side results in more x-rays being emitted from the
cathode side of the x-ray tube. The thicker part of the subject
parathyroid glands leads to abnormal loss of mineral from
should be positioned on the cathode side to take advantage
bone. May be primary (caused by parathyroid gland disease)
of the heel effect.
or secondary (due to nutritional deficiency or chronic renal
disease).
hematoma:
A localized accumulation of blood within
tissues outside of the vessels. Other names: bruise,
hypertrophic osteodystrophy (HoD): A systemic
contusion.
disease of unknown etiology that results in subperiosteal
hemorrhage and transient defects in metaphyseal mineral-
hemimelia: Congenital partial or complete absence of a
ization. Appears on radiographs as line of decreased opacity
normally paired bone (e.g., radius/ulna, tibia/fibula).
parallel to physis and mineralization along the metaphysis.
May be associated with canine distemper.
hemivertebra: Congenital defect resulting in only partial
development of a vertebral body.
hydrothorax: Accumulation of fluid within the pleural
hemothorax: Accumulation of blood within the pleural
space.
space.
iatrogenic:
  s   
hernia: Protrusion of an organ or portion of an organ
treatment.
through an opening or rent (commonly in a structure that 
idiopathic:
 Of unknown etiology: occurring without
normally contains it).
known cause.
herringbone pattern:
On a positive contrast esopha-
ileus: Partial or complete obstruction due to hypomotility
gram, refers to the normal transverse mucosal pattern of the
or physical blockage. May be associated with intestine.
distal third of the feline esophagus.
esophagus, ureter, or bile duct.
heterotopic bone formation: Focal ossification in an
ill-defined: The margin or border of a structure is not well
abnormal location. Typically refers to small, well-defined.
visualized. A simple test is whether or not you could take a
slightly irregular-shaped mineralized structures (less than
pencil and easily trace the edges of the structure. When used
3 mm in size) in the lung. Other names: pulmonary osteo-
to describe bone lesions, ill-defined osteolysis is more aggres-
mas, pulmonary microlithiasis.
sive and ill-defined periosteal response is more active. Ill-
defined is not the same as irreguiar. Well-defined is not the
hiatus/hiatal:
:An opening. gap. or cleft; term usually is
same as smooth.
associated with the diaphragm (e.g., hiatal hernia).
image detector: See detector.
high-frequency x-ray machine:"
 Type of equipment in
which the electric current to the x-ray tube is manipulated
image receptor: See detector.
to produce nearly constant potential voltage. Constant
infiltrate:
Accumulation of abnormal cells in a tissue;
voltage results in a more uniform production of x-rays with
typically describes diffuse lesions in bone or lung.
an average energy closer to the selected kVp. With standard
x-ray machines (fully rectified, single phase), the voltage
intensifying screen: A plastic sheet coated with rare
 '  s i   s  d i 
earth phosphorous and used to convert x-rays to visible
produces an average energy of the x-ray beam equal to only
light. Intensifying screens are mounted inside a light-proof
about two-thirds that of the selected kVp on the control
cassette and a piece of x-ray film is placed between two
panel.
screens in the cassette. Purpose of intensifying screens is to
464
Glossary
reduce x-ray exposure by enhancing the effect of x-rays on
lumbosacral instability:
:Abnormal movement between
film.
last lumbar and first sacral vertebrae due to a congenital or
acquired disorder. Radiographically characterized by nar-
Interlobar fissure line: See pleural fissure line.
rowing of the vertebral canal or intervertebral foramina
interstitial pulmonary pattern: A radiographic appear-
(which causes compression of the nerve roots that form the
ance caused by increased amount of tissue, fluid, or cellular
cauda equina in the lumbosacral region). Other names:
material in the non-air-containing lung parenchyma.
cauda equina syndrome, lumbosacral stenosis, lumbosacral
Increased opacity is within the lung. but not involving
malarticulation.
vessels. bronchi, or alveoli. This is the least specific lung
pattern and a frequently overused term. Rarely is a true
lung markings:1
 Refers to the radiographically visible
interstitial lung pattern visible on radiographs without some
bronchial walls and pulmonary vessels.
degree of alveolar filling.
luxation:
Complete loss of contact between articular
intramembranous ossification: Refers to (l) formation
surfa ces.
of bone in sheets of connective tissue (e.g.. bones of the
skull) and (2) method by which most bones heal.
lymphadenopathy: Abnormal lymph node; term gener-
ally is used to describe lymph node enlargement (more
intravenous
urography
(IVU): See
excretory
correct term is lymphadenomegaly).
urography.
ionic iodinated contrast media: Positive contrast agents
lymphography (lymphangiography): A radiographic
contrast study of the lymphatic vessels.
that are hyperosmolar (hypertonic). rapidly absorbed.
quickly diluted, and can be irritating to tissues.
Mach band: An optical illusion in which a false black or
ipsilateral: On or pertaining to the same side.
white line occurs at the boundary between two different
opacities. Other names: Mach line, edge enhancement.
irregular:  A descriptive term that refers only to the shape
● A negative Mach band (black line) is visible around nearly
of a structure or lesion (irregular should not be confused
any "white" structure on radiographs (may be misinter-
with ill-defined). Irregular does not define cause, activity, or
preted as a fracture line where bones cross). A negative
 aggressiveness of a lesion.
Mach band also occurs along the edge of a convex structure
kVp (kilovolt peak): ‘
(e.g., outer margin of bone cortex)-
across the x-ray tube. Determines the kinetic energy of the
● A positive Mach band (white line) occurs at the edge of a
electrons and therefore the highest energy in the x-ray
 concave structure (e.g., acetabulum and under femoral head
beam. Determines the quality and penetrating ability of the
on a ventrodorsal pelvic radiograph). Positive Mach bands
x-ray beam. Influences the radiographic contrast (degree of
may be mistaken for osteophytes (i.e., on the femoral neck).
difference between black and white on a radiograph). 1
● Mach bands cannot be eliminated by knowledge of their
kilovolt = 1000 volts.
existence; the illusion occurs in the retina and the brain
actually sees it.
kyphosis: Dorsal curvature of the spine.
· Mach bands were described in 1865 by physicist Ernst
labial: On the side that faces the lips; used to describe
Mach.
lesions associated with the mouth.
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI): A diagnostic
lateral:
 Toward the side; away from the midline plane.
imaging procedure that creates cross-sectional images of a
Contrast medial (Figure 2.22).
body part using powerful magnetic fields. The magnetic field
lateral recumbency: Animal is positioned lying on its
temporarily alters the positions of protons in the patient. As
these protons return to their normal positions, they emit
side.
radio waves that are detected by computers to create images
lateral radiograph: The x-ray beam enters the right or
with superior anatomic detail. The patient is not exposed to
left side of a body part and exits the opposite side.
harmful radiation during an MRI procedure.
lesion: A detected radiographic abnormality.
magnification: Process of enlarging a radiographic image
lingual:
 On the side that faces the tongue.
by using a small focal spot and increasing the object-film
lordosis: Ventral curvature of the spine.
(object-receptor) distance.
lumbophrenic angle: Junction of the diaphragm and
malunion fracture: Fracture has healed, but there is
lumbar spine at the dorsocaudal aspect of the thoracic cavity
abnormal bone geometry (i.e., bone is abnormally short-
on a lateral radiograph.
ened, malaligned, angled, or rotated).
465
Glossary
manus: Distal part of a thoracic limb; includes carpus.
monostotic: In the same bone.
metacarpus, and digits.
mucopolysaccharidosis: A group of inherited diseases
mAs (milliampere seconds): Product of the strength of
characterized by accumulations of mucopolysaccharides.
the current through the x-ray tube (milliamperes) and the
 which can lead to perrmanent damage in musculoskeletal,
length of time the current is on (seconds). Determines the
ocular, neurologic, and circulatory systems.
      s  
myelocele:
 Neural defect in which the spinal cord pro-
x-rays produced (quantity of x-ray beam). Influences radio-
 graphic density (degree of blackness on a radiograph).
trudes through a dorsal spinal defect.
myelography:  A radiographic contrast study of the spinal
mass effect: Displacement of viscera or other structures
away from their normal positions without distinct visualiza-
cord involving injection of positive contrast medium into the
tion of the borders of a mass.
spinal subarachnoid space. Myelogram.
mass lesion: A solitary lesion larger than 3 cm in
myositis ossificans: The deposition of inorganic materials
diameter.
in muscle, usually secondary to trauma.
median:F
 Pertaining to the middle of the body.
mural:
 Pertaining to or occurring in the wall of a body
ca vity.
medial:
Toward the midline of the body or on the inner
(axial) surface of an extremity. Along the median. Contrast
negative contrast agent: A contrast medium that absorbs
lateral (Figure 2.22).
very few x-rays and is less opaque than soft tissue or fat (i.e..
a gas such as room air, carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide, or
mediastinal shift: Displacement of the heart and/or
oxygen).
other mediastinal structures toward the right or left side.
May be caused by alteration in lung volume, a mass lesion,
nephrogram:
 The phase in excretory urography during
unilateral fluid or gas in pleural space, or congenital defect
which the kidneys are opacified by positive contrast medium.
(e.g., pectus excavatum).
niche: A recess in the wall of a hollow organ that retains
meningocele: Neural defect in which the meninges pro-
contrast. Ulcers and diverticuli are examples.
trude through a dorsal spinal defect.
nodular lesion: A spherical lesion measuring up to 30 mm
meningomyelocele:
:Neural defect in which the spinal
in diameter.
cord, meninges, or nerve roots protrude through a dorsal
nodular
spinal defect.
pulmonary pattern:
One or more small,
rounded lesions in the lung (i.e., a structured interstitial
metaphysis:
"Next to the physis": wider portion of a long
 pulmonary pa ttern).
bone between the diaphysis and the physis. The area in a
nonionic iodinated contrast media: Positive contrast
long bone where growth cartilage is transformed into corti-
cal bone.
agents that are water soluble but not converted into ions.
similar in osmolality to plasma, and cause fewer adverse
metastatic calcification: The deposition of calcium salts
reactions compared with ionic contrast media.
in tissues away from a disease site, most often due to abnor-
mal calcium/phosphorus metabolisrm.
nonunion fracture: Fracture healing ceases before a
complete union has occurred.
microlithiasis: Focal areas of mineralization (less than
3 mm in size) in an organ, usually the lung. (Other names:
Norberg angle: A numerical assessment of coxofemoral
heterotopic bone formation, pulmonary osteomas).
joint subluxation made on an extended ventrodorsal pelvic
radiograph. Measurement is made by drawing a line con-
miliary nodules: Smallin size, like a millet seed (l-2 mm).
necting the centers of the two femoral heads and another
Other names: micronodules.
line extending from the center of each femoral head to the
mineralization: The abnormal bioprecipitation of inor-
cranial edge of the corresponding acetabular rim. Norberg
ganic substances (such as calcium) in organic tissue; includes
angle greater than 105 is normal, between 90 and 105 is
petrification and fossilization.
 borderline, and less than 90 is abnormal.
mixed pulmonary pattern:
Two or more lung patterns
object:
 The thing or item being radiographed (i.e., patient
are visible concurrently (i.e., bronchointerstitial, interstitial
or body part). Other names: subject, patient.
and alveolar).
object-film distance (OFD): The distance between the
monoarticular: One joint (i.e., all lesions in the same
patient and the film or image detector. In digital radiogra-
joint).
phy, object-rece ptor distance.
466
Glossary
object-receptor distance (ORD): The distance between
osteochondritis dissecans (OCD): A developmental
the patient and the image detector or receptor.
condition in which abnormal blood supply to epiphyseal
bone disturbs endochondral ossification, resulting in thicken-
oblique radiograph: Animal or body part is slightly
ing. softening, necrosis, and eventual collapse of cartilage.
rotated from true lateral or true ventrodorsal/dorsoventral
positioning to displace overlying structures from area of
osteochondroma: A benign bony mass caused by abnor-
interest or to view a structure in profle. Oblique radiogra-
mal location of physeal cartilage. Mass usually stops growing
phy may also be accomplished by changing the angle of the
at skeletal maturity. but malignant transformation to chon-
x-ray beam.
drosarcoma or osteosarcoma can occur. Appears as an
expansile, inhomogeneous, osseous mass extending away
Orthopedic Foundation for Animals, established in
from bone, typically with irregular borders and well-defined
1966.
margins. Multiple osteochondroma is called osteochondro-
oligocephalic: Shape of skull in which nasal cavity is
matosis or multiple cartilaginous exostoses.
approximately equal in length to the cranium. Other names:
osteogenesis imperfecta: A rare, generalized condition
mesaticephalic.
caused by a defect in collagen production and resulting in
opacity (radiopacity): Characteristic of a material to
fragile bones. May be confused with hyperparathyroidism.
block (attenuate or absorb) x-rays. The more opaque a mate-
osteolysis: An abnormal, localized area of active bone
rial, the more x-rays are blocked and the whiter the material
resorption caused by disease. The pattern of osteolysis
appears on a radiograph. One of five basic opacities is
reflects the aggressiveness of the disease process. A more
assigned to a material; gas, fat, soft tissue, bone, or metal.
 aggressive disease process presents with less distinct bony
The inherent opacity of a material is related to its density
margins, a longer zone of transition between normal and
(atomic number and degree of compaction). Overall opacity
disease bone, and a more rapid rate of change on serial
 of a material relates to its thickness.
radiographs.
opacity interface: The visible difference in shades of gray
osteoma:
A rare, benign, slow-growing. osseous neo-
between two adjacent structures which allows them to be
plasm that protrudes from the surface of a bone, usually on
differentiated on a radiograph. Without opacity interfaces, a
the skull.
radiography would be homogenous, with no visible struc-
osteomalacia:
Softening of bones due to faulty mineral-
by body condition (e.g., emaciation, immature age) and
ization of available osteoid.
disease processes (e.g., effusion) and should not be confused
osteomyelitis:
 Inflammation of bone; usually caused by
with detail (affected by technical factors) or definition (refers
an acute or chronic infection (e.g., bacterial, fungal, proto-
to margination of a lesiony.
Zoal organisms). Technically, bone and medullary cavity.
organic iodinated compounds:
 Positive contrast agents
Osteopenia: Low bone density: decrease in bone mass
commonly used to study intravascular, intrathecal, intra-
(synonym for osteoporosis).
articular, and soft tissue structures. High atomic number and
mass of iodine result in high opacity in these agents, which
osteopetrosis: Uncommon congenital disease leading to
are available as ionic (hypertonic) and nonionic (isotonic)
increased bone thickness and opacity. Other names: marble
bone.
 preparations.
osteophyte: A well-defined bony growth or bone spur
orthogonal radiographs:
Radiographs made at right
projecting outward from a periarticular margin. Results from
angles (perpendicular or 90 degrees) to each other. Radio-
degeneration and mineralization of proliferating articular
graphs are two-dimensional images of three-dimensional
cartilage in non-weight-bearing areas. The common true
subjects and orthogonal projections are required for mean-
ingful evaluation.
sign of degenerative joint disease.
osteoporosis: "Porous bones": loss of bone mass resulting
ossification: The process of creating new bone by osteo-
 blasts, usually in a cartilaginous or fibrous tissue matrix.
in decreased opacity of bone; may result from disuse or
metabolic disease. Other names: bone atrophy.
Calcification occurs during ossification, but the reverse is not
true.
osteosclerosis (sclerosis): Increased bone opacity: an
area of bone with elevated density (more mineral is present
ossification center: A site of bone formation; primary
centers of ossification develop in the diaphyses: secondary
in the bone). Radiographically more opaque.
centers develop in the epiphyses and apophyses; and acces-
otic canalography: A radiographic contrast study of the
sory centers form sesamoid bones.
external auditory canal.
467
Glossary
PACS
(picture
archiving
and
communicati on
periosteum:'
Tough layer of vascular connective tissue
system): a network of computers used to accomplish
that covers outer surfaces of all bones except at the joint
surfaces. Periosteum is responsible for circumferential
P Pictures made available for viewing.
. interpretation,
growth of immature long bones and provides healing
reporting. and consultation from multiple modalities (radiol-
response when bone is damaged.
ogy, ultrasound, CT, MRI, etc.).
pes: Distal part of a pelvic limb; includes tarsus, metatar-
A Archiving and storage of imaging studies for both short 
and long terms.
sus, and digits.
C Communication with local and remote computers, pro-
phosphor: A rare-earth compound that emits an instan-
fessionals, and consultants to manage workflow and share
taneous flash of light after interaction with an x-ray. The
informa tion.
light is phosphorescence rather than fluorescence (latter
S System coordination and integration to works with
 glows for a longer period of time).
radiology information systems (RIs). hospital informa-
tion systems (HIS). and others to enable a paperless
physis:
The cartilaginous growth plate located between
the metaphysis and the epiphysis of an immature long bone.
environment.
 Other names: epiphyseal plate, growth plate.
palmar: Associated with the palm of the hand; refers to
the bottom surface of a distal thoracic limb or manus (Figure
physeal fracture: A break in bone that occurs through a
2.22). Opposed to dorsal when referring to a limb.
physis (occurs in immature animals). Fracture commonly is
described using Salter-Harris classification.
panosteitis: A self-limiting bone disorder of unknown
etiology that causes an acute onset of pain in one or more
phytobezoar: A concretion of plant material (fruit and/or
bones. Multiple bones may be affected either simultaneously
vegetable fibers) within the alimentary tract (usually
or sequentially and lameness commonly shifts between legs.
stomach or intestine).
Appears on radiographs as areas of increased medullary
plantar: Associated with the sole of the foot; refers to the
opacity. typically near a nutrient foramen, and sometimes
bottom surface of a distal pelvic limb or pes (Figure 2.22).
with a periosteal response.
Opposite of dorsal when referring to a limb.
parosteal osteosarcoma: A rare, slow-growing bone
pleural fissure line:1
 Linear increased opacity between
tumor that arises from the surface of the bone instead of the
lung lobes. May represent pleural thickening (line is uniform
intramedullary region. Commonly appears as a smooth-
in thickness and does not taper). pleural effusion (line
bordered, nonaggressive bony mass arising from the surface
of the bone.
widens peripherally and tapers toward the hilus), or inter-
lobar fat (line is wider centrally and tapers peripherally).
patchy: Refers to multiple, indistinct, irregularly shaped
Other names: interlobar fissure line, fissure line.
lesions; commonly used to describe amorphous areas of
increased opacity in the lungs.
pleural thickening: Increased width and opacity of pari-
etal or visceral pleura due to deposits of fibrin or mineral.
pathologic fracture:
A loss of continuity in a bone that
has been weakened by an underlying disease process or
pleurography: A radiographic contrast study of the pari-
developmental defect; typically caused by neoplasia or meta-
etal and visceral pleural surfaces made by instilling contrast
bolic bone disease.
medium into the pleural space.
penumbra:
The partial outer shadows that blur the edges
plication:
: Abnormal bunching of small intestine with
of structures and decrease radiographic detail. Occurs due to
tight turns and irregular pockets of gas, commonly caused
the fact that x-rays do not originate from a single point but
 by linear foreign material. Other names: pleating.
are generated over a small area. Penumbra can be minimized
pneumatocoele:
An air-filled cyst in a lung: usually
by using a small focal spot, a longer distance between focal
results from trauma.
spot and image detector, and a shorter distance between
patient (subject or object) and imaging detector. Other
pneumomediastinum: Presence of free gas in the medi-
names: geometric unsharpness.
astinum; results in visualization of mediastinal structures
not normally seen.
periosteal response: Formation of new bone to fill the
space created when the periosteum is separated from the
pneumopericardiography:  A   radiographic
contrast
cortex. New bone forms perpendicular to the periosteum.
study of the pericardial space; used to evaluate the pericar-
The appearance of the margin of the periosteal new bone
dial sac, epicardial surface of the heart, and origin of the
formation reflects the activity of the disease process (the less
aorta and pulmonary arteries. Typically performed by instill-
distinct the margin, the more active the disease process).
ing gas in the pericardial sac.
468
Glossary
 d ae    ao
pulmonary ermphysema: Refers to increased size of air
spaces distal to the terminal bronchiole, with destruction of
alveolar walls.
of the peritoneal space; gas is instilled into the peritoneal
· compensatory emphysema: Refers to overexpansion of
spa ce.
one part of a lung in response to consolidation or collapse
pneumothorax: Presence of free gas in the pleural space
in another part (also called compensatory hyperinflation).
● Simple pneumothorax: air in pleural space is less than or
pyelogram: The phase in excretory urography during
equal to atmospheric pressure.
· Closed pneumothorax: a simple pneumothorax in which
(e.g., renal pelvis, pelvic recesses).
the thoracic wall is intact.
· Open pneumothorax: a simple pneumothorax caused by
      
 an opening in the thoracic wall.
pleural space.
· Tension pneumothorax: a closed pneumothorax in which
radiograph: The image produced by passing x-rays
pressure within the pleural space is greater than atmospheric
through an object onto a radiosensitive detector. Other
pressure, resulting in compression atelectasis of the lung(s).
names: radiogram, Roentgenogram.
 polyarticular:  Associated with multiple joints.
radiographic density: Refers to the blackness of a radio-
 polyarthritis: Inflammation affecting multiple joints.
graph. Increased radiographic density = increased blackness.
Contrast tissue density: increased tissue density results in
polydactyly: Congenital anomaly in which one or more
more opaque (whiter) structure on a radiograph.
extra digits are present.
radiography: The science and art of making radiographs.
polyostotic: Associated with multiple bones.
Other names: Roen tgenogra phy.
poorly-defined: Similar meaning to ill-defined, but some-
radiologist:  A specialist trained in the diagnostic and ther-
times used as a qualifier when making a decision between
apeutic uses of x-rays, radionuclides, radiation physics, and
well-defined and ill-defined. Such a lesion should be reevalu-
radiation biology. Other names: Roentgenologist.
ated in a week or so, especially if the lesion margins are
becoming better-defined on serial radiographs, but not quite
radiology: The scientifc discipline of medical imaging
well-defined.
using ionizing radiation, radionuclides, nuclear magnetic
 resonance, and ultrasound. Other names: Roentgenology.
portography: A radiographic contrast study of the
  a   r  oa lo
radiolucent: Classically, a term used to describe a material
mesenteric vein (venous portography) or the spleen
that blocks very few x-rays and appears blacker on a radio-
(splenoportography).
graph. This is a subjective term and is not used in this book.
It is more accurate to describe the relative opacity of a struc
positive contrast agent: A contrast medium that absorbs
ture. For example; a soft tissue opacity cystic calculus (com-
many x-rays and is more opaque than soft tissue or bone
monly described as radiolucent) is soft tissue opacity on a
(e.g., barium sulfate, organic iodinated compounds) .
negative contrast cystogram, gas opacity on a positive con-
pronate: To rotate a limb inward so that the palmar or
trast cystogram, and not visible on survey radiographs.
Rather than radiolucent, the terms decreased opacity or less
plantar surface faces downward or lateral and the dorsal or
opacity/less opaque are preferred.
cranial surface faces upward or medial.
proximal: Anatomical term describing part of a limb
radiopacity: See opacity (in a radiography text, radio- is
a given and the radiopacity can be shortened to opacity).
 nearest its attachment to the body. Contrast distal (Figure
2.22).
recumbent (recumbency): Lying down, horizontal in
position; used to describe the position of an animal during
pseudoarthrosis:
"False joint"; a fibrous capsule filled
with serum that may form at the site of a long-term non-
radiography (e.g., lateral, sternal, or dorsal recumbency)
with the x-ray beam perpendicular to the long axis of the
union fracture, chronic dislocation, or developmental
body. Dorsal recumbency = lying on back.
anomaly.
receptor: See detector.
pseudo-nodule:
:A discrete soft tissue or mineral opacity
that mimics a pulmonary nodule (e.g., end-on visualization
reflux:
(Reversed) flow of gastric content into esophagus
of a pulmonary vessel, superimposed nipple, costochondral
 due to incomplete closure of the gastroesophageal sphincter.
junction, heterotopic bone formation).
Also, flow of esophageal content into mouth.
469
Glossary
regurgitation:
 Reflux of undigested food from esophagus
of epiphyseal, physeal, and metaphyseal involvement and
into pharynx or nasal cavity.
 ranked by increasing probability of a gross deformity during
healing.
relative opacity: Refers to the differences in x-ray absorp-
· type I: Fracture involves physis only.
tion by various materials. Every material absorbs x-rays in
· type II: Fracture involves physis and metaphysis.
a characteristic manner, depending on the physical composi-
· type IIl: Fracture involves physis and epiphysis.
tion of that material. It is the variation in x-ray absorption
· type IV: Fracture involves physis, metaphysis, and
that allows various materials to be differentiated on radio-
graphs. Relative opacity of a material is described as it com-
epiphysis.
· type V: A compression fracture of the physis.
pares to (l) one of the five basic opacities (gas, fat, fluid.
● type VI: A compression fracture involving only part of
mineral, or metal), (2) the opacity of adjacent structures
the physis.
(i.e., relatively increased or decreased in opacity), or (3) the
opacity of a known normal structure. Overall opacity of a
scalloping:
:Refers to the shape of a border which appears
material is also affected by its thickness.
as a series of curved indentations. Used to describe lung
margins during pleural effusion or cranial edge of caudally
 displaced diaphragm during severe pulmonary overinflation
presence of hypertrophied cartilage in the distal portion of
(latter is also called tenting of the diaphragm).
a long bone (most commonly in the distal ulna).
reticular patterm: F
Refers to a fine interlacing pattern of
scatter radiation: (l) X-rays that are deflected from their
lines; usually used to describe appearance of an interstitial
 path by interactions with patient or other material between
the source of x-rays and the detector, and (2) secondary.
pulmonary pa ttern.
 lower energy x-rays created by interactions with a material.
rheumatoid arthritis: A severe, progressive, and destruc-
Scatter radiation does not provide useful radiographic infor-
tive polyarthritis caused by circulating autoantibodies against
mation, decreases image quality, and exposes patient and
IgG.
nearby personnel to unnecessary radiation. Scattered x-rays
rhinography: A radiographic contrast study of the nasal
can be minimized using collimation, grid, or air gap.
cavity.
scintigraphy: A radiologic procedure involving the use of
rickets: Vitamin D deficiency in young animals resulting
radioisotopes to provide functional information about an
in softening and weakening of bones.
organ or body part. Scintigraphy is very sensitive in the
 detection of disease but not very specific as to etiology.
RIS (radiology information system): Used to coordi-
nate, manipulate, distribute, and store diagnostic imaging
sclerosis: See osteosclerosis.
data.
serial radiographs: Images made in sequence either
Roentgen:
Wilhelm Conrad Roentgen, a German physi-
during a single study (e.g., gastrointestinal series, excretory
cist who discovered x-rays in 1895 and won the first Nobel
urography) or over longer intervals of time (e.g., days or
 Prize in physics for his discovery.
weeks) as follow-up evaluations to monitor progress and
response to therapy of a disease or disorder.
Roentgenography: synonym for radiography.
sequestrum: A fragment of bone that has lost its blood
rostral: Toward the nose. Contrast caudal.
supply and is no longer viable. A sequestrum may be located
sacrocaudal dysgenesis: Developmental anomaly con-
 in a less opaque area of bone called an involucrum.
sisting of absence of one or more sacral or caudal
sialography: A radiographic contrast study of the salivary
vertebrae.
ducts and glands.
sail sign: 1
Refers to the normal thymus in an immature
animal as seen on a ventrodorsal or dorsoventral radiograph;
skyline radiograph: Primary x-ray beam is tangential to
appears as a triangular-shaped soft tissue opacity structure
area of interest. Frequently involves flexion or extension of
in the cranial mediastinum, projecting toward the left. Sail
a body part.
sign is abnormal in adults.
source-to-image detector distance (SID): Distance
sagittal:
I: "Arrowlike": associated with the long axis or
between focal spot (source of x-rays) and the detector. In
ventrodorsal plane of the body, which extends from head to
 film radiography it is the focal-film distance.
tail, dividing the body into right and left halves.
signet ring sign: (l) End-on visualization of a bronchus
Salter-Harris type of fracture: A classification scheme
and adjacent pulmonary artery or (2) a paragonimus lesion
to describe fractures in immature bones according to degree
in which gas is present in a cyst along with a fluke. Appear
470
Glossary
ance of these structures resembles the shape of a signet ring
lating characteristics of each tissue. Produces a whiter area
(a finger ring with an insignia on the front).
on the radiograph at the site of overlap.
silhouette sign: See border effacement.
supinate: To rotate a limb outward so that the palmar or
plantar surface faces upward or medial and the dorsal or
source-to-object distance (SOD): Distance between the
cranial surface faces downward or lateral.
focal spot (source of x-rays) and the object being radio-
graphed (i.e., subject or patient). Other names: focal-object
survey radiograph: A standard radiographic study of an
distance (FOD).
area of the body (e.g., thorax, abdomen, head, extremity)
made without the use of contrast medium.
speed:  A measure of the sensitivity of a film:screen system
to x-rays and light.
syndactyly: Congenital anomaly in which two are more
digits are fused.
spina bifida: Congenital anomaly in which failure of the
lateral vertebral arches to fuse dorsally results in incomplete
symostosis:
 Fusion of normally separate bones. Other
development of the dorsal spinal process(es).
names: bony ankylosis.
spondylitis: Inflammation of a vertebral body. usually
synovial joint: A freely movable articulation with a joint
caused by infection (e.g., migrating foreign material).
cavity, joint capsule, synovial fluid, and articular cartilage.
Other names: diarthrodial joint, diarthrosis.
spondylosis deformans: A noninflammatory degenera-
tive disorder associated with the vertebral bodies and char-
synovial osteochondroma: benign nodular proliferation
acterized by complete or incomplete bony bridging of ventral
of synovial membrane (primary, uncommon) or damaged car-
and lateral margins of vertebrae. NOT osteophytes.
tilage (secondary, common). which frequently results in free
mineralized fragments in the joint.
static fog: Radiographic artifact caused by static electricity:
 appears as blackened areas with irregularly branching patterns
systematic approach: An organized and deliberate
(resembles a picture of lightning) or as multiple foci (black dots)
 method of examining a radiograph in order to avoid over-
on a radiograph. Occurs more often in areas with low humidity
looking diagnostic information.
(in sorme hospitals, antistatic strips are installed to discharge
table top technique: Image detector (e.g., film, cassette)
personnel prior to opening cassettes or handling film).
is placed on top of the table without an interposed grid
scoliosis: Lateral curvature of the spine.
between x-ray tube and detector. Animal is positioned on
top of the detector. Because in most configurations, the grid
stenosing tenosynovitis involving the tendon of the
is in a Bucky tray within the table, techniques using a grid
abductor pollicis longus: A chronic inflamma tion caused
may be called Bucky technique and without a grid, table top
by overuse and resulting in fibrosis, enthesophyte forma tion 
technique.
on the dorsomedial aspect of the distal radius, and restriction
of tendon movement.
target: Anode (positive) part of x-ray tube and site of
x-ray production; composed of metal alloy with high melting
stress fracture: A break in bone caused by repetitive
point which is able to withstand the high temperatures
stress (micro-damage to bone occurs at a greater rate than
generated by interaction with electron beam.
can be offset by the reparative process).
teat sign:
Describes the appearance of the pyloric antrum
stress radiography: Technique used to investigate joint
during a barium contrast study in which a relatively sharp.
instability or subluxation. The bones proximal and distal to
pointed, out-pouching of the pyloric antrum develops along
a joint are stabilized and a medial-to-lateral, lateral-to-
the lesser curvature as a peristaltic wave pushes the contrast
medial, or orthogonal force is applied to document abnormal
medium up against a masslike or stenotic lesion around the
widening of the joint space or displacement of bones.
pylorus.
string sign: (l) Appearance of barium in the narrowed
tenting:
Describes the appearance of an extremely cal-
lumen of the pylorus on a positive contrast study (e.g.. gas-
dally displaced diaphragm in which the diaphragmatic
trogram, upper GI study): a sign associated with pyloric
attachments become visible as cranially directed, pointed
stenosis. (2) Also used to describe the intestinal plication
projections on a ventrodorsal or dorsoventral radiograph.
caused by adhesions or linear foreign material.
May result from tension pneumothorax or severe overinfla-
subluxation:1
 Partial loss of contact between articular
tion of lungs.
surfaces.
tissue density: Refers to characteristic of a body structure
to block (absorb or attenuate) x-rays based on the mass of
results in greater blockage of x-rays due to addition of atten-
that structure. Bone and teeth most dense; air or gas are
471
Glossary
least dense. Increased tissue density leads to increased x-ray
ureterocele: A congenital anomaly resulting in an abnor-
attenuation (increased opacity). which produces whiter
mal, focal, cystlike dilation of a terminal ureter.
areas on a radiograph. (Contrast radiographic density:
urethrography: A radiographic contrast study of the
increased radiographic density = increased blackness on a
urethra. Urethrogram.
radiograph).
urography: A radiographic contrast study of the kidneys
tracheal ratio: Technique used to objectively measure the
 d a    
size of the tracheal lumen by comparing the width of the
urography (old term: intravenous pyelogram or IVP).
trachea to the width of the thoracic inlet at the level of a
line connecting the first sternebra and first thoracic vertebra
vaginography: A radiographic contrast study of the
 on a lateral thoracic radiograph.
vagina, cervix, and urethra.
tracheoesophageal stripe sign: Occurs when the esoph-
vascular pulmonary patterm: Pulmonary arteries or/
agus contains gas and the ventral esophageal wall blends
and veins are larger or smaller than normal.
with the dorsal tracheal wall to mimic false thickening of
ventral: Toward the belly or sternum. Contrast dorsal
the tracheal wall (sign indicates presence of gas in the esoph-
(Figure 2.22).
agus). Other name; tracheal stripe sign.
ventral recumbency: Animal is positioned lying on its
tracheography: A radiographic contrast study of the
lumen of the trachea.
sternum.
ventrodorsal (VD) radiograph: The x-ray beam enters
tram lines: Parallel soft tissue or mineral opacity lines
the ventral surface of a body part and exits the dorsal surface.
representing abnormal bronchial walls (walls are thickened
 n nu op  do u sn ru
vertebral heart size (VHS): An objective measurement
Characteristic of a bronchial pulmonary pattern, but not as
of the size of the cardiac silhouette on a lateral thoracic
reliable for identifying thickened bronchi as donut signs
radiograph using the lengths of thoracic vertebral bodies as
(paired pulmonary vessels are often mistaken for thickened
units of measure. Technique is based on a study performed
bronchial walls and confused with tram lines). Other names:
by Buchanan and Bucheler in 1995.
railroad tracks.
vertical bearm:
 The x-ray beam is directed vertically.
transitional vertebra: A developmental anomaly  in
vomit:
: Forceful expulsion of gastric or intestinal content
which a vertebra has anatomic characteristics of two adja-
through the mouth due to reflex contractions of stomach
cent vertebral regions. (e.g., sacralization of L7, lumbariza-
and abdominal muscles and preceded by nausea; usually
tion of Sl)}.
d aul on ln aod e q pasn
Triadan system:
 A numbering system that provides a
x-rays:
A type of electromagnetic radiation (a form of
consistent method of identifying teeth across all animal
energy with wavelike behavior that travels at speed of light).
species.
The short wavelength and high frequency of x-rays allows
trichobezoar: A concretion of hair in the alimentary tract
them to penetrate many objects and to be useful for medical
(usually stomach or intestine).
imaging. X-rays are a form of ionizing radiation and are
trichophytobezoar:
A concretion of hair and plant mate-
as reasonably achievable" (ALARA).
rials in the alimentary tract (usually stomach or intestine).
x-ray filrm: Consists of a transparent sheet (base) coated
with an emulsion containing silver halide crystals which are
frequency sound waves to noninvasively examine soft tissue
architecture and function with real-time dynamic imaging.
sensitive to x-rays, visible light, heat, and pressure.
No ionizing radiation or other known safety hazard is
well-defined: A margin that can be defined. Distinct
encountered with diagnostic ultrasonography.  Value of
margins. The simple test is whether or not you can draw a
ultrasonography is highly user dependent, relying on the
line around the lesion or border accurately. If you can do
sonographer's patience, skill, and experience.
this. it is well-defined. Well-defined is often incorrectly
described as smooth. Smooth is a shape, while well-defined is
ununited anconeal process: Failure of the ossifcation
a margination description.
center to fuse with the proximal ulna before 22 weeks of
age (24 weeks in German shepherd dog).
upper gastrointestinal study: A radiographic contrast
study of the stomach and small intestine.
472
Bibliography
Anderson, W.D., and Anderson, B.G. Arlas of Canine Anaromy. Phila-
Schebitz, H., and Wilkens. H. Atlas of Radiographic Anatomy of the Dog
delphia: Lea & Febiger, 1994.
and Cat, 3rd ed. Verlag Paul Parey. ed. Philadelphia: W.B. Saun-
Burk, R.L., and Ackerman, N. Small Animal Radiology and Ultrasonog-
ders, 1978.
raphy, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 1996.
Suter, PF, and Lord, PF Thoracic Radiography: A Text Atlas of Thoracic
Dennis, R., Kirberger, R.M., Wrigley. R.H., and Barr, FJ. Handbook
Diseases in rhe Dog and Car. Wettswill, Switzerland: PF Suter, 1984.
ofSmall Animal Radiology and Utrasound,Techniques and Differentia!
Thrall, D.E. Textbook of Vererinary Diagnostic Radiology. 5th ed. St.
Diagnoses. New York: Elsevier, 2000.
Louis, MO: W.B. Saunders, 2007.
Evans, H.E., ed. Miller's Anaromy of the Dog. 3rd ed. Philadelphia:
Ticer, J.W. Radiographic Technique in Vererinary Practice. Philadelphia:
WB. Saunders, 1993.
W.B. Saunders, 1984.
Morgan, JP, and Leighton, R.L. Radiology of Small Animal Fracrure
Tilley, L.P, and Smith, W.K. The 5-Minute Veterinary Consult. Balti-
Management. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 1995.
more: Williams & Wilkins, 1997.
Morgan, JP, Silverman, S., amd Zontine, W.J. Technigues of Vererinary
 Radiography, 2nd ed. Davis, CA: Veterinary Radiology Associates, 1977.
College of Veterinary Radiology. indexes available on American
OBrien, T.R.Radiographic Diagnosis of Abdominal Disorders in the Dog
College of Veterinary Radiology Web site http:// www.acvr.
and Cat. Philadelphia: WB. Saunders, 1978.
ucdavis.edu/acvr/acvr.html and Index Medicus (MEDLINE).
Owens, JM., and Biery, D.N. Radiographic Interpretation for the Smal!
Wallack, S.T. The Handbook of Veterinary Contrast Radiography. San
Animal Clinician, 2nd ed. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1999.
Diego, CA: San Diego Veterinary Imaging. 2003.
oul 'suos g Aa[m uor Aq eIoz Pausqnd oul 'suos g Aam uqor eioz @
473
Note: Page numbers followed by b, f, or t indicate boxes, figures, or tables respectively.
Abdomen, 377-456
spleen, 397-398, 398f
peritoneal and retroperitoneal spaces,
anatomy checklist, 84b
stomach, 399-404, 400f-402f, 404f
379-380, 379f-380f
cross-sectional representation of, 379f
testicles, 432
prostate gland, 391, 392f
differential diagnoses for abnormal
ureters, 421-422, 421f
small intestine, 386-387, 386f
findings, 436-456
urethra, 426-427, 426f-427f
spleen, 381, 382f, 383, 383f
abdominal wall, 440
urinary bladder, 422-426, 424f-426f
stomach, 383, 386, 384f-386f
adrenal glands, 436
urinary tract, 415-427
testicles, 391, 393
female genital system, 455-456
uterus, 433-435, 433f 434f
urethra, 390
gastrointestinal tract, 441-447
vagina, 435-436
urinary bladder, 390, 390f-391f
 large intestine, 445-447
interpretation of radiographs, 27-42
urinary tract, 388-390
small intestine, 442-445
adrenal glands, 40
uterus, 393, 393f
stomach, 441-442
effects of age, body condition, and
positioning guide for abdomen, 66-68
intra-abdominal mass effect, 436-438,
conformation, 27
compression radiography, 68, 69f
436f-437f
extra-abdominal stru ctures, 27
dorsoventral (DV) radiograph, 68, 68f
liver, 447-448
female genital system, 41, 41f
general considerations, 66, 66b
lymph node enlargement, 436
gall bladder/biliary system, 34
horizontal beam radiography. 68
male genital system, 455
gastrointestinal tract, 35-38, 36f-38f,
lateral radiograph, 67, 67f
pancreas, 449-450
36t
oblique radiograph, 68
peritoneal space, 438-439
intra-abdominal mass, 30, 31f
supplemental radiographs, 68
prostate gland, 455
large intestine, 37-38
urethra radiography, 68, 69f
retroperitoneal space, 439-440
liver, 31-33, 33f
ventrodorsal (VD) radiograph, 67-68.
spleen, 448-449
Jymph nodes, 31, 32f
67f
urinary tract, 450-455
 male genital system, 40-41, 40f
technique chart, 54-55, 54f
kidneys, 450-452
pancreas, 35, 35f
viscera, 384f
ureters, 452-453
peritoneal and retroperitoneal spaces,
Abdominal distension, diaphragm position
urethra, 454-455
27-31, 27f31f
with.357
urinary bladder, 453-454
prostate gland, 40-41, 40f
Abdominal wall, differential diagnosis for
uterus, 455-456
small intestine, 36-37, 37f-38f
abnormalities of, 440
vagina, 456
spleen, 3435, 34f-35f
Abductor pollicis longus, stenosing
diseases and disorders, 393-436
stomach, 35, 36f, 36t
 tenosymovitis invalving tendon of,
adrenal glands, 427-429
urinary tract, 38-40, 39f-40f
209-210, 210f, 471
female genital system, 433-436, 434f
normal radiographic anatomy, 379-393
Abscess
gall bladder/biliary system, 396-397.
adrenal glands, 390-391, 392f
defined, 457
396f-397f
female genital tract, 393
pulmonary, 352, 353f
gastrointestinal tract, 399-415
 gall bladder and biliary system, 381,
splenic, 35f
kidneys, 415-421, 417f-419f
381f-38 2f
tooth root, 259-260,260f
large intestine, 412-415, 412f415f
gastrointestinal tract, 383-388
Acanthomatous epulis, 258, 258f
liver, 394-396
kidneys and ureters, 388-390, 389b,
 Accessory caudal glenoid ossification
male genital system, 429-433
389f
center, 132, 133f
large intestine, 386f, 387-388,
Achilles tendon injury. 228-229, 229f
387f-388f
Achondroplasia, 457
penis, 432-433
liver, 380-381, 380f, 381f
Actinomycosis, 344
peritoneal hermia, 393-394, 394f
male genital tract, 391-393
Acute respiratory distress symdrome
prostate gland, 429-432, 430f-432f
pancreas, 383, 384f
(ARDS), 341
small intestine, 405-412, 405f 41 1f
penis, 393
Adamantinoma, 258, 258f
Radiography of the Dog and Cat: Guide to Making and Interpreting Radiographs, First Edition. M.C. Muhlbauer and S.K. Kneller.
@ 2013 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
475
Index
Addison's disease, 428
 congenital and developmental
Avulsion of tibial tuberosity, 224-225,
 Adrenal glands
anomalies, 180-188
225f
differential diagnoses for abnormal
joint disease, 188-232
Axial, defined, 458
findings. 436
Arachnoid cysts, 236
Axial skeleton
diseases and disorders, 427-429
ARDS (acute respiratory distress
diseases and disorders, 232-263
adrenomegaly. 427-428
symdrome), 341
head and neck, 248-264
hyperadrenocorticism, 428
Arteriovenous fistula, 180, 458 
vertebrae, 232-247
hypoadrenocorticism, 428
Arthritis, 193-197
interpretation of radiographs, 9
mineralization, 428-429
defined, 458
pheochromocytoma, 429
feline noninfectious polyarthritis,
Bacterial disease. See also specijfc diseases
 interpretation of radiographs, 40
197
arthritis, 193
'166-06e Auoieue sqdeiao1pe1 [eunoul
infectious arthritis
osteomyelitis, 171-173, 173t
392f
 clinical correlations, 193-194
pneumonia
Adrenomegaly, 428
differential diagnosis, 194
 actinomycosis and nocardiosis, 344
Adverse reactions to contrast media,
radiographic findings, 194
dinical correlations, 344
89-90,
noninfectious, nonerosive, immune-
radiographic fndings., 344
91b
mediated arthritis
tuberculosis, 345
Aelurosrongylus, 348
clinical correlations, 194-196
Barium enema
Air bronchogram, 23, 24f, 26f, 27, 457
differential diagnosis, 196
colitis, acute, 413, 413f
Air bubbles
radiographic findings, 196
colitis, chronic, 413-414, 414f
in cystogram, 113, 113f
 polyarthritis of greyhounds, 197
defined, 458
in subarachnoid space, 109
Reiter's disease, 197
intussusception, 409, 410f
Air gap. defined, 457
rheumatoid arthritis, 196
large intestine neoplasia, 414 415,
ALARA (as low as reasonably achievable).
Arthrography
415f
44, 57. 457
contraindications, 103
 perineal hernia and rectal diverticulum,
Aliasing (digital radiography artifact), 51,
defined, 458
415
457
indications, 103
procedure, 91-93
 Alignment of subject with x-ray beam, 59.
technique, 103-104
Barium esophagram
61f
Artifact
for esophageal diverticulum, 307, 307f
 Alimentary tract, contrast radiography
aliasing. 51
for esophagitis, 307-308
 procedures for, 91-99
bending, 58, 58f
procedure, 93-94, 94f
enema with contrast, 91-93
dipping. 51
Barium sulfate. See also specifc applications
esophagography. 93-94, 94f
contouring, 51
adverse effects, 89-90
gastrography. 94-96
CR system artifacts, 52
bronchogram, 103
upper gastrointestinal study, 96-99,
defined, 458
contrast enema
97t, 98f-99f
digital radiography, 51-52
barium enema, 92
Allergic (eosinophilic) pneumonia, 345
ghost image. 51
 double contrast barium enema, 92
Alveolar flling, 22-23, 24f, 26f, 27
halo effect, 51
radiographic fndings. 93
defined, 457
lines across image, 52
defined, 458
Alveolar patterm, 23-25, 24f, 25b, 26f,
myelogram, 109-110, 110f
overview of, 88
372-374, 457
overexposure, 51
rhinography, 104
Ameloblastoma, 258
pixilated image, 52
upper gastrointestinal study, 96-97, 97t,
Amyloidosis, renal, 416
planking. 51
98f-99f
Anatomic nomenclature, 61f
processing algorithm errors, 52
Beak sign, defined, 458
Anconeal process, 137, 205f
quantum mottle, 51
Beam direction, defined, 458
ununited, 203, 204f, 472
saturation, 51
Bending artifact (film radiography), 58.
Angiocardiography, defined, 457
underexposure, 51
58f
Angiography
uneven exposure, 52
 Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), 429,
defined, 457
zipper artifact, 52
430f
nonselective, 100-101
ASD (atrial septal defect), 316
Bezoar, defined, 458
contraindications, 100
Aspergillosis, 172, 345-346
Biceps tendinopathy, 200-201, 201f
indications, 100
Aspiration pneumonia, 343-344
Blastomycosis, 172, 346
technique, 100-101
Asthma. See Chronic obstructive
Bleb, pulmonary, 354
procedures, 100-101
pulmonary disease (COPD); Feline
Block vertebrae, 232-233, 233f, 458
selective, 100
bronchial asthma
Body cavity, contrast radiography
Anode, defined, 457
Asynchronous growth, defned, 458
procedures for, 99-100
Anode heel effect. See Heel effect
Atelectasis, 340f, 341-342, 342f
peritoneography, 99
 Aorta and aortic arch
alveolar lung patterm, 372-373
pleurography. 100
 differential diagnoses for abnormal
defined, 458
Bone(s). See also Musculoskeleton; specijfc
findings. 368
Atlantoaxial subluxation, 232, 233f
bornes
enlargement, 315
Atresia ani, 412
development, 128-130, 128t-129t
normal radiographic anatomy, 284 285,
Atrial septal defect (ASD), 316 
differential diagnoses, 264-267
285f
Atrioventricular valve dysplasia, 318
distribution of bone lesions, 264
Aortic stenosis, 316-317, 317f
Avascular necrosis of femoral head, 212,
neoplasia of bone, 264
Apophysis, 126, 128, 128t-129t
213f, 458
 opacity abnormalities of bone,
Appendicular, defined, 458
Avulsion fractures, 162
264266
Appendicular skeleton,diseases and
of shoulder, 163f
shape abnormalities of bone, 266
disorders of, 180-232
of stifle, 223-224, 223f-224f
soft tissue abnormalities, 266-267
476
 Index
epiphyses and apophyses, ages at
Bronchitis
canine, 284, 284f, 289f
appearance and fusion, 128t-129t
defined,458
feline, 284,285f
fetal ossification, 130, 130t
tracheobronchitis, 338, 339f, 370
Cardiomegaly, 312-313, 313f, 322, 334t
general considerations, 125-128
Bronchogenic cyst, 353
differential diagnosis, 365-366
interpretation of radiographs, 46, 5t,
Bronchogram, 103
Cardiomyopathy
6f. 7t
Bronchography
canine dilated
activity and aggressiveness of disease,
contraindications, 103
Boxer, 323
7t
defined, 458
dinical correlations, 322-323
geometry. 6
indications, 102
Cocker Spaniel, 323
lesion distribution, 6
technique, 103
differential diagnosis, 323
margination, 4, 7t
Bronchopneumonia, 458
Doberman Pincher, 323
opacity, 4-6
Buccal, defined, 458
radiographic fndings, 323, 324f
osteolysis, 45, 5t, 7t
Bucky, defined, 458
 osteopenia, 4
Bulla, pulmonary, 353-354, 353f
differential diagnosis, 366-367
Osteosclerosis, 5, 7t
 BVA/KC (British Veterinary Association/
feline dilated, 324-325, 325f
 periosteal response, 5-6, 6f
Kennel Club), 217t, 219
feline hypertrophic, 325-326, 326f
number of bones, 125-126
feline restrictive, 326-327
opacity, 4-6, 53, 264-268
 Calcanean (Achilles) tendon injury.
primary. 366
ossification centers, variable, 132-133,
228-229,229f
secondary, 366-367
133f134f
Calcaneus, 141
Cardiovascular system. See a/so Heart
accessory caudal glenoid, 132, 133f
Calcification. See also Mineralization
contrast radiography procedures,
clavicles, 132, 133f
defined, 459
100-102
medial coronoid process, 133
dystrophic in peritoneal space, 438
angiography, 100-101
Os penis, 133
metastatic, 466
lymphography/lymphangiography.
pelvis, 133, 134f
soft tissue, 178-179
101
parts of long bones, 126-128, 126f-127f
Calcinosis, defined, 459
mesenteric venography. 102
sesamoid, 130-132, 130f-132f
Calcinosis circumscripta, 178-179, 179f,
pneumopericardiography. 102
shape, 126
236
splenoportography, 102
technique chart, 55
Calcinosis cutis, 178-179
venous portography, 102
types, 126
Caleuli
 major vessels, diseases and disorders of,
Bone cyst, 157-158, 158f, 458
biliary (cholelithiasis), 396-397, 397f
315-316
Bone infarcts, 177, 177f, 458 
cystic, 422-423
 aorta and aortic arch enlargement,
Bone loss, 156-157
in cystography. 113-114, 114f
315
osteolysis, 157
renal, 417-418, 418f
caudal vena cava size, 315
osteopenia, 156-157
urethral, 426, 426f
 main pulmonary artery enlargement,
Bone production, 152-156
Calvarium, 148, 459
315-316, 320f, 328f
osteopetrosis, 155-156
Cancellous bone, defined, 459
Carpal bones, 138, 138f
 Osteophytes and enthesophytes, 155
Canine dilated cardiomyopathy, 322-323,
Carpus,208-210
periosteal response, 152-155
324f
anatomy, 137-138,138f
Bone sclerosis, 458. See also Osteosclerosis
Canine hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
degenerative joint disease, 208
 Bone spur
323-324
fractures, 209
clinical correlations, 155
Canine influenza, 349
luxation/subluxation, 208-209
defined, 458
Canine leukocyte adhesion disorder
positioning for radiographs, 71-72.
differential diagnosis, 155 
(CLAD), 181,459
71f-72f
radiographic findings, 155
Carcinomatosis, defined, 459
dorsopalmar radiograph, 71f, 72
stermal, 297
Cardiac chambers, normal radiographic
lateral radiograph, 71, 71f 
Border effacement, defined, 458
anatomy of, 286-287, 286f-287f
stressed radiograph, 72
Boxer cardiomyopathy, 323
Cardiac silhouette
supplemental radiographs, 72
BPH (benign prostatic hyperplasia), 429.
cardiac axes, 17f
sesamoid bones, 131, 132f
430f
clock face analogy. 18f
stenosing tenosynovitis involving
 Brachycephalic skull conformation, 146.
defined, 459
tendon of abductor pollicis longus,
458
differential diagnoses for abnormal
209-210
 British Veterinary Association/Kennel
findings. 364-368
Cartilage joints (symchondroses), 134-135,
Club (BVA/KC), 217t, 219
 abnormal position, 364
459
Bronchi
abnormal size, 364-366
Cartilaginous exostosis, 297
diseases and disorders, 335-341
cardiomyopathy. 366-367
Cassette, defined, 459
bronchial obstruction, 339-340, 371
congestive heart failure, 367
Cassette radiography. 49
bronchiectasis, 338-339, 339f, 458
constrictive pericarditis, 368
Cathode, 459
feline bronchial asthma, 340-341,
endocarditis/myocarditis, 367
Caudal, defined, 459
340f
neoplasia, 367-368
Caudal cruciate ligament injury, 223
tracheobronchial parasites, 338
pericardial effusion, 368
Caudal vena cava
tracheobronchitis, 338, 339f, 370
pericardial masses, 368
differential diagnoses for abnormal
normal radiographic anatomy, 290-291.
pneumopericardium, 368
findings. 368-369
291f
position abnormalities, 364
normal radiographic anatomy, 296
Bronchial cuffing, defned, 458
 interpretation of radiographs, 17-19,
size, 315
Bronchial lung patterm, 22, 23b, 23f, 374,
17f-1 8f 
Caudocranial, defned, 459
458
normal radiographic anatomy, 284,
Cavity lesions, pulmonary, 353-354, 353f
Bronchiectasis, 338-339, 339f, 458
284f-285f, 289f
CCD (charged coupling device). 49
477
Index
Gecum
hyperparathyroidism, 184
extravasation of, 1l5, 121
ce cal inversion
hypertrophic osteodystrophy (HOD).
0smolality, 89, 89t
cinical correlations, 412
185
types, 88-89
contrast radiography, 412, 412f
lead poisoning. 188
Contrast radiography. 87-121. See aiso
differential diagnosis, 412-413
mucopolysaccharidosis, 185-186
specijfic applications
radiographic findings, 412
osteogenesis imperfecta, 186-187
adverse reactions to contrast media.
normal radiographic anatomy, 387
panosteitis, 187-188
89-90, 91b
Celiography. 99, 459
polydactyly. 181
barium sulfate, 89-90
Central beam, defned, 459
pyruvate kinase deficiency, 188
gas, 89
Central canal, contrast medium within,
retained enchondral cartilage in distal
iodinated compounds, 90, 91b
110
ulna, 187
contrast media osmolality, 89, 89t
Cervical spondylomyelopathy, 236-238,
rickets, 187
contrast media types, 88-89
237f
symdactyly. 181
barium sulfate, 88
Cervical spondylopathy, defned, 459
heart disease, 316-322
iodinated compounds, 88-89
Charged coupling device (CCD), 49
aortic stenosis, 316-317, 317f
for specific diseases and disorders
Chinese Shar-Pei fever symdrome, 195
atrial septal defect (ASD), 316
adrenomegaly, 428
Cholangiography, 459
atrioventricular valve dysplasia, 318
atresia ani, 412
Cholecystitis, 396, 396f
characteristic findings, 317t
cecal inversion, 412, 412f
Cholecystography. 459
clinical correlations, 316
colitis, acute, 413, 413f
Choledocolith, defined, 459
endocardial cushion defects, 318
colitis, chronic, 413-414, 414f
Cholelith, defned, 459
endocardial fbroelastosis, 318
cystadenocarcinoma, 416
Cholelithiasis, 396-397, 397f
mitral valve dysplasia, 318
cystic calculi, 422-423
Chondrocalcinosis, 179
 patent ductus arteriosus (PDA).
cystitis, 423-424
Chondrodysplasia, 181-183, 459
318-319, 319f
ectopic ureter, 421
Chondrodystrophic, defined, 459
pulmonic stenosis, 320-321, 320f
enteritis, 408
Chondroma, 160, 459
reverse patent ductus arteriosus.
esophageal divericulum, 307, 307f
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
319-320
esophageal foreign objects, 308
(COPD), 341
situs inversus, 321
esophageal neoplasia, 308
Chylothorax, 359, 459
tetralogy of Fallot, 321
esophageal stricture, 309
Chylous effusion, 459
tricu spid valve dysplasia, 318
esophagitis, 307-308
Cineradiography (cineflurography).
vascular ring anomalies, 321-322
Fanconi syndrome, 417
defined, 459
ventricular septal defect (VSD), 322
feline perirenal cysts, 419
CLAD (canine leukocyte adhesion
hypothyroidism, 183-184
gastric foreign material, 402
disorder), 181, 459
joints, 189
gastric inflammation (gastritis), 402
Clavicle ossification center, 132, 133f
kidney, 415-417
gastric neoplasia, 403
Clipping artifact (digital radiography). 51
thoracic wall, 294-296, 294f-295f
gastric outflow obstruction, 403-404
Clock face analogy. 286-287,287f, 459
bipartite ribs, 294, 295f
gastric ulcers, 404
CMO (craniomandibular osteopathy).
hemivertebra, 294
gastroesophageal intussusception, 309
248-249, 248f
inward curving ribs, 294
hermaphroditism, 436
Coccidioidomycosis (Valley Fever), 173,
pectus carinatum, 295
hydronephrosis, 419
346-347
pectus excavatum, 295,295f
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
Cocker Spaniel cardiomyopathy, 323
rib number, 294, 294f
408
Codman's triangle, 8b, 155, 155f, 459
stermal dysraphism, 295-296
intestinal ileus, 406-407
Coin lesion, defined, 460
 transitional vertebra, 294
intussusception, 409, 410f
Colitis, 413-414, 413f-414f
urinary bladder, 422
kidney rupture, 421
acute, 413, 413f, 446
Congestive heart failure
large intestine neoplasia, 414415,
chronic, 413-414, 414f, 446
dinical correlations, 331
41 5f
differential diagnosis, 446
differential diagnosis, 367
linear foreign body, small intestine.
Collapse of lung (atelectasis), 340f,
left heart, 367
407
341-342, 342f
radiographic findings with left heart
megaesophagus, 310-311, 310f
Collimation, defned, 460
failure, 332
microhepatica, 396
Collimator, defned, 460
radiographic findings with right heart
neoplasia urethra, 427, 427f
Colon. See Large intestine
failure, 331-332
ovary enlargement, 433
Colon torsion, 414
right heart, 367
pancreatic mass, 399
Comparison radiographs, 460
Consolidation, defined, 460
pancreatitis, 399
Compresson radiography, 460
Constipation
paraprostatic cyst, 432
Computed radiography (CR), 49
clinical correlations, 413
penile disorders, 433
Computed tomography (CT),. 86, 460
differential diagnosis, 445
 perineal hermia and rectal
Congenital and developmental disorders/
radiographic findings., 413
diverticulum, 415
anomalies
Constrictive pericarditis, 333-334, 368
peritoneal hermia, 394
appendicular skeleton, 180-188
Contouring artifact (digital radiography).
persistent or patent urachal ligament,
canine leukocyte adhesion disorder,
51
422
181
Contralateral, defined, 460
 polycystic kidney disease (PKD), 417.
chondrodysplasia, 181-183
Contrast, radiographs, 58
417f
congenital hypothyroidism, 183-184
Contrast enema. See Enema with contrast
prostate gland mineralization, 430
ectrodactyly, 180
Contrast media
prostate gland neoplasia, 431
growth arrest lines, 184
adverse reactions to, 89-90, 91b
prostatitis, 429-430
hemimelia, 180-181
defined, 460
renal amyloidosis, 416
478
 Index
renal calculi, 418
Craniomandibular osteopathy (CMO).
Degenerative joint disease (D)D). 189-191
renal cysts, 418
248-249, 248f
carpus, 208
renal dysplasia/hypoplasia, 416-417
Cranium abnormalities, 271-272
clinical correlations, 189, 190t
renal inflammation (mephritis and 
Cretinism (congenital hypothryroidism).
defined, 460
pyelonephritis), 419-420
460
elbow, 202, 202f
renal neoplasia, 420
Cricopharyngeal achalasia, 262-263
hips, 212-214, 213f214f
small intestine neoplasia, 41l, 4llf
Cryptococcosis, 272, 347
radiographic fndings, 189-191, 190t 
spirocercosis, 311
Cryptorchidism, 432
shoulder, 198, 199f
telangiectasia, 417
CT (computed tomography). 86, 460
spine, 238,238f
urachal cyst, 422
Cushing's symdrome, 428, 447
stifle, 221-222, 222f
urachal diverticulum, 422
Cutback zone, bone, 128, 460
tarsus, 229, 230f
ureterocele, 422
Cystadenocarcinoma, 416
Delayed union fracture, 166, 166f, 461
urethral calculi, 426
Cystic calculi, 422-423
Density, 52, 57, 461. See also Opacity
urethral fistula, 426
Cystitis, 423-424
Dental calculus, 255-256
urethral rupture, 427
dinical correlations, 423
Dental caries, 256, 256f
urethritis, 427
contrast radiography. 423-424
Dental formula
urinary bladder fistula, 424
differential diagnosis, 423, 454
cat, 149t
urinary bladder neoplasia, 425, 425f
emphysematous, 424, 424f
dog. 149t
urinary bladder rupture, 425-426,
imterstitial, 454
 modified Triadan numbering system.
426f
radiographic findings. 423
149-150, 149f-150f
uterine masses, 435
Cystography. 111-115, 112f-114f
numbering systems, 149-150, 149f-150f
vaginal diseases, 436
complications, 111 
Dentigerous cyst, 259, 259f
vascular ring anomalies, 31l-312,
contraindications, 111
Detail, radiograph, 57-58, 461
312f, 322
defined, 460
 Detective quantum effciency (DQE), 49
indications for, 88
for specifc diseases and disorders
Detector, defined, 461
procedures, 91-121
cystic calculi, 422-423
Development of x-ray film, 461
alimenntary, 91-99
urinary bladder neoplasia, 425, 425f
Developmental abnormalities. See
body cavity, 99-100
urinary bladder rupture, 425-426,
Congenital and developmental
cardiovascular, 100-102
426f
disorders/anomalies
musculoskeletal, 103-110 
flling defects, 113-115, 113f-114f
Diagnostic imaging, 85-86
overview of, 91
air bubbles, 113, 113f
computed tomography (CT),. 86
respiratory, 102-103
blood clots, 113
fluoroscopy. 86
soft tissue, ll0-ll1
calculi, 113-114, 114f
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 86
urogenital, 111-121
cellular debris, 114 
scintigraphy (nuclear medicine), 86
Contrast study, defined, 460
foreign material, 114
ultrasonography, 85-86
Contusion, defned, 460
mural hematoma, 114
Diaphragm
 COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary
neoplasms, 114-115, 114f-115f
differential diagnoses for abnormal
disease), 341
polyps, 114f, 115
fndings, 357-358
Coronoid process, fragmented medial,
pseudo-filling defects, 115
position abnormalities, 357-358
203-205, 204f-205f
ulcers, 115
shape abnormalities, 358
Cortical bone, 460
ureterocele, 115
diseases and disorders, 297-299
Costal cartilages
indications, 111
eventration, 298
interpretation of radiographs, 12-13,
radiographic fndings. 112-115,
hiatal hermia, 298, 299f
12f
11 2f-114f
masses, 297-298
normal radiographic anatomy, 277-278,
filling defects, 113-115, 113f114f
 traumatic diaphragmatic hermia,
277f-278f
normal bladder, 112, 112f
298-299
Costophrenic angle, 460
selection of appropriate study, 111
interpretation of radiographs, 13
Coxofemoral joint
techniques, 111-112
normal radiographic anatomy, 279, 280f
anatomy, 139-140
 double contrast cystography, 112
Diaphysis, 126, 126f, 461
disorders of, 212-221
negative contrast cystography. 112
Diarthrodial joints, 133-134, 134f
CR (computed radiography). 49
 positive contrast cystography. 112
 DICOM (Digital Imaging and
CR system artifacts (digital radiography).
Cysts
Communication in Medicine), 51,
52
arachnoid, 236
46 1
Cranial, defined, 460
bone, 157-158, 158f, 458
 Differential diagnoses for abnormal
Cranial cruciate ligament injury, 222-223,
bronchogenic, 353
findings
222f-223f
dentigerous, 259, 259f
abdomen, 436-456
Cranial hyperostosis, 249
feline perirenal, 419, 419f
abdominal cavity, 436-440
Cranial vault
intraosseous epidermoid, 212
abdominal wall, 440
cranial hyperostosis, 249
paraprostatic cyst, 431-432, 432f
adrenal glands, 436
craniomandibular osteopathy (CMO).
pulmonary. 353
female genital system, 455-456
248-249, 248f
renal, 418, 418f
gastrointestinal tract, 441-447
fractures of cranial vault, 249
urachal, 422
 intra-abdominal mass effect, 436-438,
hydrocephalus, 249-250
436f-437f
neoplasia of cranial vault, 250-251
Dacryocystorhinography, 104, 460
liver, 447-448
occipital dysplasia, 251-252
Darkroom safelight test, 58b
lymph node enlargement, 436
osteomyelitis of cranial vault, 252
Decubitus, defined, 460
male genital system, 455
otitis (exterma, media, and intema), 252
 Deep circumflex iliac artery, 379, 380f
pancreas, 449-450
Craniocaudal, defned, 460
Definition, radiograph, 460
peritoneal space, 438-439
479
Index
 Differential diagnoses for abnormal
Direct-read radiography (DR), 49
Dystocia, radiographic findings in.,
findings (cont'd)
Dirty lungs., defined, 25, 461
434-435, 434f
prostate gland, 455
Discography, 105, 461
Dystrophic mineralization, 178, 189, 462
retroperitoneal space, 439-440
Discospondylitis, 238-239, 239f, 268-269,
 calcification in peritoneal space, 438 
spleen, 448-449
461
urinary tract, 450-455
DISH (disseminated idiopathic skeletal
Eburmation, defined, 462
uterus, 455456
hyperostosis), 239, 239f, 461
Ectopic ureter, 421, 421f
vagina, 456
 Disseminated idiopathic skeletal
Ectrodactyly. 180, 181f, 462
musculoskeletal
hyperostosis (DISH), 239, 239f, 461
Edema. See Lymphedema; Pulmonary
genneral bone, 264-267
Distal, defined, 461
edema
joints, 267-268
Distortion, radiographs, 58, 59, 60f, 461
Edge enhancement, defined, 462
pharynx and larymx abnormalities,
Distraction Index, PennHIP, 217, 217t,
Effective atomic numbers, 52, 52t
273-274
218f
Elbow, 202-208
skull, 271-273
Diverticulum
anatomy. 135, 137, 136f-137f
spine, 268-271
cystography, 115
degenerative joint disease, 202
thorax,356-376
defined, 461
differentials for elbow mineralization,
cardiac silhouette, 364 368
esophageal, 306-307, 307f
208b
diaphragm, 357-358
urachal, 422
dysplasia, 202-203
esophagus, 362-364
DJD. See Degenerative joint disease
fractures, 206
lungs, 371-376
Doberman Pincher cardiomyopathy, 323
fragmented medial coronoid process,
major vessels, 368-369
Doliocephalic skull conformation, 146,
203-205
mediastinum, 360-362
461
incomplete ossification of humeral
 pleura and pleural space, 358-360
Donut sign, defined, 461
condyle,206-207
thoracic wall, 356-357
Dorsal, defined, 461
incongruity, 203
trachea, 369-371
Dorsal acetabular rim radiograph, 73
dinical correlations, 203
 Digital imaging and communication in
Dorsal recumbency, defined, 461
defined, 462
medicine (DICOM), 51, 461
Dorsal spinal articulations, evaluation of.
differential diagnosis, 203
Digital radiography. 49-52
4
radiographic findings, 169f, 203
artifacts, 51-52
Dorsopalmar/plantar, defined, 461
luxation, 207
aliasing, 51
 Dorsoventral (DV) radiograph
medial epicondylar spur, 207-208
dipping. 51
abdomen, 68, 68f
osteochondritis (OCD) of humeral
contouring. 51
defined, 461
condyle, 205
CR system artifacts, 52
skull, 78, 78f
patella cubiti, 208
ghost image. 51
thorax, 63-64, 63f, 64b
positioning for radiographs, 70-71,
halo effect, 51
Dose, defined, 461
70f-71f
lines across image, 52
Dosimeters, 56-57
craniocaudal radiograph, 70, 71f
overexposure, 51
Double contrast, defined, 461
craniolateral-caudomedial oblique
pixilated image, 52
Double contrast barium enema, 92
radiograph, 71, 71f
planking. 51
Double contrast cystography
extreme flexed lateral radiograph.
 processing algorithm errors, 52
for cystitis, 423-424
70-71, 71f
quantum mottle, 51
for urinary bladder neoplasia, 425
lateral radiograph, 70, 70f
saturation, 51
Double physis sign, defined, 461
sesamoid bones, 13l, 131f 
underexposure, 51
DQE (detective quantum efficiency),. 49
subluxation, 207
uneven exposure, 52
DR (direct-read radiography). 49
ununited anconeal process, 203
zipper artifact, 52
Drug-induced polyarthritis, 194-195
 ununited medial humeral epicondyle,
computed radiography (CR), 49
Duodenum, 386-387
205-206
digital imaging and communication in
Dural ossifcation, 239-240, 462
Embolism, gas, 89
medicine (DICOM), 51, 461
DV radiograph. See Dorsoventral (DV)
Emphysema, 342-343
digital radiographs, 49-50, 50f
yde1aoe.
defined, 462
detective quantum effciency (DQE).
Dwarfism. See Chondrodysplasia
soft tissue, 8-9, 178
49
 Dynamic range (digital vs. film), 50, 50f
subcutameous, 356
dynamic range, 50, 50f 
Emphysematous cystitis, 424, 424f
pixels, 49
262-263
Empyema, 359
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), 49
 Dysplasia
Enchondroma, 158-159, 158f, 462
 spatial resolution, 49-50 
atrioventricular valve, 318
Endocardial cushion defects, 318
direct-read radiography (DR), 49
chondrodysplasia, 181-183, 183f, 459
Endocardial fibroelastosis, 318
picture archiving and communication
defined, 462
Endocardiosis, 327
system (PACS), 50-51
elbow, 202-203
Endocarditis/myocarditis, 327, 367
Digits, 210-212
epiphyseal, 182-183, 183f
Endochondral ossification, defned, 462
anatomy, 138,139f
feline capital physeal dysplasia
Endosteum, 128, 462
digital neoplasia, 211
syndrome,220,220f, 462
Endotracheal masses and foreign material.
fracture/luxation of digits, 210
hip.214-219
337
intraosseous epidermoid cyst, 212
mitral valve, 318
Enema with contrast medium, 91-93
neoplasia, 211, 211f
occipital, 251-252, 252f
complications, 92
osteomyelitis of digit, 21l-212
renal, 416-417
indications, 91-92
positioning for radiographs, 72, 72f
shoulder, 202
radiographic findings. 93
sesamoid bone fractures, 210-211 
temporomandibular joint, 255
technique (contrast enema), 92-93
sesamoid bones, 13l-132, 132f
tricuspid valve, 318
barium enema, 92
480
 Index
double contrast barium enema, 92
kidney, 452
hermaphroditism, 436
negative contrast enema
ureter, 453
ovary enlargement, 433
(pneumocolon).93
Excretory urography, 115-118, 115f,
uterine enlargement, 433-435
Enteritis, 408, 444
117f-119f 
vaginal diseases, 435-436, 456
Enthesophytes, 7. 7f, 155, 462
complications, 115
interpretation of radiographs, 41, 41f
Eosinophilic (allergic) pneumonia, 345
contraindications, 115
 normal radiographic anatomy, 393
Epididymitis, 432
defined, 465
Femoral head
Epidural injection during myelography.
for diseases and disorders
avascular necrosis of, 212, 213f, 458
110, 110f
cystadenocarcinoma, 416
flattening of, 215
Epidurography
ectopic ureter, 421
fractures of femoral head and neck,
contraindications, 105
Fanconi symdrome, 415-416
219, 220f
defined, 462
feline perirenal cysts, 419
Fetus
indications, 105
hydronephrosis, 419
fetal death, 434-435, 434f
technique, 105-106
ovary enlargement, 433
gravid uterus and, 433-434, 433f
Epiglottis, 152
polycystic kidney disease (PKD), 417.
ossification of skeleton, 130, 130t
Epiphyseal dysplasia, 182-183, 183f
417f
FFD (focal film distance). 463
Epiphysis, 126, 126f-127f, 128t-129t, 462
renal amyloidosis, 416 
Fibrous joints (symarthrodial joints), 134,
Epulis, acanthomatous, 258, 258f
renal calculi, 418
462
Erect, defined, 462
renal cysts, 418
Field of view, defined, 462
Esophageal perforation, 93
renal dysplasia/hypoplasia, 416-417
Flament, 44
Esophagitis, 307-308
renal inflammation (nephritis and
defined, 44, 462
Esophagography. 93-94,94f
pyelonephritis), 419-420
Filling defect, defined, 462
contraindications, 93
renal neoplasia, 420
Fi]m processing, 48
contrast media, 93
telangiectasia, 417
Film:screen systems, 46-48
defined, 462
ureterocele, 422
defined, 462
indications, 93
indications, 115 
film processing. 48
radiographic findings (esophagram), 94,
radiographic fndings, 116-118,
intensifying screens, 47, 47f
94f
117f-118f
radiograph identification, 48, 48f
technique (esophagram), 93-94
nephrogram phase, 115f, 116-117
storage and retention of radiographs, 48
Esophagram
pyelogram phase, 117, 117f-118f
types, 47-48
applications
ureteral phase, 117-118, 117f-119f
x-ray film, 46-47, 47f
esophageal foreign objects, 308
vascular phase, 116
Fissure line. See Pleural fissure line
esophageal neoplasia, 308
technique, 116
Fistula
esophageal stricture, 309
Exostosis,462
 arteriovenous, 180
 gastroesophageal intussusception,
Exposure, guidelines for selecting proper.
salivary duct, 260-261
309
56
urethral, 426
megaesophagus, 310-311, 310f
Extension, defined, 462
urinary bladder, 424
spirocercosis, 311
External auditory canal, mineralization of,
Fistulography
vascular ring anomalies,322
271
contraindications, 111
radiographic findings. 94, 94f
Extrapleural sign, 16, l6f, 462
defined, 463
technique,93-94
Extremity anatomy checklist, 85b
indications, 110-111
Esophagus
technique (fistulogram), 111
 differential diagnoses for abnormal
Fabellae, 130-131, 130f
Flail chest, 463
findings.362-364
Fanconi symdrome, 417
Fexion, defned, 463
opacity abnormalities, 362-363
Fat, opacity of, 53
Fluid level, defined, 463
position abnormalities, 362
FCI (Federation Cymologique
Fluoroscopy. 86, 463
size abnormalities, 363-364
Intermationale), 217t, 218-219
Focal film distance (FFD), 463
diseases and disorders, 306-312
Federation Cymologique Intemationale
Focal spot, 45, 59, 59f-61f, 463
esophageal diverticulum, 306-307.
(FCI). 217t, 218-219
Fogging, of radiographs, 58-59, 463
307f
Feline bronchial asthma, 340-341, 340f
Foramen magnum, 147
esophageal foreign objects, 308
Feline capital physeal dysplasia syndrome.
Foreign objects/material
 esophageal inflammation (esophagitis).
220, 220f, 462
defined, 463
307308
Feline dilated cardiomyopathy, 324-325.
endotracheal, 337
esophageal neoplasia, 308
325f
esophageal, 308
esophageal stricture, 308-309
gastric, 401-402, 401f
gastroesophageal intussusception,
325326, 326f
nasal cavity. 254
309, 309f
Feline noninfectious polyarthritis, 197
small intestinal, 37, 37f, 405, 407,
megaesophagus,
, 309-311, 310f
 Feline odontoclastic resorptive lesion,
405f407f
spirocercosis, 311
256-257, 257f
soft tissue, 179-180
vascular ring anomalies, 3ll-312,
Feline perirenal cysts, 419, 419f
Fracture(s), 161-170
312f
Feline polyarthritis, 462
carpus, 209, 209f, 210f
normal radiographic anatomy, 282-283,
Feline restrictive cardiomyopathy.
clinical correlations, 161
283f
326-327
complications, 164-171
pseudo-diverticulum of, 283
 Female genital system
dinical correlations, 164
Eventration of diaphragm, 298
 differential diagnoses for abnormal
delayed union, 166, 167f, 461
Excretory urogram
findings. 455-456
malunion fracture, 167, 167f, 465
defined, 462
uterus, 455-456
nonunion fracture, 166-167, 167f,
described, 115
diseases and disorders, 433-436, 434f
466
481
Index
Fracture(s) (conr'd)
Gas
uterine enlargement, 433-435
 physeal injuries (premature closure of
within abdominal organs, 439
vaginal diseases, 435-436
growth plate), 136f, 168-171,
in colon wall, 446
male
169f-1 70f
m liver, 448
 differential diagnoses for abnormal
pseudoarthrosis, 167-168
opacity of, 53
findings, 455
radiographic fndings. 164-166
in prostate gland, 455
diseases and disorders, 429-433
sequestrum, 168, 168f
in retroperitoneal space, 439
interpretation of radiographs, 40-41,
conditions that mimic, 163
in small intestine, 443
40f
cranial vault, 249, 249f
in spleen, 449
 normal radiographic anatomy.
definitions, 463
in stomach wall, 441
391-393
digits, 210
im uterus, 456
paraprostatic cyst, 431-432, 432f
elbow, 206
Gas embolism, 89
penis, 432-433
face and frontal area, 249f, 253
 Gastric dilatation and volvulus (GDV)
prostate gland, 429-431, 430f 431f
femoral head and neck, 219, 220f
dinical correlations, 399-400
testicles, 432
healing. 164, 165t
contributing factors, 441
Geometry of radiographic image, 59, 59f
pelvis, 161, 164b, 219, 219f
differential diagnosis, 401
Ghost image artifact (digital radiography).
radiographic description of, 164b
radiographic fndings, 400-401, 400f
51
ribs,296,296f
Gastric emptying
GI transit times in normal upper
sesamoid bone, 210-211, 21lf
delayed, 402-403, 442
gastrointestinal study, 97, 97t
shoulder, 163f, 198
normal rate of, 97
Giant cell tumor, 176-177
spine, 240-241, 240f-241f
rapid, 402, 442
Glucagon to decrease gastric motility. 96
stermal, 297
Gastric foreign material, 401 402, 401f
Gram, defned, 463
tarsus, 229-230, 230f
Gastric inflammation (gastritis), 402, 402f
Granuloma
teeth, 257, 257f
Gastric neoplasia, 402-403, 404f
defined, 463
types, 161-163
Gastric outflow obstuction, 403-404, 404f
pulmonary, 352-353
abrasion, 162, 463
Gastric ulcers, 404
Graph, defined, 463
articular, 162, 463
Gravel sign, defined, 463
avulsion, 162, 163f, 463
J60
Gravity-dependent lung inflation, 62-63,
buckling. 463
Gastrogram
63f
chip. 163, 463
radiographic fndings, 97-98, 98f
Greyhounds, polyarthritis of, 197
closed, 162, 463
gastric neoplasia, 403
Grids, 46, 46f, 463
comminuted, 463
gastric outflow obstruction, 403-404
Ground-glass appearance, defined, 464
complete, 161-162, 161f-162f,
gastritis, 402
Growth arrest lines, 184, 184f, 464
463
techniques.95-96
compression, 463
double contrast gastrogram, 95-96
Halo effect artifact (digital radiography).
depression, 162, 463
negative contrast gastrogram, 95
51
fatigue, 463
 positive contrast gastrogram, 95
Head and neck. See also Skull
fissure, 463
Gastrography
diseases and disorders, 248-264
folding. 463
contrast radiography procedures, 94-96
cranial vault
greenstick,463
contraindications, 95
cranial hyperostosis, 249
hairline, 463
indications, 95
 craniomandibular osteopathy
incomplete, 16l, 16lf, 463
technique (gastrogram), 95-96
(CMO), 248-249
open, 162, 463
defined, 463
fractures of cranial vault, 249
pathologic, 162, 175f, 463
Gastrointestinal tract
hydrocephalus, 249-250
physis (Salter-Harris), 162, 163f,
 differential diagnoses for abnormal
 neoplasia of cranial vault,
470
findings, 441-447
250-251
segmental, 463
large intestine, 445-447
occipital dysplasia, 251-252
shearing. 162, 463
small intestine, 442-445
 osteomyelitis of cranial vault, 252
simple, 463
stomach, 441-442
otitis (exterma, media, and intema).
slab, 163,463
diseases and disorders, 399-415
252
stress, 463, 471
large intestine, 412-415, 412f-415f
nasal cavity and frontal sinus,
torus, 463
 small intestine, 405-412, 405f 411f
253-255
 Fragmented medial coronoid process,
stomach, 399-404, 400f 402f, 404f
fractures of face and frontal area.
203-205, 204f-205f
interpretation of radiographs, 35-38.
253
Frontal sinus
36f-38f, 36t
frontal sinus mucocele, 253
abnormalities, 272
 normal radiographic anatomy.
inflammation/infection of nasal
interpretation of radiographs, 10-11
383-388
cavity, 253-254
mucocele,253, 253f
GDV. See Gastric dilatation and volvulus
neoplasia of nasal cavity, 254-255
(GDV)
pharynx and larymx, 261-264
Gall bladder and biliary system
Genital system
 dysphagia and cricopharymgeal
diseases and disorders, 396-397.
female
achalasia, 262-263
396f-397f
 differential diagnoses for abnormal
hyoid bones, 263-264
cholecystitis, 396, 396f
findings, 455-456
laryngeal hypoplasia, 263
cholelithiasis, 396-397, 397f
diseases and disorders, 433-436, 434f
laryngeal masses, 263
parasitic disease, 397
hermaphroditism, 436
laryngeal paralysis, 263
interpretation of radiographs, 34
interpretation of radiographs, 41, 41f
 pharymgeal and retropharyngeal
 normal radiographic anatomy, 381,
normal radiographic anatomy, 393
masses, 261-262
381f-382f
ovary enlargement, 433
pharymgeal swelling. 261
482
 Index
salivary glands and nasolacrimal duct,
abnormal size and shape of heart.
heart base, 330, 331f
260-261
312-313, 313f
myocardial, 330-331
nasolacirmal duct abnormalities.
cardiomegaly, 312-313, 313f
normal radiographic anatomy, 284-290
261
left atrial enlargement, 313-314,
cardiac chambers, 286-287, 286f,
salivary duct fistula, 260-261
329f, 365
287f
 salivary gland neoplasia, 261
left ventricular enlargement, 314,
cardiac silhouette, 284, 284f-285f,
sialocele, 260
329f, 365-366
289f
sialolithiasis, 260
microcardia, 313, 314f
clock face analogy. 286-287, 287f
teeth, 255-259
right atrial enlargement, 314, 330f,
normal heart size, 287-289, 288f-
dental calculus, 255-256
366
289f,288t
dental caries, 256
right ventricular enlargement, 314,
pericardium, 289-290
feline odontoclastic resorptive
320f, 328f, 366
Heart size
lesion,256-257
acquired heart disease, 322-331
normal, 287-289, 288f-289f, 288t
fractures of teeth, 257
canine dilated cardiomyopathy.
vertebral (VHS). 288, 288f, 288t
metabolic diseases affecting teeth,
322-323, 324f
width, 288, 288t
257
canine hypertrophic
Heartworm disease, 327-328, 328b,328f,
neoplasia associated with teeth,
cardiomyopathy. 323-324
397
257-259
cardiomegaly, 322
in cats, 327-328
periodontal disease, 259
endocardiosis, 327
classes of, 328b
tooth root abscess, 259-260, 260f
endocarditis/myocarditis, 327
 clinical correlations, 327
temporomandibular joint (TMJ), 255
feline dilated cardiomyopathy.
radiographic fndings, 328, 328f
dysplasia of temporomandibular
324325, 325f
Heel effect, 45, 464
joint, 255
feline hypertrophic
Hematoma
subluxation/luxation of
cardiomyopathy, 325-326, 326f
defined, 464
temporomandibular joint, 255
feline restrictive cardiomyopathy.
pulmonary, 353
interpretation ofradiographs, 9-11,10f1lf
326-327
Hemimelia, 180-181, 464
 nasal cavity and frontal sinuses,
heartworm disease, 327-328, 328b,
Hemivertebra, 233, 234f, 294, 464
10-11, 11f
328f
Hemothorax, 359, 464
pharymx and larymx, 1l1, 1lf-12f
mitral valve insufficiency, 329, 329f
Hepatomegaly, 31-32, 33f
skull, 9-10, 10f
 aea pidsn
clinical correlations, 394 395
technique, 9
329-330, 330f
differential diagnosis, 447
teeth, 11
tumors, 330-331
radiographic findings., 395
 positioning guide for radiographs,
alterations of major vessels, 315-316
Hepatozoonosis, 172
78-82, 78f-81f
 aorta and aortic arch enlargement,
Hermaphroditism, 436
pharynx and larynx, 82
315
Hermia
skull, 78-80, 78f-80f
caudal vena cava size, 315
defined, 464
teeth, 78f, 80-81, 81f
 main pulmonary artery
hiatal, 298, 299f
temporomandibular joint (TMJ). 80.
enlargement, 315-316, 320f,
perineal, 415
81f
328f
peritoneal
Heart
congenital heart disease, 316-322
dinical correlations, 393
cardiac axes, 17f
aortic stenosis, 316-317, 317f
cardiac chambers, normal radiographic
atrial septal defect (ASD), 316
differential diagnosis, 439
anatomy of, 286-287, 286f-287f
atrioventricular valve dysplasia, 318
radiographic findings, 394, 394f
cardiac silhouette
characteristic findings, 317t
peritoneal-pericardial diaphragmatic
cardiac axes, 17f
clinical correlations, 316
hermia (PPDH), 332, 333f
clock face analogy. 18f
endocardial cushion defects, 318
traumatic diaphragmatic hermia,
defined, 459
endocardial fibroelastosis, 318
298-299
interpretation of radiographs, 17-19,
mitral valve dysplasia, 318
Herringbone patterm, 94, 94f, 283, 283f,
1 7f-1 8f 
 patent ductus arteriosus (PDA).
464
normal radiographic anatomy, 284.
318-319, 319f
Heterotopic bone formation, 352
284f-285f, 289f
pulmonic stenosis, 320-321, 320f
defined, 464
canine, 284,284f, 289f
reverse patent ductus arteriosus.
Hiatal hermia, 298, 299f
feline, 284, 285f
319-320
Hiatus/hiatal, defned, 464
differential diagnosis, 364-369
situs inversus, 321
High-frequency x-ray machine, 464
aorta and aortic arch, 368
tetralogy of Fallot, 321
Hip. See Coxofemoral joint; Pelvis
cardiomyopathy, 366-367
tricuspid valve dysplasia, 318
Hip dysplasia, 214-219
caudal vena cava, 368-369
vascular ring anomalies, 321-322
clinical correlations, 214
congestive heart failure, 367
ventricular septal defect (VSD), 322
grades of, 216-217, 217f, 217t
constrictive pericarditis, 368
congestive heart failure, 331-332,
radiographic findings, 214216,
endocarditis/myocarditis, 367
367
214f-216f
main pulmonary artery, 369
pericardial disease, 332-335
registry groups for hip dysplasia
neoplasia, 367-368
constrictive pericarditis, 333-334
certification, 216-219, 216f-218f,
pericardial effusion, 368
pericardial effusion, 333, 334f, 334t
217t
 pericardial masses, 368
pericardial masses, 335
British Veterinary Association/Kennel
pneumopericardium, 368
peritoneal-pericardial diaphragmatic
Club (BVA/KC), 217t, 219
position abnormalities, 364
hermia (PPDH), 332, 333f
Federation Cymologique
size abmormalities, 364366
pneumopericardium, 334335
Intermationale (FCI), 217t,
diseases and disorders, 312-335
tumors, 330-331
218-219
483
Index
Hip dysplasia (conr'd)
extra-abdominal structures, 27
dinical correlations, 408-409, 409f 
Orthopedic Foundation for Animals
female genital system, 4l, 41f
contrast radiography, 409, 410f
[OFA), 216-217, 217f
gall bladder/biliary system, 34
differential diagnosis, 409, 410f, 443
PennHIP, 217, 217t, 218f
gastrointestinal tract, 35-38, 36f-38f,
radiographic fndings, 409, 409f
HIS (hospital information system),. 51, 464 
36t
Inverse square law, 57, 57f
Histoplasmosis, 172, 304, 306f, 347-348
intra-abdominal mass, 30, 31f
Iodinated contrast media. See aiso specifc
HOD (hypertrophic osteodystrophy). 185.
Jarge intestine, 37-38
applications
185f, 266, 464
liver, 31-33, 33f
adverse reactions to, 90, 91b
 Horizontal beam radiography, defined,
lymph nodes, 31, 32f
arthrography. 103
464
male genital system, 40-41, 40f
cystography, 112
Hospital information system (HIS). 51, 464
pancreas, 35, 35f
dacryocystorhinography. 104
Humeral condyle
peritoneal and retroperitoneal spaces,
discography, 105
incomplete, 206-207,206f
27-31, 27f-31f
epidurography. 106
osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) of, 205,
prostate gland, 40-41, 40f
fistulography, 111
205f
small intestine, 36-37,
37f-38f
intravenous urography, 116
Humeral epicondyle
spleen,3435, 34f-35f
jonic contrast media, 88-89, 465
 medial epicondylar spur, 207-208, 208f
stomach, 35, 36f, 36t
[01AudeaoaueuduaAydeaoyd
ununited medial, 205-206, 206f
urinary tract, 3840, 40f41f
nonionic contrast media, 89, 466
Hydrocephalus, 249-250, 250f
musculoskeleton, 41 1
nonselective angiography. 101
Hydromyelia, 236
axial skeleton, 9
otic canalography. 104
Hydronephrosis, 118f, 419
checklist for interpreting orthopedic
overview of, 88-89
Hydropneumothorax, 16
radiographs, 4b
pleurography, 100
Hydrothorax, 464
evaluation of bone, 46, 5t, 6f, 7t
rhinography. 104
Hydroureter, 119f
evaluation of joints, 6-8, 7f-8f, 8b
sialography, 105
Hyoid bones, 152, 263-264
evaluation of soft tissue, 8-9
upper gastrointestinal study, 96-97
Hyperadrenocorticism, 428
head and neck, 9-11, 10f-11f
venous portography. 102
Hypercorticosterism, 428, 447
0sseous remodeling, 8b
Yonic iodinated contrast media, 88-89,
Hyperparathyroidism, 184, 257, 258f, 464
thorax, 11-27
465
Hypertrophic osteodystrophy (HOD), 185.
cardiac silhouette (heart), 17-19,
Ipsilateral, defined, 465
185f, 266, 464
17f-18f
Irregular, defined, 465
Hypertrophic osteopathy, 171, 171f
checklist for interpreting, 12t
Ischemia, intestinal, 410, 410f
Hypervitaminosis A, 241-242
diaphragm, 13
IVDD (intervertebral disc disease).
Hypoadrenocorticism, 428
effects related to age, body condition,
242-243, 242f-243f
Hypovolemia, microcardia in, 364
and conformation, 12
lungs, 21-27, 21f-26f, 23b
Jejunum, 387
Yatrogenic, defined, 464
mediastinum, 16-17, 16f-17f 
Joint space
IBD (inflammatory bowel disease), 408,
pleura and pleura space, 13-16.
differential diagnosis, 267
408f, 444
1 3f-16f
width, 6-8, 7f-8f
Idiopathic, defined, 464
thoracic wall, 12-13, 12f-13f
Joints. See also specijfic joinrs
Ieum, 387
trachea, 19-20, 19f-20f
arthography, 103-104
Ileus, 36, 405-407, 405f 406f
Interstitial lung pattem, 24-27, 24f-26f,
differential diagnoses for abnormal
dinical correlations, 405
27b
findings, 267-268
contrast radiography, 406-407
defined, 465
alignment abnormalities (instability or
defined, 464
differential diagnosis, 374-376
incongruity). 267
differential diagnosis, 442-443
structured, 24-25, 24f-25f
joint space abnormalities, 267
functional, 405, 407, 443
unstructured (general), 25-27, 27f,
 opacity abnormalities of bone
obstuctive, 405-407, 405f 406f, 442-443
375-376
associated with joint disease,
radiographic fndings. 405-406, 405f 406f
Interstitial pneumonia, 345
267-268
ll-defined, 464
Intervertebral disc disease (IvDD).
diseases and disorders, 188-232
Image detector. See Detector
242-243, 242f-243f
arthritis
Image receptor. See Detector
Intervertebral disc space, 9, 269
feline noninfectious polyarthritis,
 Incomplete ossification of humeral
Intestinal ileus. See Ileus
197
condyle, 206-207, 206f
Imtestinal ischemia, 410, 410f
infectious arthritis, 193-194
Infarct, bone, 177, 177f, 458
Intestine. See Large intestine; Small
non-infectious, nonerosive.
Inflammation. See specijfc disorders
intestine
immune-mediated arthritis,
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), 408.
 Intra-abdominal mass
194-196
408f, 444
differential diagnosis, 436-438,
polyarthritis of greyhounds, 197
Influenza, canine, 349
436f437f
Reiter's disease, 197
Intensifying screens, 47, 47f, 464
 interpretation of radiographs, 30, 31f
rheumatoid arthritis, 196
Intercostal spacing. abnormalities in, 356
Intramembranous ossification, defined,
carpus, 208-210
Interlobar fissure line, 14f. See also Pleural
465
 degenerative joint disease of carpus.
fissure line
Intraosseous epidermoid cyst, 212
208
Interphalangeal joints, 138
Intravenous pyelography. 115
fractures of carpus, 209
Interpretation of radiographs, 3-41, 82-85
Intravenous urography, see excretory
luxation /subluxation of carpus,
abdomen, 27-41
Ayde.8o.n
208-209
adrenal glands, 40
Imtussu sception
 stenosing tenosynovitis involving
effects of age, body condition, and
gastroesophageal, 309, 309f
tendon of abductor pollicis
conformation, 27
small intestine, 408-410, 409f-410f
longus, 209-210
484
 Index
 congenital and developmental
avulsion fractures of stifle, 223-224
position abnormalities, 451-452
malformations, 189
 avulsion of tibial tuberosity.
size and margination abn ormalities.
degenerative joint disease (DID).
224-225
450-451
189-191
 caudal cruciate ligament injury, 223
diseases and disorders, 415-421,
digits (metacarpu s/metatarsus/
cranial cruciate ligament injury.
417f-41 9f
phalanges), 210-212
222-223
 congenital defects, 415-417
digital neoplasia, 211
degenerative joint disease of stifle.
cystadenocarcinoma, 416
fracture/luxation of digits, 210 
221-222
Fanconi symndrome, 415-416
intraosseous epidermoid cyst, 212
luxation of stifle, 225
feline perirenal cysts, 419, 419f
osteomyelitis of digit, 2ll-212
multipartite patella, 228
hydronephrosis, 419
sesamoid bone fractures, 2l0-211
neoplasia of stifle, 227
polycystic kidney disease (PKD), 417.
elbow, 202-208
osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) of
417f
degenerative joint disease of elbow.
stifle,227-228
 renal amyloidosis, 416
202
patellar luxation, 225-227
renal aplasia, 415-416
elbow dysplasia, 202-203
premature closure of proximal tibial
renal calculi, 417-418, 418f
elbow incongruity. 203
physis, 225
renal cysts, 418, 418f
fractures of elbow, 206
ruptured patellar ligament, 227
renal dysplasia/hypoplasia, 416-417
fragmented medial coronoid
tarsus, 228-232
renal inflammation (nephritis and 
process, 203-205
common calcanean (Achilles)
pyelonephritis), 419-420
incomplete ossification of humeral
tendon injury. 228-229
renal neoplasia, 420
condyle, 206-207
 degenerative joint disease (DJD) of
rupture, 420-421
luxation of elbow, 207
tarsus, 229
telangiectasia, 417
medial epicondylar spur, 207-208
fractures of tarsus, 229-230
interpretation of radiographs, 38, 39f
 osteochondritis (OCD) of humeral
luxation/subluxation of tarsus,
normal length and width, 389b 
condyle, 205
230-231
normal radiographic anatomy, 388-390,
patella cubiti, 208
osteochondritis (OCD) of tarsus,
389b, 389f
subluxation of elbow, 207
231-232
kVp (kilovolt peak). 45
ununited anconeal process, 203
 premature closure of distal tibial
defined, 465
ununited medial humeral
physis, 232
technique charts and, 54-56, 55t
epicondyle, 205-206
effusion, 266
Kyphosis, 9, 465
feline noninfectious polyarthritis, 197
interpretation of radiographs, 6-8.
joint soft tissue swelling. 192
7f-8f, 8b
Labial, defned, 465
neoplasia, 197-198, 198f
bone alignment, 6
Large intestine
0steochondritis dissecans (OCD),
joint space width, 6-8, 7f-8f
differential diagnoses for abnormal
191-192
normal radiographic anatomy. 133-145
findings. 445-447
osteochondroses, 191
carpus, 137-138,138f
inflammation (colitis), 446 
 pelvis and coxofemoral joints,
cartilage joints (symchondroses).
neoplasia, 446-447
212-221
134-135
 opacity abnormalities, 445-446
 avascular necrosis of femoral head,
coxofemoral (hip). 139-140
position abmormalities, 446
212
digits (metacarpus/metatarsus/
size and shape abrormalities, 445
coxofemoral luxation, 220
phalanges), 138, 139f
diseases and disorders, 412-415.
degenerative joint disease (DJD) of
elbow, 135, 137, 136f-137f
412f-41 5f
hips, 212-214
fibrous joints (symarthrodial joints).
atresia ani, 412
feline capital physeal dysplasia
134
cecal inversion, 412-413, 412f
syndrome, 220
pelvis, 139-140, 139f-140f
colon torsion, 414
femoral head and neck fractures.
shoulder, 135, 135f-136f
constipation and obstipation, 413
219-220
stifle, 140-141, 140f-141f
inflammation of colon (colitis).
fractures of pelvis, 219
 synovial joints (diarthrodial joints),
413-414, 413f-414f 
hip dysplasia, 214-219
133-134, 134f
megacolon, 414
luxations, 220-221
tarsus, 141-142, 141f-143f
neoplasia, 414-415
neoplasia of pelvis, 221
vertebrae (spine), 142-145, 144f-145f
perineal hernia and rectal
sacroiliac luxation, 220-221
radiographic signs of disease, 8b
diverticulum, 415
polyarthritis of greyhounds, 197
sesamoid bones
interpretation of radiographs, 37-38
Rieter's disease, 197
carpus, 13l, 132f
normal radiographic anatomy, 386f-
shoulder
digits, 131-132, 132f
388f, 387-388
biceps tendinopathy, 200-201
elbow, 131, 131f
Laryngeal hypoplasia, 263
degenerative joint disease of
shoulder, 131, 131f
Laryngeal masses, 263
shoulder, 198
stifle, 130-131, 130f
Laryngeal paralysis, 263
fractures involving shoulder, 198
tarsus, 131, 132f
Larymx
 osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) of
soft tissue swelling. 192, 193f
differential diagnoses for abnormal
shoulder, 199-200
fndings. 273-274
 osteochondromatosis of shoulder.
Kidneys
hypoplasia, 263
200
differential diagnoses for abnormal
interpretation of radiographs, 11, 11f
scapulohumeral luxation, 198-199
findings, 450-452
masses, 263
shoulder dysplasia, 202
 excretory urogram, abnormal fndings
mineralization, 274
 supraspinatus and infraspinatus
om, 452
paralysis, 263
tendinopathy, 201-202
number abnormality, 450
 positioning for radiographs, 82
stifle,221-228
 opacity abnormalities, 451
Lateral, defined, 465
485
Index
Lateral radiograph
acute respiratory distress syndrome
Luxation, 220-221
abdomen, 67, 67f
(ARDS), 341
carpus, 208-209, 209f
carpus, 71, 71f
cavitary lesiomns, 353-354, 353f
coxofemoral, 220, 221f
defined, 465
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
defined, 465
elbow, 70, 70f
(COPD), 341
elbow, 207, 207f
elbow, extreme flexed, 70-7l, 71f
collapse of lung (atelectasis), 340f,
patellar, 225-227, 226f
pelvis, 72, 72f
341-342, 342f
sacroiliac, 220-221
shoulder, 69, 70f
emphysema, 342-343
scapulohumeral, 198-199, 199f
shoulder with pronation/supination,
granuloma, 352-353
spine, 240-241, 240f-241f
70
hematoma, 353
stifle, 225
shoulder with traction, 70
lung lobe torsion, 342f, 343
tarsus, 230-231, 231f
skull, 78. 78f
neoplasia, 354-356
temporomandibular joint, 255
skull, oblique, 80, 80f-81f
patterns of disease, 21-27
Lymph node
stifle, 73-74, 75f
pneumonia, 343-349
 differential diagnosis for enlargement,
stifle, flexed with tibial compression
 actinomycosis and nocardiosis, 344
436
radiograph, 74, 75f
Aelurostrongyius, 348
 interpretation of radiographs, 31, 32f
stifle with flexion or extension, 74
aspergillosis, 345-346
intra-abdominal, 379-380
tarsus, 75, 75f
aspiration pneumonia, 343-344
parietal, 380
tarsus, standing, 75
bacterial pneumonia, 344
visceral, 379
thorax, 62-63, 62f-63f, 63b
blastomycosis, 346
mediastinal, 281-282, 281f, 304, 305f
Lateral recumbency, defined, 465
dinical correlations, 343
Lymphadenomegaly, 274
Lead poisoning, 188
 coccidioidomycosis (valley fever),
Lymphadenopathy, 180, 465
Left atrial enlargement, 313-314, 329f,
346-347
Lymphedema, 180
365
cryptococcosis, 347
Lymphography/lymphangiography
Left ventricular enlargement, 314, 329f,
eosinophilic (allergic) pneumonia,
contraindications, 101
365-366
345
defined, 465
Leishmariasis, 173-174
histoplasmosis, 347-348
indications, 101
Lesion, defined, 465
interstitial pneumonia, 345
 mesenteric lymphangiography, 101
Lidocaine, 112, 119, 121
mycotic pneumonia, 345
 peripheral lymphogram, 101
mixed with contrast agent, 100
Paragonimus,348,349f
techniques, 101
Linear foreign body, small intestine, 37.
parasitic pneumonia, 348
37f, 407-408, 407f
pneumocystis, 348
Mach band, 465
Lines across image artifact (digital
toxoplasmosis, 348-349
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 86.
radiography). 52
tuberculosis, 345
465
Lingual, defned, 465
viral pneumonia, 349
Magnification, 46, 52, 58-59, 60f
Liver
visceral larva migrans, 349
defined, 465
 differential diagnoses for abnormal
pulmonary edema, 349-351, 350f
Major vessels
findings. 447-448
pulmonary nodules and masses,
 alterations of, 315-316
opacity abnormalities, 448
351-352
 aorta and aortic arch enlargement,
position abnormalities, 447-448
thrombosis and thromboembolism,
315
size and shape abnormalities, 447
354
caudal vena cava size, 315
diseases and disorders, 394 396
gravity-dependent lung inflation, 62-63,
 main pulmonary artery enlargement,
hepatomegaly, 394-395
63f
315-316,320f, 328f
microhepatica, 395-396
hyperinflation, 357
differential diagnoses for abnormal
interpretation of radiographs, 31-33,
interpretation of radiographs, 21-27,
findings, 368-369
33f
21f-26f, 23b
aorta and aortic arch, 368
abnormal opacity. 33
metastatic pulmonary neoplasia, 25f,
caudal vena cava, 368-369
abnormal position, 33
355-356
 main pulmonary artery, 369
abnormal shape, 33
normal radiographic anatomy 291-293,
 Male genital system
abnormal size, 31-33, 33f
292f
 differential diagnoses for abnormal
normal radiographic anatomy, 380-381,
patterms of lung disease, 21-27, 21f-26f,
findings. 455
380f-381f
23b
diseases and disorders, 429-433
Liver flukes, 397
 bronchial disease (bronchial lung
paraprostatic cyst, 431-432, 432f
Lordosis, 9, 465
patterm), 22, 23b,23f, 374, 458
penis, 432-433
Lumbophrenic angle, 279
differential diagmnosis, 372-376
prostate gland, 429-431, 430f 431f
defined, 465
lung air space disease (alveolar
testicles, 432
Lumbosacral disease, 243-244, 244f, 269
patterm),23-25, 24f, 25b, 26f,
interpretation of radiographs, 40-41, 40f 
Lumbosacral instability, defined, 465
372-374, 457
666-l6e Auoneue 3deiaopei [euiou
Lung lobe torsion, 342f, 343
lung parenchyma disease (interstitial
Malunion fracture, 167, 167f, 465
Lung markings. defined, 465
lung patterm), 24-27, 24f-26f,
Manus, 466
Lungs
27b, 375-376
Margination
barium in, 89
nodular lung patterm disease
bone, 4, 7t
 differential diagnoses for abnormal
(interstitial lung patterm), 24-25,
diaphragm, 358
findings. 371-376
374375
kidney abnormalities, 450-451
opacity abnormalities, 371-372
pulmonary vasculature disease
liver, 33
patterms of disease, 372-376
(vascular lung pattern), 2l-22,
periosteal respomse, 153
diseases and disorders, 341-356
21f-22f, 22b, 376, 472
trachea, 20, 370
abscess, 352, 353f
pulmonary abscess, 352, 353f
mAs (milliampere seconds), 45, 466
486
 Index
mAs chart, 55-56, 56t
Mesenteric lymphangiography. 101
differential diagnosis, 235
Mass effect, 31f, 436-438
Mesenteric venography. 102
radiographic fndings, 186, 186f, 235
defined, 466
Mesenteric volvulus, 410-411
Multilobular tumor of skull, 160, 251f 
 Mass lesion, defined, 466
Metabolic diseases affecting teeth
Multipartite patella, 228, 228f
Masses
dinical correlations, 257
Mural, defined, 466
diaphragm, 297-298
radiographic fndings. 257, 258f
Musculoskeleton, 123-274
endotracheal, 337
Metacarpus
contrast radiography procedures,
esophageal, 362-363
disorders, 210-212
103-110
hepatic, 447
positioning for radiographs, 72, 72f
arthrography. 103-104
 intra-abdominal, radiographic
Metal, opacity of, 53, 53f
skull (head), 104-105 
interpretation of, 30, 31f
Metaphysis, 126, 126f, 466
 dacryocystorhinography. 104
larymx, 263
Metastatic calcification, 466
otic canalography. 104
mediastinal, 304-306, 305f-306f,
 Metastatic malignant bone neoplasia,
rhinography. 104
361-362
175-176, 176f
sialography. 104-105
pancreatic, 450
Metastatic pulmonary neoplasia, 25f,
spine, 105-110, 107f-110f
pericardial, 335
355-356
discography, 105
pharymgeal, 261-262
Metatarsus
epidurography. 105-106
pleural, 360
disorders, 210-212
myelography. 106-110, 107f-110f
pulmonary, 351-352, 375
positioning for radiographs, 72, 72f
differential diagnoses for abnormal
retropharymgeal, 261-262
Microcardia, 313, 314f, 364
findings. 264-274
soft tissue, 177-178
Microhepatica, 32-33, 33f
general bome, 264-267
splenic, 34, 34f, 449
dinical correlations, 395
distribution of bone lesions, 264
stermal, 297, 356
contrast radiography, 396
neoplasia of bone, 264
thoracic wall, 297
differential diagnosis, 447
 opacity abnormalities of bone,
uterus, 435
radiographic fndings, 395-396
264-266
Medial, defined, 466
Microlithiasis, 352, 371-372
shape abnormalities of bone, 266
Medial coronoid process
defined, 466
 soft tissue abnormalities, 266-267
fragmented, 203-205, 204f-205f
Miliary nodules, 352
joints, 267-268
ossification center, 133
defined, 466
alignment abnormalities (instability
Medial epicondylar spur, elbow, 207-208,
Min eralization
or incongruity), 267
208f
adrenal gland, 428-429
joint space abnormalities, 267
Median, defined, 466
biliary system, 396-397, 397f
 opacity abnormalities of bone
Mediastinal shift
chondrocalcinosis, 179
associated with joint disease.
defined, 466
costal cartilages, 277, 277f
267-268
interpretation of radiographs, 16-17,
defined, 466
pharynx and larymx abnormalities.
16f
with DD, 189, 191
273-274
 Mediastinum
dystrophic, 178, 189, 462
skull, 271-273
barium in, 89
elbow, 208b
cranium abnormalities, 271-272
differential diagnoses for abnormal
esophagus, 363
frontal sinus abnormalities, 272
findings. 360-362
extermal auditory canal, 271
teeth abnormalities, 272-273
opacity abnormalities, 360-361
imtervertebral disc, 242-243, 243f
temporomandibular joint (TMJ)
 position abnormalities (mediastinal
larynx, 274
abnormalities, 273
shift), 360
hver, 33, 448
spine, 268-271
width abnormalities, 361-362
lungs, 372
 alignment abnormalities, 268
diseases and disorders, 304-306.
mediastinum, 305, 306f
discospondylitis, 268-269
305f-306f
metastatic, 178
intervertebral disc space, 269
masses, 304-306, 305f-306f
pancreas, 35, 399
lumbosacral disease, 269
mediastinal widening (diffuse), 306
prostate gland, 40-41, 430, 455
myelogram lesions, 269-270
pneumomediastinum, 306
in retroperitoneal space, 440
neoplasia associated with spine, 270
 interpretation of radiographs, 16-17.
shoulder, 200, 200b
 opacity abnormalities of vertebrae,
16f-17f
soft tissue, 8, 152, 178-179, 179f
270
normal radiographic anatomy, 280-282,
stifle,227b
shape abnormalities of vertebrae,
281f-28 2f
stomach wall, 441
270-271
communications,280
tarsus, 231b
size abnormalities of spinal canal.
lymph nodes, 281-282, 281f
uterus, 456
271
medistinal divisions, 280
vascular, 179
diseases and disorders, 152-264
reflections (folds), 282, 282f
Mitral valve dysplasia, 318
appendicular skeleton, 180-232
thymus, 281,281f
Mitral valve insufficiency, 329, 329f
congenital and developmental
width, 280-281
Mixed pulmonary patterm, 466
anomalies, 180-188
Megacolon, 414, 445
Modified Triadan numbering system,
joint disease, 188-232
Megaesophagus, 309-311, 310f
149-150, 149f-150f
axial skeleton, 232-264
clinical correlations, 309-310
Monoarticular, defined, 466
head and neck, 248-264
contrast radiography, 310-311, 310f
Monostotic, defined, 466
vertebrae, 232-247
differential diagnosis, 363-364
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging). 86
benign conditions, 157-160
radiographic findings, 310, 310f
Mucocele, frontal sinus, 253 
bone cysts, 157-158
Meningocele, 466
Mucopolysaccharidosis, 185-186
chondroma, 160
Meningomyelocele, 466
dinical correlations, 185-186, 235
enchondroma, 158-159
Mesaticephalic skull conformation, 146 
defined, 466
multilobular tumor of skull, 160
487
Index
Musculoskeleton (conr'd)
Mycotic disease. See also specijfc diseases
heart, 367-368
osteochondroma, 159
arthritis, 193
joints, 197-198, 198f
osteoma, 160
nasal cavity, 254
large intestine, 414-415, 415d,
symovial osteochondroma, 159-160
osteomyelitis, 171-174, 173t
446-447
bone loss, 156-157
pneumonia
mnasal cavity, 254-255, 255f
osteolysis, 157
aspergillosis, 345-346
osseous, 174-177
osteopenia, 156-157
blastomycosis, 346
bone infarcts, 177
bone production, 152-156
clinical correlations, 345
digital neoplasia, 176
osteopetrosis, 155-156
coccidioidomycosis (valley fever),
giant cell tumor, 176-177
 osteophytes and enthesophytes.
346-347
metastatic malignant bone neoplasia,
155
cryptococcosis, 347
175-176. 176f
periosteal response, 152-155
histoplasmosis, 347-348
parosteal osteosarcoma, 176
fractures, 161-170, 161-171
pneumocystis, 348
primary malignant bone neoplasia.
fracture complications, 164-171
Myelocele, defined, 466
174-175, 174f-175f, 177b
fracture healing, 164
Myelogram
osteomyelitis compared, 8b, 177b
hypertrophic osteopathy, 171
artifacts and technical errors, 109-110,
pelvis, 221, 221f
types of, 161-163
1l0f
prostate gland, 430-431, 431f
joint disease, 188-232
lesions, 108-109, 108f-109f
pulmonary
0sseous neoplasia, 174-177
differential diagnosis, 269-270
 metastatic pulmonary neoplasia, 25f,
bone infarcts, 177
extradural, 108, 108f
35 5356
digital neoplasia, 176
intradural-extramedullary, 10g-109,
 primary pulmonary neoplasia, 355
giant cell tumor, 176-177
109f
renal, 420
metastatic malignant bone
intramedullary, 109, 109f 
ribs, 296
neoplasia, 175-176
normal, 107-108, 107f-108f
small intestine, 4ll, 41lf 
parosteal osteosarcoma, 176
spinal needle placement, 110f 
spine, 244-245, 245f, 270
primary malignant bone neoplasia,
technique, 106-107
stifle, 227
174-175
cervical myelogram, 106-107
stomach, 442
osteomyelitis, 171-174
lumbar myelogram, 107
tooth associated, 257-259, 258f-259f,
leishmaniasis, 173-174
Myelography. 106-110, 107f-110f
273
neosporosis, 174
complications, 106
urethra, 427, 427f
soft tissues, 177-180
contraindications, 106
urinary bladder, 424-425, 425f
arteriovenous fistula, 180
defined, 466
Neosporosis, 174
 chondrocalcinosis, 179
indications, 106
Nephritis, 419-420
foreign objects in soft tissues,
radiographic findings (myelogram)
Nephrogram, defined, 466
179-180
myelogram artifacts and technical
Newton's inverse square law, 57, 57f
lymphadenopathy, 180
errors, 109-110,110f
Niche, defned, 466
lymphedema, 180
myelogram lesions, 108-109,
Nocardiosis, 344
soft tissue emphysema, 178
108f-109f
Nodular lesion, defned, 466
soft tissue mineralization, 178-179
normal, 107-108, 107f-108f
 Nodular pulmonary patterm, 24-25.
soft tissue swelling or mass,
technique (myelogram), 106-107
374-375, 466
177-178
cervical, 106-107
Nodules, pulmonary, 351-352, 354, 375
 interpretation of radiographs, 4-11
lumbar, 107
Nomenclature, anatomic, 6lf
axial skeleton, 9
Myocarditis, 327, 367
Nonionic iodinated contrast media, 89.
checklist for interpreting orthopedic
Myositis ossificans, 466
466
radiographs, 4b
Nonunion fracture, 166-167, 167f, 466
evaluation of bone, 46, 5t, 6f, 7t
Nasal cavity, 253-255
Norberg angle, 217t, 218-219, 218f,
evaluation of joints, 6-8, 7f-8f, 8b
fractures of face and frontal area, 253
466
evaluation of soft tissue, 8-9
frontal sinus mucocele, 253
 NRC (Nuclear Regulatory Commission),
head and neck, 9-11, 10f-1lf
inflammation/infection of, 253-254
57
osseous remodeling. 8b
 interpretation of radiographs, 10-1l.
Nuclear medicine, 86
normal radiographic anatomy, 125-152
1lf 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC).
bone development, 128-130.
neoplasia of, 254-255
57
128t-129t
opacity, 272
bone shape, 126
 Nasolacirmal duct abnormalities, 261
Object, defined, 466
bone types, 126
Neck. See Head and neck
Object-film distance (OFD), 466
epiphyses and apophyses ages at
Negative contrast agent, 88
 Object-receptor distance (ORD), 467
appearance and fusion,
defined, 466
Oblique radiograph, defined, 467
128t-129t
Negative contrast cystogram, for urinary
Obstipation, 413, 445
general considerations, 125-128
 bladder neoplasia, 425f
Obstruction
joints, 133-145
Negative contrast enema (pneumocolon),
gastric outflow, 403-404, 404f
number of bones, 125-126
93
intestinal ileus, 405-407, 405f 406f
ossification centers, variable,
Neoplasia
Occipital dysplasia, 251-252, 252f
132-133, 133f-134f
bone, 264
OCD. See Osteochondritis dissecans
parts of long bones, 126-128,
cranial vault, 250-251, 250f-251f
64 'ssaoond pioiuopo
126f-127f
in cystography. 114-115, 114f-115f
Odontoma, 259
sesamoid bones, 130-132, 130f-132f 
digital, 211, 211f
OFA fOrthopedic Foundation for
skull, 146-152
esophageal, 308
Animals), 216-217, 217t, 467
Mycoplasmal arthritis, 193
gastric, 402-403, 404f
OFD (object-film distance), 466
488
 Index
Oligocephalic, defined, 467
pelvis, 133, 134f
PACs (picture archiving and
Opacity (radiopacity)
variable, 132-133, 133f-134f
communication system), 50-51, 468
bone, 46, 264-268
vertebral, 142, 143f
Palmar, defined, 468
cardiac silhouette, 18
Osteoblasts, 128
Pancreas
cranium, 271
Osteochondritis dissecans (OCD),
differential diagnoses for abnormal
defined, 467
191-192
findings. 449-450
esophagus, 362-363
dinical correlations, 191
diseases and disorders, 398-399
kidney, 38, 451
defined, 467
interpretation of radiographs, 35, 35f
large intestine, 445-446
differential diagnosis, 192
normal radiographic anatomy, 383,
liver, 33, 448
humeral condyle, 205, 205f
384f
lungs, 371-372
radiographic findings, 191-192, 192f,
pancreatic mass, 399
mediastinum, 17, 360-361
200f
panncreatitis, 398-399, 449-450
nasal cavity, 272
shoulder, 199-200,200f
Pancreatitis, 35f, 398-399, 449-450
overview, 52-53, 52t, 53f-54f
spine, 245-246, 246f
Panosteitis, 187-188, 188f, 468
effective atomic numbers, 52, 52t
stifle, 227-228,228f
Paragonimus.348,349f
five basic opacities, 53, 53f
tarsus, 231-232, 231f
Paraprostatic cyst, 431-432, 432f
relative opacity, 53, 54f
Osteochondroma, 159, 159f, 297.
Parasitic disease. See also specijfic diseases
summation,28,28f, 53, 53f
467
of gall bladder and biliary system, 397
peritoneal space, 438-439
Osteochondromatosis, 246
pneumonia, 348-349
pleura and pleural space, 358-359
dinical correlations, 246
Aelurostrongyius,348
prostate gland, 40-41, 455
radiographic findings, 246
Paragonimus.348,349f
retroperitoneal space, 439-440
shoulder, 200, 201f
toxoplasmosis, 348-349
small intestine, 443-444
Osteochondrases, 191, 191t
visceral larva migrans, 349
soft tissue, 267
Osteoclasts, 128
tracheobronchial, 338
spinal cord, 109
Osteocytes, 128
Parosteal osteosarcoma, 176, 468
spleen, 35, 449
Osteogenesis imperfecta, 186-187, 467
Patchy, defined, 468
stomach, 441
Osteolysis, 45, 5t, 7t, 157, 467
Patella, 130, 130f
thoracic wall, 356-357
Osteoma, 160
Juxation, 225-227
trachea, 20, 369-370
dinical correlations, 160
multipartite, 228, 228f
tympanic bulla, 271
defined, 467
Patella cubiti, 208
urethra, 454455
differential diagnosis, 160
Patellar ligament, ruptured, 227, 227f
urinary bladder, 39-40, 39f, 453-454
pulmonary, 352
Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), 318-319,
uterus, 456
radiographic findings, 160, 250f
31 9f
vertebrae, 270
Osteomalachia, 156
clinical correlations, 318-319
 Opacity interface, defined, 467
Osteomyelitis, 171-174
radiographic findings, 319, 319f
Orchitis, 432
dinical correlations, 171-172, 173t
reverse PDA, 319-320
 ORD (object-receptor distance), 467
cranial vault, 252
Pathologic fracture, 468
 Organic iodinated compounds, 467
defined, 467
Patterms of lung disease, 21-27
 Orthogonal radiographs, defned, 467
differential diagnosis, 173
 PDA. See Patent ductus arteriosus
Orthopedic Foundation for Animals
digit, 211-212
Pectus carinatum, 295
(OFA), 216-217, 217t, 467
diseases and disorders, 171-174
Pectus excavatum, 295, 295f
Orthopedic radiographs, checklist for
leishmaniasis, 173-174
Pelvic bladder, 425
interpreting. 4b
neoplasia compared, 8b, 177b
 Pelvic limb positioning guide for
Os penis, ossification of, 133
neosporosis, 174
radiographs
Oslerus osleri, 338
radiographic fndings, 172f, 173
pelvis, 72-73,72f-74f
Osseous neoplasia, 174-177
Osteopenia, 4, 156-157, 156f, 467
dorsal acetabular rim radiograph, 73
bone infarcts, 177, 177f
Osteopetrosis, 5, 155-156
half-axial radiograph, 73, 74f
digital neoplasia, 176
dinical correlations, 155, 155f
lateral radiograph, 72, 72f
giant cell tumor, 176-177
defined, 467
PennHIP, 73. 74f
metastatic malignant bone neoplasia.
differential diagnosis for, 156 
ventrodorsal (VD) flexed ("frog
175-176. 176f
radiographic findings, 155, 156f
legged"). 73, 73f
Osteomyelitis compared to, 177b
Osteophyte. 7, 7f, 155
ventrodorsal (VD) radiograph, 73,
parosteal osteosarcoma, 176
dinical correlations, 155
73f
 primary malignant bone neoplasia,
defined, 467
stifle, 73-74, 75f
174-175, 174f-175f, 177b
differential diagnosis for bone spurs,
caudocranial radiograph, 74, 75f
Osseous remodeling. 8b
155
craniocaudal radiograph, 74, 75f
Ossification
in DJD, 189
flexed lateral with tibial compression
defined, 467
radiographic findings.
155
radiograph, 74, 75f
dural, 239-240, 462
Osteoporosis, 156, 467
lateral radiograph, 73-74, 75f
endochondral, 462
Osteosarcoma, 174, 176
lateral with flexion or extension, 74
fetal, 130, 130t
Osteosclerosis, 5, 7t, 8, 8f, 189, 265, 268,
skyline, 74
intramembranous, 465
467
tarsus, 74-75, 75f, 76f
 Ossification center
Otic canalography. 104, 467
dorsoplantar radiograph, 75. 76f
accessory caudal glenoid, 132, 133f 
Otitis (extema, media, and interna), 252,
flexed dorsoplantar (skyline)
clavicles, 132, 133f
253f
radiograph, 75, 76f
defined, 467
Ovary enlargement, 433
lateral radiograph, 75. 75f
medial coronoid process, 133
 Overexposure artifact (digital
oblique radiograph, 75
os penis, 133
radiography), 51, 54, 54f
standing lateral radiograph, 75
489
Index
Pelvis, 212-221
normal radiographic anatomy, 379-380.
radiographic fndings, 299-301,
anatomy. 139-140, 139f-140f
379f-380f
300f-301f
avascular necrosis of femoral head, 212
 Peritoneal-pericardial diaphragmatic
Pleural fissure line, 13, 13f-14f, 299-300,
 degenerative joint disease (DJD) of hips.
hermia (PPDH), 332, 333f
468
212-214
Peritoneogram, 99
Pleural thickening, 301, 360, 468
feline capital physeal dysplasia
 Peritoneography, 99
Pleurography, 100, 468
syndrome,220
Peritoneum, 379, 379f
Plication, defned, 468
fractures, 219
Peritonitis, with pancreatitis, 399
Pneumatocoele, 354, 468
hip dysplasia, 214-219
Pes, defned, 468
Pneumatosis intestinalis, 443
luxations, 220-221
Phalanges
Pneumocolon, 93
neoplasia, 221
disorders, 210-212
Pneumocystis, 348
ossification center, 133, 134f
positioning for radiographs, 72. 72f
Pneumocystography
positioning for radiographs, 72-73.
Pharynx
described, 112
72f-74f
 differential diagnoses for abnormal
for ectopic ureter, 421
dorsal acetabular rim radiograph, 73
fndings. 273-274
Pneumomediastinum, 17, 17f, 20, 306,
half-axial radiograph, 73, 74f
diseases and disorders, 261-264
468
lateral radiograph, 72, 72f
dysphagia and cricopharyngeal
Pneumonia, 343-349
PennHIp, 73, 74f
achalasia, 262-263
aspiration, 343-344
ventrodorsal (VD) flexed ("frog
hyoid bones, 263-264
bacterial
legged"y. 73. 73f
interpretation of radiographs, 11,
actinomycosis and nocardiosis, 344
ventrodorsal (VD) radiograph, 73, 73f
1lf-12f
dinical correlations, 344
Penis
masses, 261-262, 262f
radiographic fndings, 344
diseases and disorders, 432-433
pharyngeal and retropharymgeal masses.
tuberculosis, 345
normal radiographic anatomy. 393
261-262
clinical correlations, 343
PennHIP, 73,74f, 217, 217t, 218f
pharymgeal swelling, 261, 261f
eosinophilic (allergic), 345
 Penumbra (geometric unsharpness), 59,
positioning for radiographs, 82
interstitial, 345
59f, 468
Pheochromocytoma, 429
mycotic
Perforation, small intestine, 411-412, 444
Phosphor, defined, 468
aspergillosis, 345-346
Pericardial effusion, 333, 334f-334t, 368
Phrenic nerve paralysis, 357
blastomycosis, 346
Pericardium
 Physeal injuries (premature closure of
dinical correlations, 345
disea5es, 332-335
growth plate), 168-171
coccidioidomycosis (valley fever).
constrictive pericarditis, 333-334, 368
dinical correlations, 168
346-347
differential diagnosis, 368
defined, 468
cryptococcosis, 347
 pericardial effusion, 333, 334f, 334t,
radiographic fndings. 136f, 168-171,
histoplasmosis, 347-348
368
169f-170f
pneumocystis, 348
 pericardial masses, 335, 368
Physis, 126, 126f, 468
parasitic, 348-349
 peritoneal-pericardial diaphragmatic
Phytobezoar, defined, 468
Aelurostrongylus.348
hermia (PPDH). 332, 333f
Picture archiving and communication
Paragonimus,348,349f
pneumopericardium, 334-335, 368
system (PACS), 50-51, 468
toxoplasmosis, 348-349
function of, 290
Pixels, 49 
visceral larva migrans, 349
 interpretation of radiographs, 18-19
Pixilated image artifact (digital
viral, 349
normal radiographic anatomy, 289-290
radiography). 52
 Pneumopericardiography
Perineal hermia, 415
PKD (polycystic kidney disease), 417.
contraindications, 102
Periodontal disease, 259, 259f
417f
defined, 468
Periosteal response, 5-6, 6f, 30, 30f,
 Planking artifact (digital radiography). 51
indications, 102
152-155, 153t, 154f-155f, 468
Pantar, defined, 468
technique, 102
Periosteum
 Pleura and pleural space
Pneumopericardium, 334-335, 368
anatomy. 128
barium in, 89
Pneumoperitoneography. 469
defined, 468
differential diagnoses for abnormal
Pneumoperitoneum, 29, 29f, 439, 469
 Perirenal pseudocyst, 117f
fndings, 358-360
Pneumoretroperitoneum, 440
Peritoneal cavity, barium in, 89-90
opacity decrease, 358-359
Pneumothorax
Peritoneal effusion, 28-29, 28f, 35, 438
opacity increase, 359
clinical correlations, 301-302
Peritoneal hermia
diseases and disorders, 299-304
defined, 469
dinical correlations, 393
pleural effusion, 299-301, 300f-301f
differential diagnoses, 358-359
contrast radiography. 394
pleural thickening. 301, 360, 468
interpretation of radiographs, 15-16.
differential diagnosis, 439
pneumothorax, 301-303, 302f-303f
1 5f
radiographic fndings. 394, 394f
tension viscerothorax, 303-304
pleural space opacity, 358
Peritoneal space
interpretation of radiographs, 13-16.
radiographic findings, 302-303.
 differential diagnoses for abnormal
1 3f-16f
302f-303f
fndings. 438-439
masses and nodules, 16, 16f
tension, 16, 302-303
opacity abnormalities, 438-439
normal radiographic anatomy 279-280,
Polyarteritis nodosa, 195-196
peritoneal hermia, 439
280f
Polyarthritis
 interpretation of radiographs, 27-31,
Pleural effusion, 299-301, 300f-301f
clinical correlations, 194-195
27f-31f
dinical correlations, 299
defined, 469
peritoneal fluid and gas, 28-29,
differential diagnoses, 359-360
of greyhounds, 197
28f-29f
interpretation of radiographs, 13-15,
Polyarthritis/menigitis syndrome, 195
 soft tissue margins, 
27-28, 27f-28f
13f-14f
Polyarthritis/polymyositis complex, 195
summation, 28, 28f
pleural space opacity, 359-360
Polyarticular, defined, 469
490
 Index
 Polycystic kidney disease (PKD), 417, 417f 
 prostate gland mineralization, 430
Pulmonary emphysema, 469
Polydactyly. 181, 469
prostate gland neoplasia, 431
Pulmonary microlithiasis, 25f
Polyostotic, defined, 469
urethral calculi, 426
Pulmonary pseudonodule, 26f
Poorly-defined, 469
urethral fistula, 426
Pulmonary thrombosis and
Popliteal sesamoid, 130f, 131
urethral rupture, 427
thromboembolism, 354
Portography, 102, 469
urethritis, 427
 Pulmonary vessels
Positioning aids, 6l, 61f
Positive contrast urethrography, for
normal radiographic anatomy, 285-286,
Positioning guide, 59-82
prostatitis, 429-430
286f, 291-293, 293f-294f
abdominal radiographs, 66-68
 PPDH (peritoneal-pericardial
pseudo-nodules, 352
compression radiography, 68, 69f
 diaphragmatic hermia), 332, 333f
pulmonary artery enlargement.
dorsoventral (DV) abdominal
Pregnancy
315-316, 320f, 328f
radiograph, 68, 68f
dystocia and fetal death, 434 435, 434f
Pulmonic stenosis, 320-321, 320f
general considerations, 66, 66b
radiographic fndings in, 433-434, 433f
Pyelogram, 117, 117f-118f, 469
 horizontal beam radiography, 68
Premature closure
Pyelonephritis
lateral abdominal radiograph, 67, 67f
 of distal tibial physis, 232
 clinical correlations, 41 9-420
oblique radiograph, 68
of proximal tibial physis, 225
contrast radiography. 420
supplemental radiographs, 68
Probability of x-ray attenuation, 52
radiographic findings, 420
urethra radiography. 68, 69f
Processing algorithm errors (digital
Pyloric outflow obstruction, 403-404
ventrodorsal (vD) abdominal
radiography artifact), 52
Pyogranulomatous effusion, 359
radiograph, 67-68, 67f
Production and use of diagnostic x-rays.
Pyothorax, 359, 469
general considerations, 59-6l, 61f
44-59
Pyruvate kinase deficiency, 188
musculoskeletal radiographs, 68-82
overview, 4446
general considerations, 68-69
focal spot, 45
 Quantum mottle artifact (digital
head and neck, 78-82, 78f-81f
grids, 46, 46f
radiography). 51
pelvic limb (pelvis), 72-73, 72f-74f
heel effect, 45
pelvic limb (stifle), 73-74, 75f
kVp. 45
Radiation safety, 56-57, 56f, 57b
pelvic limb (tarsus), 74-75, 75f-76f
mA5, 45
Radiograph
pharynx and larymx, 82
scatter radiation, 45-46
defined,469
skull, 78-80, 78f-80f
x-ray machine, 44, 44f
identification of, 48, 48f
stress radiographs, 69, 69f
x-ray production, 44 45, 44f
interpreting. 82-85
teeth, 78f, 80-81, 81f
x-ray tube care, 45
checklists, 83-84, 84b-85b
temporomandibular joint (TMJ), 80.
x-rays. 44
abdominal anatomy, 84b
81f
qualities of film radiographs, 57-59
extremity anatomy, 85b
thoracic limb (carpus), 71-72, 71f-72f
radiation safety, 56-57, 56f, 57b
thoracic anatomy, 84b
thoracic limb (digits), 72, 72f
technique chart, 54-56, 54f, 55t-56t
general considerations, 82
thoracic limb (elbow), 70-71, 70f-71f
Pronate, defined, 469
roentgen signs (radiographic
thoracic limb (shoulder), 69-70, 70f
Prostate gland
findings). 84-85
vertebrae, 75-78, 76f-78f
 differential diagnoses for abnormal
"Rules of Two," 82b
thoracic radiographs, 62-66
findings. 455
systematic approach, 83-84
cervical radiographs, 65, 66f
opacity abnormalities, 455
 production of diagnostic x-rays.
craniodorsal-caudoventral (skyline)
 size and shape abnormalities, 455
4459
radiograph, 65-66, 66f
diseases and disorders, 429-432,
qualities of, 57-59
dorsoventral (Dv) thoracic
430f-432f
contrast, 58
radiograph, 63-64, 63f, 64b
benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH).
density, 57
expiratory phase radiograph, 64-65.
429, 430f
detail (definition), 57-58
6 5f
inflammation (prostatitis), 429-430
distortion, 58, 59, 60f
general considerations, 62
mineralization, 430
fogging. 58-59
horizontal beam radiograph, 64, 65f
neoplasia, 430-431, 431f
 storage and retention of, 48
lateral thoracic radiograph, 62-63,
paraprostatic cyst, 431-432, 432f
Radiographic density, defined, 469
62f-63f, 63b
 interpretation of radiographs, 40-41,
Radiography
oblique radiograph, 64, 65f
40f
basic steps in, 46b
supplemental radiographs, 64-66, 65f
normal radiographic anatomy, 391, 392f
defined, 469
VD thoracic radiograph with thoracic
Prostatitis, 429-430
digital, 49-52
limbs pulled caudally, 65, 66f
Prostatomegaly, 429, 430f, 455
 production and use of diagnostic x-rays.
ventrodorsal (VD) thoracic
Protozoal osteomyelitis, 172
43-59
radiograph, 64, 64b, 64f
Proximal, defined, 469
Radiologist, defined, 469
Positive contrast agent, defned, 469
Pseudoarthrosis, 167-168, 469
Radiology. defined, 469
 Positive contrast cystogram, applications
Pseudo-chylous effusion, 359
Radiology information system (RIS), 50.
of
Pseudo-nodule, 469 
470
 persistent or patent urachal ligament,
Pseudoulcers, small intestine, 98 
Radiolucent, defined, 469
422
Pulmonary artery enlargement, 315-316,
Radiopacity, 469. See also Opacity
urachal cyst, 422
320f, 328f, 369
Receptor. See Detector
urachal diverticulum, 422
Pulmonary cyst, 353
 Rectal diverticulum, 415
ureterocele, 422
Pulmonary edema, 349-351, 350f
Recumbent (recumbency). defned, 469
urinary bladder fistula, 424
alveolar lung patterm, 372-373
Reflux, defined, 469
Positive contrast retrograde urethrography.
cardiogenic, 350, 350f
Regurgitation 
applications of
dinical correlations, 349-350
defined, 470
neoplasia urethra, 427, 427f
noncardiogenic, 350-351, 351f
vomiting compared, 310t
491
Index
Reiter's disease
urethra, 427, 455
Signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), 49
dinical correlations, 197
urinary bladder, 425-426, 426f, 454
Signet ring sign, defined, 470
radiographic findings, 197
Silhouette sign, defined, 471
Relative opacity, 53, 54f, 470
Sacrocaudal dysgenesis, 235, 235f, 470
Situs inversus, 321
Renal amyloidosis, 416
Sacroiliac luxation, 220-221
Sjogren symdrome, 195
Renal aplasia, 415-416
Safelight test, darkroom, 58b
Skull. See aiso Head and neck
Renal calculi, 417-418, 418f
Safety, radiation, 56-57, 56f, 57b
 contrast radiography procedures,
Renal cysts, 418, 418f
Sagittal, defined, 470
104105
Renal dysplasia/hypoplasia, 4l6-417
Sail sign, 281
Renal inflammation (nephritis and
defined, 470
otic canalography. 104
pyelonephritis), 419-420
Salivary duct fistula, 260-261
rhinography. 104
Renal neoplasia, 420
 Salivary glands, 260-261
sialography, 104-105
Renomegaly, 38, 39f
 nasolacirmal duct abnormalities, 261
differential diagnoses for abnormal
Respiratory system, contrast radiography
neoplasia, 261
findings. 271-273
procedures for, 102-103
salivary duct fistula, 260-261
cranium abnormalities, 271-272
Retained cartilaginous core, 187, 470
sialocele, 260
frontal sinus abnormalities, 272
Retained enchondral cartilage in distal
salolithiasis, 260
teeth abnormalities, 272-273
ulna, 187, 187f
Salter-Harris types of fractures, 162, 163f,
temporomandibular joint (TMJ)
Reticular pattem, defined, 470
470
abnormalities, 273
Retroperitoneal disease, 29-30, 30f
 Saturation artifact (digital radiography).
interpretation of radiographs, 9-10, 10f
Retroperitoneal space
51
multilobular tumor of, 160, 251f
differential diagnosis, 439-440
Scalloping. defined, 470
normal radiographic anatomy, 146-152
enlargement (swelling), 439
Scapulohumeral luxation, 198-199, 199f
 bones of the skull, 146f
opacity abnormalities, 439-440
Scatter radiation, 45-46, 470
canine, normal, 147f
interpretation of radiographs, 27-31,
Schmorl's node, 246, 246f
conformations, 146
27f-31f
Scintigraphy (nuclear medicine), 86, 470
cranial vault, 147-148
 peritoneal fluid and gas, 28-29.
Sclerosis. See Osteosclerosis
feline, normal, 147f
28f-29f
Scoliosis, 9, 268, 471
frontal sinuses, 148, 148f
soft tissue margins, 27-28, 27f-28f
Sequestrum,8b, 168, 168f, 470
general considerations, 146-147,
summation, 28, 28f
Serial radiographs, defined, 470
146f-147f
 normal radiographic anatomy, 379-380.
Serosal margins, 27-28, 27f-28f
larymx, 151-152, 152f
379f-380f
Sesamoid bones
nasal cavity, 148, 148f
Retropharyngeal masses, 261-262, 262f 
anatomy, 130-132, 130f-132f
pharymnx, 151-152, 152f
Retropharyngeal space, 152
carpus, 131, 132f
salivary glands, 151, 151f
Reverse patent ductus arteriosus, 319-320
digits, 131-132, 132f
teeth, 148-151, 149t, 149f-150f
Rheumatoid arthritis, 196, 196f, 470
elbow, 131, 131f
temporomandibular joint (TMJ), 147f,
Rhinography
shoulder, 131, 131f
148
contraindications, 104
stifle, 130-131, 130f
positioning for radiographs, 78-80,
defined, 470
tarsus, 131, 132f
78f-80f
indications, 104
fractures, 210-211, 211f
dorsoventral (DV) radiograph, 78, 78f
technique,104
Shielding. 57
intraoral radiograph, 80, 80f
Ribs
Shoulder
lateral oblique radiograph, 80, 80f-81f
congenital anomalies
anatomy, 135, 135f136f
lateral radiograph, 78, 78f
bipartite ribs, 294, 295f
biceps tendinopathy, 200-201
open-mouth rostrocaudal radiograph,
inward curving ribs, 294
degenerative joint disease of shoulder.
79. 79f
number variation, 294, 294f
198
 open-mouth ventrodorsal (VD)
differential diagnosis for abnormalities.
differentials for shoulder mineralization,
radiograph, 79, 79f
296
200b
rostrocaudal oblique radiograph, 79,
fractures, 296, 296f
dysplasia, 202
79f
 interpretation of radiographs, 12-13,
fractures involving shoulder, 198
rostrocaudal radiograph, 79, 79f
12f
 osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) of
ventrodorsal (VD) oblique radiograph.
neoplasia, 296
shoulder, 199-200
80, 80f
Rickets, 187, 430
 osteochondromatosis of shoulder, 200
 Skyline radiograph
Rickettsial arthritis, 193
positioning for radiographs, 69-70, 70f
defined, 470
Right atrial enlargement, 314, 330f, 366
caudocranial radiograph, 70, 70f
shoulder, 70
Right ventricular enlargement, 314, 320f,
craniocaudal radiograph, 70
stifle, 74
328f, 366
lateral radiograph, 69, 70f
tarsus, 75, 76f
 RIS (radiology information system), 50.
lateral radiograph with pronation/
thorax, 65-66, 66f
470
supination, 70
 SLE (systemic lupus erythematosus), 195
Roentgen, 470
lateral radiograph with traction, 70
Small intestine
Roentgenography, 470
skyline radiograph, 70
differential diagnoses for abnormal
Rostral, defined, 470
scapulohumeral luxation, 198-199
findings, 442-445
"Rules of Two," 82b
sesamoid bones, 13l, 131f
enteritis, 444
Rupture
 supraspinatus and infraspinatus
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
kidney, 420-421
tendinopathy, 201-202
444
patellar ligament, 227, 227f
Sialocele, 260
 opacity abnormalities, 443-444
small intestine, 444
Sialography, 104-105, 470
perforation (rupture), 444
tracheal, 337
Sialolithiasis, 260
position abnormalities, 444
492
 Index
size abnormalities, 442-443
lumbosacral disease, 243-244
interpretation of radiographs, 13
 transit time abnormalities, 444 445
neoplasia of spine, 244-245
 normal radiographic anatomy. 277
diseases and disorders, 405-412,
osteochondritis (OCD) of spine,
Stifle
405f41 1f 
245-246
anatomy, 140-141, 140f-141f
enteritis, 408
osteochondromatosis, 246
avulsion fractures of stifle, 223-224
ileus, 405-407, 405f 406f
Schmorl's node, 246
avulsion of tibial tuberosity, 224-225
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
spondylitis, 246-247
caudal cruciate ligament injury, 223
408,408f
spondylosis deformans, 247
 cranial cruciate ligament injury.
intestinal ischemia, 410, 410f
Spine. See also Vertebrae
222-223
intu ssusception, 408-410, 409f-410f 
anatomy, 142-145, 144f-145f
degenerative joint disease of stifle,
linear foreign body, 37, 37f, 407-408,
contrast radiography procedures,
221-222
407f
105-110, 107f-110f
differentials for stifle mineralization.
mesenteric volvulus, 4l0-411
discography, 105
227b
neoplasia, 41l, 411f
epidurography, 105-106
luxation of stifle, 225
obstruction, 36, 37f
myelography, 106-110, 107f-110f
mineralization, 227b
 perforation, 41l-412
degenerative joint disease, 238
multipartite patella, 228
interpretation of radiographs, 36-37,
differential diagnoses for abnormal
neoplasia of stifle, 227
37f, 38f
fndings. 268-271
osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) of
wall thickness interpretation, 37, 38f
alignment abnormalities, 268
stifle, 227-228
normal radiographic anatomy, 386-387.
discospondylitis, 268-269
patellar luxation, 225-227
386f
intervertebral disc space, 269
positioning for radiographs, 73-74.
upper gastrointestinal study, 96-99, 97t,
lumbosacral disease, 269
75f
J66
myelogram lesions, 269-270
caudocranial radiograph, 74, 75f
 SNR (signal-to-noise ratio), 49
 neoplasia associated with spine, 270
 SOD (source-to-object distance), 471
 opacity abnormalities of vertebrae.
flexed lateral with tibial compression
Soft tissue
270
radiograph, 74, 75f
 contrast radiography procedures,
 shape abnormalities of vertebrae,
Jateral radiograph, 73-74, 75f
110-111
270-271
lateral with flexion or extension, 74
 differential diagnoses for abnormal
 size abnormalities of spinal canal,
skyline, 74
findings, 266-267
271
 premature closure of proximal tibial
diseases and disorders, 177-180
evaluation of, 9
physis, 225
arteriovenous fistula, 180
neoplasia, 244-245, 245f, 270
ruptured patellar ligament, 227
chondrocalcinosis, 179
radiograph technique, 9
 sesamoid bones, 130-131, 130f
emphysema, 178
Spirocercosis, 311
villonodular synovitis, 193f
foreign objects in, 179-180
Spirochetal arthritis, 193-194
Stomach
Jymphadenopathy. 180
Spleen
 contrast radiography procedures
lymphedema, 180
 differential diagnoses for abnormal
(gastrography). 94-96
mineralization, 178-179, 179f
findings, 448-449
differential diagnoses for abnormal
swelling or mass, 177-178
opacity abnormalities, 449
fndings, 441-442
evaluation of musculoskeleton, 8-9
position abnormalities, 449
neoplasia, 442
fistulagraphy, 110-111
shape abnormalities, 449
 opacity abnormalities, 441
margins, 27-28, 27f-28f
 size abnormalities, 448-449
position abnormalities, 441 -442
opacity of, 53, 267
diseases and disorders, 397-398, 398f
size abnormalities, 441
 Source-to-image detector distance (SID),
abscess, 35f
transit time abnormalities, 442
470
ma5s, 397-398
ulcers, 442
 Source-to-object distance (SOD), 471
rupture, 398
diseases and disorders, 399-404,
 Spatial resolution, digital radiograph,
torsion, 35f, 398, 398f
400f402f, 404f
49-50
interpretation of radiographs, 34 35,
 gastric dilatation and volvulus (GDV),
Speed, 47, 471
34f35f
399-401, 400f
Spina bifida, 235-236, 471
 normal radiographic anatomy, 381, 383,
 gastric foreign material, 401-402.
Spinal canal
382-383f
401f
evaluation of, 9
splenomegaly, 34, 34f
gastric inflammation (gastritis), 402,
size abnormalities of, 271
Splenoportography, 102
402f
 Spinal cord anatomy, 145, 145f
Spondylitis, 246-247, 247f, 471
gastric neoplasia, 402-403, 404f
Spinal cord disorders
Spondylomyelopathy, cervical, 236-238,
gastric outflow obstruction, 403-404,
calcinosis circumscripta, 236
237f
404f
cervical spondylomyelopathy, 236-238
Spondylosis deformans, 247, 248f, 471
gastric ulcers, 404
degenerative joint disease (DJD) of
Squamous cell carcinoma, 258, 258f
interpretation of radiographs, 35, 36f,
spine,238
Static electricity, 58, 58f
36t
discospondylitis, 238-239
Static fog. defined, 471
gastric outflow obstruction, 35, 36f
 disseminated idiopathic skeletal
Stenosing tenosymovitis involving tendon
jocation of gas and fluid in, 35, 36f,
hyperostosis (DISH), 239
of abductor pollicis longus, 209-210,
196
dural ossifcation, 239-240
210f, 471
normal radiographic anatomy, 383, 386.
fractures and luxations of the spine.
Stermal dysraphism, 295-296
384f-386f
240-241
Sternum
upper gastrointestinal study, 96-99, 97t,
hypervitaminosis A, 24l-242
 differential diagnosis for abnormalities,
98f
intervertebral disc disease (IvDD),
296
 Storage and retention of radiographs, 48
242-243
disorders, 296-297
Stress fracture, 463, 471
493
Index
 Stress radiograph
Technique chart, 54-56, 54f, 55t-56t
craniocaudal radiograph, 70, 71f
carpus, 72
abdomen, 5455, 54f 
 craniolateral-caudomedial oblique
defined, 471
bone, 55 
radiograph, 71, 71f
overview, 69, 69f
guidelines for selecting exposure, 56
extreme flexed lateral radiograph.
Stricture, esophageal, 308-309
making, 54
70-71, 71f
String sign, defined, 471
mAs chart, 55-56, 56t
lateral radiograph, 70, 70f
Subcutaneous emphysema, 356
thorax, 55
shoulder, 69-70, 70f
Subdural injection during myelography.
with variable kVp. 55t
caudocranial radiograph, 70, 70f
110
Teeth,255-259
craniocaudal radiograph, 70
Subluxation
age effect on appearance, 150f, 151
lateral radiograph, 69, 70f
atlantoaxial, 232, 233f
deciduous (primary), 150
lateral radiograph with pronation/
carpus, 208-209
dental calculus, 255-256
supination, 70
cervical spondylomyelopathy, 237
dental caries, 256
lateral radiograph with traction, 70
coxofemoral, 213-219
dental formula
skyline radiograph, 70
defined, 471
cat, 149t
Thoracic wall
elbow, 169f-170f, 207
dog. 149t
 differential diagnoses for abnormal
joint, 168-170, 169f-170f
 modified Triadan numbering system,
findings. 356-357
lumbosacral, 244
149-150, 149f-150f
bony abnormalities, 356
tarsus, 230-231
numbering systems, 149-150,
 opacity abnormalities, 356-357
temporomandibular joint, 255, 256f
149f-150f
width of wall, 357
Summation, 28, 28f, 53, 53f, 471
development, 150-151, 150f
diseases and disorders, 294297
Supinate, defned, 471
differential diagnosis for abnormalities,
congenital anomalies, 294-296,
Supraspinatus and infraspinatus
272-273
294f-295f
tendinopathy. 201-202
feline odontoclastic resorptive lesion,
masses, 297
Survey radiograph, defined, 471
256-257
rib lesions, 296, 296f
Swelling. See specijfc body area
fractures of teeth, 257
stermal lesions, 296-297
Symarthrodial joints, 134
 interpretation of radiographs, 11
interpretation of radiographs, 12-13.
Symchondroses, 134-135
metabolic diseases affecting teeth, 257
1 2f-13f
Syndactyly. 181, 471
 neoplasia associated with teeth,
normal radiographic anatomy, 277-278.
Symostosis, 471
257-259, 258f-259f, 273
277f, 278f
Symovial joints (diarthrodial joints).
normal radiographic anatomy, 148-151,
Thorax, 275-376
133-134, 134f, 471
149t, 149f-150f
 differential diagnoses for abnormal
Symovial osteochondroma, 159-160, 160f,
periodontal disease, 259
findings, 356-376
471
permanent, 150-151
cardiac silhouette, 364-368
Syringomyelia, 236
positioning for radiographs, 78f, 80-81,
cardiomyopathy, 366-367
 Systematic approach, defined, 471
81f
congestive heart failure, 367
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), 195
tooth root abscess, 259-260, 260f
constrictive pericarditis, 368
Telangiectasia, 417
endocarditis/myocarditis, 367
Table top technique, defined, 471
Temporomandibular joint (TMJ). 255
neoplasia, 367-368
Talus, 141
differential diagnosis for abnormalities.
pericardial effusion, 368
Target, defined, 471
273
pericardial masses, 368
Tarsal bones, 141
dysplasia of temporomandibular joint,
pneumopericardium, 368
Tarsus
255
position abnormalities, 364
amatomy 141-142, 141f-143f
positioning for radiographs, 80, 81f
size abnormalities, 364-366
 common calcanean (Achilles) tendon 
subluxation/luxation of
diaphragm, 357-358
injury, 228-229, 229f
temporomandibular joint, 255
position abnormalities, 357-358
degenerative joint disease (D)D) of
‘Tendinopathy
shape abnormalities, 358
tarsus,
biceps, 200-201
esophagus, 362-364
229
 supraspinatus and infraspinatus,
opacity abnormalities, 362-363
differentials for mineralization in, 231t
201-202
position abnormalities, 362
fractures of tarsus, 229-230
Tension viscerothorax, 303-304
size abnormalities, 363-364
luxation/subluxation of tarsus, 230-231
Tenting. defined, 471
lungs. 371-376
mineralization, 231b
Testicles
opacity abnormalities, 371-372
 osteochondritis (OCD) of tarsus,
diseases and disorders, 432
patterns of disease, 372-376
231-232
cryptorchidism, 432
major vessels, 368-369
osteomyelitis of, 172f
orchitis/epididymitis, 432
aorta and aortic arch, 368
positioning for radiographs, 74-75.
normal radiographic anatomy 391, 393
caudal vena cava, 368-369
75f-76f
Tetralogy of Fallot, 321
 main pulmonary artery, 369
dorsoplantar radiograph, 75, 76f
Thoracic anatomy checklist, 84b
mediastinum, 360-362
flexed dorsoplantar (skyline)
Thoracic limb positioning guide for
opacity abmormalities, 360-361
radiograph, 75, 76f
radiographs
 position abnormalities (mediastinal
lateral radiograph, 75, 75f
carpus, 71-72, 71f-72f
shift), 360
oblique radiograph, 75
dorsopalmar radiograph, 71f, 72
width abnormalities, 361-362
standing lateral radiograph, 75
lateral radiograph, 71, 71f
 pleura and pleural space, 358-360
 premature closure of distal tibial physis.
stressed radiograph, 72
opacity decrease, 358-359
232
supplemental radiographs, 72
opacity increase, 359
sesamoid bones, 13l, 132f
digits, 72, 72f
thoracic wall, 356-357
Teat sign, defined, 471
elbow, 70-71, 70f-71f
 bony abnormalities, 356
494
 Index
opacity abnormalities, 356-357
thrombosis and thromboembolism,
positioning guide for thoracic
width of wall, 357
354
radiographs, 62-66
trachea, 369-371
mediastinum, 304-306, 305f-306f
craniodorsal-caudoventral (skyline)
bronchial obstruction, 371
masses, 304-306, 305f-306f
radiograph, 65-66, 66f
margination abnormalities, 370
mediastinal widening (diffuse), 306
dorsoventral (DV) radiograph, 63-64,
opacity abnormalities, 369-370
pneumomediastinum, 306
63f, 64b
position abnormalities, 369
pleura and pleural space, 299-304
 expiratory phase radiograph, 64-65.
tracheobronchitis, 370
pleural effusion, 299-301,
6 5f
width abnormalities, 370
300f-301f
general considerations, 62
diseases and disorders, 294 356
pleural thickening, 301
horizontal beam radiograph, 64, 65f
diaphragm, 297-299
pneumothorax, 301-303, 302f-303f
lateral radiograph, 62-63, 62f-63f,
eventration, 298
tension viscerothorax, 303-304
63b
hiatal hermia, 298, 299f
thoracic wall, 294-297
oblique radiograph, 64, 65f
masses, 297-298
congenital anomalies, 294-296.
skyline radiograph of trachea, 65, 66f
traumatic diaphragmatic hermia,
294f-295f
supplemental radiographs, 64-66, 65f
298-299
masses, 297
VD radiograph with thoracic limbs
esophagus, 306-312
rib lesions, 296, 296f
pulled caudally, 65, 66f
esophageal diverticulum, 306-307.
stermal lesions, 296-297
ventrodorsal (VD) radiograph, 64.
307f
trachea and bronchi, 335-341
64b, 64f
esophageal foreign objects, 308
bronchial obstruction, 339-340
technique chart, 55
 esophageal inflammation
bronchiectasis, 338-339, 339f 
Thromboembolism, pulmonary, 354
{esophagitis), 307-308
 endotracheal masses and foreign
 Thrombosis, pulmonary, 354
esophageal neoplasia, 308
material, 337
Thymus, 281, 281f
esophageal stricture, 308-309
feline bronchial asthma, 340-341,
Tibia
 gastroesophageal intussusception,
340f
 premature closure of distal tibial physis,
309, 309f
tracheal collapse symdrome.
232
megaesophagus, 309-311, 310f
335-336, 336f
premature closure of proximal tibial
spirocercosis, 311
tracheal hypoplasia, 336, 336f
physis,225
vascular ring anomalies, 31l-312.
tracheal rupture, 337
Tibial tuberosity, avulsion of, 224-225,
312f
tracheal stenosis, 337, 338f
225f
heart and major vessels, 312-335
tracheobronchial parasites, 338
Tissue density, defined, 471
abnormal size and shape of heart.
tracheobronchitis, 338, 339f
Tooth root abscess, 259-260, 260f
312-313, 313f
interpretation of radiographs, 11-27
Toxascaris, 349
acquired heart disease, 322-331
cardiac silhouette (heart), 17-19,
Toxocara,349
alterations of major vessels,
17f-18f
Toxoplasmosis, 348-349
31 5-316
checklist for interpreting, 12b
Trachea
cardiomegaly, 312-313, 313f
diaphragm.13
barium in, 89
congenital heart disease, 316-322
effects related to age, body condition,
differential diagnoses for abnormal
congestive heart failure, 331-332
and conformation, 12
fndings, 369-371
left atrial enlargement, 313-314,
lungs. pattems of disease, 21-27.
bronchial obstruction, 371
329f, 365
21f-26f, 23b
margination abnormalities, 370
left ventricular enlargement, 314,
mediastinum, 16-17, 16f-17f
opacity abnormalities, 369-370
329f, 365-366
 pleura and pleura space, 13-16.
position abnormalities, 369
microcardia, 313, 314f
13f-16f
 tracheobronchitis, 370
pericardial disease, 332-335
thoracic wall, 12-13, 12f-13f
width abnormalities, 370
right atrial enlargement, 314, 330f,
trachea, 19-20, 19f-20f
diseases and disorders, 335-341
366
 normal radiographic anatomy.
 endotracheal masses and foreign
right ventricular enlargement, 314,
277-293
material, 337
320f, 328f, 366
bronchi, 290-291, 291f
tracheal collapse symdrome, 335-336,
lungs, 341-356
diaphragm, 279, 280f
336f
abscess, 352, 353f
esophagus, 282-283, 283f
tracheal hypoplasia, 336, 336f
 acute respiratory distress symndrome
heart and major vessels, 284-290
tracheal rupture, 337
{ARDS), 341
cardiac chambers, 286-287.
tracheal stenosis, 337, 338f
cavity lesions, 353-354, 353f
286f-287f
tracheobronchial parasites, 338
chronic obstructive pulmonary
cardiac silhouette, 284, 284f-285f,
tracheobronchitis, 338, 339f
disease (COPD), 341
289f
interpretation of radiographs, 19-20,
collapse of lung (atelectasis), 340f,
clock face analogy. 286-287, 287f
19f-20f
341-342, 342f
normal heart size, 287-289, 288t,
diameter of trachea, 19, 19f
emphysema, 342-343
288f-289f
displacement, 19-20, 20f
granuloma, 352-353
pericardium, 289-290
false narrowing. 19, 20f
hematoma, 353
lungs, 291-293, 292f
margination, 20
lung lobe torsion, 342f, 343
mediastinum, 280-282,281f-282f
opacity, 20
neoplasia, 354-356
pleura and pleural space, 279-280.
tracheal collapse symdrome, 19, 19f
patterms of disease, 21-27
280f
tracheal ratio, 19, 19f, 290, 290f, 472
pneumonia, 343-349
pulmonary vessels, 285-286, 286f,
tracheal stripe sign, 20, 20f
pulmonary edema, 349-351, 350f
291-293, 293f-294f
normal radiographic anatomy, 290, 290f
 pulmonary nodules and masses,
thoracic wall, 277-278, 277f-278f
tracheal position, 288-289, 290
351-352
trachea, 290, 290f
tracheal size, 290, 290f
495
Index
Tracheal collapse symdrome, 19, 19f,
ectopic ureter, 421, 421f
Urinary tract
335-336, 336f
hydroureter, 418, 420
differential diagnoses for abnormal
Tracheal ratio, 19, 19f, 290, 290f, 472
ureterocele, 421-422
findings, 450-455
Tracheal stenosis, 337, 338f
interpretation of radiographs, 38
kidneys, 450-452
Tracheal stripe sign, 20, 20f
normal radiographic anatomy 388-390,
ureters, 452-453
Tracheobronchitis, 338, 339f, 370
389b, 389f
urethra, 454-455
Tracheoesophageal stripe sign, 472
ureteral phase of intravenous
urinary bladder, 453-454 
 Tracheography
urography, 117-118, 117f-119f
 diseases and disorders, 415-427
contraindications, 103
Ureterocele, 115, 421-422, 472
kidneys, 415-421
defined, 472
Urethra
ureters, 421-422
indications, 102
 differential diagnoses for abnormal
urethra, 426-427
technique, 103
findings. 454-455
urinary bladder, 422-426
Tram lines, defined, 472
opacity abnormalities, 454 455
 interpretation of radiographs, 38-40.
Transitional vertebra, 234-235, 234f, 294
rupture, 455
39f-40f
Transudate/modified transudate, 359
diseases and disorders, 426-427.
kidneys and ureters, 38, 39f
Traumatic diaphragmatic hemia, 298-299
426f-427f
urethra, 40, 40f
Triadan numbering system, 149-150.
fistula, 426
urinary bladder, 39-40, 39f
149f-150f, 472
calculi, 426, 426f
normal radiographic anatomy, 388-390
Trichobezoar, defined, 472
inflammation (urethritis). 426-427
kidneys and ureters, 388-390, 389b.
Trichophytobezoar, defined, 472
neoplasia, 427, 427f
389f
Tricuspid valve dysplasia, 318 
rupture, 427
urethra, 390
Tricuspid valve insufficiency, 329-330,
interpretation of radiographs, 40, 40f
urinary bladder, 390, 390f-391f
330f
normal radiographic anatomy, 390
 Urogenital system, contrast radiography
Tuberculosis, 345
Urethritis, 426-427
procedures for, 111-121
Tumors. See also Neoplasia; specijfc locarions;
Urethrocystography, for hermaphroditism,
cystography, 111-115, 112f-114f 
specijfic rypes
436
intravenous urography, 115-ll8, 115f,
heart base, 330, 331f
Urethrography, 118-121, 120f
117f-119f
myocardial, 330-331
contraindications, 119
urethrography, 118-121, 120f
pulmonary. 354-356
defined, 472
vaginography. 121
Tympanic bullae, 80, 146, 271
indications, 119
Urography, 472. See also Excretory
normal urethrogram, 120f
Aqde.soun
Ucers
radiographic fndings. 120-121
Uterus
gastric, 404
displacement of urethra,
. 120
differential diagnoses for abnormal
small intestine, 99
extramural lesions, 120
findings, 455-456
stomach, 98,442
extravasation of contrast media,
opacity abnormalities, 456
urinary bladder, 115
121
size abnormalities, 455-456
Una. See aiso Elbow
 intraluminal filling defects, 120
diseases and disorders, 433-435,
retained enchondral cartilage in distal
mural lesions, 120
433f434f
ulna, 187, 187f
narrowing of urethra, 120
dystocia and fetal death, 434 435,
Utrasonography, 85-86, 472
prostatic urethra, 121
434f
Underexposure artifact (digital
technique, 119-120
masses, 435
radiography). 51
Urinary bladder
Uterine enlargement (non-gravid).
Uneven exposure artifact (digital
cystography, 111-115, 112f-114f
435
radiography). 52
differential diagnoses for abnormal
enlargement, 41, 41f
Ununited anconeal process, 203, 204f, 472
findings, 453-454
gravid, 433-434, 433f
Ununited medial humeral epicondyle.
inflammation (cystitis). 454
interpretation of radiographs, 41, 41f
205-206, 206f
neoplasia, 454
 normal radiographic anatomy, 393.
Upper gastrointestinal study, 96-99, 97t,
 opacity abnormalities, 453-454
393f
98f-99f. See also specijfic applications
 position abnormalities, 454
average GI transit times, 97, 97t
rupture, 454
Vaccine-induced polyarthritis, 194
contraindications, 96
size and shape abnormalities, 453
Vagina
defined, 472
diseases and disorders, 422-426,
 differential diagnoses for abnormal
indications, 96
424f426f
findings., 456
 radiographic findings
congenital anomalies, 422
diseases and disorders, 435 436
small intestine, 98-99, 99f
cystic calculi, 422-423
Vaginography. 121, 436, 472
stomach, 97-98, 98f
cystitis, 423424
Vaginourethrography. 121
technical errors, 97
emphysematous cystitis, 424, 424f
Valley fever (coccidioidomycosis), 172,
technique, 96-97
fistula, 424
346-347
Urachal cyst, 422
neoplasia, 424-425, 425f
Vascular lung patterm, 21-22, 21f-22f,
Urachal diverticulum, 422
pelvic bladder, 425
22b, 376, 472
Urachal ligament, persistent or patent,
persistent or patent urachal ligament,
Vascular ring anomalies, 311-312, 312f,
422
422
321-322
Ureter
rupture, 425-426, 426f
VD radiograph. See Ventrodorsal
differential diagnoses for abnormal
urachal cyst, 422
yde.dope.
findings, 452-453
urachal diverticulum, 422
Venous portography, 102
excretory urogram abnormalities, 453
interpretation of radiographs, 39-40, 39f
Ventral, defined, 472
size abnormalities, 45 2453
normal radiographic anatomy, 390.
Ventral recumbency, defined, 472
diseases and disorders, 421-422, 421f
390f-391f
Ventricular septal defect (VsD), 322
496
Index
Ventrodorsal (VD) radiograph
Jumbosacral disease, 243-244
Vertical beam, defined, 472
abdomen, 67-68, 67f
neoplasia of spine, 244-245
Willonodular synovitis, 193f
defined, 472
osteochondritis (OCD) of spine,
Viral disease. See also specijfc diseases
pelvis,73,73f
245-246
arthritis, 193
pelvis, flexed ("frog legged"), 73, 73f
osteochondromatosis, 246
enteritis, 408
skul]
Schmorl's node, 246
pneumonia, 349
oblique, 80, 80f
spondylitis, 246-247
Visceral larva migrans, 349
open-mouth, 79, 79f
spondylosis deformans, 247
Vomiting
thorax, 64, 64b, 64f
evaluation of, 9
defined, 472
thorax with thoracic limbs pulled
normal radiographic anatomy. 142-145.
regurgitation compared, 310t
caudally, 65, 66f
144f-145f
VSD (ventricular septal defect),
vertebrae, 75-77, 77f, 78f
associated structures, 144 145,
322
Vertebrae
145f
anatomy, 142-145, 144f, 145f
caudal vertebrae, 144
Well-defined, 472
diseases and disorders, 232-247
cervical vertebrae, 142-143
Wolff's Law, 4
developmental abnormalities,
intervertebral discs, 145, 145f
232-236,356
lan dmarks, 143f
X-ray film, 46-47, 47f
atlantoaxial subluxation, 232
lumbar vertebrae, 144, 145f
defined, 472
block vertebrae, 232-233
ossifcation centers, 142, 143f
processing. 48
hemivertebra, 233, 294
sacral vertebrae, 144
speed,47
mu copolysaccharidosis, 235
thoracic vertebrae, 144, 144f
X-ray machine, 44, 44f
sacrocaudal dysgenesis, 235
opacity, 270
X-ray production, 44 46
spina bifida, 235-236
 positioning guide for radiographs.
focal spot, 45
transitional vertebra, 233-235
75-78, 76f-78f
grids, 46, 46f
 spinal cord disorders, 236-247
cervical spine, 76, 77f-78f
heel effect, 45
calcinosis circumscripta, 236
 flexion and extension lateral
kVp. 45
cervical spondylomyelopathy.
radiographs, 78
mA5, 45
236-238
lateral radiographs, 75-77, 76f-77f
scatter radiation, 45-46
degenerative joint disease (DJD) of
lumbar spine, 77, 78f
x-ray machine, 44, 44f
spine,238
oblique radiographs, 78
x-ray production, 44-45, 44f
discospondylitis, 238-239
thoracic spine, 76, 77f-78f
x-ray tube care, 45
disseminated idiopathic skeletal
ventrodorsal (VD) radiographs, 75-77.
x-rays. 44
hyperostosis (DISH), 239
77f-78f
X-ray tube care, 45
dural ossification, 239-240
shape abnormalities of, 270-271
X-rays, 44
fractures and luxations of the spine,
transitional, 294
defined, 472
240-241
Vertebral column, regions of, 143
radiation safety, 56-57, 56f, 57b
hypervitaminosis A, 241-242
Vertebral heart size (VHS), 288, 288f,
 intervertebral disc disease (IVDD),
288t, 472
 Zipper artifact (digital radiography).
242-243
Vertebral heart width, 288, 288t
52
497
Keep up with
critical fields
Would you like to receive up-to-date information
on our books, journals and databases in the areas
that interest you, direct to your mailbox?
Join the Wiley e-mail service - a convenient way
to receive updates and exclusive discount offers
on products from us.
Simply visit www.wiley.com/email
and register online
We won't bombard you with emails
and we'll only email you with
information that's relevant to you.
We will ALWAYS respect your e-mail
MWILEY
privacy and NEVER sell, rent, or
exchange your e-mail address to any
outside company. Full details on our
privacy policy can be found online.
www.wiley.com/email
8