SUE DALLAS
Animal Biology
and
Care
SECONDEDITION
Blackwell
Publishing
Animal Biology and Care
Second Edition
S. E. Dallas
VN, CertEd
Blackwell
Publishing
@ 2000 by Blackwell Science Ltd, a Blackwell
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication
Publishing company
Data
@ 2006 by Sue Dallas
Dallas, S. E. (Sue E.)
[Animal biology and care. Selections]
Blackwell Publishing editorial offices:
Animal biology and care / S. E. Dallas. - 2nd 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 9600 Garsington Road,
ed.
Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK
p.cm.
Tel: +44 (0)1865 776868
Includes bibliographical references and
Blackwell Publishing Professional,2121 State
index.
Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
ISBN-13: 978-1-4051-3795-9 (pbk. : alk.
Tel: +1 515 292 0140
paper)
 Blackwell Publishing Asia Pty Ltd, 550 Swanston 
ISBN-10: 1-4051-3795-9 (pbk. : alk. paper)
Street, Carlton, Victoria 3053, Australia
1. Veterinary medicine.
I. Title.
Tel: +61 (0)3 8359 1011
SF745.D246 2006
636.089 - dc22
The right of the Author to be identified as the
2005028054
Author of this Work has been asserted in
accordance with the Copyright, Designs and
A catalogue record for this title is available from
Patents Act 1988.
the British Library
All rights reserved. No part of this publication
For further information on Blackwell Publishing.
may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system,
visit our website:
or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
www.BlackwellVet.com
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, except as permitted by the UK
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without
the prior permission of the publisher.
First edition published 2000 by Blackwell Science
Ltd
Second edition published 2006 by Blackwell
Publishing Ltd
ISBN-10: 1-4051-3795-9
ISBN-13: 978-1-4051-3795-9
Contents
Preface
ix
Section 1 Animal Biology
1
Chapter 1 Cells and basic tissue
3
 Biology - the study of life and living organisms
3
Cells
5
Basic tissue
6
Blood
10
 Bone and cartilage
14
Muscular tissue
14
Nervous tissue
16
Chapter 2 Movement of materials within the body
18
Body fluid
20
Tissue and lymphatic system
21
Chapter 3 Body systems and functions
25
The heart and circulation
25
Respiratory system
30
Digestive system
37
Liver and pancreas
46
Urinary system
48
Nervous system
50
Endocrine system
56
Sense organs
59
Skin or integument
64
Skeleton
65
Reproductive system
72
Chapter 4 Basic genetics
78
Introduction
78
Cell division
79
Breeding
80
Chapter 5 Body as a whole
81
Body cavities
81
Homeostasis
82
ii
iv
Contents
Section 2 Animal Health and Husbandry
85
Chapter 6 Animal welfare
87
Welfare status
87
Legislation
88
Statutory organisations
96
Chapter 7 Basic health care
98
Health routines
99
Hygiene
100
Exercise
101
Tender loving care
101
Vaccination
102
Chapter 8 Disease transmission and con trol
103
Incubation of the disease
104
Entry into a new host
104
Infection
104
 Resistance to infection
105
Methods of disease control
105
Chapter 9 Microbiology
106
Micro-organisms (microbes)
106
Bacteria
107
Viruses
110
Fungi
111
Protozoa
111
Chapter 10 Diseases of the dog and cat
113
Diseases of dogs
113
Diseases of cats
117
Immunity
124
Chapter 11 Zoonones
126
Dogs
126
Cats
126
 Zoonones from other species
126
Prevention of zoonones
127
Chapter 12 Parasitology
128
External parasites
128
Internal parasites
131
Chapter 13 Hygiene
134
 Disinfectants and antiseptics
134
Principles of disinfection
134
Disinfecting housing or surfaces
137
Contents
V
Chapter 14 Basic nutrition
138
Protein
139
Carbohydrate
140
Fats
141
Vitamins
142
Minerals
143
Water
145
General considerations for feeding
145
 Life stages for nutrition of the dog and cat
146
Chapter 15 Handling
155
Holding procedures
156
Restraint procedures in the dog and cat
160
Chapter 16 Grooming and coat care
165
Dogs
165
Cats
182
Chapter 17 Pets: mammals, birds and fish
187
General husbandry for mammals and birds
187
MAMMALS
188
Rabbits
188
Guinea-pigs
194
Mice
197
Rats
199
Hamsters
201
Gerbils
203
BIRDS
205
Budgerigar
208
Canary
210
FISH
211
Tropical freshwater fish
213
Coldwater fish
214
 Considerations when setting up an aquarium
215
Section 3 Nursing
221
 Chapter 18 First aid and nursing
223
First aid
223
Evaluating situations
223
Initial management
224
Handling and transport
224
Recovery position
227
Life-saving techniques
229
Poisons
232
vi
Contents
Insect stings
233
Bleeding or haemorrhage
233
Shock
235
Hyperthermia (heat stroke)
238
Hypothermia
239
Bone fractures
239
Wounds
241
Eye injuries
243
Chapter 19 Basic bandaging
245
Reasons for bandaging
245
Layers of a bandage
245
Aims of bandaging
246
 Rules for bandaging
248
Chapter 20 The hospital environment
249
Environmental temperature
249
Hygiene and cleaning
250
Chapter 21 The hospitalised patient
258
Records and monitoring
258
Observation
258
Feeding and watering
258
Hygiene
260
Temperature control
260
Recumbent patients
261
Handling
262
 Isolation and barrier nursing
262
Medication
263
Fluid therapy
263
Environmental enrichment
264
Chapter 22 Monitoring temperature, pulse and respiration
265
Temperature
265
Pulse
268
 Respiration
271
Chapter 23 Pharmacy and the administration of drugs
273
Routes
273
 Pharmacology and dispensing
275
 Labels for drug containers
277
Handling and dispensing drugs
277
Drugs glossary
279
Chapter 24 Isolation and quarantine
280
Isolation
280
Quarantine
281
Contents
vii
Appendix - Anatomy and Physiology Terminology
284
Medical terminology
284
Word use
285
Anatomical directions
285
Selected Reading
289
Index
291
Preface
The increasing need for competence and understanding of animal care, both in
the home and the work place, were the motivation for writing this book. It is
intended as a foundation text for those on animal care, nurse auxiliary and vet-
erinary care assistant courses. I hope that it will also prove of value to a wider
range of readers, giving them a useful and enjoyable introduction to the back-
ground required, and the skills to develop, when considering the care of any
animal.
The book seeks to provide information in a readily accessible layout, and is
illustrated with line drawings and photographs. With a better understanding and
q q  ay l pn an s  pai ar a p so
avoided or managed. The basic principles of nursing and care remain unchanged
whether carried out at home, in the work place or within a veterinary practice.
Methods for the control or elimination of disease are the same whether one is
dealing with a single animal or a large group, for example in a kennel, cattery or
animal collection.
The first edition concentrated on the biology, husbandry and care of mammals.
This has now been expanded to include more detail on small mammals, birds and
fish. Sections on legislation, pet travel, nutrition and parasites have also been
The book is divided into three sections, each concentrating on a specific area:
·Section 1 - Animal biology. This introduces the reader to basic cell and tissue
structure through to organ structures, systems and function.
·Section 2 - Animal health and husbandry. This takes the reader through the
basic requirements for animal health, detailing welfare, care, husbandry,
disease recognition and its control.
·Section 3 - Nursing. This covers the nursing procedures for an animal, both
introduction to medical terminology in common use.
Many thanks go to the staff at Blackwell Publishing for their continued guidance,
to family and friends, particularly Peter Roe and David Williams, for their support
and encouragement throughout the writing process.
Sue Dallas
VN, CertEd
ix
Section 1
Animal Biology
Chapter 1
Cells and Basic Tissue
Biology - the study of life and living organisms
But what is life?
This is best answered by stating what distinguishes a living organism from a non-
living organism. In order to be considered alive, the following are essential:
Growth - from within by a process which involves the intake of new
materials from the outside and their incorporation in the internal structure
of the organism.
· Movement - the organism is capable of moving itself or a part of itself.
 Excretion - the removal of the waste products of metabolism.
 Eating - taking in materials to maintain life and growth.
· Responsiveness - to stimuli in its surroundings.
·Release of energy - in a controlled and usable form.
Therefore considering units of life:
Cells form .
Tissues, and tissues form . . :
Organs, and organs have a.
Function t perfom in the living organism!
The cell is the functional unit of all tissues and has the ability to perform indi-
vidually all the essential life functions. Within the various tissues of the body, the
constituent cells show a wide range of specialisations. However, all cells conform
to a basic model of cell structure.
The diversity of cells
All cells are not identical (Fig. 1.1) but all have the same basic features:
·  Chromosomes
·Mitochondria
七
Chapter 1
Cuboidal epithelial cells
White blood cell
Nerve cell
Smooth muscle fibre
Fig. 1.1 Diversity of cells from their basic form.
·Endoplasmic reticulum
·Ribosomes
The above are common to virtually all cells but the shape, form and contents
of individual cells show much variation. The structural characteristics of a
particular cell are closely related to its functions.
· Epithelial cells - have a shape and form that makes them most suitable for
lining the surface of the body and the organs and cavities within it.
Glandular cells - are responsible for producing some kind of secretion, for
example mucus to lubricate between tissues.
 Osteoblasts - produce bone tissue.
·Erythrocytes (red blood cells) - have a shape designed to hold the red
pigment haemoglobin which conveys oxygen around the body In order to do
this, they are one of the few cells in the body which no longer contain a
nucleus.
 Nerve cells - or neurones, have slender arm-like processes which will
transmit electrical impulses through the nervous system to reach the whole
body.
Muscle cells - are also capable of electrical activity accompanied by a muscle
contraction for body movement.
Cells and Basic Tissue
Golgi body
Vacuole
0
Nucleolus
Nucleus
?
Ribosomes
Lysosome
Rough
endoplasmic
Mitochondrion 
reticulum
Smooth
 endoplastic
reticulum
Fig. 1.2 Basic cell structure
Cells
Cells have the same basic structure no matter what their function is or what
organism they are found in (Fig. 1.2). Therefore the single cell which forms the
body of an amoeba and the brain cell of a dog have certain features in common.
All cells contain:
A nucleus - to control the cell's activities
Cytoplasm - a jelly-like material to support organs
· Cell membrane - this encloses the cytoplasm in which lies the nucleus
These three parts make up protoplasm - living matter.
For life, cells require:
Food for energy
+
Water (body fluid) to hydrate the cells
Oxygen to all cells
Suitable temperature in which to live
The nucleus
At least one nucleus is found in the cells of all organisms. The nucleus of a cell
contains rod-shaped objects called chromosomes. These are only visible when a
cell is about to divide into two. Chromosomes contain a complex chemical called
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). DNA controls the development of the features
that an organism inherits from its parents. In other words, it contains the chemi-
cal ^instructions' for making an organism.
6
Chapter 1
The cell membrane
The cell membrane is 0.00001 mm thick and forms the outer boundary of the cell
It is here that all exchanges take place between a cell and its surrounding envi-
ronment. In a manner which is not yet fully understood, this membrane allows
certain chemicals to pass in and out of the cell but prevents the passage of others
(referred to as osmosis). As a result, the cell membranes are said to be selectively
permeable.
Thecytoplasm
The term cytoplasm refers to all the living substances of a cell except the nucleus.
Cytoplasm is a jelly-like material containing a large number of important sub.
stances, many of which are concerned with metabolism.
·Organelles - are the structures visible within the cell other than the nucleus.
·Mitochondria - are one of the most important organelles, where chemical
reactions of respiration take place. This is the release of energy for cellular
function.
· Rough endoplasmic reticulum - has ribosomes on it that have been produced
in the nucleus. Protein is synthesised here and the cell may transport it for
use in the manufacture of digestive enzymes and hormones.
· Smooth endoplasmic reticulum - does not have ribosomes but is con-
cerned with the synthesis and transport of lipids (fats) and steroids of
body origin.
·Ribosomes - are granules rich in ribonucleic acid, in which protein is
synthesised.
· Centrosome - lies near the nucleus and is made up of two centrioles. It is
important during cell division and the formation of the cilia and flagella of
certain cells (the slender projecting hairs for movement of single-celled
organisms).
· Lysosomes - are dark round bodies containing enzymes responsible for
splitting complex chemical compounds into simpler ones (known as lysis,
meaning “to break up') followed by digestion. They also destroy worn-out
organelles within the cell. These destructive enzymes are stored in tubes in
the cell called the Golgi complex or body.
Basic tissue
Tissues are a collection of cells and their products, which have a common
fundamental function and in which one particular type of cell predominates.
Cells and Basic Tissue
·  Epithelial - which forms a protective layer both inside and on the surface of
the body. Examples of this tissue are skin, glands and the linings of the various
body systems.
· Connective - which supports tissues and acts as a transport system to move
materials vital to tissue cells around the body. Examples of this tissue
are:
(a) loose connective tissue which surrounds organs
(b)  dense connective tissue which has great strength and is found as tendons
and ligaments
(c)
blood which transports essential nutrients, gases, waste products, hor-
mones and enzymes to and from all body cells
(d)  cartilage and bone which provide shape and protection for organs and
allow movement.
· Muscular - tissues concerned with movement of the skeleton, organ systems
and the heart.
 Nervous - which transports messages to tissues, connecting the body as a
whole for the required response.
Epithelial tissue
This tissue covers all surfaces of the body, both inside and out, be it a surface, a
cavity or a tube. It is made up of a diverse group of tissues which are involved in
a wide range of activities such as secretion of a special fluid, protection and
absorption.
 Depending on their function, the cells of this tisue will have a varied shape,
structure and thickness. They are classified according to appearance:
·Number of layers - a single layer of these cells is called simple epithelium;
more than one layer is called stratified epithelium.
·Shape of the cells involved.
Specialisations, such as tiny hairs called cilia or special thickened surface
tissue called keratin, which covers the nose and pads of the feet.
·Glandular - meaning it is involved in secretion. Secretions which go directly
into the bloodstream are called hormones and are produced by glands of the
endocrine or ductless system. If the gland has a duct it will secrete onto a
surface and belongs to the exocrine system; for example, enzymes secreted by
the pancreas.
The many and varied functions of epithelial tissue mean that it will take dif-
ferent forms. There are six main types.
B
Chapter 1
Pavement - found lining surfaces involved in the transport of gases (lungs) or fluids
(walls of blood vessels) (Fig. 1.3a).
Cuboidal - which lines small ducts and tubes like those of the kidney, pancreas and
salivary glands of the mouth (Fig. 1.3b).
Columnar - located on highly absorbing surfaces like the small intestine for the uptake
of nutrients (Fig. 1.3c).
Pavement
(a)
epithelium
Ciliated
epithelium
(a)
Cuboidal
epithelium
(q)
Glandular
epithelium
Columnar
(q)
 epithelium 
(c)
Fig.
1.3Pavement,
cuboidal
and
columnar tissue.
Stratified
epithelium
(c)
Fig. 1.4  Ciliated, glandular and
stratified tissues.
Ciliated - has tiny hair-like projections in parallel rows on the surface of the cell, which
beat in a wave-like manner, moving films of mucus or fluid in a particular direction.
For example, in the respiratory airway (trachea), they remove unwanted inhaled mate-
rials (Fig. 1.4a).
Glandular - which secrete a special fluid containing hormones or enzymes (Fig. 1.4b).
 Stratified - this type of epithelium has two or more layers of cells. Its function is mostly
protection. Found lining the mouth cavity or as skin (Fig. 1.4c)
Connective tissue
This tissue binds all the other body tissues together. It supports them and acts as
a transport system for the exchange of nutrients, metabolites and waste products
between tissues and the circulatory system (Fig. 1.5).
Connective tissues occur in many different forms with a wide range of physi
 cal properties.
Cells and Basic Tissue
9
Fibroblast cell
Macrophage
cell
Mast cell
Collagen fibres
Ground substance
Fat cell
Elastic fibres
Fig. 1.5 Connective tissue.
Loose connective tissue acts as a type of packing material between other
tissues with specific functions.
 Dense connective tissue provides tough support in the skin.
Rigid forms of connective tissue, like cartilage and bone, support the
skeleton.
Connective tissue also has functions including the storage of fat in adipose
tissue, fighting infection with micro-organisms and tissue repair.
Connective tissue has two components.
(1)Cells:
 fbroblasts for repair and maintenance of the tissue
 fat-storing cells
 defence and immune function cells called macrophages.
(2)
 Material called ground substance which holds together other materials to
make up tissue and looks like a semiffuid gel.
Connective tissue is composed of two types of fibre.
 Collagen - produced by the fibroblasts, is not elastic but has great tensile
strength. Tendons by which muscles are attached to bones are composed of
collagen fibres.
Elastin - has great elasticity and is found in ligaments which bind bones of
the skeleton together.
Connective tissue can be described as a mixture of fibres in different pro-
portions. Its efficiency in binding structures together is achieved by the special
Chapter 1
grouping of proteins in the ground substance. The particular type and abundance
of fibre present depend on the stresses and strains to which the tissue is normally
subjected.
Blood
This is a highly specialised tissue consisting of several types of cell suspended in
a fluid medium called plasma. The cellular constituents consist of:
·Red blood cells (erythrocytes)
·White blood cells (leucocytes)
·Platelets (thrombocytes)
Blood has a varied structure and performs a wide range of functions. One of
its main functions is that of transportation, of the red blood cells around the body
and all the materials in the plasma. Blood is considered a tissue because it con-
nects all the cells in the body together.
Live animals constantly absorb useful substances like oxygen and food, which
must then be distributed throughout their bodies. They produce a continuous
stream of waste materials, such as carbon dioxide, which must be removed from
their bodies before they reach harmful levels. The distribution of food, oxygen
and other substances throughout the body and the removal of any wastes is
performed by this transport system tissue.
Composition of the blood
Fluid called plasma makes up about 60%. Cells and other material in transit make
up the remaining 40%.
If a sample of blood (mixed with an anticoagulant to stop it clotting) was put
into a centrifuge and spun to separate out the component parts, it would show
at the top of the tube the fuid part (plasma), then the platelets (cell fragments),
then the white blood cells and finally the red cells (Fig. 1.6).
Piasma
This is mainly water containing a variety of dissolved substances which are trans-
ported from one part of the body to another. To give a few examples, food ma-
terials (glucose, lipids and amino acids) are conveyed from the small intestine to
the liver; urea from the liver to the kidneys; hormones from various ductless
glands to their target organs. Cells are constantly shedding materials into the
blood which flows past them and removing materials from it. Plasma provides
the medium through which this continual exchange takes place.
Cells and Basic Tissue
11
Plasma
Platelets
White
cells
Red cells
Fig. 1.6 Blood separated into layers.
PLASMA
SERUM
FIB RINOGEN (protein for clotting)
Contains water, protein, glucose, lipids,
plus water, protein, glucose, lipids,
amino acids, salts, enzymes, hormones
amino acids, salts, enzymes,
 and waste products but no proteins for
hormones and waste products
clotting (these have been used up)
Plasma carries many more products than the diagram shows, including the
plasma proteins called albumin, globulin and fibrinogen. Fibrinogen plays an
important role in the process of blood clotting. When it has been used up by clot
formation then the fuid part of blood seen at the site of injury is called serum.
Therefore, serum is plasma with the fibrinogen removed. About 92% of blood is
made of water and this same water can be forced into the tissues. It is then called
tissue fuid because of its location.
It is important to realise that plasma and the tissue fluid derived from it form
the environment which keeps body cells alive. In a sense, these fluids are equiva-
lent to a pond or fish tank in which both single-celled organisms and multicelled
organisms live and are supplied with their food and oxygen and into which they
excrete waste.
Red blood cells (erythrocytes)
These are produced in the red or active bone marrow. The main function of red
blood cells is to carry oxygen from the respiratory organ to the tissues and their
structure is modifed accordingly. These cells have had their nucleus removed,
with the result that the cell is sunk in on each side, giving it the shape of a bicon.
cave disc. It is surrounded by a thin elastic membrane and the interior of the cell
12
Chapter 1
Fig. 1.7 Cross-section of a red blood cell showing its biconcave shape.
Neutrophil
 Eosinophil
(granules are pink)
Basophil
(granules are blue)
Lymphocyte
Monocyte
Fig. 1.8 White blood cells.
is filled with the red pigment haemoglobin which combines with and carries
oxygen (Fig. 1.7).
Whitebloodcells (leucocytes)
The white cells are fewer in number and have a very different role to play. They
fall into two groups (Fig. 1.8).
Granulocytes (granules in the cytoplasm). These are produced in the bone
marrow.
Cells and Basic Tissue
13
BLOOD
PLASMA
FORMED
ELEMENTS
55%
45%
ERYTHROCYTES
LEUKOCYTES
SOLUTES
THROMBOCYTES
WATER
(Red blood cells)
(White blood cells)
(Platelets)
· Major Proteins:
·Neutrophils
Aibumin - affects blood viscosity
· Eosinophils
Globulins - constitute antibodies
·Basophils
Fibrinogen- forms fibrin, aids in
+Lymphocytes
blood clotting
Monocytes
● Products of Metabolism:
(non-protein nitrogen)
Urea
Creatinine
·Products of Digestion:
Amino acids
Giucose
Fatty acids
· Regulatory Substances:
Enzymes
Hormones
· Electrolytes:
Sodium
Chloride
Bicarbonate
Phosphate
Potassium
Fig. 1.9 Blood components
 Neutrophils - phagocytic cells
Eosinophils - respond to allergies
 Basophils - promote inflammation for healing of tissue
Agranulocytes (no granules in their cytoplasm). Produced in the bone marrow or
lymph system.
Lymphocytes - support the immune system
Monocytes - phagocyte cells
Phagocyte or phagocytic means 'cell eater'. These cells eat or engulf other
cells / materials that may be harmful and destroy them. Red cells will remain in
the bloodstream to perform their role of oxygen carrier but white cells will only
use the bloodstream as a transporter from their site of origin to the capillaries
14
Chapter 1
where they will push through the wall of the blood vessel and into the tissue
spaces. Those that are phagocytic will gather in and around wounds and destroy
bacteria and any other harmful material. In this manner the cells assist in *fighting
infection'.
Bone and cartilage
There are two kinds of skeletal tissue, bone and cartilage.
Bone
This tissue is closely related to connective tissue, in that it consists of cells
embedded in an organic matrix (ground substance). However, this matrix is
comparatively hard. The cells of bone are called osteoblasts and osteoclasts.
Cartilage
This is a dense, clear, blue/white material which provides support for the body
and can be elastic or rigid. Found mainly in joints, it has no blood vessels but is
covered by a membrane called the perichondrium from which it receives its blood
supply. The cells of cartilage are called chondroblasts.
There are three types of cartilage:
·Hyaline - the cells for hyaline production are called chondrocytes. They
lie within a hyaline matrix with collagen fibres running through. Hyaline
is a smooth tissue and forms articular joint surfaces for bones and the
C-shaped rings of cartilage that keep the trachea open for air passage into
the lungs.
· Fibrocartilage - this is stronger than hyaline but with a similar base structure
that contains more collagen fibres. It surrounds the articular surface of some
bones, for example in the hip joint (acetabulum) and the shoulder joint
(glenoid cavity), and is also found in the stife or knee joint as pads of carti-
lage called menisci.
·Elastic - this has a hyaline matrix and many elastic fibres which provide its
elastic properties. It is found in the ear flap (pinna) and in the larynx area of
the throat.
Muscular tissue
 The ability to contract is very well developed in this type of tissue. Muscle cells
are usually long, thin and thread-like and are often called fbres. There are three
main types of fibres:
Cells and Basic Tissue
15
Muscle cells
Connective
tissue
Fig. 1.10 Skeletal (striated) muscle fibre.
Muscle cell
Connective
tissue
Fig. 1.11 Smooth (non-striated) muscle fibre
Fig. 1.12 Cardiac muscle fibre.
 Skeletal (also called voluntary and striated) (Fig. 1.10)
Smooth (also called involuntary, non-striated and visceral) (Fig. 1.11)
Cardiac (Fig. 1.12)
Skeletal muscle
Found in muscles attached to the skeleton. The cells are cylindrical and vary from
about 1 mm to 5cm in length. Since skeletal muscles respond to the will of the
animal, the cells are also called voluntary muscle cells.
Skeletal muscles are formed of parallel muscle cells (fbres) held together in
small bundles by connective tissue. These are collected into larger groups which
are also enclosed in connective tissue and ultimately form the muscle which is
surrounded by yet more connective tissue commonly called the muscle sheath.
When muscles are close to one another, the sheaths may thicken to form an
intermuscular septa.
All the connective tissue within and around the muscles continues into the
connective tissue of the structure to which the muscle is attached, i.e. bone.
16
Chapter 1
Sometimes the muscle appears to attach directly but usually the connective tissue
leaves the muscle as a fibrous band known as a tendon {i.e. Achilles tendon on
the point of the hock) or as a fibrous sheet called an aponeurosis {i.e. the sheet
of muscle and connective tissue called the diaphragm).
Some muscles are named according to their shape, some according to their
functions and others according to their position in the body.
Under the microscope, skeletal muscle cells look striped (they have striations).
Smooth muscle
In direct contrast to skeletal muscle, which is specialised for relatively forceful
contractions of short duration and under voluntary control, smooth muscle is spe-
cialised for continuous contractions of little force but over a greater section of
muscle tissue. For example, the smooth muscle of the intestinal wall contracts in
continuous rhythm, moving food through the tract by peristaltic action.
These fibres are spindle shaped and about 0.5 mm in length or shorter. Under
the microscope they look smooth. Only small amounts of connective tissue bind
them together to form sheets or layers of muscle tissue. They may also be called
involuntary muscles because they are not controlled by the will of the animal.
These fibres are found in the muscle of organs, hence the alternative name of
visceral muscle.
Cardiac muscle
This muscle produces strong contractions using a lot of energy and is only found
in the heart. The contractions are continuous. In order for this to take place, the
fibres have junctions or connections with surrounding fibres which allow very
rapid contractions of all nearby tissue. The cells are elongated and are the only
muscle cells which frequently branch. They are held together by only very small
amounts of connective tissue.
Nervous tissue
The function of this tissue is to transmit electrical messages from one part of the
body to another. As a result of this, the nerve cells are interconnected in a very
complex way. The cells can transmit and sometimes store information because of
this complex link-up with each other.
The cells are called neurones (Fig. 1.13) and they connect and communicate to
form pathways so that the body can respond to information received. Neurones
vary in size and shape depending on where they are in the nervous system.
However, all neurones have the same basic structure. They consist of a large
cell body containing the nucleus surrounded by cytoplasm, with two types of
processes extending from the cell body: a single axon and one or more dendrites.
Cells and Basic Tissue
17
Terminals to
join next neurone
Cell body
nucleus
Axon
Dendrites
Direction taken by nerve impulse
Fig. 1.13A neurone.
Dendrites are branched, tapering processes which either end in specialised
sense receptors (information) or form junctions (synapses) with neighbouring
neurones from which they receive electrical stimuli, which is passed to the cells
beyond.
Axons extend from the cell body as a tube-like structure of variable length,
carrying stimuli or messages away to the next nerve cell.
Chapter 2
Movement of Materials Within
the Body
Time now to look at the processes by which materials get into and out of cells.
 Exchanges can be examined under the following headings:
(1)Diffusion
(2)Osmosis
(3)
Phagocytosis
(4)
Active transport
Diffusion
This is the process of movement of molecules from a region where they are at a
tration, requiring no energy in its achievement. Diffusion will always continue
until eventually the molecules are uniformly distributed throughout the system.
This is very important in the movement of molecules and salts (electrolytes or
ions) in and out of cells.
ally being used up in respiration so the concentration of oxygen inside the cell
will be lower than it is in the blood and tissue fluids as a result. Oxygen molecules
will diffuse into the cell from outside. With carbon dioxide, the reverse is true: its
concentration is highest inside the cells, where it is continually being formed. This
results in carbon dioxide molecules diffusing out of the cells.
Anything that increases the concentration of a substance in the body will
favour diffusion. Blood is involved here to carry away the diffused substance, so
encouraging further diffusion.
SjsoWso
This refers to the movement of water through a semipermeable membrane while
expending no energy (Fig. 2.1).
Although the cell wall membrane is fully permeable to respiratory gases, it is
not permeable to all substances. The nature of the membrane means that only
molecules that are small enough will diffuse through it unimpeded. Larger mol-
ecules either penetrate slowly or not at all. The membrane is therefore called
semipermeable, permitting the passage of some substances but not others.
18
Movement of Materials Within the Body
19
 Selective but
permeable
membrane
Weaksolution
Strong solution
Large molecules cannot pass through the membrane, but water passes through easily
Fig. 2.1Osmosis
Osmosis is really a special case of diffusion: it involves the passage of water
molecules from a region of high concentration to a region of lower concentra-
tion. The concentration will be supplied by other products like salts.
Terms
Osmosis - is the diffusion of fluid through a selectively permeable membrane, from
where water is in a high concentration (a weak solution) to where water is in a low
concentration (a strong solution). Osmotic pressure helps to keep fluid in its correct
compartment within the body.
isotonic - refers to solutions which cause no transfer of fluid either into or out of a
cell. These are the solutions most frequently used in fluid replacement in sick animals,
such as 0.9% sodium chloride.
Hypertonic - these are solutions with an osmotic pressure higher than that of body
fluids. If the cell is surrounded by a solution with an osmotic pressure higher than that
 of the cell, water passes out of the cell, causing it to shrink.
Hypotonic - these are solutions with an osmotic pressure lower than body fluid. In
this case the cell is surrounded by almost pure water which allows water to enter cells
by osmosis, causing the cell to swell and even to burst.
Phagocytosis
The previous headings have outlined how individual molecules cross the cell
membrane; this heading covers the larger particles which also need to enter cells.
This is achieved by specialised cells which are able to 'cell eat' or phagocytose.
This process was mentioned when discussing white blood cells which take up and
destroy bacteria and other particles which could be harmful to the body.
20
Chapter 2
To phagocytose, the cell membrane changes shape to form a flask-like depres-
sion enclosing the particles. The neck of the depression then closes and seals itself
off as a food vacuole and migrates towards the centre of the cell. The material is
digested by enzymes within the cell. Any useful food products resulting from this
process are absorbed into the cell cytoplasm. Phagocytosis is a selective process
with the cell distinguishing between food particles and harmful materials.
Active transport
Diffusion is a purely physical process in which molecules or salts move from a
logical situations where the reverse happens: molecules or salts move from a
region of low concentration to a region of higher concentration. They move
against the concentration gradient. This active transport will only take place in a
living system that is actively producing energy by respiration. It is not merely a
Body fluid
Dissolved in the body fluids are the essential salts called electrolytes or ions. They
are called electrolytes because they carry one or more electrical charges. Those
that are positively charged are called cations, ie. sodium and potassium. Those
that are negatively charged are called anions, ie. chloride and bicarbonate.
Their role is to:
· Help control the osmotic pressure
· Assist the pH and buffer mechanisms
· Support the enzyme systems
About 60% of the body consists of fluids. It is divided into two areas:
·Intracellular - 40%
·Extracellular - 20%
Extracellular fluid is further divided into:
· Tissue fuid (interstitial) which bathes the tissues and cells
· Plasma, which is the water part of blood, needed to transport the cells, nutri-
ents, gases, hormones and waste products
Acids andbasesinthebody
daa o' jo Hd y (uopay ad) Hd shi se passadxa si uoos e jo Aie au
resents neutral. A solution with a pH of less than 7.0 is acidic and the lower the
Movement of Materials Within the Body
21
tion whose pH is greater than 7.0 is basic or alkaline and the higher the figure,
the more basic is the solution.
The body functions within a normal range of 7.35-7.45 pH. This normal range
must be maintained by the body systems at all times for the correct internal
environment.
Tissue fluid and the lymphatic system
Each tissue and organ in the body contains a dense network of capillaries (blood
vessels that are one cell thick). These are called the capillary beds. Tissue fluid is
forced under pressure through the capillary walls. This process tends to occur at
the artery end of the capillary bed, since blood pressure is greatest at this point.
When tissue fluid is being forced out of the capillaries, the capillary wall acts
as a filter holding back red blood cells, most of the white cells and large protein
molecules.
Substances which do pass through the capillary wall include:
·Water
·Oxygen
·Glucose
·Fatty acids
·Amino acids
·Vitamins and minerals
· Hormones and enzymes
Tissue fluid flows away from the capillaries and passes among the body cells
s a ne p  o sa o p su xo na 
time release carbon dioxide and other waste materials into it.
Lymphatic system
This is a system of open-ended tubes within the capillary bed areas, as numerous
as the blood capillaries.
Lymph is tissue fuid which is not absorbed back into the bloodstream after
carrying required substances to the cells. This tissue fluid drains into the open-
ended tubes of the lymph system known as Iymph vessels. The structure of these
vessels is similar to that of veins, in that they have a valve system to make sure
fuid only fows in one direction . The movement of lymph in these vessels is
achieved by the movement of surrounding tissues which squeeze or 'milk' the
fhuid in the lymph vessels.
At intervals, there are lymph nodes (Fig. 2.2), some of which are near the
22
Chapter 2
Fuid in - afferent vessel
Tissue producing
lymphocytes
Filtered fluid out
efferentvessel
Fig. 2.2 Lymph node
Parotid
Submandibular
Prescapular
+
Popliteal
Inguinal
Axillary
Fig.2.3
Surface nodes.
Movement of Materials Within the Body
23
which the lymph fluid will drain and be filtered. This filtering is assisted by phago-
cytic white blood cells. Thus harmful substances are filtered out of the lymph,
which is made safe enough to return to the circulation.
Lymph ducis are where the lymph empties into the bloodstream. From the
right side of the head, neck and right forelimb, lymph drains via the right lym-
phatic duct. From the rest of the body, lymph drains via a collecting area called
the cisterna chyli into the thoracic duct in the thorax or chest. This fluid will
contain:
Fats from the digestive system
Water
Electrolytes
White blood cells
Antibodies
+
Functions of the lymphatic system
Return excess tissue fuid to the blood.
Add lymphocytes (white blood cells) to the blood for the immune protection
of the body.
Absorb fats in the lacteals of the villi in the small intestine and carry them to
the bloodstream.
Filter out bacteria and other harmful substances via the nodes.
Artery
Body cells
From the
heart
Capillary
Vein (with valves)
 Small
lymph
vessel
To the
heart 
Lymph duct (with valves)
Lymph
to the blood and
node
circulation
Fig. 2.4 Fluid movement from blood to lymph and back to blood.
24
Chapter 2
BLOOD
PLASMA
CELLS
(straw-coloured liquid)
Erythrocytes
Leucocytes
Thrombocytes
(red cells)
(white cells)
(platelets)
TISSUE FLUID
O2
bathing cells
diffusion
Phagocytes
Lymphocytes
LYMPH
(fluid in lymphatic system)
Fig. 2.5  Constituents of bood and their functions.
The lymph system is in every sense complementary to the blood and circula-
tion system. Between them, they move fuid and other substances through the
tissue spaces and help to keep the internal environment of the body within
normal limits for healthy functioning (Figs 2.4 and 2.5).
Chapter 3
Body Systems and Functions
The heart and circulation
This system is part of the transport mechanism of the body. It is made up of:
·A pump - the heart
· A circuit of joined tubes - the arteries, veins and capillaries
 Due to the need for a rapid supply of oxygen and nutrients and for the removal
by the pump, the heart, which is connected to other systems in the body and
therefore capable of responding as required to the needs of the tissues.
The circulation connects to all tissues and body cells and will transport:
Nutrients - sugars, fats, amino acids, vitamins, minerals and salts
Oxygen
Hormones - chemical messages controlling the metabolism and development
of the body and its operation as a unit
 White blood cells - which provide a defence system for the protection of the
body
It will also:
Provide a clotting mechanism - to prevent loss of blood from minor damage
to the blood vessels
·Carry heat - to and from the cells and tissues depending on their requirements
· Remove waste products - such as carbon dioxide and other nitrogenous waste
like urea and creatinine
Carry water - to replenish the tissues and transport materials in the
circulation
The blood vessels
Arteries
·Carry blood away from the heart.
·Carry oxygenated blood (except the pulmonary artery to the lungs).
25
26
Chapter 3
Valveopen-
Valve closed
blood flows
backflow of blood
towards the heart
is prevented
Fig. 3.1 Valve system in the veins to prevent backflow of the blood.
Have thick muscular walls to assist with the movement of blood.
·Under high pressure, from heart muscle contractions.
Veins
Carry blood towards the heart.
Carry deoxygenated blood (except the pulmonary vein from the lungs to the
heart).
·Have thin walls.
 Blood moved under low pressure and by action of surrounding tissues.
·Have a valve system, to prevent backflow of the blood (Fig. 3.1).
Capillaries
Carry blood from artery to vein.
 Blood movement is very slow, to allow maximum diffusion of substances.
+
Only one cell thick.
·Connects all cells and tissues, called capillary beds.
· Narrow; may only be wide enough for one blood cell at a time to pass through
Location names for blood vessels
The larger blood vessels in the body have a name. For example, the main artery
leaving the left side of the heart is called the aorta. Whenever the aorta divides to
supply an organ, it takes a location name in order to assist anatomists to describe
where they are in the body. An example of this would be the aoric division to supply
the kidney with blood, called the renal artery. When blood leaves the kidney the vessel
is called the renal vein and this will rejoin the main vein, the vena cava.
Body Systems and Functions
27
Pulmonary
artery
to lungs
Aorta to body
(main artery)
Deoxygenated blood
from the body
milunarvalves
Vena cava
Pulmonary
(mainvein)
vein from
lungs
Right atrium
Left atrium
Tricuspid valve or
right atrioventricular
Bicuspid valve
or left
valve
atrioventricular valve
Valve tendon
 or heart string
Septum or divider
Right ventricle
Leftventricle
Fig. 3.2 The heart. Arrows indicate the direction of blood flow.
The heart
The heart lies between the two sides of the chest (the thorax), surrounded by
the lungs, and is held in place by a structure called the mediastinum (Fig. 3.2).
It is made up of a specialised muscle type which differs from others in three
ways:
(1) Made of branching muscle fibres connected to each other in the form of a
   n nd  n q n s s  g
spread outwards in all directions.
(2)
 Heart or cardiac muscle contracts and relaxes rhythmically in *beats'. The
rhythm is generated within the muscle itself and not by impulses from the
nervous system.
(3)
 Heart muscle does not get tired, despite continuous and rapid contractions
over many years.
The heart consists of two pumps fused together, each having two chambers:
Right atrium and right ventricle
Left atrium and left ventricle
The right side of the heart is the less muscular side and pumps deoxygenated
blood from the body to the lungs for reoxygenation. The left side of the heart
is very muscular and is responsible for pumping oxygenated blood to the body
(Fig. 3.3). The blood is under high pressure and this will ensure:
28
Chapter 3
LUNGS
High
Low pressure
pressure
DEOXYGENATED
Right
Left
OXYGENATED
side
side
Low
High
pressure
pressure
BODY
Fig. 3.3 The heart pump
· Fast supply of materials to the cells and tissues
· Pushing of fluid from the circulation into the tissues
The heart is surrounded by a thick fbrous bag called the pericardium. Blood
enters the heart from the body (systemic circulation) via the great veins, the vena
cava, caudal and cranial vessels. The right atrium contracts to top up the right
ventricle. When the right ventricle pumps, it pushes blood out through the pul-
monary artery into the lungs (deoxygenated blood). After oxygenation of the
blood in the lungs, the blood returns via the pulmonary veins to the left atrium.
This contracts to pump the blood through to the left ventricle. The left ventricle
is the most muscular chamber of the heart, in order to be able to pump blood
around the rest of the body, via the aorta.
To stop blood flowing backwards (in the wrong direction), there are valves. On
the righr side of the heart there are the:
· Right atrioventricular valve, also called the tricuspid valve
 Semilunar valve, also called the pulmonary semilunar valve
and on the left side of the heart there are the:
· Left atrioventricular valve, also called the bicuspid or mitral valve
 Semilunar valve, also called aortic semilunar valve
At the base of the aorta, just above the semilunar valves, are the entrances to
the left and right coronary arteries which supply the myocardium (the heart
 e s  siso     sss se  (s
reduce the blood fow to the heart muscle, causing lack of oxygen (ischaemia)
when exercising. This in turn could lead to a heart attack, also called a coronary
attack.
Body Systems and Functions
29
Vagus nerve - slows heart down
and Sympathetic
nerve to speed up
heart
Sinoatrialnode
known as the PACEMAKER
for both atriums
Atrioventricular
Purkinje
 node to contract the
fibres to carry
ventricles
the electrical message
to ventricles
        o       
 provided by the pacemaker.
Heart beat
Most muscles will contract as a result of impulses reaching them from nerves.
The heart is a muscle which beats rhythmically from impulses within its struc-
ture. It has special fibres imbedded in the wall of the right atrium called the sino-
chemicals like adrenaline or the nervous system command to increase the heart
rate in situations of fear, flight or fight.
The electrical message from the pacemaker passes to the right and left atrium,
causing them to contract in unison. The impulse then arrives at the atrioven-
tricular node, before passing along special conducting tissue pathways called the
bundles of His. These fibres lead to the smaller bundles of conducting tissues
called Purkinje fibres, which cause contraction of the ventricles.
If the pacemaker region of the heart is malfunctioning, the heart rate may fall
and not increase with exercise. An animal with this condition will have a slow
heart rate with poor exercise tolerance and may faint.
Heart sounds
There are two sounds:
LUB - DUB
30
Chapter 3
Jugular
Carotid
vein
HEAD
artery
Pulmonary
Pulmonary
artery
vein
LUNGS
Right 
Left
atrium 
 atrium
Venacava
Right
Left
Aorta
ventricle
ventricle
Hepatic 
Hepatic
vein
artery
LIVER
Hepatic
portal vein
SMALL
INTESTINE
Mesenteric
artery
Renal
 Renal
vein
artery
KIDNEYS
ABDOMEN
ANDBODY
Fig. 3.5 Heart and circulation flow.
The first sound, Lub, is produced by the closure of the right and left atrioven-
 tricular valves, as the ventricles begin to contract.
When the valves at the base of the aorta and pulmonary artery (semilunar
valves) snap shut at the end of the ventricle contraction, then the second sound,
Dub, is produced.
If blood within the chest is fowing unevenly or turbulently, a murmur may be
detected. This sounds like: Lub - woosh - Dub.
Respiratory system
Respiration is a term referring to the gaseous exchange between a living struc-
ture and its environment.
Body Systems and Functions
Extermal nares - nose
Nasopharynx - back of the throat
Larynx-voice box
Trachea - open tube for passage of gases only
Bronchus - branching of the trachea to the two sides of the chest (thorax)
Alveoli - air sacs
Blood capillaries of the pulmonary system
Tissue cells around the body
Characteristics of the respiratory surfaces
 Below is a list of features common to all respiratory surfaces. They allow oxygen
and carbon dioxide to be exchanged rapidly between an organism and the air
which surrounds it.
· Respiratory surfaces have a large surface area to ensure maximum contact
with the inhaled air. A mammal's respiratory surface consists of millions of
tiny bubble-like air sacs called alveoli.
· All respiratory surfaces are moist. This is necessary because oxygen and
carbon dioxide can only diffuse in a solution across a respiratory surface
(alveoli to blood vessel).
·A respiratory surface is extremely thin, only one cell thick, so that diffusion
can take place.
· The inside of a respiratory surface is in contact with a network of capillary
blood vessels. This allows gas exchange to take place between the blood and
gases.
· There is usually a mechanism which ensures that a respiratory surface is
well ventilated, that it receives a steady flow of air. Breathing movements
increase the rate of gas exchange by continually removing carbon dioxide and
renewing supplies of oxygen to the tissue cells
The role of breathing and the circulation
The respiratory and circulatory systems determine how much oxygen and carbon
dioxide are present in the body at a given moment. If the amount of oxygen in
the blood is low and carbon dioxide high, the body responds by increasing:
· The rate and depth of breathing - ventilation rate.
·The rate at which the heart beats - cardiac frequency.
32
Chapter 3
The diameter of the arterioles serving those structures that are short of
Oxygen - vasodilation.
The respiratory organs of mammals
The thoracic cavity, thorax or chest contains the:
Heart
Lungs
· Major blood vessels
·Lymph ducts
·Major nerves
The walls of the thorax are strengthened by the ribs (skeletal system) and cau-
dally (towards the tail) consists of a sheet of muscle called the diaphragm.A
system of passageways leads from the mouth and nostrils into the lungs and will
now be described in more detail (Fig. 3.6).
The nasalpassages
This is where air enters and is warmed to body temperature. The membranes
of smell. The walls and base of the nasal passages are lined with a carpet of
microscopic hair-like structures called cilia. The cilia extend down the trachea
to create a surface of moving hairs beating in an upward manner. They help to
Turbinate bones
Soft
palate
Nose or
Larynx
nares
Hard
palate
Tongue
Epiglottis
Trachea
Fig. 3.6 Upper respiratory tract.
Body Systems and Functions
Bronchial tree
andalveolarendings
Fig. 3.8 Alveoli.
Fig. 3.7 Lung tissue
expel mucus, which contains dust and micro-organisms which are held in this
thickened liquid.
Air is drawn out of the nasal passages into the pharynx at the back of the
mouth. From here, air is drawn into the trachea via the larynx and past the vocal
cords to activate the voice.
The bronchial tree
This is the main trunk of the branching trachea, as it supplies lung tissue on both
sides of the thorax. This then becomes the bronchi leading into each lobe of lung
tissue (Fig. 3.7). The bronchi will further divide many times to form a mass of fine
branches called the bronchioles.
The alveolar ducts
These are the tubes at the end of the bronchioles leading to the air sacs or alveoli
(Fig. 3.8). The alveoli are the respiratory surface of the lungs, giving lung tissue
its spongy appearance. The outer surface of the alveoli is covered by a dense
network of capillary blood vessels. All these capillaries originate from the pul-
-x) ua Aend au m wp pue (oo pxop) rre Ar
genated blood) to return to the left side of the heart, for pumping around the
body.
Gas exchange in the lungs
Blood entering the lungs is deoxygenated because the haemoglobin (red
 pigment) in its red cells has given up all its oxygen to the body tissues.
The internal diameter of the lung capillaries is actually smaller than the diam-
eter of the red cells which pass through them. The red cells therefore are squeezed
out of shape as they are forced through the lungs by blood pressure and the speed
34
Chapter 3
Alveoliwall
(air sac)
Carbon dioxide
out
Oxygen in
 Circulation
and flow,becoming
 a pulmonary
capillary as it
passes the alveoli
BLOOD
Fig. 3.9 Gas exchange between the alveoli and the blood and between the blood and body
cells.
at which they move is considerably reduced by the resulting friction. This
increases the rate of oxygen absorption in two ways:
(1）
 so e s  se  s s   ss
surface area to the capillary walls, through which oxygen is diffusing and
absorbed.
(2) Their slow rate of progress increases the time available for oxygen to diffuse
into the vessels and combine with haemoglobin.
The continuous removal of oxygen as fast as it diffuses into the lung capil-
laries and the continuous arrival of oxygen in the alveoli owing to breathing
movements mean that there is always a higher concentration of oxygen
molecules in the alveoli than in the blood. As a result of this, carbon dioxide
is exchanged (Fig. 3.9).
Breathing -ventilation of the lungs
The thorax or pleural cavity is completely airtight and contains a partial vacuum.
body. The lungs are open to the atmosphere through the trachea and so there
is always a higher pressure in the lungs than in the thorax or pleural cavity
Body Systems and Functions
External
intercostal
muscle
Ribs
Internal intercostal
muscle
Fig. 3.10  Intercostal muscles and ribs for breathing.
which surrounds them. This pressure difference is extremely important for two
reasons:
（1)
 The higher pressure in the lungs in relation to the pleural cavity around
them stretches the thin elastic alveoli walls so that the lungs as a whole
almost fill the thorax on inspiration.
(2)
 Since this pressure difference is maintained during breathing movements,
when the thoracic cavity increases in size {inspiration), the lungs inflate to
fill the extra space available.
At normal atmospheric pressure the above could not happen, hence the need for
 negative pressure in the thorax.
The muscles which bring about these volume changes are:
The diaphragm - a dome-shaped sheet of muscle which separates the thorax
from the abdomen.
The intercostal muscles - both internal and external, that cross the gap
between each rib and pull the ribs outwards on inspiration (Fig. 3.10).
Diaphragm
Immediately before inspiration, the diaphragm is dome-shaped and its muscle
relaxed. Inspiration takes place when the diaphragm muscle contracts, making
the muscle sheet a flatter shape.
36
Chapter 3
Rib
At the same time, contraction occurs in the external intercostal muscles between
each rib. This increases the size of the rib cage, leading to an increase in lung
volume.
·  Inspiration - the movement of the diaphragm and external intercostal
muscles, causing the ribs to move visibly outwards.
· Expiration - or breathing out is when the diaphragm and external intercostal
muscles relax. This reduces the size of the thorax and the ribs move inwards
to the resting position.
      s       i
muscles but expiration tends to be passive, simply allowing these structures to
fall back into the resting position.
Respiration
The word ‘respiration' is derived from the Latin respirare which means ‘to
breathe'. At first, this term referred to the breathing movements which cause air
to be drawn into and pushed out of the lungs but now, when defined with strict
accuracy, respiration means something entirely different.
The modern definition of respiration
The processes which lead to, and include, the chemical breakdown of materials to
organism and cause the release of energy from food which is essential for life.
Cells cannot use energy as soon as it is released from respiration. This energy
is first used to build up a temporary energy store, which takes the form of a
chemical called adenosine triphosphate or ATP for short. Think of ATP as
'packets' of energy, used to transfer energy from the chemical reactions which
release it to the body processes which use it. Respiration fills these ATP packets
There are four main advantages to the ATP energy transfer system.
(1)ATP takes up some energy which would otherwise be lost as heat during
the breakdown of glucose by respiratory enzymes.
(2）E
 Energy is released from ATP the instant it is required without cells having
to go through the many different reactions of respiration, allowing for
sudden bursts of energy.
(3)ATP delivers energy in precise amounts.
Body Systems and Functions 37
(   s   d  a aq   (
for example, from sources of sugars, fats or proteins.
The release of energy at the cellular level is known as the Krebs cycle.
Digestive system
An animal is able to make full use of the food it eats after the following events
have taken place, through the digestive tract (Fig. 3.11).
· Food is first torn up into pieces small enough to swallow (mastication).
· Food enters the alimentary canal mixed with digestive enzymes to further
break down the food into simple water-soluble chemicals - the process of
digestion. It takes place outside the cells of the body.
bloodstream. This is called absorption.
·Blood then transports the digested, soluble food to all parts of the body.
The food enters cells and is transformed into substances which take part in
the body's metabolism. This is called assimilation.
 sg      n  ss P  os
expelled from the body as faecal matter or faeces.
Foods
Most foods which animals eat cannot be used by their bodies in the original form
for two main reasons:
(1)Most foods are insoluble and so cannot pass through cell membranes into
cells.
(2)Most foods are chemically different from the substances that make up body
tissues. They must therefore be processed before the body can use them by
the use of enzymes.
Digestive enzymes
All enzymes, whether digestive or belonging to another body system, are cata-
lysts. They speed up chemical reactions which would otherwise proceed very
slowly. Digestive enzymes are only one example of the many types of enzymes
which exist in living animals. The reactions which these enzymes speed up involve
splitting complicated molecules into simpler ones.
It is thought that the enzyme combines briefy with molecules of food and
while in this state the food undergoes a rapid chemical change in which its
molecules are split apart into chemically simpler substances. These substances
38
Chapter 3
separate from the enzyme, leaving it immediately available for another identical
reaction.
countless times in rapid succession.
Hepatic portal veins
Food is broken down
to the liver
by enzymes in the
 small intestines 
↑
Indigestible material
Food enters
the tract via
tnzymes
Faeces
the mouth
Digestion
Absorption
+年
Hepatic portal veins
to the liver
Fig. 3.11 Digestive tract - events.
Comparative digestive anatomy
The digestive tract or alimentary canal is simply a continuous tube, with differ-
ent regions along its length performing different functions.
Anatomically, different species of mammals are grouped according to their
digestive anatomy (Figs 3.12 and 3.13).
 Ruminants or polygastric animals (cattle and sheep)
Simple-stomached animals (e.g. dog, cat and humans)
Avian (all birds)
· Monogastric herbivores (the horse)
Other definitions may refer to the type of food eaten.
 Carnivores - meat eating
Omnivores - eat both meat and vegetable matter
+]
Herbivores - grass eating
 Grainivores - grain eating
The control of digestion of food is both voluntary and involuntary.
Voluntary
(a)
 Ingestion - placing in mouth
(b)  Chewing
Body Systems and Functions
68
Liver
Oesophagus
Gall bladder
Stomach
Duodenum
Pancreas
Jejunum
lleum
Colon
Caecum
Anus
Rectum
Fig. 3.12 Dog and cat digestive anatomy.
(c)Swallowing (deglutition)
(d)  Control of anal sphincter - the muscle controlling the opening and
closing of the anus
Involuntary
(a)
 Opening and closing of sphincters
(b)I
 Peristaltic movement (a ripple or wave of muscle) squeezing the food
through the gut
(c)
 Release of digestive enzymes
Digestive tract of dog and cat
·Mouth
Pharynx
Oesophagus
+
Stomach
40
Chapter 3
Oesophagus
Gall bladder
Liver
Stomach
Duodenum
Pancreas
Jejunum
lleum
Colon
Caecum
Rectum
Anus
Appendix
Fig. 3.13  Rabbit digestive tract showing enlarged caecum and appendix. New food is mixed
with caecal (soft) pellets, which are eaten by the rabbit from its own anus (coprophagia).
Small intestines
Duodenum
 Jejunum
[leum
 Large intestines
Caecum
Ascending colon
Transversecolon
Descendingcolon
Rectum
Anal canal
The mouth
Also called the oral cavity or buccal cavity. The teeth are responsible for grind-
ing, crushing or tearing up the food and with the aid of the tongue and saliva, the
food is mixed. The stucture of a basic tooth is shown in Fig. 3.14. Saliva is sup-
Body Systems and Functions
41
Enamel
Crown
 Dentine
Pulp cavity
Neck
Gum line
Cement
Root
Blood vessels
and nerves
Fig. 3.14 Structure of the basic tooth
plied from four glands located around the face. Saliva is usually present in the
mouth but its flow is increased by the sight and smell of food. This effect is known
as a gustatory response. Saliva is made of water with about 1% of it being mucus,
electrolytes (salts) and enzymes. The mucus acts as a lubricant and helps in the
swallowing of dry food.
The tongue also helps to move the lump of food, known as a bolus. The tongue
is a mass of striated muscle fibres. It is a sensitive structure with some of the taste
buds located on its surface. The tongue has another function, especially in the cat,
which is that of grooming.
Fig. 3.15 shows the variation in skulls and dentition in different species.
Common to the digestive and respiratory systems is the pharynx area. There
are lymphoid areas in the mucous membrane of this area called tonsils.
The processes of digestion are shown in Fig. 3.16.
Theoesophagus
Pharyngeal muscles move the food bolus into the oesophagus, which is a simple
tube. Swallowing or deglutition is now complete. No digestive enzymes are
secreted here but oesophageal cells produce mucus to lubricate the process of
peristalsis, the wave-like contraction and relaxation which will propel the food
along the tract (Fig. 3.17). These contractions are stimulated by the presence of
food.
42
Chapter 3
Dog
Canine
Rabbit
Carnassial
Incisors
6
Premolars
Premolars
Carnassial
PremolarsMol
Incisors
Cat
Diastema -the gap
 that is found in herbivores
Incisors
Molars
Canine -
Premolar
Dentalformula
Deciduous or milk teeth - I C↓ PM = total 28
Dog
Permanent or adult teeth - 1 C↓ PM M = total 42
Cat =
Permanent -I C↓ PM M↓ = total 30
Deciduous - | C↓ PM= total 26
Rabbit
openrootedCPMM=total14
Fig. 3.15 Skull/dentition variation.
Table 3.1
Enzymes of the digestive tract.
Secretion
Source
 Site of action
Enzyme
Acting on
Saliva
Salivary gland
Mouth
Waterand mucus
All foods
Gastric juice
Stomach
Stomach
Gastrin, pepsin
Protein
Bile
Liver
wnuepong
Bile salt
Fats
Pancreatic juice
Pancreas
Duodenum
Amylase
Starch
Trypsin
Protein
Lipase
Fats
Intestinal juice
Intestine wall
Small intestine
Amylase
Starch
*The cells in the duodenum release the hormone enterokinase, which activates the pancreatic
enzymes only when they reach the small intestines. Otherwise they would damage or digest the
pancreas.
Body Systems and Functions
43
Liver
Stomach
Pancreas
Small intestine
Bile
Ipase
Trypsin
Amylase
+
Carbohy-
Fats
Protein
cdrates
+
Poly-
Glycerol
Complex
peptides
sugars
Waste
Fatty
Amino
acids
Glucose
acids
Fig. 3.16 The processes of digestion.
Stomach
Oesophagus
Food bolus
moving via
peristaltic movements
Diaphragm
Fig. 3.17 Oesophagus and stomach showing food being moved by peristalsis.
44
Chapter 3
The stomach
The oesophagus enters the stomach via a ring of muscle called the cardiac sphinc-
ter, a structure which adapts itself to the quantity of food eaten. Some digestion
occurs here and the stomach acts as a temporary reservoir. The gastric juices,
which contain enzymes and hydrochloric acid, start breaking up the food. The
well-mixed and partially digested food, now called chyme, is now moved through
the sphincter at the stomach exit, called the pylorus, and on to the first section
of the small intestine.
The small intestines
So called because of their narrow bore, not their length. Enzyme digestion is com-
pleted in the small intestines.
 Protein is converted to amino acids
Fat is converted to fatty acids
Carbohydrates are converted to simple sugars
The chyme is mixed with more enzymes in the first section of the small
intestines, the duodenum. Some will originate from the duodenum, others from
the pancreas (its exocrine function). The liver also secretes a digestive fluid into
the duodenum via the gall bladder; this fluid is ducted into the small intestine to
reduce the size of fatty acid molecules and is called bile. Bile helps by emulsify-
ing fats and will neutralise the acid fluids from the stomach because it is alkaline.
The second section of the small intestines, called the jejunum, continues the
mixing and exposing of the chyme to the fuids that reduce it sufficiently for
absorption.
The third section of the small intestines is the ileum, where the final absorp-
tion is completed.
Digestion and absorption are improved by the enormous surface area in the
small intestine. Features of this area include:
· The great length of the intestines
· The presence of folds of tissue, increasing the surface area
· The arrangement of finger-like projections called villi
· The great number of these villi on the surface of the small intestine, particu-
larly in the final area, the ileum, for maximum absorption
Absorption. This takes place via the villi (Fig. 3.18). They contain smooth muscle
which allows them to contract and expand. This action brings them into contact
Body Systems and Functions
45
Cells producing mucus
to lubricate food movement
Blood vessels surrounding the lacteal which
Lacteal which absorbs fatty acids
absorbs nutrients for transport to the liver
and glycerol into the lymph system
Blood
vessels
Lymph vessel
Fig. 3.18The villi.
are absorbed, by a combination of diffusion and active transport, across the
epithelial lining of the villi into the waiting capillaries beneath. These capillaries
drain into the hepatic portal vein which leads to the liver.
Fat is dealt with differently. The fatty acids and glycerol are absorbed into the
columnar epithelial cells lining the villi and are pushed into the lymph vessels of
the villi as a white emulsion of tiny globules of fat. These globules give the lymph
vessels a milky appearance, for which they are known as lacteals. The lymph
system opens finally into the veins in the thorax and empties via the thoracic duct
into the vena cava near the heart.
Salts, vitamins and water are also absorbed in the small intestine.
The large intestines
This section of intestines is a wider tube and contains no villi. Food materials
which are of no value or cannot be broken down to absorbable size are passed
from the small to the large intestine through the ileocaecal valve. The large intes-
tine in the dog and cat is relatively short in length. Its main purpose is to absorb
salt and water. The walls of the colon (large intestine) are much folded for this
purpose. By the time materials reach the rectum, indigestible food is in a semi-
solid condition ready to be voided through the anus as faeces.
The first part of the large intestines is called the caecum. It is a blind-ended
sac which has no function in carnivores but is enlarged in herbivores as a site of
bacterial breakdown of vegetable food matter.
The colon is divided into three sections:
·Ascending
Transverse
·Descending
The colon terminates in the rectum area, where waste products are held before
excretion as faecal material.
46
Chapter 3
The last part of the tract is closed by sphincter muscles and is known as the
anal canal, over which the animal has control via skeletal muscle (voluntary
muscle). Defecation involves relaxation of the anal sphincter but diarrhoea or
illness may override this control. Diarrhoea is defined as the frequent evacuation
of watery faeces. If defecation is delayed too long, constipation may result.
Consistent with its functions of water absorption and faecal movement, the
large intestine is lined with a mucus-secreting surface. This assists in the move·
ment of materials by a lubricating action. The mucus prevents the total drying
out of the faeces, which might then damage the lining.
Brief summary of digestion and absorption of the main food constituents
· Proteins - come from muscle meat, egg or vegetable proteins like soya bean.
These are broken down in the stomach and smallintestines to become amino acids
and absorbed into the bloodstream for transport to the liver, where they are
processed.
broken down into simple sugars (glucose) and absorbed into the bloodstream for
tansport to the liver where they may be stored as glycogen. When required by the
· Fats - are found as animal fat or vegetable oils and are broken down into fatty
acids and glycerols by bile and enzymes in the small intestines. Most will enter the
lacteals in the villi to travel via the lymph system, finally reaching the bloodstream
for use or storage.
Liver and pancreas
The liver is the largest organ of the body, situated immediately caudal to the
diaphragm in the abdomen. About 75% of the liver's blood supply comes from
the hepatic portal system of vessels (Fig. 3.19). This ensures that the products
of digestion are absorbed into the bloodstream and travel to the liver for pro-
cessing, before moving on either to storage or to be used in another way. The
remaining 25% of blood to the liver arrives via the hepatic artery.
The special cells that make up the liver are called hepatocytes. The liver is a
very complex chemical factory which produces materials for use within the body
from the products of digestion which come directly to it from the gut.
Functions of the fiver
It is thought that the liver performs over 500 functions. The main functions are
as follows:
·Regulation of sugar which has four possible fates:
(1) used as energy source (Krebs cycle)
Body Systems and Functions
47
Hepatic vein
Liver
Gall
bladder
Hepatic artery
Venacava
(main vein)
Aorta
Hepatic portal
(main artery)
system of blood
vesselsfrom
 gut to liver
 Small
intestines
Fig. 3.19 Blood supply to the liver.
(2)  stored as glycogen in the liver
(3)
 converted to fat and stored around the body
(4)
passed directly into the circulation
Regulation of lipids (fats)
Regulation of amino acids and proteins
 Heat production
 Bile production
Formation of cholesterol
Elimination of sex hormones
 Storage and filtration of blood
....
Elimination of haemoglobin from exhausted red blood cells
 Formation of urea to be passed on to the kidneys for removal from the body
+
 Creation of plasma proteins (synthesis)
 Storage of vitamins A, D and B,2 and minerals like iron and copper
The pancreas
The pancreas is a large grey-pink gland, which lies in the abdomen close to the
stomach and the duodenum section of the small intestine. It is made up of two
parts which are joined together, giving the pancreas its boomerang shape.
There are two types of tissue present within the gland and these have very
different functions.
48
Chapter 3
·Exocrine tissue - which produces digestive enzymes
Endocrine tissue - which produces hormones like insulin to help in control-
ling sugar in the body.
Urinary system
This system has several functions but its main one is that of excretion and
removal of waste products from the body. Wastes are toxic if allowed to
accumulate so this removal of harmful materials, which are the end products of
metabolism, is essential and continuous.
Functions include:
loss or conservation of body water
 excretion of unwanted substances or those in excess to requirements
 storage of products before their removal from the body
endocrine organ producing hormones.
The mammalian urinary tract consists of:
·Two kidneys
Two ureters
· One bladder
· One urethra
The kidneys
These are bean shaped and situated one on each side of the abdomen (Fig. 3.20)
Each contains specialised cells which filter out materials which must be removed
from the body and conserve those which the body needs. These cells are called
the nephrons, from which we get the term nephritis, meaning inflammation of the
kidney nephron cells.
The blood supply to the kidneys is via the renal artery directly from the aorta
and drains away from the kidney via the renal vein directly into the vena cava.
The nephron
This is the special cell of the urinary system. The structure is as follows (Fig. 3.21):
Glomerulus - a network or knot of artery from branches of the renal artery
in the cortex section of the kidney.
Body Systems and Functions
49
Pyramids
Renal pelvis
Medulla
Cortex
Ureter
Fig. 3.20 The kidney.
Glomerulus or knot of capillary
Blood supply
Bowman's
capsule
Convoluted
tubule
Joins a.
collecting duct
Fig. 3.21 The nephron.
Bowman's capsule - the cup-shaped part of the nephron, at the start of the
tubule. It is into this that the glomerulus fits and contacts, resulting in the start
of blood filtration and the removal of urea and other nitrogenous wastes.
Proximal tubule - the start of the long tube through which the fltered sub-
stances will pass.
Loop of Henle and distal tubule - this is where, on instruction from hormones,
the nephron conserves water, salts and sugars or, if the body has an excess, it
is instructed to add the excess to the forming urine for removal from the body.
50
Chapter 3
Aorta
Venacava
Renal vein
Renal artery
Kidney
Ureters
Ureters
Bladder
enter bladder
Urethra
Fig. 3.22The urinary system.
The distal tubule joins a collecting duct which directs the urine to the pelvis
region of the kidney, where all nephrons drain, then along the ureter to the
bladder for temporary storage. When the bladder is full, the animal receives this
information from the brain and relaxes the sphincter muscle from the bladder
to the urethra and the outside (Fig. 3.22). The act of passing urine is called
micturition.
Nervous system
The nervous system provides the quickest means of communication within the
body. Information is received both from outside the animal (the environment)
and from inside the animal's body. The response to information received has to
be co-ordinated in order for the body systems to unite in their response, to
produce the desired effect.
Body Systems and Functions
51
Cell nucleus
Dendrites
Axon
Terminals to join to next
nerve cell
Fig. 3.23 Nerve cell - the neurone.
Messages to the body are carried in two ways:
(1)
 Electrical - these are impulses which travel along the nerves and give fast
response to a situation or stimulus (nervous system). The electrical messages
stimulate movement of muscles:
{a)
 cardiac - the heart
(b)
 skeletal - bones and joints
(c)
 involuntary - organs and tissues.
(2)
Chemical - these are hormones which, once released into the bloodstream,
n s si s  a  p ni n s a n 
a period of time (endocrine system).
Body co-ordination by nervous system tissue is conducted by the nerve cells,
 the neurones (Fig. 3.23),together with various forms of supporting tissue in which
they are embedded. These cells are the basic functional unit of the nervous system
and are found in bundles, called nerves.
There are four types of neurone.
(1)  Sensory - those attached to the senses, like sight, hearing, taste, smell and
touch. These carry messages about information outside the body to the
brain.
(2)
 Relay - information or messages between neurones.
(3)
Motor -
- these link up to relay neurones and with muscle or gland cells in
order to deliver messages from the central nervous system (brain and spinal
cord) to initiate an action. This may be the release of more hormone or the
movement of a muscle.
52
Chapter3
Synapse with the next
Dendrite
Nucleus
Axon
nerve cell
Fatty myelin
protective cover
Fig. 3.24 Nerve cell and direction of electrical impulse.
(4）
Network - these link the cell branches in order to keep the information and
action by the brain and spinal cord networked like a computer.
The shape of the nerve cell will vary to suit the tissue into which it links but
the basic components remain the same.
·A cell body containing the nucleus.
·Cell processes which lead to and from the cell body (Fig. 3.24):
(a)   the axon - which carries the impulses away from the cell body
(b)  the dendrite - which carries impulses towards the cell body.
The property of a nerve cell is that its cell membrane is electrically charged
by the action of ions (salts or electrolytes) such as potassium or sodium. Although
the voltage carried is small, when discharged along the length of nerves, it
allows the system to act as a high-speed electrical signalling system. After the
signal, the membrane is recharged and returns to a resting position, awaiting the
next signal.
The junction between two or more neurones is called a synapse (Fig. 3.25).
upon a chemical transmitter substance - a neurotransmitter. This substance will
 connect two neurones for less than one millisecond, allowing the impulse to pass
on. The chemical is then destroyed by another substance and recreated again
before each future impulse.
Reflex action or arc (Fig. 3.26)
This refers to an automatic and very rapid response to a potentially harmful
stimulus which is usually external to the body. It is a survival response.
The structural basis of reflex action is the refex arc, which represents the series
of units of nerve tissue through which impulses have to pass in order to bring
about a reflex response. The sensory tissues receiving the information are called
receptors and may be scattered sensory cells in the skin or special sense recep-
tors like the eye or ear. Their stimulation results in impulses being generated in
Body Systems and Functions
53
Dendrite
Cellbody and
nucleus
AXO
Synapse
Chemical transmitter to
assist the impulse across
the gap
Fig. 3.25 A synapse - the junction between two or more neurones.
Sen
Spinal cord
Skin
Receptor nerve
endings
Synapse
Muscle
contracts, to
move away
Fig. 3.26 Reflex arc.
sensory (afferent) neurones located in the peripheral nerves (on or near the body
surface). These afferent neurones take the impulse to the central nervous system
(only to the spinal cord) where a connection nerve in the cord connects to a
motor (efferent) neurone. This will take the impulse or message to an effector
tissue like a gland or to a muscle for the desired effect - survival.
The common example used is touching a hot surface, when the reflex arc
ensures that the animal suffers minimal harm as the foot is speedily withdrawn
from the danger.
54
Chapter 3
Central nervous system
Made up of the brain and spinal cord.
The brain
The general function of the brain is to co-ordinate the body's activities. It receives
all sensory information and processes it for:
+
Immediate use - reflex arc.
Later use - storing it in memory, passing orders via neurones and hormones,
constantly monitoring the internal body systems for any change.
The brain is divided into three parts (Fig. 3.27).
Olfactory bulb
Lobe of the
cerebrum
Cerebellum
Medulla oblongata
becoming the spinal cord
Shape of the
cerebrum
Cerebellum
Olfactory
qinq
Spinal cord
Hypothalamus
Pituitary
Medulla oblongata
Fig. 3.27 Parts of the brain, from two views
Body Systems and Functions
55
(1)  Forebrain - cerebrum, divided into two areas called the cerebral hemi-
spheres (including the hypothalamus), involved with voluntary movement
and the senses.
(2)   Midbrain - involved with sight, hearing, muscle control and body position.
(3)  Hindbrain - the cerebellum, the pons and the medulla oblongata. Involved
with complicated movements of the body, control of the circulation and
respiration and awareness of surroundings.
The spinal cord
The cord extends from the base of the skull to the lumbar/sacral region of the
spine, over the pelvis. It is a continuation of the hindbrain and medulla oblon-
gata. The cord is protected by the vertebrae and the meninges. The canal, which
runs through each vertebra, houses the spinal cord.
The cord divides into many branching spinal nerves. This continues first inside
the vertebrae, then on the outside of the coccygeal vertebrae as the cauda equina
(resembling a horse's tail), to supply motor and sensory nerves to the tip of the
animal's tail.
Protection of the brain and spinal cord
·Bones - skull and bones of the spine.
  a q s   s a ae -
Blood-brain barrier - a mechanism located in a continuous layer of endothe-
lial cells which allows only useful substances to enter the brain.
Meninges
The three protective membranes covering the brain and spinal cord
Dura mater - the tough outer membrane, in contact with the bone of the skull and
the vertebrae
· Arachnoid - a fine network of collagen and elastic fibres, next to the dura mater.
Pia mater-the membrane in contact with thebrain and spinal cord tissue surface.
Peripheral nervous system
Voluntary nervous system
· Paired spinal nerves containing both sensory and motor fibres, forming a
mixed spinal nerve.
· Twelve cranial nerves. These are mixed nerves and can contain motor and
sensory, voluntary and autonomic fibres (Table 3.2).
56
Chapter 3
Table 3.2
The 12 cranial nerves.
Number
Name
Type
Function
Olfactory
Sensory
Smell
Optic
Sensory
Vision, pupil light response
Oculomotor
Motor
Eye movement, pupil constriction
IV
Trochlear
Motor
Eye movement
V
Tigeminal
Mixed
Mastication, touch and pain
receptors
VI
Abducens
Motor
Eye movement
VIl
Facial
Mixed
Salivation, facial expression, taste 
VIlI
Auditory/
Sensory
Hearing, balance
vestibulocochlear
IX
 Glossopharyngeal
Mixed
Taste, laryngeal muscles
X
Vagus
Mixed
Vocalisation,swallowing
Decrease in heart rate
 Abdominal organs
XI
Accessory
Motor
Head movement 
XII
Hypoglossal
Motor
 Tongue movement
involuntary or autonomic nervous system
 Sympathetic nervous system
Parasympathetic nervous system
The involuntary or autonomic nervous system is not under conscious control and
is involved with the regulation of body functions. It is divided into two parts, dis-
tinguished by their function and by the chemical transmitters (neurotransmitters)
used at the synapse between nerve cells.
Sympathetic system
Parasympathetic system
Chemical - adrenaline
Chemical - cholinesterase
 Prepares body for fight, fright and
Assists in day-to-day function of the
fight
body
 Inhibits salivation
Stimulates salivation
Increases heart rate
Decreases heart rate back to normal
 Increases respiratory rate
Decreases respiratory rate
Endocrine system
This is made up of a system of ductless glands which are sites for the production
of hormones (Fig. 3.28). The hormones are discharged directly into the blood for
circulation to the target organ or tissue. Hormones are sometimes referred to as
chemical messengers.
Body Systems and Functions57
The word ‘endocrine' means ^internal secretion' and the organs of this system
are therefore glands of internal secretion. Although the glands are sited all
integrated into a highly co-ordinated system.
The messages from the hormones:
·Have long-lasting effects on their targets (hours to days)
Assist in the constant adjustment of the internal body
·Arrive at their target at the speed of the circulating blood
The nervous and endocrine systems are linked. The endocrine gland that con.
trols the functions of all the other glands in this system, the pituitary or master
gland, is in the brain close to the hypothalamus.
The glands
Pituitary
Controlling the other glands, body growth and the internal body, the pituitary is
situated at the base of the brain. It is divided into two parts.
The anterior pituitary produces:
· Thyrotropic or thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) for production of thyroid
hormone.
· Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) for control of adrenal glands and
release of corticosteroids.
· Growth hormone or somatotropin (GH) which promotes the body's growth.
· Gonadotropins which influence the ovaries and testes:
(a)follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) promotes the ripening of the eggs
 in the ovaries and the secretion of oestrogen in the female. In the male,
FSH assists the development of the sperm cells
(b)luteinizing hormone (LH) stimulates ovulation and the secretion of
oestrogen and progesterone in the female. In the male, it stimulates the
development and release of testosterone
 prolactin or lactogenic hormone develops mammary tissues during preg-
nancy for milk production.
The posterior pituitary produces:
· Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) or vasopressin, which prevents excessive loss
 of water from the body via the kidneys.
·Oxytocin which stimulates the release of milk and uterine contractions during
parturition.
58
Chapter 3
Thyroid
This gland regulates growth, body development and metabolism. It is located
below the larynx near the trachea. It produces and secretes the thyroid hormone
which regulates metabolism, growth and development.
Parathyroid
The parathyroid gland is situated near the thyroid gland. It produces parathyroid
hormone which regulates the calcium and phosphorus levels in the blood and
bones.
Adrenais
The adrenals regulate growth of bones, muscle development and secondary sex
characteristics. These two small glands are located near the kidneys. The glands
are divided into:
· Cortex - producing steroids, which are concerned with the regulation of
sodium and potassium and the body water (fuids) balance. An example of a
hormone produced here is aldosterone. Corticosteroids produced assist in the
metabolism of nutrients, antibody formation and dealing with stress. Also
produced here are the hormones responsible for the male and female sex
characteristics.
· Medulla - secretes adrenaline and noradrenaline, which prepare the body for
flight or fight in stressful situations.
Pancreas
The pancreas regulates the use and storage of glucose in the body and is con-
sidered a part of the digestive system. It lies close to the stomach in a loop of the
small intestine (duodenum). It produces insulin for the use and storage of simple
sugars from the breakdown of carbohydrates in the diet.
Pineal gland
This is a small oval gland situated near the base of the brain. It secretes mela-
tonin, which inhibits gonad activity. The secretions may be linked to seasonal light
levels, which control timing of an animal's oestrus cycle.
Gonads
Female (ovaries) and male (testes) gonads produce hormones for the function-
ing of the reproductive systems of each sex.
Body Systems and Functions
65
Pituitary gland
Adrenal
 glands
Kidneys Ovaries in the
female
Thyroid and
parathyroid glands
Testicles
in themale
Pancreas
Fig. 3.28 Endocrine glands in the dog.
Ovaries - produce some of the oestrogen hormone responsible for the sec-
for the preparation of the uterus in pregnancy.
 Testes - produce testosterone, responsible for male secondary sex
characteristics.
The following organs are not endocrine glands but do produce hormones.
?
Kidney
- produces the hormone erythropoietin, which stimulates the
 production of red cells in active bone marrow sites.
 Intestines - produce hormones to promote the production of digestive enzyme
compounds from organs such as the pancreas.
Sense organs
Sense organs collect stimuli. However, sensations are interpreted by the brain
once it is fed the information via nerves. Sense organs collect information from
inside and outside the body.
inside the body
· Temperature monitored by the hypothalamus of the brain.
Regulation of breathing by measuring the carbon dioxide levels.
 Tension of muscles or tendons which prevents overexercise and damage.
Outside the body
· Light, dark, shape or colour becomes sight.
· Sound and changes of body position become hearing and balance.
60
Chapter 3
Airborne chemicals become smells.
 Ingested chemicals become tastes.
+Touch, heat and cold pass survival information to the brain.
The eye
This is the organ of vision (Fig. 3.29). The eye resembles a camera in at least three
ways:
(1)E
Both focus light. In the eye the apparatus for this consists of the transpar-
 ent cornea and lens. These act like the glass lens of the camera in forming
the image.
 This image falls on a layer of receptors called the retina which, like the film
in a camera, is sensitive to light.
(3)
Eyes and cameras have a mechanism called an iris diaphragm, which is an
opaque disc with a hole at the centre. This increases or decreases in size to
control light entering the eye.
The retina transforms light into a stream of nerve impulses which pass down
the optic nerve to the brain, to form a picture. The frequency and pattern of these
impulses vary according to patches of colour, light and shade which make up the
retinal image. The visual area of the brain interprets these impulses to form
moving impressions.
Posterior chamber is filled 
with a jelly-like material
Sclera
called vitreous humour
Muscle and ligaments
supporting the lens 
Conjunctiva
Visual axis or fovea
Filled with
aqueous humour
 Optic nerve to brain
Cornea
Pupil
lris
Lens
Blood vessels
Choroid layer
 Retina layer
Fig. 3.29 The eye.
Body Systems and Functions  61
Protection of the eyes
·Cavities in the skull called the orbits protect the eye ball with a bone and car-
tilage ring.
· The transparent, self-repairing skin on the eye called the conjunctiva.
· Tears keep the eyes moist; a stream of liquid from the tear glands is wiped
across the eye by blinking and prevents the tissues from becoming too dry.
· The blink reflex to guard against dust and other objects which might enter
the eye socket.
Nourishment and support tissuesof the eye
The eye receives oxygen via blood vessels which enter with the optic nerve,
at the back of the eye. These vessels spread out through the choroid layer and
over the surface of the retina.
 ui sissa  oisn aq poo pe xo o sn pe oo a
liquid in the front chamber of the eye - the aqueous humour.
Vitreous humour is a jelly in the back cavity of the eye which helps to main-
tain the shape of the eye.
The iris is the coloured part of the eye and has a round hole in its centre called
the pupil. The iris consists of muscles which radiate out and contract to enlarge
the size of the pupil and circular muscles, which make it smaller in size. The iris
regulates the amount of light reaching the retina.
The lens consists of layers of transparent material arranged like the skins of
place by suspensory figaments, which in turn are attached to a ring of muscle
called the ciliary muscle.
The retina is covered with light-sensitive receptors called rods and cones (due
to their shape). These are buried under nerve fibres and a layer of blood capil-
laries which conduct the impulses to the brain. These layers are absent from the
area where the clearest image is formed, the fovea. This area is directly opposite
the lens and is the most sensitive part of the eye for colour vision.
The retina contains an area called the blind spot (Fig. 3.30). It consists of blood
Detecting the blind spot
+
Hold this page with the cross and spot at arm's length. Close the left eye and stare at the cross
with the right eye. Note that the black circle is still visible.
Bring the page slowly towards the face. At a certain point the circle will disappear. This happens
when its image falls on the blind spot.
Fig. 3.30 Detecting the eye's blind spot
62
Chapter 3
vessels and nerve fibres leading to the optic nerve. Due to these tissues this area
is completely insensitive to light.
The ear
The anatomy of the ear is shown in Fig. 3.31. Functions are:
Hearing
 Detecting change in body position
·Balance
The ear is divided into three sections:
(1)
Outer - for sound gathering.
(2)
Middle - transmits vibrations to the oval window of the inner ear.
(3)
 Inner - receives the sound waves, passes them to the nerve that connects to
the brain for conversion into hearing.
Outerear
This is made up of the earflap or pinna and the canal. The shape of the canal will
vary between species and breeds. This part of the ear collects sound waves and
To the ear flap or pinna
The ossicles - malleus,
incus, stapes
External canal
Semicircular canals
Vestibule
Cochlea
Tympanic
membrane
oreardrum
Oval window
Eustachian tube to
the back of the mouth
Fig. 3.31 Anatomy of the éar.
Body Systems and Functions
63
directs them into the canal, which is lined with modified sebaceous glands. These
panicmembrane.
Middle ear
This lies beyond the eardrum in the tympanic cavity, which is made of bone, on
the ventral surface of the skull. The cavity contains three small bones called
ossicles.
·Malleus - known as the hammer (contacts the eardrum)
·Incus - known as the anvil
·Stapes - known as the stirrup (contacts the oval window)
Vibrations of the eardrum (tympanic membrane) are transmitted by these
bones to the oval window, which is the junction between the middle and inner
ear.
The link between the middle ear and the throat/pharynx is the auditory tube
(Eustachian tube). This tube allows air pressure to be equalised on either side of
the eardrum.
innerear
This is situated in the temporal bone of the skull. It is here that sound vibrations
are converted into nervous impulses and the inner ear is also involved in
maintaining balance.
This area consists of a closed system of delicate tubes, called the membranous
labyrinth, which contains a fluid caued endolymph. The labyrinth is itself bathed
in a separate fuid, the perilymph.
The labyrinth is made up of:
· The vestibule - a sac-like structure.
· The semicircular canals - these are three loops at right angles to each other.
They respond to movement of the endolymph, the angle of the head and
changes in body position.
· The cochlea - a snail-shaped structure responsible for converting sound waves
into nerve impulses which are converted in the brain to hearing.
Othersenses
Smell or olfaction is important for the selection of food and scenting other
animals. Olfactory membranes can also receive stimuli from the mouth so as a
result, taste is sometimes actually smell.
Taste or gustation arises from taste cells contained in the mucous membranes
64
Chapter 3
of the mouth and on the base of the tongue. Taste and smell will stimulate sali-
vation and the digestive tract in readiness for food to be swallowed.
Jacobson's organ, or the vomeronasal organ, supplements the sense of smell in
receiving pheromone information about other animals. It is involved in the loca-
tion of an animal on heat for reproductive purposes.
Skin or integument
The anatomy of the skin is shown in Fig. 3.32.
Function
· Protection - from the external environment and the controlled internal envi-
 ronment of the body, actively preventing:
(a)
water loss
(b)  absorption of toxic or harmful substances
(c)  entry of disease-producing micro-organisms (pathogens).
·Production - of vitamin D which is required for the absorption of calcium
from the intestines.
 Sense organ - receptor nerves throughout the skin's surface respond to:
(a)
touch
(b) temperature
(c)
pressure
(d) pain.
Hair
Pore
Epidermis
Sebaceous
gland 
Dermis
Hair
Hair erector
follicle
muscle
Fatty
Hypodermis
layer
Fig. 3.32The skin.
Body Systems and Functions
65
 Storage - of fat as adipose tissue. This is a body energy store and acts as an
insulation layer to help maintain body temperature in cold weather.
·Temperature control
(a)   For heat loss:
-vasodilation of surface blood vessels (widening of the vessel wall)
 sweating.
(b) For heat gain:
 vasoconstriction of blood vessels (narrowing of the vessel wall)
 erection of surface hair/coat/feathers to trap a layer of air for
insulation
a fat layer under the skin (subcutaneous layer).
· Scent gland - for communication with other animals for reproductive pur-
poses (production of pheromones) or territorial purposes (use of the anal
glands on either side of the anus).
Structure
· Epidermis - is the outer layer, which is hard and dry and contains no blood
vessels. This layer continually looses dead cells.
·Dermis - is the layer below the epidermis and is a type of connective tissue
containing nerves, blood vessels, glands and hair roots.
·Hypodermis - is the innermost layer of the skin.
Hair
This covers most of an animal's surface area. It is made of keratin (a protein made
by the body) and pigments for colour. It grows from the hair follicle and attached
to the deepest section of the hair is the smooth (involuntary) muscle called the
erector pili muscle which is responsible for moving the hair upright.
Sweatglands
Sweat or sebaceous glands produce sebum which will include a pheromone.
Other very specialised glands in the skin include mammary glands for milk pro-
duction and anal glands for scenting territory.
Skeleton
The anatomy of the skeleton is shown in Fig. 3.33a. Figs 3.33b and c show the dif-
ferences between dog and cat skeletons.
The skeleton is divided into three parts:
(1)  Axial - skull, vertebral column (spine), ribs and sternum.
(2) Appendicular - the fore and hind limbs.
(3) Splanchnic - bones that develop in tisues, such as the os penis and
fabellae.
66
Chapter 3
calcaneus
digits
tat:
Siternu
edles
diqit
Metacarr
aays n o A (e) t'e 
Body Systems and Functions
67
(b)
(c)
Fig. 3.33 (b) Skeleton of cat.
Fig. 3.33 (c) Skeleton of dog.
Position terms
Proximal - meaning 'nearer to the centre of the body' (for example, the part of the
femur bone closest to the hip joint would be called the proximal end of femur).
Distal - meaning further from the centre of the body' (for example, the part of the
femur bone nearest to the knee or stifle would be called the distal end of femur).
Cranial - descriptive term meaning 'towards or within the head'
Dorsal - the surface of the body which is on top.
Caudal - a descriptive term meaning 'towards or within the tail.
Medial - a term describing something that lies nearest to the midline of the body.
Ventral - any surface of the body that is facing the ground.
Lateral - the sides of the body, both left and right.
Movementsof thebody
These are movements of a whole limb relative to the body.
Protraction - movement of a limb towards the head (cranially).
Retraction - movement of a limb towards the tail (caudally).
Elevation - movement of a limb up and nearer the body (proximal to body).
· Adduction - movement of a limb towards the middle of the body (midline).
Abduction - movement of a limb away from the middle of the body (away
from the midline).
Bone structure
Bone is hard and to some extent also flexible (Fig. 3.34). The cells in bone are
68
Chapter 3
Cartilage
Epiphysis
Diaphysis
Epiphysis
Fig. 3.34 Bone structure.
secrete minerals like calcium and phosphorus, which provide its rigid nature. The
structure of bones provides for the maximum resistance to mechanical stresses,
while maintaining the least bony mass.
Bone is made of two types of cells.
· Osteoblasts are responsible for the secretion of material which, when miner-
alised, will become bone. Osteoblasts become trapped in the forming bone
and are then called osteocytes.
 Osteoclasts are responsible for reabsorbing materials and therefore for the
remodelling of bone.
In the general structure of long bones, there are two types of bone materials.
Compacr bone which will form the dense walls of the bone shaft.
· Cancellous or spongy bone which is found in the central medullary cavity. As
the name suggests, this bone consists of a network and spaces all linked to
each other.
The medullary cavity of most bones contains active or red marrow which is
responsible for the production of platelets, red and white blood cells. The yellow,
rather fatty-looking material sometimes is found in the medullary cavities is inac-
tive bone marrow.
The outer surface of bone is covered with a layer of dense fibrous connective
tissue called the periosteum into which are inserted muscles, tendons and liga-
Body Systems and Functions
69
ments for attachment. The inner surface of bone is covered by a delicate con-
assist in the remodelling and repair of bone if it becomes damaged.
The function of bone and the skeletal system is to:
+
Support the body
 Provide levers for movement
·Protect organs
·Maintain mineral levels in the body
·Produce blood cells (both red and white)
Joints
These are the articular surfaces of the ends of bones, always protected by a layer
of cartilage (hyaline). The study of joints is termed arthrology. When joints
become infamed, this is termed arthritis.
Joints are places where different bones come into anatomical contact with each
other.
Synarthroses - are joints which are immovable, e.g- joints of the skull.
Diarthroses - are joints where movement of adjacent bones can occur and
these are usually related to the limbs, e.g. synovial joints.
·Amphiarthroses - are joints which share some of the characteristics of the
synarthroses and diarthroses but have limited movement, e.g. between the
vertebrae of the spine.
Joints are further commonly classified as:
·Fibrous - no movement at all. Also called suture joints, such as the bones of
the skull.
· Cartilaginous - some movement to these. Examples are found where there
are right and left sides, e.g. the lower jaw (mandibles) and in the pelvis.
 Synovial (Fig. 3.35) - plenty of movement to these joints. They also have other
features:
(a)   cartilage surfaces at bone ends
(b)   joint membrane or capsule
(c) joint fluid for lubricatation (synovial fluid).
Synovial joints may be called simple joints if they contain two articular sur-
faces, an example being the two bones which make up the shoulder joint. Com-
pound joints have more than two articular surfaces, as in the elbow where three
bones come together to form the joint.
  a s d  ds n 
70
Chapter 3
Bone
Cartilage
Joint capsule
Joint space with
synovial fiuid for
lubrication
Bone
Fig. 3.35  Simple synovial joint.
Pelvis
Head of femur
 in hip joint 
Femur
(hind leg)
Fig. 3.36 Ball and socket joint.
Ball and socket (femur/acetabulum) (Fig. 3.36)
1
Hinge (humerus/radius and ulna) (Fig. 3.37)
Pivot (radius/ulna or atlas/axis) (Fig. 3.38)
+
Saddle (between phalanges or toes) (Fig. 3.39)
+]
 Plane or gliding (between carpals/tarsals) (Fig. 3.39)
Condylar (stifle or knee)
The stability of all synovial joints is improved by:
Ligaments
 Surrounding muscles and tendons
Well-shaped/fitting articular bone surfaces
Body Systems and Functions
71
Humerus
Radius
UIna
Fig. 3.37Hinge joint.
Atlas
Axis
Atlas
Peg which fits
into theatlas
for twisting
movementof
the head
Axis
Fig. 3.38  Pivot or rotatory joint showing the first two cervical vertebrae.
72
Chapter 3
Radius
UIna
Carpus
Gliding joint
area
Metacarpals
Phalanges
or digits
Saddle joint
area
Fig. 3.39 Saddle and gliding joints - foot (foreleg).
Reproductive system
Reproduction refers to the formation of more individuals, from one parent (asex-
ually) or from two parents (sexually).
Different species have evolved different processes but in all species, from
plants to mammals, reproduction is closely associated with protection against
adverse conditions and survival over unfavourable periods.
Mammal reproduction is by a sexual process and the male and female repro-
ductive anatomy is very similar (Figs 3.40 and 3.41).
The reproductive process
Every cell in every organism contains a set of instructions (genetic material) in
chemical form for building the whole of the new organism. The set of instruc-
tions are called chromosomes and are situated in the nucleus of each cell. Repro-
duction is via special cells, produced only by the reproductive organs. Mammals
have the most advanced reproductive systems in the animal kingdom. Not only
do they have internal fertilisation, they have internal development as well.
Internal development has the advantage that the female mammal does not
have to remain in one place, as birds do when incubating their eggs, but can lead
a reasonably normal life during pregnancy. This also assists in the survival of a
species.
Body Systems and Functions
73
Vas deferens
andspermaticcord
Dog
Tail
Bladder
Urethra
Penis
Epididymus
Testicle
Prepuce
Cat
Urethra
Tail
Bladder
Penis
Testicle
Vas deferens
and spermatic cord
Fig. 3.40 Male dog and cat reproductive anatomy.
Ovary
Fallopian
Tail
tube
Ovary
Horn of
uterus
Cervix
Rectum and anus
Fallopian tube
Bladder -
Vagina
Uterus
Cervix
Vulva
horn
Bladder
Urethralopening
Urethra
Vagina
Vulva
Fig. 3.41  Female dog and cat reproductive anatomy.
74
Chapter 3
Table 3.3 Species data
Species
Puberty
Oestrus
Gestation
Dog
7-12 months
Twice yearly
63-67 days
Cat
6-10 months
Every 21 days
63-65 days
Rabbit
3 months
Induced ovulation
30-33 days
Guinea pig
4-5 weeks
15-16-day cycle
60-72 days
Mouse
3-4 weeks
Every 4-5 days
19-21 days
Hamster 
6-10 weeks
Every 4 days
15-22 days
Rat
6weeks
Every 4-5 days
20-22 days
The female reproductive system has the following major functions:
·
Production of the ova or egg.
·Receiving the male gametes or sperm.
· Providing a suitable environment for the fertilisation of the egg by the sperm.
·]
 Providing a safe place for the developing individuals/embryo.
 Providing food and nutrients to the developing individuals/embryo.
Production of ova (eggs)
The function of the ovary is to produce functional' eggs or ova and to act as an
endocrine organ, producing hormones to maintain reproductive functions in the
female.
Cells in the ovary group together to form follicles and follicular fluid (Fig. 3.42).
Some of the follicles produce eggs. Their formation is similar to that of sperms
in that meiosis occurs and each ovum will have only half the required number of
chromosomes.
When the outer surface of the follicle ruptures, follicular fuid and the mature
ova are expelled. This is ovulation and in some species several ova are released
at the same time. Eggs are passed into the oviducts or Fallopian tubes which act
as passageways to the uterus where, once fertilised by a sperm, the egg will
implant and pregnancy (development of the embryo) takes place until the end
of the gestation period and parturition (birth).
Production of sperm
The anatomy of the testes is shown in Fig. 3.43. In the testes, the walls of the sem-
iniferous tubules consist of two types of cell:
(1）
Those which produce sperm (spermatogenic cells) (Fig. 3.43).
{2)
 Those which produce fluid in which sperm may be supported and supplied
with nutrients (Sertoli cells).
The testicles also produce the hormone testosterone.
Body Systems and Functions
75
Older
Young
follicles
follicles
/
Corpus
luteum
Graafian
follicle
?
Discharged
egg or ovum
④
Fig. 3.42 Ovary and follicle. The stages of follicle development.
The spermatogenic cells divide and from these spermatids are formed. These
in turn become sperms by undergoing a series of changes including the forma-
tion of a tail section for movement. At this stage they detach from the sperm-
producing wall in the tubule and move into the epididymal duct for storage and
to allow the sperm to mature. This leads to a sperm duct or vas deferens, which
directs the sperm into the urethra.
The urethra leads to the penis, which is made up of erectile tissue, supported
and encased in a heavy fibrous capsule. The penis contains the end section of the
urethra which carries both urine and secretions containing sperm. It is the organ
via which sperm is placed into the female reproductive tract.
The breeding cycle
A female is said to be 'on heat' or ‘in season', when she becomes attractive
to the male, due to the secretion of pheromones (scent attractive to the male).
Different species of animal will be in season at different times so note must be
taken of:
The season - cats have a breeding season from January to September, rabbits
breed from January to November
Age
·Species variation
76
Chapter 3
Epididymus
section
Testicle
Seminiferous
tubules
Vas
deferens
Sperm cell
Fig. 3.43Testicle and sperm cell.
Oestrus
This is the period of sexual receptivity and, depending on species, may last from
one to several days. During the rest of the oestrus cycle, the female does not
accept the male's advances or allow mating. The cycle is made up of four or five
stages, depending on the species and whether the animal is polyoestrus (cycles
repeatedly like the cat, rat or hamster) or is monoestrus (cycles only once during
the breeding season, like the dog).
The stages of oestrus
Anoestrus - the end of the breeding season, with no activity on the part of
the reproductive organs.
 Pro-oestrus - just before oestrus, follicle-stimulating hormone secretion
causes the follicles to develop in the ovary. FSH stimulates the ovary to
release increased amounts of oestrogen, causing changes to the reproductive
tract and preparing for pregnancy.
Body Systems and Functions
77
Oestrus - will accept a male. Release of the ova (ovulation) occurs. FSH levels
decrease and luteinizing hormone increases, causing the ripened Graafian fol-
licles to rupture, releasing the ova.
· Metoestrus - the period in which hormone activity fades and tissues are less
active. If the ovum has been fertilised, the corpus luteum forms and produces
progesterone, which is responsible for maintaining pregnancy. Oestrogen
 secretions decrease. If pregnancy does not occur, the corpus luteum decreases
in size, reducing the production of progesterone. This is followed by anoestrus
and the cycle starts once more.
Signs of heat
·Calling, can be very vocal, especially in cats
·More affectionate
·Restless
+
 Seeking the male animal
· Rolling and appearing submissive
Chapter 4
Basic Genetics
Introduction
Mendel's first law
Mendelian inheritance is the basis of all genetic practice, but it has limitations,
in explaining the small differences that occur in a range of offspring of similar
and related matings. Mendel was an Austrian abbot who studied and researched
this variation in offspring. He used as his experimental model pea plants, which
set out the basis of modern genetics.
The cells of each individual, what ever the species, are unique to that individ-
ual. All the cells of that body will contain the same set of instructions, since all
were produced from the same fertilised egg. These instructions assist cells to
develop as the united body and will work together for the life and health of that
body.
Chromosomes and genes
The nucleus of all cells contains the threads of DNA. DNA acts as a chemical
building blueprint which is stored in each nucleus in coded form. As a result of
this blueprint, the DNA can produce exact copies of itself and instructions can
be passed on to new cells that form in the body.
DNA is stored in the nucleus of a cell in structures called chromosomes. The
number of chromosomes in each species of animal will be different and specific
to that species. Chromosomes are always found in pairs.
Genes are a unit of heredity most simply defined as a specific segment of
DNA. Many characteristics are determined by a single gene. Genes control all
aspects of the body, whether it is the coat, hair or eye colour, rate of bone growth
or the ability of the blood to clot. Unfortunately, genes are responsible for many
diseases and disorders as well, which are called inherited factors.
Each gene has its own allocated place on a particular chromosome, called
 sn p r sn   a o  s i  a
allelomorphs.
78
Basic Genetics
6
Genetic terms
Dominant - masks or suppresses the presence of a recessive gene. In order for
a dominant gene (B) to be expressed, the genotype is either Bb or BB.
Recessive - only produces characteristics if interited from both parents. In order
for a recessive gene (b) to be expressed, the genotype must be bb
Homozygous - contains the same alleles of a gene, like BB or bb.
Heterozygous - if the alleles are diferent, like B or b.
silver.
 Genotype - is the actual genetic make-up.
Masked genes - known as epistasis or masking: this happens when some genes
have an overwhelming effect on others, swamping the normally occurring charac-
teristics of the overwhelmed gene.
Mimic genes - occur when distinctly different genes produce similar bodily effects;
for example, the rex gene in cats. These two breeds look similar but genetically
are quite different.
 Rogue genes - these produce bad or life-threatening effects on the body.
including:
(a) extra toes
(b)
lack of any hair/coat
(c) undescended testicles
(d)  eyesight defects, like the Siamese gene 
(e) deafness, as in white gene animals.
Cell division
There are two methods of cell division, depending on the cells involved.
Mitosis
Refers to normal body cell division (skin, muscle, etc.). Before a cell divides,
copies of each chromosome form alongside the originals and then separate from
the originals. As a cell divides, a full set of chromosomes collect at each end to
form part of the two new cell nuclei. This method ensures that full chemical
instructions are passed on to the new cells.
Meiosis
Refers to the division of cells involved in reproduction of a new individual
only. Its purpose is to form sex cells (gametes). The result of meiosis is that
each sperm and each egg contains one member of each pair of chromo-
somes. Containing exactly one half of the usual diploid number of chromo-
somes, gametes are said to be haploid. The union of a sperm with an egg at
08
Chapter 4
fertilisation produces a fertilised egg with the usual diploid number of
chromosomes.
Comparison of mitosis and meiosis
Mitosis
Division of a cell to form new body cells
The division carries identical gene information.
Both cells are referred to as diploid (meaning identical).
Meiosis
Division of a cell to form sex cells (gametes).
 The division gives each new cell half the number of genes present.
Both cells are referred to as haploid (not identical).
Takes place only in the testes and ovaries.
Breeding
· Pedigree - mother and father of the same breed with written pedigree from
the owner tracing ancestors (pedigree chart).
Crossbred - mother and father were different breeds. They may both be pure-
bred, making the offspring a first cross'. This means the size and behaviour
of the offspring are reasonably predictable still.
·Mongrel - if the same female is mated with an already crossbred male the
offspring would be mongrels. This means the size and behaviour of the off-
spring are unpredictable.
· Inbreeding - mating for specific characteristics. It involves mating individuals
more closely related than animals chosen from other bloodlines. For example,
father/daughter, brother/sister.
· Line breeding - is a form of inbreeding but animals are not so closely related.
It is mating within certain family lines and maintains a relationship with a
particular ancestor for particular characteristics.
· Outbreeding - breeding individuals less closely related chosen at random
from available animals.
Chapter 5
Body as a Whole
Body cavities
Thoracic cavity
Found within the chest. Its boundaries are as follows:
·Cranial or anterior - the thoracic inlet through which the trachea and oesopha-
gus pass
· Dorsal - the thoracic vertebrae and joining muscles
·Ventral - the sternum
Lateral - the ribs and intercostal muscles
· Caudal or posterior - the diaphragm
Abdominal cavity
Found within the belly of the animal. Its cranial boundary is the diaphragm and
its caudal limit is the pelvic opening. Dorsally are the lumbar vertebrae and the
diaphragm. Lateral and ventral boundaries are the abdominal muscles.
Pelvic cavity
Often described as a separate cavity but there is no physical barrier between it
and the abdominal cavity. Its cranial opening is the pelvic inlet and the caudal
opening is the pelvic outlet. Dorsally are the bones of the pelvis (pubis and
ischium) and the lateral boundaries are muscles or ligaments.
Pericardium
Contains the heart and consists of a double layer of membrane.
Cavity linings
These cavities are lined with a serous membrane. This is a smooth, shiny mem-
brane which produces a watery fluid to lubricate between two tissue surfaces and
prevent friction. In the thoracic cavity, the lining is the pleura. In the abdominal
and pelvic cavities, the lining is the peritoneum.
81
82
Chapter5
Homeostasis
Homeostasis is the state of equilibrium in the body with respect to various func-
tions and the chemical composition of fuids and tissues. The word “hom-
eostasis' means ^staying the same'. Some of the factors which must be kept the
same are:
· Chemical constituents like glucose and electrolytes (salts)
· Osmotic pressure and the movement of fuid (water) and substances carried
by this water
· Levels of the waste gas carbon dioxide
· Body temperature
Other products must be eliminated from the body because of their harmful effect.
The most important of these are the nitrogenous waste products arising from
protein metabolism and toxic substances released by micro-organisms that live
in the body.
Internal environment
This refers to the immediate surroundings of the cells. The cells are surrounded
by tiny channels and spaces filled with fluid and the fuid can be identified by the
following names:
·Intercellular (between)
·Extracellular interstitial
·Tissue fuid
The cells are provided with a medium in which they live and this represents
the organism's internal environment, which must be kept constant if the cells are
to continue their vital functions. This fluid will return to the bloodstream even-
tually, either by osmotic pressure or via the lymph.
Other examples of homeostasic mechanisms in the body include the
following:
·The regulation of sugar levels in the bloodstream. It may be broken down and
used as energy at the cellular level, stored in the liver as glycogen, converted
 an dn don m an a  n n s n  
levels.
· The above cannot be achieved without the various hormone chemical mes-
sengers provided by the organs of the endocrine system.
· The nervous system receives information from the body about all products
and whether they are at the correct levels. If not, it sends a message to the
organs concerned to rectify the situation.
BodyasaWhole
E8
In order to control homeostasis, the body has feedback mechanisms. The sense
organs feed back information to the brain and from here messages are sent to
the relevant system or tissue for a response. The results of this response are then
fed back to the brain, which decides on any subsequent action.
There is an important difference between homeostatic feedback and a volun-
tary or conscious control action by the body. In homeostasis, feedback is largely
Homeostasis is most highly developed in mammals and birds, probably as a
result of their evolution. They are able to maintain a constant body temperature
despite environmental temperature change. This is greatly assisted by feathers
and fur for insulation.
Section 2
Animal Health and Husbandry
G8
Chapter 6
Animal Welfare
Welfare status
Welfare has many different aspects. There is no simple scale of expression and
the problems are many and diverse in their nature. One method of expressing
this diversity is known as ^The Five Freedoms', which relate particularly to UK
farm animal welfare and suggest that the following are essential for quality of
life:
· Freedom from hunger and thirst
· Freedom to express normal behaviour
·Freedom from discomfort
· Freedom from pain, injury and disease
· Freedom from fear or distress
Although initially set out to provide a useful framework for farm animal
welfare and guidance, the above is also a suggested framework for companion
 animals.
Welfare terms
Animal welfare - refers to an animal's:
quality of life
conditions
teatment
It is a concept that involves values as well as information. These values consider the
ways in which humans continue to use animals and whether or not this 'use' consti-
tutes animal abuse.
Animal rights-refers to animal use in industries,recreation and other practices as
cruel, unethical and outdated, and calls for their abolition.
Conservation - refers to the consideration of the needs of one species, above another,
habitats, affinity with certain species and the direct effect human activity can have on
their welfare and survival.
87
88
Chapter 6
Legislation
This covers both laws and regulations specific to the welfare of an animal or
animal collection. These are combined with the professional working standards
set by carers of animals.
Laws are guidelines and are changing all the time. It is therefore the respon-
sibility of all animal carers to:
·Maintain a practical working knowledge of the law relating to animals
·Always work within that law
Legislation in the UK refers to both Acts of Parliament and Regulations.
· Laws (statutes) - are created by Parliament. Presented as draft legislation in
the form of a bill, they are debated initially in the House of Commons and
the House of Lords. They are each then considered by a specifically formed
parliamentary committee, before finally receiving the Queen's signature to
become law and being placed on the Statute Book as an Act of Parliament.
·Regulations (orders) - these detail the technical implications of laws. The rel-
evant government minister adds regulations to the legislation. This informa-
tion is a supplement to existing law and must have the approval of Parliament.
provisions of a code is not in itself an offence, but could be used in evidence if
prosecuted.
In addition to the above, we must abide by standards set by the European
Union (EU) which have been incorporated into, and take precedence over, UK
law.
Animal welfare legislation aims to:
· Balance concern for ethics and morality
· Balance financial and practical working considerations
· Ensure public health and safety
· State housing and transport requirements
·Maintain animal health
·Control licensing
Areas of the law relating to animal concerns in the UK are:
(1) Protection of the public laws
(2) Welfare laws to cover:
keeping of animals for commercial reasons
cruelty laws
Animal Welfare
68
(3)  Animal collection laws
(4) Welfare of wild animals laws
Protection of the public laws
·Animal Health Act 1981
·Pet Travel Scheme
·Dangerous Dogs Acts 1991, 1997
· Guard Dogs Act 1975
·Animals Act 1971
· Dogs (Fouling of Land) Act 1996
Animal Heaith Act 1981 and rabies legislation
This Act gives powers for dealing with a rabies suspect and any contacts, under
the Rabies (Control) Order 1974. In addition, the Animal Health Act 1981 allows
government officers to slaughter affected or suspected animals and those that
have been exposed to the infection. The orders and regulations covered by the
Rabies (Control) Order 1974 include:
· Reporting of rabies to the Department for Environment, Food and Rural
Affairs (DEFRA), local authority inspector or police
· Declaration of the infected place where a suspected animal is identified
+
Slaughter of a suspected animal by a veterinary inspector
· Declaration of an ‘infected area' around the place where the suspect animal
was located, in order to control an outbreak of suspected rabies. This can also
control movement, detention or destruction of animals not properly con-
shows, or any activity that might cause wildlife to move excessively through
their environment.
The Rabies (Importation of Dogs, Cats and Other Mammals) Order 1974 (as
amended) also provides the Secretary of State with the power to extend the quar-
antine period of any animal detained at a quarantine premises if:
(1)  An outbreak of rabies occurs at a quarantine premises
(2)   An animal in quarantine is suspected of being infected by rabies
The Rabies (Control) Order 1974 also applies to suspected cases in quar
antine premises. Movement of animals into and out of the premises would
stop, including those animals covered by the requirements of the Pet Travel
Scheme.
06
Chapter 6
Pet Travel Scheme
The Pet Travel Scheme, known as PETS, is the system that allows pet animals
from certain countries to enter the UK without going into quarantine, as long as
they comply with the rules under the scheme. It also allows pet owners from the
UK to take and return with their pets having visited EU countries and some non-
EU (listed) qualifying countries.
Animals from unlisted countries must spend 6 months in quarantine on arrival
in the UK.
Animals returning to the UK from listed or EU countries under the PETS
scheme must have followed a list of procedures to comply with the scheme. The
procedures must be undertaken in the following order:
(1) The pet animal must be microchipped in order for it to be identified
(2)  It must be vaccinated against rabies
(3)  It must have a blood test to ensure that the vaccine has given it a satisfac-
tory level of protection against rabies
(4) The owner must organise the documentation:
- for an EU country an EU pet passport is required
-for a non-EU country it is necessary to obtain an official third-country
veterinary certificate (Gibraltar and Switzerland also issue passports)
(5) Before re-entry to the UK, the pet animal must be treated against ticks and
tapeworms 24 48 hours before it is checked in with an approved transport
company for its journey into the UK
(6）
 Arrangements must be made for the pet animal to travel with an approved
transport company on an authorised route
For details of countries taking part in this scheme and the latest information,
always check the DEFRA website.
There is a 6-month rule for entry or re-entry to the UK, which states that a
dog or cat may not enter the UK under PETS until six calendar months have
passed from the date that a blood sample was taken by a veterinary surgeon with
satisfactory test results. Once the veterinary surgeon has issued the PETS docu-
mentation and that 6-month period has passed, the PETS documentation is valid
for the named animal to enter the UK.
The scheme applies to:
· Pet dogs (to include assistance dogs) and cats
·Ferrets
· Pet rabbits and other rodents
Enforcing the new system:
· Pre-entry checks carried out by train operators, ferry companies and airlines
· Random spot checks on animals arriving in the UK by DEFRA and official
carriers
Animal  Welfare 91
Dangerous Dogs Acts 1991, 1997
After an increase in the number of attacks on people by dogs in the 1980s and
1990s, some fatal, the government introduced laws making it more difficult to
own and import into the UK the following breeds of dog:
·American pit bull terrier
· Japanese tosa
·Dogo Argentino
·Fila Braziliero
The Act states that the rules for ownership of a dangerous named breed of dog
are as follows:
· Notify the police of ownership
· Obtain a certificate of exemption from the police, which is issued when the
dog has been neutered and identified with a microchip or other permanent
method
·The dog must be covered by third-party liability insurance
· In public places, the dog must always be muzzled and on a lead
● The dog must be in the company of a person over 16 years of age
· It is an offence to sell, exchange or abandon the dog
· It is an offence to breed from these dogs
Any dog dangerously out of control and a risk to the general public comes under
the remit of this Act. The person in charge of a dog that has inflicted injury could
be prosecuted and face an unlimited fine or prison sentence.
Guard Dogs Act 1974
This Act ensures the safe use and control of dogs that guard property or sites, in
a manner that does not put the general public at risk. A notice must be on display
to inform the public that a dog is in use and the dog must only be off the lead if
accompanied by a handler.
Animais Act 1971
This Act covers liability for damage that has been caused by animals, including
damage, death and injury caused to people, property and livestock. The owner of
a dangerous animal must take precautions to ensure it has no opportunity to
inflict damage as stated by this law. If a dog kills or harms farm animals, farmers
are entitled to protect the stock in their care. If, for example, a dog is found
injuring sheep, the farmer may kill the dog but must report the incident to the
police.
92
Chapter 6
Dogs (Fouling of Land) Act 1996
Local authorities and councils use this Act to prevent dogs fouling where there
is public access to property or pavements, but allowing exemption of guide dogs
for the blind.
Welfare laws
Those keeping animals for commercial reasons:
·Animal Boarding Establishment Act 1963
·Breeding of Dogs Acts 1973, 1991, Breeding and Sale of Dogs (Welfare) Act
1999
· Pet Animals Acts 1951, 1983
Cruelty laws:
· Protection of Animals Acts 1911, 1988
· Protection of Animals (Anaesthetics) Acts 1954, 1982
·Veterinary Surgeons Act 1966
Animal Boarding Establishment Act 1963
The main provision of this Act is that boarding kennels or catteries must be
licensed by their local authority in order to trade. The following conditions apply:
·  Records must be kept of animal arrivals and departures, and details of owners
· Suitable accommodation must be provided
· Adequate and appropriate supplies of food and water must be available
· Exercise facilities must be provided
· Animals must be protected from disease and risk of fire
In order to ensure that the conditions of the licence are met, the local authority
Licences are renewed annually.
Breeding of Dogs Acts 1973, 1991, Breeding and Sale of
Dogs(Welfare) Act 1999
The breeding and selling of dogs requires a local authority licence under the 1973
Act, amended by the 1999 Act. In order to gain a licence, animals must be suit-
ably accommodated, fed, exercised and protected from disease and fire. Local
authorities have extensive powers to check on the standards of health, welfare
and accommodation of these animals. The term ^breeding establishment' refers
to any premises where more than two bitches are kept for the purpose of breed-
Animal Welfare
6
ing animals for selling. The 1999 Act ensures that puppy farms' are regulated by
use of recorded information on sales and identification.
In addition, the Breeding of Dogs Act 1991 extended the powers of local
authorities to enter any premises and inspect both licensed and unlicensed
businesses.
Pet Animais Acts 1951, 1983
This Act was introduced at the end of World War II in response to the worrying
   ss   s s  s n s  
tions or controls for conditions or care. The Act prohibits the keeping of a pet
shop without a licence. A licence is granted after inspection of premises by an
approved veterinary surgeon authorised by the local authority. The Act was
amended in 1983, making it illegal to sell pets in public places. A licence is granted
if the following conditions are met:
· Proper care
· Suitable accommodation
·Housed in the correct conditions with reference to heating, lighting, etc.
· Provided with appropriate food
· Observed and checked at suitable intervals during the day
· Sold only after weaning and a suitable age has been reached
· Prevention of spread of disease
· Emergency and fire precautions for the premises are in place and functional
ProtectionofAnimaisActs1911-2000
This series of Acts forms the main statutory control on cruelty to a domestic or
captive animal. These Acts are used when bringing prosecutions related to animal
welfare cases. The Act makes it an offence to cause unnecessary suffering to any
domestic or captive animal, either deliberately or by omission (neglect). The Act
lists offences such as:
· Inflicting physical cruelty by beating, kicking, etc.
· Inflicting mental cruelty by teasing or terrifying
· Causing unnecessary suffering during transportation by failing to provide
food or water at appropriate intervals
· Performing surgery or operations without an anaesthetic
·Poisoning without reason
Protection of Animais (Anaesthetics) Acts 1954, 1982
It is illegal for any operation that will cause pain to be conducted on an animal,
unless under anaesthetic (local or general). There are, however, several excep-
tions to this Act:
94
Chapter 6
· Does not apply to birds, fish or reptiles
· In emergency first-aid situations
· Under permitted Home Office-licensed procedures
Ps e no uns Aeuaa e q nno po suodo sd o -
veterinary nurse
Veterinary Surgeons Act 1966
This Act prohibits anyone other than a veterinary surgeon or listed veterinary
  s a       g
out treatment or operations on animals. The exceptions to this are:
· Minor treatments given by owner, household member or employee of the
owner
· Castration or tail docking of lambs, provided they are under a stated age
·Emergency first-aid to maintain life
Animal collection laws
·Welfare of Animals during Transport 1973, 1994 (Amendment) Order 1995
·Abandonment of Animals Act 1960
·Dangerous Wild Animals Act 1976
·Performing Animals (Regulation) Act 1925
·
Zoo Licensing Act 1981
This order is designed to protect all animals during transport by road, rail, sea
and air. Since 1997, a standard set of regulations on journey times, hauliers*
journey plans and routes covering EU countries have amended the original
order. The regulations cover:
· Loading and unloading of animals
· Housing and containers for transit
· Access to food and water
· Specified number of animals contained together for transit
Abandonment of Animais Act 1960
This Act applies to the abandonment of an animal in circumstances likely to cause
it unnecessary suffering. This would apply to an owner or person in control of a
companion animal who has abandoned it either completely or for only a tem-
porary period of time.
Animal Welfare95
Dangerous Wid Animais Act 1976, modified 1984 (currently under review)
This Act became necessary when, in the 1960s and 1970s, the public started to
keep animals more frequently associated with zoos and safari parks - animals
Pm snoup qo A pue ayou o sad snoa suo spredol se qons
animals. Animals were often kept in poor conditions and insecure housing.
Public demand led to legislation and strict control and inspection by
authorised veterinary surgeons who may inspect premises in which these
animals are kept. If the inspection is approved, a licence is issued by the local
authority.
The Secretary of State has the power to change the list of animals at any time,
and any animal on the list is classified as a ^dangerous wild animal'. The Act states
that anyone keeping these listed animals must:
· Pay a fee to the local authority for the issue of the licence
·Take out liability insurance
·Provide suitable accommodation
·Be over 18 years of age
Performing Animais (Regulation) Act 1925
A Select Committee of the House of Lords introduced this Act following public
concern over the treatment of animals in circuses. As a result, the local author-
ity must be informed of anyone who trains animals for exhibition to the public
or exhibits a performing animal to the public, even if it is free of charge, and any
such person must be registered to that effect.
The exceptions to this rule are when animals are trained for sporting purposes,
military or police work and display.
The Zoo Licensing Act (Amendment) (England & Wales) Regulation 2002
Formerly Zoo Licensing Act 1981
The term 'zoo' refers to the exhibiting of wild animals to the public, for educa-
tional purposes. It applies to animal collections that are open to the public for 7
days or more in any year.
This Act was passed after the dramatic increase of zoos and wildlife/safari
parks and to include butterfly houses and aquaria. It is intended to protect the
welfare and public safety are in place.
The Act requires licensing by local authorities and inspection by government-
listed inspectors.
96
 Chapter 6
The welfare of wild animals laws
· The Wildlife and Countryside Acts 1981, 1985
· Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora and
Fauna (CITES) 1973
The Wildlife and Countryside Acts 1981
These Acts replace several existing laws andregulations and cover the
protection and conservation of wild animals and their habitats. Land, sea and air-
borne species of wild animals are protected. The minister can add to or remove
from this list, species which may not legally be injured, killed or taken from the
wild.
The Act protects habitats from humans and species in captivity which, if
released into the wild, would seriously affect many other species.
The Act brings together and amends existing national legislation and EU direc-
tives covering protection of wildlife in the countryside, national parks and other
designated areas.
Fauna (CiTES) 1973
This international agreement helps to protect the world's endangered species by
gory are:
· Those that are threatened with extinction
· Those likely to become so threatened
Statutory organisations
The Society was founded in 1824 by the Reverend Arthur Broome. Its aim is to
promote kindness and prevent cruelty to animals. The Act of 1932 empowers the
RSPCA to act in certain situations concerning the welfare of animals.
The RSPCA:
· Operates throughout England and Wales, maintaining animal homes and
clinics
·Prosecutes in cases of cruelty
·Lobbies on animal welfare issues throughout Europe
· Conducts discreet surveillance of activities, such as livestock transportation
abroad
Animal  Welfare 97
·Funds research into animal welfare
· Maintains links with affliated organisations in the European community
Founded in 1917 by Maria Dickin, the initial aim of the PDSA was to help sick
ment to sick and injured animals when owners are unable to afford treatment.
It is not involved with neutering or vaccinations. It has treatment centres and
hospitals all over the country, as well as the Pet Aid scheme involving general
practices in some counties.
    s    
The college was established to teach, train and examine people who wished to
become registered as veterinary surgeons. In order to remain on the RCVS
register, members pay an annual fee. The Act established a council responsible
for regulating its membership and ensuring that unqualified people did not use
the title of veterinary surgeon, treat or operate on animals.
Veterinary organisations:
   s     
discussion of important issues relating to veterinary surgeons, linking back to
the RCvS and government departments.
·British Veterinary Association (BVA) is the representative body for the
British veterinary profession, providing services and information to members.
Members also work for the various divisions of the association, including
animal charities (Animal Welfare Foundation), research, education and gov-
ernment service.
Schedule 3 to the Veterinary Surgeons Act has a number of amendments to cover
the permitted work of veterinary nurses. The RCVS maintains the statutory list
of veterinary nurses and is the awarding body of the veterinary nursing National
Vocational Qualifications (NVQs). Qualified veterinary nurses on the list are
entitled by law to undertake a range of veterinary treatments and procedures on
animals under veterinary direction. The British Veterinary Nursing Association
(BVNA) is the national representative body for UK veterinary nurses, liaising
closely with the RCVS.
Chapter 7
Basic Health Care
Basic health care refers to the daily, weekly, monthly and lifelong observations
by the owner, carer or handler. Health care is the regular and routine examina-
tion of an animal to identify any abnormalities and keep it in the best of health.
This could refer to checking a dog's ears weekly for signs of wax or the length of
tooth check on a pet rabbit.
Owners and carers know what is normal for each animal in their care.
Signs of health include:
· Lack of discharge from eyes and ears
 Eyes clear and bright
Good coat/feather condition
+ Correct weight
·Alert and responds to stimuli
· Eats and drinks normal quantities
· Urinates and defecates without difficulty
·Enjoys exercise
Signs of ill health include:
Vomiting and'or diarrhoea
·Breathing difficulties
 Discharges from eyes, ears, nose, prepuce or vulva
+
 Scratching and hair/feather loss
·Unwilling to exercise
· Not responding to stimuli
·Pain on movement
It is important that, from an early age, the animal is used to handling. This
means that when there is a problem and the animal is taken to the veterinary
surgeon for examination, it is not further distressed. Examining feet and ears on,
for example, a puppy or kitten from an early age will mean they are much more
tolerant and no one gets bitten or scratched.
86
Basic Health Care
66
Health routines
Daily routines
·Eating and drinking
· Appearance of faeces
· Urine production and frequency
· Exercise tolerance
· Temperament
Weekly routines
· Coat and skin condition
 Checks on prepuce and vulva for discharges
 Ear canals for smell and wax
Gums and teeth (Fig. 7.1)
· Colour of mucous membranes
· Check for “lumps and bumps'
Monthly routines
·Nails
· Beaks, e.g. in birds, turtles and tortoise
·Teeth length, e.g. in rabbits
·Weight
Six-monthly routines
Worming control
 Seasonal needs, e.g. changes to housing or location
 Vaccination, e.g. kennel cough
Yearly routines
· Booster vaccinations
·Insurance
Veterinary health status check
If an animal has a medical condition, is on treatment or is elderly the veterinary
practice will guide you on frequency of veterinary medical checks. Record any
changes to the normal behaviour or routine and report.
Recognising pain
·Crying, whimpering
·Unusual body position, e.g. curled up
100
Chapter7
Fig. 7.1  Checking the mouth, gums and teeth.
Fig. 7.2 Check coat condition.
Fig. 7.3 Groom out the dead hair.
 Pupils of the eye are dilated
+
 Panting and heart rate are rapid
 Raised body temperature
· Not eating or drinking
·Unwilling to move or exercise
Hygiene
Daily hygiene
·Wash food and water bowls or containers.
·Check coat/feather condition (Fig. 7.2).
 Remove normal clean' discharges from eyes, nose, prepuce and vulva.
Check anal region for faecal material on coat. Remove material and clean
the coat.
·Remove faeces from housing or garden.
Basic Health Care
101
Remove urine-soiled bedding.
·Disinfect housing.
Weekly hygiene
·Wash bedding.
·Wash nylon harness or collars.
·Groom (Fig. 7.3).
·]
 Disinfect grooming equipment.
Exercise
Each animal has specific exercise needs. In the case of dogs, many potential
owners will partly base their decision to buy a particular breed on its energy
levels and exercise requirements.
A breed such as a border collie has a high requirement whereas a breed like
the pug has a much lower one. Breed books clearly state requirements for exer-
cise, temperament and suitability for potential owners. Life stages and lifespan
will suggest the exercise needs.
Plenty of exercise is necessary for breeds used in the areas of:
Working
·Racing
Performance
Agility
Field trials
Less exercise is required for:
Elderly animals
 Short-nosed breeds (brachycephalic)
· Some small breeds
· Those with joint disease
· Those with breathing and heart conditions
Cats tend to 'self exercise' but can be trained to walk on a lead. Small pets will
exercise if they have enhanced living areas with obstacles for climbing, toys and
run areas, plus handling time.
Tender loving care
An important aspect of health care is time spent in the company of the animal.
Owners, carers and handlers can use this time to run health status checks. Dogs
102
Chapter 7
 and cats should be companion animals. Dogs particularly are pack animals and
respond badly to isolation.
Signs of isolation response include:
·Temperament change
·Destruction of housing
· Being aggressive or withdrawn
·Fear
The above list could perfectly describe the normal behaviour of an individual.
The only way to know is to recognise what is normal for each individual, what-
ever the species.
Vaccination
This is a means of protecting an animal against a potentially lethal disease.
Vaccines temporarily stimulate the immune system of the body. The period of
protection will vary depending on the species involved, the vaccine type and the
individual receiving the vaccine. It ranges in most cases from six months to one
year, at which point the animal must receive a booster vaccination to protect it
further.
Chapter 8
Disease Transmission and Control
 Disease is spread from one animal to another by various methods. Microbes leave
the body in or on:
Oral, nasal and eye discharges, e.g. rabies via the saliva, feline respiratory
diseases and distemper via eye and nose discharge
·Urine, e.g. causing leptospirosis and hepatitis
· Vomit, e.g. causing parvo in dogs
· Blood, e.g. transmitted by fleas to another animal
· Skin surface, e.g. surface bacteria and fungi like ringworm
· Milk from mother to offspring passing worms and some viruses
The microbes are passed on from one animal to another, sometimes by a carrier
animal. These animals do not show clinical signs of disease but are:
 Individuals that have had the disease and recovered, called convalescent
carriers
Individuals that never show clinical signs of the disease and are called healthy
carriers
Both types will shed the disease-carrying microbe into the environment,
putting other animals at risk. The microbe is passed from one animal to another
by:
· Direct contact - parts of the bodies of two animals come into contact, e.g. nose
to nose or nose to anus
· Indirect contact - the contact is on an inanimate object, e.g. bedding, water
bowl or lamp post
· Aerosol transmission - through the air, in the form of droplets from sneezing,
coughing or using air currents
 Contaminated food or water - contaminated by urine and faeces of passing
rodents or others (due to incorrect storage of dried foods)
 Carrier animals - shedding microbes in discharges, urine or faeces yet
unaffected themselves, e.g. canine hepatitis
103
104
Chapter 8
Incubation of the disease
Incubation refers to the time between the animal receiving the microbe and
showing clinical signs of disease. It will depend on:
Quantity of microbes received - if received via the respiratory and/or diges-
tive tracts, secretions here and movement of particles will prevent microbes
establishing, unless the animal is susceptible.
· Immune status of the animal - it may fail to mount an adequate immune
response, allowing the microbes to move on to other target tissues and estab-
lish themselves.
· General health - if not good, then the animal is susceptible.
· Age - the immune response of the body is reduced with age.
Entry into a new host
Eating
·Infected food/water
· Contact with contaminated food/water bowls
·Eating faeces (coprophagia)
· Eating the disease carrier, e.g. flea, while grooming itself
inhalation
·Breathing in airborne microbes, or by sniffing contaminated surface
Through the skin
·Wound
·Scratch
·Insect bite
·Subsurface mite like sarcoptes
Via damaged mucous membranes
·Mouth
·Nose
·Eye
Infection
If the micro-organism has entered the host animal and overcome its resistance,
infection may ensue. Some infections are confined to a restricted area, e.g.
Disease Transmission and Control
105
abscesses; others are called systemic because they spread through the whole body
via the bloodstream.
Infection terms
 Subclinical infection - has no clinical signs
Bacteraemia - bacteria are present in the bloodstream
Pyaemia - bacteria and white blood cells forming pus are in the blood
Septicaemia - bacteria multiply in the bloodstream
Resistance to infection
Individual resistance will depend on:
·Age
●Nutritional state (too thin or overweight)
Skin being intact
· Vaccination status
· Immune response and white cell activity
Methods of disease control
· Avoid direct contact with infected animals (use of isolation).
·High levels of hygiene/disinfection in the animal's environment.
·  Reduce the number of animals kept within the same air space or improve the
efficiency of air movement to reduce aerosol transmission.
 Provide early and effective treatment of infected animals to prevent others
becoming infected.
+
 Control parasites to prevent passing of disease from one animal to another.
·Maintain vaccination status.
Chapter 9
Microbiology
Micro-organisms (microbes)
Microbiology is the study and identification of micro-organisms.
·Bacteria
Viruses
·Fungi
·Protozoa
Micro-organisms are measured in micrometres or microns: 1 micron = 1 thou-
sandth of a millimetre. Microbes range from large protozoa to the virus, which
is the smallest. Viruses can only be seen using an electron microscope and are
measured in nanometres: 1 nanometre = 1 millionth of a millimetre.
Microbes are described according to their nutritional requirements.
Autotrophs - synthesise (create) their own food
· Heterotrophs - obtain nutrients from their environment
Microbes live throughout the environment of humans and animals and are
normally present on or within the body.
Microbial terms
 Infection - process by which microbes become established in the host
 Saprophytes - live and feed on dead organic material.
Symbiosis - the association between two different species, living together.
 Parasitic - refers to the association between two different living organisms in which
the parasite lives upon the host, taking food and shelter (host's own food or body
 fluids). Parasites fall into three groups:
(a)pathogens - will harm the host animal, causing disease
(b)  commensals - will not harm but nor will they benefit the host 
(c) mutualistics - are of benefit to the host, é.g. help break down food in the gut
in some species.
106
Microbiology
107
Cocci
Bacilli
Spirillum
Fig. 9.1 Shapes of bacteria.
Fimbriae
Slime_
layer
Nuclear
 material
Cell wall
Fiagellum
Fig. 9.2 Bacterium in detail.
Bacteria
Most range from 0.5 to 5 microns in length. They may be rod shaped (bacillus),
round or spherical (cocci) or spiral shaped (Fig. 9.1).
Structure (Fig. 9.2)
· Cell wall - for shape and protection.
Capsule or loose slime layer - for sticking to surfaces, protection from its
environment and preventing destruction by phagocytic white blood cells.
 Plasma membrane - controls the passage of substances in and out of the cell.
 Internal cell organelles (cytoplasm, ribosomes, etc.) - to support the life of the
cell.
Flagellum and pili - hair-like structures for moving the cells along.
108
Chapter 9
Reproduction of bacteria
This takes place providing the following are available:
 Supply of nutrients
 Correct temperature
· Correct pH and oxygen levels
Not all bacteria require oxygen.
 Anaerobic bacteria - only grow in the absence of free oxygen
Bacteria reproduce by growth and then division of the cell. Most reproduce by
an asexual method called binary fission. For many bacteria, division takes 15-20
minutes.
Binary fission
One cell divides into two cells (Fig. 9.3).
Conjugation or bacterial mating
Sexual reproduction refers to the passing of genetic material and information
from a bacterial donor to a recipient bacterium. It is passed through a short tube,
Division of nuclear material
Septum or divider forms
Cell wall divides. The two
cells carry identical information
Fig. 9.3 Binary fission.
Microbiology
109
Donor bacteria
Sexpilus or
fibrisae
Information
to be donated
Recipient
bacteria cell
Recipient cell now has the
'passed' information
Fig. 9.4Conjugation or bacterial mating.
the sex pilus (Fig. 9.4). This method passes part of the donor cell chromosome
and extra genes, e.g- genes carrying antibiotic resistance factor, to another
bacterium.
Some bacteria produce a dormant spore form (endospore). The production of
spores is similar to binary fission but the septum or divider is nearer one end of
the cell and grows to surround the genetic information. This creates a spore, the
Bacterial terms
Endotoxins -toxins produced within the bacteria, only released into the host animal
when the bacteria die. The toxins can cause signs of shock or fever and can be
lethal.
Exotoxins - toxins secreted by the living bacteria which can also be harmful to the
host animal's body.
110
Chapter 9
 Cell finally ruptures to
release spore which will remain
in this fom, protected, until its
environment improves
Fig. 9.5 Spore formation.
genetic information being contained within a protective coat or covering. This
 spore will form when conditions for life are not favourable, e.g. nutrients are not
available. Once the spore forms, the original cell breaks down or lyses, releasing
the spore into the environment to await improved conditions (Fig. 9.5). This is
not a form of reproduction but a means of survival.
Viruses
Viruses are the smallest of the microbes (Fig. 9.6). They are always parasitic and
reproduce by replicating themselves. This process happens after the viral DNA
or RNA (genetic information) has entered a host animal's body cell. This strand
of material takes over control of the host cell's metabolism and directs it to man-
ufacture replicas of the viral material. When enough replicas have been produced,
the virus will instruct the host cell to rupture, releasing the new viruses which go
 on to use other host cells for the purpose of replicating.
The virus is not a cell. In structure, it is a protein coat around a DNA or RNA
strand. Some viruses are also surrounded by a membrane known as an envelope
which may have structures like spikes on its surface for attaching to the host cell
before entry.
Microbiology
111
S
Shape variations with
DNA strand and protein coat
for protection
Fig. 9.6 Examples of virus shapes.
In many cases, the cycle of viral infection causes no apparent harm to the host.
Disease occurs when the host is harmed by the infection which occurs when
quantities of host cells have been destroyed.
Fungi
These are non-chlorophyll bearing plants, often called hyphae and divided into:
Moulds - multicellular
Yeasts - unicellular
They do not have the ability to create their own food and so must exist as para-
sites or saprophytes. Distribution is by spores (Fig. 9.7).
Reproduction is sexual (hyphae from different strains unite into a survival
spore form, awaiting favourable conditions) and there is also an asexual method
(distribution of spores). Examples of diseases caused by fungi are ringworm and
dermatophytes.
Protozoa
These are single-celled animals and range in size from microscopic to just visible
to the naked eye. They have a cell membrane and have organelles for movement
(flagella and cilia) (Fig. 9.8). Reproduction is asexual by binary fission.
112
Chapter 9
Table 9.1
Diseases produced by different microbes.
Microbe
Dog
Cat
Protozoa
Coccidiosis
Coccidiosis
 Toxoplasmosis
Toxoplasmosis
Fungi
Ringworm
Ringworm
Bacteria
Kennel cough
Leptospirosis
Vrus
Distemper
 Panleucopenia 
Infectious hepatitis
 Respiratory disease
Parvovirus
Infectious peritonitis
Rabies
Leukaemia
Immunodeficiency
Rabies
Spindle-shaped cells which make
up the spore, as seen in
Microsporumcanisringworm
Fig. 9.7 Fungal spore.
Fig. 9.8 Protozoa forms.
Nutrition is holozoic (capture and assimilation of organic material in their
environment). Protozoa are capable of pursuing prey by following a chemical
trail or they can be stimulated by movement, particularly in water.
Protozoa will form a cyst at some point in their life cycle. This is the form which
passes from host to host and allows temporary survival outside the host.
Diseases caused by protozoa include toxoplasmosis and coccidiosis.
Chapter 10
Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Diseases of dogs
The infectious canine diseases for which there is a vaccine include:
·Canine distemper
 Canine viral hepatitis
Canine leptospirosis
+
 Canine parvovirus
· Canine infectious tracheobronchitis (kennel cough syndrome)
·Rabies
Canine distemper
The virus causing distemper attacks the following body systems:
Central nervous system
 Respiratory system
·Gastrointestinal system
·Skin
The disease is caused by a paramyxovirus that is closely related to the measles
virus of humans. The virus is inactivated by light, heat and most disinfectants.
Distemper is commonly seen in puppies of 4-5 months when no longer covered
by maternal immunity. It has a seasonal occurrence in autumn and winter, due
in part to the ability of the virus to survive in cold weather.
Routes of infection into a new host animal are:
·Respiratory tract due to aerosol (airborne) exposure
·Mouth and eye mucous membranes
During the incubation period of 3-10 days, the virus replicates and travels via
the lymphatic system to the lymph nodes, spleen, thymus and bone marrow. When
in the lymph nodes, body temperature rises to between 39 and 40°C for 2-4 days.
About half of all puppies infected are capable of mounting an adequate
response and produce antibodies to clear the infection at this point. If the virus
113
114
Chapter 10
continues, it replicates in the epithelium, organs and central nervous system. This
allows secondary infection to occur.
Clinical signs include:
· Lack of appetite (anorexia)
·Nasal and eye discharge
·Coughing
· Diarrhoea and vomiting
· Hardening of the footpads
· Inco-ordination
·Paralysis
· Epileptic-type fits
If the puppy survives the respiratory or gastrointestinal stage of the disease,
the neurological signs develop up to four weeks later. Older dogs tend to present
with just the neurological signs. This is usually fatal; occasionally the dog will
survive but there will be lasting central nervous system damage.
Vaccination gives good protection but is not lifelong, so booster vaccinations
are essential.
Canine infectious tracheobronchitis (kennel cough syndrome)
The micro-organisms causing kennel cough syndrome include:
·Bordetella bronchiseptica
· Canine adenovirus type 2 (CAV2)
· Canine parainfluenza virus (CPIV)
·Canine distemper virus (CDV)
This syndrome is a complex disease linked to a number of viruses. However,
the major cause is thought to be the bacteria Bordetella bronchiseptica. Clinically
the syndrome presents as tracheitis, which is usually self-limiting but which may
also develop into bronchitis or pneumonia.
Bordetella bronchiseptica, CAV2 and CPIV are very contagious and commonly
dogs of any age. They cause nasal and tracheal inflammation lasting 5-14 days
and then normally resolve, the dog making a good recovery. At this time the dog
sheds the organisms in the respiratory secretions.
Clinical signs include:
·Cough
· Sneezing and nasal discharge
· Depressed but still eating
·Retching after coughing
Diseases of the Dog and Cat   115
Transmission from dog to dog can be minimised by isolation of the affected
animal and by improving the kennel ventilation and disinfection routines. All
dogs that are going into a boarding establishment should have been vaccinated
with a mixed vaccine that includes CAV2 and CPIV.
Canine parvovirus
Canine parvovirus is closely related to the feline panleucopenia virus. The
virus is very resistant to inactivation by most disinfectants except bleach and
formalin-based chemicals and can survive for months in the environment.
The virus locates in lymphatic tissues and the intestinal epithelium lining. It is
found in vast numbers in the faeces and vomit of infected animals and causes
myocarditis and mild to severe haemorrhagic enteritis.
The route of infection is by faecal or oral contact. Damage to the bone marrow
results in lack of white cells and the infection spreads from lymph cells in the gut
tissues. The incubation period is 5-10 days.
Clinical signs include:
· Being dull and depressed
·Anorexia
·High temperature (up to 41°C)
· Vomiting bloodstained gastric juice
·Bloodstained diarrhoea 24 hours later
· Becomes rapidly dehydrated
Vaccination as a puppy should be followed by annual boosters for protection.
Canine viral hepatitis
Caused by the canine adenovirus type 1 (CAVl). Transmission is through oral
and nasal passages after exposure to infected materials. The virus is resistant
and survives outside the body for up to 11 days in bedding, feeding bowls, urine
and faeces. It can resist freezing, ultraviolet light and most disinfectants but is
destroyed by heat. Following exposure, the virus localises in the tonsils and lymph
nodes where primary replication occurs. The virus travels in the lymph and gains
access to the bloodstream. It is attracted to the cells of the liver and kidneys,
where further replication occurs, before shedding in urine and faeces. The incu-
bation period is 5-9 days. Recovered animals can shed the virus for several
months.
Clinical signs include the following:
Puppies
·High temperature
· Death occurs within hours
116
Chapter 10
Older dogs
·Survive the viraemic stage
· Bloodstained vomit and diarrhoea
· Acute abdominal pain
In some dogs *blue eye', a clouding of the cornea of the eye, occurs up to three
weeks after acute infection.
Vaccination and annual boosters are essential.
Leptospirosis
Also known as Stuttgart disease or Weil's disease in humans, leptospirosis is
caused by a filament-like bacterium, leptospira icterohaemorrhagiae, which is a
zoonone to humans.
The strains that cause the disease in dogs are:
· Leptospira icterohaemorrhagiae - (primary host is the rat) attacks mainly the
liver
·Leptospira canicola - (primary host is the dog) attacks mainly the kidney
These bacteria are easily destroyed by sunlight, disinfectants and temperature
extremes.
    se   n q s si  
food or water. Rodents such as rats are frequently carriers, shedding the
bacteria in urine and thus contaminating water.
Incubation is 7-21 days, with severity of the disease caused depending on the
susceptibility of the host animal and the strain.
Clinical signs include:
·High temperature
●Shivering and muscle pain
·Vomiting and diarrhoea
·Dehydration
·Shock
· Jaundice (mucous membranes of mouth and eye appear yellow)
Recovered animals shed the bacteria via the urine for some time after
o n s a ot st q s i ns 
can provide advice and information to prevent a human carer becoming infected.
An annual booster after initial vaccination is essential.
Rabies
Rabies is caused by a rhabdovirus. It is fragile, surviving for only a short time in
the environment, and is destroyed by most disinfectants, heat and light.
Diseases of the Dog and Cat  117
Transmitted in the saliva of infected animals, the virus replicates in the muscle
cells at the site of infection, then travels via the peripheral nerves to the spinal
cord and the brain. Once it is located in the central nervous tissues, neurological
signs are observed. The virus also then travels to the salivary glands, where it is
shed to infect other mammals, both human and animal. Rabies is therefore a
zoonone disease.
Incubation is from 10 days to four months, the time depending on how near to
the central nervous system the virus is initially placed. There are three phases or
stages to the disease symptoms. However, not all will necessarily occur in all
affected animals.
(1)  Preclinical stage - lasting 2-3 days with a raised body temperature, slow eye
reflexes and signs of irritation at the site of the original injury.
(2) Excitable stage - lasting up to one week with the animal becoming irritable,
aggressive and disorientated, having difficulty standing and epileptic-type
fits.
(3) Dumb stage - lasting 2-4 days during which the animal becomes pro-
gressively paralysed in throat and skeletal muscles, leading to salivation,
respiratory difficulties, coma and death.
In some cases the preclinical stage can last for several months during which the
virus is shed in the saliva.
Diagnosis is confirmed on postmortem examination of the brain and spinal
cord for signs of the virus. Vaccine is available for dogs that live in countries
where rabies is endemic or for travelling to a country with rabies in the wild or
domestic animal population. The vaccine is given at three months of age and
boostered annually.
If bitten by a suspect animal:
· clean the wound immediately using soap or antiseptic solutions
· seek medical attention straight away
Diseases of cats
Infectious feline diseases include:
·Rabies (see Rabies in the dog, p. 116)
·Feline leukaemia
·Feline panleucopenia or feline infectious enteritis
 Chlamydiosis or feline pneumonitis
·Feline viral respiratory disease:
(a)  feline herpesvirus
(b)   feline calicivirus
118
Chapter 10
·Feline infectious anaemia
·Feline infectious peritonitis
·Feline immunodeficiency
Feline leukaemia (FLV)
The retrovirus causing feline leukaemia affects approximately 2% of cats world-
wide. It is contagious and, once symptoms appear, almost always fatal. Most cats
are exposed to this virus during their life and it is most commonly found where
cats are in close contact.
Evidence of the virus is obtained from testing of blood samples using the FLV
ELISA test.
The effect of the virus on the host cat depends on the age of the cat when it
is infected and the quantity of virus received.
· Some cats become ill and apparently recover
·Some do not become ill and develop an immunity to the disease
· Some develop the disease symptoms after incubation of weeks to several
years
Young kittens are most susceptible to the virus. Most die within 2-3 years of
exposure or as a result of FLV-related disease conditions, which include:
Anaemia (lack of red blood cells)
·Lymphosarcoma (tumours of the lymph system)
Clinical signs include:
·High temperature
· Vomiting and diarrhoea
·Weight loss
·Kidney disease
· Enlargement of the spleen
The virus is shed in:
·Saliva
·Faeces
·Urine
·Milk to offspring
The virus is easily destroyed by disinfectants and cannot live long outside a
host. Infection can be passed via saliva in bite/fight episodes, contact with other
cats or from the mother to the kittens before or after birth via the milk.
Diseases of the Dog and Cat   119
systems containing lymph tissue, such as the intestines, causing enteritis, then on
to the salivary glands, the urinary and reproductive systems, causing infertility or
abortion in pregnant animals.
Control of the disease is via:
· Testing, particularly in multi-cat households
· Animals testing positive being isolated from others
Disinfection and hygiene in cat areas
· Retesting 12 weeks after positive test to ensure true result
· Testing all new cats that join a household
After two positive tests, the safe choice is to permanently isolate or euthanase
the cat. Cats are vaccinated from nine weeks of age with a second dose 2-4 weeks
later followed by an annual booster. Before vaccination, all cats are tested for
presence of the virus in the blood.
Feline panleucopenia or feline infectious enteritis
Feline panleucopenia is a highly infectious disease of cats, also called:
·Feline parvovirus
·Feline distemper
· Feline infectious enteritis
The disease is caused by a parvovirus, similar to canine parvovirus. The disease
can affect cats of any age but is mainly responsible for deaths in young kittens.
The virus is stable and capable of surviving in the environment for months to
years and is resistant to most disinfectants. The incubation period is 2-10 days
following direct contact with an infected animal or ingestion of the virus. The
virus targets rapidly dividing cells and tissues of the small intestines, lymph and
bone marrow. It is shed in saliva, vomit, faeces and urine.
Clinical signs include:
· Diarrhoea, often bloodstained
·Dull and listless behaviour
·Abdominal pain
· Fever and dehydration
Blood testing shows a typical reduction in white blood cells (leucopenia), par-
ticularly neutrophil white cells.
The virus can cross the placenta during pregnancy and affects the foetus by tar-
geting the brain tissue (cerebellum), causing death or abnormal nervous system
development. Kittens show balance difficulties and inco-ordination at about 2-3
120
Chapter 10
weeks of age if affected. If the cat survives the first week of clinical disease, careful
nursing can lead to recovery but the intestine may suffer permanent damage, seen
as poor absorption of nutrients and constant diarrhoeal episodes.
Vaccination using either live or inactivated vaccine (in pregnant cats) provides
 good immunity with a booster every 1-2 years.
Chlamydiosis or feline pneumonitis
Chlamydial infection is caused by an organism which lives within cells.
Chlamydiae are therefore treated like a virus, but in appearance resemble a
bacterium.
        so s
conjunctivitis may affect one or both eyes.
Transmission is thought to be via contact with eye/nose discharges, genital tract
 or gastrointestinal tract secretions from carrier animals. Incubation is 3-10 days.
Clinical signs include:
· Initial watery discharge in one eye, spreading to both
·Inflamed conjunctiva
·Fever
·Rubbing eyes and signs of discomfort
· In kittens, diarrhoea
During pregnancy, chlamydia may cause abortion or stillbirth.
Chlamydiosis may last for 2-3 weeks or longer, especially as a part of the feline
viral respiratory disease complex. Recovered animals may shed the respon-
sible organism for several weeks so any treatment usually continues for three
weeks postrecovery. The organism is killed by most disinfectants during routine
cleaning.
Vaccination is available, boostered annually.
Feline viral respiratory disease
Also known as:
·Cat flu
· Feline upper respiratory disease (FURD)
·Feline viral rhinotracheitis (FVR)
The two main viruses involved are:
· Feline herpesvirus
·Feline calicivirus
Diseases of the Dog and Cat 121
Cats are particularly susceptible to infections (both bacterial and viral) of the
nose and throat. Due to their location, these infections are called upper respira-
tory infections or cat flu. While it is essential to vaccinate, as with the *human flu',
vaccines do not protect against some strains of this disease, especially feline
calicivirus.
Calicivirus is easily destroyed outside the host by disinfectants. Transmission
of the virus is by aerosol or direct contact. As a result of this, any grouping of
cats may lead to infection, i.e. shows, boarding, breeding kennels and veterinary
surgeries.
Many cats that have survived the disease become carriers, shedding the virus
veterinary surgeon for the presence of the calicivirus.
(groups of cats) or stress caused by a change to the environment which may lower
the cat's resistance to disease.
Clinical signs include:
·Ulcers on the tongue
·Inflammation of the gums
· Unwilling to eat, but producing excess saliva
·High temperature
· Depressed and listless
· Loss of voice
The presence of ulcers may allow bacteria normally present to add to the cat's
original symptoms and recovery time.
Feline herpesvirus can survive outside the host for up to eight days. This virus
attacks and replicates in the tissues of the respiratory tract and conjunctiva of
the eye, causing viral rhinotracheitis. The tissues from nose {rhino) to trachea
(tracheitis) are affected and inflamed, causing breathing difficulties, sneezing and
coughing. Recovered animals can act as carriers, shedding the virus particularly
when stressed.
Viral rhinotracheitis is the most serious form of upper respiratory disease,
often leaving recovered animals with damage to the nasal passages. This causes
the affected cat to periodically sneeze, snuffle and have a runny nose, the
discharge occasionally being thick with pus.
The incubation period is from two to ten days postexposure.
Clinical signs include:
·High temperature
· Discharge from eyes and nose, later becoming thickened due to bacterial
infection
·Depressed and listless
· Loss of appetite
122Chapter 10
·Sneezing
·Conjunctivitis
·Mouth ulcers
· Pneumonia
· Abortion in pregnant queens
Vaccine is available, boostered annually by intranasal methods. In high-risk
situations, six-monthly administration is advisable.
Feline infectious anaemia
Infectious anaemia is the direct loss of red blood cells caused by a blood para-
site called Haemobartonella felis or Eperythrozoon felis. Transmission is thought
to be by bloodsucking parasites, e.g. the flea. Cats of all ages can be affected.
When the disease is linked to feline leukaemia, affecting white blood cell
numbers, the recovery is poor.
The single-celled parasite responsible can be demonstrated on a blood smear
examination in the laboratory. Discussion with a veterinary surgeon is essential
at this time. Products to safely remove feas from the affected household are
required and other cats in the same household may need to be examined and
treated.
Incubation is up to 50 days, with recovered or carrier animals often shedding
the parasite for months.
Clinical signs include:
· Pale mucous membranes - mouth and gums
·Breathing difficulty
· Listless and loss of appetite
·Third eyelid up as a sign of ill health
· High temperature
· Weight loss
Animals respond well to treatment using specific antibiotics. There is no
vaccine against this virus.
Feline infectious peritonitis
Also called feline infectious vasculitis, infectious peritonitis is caused by a
coronavirus which affects mostly young cats under three years of age. It causes
the lining membrane of the abdomen (peritoneum) and contents to become
inflamed (peritonitis). This disease is not limited in effect to the organs of the
abdomen and may also affect the nervous system and eyes.
Contact between cats via urine and faeces carrying the shed virus will act as
the transmission method. Carrier animals may carry the virus for years, with
Diseases of the Dog and Cat   123
mothers possibly passing the disease to their kittens. The virus is unstable outside
the body and easily destroyed by disinfectants.
Diseased cats are sometimes affected by feline leukaemia, which may make
them susceptible to the peritonitis virus. The form taken by the disease will vary
depending on the ability of the individual's immune system to mount a response
to the virus challenge.
Clinical signs include:
· Lack of appetite and gradual weight loss
·Fever
· Swollen abdomen due to fuid accumulation
· Diarrhoea and vomiting
Later signs include:
·Organ failure
· Neurological signs including inability to stand, paralysis and convulsions
· Inflammation within the structure of the eye, affecting sight
Depending on the form taken by the disease, it is often further described as
wer (fluid in body cavities) or dry (tumour-like masses called granulomatous
lesions forming on organs).
Control of the disease is by strict hygiene and disinfection particularly in multi-
cat households or where groups of cats are housed. There is no vaccine available
in the UK at present.
Feline immunodeficiency
Feline immunodeficiency is caused by a virus of the lentivirus group. The disease
is often characterised by a long incubation period. Incubation to signs of the
disease can initially take four weeks and finally several years; as a result, it is
unusual to find the infection in cats under two years of age. The disease attacks
the lymph system, causing a suppression of the body's immune response. Initially
the disease was known as T-lymphotrophic T cell lentivirus, due to the effect
on the cells of the immune system (T cells and B cells).
The virus is carried in the saliva of the infected animal and transmitted by bite
Therefore cats that have access to outdoor life are more at risk than those housed
completely indoors. Male cats are more commonly infected due to territorial
fighting.
Commercial screening kits are available to detect antibodies to the virus from
a blood sample. After the initial body response to the virus, the cat shows signs
of the disease within a few weeks. These signs are very similar to those of feline
leukaemia and include:
124
Chapter 10
· Conjunctivitis and nasal discharge
·Enlarged superficial lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy)
· Mouth and gum inflammation
·Diarrhoea
· Skin problems
·High temperature
●Neurological signs that include diffculty in walking and change in
temperament
The animal then appears to recover but due to gradual suppression of its
immune responses, it will frequently suffer from recurring or ongoing infections
of various kinds, often failing to respond to veterinary treatment. The cat will
suffer weight loss, becoming inactive and listless.
There is no vaccine available so owners are advised to castrate male cats and
limit exposure to other neighbourhood cats in order to avoid contact with an
infected animal.
Immunity
Immunity refers to the body's natural protection against life-threatening disease.
It can be achieved by:
· Contracting the disease and recovering
·Vaccination
The purpose of a vaccination programme is to prevent the disease by pre-
venting or limiting the infection in a host animal. Vaccines cause stimulation of
the immune system which in turn produces antibodies. The cells of the immune
system responsible for producing this protection are the B-lymphocytes and these
 in turn are assisted by the T-lymphocytes. Both are white blood cells, which may
be targeted and destroyed by certain viruses. The antibodies will recognise
specific viruses or bacteria and prevent or limit their ability to produce disease
in the host animal.
At the time of vaccination, the veterinary surgeon will fully examine the animal
to ensure that adverse conditions which may infuence the manner in which the
body responds to the vaccine are not present, such as a high body temperature
indicating infection.
There are many factors which infuence an animal's ability to respond to
vaccination. These include:
· Presence of colostral antibodies from the mother's milk which could interfere
with the vaccine
·Vaccine type
Diseases of theDog and Cat
125
·Route of administration - subcutaneous or intranasal
·Animal's age
·Medication that could interfere with the vaccine, i.e. anti-inflammatory drugs
·Diet
· Infection already present
Immunity may be acquired by passive or active means. Passive immunity
results from the transfer of maternal antibodies to the newborn via the colostrum
in the milk. The degree of immunity depends on the quantity of the first milk let
down and the quality of the mother's own antibodies resulting from her recent
vaccinations. Passive immunity lasts only as long as the antibodies remain active
in the blood, from three to 12 weeks. After this time the body will eliminate the
an tibodies.
Active immunity develops either as a result of the animal becoming infected
with a micro-organism, developing the disease and recovering or from a vacci-
nation. Both cause the body to react in much the same manner by stimulating
the production of antibodies which are specific to particular microbes ( pathogens
or antigens).
Vaccines are prepared from live or inactivated (killed) preparations of
micro-organisms. They stimulate the immune system of the vaccinated animal
to produce antibodies to specific disease-producing materials.
Chapter 11
Zoonones
Also known as zoonoses, these diseases are transmissible from animals to people
Mostdomestic animals can transmit zoonones.
Dogs
Dog infection
Disease in humans
Leptospirosis
Weil's disease
Toxocariasis
Visceral larval migrans
Echinococcosis
Hydatid disease
Sarcoptic mange
Skin rash and bites
Cheyletiella mites
Skin rash and bites
Ringworm
Skin lesions and hair loss
Salmonellosis
Diarrhoea/vomiting
Rabies
Rabies (hydrophobia)
Cats
Human disease
Signs
Pasteurellosis
Bites or scratches become infected
Cat scratch fever
High temperature, flu-like signs, rash
Ringworm (Fig. 11.1)
Raised, circular, inflamed skin lesion
Toxoplasmosis
Abortion of foetus
Rabies
Fever, itching at original bite area, behaviour
changes, paralysis and death
Zoonones from other species
Disease
Microbe
Species
Brucellosis
Bacteria
Cattle
Campylobacter
Bacteria
Hamsters
126
Zoonones
127
Fig. 11.1 Ringworm spores on a hair shaft
Psittacosis
Bacteria
Birds
Salmonellosis
Bacteria
Mice, rats and guinea pigs
Tetanus
Bacteria
Horses and other herbivores
Prevention of zoonones
In order to minimise the risk to people of diseases which can be passed by
companion animals, the following simple but effective hygiene precautions must
be taken:
Investigate any signs of illness.
Control feas and worms.
Vaccinate animals.
· Do not allow pets to lick children's faces.
Wash hands after handling any animal.
Do not feed pets from household plates or dishes.
+
Use separate utensils for food preparation.
Daily collection and safe disposal of faeces.
Always wear gloves when handling body discharges.
Chapter 12
Parasitology
A parasite lives in or on another living body. The parasite benefits by taking
nourishment from the host, which can be any species.
Parasitology terms
Transport host - transports the parasite to the next host. No development takes
place in the parasite
Paratenic host - same as transport but the parasite must be eaten, in order to be
excreted and passed on to the next host
Intermediate host - some parasites must spend time on/in this host in order to
develop to their next life cycle stage
Final host - host in which the parasite completes its development
Permanent parasite -develops through all life stages and lives on one host
Temporary parasites - move from host to host
Endoparasite - lives inside the host's body
Ectoparasite - lives on the surface of the host's body
The parasite feeds on the host but does not deliberately kill it, as this would
destroy its food source. Some hosts may die as a result of the parasite's feeding
activities or from toxins released by it.
In order to prevent disease or death of the host species, control of parasites is
important. Routine control in equine and large animals is necessary to keep
parasite numbers down. Control in small animals (dogs, cats, rabbits, etc.) aims
to completely remove all parasites, whether internal or external. There are many
easy-to-use and effective products for removing external parasites such as fleas
and lice, with a residue effect which will last for varying periods of time. The prod-
ucts supplied for eliminating internal parasites are collectively called antheimintics.
External parasites
Flea - Ctenocephalides (Fig. 12.1)
·Adult fleas can live for two years without feeding
· Flea eggs hatch in 1-2 days
128
Parasitology
129
Fig. 12.2 Tick - ixodes.
Fig. 12.1 Flea - Ctenocephalides.
· Flea larvae feed for 4-8 days (in carpets or bedding)
 Larvae spin cocoons and adults emerge in five days or less
· Adult flea cycle may take only three weeks, but if the environment is unsuit-
able, the larval stage can last for months
Tick - Ixodes (Fig. 12.2)
● Adult tick can live for two years without feeding
● Engorged female can lay 1000-3000 eggs
·]
Larva hatches in 30 days
+
 Nymphs emerge from moulted larva
·Adult tick emerges after 12 days
· Feeding is required between each stage of development
Diseases are transmitted in the saliva of the tick to other host animals. These dis-
eases include:
Lyme disease - a bacterial tick-borne infection caused by Borrelia burgdor-
feri. The bacteria can cause skin discolouration, cardiac and joint disease in
the infected animal. It is endemic in a number of states in the USA. It is also
carried in Europe by ticks of wildlife hosts, such as rodents and deer. Signs:
 sudden onset of lameness with arthritic pain in one or more joints (i.e.
carpal or wrist joint) which may last only a few days, recurring at
intervals
high temperature with enlarged surface lymph nodes
 Ehrlichiosis - caused by a parasite which lives inside certain white blood cells
It is transmitted by ticks during feeding on the host animal's blood. It is found
in the Mediterranean basin in Europe and other Mediterranean countries.
The severity and recovery of the host animal depends on the activity of its
immune system. Certain breeds of dog are particularly susceptible to the
disease, e.g. German shepherds. Babesiosis may also be present, having been
 passed by the tick at the same time. Signs:
high temperature and inappetance
130
Chapter 12
lymph nodes enlarged
bleeding from the nose and under the skin
anaemia
· Babesiosis - caused by a protozoan that develops and multiplies in the tick
salivary glands, from which it is transmitted to the host animal during feeding.
It is endemic across much of Europe. The parasitic protozoa infect red blood
cells. The severity of the disease varies, depending on the species and strain
of Babesia and the health status of the infected animal. Signs:
 pale mucous membranes
anaemia
breathing problems and collapse
Mite - Sarcoptes
Causes sarcoptic mange.
·Sarcoptic mite may live only 3-4 weeks
 Eggs are laid by the burrowing female (burrows into the epidermal skin layer)
Larvae hatch in 3-5 days
Nymph follows, through two nymph stages
· Adult mite emerges. The full cycle takes about 17 days
Lice
Dog
Cat
Biting louse
Tnchodectes
Felicola substratus
Sucking louse
Linognathus
 no ae sg o a so n o a n    ae sg
Three stages of nymph emerge
· Adult emerges after last nymph moult, after three weeks
Fur mite - Cheyletiella
·Often referred to as *walking dandruff'. There are many different types, living
on the skin cells and tissue fuid of the host to gain nutrients
 Eggs are laid and cemented to coat hair, similar to lice
Eggs hatch into six-legged larvae
· Moult into eight-legged larvae
·  Adult stage is reached
Parasitology
131
Fig. 12.3 Roundworm.
Fig. 12.4 Tapeworm.
Internal parasites
Endoparasites for small animals are divided into two groups:
(1)Roundworms (nematodes) (Fig. 12.3):
(a)  are unsegmented
(b)  have a body cavity
(c) 1
 have an alimentary tract throughout
(2)
Tapeworms (cestodes) (Fig. 12.4):
(a)
 are segmented
(b)
 each segment is independent
(c)  have a complete alimentary tract in each segment
Infected animals do not always show signs of infestation, which only start to
 appear if the infestation becomes overwhelming to the health of the host animal:
Scooting on bottom (anal irritation)
Constantly hungry and eating (polyphagia)
Weight loss
·Vomiting and diarrhoea seen in heavy infestation
·Unhealthy, dull coat
· Enlarged abdomen
Common worms in the UK include:
Roundworms
(a)
Toxocara canis
(b)
Toxocara cati
132
Chapter 12
Fig. 12.5 Dipylidium caninum worm egg.
Tapeworms
(a)Dipylidium caninum
(b) Echinococcus granulosus
Life cycles
Tapeworm-Dipyliclium caninum
This tapeworm affects both dogs and cats and has an intermediate host, which is
the flea.
(1) Animal passes egg-filled tapeworm segments in its faeces (Fig. 12.5)
(2)
 The segments burst, releasing individual eggs that are eaten by the flea
larvae
(3)
 During grooming the animal swallows the tapeworm-carrying flea larvae
(4)
 The tapeworm matures in the animal host
(5)
 The adult tapeworm releases mature, egg-filled segments and, if the host is
not treated with anthelmintic drugs, the cycle begins again
Roundworm - Toxocara canis
This worm is a zoonone. It can migrate in human tissues and is linked to a disease
called toxocariasis in humans, which can cause blindness in children.
（1）
0 Infective eggs or larval forms of this roundworm are swallowed by the dog
(2)
They migrate to the body tissues, often migrating to developing fetuses
(3) They localise in the intestines, moving to the unborn before the end of preg-
nancy or infecting them through the mother's milk after birth
Parasitology
133
(4)
 The larvae now mature, passing eggs in the puppies' faeces
(5)
These are swallowed by other puppies or the mother, and the cycle repeats
unless the dogs are treated
Prevention of toxocariasis
Worm animals regularly
Control the intermediate hosts (fleas and lice)
 Dispose of faeces immediately
 Disinfect where faeces have been
 Always wash hands thoroughly
?
 Wash animals' bowls separately from human utensils
Do not let the animal lick your face
· Keep the animal's anal area clean
Examine faeces regularly for signs of worms
Chapter 13
Hygiene
Disinfectants and antiseptics
These chemicals play an important role in maintaining the health and/or pro-
moting the recovery of an animal. Their use in basic hygiene for housing, kennels,
catteries or in veterinary practice hospitals is important to the care of both the
environment and living tissues. These products are chemicals which, if used in-
correctly, such as at low concentrations, allow micro-organisms to develop a re-
sistance, thus reducing their value.
Some of these chemicals are designed for use on the environment and non-
living structures, others are designed for use on living tissue.
Hygiene terms
 Sterilisation - the removal or destruction of all living micro-organisms including
bacterial spores.
Asepsis - is a state of being free from micro-organisms.
Disinfectants - are referred to as bactericidal, i.e. they will kill micro-organisms.
Antiseptics - are referred to as bacteriostatic, i.e. they will prevent organisms from
multiplying and therefore infections cannot develop.
Principles of disinfection
 Disinfectants are used on the environment only, on surfaces like floors, housing
walls and ceilings and runs. Disinfectants are harmful to living tissues so if they
are used in the workplace or at home, protective clothing (gloves and in some
cases masks) should be worn.
Antiseptics are used to disinfect hands prior to operating, before handling
animals to prevent transfer of microbes and after handling contaminated ma-
terial. They are also used to disinfect the patient's skin before and after surgery
 or after injury.
134
Hygiene
135
Disinfectants
Properties of an ideal disinfectant:
· Effective against a wide range of micro-organisms
·
Non-toxic to animals or humans
●Non-staining to animals' coats or housing
surfaces
Stable in storage and has a good shelf-life
Only low concentrations are necessary for effect
Economical and readily available
Disinfectants are most effective when:
Used with hot water rather than cold
· Left in contact with surfaces for the correct amount of time (see instructions
on label)
·Used at correct strength
· Not mixed with other chemicals
· Freshly prepared (see instructions on label)
Disinfectants can be inactivated by:
 Organic materials from the body, e.g. blood, faeces, pus and urine
 Surfaces, e.g. cork, wood and plastic
 Materials, e.g. wool or cotton
Excess minerals in water (hard water areas)
+
 Mixing disinfectants and detergent
When choosing a disinfectant for the cleaning of housing and surfaces, care is
needed. Some products are toxic to certain species of animals. The phenols or
phenol-containing compounds are toxic to cats, rabbits and rodents so they tend
to be used only in large animal and farming industry facilities. Products in this
group are recognised as black, white or clear. They normally have a strong and
distinctive smell and will stain housing and bedding materials. Examples are Jeyes
Fluid, Izal, Stericol, Ibcol, Phisohex and Dettol.
Disinfectants for environmental use only destroy the micro-organism by dis-
rupting its cell wall or contents in such a way that the microbe will die or be killed
by the chemical. The most resistant microbes are:
 Bacterial spores
·Some viruses (unenveloped)
136
Chapter 13
The least resistant microbes are:
·Some viruses (enveloped)
·Bacteria (vegetative)
·Fungi
The most effective disinfectants include:
·Aldehydes
·Peroxides
·Halogens (iodines and chlorines)
Aldehydes (formaidehyde and glutaraldehyde) (e.g. Formula H,
Parvocide and Vetcide)
These are effective against a wide range of micro-organisms but hazardous to
living tissue. Never use on living tissues in any form.
Care must be taken while mixing, using and discarding solutions. Avoid contact
with skin or eyes and inhaling the fumes. Use these compounds only if necessary
and follow work-based safety guidelines for safe use.
Powdered peroxygen or oxidising agents (peroxides) (e.g. Vircon)
These are effective against a wide range of micro-organisms. They are available
in a powder form, which is mixed with water as directed by the manufacturer.
The solution is used for disinfection of surfaces and housing. It is considered safe
in contact with skin but protective clothes and gloves should be worn, as with all
other chemicals. Once mixed, it is stable as a disinfectant for five days. Discard
old solution and make up fresh as instructed.
household bleach and products fike Halamid)
An effective disinfectant if correctly used. Always follow dilution instructions for
best effect as this chemical can be inactivated by incorrect dilution and by organic
materials.
It is very irritant to tissues so extreme care should be taken in preparation, use
and disposal. Thoroughly rinse off any surface that has been in contact with this
disinfectant. The product loses activity on exposure to air and light. New dilu-
tions should be made up frequently.
Hygiene137
lodophors - see antiseptics (Pevidine)
fodine
This is used on surfaces as a solution of water or alcohol. It is effective against a
also stain surfaces and materials.
Antisepfics (used as skin cleaners)
When applied to skin or mucous membranes of living tissues, antiseptics stop or
prevent the growth of micro-organisms like bacteria and fungi but will not ne-
cessarily kill microbes.
a detergent property, e.g. Hibiscrub or Dinex; (b) cetrimide,
e.g. Cetavlon, Savion or Vetasep
These are effective against microbes and have a rapid action as an antiseptic.
They are often used as a preoperative skin cleaner and as a surgeon's scrub. They
have a low toxicity to tissues but may be irritant to some individuals. Recon-
tamination by microbes is prevented for a time due to a residual effect. Use at
recommended dilution and only on intact skin.
lodophors - jodine-based compounds (e.g. Pevidine scrub, Betadine)
These are effective against skin microbes, non-irritant and have low toxicity to
tissues. Their action is slow so length of time in contact with the skin surface is
important. Follow instructions for use.
Disinfecting housing or surfaces
To maximise the effect of the chemicals being used and to prevent inactivation
by organic materials, the following rules apply:
(1)  Remove animal, food bowls, toys and bedding.
(2)  Soak all surfaces with hot, soapy water.
(3) Scrub the soaked surfaces with bristle brush.
(4)  Wash and rinse away all materials and soap.
(5) Apply the disinfectant at correct dilution and for correct time.
(6) Rinse all trace of disinfectant off with water and hose down.
(7)Leave to dry.
Chapter 14
Basic Nutrition
Food or nutrients are required by the body in order to produce energy. Energy
is necessary to drive the essential processes and systems in the body.
·Breathing
· Circulating the blood to tissues and cells
·Maintaining body temperature
· Muscle movement throughout the body
· The materials for repair, growth and reproduction
· General health
Nutrients are any food products that will support life. There are six major
groups:
Those that can supply energy:
(1)protein
(2)  carbohydrates
(3) fats
· Those which do not supply energy but are needed for its production:
(4) vitamins
(5)minerals
(6) water
Animals eat in order to satisfy their energy needs. In the wild, when animals
have eaten enough food to meet the body's energy demands, they will stop.
However, due to the improved taste of pet foods, scraps from the human table
and *treats', some companion animals will eat in excess of their body's needs.
resulting in obesity and other linked diseases. Many animals have a sedentary
lifestyle with owners unable to provide sufficient exercise, which means that
nutrients in excess of body needs will be converted to storage as body fat (adipose
tissue).
138
Basic Nutrition
139
Protein
(a) Animal origin
·meat
·fish
· eggs
W·
(b)Vegetable origin
soya and other pulses/beans
cereals
Proteins are large molecules, consisting of hundreds of single units called amino
acids which join together as chains. Dietary protein is broken down during the
digestive process into amino acids. Proteins are made up of a combination of 23
amino acids. Animals need all 23 amino acids in order to maintain their body
 proteins. Some are obtained from food and some are made within the body.
 Dogs require ten amino acids to be supplied by the diet and can create or syn-
thesise the remainder. Cats require 11 amino acids to be supplied via the diet.
The extra one (compared to dogs) cannot be synthesised by the cat and can only
be obtained from animal protein. These dietary amino acids are referred to as
essential.
Amino acids
Arginine
Histidine
Isoleucine
Leucine
Lysine
Methionine
Phenylalanine
Taurine (which the cat is unable to synthesise)
Threonine
Tryptophan
+
Valine
Function
 Energy (only used as an energy source if in excess or other energy sources
are not available)
Growth
· Repair of tissues
140
Chapter 14
Immune system to protect from disease
Assisting metabolic reactions (enzyme and hormone)
Deficiency
· Poor growth
·Weight loss
·Disease
 Many tissues in the body rely on protein as a major component, e.g. hormones,
enzymes, plasma proteins and antibodies. The quantities required by each animal
will vary depending on:
· Species
Age
Sex
· Quality of the protein
 The higher the biological value of a protein (in other words, the easier it is for
the body to use), the smaller the quantity required. High-value protein includes:
·Egg
White meat (chicken)
·Fish
Low-value protein includes:
·Soya bean and other pulses
·Cereals
Excess protein in the diet cannot be stored but is converted by the liver to
energy and nitrogenous waste (urea). This is then removed from the body by the
kidneys.
Carbohydrate
(a)  Animal origin
YW·
(b)  Vegetable origin
· cereal starches (oats, lentils, rice)
· root vegetables (potatoes)
Basic Nutrition
141
Carbohydrate can be divided into digestible (starches) and indigestible (dietary
fbre or cellulose). Dietary fibre is found in plants and cereals and provides bulk
to the faecal materials. It assists in regulating bowel function and the movement
of undigested nutrients through the digestive tract.
Function
Energy
·Provides dietary fibre
Deficiency
·None, provided other energy nutrients are available in the diet (ie. fats or
proteins)
Carbohydrate is broken down in the digestive tract to simple sugars which are
essential for most of the body's energy. If simple sugars are unavailable as a nutri-
ent, the body can divert some amino acids to become an energy source.
If the diet contains more carbohydrate than required for the production of
energy, the surplus is converted into body fat and stored as adipose tissue.
Simple sugars can be converted into a temporary stored form called glycogen.
This is stored in the liver and muscles and converted back to simple sugar when-
ever its energy is needed by the body.
Fats
(a) Animal origin
·  milk and other dairy produce
· fish oil
·fat of body origin (attached to meat)
(b) Vegetable origin
·nuts
· seed oils, i.e. sunflower, oil seed rape, linseed
·margarine
Function
·Energy (a very concentrated form)
 Improved taste to the diet
 For the absorption, transport and storage of the fat-soluble vitamins - A, D,
E and K
· Provide essential fatty acids for body use
142
Chapter 14
Table 14.1Fat-soluble vitamins.
Vitamin
Source
Function
A (retinol)
Fish oils, liver egg and cereals
Night vision, body cell division
D (cholecalciferol)
Liver, fish oils, egg and cereals
 Regulates calcium levels, bone
 growth and repair
E (tocopherol)
Vegetable oils, egg and cereals
Supports tissues and cells
around the body
K
Developed in the intestines (no
 Assists in blood clotting
 need for dietary source), green
vegetables
Deficiency
· Reproduction problems
● Impaired wound healing
·Poor coat condition
·Dry skin
Fat is also called lipid. It is made up of glycerol, with attached fatty acids.
Fatty acids are a very concentrated form of energy compared to protein or
carbohydrates.
In the dog and cat there are three essential fatty acids: linoleic, arachidonic and
linolenic. Provided there is a dietary source, the dog can obtain or synthesise all
three from any type of dietary fat. The cat, however, is only able to synthesise
one essential fatty acid from the diet and must therefore be provided with a
dietary source of the other two. Combined with the need to be supplied with one
of the amino acids in the dietary food, this means the cat is considered a true car-
nivore. That is, it cannot maintain full health without a diet of animal tissues to
utilise as a source of ready-made essential fatty or amino acids.
Body fat (adipose tissue) is created from a combination of fatty acids and
simple sugars, if either is in excess in the diet.
Vitamins
Vitamins are important in the chemical reactions that go to make up metabo-
lism. There are two groups:
·Fat-soluble vitamins - A, D, E and K (Table 14.1)
Water-soluble vitamins - B complex group and vitamin C (Table 14.2)
Fat-soluble vitamins are stored in fatty tissues and in the liver; and therefore
could reach dangerous levels if given in excess. Water-soluble vitamins are not
Basic Nutrition
143
Table 14.2Water-solublevitamins.
Vitamin
Source
Function
B, (thiamine)
Cereals, organ meat,
Assists metabolic
 green vegetables.
reactions, i.e. converts
dairy products
sugars to fatty tissues
B2 (riboflavin)
 Organ meats, milk
Use and release of energy
by cells
B。 (pyridoxine)
Cereals, meat and yeast
Metabolism of amino acids
B2 (cyanocobalamin)
 Fish, organ meats
 Blood cell production in
bone marrow
Folic acid
Organ meats, fish;
Blood cell production in
synthesised by gut
bone marrow
Biotin
 Produced by gut bacteria
 Assists body metabolism
C, ascorbic acid
 Green vegetables;
Creates collagen for tissues.
created in the body
supports bone cells
Dogs and cats may synthesise most vitamin C required by the body, but primates, fish and guinea-
pigs are unable to do so and must receive a dietary source for body health and function.
stored and must be supplied continuously via the diet, and supplemented in
medical conditions that lead to water loss, i.e. diarrhoea. Most species can
produce vitamin C in the liver, but the guinea-pig cannot and must be given
vitamin C supplements routinely.
Minerals
(a)  Animal origin
· dairy products
·meat
egg
·bone meal
(b) Vegetable origin
·cereals
· green vegetables
·salt
These are important for a variety of functions in the body. They are often referred
to as ash on containers of pet food.
Provided the animal is fed a balanced dietary product, minerals do not nor-
mally need to be supplemented.
144
Chapter 14
Minerals are divided into two groups:
(1) Macro- or major minerals (needed in large or regular amounts):
-calcium
 chloride
一
magnesium
phosphorus
一
potassium
一
 sodium
(2) Trace minerals (needed in only small amounts):
copper
iodine
iron
selenium
zinc
Function
Assist maintenance of pH balance in the body
 Maintain the body's fluid balance
 Essential for the function of muscle tissues and conducting nerve impulses
Help regulate the body's metabolism (via enzymes and hormones)
Never feed any one product in excess within an otherwise balanced diet.
Deficiencies in minerals are often associated with excess minerals being added
to the diet, i.e. calcium deficiencies can be caused by phosphorus excess in the
diet. This could happen in animals being fed an excess of dietary meat or organ
tissues.
Table 14.3
Minerals.
Mineral
Food Source
Function
Calcium
Milk, cheese, meat and bone
Nerve cell repair, muscle and bone
formation
Sodium
Salt and cereals
Nerve and muscle activity, fluid
balance in the body
Magnesium
Bone, cereals and greens
 Bone formation and synthesis of 
protein
Phosphorus
Milk, meat and bones
 Bone and teeth formation
Copper
Bones and meat
Red blood cell formation - haemoglobin
lodine
Milk and fish
Formation of hormone from thyroid
gland
lron
 Meat, eggs and greens
Red blood cell formation - haemoglobin
Selenium
Fishmeal, meat and cereals
Synthesis of vitamin E
Zinc
Meat and cereals
Tissue maintenance and aids digestion
of food
Basic Nutrition
145
If a good-quality diet (either commercial product or home recipe) is being fed,
there should be no need to supplement vitamins and minerals to an normal
healthy animal.
Water
Water is essential for all cells in the body and is found inside and outside all cells;
60-70% of body weight is water. It is involved with nearly every body process.
As a result of the presence of water in the body, the following can take place:
· Transport of any material between tissues/cells
·Electrolyte balance
·pH balance
· Control of temperature
· Lubrication of all tissue cells
·A medium for blood and lymph
Water cannot be stored by the body and must be available all the time for all
animals. Water in the body comes from:
· Food
Drinking
 Chemical reactions (metabolism)
Water is lost:
·In urine
·Via the lungs in breathing
·In faeces
·In sweat via the skin
It is important to stress that fresh water must be available at all times. This must
be emphasised to all pet owners. Some water will be available from canned food,
but if a dry diet is given, the animal must receive water by drinking.
General considerations for feeding
· There are major differences in the dietary needs of each species of animal
· If the diet is balanced for that species, do not supplement vitamins or
minerals
·The diet should provide enough energy for the animal, supplied by fats and
carbohydrate rather than by diverting protein
146
Chapter 14
Fig. 14.1 Some food bowls available for dogs.
Fig. 14.2 Some food bowls available for cats.
Energy levels and requirements will vary with age or life stages and activity
levels
Read instructions carefully before feeding dry diets in particular. Use a re-
 commended 'measure' for quantities to prevent overfeeding
Figures 14.1 and 14.2 show a variety of food bowls available for the pet dog and
cat.
Life stages for nutrition of the dog and cat
The main dietary components are:
·protein
·carbohydrate
· essential fats
·vitamins and minerals
        d s 
absorption. However, fat will provide twice as much energy as protein and car-
bohydrates. The quantities of the main components can be adjusted for any life
stage in order to meet the demand of the animal (i.e. during growth phase, preg-
nancy and lactation) provided that the basic rules are understood.
Basic Nutrition
147
Food provides energy but it is important that the nutrient content is balanced
to the individual animal's requirements. The following stages need to be consid-
ered for the dog and cat:
· Growing puppies and kittens
·Adult maintenance
Working dogs
 Senior dog and cat
·Pregnancy
Nutritional differences between the dog and the cat
Dog
Dogs are not true carnivores (meat eating); they have retained a number of molar
teeth for chewing and grinding food which demonstrate this. Dogs can convert
vegetable protein and fat into the ingredients necessary for body function.
However, a vegetarian diet may not be balanced enough to maintain health in
the long term. How the food supplied tastes, its energy content and its digestibil-
ity all need to be considered. A complete diet allows the animal to maintain body
daily needs of the animal may be.
Commercial proprietary diet types:
Canned food - meat and vegetable protein-based foods to be mixed with dog
biscuits or meal for a complete diet
· Complete semi-moist food - similar to canned but can contain three times the
calories of canned foods
· Complete dry food - have nearly all the water content removed, leaving them
more concentrated than semi-moist foods, and containing four times the
calorie content of canned food. Some may need re-hydrating with water
before being fed to the dog
Biscuits - these are cereal-based (providing carbohydrates) but also contain
high levels of fat, vitamins, minerals and small quantities of protein
· Treats - are used for reward or snacks, and are often very high in calories,
colour and smell
Cat
The cat is unusual, having remained completely carnivorous (known as an oblig-
ate carnivore), as a result protein will supply the majority of its energy require-
ments. This means that the dietary protein requirements for a cat are considerably
higher than for a dog.
Commercial proprietary diet types:
148
Chapter 14
Canned/foil-contained foods - are meat or fish based, with some cereal (car-
bohydrates), fat, vitamins, and minerals for a complete diet. The protein levels
are much higher than in dog food.
· Soft moist foods - are supplied in pellet form containing meat, soya protein,
and some fats. These are usually packed in foil sachets.
· Dry food - resembles small biscuits containing fish and meat as a base, cereals,
vitamins and minerals, but tend to be low in fats. Fresh water must always be
available for a cat fed on this form of diet.
All commercial proprietary diets and biscuit meal have full instructions for
feeding, outlining quantities for all breeds and sizes.
Home-made diets
Home-made recipes for dogs and cats must still form a balanced diet. These can
 be time consuming to prepare. It is important to either mince or chop up food
into small pieces for a cat diet because cats are unable to chew, they can only
hold and tear food.
Examples of food source in a home-made diet for a dog would include:
·Proteins
liver (high in phosphorus but low in calcium, rich in vitamins A and B)
heart (high in fat, therefore used only in small quantities)
chicken and turkey are lower in calories than other meats and easily
digested
fish is a good protein source but all bones must be removed (grill or steam
but do not boil)
egg (scrambled) is useful for recovery from illness and restoring appetite
minced beef or lamb will include animal fat
·Vegetables (seasoned, cooked carrot, cabbage and green beans) provide fibre,
vitamins and minerals
Pasta, noodles and potato are good sources of carbohydrate but need
flavouring
Feeding guidelines
(1)  Never feed bones of any kind
onpoud pooy Aenb-poob e paey (z)
(3)   Remove uneaten food daily
(4)  Always provide fresh water, changed daily
(5) Check that the protein levels are correct for the animal's life stage and circum-
stance (to prevent upset to the gut and diarrhoea)
(6) Serve food at room temperature for a dog and slightly warmed for a cat
(7) Never feed raw egg white (a chemical in it makes biotin unavailable)
Basic Nutrition
149
Table 14.4Sources of nutrients
Nutrient
Source
Protein
Muscle meat, milk, eggs, pulses
Fat
Animal fat, vegetable oils, some meats
Carbohydrate
Cereal, potato, pasta, rice
Nutritional balance
All foods supply energy. This is measured in units of heat (kJ/g or kcal/g). The
) q  rn d ad q n r r o e p spo
14.4) all contribute energy. Protein and carbohydrate are equal in energy content,
but fat will provide twice this amount of energy gram for gram weight.
The protein content of a diet must make up at least 20% of the total energy
 present in the diet in order for enough to be eaten for body maintenance needs.
Dogs and cats make use of fat in their diet. It is a rich source of energy and is
required for the essential fatty acids (EFA) needed for functions in the body. Fat
is also stored as tissue around the body if fed in excess, to be used when food
becomes short.
Carbohydrate is not required by the dog or cat but is used as a source of energy
from cooked starches and sugars released from cereals, potatoes or pasta.
Supplementation
Supplementation refers to foods that are provided as well as the normal ration
and diet (Figs 14.3 and 14.4). While some supplements may correct a deficiency
in an animal with a medical disease, others may be used as:
·Treats
· To increase food intake
· As a reward during training
Supplementation should not be used to improve a poor diet or be supplied in
excess. A good-quality complete and balanced food will provide the nutrients
required for health and fitness.
Growing puppies and kittens
After weaning, puppies and kittens need to be supplied, in their daily diet,
with about 2-2% times the nutrients required by an adult of the same
breed/species.
These increased requirements will gradually decrease as the animal becomes
older and reaches adult weight.
150
Chapter 14
Fig. 14.4 Supplementary foods - biscuit types and shapes
 Meals need to be frequent throughout the day (i.e. a three-month-old puppy
needs 4-6 meals), dividing the diet evenly between each one. The stomach size
of young animals is too small to cope with only one or two meals a day. By 6
months of age the frequency of meals is usually at 2-3 meals a day, down to 1-2
meals daily by one year of age for a dog. Cats tend to snack as adults and will
often stay on 2-3 meals daily.
The above information will vary from animal to animal. Owners generally
notice that one of the meals for puppies and kittens is often not eaten, the food
in that meal should then be spread through the remaining feeding times until the
adult routine is reached.
2-3 meals daily, as required. A lot will depend on the type of food (canned, moist
or dry) as to the feeding times, or an unlimited feeding method can be used in
cats on dry diets.
Basic Nutrition151
Commercial foods are available in formulas for growing puppy and kitten
 a mi ais u dode ae sro po rn noi st hl spa
Texture is also important: with only milk (or deciduous) teeth, chewing is not
possible.
Adult
Once established, feeding routines should not be altered in timing, place or diet
types. To do so is stressful to an animal and appetite may decrease as a result.
Feeding times should never be too late in the evening, because the animal may
need to urinate or defaecate within 3-4 hours of eating, by which time it may be
shut in and the owners in bed.
Commercial diets all have information on feeding and quantities, but if part of
the ration is always left uneaten, reduce the amount of food until all is eaten at
with meal scrapes, gravy, etc. Cat foods are produced in many flavours, some
owners using a different one for each day of the week. The condition, energy
levels, health status and body weight of the animal need to be monitored to
ensure that the diet suits the individual animal. If any change in the diet is con-
sidered, always introduce the new diet slowly over a number of days, overlapping
it with the old diet to avoid any gut upset.
Workingdogs
Depending on the training, working, resting times and function, working dogs
may need quite different diets and feeding routines.
A working dog that runs long distances each day may need as much as 2-3
times the normal recommended adult ration of food, e.g. sheep dogs who may
run more than 20 miles a day.
Generally diets are grouped for carbohydrate or fat requirement. Carbohy-
drates (i.e. cereals as biscuits) release sugars and are useful for dogs that require
energy for short duration, i.e. agility dogs, both in practice and competition.
Other working breeds that are active for long periods and in all weather condi-
tions will need more energy for running and to hold the body temperature in
extreme cold (sheep dogs and sledge dogs). Fat increase in the diet is ideal
for these dogs. Protein in increased amounts may be useful for muscle develop-
ment, but the energy requirements will come from carbohydrate and fat. Diets
that have increased carbohydrate and fat levels are often referred to as ^active
diets'.
Working dogs are normally fed only a small meal before work, leaving the main
meal of two-thirds of the required daily intake to be fed after a rest period, allow-
ing time for proper digestion.
152Chapter 14
Senior dog and cat
Older animals will vary in condition and health status considerably. There are
many commercial diets on the market to choose from. Depending on the health
of the animal, some are for use with specific medical diseases, others are more
generally restrictive of some nutrients for cases of obesity. These obesity diets are
often referred to as *light diets or reducing diets'.
Older animals may have sight, taste and smell losses, as well as poor appetite,
poor teeth and gum condition, all making eating difficult. Many also have reduced
movement of food in the gut, leading to constipation problems.
To provide for the nutritional needs of these senior animals, consider:
· Improving the taste/smell of the food by warming it to body temperature
·Using one of the appropriate senior diets on the market (seek veterinary
advice first)
· Increased fibre in the diet to prevent constipation, i.e. use of bran
● Use of easily digested high-quality proteins, such as fish, poultry and egg, in
the diet base
· Encouraging the animal to eat the daily ration by hand feeding initially
· Feeding small meals throughout the day (up to six), in order for the animal
to eat the whole daily ration
Caring for the teeth to encourage eating by preventing the build-up of tartar on
the teeth, also check for loss of, or loose, teeth, gum disease and inflammation.
All these will affect the animal's ability to eat. Many dogs and cats will allow the
owner to clean their teeth with a soft toothbrush or finger brush, but if this is not
possible, a teeth de-scale and/or teeth removal by a veterinary surgeon may be
required.
Mobility problems and joint disease, in dogs particularly, may make bending
to the food and water bowls difficult or impossible. To assist the animal, raise the
food and water bowls off the floor on to a low box (Fig. 14.5) with a ridge around
the edge (to prevent the bowls falling off). These can be home-made or bought
from most pet shops (Fig. 14.6).
Pregnancy
Dog
For most of the pregnancy it is not necessary to increase the quantity of food,
provided a balanced, good-quality food product is being used.
It is only during the final three weeks of pregnancy that an increase in food
intake is required. This is at the time of most weight gain and growth occurring
in the fetuses. Overfeeding before this stage of pregnancy may lead to fat
deposits; weight gain as a result may lead to problems during parturition
(birthing).
Basic Nutrition
153
Fig. 14.5 Food bowls on a low box.
Fig. 14.6Raised bowl system that can be bought from pet shops.
 Increase food by 10-15% per week from six weeks of pregnancy until partu-
rition. This increases total food intake to approximately 50% over mainte-
nance levels of food being fed
 Use diets formulated for pregnancy and lactation needs
 Feed small meals and often in the final two weeks of pregnancy, to assist food
intake
Provide fresh drinking water, which is always available
154
Chapter 14
Cat
From the time of mating, diet quantities need to be increased for the pregnant
cat to approximately 30% above maintenance amounts. Cats will rarely overeat,
therefore food can be constantly available as requirements increase.
· Feed a diet formulated for a cat during pregnancy and lactation
· Ensure food is always available (referred to as free-choice feeding), this will
help the cat to eat sufficient nutrients
·Provide fresh drinking water, which is always available
How much shouid be fed?
Amount is based on energy needs and the rate of conversion of food to energy
(metabolism) by the individual animal.
Take the number of kcal (kilocalories) of energy needed by an animal and refer
to the content tables on any pre-packed food. The manufacturer will use the
kcal/day requirements to suggest the amount in weight (grams) of the diet to feed
with regard to the percentage value of nutrients in that food.
As a general guide for dogs:
·Small: 250-750 kcal/day
·Medium: 1000-2000 kcal/day
·Large: 2000-2500 kcal/day
Chapter 15
Handling
It is necessary to appreciate the behavioural differences between species in order
 to perform handling safely. Body language is quite complex in some species, i.e.
the dog, and must be taken into account before approaching.
Handling may give rise to fear and stress in the animal, which may be a learned
 q  s pn so a  q  ids
helpful information.
Reasons for handling
·Daily and weekly checks
·Grooming
·Transportation
·First aid situation
·Examination after injury
·Medicating
Animals should be accustomed to handling from an early age. Teaching the
animal to tolerate having difficult areas, such as ears, feet and mouth, looked at
will make life less stressful for animal and handler at a later date.
Approaching to handle
·Assess animal's behaviour and body language.
· Be quiet but confident to establish dominance of the situation.
·Talk in a reassuring manner.
· Never corner the animal; always leave supposed choices.
· With a dog or cat, reach out to introduce yourself to the animal.
· Stroke the animal and accustom it to voice and scent.
+
 Only lift the animal if the approach has been accepted.
Handle with minimum restraint, especially cats.
· If the animal becomes or is aggressive, then a firm method of restraint is
needed for the safety of handlers.
155
156
Chapter 15
Behaviour seen when animals are unwilling to be handled
· Cats - hiss, adopt defensive posture, growl, strike with front claws and flatten their
ears to the skull.
 Dogs - hackles raised, growling, lips in snarl position, ears forward, barking and
attempting to bite.
 Rabbits - biting, scratching using hind legs, thumping hind legs on floor and, if
terrified, squealing.
 Guinea pigs - are not aggressive but will stampede or circle their housing in an
effort toget away.
Rats - bite if startled or hurt.
Holding procedures
Rat
Place hand firmly over back and rib cage, restrain head with thumb and forefinger
immediately behind lower jaw (Figs 15.1 and 15.2).
Guinea pig
Grasp under the trunk with one hand while supporting the hindquarters with the
other hand (Fig. 15.3).
Gerbil
Never lift by the middle or end of the tail. The tail is firmly grasped at the base
and the gerbil is lifted and cradled in the palm of the hand. Use the over-the-
back grip to prevent struggling (Figs 15.4 and 15.5).
Rabbit
Never lift using only the ears.
· Short distances (for cleaning housing) - grasp the skin over the neck with one
hand and support the hindquarters with the other (Fig. 15.6).
· Longer distances - having lifted the rabbit from housing using the above
method, it is positioned against the handler with its head tucked under the
handler's arm, the hindquarters being supported by the handler's arms
(Fig. 15.7).
Fig. 15.1 Correct holding technique for a rat.
Fig. 15.2 Correct holding technique to expose the
abdomen and chest.
Fig. 15.3Holding technique for a guinea pig.
Fig. 15.4 Holding a gerbil.
Fig. 15.5 Restraint for a gerbil.
158
Chapter 15
Fig.15.7
7Correct technique for moving arabbit longer
distances.
Fig. 15.6 Correct lifting technique for
rabbits.
Fig. 15.8 Check chain position - correct size and correctly held
Dog
 Before handling, always check the following:
· The collar is correctly fitted and will not slip off.
Position of check chain (correct size/correct fit) (Fig. 15.8).
?
Temperament (muzzle if necessary).
·Reason for handling.
Handling
159
To tape muzzle a dog
azznw au Adde o auo pug bop aun ploy o auo 'panbai aie siaipuey oml
Dog handler
 Stands facing the same way as the dog and to one side (alongside the shoulder).
Takes hold of the scruff and collar (if worn) with both hands, behind the dog's ears.
Personapplyingtapemuzzle
Use a bandage which will not stretch.
Cut a length in excess to requirements.
Make a loop with a double throw knot (Fig. 15.9).
Fig. 15.9 Make a loop with the tape muzzle, with a double throw knot.
Fig. 15.10 Drop the loop over the dog's mouth and nose and tighten the loop.
Continued
160
Chapter 15
To tape muzzle a dog (Continued)
Fig. 15.11 Knot the ends behind the ears and tie a bow for quick release.
Keeping the loop open, approach from the side of the dog.
Aonb dool aun uaubn pue asou pue ynow sbop aun jaao dool aun doia
(Fig. 15.10).
Cross the muzzle ties under the jaw.
· Knot the ends behind the dog's ears and tie into a bow for quick release
(Fig. 15.11).
Restraint procedures in the dog and cat
For intravenous injection
Presenting one of the forelegs for procedures such as an injection into the vein
or taking a blood sample (Figs 15.12, 15.13 and 15.14).
Handling
161
Fig. 15.12 Position for i.v. restraint.
Fig. 15.13Place thumb over the
Fig. 15.14 Restraint by one person
upper part of the leg and rotate the
of a cat for i.v.
vein from medial to cranial surface.
For subcutaneous injection
Using the scruff area on the back of the neck (Figs 15.15 and 15.16)
162
Chapter 15
Fg. 15.15 Cat in sitting position.
Fig. 15.16 Cat in standing position.
For intramuscular injection
Using the muscle on the front of the hind leg. Never use the muscle at the back
(caudal aspect) of the hind leg, to prevent damage to the main nerve supply
(sciatic nerve). Two handlers are required, one to control the head and one to
give the injection (Fig. 15.17).
Fig. 15.17 Dog standing - restraint for injection into the front/cranial part of the upper hind
leg.
Handling
163
On its side (lateral position)
To expose the limbs, chest or abdomen (Fig. 15.18).
For general examinations
In these situations, the head must be controlled (Figs 15.19 and 15.20).
Fig. 15.18 Restraint for access to limbs, chest or abdomen.
Fig. 15.20  Controlling the head standing in front.
Fig. 15.19  Controlling the head stand-
ing to the side.
164
Chapter 15
Approaching a cat
Use calm, confident movements.
Speak quietly all the time.
Attempt to stroke the head first and then along the cat's back.
When the cat responds (non-aggressively)
Pick the cat up (Fig. 15.21).
Fig. 15.21 Lifting cat from carrying cage.
Transferring a cat from basket to examination table or surface
 Place one hand under the chest and, supporting the hindquarters, lift.
Hold under one arm, hand still under the chest, and transfer other hand to support 
and control the cat's head.
 Alternatively, this hand could scruff the neck to control the head.
Never overrestrain a cat unless really necessary.
Chapter 16
Grooming and Coat Care
One of the many responsibilities of a dog or cat owner is that of coat care. As
breeds of dog and cat were developed for size, character and colour, so their coat
length, texture and density evolved. Careful management of these many and
is based on a dog or cat seen in a breed book but it is essential to investigate the
amount of time and frequency of coat care required. There is a vast difference
in the time it takes to groom a Doberman and an Old English Sheepdog, a
Siamese and a Persian cat.
Main aims of grooming
 Remove dead hair
Clean the skin
Clean the coat
 Remove knots and tangles
Dogs
Grooming covers the following factors:
Bonding
Trust
Accustoms the pet to handling
 Information on the condition of the skin
· Presence of external parasites (fleas or mites)
· Monitoring of nail condition
General health status information
The coat
The earliest breeds of dog evolved in the northern hemisphere and so needed a
dense coat for protection from the cold. As dogs moved further south to the
warmer climates of the world, their coat became thinner and shorter to allow the
165
166
Chapter 16
Table 16.1  Examples of coat type in the dog.
Type
Hair length
Breeds
Grooming frequency
Smooth
Short and fine
Chihuahua
Minimal grooming
(Fig. 16.1)
Boxer
Twice weekly
Doberman
Weekly
Whippet
Weekly
Pointer
Weekly
Long and dense
Labrador
Twice weekly
Corgi
Weekly
Double
Medium to long
Collie
 Daily and weekly
(Fig. 16.2)
German Shepherd
Daily and weekly
Old English Sheepdog
Daily and weekly
Wiry
Short
Dachshund
Weekly
(Fig. 16.3)
West Highland White
Weekly
Long
Airedale
Daily and weekly
 Schnauzer 
Daily and weekly
Silky
Short
Spaniel
Daily and weekly
(Fig. 16.4)
Pekinese
Daily and weekly
Long
Afghan
Daily and weekly
Yorkshire
Daily and weekly
Woolly/curly
Bedlington
Daily and weekly
(Fig. 16.5)
Poodle
Daily and weekly
Kerry Blue
Daily and weekly
Daily indicates the coat should be briefly groomed once a day.
Weekly means the coat should be thoroughly groomed once a week.
dog to function in extreme heat. Selective breeding further enhanced coat
features for specific breeds and purposes. The table above shows different coat
types.
Every breed varies in the type of coat hair it has. Hairs grow in hair follicles
with several hairs to each follicle. Usually there is an outer coat composed of
primary or guard hairs and an undercoat made up of secondary hairs. Often the
undercoat is finer than the outer coat.
Hair will be shed periodically. The growth rate of hair varies from breed to
breed. Other factors which influence the growth of hair are as follows.
Seasons
 Spring - triggers production of the summer coat, causing the old winter coat
to be shed. The coat is oily, due to an increase in the sebaceous gland activ-
ity in the skin.
 Autumn - triggers the production of the much denser winter coat, causing the
summer coat to be shed. The coat is less oily due to reduced sebaceous gland
activity.
Grooming and Coat Care
167
Fig. 16.1 Smooth coat - Pointer.
Fig. 16.2 Double coat - Collie.
Fig. 16.3 Wire coat - Airedale.
Fig. 16.4 Silky coat - Skye Terrier.
Fig. 16.5 Woolly/curly coat - Poodle.
168
 Chapter 16
Environmentaltemperature
Dogs kept in centrally heated housing will shed their coat continuously. Dogs
kept in outside kennels will shed in spring and autumn.
/ll health
If the animal becomes debilitated due to acute or chronic illness the coat growth
cycle will be interrupted.
Diet
condition.
Hormone leveis
Levels will alter during oestrus in the bitch, slowing the rate of growth. The coat
texture can alter in some disease conditions which affect the body's hormone
levels, not only causing the coat to grow more slowly but also making it coarse
and rough to touch.
Grooming notes
Smooth coat
Matting of this type of coat does not occur due to its short length. However, the
coat will become clogged with dead hair when moulting. Increased grooming at
this time will keep the skin in good condition. To prevent loss of natural oils in
the coat, only bath if really necessary. If the coat is muddy, brush it out once the
coat is dry.
Equipment required:
· Short coat - use a hound glove
· Long coat - use a comb and a bristle brush
Double coat
Will matt and tangle if not groomed frequently. Regular grooming sessions of up
to three-quarters of an hour to one hour may be necessary to prevent the coat
tangling. Some breeds in this category, for example the Old English Sheepdog,
are clipped to about 2.5 cm in length in order to simplify grooming. This summer
clip will allow the dog to cope better in hot weather.
Grooming and Coat Care
Bath only 3-4 times yearly, preferably twice yearly, in spring and autumn to
condition the coat and clean the skin. Brush out mud once dry and regularly comb
out the undercoat during the moulting season.
Equipment required:
· Bristle brush
·Slicker/carder brush
·Comb
Wiry coat
To avoid matting of the coat, these breeds need regular combing. Their top coat
is stripped and plucked or machine clipped at three-monthly intervals, followed
carefully with the correct dematting equipment.
Equipment required:
·Slicker/carder brush
· Comb
· Dematting comb
Silky coat
Without frequent attention, these coats become very tangled. The coat is so
fne in these breeds that it is hard to untangle even with dematting combs.
Spaniels and Afghan hounds must have the dead coat hair stripped out every 3-4
months. At this time the coat is usually trimmed, paying particular attention
to ears and feet. The fine hair in the ear canals should be plucked at regular
intervals and the foot hair trimmed to reduce mud and the attachment of barbed
grass seeds.
nban e susn uouo us pue suooo qoq diaq mi pannba se qg
use shampoo.
Equipment required:
·Bristle brush
· Dematting comb
·Slicker brush
Woolly/curly coat
Frequently referred to as the non-shedding coat, which does not moult but
which grows continuously. As a result of this growth, these breeds need clipping
followed by bathing every 6-8 weeks. If not groomed out, the dead hair
will form a felt-like mass. The ear canals need constant plucking to prevent
170
Chapter 16
these mats which soon plug with ear wax and may lead to infection if not
attended to.
Equipment required:
· Comb
·Slicker/carder brush
+
 Dematting comb
·Scissors
Grooming equipment
Every dog needs its own grooming equipment, normally bought when setting up
 a new puppy. Equipment to choose from includes the following:
·Brushes:
(a)bristle brush
(b)  slicker/carder brush
(c)  hound glove
(d)  rubber brush.
·Combs:
(a)  fine comb
(b)  wide-toothed comb
(c)rake comb
(d)  fea/louse comb
(e)（
dematting comb.
Cutting equipment:
(a)
 stripping knife or comb
(b)t
thinning scissors
(c)
scissors
(d)electric clippers
(e)
 nail clippers.
Brushes
Bristle brushes are available in a range of sizes and shapes. The handle is made
of either wood or rigid plastic, with synthetic or natural bristles. The bristles
are set close together, making this an ideal surface-only brush. It is unable to
penetrate dense coats but is ideal for smooth coats and the removal of mud or
other surface material stuck to the hair. On short smooth coats, it can be used
with pressure on areas of the dog's back, flanks and hindquarters. The main effect
of this surface brushing is to stimulate the skin and distribute the natural oils
from the skin to the hair shaft ends, giving a shine to the coat.
Pin brushes are also available in a range of sizes. The handle is made of either
wood or a rigid plastic. The pins, often with plastic-coated tips to prevent scratch-
Grooming and Coat Care
171
Fig. 16.6 Slicker/carder brushes
Fig. 16.7 Hound glove (top) and rubber brush
(below).
ing the skin surface, are set in a flexible rubber-backed cushion. The pin brush
will separate hairs and lay the coat in position, particularly useful for the silky
long coats and double coats. These brushes also stimulate the skin, distributing
the natural oils from the skin to the tips of the hairs. If the coat has tangled hair
or knots, then use a comb first to remove these before brushing. This will prevent
asn si qq ud an m r o nd q o a
Slicker/carder brushes (Fig. 16.6), with a wooden or rigid plastic handle, come
 in a range of sizes. The pins are hooked and set in a rubber-backed cushion, giving
 some fexibility to the grooming movement. The function of these hooked pins
is to remove dead coat. No pressure should be applied when using the slicker
brush because the pins could easily scratch or damage the skin surface. It can be
used on a range of coat types from silky to double and in some body areas of
curly and wire-coated breeds. Never use on areas of the body where the coat is
normally thin such as the stomach, groin or armpits.
A hound glove (Fig. 16.7) fits over the groomer's hand like a mitten or glove,
as the name suggests. It is made of flexible plastic or rubber with short bristles
made from wire or plastic and some have a velvet-type surface on one side and
bristles on the other. It is used to remove dead or moulting hair (bristle side) and
to polish the coat (velvet side) in smooth and short-coated breeds. Care should
be taken when using the bristle side, in case too much pressure is used and the
skin is damaged.
172
Chapter 16
Combs
Combs are used to remove dead hair and prevent mats forming behind the ears,
in the neck/collar area and over the hindquarters.
Combs are available in metal or plastic, with or without handles (Fig. 16.8).
Some combs are half wide toothed and half fine toothed so that each half can be
used in different body areas and on different coat types. The teeth tips are
rounded or plastic coated to avoid tearing the skin surface. Some combs also have
pins set so that they are able to roll individually and prevent coat damage when
in contact with a mat or tangle.
Combs should be used carefully, especially when encountering a knot or tangle.
 Slowly tease the hairs and never rush this stage or the coat will be pulled, hurting
the dog and making it unwilling to be groomed.
Rake combs (Fig. 16.9) have ridged metal teeth with round tips, set perpen-
dicular to the handle, and resemble a small garden rake. They should not be used
by pressing into the coat. Their function is to break up mats and, in dense coats,
lift and remove dead undercoat hair. They are pulled towards the groomer
through the coat and in the direction of the coat hair.
Flea combs have fine teeth set close together, with a grip area. These are pulled
slowly and carefully through the coat, going with the normal coat direction. If a
parasite is encountered, the gap between the teeth is too small for it to pass
through so it is lifted onto the comb for the groomer to remove.
Dematting combs (Fig. 16.10) have wooden handles and teeth which on one
side are rounded and blunt and on the other side are a series of cutting blades.
These combs are used, with extreme care, to cut through large mats of hair by
placing the blunt side against the dog's skin surface and with a gentle sawing
action cutting away from the skin surface and through the mat. This will allow
the matted areas to either be combed out or further subdivided for combing and
removal of the dead hair.
Cutting equipment
A stripping knife or comb (Fig. 16.11) is used to remove dead hair and at the
same time trim the live hair. The comb has a serrated metal cutting edge, set
against a guard plate on one side for the removal of dead hair. The stripping knife
has a metal handle and blade. Sections of coat hair are held between the opera-
tor's thumb and the blade and the blade is pulled away from the skin with a twist.
ing movement. At the same time, dead hair can be pulled or plucked. This is
known as hand stripping and is used on wire-coated breeds such as terriers, wire-
Thinning scissors (Fig. 16.12) have one regular and one serrated blade or both
blades serrated. They thin the coat without affecting its appearance. These scis-
sors are therefore used on the undercoat, preserving the colour of the outer coat
appearance.
Grooming and Coat Care
173
Fig. 16.8 Comb types.
Fig. 16.9 Rake comb.
Fig. 16.10 Dematting comb.
174
Chapter16
Fig. 16.11Stripping knife.
Fig. 16.12 Thinning scissors or shears.
Fig. 16.13 Scissor types.
Scissors (Fig. 16.13) are available in many sizes and shapes for use on the
various body areas, from long, sharp, tapering blades to short, blunt-ended blades,
depending on the area that requires a trim. Blunt-ended scissors are used to trim
between toes and in delicate areas around the eyes, ears, lips and genitals.
Electric clippers (Fig. 16.14) are used by professional groomers in conjunction
with scissors, particularly in the curly-coated breeds such as the poodle. These
coats keep growing all year round and need constant attention. Always keep the
blade of the clippers fat to the coat to avoid cutting the skin.
The clipper cuts away the excess hair more rapidly than scissors and is used
with a variety of detachable blades. The blades vary from fine tooth for close
Grooming and Coat Care
175
Fig. 16.14 Electric clipper with range of blades.
trims to ones set with wide-spaced blades or teeth, which leave short hairs against
the skin surface. The blades are snapped onto a post on the clipper only when
the clipper is running.
The clipper is held like a pencil which gives a firm grip, allowing the groomer
 to move over the coat lightly and keep the blade flat against the section being
clipped.
Clippers will get hot during use so it is important to closely monitor the blade
temperature in order to prevent a clipper burn or rash developing on the
damaged skin surface. There are several ways of avoiding this:
·Spray hot blades with aerosol lubricant spray to reduce temperature.
· Change the hot blade for a new cool blade.
· Use a second clipper, allowing the first to cool.
·Keep the blades in use sharpened.
+
 Only clip hair that is completely dry.
Nail clippers (Fig. 16.15) are only used to cut nails which are overlong. A range
of clippers is available, from the guillotine clipper (also useful in small mammals)
to the double blade type. The choice of nail clipper will depend on the length and
position of the nail presented.
Grooming procedure
Depending on the coat type of a dog, grooming will be a daily and/or a weekly
event. It provides the owner with the opportunity not only to condition the coat
and skin but to:
176
Chapter16
Fig. 16.15 Types of nail clippers.
· Clean any discharge and examine the eyes
· Check and clean the ear to prevent infection developing
· Clean and examine the mouth and particularly the teeth
· Examine and trim any overlong toe nails
·Check the anal region
Eyes should be bright and free of any discharge. If any discharge is seen in the
corner of the eye, moisten a clean piece of cotton wool with water and wipe away
in the direction of the nose. If the discharge looks anything other than clear, check
for signs of inflammation and seek veterinary attention.
Ears should be free of wax, a dull pink colour and without odour. In the curly-
coated breeds, the ears need to be plucked free of hair which, if left in place,
attracts wax, parasites and infection. Check for signs of discomfort or reluctance
by the dog when the flap is being examined, which may indicate a problem.
Mouth. The gums and tongue should be pink (pigmented in the Chow chow)
or partly pink with pigmented areas. Gums should be well defined around
each tooth, with no food or other materials attached. In order to prevent any
build-up of tartar on the teeth, pet toothpaste in various flavours and tooth
brushes can be used as part of the daily grooming examination.
Feet or paws should be clean around the nail bed, nails just in contact with the
ground, excess hair cut short between the pads and nails to prevent mats and
grass seed barbs penetrating the skin and causing an abscess.
Anal region under the tail and around the anus needs to be checked daily in
dogs, whether short or long coated. The area should be free of any faecal
material and show no signs of redness or inflammation. Should the dog start
Grooming and Coat Care177
licking excessively around the anal region or scooting on its rear end, the anal
glands should be checked for a blockage. These glands are situated on either side
of the anus and may not empty as expected when the dog defecates, leading to
infection.
Nail clipping
Active healthy dogs do not need frequent nail clips. The nails will wear naturally
with everyday use. The exception may be the dew claw, which can grow round
into the nail bed if left unchecked, although they tend to be slow growing in most
breeds.
The nails may need attention if:
· The dog is exercised only on soft ground or grass
· The dog is elderly
· Due to limb injury, the dog walks with uneven gait
· A nail becomes broken or damaged
Technique
(1)F
Restrain and reassure dog during the procedure.
(2)  Inspect each foot, identifying which nails need attention.
(3) Locate the quick' (the nerve and blood supply).
(4) Cut below the quick.
(5) Smooth any rough edges with a nail file.
 In some dogs the nails are pigmented, making it impossible to see the quick.
In these cases always be cautious and cut less to avoid damage to the quick. If
still unsure of the amount to be clipped, seek instruction from a groomer or a
veterinary practice. Once a dog has had a bad experience during nail clipping, it
will never forget, making future occasions difficult for the handler.
Brushing the coat
Once the general checks are complete, brushing and combing in preparation for
the bath can begin. It is essential to brush and comb before the bath to remove
all matted and tangled hair. Shampoo and drying make matting much worse in
some coat types. Comb check the coat to ensure no tangles are left.
Start the procedure with:
(1)The hind legs
(2)Then the forelegs
(3) Back to the tail section and tail
178
Chapter 16
(4)
 The body coat, one side at a time
(5)
Chest area
(6) Lastly the head, face and ears
Pay particular attention to the groin area and the armpit area on the forelegs
where mats may develop. The head and ears in breeds such as Poodle, Cocker
    a       r 
and fine and tends to form small mats.
The eye area on breeds such as Pekinese and Shih Tzu needs particular atten-
tion and care and these are short-nosed breeds (brachycephalic) with protruding
eyes. As a last resort, it may be necessary to remove mats and tangles with scis-
sors or electric clippers, especially if it is clearly painful to the dog or the dog is
becoming aggressive due to the grooming.
Bathing
Reasons for bathing:
· To control skin parasites
· To clean soiled coat
· To improve coat appearance for showing
· As part of a medical treatment
·To mask the scent of oestrus
Equipment includes:
· Cotton wool to plug ears (optional)
·Shampoo/conditioner
·Mixer hose or jug
·Bath with non-slip mat
· Towel or dryer
Ear plugs. After brushing and combing, ear plugs may be placed in the ear canal
to prevent the entry of shampoo and water. This is optional and should not be
used if upsetting to the dog.
Shampoo. Use a general-purpose shampoo unless the coat requires otherwise.
Conditioners may be used to improve the coat texture and make it more man-
ageable for final brushing when dry.
Shampoos available include the following:
· Mild -- have only low levels of detergent to avoid eye or skin irritation.
·Medicated - prescribed by a veterinary surgeon in cases where the dog has
Grooming and Coat Care179
skin problems. These shampoos contain antiseptics such as iodine to reduce
skin bacteria levels or drugs to assist a specific skin condition.
·Insecticida! - for control of surface/skin parasites such as lice, fleas and ticks.
These are often used in combination with parasite control programmes that
use spot on, tablet or injection methods.
· Colour enhancing - used to improve the appearance of coats, particularly
white ones.
· Conditioners - used to prevent tangles in long-haired coats and improve the
brushing-out process once dry. Used in show dogs such as Yorkshire Terriers,
Maltese Terriers, Afghans and Shih Tzus.
Always decant the shampoo required into a plastic container (such as an old
washing-up liquid bottle) as this allows easy application of the shampoo, used
either concentrated or diluted. If the shampoo should be knocked and fall there
is no risk of broken glass and the noise of the container falling will not frighten
the dog.
Mixer hose or jug. Use of a hose with a shower head allows the water pressure
and temperature to be regulated (Fig. 16.16). If a hose is not available for rinsing.
then use a jug
Bath. A household bath can be used, with a hair catcher over the plug hole to
to prevent the dog from damaging the bath surface if it slips or panics. Rubber
bath mats or car mats can be used.
Towels or dryer. Several towels are needed for any breed other than small or
toy (Fig. 16.17). Always provide more than required to avoid having to leave a
half-dry dog to shake off the excess water over all surfaces. In winter, place the
dog in a warm area to dry once excess water has been removed from the coat
using towels. Household hand-held hair dryers (Fig. 16.18) may be used but be
careful introducing the dog to the dryer as the noise and warm air fow may
frighten it. Never hold dryers too close or use a high-temperature high-flow
setting-
·Floor dryers - mounted on stands, are powerful, quickly drying heavy-coated
breeds (Figs 16.19 and 16.20).
·Cage dryers - attach to the front of holding kennels and cages. These are used
after towel drying.
·Wall-mounted dryers - similar to the hand-held dryer but more powerful and
space saving. A hose applies the “blow dry' effect when directed on to the
"1eoo s,8op
· Cabinet dryers (Fig. 16.21) box cages with a false, vented floor, containing the
blow dryer. Warm air flows, fan assisted, into the box area where the dog sits.
180
Chapter 16
Fg.16.17Have several towels available.
Fig. 16.16 Dog bath with shower hose
Method of bathing. Make sure before bathing starts that all the equip-
P jo ino 1o mu dunf m op e seoua 1an 'puey m si painba1 nuau
 bath in case of injury - always lift in. Do not leave unattended in case the dog
panics.
Use collar restraint to attach the dog to the bath, leaving both the groomer's
hands free. A nylon collar and lead is used, never a chain. If the dog panics or
slips the nylon lead can be cut quickly, preventing injury.
The groomer should wear protective clothing and non-slip soles to shoes or
 boots, for safety. When using medicated and parasite shampoo, glove protection
is required.
· Lift into the bath. Two people may be required to lift medium and large
breeds.
· Stand dog on a non-slip mat.
·Regulate water temperature.
· Soak hindquarters first, using hands to force water through heavy coats.
 Continue soaking, moving last to the head and face, protecting the eyes from
the water.
 Once the dog is soaked, introduce the shampoo, using hand and sponge. As
before, start over the hindquarters and move towards the head, including
eyes at all times.
Grooming and Coat Care
181
Fg. 16.18 Hand-held dryer.
Fig. 16.19 Type of floor dryer stand.
Fg. 16.20  Type of floor dryer stand.
Fig. 16.21  Cabinet dryer with false vented floor.
 Hold the head up to encourage water and shampoo to drain back along the
spine while attending to the face and chin.
Rinse off the shampoo.
 Repeat the application of shampoo (if medicated or parasite shampoo, leave
in contact with the skin for correct amount of time).
Rinse thoroughly.
Squeeze water out of coat using hands or chamois-type cloth.
 Towel dry on a non-slip surface and place in a warm area to finish drying or
dry using a dryer.
i   s s     qi   r as
182
Chapter 16
Fig. 16.23 In the holding kennel awaiting collection
by owner.
Fig. 16.22 Grooming table.
During the drying stage the coat can be brushed out. The object of using the
dryer to dry some breeds is to get the coat as fluffy as possible. To achieve this.
the coat is dried in sections, brushing constantly to straighten curls.
Finally, trim nails if necessary and clip hair between foot pads. Professional
groomers would then proceed with the plucking, stripping, clipping and scissor-
ing required by certain breeds, depending on coat type and requirements. This
would be done on a grooming table (Fig. 16.22). The dog would then be trans-
ferred to the holding kennel to await collection by the owner (Fig. 16.23).
Cats
Grooming provides the owner with the opportunity not only to condition the
coat and skin but to:
· Clean any discharge and examine the eyes
· Clean ears and check for signs of infection, excess wax or ear mites
 Examine mouth and check teeth for build-up of tartar and for gum disease
·Examine and trim claws and clean claw bed of caked-on dirt
·Clean dirty coat
·Check for skin parasites
Grooming should begin from the time of weaning to accustom a kitten to short
but daily coat care. As with the dog, this also becomes a bonding/playtime session
Grooming and Coat Care
between the owner and the animal. This attention is particularly important if the
kitten is to be a show animal.
Cats spend a considerable part of every day in self-grooming. They have a spe-
cially adapted tongue with backward-facing barbs for the removal of dead hairs
from the coat.
Grooming will:
·Remove dead hair
·Remove material from coat surface
· Stimulate skin and distribute secreted oils for coat condition
·Provide a feeling of well-being
Constant grooming in long-haired cats can cause health problems. During self-
grooming the cat will swallow large quantities of saliva and wet hair, which forms
 o  sn  s an n sid   s 
an obstruction in the digestive tract.
 In the event of loss of appetite, weight loss or constipation, contact a veteri-
nary surgeon for advice.
The coat
Selective breeding and genetic mutation have enhanced cats' coats or caused coat
loss. The cat has a top coat of guard hair and an undercoat which consists of
coarse, bristly awn hairs and soft downy hairs.
Examples of coat type are as follows:
·Short hair, e.g. British short hair, has short guard hairs with even shorter but
slightly curly awn hairs as a sparse undercoat.
·Long hair, e.g. Persian, has extremely long guard hairs with a thick undercoat
of downy hair which gives this breed its full, dense coat.
·Curly coat, e.g. Cornish Rex, has very short curly awn and downy hairs of the
same length and no guard hairs at all.
Wire hair, e.g. American wire hair, has short curly, even coiled guard hairs,
down and awn.
·Hairless, e.g. Sphinx, which has a coat so sparse as to appear hairless but in
fact has a covering of downy hairs on the legs, tail and face only.
The cat has three kinds of skin gland to care for its coat. Two types are sweat-
producing glands, some located only on the pads of the feet, others over the entire
body used to leave its scent and mark territory. Territory marking is seen when
the cat rubs against objects. The third type of gland is the sebaceous gland near
the hair follicles which secretes sebum to help waterproof the coat.
Moulting occurs in the spring and autumn, when the coat comes out in what
seem like handfulls at a time. Long-haired coats moult all year round due to the
184
Chapter 16
constant room temperatures in which these cats tend to live. It is therefore essen-
grooming routines.
Grooming notes
Short coat
These cats are efficient self-groomers, with the normal-shaped head giving a
stroking along the lie of the hair or polishing the coat using a piece of silk, velvet
or chamois leather cloth.
Equipment required:
· Fine-toothed comb
· Soft bristle brush
·Rubber brush (see Fig. 16.7)
·Chamois cloth
Long coat
With the shorter faces resulting in shorter tongues, these breeds tend to be less
efficient groomers. Moulting all year round, the coat tends to mat. Grooming is
needed daily, split into two half-hour sessions during the day to check for mats.
Start with a normal comb to remove dead hair and then use a fine comb to fluff
up the coat. A toothbrush is used to brush the face hair, keeping well clear of the
eyes.
Equipment required:
·Wide-toothed and fine-toothed combs
·Slicker brush
·Bristle brush
· Toothbrush - medium bristle
Curly coat
Should not be overgroomed as this could result in baldness. A soft brush with
short bristles is sufficient for removal of dead coat. Groom twice weekly
Equipment required:
· Soft bristle brush
Grooming and Coat Care
Wire coat
These have a crimped, woolly coat which is coarse to the touch. Removal of the
dead hair is essential but ensure that the curls spring untangled back into posi-
tion. This is achieved by minimum brushing with a soft bristle brush and hand
stroking at least twice weekly.
Equipment required:
·Soft bristle brush
Hairless coat
With hair only on extremities, skin conditioning is more essential. Do not brush
these breeds. The skin needs daily sponging to remove dander (small scales from
the hair and dried skin secretions). A sponge moistened with warm water wiped
over the body daily or more frequently if required will remove the dander which,
if left, could cause a skin allergy.
Equipment required:
· Sponge
Bathing
Groom out all mats and hair contaminated with faeces. If these mats cannot be
groomed out, it may be necessary to cut them off with scissors.
As with the dog, make sure all equipment is to hand before starting. A
non-slip surface in the bath is essential in order to give the cat something to cling
to. Unless bathing is a routine experience, cats can find it very traumatic so only
bath if really necessary.
Two people are required, one to hold and reassure, one to bath.
·Fill the bath with about 10cm of warm water into which the cat is lowered
gently.
A mixer hose and/or a sponge are used to soak the coat hair and apply
the shampoo. Proceed with a thorough rinse and then wrap the cat in a
towel.
·At all times, make sure water or shampoo never gets close to the eyes, ears
or mouth.
· Wipe over the face with cotton wool moistened in warm water.
Ap Ay pn eare ea e un daay pe Ap pm ·
· If the cat will tolerate it, use an electric dryer set only to warm and held at a
safe distance.
· Once the coat is dry, comb out gently and brush.
186
Chapter 16
Finish with the grooming of the coat hair.
·Short hair - start at the head and comb/brush towards the tail, including chest
and abdomen. Then rub down with a chamois or nylon pad to polish the coat.
· Long hair - comb legs free of tangles then abdomen, flanks, back, chest and
neck, then the tail section, fluffing out the coat hair by brushing the wrong
way. Finally, using a toothbrush, groom the face hair.
When all grooming is complete, remove the dead hair from the combs and
brushes, wash, disinfect and rinse before storing to prevent cross infection
between grooming sessions or infecting another animal groomed with the same
equipment.
Warning
If the coat is dirtied by chemicals such as tar, creosote, paint or oil, remove as
soon as possible to prevent absorption through the skin or self-grooming and
ingestion of the chemical, which may be a poison. Never use chemicals to remove
these substances. On a dry coat, use soft margarine, washing-up liquid or liquid
paraffn to work the substance free of the hairs, then proceed with a bath and dry
thoroughly. If the cat has self-groomed, contact a veterinary surgeon immediately
for advice.
Chapter 17
Pets: Mammals, Birds and Fish
General husbandry for mammals and birds
Small mam mals may not be used to handling and can bite. Initial restraint should
be firm but gentle to prevent injury (Fig. 17.1).
Housing
Cages, runs, housing and pens need to be well made and of materials suitable to
the species being housed. To prevent injury, housing should:
· Have no sharp edges
· Have no rough surfaces
· Be in good repair
·Be easy to clean
· Be escape proof
 Be large enough for free movement and exercise
 Be dry and well ventilated
· Be heated or cooled as required during the seasonal changes in environ-
mental temperature
·Have a supply of electricity
· Have no direct sunlight into housing
·Not be subject to temperature extremes
Health
A regular examination to determine health status or detect injury is required. If
 any animal is found to be diseased, it is important to move it to isolation or quar-
antine areas.
Only purchase animals from a reputable and reliable source. It is easy to intro-
duce disease to an animal collection, which can be hard to treat and eliminate.
To maintain health:
Clean housing thoroughly
 Move any sick animal to isolation
· Apply high levels of hygiene to all equipment
187
188
Chapter 17
Fig. 17.1 Gentle restraint, allowing the mouse to explore without escaping.
·Have a good air flow through the housing to prevent breathing problems and
airborne diseases
· Change bedding several times a week, depending on species
Nutrition
The needs of each species of animal have been well documented. However, there
are general guidelines:
· Feed only fresh and clean leafy foods
              a
damaged and is not contaminated
· Feed must provide all the nutrients necessary for full health
·Water is fresh and always available
·Water containers/feeders are cleaned regularly
· Food is stored in closed containers at room temperature and kept dry
MAMMALS
Rabbits
There are over 80 breeds of rabbit, with variation in shape, colour, size and char-
acter. Belonging to the order Lagomorpha, they usually fall into three main
categories:
Pets: Mammals, Birds and Fish
189
Fig. 17.2 Dutch rabbit (short coated)
Normal - these breeds have a coat type of short, dense fur, similar to that of
the wild rabbit, and were bred originally for meat, e.g. New Zealand White,
Chinchilla, Dutch (Fig. 17.2) and Californian
Fancy - mainly bred for show, with distinguishing features, e.g. Lop for their
 large ears, Netherland Dwarf and Flemish Giant for their size, Himalayan for
their coat markings
 Rex and Satin - noted for their velvet- or satin-like coats in which the guard
hairs are missing, or below the under-hair level, giving the coat a smooth,
dense appearance
Rabbits are social animals and should not be kept on their own. In the wild they
live in groups with a well-defined hierarchy. The males will fight to defend terri-
tory if kept in the same housing, as they would in the wild. Females will live
  o ss p as n i re q  
reached. Most owners pair up male and female, with one or both neutered if not
intending to breed from them. Sometimes rabbits can be paired with other species,
such as guinea-pigs, but this is not always ideal because the rabbits do tend to bully
the guinea-pig (being a smaller animal), also the two species have different nutri-
tional requirements, making feeding diffcult. A rabbit kept alone needs a lot of
human interaction to prevent fear or aggressive behaviour. To enable this, some
single rabbits are trained to use litter trays and are kept as house pets.
Biological data
Male
buck
Female
20P
Offspring
kits (kittens)
Adult weight
1-10 kg (depending on breed)
Maturity
12 weeks onwards
Continued
190
Chapter 17
(Continued)
Gestation period
28-32 days
Litter size
2-7 (average size)
Weaning age
6 weeks
Body temperature
38.5°℃
Life span
6-8years(average)
Anatomical facts
Eyes
Rabbits have a wide field of vision, 190° for each eye. Dilation of the pupil means
their night vision is about 7-8 times more effective than that of humans.
Ears
Have a good blood supply and assist with body heat regulation and sound
gathering.
Teeth
Dental formula: incisors 2/1; canines 0/0 (diastema or gap); premolars 3/2; molars
3/3.
 Rabbit teeth are open rooted, continuing to grow throughout life. If the correct
foods and environment are provided, the teeth are continually worn down, which
is essential for health. Rabbits are classifed as herbivores, this effectively means
that their diet consists mostly of plant matter. Therefore the diet has a high fibre
content.
The teeth are adapted to bite, chew and grind the high-fibre diet. It is because
of constant wear and tear that the teeth continue to grow during the animal's life.
The upper incisors are chisel shaped and grow roughly at a rate of 2 mm/week.
The two pairs of upper incisors (Fig. 17.3) are situated one behind the other. The
.VT-
Peg or
hind
incisor
nnmao
Diastema
Fig. 17.3 Rabbit skull: detail of mouth.
Pets: Mammals, Birds and Fish  191
upper hind incisors are called peg teeth. They are intended to be worn away by
the lower incisors; in a normal, healthy rabbit this effect gives the teeth their
sharp chisel edge.
Body cavities
The thoracic cavity is small, allowing for a large abdomen, which houses a lengthy
intestinal tract with a large caecum.
The digestive system of rabbits has evolved to ensure that the maximum
benefit is derived from their diet. Digested foods pass through the stomach, into
the small intestines to the caecum. This is a sac-like structure near the junction
of the small and large intestines. It contains active bacteria that break down plant
fibres (cellulose) for digestion and absorption.
Many nutrients would be lost to the body at this point; however, the rabbit
overcomes this loss by passing these nutrients in the form of soft caecal pellets
(produced at night) from the anus and eating them (referred to as refection).
The swallowed caecal pellets pass through the digestive tract, allowing further
breakdown and absorption of any useful nutrients. The rabbit then passes the
characteristic dry, hard faecal pellet.
Skeleton
Light, delicate bones are covered with a powerful muscle system, especially to
the hind legs. This can mean that the limbs and spine are prone to fracture, if
handled carelessly.
Scent glands
Located in the anal region for marking of territory.
Housing
There are many texts providing plans and layouts for both inside and outside
housing. They also provide construction details for housing and runs and safe
materials to use. Rabbits and guinea-pigs of similar size can be kept together
(Fig. 17.4).
Rabbits do require regular exercise, ideally an enclosed section of grass in the
garden or a mobile run, and an assault course with wide plastic pipes in the hutch
 m ny   oq  n q  (ha o  sog 
interest.
Housing should:
· Protect from extremes of heat, cold and draughts. The preferred temperature
1s12-20°C
192
Chapter 17
Fig. 17.4 Example of group housing of rabbit and guinea-pig
· Be well constructed from good-quality materials. If materials have been
treated, check the chemicals used are non-toxic
· Be the correct size, with separate compartments for living and sleeping
· Protect from predators by being raised and fitted with a sturdy catch/lock
system
·Contain materials for gnawing to reduce the teeth length. A supply of
bark-covered logs from non-toxic trees (i.e. fruit trees) should be regularly
changed
● Include an escape-proof portable outdoor 'summer' run for natural grazing
and exercise
·Provide good ventilation
·Be easy to clean. Remove soiled bedding at least twice weekly. Rabbits tend
 r e s n p sq o e rn e e   u nos a a 
tray. Ideal types of bedding include wood shavings to absorb urine, straw and
hay for warmth. Disinfect at least monthly to remove the scale and odour
from housing
Food and water
Many rabbits are fed on commercially produced pelleted foods which may
contain anti-coccidial agents which could be harmful to some species. Check the
packaging if rabbits and guinea-pigs feed together as these additives would be
harmful to the guinea-pig.
Rabbits are herbivores, so the main diet should consist of roughage: good-
quality hay or grass, supplemented by cereals, leafy greens and vegetables. Select
vegetables and greens carefully. Do not feed if any of the following are suspected
or present:
Pets: Mammals, Birds and Fish 
193
+
 Greens are not freshly picked
·Mould is visible
· The feed is frozen or unwashed
· The feed has been sprayed with chemicals or weedkillers
· Plants that may be poisonous (see below)
Rabbits naturally eat their own faeces (coprophagia), this usually takes place in
the early morning with the supplied diet. These caecal pellets are eaten directly
from the anus. They are mucus covered and stick together, passing twice through
the digestive system for maximal extraction of nutrient material.
Most rabbit foods on the market are sold loose and unlabelled, these require
supplementation with hay and fresh greens.
The type of food used is a cereal mixture of oats, maize and barley, mixed with
peas and beans. These ingredients form a complete diet when pellets containing
fbre and vitamin/mineral supplements are provided. Problems can arise with
these diets if the rabbit selects only some of the ingredients, leaving the rest
uneaten, resulting an unbalanced diet.
Complete foods are similar to the rabbit mixes but with the addition of alfalfa
to balance the cereals and provide the required dietary fibre content. These foods
are useful for rabbits living in cities where there is no access to weeds, vegeta-
tion or hay.
When selecting and feeding greens and vegetables, ensure that they are as fresh
as possible, pesticide and herbicide free.
Treats are manufactured commercially to exercise teeth; however, it is still
to wear down the constantly growing teeth.
Some wild plants are poisonous to rabbits and should never be used for feed,
these include:
·Any flowers or leaves from bulbs, i.e. tulip, bluebell or crocus
· Lily of the valley, laburnum or lupins
·Buttercups
·Deadly nightshade
+
 Scarlet pimpernel
·Bracken
· Hemlock (easily confused with hedge parsley)
·Foxglove
·Privet or yew
·Bindweed
Fresh water must be available at all times, from a water bottle and spout or a
drinking bowl. If water bottles are used, the spout must be of a non-chewable
material. Water bowls can be diffcult to keep free of hay, food and droppings.
Whichever method is used, a change of water must be made daily.
194
Chapter 17
Guinea-pigs
Guinea-pigs (Cavia aperea porcellus) are also known as *cavies', belonging to the
order Rodentia under the suborder Hystricomorphs, which includes chinchillas.
       s     
colour and marking variations. These can be grouped as:
 Smooth or short hair (also referred to as self varieties), e.g. Self Golden or
Dutch
 Containing whirls, ridges and rosettes, e.g. Abyssinian
· Long coated (up to 50 cm in length) with long, straight hairs, e.g. Peruvian and
Sheltie. This type requires a lot of grooming and is mostly kept for showing.
therefore not recommended for beginners
Guinea-pigs are nervous animals but are popular as pets. They are generally
docile, rarely biting, and are easy to handle and tame. They should not be kept
on their own because they are very sociable animals. All-female or all-male
groups can live together; however, the males must not be housed anywhere near
the females as once they are sexually mature they will fight for dominance.
Females and males can be neutered if non-breeding mixed groups are to be kept
as pets.
 qno nq siou no a po  se a s pou ar snd-a
have short legs and stocky bodies, they are able to run quite quickly, especially
when startled. For communication they are capable of making a range of noises,
from squeaks and squeals to grunts. Although guinea-pigs do not dig, they are at
home in dense undergrowth, and enjoy making 'runs' through long grass. The
main difference between the cavy and other rodents is the length of gestation
and the resulting advanced stage of their young at birth.
Biological data
Male
boar
Female
sow
Offspring
piglets
Adult weight
75-100 g
Maturity
males: 8-10 weeks
females: 4-5 weeks
Gestation period
60-72 days
Litter size
2-6 (average size)
Weaning age
34 weeks
Body temperature
38-39°℃
Life span
4-7 years
Pets: Mammals, Birds and Fish
195
Anatomicalfacts
Teeth
Dental formula: incisors 1/1; canines 0/0 (diastema); premolars 1/1; molars 3/3.
The teeth are open rooted and chisel shaped, continuing to grow throughout
the guinea-pig's lifetime. Guinea-pigs do not have the second small pair of
the gap behind the incisors called the diastema. This allows the sides of the cheeks
to be drawn in behind the incisors, enabling the animal to continue gnawing while
regulating what it swallows.
Tail
Born without a tail.
Scent glands
An  m pn p di an o po ae sp snos
Peivis
The pubic symphysis (foor of the pelvic joint) will separate under the influence
of hormones during parturition, in order to allow the newborn passage through
the birth canal. Newborn guinea-pigs are referred to as precocious, meaning that
within a few hours of birth they are self-sufficient, eating and drinking from
feeding dishes. They are born with a complete coat, eyes and ears open, and with
a set of teeth in place.
Housing
Guinea-pigs are sociable and can be housed as a colony. A single animal can be
housed with another species such as a rabbit breed of similar size (see Fig. 17.4).
Housing should:
· Protect from extremes of temperature in summer and winter, similar to the
rabbit
· Protect the animal from getting wet and exposure to draughts
· Be well constructed from good-quality materials which have not been treated
with any toxic chemicals
● Be the correct size; rabbit housing can accommodate 2-3 guinea-pigs
· Provide good air flow and ventilation
· Have a summer run for natural grazing, or wire off a part of the garden to
allow for space and freedom to exercise
196
Chapter 17
Fig. 17.5 Type of hutch used in housing
·Be easy to clean. Use similar bedding as that used for rabbits, but it must be
clean, dry and dust free. Guinea-pigs tend not to toilet in one area, so more
frequent cleaning is required than for the rabbit. If feeding and water bowls
are used, these need daily washing as they tend to be fouled.
An example of guinea-pig housing is shown in Fig. 17.5.
Foodandwater
Guinea-pigs often chew feed and water containers. Choose a suitable indestruc-
tible material.
Guinea-pigs are herbivores and spend most waking hours grazing if allowed.
By nature, guinea-pigs dislike any change to their routines, so watch for correct
use of water feeders, if any changes have been made to equipment.
Commercially available pelleted guinea-pig feed can be used. If any other pre-
pared diet is used, then it is essential to supplement vitamin C, as ascorbic acid,
in the diet, for skin and coat condition. Guinea-pigs are unable to manufacture
vitamin C and must receive a dietary source. Although some vitamin C can be
obtained from natural grazing, they must have a daily supply of 10mg/kg body
weight. During pregnancy the quantity of vitamin C must be increased by three
times the normal daily amount to maintain a healthy animal.
Some rabbit diets may also contain levels of vitamin D that are too high for
the guinea-pig. Read the packaging and ask the supplier for advice. Supply good-
quality roughage such as hay or cut grass. Supplement pelleted food with fresh
vegetables (swedes and carrots) and fruit. Useful green foods include broccoli,
dandelion and groundsel. Always provide fresh drinking water daily, using similar
drinking bottles and spouts to those found in rabbit housing.
Pets: Mammals, Birds and Fish
197
Mice
Mice kept as pets are known as fancy mice and are derived from the wild house
mouse. Belonging to the order Rodentia under the suborder Myomorph, they are
categorised first according to their coat type (varieties), then they are grouped
 into sections within each variety by colour and body markings.
 Mice are social animals and will live as a breeding pair or as a grouping of two
or more females, but male mice will fight if kept together. Aggression is signalled
by drumming the tail on the ground and stamping the hind legs. They are eff-
cient climbers, clinging to surfaces and clothing of handlers, making handling
easy. Mice do tend to be more active at night, communicating with each other by
body language and voice, squeaking (high-frequency, high-pitch sounds) when
frightened.
Biological data
Male
buck
 Female
20p
Offspring
kittens/pups
Adult weight
20-40 g
Maturity
34 weeks
 Gestation period
19-21 days
Litter size
5-11 (average size)
Weaning age
18 days
Body temperature
37.5°℃
Life span
1-2'/ years
Anatomical facts
Teeth
Dental formula: incisors 1/1; canines 0/0; premolars 0/0; molars 3/3.
The teeth are open rooted and continue to grow (incisor teeth only). The lower
jaw is also adapted in movement to allow gnawing or chewing.
Eyes
Vision is not good, but because of the eye position (on the side of the head), the
feld of vision compensates. As a result, mice navigate their environment through
smell and touch.
Feet
Using scent glands on the soles of their feet, they can mark territory and food
location.
198
Chapter 17
Fig. 17.6 Housing with plenty of compartments
Housing
It is important that mouse housing is environmentally enriched with tubes, ropes,
exercise wheels and compartments. All will enable the mouse to exercise and
keep busy for health and fitness (Fig. 17.6).
Mice may be housed in small groups or alone. They are usually active through-
out the day and night, with rest periods.
Housing should:
 Be escape proof, using commercial metal, glass or plastic cages or tanks
 Be kept indoors, with an activity area and nest box containing a variety of
bedding materials (shredded paper, hay or straw)
·Have no direct sunlight, thus avoiding extremes of temperature
Be dry and easy to clean
Be cleaned at least twice a week to reduce odour and accumulation of urine
and faeces
· Contain activities
Foodandwater
Mice are omnivores. Diets in pellet form are available. Mice require some animal-
based protein in their diet, which the commercial foods will provide. They benefit
from other additions to the diet, such as small quantities of dog biscuit, whole-
meal bread, pieces of fruit (apples, grapes and strawberries) and vegetables (espe-
cially green vegetables) in small amounts, several times a week.
Remove any uneaten food materials each morning.
Water must be provided at all times, via a water bottle and sipper tube. Fresh
water should be provided on a daily basis.
Pets: Mammals, Birds and Fish
199
Rats
Rats kept as pets are also known as fancy rats. Belonging to the order Rodentia
and under the suborder Myomorph, the fancy rat species is from the wild brown
rat, Ratus norvegicus. They are categorised first according to their coat type
(varieties; e.g. hooded or selfs), then grouped into sections by colour and body
markings.
 Rats are highly intelligent, social animals, living as groups of two or more of
the same sex. They can be kept as single pets and will bond with their human
owner. Rats can be trained to respond to their name and learn a variety of tricks.
Unlike other rodents, they need at least an hour a day of play time outside their
cage or housing. A single rat would require more.
Biological data
Male
buck
Female
20p
Offspring
sdnd
Adult weight
400-800 g
Maturity
6 weeks onwards
Gestation period
20-22 days
Litter size
6-12 (average size)
Weaning age
21 days
Body temperature
38℃
Life span
3 years
Anatomical facts
Teeth
Dental formula: incisors1/1; canines 0/0; premolars 0/0; molars 3/3.
Rats have open-rooted incisor teeth which continue to grow.
Long bones
Ossify in the second year of life.
Digestive tract
Rats have a divided stomach, large caecum and no gall bladder.
Housing
Rats will live in small groups or alone, but do need plenty of space for activity,
toys and environmental enrichment. They can become attached to their owners,
200
Chapter 17
Fig. 17.8 Close-up view of a two-level house.
Fig. 17.7 Type of housing with two
levels for a rat.
are quick to learn and easy to train. Rats will burrow given the opportunity and
can be nocturnal.
Housing should:
· Provide enough space for a nest box and activity areas
●Be inside but not in direct sunlight
·Be interesting, with different levels (Figs 17.7 and 17.8), but easy to clean
 Be cleaned 2-3 times per week to reduce odour, urine and faeces. Use a dust-
free, absorbent litter in the cage, with shredded paper for bedding in the nest
area
· Be gnaw proof and made of materials not treated with toxic chemicals
Food and water
Rats are omnivores. They do not eat strange or new foods readily. Diets can be
bought in pellet form, as for mice. Check packaging for a high protein content.
The rat diet can be added to in the form of lean meat scraps from the table or
dog food, wholegrain cereals, fruit and some vegetables. Provide with fresh water
daily, using a bottle and sipper tube to prevent contamination.
Pets: Mammals, Birds and Fish
201
Hamsters
Hamsters are one of the most popular small pets. Belonging to the order Roden-
tia under the suborder of Myomorphs, there are over 20 species of hamster.
However, those most commonly kept as pets are:
Syrian (golden) hamster - should be kept singly as adults. They tend to be
aggressive to other hamsters, both male and female. They are known to hiber-
nate if their environmental temperature falls below 5°C
Chinese hamsters - less sociable than the Russian hamster, but can be kept in
 pairs or small groups if introduced to each other when young
Russian hamsters - the most sociable of all. In the wild they live in family
groups and, if not handled regularly, they can become aggressive
Hamsters are active at dawn and dusk (referred to as crepuscular animals) but
sleep most of the day. They are escapologists and any cage needs to be secure.
Dwarf hamsters, such as the very small Roborovski hamster, are best kept in tanks
 Or cages sold as mouse housing. The Roborovski is not recommended as a pet for
children because it is so small and active, and therefore hard to handle. Hamsters
can bite if disturbed from sleep, and when feeling threatened or aggressive they
sometimes squeal, screech or hiss. They live according to smell, becoming accus-
tomed to the scent of the group if not living singly. If one animal has been handled
extensively or placed in the company of another, the group may attack it.
Biological data
Syrian(Golden)
Chinese
Russian
Male
sire
sire
sire
Female
dam
dam
dam
 Offspring
sdnd
sdnd
sdnd
Adult weight
85-150 g
27-35 g
27-35 g
Maturity
6-10 weeks
14 weeks
14 weeks
Gestation period
15-18 days
20-22 days
19-20 days
Litter size
3-7
3-7
3-7
Weaning age
21-28 days
20-22 days
20-22 days
Body temperature
37-38°℃
37-38°℃
37-38°℃
Life span
1'/-2 years
1/-2 years
1/-2 years
Anatomical facts
Teeth
Incisors are open rooted.
Dental formula: incisors 1/1; canines 0/0; premolars 0/0; molars 3/3.
202
Chapter 17
Mouth
Hamsters have large cheek pouches, reaching almost to the scapula area of the
shoulder, used to transport food or store it temporarily.
Scent glands
Situated in the flank region and used to mark territory, these are seen as darker
patches of skin and are also known as fank glands.
Housing
Hamsters are naturally solitary animals, tending to fight in group situations. When
awake, they have a lot of energy. Hamsters in the wild will dig tunnels close to
the surface. To prevent boredom, housing should include playthings such as card-
board tubes, empty jam jars and exercise wheels. If the temperature of their envi-
the Syrian hamster.
They chew soft metals, plastic and wood. Care with bedding and activity equip
ment is necessary as the hamster will chew and pouch any material, which may
cause pouch infections.
Housing should:
·Have only safe bedding materials, such as peat or wood shavings as a base,
covered with untreated paper or cardboard for shredding and nesting
·Be kept inside
·Not be in direct sunlight
· Include a sleeping house
· Be well constructed and gnaw proof
·Be cleaned at least 2-3 times a week
·Provide exercise equipment, such as a wheel, tunnels, ladders and plenty of
safe materials for shredding
Food and water
The hamster is an omnivore, therefore a commercially produced *hamster mix'
food can be used, which contains maize, corn, alfalfa, dried peas, sunflower seeds
and peanuts. The diet should contain some animal protein, such as small quanti-
ties of cat and dog food or raw meat (not pork). Vegetables and fruit will help to
improve health status, with small quantities given daily. Hamsters need a supply
of food to gnaw in order to prevent incisor overgrowth. As well as the nuts in the
diet, dog biscuits and wholemeal macaroni can be provided.
Hamsters will attempt to eat and hoard anything, therefore they must not be
given cake or sweets. The adult hamster will eat its own droppings, particularly
for vitamins B and K formed in the gut by bacteria.
Provide fresh drinking water daily using a water bottle and sipper tube.
Pets: Mammals, Birds and Fish
203
Gerbils
Belonging to the order Rodentia under the suborder Myomorph, there are about
Mongolian gerbil. The gerbil is adapted to living in desert and semi-desert areas
(Mongolia and north-eastern China). Shaw's jird is in the same family as the
Mongolian gerbil although it is much larger and originates from the Middle East
and North Africa.
As a result of their wild habitat, gerbils can conserve liquid, producing very
concentrated urine and dry faeces, which are odour free. Gerbils are active both
day and night (referred to as diurnal). In body proportions the gerbil closely
resembles the kangaroo, jumping rather than running when attacked. In the wild,
 gerbils can leap several feet in any direction, especially if startled, which, as a pet,
can make them hard to handle.
Gerbils communicate through thumping their hind legs to warn of danger or
indicate dominance. They spend a large part of their day burrowing, shredding
bedding, tunnelling and exploring. Gerbils are best kept in groups, with same-sex
litter mates or in breeding pairs.
Biological data
Male
sire
 Female
dam
Offspring
cubs
Adult weight
75-130 kg (depending on breed)
Maturity
10-12 weeks
 Gestation period
24-28 days
Litter size
3-6 (average size)
Weaning age
21-28 days
 Body temperature
38°℃
Life span
2-5 years (average)
Anatomical facts
Teeth
 Incisors are open rooted. Dental formula: incisors 1/1; canines 0/0; premolars 0/0;
molars 3/3.
Scent glands
Situated on the abdomen, these glands are used for identification and marking
of territory.
204
Chapter 17
Adrenal glands
Hormones from these endocrine glands assist the gerbil's ability to conserve
water in adverse conditions.
Hind legs
Longer than front legs, therefore they can jump to escape from predators.
Tail
Used for balance and turning. If grasped away from its base, the tail skin will
slough to allow escape.
Housing
Gerbils are social animals and will live in groups, but can be aggressive to any
newcomer. As pets, they are easy to handle, clean and friendly.
They are adapted to live in extremes of temperature, from 43°C to below freez
ing. The gerbil is a burrowing animal, creating elaborate tunnel systems and
entrances. The burrowing material, peat, hay or wood shavings, needs to be dam-
pened and impacted at the base of the housing to allow this tunnel building.
The ideal housing is a fish tank or glass-sided tank, with a mesh lid. Allow
enough room between the lid and the tunnel material for above-ground or
surface activity.
Housing should:
· Be escape proof
· Contain only non-toxic materials, as gerbils will gnaw anything in their
environment
· Be in a warm environment; 18-29°C is ideal
· Be a gerbilarium - an enclosure not less than a metre long, prepared with
layers of dampened peat and straw
· Be washed, disinfected and rinsed every 2-3 months
· Have good light levels in the daytime, to encourage activity
Gerbils produce only a few drops of urine and faecal pellets are dry and odour
less, so bedding only needs to be changed about every 2-4 weeks, unless it is par-
ticularly dirty.
Food and water
The gerbil is an omnivore, but its diet includes grain (such as wheat, maize, oats,
barley), seeds (such as millet, sunflower) and greens (such as lettuce, dandelion.
groundsel, chickweed). Intake of sunflower seeds should be restricted as these
Pets: Mammals, Birds and Fish
205
Fig. 17.9 Canaries
are too rich in fat and calcium, which can lead to dietary imbalance and ill health
An animal protein source may be included in a commercial gerbil food, or table
scraps or boiled egg can be added to the diet. Also supplement the diet with fresh
fruit and vegetables, such as apple, banana and carrot.
The gerbil will hoard food in a larder area of its housing. Always remove the
uneaten food to prevent it becoming stale. Water must be supplied in bottles with
sipper tubes, which can be attached to the side of the tank or the lid. The water
should be supplied fresh daily.
BIRDS (AVES)
Birds are kept either as pets, for breeding or for exhibition. They can be housed
singly in cages of suitable size or in groups in large outdoor aviaries. There are
many different species of bird, which are assigned to 27 Orders.
The Orders most commonly seen are:
 Anseriformes - ducks, geese and swans
· Falconiformes - diurnal hawks and falcons
· Galliformes - domestic fowl and pheasants
·Passeriformes - finches and canaries (passerines) (Fig. 17.9)
· Psittiformes - parrots and budgerigars (psittacines)
 Stringiformes - owls
 Clubiformes - pigeons and doves
Most pet cage birds come from one of two main Orders:
· Passerines - perching birds (canary)
 Psittacines - climbing birds (budgerigar)
206
Chapter 17
Fig. 17.11 Psittacine foot.
Fig. 17.10 Passerine foot.
The two main features of anatomy which distinguish these two groups are:
· beak conformation - passerines peck at seeds whereas psittacines open fruit
and nuts
·feet conformation - passerines have three outer toes facing forward and one
inner toe facing backward (Fig. 17.10), whereas psittacines have two middle
toes facing forward and two outer toes facing backward (Fig. 17.11)
Other anatomical facts:
· Skeleton - bones are thin, some containing air sacs (linked to the respiratory
system) making up a lightweight structure for flight.
· Digestive tract - food is stored in the crop, the gizzard then grinds the food
to pass to the intestines. The opening cloaca is a common end to the outside
for the digestive, urinary and reproductive tracts.
· Respiratory system - birds have no diaphragm, the lungs are set out in pairs
through the thorax and abdomen area (Fig. 17.12). The bird respiratory
system is complex for improved flow of air to the tissues.
family of birds, budgerigars have a chattering call and can be taught words and
simple tunes. They are easy to keep, both in housing and feeding needs. If let out
of their housing into a room, budgerigars will normally return to the accommo-
dation quite readily. Some birds are valued not for their chatter but for their song,
such as the canary (particularly the male bird). Canaries belong to the finch
family of birds, which are quick moving, hard to catch and usually kept in aviary-
type housing and as a group.
If pet birds do share the house un-caged, it is important to remember that birds
like to explore and should not be left unattended. Precautions to take before
letting the bird out of its cage include:
Pets: Mammals, Birds and Fish
207
Trachea
Cervical
air sac
Interclavicular
Lung (paired)
air sac
Caudal
thoracic air sac
(2)
Cranial
Abdominal sac
thoracic air sac
(2)
(2)
Fg. 17.12 Avian respiratory system.
Fig. 17.13 Budgerigar cage type in common use.
Close all windows and doors
 Do not allow flight or access to the kitchen area, because of hot surfaces and
fumes fatal to a bird
 Check that electric cables are not exposed, and that electric fans are switched
off
 Remove houseplants that are toxic to birds, such as cacti
Remove other pets, such as dogs or cats
Housing for pet birds must be cleaned easily, both daily and, more thoroughly,
monthly. Birds are kept as pets for many reasons, one of which is to display their
beauty, achieved by keeping them in:
Cages (Fig. 17.13)
Aviaries
Cage system
There are many types of cage available, with a variety of costs, size and design.
 However, many are unsuitable for the many varied species kept as pets. A cage
should be as large as possible, especially if the bird is going to be confined for
much of the day in it.
A cage must:
 Be strong and well constructed with no sharp edges (especially around the
cage base)
208
Chapter 17
·Have safe cage fittings, i.e. materials that can not be chewed used for food
containers
· Have good door fastenings
· Be easy to keep clean
· Have meshwork or bars on one side to give a feeling of security to the bird
·Be placed well above ground level, i.e. at eye height
Provide environmental enrichment (toys/activities)
Have a variety of perches (not covered with sand paper as these can damage
feet)
 Be sited away from draughts, direct sunlight and any harmful fumes (cooking
fumes, i.e. over-heated oil, cigarette smoke and room sprays)
·Be cleaned daily (removal of unwanted fresh foods, seeds and droppings)
Aviary system
There are many advantages to the pet birds when housed in a larger space such
as an aviary. Flight becomes possible, providing a more natural environment,
complete with plants and secluded areas. There are disadvantages as well.
Aviaries are more diffcult to clean,it is more time consuming to remove dropped
foods, disease can be carried to the pet birds by wild birds, mice and rats attracted
by the uneaten foodstuff. The most obvious concern for birds housed outside is
their exposure to cold and hot weather conditions.
An aviary must:
·Be well designed, with a safety door, as large as possible in size, and high
enough for good flight but be easy to clean
· Be made of materials that will cause no harm (to include gauge of the netting
and wood types used)
·Have a floor/base that is easy to clean, i.e. concrete
· Have perches of different diameters and heights
·Have shallow baths or a misting system for bathing
·Be covered in part (or one entire side), to avoid wind and rain
·Have an inside shelter of boxes to encourage roosting at night
·Ensure a 12-hour period of daylight, using lighting systems in the winter, to
encourage food intake in the correct amounts
·Never have food containers placed under perches; preferably they should be
off the floor
Budgerigar
The budgerigar is available in a wide range of colours, but in the wild it is green.
Belonging to the Order Psittiformes, its species name is Melopsitacus undulatus.
It originates from the Australian interior, where its natural habitat is semi-arid
(hot) grassland with trees, near water holes.
Pets: Mammals, Birds and Fish
209
Budgerigars are the most practical of the cage birds. They are lively, colourful,
quite hardy, diurnal and can be brought up to mimic human speech. Although
Biological data
Male
cock
 Female
hen
Offspring
chick
Adult weight
30-35 g
Sexing
male bird has blue cere
female has brown cere
Maturity
5 months onwards
Clutch
3-6 white eggs
Incubation time
18 days to hatch (up to 3 weeks)
Fledgling
further 35 days
 Body temperature
40-42°℃
Life span
6-8 years
Anatomical fact
Beak
This is a hinge joint between the skull and upper beak. With no teeth, this allows
increased movements suitable for slicing through nut shells, with the help of a
fexible tongue to obtain food (Fig. 17.14).
Food and water
 Budgerigars are fussy and do not like change to their diet. They should be fed a
 good commercial seed mixture with an iodine supplement (iodine block). Often
a combination of canary seed and millet is used in these feeds. A supply of
calcium as cuttlefish should be held in the cage clips for the bird to attack.
Fig. 17.14 Budgerigar beak.
210
Chapter 17
Fresh fruit, vegetables and green food (dandelion, chickweed, groundsel and
lettuce) all add interest and nutrients to the diet.
dietary grit. This would be swallowed with food in the wild, but for pet birds this
is supplied in soluble form (oyster-shell for minerals) and insoluble form (parti-
cles of stone/rock).
Ensure a fresh supply of water, changed daily in the housing (cage or aviary),
and thorough cleaning of the water containers to prevent growth of algae.
Canary
The canary is found in a wide range of colours and markings but in the wild is a
greenish-yellow colour only. It is part of the finch family of birds, belonging to
the Order Passeriformes (passerines). The species title is Serinus canaria and it
originates from the Canary Islands and parts of Europe.
The natural habitat for the canary is scrubland, fields and pastures, and it is
diurnal. Passerines are perching birds, best kept in aviary flocks because it is rare
that they are tame enough to handle.
Biological data
Male
cock
Female
hen
Offspring
chick
Adult weight
20 g
Sexing
When mature, both sexes look alike. The male bird song is the
best. To be sure of obtaining a male, birds are usually bought
be distinguished by their song
Clutch
3-6 eggs are laid every other day
Incubation time
14 days
Fledgling
further 14 days
 Body temperature
40-42℃
Life span
6-9 years
Anatomical fact
Beak
This is short and conical in shape, used to crack seeds when feeding (Fig. 17.15).
Pets: Mammals, Birds and Fish
211
Fig. 17.15 Canary beak.
Food and water
Canaries are hard-billed seed eaters. Their food contains both cereals and oil
seeds such as canary seed, millet, rape seed and hemp. It is important to remove
the husks from the feed container every day to enable feeding. Appropriately
sized grit (soluble and insoluble) must be available in order to grind the seeds in
the gizzard.
Commercial complete diets are available, but some fresh green food (lettuce,
dandelion, chickweed and alfalfa), fruit and vegetables should also be offered.
Remove any uneaten fresh foods or soaked seeds daily. Soaking enables ger-
mination of seeds, which improves the nutritional value, but it is important that
these are well drained and removed after a few hours if not eaten, to avoid fungal
growth which could be harmful. Tonic foods, which include a greater range of
seed types and are for occasional use, are also available commercially.
Ensure a fresh supply of water, changed daily in the housing (cage or aviary),
and thorough cleaning of the water containers to prevent growth of algae.
FISH
Fish make excellent pets, they are attractive, colourful, and interesting to study
or just watch. Fish do not demand much time and do not make any noise. Feeding
costs are low and equipment can be reasonably simple or as elaborate and expen-
sive as you wish to make it.
Types of fish commonly kept as pets fall into three main groups:
·Cold water (10-26°C)
·Tropical freshwater (21-29°C)
·Tropical marine (21-29°C)
 Of the three groups,the cold water and tropical freshwater fish are normally kept.
Tropical marine fish are complex to keep and a good understanding of their
requirements is essential.
Marine fish live in sea water, they are hypotonic (i.e. less salty than the sea
water that is their environment); this causes water to be drawn out of these fish
212
Chapter 17
Lateral line
Dorsal fin
Caudal-
fin
Operculum
/(gill cover)
(tail)
Pectoralfin
(paired)
Ana
Ventralor
fin
pelvic fin
(paired)
Fig. 17.16 Fish: external fins
by osmosis (see Chapter 2). To counteract this dehydration, they must continu-
ously take in water by drinking. The fish will die rapidly if the water they drink
is not:
· Filtered of excretions (containing ammonia and nitrite)
· The same salt concentration and pH of sea water all the time
Anatomical data
External
Fins (Fig. 17.16) give stability in the water, control the direction of movement
and can be divided into:
 Single - tend to be dorsal (top fin for balance), adipose (in some fish only),
caudal (tail fin for propelling forward) and anal (for balance)
●  Paired - pectoral and ventral (pelvic fins) both used for steering
Fins, combined with body movement, are used for moving through the water
habitat. In some fish the fins are modified for a purpose other than movement,
such as ensuring egg fertilisation (the fused anal fin called a gonopodium) and
protection from predators. The fin positions on the fish body often indicate
lifestyle (as predator or prey may need to be capable of continued speed or only
short bursts, respectively).
The position of the mouth may also indicate where that fish feeds, which, in
turn, indicates where in the aquarium it will spend most of its time. For example,
fish with barbels (feelers) around the mouth parts feed on or near the bottom,
others feed and swim in the top layer of the water, whereas fish that live in shoals
live and feed in the middle layer of water.
Pets: Mammals, Birds and Fish
213
Head types
The shape of a fish's head can indicate its location in the aquarium
Those with an undershot mouth, fringed with barbels, tend to feed on the bottom of
the tank.
The eyes vary in size and sight ability, depending on lifestyle. Plant eaters have
poor eyesight but a good sense of smell to find food. Predatory fish have good
eyesight, enabling them to catch their prey.
 Nostrils, connected to the brain by nerves, provide a sense of smell for food
location.
Gills are located beneath the gill cover (operculum), allowing the fish to extract
 oxygen from the surrounding water.
The lateral line is a fluid-flled tube below the skin surface on the sides of the
fish, seen as a line of tiny pores opening to the water outside. It is unique to fish
and is an organ of hearing. It detects vibrations in the water, alerting the fish to
danger, obstacles in its way and food location.
internal
The heart has only two chambers.
The swim bladder, which is filled with gas, helps to maintain buoyancy in the
water in most fish.
Tropical freshwater fish
Tropical freshwater fish have a life span of approximately three years.
Tropical freshwater fish are found in waters around the world, the tempera-
ture of which will vary (21-29°C) depending on altitude, i.e. mountain stream,
lake, river pool or sea-level swamp.
214
Chapter 17
Some fish species in the wild may be found in many continents or only in one
lake or river.
Tropical freshwater fish can be divided into two main groups:
· Egg-layer, hatching into fry (i.e. gouramis, tetras, barbs)
 Live-bearer, giving birth to fully formed young which are larger than fry (i.e.
platies, guppies)
Coldwater fish
Coldwater fish have a life span of approximately 6-20 years.
Coldwater fish are found in a range of habitats in the wild. The water tempera-
ture (10-23?C), the oxygen levels, the speed of the water current and water
chemistry will vary depending on location, i.e. lakes, ponds, streams, mountain
streams.
The two fish commonly kept from this group are:
· Goldfish
·Koi carp
Goldfish
Goldfish varieties are increasingly diverse as a group.
Ideal conditions:
·Water - neutral pH to slightly alkaline
·Temperature - 10-26°C
· Region - bottom, top and middle
They fall into three main categories:
 Common - the most popular in terms of the number owned; they are a hardy
fish, able to live in aquarium or pond
 Single tailed - known for fast swimming ability; the Shubunkin is ideal for a
home aquarium, whereas the Comet is better in a pond or large aquarium
·Double tailed - are more unusual and a less hardy type. They are only suit-
able for deep aquaria and indoor pools. They tend to have a shorter life span
due, in part, to their egg-shaped bodies and flotation problems, i.e. Veiltail
Koi carp
Koi carp originated from eastern Asia (Caspian and Aral seas) and China. They
 are ornamental varieties of the common carp.
Pets: Mammals, Birds and Fish
215
Ideal conditions:
· Water - neutral pH, moderately hard
Temperature - 10-24°C
· Tank region - top, middle and bottom
Koi are messy feeders, requiring a good filtration system to keep the water clear.
They tend to destroy plants, therefore the furnishings in an aquarium tend to be
bogwood or smooth rock. Koi can be mixed with fancy goldfish if required.
Considerations when setting up an aquarium
Size of aquarium
Standard aquaria can be bought in various combinations of length, width and
depth, depending on:
· The species being kept, e.g. the Veiltail goldfish requires a deeper tank
because of the size of its double tail
·Stocking density of fish to be kept
Positioning
· Firm foundation - the floor must be able to support the weight of the water-
filled tank, ideally over joists not just floor boards
 Away from draughts, heaters and direct sunlight, i.e. not near a window or in
a conservatory
· In an area of a room that has no passing traffic
· In a quiet area, too dark for a house plant
· Next to more than one electric socket
 Level the tank and place polystyrene or a foam mat under the tank on the
stand, to cushion it from any unevenness in the metalwork of the stand
Substrates
These are materials placed on the bottom of the tank (Fig. 17.17). They include:
 e jo paq aul aieaioa1 0i pasn st 11 rsyui al1el y isaq - lan asro 
or stream
 Medium and fine gravel - often mixed and can be used with under-gravel
filtration
 Coloured gravel - gaudy but fun; buy from reputable sources to ensure the
dyes used are not poisonous
216
Chapter 17
Fig. 17.17 Marine tank substrate.
· Sand - very useful for bottom-dwelling species of fish (there are no sharp
 points that can injure the fish) and a good substrate for plant growth
Ensure that, whatever the substrate used, it is washed to remove dust particles.
dirt and other impurities.
Filtersystems
Filter systems are used to clean the water; filtering out wastes such as excess food
materials, sections of plants and fish excretions.
· External power filters draw water through the various filter media and pump
the clean water back into the tank. These are useful for a smaller aquarium
set-up
·Internal power flters also draw water through the various flters but are
located inside the tank
· Under-gravel filters consist of one or more perforated plates that cover the
 base of the aquarium. An air stone or line is attached to a length of tubing
and the plates are covered by substrate material. The flow of oxygenated
water through the gravel allows filtering
Heating
Heating is used in both coldwater and tropical freshwater tank systems, which
require a stable water temperature whatever the environmental temperature may
night). Various designs of heater are available (always read the manufacturer's
instructions on adjusting the temperature):
·Combined electronic heater/thermostats are located inside the tank (Fig.
17.18)
Pets: Mammals, Birds and Fish
217
(a)
(b)
Fig. 17.18  (a) Aquarium heater located in the tank. (b) Fish in an established tank
Submersible heaters controlled by external or internal thermostats
Under-tank heating mats controlled by external or internal thermostats
Aquarium hood or cover
·Prevents dust and dirt particles falling into the tank
●Prevents fish escaping
·Keeps out predators such as other household pets
·Helps to retain the tank temperature
·Reduces evaporation
Lighting
Lighting supported in the aquarium hood is essential for the health of the fish
and live plants in the tank. Fluorescent tubes have been developed in a number
218
Chapter 17
of different colours to imitate daylight, and can be used in combination to show
off the fish colours.
Setting up the aquarium
· The aquarium tank is cleaned with dilute detergent to remove any chemicals,
rinsed thoroughly and put into position.
· In order to hide the electric cables and filter pipes, choose a decorative plastic
background to suit the type of ornament in the tank, the plants and the fish,
or have a plain black background. This is a personal choice.
·Next, the filter, substrate (gravel or sand), the heater if required, thermo-
 meter, prepared wood, rocks and other furnishings are placed.
· Using cold or warm water poured from a clean measuring jug onto a saucer
to prevent disturbance of the substrate gravel, begin to fill the tank. Water
can be pre-conditioned by allowing it to stand for several days or by adding
 a conditioner. This allows evaporation of any chlorine gas.
· If the substrate gravel has been washed properly, there should be little or no
clouding of the water as it is added. Once the gravel has been covered, water
can be poured in quite quickly to about 10-12cm from the final water
level. Plants (plastic) can be placed when the tank has matured, without
overflowing.
· It is important to wait at least 24 hours after the set-up has been run before
placing any living plants. This allows time to check that the heater and filter
are working properly.
·Before the fish can be added the tank must be at the correct temperature,
maturity and pH. Depending on which water company provides the water, it
is either:
 hard: a measure of the mineral salts dissolved in the water
- soft: indicating fewer dissolved mineral salts
- acid: pH up to 7
 alkaline: pH from 7 up to 14
·Coldwater fish are adaptable to a wide range of pH but are most stable in
water with a reading of pH between 7 and 8.5. Most tropical freshwater fish
will live in water with a pH value between 6.5 and 7.5, which is about neutral
in value, and from slightly soft to slightly hard water. There are kits available
to check the pH levels.
·Once the tank is set up, it is best for it to be left for at least 3-4 weeks for the
             
added, waiting a week to introduce the next few. The final number should be
· Bacteria will develop in the filter sponge and assist in the breakdown of waste
produced by the fish (ammonia is converted to nitrites by bacteria, nitrites
are converted to nitrates in the filtration system). To ensure that both fish and
live plants are healthy, maintenance of water quality must take place weekly.
Pets: Mammals, Birds and Fish
219
A check on the nitrite level using a test kit will indicate whether a partial
water change is required.
The nitrogen cycle in an aquarium
Waste matter from the aquarium plants, uneaten food, faeces and urine from the
fish will all contaminate the tank.
As they decompose, ammonia is formed, which is poisonous to the fish.
The bacteria in the water break down the ammonia into nitrites and then nitrates,
which are harmless to fish and act as a fertiliser for the live plants in the tank. This
completes the nitrogen cycle.
Plants
Food
Nitrate
Uneaten food
Faeces
Urine
Nitrite
Ammonia
Feeding
Types of food:
Live food (daphnia, brineshrimp and bloodworm)
Commercial food (freeze-dried, tablet, dried flakes, foating food sticks and
sinking granules)
The most convenient foods are the commercially produced flake or pellet foods.
These provide the correct nutrient requirements and, unlike live foods, are free
from the hazards of parasite or disease introduction.
Most coldwater fish kept in aquariums are omnivorous (feeding on insects and
plant material). A good-quality flake food will provide the nutrients, vitamins and
minerals required, but to keep the fish in good health, alternate this diet with
other safe live food, such as daphnia or bloodworm.
Tropical freshwater fish also benefit from variety in their diet. Use of dried
220
Chapter 17
flake foods combined with frozen or live foods offered once or twice per week
will maintain condition and health. If the fish are herbivorous, offer green foods,
such as lettuce leaves, regularly .
Aquarium tank maintenance
Daily:
·Check the fish
·Check all the tank equipment
· Make sure that the temperature is correct
·Remove any uneaten food
Every two weeks:
· Test for pH and nitrite levels
· Do a partial water change
· Remove any dead plant material
· Remove any algal growth from the glass front and sides
·Suction off any debris seen on the sand or gravel substrate
Once a month:
· Clean the filter
Every 8-12 months:
· Replace fluorescent tube lights and air stones
· Service filter motor and air pump
Section 3
Nursing
221
Chapter 18
First Aid and Nursing
First aid
This is the emergency care and treatment of an animal with sudden illness or
injury, before medical and surgical care (veterinary treatment) can be com-
menced. The main objectives at this time are to:
·Keep the animal alive
· Make it comfortable
Assist in pain control
·Prevent its condition getting worse
Different situations require different approaches. Some situations will allow
plenty of time to attend to injuries or problems and never be life threatening.
 Other situations are so severe the animal will die if urgent and skilled emergency
care is not available.
First aid, being only the initial actions of someone attending or witnessing an
accident, is very limited. It does not involve diagnosis or medical treatment of
injuries, but is designed to preserve life and temporarily prevent a condition
getting worse, if possible. It should allow time to get the animal to a veterinary
surgeon who can diagnose the full extent of the condition, which is not always
obvious at first.
Evaluating situations
Very severe
Must act immediately or the animal will die.
·The heart has stopped (cardiopuimonary arrest)
 Breathing is obstructed due to an object in the air passages
Breathing has stopped
 Bleeding from a main artery or vein
· Acute allergic reaction to insect sting or other substance
223
224
Chapter 18
Severe
Must act within one hour or the animal may die
· Deep cuts and considerable blood loss
· Established shock
·Head injuries
·Breathing difficulties
Serious
Must act within 45 hours or more serious problems will develop that could be
life threatening.
· Bone fractures that puncture through the skin (compound fractures)
·Spinal injuries
· Early stages of shock
·Diffculties in giving birth (dystocia)
Major
Must act within 24 hours to prevent further damage.
· Fractures with no skin injury (simple fractures)
· Prolonged vomiting and diarrhoea
·Foreign bodies in the eyes or ears
Initial management
(1) Assess the situation and keep caim - briefly examine the animal and note
obvious injuries
(2)   Contact the veterinary practice - for advice and to let them know you are
coming
(3）
 Ensure your own safety - make sure the animal is properly restrained before
handling and lifting, so that no one is bitten
4）
 Stop and cover any obvious bleeding - use sterile dressings if possible, to
prevent further contamination
(5)
Make sure the animal is able to breathe - if the airway is obstructed, clear it
(6)
 Treat for shock - by maintaining the body temperature
Handling and transport
If the animal's life is in danger, then it must be moved. Injured animals are usually
in pain, shocked and frightened and may attack anyone who tries to approach or
handle them.
First Aid and Nursing 225
In order to protect both the handler and the animal from further harm or
injury, great care is needed at this time.
· Slow, deliberate movements are essential
+A calm, soothing voice will help
·Handle the animal as little as possible
· Muzzle if necessary and only if the animal has no breathing difficulties
Aahns ay m jodsue *
Before moving the animal, quickly assess the condition. This is referred to as
initial help and if this can be started as soon as possible, the chances of survival
to the veterinary staff on arrival at the surgery, in order to reduce delay in
treatment.
Checks to make are as follows:
· Airway - to ensure it is not obstructed; if it is, then clear it
· Breathing - to make sure this is possible and assist with artificial respiration
if required
· Heart and puise - check the beat, its rate and strength, and record the infor-
mation. If the heart has stopped, then proceed with heart massage (see p. 229).
moving an injured dog will vary from the method used for horses, cattle or birds.
Small dogs, cats, rabbits and smaller pets
Transport in a pet carrier or in a cat-sized basket, making sure there are plenty
of breathing holes. A lot of owners now own a cat cage, which is ideal for many
species, provided there is plenty of space to stretch out (Fig. 18.1). Alternatively.
and depending on the injury, the animal can be held in the owner's arms
(Fig. 18.2).
Medium-sized dogs
If they only have minor injuries, then they may be encouraged to walk slowly. If
they are not able to walk, then pick them up with one arm around the front of
the forelegs and one around the hind legs (providing this is not contraindicated
by the injuries), lift and hold against your body, with the legs hanging downward
(Fig. 18.3).
Large breeds of dog or similar
These should only be lifted by more than one person, one supporting the head
226
Chapter18
Fig. 18.1  Carrier cage for a small dog or cat.
Fig. 18.2 Small dog held in arms.
Fig. 18.3 Medium dog lift
Fig. 18.4 Giant breed lift.
dog is too large for lifting, then with two or more handlers use a stretcher or
blanket lift (Fig. 18.5). Pull the animal on to the blanket, lying on its side, and lift
using the corners of the blanket or, if not enough handlers are available, simply
drag the blanket, provided the surface is smooth. This blanket technique is also
used for smaller animals with spinal injuries (Fig. 18.6).
Whatever the size of the injured animal, always lift in the correct manner; bend
your knees before lifting rather than bending from the waist (Fig. 18.7). The
handler's own back is less at risk, but if in doubt, get more help.
First Aid and Nursing
227
Fig. 18.6 Blanket lift for a smaller dog with spinal
Fig. 18.5 Blanket lift requires two or more people
for a large dog.
injuries.
Fig. 18.8  Recovery position for an injured animal,
keeping the airway straight.
Fg. 18.7  Lift with straight back and bent knees to
prevent back strain injury of the handler.
Recovery position
As in human first aid, in animal first aid there is a recovery posiion in which to
place the animal to ensure breathing is assisted and the heart is exposed for emer-
 gency procedures, if required (Fig. 18.8).
· Lie the animal on its right side
 Straighten head and neck
· The tongue is pulled forward and behind the canine tooth (to one side of the
mouth)
228
Chapter 18
· Remove any collar or harness
· Check the heart and pulse regularly
Other checks to make and record at this time include the following-
·Any signs of bleeding from the animal's surface or from a body opening, such
as the mouth, rectum, vulva, prepuce or ears.
· Colour is checked by looking at the lining of the lower eyelid and the mucous
membrane of the mouth and gums.
Colour of mucous membranes
Pale - indicating shock or senious bleeding (internal or external)
Blue - also referred to as cyanotic, indicates lack of oxygen to the tissue cells
in the bloodstream and usually involves the liver in some way
fever conditions
·The capillary refll time is checked. The upper lip is lifted and the gum over
the top canine tooth is pressed. This squeezes the blood out of the surface
capillaries, causing the area to go temporarily white. The refill time is the time
it takes for the gum to become the normal pink colour again as the capillar-
ies refill, usually 1-1'/2 seconds. Any time longer than that is considered 'slow'
 and may indicate a degree of shock.
·Rate and quality of the pulse. This is taken in the groin area of the hind leg,
on the femoral artery. This artery is exposed over the femur bone at this point,
allowing the pulse to be taken. Another artery that may be used is the sub-
lingual, under the animal's tongue, but this is only used in unconscious
animals. Rate refers to the speed of the pulse, which is a reflection of the heart
beat. The pulse should be taken for a full minute for a true recording. The
quality of the pulse refers to whether it is strong, thready, weak or normal. In
order to describe this, the handler must have some experience of pulse taking.
· Breathing rate is recorded, describing whether it is normal, slow, fast or
shallow.
·Body temperature is taken if a thermometer is available. If not, then feel the
extremities of the body, such as the feet and tail end. If the temperature is
lower than it should be, the handler will feel this, because the normal body
temperature of most animals (mammals and birds) is higher than that of
humans.
·Record its level of consciousness; in other words, can the animal respond to
stimuli like its name, a noise or sudden movement?
First Aid and Nursing
 Record any unusual odour on the animal's body, whether it comes from the
animal's mouth, anus or coat.
Life-saving techniques
(1)   The heart has stopped - cardiac arrest
(2)  The breathing has stopped - respiratory arrest
The two above situations are jointly referred to as cardiopulmonary arrest (pul-
monary refers to the vessels that take blood to the lungs and back to the heart).
The object of cardiopulmonary resuscitation is to restore heart and lung action
and to prevent the irreversible brain damage that would happen if the tissues
were deprived of oxygen for any length of time. Damage to body cells is thought
to occur after 3-4 minutes following cardiac arrest. Therefore, being adequately
prepared is the most important step in the management of these emergencies,
and recognising that time is short if permanent damage to body tissues is to be
avoided.
Cardiac compression (heart massage)
Small dogs or cats or other small animals
· Place in recovery position (on its right side, head and neck extended and
tongue pulled forwards)
 Take hold of its chest between the thumb and fingers of the same hand, over
the heart and just behind the elbows
·Support the body of the animal with the other hand on the lumbar spine area
·At all times, keep the head and neck in a straight line to assist breathing
· Squeeze the thumb and fingers of the hand over the heart together; this will
compress the chest wall and the heart, which is squeezed between the ribs
· Repeat this action approximately 120 times per minute
·Watch for the heart contractions restarting
Medium-sized dogs and other species
· Place in the recovery position
·Put the heel of one hand on the top of the chest, just behind the elbow and
over the heart (Figs 18.9, 18.10)
· Place the other hand either on top of the first hand or under the animal to
support the heart as it is compressed
Press down on to the chest with firm, sharp movements
· Repeat this action about 80-100 times per minute
·Watch for the heart contractions restarting
230
Chapter 18
Fg. 18.10 Same hand position, behind the elbow,
over the heart.
Fig. 18.9 Position for hands when
doing cardiac massage.
Large, barrel-chested or fat dogs and other species
· Place on its back, with its head slightly lower than its body, if possible
· Put the heel of one hand on the abdominal end of the sternum (breast bone)
· Place the other hand on top of the first
· Press firmly on to the chest, pushing the hands forwards towards the head of
the animal
·Press down in this way 80-100 times per minute
· Keep the head and neck straight during the procedure, at all times
·Watch for the heart restarting
With all animals, stop at 20-second intervals to check for heart beat or pulse, then
continue.
Respiratory arrest
Whatever the cause, if the breathing has stopped, then it must urgently be
restarted. Resuscitation methods do include the use of drugs that stimulate the
heart and the breathing, but these are only administered by a veterinary surgeon
and therefore are not a first aid procedure.
There are two methods for restarting the breathing:
(1)  Artificial respiration - manual method
(2)Mouth-to-nose technique
First Aid and Nursing
231
Fig. 18.11 For artificial respiration compression, hands are placed over the chest.
Artificial respiration
 Place in recovery position
· Clear airway of any blocking material
·Place a hand over the ribs, behind the shoulder bone (Fig. 18.11)
· Compress the chest with a sharp, downward movement
· Allow the chest to expand and then repeat the downward movement
· Repeat approximately every 3-5 seconds, until breathing restarts
·Keep head and neck straight at all times to maintain airway
Mouth-to-nose technique
· Place in recovery position
·Clear the airway
· Place a tissue or thin cloth over the animal's nose (for personal safety)
· Hold the animal's neck straight at all times
Breathe down its nose to inflate the lungs (Fig. 18.12)
Repeat this inflation of the lungs at 3-5-second intervals
·Watch for the breathing restarting
This technique provides the animal with the unused oxygen in the handler's
breath and their exhaled carbon dioxide, which helps to stimulate the breathing
or gasp reflex in the animal.
232
Chapter 18
Fig. 18.12 Mouth-to-nose resuscitation with the airway kept straight and mouth held shut
The operator breathes down the nose.
Poisons
A poison or toxin is any substance which, on entry to the body in sufficient
amounts, has a harmful effect on the individual. Poisons can gain entry to the
body by various means:
·By mouth
·Via the lungs
·Absorbed through the skin surface
· Through a cut
Animals can be poisoned by a multitude of potentially toxic substances, many of
which are ordinary household products. The source may be poisonous plants or
toxic chemicals used or stored near the animal in the kitchen or utility room.
where a dog or cat may have its bed. Such poisons would include:
· Pesticides for the garden, such as slug bait, herbicides, etc.
·Rodent killers, such as warfarin poison
· Paint and cleaning solutions for brushes
· Disinfectants such as bleach and toilet cleaners
· Drugs such as aspirin, blood pressure tablets and sleeping tablets
Very few poisons produce distinctive signs. Most cause non-specific signs, such
as:
· Becoming aggressive, excited or depressed
·Unsteady on its feet
First Aid and Nursing
·Salivating, vomiting and/or having diarrhoea
· Abdominal pain and fitting-type episodes
· Pale, with lowered body temperature
·Slow capillary refill time
The owner knows best what is normal and what is unusual in their pet, so record
all reported information and get in touch with the veterinary surgeon as soon as
possible for advice on what to do next. If the owner knows the chemical involved
and has the container or packet, take that to the veterinary surgeon too. Unless
instructed to make the animal sick, do not attempt to do so as this may cause
more harm.
Until the veterinary surgeon takes over:
· Place in recovery position
+
 Support for any breathing problems
·]
 Keep warm to reduce shock
Record pulse and heart rate
· Comfort and do not leave unattended
Get to the veterinary surgeon as quickly as possible
Insect stings
These are usually more painful than harmful. However, it is possible that an
animal may have an allergic reaction to the insect venom, or that the sting is near
the airway and could obstruct breathing.
If the venom sac is imbedded in the skin, never squeeze it, as this may inject
more venom into the animal. Remove carefully if possible, or leave it in place for
the veterinary surgeon to remove in the safety of the practice.
Wasp stings are alkaline. Treatment is therefore with an acid solution, such as
household vinegar in the form of a pad or compress.
Bee stings are acidic. Treatment is therefore with an alkali such as bicarbonate
of soda mixed with water and soaked into a pad or compress.
Treatment aims to neutralise the situation. Unless someone has seen it bite, it
is not always possible to know which insect is involved. If this is the case, then
apply a cold compress or face flannel filled with ice cubes to the area to reduce
the swelling and give some pain control.
Bleeding or haemorrhage
Bleeding or haemorrhage is the escape of blood from damaged blood vessels, and
can cause serious problems. Bleeding heavily can decrease the circulating blood
234
Chapter 18
volume enough to cause shock. Bleeding that is less heavy may still cause the
tissue cells to be deprived of oxygen, which could be permanently damaging-
Even small losses of blood can delay wound healing and contribute to develop-
ment of an infection. Therefore any loss potentially puts the animal at risk.
Bleeding is not always obvious; it may be internal, especially after a road traffic
accident, so watch for the general signs:
· Colour is pale
·Attitude is dull or listless
·Appears thirsty
· The pulse and breathing rate are fast and may appear feeble
· Feet and tail are cold to the touch
·Body temperature is subnormal
· Capillary refill time is slow
If blood loss is severe, then signs include those of blood loss to vital organs, such
as the following:
· The animal becomes restless and will not settle
·It has difficulty breathing
● It may have fitting-type episode
· The animal is unable to stand and becomes unconscious
For reporting purposes, the following information is useful to the veterinary
surgeon:
· What type of blood vessel is damaged
·Where the injury is on the body
· When the bleeding started
· Whether the bleeding is internal or on the surface
· Treatments carried out so far
Which blood vessel is damaged?
 Artery - blood is bright red (oxygenated) in colour and comes out as spurts, which
are synchronised with the heart beat
 Vein - blood is dark red (deoxygenated) in colour and is a steady flow
       i
Methods of arresting bleeding
The following methods are only for temporary application until the veterinary
surgeon takes over.
First Aid and Nursing235
Digital (finger) pressure
Used on a surface wound by pressing a sterile or clean pad of absorbent mater-
ial on to the area to control the blood loss. Care must be used with this method
in case there is a piece of metal, glass or wood imbedded in the wound tissues;
pressing on this would push it deeper, where it would be harder to locate or may
cause damage to internal structures.
This method can be used for about 5-15 minutes before tissues beyond must
receive a reviving fow. Then pressure can be re-established.
Pressure points
ns Aoq aue rau are sae noe poq an pune son rnas u
These tend to supply the extremities such as limbs and tail. Where they cross a
bone, pressure can slow, or even stop, the supply reaching an area beyond. If the
wound is on the extremity, these points can be used as a temporary measure.
·Forelimbs - the pressure is put on the inside or medial elbow area, to slow
the brachial artery flow
· Hind limbs - the pressure is put on the same site used for pulse taking, in the
groin area on the femur, to slow the femoral artery flow
· Tail - the pressure is applied to the ventral or underside of the base of the
tail, to slow the coccygeal artery fow
These locations can be used for about 5-10 minutes, before allowing the blood
to flow to restore distant tissues.
Pressure bandages
These may be used initially or after one or both of the above methods have been
used to establish the extent of the injury.
 Pressure bandages can only be applied to extremities, such as limbs and tail.
They are applied tightly to constrict and slow the surface vessels supplying the
area, thus limiting blood loss.
Plenty of padding material is applied over the dressing on the wound and is
then tightly bandaged in place. If blood seeps through, then more padding is
applied and bandaged in place.
This is still only a temporary measure to be used before arriving at the veteri-
nary surgery, and will give about 1 hour of time before the tissues must be
released from the tight bandage and flow restored.
Shock
Shock is a term used to describe a very complex and potentially fatal clinical syn-
drome which always involves insufficient blood to the tissues, resulting in lack of
236
Chapter 18
 Oxygen to the cells. Lack of oxygen to the cells is called tissue hypoxia and this
can be fatal if not corrected.
When blood is lost from the body, the body tries to compensate by redistri-
buting blood to vital structures like the brain and heart, at the expense of other
organs like kidneys, skin, intestines and muscles. Organs can be severely damaged
by the resulting tissue hypoxia.
The causes of shock vary, but some examples are:
 Blood loss from damaged vessels
 Trauma injuries to tissues from a road traffic accident
·Pain due to injury or surgical procedures
· Heart problems that interfere with its normal pumping action
Infections that cause blood to ^pool out' in the capillary beds, by affecting the
walls of the blood vessels
The signs of shock include:
·Pale colour (Fig. 18.13)
· Cold extremities
· Weak, or slipping into an unconscious state
· Increase in the heart rate and breathing
 Slow capillary refill time of longer than two seconds (Fig. 18.14)
Until the animal can be treated by a veterinary surgeon, the handler must start
the preventive shock procedure. Maintaining body temperature is probably the
Fig. 18.13 Mucous membrane colour check.
Fig. 18.14  Capillary refill time check.
First Aid and Nursing
237
single most useful thing that can be done. If the body is not allowed to shut down
the peripheral vessels to the limbs and tail, shock will be at least delayed and
possibly even prevented.
Shock takes three forms:
(1)
Impending - it is expected to happen, bearing in mind the events or
injuries
(2)
 Established - it is in place and the animal must have urgent medical treat-
ment involving whole-blood transfusions or use of plasma expanders
(3）
 Irreversible - treatment is unlikely to save the animal's life as systems are
too damaged
Treatment is aimed at not allowing shock to move beyond the impending stage.
To achieve this:
 s        
18.15) and keep massaging or rubbing the extremities to stimulate the
blood flow. Never use artificial heat as the temperature may get too
high
· Position the head slightly lower than the body to encourage the blood flow
to the brain
·Stop any further blood loss
·Assist the animal to breathe by placing in the recovery position, and give arti-
ficial respiration if breathing stops
Record the pulse
· Get to the veterinary surgery as quickly as possible
Fig. 18.15 Maintaining body temperature
238
Chapter 18
Hyperthermia (heat stroke)
n oq n  o s  so sdn 
through the skin due to their dense coats and lack of sweat glands. Therefore to
eliminate excess body heat they use the respiratory system, inhaling cool air
through the nose and exhaling hot air from the body through the mouth. The
faster this exchange occurs, the faster their body will cool down, which is why
dogs pant after exercise.
Heat stroke is rarely seen in cats, and in dogs it usually occurs because the
animal has been confined, on a hot day, with no access to shade, or in a car/vehicle
with insuffcient ventilation.
N.B. On a hot day the temperature in a car soon becomes higher than the envi-
ronmental temperature, even if windows are left open.
When the environmental temperature exceeds the animal's body temperature,
it ultimately becomes impossible to maintain body temperature within normal
limits for that animal.
Heat stroke affects all dogs, but those most at risk, if exposed to excess heat,
are:
· Those with thick dense coats
· Overweight animals
· Short-nosed breeds
·Animals with heart conditions
·Elderly animals
·Animals with medical conditions that affect the breathing
Panting becomes ineffective and the body temperature will rise rapidly, death
follows quickly if the body temperature is not immediately reduced.
Signs of heat stroke include:
· Excess panting and salivation
·Bright red mucous membranes (check the gums)
·Vomiting
·Excitement/anxiety
·Disoriented
· Collapsed/unable to stand
·Body temperature high (41-43°C)
It is essential to reduce body temperature urgently:
（1)
Remove the animal from the hot environment
(2) Cool using:
·a pack of frozen vegetables held on the neck area
First Aid and Nursing
239
wrap in towel/blanket soaked with cold water, and continue to hose
water over the soaked wrapping, keeping clear of the face
(3)  Monitor the animal's body temperature
(4)  If collapsed, put into the recovery position to assist breathing
(5) If conscious, encourage to drink restricted amounts of water continuously
(if unrestricted, the animal may swallow too much too quickly and cause
vomiting)
(6) Treat for shock if the temperature falls below normal
Hypothermia
Hypothermia is commonly seen in young or small animals, due to an inability
to control body temperature within normal limits. This may be caused by
illness or accident, leaving the animal unable to restore temperature loss unless
assisted.
Signs:
·The animal appears sleepy or lethargic
· Its movement becomes weaker
·It is unconscious
Treatment:
· If the animal is wet, dry it by rubbing vigorously with a towel
·Wrap, using a lightweight covering, to preserve heat
· Increase the environmental temperature but do not overheat
· Monitor constantly by taking temperature and do not leave unattended
Bone fractures
A fracture refers to a crack in the surface of a bone or a complete break in a
bone structure. The objectives of first aid for fractures are to prevent the situa-
tion getting worse and make the animal comfortable for transportation to the
veterinary surgery.
The causes of bone fracture are varied and include:
· Road traffic accidents
·The animal landing badly after jumping
· Muscles contracting to break small bones, particularly in the legs of racing
dogs or horses
· Bone disease that has weakened the bone structure
240
Chapter 18
Types of fracture
 Simple - the bone is broken but there is no connecting skin injury (Fig. 18.16)
Compound - the bone is broken and there is a wound connecting to the skin, or
the bone is protruding through the skin. A badly handled simple fracture can
become a compound fracture
Fig. 18.16 X-ray shows fractured right femur and extent of tissue swelling.
The signs indicating a fracture include:
· Loss of use of the affected limb, will not bear weight
·Pain on handling or will not allow handling
· Unusual position or shape to the limb
·Swelling and bruising
· Unusual movement of the limb
The best treatment for fractured bones is to get the animal to the veterinary
surgery quickly, but taking care to cause no further injuries by careless handling.
Some fractures are also complicated by damage to surrounding tissues, such as
blood vessels, nerves or organs.
Depending on the fracture, first aid aims to:
 Stop any bleeding.
 Clean and cover any wounds.
 Immobilise the fracture site. This is only possible if the joints above and below
the site can be immobilised by a splint. If splinting is possible, always apply
First Aid and Nursing 
241
the splint to the limb in the position in which it is found. For example, if the
foot and carpals of the foreleg are now positioned sideways instead of facing
front, do not correct the position - splint it.
Materials that can be used for splinting include:
 Rolled-up magazine or newspaper
A ruler or piece of wood
Cardboard
·A matchstick
If a splint is not possible then:
· Confine on plenty of bedding
 Comfort and do not leave unattended
Treat for shock
Get to the veterinary surgery
What can be splinted?
Forelimb - from elbow to toes (phalanges)
Hind limb - from stifle to toes
Tail
Wounds
A wound is damage to the continuous structure of any tissue in the body.
Healing of a wound
First-intention healing
Takes place in wounds that:
·Are not contaminated with grit, soil or micro-organisms
 Have clean-cut edges that can be held together
·Have been cleaned within one hour of injury
In this type of healing, the edges rejoin by ten days after injury.
242
 Chapter 18
Second-intention healing or granulation
Takes place in wounds that:
+Are contaminated with grit, soil and micro-organisms
· Have jagged edges and possibly sections of skin missing
· Have not been cleaned within two hours of injury
·Have edges that gape open
· Become infected
This type of healing can take weeks to months.
Types of wound
Wounds are described as being open or closed. The closed wound is one that does
not penetrate the whole thickness of the skin as a structure, such as bruises or
blood blisters (haematoma), or pockets of blood from a small damaged blood
vessel. Treatment of these injuries involves use of a cold compress, such as ice
cubes held in a face flannel, immediately after injury, to reduce the swelling of
local tissues and help control pain. This treatment is only useful immediately after
injury.
Open wounds are those with damage to surface tissue and some bleeding. They
are named according to the manner of the damage, and whether or not tissue is
missing-
· Incised - these have clean-cut edges, are painful due to surface nerve ending
damage and tend to bleed freely. Caused by sharp-edged materials such as
glass, metal or knife blade.
· Lacerated - these have very jagged flaps of skin and sometimes skin sections
are missing (avulsed). However, because tissue is torn and stretched, they are
less painful than incised wounds and do not bleed much. Caused by bite
injuries, barbed wire or road traffic accident.
· Puncture - these wounds have a long, narrow track deep into the tissues, with
only a small skin entry scab over the track. The scab holds any microbes in
the track. The wound is caused by sharp, pointed objects, such as teeth in bite
wounds, nails and thorns. These will all be contaminated with microbes, which
develop. This local infection is held in the track area and, as it increases in
size, is called an abscess. These are very painful, often causing loss of limb
function.
· Abrasions - these have torn, ragged skin edges, with many contaminants
Aq o moq suouea e Aq pasne are Aau seae paeuep aun ui pappaqua
being dragged along the ground briefly in a road traffic accident. The tissues
tend to be torn and the damage only in the surface layers of the skin, so there
is not much bleeding-
First Aid andNursing
Wound care
The sooner an open wound is cleaned using a water-based antiseptic solution, the
more chance there is that infection will not develop. Solutions used for wound
cleaning must not cause any further inflammation or damage to the wound, and
therefore should not contain any detergent.
If micro-organisms in the wound are prevented from multiplying, it could mean
the difference between the wound healing within ten days (first intention) and
the delayed healing of the second-intention or granulation method.
Solutions to use:
·Tap water
· 0.9% sodium chloride from a drip bag
Once cleaned, always cover the wound to prevent contamination and further
aggravation of the area by the animal.
Eye injuries
Any animal with eye injuries will be sight impaired and in pain. It is very impor-
approach. The animal will be frightened and could injure the handler unless pre-
cautions are observed and correct handling techniques used (Fig. 18.17).
The types of injury seen include the following.
Chemicals
These can cause serious injury to the eye structures. Always irrigate as soon as
possible, using tap water to remove any chemical. Do not leave unattended and
seek medical help.
Fig. 18.17 Examine the eye carefully, touching the lids only
244Chapter 18
Prolapsed eyeball
 Meaning the eye is now in front of the lids and the optic nerve cord is being
stretched as the lids swell. Never touch the eyeball. Treatment is as follows.
· Keep the eye moist at all costs. Use tap water soaked into a pad, squeeze out
and apply to the eye area
· Once moistened, soak the pad again in tap water and place gently over the
eye
· Hold or bandage in position
· Do not leave unattended and stop any self-mutilation
·Keep warm, quiet and comfortable
·Seek veterinary assistance urgently
The important point to remember is that the eye must not be allowed to dry out
Some breeds of dog, such as pugs, Pekinese and boxers, are prone to eye pro-
lapse due to their shortened faces; therefore, always use extra care when han-
dling these breeds.
If the handler is present when the prolapse happens, return the eye by holding
the upper and lower eye lids and pulling them gently over the eyeball. This is
only possible immediately after injury; do not attempt to do this if the eye has
been prolapsed for longer than ten minutes.
Perforating injury
Usually seen when a sharp instrument becomes embedded in the structure of the
eye. Never pull the foreign body out of the eye, even if it is large enough to grasp.
If it is removed non-surgically, the front chamber of the eye would leak fluid
(aqueous humour), causing the back chamber to prolapse forward, thereby
destroying the eye structure.
    s nd      si 
veterinary surgery quickly.
Chapter 19
Basic Bandaging
Reasons for bandaging
· Protect a wound.
· Prevent self-mutilation and interference.
· Support soft tissues (muscle or ligament) in sprains and strains.
+
 Stop bleeding (pressure bandage).
Prevent contamination.
+
 Reduce swelling (cold bandage or pack).
· Hold a dressing in place.
Layers of a bandage
Primary or contact layer
Dressings are placed against the wound to assist healing.
 Adherent dressings, i.e. gauze swab, tend to stick to the wound and may be
difficult to remove without damaging a layer of new tissue.
·Non-adherent dressings, i.e. Melolin or Rondo, absorb wound fluids into
cotton wool type backing. They do not stick to wounds or cause so much
damage on removal.
Moisr dressings, i.e. Intrasite, encourage healing.
Secondary layer
This provides the absorption and padding, i.e. cotton wool (Fig. 19.1).
Top layer
Secures the above and protects them from the environment and the patient.
This is either an adhesive or self-adherent material, i.e. Elastoplast or Vetrap
(Fig. 19.2).
245
246
Chapter 19
Fig. 19.1  The area to be bandaged is protected with
1Fig. 19.2 A protective layer covers the bandage.
a padding material, between the toes and dew claw.
Aims of bandaging
· It must be comfortable. If applied too tightly, the animal will try to remove
the bandage or the surface tissues will be damaged by the animal's constant
licking.
·Prevents the animal interfering with the area under the bandage.
·Limits movement in the case of broken bones or tissue damage and there-
fore limits pain.
· Stays on for the required amount of time.
· Looks neat but will do the job until professional help is reached.
Watch out for:
 Smells coming from the bandage
Discomfort
 Interference or self-mutilation to try and rermove the bandage
Overexercising
 Bandage getting wet or dirty
·Any signs of ill health
If any of the above are seen in an animal with a bandage, report to the veterinary
surgeon straight away for advice.
Basic Bandaging
247
Fig. 19.3 Prepare all materials prior to restraint of 
Fig.19.4B
Ear bandage. First protect the wound with
theanimal
a dressing.
Fig. 19.5 Hold dressing in place with injured ear
Fig. 19.6 The padding.
flap bandaged against the top of the head.
Fig. 19.7The bandage.
Fig. 19.8 The top protective layer.
248Chapter19
Rules for bandaging
·Wash hands before starting to prevent introducing infection.
·Get all the materials together before restraining the animal.
· Never stick adhesive tapes onto the animal's coat or hair as it is hard to
remove.
· Do not use safety pins or elastic bands to secure the ends of any bandage.
Use narrow adhesive tape on the bandage surface.
· In the case of a leg bandage, include the foot otherwise it will swell.
·Have the animal restrained in the correct position for application of the
bandage.
· If unsure of temperament, always muzzle for safety.
Figs 19.3-19.8 demonstrate bandaging technique.
Application
It is important to apply the bandage material in a spiral fashion to prevent devel-
sq e uum sadde lu anssad y us a uo s anssad jo sudo
is applied in a circular manner or the bandage has slipped from its original
position on the limb to lie as rings over one area.
A tight bandage can cause fuid to build up in the tissues and prevent its proper
flow. To make sure a bandage is not applied too tightly, it should be possible to
easily slip two fingers under the edge of the bandage.
Chapter 20
The Hospital Environment
Animals are hospitalised for:
Observation
 Operation
·Treatment
· Collection of samples or to run diagnostic tests
·Nursing care
To ensure a high standard of care, there must be adequate facilities, equipment
 and trained human resources.
Locations within the practice for the care of patients include:
· Preparation room
·Preparation/triage room
·Kennels
· Intensive care areas
·Theatre
·Recovery area
Environmental temperature
Most mammals and birds are able to regulate their body temperature to
maintain optimum levels. The ideal temperature range varies between species
to allow for the working of the internal environment of each, known as
homeostasis.
The monitoring of body temperature of cold-blooded species like snakes,
lizards and other reptiles is not useful, because they are dependent on the
environmental temperature for body function.
However, in the case of warm-blooded patients who control their own body
temperature, help is sometimes needed. When conscious and healthy, control is
 generally good but when ill or injured, patients may need help from the nursing
environment.
249
250
Chapter 20
Conditions causing araisedbody temperature
·Heat stroke
Infection
·Stress
·Exercise
·Poisons
Conditions causing a lowered body temperature
·Very young/old
·Serious haemorrhage
·Shock
·Recovery from anaesthesia
·Poisons
Patients in the veterinary hospital will benefit, often dramatically, if the
environmental temperature is raised or lowered to suit their special needs when,
for a variety of reasons, they are unable to maintain it within normal limits
themselves.
Methods to assist these patients include:
· Heat pads
·Bubble wrap
·Water-circulating pads
+Incubator
· Hot water bottles - well wrapped
 Lightweight blankets
 Space blankets
Vet beds
·Bean bags
Whatever the normal body temperature - maintain it!
Hygiene and cleaning
The hospital environment will house high concentrations of micro-organisms
which are potentially pathogenic (can cause disease) to patients. Injured or dis-
eased patients are at risk because of decreased resistance to infection. Every
effort must be made to decrease the microbe population in the hospital envi-
ronment in order to safeguard patients.
In order to protect the patient:
The Hospital Environment
251
Eliminate or control source of the disease - disinfectant and antiseptic use.
·Increase host resistance to disease - vaccination, improve diet.
Prevent transmission of disease - ventilation, isolation of suspect animals, use
of disposable protective clothing.
If mops are used for washing the foor (Fig. 20.1), the rules below should be
followed:
 Mop heads should be washed in the washing machine and dried daily.
· If used more than once daily, soak for 30 minutes in a bucket of disinfectant.
Never leave in soaking solution for more than 30 minutes.
· Wring out thoroughly before use on the floors.
In use, the mop should be moved from left to right across the body, never
pushed back and forward in front of the operator. Agitate in the disinfectant
solution, wring out and proceed to clean. When the area around the operator
has been cleaned, then move, repeating the mop rinsing. Start with the area
farthest from the door and do not allow anyone to walk on the floor until it is
AIp
Change the disinfectant solution between rooms or more frequently if heavily
soiled. Use a separate mop and cleaning equipment in the sterile areas such as
the theatre suite.
Routine room cleaning
Remove waste from all bins and replace plastic liner.
Cean and disinfect walls.
Spot clean surfaces, cupboard doors, doors, light fixtures, drip stands and any
other items routinely kept in this area.
 Check and restock any disposable equipment.
Clean and disinfect the sinks.
Cean and disinfect the floor.
 Disinfect and store cleaning equipment.
Different hospital areas require different approaches. The following areas are
important:
+
Consultation rooms
Kennels/recovery area
·Triage
·Theatre
252
Chapter 20
Fig. 20.1 Cleaning the floor area in the theatre.
Fig. 20.2 Consultation room.
Consultation rooms (Fig. 20.2)
· Clean and disinfect all floors and surfaces at the end of the consultation
periods (morning, afternoon and evening)
 Collect used instruments, wash and leave ready for sterilising (if appropriate).
 Dispose of all waste, using the correct disposal bags (yellow for clinical waste).
 Use disposable cloth or paper towel only.
 Disinfect all surfaces.
·Empty bins.
The Hospital Environment
253
Fig. 20.3Recovery cage.
Fig. 20.4 Numbering of kennels for ID purposes.
Kenneis/recovery area (Fig. 20.3)
This area includes the room maintenance and the cage/kennel maintenance.
Room maintenance is as for routine cleaning instructions, to be carried out at a
time which would cause the least disturbance to inpatients as possible. This may
be early in the morning before surgery begins or overnight if the hospital has
night shift staff.
If an animal is recovering from procedures, disturb as little as possible but if
soiled, clean out and make comfortable straight away.
Check before disposal of waste materials that a sample is not required (the
cage/kennel should be numbered or carry a cage/kennel card) (Fig. 20.4). If a
254
Chapter 20
Fig. 20.5 Triage area.
sample is requested by the veterinary surgeon in charge of the case, collect into
appropriate container, seal and refrigerate. Make a note on the case card that
collection has taken place.
NB: Before any cleaning or collection of samples, put on protective clothing!
Triage area (Fig. 20.5)
Triage refers to the examination and rapid classification of a case. This is one of
the most important areas in a modern veterinary hospital. It is here that animals
are:
·Examined as inpatients
·Prepared for minor procedures
·Prepared for surgery
This is a non-sterile area but because of the variety of patients who pass
through this room, it is essential to maintain a high level of hygiene. There will
usually be piped oxygen or a mobile oxygen delivery cylinder, plus the emergency
treatment drugs and materials for first aid. Preoperation preparation may include
anaesthetising and clipping the site of surgery in triage, which means no cross-
contamination of patients takes place as a result of the maintenance of high
standards.
To achieve these standards, routine room care includes the following:
·Frequent emptying of all bins and waste collection.
·Collect and/or vacuum up all coat clippings.
· Clean the clippers after each patient and lubricate.
·Spot check and clean the examination tables between patients.
The Hospital Environment
255
 Dispose of collected urine if for the purpose of surgery, the animal's bladder
has been emptied.
· Check all surfaces and spot clean and disinfect between patients.
· Take any samples for analysis to laboratory or to the office for posting to a
distant laboratory.
·Restock supplies.
·Regularly empty the vacuum cleaner and change the bag/filter.
·Clean and disinfect the sink area.
This area is always situated near to the theatre for the easy movement of
 patients. Also nearby are the areas for:
·Surgical team to scrub up prior to operating
· Sterilising of equipment and instruments
· Packing and cleaning of surgical instruments
These work areas need very high levels of sterility and hygiene. As many proce-
dures take place in this area, it is essential that order and organisation of equip-
ment are well established. If not, then it is hard for staff to locate and prepare
materials for the necessary procedures.
Systems include:
· Good shelving
+
 Cupboards and cabinets with obvious labels concerning equipment and use
Sterilising dates on all packs
· Stock required and location for use
Theatre
Surgery should be conducted in an environment which minimises the chances
of introducing micro-organisms into a wound or surgical site. Many micro-
organisms commonly associated with people, animals and the environment are
potentially pathogenic (disease causing) and can cause wound breakdown and
infections.
A surgical wound can be infected from:
· The surgical/theatre environment
· The surgeon and/or surgical team
· The instruments or other equipment
·The patient's own resident micro-organisms which are either internal or
external
The modern surgical ritual is designed to address each of these potential sources
of infection.
256Chapter 20
Fig. 20.6  Instruments in cold water/detergent ready for cleaning.
There is a mixture of personnel in this area:
·Those that are scrubbed up and part of the operating team and who may only
touch the sterile operating site.
· Those of the non-sterile team who have various duties to perform but are not
involved with the surgical areas. They will operate the monitoring systems,
maintain anaesthetics and other equipment which supports the surgical
procedure.
Personal hygiene for the non-scrubbed team is important although not to the
same high standard as the operating team. Non-scrubbed staff have the jobs of:
· Producing equipment required, at the appropriate time
·Tidying away equipment
· Preparing for the next operation
There should be minimal traffic through the theatre because movement
increases the distribution of micro-organisms in the atmosphere and therefore
could increase the incidence of wound infections. There should be a ventilation
in order to prevent airborne contamination.
On completion of the day's surgical procedures:
· Collect used instruments, place in cold water/detergent solutions ready for
cleaning (Fig. 20.6)
· Collect and dispose of all waste
·Spot check and clean all surfaces with disinfectant
·Restock disposable equipment
The Hospital Environment
257
 Check all other supplies and equipment
 Wipe down walls, operating table and doors with disinfectant
· Vacuum floor for any hair/coat material
·Mop the floor, starting farthest from the exit door and working towards it
· Ventilate room
· Before next operation, 'wet dust' all surfaces with antiseptic solution
Hygiene terms
 Sreriisation - the removal or destruction of all living micro-organisms including
bacterial spores.
Disinfectants - will kill pathogenic micro-organisms.
 Antiseptics - prevent micro-organism from multiplying and therefore infection fails
to develop.
Asepsis -is a state of being free from micro-organisms.
Chapter 21
The Hospitalised Patient
Records and monitoring
Records contain owner/pet details and other information which is vital to the vet-
erinary surgeon who must assess the patient's progress (Fig. 21.1).
 Temperature, pulse and respiration rates taken as often as necessary
 Detail on appetite and feeding
· Urine/faeces passed
· Any vomiting episodes
Observation
The veterinary surgeon will examine at least twice daily to assess progress. The
 nursing staff are then responsible for the animal's cleanliness, feeding, watering.
medication at correct times and reports on any changes to its condition. The
contact time due to the above duties allows nursing staff to:
· Observe the patient
· Notice any behavioural changes
· Note quantity of food eaten and which is its favourite food
· Give detail on whether the faeces is formed or diarrhoeal
● Note if the animal coughs after waking up
·Note whether the animal shows signs of pain or discomfort
Feeding and watering
The cage or kennel should contain a support for feed and water bowls, to prevent
them being tipped over. Bowls are always washed and disinfected daily. Fresh
water is always available unless prohibited by the veterinary surgeon in charge
of the case. A sign is then placed on the front of the housing indicating the patient
should not be fed (Fig. 21.2).
Special patients may require measured amounts of water, so that water input
and output can be recorded (Fig. 21.3).
258
The Hospitalised Patient
259
Fig. 21.1  Recording information on patients
NOFOOD
TODAY
38
Fig. 21.2 Identify kennels where restrictions are
Fig. 21.3  Measure the required amount and record
instructed by the attending veterinary surgeon.
on the record chart.
Feeding varies with patients but is normally twice daily, as per the hospital
routine:
In the morning to determine the appetite
 In order to assist in the administration of some medicines
· In the case of medical diabetes mellitus, where medicines and food must be
timed and regulated
 Postoperatively, patients may need to be encouraged to feed (Fig. 21.4)
260
Chapter 21
Fig. 21.4  Postoperatively patients will need to be encouraged to feed
Feeding may also be contraindicated for a number of reasons:
· Scheduled for surgery and must have an empty stomach
· Medical condition
· After surgery to the gastrointestinal tract
· Requires blood tests
· Is vomiting and/or has diarrhoea
Hygiene
Regular checks are made through the day to make sure no animal lies in a body
discharge (Fig. 21.5). After moving the animal from a soiled housing or kennel,
check to see if samples need to be collected for investigations.
Mark the cage details, with collection times, then clean and disinfect. To prevent
animals from getting soiled, grills may be covered with a layer of bedding to allow
a soak-away effect for use with incontinence pads.
Temperature control
pe eay Apoq ison wai on suisisse paau siad sanadoisod pe -ai
prevent the establishing of shock. Heat can be provided by:
·Environmental thermostat controls
● Kennels with underfloor heating
·Heated underpads (Fig. 21.6)
· Incubator for small or newborn animals
 q s s q      
Use of heat lamps can be harmful if the animal is unable to move away; it could
The Hospitalised Patient
261
Fig. 21.5 Hospital holding kennels allow easy monitoring for signs of soiling
Fig. 21.6  Bedding for warmth postoperatively will support body temperature.
overheat and even suffer skin burns if the lamp is too close. Always keep the
lamp a minimum of one metre from the body of the animal to avoid any over-
heating or burns.
Recumbent patients
·Use deep bedding to prevent pressure on any bony areas (Fig. 21.7)
 Do not allow to remain in soiled kennel
· Use incontinence pads
· Assist drinking to prevent dehydration
·Assist eating, giving small meals often
· Groom and clean away any food on the coat after feeding
262
Chapter 21
Fig. 21.7 Plenty of bedding for recumbent patients
Fig. 21.8 Assist to stand using sling to
support hindquarters.
Unless contraindicated, encourage limb movements to stimulate circulation
(Fig. 21.8)
·Turn the animal every 1-2 hours to prevent fluid pooling in the chest due to
shallow breathing
 Rub and stroke body to stimulate surface circulation, generating heat and
fluid movement within the tissues
 Spend time playing with the animal
 Assist to urinate or check indwelling urinary catheter
Handling
Use coat care and grooming as an excuse to handle. Also wipe any discharges
from nose, eye or ears and keep the area around the mouth moistened using
damp cotton wool to simulate the animal's own grooming routines. This will all
contribute to a feeling of well-being for the animal, accustoms them to the nursing
staff and promotes recovery.
Isolation and barrier nursing
If the patient has a suspected contagious or zoonotic disease, it must be moved
to the isolation area. Barrier nursing follows strict rules to prevent crossinfection
between routine patients or staff members. Barrier nursing involves:
· Protective clothing - disposable apron, intact gloves and mask if necessary
 Change of footwear
· Required drugs and medical equipment for patient care
The Hospitalised Patient
263
Fig. 21.9 TLC to promote recovery.
 Cleaning equipment for unit use only
·Feeding materials and cleaning of bowls in the unit
· One member of staff to work in isolation only and not handle any other
patients
Medication
 For any patient in the hospital, always check:
·Timings
 Dosage per day
 Whether tablet or injection required and/or assistance
Route
Fluid therapy
This will involve:
Care and maintenance of intravenous catheters
 Preventing patient interference (use of Elizabethan collar)
 Checking the fluid is running in properly
 Monitoring quantities delivered
Changing drip fluid bags on instruction
 Monitoring hydration status
· Recording and reporting all details
264
Chapter 21
Environmental enrichment
Preferred foods
m a iq lo a aq m sn ndxa  p pa o uis
spent
 Comfort in the cage, kennel or housing
+
Enough space
 Music helps calm both humans and animals
· Do not mix species
   sn d sd s- n mn an s *
 contraindicated, activity too
TLC (Fig. 21.9)
Chapter 22
Monitoring Temperature, Pulse
and Respiration
The skill of observation and monitoring life signs is essential to nursing of any
species of animal. It involves the comparing of normal behaviour against that
which is abnormal. Time spent with an animal, using all senses, is most impor-
tant. The nurse should be capable of recognising minute changes to the animal's
life signs and temperament.
Temperature, pulse and respiration or breathing all vary in animals due to
environmental temperature, recent exercise, stress situations and excitement.
Increase or decrease in the rate of these life signs can also indicate a problem
with a body system or that a disease is present. These life signs should be checked
hourly or, until an animal is stabilised, more frequently.
Temperature
Most species can regulate their body temperature in response to internal and
 si         s 
the body temperature of cold-blooded species like reptiles is not useful because
they rely on environmental sources for their own heat. The ability of warm-
blooded animals to control their own body temperature may disappear when ill
or injured.
Heat loss methods
·Sweating
·Panting
●Drinking water
·  Position - spread out, seeking a cold surface to lie on
· Vasodilation - surface blood vessels increase in size to lose body heat
Heat gain methods
·Shivering
Position - curled up
 Vasoconstriction - surface blood vessels reduce in size to reduce body heat
loss
265
266
Chapter 22
Temperature is assessed by:
· Touching extremities
· Body position
·Thermometer reading
Rules
· Take the temperature at the very least twice a day {it is always lower after
sleep).
· Leave the thermometer in position for at least one minute; in the case of the
subclinical thermometer, leave in position for at least two minutes.
· After insertion into the rectum, tilt the thermometer to contact the epithelial
wall lining the tract. This ensures that the thermometer is not placed into
faeces in the rectum, which would give a false reading.
Taking the temperature
Equipment required to take a temperature
Thermometer
Lubricant such as KY Jelly or medicinal liquid paraffin
Small amount of cotton wool
Antiseptic water-based solution
Watchwith a secondhand
（1）
 Collect and prepare all required equipment.
(2)
 Correctly restrain patient (second person restraining head).
(3)  Shake down the thermometer and check the reading.
(4)  Apply the lubricant to the thermometer.
(5）
Insert into the rectum for the correct length of time (never be tempted to
reduce this time).
6)
Remove, wipe with the cotton wool and read.
7)
Wipe clean using antiseptic solution.
Store the thermometer in a jar or container containing dilute water-based
antiseptic solution.
Monitoring Temperature, Pulse and Respiration
267
110
43
F
212.
100
42
95
95
185
41
176
80
105
167
148:
40
65
149
60
39
55
122
50
113
104
40
100
38
95
35
86
30
37
77
25
68
2号
36
50!
10
41
32
0
95
35
3
730
Fig. 22.1 Thermometer scales.
Always wipe clean of faecal material before placing in the jar or container.
 Protect the bulb end of the thermometer by placing a layer of cotton wool at
the bottom of the container.
· Never store or clean in a hot solution as this could damage the thermometer.
Before use, wipe clean of the antiseptic solution which could irritate the rectal
lining-
Always write down the reading so that a record can be built up of any changes
that occurred, at what stage of the disease and the time of day.
Types of thermometer in use include:
·Celsius or centigrade - with a scale reading of 35-43 (Fig. 22.1)
· Fahrenheit - with a scale reading of 94-108 (Fig. 22.1)
· Subclinical Celsius - with a scale reading of 25-40
The formula for converting Celsius to Fahrenheit is as follows.
F to C - Subtract 32, multiply by 5, divide by 9.
C to F - multiply by 9, divide by 5, add 32.
268
Chapter 22
Table 22.1 Normal temperatures.
Species
Celsius
Fahrenheit
Dog
38.3-38.7
100.9-101.7
Cat
38.0-38.5
100.4-101.6
Guinea pig
38.4-40
102.2-104
Rabbit
38.5-40
101.5-104
Rat
37.5
99.9
Hamster
36-38
98-101
Mouse
37.5
99.5
Differences between:
 Clinical thermometer
Laboratory thermometer
Contains mercury
Contains spirit or mercury
Triangular in shape
Circular in shape
Scale difference
Scale difference
Constriction near bulb
No constriction
Needs to be shaken down before use
Needs no shaking down before use
Short shaft
Long shaft
Temperature increase may be seen:
 In infections and fevers
+
After recent exercise
 In fear or excitement
· In heat stroke (hyperthermia)
· In hot weather
Temperature decrease may be seen:
In shock and severe bleeding
 In exposure cases (hypothermia)
 In hibernation
· In anaesthesia
·Before impending death (moribund animal)
·Immediately before parturition (giving birth)
Pulse
The pulse is used as a means of checking the heart (cardio) and blood (vascu-
lar) function. With each heart beat, the artery walls expand and contract in
size to allow the created wave of blood to pass and maintain its speed of
Monitoring Temperature, Pulse and Respiration  269
fow. This is called the pulse. If there is a change in the heart function or the
( a sd  i  a  aa  an   g 
or character.
Words used to describe the pulse include:
· Intermittent
Thready - slow, soft pulse
·Irregular
·Strong
·Weak
A normal pulse is usually described as regular, strong or firm. It is essential
that time is spent feeling pulses, both normal and abnormal,to increase the opera-
tor's ability to assess the state of the animal. This will also dramatically decrease
the time it takes to find the animal's pulse.
The pulse is taken where an artery runs close to the body surface. Each pul-
sation corresponds with the contraction of the right and left ventricles of the
heart.
Sites used
·Femoral artery located in the groin region on the medial aspect of the femur
of the hind leg.
· Digital artery located on the cranial or anterior surface of the hock region of
the hind leg.
· Coccygeal artery located on the ventral (underside) aspect of the base of the
tail just above the rectum.
· Lingual artery located on the ventral (underside) aspect of the tongue.
However, this site can only be used in unconscious or anaesthetised animals.
The most common site used to take the pulse is the femoral artery on the hind
leg. Before taking the pulse, the animal must be suitably restrained so two people
make the task much easier.
Taking the pulse
· Get the animal used to being restrained.
· Once the animal is settled, take the pulse by placing the fingers over the
chosen artery.
·When properly located, using a watch with a second hand, count the pulse for
one minute. Never shorten this period because the pulse can change quickly
and a reading of less than one minute could be inaccurate and therefore
useless.
·Write down the pulse count at the end of the minute.
·Relax the restraint of the animal and praise.
270
Chapter 22
Table 22.2Normal pulse recording
Species
Pulse rate (beats per minute)
Dog
60-180*
Cat
110-180
Rabbit
150-300
Guinea pig
230-320
Hamster
300-600
Mouse
500-600
* The pulse range in dogs is due to the size variation from toy breeds
(nearer the 180 end of the range) to giant breeds (nearer the 60 end
of the range).
Pulse terms
Dysrhythmia - indicates that the pulse and heart rate are not synchronised. The pulse
is lower due to the heart pumping blood inefficiently.
Sinus arrhythmia - refers to the pulse rate increase on breathing in and decrease on
breathing out. This is often considered to be normal.
 Fast pulse - occurs when the tissues are not geting enough oxygen and the heart is
compensating by speeding up to meet the body's needs. Fast pulse can be normal
after exercise.
Pulse increase
Exercise
Excitement or stress
Heartvalve disease
Shock or loss of blood
Pain
High temperature/fever
Pulse decrease
Sleep
Unconsciousness
Heart disease
 Other disease condition
Monitoring Temperature, Pulse and Respiration
271
Table 22.3  Normal respiration rates.
Species
Rate (breaths per minute)
Dog
10-30
Cat
20-30
Rabbit
35-65
Guinea pig
110-150
Hamster
75
Gerbil
90-140
Mouse
100-250
Respiration
Normal breathing is almost silent, although air flow may be heard in the airways.
The breathing and cardiovascular systems are very closely linked so a change in
 one is mirrored in the other. If the blood gas levels of oxygen or carbon dioxide
become abnormal this will be seen in the animal's colour, its pulse rate and char-
acter and in the breathing.
Certain breeds of dog and cat may, because of airway anatomy (short-nosed
breeds), make considerable breathing sounds and this is normal.
There should be a rhythm to the breathing, in that the time between breath-
ing in and out should be equal. The breathing can be varied by use of the vol-
untary or skeletal muscles of the chest or thorax.
The ability to voluntarily alter breathing means that the rate can only be
taken once the animal has settled. Any obvious restraint will probably cause the
breathing to increase in response. The reading is taken on either breathing in or
breathing out and when the animal:
·Is not panting
·Has not recently exercised
· Has not been stressed by overrestraint
·Is not asleep
The respiratory rate is taken when the animal is calm, awake and comfortable.
After close observation by the operator, a decision is taken to count on breath-
ing in or breathing out. The recording is timed using a watch with a second hand
for one minute. Note is also made of the depth of breathing.
Causes of respiration increase
 Shock or haemorrhage
Recent exercise
Pain
· Excitement or fear
272
Chapter 22
Heat stroke
· Medical disease, especially of the respiratory system
Causes ofrespirationdecrease
Unconsciousness
Sleep
Poisons
Low body temperature (hypothermia)
Breathing terms
Tachypnoea - rapid, shallow breathing.
Hyperpnoea - panting.
Apnoea - no breathing taking place.
Cheyne-Stokes - irregular breathing (deep breaths, then fast shallow breaths)
seen shortly before death.
Dyspnoea - dificulty breathing in or out and often painful.
Signs of dlifficult breathing
Forced breathing out
 Flaring of nostrils
 Extended head and neck
 Elbows rotated away from the chest
+
 Breathing through the mouth
+
 Exaggerated movements of the chest and abdomen
Sounds
· Unable to settle
Chapter 23
Pharmacy and the Administration
of Drugs
 Pharmacology is the science of drugs:
· The way in which the drug affects the body
· Its absorption into the body
·Its metabolism by the body
· The method used by the body to finally excrete it
Dispensing is the giving out of drugs to the owner of the animal requiring them,
either by the veterinary practice at which the owner is registered or by taking a
prescription to a dispensing chemist.
target in the body, how quickly the effect of the drug is required and the ability
of the owner to give the drug.
Routes
Oral (Fig. 23.1)
This is the most frequently used route for drugs because the owner can treat
at home. The products are supplied in various forms, from tablet to powder.
Many tablets have an outer coating and therefore should never be broken up or
crushed in case the action of the drug is reduced. Reasons for coating tablets
include:
· Protection of the drug from moisture
 To hide an unpleasant taste
To assist in identification
· To protect the drug from the hydrochloric acid in the stomach (enteric coated)
· Protection of the stomach from the irritant effect of a drug
Oral administration can have disadvantages.
· If the animal is vomiting
·Absorption can be slow and some of the drug may not be absorbed at all
 The presence of food may reduce the drug's effect
+
The animal may refuse to swallow the drug
·Owner is unable to give the drug to the animal
273
274
Chapter 23
Fig. 23.1 The mouth is opened wide so that the tablet can then be placed at the back of
the throat for swallowing.
Parenteral
A route other than by mouth. It usually refers to or is taken to mean *by injec-
tion'. Any drug administered by this method must be sterile and the method
involves some skin site cleaning and personal hygiene. The most frequently used
injection methods are:
·Subcutaneous - into the connective tissues below the skin (below the hypo-
dermis). This method is for non-irritant drugs and absorption is slow.
·Intramuscular - directly into a muscle body (hind leg or back). This method
is used for small volumes of drug only and can be painful but the drug is more
rapidly absorbed than by the subcutaneous route.
· Intravenous - into a surface vein (foreleg, hind leg or neck vein). This method
places the drug directly into the bloodstream and has very rapid action.
Other injection routes less frequently used are:
· Epidural - into the vertebral canal to give spinal pain control (analgesia)
·Intra-articular - directly into a joint
·Intradermal - into the skin structure
These drug preparations are applied to a surface tissue like the skin, eyes or ears
(Fig. 23.2). They are absorbed into either just the surface of the skin or mucous
membranes or the structure of the skin, depending on the material used to carry
        s  
Pharmacy and the Administration of Drugs
275
 a a o  pe   e si  u  
why the operator must immediately wash off any drug that contacts their skin.
Types of carriers used include:
·Water to place wettable powder against the skin
· Petroleum jelly as ointment that melts with body heat
+
 Oil and water together as a cream, which will penetrate into the skin layers
 Detergent-based products as medicated shampoos to cover the skin surface
before rinsing off
Pharmacology and dispensing
For safe drug administration, be sure that the following are checked and
confirmed before medication is given.
Is it the right:
drug?
patient?
dose?
route for the drug?
time interval?
Administer the right drug
· Check label
·Check against the animal's medical record, if available
· If the writing is illegible on the medical record, get it clarified
· Understand the difference between trade names and generic names
276
Chapter 23
Administer the right drug to the right patient
· Check the ID on the animal
· Check the ID on the kennel
· Check any medical records
Administer the right dose
·Read instructions
· Check with supervising member of staff
Administer the drug by the correct route
·Know the meaning of abbreviations like:
i.m. - intramuscular
p.o. - by mouth (per os)
i.v. - intravenous
s.c. - subcutaneous
· Do not crush *delayed action' capsules/tablets to mix with food
+
 Some drugs must be given i.m. for absorption as they may be irritant given
s.c., so always check the instructions on the container or product leafet
Administer the drug at the right time
·Know the abbreviations:
b.i.d. or b.d. - twice daily or every 12 hours
t.i.d. or t.d. - three times daily or every eight hours
q.i.d. or q.d. - four times daily or every six hours
·Observe the drug intervals for best therapeutic levels
Document drug administration on the animal's records
· The drug, dose, route, site of administration, date and time
· If there is no recording, assume the drug has not been given
· Record after drug is given, not before, in case of problems
Be aware of drug / foodor drug / drug interactions
· Some drugs must be given with food, like aspirin
· Drug interactions when treating for heart disease, arthritis and epilepsy
·Record any adverse effects seen
Pharmacy and the Administration of Drugs
277
Labels for drug containers
For legal requirements the essential information on a container label is:
·Veterinary practice name and address
 Date of dispensing
Owner's name and address
The words KEEP OUT OF REACH OF CHILDREN
The words FOR ANIMAL TREATMENT ONLY
· If applicable, the words FOR EXTERNAL USE ONLY
Additional useful information that may be included is:
· Drug strength, for example 50mg amoxycillin
Trade name (licensed name for use only by the manufacturing company that
developed the drug) or generic name (drug chemical name and manufactured
by various drug companies)
·Animal's name
· Directions for use; for example, give twice daily'
Warnings should also be attached to certain drugs such as aspirin in full-strength form
and dogs but in cats its effect lasts a lot longer. If a second dose is given by the owner
too soon then the cat will be overdosed. Clearance time for aspirin is:
Humans - four hours
Dogs - eight hours
Cats - 30 hours
Handling and dispensing drugs
Legal aspects
Drugs used in the treatment of animals are classified under the Medicines Act of
1968 into four groups:
(1)  POM - these are prescription-only medicines; only doctors, dentists and
veterinary surgeon or a pharmacist.
(2)   PML - these are called pharmacy and merchants list medicines. They are
licensed products for use only in animals and can be supplied by veterinary
278
Chapter 23
practices, saddlers and animal wholesale outlets such as animal feed and
farm merchants.
(3)   P - these are pharmacy medicines supplied by veterinary practices and dis-
pensing chemist chains.
(4) GSL - these are general sales list medicines and can be supplied and sold
by pet shops and other outlets.
The group symbol is found on the drug container label and any outer packaging.
as the controlled drugs (CD). The legislation applicable here is the Misuse of
Drugs Regulations 1985, which is divided into five schedules. These schedules are
set out in decreasing order of the need to control.
· Schedule 1 - includes drugs like cannabis and hallucinogenic drugs such as
LSD, which are considered non-therapeutic and are therefore not legally held
in veterinary practice for the purpose of treating animals.
· Schedule 2 - includes the opiate analgesics (pain control) like morphine pethi-
dine, and etorphine (anaesthetic agent). These drugs are POM and records
are kept on their ordering, supply, safe storage and, if out of date or not
required, their destruction.
·Schedule 3 - includes barbiturates (used for anaesthesia, control of epilepsy
and euthanasia), some minor stimulant drugs and some analgesics (pain
control). These drugs are POM and must have safe storage and purchase
records.
·Schedule 4 - includes the benzodiazepine drugs such as valium and diazepam
a   (    da  d 
from restrictions.
· Schedule 5 - contains preparations with only traces of otherwise controlled
drugs, such as cocaine, codeine (cough mixture) and morphine (kaolin and
morphine for diarrhoea treatment). The levels of drug are so small that they
are exempt from restrictions.
Some drugs carry special risks. Harmful products may produce an acute effect
immediately after contact whereas others may accumulate over time and con-
stant exposure will be necessary before their effect on the operator or nurse is
seen.
High-risk products include:
· Certain hormone products, like those used to postpone oestrus
· Cytotoxic drugs - those used in the treatment of cancers
· Gaseous anaesthetic agents like halothane
· Certain antibiotics
· Antifungal powders - those used to treat ringworm
· Insecticides
Pharmacy and the Administration of Drugs
279
Drugs glossary
Group
Definition
Anabolic
Promotes growth of body tissue
Analgesic
 Relieves or prevents pain
Anthelmintic
Kills internal parasitic worms
Antibiotic
Disrupts or destroys bacteria
Anticoagulant
Prevents blood from clotting
Antidiuretic
Hormone which reduces urine output
Corticosteroids
Suppress infammation
Diuretic
Increases urine production
Emetic
Causes vomiting
Sedative
Reduces awareness of surroundings
Vaccine
Stimulates the production of antibodies
Chapter 24
lsolation and Quarantine
lsolation
Isolation is required when an animal is believed to have, or has, a disease that
can be passed on to others (contagious). There is also protective isolation for
susceptible animals, e.g. unvaccinated puppies and kittens. In their case, the
isolation is in the owner's home and garden, which becomes the controlled envi-
ronment.
In many veterinary practices and hospitals there is a purpose-built isolation
housing, this type of facility may have to be created, as the need arises. Home-
made isolation may involve use of a foldaway cage or cage box in a non-animal
area of the unit which can be carefully controlled.
Infectious diseases of the dog and cat needing isolation
Dog
Cat
Distemper
 Feline infectious peritonitis
Hepatitis 
Feline leukaemia virus
Leptospirosis
Feline panleucopenia 
Kennel cough
Cat flu
Ringworm
Ringworm
Sarcoptic mange
The affected animal is housed in such a manner as to prevent other animals
coming into contact with the disease-producing organisms it will be shedding.
Micro-organisms can be shed via:
·Urine
·Faeces
 Blood
Discharges from eyes, ears, nose, mouth, prepuce, vulva or a wound
· Respiratory tract via sneezing or coughing
·Vomit
280
IsolationandQuarantine281
Bearing in mind the exit routes for contagious diseases, isolation must follow
disease management rules:
· One member of staff specifically allocated to the isolation area
Change into protective clothing
+
 Change into protective footwear or set up a footbath containing disinfectant
· Additional protection of gloves and mask
·● The unit must contain all required food preparation equipment and food
bowls
· Cleaning equipment to be used in the unit should be kept there
· Instruments used here are cleaned here
· Safe disposal of soiled bedding, faeces, urine, vomit, blood and saliva, which
may contain infectious micro-organisms
· Medical supplies to be available in the unit
An isolation facility must have an area for kennels, cages and a run area, for
take place within this area, which requires a sink unit, examination table and basic
medical supplies. All cleaning equipment and feeding supplies for patients must
be for use in isolation only. Hygiene is essential to assist the full recovery of the
patient. Thorough cleaning of all surfaces, feeding equipment and bedding mate-
rials will reduce the number of micro-organisms present.
All staff members must disinfect or change footwear and overalls and
wash hands in antiseptic solution before leaving to move through the other areas
of the animal housing. It is essential never to put healthy animals or humans
            s
may transmit from animals to human carers {known as a zoonone or zoonotic
disease).
Quarantine
This refers to the detention of animals coming into the UK for a set period of
time, in isolation from other animals, in order to screen for disease (Fig. 24.1).
Under the Rabies Order 1974 (as amended) any animal landed in the UK without
a licence or PET passport may be directed to quarantine, exported or destroyed,
and its owner prosecuted.
Quarantine time will vary depending on the species involved. For dogs
and cats, the time is six calendar months to be spent in a quarantine kennel, in
order to screen for rabies in particular. For other species, the times and locations
vary, but will involve separation from the main group of animals or birds at
a given location. In this manner, the resident animals are not put at risk by the
newcomer.
282
Chapter24
Quarantine of dogs and cats in the UK
 In March 1999 the government proposed changes to the quarantine laws, as
recommended by the Kennedy Advisory Group. The Kennedy Advisory Group
was appointed to look at the existing regulations and make recommendations
for replacing quarantine.
The new scheme proposed to allow dogs and cats coming from EU countries,
certain other European countries and rabies-free islands to enter the UK without
having to undergo quarantine, provided they can meet the necessary criteria
regarding vaccination and identification.
To enter the UK without quarantine from a listed or EU country, dogs and cats
must have a PETS passport or certificate containing information on the animal:
·Permanently identified with an electronic microchip
·Vaccinated against rabies using an inactivated vaccine
· Have an official health certificate containing details of:
owner or keeper
identification and description of animal
vaccination record and booster information
blood tests and results
treatment for ticks and tapeworms
If an animal arrives in the UK and does not meet the PETS requirements (see
Chapter 6) the authority responsible for carrying out the checks will decide, in
consultation with the owner and a veterinary surgeon, whether to re-export the
Aido r i! pun (syo xis m dn o qissod) aunh oun nn ind on te
with the PETS rules; or, as a last resort, to put the animal down.
Isolation and Quarantine
Quarantine for six months on arrival in the UK should be pre-arranged before
travelling begins from an unlisted country. Official transporters collect animals
on arrival from ports and airports. On arrival at the quarantine premises the
animal is taken to its allocated unit. It cannot be moved to any other unit during
its stay unless there is an emergency or the move is approved by the attending
veterinary surgeon.
All animals are given appropriate accommodation according to size and
species. There are recommended minimum internal measurements for individual
units, which also state sleeping area and adjoining exercise area size.
Guidelines are in place for the general standards of hygiene, materials used on
surfaces in quarantine kennels (e.g. non-slip floors). Also stated are feeding and
management routines, the need for visual stimuli and fresh air access, the condi-
tion and minimum temperature of the sleeping area.
The animal's owner is allowed reasonable access for visiting during the six-
month quarantine period. If any signs of ill health arise during the quarantine,
the attending veterinary surgeon is consulted and the owner of the animal is
informed immediately.
Appendix
Anatomy and Physiology Terminology
The majority of terms referring to the body systems and medical conditions are
derived from Greek or Latin. Most of these terms are a combination of two or
more word parts. When they combine to become a word, they usually indicate
some or all of the following:
· Body tissues involved
·What has gone wrong
·Quantity (a lot or very little)
· Levels of infection or inflammation
· Colour or substance
· Fluid involved
You may find it helpful to practise defining the components of the words sep-
arately, then combine them to find out the meaning of the complete word. In
many ways it is no different from learning a new language and by memorising
the common beginnings and endings, the rest can be worked out. It is always
helpful to have a veterinary dictionary for the less frequently used terms and
words.
Medical terminology
Certain syllables are commonly used as the beginning or ending of medical terms,
 o rd e m siu ym s pa e mn pa lq ss A u
part of the body.
·Prefix - beginning of a word stem
· Suffx - ending of a word stem
Prefixes in anatomy/physiology
A or An - lack of, e.g. anaemia (lack of blood cells)
Dys - difficult or defective, e.g. dysphagia (difficulty swallowing)
Endo - within, e.g. endoscope (equipment used to look at working organs)
Ex - out, e.g. excision (to remove)
284
Anatomy and PhysiologyTerminology
285
Haema or Haemo - refers to blood, e.g. haemorrhage (loss of blood)
Hyper - excess of, e.g. hyperthermia (high body temperature)
Hypo - lack of, e.g. hypothermia (low body temperature)
Poly - many or much, e.g. polydipsia (drinking a lot)
Pyo - pus, e.g- pyometra (pus-filled uterus)
Sub - beneath or under, e.g. sublingual (under the tongue)
Suffixes in anatomy/physiology
itis - inflammation, e.g. arthritis (inflammation of a joint)
logy - science or study of, e.g. dermatology (study of the skin)
penia - deficiency, e.g. leucopenia (deficiency of white blood cells)
phagia - eating, e.g. coprophagia (eating faeces)
rhoea - increased discharge, e.g. diarrhoea (increased discharge of faeces)
Word use
The following common words may help to illustrate the prefix/suffix idea:
Nephritis - neph refers to the specialised cell of the kidney, known as the
nephron; itis refers to infammation of a tissue. The meaning of this word is
kidney cell inflammation and pain.
· Arthritis - arth refers to a joint; itis means inflammation. The meaning of this
word is joint inflammation and pain.
·Hepatitis - hepat refers to the specialised cell of the liver know as the hepa-
tocyte; itis means infammation. This word means inflammation and pain of
the liver cells.
· Haematoma - haem refers to blood; toma refers to a lump or swelling. The
meaning of this word is blood-filled lump or swelling.
These words are descriptions, not diagnoses, and simply refer to a tissue type
or organ and what is happening to it.
Anatomical directions
Anatomical directions are used to describe areas of the animal body. They are
part of the language of medicine used between colleagues for communication.
Many of these words originated from Greek or Latin.
The first four words are another way of saying above, below, front and back
and are in common use when case recording in the medical world:
286
Appendix
Caudal
Rostral
Cranial
Caudal
Medianplane
Dorsal
Dorsal
plane
Proximal
Distal
Transverse
planes
Palmar
Plantar
Fig. A.1 Anatomical diections. Adapted fom McBride, D.F. (1996) Learning Veterinary
Terminology. Mosby, St Louis.
Dorsal - towards the top or back surface of the body
Ventral - towards the underside, lower surface or nearer the ground
Cranial or anterior - situated at the front of the body or towards the head
end
Caudal or posterior - situated towards the back end of the body or towards
the tail
Words to indicate side, middle or near the nose are:
Lateral - to the side (left or right) or away from the middle of the body
Medial - the midline of a body structure or the body
Rostral - on the head but towards the nose
Words indicating near or far from a named body structure (especially limbs)
are:
Proximal - near to the body trunk or closer to a named structure
·Distal - away from the body trunk or further from a named structure
Words which describe where on a limb, surface, especially lower limb, surfaces
are:
Anatomy and Physiology Terminology
287
Palmar or volar - indicating the caudal or back surface of the fore-limb, below
the carpus or wrist area
· Plantar - indicating the caudal or back surface of the hind limb, below the
tarsus or hock area
Words indicating inside or outside are:
Interna! - inside the body
External - outside or surface
Selected Reading
SECTION 1
Animal Science
Beckett, B.S. (1993) Biology. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Blood, D.C. & Studdert, V.P. (1998) Comprehensive Veterinary Dictionary. Bailliere
Tindall, London.
Clegg, C. (1990) Biology. Heinemann, Oxford.
Jones, G. (1991) Biology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Lane, D. & Cooper, B. (1999) Veterinary Nursing. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Michell, A.R.& Watkins, P.E. (1989) Introduction to Veterinary Anatomy and Physiology.
BSAVA,Cheltenham.
Roberts, M.B.V. (1995) Biology: A Functional Approach. Nelson, London
Genetics
Grossman, A.(1992) The Standard Book of Dog Breeding. Doral, Wilsonville, USA.
Nicholas, F. W. (1991) Veterinary Genetics. Oxford Science, Oxford.
Taylor, D. (1986) You and Your Dog. Dorling Kindersley, London.
Taylor, D. (1986) You and Your Cat. Dorling Kindersley, London.
SECTION 2
Ackerman, D.L. (n.d.) Cat Heaith. TFH, USA.
Alderton, D. (1986) Rabbits and Guinea Pigs - Petkeeper Guide. Salamander, London.
Alderton, D. (1989) The Dog Care Manual. Stanley Paul.
Anderson, R.S. & Edney, A.T.B. (1990) Practical Animal Handling. Pergamon Press,
Oxford.
Barrie, A. (1987) Step by Step - Guinea Pigs. TFH, USA.
Bell, J.C., Palmer, S.R. & Payne, J.M. (1988) The Zoonoses. Edward Arnold, London.
Burger, I. (1993) The Waltham Book of Companion Animal Nutrition. Pergamon Press,
Oxford.
Colville,J. (1991) Diagnostic Parasitology for Veterinary Technicians. American Veterinary
Publications, California.
Dallas, S.& Simpson, G. (1999) Manual of Veterinary Care. BSAVA
Evans, JM. & White, K. (1994) Book of the Bitch. Henston, Guildford.
Evans, J.M. & White, K. (1994) The Catlopaedia. Henston, Guildford.
Evans, J.M. & White, K. (1994) The Dogtopaedia. Henston, Guildford.
289
290
Selected Reading
Fletcher, N. (2000) Essential Guide to Fish Care. Internet Publishing.
Fox, S. (1988) Rats. TFH, USA.
Harkness, JE.& Wagner, JE. (1985) The Biology and Medicine of Rabbits and Rodents.
Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia.
Henwood, C. (1990) Step by Step - Hamsters. TFH, USA.
Lane, D. & Cooper, B. (1999) Veterinary Nursing. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
McCurnin, D.M. (1994) Clinical Text for Veterinary Technicians. W.B. Saunders,
Philadelphia.
Morris, D. (1986) Animal Watching. Jonathan Cape, London.
Richardson,V.C.G.(1992) Diseases of Domestic Guinea Pigs.Blackwell Science,Oxford
Thies, D. (1989) Cat Care. TFH, USA.
SECTION 3
Bell, C.T.P. (1993) First Aid and Health Care for Dogs. Lutterworth Press, Cambridge.
Edney,A.T.B.& Hughes, I.B. (1986) Pet Care.Blackwell Science, Oxford.
Fogle, B. (1995) First Aid for Dogs. Pelham, London.
Kirk,R.W.& Bistner, S.1. (1985) Handbook of Veterinary Procedures and Emergency
Treatment. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Lane, D. & Cooper, B. (1999) Veterinary Nursing. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
McBride, D.F. (1996) Learning Veterinary Terminology. Mosby, St Louis.
Taylor, D. (1986) You and Your Cat. Dorling Kindersley, London.
Taylor, D. (1986) You and Your Dog. Dorling Kindersley, London.
Index
abdominal cavity, 81
brine shrimp,219
abdominal directions, 81,285-7
bronchi, 31
absorption, 37, 445
BSAVA, 97
Abyssinian, 194
budgerigar, 208-10
acidity, 20
BVA, 97
active transport,18,20,45
BVNA, 97
adipose tissue, 9
adrenal glands, 58, 204
caecal pellets, 191, 193
adult (feeding), 151
caecum,45,191,199
alkalinity, 20
Californian, 189
alleles, 78
canary,210-11
alveoli, 31
canine distemper, 113-14
amino acids, 139
canine infectious tracheobronchitis (kennel cough), 113,
ammonia,218
114-15
anatomical directions, 81,285-7
canine leptospirosis, 113, 116, 126
animal collection Jaws, 94-5
canine parvovirus, 113, 115
animal health laws, 89-92
canine viral hepatitis, 113, 115-16
anion, 20
capillaries, 26
anoestrus, 76,77
capillaries, 26, 234
anseriformes, 205
capillary refill, 228, 236
anthelmintics,128
carbohydrate,46,140-41
anti-coccidial, 192
cardiac compression, 229
antiseptics, 137,257
cardio pulmonary arrest, 223, 229
aquarium hood, 217
carriers (of disease), 103
arteries, 25,234
carnivore,142,147
artificial respiration, 231
cartilage, 14
ascorbic acid, 196
cat grooming, 182-3
assimilation, 37
cat scratch fever, 126
ATP, 36
cation, 20
autonomic nervous system, 56
cavies, 194
aves,205-11
cell membrane, 5, 6
aviary, 206,208
cells, 3-6, 79
central nervous system, 54
babesiosis, 129-30
centrosome,6
bacteria, 106, 107-10, 136, 218
chemicals, 243
bandaging, 245-8
cheyletiella, 130
barbells, 212-13
chinchilla, 189
bathing, 178-82, 185-6
Chinese hamster, 201
behaviour, 156
chlamydiosis, 120
binary fission, 108
chromosomes,5,72,78
bladder,48
chrepuscular,201
bleeding, 233
chime, 44
blind spot, 61
cleaning,251
blood, 10-14, 25
cloaca,206
bloodworm, 219
clubiformes, 205
body temperature, 249-50, 265
coat types, 165-6, 183-4
bone, 14, 67-8
coldwater fish, 214-15
brain, 54
colour, 228
breathing, 31, 34-6
comet,214
breeding cycle, 75, 80
compound fracture, 224, 240
291
292
Index
conjugation,108
flank glands, 202
connective tissue, 7, 810
fea, 128
consultation rooms, 252
Flemish Giant, 189
coprophagia,193
fuid (body), 10-11, 82
corticosteroid, 58
fluid therapy, 263
cranial nerves, 56
follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), 76, 77
crossbred, 80
fractures (bone), 239-41
curly coated, 183, 184
fungi, 106, 111, 136
cuttlefish,209
cytoplasm, 6
galliformes,205
gametes,74,79,80
Dangerous Dogs Acts, 91
General Sales list medicines, 278
daphnia, 219
genes,78
diaphragm, 35, 206
genetic terms, 79
diastema, 190, 195
gerbil, 156,2035
diets, 147-8
gestation,74,190,194,197,199,201,203
diffusion, 18, 45
gizzard,206,210
digestion, 37, 43
glandular,7,57
digestive system, 37-48
goldfish, 214
diploid,79-80
golgi body,6
disease, 103-5
gonads,58
disinfectants, 135, 257
gonopodium,212
disinfection, 105, 1347
grit (dietary),210,211
dispensing,275-7
grooming,165,175-8,182-3
diurnal, 203, 209, 210
grooming equipment,17076
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid), 5, 78, 110
growth (feeding),149-51
dog(handling), 158
guinea pig,156,1946
double coat,168-9
guppies,214
drug glossary, 279
drug schedules, 278
haemorrhage, 233-5
Dutch, 189, 194
hair, 166
dystocia,224
hairless coated, 183, 185
hamster,201-2
ear, 62-3
handling, 155,262
ear drum,63
haploid, 79
egglayer,214
healing (of wounds), 241-2
ehrlichiosis,129-30
health (signs), 98
endocrine, 7-8, 56-9, 82
health routines, 99
environmental enrichment,264
heart,25,27-30
enzymes,37,42,46
heating, 216
epithelial,4,7
herbivores, 38, 190, 192, 220
exercise,101
Himalayan rabbit, 189
exocrine,7
homeostasis, 82
eye,60-61,243
hormones, 7, 56-9
hydatid disease, 126
falconiformes, 205
hygiene,100, 105, 134,250-51,260
fallopian tube, 74
hyperthermia(heat stroke),2389
fat, 45,46, 141-2
hypertonic, 19
fat soluble vitamins, 142
hypothermia,239
fatty acid, 141
hypotonic, 19
feeding, 145, 258-60
hypoxia,236
feline immunodeficiency,118,123-4
hystricomophs, 194
feline infectious anaemia,118,122
feline infectious peritonitis, 118, 122-3
immunity, 23, 1245, 129
feline leukaemia, 117, 118-19 
inbreeding, 80
feline panleucopenia, 117, 119-20
incubation (of disease), 104
feline pneumonitis, 117, 120
infection, 104
feline viral respiratory disease, 117, 120-22
inherited factors, 78
filter systems, 216
initial help, 225
finch, 206, 210
jnsect stings, 233
fins, 212
intestines, 40, 44,59
fish, 211-20
jodine, 209
five freedoms, 87
iris diaphragm, 60
Index
293
isolation, 105, 262-3, 280-81
oestrogen,59,76
isotonic, 19
oestrus, 74,76,77
omnivores, 38, 198, 200, 202, 204, 219
joints, 69
operculum,212,213
oral, 273
kennels/recovery area, 253-5
organelles, 6
kidney, 48, 59
osmosis, 6, 1819, 82
Koi carp, 214-15
ossicles, 63
Kreb's cycle, 37, 46
out breeding,80
ova (egg), 745, 79
lagomorpha,188
ovaries,59,75
oviduct, 74
large intestines,45
lateral line, 212-13
pacemaker, 29
legislation, 88
lice, 130
pain, 99
life stage feeding, 146-54
pancreas,46,47-8,58
lighting,217
parakeet,206
line breeding, 80
parasites, 105,12833
live bearer,214
parasympathetic system, 56
parathyroid, 58
liver, 46-7
Jog,189
parenteral,274
long coated, 83, 184, 186
parturition, 74
Juteinizing hormone, 77
passeriformes, 205, 210
lyme disease,129
PDSA, 97
Jymphatic, 21-4, 45,129
pedigree, 80
peg teeth,191,195
lysosomes, 6
pelvic cavity, 34, 81
perforating injury,244
 medical terminology, 284-5
pericardium, 81
medication, 263
peripheral nervous system, 55
meiosis, 79-80
peritoneum,81
Mendel's first law, 78
Peruvian,194
meninges, 55
pesticides,232
metoestrus, 77
pet travel scheme, 90
mice, 197-9
pH, 20-21
microbes, 106
phagocytosis, 13-14, 18,19-20,23
microbial terms, 106
pharmacology, 273
micturation, 50
Pharmacy and Merchants list medicines (PML),
minerals, 143-5
277-8
mitochondria,5-6
pharmacy medicines (P), 278
mitosis, 79-80
pheromones,75
Mongolian gerbil, 203
pineal gland,58
mongrel,80
pituitary, 57
monoestrus, 76
plasma, 10-11
mouth, 40
platies, 214
mouth to nose technique, 231
plura, 81
muscular tissue, 4, 7, 1416, 35, 79
poisons,193,232
muzzle (tape), 159
polyoestrus,76
myomorph, 197,199,201,203
pregnancy, 76,152
prescription only medicines (POM), 277
nail clipping, 177
pressure bandages, 235
nephron,48
progesterone, 59
nervous,7,16-17, 5056,82
prolapsed eye, 244
Netherland dwarf, 189
pro-oestrus, 76
neurone, 4, 51
protein, 46, 139-40, 148
New Zealand white, 189
protozoa, 106, 111-12,130
nitrates, 218-19
psittacosis, 127
nitrites, 218-19
psittiformes, 205, 208
nitrogen cycle, 219
puberty, 74
mucleus, 5
public laws, 89
pulse, 228, 26871
observation, 258
oesophagus, 41
quarantine, 281-3
294
Index
rabbit,156,18893
synovial, 69
rabies, 113,116-17,126
Syrian hamster, 201
rat,156,199-200
RCVS, 97
tapeworms, 131-2
records, 258
taste, 63
recovery position,227,239
teeth, 41-2
recumbent patients, 261-2
temperature control (environment),260
red blood cells (erythrocytes), 11
temperature taking, 266-8
reflection, 191
testes, 59, 76
reflex arc, 52
testosterone, 59, 74
reproductive system, 72
tetanus,127
respiration, 36, 2712
theatre,255-7
respiratory arrest, 229,230
thoracic cavity, 81
respiratory system, 30-37
thyroid, 58
restraint procedures, 160-64
tick, 129
retina,60
tissue fuid, 21
rex, 189
tonsils, 41
ribosomes, 6
topical medication, 274
ribs, 36
toxin, 232
ringworm,126
toxocariasis,126
Roborovski hamster, 201
toxoplasmosis, 126
rough endoplastic reticulum, 6
trachea, 31
roundworms, 131-2, 133
triage, 254-5
RSPCA,96-7
triage area,254-5
ruminant, 38
tropical freshwater fish, 213-14
Russian hamster, 201
tropical marine fish, 211
sarcoptes,130
ureters, 48
season, 75,77
urethra, 48
Self Golden, 194
urinary system, 48
senior (feeding), 152
sense organs,59
vaccination,102,1245
Shaw's jird, 203
veiltail,214-15
sheltie, 194
veins, 26, 234
shock,235-7,239
villi, 45
short coated, 183, 184, 186
virus, 106, 110, 135
Shubunkin, 214
vitamin C,196
silky coat, 169
vitamins, 140, 142, 143
simple fracture, 224, 240
skeleton,65-72
water, 145
skin, 64-5, 79
water soluble vitamins, 143
 small intestines, 40, 44
Weil's disease, 126
smell, 63
welfare laws, 92-6
smooth coat, 168
welfare terms, 87
sperm,74,75,76,79
white blood cells (leucocytes), 4, 12
spinal cord, 55
wire coated, 183, 185
splint,241
wiry coat, 169
spore formation (bacterial), 110, 135
woolly coat, 169-70
stomach, 44
working dogs (feeding), 151
stringiformes,205
wounds,2413
substrates,215
supplementation,149-50
x-ray, 240
 swim bladder, 213
 sympathetic system, 56
zoonones, 126-7
synapse,52