The Veterinary Formulary
Sixthedition
PP)
Editedby
Yolande Bishop
PharmaceuticalPress
Publishedinassociationwith
theBritishVeterinaryAssociation
The Veterinary Formulary
The Veterinary Formulary
Sixth edition
Edited by
Yolande Bishop
PP)
 Published in association with
the Brirish Veterinary Association
London·Chicago
Pharmaceutical Press
Published by the Pharmaceutical Press
Publicalions division of the Royal Pharmaceutical Sociely of Great Britain
1 Lambeth High Street, London SE1 7JN, UK
100 South Arkinson Road, Suite 206, Grayslake,IL 600307820, USA
@ Pharmaceutical Press 200S
(PP)
P/is a trade mark of Pharmaceutical Press
First edition 1991
Second edition 1994
Third edition 1996
Fourth edition 1998
 Fifth edition 2001
Sixth edition 2005
Printed in Great Britain at The University Press, Cambridge
ISBN 0 85369 S79 2
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any
of the copyright holder.
The publisher makes no representation, express or implied,
with regard to the accuracy of the information contained in
this book and cannot accept any legal responsibility or
A catalogue record of this book is available from the British Library
THEVETERINARYFORMYLARY
Sixth Edition
Advisory Committee
A Cairns BSc, MRPharmS
M Jepson BPharm, MSc, PhD, FRPharmS,
S S Carlyle MA, VetMB, PhD, MRCVS
MCPP, MInstPkg, FIPharmM, DHMSA,
S M E Cockbill PhD, LLM, BPharm, MPharm,
MBIRA (Hon)
DAgVetPharm, MIPharmM, FCPP, FRPharmS
L A Johnson, BVMS, MRCVS, DipMan
D E Creighton Dip AVN (surgical) VN
Professor A R Michell BVetMed, BSc, PhD,
A E Durham BVSc, BSc, CertEP, MRCVS
DSc, MRCVS
Professor J Elliott MA, VetMB, PhD, CertSAC,
A V Parsons BPharm, MRPharmS
DipECVPT, MRCVS
R M Stevenson, BVMS, CertPM, MRCVS
G Hockey MRPharmS, Barrister
Trevor Turner BVetMed, MRCVS, FRSH
Contributors
R E Vernon, BVSc, CertCHP, MRCVS
M E Herrtage MA, BVSc, DVR, DVD, DSAM,
A H Andrews BVetMed, PhD, MBIAC, MRCVS
DipECVIM, DipECVDI, MRCVS
+P J Barber BVM&S, PhD, DSAM(Fel), DipECVIM-
Professor D E Jacobs BVMS, PhD, ILTM, DipEVPC,
CA, MRCVS
FRCVS,FRCPath
A R S Barr MA, VetMB, PhD, DipECVS, CertSAO,
P G G Jackson BVM&S, MA, DVM&S, FRCVS
DEO, DVR,MRCVS
L Jepson MA, VetMB, CBiol, MIBiol, MRCVS
R W Blowey BVSc, BSc, FRCVS
J K Kirkwood, BVSc, PhD, FIBiol, MRCVS
J C Brearley MA, VetMB, PhD, DVA, DipECVA,
Professor P Lees CBE, BPharm, PhD, DSc, CBiol,
MRCVS
FIBiol, ILTM, Hon Assoc RCVS, Dr hc (Gent), Hon-
S N Clayton BVSc, MRCVS
FellowECVPT
S M E Cockbill PhD, LLM, BPharm, MPharm,
S A Lister BVetMed, BSc, CertPMP, MRCVS
DAgVetPharm, MIPharmM, FCPP, FRPharmS
T S Mair BVSc, PhD, DEIM, DESTS, DipECEIM,
B H Coles BVSc, DipECAMS, RCVS Specialist in Zoo
MRCVS
and Wildlife Medicine (Avian), FRCVS
Professor A R Michell BVetMed, BSc, PhD, DSc,
R G Cooke BSc, PhD
MRCVS
Professor D E Noakes BVetMed, PhD, DVRep, DSc,
S W Cooke BVSc, MRCVS
DipECAR,FRCVS
B M Corcoran MVB, PhD, MRCVS
A Patel BVM, DVD, MRCVS
B R Cottrill
G F Rendall BVSc, MRCVS
C Davis BVM&S, MRCVS
PRScott DVM&S,CertCHP,DSHP,FRCVS
 S Dawson BVMS, PhD, MRCVS
J W Simpson BVM&S, SDA, MPhil, MRCVS
C EI Day MA, VetMB, MRCVS
J D Slater BVM&S, MRCVS
B C Devine BVSc, CertVC, MRCVS
G G A Smith BVSc, BSc, MRCVS
J M Dobson, MA, BVetMed, DVetMed, DipECVIM,
C L Spencer BVetMed, MRCVS
MRCVS
W R Steele BVSc, MRCVS
P W Edmondson MVB, CertCHP, FRCVS
D J Taylor MA, VetMB, PhD, DipECVPM, MRCVS
Professor J Elliott MA, VetMB, PhD, CertSAC,
Professor M A Taylor BVMS, PhD, CBiol, MIBiol.
DipECVPT, MRCVS
MRCVS
R J Evans MA, PhD, VetMB, DipEVCPT, MRCVS
A F Trawford BVSc, MSc, MRCVS
Professor P A Flecknell MA, VetMB, PhD, DLAS,
S Turner, MA, VetMB, DVOphthal, MRCVS
DipECVA, DECLAM, MRCVS
Trevor Turner BVetMed, MRCVS, FRSH
T J Fletcher BVMS, PhD, MRCVS
A E Wall, BVM&S, MSc, CertVOphthal, MRCVS
D H Grove-White BVSc, DBR, FRCVS
P M Webbon BVetMed,PhD,DVR,MRCVS
P A Harris MA, DipECVCN, VetMB, PhD, MRCVS
W H Wildgoose, BVMS, CertFHP, MRCVS
S E Heath BVSc,MRCVS
*deceased July, 2004
vi
Contents
British Veterinary Association viii
Prefaceix
Tabtes x
Additions to sixth editionxi
Arrangement of informationxii
Symbots and Abbreviationsxiv
Drug namesxv
GUIDANCE ON PRESCRIBING
BVA Code of Practice on Medicines 1
Prescribing for animals used in competitions
23
Prescribing for horses
29
Prescribing for donkeys  31
Prescribing for cattle
¥34
Prescribing for sheep
36
 Prescribing for goats
38
Prescribing for deer
40
 Prescribing for pigs
42
Prescribing for dogs
43
 Prescribing for cats
45
 Prescribing for poultry
46
 Prescribing for game birds
48
Prescribing for pigeons
52
 Prescribing for laboratory animals  57
 Prescribing for rodents 
58
Prescribing for rabbits 
63
Prescribing for ferrets
66
Prescribing for fish 
73
Prescribing for invertebrates
8
86
Prescribing for amphibians 
96
 Prescribing for exotic birds 
¥102
 Prescribing for reptiles
109
Prescribing in hepatic impairment 
118
 Prescribing in renal impairment 
119
 Prescribing for pregnant animals 
¥121
 Prescribing for lactating animals
123
Prescribing for neonates
125
Prescribing for geriatric animals 
126
Treatment of poisoning
1128
Contents   vii
CLASSIFIED NOTES ON DRUGS AND PREPARATIONS
1 Drugs used in the treatment of Bacterial, Fungal, Viral, and Protozoal Infections 139
2Drugs used in the treatment and control of Parasitic Infections  181
3Drugs acting on the Gastro-intestinal System 221
4  Drugs used in the treatment of disorders of the Cardiovascular System  239
5   Drugs used in the treatment of disorders of the Respiratory System 253
6  Drugs acting on the Nervous System  263
8 Drugs acting on the Reproductive System  319
9Drugs used in the treatment of disorders of the Urinary System335
11  Drugs used in the treatment of Mastitis 353
12 Drugs acting on the Eye  363
14  Drugs acting on the Skin 387
15 Drugs acting on Feet 405
16 Drugs affecting Nutrition and Body Fluids 411
17 Production Enhancers 445
19 Herbal Medicines  495
APPENDICES
Appendix 1: Drug Interactions 499
Appendix 2: Drug Compatibilities and Incompatibilities 520
Appendix 3: Conversions and Units 525
Appendix4:WeightsofAnimals528
Appendix 5: Dosage Estimation from Body-weight 529
INDEX OF MANUFACTURERS AND ORGANISATIONS531
INDEX541
LILA
British Veterinary Association
The British Veterinary Association (BVA) is pleased to continue its association with the Pharmaceutical Press,
in order to support the publication of The Veterinary Formulary.
The BVA is an independent national representative body for the veterinary profession in the UK. Veterinarians,
with their knowledge, skill and compassion, have a central role to play in protecting the health and welfare of
farm livestock and as an association the BVA actively promote good practice for the maintenance of high
standards of animal health, animal welfare and public health. To these ends veterinary surgeons require a safe
and effective range of medicines to treat a wide range of animals. However, this must be balanced against the
controls necessary to protect public health from any residues that might occur in those destined for the food
chain. The BVA and its divisions provide policy and guidance, medicines codes and pharmacy courses, and
veterinary medicines.
1x
Preface
The Royal Pharmaceutical Society has a long history of publishing veterinary medicine texts with the assistance of the vet-
erinary profession. The first edition of The Veterinary Formulary was published 1991 and the second edition in 1994. The
third, fourth, and fifth editions, and this sixth edition are published in association with the British Veterinary Association,
The British Veterinary Association is committed to making essential prescribing information available to its members. The
revised BVA Code of Practice on Medicines is included in the sixth edition of The Veterinary Formulary. The Code pro-
prescribing and dispensing by veterinarians, making this document essential reading for all practitioners.
The sixth edition includes some 56 new drug monographs and numerous new sections and these are listed on page xi. Many
sections have been completely re-arranged to reflect current veterinary medicinal practice. All the text, monographs, dos-
ages, and drug preparations in the sixth edition have been fully revised by some 51 Contributors who are world-recognised
experts in their fields and subsequently peer reviewed by the Advisory Committee made up of veterinarians, veterinary
Surgeons, and the Veterinary Medicines Directorate
The sixth edition continues to include information on UK preparations ayailable from veterinarians, pharmacists, agricul-
under their pharmacological group rather than alphabetically. This one concise text provides drug information and full
product details onn medicines used in all species seen in practice.
There continues to be a requirement for more veterinary medicines that are authorised for conditions in the target species
Until a wider range of veterinary authorised medicines are available, veterinarians will need to continue to prescribe veter-
inary medicines outwith the data sheet and unauthorised conditions or dosages are shown by the symbol + in the text. In
addition, it may be necessary to use authorised human medicines and commonly used human medicines are listed in The
Veterinary Formulary and denoted by the symbol (H)
Recommended International Non-proprietary Names are used for drug names in The Veterinary Formulary with former
 British Approved Names and United States Approved Names given as synonyms and indexed. A list of drug names is given
 on page xy. The Veterinary Formutary does not aim to contain all information necessary for prescribing. Readers should
 Guidance on prescribing. While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy of the contents of the book, correct pre-
scribing, dispensing, and administration is ultimately the responsibility of the prescriber. Readers are reminded that infor-
mation on medicines is constantly changing and previous editions of The Veterinary Formulary should be considered
outdated for the purposes of prescribingin the UK
Many indi viduals and organisations have assisted in the production of this sixth edition. Thanks are especially extended to
the members of the Advisory Committee and the Contributors listed on page v, who have all worked efficiently to allow the
text to be published in a short period after a long time bet ween editions. Sadly Penney Barber died during the final stages of
the production of The Veterinary Formulary and did not see her work published. The assistance of manufacturers in provid-
 Directorate and the National Office of Anmimal Health. Thanks are given to colleagues in the Publications Department, in
particular Paul Weller and Keith Riley.
The Veterinary Formulary is intended as rapid reference text primarily for veterinarians and veterinary students. With pend-
ing legislative changes after the Competition Commission's recommendations and European law concerning supply of vet-
erinary medicines, this book will also be essential reading for pharmacists and others invol ved with animal health care.
Comments from readers are welcome and should be sent to the Editor, The Veterinary Formulary, RPSGB, 1 Lambeth High
Street, London, SE1 7JN, UK.
YolandeBishop
September, 2004
Tables
Tables
GUIDANCE ON PRESCRIBING
Table 1
Doses of drugs for donkeys
Table 2
Doses of drugs for deer
Table 3
Antimicrobial doses of drugs for game birds
Table 4
Parasiticidal and antiprotozoal doses of drugs for game birds
Table 5
Antimicrobial doses of drugs for pigeons
Table 6
Parasiticidal doses of drugs for pigeons
Table 7
Parasiticidal doses of drugs for rodents
Table 8
Doses of other drugs for rodenits
Table 9
Antimicrobial doses of drugs for rodents
Table 10 Doses of arialgesics and anaesthetics for rodents
Table 11 Antimicrobial doses of drugs for rabbits
Table 12
 Parasiticidal doses of drugs for rabbits
Table 13 Doses of other drugs for rabbits
Table 14 Doses of analgesics and anaesthetics for rabbits
Table 15 Parasiticidal doses of drugs for ferrets
Table 16 Antimicrobial doses of drugs for ferrets
Table 17 Doses of analgesics and anaesthetics for ferrets
Table 18 Doses of other drugs for ferrets
Table 19 Endoparasiticidal doses of drugs for ornamental fish
Table 20 Antimicrobial and ectoparasiticidal doses of drugs for ornamental fish
Table 21 Doses of other drugs for ornamental fish
Table 22 Husbandry requirements for common pet terrestrial invertebrates
Table 23 Anaesthetic doses of drugs for aquatic invertebrates
Table 24Antimicrobial doses of drugs for aquatic inivertebrates
Table 25 Husbandry requirements for amphibians
Table 26 Antimicrobial doses of drugs for amphibians
Table 271
Parasiticidal doses of drugs for amphibians
Table 28 Doses of other drugs for amphibians
Table 29 Anaesthetic doses of drugs for amphibians
Table 30
Anaesthetic doses of drugs for ex otic birds
Table 31Antimicrobial doses of drugs for exotic birds
Table 321
Parasiticidal doses of drugs for exotic birds
Table 33 Doses of other drugs for exotic birds
Table 34 Husbandry requirements for reptiles
Table35 Antimicrobial doses of drugs forreptiles
Table 36 Parasiticidal doses of drugs for reptiles
Table 37 Doses of pre-medicants, sedatives, and anaesthetics for reptiles
Table 38 Doses of other drugs for reptiles
CLASSIFIED NOTES ON DRUGS AND PREPARATIONS
Table 1.1
Summary of spectrum of activity for antimicrobial drugs
Table 1.2
 Physicochemical properties of antimicrobial drugs and effect on tissue distri bution
Table 1.3
Drugs effective againist protozoal infections
Table 2.1
Drugs effective against common endoparasitic infections
Table 2.2
Drugs effective against common ectoparasitic infections
Table 6.1
Relative analgesic potencies of opioid analgesics
Table 7.1
Relative anti-inflammatory potencies of glucocorticoids
Table 8.1
Drugs affecting the reproductive system
Table 13.1 Combination cytotoxic therapy COP (low dose)
Table 13.2 Combination cytotoxic therapy COP (high dose)
Table 13.3 Cyclic combination/pulse treatment of lymphoma
Table 14.1:
Shampoos and lotions
Table 16.1 Oral rehydration solutions available in the UK
Table 16.2 Parenteral fluid therapy for various disorders
Table 16.3 Composition of parenteral fluids in the UK
Table 16.4 Complete dietetic petfoods for dogs and cats available in the UK
Table 18.1 Immunological preparations for clostridial infections available in the UK
Table 18.2 Combination vaccines for dogs available in the UK
Table 18.3 Combination vaccines for cats available in the UK
Table 18.4 Combination vaccines for poultry available in the UK
xi
Additions to sixth edition
All sections have been completely revised. The following are the main changes to the sixth edition. Constant
changes are made to information on medicines for animals and pre vious editions of The Veterinary Formulary
should be considered outdated for the purposes of prescribing in the UK.
New monographs
Domperidone (section 3.4.1)
Pirlimycin hydrochloride (section 11.1)
Acitretin (section 14.5.2)
Fentanyl (section 6.3.1)
Piroxicam (section 10.1)
Ademetionine(section 3.10)
Fluconazole (section 1.2)
Prazosin (section 9.4)
Fluticasone propionate (section 5.3.1)
Propentofylline (section 6.1 1.13)
Aglepristone (section 8.2.3)
Alfentanil (section 6.3.1)
Fluvoxamine maleate (sechion 6.11.4)
Rermi fentanil (section 6.3.1)
Ganciclovir (section 12.2.3)
Rimexolone (section 12.3.1)
Azithromycin (section 1.1.4)
Beclometasone dipropionate (section 5.3.1)
Hemoglobin glutamer-200 (bovine)
Salbutamol (section 5.2.2)
(section 16.2
Salmeterol (section 5.2.2)
Benazepril hydrochloride (section 9.1)
Hylan A (section 12.6)
Sertraline (section 6.11.4)
Birmatoprost (section 12.5.2)
Ibaflox acin (section 1.1.9)
Sevoflurane (section 6.6.3)
Brinzolamide (sechion 12.5.1)
Imidapril (sechion 4.3.1)
Silver sulfadiazine (section 14.4.1)
Bronopol (Prescribing for farmed fish)
Levocabastine (section 12.3.3)
Suxibuzone (section 10.1)
Cabergoline (section 6.11.11)
Lodoxamide (section 12.3.3)
Tepoxalin (sechion 10.1)
Carmellose sodium (section 12.6)
Lysine (section 12.2.3)
Terbinafine (section 1.2)
Ciclosporin (sechion 14.2.2)
Mesterolone (section 8.2.4)
Tiludronic acid (section 10.7)
Closantel (section 2.2.1.8)
Misoprostol (section 14.2.6)
Travoprost (section 12.5.2)
Clotrimazole (section 14.4.2)
Neomycin sulfate (section 12.2.1)
Thiamazole (section 7.1.2)
Dan trolene sodium (section 9.4)
Nimesulide (sechion 10.1)
Thyrotropin (sechion 7.5. 1)
Diagnostic test kits (Prescribing for
Nitenpyram (section 2.2.1.4)
Trilostane (section 7.6)
invertebrates)
Omega Interferon (sechion 1.3)
Tulathromycin (section 1.1.4)
New sections and changes
Chapter I1 subdivided into I1.1 Intranmtaruwary preparations for
Prescribing for equines divided into Presctibing for horses,
lactating animals, 11.2 Preparations for non-lactating animals, 11.3
Prescnbing for donkeys
Preparations for the care of teats and udders
Prescribing for rurmuinants divided into Prescribing for cattle,
Sechion 11.2 subdivided into I1.2.1 Intramammary preparations fot
Prescribing for sheep, Prescribing for goats, Prescribing for deer
non-lactating animtals, 11.2.2 Teat sealants
Prescribing for birds divided into Prescribing for poultry, Prescribing
Sechion 12.3 Anti-inflanumatory preparations subdivided into 12.3.1
for galmle birds, Prescribing for pigeons
Corhicosteroids, 12.3.2 NSAIDs, 12.3.3 Antihistanmines, 12.3.4
Iuwunosuppressants
suogoas aje iedes ou pepra p sjuapoi pue slraqei iog uquosaid
Table 22 Husbandry requireents for cotTton pet terrestrial
Secion 12.5 Drugs used in glaucomla subdivided into 12.5.1
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, 12.5.2 Prostaglandin analogues,
invertebrates
12.5.3 Miotics, I2.5.4 Beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs
Secion 2.2.1.4 Neonicotinoids
Secion 4.1 Positive inotropes subdi vided into 4.1.1 Cardiac
Section 14.2 Preparations for allergic, inflanumatory, and other
glycosides, 4.1.2 Inodilators, 4.1.3 Methylxanthines
ifTlune-mlediated skin conditions subdi vided into 14.2.1
Section 5.3 Drugs for allergic and inflarmiatory disorders subdi vided
Corhicosteroids, 14.2.2 Immunosuppressants, 14.2.3 Antihistamines,
into 5.3.1 Corficosteroids, 5.3.2 NSAIDs, 5.3.3 Antihistaines, 5.3.4
14.2.4 Topical anti -inflamatory skin preparations, 14.2.5 Essential
Sodiurmt croriglicate, 5.3.5 Leukotriene Teceptor antagonists
fatty acid preparations, 14.2.6 Prostaglandin E1 analogues
Informaion on canine pheromonatherapy (section 6.11.14)
14.7.2.6 Collagen dressings
Chapter 9 subdivided into 9.1 Drugs used in the treatient of tenal
14.7.2.7 Silver dressings
failure, 9.2 Drugs for cyshitis and urinary tract infection, 9.3 Drugs
14.7.2.8 Tissue adhesives
that alter urinary pH, 9.4 Drugs for urinary retention and
18.3.8.4 Glassers disease
incontinence, 9.5 Drugs for urolithiasis
18.3.9 Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrote
Sechion 10.2 Corticosteroids
18.4.1 Canine coronavirus
Secion 10.3 Chrondroprotecti ve comipounds subdivided into 10.3.1
18.4.3 Canine herpesvirus
heparinoids, 10.3.2 Sodiumt hyaluronate, 10.3.3 Chondroitin and
18.5.1 Bordetella bronchiseptica
glucosamine
18.6.5 Avian pneumtovirus
18.6.16 Mycoplasmosis
18.6.18 Onithobacter Thinotachealae
Appendix 1 Drug Interactions reformatted
xii
Arrangement of information
Guidance on prescribing
Names (BAN) and United States Adopted Names
In this section, different aspects of 
prescribing in
(USAN) are given as synomyns and indexed where
veterinary practice are discussed. The BVA Code of
necessary.
The authorised indications for use of the drug are
practice on medicines provides guidance on the safe
use of medicines and legislation affecting the use of
given. In addition, indications that are not included in
authorised
veterinaryand
authorised
human
the data sheet are listed and denoted by the symbol+.
medicines for animals by veterinarians. Other areas
The indications under a drug monograph title may not
included are prescription writing for medicines and
 apply to all preparations of that substance.
medicated  
feedstuffs，  labelling
storage
The contra-indications of the drug such as adminis-
and
 requirements, and consent forms.
tration in certain species, specific age of animal, preg-
Prescribing for animals used in competitions is
nant animals, or conditions for example renal
considered with reference to the sporting authorities,
impainment.
and their rules and regulations.
The side-effects of the drug are given. Any warnings
There are notes on prescribing for the domestic
associated with use of the drug in animals and cau-
species including specific sections on prescribing for
tions for humans administering the drug are listed.
geriatrics, neonates, pregnant animals, hepatic
The dose of the drug is given for domestic species.
impainment, renal impainment, and lactating animals.
 For the purposes of The Veterinary Formulary ^small
There is a section providing specific infonmation on
animals’ are considered to be dogs and cats; ‘large
animals' to be horses, cattle, sheep, and pigs. The
invertebrates. The sections on exotic species such as
amphibians, reptiles, and exotic birds or
rless
dose is expressed in terms of the drug substance indi-
frequently encountered companion animals such as
cated by the monograph title unless otherwise speci-
fish, ferrets, rabbits, and rodents include common
fied. The doses stated in The Veterinary Formulary
are intended for general guidance only and represent,
clinical conditions, methods of drug administration,
unless otherwise stated, the usual range of doses that
and extensive tabular data on drug dosage including
antimicrobial drugs, parasiticides, anaesthetics, and
are generally regarded as suitable for the species indi-
Other drugs.
cated.
 Doses are given in amounts per kilogram body-weight
Information
on the management of poisoning i
in
animals, symptomatic therapy, and specific antidotes
wherever possible. Doses of drugs to be administered
for more
 in the drinking water are usually expressed as amount
frequently encountered
poisons
are
discussed in the section Treatment of poisoning.
per 100 litres for domestic species or per litre for
exotic birds. Dosages for farmed fish may be given as
Classified
parts per million (ppm); see Appendix 3 for Conver-
notes
on
drugs
and
sions and units. Doses of drugs to be administered in
preparations
the feed are usually expressed as amount per tonne of
The main text consists of 19 chapters each covering a
feed. It is important that drug dosage calculations are
particular body system, condition, or drug category.
carefully checked for treatment administered via the
The information provided in the chapters concerms the 
drinking water or feed. It is advisable to establish if
use and administration of medicines and drugs to the
e  other drugs are included in the diet before medicating
domestic species including horses, cattle, sheep,
 the drinking water or feed to avoid the possibility of
goats, pigs, dogs, cats, and poultry. Each chapter is adverse drug interactions.
divided into numbered sections such that similar The route of administration of the dose is indicated
drugs are grouped together. Text on the use of these
 and frequency of administration.
adverse effects is given, and is followed by drug drugs that have no veterinary authorised products or
monographs and relevant medicines, whether generic
for veterinary authorised products used outwith their
or proprietary.
data sheet (indicated by the symbol+) are commonly
 Drug monographs are listed alphabetically under each
used doses. Such doses may not have been derived
section. The drug titles used in The Veterinary from research in the particular species being treated;
Formulary are recommended Intemational Non- they are to be used when no suitable veterinary prod-
proprietary Names (rINN). Former British Approved uct is available and in accordance with the Medicines
Arrangement of information  xiii
(Restrictions on the Administration of Veterinary
Appendices and indexes
Medicinal Products) Regulations 1994.as amended;
The appendices include Drug Interactions and Drug
the responsibility for their use lies with the veterinary
Compatibilities and Incompatibilities. Information is
surgeon.
arranged under drug name, drug group name, or
 Preparations that are authorised in the UK for use in
therapeutic category and listeda
alphabetically.
animals are listed. Where authorised veterinary prep-
Appendix 3 provides useful conversions of mass,
arations are unavailable, products that are authorised
volume, and temperature from Imperial to metric
for use in humans in the UK and that are commonly
units, and an explanation of terms such as tonicity.
used in veterinary medicine are included. The latter
Tables of conversion of body-weight to surface area
may be easily recognised by the symbol @ and
for dogs and cats are also included.
：Appendix 4
occur predominantly in the chapters and sections
gives a list of body-weight ranges for domestic
dealing with the Gastro-intestinal system, Cardiovas-
species, exotic birds, rabbits, and rodents. Appendix
cular system, Drugs used for behaviour modification,
5 provides guidance on estimation of drug dosage in
Endocrine system, and Malignant disease and immu-
species for which limited information is available.
nosuppressants.
The Index of Manufacturers and Organisations lists
The following information is provided for veterinary
addresses, telephone numbers, facsimile numbers,
preparations:
and e-mail and website addresses of UK and
 Overseas manufacturers whose preparations appear in
LEGAL CATEGORY Brand Name (Manufacturer) UK
The Veterinary Formulary. Organisations associated
with veterinary practice are also included.
Dose form, ingredients and concentration of each/unit
measure (mL, g, kg, unit dose, division, etc), for species
for which the product is authorised
information on drugs, medicines, preparations and
diseases. Brand names are listed in italics for easy
Withdrawal Periods. Species: slaughter withdrawal
recognition and the drug monograph is listed on the
 period in days, milk or egg withdrawal period in days
 page number identified in bold type.
xiv
Symbols used in The Veterinary Formulary
Intermationally recognised units and symbols are used in The Veterinary Formulary where ver possible.
 - authorised human preparation
°C - degrees Celsius (centigrade)
● - veterinary preparation or veterinary drug used for an indication that is unauthorised in the UK
<-less than
>-more than
Abbreviations used in The Veterinary Formulary
For abbreviations of names of manufacturers and organisations associated with veterinary practice see also
 Index of Manufacturers and Organisations on pages 531-540.
AAFCO - Association of American Food Control Officials
2-LM - imidazothiazoles/ tetrahydropyrimidines
AI - artificial insemination
M - molar
ATC - animal test certificate
m² - square metres
Austraf.-Australia
MA - marketing authorisation
 3-AV - avermectins/milbemycins
MAFF - Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food
BEVA - British Equine Veterinary Association
MFS -medicated feedingstuff prescription
BP - British Pharmacopoeia 1993
 MFSX - medicated feedingstuff prescription exemption
BP(Vet) - British Pharmacopoeia (Veterinary) 1993
mg - milligram(s)
Bq -becquerel
 MIC - minimum inhibitory concentrati on
BSAVA - British Small Animal Veterinary Association
mL -millilitre(s)
BVA - British Veterinary Association
mmHg - millimetre(s) of mercury
B VetC - British Veterinary Codex and Supplement 1970
m/r -modified release
1 -BZ - benzimidazoles/probenzimidazoles
Neth. - The Netherlands
CD - controlled drug
Norw.-Norway
CFS - complementary feedingstuff 
NSAID - non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug
cm - centimetre(s)
NZ-New Zealand
CNS - central nervous system
OIE - Office International des Epizooties
CSF - cerebrospinal fluid
 P- pharmacy-only medicine
CVL - Central Veterinary Laboratory
PCR - polymerase chain reaction
DANI - Department of Agricul ture, Northern Ireland
pg - picogram(s)
DEFRA - Department for the Environment, Food anid Rural
pH - the negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion
Affairs
concentration
DNA - deoxyribonucleic acid
 PhEur- European Pharmacopoeia
DVO - District Veterinary Officer
PL - product licence
e/c - enteric coated
 PML- pharmacy merchants list 
EC - European Community
p.o. - by mouth
ECF - extracellular fluid
POM - prescription-only medicine
ECG -electrocardiogram
 ppb - parts per billion
EFAs - essential fatty acids
 ppm - parts per million
EU - European Umion
 RCVS - Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons
FAWC - Food Animal Welfare Council
RPSGB - Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain
f/c - film coated
s.c. - subcutaneous
Fr - France
s/c - sugar coated
g-gram(s)
SPVS-SocietyofPractisingVeterinarySurgeons
GFR. - glomerular filtration rate
s/f - sustained release
GSL - general sale list
soln. - solution
HSE - Health and Safety Executive
STA - Special Treatment Authorisation
i.co.-intracoelomic
Swed.- Sweden
i.m.- intramuscular
Switz. - Switzerland
i.p. - intraperitoneal
UK- United Kingdom
i.o. - intraosseous
units - standard international units, unless otherwise stated
Ital.-Italy
in the text. See also Appendix 3, page 525
i.v. - intravenous
USA - United States of America
kg - kilogram(s)
V MD - Veterinary Medicines Directorate
L - litre(s)
ZFA - Zootechnical feed additive
XV
Drug names
Recommended International Non-proprietary Names (rINN) are used in The Veterinary Formulary with former British
Approved Names (BAN) and United States Approved Names (USAN) given as synonyms. The following names are used
in the sixth edition. Further information is available at www.dh.gov.uk/assetRoot/04/07/70/41/04077041.pdf.
Former BAN
New BAN/rINN
Former BAN
New Ban/rINN
adrenaline
epinephrine
hydroxyprogesterone hexanoatehydroxyprogesterone caproate
alphadolone
alfadolone
hydroxyurea
hydroxycarbamide
alphaxalone
alfaxalone
indomethacin
indometacin
anethocaine
telracaine
lignocaine
lidocaine
aminacrine hydrochloride
aminoacridine hydrochloride
methimazole
thiamazole
amoxycillin
amoxicillin
methohexitone
Tmethohexital
arnphetamine
amn fetarnine
methotrimeprazine
levomepromazine
arnphotericin
amphotericin B
methylene blue
methylthioninium chloride
 alt acurium bes ylate
attacurium besilate
methylphenobarbitone
 methylphenobarbital
beclomnethasone
beclommetasone
metriphonate
metrifonate
bendrofluazide
bendroflumethiazide
mitozantrone
mitoxantrone
benzhexol
trihexyphenidyl
naphthalophos
naftalofos
bretyliurn tosylate
bretylium tosilate
neostigmninemethylsulphate
neostigrnine mmetisulfate
ueydinsng
busulfan
nitroxynil
nitroxinil
butobarbitone
butobarbita1
noradrenaline
norepinephrine
carbaryl
carbaril
 oes radiol
estradiol
chlorfenvinphos
chlorfenvinfos
pentobarbitone
pentobarbital
chlorpheniramnine
chlorphenarnine
phenobarbitone
phenobarbital
cephalexin
cefalexin
phthalylsulphathiazole
phthalylsulfathiazole
cephalonium
cefaloniumn
polyhexanide
polihexanide
cephazolin
cefazolin
potassium clorazepate
dipotas siurn clorazepate
cephradine
cefradine
 pralidoxine mesylate
pralidoxime mnesilate
chlorbutol
chlorobutanol
procaine penicillin
procaine benzylpenicillin
chlormethiazole
clomethiazole
quinalbarbitone
secobarbital
cholecalciferol
colecalciferol
Tiboflavine
riboflavin
cholestyramine
colestyrarnine
sodiurn calciumedetate
sodiumn calcium edetate
corticotrophin
corticotropin
sodium cromoglycate
sodium cromoglicate
coummaphos
sodium ironedetate
sodiurn feredetate
crotethamide
CTotetarnide
stilboestrol
diethy1stilbestrol
sulphacetamide
sulfacetarnide
dexamphetarnine
dexarnfetarnine
sulphadiazine
sulfadiazine
dimnpylate
sulphadinnidine
sulfadimidine
dichlorphenarnide
diclofenamide
sulphaguanidine
sulfaguanidine
dimethicone
dimeticone
sulphanethoxazole
sulfamethoxazole
dimnethy1 sulphoxide
dimethyl sulfoxide
sulphasalazine
sulfasalazine
dipyrone
metamnizole sodium 
sulphathiazole
sulfathiazole
etarniphylline carnsylate
etarniphylline carnsilate
tTimeprazine
alimemazine
ethinyloestradiol
ethinylestradiol
teltacosactrin
tetracosactide
ethyloestrenol
ethylestrenol
thiabendazole
tiabendazole
flunethasone
flumetasone
thioguanine
tioguanine
frusernide
furosemnide
thiopentone
thiopental
glutaraldehyde
glutaral
thyroxine sodiumn
levothyroxine sodiurn
guaiphenesin
guaifenesin
tricaine mnesylate
tricaine mesilate
British Veterinary Association
Code of Practice on Medicines
Classification of medicines page 1
ing disease in animals or which may be administered to
Prescribing medicines page 6
animals with a view to making a medical diagnosis or to
Dispensing medicines  page 10
restoring, correcting or modifying physiological functions
Record keeping page 15
in animals.
Suspected Adverse Reaction Surveillance
 In the UK, veterinary medicines are currently legally classi
Scheme page 17
fied into general sales list medicines, pharmacy only medi-
Drug residues  page 17
cines, pharmacy and merchants list medicines, prescription
Disposal of medicines
6page18
 only medicines, and controlled drugs. Other preparations,
Consent forms page 19
such as nutritional supplements, which are not supplied for
Further information page 2
a medicinal purpose, are classified as non-medicinal.
The protection of the health and welfare of the many spe-
General sales list medicines (GsL)
cies under the veterinarian's care depends on the availabil-
All csL veterinary medicines are listed in the Medicines
ity of sufficient veterinary medicines, which are of proven
(Veterinary Drugs) (General Sales List) Order 2001. They
safety, quality and efficacy for the target species. The selec-
may be sold without any restriction. A veterinarian can sell
tion of the best therapeutic is paramount. However, the
these to anyone, whether a client or not. However when
rational and responsible use of medicines in veterinary
selling the products as a retailer, the veterinarian must
ensure that it is clear to the purchaser that the animal for
the veterinarian and the animal owner. The professional
which the medicine is sold is not under the veterinarian's
advice the veterinarian gives in prescribing the correct med-
care. In all other circumstances, the veterinarian may supply
icine in a given set of circumstances is of equal importance.
GSL products for animals under his/her care.
The impact of European legislation and increased public
Pharmacy only medicines (P)
concern about the use of medicines, particularly in food-
This is the default category for medicines unless the licens-
producing animals, means that the veterinarian must be able
inig authority has taken statutory measures to put them into
to justify decisions taken in the selection and application of
the POM, PML or GSL categories. Very few veterinary medi-
medical treatment. The privilege to dispense veterinary
medicines rests not only on the responsible use of medi-
plied by a veterinarian for administration to animals under
cines but also on the demonstration of best accepted
the veterinarian's care or over the counter in pharmacies
practice.
with each sale by, or under the supervision of, a pharmacist.
The aims of this Code are to provide guidance on the pre-
scribing and dispensing of medicinal products by veterinar-
Pharmacy and merchants list medicines (PML)
ians in consideration of legislation and best practice. It
All PML medicines are included in the list of veterinary
drugs kept by the Veterinary Medicines Directorate (VMD)
labelling, sale and supply, record keeping, disposal, and
for the purposes of Article 3 of the Medicines (Exemptions
suspected adverse reactions. This guidance complements
for Merchants in Veterinary Drugs) Order 1998.
that provided by Veterinary Pharmacy courses organised by
They can be supplied by a veterinarian for administration to
specialist divisions of the British Veterinary Association
animals under the veterinarian's care. PML medicines may
(BVA).
   g s   s    o
Various changes have been made to the legislation and rec-
supervision of, a pharmacist. They may also be supplied by
ommended best practice for prescribing and dispensing of
an agricultural merchant who is registered with the Royal
medicines for animals since the last edition of this Code in
Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain (RPsGB) or, in
2000, and further changes are likely as the UK Government
 Northern Ireland, the Department of Health, Social Services
moves to implement the Competition Commission's recom-
and Public Safety (DHssPs) and who has undertaken to
observe a code of practice. A registered agricultural mer-
with recent changes to European legislation. It will be 
 chant may authorise sale of pML medicines only to persons
     e   
 who keep or maintain animals for the purpose of carrying
aware that the guidance may change as a result.
onl a business. Each sale must be authorised by a Suitably
The valuable contribution of those who contributed to this
Qualified Person (sQP).
updated edition of the Code is acknowledged with thanks.
Registered agricultural merchants and saddlers may sell a
small range of PML anthelmintics to horse, dog or cat own-
Classification of medicines
ers for animals under their charge. A code of practice has to
be observed and each sale must be authorised by a SQP.
If a veterinarian wishes to supply PML products for animals
combination of substances presented for treating or prevent-
not under his/her care, he/she must register with the RPsGB
2  Guidance on prescribing
or DHssps as an agricultural merchant. The veterinarian may
erinary medicinal product should be specified. Where this is
supply only to commercial keepers of animals.
not possible and an active substance is prescribed, only
Some veterinarians have taken out wholesale dealers'
approved titles should be used. These must be recom-
licences. The Medicines (Sale or Suppty) (Miscellaneous
mended International Nonproprietary Names (rINN). In most
Provisions) Regulations 1980 (Schedule I) impose strict
cases, the British Approved Names (BAN) and rINN are iderl-
limits as to whom may be supplied in the course of whole-
tical. Where they differ, the BAN must be modified to accord
sale dealing. A veterinarian s clients are not included.
with the rINN. Further information on rINNs is available at:
www.dh.goy.uk/assetRoot/04/07/70/41/0407704 1.pdfand
Prescription only medicines (poM)
http://medicines.mhra. gov.uk/inforesources/productinfo/
These are described in the Medicines (Veterinary Drugs)
banrinn.htm
(Prescription Only) Order 2001. They may be supplied by a
veterinarian for administration to animals under the veteri-
Directions should preferably be in English without abbre.
narian s care or supplied by a pharmacist on a veterinarian s
viation. It is recognised that some Latirn abbreviations, as
prescription. The Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons
 follows, are used when prescribing. It should be noted that
(Rcvs) states in its Guide to Professional Conduct: "Veteri-
 the English version is not always an exact translation.
nary surgeons are encouraged to make clients aware that
bd
bis die (twice daily)
veterinary medicines may be obtained on prescription from
other suppliers, for example pharmacies, and should mot
bid
bis in die (twice daily)
unreasonably refuse to supply prescriptions if clients wish
to purchase veterinary medicines from other suppliers.
od
omni die (once daily)
A veterinarian is not normally entitled to supply PoM prod-
qid
quater in die (four times daily)
who is not in the same practice. (The exception is for small
sid
semet in die (once daily)
quantities only of specially prepared medicines.) This may
p!
ter in die (three times daily)
change with new legislation following the reviews of EU
and UK provisions and implementation of the Competition
There are specific legal requirements for prescriptions for
Commission s recommendations.
prescription only medicines. They must be written legibly
in ink or be otherwise indelible. The prescription should
The veterinary prescription
include:
A prescription is not required for the sale or supply of GSL,
The name and address of the prescriber, which may be
P, or PML veterinary medicines. A veterinarian may give a
printed on practice forms
GSL or P authorised human medicinies.
The name and address of the client. It is good practice
There are legal requirements for veterinary prescriptions
to indicate the species or animal name/number and to
which contain POM products and controlled drugs (CD) prep-
arations. A veterinary prescription is used for medicines
The date of prescription issue
and a medicated feedingstuffs (MFs) prescription is used for
POM products incorporated into feed (see section on MFS
The name(s) and strength(s) of drug(s) to be dispensed.
prescriptions, page 4).
Usually this will be a pre-prepared formulation. Medi-
To avoid ambiguity it is good practice to write all prescrip-
cines may be prescribed using the generic name or
tions legibly in a standard manner. The following
specifying a proprietary preparation. In the former case
recommendations are given:
only, the pharmacist may dispense any suitable product.
Quantities of 1 gram or more should be written as 1 g,
The formulation of any preparation that needs to be
etc
extemporaneously prepared should be included.
Quantities of less than l gram should be written in mil-
Although it is not a legal requirement to include the
ligrams, for example 500 mg, not 0.5 g
total amount of medicine to be supplied and the dose of
Quantities of less than 1 milligram should be written in
the medicine, it is good prescribing practice to include
 micrograms, for example 100 micrograms, not 0.1 mg
this information on prescriptions
When decimals are unavoidable a zero should be writ-
 The directions that the prescriber wishes to appear on
ten in front of the decimal point where there is no other
the labelled product
figure, for ex ample 0.5 ml, not .5 ml
 The terms 'micrograms', *nanograms' or 'units' should
The prescribers usual signature, in ink, and profes-
not be abbreviated
sional qualifications
"Millilitre' (mL or ml) is used in veterinary medicine
 A declaration that *This prescription is issued ini respect
and pharmacy in preference to cubic centimetre, cc, or
of an animal or herd (group) under my care'or words to
cm3.
that effect
Names of drugs and preparations should be written clearly
and not abbreviated. Wherever possible an authorised vet-
Any instructions for repeating the prescription.
BVA Code of Practice on Medicines  3
Veterinary prescription
vulnerable to self-use of addictive drugs. The veterinary
profession operates confidential helplines, the Vet Helpline
Name and address of veterinarian
(telephone 07659 811118), and the Veterinary Surgeons
Date
Health Support Programme (vsHsp) (telephone 01926
Name/Number of animal
315119). The Vet Helpline provides infomation and advice
Name of client
to veterinarians who contact the group on where to seek
Address of client
sive nature, alcohol or drug abuse, and concerns over per-
sonal finance. The vsHsp helps veterinarians suffering
Name, strength, and formulation of the drug
problems of alcohol or drug abuse who contact the group or
Amount to be supplied
who are referred to them to combat their addiction by assist-
Dosage (amount and frequency of administration)
the recovery process.
Under the Misuse of Drugs Regulations 1985, controlled
drugs are divided into 5 schedules, in decreasing order of
Instructions to appear on the label
stringency of control.
Schedufe 1 includes cannabis and hallucinogenic drugs
For animal treatment only
such as LsD, which are not commonly used therapeutically.
This animal is under my care
Veterinarians have no general authority to possess Or
prescribe them.
Schedufe 2 includes some drugs that may be used in veteri-
Signature and qualifications
nary practice such as etorphine, fentanyl, morphine, pethi-
of veterinarian
dine, methadone, the amphetamines, and secobarbital
(quinalbarbitone). These drugs are subject to particular
Repeat instructions
requirements for prescriptions, requisition, record keeping,
safe custody (except secobarbital [quinalbarbitone]), and
disposal of unwanted medicines.
Prescriptions for Schedule 2 and 3 controlled drugs must
A PoM prescription must not be dispensed more than 6
be indelible and conform to particular requirements in addi-
months after the date issued and will not be repeated unless
it contains a specific direction for further dispensing. If a
tion to those for prescription only medicines. To minimise
the possibility of forgery, the prescription must be in the
prescription contains a direction that it is to be repeated
veterinarian's own handwriting, except for phenobarbital
without specifying the number of times, it will be dispensed
(phenobarbitone) and phenobarbital sodium (phenobarbi-
twice (ie, repeated once) only. When a prescription is to be
tone sodium). Prescriptions for Schedule 2 and 3 controlled
dispenised in instalments, the number of instalments and
intervals to be observed when dispensing must be specified
drugs must include the form and strength of drug(s) to be
dispenised, eg, Pethidine Tablets, 50 mg. In addition, the
along with the amount of drug in the instalment, and the
total quantity, in both words and figures, to be dispensed,
total amount of drug to be dispensed. Exact information on
the permission to issue and provisions of repeat prescrip-
eg, Pethidine Tablets, 50 mg, Send 10 (ten), must be
 included. A pharmacist must not dispenise a prescription for
tions for a particular animal should be included in the
a Schedule 2 or Schedule 3 cD unless it complies with the
patients record by the veterinarian who has the animal
above requirements and the prescribers address is in the
under his/her care. This is to allow a veterinary colleague in
UK. The prescription must not be dispensed later than 13
the same practice to provide a repeat prescription if neces-
weeks from the date of issue and repeat prescriptions for
sary. The period of time that the veterinarian may allow
controlled drugs are not permitted. The pharmacist should
repeat prescriptions without re-examining the patient will
be satisfied that the prescription is genuine.
be variable and dependent on the patient, the condition, the
ddns e Aq pugo sq nsnu suum ui uoismban 
client, the medicine prescribed and the necessity to monitor
clinical signs and side-effects by, eg, monitoring blood
before delivery of a Schedule 2 drug. The requisition must
parameters or hepatic function. For guidance, some authori-
be signed by the veterinarian, state the veterinarian s name,
ties suggest a time interval of 3 months (shorter for, eg,
address and professional qualifications, and specify the
total quantity of the drug and the purpose for which it is
     sd   
disease therapy) between re-examinations. Each practice
required. The supplier must be reasonably satisfied that the
signature is that of the person purporting to sign the
should decide general protocols for each drug; these may
need to be varied in individual cases.
requisition and the person is engaged in the occupation
stated.
Controlled drugs (cD)
The record keeping requirements for Schedule 2 drugs
These drugs are capable of being abused and many lead to
 indicate that they must be entered in the Register when pur-
addiction. In addition to there being strict controls on use of
chased and also each time they are used. Veterinarians must
these drugs in animals, veterinarians may themselves be
make such records in the Register within 24 hours. The
4
Guidance on prescribing
Register must take the form of a bound book (not a loose-
veterinarians name, address and professional qualifica-
leaf book) and a separate Register must be kept for each
tions, and specify the total quantity of the drug and the pur-
premises where controlled drugs are used. A separate part
pose for which it is required. The supplier must be
of the Register must be used for each class of drug, which
reasonably satisfied that the signature is that of the person
must be specified at the head of each page of the Register. A
 purporting to sign the requisition and the person is engaged
in the occupation stated.
salts, stereoisomers and any preparation in which it is con-
Temazepam, diethylpropion, and buprenorphine must be
tained; eg, a separate part of the Register must be kept for
each of pethi dine, morphine, and etorphine.
veterinarian or a person authorised by a veterinarian to do
 The layout of Registers is stipulated in the legislation:
so; this does not apply to other Schedule 3 drugs.
Schedufe 4 includes anabolic substances and the benzo-
Part 1
diazepines. When used in normal veterinary practice they
Enitries to be made ini case of obtaining a supply
 are exempt from most controlled drugs restrictions.
FENTANYL
Schedufe 5 includes certain preparations of cocaine,
codeine, and morphine that contain less than a specified
Dale an
Name and address al
Amounlablained
Farm in which
amount of the drug. They are exempt from all cD require-
which sup-
parson ar im liom
ablained
 ply reca ived
wham ablainad
ments pertaiming to veterinary practice other than the need
10 ate)
Drug Company Lto,
1 ×10 ml
 ousH
to keep relevant invoices for 2 years.
Narket Street,
in jectton
A veterinarian acting in a professional capacity has author-
Ton
ity to supply Schedule 2, 3, 4, and 5 controlled drugs. The
veterinarian may administer the drug or direct any other
Part 2
au epun shuened on snip yons seisuupe on suosied
 Entries to be made in case of supply
veterinarian 's care.
PETHIDINE
There is increased concern that some drugs that are not con-
trolled under the Misuse of Drugs Act I971, as amended,
Dale an which
 Name and 
Parliculars as la
Amaunl
Farmin which
such as ketamine, may be used as drugs of abuse. The Rcvs
lhe lransacliar
address al
icanica ár aulharily
supplied
suppliad
was elleclead
persan ar lirm
al persan ar lirm
recommends that these drugs are stored in secure
supplied
UI eq 0I pe(ddns
possassion
containers.
10 ate)
Otrect
SD mg
Peth+dt ng
SSmtLh' s
sdm intst rat ton
[1 mi)
tn jectt on
Lane,
Medicated feedingstuffs prescription (MFs)
Surrey
An MFs prescription, prescribed on the advice of a veteri-
narian, authorises the incorporation of a veterinary medici-
Entries must be indelible and made in chronological order.
nal product in the form of a premix as described under the
Entries must not be amended; if corrections are necessary
Medicated Feedingstuffs Regulations 1998. POM products
they must be made by means of a marginal note or footnote
for incorporation into feedingstuffs must be prescribed
and specify the date the correctiorn was made. The Register
under an MFs. Anthelmintics incorporated into feed are
must be kept for two years from the date of the last entry.
exempt from the requirement for an MFs prescription and
 Schedule 2 controlled drugs, except secobarbital (quinal-
are classified as MFSX.
barbitone), must be kept in a locked receptacle which can
The Regulations apply to anyone who incorporates a Pom in
anl animal feedingstuff “in the course of business carried on
veterinarian to do so. Schedule 2 controlled drugs may not
by him'. Therefore,home-mixers such as farmers and keep-
be destroyed except in the presence of a persorn authorised
ers (of, eg, zoo animals, dogs for business purposes [packs
 by the Secretary of State (see Disposal of medicines, page
of hounds], and farmed rabbits) are affected as well as com-
18).
mercial feed compounders. However, the legislation does
Schedufe 3 includes buprenorphine, butobarbital (butobar-
not affect a companion animal owner administering a medi-
bitone), pentazocine, pentobarbital (pentobarbitone), phe-
cine mixed in the feed because no business is involved. The
nobarbital (phenobarbitone), and some minor stimulant
Regulations do not apply to medicating via the drinking
drugs. These drugs are subject to prescription (see Schedule
water.
 2 above) and requisition requirements, but transactions do
All feed compounders, that is, commercial and home-
not have to be recorded in a controlled drugs Registet.
mixers, who add medicines to feeds and all distributors of
Phenobarbital (phenobarbitone) prescriptions are exempt
 medicated feeds are required to apply to the Royal Pharma-
from the requirement to be written by hand by the veterinar-
ceutical Society of Great Britain (RPsGB) or, in Northern
ian but must comply in every other respect with prescription
Ireland,
the
Department
of
Agriculture
pue
Rural
writing requirements. A requisition in writing must be
Development (DARD) for approval of their premises.
obtained by a supplier before delivery of a Schedule 3 drug.
Under the Feedingstuffs (Establishments and Intermediar-
The requisition must be signed by the veterinarian, state the
ies) Regulations I999, manufacturers and distributors of
BVA Code of Practice on Medicines  5
feedingstuffs containing vitamins, amino acids, enzymes
The MFs prescription should be personally signed and dated
and probiotics must be registered.
by the veterinarian, in respect of animals under his/her care.
The MFs is valid for a period of 3 months from the date of
POM medicine in arn animal feedingstuff if the product has a
the veterinarian's signature. For animals on farms under the
relevant marketing authorisation or an Animal Test Certifi-
veterinarians care where there are regular occurrences of
 cate (ATc) providing specifications for incorporation. Medi-
chronic or recurring disease, which could require repeat in-
cines to be included in feed must, by law, be authorised for
feed medication, it is essential, at regular but not prolonged
in-feed use, although the veterinarian may authorise use for
intervals, to reassess the need for continuing the in-feed
species or conditions other than those specified in the mar-
medication. This should be based on clinical examination
keting authorisation for PoM products but not products
and/or post-mortem findings supported by laboratory Or
under an ATc.
other diagnostic tests.
MFS products for administration in feed will either be dis-
An MFs prescription can be used to obtain more than 31
pensed by the veterinarian having the animals under his/her
days of feed where treatmenit exceeds one month; however,
care or dispensed under the authority of a prescription.
where the animals treated are intended for human consump-
It is important to know of any additives that are already
tion, only one month's supply at a time may be purchased
incorporated into the feed. The legal requirement is that it is
against the prescription. Treatment lasting more than one
necessary to indicate MFS products on the MFS prescription
month and up to 3 months can be authorised by one MFs
but it is recommended that other feed additi ves already con-
 prescription but the feed must be obtained at monthly inter-
tained in the feedingstuff should also be listed. This is to
vals and each issue of the feed recorded on the farmer's
impress upon the signatory veterinarian the need to ensure
original copy of the prescription and the compounder/
that no known adverse reaction between any active ingredi-
retailer s original copy as well as the compounder/retailer s
enits is likely. A veterinarian may, at his/her discretion and
records.
on his/her own responsibility, authorise combinations of
Three copies of an MFs prescription are required: one each
medicinal feed additives unless they are
specifically
for the compounder, the farmer and the veterinarian.
prohibited in the data sheet of one of the combinants.
 It is essential that these forms are completed accurately and
All MFs prescriptions should follow the specified format
legibly; otherwise the feed may be unusable. Pads of self-
and should include:
copying MFs prescriptions are available from McMillari-
 The name and address of the prescribing veterinarian
Scott Subscriber Services, 6 Bourne Enterprise Centre,
The name and address of the supplier, who should be a
Wrotham Road, Nr Sevenioaks, Kent TN15 8DG, telephone
person registered with the RPSGB or DARD
01732
884023,
fax
01732
884034,
e-mail
Details of the recipient of the medicated feed
cairns @mcmlslondon.co.uk
The number and species to which the medicated feed is
Compounders and on-farm mixers who supply feeding-
to be administered
stuffs without an MFs prescription where one is required by
The disease to be treated (which may be written on the
law, or on the basis of an invalid MFs prescription, commit
veterinarian s copy only)
an offence and become liable to prosecution and/or removal
The amount of product to be incorporated in the feed,
from the register of the RPsGB or DARD.
and how it should be used
Further information is given in Zootechnical Feed Additives
 The withdrawal period. If a veterinary medicine is to be
and Medicated Feedingstuffs:A prescriber's guide VMD,
incorporated in accordance with the marketing authori-
May
2004.
Available
at:
www. vmd. gov.uk/general/
sation or animal test certificate, the withdrawal period
publications/zootech0504.pdf
shown must be that on the data sheet of the product.
When prescribing an MFs outwith the recommendations
specified on the current data sheet or if the data sheet
does not specify a withdrawal period, the standard min-
Zootechnical feed additives
imum withdrawal periods must be applied (see Drug
The use of feed additives, eg, production enhancers or coc-
residues, page 17). Where use involves a species indi-
cidiostats, is controlled and authorised under EC legislation.
cated in the marketing authorisation, but for a different
 Zootechnical feed additives may be incorporated in the feed
condition, the meat withdrawal period indicated on the
at specified concentrations for particular species as indi-
data sheet is acceptable providing that the dosage is as
cated in the relevant Annex entry of Directive 70/524/EEc;
given on the data sheet. Where use is for a species not
given in the marketing authorisation, then the with-
accordance with the Annex entry, eg, at higher concentra-
drawal period should be at least as long as the standard
 tions or for different species. From October 2004, additives
minimum withdrawal period
for use in animal nutrition will be regulated under Regula-
 Any special precautions. It is important for the prescrib-
tion 1831/2003/Ec. Each product will be authorised by its own
ing veterinarian to know of other ingredients (eg,
EC Regulation, which includes conditions of use. Once a
zootechnical feed additives that may be in the feedstuff)
and to indicate any potential incompatibilities between
products will no longer be allowed. Antibiotics used to
these and the MFs.
promote growth will not be permitted after January 1, 2006.
6 Guidance on prescribing
Homceopathic products
supply when dispensing medicines for administration to the
A veterinary homceopathic medicinal product means any:
 animal to be treated.
veterinary medicinal product prepared from products, sub-  The Medicines Act I968 provides that the normal channel
stanices or compositions called homceopathic stocks in of retail supply of medicines should be through a retail
accordance with homceopathic manufacturing procedure pharmacy. There is an exception for GSL products, which
described by the European Pharmacopoeia or, in the may be sold freely. There is a further exception for a veteri-
absence thereof, by the pharmacopoeias currently used offi-
 nariarl, who is allowed to supply POM, PML and P products
cially in the EU member states. Products fulfilling the rele-
 but only to be administered to animals under his/her care.
vant criteria may be authorised under the Registration of
 The phrase ^animals under his/her care' places a restriction
Homeopathic Veterinary MedicinalProducts Regulations
 on the veterinarian s ability to supply POM, PML and P medi-
1997.
cines and an understanding of this important term is given
Probiotics and enzymes
on page 7.
Probiotics are cultures of live micro-organisms in a vegeta-
Under the Medicines (Restrictions on the Administration of
Veterinary Medicinat Products) Regulations 1994 as
tive or arrested state which, when administered in feed,
have a positive effect on the health of the animal and
amended, no person is allowed to administer any veterinary
thereby help increase productivity. Enzymes enhance the
 medicine to an animal unless the product has been granted a
marketing authorisation (or product licence) for treatment
digestibility of certain feed ingredients. The addition of
of the particular condition in the species being treated. The
enzymes to feed can significantly improve digestion of
Regulations apply to both food-producing and non-food
carbohydrate fractions in the feed that result in increased
producing animals. There are important specific excep-
viscosity in the gastro-intestinal tract of the animal, which
tions to this rule outlined in the ^cascade' method of pre-
impairs digestion. Probiotics and enzymes are controlled
scribing (below). Veterinarians are reminded that if they
under Regulation 1831/2003/EC.
feel that circumstances compel them to use a medicine not
Traditional remedies and chemicals
covered by the available legislation, they should contact the
Traditional remedies and chemicals such as Epsom salts,
VMD.
liquid paraffin, and Stockholm tar are freely available and
Under the Regulations, where no authorised veterinary
would not normally be considered as veterinary medicines.
medicine exists for a condition in a particular species, a vet-
However, once a veterinarian supplies them for a medicinal
 erinarian, or a person acting under the veterinarian s direc-
purpose, they become medicines. They may be prescribed
 tion, may admirister to a particular animal under his/her
under the Medicines (Restrictions on the Administration of
 n  n        
Veterinary Medicinal Products) Reguiations 1994,as
premises:
amended, as extemporaneously prepared products, and as
(1) A veterinary medicine authorised for use in another ani-
such the standard minimum withdrawal periods are
mal species or for another condition in the same species
applicable.
(^off-label use'); or
Under the Animais and Animat Products (Examination for
(2) If no product as described in (l) exists, an authorised
Residues and Maximum Residue Limits)Regulations 1997,
 human medicine; or
bees are classified as food-producing animals. The Veteri-
(3) If no product as described in (2) exists, a product pre-
nary Medicines Directorate (vMD) has advised that sub-
pared extemporaneously (ie, made up at the time of need)
stances may be administered to bees if the agent is not
 e       a
likely to be harmful to human health if transmitted to the
 prescription. In the UK, such medicines may be prepared by
honey. Such products are called non-medicinal curative
a veterinarian, a registered pharmacist, or the holder of an
 appropriate manufacturer's licence. Additional provisions
cent), lactic acid, oxalic acid, thymol and other essential
apply in the case of food-producing animals (see page 8).
oils, industrial talc, and liquid paraffin, which may be
'Special-order’ products are extemporaneously prepared
administered to bees.
products that are not commercially available such as, eg,
preparations containing an unusual formulation or drug
concentration, or that are preservative or additive free. They
may be obtained from certain manufacturers or hospital
Prescribing medicines
manufacturing units. Where a product is authorised, the
authorised preparation should be used unless a specific
Legal requirements and provisions determine which medi-
formulation is required.
cines may be administered to animals or incorporated in the
Where the cascade options are used, the veterinarian should
feedingstuffs of food-producing animals. These restrictions
advise the owner that he/she intends to admirister to the
are of fundamental importance to veterinarians as they
 animal an authorised veterinary preparation outwith its data
determine which medicines should be administered to an
sheet recommendations, an authorised human preparation
animal and they authorise that administration.
 Or a medicine specially prepared, and ideally obtain the cli-
Prescribing' is often taken to cover supply or dispensing.
ent's written consent (see Consent forms, page 19). The vet-
It is therefore important to remember the restrictions on
 erinarian should prescribe from knowledge based on best
BVA Code of Practice on Medicines  7
current practice. Advice should be sought from pharmaceu-
professional judgement of the veterinary surgeon in the
individual case.
recorded and retained.
The Rcvs advice is offered for professional and ethical pur-
There has been much debate over the introduction of these
poses. In a rumber of cases, the courts have also followed
Regulations and the VMD has produced guidance notes for
this guidance. If a veterinarian retails (or supplies under
veterinarians on interpretation of the legislation: The Medi-
conditions corresponding to retail sale) POM, p, or PML prod-
cines (Restrictions on the Administration of Veterinary
ucts which are administered to animals which a court does
Medicinal Products) Regulations 1994 (S1 1994/2987):
not find to be under his/her care, the veterinarian can be
Guidance to the veterinary profession AMELIA 8, revised
convicted of an offence under the Medicines Act /968.
July 1998. The aims of the legislation are to ensure that
In an emergency situation, a veterinarian may prescribe
medicinal treatment of animals is effective as well as being
safe for the treated and other animals, people handling the
therapy although the animal is not usually under the care of
medicine, the environment and, in the case of food-
the veterinarian (eg, owners on holiday with their animals).
producing animals, safe for the consumer. The VMD advises
The veterinarian should examine the animal and make
that “It is likely that the Regulations will be interpreted in
every attempt to contact the animals usual veterinarian to
obtain the relevant case history. Only sufficient quantity of
surgeon would reasonably act in pursuance of these aims in
drug for the animal s immediate use should be prescribed.
a particular set of circumstances' (AMELIA 8). In addition,
Written records should be kept.
particular issues are discussed below.
Where a client is served by more than one veterinarian, or
two or more veterinarians are each concerned with the same
A condition in a particufar species
group of animals, each may properly prescribe and supply
 In some instances, a product may be authorised for a condi-
tion in a particular species but be considered inappropriate
medicines to be administered to animals as part of the sery-
ices provided. In order to avoid adverse reactions arising
or even ineffective for the animal(s) presented. Such
from unsuitable combinations of products, each veterinar-
instances may arise, eg, due to bacterial resistance to anti-
ian must keep the other(s) infomed about the products he/
microbials and chronic infections, inadequacy of the recom-
she prescribes.
mended dosage, the age and known sensitivities of the
individual animal, complex conditions requiring concurrent
Smaff number of animais
drug treatment, unav ailability of a product within a reasona-
The Regulations limit the use of the cascade options to a
ble time, or if owner compliance considerations provide
'particular animal under [a veterinarians] care or a small
that a formulation of an authorised product would be inap-
number of auch animals'. The VMD considers that the ‘small
propriate. In such circumstances, the VMD indicates that
number' limitation would 'rneed to be decided on a case by
'where a veterinarian exercising his or her professional
case basis taking account of, eg, the method of administra-
expertise and judgement in the interests of the animals
tion, the degree of contact between the animals concerned
under his or her care may consider that no licensed treat-
 and the condition being treated. As a general example, how-
ment exists for the condition or species to be treated .. a
ever, we consider that if a veterinarian wishes to sedate a
deer, the deer will be treated as an individual, so in those
accordanice with the cascade'( AMELIA 8).
circumstances a "small number” would mean not more than
Animaf underhis/hercare
one individual. Where, however, a veterinarian is required
to treat an infectious disease in, eg, farmed fish, he or she
There is no definition in the legislation of the term *animal
may need to proceed on the assumption that all individuals
or herd which is under his care' - the phrase which is usu-
ally condensed to 'animals under his/her care' The Royal
identically at risk, and the interpretation of "small number"
College of Veterinary Surgeons (Rcvs) has interpreted the
meaning of the term in the Guide to Professional Conduct
may reflect this.What will remain uniacceptable would be
the indiscriminate prescription of unlicensed medicines [ie,
as follows:
medicines used outwith the mar keting authorisation] for use
"(1) The veterinarian must have been given responsibility
 in animals and fish whose need for and propensity to benefit
for the health of the animal or herd by the owner or the
from treatmenit has not beerl assessed'( AMELIA 8).
owner's agent
(2) That responsibility must be real and not merely nominal
Minor or exotic species
(3) The animal or herd must have been seen immediately
The Regulations indicate that the small number of animals
before prescriptior and supply or
 limitation and the requirements to follow the three stages of
 the cascade do not apply to non-food producing animals of
geon to have personal knowledge of the condition of the
minor or exotic species. The vMD states, *The Directive is
animal or current health status of the herd or flock to make a
worded in a way which makes it clear that some companion
diagnosis and prescribe
animals are not minor or exotic species, but does not define
(5) The veterinary surgeon must maintain clinical records of
which they are. We suggest that, as a working rule, minor
that herd/flock/individual.
and exotic species be taken to cover all companion, labora-
What amounts to "recent enough" must be a matter for the
   s 
8  Guidance on prescribing
enter the food chain) other than cats and dogs. This
 are required to have applied for a passport from one of the
approach should not preclude veterinarians from conclud-
 passport issuing authorities. When a veterinary medicinal
ing that, in certain circumstances, certain especially sensi-
product is to be administered, prescribed or dispensed for a
tive breeds of cat and dog could be considered as exotic if
horse, the passport must be made available. The veterinar-
that were to be considered necessary to treat them safely
ian or person administering the product must ensure that the
and effectively'( AMELIA 8).
horse is the one described in the passport. Section IX of the
passport deals with medicinal treatmerit.
Food-producing animals
 In Section IX, Part II, if the owner or representative of the
A food-producing animal is an animal whose flesh or
owner makes a declaration that the horse is not intended for
products are intended for human consumption.
slaughter for human consumption, these horses may be
Veterinarians should keep adequate case records, including
treated using products authorised for horses and other
details of medicines used for the treatment of animals and
products under the cascade (see lists available at
the circumstances of their use. The Regulations require that
www.vmd.gov.uk/general/horsemeds/horseconsumpt.htm).
records must be kept when prescribing, administering and
There is then no need to record the administration of the
supplying medicines for food-producing animals under the
 prns q raaa  sosy ssu 'le ne pod
cascade (see Record keeping, page 15). Unless the product
human consumption.
is a homcopathic medicinal product in which the level of
Alternatively, in Section IX, Part IIlA, the owner or repre-
active principles is equal to or less than one part per million,
sentative can make a declaration that the horse is intended
the veterinarian must specify an appropriate withdrawal
for human consumption. If the animal is to be treated with
period (see Drug residues, page 17).
medicinal products authorised for horses and containing
In addition to the above legislation, if the animal is a food-
substances listed in Annex I, 11 or III of Regulation 2377/90/
producing animal, the veterinarian or person acting under
EC, the owner or keeper must record the administration of
his/her direction may onty administer a product that con-
the product. The specific data sheet withdrawal period or
tains substances found in a product authorised in the UK for
the standard 6-month withdrawal period applies (see lists
use in food-producing animals. This applies whichever tier
available
at
www.vmd.gov.uk/general/horsemeds/
of the cascade is used, ie, veterinary, human or specially
horseconsumpt.htm). The owner should be informed of the
prepared medicines. Pharmacologically active substances
withdrawal period.
which are not contained in products currently authorised for
Animals may be treated with medicinal products listed in
food-producing species, including those in products that
Annex I, 1I or II1 of Regulation 2377/90/Ec but not intended
have been withdrawn, or the active ingredient has been
for horses or substances that are not included in the
entered into Annex IV or for which there is no Annex entry
Annexes. In these cases, the horse can only be slaughtered
under Regulation 2377/90/EEc, must not be administered to
for human consumption after completion of the standard
food-producing animals under the cascade.
withdrawal period of 6 months. The owner should be
This restriction may create problems for ensuring correct
informed of the withdrawal period. The substance must be
treatment of food-producing animals because some impor-
Tecorded in Section IX, Part IIIB
tant therapeutic products are not authorised in these species.
The current interpretation of the legislation allows use of
In particular, the vMD has issued guidance onl use of anaes-
substances that are indicated as ‘not for use in horses
thetics in these species: 'it may be considered inappropriate
intended for human consumption'in the data sheet (but rot
Annex IV substances) and the standard withdrawal period
using anaesthetics and analgesics which are niecessary for
of 6 months will apply.
the health and welfare of animals in circumstances where
 If an Annex IV product is administered (see Drug residues,
there is no viable authorised product and where the imposi-
 page 17), the horse can never be used for human consump-
tion of the withdrawal period set down in the Regulations
tion. The substance must be recorded in Section IX, Part
would protect conisumers'( AMELIA 8).
IIIB by the person administering the product. The owner
must be advised that the declaration status will be changed
Equidae
to not intended for human consumption.
Under European legislation, Equidae (including horses,
Anl owner may elect not to sign the declaration. In this case
 pomies, donkeys, mules or cross breeds of these species) are
the horse must be treated as if intended for human con-
regarded as food-producing animals. However, it is recog-
 sumption as far as medicines administration and recording
nised that not all these animals are intended for food
are conicerned.
production and amendments to the legislation have been
The administration of all equine vaccines must be recorded
made that allow use of products without established maxi-
by the veterinarian in the relevant section of the passport:
mum residue limits (MRLs) for specified Equidae. The term
equine influenza vaccinations must be entered in Section V;
"horse' will be used to explain the legislation in this text. It
all other vaccinations must be recorded in Section V1.
is essential that all horses are clearly identified by a pass-
Further information on the horse passport scheme is availa-
ble from: VMD, 01932 336911; DEFRA helpline, 020 7904
human consumption. Under the Horse Passports (England)
6216; ww w.beva.org.uk, then passports; www.defra. goy.uk/
Regufations 2004, from 30 June, 2004 all owners of equids
animalh/tracing/horses/horses index.htm
BVA Code of Practice on Medicines
6
Special TreatmentAuthorisation
Personal importation of veterinary medicines
Where there is no suitable authorised product available in
The Medicines (Restrictions on the Administration of Veter-
the UK to treat a particular condition in a specific animal
inary Medicinal Products)Regulations 1994, as amended,
and the use of a humar or extemporaneously prepared med-
apply to veterinary medicinal products administered to ani-
icine is inappropriate, it may be possible to authorise the
import and supply (or use) by a veterinarian of a medicine
UK. They require that any product administered to animals
that is authorised in another country.
or imported for the purposes of administration must be
The veterinarian should apply for a Special Treatment
 authorised in the UK. The vMD takes the view that a prod-
Authorisation (sTA) from the VMD. This allows import of a
 uct that is authorised in the UK is one which is labelled for
medicine for treatment of an individual named (or num-
the UK market, and which bears the UK authorisation
bered) animal under the care of the veterinarian named in 
number. This would include products that may additionally
the authorisation and under certain conditions. Guidelines
 be labelled for another country s market. It must be borne in
provided by the VMD state that an STA may be issued "to
 mind that a product imported into the UK is subject to the
allow the treatment of individual animals suffering from
UK conditions of use, such as withdrawal period and
conditions which cannot be treated using medicines availa-
distribution category.
ble to the UK veterinary surgeon by normal means. They
There may be incidences where a product is imported for
will not be issued if a suitable product is authorised and
administration but which is not labelled as above; eg, a
marketed in the UK for either animal or human use. Before
holidaymaker returning to the UK from the Continent with
anl STA is issued, the VMD must be satisfied that the benefits
their pet with treatment that has been prescribed by a Euro-
of using the product will outweigh any risks and will not
pean veterinarian. The VMD states it ‘will primarily have
 pose a threat to human or animal health or the environment.
regard to the likelihood of risks to human or animal safety.
For these reasons, STAs may not be a suitable way of obtain-
 Factors which might be considered are whether the product
ing products to treat food producing animals ...[and] STAs
is in fact the same as a UK authorised product, or whether
there are minor differences having no effect on safety,
tional
circumstanices.'
(VMD,
Speciat
Authorisations AMELIA 10, November 1995).
the adequacy of the label, and its consistency with the
 In certain cases, an animal is not named in the authorisation
equivalent UK label'. ( Note on imports of veterinary medic-
because retrospective record keeping has been permitted;
inal products for administration to animais, VMD, October
1998).
the diagnosis of a serious condition. To grant sTAs in this
manner there must be a reasonable expectation that this sit-
Prescribing medicines for use in dart guns
uation will arise on a regular basis. To prove this, veterinar-
The possession of weapons and ammunition designed for
ians need to show that they hold specialist status in the
tranquillising and treating animals and kept for that purpose
particular species or discipline, that the veterinary practice
is governed by the Firearms (Amendment) Act I997. This
legislation will affect veterinarians who possess tranquillis-
discipline, that they have records demonstrating diagnosis
ing dart guns in order to treat animals, and who prescribe
 of the condition(s) in previous years where the product
medicines for use in dart guns or blow pipes. Drugs such as
would have been used if available, and of previous drug
etorphine and ketamine are not authorised for food-
usage (product recently withdrawn from the market or
producing animals and treated animals cannot be used for
previous STA granted).
human consumption.
The STA application form is included in AMELIA 10 and
The veterinarian or applicant must have a firearms certifi-
cate that states the purpose for which the item will be used,
cial Treatment Authorisations),
Veterinary  Medicines
eg, treating animals. Rcvs guidance indicates that the veter-
Directorate, New Haw, Addlestone, Surrey KTi5 3NB.
inarian should ensure that the animals are ^under his/her
care'. In addition, there should be sufficient supervision
Prescribing by veterinarians established in EEA
considering that the medicines used are PoM. The veterinar-
states other than the UK
ian should supply the PoM only in sufficient quantity for
The Medicines(Veterinary MedicinalProducts)(Veterinary
immediate use and must instruct the user (no matter how
Surgeonsfrom other EEA States)Regulations 1994 apply to
veterinarians established in EEA states other than the UK
liser. They must also direct the user as to what to do in anl
 but whose practices extend into the UK. They permit such
emergency, eg, a person being struck by a dart. The veteri-
veterinarians to carry with them and use medicines (other
narian need not be present when the dart gun is used. It is
than immunologicals) not authorised in the UK provided
recommended to keep this method of medication under
 joint review so that any additional necessary advice can be
the veterinarian is established. The Regulations specify fur-
givenl.
ther provisions which must be complied with and restrict
Further information is given in the Rcvs Guide to Profes-
the ranige and quantity of such medicines to those required
sional Conduct, which is available at www.rcvs.org.uk/
for the daily needs of good veterinary practice.
yet surgeons/professionalconduct/annexes/index.html
10
Guidance on prescribing
Dispensing medicines
(cosHH) must be observed (contact the BVA, 7 Manisfield
Street, London W1G 9NQ, telephone 020 7636 6541, fax
Advertising and display
020 7436 2970, for further information).
There are serious concerns regarding advertising of poM
There must be no smoking, eating or storage of food for
preparations such as antimicrobials to the gerneral public
human consumption in areas where medicines are stored or
and the possibility of the general public obtaining such
dispenised. There should be notices in place to inform staff
products from inappropriate sources and using them with-
and clients accordingly.
out proper controls. However it may be valuable to advise
clients of other products that are PoM, such as flea treat-
Personnel
ments, because restriction onn advertising could limit educa-
 In all practices there must be a named person (preferably a
tion, provision of information to clients, and preventative
 veterinarian) who is responsible for seeing that the require-
health care. For guidance, POM products should not be 
 ments of this code of practice are observed. It would be
advertised to the general public but may be advertised to
convenient for the same person to also be responsible for
clients, eg, posters in the waiting room, and vaccination and
complying with cosHH requirements and waste disposal
flea treatment reminder cards. P, PML and GSL preparations
regulations. A practice manual should be prepared which
 may be displayed to the public but dummy packets for P and
provides staff with detailed specific instructions on practice
PML products must be used unless display cabinets are
policy including dispensing of medicines.
secure. The Rcvs advises in the Guide to Professional Con-
Anyone involved in dispensing activity (unless handling
duct that ‘Medicines may be advertised to clients or to pro-
GSL products) must be suitably trained. This is particularly
spective clients only at their request and may not be
important for PoM products. The veterinarian can supply
advertised generally.'(This may be amended in response to
POM products (to clients whose animals are ^under his/her
the Competition Commissions recommendations so as to
care'). The qualified veterinary rurse or trained and author-
enable veterinarians to advertise the prices of poM products
ised person can supply poM products provided he/she does
to non-clients.)
so under the authority of the prescribing veterinarian.
All persons engaged in dispensing should observe high
Premises
standards of personal cleanliness.  Protective clothing
Premises in which medicines are stored should be a build-
should be disposable or regularly and frequently cleaned.
ing, or part of a building, of a permanent nature. Areas used
No person with open lesions or skin infections should be
for sale, supply or storage of medicines should not be any
engaged in dispensing processes. Staff must report infec-
residential part of a dwellinghouse. Premises should be kept
tions and skin lesions. All persons should keep any cut or
clean and vermin proof. Premises should be divided into
 abrasion on any exposed part of their person covered with a
areas to which the public has access ( waiting rooms, surger-
suitable waterproof dressing.
ies, etc) and *staff only’ areas where public access is not
 Direct contact between the operator's hands and the dis-
allowed or is controlled.
pensed products should be avoided, eg, by wearing gloves
Premises in which medicines are stored and dispenised
 Or by using a tablet counting device.
should be capable of being secured so as to exclude the pub-
lic and deter unlawful entry. Insurers may require that the
The dispensary
premises are fitted with a security alarm. Storage within the
Great care should be taken to enisure safe storage of all med.
premises must also be secure and, ideally, no other activity
icines. Medicines should be stored in accordance with
should be allowed irn storage areas. Refrigerated space must 
manufacturers' instructions. They should be protected from
be
provided for products with specific temperature
the adverse effects of extremes of environmental condi-
requirements.
tions, such as light, temperature, and humidity in the dis-
Controlled drugs and injection equipment present an attrac-
 pensary. Blinds, as necessary, should cover windows. Light-
tive target not only to addicts but also to professional crimi-
 sensitive products should be protected from light. Sterilisers
nals aware of profits to be made from illicit drug sales. The
should not be sited in the dispensary because they may
Advisory Committee on the Misuse of Drugs reviewed the
affect the humidity of the room. Ventilation must be
security of controlled drugs in 1983. Advice should be
adequate.
obtained from the local crime prevention officer on the suit-
 In order to avoid contamination, stocks of medicines to be
ability of premises, receptacles, etc, for controlled drugs.
supplied to clients must not be stored in toilets, laboratories,
Medicines kept in consulting rooms to which the public has
Or places where animals are kept, such as kerinels.
access should be kept to a minimum, should not be drugs of
 Particular attention should be taken to ensure that products
abuse, and should be kept in cupboards and drawers not
are stored at the correct temperature. Refrigerated space
readily accessible to clients. Only the minimum necessary
must be provided for products such as vaccines, anti-sera,
quantities of medicines should be carried by car or in a
and some reconstituted antibiotic solutions with specific
small animal visit box.
low temperature storage requirements. Vaccines, etc, should
A list of key telephone numbers (doctor, hospital, fire sery-
be refrigerated as soon as received. Biological samples,
ice, poisons centre, etc) should be prominently displayed.
food, bacteriological media, etc, should be stored in desig-
Appropriate safety equipment must be available. The Con-
nated refrigerators. Particular care should be taken to avoid
trolof Substances Hazardous to Heaith Regulations 1999
freezing or prolonged exposure to high temperatures.
BVA Code of Practice on Medicines  11
Refrigerators must be maintained at 2° C to 8° C and should
Schedule 3 controlled drugs must be kept in a suitable
be fitted with a means of regular daily monitoring and
locked receptacle which can only be opened by the veteri-
recording of temperatures, such as a minimum/maximum
narian or by a person authorised by the veterinarian to do
thermometer and dedicated log book. An electronic device
 so. This is best implemented by having no more than one
can be used to monitor temperature or manual temperature
key to the receptacle per veterinarian. The keys should be
monitoring is adequate provided an accurate temperature
kept on the person. A locked car is not considered to be
recording is obtained and the bulb of the thermometer is
such a receptacle within the meaning of the Misuse of
placed in glycerol to reduce temperature fluctuations. A
Drugs (Safe Custody) Regulations 1973 and veterinarians
named person should check and record the temperature of
each refrigerator. In-car refrigeration units are now availa-
vehicles used for the transport of such medicines.
ble. Regular servicing, cleaning and stock control should be
maintained for refri gerators as for other storage areas.
Supply of human medicines for animals
Flammable products must be stored in appropriate cabinets
A veterinarian or a person under his/her direction may sup-
specifically designed for the purpose.
ply an authorised human medicine for use in a particular
Well-designed shelving and fittings should be installed to
animal (see Prescribing medicines, page 6). A veterinarian
reduce the possibility of breakage, spillage and stock mis-
should advise the owner that he/she intends to administer anl
placement. A named person should be responsible for stock
 authorised human preparation to the animal and ideally
control.
obtain the clients written consent (see Consent forms,
It is good practice to affix a practice label to each item
page 19).
before it is placed in stock. The date of first usage on multi-
dose vials and the date at which the vial should be discarded
ans directly with authorised human preparations. In such
should be indicated. Multi-dose vials with an in-use shelf
instances, the veterinarian may write a prescription for
life now have a suitably labelled space for the user to insert
supply from a pharmacist.
the date for discarding the opened container. In general,
Guidance on the supply of an authorised human medicine
medicines should be stored in the original container until
for animal use by a pharmacist is given by the RPsGB. Sup-
required.
ply may be given only with prior direction from a veterinar-
Dates of deliveries from manufacturers or wholesalers
ian. This instruction may be given verbally for GSL or P
should be recorded, unless this information is on an inivoice
products but must be written for PoM products. It is good
from the manufacturer or wholesaler, which is retained.
practice for the pharmacist to record when a verbal instruc-
Batches of the same product should be kept separate and
tion has been given by a veterinarian or for the written
older stock should be issued before rew stock, ie, careful
instruction in the form of a prescription to be entered into
stock rotation should be maintained.
the prescription book in the pharmacy. The pharmacist has
Packs with defaced or damaged labels, damaged packs or
to be satisfied that a veterinarian has given an instruction
those that are date expired should be removed. Such items
before a supply is made. If a pharmacist is asked for an
should not be sold.
authorised human product by an animal owner for use in/on
Once stock has been dispensed, it should not be accepted
the animal, the pharmacist should refer to a veterinarian for
back into the dispensary. No returned goods should be
either a recommendation or a prescription.
offered for resale because there may have been problems
with storage conditions beyond the veterinarian's control.
Containers
Although stock that has to be returned to a manufacturer or
 The RPsGB recommends that when medicines are re-packed
wholesaler should be returned without delay, there are strict
frorm bulk or prepared extemporaneously they must be
regulations relating to returned stock accepted by
 packed in containers that are appropriate for the product
wholesalers.
dispensed and the user. All containers intended for medici-
Only medicines used frequently should be carried routinely
nal products must be protected and free from contamina-
in vehicles. It is good practice to store a minimum amount
tior.
 In general, all solid dose and all oral and external prepara-
car may fluctuate greatly and the efficacy of the products
tions should be dispensed in a reclosable child-resistant
may be affected. An insulated container will provide short-
container. However there are exemptions to this require-
ment. If the medicine is in the manufacturer s original pack,
Precautions against theft from vehicles must be taken.
such as blister-packed medicines, it may be inadvisable to
Veterinarians should attempt to ensure that farmers store
change the containet. Sachets and manufacturers' strip or
medicines properly and that preparations are not used
 
 board cartons or wallets, or paper envelopes.
Working with clients, page 13).
Discretion may be exercised in the use of child-proof con-
Very strict requirements operate for the storage of control-
led drugs. Security is essential. Only the minimum quantity
 priate (aged and infirm clients, large-animal formulations,
of controlled drugs should be stored consistent with routine
to suitable child-resistant container exists for a particular
needs and emergencies of the practice. Schedule 2 and some
liquid preparation, etc). A notice should be displayed in the
12
2  Guidance on prescribing
waiting room indicating that tablets and capsules will nor-
The words "keep out of the reach of children'or words
mally be dispensed in child-proof containers but that plain
having a similar meaning
containers can be supplied on request. Advice must be
The words “for external use only' or 'not to be taken
given to keep all medicines out of reach of children.
internally' for medicines that are only for topical use
Tablets, capsules and powders are often adversely affected
(eg, embrocations, liniments, ear or eye formulations,
 by moisture and should be stored in the original container
until required in order to protect the medicine against break-
gels)
age, crushing, moisture ingress, contamination and deterio-
The relevant withdrawal period should always be stated
ration, with the lid being properly replaced after use. In
on medicines for food-producing animals. The with-
addition, adequate labelling and stock rotation should be
drawal period, even if it is mil, should be indicated.
taken into account when repackaging tablets ready for
dispensing.
that it be labelled with any of the following particulars
Paper envelopes and plastic bags are unacceptable as the
(which the veterinarian would use if he/she were dispensing
sole contai ner of veterinary medicines.
directly to a client);:
Under the Medicines (Ftuted Bottes) Regulations 1978,
The drug name, concentration and amount dispensed
certain liquid medicinal products for ex ternal use should be
Directions for use
dispenised in fluted bottles so that they are recognisable by
Where appropriate, precautions relating to the use of the
touch. This requirement does not apply to containers of a
0 ooed po si 1I ees ioeiodo insue oi ionpoid
dns sdoip 1eo 10 se 01 10 sa tI'l ueu 1ee A1ioedeo
supply the operator with, eg, disposable gloves when
plied in plastic containers. However, fluted bottles may be
difficult to obtain. Therefore, it is recommended that prepa-
The name or description of animal(s) to be treated.
rations be dispensed as proprietary products in containers
Ideally, the label should not obscure the expiry date of the
supplied by the manufacturer wherever possible.
preparation or important printed information on the manu-
Creams, dusting powders, granules, ointments, pessaries,
facturer's label or pack. For preparations such as tubes of
powders, suppositories, semi-solids, etc, should be dis-
eye ointment, the product may be dispensed in anl
pensed in wide-mouthed jars made of glass or plastic.
appropri ately labelled enivelope.
Medicines sensitive to light should be dispensed in an
Specimen labels
Example 1 Dispensing 20 acepromazine 10 mg tablets for a
It is good practice to supply, eg, injectable antibacterials for
administration by farmers, in 20 ml or 40 ml vials available
dog
from manufacturers (rather than in syringes).
The dispenser has a duty to ensure that the owner under-
Name
of animal
Name
stands any instructions on the label (see below) and knows
and address of client
how to use the product safely. The owner or keeper of the
Date
animal or herd must be warned to keep all medicines out of
20 x 10 mg acepromazine tablets
reach of children.
2 tablets by mouth, before travelling
Labelling of dispensed medicines
For Animal Treatment Only
All medicines sold or supplied by a veterinarian or pharma-
cist in accordance with a prescription given by a veterinar-
Keep all medicines out of reach of children
ian, are by definition 'dispensed medicines' and as such
JG Bloggs MRCVS
must be labelled correctly as given in the Medicines ( Label-
2 High Street, Coxton, Surrey
fing) Regulations I976 as amended. Dispensing veterinari-
Example 2 Dispensing 50 ml Framomycin 15% Injectior
ans should ensure that the label uses mechanically printed
 lettering (ie, computer generated) or labels must be indeli-
for a cow
bly and legibly printed or written in accordance with statu-
Identification number of animal
tory requirements. Biro, ballpoint or felt tip pens are
Name and address of client
acceptable for labelling; ink and pencil are not. The label
Date
must include:
 The name of the owner or keeper or the person who has 
/ 0 1  x  05
control of the animal or herd (or group)
15 ml by intramuscular injection daily
The address of the premises where the animal or herd is
Withholding times:Meat 49 days
kept or the address of one of such premises
Milk 56 hours
The name anid address of the veterinarian
For Animal Treatment Only
The date of dispensing
The words “for animal treatment only', unless the con-
Keep all medicines out of reach of children
tainer or package is too small for it to be practicable to
J G Bloggs MRCVS
do so
2 High Street, Coxton,Surrey
BVA Code of Practice on Medicines  13
Apart from complying with the legislation, instructions on :
 should be stored securely and should be kept out of reach of
labels should be aimed at creating a greater awareness onl
 childrenl or animals.
the part of the end user as to the manner irn which animal  Part-used packs of injectable preparations should be dis-
medicines should be stored, handled and administered. The
carded safely at the end of each daily operation or use and
dispenser should bring the owners attention  to
the
 not re-used on subsequent days unless the data sheet speci-
fies such a usage of opened packs. The date of first usage on
Product information leaflets are often supplied by the marl-
multi-dose vials and the date at which the vial should be
ufacturer to supplement the information on the container
 discarded should be indicated. Multi-dose vials with an in-
and package. This additional information may prove useful
use shelf life now have a suitably labelled space for the user
to the end user and product information sheets, package
to insert the date for discarding the opened container. The
inserts, or leaflets should be dispensed with the product.
expiry date on the label should be checked and the
medicines should not be used past that date.
Sending medicines by post
Clients should be reminded to use medicines only on ani-
Pharmaceutical  companies occasionally  send  medicines
mals recommended on the label or leaflet, unless the veteri-
directly to a veterinary practice by post, and wholesalers
narian has otherwise directed. The result of giving a
frequently use this means to forward medicines to remote
 practices when small items are required urgently. Veterinar-
medicine to an animal for which it is not recommended is
unpredictable and may endanger the animal.
ians may send medicines by post to clients whose animals
The BVA recommends that written standard operating
are under the veterinarians care provided the medicines are
not hazardous to the public, are in child resistant or manu-
procedures (soPs) should be designed by the veterinarian
facturer s original containers, and have been safely packed.
attending food-producing animals to cover medicines that
Safe packaging is especially important for liquid medicines
are used regularly or a farm. The soPs should be unider the
and the veterinarian must ensure that there should be no
direct supervision of the veterinarian. The reason for the use
leakage outside the packaging if the inner container breaks;
of the medicine, the dosage regimen, instructions on correct
 admimistration, storage requirements and identification of
the inner container must be covered in polythene, absorbent
material, etc. For the purposes of transporting cD medicines,
withdrawal periods should be specified. The veterinarian
the Home Office classifies these products as low, medium,
should provide additional information on exactly how the
withdrawal period must be followed.
and high risk depending on the drug and amount dis-
patched. In general, the usual amount of cD medicines sent
During farm visits a detailed appraisal of medicinal storage,
by the veterinarian to a client would be classified as low
handling and usage on the farm should be undertaken. Dis-
risk and may be sent by post. The Home Office advises that
cussion should take place with the stockpersons who carry
postal services used should provide transit security or an
out the routine day-to-day tasks to ensure that the correct
audit trail capable of identifying where any loss has
procedures are in use. In addition, line management on the
occurred.
enterprise should be observed with the owner or manager
kept fully informed.
Working with clients
The livestock farrmer has a statutory obligation to keep
Under the COSHH Regulations the veterinarian has a duty
records (see Record keeping, page 15). A veterinarian has
d   on mo smou mo  e s n o o
an ethical obligation to help the client keep such records.
safely and that this information is made known to the per-
Client education plays a vital role in ensuring that medi-
son actually using the product. The veterinarian may assist
cines are used cotrectly. There is a Code of Practice on the
farmers with their cosHH assessmenit.
Responsible Use of Animat Medicines on the Farm agteed
The veterinarian should ensure that only sufficient quanti-
by a number of organisations and a copy of this Code is
 ties of medicines are prescribed or supplied to the owner for
included in the NOAH/ADHA Animal Medicines Record
 the individual or group of animals being treated. In particu-
Book. Regular newsletters or presentations giving clients
lar cases, it will be reasonable to allow selected clients to
information on issues such as legislation affecting the man-
hold a small reserve of some preparations provided the vet-
ner in which veterinarians prescribe and dispense medi-
erinarian recognises a recurring need for the use and is sat-
cines, will help clients to understand any restrictions placed
isfied that the client has demonstrated his/her reliability in
upon them. Open days also allow clients to observe
all aspects of using medicines.
working practices.
Clients should be advised that instructions provided should
be read carefully before administering any medicine and to
Supply of prostaglandins for use on the farm
check any warning statement and guidance given about how
Prostaglandins are very potent compounds with a wide
a medicine should not be used, in particular whether it can
range of physiological effects. Accidental self-injection or
 be used concurrently with any other medicines given to the
animal.
nique may cause severe reactions in humans.
Clear and concise advice should be given to clients on the
Prostaglandins are used in cattle for treating unobserved
safe storage and use of medicines supplied or prescribed.
oestrus, controlled breeding programmes, treatment of pyo-
Clients should be advised to store medicines correctly and
metra/chronic endometritis, induction of calving, hastening
ini accordance with the instructions on the label. Medicines
placental expulsion, treatment of cystic ovarian disease, and
14Guidance on prescribing
Specimen form for Safe Use of Prostaglandin Products in Sows
[Practice Stamp]
SAFE USE OF PROSTAGLANDIN PRODUCTS IN SOWS
(1) I [name] understand and will carry out the following procedures for the safe use and administration of the
(2) I have read and I understand the packaging leaflet/data sheet/my veterinarian has explained the data sheet.
(3) The handling of this product is restricted to myself and  [ name ]  who is also bound by these rules
(4) At ALL times the product will be stored ini a nominated locked place.
(5) No other person will have access to the product or handle it.
(6) It will be administered only to sows that are my property and on my fam/farms for the induction of farrowing or for the
reduction of the weaning to oestrus interval or wearing to fertile service interval, as directed.
(7) I will record the date of administration of each dose with the records of the sow and dose volume given together with
idenitification of the sow in accordance with legislation.
(8) Supplies of the product will be obtained by me personally from the veterinarian who has the sows under his/her care. I
will sign foreachconsignment.
(9) Empty containers of the product will be disposed of in accordance with the agreed farm policy for disposal of pharma
Ceuticalwaste.
(10) I agree to receiving instructions as to the handling, storage, administration, and recording of the use of this product
and will abide by them.
(11) A new sterile syringe and needle will be used for each dose of the product administered. After the injection has been
gi ven the syringe and needle will be either returned to the veterinary practice or safely destroyed on the farm as agreed.
(12) Waterproof gloves will be worn by the operator handling the product; accidental spillage will be washed off the skin
immediately and, in the event of accidental injection, medical advice will be sought urgently.
(13) I understand that conitact with prostaglandin products by women of child-bearing age or by asthmatics conistitutes a
particular potential hazard and is to be avoided.
(14) These rules will be displayed where the product is to be stored.
(15) I understand that failure to comply with these instructions at any time would result in no further issue of the product
Signature and date:
Name and address:
Telephone:
Site of storage of prostaglandins if different to above:
Counter signature of veterinarian and date:
BVA Code of Practice on Medicines  15
misalliance. All these indications demand accurate identifi-
in which he undertakes to follow a code of practice. Failure
of a farmer to comply with the code of practice should
diagnosis.
result in the veterinarian withholding supply of further
In pig practice, prostaglandins are mainly used for the
quantities of the product under the terms of item (15) of the
induction of farrowing. In addition they may be given 24 to
undertaking (see specimen form).
48 hours after farrowing to reduce the weaning to oestrus
The procedure for issue of prostaglandins to a farmer client
interval or the weaning to fertile service interval. It is
 should be reviewed at regular intervals to take account of
accepted that for logistical reasons it would not be possible
the changes in management, sow numbers, or other
practical conditions on the farm.
the veterinarian decides it is necessary to supply or pre-
scribe prostaglandins he/she should ensure that the products
Record keeping
are issued to one named person only. The guidelines given
below should be followed.
It is imperative that veterinarians and all personnel involved
Prostaglandins are PoM and should be issued by a veterinar-
nent records. In addition to specific legal requirements for
own sows, on his own farm or farms, and issued on the
record keeping, it may be necessary to record reasons for
basis that the named person is individually responsible for
prescribing. Under legislation, the record keeping require-
the product storage, handling, administration and accounta-
ments apply to administration and sale and supply for food-
bility, and also signs a receipt for each consigrment of the
producing animals, including horses declared as intended
product.
for human consumption. However, veterinarians are
Records of supply and administration in accordance with
encouraged to maintain records of administration and sales
legislation must be kept by the veterinarian and the farmer
 of veterinary medicines for pets or other companion ani-
(see Record keeping). The veterinarian should advise the
mals voluntarily, especially to assist product traceability
farmer that at all times the product must be kept in a secure
and recall should the need arise.
locked place except as/whern required for admimistration to
All necessary records should be kept in a readily retrievable
sows. The on-farm storage conditions should be inspected
manner (eg, a handbook, files, or on a computerised data-
and approved by the veterinarian.
base). Where a computer is used there must be adequate
The veterinarian should issue only sufficient product for the
precautions against inadvertent loss of data.
Any
immediate use on the farm. Periodically, the veterinarian
discrepancies must be entered into the records.
should check the amount issued against the rumber of ani-
Prescribing cards are a useful aid to record keeping and
mals treated. The veterinarian should issue new stocks
 control of supply. Most small animal practices would keep
against the return of used or date expired packs or in
this information as part of the normal case records except
accordance with amounts used as indicated by the farmer's
 that the name and address of the recipient would be in the
records. The farmer should be supplied with a container in
patient's record and not kept separately. There is no neces-
which to store sharps and syringes and needles issued with
sity to transfer such information to the dispensary records.
the product, which should be either returned to the
For each animal or group of animals a detailed record
veterinary practice for disposal or safely destroyed.
The client should be instructed on the safe handling of the
 be supplied, in what quantities on each occasion, and what
product, the filling of syringes, the method and site of injec-
actual supply has occurred. A limit on the total supply
tion, and warned of the risk of product exposure to women
should be set and no further supply should be made without
 of child-bearing age and to asthmatics. The package leaflet,
the authority of a veterinarian in the practice. The cards
copy of data sheet or copy of technical brochure should be
should be checked periodically.
issued to the farmer. Waterproof gloves should be worn
Records should be kept for 3 years to comply with the Med.
 s s e    u 
icines Act 1968. However, they should be retained for at
washed off the skin immediately. In the event of accidental
least 6 yearsin case a civil action for damages ensues.
administration to a person, medical advice should be sought
promptly.
aun Aq sauioiaw pasuadsip jo ales jo Aiddns
Prostaglandins should only be issued for induction of far-
veterinarian
rowing in sows if farm records are adequate to indicate the
Under the Retailers’Records for Veterinary Medicinat
average gestation length taking the first day of service as
Products Regulations 2000, veterinarians must keep records
Day O. The product should not be administered earlier than
for each incoming transaction concerning products received
3 days before the expected date of farrowing and
litis
from wholesalers, manufacturers, etc, along with each out-
recommended that induced farrowings be supervised.
going transaction involving the sale of products to clients.
 No treated animals may be slaughtered until the appropriate
In practice, the legislation applies to all PML, P, or POM prod-
withdrawal period has ex pired.
ucts for food-producing animals; GsL medicines are not
 The BVA has compiled a specimen form entitled Safe Use
 affected. Records should be made within 48 hours of the
of Prostaglandin Products in Sows (see page 14). The vet-
transaction, kept for a period of at least 3 years, and be
eri narian is advised to request that the farmer signs the form
 available for inspection.
16
Guidance on prescribing
Information retained for each incoming or outgoing
Product prescribed
transaction made by a veterinarian must include:
Dosage to be administered
The date of the transaction
Duration of treatment
 The identity of the product
Withdrawal period recommended.
 The manufacturer s batch rumber
The records must be kept and be available for inspection for
The quantity recei ved or supplied
at least 3 years.
These Regulations also apply to pharmacists. Pharmacists
Administration by the farmer
supplying PoM products will also have to record the name
Under the Animais and AnimatProducts(Examination for
and address of the prescribing veterinarian and keep a copy
Residues and Maximum Residues Limits)Regulations 1997,
of the prescription. Under the Medicines (Exemptions for
-onpoid suueai un ui sssussng jo <em Xq peeus uosied e
Merchants in Veterinary Drugs) Order 1998 the same
tion or treatment of animals intended for human consump-
record keeping requirements apply to registered agricultural
tion, must keep a record of particulars relating to the
merchants and saddlers.
administration of any veterinary medicinal product to such
There has beern debate about the practical application of the
animals or group of animals. The record must be made as
legislation, in particular recording of batch numbers. How-
soon as practicable after administration and must include
ever, it is not possible in this Code to provide detailed guid-
the following information:
ance on protocols to be adopted. Each practice needs to
Date of purchase
consider their own situation carefully and decide how to
·
 Date of administrati orn
comply with the recording requirements for all medicines,
·
Identity and quantity of the veterinary medicinal
including those used in the day-to-day running of the clinic
product
and from car boot stock. Standard Operating Procedures
Name and address of the supplier of the veterinary
should be devised.
medicinal product
In addition, at least once a year a detailed audit of all trans-
 Identification of the animal or group of animals to
which
the
veterinary
medicinal
product
was
ucts should be reconciled with those held in stock and any
administered
discrepancies recorded. Although small animal transactions
The number of animals treated.
are excluded from the Regulations, in order to perform a
 It may also be in the farmer s interest to record:
detailed medicines audit there is a need to account for the
The dates on which any withdrawal period for meat,
items used for companion animals in a mixed (large and
milk, or any other animal product ended
small animal) practice, and also to account for breakages,
 The date on which the treatment finished
items used in the operating theatre, and out-of-date stock.
·
The name of the person who administered the medicine
Under the Misuse of Drugs Regulations I985, veterinarians
·
The batch numbers and expiry dates of any products
must record the purchase and administration or supply of all
used.
Schedule 2 controlled drugs in a Register within 24 hours
Records must be kept for at least 3 years except in the case
(see page 4). Although records may be kept by electronic
 of a prescription intended to show that withdrawal periods
means for POM, P, PML,and GSL medicines, the legislation for 
have been observed, which shall be retained for a period of
CD specifies the method of recording and manual recording
 5 years from the commencement of the withdrawal period
in a controlled drugs Register is required for Schedule 2
to which it relates.
controlled drugs.
The veterinarian has an obligation to assist clients to keep
The VMD has produced guidance on record-keeping require-
 good records by, eg, supplying a medicines record book.
ments in Record-keeping Requirements: Guidance for vet-
The National Office of Amimal Health (NOAH) in conjunic-
erinarians and pharmacists supptying medicinal products
tion with the Animal Health Distributors Association
by retail sale, AMELIA l6, February 2001, available at
(AHDA) produce an Animal Medicine Record Book, which
www. vmd. gov.uk
is available from AHDA (Gable Court, 8 Parsons Hill,
Hollesley, Woodbridge, Suffolk IP12 3RB, telephone 01394
Administration by the veterinarian
410444, fax 01394 410455, e-mail info @ahda.0rg.uk). The
Under the Medicines (Restrictions on the Administration of
Pig Veterinary Society also produces a Veterinary Medi-
Veterinary Medicinal Products) Regulations 1994,
as
cines Record of Administration Booklet (available from the
amended, a veterinarian must keep permanent records after
Pig Veterinary Society, Southview, East Tytherton, Chip-
administration of medicines to food-producing species
penham, Wiltshire SN15 4LX, telephone 01249 740380, fax
under the cascade.
01249 740380, e-mail office @pigvetsoc.org.uk). The NTF
The following records must be kept by the veterinarian after
Medication Book is available from the National Trainers
administration:
 Federation (NTF) to assist trainers in recording the medical
·
Date of examination of animals
treatment of horses in training. Details from NTF (9 High
Name and address of the owner
Street, Lambourn, Hungerford, Berkshire RG17 8xN, tele-
 Number of animals treated
phone
01488
71719,
fax
01488
73005，e-mail
Diagnosis
info@ racehorsetrainers.org).
BVA Code of Practice on Medicines  17
The veterinarian should regularly examine the medicines
Under the wider scope of pharmacovigilance, the VMD col-
record book to provide confirmation of the diseases and
lects information on incidents involving the provisional
conditions requiring medication on the farm, whether the
detection of antibiotic residues in milk of dairy cows which
dose and regimen is as recommended, and the latest
have been treated with lactating or dry cow therapy to treat
withdrawal periods.
or prevent mastitis. Problems in individual dairy cows Of
bulk tank supplies may be reported. The individual animal
should be identified and treatment regimens noted. In addi-
Suspected
1  Adverse Reaction Surveillance
tion, information on the milking regimen used on the farm,
Scheme
such as type and service history of the milking machine,
teat-dipping protocols, the frequency of milking, and herd
The Suspected Adverse Reaction Surveillance Scheme
lactation yield, should be given.
(SARss) is a national surveillance scheme run by the vMD to
Suspected adverse reactions in animals or humans should
record and monitor reports of suspected ad verse reactions to
be reported on Form MLA 252A (Rev 11/02) and suspected
  sds    s 
antibiotic residues in milk reported on Form MLA 2 ( 12/01)
The scheme also records lack of efficacy, adverse environ-
to:
mental effects, and suspected residues in milk and meat.
Veterinary Medicines Directorate
A suspected adverse reaction is a harmful and unintended
FREEPOST KT 4503
reaction to a veterinary medicine (or lack of expected
Woodham Lane, New Haw
effect) when administered to an animal at its normal dosage.
Addlestone, Surrey KT15 3NB
be associated with an adverse reaction in animals. Sus-
Copies of these forms are available on request from the
VMD (telephone 01932 338427, fax 01932 336618) and are
pected adverse reactions in human operators are also seen.
All veterinarians should accept as a serious ethical obliga-
available on the VMD website www.vmd.goy.uk, then
tion the reporting of suspected adverse reactions to author-
Adverse Reactions. Tear-out copies are included in the
ised veterinary medicines in animals or humans. Adverse
NOAH Compendium of Data Sheets for Animat Medicines,
The Veterinary Formulary, and the BSAVA Small Animal
reactions resulting from the use of authorised human medi-
Formulary.
cines under the cascade should also be reported. Any obser-
vation which might lead to suspicion of an adverse reaction
Identification  of  the product marketing authorisation
number is a vital part of the validation of a suspected
should be treated with careful professional judgement
The following categories of suspected adverse reactions are
adverse reaction or suspected antibiotic residues in milk
report; the product authorisation number should be pre-
important to detect and record for all species:
 Unexpected suspected adverse reaction associated with
ceded by the PL, Vm or EU prefix. Suspected adverse reac-
the use of an authorised product
tions involving use of medicines subject to Animal Test
 Expected suspected adverse reaction mentioned in the
Certificates should be recorded and reported in the same
data sheet but occurring more frequently than expected
way as for authorised products. Where a serious reaction
Any suspected adverse reaction to a new product within
occurs (especially death), the report should be sent to the
the first year of marketing
VMD as soon as possible and, in any case, within 15 days of
Any suspected adverse reaction to an authorised veteri-
occurrenice.
 It is also important to report a suspected adverse reaction or
nary medicine used outwith the data sheet (^off-label)
suspected antibiotic residues in milk to the market authori-
Lack of efficacy problems such as antimicrobial or
sation holder so that appropriate steps can be taken to
antiparasiticidal resistance
 All suspected adverse reactions in humans possibly
in vestigate the alleged problem.
associated with the use of a veterinary medicine in an
The vMD has provided guidance on pharmacovigilance in
animal
Marketing Authorisations for Veterinary Medicinal Prod-
Effects of use of authorised human medicines in ani-
ucts: Supplementary guidance on pharmacovigilance,
mals
AMELIA
12，
revised
July
2001.
Available
at
Effects of veterinary medicines on the environment
www.vmd.gov.uk/sarss/publications/animal2.pdf
Suspected meat arid milk drug residue problems.
A veterinarian may prescribe use of an authorised product
outwith the data sheet when he/she concludes that anl
Drug residues
authorised product does not exist in a particular case,
because likelihood of lack of efficacy is suspected or there
When treating food-producing animals, veterinarians may
are unacceptable side-effects on the part of the authorised
product authorised for use in the UK in food-producing ani-
product. Such suspicions should be reported to the VMD
where they will be recorded and monitored. The VMD will
mals. This is to ensure that residue implications have been
properly and fully evaluated.
then assess the incidence and severity of side-effects, and
the efficacy of the products and act as necessary to amend
Residues of veterinary medicines are defined as pharmaco-
product literature.
logically active substances (whether active principles,
18 Guidance on prescribing
excipients or degradation products) and their metabolites,
withdrawal period and its duration for the product used
which remain in foodstuffs obtained from animals that have
 should be fully and clearly explained to the farmer/owner.
been administered the veterinary medicine in question.
The UK has in place a rigorous system of statutory and non-
The EU Regulation 2377/90/EEC establishes Maximum Resi-
statutory surveillance for veterinary residues in animal
due Limits (MRLs) for pharmacologically active substances
products at slaughterhouses, on farms and at retail outlets.
used in food-producing animals. The MRL is defined as the 
Both these programmes play a central role in ensuring that
maximum conicentration of residue resulting from adminis-
the consumer is protected against harmful levels of residue
tration of a veterinary medicine which is legally permitted
of veterinary medicines.
in the Community or recognised as acceptable in or on a
The National Surveillance Scheme for residues in meat is a
food. Substances may be listed in one of the four Annexes
statutory programme designed to monitor whether residues
to the Regulation as indicated below:
of veterinary medicines are passing into meat for human
Annex I - substanices for which a full MRL has been
consumption in unacceptable concentrations and fulfils the
fixed
UK's obligations unider Directives 96/22/EEC and 96/23/EEC.
Annex II - substances for which an MRL is not required
The non-statutory programme supplements the statutory
 Annex II - substances for which a provisional MRL has
programme and currently concentrates on raw imported
been fixed
produce and surveys of produce in shops. Each year, for the
Aninex IV - substances for which no MRL can be fixed.
National Surveillance Scheme, a number of agencies
The substances listed in Annex IV are Aristolochia spp and
including the State Veterinary Service and the Meat
preparations thereof, chloramphenicol, chloroform, chlor-
Hygiene Service collect samples and the Laboratory of the
promazine, colchicine, dapsone, dimetridazole, metronida-
Government Chemist carries out analysis on behalf of the
zole, nitrofurans (including furazolidone) and ronidazole.
VMD.
These substances are banned from use in food-producing
animals. In addition, substances that do not have an Annex
medicines or residues of unauthorised substances are found
entry (I, II, II1) may not be used in food-producing animals.
under the National Surveillance Scheme, the State Veteri-
pdssed ssioy eun pun ssioy c Aidde suoisiaoid eiods
nary Service or Fish Health Officers undertake a thorough
scheme (see Equidae, page 8). Further information on MRLs
on-farm investigation. The farmer will be advised on how
may be found on the European Medicines Evaluation
to ensure that residues do not enter the food chain. Prosecu-
Agency (EMEA) website: www.eudra.org and on the VMD
tion will be considered if serious shortcomings or deliberate
website www. vmd.goy.uk
misuse are found.
MRLs established under these procedures are adopted in
Farmer education plays a vital role in a successful residue
Great Britain for surveillance and enforcement purposes
prevention programme. The programme should not only
under the Animais and Animal Products(Examination for
involve the owner and his management, but also his staff
Residues and Maximum Residues Limits)Regulations I997.
and particularly the stockpersons. This can be achieved by
0g Aiddns lo les pou e uosied e suoeiney sstn repu
regular farm visits, newsletters and discussion groups.
slaughter any animal for human consumption if the with-
drawal period of any authorised veterinary product, which
tion such as Withdrawal Periods for Animal Medicines
has been administered to the animal, has not expired.
included in the current NOAH Compendium of Data Sheets
The withdrawal period is the time interval after cessation of
for Animal Medicines can be made available to the farmer.
treatment and before the animal or any of its products can
However, some of the information may be outdated and it is
be used as human food (the concentration of residues in tis-
important to check the current product data sheet for the
sues such as muscle, liver, kidney, skin and fat, or products 
appropriate withdrawal periods and ensure that the farmer is
such as milk, eggs and honey must be lower than or equal to 
advised. Product leaflets should be left with the farmet.
the MRL).
If no withdrawal period for the species concerned is indi-
Disposal of medicines
cated on the product, the veterinarian must specify a stand-
ard minimum withdrawal period of not less than the
Disposal of veterinary medicines is regulated under many
following:
Acts and Regulations. Waste from medicines may be classi-
7 days for eggs
fied as clinical waste or pharmaceutical waste.
7 days for milk
Clinical waste is defined as ‘any waste which consists
 28 days for meat from poultry and mammals, including
wholly or partly of animal tissue, blood or other body flu-
fat and offal
ids, excretions, drugs, pharmaceutical products, swabs Of
500° days for meat from fish (where degree days is the
dressings, syringes, needles or other sharp instruments, or
cumulative sum of mean daily water temperatures in
any other waste arising from veterinary practice, investiga-
degrees Celsius following the last treatment).
tion, treatment, care, teaching, or research'.
Whenever medicines are sold, supplied or used for treating
Drugs or pharmaceutical products such as tablets, capsules,
food-producing animals, an assessment should first be
creams, ointments, ampoules, and syringes and vials,
made to ensure that the appropriate withdrawal period can
 including those containing a small amount of medicinal res-
be observed on the farm. The importanice of observing a
idue, are classified as Group D clinical waste. Some clinical
BVA Code of Practice on Medicines  19
waste is also classified as 'special waste’ and subject to
Farmers are also subject to the Regulations for the disposal
controls that are over and above other waste managemenit
 of both pharmaceutical and clinical waste. Veterinarians are
controls. Waste containing or consisting of poMs is classi-
exempt from the need to register as carriers, provided they
fied as 'special waste: Pharmaceutical product waste
are carrying waste produced in the course of their business.
should not be included with clinical waste for disposal.
They should consider providing a removal and disposal
Normal methods of flushing, incinerating and local refuse
collection are not appropriate. The forms required for dis-
inig a container for sharps.
posal of 'special waste' are complex.
Veterinarians should be aware that solutions such as spent
 It is suggested that compamies that provide a complete stor-
sheep dips or pesticides should not be disposed of so as to
age and disposal service, including sharps containers and
 contaminate water, including ponds, ditches, ground and
dump-bins (Disposal of Old Pharmaceuticals, DooP) should 
surface water, public sewers or drains. The disposal of dips
be employed to ensure safe and effective disposal of medi-
 must be in accordance with an authorisation granted under
cines; local authorities can provide information on special-
the Groundwater Regulations 1998. Spent dip should be
ist disposal service operators. In some instances,
the
disposed of by a reputable waste disposal contractor or
product data sheet may indicate that the veterinarian should
applied to a suitable area of land. The Environment Agency
dispose of waste following treatment.
 or the Scotish Environment Protection Agency should be
No person required to keep a register of transactions for
contacted for advice. Dip concentrate should not be dis-
controlled drugs may destroy a Schedule 2 controlled drug
posed of on the farm but should be disposed of by a reputa-
except in the presenice of a person authorised by the Secre-
ble specialist waste disposal contractor. Farmers can contact
tary of State such as police officers or Inspectors of the
the Environmental Services Association, 154 Buckingham
Home Office Drug Office. A record must be made of the
Palace Road, London, sw1w 9TR, telephone 020 7824 8882,
date of destruction and the quantity destroyed, which the
fax 020 7824 8753, e-mail info@esauk.demon.co.uk for
authorised person must sign. Home Office legal advice indi-
 advice on reputable waste disposal contractors.
  ,  cn     s
Empty dip containers should be made safe so as to be
not readily recoverable: Schedule 2 controlled drugs
unable to be re-used. They may be rinsed and then either
returned by the client can be destroyed without forrnality
 buried or disposed of at licensed disposal sites depending
and their destruction need not be entered in the controlled
on the original contents of the container. Rinsings should be
drugs Register. The RPsGB recommends that such destruc-
handled as for spent sheep dips.
tion is documented and witnessed by a member of staff. In
order to ensure that controlled drugs are denatured the
Consent forms
 RPSCB provides the following guidance. Liquid dose formu-
Guidance on consent forms is given by the BvA in consulta-
lations should be added to, and absorbed by, an appropriate
amount of cat litter, or similar product. Solid dose forms
tion with the Veterinary Defence Society (vDs); further
information may be obtained from the Veterinary Defence
should be crushed and placed into a small amount of hot
Society Ltd, 4 Haig Court, Parkgate Estate, Krutsford,
soapy water. The mixture should be stirred to ensure that
Cheshire WAl6 8xZ, telephone 01565 652737, fax 01565
the drug has been dissolved or dispersed. Ampoules con-
taining parenteral formulations should be crushed with a
751079. The Rcvs has produced specimen consent forms in
the Guide to Professional Conduct giving a suggested lay-
pestle inside a plastic container. After ensuring that all
out and allowing veterinarians to construct consent forms
ampoules are broken, a small amount of hot soapy water or
cat litter should be added. For fentanyl patches, the backing
suitable for their own purposes, bearing in mind the content
of the Rcvs forms.
should be removed and the patch folded over itself. Once
the controlled drug has been denatured, the resultant mix-
Consent forms should be completed for all patients pre-
ture should be added to the general pharmaceutical waste in
scribed veterinary medicines outwith the data sheet, or pre-
a dump-bin.
scribed authorised human medicines, or patients undergoing
Further information is available in RPsGB Medicines, Ethics
euthanasia or likely to require an anaesthetic (local or gen-
and Practice: A guide for pharmacists, available at
eral) or surgery (minor or major).
www.rpsgb.org.uk/members/publications/index.html
It is essential that owners be advised about the risks
The destruction of Schedule 3, 4, and 5 controlled drugs
involved with a treatment before being asked to sign a con-
does not require to be witnessed by an authorised person.
sent form. Common risks and adverse effects should be
In some instances, such as when an animal dies or the
discussed appropriate for the patients health and circum-
results of diagnostic tests lead to a change in treatment,
stances, and for the client, and then written confirmation of
medicines may be returned. Medicines returned to the sur-
the client's informed consent should be sought. The owner
gery should not be re-used because the conditions under
or authorised agent of the animal should be over 18 years of
which the medicines have been stored will be unknown.
age. Signed consent forms should be retained for at least 2
Once a product has reached the final user, the legislation
years.
affecting disposal no longer applies. However, a profes-
Consent for medical treatment
sional responsibility still exists when advising clients as to
Under the Medicines (Restrictions on the Administration of
the proper disposal of dispensed medicines.
Veterinary Medicinat Products) Regulations 1994,as
20 Guidance on prescribing
amended, a veterinarian may administer a veterinary medi-
Consent for medical treatment (ife-long care)
cine outwith the data sheet recommendations (^off-label),
CONSENT FORM
an authorised human medicine, a specially prepared
 For the use of an authorised veterinary or human medicine
unauthorised medicine ('special-order product') or a medi-
outwith the data sheet recommendations (ie,‘off label') or a
cine imported from another country under an sTA under cer-
specially prepared unauthorised medicine ('special-order
tain circumstances. A veterinarian should explain to the
under a Special Treatment Authorisation
to the animal and ideally obtain the client s written consent
[Practice Stamp]
(see example conisent form, below).
Under UK legislation where there are no suitable drugs specifically
When treating animals such as rabbits and rodents, reptiles
authorised for the treatrment of a particular species (the rmajority of small
and exotic birds, for which there are few or no authorised
rmarmals, birds, reptiles, aphibia, fish and invertebrates) or a particu-
products, it will usually be necessary to use authorised
lar rmedical condition in that species, a medicinal product authorised for a
different medical condition, or for use in another species or hurmans, or
human or veterinary products outwith the data sheet recom-
under certain circm stances a specially prepared unauthorised product, or
 mendations or specially prepared unauthorised medicines or
a rmedicine irmported frorn another country under a Special Treatment
medicines imported from another country under an sTA. In
Authorisation rmay be used for the treatrment of your arirmal with your
order to avoid the owners having to complete a consent
consent. These procedures will orly be used when we consider therm to
be the most appropriate treatrment.
form for each procedure or therapeutic course, the vDs has
produced a form to ensure consent of the owner for such
Details of owner
Name...
treatment while the animal is under the care of the
Address.
veterinary practice (example form, right).
Telephone Home...
...Work/Mobile..
Consent for medical trea tment
 Description of patient
CONSENT FORM
For the use of an authorised veterinary or human medicine
Species/Breed..
outwith the data sheet recommendations (ie, ^off label') or a
Colour...
Age.
Sex M/F/NM/NF
specially prepared unauthorised medicine ('special-order
Other identification (Microchip/Tattoo/Brand/Ring/etc)..
product') or a medicine imported from another country
under a Special Treatment Authorisation
Any rele vant clinical history/special precauions...
[Practice Stamp]
1 understand that while the animal described above is under the
Details of owner
care of this veterinary practice there may be occasions when it
Narme..
will be necessary to use authorised human or veterinary medi-
Address..
cines imported frorm another country under a Special Treatment
Telephone Home..
..Work/Mobile...
Authorisation) not authorised for use in ...
.(species)
 Description of patient
 or which are authorised for use in this species but not for the
Name...
particular condition for which the treatment will be given. 1
Species/Breed.
have been made aware that there may be known or unknown
side-effects associated with the use of these drugs andin giving
Colour....
.Age.
Sex M/F/NM/NF
Other identification (Microchip/Tattoo/Brand/Ring/etc)...
permission for their use accept any attendant risks. 1 am over 18
years of age.
Any relev ant clinical history/special precautions...
Signature of owner/agent..
Name....
.Date.
]understand that
is a product which is not
If agent:
authorised/licensed for use in
but is acknow]-
Name...
edged as a product useful in the treatment of .
Address..
1 have also been made aware of the possibility of side-effects
and of the precautions related to its adrministration. ln accepting
Relationship to owner.
its use for..
. 1 accept any attendant risks.
I am over 18 years of age.
Consent for anaesthesia and surgery
Signature of owner/agent.
Veterinarians may find it prudent to present a written fee
Name.
estimate at the same time as obtaining written consent, par-
Date.
ticularly for anaesthesia and surgical procedures. The con-
lIf agent:
sent form and written estimate may be included in the same
Narme....
document but it is advisable to obtain separate signatures
Address..
for each section. When deciding on the wording, lay-out
Relationship to owner...
and degree to which a particular fee estimate should be
BVA Code of Practice on Medicines 2
21
itemised, the veterinarian will need to take into account the
information could include the standard of supervision for
following: the animals welfare and the need to attend
in-patients, the level of care given, and practice policy on
promptly to an emergency; the time available for discussion
performance of procedures by a veterinary student, a listed
with the client; the type of case, eg, acute or chronic, elec-
nurse or other support staff.
tive surgery, routine treatment, complex investi gation fol-
Consent for euthanasia
lowed by extensive surgery, treatmenit,
10
both;
the
changing profile of many disease processes; the possibility
 It is recommended that separate consent forms for euthana-
that complications may arise; the likelihood that owners
sia are available. It is important that the client understands
will not understand the difference between anl estimate and
the term^euthanasia'and that there is no misunderstanding.
a quotation; and the need to inform owners that where cases
Under the Protection of Animais Act I9il, the Protection of
are likely to be protracted regular updates of the fee
Animais (Scotland) Act 1912 and the Welfare of Animais
estimate may be necessary.
(Northern Ireland) Act 1972, failure to destroy an animal to
prevent further suffering may amount to cruelty. The veteri-
The importance ofmaintaining good communications
with clients throughout the management of a case cannot
narian should make full records of all the circumstances
be over-emphasised.
supporting a decision to euthanase without the owner s con-
sent in case of subsequent challenge. A police officer may
order the humane destruction of an animal (horse, mule,
Consent for anaesthesia
ass, bull, sheep, goat, or pig) to terminate unreasonable suf-
fering. The veterinarian should obtain a written and signed
CONSENT FORM
ANAESTHESIA AND SURGICAL PROCEDURES
instruction to destroy from the officer in charge, including
 the name and identity number and log number of the inci-
[Practice Stamp]
dent at the police station. Where the veterinarian is asked to
Details of owner
destroy an animal injured in a sporting event, the opinion of
Name...
a professional colleague, if available, should be sought
Address..
before doing so. Under the Dangerous Dogs Act I991, as
Telephone Home.
..Work/Mobile
amended, and the Dangerous Dogs (Northerm Ireland)
Order 1991, the Court, a Justice of the Peace, or the police
 Description of patient 
 may order the destruction of a dog. The veterinarian should
Narme.
Species/Breed..
request a written and signed destruction order form from the
Colour....
Age
Sex M/F/NM/NF
appropriate authorities before or, if this is not possible and
Otheridentification(Microchip/Tattoo/Brand/Ring/etc)....
wards. Further advice is provided in the Rcvs Guide to
Operation/Procedure
Professional Conduct.
The nature of these procedures have been explained to me.
Consent for euthanasia
Any relevant clinical history /special precautions.
CONSENT FORM
EUTHANASIA
1hereby give permission for the administration of an anaes-
[Practice Stamp]
Details of owner
thetic to the above animal and to the operation/procedure
Nartie..
detailed on this form, together with any other procedures which
Address.
may prove necessary.
Telephone. Home....
...Work/Mobile...
1 understand that all anaesthetic techniques and surgical proce-
dures involve soe risk to the animal. 1 am over 18 years of
Description of patient
age.
1 have notified/will notify immediately the insurers concerning
Namie
Species/Breed.
the procedures planned for this animal.
Colour..
Age
Sex M/F/NM/NF
Other identification (Microchip/Tattoo/Brand/Ring/etc)....
Signature of owner/agent.
Nartie...
Date.
1 hereby consent to the euthanasia of the animal described
If agent:
above.
Name.....
I am over 18 years of age.
Address.
Relationship to owner.
Signature of owner/agent.
Name
.Date.
If agent:
In order to avoid unnecessarily long forms, clients may be
Nartie...
made aware of various protocols in other ways such as prac-
Address..
tice brochures or notices in the waiting room. Such
Relationship to owner..
22 Guidance on prescribing
Further information
Responsible Use of Medicines in Agriculture Alliance
(RUMA) Responsibte Use of Antimicrobiats in Sheep
Recommendations for prescribing, dispensing, and safe use
Production, Junie 2000. Available at www.ruma.org.uk
of medicinal products for animals may be found in the fol-
lowing sources.
Tennant B. BSAVA Smali Animal Formulary, 4th ed.
Veterinary Pharmacy courses organised by BVA special-
BSAVA,2002
ist divisions. For details contact the BVA, 7 Mansfield
Veterinary Medicines Directorate (vMD) The Medicines
Street, London, WIG 9NQ, telephone 020 7636 6541, fax
(Restrictions
：ontheAdministrationofVeterinary
020 7436 2970, e-mail bvahq@ bva.co.uk
Medicinal Products) Regutations 1994 (S1 1994/2987):
British Veterinary Association (BvA) Guidelines on the
Guidance to the veterinary profession. AMELIA 8,
revised July 1998. Available at www.vmd. goy.uk
Prudent Use of Antimicrobiais, BVA Publications, 2000
Veterinary Medicines Directorate (VMD) Speciat Treat-
Federation of Veterinarianis of Europe (FvE) Antibiotic
Resistance and Prudent Use of Antibiotics inVeterinary
ment
Authorisations.
AMELIA 10, November 1995.
Medicine.Available at www.fve.org
Available at www.ymd.gov.uk
Veterinary
Medicines Directorate (VMD) Marketing
 National Office of Animal Health (NOAH) Compendium
of Data Sheets for Animal Medicines. NOAH, 3 Cross-
Authorisations for Veterinary MedicinalProducts:Sup-
fields Chambers, Gladbeck Way, Enfield, Middlesex
plementary guidance on pharmacovigilance.AMELIA 12,
EN2 7HF, telephone 020 8367 3131, fax 020 8363 1155,
revised July 200 1. Available at www. vmd.gov.uk
e-mail noah @ noah.co.uk
Veterinary
Medicines Directorate (vMD)Record-
Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons (Rcvs) Guide to
keeping Requirements:Guidance forveterinarians and
Professional Conduct. Available at www.rcvs.org.uk
for pharmacists supplyingmedicinalproducts byretail
Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain (RPsGB)
sale.
AMELIA l6, February
2001.
Available
at
Medicines, Ethics,and Practice:A guide for pharma-
www. vmd. gov.uk
cists. Available at www.rpsgb.org.uk
Veterinary Medicines Directorate (VMD) Zootechnical
Feed Additives
and
MedicatedFeedingstuffs:
Responsible Use of Medicines in Agriculture Alliance
(RUMA) Responsibte Use of Antimicrobials in Poultry
prescriber's
guide,
May
2004.
Available
at
Production, June 1999. Available at www.ruma.org.uk
www. vmd.gov.uk
Responsible Use of Medicines in Agriculture Alliance
Veterinary Medicines Directorate (VMD) Question and
(RUMA)Responsibte Use of Antimicrobiats in Pig Pro-
Answer Briefon Zootechnical Additives and Medicated
duction, June 1999. Available at www.ruma.org.uk
Feedingstuffs, June 1998
Responsible Use of Medicines in Agriculture Alliance
(RUMA) Responsibte Use ofAntimicrobiais in Dairy and
Beef
Production,
June
2000.
Available
www.ruma.org.uk
23
Prescribing for animals used in competitions
Contributors:
National Greyhound Racing Club Limited (NGRC).
Professor P A Flecknell MA, VetMB, PhD, DLAS, DipECVA,
Rules of racing
DECLAM, MRCVS
National Coursing Club. Rules
G G A Smith BVSc, BSc, MRCVS
W R Steele BVSc, MRCVS
British Whippet Racing Association. Rutebook
Trevor Turner BVetMed, MRCVS, FRSH
National Whippet Racing Federation (NWRF). Rules
P M Webbon BVetMed, PhD, DVR, MRCVS
Royal Pigeon Racing Association. Rules
Irish Homing Union. Rules
Many animals are used in competitive events. For example
North of England Homing Union. Ruies
Greyhounds or pigeons are raced; dogs, cats, poultry, and
North West Homing Union. Ruies
rabbits are exhibited in beauty events; and horses compete
·
Scottish Homing Union. Rules
in racing, showing, jumping, and eventing. Drugs, includ-
Welsh Homing Union. Rules
ing legitimate medication, can affect their performance in
The Kennel Club.Rules and regulations
 these competitive events. Therefore when prescribing it is
Governing Council of the Cat Fancy. Rules
important to ensure that the rules of the controlling body of
the particular sport are not contravened.
·
Federation Cynologique Internationale (FCI). Reguia-
Such rules encourage fair competition with animals being
tions.
judged on their inherent merits, unaided by drugs. This can
present a dilemma, for there is a fine distinction between
Considerations of drug administration
legitimate therapy and unacceptable drug administration,
Ingredients. The contents of any proprietary mixture
place over time, such as Three-Day Eventing, heats and
should be disclosed and the actions known. Ari apparently
finals of major Greyhound and Whippet racing competi-
harmless tonic may contain a prohibited substance such as
tions, and various coursing events; all of which have their
caffeine. Traces of caffeine metabolites have been detected
owni rules
in the urine for up to 10 days after administration, and it is
Some controlling bodies allow the use of particular medica-
advisable to discontinue treatment with caffeine-containing
tions or designate threshold levels for concentrations of cer-
mixtures at least 14 days before competition. Proprietary
tain substances in body fluids. Appropriate vaccination
injectable preparations sometimes contain unexpected sub-
programmes are frequently specified.
stances, for example vitamin B, preparations may contain a
It is important to be aware that rules need not be permanent.
local anaesthetic. It is important to always read the data
Approaches to therapy can change and rules may be modi-
sheet or summary of product characteristics. If the contents
fied in the light of new developments and scientific discoy-
ery. Rules are available for those persons authorised under
exercised.
those rules who therefore have agreed to abide by them.
Ephedrine and its isomers have been detected in the urine of
Information on prescri bing for animals used in competitions
horses which have been treated with herbal remedies, and
is included in the following sources, many of which are
veterinarians must be satisfied that companies producing
periodically updated.
such remedies are exercising adequate quality control meas-
The Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons (RCvS).
ures since contamination of herbal remedies with medicinal
Guide to professional conduct
products is a fairly frequent finding. Quinine and quinidine
The Jockey Club.Rules of racing and Instructions
have been similarly reported to be detected after the admin-
Federation Equestre Internationale (FEI). Veterinary
istration of so-called "homoeopathic’ treatments. If admin-
regulations
istering oral therapy to racehorses, care should be taken
Dyke, TM. Pharmacokinetics of therapeutic substances
when dispensing medication into feed. Hands, buckets, and
in racehorses. Australian Equine Veterinarian 1989; 7
utensils can be inadvertent agents of contamination, there-
(suppl 1)
fore medicated feedstuffs should be prepared well away
European Horseracing Scientific Liaison Committee.
from feed for other horses. Isoxsuprine has been shown to
Informationfor veterinary surgeons on detection peri-
be particularly adherent resulting in its detection in urine
ods of named drugs (available to veterinarians from the
samples for appreciably longer than may be expected.
Chief Veterinary Advisor, The Jockey Club)
Carnivores such as Greyhounds can absorb drugs by conl-
AAFC Race Track Division. Schedute of drugs
suming meat from previously medicated animals. Currently,
Australian Equine Veterinary Association.Detection of
the NGRC advises trainers to avoid the feeding of knacker
therapeutic substances in racing horses
meat, bread, and all breakfast cereals containing chocolate
The British Horse Society. Endurance riding group
to any racing Greyhound. The feeding of knacker meat is
rutes andomnibus schedule
prohibited within 24 hours of a race or trial.
24 Guidance on prescribing
Formulation. Some drugs are specifically formulated to  RCvS recommend that the owner should be advised in
prolong their action. Particular care needs to be taken with
writing that the animal should not be raced or showfl on the
hormonal implants and long-acting corticosteroid or ana-
 occasion in question.
bolic steroid preparations. Specific information is not avail-
Drug detection times. Member countries of the Europeanl
able for horses or dogs, but it is likely that absorption of the
Horseracing Scientific Liaison Committee (EHSLC) are
drug from slow-release implants will be complete in 6
undertaking a programme to provide detection times for
months. However the veterinarian's right to prescribe ana-
 drugs which are authorised for use in horses. This informa-
bolic steroids for large animals (including horses) and poul-
tion is intended to assist veterinarians to give advice as to
try is limited to the treatment of certain fertility problems by
when racehorses may be raced after treatment for clirical
legislation in the UK under The Animals and Animat Prod-
problems.
ucts(ExaminationforResidues andMaximumResidueLim-
 In this programme, authorised veterinary drugs are adminis-
its) Regulations 1997 (S1 1997/1729)
tered to Thoroughbred horses and samples collected and
Despite recommendations to the veterinary profession that
analysed until the drug (or metabolites or isomers) are
it is inadvisable to admimister procaine benzylpenicillin to
undetectable. The published detection times represent the
horses in training, there continue to be positive findings for
longest times recorded by any of the participating European
procaine in post-competition samples. The drug combina-
drug testing laboratories using the current methods for con-
tion is valuable for prolonging the duration of antibacterial
firnatory analysis.
activity, but since procaine is a basic drug its urinary con-
 This initiative for providing drug detection information to
centration is governed by the pH of the urine. It may be
veterinarians is compleimented by an EHSLC Electi ve Test-
detected in racehorse urine for several days after topical
ing programme, whereby an analytical service is offered to
administration (even from topically applied cerate esters
racehorse trainers who wish to establish before a race that
drugs given in essential veterinary treatment will not give
for over a month after injection. A course of the soluble
rise to positive post-race analyses.
sodium salt of benizylpenicillin should be used if treatment
Desensitised and hypersensitised limbs. The Federation
against penicillin-sensitive bacteria is required.
Pharmacokinetics. Delayed absorption and excretion may
Equestre Internationale (FEl) states that no horse shall be
allowed to compete following neurectomy on a limb nor
occur following intramuscular injection or oral administra-
when any limb has been temporarily or permanently desen-
tion. Since absorption is related to vascularity and lipid sol-
ubility, inadvertent injection into fatty tissue or between
sitised by arnly means. Similarly under the Jockey Club rules
a horse is not qualified to start a race if the animal has been
fascial planes may lead to prolonged excretion.
the subject of a neurectomy operation.
Lipid-soluble substances such as corticosteroids are well
Examination of skin for increased sensitivity may invol ve a
absorbed following intra-articular injection and may be
detected in the urine.
clinical evaluation in addition to swabbing the limb to col-
lect samples or the collection of bandages or other material
Absorption of drugs across mucous membranes can be
to be analysed for prohibited substances.
 Oxygen and intravenous fluid therapy. At FEI events,
inhalants may be detectable in urine. Nebulisation can pro-
injections of saline fluids, electrolyte solutions, and glucose
duce high plasma-drug concentrations due to absorption
solutions may be administered with the written approval of
through the alveolar surface.
 Consideration should be given to the content and timing of
the Veterinary Commission or Delegate. Administration of
oxygen must be made by the use of an intubation tube only,
application of shampoos and other substances for skin. Cau-
tion should be exercised when applying topical NSAIDs
inserted into a single nostril. The use of any form of mask is
forbidden. Any horse which has had oxygen or normal
because these substances can be absorbed through the skin
nutrients administered at the conclusion of Phase D at
of the horse or dog and consequently detected in the urine.
If the epidermis is damaged, the permeable underlying der-
Three-day Events or after the Marathon at Driving Events
must be clinically examined by the Veterinary Commission
mis allows the passage of lipid-soluble and water-soluble
or Delegate before the next stage at these events.
molecules. Care must be takerl with topical applications
such as oil of wintergreen, which contains methyl sali-
cylate, especially when abrasions are present.
Testing of animals
Dimethyl sulfoxide (dimethyl sulphoxide, DMSO) pos-
sesses pharmacological properties of its own, but is also
Forensic analysis of urine or blood samples from competing
used as a vehicle for other drugs whose traniscutaneous
 animals is undertaken at designated laboratories. Any other
absorption may be enhanced. This is particularly applicable
body fluid or biological material, such as vomit from Grey-
to substances with a molecular weight of less than 3000.
hounds, may also be examined if necessary. For samples
In many cases, the elimination time of some of the compo-
taken from racehorses, the procedures involved in the anal-
nents of a compound preparation may be unknown or
 ysis and counter-analysis (confirmatory analysis undertaken
uncertain. If such a preparation is to be administered to an
animal without the certain knowledge that all residues will
 by an independent review body before a sample can finally
have been excreted before the competition or show the
be declared positi ve.
Prescribing for animals used in competitions 
25
Typically, samples are collected after performance but rules
Theobromine and arsenic can arise as a result of feed corl-
do not preclude examination at any stage of competition
tamination. Theobromine from cocoa products is often
and animals may be tested more than once during multi-
introduced into compound feeds during manufacture.
stage competitions under FEI regulations. Under NGRC
The adrenal cortex secretes hydrocortisone (cortisol) in
rules, Greyhounds are randomly chosen by a steward of the
physiologically significant amounts, and a threshold in
NGRC at a race or trial meeting and subjected to sampling.
urine for this substance has been set. Urinary levels of this
A subsequent positive result may lead to a retrospective dis-
substance can be affected by the administration either of
qualification of the dog with confiscation of prize money
corticosteroids or of specific releasing hormones.
 and an enquiry by the NGRC.
The estranediol:estrenediol ratio in urine is used to detect
Generally, the amount of a substance found in a sample
the administration of nandrolone in male horses. If a sam-
taken from a competing animal is irrelevant in determining
ple exceeds the threshold set for testosterone or other
whether or not there has been a breach of the rules, except
endogenous substance, the horse may be submitted for fur-
for those substances with threshold concentrations specified
ther examination to establish whether the amount of the
in the Jockey Club, FEI, and Hurlingham Polo Association
substance could be produced naturally by the animal.
rules (see below). FEI regulations state that if a prohibited
In a departure from the normal procedure of establishing
substance is detected on analysis, its presence is assumed to
thresholds in post-race blood or urine samples, the quantita-
be the result of a deliberate attempt, on the part of the per-
tion of available carbon dioxide can be undertaken using
son responsible, to affect the performance of the horse.
pre-race samples.
NGRC rules put the onus of responsibility on the trainer in
Occasionally a prohibited substance has been found in the
charge of the Greyhound. A minimum detectable level of
urine of a horse and the source of the substance has not been
any prohibited substance is regarded as a positive, even
established. Therefore the Jockey Club recommends that
though it may fall below the minimum effecti ve (therapeu-
trainers retain samples of feedstuffs used for the particular
tic) concentration for that drug. The official laboratory
 horse and any coding details that appear on the feed packag
(Horseracing Forensic Laboratory) prefers to work with
ing. This advice is particularly important because prohib-
urine samples rather than blood or other bodily samples.
ited substances can arise from dietary sources, for example,
 the sympathomimetic hordenine derived from some barley
 products, the opioid morphine from poppies, and the alka-
loid hyoscine and its isomers from soya bean meal.
Horses
Medication in equine competitions
Jockey Club list of threshold levels
Several autonomous bodies produce their own rules on
Maximum permissibte concentration
medication control based on a list of prohibited substances.
In essenice these can be regarded as variations on the rules
Totalarsenic
0.3 micrograms/mL in urine
of the Jockey Club (Rules of racing and instructions) or of
Available carbon
37 millimoles/L in plasma
the Federation Equestre Internationale (FEl) (Veterinary
dioxide
regulations). An exception to this is the Hurlingham Polo
Association Directive The wefare of ponies and the misuse
Dimethy]
15 micrograms/mL in urine or
of drugs, which includes a list of permitted substances (see
sulfoxide
1 microgram/mL in plasma
below).
Hydrocortisone
1 microgram/mL in urine
The Jockey Club and FEI describe a prohibited substance as
a substance originating externally whether or not it is
Estranediolin male
5α-estrane-3B, 17α-diol to
horses (other than
5(10)-estrene-3B, 17α-dio] in urine
endogenous to the horse and which is contained in the list of
geldings)
at a ratio of 1
prohibited substances. “Substance’ includes the metabolites
of the substance and the isomers or biological indicators
Methoxytyramine
4 micrograms free and conjugated
(including their metabolites) of such substance.
3-methoxy tyramine/mL in urine
Threshold levels have been established for certain sub-
Salicylic acid
750 micrograms/mL in urine or
stanices that are commonly detected in equine urine sam-
6.5 micrograms/mL in plasma
ples. Such substances may occur in ordinary diets, or may
be endogenous to the horse, or may arise as a result of con-
Theobromine
2 micrograms/mL in urine
tamination.
Testosterone (free
0.02 micrograms free and congugated testo-
Salicylic acid can be derived directly from ingested plant
and
sterone/mL in urine from geldings or
materials. Lucerne, in particular, is rich in salicylic acid and
conjugated)
0.055 micrograms free and congugated testo-
sterone/mL in urine from fllies and mares
significant quantities of dimethyl sulfoxide in forensic
(unless in foal)
samples from racehorses.
26 Guidance on prescribing
JockeyClublistofprohibited substances
Substances acting on the skin (eg hypersensitising agents)
Substances acting on the blood systenm
Substances acting on the nervous system
Substances acting on the irmrmune systerm other than those in
Substances acting on the cardiovascular systerm
licensed vaccines against infectious agents
Substances acting on the respiratory system
Substances acting on the endocrine system including endocrine
Substances acting on the digestive system
secretions and their synthetic counterparts
Substances acting on the urinary system
Antipyretics, analgesics and anti-inflarmmatory substances
Substances acting on the reproductive system
Cytotoxic substances
Substances acting on the musculoskeletal system
Masking agents
Substances acting on the blood system
Substances acting on the immune system other than those in
licensed vaccines against infecious agents
The Hurlingham Polo Association list of maximum
Substances acting on the endocrine systerm; endocrine secretions
and their synthetic counterparts
permissible concentrations
Masking agents
For the purposes of clarity these include:
Maxinum permissibte
Antipyretics, analgesics and anti-inflammatory substances
concentration
Cytotoxic substances
Phenylbutazone with
10 micrograms/mL in plasma
Antihistamines
Diuretics
oxyphenbutazone
Local anaesthetics
Flunixin
10 micrograms/mL in plasma
Muscle relaxants
Respiratory stimulants
Note. lf phenylbutazone and flunixin are used together the concen-
Sex hormones, anabolic agents and corticosteroids
tration of either must be less than 5 micrograms/mL
Substances affecting blood coagulation
The Hurlingham Polo Association list of permitted
FEIlist of theshold levels
 substances
Drug
Antibiotics except procaine penicillin
Maximum permisibte concentration
Flunixin
625 micrograms/mL in urine or
lsoxsuprine
Salicylic acid
Phenylbutazone
5.4 micrograms/mL in plasma
Regumate [altrenogest]
Theobromine
2 micrograms/mL in urine
Sputolosin [dembrexine hydrochloride]
Ventipulmin [clenbutero] hydrochloride]
Estranediol in male
5α-estrane-3B, 17α- diol to
Vi-Sorbin [iron and vitamin B substances]
horses (other than
5(10)-estrene-3B, 17c-diol in urine
geldings)
The following drugs are only permitted if prior declaration
at a ratio not exceeding 1
 of their administration has beenn made:
Dimethy]
15 micrograms/mL in urine or
Diuretics
sulfoxide
1 microgram/mL in plasma
Local anae sthetics
Hydrocortisone
1 microgram/mL in urine
Vaccination ofhorses
Available carbon
37 millimoles/L in plasma
dioxide
All competing horses should be protected against tetanus,
Testosterone
0.02 micrograms free and congugated testo-
although this is not a mandatory requirement under any
(geldings)
sterone/mL in urine from geldings, or
rules. However, the Jockey Club and the FEI insist that
0.055 micrograms free and congugated testo-
horses or ponies that compete under their regulations are
sterone/mL in urine from fillies and mares
vaccinated against equine influenza.
(unless in foal)
Many showgrounds require entrants to be adequately vacci-
 nated against influenza, whether or not such a requirement
FEIlist of prohibited substances
is incorporated into the rules of the organising authority.
This also applies to any horse or pony entering property
Substances acting on the nervous system
owned, used or controlled by the horseracing authorities,
Substances acting on the cardiovascular system
unless the property is common ground. Foals less than 6
Substances acting on the respiratory systerm
months old are exempt, providing the dam is fully vacci-
Substances acting on the digestive system other than oral raniti-
nated before foaling.
dine,cimetidine and omeprazole
There must be irrefutable evidenice that the vaccination
Substances acting on the urinary system
Substances acting on the reproductive system other than altreno-
 record applies to the animal presented and all entries must
gest given under specified conditions for the treatment of oestrus
be signed and stamped by a veterinarian. For racehorses, the
related behavioural problems
Jockey Club require entries to be endorsed in the horse's
Substances acting on the musculoskeletal system
passport, and does not accept entries which have been
Prescribing for animals used in competitions  27
altered in any way. An incorrect endorsement must be com-
tonics or other medicaments being excreted in the urine,
pletely deleted and a new endorsement of the whole entry
and interfering with the interpretation of any tests. With
made.
regard to oestrus control, it is important to note that only
 Jockey Club rules. Two injections for primary vaccination
 products that are specifically authorised may be used. Prod-
must be given not less than 21 days and no more than 92
 ucts authorised in the UK include products containing meg-
days apart. Horses should have received a booster between
estrol
acetate,
medroxyprogesterone
acetate,
10
150 and 215 days after the second injection of the vaccine.
methyltestosterone. The NGRC is examining the phasing
Following the initial course (primary vaccination and first
 out of use of the current oestrus suppressants in the light of
booster), a booster injection must be gi ven each year.
FEI rules. Two injections for primary vaccination must be
cine to prevent oestrus.
given no less than 21 days and no more than 92 days apart.
Medication control in coursing hounds is based on prohib-
A booster injection must be given each succeeding 6
ited substances.
months (effective from 1 January 2005).
Under both sets of rules, vaccinations given by a veterinar-
ian, who is the owner of the horse at the time of vaccination,
National Coursing Club list of prohibited substances
are not accepted. The Jockey Club extend this to exclude
vaccinations given by a veterinarian who is the trainer or
Substances acting on the central nervous system
who is named on the Register of Stable Employees as being
Substances acting on the autonomic nervous system
Substances acting on the cardiovascular system
employed by the trainer of the horse.
Substances affecting the gastro-intestinal function
 No horse may compete or enter competition premises until
Substances affecting the immune systerm and its response
7 days after vaccination. When calculating this interval, the
Antibiotics, synthetic and anti-viral substances
day of vaccination should not be included. Horses need
Anihistamines
 only have completed a primary vaccination course before
Anti-malarials
competition. It is not necessary to wait until after the first
Antipyretics, analgesics and anthi-inflammatory substances
booster. Annual boosters may be given on the same day in
Diuretics
conisecutive years.
Local anaesthetics
The above are minimum requirements.
Muscle relax ants
Respiratory stimulants
Greyhounds and coursing hounds
Sex hormones, anabolic agents and corticosteroids
Endocrine secretions and their synthetic counterparts
Substances affecting blood coagulation
Medication in canine competitions
Cytotoxic substances.
Drug use in racing Greyhounds is controlled by the
Vaccination of Greyhounds
National Greyhound Racing Club (NGRC). The NGRC
Rules of racing do not specifically prohibit particular sub-
The NGRC requires that all Grey hounds in authorised ken-
stances, however, their rules prohibit the administration to a
nels are fully vaccinated against distemper, viral hepatitis,
-qns <ue yo Anguenb Aue ^osn edoidu Xue ioy punoyfen
Leptospira canicola,Leptospira icterohaemorrhagiae,par-
stance which by its nature could affect the performance or
vovirus, and any other required vaccination as may be noti-
prejudice the well-being of the dog, the origin of which cari-
fied from time to time. Vaccines authorised in the UK must
not be traced to normal and ordinary feeding or care. The
be used. Documentary evidenice of the vaccinations must be
rules also state that it is an offence to have in one's charge a
 provided for subsequent entry in the identity book. Booster
Greyhound which showed the presence of any such sub-
vaccinations are required at 12-monthly intervals from the
stanice. Some Greyhounds may test positive to traces of
 date of the initial puppy inoculations.
anti-inflammatory agents, barbiturates, and antibacterials
that have come from consumption of knacker meat. The
NGRC advises against the feeding of knacker meat, bread,
and all breakfast cereals containing chocolate and prohibits
Pigeons
the feeding of knacker meat within 24 hours of a race or
tri al.
Racing pigeons that are kept for racing and showing are
Professional and  owner trainers must maintain  their
subject to The Diseases of Pouttry Order 1994, as amended,
Trainer's Treatment Book, in which any tonic, medicament,
and to the rules of the six controlling organisations: the
Or other substance administered or applied to a Greyhound
Royal Pigeon Racing Association, Irish Homing Union,
must be recorded.
 North of England Homing Union, North West Homing
Except for preparations that are specifically authorised for
Urion, Scottish Homing Urion, and Welsh Homing Union.
the suppression/postponement of oestrus and are used under
There are no requirements or restrictions on the medication
the authority of a veterinarian, no substance should be used
 and vaccination of other flying breeds of pigeons, birds kept
for at least 7 days before an official trial or race. This rule is
for display flying and showing, or for pigeons kept solely
anl attempt to avoid the possibility of the constituents of
for showing
28  Guidance on prescribing
Medication of racing pigeons
  ,   e e 
exhibited. Action may be taken should any dog act in a way
 The Royal Pigeon Racing Association rules prohibit the use
 markedly different from that described as its nomal tem-
of ‘anabolic steroids, corticosteroids, and beta-agonists’ in
 perament. There are no regulations regarding vaccination
birds used for racing. The five Homing Unions have no 
written rules regarding medication of racing pigeons but
under Kennel Club regulations not to bring to the show any
they would take appropriate action, including testing of
 dog that has contracted or been knowingly exposed to any
birds, where the use of these substanices for racing are sus-
 infectious or contagious disease during the 21 days prior to
pected.
the show.
Vaccination of racing pigeons
Medication and vaccination of cats
Under The Diseases of Pouftry Order I994, as amended, anl
Similarly, the Governing Council of the Cat Fancy (GCCF)
organiser of a show or race which takes place wholly or
 partly in Great Britain must ensure that all racing pigeons
likely to change the animal's appearance relative to the
entered for the show or race have beenl vaccinated against
t‘Standard of Points' Any treatment, including sedation,
made of every race or show for which a bird is entered by
 the person who owns or keeps racing pigeons. The rules for
All cats exhibited at shows under GCCF rules must have
the Royal Pigeon Racing Association and the five Homing
current vaccination against feline infectious enteritis (feline
Unions all contain a strict code of practice for paramyxovi-
panleucopenia), and feline viral rhinotracheitis and feline
rus vaccination.
calicivirus (cat flu). The full course or booster, in accord-
ance with manufacturers recommendations, must have
Show animals
beeri completed more than 7 days before the show. The cer-
tificate must be issued by a veterinary practice or hospital
Medication and vaccination of dogs
and signed by a veterinarian or listed veterinary nurse,
under the direction of a veterinarian.
The Kennel Club consider that nothing may be done which
is calculated to decei ve. No substance which alters the natu-
Medication and vaccination of livestock
ral colour, texture, or body of the coat may be present in the
ON mous sy suunp su Aue pe ssodind Aue 1oy jeoo soop
At major livestock shows, similar rules apply. Action will
 be taken against any ex hibitor who is found to have admin-
 of the dog may be present on the dog for any purpose at any  istered, or permitted the administration of, any tranquilliser
time during the show. Any other substance (other than  or other drugs, which may in any way affect the perform-
water) must not be allowed to remain in the coat or on any ance of the animal, or have the effect of making it behave in
29
Prescribing
for horses
Contributor:
Drug administration. In horses and ponies drugs are
A R S Bar MA, VetMB, PhD, DipECVS, CertSAO, DEO, DVR,
usually supplied for individual animal treatment and can be
MRCVS
administered via a number of routes.
This section provides general and specific advice on pre-
For parenteral administration, injections may be given sub-
scribing for horses and ponies; lack of referenice to a partic-
cutaneously, intramuscularly, intravenously, or intra-articu-
ular drug does not necessarily imply safety and efficacy
larly. Particular care should be taken when injecting drugs
because breed and individual variation should be consid-
intra-articularly because the consequences of intra-articular
ered. The conditions affecting horses and their requirements
sepsis are severe in equines; an aseptic technique should
will differ according to the area, housing environment, and
always be used. When injecting intramuscularly, the hind
maniagement system used.
quarter musculature (gluteals, semimembranous, or semi-
Under European legislation, the European Commisssion
tendinous), pectoral musculature, or cervical musculature
may be used. Not more than 30 mL volume should be
considers horses as food-producing animals by providing
meat for human consumption. Marketing authorisations for
tiorl.
Horses are particularly sensitive to components of
be given if the active substances are listed in annexes I, II,
or II1 of Regulation 2377/90/EC. This excludes several
parenteral preparations. Oil-based formulations or unbuff-
drugs with marketing authorisations for use in horses in the
ered solutions or suspensions may cause irritation and tissue
UK such as phenylbutazone, meclofenamic acid, eltenac,
damage at the site of injection.
ceftiofur, metronidazole, dihy drostreptomycin, methylpred-
A limited number of drugs are available for oral medication
nisolone, predrisolone, betamethasone, halothane, hyoscine
including anthelmintics, some antibacterials, and some
butylbromide, and quinalbarbital. The legislation is cur-
NSAIDs. These can either be administered in the feed or as
rently being reviewed and amended, and no action is antici-
an oral paste.
pated to regularise this until revised legislation is put into
 Drugs can also be administered by nebulisation and by topi-
place. This is expected towards the end of 2005. Therefore
 cal application in equines.
the above drugs continue to be available.
Drug absorption and metabolism. In horses, absorp-
It is recognised that not all horses are intended for food pro-
tion of some drugs admimistered in the feed or after feeding
duction and amendments to the legislation have been made
can be delayed and show a biphasic pattern because unab-
that allow use of products without established MRLs for
sorbed drug may be conveyed to the large intestine where
specified horses (Horse Passports (England) Regulations
further absorption takes place.For example,phenyl-
2004). It is essential that all horses are clearly identified by
butazone may be partly absorbed from the small intestine
a passport that states whether or rot the horse is intended
with further absorption occurring 8 to 12 hours later from
for human consumption. Horses declared as not intended
the large intestine.
for slaughter for human consumption in Section IX Part I1
Antimicrobial therapy can cause severe disturbances of bac-
terial fermentation in the colon and caecum of adult horses.
or pet animal under the ^cascade'. These horses must never
Whenever such a reaction occurs, it is recommended that
be used for human consumption. Horses declared as
the antimicrobial be withdrawn.If severe colitis erisues,
intended for human consumption under Section IX Part
aggressive medical and fluid therapy may be required. Any
IIIA may be similarly treated provided that either the ^cas-
antimicrobial can potentially cause such a disturbance. The
cade’ provisions in respect of food-producing animals or a
risk may increase where administration is associated with
6-month withdrawal period is observed if products contain-
stress such as surgery.
ing substances without MRLs are ermployed. Medicines
The use of lincosaimide and macrolide antibacterials should
administered must be listed in Section IX Part IllB of the
be avoided in horses, with the exception of oral admirnistra-
 passport and the owner informed of the withdrawal period.
 tion of erythromycin estolate in conjunction with rifampicin
Horses declared as intended for human consumption under
for the treatment of Rhodococcus equi infection in foals.
Section IX Part I11A and treated with Regulation 2377/90
Fluoroquinolones should not be administered to skeletally
Annex IV products must not go for slaughter for hurman
immature horses because these drugs may damage growth
consumption.
cartilage. Aminoglycosides, particularly gentamicin, are
Further information available:
Toutinely used for treatment in horses. Gentamicin is poten-
BVA Code of practice on medicines
tially nephrotoxic and should be used with care in horses
www.defra.gov.uk/animalh/tracing/horses/horses_index.htm
www.beva.org.uk
tion of feed containing tylosin, tiamulin, or monensin may
DEFRA helpline:0207 904 6216
be fatal to horses and other Equidae, because of slow
VMD: 01932 336911.
hepatic metabolism.
30 Guidance on prescribing
NSAIDs are used extensively to treat pain, oedema, and tis-  overdosage. Phenothiazines such as acepromazine should
sue destruction in inflammatory conditions in horses. Phe-  be used with caution in male horses and should not be used
nylbutazone is widely used in horses but has a marrow in breeding stallions because these drugs may cause paraly-
given. Some authorities consider carprofen to be less
ulcerogenic and is therefore the NSAID of choice for foals.
adrenoceptor agonists for sedation. Butorphanol adminis-
Corticosteroids are occasionally used in equines for condi-
tration can occasionally cause extreme excitation. Opioids
tions such as allergic respiratory disease; they are reported
 in general tend to be excitatory in horses (increasing arterial
to be capable of inducing laminitis in suscepti ble animals.
blood pressure and spinal reflex activity, for example).
The majority of sedatives and analgesics have wide safety
Metabolites of pethidine may cause hyperexcitement,
margins, however all sedatives canl cause marked cardiovas-
especially if combined with monamine oxidase inhibitors.
cular alterations. The alpha,-adrenoceptor agonists (xyla-
There is limited informationl on breed differenices in reac-
zine, romifidine, and detomidine) are useful sedatives and
 tions to particular drugs in horses and ponies. It is impor-
analgesics. Xylazine has the shortest duration of action. Ati-
 tant that suspected adverse drug reactions are reported
pamezole has beern used successfully in horses+ to reverse
to the VMD under the Suspected Adverse Reaction
excessive sedation and ataxia resulting from inadvertent
Surveillance Scheme (SARSS).
31
Prescribing
g for donkeys
Contributor:
deciding the maximum volume for intramuscular injection
A F Trawford BVSc, MSc, MRCVS
at any one site.
Drugs for oral medication, particularly for chronic condi-
This section provides general and specific advice on pre-
tions, may be admiristered in the feed (molasses sand-
scribing for donkeys. Lack of reference to a particular drug
nd s  ss   s
does not necessarily imply safety and efficacy. Breed and
Drug absorption and metabolism. Drug distribution
individual variation should be considered. The conditions
and half-life have been demonstrated to differ between
affecting donkeys and appropriate treatment will often
horses and donkeys. NSAIDs such as phenylbutazone and
depend on the geographical location, housing, environment,
flunixin have inicreased volume of distribution and more
and maniagement system used.
rapid clearance times in donkeys than in horses. The clini-
In the EU, donkeys are considered as food-producing ani-
mals, that is they provide meat for human consumption.
of administration are required for phenylbutazone and flu-
Withdrawal periods for meat stated by the manufacturer
nixin in donkeys compared to horses. Caution should be
must be observed. If no withdrawal periods are given,
exercised in using phenylbutazone in older donkeys and
standard withdrawal periods must be applied. Under The
those with hepatic or renal impairment, especially for long-
Medicines (Restrictions on the Administration of Veterinary
term pain management. The signs of development of other
Medicinal Products) Regulations 1994 (S1 1994/2987),as
conditions such as colic or laminitis may be masked when
amended, if the animal is a food-producing animal, the vet-
phenylbutazone is used for chronic conditions. The risks
erinarian or person acting under his direction may only
 associated with gastric ulceration must be balanced against
administer a product if the pharmacologically active sub-
the necessity for pain relief and the use of an alternative
stances it contains are found in a product authorised for use
 NSAID or adjunct medication may be considered.
in food-producing animals.
Ketamine has a shorter half-life in donkeys than in horses.
In some countries, such as the UK and Ireland, donkeys are
Hence, when used in conjunction with alpha-adrenoceptor
kept as comparion animals or for leisure activities and are
stimulants, ketamine produces a shorter period of general
not usually intended for human consumption. Under the
Horse Passports (England) Regulations 2004, donkeys
anesthesia in donkeys. Higher doses of xylazine and keta-
must have a full passport, including veterinary medicines
mine are required for some individuals, particularly in don-
pages (Section IX). This requirement is to ensure that no
keys that are not used to being handled, that are more
Equidae enter the human food chain after having been
boisterous, and certain types of donkeys such as miniature
administered a medicine that is unauthorised for use in
donkeys. The duration of ketamine in combination with
food-producing animals. If the passport declarations indi-
xylazine anaesthesia can be extended using bolus doses of
cate that the donkey is not for human consumption, the
thiopental up to a maximum of 3 repeated doses. The inclu-
range of medicines that may be used will not exclude those
sion of butorphanol along with detomidine, xylazine, or
whose pharmacologically active ingredients are not author-
 romifidine is used to provide standing sedation, which can
be followed with ketamine to produced a more prolonged
tion available from:
and enhanced general anaesthesia. Donkeys are more sensi-
BVA Code of practice on medicines
tive than horses to guaifenesin. A total intravenous anaes-
www.defra.gov.uk/animalh/tracing/horses/horses_index.htm
 thesic technique using guaifenesin along with xylazine and
www.beva.org.uk
DEFRA helpline: 0207 904 6216
ketamine can be safely employed in donkeys. However,
·
VMD: 01932 336911.
careful monitoring of the depth of anaesthesia is essential.
Acepromazine in combination with etorphine (Immobilon)
Drug administration. Drugs are usually prescribed for
neuroleptanalgesia must not be used in donkeys.
individual animal treatment in donkeys.
Research on antibiotics, such as oxytetracycline and poten-
Parenteral administration includes injections gi ven subcuta-
neously, intramuscularly, intravenously, and occasionally
tiated suphonamides, indicates that more frequent dosing is
intra-articularly. Particular care should be taken when
 often required in donkeys.
injecting drugs intra-articularly because the conisequences
 The full pharmacokinetics of drugs used in donkeys have
of intra-articular sepsis are particularly severe in Equidae;
 niot been fully evaluated and accurate dosages have not been
an aseptic technique should always be used. When injecting
 established. Therefore medication authorised for horses
intramuscularly, the hindquarter musculature (gluteals,
remains the reference point when treating donkeys.
semimembranous, or semi tendinous), pectoral musculature,
Any contra-indications for medications used in horses
Or cervical musculature may be used. Consideration should
 should be taken as applicable for donkeys unless stated oth-
be given to the size and body condition of the donkey when
 erwise. For example, acepromazine should be used with
32 Guidance on prescribing
caution in male donkeys and should not be used in breeding
 Laminitis is frequently seen in donkeys. It often results
stallions because it may cause paralysis of the retractor  from poor feed control (excess intake of carbohydrates),
turbances of bacterial fermentation in the colon and caecum  larly seen as a result of repeated acute laminitic episodes,
of adult donkeys, particularly in stressed animals, and
which may or may not have received treatment. Acepro-
should always be part of an holistic approach to disease
 mazine and phenylbutazone are used to treat laminitis,
management.
along with thick foot pad bandaging, rest, and ensuring that
predisposing factors are addressed. Acepromazine should
horses. Hence, assessment and effective pain management
be reduced with time and clinical response or if the donkey
needs to be more carefully evaluated to avoid underestimat-
becomes too sedated.
ing the seriousness of a condition and allowing needless
 Routine endoparasite control in donkeys can be carried out
suffering.
inl a similar maniner to horses. Ivermectin based products are
Hyperlipaemia commonly occurs in donkeys. It is often
frequently used, though moxidectin is now gaining popular-
caused by an underlying condition but may be exacerbated
ity. Infection with Dictyocaulus arnfieidi alone rarely
by stress induced, for example, by social isolation or trans-
 causes clinical problems in donkeys but it may exacerbate
port. When treating the condition, in addition to providing
respiratory infectionis resulting from other causes. Due to
supportive treatment in the form of fluid therapy, pain
the reported incidence of this parasite in donkeys, particu-
relief, and nutritional support, it is important that any under-
 larly when they are co-grazed with horses for whom lung-
lying problems are identified and treated. The type of nutri- worm does cause a significant clinical problem, a general
tional support required depends on the severity of the control strategy is recommended with ivermectin orally
hyperlipaemia, assessed by measuring plasma-triglyceride  being the treatment of choice.
concentration and observation of clinical signs exhibited.
 There are limited drugs authorised for use in donkeys. It is
Anl essential part of treatment is to maintaini some form ofj
 important that suspected adverse drug reactions are
yoluntary feed intake whether by hand feeding, offering
 reported to the VMD under the Suspected Adverse
favourite feed, titbits, or fresh grazing. If donkeys are  Reaction Surveillance Scheme (SARSS). The table
unwilling to take food this way or in sufficient quantities, 
 provides dosages for commonly used medicines.
 Oral nutrition as a drench or via nasogastric tube should be Further information on donkeys is available from:
instituted. If ileus is present,then parenteral fluid and nutri-·The Veterinary Department, The Donkey Sanictuary
tional support are required, and nothing should be given
vets @ thedonkeysanctuar y.com
orally.
E D Svendsen The Professional Handbook of the Don-
key 4th ed. Devon: The Donkey Sanctuary, 2004.
Prescribing for donkeys 33
Table 1 Doses of drugs for donkeys!
Drug
Dose
Condition
Aceprommazine
day 1, 50 micrograms/kg p.0.,
laminitis
then 500 micrograms/kg p.o. twice daily
Butorphano]
25 micrograms/kg i.v.
improved sedation, in combination with
detomidine (10 micrograms/kg i. v) or
xylazine (1.1 mg/kg i.v. )
Detomidine
10-20 micrograms/kg i.v.
sedation
Detomidine +
20 micrograms/kg i.v. +
field anaesthesia
Ketarmine1
2.2 mg/kgi.v.
Carprofen
700 micrograms/kg twice daily
pain, inflammation
Fenbendazole1
30-60 mg/kg p.0. as a single dose or
roundworms
s
Flunixin
1.1 mg/kg twice daily
 pain, inflammation
lvermectin1
 200 micrograms/kg p.o.
roundworms, lungworms (Dictyocautus
amfietdi)
Mebendazole1
5-10 mg/kg p.0.
roundworms
15-20 mg/kg p.o. daily for 5 days.
lungworms (Dictyocautus arnfietdi)
Moxidectin
400 micrograms/kg p.o.
roundworms, lungworms (Dictyocautus
amfietdi)
Permethrin!
0.1 mL/kg by 'pour-on'application (formulation to use:
aid in control of sweetitch
permethrin 4%)
Pheny lbutazone
day 1, 4.4 mg/k g i.v., then 2.2-4.4 mg p.0. twice daily
pain, inflammation
Pyrantel embonate1
19 mg/kgp.o.
roundworms
38 mg/kg p.0.
tapeworms(Anoptocephata perfotiata)
Triclabendazole
12 mg/kgp.o.
flukes
Xylazine
1.1 mg/kg i.v.
sedation
Xylazine +
1.1 mg/kgi.v. +
field anaesthesia
Ketarmine1
2.2 mg/kgi.v.
Xylazine +
1.6 mg/kg
anae sthesia for mules, feral or unhandled
Detomidine +
donkeys
Ketarmine1
3.3 mg/kg
Xylazine +
approx. 1 mL/kg of solution
maintenance of anaesthesia after
Ketarmine +
solution: 333 mL guaifenesin 150 mg/mL, + ketarmine 2 g, +
induction; monitoring of the depth of
Guaifenesin
xylazine 500 mg made up to 1 litre with warm NaC] 0.9%
anaesthesia is essenthial
solution
Xylazine +
1.1 mg/kgi.v.+
extended feld anaesthesia
Ketarmine1 +
2.2 mg/kgi.v.+
Thiopental 5%
1 drug doses for preparations that have a marketing authorisation for use in this species in the UK. Therefore, unless marked ', the drug or
doses stated are not authorised for this species
34
Prescribing
g for cattle
Contributor:
A H Andrews BVetMed, PhD, MBIAC, MRCVS
found in a product authorised for use in food-producing ani-
mals. This can create problems for animal welfare, for
While this section provides advice on prescribing for cattle,
example with general anaesthetics. In addition, the use of
it is of necessity very brief. Therefore lack of reference to a
particular drug does not necessarily imply safety and effi-
drugs and medicines in cattle may be restricted or prohib-
ited. For example,use of chloramphenicol in food-produc
cacy or lack of these because breed and individual variation
ing species is not possible because potential residues in
should also be considered. The conditions affecting cattle
human food may lead to bacterial resistance and, following
and their medicinal requirements will differ according to
contact, aplastic anaemia in humans. The admi nistration of
the use (dairy or beef), country, region, environment,
stilbenes is confined to companion and laboratory animals,
whether the animals are housed or outdoor, and the manage-
and farm animals kept for research purposes because of
ment system used.
possible carcinogenicity in humans.
Cattle constitute food-producing animals providing meat,
Although in-feed production enhancers are not therapeutic
milk, or both for human consumption. Withdrawal periods
agents, their phasing out within the EU may result in
for milk and meat stated by the manufacturer should be
increased usage of therapeutic agents for some alimentary
observed. These are specific for the stated dose and dura-
problems.
tion of therapy given in the manufacturer s data sheet. Milk
Drug administration. Drugs may be prescribed for indi-
from cows should gernierally be excluded from human con-
sumption if the animal is ill or in poor health, particularly if
-uup io ^youaip Aq poy su u uogeopeu dnoia io penpia
ing water. For parenteral administration in cattle, injections
the animal has a reproductive tract infection or mammary
may be given subcutaneously, intramuscularly, or intrave-
gland disease, or is being fed or treated with any medica-
nously. Occasionally injections may be given intra-articu-
ment that makes the milk unsuitable for human consump-
larly, intraconjunctivally, or intraperitoneally for specific
tion, or if the animal has a very low milk yield (less than 2
conditions. In adult cattle when administering intramuscu-
litres per day). Usage of a medicine authorised for farm ani-
lar injections, not more than 20 mL should be administered
mals but without a stated milk or meat withdrawal time will
necessitate application of standard withdrawal periods. At
at any one site and proportionally smaller volumes should
be given at one site in younger animals. The rate of drug
present, in the UK, this is 7 days for milk or 28 days for
 meat. Usage outwith the authorised treatment regimen will
absorption can vary depending on the site of the intramus-
cular injection. Wherever there is a choice of injection site,
necessitate application of a withdrawal period not less than
then the area used should be one which is not used, or little
the minimum standard withdrawal period. This occurs most
commonly with intramammary treatment for mastitis when
used, for human consumption.
Vaccines to prevent and control many diseases are available
extra tubes are used, or the treatment length is increased or
and can be administered by various routes including subcu-
the interval between treatments is reduced or the treatment
taneous, intramuscular, intranasal, and oral administration.
In all cases, the manufacturer s instructions on site of injec-
are used in combination to treat a disease condition and
tion, dose, and frequency of revaccination should be fol-
again in such cases a withdrawal period at least equal to the
lowed. In many instances it is an advantage to monitor the
mi nimum standard withdrawal period should be obser ved.
efficacy of any herd vaccination programme by milk Or
In the UK, lactating or milking cow intramammary treat-
 blood testing.
ments usually provide the withholding time as milk from
Ruminal boluses that can provide a continuous or pulsatile
release of a drug over a prolonged period have beern devel-
after a certain number of hours or number of milkings if
cows are milked twice daily. With dry cow intramammary
oped for use in cattle for the delivery of anthelmintics,trace
elements, and magnesium. Ruminal boluses should not be
tubes, the minimum time period from administration to the
calving date (minimum dry period, MDP) is stated and sec-
given to cattle weighing less than 100 kg body-weight, that
 ondly the withdrawal time after calving if MDP or more has
do not have a functional rumen, or are less than 3 months of
age. Operators should be trained in the correct method of
occurred.
administration of boluses and suitable restraint. Damage
Under The Medicines(Restrictions on the Administration of
from bolus administration is not always immediately appar-
Veterinary MedicinalProducts) Regulations 1994(S1 1994/
2987), as amended, if the animal is a food-producing ani-
enit.
"Pour-on' formulations are available as anthelmintics,
mal, the veterinarian or person acting under his or her direc-
endectocides, and ectoparasiticides.
Prescribing for cattle 35
Drug absorption and metabolism. Drug absorption  bacterial administration in ruminants, the ruminal
from the gastro-intestinal tract in ruminant species is influ-microflora should be re-established by cud transfer Oor
enced by the volume and pH of the ruminal contents and administration of a proprietary preparation. Probiotics may
whether the drug is subject to metabolism by ruminal
 prove helpful. An alternative is to ensure that drugs are
micro-orgamisms.
delivered directly into the abomasum via the reticular
groove mecharism. This can be achieved by adding the
rapidly in ruminant animals and horses than in pigs. Phe-  calves. In cattle, oral administration of 60 mL of sodium
dose of xylazine administered to cattle is one-tenth of that tive. Spontaneous closure in some individuals givenl oral
used in horses and in other ruminants the dose per kg body-
benzimi dazoles can result in a proportion of the drug being
weight is less.
directly transferred into the abomasum, thus reducing the
Whenever practicable the oral administration of anti-
efficacy of the drug.
microbials to ruminants should be discouraged. Orally
In cattle, rapid intravenous injection of tetracyclines may
administered penicillins or broad-spectrum antimicrobials
 cause cardiovascular collapse due to chelation of calcium,
may disturb microbial fermentation in the rumen in animals
 with consequent vasodilation and myocardial depression.
with a functional rumen resulting in severe digesti ve distur-
There is only limited information available on the breed dif-
bances particularly in the lactating animal when there are
tend to occur following oral administration of sulphona-to the VMD under the Suspected Adverse Reaction
mides or potentiated sulphonamides. Following oral anti-Surveillance Scheme (SARSS).
36
Prescribing for sheep
Contributor:
Drug administration. Drugs may be prescribed for indi-
A H Andrews BVetMed, PhD, MBIAC, MRCVS
vidual or group medication for administration in the feed,
by drench, or drinking water. For parenteral administration
While this section provides advice on prescribing for sheep,
it is of necessity very brief. Therefore lack of reference to a
in sheep, injections may be given subcutaneously, intramus-
particular drug does not necessarily imply safety and effi-
cularly, or intravenously. The rate of drug absorption can
cacy or lack of these because breed and individual variation
vary with the site of the intramuscular injection. Wherever
should be considered. The conditions that affect sheep and
 there is a choice of injection site, then the area used should
be one which is not, or little, used for human consumption.
their medicinal requirements will differ according to the
 If there is a choice of administration by intramuscular or
breed and its use (dairy, meat, fibre), country, region, envi-
subcutaneous routes, then the latter should be used because
ronment, whether the animals are housed or outdoor, and
if damage occurs and the animal is later slaughtered, any
the management system used.
Sheep are kept for fibre production as well as being food-
changes will only be superficial.
Vaccines to prevent and control many diseases are available
producing animals providing meat, milk, or both for human
and can be administered by various routes including subcu-
consumption. Withdrawal periods for milk and meat stated
taneous or intramuscular injection or scarification. In all
by the manufacturer should be observed. When milk with-
cases, the manufacturers instructions on the site of injec-
holding times are stated in data sheets they will usually be
tion, dose, and frequency of revaccination should be fol-
referring to cows' milk and not that from sheep. In some
lowed. Care must be taken with some subcutaneous
data sheets for products used in milking cows, it is indicated
vaccines because they contain an adjuvant to allow slow
'Not to be used in sheep producing milk for human con-
release of the antigen and can result in damage if inadvert-
sumption' However some data sheets do not provide any
ently injected intramuscularly. They can also cause serious
information on sheep milk withdrawal times. Where infor-
damage if accidently self-injected.
mation is not available, it is unsafe to assume the milk with-
Ruminal boluses that provide continuous or pulsatile
holding period will be the same as for dairy cows. Usage of
release of a drug over a prolonged period have been devel-
a medicine authorised for farm animals but without a stated
mi1k or meat withdrawal time will necessitate application of
oped for use ir sheep for the delivery of trace elements and
standard withdrawal periods. At present, in the UK, this is 7
magnesium. Rumi nal boluses are available in different sizes
    y s 8   1 s
that the correct size of bolus is admimistered in order to pre-
authorised treatment regimen, which affects many medi-
vent damage. Damage from boluses is riot always immedi-
cines used in sheep, will necessitate application of a with-
drawal period not less than the minimum standard
ately apparent. When in doubt, smaller boluses should be
withdrawal period; the situation is similar when different
used. Appropriate sized boluses are available for use in
sheep from about 5 weeks of age. Operators should be
 medicines are used conicurrently unless stated other wise.
trained in the correct method of administration of boluses
Under The Medicines(Restrictions on the Administration of
and suitable restraint.
Veterinary MedicinalProducts) Regulations 1994(S11994/
 2987), as amended, if the animal is a food-producing ani-
"Pour-on' formulations, mainly ectoparasiticides, are avail-
able for use on sheep. Some ectoparasiticides are applied as
mal, the veterinarian or person acting under his or her direc-
sheep dips or showering, although in the latter exposure of
tion may only administer a product that contains substances
found in a product authorised for use in food-producing ani-
the whole body surface may niot occur.
mals. This can create problems for animal welfare, for
Drug absorption and metabolism. Drug absorption
from the gastro-intestinal tract in ruminant species is influ-
example with general anaesthetics. In addition, the use of
enced by the volume and pH of the ruminal contents and
drugs and medicines in sheep may be restricted or prohib-
ited. For example, use of chloramphenicol in food-produc-
whether the drug is subject to metabolism by ruminal
micro-organisms.
human food may lead to bacterial resistance and aplastic
Drugs that are extensively metabolised by hepatic micro-
 anaemia from contact in humans. There may be interactions
somal oxidative reactions are, in general, metabolised more
rapidly in ruminant animals and horses than in pigs.
when certain anthelmintics such as some imidazothiazoles
and ectoparasiticides such as organophosphorus compounds
There is variation in absorpti ve ability of copper in different
 are used in combination or within a short period contrary to
 breeds. Therefore whenever copper is to be administered, it
recommendations for use.
is essential that blood tests, liver biopsies, or both are
Prescribing for sheep 37
undertaken and the copper content of the diet determined to
 admimistration of a proprietary preparation. Probiotics may
demonstrate the need for such treatment.
prove helpful. An alternative is to ensure that drugs are
Whenever practicable the oral administration of anti-
 delivered directly into the abomasum via the reticular
microbials to ruminants should be discouraged. Orally
groove mechanism. Reticular groove closure may however
administered penicillins or broad-spectrum antimicrobials  be counterproductive. Spontaneous closure in some individ-
may disturb microbial fermentation in the rumen in animalsuals given oral benzimidazoles can result in a proportion of
with a functional rumen resulting in severe digestive distur-  the drug being transferred into the abomasum, thus
bances particularly in the lactating animal when there are reducing the efficacy of the drug.
effects on appetite and milk production. Least problems
There is only limited information available on the breed dif-
tend to occur following oral administration of some sul-ferences inn reactions to certain drugs in sheep. It is impor-
phonamides or potentiated sulphonamides. Following oral  tant that suspected adverse drug reactions are reported
antibacterial administration in Tuminants, the Tuminal to the VMD under the Suspected Adverse Reaction
microflora should be Te-established by cud transfer or Surveillance Scheme (SARSS).
38
Prescribing
Tor
sieob
Contributor:
authorised for use in other food-producing species. Local
S N Clayton BVSc, MRCVS
anaesthetics are irritant and toxic in kid goats and use is not
recommended. Intravenous or inhalational anaesthetics are
This section provides general and specific advice on pre-
 preferred on welfare grounds for disbudding kids. Disbud-
scribing for goats; lack of reference to a particular drug
does not necessarily imply safety and efficacy because
ding is usually carried out either by masking with halothane
or isoflurane, or by intravenous administration of Saffan
breed and individual variation should be considered. The
(Schering-Plough) at a dose of 1 mL/3.5 kg body-weight.
conditions affecting goats and their requirements will differ
Veterinarians should obtained the owners writtten
according to the area, the housing and grazing environment,
informed consent before anaesthetising goats. Unofficial
and management system used.
surveys suggest a mortality rate of about 1% resulting from
Goats are kept commercially for fibre and milk production.
A smaller number are reared for meat, but the market for
goat meat, though growing, is still small and the value of
Animals thus treated must not enter the human food chain.
Drug administration. For parenteral administration of
meat is therefore usually a secondary consideration when
drugs in goats, subcutaneous and intramuscular, and, where
prescribing. Many goats are kept purely as pets, and their
appropriate, intravenous routes may be used. The rate of
value to the owner often far outstrips the monetary cost of
replacement.
drug absorption of any drug administered intramuscularly
may vary according to the site of injection, which is ideally
There are a limited number of products authorised for goats
one that is minimally used for human consumption.
in the UK. For these products, the manufacturer's stated
Drugs may often be given orally, sometimes in feed or
withdrawal periods must be observed. Where no authorised
water for group treatment.
product is available, The Medicines (Restrictions on the
 Drug absorption and metabolism. Absorption from
Administration of Veterinary Medicinat Products)Regula
 the gastro-intestinal tract in ruminant species is influenced
tions /994 (S1 1994/2987), as amended, stipulate that if the
by the volume and pH of the ruminal contents and by
animal is a food-producing animal, the veterinarian or per-
whether the drug is subject to metabolism by ruminal
sonn acting under his or her direction may onty administer a
product that contains active ingredients found in a product
micro-organisms.
authorised for use in food-producing animals.
Drugs that are extensively metabolised by hepatic micro-
When a product is used in goats that is either not authorised
somal oxidative reactions are, in general, metabolised more
ul pue shid ut ueu sosioy pue sieuue pueuuni ui Aipidei
for use in goats, or is used at a dose rate or for a longer
particular, these drugs, including sulphonamides, are
duration than is quoted in the data sheet for that product,
 metabolised unusually rapidly in pygny goats.
then the use of the product is deemed to be ^off-label: In
Some intramammary preparations are known to persist
such circumstances the standard withdrawal period should
be advised. Where the stated withdrawal period for that
longer in the caprine udder than in that of the bovine.
cies, the veterinarian should recommend a similar or longer
hepatic metabolism is, in goats, about half that for sheep.
Therefore, when treati ng for intestinal worms, if benzimi da-
withdrawal period, at his or her discretion, if the product is
being used ‘off-label'in goats.
zole drenches are used, they should be givenn at twice the
The lack of products specifically authorised for use in goats
dose recommended for sheep, and if levamisole is used, at
1.5 times the ovine dose. The dosage for avermectins is as
problems. In general, for commercial goats, the veterinarian
goats, a faecal egg count is performed about 2 weeks later
should make it clear to the goat keeper when a medicine is
to enisure that treatment has been effective because
anthelmintic resistance in goats is widespread and the
informed consent for use of the product. Similarly for treat-
resistant nematodes can be passed to sheep grazing on the
 e e sanp y pn so so od, u 
authorised for use irn any food-producing animals may not
same pasture. Idiosyncratic reactions to levamisole have
been recorded in individual fibre-producing goats.
be used for human comsumption at any time.
As with any rumi nant, in general, the oral administration
The limited number of products available may also lead to
of antimicrobials to ruminants should be discouraged
specific welfare problems. A particular problem arises with
other than for use in kids up to about 3 weeks of age, which
the use of anaesthetics. At present, no anaesthetic is author-
ised for use in goats and only certain local anaesthetics are
may be affected by similar rieonatal infections to lambs and
calves, and which respond to similar treatments. The oral
Prescribing for goats 39
use of antirmicrobial drugs in older goats is likely to lead to choice. Lambivac (Intervet) is authorised for use in goats
death from enterotoxaemia and is not recommended. An with booster vaccination recommended every 6 months
exception is oral oxytetracycline widely used in the US for rather than annually as for sheep.
the treatment of chlamydophiliosis, apparently without ill-
 There is only limited information available on breed differ-
effect.
ences in reactions to drugs in goats, and drug reactions in
The use of ‘pour-on’ preparations for the control of
 goats compared to other species. It is important that sus-
endoparasites and ectoparasites in goats is not recom-
 pected adverse drug reactions are reported to the VMD
mended because the products tend to be less readily
under the Suspected Adverse Reaction Surveillance
absorbed through the skin of goats than in other species,
Scheme (SARSS), whether the product is authorised for
with the exception of eprinomectin, which has been
 goats or not. Veterinarianis are reminded that the more infor-
reported to be effective.
mation available, the safer will become the use of medi-
 Other than for anthelmintics, dosages for most preparations
 cines in goats whether those medicines are authorised for
will be the same as for sheep. Antibiotics, a wide range of
use in this species or not.
 -<xo aupngoun sanp neyno pue ‘sanip Aioeueui-que
 Further information on the treatment of goats is available
tocin, decongestants, and antispasmodics, have all been 
frorm:
used in goats at the dosages for calves or sheep, with
·The Goat Veterinary Society
minimal reported risk of side-effects.
www.vetweb.co.uk/sites/goatsoc.htm
 Goats have an immune system that is markedly inefficient
Drug manufacturers may be able to provide information onl
inl comparison to that of cattle and sheep. This has implica-
 products authorised for use in other countries. However,
tions for the use of vaccines in goats. Vaccines containing
 such advice is provided with no acceptance of liability
single or a low riumber of antigens are the vaccines of
40
Prescribing for deer
Contributor:
col in food-producing species is not possi ble because poten-
T J Fletcher BVMS, PhD, MRCVS
tial residues in human food may lead to bacterial resistance
This section provides general and specific advice on pre-
and aplastic anaemia in humans. The administration of stil-
scribing for deer; lack of reference to a particular drug does
farm animals kept for research purposes because of their
not necessarily imply safety and efficacy because species,
and individual variation should be considered. There are no
carcinogenicity in humans.
 Drug administration. Drugs may be prescribed as group
breeds of deer, only species and subspecies. Therefore
medication for administration in the feed or drinking water
extrapolation of usage and dosage from one species of deer
 or for individual animal treatment. For parenteral adminis-
to another is no more reliable than it would be, for example,
tration in deer, injections may be given subcutaneously,
to extrapolate responses from cattle to sheep. The condi-
tions affecting deer and their requirements will differ
intramuscularly, or intravenously.
The rate of drug absorption can vary with the location of the
according to the area, housing envirorment, and manage-
 intramuscular injection site. Wherever there is a choice of
ment system used.
Few preparations are authorised for deer in the UK. Only
injection site, then the area used should be one which is not,
 Or little, used for human consumption. When administering
acepromazine + etorphine (Immobilon), oxytetracycline,
drugs by dart to deer especially during late summer, opera-
and xylazine are authorised for use in deer. Drug dosages
for deer are given in Table 2.
tors should be aware that there may be several centimetres
 Deer constitute food-producing animals providing meat for
of subcutaneous fat especially over the gluteal mass.
Ruminal boluses that provide continuous or pulsatile
human consumption. Where drugs are authorised for use in
release of a drug over a prolonged period have been devel-
deer, withdrawal periods stated by the manufacturer should
oped for use in cattle and sheep for the delivery of
be observed. Where the drugs are authorised for use in other
food-producing species such as cattle then no withdrawal
anthelmintics, trace elements, and magnesium; they are also
used in deer+. Operators should be trained in the correct
method of administration of boluses and suitable restraint.
uct is not authorised for use in any food-producing animal
"Pour-on’ fomulations are available for use on cattle,
sheep, pigs, and are also used on deer+
could enter the food chain. Wild and park deer may be
Drug absorption and metabolism. Absorption from
the gastro-intestinal tract in ruminant species is influenced
culled and enter the human food chain with relatively few
controls and consideration should be given to this when
by the volume and pH of the ruminal contents and whether
administering drugs to deer, for example, care should be
the drug is subject to metabolism by ruminal micro-organ-
isms. Deer have greater gastric and intestinal motility than
taken when deer that have been captured with a tranquilliser
cattle and sheep and there is some evidence that orally
are released into the wild.
 administered drugs should be given at a higher dose to deer.
Under The Medicines(Restrictions on the Administration of
Drugs that are extensively metabolised by hepatic micro-
Veterinary MedicinalProducts) Regulations 1994(S1 1994/
somal oxidative reactions are, in general, metabolised more
2987), as amended, if the animal is a food-producing ani-
rapidly in ruminant animals and horses than in pigs.
mal,the veterinarian or person acting under his or her direc-
 Deer may metabolise some anthelmintics more rapidly than
tion may only administer a product that contains substances
 other ruminants and the recommendation has been made
found in a product authorised for use in food-producing ani-
that anthelmintics should be given at twice the dose for cat-
mals. This can create problems. For example, Large Animal
 tle and sheep regardless of the route of administration. No
Immobilon is no longer authorised for use in cattle, and
adverse effects have been reported using this regimen.
“Pour-on' preparations are preferred for use in deer. It has 
tined for human consumption. Since there are no readily
been shown that diethylcarbamazine and levamisole are
available equally effective and humane alternatives availa-
ble in the UK for tranquillising red deer, breeding stags in
much less effective in controlling lungworms in red deer
parks, which may have been tranisported or otherwise han-
than they are in cattle.
Whenever practicable the oral administration of anti-
dled during their lifetime, may have to be shot and the meat
microbials to ruminants should be discouraged. Orally
disposed of when they reach the end of their useful lives. In
addition, the use of drugs and medicines in deer may be
admimistered penicillins or broad-spectrum antimicrobials
may disturb bacterial fermentation in the rumen in animals
restricted or prohibited. For ex ample, use of chlorampheni-
with a functional rumen resulting in severe digestive distur
Prescribing for deer 41
bances. Following oral antibacterial administration in rumi- in newly weaned cal ves, the drug is often incorporated into
nants, the ruminal microflora should be re-established by  the ration.
adeo on pesn uo augip Aq sisnbuen on ssuods  uogeedaid Aieeudoid e go uogensupe io eysuen pno
Probiotics may be helpful. An alternative is to ensure that  deer, varies greatly between the different species, for exam-
drugs are delivered directly into the abomasum via the retic- ple there is evidence that isolated populations of red deer
zoles can result in only a proportion of the drug being
to the VMD under the Suspected Adverse Reaction Sur-
transferred into the abomasum, thus reducing the efficacy of
veillance Scheme (SARSS). Further information on the
the drug.
treatment of deer is available:
Tetracyclines are the drug of choice for treating deer with
Alexander T L, Buxton D (eds) Management and
Yersinia pseudotubercufosis and in order to minimise stress
Diseases of Deer 2nd ed. Veterinary Deer Society
Publications, 1994.
Table 2 Doses of drugs for deeri
Drug
Dose
Antibacterial drugs
Oxytetracycline1
red deer, 20 mg/kg i.m., repeat after 2-4 days
Other antibacterial drugs
in general, use at same dosage as for cattle
Parasiticides
Endectocides
use at about twice dosage for cattle
red deer, pour-on preparations, use at about twice dosage for cattle
Tranquillisers
Acepromazine + Etorphine1
tame deer, 0.5 mL/50 kg i.m. (reduce dose by 30% in pregnant hinds)
(Large Animal Immobilon )
rutting or wild deer, up to I mL/50 kg i.m.
Reversat
Diprenorphine', volume equal to total volume of Immobilon previously admini stered, i.m. + , i.v.
Detomidine+Ketamine
60-90 micrograms/kg + I-2 mg/kg
(capture of reindeer, fallow deer by dart)
Reversat
Atipamezole, volume 3-7 times volume of detomidine previously administered
Ketamine + Xylazine2
fallow deer, 23 mL/50 kg i.m.
Xylazine 20 mg/mL
for sedation of red deer in yards or pens, 0.51.5 mg/kg, i.m.
(should not be used as sole agent for capture of free ranging deer by dart)
Reversat
Yohim bine, 250 micrograms/kg i.v.
Minerals
Copper supplements
female adult red deer, 2 Copacaps Sheep
Vaccines
Polyvalent
hinds, 2 times dosage for sheep
Clostridial vaccines
1 drug doses for preparations that have a marketing authorisation for use in this species in the UK. Therefore, unless marked , the drug or doses
stated are not authorised for this species
 dose is in mL/kg of a mixture (*Hellabrun mixture') made up of 4 mL ketamine I00 mg/mL added to xylazine 500 mg powder for recon stitution
42
Prescribing
Contributor:
Drug administration. Drugs may be prescribed as group
D J Taylor MA, VetMB, PhD, DipECVPM, MRCVS
medication for administration in the feed or drinking water
or for individual animal treatment. Group medication in the
This section provides general and specific advice on pre-
scribing for pigs. Lack of reference to a particular drug does
drinking water is carried out by medication of a finite vol-
ume of water to give the required level or by continuous
administration through devices such as water proportioners.
breed, and individual variation should be considered. The
Medicated water should be the only source of water availa-
conditions affecting this species and their requirements wil1
ble during a course of treatment. Prescription-only medi-
differ according to the area, housing environment, and man-
 g     g  o s
   s     
 management requirements throughout the world. For ex am-
feedingstuff manufacturer following completion of a MFS
ple, a wallow should be provided for pigs kept outdoors in
prescription signed by a veterinarian. Top dressinig of feed
with medication for individual animals is not allowed in the
order to give protection against sunburn and to maintain
UK. The inclusion rate of some products may be modified
optimum temperatures in hot weather.
to give the correct dose in mg/kg where restricted feeding is
 In the UK, the FAwC publishes information and reports on
practised (for example, sows or finishers). Where group
aspects of animal welfare annd Codes of Practice with rec-
medication is employed, individual animals that are too sick
ommendations for pig welfare are produced by several
to ingest therapeutic doses of antimicrobial should be
countries including the UK:
removed
OT
treated
individually
Code of Recommendationsfor the Welfare of Livestock:
parenteral
admi nmistration.
Pigs London: DEFRA Publications, 2003 PB 7950
www.defra.gov.uk/anaimlh/welfare/farmed/pigs/pigcode.pdf
Parenteral administration in these species may be given by
subcutaneous, intramuscular, or intravenous injection, or by
Pigs are food-producing animals providing meat for human
consumption and the administration of medicines is strictly
controlled. Withdrawal periods stated by the manufacturer
tice, such injections may be given by fam staff under the
of medicines should be adhered to. If no withdrawal periods
direction of the veterinarian who has the herd under their
are given, standard withdrawal periods should be applied.
care. The veterinarian should ensure that staff concerned are
Under The Medicines (Restrictions on the Administration of
adequately trained
Veterinary Medicinal Products) Regulations 1994 (SI 1994/
Drug absorption and metabolism. Pigs are omnivor-
2987), as amended, if the animal is a food-producing ani-
ous monogastric animals and drug absorption takes place
 mal, the veterinarian or person acting under his or her direc-
mainly from the small intestine following oral
tion may only administer a product that contains substances
administration.
sunpoid-pooy ui osn ioy posioune onpoid e ul punoy
Drugs that are extensively metabolised by hepatic micro-
somal oxidative reactions are, in general, metabolised more
animals.
rapidly in ruminant animals and horses than in pigs. In pigs,
  d        
ex ample the Vietnamese pot-bellied pig, as companion ani-
the defect in sulfate conjugation is compensated for by
alternative metabolic pathways such as glucuronide
mals. Veterinarians are reminded that movement of these
pigs (for example from the owners home to hospital
synthesis.
 premises) requires a licence from the VMD and treatment
Procaine benizy lpenicillin may cause shivering in pigs. Pot-
records should be retained for the requisite period. Behay-
bellied pigs may be prone to hypothermia following
ioural problems such as aggression may arise when pigs are
aniaesthesia.
kept as pets and owners should be warned of potential haz-
There is limited information on breed differences in reac-
ards. The pet pig may be the subject of surgical procedures
tions to particular drugs in pigs. It is important that
involving anaesthetics and may be given medicines niot
adverse drug reactions are reported to the VMD under
authorised for food animals. Such animals must not enter
the Suspected Adverse Reaction Surveillance Scheme
the food chain.
(SARSS)
43
Prescribing
Contributor:
urine favours sulphonamide reabsorption and increases
Trevor Turner BVetMed, MRCVS, FRSH
half-life.
Sulphonamides, sulphasalazine, mesalazine, and olsalazine,
This section provides general and specific advice on pre-
administered systemically, may cause keratoconjunctivitis
scribing for dogs; lack of reference to a particular drug does
sicca. Potentiated sulphonamides may cause an immune-
    e s  s 
  s   d s s
vidual variation should be considered.
Dobermanns. Tetracycline antibacterials may cause perma
nent staining of the dental enamel if given to puppies before
Dogs are classed as companion animals and in the UK, pre-
scribing of medicines for them must be in accordance with
eruption of the permanent dentition or to the dam during
The Medicines(Restrictions on the Administration of Veter-
pregnanicy.
inary Medicinal Products) Regulations 1994 (S1 1994/
NSAIDs may cause gastric ulceration, particularly at high
2987), as amended. The VMD has indicated that for the
doses or if given in combination with corticosteroids. These
cumstances, certain especially sensitive breeds of cat and
bilities to toxic effects. Dose-dependent liver failure is
dog should be considered as exotic’ as indicated in Medi-
encountered in dogs gi veni excessive doses of paracetamol.
cines (Restrictions on the Administration of Veterinary
Pheniothiazines such as acepromazine should be used with
MedicinatProducts)Regulations 1994:Guidance notes for
caution in Greyhounds and other coursing hounds and in
the veterinary profession. Animal Medicines European
brachycephalic breeds. In the Boxer in particular, fainting
Licensing Information & Advice (AMELIA) 8 revised 1998
may be precipitated. Phenothiazines may cause paradoxical
published by the VMD. This allows rather more
manoeuvrability under the *cascade' system.
sis in dogs. Some breeds including Basset Hounds, Great
e ieoia on siandeosns ieadde 'sines ysur pue ‘souea
Dogs should always be weighed before being medicated
and especially with larger dogs calculation of the total dose
xylazine administration. Thiobarbiturates such as thiopental
should be based at the lower end of the recommended
may have prolonged action in coursing hounds due to lim-
ited redistribution of the drug into fatty tissue or decreased
ranige.
plasma-protein binding. Greyhounds appear particularly
Drug administration. Drugs may be administered by
sensitive in this respect and some authorities suggest that
mouth, via the food, by injection, or in certain circum-
use of thiopental in this breed is contra-indicated.
The unusual sensitivity of some breeds to ivermectin may
branes. Owner compliance should be conisidered when
be due to genetic differences in permeability of the blood-
prescribing medicines for dogs.
brain barrier, the release of gamma-aminobutyric acid in the
Common routes for injection for parenteral administration
CNS, or both. In dogs, severe adverse reactions to ivermec-
of drugs to dogs are intravenous, intramuscular, and subcu-
tion (including fatalities) may occur. In the UK, injectable
taneous. Other routes for parenteral admimistration include
praziquantel (Droncit) is not recommended for use in
intracardiac, intraperitoneal, intrapleural, epidural, and
hounds.
intra-articular. Due to the density of muscle tissue in dogs,
Pharmaceutical adjuvants may also induce adverse reac-
intramuscular injections can be very painful if the total vol-
tions in some species. Polyoxyl 35 castor oil, the solubilis-
ume exceeds 4 to 5 mL in large breeds and a maximum of 2
ing constituent of Saffan (alfaxalone and alfadolone
to 3 mL in small breeds. Injections involving volumes
 acetate), causes the release of histamine and histamine-like
greater than these should invol ve multiple sites. Larger vol-
 substances in dogs and therefore the preparation should not
umes can be administered by subcutaneous injection in the
be used in this species.
conscious animal but multiple sites should be considered if
 For further information on adverse reactions of drugs, indi-
total volume exceeds 15 to 20 mL in small breeds anid 25 to
vidual product data sheets should be consulted. See also
30 mL in large dogs.
Keller W C, Bataller N, Adverse Drug Reactions. In: Bonl-
Drug absorption and metabolism. Dogs are mono-
agura J D, ed. Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy Xlll Smalf
 gastric and drug absorption takes place mainly in the small
Animal Practice.USA:Saunders,2000,239-242
intestine. In dogs, the acetylation process for aromatic
 The following texts provide further information on pharma-
amines such as sulphonamides is absent. This does not
t cology of drugs in dogs:
decrease the overall rate of sulphonamide elimination
·Adams H R.Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeu-
because alternative metabolic pathways compensate; acidic
tics 8th edn. USA: Iowa State Urmiversity Press, 2001
44Guidance on prescribing
·Aiello S E, Mays M eds. Merck Veterinary Manual 8th
1·Bonagura J D, Kirk J D eds. Current Veterinary Ther-
edr. USA: Merck & Co Inc, 1998. Available at:
apy X Small Animal Practice. USA: Saunders, 1989.
www.merckvetmanual.com/mvm/index.jsp
Limited information is available on breed differences in
Bonagura J D, ed. Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy
 reactions to particular drugs in dogs. It is important that
X!ll Small Animal Practice. USA: Saunders, 2000
suspected adverse drug reactions are reported to the
·Kirk R W ed. Current Veterinary Therapy IX Small
VMD  under the  Suspected Adverse  Reaction
Animal Practice. USA: Saunders, 1986
Surveillance Scheme (SARSS).
45
Prescribing
a for cats
Contributor:
mol may cause death in cats as a result of profound anaemia
Trevor Turner BVetMed, MRCVS, FRSH
with methaemoglobinaemia due to the accumulation of
toxic metabolites.
This section provides general and specific advice on pre-
Antiseptic and disinfectant agents such as iodine and its
scribing for cats; lack of reference to a particular drug does
derivatives, benizyl benzoate, phenols and cresol are partic-
not necessarily imply safety and efficacy. Breed and indi-
ularly toxic to cats. This results from a combination of drug
vidual variation should be considered. Cats should be
 ingestion due to the animal's grooming habits together with
weighed prior to medication to ensure accuracy of dosage.
slow drug metabolism.
 Cats are classed as companion animals and in the UK, pre-
Overdosage of opioid analgesics including morphine,
scribing of medicines for them must be in accordance with
butorphanol, etorphine, pethidine, and pethidine derivatives
The Medicines (Restrictions on the Administration of Veter-
such as diphenoxylate hydrochloride (an ingredient of
inary Medicinal Products) Regulations 1994 (S1 1994/
 Lomotil) may cause violent excitatory activity in cats. Phe-
2987), as amended. The VMD has indicated that for the
nothiazines such as acepromazine may cause paradoxical
purposes of interpretation of the Regulations *in certain cir-
excitement in some cats. Xylazine causes emesis in cats.
cumstances, certain especially sensitive breeds of cat and
Cats are particularly susceptible to ototoxicity caused by
dog should be considered as exotic' as indicated in Medi-
aminoglycoside antibacterials such as gentamicin, strepto-
cines (Restrictions on the Administration of Veterinary
mycin, and neomycin. Tetracycline antibacterials may
MedicinalProducts)Regulations 1994:Guidance notes for
cause permanent staining of the dental enamel if given to
the veterinary profession. Animal Medicines European
kittens before eruption of the permanent dentition or to the
Licensing Information & Advice (AMELIA) 8 revised 1998
queen during pregnancy.
published by the VMD. This allows rather more manouvra-
Phosphate-containing rectal enemas cause severe hyper-
bility under the 'cascade' system.
phosphataemia in cats and their use is contra-indicated in
Drug administration. Drugs may be administered by
this species.
mouth, via the food, by injection, or in certain circum-
For further information on adverse reactions of drugs, indi-
stances through absorption through intact skin or mucous
vidual product data sheets should be consulted. See also
membranes. Owner compliance should be considered when
Keller W C, Bataller N, Adverse Drug Reactions. In: Borl-
 prescribing medicines for cats.
agura J D,ed.Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy Xill Small
Common routes for injection for parenteral administration
Animal Practice. USA:Saunders, 2000: 239-242
of drugs to cats are intravenous, intramuscular, and subcuta-
The following tex ts provide further information on pharma-
neous. Other routes for parenteral administration include
cology of drugs in cats:
intracardiac, intraperitoneal, intrapleural, epidural, and
Adams H R. Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeu-
intra-articular. Intramuscular injections can be very painful
tics 8th edn. USA: Iowa State Umiversity Press, 2001
for cats if the total volume exceeds 1.5 to 2 mL at one site.
Aiello S E, Mays M. eds Merck Veterinary Manuat 8th
Injections involving volumes greater than these should
edn. USA: Merck & Co Inc, 1998. Available at:
involve multiple sites. Single subcutaneous injections in
www.merckvetmanual.com/mv m/i ndex.jsp
conscious cats should not exceed 15 to 20 mL. Multiple
Bonagura J D,ed. Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy
sites should be used if the volume exceeds this amount
Xlll Smalf Animai Practice.USA: Saunders,2000
 Drug absorption and metabolism. Cats are monogas-
·
Kirk R W ed. Current Veterinary Therapy IX Small
tric and drug absorption takes place mainly in the small
Animal Practice USA: Saunders, 1986
intestine.
Bonagura J D, Kirk J D eds. Current Veterinary
Therapy X Small Animal Practice. USA: Saunders,
curonyl transferase activity and therefore drugs that are
1989.
metabolised by this pathway will usually be eliminated at a
Limited information is available on breed differences in
slower rate. Organophosphorus compounds, aspirin, chlor-
reactions to particular drugs in cats. It is important that
amphenicol, phenytoin, and griseofulvin may
be toxic
suspected adverse drug reactions are reported to the
unless the appropriate dosage regimen is carefully applied.
VMD
under
the
Suspected
Adverse Reaction
Such drugs should be used with caution.
Surveillance Scheme (SARSS).
Paracetamol should not be administered to cats because
they are particularly susceptible to intoxication. Paraceta
46
Prescribing
I tor
bolltr
Contributor:
tegic therapy and paddock rotation if the land is to be pre-
S A Lister BVetMed, BSc, CertPMP, MRCVS
vented from becoming 'fowl sick'
Drug administration. Drugs may be given in the drink-
Poultry are farmed domestic birds, which include chickens,
ing water, feed, or by injection. Administration via the
ducks, geese, and turkeys. Preparations that are authorised
drinking water is usually preferable because sick birds will
e ul ssn ioy egenns io ajes Aiuesssou ou sie <njnod 10j
tend to drink when they will not eat. However, fluid intake
species, for example salinomycin is toxic in turkeys. There
by the birds may vary due to the weather, to the ease of
are limited products available for use in laying fowl. Some
access or hygiene of drinking water dispensers ('drinkers),
treatments can only be given if the standard withdrawal
or to the unpalatability of the medicated water. Care must
period of seven days is adhered to after completion of treat-
be taken that the medication does not block the water sys-
ment, resulting in destruction of a considerable rumber of
tem. Conversely, care should be taken to ensure that drink-
ers do mot overflow because surrounding damp bedding
eggs.
could potentially encourage coccidial oocyst sporulation.
When investigating a disease problem, management proce-
Water contamination and hygiene problems may arise as a
dures should be examined before medicating the flock. An
result of poor mixing and preparation, or from fungal prolif-
undesirable environment can nullify the benefits of medica-
eration in certain glucose-containing carriers present in the
tion, may be the cause of illness, and should be corrected at
formulation. Drinker lines should be sanitised before drug
the same time as instituting any medication. In some cir-
cumstances it may be more economical to slaughter the
ilar basis have been used. They should be cleaned regularly
flock earlier than plarned because the cost of treatment
 as part of the routine terminal house disinfection.
would be excessive or the welfare of the birds may be com-
Alternatively, the feed may be medicated. This is coniven-
promised.
ient for the farmer but it may take time getting feed mixed
The management system can have a significant effect on the
 at the mill and mills may find making special mixes uneco-
pattern of infection. Viral diseases spread via the respiratory
nomical. Absorption of the drug may be unpredictable
route or in the faeces can be especially important where
because of binding to feed ingredients. Some birds may
have a reduced feed intake anid may require adjustment of
endemic in older birds on site. In cage systems, birds are 
 Treatment by injection is the most predictable method of
removed from contact with their own faeces and the lack of
 drug administration but is only practicable where there are
interaction between birds may result in slow dissemination
sufficient staff available and the birds are of high monetary
of certain infections within a house. This may lead to a
 value such as turkeys and breeding stock. Intramuscular
more protracted disease as the infection spreads across the
 injection is usually given into the thigh or breast muscle in
house and may make therapy more problematic.
adult birds. In day-old chicks intramuscular vaccinations
In birds kept on litter, strategic anticoccidial regimens are
 are given into the thigh or neck muscle. Aseptic procedures
required to prevent clinical coccidiosis due to the birds'
 must be strictly observed. There are currently no injectable
exposure to the parasite on the litter. Coccidiostats are 
 products authorised for poultry in the UK and therefore any
zootechnical feed additives and must be used in accordance
such treatment is deemed *off-label'under the cascade.
with the relevant Annex entry of Directive 70/524/EEC
The most accurate method of dosing is in direct relation to
(The Feedingstuffs (Zootechnical Products) Regulations
 body-weight. Most preparations can be administered as mg
1999); there is no provision for the veterinarian to alter pre-
 of drug per kg body-weight. The calculated mg/kg dose can
scribing from that given in the manufacturers data sheet.
 then be given as a daily loading pulsed dose or as divided
Treatment programmes are often designed to allow birds to
amounts throughout the day. Alternatively treating via the
build up natural resistance to such parasites and therefore
 drinking water can be given on the basis of weight of prod-
early withdrawal of medication. This is especially signifi-
uct per volume of drinking water consumed. This assumes
cant for birds destined for litter or free range conditions as
 anl estimated daily water intake sufficient to achieve the
adult laying birds. Such birds should not be cage reared.
required dosage. Advice is given in the data sheets or is
 n  a  s e  s  
available from manufacturers.
free range conditions where there is access to land which
Antimicrobial therapy. A number of antibacterials are
may be contaminated by the birds themselves, wild birds, or
authorised for use in poultry for the treatment of enteric and
vermin. Control of coccidia and nematodes depends on stra-
respiratory disease or systemic bacterial infection. Specific
Prescribing for poultry 47
therapy must be related to accurate diagnosis of the primary
Coccidiosis, mainly caused by Eimeria spp., is a common
cause and any secondary (usually bacterial) sequelae. The infection in poultry flocks and medication is usually admin-
choice of medication is dependent on a number of variables istered prophylactically to control the disease (see section
including knowledge of the site of action, spectrum of  1.4.1). Anticoccidials such as monensin, narasin, or salino-
activity, and distribution of the drug in tissues. If possible, 
 mycin should not be administered concurrently with tiamu-
medicate using the drug most likely to be effective, while  effects when administered with monensin. Anticoccidials
awaiting laboratory results. Further medication can then be should not be used in laying hens because of posible drug
adjusted in the light of these results. In addition, other fac-
 residues in eggs intended for human consumption. Chick-
tors such as ease of use of the product may be of signifi-
enis may be vaccinated againist coccidiosis (see section
cance, especially in relation to the management system in
18.6.1), which avoids problems of drug resistance and con-
operation. For example, for birds on a nipple line water sys-
tinuous medication.
tem it is essential that a highly soluble product is used to
 Guidelines on the use of antimicrobials in poultry are pub-
prevenit blockage of the water system.
a      
 Certain drugs appear especially effective against specific
Poultry Association and RUMA Alliance.
conditions. For example, amoxicillin is well absorbed from
Parasiticidal therapy. Infectior with the gapeworm,
the gastro-intestinal tract and is effective against acute sep-
Syngamus trachea, and intestinal nematodes such as Capif-
ticaemic conditions and also arthritis and tenosynovitis
laria, Heterakis, and Ascaridia may be treated with author-
associated with staphylococcal infection. Amoxicillin is
ised preparations including flubendazole. Lice, mites, and
also active against Gram-positive micro-organisms and is
fleas may affect poultry and preparations authorised for
the drug of choice in clostridial enterotoxaemia of broilers
 treatment include cypermethrin (see section 2.2). Poultry
and turkeys. Drugs such as neomycin are not absorbed from
houses should also be treated to ensure insect eradication
the gastro-intestinal tract. Tylosin attains high bone levels
(see section 2.2.6).
and is reported to be effective in cases of osteomyelitis
associated with femoral head necrosis. Sulfaquinoxaline
Other drugs. Some antibiotics may be used as produc-
and enrofloxacin appear especially effective against Pas-
tionl enhanicers (see section 17. 1).
teurefa infections. Tylosin, tilmicosin, tiamulin, and enro-
Vaccines. Many vaccines are available to provide protec-
floxacin have specific activity against mycoplasma. tion against poultry viruses, bacteria such as Erysipelothrix
Information on dosage and preparations available for poul- and Pasteurella, and also coccidiosis; these are described
try is found in section 1. 1. 1.
under section 18.6.
48
Prescribing for game birds
Contributor:
individual birds. In the earlier stages of rearing and before
CDavis BVM&S,MRCVS
release, the birds are fairly easily handled and treated with
medication administered in the drinking water or in the
Game birds include grouse, guinea fowl, quail, partridges,
feed. However, fluid intake may vary due to weather condi-
and pheasants. Quail and guinea fowl are reared directly for 
tions, unpalatability of the medicated drinking water, or if
the table while, in the UK, pheasants and partridges are water is available from other sources such as streams or
reared for release into the wild to supplement wild popula-rainwater. Advice should be given on suitable water supply
tions for shooting. Grouse are essentially managed as wild
systems to enable medication of small groups of birds.
populations with a few reared in captivity in pri vate collec-
When medicating, account should be taken of the size of the
tions. However, in grouse Trichostrongylus tenuis and loup-
header tank and the amount of “dead’'space in pipeline sys-
  s       
tems as this may easily exceed daily corisumption. The use
consulted for advice orn worm and tick control and vaccina-
 of flavouring in the water may mask the taste of medicine,
tion programmes. Many of the comments in the above sec-
however the stability of the solution may be affected.
tion on poultry also relate to game birds and these sections
 Feed medication may be impractical where the quantity of
should be read together. The breeding, rearing, and manage-
ment of pheasants and partridges is now highly specialised
 supplied by the mill as a single-mix batch. PoM products for
and becoming more intensive. Although the diseases of
 incorporation in feed must be prescribed under a Medicated
game birds are not unique, management practices do have
Feeding Stuffs (MFS) prescription.
Antimicrobial therapy. Infections caused by E. coli,
observed in these species. In general, parasitic diseases
Satmonela, and Staphylococcus are commonly seen in
(protozoa and helminths) are common as a result of com-
game birds. Saimonefla infection usually causes enteric dis-
pi pue pii suiag sig ro siqnu ae ieageid
ease, which under stress may lead to septicaemia and this
on areas of land over a period of years.
condition has a high mortality rate especially in younger
 Few medications are authorised for use in game birds and
birds. Antibacterials should be given although they will
the list is constantly declining. Game birds are classified as
S only reduce the degree of infection rather than eliminate it.
food-producing species and therefore only products author-  Neomycin is the drug of choice for enteric salmonellosis,
ised for use in food-producing animals can be used. The while potentiated sulphonamides are effective for the sys-
legal position regarding exotic pheasants in zoological col-  temic disease caused by Satmonella and colibacillosis.
food-producing would greatly increase the therapeutic tinomycin combination can also be used in game birds for
options available. No products registered as zootechnical
 these conditions.
food additives (ZFA) are authorised in game birds and these
 Drugs used for the treatment of staphylococcal infections
caninot be prescribed.
include chlortetracycline for infection within the joints and
Many diseases in game birds present with similar clinical
amoxicillin when the infection causes acute toxaemia.
signs and full laboratory back up is commonly required in
Infections caused by Pasteurella and Erysipelothrix are
order to diagnose individual conditions. The correct use of fairly common and may lead to high mortality. Acute dis-
 medication in game birds is essential especially in regard to ease should be treated with tetracycline or amoxicillin in the
withdrawal periods prior to the birds being presented for drinking water. A vaccine is available for pasteurellosis and
shooting. Game birds should not be medicated once they  erysipelas and may be used in pheasants. Vaccination is
have beenl released into the wild. Knowledge of the shoot-
helpful on farms that have previously been affected by the
ing seasons and likely release dates is essential. Due to the  disease.
within at least one withdrawal period of game being pre-
Mycoplasma infection is endemic in game birds, particu-
sented for shooting in the same geographical area. To  larly pheasants. Various treatment regimens are available.
ensure both legal and welfare aspects are adequately cov-
However, treatment will control rather than eliminate the
ered, veterinary invol vement is a necessity.
disease and therefore management practices, for example
Drug administration. Drugs may be administered in the
the formation of closed breeding flocks, need to be
drinking water or in the feed when flock medication is nec-
reviewed in order to reduce the incidence of the disease.
essary, or on rare occasions by intramuscular injection into
Mycoplasma infection causes respiratory problems in all
Prescribing for game birds 49
sinusitis, and facial oedema. Whenl complicated by second- nate or reduce the level of infection with the worm Heter-
ary bacterial infection (usually E. coli) septicaemia is the  akis, which acts as an intermediate host for the protozoa.
sequelwith subsequent mortality.Poultry respiratoryThe clinical effects of Blastocystus are debatable because
yiruses may play a role in the condition in game birds and no invasive forms have been observed. It is possibly a yeast
should be considered by the veterinarian. Breeding birds
 or protozoan which depends on bacteria for its survival. The
carrying Mycoplasma suffer from poor egg production. The organism has been seen in birds which have lost weight and
disease is egg transmitted and any suspect birds should be some authorities report that it causes earth-brown droppings
culled and all remaining birds treated before coming into and mortality. Medication of affected birds with oxytetracy-
lay to prevent disease and also improve chick quality. Treat-cline removes the organism while trimethoprim may have
ment for Mycoplasma can be given via the drinking water
some effect.
or by injection; enrofloxacin,tiamulin, tilmicosin, or tylosin  Parasiticidal therapy. The gapeworm, Syngamus tra-
are used for treatment. Tiamulin must not be given in com-chea, affects game birds by causing an obstruction of the
narasin, or salinomycin, because concurrent admimistration
 diagnosis for these clinical signs includes aspergillosis and
 may give rise to toxic effects.
other respiratory disease.
Competitive exclusion products and probiotics are com-
 Other helminths affecting game birds are the common cae-
monly used in game birds to help the incidence of disease
cal worms Heterakis spp., intestinal round worms (ascarids)
and as an adjunct to antibacterial therapy.
and the much smaller Capillaria worm. Capillaria affects
Antiprotozoal therapy. Coccidiosis is still commonly
 adult breeding stock causing a delay in onset of laying and
diagnosed in game birds but the availability of more effica-
s uogoeut yuey jo jueunei vogonpoid sae peonpai
cious coccidiostats has reduced its prevalence. Lasalocid is
based on the use of flubendazole in the feed, which is
the only in-feed anticoccidial authorised for use in pheas-
 authorised for these species. Other products such as fenbenl-
ants and partridges. The other ionophores are zootechnical
dazole, levamisole, and mitroxinil are used ‘off-label':
feed additives and may niot be prescri bed.
Repeated doses of flubendazole may be given for the pre-
vention of helminth infection. Breeding birds should be
A number of species of coccidia may be seen in game birds.
treated before commencement of lay to ensure maximum
They are host specific and no cross infection between the
fertility and production with treatments repeated during the
game bird species occurs. The disease tends to occur at
about 3 weeks of age or in the release pen and it is often
laying season. Growing birds are treated before entering the
linked to a reduction in the intake of the anticoccidial due to
becoming more important as a control measure againist his-
intercurrent disease. Suitable reduction ('step down') anti-
coccidial programmes should be employed to ensure that
tomomiosis.
adequate immurity to infection develops. Red-legged par-
Fenbendazole is authorised for the treatment of T. tenuis
tridges appear to have a poorly developed immunity to the
 infection in grouse and is administered in the form of medi-
cated grit. Other products used ‘off-label’ for the treatment
with motile protozoa. Toltrazuril or sulfaquinoxaline with
of T. tenuis include levamisole and the avermectins such as
trimethoprim administered in the drinking water may be
ivermectin or moxidectin by individual administration.
used to treat clinical coccidiosis and in some circumstances
For the control of red mite and other ectoparasites,cyper-
pulsed doses (every 2 to 3 weeks) of toltrazuril are used as a
 methrin may be used; attention to the environment is also
preventative measure especially ini red-legged partridges.
essential. Tick control programmes in grouse essentially
apply to co-existing mammalian species, for example,
Infectior with flagellate parasites such as Hexamita melea-
sheep, deer, and mountain hares; louping ill vaccination
gridis and Trichomonas phasioni may lead to disease char-
 programmes are confined to sheep flocks on the moot.
acterised by high mortality rate and chronic unthriftiness
with severe weight loss. Clinical signs are often seen early
Vaccines. Viral diseases seen in game birds include New-
in the rearing phase or in the release pen. The disease can be
castle disease, which can be a fatal condition in pheasants;
authorised vaccines are available (see section 18.6.16). Vac-
infection with coccidia is seen. Infections may be treated
 cines for infectious bronchitis and avian rhinotracheitis are
with tetracyclines. If the outbreak is associated with concur-
 not authorised for game birds but may be used on veterinary
rent enteritis other antibacterial therapy may be of value.
advice. The mycoplasma vaccine containing strain Mg 6/85
The role of electrolyte and rehydration solutions is currently
 is available for poultry and is not authorised for and has not
being inivestigated and is showing some promise. Currently
 been fully tested in game birds.
must incorporate the use of suitable anthelmintics to elimi- not yet available. Hygiene precautions and adequate nurs
50  Guidance on prescribing
ing especially in relation to ensuring adequate fluid intake
Complementary treatments. Recently there has been
and rehydration of the affected chicks are essential in over-
arl upsurge in the marketing of complementary and herbal
coming and preventing the condition. Concurrent antibacte-
medicines for game birds. Very limited data are available on
rial therapy may be required.
their efficacy and none are registered products.
Table 3 Antimicrobial doses of drugs for game birds1
Drug
By addition to drinking water
By addition tofeed
Amoxicillin
17 g/100 L
 20 mg/kg body-weight
Apramycin
25-50 g/100 L
40 mg/kg body-weight
Chlortetra-
4-12 g/100 L
200-600 g/tonne
cycline
30 mg/kg body-weight
Difloxacin
10 mg/kg body-weight
Enrofloxacin
5-10 g/100 L
10 mg/kg body-weight
Erythromycin
25.7 g/100 L
Lincomycin/
50-150 mg of powder (Linco-Spectin)/kg
spectinomycin
body-weight
Neomycin
12.6 g/100 L
220 g/tonne
 11 mg/kg body-weight
Sulfadiazine with
10.7 g/100 L
trimethoprim
 30 mg/kg body-weight
Sulfaquinoxaline with
28 g/100 L
500 g/tonne
trimethoprim
 30 mg/kg body-weight
Tetracycline
4-12 g/100 L
200-600 g/tonne
30-60 mg/kg body-weight
Tiamulin
25-30 mg/kg body-weight
200-300 g/tonne
Tilmicosin
75 mg/L
10-25 mg/kg body-weight
Tylosin
Treatment, 50 g/100 L,
200 g/tonne
 50-200 mg/kg body-weight
Prophylaxis, 12.5 g/100 L
1drug doses for preparations that have a marketing authorisation for use in these species in the UK. Therefore unless marked 1.
the drug or doses stated are not authorised for these species
Prescribing for game birds 51
Table 4 Parasiticidal and antiprotozoal doses of drugs for game birds!
Drug
Dosage
Cypermethrin
control of red mites, 20 mL 0.05% solution/bird
Fenbendazole
Grouse1, Trichostrongylus, by addition to grit, 7-10 mg/kg in divided doses over 14 days
Pheasants, partridges, Syngamus, Heterakis, Ascardia, 12 mg/kg as a single dose
Pheasants, partridges, Capilaria, 24 mg/kg in divided doses over 3 days
Flubendazole1
Pheasants, partridges, 60 g/tonne feed for 7-14 days
 Ivermectin
0.2-0.25 mL/kg p.o. (formulation to use: ivermectin oral solution 800 micrograms/mL)
Lasalocid1
Pheasants, partridges, 120 g/tonne feed
Levamisole
10-20 mg/kg body-weight p.o.
Moxidectin
0.2-0.25 mL/kg p.o. (formulation to use: moxidectin oral solution 1 mg/mL)
Nitroxinil
 Pheasants, partridges, by addition to drinking water, 24 mg/kg
Sulfaquinoxaline with
by addition to drinking water, 30 mg/kg body-weight daily for 5 days
trimethoprim
Toltrazuril
Pheasants, partridges, by addition to drinking water, 7 mg/kg daily for 2 days
1drug doses for preparations that have a marketing authorisation for use in these species in the UK. Therefore unless marked 1,
52
Prescribing
for
pigeons
Contributor:
diarrhoea. Intake may also be reduced by the unpalatability
G G A Smith BVSc, BSc, MRCVS
of some medications. Many pigeons will drink less of any
medicated water, particularly on the first day of treatment.
Many breeds and types of pigeons are kept solely for show-
 d   n   s e 
cated water with subsequent treatment ‘failure This may
pigeons are kept for racing and showing. Other flying
 lead to re-infection of the group, for example in the case of
breeds such as tipplers, tumblers, and rollers are kept for
Trichomonas or Hexamita spp. infection. Some drugs are
showing and display flying.
particularly unpalatable and it may be necessary to withhold
In the UK, few preparations are authorised for use in
water for a few hours before offering medicated drinking
water.
authorised for pigeons are available. Preparations available
 Pigeons are frequently offered much more water than they
for other species, particularly poultry, are frequently used.
drink because the drinking vessels may be emptied and
Pigeon owners should be informed and consent obtained
tefilled several times each day to ensure water is fresh and
 not soiled. Pigeons normally drink mainly after feeding and
ommendations. It is important that withdrawal periods
therefore consume the bulk of their daily water intake
stated by the manufacturer are adhered to if the preparation
within a fairly short period, following the main feed. It is
is authorised for pigeons and the birds are intended for 
 therefore essential to assess accurately the amount of water
human consumption. If no withdrawal period is given or the
being consumed (rather than the total amount being offered
preparation is not authorised for pigeons, standard with-
to the group of pigeons) and then use that volume to carry
drawal periods should be applied.
 the appropriate amount of medication. In intensi ve poultry
Drug administration. Pigeons may be medicated indi-
units, stable environmental conditions enable water con-
vidually or as a group. While clinically ill birds are often
sumption to be very accurately predicted, so that dosages
treated individually, it is usually necessary to consider the for marny poultry preparations may be given as mg or mL/
group or the whole loft as a colony. For many infections litre of drinking water rather than mg/kg body-weight. Such
 only a few individuals may appear to be clinically affected  dosages may therefore require adjustment when using these
but most of the birds in the group are likely to harbour the 
preparations for treating pigeons.
same infection. Treatment of the entire group is usually  Preparations containing tylosin, citric acid, or copper sul-
essential. Individual medication is therefore often given to fate should not be administered in galvanised water contain-
sick birds with simultaneous mass medication to the group.  ers. Medicated water must not be disposed of into
 Individual treatment can be given by crop tubing, by injec- watercourses, ditches, or drains.
tion, or by mouth using tablets, capsules, or liquids. Injec-  Absorption of many drugs from the digestive tract of
tions can be given subcutaneously on the back at the base of  pigeons is thought to be relatively poot. Calcium and mag-
the neck, with the needle directed posteriorly and in the nesium contained in bird grit may further reduce the absorp-
mid-line to avoid the plexus of vessels in the neck. Intra-  tion of medicines, particularly tetracyclines. Doses may
  d                
close to the posterior end of the keel to avoid the major adequate dosing.
blood vessels in the anterior part of this muscle. Thigh mus-  Insoluble medication may be incorporated into the feed.
cle can also be used. However, if this route is used, a pro-  Pigeons are often selective feeders so that unless medica-
portion of the drug may be excreted via the renal portal  tion is actually adherent to the feed grains, it is unlikely to
system before reaching the systemic circulation. Some be eaten. The estimated amount of food to be consumed
so could potentially adversely affect racing performance.
 table oil. The oil is thoroughly mixed into the feed and the
Most group medication is given via the drinking water.  appropriate amount of drug in the form of oral powder
 Drug dosages are commonly calculated on the assumption added and likewise thoroughly mixed. Lemon juice and live
that a typical pigeon consumes about 50 mL per day but in
I unpasturised yoghurt are often used instead of vegetable oil.
practice this amount is variable and may range from 15 mL
 The amount of medication consumed by any given individ-
to 250 mL per day. Consumption will be low inn cold dull ual following group medication is unpredictable. Therefore
weather, during illness and rest periods, and will increase  sick birds should be isolated and medicated individually.
considerably in hot dry conditions, racing, feeding niest-  When birds are under mass medication via the feed or
lings, and some clinical conditions involving profuse
 drinking water, they must be confined to prevent access to
Prescribing for pigeons 53
ex ternal sources, for example rainwater, garden ponds, and 
bird baths.
via the drinking water.
Drugs may also be administered topically either as localised
Benzimidazoles may cause feather abnormalities if used
treatment or with the intention that they be absorbed
during feather development in young birds during moulting.
through the skin and act systemically.
Ivermectin can be given by subcutaneous injection, individ-
ual oral dosing, or topically. Gapeworm infection is rarely
Although limited information is available on the toxic
  s
effects of drugs in pigeons, in general, drug administration
should be avoided during the breeding season (mid-Decem-
Ivermectin is also used to control mites (skin, subcutaneous,
quill, feather, nasal, and airsac mites) and lice. Permethrin
Antimicrobial therapy. A yariety of antibacterial and
 Or pyrethrins are commonly used on birds for control of lice
and mites. Loft hygiene is important in the control of inter-
antiprotozoal preparations are in wide circulation and use
nal and external parasites and essential if red mite infesta-
by the pigeon fancy in the UK. Many antibacterial combi-
 nation preparations are available in other European coun-
tion occurs. Pesticides containing malathion or permethrins
can be used on the loft and fittings.
         s
fanciers. Pigeons treated with these products in their native
Other drugs. Betamethasone 500 micrograms (0.5 mg)
country and imported into the UK may introduce resistant
 by intramuscular injection as a single dose may be used for
strains of bacteria and protozoa and also significantly
 anaphylactic reactions in pigeons. Ophthalmic preparations
increase the incidence of some conditions, for example hex-
of chlortetracycline, cloxacillin, fusidic acid, and gen-
amitosis. Consequently, when treating pigeons in the UK,
tamicin can be used for ocular infections, applied twice
the existence and usage of these products must be taken into
daily for up to 7 days. Systemic treatment is recommended
account even though their use may not be admitted.
for unilateral conjunctivitis ('one-eyed cold). Levothyrox-
Suitable antibacterials for pigeons include amoxicillin,
ine can be used to accelerate the moulting out and replace-
ment of damaged feathers. Multivitamins, probiotics, and
enrofloxacin, doxycycline, tetracyclines, tylosin, and eryth-
electrolyte preparations are widely used, particularly after
romycin. Tiamulin is used but caution is recommended to
medicinal treatments and for prophylaxis and therapy dur-
avoid toxicity. Wherever possible, bacterial sensitivity
should be determined before selecting the antibiotic. There
ing breeding and racing. Mesterolone can be used to
 improve fertility in cock pigeons at an oral dose of 12.5 mg
is widespread resistance to oxytetracycline. Some inifec-
tions such as those caused by Streptococcus spp., which are
once daily for 5 to 7 days.
Anaesthetics. Ketamine is used for sedation and light
to be resistant when causing disease ini pigeonis.
anaesthesia of pigeons at a dose of 50 to 100 mg/kg by
intramuscular injection. Recovery after ketamine anaesthe-
Coccidiosis is seen in pigeon flocks. Anticoccidials such as
sia may be characterised by excitation. Birds should be
amprolium, clazuril, and sulphonamides may be given pro-
restrained by wrapping with a cloth and kept in the dark
phylactically to control infection. Prolonged intermi ttent or
 until recovery is complete. Ketamine is also used at 20 to 40
continuous medication may be required for severe coccidio-
mg/kg in combination with diazepam 1 to 2 mg/kg. Isoflu-
sis. For the treatment and prophylaxis of trichomoniosis
 rane admiristered by mask is the anaesthetic of choice.
carnidazole, dimetridazole, and metronidazole are used.
Vaccines. Under The Diseases of Poultry Order 1994 (SI
Dimetridazole has a low safety margin and toxicity will
1994/3141) as amended, all racing pigeons entered for
result in CNS signs, incoordination, and death. These drugs 
races, shows, or training, whether wholly or partly within
are also used for the treatment of hexamitosis, a cause of
GB, must be vaccinated against pigeon paramyxovirus 1
severe debility and rapid death in young pigeons.
using a vaccine approved by DEFRA for this purpose (see
 Parasiticidal therapy. Gastro-intestinal
roundworms
section 18.6.21). Separate (see section 18.6.23) and combi-
found in pigeons include Ascaridia and Capillaria spp.
nation vaccines (see section 18.6.29) are available for
pigeon pox. A vaccine against Saimonella typhimurium
Drugs used for treatment include fenbendazole, febantel,
(paratyphoid) in pigeons is also available (see section
ivermectin, levamisole, and piperazine.
18.6.22).
Levamisole is often unpalatable when added to drinking
Further information on pigeons is available:
water and oral levamisole may cause vomiting. This drug
should preferably be administered by injection. It is usually
David C, Tudor B S. Pigeon Heafth and Disease. Iowa:
necessary to withhold water for a period before feeding and
Iowa State Umiversity Press, 1991.
54  Guidance on prescribing
Table 5 Antimicrobial doses of drugs for pigeons1. 2
Drug
By mouth
By addition to drinkingwater
By injection
Amoxicillin
40-80 mg/kg twice daily for
20 mg/kg daily for 3-5 days1
30 mg/kg i.m. twice daily
5 days
50-100 mg/kg daily for 3-5
for 5 days (formulation to
days#3
use: long-acting
preparation)
Amoxicillin with clavulanic
100 mg/kg daily for 5 days
acid4
Amprolium
28 mL (Coxoid)/4.5 litres for
7 days1
Carnidazole
(adult birds) 10 mg/bird;
(young birds) 5 mg/bird1
Cefalexin
50 mg/kg 4 times daily for 5
days (formulation to use:
cefalexin 100 mg/mL oral
suspension)
Clazuril
2.5 mg/bird1
Diclazuril
1 mL (Vecoxan)/2.5 kg daily
for2 days
Difloxacin
7.5 mg/kg daily for 5 days
10 mg/kg daily for 5 days
Dimetridazole
1.2 g/4.5 litres1 for7 days
Doxycycline
10-20 mg/kg once daily for
15 mg/kg1 daily for 3-5 days
3-5 days
Enrofloxacin
5-20 mg/kg 1-2 times daily
5-20 mg/kg daily for 5 days
10-20 mg/kg s.c. daily for
for 5-10 days
or 100-200 mg/L for 5 days
7-10 days
Erythromycin
Sone level 5-mL spoonful
powder (Erythrocin Soluble,
Ceva) in 2.27L
Itraconazole
26 mg/kg twice daily
Ketoconazole
30 mg/kg daily for 7 days
(formulation to use:
ketoconazole 200 mg tablets,
crushed and suspended in 
water)
Lincomycin/spectinomycin
100 mg activity/kg or 5one
Jevel 5-mL spoonful powder
(Linco-Spectin) in 3.4 L
Marbofloxacin
20 mg/kg once daily for 5
days
Prescribing for pigeons 55
Table 5 Antimicrobial doses of drugs for pigeons1. 2 (continued)
Drug
By mouth
By addition to drinkingwater
By injection
Metronidazole
40 mg/kg once daily for 5
days or
100 mg/kg on altemate days
for 3 treatments or
200 mg/kg as a single dosee
Nystatin
20 000-100 000 units daily
for 7 days
Oxytetracycline
100 mg/kg once daily for 5
133-444 mg/L
100 mg/kg i.m. on
days
alternate days
Sulfadimethoxine1
1 g/2 litres (40 birds) for 5
days1
Sulfadimidine
2 g/L for 3 days. Repeat dose
1-2 times at intervals of 2
days or
6 mL/L for 5 days. Repeat
after 5 days (formulation to
use: sulphadimidine injection
333 mg/mL)
Sulfatroxazole with
60 mg for 3 days
480 mg/L for 3-5 days
trimethoprim
(formulation to use: 480 mg
dispersible tablets)
Tetracycline
5one level 5-mL spoonful
g) in 4.55 L
Tiamulin
250 mg/L for 3-5 days
(fomulation to use: Tiamutin
12.5% solution
Toltrazuril
7.5 mg/kg daily for 3 days
Tylosin
100 mg/kg daily for 3 days
500 mg/L for 3-5 days
1 drug doses for preparations that have a marketing authorisation for use in pigeons in the UK. Therefore unless marked 1, the 
drugs or doses stated are not authorised for this species
2 for the purposes of this table, it is assumed that a cock racing pigeon weighs 500 g and a pigeon drinks 50 mL water per day
3 preferred dosage to ensure adequate drug intake particularly in ill pigeons with reduced water intake
4 dose expressed as amoxicillin
5 5-mL medicine spoonful: a level spoonful is the amount of powder left in the spoon when the top of the heap has been gently
scraped off with a straight edge but not packed down
treatment of choiceforhexamitosis and severe trichomoniosis
56Guidance on prescribing
Table 6 Parasiticidal doses of drugs for pigeons1
By addition to
Drug
By mouth
drinking water
By injection
Topical application
 Endoparasiticides
Febantel
15 mg/bird1
Fenbendazole
8 mg/bird1
Ivermectin
 600 micrograms/kg.
 200 micrograms/kg
600 micrograms/kg. May
May be repeated after
s.c., i.m. May be
be repeated after 7-10 days
7-10 days
repeated after 7-10
days
Levamisole
20 mg/bird, repeat
1 mL/420 mL
after 3 weeks1
(formulation to use:
levamisole injection
75 mg/mL)
Piperazine
1.9 g/litre for 30
birds1
Praziquantel
10-20 mg/kg. Repeat
0.1 mL/bird s.c.
in 10-14 days
Repeat after 4 weeks
(formulation to use:
(formulation to use:
praziquantel 50 mg
praziquantel injection
tablets, crushed and
56.8 mg/mL)
suspended in water)
Ectoparasiticides
Benzyl benzoate
Apply benzyl benzoate
25% solution directly to
Jesions
Ivermectin
600 micrograms/kg.
 600 micrograms/kg. May
May be repeated after
be repeated after 7-10
7-10 days²
days3
Permethrin
Dusting powder1
Pyrethrins
Dusting powder, spray1
1 drug doses for preparations that have a marketing authorisation for use in pigeons in the UK. Therefore unless marked 1, the
drugs or doses stated are not authorised for this species
2 Solution to use: 3 mL ivermectin 10 mg/mL with 10 mL propylene glycol. Administer0.1 mL solution/pigeon of 500 g body-
weight
3Solution to use: 0.05 mL of ivermectin *pour-on* 5 mg/mL or 3 mL ivermectin 10 mg/mL with 10 mL propylene glycol and
administer 0.1 mL solution/pigeon of 500 g body-weight
57
Prescribing for laboratory animals
Contributor:
proposed or current study, and in these circumstances it
Professor P A Flecknell MA, VetMB, PhD, DLAS, DipECVA,
may be necessary to kill the animals humanely. Although
DECLAM, MRCVS
treatment may interfere with an experiment, this should not
Animals used in research include guinea pigs, mice, rats
 be a total contra-indication for the use of medication. When
and other small rodents, rabbits, primates, dogs, cats, farm
withholding treatment would compromise the welfare of the
animals, and a range of less familiar species such as
 animals, for example, when deciding whether to admirister
amphibians, reptiles, fish, and some invertebrates.
analgesics, special care must be taken to ensure that a spe-
Vertebrates used in research are protected under the Ani-
 cific scientific justification is provided if treatment is to be
mais (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986 along with certain
 withheld. If the veterinary surgeon is still uncertain as to the
invertebrates such as the common octopus Octopus vul-
correct action to be taken the Home Office Inspectorate
garis. All premises registered under the Act must employ a
may be consulted
-m pe yiey sun uo ssape cn uons aeuna p.
Treatment may require medication of an individual animal
fare of all laboratory animals. The animals are under the
 or mass medication. Drugs may be administered to groups
care of the named veterinary surgeon and it is appropriate
 of animals via the feed or drinking water. Antibacterials
that he or she should take responsibility for prescribing all
administered in the drinking water may be ineffective due
required medication and formulating preventive health
to reduction in water consumption as a consequence of the
control programmes.
preferable, although very labour intensive, to administer
whether the animals are being or will be used for any exper-
imental procedures. If so, the proposed therapy should be
animal.
discussed with the Animal Care and Welfare Officer, the
personal licensee, and the project licence holder. The per-
sonal licensee carries out the experiment described in the
 marketing authorisation have not been approved for use in
project licence and is the person immediately responsible
 some of these species, most products authorised for humanl
for the welfare of the animals. The project licence holder is
use will have been administered to laboratory animals pre-
required to justify the use of the animals and to provide an
viously in order to assess drug safety and efficacy. There-
assurance that no suitable in vitro techniques, which would
 fore information may be obtained from scientific literature
avoid the need to use live animals, are available
Or pharmaceutical companies. In addition see Prescribing
When determiming a therapeutic regimen, the welfare of the
 for fish, Prescribing for rabbits, Prescribing for rodents,
tion. In many instances it will be found that treatment can-  estimation, and chapters 1 to 17 for specific drug dosage
not be undertaken, as it could influence the results of the  regimenis.
58
Prescribing for rodents
Contributor:
by Mycoplasma puimonis, and in the rat this may be treated
Professor P A Flecknell MA, VetMB, PhD, DLAS, DipECVA,
using oxytetracycline or enrofloxacin, given by injection.
DECLAM, MRCVS
Cephalosporins are also useful in treating respiratory dis-
Gerbils, guinea pigs, hamsters, mice, and rats are kept as
eases in rats and mice, but affected animals frequently
pets, exhibited, and used for research.
develop chronic lung lesions, which can rarely be treated
successfully.
Drug administration. Administration of medication to
Antibacterials are of limited value in the treatment of gas-
tro-intestinal disturbances in guinea pigs, and most empha-
ment, animals should be accurately weighed in order to
sis should be given to maintaining fluid balance using both
determine the correct dose of a drug. Many drug prepara-
oral fluids (see section 16.1.1) and parenteral fluid therapy,
tions will have to be diluted to obtain the required dose in a
for example, using Hartmann's solution, administered by
volume that can be administered accurately. Some drugs are
intravenous, intraperitoneal, or subcutaneous injection.
not water soluble and may require dilution in other sol vents.
When treating diarrhoea in hamsters (* wet tail'), fluid ther-
These species will often more readily accept oral medica-
tion if either palatable veterinary preparations or human
apy is of major importance, but neomycin given by mouth,
may also be of value.
 paediatric sugar-based formulations are used. Medication
Subcutaneous abscesses are seen quite frequently, espe-
may also be incorporated into highly palatable foods or
cially in guinea pigs. These abscesses usually require surgi-
cubes of fruit-flavoured jelly. The jelly should be reconsti-
       
tuted in half the recommended quantity of water, allowed to
 preparation. Systemic antibacterial therapy should also be
cool and the drug then added. Sucrose may be added to the
instituted. Treatment at arl early stage of abscess develop-
medicated drinking water to increase palatability (50 g/litre
ment is usually successful, but if the lesion has become
drinking water).
extensive, repeated drainage may be required.
Antimicrobial therapy. The use of antimicrobial drugs
in guinea pigs and hamsters is associated with a high inci-
Parasiticide therapy. Parenteral and topical ectoparasit-
dence of undesirable side-effects. Clindamycin, lincomycin,
icides may be used for the treatment of mites in rodents.
The safety and efficacy in rodents of many products cur-
fatal adverse reactions through an effect on gastro-intestinal
rently available is uncertain, and the most widely used ther-
micro-organisms. Cephalosporins can also be toxic in ham-
apy for ectoparasitic infection is ivermectin. Surface-living
- ssno e suonn eio pue sid eouns pue ss
mites, for example, Cheyletiella and Myobia may be treated
tro-intestinal
disturbance and death in guinea
pigs.
using permethrin-containing dusting powders. Treatment
Alteration of the normal bacterial flora in the intestine
may need to be repeated on several occasions at 10 to 21
results in proliferation of organisms such as Clostridium
day intervals. Sarcoptic mange in guinea pigs is caused by
Trixacarus caviae infection. The treatment of choice is iver-
When administering anti bacterials to guinea pigs, it may be
mectin. Treatment of both affected and clinically normal in-
advisable to provide a vitamin supplement (such as H Abi-
contact animals may be required at 7 to 10 day intervals for
dec, Pfizer Consumer) and lactobacilli (live yoghurt) and to
six weeks. For all ectoparasitic infestations, the caging
continue this for five days after completion of therapy. In all
should be thoroughly cleaned.
species, if diarrhoea develops during antibacterial adminis-
 Treatment of endoparasites, such as Syphacia obvelata the
tration, drug treatment should be discontinued. Rats and
mouse pinworm, may be required. Ivermectin is effective
mice appear much less susceptible to disturbances to the
 and when treating large groups of animals it is most con-
gastro-intestinal tract, but antibacterials such as streptomy-
veniently administered in the feed or drinking water. If nec-
essary, treatment can be repeated after 2 to 3 weeks.
toxic effect in these species, causing flaccid paralysis,
 Ivermectin has been reported to be effective in a range of
coma, respiratory arrest, and death. Griseofulvin should be
small mammals, and the very wide range of dosages used
used with caution in guinea pigs because the drug is derived
suggests that this drug is generally safe for these species.
from Penicillium cultures. The usual antibacterial course is
Adverse reactions associated with high mortality have beenl
5 to 7 days.
noted in C57/BL6 mice and related strains, indicating the
The most common bacterial infections in rodents are respi-
need for caution before treating large numbers of animals.
ratory tract infections, gastro-intestinal tract disease, and
Anaesthetics. Many anaesthetics and analgesics are
subcutaneous abscesses caused by fight wounds or other
used in rodents. A drug may be used alone or in combina-
injuries. Pneumonia in guinea pigs caused by Bordetella
tion. All of the commonly used volatile anaesthetics such as
bronchiseptica can be treated using enrofloxacin, provided
halothane, isoflurane, and sevoflurane can be used to pro-
therapy is commenced early in the course of the disease.
vide safe and effecti ve anaesthesia in rodents. Ether is irri
Respiratory infection in rats and mice may involve infection
tant to mucous membranes, flammable, and explosive and
Prescribing for rodents
59
should not be used. Volatile anaesthetics are generally fec-
control post-operati ve and other pain in rodents.
ommended as the most suitable means of anaesthetising
Small rodents may be in poor clinical condition when pre-
small rodents, because the depth of anaesthesia can be
sented for anaesthesia, especially those requiring dental
altered and both induction and recovery are generally rapid.
 treatment. These animals may be significantly dehydrated,
Safe inspired concentrations of volatile anaesthetics are
and if a fluid deficit is considered likely, then replacement
similar to those used in dogs and cats. If injectable agents
therapy before inducing anaesthesia may be of significant
are used, then ketamine + medetomidine, or ketamine +
benefit. In small rodents, warmed fluid (for example
xylazine are recommended. These combinations cause mild
sodium chloride 0.18% + glucose 4% or Hartmanins solu-
or moderate respiratory depression and oxygen should be
tion) can be given by intraperi toneal or subcutaneous routes
administered during anaesthesia. Atipamezole should be
and this will be absorbed inn 8 to 12 hours.
administered to reverse medetomidine or xylazine,but this
Further information on rodents is available:
will reverse both the sedative and analgesic actions of these
Meredith A, Redrobe, S (eds). Manual of Exotic Pets.
agents and it is important to ensure that other analgesics
Gloucester: BSAVA Publications, 2002
have been administered. Opioids such as buprenorphine or
Quesenberry, K E, Carpeniter J W. Ferrets, Rabbits and
NS AIDs including carprofen and meloxicam can be used to
Rodents, Clinical Medicine and Surgery 2nd ed. St.
Louis: Saunders, 2003.
Table 7 Parasiticidal doses of drugs for rodents!
Drug
Gerbil
Guinea pig
Hamster
Mouse
Rat
Endoparasiticides
Ivermectin
200-400
200-500 micro-
200-400 micro-
200-400
200-400 micro-
micrograms/kg s.c.
grams/kg s.c.
grams/kg s.c.
micrograms/kg s.c.
 grams/kg s.c.
500 micrograms
p.o.
Piperazine
5 g/L drinking
3 g/L drinking
10 g/L drinking
5 g/L drinking water
2 g/L drinking
water for 7 days
water for7days
water for 7 days
for 7 days
water for7days
Ectoparasiticides
Ivermectin
-- as above for all species-
Permethrin
 dusting powder, 'spot-on*1 (dose depends on body-weight) -
1 drug doses for preparations that have a marketing authorisation for use in these species in the UK. Therefore, unless marked 1,
the drug or doses stated are not authorised for these species
 Table 8 Doses of other drugs for rodents1
Drug
Gerbil
Guinea pig
Hamster
Mouse
Rat
Dexamethasone
400 micrograms/  600 micro-
kg s.c.
grams/kg s.c.
Oxytocin
1-3 units/kg i.m.
0.2-3.0 units/kg
i.m.
Phenobarbital
10-20 mg/kg
p.o.
1 drug doses for preparations that have a marketing authorisation for use in these species in the UK. Therefore, unless marked 1,
the drug or doses stated are not authorised for these species
60
Guidance on prescribing
Table 9 Antimicrobial doses of drugs for rodents1
Gerbit
Guinea pig
Hamster
Mouse
Rat
Amoxicillin
100 mg/kg s.c.once
150 mg/kg i.m. once daily
daily
Ampicillin
150 mg/kg s.c. twice
150 mg/kg s.c.twice
daily
daily
Benzylpenicillin
60 mg/kg i.m. twice
12 mg/kg p.o. once daily
daily
(forrmulation to use:injec-
tion, powder for recon sti-
tution)
Cefalexin
25 mg/kg i.m.
15 mg/kg i.m.
60 mg/kg p.o. daily in 3
60 mg/kg p.o. daily in 3
once daily
twice daily
divided doses
divided doses
30 mg/kg i.m. once
15 mg/kg s.c. once daily
daily
Chloram-
30 mg/kg i.m.
50 mg/kg p.o. 3
30 mg/kg s.c.
200 mg/kg p.o. 3 times
20-50 mg/kg p.o. twice
phenicol
once daily
times daily
twice daily
daily
daily
20 mg/kg i.m.
50 mg/kg s.c. twice
10 mg/kgi.m.twice daily
twice daily
daily
Enrofloxacin
50-100 mg/L
50-100 mg/L
50-100 mg/L
50-100 mg/L drinking
 50- 100 mg/L
drinking water
drinking water
drinking water
water
drinking water
5 mg/kgp.o.,
5 mg/kg p.o., s.c.
5 mg/kg p.o., s.c.
5 mg/kg p.o., s.c. twice
5 mg/kg p.o., s.c. twice
s.c. twice daily1
twice daily1
twice daily1
daily1
daily1
Gentamicin
5 mg/kg i.m.
5-8 mg/kg s.c.
2-4mg/kg s.c.
5mg/kg i.m.once
4.4 mg/kgi.m. twice
once daily
once daily
twice daily
daily
daily
Griseofulvin
15-25 mg/kg
25 mg/kg p.o.once
25-30mg/kgp.o.
25 mg/kg p.o.once
25 mg/kg p.o. once daily
p.o. once daily
daily for 2 weeks
once daily for 3
daily for 2 weeks
for 2 weeks
for 3 weeks
800 micrograms/
weeks
kg feed
Neomycin
100 mg/kg p.o.
5 mg/kg p.o. twice
250mg/kg p.o.
2.5 g/L drinking water
 2 g/L drinking water
daily in divided
daily
daily in divided
doses
doses
Oxytetracycline
5 g/L drinking
5 g/L drinking
400 mg/L drinking
800 mg/L drinking water
water
water
water
10 mg/k g s.c. twice daily
20 mg/kg s.c.
20 mg/kg s.c.
10 mg/kg s.c.twice
once daily
once daily
daily
Streptomycin
25 mg/kg s.c.
once daily
Sulfadiazine with
120 mg/kg s.c.
48mg/kg
120 mg/kg s.c. once daily
 trimethoprim
once daily
s.c.once daily
Sulfadimidine
20 g/L drinking
500 mg/L drinking
200 mg/L drinking water
water
water
Tetracycline
20 mg/kg p.o.
10 mg/kg p.o.
500 mg/L drinking
15-20 mg/kg p.o.twice
twice daily
once daily
water
daily
Tylosin
10 mg/kg s.c.
500 mg/L drink-
10 mg/kg p.o., s.c.
10 mg/kg i.m. once daily
once daily
ing water
10 mg/kg s.c.
once daily
1 drug doses for preparations that have a marketing authorisation for use in these species in the UK. There fore, unless marked ', the drug
or doses stated are not authorised for these species
Prescribing for rodents
61
Table 10 Doses of analgesics and anaesthetics for rodents1
Gerbit
Guinea pig
Hamster
Mouse
Rat
Acepromiazine
2.5mg/kg
2.5mg/kg
2.5mg/kg
2.5mg/kg
2.5mg/kg
i.ml., i.p.
i.TTL.
i.., i.p.
i.TTl.
i.m., i.p.
Alfaxalone/alfadolone
y
10mg-15 mg/kg
10-12mg/kg
i.p.
i.v.
i.v.
Atipalezole
1 mig/kg s.C.,
Img/kg s.c., i.m.,
1mg/kg s.c.,i.T,
1 mg/kg s.c.,i.,
I ig/kg s.c., i.1Tl,
i.., i.p., i.v.
i.p., i.v.
i.p., i.v.
i.p., i.v.
i.p., i.v.
Atropine
 40 microgTais/
40microgramis/kg
 0
kg s.c., i.ml.
S.C., 1.TTI.
5.C., 1.IT1.
S.C., 1.TI.
S.C., 1.I
Buprenorphine
100microgTams/
50 microgramis/kg
100 muicrogramis/kg
100microgTaTIs/
kg s.c.
5.C.
5.C.
kg s.c.
5.C.
Butorphano]
2mg/kg s.c.
1-5 mg/kg s.c.
2 mig/kg s.c.
Carprofen
5mg/kg s.c.twice
5mg/kg s.c.twice
daily
daily
Diazeparmt
5mg/kg
2.5 mg/kg i.m,i.p.
5mg/kg
5mg/kg
2.5 mg/kg
i.p.
i.p.
i.ml., i.p.
i.p.
DoxaprafTt
5-10mg/kg
5-10 mg/kg i.v.
5-10 mg/kg
5-10mg/kg
5-10mg/kg
i. v.
i.v.
i.v.
i.v.
Fentanyl citrate/fluanisone
0.5-1.0mL/kg
1.0 mL/kg i.m.1
0.5-1.0 mL/kg i.l.,
0.01 mL/30 gi.p.1
0.4mL/kgi.TL,
i.TTL.
i.p.
i.p.1
Flunixin
2.5 mig/kg s.c.
2.5 mg/kg s.c.
twice daily
twice daily
Ketamine
200mg/kg
"1 8y8m 001
200 mg/kg
150 mg/kg
ya001
i.ml., i.p.
i.p.
i.m., i.p.
i.ml., i.p.
i.m., i.p.
Ketanmine
40 mg/kg
100mg/kg
75mg/kg
75mg/kg
+Tledetolidine
+ 500 mlicTOgTaTTS/
+250microgTaTs/kg
+ I mig/kgi.p.
0 +
kgi.p.
i.p.
kg i.p.
Ketamine
50mg/kg
40mg/kg
200mg/kg
100mg/kg
y06
+xylazine
+ 2 mig/kg i.mm.
+5 mig/kg i.ml.
+10mig/kgi.p.
+ 10 mig/kg i.p.
+ 10 mg/kg i.p.
Ketoprofen
5 mig/kg i.ml.
Meloxicaml
2 mig/kg p.o., s.c.
1-2mg/kgp.o.,s.c.
A
once daily
Methohexital
30 mg/kg i.p.
10 mg/kg i.v.
7-10 mg/kgi.v.
Morphine
5 mig/kg s.c.
5 mg/kg s.c.
5 mig/kg s.c.
Nalbuphine
4-8 mg/kg s.c.
1-2 mig/kg s.c.
Naloxone
10-100micro-
10-100micro-
10-100 microgTams/
10-100micro-
10-100 micro-
grams/kg i.m,
grams/kg i.m.,i.p..
kg i.TTl., i.p., i. v.
grams/kg i.m,
grams/kg i.m.,i.p,
i.p., i.v.
1.V.
i.p., i.v.
1. v.
Pentazocine
10 mg/kg s.c.
10 mg/kg s.c.
Pethidine
I0 mig/kg s.c., i.l.
10mg/kg s.c,
10 mg/kg s.c., i.mml.
i.TTL.
Propofol
26 mg/kg i.v.
10 mg/kg i.v.
Thiopental
30-40 mg/kg i.v.
30 mg/kg i.v.
1drug doses for preparafions that have a marketing authorisation for use in these species in the UK Therefore, unless marked ', the drug
stoads aseui log pestiouine jou aie peleis sesop 1o
62
Prescribing for rabbits
Contributor:
gastro-intestinal disturbances in rabbits and most emphasis
Professor P A Flecknell MA, VetMB, PhD, DLAS, DipECVA,
should be given to maintaining fluid balance using both oral
DECLAM, MRCVS
fluids (see section 16.1.1) and parenteral fluid therapy, for
example, using Hartmann's solution, administered by intra-
Rabbits are kept as pets, exhibited, used for research, and
may also be bred for meat or fur production. There is grow.
venous, intraperitoneal, or subcutaneous injection.
Subcutaneous abscesses are seen quite frequently, espe-
cially in rabbits. These abscesses usually require surgical
tions with poor housing and this may have an effect on the
ugeiedaid sursueno punom e wim saeael pue saeueip
disorders seen in these animals.
Systemic antibacterial therapy should also be instituted.
Drug administration. Medication may be admi nistered
Treatment at an early stage of abscess development is usu-
to rabbits by mouth or by injection. Before treatment, ani-
ally successful, but if the lesion has become extensive,
mals should be accurately weighed ini order to determine the
repeated drainage may be required.
correct dose of a drug. Many drug preparations will have to
Antimicrobial therapy may also be required to treat masti-
be diluted to obtain the required dose in a volume that canl
be administered accurately. Some drugs are not water solu-
tis. This cani occur in lactating or pseudopregnant does. Sev-
erly affected animals may require fluid and other supportive
ble and may require dilution in other solvents.
therapy, and debridement and drainage of the affected
Rabbits will often more readily accept oral medication if
tissue.
either palatable veterinary preparations or human paediatric
 Parasiticide therapy. Parenteral and topical ectoparasit-
sugar-based formulationis are used. Medication may also be
incorporated into highly palatable foods or cubes of fruit-
icides may be used for the treatment of mites in rabbits. The
flavoured jelly. The jelly should be reconstituted in half the
safety and efficacy in rabbits of many products currently
recommended quantity of water, allowed to cool and the
available is uncertain, and the most widely used therapy for
drug then added. Sucrose may be added to medicated drink-
ectoparasitic infection is ivermectin. Ear mites, Psoroptes
cunicufi, in rabbits can be treated either with topical acari-
Antimicrobial therapy. The use of antimicrobial drugs
cides or by subcutaneous administration of ivermectin. Sur-
in rabbits is associated with a high incidence of undesirable
face-living mites, for example Cheyletiella and Myobia,
side-effects. Clindamycin, lincomycin, erythromycin, and
narrow-spectrum penicillins can produce fatal adverse reac-
ders. Treatment may need to be repeated onl several occa-
tions through an effect on gastro-intestinal micro-organ-
sions at 10 to 21 day intervals. Imidacloprid may be used
isms. Alteration of the normal bacterial flora in the intestine
for flea infestation on rabbits more than 10 weeks of age.
results in proliferation of organisms such as Clostridium
   so ods,  pde s n 
spp. and the production of an often fatal enterotoxaemia.
ectoparasitic infestations, the caging should be thoroughly
When administering antibacterials to rabbits, it may
be
cleaned.
advisable to provide a vitamin supplement (such as  Abi-
Rabbits are susceptible to myiosis (fly-strike), especially
dec, Pfizer Consumer) and lactobacilli (live yoghurt) and to
when kept in hutches with poor standards of husbandry.
continue this for five days after completion of therapy. If a
Obesity and dental disease also predispose to the condition,
rabbit develops diarrhoea during antibacterial therapy, or is
due to accumulation of caecotrophs around the perineum as
 presented with clinical signs of enterotoxaemia, treatment
a result of reduced grooming. If untreated, the condition can
be life-threatening. The animal should be sedated, the mag-
with colestyramine may be of value. If diarrhoea develops
during antibacterial administration, drug treatment should
gots removed, and the fur clipped and cleaned, and topical
be discontinued. The usual antibacterial course is 5 to 7
and systemic antibiotics admimistered. Fluid and supportive
days.
treatment is also required. Ivermectin should be adminis-
The most common bacterial infections in rabbits are respi-
tered and an NSAID such as carprofen may be useful. The
ratory tract infections, gastro-intestinal tract disease, and
underlying cause of the problem should be addressed and
subcutaneous abscesses caused by fight wounds or other
routine use of cyromazine can help prevent recurrence.
Anaesthetics. Many anaesthetics and analgesics
are
by Pasteurella muttocida, and remission of clinical signs
used in rabbits. A drug may be used alone or in combina-
can usually be obtained using cefalexin or sulfadiazine with
tion. All of the commonly used volatile anaesthetics such as
trimethoprim. Recurrence of infection is however common,
halothane, isoflurane, and sevoflurane can be used to pro-
even following prolonged periods of therapy of 10 to 21
vide safe and effective anaesthesia in rabbits. Induction of
days. Ocular involvement is frequently associated with
anaesthesia with inhalational agents in rabbits is not recom-
naso-lacrimal blockage; flushing of the duct with either
mended unless the animal has been heavily sedated. Safe
saline or anti bacterial solutions may be beneficial.
inspired concentrations of volatile anaesthetics are similar
Antibacterials are of limited value in the treatment of
to those used in dogs and cats.
Prescribing for rabbits 63
If injectable agents are used, then the combination of keta-
bandage. After 45 to 60 minutes, the dressing is removed,
mine + medetomidine, or ketamine + xylazine are recom-
the ear cleaned, and venepuncture undertaken. If intrave-
mended. Both of these combinations cause mild or
nious administration is not possible, then fluids can be given
moderate respiratory depression, and oxygen should be 
intraperitoneally or subcutaneously, although absorption
administered during anaesthesia. Atipamezole should be
 from the latter route may take 8 to 12 hours, and be rela-
administered to reverse medetomidine or xylazine, but this
ti vely ineffecti ve if the animal is severly dehydrated.
will reverse both the sedative and analgesic actions of these
 Other drugs. Authorised preparations of buserelin are
agents and it is important to ensure that other analgesics
available for the induction of postpartum ovulation in rab-
have been administered. Opioids such as buprenorphine or
 NSAIDs including carprofen and meloxicam can be used to
reported to be of value in this species and dosages are listed
control post-operative and other pain in rabbits.
in table.
Rabbits may be in poor clinical condition when presented
Vaccines. Rabbits may be vaccinated against infectious
for anaesthesia, especially those requiring dental treatment.
myxomatosis and viral haemorrhagic disease (see section
These animals may be significantly dehydrated, and if a
18.7).
fluid deficit is considered likely, then replacement therapy
Further information on rabbits is available:
before inducing anaesthesia may be of significant benefit.
Flecknell,P A (ed).Manual of Rabbit Medicine and
Warmed fluid (for example sodium chloride 0.18% + glu-
Surgery. Gloucester: BSAVA Publications, 2000
cose 4% or Hartmann's solution) can be given by the intra-
Harcourt-Brown, F. Textbook of Rabbit Medicine.
venous route. A catheter (20 to 25 gauge) can be placed in
Oxford: Butter worth-Heinemann, 2002
the ear vein or cephalic or saphenous veins. Placement of
Quesenberry, K E, Carpenter J W. Ferrets, Rabbits and
the catheter is facilitated by applying local anaesthetic
Rodents, Clinical Medicine and Surgery 2nd ed. St.
Cream ( @ Emla, AstraZeneca) to the ear. The cream is coy-
Louis: Saunders, 2003.
        
Table 11 Antimicrobial doses of drugs for rabbitst
Drug
Dose
Cefalexin
15 mg/kg s.c. twice daily
 Chloramphenicol
50 mg/kg p.o. once daily
15 mg/kg i.m. twice daily
Chlortetracycline
1 g/L drinking water
Clopidol
200 g/tonne feed1
Enrofloxacin
50-100 mg/L drinking water
5-10 mg/kg p.o., s.c. twice daily1
Gentamicin
4 mg/kg i.m. once daily
Griseofulvin
25 mg/kg p.o. once daily for 4 weeks
Neomycin
 200-800 mg/L drinking water
Oxytetracycline
30 mg/kg p.o. twice daily
15 mg/kg i.m. twice daily
Robenidine
50-66 g/tonne feed'
Streptomycin
50 mg/kg i.m. once daily
Sulfadiazine with trimethoprim 48 mg/kg s.c. once daily
Sulfadimidine
100-233 mg/L drinking water
Tetracycline
30 mg/kg p.o. twice daily
1 drug doses for preparations that have a marketing authorisation for use in these species in the UK. Therefore, unless marked 1.
the drug or doses stated are not authorised for these species
64Guidance on prescribing
Table 12 Parasiticidal doses of drugs for rabbits 1
Drug
Dose
Endoparasiticides
 Ivermectin
200-400 micrograms/kg s.c.
400 micrograms p.o.
Piperazine
500 micrograms/kg p.0., repeat after 10 days
Ectoparasiticides
Cyromazine1
apply 6% solution (Rearguard, Novartis) topically every 8-10 weeks
Imidacloprid1
40 mg, applied as 'spot-on' (Advantage, Bayer)
Ivermectin
as above
Permethrin
dusting powder, shampoo
1 drug doses for preparations that have a marketing authorisation for use in these species in the UK. Therefore, unless marked ',
the drug or doses stated are not authorised for these species
Table 13 Doses of other drugs for rabbits!
Drug
Dose
Colestyramine
2 g/adult daily for 2 weeks
Dexamethasone
0.5-2.0 mg/kg s.c., i.m., i.v.
Fusidic acid1
eye ointment, apply 1-2 times daily
Gentamicin sulfate1
eye drops, apply three times daily
Metoclopramide
0.2-1.0 mg/kg p.o., s.c., i.m., i.v. twice daily
1 drug doses for preparations that have a marketing authorisation for use in these species in the UK. Therefore, unless marked ',
the drug or doses stated are not authorised for these species
Prescribing for rabbits65
Table 14 Doses of analgesics and anaesthetics for rabbits1
Drug
Dose
Acepromazine
1 mg/kg i.m.
Alfaxalone/alfadolone
6-9 mg/kg i.v.
Atipamezole
1 mg/kg s.c., i.m. i.p. i.v.
Atropine
50 micrograms/kg s.c., i.m.
Buprenorphine
50 micrograms/kg s.c., i.v.
Butorphanol
100-500 micrograms/kg s.c., i.v.
 Carprofen
1.5 mg/kg p.o. twice daily
2-4 mg/kg s.c. once daily
Diazepam
1-2 mg/kg i.m., i.v.
Doxapram
5-10 mg/kg i.v.
Fentanyl citrate/fluanisone
0.5 mL/kg i.m.1
Flunixin
1.1 mg/kg s.c. twice daily
Ketamine
 50 mg/kg i.m.
Ketamine
15 mg/kg
+ medetomidine
+ 250 micrograms/kg s.c.
Ketamine
35 mg/kg
+ xylazine
+ 5 mg/kg i.m.
 Ketoprofen
3 mg/kg i.m.
Meloxicam
100-300micrograms/kg p.o.once daily
200-300micrograms/kg s.c.once daily
Methohexital
10 mg/kg i.v.
Morphine
 5 mg/kg s.c.
 Nalbuphine
1-2 mg/kg i.v.
Naloxone
10-100 micrograms/kg i.m, i.p., i.v.
Pentazocine
5 mg/kg i.v.
Pethidine
10 mg/kg s.c., i.m.
Propofol
10 mg/kg i.v.
 Thiopental
30 mg/kg i.v.
1drug doses for preparations that have a marketing authorisation for use in these species in the UK. Therefore, unless marked 1,
the drug or doses stated are not authorised for these species
66
Prescribing for ferrets
Contributors:
acid supplements, double cream, taramasalata, or couscous.
S WCooke BVSc,MRCVS
Individuals may show a preference. Tablets may be given
whole with a commercial tablet administrator, such as that
In the UK, domesticated ferrets Mustela putorius furo, are
used for cats, but ferrets are oftenn not tolerant of tablet
now used for rabbit hunting, as pets, as show animals
administration. Alternatively tablets may be crushed and
(including demonstrations such as ferret racing), and for
mixed with a palatable substance. In view of the short intes-
biomedical research.
tinal transit time, tablets formulated for other species (espe-
Ferrets are carni vorous and will take prey much larger than
 cially humans) are likely to show rather low bioavailability.
themselves, killing it with their strong jaws and sharp
 Subcutaneous injections should be given in the neck and
canine teeth. They do not have a caecum and are unable to
shoulder regions using small gauge needles (22 g to 27 g) to
digest fibre. High concentration of carbohydrates in the diet
reduce discomfort. Up to 20 mL of fluid may be given at a
 may predispose to diabetes mellitus. The diet should con-
single injection site. Intramuscular injections should be
tain a high concentration of good quality protein (26 to 36%
given in the semitendinous, semimembranous, biceps femo-
wet matter basis), less than 30% carbohydrate, fat (15%),
ris, or lumbar muscles and a maximum volume of 0.25 mL
and approximately 4 kcal/g metabolisable energy. Commer-
may be given at any one site.
cially produced compounded diets are now readily availa-
ble. Excess fat in the diet may cause obesity, lethargy, and
Intravenous injections may be given into the cephalic, jugu-
poor reproductive performance. Hypovitaminosis E and
lat, or lateral saphenous veins; the jugular site is often
excess polyunsaturated fats may cause a steatitis and is usu-
 poorly tolerated. Liberal application of spirit or alcohol to
ally seen in young animals fed excessive amounts of fish or
the fur often allows better visualisation of the vein than
horsemeat. Fresh water should be provided ad lib. Thiamine
clipping. For long to medium term administration, 22 g to
deficiency may be caused by feeding young ferrets solely
24 g over-the-needle catheters should be used and may
on whole chicks due to the thiaminase contained in day old
require chemical restraint to ease placement. Butterfly cath-
eters (23 g to 25 g) are useful for short term fluid or chemo-
chick yolk sacs.
The Mustelinae all possess anal glands and produce a
therapy administration. The animal should be prevented
strongly smelling “musk'. However 90% of the animal's
from chewing the catheter by covering the area with adhe-
odour originates from the sebaceous glands. Neutering
sive dressing.
(both sexes) is effective at controlling odour and anal gland
Intra-osseous catheters are very useful in severely debili-
removal is not indicated for this purpose. In females,
tated animals. The femur (most commonly used), humerus,
oestrus may last up to 6 months and ovulation is coitus
or tibia are suitable bones. A 22 g to 20 g spinal needle or
induced.
similar sized hypodermic using sterile orthopaedic wire as a
Bone marrow suppression and irreversible anaemia may be
stylet may be used. Anaesthesia is required for placemenit.
   o   d  
Catheters may be left in place for several days for giving
should be terminated promptly by mating (preferably using.
intravenous medication (except some chemotherapeutics); a
a vasectomised male or hobble), neutering, or the use of
proligestone, Delvosteron (Intervet). The product may
ommended during this time and for 3 days after removal.
cause irritation on injection and care should be taken to
 Intraperitoneal injections should be restricted to euthanasia
avoid a bite reflex.
or fluid replacement in very debilitated animals due to the
Sexual maturity is at 8 to 12 months but may be as early as
risk of organ damage if the animal struggles.
5 months. Despite often uncontrolled interbreeding, on
Blood transfusions may be performed in ferrets. They have
average ferrets live for 5 to 7 years with evidence of ageing
no discernible blood types so a number of donors may be
beginning at 3years.
used for a single recipient. A maximum of 1% of body-
Due to their inquisitive nature, varied diet, and ability to
weight may be collected from the anaesthetised (preferably
chew, gastro-intestinal foreign bodies are commonly diag-
with isoflurane or sevoflurane) donor with either heparin or
nosed in ferrets. Gastric emptying ranges from 25 to 130
acid citrate dex trose (ACD) solution as anticoagulant and
minutes and small intestinal transit time is less than 120
admiristered immediately to the recipient at a rate of 0.25
mi nutes, the small intestine being best visualised in barium
to 0.5 mL/minute. Isoflurane anaesthesia causes red cell
series at 20 and 40 minutes post administration. Barium
sequestration to the spleen and so dramatically influences
often *sticks’ to the gut mucosa and such deposits should
 haematology parameters such that RBC count, haematocrit,
not be confused with filling defects.
and haemoglobin are all reduced by approximately 35%,
Drug administration. Ferrets readily accept oral medi-
and plasma-protein concentration by 20%. This effect
cation if the taste of the medicine is disguised in sweet or
should be taken into consideration when interpreting
fatty foods, for example flavoured syrups (not real choco-
 laboratory results reported for samples obtained under
late), cat laxatives, nutritional supplements, honey, fatty
anaesthesia.
Prescribing for ferrets 67
Antimicrobial therapy. Abscesses caused by Staphyfo-
leukaemia virus, mink enteritis, and canine parvovirus are
CoccuS,
Streptococcus,Pasteurella,Corynebacterium,
not thought to constitute a risk to ferrets.
Actinobacillus and E. coli occur as opportunist infections
 Blastomycosis, cryptococcosis, histoplasmosis, coccidio-
secondary to penetrating wounds, for example bites from
mycosis, and mucormycosis are all reported (especially
other ferrets or other animals, foreign bodies such as sharp
from the USA) and should be considered if other diseases
bones in the diet, or skin injuries.
are eliminated by appropriate diagnostic methods. Ring-
Bacterial pneumonia may be primary, or secondary to a
worm due to Microsporum canis and Trichophyton menta-
viral infection for ex ample influenza, or other illnesses such
grophytes are reported.
as hyperadrenocorticism or abscesses. Organisms impli-
Coccidia (Isospora spp.), Toxoplasma, Sarcocystis, Giardia
cated include Streptococcus zooepidemicus, S. pneumoniae,
may occur in ferrets.
E.coli,Klebsiella pneumoniae,Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
Antiparasiticidal therapy. Both internal and external
Bordetetla bronchiseptica andListeria monocytogenes.
parasites are common in ferrets and treatment is similar to
Enteritis is commonly seen, especially in young ferrets, and
that used for cats. Caution should be exercised with dosage
 of any preparation but particularly organophosphorus com-
tions, for example with E. cofi, may cause sudden death.
 pounds because the animal s small body-weight predisposes
Proliferative bowel disease caused by a Campylobacter
 to overdose and toxic dose levels have not beenn established.
(Desulfovibrio) affects ferrets of less than 1 year of age and
It is recommended to treat several times with the minimal
 may require treatment with gentamicin or chloramphenicol.
dose rather than attempt a single-dose medicatiorn.
Helicobacter mustelae infection is implicated in causing
Fleas (Ctenocephalides spp.), ear mites (Otodectes cynotis),
gastric ulceration, chronic atrophic gastritis, gastric adeno-
carcinoma, and mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lym-
affect ferrets. Sarcoptes infestation may be generalised or
phoma. Treatment includes amoxicillin combined with one
limited to the feet. Toxascaris, Toxocara, Ancylostoma, ces-
or two other appropriate anti biotics as well as mucosal pro-
todes, and (in the USA), heartworm (Dirofilaria immitis)
tectants, proton pump inhibitors, and H, antagonists. Other
 are all reported as occurring in ferrets.
Helicobacter spp. have been implicated in causing hepatic
Other drugs. Insulinoma is commonly reported as is
disease (ranging from cholangiohepatitis to neoplasia) in a
hyperadrenocorticism, and diabetes mellitus. Patients
colony of ferrets.
respond well to surgical resection for insulinoma. ACTH
stimulation and dexamethasone suppression tests to diag-
sis caused by Mycobacterium avium, M. bovis and M.
nose hyperadrenocorticism are not reliable in ferrets. Surgi-
tuberculosis. They are not very susceptible to leptospirosis
cal removal of adrenocortical adenomas and carcinomas is
but may be exposed if used for rodent control. Infection due
possible but there is a significant incidence of malignant
to Listeria monocytogenes has been reported.
myxoid differentiation of carcinomas and subsequent meta-
Botulism (Types A, B, and especially the common C) may
static spread, which reduces success rate and influences a
 pose a risk to animals fed uncooked food or by soil expo-
-soudi se yons sinoun otins jen on uoisiop
sure. Actinomycosis should be considered in the differential
coma, ovarian and other reproductive organ tumours (mam-
list for lumpy jaw: Both Mycoptasma and Chlamydophilia
mary tumours and pyometra are uncommon), skin and
(Chlamydia) have been isolated from ferrets but their clini-
subcutaneous tumours (mast cell tumours, squamous cell
cal significance is not known.
carcinomas and adenomas) occur in ferrets. A cutaneous
epitheliotropic lymphoma is reported to have responded
ally from dogs) with mortality approaching 100%. Intensive
palliatively to a 60-day course of isotretinoin. T-cell lym-
nursing and symptomatic treatment reduce mortality. Vacci-
 phoma affecting the mediastinum in young ferrets is com-
 monly recorded. Some lymphomas have features suggestive
from the manufacturer may be of value. Ferrets are also
of a retrovirus induction. Lymphoma and lymphosarcoma
very susceptible to rabies. There is a significant incidence
have been successfully treated with prednisolone alone to
(approximately 6%) of post vaccination anaphylactic shock
reaction to authorised distemper (modified live) and rabies
Starting treatment at immunosuppressive doses (2 mg/kg)
(inactivated) vaccines administered either together or sepa-
and reducing gradually often provides good remission but
rately. The reaction is characterised by hyperaemia, hyper-
over time greatly increased doses (up to 5 mg/kg twice
salivation, and vomiting 25 minutes post vaccination.
daily) may be necessary. More aggressive multi-agent
Dermal and subcutaneous tumours with some of the charac-
 chemotherapy regimens based on those used in dogs and
teristics of vaccine site fibrosarcomas have been reported.
cats also give good results with cases that relapse often
Aleutian disease, which is usually a problem in mink farms,
responding well to high dose vincristine or doxorubicin plus
is caused by a parvovirus but often remains as an asympto-
radiation therapy.
matic infection; morbidity and mortality are very variable.
 Dilated and hypertrophic cardiomyopathies are commonly
Human influenza virus infections are pathogenic for ferrets.
diagnosed and usually respond well to treatment initially.
In adults, infection is characterised by a short illness with
However, survival times in one study were only 3 to 5
      
 months from onset of climical signs.
cause high mortality in kits. Feline panleucopaenia, feline
Gastric dilation (may be associated with Clostridium
68  Guidance on prescribing
weichii), eosinophilic gastro-enteritis, periodonital disease, 
 tolerated if the protecti ve dressings are light and not restric-
posterior paralysis/paresis and splenomegaly (the latter two
ti ve but are sufficient to prevent chewing of the cap or cath-
may be caused by a rumber of other disease enitities and are
 eter end and subsequent gastro-intestinal foreign body
q se one e  e n od ou
problems. Calorific requirements are 200 to 300 kcal/kg/
significant clinical entities. A pseudohypoparathyroidism
Kep
causing seizures responded well to dihydrotachysterol and
For fluid administration in ferrets, maintenance replace-
calcium carbonate.
ment is approximately 60 to 70 mL/kg/24 hours. There is a
Zinc toxicosis is also reported as are cases of struvite uro-
high incidence of insulinoma in ferrets (in one report as
lithiasis and osteodystrophy. Treatment of conditions
high as 50% of individuals over 3 years of age) and glucose
2.5% or 5% + sodium chloride 0.9% solution should be
edge and techniques and modified where necessary by ref-
used rather than lactated Ringer s solution in animals over 3
years of age including during elective surgery if indicated.
compliance.
Ibuprofen has been reported as causing toxic effects includ-
Ketamine and medetomidine cause severe hypothermia as
ing depression, dyspnoea, and death in ferrets.
well as reduced respiratory and heart rates. External heat
Complete nutritional replacement therapy may be used in
must be provided when using these drugs and conisideration
debilitated or convalescing animals. Prescription diet a/d
 should be given to using inhalation anaesthesia for most if
(Hills) may be given at a dose of 10 to 20 mL/kg 3 to 6
 not all elective surgery. Mask or anaesthetic chamber induc-
times daily. Pharyngostomy tubing (using 8 to 19 F paediat-
tion with isoflurane or sevoflurane is considered the method
ric feeding tube placed under general anaesthesia) is well
of choice.
Table 15 Parasiticidal doses of drugs for ferrets
Drug
Dose
Endoparasiticides
 Fenbendazole
20 mg/kg p.o. daily for 5 days or
100 mg/kg as a sinigle dose2
Mebendazole
50 mg/kg p.o. twice daily for 2 days
Milbemycin oxime
1.15-2.30 mg/kg p.o. monthly
 Praziquantel
5-10 mg/kg s.c. Repeat after 2 weeks
Pyrantel
4.4 mg/kg p.o. as a single dose
Ectoparasiticides
Carbaril
shampoo, once weekly for 3-5 weeks
Ivermectin
0.4-1.0 mg/kg s.c. Repeat after one week
Pyrethrins
dusting powder, weekly for 3 weeks
1 drug doses for preparations that have a marketing authorisation for use in these species in the UK. There fore, unless marked 1, the drug or
doses stated are not authorised for these species
2 reported cases of bone marrow suppression, gastro-intestinal tract irritation, and teratogenicity in some mammalian species given high
doses
Prescribing for ferrets 69
Table 16 Antimicrobial doses of drugs for ferrets1
Drug
Dose
Amantadine
6 mg/kg p.o. or nebulisation twice daily
Amikacin
10- 15 mg/kg s.c., i.m. twice daily
Amoxicillin
10-20 mg/kg p.o., s.c. 2-3 times daily for 7-10 days
Amoxicillin with clavulanic acid2
13-25 mg/kg p.o., s.c., i.m. twice daily
Amphotericin B
0.25-1.0 mg/kg i.y. daily or on alternate days until total dose of 7-25 mg given
cryptococcosis,150 micrograms/kg i.v.3 times weekly for 2-4 months
Ampicillin
20 mg/kg p.o., s.c. twice daily
10 mg/kg i.m. twice daily
Cefadroxil
15-20 mg/kg p.o. twice daily
Cefalexin
15-30 mg/kg p.o. 2-3 times daily
Ciprofloxacin
10 mg/kg p.o. twice daily
 Clindamycin
5.5- 10.0 mg/kg p.0. twice daily
Enroflox acin
5- 10 mg/kg p.o. twice daily
3-5 mg/kg s.c., i.m. twice daily
 Erythromycin
10 mg/kg p.0. 4 times daily
Gentamicin
5 mg/kg s.c., i.m. once daily
Griseofulvin
25 mg/kg p.o. once daily
Itraconazole
25-33 daily p.o. long term (Cryptococcus neoformans infection)
Ketoconazole
10-30 mg/kg p.0. once daily for 60 days
Lincomycin
11 mg/kg p.o. 3 times daily
 Metronidazole
20 mg/kg p.o. twice daily
Neomycin
10 mg/kg p.0. 4 times daily
Oxytetracycline
17-20 mg/kg p.o. 3 times daily
10 mg/kg i.m. twice daily
Sulfadiazine with trimethoprim
30 mg/kg p.o., s.c. twice daily
Sulfamethox azole with trimethoprim 
30 mg/kg p.o., s.c. twice daily
Tetracycline
20 mg/kg p.o. 3 times daily
Tylosin
10 mg/kg p.o. 3 times daily
5- 10 mg/kg i.m., i.v. twice daily
1 drug doses for preparations that have a marketing authorisation for use in these species in the UK. There fore, unless marked 1, the drug or
doses stated are not authorised for thesespecies
2 dose expressed as amoxicillin
70Guidance on prescribing
Table 17 Doses of analgesics and anaesthetics for ferretst
Drug
Dose
Acepromazine
100-250 micrograms/kg s.c., i.m.
Alfadolone + Alfax alone
10 mg/kg i.m.: 8-12 mg/kg i.v.
Atipamezole
0.41.0 mg/kg i.m.
Atropine
50 micrograms/kg s.c., i.m.
Buprenorphine
10-50 mg/kg s.c., i.m., i.v. 2-3 times daily
[oue qdiomg
10-50 mg/kg i.m. every 4-6 hours
Diazepam
1-2 mg/kg i.m.
Fentanyl + Droperido]
0.15 mL (lnnovar-Vet)/kgi.m.
Fentany] + Fluanisone
300 micrograms/kg i.m.
Glycopyrronium
10 micrograms/kg s.c.
Halothane
induction, 3.0-3.5%; main tenance, 0.5-2.5%
Jsoflurane
induction, 3.0-5.0%; main tenance, 1.5-3.0%
Ketarmine +.
20-35 mg/kg s.c.,i.m.
Acepromazine
200- 350 rmicrograms/kg for 30- 35 minutes effect
Ketarmine +
25-35 mg/kg s.c., i.m.
Diazepam
2-3mg/kg
Ketarmine +
10-25 mg/kg s.c., i.m. (use with caution)
Xylazine
1-2 mg/kgi.m.
Ketarmine+
10mg/kg
Medetomidine +
200 micrograms/kg i.m. (combination provides 28- 54 minutes anaesthesia, may be
reversed with atipamezole)
Medetomidine +
80 micrograms/kg i.m.
Ketamine +
5mg/kg
Butorphanol
Methoxyflurane
induction,1-3 %;maintenance,0.3-0.5%
Morphine
0.5-5.0 mg/kg s.c., i.m. every 2-6 hours
Nalbuphine
0.5-1.5 mg/kg i.m., i.v. every 2-3 hours
Naloxone
40 micrograms/k g s.c., i.m., i.v.
Oxymorphone
50-200 micrograms/kg s.c., i.m., i.v. 2-3 times daily
Pentazocine
5-10 mg/kg i.m. every 4 hours
Pethidine
5-10 mg/kg s.c., i.m., i.v. every 2-4 hours
Phencyclidine +
0.8-1.1 mg/kg i.m.
Promazine
1 mg/kg i.m.
Propofo]
2-10 mg/kg i.v.
Thiopental
8-12 mg/kg i.v.
Tiletamine + Zolazepam
8-22 mg/kg i.m.
Xylazine
4 mg/kg s.c.
1 drug doses for preparations that have a marketing authorisafion for use in these species in the UK. Therefore, unless marked 1, the drug or
dosesstated are not authorised for these species
Prescribing for ferrets   71
Table 18 Doses of other drugs for ferrets1
Drug
Dose
Aminophylline
4.4-6.6 mg/kg p.o., i.m. twice daily
Apomorphine
5 mg/kg s.c. as a single dose
Aspirin
0.5-20.0 mg/kg p.o. once daily or on alternate days
Atenolol
6.25 mg/kg p.o. once daily
Atropine
organophosphorus toxicity, 5- 10 mg/kg s.c., i.m.
Barium sulfate suspension (30% w/v)
contrast radiography, 8-13 mL/kg p.o.
Betamethasone
100 micrograms/kg s.c.
Bismuth subsalicylate
0.25 mL (Pepto-Bismol)/kg p.o. every 4-6 hours
Bleomycin
 20 units/m2 once weekly (temporary reduction in size of metastatic squa-
mous cell carcinoma)
Buserelin
I microgram i.m.
 Chorionic gonadotrophin
20- 100 units i.m.
Chlorphenamine
1-2 mg/kg p.o. 1-2 times daily
Cimetidine
5- 10 mg/kg p.0., i.v. 3 times daily
Crisantaspase2
400 units i.p. total dose
Cyclophosphamide2
10 mg/kg s.c.
Dexamethasone
0.5-2.0 mg/kg s.c., i.m., i.v.
 Diazepam
1.0 mg/kg i.v.
Diazoxide
2.5-30.0 mg/kg p.0. twice daily
 Digitoxin
70- 100 micrograms/kg p.o. once daily or on alternate days. Plasma-
digitoxin concentration should be monitored
 Diltiazem
3.75-7.5 mg/kg p.o. twice daily
 Diphenhydrami ne
0.5-2.0 mg/kg p.o. 2-3 times daily
Doxapram
2 mg/kg i.m.
Doxorubicin2
1 mg/kg i. v.
Enalapril
500 micrograms/kg p.o. from 3 times daily to on alternate days
Famotidine
250-500 micrograms/kg p.o., i.v. once daily
Flunixin
infl ammation, 1.1 mg/kg; analgesia, 0.3-2.0 mg/kg s.c., i.m. 1-2 times
daily (on alternate days for long-term therapy)
Furosemide
12 mg/kg p.0., s.c., i.m., i.v. 2-3 times daily. May use up to 4 mg/kg i.m.
for acute conditions
Hydrocortisone
25-40 mg/kg i.v. as a single dose
 Immunoglobulins
0.2 mL (Maxaglobulin P)/kg s.c., i.m. for distemper prophylaxis
Insulin, protamine zinc
0.5-1.0 unit/kg s.c. once daily
72  Guidance on prescribing
Table 18 Doses of other drugs for ferrets' (continued)
Drug
Dose
lohex ol
 contrast radiography, dilute 1 volume with 1 volume water, 10 mL/kg p.o.
Iron dextran
10 mg/kg i.m. weekly
Ketoconazole
hyperadrenocorticism, 15 mg/kg p.o. twice daily
Lactulose
150-750 mg/kg p.o. 2-3 times daily
Levothyroxine
200-400 micrograms/kg p.o. 2-3 times daily
Oxytocin
0.2-3.0 units/kg s.c., i.m.
Methotrexate2
500 microgr ams/kg i.v.
Mitotane
50 mg/kg p.o. once daily. Reduce to every 3 days after 1 week 
Nandrolone
1-5 mg/kg i.m. weekly
Prednisolone?
 infl ammation,250- 500 micrograms p.0. twice daily. May increase up to 2
mg/kg gradually
malignant disease, 1 mg/kg p.o. once daily
Proligestone'
50 mg/kg s.c. as a single dose
 Propranolol
0.2- 1.0 mg/kg p.o. 2-3 times daily
Sucralfate
25- 30 mg p.0. 4 times daily
Theophylline
4.25 mg/kg p.o. 2-3 times daily
Vincristine2
70 micrograms/kg i.v.
1drug dosesforpreparatons thathave amarketing authorisationfor use inthese species in the UK.Therefore,unlessmarked,the rug
or dosesstatedarenot authorised forthese species
2usually cyclophosphamideprednisolone,andvincristine aregiven concurrentlyAltemativelycyclophosphamide,prednisolone,nd
vincristine combination may be given with cristantaspase and methotrexate, or doxorubicin
73
Prescribing for fish
Contributors:
Antibacterial preparations that are used in farmed fish
A E Wall, BVM&S, MSc, CertVOphthal, MRCVS
include amoxicillin, florfenciol, oxytetracycline, and sul-
W H Wildgoose, BVMS, CertFHP, MRCVS
fadiazine with trimethoprim. Further information on
these antibacterials is given in section 1.1. The usual treat-
Fish are farmed as food-producing animals and also kept by
ment course is 7 to 10 days, but readers should also refer to
enthusiasts as a hobby. In the UK, Atlantic salmon and rain-
the manufacturer's data sheet. Sulfadiazine with trimetho-
bow trout are most commonly farmed. Species kept by
prim administered at a dose of 30 mg/kg daily for 7 to 10
days has been found to cause lethargy and inappetence in
fish. Cold-water fish include goldfish and koi in ponds, and
Atlantic salmon. In practice, the usual dose administered is
fancy goldfish and temperate marine fish in aquaria. Tropi-
15 mg/kg daily + or 30 mg/kg on alternate days+.
cal fish may be freshwater or marine.
When administering antimicrobials to farmed fish, the
Preventive medicine is extremely important for fish health.
Fish live in a “bacterial soup’ and poor water quality Or
appropriate withdrawal periods must be observed. Fish are
ectothermic and their basal metabolic rate varies with water
frank infection may quickly lead to an acute cascade of dis-
ease within a cage, pond, or tank. Maintenance of good
temperature. Therefore withdrawal periods vary with ambi-
water quality, adequate feeding but not overfeeding, long
ent water temperature, and so are stated in degree days. For
example 400 degree days is 20 days at a water temperature
quarantine, and low stocking densities will aid the produc-
of 20°C or 40 days at 10°℃. The standard withdrawal period
tion and maintenance of healthy fish.
for fish of 500° days should be observed unless otherwise
stated by the manufacturer.
In general, treatment with in-water antimicrobials
10
Farmed fish
methylthioninium chloride (methylene blue) should not be
Antibacterial therapy. The majority of bacterial infec-
carried out in tanks with biological filters. Although some
tions affecting fish are caused by Gram-negative organisms
drugs are claimed not to disturb biological filters, many do
such as Aeromonas, Vibrio, and Pseudomonas spp., which
so depending on the dose used. It is preferable to admirnister
cause furunculosis, septicaemia, and ulcer disease. Winter
 the treatment in a quarantine tank without filtration but with
ulcer disease associated with Moritella viscosa is com-
appropriate monitoring of water quality or water changes.
monly seen in Atlantic salmon smolts newly introduced to
Alternatively, with a commercial recirculation system,
the sea. It is characterised by shallow patches of ulceration
individual tanks may be isolated for treatment and then the
on the flank of the fish. Yersinia ruckeri infection causes
water discharged to waste. Operators should apply to the
enteric redmouth disease. The intracellular bacterium Pis-
local office of the Environmental Agenicy or SEPA for a
cirikettsia saimonis has been implicated in some disease
Discharge corsent.
outbreaks in salmon.
Vaccines are available for the control of some fish diseases
Bacterial kidney disease (BKD) infection caused by the
caused by bacteria (see section 18.8).
Gram-positive bacterium Renibacterium saimoninarum
affects all salmonid stocks. This chronic disease causes
AMOXICILLINTRIHYDRATE
highest mortality with changing water temperatures. Fish
(Amoxycillin trihydrate)
are lethargic, anorexic, and have darkened skin often with
shallow ulcers on the flanks. Internally the kidney is very
UK
swollen and grey with a fibrinous peritonitis over the inter-
Indications.Amoxicillin-sensitive infections including
nal organs. Vertical transmission within the egg makes con-
furunculosis
trol of this disease difficult.
Warnings. Penicillins and cephalosporins may cause
Bacterial resistance to antimicrobial therapy has been a
hypersensitivity (allergy) following self-injection, inhala-
problem in the fish industry. Good husbandry including sin-
tion, ingestion, or skin contact; operators should wear suit-
gle year classes, fallowing sites, and lower stocking densi-
able
protective
clothing;
operators
with
known
ties, and vaccination have significantly reduced the use of
hypersensitivity should not handle these drugs; clinical
antimicrobials in the UK.
signs of allergic reaction in operators include skin rash,
Antimicrobials are usually formulated as in-feed medica-
swelling of the face, lips, or eyes, or difficulty breathing.
tions for farmed fish. The drug is surface coated on the pre-
Dose. Fish: by addition to feed, 80 mg/kg body-weight
pared pellet and then oil is added to maintain adhesion. Fish
daily for 10 days
should be starved for 12 to 24 hours before treatment
because in-feed medication may be unpalatable. Adequate
POM Vetremox Fish (Alpharma) UK
oxygenation must always be maintained, particularly in
Powder, for addition to feed, armoxicillin trihydrate l00%, for Aflantic
saimon
treatment tanks.
Withdrawal Periods. Aflantic suimon: slaughter 40° days
74  Guidance on prescribing
FLORFENICOL
due to skin damage. Saprofegnia is a common fungal infec-
tion of fish; it is usually a secondary infection.
UK
Fish should be starved before any flush or bath treatment
Indications. Florfenicol-sensitive  infections  including
because this reduces the metabolic rate of the fish and the
furunculosis
organic loading of water from food and faeces, which
Contra-indications. Brood stock
increases the oxygen demand. Initially only a few fish in a
Warnings. May prolong the effects of anaesthetics; Drug
group, as a representative sample, should be treated. After
Interactions - see Appendix 1; operators should wear suita-
observing these fish for good recovery over a few hours, the
ble protective clothing
remaining fish can be treated similarly. Adequate oxygena-
Dose. Fish: by addition to feed, 10 mg/kg body-weight
tion should always be provided in treatment tan ks.
daily for 10 days
Chemicals or drugs are added to the water, which is used as
a bath, a flush, or a dip. To prepare a bath, a low concentra-
MFS Florocol (Schering-Plough) UK
Powder, for addition to feed, florfenicol 500 mg/g, for Aflantic sulmon
tion of drug is added to the water and the fish are placed in
Withdrawal Periods. Atlantic sulmon: slaughter I50° days
the solution for 30 to 60 minutes, or longer for prolonged
immersion. When given as a flush, a higher concentration
OXYTETRACYCLINE
of drug is added to the water, which is then flushed through
with fresh incoming water. This usually means the fish
UK
remain in contact with the drug for 15 to 20 minutes. In a
Indications. Ox ytetracycline-sensitive infections including
dip, a very concentrated solution of the drug is prepared
furunculosis
and fish are netted into the solution for 30 to 60 seconds and
  e  a r   
then replaced in their ori ginal tank.
feed medication); operators should wear suitable protective
clothing
The organophosphorus compound azamethiphos is used
for the treatment of salmon infested by the sea lice,
Dose. Fish: by addition to feed, 75 mg/kg body-weight
daily for 48 days
Lepeophtheirus satmonis and Caligus spp., before the stage
at which serious skin damage is evident. Organophosphorus
POM Aquatet (Alpharma) UK
compounds affect mature sea lice (stages pre-adult l to
Powder, for addition to feed, oxytetracycline hydrochloride, for Aflantic
adult); they do not affect juvenile stages. Therefore treat-
salmon,rainbow trout
ment may need to be repeated after 10 to 20 days and again
Withdrawal Periods. Aflantic saimon, rainbo w frout: slaughter 400° days
after a further 14 days to ensure complete eradication of the
SULFADIAZINEWITHTRIMETHOPRIM
infestation. Vigorous water aeration should be provided
when using organophosphorus compounds. Gasping and
UK
rolling are signs of toxicity and asphyxiation in fish.
Indications. Sulfadiazi ne/trimethoprim-sensitive
Cypermethrin is a synthetic pyrethroid and is used for the
infec-
tions including furunculosis
treatment of sea lice and has largely superseded the organo-
phosphorus compounds. Cypermethrin is used to treat and
and inappetence, see notes above; operators should wear
control all stages of sea lice. Treatment before the sea lice
reach the reproductive stage should help to reduce the
suitable protective clothing
Dose. Expressed as trimethoprim + sulphadiazine
number of free-swimming infective stages released and
Fish: by addition to feed, 30 mg/kg body-weight daily for
fewer treatments will be required. Fish may be retreated
7-10 days but see dose+ above
when re-infestation occurs.
Goldsinney wrasse have been used, as an alternative to
POM Sulfatrim (Novartis) UK
chemical treatment, to control sea louse infestation on
Powder, for addition to feed, sulphadiazine 416.7 g,trirmethoprirm 83.3 g/kg,
for saimon
salmon (the wrasse ingest the lice).
Withdrawal Periods. Salmon: slaughter 500° days
AZAMETHIPHOS
UK
Parasiticidal and antifungal therapy. The
common
Indications. Sea lice infestation
protozoal infections affecting farmed fish include white
 Warnings. Limit treatment to 30 minutes at water tempera-
spot caused by Ichthyophthirius multifiiis; slime disease
tures greater than 100
due to Chilodonella, Ichthyobodo (Costia), and Trichodina;
 Prescribing veterinarian must ensure that operators
velvet disease caused by Piscinoodinium (Oodinium) spp.;
have received adequate instruction in safe use of the
and fin rot caused by traumatic injury, poor water quality,
 p o a  o  
and protozoal and ectoparasitic infections. Other ectopara-
contact; operators should wear suitable protective clothing;
sites causing lesions include flukes such as Gyrodactyfus,
operators should seek medical advice if breathing problems
which attach on to the skin and Dactylogyrus, which affect
occur or if they feel persistently unwell after using the
the gills, and the anchor worm Lernaea. Gyrodactyfus saia-
product
ris causes widespread losses in Atlantic salmon in Norway
Dose. Fish: by bath, 0.1 ppm for 30-60 minutes
Prescribing for fish  75
POM Salmosan (Novartis) UK
Contra-indications. Adult Atlantic salmon intended for
Powder, azarmethiphos 500 rmg/g, for sulmon
brood stock; treatment of smolts in freshwater cages
Withdrawal Periods. Fish: slaughter I day
Side-effects. Slight inappetence
Warnings. Level of infestation should be monitored; treat-
BRONOPOL
 ment should be given for full 7-day period; operators should
wear suitable protective clothing
UK
Dose. Fish: by addition to feed, 50 micrograms/kg fish
Indications. Fungal infections in fish and fish eggs
daily for 7 days. Maximum number of marine treatments is
Contra-indications. Smolting Atlantic salmon; concurrent
 5 per year growth cycle and not more than 3 per 12 month
other bath treatments
period
Warnings. Irritant to eyes and skin; operators should wear
suitable protective clothing
POM Slice (Schering-Plough) UK
Premix, ermarmectin benzoate 2 g/kg, for Aflantic sulmon
Dose. Fish: by bath, 20 ppm daily for 30 minutes for up to
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil. Do rot treat rmore than
14 consecutive days
once within 60 days before slaughter
Fish eggs: by bath, 50 ppm daily for 30 minutes, commenc-
ing 24 hours after fertilisation
POM Pyeeze (Novartis) UK
Chemicals used in the treatment of fish diseases may be
Solution, for dilution with water, bronopol 500 mg/mL, for Aflantic slmon,
farmedfertilisedsaimonideggs
obtained in the UK from:
Withdrawal Periods. Fish: slaughter withdrawal period nil. Should not be
· Alphama
used in fish eggs intended for human corn surn ption
· James A Mackie (Agricultural)
·Vetark.
Parasiticides may be toxic to animals and the operator.
There are many chemical treatments for ectoparasitic and
Care should be taken with dosage and handling of the
fungal infections available. These chemicals may be used in
product. The recommendations for storage, use, and
fish destined for human consumption because they are con-
disposal of unused materials and containers should be
sidered as non-medicinal curative substances. Although res-
followed. For guidance and information, see:
ervations about their use have been expressed by consumer
MAFF/HSE. Code of Practice for the Safe Use of
Pesticides on Farms and Hoidings. London: HMSO,
1998. PB3528
and it must not be used.
Control of Substances Hazardous to Health (COSHH)
 In general, the ectoparasiticides of choice for farmed fish
Regulations 2002.
are fornaldehyde, chloramine, and sodium chloride. For
fungal infections, bronopol, formaldehyde, or sodium chlo-
ride is employed.
CYPERMETHRIN
Formaldehyde is a general ectoparasiticide and is also used
for fluke infections due to Gyrodactyfus and resistant Chilo-
UK
donella infections. The dose of formaldehyde should be
Indications. Sea lice infestation
adjusted according to the water pH; low doses should be
Side-effects. Rarely mild transient headshaking and unco-
used at low pH and higher doses used at high pH. Toxic pre-
ordinated swimming
cipitates of paraformaldehyde form on storage which
Warnings. Oxygen concentration should be maintained at
should be discarded before use. Formaldehyde actively
depletes water oxy geni and adequate aeration must therefore
stock has not been established; operators should wear suita-
be provided.
ble protective clothing
 Chloramine is effective against ectoparasites. It aids in the
Dose. Fish: by seawater bath, 0.005 ppm (5 micrograms/
control of fin rot by decreasing the bacterial loading. Chlor-
litre) for 60 minutes
amine is more toxic in soft water with a low pH. Sodium
chloride is used as a general antifungal and ectoparasiticide
POM Excis (Novartis) UK
 in freshwater fish and for supportive therapy.
Solution, for dilution with water,cypermethrin (cis:trans 40:60) 1% for
Iodine compounds are used for disinfection of fish eggs
Aflantic salmon Correct dose diluted with 40 litres of seawater before add-
ing to the seacage
and also for direct application to lesions. These compounds
Withdrawal Periods. Atlantic samon: slaughter 24 hours
are toxic to newly hatched fish. Benzalkonium chloride is
used as a general antibacterial. It acts as a surfactant,
removing excess mucus and slime containing parasites and
EMAMECTIN BENZOATE
bacteria from the fish. It is also used as a disinfectant of
rainbow trout eggs against Flavobacterium psychrophitum,
UK
which causes rainbow trout fry syndrome. Benzalkonium
Indications. Sea lice infestation for smolts raised in tanks
chloride tends to be more toxic in soft water and lower
or flowing waterways
 doses should then be used.
76  Guidance on prescribing
Copper sulfate is used for velvet disease but is potentially
UK
toxic in fresh water. It is inadvisable to use this compound
 Indications. Ectoparasitic and external bacterial infections;
where other treatments are available. The dose of copper
disinfection; aid in control of fin rot
sulfate in fresh water depends orn the water hardness. It
Warnings. Appropriate grade
material (see definition
should be used with caution if the calcium carbonate level
 above) must be used; avoid contact with metal
in the water is less than 50 mg/litre, as occurs in soft water.
Dose. By bath (1 hour), dose dependent orn pH and water
Potassium perrmanganate is toxic in water of high pH
hardness as indicated in the following table:
because manganese dioxide may precipitate on to the gills.
Dose (ppm)
 Potassium permanganate acts by liberating oxygen and has
been used in situations of intensive fish stocking in earth
pH of water
Soft water
Hard water
ponds where emergency aeration is needed. This oxidising
effect is potentially dangerous and use of this chemical
6.0
2.5
7.0
should be restricted  to specialists. Methylthioninium
chloride (methylene blue) is also used in cases of mitrite
6.5
5.0
10.0
toxicity; it converts methaemoglobin to haemoglobin.
Methylthioninium chloride is absorbed through the skin
7.0
10.0
15.0
regardless of the condition of the gills. The agent is easily
7.5
18.0
18.0
removed by charcoal filtration. However, it must not be
used with biological filter systems.
8.0
20.0
20.0
1 ppm = 1 mg/litre
Chloramine-T UK
= 1 mL/1000 litres
Available frorm Alpharrma, Jarmes A Mackie (Agricultural), Vetark
= 1 mL in 1 m²
COPPER SULFATE
After the use of any in-water medication, reliable water test
UK
kits should be used to monitor the water chemistry to ensure
Indications. Ectoparasitic infecti ons
that appropriate water conditions are maintained. After
medication to aquaria or ponds, water chaniges should be
soft water systems; kills marine irnivertebrates and elasmo-
carried out before the use of other chemicals.
branchs. (Copper can be removed from the system by water
chariges
S Or activated charcoal 3 g/litre of water being
BENZALKONIUM CHLORIDE
treated)
Dose. Dissolve 400 mg in 1 litre water for stock solution.
UK
By prolonged immersion, 1 mL stock solution/litre. Daily
Indications. Ex ternal bacterial infectionis, in particular bac-
tests should be carried out to maintain a copper concentra-
terial gill disease; disinfection
tion of 100- 200 micrograms/litre for at least 10 days. Water
Warnings. Toxicity is increased in soft water
changes should be carried out if the copper-concentration
Dose. By bath, as indicated in the following table: Where
rises. In fresh water, care needs to be taken because the dose
Dose (ppm)
Duration of treatment
depends on water hardness.
10
5-10 minutes
FORMALDEHYDE SOLUTION
5
30 minutes
Formaldehyde is available as formaldehyde solution (formalin)
60 minutes
which is diluted before use,the percentage strength being
2
expressed in terms of formaldehyde solution rather than forrmalde-
several hours
hyde (CH,O). For example, in the UK, formaldehyde solution 3%
consists of 3 volumes of Formaldehyde Solution BP diluted to 100
the water softness is unknown lower doses should be used
volumes with water and thus contains 1.02 to 1.14% w/w of for-
and then increased as appropriate.
maldehyde (CH,O).
Ark Klens (Vetark) UK
UK
Sol ution, ben zalkon iurm ch loride 12.5 %
Indications. Ectoparasitic infections
Contra-indications. Should not be mixed with potassium
CHLORAMINE
permanganate; fish with gill disease
(Chloramine-T)
warnings. Operators should avoid contact with skin and
inhalation of formaldehyde fumes, see notes above. Oxyger
There are many_chloramines. Chloramine BP is synonymous with
depletion is rapid at high temperature. Therefore water-ox y-
 gen concentration should be monitored and emergency aer-
contra-indicated for use in these species
ation employed if required
Prescribing for fish   77
Dose. Expressed in terms of formaldehyde solution 35-
SODIUM CHLORIDE (Iodine-free)
40%
01 0e 1oy “(Hd mo1) udd oLI 10 (Hd ya1y) udd 0sz ^ymq 6g
UK
60 minutes
Indications. Fungal and ectoparasitic infections in fresh-
By prolonged immersion, 20 ppm for 12 hours
water fish; osmotic support for stressed or diseased fresh-
water fish
Formalin UK
Contra-indications. Gal vanised zinc containers
Available frorn Alpharrm a
Dose. By bath, 10 000-15 000 ppm for 20 minutes
By dip, 20 000-30 000 ppm (2-3 kg/100 litres) until fish
show signs of distress
I0DINE COMPOUNDS
UK
Hormonal preparations authorised for fish are availa-
 Indications. Disinfection of fish eggs; cleaning wounds
ble. Buserelin (see section 8.1.2), a synthetic analogue of
Warnings. Toxic to unfertilised ova and live fish
gonadotrophin-releasing hormone, is used to facilitate strip-
Dose. See preparation details
ping in male and female rainbow trout and to reduce mortal-
ity due to egg binding.
Buffodine (Evans Vanodine) UK
Immunomodulators are   available  from   yarious
Solution, iodine I%; I litre 
Dose. Eggs: by bath, I0 rmL/litre for 10 rmirutes. Rinse ova thoroughly in
suppliers.
clean water
Anaesthetics should preferably be administered to fish
after they have been starved for 12 to 14 hours. Constant
Tamodine (Vetark) U/K
Soltion,povidone-iodine 0.75%
aeration and a recovery tank of clean water should be avail-
For topical application only
able in case the fish become too deeply anaesthetised. If this
occurs fish should be pushed through the water manually so
Tamodine-E (Vetark) UK
that fresh water passes across their gills in an antero-poste-
Solution, available iodine I.6%
Dose. Eggs: by bath, 3 rmL/litre for 10 rminutes. Rinse ova thoroughly iri
rior direction. Thumb/finger pressure ventrally between the
clean water
operculae will usually open the fishs mouth and flare the
operculae, therefore facilitating artificial ventilation.Exces-
Vetridine (Alpharma) UK
sive water flow in the wrong direction may severely dam-
Solution, available iodine 1.6%
age the delicate structure of the gills.
 A few fish are anaesthetised as a sample group. Sedation or
METHYLTHIONINIUM CHLORIDE
anaesthesia should take 1 to 3 minutes to develop. Fish
(Methylene blue)
placed in a clean tank following anaesthesia usually recover
within 2 to 3 minutes.
UK
The anaesthetics most commonly used in fish are tricaine
Indications. Ectoparasitic and fungal infections
mesilate, benzocaine, and phenoxyethanol. They are used
Contra-indications. Toxic to scaleless fish; should not be
for tranquilisation of fish for transportation, weighing,
used in tanks with bacterial filters
examination or minor procedures such as treating a surface
Dose. Dissolve 10 g methylthioninium chloride in 1 litre
lesion, and for anaesthesia before drug administration by
water for stock solution.
injection, for example vaccination. Sedative doses may be
By prolonged immersion, 0.2-0.4 mL stock solution/litre.
given by merely reducing the amount of anaesthetic that is
Dose may be doubled with care
placed in the bath to half the anaesthetic dose.
Tricaine mesilate may reduce the pH of soft water to about
3.8, which may cause stress to fish. The anaesthetic solution
POTASSIUM PERMANGANATE
normally nieeded for the fish species to be treated. Benzo-
caine should be dissolved in anl organic solvent before use
UK
(see below).
Indications. Ectoparasitic infections, emergency oxygena-
tion
BENZOCAINE
Warnings. See notes above
Dose. Treatment.
UK
By bath, 5 ppm for 1 hour
Indications. Sedation and anaesthesia of fish
By dip, 10 ppm for 10-40 seconds. If organic load is high,
Warnings. Care should be taken when handling the organic
repeat treatment after 24 hours
solvent. Solutions should be stored protected from light
Emergency aeration.
Dose. Dissolve 40 g benzocaine in 1 litre ethanol or ace-
By permanent bath, 2 ppm or 3-4 ppm if a high organic
tone (benizocaine 40 mg/mL) stock solution.
load is present
By bath, 0.6-1.2 mL stock solution/litre
78  Guidance on prescribing
PHENOXYETHANOL
healthy fish may need to be slaughtered with the few
affected fish.
UK
Spring viraemia of carp (SvC) is a viral disease endemic in
Indications. Sedation and anaesthesia of fish
a number of European countries and is caused by a rhab-
Warnings. May elute toxins from activated charcoal filters;
dovirus. The disease has occurred in the UK due to importa-
solidifies below 5°C
tion of infected stock. SvC is known to infect common carp
Dose. Fish: by bath, 0.1-0.5 mL/litre
anid varieties such as koi as well as other ornamental species
By prolonged immersion, 0.1 mL/litre for prolonged seda-
including goldfish. Strict importation controls are required
tion
for farmed and ornamental fish together with veterinary
inspection and quarantine. Clinical signs of this disease are
TRICAINE MESILATE
variable.
(Tricaine mesylate)
UK
Ornamental fish
Indications. Sedation and anaesthesia of fish
Contra-indications. Should not be used for certain tropical
Management. Correct management is the most important
fish
aspect of maintaining ornamental fish health because the
light
ronmental conditions alone will often aid recovery without
Dose. Fish: by bath, 25-100 mg/litre
the need for drug therapy. Metabolic wastes and their prod-
PML MS-222 (Alpharma, Thorm son & Joseph) UK
ucts should be monitored regularly every two weeks (and
Powder,tricaine mesilate I00%, for fish 
more frequently if water conditions are poor). Simple and
Withdrawal Periods. Fish: slaughter I0 days
reliable test kits for ammonia, mitrite, nitrate, and pH are
available from aquatic suppliers.
To limit the occurrence of toxicity, the Ornamental Aquatic
Viral conditions. Increased prevalence of many notifia-
Trade Association (OATA) recommends the following con-
ble viral diseases is now seen. Infectious pancreatic necro-
centrations:
sis (IPN) is classically a disease of first-feeding rainbow
ammonia (unionised) < 0.01 mg/litre
trout fry. This viral disease is oftenn stress mediated and
nitrite
< 0.125 mg/litre
nitrate
< 40 mg/litre (above ambient)
The disease is characterised by skin darkening, inappetence,
oxygen (dissol ved)
> 5.5 mg/litre.
Some fish species will have other minimum requirements
caused major losses in Atlantic salmon especially in smolts
for pH, water hardness, and salinity. Nitrifying bacteria in
in the sea.
the environment and filter systems remove ammonia and
Infectious haemopoietic necrosis (IHN) is a viral disease
nitrite but take several weeks to reach sufficient rumbers in
affecting mainly very young fish with the highest losses
a new facility. These beneficial bacteria must be considered
Occurring at temperatures over 10°C where morbidity canl
when adding any antibacterial medication to the watet.
reach 100% of the population. Clinical signs include erratic
High concentrations of ammonia and nitrite are toxic to fish
swimming patterns, skin darkening, ascites, and exophthal-
while raised concentrations are physiologically stressful
 mia. Haemorrhages may be seen on the fins and head with
and may compromise the fish's natural resistance to infec-
 the fish appearing anaemic. Transmission is both horizontal
tion and disease. Frequent water changes (30% every 2 to 3
and vertical.
days) may be required to improve water quality and reduce
Viral haemorrhagic septicaemia (VHS) is an acute to
the chemical conicentrations to acceptable levels. The addi-
chronic disease occurring in rainbow trout but also seen in
tion of salt (2 g/litre) may benefit freshwater species in poor
other species. The disease has been diagnosed in turbot in
water conditions while water changes are taking place.
the UK. In the acute form, the fish are anaemic with exten-
sive haemorrhages, exophthalmia, and skin darkening.
g. The
prove difficult to detect. Water changes should be per-
chronic form is characterised by very dark fish with pro-
nounced ascites. Outbreaks are usually a continuum
case, typically, all fish will be affected and the onset of clin-
between the acute and chronic types. Transmission is only
ical signs is sudden.
horizontal and so eradication can be achieved by using
Raising the water temperature to 20°C with submersible
clean stocks.
electric heaters will benefit many cold-water species
Infectious salmon anaemia (ISA) caused by an orthomyxo-
because their rate of metabolism and recovery from disease
type (envelope) virus has been diagnosed on a rumber of
is related to ambient water temperature.
marine salmon farms in Scotland. Anaemia, ascites, ocular
The clinical signs of many diseases that affect ornamental
haemorrhages and necrotic and haemorrhagic lesions in the
fish are similar and it is important to establish a cause where
liver are seen. Under UK law, large numbers of in-contact
possible and identify disease agents. Parasites are always
Prescribing for fish
79
present on fish but stress often results in the parasites multi-
Medicines (Restrictions on theAdministration of Veterinary
plying to high levels that then cause clinical disease.
Medicinal Products) Regulations 1994 (S1 1994/2987).
Therefore, the final choice of drug often depends on anti-
bacterial resistance, availability of a suitable formulation,
Attention to water quality and husbandry is the primary
 and palatability, where applicable.
consideration  in
the management of diseases
of
It may be necessary to take samples for bacterial culture and
ornamental fish
sensitivity tests because of increasing bacterial resistanice.
Although results may niot be available for 5 to 14 days,
Drug administration. The operator should aim to use
treatment should be instituted immediately to limit the
the least stressful method of treatment to achieve the thera-
severity and spread of the disease.
peutic concentration of medication. Ornamental fish may be
Oral antibacterials are often administered for up to 3 weeks.
treated by the following methods: in-water medication
(short dip or permanent bath), oral medication (in feed or by
per day as medicated feed. Therapy is administered by
gavage), intramuscular injection, or topical application.
injection to fish that are not feeding, are of suitable size and
Irn-water medication is usually employed for the treatment
value, and to initiate treatment that is continued by oral
of fungal infections and ectoparasites. This may involve
medication. Injections may be repeated 3 to 4 times and
short-timed dips in a strong chemical solution or a perma-
 may require anaesthesia. However, this is stressful and it
nent bath of low-dose medication in a tank or pond. Where
may be preferable to attempt feeding oral antibacterials.
ultra-violet sterilisers are in use, these should be switched
The administration of antibacterials via the water is prob-
 off when using some water treatments. Activated carbon or
lematic. Small fish respond quite well and may be too small
ozone should not be used in filters during medication.
to inject. However in large fish, although treatment may
There are several methods to make home-made in-feed
appear to be clinically effective particularly where skin
medication for ornamental fish: gelatin solution may be
lesions are part of the condition, drugs may not be ade-
mixed with the drug, then applied to the feed, and then
quately absorbed and the condition may not be resolved.
allowed to solidify. Alternatively the feed may be damp-
Concentrated or pure drugs should be used wherever possi-
ened with a solution containing water-soluble drugs and
 ble to avoid potential water chemistry problems due to other
then allowed to dry or the drug may be mixed with the dry
agents in formulated preparations. Where pure preparations
food then coated with a small amount of vegetable oil.
are not commercially available, it may be possible to obtain
However, many fish are fastidious eaters and may prove
the drug directly from the manufacturer.
difficult to treat orally.
 In genieral, treatment with in-water anti bacterials or methyl-
Antibacterials are more effective and commonly adminis-
thioninium chloride (methylene blue) should not be carried
tered by intramuscular injection. The needle should be care-
out in tanks with biological filters. Although some drugs are
fully angled and inserted between the scales so as not to
claimed not to disturb biological filters, many do so
damage or remove scales when injecting. Sites for injection
depending on the dose used. It is preferable to administer
vary according to personal preference but injections are
usually given into the flank above the lateral line. Due to
appropriate monitoring of water quality and water changes.
species differences in anatomy, intraperitoneal injection
This will allow removal of the fish in case of accidental
should be used with care in ornamental fish.
overdose.
Topical preparations are often applied after debridement of
Benzalkonium chloride, acriflavine, proflavine hemisulfate,
skin wounds under general anaesthesia. Preparations used
and chloramine are used for external bacterial infections.
include skin disinfectants such as povidone-iodine, and top-
ical antibacterials such as Panolog Ointment (Novartis).
Parasiticidal and antifungal therapy. The  common
external protozoal infections of freshwater fish include
for example,
 Orabase (ConivaTec) or H Orahesive
white spot caused by Ichthyophthirius multiflis; slime dis-
(ConivaTec).
ease due to Chilodonella, Ichthyobodo (Costia), and tri-
Antibacterial therapy. The most common bacteria caus-
chodinids; velvet disease caused by Piscinoodinium
ing disease in ornamental fish are Gram-negative rods such
(Oodinium) spp.; and secondary infection of skin wounds
as Aeromonas, Pseudomonas, Vibrio, Flavobacterium, and
with Epistyfis. Other ectoparasites causing lesions include
Edwardsiella. These bacteria are commonly associated with
flukes such as Gyrodactyfus (body fluke), which attach on
acute septicaemia and ulcerati ve skin lesions. Nocardia and
to the skin and Dactylogyrus (gill fluke), which affect the
Mycobacteria cause systemic granulomata; the latter is a
gills. The crustacean parasites include the anchor worm
zoonotic disease. Ulcer disease is caused by atypical
Lernaea and the fish louse Argufus, which cause localised
Aeromonas saimonicida and affects cyprinids such as carp
damage to the skin, and the gill maggot Ergasilus. The fish
and goldfish. The organism is a variant of the one that
leech Piscicota is found in fresh and salt water. Saprolegnia
causes furunculosis in salmonids.
(cotton wool fungus) is a common fungal infection in fish
There are few antibacterial preparations authorised for use
that usually develops from secondary invasion of lesions on
in ornamental fish in the UK. However, these species may
the skin and gills. Dermocystidium is a fungal-like pathogen
be considered as ‘minor or exotic species’ under The
that affects the skin and gills.
80
Guidance on prescribing
The flagellate protozoan Hexamita infects the skin and the
 Proprietary preparations and the manufacturer s indications
gut. Various microsporidia and myxosporidia are found
are listed below in alphabetical order. Although these prep-
internally in a wide variety of ornamental fish. The round-
arations have been used for years by the aquarist, most of
worms Camallanus and Capillaria may infect freshwater
 the products do not have a marketing authorisation. Manu-
tropical fish. The tapeworm Bothriocephalus is occasion-
facturer recommendations for conditions such as the treat-
ally found in the gastro-intestinal tract of carp.
ment of viral infections, systemic bacterial infections, and
Common protozoal infections of marine fish include white
lice infestation may niot be able to be substantiated. Cases
spot caused by Cryptocaryon irritans, coral fish disease
that fail to respond to these proprietary preparations for
caused by Amyfoodinium ocellatum, and infestation with
ornamental fish may be treated with chemicals such as
Uronema mariunim, Brooklynefla hostilis, and trichodinids.
those listed in Prescribing for farmed fish.
Monogeneans such as Benedenia and Neobenedenia spp.
After in- water medication, reliable water test kits should be
cause skin irritation and corneal lesions such as keratitis and
used to monitor the water chemistry to ensure that appropri-
ulceration. Ichthyophonus hoferi, a fungal-like organism,
ate water conditions are mai ntained. Following the addition
causes systemic granulomatous disease.
of a medicine to aquaria or ponds, water changes should be
External parasitic and fungal infections affecting ornamen-
carried out before the use of other chemicals.
tal fish are usually treated by in-water medication. Fish
should be starved before anly treatment because this reduces
their metabolic rate and the organic loading of water from
Attention  to environmental conditions is important
because correct treatment may prove ineffective unless
food and faeces, which increases the oxygen demand. Ini-
water quality is adequate.
should be treated. After observing these fish for good
Disinfection and general hygiene of tanks, ponds, and
recovery over a few hours, the remaining fish can be treated
equipment is part of good husbandry. Only products
 considered safe for use in fish should be used.
similarly. Adequate aeration should always be provided in
treatment tanks because some medications reduce dissolved
oxygen, for example formaldehyde. Temporary treatment
Anaesthetics for fish are discussed under Prescribing for
tanks may not be available for tropical fish and their capture
farmed fish. Great care must be taken to allow for species
and handling may be excessively stressful. Therefore medi-
variation in tolerance to the anaesthetic agent. Efficacy and
cation is often administered directly into the tank. In gen-
toxicity are also influenced by variations in water condi-
eral, when medicating ornamental fish, treatment should
tions and quality. Due to the anatomy of some species (for
always begin at the lower end of a dose ranige, increasing as
example some marine fish and eels which have a soft gill
necessary. When treating fish in soft water or at low pH,
cover), assistance may be required during recovery and
low doses should be used because chemicals may be more
clean water should be gently flushed through the mouth.
toxic under these conditions.
Euthanasia of ornamental fish is carried out by using an
Many different chemical treatments are used for ectopara-
 overdose of anaesthetic followed by one of the following
sitic and fungal infections (see Prescribing for farmed fish
methods: severing the spinal cord just behind the gill cov-
for information on individual chemicals). Malachite green
ers, a sharp blow to the head using a blunt instrument, or
is primarily used for fungal infections and some ectopara-
administration of a lethal dose of pentobarbital into the
sitic infections. Care should be taken with regard to the
heart or intravenously into the caudal vein found ventral to
source of malachite green; some grades may be lethal to
the vertebrae of the peduncle. In the absence of arnaesthetics
fish. Low doses should be used at low pH and higher doses
commonly used in fish, isoflurane at a dose of 5 mL/litre, or
used at high pH. Residues of this chemical persist in flesh
clove oil at a dose of 10 drops/litre have been used; their use
and it may only be used in ornamental fish or eggs not
has not been fully evaluated.
intended for human consumption. Similarly for Leteux-
Other drugs. Vitamin deficiencies are rarely identified in
Meyer mixture. This combination is used in ornamental fish
species fed on commercial manufactured diets which have
as an ectoparasiticide in particular for white spot and slime
 added vitamins and minerals. However, dietary deficiencies
disease. It is effective against secondary fungal overgrowth.
may arise in fish fed on a limited variety of natural food-
When treating ornamental fish the volume of diluted chemi -
stuffs. Compound multivitamin and mineral preparations
cal required may be small and difficult to titrate correctly.
for fish are available (see section 16.7).
Therefore it is preferable to advise the use of a proprietary
Immuno-modulators are available from various suppliers.
preparation. There are many commercial preparations avail-
They may be given alone or in conjunction with antibacteri-
able which contain one or several ingredients and are rec-
als. Their main use has been in the fish farming industry but
ommended by the marufacturer for various conditions.
 they are now incorporated into some commercial ornamen-
Proprietary preparations for ornamental fish should be
tal fish feeds.
the initial choice of treatment. Complete eradication of
Viral conditions. Carp pox is caused by cyprinid herpes-
the parasite may involve repeated treatments to kill resistant
virus (CHV) and produces smooth raised hyperplastic
 stages, for example eggs, and treatment of the environment
lesions, which resemble drops of candle wax on the skin of
to remove free-swimming parasites.
carp such as koi. It is not fatal, rarely causes secondary
Prescribing for fish8
81
health problems, and often resolves spontaneously. Usually
Bacterial Control No 7 (Sinclair) UK
only one or two fish are affected. There is no treatmennt.
Liquid, allantoin, forrmaldehyde, magnesiurm sulfate, sodiurm chloride, for
freshwater aquarium fish
Lymphocystis is caused by an iridovirus and is character-
Indications.External bacterial and fungal infections
ised by discrete lesions due to hypertrophy of dermal
fibroblasts, which swell to about 1 mm in diameter and fre-
Bactocide (NT Lab.) UK
Liquid, acriflavine, aminoacridine hydrochloride, formaldehyde, for fresh-
quently cluster to form larger masses up to l cm in size.
water and marine aquarium fish
Morbidity, clinical pattern, and lack of treatment are similar
Indications. Extemal bacterial, fluke, and Piscinoodinium infections
to carp pox but lymphocystis mainly affects tropical marine
Baktopur (Sera) Ger
fish.
Liquid, acriflavine,
I,3-butylglycol, methylthioniniurm chloride, for fresh-
Koi herpesvirus is a highly infectious disease that causes
wateraquariumfish
acute gill disease and may result in up to l00% mortality.
Indications. External bacterial infections
The disease is most severe when water temperatures are
Comments. Harmful to filters
between 18 and 25°C. It has only been recorded in koi and
Chloramine-T (Alpharma, Vetark) UK
other carp.
Powder, chlorarmine-T, for pond fish
Indications.External bacterial,protozoal (chthyobodo, Ichthyophthirius)
Spring viraemia of carp is known to infect common carp
and fluke (Gyrodactylus) infections
and varieties such as koi as well as other ornamental species
Comments. Use higher dosage in high pH and hard water; irritant for skin,
including goldfish; it is a notifiable disease (see Prescribing
eyes, and respiratory systerm; rmay cause sensitisation in people prone to
allergic asthrma
for farmed fish).
Costapur (Sera) Ger.
Liquid, malachite green, potassium iodide, for freshwater und marine
Proprietary preparations for ornamental fish
uquariumfish
There are many preparations available. This is not a com-
Indications.Protozoal infections (fchthyophthirius, lchthyobodo，Chile-
prehensive list but contains preparations for which informa-
donella)
 Comments. Harmful to marine invertebrates
tion on active ingredients is available
from
the
manufacturer. It is preferable to use preparations for which
Cyprinopur (Sera) Ger
the active ingredients are known in order to limit potential
Liqwid, 1 ,3 dihydroxybenzol, ethanol, phenol, for pond fish
Indications. Treatrment of open wounds and ulcers
problems of toxicity in the operator, fish, and invertebrates.
Disease Clear (Sinclair) UK
UK
Liqwid, silver protein, mild,forfreshwater αquariumfish
Indications. See preparation details
Indications. External bacterial infections
Contra-indications. Side-effects.Warnings. See
Comments. Harmful to marirne fish; best at 10-30°℃
-OUOu
graphs under Farmed fish, manufacturer's information, and
Diseasolve Aquarium Antiseptic (NT Lab.) UK
preparation details
Liquid, acriflavine, methylthioniniurm chloride, for aquarium fish and pond
Dose. A measure is provided with many products, see 
fish
 Indications. Extern al bacterial and protozoal infections
manufacturer's instructions for dosage details
Ectopur (Sera) Ger
ACE-High (Vetark) UK
Powder, sodiurm borate, sodiurm chloride, sodiurm perborate, for freshwafer
See section 16.7 for preparation details 
and marine aquarium fish
Indications. Conditions requiring cormpound rmineral and multivitamin
Indications. Fungal and ectoparasitic infections 
supplerment
Fin-Rot (NT Lab.) UK
Acriflavine (PPI, UK Pond Products) UK
Liquid,acriflavine, aminoacridine hydrochloride, formaldehyde,forfreh
Liquid, acriflavine, for pond fish
water aquarium fish
Indications. Ex ternal bacterial, fungal, and protozoal infections 
Indications. Extemal bacterial and fluke infections
Aquarium Care Fungus (NT Labs.) UK
Fin Rot and Fungus Control No 6 (Sinclair) UK
Liquid, malachite green, for mquarium fish
Liqwid, 2-phenoxyethanol, for fresh water uquarium fish
Indications. Fungal and ectoparasitic infections 
Indications. Fungal infections 
Comments. Harmful in salt water; best at 16-27°℃
Aquarium Care White Spot (NT Labs.) UK
Liquid,acetic acid,for freshwater uquarium fish
Formaldehyde 30% Solution (Alpharma, UK Pond Products) UK
Indications. Protozoal infections (fchthyophthirius, fchthyobodo, Chile-
Liqwid, formaldehyde, for pond fish
donella, Pisc inoodinium)
Indications. Ectoparasitic infections
  s   s    
Ark-Klens ( Vetark) UK
burrs
Liquid, benzalkoniurm chloride, for pond fish
Indications. Extemal bacterial infections 
Formalachite (PPI) UK
Comments. Harmful to filters; use half dosage in soft water; corosive and
Liqwid, formaldehyde, malachite green, for pond fish
irritant for skin, eyes, and respiratory systerm; treatrment should be carried out
Indications.Protozoal (ichthyophthirius，lchthyobodo,Trichodina) and
in an isolation facility
fluke infections
Comments. May cause skin sensitisation by skin contact, operators should
Bacta-Pure (UK Pond Products) UK
avoid skin contact and inhalation of product 
Liquid, acriflavine, aminoacridine, formaldehyde,for pond fish
Indications. Extemal bacterial and fluke infection s
Formalin (PPI) UK
Comments. May cause skin sensitisation by skin contact, operators should
Liquid, formaldehyde, for pond fish
avoid skirn contact and inhalation of product 
Indications. Protozoal (fchthyophthirius, fchthyobodo, Trichodina) and
fluke infections
 82  Guidance on prescribing
GillPure (UK Pond Products) UK
Malachite Green Solution (UK Pond Products) UK
Liquid, benzalkoniurm chloride, for pond fish 
Ligwid, rmalachite green, for pond fish
Indications. External bacterial and parasitic infections
Indications.Fungal and some parasitic infections
Comments. Harrmful to filters; use half dosage in soft water
Icheide (NT Labs.) UK
Methylene Blue No 10 (Sinclair) UK
Liqidformalhyealachiteenofeshwatquiumih
Liqwid, rmethyIthioniniurm chloride, for freshwater aquarium fish
Indications. Fungal and protozoal (/chthyophthirius, Chilodonella) infec-
Indications. Fungal, fluke and protozoal infections 
tions
Comments. Harmful to filters; harmful to marine fish and plarnts; best at
D0-01
avoid skin contact and inhalation of product
Mycopur (Sera) Ger.
Koi Bath (PPI UK
Liquidcriflavine,coperchloridecoper sulfate,forreshwaterquarim
Liquid, benzalkoniurm chloride, stabiliser, aloe vera, witch hazel, for pond 
fish
fish
 Indications. Fungal infections, fluke infestations
 Indications. Extemal bacterial, and parasitic infections of the gills
Nishicare Anti-Bacterial Fin Rot Treatment (Nishikoi) UK
Koi Care Acriflavin (NT Labs.) UK
Liquid, acriflavine, aminoacridine hydrochloride, formaldehyde, for pond
Liquid, acriflavine, for pond fish
fish
Indications. External bacterial infections
Indications. Extemal bacterial infectior s
Koi Care Formaldehyde 30% Solution (NT Lab.) UK
Nishicare Anti-Fungus Treatment (Nishikoi) UK
Liquid, formaldehyde, for pond fsh
Ligwid, rmalachite green, for pond fish
Indications. Protozoal (fchthyophthirius, Trichodina, lchthyobodo) and
Indications. Fungal infections
Comments. Use above 6°℃
fluke infections
Comments. Tox ic
Liquid, formaldehyde, malachite green, for pond fish
Koi Care F-M-G (NT Lab.) U/K
Indications. Protozoal infection s
Liquidmalhyealahiteenfioldfh
Comments. May cause skin sen sitisation by skin contact, operators should
Indications. Fun gal or parasitic infections
avoid skin contact and irnhalation of product; use above 6°℃
Comments. Switch off ultraviolet light; harmful to orfe, rudd, tench, and
sterlets; rmay cause skin sensitisation by skin contact, operators should avoid
Qodinopur A (Sera) Ger.
skin contact and inhalation of product
Liqwid, copper chloride, copper sulfate, for freshwafer und marine aquar-
iumfish
Koi Care Gill-Wash (NT Lab.) UK
Indications. Protozoal (Piscinoodinium) infection
Liqwid, benzalkoniurm chloride, for pond fish
Comments. Harmful to marine invertebrates
Indications. Extemal bacterial infections of the gills 
Comments. Harrmful to filters; use half dosage in soft water
Paracide (NT Lab.) UK
Liquid,citic acid, cupric sulfate,formaldehyde,fofreshwater and marine
Koi Care Koi Calm (NT Lab.) UK
Liquid, clove oil
Indications. Protozoal infections including Pisc inoodinium, Cryptocaryon
Indications. Use as a calmative
Comments. Harnful to invertebrates
Comments. Harmful to skin
ParaPure (UK Pond Products) UK
Koi Care Malachite (NT Lab.) UK
Liqwid, formaldehyde, rmalachite green, for pond fish
Liquid, malachite green, for pond fish
Indications. Fungal and protozoalinfections
Indications. Fungal and external parasitic infections
Comments.May be applied topically for Argulus, Lemaea; maycause ski
Comments. Irritant
sern sitisation by skin contact, operators should avoid skin contact and inhala-
tion of product
Koi Care Permanganate (NT Lab) UK
Liquid, potassiurn permanganate, for koi und other pond fish
Pond Aid Bacterad (NT Lab.) UK
Indications. Extemal bacterial and parasitic infections
Liquid, acriflavine, arminoacridine hydrochloride, formaldehyde, for pond
Comments. Best used as a 30 minute bath at 10 rmg/L; use topically for
Argulus, Lernaea
fish
Indications. Extemal bacterial and fluke infections
Comments. May cause skin sensitisation by skin contact, operators should
Koi Care Uleer Swab (NT Lab.) U/K
 avoid skin contact and inhalation of product
Liquid, benzalkoniurm chloride, povidone, for koi and other pond fish
Indications. Cleanser and disinfectant for skirn wounds
Pond Aid Eradick (NT Lab.) UK
Comments. Topical use only; best used in conjunction with Koi Care
Liqwid, formaldehyde, malachite green, forpond fish
Wound Seal (NT Lab.)
Indications.Protozoal infections including fchthyophthirius, Chilodonella,
fchthyobodo, and fungal infections 
Koi Care Wound Seal (NT Lab.) U/K
Comments. May cause skin sensitisation by skin contact, operators should
Liquid, zine cream, aloe vera,for koi und other pond fish
avoid skin contact and inhalation of product 
Indications. Used to seal wounds and assist healing
Comments. Topical use only; best used in conjunction with Koi Care 
Pond Pride No 3 - Parasite Control (Sinclair) UK
Ulcer Swab (NT Lab.)
Liquid,acriflavine,malachite geen,quinine sulfate,forpondfish
Indications. Protozoal infections
Malachite (PPI) UK
Comments. May cause sensitisation by skin contact
Liquid,malachitereenfopondish
Indications. Fungal and parasitic infections
Pond Pride No 4 - Fungus Control (Sinclair) UK
Liqwid, forrmaldehyde, malachite green, for pond fsh
Malachite Green (Alpharma) UK
Indications. Fungal infections
Liqwid, rmalachite green, for ornamental fish
Comments. May cause skin sen sitisation by skin contact, operators should
Indications. Fungal and parasitic infections 
avoid skin contact and inhalation of product
Prescribing for fish 8
83
Pond Pride No 5 - Fin and Tail Rot Control (Sinclair) UK
TetraMedica ContraSpot (Tetra) UK
Liquid silver protein,mild,foondfish
Liqwidformaldehyde,malachitegreen,forfreshwater uquariumish
Indications.Externalbacterialinfections
Indications.Protozoal and fluke infections
Comments. May cause sen sitisation by skin contact; rmay be used topically
Comments. May cause skin sen sitisation by skin contact, operators should
avoid skin contact and inhalation of product 
Pond Pride No 8 - Open Wound Treatment (Sinclair) UK
Liquid, allantoin, formaldehyde, rmagnesiurm sulfate, sodiurm chloride, for
TetraMedica FungiStop (Tetra) UK
pondfish
Liquid, collidon, rmetanil yellow, silver in colloidal form, for freshwater
Indications. External bacterialinfections
uquariumfish
 Comments. May cause skin sensitisation by skin contact, operators should 
Indications. Fungal infections on fish and eggs
avoid skin contact and inhalation of product
Comments. Not recommended for rmarine aquaria
Potassium (PPl) UK
TetraMedica General Tonic (Tetra) UK
Liquidpotassium saltsforpondfish
Liquid, acriflavine, arminoacridine, ethacridine lactate, rmethylthioninium
Indications. Protozoal infections (fchthyophthirius, Frichodina), anchor
chloride,fofreshwaterquriumfih
worrm, fungal infections
Indications. External bacterial infections
Protoban (Vetark) UK
TetraPond Medifin (Tetra) UK
Liquid, formaldehyde, rmalachite green, for pond fish 
Liquid, forrmaldehyde, malachite green, for pond fish 
Indications. Protozoal (fchthyobodo, Trichodina, Chilodonella) infections
Indications. External bacterial, fungal, fluke, and protozoal infections
and sorme ex ternal bacterial and fluke infections
Comments. Harmful, rmay cause skin sensitisation by skin contact, opera-
Comments. May cause skin sensitisation by skin contact, operators should
tors should avoid skin contact and inhalation of product 
avoid skin contact and inhalation of product
Velvet Control No 8 (Sinclair) UK
Tamodine (Vetark) U/K
Liqwid,cupric sulfate,forfreshwateraquariumfish
Sol wtion, povidone-iodine, for allfish species
Indications. Piscinoodinium infection 
Indications. Topical application to skin ulcers and wounds
Comments. May be toxic in soft water, use half dose for light scaled fish
Comments. Some individuals rmay develop an acute allergic-type dermati-
e.g. sharks, loaches; use at 2030°℃
tis following skin contact
White Spot Control No 5 (Sinclair) UK
Tamodine-E (Vetark) UK
Liquid, acriflavine, rmalachite green, quinine sulfate, for freshwater αquar-
Liquidopho,forllfishspei
iumfish
Indications. Disinfection
Indications. Protozoal infections
Comments. Highly toxic to live fish
Comments. Harmful to marirne fish; best at 25-30°℃
TetraFin Goldfish Disease Treatment (Tetra) U/K
WS3 White Spot Terrminator (Sinclair) UK
Liquid, formaldehyde, malachite green oxalate, for uquarium goldfish
Liquidacriflavine,malachite reen,quinine sulfate,forfreshwater quar-
Indications. External bacterial and protozoal infections
iumfish
Comments. Harmful, may cause skin sensitisation by skin contact 
Indications. Protozoal (ichthyophthirius, fchthyobodo, Trichodina) infec-
tions
TetraFin GoldMed (Tetra) UK
 Comments. Harmful to rmarine fish; best at 25-30°℃
Liquid, formaldehyde, malachite green oxalate, for uquarium goldfish
Indications. External bacterial, fungal, and protozoal infections 
Comments. Harmful, may cause skin sensitisation by skirn contact
Table 19 Endoparasiticidal doses of drugs for ormamental fishi
Drug
Dose
Condition
Fenbendazole
by gavage or addition to feed, 50 mg/kg body-weight daily for 2 days, repeat
roundwoms
after 14 days
Levamisole
by addition to water, 5 mg/L as a single dose
roundwoms
Mebendazole
by addition to feed, 25-50 mg/kg body-weight weekly for 3 weeks
roundwoms
Piperazine
by addition to feed, 10 mg/kg body-weight for 3 days
roundwoms
Praziquantel
by gavage, 50 mg/kg as a single dose
tapeworms
by addition to feed, 5 mg/kg body-weight weekly for 3 weeks
10-25 mg/kg i.m. as a single dose
1drug doses for preparations thathave a marketing authorisation for use in ornamental fish in the UK.Therefore,unless
marked 1, the drug or doses stated are not authorised for ornamental fish
84   Guidance on prescribing
Table 20 Antimicrobial and ectoparasiticidal doses of drugs for ormamental fish!
Drug
Dose
Condition
Acriflavine (neutral)
by addition to water, 5-10 mg/L as prolonged bath
bacterial, fungal, and
or by addition to water, 500 mg/L daily as 30 minute bath
 ectoparasitic infections
Amikacin
5 mg/kg i.m. twice daily
bacterial infections
Amoxicillin
by addition to feed, 80 mg/kg body-weight for 10 days
bacterial infections
15 mg/kg i.m. as a single dose (formulation to use: long-acting prep-
aration)
Ampicillin
10 mg/kg i.m. daily
bacterial infections
 Benzalkonium
see Prescribing for farmed fish
extemal bacterial infections
chloride
Chloramine
see Prescribing for farmed fish
extemal bacterial and
ectoparasitic infections
Chloramphenicol
40 mg/kg i.m. daily
bacterial infections
 Copper sulfate
see Prescribing for farmed fish
 ectoparasitic infections
Dimetridazole
by addition to feed, 28 mg/kg body-weight for 10 days
protozoal infections
by addition to water, 5 mg/litre every 3 days for 3 treatments
Enrofloxacin
by addition to feed, 10 mg/kg body-weight for 10 days
bacterial infections
by addition to water, 2mg/L for 5 hours daily for 5 days
510 mg/kg i.m. on alternate days for 15 days
Florfenicol
40-50 mg/kg i.m. daily
bacterial infections
by addition to feed, 10 mg/kg body-weight for 10 days
Formaldehyde
see Prescribing for farmed fish
ectoparasitic infections
Formaldehyde and
by bath, 25 ppm for 1 hour
fungal and ectoparasitic
malachite green
  n s   e    d q
infections
mixture
(Leteux-Meyer
ments for Ichthyophthirius infections
mixture?)
Gentamicina
2.5 mg/kg i.m.every 3 days
bacterial infections
Itraconazole
by addition to feed, 1-5 mg/kg body-weight every 1-7 days
systemic fungal infections
Lufenuron
by addition to water, 88 micrograms/L (0.088 mg/L) as a single dose crustacean parasites
(formulation to use: oral suspension)
Malachite green
Fish4: by dip, 50-60 ppm for 10-30 seconds
fungal and protozoal
(zinc free)
by bath, 1-2 ppm for 30-60 minutes (the higher dose should only be
infections
used for large fish kept in hard water)
by prolonged immersion, 0.1 ppm for 30-96 hours
Eggs: by bath, 0.5 ppm for 1 hour
Mebendazole
1 mg/L as a 24 hour bath
ectoparasitic flukes
Methylthioninium
see Prescribing for farmed fish
fungal and ectoparasitic
chloride (Methylene
infections
blue)
Metronidazole
by addition to water, 7 mg/L (14 mg/L for Piscinoodinium)
protozoal infections
by addition to feed, 10 g/kg feed for 5 days
Neomycin
by addition to water, 50-75 mg/L (sea water) for 24-48 hours
bacterial infections
Prescribing for fish 85
Table 20 Antimicrobial and ectoparasiticidal doses of drugs for omamental fish'(continued)
Drug
Dose
Condition
Oxolinic acid
by addition to feed, 10 mg/kg body-weight (freshwater fish)
bacterial infections
by addition to feed, 30 mg/kg body-weight (marine fish)
Oxytetracycline
by addition to water, 10-100 mg/L for 1-3 days
bacterial infections
by addition to feed,75 mg/kg body-weight
25 mg/kg i.m. daily for 5-7 days5
Potassium
see Prescribing for farmed fish
extemal bacterial and
permanganate
ectoparasitic infections
Praziquantel
2 mg/L as a permanent bath or
ectoparasitic flukes
10 mg/L as 4 hour bath
Proflavine hemisulfate
by addition to water, 1 mg/L as a permanent bath
mild bacterial infections
Sarafloxacin
10 mg/kg body-weight daily for 10 days
bacterial infections
Sodium chloride
by addition to fresh water, 10- 30 g/L as a 15-30 minute bath
extemal bacterial and
by addition to fresh water, 30- 35 g/L as a 4-5 minute bath
ectoparasitic infections
Sulfadiazine +
by addition to feed, 30 mg/kg body-weight
bacterial infections
trimethoprim
30 mg/kg i.m. on alternate days for 14 days
Toltrazuril
30 mg/L as a 60-minute bath
myxozoan parasites
20 mg/L as a 60-minute bath on alternate days for 6 days
Water, fresh
(marine fish) 2-10 minute dip daily for 5 days. Add sufficient
 protozoal infections
sodium bicarbonate to ensure pH equals that of tank water
1 drug doses for preparations that have a marketing authorisation for use in ornamental fish in the UK. Therefore, unless
marked 1, the drug or doses stated are not authorised for ornamental fish
2 a stock solution containing malachite green 3.3 g/litre in formaldehyde solution 35-40%
3may cause renal toxicity in some species, for example Opsanus spp.
4toxic to Tetras and scaleless fish,may be toxic to small marinefish
5 long-acting preparations may cause reaction at injection site with fonmation of sero-sanguineous fluid-filled cavity; may also
be immunosuppressive
Table 21 Doses of other drugs for omamental fish1
Drug
Dose
Indications
Butorphanol
50-100 micrograms/kg (0.05-0.1 mg/kg) i.m. as a single dose
analgesia
Dexamethasone
1-2 mg/kg i.m. as a single dose
treatment for shock,
trauma, and stress
Doxapram
5 mg/kg i.m, i.v. as a single dose
respiratory stimulant
Potassium iodide
by addition to feed, 10 mg/kg body-weight once weekly
goitre
Sodium chloride
1-3 g/L as permanent bath
prophylaxis and aid in
wound healing in fresh-
water fish
Sodium thiosulfate
10 mg/L in tap water
dechlorination
1 drug doses for preparations that have a marketing authorisation for use in ornamental fish in the UK. Therefore, unless
marked 1, the drug or doses stated are not authorised for ornamental fish
86
Prescribing for invertebrates
Contributors:
ments designed for topical use have relati vely high conicerl-
L Jepson MA, VetMB, CBiol, MIBiol, MRCVS
trations of active ingredients and although these may appear
G F Rendall BVSc, MRCVS
ideal for topical use, overdose can occur if applied directly
to mucous membranes or if ingested. Injections and haemo-
lymph sampling should be performed with care. Insects
ronmental, nutritional, and behavioural requirements. Spe-
have ar open haemolymph system with a dorsal heart
cies of economic importance include bees, crustaceans,
extending along the first nine abdominal segments. Tarantu-
snails, and silkworms. Others such as spiders and butterflies
las and scorpions have a a semi-closed system with a larger,
are kept as pets or for exhibition. Many are used in research,
dorsal mid-line heart with a well developed arterial system.
for example leeches and octopuses.
Injections should be given in the caudolateral aspect of the
The majority of conditions affecting invertebrates kept in
abdomen to avoid these critical structures. Fluids (up to
captivity are related to poor husbandry or nutritional defi-
0.5 mL Hartmann's solution or sodium chloride 0.9%) may
ciencies and thus conditions for which phamacological
be administered to dehydrated tarantulas by this route, and
intervention is appropriate are generally limited to infec-
the hole sealed with tissue glue or equivalent. The same
tious disease. With the increasing popularity of numerous
area is used for the insertion of microchips. Alternatively
invertebrates as pets, the growth of commercial snail farm-
fluids may be admirnistered into the ventral aspect of a distal
ing, and the conservation importance of many endangered
leg joint.
invertebrate species, further work on disease in these ani-
Antimicrobial therapy. A great many viral infections are
mals and the development of effective chemotherapeutic
known to infect insects including picornaviruses (such as
agents is important.
cricket paral ysis virus), entomopoxviruses and iridoviruses,
Many agents used for these animals are not authorised for
and little can be done for these except culling infected indi-
the target species and are used under the responsibility of
viduals and enforcing strict hygiene. Sublethal doses of
the veterinarian who has the animal ‘under his care'.
 COSHH regulations should be adhered to when handling
arsenic sulphide 0.01% have been given in feed to silk worm
larvae to reduce the effects of viral disease.
chemicals.
Bacterial infections are common in mantids, phasmids, spi-
ders anid cricket cultures. Such infections are probably sec-
Terrestrial invertebrates
ondary to immunosuppression as a result of poor
Although considerable work has been undertaken on the
husbandry. Common isolates include Serratia, Bacilfus,
diseases of the honey bee Apis melifera (see below) and the
Clostridia, and Pseudomonas. This last is thought to enter
silkworm Bombyx mori because of their economic impor-
the invertebrate via the digestive tract and can cause death
tance, little is known about the diseases of terrestrial inver-
within 24 to 48 hours due to a septicaemia-like condition.
tebrates such as insects (cockroaches, mantids, and stick
Many bacterial pathogens produce environmentally resist-
insects), arachnids (spiders and scorpions), myriapods (cen-
ant spores and so pose a constant threat; hence the core
tipedes and millipedes), terrestrial crustacea (land and tree
management of these problems should be directed towards
crabs), or molluscs (snail species). Invertebrate pathology
correcting
any environmental or husbandry deficits.
has concentrated on diseases in which invertebrates act
Attempted antimicrobial therapies should be based upon
merely as vectors, or in the use of diseases for biological
culture and sensitivity, but could include broad spectrum
control of pest species.
antibiotics such as potentiated sulphonamides. This can be
In practice, the veterinarian is most likely to encounter ter-
administered as an oral paediatric elixir formulation or by
restrial invertebrates kept as pets, in particular the large
intra-abdominal injection of a dilute intravenous prepara-
theraphosid spiders (tarantulas). Other invertebrates such as
tion. Sulphonamides have been reported as being safe and
pasmids (stick insects), hissing cockroaches (Grom-
efficacious in grasshoppers, mealworms, and bees.
phadorhina spp.), and land hermit crabs (Coenobita spp.)
 Fungal infections are common in terrestrial invertebrates
are also occasionally encountered.
especially those kept in humid conditions. Muscardine,
Drug administration. The use of drugs in terrestrial
caused by Beauvaria bassiana, has been a serious problem
invertebrates should be approached with caution. Hardly
in silkworms but has also been noted in other terrestrial
any pharmacokinetic data for the use of therapeutic drugs in
inivertebrate colonies. Other fungal infections include Ento-
these groups exist. As with other ectothermic animals, the
mophthorales, Hyphomycetes, and Oomycetes. These fungi
can be active pathogens with spores attaching and invading
perature zone (POTZ) for optimal drug metabolism. As a
 across the cuticle. Death is often slow; in some cases epizo-
otics cani result. Antifungal drugs that may be of use include
these animals have a significantly lower metabolic rate than
 topical ketoconazole or enilconazole used as a spray formu-
mammals. Dermatological or ophthalmic medicinal oint-
lation or painted onl.
Prescribing for invertebrates 8
87
Parasiticidal therapy. Protozoal parasitism can be diff-
Bees
cult to diagnose in terrestrial invertebrates. Some such as
Gregarina are known entomopathogens, while others may
Honeybees, Apis melfifera, are kept for the production of
be normal commensals. The microsporidian parasite
honey, beeswax, pollen, royal jelly, venom, and propolis;
Nosema bombycis can be a serious problem in silkworms. It
for the propagation of queen bees and the preparation of
can be transmitted horizontally on infected leaves; verti-
new colonies; and for the purpose of pollination of agricul-
cally by transovarian transmission and venereally from the
tural and horticultural crops. Honeybees are also used in
male. In the latter case, spores transferred at the time of
research into, for example, the neural tract and giant
 mating secondarily contaminate the fertilised eggs and the
neurons.
subsequently hatched silkworm larvae. To eliminate this
There is limited information available on the diseases and
kind of contamination,the eggs are routinely surface steri-
their treatment in bees. Some diseases have low economic
lised in 2% formalin solution ini grainages (building or room
value or have been incompletely researched; for others the
where silkworm pupae are stored).
causative agent is unknown.
The nematode Nemihelix bakeri is reported to cause
 Bees are susceptible to a number of viral, bacterial, proto-
reduced fecundity in snails such as Achatina and Helix but
zoal, fungal, and acarine infections, which affect either the
no treatment regimens have been suggested except hygiene
adult bees or their brood. Diseases affecting adults include
 measures. Nematodes can also be a problem for tarantulas.
nosema caused by the microsporidian Nosema apis. The
Some such as heterorhabtids carry symbiotic bacteria that
disease is spread in the faeces of infected bees. During the
can infect and quickly kill the spider host. These nematodes
warmer period of the year the faeces are discharged away
appear as a whitish discharge around the mouthparts and
from the hive and represent no risk to the colony, but in
should be removed physically with a damp cottonwool bud
winter and early spring faecal contamination of the inside of
with the spider under a general anaesthetic. Benzimidazoles
the hive may occur if cleansing flights are limited by
and fluoroquinolones have proved of little use in these
adverse weather. The young bees on “house' duties are
cases.
infected with the organism when cleaning soiled frames.
Mites can be a problem in both myriapods and tarantu-
The organism multiplies in the epithelial cells of the midgut
las.They should be physically removed. In the USA, cul-
producing huge numbers of spores.
tures of predatory mites (Hypoaspis miles) are available for
‘Amoeba disease’ is caused by the protozoa Mal-
biological control of the parasitic species. However, not all1
pighamoeba mellificae. The organism encysts in the mal-
mites found are parasitic. The hissing cockroach Grompha-
 pighian tubules, later moving into the ventriculus where it
rodina potentosa has a commensal relationship with its mite
multiplies, becomes flagellated and then invades the mal-
and so no treatment should be undertaken. Parasitic wasp
pighian tubules again to form cysts, some of which are
lar vae are occasionally encountered in wild caught tarantu-
discharged through the intestine.
las. Nothing can be done for these.
Tracheal mites are acarine mites, Acarapis woodi, which
Sudden deaths. Unexplained deaths are often due to poi-
live in the trachea behind the first thoracic spiracle. Eggs
sonings such as cigarette smoke or use of garden insecti-
are laid in the trachea, which hatch, pass through a nymph
cidal sprays. Concurrent use of fipronil on other household
pets has been tentatively linked to unexpected mortalities.
transfer to other bees. It is believed that they can only eniter
Anaesthesia. Pet tarantulas have a different respiratory
the spiracle in young bees where the hairs guarding the
systerm to insects and this can affect their response to gase-
entrance are still soft. Feeding on haemolymph through the
ous anaesthetics. The ^primiti ve' groups such as the scorpi-
tracheal wall, they have the potential of passing on infec-
ons and tarantulas have book lungs as their only gaseous
tions to their host and their presence is usually associated
exchange system; oxygen and anaesthetic gases are distrib-
uted by diffusion through the haemolymph. More advanced
wings, fluttering, and bloated abdomen.
spiders, insects and the myriapods have a system of tubes
The larvae of the greater wax moths Gafleria meffonella
called trachea that directly transport oxygen to tissues. In
(honeybee moths) and the lesser wax moths Achroia
insects, the tracheae subdivide down to tracheoles that
grisefla (Meliphora grisella) feed on larval skins and pupal
invest individual cells. These anatomical and physiological
remains together with some wax in the brood combs. Their
tunnels are lined with silken threads and frass, which the
anaesthetics, such as isoflurane, is quite quick in insects
bees dislike, causing the bees to abandon areas of comb.
while in tarantulas the process may be prolonged.
For tarantulas the method of choice is to soak some isoflu-
resulting in the condition called *bald brood': In an empty 
rane on to cotton wool and place this with the tarantula in a
hive, there is complete destruction of the combs, leaving a
sealed container. Response to anaesthetic is assessed by
tangled mass of silk threads, frass, and debris, and probably
monitoring righting reflex. The use of carbon dioxide or
erosions into the woodwork by the pupae.
hypothermia should be avoided for invasive procedures
Braula coeca (*bee louse) lives on the adult bees, rarely
because these provide no analgesia. Snails may be anaes-
causing any problem. However its larval stages pass along
thetised by placing the foot in appropriate solutions of ben-
the cappings of the stored honey, producing lines that dis-
zocaine, phenox yethanol, or thicaine mesylate.
figure the appearance of comb honey. (Subjecting the comb
88
Guidance on prescribing
Table 22 Husbandry requirements for common pet terrestrial invertebrates
Habitat/
Species
Vivariumtype
POTZ(°C)
Humidity (%)
Diet
Mexican red knee tarantula
terrestrial
22-25
55-70
carnivorous
(Brachypelma smithi)
Chilean rose
terrestrial
22-25(summer)
55-70
carnivorous
(Grammostola cala)
10-15 (winter)
Bird eating tarantulas
arboreal
25-28 (day)
70-80
carnivorous
(Avicalaria spp.)
20-23 (night)
Baboon spider
terrestrial
25-30
+08
carnivorous
(Ceratogyrus spp)
Emperor scorpion
terrestrial
25-30 (day)
70-85
carnivorous
(Pandinus imperator)
20-25 (night)
Mantids
arboreal; house individually;
25-30
50 - 70
carnivorous: small to large
(order Mantodea)
need height (3 times body
insects depending upon spe-
length minimum) to
cies
moult properly
Stick insects
arboreal; need height (3 times 21- 28 (day)
50-70
 most species eat bramble and
body length minimum) to moult 17-22 (night)
(order Phasmida)
rose; the common Indian
properly
stick insect Carausius moro-
sus feeds well on privet
Land hermit crab
Relatively humid; sand or old
20-25
60-80
wide range of food materials
(Coenobita clypetus)
compost as substrate; provide
eaten including commercially
spare mollusc shell
available pellets
Giant African land snail
Basic terrestrial vivarium;
20-25
60-80
wide range of vegetable
(Achatina fulica)
humid; old compost, bark, or
materials; must have calcium
leaf mould as substrate
source supplied
Prescribing for invertebrates 8
89
to freezing for a brief period will prevent development of
 of breeding, are removed and destroyed before emergence
the larvae.)
of daughter mites. Use of bio-technical methods of queenl
Chalkbrood is a widespread infection due to the fungus
trapping are recommended. Use of open mesh floors (or
Ascosphaera apis. Most hives have a few cells of infected
specially-designed floors such as Anti-Varroa Bottom
larvae but it can become more extensive if other factors,
Board available from Happykeeper), rather than solid
such as chilling, weaken the brood. The spores germinate in
floors, ensures that fallen mites are outside the hive, unable
the ventriculus and invade the haemocoel. The larvae die
to climb back into the hive on passing bees, and do not sur-
just after capping and when exposed by the bees are swollen
vive. Use of beeswax foundation with a smaller than normal
and chalky white. They then shrink and are removed by the
cell size (available from Thorne (Beehives)) is recom-
bees and dropped at the front of the hive (known as 'mum-
mended. Small cell foundation (SCF) colonies appear to
mies' by beekeepers). Dead larvae are occasionally black
 sid og ae s    e 
due to the presence of fungal fruiting bodies. Stonebrood is
find it more difficult to hide in the restricted space in SCF
a less frequent infection caused by Aspergiffus flavus or
brood cells, and smaller but more rumerous bees are more
Aspergilfus fumigatus and is similar to the above.
efficient in maintaining the brood temperature at a level
Sac brood is fairly common and is caused by sac brood
above that preferred by Varroa mites, which then seek
virus (SBV), which is able to cause clinical disease appar-
drone brood or cells on the periphery of the comb.
ently without needing a triggering factor. The virus inter-
For many years it has been known that several honeybee
feres with the production of a chitinase responsible for
viruses persist as inapparent infections, difficult to detect by
enabling the separation and sloughing of the skin at the final
nomal techniques. It has been found that in combination
larval moult. The partially shed skin fills with fluid contain-
with infections, such as Varroa destructor (Varroa jacob-
ing huge amounts of virus particles.
soni) or Nosema apis, these viruses can increase to lethal
American foul brood (AFB) caused by Paenibacilfus
levels. Slow paral ysis virus (SPV) in the UK, acute paraly-
larvae farvae infection and European foul brood (EFB)
sis virus (APV) in other parts of Europe, deformed wing
caused by Melissococcus pfutonius infection are notifiable
virus, and cloudy wing virus are associated with varroosis.
diseases in the UK. The bacteria are passed to the newly
Kashmir bee virus, a virulent and highly infective bee virus,
hatched larvae by infected nurse bees and thern multiply at
previously found in Apis cerana in Asia and in A. mellifera
different stages dependent on the oxygen:carbon dioxide
in Australia and New Zealand has beenl recovered associ-
concentrations. The disease is characterised by death after
ated with Varroa infection in Canada, USA, and Spain and
capping (AFB) or usually before capping (EFB). Dried
recently in Costa Rica together with deformed wing virus
remnants of the AFB infected larvae are difficult to remove
infection. Similarly Nosema infections can be associated
from the comb and the contained spores provide a very
with black queen cell virus, bee virus Y, and filamentous
durable source of further infections, hence the requirement
virus. The latter is common in the UK, fortunately showing
to destroy by burning any infected material such as frames
little pathogenicity.
and combs. EFB is not so persistent and does not form
Drug administration. Drugs can be administered to bees
reoddesapngsenods
unexpectedly
in colonies;
as powder, in syrup, in gel, by aerosol, in smoke, or by con-
subclinical or latent infection in otherwise normal colonies
tact with a medicated strip. Fumigation is used to treat
can be detected by the laboratory tests recently developed.
combs. Great care should be taken to ensure that the bees
Research into the biological control of EFB is being carried
utilise the drug immediately rather than store it because the
out using Paenibacilflus larvae pulvifaciens, a non-
drug may contaminate the honey. This is achieved in the
pathological type of AFB.
case of medicated sugar syrup by using a slow feeder from
Varroosis caused by infestation by the acarine mite, Varroa
which the drug is taken over 2 to 3 days, rather than a rapid
destructor ( Varroa jacobsoni) is also a notifiable disease in
feeder which allows the bees to take litres of syrup over-
the UK. A high level of infection of varroa mites on the bee
night, which is then likely to be put into the honiey super.
brood will result in developmental damage such
as
However, medication should not normally be administered
deformed wings and abdomens, and also abnormal salivary
with honey supers still on the hive. There is a risk that cer-
glands so that the emerging bee is unable to carry out nor-
tain drugs may accumulate in the wax of the comb and
mal duties in the hive and the lifespan is shortened. Treat-
ment in the UK has largely depended on the use of the
down even if the wax is heat processed. This has occurred
pyrethroids, flumethrin, and fluvalinate. However the
with some varroacidal preparationis. Therefore the mariufac-
appearance of pyrethroid-resistant mites at several sites in
turer recommends that bee products other than honey, for
the UK (as on mainland Europe) has necessitated changes
example comb honey, are not taken for human consumption
in technique and introduction of Integrated Pest Manage-
until the spring following treatment. Transfer to extracted
ment (IPM).
honey is negligible. The duration of treatment specified in
Under IPM, treatment is carried out for the specified period
the data sheet should not be exceeded.
and only when necessary as shown by assessment of the
The formulation of the preparation may affect its stability
mi te population. Non-pyrethroid varroacides or non-medic-
within the hive, for example ox ytetracycline degrades rap-
inal curative substances are advocated. Trap combs of drone
idly in aqueous solution but retains potency for several
brood, in which mother mites have entered for the purpose
  n   s   s
90 Guidance on prescribing
significant effect on the activity of the bees and also affects
Warnings. Not effective against the lesser waxmoth. Store
the vaporisation of chemicals such as formic acid and
the suspension at <20°C, do not freeze
essential oils; ambient temperature should be monitored to
Dose. See preparation details, apply in autumn before stor-
ensure adequate, but not toxic, concentration of medication.
ing the combs, or in spring prior to placing on the hive
Few preparations for bees have a UK marketing authorisa-
tion; preparations for bees available in other countries may
Certan (Swarm, distributed by Thorne (Beehives) UK
be obtained by veterinarians under a Special Treatment
Dose. Dilute I volurme in 19 volures water. By spraying, 10 mL of diluted
solution on each cormb surface, en suring penetration of the open cells.
Authorisation from the VMD. The Medicines (Restrictions
on the Administration of Veterinary Medicinat Products)
Mellonex (Andermatt Biocontrol) Switz.
Dose. By spraying, dilute 7.5 rmL in 100 mL water
Amendment Regulations /997 prohibits personal imports of
products not authorised in the UK.
DIAGNOSTIC TEST KITS
Under the Animal and Animat Products (Examination for
Residues and Maximum Residue Limits)Regulations 1997,
UK
bees are considered as food-producing animals. The VMD
Indications. Diagnosis of American Foul Brood by detec-
have indicated that non-medicinal curative substances such
tion of presence of dead sealed brood in the suspect hive
as industrial talc, lactic acid, oxalic acid, thymol, other
Warnings. The results should be interpreted in conjunction
essential oils, homoeopathic treatments, oil of wintergreen,
with clinical signs; AFB is notifiable in the UK; no treat-
liquid paraffin, and formic acid may be used for bees if such
 ment is permitted
agents are unlikely to be harmful to human health, if trans-
mitted to honey.
Vita AFB Test Kit (Vita (Europe)) UK
Field test kit, based on rmonoclonal antibodies, for honey bees
In the UK, preparations for bees are available from drug
 manufacturers and also bee equipment suppliers including:
UK
Beesy
Indications. Diagnosis of European Foul Brood by detec-
·
Happykeeper
tion of abnormal larvae in open brood (occasionally in
+
KBS
sealed brood)
Loveridge
Warnings. The results should be interpreted in conjunction 
+
Maisemore Apiaries
with clinical signs; EFB is notifiable in the UK; treatment at
National Bee Supplies
the discretion of the Bee Inspector, National Bee Umit
+
Thorne (Beehives)
Vita(Europe)
Vita EFB Test Kit (Vita (Europe) UK
Field test kit, based on rmonoclonal antibodies, for honey bees
Wynine Jones.
Further information on bees and beekeeping is available
from many sources including:
ESSENTIAL OILS
Bee Improvement and Bee Breeders Association (BIBBA)
Essential oils such as oil of citronella and oil of sandalwood
British Beekeepers Association (BBKA)
act by repelling the mites from beeswax that has oil incor-
International Bee Research Association (IBRA)
porated. Other oils, especially oil of cinnamon, are toxic to
National Bee Unit.
mites. The efficacy of treatment is reduced considerably if
ambient temperature falls below 12°C or in very large
ACETIC ACID
hives.
Oils are relatively insoluble in water so negligible transfer
UK
to honey occurs and cannot be detected by smell or taste.
Indications. Eggs and larvae of wax moths, Nosema apis,
Residues in wax dimish rapidly and airing the combs will
Matpighamoeba mellificae
speed evaporation (melting the wax has no effect).
Warnings. Concentrated solutions are irritant to skin; oper-
ators should take care not to inhale fumes; corrosive to
UK
metal hive parts
Indications. Prophylaxis of mites Varroa destructor (Var-
Dose. As fumigant, soak pads of cotton wool in 150 mL
roajacobsoni)
acetic acid 80% and place between hive bodies full of
Warnings. Best used in late summer immediately after
combs in winiter storage. Ventilate the combs before offer-
honey harvest; whole apiary should be treated at the same
inig them to the bees
time; honey supers should be removed before treatment;
treatment is less effective if there is a drop in temperature
BACILLUS THURINGIENSIS
Dose. Apply one tablet (broken into 34 parts) to either
over or under brood frames. Close hive and leave for 7-8
UK
days, depending on ambient temperature. Repeat 3-4 times
Indications. Infestation of comb by the larvae of the
and remove residues at end of treatment. Apply in late sum-
greater wax moth Gatteria mellonella
mer when daily temperature is over 12°C, ideally 20- 30°℃
Prescribing for invertebrates 
16
GSL Apilife VAR (Chermicals LAIF) ftaly
Warnings. Keep in original packing until ready for use;
Impregnated tablet, camphor 3.7%, eucalytol 1 6.0%, rmenthol 3.7%, thymol
operator should take adequate precautions such as wearing
74.08 %
gloves, avoiding contact with skin, mouth, or eyes
Dose. Treatment, suspend 2 strips between the combs in
FORMIC ACID
the brood chamber; leave for 6-8 weeks. May be used
Formic acid is a liquid at less than 50°C, is soluble in water
throughout the period of honeyflow if required
and honey, is a small molecule, and penetrates porous wax
cappings. Therefore it may be used in the treatment of
GSL Apistan ( Vita (Europe)) UK
sealed brood.
impregntedstrip,flvalinate0%,fhney ee
Withdrawal Periods. Bees: honey withdrawal period nil
UK
FORMALDEHYDE SOLUTION
Indications. Control of mites Acarapis woodii and Varroa
destructor (Varroa jacobsoni), bee louse Braula coeca, wax
UK
moth larvae
Indications.Nosema apis,Malpighamoeba mellificae,
Side-effects. A few bees may be killed and bees emerging
European Foul Brood, wax moths
from sealed cells and queens appear to be at greatest risk
Warnings. Use only on empty combs or hive bodies; oper-
Warnings. Corrosive, causes severe burns to skin and dan-
ators should take care not to inhale fumes
gerous if inhaled; reported to be cytotoxic. Operator should
Dose. As fumigant, add 500 mL Formaldehyde Solution
take adequate precautions; remove honey supers before
BP to 240 g potassium permanganate (sufficient for 30 m?).
treatment
Leave in contact with combs or hive bodies for 14-17 days
Dose. By vaporiser, formic acid 60% or 85%. Treatment
can be applied at any time of year if ambient temperature is
LACTIC ACID
high enough to achieve adequate vaporisation and the bees
are not clustered
UK
Indications. Treatment of mites Varroa destructor (Varroa
FLUMETHRIN
jacobsoni)
Contra-indications. Brood cappings are not penetrated by
UK
the acid, therefore should not be used in presence of brood
Indications. Diagnosis and control of mites Varroa
Warnings. Chilling of bees by the spray is stressful and
destructor (Varroa jacobsoni)
treatment at low temperatures should be avoided. Lactic
Warnings. Avoid use during periods of honey flow except
acid is corrosive and likely to cause skin burns. Operator
for diagnosis, or treatment if necessary for survival of the
should wear protective clothing
Dose. By spray, 5 mL lactic acid 15% solution each side of
colony; avoid contact of preparation and honey to be har-
vested for human consumption
combs directly on to the bees, ensuring that they are thor-
oughly wetted. Repeat 4 times at weekly intervals. Ambient
the combs in the brood chamber. Leave in place for a maxi-
temperature should be between 5°C and 10°C (late autumn)
when minimal flying is taking place so that most bees are
mum of 6 weeks
treated and there is little brood to conceal mites. May be
Diagnosis, leave in place for 24 hours. Dead mites seern on
used in summer on broodless stocks such as natural or arti-
floor tray, which must be protected by a mesh or screen to
ficial swarms
prevenit removal by the bees. The level of infestation can be
estimated by the number of mites. Interpretation of the
METHYL SALICYLATE
result must relate the number of mites to the size and condi-
tion of the colony, previous treatment, time of year, the
UK
breeding activity of bees at the time
Indications. Prevention of migration of mites Acarapis
GSL Bayvarol (Bayer) UK
woodi from infested bee to healthy bee. Mites are not killed
impregnated srip,flumethrin 3.6 mg/strip,foc honey bees
Withdrawal Periods. Bees: honey withdrawal period nil; other bee produce
present
intended for human consurn ption should not be taken until the spring follow-
Dose. As fumigant, moisten a gauze pad with 2.5 mL and
ing treatrment
apply over frames daily for 6 days or fill a small bottle fit-
ted with a wick and place it at the back of the hive, allowing
FLUVALINATE
natural ev aporati on
UK
OXALIC ACID
Indications. Diagnosis and control of mites Varroa
destructor (Varroa jacobsoni)
UK
Contra-indications. Leaving strips in the hive for more
Indications. Control of mites Varroa destructor (Varroa
than 8 weeks
jacobsoni)
92  Guidance on prescribing
Warnings. Care must be taken not to contaminate honey (if
Contra-indications. Do not apply near the honey super
applied as directed accumulation in wax does not occur and
Warnings. Excessive amounts of powder should be
no residues remain); operators should wear suitable protec-
avoided because of risk of damage to uncapped brood; very
tive clothing
fine powder may cause blockage of the spiracles of bees.
Dose.
Dose. By sprinkling (using container with fine holes such
By hand spray or pressure pump with a very fine nozle,
as flour dredger), lightly cover all bees on each side of
reconstitute 30 g oxalic acid dihydrate in 1 litre water (=
combs in the brood box. Close the hive entrance for 20-30
%I'7 pie exo u  Aiddy unos %I' pioe oexo
minutes. Collect mites on floor tray or use open mesh floor.
solution to the bees oni each side of combs. May be repeated
Repeat as necessary at 4-day intervals
2-3 times. Time of treatment depends on level of infesta-
tion, but likely to be July to December. Ambient tempera-
THYMOL
ture should be more than 5°C
By application of sotution, reconstitute 50 g oxalic acid
UK
dihydrate in 1 litre sugar syrup (= oxalic acid 3.5% solu-
Indications. Control of mites Acarapis woodi, Varroa
destructor (Varroa jacobsoni), and funigal infection chalk-
occupied frame space. Do not repeat. Apply autumn or
brood caused by Ascosphaera apis infection
early winiter after colony has ceased to rear brood
Contra-indications. Use at temperatures < 15°C; use for
By sublimation (lsenring's method), 3 g oxalic acid dihy-
longer than 6 weeks
drate inserted into closed end of a 15 mm × 80 cm copper
Side-effects. Strong odour persistent in the hive after treat-
tube (Varrox, Andermatt Biocontrol). Open end of tube
ment, which can adhere to the honey
inserted into hive entrance or aperture in crown board.
Dose. As fumigant and by contact, place one tray with lid
 Closed end heated to vaporise the acid, which condenses on
removed on top of brood frames. Allow sufficient space
bees, comb, and hi ve walls. May be repeated after 3 weeks.
 over top of tray to allow access by bees and circulation of
  ss y  m    
air. After 14 days, place another tray alongside and leave for
temperature more than 3°C
 4 weeks or until supers are required
OXYTETRACYCLINE
GSL Apiguard (Vita (Europe) UK
Slow-release gel, thyrmol 25%, for honey bees
Withdrawal Periods. Bees: honey withdrawal period nil
UK
Indications. Ox ytetracycline-senisitive infecti ons
VEGETABLE OILS/LIGHT PARAFFIN OILS/FOOD
Dose. Bees+: by addition to sugar syrup, 250-400 mg/5
GRADE MINERAL OILS (FGMO)
litres sugar syrup
By addition to patty, 250-500 mg mixed with yeast, pollen,
UK
poxiu 3 I on dn io souey jo don uo pooeid pue Xeuoy pue
Indications. Control of mites Acarapis woodi, Varroa
with sugar and vegetable fat and placed on top of frames
destructor (Varroa jacobsoni)
By dusting, 250-500 mg mixed with powdered sugar and
Warnings. Care must be taken not to contaminate honey;
dusted on frames
use at temperature > 12°C
Dose.
POM Terramycin (Pfizer) UK
See section l.1.2 for preparation details
pe va yo uoss an yau d uo si a  au u o
killed directly but attractiveness of host bee diminished
issled for the trea trment of European Foul Brood
side of the comb; repeat twice after 1-week interval
POWDER
By fogger (15 micron-size particle), FGMO every 1-4
Inert dust or powder such as glucose powder, talcum, chalk,
weeks in conjunction with cotton cords soaked in an emul-
flour, corn starch, milk powder, cellulose, icing sugar,
sion of FGMO, honey, and beeswax placed on tops of
finely ground pollen, diatomaceous earth. Mites are not
frames
killed but lose their grip on bees because of the effect of the
 powder on the sticky tarsal pads. Recent tests reveal that
Aquatic invertebrates
powdered sugar was the most efficient in dislodging mites
from bees followed by talc and corn starch. Minimal drug
Aquatic invertebrates, for example bivalve molluscs and
residues or drug resistance occur because powder such as
crustaceans such as lobsters (Homarus), shrimps, and
sugars, pollen, and milk powder are utilised by the bees and
 prawns are farmed for food. They are also used in research,
other powders are removed by grooming. Powdered sugar
for example Daphnia have been used in pollution studies.
stimulates bees' grooming behaviour.
Aquatic invertebrates are exhibited in private, public, and
educational establishments.Some of these animals are
UK
important in medicine, for example leeches Hirudo medici-
Indications. Control of mites Varroa destructor (Varroa
nafis are used in skin graft management and also for the iso-
jacobsoni)
lation, characterisation, and production of their beneficial
Prescribing for invertebrates 
6
salivary components such as hirudin, a very potent antico-
Marine). Both are used as dips and concentrates. Fresh water
agulant.
baths are also sometimes effective. If identified, these dis-
When administering drugs to aquatic inivertebrates used for
eases will often respond well to antibiotics.
human consumption, withdrawal periods should be consid-
Antibacterials have an optimal pH for maximal activity.
Marine systems usually have a pH greater than 8.0 and this
given, it is advisable to apply the withdrawal period for fish.
will limit the effecti veness of, for ex ample the tetracyclines,
The health and welfare of aquatic invertebrates, like all
which have optimal activity at pH 6.0 to 6.6. Chloramphen-
aquatic animals, are closely dependent upon their immedi-
 icol or streptomycin may be preferred because their optimal
ate environment. Each species has its own preferred erivi-
activity is at pH 7.4 to 8.0. Antibacterials in solution are
ronment within which it is able to survive, grow, and
constantly being deactivated due to reducing substances,
multiply. Therefore consideration must be given to the sub-
chelation (for example tetracyclines), and high pH. Strepto-
strate and water temperature, composition, pH, and hard-
mycin, chloramphenicol, kanamycin, and neomycin have a
ness. In some species, provision of light of the correct
 long half-life in solution. Penicillin and erythromycin have
wavelength is required. Unfortunately, information about
 a short half-life and therefore medication will need to be
the physiology and habitat requirements of many species,
repeated.
.Neomycin, kanamycin, and chloramphenicol are
particularly tropical marine invertebrates, is incomplete and
considered potentially toxic to invertebrates. Attempts
therefore there may be unknown factors influencing captive
should be made to determine the toxicity for each new drug
success. Furthemore, marine organisms have evolved in a
used with a different inivertebrate species. One caninot safely
stable environment and may lack the range of physiological
extrapolate from one species to another, for example in the
and behavioural responses to cope with any alteration in
marine crustacean Artemia, penicillin is toxic at 200 mg/
their habitat.
litre whereas 40 mg/litre is toxic to the freshwater crusta-
Generally, invertebrates appear to be relatively resistant to
cean Daphnia. In general, treatment with antibacterials
infections providing water quality and environmental con-
should not be carried out in tanks with biological filters.
siderations are met. Detectable levels of ammonia, nitrites,
Probiotics may aid prevention of bacterial diseases. Epicin
and other pollutants, as well as overstocking can readily
(Epicore BioNetworks) has been shown to significantly
predispose to viral, bacterial, and fungal disease. Most of
reduce the incidence of Vibrio spp. in pond cultures both
the diseases recognised irn aquatic inivertebrates are those
 directly by production of natural bacteriostatic products
encountered in commercially important species, but some
are known from studies in the wild.
sites. For lobsters the dose is 30 g/455 litres for 4 weeks,
Antimicrobial therapy. Although there are many bacte-
theni every 2 weeks. For shrimp, the dose is 0.5 to 1 ppm for
rial infections to which aquatic invertebrates are susceptible
vibriosis.
the commonest are caused by Aeromonas and Pseudomonas
Rickettsial and chlamydial infections have been recorded in
spp., and in marine invertebrates, Vibrio spp. Bacteria asso-
scallops, cockles, mussels, crayfish, and clams.
ciated with marine invertebrates are mainly Gram-negative
while those affecting freshwater inivertebrates are both
 Fungal infections such as freshwater Saprolegnia are also
Gram-positive and Gram-negative. An important bacterial
of major importance. Other fungal diseases seen include
Aphanomyces asataci infection ("crayfish plague) and
disease of the lobster is gaffkaemia ('red tail') caused by
Aerococcus viridans. This is a natural commensal of lob-
Fusarium spp. infection (fungus disease, "burn spot dis-
sters with 5 to 7% of individuals in a population hosting the
ease') of lobsters.
bacterium. In the past, commercial vaccines against
Protozoan diseases such as thelohaniosis ('porcelain dis-
gaffkaemia have been available and hence autogenous vac-
ease') of crayfish or microsporidiosis of oyster eggs (one of
cination deli vered by injection to individual animals may be
the causes of oyster egg disease) have no practical treatment
considered. The experimental use of the small freshwater
inl open systems. Some promising in vitro studies with the
crustacean Moina macrocopa as a biocarrier of norflox acin
protozoan affecting lobsters Anophryoides haemophila sug-
to feed to fish suggests that, for this antibiotic at least,
gest that formaldehyde, pyrimethamine combined with
uptake directly out of the surrounding water is good.
Coral diseases both in the wild and in aquaria have received
amprolium is not effective. Alternative methods of disease
some attention. Caribbean elkhorn coral Acropora patmata
control include the production of resistant stock; this has
is susceptible to Serratia infection (white pox) and Vibrio
beern used for Haplosporidium neisoni infection (MSX dis-
charcharri (a cause of white band disease). Vibrio vufnifi-
ease) inl oysters.
cus is the cause of rapid tissue necrosis (RTN) of acropora
 Parasiticidal therapy. Parasitic diseases are common
and small-polyped stony corals and Phormidium corallyti-
and problematic to control. Drugs that are toxic to the para-
cum, a cyanobacterium, is the main pathogen involved in
site may also be toxic to the host. The red worm parasite of
black band disease. There are now some commercially
oysters, mussels, clams, and cockles is a copepod (Crusta-
available products for marine hobbyists to use for these
 cea) and there is no known method of prevention or control.
conditions: Lugols solution, containing iodine and potas-
Various insecticides for terrestrial species have beern used in
sium iodide, and Tech D, containing iodine, potassium
the control of aquatic parasites. However, there are conl-
iodide, and potassium bromide (available from Kent
 cerns about persistent drug residues inl marine sedimenits
94  Guidance on prescribing
and drug action on non-target species and use is not recom-
of exposure. Recovery from anaesthesia is achieved by
mended.
returning the animal to fresh, well aerated water and can be
Viral conditions. Many viral infections have been recog-
accelerated, where practical, by manually moving the ani-
nised in invertebrates including herpes-type virus disease of
mal forwards and backwards in an attempt to increase the
oysters, Baculovirus penaei (BP virus disease) of shrimps
water flow over the gills. In octopuses, flushing fresh sea
and prawnis, hepatopancreatic parvovirus (HPV) disease of
water through the mantle cavity and massaging the muscu-
shrimps and prawns, and baculovirus of blue crayfish. The
lature will aid recovery. The use of hypothermia to induce
 management of viral diseases involves regular health moni-
'anaesthesia'must be approached with caution. Many of the
toring, the correction of predisposing factors, and the dis-
criteria for assessing the depth of anaesthesia such as cessa-
posal of affected stock.
tion of respiration and loss of chromatophore tone have a
Anaesthetics. Anaesthetics for aquatic invertebrates are
temperature dependence in these ectotherms and so may not
usually added to the water, the depth of anaesthesia being
be a reflection of the degree of anal gesia experienced by the
controlled by a combination of the concentration and time
animal.
Table 23 Anaesthetic doses of drugs for aquatic invertebrates!
Drug
Dose
Species
Benzocaine
 Dissolve 100 g in 1 litre ethanol for stock solution.
univalve molluscs
Add stock solution to water dropwise according to the animal's
response
Carbon
Bubble gas through water or Dilute 1 volume soda water in
Hirudo medicinalis
dioxide
1 volume water
Ethanol
2.0-2.5 mL/100 mL sea water
cephalopods (may be irritant to octopuses)
96%
8 mL/100 mL water
Hirudo medicinalis,univalvemolluscs
Isobutanol
1-2 mL/10 g body-weight, by injection into the abdominal sinus
Homarusamericanus
Tricaine
Add in incremental doses until desired effect achieved
various aquatic invertebrates (not
mesilate
Homarus americanus,Actinosphaerum,
Hydra, Planaria)
1 drug doses for preparations that have a marketing authorisation for use in these species in the UK. Therefore, unless marked 1.
the drug or doses stated are not authorised for these species
Prescribing for invertebrates
95
Table 24 Antimicrobial doses of drugs for aquatic inivertebrates1
Drug
Dose
Condition
Species
Amphotericin B
1-25 mg/L for 2-7 days (formulation to use:
fungal infections
crustacea
amphotericin, powder for reconstitution)
 Benzylpenicillin
80 mg/kg body-weight i.co.
gaffkaemia
lobsters
Chloramine
5.5-100 mg/L for 2 days
 protozoal and fungal
 paenid prawns
infections
Chloramphenicol
20 mg/L (formulation to use: chloramphenico]
bacterial infections
tropical marine invertebrates
(as sodium succinate), powder for
reconstitution)
Chlortetracycline
1 mg/L
bacterial infections
tropical marine invertebrates
30 mg/L
bacterial infections
oyster and clam larvae
Erythromycin
0.65-1.3 mg/L
bacterial necrosis
crustacea
Formaldehyde
 20-25 ppm indefinitely
fungal infections
rock lobster Jasus edwardsii
solution
Griseofulvin
100 mg/L for 2 days (formulation to use:
fungal infections
Penaeus
griseofulvin 75 mg/g, oral powder)
Malachite green
0.5-1.0 ppm as a bath for up to 12 hours
fungal infections
rock lobster Jasus edwardsii
Methylthioninium
8-10 mg/L
 protozoal and fungal
crustacea
chloride
infections
(Methylene blue)
Neomycin
100 mg/L for 2 days
fungal infections
Penaeus
Nystatin
1 mg/L (formulation to use: nystatin 100 000
fungal infections
Penaeus
units/mL, oral suspension)
Oxytetracycline
450 mg/kg biomass
Vibrio infection
 paenid prawn larvae
75 mg/kg p.o. or injection into abdominal
gaffkaemia
lobsters
sinus
Streptomycin
10-100 mg/L
bacterial infections
variety of invertebrates
100 mg/L
bacterial infections
oyster and clam larvae
Tetracycline
1.2 mg/L
bacterial necrosis
paenid prawn larvae
Vancomycin
 25 mg/kg injection into abdominal sinus
gaffkaemia
lobsters
Water, fresh
2-10 minutes daily for 5 days
bacterial infections
 soft and hard corals
 q d pe 
main aquarium; add sodium bicarbonate and
dechlorinator if using tapwater
1 drug doses for preparations that have a marketing authorisation for use in these species in the UK. Therefore, unless marked 1,
the drug or doses stated are not authorised for these species
96
Prescribing
for amp
hibians
Contributor:
 period each day, doses and exposure times being empiri-
L Jepson MA, VetMB, CBiol, MIBiol, MRCVS
cally detemined.
The subcutaneous injection route is preferred. Although
Most commonly kept amphibia are the salamanders and
each animal must be handled, this allows brief clinical
newts (orders Urodela, including the axolotl Ambyfostoma
inspection of the patient. Hands should be washed or gloves
mexicanum) and frogs and toads (order Anura).
Successful care of the captive amphibians is based on anl
changed between individuals where infectious disease is
understanding of the basic biology of these animals in gen-
suspected.
Caution is required when applying topical agents
eral and also on a knowledge of the environment normally
to
inhabited by the particular species in question. Hence texts
amphibians because relatively “harmless’ substances, for
on amphibian husbandry should be consulted. Environmeri-
example
dilute povidone-iodine or chlorhexidine, can
tal factors underly the vast majority of amphibian disease
induce severe dermatitis and toxicity.
outbreaks. Water quality, in particular, is paramount in
Drug dosage. Limited data are available on the pharma-
maintaining amphibian health.
cokinetics and pharmacodynamics of drugs in amphibians
Amphibians are ectotherms and have a preferred body tem-
and most dosages have to be extrapolated from other
perature, or more correctly, a preferred optimal temperature
groups. However, significant variation occurs between spe-
zone (POTZ). Within the POTZ their body functions oper-
cies and at different temperatures. Determination of dosages
ate at maximal efficiency. This reliance on heat from the
of parenterally or orally administered drugs could use allo-
 metric scaling but this, together with the variation at differ-
surrounding environment has important ramifications for
captive animals. Suboptimal temperatures will result in
ent body temperatures, renders the calculation of doses
delayed reurological reactions and abnormal behaviour,
reduced digestion and absorption of food, and impaired
kg assuming that the drug will be given within the POTZ of
immunological defences. The absorption, metabolism, and
the animal. The metabolism of the drug actually varies with
excretion of drugs are markedly slower than when the ani-
the log of the temperature but such considerations become
somewhat academic whenl variations from the POTZ are
Amphibians have an unusually fragile and permeable skin.
small. Anurans have a low metabolic rate but a high rate of
The stratum corneum, although having some effective bar-
rier functions, is only a few cell layers thick since it acts, in
used for these species, unless other wise indicated.
adults, as the prime respiratory organ. While epidermal and
Antimicrobial therapy. While several viral diseases have
dermal glands secrete mucus and wax, passage of water
 been reported in amphibians, bacterial conditions lead to 
through the skin allows substantial cutaneous water loss. In
most significant morbidity and mortality. “Red leg’ is the
some toad species, the skin of the belly is particularly
main cause of death in captive amphibians. This condition
designed to absorb water across it. Electrolytes and toxins
is characterised by petechial epidermal lesions seen with a
can be absorbed across undamaged skin. Trauma or toxic
Gram-negative septicaemia. Many bacteria have been iso-
damage leads to infection with organisms normally present
lated but predominantly the condition is caused by Aerom-
in the environment. Therefore amphibians should
be
onas
hydrophilia.
Other epidermal lesions include
restrained with care and the operator's hands should be kept
ulceration and subcutaneous oedema. Poor water quality
moist or ideally disposable plastic gloves should be worn.
and nutrition as well as suboptimal environmental tempera-
The aquatic tadpole (larval) stage of amphibia and the adult
tures may be predisposing factors. In these cases cull or
form are markedly different, which necessitates different
quarantine of affected animals and prophylactic treatment
methods of diagnosis and treatment. In general, it is the
adult animal that is seen in veterinary practice and these are
treatmenit of choice.
mainly pet frogs and toads.
Chlamydophiliosis is characterised by similar dermatologi-
Amphibians produce urea as a nitrogenous waste product;
cal lesions and postmortem histopathological diagnosis is
aquatic amphibians excrete ammonia.
required.
Drug administration. Adding drugs such as anti bacteri -
Mycobacterial disease is seenn sporadically. The condition
als directly into the surrounding water is to be discouraged.
 may be characterised by dermal lesions such as pale nod-
Although uptake is generally good because of the nature of
ules and occasional ulcerations, or by a more systemic dis-
amphibian skin, it is impossible to judge exact dosages
received by the animal via this route. Antibacterials in
clinical signs such as weight loss. These atypical mycobac-
aquarium water can predispose to fungal overgrowth and
teria are zoonoses, causing aquarists’ nodule; operators
seriously compromise biological filtration.
should wear gloves. Non-specific antibacterial agents are
If a topical route via exposure to a bath is to be used, the
used in addi tion to antibiotics, and may be useful for proph-
animal should be placed in a treatment tank for a defined
ylaxis in in-contact or at risk animals.
Prescribing for amphibians  97
Fungal diseases in amphibians are variable. Saprolegniasis 
bers of roundworm larvae or microfilaria in situ may give
is seen in aquatic species and is characterised by cotton
rise to a severe inflammatory reaction, compromising the
wool-like growths on skin and gills. Systemic infections
 patient. Fenbendazole and tiabendazole do not appear to
include chromomycosis caused by pigmented fungi, for 
 produce such a reaction. A levamisole bath is reported to be
example Cladosporium and phycomycosis caused by the
 as efficacious as parenteral treatment.
noni-pigmented Mucor and Basidiobolus. All these condi-
Trombiculid mite larvae may be found subcutaneously with
tions present as similar dermal lesions and diagnosis is
 minute vesicles containing the parasite and the fish louse
achieved by culture and biopsy rather than from clinical
Argufus may be found on aquatic adults and tadpoles.
presentati on al one.
 Other drugs. Nutritional deficiencies seen in amphibians
Some fungal diseases in aquatic species may be ameliorated
include inadequate calcium intake resulting in metabolic
bone disease in carnivorous species, thiamine deficiency
(mercurochrome). Deep cutaneous or systemic infections
causing flaccid paralysis, or amino acid deficiency resulting
require combined topical treatment and parenteral therapy.
in nutritional myopathy. Dropsy or anasarca may be a clini-
cal sign of osmotic dysfunction or may occur in otherwise
tiont; severe muscle necrosis may occur.
healthy animals.
Protozoa are mainly non-pathogenic in amphibians. How-
 Hormonal drugs are used increasingly to manipulate captive
ever, Entamoeba ranarum causes amoebiosis characterised
 breeding in various amphibian species. Although these
by enteritis and hepatic abscesses. Aquatic protozoa such
techniques were originally employed in biomedical
as Piscinoodinium (Oodinium), Trichodina,and Voticella
research, they are proving useful for the captive breeding of
 may cause skin iritation and lesions in tadpoles but rarely
affectadults.
Intracoelomic injection is the normal route for fluid admin-
Parasiticidal therapy. Parasitic infections include nema-
istration in a dehy drated amphibian. The preferred solution
todiosis with strongyle infection either of the gastro-intesti-
is sodium chloride 0.18% + glucose 4%. Other solutions
nal tract or lungs. Pseudocapillaroides infection of the skin
used are 1:2 sodium chloride 0.9%:glucose 5% or 1:2 Hart-
is commonly found in Xenopus and large numbers of filarid
mann s solution:glucose 5%.
roundworms in tissues and blood vessels may be signifi-
Anaesthetics. Anaesthetics can be administered by injec-
carit.
tion, gaseous induction, or transcutaneously using an anaes-
Anthelmintic treatment should be administered when para-
thetic bath. Reversal of anaesthesia is facilitated by
sitic ova are present in a faecal sample on a routine health
 transferring the animal to a bath of clean well oxygenated
check even in the absence of physical clinical signs. Non-
water. Doxapram also aids recovery by stimulating respira-
specific parasiticidal agents are used in addition to
tion.
anthelmintics. For visceral roundworm infections, ivermec-
Tricaine mesilate, isoflurane, and propofol are the anaes-
tin is particularly useful. However, the death of large rum-
thetic agents of choice.
98
8Guidance on prescribing
 Table 25 Husbandry requirements for amphibians
Habitat/
POTZ
Species
Vivariumtype
(°℃)1
Lighting2
Diet
European common frog
 best kept outdoors in garden
0-25
broad spectrum,
various invertebrates including flies,
(Rana temporaria)
enclosure, pond for breeding
sunlight
worms, crickets, maggots. Vitamin/
recommended
mineral supplementation
recommended
Common toad
garden enclosures, well
5-20
broad spectrum,
various invertebrates including insects,
(Bufo bufo)
drained site, pond for breeding
sunlight
worms, slugs, crickets. Vitamin/min-
recommended
eral supplementation recommended
White's tree frog
well ventilated vivarium with
5-25
broad spectrum
larger insects and other invertebrates,
(Litoria caerulea)
land and water partition for
dead neonate mice. Vitamin/mineral
breeding, leaf-litter of bark
supplementation recommended
chips as substrate, stout
branches for climbing
European tree frog
outside enclosure with high
-25
broad spectrum
various invertebrates including flies,
(Hyla arborea)
humidity and protection from
waxwoms,mealworms,moths.Vita-
frost, or large unheated indoor
min/mineral supplementation recom-
vivaria
mended
Poison arrow frog
large tropical vivarium with
22-28 bright, broad
small invertebrates including fruit flies
(Dendrobates spp.)
good ventilation, frequent
spectrum
(Drosophilia) and small crickets.
spraying essential
Vitamin/mineral supplementation
recommended
African clawed toads
aquatic species,10 to 20 cm
18-22 broad spectrum
small fish, earthworms, aquatic insects.
(Xenopus spp.)
freshwater depth
Vitamin/mineral supplementation rec-
ommended
Horned toads
Jarge tropical vivarium with
25-28 broad spectrum
various insects and small pre-killed
(Ceratophrys spp.)
spacious shallow water area
rodents. Vitamin/mineral supplementa-
(depth of water approximately
tion recommended if feeding inverte-
half height of frog)
brate prey, unnecessary if feeding
whole dead rodents
European fire salamander
Jarge vivarium with shallow
5-20
broad spectrum,
small invertebrates including worms,
(Salamandra salamandra) water dish and substrate of
subdued
crickets, waxworms, mealworms, and
peat, leaf-litter, and moss
slugs. Vitamin/mineral supplementa-
tion recommended
Japanese fire bellied newt 
aquatic species (but may leave 10-20 broad spectrum
Daphnia, Tubifex, and various
(Cynops pyrrhogaster)
water at end of breeding sea-
invertebrates including worms.
son), large aquarium, 20 cm
Vitamin/mineral supplementation
freshwater depth
recommended
Axolotl
large aquarium, 45 cm
16-22 broad spectrum
small invertebrates including worms,
(Ambystoma mexicanum)
freshwater depth
crickets, waxworms, mealworms, and
slugs; small whole fish. Vitamin/min-
eral supplementation recommended
2broad-spectrum lighting includes ultra-violet B light
Prescribing for amphibians
99
Table 26 Antimicrobial doses of drugs for amphibians1
Drug
Dose
Comments
Acriflavine
0.025% in water for 5 days
or 500 mg/L as 30 minute bath once daily
Amikacin
5 mg/kg i.m.on alternate days
Ampicillin
6 mg/L as bath
Amphotericin B
1 mg/kg i.co. daily for 15-20 days
Benzalkonium chloride
2 mg/L as 60 minute bath once daily
fungal infections
or 0.25 mg/L water as 2 hour bath
Chloramphenicol
50 mg/kg i.m. twice daily
or 20 mg/L as bath
Doxycycline
10-50 mg/kg p.o. once daily
 chlamydiosis in African clawed frogs
Enrofloxacin
5-10 mg/kg s.c., i.m. once daily
American bullfrog (Rana catesbieana) 5 mg/kg every 4
days
Gentamicin
2.5-5.0 mg/kg s.c., i.m., i.co. once daily at 22°C
caution: may be toxic in some species
or 10 mg/L as bath (poor efficacy).
or 1.3 mg/L as soak for 1 hour daily
Mudpuppy (Necturus macuiosus) 2.5 mg/kg every 3 days at
3°C
Isoniazid
12.5 mg/L as bath
Itraconazole
0.01% solution as a 5 minute bath daily for 11 days
chytridiomycosis
Ketoconazole
10 mg/kg p.o. daily
Malachite green
150 micrograms/L as soak daily
fungal infections
Merbromin
3 mg/L as 72 hour bath
(Mercurochrome)
Methylthioninium
2-4 mg/L
decreases mortality in tadpoles
chloride (Methylene blue)
Metronidazole
100-150 mg/kg p.0. weekly
protozoal infections
or 50 mg/kg p.0. daily for 3 days
or 5 mg/kg food
or 50 mg/L as 24 hour bath
Miconazole
5 mg/kg i.co. daily
Nalidixic acid
10 mg/L
Oxytetracycline
25 mg/kg i.m., s.c. daily
or 50 mg/kg p.o. twice daily
or 1 g/kg food daily for 7 days
American bullfrog (Rana catesbieana) 50 mg/kg i.m. every
4 days
Paromomycin
55 mg/kg p.0., repeat after 14 days
0r 25 mg/kg p.o., repeat after 7 days
 Piperacillin
100 mg/kg s.c.,i.m. once daily
anaerobic infections
Rifampicin
25 mg/L as bath
100 Guidance on prescribing
Table 26 Antimicrobial doses of drugs for amphibians' (continued)
Drug
Dose
Comments
Sodium chloride
4-6 g/L as 72 hour bath
protozoal infections; osmotic compli-
or 10-25 g/L as 5-10 minute bath
cations may occur depending on the
species
Sulfadimidine
1 g/L as bath
Sulphonamide +
3 mg/kg p.o., s.c. once daily
Trimethoprim
Tetracycline
50 mg/kg p.o. twice daily
Water, distilled
2-3 hours bath
1 drug doses for preparations that have a marketing authorisation for use in these species in the UK; unless marked 1, the drug or
Table 27 Parasiticidal doses of drugs for amphibians1
Drug
Dose
Indications
Copper sulfate
500 mg/L bath for 2 minutes daily
parasites
Fenbendazole
50-100 mg/kg p.0o. every 14 days
roundworms
Formaldehyde (10%)
1.5 mL/L as 10 minute dip every 48 hours
ectoparasites
Ivermectin
200-400 micrograms p.0. every 14 days
or 200 micrograms/kg i.m. as a single dose
roundworms
or 400 micrograms/kg i.m. as a single dose
rhabdiosis
or 2 mg/kg by topical application on thorax (Rana
spp.)
Levamisole
300 mg/L as 24-hour bath
or 8-10 mg/kg i.co. every 1421 days
or 50-75 mg in 4.0-6.5 L tank waterfrog
Mebendazole
20 mg/kg p.o., repeat after 14 days
Niclosamide
150 mg/kg p.o., repeat after 14 days
tapeworms
Oxfendazole
5 mg/kg p.o. as a single dose
Praziquantel
10 mg/L bath for 3 hours as a single dose
or 8-24 mg/kg p.o., s.c. daily for 14 days
Tiabendazole
50-100 mg/kg p.o., repeat after 14 days
doses stated are not authorised forthese species
Prescribing for amphibians  101
Table 28 Doses of other drugs for amphibianst
Drug
Dose
Indications
Chorionic gonadotrophin 2000-5000 units/kg s.c. i.m.
breeding
(hCG)
Xenopus spp, 300-400 units s.c., i.m.
Ambystoma spp., (female) 250 units s.c., i.m., (male) 300 units i.m.
Doxapram
5-10 mg/kg i.m., i.v.
respiratory stimulation
Serum gonadotrophin
Xenopus spp., 50 units s.c., i.m., then 600 units after 72 hours
breeding
Thiamine
25 mg/kg of fish
Vitamin E
200 units/kg food
1 drug doses for preparations that have a marketing authorisation for use in these species in the UK. Therefore, unless marked 1.
the drug or doses stated are not authorised for these species
Table 29 Anaesthetic doses of drugs for amphibians1
Drug
Dose
Comments
Benzocaine
larvae, 50 mg/L water
(Dissolve in ethanol )
frogs, salamanders, 200-300 mg/L water
Clove oil (pure)
0.3-0.5mL/L
Leopard frog, 0.3 mL/L as a bath
Tiger salamander, 0.46 mL/L as a bath
Isoflurane
all species, 4-5% bubbled into water administered
according to animals response or
place animal on damp towels in induction chamber
frogs, newts,toads,mix 3 mL liquid isoflurane with 1.5
 use lower dose for frogs and newts,
mL water and 3.5mL KY jelly. Apply to animal s dorsum
 higher dose for toads
at a dose of approx. 0.025-0.035 mL/gram body-weight.
Place animal in small sealed container until induction
occurs (5-15 minutes). Wipe dermis free of anaesthetic
when righting and withdrawal reflexes lost. Duration
45-80 minutes
Ketamine
50-100 mg/kg s.c., i.m.
long recovery period
Phenoxyethanol
0.1-0.5 mL/L
Propofol
all large species, 10 mg/kg i.v.
for salamanders use ventral tail vein,
for frogs and toads use abdominal
vein or heart
Tiger salamander, 25-35 mg/kg i.co.
Tiletamine + zolazepam
10- 15 mg/kg i.m.
variable response
Tricaine mesilate
tadpoles, newts, 200-500 mg/L
administered according to animal's
response
frogs, salamanders, 0.5-2.0 g/L
buffer with sodium bicarbonate
toads, 1-3 g/L or
buffer with sodium bicarbonate
50-150 mg/kg s.c., i.m., i.co.
1 drug doses for preparations that have a marketing authorisation for use in these species in the UK; unless marked 1, the drug or
sds as aseu ae pais sis
102
Prescribing for exotic birds
Contributor:
chloride 0.9% solution and administered by sfow
B H Coles BVSc, DipECAMS, RCVS Specialist in Zoo and Wildlife
intravenous injection at a dose of 2 mL/kg.
Medicine (Avian), FRCVS
Drug administration. Drugs may be administered to
exotic birds by addition to drinking water or feed. The drug
This section provides general advice on prescribing for
ex otic birds including Passeriformes, Psittaciformes, and
dose is mixed in half the daily ration of feed, which should
Falconiformes. Research indicates that the metabolism of
be conisumed before any further food is offered. This
individual species of birds carn differ widely. The pharma-
method is non-stressful and convenient for groups of birds
on either a therapeutic or prophylactic basis. However,
cokinetics and hence dosage and safety of some drugs are
often the correct dose may niot be consumed because sick
section is provided for guidance and the reader should also
birds may be anorexic or polydipsic leading to under or
Overdosage. Palatability of drugs, such as chlortetracycline
refer to additional texts. For some species it may be prefera-
ble to refer to the sections on Prescribing for poultry, game
or ivermectin, may be improved by mixing with honey,
birds, or pigeons. Drug preparations authorised for use in
syrup, or fruit juice or, alternatively, a sweetened paediatric
exotic birds are not generally available. Preparations
preparation may be used where available.
authorised for use in other species or authorised human
Oral medication may also be given by gavage using a metal
preparations may be administered under the responsibility
tube for parrots, or plastic catheters for other birds. This
of the veterinarian who has the animal *under his care'
direct method of medication is more reliable but requires
When prescribing for exotic birds, it is important to firstly
frequent handling, which may cause stress. It is important
ascertain the feeding, husbandry, and stress under which the
that the fluid is placed directly into the crop and not into the
birds have been kept since disease in these species is often
upper oesophagus. The volume of fluid administered will
directly related to these factors.
depend on the individual bird. For guidance: 0.5 mL (budg-
It is often advisable to hospitalise exotic birds for treatment.
erigars), 2 mL (cockatiels), 5 mL (amazons), or 10 mL
 In these conditions an ambient temperature of 29°C to 32°℃
(macaws). Capsules or tablets can be given to birds of
together with oxygen, nebulisation, fluid and supportive
pigeon size and larger (placed in the mouth and gently
therapy can be provided. In addition a strict routine for drug
 pushed into the oesophagus with a finger).
administration can be adhered to.
Therapy may also be administered by parenteral injection
Fluids can be provided in the form of lactated Ringer's
 but frequent handling of the patient is necessary. Subcuta-
solution (Hartmann's solution) or sodium chloride 0.9%
neous injection may be given in the inguinal region and
andglucose 5%solution
given intravenously,
intra-
over the breast muscle, but is most readily given at the back
osseously, or into the cloaca. For guidance, the volume of
of the base of the neck. Care should be taken not to puric-
ture the crop or the cervical-cephalic air sac, both of which
the jugular vein is 5% of the body-weight, given in 4
may extend into this area. For critically ill birds, intramus-
divided doses over 12 hours. The volume of fluid for
cular or intravenous injection is preferred. Intramuscular
cloacal administration into the rectum is usually 0.5 mL
 injection is given in the posterior part of the pectoral mus-
(budgerigars), 1 mL (cockatiels), 4 mL (amazons), or 6 to 7
 cles or the quadriceps muscle. Certain preparations givern
mL (macaws). Thereafter, the minimal daily fluid
by intramuscular injection may cause pain and muscular
requiremenit
t of 50mL/kg maybe met
by
oral
damage. Birds have a renal-portal system and a proportion
administration, subcutaneous or slow intravenous injection,
of a medicament may therefore be excreted before reaching
 Or by administration into the medullary cavity of the ulna or
 the systemic circulation when the drug is given into the leg
tibiotarsal bone using a 20 to 22 gauge needle with an
muscles. Intravenous injection is given into the right jugular
vein or the brachial vein; the superficial medial metatarsal
shock, a plasma substitute such as Dextran 70 (see section
          
16.2), may be used at a dose of 10 to 20 mL/kg.
medication may be injected directly into the infra-orbital
Provision of nutritive support is similarly important. This
sinus to treat localised infections.
may be provided via a gavage (stomach), pharyngostomy,
Nebulisation may be used for treatment of disease of the
Or Oesophagostomy tube. Suitable products include Critical
respiratory tract or the skin. This requires specialised equip-
Care Formula (Vetark) and baby foods such as H) Milupa
ment that produces a droplet size of 0.5 to 5.0 microns.
(Milupa) with probiotics, for example Avipro Plus (Vetark),
Equipment for human use, such as the H Porta-Neb 50
added. Intravenous parenteral nutrition may also be
nebuliser (Profile Respiratory), may be employed with a
employed; asepsis is paramount. Preparations used include
 small air compressor, or with oxygen flow provided by an
Duphalyte (Fort Dodge) diluted 1:1 with sodium chloride
anaesthetic machine delivering not less than 6 litres oxygenl
0.9% and administered by sfow intravenous injection at a
per minute. Drugs administered by nebulisation include
dose of 10 mL/kg or dextrose 40% diluted 1:1 with sodium
 amphotericin B and tylosin.
Prescribing for exotic birds
103
Drugs may also be applied topically although preparations  didiasis. Alternatively, flucytosine may be given in combi-
should be used sparingly. Ointments and creams used in  nation with amphotericin B, itraconazole, or ketoconazole.
excess are easily spread through preening and may damage
Treatment of aspergillosis, a severe and life-threatening dis-
plumage, which can lead to loss of body heat. Some drugs,
ease, includes amphotericin B in combination with keto-
such as ivermectin, are absor bed percutaneously.
conazole or itraconazole and fluid therapy.
Antimicrobial therapy. It is strongly advised that before
Amphotericin B is severely hepatotoxic and should not be
the use of antibacterials is considered other methods of ther-
used in birds that are dehydrated or have renal impairment.
apy are employed and bacterial sensitivity tests are first car-
 However, its side-effects should not prohibit its use for the
ried out. However where a systemic diagnosis has riot beenl
treatment of aspergillosis. The drinking water should be
made and where use of a broad-spectrum antibiotic is corl-
 acidified with citric acid or apple cider vinegar during treat-
sidered imperative, one of the fluoroquinolones such as
ment with amphotericin B.
enrofloxacin or marbofloxacin may be administered (but
Imidazoles are relatively frequently hepatotoxic. Clotrima-
should not be used in growing birds or with concurrent
 zole has been given by nebulisation and found to be effec-
NSAID therapy). Where a tentative systemic diagnosis has
ti ve. Terbinafine administered orally has also been found to
been made, the following antibacterials are recommended:
be an effective treatment for aspergillosis.
amoxicillin with clavulanic acid for respiratory-tract infec-
Metronidazole, carnidazole, and ronidazole are used for
tions; aminoglycosides plus sulfadiazine with trimethoprim
Giardia,Trichomonas,Cochlosoma,and Hexamita infec-
for gastro-intestinal or urinary-tract infections; and amoxi-
tions. Coccidiosis may occasionally be a problem, particu-
cillin with clavulanic acid or sulfadiazine with trimethoprim
larly in finches, budgerigars, and parrots. Sulfadimidine is
for skin infections.
an effective treatment for coccidiosis; the dosage must be
Many adverse reactions to antimicrobials have been
adequate.
reported in exotic birds particularly in smaller birds such as
finches, canaries, and soft bills. The aminoglycoside anti-
raptors. Toltrazuril is ann effective treatmerit.
bacterials are potentially nephrotoxic. Sulphonamides may
Parasiticidal therapy. General parasite control meas-
cause tissue haemorrhage and anaemia. Sulfadiazine with
ures are indicated. To avoid contact with invertebrates
trimethoprim may cause gastro-intestinal disturbances such
as crop stasis or emesis. Enrofloxacin may cause vomiting
standing cages with wire mesh flooring or aviaries with
in1 raptors.
solid concrete flooring, birds should be isolated to avoid
 All birds should be weighed before being medicated.
indirect contact with wild birds, and regular faecal exami-
nation should be carried out every 4 to 6 months.
Visual estimation of weight may be grossly inaccurate
Endoparasiticides such as fenbendazole or levamisole may
be used regularly (every 4 to 6 months) for prophylaxis in
In potentiated sulphonamide formulations, the half-life of
groups of birds. The parasiticide group used should be alter-
trimethoprim and the sulphonamide differ and may vary
nated to avoid problems of drug resistance. However there
considerably in different species of birds. To be effective
is growing evidence that fenbendazole may be toxic in cer-
both need to be at their optimal concentration.
tain circumstances. It should not be used in nestlings, in
Calcium and magnesium found in bird grit may affect the
growing birds, or those in moult because it inhibits mitosis
absorption of tetracyclines, although this effect may
be
and has an adverse effect on growing tissues. It can cause
reduced by adding citric acid 500 mg/100 mL drinking
crypt cell necrosis of the intestine leading to invasion of
water. Ideally, tetracyclines should only be used after bacte-
 pathogens and it also inhibits bone marrow resulting in a
rial sensitivity has been established because resistance to
neutropenmia.
these antibacterials is now widespread.
Levamisole must not be administered parenterally to birds
Psittacosis is a zoonotic disease caused by Chlamydophila
inl any circumstances. Levamisole gives a bitter taste when
psittaci (Chlamydia psittaci). Tetracyclines (in particular
added to drinking water. The addition of sweeteners may
doxycycline) are the drugs of choice for the treatment of the
improve palatability. The margin of safety with levamisole
disease in birds. Fluoroquinolones may also be used but
is relatively narrow and some species are particularly senisi-
only after bacterial sensitivity tests.A minimum 45-day
tive to this drug.
course of treatment is essential (because the viable patho-
Parenterally administered ivermectin may be toxic to
finches and budgerigars but is relatively safe when applied
should be retested for the continued excretion of Chlamydo-
to the skin and subsequently absorbed and distributed
 phila (Chlamydia) in the faeces and therapy continued if
throughout the body.
necessary.
Ectoparasiticides such as pyrethrins and fipronil are used in
Candida aibicans is a normal component of the gastro-
birds to control Cnemidocoptes, feather mites, and lice
intestinal microflora. Overgrowth of C. aibicans in the gas-
infestations.
.A dichlorvos-impregnated strip such
as
tro-intestinal tract may occur with prolonged antibacterial
Vapona (Sara Lee) may be placed in the bird room for up to
therapy, retinol (vitamin A) deficiency, crop impaction, or
3 days, with removal at might. Birds should not come inito
feeding of infected grain. Nystatin is effective against cari-
direct contact with the strip. The strip should be removed
104  Guidance on prescribing
immediately and the room ventilated if signs of toxicity
ume of drinking water. Birds drink on average 50 to 150 mL
such as ruffled feathers occur.
water/kg body-weight daily, depending on diet and basal
Other drugs. These are used for the treatment of a vari-
metabolic weight.
ety of disorders ini exotic birds.
Haloperidol has been found to be effecti ve in a broad range
of psittacine species and is considered to have a wide mar-
ent egg laying due to ovarian cysts. Chronic use
of
gin of safety. Regrowth of feathers may be seen ini about 3
medroxyprogesterone acetate may lead to obesity and poly-
months. Side-effects of haloperidol include depression,
dipsia. Medical treatment for egg binding includes oxytocin
inappetance, and occasionally hyperactivity or excitability,
in combination with calcium gluconate 10% solution, or the
which are resolved when treatment is discontinued and
 -ou suuinbai soseo jo %os on dn :isoidoup upueleeisoid
recommenced at a lower dosage after an interval of 2 to 3
cal treatment also need surgery.
days.
Birds excrete nitrogenous waste as uric acid rather than
 Anaesthetics. Ketamine given in combination with sed-
urea. Allopurinol inhibits tubular uric acid resorption and
active tubular uric acid secretion, the latter function being
atives is the injectable drug of choice. When ketamine is
more important in birds. Consequently the use of allopuri-
combined with medetomidine, its alphag-adrenoceptor ago-
nol is contra-indicated in birds. For treatment of gout in
nist effects can be antagonised by administration of atipam-
birds, vitamin A supplementation should be provided and
ezole at 5 times the previously administered medetomidine
dose (= the same volume Antisedan as previously adminis-
the concentration of protein reduced.
tered Domitor). Isoflurane is the preferred inhalational
The NSAIDs ketoprofen and carprofen have beenl used in
anaesthetic.  Administration of butorphanol  1 mg/kg by
exotic birds for treatment of shock, inflammatory condi-
tions, and trauma. NSAIDs are contra-indicated in patients
 intramuscular injection 10 minutes before isoflurane anaes-
with renal impairment. These drugs may occasionally cause
thesia is found to reduce the amount of anaesthetic required.
vomiting.
 In general, the routine use of corticorticoids is not recom-
Table 30 Anaesthetic doses of drugs for exotic birds1
mended in birds because they inhibit the immune system.
Prolonged use results in long lasting depression of the pitui-
Drug
Dose
tary-adrenal axis leading to corticosteroid deficiency when
therapy is stopped. Short-acting glucocorticoids may be
Injectable anaesthetics
indicated ini cases of severe shock.
Respiratory system and epidermal disorders in birds are
Ketamine
50 mg/kg i.m.
often caused by an underlying vitamin A deficiency. Bird
Ketamine +
5-10 mg/kg i.m.
seed often does not provide adequate vitamin A, which may
medetomidine
100 micrograms/kg i.m.
need to be provided as a supplement (see section 16.7).
Treatment is given twice weekly by injection for 2 weeks
Ketamine +
20 mg/kg i.m.
followed by maintenance with an oral supplement. The diet
midazolam
4 mg/kg i.m.
should be changed to include sources high in vitamin A
such as carrots and spinach. Bromhexine with concurrent
Inhalational anaesthetics
vitamin A therapy, may also aid recovery.
Hypothyroidism is a common condition in budgerigars fed
Isoflurane
Induction, 5%
loose-bought seed. Treatment conisists of iodine supplemerl-
Maintenance, 2.5-3.5%
tatior.
Antiepileptics such as diazepam and potassium bromi de are
njo uoesuoune uaeu aey ey suoedad jo sasop up1
used in exotic birds to aid in the treatment of seizures due to
in these species in the UK. Therefore, urless rmarked , the drug or doses
 stated are not authori sed for these species
various disorders including lead poisoning.
Sodium
calciumedetate is used for treatment of lead and zinc
Further information on exotic birds is available:
poisoning
·
Coles B H. Avian Medicine and Surgery 2nd ed.
Some neuroleptics (antipsychotic) and antidepressant drugs
Oxford: Blackwell, 1997
have undergone limited trials in ex otic birds for behavioural
problems, in particular feather picking in parrots. Before
Coles B H, Krautwald-Junghanins M E. Avian Medicine.
Mosby, 1998
using these drugs it is essential that all other possible causes
of feather picking have been eliminated. Owner compliance
Forbes N A,
Altman R B.Avian Medicine.Manson
may be a problem with the use of these drugs because they
Publishing, 1998
may need to be administered continuously for 3 to 4 months
·
Lake.Avian Medicine:Principles and Application.
before they can be shown to be effective and cost may pre-
Worth, Wingers Publishing, 1994
clude their use in some patients. Many of the drugs are
Olsen G H, Orosz S E. Manual of Avian Medicine.
administered by addition to the drinking water. To ensure
Mosby, 2000
that the bird receives the full dose, the average daily water
Tully T N, Lawton M P C, Dorrestein G M. Avian Med-
intake should be calculated and the dose added to this vol-
icine. Oxford: Butterworth Heinmarin, 2000.
Prescribing for exotic birds
105
Table 31 Antimicrobial doses of drugs for exotic birds1
By addition to
By addition to
Drug
By mouth
drinking water
feed
By injection
Othermethods ofadministration
Amoxicillin
150-175 mg/kg
1.5-4.5g/L
600 mg/kg soft
150 mg/kg i.m. daily
 2 times daily
feed
(fommulation to use:
(formulation to
long-acting
use: tablets or oral
preparation)
suspension)
Amoxicillin
125 mg/kg
100 mg/kg i.m.
with.clavulanic 4 times daily
acid2
Amphotericin
treatment of
1.5 mg/kg i.v. daily
By oral topical application, 10 %
B (but see text) megabacteriosis in
for7 days
solution
budgerigars, 0.2
By nebulisation, 100 mg diluted
mL/bird twice
in 15 mL of sodium chloride 0.9%
daily for 10 days
solution
(formulation to
By intratracheal administration, 1
use: intravenous
mg/kg daily for 12 days then on
infusion 5 mg/mL)
altemate days for 5 weeks
Carnidazole
10 mg (adults);
5 mg (young
birds)
Cefalexin
35-50mg/kg
25-50 mg/kg i.m.
repeat 4 times
daily; if less than
500 g body-
weight, repeat 8
times daily
Clotrimazole
By nebulisation, clotrimazole 1%
solution (formulation to use:
Canesten solution)
Doxycycline
25 mg/kg twice
500 mg/L+
75-100 mg/kg i.m.
daily
 260 mg/2
every 5-7 days
15 mg/kg
litres'. Birds
with low daily
water intake,
260 mg/500
mL1
Enrofloxacin
10 mg/kg twice
100-200 mg/L
10 mg/kg i.m. twice
daily1
for 5-10 days
daily1
Flucytosine
50 mg/kg twice
80-300mg/kg
daily for 2-4
feed (psittacines,
weeks
mynahs)
Itraconazole
10 mg/kg twice
10 mg/kg twice
(but see text)
daily for 30-60
daily for 30-60
days (formulation
days (formula-
to use: itracon-
tion to use: itra-
azole 100 mg cap-
conazole 100 mg
sules)
capsules)
Ketoconazole
20 mg/kg daily for
40-100 mg/kg
(but see text)
2 weeks
soft feed
Lincomycin/
1 g Linco-
spectinomycin
Spectin)/L
106
6 Guidance on prescribing
Table 31 Antimicrobial doses of drugs for exotic birds1 (continued)
By additionto
By addition to
Drug
By mouth
drinking water
feed
By injection
Othermethods ofadministration
Metronidazole
 20-50 mg/kg once
100 mg/L
一
5 mg/kg i.m. twice
daily for7 days
daily
Nystatin
300 000-600 000
100 000 units/
200 000 units/kg
units/kg 2-3 times
L for 3-6
soft feed for 3-6
daily for 1-2
weeks
weeks
weeks
Oxytetracy-
25-50 mg/kg
Treatment.
Treatment. 300
50 mg/kg i.m. daily
cline
0.65-2.0 g/L
mg/kg soft feed
(>400 g body-
for 5-14 days
for5-14 days
weight);100 mg/kg
4.5 mg/bird (as
i.m. daily (<400 g
medicated seed′) body-weight)
Sulfadiazine
75 mg/kg for upto
20 mg/kg s.c., i.m.
with trimetho-
7 days
twice daily
prim
Sulfadimidine
50mg/kg
220 mg/L for3
30 mg/kg s.c., i.m.
days, repeat
after2days
Terbinafine
10 mg/kg daily for
By nebulisation, 1 mg/mL 3 times
30 days
daily for7 days
Toltrazuril
2 mg/L, give
on 2 consecu-
tive days per
week
Tobramycin
2.5 mg/kg i.m. 3
times daily for 14
days (raptors); 5 mg/
kg i.m. 2-3 times
daily for 14 days
(other species)
Tylosin
20 mg/kg daily for 500 mg/L
20-40 mg/kg i.m. 3
By nebulisation, 100 mg diluted
3 days
times daily (use
in 5 mL DMSO and 10 mL
higher dose for
sodium chloride 0.9% solution
smaller birds)
1drug doses for preparations that have a marketing authorisation foruse in these species in the UK. Therefore, unless marked 1.
the drug or doses stated are not authorised for these species
2 dose expressed as amoxicillin
Prescribing for exotic birds
¥107
Table 32 Parasiticidal doses of drugs for exotic birds1
By addition to
Other methods of
Drug
By mouth
drinkingwater
By injection
administration
Endoparasiticides
Fenbendazole
50 mg/kg once, repeat
10 mg/L (finches)
(but see text)
after 10 days (nematodes);
33 mg/kg, repeat daily for
3 days (microfilaria,
trematodes);
20 mg/kg, repeat daily for
5 days (Capillaria)
 Ivermectin
 200 micrograms/kg, repeat
200 micrograms/kg
By topical
after 2-3 weeks
i.m., repeat after 23
application, one
weeks (not finches,
%IJo dop
budgerigars)
solution
Levamisole
10 mg/kg, repeat after 2
80 mg/L (finches);
(but see text)
weeks
100 mg/L daily for 3
days (other
species)
Praziquantel
5-10 mg/kg, repeat after
7.5 mg/kg s.c., i.m.,
2-4 weeks
repeat after 2-4 weeks
(not finches)
Ectoparasiticides
Dichlorvos-
Minimum air space
impregnated strips
30 m? per strip, use
(bird room)
for up to 3 days,
(but see text)
see niotes above
 Fipronil
Spay on to skin,
repeat after14 days
if required
Pyrethrins1
Dusting powder,
spray
or doses stated are not authorised for these species
108 Guidance on prescribing
Table 33 Doses of other drugs for exotic birds1
Drug
Dose
Indications
Bromhexine
3-6 mg/kg i.m.
respiratory disorders
6.5 mg/L drinking water
Butorphanol
2 mg/kg i.m. daily. May be used for up to 28 days
analgesia
Calcium gluconate 10%
1-2 mL/kg i.m. + oxytocin
egg binding
Carprofen
2-10 mg/kg i.m.
inflammatory disorders
Diazepam
0.5-1.5 mg/kg p.o., i.m., i.v. 3 times daily
seizures
Digoxin
10-20 micrograms/kg p.0. twice dailyor 4 micrograms/30 mL drinking
congestive heart failure
water (formulation to use: Lanoxin-PG elixir 50 micrograms/mL)
Dinoprost
20- 100 micrograms/kg i.m. as a single dose
egg binding
Doxapram
(< 2 kg body-weight) one drop p.o.;
respiratory stimulationin
(> 2 kg body-weight) 7 mg/kg i.m.
apnoea and newly
hatched chicks
Haloperidol
by addition to drinking water, initial dose 200 micrograms/kg (< 1 kg
behaviour modification
body-weight); initial dose 170 micrograms/kg (> 1 kg body-weight)
(formulation to use: haloperidol oral liquid). Gradually increase dose to
900 micrograms/kg overa 9 week period. Maintenance doses of 400
micrograms/kg may be required if a relapse occurs and may be given
for more than 12 months
Hydrocortisone
10 mg/kg i.v.
but see text
Dilute 1 volume Aqueous Iodine Oral Solution with 14 volumes water.
hypothyroidism
Add 1 drop of this solution to 30 mL drinking water daily for 3 weeks
Ketoprofen
2 mg/kg i.m.
inflammatory disorders
Lactulose
0.3 mL/kg p.0.
Medroxyprogesterone
30 mg/kg s.c., i.m. Repeat dose once every 4 weeks 
persitant egg laying (but
acetate
see text)
Metoclopramide
500 micrograms/kg p.o., i.m.
anti-emetic, to increase
motility of upper gastro-
intestinal tract
Oxytocin
3-5 units/kg i.m. + calcium gluconate
egg binding
Penicillamine
50-55 mg/kg p.0. daily for 7-14 days
copper, zinc, mercury.
and lead poisoning
Potassium bromide
75 mg/kg p.o. (parrots)
idiopathic epilepsy
Sodium calciumedetate
10-40 mg/kg i.m., slow i.v.
lead and zinc poisoning
(but see text)
Vitamin A
0.2 mL/kg Multivitamin injection (Arnolds) i.m. daily for 2 weeks,
respiratory and epithelial
then Nutrobal (Vetark) or Ace High (Vetark) p.o.
disorders
Vitamin E /selenium
68 micrograms/kg i.m. every 7-14 days (formulation to use: 0.01 mL
cockatiel paralysis,
Dystosel (Intervet)/kg)
paresis syndrome and
similar neuropathies in
other psittacines
Vitamin K
0.2-2.5 mg/kg i.m.
coagulopathies
the drug or doses stated are not authorised for these species
109
Prescribing t
for re
les
Contributor:
blood is shunted around or through the kidneys. The RPS is
L Jepson MA, VetMB, CBiol, MIBiol, MRCVS
of significance with drugs that are renally excreted because
if injected into the caudal half of the body, such drugs may
The class Reptilia consists of more than 6500 species,
have a significantly reduced half-life, while nephrotoxic
divided into the following groups: lizards (order Squamata,
drugs may reach the kidneys at a significantly high concenl-
suborder Sauria), snakes (order Squamata, suborder Serpen-
tration. As a precaution, if in doubt treatment should be
tes), tortoises, terrapins, and turtles (order Chelonia), and
injected into the cranial half of the reptile, or in snakes the
crocodiles. Fortunately only some 20 to 30 species are com-
middle third.
monly seen in practice and these fall into the first three
groups, although many zoological and specialist collections
Chelonians have a large voluminous bladder that may act as
will house species from all four groups.
a drug reser voir, producing a second therapeutic peak many
Although often regarded as *primitive', reptiles are in fact
hours after intitial drug admi nistrati on.
highly adapted species that have evolved to exploit quite
The shell of chelonians is largely living tissue and therefore
 specific miches in the wild. The successful care and medical
 all chelonian medication should be based on total body
management of them therefore requires a knowledge of
weight.
their specific nutritional and husbandry requirements, much
Drug administration. There are few drug preparations
of which can be gained from advanced hobbyist literature
authorised for use in reptiles. Therefore, drugs authorised
and some veterinary texts. Reptiles should not be regarded
for use in other species or for humans may be administered
as a homogeneous one-drug-suits-all species. They are as
under the responsibility of the veterinarian who has the ani-
different from each other as are mammals.
 mal ^under his care'. A limited number of pharmacokinetic
studies for reptiles have been published and where possible
All reptiles should be weighed accurately (to the nearest
these should always be used. Where species specific infor-
gram) before being treated to avoid overdosage. It is also
mation is lacking, then it may be possible to extrapolate
useful to reweigh during the treatment course to help
from closely related species. For example, data for Her-
 assess response to therapy.
mann's tortoise (Testudo hermanni) could be used for the
Spur-thigh tortoise (Testudo graeca).
All reptiles are ectotherms and so rely on environmenital
heat and behaviour adaption to maintain their preferred
Medication may be administered to reptiles by mouth or
body temperature (PBT). The PBT varies with species, age,
stomach tube or by subcutaneous, intramuscular, intrave-
nous, intracoelomic, intraosseous, intrasynovial, or intra-
season, time of day, pre- and post-prandially, and is the tem-
perature at which metabolism is optimal. PBT affects
immune functions such as antibody production and phago-
gi ven per cloaca, or administered by nebulisation.
cytosis, as well as how the reptile metabolically handles any
Antimicrobial therapy. The majority of bacterial infec-
drugs. PBT therefore affects drug distribution, metabolism,
tions in reptiles are caused by Gram-negati ve bacteria, par-
excretion, and elimination half-life. The preferred optimum
ticularly Pseudomonas, Aeromonas, Citrobacter, Klebsiella,
     )  
allows the reptile to achieve its PBT, and this temperature 
is common and many bacteria can have unexpected sensi-
range should be provided within the home, in the hospital 
tivity to particular anti bacterials. Therefore sampling for
vivarium, on the operating table, or during recovery from
microbial culture and sensitivity testing should be caried
anaesthesia. Some therapeutic regimens state a fixed tem-
out before commencing therapy. However, antibacterial
perature at which the reptile should be maintained during
cover should be given while awaiting the results of tests and
treatment, which means for those drugs where pharmacoki-
typically amikacin, ceftazidime, or a fluoroquinolone such
netic data exist that the elimination will be known and con-
as enrofloxacin, ciprofloxacin, or marbofloxacin would be
stant. The stated temperature must be within the reptile's
used. In severe infections, amikacin may be combined with
POTZ; if it is above or below then stress and debilitation
ampicillin or amoxicillin for respiratory tract infections, or
may ensue. Also, maintaining a reptile at a constant temper-
ceftazidime for generalised or systemic infections. Chlor-
ature, even one within its POTZ, is unnatural and may cause
amphenicol in combination with neomycin may be givenl
stress and maladaption over a period of time.
for gastro-intestinal infections. Metronidazole, lincomycin
Reptiles have a well developed renal portal system (RPS)
or clindamycin can be used for anaerobic infections,
where blood from the caudal half of the body may pass
although the use of the latter two should be considered care-
directly through the kidneys before joining the systemic cir-
 fully in herbivorous reptiles such as iguanas or tortoises. If
culation. This does not occur continuously and although no
possible a bactericidal antibiotic rather than a bacteriostatic
physical structure has yet been identified, it is believed that
1anitibiotic should be chosen because many sick reptiles are
there is a valvular mechanism that determines whether
immunocompromised.
110
Guidance on prescribing
Table 34Husbandryrequirements for reptiles
Habitat/
POTZ Humidity
Species
Vivariumtype
("℃)1
(%)
Lighting2
Diet
Bearded dragon
terrestmial/
20-3220-303broad-spectrurmi
mainly insectivorous, also
(Pogona vitticeps)
desert
cami vorous, herbi vorous
Boa constrictor
terrestrial/
28-32 50-80
specialreqwirementscamivorous
(Boa constrictor)
rain forest (semi-arboreal,
not known
aquatic)
Box tortoise
terrestmial/
24-30
50-80
broad-spectrum
mainly herbivorous and
(Terrapene carolina)
semi-aquatic, temperate
insectivorous, also camivorous
Burmese python
terrestmial/
26-30
50-80
special requirements
carmivorous
(Python moturus)
rain forest, scrub land
not known
Corn/Rat snake
terrestrial/
25-30
30-70
specia] requirements
carmivorous
(Etaphe gutiata)
scrub land
not known
Garter snake
terrestmial/
21-28
50-80
special requirements
camivorous
(Thamnophis siratis)
temperate
not known
Green anole
arboreal/
23-29
70-80
broad-spectrum
mainly insectivorous
(Anotis carotinensis)
rain-forest
Green iguana
arboreal/
29-34
60-85
broad-spectrum
herbivorous
(Iguana iguana)
rain-forest
Leopard gecko
terrestrial/
25-30
20-303
special requirements
mainly insecti vorous, also
(Eubtepharus macutarius)
desert
not known
carmivorous
King snake
terrestrial/
25-30
30-70
specialrequirements
carmivorous
(Lampropeltis spp.)
scrub land
not known
Mediterranean tortoise
terrestmial/
20-28
30-50
broad-spectrum
mainly herbivorous
(Testudo spp.)
subtropical, temperate
Plumed basilisk
arboreal/
24-32
70-85
broad-spectrum
mainly insectivorous, also
(Basitiscus ptumifrons)
rain-forest
camivorous
Red-eared terrapin
aquatic/
20-26
06-09
broad-spectrum
mainly carnivorous, also
(Trachemys scripta elegans)
subtropical
herbi vorous
Royal python
terrestmial/
26-30
50-80
special requitements
camivorous
(Python regius)
scrub land
not known
 Sand boa
burrowing/
25-30 20-302
special requirements
carmivorous
(Eryx spp.)
desert
not known
Veiled or Yemen chameleon
arboreal/de sert
22-3340-70
broad-spectrum
camivorous -mainly
(Chameteo catypterus)
insectivorous, some vegetable
matter. Must be sprayed
because rarely drink frorm a
bow]
Water dragon
arboreal (semi-aquatic)/
25-32 80-90
broad-spectrum
mainly insectivorous, also
(Physignathus cocincinus)
rain-forest
herbivorous
1 ermperare requirerments are air termperature ranges. Ir general, basking termperaure should be 5°C greater and night termperahure should be 5°C less
2 broad-spectrurn lighting includes ultra-violet B light
3 hurmidity requirerments will be significantly greater during ecdysis
Prescribing for reptiles  111
Fungal and yeast infections occur in reptiles. Gastro-intesti-
ranean tortoises kept on contaminated ground, regular
nal mycoses are particularly common in reptiles that have
worming during spring and late summer is recommended.
Oxfendazole is the benzimidazole of choice for the treat-
trum antibacterials. Cutaneous mycoses can often be treated
ment of roundworms, although fenbendazole may also be
by debridement and the topical application of malachite
used.
green or povidone-iodine, although griseofulvin can also be
Most endoparasites affect the gastro-intestinal tract. How-
used. Gastro-intestinal infections can be treated with nysta-
ever, Kalicephafus (hookworm) can penetrate the skin and
tin while systemic infections may require ketoconazole,
cause extensive damage by tissue migration. Rhabdias
amphotericin B, or polymixin B. In cases of pulmonary
(lungworm) and pentastomids (arthropods) are parasites of
mycoses, antifungal medication may be given by nebulisa-
the respiratory tract of snakes and examination of a lung
tion, or intratracheal or intrapulmonary injection.
wash and lung endoscopy are recommended.
Viral diseases including ophidian paramyxovirus, boid
Parasiticide overdosage may lead to drug toxicity, which
inclusion body disease virus, and herpesviruses are identi-
may manifest as neurological signs including seizures.
fied in reptiles; aciclovir has beenn used with some success
Ivermectin is contra-indicated in Chelonia, and adverse
against herpesviruses.
reactions have been reported in iguanid lizards, skinks,
Entamoeba invadens is a fatal protozoan disease of snakes
and indigo snakes. Milbemycin has beernl used successfully
that can penetrate the gastro-intestinal mucosa causing
in box tortoises and terrapins but it is recommended that
severe gastro-enteritis and can also invade other organs
avermectins and milbemycins are av oided in Chelonia.
including the liver. Protozoa are not necessarily restricted to
Other drugs. Nutritional disease in reptiles is still very
the alimentary tract and some,notably Hexamita,can cause
common. Ocular problems in terrapins due to hypovitamin-
kidney and bladder disease in tortoises. Metronidazole is
osis A can be treated with vitamin A supplementation,
the drug of choice for these conditions. However, neurolog-
although a change in diet is essential to produce a perma-
ical signs have been reported with repeated use of metroni-
nent cure. Hypovitaminosis B causes neurological signs in
dazole and, in general, a single dose of 250 mg/kg
garter and ribbon snakes (Thamnophis spp.) fed fish that
(maximum 400 mg/animal) is recommended. Adverse
contain thiaminase. Thiamine produces a rapid recovery but
effects have been reported in indigo snakes (Drymarchon
a change of diet or preboiling fish to destroy any thiaminase
spp.), king snakes (Lampropeltis spp.), and uracoan rattlers
is needed. Hypovitaminosis C is implicated in cases of sto-
(Crotaius vegrandis) and a maximum dose of metronida-
matitis, iron deficiency is associated with anaemia in alliga-
zole 40 mg/kg is recommended for these species. Crypto-
tors, and iodine supplementation is required in cases of
sporidiosis can cause hypertrophy of the gastric mucosa and
goitre in tortoises.
Nutritional metabolic bone disease (NMBD) remains the
ineffective. Many other protozoa are commonly seen in the
primary nutritional disease of captive reptiles fed an inap-
faeces of healthy reptiles; these are usually part of the nor-
propriate diet (typically high protein or low Ca:P ratio) and/
mal gut flora and indiscrimi nate treatment may be counter-
productive.
High calcium and phosphorus concentrations may cause
 Parasiticidal therapy. Ticks and helminth parasites, that
soft tissue mineralisation. Nutrobal (Vetark) is a multivita-
require an intermediate host, are more commonly associ-
min and high calcium supplement given at a maintenance
ated with wild caught imports. Mites and helminths with a
 rate of 0.1 mg/kg daily. This supplement has been used
direct life cycle are usually seen in captive bred reptiles.
orally at 1 to 2 mg/kg daily + to treat NMBD without induc-
Individual ticks can be removed while heavy tick infesta-
ing hypercalcaemia or any side-effects. Commercial reptile
tions are treated with the localised application of a topical
diets are available for some species and may help in pre-
spray or the use of systemic ivermectin (not Chelonia).
venting nutritional disease.
Mites, particularly the snake mite Ophionyssus natricis, can
Most sick reptiles present in a state of dehydration. Reptiles
be difficult to eradicate. The snake mite readily hides in fis-
are uricotelic and excrete uric acid rather than urea, and
sures in vivarium furniture, is parthenogenetic, and highly
therefore gout is of important clinical concern and may
 mobile making its complete removal difficult and pro-
necessitate the use of allopurinol to reduce further uric acid
longed. Re-infestations are common. Mite infested reptiles
production. For reptiles receiving potentially nephrotoxic
should be placed in a temporary vivarium and treated with
drugs such as potentiated sulphonamides or aminoglyco-
ivermectin (given by injection or spray) or fipronil, while
sides, concurrent oral or subcutaneous fluid therapy at 20
the main vivarium is thoroughly cleaned. Anything that
mL/kg daily is sufficient. In cases of severe dehydration,
caninot be disinfected or heat treated should be discarded. If
 parenteral hypotonic fluids are recommended. This can be
it is not possible to remove the snake then fipronil or iver-
achieved by intracoelomic administration of wam fluids or
mectin may be used orl a weekly basis.
the use of syringe drivers (even in reptiles as small as 75 g
Occasionally large ascarids may be passed in the faeces of
body-weight) for intravenous or intraosseous fluids. In liz-
tortoises. The faeces or a cloacal wash should be exarmined
ards, intraosseous fluids can be given into the proximal tibia
for eggs and larvae to identify the parasite(s) present. In
and in Chelonia the cancellous bone of the lateral bridge
general, worming should be repeated until faecal examina-
that connects the plastron and carapace or proximal tibia
tions are negative. For certain species, particularly Mediter-
may be used. For larger iguanas and monitor lizards, the
112 Guidance on prescribing
Table 35 Antimicrobial doses of drugs for reptiles12.3
Drug
Dose2
Comments
Abacavir (in
boa constrictor, abacavir 5 mg/kg every 3 days
anti-retroviral combination used to treat
combination with
(formulation to use: Trizivir, GSK)
boid inclusion body disease
Lamivudine, and
Zidovudine)
Aciclovir
80 mg/kg p.o. daily
topical cream 1-2 times daily
Amikacin
gopher snakes, initial dose 5 mg/kg i.m., then 2.5 mg/kg i.m.
every3 days
gopher tortoises, 5 mg/kg i.m. on alternate days at 30°℃
American alligators (juvenile), 2.25 mg/kg i.m. every 3-4
days at 22°℃
royal python, 3.5 mg/kg i.m. every 4-5 days
Amoxicillin
22 mg/kg p.o. 1-2 times daily
often ineffective unless given in combi-
10 mg/kg i.m. daily
nation with aminoglycosides
Amphotericin B
0.5-1.0 mg/kg i.co., i.v every 1-3 days for 14-28 days
aspergillosis; fluid therapy recommended
Ampicillin
Hermmann's tortoises, 50 mg/kg i.m. on alternate days
20 mg/kg i.m. daily at 26°C for 7-14 days
Cefalexin
20-40 mg/kg p.o. twice daily
Ceftazidime
20-40 mg/kg i.m. every 3 days
snakes, 20 mg/kg i.m. every 3 days at 30°℃
Ceftiofur
tortoises, 20 mg/kg i.m. daily; 4 mg/kg i.m. daily (upper
respiratory tract infection)
snakes, 2.2 mg/kg i.m. on alternate days
turtles, 2.2 mg/kg i.m. daily
Cefuroxime
100 mg/kg i.m. daily for 10 days at 30°C
Ciprofloxacin
10 mg/kg p.o. on alternate days
Clarithromycin
desert tortoises, 15 mg/kg p.0. every 2-3 days
mycoplasmal infection
Clindamycin
5 mg/kg p.o. daily
Chloramphenicol
indigo snakes, 50 mg/kg i.m. twice daily
Midland water snakes, 50 mg/kg i.m. every 4 days
bull snakes, 40 mg/kg i.m. daily
Dimetridazole
40 mg/kg p.o. daily for 5 days
Doxycycline
2.5-10.0 mg/kg p.o. 1-2 times for 10 days
Hermann's tortoises, initial dose 50 mg/kg i.m., then 25 mg/kg
i.m.every 3 days
Prescribing for reptiles   113
Table 35 Antimicrobial doses of drugs for reptiles123 (continued)
Drug
Dose2
Comments
Enrofloxacin
5 mg/kg p.o., i.m. every 1-2 days1
upper respiratory tract infection in tortoises, 15 mg/kg i.m.
every 3 days; nasal flush, 1-3 mL every 1-2 days (using
solution of enrofloxacin 200 mg/L water)
Burmese pythons (juvenile), initial dose 10 mg/kg i.m., then
5 mg/kg i.m. on alternate days; Pseudomonas infection, 10
mg/kg i.m. on alternate days
Hermann's tortoises, 10 mg/kg i.m. daily
gopher tortoises, snakes, 5 mg/kg i.m. every 1-2 days
Indian star tortoises, 5 mg/kg 1- 2 times daily
box tortoises, 5 mg/kg i.m. every 4 5 days
Savannah monitor, initial dose 10 mg/kg i.m., then 10 mg/kg
p.o. every 5 days
American alligator (juvenile) 5 mg/kg every 36 hours
green iguana, 5 mg/kg every 24 hours
red-eared terrapins, 10 mg/kg p.0. every 3 days or 5 mg/kg
i.m. on alternate days
Gentamicin
American alligators, 1.75 mg/kg i.m. every 3-4 days at 22°℃
 potentially nephrotoxic. Animal should
painted turtles, 10 mg/kg i.m. on alternate days at 26°℃
be kept at lowerend of temperature range
red-eared terrapins, 6 mg/kg i.m. every 2-5 days
because drug is less nephrotoxic at lower
gopher snakes, 2.5 mg/kg i.m. every 3 days at 24°℃
temperatures
nebulisation, solution of 50 mg (1 mL) gentamicin + 9 mL
 NaCl 0.9% solution. Repeat every 12 hours
Griseofulvin
20-40 mg/kg p.0. every 3 days
fungal dermatitis
Itraconazole
spiny lizard, 23.5 mg/kg p.0. daily for 3 days
Ketoconazole
crocodilians, 50 mg/kg p.0. daily
turtles, 25 mg/kg p.0. daily for 1428 days
tortoises, 15 mg/kg p.o. daily
Lincomycin
10 mg/kg p.o. daily
5 mg/kg i.m. 1-2 times daily
Malachite green
150 micrograms/L water, 1 hourdip daily for 14 days
Marbofloxacin
Chelonia, 10 15 mg/kg p.o., i.m. daily or on alternate days
skin necrosis at site of injection unlikely
Squamata, 2- 10 mg/kg p.o., s.c., i.m. daily or on alternate
because product has aqueous basis
days
Metronidazole
bacterial infections, 150 mg/kg p.o. every 7 days
maximum dose 400 mg
 or 50 mg/kg p.0. daily for 5-7 days
maximum dose fortricolour snakes, king
protozoal infections, 250 mg/kg p.o.as a single dose (may be snakes, indigo snakes, or uracoan rattles
repeated after 14 days)
is 40 mg/kg. Repeat after 14 days and 28
or 100 mg/kg p.o., repeat after 14 days and 28 days
days for protozoal infections
or 25-40 mg/kg p.0., repeat after 3-4 days
Neomycin
10 mg/kg p.o. daily
should not be given systemically
Nystatin
turtles, 100 000 units/kg p.o. daily for 10 days
enteric fungal conditions
Oxytetracycline
5-10 mg/kg p.o., i.m. daily for 7 days
pain, irritation, and inflammation at i.m.
 injection site
kg i.v. every 4-10 days
 Piperacillin
50-100 mg/kg i.m.every 1-2 days
fluid therapy recommended
114  Guidance on prescribing
Table 35 Antimicrobial doses of drugs for reptiles123 (continued)
Drug
Dose2
Comments
Polymixin B
1-2 mg/kg i.m. daily
Sulfadoxine +
15-25 mg/kg p.o., i.m. daily
fluid therapy recommended
trimethoprim
30 mg/kg i.m. on alternate days
Sulfamethoxy-
initial dose 80 mg/kg s.c., then 40 mg/kg s.c. daily for 4 days
coccidial infections
pyridazine
 or 50 mg/kg p.o. daily for 3 days, repeat after an interval of 3
days
Tobramycin
turtles, 10 mg/kg i.m. daily
fluid therapy recommended
tortoises and terrapins, 10 mg/kg i.m. every 1-2 days
Chelonia, snakes, and lizards, 2 mg/kg i.m. daily
Tylosin
5 mg/kg i.m. daily
1drug doses for preparations that have a marketing authorisation for use in these species in the UK; unless marked 1, the drug or
doses stated are not authorised for these species
2 where a particular temperature is not stated, the reptile should be maintained within the species-specific POTZ
3 species-specific data should be used wherever possible
Table 36 Parasiticidal doses of drugs for reptiles!
Drug
Dose
Parasite
Comments
Endoparasiticides
Albendazole
50 mg/kg p.o. as a single dose
ascarids
(25 mg/mL)
Fenbendazole
50-100 mg/kg p.0. every 5-7 days
roundworms
Ivermectin
 200 micrograms/kg s.c., i.m., repeat after 28
do not use in Chelonia; care in
days
skinks and indigo snakes
Levamisole
5-10 mg/kg i.m., repeat after 14 days
roundworms in
care in tortoises
400 mg/kg p.o. as a single dose
snakes, lizards
Mebendazole
20-25 mg/kg p.o., repeat after 14 days
strongyles and
ascarids
Oxfendazole
66 mg/kg p.o. as a single dose
roundworms
 Praziquantel
8 mg/kg p.o., i.m., repeat after 14 days
tapeworms,flukes
and 28 days; or 30 mg/kg p.o. as a single dose
Loggerhead turtles, 25 mg/kg, repeat twice at tapeworms
intervals of 3 hours
Ectoparasiticides
Fipronil
by spraying, every 7-10 days
mites and ticks
Ivermectin
by spraying, 1-2 mL/L water every
mites and ticks
do not use in Chelonia; care in
(10 mg/mL)
7-10 days
skinks and indigo snakes
200 micrograms/kg i.m. every 7 days
1drug doses for preparations that have a marketing authorisation for use in these species in the UK; unless marked 1, the drug or
Prescribing for reptiles 115
cephalic vein may be catheterised. In snakes, the ri ght jugu-
tion, parasites (for example Kalicephaius spp.), persistent
lar vein may be catheterised using a cut-down technique. In
hypothermia, poor conditions, stress, maladaptation, or fol-
emergencies, an intracardiac catheter may be safely left in
lowing hibernation. Most cases are seen in snakes and tor-
place for 24 hours. For parenteral fluid therapy sodium
toises although certain lizards, such as water dragons, are
chloride 0.18% + glucose 4% solution or lactated Ringer's
also frequently affected. Most snake cases are due to Gram-
(Hartmanns) solution is effective. In cases of shock or
negative bacteria while tortoises often have fungal and
severe dehydration, fluids may be given at a dose of 50 to
yeast involvement. Untreated cases may progress to maxil-
lary/mandibular osteomyelitis, aspiration pneumonia, ear
sion for 2 to 3 hours before reducing the infusion rate to 20
abscesses, septicaemia and death. Treatment involves the
to 30 mL/kg/24 hours. For oral therapy, warm (30°C) elec-
correction of underlying husbandry factors, surgical debri-
trolyte mixtures (see section 16.1.1) may be employed but
dement, and antimicrobial therapy based on culture and
the solution should be diluted an additional 10% beyond
sensitivity. Daily debridement using dilute povidone-iodine
that stated for mammals.
is usually necessary and in severe cases fluid and nutritional
Egg-bound reptiles should initially be radiographed to pro-
support (including vitamin C) may be required.
vide a good quality dorsoventral radiograph. In cases of
'Runny nose syndrome' in Mediterranean tortoises ( Testudo
spp.) is a common presentation of a multifactorial disease.
coelomic cavity, often appear oval in shape and possess a
The nasal discharge may be clear and serous, haemorrhagic,
thin, sometimes barely perceptible, shell. In cases of pre-
Or purulent in nature. Various environmental, bacterial, and
ovulatory stasis, the ova can be difficult to distinguish even
viral aetiologies have been advocated but none appear to be
though they occupy most of the coelomic cavity. If visible,
universally applicable. It appears that this syndrome is more
the ova often appear quite rounded and lack a shell. Injec-
common in the Spur-thighed tortoise (Testudo graeca) than
tion of a small volume of air into the coelomic cavity can
in the Hermann's tortoise ( Testudo hermanni) and outbreaks
improve contrast and visualisation of the individual ova.
have often followed the mixing of these two species.
Diagnostic
investigation includes haematology, masal
and parenteral fluid therapy is usually indicated. Parenteral 
flushing for cytological examination, bacterial and fungal
calcium should not be administered unless hypocalcaemia
culture and an accurate assessment of husbandry is
has been confirmed. In most cases provision of a suitable
essential. PCR tests for two of the main aetiological agents,
nesting environment will stimulate reptiles to lay or give
Mycoplasma agassizi and chelonian herpesvirus, are now
birth. Oxytocin may be given by slow intravenous or intra-
available from the Department of Pathology and Infectious
osseous administration. Chelonia respond well to oxytocin,
Diseases, RVC. Treatment includes isolation of affected
lizards and snakes less so. In snakes, the concurrent use of
prostaglandins E and Fz。 has been successful.
Any evi-
temperature, humidity, and ventilation. Antimicrobial drugs
dence of abnormality such as large or deformed eggs or ovi-
can be given by mouth, by injection, or by nasal flushing.
ductal or cloacal obstruction precludes medical therapy and
In refractory cases, scanning electron microscopy for
the reptile should be stabilised for surgery.
viruses (for example chelonian herpesviruses) can be
Respiratory disease is common in reptiles kept constantly
considered. Ideally, affected animals should not be allowed
below their POTZ, exposed to draughts, inappropriate
to hiber nate.
humidity, poor ventilation, or kept in squalid conditions.
Chemotherapy in reptiles is in its infancy and most tumours
Diagnosis relies on good quality horizontal beam radio-
are managed surgically. Accessable cutaneous tumours can
graphs (lateral views in Squamata; lateral and cranio-caudal
be treated by injecting cisplatin directly into the tissue mass
views in Chelonia), endoscopy, and lung washing (using up
onl a weekly basis as a debulking exercise. Radiation has
to 1 mL fluid/100 g body-weight) for microscopy (para-
       n  
sites), cytology (inflammatory cells), and aerobic and
sungazer lizard (Cordyfus giganteus) and surgical laser has
anaerobic bacterial and fungal culture and sensitivity.
been used in the treatment of a dermal melanoma in a green
Treatment options include husbandry improvements (tem-
iguana.
perature, humidity and ventilation), surgical removal of
Anaesthetics. Propofol is the injectable anaesthetic of
caseous lung material, coopage, bronchodilators, and anti-
choice because of its rapid smooth induction and recovery,
microbial drugs. Antimicrobial drugs can be givenl
by
minimal accumulation on repeated injections, and limited
excitatory side-effects; the drug is administered by intrave-
tracheal blockage or lung surgery, the air sac part of the
nous or intraosseous injection.
lung can be cannulated in many snakes. This can be
Ketamine may be given by intramuscular injection and its
achieved in the mid-caudal third of the lung and provides an
effect is dose dependent. At higher doses apnoea and recoy-
airway through which oxygen and isoflurane can be deliv-
ery may be prolonged, taking up to 72 hours in certain cir-
ered. The cannula may be safely left in place for up to 5
cumstanices.
Ketamine should be used with care in
days.
debilitated reptiles.
Ulcerative stomatitis in snakes is a multifactorial disorder
Once anaesthesia has been induced, the reptile should be
which may arise from mouth trauma from cage furnishings
intubated and anaesthesia mantained with an inhalational
Or prey items, secondarily to pneumonia or systemic infec-
agent. Many species such as iguanid and monitor lizards
116  Guidance on prescribing
may be induced using a face mask, although aquatic reptiles
in most reptiles is governed by hypoxia and not hypercap-
such as terrapins are able to breath-hold for an extremely
nia. Therefore, it is not uncommon for reptiles to be apnoeic
long time. Conscious intubation and intermittent positive
for much of the anaesthetic period and part of the recovery
pressure ventilation (IPPV) is advised only for snakes.
phase if the inhalational agent is delivered with pure oxy-
Many reptiles have subclinical liver disease and isoflurane
 gen, necessitating IPPV every 5 to 30 seconds. Maintaining
is the inhalational anaesthetic of choice because it is less
anaesthetised reptiles using air (20% oxygen) seems to
hepatotoxic than halothane. However, sevoflurane may be
induce most species to breathe spontaneously, but in such
preferred to isoflurane. Studies suggest that the cardiopul-
monary effects are similar but induction and recovery are
oxygen using an oesophageal or cloacal (ventral aspect)
smoother and shorter for sevoflurane. The respiratory drive
pulse oximeter.
Table 37 Doses of pre-medicants, sedatives, and anaesthetics for reptiles1
Drug
Dose
Anaesthetic times
Comments
Alfadolone/
9-15 mg/kgi.m.
induction: <1 minute (i.v.),
incremental doses may be given
alfaxalone
6-9mg/kg i.v.
15-20 minutes(i.m.)
every 30 minutes
duration: 10-20 minutes (i.v.),
20-30 minutes (i.m.)
recovery: 30-45 minutes
Atropine
10-20 micrograms/kg i.m.
may inhibit intracardiac shunting
Diazepami
220-620 micrograms/kg i.m.
administered to alligators be fore
suxamethonium
Etorphine
crocodilians, 0.05-5.0 mg/kg i.m.
sedation and analgesia in turtles, 0.5-
2.75 mg/kg i.m.
Gallamine
crocodilians, 0.4 1.0 mg/kg i.m.
induction: 2- 10 minutes
may cause respiratory arrest; no
recovery: 1.5-15 hours
loss of consciousness or
analgesia; can be reversed with
neostigmine; to be used only in
an anaesthetised animal
lsoflurane1
induchion,3-5%
induction: 2-10 minutes
less hepatotoxic than halothane
maintenance, 1-3%
recovery: 2-10 minutes
Ketarmine
sedation, 10-50 mg/kg i.m.
should not be used in debilitated
animals: prolonged apnoea at
anaesthesia, 50-100 mg/kg i.m.;
induction: 10-30 minutes
high doses: involuntary
5- 15 mg/kgi.v.
duration: 10-60 minutes
locomotor activity may occur
recovery:12-72 hours
during induction
Ketamine +
5mg/kg i.m. +
induction: 5-45 minutes
reversal: atipamazole 5 times
Medetomidine
100- 150 micrograms/kg i.m.
duration: 1430 minutes
dose medetormidine given 25-90
recovery: 2-20 minutes
minutes after ketamine/
medetomidine; transient hind
limb paraly sis
Propofo]
Squamata, 10- 14 mg/kg i.v.
induction: <1 min
must be given i.v. or i.o. (or
Chelonia,12-15mg/kgi.v.
duration: 15-25 minutes
intra ventricular in snakes)
snakes, 12 mg/kg intra ventricular
recovery: 20-40 minutes
Sevoflurane
induction,5-8%
induction: 3-9 minutes
maintenance,3-5%
recovery: 3-11 minutes
Sux ameth-
Crocodilians,tortoises,0.25-5.0 mg/
induction: < 4 minutes
may cause respiratory arrest;no
kg i.m.
duration: 1-9 hours
loss of consciousness or
recovery:1-9 hours
analgesia; to be used only in an
anaesthetised animal
Tiletamine/
45 mg/kg i.m.
induction: 9-15 minutes
not suitable as sole agent;
zolazepam
recovery: 1-12 hours
sedation rather than anaesthesia
1 drug doses for preparations that have a marketing authorisation for use in these species in the UK; unless marked 1, the drug or doses
stated are not authorised for these species
Prescribing for reptiles  117
Table 38 Doses of other drugs for reptiles!
Drug
Dose2
Indications
 Allopurinol
10-20 mg/kg p.o. daily
gout, reduction of uric acid production
Arminophylline
2-4 mg/kg i.m.
re spiratory disease where bronchodilation required
Argipressin 
0.01-1.0 micrograms/kg
egg binding (more potent than ox ytocin)
Ascorbic acid
10-200 mg/kg i.m. as required
ulcerative stomatitis
Butorphanol
0.2-2.0 mg/kg i.m.
analgesia
Calcitonin
1.5 units/kg s.c. 3 times daily
hypercalcaemia (fluid therapy also recommended)
50 units/kg i.m., repeat after 2 weeks
Calcium gluconate
100 mg/kg i.m. 4 times daily
hypocalcaemia in iguanas
(10 mg/mL)
or 400 mg/kg i.v., i.o. given over 24 hours
Carprofen
2-4 mg/kg s.c., i.m., i.v.
Cimetidine
4 mg/kg p.o. 3-4 times daily
regurgitathion, vomiting, gastris, gastro-inte stinal wlceration
Colecalcifero]
100- 1000 units/kg i.m. as a single dose
hypocalcaemia, fibrous osteodystrophy in iguanas
Cyanocobalamin
50 micrograms/kg s.c., i.m.
appetite stimulahion
Dex amethasone
30-150 micrograms/kg i.m., i.v,i.0.
inflammation, shock
Dinoprost
500 micrograms/kg i.m. as a single dose
egg binding in snakes
Dox apram
5-10 mg/kg i.v, i.0.
re spiratory stimulation
Flunixin
100-500micrograms/kgi.m, i.v. 1-2
times daily
Furosemide
2-5 mg/kg i.m.,i.v. 1-2 times daily
diuresis
lodine
2-4 mg/kg p.o. every 7 days
prophylaxis for goitrogenic diets
lron
12 mg/kgi.m. every 7 days (alligators)
anaemia in alligators
Levothyroxine
20 micrograms/kg p.o. on alternate days
hypothyroidism in tortoises
Meloxicam
50 micrograms/kg p.o. once daily
Metoclopramide
60 micrograms/kg p.o. daily for 7 days
stirmulation of gastric ermptying in tortoises
Prednisolone
1-2 mg/kg p.o.
anti-inflammatory, reduction of nephrocalcinosis
Selenium
 25-500 micrograms/kg i.m.
deficiency in lizards
Sucralfate
0.5- 1.0 g/kg p.o. 3-4 times daily
gastric irmitation
50- 100 mg/kg i.m
thiamine deficiency
Vitarmin A
10 000 units/kg p.o. (ACE-High, Vetark)
hypovitaminosis A (iatrogenic hypervitarminosis A may result
every 7 days
from repeated treatment)
Vitarmin ADE complex
0.02 mL (Duphafral ADE Forte, Fort
hypovitaminosis A, hypovitaminosis D, hepatic lipidosis
Dodge) every 7 days
Vitamin B complex
0.2 mL (Anivit 4BC, Animalcare)/kg
Vitarmin E
50- 100 mg/kg i.m.
vitamin E deficiency
1 drug doses for preparations that have a marketing authorisafion foruse in these species in the UK; unless marked', the drug ordoses
stated are not authorised for these species
2 where a particular temperature is not stated, the reptile should be maintained within the species-specific POTZ
118
Prescribing i
ne
pairment
Contributor:
tion might serve as a prognostic indicator of hepatic drug-
R J Evans MA, PhD, VetMB, DipEVCPT, MRCVS
metabolising activity. Plasma or serum enizymes released
Hepatic disease can alter the bioavailability and disposition
from the hepatocytes, such as alanine aminotransferase
of a drug and influence the pharmacological effects pro-
(ALT) or from biliary epithelial cells such as alkaline phos-
phatase (ALP), while associated with hepatic damage may
duced by the drug; these effects are dependent on the nature
and severity of the disease. The liver is the principal organ
also be raised for other reasons and do not relate to the
for metabolism of lipid-soluble drugs and for the production
degree of liver dysfunction. In horses, dogs, cats, and pri-
of plasma proteins.
mates serum-bile acid concentration gives a sensitive but
The enhanced effect of drugs in patients with hepatic dis-
variably specific test of hepatocellular function and the
ease is mainly due to decreased drug metabolism and there-
integrity of the enterohepatic portal circulation, and is not
fore increased duration of drug action. Glucuronide
affected by hypoalbuminaemia. Although elevation of bile
conjugation of drugs appears to be relatively unaffected by
acid indicates liver dysfunction, correlation with the degree
 of functional loss is poor.
hepatic disease. Other reasons for augmented effect, partic-
ularly of those drugs that act on the CNS, could be attrib-
Ultrasonographic examination may show focal or diffuse
uted todecreased drug-protein
binding
due
to
changes in liver size and texture but specific diagnosis of
hypoal buminaemia, or increased permeability of the blood-
chronic hepatic failure usually requires a liver biopsy.
brain barrier due to release of substances from the damaged
liver, or a combination of both.
Drug dosage in hepatic impairment. Although
the
The occurrence of drug-induced hepatotoxicity is more
effect of hepatic disease on the bioavailability and disposi-
commonly associated with chronic medication or overdos-
tion of drugs is highly variable and difficult to predict, there
age of certain drugs than with short courses of therapy. The
are well-recognised principles for modifying dosage. The
halogenated anaesthetic agents, paracetamol, antiepilep-
dose of drugs administered parenterally, or low clearance
tics, and corticosteroids are among the most significant
drugs given orally, should be reduced by 50%. Drugs with
causes of drug-related hepatotoxicity encountered in veteri-
high hepatic clearance, for example propranolol and the
nary practice. Drugs that should be avoided in patients with
opioid analgesics pentazocine and pethidine, should be
hepatic disease are listed in the table.
given orally at 10% to 50% of the usual dose. In general,
Diagnosis of hepatic impairment. Routine
hepatic
when admimistering drugs that depend on hepatic metabo-
function tests poorly correlate with liver dysfunction, drug
lism to animals with liver disease, the dosage interval
metabolising activity, or both. Serum-albumin concentra-
should be increased.
 Drugs to be avoided or used with caution in animals with hepatic disease
This list is not comprehensive; absence from the table does not irmply safety
Acepromazine
Danazo]
Lidocaine
 Phen ytoin
Anabolic steroids
Diazepam
Lincosamides
Polysulfated glycosaminoglycan
Anaestheics,halogenated
Diltiazem
Megestrol acetate
 Propofol
Antiepileptics
Doxapram
 Meglumine antimon ate
Quinidine
Atipamezole
Doxorubicin
Metformin
Rocuronium
Beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs
Ethylestreno]
Methoxyflurane
Sodium stibogluconate
Buprenorphine
Epirubicin
Methyltestosterone
Sulphonarmides
Buspirone
Fenthion
Metronidazole
Suxamethonium
Butorphano]
Flucytosine
Mexiletine hydrochloride
Tetrac yclines
Carbamazepine
Fluoxetine
Mitox an trone
Theophylline
Chloramphenico]
Furosemide
NSAIDs
Thiacetarsamide
Chlorpropamide
Glibenclamide
Pancuronium
Thiamazole
Chlorpromazine
Glipizide
Paracetamo]
Tolbutamide
Clorazepate
Griseofulvin
 Pentamidine
Trilostane
Codeine
Heparin
Pentobarbital
Thiopentone
Copper salts
Ketamine
Pentosan polysulfate sodiurm
Vecuronium
Corticosteroids
Ketoconazole
Phenobarbital
Zidovudine
119
Prescribing in renal impairment
Contributor:
(GFR) will be reduced by 75% before plasma-urea and cre-
R J Evans MA, PhD, VetMB, DipEVCPT, MRCVS
atinine concentrations rise and signs of clinical disease are
readily evident. This is because of the large functional
Renal excretion is the principal process of elimination for
reserve of the kidney. In adult animals, creatinine clearance
drugs that are predominantly ionised at physiological pH
provides a better quantitative indication of the degree of
-os pidi mo ym snognu snip pue snp ieod ioy pue
renal impairment and is the parameter on which calculation
ubility. Renal excretion is dependent on renal blood flow,
of dosage adjustment should be based. A limitation associ-
urinary pH, drug polarity, and lipid solubility. While the
ated with the use of plasma creatinine as an indicator of
same basic mechanisms of renal excretion apply to mam-
renal function impairment is that patients with the same
malian species, the glomerular filtration rate, activity of
plasma-creatinine concentration may have widely varying
tubular secretion, and contribution of pH-dependent passive
renal function; hence the justification for using creatinine
reabsorption vary among species.
clearanice.
The degree to which impaired renal function affects drug
elimination is determined by the fraction of the dose that is
Drug dosage in renal impairment. There are several
excreted unchanged by the kidneys. In severe renal disease,
renal disease. Most of the methods assume that the required
decreased drug excretion and changes in drug distribution
plasma therapeutic concentration of the drug in patients
occur, thereby enhancing the pharmacological effect of the
drug. In uraemic patients and patients with nephrotic syrl-
drome, plasma-protein binding of many drugs, notably
with no renal impairment. The objective is therefore to
furosemide, phenylbutazone, and phenytoin is decreased.
maintain uraemic patients at the same average concentra-
Permeability of the blood-brain barrier may be increased in
tion after multiple doses or the same steady-state concentra-
renal disease and therefore the anaesthetic effect of, for
tion during infusions as those for normal individuals.
example, thiopental is enhanced. Decreased renal function
The design of dosage regimens is based on the pharmaco-
affects not only the excretion of drugs that are eliminated by
kinetic changes that have occurred. In general pharmaco-
the kidneys, but may also alter the distribution and metabo-
kinetic approaches to dosage adjustment in renal failure can
lism of drugs that are eliminated by the liver.
be based either on drug clearance or the GFR as an estimate
Nephrotoxic renal failure is most commonly associated
of elimination rate constant. The latter is the more com-
with injury to the proximal tubules. It may be caused by
monly used and requires assessment of the patient's renal
antimicrobial drugs such as aminoglycosides, amphotericin
function. It might be thought that active excretion or reab-
B, cefaloridine, and polymyxins, and by heavy metals
sorption of drug by the nephron might invalidate this
including mercuric salts, arsenic salts, bismuth, and copper.
approach. However, although occasional significant dis-
Nephrotoxic drugs should, if possible, be avoided in
crepancies can arise, in most circumstances, GFR is an ade-
patients with pre-existing renal disease because conse-
quate measure. For example, although procainamide and
quences of nephrotoxicity are likely to be more serious
penicillins are actively excreted, their renal elimination is in
each case proportional to measured GFR, regardless of the
caused by aminoglycosides is dose-related; the total amount
nature of the renal dysfunction. The simplest reliable
of drug administered is probably more important than the
assessment of GFR is by measurement of plasma-creatinine
daily dose in determining toxicity. Dehydration due to
concentratiorl.
reduced water intake and increased loss due to vomiting in
Creatinine is an obligatory by-product of muscle metabo-
animals in renal failure, sodium deprivation, or administra-
lism and is normally produced at constant rate and elimi-
tion of diuretics in particular furosermide, increases the
nated by renal clearance. Thus, under steady-state
nephrotoxic potential of aminogl ycosides. Diuretic-induced
conditions, the plateau principle applies to creatinine and,
potassium loss may be a contributing factor. Neonates are
more susceptible than adult animals to aminoglycoside
body clearance, the plasma concentration is inversely
nephrotoxicity.
related to GFR. It should be noted, however, that reduced
Diagnosis of renal impairment. Reduced renal func-
      s s
tion is commonly assessed from the plasma (or serum) con-
steady-state plasma concentrations. Uraemic animals often
centrations of urea or creatinine. Increased
ureaand
have significant muscle wasting and the degree of renal
creatinine concentrations result from moderate to severe
function impairment will therefore be underestimated and
renal dysfunction but plasma-urea concentration may be
GFR overestimated. None the less plasma-creatinine coni-
complicated by diet and protein metabolism. It is important
 centration gives a simple measure on which to base altera-
to rule out pre-renal causes of renal function impairment,
tions in dosing regimen that is sufficiently accurate for
such as dehydration from any cause, circulatory disorders,
most purposes in chronic renal failure. It can therefore be
hypotension, and hypovolaemia. Glomerular filtration rate
used as a substitute for measurement of creatinine clearance
120 Guidance on prescribing
although the latter is preferable, if practical. Plasma-creati-
eliminated by non-renal routes the correction should be
nine concentration will lag several hours to days behind
applied for that proportion of the dose eliminated by renal
changing renal function in acute renal failure.
excretion. Basing the adjustment of dosage on plasma creat-
The dosage regimen can be adjusted by reducing the dose,
inine is an imperfect approach; in particular the reduction in
increasing the dosage interval, or altering both. Changing
dose required may be overestimated at low GFR. However,
the dosing interval alone may result in very large fluctua-
since caution in drug usage is required at very low GFR this
tions in plasma concentration between doses. Altering the
may be an acceptable failing. It is certainly preferable to use
maintenance dose alone minimises fluctuations. However,
e pe juosnfpe saesop pioae on weu nuei yoeoidde si
since toxicity may be related both to the peak and trough
simply because creatinine clearance or drug clearance can
concentrations for some drugs, and since peak concentra-
not easily be measured in practice.
tions may be important for therapeutic effect, there is merit
One or more loading doses may be required if a prompt
in adjusting both variables so as to match the variations in
therapeutic effect is sought because the desired steady-state
concentration in the normal as closely as possible in the
plasma concentration will not be reached until after five
compromi sed patient.
times the half-life, and this will be greatly prolonged if the
If the plasma-creatinine concentration was found to be
increased fourfold, the maintenance dose could be quar-
reduced elimination.
tered and the dosage interval increased fourfold, but a better
option is to halve the dose and double the dosage interval.
Drugs that are nephrotoxic
To find the most satisfactory dosage regimen to use in the
This listis not comprehensive; absence from the table does not
uraemic patient, use the following equations:
imply safety
U = uraemic patient
N = normal patient
Amphotericin B
Doxorubicin
Dose rate = average hourly rate
Arminoglycosides
Methotrex ate
C = proportion increase in plasma-creatinine concentration
Carboplatin
Methoxyflurane
Ciclosporin
Pentamidine
Dose (U) = Dose (N) x
1
Cisplatin
Sodium silbogluconate
Dose interval (U) = Dose interval (N) x C
Drug prescribing should be kept to a minimum in all
patients with severe renal disease. If renal impairment is
Dose rate (N)
Dose rate (U)=
considered on clinical grounds, renal function should be
2
assessed before prescribing any drug which requires dose
If a significant proportion of the drug (greater than 20%) is
modification even when renal impairment is mild.
This list is not comprehensive; absence from the table does not imply safety
Acepromazine
Chlorpropamide
Glibenclamide
 Pethidine
Alcuronium
Chlorpromazine
Glipizide
Phenoxybenzamine
Allopurino]
Ciclosporin
Glucocoricoids
Piperazine
Amiloride hydrochloride
Cisplatin
Hydrochlorothiazide
Polysulfated glycosaminoglycan
Amphotericin
Clindamycin
Hydrox ycarbarmide
Procainamide
Ampicillin
Danazo]
Ketamine
Propofo]
Apramycin
Disodium etidronate
Meglumine antimonate
Rocuronium
Bendroflumethiazide
Doxapram
Mesalazine
Sodium stiboglucon ate
Beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs
Enalapri]
 Metformin
Spironolactone
Buspirone
Fenthion
Methyltestosterone
Sulphonamides
Captopril
Flucytosine
Metronidazole
Tetracyclines (except doxycycline)
Carbamazepine
Fluorouracil
Neomycin
Thiazides
Carboplatin
Fluoxetine
NSAIDs
Tolbutamide
Cardiac glycosides
Furosemide
Olsalazine
Trilostane
Cephalosporins
Gallamine
Pancuronium
Tubocurarine
Chloramphenico]
Gentamicin
Pentamidine
Zidovudine
121
Prescribing
for preanant animals
Contributor:
R J Evans MA, PhD, VetMB, DipEVCPT, MRCVS
drug, the physicochemical properties that influence its pas-
sage by passive non-ionic diffusior across the placental bar-
Effect of drugs used during pregnancy.
Important
rier, and the mechanisms of elimination of the drug must
physiological charniges occur during pregnancy that may
also be taken into account. Modification in dosage, if
alter the processes of drug absorption, distribution, and
elimination. Changes occur in the cardiovascular, pulmo-
parameters, such as bioavailablity, systemic clearance,
nary, renal, and gastro-intestinal systes, and in body water
apparent volume of distribution, and half-life. It must be
compartments. The placenta, ammiotic fluid, and fetus con-
remembered that the dam’s cardiovascular, respiratory,
stitute additional  distribution  compartments  for drugs.
renal and metabolic physiology are changing throughout
Drug exposure of offspring during pregnancy is determi ned
 pregnancy, as are those of the fetus.
by transplacental transfer. The rate and degree of transpla-
Unfortunately, too few studies of the absorption, distribu-
cental transfer is influenced by the same principles and fac-
tion, and disposition kinetics of drugs have been performed
tors that affect transfer across other cellular barriers. These
are: the concentration of free drug on each side of the bar-
to be made on dosage modifications.
rier, the degree of ionisation, and the lipid solubility of the
Effect of drugs used at parturition. Drugs may cause
uniorised drug. As a genieral rule, if a drug can be absorbed
from the gut it will usually cross the placenta and eniter the
pregnancy termination or premature parturition. Abortion
may be induced by corticosteroids, cabergoline, some pros-
fetus. The fetus is susceptible to damage during implanta-
tion, when embryonic death is the outcome; during the
taglandins, and alpha,-adrenoceptor stimulants such as
xylazine. Prostaglandins are used therapeutically to termi-
result, and at birth when CNS, cardiovascular and respira-
nate early pregnancy in cattle, and to induce parturition in
tory depression are the most serious effects.
cattle and pigs. In dogs, the progesterone receptor antago-
Some drugs may cause abortion, congenital malforma-
nist aglepristone is used for the prevention of implantation
tions or neonatal disease if administered during preg-
and the termination of pregnancy before day 45. When
nancy. Drugs that are known to cause teratogenesis in
drugs are used to induce early parturition, the length of ges-
tation should be calculated to minimise the risk of non-
animals include some benzimidazoles such as albendazole
viable offspring.
and oxfendazole (particularly at high doses), corticoster-
oids, griseofulvin, ketoconazole, and methotrexate. Drugs
 Drugs may also prolong normal delivery. Clenbuterol is
that may affect the fetus or neonate include opioids and bar-
used as a bronchodilator and also to reduce uterine motility.
biturates, which may alter respiration. Diethylstilbestrol
When used to treat a respiratory condition, therapy should
be discontinued before the expected date of parturition. Pro-
offspring. Chlorpropamide and tolbutamide may cause
gestogens may delay parturition. NSAIDs may delay Or
hypoglycaemia. Salicylates (including aspirin) are tera-
prolong parturition, and may cause premature closure of the
togenic and prolonged use may also increase the risk of
haemorrhage. Tetracyclines may cause dental discoloration
and malformation in the offspring. Corticosteroids may
cause teratogenesis and also affect skeletal calcification.
Drugs to be avoided or used with caution at
Steroid hormones including androgens, anabolic steroids,
parturition
and progestogens are teratogeric and may affect the sexual
This list is not comprehensive; absence from the table does not
development of the offspring. Drugs may induce abortion or
irmply safety
premature parturition and these are discussed below.
This does not mean that the use of drugs is contra-indicated
Alpha,-adrenoceptor stimulants (detomidine, metomidine,
in pregnant animals, but drug selection and manufacturer's
romifidine, xylazine)
warnings on the data sheets and package leaflets must be
Barbiturates
considered. The need for therapy of the dam must be
Chlorpropamide
weighed against the generally uncertain risk to the fetus. It
Corticosteroids
is important that the balance of risks is fully discussed with
Clenbutero]
NSAIDS
the client. Sometimes administration during a certain period
Opioid analgesics
of pregnancy is not recommended. In many cases, safety
has not been established and limited data are available on
Progestogens
Tolbutamide
the consequences of administering drugs to the dam during
pregnancy; manufacturer's information on the effect of
drugs in laboratory animals may be helpful when assessing
122  Guidance on prescribing
 Drugs to be avoided or used with caution in pregnant animals
These drugs can present hazards to certain operators such as women of child-bearing age and pregnant women, as well as the patient
This list is not comprehensive; absence from the table does not irmply safety
Aglepristone
Cytotoxic drugs
lsoxsuprine
Salicylates
Amitraz
Danazo]
Ketamine
Sex hormones
Atipamezole
Diethylstilbestrol
Ketoconazole
Sodium cromoglicate
Barbiturates (including
Diltiazem
Levarmisole
Tetrac yclines (including
phenobarbital)
doxycycline)
Ben azepril
Enalapril
Metoclopramide
Thiamazole
Beta-adrenoceptor blocking
Ethosuximide
Misoprosto]
Trilostane
drugs
Some benzimidazoles
Ethylestrenol
Pethidine
Vaccines, live (but re fer to
indi vidual vaccine information)
Bromocriptine
Fenthion
Phenothiazines
Warfarin
Bupre norphine
Flucytosine
Phenytoin
Cabergoline
Fluoroqwinolones
Piperazine
Clenbuterol hydrochloride
Gentamicin
Poly sulfated glycosarminoglycan
Clonazepam
Griseofulvin
Primidone
Corticosteroids
Hydrochlorothiazide
Prostaglandins
Cyromazine
Sorme inhalational anaesthetics Ramipril
This list is not comprehensive; absence from the table does not irmply safety
Ceffiofur
Etamiphy lline
Pethidine
Selegiline
Ciclosporin
Lidocaine
Pimobendan
Theoph ylline
Clindamycin
Methoprene
Praziquantel (horses)
Valnemulin
Clomipramine
Omega interferon
Prope ntofylline
123
Prescribing 
tor lactatind
 animals
Contributor:
foal. Barbiturates could also theoretically pass into milk to
R J Evans MA, PhD, VetMB, DipEVCPT, MRCVS
affect the neonate. Phenobarbital may inhibit the sucking
reflex. Many topical ectoparasiticides should not be used on
Drug therapy in lactating animals should preferably only be
nursing bitches or queens. In general, any treatment given
instituted with a knowledge of the possible effects of that
to the dam during lactation should be used with caution.
drug on lactation, the amount of drug likely to pass into the
Drugs such as atropine, bromocriptine, cabergoline, and
milk, whether the presence of the drug irn milk is likely to be
furosemide may inhibit lactation and cause agalactia.
harmful to a neonate feeding from the dam, and, for food-
 Repeated glucocorticoid therapy may also depress appetite
producing animals, a knowledge of the withdrawal period
and milk yield.
for both meat and milk. When no authorised product for a
There may be potential problems for humans arising from
particular situation exists in an animal where the milk could
drug residues in milk. For example, iodides are concen-
be used for human consumption, the choice of product and
trated in milk. Milk iodine is primarily affected by dietary
withdrawal period applied must take into account provi-
intake, but pre- and post-milking teat dipping, if not per-
sions of EC legislation. It should be noted that if an active
formed correctly, has a significant effect on milk-iodine
ingredient is included in Annex IV of Regulation 2377/90/
EEC, no product containing that active ingredient can be
concentration. Also antibacterial residues in milk can be
sufficient to trigger an anaphylactic reaction in a sensitive
administered to a food-producing species, whether lactating
individual
or not.
During lactation lipid-soluble drugs pass from the systemic
circulation into milk. The concentration of drug attained in
the milk is influenced by the extent of plasma protein-bind-
ing, its lipid solubility, and degree of ionisation. Milk is
 separated from the general circulation by an intact mem-
Drugs to be avoided or used with caution in
brane through which only the non-ionised lipophilic form of
lactating animals or for which safety in lactating
a drug may pass. When the non-ionised form of a basic drug
animals has not been established
such as a macrolide enters the relatively acid milk it dissoci-
This listis not comprehensive; absence from the table does not
ates and so becomes trapped resulting in high concentra-
imply safety
tions in milk - the so called ‘ion-trap' Therefore
erythromycin, novobiocin, and trimethoprim achieve high
concentrations in milk and diffuse well throughout the
Acepromazine
NSAIDs
udder. Polar organic bases, such as the aminoglycosides
streptomycin and neomycin, and organic acids are less con-
Amitraz
Omega interferon
Atropine
Phenobarbital
between blood (pH 7.4) and normal milk (pH 6.7) is
reduced irn patients with mastitis, when milk pH may rise to
Benazepri]
Pimobendan
pH 7.3. Increased blood flow and increased capillary per-
Bromocriptine
 Praziquante]
meability contribute to the transfer of antibacterials and
 other drugs into mastitic milk. The presence of milk has anl
Cabergoline
Selegiline
inhibitory effect on some antibacterials when tested in vitro.
Clomiprarmine
This effect is most pronounced with oxytetracycline,
Thiamazole
dihydrostreptomycin, erythromycin, and trimethoprim-con-
Diltiazem
Tilmicosin
taining preparations.
Fluoroquinolones
Drugs achieving high concentrations in milk include: ery th-
Trilostane
romycin, metronidazole, quinidine, trimethoprim and vera-
Furosemide
Pyriprox yfen
pamil (metronidazole is included in Annex IV of
Regulation 2377/90/EEC and its use is banned in food-pro-
Lidocaine
Ramipri]
ducing animals).
Methoprene
Valnermulin
Limited data are available on the effect of drugs orn the off-
spring being suckled. Chloramphenicol may be found in
milk but safety to neonates has not been established (chlor-
amphenicol is included in Annex IV of Regulation 2377/90/
 EEC and its use is banned in food-producing animals). Dan-
tron preparations, for example, should not be administered
to lactating mares because the drug may affect the nursing
124
Prescribing for neonates
Contributor:
combined effect of slow hepatic metabolic reactions and
R J Evans MA, PhD, VetMB, DipEVCPT, MRCVS
inefficient renal excretion in very young animals may con-
siderably decrease the elimination of lipid-soluble drugs
The neonatal period varies between species: from one week
and their metabolites. Therefore care must be exercised in
in foals to 6 to 8 weeks in calves and puppies. Physiological
the calculation of drug dose and dose frequency.
systems that affect drug absorption and disposition differ
Limited data are available on the side-effects of drugs in
during the neonatal period and undergo rapid development
neonates and young animals. Tetracyclines may cause stain-
particularly during the first 24 hours after birth. Character-
istics of the neonatal period include more efficient absorp-
ing of the teeth and fluoroquinolones may adversely affect
tion from the gastro-intestinal tract compared to older
the articular cartilage during periods of rapid growth.
animals, lower binding to plasma proteins, increased vol-
Precise recommendations cannot be made on dosage adjust-
ume of distribution of drugs that are distributed in ex tracel-
ment of drugs for neonates. In The Veterinary Formulary
lular fluid or total body water, increased permeability of the
the dose for young animals, in mg/kg, is the same as that
blood-brain barrier, and slower elimination of many drugs.
given for adults, unless otherwise stated. In general, the
These differences largely account for the clinical observa-
dose frequency should be reduced to allow for the
decreased rate of elimination of the drug. It is clearly
tion that neonates are often more sensitive to the effects of
some drugs. Enhanced effect or toxicity may be seen with a
important to select drugs with a wide therapeutic dose range
rumber of drugs including chloramphenicol, mitrofurantoin,
and therapeutic index whenever possible, given the uncer-
sulphonamides, and tetracyclines. There is generally, how-
tainties over absorption and elimination. It is essential
ever, a reduced risk of immunological hypersensitivity.
whenever possible to weigh the patient.
Some antimicrobial agents that are poorly absorbed after
The oral route is generally preferable to parenteral adminis-
oral administration to adult animals, particularly aminogly-
tration, for convenience and relative safety, but when the
cosides, may attain effective systemic concentrations in
parenteral route is required it may be best to administer the
neonates.
drug by intravenous infusion, which should be given slowly
The gastro-intestinal absorption pattern of drugs in young
to avoid circulatory overload and to ensure complete sys-
ruminants is similar to that in monogastric species, depend-
temic availability of the dose, although difficulties can arise
ing on dietary composition, until the functional rumen has
because of small fragile veins and the difficulty of immobi-
developed. The high incidence of diarrhoea in this period of
lising the patient. Low muscle mass and poor muscle blood
life is a common cause of unpredictable alterations in oral
supply can cause irregular and unpredictable absorption
bioavailability.
from intramuscular admimistration sites. Haematoma for-
There is wide variation among species in the rate of devel-
mation and discomfort are more common than in adult ani-
opment of hepatic microsomal oxidative reactions and glu-
mals. It is wise to avoid topical or aerosol insecticides,
curonide conjugation, which constitute the principal
although fipronil is an exception to this generalisation, and
pathways of metabolism for various lipid-soluble drugs.
to exercise care with topical glucocorticoids, medicated
 Until the pathways are fully developed at between 1 and 8
shampoos, ointments, creams, and occlusive dressings
because of the risk of high drug absorption rates. The intra-
weeks of age, depending on the species, drugs are metabo-
lised at a slower rate. Most other hepatic metabolic path-
peritoneal route has little to recommend it, being hazardous,
ways develop rapidly within the first 1 to 2 weeks after
due to risks of infection and of hyperosmolarity, and giving
birth. For kittens and puppies it is often assumed that the
slow absorption. For particularly small patients insulin
hepatic drug metabolising system is mature by 4 to 6 weeks
syringes are useful for dosing because measurement of vol-
of age. This may,however, be too optimistic,
，because
umes to 0.0lmL is facilitated.
 maturity for some substrates may require 6 months. Slow
Due to the immunodeficient condition of the neonatal ani-
clearance and prolonged half-life of chloramphenicol, sul-
mal combined with the decreased ability to eliminate drugs,
phonamides, tetracyclines, macrolides and lincosamides
antimicrobial drugs that have a bactericidal action and wide
persist beyond 6 weeks of age.
margin of safety should be used in the treatment of systemic
Renal excretion mechanisms are poorly developed in
infections. Such drugs include penicillins (for example
neonates, particularly in puppies, kittens, and piglets.
amoxicillin or ticarcillin combined with clavulanic acid),
calves and foals, glomerular filtration reaches functional
potentiated sulphonami des, and most of the cephalosporins.
maturity 24 to 48 hours after birth, whereas in puppies it
Gut colonisation by micro-organisms is an important pro-
may take 2 weeks. Tubular secretion develops more slowly
cess in the neonate. This is susceptible to disturbance, par-
and at a rate that also varies betweern species.
ticularly by antibiotics. Studies in humans and experimental
Neonates of all species produce acidic urine, which pro-
animals, particularly in respect of colonisation by anaer-
motes tubular reabsorption of lipid-soluble organic acids
obes, show marked inhibition of colonisation following
prolonging the duration of action of these drugs. The
administration of metronidazole, furazolidone, or oral
Prescribing for neonates 125
ampicillin or cloxacillin. Moderate inhibition is produced  any reason, it may be necessary to feed neonates with a
by amoxicillin, tetracycline and chloramphenicol, while  milk substitute. Colostrum replacers should be adminis-
aminoglycosides, trimethoprim, sulphonamides, erythro-  tered within 12 hours of birth. Fresh or frozen colostrum
mycin, and parenteral penicillins are without major effect.from the farm's own herd or flock is superior to commercial
n n  s n g n  s 
colostrum substitutes. Colostrum primarily provides a
resistance to colonisation by pathogens and these include
source of immunoglobulins.
potentiated sulphonamides, polymyxin B and neomycin.
Milk replacers do not contain immunoglobulins but are anl
The extent to which these findings can be extrapolated to
 important source of nutrition when, for example, the dam is
veterinary clinical circumstances is unknown.
unable to feed the offspring due to eclampsia or other
When normal nourishment of offspring is not possible for
causes.
126
Prescribing 
 for geriatric animals
Contributor:
for example loss of condition may be due to overlooked
R J Evans MA, PhD, VetMB, DipEVCPT, MRCVS
parasitism rather than poor feed intake.
With horses, particularly competition animals, as with farm
Advances in nutrition, husbandry, welfare and veterinary
livestock, there is strong pressure to eliminate animals with
practice are leading to increased longevity in animals.
A
compromised performance early in life. This must result in
greater proportion of elderly dogs and cats will be seen by
 marked selection of the animals surviving into old age and
veterinarians, and, as the horse population is anticipated to
thus may account for the lower incidence of problems
continue increasing, more elderly horses are likely to be
encountered than for other species. Nevertheless a signifi-
encountered. Elderly farm animals are least likely to be pre-
-puanoi sie suod snonsunu pue sosioy go uoodod puno
sented but this too is changing with the increasing popular-
off and kept into old age without particular problem. Old
ity of organic and extensive systems and of hobby farming
age can be considered to begin at 15 years, and at 20 years
Or small-hol ding.
of age many horses will be distinctly geriatic, but animals
can survive to twice this. Many owners will be neither
 Organs and body systems coupled with reduced regerierative
working nor breeding from animals over 20 years of age.
capacity and an associated decline in functional reserve
Renal and hepatic dysfunction are rare in old horses and
capacity. This leads to discernible anatomical changes and
when liver disease occurs it is usually characterised by
fibrosis and decreased hepatic mass associated with ragwort
and to respond to and survive stress. The animal can be con-
ingestion or unknown causes, as in younger animals. The
sidered geriatric once these deficiencies come to have a
commonest problems of older horses are pituitary adenoma
detectable impact on the animals lifestyle and/or its veteri -
and the associated endocrine problems, degenerative joint
nary care and maintenance. This reduced response capacity
disease, and dental problems. Joint disease involves a range
may not be apparent until the animal is stressed by disease,
of joints but most commonly the hock and distal limb joints.
kennelling, hospitalisation, anaesthesia, or surgery.
In
The dental problems encountered include overgrowth,
humans, elderly (60 to 75 years) and aged (beyond 75
 spontaneous tooth decay, and infundi bular abscesses. There
years) categories are distinguished but it is currently
is no particular evidence for important pharmacokinetic
impracticable to attempt such discrimination in veterinary
changes in older horses and generally clinicians use the
work. The age at which the changes become clinically sig-
range of drugs and dosage regimens employed in younger
nificant vary with species and, within species, with breed,
horses.
size, indi vidual, and the use to which the animal is put. It is
Prescribing for older dogs and cats requires complex judge-
therefore difficult to generalise but the threshold is in the
ments. Because of the increased prevalenice of many dis-
range 10 to 13 years for cats; 9 to 13 years for small to
eases (see tables below), older animals are more likely to be
medium dogs, 7 to 10 years for most large breeds of dog
affected by several concurrent conditions. The need for
and as early as 6 years for some giant breeds.
Ageing affects all body systems and the consequences are
mals. Conditions needing long-term treatment are also more
wide-ranging. Those most likely to be noticed by the owner
prevalent in older animals. There is thus greater likelihood
of drug interactions and adverse reactions and also contra-
mentation, thinning and loss of pliability of the skin,
indications to treatment. In some cases, there can be consid-
increased sensitivity to cold, obesity, reduced mobility,
erable difficulty in selecting safe and effective treatments,
reduced alertness, cataract development, and loss of fastidi-
particularly when several conditions exist concurrently.
ousness in urination, defecation and grooming. These are
Because of the increased risk of adverse effects and drug
not necessarily of diagnostic significance or amenable to
interactions, it is prudent to minimise drug therapy as far as
treatment.
practicable. It may be necessary to leave conditions
Cattle, sheep and goats can survive, breed and lactate well
untreated if they interfere with the therapy of a more signif-
into their second decade and some individuals have lived
icant disorder, to tolerate adverse effects which may be less
much longer, however by 8 to 10 years of age many will be
acceptable in younger animals, to accept limited therapeutic
requiring special attention in terms of husbandry and possi-
responses, or to elect for euthanasia. Which of these is more
bly veterinary intervention. Degenerative joint disease, foot
appropriate will depend not only upon the clinical circum-
problems and tooth loss all of which may contribute to diffi-
stanice but on the welfare implications for the animal and
culty in feeding are most likely to be encountered. The conl-
the perceptions, philosophy, and financial resources of the
owner. It is important that there is discussion of the availa-
younger animals may lead to the need for separate feeding
ble options. Elderly owners are likely to have older com-
and require the use of compound feeds. It is important in
panion animals, limited financial resources but to be greatly
dealing with these older animals that full clinical investiga-
tion is pursued otherwise false assumptions may be made,
dependent on the companionship afforded by the humar-
Prescribing for geriatric animals  127
animal bond and such circumstances will require particu-
bronchopulmonary infection and the difficulty of attaining
larly delicate consideration.
bacteriological cure, so that longer-term and more aggres-
Factors influencing pharmacokinetics in older animals
sive antimicrobial therapy may be required.
include renal insufficiency, with reduced GFR, leading to
reduced renal clearance; hepatic insufficiency with reduced
 Drugs to be used with caution in aged animals
drug metabolism, conjugation or biliary clearance; reduced
This list is not comprehensive; absence from the table does not
first pass effect; and reduced body water proportion.
imply safety
There is no evidence that age-related changes influence
drug absorption, whether following oral
or parenteral
Acepromazine (may result in prolonged recovery time)
Aminoglycosides
administration. There is reduced plasma-albumin concen-
Antidysrhythmic agents
tration, but the magnitude of the change is small and has not
Barbiturates (and repeat dosing should be avoided)
been shown to have a significant influence on bound to free
Cholinergic agonists and antagonists (may lead to exaggerated
rati o.
cardiac rate changes)
 Reduction in body water proportion can be of greater signif-
Digoxin
icance. For hydrophilic drugs, the volume of distribution is
Ketamine
generally reduced by this, whereas, for lipophilic drugs, the
Tiletamine
distribution volume is increased.
Xylazine
The dose regimen adjustment appropriate for the animal's
Zidovudine
GFR can be estimated using the method outlined in the sec-
tion Prescribing in renal impairment. However this formula
It is those conditions for which long-term or aggressive
is unreliable for animals with muscle wasting and thus for
many older patients. Reduced muscle mass (and thus creati-
 Drugs with a narrow therapeutic index will need careful
mine production) means that plasma-creatinine concentra-
individualisation of dosage regimen, particularly if affected
        
. In
 by one of the pharmacokinetic variables
consequence, 
adjusted dose rates will be overestimated
Common conditions seen in older dogs and cats
when using the formula based on plasma-creatinine concenl-
tration. In such circumstances creatinine clearance is a more
Dogs
Cats
reliable estimate of drug clearance and therefore adjusted
Anaemia
+
+
dose rate.
Cardiovascular disease1
+
+
Even in animals without clinically detectable hepatic dys-
Cataracts
+
function, drug uptake and clearance may be reduced
Cystitis
+
+
 because with ageing, hepatic blood flow decreases and the
Degenerative joint disease1
+
Dental calculus
acti vity of the microsomal oxidative enizymes and of conju-
+
Diabetes mellitus1
+
gating systems declines. There is no clinically applicable
Endocardiosis
method of estimating the degree of impairment of hepatic
+
Endocrine disease
+
drug handling. Empirical reduction in dose rate, coupled
Gingivitis
with close clirical monitoring of therapeutic and adverse
+
+
Hepatic insufficiency2
+
effects in order to titrate the dose, must be employed.
Hepatic lipidosis
+
+
When administering fluid therapy it is important to remem-
Hyperadrenocorticism1
+
ber that reduced renal functional reserve, decreased ability
Hyperthyroidism
+
+
to concentrate urine and less facile cardiovascular compen-
Hypothyroidism1.2
+
satory responses together render the animal less tolerant of
Myocardial insufficiency
+
Mitral insufficiency
 a       
+
Neoplasms1
electrolyte overload. Renal ability to excrete H+ ions is also
+
reduced and influences the clearanice of drugs by ion-trap-
Obesity2
+
+
Oral disease
+
ping.
+
Discomfort associated with oral lesions and greater risk of
Periodontitis
+
+
Prostatic disease1(abscessation,hyper-
associated  with sluggish 
laryngeal
+
aspiration
reflex
trophy)
+
responses may render oral adminstration problematical.
Prostatitis
+
Other miscellaneous effects can be significant. Myelin loss
Renal insufficency2
+
+
results in enhancement of the effect of local anaesthetics.
Tooth decay
+
+
Decreased immunocompetence may lead to greater suscep-
Urinary incontinencet
+
tibility to disease, reduced ability to eliminate infections,
Urinary tract disease
+
+
and require prompt, more aggresive antibiotic therapy pref-
Urolithiasis
+
+
erably with bactericidal agents. Infected teeth may lead to a
1 Conditions likely to require long-term therapy
higher incidence of bacteraemic episodes and bacterial
2 Conditions where dosage regimen individualisation is
seeding to other organs.
Chronic airway disease and
essential
reduced mucociliary clearance increase susceptibility to
128
Treatment of pois
Contributor:
achieved in this way and must be followed by thorough
R J Evans MA, PhD, VetMB, DipEVCPT, MRCVS
rinsing. If the animal has been in contact with strong alkalis,
wash with copious amounts of water, and vinegar or lemon
Poisoned patients commonly present as emergencies, and
 juice. If acids are implicated, wash with water and a weak
often without definitive evidence of poisoning. General
solution of sodium bicarbonate. The owner should be
supportive therapy, essentially as for any other emergency,
advised to be careful of self-exposure to the toxicant and
is outlined in the plan below. Useful specific antidotes are
rare. It is important to collect diagnostic specimens before
 protective clothing, particularly gloves, if necessary.
initiating therapy and to keep detailed contemporary
records in case of possible litigation.
Reduce absorption and enhance elimination
Veterinary Poisons Information Service
 In dogs and cats, ingested materials may be removed by
The Veterinary Poisons Information Service (VPlS) centres in
inducing vomiting or by gastric lavage. Gastric lavage is
London and Leeds offer an infomahion and advice service to
preferred because of the risks and contra-indications of
veterinarians and animal welfare organisations who have regis-
emesis, however cost and practical circumstances often dic-
tered and have paid an annual subscription fee. The registration
tate the use of emetic agents. Vomiting should not be
fee is scaled according to the number of veterinarians in the
induced if the poison has been ingested for more than 2
practice. Subscribers are issued with a membership number that
hours or if the ingesta are thought to contain paraffin, petro-
should be quoted when an enquiry is made.
leum products, or other oily or volatile organic materials
due to the risk of inhalation. The risk of inhalation is also
VPIS (London)
Tetephone: 020 7635 9195
great and vomiting should not be induced if the animal is
Facsimite: 020 7771 5309
unconscious, convulsing, or has a reduced or absent cough
E-mait: vpis @ gstt.sthames.nhs.uk or vpis@ gstt.nhs.uk
reflex. In such cases, endotracheal intubation followed by
gastric lavage is indicated in small animals and, in rumi-
VPIS (Leeds)
nants, rumenotomy may be performed.
Tetephone:0113 245 0530
 Ingesta containing strong acids or alkalis may cause further
Facsimite: 0113 2445849
oesophageal damage if emesis is attempted. Ingested alkalis
E-mait: medicines.inforrmation @leedsth.nhs.uk
can be partly neutralised using lemon juice or vinegar
TOXBASE
diluted 1 volume with 4 volumes of water. Ingested acids
NPIS clinical toxicology data base available at
should not be neutralised with sodium bicarbonate because
www.spib.axl.co.uk
 of gas formation; magnesium hydroxide mixture is pre-
ferred.
Gastric lavage with water, sodium chloride 0.9 % (normal
saline) solution, or a slurry of activated charcoal may be
Remove the animal(s) from the source or
carried out; isotonic saline is the treatment of choice. Some
suspected source of intoxicant
activated charcoal should be left in the stomach after lav-
Any partly eaten food or vomitus should be kept,together
age. Activated charcoal is the residue from destructive dis-
with a sample of the suspected poison and its packaging, for
tillation of vegetable material. Adsorption of intoxicants is
subsequent
t examination, identification, and possible
due to surface binding and activity is therefore greatest with
analysis.
small particle sizes. Saline or laxatives may also aid elimi-
nation of the toxin.
Apomorphine is a useful emetic and if employed with care
Decontaminate the patient
produces self-limiting emesis within a few minutes. It is
Wash any contaminants from the skin, fur, or fleece with
more effective as ar emetic after subcutaneous administra-
running water. It may be necessary to clip the coat to
tion than by other routes; a dose at the lower end of the dos-
remove contamination. Oily materials, paint, or tar should
be gently removed with cloths or paper towels and then the
dose is ineffective repeat administration is unlikely to
animal washed with copious amounts of soapy water. The
induce vomiting and should not be attempted. Apomor-
use of cooking oil or margarine to dilute such materials
phine is not recommended for use in cats.
prior to their removal with liquid detergents or hand
Although not generally recommended, in an emergency
degreasing agents is not now considered good practice
information on emesis may be given to the owner if they are
because of the risk of increasing percutaneous absorption.
In practice, however, decontamination can often only be
soda (sodium carbonate), salt (sodium chloride), or
Treatment of poisoning 129
mustard deposited at the back of the tongue and swallowed
Ensure that the airway is clear
can cause vomiting
In large animal practice, emesis and gastric lavage are not
The airway should be clear of vomitus, tongue, and debris.
used. Laxatives may be used to eliminate toxin from the
Intubate and ventilate if required. Avoid the use of analep-
tics to stimulate respiration
be performed only by rumenotomy. If the ruminal contents
are removed, they should be replaced by suitable fluids and
Regularly monitor and record body functions
roughage, and the bacterial microflora re-established.
Data should include body temperature, respiration, pulse
APOMORPHINE
and peripheral perfusion, hydration, electrolyte balance,
and urine output.
UK
Indications. Induction of emesis
Institute fluid therapy
Contra-indications. General contra-indications to emesis,
see notes above; CNS depression; cats
Fluid therapy should be instituted to correct any detected
Side-effects. Hyperemesis, respiratory depression, seda-
imbalances.
tion
Dose. Dogs: by subcutaneous (preferred) or intramuscular
Correct and maintain body temperature
injection, 100 micrograms/kg
by intravenous injection, 20-40 micrograms/kg
Heat sources or cooling, as appropriate, should be used to
correct and maintain body temperature.
POM APO-go Ampoules (Forurm) UK
Injection, apormorphine 10 mg/mL
Ensure urine output
CHaRCoal, ACtIvaTED
If the animal is oliguric or anuric indicating renal shutdown
UK
administer, by intravenous injection, mannitol (see section
Indications. See notes above
4.2.5) or sodium chloride 0.18% and glucose 4% solution
Dose. Administer as an aqueous slurry of 2 g charcoal in
(see section 16.1.2) with furosemide (see section 4.2.2) to
10 mL water
re-establish renal funiction and induce diuresis.
Horses: 1-3 g/kg
For weak acid intoxicants, excretion may be enhanced by
Ruminants: 2-8 g/kg
alkalinisation of the urine with 7 mL/kg of sodium bicarbo-
 Pigs: 2 g/kg. Administer saline purge 30 minutes after char-
nate 1.26% solution given intravenously every 3 to 4 hours
coal
in rotation with glucose saline solution.
Dogs, cats: 0.5-2.0 g/kg by oesophageal tube following
For weak bases, acidification may be achieved with 7 mL/
 gastric lavage. Administer saline purge 30 minutes after
kg glucose 5% solution, to which has been added 1 g
charcoal
ammonium chloride per 100 mL of glucose 5% solution,
given intravenously every 3 to 4 hours in rotation with glu-
P  Actidose-Aqua Advance (Cambridge) UK
Oral suspension, activated charcoal 50 g/240 mL
cose saline solution. Ammonium chloride may be adminis-
tered by mouth at a dosage of 66 mg/kg 3 times daily for
CSL BCK (Fort Dodge) UK
dogs, and for cats the dosage is 20 mg/kg twice daily.
See section 3.ll for preparation deails
-i un pue paioou s pinoys Hd pue nndno Aeuun
P  Carbomix(Meadow) UK
men adjusted on this basis whenever diuresis with urinary
Oral powder, activated charcoal 25 mg, 50 mg
acidification or alkalinisation is employed to enhance elimi
PH Charcodote (PLIVA) UK
nation of intoxicants.
Oral suspension, activated charcoal 50 g/250 mL
Liqui-Char-Vet (Arnolds) UK
Mixture, activated charcoal USP 50 g/240 rmL
Treat convulsions,
 cardiac dysfunction,
gastro-intestinal
irritation,  and
 pain
Collect samples for diagnosis
appropriately
The samples to be collected may include:
Treatment of convulsions should include diazepam or other
(a) blood for haematological and biochemical examinations
anticonvulsants (see section 6.9.2), administered by intrave-
including fluid and electrolyte balance
nous injection. The dose is dependent on the degree of CNS
(b) vomitus, lavage washings, urine, blood, faeces, plus
depression required and each animal should be treated
other defined samples for particular intoxicants (after
according to response. Acepromazine lowers the seizure
seeking laboratory advice)for possible toxicological
threshold and should not be administered to animals with,
ex amination.
or at risk of, seizures.
130  Guidance on prescribing
Administer antidote
quate air supply. Poisoning in the domestic situation is not
Aenonied ose se ssnoy sid pue Annod pue uouooun
If the intoxicant has been identified and a suitable antidotal
at risk. The gas is intensely toxic and is absorbed by inhala-
treatment is available, this should be given. Other support-
tion. It reacts with the iron atom of haemoglobin to form
ive therapy should be maintained until the toxicant has been
carboxyhaemoglobin which is incapable of oxygen trans-
metabolised or eliminated.
port. The clinical consequences depend upon carbon mon-
oxide concentration. Up to approximately 200 ppm
1S
Keep detailed contemporary records
without discernible clinical effect. Above this level and up
to around 2000 ppm ataxia, muscle weakness, dyspnoea,
This is particularly important where there is the possibility
of litigation. Ideally, all samples for analysis should be
and cardiac dysrhythmias may be noted. Above 2000 ppm
death occurs in 2 to 4 hours or less as the concentration
labelled, dated, and sealed in the presence of a witness. If
rises. Affected animals have cherry red mucous membranes
possible, samples should be divided so that they may be
and blood. Treatment is symptomatic and supportive.
analysed by more than one laboratory.
Affected animals should be removed from the carbon mon-
oxide atmosphere (with due regard for human safety in
doing so) and allowed to breathe fresh air, an oxygen 95%
 Antidotes and other specific therapy
and carbon dioxide 5% gas mixture, or 100% oxygen, pref-
erably humidified.
Antidotes act in a variety of ways. They may antagonise the
toxin, react with it to form less active or inactive com-
Smoke injury is relatively common as a consequence of
plexes, or interfere with the metabolism of the poison. For
fires. The effects are complex. There is direct thermal injury
the purpose of this section intoxicants are considered under
 of upper airways. In addition, chemical and particle injury 
the following classification: household products; medicinal
 of lower airways and lung parenchyma occurs due to low
preparations intended for humans; pesticides and herbi-
 oxygen tension in the fire atmosphere and carbon monoxide
cides; minerals and inorganic substances; miscellaneous
chemicals; food, feed additives, and food toxins; poisonous
signs are progressive. Acute pulmonary insufficiency with
plants; and poisonous animals. The toxicity of veterinary
upper airway obstruction and lower airway oedema occur
drugs is dealt with under the relevant monographs in Chap-
over the first 36 hours. Pulmonary parenchymal oedema
ters 1 to 19.
with alveolar proteinosis may develop over one to three
days and secondary bacterial bronchopneumonia may occur
Household products
up to a week following smoke exposure. Initial clinical
signs include tachypnoea, dyspnoea, marked increase in
Detergents, bteaches, and disinfectants commonly contain
expiratory effort, paroxysmal coughing, nasal discharge,
hypochlorite, phenols, or pine oils and are widely used in
and cyanosis. Auscultation reveals decreased air movemenit,
the home, veterinary practices, and boarding establish-
crackles, and wheezes. Radiology  indicates pulmonary
ments. Dilute bleach is a mild to moderate irri tant but inges-
oedema with diffuse or patchy densities early in the condi-
tion of concentrated solutions causes severe erosion of the
tion, with bronchial interstitial and alveolar patterns devel-
gastro-intestinal mucosa. Surface-active agents such as
oping later. Treatment includes administration of oxygen
detergents and soaps damage membranes and remove
95% and carbon dioxide 5% gas mixture, preferably humid-
mucus thus enhancing damage to mucosal surfaces. Alkalis
ified. Cautious fluid therapy with crystalloids may be
needed initially. Plasma and colloids should not be admins-
severe burns with little or no initial pain so that the injury
tered for at least the first 12 to 24 hours. Bronchodilators
may be overlooked. The marked alkalinity of many dish-
are helpful and aminophylline may be adminstered at a
washer powders, particularly older high bulk products, can
dosage of 4 to 10 mg/kg 3 times daily in dogs and cats. The
result in stomatitis and pharyngitis with oesophageal ulcera-
use of glucocorticoids is controversial but use of short-act-
lemon juice or vinegar is indicated.
pulmonary oedema. Antibacterials should be used only in
Phenois and coal tar products are corrosive, may cause
the face of documented infection and not for prophylaxis.
local coagulative necrosis, and are absorbed from the gas-
Acrolein is an unsaturated aldehyde generated by the
tro-intestinal tract and percutaneously. Hepatic and renal
decomposition of hot fats, notably overheated chip pans. It
damage may result. Ocular exposure may result in severe
is a severe corneal irritant, lachrimatory agent, and causes
corneal damage and perforation. Cats are particularly sus-
dyspnoea. Hepatotoxicity, tonsillar enlargement, airway
ceptible to the hepatic effects of phenols. Pine oil is a gas-
constriction and oedema, epistaxis, pulmonary haemor-
tro-intestinal irritant and is also absorbed causing
CNS
 rhage, and cyanosis can also result. Most cases encountered
depression and pulmonary, hepatic, and renal damage.
inivolve dogs and prolonged exposure can be fatal.
Polytetrafluoroethyfene (PTFE, Teflon) degradation prod-
tion of hydrocarbon fuels and thus by gas heaters and solid
ucts are formed when the material decomposes and vapour-
ises when overheated.The products cause pulmonary
Treatment of poisoning 131
oedema, acute haemorrhagic peritonitis, and cardiac and
thione. Acetylcysteine reduces free NABQI concentrations,
hepatic degeneration. Birds are particularly susceptible and
decreases toxicity, and is the major element of treatment. In
in these species exposure is often fatal.
cats, in addition to acetylcysteine, administration of ascor-
There are no specific antidotes for these household materi-
bic acid (see section 16.6.3) 30 mg/kg every 6 hours for 7
als and supportive and symptomatic treatment should be
treatments by intravenous injection or orally, is also of
givenl.
value in order to reduce methaemoglobin to haemoglobin.
Ferrous sulfate may be toxic when ingested in the form of
Medicinal preparations intended for humans
iron tabtets, iron-supplemented vitamin preparations, Of
moss killer for lawns. Ferrous sulfate (iron) poisoning
P anid GsL medicines for humans that may be sold over the
presents as severe gastro-enteritis and cardiovascular shock
counter, such as paracetamol and the NSAIDs aspirin and
followed by pulmonary oedema and pallor or grey cyanosis.
ibuprofen, are not infrequently administered by pet owners
Haematemesis or black-stained vomitus may be noted and
to dogs and cats.
the faeces may be black and offensive. Acute liver necrosis
Aspirin and other salicylates have a longer half-life in dogs
may also develop, as may anuria or oliguria. After recent
(9 to 13 hours) compared to man (3 to 4 hours) and a mark-
ingestion, gastric lavage is essential. The use of desferriox-
edly longer half-life in cats (22 to 45 hours). In both dogs
amine as a chelating antidote may assist in treatment of
and cats, the half-life is dose dependent such that it is
severe cases.
increased at higher doses. Intoxication may result from a
Ointments containing the vitamin D derivative calcipotriol
single ingestion of an excessive quantity, from over fre-
((H) Dovonex, Leo) are prescribed for the management of
quent administration, or from the repeated administration of
psoriasis in humans. Ingestion of ointment by animals by
small or moderate overdose.
chewing of the tube or licking of the area to which applica-
 Intoxication usually presents as gastro-enteritis, which may
tion has been made can result in toxicity with acute and
be haemorrhagic. Steps should be taken to minimise
severe hypercalcaemia, hypercalciuria, bone resorption,
absorption and enhance elimination. Treatment is sympto-
nephrocalcinosis, and respiratory and cardiovascular dys-
matic: H,-receptor antagonists, such as cimetidine (see
function. Treatment should be as for intoxication with ergo-
section 3.8.2), proton pump inhibitors, such as omepra-
calciferol (see Pesticides and Herbicides below).
zole (see section 3.8.2), or sucralfate (see section 3.8.2)
Direct-acting betaz-adrenoceptor stimulants are used in aer-
may be of value to minimise gastritis and ulceration. Miso-
osol or nebulised form for the symptomatic management of
 prostol (see section 3.8.2), an analogue of prostaglandin E,,
asthma in humans. Cases of toxicosis in dogs have beenl
is cytoprotective to the mucosa and may be used in the
reported following the ingestion or inhalation of orciprena-
treatment of gastritis. Severe intoxication may result in ini-
 line (metaproterenol) or terbutaline when the animal has
tial respiratory alkalosis followed by metabolic acidosis or
 chewed into the owner's inhaler. Animals may present with
by fluctuating acid-base status. The acidosis should be
anxious demeanour, weakness, rapid shallow respiration,
ameliorated by administration of intravenous fluid therapy
cardiac tachydysrhythmia, premature contractions, pulse
and the judicious use of sodium bicarbonate (see section
deficit, and vomiting. Pulse strength may be increased or
16.1.2).
decreased. Fluid therapy and beta-adrenoceptor blocking
Ibuprofen has a narrow margin of safety in dogs and cats
drugs are indicated. Propranolol (100 to 300 micrograms/
such that repeated doses of more than 5 mg/kg daily canl
kg, by slow intravenous injection repeated if necessary
result in intoxication in dogs. Overdose or intoxication
within one hour and after a further 2 to 3 hours) alone, or
gives rise to gastro-intestinal irritation with enteritis, haem-
followed by oral propranolol (0.3 to 1.0 mg/kg 3 times
orrhage and possible perforation, in addition to renal failure
daily) or atenolol (700 micrograms/kg twice daily) for up to
and metabolic acidosis. Treatment for this, and intoxication
fi ve days, are suggested on the basis of reported cases.
with most other NSAIDs, is as for the gastro-intestinal dis-
Palatable laxatives, for example phenotphthatein in a choc-
turbances due to salicylates.
olate basis, are potential sources of poisoning.
Paracetamol (acetaminophen)intoxication is most common
Poisoning with caffeine or ^doping’ may be seen in horses
in cats due to the deficiency of hepatic glucuronidation in
or dogs used in competitions. In dogs, diazepam (see sec-
this species. Also, feline haemoglobin is particularly sus-
tion 6.9.2) is used to control the clinical symptoms of
ceptible to oxidati ve damage. The resulting methaemoglob-
excitement, incoordination, and convulsions.
inaemia is the major clinical sign of paracetamol poisoning
in cats rather than hepatic necrosis as in other species. Para-
ACETYLCYSTEINE
cetamol poisoning occurs in cats at doses greater than 45
UK
mg/kg. Large overdoses (of more than 250 mg/kg) can
Indications. Paracetamol poisoning
cause clinical signs of hepatic failure and nephropathy in
Dose. Dogs, cats: by intravenous injection, 140 mg/kg as
dogs. The reactive metabolite of paracetamol, N-acetyl-p-
 benzoquinoneimine (NABQI) is inactivated by conjugation
soon as possible after ingestion, then 70 mg/kg every 4-6
with glutathione leading to preferential depletion of gluta-
hours 3-7 times
thione. Free NABQI then accumulates leading to damage.
POM ) Parvolex (Celltech) UK
Acetylcysteine is a precursor for replenishment of gluta-
Injection, acetyley steine 200 mg/mL
132 Guidance on prescribing
DESFERRIOXAMINE MESILATE
each dose should be divided between a riumber of injectionl
(Deferoxamine mesilate, Deferoxamine mesylate)
sites. In severe cases, the drug may be given initially by
slow intravenous injection. Menadione is ineffective and
UK
shouid not be used. Treatment should be continued for 7
Indications. Ferrous sulfate (iron) poisoning
Side-effects. Hypotension, when given by rapid intrave-
days in cases of warfarin intoxication. Second generation
coumarins, for example bromadiolone, brodifacoum, and
nous injection
Dose. Dogs, cats : by intramuscular injection, 20 mg/kg
difenacoum, have a very long half-life and treatment for 4
to 8 weeks is required. The one stage prothrombin time
By intravenous infusion, 10-15 mg/kg per hour (max. dose
75 mg/kg over 24 hours)
should be checked 3 to 4 days after the cessation of treat-
ment. In severe cases blood transfusion may be indicated to
POM H) Desferal (Novartis) UK
replenish coagulatior factors immediately because there is a
Injection, powder for reconstitution, desferrioxarmine mesilate 500 rmg
6 to 8 hour delay before the action of phytomenadione is
evident.
Pesticides and Herbicides
Ergocalciferof (vitamin D,) causes hypercalcaemia, hyper-
phosphataemia, and renal failure. To reduce the hypercal-
Pesticides include insecticides, molluscicides, and rodenti-
caemia, saline diuresis and furosemide (see section 4.2.2) at
cides. Many older herbicides and pesticides have now been
a dose+ of 2.5 to 4 mg/kg 3 times daily by mouth may be
withdrawn and more recently introduced products are genl-
employed. A low calcium diet, prednisolone (see section
erallysafer.
7.2.1) at a dose+ of 2 to 4 mg/kg daily by mouth and, if
The organochlorine insecticides, for example lindane and
necessary, treatment of renal failure are indicated. Exposure
dieldrin, have largely been phased out of use. Cases of poi-
to sunlight should be avoided. In severe cases, the use of
soning are, however, still encountered and present with
calcitonin (see section 7.7.1) by subcutaneous or intramus-
CNS stimulation and seizures. Convulsions may be control-
cular injection at a dose of 8 to 18 units/kg daily in divided
led with diazepam or other anticonvulsants (see section
6.9.2).
doses for up to 28 days may help to reduce bone resorption,
although vomiting may be arl unacceptable adverse effect.
The organophosphorus and carbamate insecticides are
Aluminium hydroxide (see section 3.8.1) at a dose of 10 to
inhibitors of cholinesterase and poisoning results in severe
30 mg/kg by mouth 2 to 3 times daily has also been recom-
muscarinic stimulation. Atropine (see section 6.6.1) at a
mended to limit intestinal phosphate absorption.
dose of 25 to 200 micrograms/kg is used to control mus-
Alphachtoralose induces hypothermia, which may be fatal
carinic signs; it is usually recommended that one-quarter to
in small animals including mice, hedgehogs, and birds. Cats
one-half of the dose is administered according to response
are more susceptible to poisoning than dogs. Maintenance
by intravenous injection and the remainder by subcutaneous
of body temperature is essential. Strychnine is used under
injection. Atropine administration should be repeated as
rigorous control for killing moles. Blockade of spinal inhib-
required. Pralidoxime may also be used to reactivate
itory transmission results in rigidity and seizures. There is
sented within 24 hours of exposure.
no antidote; symptoms may be controlled with diazepam or
. It has genierally been
thought that pralidoxime is contra-indicated in poisoning by
other anticonvulsants (see section 6.9.2).
While most herbicides, and particularly those for garden
carbamate anticholinesterases. Recent findings suggest that
use, are of low toxicity, the bipyridylium agents paraquat
and diquat are extremely dangerous by direct exposure,
bamate insecticides but not that due to carbaril.
although they are inactivated on contact with soil. Paraquat
Pyrethrum and pyrethroid insecticide poisonings are fre-
and diquat poisoning is characterised by severe oral and
quently reported in dogs and cats. Hypersali vation is a com-
pharyngeal ulceration, vomiting, diarrhoea, and marked
abdominal pain followed by renal function impairment, pul-
In more severe cases vomiting, diarrhoea, CNS distur-
monary oedema, and progressive pulmonary fibrosis. In
bances including hyperexcitability, tremors, or fascicula-
cases presented within 4 hours of ingestion, fuller's earth
tions are seen. Diazepam may be used to control the CNS
(available from home winemaking shops, pharmaceutical
signis.
suppliers, and pharmacies), bentonite, activated charcoal
Metaldehyde is still widely used as a molluscicide and
(preferred and at a dose of 2 g/kg body-weight), or clay soil
many older preparations were highly palatable to dogs and
(as a last resort) should be administered by stomach tube or
cats. It is also used as a solid fuel in some camping stoves.
orally. Forced diuresis to enhance clearance is also of value
The resulting CNS stimulation, with hyperexcitability or
in the first 12 to 24 hours after ingestion. Administration of
convulsions, should be controlled with diazepam or other
oxygen enhances pulmonary damage and should be
anticonvulsants (see section 6.9.2).
avoided. Massive doses of glucocorticoids and cytotoxics
Many Todenticides contain warfarin or related coumarin
have been employed with inconsistent results.
anticoagulants, sometimes in combination with ergocaicif-
Poisoning with sodium chforate, which is used as weed-
erof. The coumarins inhibit the synthesis of vitamin K
killer, causes conversion of haemoglobin to methaemo-
dependent coagulation factors. Treatment is by administra-
 globin. Methylthioninium chloride (methylene blue) (see
tion of phytomenadione (vitamin K,). In large animals
under Poisonous plants) is administered as the antidote.
Treatment of poisoning 133
PHYTOMENADIONE
hysteria, depression, and blindness. In horses, pharyngeal
(Vitamin K,)
and laryngeal paralysis may be seen. Treatment includes
removing any solid lead from the gastro-intestinal tract
UK
together with the use of chelating agents to enhance urinary
Indications. Warfarin and coumarin poisoning
elimination.
Dose. Horses, ruminants, pigs: by intramuscular injec-
Magnesium sulfate (Epsom salts) (see section 3.6.3) pre-
tion, 0.5-1.0 mg/kg daily in divided doses. For second gen-
cipitates lead in the gastro-intestinal tract as lead sulfate and
has a mild cathartic action hastening elimination. Sodium
with by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection,1 mg/kg
calciumedetate is a veterinary authorised product and is the
daily as a single dose in ruminants
chelating agent of choice. It mobilises lead from bone and
Dogs, cats: by intramuscular injection, 3-5 mg/kg daily in
tissues and enhances removal of lead from the body by
divided doses for 1- 3 days followed by oral administration.
forming a stable, water-soluble lead complex that is readily
In severe cases, initial treatment may be given by slow
excreted by the kidneys. Sodium calciumedetate should not
intravenous injection. For second generation coumarins,
 be administered orally because solubilisation of the lead in
continue treatment after the first week with by mouth, 1 mg/
the gastro-intestinal tract may enhance absorption. Peni-
kg daily in 3 divided doses
cillamine is a chelating agent, which may be used in the
treatment of lead poisoning. It may also be of benefit in
POMH Konakion (Roche) UK
Tablets, s/c, phytomenadione 10 rmg
copper poisoning in dogs. It is administered orally and may
Injection, phytorenadione 2 mg/mL
therefore enhance lead absorption from the gastro-intestinal
Note. Contains polyethoxylated castor oil which has been associated with
tract. It is often poorly tolerated especially at higher doses.
anaphylaxis; should not be diluted therefore not for intravenous infusion
Both sodium calciumedetate and penicillamine may induce
POM  Konakion MM (Roche) UK
renal and gastro-intestinal adverse effects. Succimer is an
Injection, phytormenadione 10 rmg/mL
 alternati ve agent which appears, on limited evidence cur-
 o        o
 rently available from dogs, to offer ad vantages.
infusion in glucose 5%; not for intrarmuscular injection 
It is advisable to measure blood-lead concentration to con-
POM  Konakion MM Paediatric (Roche) UK
firm the diagnosis and blood- and urine-lead concentration
injection, phytormenadione 10 mg/mL
to monitor effectiveness of therapy.
Note. May be adrministered by rmouth, by intravenous injection or intrarmus-
Lead shot in the tissues usually becomes encapsulated in
cular injection
fibrous tissue and has generally been thought to be biologi-
PRALIDOXIME MESILATE
cally inert. Recently, a number of cases of lead poisoning
(Pralidoxime mesylate)
resulting from retained lead shot have been described in
humans. In cases of doubt in animals with retained pellets
UK
and compatible clinical signs, blood-lead concentrations
pue snioydsoydoueaio ui suidone cn jounfpv 'suoneoipul
should be measured.
carbamate (see riotes above) poisoning
Arsenic, cyanide, copper, mercury, and nitrite and nitrate as
Dose. Administer within 24 hours of exposure and repeat
constituent ions of inorganic compounds are contained in
after 12 hours if required
pesticides, plants, and therapeutic preparations.
Horses, ruminants: by sfow intravenous injection, 10-40
 Sodium thiosulfate in conjunction with sodiun nitrite is
mg/kg
given in the treatment of cyanide poisoning. In the body
Dogs: by slow intravenous injection, 20-50 mg/kg
sodium nitrite converts some haemoglobin to methaemo-
Cats: by stow intravenous injection,20 mg/kg
globin. The lethal cyanide ion binds with methaemoglobin
POM  Pralidoxime Mesilate (Non-proprietary) UK
forming cyanmethaemoglobin. This is converted to the
fnjection, pralidoxirme resilate 200 mg/mL
readily eliminated thiocyanate following sodium thiosulfate
Information on availability frorm the Veterinary Poisons Information Service
administration. Sodium thiosulfate is also used in the treat-
ment of poisoning by arsenic and mercury.
Sodium  thiosulfate in  combination  with  ammonium
Minerals and inorganic substances
native treatment is ammonium tetrathiomolybdate 3 to 4
mg/kg given by subcutanous injection and repeated after 2
Lead is still a common intoxicant, especially of calves,
days. Molybdenum (7 mg/kg daily by addition to feed) has
dogs, and birds. Sources include old paint, lead accumula-
 been used to prevent copper poisoning in lambs exposed to
tors (especially car batteries), curtain weights, lead toys,
high copper intake.
golf balls, linoleum, putty and, for water fowl, fishermen's
Penicillamine may be of benefit in copper poisoning in
lead weights. Growing awareness of the risks arising from
dogs.
lead is leading to reduction of its use in such products. Lead
Animals may exhibit signs of molybdenum poisoning when
poisoning is characterised by severe abdominal pain, varia-
grazing on pastures deficient in copper and having high sul-
ble gastro-intestinal motility disturbances, and neurological
fate levels. Copper supplements (see section 16.5.6) are
signs, which may include convulsions, hyperexcitability,
used in the treatment of molybdenosis.
134  Guidance on prescribing
AMMONIUM MOLYBDATE
Dose. Cattle, sheep: by intravenous injection, sodium
nitrite 1% injection, 22 mg/kg, followed by sodium thiosul-
UK
fate 25% injection, 660 mg/kg. Then sodium thiosulfate
Indications. Copper poisoning
Dose. Sheep: by mouth, 100 mg ammonium molybdate
30 g by mouth every hour to prevent further absorption of
with 1 g sodium thiosulfate daily
cyanide
Dogs, cats: by intravenous injection, sodium nitrite 1%
Armrmoniurm rmolybdate is available frorm chemical suppliers
injection, 25 mg/kg, followed by sodium thiosulfate 25%
injection, 1.25 g/kg
PENICILLAMINE
POM H Sodium Nitrite UK
UK
fnjection, sodiurm nitrite 30 mg/mL (3%). To be diluted before use
Indications. Lead and copper poisoning in dogs; cystine
Available by 'Special Order' frorm Martindale
 calculi (see section 9.5); copper hepatotoxicosis (see sec-
tion 3.10)
SODIUMTHIOSULFATE
 Side-effects. Anorexia, vomiting, pyrexia, nephrotic syn-
UK
drome
Indications. Arsenic, mercury, cyanide poisoning (in com-
Warnings. May enhance the absorption of lead from the
bination with sodium mitrite); copper poisoning (in combi-
gastro-intestinal tract
nation with ammonium molybdate)
Dose. Dogs: lead poisoning, by mouth, 110 mg/kg daily in
 Dose. Cyanide poisoning, see under Sodium mitrite. Cop-
 3-4 divided doses for 2 weeks given on an empty stomach.
per poisoning, see under Ammonium molybdate
Antiemetics (see section 3.4.1) administered 30 minutes
Horses, cattle: arsenic poisoning, mercury poisoning, by
before penicillamine may help to reduce vomiting. Lower
intravenous injection, 8-10 g and by mouth, 20-30 g diluted
doses of 33-55 mg/kg daily may be better tolerated and as
in 300 mL water
efficacious. Repeat with either regimen after 1 week if
Sheep, goats: arsenic poisoning, mercury poisoning, by
required
intravenous injection,2.0-2.5g and by mouth,5-7g
Copper poisoning, by mouth, 10- 15 mg/kg twice daily
POM  Sodium Thiosulfate UK
See section 9.5 for preparation details 
Injection, sodiurm thiosulfate 500 mg/mL
Available as a 'Special Order from Martindale
SODIUMCALCIUMEDETATE
Crystalline sodium thiosulfate is available frorn Loveridge and other whole
(Sodium calciumedetate)
salers
UK
SUCCIMER
Indications. Lead poisoning
Warnings. Urine-lead concentrations should be monitored.
UK
Excessive lead mobilisation may enhance intoxication and
Indications. Lead poisoning
result in renal tubular damage
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 10 mg/kg 3 times daily for 10 days
Dose. Horses +: by slow intravenous injection, 100 mg/kg
Preparations of succimer are not generally available. H Chemet (Sanofi
twice daily for 5 days. Repeat after 2-5 days if required
Winthrop, USA) rmay be obtained under a Special Treatrment Authorisatior
Cattle,dogs,cats +: by subcutaneousor stow intravenous
frorm the VMD
injection or infusion, 75 mg/kg daily in 4 divided doses for
2-5 days. Repeat after 2-3 days if required. (Maximum
Miscellaneous chemicals
daily dose for dogs 2 g)
Birds+:by intramuscular or slow intravenous injection,
Ethyfene glycof is used as an antifreeze, industrial solvent,
 35-50 mg/kg 1-3 times daily for 5 days. Repeat after 5 days
and in some photographic solutions. The initial signs of poi-
if required
soning are similar to those produced by ethanol: incoordina-
tion and drunkenness: Ethylene glycol is metabolised by
POM Sodium Caleiumedetate (Strong) (Anirmalcare) UK
alcohol dehydrogenase to oxalate and precipitation of cal-
Injection, sodium calciurmedetate 250 mg/mL, for catfle, dogs. To be diluted
cium oxalate crystals in the kidney produces renal failure
before use
Dilute I mL in 4 rmL glucose 5% or sodiurn chloride 0.9%
and, in the CNS, convulsions. Treatment involves saturating
Withdrawal Periods. Catfe: slaughter dependent on 2 successive blood-lead
the enzyme, alcohol dehydrogenase, with ethanol thus pre-
concentrations below I50 micrograrms/litre. Blood-lead concentration should
venting the formation of oxalate.Ideally alcohol BP 95%
be rmeasured at intervals of at least 7 days cornrmencing after 28 days of clir-
ical recovery. Milk dependent on 2 successive rmilk-lead concentrations
should be used but vodka is a readily available source of
below 20 micrograrms/lire. Other food-producing unimals: produce frorn
ethanol containing approximately 40% by volume. The
treated anirmals should not be used for hurmar corsurn ptior
dose of ethanol 25%, by intravenous injection, is initially 4
mL/kg followed by 2 mL/kg every 4 hours for 4 days.
SODIUM NITRITE
Fomepizole, an inhibitor of alcohol dehydrogenase, has
UK
 also been recommended for use in the dog but cost may pro-
Indications. Cyanide
poisoning (in combination with
hibit routine use. Fluid therapy, and, in cases of acidosis,
sodium thiosulfate)
sodium bicarbonate must be given (see section 16. 1.2).
Treatment of poisoning 135
Turpentine, white spirit, kerosene, and petro! (light-weight
hydrocarbons) and tar and creosote (phenols) usually
 animal remains conscious and aware. Death usually results
present as topical contamination. The toxin should be
from respiratory paralysis. Definitive diagnosis depends on
removed with cloths or paper towels or, for tarry sub-
the demonstration of toxin(s) in the source material, serum,
stances, by clipping. Vegetable oils and hand degreasers are
or both. Although mixed (A, B and E) botulinum antitoxin
is available from hospitals, it is of little use once a signifi-
ingested light-weight hydrocarbons due to the risk of aspi-
cant amount of toxin is bound to receptors. Antitoxin is
ration.
has been used in treatment of botulism in foals and horses at
FOMEPIZOLE
a dose of approximately 1 mL/kg body-weight. Supportive
UK
therapy is given, with intermittent positi ve pressure ventila-
Indications. Ethylene glycol poisoning
tion, if practicable, should respiratory failure supervene.
Dose. Dogs: by intravenous injection, initial dose 20 mg/
Clearance of residual toxin from the gastro-intestinal tract
kg, then 15 mg/kg 12 and 24 hours later, then 5 mg/kg every
by emesis and enema may be of some value. Since the toxin
12 hours until blood-ethylene glycol concentration neglible
is generally preformed, antimicrobial drugs are not indi-
or animal has visibly recovered
cated.
Preparations containing fomepizole are not generally available.  Antizol
(Orphan-Medical, U/SA) rmay be obtained frorn IDIS under a Special Treat-
ment Authorisation frorn the VMD
Poisonous plants
Poisonous plants may be ingested from roadsides, neglected
pastures, dried in hay, or in preserved forage. Plants
Foods, feed additives, and food toxins
infected with fungi such as ergot may also cause poisoning.
Before treatment, potentially poisonous plants should be
Chocolate and cocoa (drinking chocolate) contain theobro-
mine, a methylxanthine, which like caffeine, is not an
identified. Identification systems are available on CD-
unicommon cause of poisoning in dogs. Dark chocolate is
ROM: Daucey E A (ed). Poisonous Plants and Fungi in
Britain and Ireland. London: Nightshade, 2000. This
more dangerous than milk or white chocolate. Doses of
theobromine as low as 115 mg/kg (10 g of cooking choco-
includes information on plants that are toxic in humans and
late/kg body-weight) have been reported to be fatal. Poison-
some of signifance for animals.
Sweet vernal grass Anthoxanthum odoratum contains cou-
ing is characterised by hyperexcitability, tachycardia,
marin, which may cause clinical signs in cattle similar to
dysrhythmias, and, in severe cases, convulsions and death.
The cardiac signs may be controlled with anti-arrhythmic
warfarin poisoning. Phytomenadione (vitamin K,) is given
drugs such as lidocaine (see section 4.4.1.1) or pro-
intramuscularly at a dose of 1 to 3 mg/kg body-weight.
pranolol (see section 4.4. 1.2) and the CNS stimulation with
Cyanogenetic glycosides found in plants such as cherry lau-
rel, bird cherry, linseed, and some grasses and clovers are
diazepam or other anticonvulsants (see section 6.9.2).
Feed additives may be toxic when feedstuffs are incorrectly
toxic and may affect cattle and sheep. Treatment includes
sodium nitrite injection followed by sodium thiosulfate
compounded or when cross contamination occurs,
for
injection.
example, copper supplements for pig foods contaminate
The nitrite and nitrate content of various plants such as
sheep rations. Copper poisoning in sheep is treated with
ammonium molybdate and sodium sulfate.
grasses, kale, rape, turnips and swedes is influenced by cli-
Aflatoxins are fungal toxins. The source is contaminated
mate and use of nitrogenous fertilisers. Poisoning results in
conversion of haemoglobin to methaemoglobin within the
seeds and nuts such as mouldy peanuts. Aflatoxins are
hepatotoxic causing marked bile duct hyperplasia and
body and also vasodilation with consequent hypotension.
Oxygen delivery is compromised resulting in tissue anoxia
hepatic fibrosis and cirrhosis.
Botulism is the clinical manifestation of poisoning by pre-
with dyspnoea; muddy brown cyanosis and weakness are
formed meurotoxins of the obligate anaerobic spore-forming
prominent
clinical signs.  Methylthioninium  chloride
bacterium Clostridium botulinum.Several neurotoxins are
(methylene blue) is used as arl antidote because it coniverts
 snd a suens u pe six cn umou
methaemoglobin to haemoglobin. A wide range of dosages
spectra of toxins. Toxin production is also influenced by
has been suggested (for ruminants 1 mg/kg up to 20 mg/kg).
substrate type and availability. Disease may result from the
Methylthioninium chloride in excess may itself cause
methaemoglobinaemia and caution is advised.
ingestion of feedstuffs, carrion, garbage, soil, or mud con-
 Beet tops should be wilted before feeding to stock and intro-
taining the toxins. All species are susceptible but dogs are
commonly affected, as are water birds in hot dry summers.
duced into the diet slowly because these and other plants
such as Oxalis species may be toxic due to their oxalate
Botulinum toxins block acetylcholine release from motor
content. Rhubarb leaves commonly cause oxalate poisoning
nerve terminals resulting in flaccid paralysis which is sym-
metrical and commonly sufficiently severe that the animal
in goats kept in gardens. Clinical signs are those of
becomesquadriplegic.(
Gastro-intestinal
disturbanice,
136
6Guidance on prescribing
nous injection of calcium borogluconate (see section
hyperglycaemia, and marked liver damage resulting in jaun-
16.5.1).
dice and photosensitisation due to ingestion of Anacystis
Bracken and Equisetum species contain thiaminases, which
cyanea (Microcystis aeruginosa) is probably most common.
may cause thiamine deficiency. Thiamine (see section
Death may occur within hours in the worst affected cases.
16.6.2) at a dose of 0.25 to 1.25 mg/kg twice daily for up to
There is no speci fic treatment.
7 days by intramuscular or slow intravenous injection is
Plants of the genus Senecio, notably various ragworts, con-
used for the treatment of thiaminase poisoning in horses and
tain pyrrolizidine alkaloids. They cause poisoning as a
pigs. In cattle, bracken poisoning is unrelated to thiaminase
result of ingestion directly from pasture or by contamina-
and causes aplastic anaemia with thrombocytopenia and
tion in hay, silage, or other preserved forage. Ragwort poi-
bladder neoplasia.
soning occurs in horses and cattle. The alkaloids may
Oak and acorn poisoning due to the leaves and fruit of trees
induce acute or, more commonly, chronic liver disease with
of the genus Quercus may affect ruminants, horses, and pigs
consequent hepatic function impairment. Jaundice, photo-
and is relatively common. Toxicity results from high con-
 centrations of tannins in the plant and is manifested as gas-
is no specific treatment and euthanasia is normally indi-
tro-enteritis, which is often haemorrhagic, and hepatic and
cated once clinical signs are apparent although there have
renal damage with consequent jaundice and haematuria.
beern reports of full recovery of mild cases in horses.
The mortality rate is very high and there is no specific treat-
A variety of species and hybrids of daffodil and narcissus
ment. If ingestion is known to have occurred, oral adminis-
(Narcissus spp.) occur in the UK as nati ve plants as natural-
tration of calcium hydroxide may have a protective effect.
ised introductions or are grown as ornamental plants. A
mixture of alkaloids is present throughout the plants but in
pidata contain a highly poisonous taxine alkaloid. The main
highest conicentration in the bulbs. Calcium oxalate crystals
action is on the heart and toxicity is generally characterised
are also present and may act as mechanical irritants. The
alkaloids are emetic, purgative and irritant, thus inducing a
is most commonly seen in cattle, sheep, and horses. There is
 marked gastro-eniteritis. Dogs are most commonly affected
no specific antidote and the extreme rapidity of effect ger-
 and ingestion of as little as 15 g of bulbs can be fatal. In
 n  ne   d 
addition to the gastro-enteritis, severe cases may develop
hyperglycaemia, ataxia, cardiovascular collapse and or
value.
coma. Rehydration and symptomatic treatment are indi-
Laburnum Laburnu anagyroides is the most toxic tree in
cated.
Britain after the yew. All parts of the plant are poisonous,
containing the alkaloid cytisine, but the fallen seeds and
Aescufus hippocastanum the familiar white-flowered horse
chestnut is a common introduced tree now with many natu-
seed pods represent a particular hazard. Cases of poisoning
are severe but infrequent; they have been recorded in cattle,
ralised specimens. A pink-flowered hybrid (Aescufus
horses, pigs, and dogs. Vomiting, excitement, incoordina-
carnea) is also grown in the UK but is not naturalised. A
tion, and convulsions progress to coma, asphyxia, and
number of glycosides, alkaloids and saponins are present in
death. There is no specific therapy but control of convul-
Aescufus spp. The hydroxycoumarin saponin glycoside aes-
sions and general supportive therapy are indicated.
culin is probably the most significant toxic principle.
Although the bark reputedly has a high aesculin content and
The abuse of cannabis (Indian hemp, hashish, marijuana,
Cannabis sativa) by humans means that opportunities for
young leaves and flowers are the most toxic parts of the
intoxication of animals arise with considerable frequency.
tree, poisoning is commonly due to the ingestion of the
The main pharmacologically active and toxic compound is
seeds ('conkers'). Poisoning is reported for a variety of spe-
tetrahydrocannabinol. The dried plant is of low toxicity and
cies including horses, cattle, pigs, and dogs. The clinical
 even after ingestion of large amounts the prognosis is good
signs include gastro-enteritis and abdominal discomfort,
 depression, incoordination with muscle tremor and weak-
with fatalities being rare. The intoxication presents as inco-
ordination, depression and stupor, slow strong pulse, and
ness or paralysis. There is no specific treatment. Decontam-
reduced respiratory rate. Sometimes there are intervening
 inati ve and supportive measures should be instituted.
periods of wakefulness and hyperaesthesia and occasionally
 Many garden and house plants are poisonous and represent
collapse supervenes. Clinical signs seen in animals are not 
a potential hazard to dogs, cats, and other domestic pets.
necessarily similar to the effects observed in humans. Sup-
Dieffenbachia spp. (dumbcane), Philodendron spp. (for
portive therapy is indicated but recovery is usually sponta-
example sweetheart vine), and Monstera spp. (Swiss cheese
neous after a few hours and uneventful. There is no specific
plant) contain numerous fine oxalate crystals and, when
treatment. Diazepam may be useful to control marked
ingested, these penetrate the gastro-intestinal mucosa caus-
hyper aesthesia or agitatiorl.
ing marked stomatitis, pharyngitis, oesophagitis, and intes-
 In periods of intense algal bloom, ingestion of water con-
tinal irritation. Euphorbia spp. (spurges, ornamental garden
taining high densities of blue-green algae Cyanophyceae
and house plants, for example poinsettia) contain chemical
may result in poisoning. A number of syndromes are seen
 irritants and may cause blistering of the mouth, severe vom-
depending on the algal species involved. A severe syn-
iting, diarrhoea, anorexia, and depression. Supportive care
drome
characterised
by
hypotension,
tachycardia,
is indicated
Treatment of poisoning 137
METHYLTHIONINIUM CHLORIDE
(Methylene blue)
antivenom relative to body-weight is required. A dose of
10 mL of antivenom may be required for the treatment of a
UK
Indications. Nitrite and mitrate poisoning; sodium chlorate
10 mL may be adminmistered after 2 hours, if there is no sig-
poisoning
nificant improvement after the first dose. Glucocorticoids,
Dose. Administer according to the patients response, by
 antihistamines, and antibacterials may be of some benefit.
sfow intravenous injection. Treatment may be repeated after
Localised swelling occurs after bee, hornet, or wasp stings.
4 to 6 hours if required
Cattle: initially 1-2 mg/kg, may be given up to 10- 15 mg/
Insect stings around the larynx may cause respiratory dis-
tress. Glucocorticoids (see section 7.2.1) and antihista-
kg
mines (see section 5.2.1) are used as systemic therapy.
 Sheep: initially 1-2 mg/kg, may be given up to 20 mg/kg
Dogs, cats: 5-10 mg/kg
         
sodium bicarbonate for bee stings may be applied to the
POM  Methylthioninium chloride UK
affected area. In case of anaphylactic shock, adrenaline and
Injection,methylthioninium chloride 10 mg/mL
antihistamines should be administered.
Available as a 'Special Order' from Martindale
The common toad Bufo vuigaris secretes veniom from
glands within the skin. Dogs and cats may be poisoned
Poisonous animals
S s     ,  m
The only venomous snake indigenous to the UK is the com-
symptoms of profuse salivation. Usually flushing the mouth
mon adder Vipera berus. Dogs are the main species affected
and are usually bitten on the head or meck. @ European
lowed by unrestricted access to water. Sometimes cornieal
irritation is present and liberal irrigation of the eye with
viper venom antiserum (available from Farillon) is the
water is indicated.
antidote. The small size of dogs and cats means that the
venom load per unit body weight is high. This has two con-
139
1
Drugs used in the treatment of
BACTERIAL, FUNGAL, VIRAL, and PROTOZOAL
INFECTIONS
Contributors:
concentrations attained in body tissues. In this chapter, a
S Dawson BVMS, PhD, MRCVS
micro-organism will be deemed “sensitive' to a drug if,
Professor J Elliott MA, VetMB, PhD, CertSAC, DipECVPT, MRCVS
following administration according to the recommended
Professor M A Taylor BVMS, PhD, CBiol, MIBiol, MRCVS
dosage regimen, tissue concentrations are likely to be in
1.1
Antibacterial drugs
excess of the MIC for that micro-organism for a major part
1.2
Antifungal drugs
of the time between doses. The spectrum of activity for
1.3
Antiviral drugs
antimicrobial drugs is given in Table 1.1. Having narrowed
1.4
Antiprotozoal drugs
the list of possible drugs to those likely to be active against
the micro-organism or micro-organisms concerned, the
final choice is based on the following criteria.
1.1 Antibacterial drugs
Species, breed, and age differences affect an animal's
ability to eliminate antibacterial drugs; the following of
1.1.1
Beta-lactam antibacterials
which are examples. Cats are less able than other species to
1.1.2
Tetracyclines
metabolise chloramphenicol, which may accumulate fol-
1.1.3
Aminoglycosides
lowing prolonged administration in this species. The young
1.1.4
Macrolides and lincosamides
of all species are similarly deficient in their ability to
1.1.5
Chloramphenicols
metabolise drugs. Antibacterial action can disrupt bacterial
1.1.6
Sulphonamides and potentiated
fermentation and therefore animals with a functional rumen
sulphonamides
should not be given broad-spectrum antibacterials by
1.1.7
 Nitrofurans
mouth. Many antibacterials and particularly tetracyclines
1.1.8
 Nitroimidazoles
by any route may be associated with a fatal enterocolitis in
1.1.9 Quinolones
horses subjected to stress. Penicillins, macrolides, and
1.1.10 Pleuromutilins
lincosamides should not be administered to gerbils, guinea
1.1.11 Other antibacterial drugs
pigs, hamsters, or rabbits in which they are likely to cause a
1.1.12 Compound antibacterial preparations
fatal enterotoxaemia. Further species-specific information
is given in the sections under General guidance on
Selection of a suitable drug
prescribing.
Bacterial sensitivity. Antibacterial drugs are often used
Predisposition to toxicity. Certain conditions may exacer-
bate the toxicity of antibacterial drugs; the following ate
unnecessarily and sometimes (as in uncomplicated diar-
rhoea) when they are clearly contra-indicated. However,
examples. Renal disease may predispose animals, espe-
when antibacterial therapy is essential, there is a rational
cially cats, to the toxic effects of aminoglycosides because
basis for deciding which antibacterial drug to use in a spe-
they are eliminated solely by renal excretion and so will
cific case. For time-dependent bactericidal drugs and
accumulate in renal failure. Tetracyclines are contra-
bacteriostatic drugs, the aim of therapy is to maintain an
A m d ei ui snb pee sog ui p
effective concentration of the drug at the site of infection to
may cause enamel defects and discoloration inthe
ensure eradication of the causal organisms. An effective
 offsprings' milk teeth. In growing dogs and cats, fluoro-
concentration is defined as that sufficiently ini excess of the
quinolones may cause an arthropathy.
minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of the drug to be
Site of infection. Special considerations apply to the treat-
effective for sufficient time to inactivate the causal micro-
ment of infections at particular sites. For example, antibac-
organisms. Effective therapy is thus dependent on the sus-
terials such as chloramphenicol and the macrolides are
ceptibility of the micro-organisms to the drug and the phar-
extensively metabolised and so are not used to treat urinary-
macokinetics which determine its ability to attain and
tract infections. For these infections, drugs that are excreted
maintain effecti ve concentrations at the infection site.
unchanged in the urine are preferred. In addition, in the
Except in the rare cases where sensitivity data are available,
assessment of the potential sensitivity of the
emicro-
choose a drug with actions that are favoured by the prevail-
organisms concerned depends firstly upon accurate clinical
ing urinary
pH to maximise efficacy. In particular,
diagnosis and secondly upon the knowledge that these are
aminoglycosides are much more active in alkaline urine.
the micro-organisms likely to be implicated and of their
Some body compartments, notably the brain and the inter-
susceptibility to antibacterial drugs. Fortunately, detailed
knowledge of MIC values is not required because microbial
drugs that are able to cross intact cell membranes. Permea
sensitivity to a drug can be expressed in terms of the
bility is increased by inflammation. Although chloramphen-
140 Bacterial, fungal, viral, and protozoal infections
icol and sulphonamides normally enter the brain, ampicillin
apply in all instances. For example, acute cystitis in the
and doxycycline do so only in the presence of inflamma-
 bitch often responds very quickly to antibacterial drugs (24
tion. Similarly, milk is separated from the general circula-
to 48 hours) but if treatment is not continued for 7 to 10
tion by an intact membrane through which only the non-
days, relapses may well occur. This more extended period
ionised lipophilic form of a drug may pass. When the non-
 of treatment allows the important mucosal defence mecha-
ionised form of a basic drug such as a macrolide enters the
nisms within the bladder to heal fully and therefore be
relatively acidic milk it dissociates and so becomes trapped
effective in preventing re-infection when the treatment
resulting in high concentrations in milk - the so called ^iori-
stops. Clinical experience has shown that some chronic
trap'. Conversely, acidic drugs such as benzy lpenicillin are
infections may require more prolonged duration of therapy
largely excluded from the healthy udder. Both factors cease
(for example, deep pyodermas, chronic prostatitis and
osteomyelitis in dogs). Empirically, therapy for 4 to 6
penetrate the acutely inflamed mammary gland to the same
weeks may be required in these cases.
extent as any other inflamed tissue. The physicochemical
 The route of administration depends upon the severity of
 properties of antimicrobial drugs are gi ven in Table 1.2.
 the disease and ease of administration. In the treatment of
Mode of antibacterial action. As noted in the sections
 severe infections it is advantageous to give the initial dose
dealing with individual groups of drugs, some are bacteri-
 by the intravenous route in appropriate cases. In companion
cidal, that is they are able to kill bacteria, whereas others are
bacteriostatic, only inhibiting multiplication and hence rely-
more painful intramuscular route. In order to attain effective
ing upon host defences to clear the infection. Although the
concentrations in the cerebrospinal fluid, an initial intrathe-
advantages of bactericidal drugs have probably beenl exag-
cal injection may be administered. However, penicillins
gerated in the past, there are certain situations in which their
should not be administered by the intrathecal route
use is essential. These include the treatment of endocarditis,
because seizures may result.
-mu ue sunooo uoisssiddnsonuul jo soseo ui pue
Although oral medication given with food is often conven-
rally or due to administration of corticosteroids.
ient, it may considerably reduce the amount of drug
Antibacterial policy. It is essential that antibacterials are
absorbed. For example, ampicillin (unlike amoxicillin) is
given according to a predetermined policy in order that effi-
poorly absorbed in dogs if administered following a meal.
cacy may be monitored. Changes in resistance patterns in a
Milk, iron salts, and antacids all interfere with the absorp-
particular area should be noted and therapy
altered
tion of tetracyclines from the gastro-intestinal tract. How-
accordingly.
ever, in some cases, for example ketoconazole,
administration with food will reduce side-effects such as
Beforecommencingtherapy
nausea. In other cases, giving the drug with food is impor-
The dose of arl antibacterial drug expressed as weight of
tant to aid in its absorption, for example griseofulvin is
drug per kg body-weight will vary with a number of factors
highly lipid soluble and requires biliary secretion to allow
optimal absorption from the gastro-intesti nal tract.
including intercurrent disease, severity of the infection, and
size of the animal. In serious infections high doses are
administered more frequently. Depot preparations are long-
1.1.1 Beta-lactam antibacterials
acting but attain relatively low plasma-drug concentrations;
1.1.1.1 Narrow-spectrum penicillins
they are not suitable for the treatment of severe acute infec-
1.1.1.2 Beta-lactamase resistant penicillins
tions. In general, the larger the animal the smaller the dos-
1.1.1.3 Broad-spectrum penicillins
age per unit body-weight.
1.1.1.4 Antipseudomonal penicillins
The dosing regimen used should also reflect the mode of
1.1.1.5 Cephalosporins
action of the antibacterial drug. For bactericidal drugs, such
as beta-lactams, which operate time-dependent killing
This group comprises the pemicillins and the cephalo-
mechanisms, and bacteriostatic drugs, it is important to
 sporins. They are bactericidal by interfering with cell wall
maintain tissue concentration of the drug above the MIC for
synthesis. Beta-lactam antibacterials are not metabolised in
as long as possible during the inter-dosing interval. For bac-
the body, but are rapidly excreted unchanged in the urine.
tericidal drugs, such as aminoglycosides and fluoroquino-
lones, which operate concentration-dependent 
tkilling
Relatively insoluble depot preparations are often used to
prolong action, albeit at the expense of concentrations
mechanisms, the most successful dosing regimen is one
achieved in body fluids. An initial high concentration of
which produces a peak tissue concentration of the drug
drug in body fluids combined with prolonged activity may
which greatly exceeds the MIC value for the bacterium and
be achieved by simultaneous administration of a soluble
the time the concentration of the drug is above the MIC is
and a less soluble penicillin salt.
much less significant.
The duration of therapy depends upon the nature of the
infection and the response to treatment. In general, therapy
1.1.1.1 Narrow-spectrum penicillins
should continue for 2 to 3 days beyond the clinical cure for
Benzylpenicillin, also known as penicillin G, was the first
acute infections and for 1 to 2 weeks beyond the clinical
of the penicillins, and remains an important and useful anti-
cure for chronic infections. However, this guidanice does not
bacterial. It is particularly active against Gram-positive bac-
1.1 Antibacterial drugs 141
Table 1.1 Summary of spectrum of activity for antimicrobial drugs1
Bacteria
Antimicrobials
Additional information
Narrow spectrum antimicrobials for aerobes and facultative anaerobes
Mainly Gram-positive
Jincosamides
also very active against many obligate
anaerobes
glycopeptides:vancomycin
Gram-positive and fastidious
benzy lpenicillin,
poor activity against beta-lactamase producing
Gram-negative organisms
phenoxymethylpenicillin
Staphylococcus
(for example Haemophitus)
clox acillin, fluclox acillin
active against beta-lactamase producing
Staphytococcus
macrolides
also active against Chtamydophita and
mycoplasmas
rifampicin
also active against pox viruses, Chtamydophila,
some protozoa and fungi (but antiviral and anti-
fungal activity not used clinically)
Mainly Grarm-negative
aminoglycosides: neomycin,
neomycin is acthive against Pseudomonas
streptomycin
aeruginosa, aminoglycosides should usually be
reserved for treatment of infections caused by
particularly resistant Gram-negative organisms
nalidixic acid
polyrmi xins
active against Pseudomonas aeruginosa; should
usually be reserved for treatment of infections
caused by particularly resistant Gram-negative
organismis
Broad spectrum antimicrobials for aerobes and facultative anaerobes
Many Gram-positi ve and
aminoglycosides: armikacin,
sometimes active against Pseudomonas
Gram-negative bacteria
gentamicin, tobramycin
aeruginosa, shouldusually bereserved for
treatment of infections caused by particularly
resistant Gram-negative organismis
aminopenicillins
poor activity against beta-lactamase producing
Staphytococcus
carboxypenicillins: icarcillin
active against Pseudomonas aeruginosa;should
usuallybereserved for treatment ofinfections
caused by particularly resistant Gram-negati ve
organismis
cephalosporins
third generation cephalosporins active against
Pseudomonas aeruginosa; should usually be
reserved for treatment of infections caused by
particularly resistant Gram-negative organisms
baquiloprin, trimethoprim,
ormetoprim
142 Bacterial, fungal, viral, and protozoal infections
Table 1.1 Summary of spectrum of activity for antimicrobial drugs' (continued)
Bacteria
Antimicrobials
Additional information
Broad spectrum antimicrobials for aerobes and facultative anaerobes
Many Grarm-positive and
chloramphenicol
also active against rickettsiae and
Gram-negative bacteria,also
Chlamydophita
some protozoa,rickettsiae,Chtamydophita
fuoroquinolones
also active against rickettsiae
nitrofurans
also active against protozoa
sulphon amides
also active against protozoa and Chlamydophita
tetracyclines
also active against protozoa, rickettsiae, and
Chlamydophita
Antimicrobialsforspecial organisms
Obligate anaerobic bacteria
cephalosporins
Bacteroides fragilis is resistant to all
cephalosporins except cefox itin
clindamycin, chloramphenicol,
nitroimidazoles
penicillins
Bacteroides fragiis is resistant to all penicillins
except piperacillin
Mycobacteria
rifampicin, streptomycin,
azithromycin, clarithromycin,
fluroquinolones
Mycoplasma
fluroquinolones
active against Pseudomonas aeruginosa, should
usually be reserved for tre atment of infections
caused by paricularly resistant Gram-negative
organisms
lincosarmides, macrolides,
nitrofurans, tetracyclines
1 The information given is for guidance.Antirmicrobial sensitivity teshing will be necessary in the clinical situation, particularly for
unpredictable and change due to plasmid-mediated resistance
1.1 Antibacterial drugs  143
Table 1.2 Physicochemical properties of antimicrobial drugs and effect on tissue distribution
Polar (hydrophilic) drugs of low lipophilicity
These drugs do not readily penetrate 'natural body barriers' so that effective concentrations in CsF, milk, and other transcel-
lular fluids will not always be achieved. Adequate concentrations may be achieved in joints, and pleural and peritoneal fluids
Acids
Bases
Beta-lactams
Polymixins: polymixin B, colistin
Penicillins: aminopenicillins,
Aminogl ycosides: amikacin,
carbenici llin,
dihydrostreptomycin, gentamicin,
isoxazolypenicillins(continued),
neomycin, streptomycin, tobramycin
benzylpenicllin,
phenoxymethylpenicllin, piperacillin,
ticarcillin
Cephalosporins (all)
Spectinomycin
Beta-lactamase inhibitors: clavulanate
Drugs of moderate to high lipophilicity
Weak acids
Weakbases
Amphoteric substances
Sulphonami des: sulfadiazine,
Diaminopyrimidines: baquiloprim,
Tetracyclines: chlortetracycline,
sulfadimethoxine, sulfadoxine,
ormetoprim, trimethoprim
oxytetracycline, tetracycline
sulfafurazole, sulfamethazine,
sulfamethox azole, sulfathiazole
Lincosamides: clindamycin, lincomycin,
pirlimycin
Macrolides: azithromycin,
clarithromycin, erythromycin,
spiramycin, tilmicosin, tylosin
Highly lipophilic molecules with low ionisation
secretions. All these drugs penetrate into intrace llular fluids. All these drugs, except tetracyclines and rifampicin, penetrate
into CSF.
Fluroquinolones: danofloxacin, diflox acin, enroflox acin, ibafloxacin, orbifloxacin, marbofloxacin, saraflox acin
Tetracyclines (lipophilic): dox ycycline, minocycline
 Other antimicrobials: chloramphenicol, florfenicol, metronidazole, rifampicin, thiamphenicol
(continued) cloxacillin, flucloxacillin, and oxacillin are highly plasma protein bound (> 95%) in dogs
144 Bacterial, fungal, viral, and protozoal infections
teria. Sensitive micro-organisms include Gram-positive
POM Crystapen 5 Mega for Injection (Veterinary) (Schering-Plough) UK
aerobes such as Staphyfococcus aureus, streptococci, most
Injection, powder for reconstinution, benzylpenicillin (as sodiurm salt) 3 g, for
Actinomyces spp., Erysipelothrix, and Bacillus spp. Most
horses
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurman cor -
anaerobic bacteria including Clostridium and some Bacter-
surm ption
oides spp. (not B. fragilis) are also sensiti ve. Benzylpenicil-
lin has activity against the more fastidious Gram-negative
PHENOXYMETHYLPENICILLIN
aerobes such as Haemophifus, Pasteurella, Leptospira, and
(Penicillin V)
 by the beta-lactamase enzymes produced by staphylococci
UK
and Bacteroides spp. A high proportion of strains of these
Indications.Penicillin-sensitive infections,
micro-organisms are now resistant to benzylpenicillin.
Contra-indications. Penicillin or cephalosporin hypersen-
Other organisms mentioned retain their sensitivity to ben-
sitivity; should not be administered to gerbils, guinea pigs,
hamsters, rabbi ts, horses
lactamase.
Side-effects.Allergic reactions; diarrhoea
Benzylpenicillin is inactivated by gastric acid and so is not
Warnings. Safety in pregnant pigs has not been estab-
 lished. Penicillins and cephalosporins may cause hypersen-
administered by mouth. It is available as a range of salts
that differ in their solubility and hence their duration of
   ) 
action. The sodium salt is very soluble and rapidly absorbed
inigestion, or skin contact; operators should wear suitable
following injection, but gives effective concentrations for
 protective clothing; operators with known hypersensitivity
no more than 4 hours, unless the organisms involved are
should not handle these drugs; clinical signs of allergic
highly sensitive.
reaction in operators include skin rash, swelling of the face,
 Procaine benzylpenicillin is slightly soluble. Following
lips, or eyes, or difficulty breathing; operators should seek
parenteral administration, it forms a ^depot’ which slowly
medical advice
releases free benzylpenicillin into the circulation, maintain-
Dose. Pigs: by addition to feed, 200 g/tonine feed
ing effective concentrations against the more susceptible
Dogs, cats: by mouth, 10 mg/kg 3 times daily
micro-organisms for up to 24 hours. It is thought that the
POMH Phenoxymethylpenicillin (Non-proprietary) UK
Tablets, phenoxyrmethylpenicillin (as potassiurn salt) 250 mg
rise to a febrile reaction and abortions in sows infected with
Oral solution, powder for reconstinution, phenoxy methylpenicillin (as potas-
Erysipelothrix. Benzathine benzylpenicillin, an almost
siurm salt) 25 rmng/mL, 50 mg/mL
insoluble ester, is no longer authorised for use in food-pro-
ducing animals within the EU because products containing
MFS Poteneil (Novartis) U/K
Oral powder, for addition to feed, phenoxymethylpenicillin potassiurm 100 g/
it showed prolonged persistence of injection site resi dues.
kg,for pigs
Phenoxymethylpenicillin, or penicillin V, has a similar 
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter I day
antibacterial spectrum to benizylpenicillin but is less active.
PROCAINE BENZYLPENICILLIN
It is gastric acid-stable and thus suitable for oral administra-
tion (not to horses). It should not be used for severe infec-
(Procaine penicillin)
concentrations are variable.
UK
Indications.Penicillin-sensitive infectionis
Contra-indications. Penicillin or cephalosporin hypersenl-
sitivity; should not be administered to gerbils, guinea pigs,
BENZYLPENICILLIN
hamsters, rabbits, horses
(Penicillin G, Penethamate hydriodide)
Side-effects. Allergic reactions; diarrhoea
Warnings. Penicillins  and  cephalosporins 
may
cause
UK
hypersensitivity (allergy) following self-injection, inhala-
Indications.Penicillin-sensitive infections
tion, ingestion, or skin contact. Operators with known
Contra-indications. Penicillin or cephalosporin hypersen-
hypersensitivity should not handle these drugs. Clinical
sitivity; should not be administered to gerbils, guinea pigs,
signs of allergic reaction in operators include skin rash,
hamsters, rabbits
swelling of the face, lips, or eyes, or difficulty breathing.
Side-effects. Allergic reactions; diarrhoea
Operators should seek medical advice
Warnings. Penicillins and cephalosporins may
cause
Dose. Dosages vary, for guidanice.
hypersensitivity (allergy) following self-injection, inhala-
Horses: by intramuscular injection, 10 mg/kg once daily
tion, ingestion, or skin contact. Operators with known
Cattle: by intramuscutar injection, 10 mg/kg once daily
hypersensitivity should not handle these drugs. Clinical
cattle,non lactating:by depot subcutaneous or intramuscu
signs of allergic reaction in operators include skin rash,
lar injection, 20 mg/kg. Repeat after 3 days if required
swelling of the face, lips, or eyes, or difficulty breathing.
cattle,lactating:by depot intramuscular injection,20 mg/
Operators should seek medical advice
kg. Repeat after 3 days if required
Dose. Horses: by intravenous injection, 10 mg/kg twice
Sheep: by intramuscular injection, 10 mg/kg once daily
daily for 1 day
Pigs: by intramuscular injection, 10 mg/kg once daily
1.1.1 Beta-lactam antibacterials
145
by depot intramuscular injection, 20 mg/kg.Repeat after 3
1.1.1.2 Beta-lactamase resistant penicillins
days if required
Isoxazolylpenicillins have the antibacterial spectrum of
Dogs, cats: by subcutaneous injection, 30 mg/kg once daily
 benzylpenicillin but they are stable in the presence of sta-
phylococcal beta-lactamases; in addition, they block the
POM Depocillin (Intervet) U/K
Injection, procaine benzylpenicillin 300 mg/m, for horses, cate, sheep,
activity of these enzymes. They are effective in infections
pigs, dogs, cafs
caused by penicillin-resistant staphylococci, the sole indica-
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in hores intended for hurmarn corn -
tion for their use. Cloxacillin and oxacillin are incorporated
surmption. Cafle: slaughter 4 days, rmilk 3 days. Sheep: slaughter 4 days,
into intramammary or ophthalmic preparations. Flucloxa-
should not be used in sheep producing milk for humarn consurmption. Pigs:
cillin is absorbed from the gastro-intestinal tract and is
slaughter 5 days 
available for oral administration. Its bioavailability is sig-
POM Duphapen (Fort Dodge) UK
nificantly reduced by the presence of food thus this drug
Injection, procaine benzylpenicillin 300 mg/mL, for cattle, sheep, pigs
should be given before feeding.
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 5 days, milk 2 days. Sheep: slaughter 5
days, should not be used in sheep producing rmilk for hurmarn consurmption.
Pigs: slaughter 5 days
FLUCLOXACILLIN
POM Duphapen Fort (Fort Dodge) UK
UK
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter I0 days (subcutaneous injection), 21
Indications. Infections caused by beta-lactamase-produc-
days (intrarmuscular injection), milk 5 days (intrarmuscular injection), should
ing staphylococci
not be used by subcutaneous injection irn cattle producing rmilk for hurmar
Contra-indications. Penicillin or cephalosporin hypersen-
consurmption. Pigs: slaughter 7 days
sitivity; gerbils, guinea pigs, hamsters, rabbits; oral admin-
istration to horses or calves with a functional rumen
POM Norocillin (Norbrook) UK
Injection, procaine benzylpenicillin 300 mg/mL, for catte, sheep, pigs
Side-effects.Allergic reactions; diarrhoea
WithwaleridCatsaugheday,m2.dayheeplah
Dose. Dogs, cats: by mouth, 15 mg/kg 4 times daily, given
5 days, should not be used in sheep producing milk for hurman consurmption.
on an empty stomach
Pigs: slaughter 5 days
POM Flucloxacillin (Non-proprietary) UK
POM Penacare (Anirmalcare) UK
Injetinzllmmth
Capsules, flucloxacillin (as sodium salt) 250 mg, 500 mg
Oral solution, powder for reconstiution, flucloxacillin (as sodium salt) 25
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 5 days, rmilk 2.5 days. Sheep: slaughter
mg/mL
5 days, should not be used in sheep producing rmilk for humar consurmption.
Pigs: slaughter 5 days
POM H) Floxapen (GSK) UK
Capsules, flucloxacillin (as sodium salt) 250 mg, 500 mg
POM Ultrapen LA (Norbook) UK
Syrup, fluclox acillin (as rmagnesiurm salt) 25 rmg/mL, 50 rmg/mL
Withdrawal Periods. Catfe: slaughter 10 days (subcutaneous injection), 21
days (intrarmuscular injection), milk 5 days (intrarmuscular injection), should
1.1.1.3 Broad-spectrum penicillins
not be used by subcutaneous injection irn cattle producing rmilk for hurmar
consurmption. Pigs: slaughter 7 days
Ampicillin and amoxicillin have slightly less activity than
benzylpenicillin against Gram-positive bacteria and obli-
BENZATHINE BENZYLPENICILLIN and
gate anaerobes but considerably greater activity against
PROCAINE BENZYLPENICILLIN
Gram-negative bacteria, although their action is poor
against Klebsiella, some Proteus spp., and Pseudomonas
(Benzathine Penicillin and Procaine Penicillin)
spp. In addition, they are broken down by beta-lactamases,
UK
both the staphylococcal enzymes and those produced by
Gram-negative organisms such as E. coli and Haemophitus
Indications. Penici llin-sensiti ve infections
spp. Acquired resistanice in such organisms has limited the
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See
under
usefulness of these antibiotics.
Benzylpenicillin
Amoxicillin is better absorbed following administration by
 Dose. Expressed for a suspension containing benzathine
 benzylpenicillin 112.5 mg + procaine benzylpenicillin 150
mouth than ampicillin, giving higher plasma and tissue con-
centrations. Its absorption is less affected by the presence of
mg/mL
food in the stomach. Ampicillin should be given to fasted
Horses, cattle, sheep, pigs: by intramuscular injection,
1 mL/25 kg body-weight, repeat after 3-4 days if required
animals and at least an hour should then elapse before food
Dogs, cats: by intramuscular injection, 1 mL/10 kg body-
both bile and urine.
weight, repeat after 3-4 days if required
Depot preparations of both amoxicillin and ampicillin are
POM Duplocillin LA (Irntervet) U/K
available. The drug is incorporated into an oily vehicle to
Depot injection, benzathine benzylpenicillin I 2.5 rmg, procaine benzylpeni-
prolong the action of the antibacterial. Depot oil-based
cillin 50 mg/mL,forhorses, catfle, sheep,pigs,dogs,cats
ampicillin preparations include aluminium monostearate in
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for humar con-
the formulation.
sumption. Catle: slaughter 60 days, milk 3 days. Sheep: slaughter 60 days,
should not be used in sheep producing rmilk for hurmarn consumption. Pigs:
Pivampicillin is the pivaloyloxymethyl ester of ampicillin
slaughter 60 days
and as such is a prodrug. It is hydrolysed by riori-specific
146 Bacterial, fungal, viral, and protozoal infections
esterases in the mucosal wall of the gastro-intestinal tract
POM Amoxinsol Tablets ( Vetoquinol) U/K
and in plasma to release ampicillin (75% by weight is con-
Tablets, scored, armoxicillin (astrihydrate) 40 mg, for dogs, cats
Tablets, scored, armoxicillin (as trihydrate) 200 mg, for dogs
verted to ampicillin).
Clavulanic acid has no significant antibacterial activity,
POM Amoxycare Capsules (Anirmalcare) UK
but is a potent beta-lactamase inhibitor. Therefore, its inclu-
Capsules, amoxicillin (as trihydrate) 250 mg,for dogs
sion in preparations of amoxicillin (co-amoxiclav) renders
POM Amoxycare Injection (Animalcare) UK
the combination active against most strains of Staph.
Injection, armoxicillin (as trihydrate) I50 mg/mL, for catfle, sheep, pigs,
aureus, some E. coli spp., in addition to Bacteroides and
dogs,cats
Klebsiella spp.
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter I0 days, milk I day. Sheep: slaughter
I8 days, should not be used in sheep producing milk for hurmar corsurmptior.
Pigs: slaughter 16 days
AMOXICILLIN
POM Amoxycare LA Injection (Anirmalcare) U/K
(Amoxycillin)
Depot injection, armoxicillin (as trihydrate) 150 mg/mL, for cattle, sheep,
pigs, dogs, cats
UK
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 2l days, milk 2.5 days. Sheep: slaugh-
infections;
hepatic
ter l6 days, should rnot be used in sheep producing milk for hurman consurmp-
Indications. Amoxicillin-sensitive
tion. Pigs: slaughter l6 days
encephalopathy (see section 3.10)
Contra-indications. Penicillin or cephalosporin hypersen-
POM Amoxycare Palatable Drops (Anirmalcare) UK
sitivity; gerbils, guinea pigs, hamsters, rabbits; oral admin-
Oral suspension, powder for reconstitution, armoxicillin (as trihydrate) 50
istration to horses or calves with a functional rumen
mg/mL, for dogs, cats. Life of reconstinuted suspension 7 days
Side-effects. Allergic reactions; diarrhoea
POM Amoxycare Tablets (Anirmalcare) UK
Warnings. Penicillins and cephalosporins
may
cause
Tableis, scored, amoxicillin (as trihydrate) 40 mg, for dogs, cats
hypersensitivity (allergy) following self-injection, inhala-
Tableis, scored, amoxicillin (as trihydrate) 200 mg, for dogs
tion, ingestion, or skin contact; operators should wear suit-
POM Amoxypen Injection (Intervet) UK
able
operators
with
knownl
Injection (oily), armoxicillin (as trihydrate) 150 mg/mL, for catle, sheep,
hypersensitivity should not handle these drugs; clinical
pigs, dogs, cats
signs of allergic reaction in operators include skin rash,
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 18 days, milk I day. Sheep: slaughter
I0 days, should not be used in sheep producing milk for hurman corn surmption.
swelling of the face, lips, or eyes, or difficulty breathing;
Pigs: slaughter 16 days
operators should seek medical advice
Dose. Dosages vary. For guidanice.
POM Amoxypen LA (Intervet) UK
Cattle: by intramuscular injection,7 mg/kg daily
Depot injection (oily), armoxieillin (as trihydrate) 150 mg/mL, for catfle,
by depot intramuscular injection,15 mg/kg, repeat after 2
sheep,pigsdog,
sAep
Withdrawal Periods. Cale: slaughter 23 days, milk 79 hours. Sheep: slaugh-
ter l6 days, should not be used in sheep producing rmilk for hurman consump-
calves: by mouth, 8 mg/kg twice daily
tion. Pigs: slaughter l6 days 
Sheep: by intramuscular injection,7 mg/kg daily
by depot intramuscutar injection,15 mg/kg,repeat afte2
 (a s t  
days
Oral suspension, powder for reconstitution, amoxicillin (as trihydrate) 50
mg/mL, for dogs, cats. Life of recon stinuted suspen sion 7 days 
Pigs: by addition to drinking water, 20 mg/kg daily
by intramuscular injection,7 mg/kg daily
POM Betamox Injection (Norbrook) UK
by depot intramuscular injection, 15 mg/kg, repeat after 2
Injection, amoxicillin (as trihydrate) 150 mg/mL, for catle, sheep, pigs,
days
dogs, cats
piglets: by addition to feed, 15 mg/kg body-weight daily for
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 18 days, milk I day. Sheep: slaughter
I0 days, rmilk frorn treated sheep should not be used for hurman cor surmption.
14 days
Pigs: slaughter I6 days
Dogs, cats: by mouth, 10 mg/kg twice daily
by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection,7mg/kg daily
POM Betamox LA (Norbrook) UK
by depot subcutaneous or intramuscular injection,15 mg!
Depot injection, amoxicillin (as trihydrate) 150 mg/mL, for catle, sheep,
kg, repeat after 2 days
pigs, dogs, cats
Withdrawal Periods. Cale: slaughter 23 days, milk 79 hours. Sheep: slaugh-
Poultry: by addition to drinking water, 15-20 mg/kg
ter I6 days, should not be used in sheep producing milk for hurman consump-
Pigeons, ducks: by addition to drinking water, 20 mg/kg
tion. Pigs: slaughter l6 days 
Fish: see Prescribing for fish for preparation details and
POM Betamox Palatable Drops (Norbook) UK
dosage
Oral suspension, powder for reconstinution, armoxicillin (as trihydrate) 50
rmg/mL, for dogs, cafs. Life of recon stituted suspen sion 7 days
Note. Amoxicillin 1 g = amoxicillin trihydrate 1.15 g
POM Betamox Palatable Tablets (Norbook) UK
POM Amoxinsol 50 ( Vetoquinol) UK
Fablets, scored, armoxicillin (as trihydrate) 40 mg, for dogs, cats
Oral powder, for addition to drinking water, armoxicillin trihydrate 500 mg/g,
Tabletsordxiishyrat00mds
foc pigs,chickens,turkeys,ducks
Tablets, scored, amoxicillin (as trihydrate) 400 mg, for dogs
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs, chickens: slaughter 2 days. Turkeys: slaughter 5
days.Dueks: slaughter9 days. Should not be usedin birds producing ege
POM Bimoxyl (Birmeda) UK
for hurman consurmption
Capsules, armoxicillin 250 mg, for dogs
1.1.1 Beta-lactam antibacterials  147
POM Bimoxyl LA (Bimeda) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in pigeons intended for hurmar cor-
surm ption or laying eggs for human consurm ption
sheep,pigs, dogs
Withdrawal Periods. Catfe: slaughter 21 days, rmilk 3 days. Sheep: slaughter
POM Vetrimoxin Paste (Ceva) UK
21 days, should not be used in sheep producing milk for human consumption.
Oral paste, armoxicillin (as trihydrate) 20 mg/mL, for small dogs, cats;
Pigs: slaughter II days
 rmetered dose applicator
POM Clamoxyl (Pfizer) UK
Tablets, scored, armoxicillin (as trihydrate) 40 rmg, for dogs, cafs
Tablets, scored, amoxicillin (as trihydrate) 200 mg, for dogs
POM Clamoxyl Oral Multidoser (Pfizer) UK
Mixture, armoxicillin (as trihydrate) 40 mg/dose, for piglets; dose applicator
Withdrawal Periods. Piglets: slaughter 7 days
AMOXICILLIN with CLAVULANIC ACID
Dose. Piglets: by mouth, (up to 7 kg body-weight) I dose wice daily, (7 1 5
(Co-amoxiclav : preparations of amoxicillin (as trihy drate or
kg body-weight) 2 doses rwice daily
the sodium salt) and clavularic acid (as potassium
POM Clamoxyl LA (Pfizer) UK
clavulanate); the proportions are expressed in the form x/y,
Depot injection (oily), armoxicillin (as trihydrate) 150 rmg/mL, for catfle,
where x and y are the strengths in milligrams of amoxicillin
sheep, pigs, dogs, cats
and clavulanic acid respectively)
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 2l days, milk 4 days.Sheep: slaughter
21 days, should not be used in sheep producing milk for human consumption.
UK
Pigs: slaughter 21 days
Indications.Amoxicillin-sensitive infections including
POM Clamoxyl Ready to Use Injection (Pfizer) UK
beta-lactamase-producing micro-organisms
Injection, armoxicillin (as trihydrate) 150 rmg/rmL, for catfle, sheep, pigs,
Contra-indications. Penicillin or cephalosporin hypersen-
dogs, cats
sitivity; gerbils, guinea pigs, hamsters, rabbits; oral admin-
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 2l days, milk 2 days.Sheep: slaughter
uodunsuoo ueuny jojpasn aq jou pnous daoys pagan woj au shep se
istration to horses or calves with a functional rumen
Pigs: slaughter 14 days
Side-effects.Allergic reactions; diarrhoea
Warnings. Penicillins and cephalosporins may  cause
POM Duphamox (Fort Dodge) UK
hypersensitivity (allergy) following_ self-injection, inhala-
Fablei5, scored, armoxicillin (as trihydrate) 40 rmg, for dogs, cafs
Fablets, scored, armoxicillin (as trihydrate) 200 mg, for dogs
tion, ingestion, or skin contact. Operators with known
hypersensitivity should not handle these drugs. Clinical
POM Duphamox (Fort Dodge) UK
signs of allergic reaction in operators include skin rash,
Injetion, armoxicillin (as trihydrate) 150 mg/mL, for cale, sheep, pigs,
swelling of the face, lips, or eyes, or difficulty breathing.
dogs, cafs
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle: slaughter I8 days, milk I day. Sheep: slaughter
Operators should seek medical advice
I0 days, should not be used in sheep producing milk for hurmarn consurmptior.
Dose. Expressed as amoxicillin
Pigs: slaughter I6 days
Cattle: by intramuscular injection, 7 mg/kg once daily
calves: by mouth, 5-10 mg/kg twice daily
POM Duphamox LA (Fort Dodge) UK
Pigs: by intramuscular injection, 7 mg/kg once daily
Depot injection, armoxicillin (as trihydrate) 150 mg/mL, for catle, sheep,
pigs, dogs, cats
Dogs, cats: by mouth, 10-20 mg/kg twice daily
by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection,7 mg/kg once
ter 21 days, should not be used in sheep producing milk for hurman corsump-
daily
tion.Pigs: slaughter 21 days
POM Duphamox Palatable Drops (Fort Dodge)
POM Nisamox Tablets (Fort Dodge) U/K
Oral suspension, powder for recon stinution, armoxicillin (as trihydrate) 50
-d  e  o ( s e s 
sium salt) 10 mg,for dogs
mg/mL, for dogs, cats. Life of reconstituted suspension 7 days
Tablets, scored, armoxicillin (as trihydrate) 200 rmg, clavulanic acid (as potas-
POM Stabox 5% Premix (Virbac) UK
siurm salt) 50 mg, for dogs
Premix, amoxicillin 50 g/kg, for weuned piglets
POM Noroclav Injection (Norbook) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter 4 days
injection, armoxicillin (as trihydrate) 140 rmg, clavulanic acid (as potassiurm
salt) 35 mg/mL, for cafle
POM Trioxyl LA (Tulivin) U/K
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 42 days, milk 80 hours
Depot injection (oily), armoxicillin (as trihydrate) 150 rmg/mL, for catle,
sheep,pigs
POM Noroclav Tablets (Norbrook) UK
 21 days, should not be used in sheep producing rmilk for hurmar consurmption.
siurm salt) 10 mg, for dogs
Pigs: slaughter 21 days
Fablets, scored, armoxicillin (as trihydrate) 200 mg, clavulanic acid (as potas-
siurm salt) 50 rmg, for dogs
POM Vetremox (Alpharma) UK
Oral powder, for adition to drinking water, armoxicillin trihydrate l00%, for
POM Symulox 500 mg Bolus (Pfizer) U/K
chickens,turkeys
Tablets, f/c, scored, amoxicillin (as trihydrate) 400 mg, clavulanic acid (as
Withdrawal Periods. Chickens: slaughter 24 hours. Turkeys: slaughter 5
potassiurm salt) t00 mg, for calves
days. Should not be used in chickers or turkeys laying eggs for hurman con-
Withdrawal Periods. Calves: slaughter 4 days
surmptior
POM Synulox Palatable Drops (Pfizer) UK
POM Vetremox Pigeon (Genitrix) UK
Oral suspension, powder for reconstitution, armoxicillin (as trihydrate) 40
Oral powder, for addition to drinking water, armoxicillin trihydrate l00%, for
rmg, clavulanic acid (as potassiurm salt) 10 rmg/mL, for dogs, cafs. Life of
pigeons
(  uxoe = dop 1 sp uosudsns psoa
148 Bacterial, fungal, viral, and protozoal infections
POM Synulox Palatable Tablets (Pfizer) U/K
POM Amfipen LA (Irtervet)
Fablets, scored, armoxicillin (as trihydrate) 40 mg, clavulanic acid (as potas-
Depot njection (oily), ampicillin I00 mg/mL with alurminiurm rmonostearate,
siurm salt) 10 mg, for dogs, cats 
forcate,h,i,dg
Tablets, scored, armoxicillin (as trihydrate) 200 rmg, clavulanic acid (as potas-
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 60 days, rmilk 7 days. Sheep: slaughter
siurm salt) 50 mg, for dogs
60 days, should not be used in sheep producing milk for hurman cor surmption.
Fablets, scored, armoxicillin (as trihydrate) 400 mg, clavulanic acid (as potas-
Pigs: slaughter 60 days
siurn salt) 100 mg, for dogs
POM Synulox Ready to Use Injection (Pfizer) UK
Injection, armoxicillin (as trihydrate) 140 mg, clavulanic acid (as potassiurm
Accidental  self-injection  with  oil-based  formulations
salt35mg/m,foatle,pigs,dogscats
can cause severe pain and intense swelling, which may
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 42 days, milk 60 hours. Pigs: slaughter
result in ischaemic necrosis and loss of a digit. Prompt
31 days
medical attention is essential.
POM Ampicaps (Bimeda) UK
AMPICILLIN
Capsules, armpicillin (as trihydrate) 250 rmg, for dogs more than f0 kg body-
weight
UK
POM Ampicare (Animalcare) UK
Indications. Ampicillin-senisitive infections
Capsules, arnpicillin (as trihydrate) 250 mg, for dogs more fhan f0 kg body-
Contra-indications. Penicillin or cephalosporin hypersen-
weight
sitivity; gerbils, guinea pigs, hamsters, rabbits; oral admin-
POM Ampitab (Vetoquinol) UK
istration to horses or calves with a functional rumen; severe
Ora suspension, armpicillin (as trihydrate) 380 rmg/mL, for cafs
renal impairment with anuria and oliguria in cats; presence
Fabiets, ampicillin (as trihydrate) 50 rmg, I80 mg, for dogs
of beta-lactamase producing bacteria
Side-effects. Allergic reactions; diarrhoea; occasional
POM Duphacillin (Fort Dodge) UK
njecinoily),ampicillin (astrihydrat)50mg/mL,forcatle,sheep,igs
reaction at site of injection
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter I8 days, rmilk I day. Sheep: slaughter
Warnings. Penicillins and
cephalosporins
may
cause
I8 days, should not be used in sheep producing rmilk for hurman cor surmption.
hypersensitivity (allergy) following self-injection, inhala-
Pigs: slaughter18 days
tion, ingestion, or 
skin contact. Operators with known
POM Norobrittin (Norbrook) UK
hypersensitivity should not handle these drugs. Clinical
fnjection (oily), ampicillin (as trihydrate) 150 mg/mL, for cafle, sheep, pigs
signs of allergic reaction in operators include skin rash,
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter I8 days, milk I day. Sheep: slaughter
swelling of the face, lips, or eyes, or difficulty breathing.
18 days, should not be used in sheep producing milk for hurman con surmption.
Operators should seek medical advice
Pigs: slaughter18 days
Dose.
Horses: by intramuscutar injection,7.5 mg/kg once daily
1.1.1.4 Antipseudomonal penicillins
Cattle, sheep: by intramuscular injection, 7.5 mg/kg once
The carbox ypericillin ticarcillin is pri ncipally indicated for
daily
the treatment of Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections
by depot intramuscular injection, 15 mg/kg, repeat after 2
although it is also active against a number of other Gram-
sAep
 megative organisms including Proteus and Bacteroides spp.
Pigs: by intramuscular injection, 7.5 mg/kg once daily
Ticarcillin is broken down by the beta-lactamase produced
by depot intramuscular injection, 25 mg/kg, repeat after 2
by some strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and is availa-
days
 ble in preparations to which clavulanic acid has been added
Dogs: by mouth, 10-20 mg/kg twice daily given on anl
 to inhibit beta-lactamase. The ureidopenicillin, piperacillin
empty stomach
 is broad spectrum and is more active than ticarcillin against
by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection,7.5 mg/kg
Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
once daily
by depot subcutaneous injection, 15 mg/kg,repeat after 2
TICARCILLIN with CLAVULANIC ACID
days
Cats: by mouth, 10-20 mg/kg twice daily given on an
UK
empty stomach
Indications. See notes above
by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection,7.5 mg/kg
Contra-indications. Penicillin or cephalosporin hypersen-
once daily
sitivity; should not be administered to gerbils, guinea pigs,
by depot subcutaneous injection, 20 mg/kg, repeat after 2
hamsters, rabbits
sAep
Side-effects.Allergic reactions; diarrhoea
Dose. Expressed as ticarcillin
POM Amfipen Tablets (Irtervet) UK
Foals: by intravenous injection,50 mg/kg 4 times daily
Tableis, armpicillin 50 mg, 125 rmg, for dogs, cats
Tablets, armpicillin 500 mg, for dogs 
Dogs, cats: by intravenous infusion, 30-100 mg/kg 3 times
daily
POM Amfipen 15% (Intervet) UK
Injectin foily),ampicillin 50 mg/mL,forhorses,dogs,cats
POM Timentin (GSK) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmar con -
Injection, powder for reconstitution, ticarcillin (as sodium salt) 3 g, clavu-
sumptior
lanic acid (as potassium salt) 200 mg
1.1.1 Beta-lactam antibacterials
149
1.1.1.5 Cephalosporins
Contra-indications. Hypersensitivity to cephalosporins or
penicillins
Side-effects. Local tissue reaction; rarely salivation and
containing the beta-lactam ring. They are closely related to
vomiting in dogs
the penicillins. Like the penicillins they are bactericidal
Warnings. Penicillins and cephalosporins may
cause
(operating time-dependent killing), are relatively non-toxic
hypersensitivity (allergy) following self-injection, inhala-
(although less so than the penicillins), and less likely to
tion, ingestion, or
skin contact. Operators with known
cause allergic reactions. Cephalosporins are suitable for use
hypersensitivity should not handle these drugs. Clinical
ini rabbits and rodents.
signs of allergic reaction in operators include skin rash,
It is difficult to generalise about the spectrum of activity of
swelling of the face, lips, or eyes, or difficulty breathing.
cephalosporins and each individual drug can be different.
Operators should seek medical advice; reduce dose in renal
The tradition of classifying these drugs as first, second and
 impairment to avoid unnecessary accumulation
third generation can cause confusion particularly as newer
Dose. Dosages vary. For guidance.
drugs are developed. The first generation drugs are active
Cattle: by intramuscutar injection,7mg/kg once daily
against a range of both Gram-positive and Gram-negative
Dogs, cats: by mouth, 10-25 mg/kg twice daily
 organisms comprising staphylococci (including beta-lacta-
by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection, 10 mg/kg once
mase-producing strains), Pasteureffa, E. cofi, Actinobacif-
daily
tus,
Actinomyces,
Haemophitus,
Erysipetothrix,
Clostridium, and Satmonella spp.However Pseudomonas
POM Cefaseptin (Vetoquinol) UK
and many Proteus spp. are resistant.
Fablets, f/c, cefalexin (as rmonohydrate) 120 mg, for dogs 5-10 kg body-
weight,cats
Successive generations of cephalosporins are characterised
Tablets, f/c, cefalexin (as monohydrate) 600 mg, for dogs I2-24 kg body-
by being less well absorbed following oral administration
weight
(so that only first generation cephalosporins are available as
 oral preparations and most other cephalosporins are rot
POM Ceporex Injection (Schering-Plough) UK
fnjection (oily), cefalexin (as sodiurm salt) 180 rmg/mL, for cafle, dogs, cafs
suitable for oral administration), have increased stability to
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter I9 days, rmilk withdrawal period nil.
Gram-negative beta-lactamases, and generally increased
activity against Gram-negative organisms, but reduced
POM Cephorum (Forurm) UK
Tablets, f/c, scored, cefalexin 250 mg, for dogs
activity
y against Gram-positive organisms particularly
staphylococci.
POM Ceporex Vet 50/250/500 (Schering-Plough) UK
As a general rule, the second generation cephalosporins 
Fablets, f/c, cefalexin 50 mg, for dogs 69 kg body-weight, cats
Tablets,f/c, cefalexin 250 mg,for dogs more than f0 kg body-weight
have good acti vity against Gram-positive organisms and the
Tablets,f/c, cefalexin 500 mg, for dogs more than 26 kg body-weight
Enterobacteriaceae but are riot effective against the most
intractable Gram-negative organisms such as Klebsiella
POM Ceporex Vet Oral Drops (Schering-Plough) UK
spp. or Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Further developments
Ora suspension, granules for reconstitution, cefalexin I00 mg/mL, for dogs
up to 20 kg body-weight, cats. Life of reconstituted suspension 10 days
Note. Store reconstituted suspension in refrigerator
which are effective against Klebsiella spp. or Pseudomonas
POM Rilexine Tablets (Virbac) UK
aeruginosa or to produce drugs which are effective against
Tablets, cefalexin 75 mg, for dogs, coats
the refractory anaerobes, such as Bacteroides fragilis. These
Tableis, cefalexin 300 mg, 600 mg, for dogs
developments have been made sometimes at the expense of
the Gram-positive spectrum, such that potency against Sta-
CEFQUINOME
phylococcus spp, in particular, may be reduced. Cefopera-
zone is anl example of a cephalosporin (third generation)
UK
with activity against Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Cefoxitin is
Indications. Cefquinome-sensitive infections
a cephalosporin which is noted for its activity against
Contra-indications. Hypersensitivity to cephalosporinis Or
Bacteroides fragilis. Cefquinome is the most recently
penicillins
developed cephalosporin for veterinary use (sometimes
Warnings. Penicillins and cephalosporins may
cause
termed fourth generation). It is extremely broad-spectrum
hypersensitivity (allergy) following self-injection, inhala-
being highly active against Enterobacteriaceae, staphyloco-
tion, ingestion, or
skin contact. Operators with known
cci (including methicillin resistant strains), and enterococci.
hypersensitivity should mot handle these drugs. Clinical
 In addition, it is not destroyed by the most common plasmid
signs of allergic reaction in operators include skin rash,
Or chromosomal beta lactamases of Klebsiella spp. and
Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
Operators should seek medical advice
Dose. By intramuscular injection.
CEFALEXIN
Cattle: 1 mg/kg daily; caives: 2 mg/kg daily
Pigs: 1-2 mg/kg
(Cephalexin)
POM Cephaguard (Intervet) UK
UK
Injection (oily), cefquinome 25 mg/mL, for catfle, pigs
Withdrawal Periods. Carfle: slaughter 5 days, rmilk not less tharn 12 hours.
Indications. Cefalexin-sensiti ve infections
Calves: slaughter 4 days. Pigs: slaughter 3 days
150 Bacterial, fungal, viral, and protozoal infections
CEFTAZIDIME
The widely used oxytetracycline and the less ofterl used
tetracycline and chlortetracycline have similar properties.
UK
Indications. Ceftazidime-sensitive infections
depending on the vehicle used. For this reason some prepa-
Dose. See Prescribing for reptiles
rations incorporate a local anaesthetic, which reduces the
pain (temporarily), but not the tissue damage. Depot prepa-
POMH Fortum (CSK) UK
injectin, powderfor econstition, ceftazidime (as pentahydrate) 250 mg,
rations will maintain effective plasma concentrations for 72
500 mg, lg,2g,3 g
to 96 hours. Some preparations may be given intravenously,
but rapid injection by this route in cattle may cause cardio-
POMH Kefadim (Lilly) UK
Oral administration may cause diarrhoea. Absorption of tet-
CEFTIOFUR
racyclines from the gastro-intestinal tract is variable and is
reduced by milk (not doxycycline), antacids, and calcium,
UK
iron, magnesium, and zinc salts.
Indications. Ceftiofur-sensitive infections
Tetracyclines are deposited in developing teeth by binding
 Contra-indications. Hypersensiti vity to cephalosporins or
to calcium and if given to puppies, kittens, or bitches or
penicillins
queens in late pregnancy they may cause discoloration and
Side-effects. Transient occasional pain on injection;
defects of the enamel of the puppies' temporary dentition.
inflammation at site of injection
Horses that are given parenteral or enteral tetracyclines and
Warnings. Safety in pregnant or breeding animals has not
beenl established
which can prove fatal. Photodermatitis has occurred follow-
Dose.
ing treatment with tetracyclines after exposure to intense
Horses: by intramuscular injection, 2 mg/kg once daily
sunlight or ultraviolet light. There are reports of nephrotox-
Cattle: by subcutaneous injection, 1 mg/kg once daily
icity being associated with use of tetracyclines. These may
Pigs: by intramuscular injection, 3 mg/kg once daily
have been due to degradation products which accumulate in
preparations which are used beyond the expiry date.
POM Excenel Sterile Powder (Pfi zer) U/K
The main excretory routes for tetracyclines are the urinary
Injection, powder for reconstinution, ceftiofur (as sodiurm salt) I g, 4 g, for
horses,catfle,pigs
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurman con 
surmption. Catfle: slaughter 8 hours, rmilk withdrawal period nil. Pigs:
slaughter 2 days
older tetracyclines and have a number of advantages.
Absorption of orally administered dox ycycline and minocy-
 Note. For intrarmuscular injection in cattle
cline is better and they are less affected by milk and calcium
POM Excenel RTU (Pfizer) U/K
injectin,ftiofu ashyrohlorid)0m/m,foatte,p
salts. These drugs also penetrate better into several body
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 8 days, rmilk withdrawal period nil.
compartments and fluids, notably bronchial secretions and
Pigs: slaughter 5 days
prostatic fluid. Doxycycline enters the gastro-intestinal tract
Note. For subcutaneous injection in cattle
through the bile and is particularly liable to produce entero-
colitis in the horse. Minocycline is metabolised prior to
CEFUROXIME
excretion in the bile. These lipid soluble tetracyclines are
safer to use in animals with renal impairment.
UK
Indications. Cefuroxime-sensitive infections
Tetracyclines, particularly doxycycline, are used for the
treatment of canine ehrlichiosis caused by rickettsial organ-
Dose. See Prescribing for reptiles
isms within the genera, Ehrlichia and Anaplasma. The
POMH) Cefuroxime (Non-proprietary) UK
cause of canine monocytic ehrlichiosis is E. canis, which is
injection, powder for reconstitution, cefuroxirme (as sodium salt) 250 rmg,
transmitted by the tick Rhipicephaius sanguineus. Granulo-
750 rmg, 1.5 g
cytic ehrlichiosis or tick-borne fever of sheep is caused by
POM Zinacef (GSK) UK
A. phagocytophilum. It infects dogs and is transmitted by
injection, powder for reconstitution, cefuroxirme (as sodiurm salt) 250 rmg,
the tick lxodes ricinus.
750 mg, 1.5 8
CHLORTETRACYCLINE
1.1.2 Tetracyclines
The tetracyclines are broad-spectrum antibacterials active
UK
against Mycoplasma, Chtamydophila, and Rickettsia in
Indications. Chlortetracycline-sensitive infections; theiler-
addition to bacteria. They are active against a range of
iosis (see section 1.4.8)
Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria but have little
 Contra-indications. Oral administration to ruminants with
useful activity against E. coli,Satmonella,Proteus,or Pseu-
 a functional rumen is not recommended; renal impairment;
domonas spp. Tetracyclines are bacteriostatic and acquired
last 2-3 weeks of gestation in pregnant animals and up to 4
resistanice is row widespread among bacteria.
weeks of age in rieoniates, see notes above; avoid use in
1.1.2 Tetracyclines  151
used; mineral salts, citric acid, ferrous products can affect
inig
absorption; Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1 (tetracy-
Side-effects. May cause vomiting, diarrhoea
clines); use during period of tooth development may lead to
Dose. Dosages vary. For guidanice. By mouth.
tooth discoloration (less risk than other tetracyclines)
Calves: 10-20 mg/kg body-weight daily
Dose.
Pigs: 10-20 mg/kg body-weight daily
Dogs: by mouth, 10 mg/kg daily, given with food
by addition to feed, 400-600 g/tonne feed
Cats: by mouth, 10 mg/kg daily
Chickens: 20- 50 mg/kg body-weight
Feline chlamydophilial infections+, by mouth, 5 mg/kg 1-2
by addition to feed, 300-400 g/tonne feed
times daily
Turkeys, ducks: 10-30 mg/kg body-weight; 300-400 g/
Pigeons, caged birds: by addition to drinking water, 15 mg/
tonne feed
kg or 260 mg/2 litres drinking water. For birds with 1ow
daily water intake, 260 mg/500 mL drinking water
POM Aureomycin Soluble Oblets (Fort Dodge) U/K
Fableis, or to prepare ar oral solution, scored, chlortetracycline hydrochlo-
POM Doxirobe (Pfizer) UK
ride 500 mg, for calves
Withdrawal Periods. Calves: slaughter 25 days
See section 3.1l for preparation details 
POM Aureomyein Soluble Powder (Fort Dodge) UK
POM Doxyseptin (Vetoquinol) UK
Oral powder, for addition to drinking water or to prepare an oral solution,
Fablets, doxyxcycline (as hyclate) 300 mg, for dogs more than 15 kg body-
chlortetracycline hydrochloride 55 g/kg,for calves, pigs, chickens, turkeys
weight
Withdrawal Periods. Calves: slaughter 25 days. Pigs: slaughter 10 days.
Chickens, furkeys: slaughter I day, egg withdrawal period nil
POM Ornicure (Genitrix) UK
Oral powder, for addition to drinking water, doxycycline (as hyclate) 260
MFS Aurofac 100 Granular (Alpharma) UK
mg/sachet, for pigeons, cage birds
Premix, chlortetracycline hydrochloride I00 g/kg, for pigs, chickens, fur-
POM Ronaxan (Merial) UK
keys,ducks
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter I0 days. Chickens, turkeys: slaughter 2
Tablets, doxycycline 20 rmg, for dogs, cts
Tabieis, doxycycline 100 mg, for dogs
days, egg withdrawal period nil. Ducks: slaughter 4 days 
POM Aurofac 200 MA (Fort Dodge) UK
OXYTETRACYCLINE
Oral powder, for addition to milk, milk replacer, or to prepare ar oral solu-
tion, chlortetracycline hydrochloride 200 g/kg, for calves
Withdrawal Periods. Cuives: slaughter I5 days
UK
Indications.Oxytetracycline-sensitive infections; theileri-
MFS Aurogran (Novartis) UK
osis (see section 1.4.8)
Premix, chlortetracycline 100 g/kg,for pigs, chickens, turkeys
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter 14 days. Chickens: slaughter 6 days,
Contra-indications. Oral administration to ruminants with
eggs 6 days. Turkeys: slaughter 3 days
a functional rumen; renal impairment; last 2-3 weeks of
 gestation in pregnant animals and up to 4 weeks of age in
MFS Aurogran 150 (Novartis) U/K
Premix, chlortetracycline 150 g/kg, for pigs, chickens, turkeys
neonates, see notes above; avoid use in patients with dys-
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter 14 days. Chickens: slaughter 6 days,
phagia or diseases accompanied by vomiting; avoid subcu-
eggs 6 days. Turkeys: slaughter 3 days
taneous injection or concurrent corticosteroids in horses;
POM Chlorsol 50 (Vetoquinol) UK
some manufacturers recommend that intravenous injection
Oral powder, for adition to drinking water, chlortetracycline hydrochloride
in dogs should be avoided
500 g/kg,forpigs, broiler chickens
Side-effects. May cause vomiting, diarrhoea; photoderma-
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter 6 days. Chickens: slaughter 3 days
titis; transient swelling at site of injection
Contra-indications. Pregnart sows; laying hens
Warnings. Care with use in animals with renal or hepatic
MFS Chlortet FG 100 (ECO) UK
impairment; Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1
Premix, chlortetracycline 100 g/kg, for pigs
Dose. Dosages vary. For guidance.
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter 7 days
Horses: by intramuscular or intravenous injection,2-10
DOXYCYCLINE
mg/kg daily
Cattle,shep,goats,pigs:byntramuscularorntravenous
UK
injection,2-10 mg/kg daily
Indications. Doxycycline-sensiti ve infections, in particular
by depot intramuscular injection, 20 mg/kg, repeat after 2-
respiratory tract infections; ehrlichiosis 
4 days or
Contra-indications. Hepatic impairment; pregnant ani-
 30 mg/kg (preparations containing oxytetracycline 300 mg/
mals; up to 4 weeks of age in neonates, see notes above;
mL), repeat after 6 days
avoid use in patients with dysphagia or diseases accompa-
calves, pigs: by mouth, dosage varies, for guidance 10-30
nied by vomiting
mg/kg 1-2 times daily but see also manufacturer s informa-
Side-effects. Vomiting, oesophagitis, diarrhoea, photoder-
tioni
Red deer: by depot intramuscular injection,20 mg/kg,
term treatment
repeat after 2-4 days
Warnings. Avoid use during reproductive period of birds;
Dogs: by mouth, 25 mg/kg twice daily
manufacturer advises that birds do not participate in races
by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection,2-10 mg/kg
during treatment; deionised or distilled water should be
daily
152 Bacterial, fungal, viral, and protozoal infections
Cats:by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection,2-10
POM Hexasol LA (Norbrook) UK
mg/kg daily
Injection, flunixin (as flunixin rmeglurmine) 20 rmg, oxytetracycline hydro-
Poultry: by addition to drinking water, 7-27 g/100 litres
chloride (as dihydrate) 300 mg/mL, for cale 
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 35 days, should not be used in cattle
Cage birds : see preparation details
producing milk for hurman consurm ption 
 Fish: see Prescribing for fish for preparation details and
Dose. Catle: by intramuscular injection, 0.l mL/kg
dosage
POM Oecrycetin Bolus (Fort Dodge) UK
Fablets, scored, oxytetracycline hydrochloride 500 mg, for calves
POM Alamycin 10 (Norbrook) UK
injectinoxyeracyliehydrchlride00m/m,foatepi;
Withdrawal Periods. Caives: slaughter 14 days
Withdrawal Periods. Cale: slaughter 15 days, milk 2.5 days. Pigs: slaughter
15 days
POM Ornimed Oxytetracycline (distributed by Millpledge) UK
Medicated seed, oxytetracycline 3 rmg/g,for budgerigars
POM Alamycin LA (Norbook) UK
Side-effects. May cause fungal infections and soft shelled eggs with pro-
Depot injection, oxytetracycline dihydrate 200 mg/mL, for catle, sheep, pigs
longed treatrment
Withdrawal Periods. Catfe: slaughter 31 days, milk 10 days. Sheep: slaugh-
Dose. Birds: I.5 g of seed rwice daily
ter 9 days, rmilk 7 days. Pigs: slaughter 18 days
POM Oxycare 10% (Anirmalcare) UK
POM Alamycin LA 300 (Norbrook) U/K
Injetion, oxytetracycline hydrochloride 50 mg/mL, for catle, pigs
Depot injection, oxytetracycline (as dihydrate) 300 mg/mL, for cattle, sheep,
Withdrawal Periods. Cale: slaughter 15 days, milk 2.5 days. Pigs: slaughter
15 days
58t0
Withdrawal Periods. (20 mg/kg dose) Catfe: slaughter 28 days, rmilk 10
POM Oxycare 20/LA (Animalcare) UK
(30 rmg/kg dose) Cattle: slaughter 35 days, rmilk 10 days. Sheep : slaughter 28
Depot intn,ytayli(asdyra0mfat,h,
days, rmilk 8 days. Pigs: slaughter 28 days
pigs
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 14 days, milk 7 days. Sheep: slaughter
POM Duphacycline 100 (Fort Dodge) UK
[4 days, should not be used in sheep producing milk for human consurmptior.
Injection, oxytetracycline hydrochloride 100 mg/mL, for cafle, pigs
Pigs: slaughter 14 days
15 days
POM Oxycare Tablets (Animalcare) UK
Tablets, s/c, oxytetracycline dihydrate 50 mg, 100 mg, 250 mg, for dogs
POM Duphacycline LA (Fort Dodge) UK
Depot injection, oxytetracycline dihydrate 200 mg/mL, for catle, sheep, pigs
POM Oxycomplex NS (Birmeda) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 31 days, rmilk 10 days. Sheep: slaugh-
Injection, oxytetracycline (as hydrochloride) I00 rmg, flunixin (as rmeglu-
ter 9 days. Pigs: slaughter 18 days
mine) 20 mg/mL, for caffle
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 3l days, should not be used in cattle
POM Duphacycline XL (Fort Dodge) UK
producing milk for hurmar consurm ption
Depot injection, oxytetracycline (as dihydrate) 300 mg/mL, for catle, pigs
Dose. Catle: initially by intravenous injetion, then by intramuscular injec-
Withdrawal Periods. (20 rmg/kg dose) Cale: slaughter 28 days, milk 10
tion, 0.1 rmL/kg daily forup to 5 days
days. Pigs: slaughter 14 days. (30 rmg/kg dose) Catfe: slaughter 35 days,
rmilk 10 days. Pigs: slaughter 28 days
POM Oxytetrin 5 (Schering-Plough) UK
injectlri0e
POM Engemyein LA (Intervet) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 7 days, rmilk 3 days. Sheep: slaughter
Depot injection, oxytetracycline 200 mg/mL, for catle, sheep, pigs
5 days, should not be used in sheep producing milk for hurmar con surmptior.
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 31 days, rmilk I0 days. Sheep: slaugh-
Pigs: slaughter Il days
ter 9 days, rmilk 7 days. Pigs: slaughter 18 days
POM Oxytetrin 10 DD (Schering-Plough) UK
POM Engemyein 5 % (Intervet) UK
Injection and depot injection in cale, oxytetracycline hydrochloride 100
Injection, oxytetracycline (as hydrochloride) 50 rmg/mL, for horses, catfle,
mg/mL, for catfle, sheep, pigs
sheep, pigs, dogs, cats
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter 10 days, rmilk 80 hours. Sheep: slaugh-
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurman con -
ter 5 days, should not be used in sheep producing milk for human consump-
surmption. Catfle: slaughter 35 days, rmilk 6 days. Sheep: slaughter 14 days,
tion. Pigs: slaughter II days
should not be used in sheep producing milk for human consurmption. Pigs:
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 10 days, rmilk 80 hours
slaughter 14 days
POM Oxytetrin 20 LA (Schering-Plough) UK
POM Engemycin 10% (DD) (Intervet) UK
Depet injection, oxytetracycline dihydate 200 mg/mL, for catle, sheep, pigs
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle: slaughter 14 days, rmilk 7 days. Sheep: slaughter
mL, for horses, catle, sheep, pigs, dogs, cats
21 days, should not be used in sheep producing rmilk for hurman corn surmption.
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmarn con -
Pigs: slaughter 35 days
surmption. Catfle: (daily dosage) slaughter 35 days, milk 6 days, (prolonged-
action dosage) slaughter 2l days, milk 6 days. Sheep: (daily dosage, pro-
POM Terramycin LA Injectable Solution (Pfizer)
longed-actiorn dosage) slaughter [4 days, should not be used in sheep produc-
Dept inin,xeacyline (asdhyrat)200 m/mL,focatl, shp,
ing milk for hurman consurmption. Pigs: (daily dosage) slaughter [4 days,
red deet,pigs
(prolonged-actior dosage) slaughter I0 days
21 days, should not be used in sheep producing rmilk for hurman con surmption.
POM Engemycin 10% Farm Pack (Intervet) UK
Pigs: slaughter 21 days. Red deer: slaughter 30 days
injetion and depot injection, oxytetracycline (as hydrochloride) 100 mg/
Note. Administered by intravenous injection in cattle for short-acting effect
mL,g
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for human corl -
POM Terramycin Q-100 Injectable Solution (Pfizer) U/K
sumption. Catle: (daily dosage) slaughter 35 days, rmilk 6 days, (prolonged-
Injection, oxytetracycline hydrochloride (as rmagnesiurm cormplex) 100 mg/
-d  ) s 9 s 1 s ( e
mL,foccate,sheep,is
longed-action dosage) slaughter I4 days, should not be used irn sheep produe-
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter 14 days, milk 5 days. Sheep: slaughter
ing milk for hurmar corsurmption. Pigs: (daily dosage) slaughter [4 days,
28 days, should not be used in sheep producing milk for hurman cor surmption.
(prolonged-action dosage) slaughter 10 days
Pigs: slaughter 2l days
1.1.3 Aminoglycosides 153
POM Terramycin Soluble Powder 5.5% (Pfizer) U/K
brain, cerebrospinal fluid, and the eye. Elimination is solely
Oral powder, for addition to drinking water or feed, or to prepare arn oral
by renal excretion.
solution, oxytetracycline hydrochloride 55 g/kg, for catle, pigs, chickens,
turkeys (measure provided =oxytetracycline 200 mg)
The important side-effects of aminoglycosides are vestibu-
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter I0 days, milk withdrawal period nil.
lar or auditory ototoxicity, and nephrotoxicity. Risk of tox-
Pigs: slaughter 7 days. Chickens, furkeys: slaughter 7 days, eggs I day
icity following systemic admimistration varies with different
POM Terramycin Soluble Powder Concentrate 20% (Pfizer) U/K
members of the group. Neomycin is particularly toxic to the
Oral powder, for addition to drinking water or feed or to prepare ar oral solu-
auditory and renal systems. Streptomycin and dihydrostrep-
tion, oxytetracycline hydrochloride 200 g/kg, for catfle, pigs, chickens, fur-
tomycin are ototoxic and gentamicin is ototoxic and neph-
(xod ) s
Withdrawal Periods. Carfle: slaughter I0 days, rmilk withdrawal period nil.
rotoxic. Due to their potential nephrotoxic effect, they
Pigs: slaughter 7 days. Chickens, turkeys: slaughter 7 days, eggs I day
should be used with care and for short periods of time. The
toxic effects on the kidney vary with the individual drugs
MFS Tetramin 200 (Pfizer) UK
Premix, oxytetracycline dihydrate 200 g/kg, for pigs 5-90 kg body-weight
but dosing regimens that have short interdosing intervals
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter 5 days
are more likely to cause damage to the kidneys than dosing
regimens where long interdosing intervals are used. As
POM Tetroxy LA (Birmeda) U/K
Depot injection, oxytetracycline (as magnesiurm complex) 200 rmg/mL, for
these drugs kill by a concentration-dependent mechanism,
cattle, sheep,pigs
giving the daily dose once rather than dividing and giving it
Withdrawal Periods. Catte: slaughter 14 days, milk 7 days. Sheep: slaughter
every 8 hours is also more likely to be successful since
21 days, should not be used in sheep producing milk for hurman consumption.
Pigs: slaughter 35 days
higher peak concentrations of the drug will be achieved by
TETRACYCLINE HYDROCHLORIDE
tive drug should be chosen. If this is not possible, the inter-
dosing interval should be increased on the basis of the
UK
animal's plasma-creatinine concentration (see Prescribing
Indications. Tetracycline-sensitive infections
in renal impairment) and the plasma levels of the drug
Dose. By addition to drinking water.
should be monitored. The trough drug concentration should
Pigs: 40 mg/kg daily; 33 g/100 litres drinking water
be measured just before the next dose is given to ensure
Poultry: 60 mg/kg; 55 g/100 litres drinking water
that, in the case of gentamicin, it has fallen below 1 micro-
gram/mL to avoid toxicity
POM Tetsol 800 (Novartis) UK
Simultaneous administration with other potentially ototoxic
Oral powder, for addition to drinking water, tetracycline hydrochloride 800
g/kg,foc pigs,chickens
drugs such as loop diuretics should be avoided (see Drug
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter 10 days. Poulry: slaughter 3 days,
Interactions - Appendix 1). Aminoglycosides may impair
should not be used in laying birds producing eggs for human consumption
neuromuscular transmission particularly if used peri-opera-
tively in association with anaesthesia. They should not be
1.1.3 Aminoglycosides
given to animals with myasthenia gravis. These drugs are
well absorbed from the peritoneal cavity and instillation
This group includes streptomycin, dihydrostreptomycin,
 neomycin, framycetin, gentamicin, paromomycin, ami.
 during surgery may result in drug overdose and transient
kacin, tobramycin, and apramycin. All are bactericidal
respiratory paralysis.
and active against Gram-negative organisms and some
Gram-positive organisms, but not streptococci. Amikacin,
AMIKACIN
gentamicin, and tobramycin are active against Pseu-
UK
domonas aeruginosa. Aminoglycosides are taken up into
Indications.Amikacin-sensitive infections
bacteria by an ox ygen-dependent process and are therefore
Dose. See Prescribing for reptiles
alkaline media, which is of particular importance when
POM  Amikacin (Non-proprietary) UK
treating urinary infections. Aminoglycosides show syner-
Injection, armikacin (as sulfate) 250 rmg/mL
gism with beta-lactam antibacterials.
POM (H Amikin (Bristol-Myers Squibb) UK
Bacteria may rapidly acquire resistance to these antibiotics.
fnjection, armikacin (as sulfate) 50 rmg/mL, 250 rmg/mL
Enteric bacteria may gain the ability to produce a range of
aminoglycoside-inactivating enzymes particularly if a sub-
APRAMYCIN
therapeutic dose is given. The different members of the
UK
enizymes.
Indications. Apramycini-sensiti ve infections
The aminoglycosides are not absorbed from the gastro-
Contra-indications. Cats, myasthenia gravis, see notes
intestinal tract following oral administration; therefore this
above
route is used for the treatment of gastro-intestinal infections
Side-effects. Ototoxicity, niephrotoxicity, see notes above
and hepatic encephalopathy. The treatment of systemic
 Warnings. Caution in renal impairment; Drugs Interactions
infections, including invasive enteric organisms, requires
see Appendix 1 (aminoglycosides); aminoglycosides may
that the drug is administered by injection. Aminoglycosides
cause hypersensitivity reactions in operators following
are poorly distributed into body compartments such as the
 injection, inhal ation, ingestion, or skin contact
154  Bacterial, fungal, viral, and protozoal infections
Dose. Calves: by addition to drinking water, mitk, or mitk
NEOMYCIN SULFATE
replacer, 20-40 mg/kg daily
(Neomycin sulphate)
Lambs: by mouth, 10 mg/kg daily
Pigs: by addition to drinking water, 7.5-12.5 mg/kg daily
UK
or 5 g/100 litres drinking water
Indications. Neomycin-sensitive
infections;
hepatic
by addition to feed, 100 g/tonne feed
encephalopathy + (see section 3.10)
piglets: by mouth, 10-20 mg/kg daily
Contra-indications. Cats, myasthenia gravis, foals mani-
Poultry: by addition to drinking water, 25-50 g/100 litres
festing signs of toxaemia, see notes above
Side-effects. Ototoxicity, nephrotoxicity, see notes above
MFS Apralan G200 (Elanco) UK
Warnings. Caution in renal impairment or urinary obstruc-
Premix, aprarmycin (as sulfate) 200 g/kg, for pigs
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter 14 days
tion; Drugs Interactions - see Appendix 1 (aminoglyco-
sides); aminoglycosides 
smaycause
hypersensitivity
POM Apralan Oral Doser (Elanco) U/K
reactions in operators following injection, inhalation, inges-
Mixture, aprarmycin (as sulfate) 20 rmg/unit dose, for lambs, piglets; dose
applicator (l unit dose = l.l rmL)
tion, or skin contact, operators should wear suitable protec-
Withdrawal Periods. Laumbs: slaughter 35 days. Piglets: slaughter 28 days
tiveclothing
Dose. Piglets: I-2 unit doses daily
Dose.
Lumbs: I unit dose/2 kg body-weight
Horses: hepatic encephalopathy +, see section 3.6.3
POM Apralan Soluble Powder (Elanco) U/K
 Lambs: see preparation details
Oral powder, for addition to drinking water, rmilk, or milk replacer, apramy-
Pigs: by addition to drinking water, 11 mg/kg body-weight;
cin (as sulfate) I g, 50 g, I kg, for calves, pigs, poultry (rmeasure provided =
12.5 g/100 litres
apramycin 5 g with 50-g bottle, aprarmycin 25 g with I-kg bag)
Withdrawal Periods. Calves: slaughter 28 days. Pigs: slaughter [4 days.
by addition to feed, 11 mg/kg body-weight; 230 g/tonne
Poultry: slaughter 7 days, should not be used in birds producing eggs for
feed
hurm an corsurmptior
 Dogs, cats: bacterial infections, 11 mg/kg daily in divided
doses
FRAMYCETIN SULFATE
 Hepatic encephalopathy + , see section 3.6.3
(Framycetin sulphate)
Poultry: by addition to drinking water, 11 mg/kg
by addition to feed, 230 g/tonne feed
UK
Indications. Framycetin-sensitive infections, in particular
POM (H Neomycin (Non-proprietary) UK
acute bovine mastitis with systemic involvement
Fablets, neormycin sulfate 500 rmg
Contra-indications. Cats, myasthenia gravis, see notes
POM Neobiotic Soluble Powder 70% (Pfizer) UK
above; hypersensitivity to framycetin or other aminoglyco-
Oral powder, for addition to drinking water or feed, neormycin sulfate 700
sides; conicurrent cephalosporins
mg/g,focpigs,broiler chickens
Side-effects. Ototoxicity, nephrotoxicity, see notes above
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter I4 days. Chickens: slaughter with-
Warnings. Caution in renal impairment; Drugs Interactions
drawal period nil
-see Appendix 1 (aminoglycosides); concomitant use of
MFS Neomycin Premix (Pfizer) UK
calcium borogluconate at parturition advised because
Premix,neormycin sulfate l00%,for pigs, broiler chickens
aminoglycosides may cause hypocalcaemia; aminoglyco-
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter [4 days. Chickens: slaughter with-
sides may cause hypersensitivity reactions in operators fol-
drawal period nil
POM Orojet N (Fort Dodge) UK
Dose. Dairy cattle: by intramuscuiar injection, 5 mg/kg
Oral liquid, neormycin sulfate 70 mg/unit dose, for lambs (l unit dose = l
twice daily for up to 3 days
mL)
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter 28 days
POM Framomycin 15% Injection (Novartis) U/K
Dose. Lumbs: I urit dose/5 kg body-weight
Injection, framycetin sulfate 150 mg/mL, for dairy cattle
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 49 days, rmilk 56 hours
PAROMOMYCIN
GENTAMICIN
Indications. Paromomycin-senisitive infections
Dose. See Prescribing for amphibians
UK
Paromomycin (Available from IDIS, UK)
Indications. Gentamicin-sensitive infections
Paromormycin preparations are not available in the UK. To obtairn a supply,
Contra-indications. Pregnant animals, concurrent use of
 the veterinarian should obtain a STA frorm the VMD
other drugs that may induce ototoxicity or nephrotoxicity
Warnings. Care in renal impairment
STREPTOMYCIN
Dose. Horses +: by intravenous injection, 6.6 mg/kg once
daily
Indications. Streptomycin-sensitive infections
Warnings. Excessive or prolonged administration can lead
Dogs, cats: by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection, 5
to balance and hearing impairment
 mg/kg twice daily for 24 hours then once daily
Dose.Horses,cattle, sheep,goats: by intramuscular injec-
POM Pangram 5% (Birmeda) UK
tion, 10 mg/kg daily
Injction, gentarmicin 50 mg/mL, for dogs, cats
Dogs,cats:by intramuscular injection,25 mg/kg daily
1.1.4 Macrolides and lincosamides  155
POM Devomyein (Norbrook) UK
inhibits the metabolism of other drugs by the liver and, in
Injection, steomycin sulfate 250 mg/m,forhorses, cate, sheep, gots,
humans, has given rise to serious drug interactions. These
dogs, cafs
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for human cort 
interactions have not been studied in veterinary species but
sumption. Catle: slaughter 14 days, rmilk 2 days. Sheep, gouts: slaughter 14
care should be taken when administering erythromycin with
days, should not be used in sheep, goats producing rmilk for humar consurmp-
cyclosporin, oral anticoagulants,
 methylprednisolone,
tior
theophylline, and antihistamines such as terfenidine.
With Dihydrostreptomycin
Azithromycin and clarithromycin are structural anal ogues
of erythromycin produced for human medicine. They have
POM Devomyein-D (Norbrook) UK
longer half-lives and less frequent dosing is required. In
Injection, dihydrostreptomycin sulfate I50 mg, streptormycin sulfate 150 rmg/
mL,fr,,tsg
addition, the gastro-intestinal side-effects are less of a
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmarn corn -
n       
sumptiona slaghtay,ikdyhe, agh
the cytochrome P450 erizymes inhibited by erythromycin so
days, should not be used in sheep, goats producing milk for humar consump-
[0]
the potential for serious drug interactions is much less. Both
Dose.
.Horses, catle, sheep, gouts: by intramuscular injection, I mL/30 kg
azithromycin and clarithromycin have greater activity than
daily
erythromycin against Mycobacterium avium complex (and
Dogs, cats: by intramscwlar injction, I mL/12 kg daily
can be used in treating atypical mycobacterial infections)
TOBRAMYCIN
and against Toxoplasma gondi. Azithromycin is also highly
active against Chlamydophila and clarithromycin is active
UK
against M. leprae. Little work has been done on these drugs
Indications. Tobramycin-sensitive infections
in domestic animals and many data in the literature are
Dose. See Prescribing for reptiles and Prescribing for
extrapolated from human studies. Azithromycin appears to
exotic birds
have a long half-life of 35 hours in cats. Although
azithromycin use will result in rapid resolution of clinical
POMH Tobramycin (Non-proprietary) UK
signs of chlamydophilial infection in cats, a recent study
Injection, tobrarmycin (as sulfate) 40 rmg/mL
suggets that even prolonged and continuous dosing does not
POM Nebcin (King)UK
eliminate Chlamydophila felis infection and animals remain
Injection, tobrarmycin (as sulfate) 10 rmg/mL, 40 mg/mL
carriers.
Spiramycin is a macrolide which achieves very high tissue
concentrations (in excess of those found in plasma) and
1.1.4 Macrolides and lincosamides
penetrates well into milk, lacrimal fluids, respiratory secre-
tions and other body fluids partly because of ion trapping of
The macrolides include erythromycin, josamycin, spiramy-
this weak base in fluids which are more acidic tharn plasma.
cin, tilmicosin, and tylosin, while clindamycin, pirlimycin
The high tissue levels found are partly due to binding of the
and lincomycin belong to the related lincosamide group.
drug to tissue proteins, a feature which prolongs the resi-
They are usually bacteriostatic in action. All are basic com-
dence time of spiramycin within tissue compartments. Its
pounds that are well absorbed following oral administration
spectrum of activity is similar to that of erythromycin. It
and inactivated by hepatic metabolism. Due to their basic
has greater acid stability than erythromycin and good oral
nature they are concentrated by the “ion-trap' in acidic flu-
bioavailability in monogastric animals. There is some evi-
ids such as milk and prostatic fluid. Ion trapping also occurs
dence of a synergistic action with metronidazole against
within cells and macrolides, in particular, will attain high
obligate anaerobic bacteria. Spiramycin also has activity
concentrations inside cells, including macrophages which
dds nuodsosi pue upu musnjdoxoy isurese
may target the drug to sites of infection. They can be effec-
tive against intracellular pathogens (for example Mycobac-
Tilmicosin is indicated for the treatment of pneumonia
associated with Pasteurella spp. in cattle and sheep and
teria spp.).
Tylosin has good activity against Mycoplasma spp. and Ser-
Actinobacilius pleuropneumoniae,Mycoplasma hyopneu-
pulina hyodysenteriae (Treponema hyodysenteriae)and a
moniae, and Pasteurella multocida in pigs. It is also effec-
tive against ovine mastitis associated with Staphylococcus
number of Gram-positive aerobes, but little activity against
Gram-negati ve organisms or obli gate anaerobes.
aureus and Mycoplasma agalactiae.
Erythromycin is active against streptococci, Staph. aureus
Lincomycin is effective against Gram-positive bacteria,
including penicillin-resistant strains, the more fastidious
obligate anaerobes, and Mycoplasma but has little activity
Gram-negati ve bacteria, and obligate anaerobes. It is likely
against Gram-negative organisms. Clindamycin has more
to be the drug of choice for Campylobacter and also
 potent antibacterial activity than lincomycin. It is particu-
Rhodococcus equi in foals. Erythromycin has less activity
larly indicated in staphylococcal osteomyelitis. Lincosa-
than tylosin against Mycoplasma spp. or Serpulina
mides may cause a fatal enterocolitis in horses, rabbits, and
hyodysenteriae.Vomiting is a common side-effect
of
rodents. Accidental administration of feedstuffs contami-
erythromycin due to a gastric irritant effect. Fatal
nated with trace amounts of lincomycin to cattle may cause
enterocolitis has been reported in horses
sfollowing
a drop in milk production, inappetence, diarrhoea, and in
ingestion of erythromycin. In addition, this drug also
some cases ketosis.
156 Bacterial, fungal, viral, and protozoal infections
AZITHROMYCIN
ERYTHROMYCIN
UK
UK
Indications. Azithromycin-sensitive infections, particu-
Indications.Erythromycin-sensitive infections, especially
larly Chlamydophila felis infection
 those caused by Campylobacter spp. and Mycoplasma spp.;
Dose. Cats: by mouth, 5 mg/kg every other day
reduction of gastric motility (see section 3.7)
Dose.
POM(H Zithromax (Pfizer) U/K
Foals: by mouth, 25 mg/kg 3 times daily
Ora? suspension, azithomycin (as dihydrate) 40 rmg/mL
Dogs, cats: by mouth, 2- 10 mg/kg daily
Poultry: by addition to drinking water, 25 g/100 litres
CLARITHROMYCIN
POM  Erythromycin (Non-proprietary) UK
Tablets, e/c, erythromycin 250 rmg
UK
POMH Erythromycin Ethyl Suecinate (Non-proprietary) UK
Indications. Clarithromycin-sensitive infections
Oral suspension, powder for reconstinution, erythrormycin (as ethyl succi-
mate) 25 rmg/mL, 50 rmg/mL, 100 mg/mL
Dose. See Prescribing for reptiles
POM Erythrocin Proportioner (Ceva) UK
POMH Klaricid (Abbott) UK
Orl powder, for reconstitution and then addition to drinking water, erythro-
Oral suspension, powder for reconstitution, clarithrormycin 25 mg/mL, 50 
mycin activity (as phosphate) 300 mg/g, for chickens
rmg/rmL
Reconstiute erythrormnycin 23.12 g (78 g powder) in I.1 litres water then add
to drinking water at a rate of 13 mL/litre drinking water
Withdrawal Periods. Chickens: slaughter 3 days, eggs 6 days
POM Erythrocin Soluble (Ceva) UK
CLINDAMYCIN
Ora! powder, for reconstinution and then addition to drinking water, erythro-
mycin activity (as thiocyanate) 165 mg/g, for chickens
UK
Reconstiute erythrornycin I1.56 g (70 g powder) in 2.5 litres water then add
to drinking water to rmake a total volurme of 45 litres 
Indications. See notes above
Withdrawal Periods. Chickens: slaughter 3 days, eggs 6 days
Contra-indications. Clindamycin or lincomycin hypersen-
sitivity; horses, ruminants, rabbits, hamsters, guinea pigs,
chinchillas; concurrent chloramphenicol, macrolides
LINCOMYCIN
Side-effects. Occasional vomiting, diarrhoea, inappetence
Warnings. Safety in breeding animals has not been estab-
UK
lished, care in patients with renal or hepatic impairment;
Indications. See notes above and under Dose
renal and hepatic function and blood parameters should be
Contra-indications. Lincomycin hypersensitivity: horses,
monitored during prolonged treatment; care with conicurrent
ruminants, rabbits, hamsters, guinea pigs, chinchillas; con-
neuromuscular blocking agents; Drug Interactions － see
current treatment with erythromycin
Appendix 1
Side-effects. Transient soft stools, mild swelling of the
Dose.
anus, skin erythema, mild irritable behaviour
 Dogs: infected wounds, dental infections, superficial pyo-
Warnings. Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1
Dose. Pigs:
derma, by mouth, 5 mg/kg twice daily or 11 mg/kg once
daily for 5-7 days
Swine dysentery
Osteomyelitis, by mouth, 1l mg/kg twice daily for mini-
treatment, by addition to drinking water, 3.3 g/100 litres
mum 28 days
by addition to feed, 110 g/tonne feed
by intramuscular injection, 10 mg/kg once daily for up to 2
by intramuscular injection, 10 mg/kg twice daily
Cats: infected wounds, dental infections, by mouth, 5 mg/kg
days
twice daily or 11 mg/kg once daily for 5-7 days
prophylaxis, by addition to feed, 44 g/tonne feed
by intramuscular injection, 10 mg/kg twice daily
S wine mycoplasmal pneumonia, treatment and prophylaxis,
Toxoplasmosis+, by mouth, 25 mg/kg daily in divided
by addition to feed, 220 g/tonne feed
doses for at least 2 weeks
by intramuscular injection, 10 mg/kg daily
Other bacterial infections, by intramuscular injection, 4.5-
POM Antirobe Capsules (Pfizer) UK
11.0 mg/kg daily
Capsules, clindarmycin (as hydrochloride) 25 mg, for dogs, cats
Dogs, cats: by mouth, 22 mg/kg twice daily or 15 mg/kg 3
Capsules, clindarmycin (as hydrochloride) 75 rmg, 150 mg, 300 rmg, for dogs
times daily
by intramuscular injection, 22 mg/kg once daily or 1l mg/
POM Clinacin (Alstoe, Chanelle) UK
Tableis, clindamycin (as hydrochloride) 25 mg, 75 mg, 150 mg, for dogs
kg twice daily
by sfow intravenous injection, 11-22 mg/kg 1-2 times daily
POM Clindacyl (Vetoquinol) UK
Tablets, clindamycin (as hydrochloride) 25 mg, 75 rmg, 150 mg, for dogs
MFS Lincocin Premix (Pfizer) UK
Premix,lincomycin (as hydrochloride) 44 g/kg,for pigs
POM Dalacin C (Pharmacia) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: (44 g/torne, I10 g/tonne) slaughter I day, (220 g/
Injection,clindamycin (as phosphate) 150 mg/mL
tonne) 3 days
1.1.4 Macrolides and lincosamides  157
POM Lincocin Soluble Powder (Pfizer) U/K
TULATHROMYCIN
Oral powder, for addition to drinking water,lincormycin (as hydrochloride)
400 mg/g, for pigs
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter I day
UK
Indications. Tulathromycin-sensitive organisms
POM Lincocin Sterile Solution (Pfizer) UK
Contra-indications. Hypersensitivity to macrolides; conl-
Injection, lincomycin (as hydrochloride) t00 mg/mL, forpigs, dogs, cats
current other macrolides or lincosamides 
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter withdrawal period ril
Side-effects. Transient reaction at site of injection in cattle
POM Lincocin Tablets (Pfizer) UK
Warnings. Safety in pregnant and lactating animals has not
Tablets, scored, lincomycin (as hydrochloride) 100 mg, 500 mg, for dogs,
been established
cats
Dose.
Cattle: by subcutaneous injection, 2.5 mg/kg as a single
POM Lincoject (Norbrook) UK
injectin,lincomycin (ashydochloride 00mgmL,fpigs,dogs,ts
dose
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter 2 days
Pigs: by intramuscular injection, 2.5 mg/kg as a single dose
POM Draxxin (Pfizer) UK
injection, tulathrormycin I00 mg/mL, for cattle, pigs
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter 49 days, should not be used in cattle
TILMICOSIN
producing milk for hurman consurmption or in pregnant cows or heifers
intended to produce milk for hurman consurmption within 2 rmonths of
expected parturition. Pigs: slaughter 33 days
UK
Indications. Tilmicosin-sensitive organisms
Contra-indications. Intravenous injection, goats, horses;
incorporation into pig feeds containing bentonite
TYLOSIN
Side-effects. Occasional swelling at injection site
Warnings. Self-injection may cause cardiovascular system
UK
toxicity in humans; operators should exercise extreme cau-
Indications. Tylosin-sensitive  organisms; to improve
tion to avoid self-injection and wear suitable protective
tion 17.1)
Warnings. Operators should wear suitable protective cloth-
used for breeding purposes has not been established. Drug
ing
Interactions - see Appendix 1
Dose.
Dose. Dosages vary. For guidance.
Catte: pneumonia, by subcutaneous injection, 10 mg/kg
Cattle: by addition to mitk or milk replacer, 1 g/calf twice
Interdigital necrobacillosis, by subcutaneous injection, 5
daily
by intramuscular injection,4-10 mg/kg daily
mg/kg
Sheep:by subcutaneous injection,10 mg/kg
Pigs: by addition to drinking water, 25 g/100 litres
Pigs: by addition to feed, 8-16 mg/kg body-weight; 200-
prophylaxis of swine dysentery, enzootic pneumonia, by
400 g/tonne feed
addition to feed, 100 g/tonne feed for 21 days, then 40 g/
 tonne feed during period of risk
Poultry: by addition to drinking water, 10-25 mg/kg body-
treatment and prophylaxis Lawsonia intraceffularis, by
weight; 7.5 g/100 litres
addition to feed, 100 g/tonne feed for 21 days
POM Micotil (Elanco) UK
by intramuscular injection, 2-10 mg/kg daily
injection, tilrmicosin 300 mg/mL, for young catle, sheep more than 15 kg
Dogs: by mouth, 40 mg/kg daily in divided doses
body-weight
Poultry: by addition to drinking water, 50 g/100 litres
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle: slaughter 60 days, should not be used in cattle
producing milk for human consum ption or heifers within 60 days of calving.
POM Bilosin 200 (Bimeda) U/K
Sheep: slaughter 42 days, rmilk 15 days
injection, tylosin 200 rmg/mL, for pigs
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter 28 days
Accidental self-injection may be fatal in humans. In case
POM Norotyl LA (Norbrook) UK
 of accidental self-injection seek urgent medical attention
Injection, tylosin 1 50 mg/mL,for pigs
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter 7 days
and show package leaflet to medical services
POM Tylan 200 (Elanco) UK
POM Pulmotil AC (Elanco) UK
Injection, tylosin 200 mg/mL, for cattle, pigs
Oral solution, tilrmicosin 250 mg/mL, for chickens
Withdrawal Periods. Cale: slaughter 28 days, milk 4.5 days. Pigs: slaughter
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter 12 days
3 weeks
MFS Pulmotil G100 (Elanco) U/K
MFS Tylan G20 (Elanco) UK
Premix, tilmicosin (as phosphate) to0 g/kg,for growing fattening pigs
Premix,tylosin (as phosphate) 20 g/kg,for pigs
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter 14 days
MFS Pulmotil G200 (Elanco) U/K
MFS Tylan GS0 (Elanco) UK
Premix, tilmicosin (as phosphate) 200 g/kg,forgrowing fattening pigs
Premix, tylosin (as phosphate) 50 g/kg,for pigs
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter 14 days
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter withdrawal period nil 
158 Bacterial, fungal, viral, and protozoal infections
MFS Tylan G250 (Elanco) UK
resistant to chloramphenicol. Both florfenicol and thiam-
Premix, tylosin (as phosphate) 250 g/kg, for pigs
phenicol lack the nitrobenzene component of chloramphen-
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter withdrawal period nil
icol that is thought to be responsible for the idiosyncratic
POM Tylan Soluble (Elanco) UK
reaction to chloramphenicol leading to fatal aplastic anae-
Oral powder, for addition to drinking water, milk, or milk replacer, tylosin
(as tartrate) 100 g,for calves, pigs, broiler chickens, turkeys
mia, occasionally seen in humans.
Withdrawal Periods. Calves: slaughter 14 days. Pigs: slaughter withdrawal
period nil. Chickens, furkeys: slaughter withdrawal period nil, should not be
used in birds producing eggs for human consurmptiorn
POM Tyluvet-20 (Vetoquinol) UK
CHLORAMPHENICOL
Injection, tylosin 200 mg/mL, forpigs
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter 28 days
UK
Indications. See notes above
1.1.5 Chloramphenicols
Contra-indications. Hepatic impairment, see notes above
 Side-effects. Bone marrow suppression, diarrhoea, vomit-
Chloramphenicol is a broad-spectrum bacteriostatic anti-
ing
bacterial. It is active against rickettsial and chlamydophilial
Warnings. Administer with caution to cats, safety in preg-
infections, the majority of obligate anaerobes, most Gram-
positi ve aerobes, and non-enteric aerobes including Actino-
nant or lactating animals and neonates has not been estab-
 lished; Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1
bacilfus,Bordetella,Haemophitus,Pasteurella multocida,
Dose.
and Mannheimia haemotytica. Enterobacteriaceae including
Dogs: by mouth or by stow intravenous injection, 50 mg/kg
Escherichia and Satmonella spp. are intrinsically suscepti-
1-2 times daily
ble but plasmid-mediated resistance is widespread. Chlor-
Cats: by mouth or by stow intravenous injection,25 mg/kg
amphenicol has activity against Mycoplasma and Proteus
1-2 times daily
spp. but is unreliable. It is inactive against Pseudomonas
spp.
POMH Chloramphenicol (Non-proprietary) UK
Chloramphenicol is used in the treatment of human Satmo-
Capsules, chlorarm phenicol 250 rmg
nefla typhi infection (typhoid). In veterinary medicine, the
use of chloramphenicol is restricted to non-food producing
POM (H Kemicetine (Pharmacia) UK
animals; the drug is included in Annex IV of Regulation
(njection, powder for reconstinution, chlorarmphenicol (as sodium succinate)
lg
2377/90/EEC which prohibits its use in food-producing ani-
mals. Chloramphenicol should be used to treat individual
d m  so d e n r s
ous gloves and avoid drug-skin contact.
FLORFENICOL
Chloramphenicol is a simple uncharged lipid-soluble com-
pound which readily crosses cellular barriers. Chloram-
UK
phericol diffuses throughout the body and reaches sites of
Indications.Florfenicol-sensitive infections
infection inaccessible to many other antibacterial drugs
Contra-indications. Adult bulls or boars intended for
including cerebrospinal fluid, brain, and internal structures
breeding purposes; pregnant or lactating sows; operators
of the eye. It is inactivated in the liver by conjugation and
with known hypersensitivity to propylene glycol and poly-
then excreted in urine and bile.
ethylene glycol
 Drug metabolism is particularly rapid in horses and chlor-
Side-effects.
. Transient decrease in appetite and softening
amphenicol is therefore of limited use in this species. Due
of stools; inflammatory lesions at site of injectionl
to limited drug metabolism in the cat, chloramphenicol may
 accumulate giving rise to reversible bone-marrow suppres-
 not been established; safety in pregnant and lactating sows
sion. Treatment should be restricted to one week in cats.
has not been established
The bacteriostatic action of chloramphenicol may inhibit
Dose. Cattle: by subcutaneous injection, 40 mg/kg as a sin-
the bactericidal action of beta-lactam antibacterials and
gle dose
these drugs should not therefore be used concurrently.
by intramuscular injection, 20 mg/kg.Repeat after 2 days
Pigs: by intramuscular injection, 15 mg/kg. Repeat afer 2
Chloramphenicol is an irreversible inhibitor of the cyto-
days
chrome P450 enzymes involved in the metabolism of bar-
biturates and will affect the metabolism of these drugs by
Fish: see Prescribing for fish for preparation details and
dogs for up to 3 weeks following a single dose of 50 mg/kg
dosage
of chloramphenicol.
POM Nuflor (Schering-Plough) UK
Thiamphenicol has a broad spectrum of activity similar to
Injection, florfenicol 300 mg/mL, for catfle
chloramphenicol. Florfenicol, a fluorinated analogue of
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 30 days (20 rmg/kg), 44 days (40 mg/
kg), should not be used in cattle producing milk for hurmar consurmption
substance but is less liable to produce blood dyscrasias. It is
POM Nuflor Swine (Schering-Plough) UK
a less satisfactory substrate for bacterial chloramphenicol
injection, florfenicol 300 mg/mL, for pigs more than 2 kg body-weight
acetyl-transferase and may be active against some strains
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter 18 days
1.1.6 Sulphonamides and potentiated sulphonamides  159
1.1.6 Sulphonamides and potentiated
SULFADIMIDINE
sulphonamides
(Sulphadimidine)
1.1.6.1 Sulphonamides
UK
1.1.6.2 Potentiated sulphonamides
Indications. Sulfadimidine-senisitive infectionis; coccidio-
sis
Contra-indications. Sulphonamide
hypersensitivity;
severe hepatic impairment; blood dyscrasias
Side-effects. Agranulocytosis, haemolytic anaemia, avita-
1.1.6.1 Sulphonamides
minosis-K with prolonged administration; cystalluria
The sulphonamides form an extensive series of drugs that
Warnings. Care in renal impairment; ensure adequate
differ more in their physicochemical characteristics, and
water intake during treatment; avoid prolonged admi nistra-
hence in mode of administration and pharmacokinetics,
tion
than they do in their antibacterial activity. They act by com-
Dose. Cattle, sheep, pigs: by subcutaneous or intravenous
peting with tissue factors, notably p-aminobenzoic acid, and
(preferred) injection, 200 mg/kg daily on day 1, then 100
are therefore inactive in the presence of necrotic tissue.
mg/kg daily
They are bacteriostatic to a range of Gram-positive and
POM Intradine (Norbrook) UK
Gram-negative bacteria. They are active against aerobic
njeton, sulfadimidine (as sodium salt) 308.9 mg/mL,for catle, sheep, pigs
Gram-positive cocci and some rods and many Gram-nega-
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 18 days, rmilk 6.5 days. Sheep : slaugh-
tive rods including Enterobacteriaceae. Leptospira and
ter I 8 days. Pigs: slaughter 42 days
Pseudomonas spp. are resistant. Sulphonamides are also
active against Chtamydophila, Toxoplasma, and coccidia
1.1.6.2 Potentiated sulphonamides
(see section 1.4). Acquired resistance to sulphonamides is 
Sulphonamides may be combined with the dihydrofolate
widespread in the UK.
reductase inhibitors baquiloprim, ormetoprim, or tri-
The sodium salts are alkaline and hence irritant by intra-
methoprim. They inhibit the conversion of bacterial dihy-
drofolic acid to tetrahydrofolic acid which is necessary for
However, there are safety concerns over intravenous admin-
 the synthesis of certain amino acids, purines, and DN A syni-
istration of sulphonamides (see below). Sulphonamides are
 thesis. Potentiated sulphonamides block sequential stages in
well absorbed following oral administration. They diffuse
 the synthesis of tetrahydrofolate and thus have a synergistic
well into body tissues and are partly inactivated in the liver,
 antibacterial action. This combination may be bactericidal
mainly by acetylation. The acetylated derivati ves are rela-
anid allows a smaller dose of sulphonamide to be used. The
tively insoluble in acidic urine and so may precipitate in the
antibacterial spectrum of the combination is broad and
renal tubules of carnivores leading to crystalluria and renal
includes a high proportion of anaerobic bacteria, Nocardia.
failure. This problem may be reduced by increasing the
Chlamydophila, and Toxoplasma spp. Plasmid-mediated
urine volume or by increasing the urine pH.
resistance to trimethoprim occurs. Side-effects seen with
Prolonged administration of certain sulphonamides may
sulphonamides also occur with potentiated sulphonamide
cause keratoconjunctivitis sicca (dry eye) in dogs, and sul-
 admi mistration. In human medicine, the therapeutic activity
fadiazine-containing preparations may promote a reversible
 of the combination has been found to be fully accounted for
immune-mediated sterile polyarthritis in dogs. Sulphona-
 by the trimethoprim and the recommendations for com-
mides may cause petechial haemorrhages in poultry as a
 bined therapy are rather restricted. Trimethoprim is cleared
result of vitamin K antagonism. Prolonged treatment with
 much more rapidly in animals than humans. There are no
       ss
veterinary products containing only baquiloprim 
agranulocytosis and haemolytic anaermia. Sulphonamides
ormetoprim.
may inhibit thyroid hormone synthesis and, in some dogs
 Compound preparations usually contain 5 parts sulphona-
canl cause subclinical hypothyroidism with subrormal T4
mide and one part trimethoprim, baquiloprim, or ormeto-
concentrations and high concentrations of TSH detected in
prim. The sulphonamides most commonly used in
plasma in these cases. This effect is reversible when the
conjunction
with trimethoprim are sulfadiazine (co-
therapy is stopped. Concurrent administration of sulphona-
trimazine) and sulfadoxine, the latter acting for a longer
mides and sedatives or anaesthetics is contra-indicated in
period.
horses because severe cardiac arrhythmias and collapse
Trimethoprim, like the sulphonamides, diffuses well into
may result. Intravenous administration of sulphonamides to
body tissues and so the combination is the treatment of
cattle and horses can result in sudden collapse. A relati vely
choice for disorders such as coliform meningitis. Unfortu-
rare but severe idiosyncratic reaction to sulphonamides
ately, in domesticated animals, trimethoprim is more rap-
reported to occur in dogs is acute hepatopathy. It is likely
idly inactivated than the sulphonamide component so that
that this occurs due to increased formation of toxic metabo-
useful ratios are present in the body for a short time only
lites (hydroxylamine, nitroso metabolites, or both) in some
Trimethoprim is active against Gram-negative and Gram-
individual animals although work on the pathogenesis is
positive bacteria. Trimethoprim is used alone in human
ongoing.
medicine in the treatment of urinary tract, respiratory, and
160 Bacterial, fungal, viral, and protozoal infections
prostatic infections. The rapid clearance of trimethoprim
Dogs, cats: by mouth or by subcutaneous injection, 30 mg/
from the plasma of domestic species makes its use as a sole
kg daily
agent less likely to be successful.
Poultry: by addition to drinking water, 15 mg/kg body-
Baquiloprim is however more slowly inactivated and its
weight daily
of
by addition to feed, 300 g/tonne feed
sulfadimidine in cattle and pigs or sulfadimethoxine in dogs
Fish: see Prescribing for fish for preparation details and
and cats.
dosage
Ormetoprim has been less well studied in domestic animals.
POM Chanoprim 20/S0 (Chanelle) UK
It appears to have similar pharmacokinetic properties to tri -
Fablets, scored, sulfadiazine 100 mg, trirethoprim 20 mg, for dogs, cats
methoprim in those species in which it has been studied
Tableis, scored, sulfadiazine 400 mg, rirmethoprirm 80 mg, for dogs
(horses and cattle) such that the drug is more rapidly cleared
POM Delvoprim Tablets (Intervet) UK
from the plasma than the sulphonamides with which it is
Tables,,ufzie00mr0m
combined.
Tablets, scored, sulfadiazine 400 mg, trimethoprim 80 mg, fordogs
Trimethoprim (and possibly baquiloprim) retain some slight
activity on mammalian dihydrofolate reductase and so may
POM Duphatrim (Fort Dodge) UK
Tabiets, s/c, sulfadiazine 100 mg, trirmethoprirm 20 mg, for dogs, cafs
Fablets, scored, sulfadiazine 400 mg, trirmethoprim 80 mg, for dogs 
bone marrow function. Intravenous administration of poten-
Tablets, or to prepare arn oral solution, scored, sulfadiazine I g, trirmethoprirr
200 mg, for calves
cattle.
Withdrawal Periods. Calves: slaughter 28 days
POM Duphatrim Equine Formula (Fort Dodge) UK
Oral paste, sulfadiazine 1.3 g, trirmethoprirm 260 mg/division, for horses
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmarl
consurn ption
SULFADIAZINE with TRIMETHOPRIM
(Co-trimazine: preparations of trimethoprim and
POM Duphatrim Granules for Horses (Fort Dodge) UK
Oral granules, for addition to feed, sulfadiazine 12.5 g, trimethoprirn 2.5 g/
sulfadiazine in the proportions, by weight, of 1 part to
sachet, for horses
5 parts)
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurman
consurm ption
UK
Indications. Sulfadiazine/trimethoprim-sensitive
POM Duphatrim IS (Fort Dodge) UK
infec-
Injection, sulfadiazine 200 mg, trirmethoprim 40 mg/mL, for horses, catle,
tions
pigs, dogs, cats
Contra-indications. Sulphonamide
hypersensiti vity:
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmarl
drug-induced cardiac arrhythmias; dogs with keratocon-
POM Equitrim Equine Paste (Boehringer Ingelheim) UK
juncti vitis sicca; oral admimistration to calves with a func-
Oral paste, sulfadiazine 1.25 g, trirmethoprirm 250 rmg/division, for horses
tional rumen
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmar corn-
Side-effects. Occasional transient polyarthritis and kerato-
surm ptior
conjuncti vitis sicca in dogs, drowsiness in cats
POM Equitrim Granules (Boehringer Ingelheirm) U/K
Warnings. Care in renal impairment; care with concurrent
Oral granules, sulfadiazine 12.5 g, trirmethoprirm 2.5 g/sachet, for horses
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for humarn
chloramphenicol, detomidine, halothane, miconazole, phe-
consurn ption
 nylbutazone, procaine hydrochloride, romifidine, thiopen-
tal, warfarin; Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1; the drug
POM Norodine (Norbook) UK
may cause salivation in cats anid coated tablets should be
Tablets, s/c, sulfadiazine 100 rmg, trirmethoprirn 20 mg, for dogs, cafs
Tabieis, scored, sulfadiazine 400 mg, trirmethoprirm 80 mg, for dogs
fed whole, should not be halved, crushed, or chipped;
Fablets, or to prepare an oral solution, scored, sulfadiazine l g, trimethoprirm
ensure sufficient water intake to avoid crystalluria; safety of
200 mg, for culves
feeding milk from treated animals to young not established
Withdrawal Periods. Calves: slaughter 15 days
Dose. Dosages vary. For guidance.
POM Norodine 24 (Norbook) UK
Expressed as trimethoprim + sulfadiazine
Injection, sulfadiazine 200 mg, trimethoprirn 40 mg/mL, for horses, cafle,
Horses, cattle: by mouth, 30 mg/kg daily (absorption may
pigs, dogs, cats
be better if food withheld for a few hours prior to treatment)
Withdrawal Periods. Should rnot be used in horses intended for hurmarl
by intramuscular or stow intravenous injection, 15-24 mg/
kg daily
POM Norodine Equine Paste (Norbook) U/K
-SI uoafun snouaanpu mojs io tnnsmun. ig doous
Orl paste, sulfadiazine 1.25 g, trirmethoprirm 250 mg/division, for horses
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmarl
24 mg/kg daily
corsurm ption
Pigs: by mouth, 30 mg/kg body-weight daily
POM Norodine Granules (Norbook) UK
by addition to feed, 300-450 g/tonine feed
Oral powder, for addition to feed, sulfadiazine 12.5 g, trirnethoprim 2.5 g/
by intramuscular or stow intravenous injection,15-24 mg/
sachet, for horses
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmarl
kg daily
consurm ption
1.1.6 Sulphonamides and potentiated sulphonamides 161
POM Strinacin II (Merial) U/K
POM Trimedoxine 4S (Vetoquinol) U/K
Fableis, or to prepare an oral solution, scored, sulfadiazine I g, trirmethoprirm
Tablets, or to prepare arn oral solution, sulfadiazine, trirmethoprirn, for calves 
200 mg, for calves
Withdrawal Periods. Calves: slaughter 15 days
Withdrawal Periods. Culves: slaughter 28 days
Dose. Calpes: by mouth, I tablet/40 kg body-weight
POM Synutrim Fortesol (Novartis) UK
POM Trimedoxine Tablets ( Vetoquinol) UK
Oral powder, for addition to drinking water, sulfadiazine (as sodium salt)
Fablets, scored, sulfadiazine 400 mg, trirmethoprirm 80 mg, for dogs 
625 g, trirmethoprim 125 g/kg, for pigs, chickens
POM Trinacol (Boehringer Ingelheirm) U/K
eggs frorm teated birds should not be used for human consurmption
injection, sulfadiazine 200 mg, trimethoprim 40 mg/mL, for catle, pigs,
dogs
MFS Symutrim Granular (Novartis) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 12 days, rmilk 2 days. Pigs: slaughter
Granules, sulfadiazine 50 g, trimethoprirm 250 mg/kg, for pigs, chickens,
20 days
turkeys
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter 10 days. Chickens: slaughter 5 days,
MFS Uniprim 150 (Pfizer) UK
should not be used in chickens producing eggs for hurman consurm ption. Tur-
Oral powder, for addition to feed, sulfadiazine 125 g, trirmethoprirm 25 g/kg,
keys: slaughter 2 days, should not be used in hurkeys producing eggs for
for pigs, non-laying chickens
 hurm an consurmptior 
should not be used in birds producing eggs for hurman con surmption 
POM Tribrissen (Schering-Plough) UK
Fablets, scored, sulfadiazine 400 mg, trirmethoprirn 80 rmg, for dogs
POM Uniprim for Horses (Pfizer) UK
Oral powder, for addition to feed, sulfadiazine 12.5 g, trirmethoprirm 2.5 g/
POM Tribrissen 24%/48% (Schering-Plough) UK
sachet, for horses
Injection, sulfadiazine 200 mg, trimethoprim 40 mg/mL, for dogs, cats
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmarn
consurn ptior
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for humar cort -
Oral powder, for addition to fed, clenbuterol 21.44 micrograrms, sulfadi-
azine 335 rmg, trirmethoprirn 67 mg/g, for horses
POM Tribrissen Oral Paste (Schering-Plough) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmnari
Oral paste, sulfadiazine 1.25 g, trirmethoprirm 250 mg/division, for horses
consurn ption
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurman
Dose. Horses: 9 g (measure provided) of powder/250 kg body-weight twice
consumption
daily
POM Trimacare (Animalcare) UK
Tableis, sulfadiazine00 mg,trimethoprirn 20 mg,fordogs,cas
SULFADOXINE With TRIMETHOPRIM
Fablets, scored, sulfadiazine 400 mg, trirmethoprirm 80 rng, for dogs
Fableis, or to prepare an oral solution, scored, sulfadiazine I g, trirmethoprirm
200 mg,for calves
UK
Withdrawal Periods. Culves: slaughter 28 days
Indications.Sulfadoxine/trimethoprim-sensitive infections
Contra-indications. Intraperitoneal administration; horses
POM Trimacare 24% (Anirmalcare) UK
injection, sulfadiazine 200 mg, trirmethoprir 40 mg/mL, for horses, cattle,
with cardiac arrhythmias; sulphonamide hypersensitivity;
sheep,pigs,dogs,cats
concurrent alpha,-adrenoceptor stimulants
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmar corn -
Side-effects. Occasional transient swelling at site of injec-
surmption. Catle: slaughter 10 days, milk 2.5 days. Sheep: slaughter 1 8 days,
tion; cardiac and respiratory shock in horses; anaphylactic
should not be used in sheep producing milk for human consurmption. Pigs:
slaughter 10 days
or hypersensitivity reactions in horses; renal, hepatic, or
haematopoietic system damage
MFS Trimediazine 15 (Vetoquinol) U/K
Warnings. Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1; safety in
Oral powder, sulfadiazine 125 g, trirmethoprirm 25 g/kg, for pigs, chickens,
pregnant animals has not been established; use with caution
turkeys
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter 5 days. Chickens: slaughter I day,
should not be used in chickens producing eggs for human consurmption. Tur-
crasias; ensure adequate water supply available
keys: slaughter 3 days
 Dose. Expressed as sulfadoxine + trimethoprim
Horses: by intramuscular or slow intravenous (preferred)
MFS Trimediazine BMP (Vetoquinol) U/K
injection, 15 mg/kg
Oral powder, for addition to feed, sulfadiazine 125 g, trirmethoprirn 25 g/kg,
Cattle,pigs:by intramuscular (preferred) or intravenous
for pigs, chickens, turkeys
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter 7 days. Chickens: slaughter I day,
injection, 15 mg/kg daily
Pigs: by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection, 15 mg/kg
should not be used in chickens producing eggs for hurman consurm ption. Tur-
keys: slaughter 3 days
daily
POM Trimediazine Paste (Vetoquinol) U/K
POM Bimotrim Co (Bimeda) UK
Oral paste, sulfadiazine 1.3 g, trirmethoprirn 260 rmg/division, for horses
njection, sulfadoxine 200 mg, trirmethoprin 40 rmg/mL, for horses, catte
Withdrawal Periods. Should rnot be used in horses intended for hurman
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurman con-
consurmption
surmption. Cafle: slaughter 10 days, milk 2 days
POM Trimediazine Plain (Vetoquinol) U/K
POM Borgal 24% (Intervet) UK
Oral powder, for addition to feed, sulfadiazine 250 mg, trirmethoprirn 50 rmg/
Injection, sulfdoxine 200 mg, trimethoprirm 40 mg/mL, for horses, cate,
g,for horses
pigs
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmar
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter 8 days. Catfe: slaughter 10 days,
consurmption
rmilk 2 days. Pigs: slaughter 8 days
162 Bacterial, fungal, viral, and protozoal infections
SULFAMETHOXAZOLE with TRIMETHOPRIM
NITROFURANTOIN
(Co-trimox azole: preparations of trimethoprim and
sulfamethoxazole in the proportions, by weight, of 1
UK
part to 5 parts)
Indications. Urinary-tract infections
Dose. By mouth.
UK
Dogs, cats: 4 mg/kg 3 times daily
Indications. Sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim-sensitive
POM H Nitrofurantoin (Non-proprietary) UK
infections
Fablets, nitrofurantoin 50 mg, 100 mg
Contra-indications. Sulphonamide
hypersensiti vity;
severe hepatic impairment; blood dyscrasias
POM Furadantin (Goldshield) UK
Side-effects. Occasionally erythema and petechiae of the
Fableis, scored, nitrofurantoin 50 rmg, 100 mg
skin, internal haemorrhage, haematuria, keratoconjunctivi-
tis sicca
Warnings. Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1
Dose. Expressed as sulfamethox azole + trimethoprim
1.1.8 Nitroimidazoles
Dogs, cats: by mouth, 30 mg/kg daily
The nitroimidazoles include dimetridazole and metronida-
POM Co-trimoxazole (Non-proprietary) UK
zole, which are bactericidal to most obligate anaerobic bac-
Tablets, sulfarmethox azole 400 mg, trirmethoprirm 80 mg
teria. They have negligible activity against aerobic bacteria.
Paediatric oral suspension, sulfamethoxazole 40 mg, trirmethoprirm 8 mg/mL
They
areactiveagainstSerpulinahyodysenteriae
Oral suspension, sulfarmethoxazole 80 mg, trirmethoprir 16 rmg/mL
(Treponema hyodysenteriae) and a variety of protozoa.
Strong 5terile solution, sulfarmethoxazole 80 rmg, trirmethoprirm l6 rmg/mL.
For dilution and use as an intravenous infusior
Acquired resistance among susceptible organisms is rare.
Dimetridazole is included in Annex IV of Regulation
2377/90/EEC which prohibits its use in food-producing
species in Europe. Products containing dimetridazole have
beerl voluntarily suspended and will become unavailable
SULFAQUINOXALINE with TRIMETHOPRIM
once existing stocks are depleted.
Metronidazole is well absorbed by mouth and penetrates
UK
tissues throughout the body inicluding the brain and cerebro-
Indications. Sulfadimidine/trimethoprim-senisitive  infec-
spinal fluid. It is administered for a variety of anaerobic
tions; treatment of coccidiosis in chickens (see section 1.4)
infections including gingivitis and empyema. The action of
 Contra-indications. Use in water-proportioner systems
metronidazole is restricted to obligate anaerobic organisms
Dose. Expressed as sulfaquinox aline + trimethoprim
but infections are often mixed. Therefore, it may be neces-
Chickens, turkeys: bacterial infections, by addition to
sary to concurrently administer a drug which is active
drinking water or feed, 30 mg/kg body-weight
against aerobic organisms. One such drug, whose spectrum
of activity is complementary to metronidazole, is spiramy-
POM Tribrissen (SQX) Poultry Formula (Schering-Plough) UK
cin which is effective against Gram-positive aerobes and
Granules, for addition to feed or drinking water, sulfaquinoxaline (as
sodiurm) 500 mg/g, trirmethoprirm 165 mg/g, for chickens, furkeys more than
appears to be synergistic with metronidazole against the
21days ofage
obligate anaerobes.
Withdrawal Periods. Broiler chickens: slaughter 7 days. Turkeys: slaughter
9 days. Should not be used in layer or breeder flocks when birds are in lay
METRONIDAZOLE
UK
1.1.7 Nitrofurans
 Indications. Infections caused by anaerobic bacteria; treat-
ment of trichomoniosis (see section 1.4.3); giardiosis (see
The nitrofurans, which include furazolidone and nitro-
section 1.4.5); hepatic encephalopathy (see section 3.10)
furantoin, are relatively broad-spectrum bactericidal drugs.
Contra-indications. Very small birds such as zebra finches;
They are active against Satmonella spp., coliforms, Myco-
hypersensitivity
plasma spp., Coccidia spp., and some other protozoa.
Warnings. Care in patients with renal or hepatic impair-
Resistance is by chromosomal mutation. Plasmid-mediated
tranismissible resistance is rare.
depression, ataxia, hepatic impairment; operators should
Furazolidone and nitrofurantoin are included in Annex IV
wear impervious gloves when handling the product. Drug
of Regulation 2377/90/EEC, which prohibits their use in
Interactiorns - see Appendix 1
 medicinal products for food-producing species.
Dose.
Nitrofurantoin is well absorbed following oral administra-
Horses: by mouth, 20 mg/kg twice daily
tion and rapidly excreted in the urine. Blood and tissue con-
by intramuscular or slow intravenous injection or intrave
centrations are too low for the treatment of systemic
nous infusion, 20 mg/kg daily
infection and it is mainly used for urinary tract infections in
Dogs,cats: by mouth or by intravenous infusion, 20 mg/kg
dogs anid cats.
daily
1.1.9 Quinolones 163
POM) Metronidazole (Non-proprietary) UK
organisms such as Saimonella spp, Campylobacter spp.
Tablets, f/c, rmetronidazole 200 rmg, 400 rmg
and E. cofi. The resistance is often due to chromosomal
Oral suspension, metronidazole (as benzoate) 40 rmg/mL
mutations either in the Gyr A gene or in proteins in the bac-
POM  Flagyl (Hawgreen) UK
terial cell membrane which allow the drug to enter the bac-
Tablets, rmetronidazole 200 rmg, 400 mg, 500 mg
tenialcell.
 Resistance within a population of bacteria
POM  Flagyl (Aventis Pharma) UK
becomes evident whenever antibacterial drugs are heavily
Intravenous infusion, rmetronidazole 5 rmg/mL
 used due to selection pressure. It is recormmended to per-
form antimicrobial sensitivity tests before using fluro-
POM  FlagylS (Hawgteen) UK
quinolones or to limit the use of this group of drugs to
Oral suspension, rmetronidazole (as benzoate) 40 rmg/mL
the treatment of intractable Gram-negative infections.
POM(H) Metrolyl (Sandoz) UK
Examples of such infections are those that are potentially
Intravenous infusion, rmetronidazole 5 rmg/mL
life-threatening or resistant infections where other antibac-
POM Metronex for Horses (Pfizer) UK
terial drugs do not penetrate well enough to the site of infec-
tion and are therefore not likely to be successful in treating
Oral paste, metronidazole 500 mg/g, for horses; metered dose applicator
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurman
the problem (for example, chronic prostatic infections in
consumption
dogs or recurrent and resistant urinary tract infections).
POM Stomorgyl (Merial) UK
See section l.l.12 for preparation details
 DANOFLOXACIN
1.1.9 Quinolones
UK
Oxolinic acid, pipemidic acid, and nalidixic acid are 4-
Indications. Danofloxacin-sensitive infections
 Contra-indlications. Hypersensitivity to quinolones; preg-
quinolone antibacterial agents. They are active against
Gram-negative bacteria. However Gram-positive bacteria,
nant cattle
 Side-effects. Transient inflammatory reaction at site of
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and obligate anaerobes are not
susceptible.
injection; nasal and ocular erythema; reduced food intake
Warnings. Caution in animals with joint disease or carti-
Fluoroquinolone derivatives such as difloxacin, dano-
 lage growth disorders; safety in pregnant cows and breeding
floxacin, enrofloxacin, flumequine, ibafloxacin, marbo-
floxacin, orbifloxacin, and sarafloxacin have a broader
bulls has not beenn established
spectrum of activity than the parent compounds and are
Dose. Cattle: by subcutaneous injection, 6 mg/kg as a sin-
well distributed to tissues. They are bactericidal by inhibit-
gle dose. Repeat after 48 hours if required
ing microbial DNA gyrase and are active against a wide
by intramuscular or intravenous injection, 1.25 mg/kg daily
range of Gram-negative bacteria, including Pseudomonas
Pigs: by intramuscular injection, 1.25 mg/kg daily for 3
aeruginosa and Klebsiella spp., and also against some
days
Gram-positive micro-organisms and Mycopfasma spp. They
are not active against obligate anaerobes. Fluoroquinolones
POM Advocin (Pfizer) U/K
Injection, danofloxacin (as danofloxacin mesilate) 25 mg/mL, for catle, pigs
are not particularly effective against streptococcal and ente-
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle: slaughter 5 days, rmilk 48 hours. Pigs: slaughter
rococcal infections. For this reason they tend to spare the
3 days
normal gut flora of animals under treatment and are there-
Note. For intrarmuscular or intravenous injection in cattle
fore the treatment of choice for neutropenic patients under-
going cancer chemotherapy.
POM Advocin 180 (Pfizer) UK
injection, danofloxacin (as danofloxacin rmesilate) I 80 mg/mL, for catfle
Fluoroquinolones operate by a concentration-dependent
Withdrawal Periods. Catfe: slaughter 8 days, milk 4 days
killing mechanism in Gram-positive organisms and the
Mote. For subcutaneous injection in cattle
most successful dosing regimens are those which produce
high peak plasma concentrations.
DIFLOXACIN
Fluoroquinolones may inhibit the growth of load-bearing
articular cartilage and therefore should not be administered
UK
Indications. Difloxacin-sensitive infections
that fluoroquinolones may pre-dispose to seizure activity in
Contra-ilndications. Birds with existing leg weakness Or
patients suffering from epilepsy. These drugs should there-
osteoporesis
fore be used with caution in epileptic patients, particulary if
Warnings. Safety in birds with existing leg weakness or
combined with certain NSAIDs. At higher dose rates than
 osteoporesis has riot been established
currently recommended in the UK, enrofloxacin use has
Dose. Poultry: by addition to drinking water, 10 mg/kg for
been associated with retinal blindness in cats. Fluoroqui-
5 days
nolonies have been shown to initerfere with the metabolism
of methylxanthines in dogs and caution should be exercised
POM Dicural (Fort Dodge) U/K
if combining these drugs.
Oral solution, difloxacin (as hydrochloride) I00 mg/mL, for broiler chick-
ens, future breeder chickens, turkeys up to 2kg body-weight
There is concern about the increasing resistance of certain
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter I day, should not be used in laying
bacteria to fluoroquinolones. These include some zoonotic
henis
164 Bacterial, fungal, viral, and protozoal infections
ENROFLOXACIN
Withdrawal Periods. Chickens, furkeys: slaughter 8 days, should not be used
in birds producing eggs for hurman consurmptior
UK
Note. Should not be given to replacerment birds within I4 days of corm rmence
ment of laying
Indications. Enrofloxacin-sensiti ve infections
Contra-indications. Dogs under 12 to 18 months of age
POM Baytril Piglet Doser (Bayer) UK
and cats under 8 weeks of age, see notes above
1rx
Side-effects. Occasional skin reactions in keninelled Grey-
unit dose = I mL)
Withdrawal Periods. Piglets: slaughter I0 days
hounds; retinotoxic effects including blindness in cats;
e sa  si u  o ro
POM Baytril Max (Bayer) UK
Depot injection, enrofloxacin 100 mg/mL, for cattle
injection
Withdrawal Periods. Cale: slaughter 14 days, milk 84 hours
Warnings. Safety in pregnant or lactating exotic animals
POM Baytril Tablets (Bayer) UK
has not beenl established; operators should wear suitable
Tablets,enrofloxacin 15 mg, for dogs, cats
protective clothing
Tablets, enrofloxacin 50 mg, 150 rmg, for dogs
Dose. Cattle: by subcutaneous injection, 2.5 mg/kg daily
for 3 days. Dose may be inicreased to 5 mg/kg for 5 days for
IBAFLOXACIN
salmonellosis or complicated respiratory disease
by depot subcutaneous injection, 7.5 mg/kg as a single dose
UK
calves: by mouth, 2.5 mg/kg daily for 3 days. Dose may be
Indications.Ibafloxacin-sensitiveinfections
increased to 5 mg/kg for 5 days for salmonellosis and com-
Contra-indications. Dogs less than 8 months of age in
plicated respiratory disease
small to large sized breeds or less than 18 months of age for
Pigs: by intramuscular injection, 2.5 mg/kg daily for 3
giant breeds, see notes above; concurrent use of NSAIDs;
days. Dose may be inicreased to 5 mg/kg for 5 days for sal-
dogs less than 3 kg body-weight; hypersensitivity to
monellosis or complicated respiratory disease
piglets: by mouth, (up to 3 kg body-weight) 5 mg; (up to 10
Side-effects. Transient mild diarrhoea, vomiting, lethargy,
kg body-weight) 15 mg
anorexia
Warnings. Safety in male breeding dogs or lactating ani-
Dogs, cats: by mouth, 5 mg/kg once daily or as a divided
dose givenn twice daily
mals has not been established; care with concurrent ant-
by subcutaneous injection,5 mg/kg daily
acids, nitrofurantoin; Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1
Poultry: by addition to drinking water, 10 mg/kg daily for
(Fluroquinolones)
3-10 days
Dose. By mouth.
Dogs, cats: 15 mg/kg once daily
Exotic animals: see Prescribing for rabbits and Prescribing
for rodents, Prescribing for reptiles, and Prescribing for
POM Ibaflin (Intervet) UK
exotic birds. Contact the manufacturer for specific case
Tablets,ibafloxacin50 mg,300 mg,fordogsmore than3kgbody-weight
informati on
Oral gel, ibafloxacin 30 rmg/g, for dogs, cats; rmetered-dose applicator
POM Baytril 2.5% Injection (Bayer) UK
Injection, enrofloxacin 25 mg/mL, for dogs, cats, exotic unimals such us
MARBOFLOXACIN
small mammals,reptiles,birds
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in exotic animais and birds
UK
intended for human con sumption
Indications. Marbofloxacin-sensiti ve infections
POM Baytril 5 % Injection (Bayer) U/K
Contra-indications. Dogs less than 12 months of age or to
injetion,enrofloxacin 50 mg/mL,forcatle,pigs,dogs,cs
18 months of age for large breeds such as Great Danes or
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter 14 days, should not be used in cattle
Mastiffs, cats less than 16 weeks of age, see notes above
producing milk for hurman consurmption. Pigs: slaughter 10 days
Side-effects. Occasional vomiting, loose faeces, modifica-
POM Baytril 10% Injection (Bayer) UK
 tion of thirst, transient increase in activity in dogs and cats;
Injetion, enrofloxacin 100 mg/mL, for catle, pigs
occasional transient inflammatory reaction at injection site
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 14 days, milk 84 hours. Pigs: slaughter
Warnings. Safety in pregnant animals has not been estab-
10 days
lished; caution in young animals and epileptics; overdosage
may cause neurological symptoms; possible reduced drug
POM Baytril 2.5% Oral Solution (Bayer) UK
Oral solution, for addition to milk, milk replacer, oral electrolyte solution, or
 activity in patients with low urinary pH; care with concur-
water, enrofloxacin 25 mg/mL, for calves, exotic unimals such us small
rent antacids, theophylline; Drug Interactions - see Appen-
mammals,reptiles,birds
dix 1 (Fluroquinolones)
Withdrawal Periods. Calves: slaughter 8 days. Should not be used in exofic 
Dose.
animals and birds intended for human con surmption
Dilute I volume in 4 volurmes water for oral adrministration by gavage in
Cattle: by mouth, 1-2 mg/kg daily for up to 3 days
exotic anirmals
by subcutaneous,intramuscular, or intravenous injection,2
Contra-indications. Chickens, rurkeys
mg/kg daily
Pigs: by intramuscular injection, 2 mg/kg daily
POM Baytril 10% Oral Solution (Bayer) UK
Oral solution, for addition to drinking water, enrofloxacin 100 mg/mL, for
Dogs, cats: by mouth, 2 mg/kg once daily
broilerchickensroilerreeders,replacementchickens,turkey
by subcutaneous or intravenous injection,2 mg/kg
1.1.10 Pleuromutilins  165
POM Marbocyl 2 % ( Vetoquinol) U/K
ation of protein synthesis at the level of the bacterial ribos-
injection, marbofloxacin 20 mg/mL, for pre-ruminant catfle up to f00 kg
body-weight,pigs
ome. They have a broad spectrum of action, which includes
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 6 days. Pigs: slaughter 2 days
more fastidious Gram-negative organisms such as Haemo-
Note. For subcutaneous or intravenous injection in cattle
phitus,Bordetella,Pasteurella spp.,Serpulina,and Actino-
bacillus spp., and also a number of anaerobic organisms.
POM Marbocyl 10% (Vetoquinol) UK
Injection, marbofloxacin 100 mg/mL, for catle, pigs
Concurrent administration of pleuromutilins and ionophore
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter 6 days, rmilk 1.5 days. Pigs: slaughter
2 days
paralysis, or death.
Note. For subcutaneous, intramuscular, or intravernous injection in cattle
POM Marbocyl Bolus (Vetoquinol) UK
TIAMULIN FUMARATE
Tablets,marbofloxacin50mg,forcalves 2550kg body-weight
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 6 days
UK
POM Marbocyl P Tablets ( Vetoquinol) UK
Indications.Tiamulin-sensitive organisms
Tablets, scored, marbofloxacin 5 mg,for dogs, cats
Contra-indications. Not to be given at tiamulin 100 g/
Tableis, scored, marbofloxacin 20 mg, for dogs
tonne feed or 5 mg/kg body-weight within 7 days of admin-
Tablets, scored, marboflox acin 80 mg, for dogs
istration of monensin, narasin, or salinomycin
POM Marbocyl SA 100 mg/200 mg ( Vetoquinol) U/K
Side-effects. Rarely, skin erythema
Injection, powder for recon stitution, marbofloxacin 10 mg/mL, 20 mg/mL,
Warnings. Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1
for dogs, cats
Dose. Pigs:
POM Marbocyl Tablets ( Vetoquinol) UK
Swine dysentery
Tableis, scored, marboflox acin 5 rmg, for dogs, cats
treatment, by addition to drinking water, 8.8 mg/kg body-
Tableis, scored, marbofloxacin 20 mg, for dogs
weight or 60 g/100 litres for 3-5 days
Tablets, scored, rmarbofloxacin 80 mg, fordogs
by addition to feed, 5 mg/kg body-weight or 100 g/tonne
feed for 7-10 days
NALIDIXIC ACID
by intramuscular injection, 10 mg/kg as a single dose
UK
prophylaxis, by addition to feed, 1.5-2.0 mg/kg body-
Indications. Nalidi xic acid-sensitive infections
weight or 30-40 g/tonne feed and given during period of
Dose. See Prescribing for amphibians
risk
Enzootic pneumonia complex
POM Negram (Sanofi Synthelabo) UK
treatment, by intramuscular injection, 15 mg/kg daily for 3
Oral suspension, nalidixic acid 60 mg/mL
days
POM Uriben (Rosemont) UK
prophylaxis, by addition to feed, 1.5-2.0 mg/kg body-
Oral suspension, nalidixic acid 60 mg/mL
weight or 30-40 g/tonne feed and given for up to 2 months
during period of risk
ORBIFLOXACIN
Mycoplasmal arthritis, treatment, by intramuscular injec-
tion, 15 mg/kg daily for 3 days
UK
Indications. Orbifloxacin-sensiti ve infections, in particular
MFS Tiamutin 2% Premix (Novartis) UK
cystitis in dogs
Premix, tiarmulin furmarate 20 g/kg, for pigs
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter I day
Contra-indications. Dogs less than 8 months of age in
small and medium sized breeds, up to 12 months of age in
MFS Tiamutin 25% Premix (Novartis) UK
large breeds, or to 18 months of age for giant breeds, see
Premix, tiamulin fumarate 250 g/kg,for pigs
notes above; pregnant and lactating animals or animals
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter I day
intended for breeding; concurrent cyclosporin
MFS Tiamutin 80% Premix (Novartis) UK
Warnings. Safety in pregnant and lactating animals or ani-
Premix, tiarmulin furmarate 800 g/kg, for pigs
mals intended for breeding has not been established; care
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter I day
with concurrent antacids, oral anticoagulants, cimetidine,
POM Tiamutin 12.5% Solution (Novartis) UK
multivitamins containing zinc or iron, theophylline; Drug
Oral solution, for addition to drinking water, tiarmulin fumarate 125 mg/mL,
Interactions - see Appendix 1 (Fluroquinolones)
foc pigs
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter I day
Dose. By mouth.
Dogs: bacterial cystitis, 2.5 mg/kg once daily for 10 days
POM Tiamutin 200 Injection (Novartis) UK
Skin infections, 7.5 mg/kg once daily for 10 days
Injection (oily),tiamulin furmarate 200 mg/mL,for pigs
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter l0 day
POM Orbax (Schering-Plough) UK
Tableis, f/c, scored, orbifloxacin 6.25 mg, 25 mg, 75 mg, for dogs
VALNEMULIN HYDROCHLORIDE
1.1.10 Pleuromutilins
UK
Indications. Tiamulin-sensitive organisms
Tiamulin and valnemulin are antibiotics belonging to the
Contra-indications. Rabbits; not to be givenl within 5 days
pleuromutilin group, which act by the inhibition of the initi -
of administration of monensin, narasin, or salinomycin
166 Bacterial, fungal, viral, and protozoal infections
Side-effects. Perianal erythema or mild dermal oedema;
 It selectively inhibits bacterial protein synthesis; there is
transient inappetence at concentrations above 200 mg/kg
poor penetration of the host cell.
feed; rarely pyrexia, inappetence, incoordination, ataxia,
Novobiocin acts by inhibiting DNA gyrase. It is active
recumbanicy
against many Gram-positive bacteria. Novobiocin is mainly
used topically in intramammary preparations. This drug is
pregnant and lactating sows has not been established;
highly potent against Staphylococcus spp. and Streptococ-
ex treme care with use in pigs of Scandinavian origin
Dose. Pigs:
cillin hence it is often co-formulated with this drug.
Swine dysentery
Vancomycin is a glycopeptide antibiotic and is active
treatment, by addition to feed, 3-4 mg/kg body-weight daily
against Gram-positive bacteria. It exerts its action by inhib-
or 75 g/tonine feed
iting the formation of the peptidoglycan polymers of the
prophylaxis, by addition to feed, 1.0-1.5 mg/kg body-
bacterial cell wall. Vancomycin is not absorbed if given by
weight daily or 25 g/tonine feed
the oral route and has a narrow therapeutic index when
Swine enzootic pneumonia (Econor 10%), treatment and
given parenterally. Toxic effects of vancomycin include
prevention, by addition to feed, 10-12 mg/kg body-weight
ototoxicity and nephrotoxicity. It also causes local phlebitis
daily or 200 g/tonne feed
at the site of injection. In human medicine, vancomycin is
used to treat life threatening methicillin resistant staphylo-
POM Econor 1% (Novartis) U/K
coccal infections. Oral administration can be used to treat
Premix, valnermulin (as hydrochloride) 10 g/kg, for pigs
pseudomembranous colitis in humans, which is caused by
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter I day
overgrowthof Clostridiumdifficile.
Spectinomycin is an aminocyclitol anti biotic which acts by
POM Econor 10 % (Novartis) U/K
binding to the 30S subunit of the bacterial ribosome and
Premix, valnermulin (as hydrochloride) 100 g/kg, for pigs
inhibiting protein synthesis. It is active against some Gram-
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter I day
positive and Gram-negative bacteria; obligate anaerobic
1.1.11 Other antibacterial drugs
micro-organisms are mostly resistant. Spectinomycin is
similar to steptomycin but it is not an ami noglycoside.
Rifampicin is bactericidal against a wide range of micro-
Organisms and interferes with their synthesis of nucleic
acids by inhibiting DNA-dependent RNA polymerase. The
RIFAMPICIN
(Rifampin)
ability of rifampicin to penetrate into cells makes it an ideal
treatment of tuberculosis in humans and has been suggested
UK
for use in treating atypical mycobacterial infections in cats.
Indications. Rifampicin-sensiti ve infections
Rifampicin is frequently used in combination with erythro-
Dose. Foals: by mouth, 5 mg/kg twice daily
mycin for the treatment of some pneumonic conditions in
POM Rifampicin (Non-proprietary) UK
foals, particularly those caused by Rhodococcus equi infec-
Capsules,rifarmpicin 150 mg,300 mg
tion. Rifampicin is an inducer of cytochrome P450 enzymes
in the liver and enhances the metabolism of many other
POM H Rifadin (Aventis Pharma) UK
drugs including anticonvulsants and anticoagulants
Capsules, rifarmpicin 150 mg, 300 rmg
Syrup, rifampicin 20 mg/mL
Polymixin B and other polymixin anti biotics such as colis-
tin are active against Gram-negative bacteria. They act pri-
POMH Rimactane (Swedish Orphar) UK
pue
Capsules, rifarmpicin 150 mg, 300 mg
disrupting the bacterial cytoplasmic membrane. Polymi xins
are highly charged basic (cationic) molecules which cross
biological membranes very poorly and are not absorbed
SPECTINOMYCIN
from the gastro-intestinal tract. They are used in oral prepa-
rations for the treatment of gastro-intestinal disturbances
UK
and also in topical formulations (ear preparations) for the
Indications. 
Spectinomycin-sensitive infections
treatment of Gram-negative infections including Pseu-
Side-effects. Ototoxicity, nephrotoxicity
domonas aeruginosa. If given systemically, they cause pain
Dose.
at the site of injection and have a narrow therapeutic index
Calves: by intramuscular injection, 20-30 mg/kg once daily
being both nephrotoxic and neurotoxic. These drugs are
for up to 5 days
renally excreted and should never be given systemically to
Lambs: by mouth, 50 mg once only
patients with renal insufficiency. They do have a capacity to
Piglets: by mouth, (<4.5 kg body-weight) 50 mg twice
bind endotoxins and some authorities advocate their use for
daily; (4.5-7 kg body-weight) 100 mg twice daily
this purpose.
Fusidic acid is a steroidal antibiotic with bacteriostatic or
POM Spectam Injectable (Ceva) UK
Injection, spectinormycin activity (as dihydrochloride) 100 mg/mL, for calves
bactericidal activity mainly against Gram-positive bacteria.
Withdrawal Periods. Calves: slaughter 32 days
1.1.12 Compound antibacterial preparations  167
POM Spectam Scour Halt (Ceva) U/K
MFS Linco-Spectin Premix (Pfizer) U/K
 (s se) s  z (y s) o xa
unit dose, for lambs, piglets up to 7 kg body-weight or 4 weeks of age (l unit
kg,for pigs
dose = I mL)
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter I day
Withdrawal Periods. Lambs, piglets: slaughter 10 days 
Dose. Pigs: enteritis, treatrment, 2 kg of prermix/tonne feed daily for 3
Dose. Lambs: I unit dose once only as soon as possible after birth
weeks; prophylaxis, I -2 kg of prermix/tonne feed during period of risk 
Piglets: (<4.5 kg body-weight) I unit dose rwice daily, (4.57.0 kg body-
Mycoplasal pneurmonia, prophylaxis, 12 kg of prermix/tonne feed during
weight) 2 unit doses rwice daily
period of risk
Mastitis, rmetritis, agalactia syndrorme (MMA), treatrment, I-2 kg of prermix/
tonne feed daily for 5- 10 days before and 23 weeks after farrowing
POM Linco-Spectin 100 Soluble Powder (Pfizer) UK
VANCOMYCIN
Oral powder, for addition to drinking water, lincormycin (as hydrochloride)
333gimyalfapi
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter withdrawal period nil. Poultry:
UK
slaughter 2 days, should not be used in poultry producing eggs for hurmar
Indications. Vancomycin-sensitive infections
consurm ption
Dose. Prescribing for aquatic invertebrates
Dose. Pigs: I 50 g of powder/l600 litres water
Poultry: 75 g of powder/100 litres drinking water
POM() Vancomycin (Non-proprietary) UK
POM Neopen (Irntervet) UK
injection, powder for reconstinution, vancomycin (as hydrochloride) 500 mg,
(njection, neormycin (as sulfate) 100 mg, procaine benzylpenicillin 200 mg/
lg
mL,fohrse,sheeppigs,dogs,ts
POM Vancocin (Lilly) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for human con -
Injection, powder for reconstitution, vancomycin (as hydrochloride) 500 mg,
surmption. Sheep: slaughter 70 days, should not be used in sheep producing
lg
milk for hurman cor surmption. Pigs: slaughter 60 days
Dose.Hrsessheep,pisbyinramusuarintin,.05m/g
Dogs, cats: by intramuscular injection, 0.l mL/kg
POM Orojet Lamb (Fort Dodge) UK
Oral liqwid, neormycin sulfate 70 mg, streptormycin sulfate 70 rmg/unit dose,
1.1.12 Compound antibacterial preparations
for lumbs (I unit dose = I mL)
Withdrawal Periods. Lambs: slaughter 28 days
Although in principle the use of antibacterial mixtures is
Dose. Lambs: I unit dose/5 kg body-weight rwice daily
not recommended, in some cases two antibacterials may be
POM Pen & Strep (Norbook) UK
used in combination for their activity against two specific
fnjection, dihydrostreptormycin sulfate 250 rmg, procaine benzylpenicillin
and co-existing infections, for ex ample, a mixture of a mac-
200 mg/mL,forhorses, catle, sheep,pigs
rolide and a sulphonamide for enteric or respiratory disease
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurman con -
in pigs.
sumption. Cutte: slaughter 23 days, milk 2.5 days. Sheep: slaughter 31 days,
The main components of combination parenteral prepara-
should not be used in sheep producing milk for hurman con surmption. Pigs:
slaughter 18 days
tions are procaine benzylpenicillin and a streptomycin
Dose.Horses,catle, sheep,pigs:by intramuscular injection,0.04mL/kg
which are complementary, having bactericidal activity
POM Stomorgyl 2 (Merial) U/K
against Gram-positive and Gram-negative
organisms
Tablet, coated, metronidazole 25 mg, spicamycin 46.7 rmg,for dogs, cfs
respectively, and may be synergistic.
Dose.Dogs,cats:table/2kg body-weightonce daily
Note. Tablets should not be broken or crushed 
POM Stomorgyl 10 (Merial) U/K
UK
Tablets,coated, rmetronidazole 125 mg, spirarmyein 234.4 mg, for dogs, cats
Indications. Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings.
Dose. Dogs, cats: I tablet/l0 kg body-weightonce daily
See individual drug monographs
Note. Tablets should not be broken or crushed 
Dose. See preparation details
POM Stomorgyl 20 (Merial) UK
Tablets, coated, metronidazole 250 mg, spirarmycin 469 rmg, for dogs
POM Depomycin Forte (Irntervet) U/K
Dose. Dogs: I tablet/20 kg body-weight once daily
injection, dihydrostreptormycin (as sulfate) 250 mg, procaine benzylpenicil-
Note. Tablets should not be broken or crushed
lin200mg/m,orsesate,heep,pigs,ogsa
POM Streptacare (Anirmalcare) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmar con -
Injection, dihydrostreptomycin sulfate 250 rmg, procaine benzylpenicillin
sumption. Catle: slaughter 21 days, millk 2.5 days. Sheep: slaughter 35 days,
200 mg/mL,forhorses, cattle, sheep, pis
should not be used in sheep producing rmilk for hurman consurmption. Pigs:
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmar corn-
slaughter 2l days
surmption. Catle: slaughter 23 days, rmilk 2.5 days. Sheep: slaughter 31 days,
Dose. Horses, cattle: by intramusc ular injection, 0.04 rmL/kg
should not be used in sheep producing milk for human consurmption. Pigs:
Sheep, pigs: by intramuscular injection, 0.05 mL/kg
Dogs, cats: by subcutaneous injection, 0.1 mL/kg
slaughter 18 days
Dose. Horses, catle, sheep, pigs: by intramuscular injetion, 0.04 mL/kg
POM Duphapen + Strep (Fort Dodge) UK
POM Streptopen (Schering-Plough) UK
injection, dihydrostreptormycin sulfate 250 mg, procaine benzylpenicillin
200m/m,fhresathep
lin 250 mg/mL,forhorsescatle,sheep,pigs
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmarn con -
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmar corn -
surmption. Catle: slaughter 28 days, milk 2.5 days. Sheep: slaughter 28 days,
should not be used in sheep producing milk for hurmarn consurmption. Pigs:
should not be used in sheep producing milk for hurman con surmption. Pigs:
slaughter 18 days
slaughter 28 days
Dose. Horses, cattle, sheep, pigs: by intramusc ular injection, 0.04 mL/kg
Dose.Horses, cattle, sheep, pigs: by intramuscular injetion, 0.04 mL/kg
168 Bacterial, fungal, viral, and protozoal infections
1.2 Antifungal drugs
useful in treating cats with cryptococcal infections. It also
attains therapeutic concentrations in urine. Its clearance
Treatment of fungal infections may include either systemic
from the body is dependent on renal excretion and the dose
Or topical medication. Topical antifungal drugs are used for
should be reduced in patients with renal impairment.
the treatment of fungal infections of the skin (see section 
Nystatin is not absorbed from the gastro-intestinal tract and
14.4.2), ear (see section 14.8), and eye (see section 12.2.2).
may be given orally for the treatment of gastro-intestinal
Systemic anti fungal drugs are discussed below. Discussion
candidiasis.
of dermatophytosis (ringworm) and topical treatment is
Amphotericin is active against yeasts and fungi. Ampho-
included in section 14.4.2. Griseofulvin is the main sys-
tericin B causes renal damage and renal function should be
temic medication used although ketoconazole or itracona-
monitored regularly during treatment.
zole are recommended for refractory cases.
Flucytosine is effective against systemic yeast infections
Aspergillosis is caused by Aspergillus fuigatus infection
but not against fungal infections. Resistance develops rap-
and characterised by severe mucopurulent nasal discharge
idly and therefore the use of flucytosine is restricted to com-
and epistaxis. Long-term systemic treatment such as keto-
bination therapy with amphotericin B. Flucytosine and
conazole has been used. Topical enilconazole (see section
amphotericin B are synergistic and may be given concur-
14.4.2) by intrasinus administration is preferred. The frontal
rently to delay the onset of resistance to flucytosine and for
sinuses are trephined and irrigation tubes inserted. Enilco-
the treatment of systemic cryptococcosis. The dose of
nazole 10 mg/kg daily in 2 divided doses is diluted in
amphotericin B should be halved when used irni combination
sodium chloride 0.9% solution (to make up to 5 to 10 mL)
with flucytosine. Flucytosine is distributed throughout the
and administered for 10 days.
body and diffuses into the cerebrospinal fluid and thus is
Yeast infections include candidiasis (moniliasis) caused by
 indicated for intracranial yeast infections.
Candida albicans and cryptococcosis caused by Cryptococ-
Sodium iodide is used for fungal infections although the
precise mechanism of action is unknown. It aids in resolu-
tion such as ketoconazole, amphotericin B, or amphotericin
 tion of granulomatous lesions in actinobacillosis, actinomy-
B in combination with flucytosine.
cosis, and other fungal infections.
Griseofulvin is deposited in keratin precursor cells and
Terbinafine is an orally active antifungal with good effi-
concentrated in the stratum corneum of skin, hair, and nails
cacy against dermatophytes and yeasts. It is an allylamine
thus preventing fungal invasion of newly fomed cells. Gri-
derivative, which inhibits squalene epoxide and is fungi-
seofulvin is metabolised in the liver. In dogs and cats,
cidal. Like griseofulvin, it binds to keratinised tissues and
absorption of griseofulvin is enhanced by administration
persists in nail beds for prolonged periods after treatment
has ceased. Unlike ketoconazole, it does not inhibit cyto-
for 7 days but usually treatment for 3 to 4 weeks is required
chrome P4so enzymes. The optimum dose for treatment of
and extended periods of up to 12 weeks are often necessary
dermatophytosis in dogs and cats has not been established
In dogs and cats, the usual dose may not be effective and a
by scientific study.
dose of 40-50 mg/kg daily+ may be required. Griseofulvin
may be teratogenic and therefore should not be adminis-
AMPHOTERICIN
tered to pregnant animals.
(Amphotericin B)
Ketoconazole, an imidazole compound, is active against
fungi and yeasts and also against some Gram-positive bac-
UK
teria. Ketoconazole is well absorbed by mouth and is the
treatment of choice for systemic candidiasis. It is also used
maniosis (see section 1.4.7)
for refractory dermatophyte infections. Ketoconazole may
Contra-indications. Rennal impairment, see notes above
interfere with the biosynthesis of steroid hormones and
Side-effects. Nephrotoxicity
indeed may be used in the treatment of hyperadrenocorti-
Warnings. Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1
cism. Administration of ketoconazole with food may reduce
Dose. Dogs, cats: fungal infections, by intravenous infu-
the nausea associated with the drug. Prolonged administra-
sion, 0.15-1.0 mg/kg, given as amphotericin B 200 micro-
tion of ketoconazole may cause liver damage and the drug
grams/mL solution, 3 times weekly
may be teratogenic.
Note. Dose should be halved when used in combination
The related itraconazole may also be used in systemic cari-
with flucytosine
didiasis and is the drug of choice for refractory dermato-
POMH Fungizone (Squibb) UK
phyte infections. Itraconazole appears to be much less
Intravenous infusion, powder for reconstitution, armphotericin (as sodiurm
hepatotoxic and associated with fewer side-effects than
deoxycholate cormplex) 50 rmng
ketoconazole. It has minimal effect on steroid hormone conl-
centrations.
FLUCONAZOLE
Fluconazole, like itraconazole, is a triazole antifungal agent
that is orally active. It is sufficiently water soluble to be
UK
given by intravenous injection, following which it can
Indications. Systemic fungal infections, including crypto-
attain therapeutic concentrations within the CSF; this can be
coccosis inl cats
1.2 Antifungal drugs 169
Warnings. Care in renal impairment
ITRACONAZOLE
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 2.5-5.0 mg/kg twice daily
Cats: by mouth or by intravenous injection, 10 mg/kg once
UK
daily
Indications. Dermatophyte infections
Cryptococcosis, by intravenous infusion, 50 mg/cat
Contra-indications. Hypersensitivity
to
itraconazole;
 hepatic impairment; pregnant or lactating queens
POM Diflucan (Pfizer) UK
Side-effects. Mild transient salivation, vomiting, diar-
Capswies, fluconazole 50 mg, 150 mg, 200 mg
rhoea, and anorexia
Oral suspension, fluconazole 10 mg/mL, 40 mg/mL
fntravenous infusion, fluconazole 2 mg/mL in sodiurn chloride intravenous
Warnings. Operators should wear impervious gloves; care
infusion 0.9%
with
concurrent phenobarbital，
digoxinl,
methylpred-
nisolone; Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1
Dose. By mouth.
FLUCYTOSINE
Dogs: 10 mg/kg daily
Cats: 5 mg/kg daily for 7 days. Repeat treatment course 2
UK
times at intervals of 7 days
Indications. Systemic yeast infections
 Contra-indications. Renal and hepatic impairment, preg-
POM Itrafungol (Jarssen) UK
nant animals
Ora solution, itraconazole 10 mg/mL,for cts
Dose. Dogs, cats: by mouth, 100-200 mg/kg daily in 3-4
POMH Sporanox (Janssen-Cilag) UK
divided doses in combination with amphotericin B
Capsules,itraconazole 100 mg
POM Flucytosine (Non-proprietary) UK
Preparations of oral flucytosine are not generally available. A written order,
stating case details, should be sent to Bell and Croydon to obtain a supply of
KETOCONAZOLE
the preparation
UK
Indications. Systemic candidiasis, dermatophyte infec-
GRISEOFULVIN
tions; hyperadrenocorticism (see section 7.6)
Contra-indications. Hepatic impairment, pregnant animals
UK
Side-effects. Hepatotoxicity, anorexia, particularly in cats
Dose. Dogs, cats: skin conditions, by mouth, 10 mg/kg
Indications. Dermatophyte infections
Contra-indications. Hepatic impairment, pregnant animal s
daily
Side-effects. High doses may cause hepatotoxicity,
POMH Nizoral (Janssen-Cilag) UK
particularly in cats
Tablets, scored, ketoconazole 200 mg
Warnings. Preparations should be handled with caution by
women of child-bearing age, operators should wear imper-
vious gloves; Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1
Dose. By mouth.
NYSTATIN
Horses, donkeys: 10 mg/kg daily for 7 days
Dogs, cats: 15-20 mg/kg daily (but see notes above)
UK
Indications. Alimentary candidiasis
POM Equifulvin (Boehringer Ingelheirm) UK
Dose. Dogs, cats: by mouth, 100 000 units 4 times daily
Oral granules, for addition to feed, griseofulvin 75 mg/g, for horses
Withdrawal Periods. Should mot be used in horses intended for hurman
POM  Nystatin (Non-proprietary) UK
consumption
Oral suspension, nystatin 100 000 units/mL
POM Grisovin (GSK)UK
POM (H Nystan (Squibb) U/K
Tablets, f/c, griseofulvin 125 mg, 500 mg
Fablets, s/c, nystatin 500 000 units
POM Grisol-V (Vetoquinol) UK
Oral suspension, nystatin 100 000 units/mL
Oral granules, for addition to feed, griseofulvin 75 mg/g, for horses
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurman
consurmption
Oral powder, for addition to feed, griseofulvin 75 rmg/g, for horses
TERBINAFINE
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmar
consurmption
UK
POM Norofulvin (Norbook) UK
Indications. Dermatophyte infections
Oral paste, griseofulvin 1.5 g/division, for horses, metered-dose applicator
Dose. (But see notes above). By mouth.
(I dose/1 50 kg body-weight)
Dogs: 2-10 mg/kg once daily
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurman
Cats: 10-30 mg/kg once daily
consurmptior
Oral granules, for addition to feed, griseofulvin 75 mg/g, for horses
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurman
POM (H Lamisil (Novartis) UK
consurmption
Fablets, scored, terbinafine (as hydrochloride) 250 mg
170 Bacterial, fungal, viral, and protozoal infections
1.3 Antiviral drugs
clinical disease. Interferon has also beenn used in cats
infected with FeLV+, FIV+, or both and has shown some
Although antiviral compounds are sometimes used for sys-
effect in these cases.
temic infections such as feline immunodeficiency virus
 Immunoglobulins directed against specific viral infections
(FIV) infection, their main application in veterinary medi-
are available for use in animals exposed to infection (see
cine is in ophthalmology, particularly for herpesvirus infec-
sections 18.1.8 and 18.4.9). Vaccines are rarely effective at
tions in cats and horses. Only limited data are available on
controlling disease once infection has occurred (and cer-
the efficacy of antiviral compounds against veterinary
tainly once clinical signs have developed) in an individual
viruses. Anti viral compounds are highly toxic, have a rela-
 animal, although they will provide group protection.
tively narrow therapeutic index and should be used with
Treatment of viral infections in animals usually consists of
great care.
nursing, control of secondary bacterial infections, possibly
Aciclovir has been used to treat both ocular and respiratory
analgesics, NSAIDs, and other symptomatic therapies.
disease caused by feline herpesvirus 1 in cats. However
published information on efficacy is equivocal and aciclovir
has no activity against felid herpesvirus l in cell culture.
ACICLOVIR
Aciclovir appears to be more effective for conjunctivitis
and keratitis caused by equine herpesvirus in horses; clini-
UK
cal improvement is usually seen within a few days. Aciclo-
Indications. Dose. See Prescribing for reptiles
vir has also been used experimentally in equid herpesvirus 1
POM  Aciclovir (Non-proprietary) UK
abortion outbreaks, but further studies are required before
this regimen can be recommended.
Tablets, aciclovir 200 rmg, 400 mg, 800 rmg
Zidovudine has been used to treat cats with FIV infection.
The drug produces at least temporary alleviation of clinical
signs in a proportion of cats, and may increase both survival
AMANTADINE HYDROCHLORIDE
time and quality of life. However, zidovudine has no obvi-
UK
 ous effect on viraemia. Clinical improvement is generally
observed 10 to 14 days after commencement of treatment.
Indications. Dose. See Prescribing for fertets
Zidovudine is less effective against feline leukaemia virus
POM Symmetrel (Alliance) UK
and provides no clinical improvement. The drug can cause
Capsules, arm antadine hydrochloride 100 mg
severe anaemia in cats, and possibly hepatotoxicity at high
Syrup, armanitadine hydrochloride 10 mg/rmL
doses. The side-effects of long-term treatment with lower
doses have not been ascertained.
In addition to specific antiviral compounds, drugs which
OMEGA INTERFERON
may enhance the immune response are sometimes used
either alone or in conjunction with antivirals to treat virus
UK
infections. These include interferons and various other
Indications. Parvovirus infection (enteric form); viral
immune-stimulatory preparations.
infections in cats
Interferons are cytokines produced by the host cells under
Contra-indications.
Vaccination during and after treatment
particular circumstances, including viral infection. Once
until full recovery
produced these interferons are then able to produce a vari-
Side-effects.
Transient hyperthermia, vomiting, slight leu-
ety of effects including prevention of viral infection of other
copenia, erythropenia, thrombocytopenia
cells. There are several different types of interferon identi -
Warnings. Fluid therapy and other supportive treatment
fied, and a recombinant interferon omega of feline origin is
necessary; safety in pregnant or lactating animals has not
been established; studies on long-term effects have not been
authorised in the UK. Although currently authorised for the
treatment of dogs with canine parvovirus infection, this
established
Dose.
been shown to be susceptible in vitro. The exact mechanism
Dogs: by intravenous injection, 2.5 million units/kg once
daily for 3 days
of antiviral action of omega interferon is not fully under-
stood, however, there is no direct effect against the virus,
Cats +: feline calicivirus, by intravenous injection, 2.5 mil-
rather an inhibition of synthesis within infected cells by
lion units/kg. Repeat twice at intervals of 2 days
destruction of mRNA and inactivation of translation
Chronic gingivostomatitis, by subcutaneous injection, 1
proteins.
million units/kg daily for 5 days, then by mouth, 50 000
Interferon treatment has been used for cats infected with
units daily
feline calicivirus+ and has been shown to reduce acute sto-
FeLV, FIV infection, by subcutaneous injection, l million
matitis associated with this infection. Cases of feline
units/kg daily for 5 days
chronic gingivostomatitis· have also been treated with
POM Virbagen Omega ( Virbac) UK
interferon and although the results of clinical trials are still
Injection, recorm binant omega interferon of feline origin 5 rmillion units/vial,
awaited, there are anecdotal reports of treatment improving
10 million units/vial, for dogs
1.4 Antiprotozoal drugs 171
ZIDOVUDINE
In the poultry industry, it is usual to employ anticoccidials
(Azidothymidine, AZT)
to control the disease in broiler birds and replacement stock.
In broilers,anticoccidials are administered continuously
UK
until just before slaughter. In replacement stock, pullets that
Indications. Feline immunodeficiency virus infection in
 cats, particularly when clinical signs of immunodeficiency
related disease are evident
egg laying. Anticoccidials may interfere with egg quality
Contra-indications. Renal
impairment,
hepatic
 and production, and with fertility. Prophylactic medication
impairment
is therefore discontinued from the commencement of egg
Side-effects. Hepatotoxicity and anaemia in cats
Dose. Cats: by mouth or by subcutaneous injection, 5-10
laying and some anticoccidials may only be indicated for
mg/kg daily in 2-4 divided doses
use in broilers. In pullet rearing, where the birds are to be
raised on litter, the use of subtherapeutic doses of anticoc-
POM Retrovir (GSK) UK
cidials allows a degree of parasite development enabling the
Oral solution, zidovudine 10 mg/mL
birds to acquire immunity to reinfection.
injection, zidovudine 10 mg/mL. For dilution and use as an intravenous
infusion
Continuous use of anticoccidials may lead to ineffective
 treatment due to drug resistance in the parasite populations.
Combination preparations
o Ansnput nod s u pode e sens snoe
avoid this problem, such as shuttle programmes using dif-
UK
ferent drugs in the starter and grower rations, and rotation
Indications. Dose. See Prescribing for reptiles
of drugs after several crops of broilers. Immunological con-
POM Trizivir (GSK) UK
trol in pullets can also be achieved through use of an attenu-
ated vaccine (see section 18.6.1).
Fablets, abacavir (as sulfate) 300 mg, larmivudine 150 rmg, zidovudine
300 mg
In lambs, calves, and rabbits, continuous anticoccidial med-
ication is used during periods of increased risk and stress.
The sulphonamides were among the first anticoccidials
1.4 Antiprotozoal drugs
and are active against first and second stage schizonts,
1.4.1 Anticoccidials
being coccidiostatic at low doses and coccidiocidal at
1.4.2 Drugs for histomoniosis
higher doses.
1.4.3 Drugs for trichomoniosis
Currently the most widely used compounds are the iono-
1.4.4 Drugs for babesiosis
phore antibiotics, monensin, narasin, salinomycin,
1.4.5 Drugs for giardiosis
maduramicin, semduramicin and lasalocid, which pre-
1.4.6 Drugs for hexamitiosis
vent the development of first generation schizonts. These
1.4.7 Drugs for leishmaniosis
compounds are extremely toxic to horses. Ionophores such
1.4.8 Drugs for theileriosis
as monensin, narasin, and salinomycin may cause severe
1.4.9 Drugs for trypanosomosis
growth retardation when administered with tiamulin. Iono-
phores allow birds to develop immunity to coccidial proto-
Protozoal infections affect many species; causative proto-
zoa and are used in replacement stock to be housed on litter.
zoa and effective drug treatments are listed in Table 1.3.
Clopidol (meticlorpi ndol), decoquinate, and methylben-
Medicated feedingstuffs, that were previously authorised as
zoquate are 4-hydroxyquinolones that act on first genera-
PML in the UK, are niow zootechrical feed additives author-
tion schizonts.
ised under and used in accordance with the relevant Annex
Dinitolmide and nicarbazin are dinitro compounds used to
ofDirective70/524/EEC
(TheFeedingstuffs
prevent coccidiosis. Dinitolmide affects first generation
entry
(Zootechnica! Products) Regulations I999), as amended.
schizonts and nicarbazin affects second generation sch-
izonts. Robenidine affects the late first generation and sec-
ond stage schizonts. Halofuginone affects first and second
1.4.1 Anticoccidials
generation schizonts. Diclazuril is active against various
Coccidiosis is of major economic importance in the poultry
stages of the life cycle depending on the particular species
industry, but other animals including calves, lambs, goats,
of coccidia. Amprolium acts on first generation schizonts
pigs, dogs, cats, game birds, and rabbits may also be
thereby preventing differentiation of merozoites. Toltraz-
affected by the disease. The principal enteric coccidia
uril is a symmetrical triazone compound and is active
affecting animals are Eimeria or Isospora spp. The protozoa
against all intracellular stages of coccidia.
invade the gut where their development damages the intesti-
 Treatment of coccidiosis in all species involves restoring
nal mucosa causing diarrhoea. Intestinal damage may occur
body fluids, when practicable, and combating the causal
before diagnosis of coccidiosis is possible. Disease preven-
organism with a suitable anticoccidial drug.
tion involves good husbandry and the use of anticoccidials.
Infections with Isospora spp. may occasionally be respon-
Anticoccidials may suppress development of asexual
sible for disease in young dogs and cats. Clinical signs
stages, sexual stages, or both. Drugs may act at different
include diarrhoea, weight loss, reduced appetite, and dehy-
stages of the protozoal life-cycle
dration. Treatment in dogs and cats with sulfadiazine with
172 Bacterial, fungal, viral, and protozoal infections
 Table 1.3 Drugs effective against protozoal infections1. 2
Protozoa
Antiprotozoals2
HORSES
Babesiosis, Theileriosis
Babesia caballi,Theileriaequi
imidocarb
CATTLE
Coccidiosis
Eimeria spp.
decoquinate, sulfadimidine
Babesiosis
Babesia divergens
imidocarb
Cryptosporidiosis
Cryptosporidium
halofuginone
SHEEP
Coccidiosis
Eimeria spp.
decoquinate, diclazuril
Toxoplasmosis
Toxoplasma gondii
decoquinate
PIGS
Coccidiosis
Isospora suis
toltrazuril
DOGS
Babesiosis
Babesia canis
imidocarba
Giardiosis
Giardia duodenalis
fenbendazole (Panacur), metronidazole
Leishmaniosis
Leishmania infantum
allopurinol @ , amphotericin B? , meglumine
antimoniate3, pentamidine  , sodium stibogluconate H
Ehrlichiosis
Ehrlichia canis,Anaplasma phago-
doxycyline+, oxytetracycline→ (see section 1.1.2)
cytophilum
CATS
Toxoplasmosis
Toxoplasma gondii
clindamycin
Giardiosis
Giardia duodenalis
metronidazole
CHICKENS
Intestinal and caecal
Eimeria spp.
decoquinate, diclazuril, halofuginone, lasalocid,
coccidiosis
maduramicin, monensin, narasin, nicarbazin, robenidine,
salinomycin, semduramicin, sulfaquinoxaline +
trimethoprim, toltrazuril, narasin + nicarbazin (Maxiban
G160)
1.4 Antiprotozoal drugs173
Table 1.3 Drugs effective against protozoal infections1. 2 (continued)
Protozoa
Antiprotozoals2
TURKEYS
Intestinal and caecal
Eimeria spp.
diclazuril, halofuginone, lasalocid, maduramicin,
coccidiosis
monensin, robenidine
PIGEONS
Coccidiosis
Eimeria spp
amprolium,clazuril,sulfadimethoxine
Trichomoniosis
Trichomonas gallinae
carnidazole, dimetridazole,metronidazole
PARTRIDGES, PHEASANTS
Coccidiosis
Eimeria spp.
clopidol, lasalocid
Histomoniosis
Histomonas meleagridis
dimetridazole4
Trichomoniosis
Trichomonas spp.
dimetridazole4
Hexamitosis
Spironucleus spp.
dimetridazole4
RABBITS
Coccidiosis
Eimeria spp.
robenidine
1 infections and treatment used in the UK
 specific veterinary-authorised preparations not available in the UK
 product suspended and becoming unavailable. No alternative treatment.
trimethoprim (co-trimazine) at a dose of 15 to 30 mg/kg
Clinical signs can be severe in intermediate hosts such as
twice daily for 6 days (once daily in animals weighing less
sheep and man, that usually become affected through infec-
 than 4 kg) has been reported. Toltrazuril has been used for
tion derived from cat faeces. In humans, infection is rela-
 the treatment of Isospora suis in piglets+.
tively common but clinical signs usually develop only in the
Neosporosis is caused by Neospora caninum. The main
presence of immunodeficiency, in pregnancy, or in children.
climical signs of infection consist of abortion in cattle and
Routine hygiene measures prevent Toxoplasma gondii
included clindamycin+ and sulfadiazine with trimethoprim
·The facts about toxoplasmosis. Pet Health Council
(co-trimazine)+
·Toxoplasmosis and your pet cat. The Toxoplasmosis Trust.
Toxoplasmosis is an infection caused by Toxoplasma gondii
 In sheep, toxoplasmosis can cause heavy losses through
with a wide host range including all domestic animals,
early embryonic death, abortion, or the birth of weak,
birds, and man. The cat is the definitive host in which
infected lambs. Control in sheep is through routine meas-
oocyst production occurs. Clinical signs of toxoplasmosis
ures such as disposal of dead lambs, infected placentas, and
are rarely seenn in cats. Treatment of toxoplasmosis inl cats
disinfection of contaminated pens. Decoquinate is used in
may be effected with clindamycin + (see section 1.1.4) at a
ewes during mid-pregnancy to prevent abortions and peri-
dose of 25 mg/kg daily in divided doses for a minimum
natal losses due to tox oplasmosis. Vaccination is available
period of 2 weeks.
for use in non-pregnant ewes (see section 18.2. 12.2).
174  Bacterial, fungal, viral, and protozoal infections
Cryptosporidiosis is caused by parasites of the coccidial
prophylaxis of coccidiosis, 50 g/tonne feed or 500 micro-
genus Cryptosporidium and occurs in a number of hosts
grams/kg body-weight for 28 days
including cal ves, lambs, and humans. Infection with Crypt-
 Sheep. Ewes: prophylaxis of coccidiosis in lambs (given
osporidium also occurs in poultry, turkeys, and game birds,
with concurrent medication in lambs), 50 g/tonne feed or
although the significance is not known. Disease is usually
500 micrograms/kg body-weight for 28 days
prophylaxis of toxoplasmosis, 2 mg/kg body-weight daily
Halofuginone is used for treatment of cryptosporidiosis in
for 14 weeks before lambinig
calves. Cryptosporidiosis is a zoonotic disease.
Lambs: treatment and prophylaxis of coccidiosis, 100 g/
tonne feed or 1 mg/kg body-weight for 28 days
AMPROLIUM HYDROCHLORIDE
MFS Deccox (Alpharma, Forurm) UK
UK
Premix, decoquinate 60 g/kg, for calves, sheep
Indications. Treatment of coccidiosis
Withdrawal Periods. Calves, sheep: slaughter I day, should not be used irn
anirmals producing milk for hurman consurm ption
GSL Coxoid (Petlife) UK
CFS Deccox 25 Individual Treatment Pack (Forurm) UK
Oral solurion, for addition to drinking water, armproliurm hydrochloride 38.4
Complementary feedingstuff, decoquinate 25g/kg, for cal ves
rmg/rmL, for pigeons
Withdrawal Periods. Calves: slaughter I day, should not be used in anirmals
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in pigeons intended for hurman con-
producing milk for hurman consurm ptior 
surmption
Dose. Pigeons: by addition to drinking water, Il2 mL for treatment of 30
birds (28 rmL/45 litres) daily for 7 days
DICLAZURIL
CLAZURIL
UK
Indications. Treatment and prophylaxis of coccidiosis in
UK
lambs, prophylaxis of coccidiosis in poultry
Indications. Treatment and prophylaxis of coccidiosis
Side-effects.Rarely severe scouring
Contra-indications. Concurrent administration of drugs
Warnings. Should not be mixed with other anticoccidials;
that may cause emesis
operators should wear suitable protecti ve clothing
Dose. Pigeons: by mouth, 2.5 mg
Dose. Lambs: 1 mg/kg body-weight
Poultry: 1 g/tonne feed
GSL Appertex (Petlife) UK
Tablets, clazuril 2.5 mg, for pigeons
ZFA Clinacox (Janssen) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in pigeons intended for hurman con-
Premix,diclazuil5g/g,forbroilerchickens,turkeysupto12weeksofge
surmption
Withdrawal Periods. Chickens, turkeys: slaughter 5 days
CLOPIDOL
PML Vecoxan (Jar ssen) U/K
Oral suspension, diclazuril 2.5 mg/mL, for lambs
(Meticlorpindol)
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil
Wa rnings. Product should be protected frorm frost 
UK
Indications. Prophylaxis of coccidiosis
Contra-indications. Layer replacement stock from com-
HALOFUGINONE HYDROBROMIDE
mencement of egg laying. Replacement stock to be housed
UK
on litter
Side-effects.Overdosage may cause inappetence
Indications. Prophylaxis of coccidiosis; treatment and
Warnings. Should not be mixed with other anticoccidials
prophylaxis of cryptosporidiosis in cal ves
Dose. Game birds: 125 g/tonne feed
Contra-indications. Layer replacement stock from com-
mencement of egg laying: replacement stock to be housed
MFS Coyden 25 for Game Birds (Merial) UK
on litter; poultry over 12 weeks of age; calves with an
Premix,clopidol250 g/kg,forphesants,partrides
empty stomach or with diarthoea of more than 24 hours?
Withdrawal Periods. Pheusants, partridges: slaughter 7 days, should not be
duration
used frorn laying age onwards 
Side-effects. Overdosage may cause inappetence
DECOQUINATE
Warnings. Should not be mixed with other anticoccidials;
operators should wear suitable protective clothing when
UK
handling the product
Indications. Treatment and prophylaxis of coccidiosis in
Dose. Calves: by mouth, (<35 kg body-weight) 1 g/10 kg
calves and lambs; prophylaxis of coccidiosis in chickens;
once daily; (35-45 kg body-weight) 4 g once daily; (45-60
prophylaxis of abortion due to toxoplasmosis in sheep
kg body-weight) 6 g onice daily; (>60 kg body-weight) 1 g/
Warnings. Should not be mixed with other anticoccidials
10 kg once daily. Give after feeding
Dose.
POM Halocur (Intervet)
Calves: treatment of coccidiosis, 100 g/tonne feed or 1 mg/
Oral solution, halofuginone 500 micrograrms/mL, for calves
kg body-weight for 28 days
Withdrawal Periods. Calves: slaughter 13 days
1.4.1 Anticoccidials  175
LASALOCID SODIUM
ZFA Elancoban G200 (Elanco) UK
Premix,monensin 200 g/kg,for broiler chickens, layer replacement chick-
UK
ens up to I6 weeks of uge,turkeys up to I6 weeks of age
Withdrawal Periods. Chickens, furkeys: slaughter 3 days, should not be used
Indications. Prophylaxis of coccidiosis
in birds producing eggs for hurman consurmption
Contra-indications. Layer replacement stock from com-
mencement of egg laying. Replacement stock to be housed
on litter
Side-effects. Overdosage may cause inappetenice
NARASIN
Warnings. Should not be mixed with other anticoccidials
Dose. Chickens: 75-125 g/tonine feed (usual dose 90 g/
UK
tonne for broiler chickens)
Indications. Prophylaxis of coccidiosis
Turkeys: 90- 125 g/tonne feed
Contra-indications. Layer replacement stock from com-
Game birds: 90-120 g/tonne feed
on litter; turkeys, guinea fowl or other game birds; use
MFS Avatec 15% CC (Game Birds) (Alpharma) U/K
within 7 days of administration of tiamulin
Premix, lasalocid sodiurm I50 g/kg, for purtridges, pheusanfs
Side-effects. Overdosage may cause inappetence
Withdrawal Periods. Gume birds: slaughter 7 days
Warnings. Should not be mixed with other anticoccidials;
toxic to horses; Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1; opera-
ZFA Avatec 15% CC Premix (Alpharma) UK
Premix,lasalocid sodiurm 150 g/kg, for broiler chickens, layer replucement
tors should wear suitable protective clothing
chickens up to I6 weeks ofage, turkeys up to 12 weeks of age
Dose. Poultry: 70 g/tonne feed
ZFA Monteban G100 (Elanco) UK
Premix,narasin100g/kg,forbroilerchickens
MADURAMICIN AMMONIUM
Withdrawal Periods. Chickens: slaughter 5 days, should not be used in birds
producing eggs
UK
Indications. Prophylaxis of coccidiosis
 Contra-indications. Layer replacement stock from com-
NICARBAZIN
 mencement of egg laying. Replacement stock to be housed
on litter
UK
Side-effects.Overdosage may cause inappetence
Indications. Prophylaxis of coccidiosis
Warnings. Should not be mixed with other anticoccidials;
Contra-indications. Layer replacement stock from com-
toxic to horses; operators should wear suitable protective
clothing
on litter
Dose. Poultry: 5 g/tonne feed
Side-effects. Overdosage may cause inappetence
Warnings. Should not be mixed with other anticoccidials;
ZFA Cy gro (Alpharrma)
operators should wear suitable protecti ve clothing
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter 5 days 
Dose. Poultry: 100-125 g/tonine feed
ZFA Carbigran (Elanco) UK
Premix,nicarbazin250g/kg,forbroilerchickens up to4weeksofuge
MONENSIN
Withdrawal Periods. Chickens: slaughter 9 days, should not be used in lay-
ing birds
UK
Indications. Prophylaxis of coccidiosis in poultry; to
improve growth-rate and feed coniversion efficiency in cat-
ROBENIDINE HYDROCHLORIDE
tle (see section 17.1)
Contra-indications. Layer replacement stock from com-
UK
mencement of egg laying. Replacement stock to be housed
Indications. Prophylaxis of coccidiosis
on litter; use within 7 days of administration of tiamulin;
Contra-indications. Layer replacemenit stock from com-
horses, guirnea fowl or other game birds; care in turkeys
with concurrent chloramphenicol, sulphonamides
on litter
Warnings. Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1; operators
 Side-effects. Overdosage may cause inappetence
should wear suitable protective clothing
Warnings. Should not be mixed with other anticoccidials
Dose. Chickens: coccidiosis, 100-120 g/tonne feed
Dose. Poultry: 30-36 g/tonne feed
Turkeys: coccidiosis, 90-100 g/tonne feed
Rabbits: 50-66 g/tonne feed
ZFA Ecox 200 (ECO) UK
ZFA Cycostat 66G (Alpharma) U/K
Premix, rmonensin (as rmonensin sodium) t00 g/kg, for beef cafle (see sec-
Premix,robenidine hydrochloride 66 g/kg,for broiler chickens, turkeys,
tion 17.1), poultry
rabbits
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle: slaughter withdrawal period nil. Poultry: slaugh-
Withdrawal Periods. Chickens, furkeys: slaughter 5 days, should not be used
ter 3 days
in laying birds. Rabbits: slaughter 5 days
176 Bacterial, fungal, viral, and protozoal infections
SALINOMYCIN SODIUM
SULFAQUINOXALINE With TRIMETHOPRIM
UK
Indications. Treatment of coccidiosis in chickens; sulfadi-
Indications. Prophylaxis of coccidiosis in poultry; to
midine/trimethoprim-sensiti ve infections ( section 1.1.6.2)
Warnings. Should not be mixed with other anticoccidials
tion 17.1)
Dose. Expressed as sulfaquinoxaline + trimethoprim
Contra-indications. Use within 7 days of administration of
Chickens: coccidiosis, by addition to drinking water, 30
tiamulin; turkeys, breeding birds
mg/kg body-weight
Warnings. Toxic to horses; Drug Interactions - see Appeni-
dix 1; operators should wear suitable protective clothing
See section l.l.6.2 for preparation details
Dose. Broiler chickens: coccidiosis, 60 g/tonne feed
TOLTRAZURIL
Replacement layer chickens: coccidiosis, 40 g/tonne feed
UK
ZFA Bio-Cox 120G (Alpharma) U/K
Indications. Treatment of coccidiosis in poultry; treatment
Premix, salinomycin sodium 120 g/kg,foc broiler chickens, replacement
of Isospora suis in piglets
layer chickens
Withdrawal Periods. Chickens: slaughter 5 days
Warnings. Alkaline solution; operators should wear suita-
ble protective clothing
ZFA Coxistac 12% (Forurm) UK
Dose. Piglets +: by mouth, 25 mg/kg at 4 days of age
Premix, salinomycin sodiurn 120 g/kg,forbroilerchickens
Withdrawal Periods. Chickens: slaughter 5 days
Poultry: by addition to drinking water, 7 mg/kg daily for 2
days
ZFA Sacox 120 (Intervet) UK
Premix, salinormycin sodiurm 120 g/kg, for broiler chickens, replacement
POM Baycox 2.5% (Bayer) U/K
layer chickens up to 12 weeks of age
Solution, for addition to drinking water, toltrazuril 25 rmg/mL, for broiler
Withdrawal Periods. Chickens: slaughter 5 days
breeders
ZFA Sal-Eco 120 (ECO) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Chickens: slaughter 2l days, should not be used in
birds producing eggs for hurman consurmptior
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter withdrawal period nil. Pouitry: slaugh-
ter 5 days
COMPOUND ANTICOCCIDIAL PREPARATIONS
UK
SEMDURAMICIN
Indications. Prophylaxis of coccidiosis
UK
ZFA Maxiban G160 (Elanco) UK
Indications. Prophylaxis of coccidiosis
Premix, narasin 80 g,nicarbazin 80 g/kg,for broiler chickens
Contra-indications. Breeding birds
Withdrawal Periods. Chickens: slaughter 5 days, should mot be used in
chickens producing eggs
Warnings. Operators should wear suitable protective
Dose. Poultry: 500-625 g prermix/ton ne feed
clothing
Dose. Poultry: 20-25 g/tonne feed
1.4.2 Drugs for histomoniosis
ZFA Aviax (Forurm) UK
Dimetridazole and nifursol have been used to prevent and
Premix, semdurarmicin 50 g/kg, for broiler chickens
Withdrawal Periods. Chickens: slaughter 5 days
treat infections caused by Histomonas meleagridis (black-
head) in pheasants and partridges. Histomoniosis (histomo-
  s        
SULFADIMETHOXINE
likely to be seen in game birds after they have been
released.
UK
Dimetridazole appears to interfere with RNA synthesis.
Indications. Treatment and prophylaxis of coccidiosis in
Dimetridazole is included in Annex IV of Regulation 2377/
pigeons
90/EEC which prohibits its use in food-producing species.
Contra-indications. Renal impairment; use during the
Products containing dimetridazole have been voluntarily
breeding season
suspended and will become unavailable once existing
Warnings. Birds should not participate in races during
stocks are depleted.
treatment
Nifursol acts by causing damage to lipids and DNA within
Dose. Pigeons: by addition to drinking water, 50 mg/kg
the cells. Nifursol has been removed from Annexes of
body-weight
Directive 70/524/EEC and therefore withdrawn for con-
sumer safety reasons.
POM Coxi Plus (Genitrix) UK
Oral powder, for addition to drinking water, sulfadirmethoxine sodiurn arhy-
drous I g/sachet, for racing pigeons
1.4.3 Drugs for trichomoniosis
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used irn pigeons intended for hurman con-
Trichomonads cause infection in a number of species of
surmptior
Dose. Pigeons: (40 birds) by addition to drinking water, I sachet/2 litres
animals. Bovine trichomomiosis (trichomomiasis) is a vene-
water for 5 days
real disease caused by Tritrichomonas foetus, and has been
1.4.4 Drugs for babesiosis177
controlled in many countries by artificial insemination.
 Ovine babesiosis has been reported throughout Europe.
Avian trichomoniosis occurs in two forms. Infectionl with
Bab.motasi and Bab.ovis are both capable of causing either
Trichomonas galfinae (T. cofumbae) causes lesions in the  acute or chronic disease with symptoms similar to those
mouth and upper respiratory tract (canker in pigeons,  seen in cattle.
frounce in birds of prey). Tetratrichomonas gallinarum
Equine babesiosis (Theileria equi and Bab. caballi) is anl
(Trichomonas gallinarum) has been incriminated as causing
occasional cause of severe clinical disease and mortality. It
diarrhoea in pheasants, partridges, and other game birds.
 is of importance to the international horse trade, requiring
5-Nitroimidazole drugs are used to treat a number of proto-:
strict control.
zoal infections. Metronidazole, ronidazole, and carnida-
Canine babesiosis (Bab.canis)is becoming inicreasingly
zole are thought to interact with DNA destroying its ability
widespread in the USA and Europe. The clinical signs
to act as a template for DNA and RNA synthesis; dimetri-
 range from lethargy, fever, and pale mucous membranes to
dazole appears to act by interfering with RNA synthesis.
icterus anid haematuria inl severe cases. Tick control is
Dimetridazole is included in Annex IV of Regulation 2377/
 essential in infected areas and dogs travelling to these areas
90/EEC which prohibits its use in food-producing species.
should be protected against ticks. A vaccine against this dis-
ease is available in some countries.
CARNIDAZOLE
cholinesterase inhibitor. It appears to act directly on the par-
UK
asite leading to an alteration in morphology. Imidocarb is
Indications. Treatment and prophylaxis of trichomoniosis
excreted unchanged mainly in the urine. It is effective in
Dose. Pigeons: by mouth, (adult birds) 10 mg; (young
preventing and treating bovine babesiosis without interfer-
birds) 5 mg
ing with the development of immunity. Infections caused by
T. equi infections in horses+ are usually refractive to treat-
GSL Spartrix (Petlife) UK
 ment and therapy at higher doses is within the toxic dose
Fableis, scored, carnidazole 10 mg, for pigeons
Tanige.
consumption
Diminazene and amicarbalide are aromatic diamidine
derivatives related to pentamidine. Both have low therapeu-
DIMETRIDAZOLE
tic indices and overdosage results in clinical signs such as
lethargy, incoordination, and seizures.
UK
Indications. Treatment and prophylaxis of trichomoniosis
Dose. See preparation details
IMIDOCARB DIPROPIONATE
CSL Harkanker Soluble (Petlife) UK
Powder in soluble sachei, dirmetridazole 40 mg/g, for rucing pigeons, show
UK
pigeons
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in pigeons intended for hurman
Indications. Babesiosis in horses+, cattle
corsurmption
Contra-indications. Operators under medical advice not to
Dose. Pigeons: I or 2 sachets/4.5 littes drinking water
work with compounds that may ex hibit anti-cholinesterase
Note. Sachet must riot be opened, operators should handle the product with
activity; repeated doses in cattle
su Ap
Side-effects. Restlessness, sweating, abdominal pain
METRONIDAZOLE
Warnings. Operators should wear suitable protective
clothing
UK
Dose. Horses + : babesiosis, by intramuscular injection, 2-
3 mg/kg. Repeat after 24 hours
Indications. Treatment of trichomoniosis; metronidazole-
Cattle: babesiosis, treatment, by subcutaneous injection, 1.2
tion 1.4.5); hepatic encephalopathy (see section 3.10)
mg/kg as a single dose
Dose. Birds: trichomoniosis,by mouth or by subcutaneous
babesiosis prophylaxis,by subcutaneous injection,3 mg/kg
injection, 20 mg/kg daily
as a single dose
See section 1.1.8 for preparation details
POM Imizol Injection (Schering-Plough) UK
Injection, imidocarb as dipropionate 120 mg/mL, for catte
Withdrawal Periods. Cate: slaughter 213 days, milk 21 days
1.4.4 Drugs for babesiosis
France
Infection caused by Babesia spp. occurs in a number of spe-
Indications. Babesiosis in horses, cattle and dogs; anaplas-
cies. Transmission of the protozoa is by ticks and ectopara-
mosis in cattle
sitic control (see section 2.2) may assist in prevention of the
Side-effects. Transient vomiting immediately after dosing
disease.
in dogs; pain on injection in dogs
Bovine babesiosis (redwater fever) is characterised by fever
Dose.By subcutaneous or intramuscular injection.
Dogs: babesiosis, treatment, 2 mg/kg as a single dose;
Bab.bigemina,Bab.bovis,and Bab.divergens
prophylaxis, 4 mg/kg
178 Bacterial, fungal, viral, and protozoal infections
Carbesia (Schering-Plough) Fr.
1.4.7 Drugs for leishmaniosis
Injection, irmidocarb as dipropionate 85 mg/mL, for horses, catle, dogs
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter 60 days. Cattle: slaughter 28 days,
Leishmania spp. are vector-borne protozoan parasites pri-
mnilk 2 days
marily affecting dogs. The protozoa are transmitted by vari-
Note. To obtain a supply, the veterinarian should obtain a Special Treatrment
ous species of sandflies belonging to the genus
Authorisation frorm the VMD
Phlebotomus. In Mediterranean Europe, canine visceral
leishmaniosis is caused by L. infantum. The disease is
1.4.5 Drugs for giardiosis
Giardia spp. are flagellate protozoa commonly associated
dogs causes a chronic insidious systemic disease character-
with human enteric infections, yet frequently overlooked as
ised by inappetence, hair loss, diarrhoea, respiratory sym-
parasites of domestic animals. Infections in many animals
toms, and enlarged lymph nodes, liver, and spleen. The
are asymptomatic; where disease does occur, the signs
disease often proves fatal. Cutaneous leishmaniosis in
include chronic diarrhoea, weight loss, lethargy, and failure
Europe is usually caused by L. tropica which manifests
to thrive. Giardiosis is a zoonotic disease.
itself in dogs as ulcers and sores that heal to a scar after sey-
Metronidazole is used for the treatment of giardiosis (giar-
eral months.
diasis) in dogs and cats. Fenbendazole is also available for
Pentavalent antimony compounds such as meglumine anti-
 the treatment of giardiosis in adult dogs and puppies.
monate and sodium stibogluconate are active against
amastigote stages but the mechanism of action is unknown.
FENBENDAZOLE
Pentamidine, anl aromatic diamidine derivative, has been
used against some species of Leishmania but can be
UK
extremely nephrotoxic and hepatotoxic. It acts by interfer-
Indications. Treatment of giardiosis in dogs; endoparasites
ing with DNA and folate transformation and by inhibiting
(see section 2.1.1.2)
RNA and protein synthesis.
Dose. Dogs: giardiosis, by mouth, 50 mg/kg daily for 3
Treated animals often show clinical relapse and remain car-
sAep
riers. For unresponsive cases or relapses, amphotericin B
may be of benefit for visceral leishmaniosis but is
PML Panacur 2.5% Liquid (Intervet)
nephrotoxic.
See section 2.1.l .2 for preparation details
Allopurinol is usually administered in combination with
PML Panacur 10% Liquid (Intervet)
meglumine antimony for the first month of treatment and
See section 2.l.l .2 for preparation details
thereafter alone as maintenance for the dogs life. The
mechanism of action of allopurinol for leishmaniosis is
PML Panacur Paste (Intervet)
See section 2.l.1.2 for preparation details
purine salvage pathway. This leads to the formation of a
PVL Panacur Wormer (Intervet)
toxic analogue of adenosine triphosphate, which is incorpo-
See section 2.l.1.2 for preparation details
rated into ribonucleic acid.
There have been reports of treatment failures with antimo-
nials in humans and some authorities advocate sole use of
allopurinol in dogs. Clinical cure is obtained albeit more
METRONIDAZOLE
slowly than in combination with meglumine antimonate
UK
Indications. Treatment of giardiosis; metronidazole-sensi-
tive infections (see section 1.1.8); trichomoniosis (see sec-
tion 1.4.3); hepatic encephalopathy (see section 3.10)
Dose. Dogs, cats: giardiosis, by mouth or by subcutaneous
injection, 20 mg/kg daily
See section l.l.8 for preparation details
ALLOPURINOL
UK
Indications.Leishmaniosis in combination with meglu-
1.4.6 Drugs for hexamitiosis
mine antimonate; urate calculi (see section 9.5)
Side-effects. Erythema, hypersensitivity; predisposition to
Spironucleus meleagridis(Hexamita meleagridis)is a flag-
xanthine calculi
ellate protozoan causing an infectious catarrhal enteritis in
birds. Infections in adult birds are usually asymptomatic but
ment
inl young birds heavy losses can occur. Dimetridazole
Dose. Dogs: 1
leishmaniosis, by mouth, 15 mg/kg twice
appears to interfere with RNA synthesis.
daily for life
Dimetridazole is included in Annex IV of Regulation 2377!
90/EEC which prohibits its use in food-producing species.
See section 9.5 for preparation details
1.4.8 Drugs for theileriosis 179
AMPHOTERICIN
SODIUM STIBOGLUCONATE
(Amphotericin B)
UK
UK
Indications. Cutaneous and visceral leishmaniosis
Indications. Leishmaniosis; systemic yeast and fungal
Side-effects. Occasional anaphylactoid reaction, bradycar-
infections (see section 1.2)
dia, cardiac arrhythmias
Contra-indications. Renal impairment, see notes above
Warnings. Renal impairment, hepatic impairment, risk of
Side-effects. Nephrotoxicity
local thrombosis (injection should be administered slowly
Warnings. Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1
over 5 minutes)
Dose. Leishmaniosis, by intravenous infusion, 0.5-1.0 mg/
Dose.Dogs: by intravenous injection, 100-200 micro-
kg. Dose should be gradually increased from 5- 10 mg daily
 grams/kg (0.1-0.2 mg/kg) daily for maximum 20 days
See section I .2 for preparatior details 
POM  Pentostam (GSK) UK
injection, sodium stibogluconate equivalent to pentavalent antirmony 100
rmg/rmL
1.4.8 Drugs for theileriosis
A number of Theileria spp. have been reported in cattle and
MEGLUMINE ANTIMONATE
sheep, of which some are significant causes of disease in
(Meglumine antimoniate)
many tropical countries. The protozoa occur within lym-
phocytic and erythrocytic cells and are transmitted by the
France
bites of various species of ticks. In cattle, Theileria parva
Indications. Acute and chronic leishmaniosis
parva, the cause of East Coast fever, and T. annulata, the
Contra-indications. Renal, hepatic, or cardiac impairment
cause of Mediterranean Coast fever, are the main patho-
Side-effects. Hyperthermia, diarrhoea, vomiting, lethargy
genic species. In sheep, T. lestoquardi (T.hirci) is highly
Warnings. Blood-creatinine and urine-protein concentra-
pathogenic. A more benign species of Theileria found
tion should be monitored throughout treatment
throughout Europe is T. ovis.
Dose. Administer on alternate days 15-20 times; gradually
Buparvaquone
(Butalex,
Schering-Plough)
increase to maximum dose
parvaquone (Parvexon, Bimeda) are hydroxynapthoqui-
nones used for the treatment of theileriosis in cattle. Nap-
Dogs: by subcutaneous, intramuscular intravenous or
intraperitoneal injection, (5- 10 kg body-weight) 5- 10 mL;
thoquinones are thought to interfere with electron transport
(10-20 kg body-weight) 10-15 mL; (20 kg body-weight)
within mitochondria at the uboquinone level.
15-20 mL every other day or
The tetracyclines (see section 1. 1.2), chlortetracycline and
by subcutaneous injection, 100 mg/kg every other day for 1
oxytetracycline, are used for prophylaxis against T. parva
month in combination with allopurinol
parva and may reduce parasitaemia by arresting schizog-
ony. Chlortetracycline is used at a dose of 1.5 mg/kg orally
Glucantime (Merial) Fx
injection, rmeglurmine antirmonate 300 mg/mL, for dogs
kg intramuscularly once or twice, or 5 to 15 mg/kg
Note. To obtain a supply, the veterinarian should obtain a Special Treatrment 
intraveniously
Authorisation frorm the VMD
1.4.9 Drugs for trypanosomosis
Trypanosomosis is an important disease of humans and
domestic animals in parts of the tropics. A large number of
PENTAMIDINE ISETIONATE
species have been identified and can be broadly dividedinto
(Pentamidine isethionate)
two groups depending on the site of development in the
insect vector. The salivarian trypanosomes, transmitted in
UK
the saliva of biting flies, are responsible for diseases such as
pe ns, pun ‘suy u ssuis udeis wo
Indications. Cutaneous and visceral leishmaniosis
'nagana' in domestic ruminants. The stercorarian trypano-
Side-effects. Metabolic disturbances, hepatic impairment,
somes, which are transmitted by contamination with
haematological disorders
Warnings. Use with caution in animals with renal or
infected insect faeces, cause diseases including Chagas
hepatic impairment
disease in humans in Central and South America and are
 transmitted by reduviid bugs.
Dose. Dogs: by intramuscular injection, 3-4 mg/kg on
alternate days. Maximum course is 10 treatments
Diminazene, an aromatic diamidine derivative related to
POM  Pentacarinat (JHC) UK
cally, for prophylaxis, or both. These drugs appear to bind
Injection, powder for reconstitution, pentarmidine isetionate 300 mg
to parasite DNA and block DNA and RNA synthesis.
181
2
Drugs used in the treatment and control of
PARASITIC INFECTIONS
Contributors:
2.1.1 Drugs for roundworms (nematodes)
Professor D E Jacobs BVMS, PhD, ILTM, DipEVPC, FRCVS,
FRCPath
2.1.1.1 Avermectins and milbemycins
Professor M A Taylor BVMS, PhD, DipEVPC, CBiol, MIBiol, MRCVS
2.1.1.2 Benzimidazoles
2.1.1.3 Imidazothiazoles
Parasitic infections are caused by helminths, arthropods,
2.1.1.4 Organophosphorus compounds
and protozoa. The latter group is considered in section 1.4.
2.1.1.5 Tetrahydropyrimidines
Control of parasites of animals, birds, fish (see Prescribing
2.1.1.6 Other drugs for roundworms
for fish), and bees (see Prescribing for invertebrates) is
The roundworms form a large and complex group and
essential for both their welfare and to maximise production.
infections may be caused by a single or multiple species.
The control of some infections is particularly important for
Infections should be controlled by suitable hygiene and
public health reasons; for example, they may have zoonotic
strategic prophylactic treatment based on a knowledge of
potential or cause condemnation of offal or the carcass at
the epidemiology of the infection. Both specific and broad-
the slaughterhouse. In this chapter, drug treatment is dis-
spectrum treatments are used. The latter are also used in
cussed under the following headings:
cases where it is difficult to make a definitive diagnosis
2.1 Endoparasiticides
without undue delay or to maximise the production benefits
2.2 Ectoparasiticides
of prophylactic treatment.
Products must be used in a maniner that will delay or pre-
Notes on endectocides, such as avermectinis and milbemy-
vent the development of anthelmintic resistance. Benzimi-
cinis, are included in each section because they have activity
dazole-resistant Teladorsagia (Ostertagia), Haemonchus,
against a range of parasites in both categories.
Cooperia, or Trichostrongyfus already occur in small rumi-
nants on many British farms, and triclabendazole-resistant
Fasciola has been reported on some.Benzimidazole-resi-
2.1 Endoparasiticides
2.1.1 Drugs for roundworms (nematodes)
Levamisole-resistance has been confirmed in some ovine
2.1.2 Drugs for tapeworms (cestodes)
Teladorsagia (Ostertagia), Cooperia,and Trichostrongyfus
2.1.3 Drugs for flukes (trematodes)
populations, while evidence of resistance to macrocyclic
2.1.4 Compound endoparasiticides
lactones is starting to appear in Teladorsagia (Ostertagia)
of sheep and goats. Resitance to one product normally con-
fers side- or cross-resistance to other drugs in the same
Anthelmintics are used prophylactically and also to treat
chemical group, because compounds within the same group
acute and chronic infections. Control measures reduce
generally have similar modes of action. To assist in the
worm burdens, enhance productivity, and substantially
planning of anthelmintic rotation programmes, labels on
reduce the build-up of infective worm larvae on the pasture
worming products for farm animals display one of the fol-
or eggs in the environment.
lowing symbols to denote the chemical group of the active
The three major groups of helminths are the roundworms
ingredient:
(nematodes), tapeworms (cestodes), and flukes (trema-
1-BZ benzimi dazoles, probenzimidazoles
todes). The biological characteristics of these groups are
 2-LM imidazothi azoles, tetrahy dropyrimi dines 
often sufficiently disparate to necessitate anthelmi ntics with
3-AV avermectins, milbemycins.
different modes of action. Even within a group there is suf-
Precautions to slow the onset of resistance include adminis-
ficient diversity to limit the spectrum of activity of many
tration of the minimum required number of correctly timed
drugs, the choice being further complicated by the fact that
and accurately measured doses of the most appropriate
the various developmental stages of the parasites may not
product, quarantine treatments of all animals entering the
be equally susceptible. The nature and composition of the
property (to avoid importation of resistant worms), regular
target population must therefore be known in order to select
monitoring to assess the resistance profile on the farm, and
 the most appropriate preparation. Some endoparasiticide
reduction of dependence on anthelmintics (for ex ample, by
preparations contain cobalt and selenium.
grazing management or breeding programmes). Sheep
Table 2.1 outlines drugs that are effective against common
should not be grazed on pasture previously used by goats
endoparasitic infections in the UK in horses, ruminants,
because resistant strains develop more rapidly in the latter
pigs, dogs, cats, poultry, game birds, and pigeons. Different
formulations of a preparation may be indicated for different
retical basis are more fully described in Abbott K A et al.
host species or parasites. Care must be taken to ensure only
SustainabteWorm Contro!Strategiesfor Sheep:a technicat
the correct use of appropriately authorised formulations in
manual for veterinary surgeons and advisers SCOPS,2004
food-producing animals.
available at www.nationalsheep.org.uk.
182 Parasitic infections
Table 2.1 Drugs effective against common endoparasitic infections1
Parasite
Endoparasiticides
EQUIDAE (consult individual monographs because some preparations are not suitable for allspecies )
Gastro-intestinal
Parascaris, Strongylus,
fenbendazole, ivermectin,mebendazole, moxidectin,
roundworms
Cyathostomes, Oxyuris
oxibendazole, pyrantel
Strongyloides
fenbendazole,ivermectin,moxidectin,oxibendazole
Migrating strongyles
fenbendazole,ivermectin,moxidectin
Horse bots
Gasterophilus
haloxon, ivermectin, moxidectin
Lungworms
Dictyocaulus
ivermectin, mebendazole
Tapeworms
Anoplocephala perfoliata
pyrantel, praziquante]
Anoplocephaloidesmammillana
praziquante]
Liver flukes
Fasciola
triclabendazole
RUMINANTS (consult individual monographs because some preparations are not suitable for all species)
Gastro-intestinal
Bunostomum, Chabertia, Cooperia,
abamectin, albendazole, closantel (Haemonchus only),
roundworms
Haemonchus,Nematodirus,
doramectin, eprinomectin, fenbendazole, ivermectin,
Oesophagostomum, Teladorsagia
levamisole, mebendazole, morantel, moxidectin,
(Ostertagia), Strongyloides,
netobimin, nitroxinil (Bunostomum, Haemonchus,
Trichostrongylus
Oesophagostomum only), oxfendazole
Type II ostertagiosis
abamectin, albendazole, doramectin, eprinomectin,
fenbendazole,ivermectin,moxidectin, netobimin,
oxfendazole
Lungworms
Dictyocaulus
abamectin, albendazole, doramectin, eprinomectin,
fenbendazole, ivermectin, levamisole, mebendazole,
moxidectin, netobimin, oxfendazole
Protostrongyius
ivermectin (by injection)
Sheep nasal bots 
Oestrus ovis
closantel, doramectin, ivermectin
Tapeworms
Moniezia
albendazole, fenbendazole, mebendazole, netobimin,
oxfendazole, praziquantel (sheep)
2.1 Endoparasiticides 183
Table 2.1 Drugs effective against common endoparasitic infections' (continued)
Parasite
Endoparasiticides
Liver flukes
Fasciola
immature (1-12 weeks)
closantel, nitroxinil, triclabendazole
[npe
albendazole, clorsulon, closantel, netobimin, nitroxinil,
triclabendazole
Dicrocoelium
netobimin
PIGS
Gastro-intestinal
Oesophagostomum, Ascaris,
doramectin, fenbendazole, flubendazole, ivermectin
roundworms
Hyostrongylus
Trichuris
doramectin (adult worms), fenbendazole, flubendazole
Strongyloides
doramectin, ivermectin
Lungworms
Metastrongylus
doramectin, fenbendazole, flubendazole, ivermectin
DOGS and CATS (consult individual monographs because some preparations are not suitable for both species)
Gastro-intestinal
Ancylostoma,Toxocara,Toxascaris,
fenbendazole, flubendazole, milbemycin oxime,
roundworms
Uncinaria
nitroscanate, piperazine, pyrantel, selamectin 
Trichuris
fenbendazole,flubendazole, milbemycin oxime
 Transplacental roundworm
fenbendazole
transmission in dogs
Lungworms
Oslerus
fenbendazole
Angiostrongylus
fenbendazole+, levamisole
Aelurostrongylus
fenbendazole
Tapeworms
Echinococcus
praziquantel
Dipylidium
dichlorophen, nitroscanate, praziquante]
Taenia
dichlorophen, fenbendazole, flubendazole, nitroscanate,
praziquante]
184 Parasitic infections
Table 2.1 Drugs effective against common endoparasitic infections' (continued)
Parasite
Endoparasiticides
Heartworms
Dirofilaria
prophylaxis in dogs
ivermectin?, milbemycin oxime, moxidectin?, selamectin
adults
ivermectin2. 3, melarsomine2, thiacetarsamide2
microfilariae
milbemycin oxime
POULTRY
Gastro-intestinal
Amidostomum,Ascaridia,
flubendazole
roundworms
Capillaria, Heterakis,
Trichostrongylus
Gapeworms
Syngamus
flubendazole
Tapeworms
Raillietina
flubendazole
GAME BIRDS (consult individual monographs because some preparations are not suitable for all species)
Gastro-intestinal
Amidostomum,Ascaridia,
flubendazole
roundworms
Capillaria, Heterakis
Trichostrongylus
fenbendazole,flubendazole
Gapeworms
Syngamus
flubendazole
Tapeworms
Raillietina
flubendazole
PIGEONS
Gastro-intestinal
Ascaridia
febantel,fenbendazole,piperazine
roundworms
Capillaria
fenbendazole
linfections and treatment used in the UK
2 species-specific authorised veterinary preparations not available in the UK
3 see section 2.1.1.1
2.1.1 Drugs for roundworms (nematodes)185
Equidae
This property of avermectins and milbemycins has been
Equidae harbour a wider variety of nematodes than any
used for the design of strategic control programmes for cat-
other domesticated animal. Strongylid and ascarid infec-
tle. When set-stocked calves are given 2 or 3 carefully
tions commonly cause ill-thrift, diarrhoea, and sometimes
 timed anthelmintic doses at or after turnout, there is a sub-
colic in horses and donkeys. Migrating Strongyfus vulgaris
larvae damage the cranial mesenteric artery, causing equine
 nal and lungworm larvae on the pasture throughout the
yerminous arteritis. Dictyocauus infection may cause lung
grazing season. A similar effect can be obtained by the use
lesions and although it generally causes few ill effects in
of modified-release (continuous or pulse-release) intra-
donkeys unless they carry a heavy worm burden, it may
 ruminal devices that provide medication over a period of 90
affect ponies and horses if they graze alongside; control of
to 135 days, although not all are effective against lung-
this parasite necessitates treatment of donkeys with anl
appropriate anthelminthic and inclusion in a regular dosing
 grazed on the clean pasture or if treated animals are subse-
regimen for all equines.
quently put onto contaminated pasture. There is concern
Where necessary, gastro-intestinal nematodes may be con-
 that some prophylactic measures for calves are so effective
trolled by regular dosing of all horses, for example every 4
that there may not always be sufficient antigenic stimula-
to 13 weeks (depending on the product used, and risk fac-
tion to ensure full development of immunity. Animals may
tors such as pasture history and stocking rate) throughout
be at risk if put onto heavily contaminated pasture towards
spring, summer, and autumn, and every 3 months during
the end of a long grazing season, or in their second year. An
wintet. Avemectins and milbemycins, particularly moxid-
 alternati ve prophylactic approach is to give a mid-July dose
ectin, delay faecal egg-output for a longer period than other
chemical groups. A 5-day course of treatment with fenben-
ture. If there is no option but to graze calves on heavily con-
dazole in early winter is claimed to reduce the risk of larval
taminated pasture, repeated avermectin or milbemycin
cyathostomosis, which is associated with the resumed
 treatment or an intra-ruminal device can be given later in
development of hypobiotic larvae. Newly acquired animals,
the season.
Or those returning from grazing elsewhere, should be
Medicated feed blocks are sometimes used for general
treated with a broad-spectrum anthelmintic effective against
worm control but the accuracy of individual dosing by this
enicysted cyathostomes.
method is uncertain.
Reliance on anthelmintics can be reduced by grazing man-
agement and regular removal of faeces from pastures. Fae-
often less satisfactory. The ewe acts as an additional source
cal egg-counts should be used to monitor the adequacy of
of infection to the lamb around lambing time and treatments
worming programmes and to avoid the overuse of
anthelmintics.
cal egg-counts. Revised guidelines have been prepared for
sustainable worm control strategies that take account of
changing epidemiological patterns (for ex ample, the widen-
Ruminants
ing distribution of Haemonchus), and the need to delay or
In ruminants, parasitic gastro-enteritis and parasitic bron-
prevent anthelmintic resistance (see introductory section
chitis (husk) are the main clinical disorders caused by adult
2.1.1). Reliance on anthelmintics can be reduced by alter-
nematodes.
nating annual grazing schemes with cattle, sheep, and ara-
Teladorsagia (Ostertagia) larvae may undergo an arrested
ble rotations because few parasites can survive in the wrong
development within the host when environmental condi-
host, although problems have arisen iri some areas because
tions are adverse to the survival of free-living stages. Type
Nematodirus battus can be transmitted through calves to
II ostertagiosis is caused by these larvae emerging from a
 cause disease in lambs the following year. Additional treat-
prolonged hypobiotic state. They have a reduced metabolic
ment of lambs in spring may be necessary to prevent nema-
rate and are relatively resistant to anthelmintic attack.
todirosis, especially if a high-risk season is anticipated due
Most forms of parasitic gastro-enteritis in ruminants tend to
to climatic conditions.
 occur in the second half of the summer, although Type II
The control of nematode infections in goats is further com-
ostertagiosis occurs in late winter and spring, and nematod-
plicated by the fact that they do not develop an effective
irosis in lambs occurs in late spring. Routine control entails
 immunity and therefore remain susceptible throughout their
repeated use of anthelmintics during spring and summer
lives. They also tend to metabolise some anthelmintics
and at housing, but to prevent or delay resistance problems,
 more quickly than sheep and so doses and treatment inter-
unnecessary treatments should be avoided. The dosing
 vals cannot be extrapolated from one species to the othet.
interval is determined by the stocking density, pasture con-
For example, the recommended dose of albendazole for
tamination, and the particular anthelmintic. Certain aver-
sheep is 5 mg/kg and for goats is 10 mg/kg. This higher
mectin and milbemycin preparations prevent infective
dose entails withdrawal periods of at least 7 days for milk
lar vae from establishing for some time after treatment. This
and 28 days for meat, but lower doses may be ineffective
provides a period of protection from re-infection, the dura-
and may encourage the onset of resistance. Similarly,
tion of which varies with the drug, formulation, host and
levamisole+ has to be given at an elevated dosage of up to
worm species (see section 2.1. 1. 1).
12 mg/kg. Levamisole may be toxic in goats and should be
186 Parasitic infections
used with caution in this species; treatment by injection is
age followed by further doses every 3 weeks up to the age
contra-indicated. Ivermectin may be givenn as ann oral formu-
of 4 months.
lation at a dose of 200 micrograms/kg. The frequency of
fToxascaris, Uncinaria (hookworm), and Trichuris (whip-
occurrence of resistance and the range of anthelmintics
 worm) are acquired later in life and are associated mainly
involved are greater in goats than sheep. It is important
 with large kennel establishments and contaminated exercise
therefore that an integrated approach to worm control is
areas. Trichuris, which causes intermittent diarrhoea, is par-
adopted with mi nimal reliance on anthelmintics.
ticularly difficult to treat and repeated dosing may be
necessar y.
For routine control of common gastro-intestinal round-
Pigs
woms，
adults should normally be treated every few
In pigs, Hyostrongylus, Trichuris, and lungworms are
months. Lactating bitches, however, commonly harbour
almost exclusi vely found in animals kept outdoors, as is the
 patent Toxocara infections and should be treated at 3-week
swine kidney worm, Stephanurus dentatus, but this does not
 inter vals until the puppies are weaned.
There are few authorised treatments for lungworm infec-
tropical regions. Ascaris and Oesophagostomum are com-
tions in dogs and cats. Angiostrongyfus infections usually
mon even in intensively kept pigs, the former mainly in
respond to levamisole+, but fenbendazole+ may be safer
younger animals, and the latter particularly in breeding
although its efficacy is less well documented. Osferus
stock. They can both cause production losses.
(Filaroides) and Aelurostrongyfus can be serious pathogens
For convenience and economy, pig anthelmintics are usu-
of dogs and cats respectively. Each can be controlled with
ally administered as a single dose in the form of a feed
         
The course of treatment may have to be repeated in some
mectin and doramectin can be given by injection. Weaners
cases.
may be treated before moving to fattening pens and again 8
 Fortunately, canine heartworm disease (dirofilariosis) is not
weeks later. Sows are dosed shortly before farrowing. Boars
endemic in the UK but cases do occur among imported
are dosed regularly at intervals of about 6 months. Alterna-
 dogs. It is a major cause of morbidity and premature death
tively, all pigs in a building may be treated simultaneously
inl unprotected dogs in endemic areas such as southern
at intervals determined by monitoring faecal egg-counts.
Europe, particularly the Po valley region of Italy, North
America, notably the south-eastern states and Mississippi
river, and many tropical and subtropical countries. Cats ate
Dogs and cats
sometimes infected. Affected animals initially show exer-
Roundworm infections are common in dogs and cats. Most
cise intolerance due to progressive heart failure and organ
puppies carry prenatally acquired Toxocara infection. This
dysfunction, but acute cases occasionally occur. Melarsom-
round worm is of zoonotic importance and is harmful to the
ine may be used for treatment. This drug does niot have a
-s ae s aox yo s   nd
veterinarymarketing authorisation in theUK and therefore
lowed by humans, the larvae migrate to various sites and
may rarely result in unilateral impairment of vision. There-
tion from the VMD. After the adult worins have been
fore routine worming of puppies from an early age is essen-
 cleared, microfilariae may be eliminated with milbemycin
tial together with removal of faeces. For guidance, puppies
 oxime. The management of heartworm cases is complex
should ideally be wormed fortnightly from 2 weeks of age
and treatment can be hazardous to the patient. Label
until 12 weeks of age. A similar result may be achieved
instructions must be followed carefully. Dead adult worms
with fenbendazole given during the third and sixth weeks of
cause thrombo-embolism, and the rapid death of large num-
life. In this case, fewer doses are effective because benzi-
bers of microfilariae may result in transient systemic effects
or acute circulatory collapse. Further information is availa-
prevent faecal egg-output for a longer period. Ease of appli-
ble from:
cation is an important criterion for the choice of product in
American Heart worm Society
very young pups.
www.heartwormsociety.org
Older dogs may harbour somatic Toxocara larvae in various
 Ettinger S J, Feldman E C Textbook of Veterinary Inter-
tissues. These are not killed by routine worming and
nat Medicine: Diseases of the Dog and Cat 5th ed.
become active in late pregnancy to migrate across the pla-
Philadelphia: W B Saunders, 1999.
centa and into the milk. Pre- and post-natal transmission
 Dogs travelling to affected countries can be protected with a
can be controlled with a special regimen of fenbendazole
 monthly programme of milbemycin oxime or selamectin,
 provided that they are not already harbouring adult heart-
2.1.1.2). This prophylactic programme will also prevent the
worn, starting prior to first exposure and finishing one
transfer of Ancyfostoma larvae via the milk. This hook-
month after the end of the risk period. Ivermectin+ and
worm is rare in the UK but is a frequent cause of anaemia,
moxidectin+ are also available for this purpose in some
particularly in puppies, in warmer climates.
endemic countries. Diethylcarbamazine, which has to be
As kittens are infected by Toxocara cati via the milk but not
given daily during and subsequent to the mosquito season,
prenatally, routine worming commences at 4 to 6 weeks of
is still used in some countries.
2.1.1 Drugs for roundworms (nematodes)187
Birds
will remove adult Dirofilaria but this may take up to 2 years
Poultry and game birds are treated for gastro-intestinal
(depending on the age of the worms). Selamectin and
roundworm,
gapeworn,
anid
tapeworm  infections.
milbemycin are also active against Toxocara, some other
Helminth infection is less of a problem in poultry reared
nematodes of dogs and cats, and some ectoparasites (see
indoors because of their lack of contact with intermediate
section 2.2.1.1)
hosts. Breeding birds are treated before laying. Rearing
Ivermectin is sometimes used for control of lungworms and
birds are dosed 3 weeks after placing on infected ground,
ectoparasites in dogs+ but should be used with extreme
maintenance doses being given every 6 to 8 weeks. Pigeons
caution. Toxicity is predominantly seen in rough-haired
 are treated routinely for gastro-intestinal roundworm infec-
Collies but has also occurred in other breeds. The clinical
tionis each year 2 weeks before their first race and before
signs of toxicity are ataxia, depression, tremors, recum-
pairing.
bency, and mydriasis; fatalities may occur. Similar clinical
signs have been reported in cases of moxidectin overdosage
2.1.1.1 Avermectins and milbemycins
in dogs due to ingestion of preparations authorised for
horses.
Avermectins include abamectin, doramectin, eprinomec-
tin, ivermectin, and selemectin. Milbemycins include
milbemycin oxime and moxidectin. Preparations for farm
ABAMECTIN
animals are labelled with the symbol 3-AV. These are niatu-
ral or semi-natural macrocyclic lactone fermentation prod-
UK
ucts of strains of, respectively, Streptomyces avermitilis and
Indications. Endoparasites. Gastro-intestinal roundworms
Streptomyces cyanogriseus. They interfere with parasite
and lungworms in cattle; Type II ostertagiosis in cattle
nerve transmission by indirectly opening chloride channels
Ectoparasites. See section 2.2.1.1
in the post-synaptic membrane. They are effective against a
Contra-indications. Administration to calves less than 16
wide range of nematode species and developmental stages,
weeks of age
but have no activity against trematodes or cestodes. They
Side-effects.
 Transient discomfort and swelling at injec-
are termed endectocides because they are also active against
tion site
many ectoparasites (see section 2.2.1.1). As yet, resistanice
Dose. Catle: by subcutaneous injection, 200 micrograms/
is mostly confined to some goat farns, but resistant Tel-
kg
adorsagia (Ostertagia) is starting to appear in sheep.
 In addition to killing an existing parasite population, the 
PML Enze Injection for Cattle (Merial) UK
Injection,abamectin 10 mg/mL,for catle
avermectins and milbemycins prevent re-infection for a
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter 42 days, should not be used in cattle
period after treatment. The duration of activity is affected
producing milk for hurman consurm ption
by the lipophilicity of the molecule, the formulation, the
route of administration, the host and worm species. In cat-
tle, for example, different preparations provide a duration of
activity against Ostertagia of 14 to 35 days. Corresponding
DORAMECTIN
figures for Cooperia are 0 to 28 days and for Dictyocaufus
28 to 42 days. In sheep, abomasal worms may be controlled
UK
for 5 weeks with moxidectin. This phenomenon is utilised
Indications. Endoparasites. Gastro-intestinal roundworms
in strategic programmes for the prevention of parasitic gas-
and lungworms in ruminants and pigs; Type II ostertagiosis
tro-enteritis and bronchitis in calves (see section 2.1.1
in cattle; nasal bots in sheep
Ruminants). For example, ivermectin is given at 3, 8, and
Ectoparasites. See section 2.2.1.1
13 weeks after turnout, or doramectin is given at turnout
Dose. Catle: by ‘pour-on' application, 500 micrograms/
and again 8 weeks later. Because of their persistence, how-
kg
ever, avermectins and milbemycins are not authorised for
by subcutaneous injection, 200 micrograms/kg
Sheep: roundworms, masal bots, by intramuscular injection,
    g  s   
200 micrograms/kg
Nematodirosis, by intramuscular injection, 300 micro-
ally low milk:plasma coefficient, allowing a zero milk with-
holding period in dairy cows.
 grams/kg
Ivermectin given to sows before farrowing effectively con-
Pigs: by intramuscular injection, 300 micrograms/kg
trols transmission of Strongyfoides ransomi via the milk.
PML Dectomax Injectable Solution for Cattle and Sheep (Pfizer) UK
Horses carrying heavy infections of Onchocerra may
Injection, doramectin 10 mg/mL, for catle, sheep
develop transient oedema and pruritus following treatment.
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter 56 days, should not be used in cattle
This may be due to the sudden death of large numbers of
producing milk for human consurmption, or dairy cows within 60 days before
calving. Sheep: slaughter 70 days, should not be used in sheep producing
microfilariae in the skin.
rmilk for hurman con sumptiorn 
Selamectin and milbemycin are available for heartworm
prophylaxis. Continuous monthly dosing with ivermectin +
PML Dectomax Injection for Pigs (Pfizer) UK
Injection,doramectin 10 mg/mL,for pigs
at the heartworm preventive dose rate (6 micrograms/kg)
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter 56 days
188 Parasitic infections
PML Dectomax Pour-On (Pfizer) UK
PML Depidex Drench (Novartis) UK
Solution, 'pour-on’, dorarmectin 5 mg/mL, for catfle
Oral solution, ivermectin 800 micrograrms/mL, for sheep
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter 35 days, should not be used in cattle 
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter [4 days, should not be used in anirmals
producing rmilk for hurmarn consurnption or orn dairy cows within 60 days
producing milk for hurman consurm ption 
before calving
PML Depidex Injection (Novartis) UK
Injection, ivermectin I0 mg/mL,for beef caffle, non-lactating dairy catfle
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle: slaughter 35 days, should not be used irn catle
EPRINOMECTIN
producing milk for hurman consurmption or in dairy cows, including pregnant
heifers, within 60 days before calving.
UK
PML Depidex Pour-On (Novartis) UK
Indications. Endoparasites. Gastro-intestinal roundworms
Soltion,pour-on,ivermectin 5mg/mL,for beef cattle,non-lactating diry
and lungworms ini cattle; Type II ostertagiosis in cattle
catfle
Ectoparasites. See section 2.2.1.1
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter 28 days, should not be used on cattle
jue uad upouy 'so Aep uo jo uogduns oo uny joy yu uonpaid
Contra-indications. Administration to areas of backline
heifers, within 60 days before calving
covered with mud or faeces
Warnings. Operators should 
PML Eqvalan (Merial) UK
wear suitable
protective
clothing
Ora? paste, iverrmectin 20 mg/division, for horses, donkeys; rmetered-dose
Dose. Cattle : by ^pour-on’ application, 500 micrograms/kg
applicator
Withdrawal Periods. Horses, donkeys: slaughter 2l days
Dose. Horses: by mouth, I division of paste/l00 kg body-weight
PML Eprinex (Merial) UK
Solution, 'pour-on', eprinormectin 5 mg/mL, for beef catle, dairy cattle
PML Eraquell (Virbac) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Catfe: slaughter 15 days, rmilk withdrawal period nil
Ora paste, ivermectin 20 mg/division, for horses; metered-dose applicator
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter 30 days, should not be used irn mares
producing milk for hurman consurm ption 
Dose. Horses: by mouth, I division of paste/100 kg body-weight
IVERMECTIN
PML Ivomec Classic Injection for Cattle and Sheep (Merial) UK
UK
Injection, ivermectin 10 mg/mL, for beef catle, non-lactating dairy cattle,
sheep
Indications. Endoparasites. Gastro-intestinal roundworms
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter 35 days, should not be used in cattle
and lungworms in horses, ruminants, and pigs; Type I1
producing rmilk for hurman consurmption or in dairy cows, including pregnant
ostertagiosis in ruminants; horse bots; nasal bots in sheep
heifers, within 60 days before calving. Sheep: slaughter 42 days, should not
be used in sheep producing rmilk for hurman consurmptior 
Ectoparasites. See section 2.2.1. 1
 Side-effects. Occasional coughing in sheep and goats after
PML Ivomec Classic Pour-On for Cattle (Merial) UK
oral treatment; occasional transient oedema and pruritus in
Solution, 'pour-on', ivermectin 5 mg/mL, for beef catle, non-lactating dairy
catfle
 horses; transient pain after injection in sheep
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 28 days, should not be used or catle
Dose.
jeuad upou 'so jep uo jo uogdinsuo uny jo yu ujnpa
Horses: by mouth, 200 micrograms/kg
heifers, within 60 days before calving
Cattle: by pour-on' application, 500 micrograms/kg
PML Ivomec Injection for Pigs (Merial) U/K
by subcutaneous injection, 200 micrograms/kg
Injection,ivermectin L0 mg/mL,forpis
Sheep: by mouth or by subcutaneous injection, 200 micro-
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter 28 days
grams/kg
Goats: by mouth, 200 micrograms/kg
MFSX Ivomee Premix for Pigs (Merial) UK
Pigs: by addition to feed, 100 micrograms/kg daily for 7
Premix, ivermectin, 6 g/kg, for gro wing und adult pigs
0<) sep aes (aa-oq  ol >) si sad em
sAep
kg body-weight) slaughter 28 days
by subcutaneous injection, 300 micrograms/kg
PML Noromectin 1.87 % Oral Paste for Horses (Norbrook) UK
Oral paste, ivermectin 20 mg/division, for horses; metered-dose applicator
Withdawal PerodsHres: slaughter4days,should noteusedinma
PML Alstomec (Alstoe) UK
Injection,ivermectin 10 mg/mL, for cattle, pigs
producing rmilk for hurman consum ption
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 42 days, should not be used in cattle
Dose. Horses: by mouth, I division of paste/l00 kg body-weight
producing milk for hurman consurm ption or in dairy cows, including pregnant
heifers, within 60 days before calving. Pigs: slaughter 28 days
PML Noromectin Drench (Norbrook) UK
Ora solution, ivermectin 800 rmicrograrms/mL,for sheep, gots
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep, gouts: slaughter 14 days, milk 14 days. Should
PML Animec (Chanelle) UK
Injection,ivermectin 10 mg/mL, for catle, pigs
not be used in anirmals within 28 days of cormrmencerment of lactation if milk
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 42 days, should not be used in cattle
is to be used for hurman consurm ption 
juud poui so p uio udnsuo uewy joi yu uno
heifers, within 60 days before calving. Pigs: slaughter 28 days
PML Noromectin Multi Injection (Norbrook) UK
injetion,ivermectin 10 mg/mL,for beef catle,non-lactating dairy catle,
sheep,pigs
PML Bimectin (Birmeda) UK
Injection,ivermectin 10 mg/mL, for catle, pigs
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 35 days, should not be used in cattle
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 35 days, should not be used in catle
producing milk for human consumption or in dairy cows, including pregnant
heifers, within 60 days before calving. Sheep: slaughter 42 days, should not
producing milk for human consumption or in dairy cows, including pregnant
be used in sheep producing milk for human consumption. Pigs: slaughter
heifers, within 60 days before calving. Pigs: slaughter 28 days
28 days
2.1.1 Drugs for roundworms (nematodes)  189
PML Noromectin Pour-On (Norbrook) U/K
MILBEMYCIN OXIME
Solution,pour-on,ivemectin5mg/mL,for beefcattle,non-actating diry
cattle
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 28 days, should not be used on cattle
UK
producing milk for hurman consurmption or on dairy cows, including pregnant
Indications. Endoparasites.
Gastro-intestinal
round-
heifers, within 60 days before calving
worms, hookworms, whipworms, and heartworm prophy-
PML Oramec (Merial) U/K
laxis in dogs; gastro-intestinal roundworms in cats
Oral solution, ivermectin 800 rmicrograrms/mL, for sheep, gouts
Contra-indications. Puppies less than 2 weeks of age
Side-effects. Pale mucous membranes, inicreased intesti nal
not be used in anirmals within 28 days of cormrmencerment of lactation if rmilk
peristalsis, vomiting, dyspnoea, hypersalivation
is to be used for hurman consurnption
Warnings. Presenice of concurrent Dirofilaria immitis
PML Panomec Injection for Cattle, Sheep and Pigs (Merial) UK
infestation should be excluded before treatment in dogs in
Injection, iverrmectin 10 mg/mL, for beef cattle, non-lactating dairy catfle,
or from heartworm risk area
sheep,pigs
Dose. Heartworm prophylaxis, treatment (depending on
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 35 days, should not be used in cattle
environmental risk) on the same day each month throughout
producing milk for hurman consurm ption or in dairy cows, including pregnant
heifers, within 60 days before calving. Sheep: slaughter 42 days, should not
the year, or one month before, during and one month after
be used in sheep producing milk for hurman consurmption. Pigs: slaughter 28
 period of risk; see preparation details for dosage; must be
days
feeding)
PML Panomec Paste for Horses (Merial) UK
Oral paste, iverrmectin 20 rmg/division, for horses, donkeys; rmetered dose
applicator
POM Milbemax (Novartis) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Horses, donkeys: slaughter 21 days
See section 2.1.4 for preparation details
PML Qualimintic 1%Injection (Janssen) UK
Injection, iverrmectin I0 mg/mL, for beef cattle, non-lactating dairy catfle,
See section 2.1.4 for preparation details
pigs
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 42 days, should not be used in cattle
MOXIDECTIN
producing milk for hurman consumption or in dairy cows, including pregnant
heifers, within 60 days before calving. Pigs: slaughter 28 days 
UK
PML Qualimintie Pour-On for Cattle (Janssen) UK
Indications. Endoparasites. Gastro-intestinal roundworms
Solution,pour-on,ivermectin5 mg/mL,for beefcatle,non-actating dairy
 in horses and ruminants; lungworms in ruminants; Type II
catfle
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 28 days, should not be used on cattle
ostertagiosis in cattle; horse bots; nasal bots in sheep
producing milk for hurman consurmption or on dairy cows, including pregnant
Ectoparasites. See section 2.2.1.1
heifers, within 60 days before calving
Contra-indications.Administration to calves less than 8
PML Rycomec Drench (Novartis) UK
weeks of age; administration to foals less than 4 months of
Oral solutin,ivermectin 00 rmicrograms/mL,forsheep,gouts
age; injection in sheep previously vaccinated against footrot
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep, goats: slaughter 14 days, milk 14 days. Should
Dose.
not be used in anirmals within 28 days before lambing if milk is to be used for
Horses, ponies: by mouth, 400 micrograms/kg
 hurm an consurmptior
Cattle: by ^pour-on'application, 500 micrograms/kg
PML Rycomec Injection (Novartis) UK
by subcutaneous injection, 200 micrograms/kg
Injection,ivermectin 10 mg/mL, for sheep
-ou ooz uonafun snoaumqns kq io ymou kq :das
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 42 days, should not be used in sheep 
grams/kg
 producing milk for hurman consurmption 
PML Vectin 0.08 % (Intervet) UK
PML Cydectin 0.1% Oral Drench for Sheep (Fort Dodge) UK
Oral solution, ivermectin 800 rmicrograrm s/mL, for sheep
Ora solution,rmoxidectin I mg/mL,for sheep
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter I4 days, should not be used in sheep
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 14 days, should not be used in sheep
 producing rmilk for hurman consurmption 
producing milk for hurnan consurmption or industrial purposes during lacta-
tion or the dry period 
PML Vectin Horse Paste (Intervet) UK
Oral paste, iverrmectin 20 mg/division, for horses, donkeys; rmetered dose
PML Cydectin 0.s% Pour-On for Cattle (Fort Dodge) UK
Solution,pour-on,moxidectin5mg/mL,forcatte
applicator
Withdrawal Periods. Horses, donkeys: slaughter 2l days 
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter [4 days, should not be used in cattle
producing milk for hurman consurmption or industrial purposes or on dairy
PML Virbamec Injectable Solution (Virbac) UK
cows within 60 days before calving
Injection, ivermectin 10 mg/mL, for beef cattle, non-lactating dairy catle,
pigs
PML Cydectin 1 % Injectable Solution for Sheep (Fort Dodge) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Caffle: slaughter 35 days, should not be used in cattle
Injection, rmoxidectin 10 rmg/mL, for sheep
producing milk for hurman consumption or in dairy cows, including pregnant
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 70 days, should not be used in sheep
heifers, within 60 days before calving. Pigs: slaughter 28 days
producing rmilk for hurmarn consurmption or industrial purposes during lacta-
tion or the dry period 
PML Virbamec Pour-On (Virbac) UK
Solution, pour-on', ivermectin 5 mg/mL, for beef catle, non-luetating dairy
PML Cydectin 1% Injection for Cattle (Fort Dodge) UK
catfle
injection,moxidectin10 mg/mL,for cattle more than 8weeks ofage
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 28 days, should not be used on cattle
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter 65 days, should not be used in cattle
producing milk for hurman consurmption or on dairy cows, including pregnant
producing milk for hurman consurmption or industrial purposes or within 60
heifers, within 60 days before calving
days before calving
190 Parasitic infections
PML Equest (Fort Dodge) U/K
ALBENDAZOLE
Oral gel, moxidectin 18.92 mg/g,for horses und ponies more than 4 months
ofage
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter 32 days
UK
Indications. Gastro-intestinal roundworms,
lungworns,
SELAMECTIN
tapeworms (see section 2.1.2), and adult Fasciola (see sec-
tion 2.1.3) in cattle, sheep; Type II ostertagiosis; gastro-
UK
intestinal roundworms and lungworms in goats+ and deer+
Indications. Endoparasites. Gastro-intestinal roundworms
Contra-indications. Concurrent administration of other
and heartworm prophylaxis in dogs and cats
ruminal boluses, treatment of ewes at a dosage of 7.5 mg/kg
Ectoparasites. See section 2.2.1.1
during the mating period and until 1 month after rams are
Contra-indications. Admi mistration to puppies and kittens
removed
less than 6 weeks of age; application when hair coat is wet
Warnings. Care not to exceed “fluke and worm dose' in
Warnings. Do not allow treated animals to bathe in water
cows during first month of pregnancy; coughing for some
courses until at least 2 hours after treatment, keep children
weeks after treatment in cattle suffering from severe lung
away from treated animals for at least 30 minutes after
damage at time of treatment; operators should wear suitable
application or until hair coat is dry
protective clothing
Dose. Dogs, cats: by ‘spot-on'application, 6 mg/kg
Dose. By mouth.
Cattie: roundworms and tapeworms, 7.5 mg/kg
POM Stronghold (Pfizer) UK
Adult flukes, roundworms, and tapeworms, 10 mg/kg
Solurion, 'spot-on', selarmectin 15 mg, 30 mg, 60 mg, 120 mg, 240 mg/dose
Sheep: roundworms and tapeworms, 5 mg/kg
applicator, for dogs
Soution, spot-on', selarmectin 15 rmg, 45 mg/dose applicator, forcafs
Adult flukes, roundworms, and tapeworms, 7.5 mg/kg
Goats +, deer+: roundworms, 10 mg/kg
2.1.1.2 Benzimidazoles
 Note. For therapeutic purposes albendazole and albendazole
Benzimidazoles such as albendazole, fenbendazole,
 oxide may be considered equivalent in effect
flubendazole, mebendazole, oxfendazole, oxibendazole
and tiabendazole have a similar mode of action. They
interrupt parasite energy metabolism by binding to tubulin,
thereby disrupting microtubular cell structure and prevent-
PML Albenil Low Dose (Virbac) UK
Oral suspension, albendazole I00 rmg/mL, cobalt (as sulfate) 2.5 rmg/mL,
ing nutrient uptake and other functions. Febantel, neto-
selenium (as sodiurm selenite) 1.08 mg/mL, for catle, sheep
bimin, and thiophanate are probenzimidazoles, which are
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter I4 days, rmilk 2.5 days. Sheep: slaugh-
converted to fenbendazole, albendazole, and lobendazole,
[er 4 days, should not be used in sheep producing milk for hurman
respectively, in the body. The symbol 1-BZ is used on the
consurm ption
label
of
products
containing
benzimidazoles
OT
PML Albenil SC (Virbac) UK
probenzimidazoles.
Orgl suspension, albendazole 25 mg/mL, cobalt (as sulfate) 620 micrograrms/
mL,selenium（as sodu selenite）270micograms/mL,focatlehee
The anthelmintic acti vity of the benzimidazoles is related to
the duration of therapeutic blood concentrations. Doses
Withdrawal Periods. Catfe: slaughter 14 days, rmilk 2.5 days. Sheep : slaugh-
ter 4 days, should mot be used in sheep producing rmilk for hurman
may need to be repeated in pigs, dogs, and cats, while single
consurn ption
doses are sufficient in ruminants and horses because the
rumen or large intestine acts as a drug reservoir.
PML Albensure 2.5% SC (Anirmax) U/K
Most benizimidazoles are effective against larval and adult
Oral suspension, albendazole 25 mg/mL, cobalt, selenium, for cattle, sheep
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 14 days, rmilk 2.5 days. Sheep: slaugh-
roundworms, and albendazole, febantel, fenbendazole,
ter 4 days, should not be used in sheep producing rmilk for hurmar
ox fendazole, and oxibendazole are also ovicidal. Fenbenda-
consurn ption
zole is used in pregnant and lactating bitches to reduce
roundworm infection in puppies. Fenbendazole is author-
PML Albensure 10 % (Anirmax) UK
ised for the treatment of Filaroides (Osierus) in dogs and
Oral suspension, albendazole I00 mg/mL, for catfle, sheep
Aelurostrongyfus in cats, but is also used for the control of
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter 14 days, milk 2.5 days. Sheep : slaugh-
[er 4 days, should not be used in sheep producing rmilk for hurmarl
other lungworms in dogs+. Albendazole, febantel, fenben-
consurn ption
dazole, mebendazole, netobimin, and oxfendazole are also
effective against tapeworms (see section 2.1.2), and some
PML Albex 2.5% SC (Chanelle) UK
are also active against adult liver flukes at a higher dosage
Oral suspension, albendazole 25 mg/mL, cobalt, seleniurm, for cattle, sheep
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle: slaughter I4 days, rmilk 2.5 days. Sheep: slaugh
(see section 2.1.3). Triclabendazole is effective against
ter 4 days, should not be used in sheep producing rmilk for hurman
both immature and adult flukes (see section 2.1.3) but has
consurn ptior
no activity against nematodes.
Some benzimidazoles such as albenndazole have been found
PML Albex 10% (Chanelle) UK
Oral suspension, albendazole I00 mg/mL, for catle, sheep
should be used with caution or avoided at mating or during
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter 14 days, milk 2.5 days. Sheep: slaugh-
early pregnancy.
ter 4 days, should not be used in sheep producing rmilk for hurmar
consurn ption
2.1.1 Drugs for roundworms (nematodes) 191
PML Allverm 4% (Novartis) U/K
Contra-indications. Administration within 14 days of
Oral suspension, albendazole oxide 40 mg, hydrated cobalt sulfate 28.8 rmg,
treatment for liver fluke; administration of ruminal boluses
hydrated sodiurn selenate 3 rmg/mL, for sheep
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 3 days, should not be used in sheep
to non-ruminating cattle or cattle less than 100 kg body-
 producing milk for hurman consurmption 
weight and 3 months of age, concurrent administration of
other ruminal boluses; treatment of grouse after March
PML Endospec 2.5% SC (Bimeda) UK
Oral suspension, albendazole 25 rmg, cobalt (as sulfate) 2.5 mg, seleniurm (as
Warnings. If cattle are vaccinated against lungworm, the
sodium selenite) 108 mg/mL, forcattle, sheep
ruminal bolus should not be administered until 14 days after
the second dose of vaccine; treatment of pigeons when rear-
ter 4 days, should not be used in sheep producing rmilk for hurman
ing young and during the main moult not recommended
consumption
Dose. By mouth.
PML Endospec 10% SC (Birmeda) UK
Horses: roundworms, 7.5 mg/kg as a single dose
Oral suspension, albendazole 100 mg, cobalt (as sulfate) 620 rmicrograrms,
seleniurm (as sodium selenite) 270 rmicrograms/mL, for cattle, sheep
Larval Trichonema (cyathostomes), 30 mg/kg as a single
Withdrawal Periods. Catfe: slaughter 14 days, rmilk 2.5 days. Sheep: slaugh-
dose or 7.5 mg/kg daily for 5 days
ter 4 days, should not be used in sheep producing rmilk for hurman
Migrating strongyles, 60 mg/kg as a single dose or 7.5 mg/
consumptior
kg daily for 5 days
PML Ovispec S&C 2.5% (Janssen) UK
Strongyloides westeri in foals, 50 mg/kg as a single dose
Oral suspension, albendazole 25 mg, cobalt (as sulfate) 624 micrograms,
Catte: 7.5 mg/kg as a single dose orin divided doses over 5
seleniurm (as sodiurm selenite) 270 mg/mL, for catfle, sheep
or 10 days (may riot be effective against Trichuris,
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter I4 days, rmilk 2.5 days. Sheep: slaugh-
Strongyloides)
ter 4 days, should mot be used in sheep producing rmilk for humar
consumption
see also modified-release oral preparations below
Sheep: 5 mg/kg as a single dose
PML Ovispec S&C 10% (Janssen) UK
 Pigs: roundworms, 5 mg/kg as a single dose
Oral suspension, albendazole 100 mg, cobalt (as sulfate) 2.5 rmg, seleniurm
(as sodiur selenite) 1.08 mg/mL, for cattle, sheep
Trichuris, Metastrongyfus apri, 5 mg/kg in divided doses
Withdrawal Periods. Catfe: slaughter 14 days, rmilk 2.5 days. Sheep: slaugh-
over 7 days
ter 4 days, should not be used in sheep producing rmilk for hurmarn
Dogs: roundworms, tapeworms, Giardia,
consumption
treatment, (adults) 50 mg/kg daily for 3 days
PML Rycoben Cattle (Novartis) UK
prophylaxis, (< 6 months of age) 50 mg/kg daily for 3 days;
Oral suspension, albendazole oxide 75 mg, hydrated cobalt sulfate 54 mg,
(adults) 100 mg/kg as a single dose
hydrated sodium selenate 5.7 mg/mL,forcale
Withdrawal Periods. Catfe: slaughter [4 days, rmilk 3 days
Transplacental transmission, 25 mg/kg daily from day 40 of
 pregnancy until 2 days post partum
PML Rycoben SC for Sheep (Novartis) UK
Lungworms, 50 mg/kg daily for 7 days
Oral suspension, albendazole oxide 25 rmg, hydrated cobalt sulfate 18 mg,
Cats: roundworms, tapeworms,
hydrated sodiurm selenate 1.9 rmg/mL, for sheep
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 3 days, should not be used in sheep
treatment, (adults) 50 mg/kg daily for 3 days
 producing milk for hurman consurmption 
prophylaxis, (< 6 months of age) 50 mg/kg daily for 3 days;
(adults) 100 mg/kg as a sinigle dose
PML Tramazole 2.5% (Tulivin) U/K
Oral suspension, albendazole 25 mg/mL, forcattle, shee
Pregnant queens, 100 mg/kg as a single dose
Withdrawal Periods. Catte: slaughter 14 days, rmilk 2.5 days. Sheep: slaugh-
Lungworms, 50 mg/kg daily for 3 days
ter 4 days, should not be used in sheep producing rmilk for hurman
Grouse: Trichostrongylus, by addition to feed, 7-10 mg/kg
consumption
body-weight given in divided doses over 14 days; 1 kg/
PML Valbazen 2.5% SC Total Spectrum Wormer (Pfizer) U/K
tonne feed
Oral suspension, albendazole 25 rmg, cobalt 630 rmicrograrms, seleniurm 270
Pigeons: 20 mg/kg
microgra/mL,fo hee
Exotic species +: contact manufacturer for further details
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 8 days, should not be used in sheep
 producing milk for hurman consurmption 
MFSX Curazole 5% Powder (Tulivin) UK
Oral powder, for addition to feed, 50 mg/g,for pigs
PML Valbazen 10% Total Spectrum Wormer (Pfizer) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter I0 days
Oral suspension, albendazole 100 mg/mL, for caffle, sheep
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter 20 days, milk 3 days. Sheep: slaughter
PML Curazole 10% Oral Drench (Tulivin) U/K
 8 days, should not be used in sheep producing milk for hurmar consurmption 
Oral suspension, fenbendazole 100 mg/mL, for catle
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 28 days, rmilk 3 days
FENBENDAZOLE
GSL Easy to Use Wormer (Bob Martin) U/K
UK
Oral granules, fenbendazole 220 mg/g, for cats
Indications. Gastro-intestinal round worms in horses, rumi -
GSL Easy Wormer Granules (Joh nson's) UK
nants, pigs, dogs, cats, and pigeons; Type II ostertagiosis;
Oral granuies, for addition to feed, fenbendazole 222 mg/g, for dogs, cats
transplacental roundworm transmission in dogs; lungworms
Contra-indications. Pregnant anirmals
in ruminants, pigs, dogs, and cats; Trichostrongylus tenuis
PML Fenzol 5% (Norbrook) UK
Oral suspension, fenbendazole 50 mg/mL, for catfle, sheep
nia in dogs and cats; Giardia in dogs (Panacur, see section
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 12 days, rmilk 5 days. Sheep: slaughter
1.4)
[4 days, should not be used in sheep producing milk for hurmarn consurmption
192 Parasitic infections
PML Granofen Wormer for Dogs and Cats (Virbac) UK
PML Panacur Granules (Intervet) UK
Oral granules, fenbendazole 220 mg/g, for dogs, cafs; I g, 2 g, 4 g
Oral granules, for addition to feed, fenbendazole 220 rmg/g, for dogs, cafs
PML Panacur 1.5% Pellets (Intervet) UK
PML Panacur Paste (Intervet) UK
Pelles,fenbendazole15 mg/g,forcatle,pigs
Oral paste, fenbendazole 187 mg/g, for dogs, cats; dose applicator
PML Panacur SC 2.5 % (Irtervet)
days
Ora suspension, fenbendazole 25 mg, cobalt 940 micrograrms, seleniurm 400
PML Panacur 2.5% Liquid (Intervet) UK
micrograrms/mL, for sheep
Oral suspension, fenbendazole 25 mg/mL, fordogs, cts
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 15 days, nilk 7 days
PML Panacur SC 5% (Intervet) UK
PML Panacur 2.5% Suspension (Intervet) UK
Oral suspension, fenbendazole 50 mg, cobalt 10 mg, seleniurm 1.6 mg/mL,
Oral suspension, fenbendazole 25 mg/mL, for cattle, sheep
foc catle,sheep
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 12 days, rmilk 5 days. Sheep: slaughter
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter 12 days, milk 5 days. Sheep: slaughter
15 days, rmilk 7 days
15 days, rmilk 7 days
MFSX Panacur 4% Powder (Intervet)
PML Wormazole (Norbook) UK
Oral powder, for addition to feed, fenbendazole 40 mg/g, for cattle, pigs,
Oral granules, for addition to feed, fenbendazole 220 mg/g, for dogs
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 14 days, rmillk 7 days. Pigs: slaughter 3
grouse
GSL Worming Granules for Cats (Sherley's)
days
Oral granules, fenbendazole 220 rmg/g,for cats more than 6 months of uge
PML Panacur 10% Liquid (Intervet) UK
GSL Worming Granules for Dogs (Sherley's)
Oral suspension, fenbendazole 100 mg/mL, for dogs, cafs
Orl granules, fenbendazole 220 mg/g, for dogs more than 6 months of age
PML Panacur 10% Suspension (Intervet UK
PML Zerofen 2.5% (Chanelle) UK
Oral suspension, fenbendazole 100 mg/mL, for horses, catle, sheep
Ora suspension, fenbendazole 25 mg/mL,forcatle, sheep
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurman con -
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle: slaughter 14 days, milk 4 days.Sheep: slaughter
 2 1 days, should not be used in sheep producing milk for hurman consurm ption
rmilk 7 days
MFSX Zerofen 4% (Chanelle) UK
PML Panacur Bolus (Intervet) UK
Oral powder, for addition to feed, fenbendazole 40 rmg/g, for pigs
Rumrinal bolus, rm/r, fenbendazole 1 2 g delivered for up to 140 days, for cuf-
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter 2l days
tle 100-300 kg body-weight
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 200 days, should not be used in cattle
PML Zerofen 10% (Chanelle) UK
Oral solution, fenbendazole I00 mg/mL, for cattle, sheep
before calving
Dose. Catfle: one 12-g bolus
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 14 days, rmilk 4 days. Sheep: slaughter
21 days, should not be used in sheep producing rmilk for hurman consurmption
CSL Panacur Capsules (In tervet) UK
Capsuies,fenbendazole&ng,forpigeons more than 2months of age
CSL Zerofen 22 % (Alstoe, Chanelle) U/K
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in pigeons intended for hurman
Oral granules, for addition to feed, fenbendazole 220 mg/g, for dogs, cats
consumption
Dose. Pigeons: by mouth, I capsule/bird
PML Zerofen 22% Equine Granules (Horse Wormer) (Chanelle) UK
Oral granules, fenbendazole 220 rmg/g,for horses
PML Panacur Equine Granules (Intervet) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter 35 days
Oral granules, for addition to feed, fen bendazole 220 rmg/g, for horses, other
equines
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurman
consumptior
FLUBENDAZOLE
PML Panacur Equine Guard (Intervet) UK
Oral suspension, for addition to feed, fenbendazole 100 mg/mL, for horses,
UK
otherequines
Indications. Gastro-intestinal roundworms and lungworms
Withdrawal Periods. Should mot be used in horses intended for hurman
in pigs; gastro-intestinal roundworms and tapeworms in
consumption
dogs; gastro-intestinal roundworms, gape worms, and tape-
PML Panacur Equine Guard: Unflavoured (Intervet) UK
worms in poultry and game birds
Oral suspension,for addition to feed, fenbendazole 100 mg/mL, for horses,
 Side-effects. Occasional transient vomiting and diarrhoea
otherequines
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for human corl -
in dogs
surmptior
Dose. Pigs: by addition to feed, 5 mg/kg body-weight as a
single dose; 30 g/tonne feed for 5 or 10 days
PML Panacur Equine Paste (Intervet) UK
Oral paste,fenbendazole 187 mg/g,for horses, other equines; dose
Dogs: by mouth, 22 mg/kg for 2 or 3 days
applicator
Chickens: roundworms, 30 g/tonne feed for 7 days
Withdrawal Periods. Should rot be used in horses intended for hurman
Tapeworms, 60 g/tonne feed for 7 days
consumption
Turkeys: 20 g/tonne feed for 7 days
PML Panacur Favourites for Cats (Interver) UK
Geese: roundworms, 30 g/tonne feed for 7 days
Tableis, fenbendazole 500 mg, for cats more fhan 2.5 kg body-weight
Tapeworms, 60 g/tonne feed for 7 days
PML Panacur Favourites for Dogs (Intervet) UK
Game birds: 60 g/tonne feed for 7 days
Tablets, fenbendazole I g, for dogs more than 5 kg body-weight, pregnant
bitches more than 10 kg body-weight
PML Flubenol Easy (Jan ssen) UK
Tablets, flubendazole 220 mg/kg, for dogs
2.1.1 Drugs for roundworms (nematodes)  193
MFSX Flubenol Individual Treatment Pack (Janssen) U/K
NETOBIMIN
Oral powder, for addition to feed, flubendazole 50 mg/g, for pigs
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter 7 days
UK
MFSX Flubenol Intermediate (Jan ssen) UK
Indications. Gastro-intestinal roundworms,
lungworms,
Oral powder, for addition to feed, flubendazole 25 rmg/g, for chickens, fur-
tapeworms (see section 2.1.2), and adult flukes (see section
keys, geese, purtridges, pheasunts
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry, slaughter 7 days, egg withdrawal period nil
2.1.3) in ruminants; Type II ostertagiosis
Contra-indications. Administration during first 7 weeks of
MFSX Flubenol Premix Pack (Janssen) UK
Dose. By mouth.
Premix, flubendazole 50 rmg/g,for pigs
Cattle: roundworms, tapeworms, 7.5 mg/kg
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter 7 days
Type II ostertagiosis, adult flukes, 20 mg/kg
MFSX Flubenvet Intermediate (Janssen) U/K
Sheep: roundworms, tapeworms, Type II ostertagiosis, 7.5
Oral powder, for addition to feed, flubendazole 25 mg/g, for chickens, fur-
keys, geese, partridges, phesants
mg/kg
Adult flukes, 20 mg/kg
Withdrawal Periods. Poulry, slaughter 7 days, egg withdrawal period nil
 sss ( )
PML Hapadex Cattle Wormer (Schering-Plough) UK
Oral suspens ion, netobirmin 150 mg/mL, for cale
Withdrawal Periods. Catfe: slaughter 10 days, rmilk 2 days 
PML Hapadex Sheep Wormer (Schering-Plough) UK
Oral suspension, netobirmin 50 mg/mL, for sheep
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 5 days, rmilk 3 days
MEBENDAZOLE
UK
Indications. Gastro-intestinal roundworms in horses, dorl-
OXFENDAZOLE
worms (see section 2.1.2) in sheep
 Contra-indications. Administration during first 4 months UK
Indications. Gastro-intestinal roundworms, lungworms,
Manufacturer does not recommend administration to
    (    
pigeons or parrots
ostertagiosis
Side-effects. Occasional mild diarrhoea
Contra-indications. Administration of ruminal boluses to
Dose. By mouth.
non-ruminating cattle or calves less than 12 weeks of age,
Horses: roundworms, 5-10 mg/kg
concurrent admini stration of other ruminal boluses (except
Donkeys: Dictyocautus anfieldi, 15-20 mg/kg daily for 5
as specified by manufacturer)
days
Warnings. If cattle are vaccinated against lungworm, the
Sheep: 15 mg/kg
ruminal bolus should not be administered until 10 to 14
days after the second dose of vaccine
PML Chanazole SC (Chanelle) UK
Dose. By mouth.
Oral suspension, rmebendazole 50 mg, cobalt (as sulfate) 4 mg, seleniurm (as
Cattle: 4.5 mg/kg as a single dose
sodiurn selenite) 400 rmicrograrm s/mL, for sheep
 modified-release preparations, (100-400 kg body-weight)
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter [4 days, should not be used in sheep
 producing milk for hurman consurmption
one ruminal bolus
Sheep: 5 mg/kg as a single dose
PML Ovitelmin S & C (Janssen) UK
Oral suspension, rmebendazole 50 rmg, cobalt (as sulfate) 430 rmicrograms,
PML Autoworm Finisher (Schering-Plough) UK
sodiurm (as selenite) 340 micrograrms/mL, for sheep
Ruminal bolus, rm/r, cormprising 5 tablets each containing oxfendazole 1.25 g
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 7 days, should not be used in sheep
(= total oxfendazole 6.25 g) released at 3-week intervals starting 2l days
 producing milk for hurman consurmption
after administration,for grazing catlef00-400 kg body-weight
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 6 rmorths, should not be used in cattle
PML Telmin (Janssen) UK
producing milk for human consumption nor in cattle 6 months before calving
Oral granules, for addition to feed, rmebendazole 100 mg/g, for horses,
donkeys
Dose. Cafle: ( l100-400 kg body-weight) one rurminal bolus
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses, donkeys intended for
hurm an consurmptior 
PML Autoworm First Grazer (Schering-Plough) UK
Ruminal bolus, m/r, cormprising 7 tablets each containing oxfendazole 1.25 g
PML Telmin Paste (Janssen) UK
(= total oxfendazole 8.75 g) released at 3-week intervals starting 21 days
after administration, for catle in their first grazing season f00-400 kg
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used for horses, donkeys intended for
body-weight
hurm an consurmption
Withdrawal Periods. Cale: slaughter 6 months, should not be used in cattle
Dose. Horses: (100-200 kg body-weight) % dose applicator; (200-400 kg
producing rmilk for human con surmption nor in cattle 6 rmon ths before calving
body-weight) % dose applicator, (400-800 kg body-weight) I dose applica-
which precedes the production of rmilk for hurman consurm ption 
tor
Dose. Catfe: ( 100-400 kg body-weight) one rurminal bolus
194 Parasitic infections
PML Autoworm Ready Pulse (Schering-Plough) U/K
Levamisole also modulates cell-mediated immune
Ruminal bolus, rm/r, cormprising 7 tablets each containing oxfendazole 1.25 g
responses by restoring depressed T-cell function. The term
(= total oxfendazole 8.75 g) released orn day of treatrment arnd then at 3-week
intervals, for grazing cattle 100-400 kg body-weight
‘immunostimulant' has often been used; it is appropriate
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter 6 months, should not be used in cattle 
 only so far as restoration of depressed response is con-
producing milk for hurman con surmption or in cattle 6 rmonths before calving
cerned; stimulation above normal does not seem to occut.
which precedes the production of rmilk for human consumption
Dose. Cafle: ( 100-400 kg body-weight) one rurminal bolus
LEVAMISOLE
PML Bovex 2.265% (Chanelle) UK
Oral suspension, oxfendazole 22.65 mg/mL, for catfle, sheep
UK
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 19 days, rmilk 3.5 days. Sheep: slaugh-
ter 24 days, should rot be used in sheep producing rmilk for hurmar
Indications. Gastro-intestinal roundworms in ruminants
consumptior
and pigeons; lungworms in ruminants and dogs+
Contra-indications. Administration within 14 days
of
PML Parafend 2.265% (Norbrook) UK
treatment with organophosphorus compounds or diethylcar-
Oral suspension, oxfendazole 22.65 mg/mL, for sheep
bamazine; application of ‘pour-on’ formulations to wet
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 10 days, should not be used in sheep
 producing milk for hurman consurmption
animals
Side-effects.Transient coughing; overdosage may cause
PML Parafend 5% SC (Norbrook) UK
transient muscle tremors, salivation, nervous symptoms,
niurm (as anhydrous sodiurm selenate) I .l/rmL, for sheep 
and colic; occasional skin irritation and epidermal flaking at
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 2l days, should not be used in sheep
producing milk for human consurmption
tion at injection site
Warnings. Operators should wear suitable protective cloth-
PML Parafend LV (Norbrook) UK
Oral suspension, oxfendazole 90.6 mg/mL, for catle, sheep
inig. Levamisole may cause idiosyncratic reactions and seri-
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle, sheep: slaughter 2l days, should not be used in
ous blood disorders in a small number of people. Seek
sheep producing rmilk for hurman consurmption
medical advice immediately if dizziness, nausea, vomiting,
PML Performex 5.0% SC (Novartis) UK
abdominal discomfort, sore mouth or throat, or fever occur
Oral suspension, oxfendazole 50 mg, cobalt (as sulfate) 3.69 mg, seleniurm
during or shortly after product application; prevent expo-
(as sodiurm selenate) l.l rmg/mL, for sheep
sure of animals to rain for l hour after treatment
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 2l days, should not be used in sheep
Dose. Cattle: roundworms, by mouth or by subcutaneous
 producing milk for hurman consurmption 
injection, 7.5 mg/kg
PML Systamex 2.265 (Schering-Plough) UK
by‘pour-on'application,10 mg/kg
Oral suspension, oxfendazole 22.65 mg/mL, forcattle, sheep
Sheep: roundworms, by mouth or by subcutaneous injec-
Withdrawal Periods. Catte: slaughter 28 days, rmilk 5 days. Sheep: slaughter
tion, 7.5 mg/kg
10 days, should not be used in sheep producing rmilk for humar consurmptior
Goats+: roundwoms, by mouth, 12 mg/kg but should be
TIABENDAZOLE
used with caution
(Thiabendazole)
Dogs +: Angiostrongylus, by mouth, 7.5 mg/kg daily for 2
days, then 10 mg/kg daily for 2 days
UK
PML Anthelpor 20 (Novartis) UK
Indications.Dose. See Prescribing for amphibianis
Solution, 'pour-on', levarmisole 200 mg/mL, for catfle
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter 22 days, should not be used on cattle
POM) Mintezol (Available fcom IDIS, UK)
producing milk for hurman consum ption
s e ego   u ui a nou ae s aoza
Note. Use Endecto dosing gun for adrministratior
the veterinarian should obtain a Special Treatrment Authorisation frorn the 
VMD
PML Chanaverm 7.5 % (Chanelle) UK
Orasolutin,levamisolehydrochloride5mg/mL,forcatle,she
Withdrawal Periods. Catle, sheep: slaughter 18 days, should not be used ir
2.1.1.3 Imidazothiazoles
cattle, sheep producing milk for hurman consurmption 
Levamisole and tetramisole are imidazothiazoles that act
PML Decazole Forte (Birmeda) UK
by interfering with parasite nerve tranismission causing
Orasolution,levamisole hydrochloride75 mg/mL,for catle, sheep
muscular spasm and rapid expulsion. Products containing
Withdrawal Periods. Catle, sheep: slaughter 28 days, should not be used ir
cattle, sheep producing milk for hurman consurmption
imidazothiazoles are labelled with the symbol 2-LM.
Levamisole is the acti ve isomer of tetramisole and is there-
PML Levacide 3% Drench (Norbrook) UK
fore more potent and has a wider safety margin.
Orasoltin,levamisolehyrochloride30mg/mL,frcattshe
Levamisole is effective against adult and larval gastro-
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter [4 days, should not be used in cattle
producing milk for human consurmption. Sheep: slaughter 2l days, should
intestinal round worm and lungworm infections. The margin
 mot be used in sheep producing rmilk for hurman consurmption 
of safety of levamisole is relatively low in animals, espe-
cially in horses· and dogs+. The clinical signs of toxicity
PML Levacide Injection (Norbrook) UK
include sali vation and muscle tremors. Resistance to levam-
Injection, levarmisole hydrochloride 75 mg/mL, for catle, sheep
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 28 days, should not be used in cattle
isole is emerging as a problem on some sheep farms in the
producing milk for human consurmption. Sheep: slaughter 15 days, should
UK.
 mot be used in sheep producing rmilk for hurman consurmption 
2.1.1 Drugs for roundworms (nematodes) 195
PML Levacide Low Volume (Norbrook) U/K
2.1.1.5 Tetrahydropyrimidines
Oral solution, levamisole hydrochloride 75 mg/mL, for catle, sheep
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter I4 days, should not be used in cattle
Tetrahydropyrimidines, such as morantel, oxantel, and
us s i as a o u ro  
pyrantel, interfere with parasitic nerve transmission as
mot be used in sheep producing rmilk for hurman con sumption
cholinergic stimulants, leading to neuromuscular spastic
PML Levacur SC 3% (Intervet) U/K
paralysis. This mode of action is similar to that of the imi-
Oral solution, levarmisole hydrochloride 30 mg, cobalt (as sulfate heptahy-
dazothiazoles (section 2.1. 1.3) and cross-resistance is possi-
drate) 1.6 rmg, selenium (as sodiurn selenate) 320 rmicrograrms/mL, for cale,
ble between the two chemical classes. Products containing
sheep
Withdrawal Periods. Catle, sheep: slaughter 18 days, should not be used in
cattle, sheep producing rmilk for human consurmption
bol 2-LM. These drugs are effective against adult and larval
gastro-intestinal roundworms. Pyrantel is also effective at
PML Levasure 7.5% (Anirmax) UK
an increased dose against tapeworms in horses. Morantel is
Oral solution, levarmisole hydrochloride 75 mg/mL, for cattle, sheep
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle, sheep: slaughter I8 days, should not be used in
available as a modified-release ruminal bolus. A negligible
cattle, sheep producing milk for hurmar consum ptiorn 
amount of drug is absorbed systemically by this route.
PML Nilverm Gold (Schering-Plough) UK
MORANTEL
Oral solution, levarmisole hydrochloride 30 mg/mL, for catfle, sheep
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 9 days, should rot be used in cattle
producing milk for human consurmption. Sheep: slaughter 14 days, should
UK
not be used in sheep producing milk for hurmarn con surmption
Indications. Gastro-intestinal roundworms in ruminants
Contra-indications. Concurrent administration of other
PML Nilverm Super Drench (Schering-Plough) UK
Oral solution, levarmisole hydrochloride 30 mg, cobalt sulfate heptahydrate
ruminal boluses; administration of ruminal boluses to non-
7.64 mg, sodium selenate766micrograms/mL,foctle,shee
ruminating cattle; administration of ruminal boluses to
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 7 days, should not be used in cattle
calves less than 100 kg body-weight and less than 4 months
producing milk for hurman consurmption. Sheep: slaughter 10 days, should 
 of age; administration of ruminal boluses less than 14 days
not be used in sheep producing rmilk for humar corn sumption
after lunigworm vaccine
PML Ripereol 3.2% (Janssen) UK
Dose. See preparation details 
Oral solution, levarmisole hydrochloride 32 rmg/mL, for sheep
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 10 days, should not be used in sheep
PML Exhelm (Pfizer) UK
producing milk for hurman consurmption 
Oral suspension, rmorantel (as citrate monohydrate) 29.7 mg/mL, for sheep
PML Ripereol Pour-on (Janssen) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 3 days, should not be used in sheep
Solution, 'pour-on, levarmisole 200 mg/mL, for catfle
producing rmilk for hurman consum ption
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 22 days, should rot be used on cattle
Dose. Sheep: by mouth, 5.94 mg (0.2 mL)/kg
producing milk for human consurmption
PML Paratect Flex Sustained Release Bolus (Pfizer) U/K
PML Sure LD (Novartis) UK
Ruring? bolus, m/r, morantel (as tartrate) Il.8 g delivered for at least 90
Oral solution, levamisole hydrochloride 75 mg/mL, for cattle, sheep
days,for cattle more than I0o kg body-weight
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle, sheep: slaughter 18 days, should not be used in 
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk with-
cattle, sheep producing milk for hurmar consum ption 
drawal period nil
Dose. Catfe: (>1 00 kg body-weight) one I l.8-g rurminal bolus
PML Wormaway Levam (JohnsonDiversey) UK
Oral solution, levarmisole hydrochloride 75 rmg/mL, for catfle, sheep
PYRANTEL EMBONATE
Withdrawal Periods. Catle, sheep: slaughter 28 days, should not be used in
cattle, sheep producing milk for hurmar consum ption 
(Pyrantel pamoate)
PML Wormaway Levamisole Injection (JohnsonDiversey) UK
Note. Pyrantel embonate 2.9 g = pyrantel base 1 g
njection,levarmisole hydrochloride75 mg/mL,foc cattle,sheep
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle, sheep: slaughter 28 days, should not be used irn
UK
cattle, sheep producing milk for human consumption
Indications. Gastro-intestinal roundworms in horses and
dogs; tape worms (see section 2.1.2) in horses
Contra-indications. Foals less than 4 weeks of age; conl-
current administration of levamisole, piperazine
2.1.1.4 Organophosphorus compounds
Dose. By mouth.
Haloxon,
dichlorvos,
naftalofos,
anid
1 metrifonate
Horses: roundworms,19 mg/kg
(trichlorfon) are organophosphorus compounds. They act
Anoplocephaia perfoliata,38mg/kg
Dogs: 14.4 mg/kg (= 5 mg pyrantel base/kg)
muscular transmission in the parasite. They are effective
PML Provid (Chanelle) UK
against adult gastro-intestinal roundworms and bots, but
Ora? paste, pyrantel ermbonate 439 mg/g,for horses und ponies more than 8
ineffective against migrating larvae, tapeworms, or flukes.
weeks of αge; dose applicator
Clinical signs of toxicity such as salivation and diarrhoea
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, should not be used in
may occasionally occur, particularly in foals. If used as a
rmares producing rmilk for hurman consurmption 
feed dressing, birds and other animals must not have access
PML Pyratape P (Intervet) UK
to uneaten residues. These compounds should not be given
Oral paste, pyrantel ermbonate 400 rmg/g, for horses, donkeys, ponies; dose
if other anticholinesterases are in use, for example for
applicator
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmar
ectoparasite or environmental insect control.
consurn ption
196 Parasitic infections
PML Strongid Caramel (Pfizer) UK
must be followed carefully. Further information is available
Oral paste, pyrantel embonate 439 mg/g, for horses αnd ponies more than 4
from:
weeks of age; dose applicator
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil
American Heart worm Society
www.heartwormsociety.org
PML Strongid Paste for Dogs (Pfizer) UK
Ettinger S J, Feldman E C. Textbook of Veterinary Inter-
Oral paste, pyrantel base 10 mg/division, for dogs; rmetered dose applicator
nat Medicine: Diseases of the Dog and Cat 5th ed.
PML Strongid-P Granules (Pfizer) UK
Philadelphia: W B Saunders, 1999.
Oral granules, for addition to feed, to prepare an oral solution, or for admin-
 Disophenol is a narrow-spectrum compound active against
 p s no    d s  u
more than4 weeks ofage
adult hookworms in dogs. It has a narrow safety margin. It
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil
poultry.
PML Strongid-P Paste (Pfizer) UK
Oral paste, pyrantel ermbonate 439 mg/g, for horses αnd ponies more than 4
Hygromycin B is a fermentation product used as a feed
weeks of age; dose applicator
additive which, over a period of weeks, gives moderately
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil 
effective control of gastro-intestinal roundworms in pigs
and poultry. Continuous feeding may lead to deafness in
2.1.1.6 Other drugs for roundworms
pigs.
Piperazine and diethylcarbamazine modify
neurotrans-
NITROSCANATE
mission in parasites causing relaxation and subsequent
expulsion of helminths. Piperazine is used for treatment of
UK
some gastro-intestinal roundworms such as Toxocara, Tox-
Indications. Gastro-intestinal 1
toundworms, tapeworms
ascaris, and Uncinaria in dogs and cats. Piperazine has lit-
(see section 2.1.2) in dogs
tle activity against larval Toxocara in puppies and is
Side-effects. Occasional vomiting with high dosage
Warnings. Nitroscanate is irritant and tablets should not be
of the drug are required for hookworm infection. In the
crushed, broken, or divided
treatment of kittens and small puppies, particular care
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 50 mg/kg, given with a little food
should be taken to assess body-weight accurately to mini-
but on an empty stomach
mise the risk of ataxia due to overdosing. Benzimidazoles
(see section 2.1.1.2) are more effective against larval
GSL All in One Wormer (Bob Martin) UK
ascarids than piperazine and therefore prevent faecal egg-
Tablets, nitroscanate 100 mg, 500 mg, for dogs
output for a longer period. Diethylcarbamazine is active
GSL One Dose Easy Wormer for Dogs Size 1, 2, 3 (Johnson's) UK
against adult ascarids but is more frequently used as a heart-
Tablets, nitroscanate I00 rmg, 500 mg, for dogs more fhan 8 weeks of αge
worm prophylactic. It must not be given to dogs with
microfilaraemia because a hypersensiti vity reaction some-
GSL Lopatol 500 (Novartis) U/K
Tablets, f/c, nitroscanate 500 mg, for dogs
times occurs.
Nitroscanate is used for the control of roundworms and
GSL One Dose Wormer (Shedey's) UK
Tables,,nisat0m00gg
tapeworms (see section 2.1.2) in dogs. Nitroxinil is used to
treat adult and immature fluke infections but is also active
GSL Pet Care Single Dose Wormer (Armitage) UK
against some nematode infections in ruminants (see section
Fabiets, nitroscanate 100 mg, 500 mg, foc dogs
2.1.3). Closantel, in addition to its use for treatment of
GSL Troscan 100, 500 (Alstoe, Chanelle) U/K
fluke infections, can be used for the treatment of benzimi-
Tabiets,f/c, nitoscanate 00mg, 500 mg, fo dgs
dazole-resistant Haemonchus infections in sheep (see
section 2.1.3).
Arsenamide,
1
melarsomine
pue
thiacetarsamide
are
PIPERAZINE
arsenical derivatives used for the treatment of canine diro-
filariosis. Thiacetarsamide was the standard treatment for
UK
adult heartworm infection in dogs for many years. It is
Indications. Gastro-intestinal roundworms in dogs, cats,
hepatotoxic and nephrotoxic and should be used with cau-
and pigeons
tion. Liver and kidney function tests should be performed
 Contra-indications. Renal impairment
before initiating treatment. Debilitated dogs should first be
Warnings. Overdosage may cause vomiting, diarrhoea,
treated symptomatically to improve their physical condi-
and ataxia in dogs and cats; care in animals with history of
tion. The drug is administered intravenously; oedematous
epilepsy or severe renal impairment; pregnant animals
Dose. Expressed as piperazine hydrate. By mouth.
swelling and skin sloughing may occur if the drug is depos-
Dogs, cats: Toxocara, Toxascaris, 80- 100 mg/kg
ited subcutaneously. The recently introduced melarsomine
is given by deep intramuscular injection. It is more effective
Ancylostoma,Uncinaria,120-240 mg/kg
Pigeons: Ascaridia, see preparation details
and safer than thiacetarsamide but needs to be used with
care. The management of heartworm cases is complex and
Note. 100 mg piperazine hydrate = 120 mg piperazine adipate =
treatment can be hazardous to the patient. Label instructions
125 mg piperazine citrate = 104 mg piperazine phosphate
2.1.2 Drugs for tapeworms (cestodes)  197
GSL Biozine (Harkers) U/K
tapeworm strobilae may be passed after use of a relatively
Oral powder, for addition to drinking water, piperazine (as dihydrochloride)
510 mg/g,for ornamental pigeons
ineffective product, but this is of no benefit if the scolices
are left to re-grow. Conversely, a lack of evidence of expul-
consurmption
sion of segments may be due to dissolution of the dead tape-
Dose. Pigeons: (30 birds) one 3.7-g sachet/litre drinking water
worm within the alimentary tract.
GSL Canovel Palatable Wormer (Pfizer) UK
All tapeworms have an indirect life-cycle and preventive
Fabiet5, piperazine phosphate 416 rmg, for dlogs
measures often include control of the intermediate host or
its removal from the diet. Information on effective drugs for
CSL Catovel Palatable Wormer (Pfizer) UK
Fablets, piperazine phosphate 4l6 rmg, for cats 
treatment is given in Table 2.l at the beginning of the
chapter.
CSL Easy Round Wormer for Cats & Kittens (Johnson's) UK
Tabieis, piperazine phosphate 104 mg,for cats more than 2 weeks of αge
Heavy infections of Anopfocephala in horses may be a pre-
and 500g body-weight
disposing factor in some colics. Pasture-living mites are the
Contra-indications. Kittens less than 2 weeks of age
initermediate hosts and therefore infection is unlikely in per-
CSL Easy Round Wormer for Dogs & Puppies (Johnson's) UK
-  n sn  ss ssr s 
Tabiet5, piperazine phosphate 416 mg,for dogs more than 2 weeks of uge
summer and again in early autumn.
andIkg body-weight
Moniezia infection is mostly seen in lambs and cal ves dur-
Contra-indications. Puppies less than 2 weeks of age
ing their first summer on pasture but rarely causes ill-effect,
GSL Endorid (Pfizer) UK
Tablets, scored, piperazine phosphate 4l6 mg, for dogs, cafs
tions are often lost spontaneously in the summer and are not
CSL Kitten Easy-Worm Syrup (Johnsons) UK
common in older arnimals. Free-living mites on the pasture
Oral syrup, piperazine hydrate 58 mg/mL, for cats more than 2 weeks of age
 are the intermediate hosts and prevention of re-infection is
und 250g body-weight
thus impossible. Control of Moniezia, if required, includes
Contra-indications. Kittens less than 2 weeks of age
treatment in late spring or early summer and again in
CSL Piperazine Citrate Tablets BP (Battle Hayward & Bower) UK
autumn.
Tablets, scored, piperazine citrate 500 mg, for dogs und cats more than I.25
Dipylidium, Echinococcus, and Taenia affect dogs. Dipylid-
kg body-weight
ium and Taenia affect cats. The choice of anthelmintic and
CSL Piperazine Citrate Worm Tablets (Loveridge) UK
advice on preventing re-infection are dependent on accurate
Tablets, scored, piperazine citrate 500 mg, for dogs und cats more than I.25
identification of the tapeworm involved. The long-term
kg body-weight
control of Dipyfidium tapeworm includes elimination of
CSL Puppy Easy-Worm Syrup (Johnson's) UK
fleas and lice (see section 2.2), the intermediate hosts. Dogs
Oral syrup, piperazine hydrate 58 mg/mL, for dogs more than 2 weeks of
age and 250gbody-weight
 are infected with Taeniα by ingesting the larval forms (met-
Contra-indications. Puppies less than 2 weeks of age
 rabbits. Cats are infected by hunting small mammals. Treat-
GSL Roundworm Tablets (Bob Martin) UK
Tablets, scored, piperazine (as citrate) 105 mg, for dogs more fhan 2 weeks
ments are usually given every 6 months for the routine con-
of age und 1.2 kg body-weight
trol of Taenia and Dipyfidium. If animals are persistently re-
CSL Roundworm Tablets for Cats (Bob Martin) UK
infected, the treatment interval has to be reduced and advice
Tablets, scored, piperazine (as citrate) 105 mg, for cats more than 2 weeks of
 given, as appropriate, on feeding or flea control. The meta-
uge and 1.2 kg body-weight
cestodes of the two British strains of Echinococcus are
GSL Ruby Oral Wormer Syrup (Spencer) UK
found irn the viscera of sheep and horses, respectively. The
Syrup, piperazine 100 mg/mL, for puppies
CSL Worming Cream (Sherley's)UK
areas should be treated with praziquantel every 6 weeks to
Oral paste, piperazine citate 250 mg/g, for dogs, cats; dose applicator
ensure that no infective eggs are passed. Another species,
Contra-indications. Puppies and kittens less than 2 weeks of age
Echinococcus muftilocularis is also zoonotic but fortunately
 (su) d  
does not occur in the UK. The cyst form of this species
Oral syrup,iperazire citrate 0 m/m,for dogs, cats, dose appliator
infiltrates tissues by budding externally and thus infection
Contra-indications. Puppies and kittens less than 2 weeks of age
in humans is very serious.
 Praziquantel is effecti ve against all tapeworms in dogs and
2.1.2 Drugs for tapeworms (cestodes)
cats and is preferred in most Echinococcus control pro-
grammes because it kills all intestinal forms of the parasite.
Although adult tapeworms do not usually cause discernible
It acts by inducing calcium ion influx across the parasite
disease, treatment is often necessary for public health pur-
tegument causing immediate muscular spasm. The tegu-
poses, to prevent disease due to larval stages in farm live-
ment is disrupted making it more easily attacked by proteo-
stock, to minimise meat inspection losses, and for aesthetic
lytic enzymes. Therefore, whole tapeworms are very rarely
reasons in dogs and cats.
passed in the faeces; only disintegrated and partially
Diagnosis of infected animals is difficult and often relies on
digested fragments are seen. Under the Pet Trave! Scheme,
the chance observation of a passed segment, the morphol-
implemented in the UK, 24 to 48 hours before embarkation
ogy of which is used for generic identification. Care is
for the UK, animals must be treated against Echinococcus
needed in assessing the success of treatment. A mass of
muftilocularis with praziquantel. Other requirements for
198 Parasitic infections
Side-effects. Occasional pain on subcutaneous injection;
antine are given under section 18.4.8. Praziquantel is also
occasional transient local reaction at site of spot-on applica-
active against Moniezia in sheep and against Anoplocephala
and Anoplocephaloides in horses.
tion area
Epsiprantel is an anthelmintic closely related to praziquanl-
Warnings. Do not allow animals treated with ‘spot-on'
      n 
 application to groom each other; safety in pregnant and lac-
Echinococcus.
tating mares has not been established
Dichlorophen and nitroscanate (see section 2.1.1.6) are
Dose. Horses: by mouth, 1 mg/kg
effective against Taenia and Dipylidium but have limited
Sheep:by mouth,3.75mg/kg
efficacy against Echinococcus.
Dogs: by mouth, 5 mg/kg
by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection,5.68 mg/kg
cephala perfoliata in horses at twice the dose required for
(0.1 mL/kg)
roundworms; it is riot effective against Anoplocephaloides
Cats: by mouth, 5 mg/kg
mammillana.
by‘spot-on’application,(1.0-2.5 kg body-weight) 1 appli-
Various benzimidazoles (see section 2.1.1.2), including
cation; (2.5-5.0 kg body-weight) 2 applications; (> 5.0 kg
albendazole, febantel, fenbendazole, mebendazole, neto-
body-weight 3 applications
bimin, and oxfendazole are effective for tapeworm control
by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection,5.68 mg/kg
(0.1 mL/kg)
in ruminants. Fenbendazole and mebendazole also control
some tapeworms in dogs and cats, and flubendazole in
Droncit (Bayer) UK
dogs.
CSL Tabieis, scored, praziquantel 50 mg, for dogs more than 2.5 kg body-
Niclosanide acts by uncoupling oxidative phosphorylation,
weight,cats
 thereby inter fering with adenosine triphosphate production.
POM 'Spot-on', praziquantel 20 rmg/applicator, for cats more than I kg
It has little efficacy against Echinococcus and variable
body-weight
POM Injection, praziquantel 56.8 mg/mL, for dogs, cats
activity against Dipyfidium.
PML Ecotel2.5% (ECO) UK
DICHLOROPHEN
Oral suspension, praziquantel 25 rmg/mL, for lumbs
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter I day, should not be used in sheep pro-
ducing milk for hurman consurmption
UK
Indications. Dipyfidium and Taenia in dogs and cats
POM Equitape (Fort Dodge) UK
Side-effects. Rarely salivation, vomiting, anorexia, hyper-
Ora paste, praziquantel 90 mg/g, for horses; metered-dose applicator ( l urit
dose/50 kg body-weight)
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter withdrawal period nil, should not be
ness and unsteadiness
used in horses producing rmilk for hurman corn surmption
Dose. Dogs, cats: by mouth, 200 mg/kg
CSL Cat Easy Tape Wormer (Johnsons) UK
2.1.3 Drugs for flukes (trematodes)
Tablets, dichlorophen 250 mg, for cats more than 2 kg body-weight
Contra-indications. Cats less thar 6 rmonths of age, pregnant or lactating
The liver fluke Fasciota hepatica is endemic in many wet
queenis
regions and mainly affects ruminants kept in or originating
from such areas. The intermediate host is a small mud snail,
CSL Dichlorophen Tablets BP (Battle Hayward & Bower) UK
Tablets, scored, dichlorophen 500 mg, for dogs und cats more than I.25 kg
Lymnaea truncatula. The acute disease, which occurs in
body-weightundmore than6monthsofage
autumn and early winter, is caused by immature F hepatica
 (s    
destroying the liver parenchyma, while the chronic form in
Tablets,dichlorophen500 mg,fordogs
the early months of the year results from the feeding activi-
Contra-indications. Dogs less than 6 months of age, pregnant or lactating
ties of adult flukes in the bile ducts. Both acute and chronic
bitches
forms of fasciolosis occur in sheep, but only the latter in
cattle. Horses are more resistant to fasciolosis but occasion-
NICLOSAMIDE
ally show clinical signs of ill thrift. Patent liver fluke infec-
tion occurs in donkeys and treatment with triclabendazole+
UK
has proved effective.
Indications. Dose. See Prescribing for amphi bians
Treatment may be therapeutic or prophylactic. For acute
disease in young animals the drug dose should be repeated
Niclosamide (Available frorm IDIS, UK)
Niclosarmide preparations are not available in the UK. To obtain a supply, the
after 5 to 6 weeks. To prevent infection, all animals exposed
veterinarian should obtain a Special Treatment Authorisation frorm the VMD
to fluke-infested pastures during the fluke season should be
treated regularly at inter vals dependent on the area, climatic
PRAZIQUANTEL
conditions, and the particular product and there should be
restricted access to contaminated areas during the high risk
UK
periods of autumn and winter. Control of the mud snail
Indications. Tapeworms in horses, sheep, dogs and cats
 Contra-indications. Unweaned puppies or kittens; injec-
includes drainage, fencing off of wetter areas, and using
molluscicide sprays. The risk of disease varies from year to
tion in hounds
2.1.4 Compound endoparasiticides 199
year and a monitoring system assists the choice of an appro-
Dose.
priate level of control.
Catte: by subcutaneous injection,10 mg/kg
Care is required in the choice of fasciolicide because few
Sheep: by subcutaneous injection, 10 mg/kg
are active against all stages of parasitic development. See
Acute fascioliosis, by subcutaneous injection, up to 15 mg/
Table 2.1 in the introduction to section 2.1, and drug mono-
kg
graphs for information on drug treatment.
The lancet fluke, Dicrocoelium dendriticum, passes through
PML Trodax 34% (Merial) U/K
Injection, nitroxinil 340 mg/mL, for catfle, sheep
various land snails and ants. This fluke affects cattle and
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter 60 days, should not be used in cattle
sheep although infection in the UK is largely restricted to
 producing rmilk for hurmar consurm ption. Sheep: slaughter 60 days
the Hebnides.
Note. Dairy cattle should be treated at least 15 days before calving
Benzimidazoles (see section 2.1. 1.2) active against Fasci-
TRICLABENDAZOLE
ofa include albendazole and netobimin, which are effective
against adult stages. Netobimin is also effective against
UK
adult Dicrocoefium dendriticum. Triclabendazole is highly
Indications. Immature and adult Fasciola in horses· and
effective against all liver stages of Fasciola. Liver fluke
rumi nants
resistant to triclabendazole have recently been found on a
Dose.
small rumber of farms in the UK.
Horses+, cattle: by mouth,12 mg/kg
Nitroxinil is effective against adult flukes and at a higher
Sheep: by mouth, 10 mg/kg
dosage, immature flukes and also Haemonchus in cattle and
sheep, and Oesophagostomum and Bunostomum in cattle.
PML Fasinex 5% (Novartis) UK
However, it should not be regarded or used as a broad spec-
Oral suspension, triclabendazole 50 rmg/mL, for sheep
trum anthelmintic. Closantel is effective against adult and
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 56 days, should not be used in sheep
 producing milk for hurman consurm ption 
immature flukes, Oestrus ovis, and Haemonchus contortus.
This drug acts by uncoupling oxidative phosphorylation. It
PML Fasinex 10 % (Novartis) UK
binds strongly to plasma proteins and therefore its activity
Oral suspens ion, triclabendazole 100 mg/mL, for caffle
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 28 days, should not be used in cattle
against nematodes is restricted to those that suck blood.
jo sp L um so iep ui no uodno uey ro  unaid
Clorsulon is a sulphonamide and competitive inhibitor of
calving
enzymes important for energy metabolism in flukes. It is
PML Tribex 5% (Alstoe,Chanelle) UK
used in cattle for control of liver fluke.
Oral suspension, triclabendazole 50 rmg/mL, for sheep
Oxyclozanide is mainly active against adult flukes.
.The
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 56 days, should not be used in sheep
drug is distributed to the liver, kidney, and intestines and is
producing milk for hurman consurm ptior 
excreted in the bile.
PML Tribex 10% (Alstoe, Chanelle) UK
Bithionol is a chlorinated bis-phenol with bactericidal and
Oral suspens ion, triclabendazole 100 mg/mL, for caffle
anthelmintic properties and bromofenofos is a bis-phenol
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter 56 days, should not be used in cattle
derivative; both are active against adult flukes. Rafoxanide
producing milk for hurman con surmption or in dairy cows after the start of the
dry period
is a salicylanilide active against adult and immature flukes
aged 6 to 8 weeks and older.
2.1.4 Compound endoparasiticides
CLOSANTEL
Multiple parasitic infections are the rule rather than the
exception in domesticated animals. Most preparations in
UK
this category are combinations of drugs with complemen-
Indications. Immature and adult Fasciola, nasal bots, and
Haemonchus in sheep
example, most combination endoparasiticide preparations
Dose. Sheep: by mouth, 10 mg/kg
for ruminants include a fasciolicide and a drug effective
against roundworns. Similarly, combination preparations
PML Flukiver (Jarn ssen) UK
Oral suspension, closantel 50 mg/mL, for sheep
for horses, dogs, and cats generally give broad spectrum
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 42 days, should not be used in sheep
roundworm and tapeworm control. See sections 2.1.1 to
producing milk or rmilk products for hurman consurmption
2.1.3 for specific drug information.
Many parasitic infections are seasonal and the prescriber
NITROXINIL
should consider if it is therapeutically sound to use a com-
(Nitroxynil)
pound preparation at a time of year when one ingredient is
redundant. An appropriate time for treatment of ewes is at
UK
prelambing to control both chronic fluke disease and inhib-
Indications. Immature and adult Fasciola and some gas-
ited or recently ingested nematodes. Otherwise, the use of a
tro-intestinal roundworms in ruminants
compound preparation is usually on arl ad hoc basis when
Side-effects. Solution may stain wool if accidental spillage
animals present evidence of infection with both types of
occurs; transient swelling at injection site in cattle
parasite.
200 Parasitic infections
UK
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle: slaughter 35 days, should not be used irn cattle
PML Combinex Cattle (Novartis) UK
producing milk for hurman consurmption or in dairy cows within 60 days
Oral suspension, levamisole hydrochloride 75 mg, triclabendazole 120 mg/
before calving
mL, for roundworrms and flukes in cale
Dose. Catle: by subcutaneous injection, 0.02 mL/kg (l mL/50 kg body-
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 28 days, should not be used in cattle
weight)
 producing rmilk for hurman con surmption or in dairy cows within 7 days of
calving
PML Levafas (Norbook) UK
Dose. Catfle: by mouth, 0.I mL/kg
Ora? suspension, levamisole hydrochloride 15 rmg, oxyclozanide 30 rmg/mL,
for roundworms and flukes in cattle, sheep
PML Combinex Sheep (Novartis） UK
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle, sheep: slaughter 5 days, should not be used in
Oral suspension,levarnisolehydrochloride 37.5 mg,triclabendazole50 m
cattle, sheep producing rnilk for hurman consurmption
mL, for roundworms and flukes in sheep
Dose. Cattle, sheep: by mouth, 0.5 mL/kg
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 28 days, should not be used in sheep
 producing milk for hurman consurmption 
PML Levafas Diamond (Norbook) UK
Dose. Sheep: by mouth, 0.2 mL/kg
Ora suspension,levarmisole hydrochloride 30 mg, oxyclozanide 60mg/m,
for roundwomms and flukesin catle, shee
PML Drontal Cat Tablets (Bayer) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle, sheep: slaughter 5 days, should not be used in
Tableis, scored, coated, praziquantel 20 mg, pyrantel ermbonate 230 mg, for
cattle, sheep producing milk for hurman consurmption
roundworms and tapeworms in cafs
Dose. Cattle, sheep: by mouth, 0.25 rmL/kg
Contra-indications. Kittens less than 6 weeks of age, pregranit queens;
concurrent adrministration of pipera zine
GSL Kitzyme Veterinary Combined Wormer (Seven Seas) UK
Dose. Cats: by mouth, I tablet/4 kg
Fablets, scored, (white) dichlorophen 750 rmg, (blue) piperazine citrate 375
mg,for cats more thun 900 g body-weight und 6 months of uge
PML Drontal Plus (Bayer) UK
Dose. Cats: by mouih, (depending on body weight) see rmanufacturer's
Tableis, febantel 150 mg, praziquantel 50 mg, pyrantel ermbonate 144 mg, for
information
roundworms and tapeworms in dogs 
Note. Consult a veterinarian before treating pregnant anirmals or anirmals with
Contra-indications. Concurrent adrministration of piperazine; care in
a history of epilepsy or renal irm pairrment
pregnant anirm als
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, I tablet/10 kg
PML Mebadown Super (Janssen) UK
Oral solut ion, closantel 50 rmg, rmebendazole 75 rmg/mL, for roundworms,
PML Drontal Plus XL (Bayer) UK
tapeworms, flukes, and nasal bots in sheep 
Fablets, febantel 525 rmg, praziquantel 175 rmg, pyrantel ermbonate 504 mg,
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 42 days, should not be used in sheep
for roundworms and tapeworms in dogs
producing rmilk for hurman consum ption
Contra-indications. Concurrent administration of piperazine; care in
Dose. Sheep: by mouth, 0.2 rmL/kg
preg nart anirnals
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, I tablet/35 kg
POM Milbemax Tablets for Cats (Novartis) U/K
PML Drontal Puppy Suspension (Bayer) UK
Tablets, f/c, scored, milbermycin oxirme 4 rmg, praziquantel 10 rmg, for round-
Oral suspension, febantel 15 mg/mL, pyrantel ermbonate 14.4 mg/mL, for
worrms and tapeworrms irn cats more fhan 0.5 kg body-weight und/or 6 weeks
ofage
roundworms in puppies und dogs up to I year of age
Contra-indications. Pregrant or lactating queens
Contra-indications. Concurent adrministration of piperazine
Dose. Cats: by mouth, (0.5-1.0 kg body-weight) V tablet; ( l-2 kg body-
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, I mL/kg
weight) I tablet, given with or after sorme food
CSL Dual Wormer for Cats (Bob Martin) UK
Tabiets, f/c, scored, milbermycin oxime l6 mg, praziquantel 40 mg, for
roundworrms and tapeworms in cats more fhan 2 kg body-weight
for cats more than I.2 kg body-weight
Contra-indications. Pregnant or lactating queens; debilitated anirmals;
Contra-indications. Cats less than 6 rmonths of age
severe renal or hepatic irmpairrment
Dose. Cats: by mouth, see manufacturer's information
Dose. Cats: by mourh, (2-4 kg body-weight) % tablet; (48 kg body-
weight) I tablet; (8- 12 kg body-weight) IV tablets, given with or after some
GSL Dual Wormer for Dogs (Bob Martin) UK
food
Tablets, (white) dichlorophen 250 rmg, (yellow) piperazine citrate 297 rmg,
for dogs more than 1.2 kg body-weight
POM Milbemax Tablets for Dogs (Novartis) UK
Contra-indications. Dogs less than 6 rmonths of age
Tableis, scored, milbermycin oxirme 2.5 mg, praziquantel 25 mg, for round-
Dose. Cats: by mouth, see rmanufacturer's inforrmation
worms, tapeworms, and hearrworm prevention in dogs more than 0.5 kg
body-weight and/or 2 weeks of age
PML Equimax (Virbac) UK
Contra-indications. Pregnant or lactating bitches
Oral paste, ivermectin 18.7 mg, praziquantel 140.3 mg/g, for roundworms,
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, (0.5- I.0 kg body-weight) V tablet; (l-5 kg body-
bots, and tapeworrms in horses more fhan 2 weeks of age; rmetered dose
weight) I tablet; (5- 10 kg body-weight) 2 tablets, given with or after sorme
applicator
food
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter 35 days
Fablets, scored, milbermycin oxime 12.5 mg, praziquartel 125 mg, for round-
Dose. Horses: by mouth, 1.07 g of paste/l00 kg body-weight( Ist unit dose
-poq oy s u aro sop uy uouad oay pue somade som
treats 100 kg body-weight, subsequent unit doses treat 50 kg body-weight)
weight
 Contra-indications. Pregnant or lactating bitches
 PML Eqvalan Duo (Merial) UK
Dose. Dogs: by mowrh, (5-10 kg body-weight) I tablet; (10-25 kg body-
Oral paste, iverrmectin 15.5 mg, praziquantel 77.5 mg/g, for roundworms,
weight) I tablet; (25- 50 kg body-weight) 2 tablets; (50-75 kg body-weight)
bots, and tapeworms in horses more fhan 5 months of age; rmetered dose
3 tablets, given with or after sorme food
applicator
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter 2 1 days
Dose. Horses: by mouth, I.29 g of paste/l 00 kg body-weight
GSL Multiwormer for Cats (Sherley's) UK
Tablets, (fawn) dichlorophen 250 rmg, (pink) piperazine citrate 125 rmg, for
PML Ivomec Super (Merial) UK
cats
injection, clorsulon 100 rmg, ivermectin 10 mg/mL, for roundworms, adult
Contra-indications. Kittens less than 6 rmonths of age
flukes, lice, mites, and warble fly larvae in beef cattle, non-lactating dairy
Dose. Cats: by mouth, (depending on body weight) see rmanufacturer's
cattle
information
2.2 Ectoparasiticides 201
CSL Multiwormer for Dogs (Sherley's) UK
2.2 Ectoparasiticides
Fablets, (fawn) dichlorophen 750 mg, (pink) piperazine citrate 375 mg, for
dogs
2.2.1 Ectoparasiticides
Contra-indications. Puppies less than 6 rmonths of age
2.2.2 Insect growth regulators
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, (depending on body weight) see rmamufachurer's
2.2.3 Compound preparations for ectoparasites
inform ation
2.2.4 Sheep dips
PML Nilzan Drench Super (Schering-Plough) UK
2.2.5 Fly repellents
Oral suspension, levarmisole hydrochloride 30 rmg, oxyclozanide 60 rmg,
cobalt sulfate heptahydrate 7.64 mg, sodiurm selenate 766 micrograms/mL,
 2.2.6 Environmental control of ectoparasites
for roundworms and flukes in catfe, sheep
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle, sheep: slaughter 28 days, should not be used in
 Ectoparasites can cause severe irritation and be responsi ble
cattle, sheep producing rmilk for hurmar consurm ption 
Dose. Catfle, sheep: by mouth, 0.25 mL/kg
for loss of condition, disease, and in farm animals, produc-
tion deficits due to weight loss, reduced milk yield, or dam-
PML Nilzan Gold (Schering-Plough) U/K
Oral suspension, levarmisole hydrochloride 30 rmg, oxyclozanide 60 rmg/mL,
age to the hide or fleece.
for roundworms and flukes in catle, shee
The use of ectoparasiticides often depends on the conditions
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle, sheep: slaughter 28 days, should not be used irn
under which the animals are kept as well as the species of
cattle, sheep producing milk for hurman consumption 
Dose. Catle, sheep: by mouth, 0.25 mL/kg
ectoparasite causing the infestation. In many cases, the
expected ectoparasitic challenge may be predicted. For
CSL Pet Care Dual Action Worming Tablets for Dogs (Armitage) UK
example, there will be a rise in tick populations in the
Tableis, dichlorophen 500 rmg, piperazine citrate 500 mg, for dogs
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, (depending on body weight) see rmarufachurer's
spring and autumn, increased numbers of blowfly in late
inform ation
spring and early summer, warble fly oviposition from May
to July, and the possible increase of lice on winter-housed
CSL Pet Care Dual Action Worming Tablets for Cats (Armitage) UK
Tablets, dichlorophen 500 rmg, piperazine citrate 500 mg, for cats; 4 + 2
stock and hill sheep. These can be countered by strategic
Dose. Cats: by mouth, (depending on body weight) see rmarufacturer's
therapeutic and prophylactic use of ectoparasiticides. In
inform ation
contrast, parasitism of intensively housed stock or companl-
POM Program Plus (Novartis) UK
ion animals, where transmission is by contact, is not *sea-
Tablets (red), lufenuron 46 mg, milbermycin 2.3 rmg, for roundworms, heart-
sonal’ and requires diagnosis as infestations may go
worrm prevention, and fleas in dogs
unnoticed for some time. In these situations, control meas-
Dose. Dogs: (up to 4.5 kg body-weight) by mouth, I tablet/rmonth 
Fablets (green), lufenuron 115 mg, rmilbermycin 5.75 mg, for roundworms,
 ures should be included in routine hygiene programmes to
heartworm prevention, and fleas in dogs
treat the animals and, where necessary, the housing.
Dose. Dogs: (5-II kg body-weight) by mouth, I tablet/month 
It is advisable that if no parasite control programme has
Tablets (yellow), lufenuron 230 rmg, milbermycin Il.5 mg, for roundworms,
beerl used before, or has been allowed to lapse, the whole
heartworm prevention, and fleas in dogs
Dose. Dogs: (12- 22 kg body-weight) by mouth, I tablet/month
herd or flock should be treated. All new additions to the
Tablets (white), lufenuron 460 rmg, rmilbernycin 23 rmg, for roundworms,
herd or flock should be isolated and treated before mixinig
heartworm prevention,and fleas in dogs
with the established stock. Empty premises should be thor-
Dose. Dogs: (23-45 kg body-weight) by mouth, I tablet/month
oughly cleaned and then disinfested.
PML Supaverm (Janssen) UK
Oral suspension, closantel 50 rmg, rmebendazole 75 rmg/mL, for roundworms,
Equidae
tapeworms, flukes, and nasal bots in sheep 
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 42 days, should not be used in sheep
Horses are susceptible to various flies, lice, and mites. The
producing rnilk for hurman consurmption
blood-sucking fly that seriously affects horses is Stormoxys,
Dose. Sheep: by mouth, 0.2 mL/kg
the 'stable fly'. In addition to the severe irritation caused by
CSL Twin Wormer for Cats (Johnson's) U/K
its bite, the fly is also an intermediate host of the nematode
Fableis, (yellow) dichlorophen 250 mg, (white) piperazine phosphate 104
Habronema, which infects horses. Infected flies modify
mg, for cats more than 1.2 kg body-weight
their feeding habits, larvae pass from the mouth parts and
Contra-indications. Cats less than 6 months of age, pregnant or lactating
are swallowed, or flies are swallowed whole. Flies that
queeris
Dose. Cats: by mouth, (depending on body weight) see rmarufacturer's
cause worry to horses are mainly the non-biting flies
inform ation
Hydrotaea and Musca.
GSL Twin Wormer for Dogs (Johnson's) UK
Horse bots are larvae of the flies of several species of the
Tableis, (yellow) dichlorophen 500 mg, (white) piperazine phosphate 416
genus Gasterophilus. The noise of the flies causes worry to
mg, for dogs more than I.4 kg body-weight
s my sesio s uo sh si s sui  sesiy
Contra-indications. Dogs less than 6 months of age, pregnant or lactating
The eggs hatch as a result of the increase in temperature
bitches
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, (depending on body weight) see manufachurer's
caused by the licking or grooming action of the animal. The
inform ation
other species lay their eggs in or near the mouth. Hatched
CSL Vetzyme Veterinary Combined Wormer (Seven Seas) UK
larvae either enter the mouth or are transferred via the
Tablets, scored, (white) dichlorophen 750 mg, (blue) piperazine citrate 375
tongue to penetrate it or the buccal mucosa. Some aspects
of the life cycle of Gasterophiius are not fully known but
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, (depending on body weight) see rmanufacturer's
the larvae of all species ultimately reach the stomach where
inforrmatior
Note. Consult a veterinarian before treating pregnant anirmals or anirmals with
they remain for several months. The infection cannot be
a history of epilepsy or renal irmpairrment
diagnosed, by parasitological means, once the larvae are
202 Parasitic infections
located in the stomach or intestines but areas around the 
Biting mi dges, Simufium spp., breed in running water. They
mouth may be examined for parasite eggs, the pharynx for
may cause eye lesions in cattle. Only the adult female sucks
lar vae, and the stomach by gastroscopy. Infection is control-
blood, whereas both male and female biting ‘stable flies'
led by frequent grooming to remove eggs before they hatch.
Alternatively, warm water containing insecticide may be
ful for cattle and other species, such as horses (see also
applied to the forelimbs and mouth area; this encourages the
 above). Treatment should be anticipated for peak activity in
eggs to hatch and the drug then kills the larvae. Treatmerit
summer.
of larvae in the stomach is traditionally given twice yearly;
Warble flies ("cattle grubs), Hypoderma, affecting cattle
initially after adult fly activity has ceased and again during
and also deer, are active particularly during the warm sum-
late winter (see section 2. 1 for preparation details).
mer months. The adult fly makes a characteristic noise,
Culicoides spp. are midges that give rise to 'sweetitch'
which causes excessive worry to animals as the flies
(Queensland itch'), a dermatitis resulting from hypersensi-
tivity to the saliva of this insect. Preventative measures to
the arimal and migrate towards the diaphragm spending the
reduce exposure to midges during the summer months
winter months in the spinal canal or the oesophageal area.
include the application of fly repellents, spraying 
with
insecticides, or stabling before the afternoon and overnight.
forming a perforated warble, which ultimately downgrades
Treatment in severe cases involves the administration of
the hide. Hypoderma is a notifiable disease in the UK. It has
oral or parenteral corticosteroids (see section 7.2.1) sup-
beern almost eradicated from the UK. Traditionally, treat-
ported by the application of topical corticosteroid and anti-
bacterial creams (see section 14.2.1) or antipruritic
controlled. Systemic organophosphorus parasiticides should
preparations (see section 14.5.1).
be used at the appropriate time and use is contra-indicated
Lice can be identified in the mane and at the base of the tail
when serious adverse effects may result due to the location
during early infestation. Later they become more general-
of the parasite within the animal s body. Dead larvae in the
ised. Bovicola (Damalinia) spp., the chewing louse, causes
proximity of the spinal column or oesophagus may result in
hair loss and irritation with consequent rubbing. Animals
either paraplegia, or bloat, respectively.
 infested with the sucking louse Haematopinus spp. will lose
Sucking lice found on cattle include Haematopinus, Linog-
condition and anaemia can result.
nathus, and the more uncommon Solenopotes. Lice will be
Sarcoptes spp., a mite that burrows into the skin, is first
found on different areas of the body depending upon the
observed on the head, neck, and shoulders, while the non-
 species: Linognathidae prefer the head, neck, and dewlap.
burrowing mite Psoroptes spp. is found on either the body
The chewing louse, Bovicola bovis (Damalinia bovis) may
saa nemoi sun uo punoy aq ueo dds saidoou siee aui 1o
be present on most of the upper parts of the animal's body.
and hocks. All will cause irritation, rubbing, scratching,
Chorioptic mange is due to the mite Chorioptes bovis,
restlessness, and hair loss. Treatment for mite infestation is
which is prevalent in winter. Chorioptes bovis and Pso-
usually in autumn or winiter.
roptes ovis var bovis can spread over the body from the base
of the tail. Sarcoptes scabiei var bovis causes sarcoptic
Cattle
manige but infestations are unicommon. It is usually present
Cattle are susceptible to attacks by various flies. The blood-
on the head and neck but may occur elsewhere on the body.
sucking flies of the genera Stomoxys and Haematobia
Ticks are blood feeders and species affecting cattle and
(Lyperosia) are common parasites of cattle. The biting fly
sheep include Ixodes, Dermacentor, and Haemaphysalis. In
Haematobia irritans, also called the “horn fly', causes
 tropical climates a rumber of tick species belonging to the
intense irritation. Hydrotaea irritans is not a biting fly but
generaAmblyomma,Boophilus,Hyalomma,andRhipiceph
the female can abrade skin and the fly does cause worry to
afus are important as vectors of a number of major diseases
cattle, sheep, and goats by feeding on ocular and nasal
worldwide. In Britain, Lxodes ricinus transmits babesiosis
secretions. Skin lesions and weight loss may result. In addi-
(redwater), louping ill, and tick-borne fever. Dermacentor
tion, Hydrotaea irritans appears to be a major factor in the
reticulatus is occasionally found in southern England and
tranismission of bacteria that cause summer mastitis. Some
Wales, and can transmit equine and canine babesiosis.
species of muscids, for example Musca autumnalis, have
Haemaphysalis punctata, found in the same general areas
been implicated in the transmission of Moraxella bovis
as Dermacentor transmits Babesia major in Britain. Treat-
(infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis, 'pinkeye', New
 ment just before the tick population rise is advocated, par-
Forest Disease). Others, including Morellia, occur on vege-
ticularly in sheep (see below), with additional treatments,
tation but may be attracted to sweat and mucus oni cattle and
especially in cattle, according to the duration of challenge.
horses, and cause fly-worry in late summer. Musca domes-
Although challenge can be anticipated, the persistence of
tica also affects cattle similarly. Fly control is usually from
many ectoparasiticides on hair is less than on wool there-
late spring until autumn. Insecticide impregnated ear tags
fore repeat treatments may be necessary on cattle.
(see section 2.2.4), applied at the start of the grazing season,
can give full season protection. Alternati vely, insecticides
Sheep and goats
or fly repellents may be applied at regular intervals or at
One of the main ectoparasites infesting sheep is calliphorine
anticipated periods of peak fly activity.
larval myiosis (myiasis). Species of flies responsible are
2.2 Ectoparasiticides 203
Lucilia, (Proto), Phormia, and some Calliphora. Calli-
 The mites are able to survive in the environment for about 2
phorine myiosis may be complex and an initial strike may
weeks and may be present on fences, in buildings, vehicles,
lead to further strikes and result in large wounds. Affected
 and trailers. Mites are spread by physical contact with
sheep have identifiable characteristics and odour. Feed
 infested sheep. Treated stock should be kept off grazed pas-
intake is reduced and their condition deteriorates leading to
tures for about 3 weeks. Psoroptes mites suck lymph by
reduced meat, milk, and fleece production and finally death.
piercing the epidermis, causing a serious allergic response
 followed by crust formation. There is marked variation in
and certainly during the peak challenge in late spring and
the response of sheep to the allergen. Animals become rest-
early summer is advised. Clipping wool from the area
 less, and wool is pulled out by scratching or biting, or sim-
around the tail and breech can help reduce fly strike in this
ply falls out. This is a continuous process as scab mites
area.
migrate away from the initial infective foci. Death can
Hydrotaea irritans, the “head fly', causes considerable
result from scab mi te infestations.
worry to sheep. Frequently, a large number of flies will
Psoroptes infestations are most prevalent in autumn and
attack an individual animal, concentrating around the head
section 2.2.4). Dimpylate (diazinon)- and flumethrin-con-
skin, particularly around the horns and eyes.
taining dips treat and prevent scab infestations. Cypermeth-
Infestation with sheep nasal bots Oestrus ovis, results in the
rin-containing dips are effective for treatment only. The
condition false gid: The viviparous females deposit larvae
emergence of populations of mites resistant to flumethrin
around the animals nostrils. During this process, large
may limit the choice of sheep dip. As an alternati ve, infesta-
numbers of flies may attack, causing the sheep to panic. The
 tions may be treated with injectable ivermectin adminis-
fly may also affect goats. The larvae crawl up the nose into
tered as 2 doses given at an interval of 7 days, or injectable
the sinuses and irritate the mucosae. This results in the dis-
moxidectin as 2 doses given at an interval of 10 days, or
charge of mucus exudate on which the larvae feed. Dead
 injectable doramectin given as a single dose.
larvae may give rise to secondary bacterial infection with
 Mange due to Sarcoptes spp. is usually limited to the head
occasional mortality. When development is complete, the
in sheep; the area of infestation is more generalised in
lar vae crawl out from the nostrils and pupate on the ground.
goats. Chorioptic mange in sheep is now believed to be the
See section 2.1 for details of treatment of nasal bots with
result of infection with Chorioptes bovis, and lesions occur
anthelmintics.
on the pasterns and interdigital spaces.
Melophagus ovinus, the sheep ked, lives in the wool and
 Ixodes ricinus transmits louping ill and tick-borne fever in
feeds by sucking blood; heavy infestations may cause anae-
sheep. Lambs should initially be treated twice with an inter-
mia. Generally, production loss is associated with irritation
val of 3 weeks between treatments. Adult sheep should
leading to wool damage and staining. Chewing and sucking
lice lead to wool and skin damage, and sucking lice to body
residual protection. Treatment should anticipate the tick rise
fluid loss. Louse infestations are characterised by constant
 and, if the level of challenge is high, a further treatment
itching, rubbing, tagging, and biting of the fleece. Sucking
lice found on sheep include the face louse Linognathus ovii-
 of the sheep tick may extend over 3 years and the location
fus and the foot louse Linognathus pedaius. The prevalence
of flocks in the UK is important when considering chal-
of chewing lice Bovicola (Damalinia) ovis has increased
lenge and treatment. It was generally considered that ticks
throughout Britain in recent years. Lice and keds are con-
feed from March until June in north-east England and
trolled by the ectoparasiticides used for fly, tick, and scab
north-east Scotland but in Wales, Ireland, Cumbria, western
identified as a major problem. Frequent treatments have led
to be a tendency to feed also between August and Novem-
to a serious resistance problem in some countries. It is
Jo sunened auaueuo isesans suogeaiesgo jusosi ing 1og
important not to dip unnecessarily nor at an ineffective drug
tick activity and feeding.
concentration. Goats may be treated in winter; care should
be takerl.
Pigs
The sheep scab mite, Psoroptes ovis, is an economically
There are two main ectoparasites of intensively and exten-
important ectoparasite that occurs in sheep. In Britain, this
sively housed pigs, the burrowing mange mite Sarcoptes
disease is the subject of The Sheep Scab Order 1997 (S1
scabiei var suis and the sucking louse Haematopinus suis.
1997/968), which is based on the treatment of infected
Both parasites cause restlessness, rubbing, and scratching
sheep or those that may have been exposed to the mite,
with consequent skin abrasion, encrustation, and hair loss.
  p  g  os   
The skin may become thickened and consequent open
previously required by DEFRA. Guidelines have been pub-
lesions may lead to secondary infections and loss of body
lished on the treatment and flock management by DEFRA.
fluids. Mange can adversely affect production efficiency in
Farmers should not send infected sheep to market or slaugh-
growing stock and cause erratic suckling patterns in nursing
ter, and should follow the manufacturer's instructions on
sows. Infection may lead to carcass downgrading due to
treatment to avoid temporary suppression of the disease.
skin rash. Ideally the ectoparasiticides used should control
 both mange and lice. Prophylactic use includes treatment of
204 Parasitic infections
sows as they enter the farrowing house, young pigs at weari-
may have to be treated with arl acaricide. In some parts of
ing, and boars every 2 to 3 months.
the world, ticks are responsible for the transmission of
canine babesiosis (Bab.canis,Bab.gibsoni), tropical canine
pancytopenia (Ehrlichia canis), and various bacterial and
Dogs and cats
-puedep neia si sieo pue sop uo sniseiedooe go lonuo
rickettsial diseases. In the UK, under the Pet Travef
Scheme, 24 to 48 hours before embarkation for the UK, ani-
ent upon the diligence of the owner. Ticks, lice, and fleas
mals must be treated against ticks. However, to prevent an
may be noticed by the owner. Microscopic parasitic mites
animal becoming infected with tick-borne diseases, it is rec-
or allergic conditions due to ectoparasites are initially only
ommended that animals are also treated for ticks before and
apparent from the dermatological conditions they cause.
during the period outside the UK. Other requirements for
Ctenocephalides felis (the cat flea) more commonly infests
 bringing pet dogs and cats without being placed under quar-
dogs and cats than C. canis. The adult flea feeds and breeds
antine are given under section 18.4.8.
on the animal. Flea eggs are shed from the animals coat
and develop in the environment. The flea emerges as an
adult when favourable conditions are present and usually
Rabbits and guinea pigs
when a suitable host is nearby. Flea control includes elimi-
 Rabbits may become fly struck leading to larval myiosis.
nation of adult fleas on the animal and reduction of devel-
 the main species involved being the Bluebottle Calfiphora
opmental stages and emerging adult fleas
in the
 spp. and the Greenbottle Lucilia sericata. Rabbits may
environment by prevention of adult fleas producing viable
 become attractive to flies if they are diarrhoeic, incontinent,
eggs, using an insecticide (see section 2.2.1.7) on the ani-
if uneaten caectrophs accumulate around the anus, or if
mals bedding, and vacuum cleaning regularly. In animals
housed in unhygienic conditions. Cyromazine may be used
that have developed an allergy to fleas, it is particularly
before fly challenge, particularly during the summer, and
important that control is aimed at reducing the rumber of
 applied with a sponge applicator. Repeat treatment may be
fleas biting the animal. Many preparations are unsuitable 
required at 8 to 10 week intervals to prevent infestation.
for dogs and cats less than 12 weeks of age. Fipronil spray
Affected animals should be clipped and washed particularly
may be used on puppies and kittens more than 2 days of age
 around the tail and breech, cleaned with disinfectant and
or fleas may be manually removed with a fine-toothed
treated with an insecticide to kill maggot larvae. The under-
comb in very young animals.
lying cause of the soiling of the fur should also be
Lice infestation on dogs is due to Trichodectes, a biting
addressed.
louse, and is considered more prevalent than lice on cats.
Rabbits may also be infested with fleas. The rabbit flea
Localised or generalised demodectic mange, Demodex,
Spilopsyffus cunicufi is responsible for the transmission of
transmitted by contact, can be severely traumatic to the dog.
myxomatosis. Imidacloprid can be used to kill fleas on rab-
Demodectic mange is commonly associated with immuno-
bits and provides protection for up to one month.
suppression in dogs and maintenance treatment may need to
The ear mite, Psoroptes cunicufi, causes *canker'in rabbits.
 be continued for a long period in such animals. Sarcoptic
Ears should be cleaned with an ear cleaner and sebolytic
mange, Sarcoptes, also occurs in the dog. Other mites
(see section 14.8.2). Ivermectin is effective for treatment.
infesting companion animals include Notoedres, causing
Cheyletiella parasitovorax (rabbit fur mite) and Leporacus
notoedric mange, now rarely seen in the UK, which princi-
gibbus (Listrophorus gibbus) may cause dermatitis and
pally affects cats'ears and face but may be more genneral-
scaling (mange). Skin cleansing agents (see section 14.7.1)
ised, and otodectic mange, caused by Otodectes, which
 or insecticidal shampoos containing permethrin can be used
affects aural and facial areas of both dogs and cats (see also
for treatment.
section 14.8). It is important to choose an ectoparasiticide
Guinea pigs may be infected with the lice Gliricola porcilli
that is indicated for use in cats because some drugs, such as
and Gyropus ovalis and can be treated with insecticidal
benzyl benzoate, are contra-indicated in this species.
shampoos. Such treatment is also effective against the fur
Sandflies, so called because of their sandy colour, include
mite Chirodiscoides cavia. The mange mite, Trixacarus
the genus Phlebotomus and Lutzomyia. They are of impor-
 caviae, causes pruritis, hair loss, and skin thickening and
tance in the transmission of leishmaniosis (see section
 can be treated with ivermectin by parenteral injection.
1.4.7) to dogs and humans.
Neotrombicula autumnalis (harvest mite) is a free-living
mite found in wooded and grassed areas. Animals may
Birds
become infested with the larvae, particularly on the fet and
Common ectoparasites infesting poultry in the UK include
poultry red mite Dermanyssus gallinae, northern fowl mite
head, resulting in mild to severe pruritic lesions. Treatment
is aimed at killing the larvae and should be repeated if re-
Ornithonyssus, lice, and more rarely the soft tick Argas per-
sicus. Most production involving poultry for meat or eggs is
infestation occurs.
intensive, therefore broiler houses or laying houses should
Ticks, Ixodes spp., may be found on dogs and cats that are
exercised in infested woodland or open areas. Dogs and cats
be disinfested when they are cleared at the end of each
are affected mainly on the head, face, ears, and legs. Indi-
batch of birds. Lice and mites affect pigeons, and lofts
vidual ticks may be removed manually but large rumbers
should be routinely disinfested.
2.2.1 Ectoparasiticides  205
Ectoparasiticide formulation and application.Table 2.2
 Spray formulations are used on dogs and cats although cats,
 outlines drugs that are available in the UK and effective in particular, may not tolerate the noise of aerosol spraying:
against common ectoparasitic infections in the UK in  powders, foams, or pump sprays may be preferred. To apply
horses, ruminants, pigs, dogs, cats, rabbits, guinea pigs, a spray, the animals coat should be combed or brushed
poultry, and pigeons. Ectoparasiticides are available for sys-
 against the lie and the spray applied to the roots of the fur
temic administration and for topical application by various
 and the skin from a distance of 15 to 20 cm. Care should be
-jsnp ^uo-jods, ^uo-inod, eids ^dip Aq supnoui spoueul
taken to avoid spraying the eyes, nose, and mouth. In gen-
ing powder, collar, and tag. Different formulations of a drug
eral, the animal should be kept away from fires and other
 preparation may be indicated for different parasites.
sources of heat for at least 30 minutes following spraying
Typically, formulations used in ectoparasite control for live-
and until the coat is totally dry. Similarly, before application
stock are liquid concentrates requiring dilution with water
 of a powder, the animal's fur should be raised and the pow-
to produce an emulsion for application. Traditionally, to
der applied close to the skin. Powders should only be
ensure wetting to the skin, sheep are dipped, while other
applied when the coat is dry. Some ectoparasiticides are
available as tablets, oral solution, or injection for dogs and
poid spoueu uogeondde uo-jods, pue uo-inod, osn
cats.
the farmer with a broad choice of systems depending upon
 Insecticidal collars for dogs and cats work on the same prin-
individual circumstances, for example, availability
of
ciple of insecticide dispersion as tags and should be worn at
spraying, dipping, and animal handling facilities, in addi-
all times. The collar should be applied to fit loosely around
tion to staff numbers required for such operations.
the animals neck; elasticated collars are available for cats.
The volume of solution of *pour-on' formulations used may
Some authorities do not recommend that cats wear collars
depend on the size of the animal and the type of infestation.
because it has been found that elasticated collars may allow
Solutions may be applied along the dorsal midline for fly
 the animal to put its jaw or leg through the collar and then
infestation, to the top of the head and around the base of the
 sustain injury. Children should not be allowed to handle or
horns for headfly infestation, or to the site of the lesion for
play with the collar, and animals should not be allowed to
blowfly strike. In general, *pour-on' solutions should not be
chew it. Occasionally animals show an allergic reaction to
applied to the base of the tail in lambs as this may interfere
collars and the collar should be removed immediately if this
with ewe-lamb recognition. “Spot-on’ formulations are
is evident. Owners should be directed to read the Owner
applied to a single site on the dorsal midline behind the
Information Leaflet insert which provides information on
shoulders or to the base of the poll of the head.
the drugs contained in the collar and human and animal
Tapes and tags are used for fly control in extensive hus-
safety precautions.
bandry systems on animals that are not gathered on a regu-
larbasis.
These should be removed when no longer
2.2.1 Ectoparasiticides
efficacious (as described by the manufacturer) in order to
 prevent exposure of ectoparasites to sub-lethal drug dosage,
2.2.1.1 Amidines
resulting in resistant strains. Tags are attached to one or
2.2.1.2 Avermectins and milbemycins
both ears of cattle. It is preferable to apply tags to the whole
2.2.1.3 Carbamates
          
2.2.1.4 Neonicotinoids
2.2.1.5 Organophosphorus compounds
tags should be attached to the animal shortly before
2.2.1.6 Phenylpyrazoles
required. The insecticide is released on to the animal and
2.2.1.7 Pyrethrins and synthetic pyrethroids
spreads over its surface. Most tags act for up to 4 to 5
2.2.1.8 Other ectoparasiticides
months and are used on dairy and beef cattle and calves.
Tags should be removed at the end of the fly season or
Ectoparasiticides are available that act systemically and
before slaughter. Bands are used on horses. They are
may be given parenterally or applied topically, either by the
attached to the browband or head collar and left in place for
'pour-on' technique where a solution of the drug is poured
approximately 4 months.
along the animals dorsal midline, or by the ‘spot-on'
Emulsifiable concentrates for dilutiorn with water are also
method in which all the specified amount of solution is
applied to dogs, particularly for demodectic and sarcoptic
applied to a small area on the head or back, as directed by
mange control, to ensure penetration to the skin of the
the manufacturer. Some of the applied drug is absorbed per-
active ingredient. Shampooing and washing of cats is rarely
cutaneously and taker up into the circulatory system.
- uo-o,  ed ood on np un
-u eionnoe pe pde e spdo r
mulations are available for use on dogs and cats. The medi-
cation should be applied to an area where the animal is
many formulations of topical ectoparasiticides available
unable to lick it off, such as the back of the neck. The coat is
 and the preparation of choice will depend on the animal,
parted to allow visibility of the skin because the solution
 owner compliance, and environment. In general, different
should be applied to the skin rather than the fur. Excessive
preparations should not be used concurrently or within 7
wetting of the fur should be avoided.
days of treatment.
206 Parasitic infections
Table 2.2 Drugs effective against common ectoparasitic infections'
Parasite
Ectoparasiticides
HORSES
Flies
Haematobia,Hydrotaea,Musca,
cypermethrin, permethrin
Stomoxys
Biting midges
Culicoides
benzy] benzoate, permethrin, pyrethrins
Lice
Bovicola,Haematopinus
cypermethrin, permethrin, pyrethrins
Mites
Psoroptes, Sarcoptes
ivermectin
Chorioptes
selenium sulphide+ (see section 14.5.1)
Horse bot
Gasterophilus
(ivermectin, moxidectin) see section 2.1
Flies
Hydrotaea,Morellia,Musca,
cypermethrin, deltamethrin, permethrin
Simulium,Stomoxys
Haematobia
doramectin 'pour-on, ivermectin 'pour-on', moxidectin
'pour-on'
Blowfly larvae
Calliphora, Lucilia
cypermethrin, cyromazine, deltamethrin, dicyclanil,
dimpylate (diazinon)
Warble flies
Hypoderma
abamectin, doramectin, eprinomectin, ivermectin,
moxidectin
Sheep keds
Melophagus ovinus
amitraz, deltamethrin, dimpylate (diazinon)
Lice
Bovicola,Haematopinus,
abamectin, amitraz, cypermethrin, deltamethrin, dimpylate
Linognathus,Solenopotes
(diazinon), doramectin, eprinomectin, fenthion,
ivermectin, moxidectin, permethrin, propetamphos
Mites
Chorioptes,Sarcoptes
abamectin, amitraz, doramectin, eprinomectin, ivermectin,
moxidectin, permethrin
Psoroptes
abamectin, cypermethrin, dimpylate (diazinon),
doramectin, ivermectin, moxidectin
Ticks
Ixodes,Dermacentor,
amitraz, cypermethrin, deltamethrin, dimpylate (diazinon)
Haemaphysalis
Sheep nasal bot
Oestrus ovis
(closantel, doramectin, ivermectin,moxidectin) see
section 2.1
2.2.1 Ectoparasiticides  207
Table 2.2 Drugs effective against common ectoparasitic infections' (continued)
Parasite
Ectoparasiticides
PIGS
Lice
Haematopinus
amitraz, doramectin, ivermectin
Mites
Sarcoptes
amitraz, doramectin, ivermectin
DOGS and CATS (some preparations are not suitable for both species, please consult individual monographs)
Fleas
Ctenocephalides
carbaril, dimpylate (diazinon), dichlorvos + fenitrothion
(Nuvan Top), fipronil, flumethrin + propoxur,
imidacloprid, lufenuron, nitenpyram, permethrin,
propoxur, pyrethrins, selamectin
Lice
Felicola, Trichodectes
fipronil, selamectin
Mites
Cheyletiella
fipronil
Demodex(dogs)
amitraz, ivermectin
Sarcoptes (dogs)
amitraz, fipronil, selamectin
Notoedres (cats)
selamectin
Otodectes
selamectin, see also section 14.7
Neotrombicula,Pneumonyssoides
dichlorvos + fenitrothion+ (Nuvan Top), fipronil,
propoxur
Ticks
Ixodes,Rhipicephalus
deltamethrin, dimpylate (diazinon), fipronil, flumethrin +
propoxur, permethrin
Sandflies
Phlebotomus spp.
deltamethrin, imidacloprid + permethrin (Advantix)
RABBITS
Flies
Lucilia
cyromazine, permethrin
Fleas
Spilopsyllus
imidacloprid
Mites
Psoroptes
ivermectin+, moxidectin
Cheyletiella,Listrophorus
permethrin
GUINEA PIGS
Lice
Gliricola,Gyropus
permethrin
Mites
Trixacarus
ivermectin+, moxidectin
Chirodiscoides
permethrin
208 Parasitic infections
Table 2.2 Drugs effective against common ectoparasitic infections' (continued)
Parasite
Ectoparasiticides
POULTRY
Mites
Dermanyssus
cypermethrin
Lice
Lipeurus, Goniocotes, Gonoides,
fipronil
Menopon,Menacanthus
PIGEONS
Lice
Columbicola
permethrin, pyrethrins
Goniocotes
permethrin
Mites
Cnemidocoptes,Dermanyssus
pyrethrins
Megninia,Pterolichus
permethrin
Iinfections and treatment used in the UK
2.2.1.1 Amidines
Dose.
Cattle: by spray, 0.025% solution
Amitraz acts at octopamine receptor sites in ectoparasites
giving rise to increased nervous activity. There is no
Sheep: by dip, 0.05% solution
Pigs: by spray, 0.05% solution
Idiosyncratic reactions have been reported in Chihua-
Dogs: by wash,
huas, and preparations containing amitraz should not be
demodectic mange, 0.05% solution
used on this breed nor on dogs with heat stress. In horses,
sarcoptic mange, 0.025% solution
amitraz may cause a reduction in gastro-intestinal motility
Rabbits +, rode nts + : contact manufacturer for information
on dosage
resulting in impaction of the large intestine; amitraz should
not be used on this species. Amitraz should not be used on
POM Aludex (Intervet) U/K
cats.
Liquid concentrate, amitraz 5%, for dogs. To be diluted before use
Dilute I volume in 100 volurmes water (= armitraz 0.05 %)
Dilute I volurme in 200 volurmes water (= armitraz 0.025%)
AMITRAZ
PML Taktic (Intervet) UK
Liquid or dip concentrate, amitraz 12.5%, for catfle, sheep, pigs. To be
UK
diluted before use
Indications. Lice, mites, and ticks on cattle; keds, lice, and
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 4 days, milk 4 days. Sheep: slaughter
24 days, should not be used on sheep producing milk for human consump-
ticks on sheep; lice and mites on pigs; Demodex and Sar-
tion. Pigs: slaughter 2 days
coptes on dogs
Dilute I volume in 250 volumes water (= armitraz 0.05 %)
Contra-indications. Horses, Chihuahuas, cats, or dogs in
Dilute I volurme in 500 volurmes water (= armitraz 0.025%)
heat stress; puppies less than 12 weeks of age, pregnant or
Dipwash. Dilute I volurme in 250 volurmes water (= armitraz 0.05%)
lactating
bitches;
Replenisher. Dilute I volurme in 167 volurmes water and add to dipwash after
concurrent treatment
with
other
each fall in volurme of 20%
insecticides
Side-effects. Occasional transient sedation, lethargy, CNS
depression, bradycardia, slow shallow breathing in dogs
2.2.1.2 Avermectins and milbemycins
Warnings. Maintenance therapy may be required for a long
Avermectins such as abamectin, doramectin, eprinomec-
said ^uinquns pioae on (ssop pessaiddnsounuu ul poued
tin, and ivermectin, and the structurally related milbemy-
kept outdoors should not be exposed to intense sunlight on
cins such as moxidectin are active against a wide range of
day of treatment; operators should wear suitable protective
immature and mature nematodes and arthropods. The aver-
clothing
mectin, selamectin, has been formulated for use in dogs
2.2.1 Ectoparasiticides  209
and cats with activity against ectoparasites and endopara-
EPRINOMECTIN
sites. These drugs are carried to all parts of the body in the
UK
mites are eliminated in addition to endoparasites.
Indications. Ectoparasites. Warble-fly larvae, mites, and
They may be used for the control of sucking lice in cattle
lice on cattle
although complete elimination of chewing species, for
Endoparasites. See section 2.1.1.1
example Bovicola (Damalinia) does not occur. For the con-
Dose. See section 2.1.1.1
trol of lice infestation in pigs, re-treatment after 3 weeks
may be necessary.
See section 2.1.1.I for preparation details
They are also effective in cattle against the mange mites
IVERMECTIN
Psoroptes bovis and Sarcoptes scabiei var bovis and may
assist in control of Chorioptes although complete elimina-
UK
tion does not occur. For the treatment of Psoroptes ovis
Indications. Ectoparasites. Mites and lice on pigs; warble-
(sheep scab) 2 injections of ivermectin should be adminis-
fly larvae, mites, lice, and horn flies ('pour-on' on cattle;
tered at an interval of 7 days, or 2 injections of moxidectin
Psoroptes on sheep; mites on horses+
at an interval of 10 days, or a single injection of doramectin
Endoparasites. See section 2.1.1.1
in order to treat the clinical signs of scab and to eliminate
Contra-indications. Administration of ruminal boluses to
living mites. No protection is afforded after treatment. Fol-
non-ruminating cattle; administration to calves less than 12
lowing treatment, sheep must be moved to fresh pasture
weeks of age; in general, treatment with a *pour-on' formu-
which has not carried sheep during the previous 14 to 16
lation when hide or hair is wet or rain is expected; direct
days. Psoroptes and Sarcoptes in horses+ may be control-
application of ‘pour-on’ formulation to mange scabs or
led with ivermectin.
areas contaminated with mud or dung
Otodectes and Notoedres ini cats anid Sarcoptes in dogs may
Warnings. If cattle are vaccinated against lungworm, the
be treated with selamectin. Ivemectin should be used with
ruminal bolus should not be given until 14 days after the
great caution because toxicity and fatalities may occur.
second dose of vaccine. Serious side-effects and fatalities
Ivermection should not be administered to Collies.
Avermectins and milbemycins are also effective against
Demodex; treated infected and untreated uninfected sheep
warbles in cattle. Ivermectin and moxidectin administered
 should not be in contact for 7 days
by ^pour-on' on cattle aids in protection against Haemato-
Dose.
bia irritans for up to 35 days after treatment; doramectin for
Horses +, cattle, pigs: see section 2.1. 1.1
up to 42 days.
Sheep: Psoroptes, by subcutaneous injection, 200 micro-
grams/kg, repeat after 7 days
ABAMECTIN
See sections 2.l.l.l and 2.1.4 for preparation details
UK
MOXIDECTIN
Indications. Ectoparasites. Warble-fly larvae, mites, and
lice on cattle
UK
Endoparasites. See section 2.1.1.1
Indications.Ectoparasites. Mites,lice,warble-fly larvae
and horn flies on cattle; Psoroptes ovis on sheep
See section 2.l.l.l for preparation details
Endoparasites. See section 2.1.1.1
Contra-indications. Administration to calves less than 8
weeks of age
DORAMECTIN
Warnings. Treated infected and untreated uninfected sheep
should not be in contact for 12 days
UK
Dose. Cattle : see section 2.1.1.1
Sheep: Psoroptes ovis,by subcutaneous injection, 200
Indications. Ectoparasites. Warble-fly larvae, mites, lice,
horn flies ('pour-on) on cattle; mites and lice on pigs;
 micrograms/kg, repeat after 10 days for treatment
Psoroptes ovis oni sheep
See section 2.1.1.I for preparation details
Endoparasites. See section 2.1.1.1
Warnings. Treated infected and untreated uninfected sheep
SELAMECTIN
should not be in contact for 14 days
Dose. Cattle: see section 2.1.1.1
UK
Sheep:Psoroptes ovis,by intramuscular injection,300 mg/
Indications. Ectoparasites. Fleas, lice, and sarcoptic mange
kg
mites on dogs; fleas, lice, Otodectes, and Notoedres on cats
Pigs: see section 2.1.1. 1
Endoparasites. See section 2.1.1.1
See section 2.l.l.l for preparation details
See section 2.1.1.1 for preparation details
210 Parasitic infections
2.2.1.3 Carbamates
Dogs: (up to 4 kg body-weight) 0.4 mL, (4-10 kg body
Bendiocarb, carbaril, and propoxur are carbamates.
weight) 1.0 mL, (10-25 kg body-weight) 2.5 mL, (25-40 kg
These drugs cause inhibition of cholinesterase at the para-
body-weight) 4.0 mL, (> 40 kg body-weight) two 4.0 mL
site nerve synapses but unlike organophosphorus com-
Cats: (up to 4 kg body-weight) 0.4 mL, (> 4 kg body-
pounds are spontaneously reversible. Carbaril may be
weight) 0.8 mL
Rabbits: (up to 4 kg body-weight) 0.4 mL, (> 4 kg body-
handling carbaril-containing products.
weight) 0.8 mL
POM Advantage 40, 80 for Cats (Bayer) UK
PROPOXUR
Solution, 'spot-on', irmidacloprid 10%, for cats; 0.4 mL, 0.8 rmL
UK
POM Advantage 40, 100, 250, 400 for Dogs (Bayer) UK
 Indications. Fleas on dogs and cats
Solution, 'spot-on', irmidacloprid 10%, for dogs; 0.4 mL, I rmL, 2.5 rmL,
Contra-indications. Concurrent or use within 7 days of
4.0 mL
 other ectoparasiticides; puppies or kittens less than 12
POM Advantage for Small Cats, Small Dogs, and Pet Rabbits (Bayer) UK
weeks of age, nursing bitches or queens
Solution, 'spot-on', imidacloprid t0%, for dogs und cats up to 4 kg body-
Side-effects. Occasional skin irritation and alopecia with
weight, rabbits; 0.4 mL
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used on rabbits intended for hurman
collar
Warnings. Children should not be allowed to play with
consurm ptior
collar; animals should not be allowed to chew the collar
POM Advantix Spot-on (Bayer) UK
See section 2.2.3 for preparatiorn details
GSL Big Red Flea Spray (Sherley's) UK
Aerosol spray, propoxur 0.25%, for dogs, cats
NITENPYRAM
GSL Vet-Kem Breakaway Flea Collar for Cats (Ceva) UK
UK
%01 Jmxodod
Indications. Fleas on dogs and cats
Contra-indications. Animals less than 4 weeks of age or
2.2.1.4 Neonicotinoids
less than 1 kg body-weight
Side-effects. Transient pruritis
Imidacloprid and nitenpyram are chloronicotinyls that act
Dose.By mouth or mixed with a small amount of food
by binding to nicotinic acetycholine receptors in the insect
Dogs: (1-11 kg body-weight) 11.4 mg: (11.1-57 kg body-
CNS leading to inhibition of cholinergic transmission
weight) 57 kg: (> 57 kg body-weight) 114 mg
resulting in paralysis and death.
Cats: 11.4 mg
Imidacloprid provides protection against re-infestation of
fleas for up to one month in dogs and cats and one week on
GSL 4Fleas Tablets (Johri son's) UK
pet rabbits. It is not necessary to treat puppies or kittens of
Fablets, nitenpyrarm I1.4 mg, for dogs and cats I-f! kg body-weight
less than 8 weeks of age because treatment of nursing
Tablets, nitenpyram 57 mg, for dogs more than If kg body-weight
bitches and queens controls flea infestation on both the dam
GSL Capstar (Novartis) UK
Tablets, nitenpyrarn Il.4 mg, for dogs und cats Il! kg body-weighf
Tablets, nitenpyrarm 57 mg, for dogs more than If.I kg body-weight
rapidly kill fleas and therefore the incidence of flea allergy
dermatitis is reduced.
 Parasiticides may be toxic to animals and the operator.
Care should be taken with dosage and handling of the
are seen. Effects may be seen within 15 minutes of treat-
product. The recommendations for storage, use, and
ment and for up to 24 hours. No more than one treatment
should be given per day. Products to control immature
disposal of unused materials and containiers should be
followed. For guidance and information, see:
stages are required to prevent re-infestation.
MAFF/HSE.Code of practice for the safe use of
pesticides on farms and holdings. London: HMSO,
1998. PB3528
IMIDACLOPRID
Control of Substanices
Hazardous to Health
(COSHH) Regulations 2002.
UK
Indications. Fleas on dogs, cats, and rabbits; control of flea 
allergy dermatitis
2.2.1.5 Organophosphorus compounds
Contra-indications. Recently treated animals should not
groom each other; puppies or kittens less than 8 weeks of
Organophosphorus
compounds
 inhibit 
cholinesterase,
age;rabbits less than 10 weeks of age
 thereby interfering with neuromuscular transmission in the
Side-effects. Transient salivation if the animal licks the
ectoparasite. Topical acting organophosphorus compounds
application site immedi ately after treatrment
include azamethiphos, chlorpyrifos, clofenvinfos, cou-
Warnings. Efficacy reduced if arimal becomes very wet
mafos, dichlorvos, dimpylate (diazinon), ethion, feni-
Dose. By 'spot-on'application.
trothion, heptenophos, malathion, metrifonate, phoxim,
2.2.1 Ectoparasiticides 211
propetamphos, temefos, and
tetrachlorvinphos.
DIMPYLATE
 Dimpylate (diazinon) is approved for use in the control of
(Diazinon)
sheep scab in the UK and is also active against blowfly lar-
vae, keds, lice, and ticks. Dimpylate (diazinon) provides
UK
residual action and protection. Organophosphorus 
Indications. Blowfly strike, keds, lice, Psoroptes, and ticks
pounds are strongly lipophilic and replenishment according
on sheep; fleas and ticks on dogs; fleas on cats
to the manufactuer s recommendations must be adhered to
Contra-indications. Administration of an organophospho-
 in order to prevent inadequate concentration in the dip bath.
rus compound or levamisole within 14 days of dipping:
Collars containing dimpylate and esters of fatty acids as a
puppies less than 12 weeks of age; cats less than 6 months
conditioner are available. The effect of the drug on fleas can
of age, aged cats, nursing bitches or queens; concurrent use
be seen within a few hours and that on ticks within 5 days.
of other ectoparasiticides or within 7 days of removal of
Collars are effective for about 4 months.
collar
Cythioate is an orally administered organophosphorus
 Side-effects. Occasional skin irritation and alopecia with
compound. Cythioate is absorbed from the gastro-intestinal
collar
tract within 2 to 3 hours of administration. Ectoparasites are
Warnings. Some dimpylate (diazinon)-containing dip con-
killed when they ingest body fluids containing cythioate.
centrates contain epichlorhydrin 1%; adequate ventilation
Fenthion and phosmet are systemically acting organophos-
 should be provided for operators working continuously with
phorus compounds. These compounds are applied by either
these preparations. Doctors should be aware of possible
the 'pour-on'or 'spot-on' method. Fenthion, for ex ample, is
clinical signs associated with exposure to organophospho-
rus compounds; operators should wear suitable protective
tion is absorbed into the circulation and is widely distrib-
clothing: children should not be allowed to play with the
uted in the body so in warble-fly treatments all larval stages
collar; animals should not be allowed to chew the collar
within the body are destroyed. Therefore treatment in cattle
      
should not be caried out between December and March
Dirmpylate (diazinon) 15%
during this period and destruction of the parasites may
PML Coopers Eetoforee Sheep Dip (Schering-Plough) U/K
cause side-effects. Dead larvae may give rise to severe local
Dip concentrate, (water soluble sachet), dirnpylate (diazinon) 60%, for
sheep. To be diluted before use
oedematous lesions. Systemic insecticidal action persists
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 35 days, should not be used on sheep
for some time, for example for about 4 weeks in dogs and
producing milk for hurman consurm ptior
cats and fleas approaching the animal to feed will be killed.
Dipwash. Dirmpylate 0.04% (300 mL/450 litres water, 600 rmL/900 litres
Acute overdosage or overexposure to organophosphorus
water, I 200 mL/1 800 litres water, 1500 mL/2250 litres water)
Replenisher. Add 200 mL (for bath < 2250 litres) after every 40 sheep dipped
compounds in animals and humans is characterised by
and replenish water to original volurme. Add 500 rmL (for bath > 2250 lites)
abdominal pain, diarrhoea, salivation, muscular tremors,
after every I00 sheep dipped and replenish water to original volurme
and pupil constriction. Death may occur from respiratory
GSLDog Flea Collar (Plastic) (Sherley's)UK
failure. Acetylcholine accumulates at muscarinic and nico-
Dirmpylate (diazinon) 15%
tinic receptors, which are subsequently overstimulated.
Treatment is aimed at inhibiting the muscarinic effects of
GSL Flea Collar for Cats (Bob Martin) U/K
Dinpylate (diazinon) 15%
acetylcholine with a competitive antagonist such as atropine
(see Treatment of poisoning). Manufacturer's literature
GSL Flea Collar for Dogs (Bob Martin) UK
should be consulted. Chronic exposure may lead to damage
Dirmpylate (diazinon) 15%
to the nervous system. Clinical signs including headaches,
GSL Flea Guard Flea & Tick Collar for Cats (Johnson's) UK
an xiety, and irritability in operators.
Collar, dirmpylate (diazinon) 15%, for cats
 Operators should take care when handling or using prep-
GSL Flea Guard Flea & Tick Collar for Dogs (Johnson's) UK
Collar, dimpylate (diazinon) 15%, for dogs
arations containing organophosphorus compounds. Per-
sonal protective equipment should be worn. Care should
PML Osmonds Gold Fleece Sheep Dip (Birmeda, Virbac) UK
be taken to avoid inhalation of powder or spray and any
Dip concentrate, dirmpylate (diazinon) 60%, for sheep. To be diluted before
skin contamination should be washed off immediately.
11se
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 35 days, should not be used on sheep
Cases of ill health among sheep handlers claimed to
producing milk for hurman consurm ption
arise from exposure to organophosphorus-containing
dips have beer reported. Operators should wear protec-
Replenisher. Replenisher. Add 1 80 mL (for bath < 2250 litres) after every 36
tive clothing when applying treatment and handling
sheep dipped and replenish water to original volurme. Add 480 rmL (for bath
       a (  
freshly treated animals.
volurme
Although most organophosphorus compounds are not per-
PML Paracide Plus (Anirmax) U/K
Dip concentrate, dimpylate (diazinon) I6%, for sheep. To be diluted before
sistent in the environment, they may be toxic to humans,
livestock, and wildlife. Adequate precautions should be
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 35 days, should not be used on sheep
Use
taken to avoid environmental contamination.
producing milk for hurman consurm ption 
212 Parasitic infections
Dipwash. Dilute I volurme in 400 volumes water
Cats: by 'spot-on'application,0.5 mL
Replenisher. Dilute 1.5 volurmes in 400 volurmes water and add to dipwash
by spray application, see manufacturer s information
after every 20 sheep dipped
CSL Pet Care Plastie Flea Band for Dogs (Armitage) UK
POM Frontline Spray (Merial) UK
Collar, dimpylate (diazinon) 15%, for dogs
Spray, fipronil 0.25%, for dogs, cats
GSL Pet Care Plastic Flea Band for Cats (Armitage) UK
POM Frontline Spot On Cat (Merial) UK
Collar, dirmpylate (diazinon) 15%, for cafs
Solution, 'spot-on', fipronil 10%, for cats; 0.5 rmL
CSL Prevender Insecticidal Collar for Dogs/Large Dogs (Virbac)UK
POM Frontline Spot On Dog (Merial) UK
Dipylate (diazinon) 15%, for dogs
Solution, 'spot-on', fipronil 10%, for dogs; 0.67 mL, 1.34 mL, 2.68 mL,
4.02 rmL
CSL Preventef Elasticated Flea Collar (Virbac) UK
Dirm pylate (diazinon) 1 5%, essential fatty acid esters 5%, for cafs
CSL Preventef Insecticidal Collar for Dogs/Large Dogs (Virbac) U/K
Dirmpylate (diazinon) 1 5%, essential fatty acid esters 5 %, for dogs
2.2.1.7 Pyrethrins and synthetic pyrethroids
FENTROTHION
Natural pyrethrins extracted from pyrethrum flowers and
the synthetic pyrethroids bioallethrin, cyhalothrin, cyper-
UK
methrin, deltamethrin, fenvalerate, flumethrin, lambda-
Indications. Fleas on dogs and cats
cyhalothrin, phenothrin, and permethrin exert their
Contra-indications. Puppies or kittens less than 12 weeks
action on the sodium channels of parasite nerve axons,
of age; nursing bitches or queens; concurrent use within 7
causing initial excitement then paralysis.
days of other ectoparasiticides
Pyrethrum extract, prepared from pyrethrum flower, con-
tains about 25% of pyrethrins. Some preparations contain
See section 2.2.3 for preparation details
 pyrethrins together with piperonyl butoxide, which potenti-
ates them by inhibiting their microsomal metabolism and
2.2.1.6 Phenylpyrazoles
has been shown to be effective against some mites.
Fipronil is a phenylpyrazole that acts by blocking the
 The content of some synthetic pyrethroid preparations is
action of the neurotransmitter gamma-amino-butyric acid
expressed in terms of the drug isomers. For ex ample, cyper-
resulting in rapid death of the invertebrate. Adult fleas are
methrin preparations may contain varying proportions of
killed before egg laying is possible and therefore environ-
their cis:trans isomers, for example 60:40 or 80:20. Cyper-
mental challenge is reduced. Depending on the environ-
methrin (cis:trans 60:40) 2.5% is equivalent to cypermeth-
mental population, fipronil spray provides protection
rin (cis:trans 80:20) 1.25%.
against re-infestation of fleas for up to 3 months in dogs and
Some pyrethrins such as permethrin appear to repel flea
up to 2 months in cats. Fipronil *spot-on' provides protec-
feeding and may be able to prevent the flea biting and there-
tion against re-infestation of fleas for up to 2 months in
fore assist in the control of allergic dermatitis.
dogs and up to 5 weeks in cats. Tick control in dogs and cats
Cypermethrin-containing ‘pour-on' preparations for sheep
lasts for up to 4 weeks. Fipronil spray (100 mL, delivering
may be used for the prevention and treatment of blowfly
0.5 mL/actuation) is safe to use in puppies and kittens more
strike. Protection against blowfly is only provided at the site
than 2 days of age.
of application for 6 to 8 weeks. Cypermethrin- and flumeth-
rin-containing sheep dips are authorised for use against
FIPRONIL
sheep scab in the UK. Cypermethrin is effective against
Indications. Fleas and ticks on dogs and cats; spray may
 many ectoparasites. Animals should be dipped twice at an
interval of 14 days for Psoroptes. After treatment sheep
aid in control of lice, Sarcoptes+, Cheyletiella+, and Neo-
trombicula· on dogs and cats; control of flea allergy
should be moved to pasture that has not carried sheep for 16
days. Flumethrin has residual action and is effective against
dermatitis
Contra-indications. Rabbits; puppies and kittens less than
keds, lice, ticks, and Psoroptes but not blowfly strike.
 2 days of age (spray); puppies and kittens less than 8 weeks
Cypermethrin ear tags are attached to the back of the ear in
of age ('spot-on'); bathing animals 1 hour before treatment 
cattle and provide protection for up to 5 months. Permeth-
or within 2 days after treatment
rin-containing ear tags are available that are effective for up
to 5 months. One tag will provide general fly control; 2 tags
are required when fly infestation is likely to be severe. Tags
on' application area
Warnings. Safety of spot-on in puppies and kittens less
containing second and third generation synthetic pyre-
than 8 weeks of age not established; recently treated ani-
throids are used to control biting and nuisance flies on cat-
mals should not be handled until dry and should not be
tle. High fly populations are associated with summer
allowed to sleep with humans, especially children
mastitis and infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis (New
Dose. Dogs: by 'spot-on' application, (up to 10 kg body-
Forest Disease). Other measures such as dry cow therapy
weight) 0.67 mL, (10-20 kg body-weight) 1.34 mL, (20-40
(see section 11.2) and treatment of udder and teat lesions
kg body-weight) 2.68 mL, (> 40 kg body-weight) 4.02 mL
(see section 11.3) should also be used to prevent summer
by spray application, see manufacturer's information
mastitis.
2.2.1 Ectoparasiticides 213
Collars containing deltamethrin have a repellent/insecti-
PML Dysect Sheep “Pour-on’ (Fort Dodge) UK
cidal activity against sandfly bites and provide protection
Solution,pour-on’,alphacypermethrin 12.5%,for sheep more thanI week
for up to 6 months.
ofo
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 28 days, should not be used on sheep
producing rmilk for hurmarn consurm ption
CYPERMETHRIN
Dose. By 'pour-on'application.
Sheep: (> 25 kg body-weight) blowfly, lice, ticks, 40 mL; headflies, 5 mL
Lumbs: (< 25 kg body-weight) blowfly 25 mL; headflies 5 mL
UK
Indications. Flies on horses and cattle; lice on horses, cat-
PML Ecofleece Sheep Dip (Birmeda) UK
tle and goats+; blowfly strike, biting lice, ticks, headflies,
Dip concentrate, cypermethrin (high cis) I0%, for sheep. To be diluted
Annod uo su pi :dous uo (dp) saidaiosd pue
before use
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 12 days, should not be used on sheep
Contra-indications. Treatment of lambs less thann one
producing milk for hurman consum ption 
week of age or treatment of animals during hot weather
Dipwash and Replenisher. Blowfly, keds, lice, ticks, Psoroptes. Dilute I vol-
Side-effects. *Pour-on' preparations should not be applied
urme in 500 volurmes water
to the tail region of lambs because this could interfere with
PML Flectron Fly Tags (Fort Dodge) UK
ewe-lamb recognition
Earagsyethinrans0:093.5%f
Warnings. Wash udders of sprayed animals before milking
WithdrawalPeriods.Catte: slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk with-
and apply only to unbroken lesions; operators should wear
drawal period nil
suitable protective clothing
          
Dose. See preparati on details
PML Renegade (Sorex) UK
Solution,'pour-on', alphacypermethrin 1.5%, for cattle
PML Auriplak Fly and Scab Dip (Virbac) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 28 days, rmilk withdrawal period nil
Dip concentrate, cyperrmethrin (cis.trans 80:20) 10%, for sheep. To be
Dose. Cattle:by ^pour-on’application, l0 rL
diluted before use
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 12 days, should not be used orn sheep 
PML Robust (Novartis) UK
producing milk for human consurmptior
Dip concentrate, cyperrmethrin (high cis) l0%, for sheep. To be diluted
Dipwash. Blowfly, keds, lice, ticks, Psoroptes. Dilute I volurme in 500 vol-
before use
umes water. Repeat after I4 days for Psoroptes
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter I8 days, should not be used on sheep
Replenisher. Dilute I volurme in 500 volurmes water and add to dipwash after
producing milk for hurman consurm ption 
each 50 sheep dipped
Dipwash. Blowfly, Psoroptes. Dilute I volurme in 400 volurmes water. Repeat
after 14 days for Psoroptes
PML Barricade 5% EC (Sorex) UK
Replenisher. Dilute I volurne in 300 volurmes water and add to dipwash afer
Liquid concentrate, cyperrmethrin 5%, for horses, ponies, poulry. To be
each fall in volurme of 10% 
diluted before use
Dipwash. Lice, ticks. Dilute I volurme in l000 volurmes water
Withdrawal Periods. Should rot be used on horses intended for hurmar con-
Repienisher. Dilute I volurme in 660 volurmes water and add to dipwash affer
 each fall in volurme of 10%
(  )  so 1 
Dilute I volurme with 100 volurmes water (= cypermethrin 0.05 %)
Dose. Horses: by spray, 125- 500 mL of 0. 1% solutior
Poultry: by spray, 20 mL of 0.05% solution
DELTAMETHRIN
PML Crovect (Novartis) UK
UK
thanIweekofage
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 3 days, should not be used orn sheep
Indications. Lice and flies onn cattle; headflies, blowfly
producing milk for hurman consurmption
strike, keds, lice, and ticks on sheep; ticks and sandflies on
Dose. Sheep: by pour-on'application (unless otherwise indicated).
dogs
Blowfly larvae, treatment, 5- 10 rmL on affected area; prophylaxis, by spray,
 Contra-indications. For collars on dogs: puppies less than
q0)0 (q>eq1 <)
weight) 30 mL, (> 40 kg body-weight) 40 rmL
7 weeks of age; dogs with skin lesions; cats; concurrent use
Headflies, 5 rmL
of organophosphorus ectoparasiticides in dogs; swimming
Lice, 0.25 rmL/kg (maxirmurm 20 rmL)
for first 5 days after application of collar
Ticks, (< 10 kg body-weight) 5 mL then, after 3 weeks, 10 mL, (> 10 kg
body-weight) 0.5 mL/kg (maxirmum 40 mL)
Side-effects. Minor signs of discomfort with some cattle
up to 48 hours after treatment; rarely skin lesions and hair
PML Deosect Spray (Fort Dodge) UK
loss in dogs; rarely uncoordinated movements, tremor,
Liquid concentrate, cyperrmethrin (cis:trans 50:50) 5%, for horses, poultry.
To be diluted before use
hypersalivation, vomiting, rigidity of hindquaters in dogs if
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used on horses, ponies intended for
chew collar
hurman consurmption. Poultry: slaughter 2l days, egg withdrawal period nil
Warnings. Some operators may experience transient tin-
Dilute I volume with 50 volmes water (= cypermethrin 0.1%)
gling sensation on skin contact; operators should wear pro-
Dilute I volurme with 100 volurmes water (= cy perrmethrin 0.05 %)
tective clothing and avoid handling recently treated
Dose. Horses: by spray, 500 mL of 0. 1% solution
Ponies: by spray, 125 rmL of 0.1% solution 
animals; treated dogs should not be allowed to sleep with
Poultry: by spray, 20 mL/bird of 0.05% solution
people, especially children; children should not be allowed
to play with collar; remove collar if signs of irritation occur
PML Dysect Cattle “Pour-on (Fort Dodge) UK
Dose. Cattle : see preparation details
Solution, *pour-on', alphacypermethrin I .5%, for catfle
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 28 days, milk withdrawal period nil
Sheep: by ‘spot-on’ application, 5 mL of 1% solution
Dose. Catfle: by 'pour-on'applicat ion, l0 mL
Lambs: by 'spot-on'application, 2.5 mL
214 Parasitic infections
PML Butox Swish (Irtervet) UK
GSL Canovel Insecticidal Shampoo (Pfizer) U/K
Solution, pour-on’, deltamethrin 7.5%,for catle
Shampoo, perrmethrin (cis:trans 40:60) 1%, for dogs
Withdrawal Periods. Catte: slaughter 20 days, milk withdrawal period nil
Dose. Cattle: by powr-on' application, flies, 10-30 mL of 7.5% solution;
GSL Cat Flea Collar (Felt) (Sherley's) UK
lice, 10 mL of 7.5% solutior
Perrmethrin (cis:t rans 40:60) 456 mg
POM Scalibor Collar (In tervet) UK
GSL Cat Flea Collar (Felt-Reflective) (Sherley's) UK
Collar, deltamethrin 4%, for dogs
Permethrin (cis:trans 40:60) 456 mg
PML Spot On Insecticide, Coopers (Schering-Plough) UK
GSL Catovel Insecticidal Powder (Pfizer) U/K
Solution,spot-onetaethin%,forcatlsh
Dusting powder, permethrin (cis:trans 40:60) I %, for cats
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 17 days, rmilk withdrawal period nil.
Sheep: slaughter 7 days, should not be used on sheep producing rmilk for
CSL Day Son & Hewitt Dermoline Louse Powder (Quay Equestrian) UK
hurm arn consumption
Dusting powder, permethrin (cis:trans 25:75), for horses, ponies
Dose. Catle: by 'spot-on'application, l0 rmL of 1% solution
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used on horses intended for hurman
consum ption
PERMETHRIN
GSL Day, Son & Hewitt Switch (Quay Equestrian) UK
UK
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used on horses, donkeys intended for
Indications. Cuficoides, flies, and lice on horses; lice on
hurman con surn ptior
Dose. Horses, donkeys: by ‘powr-on'application, 0.1 mL/kg (rmaxirmurr
donkeys; flies, mites, and lice on cattle; fleas, ticks, and
40 rmL)
lice+ on dogs and cats; lice and mites on pigeons +
Contra-indications. Treatment of calves under one week
GSL Defencare Shampoo (Virbac) UK
 of age; unless otherwise indicated puppies or kittens less
Shampoo, permethrin (cisrans 40:60) 1%,for dogs
than 12 weeks of age, rursing bitches or queens, pigeons
Contra-indications. Puppies less tharn I2 weeks of age, rursing bitches,
cats
 less than 1 month of age; permethrin ‘spot-on' must not be
used on cats
GSL Defencat Insecticidal Foam for Cats ( Virbac) UK
Aerosol foam, permethrin (cis:trans 40:60) 0.72%, for cafs
Side-effects. Occasional skin irritation and alopecia in ani -
Contra-indications. Kirtens less than 4 months of age, nursing queens
mals wearing insecticidal collars and after application of
 Dose. Cats: apply a ball of foam of approxirmately 8 cm in diarmeter/kg
'spot-on'formulations
body-weight. Operators should wear household or rubber gloves
Warnings.
saop ssop 1oy suogeoudde uo-inod, pue ,uo-ods, 104
GSL Exspot (Schering-Plough) UK
Solution,'spot-on, perrmethrin ( cis:trans 40:60) 65%, for dogs
should be treated in the evening, treated area should not be
Contra-indications. Puppies less than 2 weeks of age; cats
handled for 3-6 hours and dogs should not be allowed to go
 1 (ya-Apog ay 51 o dn) udde uo-iods, q sloa eso
swimming for 12 hours after application; treated dogs
(>1 5 kg body-weight) 2 mL. Do not re-apply until at least 7 days 
should not be allowed to sleep with people, especially chil-
GSL Dog Spot On (Bob Martin) UK
dren; care should be taken to ensure that other animals do
Solution,'spot-on, perrmethrin (cis:trans 25:75) 65%, for dogs
not lick the preparation off treated dogs; extremely toxic
Contra-indications. Puppies less than 2 weeks of age; cats
for cats and must not be applied to this species
Dose. Dogs: by 'spot-on' application, (up to 15 kg body-weight) I mL;
sep  sea  un Adde-a jou o u z (ua-poq  51<)
For collars for dogs and cats: children should not be
allowed to play with collar; cats may show signs of hyper-
GSL Flea & Tick Drops (Armitage) UK
aesthesia with excitability, twitching, and collapse if over-
Solution, 'spot-on', perrmethrin ( cis.:trans 25:75) 65%, for dogs
dosage occurs; remove collar if signs of irritation occur;
GSL Fly Repellent Plus for Horses, Coopers (Schering-Plough) UK
operators should wear suitable protective clothing
See section 2.2.5 for preparation details 
Dose. See preparation details
PML Flypor (Novartis) UK
POM Advantix Spot-on (Bayer) UK
Solution,pour-on,permehrin (cisrans 80:20）4%,forcate
See section 2.2.3 for preparationi details
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter 3 days, milk withdrawal period nil (see
[iote)
PML Auriplak (Virbac) UK
Note. Anirmals producing rmilk for hurman consurmption should be treated
Ear ags,pemethrin (cistrans 40:60)1.2g,forcafle
irmmediately after rmilking, which should be at least 6 hours before next
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk with-
milking
drawal period nil
Dose. Catfle: by 'pour-on'application, 0.l mL/kg
Note. Tags should be rermoved before slaughter
GSL Felt Cat Flea Collar (John son's) UK
GSL Canac Cat Flea Collar (Sinclair) UK
Collar, permethrin (cis:trns 40:60) 456 mg, for cats
Collar, permethrin 456 mg, for cats
Contra-indications. Kirtens less than 12 weeks of age
CSL Canac Dog Flea and Tick Drops (Sinclair) UK
GSL Flea & Tick Drops for Dogs (Johnson's) UK
Solution, 'spot-on', perrmethrin 65%, for dogs
Solution,'spot-on, perrmethrin (cis:trans 25:75) 65%, for dogs
Contra-indications. Puppies less than 8 weeks of age, mursing bitches;
CSL Canovel Flea Drops (Pfizer) UK
cats
Solwtion, 'spot-on', permethrin ( cis:trans 80:20) 4%, for dogs
Contra-indications. Cats
CSL Head-To-Tail Flea Powder, Coopers (Schering-Plough) U/K
Dusting powder, permethrin (cis:trans 25:75) 1 .05%, for dogs, cats
GSL Canovel Insecticidal Powder (Pfizer) U/K
Contra-indications. Kittens less than 2 weeks of age, puppies less than
Dusting powder, permethrin (cis:trans 40:60) 1%, for dogs
12 weeks of age
2.2.1 Ectoparasiticides  215
CSL Insecticidal Shampoo (Sherley's) UK
GSL Canae Cat Flea Spray (Sinclair) UK
Shampoo, permethrin (cis:trans 40:60) 0.2%, for dogs
Spray, piperonyl butoxide 1.25%, pyrethrins 0.25%, for cats
GSL Louse Powder (Amolds) UK
GSL Canae Dog Flea Spray (Sinclair) UK
Dusting powder, perrmethrin (cis:trans 25:75) 1%, for horses
Spray, piperonyl butoxide 1.25%, pyrethrins 0.25%, for dogs
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used on horses intended for hurmarl
consumption
CSL Canae Dog Flea Shampoo (Sinclair) UK
GSL Natura Elasticated Insecticidal Collar for Cats (Virbac) UK
Shampoo, piperonyl butoxide 0.49%, pyrethrins 0.0475 %, for dogs
Perrmethrin (cis:trans 40:60) 8%, essen tial fatly acid esters, for cafs
Contra-indications. Kitens less than I2 weeks of age, nursing queens
Canovel Insecticidal Spray (Pfizer) UK
Aeresol spray, piperonyl butoxide 1%, pyrethrins 0.1%, for dogs
CSL Natura Insecticidal Collar for Dogs (Virbac) UK
Perrethrin (cis:trans 40:60) 8%, essential fatty acid esters, fordogs
GSL Cat Flea Preparations (John son's) UK
Dusting powder, piperonyl butoxide 0.8%, pyrethrins 0.1%, for cats
GSLPermethrin FleaPowder (Sherleys)UK
Aerosol spray, piperonyl butoxide 1%, pyrethrins 0.25%, for cafs
Dusting powder, permethrin (cistrans 25:75) 1%,for dogs, cats
Non-qerosol spray,piperonyl butoxide 109%,pyethrins 0.22%,frcats
GSL Pet Care Felt Flea Collar for Cats (Arrmitage) UK
CSL Day Son & Hewitt Dermoline Insecticidal Shampoo (Quay Eques-
Permethrin 456 rmg
trian) UK
Liquid concentrate, piperonyl butoxide 0.08%, pyrethrurm extract 0.04% (=
GSL Reflective Flea Collar (Bob Martin) UK
pyrethrins 0.01 %), for horses. To be diluted before use
Permethrin 18%,for cats
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter 28 days
Contra-indications. Kittens less than 12 weeks of age
CSL Day Son & Hewitt Sweet Itch Lotion (Quay Equestrian) UK
PML Ridect Pour-On (Pfizer) UK
Piperonyl butoxide 0.5%, pyrethrurm extract 0.4% (= pyrethrins 0.1 %), for
horses
weekofuge
consurm ptior
[iote)
Note. Anirmals producing milk for hurman consurmption should be treated
GSL Dog Flea Preparations (Johnson s) UK
irnrmediately after milking and at least 6 hours before next rmilking
Dustingwerironylbuxid0.%yhin0.1%fd
Dose. Cattle: by ^pour-on'application,0.1 mL/kg
Non-aerosol spray, piperonyl butoxide 1.09%, pyrethrins 0.22%, for dogs
Agrosol spray, piperonyl butoxide 1%, pyrethrins 0.2%, for dogs
GSL Velvet Flea Collar (Bob Martin) UK
Shapo,piperonyl butoxide 0.49%,pyrethrins 0.05%,fordogs
Permethrin I8%, for cats
Contra-indications. Kittens less than 12 weeks of age
GSL Flea & Tick Spray Plus (Bob Martin) UK
Spray, piperonyl butoxide (free and encapsulated) 1.3%, pyrethrins (free and
CSL Vetzyme JDS Insecticidal Shampoo (Seven Seas) U/K
encapsulated) 0.21%, for dogs, cafs
Shampoo, permethrin 1%, for dogs
GSL Flea Powder (Bob Martin) UK
GSL Xenex Ultra (Genitrix) UK
Dusting powder, piperonyl butoxide 0.8%, pyrethrins 0.1%, for dogs, cats
Solurion, 'spot-on', permethrin (cis:trans 25:75) 65%, for gerbils, guineα
pigs, humsters, mice, rats
GSL Flea Shampoo (Bob Martin) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used on anirmals intended for hurman
Shampoo, piperonyl butox ide 0.49%, pyrethrins 0.04%, for dogs
consurmptior
Contra-indications. Cats; pregnant and lactating anirmals; anirmals less
GSL Flea Spray (Bob Martin) UK
thar I6 weeks of age
Aerosol spray, piperonyl butoxide 1.57%, pyrethrins 0.32%, for dogs
Side effects. Dermal irritation at site of application; rarely ataxia and
CSL Flea Spray (Shedey's) UK
trermior's
Spray piperonyl butoxide 1.5%, pyrethrurm extract 1.2% (= pyrethrins
0.3%), for dogs, cafs
PYRETHRINS
Contra-indications. Puppies or kittens less than 6 rmonths of age
UK
GSL Kil-Pest (Johnson's) UK
Dusting powder, piperonyl butoxide 0.8%, pyrethrins 0.1%, for dogs, cats,
Indications. Cuficoides, flies, and lice on horses; lice and
pigeons, caged birds
mites on pigeons and caged birds; fleas and lice● on dogs
Withdrawal Periods. Should rot be used on pigeons intended for hurman
and cats
consurn ptior
Contra-indications. Unless otherwise stated, puppies or
GSL Kitzyme Flearid Insecticidal Spray (Seven Seas) UK
kittens less than 12 weeks of age, nursing bitches or queens
Aeresol spray, piperonyl butoxide 0.6%, pyrethrins 0.125%, for cats
GSL Anti-Mite & Insect Spray (Johnson's) UK
GSL Original Extra Tail (Kalium) U/K
Aerosol spray, piperonyl butoxide 1%, pyrethrins 0.2%, for caged birds,
Finger spray, diethyltoluarmide 4.5%, piperonyl butoxide 0.6%, pyrethrins
pigeons
0.075%, for horses
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used on pigeons intended for hurman 
Liqwid, diethyItoluarmide 4.5%, piperonyl butoxide 0.6%, pyrethrins 0.075%,
consurmption
for horses
CSL Anti-Pest Insect Spray (Johnson's) UK
GSL Pet Care Flea Powder for Cats (Armitage) UK
Aerosol spray, piperonyl butoxide 1%, pyrethrins 0.2%, for dogs, cafs,
Dusting powder, piperonyl butoxide 0.8%, pyrethrins 0.1%, for cafs
pigeons
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used on pigeons intended for hurman
GSLPet Care Flea Powder for Dogs (Armitage) UK
consurmptior
Dusting powder, piperonyl butoxide 0.8%, pyrethrins 0. 1 %, for dogs
GSL Anti-Seratch Powder (Johnson's) UK
GSLPet Care Flea Spray for Cats (Armitage) UK
Dusing powder,piperonylbutxide0.8%,pyrehrins0.1%,for dogs, cts
Aerosol spray, piperonyl butoxide, pyrethrurm extract 0.125 %, for cats
216 Parasitic infections
CSLPet Care Flea Spray for Dogs (Armitage) UK
CLOSANTEL
Aerosol spray, piperonyI butoxide 0.6%, pyrethrurm ex tract 0. 125%, for dogs
UK
CSL Pigeon Insect Preparations (Johnson's) UK
Dusting powder, piperonyl butox ide 0.8%, pyrethrins 0.1 %, for pigeons
Indications. Ticks on sheep; immature and adult Fasciola,
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used on pigeons intended for hurmar
nasal bots, and Haemonchus in sheep (see section 2.1.3)
consurmption
Aeroso? spray, piperonyl butoxide 1%, pyrethrins 0.2%, for pigeons
See section 2.1.3 for preparation details
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used orn pigeons intended for hurmarl
consurmptior
CSL Puppy Flea Powder (Johnson's) UK
Dusting powder, piperonyl butoxide 0.8%, pyrethrins 0.1%, for dogs
2.2.2 Insect growth regulators
CSL Radiol Insecticidal Shampoo (Battle Hayward & Bower) UK
2.2.2.1 Benzoylphenyl urea derivatives
Shampoo, piperonyl butoxide 0.08%, pyrethmurm extract 0.04%, for horses
2.2.2.2 Juvenile hormone analogues
Withdrawal Periods. Should mot be used on horses intended for hurmar
2.2.2.3 Triazine and pyrimidine derivatives
consurmption
GSL Rid-Mite (John son's) UK
Insect growth regulators (IGRs) are a group of chemical
Dusting powder, piperonyl butoxide 0.8%, pyrethrins 0.1 %, for caged birds,
compounds that do not kill the target parasite directly but
pigeons
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used orn pigeons intended for hurmarl
 interfere with its growth and development. IGRs act mainly
corsurmption
on immature stages of the parasite and as such are rot usu-
ally suitable for the rapid control of established adult popu-
GSL Ruby Paragard (Spencer) UK
Spray, piperonyl butoxide 0.8%, pyrethrins 0.1 %,for dogs, cats, pigeons
lations of parasites. With heavy infestation of adult
Withdrawal Periods. Should rot be used on pigeons intended for hurmar
bloodsucking parasites, IGRs may need to be combined
consumption
with adulticides for the first few treatments.Where para-
sites show a clear seasonal pattern, IGRs can be applied at
GSL Scaly Lotion (Johnson's) UK
Lotion,piperonyl butoxide 1%, pyethrins 0.1%, foc caged binds
the start of the parasite season as a preventative. Based on
their mode of action IGRs can be classified as chitin inhibi-
CSL Silent Flea Spray (Bob Martin) U/K
tors, juvenile hormone analogues, and others.
Soray, piperonyl butoxide 1.1%, pyrethrins 0.2%, for dogs more than I.5 kg
body-weight,cats
CSL Vetzyme Flearid Insecticidal Spray (Seven Seas) UK
2.2.2.1 Benzoylphenyl urea derivatives
Aerosol spray, piperonyl butoxide 0.6%, pyrethrins 0.1 25%, for dogs
Diflubenzuron, fluazuron, and lufenuron are a benzoyl-
2.2.1.8 Other ectoparasiticides
phenyl urea derivatives.
Lufenuron is used for the control of fleas of dogs and cats.
Benzyl benzoate is used for control of sweet itch caused by
Lufenuron accumulates in fat tissue allowing subsequent
hypersensitivity to Culicoides midges.
slow release. Fleas take up the drug through the blood and
Lindane (gamma benzene hex achloride) is an organochlo-
transfer it to their eggs. The formation of larval chitin struc-
rine compound which is banned from use in many countries
tures is blocked by interference with the assembly of chitin
including the UK.
chains and microfilrils thereby inhibiting the development
Closantel is used for fluke infections and is active against
of flea larvae and providing environmental control of the
nasal bot flies, Oestrus ovis. Ticks such as Ixodes ricinus
flea population. No viable eggs are produced 24 hours after
which are feeding on sheep at the time of treatment with
administration. For oral administration, the drug must be
closantel are likely to produce less viable eggs.
 admimistered in the food to allow sufficient time for absorp-
tion from the stomach. Injectable treatment is given at six-
monthly intervals to cats and oral treatment is given to dogs
BENZYL BENZOATE
or cats once monthly during summer, commencing 2
months before fleas become active. Insecticides that kill
UK
 adult fleas may be required if there is an initial heavy infes-
Indications. Culicoides on horses
Contra-indications. Should not be used on cats
Diflubenzuron is available for blowfly control in sheep. It is
Warnings. Operators should wear suitable
protective
clothing
also active against flies and lice. The drug is highly
lipophilic with low solubility in water and is available as an
GS LCarr & Day & Martin Killitch (Quay Equestrian) UK
emulsifiable concentrate for use as a dip or shower or for
Lotion, benzyl ben zoate 25%, for horses
spraying after dilution. It provides 12 to 14 weeks protec-
Withdrawal Periods. Should rot be used on horses intended for hurmar
tion against flystrike.
consurmption
Fluazuron is a tick development inhibitor providing long-
GSL Sweet Itch Plus (Pettifer) U/K
term protection against the one-host tick Boophitus
Liquid, benzyl bern zoate 25 %, for horses
micropius.
2.2.3 Compound preparations for ectoparasites 217
LUFENURON
blowfly strike on rabbits providing protection for up to 10
weeks after dosing.
UK
Other drugs, for example, sheep dips containing dimpylate
Indications. Prevention of flea infestation and treatment of 
(diazinon), and selected formulations containing cyper-
flea allergy dermatitis in dogs and cats
methrin with blowfly larvae control recommendations,
Contra-indications. Injection in dogs; administration to 
should be used to treat established myiosis.
uni weaned puppies and kitternis
Side-effects. Transient painless swelling at injection site
CYROMAZINE
for a few weeks in cats; rarely tranisient lethargy after injec-
tion in cats
UK
Dose. Dogs: by addition to feed, 10 mg/kg
Indications. Prevention of blowfly strike on sheep and
Cats: by subcutaneous injection, 10 mg/kg or (up to 4 kg
rabbits
body-weight) 0.4 mL; (> 4 kg body-weight) 0.8 mL
Contra-indications. Pregnant or breeding does; applica-
by addition to feed, 30 mg/kg or (up to 4.5 kg body-weight)
tion to broken skin; rabbits less than 10 weeks of age
133 mg; (> 4.5 kg body-weight) 266 mg
 Side-effects. Transient inappetence for 24 to 48 hours after
treatment in rabbi ts
POM Program 40/80 Injectable for Cats (Novartis) U/K
Dose. Sheep: by pour-on' application, 15-50 mL of 6%
injection, lufenuron 40 mg/0.4 rmL, for cats less than 4 kg body-weight; 0.4
mL-syringe
solution depending on body-weight
injection, lufenuron 80 rmg/0.8 rmL, for cats equal to or more than 4 kg
Local application, 7.5-25 mL depending on body-weight
body-weight; 0.8-mL syringe
Rabbits: local application, as required to ensure fur is
POM Program Suspension for Cats (Novartis) UK
wetted
Oral suspension, lufenuron 133 mg/applicator, for cats up to 4.5 kg body-
weight; 1.9-g dose applicator
POM Rearguard (Novartis) UK
Oral suspension, lufenuron 266 mg/applicator, for cats more than 4.5 kg
Solution cyrormazine 6%, for rubbits
body-weight; 3.8-g dose applicator
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used orn rubbits intended for human
consurn ptiorn 
POM Program Tablets for Dogs (Novartis) UK
Tablets, lufenuron 23.1 rmg, 67.8 mg, 204.9 mg, 409.8 mg, for dogs
PML Vetrazin (Novartis) UK
Solution,'pour-on', cyromazine 6%,for sheep
2.2.2.2Juvenilehormone analogues
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 3 days, should not be used or sheep
producing milk for hurman consurm ptior
The juvenile hormone
analogues,
methoprene
and
pyriproxyfen mimic the activity of naturally occurring
DICYCLANIL
juvenile hormones and prevent metamorphosis to the adult
stage.
UK
Indications.Prevention of blowfly strike on sheep
Contra-indications. Treatment of very wet sheep or during
METHOPRENE
UK
Warnings. Operators should wear suitable protective cloth-
Indications. Prevention of flea infestation
ing and when handling sheep after treatment; shearing of
sheep not recommended for up to 3 months after treatment;
CSL 4Fleas Cat Collar (Johnson's) UK
 treated sheep should be kept away from watercourses for up
Collar, rmethoprene 2.1%, forcats
to l hour after treatment
Contra-indications. Cats less than I2 weeks of age
Dose. Sheep: by pour-on application, 30-100 mg of 5%
See also section 2.2.6 for preparation details
solution, depending on body-weight
PML Clik (Novartis) UK
2.2.2.3 Triazine and pyrimidine derivatives
Solution, pour-on', dicyclanil 5%, for sheep
Cyromazine (a triazine derivative) and dicyclanil (a pyri-
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 40 days, should not be used on sheep
producing milk for hurman consurmption
 midine derivative) have a similar mode of action and appear
to inhibit the deposition of chitin into the cuticle.
2.2.3 Compound preparations for
Cyromazine is effective for prevention of blowfly strike on
sheep and lambs. The use of a 'pour-on' preparation of
ectoparasites
cyromazi ne has the advantage that efficacy is not dependent
upon factors such as weather, fleece length, or whether the
UK
fleece is wet or dry. In addition, the persistence of the drug
POM Advantix Spot-on (Bayer) UK
is such that control can be maintained for up to 10 weeks
Solution, 'spot-on', irmidacloprid 40 mg, permethrin 200 mg, for fleas, ticks,
sandflies, and mosquitoes on dogs 1.5-4 kg body-weight
Solution, 'spot-on',irmidacloprid 100 mg, permethrin 500 mg, for fleas, ticks,
clanil, after a single application. The drugs spread to give
sandflies, and mosquitoes on dogs 4f0 kg body-weight
full body protection. Both are applied before an anticipated
Contra-indications. Puppies less than 7 weeks of age; cats
challenge. Cyromazine is also available for the control of
Warnings. Treated or in-contact anirmals must not be allowed to lick the
application site; keep cats away from treated dogs until application site is dry
218 Parasitic infections
POM Advantix Spot-on (Bayer) UK
Attention should be paid to the prevention of post-dipping
Solution, *spot-on', irmidacloprid 250 mg, permethrin 1250 mg, for fleas,
lameness caused by Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae. The dip
ticks, sandflies, and rmosquitoes on dogs f0-25 kg body-weight
Solution, 'spot-on', irmidacloprid 250 mg, permethrin 1250 rmg, for fleas,
should be prepared in a clean bath and any surface residues
ticks, sandflies, and mosquitoes on dogs 25 kg body-weight or more
removed at regular intervals. Excessively fouled dipwashes
Contra-indications. Puppies less than 7 weeks of age; cats
should be discarded and manufacturers may recommend
Warnings. Treated or in-contact anirmals rmust not be allowed to lick the
limitation of the number of sheep dipped to one for each 2
application site; keep cats away frorm treated dogs until application site is dry
litres of dipwash, after which the bath should be emptied
PML Nuvan Top (Novartis) UK
and refilled with fresh dipwash. Alternati vely, dip formula-
Aerosol spray, dichlorvos 0.2%, fenitrothion 0.8%, for fleas on dogs, cafs
tions may be bacteriostatic or bactericidal, or manufacturers
Contra-indications. Puppies less than 7 weeks of age, kitens less than 8
weeks of age, rursing bitches or queens
may advise addition of a disinfectant or bacteriostat to the
2.2.4 Sheep dips
fate are commonly used as disinfectants.
Dipping. To ensure a reasonable level of residual protec-
Dipping is the most common method of applying an
tion, sheep should have at least 3 weeks of wool growth
ectoparasiticide to sheep. In the UK, the amidine, amitraz
before dipping. Extremes of weather should be avoided and
(see section 2.2.1.1), the synthetic pyrethroids cypermethrin
dipping is inadvisable when it is raining or the sheep have
and flumethrin (see section 2.2.1.7), and the organophos-
wet fleeces. Also, sheep that are hot, tired, thirsty, or which
have recently been fed should be allowed time to stabilise
able as sheep dips; other organophosphorus compounds,
before dipping.
cyhalothrin, cyromazine, and diflubenzuron are also availa-
Where posible, lambs should be dipped separately from
ble as sheep dips in other countries. Some products may be
applied by shower, if so authorised, for the treatment of
lambs after dipping. It is recommended that rams and fat
some ectoparasitic infestations and are formulated for such
sheep are dipped separately. Care should be taken to reduce
use in some countries. Shower applications should not be
immersion shock. In addition, although it is necessary to
used for the treatment of mite infestations of sheep.
immerse the sheeps head while dipping (as indicated
In the UK, the sale and supply of sheep dips is regulated.
below) the animals head should not be restrained in that
Agricultural merchants must ensure that anyone purchasing
position because it may swallow or inhale the dipwash.
sheep dips (organophosphorus compounds and non-organo-
When dipping for blowfly larvae, keds, lice, mange mites,
phosphorus compounds) is the holder of a Certificate of
and ticks, the body of the sheep should be kept immersed
Competence in the Safe Use of Sheep Dips issued by the
until the fleece is completely saturated with the wash.
National Proficiency Tests Council. Alternatively, the pur-
Thirty seconds should be sufficient. For treatment of Pso-
chaser may be an employer of, or acting on behalf of, some-
roptes ovis (sheep scab) immersion for one minute is
 one who has such a certificate. To ensure good practice and
required to ensure full penetration of the ^scab' layer. The
continued availability of these dips, the RPSGB and RCVS
head should be immersed once or twice allowing the animal
have requested that pharmacists and veterinarians comply
to breathe between immersionis.
with the legislation when supplying clients and for their
Sheep should be allowed to drain in an open space, prefera-
own use. Pharmacists are advised to record or keep a copy
bly in the shade, but not in an enclosed building.
of the Certificate of Competenice so that it may be seen by
In Britain, The Sheep Scab Order I986 has beenl replaced
an inspector. Sheep dipping contirues to be regulated by
by The Sheep Scab Order 1997 (S1 1997/968), but existing
inspection by officials from the HSE and be subject to the
legislation for Northern Ireland, The Sheep Scab (Northern
requirements of the COSHH regulations.
Ireland) Order 1970, as amended, is still in place. This
deregulation of previous sheep scab control measures has
ensure the correct use of sheep dips, the most fundamental
led to an increase in the number of outbreaks of the disease.
being the accurate dilution of the concentrate for a particu-
Owing to the importance of this highly contagious disease,
lar dipping programme For this to be calculated, the capac-
manufacturers directions should be carefully followed to
ity of the dip bath must be known. The amount of dip
prevent residual infestation leading to new outbreaks. When
 prepared should not be more than is required for immediate
used in scab control, approved dips should not be used in
use.
The dipwash should be prepared according to the manufac-
prepared and replenished correctly.
turer s directions. The dipwash should be stirred thoroughly
Dimpylate (diazinon), cypermethrin, and doramectin, iver-
mectin, or moxidectin (by injection) are authorised for use
rupted. Replenishment should be made using volume drop
against sheep scab in the UK. Cypermethrin dips should be
or head count, carefully following the manufacturer s rec-
repeated after about 14 days. Cypermethrin affords no pro-
ommendations on concentration required. The dipwash 
 tection against reinfestation. Dimpylate (diazinon) provides
depletion per animal depends upon the fleece length. The
 a minimum of 3 weeks protection depending on the length
yolume of the dipwash should not fall below 75% of origi-
of fleece when treated. Two injections of ivermectin at anl
nal volume.
2.2.5 Fly repellents 219
injection of doramectin should be administered in order to
should ensure that they consult current literature. The fol-
treat the clinical signs of scab and to eliminate living mites.
lowing can only be considered as a guide. A boiler suit or
Storage. All dip concentrates should be stored in their
similar clothing made of strong cotton or similar material,
original containers, kept out of reach of children, and not
wellington boots, strong gauntlet length nitrile or PVC
mixed with other dip concentrates or washes unless other-
gloves, waterproof leggings (worn outside the wellingtons),
wise directed by the manufacturer.Dips are for external
a bib apron (or waterproof coat), a face shield, and a hat, are
treatment only.
 nlecessary for those procedures involving measuring out the
dip concentrate and mixing the bath for both the initial
Parasiticides may be toxic to animals and the operator.
charge and top up, plunging sheep, emptying the dip, and
Care should be taken with dosage and handling of the
disposal of wash. A boiler suit, wellingtons, waterproof
product. The recommendations for storage, use, and
trousers or leggings, and a bib apron, should provide suffi-
disposal of unused materials and containers should be
cient protection for putting sheep into the dip bath. It should
followed. For guidance and information, see:
not be necessary to handle the sheep immediately after dip-
MAFF/HSE. Code of practice for the safe use of
ping because they should be simply shepherded out of
pesticides on farms and other holdings. London:
draining pens on to pasture. All handling tasks should be
HMSO,1998.PB3528
done prior to dipping. All waterproof clothing should be
Controlof Substances
Hazardous to
Health
resistant to penetration by chemicals, should be washed
(COSHH) Regulations 2002
thoroughly after each days dipping, and kept in good
NOAH. Organophosphates for animal health. Brief-
condition.
inig Document 8. Middlesex: NOAH 2003
Overalls and wellingtons should be worn when handling
HSE, VMD, EA, SEPA. Sheep Dipping. Sudbury:
sheep during the weeks after dipping, and it must be
HSE Books, 1999. AS29 (rev2)
DARD. Code of good agricultural practice for the
remembered to wash hands afterwards. Again this should
only be taken as a guide for handling sheep after they have
prevention of pollution of water. Belfast: DARD,
returned to pasture and the detail on PPE for such opera-
2003.
tions is the subject of material associated with the NPTC
programme and supplementary literature. Precautions
Disposal. In the UK, the disposal of dips must be in
should be taken to minimise accidental splashing. For
accordance with an authorisation granted under
The
example, pen-gates should be remotely operated. Operator
Groundwater Regulations /998 (S1 1998/2746). Authorisa-
work stations should be provided with the means to treat
tions are granted by the Environment Agency (EA), the
people who may be injured or become unwell, particularly
Scottish Environment Protection Agency (SEPA), or the
in isolated locations, and with washing facilities, that is,
Environment and Heritage Service of the Department of the
clean water and soap available close to the dipping area.
Environment for Northern Ireland (EHS/DENI). Used
(For further details, readers are advised to consult appropri-
sheep dip may also be disposed of by a licensed waste dis-
ate literature.)
posal contractor.
Soakaways are not acceptable for disposal of spent sheep
2.2.5 Fly repellents
dips. Degradation treatments are available. Sodium hydrox-
ide based treatment is used for cypermethrin-containing
Citronella oil, diethyltoluamide, and dimethyl phthalate
dips. Dips containing dimpylate (diazinon) or flumethrin
are the active ingredients of fly repellents. These prepara-
can be hydrolysed with slaked lime (hydrated lime), and
tions are used mainly on horses and cattle to reduce Culi-
sodium hypochlorite 10% is used for propetamphos-con-
coides attack and prevent worry by ruisance flies such as
tai ning dips. Manufacturers should be contacted for further
Musca and Hydrotaea. Preparations containing permethrin
information. Degraded dipwash can be disposed of by a
are also effective against biting lice Bovicola equi (Dama-
reputable waste contractor or by spraying on suitable land
linia equi).
 The preparations are generally applied on the basis of need
used dip is not applied to areas where wild fowl are likely to
rather than anticipating challenge. Time of challenge may
graze; bird scarers should be used on land where used dip
vary from year to year, and with preceding and current
has been spread.
weather.
The Sheep Dip and Textiles Working Group of the Environ-
UK
mental Agency recommends that dips and pour-ons are not
 Many preparations are available. This is not a comprehen-
used on sheep within at least three months of shearing or
sive list.
slaughter. This is to minimise the amount of dip chemicals
being discharged to rivers via sewerage treatment works
Extra Tail (Kalium) UK
after processing of fleeces and skins.
Liquid, diethyltoluamide 10%, diethl phthalate 10%,citronella 3%,foc
Protection of operators. Detail conicerning Personal Pro-
horses
tective Equipment (PPE) is the subject of the National Pro-
CSL Fly Repellent Plus for Horses, Coopers (Schering-Plough) UK
ficienicy Tests Council (NPTC) certificate of competence
Liquid, citronellol 2%, permethrin (cis:trans 25:75) 1.05%, for horses
Withdrawal Periods. Should rot be used on horses intended for hurmar
and the advisory literature cited in this section. Readers
consurn ptior
220 Parasitic infections
Summer Fly Cream (Battle Hayward & Bower) UK
Defest 3 Months (Sherleys) UK
Cream, diethyltoluarmide 5%, for sheep
Aerosol spray, bioallethrin 0.1%, permethrin (cis:trans 25:75) 0.5%
Note. Not for use on anirmals
2.2.6 Environmental control of ectoparasites
Defest 12 Months (Sherleys) UK
To control the population of ectoparasites in the envir-
Aerosol spray, cyrormazine 3.11%, perrmethrin 0.64%
Note. Not for use on anirmals
onment several methods may be employed. Flea environ-
mental challenge may be controlled by use of insect growth
Defest Powder (Sherley's) UK
regulators (see section 2.2.2) or fipronil (see section
Dusting powder, orthoboric acid 64%
Note. Not for use on anirmals
2.2.1.6) that inhibit reproduction. Alternatively, chemicals
Duramitex (Harkers) UK
prevent larval development.
Liquid concentrate, rmalathion 60%. To be diluted before use
Dilute 140 mL in 9 litres water
These insecticides are used to eradicate crawling and flying
Note. Not foruse on anirnals
arthropods from an environment. They are employed in
poultry houses, intensive livestock houses, and refuse
Flea Bomb (Bob Martin) UK
 depots to control flies, in pigeon lofts and poultry houses to
 Permethrin smoke for horme use
I device per 3rm x 4 rm x 2rm roorm
control mites and beetles, and in the home mainly to control
Note. Not for use on animals
fleas. Arthropods breed in buildings and, in many cases,
Flea Kill Powder (Bob Martin) UK
infest the animal or bird only when the arthropods con-
Dusting powder,permethrin 0.5%
cerned need to feed. Therefore it is an advantage to mini-
Note. Not for use on anirmals
mise the number of pests in the environment before the
POM Frontline (Merial) UK
building is used to accommodate animals. Some insecti-
See section 2.2.1.6 for preparation details
cides can be used in buildings that would not be suitable for
direct application to the animal. Therefore, in general the
POM Frontline Combo Spot On Cat (Merial) UK
following preparations are not for use on animals. Regu-
Solution, 'spot-on', fipronil 10%, (S)-methoprene I 2%, for cats;, 0.5 mL
lar vacuum cleaning helps reduce the build-up of a flea pop-
POM Frontline Combo Spot On Dog (Merial) UK
ulation in a domestic environment.
Solution, 'spot-on', fipronil 10%, (S)-rmethoprene 12%, for dogs; 0.67 mL,
1 .34 rmL, 2.68 rmL, 4.02 mL
UK
Home Flea Fogger Plus (Bob Martin) UK
Many preparations are available. This is not a comprehen-
Total release gerosol, bioallerthrin 0.1%, rmethoprene 0.15%, perrmethrin
%50
sive list.
Note. Not foruse orn anirmals
4Fleas Household Spray (Johnson s) UK
Home Flea Guard Trigger Spray (Joh nson's) UK
Aeroso? spray, methoprene 0.095%, permethrin 0.395%, tetrarmethrin 0.09%
Solution, deltarmethrin 0.0 15%
Note. Not for use on anirmals
Note. Not for use on anirmals 
Acclaim Plus Flea Control (Ceva) UK
Home Flea Spray (Bob Martin) UK
Aeroso spray, rmethoprene 0.1 8%, permethrin 0.567%
Aerosol spray, permethrin 0.5%
Yote. Not for use orn anirmals
Note. Not for use on anirnals
Alfadex (Novartis) UK
Home Flea Spray Plus (Bob Martin) UK
Solution, pyrethrins 0.075%
Spray, bioallethrin 0.1%, RS-rmethoprene 0.1%, permethrin 0.5%
Note. Not for use on anirmals
Note. Not for use or anirmals
Y (suosuuor) Aeads ioasu ymH u, e
House Flea Spray (Johnson's) UK
Aerosol spray, methoprene 0.023%, permethrin 0.4%, tetrarmethrin 0.1 %
Aerosol spray, permethrin 0.39%, tetrarmethrin 0.09%
Note. Not for use ori arirmals
Note. Not for use on anirmals
Canac Extra Long Lasting Household Flea Spray (Sinclair) UK
IGR Xtra Gd House Flea Spray (Johnson s) UK
Aeroso? spray, methoprene 0.1 %, permethrin 0.2%, pyrethrins 0.05%
Aerosol spray, methoprene 0.095%, permethrin 0.395%,tetrarmethrin 0.09%
Note. Not for use on arnirmals
Note. Not for use on anirmals 
Canac Household Flea Powder (Sinclair) U/K
Indorex (Virbac) UK
Dusting powder, perrmethrin 0.5%
Aerosoi spray, permethrin 0.93%, pyriproxyfen 0.02%
Note. Not for use on anirmals
Note. Not for use on anirmals
Canac Household Flea Spray (Sinclair) UK
Aerosol spray, d-phenothrin 0.15%,tetrarrethrin 0.30%
POM Program (Novartis) U/K
Yote. Not for use orn anirmals
See section 2.2.2.I for preparatiorn details 
Canovel Pet Bedding & Household Spray (Pfizer) UK
Rug-de-Bug (Sherleys) UK
Aerosol spray, methoprene 0.03%, piperonyl butoxide 1 %, pyrethrins 0.1%
Powder, permethrin 0.5%
Note. Not for use ori anirmals
Note. Not for use on anirmals
Carpet Flea Guard (Johnson's) UK
Super Fly Spray (Sorex) UK
Powder, permethrin 0.5%; 200 g
Aerosol spray, phenothrin 0.25%, tetrarmethrin 0. 1%
Note. Not for use on anirmals
Note. Not for use on anirmals
221
3
Drugs acting on the
GASTRO-INTESTINAL SYSTEM
Contributors:
concentration (on which depends the rehydrating ability of
D H Grove-White BVSc, DBR, FRCVS
the fluid). Parenteral solutions should be isotonic with ade-
T S Mair BVSc, PhD, DEIM, DESTS, DipECEIM, MRCVS
quate alkalinising potential, for example Hartmann's
J W Simpson BVM&S, SDA, MPhil, MRCVS
D J Taylor MA, VetMB, PhD, DipECVPM, MRCVS
solution.
Food is usually withheld for 24 hours in dogs and cats and
3.1
Antidiarrhoeal drugs
oral electrolyte replacement solutions (see section 16.1.1)
3.2
 Drugs used in the treatment of bloat
are provided. This is followed by a low fat hypoallergenic
3.3
 Drugs used in the treatment of equine colic
diet with a highly digestible carbohydrate source and grad-
3.4
Anti-emetics
ual re-introduction of normal feed. There is debate about
3.5
Emetics
withholding food or milk during oral fluid therapy in calves
3.6
Laxatives
but it is suggested that witholding milk for more than 24
3.7
Modulators of intestinal motility
hours is contra-indicated in view of the villous atrophy that
3.8
Antacids and ulcer-healing drugs
such starvation may produce. Hyperosmotic oral solutions
3.9
Treatment of pancreatic disease
containing glutamine (Glutalyte, Norbrook) are available.
3.10 Drugs used in the treatment of hepatic disease
These limit the deleterious effects on gut structure and
 3.11 Oral hygiene preparations
energy balance caused by withholding food or milk for a
short period by minimising villous atrophy and assisting in
repair in addition to improving fluid and electrolyte absorp-
3.1 Antidiarrhoeal drugs
tion. In view of the hypertonicity, these solutions should not
be used in species in which they have not beenn evaluated
3.1.1 Adsorbents
Anti bacterials are also often employed for the treatment of
3.1.2 Antidiarrhoeal drugs that reduce motility
diarrhoea, but their use is controversial in some situations.
 3.1.3 Drugs used in the treatment of chronic diarrhoea
The routine use of antibacterials in the treatment of uniden-
tified diarrhoea is not warranted because many of the infec-
In diarrhoea there is a net failure of intestinal uptake of
tious agents involved are viral or protozoal. Where diseases
water and sodium, which is sufficient to overwhelm the
that result in diarrhoea (for example, salmonellosis in
compensatory capacity of the colon and results in the pro-
calves, watery mouth in lambs, post weaning enteritis and
duction of faeces with a higher than normal fluid content.
swine dysentery in pigs) are clearly identifiable clinically or
This net failure ini water and electrolyte uptake may be due
following post mortem examination of members of an
to hypersecretion, reduced absorption, or both. Its deleteri-
affected group, the group should be treated immediately
ous effects on the animal are primarily metabolic in nature
with the appropriate antimicrobial and fluid therapy as
with dehydration and acidosis being of major importance
necessary.
and ultimately life threatening.
 In some species, diseases causing diarrhoea, for example
The causati ve agents of diarrhoea are numerous and include
 swine dysentery, are well defined and treatment protocols
have been established. In species where diarrhoeal disease
viruses, bacteria, yeasts, protozoa, or endoparasites, inges-
is less well defined, antibacterials (see section 1.1) that are
tion of toxins, neoplasia, lymphangiectasia, villous atrophy,
poorly absorbed from the gastro-intestinal tract may be
chronic inflammatory bowel disease, granulomatous enteri-
given and can be included in compound preparations with
tis and colitis-X in horses, exocrine pancreatic insuffi-
adsorbents. Antibacterials, which are absorbed systemi-
cienicy, and stress. Diarrhoea may also result as a side-effect
cally, are particularly indicated in acute haemorrhagic diar-
of drug treatment.
rhoea and when there is evidence of sepsis because this
Treatment of diarrhoea should be directed at the cause but
suggests bacterial invasion of the intestinal mucosa. Anti-
due to the multi-factorial aetiology of the condition, the
bacterials are also indicated if a known pathogen is cultured
causative agent(s) cannot always be ascertained; this is
from the faeces, when biopsy shows entero-adherent bacte-
especially the case for acute diarrhoea in individual ani-
ria, or in antibiotic responsive diarrhoea in dogs.
mals. Symptomatic treatment is therefore important and
Treatment should be considered if the condition is life
includes bowel rest and correction of fluid, electrolyte, and
acid-base disturbances.
nursing cannot be given. Animals with salmonellosis or
Fluid therapy, oral or parenteral, is of prime importance. In
Campyfobacter infection may remain carriers following
the majority of patients oral fluids will suffice but in severe
treatment and antimicrobial resistance may be selected in
cases, parenteral fluids will be required. Consideration
pathogens or normal flora and plasmid-mediated transfera-
should be given to the choice of oral fluid used especially
ble multiple drug resistance encouraged where antimicrobi-
with regard to the alkalinising potential and sodium
als are given in inappropriate circumstances. Potential toxic
222Gastro-intestinal system
effects such as reduced lactase acti vity have beern seen with
GSL Diarrhoea Tablets (Johnson's) UK
oral neomycin or tetracycline therapy. Prolonged antibacte-
Fablets, bisrmuth carbonate 30 rmg, calciurm carbonate 240 mg, for dogs, cats
Contra-indications. Puppies or kittens less than I2 weeks of age
rial treatment for diarrhoea may result in alteration of the
Dose. By mouth.
gastro-intestinal flora, secondary bacterial proliferation, and
Dogs: I4 tablets daily (depending on body-weight)
ex acerbation of clinical signs.
Cats: -I tablet rwice daily
Ruminal extract, probiotics, and yoghurt have been used to
GSL Forgastrin (Arnolds) UK
re-establish gastro-intestinal microbes after antibacterial
Oral powder, for addition to feed or to prepare an oral suspension, attapulgite
therapy.
730 mg/g, bone charcoal 270 mg/g, for catfle, pigs
Vaccines (see Chapter 18) are available for the prevention
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
period nil
of diarrhoea due to bacteria such as E. coli, Satmonella spp.,
Dose. Bymouth.
and Clostridium spp. and viral infections including rotavi-
Horses+ : 3-4 tablespoonfuls (45-60 g) 3 tirmes daily
rus, panleucopenia, and parvovirus.
Catle: 34 tablespoonfuls (45-60 g) 3 tirmes daily
calves: I2 tablespoonfuls (1 530 g) 3 tirmes daily
Pigs: 23 5-mL spoonfuls (6 10 g) 3 tirmes daily; piglets: dissolve three 5-
3.1.1 Adsorbents
 rmL spoonfuls (10 g) in 60 mL water. Administer 5 rmL daily
Adsorbents, given by mouth, are claimed to adsorb toxins
POM Kaobiotic Tablets (Pfizer) UK
Tablets, scored, neomycin (as sulfate)5.68 mg, kaolin 729 mg, for dogs, cs
from the gastro-intestinal tract and thereby may prevent irri-
Dose. Dogs, cats: by mowih, I tablet/4 kg daily in divided doses
tation and erosion of the mucosa. They may also adsorb
GSL Kaogel VP (Pfizer) UK
Oral suspension, light kaolin 200 mg/mL, pectin 4.3 rmg/mL, for dogs, cafs
(see Drug Interactions - Appendix 1). Adsorbents also
Dose.Bymowth.
increase the bulk of the faeces. However, they have little or
Horses+: I tmL/kg daily
no effect on fluid or electrolyte losses and their value is
Dogs, cats: 0.5-1 mL/kg daily in 34 divided doses
doubtful.
P Pepto-Bismol (Proctor &Gamble) UK
Bismuth salts, charcoal (see also Treatment of poisoning),
Ora suspension, bisrmuth subsalicylate 1 7.52 mg/mL
zinc oxide, and kaolin are available in single ingredient
Dose. By mouth
Horses: 20 mg/kg (I mL/kg) 2-3 times daily
products, or compound preparations with antacids and elec-
Dogs, cats: 0.1-1.0 rmg/kg three tirmes daily
trolytes for the treatment of non-specific diarrhoea. Kaolin
MFS Pigzin (DSM) U/K
does not adsorb E. cofi enterotoxins and therefore has lim-
Oral powder, zinc oxide 100%, for pigs
ited use in neonatal diarrhoea and may even be contra-indi-
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter 28 days
cated. Bismuth salts and activated charcoal may adsorb
Dose. Pigs: 3.l kg/tonne feed daily for up to I4 days
these toxins. Some absorption of salicylate will occur from
administration of bismuth salicylate; care should be taken
3.1.2 Antidiarrhoeal drugs that reduce
with administration to cats (see Prescri bing for cats).
motility
Ispaghula husk and sterculia (see section 3.6.2) are used in
the treatment of diarrhoea because of their ability to absorb
The use of drugs to stimulate or reduce intestinal motility in
water and increase faecal mass. Adequate fluid intake
patients with diarrhoea is controversial. The diarrhoea may
should be maintained.
be accompanied by hypomotility rather than hypermotility.
In patients with diarrhoea due to entero-invasive bacteria,
ADSORBENTS
 the diarrhoea may be considered as a protective response in
eliminating pathogens and attermpts to delay passage of gut
UK
contents may be contra-indicated because the toxins remain
Indications. Nor-specific diarrhoea
in the lumen for a prolonged period and the severity of the
Contra-indications. Concurrent oral treatment
condition is increased. Some authorities indicate that drugs
 Dose. See preparation details
that reduce motility are contra-indicated for the treatment of
GSL BCK (Fort Dodge) UK
diarrhoea due to infection with invasive bacteria.
Oral granules, by addition to feed, bisrmuth subnitrate 39.2 rmg/g, calciurm
Intestinal transit time is determined by the ratio between
peristalsis and segmentation contractions. Antimuscarinics
Dose. Dogs, cufs: by mouth, I-3 heaped 5-mL spoonfuls (6-18 g) 2-3
(anticholinergics) reduce both peristalsis and segmental
tirnes daily
contractions causing an open tube effect and may increase
GSL Diarrhoea Tablets (Bob Martin) UK
the severity of diarrhoea. Opioids are more effective for the
Tableis, bisrmuth carbonate 32.5 mg, catechu powder 65 mg, prepared chalk
treatment of diarrhoea because they reduce intestinal pro-
210 mg,hubarb powder l6.5 mg,fordogs
 pulsive activity and increase segmental contractions and
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, I-3 tablets (depending on body-weight) 34 tirmes 
daily
therefore prolong intestinal transit time.
Diphenoxylate, codeine, and loperamide are opioid deriv-
GSL Diarrhoea Tablets (Genitrix) UK
atives that are used in the treatment of mon-specific acute
Tableis, bisrmuth carbonate 32.5 mg, catechu powder 65 mg, prepared chalk
 and chronic diarrhoea. Diphenoxylate is well absorbed from
210 mg, rhubarb powder 16.5 mg, for dogs more than 12 weeks of age
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, I3 tablets (depending on body-weight) 34 tirmes
-ed auo si aped snem on pugs-ns sn
daily for up to 48 hours
tially absorbed. Both drugs are metabolised in the liver.
3.1 Antidiarrhoeal drugs 223
Loperamide may be of particular value in hypersecretory
P Arret (J&J MSD) UK
diarrhoea (because it has been shown in humans to inhibit
Capsules, loperamide hydrochloride 2 rmg
cholera toxin induced hypersecretion). Diphenoxylate and
P Diocalm Ultra (SSL International) UK
loperamide should be used with care in cats because these
Capsules, loperarmide hydrochloride 2 mg
drugs may cause excitability with overdose in this species.
POM H Imodium (Jarssen-Cilag) UK
In dogs these drugs may be sedative with loperamide being
Capsules, loperarmide hydrochloride 2 mg
less so than diphenoxylate. Loperamide may be used in
Syrup, loperarmide hydrochloride 200 rmicrograrm s/mL
horses. Diphenoxylate is available in combination with a
Note. P if authorised and labelled for treatrment of acute diarrhoea
low dose of atropine (co-phenotrope). However, the atro-
pine in this combination product has no pharmacological
3.1.3 Drugs used in the treatment of chronic
effect on the gut.
diarrhoea
CODEINE PHOSPHATE
Chronic diarrhoea may be caused by dietary imbalance,
small intestinal disease (for example, villous atrophy,
UK
inflammatory bowel disease, lymphangiectasia, and antibi-
Indications. Non-specific diarrhoea; nor-productive cough
otic responsive diarrhoea), parasitism, ex ocrine panicreatic
(see section 5.4); analgesia (see section 6.3)
insufficiency (see section 3.9), colitis, or occur as a result of
Contra-indications. Respiratory conditions
with excess
other systemic disease.
airway secretion, conditions causing CNS depression,
Sulfasalazine is used in the management of chronic colitis
hepatic impairment
in dogs and cats. Colonic bacteria split the compound into
Side-effects. Sedation, ataxia, respiratory depression
5-aminosalicylate and sulfapyridine. The aminosalicylate
Dose. Non-specific diarrhoea, by mouth.
becomes concentrated in the colonic wall where it exerts its
Horses: 1-3 mg/kg 3 times daily
anti-inflammatory effect. The active component of mesala-
Dogs: 0.5-2.0 mg/kg twice daily
zine and olsalazine is 5-aminosalicylate. The most com-
mon side-effects of sulfasalazine are anorexia, vomiting,
See section 5.5 for preparatior details
and diarrhoea. Keratoconjunctivitis sicca may occur with
proloniged use and is often irreversible. This side-effect has
DIPHENOXYLATE with ATROPINE
been attributed primarily to the sulfapyridine moiety, but is
(Co-phenotrope:.
preparations
of
diphenoxylate
hydrochloride and atropine sulfate in the proportions, by
occasionally seen with drugs containing 5-aminosalicylate
weight, 100 parts to 1 part respectively)
only. Care should be taken with administration to cats (see
Prescribing for cats).
UK
Corticosteroids can be used in the control of inflammatory
Indications. Non-specific diarrhoea
bowel disease including lymphocytic-plasmacytic or eosin-
Side-effects. Sedatiorn, constipation
ophilic infiltrates of the small or large bowel in horses,
Warnings. Care on admiristration to cats, see Prescribing
dogs, and cats. Prednisolone (see section 7.2.1) is givenn at
for cats
a dose of 1 to 2 mg/kg once or twice daily for up to 1
Dose. Expressed as diphenoxylate, by mouth.
month, and reduced to the lowest effective dose adminis-
Dogs: 50-100 micrograms/kg (0.05-0.1 mg/kg) 2-3 times
tered on alternate days in dogs. In cats, an initial dose of 1
daily
to 4 mg/kg once or twice daily is used. In horses, pred-
Cats: 50 micrograms/kg (0.05 mg/kg) daily, use with care
nisolone may be used for chronic granulomatous enteritis at
POM Lomotil (Goldshield)UK
a dose of 0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg: dexamethasone, at a dose of
20-200 micrograms/kg once daily given by mouth, is also
Fablets, diphenoxylate hydrochloride 2.5 mg, atropine sulfate 25 rmicrograrms
appropriate. Systemically administered dexamethasone is
LOPERAMIDE HYDROCHLORIDE
more effective than orally administered dexamethasone or
predmisolone in horses with inflammatory bowel disease
UK
and malabsorption sy ndrome.
Indications. Non-specific diarrhoea
NSAIDs (see section 10.1) such as flunixin may be of value
Side-effects. Sedation, constipation
in ameliorating gastro-intestinal inflammation and reducing
Warnings. Care on administration to cats, see Prescribing
hypersecretion in neonatal calf diarrhoea. NSAIDs should
for cats
not be used in hypovolaemic patients due to the risk of
Dose. By mouth.
inducing renal failure. Flunixin meglumine at a low 'anti-
Horses: 100- 200 micrograms/kg 4 times daily
endotoxic’ dose+ (250 micrograms/kg 3 times daily by
Dogs: 40-200 micrograms/kg (0.04-0.2 mg/kg) 2-3 times
intravenous injection) is helpful in horses affected by acute
daily
colitis complicated by endotoxaemia.
Cats: 40-100 micrograms/kg (0.04-0.1 mg/kg) twice daily
Antibacterials may be required to control antibiotic
POM Loperamide (Non-proprietary) UK
responsi ve diarrhoea (ARD) in dogs. Oxytetracycline (10 to
20 mg/kg 3 times daily by mouth+) is the drug of first
Capsules, loperarmide hydrochloride 2 mg
Note. P if authorised and labelled for treatrment of acute diarrhoea
choice. If response is inadequate, metronidazole (20 mg/kg
224Gastro-intestimal system
twice daily by mouth +) or tylosin (20 mg/kg twice daily by
Warnings. Monitor Schirmer tear test at 1-3 month inter-
mouth+) can be used. Treatment is given for at least 4
vals
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 10-20 mg/kg twice daily
inl some dogs. Metronidazole may also have ann effect on
POM Dipentum (Celtech) UK
cell-mediated immunity and has been used as adjunctive
Tablets, scored, olsalazine sodiurn 500 mg
treatment in refractory inflammatory bowel disease in dogs
Capsules, olsalazine sodiurm 250 rmg
and cats and in colitis. Metronidazole is indicated in the
treatment of clostridial colitis in horses (that are not
SULFASALAZINE
intended for human consumption).
(Sulphasalazine)
Azathioprine (see section 13.2) is used in the management
of severe inflammatory bowel disease. It is administered as
UK
anl adjunct to corticosteroids or to enable a reduction in the
Indications. Treatment of chronic colitis and maintenance
dosage of corticosteroids where side-effects are unaccepta-
of remission
ble. In dogs, ann initial dose of 2 mg/kg once daily is given
Side-effects. Prolonged administration may cause kerato-
0'I o so on ssop paede Alenpe e Aq pmoloy ynou Aq
conjunctivitis sicca; diarrhoea may worsen at higher
mg/kg on alternate days. Corticosteroids and azathioprine
dosages
ate given on alternate days. The white blood cell counts
Warnings.
should be monitored when the drug is given daily. Azathio-
initervals
prine must not be used in cats.
Dose. By mouth.
Dietetic pet foods (see section 16.8) may also assist in the
 Dogs: 15-30 mg/kg 3 times daily until response then reduce
management of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) in dogs
to lowest effecti ve maintenanice dose
and cats. Patients with mild to moderate chronic idiopathic
Cats : 10-20 mg/kg once daily
colitis may respond to dietary management alone, using a
POM H Sulfasalazine (Non-proprietary) UK
highly digestible diet containing a selected protein source
Tablets, sulfasalazine 500 mg
that the animal has not beenn exposed to recently. Some ani-
POM H Salazopyrin (Pharmacia) UK
mals may benefit from the use of diets containing either a
Tablets, scored, sulfasalazine 500 mg
fermentable or non-fermentable fibre source. Patients with
Ora? suspension, sulfasalazine 50 mg/mL
ARD
mayrespondtodiets containing
fructo-
oli gosaccharides.
3.2 Drugs used in the treatment of
MESALAZINE
bloat
UK
Acute ruminal distension can result in compromise of respi-
Indications. Treatment of chronic colitis and maintenance
ratory and cardiovascular function, and requires urgent
of remission
treatment. In dogs, gastric dilatation/torsion is a surgical
Contra-indications. Renal impairment
emergency with adjunctive therapy given as necessary. In
Side-effects. Prolonged administration may cause kerato-
ruminants, medical treatment, with or without surgical
conjuncti vitis sicca although less commonly than sulfasala-
intervention, may be effective depending on the type of
zine; diarrhoea may worsen at higher dosages
bloat.
Warnings. Monitor Schirmer tear test at 1-3 month
 Ruminal tympany or bloat is the accumulation of gas in the
intervals
rumen in a stable foam (frothy bloat) or as free gas. In the
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 10-20 mg/kg twice daily
majority of cases, free gas bloat is secondary to other dis-
POM Asacol MR (Proctor & Gamble Pharm.) UK
eases such as oesophagitis, oesophageal foreign body or
Tablets, e/c, mesalazine 400 rmg
other oesophageal obstruction, vagal nerve lesions, rumini-
tis, tetanus, or ruminal acidosis. Frothy bloat is dietary in
POM Ipocol (Sandoz) UK
Tablets, e/c, mesalazine 400 rmg
diets, which contain foam-forming agents, are ingested. In
POM Salofalk (Provalis) UK
frothy bloat a stable foam is produced which traps the gases
Fabtets, e/c,rmesalazine 250 rmg
 of fermentation. In addition, dietary lipids, which constitute
part of the normal anti-bloat system, are sequestered in the
OLSALAZINE SODIUM
stable foam. Small gas bubbles are unable to coalesce
UK
thereby preventing their removal by eructation. The produc-
Indications. Treatment of chronic colitis and maintenance
tion of insufficient saliva, which is alkaline, may also exac.
of remission
erbate frothy bloat.
Contra-indications. Renal impairment
Treatment of free gas bloat includes ruminal intubation or
Side-effects. Prolonged administratior may cause kerato-
trocharisation to allow the release of gas. Medical treatment
conjunctivitis
sicca
although
less
commonly
thari
of frothy bloat requires the administration of an antifoaming
sulfasalazine
agent to break down the stable foam. Oils such as sunflower
3.3 Drugs used in the treatment of equine colic 225
oil or arachis oil (peanut oil) are given via stomach tube at a
Dose. Cafle: treatrment, (up to 227 kg body-weight) 30 mL diluted in 500
  g  o     o  
mL water given as oral solution; (>227 kg body-weight) 60 mL diluted irn
 500 mL water givern as oral solution
ally, turpentine oil and linseed oil have been used to treat
Treatrment, severe cases, (up to 227 kg body-weight) 30 mL diluted in 4.5
 bloat and may still play a role in cases induced by grain
litres water given by stormach mube; (>227 kg body-weight) 60 mL dilured in
overload. Turpentine oil is readily absorbed from the gas-
4.5 litres water given by storm ach hube 
tro-intestinal tract and skin and may taint meat and milk.
PML Bloat Guard Premix (Agrirmin)
Absorption may lead to clinical signs of renal and gastro-
Premix, poloxalene 530 mg/g,for catle
intestinal toxicity including colic, diarrhoea, incoordina-
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 3 days, rmilk withdrawal period nil 
Dose.Catepeventonbyanfeed,22mgofploxalene/kg
tion, and excitement, followed by coma. Fish oils stabilise
body-weight daily given 2-3 days before and throughout period of risk. May
the foam and are contra-indicated in the treatment of frothy
be increased to 44 mg of poloxalene/kg if high risk of bloat developing
bloat.
Silicones such as dimeticone are used in the treatment of
TURPENTINE OIL
frothy bloat. They act as synthetic lipids, raising the surface
UK
alternative adsorption site for the amphiphilic surface-ten-
Indications. Frothy bloat, in combination with linseed oil
sion lowering molecules, and hence cause the bubbles to
Warnings. May taint meat and milk; see notes above
coalesce. Poloxalene is a nonionic surfactant used for the
Dose. Cattle: 15-60 mL
treatment and prevention of frothy bloat. It acts partly by
Sheep: 3-15 mL
killing ruminal ciliates, but mostly by releasing dietary lip-
ids from their binding to the bloat foam.
3.3 Drugs used in the treatment of
Sodium bicarbonate may also be used for the treatment of
frothy bloat at a dose of 150 to 200 g dissolved in one litre
equine colic
of water given via stomach tube to cause alkalinosis of
Tuminal contents. Caution should be exercised because fur-
Colic describes the clinical sign of abdominal pain, particu
larly in horses. The most frequent causes of colic signs are
ther gas production may occur.
The prevention and control of bloat includes limited pasture
intestinal problems. The aetiology of these is very diverse
access, avoiding finely milled feeds, and maintaining a high
and in many cases poorly understood. Recognised factors
fibre content in the diet. Antifoaming substances may be
are dietary changes, overfeeding, sand ingestion, and para-
included in the feed, drinking water, or sprayed on the
sites including strongyles, ascarids, and tapeworms. Stress,
changes in stabling and levels of activity, dental problems,
crops.
certain feeds, and climatic changes have also been impli-
poo pe  sy ui e d on ssooe o eo
quality hay are factors known to decrease the incidence of
DIMETICONE
colic. Differential diagnoses include exertional rhabdomy-
(Dimethicone)
olysis, lami nitis, and peritonitis.
A careful clinical evaluation is required to determine
UK
whether the horse has a simple, non-strangulating obstruc-
Indications. Frothy bloat
tion that will respond to medical therapy or a strangulating
GSL Birp (Arnolds)
obstruction that is already causing, or has the potential to
Oral liquid, dimeticone ermulsion BVetC 65, for catle
cause, intestinal infarction and will require surgery. Rectal
Dose. Cattle: by mouth,100 mL
examination and abdominal ultrasonography will help to
reach a definitive diagnosis in some cases. A thorough
assessment of the cardiovascular parameters is vital for
LINSEED OIL
detection of developing endotoxaemia.
Following initial treatment, the patient should be re-evalu-
UK
ated after two hours and sooner if the animal's condition
Indications. Frothy bloat, in combination with turpentine
 deteriorates. Surgical cases should be referred promptly. If
oil
sedation is necessary for transport, xylazine or romifidine
Dose. Cattle: 0.6-1.2 litres
(see section 6.1.3) are suitable. The NSAID, flunixin meg-
Sheep: 100-250 mL
lumine, decreases endotoxic shock and does not reduce gas-
tro-intestinal motility. It is effective for up to 8 hours.
POLOXALENE
Therefore flunixin meglumine should only be used in the
colic case once a treatment plan has been decided upon
UK
because this drug may mask clinical signs until it is too late
Indications. Treatment and prevention of frothy bloat
for successful surgery. Acepromazine is contra-indicated
for patients with colic because of its hypotensive properties.
PML Bloat Guard Drench (Agrimin) UK
Oral liquid, poloxalee 833 mg/mL, for catle.To be diluted before use
Analgesics are required for treatment. These should have
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 3 days, rmilk 24 hours 
minimal adverse effects on the cardiovascular system and,
226 Gastro-intestimal system
except in spasmodic colic, on gastro-intestinal motility.
ascertained before treatment is commenced. If vomiting is
NSAIDs may be used and phenylbutazone combined with
prolonged, dehydration, hypokalaemia, and acidosis or
ramifenazone (Tomanol) is effective without having signifi-
 alkalosis may occur, and replacement fluids and electrolytes
cant adverse effects. Opioid analgesics are employed (see
may be riecessary (see 16.1.2).
section 6.3). Butorphanol provides more consistent results
than methadone or pethidine and has minimal cardiovascu-
3.4.1 Drugs used in the treatment of non-
lar effects at lower dosages. Butorphanol has been shown to
decrease propulsive bowel motility when gi ven in repeated
specific vomiting
doses. Xylazine, detomidine, and romifidine are effective
      
although quite short acting: detomidine being of greater
due to stimulation of a variety of receptors. Anti-emetic
duration of action. These agents reduce intestinal motility
therapy in patients with gastro-intestinal disease is therefore
and cause a transient fall in blood pressure. Care should be
 best initiated with a broad-spectrum anti-emetic drug.
taken to avoid overmedication. Whenever gastric distension
H,-receptor histamine antagonists such as acepromazine,
is suspected, decompression by nasogastric intubation is
chlorpromazine and prochlorperazine are often used ini-
essential.
tially in undiagnosed vomiting because they have a broad
Spasmodic colic is best treated with antispasmodics such
spectrum of anti-emetic activity, acting at both the chemo-
as Buscopan Compositum, which contains hyoscine butyl-
receptor trigger zone and the vomiting centre. Hypotension
bromi de and metamizole (see section 3.7).
and sedation are potential side-effects and use of phenothi-
Patients with pelvic flexure impactions should be given
azines should be avoided in hypovolaemic animals.
lubricant laxatives such as liquid paraffin (see section
Metoclopramide is a dopamine D, and 5HT, receptor
3.6.1) 4 litres/450 kg body-weight. Concurrent analgesia is
antagonist, which acts at both the chemoreceptor trigger
usually required because oils may take 24 hours or longer to
zone and in the enteric nervous system. It restores normal
be effective. Ispaghula or psyllium (see section 3.6.2) may
gastroduodenal motility and is especially useful to facilitate
be useful agents for the treatment of sand impaction in
horses.
metoclopramide is given by constant rate intravenous infu-
 In all cases of colic, adequate fluid therapy (see section
sion rather than as intravenous bolus injections. Metoclo-
16.1.2), given intravenously, should be administered as nec-
pramide has no prokinetic activity on the distal small
essary. Horses with severe hypovolaemia may be treated
intestine or colon. It should not be used if there is suspicion
of gastric or intestinal foreign body.
4 to 6 mL/kg givenl over 15 minutes. This must be followed
Metoclopramide may cause restlessness, excitement, and
with 15 to 20 litres of intravenous isotonic fluids within 2
behavioural disturbances in certain individuals at the usual
hours until the horse is stabilised. Hypertonic saline is con-
dose. In these dogs and cats an alternative anti-ermetic
tra-indicated if there is impaired renal function or in horses
should be used such as domperidone, which acts in a simi-
suffering from ex haustion or water deprivation.
lar manner to metoclopramide but without causing CNS
Since most risk factors for colic are unproven, it is difficult
side-effects.
Ranitidine (see section 3.8.2), although primarily an H,
ment for both roundworm and tapeworm should be consid-
receptor histamine antagonist, does have some gastric pro-
ered. It is important to ensure that the horse is receiving
kinetic activity.
appropriate feeds in a regular routine and that the animal
Vomiting due to uraemia has both central and peripheral
components. The central component is associated with acti-
and potential stress problems such as changes in stable or
vation of the chemoreceptor trigger zone and is best treated
exercise routine may be helpful.
with metoclopramide. The peripheral component is associ-
ated with uraemic gastritis and is treated with H,-receptor
antagonists such as cimetidine (see section 3.8.2) at a dose
3.4 Anti-emetics
of 2.5 to 5.0 mg/kg 2 to 3 times daily by mouth and gastro-
protectants for example sucralfate (see section 3.8.2) 0.25
do      sa 
to 1.0 g 3 times daily in dogs or 250 mg 2 to 3 times daily in
vomiting
cats.
3.4.2 Drugs used in the prevention of motion sickness
Vomiting follows stimulation of the vomiting centre in the
CHLORPROMAZINE HYDROCHLORIDE
medulla and the closely associated chemoreceptor trigger
zone, which is senisitive to many drugs and to certain meta-
UK
bolic disturbances. Stimulation of the vomiting centre also
 Indications. Gastritis; prevention of motion sickness
occurs following activation of other areas such as the ves-
Contra-indications. Rernal or hepatic impairment
tibular apparatus of the ear as in motion sickness. Vomiting
Side-effects. May cause drowsiness, hypotenision
may be due to systemic or metabolic disorders in addition to
Warnings. Owing to the risk of contact sensitisation, oper-
gastro-intestinal disease; the causative agent should be
ators should avoid direct contact with chlorpromazine; tab-
3.4 Anti-emetics 227
lets should not be crushed and solutions should be handled
POM Maxolon (Shire)UK
with care.
Fablets, rmetocloprarmide 5 rmg, 10 rmg
Dose. Dogs, cats.
Syrup, metocloprarmide hydrochloride I mg/mL
Paediat ric liquid, rmetocloprarmnide hydrochloride I rmg/mL
Motion sickness, by mouth, 0.5- 1.0 mg/kg
injection, rmetoclopramide 5 rmg/mL
Gastritis, by subcutaneous injection, 200-400 micrograms/
POM  Maxolon High Dose (Shire) UK
kg 3 times daily
Intravenous infusion, rmetocloprarmide hydrochloride 5 mg/mL. For dilution
by intravenous injection, 50 micrograms/kg 3-4 times daily
ard use as ar irtraverous infusior
POM) Chlorpromazine (Non-proprietary) UK
Tablei5, coated, chlorpromazine hydrochloride 10 mg, 25 mg, 50 mg, 100 rmg
Oral solution, chlorprormazine hydrochloride 5 mg/mL, 20 rmg/mL
PROCHLORPERAZINE
Injection, chlorprormazine hydrochloride 25 mg/mL
POMH Largactil (Hawgcreen) UK
UK
Tablets, f/c, chlorprormazine hydrochloride 10 mg, 25 mg, 50 rmg, 100 mg
Indications. Gastritis; prevention of motion sickness
Syrup, chlorprormazine hydrochloride 5 rmg/mL, 20 rmg/mL
Side-effects. May cause drowsiness,hypotension
fnjection, chlorprormazine hydrochloride 25 rmg/mL
Dose. Dogs, cats.
Motion sickness, by mouth, up to 500 micrograms/kg
DOMPERIDONE
Gastritis, by intramuscular (preferred) injection,100-500
micrograms/kg 3-4 times daily
UK
Indications. Vomiting due to gastritis
by intravenous injection, 50 micrograms/kg 3-4 times daily
Contra-indications. Gastric outlet obstruction
POM  Prochlorperazine (Non-proprietary) UK
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 2-5 mg/animal 2-3 times daily
Tableis, prochlorperazine maleate 5 mg
POM Domperidone (Non-proprietary) UK
POM Stemetil (Castlermead) UK
Tabieis, domperidone (as maleate) 10 rmg
Tableis, prochlorperazine rmaleate 5 mg, 25 mg
Syrup, prochlorperazine rmesilate I rmg/mL
POM Motilium (Sanofi-Synthelabo) UK
Injection, prochlorperazine mesilate 12.5 mg/mL
Tableis, f/c, dormperidore (as maleate) 10 rmg
Oral suspension, domperidone I mg/mL
3.4.2 Drugs used in the prevention of motion
sickness
METOCLOPRAMIDEHYDROCHLORIDE
Motion sickness is believed to arise from stimulation of the
labyrinthine structures in the inner eat.
UK
In dogs, motion sickness may be treated with H,-histamin-
Indications. Vomiting due to gastritis, oesophageal reflux;
ergic antagonists such as diphenhydramine. The antihista-
ruminal atony, post-operative ileus; see notes above
mine cyclizine acts directly on the neural pathways arising
Contra-indications. Gastric outlet obstruction
in the vestibular apparatus. The action of cyclizine may last
Side-effects. Occasional transient incoordination, excite-
for 8 to 12 hours.
ment, behavioural disturbances
Acepromazine (see section 6.1.1), chlorpromazine (see
Warnings. Manufacturer does not recommend administra-
section 3.4. 1), and prochlorperazine (see section 3.4.1) are
tion to animals in early stages of pregnancy; caution with
phenothiazine derivatives. They are broad-spectrum anti-
administration to epileptics; Drug Interactions
-see
emetics, which can also be used because their sedative
Appendix 1
properties may be of additional benefit in controlling
Dose.
motion sickness. In cats, chlorpromazine appears to be the
Horses: by intravenous infusion, 40 micrograms/kg per
more effective drug. Acepromazine 0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg by
hour
mouth, 15 to 30 minutes before a light meal, is used for pre-
Cattle: initial dose by intravenous injection, 0.5-1.0 mg/kg
venting motion sickness in dogs and cats. Acepromazine is
then by intramuscufar injection, 0.5- 1.0 mg/kg twice daily
effective for up to 24 hours.
(maximum 2 doses by intramuscular injection)
catves: by intravenous injection,0.5-1.0 mg/kg
CYCLIZINE
Dogs, cats: by mouth or by subcutaneous, intramuscular, or
intravenous injection, 0.5- 1.0 mg/kg daily
UK
by intravenous infusion, 1-2 mg/kg daily
Indications. Prevention of motion sickness
may cause excitement in certain individuals, see notes
Side-effects. May cause drowsiness
above
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 25- 100 mg daily in divided doses
by intramuscular injection,4mg/kg
POMH Metoclopramide (Non-proprietary) UK
Tableis, rmetocloprarmide 10 mg
valoid (CeNeS) UK
Oral solution, rmetocloprarmide hydrochloride I mg/mL
P Tableis, scored, cyclizine hydrochloride 50 mg
Injection, rmetocloprarmide 5 mg/mL
POM injection, cyclizine lactate 50 rmg/mL
228  Gastro-intestinal system
DIPHENHYDRAMINE
Laxatives loosen the bowel contents and induce defecation.
Drugs that have a stimulant effect on the intestines are
UK
known as purgatives or cathartics. The degree of intestinal
Indications. Prevention of motion sickness
stimulation is usually dose related.
Dose. Dogs. by mouth, 2-4 mg/kg 3 times daily
See sectior 14.2.3 for preparation details
3.6.1 Lubricant laxatives
Lubricant laxatives soften and lubricate the faecal mass,
3.5 Emetics
which allows expulsion. Liquid paraffin and white soft
paraffin are commonly used and are thought generally
Vomiting is a protective reflex that occurs effectively only
safe, although prolonged use may cause problems. Lubri-
in certain species. True emesis is not possible in horses,
cant laxatives line the mucosal surface and may inhibit the
ruminants, rabbits, and rodents. Regurgitation may occur in
absorption of fat-soluble vitamins, other nutrients, or drugs.
these species but is indicative of severe illness.
n cn pe Aeu uyeied jo sunoue heus go uondosy
In other species emesis may be induced, if the animal has
lomatous lesions in the intestinal wall and the liver. Paraf-
ingested a poisonous or undesirable substance within the
fins are not effective for chronic constipation or severe
previous 1 to 2 hours, in order to empty the stomach and so
impactions.
mi nimise further absorption of toxin. See also Treatment of
Liquid paraffin may be used in the treatment of equine colic
poisoning.
due to impaction. When liquid paraffin is administered to
Ipecacuanha has an iritant action on the gastro-intestinal
ruminants it should be mixed with ginger or mustard
  o  si s n s    n
(except when given by stomach tube) in order to reduce the
However, its efficacy is unpredictable. In cases of poison-
risk of inhalation. Oral dosing in horses is contra-indicated.
ing, ipecacuanha syrup should not be used in conjunction
Liquid paraffin may be mixed with food or sugar for admin-
with activated charcoal because the effectiveness of the
istration to dogs and cats.
charcoal is reduced. Apomorphine is also used to induce
emesis in cases of poisoning.
PARAFFINS
Although not generally recommended, in an emergency
information on emesis may be given to the owner. Crystal-
UK
Indications. Constipation; “fur-balls'
line washing soda (sodium carbonate), salt (sodium chlo-
Contra-indications. Prolonged use especially in young
ride), or mustard deposited over the back of the tongue and
swallowed can cause vomiting.
animals
Xylazine (see section 6.1.3) 200 micrograms/kg+ by intra-
Side-effects. Reduced absorption of nutrients; granuloma-
venous injection has been used in dogs and cats for induc-
tous lesions may develop with prolonged use
ing emesis; administration at this dose should not cause
bronchial tree may lead to lipid pneumonitis
undue sedation.
Katalax (Novartis) UK
IPECACUANHA
Oral paste, white sof paraffin 474 rng/g, for cats
Dose. Cats: by mouth, I-2 crmn of paste I2 tirmes daily
UK
CSL Liquid Paraffin UK
Indications. Induction of emesis
Dose. By rmouth.
Contra-indications. Poisoning with corrosive compounds
Horses, catle: 3-4 litre/450 kg body-weight;fouls: 200-400 mL
Or petroleum products (risk of aspiration); shock; uncon-
Dogs: 2-60 mL (depending on body-weight)
Cats: 2- 10 mL (depending on body-weight)
scious or convulsing patient; see notes above
Side-effects. Cardiac effects if absorbed
Dose. Dogs, cats: 1-2 mL/kg. Maximum dose 15 mL for
3.6.2 Bulk-forming laxatives
dogs. May be repeated once after 30 minutes, if required
Ispaghula and sterculia take up water in the gastro-intesti-
PH Paediatric Ipecacuanha Emetic Mixture (Non-proprietary) UK
nal tract, thereby increasing the volume of the faeces and
Ipecacuanha liquid extract 0.7 mL, hydrochloric acid 0.025 rmL, glycerol I
promoting peristalsis. They are used in the management of
mL, syrup to 10 rmL
chronic constipation and when excessive rectal straining is
to be avoided, such as following surgery for perineal hernia
3.6 Laxatives
repair or anal sac removal. Due to their ability to increase
faecal mass they are also used in the control of diarrhoea.
3.6.1 Lubricant laxatives
Ispaghula or sterculia (rather than bran) are used in patients
that cannot tolerate gluten-containing diets. Ispaghula may
3.6.2 Bulk-forming laxatives
3.6.3 Osmotic laxatives
  s g n  og    
3.6.4 Stimulant laxatives
horses.
3.6.5 Bowel cleansers
Bran provides water-insoluble fibre and is obtained from
the outer layer of cereal grains, usually wheat. It is also used
3.6 Laxatives 229
to treat chronic constipation. Unprocessed wheat bran conl-
useful in the treatment of hepatic encephalopathy (see sec-
tains approximately 40% wheat fibre. As a guide, for dogs
tion 3.10)
and cats, 1 to 2 tablespoonfuls of unprocessed bran are
 Impacted rectal and colonic contents are best resolved by
given per 450-g can of food consumed.
the use of an enema. Warm, soapy water solutions soften
Adequate fluid intake should be provided whern using bulk
and break up the faecal mass. Intestinal distension will
lax atives to avoid dehydration and consequent worsening of
stimulate contractions of the gut wall.
constipation leading to intestinal obstruction.
Proprietary enema preparations containing phosphates Or
sodium citrate act as osmotic laxatives and are used to treat
ISPAGHULA HUSK
constipation, and evacuation of the bowel prior to surgery
or radiographic exami nation. Phosphate-containing enemas
UK
cause electrolyte abnormalities, such as hyperphosphat-
Indications. Constipation
aemia or hypocalcaemia, in small dogs and cats and their
Contra-indications. Abdominal pain, vomiting, intestinal
use is contra-indicated in these animals.
obstruction
Side-effects. Flatulence, abdominal distension
LACTULOSE
Warnings. Water must be available at all times
UK
CSL Isogel (Pfizer Consurmer) UK
Indications. Constipation; hepatic encephalopathy (see
Oral granules, ispaghula husk 90%
section 3.10)
Dose. By addition to food.
Contra-indications. Intestinal obstruction
Horses: 75 g/450 kg body-weight I-2 tirmes daily for 2 weeks
Dogs: one to three 5-rmL spoonfuls I2 tirmes daily
Dose. By mouth.
Cats: one 5-mL spoonful I2 tirmes daily
Horses: hepatic encephalopathy, 0.2-0.5 mL/kg 3-4 times
daily
STERCULIA
Dogs: constipation, 0.25-0.5 mL/kg 2-3 times daily
(according to indi vidual's response)
UK
Hepatic encephalopathy, 0.5 mL/kg 3-4 times daily
Indications. Constipatiorn; diarrhoea (see section 3.1.1)
Cats: constipation, 2.5-5.0 mL/animal 2-3 times daily
Contra-indications. Abdominal pain, vomiting, intestinal
Hepatic encephalopathy, 0.25 mL/kg twice daily
obstruction
Enema.
Side-effects. Flatulence, abdominal distension
Dogs: hepatic enicephalopathy, 5- 15 mL with twice volume
Warnings. Water must be available at all times 
of water, administered 3 times daily
GSL Peridale Capsules (Arnolds) U/K
PDuphalac (Solvay) UK
Capsules, sterculia Il8 mg, for cats
Dose. Cats: by mouth, I capsule wice daily; kittens: I capsule daily
Orgl solution, laculose 0.6 g/mL, other ketoses
P Lactulose (Non-proprietary) UK
GSL Peridale Granules (Arnolds) UK
Oral granules, sterculia 980 mg/g, for dogs
Ora solution, lactulose 0.6 g/mL,other ketoses
Dose. Dogs: by mouth or by addition to food, (up to 5 kg body-weight) 
PH Lactugal (Intrapharm) UK
5-mL spoonful (1.5 g) daily, (5-15 kg body-weight) one 5-mL spoonful (3 g)
[2 tirmes daily, (>15 kg body-weight) one heaped 5-rmL spoonful (6 g) I2
Orgl solution, laculose 0.6 g/mL, other ketoses
tirnes daily
MAGNESIUM SALTS
3.6.3 Osmotic laxatives
UK
Indications. Constipation
Osmotic laxatives are hypertonic solutions of poorly
absorbed substances that retain water and promote its
GSL Magnesium Hydroxide Mixture (Cream of Magnesia) U/K
movement from the tissues into the intestinal lumen. The
Magnesiurn oxide (hydrated) 83 mg/mL
Dose. By mouth.
resulting bowel distension promotes peristalsis. Fluid
Dogs: 5-10 mL
should be available throughout treatment. These drugs are
Cuts: 2-6 rmL
particularly contra-indicated as laxati ves in dehydrated ani-
CSL Magnesium Sulfate BP (Epsom salts) UK
mals and should not be used in patients with renal failure.
Dose. By mouh.
Magnesium sulfate (Epsom salts) is effective within 3 to
Horses: I g/kg body-weight given in 4 litres water
12 hours in monogastric animals and after 12 to 18 hours in
Catle: 250- 500 g
ruminants. Sodium sulfate (Glauber's salt) may be pre-
Pigs: 25-125 g
Dogs:5-25g
ferred because it has a less purgative and more predictable
Cats: 2-5 g
action.
Lactulose is not absorbed from the gastro-intestinal tract. It
PHOSPHATES (RECTAL)
produces an osmotic diarrhoea of low faecal pH, discour-
ages the proliferation of ammonia-producing organisms,
UK
and reduces absorption of ammonia. It is therefore also
Indications. Rectal impaction
230Gastro-intestimal system
Contra-indications. Cats, small dogs
mucosa, and linseed oil can be toxic; they are infrequently
Dose. Dogs: (5-10 kg body-weight) % enema; (>10 kg
used in veterinary medicine.
PFletchersPhosphate Enema (Forest) UK
BISACODYL
Sodiurm acid phosphate 12.8 g, sodiurn phosphate 10.24 g/128 rmL
UK
SODIUM CITRATE (RECTAL)
Indications. Constipation
Dose.
UK
Dogs: (up to 5 kg body-weight) 5 mg daily; (5-25 kg body-
Indications. Rectal use in constipation
weight) 10 mg daily; (more than 25 kg body-weight) 15-20
Dose. Dogs, cats : one enema as necessary
mg daily
Cats:5 mg daily
PHMicolette Micro-Enema (Pinewood) UK
Sodiurm citrate 450 rmg, sodiurm lauryl sulphoacetate 45 mg, glycerol 625 mg/
GSL  Bisacodyl (Non-proprietary) UK
5 rmL with citric acid, potassiurm sorbate, and sorbitol; 5-mL dose applicator
Tablets, e/c, bisacodyl 5 rmg
P Micralax Micro-Enema (Celltech） UK
 PHENOLPHTHALEIN
Sodium citrate 450 mg, sodiurm alkylsulphoacetate 45 mg, sorbic acid 5 mg/5
mL with glycerol and sorbitol; dose applicator
UK
PH Relaxit Micro-Enema (Crawford) UK
Indications. Constipation
Sodiurm citrate 450 mg, sodiurn lauryl sulfate 75 mg, sorbic acid 5 mg/5 mL
Side-effects. Pink or red discolouration of urine or faeces
with glycerol arnd sorbitol; dose applicator
Warnings. See notes above
SODIUM SULFATE
GSL Laxative Tablets (Bob Martin) UK
Tabieis,phenolphthalein 100 mg,for dogs more than6 weeks ofuge
(Glauber's salt)
UK
3.6.5 Bowel cleansers
Indications. Constipation and impaction
Bowel cleansing solutions are used to evacuate the colon in
Dose. By mouth.
preparation for colonoscopy, barium enema, and colonic
Horses: 1-3 g/kg
surgery. They are not treatments for constipation. When
Cattle:60-120g
ingested, they produce a voluminous liquid stool with mini-
Sheep: 10-15 g
mal changes in the patients fluid and electrolyte balance.
Pigs: 15-30 g
Bowel preparation is superior to that achieved by standard
Dogs: 0.5-2.0 g
Cats: 300-600 mg
enema techmiques.
 by warming the lavage solution to body temperature or by
 giving parenteral metoclopramide (see section 3.4.1) before
3.6.4 Stimulant laxatives
admimistration.
In general, stimulant laxatives should not be used in the
UK
presence of severe constipation or obstructive lesions.
Indications. See notes above
Bisacodyl and phenolphthalein are diphenylmethane stim-
Contra-indications. Intestinal obstruction
ulant laxatives, which produce their effect by stimulating
 Side-effects. Occasional vomiting, see notes above
colonic smooth muscle and the myenteric plexus to produce
organised peristaltic contractions.
P  Klean-Prep (Norgine) UK
Bisacodyl is a useful adjunct to enemas for the treatment of
Oral solution, powder for reconstitution, anhydrous sodiurm sulfate 5.685 g,
mild to moderate constipation. Long-term treatment with
 sodiurn bicarbonate I .685 g, sodiurm chloride I .465 g/sachet
bisacodyl can result in damage to the myenteric plexus.
Reconstitute I sachet in I litre water 
Phenolphthalein has an initial effect of 4 to 6 hours but a
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 12-18 hours before the procedure, adrminister 25-
30 mL lavage solution/kg, repeat after I hour
 proportion of the dose undergoes enterohepatic circulation.
Therefore the action may be prolonged, although the circu-
lating concentration may be too low to be effective.
3.7 Modulators of intestinal motility
Dantron is an anthraquinone laxati ve. Prolonged adminis-
tration may cause degeneration of the myenteric plexus
Diphenoxylate and loperamide (see section 3.1.2) increase
leading to loss of intestinal motility. Dantron is excreted
intestinal segmental (circular) contractions, decrease pro-
into the milk and may affect offspring.
pulsi ve contractions, and are used for diarrhoea.
Docusate sodium probably acts both as a stimulant and as a
The antimuscarinics (anticholinergics), such as atropine
softening agent.
dimevamide, propantheline bromide, and hyoscine, have
Castor oil is hydrolysed to ricinoleic acid, which causes a
antispasmodic activity. Propantheline bromide is less lipid
shift from net absorption to net secretion by the intestinal
soluble than atropine, and therefore less effectively
3.7 Modulators of intestinal motility  231
absorbed and less likely to cross the blood-brain barrier. It
An imbalance in the factors controlling excitation and inhi-
has peripheral effects similar to atropine.
bition of gastro-intestinal tract smooth muscle may predis-
Hyoscine butylbromide in combination with metamizole
 pose horses to ileus. Consequently, an attempt has been
(Buscopan Compositum) has been used in young calves for
made to identify prokinetic agents that potentially would
its antispasmodic effects in diarrhoea. However, the benefit
restore the balance between excitatory and inhibitory con-
of antispasmodics in diarrhoea is undetermined (see section
trol of contractility. Pharmacological modulation aimed at
3.1.2). Buscopan Compositum is also used in equine colic
increasing excitatory activity has principally involved the
both for its antispasmodic and analgesic properties. Busco-
administration  of parasympathomimetic agents that
pan Compositum is occasionally used in dogs as a long-act-
increase cholinergic transmission, such as bethanecol or
ing gastro-intestinal antispasmodic. Side-effects in dogs
neostigmine. Attempts to block inhibitory components of
include constipation and dysuria. It should not be used in
cats.
pathetic hyperactivity should respond to H, -receptor hista-
Carbachol is a quaternary ammonium parasympathomi-
mine
antagonists
such  as  acepromazine,
while
metic that increases intestinal motility. It is a very potent
admimistration of alpha,-adrenoceptor stimulants such as
drug and can cause intestinal rupture.
xylazine and detomidine should decrease motility. Metoclo-
Metoclopramide (see section 3.4.1) stimulates gastric
pramide, which among other activities has antidopaminer-
emptying and small intestinal transit, and enhances the
gic properties, and NSAIDs have also been used to
strength of lower oesophageal sphincter tone. It is used to
inter vene in ileus cases.
reduce vomiting in gastritis and following surgery, in the
 In addition to the use of prokinetic drugs, general support-
treatment of ruminal atony or abomasal atony and dilata-
ive therapy is required. Included in this supportive treat-
tion, and for oesophageal reflux. In horses, it is used to
ment are fluid, acid-base, and electrolyte therapy, which are
reduce post-operative ileus at a dose of 0.25 mg/kg diluted
important in any horse with colic. Antibiotics are also indi-
in 500 mL of sodium chloride 0.9% intravenous solution
cated if the intestine is compromised or there is the possibil-
infused over 30 to 60 minutes. Some evidence suggests that
ity of bacterial contamination. Caution should be exercised
a continuous infusion of 0.04 mg/kg per hour may be more
when treating these horses with common analgesics (such
effective. Metoclopramide (especially at 0.25 mg/kg) may
as the alpha,-adrenoceptor stimulants xylazine, detomi dine,
cause extrapyramidal side-effects such as skeletal muscle
 and romifidine, and the opioid butorphanol) because these
 agents have the potential to depress gastro-intestinal motil-
ness, sweating, and abdominal cramping. Certain breeds
ity with repeated use.
such as West Highland white Terriers appear particularly
Repeated attempts to relieve gastric distension are impera-
sensitive to these side-effects.
 tive in treating horses suspected of suffering from ileus. In
Ranitidine and nizatidine (see section 3.8.2) are H, recep-
horses where nasogastric reflux is present, the nasogastric
tor antagonists used to reduce gastric acidity. However at
tube can be left in place, or removed and intermittently
antisecretory dosages these drugs also inhibit acetylcho-
replaced to check for reflux. An increasing heart rate is
linesterase which leads to stimulation of gastric motility.
probably one of the most sensitive clinical indications to
They are therefore useful in treating delayed gastric empty-
attempt to retrieve reflux. Increasing abdominal pain is
ing in dogs and cats.
another indication.
Erythromycin (see section 1.1.4) is a macrolide antibacte-
rial that enhances gastro-intestinal motility at microbially
ineffective dosages. It acts on enteric neurons through moti-
lin receptors, 5HT, receptors, or both to stimulate the
ATROPINE SULFATE
release of acetylcholine. Erythromycin is given to dogs and
cats at a dose of 0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg where there is delayed
UK
gastric emptying or intestinal ileus. In horses, erythromycin
Indications. Adjunct in gastro-intestinal disorders charac-
at a dose of 0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg in 1 litre sodium chioride 0.9%
terised by smooth muscle spasm; pre-anaesthetic medica-
intravenous solution infused over 60 minutes 4 times daily
tion (see section 6.6.1), antidote for organophosphorus
induces small intestinal activity and increases the rate of
poisoning (see Treatment of poisoning)
gastric and caecal emptying in normal horses. Side-effects
Contra-indications. Glaucoma, congestive heart failure,
are infrequent but some clinicians have reported observing
intestinal hypomoti lity
abdominal pain and, in a few cases, diarrhoea.
Side-effects. Dry mouth, dilatation of pupils and photo-
He us (adynamic ileus) is the impairment of aboral transit of
phobia, constipation, urinary retention, tachycardia
gastro-intestinal contents. Post-operative ileus is one of the
Dose. By subcutaneous injection.
Horses, cattle: 10 micrograms/kg
tro-intestinal surgery, especially surgery for the correction
 Sheep: 80-160 micrograms/kg
of lesions involving the small intestine. Traumatic handling
Pigs: 20-40 micrograms/kg
of the intestine, intestinal distension, resection and anasto-
Dogs, cats: 20-50 micrograms/kg (depending on use)
mosis, and intestinal ischaemia may contribute to ileus in
these cases.
See section 6.6.I for preparatiorn details 
232 Gastro-intestinal system
PROPANTHELINE BROMIDE
require the adminstration of intravenous sodium bicarbo-
nate and isotonic fluids therapy. Rumenotomy should be
UK
performed in very severe cases in patients that ate
Indications. Adjunct in gastro-intestinal disorders charac-
recumbent.
terised by smooth muscle spasm; diarrhoea; urinary inconti-
Sodium bicarbonate is soluble and acts rapidly, producing
nence (see section 9.3)
carbon dioxide. This carbon dioxide may worsen pre-exist-
Contra-indications. Glaucoma, urinary obstruction
ing bloat often encountered in severe ruminal acidosis or
Side-effects. Dry mouth, increased intra-ocular pressure,
may be released by eructation. Gas may accumulate if the
constipation, tachycardia, photophobia, mydriasis
rumen is atonic and lead to free gas bloat (see section 3.2).
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 250 micrograms/kg (0.25 mg/kg)
Bicarbonate may be absorbed systemically and produce
twice daily
alkal osis.
See section 9 4 for preparatior details
Aluminium- and magnesium-containing antacids react
with gastric acid to form an insoluble colloid which is not
COMPOUND ANTISPASMODICS
absorbed to a significant extent. They are therefore long-
acting if retained in the stomach. Aluminium salts tend to
UK
cause constipation whereas magnesium-containing antacids
Indications. Gastro-intestinal spasm, urogenital spasm
may act as laxatives. Aluminium hydroxide lines gastric
Contra-indications. Intramuscular injection in horses;
mucosa and acts as a mechanical barrier against excess
pregnant animals
acid. Aluminium accumulation does not appear to be a risk.
Warnings. Care with concurrent administration of other
Aluminium salts are potent intestinal phosphate binders and
anticholinergic or analgesic drugs; safety in pregnant ani-
are also used to reduce serum-phosphate concentrations in
mals has not been established; operators should take care to
patients with renal failure. Aluminium hydroxide is the
avoid self-injection because product may cause reaction in
drug of choice for ruminal aci dosis.
Antacids should be givenn at least six times daily because
nes or aspirin should avoid handling the product
infrequent antacid administration results in rebound acid
 Dose. See preparation details
hypersecretion. Antacids are best administered betweenl
meals and at night-time to dogs and cats. The need for fre-
POM Buscopan Compositum (Boehringer Ingelheim) UK
Injection, rmetarmizole 500 mg/mL, hyoscine butylbrormide 4 rmg/mL, for
quent administration often makes therapy impractical in
horses,catle,dogs
small animal medicine.
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter 9 days. Catfle: slaughter 9 days
(intravenous injection), 28 days (intrarmuscular injection), should not be used
in cattle producing milk for human consurmption
Dose. Horses: by intravenous inject ion, 5 mL/l00 kg
Catle: by intramuscular or intravenous injection,5 mL/l00 kg; calves:
ALUMINIUM HYDROXIDE
5 mL/50 kg mL
Dogs: by intramusc ular or intravenous injection, 0.l mL/kg
UK
Indications. Gastric acidosis, gastric ulceration
3.8 Antacids and ulcer-healing drugs
Side-effects. Constipation
Warnings. Reduces the absorption of other drugs, see Drug
 Interactions - Appendix 1 (antacids)
3.8.1 Antacids
3.8.2 Ulcer-healing drugs
CSLAluminium Hydroxide (Non-proprietary) UK
Fablets, dried alurminiur hydroxide 500 mg
The treatment and prevention of gastric and duodenal ulcer-
Orl suspens ion, approxirmately 40 mg Al,O/mL
Dose. By mouth.
ation includes antacids alone or in combination with ulcer-
Dogs: 100-200 mgor 0.25-0.5 rmL/kg 46 tirmes daily, see notes above
healing drugs.
Cais: 50-100 mg or 0.250.5 rmL/kg 46 tirmes daily, see notes above
3.8.1 Antacids
Ora? powder, alurminiurm hydroxide, available frorm chermical suppliers
Dose. By mouth.
Antacids are used in the therapy of gastric ulceration (see
Catle:15-30 g2-3 ticmes daily
section 3.8.2). They neutralise gastric acid and this helps to
Sheep: I-2 g 23 tirrmes daily
break the cycle that perpetuates ulceration. However, the
underlying cause must also be addressed.
GSL Anti Flatulence Tablets (Bob Martin) UK
Tabiets, dried aluminium hydroxide gel 120 mg, rmagnesium trisilicate
Antacids are also used to prevent and treat mild ruminal aci-
250 mg, for dogs
dosis. Ruminal acidosis is caused by excessive carbohy-
Dose. Dogs: by mowth, I tablet/3.5 kg body-weight daily in divided doses.
drate intake fromgrainengorgement
10
soluble
Maxirmurm 6 tablets daily
carbohydrate overload, which leads to the production of
GSL Anti Flatulence Tablets (Genitrix) UK
large quantities of lactic acid in the rumen instead of the
Tablets, dried alurminiurm hydroxide gel 120 mg, rmagnesiurm trisilicate
normal volatile fatty acids. While antacids alone may be
250 mg, for dogs
sufficient in mild ruiminal acidosis, more severe cases will
Dose. Dogs: by mowth, I tablet/3.5 kg body-weight daily in divided doses.
Maxirmurm 6 tablets daily
3.8 Antacids and ulcer-healing drugs  233
Note. A rmixure of alurmiriurm hydroxide and rmagnesiurm hydroxide with the
secretion, and, if necessary, control of gastric haemorrhage.
proportions expressed in the form x/y where x and y are the strengths in rmilli-
grarms per unit dose of rmagnesiurn hydroxide and alurminiurn hydroxide
The finding that gastric ulceration in humans is frequently
respectively is called co-rmagaldrox.
associated with infection by Helicobacter pylori has
CSL Maalox (Rhone-Poulenc Rorer) UK
directed veterinary attention towards this genus, particu-
Oral suspension, magnesiurm hydroxide 195 mg/5 mL, dried alurminium
larly in dogs and cats. The involvement of Helicobacter
hydroxide 220 mg/5 rmL
spp. in the aetiology of gastric ulceration in dogs and cats is
Dose. Dogs, cats: by mouth, 0.25-0.5 rmL/kg 4-6 tirmes daily, see motes
above
not proven. However, ulcers in these species are increas-
-ss pe Adenun engooe uisn p sq A
CSL Mucogel (Forest) UK
temic antacids, especially after gastric biopsy
has
Oral suspension, magnesiurm hydroxide 195 rmg/5 mL, dried alurminiurm
hydroxide 220 mg/5 mL
eliminated other causes.
Dose. Dogs, cuts: by mowth, 0.25-0.5 rmL/kg 4-6 tirmes daily, see notes
 In pigs, oesophageal ulceration has been associated with
above
dietary concentration of copper, fungal spoiling of food,
MAGNESIUM CARBONATE
inadequate concentrations of vitamin E and selenium, and is
UK
Indications. Adjunct in the treatment of abomasal
 should be by avoidance of dietary factors. Inclusion of zinic
ulceration
carbonate at a dose of 110 g/tonne in the pig ration reduces
Dose. Cattle: 16 g
the ulcerogenic effect of dietary copper. Susceptibility to
 stress is heritable in some breeds of pigs.
MAGNESIUM HYDROXIDE
The treatment of abomasal ulceration in cattle is usually
conservative and includes antacids such as magnesium car-
UK
bonate, magnesium oxide, or magnesium trisilicate.
Indications. Adjunct in the treatment of abomasal
Adult horses suffering from gastric ulceration may exhibit
ulceration
 non-specific clinical signs such as poor appetite, unthrifti-
Dose. Cattle: 400-450 g/450 kg 2-3 times daily
ness, and abdominal pain. The significance of ulcers
Sheep: 10-30 g 2-3 times daily
detected gastroscopically is not always clear. Omeprazole
Or ranitidine is used for treatment.
MAGNESIUM OXIDE
Cimetidine, famotidine, nizatidine, and ranitidine block
H,-receptors and inhibit the secretion of gastric acid and
UK
reduce pepsin output. Reduced gastric acid secretion allows
Indications. Adjunct in the treatment of abomasal
 the ulcer to heal. Cimetidine blocks hepatic microsomal
ulceration
drug metabolism and should be used with caution in
Dose. Catte: 1-2 mg/kg
patients receiving concurrent drug therapy. Famotidine,
 nizatidine, and ranitidine are more potent than cimetidine
MAGNESIUM TRISILICATE
and do not share its drug metabolism inhibitory properties.
Cimetidine can be used as an adjunct in the treatment of
UK
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency to inhibit acid peptic
Indications. Adjunict in the treatmenit of abomasal ulcera-
breakdown of pancreatic enzyme supplements.
tion
Sucralfate binds to proteins at an ulcer site thereby provid-
Dose. Cattle: up to 16 g
ing a protective barrier against acid-pepsin attack. It is used
inl conjunction with other drugs for the treatment of gastric
SODIUM BICARBONATE
ulceration. It should be given on an empty stomach at least
UK
one hour before a meal to avoid the drug binding to the food
rather than the ulcer site. Sucralfate should not be relied
Indications. Ruminal acidosis
upon as the sole treatment for gastric ulceration in horses. It
Warnings. See notes above
Dose. Cattle: 60-120 g 2-3 times daily
is thought to be ineffective for lesions confined to the squa-
Sheep: 40-60 g 2-3 times daily
mous mucosa of the stomach.
Omeprazole inhibits the hydrogen-potassium adenosine
triphosphatase enzyme system (the ^proton pump), which
3.8.2 Ulcer-healing drugs
is responsible for gastric acid production by the parietal
Gastric ulceration may occur in all species but most com-
cell. It is more potent and longer acting than the H-receptor
monly occurs in foals, performance horses, and dogs.
 antagonists, and is used in patients failing to respond to
Mucosal damage may be caused by parasite invasion, incor-
other treatment or with severe disease.
rect diet, liver disease, neoplasia, uraemia, or prolonged use
Misoprostol, a synthetic analogue of prostaglandin E,
of anti-inflammatory drugs such as NSAIDs or corticoster-
inicreases mucosal blood flow and mucus secretion and
oids. In foals, stress appears to be an important factor. Man-
 inhibits gastric acid secretion thereby promoting gastric and
agement of gastric ulceration is aimed at treatment of the
duodenal ulcer healing. It is used to protect against NSAID-
primary cause (if identified), inhibition of gastic acid
associated gastric and duodenal ulcers and is not designed
234Gastro-intestimal system
to treat ulceration. The use of misoprostol in horses is not
NIZATIDINE
well documented.
UK
CIMETIDINE
Indications. Gastric and duodenal ulceration; motility
disorders
UK
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 1-5 mg/kg daily
Indications. Gastric and  duodenal ulceration; reflux
POMH Nizatidine (Non-proprietary) UK
Capsules, nizatidine 150 mg, 300 mg
atic insufficiency
 Warnings. Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1
POM  Axid (Lilly) UK
Dose.
Capswies, nizatidine 150 rmg, 300 mg
Horses: (foals) gastric ulceration, by mouth, 20 mg/kg 1-3
times daily
OMEPRAZOLE
by intravenous injection, 8-10 mg/kg 4-6 times daily
UK
Indications. Gastric and duodenal ulceration, see niotes
tion, 5-10 mg/kg 3 times daily
above; Zollinger-Ellison syndrome; reflux oesophagitis
Cats:by mouth or by intramuscular or intravenous injec-
Contra-indications. Horses less than 4 weeks of age
tion, 2.5-5.0 mg/kg 3 times daily
Warnings. Prolonged administration not recommended;
safety in pregnant and lactating mares has not beenn estab-
POM Cimetidine (Non-proprietary) UK
lished; care with concurrent warfarin; Drug Interactions
Tabieis, cimetidine 200 mg,400 mg,800 mg
一
Oral solution, cirnetidine 40 mg/mL
see Appendix 1; operators should wear impervious gloves
when handling and administrating the product
POMDyspamet (Colshield) UK
Dose. By mouth.
Oral sspension, cirmetidine 40 mg/mL
Horses: treatment, 4 mg/kg once daily for 14-28 days;
POM  Tagamet (GSK) UK
prophylaxis, 2 mg/kg once daily for 30 days
Tabiets, f/c,cirmetidine 200 mg,400 mg, 800 mg
Dogs, cats: by mouth, 0.5- 1.0 mg/kg once daily
Syrup, cimetidine 40 mg/mL
Injection, cimetidine 100 mg/mL
POM Gastrogard (Merial) UK
P Tagamet100 (GSK)UK
Oral paste, ormeprazole 400 mg/unit dose, for horses more than 4 weeks of
Tabieis, cimetidine 100 mg
αge; rmetered-dose applicator
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter withdrawal period nil
FAMOTIDINE
POM H) Losec (AstraZeneca) U/K
Capsuies, ormeprazole 10 mg, 20 mg, 40 rmg
UK
Note. Should be dispensed in original container which contains a desiccant
Indications. Gastric and duodenal ulceration
POM (H Omeprazole (Non-proprietary) UK
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 0.5-1.0 mg/kg 1-2 times daily
Tablets,e/c, ormeprazole 10 mg, 20 rmg, 40 rmg
Capsules, omeprazole 10 mg, 20 rmg, 40 mg
POM Famotidine (Non-proprietary) UK
Tabiets, farmotidine 20 mg, 40 mg
RANITIDINE
POM) Pepcid (MSD) UK
Tabiets, farmotidine 20 mg, 40 mg
UK
P Pepeid AC (MSD) UK
Indications. Gastric and duodenal ulceration; reflux
Tablets, farnotidine 10 mg
oesophagitis; motility disorders
Dose.
MISOP ROSTOL
Horses: by mouth, 6.6 mg/kg 3 times daily
foals : by mouth, 4-6 mg/kg 2-3 times daily
UK
by intravenous injection, 1-2 mg/kg 3 times daily
Indications. Prevention of NSAID-associated gastric and
Dogs: by mouth or by intravenous injection, 2 mg/kg twice
duodenal ulceration; canine atopic dermatitis (see section
daily
14.2.6)
POM  Ranitidine (Non-proprietary) UK
Contra-indications. Pregnant animals
Side-effects. Dose dependent and may include diarrhoea,
Tablets, ranitidine (as hydrochloride) 150 mg, 300 mg
abdominal pain, nausea, abortion in pregnant animals
POM Zantac(GSK) UK
Warnings. Pregnant women should avoid exposure to
Tablets, f/c, ranitidine (as hydrochloride) 150 mg
Fablets, dispersible, scored, ranitidine (as hydrochloride) 150 rmg, 300 rmg
misoprostol
Dose. Dogs, cats: by mouth, 2-5 micrograms/kg 3 times
 Dissolve or rmix with water before adrministratior
Syrup, ranitidine (as hydrochloride) 15 mg/mL
daily
fnjection, ranitidine (as hydrochloride) 25 rmg/mL
POM Cytotec (Pharmacia) UK
P Zantac 75 (GSK) UK
Fabiet5, scored, misoprostol 200 rmicrograrms
Fablets, ranitidine (as hydrochloride) 75 rmg
3.9 Treatment of pancreatic disease 235
SUCRALFATE
Frequent small amounts of a diet containing low fat, low
fibre, highly digestible carbohydrate, and high quality pro-
UK
tein, or dietetic pet foods (see section 16.8) should be used
 Indications. Gastric and duodenal ulceration; uraemic gas-
in combination with a commercial pancreatic enzyme
tritis (see section 3.4.1)
replacer. A strict diet should be maintained with any dietary
Warnings. May affect absorption of other drugs and other
changes introduced slowly
oral drug therapy should not be given within 2 hours of
In refractory cases, cimetidine (see section 3.8.2) may be
sucralfate
used as an adjunct to pancreatin therapy. Cimetidine
Dose. Give on an empty stomach 1 hour before a meal, by
reduces gastric acid production thereby decreasing inacti va-
mouth.
tion of pancreatin and may improve the response to treat-
Foals: 10-20 mg/kg 4 times daily
ment in some indi viduals. Treatment of secondary bacterial
Dogs: 0.25-1.0 g 3 times daily
 overgrowth may be useful as adjunctive treatment in dogs
Cats: 250 mg 2-3 times daily
with exocrine pancreatitic insufficiency.
POMH) Sucralfate (Non-proprietary)
Tabiets, sucralfate l g
PANCREATIN
POM Antepsin (Chugai)
UK
Fableis, scored, sucralfate I g
Indications. Treatment of diarrhoea and weight loss due to
Oral suspension, sucralfate 200 rng/mL
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
Warnings. May be iritant, wash hands after handling
product and av oid inhalati on
3.9 Treatment of pancreatic disease
Lypex (VetPlus) UK
Capsules, amylase 8750units, ipase 30000units, potease 1200units, for
chronic pancreatitis is common in cats. The basis for treat-
dogs, cats
Dose.
ment is maintenance of fluid and electrolyte balance while
Dogs: by mowth, (<10 kg body-weight) 0.5 capsule rwice daily; (>10 kg
the pancreas is rested by withholding food, therefore allow-
body-weight) I capsule rwice daily with food
ing it to recover from the acute inflammation. Severe cases
Cats: by mouth, 0.5 capsule rwice daily with food
of pancreatitis require aggressive intravenous fluid therapy
GSL Pancrex-Vet (Pfizer) U/K
given over several days with mil given by mouth. Parenteral
Ora? powder, amylase 24 000 units, lipase 20 000 units, protease 1400 urits/
antibacterial prophylaxis is usually administered during this
g,for dogs, cats
Dose. Dogs, cuts:by mouth, of 5-mL spoonfl/l00 g of feed consumed
 period. Analgesic therapy such as butorphanol is given if
abdominal pain is severe. Transfusion of plasma or whole
blood may be life-saving in severely ill patients that con-
Capsules, armylase 9000 units, lipase 13 000 units, protease 450 units, for
dogs, cats
tinue to deteriorate despite supporti ve care. Once vomiting
Dose. Mix conitents of capsule with food
has ceased, small amounts of water and then food may be
Dogs: by mouth, 2-5 capsules daily. (5 capsules for 500 g of feed consurmed)
re-introduced. The diet should be high in carbohydrate and
Cats: 12 capsules daily (2 capsules for 250 g of feed consumed)
low in fat to minimise pancreatic stimulation. Recurrence
may be prevented by avoiding high fat content foods and
3.10 Drugs used in the treatment of
reducing obesity. A low fat maintenance diet should be fed
hepatic disease
to dogs that have multiple attacks. The addition of pancre-
atic enzyme replacers can reduce post-prandial pain
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (EPl) in dogs, particu-
Acute hepatic disease may be caused by a wide variety of
larly German Shepherds, is usually due to pancreatic acinar
agents which differ from species to species. Causative
agents include bacterial, viral, and parasitic infections.
atrophy, infrequently to chronic pancreatitis, and rarely to
Foals will occasionally develop hepatic disease as a result
neoplasia. Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency is less com-
mon in cats. Most dogs and cats with this condition can be
of equine herpesvirus 1, Rhodococcus equi abcessation,
   s   ss
Parascaris equorum larval migration, Tyzzers disease, or
.Thesesupplements
neonatal septicaemia. In ruminants, mi gration by ascarids
pancreatin supplements.
contain
enzymes having protease, lipase and amylase activity that
or liver fluke may be problematic and helminth migration
may precipitate Clostridium oedematiens proliferation with
are able to assist in the digestion of protein, fat, and starch,
acute toxaemia. Massive hepatic necrosis in dogs may be
respectively. Pancreatin is inactivated by gastric acid. Oral
powder or granules are much more effective than capsules
associated with canine infectious hepatitis virus infection,
or tablets. Capsules may be opened and contents sprinkled
leptospirosis, and drugs such as mebendazole; in cats a sim-
 on or mixed with food and tablets can be crushed and sprin-
ilar syndrome may be seen with drug toxicity due to
kled on or mixed with food. However, caution should be
diazepam. Hepatotoxins, systemic or metabolic disorders,
exercised because the powder may be irritant to skin and the
and ischaemic or hypoxic injury, may also cause acute liver
disease. In some species, traumatic hepatitis is likely to
respiratory system.
236Gastro-intestimal system
result in localised abscessation. In many cases, the causa-
measures aimed at controlling the pathogenesis of the
tive agent cannot be identi fied.
disease.
Chronic liver disease may result from a chronic exposure to
Ademetionine (S-adenosyl-L-methionine, SAMe) is impor-
toxicants such as copper, drugs including antiepileptics,
tant in transamination, movement of sulphur, and formation
plant toxins for example ragwort, or mycotoxins. Dietary
of glutathione, an important intracellular anti-oxidant. Dogs
deficiency may result in liver disease in some species, for
and cats with liver disease have deficiency of glutathione
example, vitamin E and selenium in pigs, fatty liver syn-
due to an enzyme failure (methionine transaminase).
drome in high yielding dairy cows, and pregnancy toxaemia
Ademetionine bypasses this enzyme and provides glutath-
in sheep and goats. Chronic infection with liver fluke in
ione. It ensures good free radical scavenging and may
ruminants results in cholangitis and hepatic fibrosis.
reduce development of fibrosis.
Cholestasis or immunologic injury may be the apparent
cause of chronic liver disease, or the disease may result 
tite although efficacy is not proven.
from severe hepatic necrosis. Dogs are prone to develop
Complications of hepatic disease such as ascites (see diu-
chronic hepati tis; many forms are breed specific. Cats more
retics, section 4.2), gastro-intestinal bleeding, and hepatic
commonly develop cholangiohepatitis, either lymphocytic
encephalopathy should be managed. Photosensitised ani-
(immune-mediated) or suppurative (bacterial). Cithosis is
mals should be kept out of sunlight. Supportive measures
end stage liver disease.
such as fluid therapy should be initiated. Multi vitamins are
In congenital portosystemic shunts, clinical signs are due to
often administered.
diversion of portal blood rather than actual liver disease.
 Dietary modification in all species may include feeding a
Treatment of hepatic disease includes removal of the
 high energy, restricted high biological value protein diet.
initiating cause if identified, and wherever possible, fol-
Nutritional therapy is important in dogs and cats with
lowed by management of the resulting hepatic insuffi-
chronic liver disease. Adequate calories (1.25 to 1.5 MER)
ciency. In liver disease many drugs should be used with
should be fed because these patients are often catabolic and
caution because the liver is the major site of drug metabo-
in negative nitrogen balance. Frequent feeding of small
lism. Antibacterials are specifically indicated for the treat-
 meals is recommended in order to reduce fasting hypogly-
 ment of suppurative cholangiohepatitis, cholecystitis, and 
caemia and to increase protein tolerance. Dietary protein
hepatic abscesses. Antibacterials that are at therapeutic
should not be restricted unless the animal is encephalo-
conicentrations in an active form in bile, without being
pathic because adequate protein is important for hepatocyte
hepatotoxic, are most suitable for the treatment of hepato-
i e  i g  is u r
biliary infections, for ex ample ampicillin, amoxicillin with
Restriction of dietary fat is only indicated in dogs with
clavulanic acid, cephalosporins, or enroflox acin.
severe cholestasis and steatorrhoea. Maintenance require-
Corticosteroids are used to modulate the inflammatory and
ments for water soluble B vitaminis should be doubled
fibrotic response in canine chronic hepatitis and feline lym-
because these frequently become deficient in liver disease.
phocytic cholangiohepatitis. They have the disadvantage of
Zinc supplementation (zinc sulfate 2 mg/kg daily or zinc
being catabolic and immunosuppressive, contra-indicating
gluconate 3 mg/kg daily) is recommended.
Hepatic encephalopathy is a neurological syndrome that
tious hepatitis,while high dosages may cause a reversible
results from acute or chronic liver failure. The most com-
hepatopathy. For dogs with chronic hepatitis that fail to
respond to corticosteroid therapy alone, or to decrease the
portosystemic shunts that allow mesenteric blood to bypass
severity of side-effects, prednisolone (1 to 2 mg/kg daily in
the liver and directly enter the systemic circulation. It may
dogs or 2 mg/kg daily ini cats) may be combined with aza-
also occur with acquired portosystemic shunting resulting
thioprine (1 to 2 mg/kg daily). Alternate-day treatment is
from chronic liver disease and portal hypertension. Uncom-
advised to minimise drug toxicity and can be considered
monly, hepatic encephalopathy develops without shunting
once the animal shows a good clinical response to daily
after severe acute hepatic necrosis. Clinical signs are asso-
therapy.
ciated with impaired hepatic removal of neuroactive metab-
Copper chelation therapy is indicated in Bedlington or West
olites (especially ammonia, deri ved from colonic bacterial
Hi ghland White Terriers with copper hepatotoxicosis. Peni-
protein metabolism) from the mesenteric blood. Neurologi-
cillamine is used most commonly. The chelating agent tri-
cal signs such as disorientation, ataxia, and behavioural
entine may be used in dogs that do not tolerate
changes are most common, and are often worse after a high-
penicillamine; this drug has a similar potency but has fewer
side-effects. Control of the condition includes restriction of
 stunted growth, polyuria and polydipsia, and urate cystic
copper intake and provision of a high fat diet to stimulate
calculi. Medical management of hepatic encephalopathy is
biliary secretion and copper excretion.
directed towards reducing gut bacterial protein metabolism.
Ursodeoxycholic acid is used in the treatment of a variety
This is achieved by limiting absorption of ammonia from
of chronic hepatobiliary disorders in dogs and cats. It pro-
 the colon, suppressing urease-producing bacteria, and feed-
tects hepatocytes by displacing toxic hydrophobic bile
ing a low-protein diet.
acids, but it also has choleretic and immunomodulatory
Lactulose (see section 3.6.3) produces an osmotic diar-
properties. It should be used in conjunction with other
rhoea of low faecal pH, discourages the proliferation of
3.11 Oral hygiene preparations 237
ammonia-producing organisms, and reduces absorption of
 Dose. Dogs: copper hepatotoxicosis, by mouth, 10- 15 mg/
ammonia from the colon. It is thus useful in the treatment of
kg daily, preferably given on an empty stomach. May be
hepatic enicephalopathy. In acute cases of hepatic encepha-
mixed with food or daily dose divided if vomiting occurs
lopathy, lactulose can also be used as a retention enema.
Antibacterials that are not absorbed from the gastro-intes-
See section 9.4 for preparation details
tinal tract assist in reducing ammonia-producing bacteria.
TRIENTINE DIHYDROCHLORIDE
Oral neomycin (see section 1.1.3) at a dose of 20 mg/kg 3
times daily for dogs and 10 to 20 mg/kg twice daily for cats
UK
has been used. The dose of neomycin for horses is 5 mg/kg
Indications. Copper hepatotoxicosis in dogs intolerant to
3 times daily. Oral amoxicillin (see section 1.1.1.3) may be
penicillamine
given at a dose of 1l mg/kg twice daily in dogs. Metronida-
Side-effects.
Abdominal pain, vomitimg, melaena
zole (see section 1.1.8) is active against urease-positive
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 10-15 mg/kg twice daily
anaerobes that produce ammonia within the intestine, and is
as effective as neomycin in controlling blood-ammonia
POM  Trientine Dihydrochloride (Non-proprietary) UK
concentrations in dogs and cats. The dose for oral metroni-
Capsuies, trientine dihydrochloride 300 mg
dazole is 10 to 15 mg/kg 2 to 3 times daily for dogs and 7.5
mg/kg twice daily for cats.
URSODEOXYCHOLIC ACID
(Ursodiol)
A high dose of mineral oil is used to aid removal of ammo-
nia in horses. Vinegar (acetic acid) may also be effective at
UK
reducing blood-ammonia concentration when admi mistered
Indications. Chronic hepatic disease associated with
orally at a dose of 250 mL/450 kg horse.
cholestasis
Horses with hepatic encephalopathy usually require seda-
tives but these should be administered at minimum dosage;
Contra-indications. Extrahepatic biliary obstruction
Dose. Dogs, cats: by mouth, 10- 15 mg/kg once daily
xylazine is recommended. Diazepam should be avoided
because it may worsen hepatoencephalopathy
POM H Destolit (Norgine) UK
Tablets, scored, ursodeoxycholic acid 1 50 rmg
POM (H Urdox (CP) UK
ADEMETIONINE
Fablets, f/c, ursodeoxycholic acid 300 mg
(S-Adenosyl-L-methionine, SAMe)
POM H Ursodeoxycholic Acid (Non-proprietary)
UK
Tablets, scored, ursodeoxycholic acid 150 mg
Capsules,ursodeoxycholic acid 250 mg
Indications. Hepatic disease
POM (H Ursofalk (Provalis) UK
Hepatosyl ( Vetriscience) UK
Capsules, ursodeoxycholic acid 250 mg
Capsules, adermetionine 100 rmg, vitarmin E, vitarmin K, for dogs, cafs
Ora suspension, ursodeoxycholic acid 50 mg/mL
Dose. By mouth.
Dogs: I6 capsules daily, depending or body-weight
POM Ursogal (Galen) UK
Cuts: I-2 capsules daily, depending on body-weight
Tablets, scored, ursodeoxycholic acid 1 50 mg
Capsuies,ursodeoxycholic acid250mg
COLESTYRAMINE
3.11 Oral hygiene preparations
(Cholestyramine)
UK
Tooth brushing with dentifrice is helpful in oral plaque con-
Indications. See Prescribing for rabbits
trol. Denti frices are dental cleaning preparations containing
an inorganic abrasive; some also contain fluoride and chlor-
POM Colestyramine (Non-proprietary) UK
hexidine. Toothpaste specifically for dogs and cats should
Powder, colestyrarmine (arhydrous) 4 g/sachet
be used. Human toothpaste is indigestible and contains a
POM Questran (Bristol-Myers Squibb) UK
foaming agent. Veterinary toothpastes are available in fla-
Powder, colestyrarmine (anhydrous) 4 g/sachet
vours palatable to animals. Proper toothbrushing technique
is essential for plaque control.
Chlorhexidine is anl effective antiplaque agent which has
PENICILLAMINE
both immediate and sustained antimicrobial activity after
UK
oral application. Side-effects include arn unpleasant taste. It
Indications. Copper hepatotoxicosis; cystine calculi (see
is used in patients with periodontal disease usually as an
oral rinse once or twice daily but may also be applied by
section 9.5); copper and lead poisoning (see Treatment of
swabbing the gums with a cotton swab soaked in solution or
poisoning)
Side-effects. Anorexia, vomiting: pyrexia; nephrotic
 i ps o s  e s g  
patches.
syndrome
238Gastro-intestimal system
A fibrous or dry diet is important in controlling build-up of
Hexarinse (Virbac) U/K
plaque. Products aimed at encouraging chewing activity are
Dental solution, chlorhexidine gluconate 0.12%
        o 
Logic Dental Gel (Ceva) UK
effect of salivary flow and composition. However, tooth
Dental gel, enzymatice complex, fine abrasives, for dogs, cats
brushing remainis the single most effective way of prevent-
Nolvadent (Fort Dodge) UK
ing plaque deposition.
Dental solution, chlorhexidine acetate 0.1 %, for horses, dogs, cats
ORAL HYGIENE PREPARATIONS
Nolvadent (Fort Dodge) UK
Dental spray, chlorhexidine acetate 0.1%, for horses, dogs, cats
UK
MaxiGuard (distributed by Millpledge) UK
Dentagyl (Merial) UK
Oral gel, zinc ascorbate cysteine, for dogs, cafs
Dental paste, chlorhexidine, fine abrasives, fluoride, for dogs, cats
Oral Hygiene Rinse (Virbac) U/K
Dentipet Premier (Amolds) U/K
Dental solution, chlorhexidine gluconate 0.12%, zinc gluconate
Dental paste, chlorhexidine, fine abrasives, fluoride, for dogs, cats
Paradongyl LA Gel (Virbac)UK
POM Doxirobe (Pfizer) U/K
Dental gel, chlorhexidine gluconate 0. 12%
Oral dental gel, doxycycline (as hyclate) 44 rmg, for dogs
Contra-indications. Dogs less than I year of age; pregnant or lactating 
Paradongyl Polishing Paste (Virbac)UK
bitches
Dental paste, chlorhexidine gluconate 0.12%
Warnings. Safety in breeding dogs has riot beern established
Paradongyl Toothpaste(Virbac)UK
Enzymatic Toothpaste (Virbac) UK
Dental paste, chlorhexidine gluconate 0.1 2%
Dental paste, enzymatic cormplex, available in fish and poultry flavour
239
4
Drugs used in the treatment of disorders of the
CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM
Contributors:
especially atrial fibrillation. In horses, digoxin is occasion-
B M Corcoran MVB, PhD, MRCVS
ally used in cases of atrial fibrillation refractory to quinidine
B C Devine BVSc, CertVC, MRCVS
sulfate.
Cardiac glycosides also have a place in the management of
Congestive heart failure is usually a progressive condition
and can be a consequence of a variety of diseases. Rarely
congestive heart failure where it is associated with primary
will the underlying cause be corrected, but reasonably suc-
myopathy). They are not primarily indicated for the treat-
cessful control of clinical signs can be achieved, with sig-
ment of congestive heart failure caused by valvular
nificant improvements in the quality of life and life
insufficiency or intracardiac shunts unless there is second-
expectancy. Similarly, advances in understanding of disease
ary my ocardial failure or tachycardia.
mechanisms have improved the treatment and management
These drugs have a narrow therapeutic margin and doses
of potentially fatal cardiac arrhythmias.
should be titrated for each patient. Slow digitalisation is the
4.1 Positive inotropes
method of choice. This relies on the plateau principle.
4.2 Diuretics
which depends on the half-life of the drug. In dogs thera-
 peutic plasma-drug concentrations, in the range 1.0 to 2.5
4.3 Vasodilators
4.4 Antidysrhythmics
nanograms/mL, are achieved within 4 to 5 times the half-
4.5 Adrenoceptor stimulants
life, that is 3 to 5 days for digoxin and 1 to 2 days for digi-
4.6 Anticoagulants
toxin. Blood concentration of glycosides should be evalu-
4.7 Haemostatics
ated at about 8 hours after administration. The target serum
concentration suggested is between 0.8 and 2.4 manograms/
mL, but less than 1.5 nanograms/mL is probably preferable
4.1 Positive inotropes
inl order to avoid toxicity. Serum concentrations less than
 0.8 manograms/mL are acceptable if the therapeutic aim has
4.1.1 Cardiac glycosides
been achieved (lowering heart-rate).
4.1.2 Inodilators
Digoxin is the most commonly used cardiac glycoside.
4.1.3 Methylxanthines
Excretion is mainly via the kidney as unchanged drug.
Therefore the dose should be decreased in patients with
Positive inotropic drugs increase the force of contraction of
reduced renal perfusion. It is suggested that the dose may be
the myocardium. These drugs are indicated where myocar-
d       
dial failure is either a primary or secondary problem. Myo-concentration, and then serum-digoxin concentratior meas-
cardial stimulants used in veterinary practice include
 ured, with titration of subsequent doses. See also Prescrib-
cardiac glycosides, inodilators, and methylxanthines. Beta,
ing in renal impairment for information on dosage
adrenoceptor stimulants such as dobutamine (see section
 adjustment. Digoxin has a plasma half-life of 20 to 55 hours
4.5) also act as potent myocardial stimulants.
in dogs and 12 to 48 hours in horses.
Authorities advise that the use of digitoxin in horses and
cats is not recommended.
4.1.1 Cardiac glycosides
The bioavailability of digitalis glycosides varies with the
Cardiac glycosides act as positive inotropes by increasing
the force of myocardial contraction by mechanisms that
lar preparation. These factors result in individual variation
enhance calcium influx into the myocardial cells. There is
to specific doses and in variable clinical responses to differ-
ent preparations. Ideally the digoxin oral dose form should
also an increase in the refractory period of the cells and a
not be altered, and when changing from a tablet to an elixir
decrease in conductivity throughout the myocardium. This
causes a reduction in the rate of contraction (negative
formulation the dose should be reduced by 25%. Any
change in dose form during maintenance therapy willtake 6
chronotropy). The effect of cardiac glycosides on the auto-
nomic nervous system also contributes to a slowed heart-
to 8 days for the effect to be evident.
A number of factors increase the animal's susceptibility to
rate. This may be the major beneficial effect of digitalis
the toxic effects of cardiac glycosides including hypo-
alkaloids in cases of heart failure. Parasympathomimetic
effects cause slowing of the sino-atrial node rate and
thyroidism, renal insufficiency, old age, obesity, and
delayed conduction in the atrioventricular (A-V) node. Any
hypokalaemia resulting from prolonged diuretic therapy
(see section 4.2). Adverse effects can include various types
increase in cardiac output resulting from digoxin treatment
may lead to a reduction in sympathetic dri ve.
of dysrhythmia. Indications of toxicity include depression,
with gastro-intestinal disturbances such as anorexia, vomit-
In dogs and cats a major indication for cardiac glycoside
ing, and diarrhoea. Clients should be warned to withdraw
therapy is in the control of supraventricular tachycardias,
240Cardiovascular system
the drug if these signs are seen. Overdosage with cardiac
relieve coughing in congestive heart failure in dogs.
glycosides may cause an excessively slow heart-rate, which
Methylxanthines may cause tachycardia and vomiting.
reduces cardiac output and causes renal dysfunction as a
result of hypoperfusion.
4.2 Diuretics
Phenytoin (see section 4.4.1) has beenn used in the treatment
of ventricular tachycardias caused by cardiac glycoside
4.2.1 Thiazides
toxicity.
 Conversion tables from body-weight to surface area ate
4.2.2 Loop diuretics
4.2.3 Potassium-sparing diuretics
included in Appendix 3.
 4.2.4 Potassium-sparing diuretics with thiazides
4.2.5 Osmotic diuretics
DIGOXIN
UK
Diuretics are mainly used in veterinary medicine to reduce
Indications. Congestive heart failure with systolic failure;
oedema in, for example, cases of heart failure, hepatic dis-
ease, cerebral oedema, hypoproteinaemia, and udder
supraventricular tachycardias
Contra-indications. Hypertrophic myocardial disorders,
oedema. Most act by promoting sodium excretion, thus
severe dysrhythmias including bradycardia
reducing the volume of ex tracellular fluid (ECF). Some also
Side-effects. Depression, anorexia, vomiting, diarrhoea,
have vascular effects,for example furosemide administered
bradycardia, arrhythmias
intravenously is a venodilator. Diuretics reduce hypertenl-
Warnings. Reduce dose ini renal impairmenit, see also notes
sion and furosemide is claimed to aid in the treatment of
above; higher rate of gastro-intestinal absorption of elixirs
necessitates lower absolute doses, see notes above; use with
Diuretics are the mainstay of therapy for congestive heart
care in cats; Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1 (cardiac
glycosides)
However, diuretics are known to stimulate adverse humoral
Dose.
Horses: by mouth, initial dose 20 micrograms/kg then 20
concentration. This effect may be minimised by combining
micrograms/kg daily in 2 divided doses
therapy with an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
by intravenous injection, 2.5-5.0 micrograms/kg twice
inhibitor (see section 4.3.1) or an inodilator (see section
daily
4.3.2) and by reducing the dosage of diuretic to the
Dogs: by mouth, 220 micrograms/m2 twice daily. This is
minimum required to suppress signs of oedema and heart
achieved by (small dogs) 10 micrograms/kg twice daily;
failure.
(large dogs) 5 micrograms/kg twice daily. Reduce dose fur-
Prolonged therapy with certain diuretics may lead to exces-
ther for Dobermanns
 sive loss of potassium and magnesium in urine. Hypokalae-
Cats: by mouth, 7-10 micrograms/kg on alternate days or 4
mia increases the animal's susceptibility to toxicity from
micrograms/kg daily. Elixir should be used for cats
cardiac glycosides (see section 4.1.1) and to cardiac dys-
rhythmias and may impair carbohydrate metabolism. The
POM Digoxin (Non-proprietary) UK
Tablets, dgoxin2.5microgram, 25microgams250miogams
risk of hypokalaemia is increased by anorexia. To avoid
injection, digoxin 100 rmicrograrms/mL, digoxin 250 micrograms/mL
potassium depletion, dietary supplementation may be used
 Or diuretics may be combined with ACE inhibitors (see sec-
Specials)
tion 4.3.1), inodilators (see section 4.3.2), or with potas-
POM Lanoxin (GSK) UK
sium-sparing agents (see section 4.2.4). Depletion
of
Fableis, digoxin 125 micrograrms, 250 micrograrms (scored)
extracellular fluid volume without the loss of bicarbonate
Injection, digoxin 250 rmicrograms/mL
ionis may lead to metabolic alkalosis. Excessive use of diu-
POM Lanoxin-PG (GSK) UK
retics may also cause hypovolaemia and loss of cardiac out-
Fablets, digoxin 62.5 micrograms
put, leading to reduced renal blood flow and glomerular
Elixir, digoxin 50 rmicrograrms/mL
filtration-rate, thereby compromising renal function; care
Note. Elixir should not be diluted
should be taken in animals with low cardiac output, espe-
cially cats.
Treatment of chronic left-sided congestive heart failure in
4.1.2 Inodilators
dogs may also require therapy for coughing due to small
 Pimobendan has mixed positive inotrope and vasodilator
airway disease and bronchial occlusion by the enlarged left
properties (see section 4.3.2).
atrium. Additional treatment which may be required
includes bronchodilators such as methylxanthines (see sec-
4.1.3 Methylxanthines
tion 5.1.1), antitussives such as opioids (see section 5.5),
sedatives (see section 6.1), or corticosteroids (see section
The methylxanthines (see section 5.1.1) aminophylline,
7.2.1). Cardiac glycosides (see section 4.1.1) may be used
etamiphylline, and theophylline are mainly used as bron-
to control heart rate.
chodilators but also have a mild diuretic action and positive
 Severe pulmonary (alveolar) oedema is often acute in onset
chronotropic and inotropic activity. They are also used to
 and may be life-threatening in dogs, cats, and horses.
4.2 Diuretics 241
Intensive therapy is required. A suitable regimen is intrave-
BENDROFLUMETHIAZIDE
nous furosemide, intramuscular morphine, and transcutane-
(Bendrofluazide)
ous glyceryl trinitrate, with additional oxygen therapy
(administered via a nasopharyngeal cannula in dogs and
UK
cats). Coupage (percussion of the thorax) may also be help-
Indications. Oedema
ful to aid removal of secretions. This combination therapy
Contra-indications. Renal failure with anuria
Side-effects. Hypokalaemia (may require potassium sup-
plementation)
most cases. However, careful monitoring and mainteniance
Warnings. Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1 (diuretics)
treatment will al so be required.
Dose.Dogs, cats: by mouth, 125-250 micrograms/kg
Attempts to mobilise oedema fluid with short periods of
(0.12-0.25 mg/kg) once daily in the morning
intensive diuresis will create phases during which the ani-
mal is predisposed to acute hypovolaemia followed by
POM H Bendroflumethiazide (Non-proprietary) UK
extended phases when its kidneys negate the effect of the
Tabiets, bendroflurmethiazide 2.5 mg, 5 rmg
diuretic. Therefore, over a 24-hour period, a short-acting
potent diuretic may have poorer efficacy than a less potent
4.2.2 Loop diuretics
but longer-acting diuretic.
 Loop diuretics are the most potent group of diuretics, with a
Diuretics are usually classified according to their site of
rapid onset of effect but a short duration of action. These
action because this affects their likely side-effects. For
drugs block sodium reabsorption in the loop of Henle. Loop
ex ample, loop diuretics are much more potent than diuretics
diuretics are potent and excessive doses can lead to hypo-
acting distally because the loop is the site of greater sodium
volaemia and decompensation of rennal function. However,
reabsorption. However, the animal responds to the induced
their potency allows them to remain effective evenl when
sodium depletion by producing more aldosterone, thus the
urine delivery is poor, as in renal impairment. Loop diuret-
distal tubule becomes an important site of potassium loss.
ics increase magnesium excretion and, as with thiazides,
Distally active potassium-sparing diuretics may be used
may cause severe potassium loss. Hypomagnesaemia
alongside a more potent diuretic, therefore, to reduce this
potentiates the cardiac effects of hypokalaemia. Loop diu-
un wanted potassium loss (see section 4.2.4). In animals in
retics may potentiate the ototoxic effects of aminoglycoside
which oedema or ascites becomes resistant to treatment,
antibacterials.
combination therapy, using two or more diuretics from dif-
Furosemide is used to decrease oedema in conditions such
ferent groups, may prove valuable.
as cardiovascular and pulmonary oedema, hepatic and renal
dysfunction, hydrothorax, ascites, and non-specific oedema.
Furosemide may be used in the treatment of exercise
4.2.1 Thiazides
Thiazide diuretics, such as bendroflumethiazide, chloro-
administered intravenously, furosemide may be an effective
thiazide, hydrochlorothiazide, and trichlormethiazide,
venodilator in the initial treatment of pulmonary oedema.
inhibit sodium reabsorption in the early distal tubule.
Furosemide is advocated by some clinicians in anuric renal
Hydrochlorothiazide is only available in combination with
failure if intensive fluid therapy replacement leads to subcu-
the potassium-sparing diuretic amiloride. These drugs act
taneous or pulmonary oedema through persistent anuria.
proximal to the site of aldosterone-stimulated sodium and
However, in these cases the prognosis is very guarded.
 potassium exchange. The delivery of increased amounts of
Furosemide is detectable in milk for up to 30 hours after
sodium to this area causes greater potassium loss, and either
treatment.
concomitent potassium-sparing diuretic therapy or potas-
FUROSEMIDE
azides for diuresis. Thiazides decrease urinary calcium
(Frusemide)
excretion and they may also be used to reduce the formation
UK
of oxalate uroliths in dogs.
Indications. Oedema
Thiazides are used to treat cardiac or hypoproteinaemic
Contra-indications. Severe hepatic impairment; acute
oedema. Paradoxically, thiazides have also beern used in the
glomerular nephritis; some manufacturers state contra-indi-
treatment of diabetes insipidus because they cause sodium,
cated for renal failure with anuria; electrolyte or fluid defi-
chloride, and water loss leading to hypovolaemia. This
ciency disorders; cardiac glycoside overdose; concurrent
increases absorption of sodium and water from the proximal
 treatment with ACE inhibitors in dogs with functional renal
tubule. As a result, sodium delivery to the loop is reduced
insufficiency, aminoglycosides, or cephalosporins; hyper-
and formation of fully dilute urine is prevented; hence, the
sensitivity to sulphonamides
diuretic reduces the polyuria obser ved in diabetes insipidus.
Side-effects. Hypokalaemia; allergic reactions with con-
Hydrochlorothiazide remains effective for up to 12 hours
current sulphonami des
and is thus given in divided doses. Bendroflumethiazide, a
Warnings. Hypokalaemia may potentiate the toxic effects
more potent diuretic, is effective for up to 24 hours and is
of cardiac glycosides; Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1
usually admini stered in the morni ng.
(diuretics); plasma-potassium concentration should be mon-
242Cardiovascular system
itored during prolonged treatment or concurrent treatment
AMILORIDE HYDROCHLORIDE
with cardiac glycosides. (Potassium supplementation may
UK
be required); renal function should be monitored in patients
Indications. Resistant oedema; prevention of hypokalae-
on long-term NS AIDs
Dose.
mia in diuresis
Contra-indications. Renal impairment; metabolic acido-
Horses: by mouth+ or by intravenous injection, 0.5-1.0
sis; diabetes mellitus
mg/kg 1-2 times daily
 Side-effects. Hyperkalaemia with prolonged adminmistra-
Cattle: by intravenous injection, 0.5- 1.0 mg/kg
tion
Dogs, cats: by mouth, up to 5 mg/kg 1-2 times daily.
Warnings. Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1 (diuretics)
Should be reduced to 1-2 mg/kg 1-2 times daily for
Dose. Dogs, cats: by mouth, 1-2 mg/kg daily
maintenance
by intramuscular or intravenous injection,2.5-5.0 mg/kg
POM Amiloride (Non-proprietary) UK
1-2 times daily
Tableis, amiloride hydrochloride 5 rmg
Oral solution, armiloride hydrochloride I rmg/mL (available as ‘Special
POM Dimazon 5% Solution (Intervet) UK
Order' from Rosermont)
Injection, furosemide 50 mg/mL, for horses, catfle, dogs, cafs
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: rmilk 2 rmilkings after treatrment
SPIRONOLACTONE
POM Frusecare (Anirmalcare) UK
UK
Tablets, scored, furosermide 40 rmg, for dogs und cats more than 4 kg body-
Indications. Resistant oedema; prevention of hypokalae-
weight
mia in diuresis
POM Frusedale (Amolds) UK
Contra-indications. Renal impairment; metabolic acido-
Tabiets, scored, furosermide 40 rmg, for dogs und cats more than 4 kg body-
sis; diabetes mellitus
weight
Side-effects. Hyperkalaemia with prolonged administra-
tion
Warnings. Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1 (diuretics)
Dose. Dogs, cats: by mouth, 2-4 mg/kg daily
4.2.3 Potassium-sparing diuretics
POM H Spironolactone (Non-proprietary) UK
Tablets, spironolactone 25 mg, 50 mg, 100 mg
Potassium-sparing diuretics act in the late distal tubule and
Oral suspension, spironolactone 1 rmg/mL, 2 mg/mL, 5 mg/mL, 10 mg/mL
increase the excretion of sodium and reduce the excretion of
(available as 'Special Order' frorn Rosermont)
potassium. They can thus ameliorate the excessive potas-
POM  Aldactone (Searle) UK
sium loss sometimes caused by more potent diuretics and
Tabiets, f/c, spironolactone 25 rmg, 50 mg, 100 rmg
are usually combined with them. In addition, potassium-
sparing diuretics may enhance the therapeutic effect of
4.2.4 Potassium-sparing diuretics with
potent diuretics especially in resistant oedema, for example
thiazides
ascites. Potassium-sparing diuretics also reduce magnesium
loss. Angiotensin-converting enizyme (ACE) inhibitors (see
 Combination preparations of potassium-sparing diuretics
section 4.3. 1) have similar but less potent acti vity.
and other diuretics are used in patients with oedema or
ascites refractory to loop diuretics, hypokalaemia requiring
sterone by binding to its receptor in the distal renal tubules.
diuresis, or if high doses of loop diuretics are required,
The action of spironolactone is self-limiting because any
which may cause hypokalaemia. Co-flumactone, a combi-
consequent hyperkalaemia will further increase aldosterone
nation of hydroflumethiazide and spironolactone, has
secretion, allowing it to compete with the drug. The phe-
been used in veterinary practice.
nomenon of 'aldosterone escape'is now recognised in asso-
ciationwith
prolonged
ACE
inhibitor
use,
and
spironolactone is used to counter this effect. It may also
have beneficial effects in myocardial remodelling.
HYDROFLUMETHIAZIDE/ SPIRONOLACTONE
Amiloride does not act by specifically antagonising aldos-
(Co-flumactone: preparations of hydroflumethiazide and
terone. It has a direct effect on ion transport across the lumi-
nal face of tubular cells. Therefore, amiloride is effective
when there is no aldosterone excess and is the drug of
UK
choice for combination with thiazides.
Indications. Congestive heart failure; oedema, see notes
 Potassium-sparing diuretics should be avoided in conditions
above
predisposing to hyperkalaemia such as renal failure, meta-
Contra-indications. See under Amiloride hydrochloride
(section 4.2.3) and Bendroflumethiazide (section 4.2.1)
bolic acidosis, and diabetes mellitus. They should also be
avoided in combination with beta-adrenoceptor blocking
Side-effects. Rarely hyperkalaemia
Warnings. Avoid concurrent admirnistration with ACE
drugs which impair cellular uptake of potassium, or ACE
inhibitors or other potassium-sparing diuretics
inhibitors, which may predispose to hyperkalaemia.
Dose. See preparation details
4.3 Vasodilators 243
POMHydroflumethiazide and Spironolactone (Co-flumactone)
angiotensin, release of vasopressin, or increased vascular
(Non-proprietary) UK
Tablets, hydroflumethiazide 25 mg, spironolactone 25 mg
wall stiffness caused by salt and water retention. Arteriolar
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, I tablet/6-12 kg body-weight
      
Tablets, hydroflurmethiazide 50 rmg, spironolactone 50 rmg
which the regurgitant fraction may be significantly reduced
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, I tablet/1 2-25 kg body-weight
by therapy and in systemic hypertension.
4.2.5 Osmotic diuretics
4.3.1 ACE inhibitors
Osmotic diuretics include hypertonic solutions of manni-
Benazepril, enalapril, ramipril, and imidapril are angio-
tol. Administration of mannitol causes water retention
tensin-converting enizyme (ACE) inhibitors that block the
within the nephron, which dilutes urinary sodium and
 opposes its reabsorption especially in the proximal tubule
is a potent vasoconstrictor and has further deleterious
and loop of Henle.
effects such as myocardial remodelling. In addition, angio-
Mannitol is used to promote urine output, as in acute renal
tensin II stimulates the production of aldosterone, which
failure, or to reduce cellular oedema in cerebral trauma or
contributes to oedema in congestive heart failure. ACE
oedema. It is not suitable for the mobilisation of general or
inhibitors have been shown to prolong life and to improve
local oedema, because it may lead to cardiac overload.
the quality of life in most dogs with moderate to severe
Excessive administration of mannitol can produce severe
heart failure. The blood pressure and volume loading on the
hypovolaemia and maintenance of extracellular fluid vol-
heart may be lowered. ACE inhibitors may also help to
ume may require administration of an electrolyte solution
improve ventricular diastolic function in cardiomyopathies,
such as compound sodium lactate intravenous infusion
 especially in cats, probably by inhibiting the remodelling
(Hartmann's solution) (see section 16. 1.2).
effects of angiotensin I1.
MANNITOL
BENAZEPRIL HYDROCHLORIDE
UK
UK
Indications. Cerebral oedema; forced osmotic diuresis;
Indications. Congestive heart failure; systemic hyperten-
glaucoma (see section 12.5)
sion+ ; chronic renal failure in cats (see section 9.1)
Contra-indications. Congestive heart failure; pulmonary
Contra-indications. Animals at risk of hypotension; ani-
oedema
mals intended for breeding, pregnant or lactating animals
Warnings. Extravasation
causes
inflammation
anid
unless the benefit-risk ratio is considered justified; reduced
thrombophlebitis
cardiac output due to aortic stenosis
Dose.
Side-effects. Rarely clinical signs of tiredness or dizziness
Horses: by stow intravenous injection or intravenous infu-
Warnings. Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1; care with
sion, 0.25- 1.0 g/kg test dose. Repeat as necessary if diuresis
concurrent NSAIDs, hypotensives, anaesthetics; plasma-
OCCurs
potassium concentration should be monitored in patients
Dogs: by slow intravenous injection, l g/kg test dose.
recei ving concurrent potassium-sparing diuretics
Repeat as necessary if diuresis occurs
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 250-500 micrograms/kg (0.25-0.5
Cats: by slow intravenous injection, 250-500 mg/kg test
mg/kg) onice daily. May be increased to 0.5- 1.0 mg/kg once
dose. Repeat as necessary if diuresis occurs
daily if required
POMMannitol (Non-proprietary) UK
POM Fortekor 2.5, 5 and 20 (Novartis) UK
Intravenous infusion,mannitol 10%, 20%
Tabletsscordazerilhyhorid2mg,m,20mg
cats more than 2.5 kg body-weight (see section 9.1)
4.3 Vasodilators
ENALAPRIL MALEATE
4.3.1 ACE inhibitors
UK
4.3.2 Inodilators
Indications. Congestive heart failure; systemic hyperten-
4.3.3 Vasodilators
sion+
4.3.4 Cerebral vasodilators
 Contra-indications. Animals at risk of hypotension; preg-
nant bitches; cardiac output failure; concurrent potassium-
Vasodilators effectively decrease the myocardial workload.
sparing diuretics; renal impairment
Venodilators reduce the preload by increasing venous vol-
Side-effects. Transient and mild azotaemia, lethargy,
ume and arteriodilators reduce afterload by decreasing
drowsiness, hypotension, incoordination
peripheral resistance. Arteriodilators may promote cardiac
 Warnings. Renal function should be monitored before and
output by increasing the forward stroke volume. Some
for 2-7 days after start of treatmenit; safety in breeding dogs
drugs act on both veins and arteries. Vascular tone and
 has not been established; Drug Interactions - see Appendix
intravascular pressure may be elevated in heart failure
1; care with concurrent diuretics, ACE inhibitors; treatment
because of increased sympathetic tone, activation of
 with diuretics should start 1 day before enalapril treatment
244Cardiovascular system
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 500 micrograms/kg (0.5 mg/kg)
thereby increasing the contractility of the myocardium. The
once daily. May be increased to 500 micrograms/kg twice
bioavailability of pimobendan is reduced with food; ani-
daily if required
mals should be treated approximately one hour before feed-
Cats +: by mouth, 250-500 micrograms/kg (0.25-0.5 mg/
ing. Pimobendan has a proven clinical efficacy in dogs with
kg) once or twice daily
myocardial failure and in dogs with congestive heart failure
due to a variety of reasons. It is routinely used alone or in
POM Enacard (Merial) UK
combination with ACE inhibitors, and has proven effects on
Tablets, enalapril maleate I mg, 2.5 mg, 5 rmg, 10 rmg, 20 mg, for dogs
the quality of life and survival of dogs with dilated cardio-
RAMIPRIL
myopathy and mitral valve disease.
Isoxsuprine is a vasodilator which also stimulates beta-
UK
adrenergic receptors. It causes direct relaxation of vascular
Indications. Congestive heart failure
and uterine smooth muscle (see section 8.5). It is used in the
Contra-indications. Pregnant and lactating bitches; car-
treatment of navicular disease (see section 10.7). Isoxsu-
diac output failure; obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyo-
prine is also a positive inotrope.
pathy; concurrent low-sodium diet; concurrent potassium-
sparing diuretics or NSAIDs
PIMOBENDAN
Side-effects. Hypotension; fatigue, lethargy, ataxia
Warnings. Care in patients at risk of hypotension; Drug
UK
 Interactions - see Appendix 1; care with concurrent diuret-
Indications. Congestive heart failure
ics, ACE inhibitors; renal function should be monitored
Contra-indications. Cardiac output failure; hypertrophic
before and during treatment
cardiomyopathy
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 125 micrograms/kg (0.12 mg/kg)
Side-effects.Rarely
vomiting, moderate chronotropic
once daily. May be increased to 250 micrograms/kg (0.25
effect
mg/kg) once daily after 2 weeks
 Warnings. Safety in pregnant and lactating animals has not
been established; Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1; care
POM Vasotop (Intervet) UK
 with concurrent verapamil, propranolol
Tablets, scored, ramipril 1.25 rmg, 2.5 mg, 5 mg, for dogs
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 200-600 micrograms/kg (0.2-06
 mg/kg) daily in 2 divided doses and given approx. 1 hour
IMIDAPRIL
before feeding
UK
Indications. Moderate to severe heart failure due to mitral
POM Vetmedin Capsules (Boehringer Ingelheirm) UK
valve regurgitation or dilated cardiomyopathy
Capsules, pirmobendan 1.25 mg, 2.5 mg, 5 rmg, for dogs
Contra-indications. Hypotension; acute renal impairment;
congenital heart disease; haemodynamically significant
stenoses; obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; hyper-
4.3.3 Vasodilators
sensitivity to ACE inhibitors; pregnant or lactating bitches;
breeding dogs
See also ACE inhibitors (section 4.3.1) and inodilators (sec-
Side-effects. Diarrhoea, hypotension, lethargy, anorexia
tion 4.3.2).
Warnings. Care in patients with hypovolaemia and dehy-
Glyceryl trinitrate and other nitrates relax venous smooth
dration; renal function should be monitored before and dur-
muscle and can be useful preload reducers especially in
ing treatment; care with concurrent diuretics or low-sodium
severe pulmonary oedema. It is also used in acute and
diet; Drug Interactiors - see Appendix 1; plasma-potassium
chronic laminitis in horses as a vasodilator to improve lami-
concentration should be monitored in patients receiving
nar perfusion. Topical ointment formulations are applied to
concurrent potassium-sparing diuretics
provide slow transcutaneous absorption. Tolerance to the
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 250 micrograms/kg (0.25 mg/kg)
effect of glyceryl trinitrate will develop in 3 to 5 days.
once daily
Hydralazine is an arteriodilator causing relaxation of arte-
riolar smooth muscle, probably by local mechanisms. Ade-
POM Prilium (Vetoquinol) UK
quate monitoring should be provided because the initial
Oral solution, powder for reconstitution, irmidipril 5 mg/mL, for dogs. Life of
reconstituted solution 77 days
dose may lead to a precipitous fall in blood pressure. Fur-
Oral solution, powder for reconstitution, irmidipril 10 rmg/mL, for dogs. Life
 thermore, prolonged use of this agent leads to undesirable
of reconstituted solutior 60 days
catecholamine release.
Note. Store solution in refrigerator
Sodium nitroprusside is administered intravenously in
severe congestive heart failure because it is a potent arterial
4.3.2 Inodilators
and venous dilator. It is usually combined with a positive
Pimobendan has positi ve inotrope and vasodilator activity.
inotrope such as dobutamine (see section 4.5) for use under
It inhibits phosphodiesterase thereby increasing intracellu-
intensive care conditions for the management of severe
lar cyclic AMP concentrations. This results in vasodilata-
acute congestive heart failure. Sodium nitroprusside
tion in peripheral and coronary vessels. Pimobendan also
improves cardiac output but may result in marked hypoten-
inicreases the calcium sensitivity of cardiac myofilaments
sion. The positive inotropic effect of dobutamine appears to
4.4 Antidysrhythmics 245
mi tigate this. Both drugs have short duration of action with 
4.3.4 Cerebral vasodilators
a half-life of only 2 to 3 minutes. The dosages givenn are for
These drugs are claimed to improve mental function in aged
guidance and should be adjusted for the individual patient
animals. It is important that patients are thoroughly exam-
in accordance with intensive care monitoring parameters.
 ined and investigation and treatment of specific diseases is
Close attention to monitoring of blood pressure is required.
employed before using these drugs.
Nicergoline is an ergot deri vative, which acts on the vascu-
GLYCERYL TRINITRATE
lar system and cells of the brain. It is an alpha-adrenoceptor
UK
blocking drug acting primarily on alpha, and alpha adreno-
Indications. Cardiogenic
pulmonary
oedema;
acute
ceptors. Nicergoline also blocks serotonin and dopamine
laminitis
receptors.
Contra-indications. Cardiogenic shock
Propentofylline is a xanthine derivative, which alters the
Side-effects. Hypotension; decreased cardiac output
physical characteristics of the blood by increasing erythro-
Warnings. Operators should wear gloves for application of
cyte flexibility, preventing aggregation of erythrocytes and
ointment to patients
platelets, decreasing fibrinogen levels, and inhibiting the
Dose.
action of some inflammatory cytokines.
Horses: by topicat application, 2.5 cm of 2% ointment
applied to each digital vessel of affected feet (maximum
NICERGOLINE
dose 2.5 cm/60 kg body-weight)
Dogs, cats : by topicat application, 0.5-4.0 centimetres of a
UK
 2% ointment applied to inside of pinna or other area free of
Indications. Improvement of age-related disorders, partic-
hair and inaccessible to the patient
ularly behavioural problems
Contra-indications. Use within 24 hours of administration
P  Percutol (PLIVA) UK
of alpha,-adrenoceptor agonists; use before administration
Ointment, glyceryl trinitrate 2%
of vasodilators such as acepromazine and prazosin
Warnings. Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1
HYDRALAZINE HYDROCHLORIDE
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 250-500 micrograms/kg (0.25-0.5
UK
mg/kg) daily, given in the morning
Indications. Mitral regurgitation and left-sided congestive
POM Fitergol (Merial) UK
heart failure
Fablets, or to prepare ar oral solution, nicergoline 5 mg, for dogs 
Side-effects. Reflex tachycardia; hypotension; 
gastro-
Note. Tablets should not be broken. To administer the correct dosage to dogs
intestinal disturbances; depression; anorexia
5-10 kg body-weight, dissolve I tablet in 10 rmL water and give 5 mL of
Dose.
solution irmrmediately Rermaining solution should be discarded
Dogs: by mouth, 0.5-2.0 mg/kg twice daily
Cats: by mouth, 2.5 mg twice daily, increasing to 5 mg
PROPENTOFYLLINE
twice daily if required
UK
POMH Hydralazine (Non-proprietary) UK
Indications. Dullness, lethargy in older dogs; navicular
Tabieis, hydralazine hydrochloride 25 mg, 50 mg
disease in horses+ (see section 10.7)
 Contra-indications. Pregnant or breeding animals
POM)Apresoline (Sovereign) UK
Side-effects. CNS and cardiovascular over-stimulationl
Tablets, s/c, hydralazine hydrochloride 25 mg
Warnings. Safety in pregnant or breeding animals has not
been established
Dose. By mouth, given on an empty stomach 30 minutes
SODIUM NITROPRUSSIDE
before feeding
UK
Dogs: 25 mg/5 kg body-weight twice daily
Indications. Life-threateni ng congestive heart failure
Side-effects. Hypotension
POM Vivitonin (Irntervet) UK
Fableis, scored, propentofylline 50 mg, 100 mg, for dogs
Warnings. Mean arterial blood pressure should be moni-
tored; to avoid cyanide toxicity total dose should be no
4.4 Antidysrhythmics
pared immediately before use and protected from light dur-
ing infusion by wrapping the container in aluminium foil or
4.4.1 Drugs for tachydysrhythmias
some other light-proof material.
4.4.2 Drugs for bradydysrhythmias
Dose. Dogs: by intravenous infusion, 5- 15 micrograms/kg
per minute increasing gradually, maintaining a mean arterial
Abnormal heart rhythms may be due to cardiac or non-car-
blood pressure above 70 mmHg
diac diseases. Examples of the latter include metabolic,
POM) Sodium Nitroprusside (Non-proprietary) UK
toxic, or endocrine disturbances, such as gastric torsion,
Intravenous infusion, powder for reconstiution, for dilution, sodium nitro-
acute pancreatitis, CNS disease, adrenal, spleenic, or thy-
prusside I0 rmg/rmL. To be diluted before use
roid diseases, hypoxia, or electrolyte disturbances. If the
246 Cardiovascular system
primary disease is treated, the dysrhythmia may also
 often used in combination with drugs from classes I or III
resolve even in the absence of cardiac therapy. When
(not class IV because the combination may result in severe
rhythm disturbances are detected, the animal should be
heart block)
thoroughly examined for the presence of primary myocar-
dial disease and for metabolic disturbanices.
4.4.1.1 Class I anti-arrhythmics
Many drugs used to treat tachydysrhythmias are pro-
arrhythmic in that they may exacerbate the disturbance or
Drugs included in this class have a local anaesthetic action.
cause some further rhythm complication. Therefore therapy
They have a membrane-stabilising effect that results in a
should be considered only after an evaluation of the case,
reduced rate of depolarisation. Although the subdi vision of
 this class into A, B, and C is based on their varied effects on
and reserved particularly for disturbances in which the
rhy thm is considered life-threatening and those in which the
the action potential there is no clinical significance in these
disturbance is causing clinical signs of or contributing to
divisions. Only drugs in classes lA (procainamide and qui-
heart failure.
nidine) and 1B (lidocaine and mexilitine) are commonly
used in veterinary medicine.
Quinidine is used mainly to reverse atrial fibrillation in
4.4.1 Drugs for tachydysrhythmias
horses. It prolongs the atrial refractory period, is vagolytic,
4.4.1.1 Class I anti-arrhythmics
and is a negative inotrope. It is rarely used in dogs.
4.4.1.2 Class Il anti-arrhythmics
Lidocaine (without epinephrine) is used intravenously for
4.4.1.3 Class Ill anti-arrhythmics
severe acute ventricular arrhythmias of any cause. Efficient
4.4.1.4 Class IV anti-arrhythmics
metabolism in the li ver precludes long-term use. Phenytoin
(see section 6.9.1) has similar cardiov ascular effects to lido-
Effective drugs are frequently grouped according to the
caine. It is used to treat arrhythmias caused by cardiac gly-
Vaughan Williams classification (see above). As a general
coside toxicity· in dogs at a dose of 35 to 50 mg/kg by
Tule, drugs from the same group should not be admiristered
simultaneously. However in patients that do not respond to
or by intravenous injection and has a similar anti-arrhyth-
treatment, a combination of drugs from different groups can
mic action to lidocaine. It is likely to depress myocardial
sometimes prove to be helpful.
function less than Class A drugs and is more desirable for
There is rarely definitive guidance on which drug is most
dogs with mild congestive heart failure.
likely to be effective, and even the successful suppression
of a rhythm disturbance may not presage an improved sur-
LIDOCAINE HYDROCHLORIDE
vival of the animal.
(Lignocaine hydrochloride)
Atrial fibrillation is rarely reversible in dogs and cats. How-
UK
ever, in performance horses there is frequently no underly-
ing cardiac abnormality and the animal may often return to
Indications. Life-threatening ventricular tachyarrhythmias
such as tachycardia
normal work after therapy with quinidine sulfate. None the
Contra-indications. Atrial fibrillation or flutter
less, treatment requires reasonably intensive monitoring.
The Class CI antidysrhythmic drug flecanide has been sug-
Side-effects. Seizures; hypotension; CNS disturbances
Warnings. Not effective in the presence of hypokalaemia;
gested as ann alternative to quinidine for the conversion of
doses should be reduced in congestive heart failure or
atrial fibrillation in horses, but extensive data on efficacy
hepatic disease; Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1
are lacking.
Dose. Dogs: by slow intravenous injection (given over 3-5
Xe seo pue siop u seipiouoen einouaidns eo
minutes), 2 mg/kg, repeated at 5-10 minute intervals up to a
respond to vagal manioeuvres such as carotid sinus pressure
total dose of 8 mg/kg, followed by intravenous infusion at a
Or ocular pressure but any benefit may only be transient.
rate of 25-75 micrograms/kg per minute
Alternatively, a Class II beta-adrenoceptor blocking drug or
a Class IV calcium antagonist may control the tachycardia.
POM  Lidocaine (Non-proprietary) UK
Additionally digoxin may be administered in combination
Injection, lidocaine hydrochloride (anhydrous) 20 mg/mL
with a drug from Class II or Class IV in cases resistant to
POM H Lidocaine in Glucose Injection (Non -proprietary) UK
therapy. This combination may also be used to control the
Intravenous infusion, lidocaine hydroch loride I mg/rmL and 2 rmg/mL in glu-
ventricular rate in atrial fibrillation in dogs.
cose intravenous infusion 5%
The efficacy of any individual agent for treatment of ven-
POM  Minijet Lignocaine (Celltech) UK
Injection, lidocaine hydrochloride 10 rmg/mL, 20 rmg/mL
caine (without epinephrine) is usually effective. However,
lidocaine may only be administered intravenously and is
rapidly excreted; it is best reserved for emergency treat-
MEXILETINEHYDROCHLORIDE
ment. Lidocaine is ineffective in patients with hypokalae-
UK
mia and may be toxic (especially in cats). Therapy for
Indications. Ventricular tachydy srhythmias, especially fre-
seizures should be readily available when using lidocaine.
quent ventricular premature beats or ventricular tachycar-
Beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs (Class II agents) are
 dia, after conversion with lidocaine
4.4 Antidysrhythmics 247
Contra-indications. Hypotension, very low cardiac output, 
ity. The heart-rate is decreased by a reduction in the sinus
heart block, bradycardia, hepatic impairment
node rate and prolongation of atrioventricular (A-V) node
Side-effects. Gastro-intestinal disturbances, CNS distur-
conduction. These drugs prevent reflex tachycardia and
bances such as seizures
decrease the occurrence of both atrial and ventricular pre-
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 48 mg/kg 2-3 times daily
mature depolarisations. In addition, beta-adrenoceptor
by stow intravenous injection,3-5 mg/kg, followed by
  sd    s 
intravenous infusion at a rate of 5-10 micrograms/kg per
 and may be used to suppress the deleterious effects of venl-
minute
tricular hypertrophy (for example in hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy, hyperthyroidism, or aortic stenosis) and in
Capsules, rmexiletine hydrochloride 50 rmg, 200 mg
systemic hypertension.
injection, mexiletine hydrochloride 25 mg/mL
Propranolol is the most common beta-adrenoceptor block-
ing drug used in veterinary practice for atrial arrhythmias. It
PROCAINAMIDE HYDROCHLORIDE
undergoes hepatic metabolism and has a plasma half-life of
UK
1.5 hours. In heart failure, hepatic blood flow is reduced
Indications. Ventricular arrhythmias such as frequent ven-
and propranolol metabolism is altered with prolonged
administration, therefore the drug is given every 8 hours.
tricular premature depolarisations or ventricular tachycardia
Contra-indications. Untreated atrial fibrillation, conduc-
Bronchial smooth muscle constriction is an important,
tion blocks, poor left ventricular function
undesirable side-effect of non-specific beta-adrenoceptor
Side-effects. Gastro-intestinal disturbances
blocking drugs. Therefore, high doses should be gradually
introduced over 3 to 5 days. Non-selective beta-adrenocep-
see notes above
tor blocking drugs should be used with care in patients with
Dose. Dogs: by intramuscular injection, 8-20 mg/kg 4
diabetes mellitus.
times daily
There are many other compounds in this group. Atenolol is
by stow intravenous injection (given over 5 minutes), initial
 beta, -receptor selective and long acting and is often useful
dose 6-8 mg/kg, followed by intravenous infusion at a rate
for long-term therapy for example in cats with hypertrophic
 of 10-40 micrograms/kg per mirute
cardiomyopathy or hypertension. Metoprolol is highly
beta,-receptor selective and has been used in dogs and cats
POMH Pronestyl (Squibb) UK
in preference to atenolol. Esmolol is ultra-short acting and
Injection, procainarmide hydrochloride 100 mg/mL
very useful for the investigation and immediate therapy of
tachycardias. For all beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs,
QUINIDINE
doses should be gradually increased from the lowest recom-
UK
mended levels, and titrated on an individual patient basis.
Indications. Supraventricular arrhythmias especially atrial
Carvedilol, a beta-adrenoceptor blocking drug with vasodi-
fibrillation
lator properties, has been shown to be particularly effective
Contra-indications. Hepatic impairment
at prolonging life in humans with congestive heart failure;
Side-effects.Anorexia, vomiting, diarrhoea, tachycardia,
studies in dogs are not yet reported. Sotalol has non-
ventricular fibrillation, allergic responses, lamimitis, ataxia,
selective beta-adrenoceptor acti vity (see section 4.4. 1.3)
nasal mucosal swelling
Warnings. Increased toxicity in cases with hypoalbumi-
naemia, monitor the ECG in horses; Drug Interactions - see 
ATENOLOL
Appendix 1
Dose. Expressed as quinidine sulfate
UK
Horses: by stomach tube, 20 mg/kg every 2 hours until
Indications. Supraventricular arrhythmias; excessive venl-
arrhythmia is abolished or toxic side-effects are seenn (maxi-
tricular hypertrophy
mum 60 g daily)
Contra-indications. Concurrent administration of quini-
Dogs: by mouth, 6- 16 mg/kg 3-4 times daily
dine, hepatic impairment with decreased blood flow,
asthma, small airway disease, sick sinus syndrome, atrio-
Note. Quinidine sulfate 200 mg = quinidine bisulfate
ventricular block
250 mg
Side-effects. Bronchospasm,
，myocardial
depression,
bradycardia, hypotension
POMH) Quinidine Sulfate (Non-proprietary) UK
Warnings. Bronchospasm, negative inotropic properties
Tabieis, quinidine sulfate 200 mg
may exacerbate congestive heart failure, reduce dose in
POM Kinidin Durules (AstraZeneca) UK
renal impairment
Tableis, m/r, f/c, quinidine bisulfate 250 mg
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 100-500 micrograms/kg 1-2 times
daily
4.4.1.2 Class Il anti-arrhythmics
Cats: by mouth, 1-2 mg/kg 1-2 times daily
Drugs included in this class are beta-adrenoceptor blocking
POM (H Atenolol (Non-proprietary) UK
drugs (beta-blockers), which antagorise sympathetic activ-
Tabiets, atenolol 25 mg, 50 rmg, 100 mg
248Cardiovascular system
POM(H) Tenormin (AstraZeneca) UK
4.4.1.3 Class Ill anti-arrhythmics
Tablets, f/c, atenolol 25 mg, 50 rmg, 100 mg
Syrup, atenolol 5 mg/mL
Drugs in this class prolong the action potential and hence
the effective refractory period. They are mainly used in ven-
tricular tachycardia resistant to other therapy and are some-
ESMOLOL HYDROCHLORIDE
times combined with Class I agents. Sotalol combines
UK
Class III activity with beta-adrenoceptor blockade and has
been used effectively in dogs. Amiodarone has anti-
Indications. Tachycardias,
especially
supraventricular
tachycardias;i
 investi gati on
arrhythmic effects of all four classes and has been success-
andacute
treatment
tachycardias
fully used in the treatment of ventricular tachycardia in
Contra-indications. Bradycardia, heart block
Dobermanns.
Side-effects. Weakness, bradycardia
Dose.Dogs: by intravenous injection, 100-500 micro-
AMIODARONE HYDROCHLORIDE
grams/kg (0.1-0.5 mg/kg)
UK
by intravenous infusion, 0.5-1.0 mg/kg given over 5
Indications. Supraventricular and ventricular arrhythmias
minutes
Contra-indications. Thyrotoxicosis, bradycardia
Side-effects. Gastro-intestinal
disturbances,
POM Brevibloc (Baxter) UK
anorexia,
Injection, esmolol hydrochloride 10 rmg/mL
weight loss, corneal deposits, hepatic impairment, negative
fnjection, for dilution, esrmolol hydrochloride 250 mg/mL. For dilution
inotropic properties, thyroidal disturbances, pulmonary
before use as intravenous infusion
fibrosis
Warnings. This drug should be used with caution
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 10 mg/kg twice daily, reducing to
METOPROLOL TARTRATE
5.0-7.5 mg/kg once daily
UK
by intravenous injection, 10-20 mg/kg
Indications. Supraventricular arrhythmias; excessive venl-
POM  Amiodarone Hydrochloride (Non-proprietary) UK
tricular hypertrophy
Tablei5s, amiodarone hydrochloride 100 mg, 200 rmg
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See
unider
Atenolol
POMH Cordarone X (Sanofi-Synthelabo) UK
Dose. Dogs, cats: by mouth, 0.5-1.0 mg/kg 3 times daily
Fablets, scored, amiodarone hydrochloride 100 mg, 200 mg; 28
fnjection, for dilution, armiodarone hydrochloride 50 mg/mL. For dilution
POM Metoprolol (Non-pcoprietary) UK
before use as intravenous infusion
Tablets, metoprolol tartrate 50 mg, 100 mg
SOTALOL HYDROCHLORIDE
POMH) Betaloc (AstraZeneca)
Tablets,rmetoprolol tartrate 50 mg, 100 mg
UK
POMH Lopresor (Novartis)
Indications. Ventricular tachydysrhythmias
Tablets, f/c, scored, rmetoprolol tartrate 50 rmg, 100 rmg
Contra-indications. Atrio-venitricular block
Side-effects. Bradycardia,
atrio-ventricular
block,
weakness
PROPRANOLOL HYDROCHLORIDE
Warnings. Use with care in moderate to severe congestive
UK
heart failure
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 2-4 mg/kg twice daily. Commenice
Indications. Supraventricular tachycardia; hypertrophic
with low dose and increase according to individual patient
cially in cats; atrial or ventricular premature depolarisa-
response
tions; behaviour modification (see section 6.11.6)
POMH Sotalol (Non-proprietary) UK
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See
under
Tableis, sotalol hydrochloride 40 mg, 80 rmg, 1 60 rng
Atenolol; caution in hepatic impairment
POM  Beta-Cardone (Celtech) UK
Dose. Cardiac conditions, by mouth.
Tablets, scored, sotalol hydrochloride 40 mg, 80 rmg, 200 mg
Dogs: 20- 100 micrograms/kg 3 times daily, increasing over
3-5 days to a maximum of 1 mg/kg 3 times daily as
POM H Sotacor (Bristol-Myers Squibb)
necessary
Tableis, scored, sotalol hydrochloride 80 mg, 1 60 rmg
Cats: 2.5 mg 3 times daily, increasing over 3-5 days to up
to 10 mg 3 times daily as necessary
4.4.1.4 Class IV anti-arrhythmics
POM Propranolol (Non-proprietary) UK
Drugs in this class inhibit slow calcium channels and dilate
Tablei5, propranolol hydrochloride 10 mg, 40 rmg, 80 mg, 160 mg
capillaries. They have a profound depressant effect on atrio-
Oral solution, propranolol hydrochloride I mg/mL, 2 mg/mL, 10 rmg/mL
ventricular nodal conduction and are the drugs of choice for
(available as 'Special Order'from Rosermont)
severe acute supraventricular tachycardias. In addition, they
POM H Inderal (AstraZeneca)
are potent coronary artery dilators and cause hypotension.
Tablets, f/, propranolol hydrochloride 10 mg, 40 mg, 80 mg
 A negative inotropic effect may ex acerbate congestive heart
4.4 Antidysrhythmics 249
failure. However, these drugs may also be valuable for
POM Hypercard 10 (Amolds) UK
Fablets, s/c, diltiazerm hydrochloride 10 rmg, for cats
roi dism, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and aortic stenosis,
and for systemic hypertension.
VERAPAMIL HYDROCHLORIDE
Verapamil is the calcium channel blocker of choice for
UK
intravenous administration, while diltiazem is used for
Indications. Supraventricular tachyarrhythmias; sustained
long-term oral therapy and is believed to be a less potent
anid
paroxysmal
tachycardia;
excessive
ventricular
negative inotrope than verapamil. Diltiazem may be used in
hypertrophy
the treatment of unresponsive supraventricular tachycardias
Contra-indications.
Atrioventricular block, hypotension,
sick sinus syndrome
be used with beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs, but signifi-
Side-effects. Hypotension,
bradycardia,
myocardial
cant bradycardia may result. Amlodipine is now the drug of
depressionl
choice for hypertension in cats. It is sometimes used in
Warnings. Serum-glucose concentration should be moni-
combination wih ACE-inhibitors (see section 4.3.1). Beta-
tored in diabetic animals; avoid use in hepatic impairment;
adrenoceptor blocking drugs are also used.
use with caution in cats with congestive heart failure; ani-
AMLODIPINE BESILATE
rane should be monitored closely; Drug Interactions - see
(Amlodipine besylate)
Appendix 1
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 1-5 mg/kg 3 times daily
UK
by intravenous injection, 500 micrograms/kg (0.5 mg/kg)
Indications. Systemic hypertension, especially in cats
every 10- 30 minutes according to the patient's response
Contra-indications.Low
cardiac
output,
shock,
Cats : by mouth, 1.1-2.9 mg/kg 3 times daily
hypotension
Side-effects. Possible ataxia and lethargy; hypotension
POM Verapamil (Non-proprietary) UK
especially if combined with other hypotensive drugs
Tablets, coated, veraparmil hydrochloride 40 rmg, 80 mg, 120 rmg, 160 mg
Warnings. Blood pressure should be monitored regularly;
Oral solution, veraparmil hydrochloride 8 mg/mL (available as 'Special
Order'frorm Rosermont)
reduce dosage in hepatic impairment; use with care in car-
diac failure
POM Cordilox (IVAX) UK
Dose. By mouth.
Fablets,f/c, veraparmil hydrochloride 40 mg, 80 mg, 120 mg, 160 rmg
Dogs: 50-100 micrograms/kg (0.05-0.1 mg/kg) 1-2 times
Injection, verapamil hydrochloride 2.5 mg/mL
POM H Securon (Abbott) UK
Cats: 250 micrograms/kg (0.25 mg/kg) once daily
Fablets, veraparmil hydrochloride 40 mg, 120 rmg
Injection, veraparmil hydrochloride 2.5 mg/mL
POM Istin (Pfizer) UK
Tablets, armlodipine (as besilate) 5 rmg, 10 rmg
DILTIAZEM HYDROCHLORIDE
4.4.2 Drugs for bradydysrhythmias
UK
Indications. Feline hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
mal should be carefully evaluated for metabolic, endocrine,
Contra-indications. Atrioventricular block; hypotension;
and other ex traneous disease.
sick sinus syndrome; renal impairment; hypersensitivity to
If bradycardia is vagally mediated,antimuscarinic drugs
diltiazem; severe bradycardia or arterial hypotension; cats
such as atropine may be effective. However, side-effects are
less than 12 months of age or 3 kg body-weight; pregnant or
li kely. Direct sympathomimetic agents, such as terbutaline,
lactating cats
and methylxanthines may also be effective and are less
Side-effects.
. Occasional constipation; inappetence; tran-
likely to cause side-effects. Adrenoceptor stimulants are
sient lethargy; erythema; bradycardia; hypotension; cardiac
conduction abnormalities
For serious and persistent disease, artificial pacemakers
Warnings. Serum-glucose concentration should be moni-
may be essential. These should prevent cardiac asystole and
tored in diabetic animals; avoid use in hepatic impairment;
 therefore reduce episodes of syncope and prevent sudden
use with caution in cats with congestive heart failure; care
death.
with concurrent cimetidine, beta-adrenoceptor blocking
Atropine sulfate and glycopyrronium (see section 6.6. 1)
drugs, cardiac glycosides, other calcium channel blockers,
are used for the treatment of bradycardia,incomplete A-V
anticonvulsants, immunosuppressants, lithium, neuromus-
block+, and sino-atrial arrest + in dogs and cats. The dose
cular blocking drugs, aminoglycosides, gaseous anaesthet-
for atropine is 10 to 20 micrograms/kg by intramuscular or
ics; Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1; cardiac rate should
intravenous injection or 30 to 40 micrograms/kg subcutane-
be monitored before and during treatment; tablets must not
 ously. The dose for glycopyrronium is 5 to 10 micrograms/
be broken; wash hands after handling the product
kg by subcutaneous, intramuscular, or intravenous injec-
Dose. Dogs + : by mouth, 0.5- 1.5 mg/kg 3 times daily
tion. The antimuscarinic agent propantheline bromide (see
Cats: by mouth, 1.6-3.3 mg/kg 3 times daily
section 9.4) can also be effective and causes fewer side-
250Cardiovascular system
effects than atropine sulfate. The dose given is 0.5 to 1.0
POM Dobutrex (Lilly) UK
mg/kg orally three times daily.
Intravenous infusion, for dilution, dobutarmine (as hydrochloride) 12.5 mg/
mL. To be diluted before use
POM Posiject(Boehringer Ingelheim) UK
4.5 Adrenoceptor stimulants
Intravenous infusion, for dilution, dobutarmine (as hydrochloride) 12.5 mg/
(Sympathomimetics)
mL. To be diluted before use
Adrenoceptor stimulants are used for cardiovascular sup-
EPINEPHRINE
port in the management of critically ill patients. These are
(Adrenaline)
usually cases under anaesthesia or recovering from major
UK
surgery. Patients in shock, especially cardiogenic in origin,
Indications. Anaphylaxis; cardiac arrest
may also benefit from this type of support. However, pro-
Side-effects. Anxiety, fear, restlessness; tachycardia, verl
longed use of these agenits in humans has led to decreased
tricular arrhythmias
survival.
Warnings. Epinephrine solutions should be diluted to at
The properties of adrenoceptor stimulants vary according to
least 1 in 10 000 (100 micrograms/mL) for all animal use;
whether they act on alpha- or beta-adrenergic receptors
monitor ECG; Drug Interactions
see Appendix
.1
(adrenoceptor stimulants)
tors and increases both the heart-rate and the contractility
Dose. By subcutaneous or intravenous injection or intra-
(beta, effects). It can cause peripheral vasodilation (a beta,
tracheal administration, 20 micrograms/kg
effect) or vasoconstriction (an alpha effect). Epinephrine is
used in the emergency treatment of acute allergic and ana-
POM H Epinephrine Injection 1 in 1000 (Non-proprietary) UK
phylactic reactions. The use of epinephrine by intracardiac
injection, epinephrine (as acid tartrate) I rmg/mL (I in 1000)
For subcutaneous or intrarmuscular injection
administration is not recommended. In cardiac arrest, the
drug is best administered either intratracheally or via a cen-
POM Epinephrine Injection 1in 10 000, Dilute (Non-proprietary) UK
tral veirn.
fnjection, epinephrine (as acid tartrate) 100 micrograrms/mL (l in 10 000)
The cardiac stimulant dobutamine acts on beta -receptors
 For intravenous injection
in cardiac muscle, with minimal effect on heart-rate or sys-
temic vascular resistance. It has a positive inotropic effect
4.6 Anticoagulants
and is used for cardiogenic shock. It is also used during
equine anaesthesia to maintain mean blood pressure above
4.6.1 Parenteral anticoagulants
approximately 70 mmHg in order to prevent hypotension-
4.6.2 Oral anticoagulants
induced myopathy, a not uncommon complication of anaes-
4.6.3 Protamine sulfate
thesia in horses.
Isoprenaline is less selecti ve and increases both heart-rate
Anticoagulant drugs are much less frequently used in veter-
and contractility. It has been used to increase heart rate in
 inary medicine than in human patients because atheroscle-
some bradycardias but cardiac pacemakers are usually more
rotic disease and prolonged postoperati ve recumbency are
effective. Isoprenaline may also cause tachycardia or
not common veterinary problems. Anticoagulants are
fibrillation.
mainly used to maintain the patency of vascular catheters
and are part of the management of disseminated intravascu-
lar coagulation (DIC). In DIC, administration of fresh
blood, platelet rich plasma, or plasma may also be
DOBUTAMINE
indicated.
The main use of anticoagulants is to prevent thrombus for-
UK
mation or the extension of an existing thrombus. These
Indications. Cardiogenic shock; dilated cardiomyopathy
drugs act by affecting the clotting mechanisms. Aspirin
with congestive heart failure; hypotension during equine
anlaesthesia
thrombo-embolism secondary to cardiomyopathy; the dose
Side-effects. Tachyarrhythmias; seizures in cats
for antiplatelet action is up to 75 mg by mouth, once every 3
Warnings. Monitor ECG; Drug Interactions - see Appen-
days. Aspirin acts by reducing platelet aggregation and
dix 1 (adrenoceptor stimulants)
inhibiting thrombus formation particularly in the arterial
Dose.
circulation.
Horses: by intravenous infusion, up to 5 micrograms/kg per
minute (doses of less than 1 microgram/kg per minute are
4.6.1 Parenteral anticoagulants
often sufficient)
Dogs: by intravenous infusion, 2-7 micrograms/kg per
The action of heparin inhi bits thrombus formation but does
minute (for up to 3 days in cases of cardiomyopathy)
Cats: by intravenous infusion, up to 4 micrograms/kg per
effective, which makes it suitable for emergency situations.
minute
It is metabolised in the liver and has a plasma half-life of 2
4.6 Anticoagulants 251
hours. Heparin has been used irn cats with thromboembo-
4.6.2 Oral anticoagulants
lism. For patients receiving treatment, the activated partial
Coumarin deri vative anticoagulants inhibit the hepatic synl-
thromboplastin time, activated coagulation time, or kaolin-
thesis of vitamin K-dependent clotting factors and are thus
cephalin time should be monitored frequently and main-
more suitable than heparin where prolonged therapy is
tai ned at 1.5 to 2.5 times normal.
required. Warfarin is well absorbed from the intestine and
is highly bound to plasma albumin. The onset of effect
Partial thromboplastin time, activated coagulation time,
occurs after 6 to 12 hours, with ful1 benefit realised after 2
and kaolin-cephalin time results are highly variable and
to 3 days of repetitive administration. The effects of warfa-
practitioners are advised to use the normal values
rin therapy should be monitored. Two blood samples should
supplied by the appropriate veterinary testing laboratory.
be taken on separate days before treatment is started to
establish the baseline one stage prothrombin time (OSPT)
for that particular animal. OSPT should be monitored daily,
For maintaining catheter patency, sodium chloride intrave-
with samples taken at the same time each day for compara-
nous infusion 0.9% is as effective as heparin flushes for up
tive purposes, until it reaches a steady state of 1.5 to 2.0
to 48 hours and is therefore recommended for cannulas
times the base level for a particular dose of warfarin. There-
intended to be in place for up to 2 days. Heparin flushes are
after twice weekly OSPT measurements are advised for sev-
recommended for cannulas intended to be in place for
eral weeks and then once every 2 months for animals on
longer than 48 hours. Heparin injection diluted to 5 units/
long-term therapy.
mL in sodium chloride intravenous infusion 0.9% may be
Warfarin is used in cats with thromboembolism, and has
used. Commercially available heparin flushes should not be
been used for treatment of navicular disease (but see section
used for therapeutic purposes.
10.7).
If haemorrhage occurs it is usually sufficient to withdraw
Phytomenadione (vitamin K,) is used in the treatment of
heparin, but if rapid reversal of the effects of heparin is
overdose of coumarin anticoagulants (see Treatment of
required, protamine sulfate is anl antidote (see section
poisoning).
4.6.3).
Many drugs are capable of displacing warfarin from plasma
Heparin may be indicated in equine laminitis (see section
albumin, causing an increase in free warfarin and possible
15.1) both for its anticoagulant effect and its potentially
haemorrhage (Drug Interactionis - see Appendix 1).
beneficial effect on the laminar basement membrane.
HEPARIN SODIUM
WARFARIN SODIUM
UK
UK
Indications. Venous thrombosis; disseminated intravascu-
Indications.Vascular thrombosis; navicular disease (see
lar coagulation; pulmonary thrombo-embolism; laminitis in
section 10.7)
horses (see section 15.1)
Contra-indications. Purpura, malnutrition, haemorthage,
Contra-indications. Hepatic
impairment, haemorrhage;
late pregnancy; Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1
Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1
Side-effects. Haermorrhage
Side-effects. Haemorrhage
Warnings. Monitor effects of Warfarin therapy, see notes
Dose.
above; Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1
Horses: laminitis, by subcutaneous injection, 40-100 units/
Dose. Horses: by mouth, 20 micrograms/kg daily increas-
kg 3 times daily; see also chapter 15
ing gradually to desired effect (usual dose range: 16-170
Dogs: by subcutaneous injection, 100-250 units/kg 3 times
micrograms/kg)
daily
Cats : by mouth, 500 micrograms once daily
by intravenous injection, initial dose 100-200 units/kg then
 50 units/kg every 3 hours
POM Warfarin (Non-proprietary) UK
Cats: by subcutaneous injection, 200 units/kg 3 times daily
Fabiets, scored, warfarin sodiurm 0.5 mg, I mg, 3 mg, 5 mg
POMH Heparin (Non-proprietary) UK
4.6.3 Protamine sulfate
injetion, heparin sodium 1000 units/mL, 5000 units/mL, 25 000 units/mL
Although protamine sulfate is used to counteract overdos-
Heparin catheter flushes (Not for therapeutic use)
age with heparin, if used in excess it has an anticoagulant
effect.
POM(H) Heparin Sodium (Non-proprietary) UK
Sol ution, heparin sodiurm 10 units/mL, 100 units/rmL
POM( Canusal (CP) UK
PROTAMINE SULFATE
Sol ution, heparin sodiurm 100 units/mL
(Protamine sulphate)
POM(H Hepsal (CP) UK
UK
Sol ution, heparin sodium 10 units/mL
Indications. See niotes above
252 Cardiovascular system
Dose. By stow intravenous injection, 1 mg neutralises 100
4.7 Haemostatics
units heparin. Decrease dose by 50% for every hour elapsed
since heparin administration.
The use of phytomenadione (vitamin K,) in the treatment
 of anticoagulant poisoning is described in Treatment of poi-
POM Protamine Sulfate (Non-proprietary) UK
soning. Tranexamic acid is an antifibrinolytic drug which
injection, protarmine sulfate 10 mg/mL
inhibits breakdown of fibrin clots. It is used to prevent and
POM (H Prosulf (CP) UK
control surgical haemorrhage.
Injection, protarmine sulfate 10 mg/mL
Epinephrine (see section 4.5) may be applied topically as a
haemostatic. Ferric chloride solution 15% has also been
used topically to arrest bleeding from small wounds
Dressings containing calcium alginate are available for
control of wound haemorrhage during surgical procedures.
253
5
Drugs used in the treatment of disorders of the
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
Contributors:
tion, antibacterials may prevent the horse developing a pro-
B M Corcoran MVB, PhD,MRCVS
tectiveimmuneresponse.
D H Grove-White BVSc, DBR, FRCVS
Inflammatory lower airway disease with secondary bacte-
T S Mair BVSc, PhD, DEIM, DESTS, DipECEIM, MRCVS
tial infection by a variety of bacterial species such as Strep
D J Taylor MA, VetMB, PhD, DipECVPM, MRCVS
tococcus equi subspecies zooepidemicus, Pasteurella spp.,
 5.1 Treatment of respiratory infections
and Bordetella bronchiseptica is common following viral
infections. Primary infections with these bacteria and Strep-
5.2 Bronchodilators
5.3 Drugs for allergic and inflammatory disorders
tococcus pneumoniae and Mycoplasma spp. may also occur
 5.4 Mucolytics and expectorants
     s  
5.5 Antitussives
broad-spectrum antibacterials is helpful in these cases,
5.6 Respiratory stimulants
which may also benefit from the administration of mucolyt-
 5.7 Nasal decongestants
ics and bronchodilators.
the UK and Eire, but sometimes develop in animals stressed
5.1 Treatment of respiratory
by long-distance travel. Mixed bacterial infections includ-
infections
ing anaerobes are usually present in these conditions and
aggressive antibacterial therapy based on bacterial culture
Bacterial and viral infections are among the main causes of
 and sensitivity results is required for treatment; metronida-
respiratory disease. Wherever possible, the identity of the
zole is helpful in cases where anaerobic infections are
causative organism should be sought and appropriate treat-
 present. Rifampicin is frequently used in combination with
n   n  
erythromycin for the treatment of some pneumonic condi
Respiratory bacterial infections may be primary (Mannhe-
tions in foals, particularly those caused by Rhodococcus
imia haemotytica in cattle and sheep, Bordetella bron-
equi infection.
chiseptica in horses, dogs, and cats, Actinobacius
In horses, viral causes of respiratory disease include the
-sadey suinbe pue sosnioxu yo dnon ezuonui suinba
tions involving a wide range of micro-organisms found in
virus 1 and 4; vaccination against these viruses is available
the upper airways as normal bacterial flora such as Burkhol-
(see section 18.1).
deria cepacia,Klebsiella,E.coli,Proteus,Pasteurella,Sta-
Donkeys can carry subclinical infections of the lungworm
phylococcus, Streptococcus, and Haemophilus.
   sr e  
In general, antibacterials effective for treatment of respira-
when grazing pasture that has been contaminated. Ir horses,
tory tract infections include the potentiated sulphonamides
lungworm infections rarely reach patency but may induce a
(see section 1.1.6.2), tetracyclines (see section 1.1.2),
climical disease characterised by chronic coughing. Treat-
fluoroquinolones (see section 1.1.9), macrolides (see sec-
ment with ivermectin, moxidectin, or some benzimidazoles
tion 1.1.4), pleuromutilins (see section 1.1.10),
and
is effective in eliminating the infection.
cephalospori ns (see section 1. 1. 1.5).
In the UK, further information on control of respiratory
Adjunctive treatment including NSAIDs, fluid and nutri-
infections is provided in the National Trainers Federation
tional support may aid recovery.
Code ofpractice for respiratory diseases affecting horses
Preventitive measures include attention to the quality of
and the Horserace Betting Levy Board Guidelines on
housing (particularly for farm livestock), transportation of
strangtes.
animals, and quality of nutrition. The use of vaccines to
Conditions affecting cattle. The aetiology of calf pneumo-
provide specific protection against pulmonary and upper
nia is complex invol ving both non-infectious factors such as
respiratory tract infection is described in Chapter 18.
housing, weather, nutrition, and general management in
Species-specific conditions and treatment are discussed
addition to infectious agents namely viruses, mycoplasma,
below.
and bacteria. Infection usually includes secondary bacterial
Conditions affecting horses. Strangles is a bacterial infec-
infection and primary viral infection (often involving more
tion caused by Streptococcus equi subspecies equi and char-
than one virus). The major viruses invol ved are parainflu-
acterised by purulent lymphadenitis of the submandibular
eniza 3, infectious bovine rhinotracheitis, bovine respiratory
and retropharyngeal lymph nodes. Although the organism is
syncytial virus, and bovine virus diarrhoea, while the main
susceptible to penicillins, antibacterial treatment should be
bacteria involved are Mannheimia haemolytica, Pasteurella
avoided once abscesses have formed because this may
multocida,Haemophitus somnus,Mycoplasma bovis,and
delay their maturation and rupture. Penicillins may be effec-
Arcanobacterium pyogenes.
tively used before abscesses have developed or after they
Antibacterials used for treatment include broad-spectrum
have ruptured. However, if used early in the course of infec-
 penicillins such as amoxicillin, cephalosporins for example
254 Respiratory system
ceftiofur and cefquinome, macrolides such as tylosin and
Envirorimental factors affect the incidence of respiratory
floxacin, potentiated sulphonamides, florfenicol, spectino-
 kept such as temperature, humidity, ventilation, airborne
mycin, and tetracyclines. Antibacterials may be used in
dust, gases, and bacteria are important. In addition, social
individual animals or on a group basis. They may also be
factors such as age, genetics, herd size, and stocking density
administered prophylactically before expected risk of dis-
should be considered. Also management factors such as
ease, for ex ample after transport.
purchase of pigs, method of production and manure sys-
NSAIDs (see section 10. 1) such as flunixin, ketoprofen, and
tems, and amount of mixing and moving of pigs should be
carprofen may be used as an adjunct to antibacterial therapy
taken into account.
with beneficial effects on both mortality and future growth
Antibacterials effective for the treatment of pigs with
rates. Corticosteroids (see section 7.2) are generally contra-
enzootic pneumonia include tiamulin, val nemulin, ceftiofur,
indicated although soluble short acting corticosteroids may
lincomycin, tetracyclines, and tylosin. A combination of
be of value in acutely dyspnoeic animals such as in peracute
tiamulin and chlortetracycline has been successful irn con-
bovine respiratory sync ytial virus infections.
trol of the disease on many farms. Enrofloxacin and tilmi-
Mucolytics, for example bromhexine, may be used in some
cosin have been used in the treatment and control of
cases of pneumonia.
enzootic pneumonia and bacterial pneumonia. Infection
Vaccines are available for prevention of viral pneumonias
caused by Actinobacilfus pleuropneumoniae has been suc-
and M. haemolytica infection (see section 18.2.2) and live
cessfully treated with ceftiofur, enrofloxacin, tiamulin, and
vaccines given by intranasal administration may reduce
sulfadiazine with trimethoprim but the damage caused by
the lesions may be irreversible and the prognosis for indi-
disease.
vidual affected pigs may be poor.
Infection of cattle with the lungworm Dictyocaufus vivipa-
Adjunctive treatment with the NSAID ketoprofen (see sec-
rus results in respiratory disease and is a condition of eco-
nomic importance. Pasture management, anthelmintic
distress.
therapy, and vaccination (see section 18.2.10) are used to
Verminous pneumonia caused by Ascaris suum or Meta-
control lungworm infection.
 sed uo ndoy so shid un siooo dds sua
more likely to be infected with lungworm. Treatment of
Conditions affecting sheep. The major acute pneumonic
individual animals is by injection with levamisole or aver-
condition of sheep is pasteurellosis caused by Mannheimia
mectins, such as ivermectin or doramectin. Growing or
haemolytica serotype A2 and infection with this organism is
adult pigs are treated with benzimadazoles or ivermectin by
susceptible to the same antimicrobials used for its treatment
group medication in the feed.
in cattle. Pasteurella trehalosi infections may present as
Control of respiratory disease in pigs is important and pre-
pneumonia and may be treated in the same way but are less
ventative strategies are developing. Targeting specific anti-
sensitive to penicillin. New and effective vaccines against
microbial therapy (based on examination of suitable
these two infections mean that passive protection of the
samples) is combined with vaccination and reduction of
lamb and active protection of the growing and adult sheep
adverse erivironmental factors. The increased availability of
are now routine. These vaccines are available alone or in
vaccines for respiratory disease means that progressive
combination with vaccines for clostridial infections (see
atrophic rhinitis (Pasteure lla muftocida) is now preventable
section 18.2).
by maternal vaccination. Enzootic pneumonia and pleuro-
pneumonia caused by the major serotypes of Actinobacillus
Conditions affecting pigs. Respiratory conditions in pigs
pleuropneumoniae, and Glasser's disease caused by sero-
are usually the result of several respiratory pathogens com-
and e se ssad so ro s pue t sds
bined with environmental factors. On farms with endemic
respiratory disease, growing and finishing pigs are mainly
Aujeszky's disease occurs, vaccination programmes can
affected. Bacteria involved include Pasteurefla muftocida,
prevent pneumonia caused by this virus in finishing pigs.
Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae,Haemophilus parasuis,
Influenza vaccines and vaccines against porcine respiratory
Bordetella bronchiseptica,Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae,
and reproductive syndrome virus may also reduce respira-
and Streptococcus suis. Viral infections may include por-
tory disease.
cine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus, inclusion
Management practices are changing from keeping of all
body rhinitis virus, varying strains of swine influenza virus,
breeding and finishing pigs to multi-site operations. By seg-
and respiratory coronavirus. The herpesvirus of Aujeszky's
regating breeding, weanet, and finishing pigs on to separate
disease will also produce lung pathology. Mycoplasma
sites there is reduction in the usual spread of infectious
hyopneumoniae continues to be a major cause of lung dis-
agents from older to younger pigs. Multi-site production
infected with porcine circovirus type 2, and where post-
after removal from the dam and while still protected by pas-
weaning multisystemic wasting syndrome (PMwS) and
sive maternal immunity (previously modified medicated
porcine dermatitis and nephropathy syndrome (PDNS)
early weaning, now isowean) has been successful in reduc-
OCCur.
ing and even eliminating conditions on farms with
5.2 Bronchodilators 255
previously intractable respiratory disease of multiple aetiol-
 The principal endoparasites affecting the respiratory system
ogy. Batch farrowing, and strict hygiene and disinfection
of dogs are Osternus osteri (Filaroides osteri) and Creno-
protocols are important. The complete depopulation and
soma vuipis, and in cats, Aeturostrongyfus abstrusus
restocking of farms with pigs free from all respiratory dis-
Migrating ascarid larvae may also cause respiratory disease.
ease is increasingly being practised. On farms that purchase
 Benzimidazole anthelmintics (see section 2.1.1.2) are the
weaners for finishing, pigs with the same known respiratory
 drugs of choice in treating respiratory parasites in dogs and
micro-organism profile are often mixed if more tharn one
cats.
source of weaner is used. This practice is of little value
unless account is taken of the serotypes and antibiotic
5.2 Bronchodilators
resistance patterns of the two populations of organism.
5.2.1 Methylxanthines
Conditions affecting dogs and cats. In small animals, the
5.2.2 Adrenoceptor stimulants
main respiratory infectious agenits are Bordetella bron-
5.2.3 Antimuscarinic bronchodilators
      e 
Chlamydophila felis (Chlamydia psittaci),feline herpes-
Bronchodilators are used where there is suspicion of bron-
virus (feline rhinotracheitis virus), calicivirus, Bordetella
chial narrowing due to excessive bronchial secretion or
bronchiseptica, and Mycoplasma spp. in cats. Effective vac-
bronchoconstriction or where improved alveolar ventilation
cines against most of these pathogens are available; B.
is required.
bronchiseptica is susceptible to most broad-spectrum anti-
including mild tracheobronchitis and recurrent airway
fluoroquinolones.
obstruction (see further information section 5.3) in horses,
Treatment of severe bronchopneumonia in dogs with multi-
and bronchopneumonia and chronic pulmonary interstitial
disease in all species. They are oftenn used, with or without
single antibacterial treatment. Recommendations vary but a
concurrent corticosteroid therapy, for the control of chronic
typical regimen would include a cephalosporin, fluoroqui-
bronchitis ir dogs and asthma syndrome in cats. Hypox-
nolone, and clindamycin. Addition of potentiated sulphona-
aemia is a possible complication of bronchodilator therapy
mides may be beneficial in some instanices. Treatment
 caused by ventilation-perfusion mismatching; this may be
should be given for at least 8 weeks. Concerns have been
raised about the use of multiple antibacterial therapy in
in young animals such as calves and foals.
The assessment of airway function, airway calibre, and
combinations. It is standard recommendation that bacteri-
bronchomotor tone is often subjective. The choice and use
cidal (for example cephalosporins, fluoroquinolones) and
of a bronchodilator may be primarily on an empirical basis.
bacteriostatic (such as clindamycin, potentiated sulphona-
 In diseases where the airway obstruction mainly affects the
mides, tetracyclines) should not be used together in the
 bronchioles, bronchodilator therapy may be most effective
treatment of bacterial infections. However, clinical experi-
if administered by aerosol.
ence suggests that the use of such combinations in dogs
with severe fulminating bacterial bronchopneumonia rarely
5.2.1 Methylxanthines
causes problems and that the use of a single antibiotic alone
Methylx anthines incl uding aminophylline, etamiphylline,
is less likely to effect a cure.
diprophylline, and theophylline induce bronchodilation of
Aminoglycosides such as gentamicin may be administered
the smaller airways by inhibition of phosphodiesterase and
to dogs by nebulisation. Gentamicin 50 mg is diluted in
antagonism of adenosine receptors; they have little effect on
4 mL sodium chloride 0.9% and administered 4 times daily.
The procedure is well tolerated and there are minimal renal
by stimulating the respiratory centre in the medulla
toxic effects. Nebulisation as a drug delivery method is
oblongata.
being more widely used in companion animal medicine,
Methylxanthines are more effective where there is reversi-
ble airway obstruction than in chronic respiratory disease.
treating chronic bronchitis in dogs.
Their ability to induce bronchodilation is severely impaired
Adjunctive treatment of respiratory infectious disease may
by pathological changes in both the airway walls and pul-
be necessary. Nutritional support may be required and 
monary interstitium. This accounts for the wide variability
assisted feeding is often necessary in animals with severe
 of response seen with these drugs and individual animal
respiratory disease. For dogs and cats, additional therapy
 treatment is often determined on a trial-and-error basis.
such as oxygen supplementation (for example delivered by
Methylxanthines are also CNS and myocardial stimulants
nasal catheter), chest physiotherapy to assist removal of air-
and diuretics. The therapeutic index of methylxanthines is
way secretions, and adequate fluid and nutritional support
low and they are erratically absorbed from the gastro-intes-
(intravenous or naso-gastric feeding) can be vital in the suc-
tinal tract; they are difficult to use effecti vely in practice. At
cessful treatment of respiratory disease. Concurrent medi -
therapeutic doses they cause increased alertness and activ-
cation with NSAIDs such as phenylbutazone, ketoprofen
ity. Signs of toxicity include restlessness, tachycardia,
(dogs), or tolfenamic acid may also be useful.
tachypnoea, and convulsions.
256 Respiratory system
AMINOPHYLLINE
PROPENTOFYLLINE
UK
See section 4.3.4
Indications. Respiratory disease where bronchodilation
may be beneficial; myocardial stimulation (see section
THEOPHYLLINE
4.1.3)
UK
Side-effects. Restlessness, agitation, excitemenit, vomit-
Indications.
. Bronchitis; congesti ve heart failure
ing, diarrhoea, polydipsia, sedation, reduced 
I appetite,
Contra-indications.Acute
myocardial disease; patients
polyuria
with history of epileptiform seizures; conicurrent adrenocep-
Dose.By mouth or by intramuscular or sfow intravenous
injection.
tor stimulants
Side-effects.
Dogs, cats: 10 mg/kg 2-3 times daily
. Restlessness, agitation, excitement, vomit-
ing, diarthoea, polydipsia, sedation, reduced appetite,
 Aminophylline (Non-proprietary) UK
polyunia
P Fablets, arminophylline I00 mg
Warnings. Caution in hepatic impairment. Assess risk/ben-
POM Injetion, arminophylline 25 rmg/mL
efit before administration to pregnant bitches; care with
concurrent macrolides, fluoroquinolones, phenobarbital,
ETAMIPHYLLINE CAMSILATE
phenytoin, ketamine, halothane; Drug Interactions - see
(Etamiphylline camsylate)
Appendix 1
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 20 mg/kg once daily given in the
UK
morning
Indications. Respiratory disease where bronchodilation
may be beneficial; respiratory stimulation of neonates (see
POM Corvental-D Capsules (Novartis) UK
section 5.6); myocardial stimulation (see section 4. 1.3)
Capsules,theophylline 100 mg, 200 mg, 500 rmg, for dogs
Contra-indications. Racehorses 7 days prior to racing
Side-effects. Occasional CNS stimulation
5.2.2 Adrenoceptor stimulants
Warnings. Safety in pregnant animals has not been
(Sympathomimetics)
established
Dose.Horses: by addition to feed or as an oral sofution,
Adrenoceptor stimulants cause bronchodilation by stimula-
 s  on dn u-oq  o/ c 0 dn
tion of beta,-receptors in the large and small air ways. Beta,-
Reduce to lowest effective dose after 2 weeks
receptors are also found in vascular beds and the uterus.
by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection, 1.4 g repeated
Beta-adrenoceptor stimulants such as clenbuterol, pir-
up to 3 times daily if required
buterol, and terbutaline are direct-acting sympathomi-
Dogs, cats: by mouth, (3-10 kg body-weight) 100 mg: (11-
metic drugs. Ephedrine is a sympathomimetic agent with
000 (y319m-Ap0q 3x 06-17) :311 002 (1431m-Ap0g 3y 07
direct and indirect effects on adrenoreceptors. It has alpha-
mg: (31-40 kg body-weight) 400 mg. May be repeated up
and beta-adrenergic activity and is rarely used clinically.
to 3 times daily if required. Reduce to lowest effective dose
The duration of action of pirbuterol and albuterol is approx-
after 2weeks
imately only one hour and therefore their clinical use is
by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection,(3-5kg body-
limited.
weight) 70 mg; (6-10 kg body-weight) 140 mg; (11-20 kg
The cardiac effects of beta,-adrenoceptor stimulants may be
body-weight) 280 mg: (21-30 kg body-weight) 420 mg:
more pronounced in cats. Signs of toxicity include tachy-
(31-40 kg body-weight) 700 mg. Dose may be repeated up
cardia, erythema of the nostrils and ear pinnae, and tremors
to 3 times daily if required
and sweating in horses; therapy should be immediately
withdrawn. Aerosol administration of these drugs reduces
Millophyline-V (Amolds) UK
the cardiac effects but is impractical in most animals except
P Tablets, s/c, etarmiphylline carmsilate I00 mg, for dogs und cafs more fhan
horses. In addition to bronchodilation these drugs increase
3 kg body-weight
ciliary beating of the respiratory mucosal cells and have a
Note. Tablets should not be divided
 mucolytic action, which may contribute to their therapeutic
P Tablets, s/c, etarmiphylline carmsilate 200 rmg, 300 rmg, for dogs more fhan 
3kgbody-weight
effect.
Aerosolised, short-acting beta-adrenoceptor stimulants
Note. Tablets should not be divided
such as salbutamol, pirbuterol, and fenoterol, are rapid
P Oral powder, for addition to feed or to prepare arn oral solution, etarmiphyl-
 and powerful bronchodilators and serve as 'rescue therapy"
line carm silate 300 mg/sachet, for horses
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmarl
for horses with respiratory distress at rest. Salbutamol sul-
consumption
fate improves pulmonary function by 70% within 5 minutes
of administration. To overcome poor drug distribution in
Millophyline-V (Amolds) UK
POM injection, etarmiphylline carmsilate 140 mg/mL, for horses, dogs and
horses with severe airway obstruction, salbutamol may be
cats more than 3 kg body-weight
administered every 15 minutes for 2 hours to provide
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmarl
sequential  bronchodilation.  Unfortunately the  beneficial
consurmptior
effects of the short-acting beta,-adrenoceptor stimulants last
5.2 Bronchodilators 257
approximately only 1 hour in severely obstructed horses,
POM Ventipulmin (Boehringer Ingelheim) U/K
which necessitates addition of a long-acting bronchodilator
Oral granules, for addition to feed, clenbuterol hydrochloride l6 rmicro-
to provide prolonged relief of airway obstruction. Concur-
grarms/g, for horses
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter 28 days 
rent administration of corticosteroids prevents beta, toler-
Syrup, for addition to feed, clenbuterol hydrochloride 100 rmicrograrms/unit
ance and may induce formation of new beta,-receptors.
dose, for horses; 355-mL dose applicator ( I unit dose = 4 rmL)
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter 28 days
The long-acting bronchodilators are inappropriate to pro-
Dose. By mouth, I unit dose/l 25 kg body-weight
vide rescue therapy in horses with severe airway obstruc-
fnjection, clenbuterol hydrochloride 30 rmicrograrms/mL, for horses
tion due to the delayed onset of action and slightly
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter 28 days
diminished magnitude of response in comparison
to
albuterol. However, two to three times daily administration
SALBUTAMOL
of long-acting bronchodilators are indicated to provide pro-
(Albuterol)
longed relief of airway obstruction, after rescue therapy has
beern achieved with a short-acting bronchodilator. The most
UK
popular long-acting bronchodilators are salmeterol and
Indications. Bronchodilation in allergic respiratory dis-
ease, 'rescue therapy
ipratropium bromide (see section 5.2.3). Salmeterol is a
long-acting beta,-adrenoceptor stimulant that is a chemical
Dose. Horses: by inhalation, 360 micrograms
analogue of salbutamol, with the addition of an elongated
POM  Salbutamol (Non-proprietary) UK
(aliphatic) side chain. Salmeterol has higher lipophilicity
Aerosol inhalation,
salbutarmol (as sulfate)
100 rmicrograms/metered
(prolonged pulmonary residence time), beta,-affinity, betaz-
inhalation
selectivity (safety), and potency (ten-fold) than salbutamol.
POM Ventolin (A&H) UK
Salmeterol improves pulmonary function by 55% within 60
Evohaler qerosol inhalation, salbutamol (as sulfate) l00 rmicrograrms/
minutes of aerosol administration and the duration of action
rmetered inhalation
is approximately 8 hours in severely affected horses.
Terbutaline may have a greater cardiac stimulant effect than
SALMETEROL
clenbuterol. Terbutaline was previously considered to be an
acceptable systemic bronchodilator in horses. However, the
UK
bioavailability has recently been shown to be negligible in
Indications.Bronchodilation in allergic respiratory disease
horses, and clinical efficacy has not been shown.
Dose. Horses: by inhalation, 210 micrograms
Oral clenbuterol is the systemic alternative to the aero-
POM Serevent (A&H) UK
solised, long-acting bronchodilators for the management of
Aerosol inhalation, salrmeterol (as xinafoate (= hydroxynaphthoate)) 25
horses with mild to moderate recurrent airway obstruction.
micrograrms/metered inhalation
It has been found that some horses will not respond to the
standard dosage of clenbuterol but require higher dosages.
TERBUTALINE SULFATE
These horses should be treated initially at the standard dose
(see below) for 3 days. If there is no improvement, the dose
UK
may be increased in incremental doses (from 0.8- 1.6 micro-
Indications. Respiratory disease where bronchodilation
grams/kg to 2.4-3.2 micrograms/kg+) providing each dose
may be beneficial
for 3 days and stabilising the dose on amelioration of the
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 1.25-5.0 mg 2-3 times daily
condition. Treatment should not start at the higher dosages
Cats: by mouth, 1.25 mg 2-3 times daily
because some horses may show excitement, tremors, and
POM H Bricanyl (AstraZeneca) UK
sweating.
Tablets, scored, terbutaline sulfate 5 rmg
Syrup, terbutaline sulfate 300 rmicrograrms/mL
CLENBUTEROL HYDROCHLORIDE
5.2.3 Antimuscarinic bronchodilators
UK
Smooth muscle contraction is an important cause of airway
Indications. Bronchodilation in allergic respiratory dis-
obstruction in horses with recurrent airway obstruction
ease, respiratory infection and inflammation, recurrent air-
(COPD), and is partly the result of acti vation of muscarinic
way obstruction
receptors. The antimuscarinic drug atropine may be used
Contra-indications. Cardiac
disease,
late
pregnancy;
for bronchodilation in recurrent airway obstruction. How-
hypersensitivity to the drug
ever it causes significant side-effects including decreased
Side-effects. Transient vasodilation and tachycardia with
mucociliary clearance, tachycardia, mydriasis, ileus, and
sweating and muscle tremor in horses
excitement that limit its routine use. Although atropine may
Warnings. May abolish uterine contractions; Drug Interac-
be administered by aerosol, it is rapidly absorbed and has
tions - see Appendix 1
systemic effects.
Dose.
The antimuscarinic bronchodilator ipratropium has a qua-
Horses: by mouth or by slow intravenous injection, 800
ternary ammonium structure, and little of the compound is
nanograms/kg twice daily; see also dose+ above
absorbed
1fromtherespiratory
tractafteraerosol
258 Respiratory system
administration. Ipratropium does not inhibit mucociliary
 should be soaked before feeding to dampen down any dust.
clearance. Ipratropium improves pulmonary function by
Better alternatives to feeding hay include the use of vac-
50% within one hour, and the duration of effect is approxi-
mately 4 to 6 hours in severely affected horses.
pasture-associated
obstructive
pufmonary
disease
(SPAOPD) is similar to RAO except that it occurs in pas-
IPRATROPIUM BROMIDE
tured horses and is probably caused by pollen allergens.
Treatment of RAO and SPAOPD should ideally be directed
UK
at preventing further exposure to the allergens rather than
Indications. Reversible airway obstruction due to bron-
the use of long-term therapy. However, short-term therapy
chospasm in recurrent airway obstruction
may be helpful when clinical signs are severe, and long-
Dose. Horses: by inhalation, (75 micrograms/mL solution)
 2-3 micrograms/kg up to 4 times daily
changes are ineffective at controlling the disease.
POM(H Atrovent (Boehringer Ingelheim) UK
Drugs that may be usefully employed include bronchodila-
Nebuliser solution, ipraropium brormide 250 micrograrms/mL
tors such as clenbuterol or ipratropium and mucolytics such
For use in horses, dilute to 75 rmicrograrms/mL in sterile sodiurm chloride 
as dembrexine. Corticosteroids are also used. To reduce the
0.9% solution
risk of side effects, corticosteroids are administered by
mouth or nebulisation. Oral prednisolone on an alternate
5.3 Drugs for allergic and
day regime is advised. An initial dose of 1 to 2 mg/kg is
administered every morning. After two weeks of therapy,
inflammatory disorders
response to treatment should be assessed and the dosage
5.3.1 Corticosteroids
reduced until the minimum effective dose is reached. Corti-
costeroid therapy should eventually be discontinued if
5.3.2 NSAIDs
possible.
5.3.3 Antihistamines
In severe cases and in horses with acute exacerbations of
5.3.4 Sodium cromoglicate
disease, dexamethasone therapy may be necessary, but this
 5.3.5 Leukotriene receptor antagonists
drug carries a greater risk of undesirable side effects. An
initial dose of intravenous dexamethasone (0.1 mg/kg) may
Respiratory diseases with a possible allergic aetiology are a
be administered once daily for 2 to 3 days, followed by a
poorly defined group of conditions in animals, and include
reducing dosage over the next 7 to 10 days (depending on
pulmonary infitration with eosinophilia (PIE) in dogs,
the clinical response). The efficacy of orally administered
feline asthma syndrome, acute bovine pulmonary emphy-
 dexamethasone preparations has not been evaluated.
sema and oedema (atypical interstitial pneumonia, fog
Inhaled corticosteroid therapy has also been used for treat-
fever) in cattle, and recurrent airway obstruction and sum-
ment for RAO in horses.
Acute bovine pulmonary emphysema and oedema is prob-
horses. All are believed to inivolve an allergic reaction to
ably initiated by ingestion of large quantities of DL-tryp-
either inhaled allergens (see below) or migrating pulmonary
tophan in grass aftermath, although some cases have
parasites.
occurred due to migrating lungworms or inhalation of toxic
Inflammatory lung disease has been recorded in pigs and
gases. Fibrosing alveolitis involves a chronic allergic reac-
other species following inhalation of irritant gases
tion to mould spores.
The most common allergens implicated in feline asthma
eosinophilic migration into the lung parenchyma and air-
syndrome have not been definitively identified but may
ways, and mast-cell degranulation with release of inflam-
include human and equine dander (epithelium) and house
matory mediators such as histamine. Airway mucosal
dust mite. In cats presented in status asthmaticus emergency
inflammatory mechanisms may be activated leading to the
therapy is required. Cats in respiratory distress oftern resent
release of prostaglandins and leukotrienes. The symptoms
 restraint making oxygen suplementation difficult. Reversal
of allergic pulmonary disease can vary from mild intracta-
of severe bronchoconstriction can be achieved with intrave
ble coughing to severe respiratory distress and death
nous aminophylline (2 to 5 mg/kg), intravenous atropine
Allergens causing recurrent airway obstruction,
RAO
(20 to 40 micrograms/kg), or epinephrine 20 micrograms/
(chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, COPD) in horses
kg by subcutaneous, intramuscular, or intravenous injection
include mould spores from hay and bedding. Poor quality
using epinephrine 100 micrograms/mL. The intravenous
and *heated’ hay and straw carry the greatest concentration
injection should be given with extreme caution. Corticoster-
of these spores. Control of RAO is effected by avoiding
oids have limited use in status asthmaticus.
these allergens, which is best achieved by keeping suscepti-
 For cats presented with acute bronchospasm associated with
ble animals permanently at pasture. If affected horses need
feline asthma, therapy may include intravenous aminophyl-
to be stabled, ar alternative to straw, such as shredded paper
line, atropine (15 micrograms/kg by intravenous injection
or shavings, should be used for bedding. Adequate ventila-
Or 40 micrograms/kg by intramuscular injection), or dexam
tion of the stable is essential and each horse should be
ethasone (0.2 to 1.0 mg/kg by slow intravenous injection).
housed separately. Good quality hay should be fed and
These drugs should give a rapid response and reversal of
5.3 Drugs for allergic and inflammatory disorders 259
bronchospasm. The rapidity of the response can assist in
function, and reduces responsiveness to histamine chal-
making a diagnosis of this condition.
lenge during an episode of air way obstruction.
 Routine management of feline asthma is effected by oral
Beclomethasone is the therapy of choice for moderate to
prednisolone. Initial treatment is 1 mg/kg once daily and
 severe allergic airway disease in humans. It reduces pulmo-
then reduced over the subsequent 3 weeks to 200 micro-
nary
y inflammation, improves parameters of pulmonary
grams/kg on alternate days, or to a dose sufficient to control
function, and improves ventilation imaging of horses with
the symptoms. Medication may be withdrawn at 6 to 8
recurrent airway obstruction. There is no immediate (15
weeks and re-introduced as required. Continuous medica-
 minute) therapeutic effect, however clinical signs and pul-
tion may be necessary, particularly if the suspected airborne
monary function begin to improve within 24 hours of
allergen cannot be identified or avoided. The potential long-
administration. Clirical signs of airway obstruction, pulmo-
term effects of corticosteroids should be considered (see
 nary neutrophilia, and pulmonary function return to pre-
section 7.2). Zafirlukast (see section 5.3.5) is reported to be
treatment levels 3 to 7 days after discontinuation of beclo-
a beneficial adjunct to standard feline asthma prophylactic
methasone. Short-term admiristration of inhaled beclom-
therapy. Cyproheptadine (see section 5.3.3) may be used
ethasone  without  minimising
 environmental  allergen
prophylactically in asthmatic cats. However, cyprohepta-
exposure is not expected to provide prolonged anti-inflam-
dine should only be used if other control methods have
matory benefit for horses with recurrent airway obstruction.
failed. The delivery of glucocorticosteroids by inhalation
Flunisolide is the least potent of the synthetic, topically
for the treatment of feline asthma and feline bronchial dis-
active corticosteroids. The primary advantage of flunisolide
ease is being evaluated and has shown promising results to
 is cost. It is the least lipophilic resulting in the shortest pul-
date. Inhalational drugs may be delivered using an AeroKat
monary residence time. Flunisolide has relatively high oral
spacer (distributed by BreathEazy).
bioavailability (21%) and is extensively absorbed from the
respiratory tract as unchanged drug. Much higher dosages
are required to achieve therapeutic effects similar to flutica-
5.3.1 Corticosteroids
sone or beclomethasone and adverse effects (adrenal sup-
pression) occur more frequently in humans with flunisolide.
Corticosteroids (see section 7.2.1) are the drugs of choice
Despite its limitations, the therapeutic index of flunisolide
in the treatment of canine and feline allergic respiratory dis-
is superior to systemically administered corticosteroids.
ease and have also been used in cattle and horses. Cortico-
Dosage of flunisolide for horses has not yet beenl
steroids counteract the symptoms of respiratory disease in a
established.
variety of ways. They reduce airway inflammation due to
Potential side effects of corticosteroids include immunosup-
histamine and prostaglandin release, prevent inflammatory
 pression, Cushings-like signs, and laminitis. Laminitis is
mediator-induced bronchoconstriction, and may stabilise
probably the commonest side-effect of corticosteroid ther-
mast cell and lysosomal membranes. Reduction of inflam-
 apy seen in practice in horses, however immunosuppression 
matory mediator release and mucus secretion improves
and bacterial infections, including pneumonia, occur
mucociliary clearance of airway debris and reduces eosin-
occasionally.
ophil migration into lung tissue. Corticosteroids also
increase numbers and activity of beta-receptors. In emer-
gency situations intravenous corticosteroids such as dexa-
BECLOMETASONE DIPROPIONATE
methasone or betamethasone should be used, followed by
(Beclomethasone dipropionate)
oral prednisolone for long-term mainitenance.
Inhaled corticosteroid therapy is becoming a more popular
UK
form of treatment for RAO in horses. Aerosolised cortico-
Indications. RAO in horses
steroids are effective in horses with mild to moderate air-
Dose. Horses: by aerosol inhalation, 0.5-1.5 mg twice
way obstruction with clinical signs ranging from exercise
daily
intolerance to horses with moderate increased effort of res-
POM  Beclazone Easi-Breathe (IVAX) UK
piration at rest. Aerosolised drugs reduce the total therapeu-
Aerosol inhalation, beclormetasone dipropionate 250 rmicrograrms/rmetered
tic dose and allow direct delivery of the drug to the lower
inhalatior
respiratory tract, but are generally more expensive.
Fluticasone is the most potent of the commercially available
POMH Becloforte (A&H) UK
aerosolised corticosteroid preparations. It
highly
Aerosol inhalation, beclormetasone dipropionate 250 micrograms/metered
is
inhalation
lipophilic, and consequently has the longest pulmonary res-
idence time. Due to its low oral bioavailability (<2%) and
FLUTICASONE PROPIONATE
ex tensive first-pass metabolism (99%), fluticasone has the
UK
least potential for adverse systemic effects and the most
Indications. RAO in horses
favourable therapeutic index of all of the aerosolised
corticosteroids.
Dose. Horses: by aerosol inhalation, 2 mg twice daily
In RAO-affected horses, fluticasone propionate reduces
POM Flixotide (A&H) UK
pulmonary neutrophilia, improves parameters of pulmonary
Ae rosol inhalation, fluticasone propionate 25 micrograrms/metered inhalation
260 Respiratory system
5.3.2 NSAIDs
5.3.4 Sodium cromoglicate
The NSAIDs (see section 10.1), flunixin meglumine and
Sodium cromoglicate inhibits mast-cell degranulation on
ketoprofen, may be used in the treatment of acute bovine
antigen challenge and may also have membrane-stabilising
is    n s 
properties, but its precise mode of action is unclear. It has
reduce the mortality due to this condition.
been used for prophylaxis of RAO in the horse. Sodium
cromoglicate should not be administered during an allergic
5.3.3 Antihistamines
attack, but may be delivered by inhalation, using a face
mask, prior to expected exposure to an allergen. The length
The antihistamine diphenhydramine is an antagonist of the
of protection is dependent on the number of consecutive
histamine H, receptor and diminishes or abolishes the main
days that the drug is administered.
actions of histamine in the body by competitive, reversible
blockade of histamine receptor sites. Histamine is only one
5.3.5 Leukotriene receptor antagonists
of many autacoids involved in hypersensitivity reactions
and so antihistamines have limited use in the treatment of
The leukotriene receptor antagonists such as zafirlukast
allergic respiratory disorders in animals.
block the effects of cysteinyl leukotrienes in the airways.
Certain drugs are useful in the control of allergic rhinitis in
They are beneficial in terms of smooth muscle relaxation,
the cat, but sedation often precludes long-term use. Nasal
chemotaxis for inflammatory cells, and vascular permeabil-
decongestants, such as pseudoephedrine (see section 5.6),
ity. In cats, current advice is that they should be used to
are more effective therapy.
complement glucocorticoid or bronchodilator therapy, but
Cyproheptadine is an antihi stamine with serotonin-antago-
should not be used on their own. Anecdotal reports suggest
nist and calcium-channel blocking properties. Cyprohepta-
that they are beneficial as adjunctive therapy for asthma
dine may be used for prophylaxis in feline asthma but
where standard therapy is only partially effective. They
should only be used if other control methods have failed.
should not be used to treat acute asthmatic attacks. Defini-
tive proof of the beneficial effects of leukotriene receptor
CYPROHEPTADINE HYDROCHLORIDE
antagonists in the treatment of feline asthma is, to date,
lackinig.
UK
Indications. Feline asthma; pituitary-dependent hyper-
ZAFIRLUKAST
adrenocorticism (see section 7.6)
Side-effects. Polyphagia
UK
Dose. By mouth.
Horses: head shaking syndrome, 300 micrograms/kg twice
Indications. Feline asthma prophylaxis in combination
with standard therapy
daily
Contra-indications. Acute asthmatic attacks; as sole
Hyperadrenocorticism, 0.6 mg/kg?7s increasing to 1.2 mg/
kg0.7s daily
therapy
Dose. Cats: by mouth, 1-2 mg/kg 1-2 times daily
Dogs: hyperadrenocorticism, 0.3 mg/kg increasing to 3.0
mg/kg daily
POM H Accolate (AstraZeneca) UK
Cats: asthma, 300-500 micrograms/kg 3 times daily
Tablets,f/c, zafidukast 20 mg
P Periactin (MSD) UK
Tablets, scored, cyproheptadine hydrochloride 4 mg
5.4 Mucolytics and expectorants
5.4.1 Mucolytics
DIPHENHYDRAMINE HYDROCHLORIDE
5.4.2 Expectorants
UK
Mucolytics alter the structure of mucus to decrease its vis-
Indications. Allergic respiratory disease; relief of cough-
cosity and therefore facilitate its removal by ciliary action
ing; pruritus in allergic skin disorders (see section 14.2);
and expectoration. Expectorants increase the volume of
mild sedation (see section 6.11.10); motion sickness (see
secretions in the respiratory tract and therefore assist in
section 3.4.2)
removal by ciliary action and coughing.
Contra-indications. Urine retention, glaucoma, hyperthy
roi dism
5.4.1 Mucolytics
Side-effects. CNS depression; drowsiniess
Dose. Coughing, see preparation details
Mucolytic agents such as bromhexine and dembrexine
reduce mucus viscosity in the tracheobronchial tree and are
PH) Benylin Chesty Cough (Pfizer Con surmer) UK
often prescribed for chronic bronchitis in dogs, broncho-
Linctus,diphenhydramine hydrochloride 14 mg, menthol l.1 mg/5 mL
pneumonia in cattle, and chronic coughing in horses. The
Dose. Coughing, by mouth.
Horses, catle: 60 rmL as necessary; foals, calves: 10 20 rmL 23 tirmes daily
Dogs: 15-20 rmL every 2-3 hours
more easily carried up the tracheobronchial tree by the
5.5 Antitussives 261
mucociliary clearance mechanism and expectorated during
sleep and rest, or causes muscular fatigue and exhaustion.
coughing. Ambroxol is a metabolite of bromhexine and has
They should not be used where there are excess secretions
similar acti ons
in the tracheobronchial tree, as in chronic bronchitis or
Acetylcysteine is a mucolytic agent that reduces the viscos-
bronchopneumonia. In general, the use of antitussives is
ity of secretions probably by the splitting of disulfide bonds
restricted to dogs.
in mucoproteins. It is also used to detoxify an intermediate
Antitussive drugs are selected to exploit the cough suppres-
paracetamol metabolite that is present in paracetamol over-
sant effects of opioid drugs, while minimising the sedative
dosage (see Treatment of poisoning).
and drug dependency characteristics.
In small animals inhalation of water vapour and chest phys-
Butorphanol is the most effective antitussive and is also a
iotherapy are effective methods of mucus removal.
antitussive, has little analgesic activity, and can induce con-
BROMHEXINE
stipation. All opioid drugs should be used with caution in
cats. Dextromethorphan is used for relief of non-produc-
UK
tive cough; it has a central action on the cough centre in the
Indications. Respiratory disease where excess tenacious
 medulla. It is structually similar to opioids but has no anal-
mucus is present
gesic and limited sedative properties. Guaifenesin
is
Dose.
reported to increase the volume and reduce the viscosity of
Horses: by mouth, 200-400 micrograms/kg once daily
tenacious sputum.
Cattle: by mouth or by intramuscular injection, 500 micro-
grams/kg onice daily
BUTORPHANOL
Pigs: by mouth or by intramuscular injection, 200-500
micrograms/kg onice daily
UK
Dogs: by mouth, 2 mg/kg twice daily
Indications. Non-productive cough; analgesia (see section
Cats: by mouth, 1 mg/kg once daily
6.3)
 Contra-indications. Chronic bronchitis, bronchiectasis,
POM Bisolvon (Boehringer Ingelheim) UK
bronchopneumonia, or any other condition in which there is
Ora? powder, for addition to feed or drinking water, brormhexine hydrochlo-
ride l0 mg/g,forhorses,cattle,pigs,dogs,cats
excess airway secretion; conditions causing CNS depres-
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurman con -
sion; hepatic impairment; cats
sumption. Cafle: slaughter I day, should not be used in cattle producing milk
Side-effects. Mild sedation; rarely transient ataxia, ano-
for hurmar consurmption. Pigs: slaughter withdrawal period ni
rexia and diarrhoea; respiratory depression
injectonbrohexinehydrochloride3mg/mL,forcatte,igs
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 500 micrograms/kg 2-4 times daily
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter 3 days, should not be used in cattle
for up to 14 days
producing rmilk for human consurmption. Pigs: slaugher withdrawal period
ril
POM Torbutrol (Fort Dodge) UK
Fabiets, butorphanol (as tartrate) 5 mg, 10 mg, for dogs
DEMBREXINE HYDROCHLORIDE
CODEINE PHOSPHATE
UK
Indications. Respiratory disease where excess or tenacious
UK
mucus is present in the airways
Indications. Non-productive cough; analgesia (see section
Contra-indications. Animals  with hypersensitivity
to
6.3); non-specific diarrhoea (see section 3.1.2)
dembrexine
Contra-indications. See under Butorphanol
Dose. Horses: by mouth, 300 micrograms/kg twice daily
Side-effects.Sedation, ataxia; respiratory
depression;
constipation
POM Sputolosin (Boehringer Ingelheim) UK
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 0.5-2.0 mg/kg twice daily
Oral powder, for addition to feed, dermbrexine hydrochloride 5 rmg/g, for
horses
POM Codeine Phosphate (Non-proprietary) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter I day
Tablets, codeine phosphate 15 rmg, 30 rmg, 60 rmg
Syrup, codeine phosphate 5 rmg/mL
5.4.2 Expectorants
POM  Codeine Linctus (Non-proprietary) UK
Expectorants containing small doses of ipecacuanha, squill,
Linctus, codeine phosphate 3 rmg/mL
anid ammoniumn salts are claimed to aid removal of mucus
Mote. Codeine linchus is categorised as P when a single dose is 5 rmL or less
from the airways by a mild irritant effect or the mucous
POM  Codeine Linctus Paediatrie (Non-proprietary) UK
membrane; their efficacy is unprovenl.
Lincius,codeine phosphate 3 mg/5 mL
DEXTROMETHORPHAN HYDROBROMIDE
5.5 Antitussives
UK
 Cough suppressants are only beneficial where coughing is
Indications. Non-productive cough
persistent and unproductive, interferes with the animal's
Contra-indications. See under Butorphanol
262 Respiratory system
Side-effects. See under Codeine phosphate
Lambs:by subcutaneous or intravenous injection,or by
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, up to 5 mg 3-4 times daily
sublinguat application, 5- 10 mg
PH Robitussin Dry Cough (Wyeth Consurmer） UK
Puppies: by subcutaneous or intravenous injection, or by
sublingual application,1-5 mg
Oral solution, dextromethorphan hydrobrormide 1.5 mg/mL
Kittens:by subcutaneous or intravenous injection, or by
PH Robitussin Junior Persistant Cough (Wyeth Con surmer) UK
sublingual application,1-2 mg
Oral solution, dextrormethorphan hydrobrormide 750 rmicrograrms/ rmL
Post-anaesthetic use.
5.6 Respiratory stimulants
Horses: by intravenous injection, 0.5- 1.0 mg/kg
Dogs, cats: by intravenous injection, 1-2 mg/kg following
Respiratory stimulants are administered, at doses below the
inhalational anaesthetic; 2-5 mg/kg following intravenous
convulsive threshold, to stimulate respiration. Their main
anaesthetic
uses are to promote respiration in apnoeic newborn and pre-
Dopram-V (Fort Dodge) UK
term animals and to reverse respiratory depression associ-
PML Ora? drops, doxaprarn hydrochloride 20 mg/mL, for calves, lambs,
ated with general anaesthetic, sedative, or hypnotic drugs.
puppies,kittens
These drugs should not be used as an alternative to patient
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used irn anirmals intended for hurman cor -
surmption except reonates. Calves, lambs: slaughter 28 days
management because CNS stimulation my be followed by a
POM injection, doxaprarm hydrochloride 20 mg/mL, for horses, dogs, cats
subsequent ex acerbation of the depression. In drug-induced
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in anirmals intended for hurmarn cor -
respiratory depression maintenance of an adequate airway
surn ptior except reonates
and airflow by intubation and positive-pressure ventilation
are the recognised methods of treatment. While analeptic
ETAMIPHYLLINE CAMSILATE
drugs will temporarily increase tidal and minute volume,
(Etamiphylline camsylate)
the oxygen gain may be partly offset by increased brain
ox ygen consumption.
UK
All analeptics are CNS stimulants and may induce convul-
Indications. Respiratory stimulation of neonates; respira-
sions. Doxapram is selective as a respiratory stimulant.
tory disease where bronchodilation may be beneficial (see
The principal mechanism of action of doxapram inivolves
section 5. 1); myocardial stimulation (see section 4.1.3)
stimulation of the peripheral aortic and carotid body chemo-
Dose. By mouth.
Calves: 700 mg repeated after 3-4 hours if required
receptors rather than a central action.
The methylxanthines such as diprophylline and etami-
Lambs: (<2.5 kg body-weight) 140 mg: (>2.5 kg body-
phylline, in addition to their bronchodilatory action,
weight) up to 280 mg. Dose may be repeated after 3-4
increase respiratory drive by altering the sensitivity of the
hours if required
respiratory centre to carbon dioxide. They are also nion-spe-
PML Dalophylline (Arnolds) UK
cific CNS stimulants.
Oral gel, etarmiphylline camsilate l40 mg/unit dose, for calves, lambs;
rmetered-dose applicator ( I unit dose = 3.2 mL)
DOXAPRAM HYDROCHLORIDE
Withdrawal Periods. Calves, lambs: slaughter 7 days
Dose. Caves: 5 unit doses. May be repeated after 3-4 hours
Lambs: I2 unit doses. May be repeated afer 3-4 hours 
UK
Indications. Respiratory stimulation of neonates; reversal
5.7 Nasal decongestants
of respiratory depression associated with overdose of genl-
eral anaesthetic, hypnotic, and sedati ve drugs
 Nasal decongestants contain alpha-adrenoceptor stimulants
Contra-indications. Convulsions, renal or hepatic disease,
hypocalcaemia
to provide symptomatic relief in upper respiratory tract
Side-effects. Convulsions
problems associated with profuse secretion; they should be
Warnings. Airway should be patent; overdosage may pro-
used with caution. Pseudoephedrine may be of use in cats
duce hyperventilation, which may be followed by reduced
with allergic rhinitis.
carbon dioxide tension in blood, cerebral vasoconstriction,
UK
hypoxia, and possible brain damage; use with extreme cau-
Indications. Upper respiratory tract conditions with pro-
tion in dogs that have been sedated with morphine; see also
Drug Interactions -A
Appendix 1; excessive doses after
fuse secretion
Dose. Cats: by mouth, 2-4 mg/kg twice daily
diac arrhythmias
P Sudafed (Warner Larmbert) UK
Dose. Neonatal use.
Elixir, pseudoephedrine hydrochloride 6 mg/rmL
Foals +, calves: by subcutaneous, intramuscular or intrave-
nous injection,or by sublingualapplication,40-100 mg
P Galpseud (Thornton& Ross)UK
Elixir, pseudoephedrine hydrochloride 6 mg/mL
263
6
Drugs acting on the
NERVOUS SYSTEM
Contributors:
This is termed neuroleptanalgesia (see sections 6.3.1 and
J C Brearey MA, VetMB, PhD, DVA, DipECVA, MRCVS
6.4 for furtherinformation and dosages).
S E Heath BVSc, MRCVS
6.1
Sedatives
6.1.1 Phenothiazines
6.2
Sedative antagonists
Phenothiazine derivatives are commonly used in veterinary
6.3
Analgesics
 practice. They have a wide range of activity arising from
6.4
 Neuroleptanalgesics
their depressant actions on the CNS, dopamine inhibitory,
6.5
 Opioid antagonists
alpha-adrenoceptor blocking, and weaker antimuscarinic
6.6
General anaesthetics
activities.
6.7
Drugs modifying neuromuscular transmission
Acepromazine produces mild to moderate sedation, but has
6.8
Local anaesthetics
no analgesic properties. Its effect is variable and may be
6.9
Antiepileptics
unpredictable, with some excitable animals failing to show
6.10 Drugs used for euthanasia
 6.11 Drugs used to modify behaviour
anl observable response. Oral administration particularly
 produces unreliable results, especially in dogs and cats.
While some effect may be seen after 15 minutes, maximal
6.1 Sedatives
effect is generally only achieved after one hour following
admi nistration. Likewise, absorption following subcutane-
6.1.1 Phenothiazines
 ous injecti on is variable and hence intramuscular or intrave.
6.1.2 Butyrophenones
nous administration is preferred. Peak effect after
6.1.3 Alpha,-adrenoceptor stimulants
intravenous injection is generally within 5 minutes. Dura-
6.1.4 Benzodiazepines
tion of action of acepromazine can range from approxi-
mately 4 hours, with a low dose in a fit animal, to over 24
hours at higher doses or in debilitated animals. Doses
Sedatives produce calmness, drowsiness, and indifference
greater than 100 micrograms/kg will not produce a deeper
to the surroundings. The differenice between sedatives and
sedation, but lead to increased duration of action and side-
effects. High doses may result in excitement and extrapy-
duce a state of calmness with less drowsiness.
ramidal side-effects in some animals. In the majority of ani-
mals doses+ of 20 to 50 micrograms/kg will produce
cation, and enable a 20 to 75% reduction in the dose of the
adequate moderate sedation to allow vennous catheterisation
general anaesthetic depending on the drug and species to
OT
intravenous injection.Increasedsedation may
be
which it is administered. Generally, sedatives are used for
achieved by concomitant administration of ar opioid anal-
restraint, to facilitate handling and transport of animals, and
gesic rather than increasing the dose of acepromazine.
to modify behaviour (see section 6.11). They are also used
Acepromazine is highly metabolised and excreted in the
to facilitate minor surgery and radiographic examination.
urine.
 There is a continuous gradation of levels of sedation from
Contra-indications for the use of phenothiazine derivatives
light sedation to a depth approaching anaesthesia. The level
 include premedication for procedures that may promote epi-
of sedation is determined by the drug, dosage, route of
leptiforn seizures, such as myelography, premedication of
administration, the interacting effect of any other drugs that
known epileptic animals, and treatment of status epilepti-
are being used to treat the animal at the time of administra-
cus, because these drugs decrease the seizure threshold.
tion, and the initial degree of excitement of the animal. In
general, sedatives should be administered before an animal
because acepromazine causes hypotension, which may be
becomes excited. Onice unsettled, the animal may require a
fatal in a hypovolaemic animal. In the male horse the drug
much higher dose of sedative or the sedative may not have
can cause paralysis of the retractor penis muscle and para-
an appreciable calming effect. The doses given in each
phimosis. Although not totally contra-indicated in stallions,
monograph below range from the lowest figure for light
acepromazine should be used at the lower dose rates and the
sedation to the highest amount appropriate for deep seda-
 condition treated at once if it occurs, to prevent trauma to
tion. Deeply sedated animals require the same standards of
the penis.
 monitoring as anaesthetised animals. If the procedure is
The extrapyramidal side-effects observed with phenothi-
 more painful and the sedative does not have analgesic prop-
erties, administration of an opioid analgesic or local anaes-
only seen at high doses. However the piperazine deriva-
thesia is essential.
ti ves, for example prochlorperazine and perphenazine, are
The combination of an opioid analgesic with a sedative will
particularly prone to producing these effects hence they
 produce greater sedation than seen with the sedative alone.
have largely been superseded by acepromazine.
264 Nervous system
Chlorpromazine (see section 3.4.1) is still used to treat
6.1.2 Butyrophenones
Butyrophenones used in veterinary medicine include aza-
zone-induced yomiting. Chlorpromazine may
perone, droperidol, and fluanisone. Azaperone is prima-
induce
rily used in pigs to control fighting, reduce stress, prevent
hepatic microsomal enzymes.
maternal rejection of piglets, and sedation for obstetric pro-
The effects of propionylpromazine and promazine are
cedures. Animals should be left alone in a quiet eniviron-
very similar to those of acepromazine. Propionylpromazine
 ment during the induction period. The long duration of
is used for sedation and premedication of both large and
action of azaperone results in prolonged anaesthetic recoy-
small animals. Promazine is reported to cause hepatic
microsomal enzyme induction and so prolonged use of this
violent reactions in horses and is not recommended in this
drug could be expected to result in reduced pharmacologi-
 cal effects of other drugs which undergo biotransformation
species.
in the liver.
AZAPERONE
ACEPROMAZINE
UK
(Acetylpromazine)
Indications. Pre-anaesthetic medication; behaviour modi-
fication (see section 6. 11. 1)
UK
Contra-indications. Dose of l mg/kg should niot be
Indications. Pre-anaesthetic medication; sedation; motion
exceeded in boars
sickness (see section 3.4.2)
Side-effects. Transient sali vation or panting; extrapyrami-
Contra-indications. Pregnant female animals; lactating
dal effects; hypotension; respiratory stimulation
mares; epileptics; animals in shock or post trauma or with
Warnings. Avoid use of azaperone in very cold conditions;
existing emotional excitation; concurrent
t hypotensive
care in Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs
drugs, procaine hydrochloride, or organophosphorus com-
Dose. Pigs: pre-anaesthetic medication, by intramuscuiar
pounds in horses; horses should not be ridden within 36
injection,1-2mg/kg
hours of treatment; equine colic; hypovolaemia
Side-effects. See notes above; hypotension; thromboc yto-
POM Stresnil (Janssen) UK
penia; platelet dysfunction; protrusion of nictitating mem-
Injection,azaperone 40 rmg/mL,for pigs
brane in dogs and cats; ataxia; muscle tremors; hypothermia
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter 10 days
Warnings. The lowest dose range should be used in stal-
lions, see notes above; may cause syncope in canine
6.1.3 Alpha,-adrenoceptor stimulants
brachycephalic breeds; caution in renal impairment, debili-
Xylazine, medetomidine, romifidine, and detomi dine are all
tated animals, anaemia, cardiovascular disease, large breed
alpha,-adrenoceptor stimulants, with marked sedative, mus-
dogs; some authorities recommend care when used for car
cle relaxant, and analgesic properties. Sedation is dose
travel especially in hot weather; Drug Interactions - Apperi-
 dependent for the recommended range for all the drugs, but
dix 1
at higher doses there is an increased incidence of side-
Dose. Horses: by mouth, 75-220 micrograms/kg (0.075-
effects. Characteristic of the group is the marked bradycar-
0.220 mg/kg). Moderate sedation 150 micrograms/kg
dia produced at even moderate doses. The bradycardia ini-
by intramuscular or slow intravenous injection,30-100
tially results from sino-atrial and atrioventricular heart
micrograms/kg (0.03-0.1 mg/kg)
block, partially produced in reflex response to an initial
 Dogs, cats: pre-anaesthetic medication, sedation, by mouth,
 drug-induced hypertension. There is a subsequent moderate
0.25-3.0 mg/kg
 hypotension with all drugs in this group. Hyperglycaemia
by subcutaneous,intramuscular or slow intravenous injec-
and polyuria also occur with all drugs in this group, againl
-) (/ 110-00) /s 50 0
due to alpha,-adrenoceptor stimulation. The hyperglycae-
mum 4 mg)
mia can be sufficient to result in glucosuria. The specific
Motion sickness, by mouth, 0.5-1.0 mg/kg 15-30 minutes
alpha-adrenoceptor antagonist atipamezole (see section
before a light meal
6.2.1) has been used to reverse all of these drugs, although
POM ACP (Novartis) UK
specifically authorised to reverse medetomidine.
Tablets, aceprormazine (as maleate) 10 mg, 25 rng, for dogs, cfs
Xylazine is used in cats, dogs, horses, and cattle as a seda-
ti ve to allow minor procedures (with local anaesthesia) and
POM ACP (Novartis) UK
injetin,acepmazine (asmaleate 2m/m,fodogs,s
to facilitate handling. It is also used as a premedicant in
Injection, aceprormazine (as maleate) 10 mg/mL, for horses
 these species. In dogs and cats, vomiting frequently occurs
Withdrawal Periods. Should rnot be used in horses intended for hurmar
after administration of xylazine.  Therefore it is contra-
consumption
indicated in animals  with  gastro-intestinal  obstruction.
POM Sedalin (Vetoquinol) UK
Vomiting may be advantageous in animals not starved for at
Oral gel, aceprormazine (as maleate) 35 rmg/mL, for horses; rmetered dose
least the preceding 6 hours. The amount of induction agent
applicator (I unit dose= I rmL)
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmarl
should be reduced by 50-75% in animals premedicated
consumption
with xylazine to avoid fatal overdose. Concurrent adminis-
6.1 Sedatives 265
tration of atropine (see section 6.6.1) in dogs and cats may
sedative effect has a duration of action between 40 and 60
be advantageous to reduce salivation and the bradycardic
 minutes. In dogs and cats, xylazine analgesia lasts between
effects of xylazine. The bradycardia associated with the
15 and 30 minutes and sedation for 1 to 2 hours. The dose
alpha,-agonists is initially a physiological response to the
 of xylazine should not be repeated in the event of an unsat-
hypertension associated with the use of these drugs and
 isfactory response. Instead the entire procedure should be
should not be viewed as pathological. The more prolonged
repeated the following day with a higher dose of xylazine.
effects are due to central hypotensive action. Although the
 In ruminants, specific precautions are essential in recum-
bradycardia can be prevented by the concurrent use of anti-
bent animals (see section 6.6)
cholinergics such as atropine, this is controversial as the
Xylazine may also be used in the growth hormone stimula-
 x   
tion test+ (see section 7.5.1) at a dose of 100 micrograms/
m unpieoou oixody e os pue Xiddns Aq neu sq nou
kg administered by intravenous injection.
result. This may produce malignant cardiac arrhythmias.
Care should be exercised if administration to elderly or
Deep sedation lasts for about 40 mirutes after detomidine
debilitated animals is contemplated, due to the profound
 and its effects may persist for hours. Detomidine is more
cardiovascular changes the drug induces.
potent than xylazine. Fatal arrhythmias have been reported
Xylazine is a useful sedative in horses. Approximately
when detomidine has been administered in conjunction with
twice as much drug is required to achieve comparable seda-
 potentiated sulphon amides.
n      
As a premedicant, detomidine can be followed by thiopen-
Xylazine may initially cause bradycardia and second degree
 tal, methohexital, or ketamine. Maximum sedation should
heart block, which resolve after approximately 10 minutes.
be allowed to develop before administration of the induc-
Arterial blood pressure will rise sharply after intravenous
tion agent and this may take approximately 5 minutes.
injection, then fall to a level slightly below normal. Horses
Detomidine, romifidine, and xylazine increase the circula-
sedated with xylazine usually remain standing although
 tion time, and loss of consciousness after intravenous injec-
they will sway if given high doses. Care must be exercised
tion of thiopental or methohexital will be approximately
 one minute longer than with other premedicants.
sedated can still kick accurately in response to a stimulus.
Detomidine has been used in combination with opioid anal-
The depth and reliability of sedation can be increased by
gesics to produce deeper and more reliable sedation in
administering an opioid analgesic concomitantly, and drugs
horses. Many opioid analgesics may be used but butorpha-
such as pethidine, morphine, methadone, or butorphanol
 nol has proved to be particularly useful. Ataxia is increased
have been used in combination with xylazine for standing
when opioid analgesics are used with detomidine in stand-
sedation in horses. The duration of action of many opioid
ing horses.
analgesics is longer than that of xylazine in the horse, and
Medetomidine is structurally similar to xylazine and deto-
acepromazine is often included in combinations of xylazine
 midine, and has similar side-effects when used in dogs and
and opioid analgesics, to provide continued sedation. This
cats. It is more potent than xylazine. As a premedicant,
medetomidine may be followed by thiopental or propofol in
morphine or methadone are used.
dogs. In cats, medetomidine may be used in combination
As a premedicant in horses, xylazine may be followed by
with ketamine for the induction of general anaesthesia. The
thiopental, methohexital, or ketamine. With ketamine, a
effects of medetomidine can be reversed by the specific
premedicant dose of xylazine 1.1 mg/kg is required to an
sanip omi sun pue (Iz'g uogs sos) aozauedge suoue
induction dose of 2.2 mg/kg ketamine. The dose of xylazine
 may be useful for procedures such as radiography in healthy
should not be reduced below this because ketamine, without
arimals.
adequate sedation, will cause muscle rigidity and tremors in
Romifidine is used for sedation and premedication in
horses. The induction agent should be given a few minutes
horses. It is reported to cause less ataxia than detomidine or
after the xylazine when sedation has reached its peak level.
xylazine and is therefore a useful sedative for farriery and
x n is  s  e e 
radiography. Animals sedated with romifidine can be
zine than horses. Low doses of xylazine in cattle will pro-
walked, making it useful for loading, transportation, and
duce sedation, while high doses will cause recumbency.
turning out animals that have beenn stabled for a period.
Xylazine is useful for sedating animals before surgery
 Romifidine can also be administered in combination with
under local anaesthesia. Before general anaesthesia, xyla-
 butorphanol. Romifidine has been used as a premedicant
zine can be used to produce recumbency and permit
prior to induction of anaesthesia with ketamine or thiopen-
endotracheal intubation with the laryngeal reflexes intact,
tal with good success.
thereby reducing the occurrence of inhalation of rumen
conitenits.
DETOMIDINE HYDROCHLORIDE
The onset and duration of action of xylazine is species-
dependent. In cattle, the onset is usually within 5 minutes
UK
with peak effect 15 minutes following administration. In
Indications. Sedation; sedation in combination with Butor-
horses, peak action is achieved within 5 minutes following
phanol; general anaesthesia in combination with Ketamine
intravenous administration and lasts for 15 minutes; the
(see section 6.6.2.4)
266 Nervous system
Contra-indications. Concurrent administration of adreno-
ROMIFIDINE
ceptor stimulants or potentiated sulphonamides; last month
of pregnancy in animals except at parturition; detomidine
UK
Indications. Sedation; sedation in combination with Butor-
nancy, colic, or pre-existing cardic disease
phanol; pre-anaesthetic medication; general anaesthesia in
Side-effects. Cardiac arrhythmias;sweating;
ataxia;
combination with Ketamine (see section 6.6.2.4)
hyperglycaemia; polyuria
Contra-indications. Last month of pregnancy in horses,
Warnings. Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1
pregnant dogs or cats; diabetes mellitus; concurrent
Dose. Sedation. Horses: by intramuscular or stow intrave-
intravenous potenti ated sulphonamides in horses
nous injection, 10-80 micrograms/kg
Side-effects. Cardiac arthythmias, bradycardia, incoor-
dination, sweating, hyperglycaemia, diuresis; vomiting in
Sedation, in combination with Butorphanol.
Horses: (200 kg body-weight or less) detomidine, by sfow
cats
Warnings. Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1; ensure
intravenous injection, 12 micrograms/kg, followed not
sufficient fluid intake
more than 5 minutes later by butorphanol, by intravenous
Dose. Sedation.
injection, 25 micrograms/kg; (> 200 kg body-weight), deto-
Horses: by intravenous injection, 40-120 micrograms/kg
midine, by stow intravenous injection, 5 mg, followed by
Dogs: by intravenous injection, 40- 120 micrograms/kg
butorphanol, by intravenous injection, 10 mg
Cats : by intravenous injection, 200-400 micrograms/kg
POM Domosedan (Pfizer) UK
Injection, detormidine hydrochloride 1 0 rmg/mL, for horses
Sedation, in combination with Butorphanol.
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmar
Horses: by intravenous injection, romifidine 40120 micro-
consurmptior
grams/kg, followed 5 minutes later by butorphanol 20
microgr ams/kg
MEDETOMIDINE HYDROCHLORIDE
POM Rimidys (Virbac) UK
UK
Injection, rormifidine hydrochloride Img/mL, for dogs, cats
Indications. Sedation; sedation in combination with Butor-
POM Sedivet (Boehringer Ingelheirm) UK
Injection,ifidinel0mg/mLfohorses
combination with Butorphanol and Ketamine (see section
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter 6 days. If used with other products,
6.6.2.4)
apply longest withdrawal period
Contra-indications. Concurrent administration of adreno-
XYLAZINE
ceptor stimulants; pregnant animals
Side-effects. Hypothermia; polyuria; occasional vomit-
UK
ing; muscle twitching; diuresis; bradycardia; hypotension
Indications. Sedation; pre-anaesthetic medication; general
Warnings. Caution in cardiovascular disease and debili-
anaesthesia in combination with Ketamine 
(see section
tated animals; operators should wear impervious gloves;
6.6.2.4); epidural injection + (see section 6.8)
safety in pregnant animals has not been established; care
 Contra-indications. Later stages of pregnancy in animals,
with concurrent CNS depressants; Drug Interactions - see
except parturition; mechanical obstruction of the gastro-
Appendix 1
intestinal tract in dogs and cats; concurrent administration
Dose. Sedation.
Dogs: by subcutaneous, intramuscular or intravenous
of adrenoceptor stimulants
 Side-effects. Vomiting in dogs and cats; cardiac arrhyth-
injection, 10-80 micrograms/kg
mias; bradycardia; polyuria; hypoxaemia; transient hyper-
Cats:by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection,50-150
glycaemia; profuse salivation and bloat in cattle
micrograms/kg
Warnings. Caution when pulmonary disease is present or
Sedation, in combination with Butorphanol.
suspected; transient rise followed by fall in blood pressure
Dogs: by intramuscular or intravenous injection, butorpha-
nol 100 micrograms/kg in combination with medetomidine
not established; avoid tympany in recumbant cattle by
1-20 micrograms/kg
maintaining animal in sternal recumbancy; see notes above;
Cats: by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection, butorph-
alpha adrenoceptor agonist - operators should take care to
anol 400 micrograms/kg in combination with medetomi dine
avoid accidental self injection
50 micrograms/kg
Dose. Sedation.
Horses: by intramuscular injection, 2.2-3.0 mg/kg
Pre-anaesthetic medication.
by stow intravenous injection,0.6-1.1 mg/kg
Dogs: by subcutaneous, intramuscular or intravenous
Cattle: by intramuscular injection, 50-300 micrograms/kg
injection, 10-40 micrograms/kg
Dogs: by subcutaneous, intramuscular (preferred), or intra-
Cats:by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection,80
venous injection, 1-3 mg/kg
micrograms/kg
Cats:by intramuscular injection, 3 mg/kg
Deer, zoo animals: information on dose available from
POM Domitor (Pfizer) U/K
Injection, rmedetormidine hydrochloride I mg/mL, for dogs, cats
manufacturers
6.1 Sedatives 267
POM Chanazine 2% (Alstoe, Chanelle) UK
 animals respiratory depression may become climically sig-
Injection, xylazine 20 mg/mL, for horses, cattle, dogs, cats
nificant and necessitate ventilatory support. Muscle relaxa-
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurman con -
surmption. Catle: slaughter l4 days, should not be used in cattle producing
 'u  o d si   q  on
rmilk for hurmar consurmptior
conscious horses, this property results in ataxia and may
cause panic reactions. In dogs and cats, muscle relaxation is
POM Chanazine 10 % (Alstoe, Chanelle) UK
Injection, xylazine 100 rmg/mL, for horses
not a problem. In combination with fentanyl or morphine,
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurman 
profound sedation is achieved with minimal disturbanice to
consurmptior
the cardiovascular system and allows smaller doses of
induction agent, such as propofol, to be used to achieve
POM Rompun 2% (Bayer) UK
injection,xylazine (ashyrochloride20mgmLfohorsescattle,gs
endotracheal intubation. This may be of considerable
cats
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmarn corn -
systems.
sumptiorn. Catfle: slaughter [4 days, should not be used in cattle producing
milk for hurn an consumption
Benzodiazepines are used in combination with ketamine
after antimuscarinic premedication to produce chemical
POM Rompun Dry Substance (Bayer) UK
restraint in dogs and cats for radiography. Premedication is
Injection, powder for recon stitution, xylazine (as hydrochloride) 500 mg, for
 not essential but may control hypersalivation, which may
horses, zoo animals inclading deer
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses, deer, zoo unimals
occur with ketami ne administration.
irntended for human consumption
DIAZEPAM
POM Virbaxyl 2% (Virbac) UK
Injection, xylazine 20 mg/mL, for horses, catfle, dogs, cats
UK
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmar con -
surmption. Catfle: slaughter [4 days, should not be used in cattle producing
Indications. Sedation in intensive care; pre-anaesthetic
rmilk for human consumption
medication for foals under one month of age, epileptics,
 before myelography, high risk cardiac patients, and geriatric
POM Virbaxyl 10 % (Virbac) UK
Injection,xylazine I00 rmg/mL, for horses
dogs and cats; status epilepticus (see section 6.9.2); behav-
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurman
iour modification (see section 6.11.3)
consumption
Contra-indications. Severe
hepatic
disease;  normal
POM Xylacare 2 %(Animalcare)
animals
Injection, xylazine 20 mg/mL, for horses, catle, dogs, cats
Side-effects. See rnotes above
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmar con -
Dose. Sedation.
surmption. Catle: slaughter 14 days, should not be used in cattle producing
Horses: by intravenous injection, 0.05-2.0 mg/kg
rmilk for hurman consurmption
Dogs: by intravenous injection, 100-500 micrograms/kg
POM Xylapan (Vetoquinol)
by intramuscuiar injection, 300-500 micrograms/kg
injection, xylazine 20 mg/mL, for horses, cattle, dogs, cats
Cats: by intravenous injection, 100-500 micrograms/kg
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurman con -
by intramuscular injection, 0.3-1.0 mg/kg
surmption. Catle: slaughter 14 days, should not be used in cattle producing
Sedation, in combination with ketamine.
milk for hurman consurmption 
Dogs, cats: diazepam by intravenous injection, 200 micro-
grams/kg with ketamine 5-10 mg/kg
6.1.4 Benzodiazepines
See section 6.9.2 for preparation details
Benizodiazepines can be useful premedicants in elderly,
debilitated animals, epileptics, or before procedures such as
MIDAZOLAM
myelography that may induce epileptiform seizures. They
are also used in intensive care, in conjunction with opioid
UK
analgesics to sedate animals requiring invasive monitoring.
Indications. Sedation in intensive care; pre-anaesthetic
Sedation for intensive care (to control restlessness and
medication for foals under one month of age, epileptics,
allow nursing procedures to be undertaken) in combination
before myelography, high risk cardiac patients, and geriatric
with sufficient analgesia can be provided by diazepam (up
dogs and cats; status epilepticus (see section 6.9.2)
to 1 mg/kg per hour). The analgesia can be provided by
Contra-indications. Severe hepatic disease; normal ani-
 morphine (100-500 micrograms/kg) or any of the pure opi-
mals
oids at routine dose rates (see section 6.3.1).
Side-effects.See riotes above
Intravenous administration of these drugs to normal healthy
Dose. Sedation.
animals can result in marked excitation.
Dogs: by intravenous injection, 100-200 micrograms/kg
Diazepam is the most commonly used representative of the
 benzodiazepines. The shorter-acting midazolam may also
 Sedation, in combination with ketamine.
be used. Midazolam produces less sedation than diazepam.
Dogs, cats: midazolam by intravenous injection, 500 micro-
 Zolazepam is used in combination with tiletamine.
grams/kg with ketamine 10 mg/kg
At clinical doses, the cardiovascular effects are minimal as
POM  Midazolam (Non-proprietary)
are the respiratory effects in healthy animals. In debilitated
Injection, rmidazolarm (as hydrochloride) 1 mg/mL, 5 rmg/mL
268  Nervous system
POMHypnovel (Roche)UK
6.2.2 Benzodiazepine antagonists
Injection, midazolarm (as hydrochloride) 2 mg/mL, 5 rmg/mL
Flumazenil is a benizodiazepine antagonist used for
reversal of the central sedative effects of benzodiazepine
6.2 Sedative antagonists
overdosage. Flumazenil has a shorter half-life than
diazepam or midazolam in humans and there is a risk that
6.2.1 Alpha,-adrenoceptor antagonists
patients may become re-sedated
6.2.2 Benzodiazepine antagonists
FLUMAZENIL
6.2.1 Alpha,-adrenoceptor antagonists
UK
Atipamezole is ann alpha,-adrenoceptor blocking drug,
Indications. Reversal of benzodiazepine overdosage
which is authorised to reverse the effects of medetomidine.
Warnings. May result in overstimulation, not commonly
However, it also effectively reverses the effects of detomi-
used in animals
dine and xylazine in various species. Care must be taken if
Dose. By intravenous injection, 100 micrograms/kg giverl
the adrenoceptor stimulant is reversed within a short period
 at 1 mirute intervals until signs of consciousness return
of time after its administration because re-sedation may
occur after the effect of atipamezole subsides, such as in the
POM H Anexate (Roche) UK
case of the longer-acting detomidine. Provided 15 to 40
Injection, flurmazenil t00 micrograrms/mL
minutes is allowed to lapse between the administration of
medetomidine and that of atipamezole, re-sedation is very
6.3 Analgesics
rare.
Atipamezole will not reverse the sedative action of other
6.3.1 Opioid analgesics
classes of sedative or anaesthetic drugs. Therefore care
6.3.2 Non-opioid analgesics
should be exercised if, for ex ample, ketamine has also been
6.3.3 Compound analgesics
previously administered to a dog as this drug is unsuitable
as a sole anaesthetic agent in this species.
Analgesic drugs are used for the relief of pain. They have
Yohimbine is used to reverse the effects of the alpha,-recep-
 many indications, ranging from their use in first aid situa-
tor agonist agents. It is a much less alpha,-receptor specific
tions to the relief of severe visceral pain. Analgesics are
also used routinely as part of the pre-operative medication
antagonistic actions.
and, combined with a sedative drug, provide analgesia for
 Fampridine facilitates the release of neurotransmitter from
minor surgery.
nerve endings and hence aids in the competitive reversal of
 During recent years there has been a greater understanding
alpha,-receptor agonist agents by enhancing the synaptic
 and appreciation of pain perception in animals. Alongside
concentration of norepinephrine (the natural neurotransmit-
ter). However it has mainly been used in conjunction with
and variety of analgesic drugs available to the veterinary
yohimbine and is unlikely to enhance the effect of the more
profession. There is now little excuse for any animal to suf-
specific alpha,-receptor antagonist atipamezole.
fer pain during and after veterinary procedures. Even rou-
tine surgery such as ovariohysterectomy results in a degree
ATIPAMEZOLE HYDROCHLORIDE
of post-operative pain that can be prevented by the use of
appropriate analgesic drugs.
UK
The opioid anal gesics are the most potent drugs for the con-
Indications. Reversal of sedative effects of medetomi dine
trol of pain. The NSAIDs (see section 10.1) also have anal-
Contra-indications. Pregriant animals; see notes above
gesic activity. Although this property of NSAIDs is largely
Side-effects. Transient over-alertness and tachycardia with
through their anti-inflammatory action, recent studies have
high dosage; transient hypotension; hypothermia; rarely
shown that they also act at the spinal level. NSAIDs are
vomiting, defecation, panting, and muscle tremors
widely used perioperatively
Warnings. Operators should wear impervious
gloves;
safety in pregnant animals has not been established
Dose. In micrograms/kg, by intramuscular injection.
Horses+: 150 micrograms/kg
6.3.1 Opioid analgesics
Dogs: 5 times the previously administered medetomidine
dose (= same volume of medetomidine previously
CNS and other tissues. There are 3 main receptor types: μ
administered)
(mu), k (kappa), and & (delta). Stimulation of μ receptors
Cats: 2.5 times the previously administered medetomidine
results in analgesia (mainly at supraspinal sites), respiratory
dose (=
volume
of
 medetomidine
previously
depression, miosis in dogs (cats frequently show mydriasis
administered)
due to sympathetic stimulation), reduced gastro-intestinal
motility, and euphoria. Stimulation of k receptors gives
POM Antisedan (Pfizer) UK
Injection, atiparmezole hydrochloride 5 mg/mL, for dogs, cafs
analgesia (mainly in the spinal cord) and less intense miosis
6.3 Analgesics 269
and respiratory depression. Stimulation of & receptors prob-
indications are similar to those of morphine, although it
ably provides analgesia.
causes less sedation.
Opioid analgesics act at one or more of these receptors as
Pethidine is a synthetic opioid analgesic that is structurally
agonists, antagonists, or a combination of both (partial ago-
unlike morphine. It produces a prompt but short-acting
mists). Morphine, etorphine, and fentanyl are examples of
analgesia. In cats, rapid detoxification of pethidine results
 pu y sdeud ue r ne Aud poe  sse juo
in unpredictable effects. The recommended dose produces
satisfactory analgesia for more than 2 hours; doses of more
Pentazocine, buprenorphine, and butorphanol are regarded
than 6 mg/kg are unnecessarily high and may result in exci-
as mixed agonist-antagonists or partial agonists. Pentazoc-
tation. Side-effects and contra-indications are similar to
m e    y e s n on sd 
those of morphine, although it is less likely to cause vomit-
inig: it also causes less respiratory depression, which makes
antagonist activity at K receptors. Diprenorphine and nalor-
it more suitable for pregnant animals before parturition.
phine are also partial agonists but closer to pure antagonists,
In dogs the maximum analgesic effect of pethidine is
reducing all of the effects of the agonist but possessing a
reached about 45 minutes after oral administration, or about
degree of intrinsic activity that is evident at higher doses.
20 minutes after subcutaneous injection.
-e io s ou  nse nd  si uoxo
Pethidine has significant antimuscarinic acti vity and there-
sic action at recommended doses but capable of reversing
fore has an antispasmodic action on the smooth muscle of
the effects of an agonist. Naltrexone is longer lasting and
the large intestine and it is frequently used in the treatment
orally actve.
of equine colic.
There are major species differences in the responses elicited
by opioid analgesics. In the CNS, opioid analgesics modify
Table 6.1 Relative analgesic potencies of opioid
pain perception and behavioural reaction to pain. They also
relieve anxiety and distress but may induce drowsiness
analgesics
from which the animal can usually be aroused. Cats, horses,
Drug
Equivatent analgesicpotency
cattle, sheep, goats, and pigs often become hyperexcited at
high doses. Excitement is less likely in animals in pain
than in pain-free animals.
Buprenorphine
10-20
Due to their misuse potential, opioid analgesics are subject
Butorphanol
4-7
to the Misuse of Drugs Regulations 2001. It is recom-
mended, therefore, that they should only be used when there
Etorphine
at least 1000
is no non-opioid alternative for moderate to severe pain,
 Fentanyl
80-100
and that the newer, less addictive drugs should be used,
Methadone
1
where appropriate, rather than morphine or methadone.
Morphine
1
Opioid analgesics are contra-indicated in head injury
Oxymorphone
10
raise intracranial pressure, which may interfere with neuro-
Pentazocine
0.33-0.5
logical examination.
Pethidine
0.1
Morphine provides the standard against which the analge-
sic potency and actions of other opioid analgesics are com-
 pared (see Table 6.1). Morphine remains the drug of choice
for severe pain as in injury sustained in road traffic acci-
Pentazocine is a partial agonist with similar side-effects
dents. Side-effects of morphine include constriction of
and contra-indications to morphine, although it has little
pupils (dilation in species that show excitability at moderate
sedative effect, does not induce excitement, has little action
to high doses), peripheral vasodilation, respiratory depres-
on the gastro-intestinal tract, and does not cause vomiting.
sion, vomiting, exaggerated spinal cord reflexes, initially
The respiratory depression produced by pentazocine is less
defecation followed by constipation, transient hypotension,
than with morphine. Pentazocine is a useful analgesic in the
urinary retention, sweating in horses, and bradycardia, but
dog for both musculoskeletal and visceral pain, and it is
helpful in the control of colic pain in horses. Afthough pen-
respiratory depression in neonates if used in pregnant ani-
tazocine has been used in cats, its use is not recommended
mals before birth. Morphine is commonly used in dogs; in
in this species.
cats, low doses produce analgesia without excitement,
 Buprenorphine is a partial agonist with a very high affinity
although high doses induce profound excitement. In horses,
for μ receptors. It has similar side-effects and contra-indica-
morphine is used to provide perioperative analgesia.
tions to morphine, although it causes less respiratory
Oxymorphone has actions similar to morphine. It causes
depression, only mild sedation, rarely vomiting, and does
less sedation than morphine, and is not antitussi ve. It is used
not cause constipation or excitement.
The analgesic effects of buprenorphine are slow in onset,
Methadone is a synthetic opioid that has the same analge-
occurring after approximately 15 minutes even when
sic potency as morphine. Side-effects
and
contra-
administered intravenously and the duration of action is up
270 Nervous system
to 12 hours. The effects of buprenorphine are only partially
CD  Rapifen (Janssen-Cilag) UK
reversed by naloxone and a higher concenitration is needed.
Injection, alfentanil (as hydrochloride) 500 micrograrms/mL, 5 rmg/mL (to be
Butorphanol is a synthetic opioid analgesic with similar
diluted before use)
side-effects and contra-indications to morphine, although it
BUPRENORPHINE
causes less intense sedation, slight respiratory depression,
and minimal cardiovascular effects. It is particularly useful
UK
for the relief of visceral pain in horses and may be com-
Indications. Moderate to severe post-operative pain;
bined with detomidine hydrochloride in this species (see
sedation
section 6. 1.3). Butorphanol is used as an antitussive in dogs
Contra-indications. See under Morphine sulfate; concur-
(see section 5.4). In both dogs and cats butorphanol is used
rent use of other opioid-type anal gesics
as an analgesic and may be combined with medetomidine to
Side-effects. Less sedation than morphine and does not
give profound sedation.
cause excitement or constipation; rarely vomiting
Combinations of opioid analgesics and sedatives are used to
Warnings. Repeated doses may cause overdosage, see
provide neuroleptanal gesia (see section 6.4).
In cats, the combined use of butorphanol, medetomidine,
impairment, or pregnant animals; Drug Interactions - see
Appendix 1
tion provides anaesthesia for at least 30 minutes.
Dose.
Carfentanil is an opioid analgesic related to fentanyl but it
Dogs: post-operative analgesia, by intramuscular injection,
10-20 micrograms/kg. May be repeated after 12 hours
more potent than morphine and can be dangerous to the
Sedation, by intramuscular injection, 10 micrograms/kg.
user. This drug should not be used without an assistant,
May be repeated after 12 hours
capable of administering the reversing agent to the operator,
Cats +: by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection, 5-10
being present, and an opioid antagonist (for example
 micrograms/kg
nalox one) should be readily available.
Fentanyl, alfentanil, and remifentanil are all short acting
Neuroleptanaesthesia+, in combination with Acepro-
μ agonist opioids, which have been used by continuous
mazinie.
infusion to provide intra-operative anal gesia. Alfentanil and
Dogs, cats: by intramuscular injection, acepromazine 30
remifentanil are particularly suitable due to the rapid onset
micrograms/kg, and buprenorphine, 10 micrograms/kg
of action (1 to 2 minutes) and short half-life. However, ade-
quate analgesic provision by longer acting drugs is required
CD Veter gesic (Alstoe) U/K
Injection, buprenorphine (as hydrochloride) 300 rmicrograrms/mL, for dogs
for the recovery period. Provision of ventiliation is manda-
tory with these drugs because they are profound respiratory
BUTORPHANOL
depressants. Alfentanil and fentanyl undergo hepatic metab-
olism, whereas remifentanil is metabolised by non-specific
UK
plasma esterases and it is therefore suitable for patients with
Indications. Moderate to severe pain; sedation in dogs and
liver failure.
cats in combination with Medetomidine (see section 6. 1.3);
Fentanyl is also used by bolus administration as a co-induc-
sedation in horses in combination with Detomidine or
Romifidine (see section 6.1.3); general anaesthesia in dogs
continuous infusion or transdemally via the application of
and cats in combination with Medetomidine and Ketamine
fentaryl patches. Patches are effective after about 24 hours
(see section 6.6.2.4); non-productive cough in dogs (see
in dogs and 12 hours in cats, and the duration of action is 3
section 5.4)
days in dogs and 5 days in cats.
Contra-indications. See under Morphine sulfate; hepatic
impairment; horses with pre-existing cardiac dysrhythmias;
butorphanol and detomidine combination in pregnancy or
ALFENTANIL
colic; butorphanol and romifidine combination in last
month of pregnancy
UK
Side-effects. Less intense sedation than morphine; ataxia;
Indications. Moderate to severe intra-operative pain
rarely transient diarrhoea in dogs, anorexia in dogs, mydria-
Contra-indications. See under Morphine sulfate
sis in cats; rarely extreme excitation in horses
Side-effects. Respiratory and cardiovascular depression
Warnings. If respiratory depression occurs, naloxone may
Warnings. Concomittant use of atropine prevents brady-
be used as ani antidote
cardia associated with bolus administrati on
Dose. Analgesia.
Dose.
Horses: by intravenous injection,100 micrograms/kg
Dogs: by subcutaneous, intramuscular, or intravenous
kg, with concomittant atropine, 40 micrograms/kg
injection, 200-300 micrograms/kg
by intravenous infusion, 1.0 1.6 micrograms/kg per minute
Cats:by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection, 400
Cats: by intravenous infusion, 0.5 micrograms/kg per
micrograms/kg
minute
by intravenous injection, 100 micrograms/kg
6.3 Analgesics 271
Pre-anaesthetic medication.
MORPHINE SULFATE
Dogs:by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection,100
(Morphine sulphate)
200 micrograms/kg
UK
Neuroleptanaesthesia+, in combination with Medetomi-
Indications. Severe pain
dine.
Contra-indications. Head injury and raised intracranial
Dogs, cats: by intramuscular injection, medetomidine 10
pressure; see niotes above
micrograms/kg, and butorphanol 200 micrograms/kg
Side-effects. See notes above; constriction of pupils (dila-
tion in species that show excitability at moderate to high
POM Torbugesic (Fort Dodge) U/K
doses); peripheral vasodilation; respiratory depression;
Injection, butorphanol (as tartrate) 10 rmg/mL, for horses, dogs, cats
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter withdrawal period nil
vomiting; exaggerated spinal cord reflexes; initially defeca-
tion followed by constipation; transient hypotension; uri
FENTANYL
nary retention; sweating in horses; bradycardia but high
doses can cause tachycardia in horses and dogs; respiratory
UK
depression in neonates if used in pregnant animals prior to
Indications. Moderate to severe intra-operative pain
birth
Contra-indications. See under Morphine sulfate
Warnings. Hyperexcitability in cats, see notes above
Side-effects. Respiratory depression; bradycardia
Dose.
Warnings. Increase in ambient temperature or application
Horses: by intramuscular injection, 100-170 micrograms/
of direct heat to transdermal patch may result in overdosage
kg
due to increased absorption
Dogs: by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection, 200
Dose.
micrograms/kg
Dogs: by intravenous injection, 2-4 micrograms/kg
Cats : by subcutaneous injection, 100 micrograms/kg
by intravenous infusion, 0.5-3.0 micrograms/kg per hour
by transdermal patch application, 2-4 micrograms/kg per
Neuroleptanaesthesia, in combination with Acepromazine.
hour
Dogs, cats:by intramuscuiar injection, acepromazine 20
Cats: by intravenous infusion,0.1 microgram/kg per minute
micrograms/kg, and morphine, 200 micrograms/kg
intra-operatively
CD H Morphine Sulfate(Non-proprietary)
by transdermal patch application, 2-4 micrograms/kg per
Injection, rmorphine sulfate 10 mg/mL, 15 mg/mL, 20 mg/mL, 30 rmg/mL
hour
CD Fentanyl (Non-proprietary) UK
NALBUPHINE HYDROCHLORIDE
njection, fentanyl(as citrate) 50 micrograms/mL
UK
CDH Durogesic(Janssen-Cilag) UK
Indications. Moderate to severe pain
Patches, self-adhesive, fentanyl, 25’ patch (releasing approx. 25 micro-
Dose. See Prescribing for rabbits and rodents
grarns/hour), *50’ patch (releasing approx. 50 rmicrograrms/hour), *75’ patch
(releasing 75 micrograrms/hour), *100' patch (releasing approx. 100 rmicro-
POM H Nubain (Bristol-Myers Squibb)
grarms/hour)
Injection, nalbuphine hydrochloride 10 mg/mL
CDH Sublimaze (Janssen-Cilag) UK
Injection, fentanyl (as citrate) 50 micrograms/mL
PENTAZOCINE
UK
Indications. Moderate to severe pain
METHADONE HYDROCHLORIDE
Contra-indications. Should not be used in cats; see under
Morphine sulfate
UK
Side-effects. See under Morphine sulfate; less sedation
Indications. Severe pain
and respiratory depression than morphine; does not cause
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See
under
excitement and yomiting
Morphine sulfate; less sedation than morphine
Dose. Horses: by intramuscular or stow intravenous injec-
Dose. Analgesia.
tion, 330 micrograms/kg, repeat after 15 minutes if required
Horses,dogs: by intramuscular injection,200 micrograms/
Dogs: by intramuscular injection, 2 mg/kg
kg
by intravenous injection, 100 micrograms/kg
CD Pentazocine (Non-propietary) UK
Injection, pentazocine (as lactate) 30 mg/mL
Neuroleptanaesthesia, in combination with Acepromazine.
Dogs, cats: by intramuscular injection, acepromazine 20
PETHIDINE HYDROCHLORIDE
 micrograms/kg, and methadone 200 micrograms/kg
(Meperidine hydrochloride)
CD Methadone (Non-proprietary) UK
UK
Injection, methadone hydrochloride 10 mg/mL
Indications. Moderate to severe pain; sedation
272 Nervous system
Contra-indications. Renal impairment; obstructive equine
6.3.3 Compound analgesics
colic; concurrent use of detomidine; see under Morphine
Compound analgesic preparations are relatively infre-
sulfate; intravenous injection in dogs
Side-effects. See under Morphine sulfate; less respiratory
quently used in veterinary practice compared with human
depression and vomiting than morphine
medicine. They combine a non-opioid analgesic such as
Warnings. Hyperexcitability inn cats, see notes above; over-
paracetamol with an opioid analgesic such as codeine,
which is related to morphine and has similar but less potent
animals has not been established; intravenous administra-
actions.
tion in dogs causes hypotension
Dose.
UK
Analgesia
Indications. Mild to moderate pain
By intramuscular injection.
Contra-indications. Patients with cardiac, renal, or hepatic
Horses: spasmodic colic, 2 mg/kg
 disease, where there is the possibility of gastro-intestinal
Dogs, cats: pre-anaesthetic medication, analgesia, 3.3 mg/
ulceration or bleeding, where there is evidence of a blood
kg
dyscrasia or hypersensitivity to the drug: treatment with
other NSAIDs concurrently or within 24 hours; cats
Neuroleptanaesthesia+, in combination with
1Acepro-
Side-effects. Occasional constipation
Warnings. Caution with use in animals less than 6 weeks
mazine.
 of age, or aged animals; avoid use in dehydrated, hypovol-
Dogs, cats: by intramuscular injection, acepromazine 20
 micrograms/kg, and pethidine, 4 mg/kg
aemic, or hypotensive patients; avoid concurrent adminis-
tration of potentially nephrotoxic drugs
Neuroleptanaesthesia+, in combination with Medetomi-
P Pardale-V Tablets (Amolds) UK
dine.
Tablets, scored, codeine phosphate 9 rmg, paracetarmol 400 mg, for dogs
Dogs, cats: by intramuscular injection, medetomidine 10
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, (up to 6 kg body-weight) % tablet 3 tirmes daily; (6-
micrograms/kg, and pethidine, 4 mg/kg
18 kg body-weight) - 1 tablets 3 tirmes daily; (18-42 kg body-weight)
I3 tablets 3 tirmes daily. Treatment course should notexceed 5 days
CD Pethidine Injection S0 mg/ml (Arnolds) UK
injection, pethidine hydrochloride 50 rmg/mL, for horses, dogs, cats
6.4 Neuroleptanalgesics
Withdrawal Periods.Shouldnotbeused in horsesintended forhuan
consumption
Neuroleptanalgesia is defined as a state of quiescence,
reduced awareness and analgesia. It is a state of sedation
REMIFENTANIL
combined with analgesia, which is similar, although not
equal, to a light plane of anaesthesia. The animal no longer
UK
uooun Aeion jou st jnq ujed o io sauipunoins oi spuodsol
Indications. Moderate to severe intra-operative pain
scious. Therefore, handling and minor surgical procedures
Contra-indications. See under Morphinie sulfate
may be carried out painlessly without having to resort to
Side-effects. Respiratory depression
full anaesthesia. This technique has the advantage of
Warnings. Very short acting and adequate analgesia must
increased sedation without increasing the dose of sedative,
be provided by other means in the post-operative period
thus reducing sedati ve related side-effects as well as provid-
Dose. Dogs: by intravenous infusion, 300-500 nanograms/
 ing a degree of analgesia. The latter is extremely useful if
kg (0.3-0.5 micrograms/kg) per minute
the combination is used prior to anaesthesia for an invasive
CDUtiva(Elan) UK
procedure. By providing analgesia before pain is experi-
Injection, powder for recon stiution, rermifentanil (as hydrochloride) I mg,
enced the amount of analgesia required after the procedure
2 mg, 5 mg
is reduced (pre-emptive analgesia) because sensitisation of
the central nervous system by pain is either reduced or
prevented.
In dogs and cats, acepromazine has been combined with a
6.3.2 Non-opioid analgesics
variety of opioid analgesics including pethidine and
Paracetamol (acetaminophen) is an analgesic with rela-
buprenorphine to produce deep sedation. Butorphanol may
tively weak anti-inflammatory activity. It should not be
be combined with medetomidine in dogs and cats to pro-
administered to cats. Cats have a reduced capacity for glu-
duce sedation. In cats, butorphanol, medetomidine, and ket-
curonide conjugation and the drug is converted to a reactive
amine may be combined to provide general anaesthesia.
electrophilic metabolite in this species. Clinical signs of
Acepromazine, detomidine, and xylazine are often com-
toxicity include anaemia, methaemoglobinaemia, and liver
bined with opioid analgesics, especially butorphanol, in
failure (see Treatment of poisoning)
horses to produce deep sedation.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs) are
Opioid antagonists (see section 6.5) may be used to reverse
described in section 10.1. They are used for musculoskele-
the sedation of neuroleptanal gesia, so that recovery is rapid
tal pain and perioperative pain.
and relatively safe. Dogs may be left alone to recover,
6.5 Opioid antagonists 273
which usually takes between 1.5 and 2 hours, although
CD Large Animal Immobilon (Novartis) UK
close supervision during this period is essential.
fnjection, etorphine (as hydrochloride) 2.25 mg, aceprormazine (as maleate)
7.38mg/mL,forhorses, deer
Etorphine is a derivative of thebaine and at least 1000
Withdrawal Periods. Must rot be used in anirmals intended for hurmar or ani-
times more potent than morphine (see Table 6.1). In combi-
mal con surmption 
nation with a phenothiazine such as acepromazine, neuro-
Dose.Horses: by
intrarmuscular injection if intravenous injection not possible
leptanalgesia is induced that is suitable for minor surgical
Deer. Tume deer: by intramusc ular injection, 0.5 mL/50 kg (reduce dose by
procedures. Only a small volume of the drug is required,
30% in pregnant hinds)
therefore it is useful for darting, as in zoo practice and deer
Rutting or wild deer: by intramusc ular injection, up to I mL/50 kg
farming. Horses should be stabled and protected from
Note. Reversal, see section 6.5
ex tremes of temperature and supervised for at least 24 hours
after administration.
Fentanyl is a synthetic opioid anal gesic similar in structure
FENTANYL CITRATE and FLUANISONE
to pethidine. Its analgesic potency is 80 to 100 times that of
morphine. Fentanyl is used in combination with fluanisone
UK
Or xylazine.
Indications. Neuroleptanalgesia
Dose. See Prescribing for rodents, Prescribing for rabbits 
ETORPHINE HYDROCHLORIDE and
POM Hypnorm (Abbeyvet) UK
PHENOTHIAZINES
Injection, fentanyl citrate 314 micrograrms, fluarnisone I0 mg/mL, for rubbits,
mice,ruts, guineα pigs
Withdrawal periods. Should not be used in unimals intended for hurmarn
UK
consumption
Indications. Neuroleptanalgesia
Contra-indications. Horses with
cardiac arrhythmias,
endocarditis, or hepatic impairment; fallow deer; cats
Side-effects. Hypertension or hypotension; mild residual
6.5 Opioid antagonists
sedation; priapism leading to paraphimosis in horses; respi-
ratory depression; transient muscle tremor in horses; entero-
These drugs are used to reverse the effects of opioid analge-
hepatic recirculation may cause excitement 6-8 hours after
sics (see section 6.3), especially ir neuroleptanalgesia (see
remobilisation
section 6.4). They are chemically related to opioid analge
sics and are able to reverse all their actions, including anal-
If there is any danger that a human may have absorbed
gesia and respiratory depression.
Or self-injected Immobilon, the following steps should
Nalorphine was the first drug to be used as an opioid antag-
be taken IMMEDIATELY. Before calling medical assist-
onist but has now been superseded by naloxone. Naloxone
anice, inject reversing agent such as 0.8- 1.2 mg naloxone
is a pure antagonist so there is minimal danger of overdose.
(2-3 mL Narcan) intravenously or intramuscularly (see
However, the short duration of action in dogs means that the
section 6.5). Revivon may be used in humans in extreme
antagonistic effect may cease before the action of the opi-
emergencies. Repeat dose every 2 to 3 minutes until
oid, previously administered, has been eliminated, and
symptoms are reversed. Wash area with water. MAIN-
sedation may recur. Naloxone is recommended in the event
TAIN RESPIRATION AND HEARTBEAT UNTIL
of self-administration of etorphine (see Warnings under
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE ARRIVES. The data sheet or
Etorphine hydrochloride, section 6.4).
package leaflet should be handed to the attending doctor.
Diprenorphine is structurally similar to etorphine and is
Warnings. Caution in elderly animals and pregnant animals
 e     n
(respiratory depression in newborn if used during birth);
high doses.
protect horses' eyes from bright light; animals must be kept
stabled, protected from extremes of temperature, and under
close supervision for at least 24 hours after administration;
care must be taken to avoid hypothermia or hyperthermia
Etorphine and phenothiazine combination is a very potent
DIPRENORPHINE
neuroleptanalgesic, which is highly toxic to humans; it
causes dizziness, nausea, and pin-point pupils, followed by
UK
respiratory depression, hypotension, cyanosis, and in severe
Indications. Reversing agent for etorphine
cases, loss of consciousness and cardiac arrest. Operators
should wear surgical gloves. Immobilon should not be used
POM Large Animal Revivon (Novartis) UK
injection, diprenorphine (as hydrochloride) 3 mg/mL,for horses, deer
without an assistant, capable of administering the reversing
Withdrawal Periods. Should rnot be used irn anirmals intended for hurman cort 
agent to the operator, being present and a stock of Narcan
surm ption
and Revivon being available
Dose. Horses, deer: by intravenous injection, a volurme equal to the total
volurme of Large Anirmal Imrmobilon (Etorphine hydrochloride, see sectior
Dose. See preparation details
6.4) previously administered
274 Nervous system
NALOXONE HYDROCHLORIDE
assessed before general anaesthesia in order to identify
 potential complications that may occur during or after the
UK
operation. The presence of underlying disease and concur-
Indications. Reversing agent for opioid analgesics;
rent medication increases the risks of general arnaesthesia.
reversal of accidental etorphine poisoning in humans (see
If possible, pre-existing disease should be treated and the
Warmings under Etorphine hydrochloride, section 6.4)
animal stabilised before undergoing elective anaesthesia.
Warnings. Short acting, possibility of relapse (see notes
The commonest problems of profound sedation and general
above)
anaesthesia in ruminants are regurgitation, inhalational
Dose. Dogs: reversal of opioid analgesia, by subcutaneous,
pneumonia, and bloat, all of which relate to ruminal filling.
intramuscular, or intravenous injection, 0.04- 1.0 mg/kg
fermentation, and fluidity of ruminal contents. While it
POM Naloxone (Non-proprietary) UK
would take days to reduce the volume of ruminal contents
Injection, naloxone hydrochloride 400 rmicrograrms/mL
significantly, it is advisable to minimise the risk of regurgi-
POMH Narcan (Bristol-Myers Squibb) UK
tation and bloat by withholding fermentable foodstuffs for
Injection, naloxone hydrochloride 400 rmicrograrms/mL
24 hours and water for 12 hours. Periods of starvation
longer than 48 hours are associated with acid-base distur-
bances (in particular ketoacidosis).
6.6 General anaesthetics
endotracheal intubation with a cuffed endotracheal tube to
6.6.1 Antimuscarinic pre-anaesthetic medication
6.6.2 Injectable anaesthetics
safeguard the airway against regurgitated material. A
6.6.3 Inhalational anaesthetics
larynx-high nose-down position in lateral recumbency and
head-down position in dorsal recumbency allow drainage of
The main aims of general anaesthesia are to produce uncon-
any regurgitated material and the copious amounts of saliva
sciousness, immobility, and muscle relax ation so that surgi-
ruminants continue to produce during anaesthesia. The
cal or other procedures may be performed painlessly. Most
placement of a ruminal tube may allow relief of increased
anaesthetic drugs also cause profound alterations in the
ruminal pressure from gas productior caused by fermenta-
function of vital body systems, in particular the cardiovas-
tion if it is placed in the gas cap.
cular and respiratory systems. Careful technique with atten-
In horses, size in combination with variations in blood pres-
tion to basic principles such as airway management,
sure predispose the recumbent animal to nerve and muscle
constant patient monitoring, and the use of properly main-
injury. The nerve injury is generally due to direct pressure
tained equipment, all contribute to good anaesthetic prac-
on a superficial nerve while the muscle injury may result
tice with minimal complications.
from ischaemia due to hypoxia and hypotension leading to
Most anaesthetic drugs have a riarrow therapeutic index and
decreased oxygen delivery to muscle masses. The result is
careful attention to dose rates is required. A common source
that animals may exhibit postoperative signs ranging from
of error is inaccurate weight estimation and all patients
limb stiffness to total inability to stand. Currently recom-
should be weighed as part of their preparation for
 mended attempts at prevention include careful positioning,
anaesthesia.
 maintaining oxygenation, and support of blood pressure
Anaesthetic drugs cause respiratory depression and, in gernl-
with dobutamine and intravenous fluid therapy. There have
eral, during anaesthesia the inspired oxygen concentration
been reports of post-anaesthesic spinal injury in horses
 d sssiy un p o  ss  nou ou
positioned in dorsal recumbency during anaesthesia.
dorsal recumbancy, should be 100%. This necessitates sup-
Although the cause of injury may be multifactorial, preven-
plementary oxygen in all cases. This can be provided via a
 tion may include tilting the animal from the dorsal position
nasal tube or face mask but in most cases it is convenient to
if practicable for surgery.
intubate the animal and connect the patient to a suitable cir-
cuit and anaesthetic machine, which also allows the use of
 Pre-anaesthetic medication is appropriate in most patients.
inhalational anaesthetic agents. In cats, young goats+, and
The main aims are to calm the patient, provide analgesia if
pigs+, intubation may be facilitated by the use of lidocaine
needed,reduce the dose of anaesthetic agent, reduce or
administered as a spray to avoid laryngospasm.
counteract the side-effects of anaesthetic drugs, and provide
The majority of patients undergo elective surgery and can
a simooth anaesthetic induction and recovery. These aims
be prepared for general anaesthesia under optimal condi-
are generally achieved by using sedatives, opioid analge-
tionis. Cats, dogs, and horses should be starved for at least 6
sics, and antimuscarinic drugs either alone or in combina-
hours so that the stomach is empty. Overnight starvation is
tion. The dose of barbiturate for induction can be reduced
convenient. Water should be allowed until premedication or
 by a third to a half (no reduction in horses) if a light pre-
one hour before anaesthesia if the animal is not to be pre-
anaesthetic medication such as acepromazine is used. When
medicated. In general, very young and very small animals
heavier premedication is produced by drugs such as xyla-
have high metabolic rates and food should be withheld for
zine or medetomidine, the dose of barbiturate may need to
shorter peri ods.
be reduced further (or halved in the horse). In horses, the
Sick and debilitated animals require individual pre-anaes-
dose of barbiturate for induction may only be reduced whenl
thetic regimens. The health status of patients must be
heavier premedication is used. Doses of other induction
6.6 General anaesthetics 275
agents are also reduced if pre-anaesthetic medication is
Side-effects. Tachycardia; conistipation; urinary retention;
given (see Dose under drug monographs).
dilation of pupils and photophobia
Patients should be closely monitored during recovery to
Warnings. Intravenous injection may initially increase
ensure safe return to normal; analgesics may be required
bradyarrhythmias due to central vagal stimulation
during this period.
Dose. Antimuscarinic use, by subcutaneous injection.
Horses, cattle: 30-60 micrograms/kg
Sheep: 80-160 micrograms/kg
6.6.1 Antimuscarinic pre-anaesthetic
Pigs: 20-40 micrograms/kg
 medication
Dogs, cats: 30-50 micrograms/kg
Antimuscarinic drugs are used to reduce salivation and
 Organophosphorus poisoning.
bronchial secretion and to prevent and treat vagally-medi-
By subcutaneous injection, 25-200 micrograms/kg at
ated cardiac arrhythmias caused by the procedure or anaes-
approximately 3-4 hour intervals until clinical signs of poi-
soning relieved. In severe cases, a quarter of the dose may
because halogenated inhalational agents are less irritant to
be given by intramuscular or slow intravenous injection and
the airways than ether. Premedicants may be indicated in
the remainder by subcutaneous injection
cats and small dogs in which a small amount of saliva can
block the airway but their routine use in larger dogs is
POM Atrocare (Anirmalcare) UK
controversial
Injection, atropine sulfate 600 micrograrms/mL, for horses, catle, sheep,
Atropine and hyoscine are not recommended as premedi -
pigs,dogs,cats
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter [4 days (antirmuscarinic use), 28 days
cants in horses because the central excitation and mydriasis
(antidote use); rmilk 3 days (antirmuscarinic use), 6 days (antidote use).
that these drugs produce can be unpleasant, and gastro-
Sheep, pigs: slaughter 14 days (antirmuscarinic use), 28 days (antidote use)
intestinal motility will be reduced. Glycopyrronium may
be better for use in horses, if required, because it does not
cross the blood-brain barier and so does not produce cenl-
tral effects. Administration of antimuscari mic drugs to rumi-
GLYCOPYRRONIUMBROMIDE
nants does not inhibit salivation but results in production of
(Glycopyrrolate bromide)
a more viscid saliva and is therefore generally contra-indi -
UK
glycopyrronium is used intra-operatively for ocular and
Indications. Treatment of vagally induced bradycardia;
head and neck surgery to block the vagal reflexes stimu-
(see section 6.7.4)
nerve trunk. Glycopyrronium causes reduced intensity of
Side-effects. Tachycardia; constipation; urinary retention;
tachycardias compared to atropine. Glycopyrronium is also
dilation of pupils and photophobia
preferred in caesarean section because it does not cross the
Warnings. Concurrent
administration of  adrenoceptor
placenta.
stimulants may cause tachycardia and fatal dysrhythmias in
Atropine and other antimuscarinic drugs prevent the mus-
horses
carinic side-effects of anticholinesterases, which are used to
Dose. Horses: by intravenous injection, 1-3 micrograms/
reverse the effects of competitive non-depolarising neuro-
kg
muscular blocking drugs.
Dogs: by intramuscular or intravenous injection, 2-8
Antimuscarinic drugs conti nue to be important for the treat-
 micrograms/kg
ment of bradycardia. Atropine is the most commonly used.
POMH Robinul (Anpharm) UK
 It produces a more stable heart rate during anaesthesia than
Injection, glycopyrroniurm bromide 200 micrograms/mL
hyoscine. The latter also has greater central effects, which
are generally undesirable.
HYOSCINE HYDROBROMIDE
(Scopolamine hydrobromide)
ATROPINE SULFATE
(Atropine sulphate)
UK
Indications. Drying secretions
UK
Contra-indications. Glaucoma; pre-existing tachycardia;
Indications. Drying secretions; adjunct in gastro-intestinal
ventricular arrhythmias; known myocardial ischaemia; see
disorders characterised by smooth muscle spasm (see sec-
also notes above
-osiod punoduoo snioydsoydouelio 1og opgue :/'g uon
Side-effects. Tachycardia; conistipation; urinary retention;
dilation of pupils and photophobia; see also notes above
anticholinesterases (see section 6.7.4); vagally-mediated
Dose. Dogs, cats: by intramuscular injection, 10-20
cardiac arrhythmias
micrograms/kg
Contra-indications. Glaucoma; pre-existing tachycardia;
POMH Hyoscine (Non-proprietary) UK
ventricular arrhythmias; known my ocardial ischaemia
Injetion, hyoscine hydrobrormide 400 micrograrms/mL, 600 micrograrms/mL
276 Nervous system
6.6.2 Injectable anaesthetics
administered. If repeated doses of thiopental are adminis-
6.6.2.1 Barbiturates
tered, the tissues may become saturated with thiopental and
6.6.2.2 Propofol
recovery will be prolonged for many hours. Therefore, thio-
pental is not generally suitable for maintenance of anaesthe-
6.6.2.3 Steroid anaesthetics
6.6.2.4 Dissociative anaesthetics
sia of more than 15 to 20 minutes.
6.6.2.5 Metomidate
Recovery from thiopental may be prolonged in Greyhounds
and hounds of similar physique; some authorities state that
use of thiopental is contra-indicated in these breeds. Metho-
Injectable anaesthetics have a rapid onset of action and are
hexital has been used for many years in breeds with little
commonly used as induction agents to effect rapid passage
body fat but use of propofol is becoming popular due to the
through the light planes of anaesthesia during which the
patient may struggle. These drugs are eliminated by metab-
smoother induction and recovery observed with this drug.
olism and excretion and there is no way of increasing the
Thiopental should be used with a sedative pre-anaesthetic
medicant in dogs and horses. If used alone the recovery
rate of removal from the body to compensate for overdos-
may be violent in these species. When a phenothiazine pre-
age. Urinary pH may be altered to increase drug excretion
but this is usually only employed for barbiturate poisoning.
medicant is used in horses the dose of thiopental should not
Most injectable anaesthetics cause respiratory depression;
be reduced.
 Methohexital is shorter acting than thiopental, but causes
periods of apnoea commonly occur, but are not hazardous
provided the patient is monitored closely and intermittent
greater respiratory depression. Induction and recovery are
positive pressure ventilation (IPPV) can be provided if nec-
pental. The solution is irritant and care should be taken to
essary. Other effects of injectable anaesthetics include
hypotension and tachycardia.
avoid ex travasation. Methohexital is more rapidly metabo-
 The doses indicated in the monographs below represent a
lised than thiopental although recovery from a single dose is
guide. There is inter-individual variation to a given dose.
still mainly dependent on redistribution.
Pentobarbital was mainly used for the treatment of status
Therefore the entire calculated dose should not be adminis-
epilepticus (see section 6.9.2), control of muscle rigidity
tered but the drug given until the required depth of anaes-
thesia is achieved. This method of administration ensures
and convulsions as a result of poisoning (see Treatment of
an appropriate depth of anaesthesia and avoids overdosage.
thetic, excitement may occur during induction because
 pentobarbital is slow to cross the blood-brain barrier. Respi-
6.6.2.1 Barbiturates
ratory and cardiovascular depression are marked and hypo-
Thiopental is the standard drug for induction with which
 thermia is common as a result of the long recovery period.
others are compared. It is administered intravenously as an
In the majority of species, onset of action, duration of
aqueous solution of the sodium salt, which is alkaline and
action, and recovery from pentobarbital are protracted and
highly irritant. Extravascular injection may lead to tissue
 as an anaesthetic it has been superseded by other agents
necrosis. If extravascular injectiorn occurs, the area should
such as thiopental and propofol.
be infiltrated with sodium chloride 0.9%, containing lido-
caine 2% or procaine 5% if required, to reduce the local
alkalinity by dilution and minimise irritation. Intra-arterial
THIOPENTAL SODIUM
injection may lead to gangrene of an extremity and injection
(Thiopentone sodium)
into the carotid artery may cause death. Solutions should be
as dilute as possible, using a 1.25% solution for neonates
UK
and cats, and a 2.5% solution for dogs. Horses, ruminants,
Indications. Induction of general anaesthesia
and pigs require more concentrated solutions, to reduce the
Contra-indications. Foals less than 2 months of age, pup-
volume required, and this should always be given via an
pies and kittens less than 2-3 months of age; conditions
intravenous catheter.
causing diminished cardiac output
Side-effects. Respiratory depression;
The initial dose of thiopental rapidly reaches the brain, and
transient apnoea;
is thenn redistributed to the viscera, muscles, and fat, and
hypotension; tachycardia; reduction in pain threshold at
slowly metabolised in the livet. Therefore, recovery from a
sub-anaesthetic doses
Warnings. Extravasation may cause local irritation and
excretion or metabolism. In general, when the animal
slough; caution in pregnant animals, hepatic impairment,
recovers consciousness, the full dose of thiopental is still
cardi ovascular disease, and hypoproteinaemia and hypovol-
present in its body. For this reason, minimal doses of thio-
aemia associated with shock; care with concurrent strepto-
pental should be used wherever possible to achieve the
mycin or chloramphenicol; Drug Interactions -
see
desired effect. If high doses are required (for example 25-
 Appendix 1; slight limb movement or respiratory irregulari-
30 mg/kg) a very prolonged recovery should be anticipated
 e ooi ns n se g nou  
and precautions taken to maintain fluid and thermal bal-
 prolonged in foals less than 12 weeks of age, puppies and
anice. Pre-anaesthetic medication should be given wherever
kittens less than 8 weeks of age, Greyhounds and similar
possible in order to reduce the dose of thiopental
breeds
6.6 General anaesthetics 277
Dose.
General anaesthetic induction (with pre-anaesthetic medica-
General anaesthetic induction (without pre-anaesthetic
tion).
medication).
Dogs: by intravenous injection, 4 mg/kg
Dogs, cats: by intravenous injection, 25-30 mg/kg (maxi-
Cats:by intravenous injection,6 mg/kg
mum 1.25 g) of 1.25% or 2.5% solution; see notes above
General anaesthetic maintenance.
General
anaesthetic induction (with
pre-anaesthetic
Dogs, cats: by intravenous injection, 2.5-5.0 mg/kg given
medication).
 according to the patient's response
Horses: by intravenous injection, 5.5-10.0 mg/kg of 5%
solution
 Control of seizures in status epilepticus+
Dogs, cats: by intravenous injection, 8-12 mg/kg
Dogs: by intravenous infusion, 100-200 micrograms/kg
(0.1-0.2 mg/kg) per minute
POM Intraval Sodium (Merial) UK
Injection, powderfor reconstition, thiopental sodum 2.5 g, 5 g, forhoes,
POM Procare(Anirmalcare)UK
dogs, cats
injetinfolmmdog
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter 28 days
POM Propoflo (Abbott Anirmal Health) UK
POM Thiovet (Novartis) UK
injeciion, propofol 10 mg/mL, for dogs, cats
Injection, powder for reconstitution, thiopental sodiurm 2.5 g, 5 g, for horses,
POM Rapinovet (Schering-Plough) UK
dogs, cats
Injection, propofol 10 mg/mL, for dogs, cats
Withdrawal Periods. Should rot be used in horses intended for hurmar
consurmption
POM Tivafol (Novartis) UK
Injection, propofol 10 mg/mL, for dogs, cafs
6.6.2.2 Propofol
6.6.2.3 Steroid anaesthetics
Propofol produces anaesthesia after intravenous injection
in a similar manner to thiopental, although cardiovascular
Alfadolone and alfaxalone in combi nation are insoluble in
depression is slightly greater. The incidence of transient
water and are solubilised in polyoxyl 35 castor oil (Cremo-
phor EL). This vehicle may cause histamine release, which
reduced by injecting the drug over a period of 20 to 30 sec-
is usually mild in cats but can be severe in dogs. The drug
onds rather than by bolus administration. This may also
combination is not irritant and may be given by intravenous
reduce the dose necessary for intubation.
or deep intramuscular injection. Recovery from alfaxalone
The recovery from propofol is rapid and generally smooth,
and alfadolone anaesthesia is by metabolism and may be
even when no sedative premedication has been given.
prolonged by repeated administration or continuous
Therefore, the drug is useful for minor out-patient proce-
infusion.
 dures and caesarian section. Recovery from propofol is by
metabolism rather than redistribution so that repeated doses
can be given with little increase in recovery time. Cats do
not metabolise propofol as efficiently as dogs.
ALFADOLONEACETATEandALFAXALONE
Propofol is not irritant to tissues and extravasation does not
(Alphadolone and Alphaxalone)
cause problems, but pain on injection occurs in humans and
may be observed in some animals.
UK
Indications. Induction and 
maintenance of general
PROPOFOL
anaesthesia
Contra-indications. Dogs, see notes above
UK
Side-effects. Transient unilateral or bilateral erythema and
Indications. Induction and maintenance of general anaes-
oedema of paws, pinnae, or both; sneezing during induction
thesia; status epilepticus+ (see section 6.9.2)
and recovery in cats; excessive salivation in monkeys
Side-effects. Transient apnoea during induction; if panting
Warnings. Rarely oedema of larynix; rarely necrotic lesions
is evident before induction, this may continue through
of the ex tremities
anaesthesia and recovery; vomiting and excitation during
 Dose. Expressed as alfadolone acetate + alfaxalone (total
recovery; paw and face licking during recovery in cats
steroids)
Warnings. Caution in patients with cardiac, hepatic, respi-
General anaesthesia (without pre-anaesthetic medication).
ratory, or renal impairment
Cats: by intramuscular injection, 18 mg/kg
Dose.
by intravenous injection, initial dose 9 mg/kg, followed by
 General  anaesthetic  induction  (without  pre-anaesthetic 
 3 mg/kg increments if required
medication),
POM Saffan (Schering-Plough) UK
Dogs: by intravenous injection, 6.5 mg/kg
Injection, alfadolone acetate 3 mg, alfaxalone 9 rmg/mL ( 12 mg total steroids/
Cats:by intravenous injection,8mg/kg
mL), for cafs
278Nervous system
6.6.2.4 Dissociative anaesthetics
recommendations on storage and record-keeping should be
Ketamine and tiletamine are phencyclidine derivatives and
applied, see niotes above
have antagonistic actions at the N-methyl D-aspartate
Dose.
(NMDA) receptors in the brain and spinal cord. They inter-
General anaesthesia ( without pre-anaesthetic medication).
rupt the cerebral association between the limbic and cortical
Cats:by subcutaneous,intramuscular(preferred),or intra-
venous injection, 11-33 mg/kg
systems. The animal may appear to be in a light plane of
anaesthesia but is insensitive to surgical stimulation. Mus-
Primates: information available from manufacturers
cle relaxation may be poor when these drugs are used alone
General anaesthesia, in combination with Detomidine.
and the addition of either an alpha,-adrenoceptor stimulant
Horses: by intravenous injection, detomidine 20 micro-
such as xylazine, or a benizodiazepine such as diazepam wil1
grams/kg, followed 5 minutes later by ketamine 2.2 mg/kg
inicrease muscle relaxation.
Ketamine may be used as a sole anaesthetic ini cats and pri-
Sedation or general anaesthesia, in combination with
mates. In cats, the eyes remain open during ketamine anaes
Diazepam.
thesia and a bland eye ointment may be used to protect the
 Dogs: by intravenous injection, diazepam 200-300 micro-
cornea. Ketamine may be given intramuscularly or intrave-
grams/kg, and ketamine 5-6 mg/kg (provide sedative
nously, although intramuscular injection is painful. Keta-
premedication)
mine should be given to horses and dorkeys only after deep
Cats:by intramuscular or slow intravenous injection,
sedative premedication with xylazine, romifidine, or deto-
diazepam 200 micrograms/kg, and ketamine 10 mg/kg
mi dine. Induction of anaesthesia in horses with ketamine is
General anaesthesia, in combination with Medetomi dine.
generally calm, but quiet surroundings and handling are
Dogs: by intramuscular injection, medetomidine 40 micro-
important. There are a few reports of failure of ketamine to
grams/kg, followed by ketamine, 5.0-7.5 mg/kg
induce anaesthesia in horses and this potential problem
Cats: by intramuscular injection, medetomidine 80 micro-
should be remembered. Ketamine may produce convulsions
grams/kg, followed by ketamine, 2.5-7.5 mg/kg
in dogs when used as the sole anaesthetic. Ketamine has
by intravenous injection, medetomidine 40 micrograms/kg
been used to provide intra-operative and post-operative
with ketamine 1.25 mg/kg
analgesia at low constant rate infusions in dogs. The doses
used are subanaesthetic and appear to augment analgesia
General anaesthesia, in combination with Butorphanol and
and comfort in the post-anaesthetic period.
Medetomidine.
Ketamine may be the subject of misuse, and the RCvS
Dogs: by intramuscutar injection, butorphanol 100 micro-
advises that the drug is stored in the controlled drugs cabi-
grams/kg with medetomidine 25 micrograms/kg, followed
net and its use recorded in an informal register. Guide to
15 minutes later by ketamine 5 mg/kg
Professiona! Conduct. London: RCVS, 2004.
Cats: by intramuscufar injection, butorphanol 400 micro-
Tiletamine is used in combi nation with the benzodiazepine
 grams/kg and medetomidine 80 micrograms/kg and keta-
zolazepam. When used as a sole anaesthetic agent, tileta-
 mine 5 mg/kg
mine has a long duration of action, provides no muscle
by intravenous injection, butorphanol 100 micrograms/kg
relaxation, and causes profuse salivation, lacrimation, and
and medetomidine 40 micrograms/kg and ketamine 1.25-
mydriasis. Atropine should be given to reduce salivation
2.5 mg/kg
and cardiac effects. Combination with zolazepam allows the
Sedation or general anaesthesia, in combination with Mida-
effective dose of tiletamine to be reduced and affords rea-
zolam.
sonable muscle relaxation. However, recovery can still be
prolonged. Cardiovascular and respiratory effects of tileta-
Dogs: by intravenous injection, midazolam 500 micro-
grams/kg, and ketamine 10 mg/kg
mine are similar to those of ketamine.
Cats: by intramuscular injection, midazolam 200 micro-
KETAMINE
grams/kg, and ketamine 10 mg/kg
by intravenous injection, midazolam 200 micrograms/kg,
UK
and ketamine 5 mg/kg
Indications. General anaesthesia, in combination with
General anaesthesia, in combination with Romifidine.
Butorphanol, Detomidine, Medetomidine, Romifidine, or
Horses: by intravenous injection, romifidine 100 micro-
Xylazine; anal gesia
grams/kg, followed 5-10 minutes later by ketamine 2.2 mg/
Contra-indications. Sole aniaesthetic in horses, donkeys,
kg
Cats: by intramuscular injection, Tomi fidine hydrochloride
nancy in animals
120 micrograms/kg, followed 10- 15 mirutes later by keta-
Side-effects. Excessive salivation, muscle twitching and
mine 10 mg/kg
 mild tonic convulsions in cats; hypotension; increased car-
diac output; high doses may produce dysphagia and/or
General anaesthesia, in combination with Xylazine.
convulsions
Horses: xylazine, by stow intravenous injection, 1.1 mg/kg,
Warnings. A small proportion of animals are reported to be
followed 2 minutes later by ketamine, by intravenous injec-
uniresponisive
to
ketamine
at
normal
doses;
tion,2.2mg/kg
6.6 General anaesthetics 279
Donkeys: xylazine, by sfow intravenous injection, 1.1 mg/
Halothane is the most commonly used halogenated inhala-
kg, followed 2 minutes later by ketamine, by intravenous
tional anaesthetic. It is a potent agent and the vapour is non-
injection, 2.2 mg/kg
irritant; induction is smooth with little, if any, excitement,
Dogs: by intramuscular injection, xylazine 1-2 mg/kg, fol-
although restraint is difficult while holding the mask in
lowed 10 minutes later by ketamine 10- 15 mg/kg
position. Halothane provides moderate to good analgesia
Cats: by intramuscular injection, xylazine 1.1 mg/kg, fol-
and muscle relaxation. Adverse effects associated with the
lowed by ketamine 22 mg/kg
use of halothane include vasodilation, hypotension, cardiac
Primates, exotic animais +: contact manufacturer for fur-
arrhythmias, and shivering and tremor on recovery; malig-
ther information
rnant hyperthermia has been reported in pigs, horses, and
dogs. Repeated use may cause liver damage due to the for-
Analgesia.
mation of toxic metabolites. Halothane, enflurane, and iso-
Dogs: by intravenous infusion,2-10 micrograms/kg per
flurane concentrations in the brain and myocardium can rise
minute (lower dose used in conscious animals, higher dose
quickly if high inspired concentrations are given, producing
used intra-operatively)
severe cardio-respiratory depression and cardiac arrest.
POM Ketaset (Fort Dodge) UK
These adverse effects caused by halothane are dose-depend-
Injection, ketamine (as hydrochloride) 100 mg/mL, for horses, dogs, cats,
ent and the horse is particularly susceptible. To avoid very
primates
high concentrations of halothane, it should be vaporised in a
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurman 
mixture of oxygen and nitrous oxide, which accelerates
consumptior
induction.
POM Narketan 10 ( Vetoquinol) U/K
injection, ketarmine (as hydrochloride) I00 mg/mL, for horses, donkeys,
than halothane because of its lower blood solubility.
dogs, cats
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmarl
Cardiovascular depression is greater than that produced by
consurmption
halothane. Enflurane may produce seizure-like electroen-
POM Vetalar-V (Pfizer) UK
leptic patients. Enflurane is not recommended for horses
Injection,ketamine (as hydrochloride)00 m/mL, fo horses, dogs, cas,
because cardiovascular depression is severe and recovery is
primates
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmarl
rapid but violent.
consumption
Isoflurane has similar physical properties to halothane, but
is slightly less soluble in blood and so induction and recov-
ery are more rapid than with halothane or enflurane. In
6.6.2.5 Metomidate
addition less isoflurane is metabolised in the liver (0.2%)
Metomidate is the methyl analogue of etomidate. Metomi-
than halothane (20%), the vast majority being excreted
date is not particularly good as a sole anaesthetic agent
unchanged via the lungs. Although changes in peripheral
because analgesia is limited and the animal may respond to
arterial blood pressure are similar with both anaesthetic
stimuli. It is used in combi natiorn with azaperone.
agerits, the fall in blood pressure observed with isoflurare is
primarily due to vasodilation rather than my ocardial depres-
sion as is found with halothane. This property, in associa-
6.6.3 Inhalational anaesthetics
tion with less sensitisation of the myocardium to
 Inhalational anaesthetics may be gases or volatile liquids.
epinephrine, makes isoflurane the agent of choice in high
They can be used for induction and maintenance of anaes-
risk cardiac cases. It does not produce seizure-like changes
thesia, and may be used following induction with an inject-
in EEG activity. Isoflurane may be used in horses; it is not
ableanaesthetic(seesection
6.6.2). Halogenated
certain whether it offers any real advantages over halothane
inhalational anaesthetics such as halothane, enflurane, and
 and there have been reports that recovery may be more vio-
isoflurane, are the most commonly used agents.
lent than with halothane.
Inhalational anaesthetics are absorbed and
excreted
Sevoflurane has recently been authorised for use in dogs in
unchanged via the lungs although some metabolism does
the EU although it has been widely used in other species. It
occur for most agents. However, recovery does niot depend
is less soluble than the other volatile agents in blood and so
upon drug metabolism and therefore these agents are useful
 induction and recovery tend to be more rapid and generally
in species for which there is litle information on use of gen-
very smooth, although occasional emergence excitement
eral anaesthetics, because their action will be similar in all1
has been reported. It is mon-irritant to the respiratory system
mammals. Removal of an overdose of inhalational anaes-
and hence is suitable for mask induction. Sevoflurane has
thetic can be hastened by mechanical ventilation of the
similar cardiov ascular and respiratory actions to isoflurane.
lurigs.
It undergoes a greater degree of biotransformation and
Humans should not be exposed to inhalational anaesthetics
although this results in formation of free fluoride ions, there
for long periods, even in small doses, and some form of
has been no evidence that this results in renal toxicity, nior
waste gas scavenging is essential when these agents are
have there been any reports of renal failure directly attrib-
employed. The inhalational anaesthetics should always be
uted to its use. At very low fresh gas flow rates, sevoflurane
undergoes base degradation in the presenice of some carbon
280Nervous system
dioxide absorbents. This results in the formation of two
Contra-indications. Concurrenit
admi nistrati on
of
compounds: compounds A and B, which have been shown
epinephrine
to be nephrotoxic experimentally. However this is of no
Side-effects. Cardiovascular and respiratory depression,
clinical relevance if sevoflurane is used at the recom-
cardiac arrhythmias, hypotension, vasodilation, delayed
 mended fresh gas flow rates of at least 1 litre/minute for up
uterine involution; see also notes above
to l hour and at least 2 litres/minute over 1 hour.
Warnings. When anaesthetising
gananimalwithhead
Methoxyflurane induction is slow because of its high
injury, artificial ventilation may be required to maintain
 blood solubility and low saturated vapour pressure. Recoy-
nomal carbon dioxide concentration to avoid increase in
ery is also prolonged. Methox yflurane is a considerably bet-
cerebral blood flow; may induce hepatic damage; Drug
ter analgesic than halothane. However, it frequently causes
Interactions - see Appendix 1
diuresis due to its exterisive hepatic metabolism to free fluo-
 Dose. Induction of anaesthesia, inspired concentration of
ride ions, and is contra-indicated in animals with renal or
1-7%
hepatic impairment.
Maintenance of anaesthesia, inspired concentration of 0.5-
Nitrous oxide is a good analgesisc but a weak anaesthetic
2.0%
and is incapable of producing general anaesthesia when
P Fluothane (Schering-Plough) UK
used alone in animals. It is used to supplement other drugs,
Halothane,for horses,dogs,afs
especially inhalational anaesthetics allowing a significant
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for human
reduction in their dosage, and provides anal gesia and anaes-
consurm ption
thesia with relatively few adverse effects. It is usually used
P Halothane Vet (Merial) UK
at the highest possible inspired concentration, between 50%
Halothane, for non food-producing unimais, non domesticated mammais,
and 70%, with oxygen and an inhalational anaesthetic drug.
reptiles,und birds
Induction and recovery with nitrous oxide are rapid.
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in unimals intended for hurman
consurn ptiorn 
The main danger when using nitrous oxide is hypoxia.
Modern anaesthetic machines have interlocks to shut off the
P Vetothane (Virbac) UK
nitrous oxide if the oxygen supply fails. If mitrous oxide is
Halothane, for horses, dogs, cafs
used in rebreathing circuits then an oxy gen meter is needed
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurman
to check that the inspired oxygen concentration does not fall
consurm ption
below 30%. Diffusion hypoxia may occur at the end of
ISOFLURANE
nitrous oxide anaesthesia and the patient should be allowed
to breathe 100% oxygen for 2 to 10 minutes depending on
UK
Indications.Inhalational anaesthesia
the duration of exposure to nitrous oxide.
In animals anaesthetised via a circle breathing system,
 Contra-indications. Susceptibility to malignant hyper-
thermia
nitrous oxide should not be used unless inspiratory oxygen
Side-effects. Cardiovascular and respiratory depression,
concentration can be measured. In animals with large venti-
cardiac arrhythmias, hypotension, vasodilation, malignant
lation:perfusion differences, nitrous oxide should not be
hyperthermia, hypercapnoea; see also notes above
used due to the risk of hypoxia. Prolonged exposure to even
Warnings. When anaesthetising an animal with head
low concentrations of nitrous oxide (such as may occur in
injury, artificial ventilation may be required to maintain
operating theatre staff) is believed to cause anaemia and
normal carbon dioxide concentration to avoid increase in
abnormalities in fetal development
cerebral blood flow; manufacturer recommends arterial
blood pressure be monitored throughout anaesthesia; com-
ENFLURANE
plete safety in pregnant and lactating animals has not been
UK
established; may induce hepatic damage; Drug Interactions
Indications. Inhalational anaesthesia
see Appendix 1; pregnant and breast-feeding woman
Contra-indications. Horses (see notes above); animals
should avoid exposure
Dose. Induction of anaesthesia, inspired concentration of
prone to seizures
2-5%
Side-effects. See
under Halothane and notes above;
seizures
Maintenance of anaesthesia, inspired concentration of 0.25-
 Dose. Maintenance of anaesthesia, inspired concentration
3.0%
of 1.5-2.5%
POM Isocare (Animalcare) UK
PH Enflurane (Abbott) UK
Isoflurane l00%,forhorses, dogs, cats
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in animals intended for hurman
Enflurane; 250 mL
consurm ption
HALOTHANE
POM Isofane (Novartis) UK
Isofaresatsmti
UK
mummais
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in animals intended for hurman
Indications. Inhalational anaesthesia
consurn ption
6.7 Drugs modifying neuromuscular transmission 281
POM IsoFlo (Abbott Anirmal Health) U/K
Muscle relaxants are also known as neuromuscular block-
Isoflurane l00%, for horses, dogs, cats, ornamental birds, reptiles, small
-n sp su sp uo  n s 
mammals
fere with transmission at the neuromuscular junction,
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in αnimals intended for hurman
consumption
thereby causing voluntary muscle paralysis or relaxation.
Non-depolarising and depolarising muscle relaxants should
POM IsoFlo Vet (Schering-Plough) UK
Isoflurane l00%,for horses, dogs,cats,ornamental birds,reptiles, small
not be administered together.
mammais
In veterinary anaesthesia 1
muscle relaxants facilitate
Withdrawal Periods. Should rot be used in unimais intended for humar 
 endotracheal intubation and endoscopy, and cause relaxa-
consumption
tion of skeletal muscle for easier surgical access and reduc-
POM Isoflurane Vet (Merial) UK
tion of joint dislocation and bone fractures. They allow
Isoflurae 99.9%,fochorses, dogs,cats, ornumental birds
lighter levels of genleral anaesthesia to be employed, and are
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurman
also used to facilitate artificial respiration and reduce move-
consumption
ment of horses during induction.
POM Vetflurane (Virbac) UK
Respiration should always be controlled in animals that
Isoflurane 100%, for dogs, cats
have received a muscle relaxant until the drug has either
beern metabolised or antagonised. On humane grounds,
SEVOFLURANE
muscle relaxants should be givenl only to animals that are
already unconscious.
UK
Indications. Inhalational anaesthesia
Muscle relaxants should only be used by veterinary
Contra-indications. Dogs less than 12 weeks of age; preg-
anaesthetists familiar with their use and where facilities
nant or lactating bitches; animals with known or suspected
for
endotracheal
intubation,
intermittent
tpositive
genetic susceptibilty to mali gnant hyperthermia
Side-effects. Hypotension, tachypnoea, muscle ternseness,
pressure ventilation, and resuscitation are available
excitation, apnoea, muscle fasciculations, vomiting; dose-
dependent respiratory depression; rarely paddling, retching,
6.7.1 Non-depolarising muscle relaxants
salivation, cyanosis, premature ventricular contractions,
excessive cardiopulmonary depression; transient increased
These drugs, also known as competitive muscle relaxants,
blood-ALT, -LDH, -bilirubin concentration, leucocytosis
block neuromuscular transmission by competing with ace-
Warnings. Operators should take extreme care to avoid
tylcholine for receptor sites at the neuromuscular junction.
The postsynaptic receptors are occupied but the membrane
rapid-action agent and accidental self-anaesthesia may
is not depolarised. The action of non-depolarising muscle
result; Drug Interations - see Appendix 1
relaxants may be reversed by anticholinesterases such as
Dose. Induction of anaesthesia, inspired concentration of
neostigmine (see section 6.7.4), which raise the concentra-
5-7%
tion of acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junction.
Maintenance of anaesthesia, inspired concentration of 3.3-
In veterinary anaesthetic practice, these drugs are used
3.8%
mainly for orthopaedic or intrathoracic surgical procedures.
Atracurium has a duration of action of 30 to 40 minutes in
POM SevoFlo (Abbott Anirmal Health) UK
Sevoflurane 100%,for dogs
horses, sheep, dogs, and cats, which may be prolonged by
hypothermia. The drug has minimal vagolytic or sympatho-
NITROUS OXIDE
lytic properties. It can be administered to animals with
hepatic or renal failure, and is non-cumulative after
UK
Indications. Inhalational anaesthesia in combination with
extracellular fluid. Its effects may be prolonged in acidosis.
other inhalational drugs
Gallamine has a duration of action which varies depending
Warnings. The amount of oxygen used with nitrous oxide
on the species (see below). Gallamine causes an undesirable
should not fall below 30% to prevent hypoxia
tachycardia as a result of its vagolytic action. The drug is
Dose. Inspired concentration of 50- 70%
excreted unchanged in urine.
Note. Cylinders are painted blue
Pancuronium has an initial duration of action of 30 to 45
minutes in horses, cattle, sheep, goats, pigs, and cats.
Although it does not cause histamine release or significant
6.7 Drugs modifying neuromuscular
changes in blood pressure, panicuronium may produce
transmission
tachycardia, especially in dogs and cats, as a result of its
vagolytic properties.
Pancuronium is excreted partly
6.7.1 Non-depolarising muscle relaxants
unchanged irn urine and partly metabolised by the liver.
6.7.2 Depolarising muscle relaxants
Vecuroniun has a duration of action of approximately 30
6.7.3 Centrally-acting muscle relaxants
minutes in dogs and horses, and 15 minutes in sheep. It does
6.7.4 Musclerelaxant antagonists
not cause histamine release, sympathetic blockade, Or
282 Nervous system
vagolytic actions and therefore has minimal cardiovascular
Sheep: 400 micrograms/kg, which has an initial duration of
effects. The drug is relatively non-cumulative and is
action of more than 2 hours
excreted mainly by the liver.
Pigs: 4 mg/kg, which has an initial duration of action of 20
One-fifth to one-tenth of the usual dosage of atracurium or
minutes, followed by increments of 800 micrograms/kg
vecuronium may be used to provide muscle relax ation dur-
go  go u 1  sy yom  I 
ing anaesthesia in dogs suffering from myasthenia gravis;
mirutes, followed by increments of 200 micrograms/kg
adequate monitoring of neuromuscular tranismission is
Cats: 1 mg/kg, which has an initial duration of action of 15-
essential.
 20 minutes, followed by increments of 200 micrograms/kg
ATRACURIUM BESILATE
POM (H Flaxedil (Concord) UK
(Atracurium besylate)
Injetion, gallarmine triethiodide 40 mg/mL
MIVACURIUM
UK
Indications. Non-depolarising muscle relax ant of medium
UK
duration
Indications. Non-depolarising muscle relaxant of short
Side-effects. See notes above
duration
Warnings. Inactivated by thiopental and other alkaline
Warnings. Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1 (muscle
solutions; Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1 (muscle
relaxarts)
relaxants)
Dose. By slow intravenous injection.
Dose. By sfow intravenous injection.
Dogs, cats: 30 micrograms/kg, followed by increments of
Horses: initial dose 150 micrograms/kg then increments of
10 micrograms/kg
60 micrograms/kg
Sheep, dogs, cats: initial dose 500 micrograms/kg then
POM Mivacron (GSK) UK
increments of 200 micrograms/kg
injection,mivacurium (as chloride) 2mg/mL
POM Atracurium (Non-proprietary) UK
PANCURONIUM BROMIDE
Injection, atracuriurm besilate 10 rmg/mL
POM Tracrium (GSK) UK
UK
Injection, atracuriurm besilate 10 mg/mL
Indications. Non-depolarising muscle relaxant of medium
duration
CISATRACURIUM
Contra-indications. Hepatic or renal impairment; obesity
UK
Side-effects. See notes above
Indications. Non-depolarising muscle relax ant of medium
Warnings. Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1 (muscle
duration
relaxants)
Warnings.
. Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1 (muscle
Dose. By stow intravenous injection.
relaxants)
 Horses: initial dose 60 micrograms/kg then increments of
Dose. By sfow intravenous injection.
10 micrograms/kg
Dogs: 100 micrograms/kg, followed by increments of 20
Cattie: initial dose 40 micrograms/kg then increments of 8
micrograms/kg
micrograms/kg
Sheep, goats: initial dose 25 micrograms/kg then incre-
POMH Nimbex (GSK) UK
 ments of 5 micrograms/kg
fnjection, cisatracuriurm (as besilate) 2 mg/mL, 5 rmg/mL
 Pigs: initial dose 100 micrograms/kg then increments of 20
GALLAMINE TRIETHIODIDE
 micrograms/kg
Dogs: initial dose 60 micrograms/kg then increments of 10
UK
micrograms/kg
Indications. Noni-depolarising muscle relax ant of medium
Cats : initial dose 80 micrograms/kg then increments of 20
duration
micrograms/kg
Contra-indications. Renal impairment
POM H Pancuronium (Non-proprietary) UK
Side-effects. Tachycardia
Warnings. Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1 (muscle
Injetion, pancuroniurn brormide 2 mg/mL
relaxants)
ROCURONIUM BROMIDE
Dose. By stow intravenous injection.
Horses: 1 mg/kg, which has an initial duration of action of
UK
 20-25 minutes, followed by increments of 200 micrograms/
Indications. Non-depolarising muscle relaxant of short
kg
duration
Cattle : 500 micrograms/kg, which has an initial duration of
Contra-indications. Hepatic or renal impairment 
action of 30-40 minutes, followed by increments of 100
Warnings. Drug Interactions － see Appendix 1 (muscle
micrograms/kg; calves: 400 micrograms/kg, which has an
relax ants)
initial duration of 4 hours
Dose. By sfow intravenous injection.
6.7 Drugs modifying neuromuscular transmission 283
Dogs, cats: 500 micrograms/kg, followed by increments of
 that have received organophosphorus compounds within the
200 micrograms/kg
preceding month.
POM Esmeron (Organon) UK
SUXAMETHONIUM CHLORIDE
Injection, rocuronium bromide 10 mg/mL
(Succinylcholine chloride)
VECURONIUMBROMIDE
UK
Indications. Depolarising muscle relaxant of short
UK
duration
Indications. Non-depolarising muscle relaxant of medium
Contra-indications. Hepatic impairment
durationi
Side-effects. See notes above
Contra-indications. Hepatic impairment
Warnings. Drug Interactions
S - see Appendix 1 (muscle
Side-effects. See notes above
relax ants) and notes above
Warnings. Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1 (muscle
Dose. By stow intravenous injection.
relaxants)
Horses: 100 micrograms/kg produces paralysis for up to 5
Dose. By stow intravenous injection.
minutes
Horses: initial dose 100 micrograms/kg then increments of
Cattle, sheep: 20 micrograms/kg produces paralysis for 6- 8
20 micrograms/kg
minutes
Sheep: initial dose 40 micrograms/kg then increments of 10
Pigs : 2 mg/kg produces paralysis for 2-3 minutes
 micrograms/kg
Dogs: 300 micrograms/kg produces paralysis for 25-30
Dogs, cats: initial dose 100 micrograms/kg then increments
minutes
of 20 micrograms/kg
Cats: 1.5 mg/kg produces paralysis for 5 minutes
Primates: 1 mg/kg produces paralysis for 5 minutes
POM Norcuron (Organon) UK
Injection, powder for reconstitution, vecuroniurm brormide 10 rmg
POM H Suxamethonium Chloride (Non-proprietary) UK
Injection, suxarmethoniurn chloride 50 rmg/mL
Muscle relaxants should onlybe used by veterinary
POM Anectine (GSK) UK
anaesthetists familiar with their use and where facilities
injection, suxamethoniurm chloride 50 mg/mL
for endotracheal intubation, intermittent positive
pressure ventilation, and resuscitation are available
6.7.3 Centrally-acting muscle relaxants
Guaifenesin is a centrally-acting muscle relaxant which
6.7.2 Depolarising muscle relaxants
acts by blocking the internuncial neurons within the brain
The depolarising muscle relaxant suxamethoniun pro-
stem and the spinal cord. Relaxation of skeletal muscle and
sedation are seen. Solutions containing guaifenesin greater
duces a neuromuscular blockade by depolarising the end-
than 150 mg/mL may cause haemolysis, although it may
plates at the neuromuscular junction similarly to the action
not be of clinical significance.
of acetylcholine. Depolarisation is prolonged since disen-
gagement from the receptor site and subsequent breakdown
Methocarbamol is a centrally acting skeletal muscle relax-
by plasma cholinesterase is slower than for acetylcholine.
ant which acts on the internuncial neurones of the spinal
The initial depolarisation causes transient muscular spasm,
cord resulting in reduced skeletal muscle hyperactivity
without alteration in muscle tone.
which may be painful, and is followed by paralysis.
Paralysis in mammals is rapid, complete, and predictable,
GUAIFENESIN
but recovery is dependent on plasma-cholinesterase activity.
(Guaiphenesin)
Unlike non-depolarising muscle relaxants, the action of
suxamethonium cannot be reversed by anticholinesterases,
UK
which actually enhance its effect. Birds, reptiles, and
Indications. Muscle relax ation during anaesthesia
amphibians have a higher proportion of slow tonic fibres in
Contra-indications. Must not be used without general
their skeletal muscles. In these species, suxamethonium
anaesthetic agent
causes prolonged spasm rather than relaxation.
Side-effects. May lower arterial blood pressure; phlebitis;
In veterinary anaesthesia, suxamethonium is used to facili-
extravascular reactions; rarely respiratory arrest on induc-
tate endotracheal intubation especially in pigs, cats, and pri-
 tion of anaesthesia
mates. It may also be used by repeated injection for longer
       
surgical procedures and is occasionally administered by
with heparinised saline
infusion.
Dose.
Suxamethonium is metabolised in the liver. It has a rapid
 General anaesthesia, in combination with Thiopentone.
onset and relatively short duration of action. The duration
Horses: suitable premedication, followed by rapid intrave-
of action may be prolonged with concomitant administra-
nous injection, guaifenesin 50-100 mg/kg, followed by
tion of anticholinesterases (see section 6.7.4), or in animals
thiopentone 2.5-5.5 mg/kg
284Nervous system
General anaesthesia, in combination with Ketamine.
caused by an immune-mediated disorder of muscle. There
Horses: premedication with detomidine 20 micrograms/kg
is an antibody-mediated autoimmune response directed
Or romifidine 100 micrograms/kg or xylazine 1.1 mg/kg,
against nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in skeletal muscle.
The disease is characterised by muscle weakness which is
120 mg/kg, followed by ketamine 2.2 mg/kg
exacerbated by exercise and alleviated by rest. Mega-
oesophagus is commonly present in these animals.
Maintenance of general anaesthesia for up to I hour.
Diagnosis is made on clinical signs and confirmed by the
Horses: by intravenous infusion, combined detomidine 30
intravenous administration of edrophonium: an improve-
micrograms/mL, ketamine 3 mg/mL, and guaifenesin 150
 ment of short duration occurs. Electromyography or radio-
mg/mL, infused at 0.5- 1 .0 mL/kg per hour
immunoassay may also be used to confirm the diagnosis.
by intravenous infusion, combined romifidine 75 micro-
The condition may be treated by thymectomy and by drug
grams/mL, ketamine 3 mg/mL, and guaifenesin 150 mg/
 therapy. Oral therapy with neostigmine bromide is the treat-
mL, infused at 0.5-1.0 mL/kg per hour
ment of choice. Alternatively pyridostigmine may be used.
However it is essential that the dosage should be modified
POM Myolaxin 15% (Vetoquinol) U/K
in the light of the response to therapy. Predrisolone (see
injection, guaifenesin is0 mg/mL,for horses
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurman
section 7.2.1) may also be used in relati vely high doses+ of
consumption
2 to 5 mg/kg in daily divided doses. The dose of pred-
nisolone is reduced to alternate day therapy if response to
6.7.4 Muscle relaxant antagonists
treatment is observed. Owner compliance and dedication is
(Anticholinesterases)
  o g  u a   
to 8 months.
Anticholinesterases inhibit the hydrolysis of acetylcholine
by cholinesterases. Consequently, acetylcholine accumu-
lates and its action is prolonged. Anticholinesterase drugs
EDROPHONIUM CHLORIDE
reverse the effects of the non-depolarising muscle relaxant
drugs, but they prolong the duration of action of the depo-
UK
larising muscle relaxants.
Indications.Reversal of non-depolarising muscle relax-
These drugs are used to antagonise the neuromuscular block
ants; diagnosis of myasthenia gravis
of non-depolarising muscle relaxants (see section 6.7.1),
Side-effects. See notes above
and are preferably administered only on the return of mus-
Warnings. Should be administered with an antimuscarinic
cular activity as determined by a nerve stimulator. Clinical
agent (see notes above)
signs such as discernible diaphragmatic movement or an
Dose.
increase in jaw tone may also be used to indicate the return
Horses, cattle, sheep, pigs: reversal of muscle relaxant, by
of neuromuscular activity. Before admimistration of an anti-
stow intravenous injection, 0.5-1.0 mg/kg, repeat after 5
cholinesterase, an antimuscarinic drug (see section 6.6.1)
minutes if required
should be given to prevent excessive salivation, bradycar-
Dogs: reversal of muscle relaxant, by sfow intravenous
dia, vomiting, and diarrhoea. Glycopyrronium, at a dose of
injection, 0.5- 1.0 mg/kg, repeat after 5 minutes if required
10 micrograms/kg, or atropine, at a dose of 44 micrograms/
Diagnosis of myasthenia gravis, by intravenous injection,
kg, for all species, are the drugs commonly used. Glycopyr-
100-500 micrograms
ronium causes reduced intensity of tachycardias compared
Cats: reversal of muscle relaxant, by stow intravenous
to atropine. Glycopyrronium is also preferred in caesarean
injection, 0.5- 1.0 mg/kg, repeat after 5 minutes if required
section because it does not cross the placenta. If the initial
POM  Edrophonium (Non-proprietary) UK
dose of anticholinesterase is repeated, then the dose of atro-
Injection, edrophoniurm chloride 10 mg/mL
pine or glycopyronium should also be repeated. However,
it would appear that there are species variations and
NEOSTIGMINE
antimuscarinics are not required before edrophonium
administration in horses. Antimuscarinics must always be
UK
readily available to treat severe cholinergic effects should
 Indications. Reversal of non-depolarising neuromuscular
they occur.
 block; treatment of myasthenia gravis
Neostigmine is commonly used for the reversal of non-
Side-effects. See rnotes above
depolarising neuromuscular block. It acts within 2 minutes
Warnings. Should be administered with an antimuscarinic
of intravenous injection and has a duration of action of at
agernt (see notes above)
least 30 minutes. Edrophonium has a rapid onset and a rel-
Dose.
ati vely short duration of action.
Horses, ate, sheep, pigs: eersal f musclelaxat, by
Myasthenia gravis is a disease of dogs which is classified
slow intravenous injection, 50 micrograms/kg,repeat after
as either congenital or acquired. In the congenital form of
5 minutes if required
the disease there is deficiency of the acetylcholine receptor
Dogs: reversal of muscle relaxant, by intravenous injection,
100 micrograms/kg, repeat after 5 minutes if required
6.8 Local anaesthetics  285
Treatment of myasthenia gravis, by mouth, 500 micro-
grams/kg 3 times daily. Reduce dose according to individ-
regional anaesthesia.
ualresponse
Epidurat and spinat injections of local anaesthetics around
Cats: reversal of muscle relaxant, by intravenous injection,
the spinal cord will block conduction in spinal nerves or the
100 micrograms/kg, repeat after 5 mi nutes if required
entire spinal cord. Large areas of the body can be anaesthe-
tised with small amounts of drug. Anterior epidural anaes-
POM Neostigmine (Non-proprietary) UK
thesia is used for surgery on the recumbent animal or
Fableis, scored, neostigmine brormide 15 rmg
Injection, neostigmine rmetilsulfate 2.5 rmg/mL
extrusion of the penis in bulls. A caudal epidural injection is
used mainly to anaesthetise the perineal region because of
PYRIDOSTIGMINE BROMIDE
blocks. It is useful for obstetric operations, surgery on the
UK
anal and peri-anal areas, and administering enemas to
Indications. Treatment of myasthenia gravis
horses. Xylazine (see section 6.1.3) may be administered by
Side-effects. See notes above
epidural injection + in horses to provide sensory anaesthesia
Dose. Dogs: treatment of myasthenia gravis, by mouth, 2
with little ataxia. A dose of 170 micrograms/kg body-
mg/kg 3 times daily. Reduce dose according to individual
weight is administered. For a 500 kg horse the required
responise
dose would be 85 mg. The appropriate volume for injection
POM Mestinon (ICN) UK
is achieved by using the following dilution: 0.85 mL of a
Tablets, scored, pyridostigmine bromide 60 mg
solution containing xylazine 100 mg/mL is diluted to 10 mL
in sodium chloride 0.9%. The onset of anaesthesia occurs
after 30 to 45 minutes and lasts for at least 3.5 hours.
6.8 Local anaesthetics
Intra-articular injection is mainly used as a diagnostic aid
in horses to confirm the presence of joint pain. Strict aseptic
Local anaesthetics act by blocking conduction in nerve
technique is essential. Excess joint fluid is aspirated before
lpieoau se yons shemed uogonuoo neuo pue sang
instilling the local anaesthetic and lameness is re-assessed
cells. Conduction block in nerves results in muscle paraly-
after 5 to 45 minutes. The volume of the solution required
sis, loss of sensation, or both depending on the type of fibre
depends on the joint size; the equine fetlock (metacarpo-
involved. If sympathetic nerves are blocked, vasodilation
and metatarsophalangeal joint) requires about 10 mL, the
and other effects will be observed. The slowing of conduc-
coffin joint (distal interphalangeal joint) 6 mL, and the stifle
tion in myocardial cells after intravenous administration is
joint (femorotibial and femoropatellar joint) 50 mL.
classified as a toxic effect if the local anaesthetic was
Intravenous regional anaesthesia (IVRA) is produced when
intended for intravenous regional anaesthesia. This effect
a local anaesthetic is injected intravenously distal to a tour-
can be utilised effectively in the treatment of ventricular
niquet applied to isolate the blood supply to a limb. All sen-
tachycardias (see section 4.4. 1).
sation in the limb is lost until the tourniquet is released.
Local anaesthetics are often used to block conduction in
 Prilocaine is recommended for this technique because of its
pain fibres, producing complete analgesia. This may be
low toxicity.
required for diagnostic purposes or to permit minor surgery.
The use of local anaesthetics for the control of traumatic or
Surface anaesthesia is application of local anaesthetics
directly to the cornea or mucous membranes, producing
postoperative pain is limited by anatomical considerations,
anaesthesia of the surface layer of tissue. Normal skin is too
costal nerve blockade.
thick and impervious for most preparations of local anaes-
thetics to have much effect if applied topically. However, a
There are several ways in which local anaesthetics can be
used to produce local analgesia.
cream containing lidocaine and prilocaine is available that
will anaesthetise skin in about 60 minutes and allow pain-
Perineural injection is the technique used when the precise
anatomical position of the nerve supplying the area Or
less venepuncture. An occlusive dressing should be applied
region to be anaesthetised is known. A solution of a local
over the cream.
anaesthetic is injected as closely as possible to the nerve
The speed of onset of neuronal blockade produced by local
and conduction in the nerve is blocked as the drug diffuses
anaesthetic drugs is determined by the drug, its concentra-
into the nerve trunk. For example, cornual anaesthesia or
tion, the accuracy of injection, and the size of the nerve.
cornual nerve block in cattle is produced when the drug is
        s
injected subcutaneously about 2.5 cm below the base of the
through the tissues and nerve trunk. The duration of the
horn or horn bud. In general, only small quantities of drug
block is determined by the type of drug, the amount used,
are needed for perineural blocks.
the site of injection, and whether or not a vasoconstrictor
Afield block occurs when a solution of a local anaesthetic is
has been added. The duration of action of local anaesthetics
injected along a line, blocking conduction in the nerves that
is increased by adding a vasoconstrictor, usually epi-
pass through the tissue. All regions supplied by the distal
nephrine, which decreases the rate of absorption. Potential
sections of these nerves will be aniaesthetised. Much more
toxicity from the more slowly metabolised local anaesthet-
local anaesthetic is required than for perineural injection.
ics is also reduced.
286 Nervous system
Vasoconstrictors such as epinephrine should not be added to
Dose. Expressed as bupivacaine hydrochloride 0.5% (5
solutions used for intra-articular, intravenous, epidural, or
mg/mL).
intradigital anaesthesia because tissue necrosis and cardiac
Horses, cattle: by perineural injection, 1-2 mL/site
arthythmias may occur. Vasoconstrictors should be used
Dogs, cats: by epidural injection, 1 mL/5 kg
with caution in horses because they may cause digital
POM Bupivacaine (Non-proprietary) UK
ischaemia when used for lower limb nerve blocks, and the
Injection, bupivacaine hydrochloride 5 rmg/mL
coat colour at the site of injection may turn permanently
white.
POM Marcain 0.5% (AstraZeneca) UK
Local anaesthetics will cause systemic toxicity if excess
Injetion, bupivacaine hydrochloride 5 mg/mL
amounts are used or if absorption is too rapid, which may
occur if injected into infected or inflamed tissues. The signs
LIDOCAINE HYDROCHLORIDE
of toxicity seen in animals are convulsions followed by
(Lignocaine hydrochloride)
CNS depression.
UK
 Inadvertent intravenous injection of local anaesthetics may
Indications. Local aniaesthesia; arrhythmias (see section
produce toxic plasma-drug concentrations. If intravenous
4.4.1)
regional anaesthesia is used, toxicity caused by early tourni-
Warnings. Safety in pregnant animals has not been estab-
quet removal (less than 20 minutes) may be avoided if the
lished; caution in patients with cardiac or hepatic impair-
tourniquet is loosened for 10 to 15 seconds, retightened for
2 minutes, and the procedure repeated several times before
merit
complete removal. Tourmiquet application for more than 2
POM  Emla (AstraZeneca) UK
hours is associated with tissue necrosis and lameness.
Cream, lidocaine 2.5%, prilocaine 2.5%
Bupivacaine has a long duration of action of up to 8 hours.
For topical anaesthesia; will anaesthetise skirn in about 60 mirnutes. Arn occlu-
It is therefore useful for spinal or epidural blocks where a
sive dressing should be applied over the crearn.
prolonged action is required. It is also indicated when local
POM Intubeaze (Arnolds) U/K
anaesthetics are used for pain relief, for example in inter-
Laryngeal spray lidocaine 2-4 mg/spray,forcats
costal nerve blocks following rib trauma. Bupivacaine has a
Contra-indications. Hypovolaermia, heart block
Dose. Cats: apply I2 sprays to back of throat. Allow 30-90 seconds to
similar therapeutic index to lidocaine, but with its longer
elapse before attermpting in hubation
duration of action, blocks should not be repeated within 4 to
6 hours to avoid accumulation and hence toxicity.
LIDOCAINE with EPINEPHRINE
 Lidocaine is widely used for most applications. It diffuses
(Lignocaine with adrenaline)
readily through the tissues and has a rapid onset of action.
Duration of action is about 45 minutes without epinephrine
UK
Indications. Field block and perineural anaesthesia, see
200 000 (5 micrograms/mL). The use of epinephrine is lim-
notes above
ited as indicated previously and is contra-indicated if lido-
Contra-indications. Intra-articular, intravenous, epidural,
caine is used in the treatment of ventricular arrhythmias
or intradigital administration
(see section 4.4.1)
Warnings. Some manufacturers advise not to use or use
Mepivacaine produces less tissue irritation than lidocaine
with caution in pregnant or lactating animals, patients with
and has been recommended when intra-articular anaesthesia
cardiac or hepatic impairment, or young puppies; operators
should wear surgical gloves
caine. Mepi vacaine does not cause vasodilation and epine-
Dose. Expressed as lidocaine 2% (20 mg/mL).
phrine is not required to prolong its effect.
Horses: by fetd block injection, maximum 200 mL
Prilocaine is similar to lidocaine but of low toxicity and is
Dogs: by field block injection, 25-50 mL
preferred for intravenous regional anaesthesia. Procaine
by perineural injection, 2-4 mL/site
spreads through tissues less readily than lidocaine and is
Cats : by feid block injection, 5-20 mL
now rarely used. Proxymetacaine and tetracaine are used
for topical analgesia of the cornea. They produce less initial
POM Lignadrin 2% Injection (Vetoquinol) UK
Injection, lidocaine hydrochloride 30 rmg, epinephrine (as acid tartrate) 12.5
sti nging than other agents (see section 12.7).
micrograms/mL, for horses, dogs, cats
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter withdrawal period nil
BUPIVACAINE HYDROCHLORIDE
 POM Lignocaine and Adrenaline Injection (Norbrook) UK
Injection, lidocaine hydrochloride 20 rmg, epinephrine 12.5 rmicrograrms/mL,
UK
for horses
Indications. Epidural,
field
block,
anid
penineural
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurman
anlaesthesia
consurm ption
Contra-indications. Warnings. Should not be used for
PML Lignol (Arnolds) UK
intravenous regional anaesthesia; care should be taken to
fnjection, lidocaine hydrochloride 20 rmg, epinephrine 10 rmicrograms/mL,
avoid intravenous or intra-arterial injection; maximum dose
for horses, dogs, cats
should rot exceed 2 mg/kg
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter withdrawal period nil
6.9 Antiepileptics 287
PML Locaine 2 % (Anirmalcare) U/K
6.9.1 Drugs used in control of epilepsy
Injection, lidocaine hydrochloride 20 rmg, epinephrine Il rmicrograrms/mL,
for horses, dogs, cats
Except in certain large breeds of dog, therapy for epilepsy
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmar con -
should not be commenced in any animal irn which a single
surmption
isolated seizure has occurred unless it develops into status
POM Locovetic (Birmeda) U/K
epilepticus. In all cases, a thorough inivestigation should be
Injection, lidocaine hydrochloride 30 rmg, epinephrine (as bitartrate) 12.5
carried out to determine any underlying cause, such as poi-
rmicrograrms/mL, for horses, dogs, cats
soning, hepatic encephalopathy, or hypoglycaermia before
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter withdrawal period nil
diagnosis of epilepsy can be confirmed. Therapy should be
MEPIVACAINE HYDROCHLORIDE
directed towards the disorder rather than routine use of
antiepileptic drugs. Long-term therapy in horses involves
UK
expense, commitment, and a horse which has suffered sei-
Indications. Epidural, field block, intra-articular, and
zures is unsafe to ride until seizure-free for 6 months with-
perineural anaesthesia
out the administration of antiepileptics.
Dose. Expressed as mepivacaine hydrochloride 2% (20
Epilepsy is most common in dogs, although cases do occur
mg/mL).
in cats, horses, and cattle. In foals, seizures may be associ-
Horses: by field block injection, 2-5 mL
ated with neonatal maladjustment syndrome. Some dogs,
by intra-articular injection, 4-10 mL
usually of the large breeds such as Golden Retrievers and
by perineural injection, 2-10 mL depending on site of
German Shepherds, suffer from cluster seizures, that is 3 to
nerve
15 seizures in close succession over 24 to 48 hours, fol-
POM Intra-Epicaine (Arnolds) UK
lowed by an interval of 1 to 3 weeks. In those breeds in
njection, rmepivacaine hydrochloride 20 mg/mL, for horses
which cluster seizures occur, it is advisable to commence
Withdrawal Periods. Should rot be used in horses intended for hurman
therapy with antiepileptic drugs at an early stage, for exam-
consurmption
ple after one or two episodes.
In dogs it is often difficult to distinguish between general-
PRILOCAINE HYDROCHLORIDE
ised (grand mal) and partial (focal) seizures. Primary epi-
UK
lepsy is characterised by seizures that are generalised at the
Indications. Caudal epidural, field block, and intravenous
outset. Partial seizures may yield localising signs but often
regional anaesthesia
within the temporal lobe of the cerebrum may result in psy-
 Dose. Expressed as prilocaine hydrochloride 0.5% (5 mg/
mL).
chomotor or behavioural seizures.
Cattle: for intravenous regionat anaesthesia, 20-30 mL
 Partial seizures are more difficult to control than those that
by epiduralandfield block injection,a suitable volume
Dogs: for intravenous regionat anaesthesia, 2-3 mL
antiepileptic drugs have a specific indication for a particular
type of seizure in dogs.
POM Citanest 1% (AstraZeneca) UK
The object of treatment is to suppress seizures by maintain-
Injection, prilocaine hydrochloride 10 rmg/mL
ing an effective concentration of the drug in plasma and
brain tissue and minimising side-effects. Therapy should be
PROCAINE HYDROCHLORIDE
    s y o   
than once every 6 weeks, clusters of seizures more than
UK
onice every 8 weeks, or recurrent seizures accompanied by
Indications. Field block and perineural anaesthesia
aggression. Therapy should also be commenced in any dog
Contra-indications. Intravenous, intra-articular,
epi-
suffering from epilepsy in which the seizures, although
dural admi nistration; concurrent sulphonamides
infrequent, are severe, generalised, and of concern to the
Warnings. Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1
Dose. Expressed as procaine hydrochloride 5% (50 mg/
owner. Successful control may not mean complete abolition
of seizures. Some control is being achieved if there is a sig-
mL).
Cattle: by field block or perineural injection, 2-5 mL
nificant increase in the time interval between fits.
Dogs, cats: by feid block or perineural injection, 0.25-
The dose and the frequency of administration vary with the
absorption, metabolism, and half-life of the drug and the
1.0 mL
species to which it is administered. Absorption is more
PML Willcain (Arnolds) UK
rapid from anl empty stomach. Antiepileptic drugs are
Injection, procaine hydrochloride 50 rmg, epinephrine 2 rmicrograrms/mL
mainly lipid soluble and are distributed readily to all tis-
For field block and perineural injection, including cornual injection.
sues, including the nervous system, such that plasma-drug
concentrations accurately reflect tissue concentrations.
6.9 Antiepileptics
Control is ideally achieved by the administration of a single
6.9.1 Drugs used in control of epilepsy
ily give an additive therapeutic effect, but the combination
6.9.2 Drugs used in status epilepticus
of two drugs with different pharmacological actions may be
288 Nervous system
low doses and then gradually inicreased over several weeks.
inducers, enhancing their own metabolism and the metabo-
Primidone is more hepatotoxic than phenobarbital.
lism of other drugs.
Phenytoin has a half-life of only 3 to 4 hours in the dog, but
Sudden withdrawal of therapy may precipitate severe
rebound seizures and should be avoided. In a dog that has
cies. Absorption and metabolism of phenytoin are variable,
not suffered a seizure for 6 to 12 months, a very gradual
and it is difficult to achieve therapeutic plasma-drug con-
centrations in dogs because of its rapid metabolism.
another drug should be made with similar caution, with-
drawing the first drug only when the new regimen has
disturbanices minimised if the drug is given with food.
largely been established.
Diazepam (see section 6.9.2) has antiepileptic effects but
Patients should be monitored regularly during therapy to
its short half-life renders it unsuitable for maintenance ther-
allow early detection of hepatotoxicity. The determination
 apy in canine epilepsy. Oral administration of diazepam has
of plasma-drug concentrations is the only way to assess
a bioavailability of only 2 to 3%. Its metabolites have only
whether the administration regimen is appropriate. Routine
about one-third the anticonvulsant activity of unchanged
assays of some antiepileptics including phenobarbital,
diazepam. In cats the half-life of diazepam is 15 to 20 hours
primidone, potassium bromi de, and phenytoin are commer-
so that in this species it may be used for oral therapy; it is
cially available.
used at a dose of 1 to 5 mg 2 to 3 times daily, increasing Of
Apparent failure of therapy may be caused by drug toler-
decreasing the dose by 0.5 to 2.0 mg increments according
ance or by concurrent disease affecting drug absorption.
toresponse.
Care is needed when prescribing drugs to epileptics for con-
Clonazepam (see section 6.9.2) is more useful than
ditions unrelated to the seizures because they may alter the
diazepam for oral therapy in canine epilepsy because its
absorption or metabolism of the antiepileptic drugs. Alter-
half-life is dose-dependent and increases with the duration
natively, owner non-compliance or inadequate prescribing
 of drug administration. It is used at a dose of 100 to 500
may affect therapeutic efficacy. Incorrect diagnosis or the
micrograms/kg 3 times daily. Many dogs develop tolerance
existence of refractory epilepsy will also lead to apparent
to clonazepam after about 6 weeks.
failure of treatment.
 Sodium valproate also has a short half-life in the dog mak-
Agents such as acepromazine and evening primrose oil,
ing it impossible to maintain therapeutic plasma concentra-
which lower the seizure threshold, should not be adminis-
tions. However, clinical trials have indicated that it may be
tered to epileptic patients.
effective in animals refractory to other medication, particu-
Phenobarbital is the drug of choice for the treatment of
leptic drug such as phenobarbital.
canine epilepsy and is both effective and safe to use in cats,
Ethosuximide is an antiepileptic suitable for use in dogs.
cattle, and horses. The half-life of phenobarbital in dogs
Its primary indication is in the treatment of petit mal epi-
varies from 47 to 74 hours so that therapy for 2 to 3 weeks
sodes, or absenice seizures, which are rare in dogs. Some
is required to achieve a steady state plasma-drug conicentra-
success is also reported for the use of ethosuximide in the
tion; the therapeutic plasma-phenobarbital concentration is
within the range of 15 to 45 micrograms/mL, although it is
control of the flexor spasms (often called myoclonus) of
 distemper virus infection in dogs.
advisable to aim for 25 to 35 micrograms/mL initially and
Potassium bromide may be used as an adjunct to pheno-
increase the dose, if required, according to response.
 barbital therapy when full control has not been achieved.
In suckling and weanling foals, phenobarbital may be used
Oral administration is well tolerated and in dogs the thera-
to control seizures and then continued as maintenance ther-
peutic serum concentration is 500 to 2000 mg/lire,
apy for 3 to 6 months. Without changing the amount admin-
although the steady state plasma-drug concerntration is not-
istered, the dose irn mg/kg is slowly reduced as the foal
reached until 4 to 5 months after the start of therapy. In
grows and gains weight.
some dogs, a dose of 15 mg/kg may give rise to brominism,
  n   s   
for sedation in the treatment of tetany caused by hypomag-
which may occur some months after treatment because of
the very long half-life of potassium bromide. Careful clini-
nesaemia. Preparations intended for euthanasia (see section
6.10) have been used but may not be sterile; if used, the vet-
cal observation and regular monitoring of serum-bromide
concentration is essential. Potassium bromide is also occa-
erinarian must take full responsibility.
sionally used in horses.
of the antiepileptic activity of primidone is achieved by its
ETHOSUXIMIDE
phenobarbital metabolite, and it is therefore illogical to give
primidone and phenobarbital together. The half-life of
UK
primidone in dogs is between 5 and 10 hours. The rate of
Indications. Petit mal in dogs; flexor spasms associated
metabolic conversion increases after 14 days of treatment
with canine distemper
and results in lower plasma-drug concentrations. Initially,
Contra-indications. Pregnant animals
 -saidep pue eixee Aenoduen ssneo Aeu Adere suopud
Warnings. Abrupt cessation of therapy may precipitate sei-
sion. Thus it is recommended that therapy be commenced at
zures or status epilepticus
6.9 Antiepileptics  289
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, initial dose 40 mg/kg once then 15-
POM Epanutin (Parke-Davis) UK
25 mg/kg 3 times daily
Capsules, phenytoin sodium 25 mg, 50 mg, 100 mg, 300 mg
POM Emeside (LAB) UK
POTASSIUM BROMIDE
Capsules, ethosuximide 250 mg
Syrup, ethosuxirmide 50 rmg/mL
UK
POM(H) Zarontin (Parke-Davis) U/K
 Indications. Epilepsy, used as an adjunct to phenobarbital
Capsules, ethosuxirmnide 250 mg
Side-effects. Somnolence; ataxia; polyphagia; polydipsia;
Syrup, ethosuxirmide 50 rmg/mL
gastro-intestinal irritation (give with food)
Warnings. Abrupt cessation of therapy may precipitate sei-
PHENOBARBITAL
zures or status epilepticus; rarely potassium bromide may
(Phenobarbitone)
contribute to the development of pancreatitis
Dose. See preparation details
UK
Indications. Epilepsy; status epilepticus· (see section
Epilease (VetPlus)
6.9.2); behaviour modification + (see section 6.11.7)
Capsles, potassiurm brormide 985 mg, for dogs, cats
Dose. By mouth, 50-80 mg/kg once daily
Contra-indications. Pregnant animals, lactating bitches,
Adjunct to phenobarbital, 20-40 mg/kg
hepatic impairment
Side-effects. Occasionally transient polyphagia, polyuria,
KBr Tablets (Genitrix)
Tablets, scored, potassiurm brormide 325 mg
polydipsia, sedation, paradoxical hyperactivity
Dose. Dogs: by mouth,(20 kg body-weight) 325 mg rwice daily
Warnings. Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1. Hepatic
Potassium Bromide Powder
function should be monitored before and during treatment;
Oral solution, prepared frorn Potassiurm Brormide BP powder 250 rmg/mL
serum-phenobarbital concentration should  be monitored;
Dose. Horses: by mouth, 10- 15 mg/kg wice daily
abrupt cessation of therapy may precipitate seizures or sta-
tus epilepticus; seizure activity should be monitored
PRIMIDONE
Dose. Epilepsy, by mouth.
Horses +: 4- 10 mg/kg twice daily
UK
Dogs: initial dose, 2-5 mg/kg daily in 2 divided doses
Indications. Epilepsy
Cats +: 1.5-5.0 mg/kg twice daily
Contra-indications. Pregnant bitches
Side-effects.
Transient initial ataxia, polydipsia, hepato-
Note. For therapeutic purposes phenobarbital and phenobar-
toxicity, megaloblastic anaemia
bital sodium may be considered equivalent in effect
Warnings.
. Abrupt cessation of therapy may precipitate sei-
zures or status epilepticus; chronic treatment may cause
CD Epiphen (Vetoquinol) UK
Tabieis,phenobarbial30m60mfd
hepatotoxicity; megaloblastic anaemia
Note. Tablets must not be divided
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, initial dose 15-30 mg/kg daily in 2
Orai sorurion, phenobarbital 40 mg/mL, for dogs
divided doses with gradual increase until effect obtained.
CD  Phenobarbital (Non-proprietary) UK
Usual dose 50 mg/kg daily but up to 100 mg/kg daily may
be required
Tablets, phenobarbital 15 mg, 30 rmg, 60 rmg
Elixir, phenobarbital 3 mg/mL in a vehicle containing alcohol 38%
POM Mysoline (Schering-Plough) UK
Injection, phenobarbital sodiurm 200 rmg/mL
Note. phenobarbital injection 200 mg/mL must be diluted 1 in 10 with water
Fablets, prirmidone 250 rmg, for dogs
for injection before intravenous injection
SODIUMVALPROATE
PHENYTOIN SODIUM
UK
UK
Indications. Epilepsy
Indications.Epilepsy
Side-effects. Sedation, hepatopathy
Contra-indications. Cats, see notes above; hepatic impair-
Warnings. Abrupt cessation of therapy may precipitate sei-
ment; pregnant animals
zures or status epilepticus
Side-effects. Transient ataxia, gastro-intestinal
distur-
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 60 mg/kg 3 times daily
 bance, peripheral neuropathy, hepatotoxicity
When sodium valproate and phenobarbital are used in com-
Warnings. Abrupt cessation of therapy may precipitate sei-
bination, the dose of each drug should be reduced by 33-
zures or status epilepticus; Drug Interactions
see
50% depending on plasma-drug concentrations and clirical
Appendix 1
sigris
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 10-35 mg/kg 3 times daily given
POM H Sodium Valproate (Non-proprietary) UK
with food; adjust dose according to the patients response
Tabieis, e/c, sodiurn valproate 200 mg, 500 mg
and serum-phenytoin concentration
Oral solution, sodiurm valproate 40 mg/mL
POMPhenytoin (Non-proprietary) UK
POMH Epilim (Sanofi-Synthelabo) UK
Fablets,(crushable) scored, sodiurn valproate 100 rmg
Fablets, coated, phenytoin sodium 50 rmg, 100 mg
Tablets, e/c, sodiurn valproate 200 mg, 500 mg
Capsules, phenytoin sodiurn 50 rmg, 100 rmg
Oral liqwid, sodiurm valproate 40 rmg/mL
290 Nervous system
6.9.2 Drugs used in status epilepticus
POM Rivotril (Roche)UK
Fablets, scored, clonazeparm 500 rmicrograrms, 2 mg
The occurrence of repeated seizures without intervening
fnjection, for dilution, clonazeparm l mg/mL. To be diluted irmrmediately
periods of consciousness is called status epilepticus. Ani-
before use
mals that suffer from cluster seizures are at particular risk of
developing status epilepticus. This is an emergency situa-
DIAZEPAM
tion that requires prompt and appropriate therapy to avoid
UK
serious brain damage and death. If the cause of seizures is
Indications. Status epilepticus; epilepsy (see section
known or suspected to be due to hypoglycaemia, hypocal-
 6.9.1); convulsions caused by poisoning (see Treatment of
caemia, or thiamine deficiency, then appropriate therapy
should be instituted. Once the seizures are controlled, ade-
poisoning); urinary retention (see section 9.4); behaviour
quate ventilati on must be maintained.
modification (see section 6.11.3)
Contra-indications. Hepatic impairment
If the cause is unknown, the first priority is to administer an
Side-effects. Respiratory depression at high doses
antiepileptic drug. Diazepam and clonazepam cross the
Warnings. Diazepam potentiates phenobarbital and may
blood-brain barrier more quickly than other antiepileptics,
precipitate respiratory and cardiovascular collapse; Drug
hence their value in treating status epilepticus. Diazepam,
 Interactions - see Appendix 1
given intravenously, is the drug of choice (although clon-
Dose. Status epilepticus.
azepam is more potent). It is available in a solvenit-based
Horses,cattle:by stow intravenous injection,25-100 mg
preparation and as an oil-iri-water emulsion. The solvent-
 doses according to response, followed by phenobarbital, by
intravenous injection,5 mg/kg
and cause damage to vessel intima resulting in throm-
foals: by stow intravenous injection, 5- 10 mg doses accord
bophlebitis. The solvent-based preparation is even more
ing to response, followed by phenobarbital, by intravenous 
painful on intramuscular injection with slow absorption and
injection,9 mg/kg
therefore should not be used by this route. The emulsion
Dogs, cats: by intravenous injection, 5-50 mg given in 5-
preparation is less irritant by intravenous injection but is not
10 mg doses, followed by sfow intravenous infusion, 2-5
suitable for intramuscular injection. Diazepam is only
mg/hour in glucose 5% intravenous infusion
slightly soluble and it is important to avoid crystallisation in
intravenous infusions (see preparation details).
POM H Diazepam (Non-proprietary) UK
Neither diazepam nor clonazepam is authorised for veteri-
Tablets, scored, diazepam 2 mg, 5 mg, 10 mg
nary use in the UK but, nethertheless, they are the most suit-
Oral solution, diazeparm 400 micrograrms/mL
able drugs to administer in the first instance in any case of
fnjection (solution), diazepam 5 rmg/mL
status epilepticus in dogs or cats.
Note. If used for intravenous infusion, dilute to a maxirmurm concentration of
40 mg in 500 rmL of glucose 5% intravenous infusion or sodiurn chloride
If diazepam is not effective then propofol (see section
0.9% intravenous infusion. Allow not more than 6 hours between addition
6.6.2.2) should be administered by intravenousinfusion at a
and cormpletion of adrmini stratior
dose of 100 to 200 micrograms/kg (0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg) per
Injection (emuision), diazeparm 5 rmg/mL
minute. Overmedication should be avoided, and only
Note. If used for intravenous infusion, dilute to a rmaxirmurm concentration of
enough drug administered to suppress the seizures.
 200 rmg in 500 rmL of glucose 5% or 10% intravenous infusion. Allow not
Phenobarbital sodium (see section 6.9.1) is slower in its
 rmore tharn 6 hours berween addition and cormpletion of adrministration.
 action than pentobarbital but has been used intravenously
POM Diazemuls (Alpharma) UK
subsequent to the initial control. In a dog that has not previ-
Injection (emulsion), diazeparm 5 rmg/mL
 ously received oral phenobarbital, 3 to 6 mg per hour, as a
Note. If used for intravenous infusion, dilute to a rmaxirmurm concentration of
diluted solution, should be administered intravenously. If
 200 mg in 500 mL of glucose 5% or 10% intravenous infusion. Allow not 
the patient is on long-term oral phenobarbital therapy
 rmore than 6 hours berween addition and cormpletion of adrministration.
before the onset of status epilepticus, the drug may be
administered by intravenous injection at a dose equivalent
6.10 Drugs used for euthanasia
to the oral dose routinely given. Thereafter, the dose of
Euthanasia of animals is carried out in veterinary practice.
phenobarbital should be admiristered according to the
patient's response.
Whatever the reason for euthanasia, once the veterinarian is
satisfied that this is the only option, and that the client fully
understands the situation and gives written consent, an
CLONAZEPAM
agent for euthanasia is chosen to satisfy several criteria.
Euthanasia should be as painless as possible and the proce-
UK
dure should not cause undue anixiety or fear. Prior sedation
 Indications. Status epilepticus; epilepsy (see section 6.9.1)
Or tranquillisation may be necessary.
Contra-indications. Pregnant animals
Barbiturates are the most suitable drugs to comply with the
Side-effects. Sedation at high doses
criteria for acceptable agents. Preparations are in injectable
Dose. Dogs: status epilepticus, by intravenous injection,
form and not necessarily sterile. Intravenous injection of
50-200 micrograms/kg
pentobarbital sodium for euthanasia produces a smooth
6.11 Drugs used to modify behaviour 291
and rapid loss of consciousness in many species. Euthanasia
COMPOUNDPREPARATIONSFOR
may be delayed in animals with severe cardiac or respira-
EUTHANASIA
tory impairment. It can also be administered by the intra-
A compound preparation for euthanasia is available in the
peritoneal route; intracardiac injection is painful and should
UK containing
secobarbital (quinalbarbitone) and cin-
not be used in conscious animals, although it can be used in
chocaine. It is claimed that the cardiotoxic properties of cin-
unconscious animals. Overdosage of barbiturates causes
chocaine result in rapid cardiac arrest and generally gasping
death by depression of medullary respiratory and vasomotor
does not occur. However, it is recommended that the injec-
centres. In horses, pentobarbital may cause excitement and
tion is given slowly (25 mL in 10 to 15 seconds) to mini-
a short-acting barbiturate or sedative such as an alpha2-
mise the risk of premature cardiac arrest. There is debate
adrenoceptor stimulant should be administered initially or
an alternative method of euthanasia should be used.
Some authorities suggest that horses are sedated with deto-
Other methods of euthanasia of animals and useful guid-
midine and cattle with xylazine. Other authorities indicate
ance is given in Humane killing of animais. 4th ed. Eng-
that sedation increases the risk of agonal gasping and mus-
land: UFAW, 1989 and The humane killing of fivestock
cle tremors.
using firearms. England: HSA,1999.
 In other countries, preparations containing pentobarbital
and phenytoin are available; the effect of pentobarbital is
Animals given pentobarbital sodium  for euthanasia
potentiated by phenytoin resulting in faster cessation of car-
should not be used for animal or human consumption. In
diac electrical activity. Embutramide has a strong narcotic
addition, the VMD provides the following warning:
action and paralyses the respiratory centre. Mebezonium
carcasses of chemically euthanased animals must be
iodide has a curariform paralytic action on striated muscle
incinerated and not sent to the knacker's yard.
and respiratory muscle.
UK
PENTOBARBITAL SODIUM for euthanasia
Indications. Euthanasia only
Contra-indications. Animals
intended for human or
UK
animal consumption
Indications. Euthanasia only
Warnings. Preparations
are not suitable for general
Warnings. Preparations are not suitable for general anaes-
anaesthesia
thesia; operators should wear suitable protective clothing
 Dose. See preparation details
when handling the product
CD Somulose (Arnolds) UK
Injection,cinchocaine hydrochloride 25 mg, secobarbital sodium 400 mg/
Accidental contact through skin, eyes, or ingestion or
mL, for horses, catfle, dogs, cats
self-injection may be fatal in humans. Contact area
Withdrawal periods. Should not be used in anirmals intended for anirmal or
hurman con surm ption 
should be washed or irrigated with water and medical
Dose. By intravenous injection.
aid obtained. In case of accidental self-injection seek
Horses, catle: 0.I mL/kg
urgent medical attention, advising medical services of
Dogs, cats: 0.25 mL/kg
barbiturate poisoning. Do not leave patient unattended.
Maintain airways and give symptomatic and supporti ve
6.11 Drugs used to modify behaviour
treatmenit.
The use of drugs to treat animal behavioural problems is a
relatively new field of veterinary medicine. A wide range of
Dose.By rapid intravenous (preferred),intraperitoneat,or
intracardiac injection, 120-200 mg/kg as necessary
many of which have other indications for use in veterinary
medicine. Readers should also consult monographs in other
CD Dolethal (Vetoquinol) UK
Injection, pentobarbital sodium 200 mg/mL, forcattle, dogs, cats
sections of the book where indicated. The drugs listed
below are not intended to be comprehensive but represent
CD Euthatal (Merial) UK
drugs that are commonly used for behaviour modification.
Injection, pentobarbital sodiurn 200 mg/mL, for dogs, cats, other small
 The recommended dose ranges given are compiled from a
unimais
variety of sources and represent current available data but
CD Lethobarb (Fort Dodge) UK
due to the dynamic nature of the subject this information is
Injection, pentobarbital sodiurm 200 mg/mL, for small farm animals, domes-
constantly under review.
tic pets
When using drugs in this field, it is important to consider
CD Pentobarbital Solution 20% for Euthanasia (Loveridge) UK
the limitations of medical treatment. Drug therapy alone is
Injection, pentobarbital sodiurm 200 rmg/mL
unlikely to be effective in dealing with behavioural prob-
lems and it is important to also institute appropriate behay-
CD Pentoject (Anirmalcare) UK
Injection, pentobarbital sodiurm 200 rmg/mL, for dogs, cats, other small
ioural modification programmes. Also, it is well recognised
unimals,mink
292 Nervous system
that behavioural symptoms may be seen in conjunction with
ification. In cases of sound phobia, the ability to limit motor
medical conditions and these should be addressed.
responses while increasing the animal's sensitivity to sound
There are many non-veterinary behavioural counsellors
makes acepromazine wholly unsuitable. Doubts over the
inivolved in the treatment of behavioural problems and vet-
anxiolytic properties of phenothiazines and concerns over
erinarians are reminded that the animal must be ^under his/
their sometimes unpredictable effects mean that they are no
her care’ to enable drug prescribing. In addition, many of
longer considered appropriate for use in behavioural medi-
the drugs prescribed for behaviour modification in animals
cine.
have potential for human abuse and it is important that their
use is under adequate control.
AZAPERONE
6.11.1
Neuroleptics
UK
6.11.2
Azapirones
Indications. Behaviour modification; pre-anaesthetic med-
6.11.3
Benzodiazepines
ication (see section 6.1.2)
6.11.4
Antidepressants
 Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See
section
6.11.5
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
6.1.2
6.11.6
Beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs
Dose. Pigs: aggression, stress, by intramuscular injection,
Antiepileptics
0.4-2.0 mg/kg
6.11.7
6.11.8
Opioid antagonists
See section 6.l.2 for preparation details
6.11.9
Central nervous system stimulants
6.11.10 Antihistamines
HALOPERIDOL DECANOATE
6.11.11 Hormonal preparations
6.11.12 Cerebral vasodilators
UK
6.11.13 Artificial 'pheromones
Indications. Behaviour modification
Dose. See Prescribing for exotic birds
6.11.1 Neuroleptics
POM  Dozic (Rosemount) UK
Oral liquid, haloperidol I mg/mL
medicine) include the butyrophenones, the phenothiazines,
POM (H Haldol (Janssen-Cilag) UK
and the thioxanthenes. These drugs are rather non-specific
Oral liquid, haloperidol 2 rmg/mL
causing varying degrees of sedation, antimuscarinic effects,
POM (H Serenace (IVAX) UK
alpha-adrenoceptor blocking activity, and extrapyramidal
Oral liquid, haloperidol 2 mg/mL
effects. They are commonly used in veterinary medicine for
sedati on and restrai nt.
 oadze pe padonr se yons snonng
6.11.2 Azapirones
be classified as high potency neuroleptics. They have the
least sedative, least hypotensive, and the least antimus-
Drugs in this class have specific anxiolytic action and are
carinic effects of the neuroleptics. However, they are non-
reported to have minimal side-effects. The exact mode of
action is unknown but their primary action appears to be as
extrapyramidal effects. Some authorities advocate these
serotonin agonists, although they are also thought to inter-
drugs for compulsive and aggressive states in dogs. How-
act with norepinephrine, acetylcholine, and dopamine
ever their use is controversial and they are not commonly
systems.
used for therapy in companion animals other than exotic
Buspirone is considered to be safe, does not interfere with
birds. Haloperidol is contra-indicated for use in horses.
learning, and has been shown to cause minimal problems on
Azaperone is used to control aggression and fi ghting and to
withdrawal. It is theoretically ideal for the treatment of anx-
decrease excitement in pi gs.
iety related problems and its use in the treatment of indoor
Phenothiazines, for example acepromazine, are character-
urine spraying in cats is well documented. It has also been
ised by pronounced sedative effects and moderate antimus-
used in cases of aggression, including fear related aggres-
carinic and extrapyramidal side-effects. They are non-
sion, in dogs and cats but caution is advised because bus-
specific in their action and can affect aspects of the animal's
pirone may cause a paradoxical increase in aggression in
behaviour other than those being targeted. They decrease
some cats. Alternatively, some cats may show an increase in
motor function and reduce awareness of external stimuli.
friendliness and attention seeking behaviour and this side-
Animals treated with phenothiazines should be assessed
effect has been used to advantage in aiding the introduction
carefully because some may become more reactive to
of semi-feral animals into a domestic environment. Its use
noises and can be easily startled. The level of sedation asso-
is limited in treatment of fears and phobias because,
ciated with doses used to control behavioural clinical signs
although effective for low grade anxieties, it is ineffective
may limit the usefulness of these drugs. Sedation and gen-
when the animal is exposed to intense fear inducing stimuli.
eral indifference to the environment can affect the ability of
The onset of the effects of buspirone is gradual and full
the animal to learn and thereby jeopardise behavioural mod-
effects may niot be seen for up to four weeks.
6.11 Drugs used to modify behaviour 293
BUSPIRONE HYDROCHLORIDE
umented. Animals also show an anxiety withdrawal
response after the use of benzodiazepines and this accounts
UK
for the high recurrence rate for urine spraying in cats when
Indications. Feline urine marking, anixiety related behav-
treated with diazepam. Guidance for prescribing benizodi-
ioural problems (stereotypies), feline bonding problems
 azepines as anxiolytics in humans includes use for as short a
Contra-indications. Severe renal or hepatic impaiment;
time as possible and at the lowest effective dose. Gradual
epileptics
reduction in plasma-drug concentration is essential and
Side-effects. Disinhibition, increased friendliness
withdrawal of therapy over a period of weeks is recom-
Warnings. Paradoxical increase in aggression in some cats;
mended. These principles apply equally to the use of benizo-
responise to treatment may take up to 4 weeks
diazepines in the veteri nary field.
Dose. By mouth.
Dogs: mild anxiety, 1 mg/kg 2-3 times daily
ALPRAZOLAM
Cats: indoor urine spraying, 5 mg/cat twice daily for 1
week. If patient responds, continue treatment for 8 weeks,
UK
than gradually withdraw treatment
Indications. Acute fears, refractory feline elimination
Anxiety, 0.5- 1.0 mg/kg 2-3 times daily for 6-8 weeks
problems, feline anxiety related conditions, appetite stimu-
lation, short-term management of canine sound phobia
POMH) Buspirone Hydrochloride (Non-proprietary)
Contra-indications. Hepatic impairment
Fabiets, buspirone hydrochloride 5 mg, 10 rmg
 Side-effects. Warnings. See under Diazepam, paradoxical
POMH) Buspar (Bristol-Myers Squibb) UK
excitement
Fablets, buspirone hydrochloride 5 rmg, 10 rmg
Dose. Dogs:
by mouth, 100-125 micrograms/kg twice
daily
6.11.3 Benzodiazepines
Cats: by mouth, 100 micrograms/kg 3 times daily
Benzodiazepines such as diazepam, clorazepate, and
POM Xanax (Pharmacia) UK
alprazolam are used as anxiolytics in behavioural medi-
Tableis, scored, alprazolarm 250 micrograrms, 500 micrograrms
cine, and are currently regarded as the drug class of choice
in the short-term management of sound phobias. However,
CLORAZEPATE DIPOTASSIUM
when used on a long-term basis, benizodiazepines are found
UK
to produce adverse effects and induce physical dependence
Indications. Anxiety related behaviours, noise phobias,
and their applications can therefore be limited. These drugs
thunderstorm phobias
are oftenn associated with some degree of psychomotor
Contra-indications. Hepatic impairment
 Side-effects. See under Diazepam; sedation, hepatic
short term) and consequently learning ability. These amne-
damage
sic properties of benzodiazepines limit their long-term use
Warnings. See under Diazepam
 as an adjunct to behavioural modification programmes but
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 0.55-2.2 mg/kg daily
POM Tranxene (Boehringer Ingelheim) UK
bias.
Capsules, clorazepate dipotassurm 7.5 mg, 15 mg
Benzodiazepines are contra-indicated  in patients
with
impaired liver function and the long-term use of these drugs
DIAZEPAM
inl cats is believed to be associated with hepatic damage. In
a feline context they may also affect depth perception and
UK
render cats unable to judge distances between objects or
Indications. Anxiety related behaviour problems, feline
proximity of approaching cars: a serious concern for cats
urine spraying, short-term management of canine sound
that have access to outdoors.
phobia, some forms of feline aggression, appetite stimula-
Diazepam has an ex tremely short half-life in the dog and
tion; epilepsy (see section 6.9); urine retention (see section
frequent administration can seriously limit its usefulness.
9.4)
Clorazepate has a longer duration of action in dogs and is
Contra-indications. Hepatic impairment
advocated as more effective but has been associated with
Side-effects. Disinhibition, interference with learning and
liver failure. Alprazolam is a short acting highly potent ben-
memory, ataxia or depression but paradoxical increase in
zodiazepine, which appears to be better tolerated by cats
activity possible
and is particularly beneficial in the short-term management
Warnings. Dependence and consequent problems of with-
of cases of sound phobia in dogs.
drawal, see notes above
One major limitation of the use of benzodiazepines in
Dose. Dogs: behaviour modification, by mouth, 0.55-2.2
canine aggression is the risk of disinhibition, which can
mg/kg as required
lead to a paradoxical escalation in the level of aggression.
Cats: behaviour modification, by mouth, 200-400 micro-
Physical dependence is well recognised in conjunctior with
grams/kg 1-2 times daily
benzodiazepine use in humans and a distinctive withdrawal
Appetite stimulation, 0.5-1.0 mg/kg
syndrome associated with resurgence of anxiety is well doc-
See section 6.9.2 for preparation details
294 Nervous system
6.11.4 Antidepressants
and is thought to act primarily on serotonergic path ways. It
also blocks central and peripheral H,-receptors and blocks
pre-synaptic alpha,-receptors, which enhances norepine-
cyclic antidepressants (TCAs), selective serotonin re-
phrine secretion and thus increases the turnover of this neu-
uptake inhibitors (SSRIs), and the tetracyclic antidepressant
mianserin. Depending on the drug used there may be inhibi-
rotransmittet. In human psychiatry, mianserin is widely
used for its antidepressant, anxiolytic, and sleep improving
tion of norepinephrine re-uptake, serotonin re-uptake, or
both.
effects and there have been reports of its successful use in
the treatment of depressive states associated with anorexia,
Other atypical antidepressants include monoamine oxidase
 apathy, and excessive sleeping in both cats and dogs.
inhibitors (see section 6.11.5) and lithium. The use of lith-
ium as a mood stabilising compound is well established in
AMITRIPTYLINE HYDROCHLORIDE
human medicine but its narrow margin of safety precludes
its use in veterinary medicine.
UK
Amitriptyline, clomipramine, desipramine, and doxepin
Indications. Generalised anxiety, separation problems,
are TCAs. Clomipramine inhibits the re-uptake of serotonin
and also inhibits the re-uptake of norepinephrine through
excessive grooming
Contra-indications. Male breeding dogs; hypersensitivity
the action of the active metabolite desmethylclomipramine.
to the drug
Desipramine primarily inhibits norepinephrine re-uptake
Side-effects. Occasional vomiting, changes in appetite Or
and has little effect on serotonin re-uptake.
 lethargy, antimuscarinic effects; antihi staminic effects 
Antidepressants produce varying degrees
ofsedation
Dose. By mouth.
depending on the antimuscarinic and antihistamimic effects
Dogs: 1-2 mg/kg 1-2 times daily. (May be inicreased to 4
seen. Alpha-adrenergic side-effects are seenl with clomi-
mg/kg 1-2 times daily)
pramine and amitriptyline and may be useful in cases where
Cats : 0.5-1.0 mg/kg once daily
incontinence is a feature.
POMH Amitriptyline (Non-proprietary) UK
TCAs are used frequently in veterinary behavioural medi-
Tablets, coated, armitriptyline hydrochloride 10 mg, 25 rmg, 50 rmg
cine and are the subject of extensive research. They are
Oral solution, armitriptyline (as hydrochloride), 5 rmg/mL, 10 rmg/mL
indicated for a wide range of behavioural disorders when
used in association with behavioural therapy. In addition to
CLOMIPRAMINE HYDROCHLORIDE
their antidepressant effects, they have noticeable anxiolytic
properties and their blocking action on the re-uptake of
UK
serotonin makes them useful in the treatment of stereotypic
 Indications. Separation-related anxiety, generalised anxi-
conditions. TCAs are reported to be potentially cardiotoxic
ety+, feline urine spraying+, stereotypies· (including
with reference made to causing tachycardia, arrhythmias,
acral lick dermatitis)
and hypotension. In clinical use these side-effects are found
Contra-indications. Male breeding dogs; hypersensitivity
to be infrequent but it is recommended that treatment
to the drug
should start at a low dose and gradually be increased to
Side-effects.
.Occasional vomiting, changes in appetite Or
optimal level over several weeks. A delay in the onset of
lethargy, antimuscarinic effects
action of antidepressants, which varies from one to four
Warnings. Use with caution in patients with cardiovascular
weeks, is often quoted as a disadvantage of their usage. Cer-
dysfunction, epilepsy, marrow angle glaucoma, reduced
tainly this potential delay precludes the use of serotonergic
gastro-intestinal motility, or urinary retention; safety in
antidepressants on an 'as needed' basis.
 pregnant or lactating dogs has not been established; Drug
The non-tricyclic antidepressant fluoxetine is a selective
Interactions - see Appendix 1
serotonin re-uptake inhibitor (SSRI) which has been advo-
Dose. By mouth.
cated for the treatment of compulsive behaviours in dogs.
 Dogs: 1-2 mg/kg twice daily in combination with behay-
Fluoxetine has also been suggested for its mood stabilising
ioural modification techniques. May be given with small
effects for some cases of affective aggression in dogs and
amount of food to reduce vomiting
cats. Other SSRIs have attracted interest in the field of
Treatment of stereotypies+, 1 mg/kg twice daily for 2
behavioural medicine. Fluvoxamine has been advocated
weeks, then 2 mg/kg twice daily for 2 weeks, then 3 mg/kg
for the treatment of compulsive behaviours and shares
twice daily to effect, then gradually withdraw therapy
many of the indications of fluoxetine. Sertraline, a potent
Cats + : 0.5- 1.0 mg/kg once daily
and specific inhibitor of serotonin re-uptake, has beenn used
POM Clomicalm (Novartis) UK
in the treatment of panic associated with sound phobias and
Fablets, scored, clomiprarmine hydrochloride 5 rmg, 20 rmg, 80 mg, for dogs
other fearful states.
more than 1.25 kg body-weight and 6 months of age
Another antidepressant which has been discussed within the
context of veterinary behavioural medicine is mianserin. It
DOXEPIN
belongs to the piperazino-azepine group of tetracyclic anti-
UK
depressant compounds that are chemically related to the tri-
cyclic antidepressants. It lacks antimuscarinic side-effects
Indications. Acral lick dermatitis, compulsive stereotypic
behaviours
6.11 Drugs used to modify behaviour 295
Contra-indications. Male breeding dogs; hypersensitivity
current MAOIs, antiepileptics, anti-arrhythmic drugs, Or
to the drug
propranolol
 Side-effects. Occasional vomiting, changes in appetite Or
Warnings. Care in cases involving aggression due to the
lethargy, antimuscarinic effects; moderate sedation, potent
risk of disinhibition; Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1
antihistaminic effects
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 1 mg/kg twice daily for one week,
Warnings. Use with caution in patients with cardiovascular
then 1-2 mg/kg twice daily
dysfunction, epilepsy, narrow angle glaucoma, reduced
gastro-intestinal motility, or urinary retention
POM (H Lustral (Pfizer) UK
Dose. By mouth.
Tableis, f/c, sertraline (as hydrochloride) 50 mg, 100 rmng
Dogs: 3-5 mg/kg 2-3 times daily
Cats: 0.5-1.0 mg/kg 1-2 times daily
6.11.5 Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
POMH Sinequan (Pfizer) UK
Conventional monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs),
Capsuies, doxepin (as hydrochloride) 10 mg, 25 mg, 50 rmg, 75 rmg
which inhibit both monoamine oxidase-A and monoamine
oxidase-B enzymes, are not commonly used in veterinary
FLUOXETINE
practice due to the potentially fatal toxic reaction that canl
UK
tain foods. However, selegiline which is a selective
Indications. Stereotypies, 'depression', generalised and
monoamine oxidase-B inhi bitor does not have such effects.
recurrent fears and anxieties, aggression
Selegiline is believed to have three main types of activity on
Contra-indications. Severe hepatic or rennal impairment
the CNS, which result in its application within the behay-
Warnings. Caution in diabetes mellitus, epilepsy; response
ioural field. Synaptic transmission is enhanced via the
to treatmenit may take from 8 days to 4 weeks
inhibitory effects on monoamine oxidase-B and is also
Dose. By mouth.
affected by inhibition of the re-uptake of certain neurotrans-
Dogs: 1 mg/kg once daily
mitters, in particular dopamine and secondarily norepine-
Cats: 0.5-1.0 mg/kg once daily
phrine.  A modulatory effect on transmission
by
POM Fluoxetine (Non-proprietary)
catecholamines (dopamine and norepinephrine) is also
Capsules, fluoxetine (as hydrochloride) 20 rmg
effected through the action of selegiline on phenylethyl-
amine concentration. Selegiline has a neuroprotective
POM Prozac (Dista)
Capsules, fluoxetine (as hydrochloride) 20 rmg, 60 rmg
action via its activation of superoxide dismutase and cata-
Oral liquid, fluoxetine (as hydrochloride) 4 mg/mL
lase, two enzymes that are responsible for removing free
radicals, and has been shown to antagonise the effects of
FLUVOXAMINE MALEATE
exogenous neurotoxic substances.
Behavioural indications for selegiline include age related
UK
behavioural disorders, where decreased dopamine concen-
Indications. Treatment of canine phobias and panic attacks
tration is believed to cause problems of memory loss, dis-
orientation, and disruptions to the sleep-wake cycle. Also
aggression; treatment of canine compulsive disorders
behavioural problems of anl emotional origin such as fears,
Contra-indications. Severe hepatic or renal impairment;
phobias, depression, and anxiety. As with any psychoactive
cardiovascular disease; pregnant and lactating animals; con-
medication, the drug should always be used in combination
current MAOIs, antiepileptics, anti-arrhythmic drugs, or
with behavioural therapy. Concurrent administration of
propranolol
monoamine oxidase inhibitors and tricyclic antidepressants
Warnings. Care in cases involving aggression due to the
should be avoided and a drug free period of two weeks
risk of disinhibition; Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1
between therapy with these two groups is recommended.
Dose.Dogs: by mouth, 1-2 mg/kg twice daily
POMFluvoxamine (Non-proprietary) UK
Tabieis, fluvox armine maleate 50 rmg, 100 rmg
SELEGILINE
POM Faverin (Solvay) UK
UK
Fabiets, f/c, scored, fluvoxamine maleate 50 mg, I00 mg
Indications. Behavioural problems of an emotional origin
such as depression, anxiety, fears+, phobias+; age related
behavioural problems+; aggression; pituitary-dependent
SERTRALINE
hyperadrenocorticism + (see section 7.6)
Contra-indications. Concurrent or treatment within 1 day
UK
of administration of alpha,-adrenoceptor stimulants; con-
Indications. Treatment of canine anxiety, phobia, and
current administration of pethidine, fluoxetine, phenothi-
panic attacks; treatment of canine compulsive disorders
azines, or TCAs
Contra-indications. Severe hepatic or renal impairment;
Warnings. Safety in pregnant and lactating bitches has not
cardiovascular disease; pregnant and lactating animals; con-
beern established; Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1
296 Nervous system
Dose. By mouth.
6.11.7 Antiepileptics
Dogs: behaviour modification, 500 micrograms/kg (0.5 mg/
Where behavioural symptoms are related to seizure activity,
kg) daily for a minimum of 2 months
antiepileptic therapy (see section 6.9) is specifically
POM Selgian (Ceva) UK
indicated and a combination of phenobarbital and potas-
Fablets, f/c, scored, selegiline hydrochloride 4 mg, for dogs I.5-8.0 kg body-
sium bromide is often used in the management of this
weight
condition.
Tablets, f/c, scored, selegiline hydrochloride I0 mg, for dogs 842 kg body-
weight
Psychomotor epilepsy is a form of epilepsy particularly
Fablets, f/c, scored, selegiline hydrochloride 20 mg, for dogs 2686 kg body-
important in a behavioural context. In human medicine,
weight
antiepileptics have also been used in the treatment of
aggressive patients where violent mood swings are
involved, when they are believed to have a non-specific
6.11.6 Beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs
mood stabilising effect. Diazepam has been described in the
 Beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs (beta blockers) are used
treatment of seizure related aggression but the short half-
in behavioural therapy to reduce anxiety and decrease the
life in dogs effectively limits its use. In behavioural medi-
somatic symptoms such as tremors and palpitations which
cine, barbiturates can be of value in controlling acute anxi-
are associated with an anixious state. Without these somatic
ety states due to their anxiolytic properties. The use of
signals, the fear response can be significantly reduced and
phenobarbital in conjunction with propranolol is suggested
the use of medication can thus vastly improve the success of
d   r s  n s s s s
concomitant behavioural therapy. Since stress, anxiety, and
lems and phobic responses. However, with increasing
high levels of arousal predispose patients to aggressive inci-
research into psychoactive medication in the veterinary
dents, these drugs may also have a role in anti-aggressive
field and availability of newer medications, the indications
therapy. It is thought that propranolol may inhibit aggres-
for the use of barbiturates in behavioural therapy are
decreasing. Care must be taken when administering pheno-
Propranolol may be used as a sole agent in cases of situa-
barbital due to risks of disinhibition. Gradual withdrawal is
tional anxieties. It has also been suggested by some authori-
ties for use in combination with other drugs for the
other medication, the possibility of an effect on the hepatic
treatment of fears, phobias, and separation related prob-
metabolism of these other drugs must be considered.
lems. Propranolol and phenobarbital combination has been
Carbamazepine, a tricyclic compound, is used in humans
suggested by some authorities as a treatment for a wide
for the treatment of implusive aggression, temporal lobe
ranige of fear-based conditions including fear related separa-
epilepsy, and acute mania. In dogs it has beern suggested for
tion problems and specific phobias. Its use in combination
the treatment of psychomotor epilepsy, anxiety conditions
with TCAs has been advocated in cases of separation
and *compulsive behaviours' In cats, carbamazepine has
related anxiety and combined administration of propranolol
been used for treatment of aggression with a fear basis and
and buspirone has been suggested for the treatment of cer-
has been reported to increase affection towards people in
tain fears and phobias. Withdrawal of propranolol should be
some cats. Carbamazepine is slightly sedating, mildly
gradual in order to avoid a norepinephrine rush that can
antimuscarinic, and does not cause significant muscle relax-
tri gger a reaction of intense fear.
ation in animals, however disinhibition is a potential side-
effect of its use.
CARBAMAZEPINE
UK
PROPRANOLOL
Indications. Psychomotor epilepsy;
'compulsive disor-
ders'; fear based aggression in cats
UK
Contra-indications. Renal, hepatic, cardiovascular, and
Indications. Decrease somatic signs of anxiety; used in
haematological disorders; breeding animals
combination with phenobarbital in fears, phobias, and fear-
 Side-effects. Ataxia, gastro-intestinal disturbances, loco-
related separation problems; arrhythmias (see section 4.4.2)
motor disturbances
Contra-indications. Side-effects. See under Propranolol,
Warnings. Disinhibition may lead to paradoxical increases
section 4.4.1.2
 in aggression and careful monitoring is required
Warnings. Gradual withdrawal required
Dose. By mouth.
Dose. Behaviour modification, by mouth.
 Dogs: 4-10 mg/kg given in 3 divided doses
Dogs: 0.5-3.0 mg/kg 2 times daily (sole use); 2-3 mg/kg
Cats : 4-8 mg/kg twice daily
twice daily (in combination with phenobarbital)
Cats: 0.2- 1.0 mg/kg 3 times daily (sole use); 5 mg/cat twice
POM  Carbamazepine (Non-proprietary) UK
daily (in combination with phenobarbital)
Fableis, carbarmazepine 100 mg, 200 rmg, 400 mg
POM Tegretol (Cephalon) UK
See sectior 4.4.1 .2 for preparation details
Fablets, scored, carbarmazepine 100 mg, 200 rmg, 400 rmg
6.11 Drugs used to modify behaviour 297
PHENOBARBITAL
Side-effects. Increased heart rate and respiratory rate; ano-
rexia; tremors; aggression; insomnia; hyperthermia
UK
Warnings. Potential for human abuse
Indications. Psychomotor epilepsy+; feline excessive
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 0.2-1.3 mg/kg
yocalisation+; used in combination with propranolol in
CD  Dexedrine (Celltech) UK
fears+, phobias+, and fear related separation problems+;
Tableis, scored, dexarnfetarmine sulfate 5 mg
epilepsy (see section 6.9)
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See
under
METHYLPHENIDATE HYDROCHLORIDE
Phenobarbital, section 6.9.2
Dose. Behaviour modification, by mouth.
UK
Dogs: 2-3 mg/kg twice daily (sole use or in combination
Indications. Hyperkinesis; narcolepsy
with propranolol)
Contra-indications. Cardiovascular disease, glaucoma,
Cats: 1-3 mg/kg 1-2 times daily (sole use); 7.5 mg/cat
hyperthyroidism
twice daily (in combination with propranolol)
Side-effects. Increased heart rate and respiratory rate; ano-
rexia; tremors; aggression; insomnia; hyperthermia
See section 6.9.2 for preparation details
Warnings. Potential for human abuse
Dose. By mouth.
6.11.8 Opioid antagonists
Dogs: hyperkinesis, 2-4 mg/kg 2-3 times daily
Opioid antagonists such as naloxone and naltrexone have
 Narcolepsy, 250 micrograms/kg
beenn used in the treatment of stereotypic behaviours such as
CD  Methylphenidate Hydrochloride (Non-proprietary) UK
self-mutilation, tail-chasing, flank-sucking, and acral lick
Tabieis, methylphenidate hydrochloride 5 mg, 10 rmg, 20 mg
dermatitis. It is believed that the release of endogenous opi-
CD Ritalin (Cephalon) UK
ates is an integral part of the mechanisms of stereotypic
Fablets, scored, methylphenidate hydrochloride 10 rmg
behaviour, although current knowledge of the dynamics of
endorphins within stereotypic and non-stereotypic animals
is limited. Some researchers have expressed concern over
the effects that the blocking of opioid pathways may have
on other aspects of the animal s behaviour and on the total
quality of life. Naloxone has a short half-life and is only
available in injectable form, therefore its usefulness is lim-
6.11.10 Antihistamines
ited. Naltrexone is the opioid antagonist most likely to be
used. However, its application is usually limited to research
Anti histami nes such as chlorphenamine and diphenhy-
situations.
dramine are primarily used for behavioural conditions
relating to car travel where mild sedation is required due to
6.11.9 Central nervous system stimulants
apprehension on the part of the animal, and cases involving
pruritus and self-trauma. These effects should be considered
Hyperactive is a term often used by owners when describ-
 as side-effects of the drugs. Owners should be made aware
    n  ,  
of the antimuscarinic properties of these drugs.
overactive would be a more accurate term. In fact, true
hyperkinesis, a recognised medical condition, is extremely
CHLORPHENAMINE MALEATE
rare. Overactivity is treated using a combination of owner
(Chlorpheniram ine maleate)
education and alterations in management along with recog-
rised behavioural modification techniques, whereas hyper-
UK
kinesis does require medical treatment. It is essential that
Indications.Mild sedation (for example car travel), com-
the diagnosis is confirmed before therapy is instituted; dex-
pulsi ve scratching; premedication for drugs that may induce
amfetamine results in a paradoxical decrease in heart rate
an anaphylactic reaction (see section 5.2.1); pruritus in
and activity in hyperkinetic individuals. Treatment can then
be instituted with methylphenidate. Narcolepsy, a very
allergic skin disorders (see section 14.2)
Contra-indications. Urine retention, glaucoma, hyperthy-
rare behavioural condition, may also be treated with
roidism
stimulants.
Side-effects. Mild CNS depression, constipation, dry
mouth
DEXAMFETAMINE SULFATE
Dose. Behaviour modification, by mouth.
(Dexamphetamine sulphate)
 Dogs: 220 micrograms/kg 3 times daily (maximum 1 mg/kg
daily)
UK
Cats: 1-2 mg/cat 2-3 times daily (low dose), 2-4 mg/cat
Indications. Diagnosis of hyperkinesis
twice daily (high dose)
Contra-indications. Cardiovascular disease, glaucoma,
hyperthyroidism
See section 14.2.2 for preparatiorn details
298 Nervous system
DIPHENHYDRAMINE HYDROCHLORIDE
the same effect. Delmadinone is used extensively in the
treatment of hypersexual behaviour in male dogs. It is
UK
imperative that an accurate behavioural history is taken
Indications. Mild sedation (for example car travel), late
because the behaviour must be sexually motivated if this
night activity patterns, behavioural cases involving pruritus
course of treatment is to be effective. In some cases del-
and self mutilation; allergic respiratory disease and relief of
madinone may result in increased aggression due to a
coughing (see section 5.2.1); pruritus in allergic skin disor-
behavioural side-effect of disinhibition.
ders (see section 14.2)
The extensive list of potential side-effects is a major limit-
Contra-indications. Side-effects. See Chlorpheniamine
ing factor in the use of progestogens such as megestrol and
Dose. By mouth.
medroxyprogesterone (see section 8.2.2), especially when
Dogs, cats: 2-4 mg/kg 2-3 times daily
long-term use is being considered.
Oestrogens such as diethylstilbestrol have been shown to
See section 14.2.3 for preparation details
be effective in the control of aggression in bitches after
spaying although potential side-effects such as bone mar-
6.11.11 Hormonal preparations
row suppression must be considered and may limit their
 In the past, hormonal preparations such as the progestogens
use. Blood parameters should be monitored regularly.
and oestrogens have been commonly used to treat behav-
Behavioural effects of pseudopregnancy in bitches may
iours that are believed to have a dimorphic component such
require treatment with a prolactin suppressant such as
as canine aggression and feline marking. There is little
cabergoline even in the absence of clinical signs and the
doubt that these drugs can have a role to play in behavioural
use of cabergoline pre-neutering is recommended in bitches
modification but there has been a tendency in the past to
with a history of aggression at the end of their oestrous
view them as a cure-all for behavioural problems and this is
cycle. It is also indicated in spayed bitches displaying
not the case. Behavioural patterns are complex in their aeti-
aggression where there is a history of pseudopregnancy
ology and it is important that comprehensive behavioural
 prior to neutering. Results with the use of this drug in the
histories are taken before prescribing these drugs. In addi-
control of aggression associated with elevated blood-prol-
tion, progestogens have many potential side-effects and it is
 actin concentration have suggested that a longer course (10
essential that owners are informed of adverse effects before
to 14 days) than that recommended for the control of the
long-term usage is considered.
clinical signs of pseudopregnancy is beneficial.
In the case of feline marking it is true that the behaviour is
sexually dimorphic to anl extent but there are many other
CABERGOLINE
and it is recognised that hormonal preparations do not work
uniformly in spraying cats. The beneficial effect observed
UK
in some individuals may not be limited to the hormonal
Indications. Canine aggression associated with pseudo-
action of the drug, and in the case of progestogen therapy
pregnancy in spayed bitches and elevated blood-prolactin
some of the therapeutic value stems from the non-specific
 concentration in entire bitches; pseudopregnancy and sup-
 calming and sedative effect of the progestogen. In view of
 pression of lactation (see section 8.6)
the availability of other more specifically indicated drugs
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See section
for the management of feline urine marking the use of hor-
8.6
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 5 micrograms/kg once daily for
monal preparations such as progestogens is now considered
10-14 days
outdated and inappropriate.
 In canine aggression, the progestogens are believed to have
See section 8.6 for preparation details
specific CNS depression. The use of low doses of pro-
gestogens as a short-term measure in the treatment of
behavioural cases may be considered acceptable, but mod-
DELMADINONE ACETATE
ern psychoactive drugs have largely superseded their use.
UK
ioural problem is believed to have a strong sexual compo-
Indications. Sexually dimorphic male behaviours includ-
nent and to be under hormonal control. Reversible chemical
ing roaming, mounting, dog to dog aggression
castration is often seen as the first step in assessment for
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See section
surgical castration. Delmadinone competes with androgens
8.2.2
for receptor sites and can be a useful indicator of the poten-
Dose. Dogs, cats: by subcutaneous or intramuscular injec-
tial effects of surgical castration. However it has some pro-
tion, 1-2 mg/kg depending on the severity of the condition,
gestogenic activity and also acts upon the limbic system to
repeat dose after 8 days if no improvement. Repeat dose
give behavioural effects. Although administration of del-
every 3-4 weeks in animals showing improvement
madinone may markedly reduce aggression in some male
dogs, it is not a guarantee that surgical castration will have
See section 8.2.2 for preparation details
6.11 Drugs used to modify behaviour 299
DIETHYLSTILBESTROL
Propentofylline is a xanthine derivative and has been sug
(Stilboestrol)
gested for treatment of dullness and lethargy in older dogs.
Propentofylline is believed to increase erythrocyte flexibil-
UK
ity and thereby improve tissue oxygen supply and its action
Indications. Urinary incontinence leading to house soiling,
onl glial cells within the CNS is believed to be beneficial in
oss eiseldieday seisoid :tueds isod seuog ut uoissaie
cases of cognitive dysfunction. In such cases where dogs
section 8.2.1)
are exhibiting specific signs such as disorientation changes
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See section
in social interaction, alterations in sleep-wake cycle, and
8.2.1
changes in previously conditioned behaviours, such as
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, up to 1.0 mg/dog for 3-5 days, than
house soiling, the admimistration of propentofylline in com-
decrease to lowest effective dose given 1-2 times weekly
binatior with selegiline (see section 6.11.5) has been advo-
cated.
See section 8.2.1 for preparation details
MEDROXYPROGESTERONE ACETATE
NICERGOLINE
UK
UK
Indications. Improvement of age-related changes  for
Indications. See Megestrol acetate
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See section
example diminished vigour and vigilance, fatigue, sleep
8.2.2
disorders, loss of house training, reduced appetite, and psy-
Dose. Dogs. Males +:by subcutaneous or intramuscular
chomotor disturbances such as episodes of ataxia
injection, 5-11 mg/kg 3 times a year
Contra-indications. Use within 24 hours of administration
Cats. Males +: by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection,
of alpha,-adrenoceptor stimulants; use before admimistra-
 5-20 mg/kg 3 times a year
tion of vasodilators such as acepromazine and prazosin
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 250500 micrograms/kg once
See sectior 8.2.2 for preparation details
daily, given in the morning
MEGESTROL ACETATE
See section 4.3.4 for preparation details
UK
 PROPENTOFYLLINE
Indications. Calming effect, feline urinary marking,
UK
aggression, suppression of male species-typical behaviour;
oestrus control (see section 8.2.2)
Indications. Canine cognitive dysfunction
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See section
 Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. Dose. See
8.2.2
section 4.3.4
Dose. Behaviour modification, by mouth.
See sectior 4.3.4 for preparatior details
Dogs. Males: 2 mg/kg daily for 7 days then 4 mg/kg for 7
days if no improvement in behaviour, followed by 1 mg/kg
daily for 14 days if some improvement in behaviour or 2
6.11.13 Artificial 'pheromones'
mg/kg daily for 7 days then 1 mg/kg daily for 14 days if
 Pheromonatherapy is a relatively new therapeutic approach
       
to behavioural disorders. Social odours are the olfactory
nance dose or repeated short courses may be necessary
signals by which animals communicate and they are
Cats. Males+: 2.5-10.0 mg for 7 days, then reduce dose
detected in the cat by the use of the vomeronasal or Jacob-
every 2 weeks to lowest effective dose
son's organ.
Feline pheromonatherapy. Feline  territorial
 social
See section 8.2.2 for preparation details
odours may be classified into three groups. Firstly there are
those contained in urine spots and those associated with
6.11.12 Cerebral vasodilators
scratching, secondly there are the so called “alarm marks',
Nicergoline is anl alpha-adrenoceptor antagonist  (alpha
which consist of the scent signals contained in anal gland
blocker). One of the most important clinical actions of
secretions and paw pad sweat gland secretions, and finally
nicergoline is thought to be cerebral vasodilation resulting
the identification marks which are produced in the facial
in increased blood supply to the brain and a reversal of
skin and consist of the so called facial pheromones' This
chronic hypoxia which has been indicated as one of the fac-
third group is the basis of commercially available ^pherom-
tors underlying age related behavioural disorders. Nicergo-
one' products. These products are marketed for use in con-
 junction with behavioural modification programmes for a
line also exerts a neuroprotective action on neural cells
which limits the damage caused by chronic hypoxia and
number of behavioural problems and although they are not
anoxic attack, and increases the rate of recovery following
strictly classed as medication they are only available
damage due to hypoxia.
through a veterinary practice and they should only be pro-
300Nervous system
vided for clients in association with suitable behavioural
specifically advocated in a prophylactic role for assisting
advice.
 n  s  l o  n snd 
Feliway (Ceva) is known as the *familiarisation pherom-
management role in cases of anxiety based behavioural dis-
one' and it is believed to provide a feeling of security for
orders, such as separation anxiety. It has also been found to
cats in unfamiliar or stressful situations. It is a synthetic
analogue of the F3 fraction of the so called ‘feline facial
behaviours in dogs including sound sensitivity and fear of
pheromone: Its applications reflect this belief although the
noises, such as fireworks. In such cases, DAP is recom-
exact mode of action is as yet unclear. The major applica-
mended as an adjunct to a desensitisation and counter con-
tions are indoor urine marking, inappropriate scratching,
ditioning programme. Other applications include the
and stress during transportation but Feliway is also
management of transfer of adult dogs from familiar to unfa-
extremely useful in decreasing stress for cats in confine-
p ssn go    shun 
 ment both in veterinary hospital cages and in cattery condi-
 potentially challenging situations such as interacting with
tions. It has also been shown to decrease stress in cats
stran gers.
during handling for anaesthesia induction and during other
DAP is available as a diffuser application. The diffuser is
medical examination when it is applied to the consulting or
preparation table. Feliway is an envirormental product and
target area exceeds this size, a second diffuser should be
the spray needs to be applied 15 to 30 minutes before cats
used. Exotic birds may be sensitive to diffuser solutions. It
are allowed access to treated areas. The diffuser is plugged
is recommended that diffusers should not be placed either
into an electrical socket and the product is applied to the
directly under bird cages or within a distance of three
environment on a 24-hour basis. This provides sufficient
metres of a cage.
cover for 70 m? and one bottle lasts for a period of one
 One vial lasts for a period of one month if device is left
month. Refills are available. Exotic birds may be sensitive
switched on 24 hours per day. Refills are available. Clients
to diffuser solutions. It is recommended that diffusers
should be advised not to repeatedly switch the diffuser on
should not be placed either directly under bird cages or
and off; it is designed to be left on at all times. The diffuser
within a distance of three metres of a cage.
should be placed in the room most frequently occupied by
Felifriend (Ceva) is a synthetic analogue of the F4 fraction
the dog and, in the case of management of behavioural dis-
of the so called *feline facial pheromone' and is believed to
 orders, where the inappropriate behaviour most frequently
assist in the development of an atmosphere of confidence
occurs. For management of sound related phobias, such as
between cats and unfamiliar people. Felifriend is applied to
fireworks, the diffuser should be placed in the designated
the palms of each hand and is rubbed over the hands and
den, which has been provided for the dog to hide in. It
wrists of the handler. It is marketed specifically for use in
 should be switched on two weeks before arn anticipated
the veterinary consulting room where it is believed to
event and left or until two weeks after the event. When
reduce the cat's anixiety. It has beern advocated for use with
used to support the process of desensitisation during treat-
particularly fractious cats during consultation and at other
 ment of sound phobia the diffuser should be left on through-
times of restraint. In studies the use of Felifriend has signif-
 out the time when the behavioural therapy is being carried
icantly reduced the major signs of aggression during con-
 out. For behavioural problems invol ving hyperattachment
sultations including attempts to bite and scratch the handler.
to the owner, a treatment period of three months is
In France, Felifriend is also marketed for use inn cases of
recommended.
aggression between cats in the same household and in these
 DAP is also available as an environmental pump spray for-
 cases it is applied to the neck and flank region of each cat.
mulation and this can be used both inside and outside the
In some cases Felifriend has been found to induce what
home environment. It can be used in cars, hospitalisation
appears to be a panic reaction and it is suggested that this is
cages, kennels, indoor pens or refuge areas, and applied
most likely to occur when the cat is faced with a humar or
directly on to the bedding. It should not be sprayed directly
on to animals or near an animals face. It can be sprayed
therefore the visual signal of threat is in direct contradiction
with the bottle in an upside down position. In the house,
to the appeasing scent signal. The best results are obtained
DAP spray cani compliment the use of the diffuser device
where a more local application is needed. Application is as
aggression is in its early stages.
follows: 8 to 10 pumps of DAP are applied on to the
Canine pheromonatherapy. Dog Appeasing Pherom-
 required surface 15 minutes before the dog is introduced in
one or DAP (Ceva) is based on a synthetic analogue of a
to the environment (for example, indoor pen, kennel, etc.)
scent signal that emanates from the intermammary sulcus of
to allow the alcohol carrier to evaporate. The effect should
the lactating bitch. At a certain stage of puppy development
last for approximately one to two hours, although each
the scent appears to be important in establishing calm and
 animal will respond individually. The application can be
secure behaviour and in establishing a bond with the
renewed after one to two hours or when the effects appear
mother. The applications of DAP are varied but it has been
tobereducinig
301
7
Drugs used in the treatment of disorders of the
ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
Contributor:
tissues, to the more active tri-iodothyronine. The clinical
M E Herrtage MA, BVSc, DVR, DVD, DSAM, DipECVIM, DipECVDI,
effects of levothyroxine sodium may not be apparent for
MRCVS
several days and resolution of all the clinical signs may take
7.1 Thyroid and antithyroid drugs
several months. Although rare, thyrotoxicosis may develop
7.2 Corticosteroids
while receiving levothyroxine treatment. Clinical signs
7.3 Anabolic steroids
include polyuria, polydipsia, nervousness, panting, tachy-
cardia, weight loss, diarrhoea, and increase in appetite.
7.4 Drugs used in diabetes mellitus
7.5 Pituitary and hypothalamic hormones
Liothyronine sodium is an exogenous source of tri-
7.6 Drugs used in hyperadrenocorticism
iodothyronine. It has a similar action to levothyroxine, but
7.7 Calcium regulating drugs
7.8 Clonidine
of activity. Although tri-iodothyronine is the main active
intracellular hormone, liothyronine is only indicated when
levothyroxine therapy has failed to achieve a response in
7.1 Thyroid and antithyroid drugs
dogs with confirmed hypothyroidism. The dose should be
adjusted for the indi vidual patient. Liothyronine is also used
7.1.1 Thyroid drugs
in the tri-iodothyronine (T) suppression test for the
7.1.2 Antithyroid drugs
diagnosis of mild hyperthyroidism in cats.
The dog is relati vely resistant to thyrotoxicosis from over-
Hypothyroidism is one of the most common endocrine dis-
supplementation with thyroid drugs because of the animal’s
orders of the dog, but is diagnosed uncommonly in other
efficient metabolism and excretion of thyroid hormone.
domestic animals. In dogs, the most frequent causes of
Howevet, patients with pre-existing cardiac disorders
hypothyroidism are related to impaired production and
should initially receive lower doses of thyroid drug.
secretion of the thyroid hormones, thyroxine (T4) and tri-
Dried thyroid gland preparations should not be used
iodothyronine (T,), which usually result from destruction of
because their potency varies and their effects are
the thyroid gland (primary hypothyroidism). However,
unpredictable.
hypothyroidism may also result from pituitary disorders
(secondary hypothyroidism) or hypothalamic dysfunction
(tertiary hypothyroidism). Clinical signs are variable and
may include lethargy, poor exercise tolerance, obesity, hair
LIOTHYRONINE SODIUM
(L-Tri-iodothyronine sodium)
loss, and skin disease.
Hyperthyroidism is recognised most commonly in older
UK
cats, but has beer reported rarely in dogs. Feline hyperthy-
Indications. Hypothyroidism; tri-iodothyronine suppres-
roidism is associated with increased circulating levels of
sion test in cats
thyroxine and tri-iodothyronine and is usually caused by
Side-effects.Rarely thyrotoxicosis,see notes above
nodular hyperplasia of the thyroid or thyroid adenomas.
Dose. By mouth.
Hyperthyroidism is characterised by weight loss despite
Dogs: initially 2-3 micrograms/kg 3 times daily. Adjust
polyphagia, restlessness, nervousness, poly dipsia, polyuria,
dose for each individual animal. May be increased to 4-6
tachycardia, heat intolerance, and a poor matted or unkempt
micrograms/kg if required
hair coat.
Cats: tri-iodothyronine suppression test, 25 micrograms
Thyrotrophin (thyroid-stimulating hormone, TSH), recom-
every 8 hours for a total of 7 doses
binant human thyrotropin (rhTSH), or thyrotrophin-releas-
ing hormone (TRH) may be used in the assessment of
POM H Tertroxin (Goldshield) UK
thyroid function (see sections 7.5.1 and 7.5.3).
Fabiets, scored, liothyronine sodiun 20 micrograms
7.1.1 Thyroid drugs
LEVOTHYROXINE SODIUM
(Thyroxine sodium)
Thyroid hormones are used in the treatment of hypothy-
roidism regardless of the cause. Congenital hypothyroidism
UK
requires prompt treatment if normal development is to be
Indications. Hypothyroidism 
attained.
Contra-indications. Thyrotoxicosis, uncorrected adrenal
Levothyroxine sodium is commonly used for maintenance
insufficiency
therapy because this optical isomer of thyroxine is the main
Side-effects. Rarely thyrotoxicosis, see notes above
normal secretory product of the thyroid gland. Part of the
Warnings. Care in administration to patients with clini-
absorbed dose of levothyroxine is de-iodinated in peripheral
cally significant cardiac disease or hypertension or any con-
302 Endocrine system
 used for long-term treatment because its antithyroid action
rate
tends to diminish and patients may not achieve the euthy-
Dose. By mouth.
roid state.
Dogs: initially 22-44 micrograms/kg once daily. Adjust
Radioactive iodine (131) has been used successfully in the
dose for each individual animal after approximately 8
management of feline hyperthyroidism. Indications for 1311
weeks of therapy. Occasionally divided doses are required
to maintain adequate blood concentrati ons. Measurement of
serum-thyroxine concentrations before and 4-6 hours after
tra-indicated due to location of the tumour or the condition
administration can be used to assess the adequacy of the
of the individual patient. The lowest dose required to
dosage.
restore euthyroidism should be employed. In practice, doses
Cats + : 10-20 micrograms/kg daily in divided doses
between 37 and 370 MBq have been used. Isolation facili-
ties are required when radioactive iodine is used as indi-
POM Soloxine (Arnolds) UK
Tablets, scored, levothyroxine sodiurm 100 rmicrograrms, 200 rmicrograrms,
cated in the lonising Radiations Regulations 1999 (S1 1999)
3232).
300 micrograms, 500 rmicrograrms, 800 micrograrms, for dogs
7.1.2 Antithyroid drugs
roidism to prevent many of the neuromuscular and cardio-
vascular effects, including the control of associated
Antithyroid drugs are used in the pre-operative preparation
tachycardia, tachyarrhythmias, and hyperexcitability. It is
 of hyperthyroid patients for thyroidectomy or for long-term
generally considered to have nio effect on serum concentra-
management of hyperthyroidism.
tions of thyroid hormones and has beerl used with antithy-
Both thiamazole (methimazole) and carbimazole have
roid drugs in the pre-operati ve management of hyperthyroid
been used for palliative treatment before surgery or radio-
patients. The dose of propranolol for cats is 2.5 to 5.0 mg 3
therapy, or following recurrence after surgery, chemother-
times daily before surgery and for 2 days post surgery.
apy, or radioactive iodine treatment. Thiamazole is the
 Hypocalcaemia may be encountered after bilateral thyroid-
authorised veterinary preparation in the UK for use in cats
ectomy, due to damage to the parathyroid glands, and moni-
with hyperthyroidism. Although effective as an antithyroid
toring of serum-calcium concentration is recommended.
drug, propyithiouracil has a much higher incidence of
Treatment includes calcium (see section 16.5. 1), by intrave-
side-effects and therefore it is not recommended as the
nous injection, followed by oral calcium and vitamin D sup-
treatment of choice.
plementation (see section 16.6.4).
These antithyroid drugs act primarily by interfering with the
synthesis of thyroid hormones and must be administered at
least once daily to control excessive thyroid hormone pro-
CARBIMAZOLE
duction. Carbimazole is metabolised to thiamazole, which
is the acti ve molecule. Particular care should be taker when
UK
treating hyperthyroid patients with concomitant renal fail-
Indications. Hyperthyroidism
ure because treatment is likely to decrease glomerular filtra-
 Side-effects. Anorexia, vomiting, lethargy, pruritus, bleed-
tion rate with a corresponding increase in the plasma-urea
ing disorders, jaundice, hepatopathy
and -creatinine concentrations. Both thiamazole and carbi-
Dose. By mouth.
mazole have been used for long-term control of hyperthy-
 Dogs: 10- 15 mg daily in divided doses, increasing dose as
roidism. After 3 weeks of treatment with thiamazole, the
required to control clinical signs and maintain the serum-
dose should be adjusted according to the individual
thyroxine concentration within the normal range.
patient's needs as indicated by the serum-thyroxine concen-
Cats: 10- 15 mg daily in divided doses for 1 to 3 weeks will
tration. If the concentration is above the laboratory's refer-
produce a euthyroid state in most patients. Then adjust dose
ence range, the dose should be increased by 5 mg daily.
for each individual animal to the lowest effective dosage
Wherever possible treatment should be given in two divided
using measurement of serum-thyroxine concentrations. At
daily doses (but tablets must not be divided).
least once-daily administration is required to control thyroid
Regular monitoring (at 3, 6, 10, and 20 weeks and thereafter
hormone synthesis.
every 3 months) of serum-thyroxine concentration and hae-
POM H Neo-Mercazole (Roche) UK
matological parameters for potential side-effects is recom-
mended for animals on long-term maintenance. If side-
Tabiets, carbirmazole 5 mg, 20 rmg
effects occur, treatment should be discontinued immedi-
ately because most side-effects are reversible. Neutroperia
IODINE and IODIDE
(neutrophil count <2.5 x 109/L) should be treated with bac-
tericidal antibacterial drugs (see section 1.1) and supportive
UK
therapy.
Indications. Hyperthyroidism (pre-operative management)
Iodine and iodide are used before thyroidectomy to block
 Side-effects. Hypersali vation, anorexia, yomiting
the release of thyroxine and tri-iodothyronine and to reduce
Dose. Cats: by mouth, Aqueous Iodine Oral Solution, 3 to
the vascularity of the thyroid gland. Iodine should not be
5 drops daily for 7-14 days before surgery
7.2 Corticosteroids
303
 Aqueous Iodine Oral Solution (Lugols Solution) UK
7.2.1 Glucocorticoids
Iodine 5 g, potassiurm iodide 10 g, water to 100 mL. Total iodine (free and
cormbined) 130 rmg/mL
The action of glucocorticoids in suppressing inflammatory
reactions may be useful in a wide variety of conditions: res-
THIAMAZOLE
piratory disease such as chronic obstructive pulmonary dis-
(Methimazole)
ease and feline asthma syndrome (section 5.2); gastro-
intestinal disease including colitis in the dog (section 3. 1.3);
UK
and inflammatory lesions of the eye (section 12.3.1), ear
Indications. Hyperthyroidism (pre-operative management
(section 14.8), and skin (section 14.2.1). The use of gluco-
and long-term maintenance)
corticoids in the treatmenit of mastitis is described in section
Contra-indications. Pregnant or lactating animals; diabe-
11.1. Glucocorticoids are capable of producing sympto-
tes mellitus, abdominal neoplasia or other systemic disease
matic improvement in many conditions, but without treat-
Side-effects. Anorexia, vomiting, lethargy, pruritus, bleed-
ment of the underlying disease.
ing disorders, jaundice, hepatopathy, anaemia, thrombocy-
In musculoskeletal disorders (section 10.2) the benefits of
topenia, neutropenia, development of serum antinuclear
suppression of the disease process are weighed against the
antibodies,
increased plasma-urea
and
-creatinine
protective effects of reduced mobility if therapy is withheld.
concentration
Glucocorticoids are not indicated where only mild analgesia
Warnings. Care in cats with hepatic impairment; tablets
should not be divided or crushed; animals should always
is required.
Clinical signs of hypersensitivity disorders including aller-
have access to drinking water; haematology, biochemistry,
gic dermatitis and urticaria, and immune-mediated diseases
and serum-thyroxine concentration should be monitored in
such as haemolytic anaemia, thrombocytopenia, systemic
animals on long-term maintenance; Drug Interactions - see
lupus erythematosus, myasthenia gravis, and pemphigus
Appendix 1; care with concurrent administration of pheno-
variants may be reduced by glucocorticoid administration.
barbital, benzimidazole anthelmintics
Glucocorticoids may also be used as adjunictive therapy in
Dose. Cats: by mouth.
 Pre-operative management, 5 mg twice daily for 2-3 weeks
the management of mast cell and lymphoid neoplasia (see
section 13.2).
Long-term mainitenance, 5 mg daily for 3 weeks. Then
Early
administration of large intravenous doses of
adjust dose for each individual animal according to serum-
corticosteroids such as betamethasone, dexamethasone,
thyroxine concentration (see notes above)
hydrocortisone, or methylprednisolone may be of benefit in
POM Felimazole (Arnolds) U/K
acute circulatory failure or shock irrespective of the cause;
Tablets, thiarmazole 5 mg, for cats
intravenous fluid therapy should also be administered.
Glucocorticoids have been used in the management of acute
spinal cord injury. Methylprednisolone sodium succinate is
PROPYLTHIOURACIL
the glucocorticoid of choice because it also has free radical
scavenging properties when used at very high dosages.
UK
Methylprednisolone sodium succinate has a neuroprotective
Indications. Hyperthyroidism
effect when given at the time of, or soon after, spinal cord
 Side-effects. Anorexia, vomiting, lethargy, pruritus, bleed-
injury. The aim of treatment is to maintain therapeutic con-
ing disorders, jaundice, hepatopathy,
immune-medi ated
centrations for up to 24 to 48 hours after lesion develop-
haemolytic anaemia, development of serum antinuclear
ment. The protective effect is lost after 48 hours and the use
antibodies, lupus-like syndrome
of glucocorticoids at this stage may be detrimental and
Dose. Cats: by mouth, 50 mg 3 times daily. Adjust dose as
worsen the outcome.
described under Carbimazole
The use of large doses of dexamethasone with the aim of
reducing post traumatic swelling is widespread. However,
POM() Propylthiouracil (Non-proprietary) UK
experimental trials examining the efficacy of dexametha-
Tablets,propylthouracil50mg
sone have failed to show a beneficial effect and their use
may even be detrimental to the patient's recovery. The use
of high doses of dexamethasone in the treatment of acute
7.2 Corticosteroids
Aoeueui-uv ppiae sq pinous ssunfui pio leuds
doses of prednisolone have been used for dogs with thora-
7.2.1 Glucocorticoids
columbar and cervical spinal pain usually resulting from a
7.2.2 Treatment of hypoadrenocorticism
protrusion of an intervertebral disc. However, such patients
are at increased risk of gastro-intestinal haemorrhage and
The corticosteroids secreted by the adrenal cortex are the
care should be taken to ensure enforced confinement (cage
glucocorticoids and the mineralocorticoids. Glucocorticoids
rest) while animals are recei ving prednisolone.
alter glucose, protein, and calcium metabolism and possess
 Glucocorticoids are used for the induction of parturition in
anti-inflammatory activity; and mineralocorticoids affect
cattle and sheep+ in late pregnancy; dexamethasone may
water and electrolyte balance.
be administered. This practice is sometimes suggested in
304 Endocrine system
cases of possible fetal oversize and periparturient oedema
contiriued treatment may be effected by oral administratior.
of the udder in cattle, and in sheep to aid in the treatment of
 In courses of therapy lasting longer than 2 weeks, the dose
of prednisolone should be tapered to the lowest clinically
shorten the lambing seasonl.
acceptable maintenance level with a gradual transition to
Glucocorticoids should be given after day 260 of gestation
admimistration of twice this maintenance dose on alternate
in cattle and after day 138 in sheep to avoid production of
days. This regimen, combined with morning medication in
premature offspring.
Glucocorticoids are commonly used in the treatment of
ketosis (see section 16.4) in cattle and goats+ and also for
cats is uncertain. If treatment is to be discontinued, the dose
pregnancy toxaemia+ in sheep and goats, but are contra-
should be gradually reduced.
indicated for the treatment of the related condition of equine
The use of injectable combination preparations containing a
hyper lipaemia.
corticosteroid and an antimicrobial is not generally
Administration of glucocorticoids. Acceptable doses
 justified.
of glucocorticoids vary widely depending upon the potency
of the drug employed, its formulation, rate and route of
Side-effects
of
 glucocorticoids.
 Prolonged
administration; the nature and severity of the condition
corticosteroid treatment with either rapidly eliminated for-
being managed; and the goals of therapy. Betamethasone,
mulations or depot preparations may have suppressive
dexamethasone, flumetasone, isoflupredone,
,methyl-
effects on the HPA axis and lead to adrenal atrophy. Urnec-
prednisolone, prednisolone, and triamcinolone are com-
essarily prolonged therapy should be avoided in order to
monly used for their anti-inflammatory activity. The anti-
minimise the possibility of precipitating signs of adrenal
inflammatory effect of a corticosteroid parallels its glucone-
corticoid treatment is finally withdrawn.
glucocorticoids are listed in Table 7.1.
Corticosteroids should be used with caution in pregnant ani-
mals because they may cause abortion and fetal abnormali-
 Table 7.1 Relative anti-inflammatory potencies of
ties. The use of glucocorticoids to induce parturition is
glucocorticoids
associated with an increased incidence of retained placenta
in cattle, although subsequent fertility may not necessarily
Equivalentanti-inflammatory
be affected. Fetal abnormalities have been observed in labo-
Drug
potency
ratory animals, particularly when the drug is given during
the first third of pregnancy. In breeding mares, administra-
Hydrocortisone
1
oestrous behaviour and ovulation. Corticosteroids may
Prednisolone
4
induce a temporary fall in milk yield when given to
Methylprednisolone
5
lactating animals.
Triamcinolone
5
Catabolic effects of glucocorticoids include muscle wast-
ing, cutaneous atrophy, telogen arrest of hair follicles, and
Betamethasone
30
delayed wound healing. In cases of corneal ulceration,
Dexamethasone
30
repair of corneal stroma and epithelium is suppressed. Cor-
ticosteroids should not be used for the treatment of laminitis
Sodium phosphate salts and succinate esters are soluble,
 in horses. In addition, corticosteroids may induce laminitis
readily absorbed, and eliminated within 8 to 24 hours. They
when they are used to treat other conditions. Chronic use of
can be administered intravenously and are used when high
exogenous glucocorticoids may lead to iatrogenic hyper-
plasma or tissue concentrations are required rapidly such as
adrenocorticism (iatrogenic Cushings syndrome). Admin-
in cases of shock or allergic reactions; intravenous fluid
istration of corticosteroids may result in hepatomegaly with
 therapy is also required. Despite the rapid elimination of
concurrent raised serum- hepatic enzyme concentrati ons.
some of these corticosteroid forrmulations, suppression of
Diabetes mellitus may be unmasked by glucocorticoid ther-
the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis may
be
apy and alteration of insulin requirements in established
prolonged.
diabetics may occur. Gastric and colonic ulceration, some-
Other esters including acetate, adamantoate, dipropionate,
times with perforation, may occur in patients given gluco-
isonicotinate, phenylpropionate, pivalate, and trioxa-unde-
corticoid treatment particularly when used in conjunction
canoate are insoluble and should not be given intrave-
with certain NS AIDs.
nously. They are less rapidly absorbed and metabolised.
 Immunosuppressive effects and modification of inflamma-
Insoluble esters of dex amethasone are usually intermediate-
tory reactions by glucocorticoids may facilitate the progres-
acting and effecti ve for 4 to 14 days.
sion of concurrent infectious disease. In pre-existing
Depot or long-acting corticosteroids such as insoluble esters
infections, an appropriate antimicrobial (preferably micro-
of methylpredrisolone or triamcinolone may be effective
bial) drug should be administered at the same time if gluco-
for 3 to 6 weeks. These preparations are used for sustained
corticoids
are used. Corticosteroids should not be
administered in conjunction with a vaccine.
7.2 Corticosteroids
305
BETAMETHASONE
POM Colvasone (Norbrook) UK
Injection, dex armethasone (as sodiurm phosphate) 2 rmg/mL, for horses, caffle,
UK
dogs, cats
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmar cor -
Indications. Shock; inflammatory and allergic disorders
sumption. Cale: slaughter 21 days, milk 3 days
Contra-indications. Renal impairment; diabetes mellitus;
Dose.By intravenous or intramuscuiar injection
pregnant animals; young kittens
Horses, catte: I mL/25kgbody-weight
 Side-effects. Polydipsia, polyuria, polyphagia, calcinosis
Dogs, cats: 0.l rmL/kg daily
 cutis, immunosuppression, delayed wound healing, gastro-
POM Dexadreson (Intervet) UK
intestinal ulceration, hepatomegaly, hypokalaemia with 
fnjection, dex armethasone (as sodiurm phosphate) 2 mg/mL, for horses, catfle,
long-term use
pigs, dogs, cats
Warnings. May cause Cushingoid syndrome; use with care
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses irntended for hurman cori-
surn ption. Catfe: slaughter 7 days, rmilk 2.5 days. Pigs: slaughter 2 days
 in animals with laminitis
Dose.
Dose.
Horses: inflarmmatory disorders, by intramuscular or intravenous injection,
Horses: inflammatory disorders, shock, by intramuscular
60 rmicrograrms/kg daily
or intravenous injection,40-80 micrograms/kg
Shock,by intravenous injection,4-6 mg/kg
Cattle: by intramuscular injection.
Dogs, cats: inflammatory disorders, initial dose, by mouth,
 Inflarmrmatory disorders, 60 rmicrograrms/kg daily
 25 micrograms/kg daily. Adjust dose for each individual
Ketosis, 10-20 mg, rmay be repeated after 2 days
animal
Induction of parturition, 20 mg
Inflammatory disorders, shock, by intramuscular or intra-
Pigs: inflarmmatory disorders,by intramuscuiar injection, 60 rmicrograrms/kg
daily
venous injection, 40-80 micrograms/kg
Dogs, cats: inflarmrmatory disorders, by intramscular injection, I00 micro-
grarms/kg daily
POM Betsolan Tablets (Schering-Plough) UK
Note. May also be adrministered by intra-articular injection (see section 10.2)
Tablets, scored, betarmethasone 250 rmicrograms, for dogs, cats excluding
young kittens
POM Dexafort (Intervet) UK
Injection, dexarmethasone (as phenylpropiornate) 2 rmg, dexarmethasone (as
POM Betsolan Injection (Schering-Plough) UK
sodiurn phosphate)mg/mL,fohorses, catle,pigs, dogs,s
Injection, betarmethasone 2 mg/mL, for horses, dogs, cafs
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurman cor -
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for human
surnption. Catle: slaughter 36 days, rmilk 6 days. Pigs: slaughter 36 days
consumptior
Dose.By intramuscular injection.
 For intrarmuscul ar injectior 
Horses: 0.02 mL/kg
Cattle: inflarmmatory disorders, 0.02 mL/kg
POM Betsolan Soluble (Schering-Plough) UK
Ketosis, 5 10 mL
Injetion, betarmethasone (as sodiurn phosphate) 2 rmg/mL, for horses, dogs,
Induction of parturition, 10 mL
cats
Withdrawal Periods. Should mot be used in horses intended for hurman
Pigs: 0.02 mL/kg
Dogs, cats: 0.05 rmL/kg
consurmption.
For intrarmuscul ar or intravenous injection
POM Duphacort Q (Fort Dodge) UK
Injection, dexarmethasone sodiurn phosphate 2 mg/mL, for horses, cale,
DEXAMETHASONE
dogs,cats
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurman corn -
UK
surmption. Catfe: slaughter 21 days, rmilk 2 days
Indications. Shock; inflammatory and allergic disorders;
Dose. By intramuscular or intravenous injection.
Horses, catle: 80 rmicrograms/kg
ketosis; induction of parturition in cattle; hypoadrenocorti-
Dogs, cats: 200 rmicrograrms/kg
cism (see section 7.2.2); chronic granulomatous enteritis in
POM Opticorten (Novartis) UK
horses (see section 3. 1.3)
Tablets, scored, dexarmethasone 250 micrograrms, for dogs and cats more
Contra-indications. Except in emergenicies: renal impair-
than5 kg body-weight
ment; diabetes mellitus; chronic nephritis, congestive heart
Dose. By mouth.
failure, osteoporesis, viral infections during viraemic stage,
Dogs, cats: 25- 100 rmicrograrms/kg daily in divided doses
pregnant animals except in cattle to induce parturition;
POM Opticorten (Novartis) UK
laminitis
Tablets, or to prepare an oral solution, scored, dexarmethasone 5 mg, for
Side-effects. Polydipsia, polyuria, polyphagia, hypokalae-
horses
 mia, calcinosis cutis, immunosuppression, delayed wound
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmarn
healing, gastro-intestinal ulceration, decreased milk yield in
consurm ptior
Dose. By mouth.
lactating cows, hepatomegaly
Horses: 5 mg/100 kg body-weight. May be repeated after 2 days 
Warnings. May cause Cushingoid syndrome; may cause
POM Voren (Boehringer Ingelheim) UK
retained placenta and possible subsequent metritis and/or
Injetion, dexarmethasone isonicotinate I mg/mL, for horses, catfle, pigs,
subfertility when used to induce parturition
dogs, cats
Dose. See under preparation details
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurman con -
surnption. Catle: slaughter 60 days, rmilk 2 days. Pigs: slaughter 60 days
 Note. Dexamethasone 1 mg = dexamethasone acetate 1.1
Dose.
 mg = dexamethasone isonicotinate 1.3 mg = dexametha-
Horses, catle,pigs:by iniramuscuiar or intravenous injection,20 rmicro-
grarms/kg; piglets: 100 rmicrograrms/kg
sone sodium phosphate 1.3 mg = dexamethasone trioxa-
Dogs, cats: by subcutaneous, intramuscular, or intravenous injection, 100
undecanoate 1.4 mg (approximately)
rmicrograrms/kg
306 Endocrine system
PREDNISOLONE
Depot injection, dexarmethasone isonicotinate 3 rmg/mL, for horses, dogs,
cats
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmar
UK
consurmption
Indications. Inflammatory and allergic disorders; adreno-
Dose. By intramusc ular injection.
cortical insufficiency (see section 7.2.2); myasthenia gravis
Horses: 3 rmg/50 kg, repeat after 14 days
(see section 6.7.4), cancer therapy (see section 13.2);
Dogs, cats: 225300 rmicrograrms/kg, repeat after 14 days
inflammatory bowel disease (see section 3.1.3)
Contra-indications. Except in emergencies: renal impair-
ment; diabetes mellitus; chronic nephritis, congesti ve heart
failure, osteoporesis, viral infections during viraemic stage,
pregnant animals ; laminitis
METHYLPREDNISOLONE
Side-effects. Polydipsia, polyuria, polyphagia, hypokalae-
mia, calcinosis cutis, immunosuppression, delayed wound
UK
healing, gastro-intestinal ulceration, hepatomegaly, vomit-
Indications. Shock; inflammatory and allergic disorders
ing with rapid intravenous administration, hyperaesthesia,
Contra-indications. Except in emergencies: renal impair-
decreased blood pressure
ment; diabetes mellitus; chronic nephritis, congestive heart
Warnings. May cause Cushingoid syndrome
failure, osteoporesis, viral infections during viraemic stage,
Dose. Dogs, cats: inflammatory disorders, by mouth, 0.1
2.0 mg/kg daily. For prolonged treatment, gradually reduce
pregnant animals; laminitis
Side-effects. Polydipsia, polyuria, polyphagia, hypokalae-
to lowest effective dose and give alternate day administra-
 mia, calcinosis cutis, immunosuppression, delayed wound
tion in the morning for dogs, in the evening for cats
healing, gastro-intestinal ulceration, hepatomegaly, vomit-
POM Prednicare (Anirmalcare) UK
ing with rapid intravenous administration, hyperaesthesia,
Tableis, prednisolone I mg, 5 mg, for dogs, cafs
decreased blood pressure
Warnings. May cause Cushingoid syndrome
POM Prednidale 5 (Arnolds) UK
Dose.Horses:by depot intramuscular injection,200 mg
Tablets, scored, predisolone 5 mg,for dogs, cs
Dogs: by mouth, (dependent on individual clinical circum-
Compound preparations for osteoarthritis
stanices and body-weight) initially 1-8 mg in divided doses
by intramuscuiar stow intravenous injection or by intrave-
POM PLT (Novartis) UK
nous infusion, 20-30 mg/kg 4-6 times daily for 1-2 days as
Fabieis, scored, cinchophen 200 mg, prednisolone I rmg, for dogs
Dose. Dogs: by administration with food, (8 kg body-weight) V tablet
riecessary
[wice daily; (l6 kg body-weight) I tablet rwice daily; (24 kg body-weight)
by depot intramuscular injection,1-2 mg/kg
 
Spinal injury, by intravenous injection, 30 mg/kg as a single
reduce to lowest effective dose
dose, then+ by intravenous infusion, 5.4 mg/kg/hour for 24
hours
7.2.2Treatmentofhypoadrenocorticism
Cats: by mouth, (dependent on individual clinical circum-
Hypoadrenocorticism is a deficiency of glucocorticoid
stanices and body-weight) initially 1-8 mg in divided doses
secretion, mineralocorticoid secretion, or both from the
by intramuscular, stow intravenous injection or by intrave-
adrenal cortices. Destruction of both adrenal cortices is
nous infusion, 20-30 mg/kg 46 times daily for 1-2 days as
termed primary hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease).
necessary
Secondary hypoadrenocorticism is caused by a deficiency
by depot intramuscular injection,1-2 mg/kg
of corticotropin (ACTH) that leads to atrophy of the zona
Spinal injury, by intravenous injection, 30 mg/kg, then+ at
fasciculata of the adrenal cortices and impaired secretion of
2 and 6 hours by intravenous injection 15 mg/kg, then by
glucocorticoids. The production of mineralocorticoids from
intravenous infusion 2.5 mg/kg/hour for 42 hours
the zona glomerulosa, however, usually remains adequate.
POM Depo-Medrone V (Pfizer) UK
 Primary hypoadrenocorticism is seen in dogs and cats. Clin-
Depot injection, methylprednisolone acetate 40 mg/mL, horses, dogs, cats
ical signs include anorexia, lethargy, depression, weakness
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmarl
(usually episodic), waxing and waning illness, dehydration,
consurmption
intermittent vomiting and diarrhoea.
For depot intrarmuscul ar injection
Note. May also be adrministered by intrasynovial or intratendinous injection
In acute primary hypoadrenocorticism, sodium chloride
(see section [0.2)
0.9% intravenous infusion and glucocorticoid therapy
should be given. Hydrocortisone sodium succinate and
POM Medrone V Tablets (Pfizer) UK
Tablets, scored, rmethylprednisolone 2 rmg, 4 rmg, for dogs, cats
dexamethasone sodium phosphate are suitable for intra-
yenous glucocorticoid therapy. However, if plasma-cortisol
POM Solu-Medrone V (Pfizer) UK
concentrations are to be measured for diagnosis, then dexa-
Injection, powder for recon stintion, rmethylprednisolone (as sodiurm succi-
methasone should be used to avoid interference with the
nate) 125 rmg, 500 mg, for dogs, cats
 For intrarmuscul ar or intravenous injection or intravenous infusion
assay. Dexamethasone (0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg twice daily by
For intravenous infusion, dilute in glucose 5% in water, glucose 5% in
sodiurn chloride 0.9%, or sodiurn chloride 0.9%
-un Aq inoy/oy/au s'o io uogofui snouaui Aq sinoy
7.3 Anabolic steroids 307
venous infusion) should be administered until oral therapy
POM (H Hydrocortone (MSD) UK
can be tolerated. Once the animal has improved, mainte-
Fablets, scored, hydrocortisone 10 rmg, 20 rmg
nance treatment with mineralocorticoids can be instituted.
POM (H) Solu-Cortef (Pharrmacia) UK
Chronic primary hypoadrenocorticism requires supplemen-
Injection, powder for reconstitution, hydrocortisone (as sodiurm succinate)
tation with fludrocortisone acetate, an oral synthetic
100 mg
adrenocortical steroid with mineralocorticoid activity. The
dose should be adjusted until the plasma-sodium concentra-
7.3 Anabolic steroids
tion and plasma-potassium concentration are within the
normal ranges.
Corticotrophin and desoxycortone
Anabolic steroids are synthetic derivatives of testosterone.
pivalate (DOCP), a mineralocorticoid, are used for
They have some androgenic activity but less virilising
hypoadrenocorticism.
effects. In some countries, including the UK, the use of ana-
The majority of cases do not require continuous daily glu-
cocorticoid supplementation after initial stabilisation. How-
tions, and animals intended for human consumption as
ever, owners should be given a supply of prednisolone or
indicated in Animais and Animal Products ( Examination for
hydrocortisone tablets and clear instructions for their
Residues and Maximum Residue Limits)Regutations 1997
appropriate use in animals requiring additional glucocorti-
(SI 1997/1729).
coid treatment. Either prednisolone at a dose of io0 to 200
Anabolic steroids are indicated to promote nitrogen retenl-
micrograms/kg daily or hydrocortisone at a dose of 500
tion in animals with catabolic diseases. They also cause
micrograms/kg twice daily can be used for replacement
retention of sodium, calcium, potassium, chloride, sulfate,
therapy.
and phosphate. Various anabolic steroids are used in veteri-
Salt supplementation is required initially to correct
nary practice including boldenone, ethyestrenol, meth-
hyponatraemia but is not usually required long term. Dogs
andriol, nandrolone, norethandrolone, and stanozolol.
requiring unusually high doses of fludrocortisone may
Anabolic steroids stimulate appetite, increase muscle mass,
 respond to lower doses with salt supplementation.
retain intracellular water, increase skin thickness, increase
It is advisable to administer prednisolone or hydrocortisone
skeletal mass, close growth plates prematurely, and inicrease
at replacement dosages (see above) to patients with adreno-
production of erythrocytes. Despite potential benefits, the
cortical insufficiency before situations that may be stressful
clinical efficacy of anabolic steroids is unproven.Anabolic
such as general anaesthesia and surgery.
steroids may be used as an adjunct to the treatment of
chronic renal failure, in debilitating diseases and convales-
cence, and to promote tissue repair.
FLUDROCORTISONE ACETATE
Anabolic steroids are also indicated in the management of
hypoplastic anaemia and anaemia due to uraemia and meo-
UK
plasia. The erythropoietic effects result partly
from
Indications. Mi neralocorticoid replacement in adrenocorti -
inicreased erythropoietin production and partly from direct
calinsufficiency
stimulatory effect on bonie marrow stem cells. The aniabolic
Dose. Dogs, cats: by mouth, 15-20 micrograms/kg daily.
steroid danazol (see section 13.2) has beerl used as part of
The dose may need to be increased during the first 6 to 18
the  immunosuppressive  therapy  in immune-mediated
 months of therapy and may be required twice daily in a few
thrombocytopenia andimmune-mediatedhaemolytic
cases.
anaemia.
POM Florinef (Squibb) UK
Injectable anabolic steroid products contain esters in oil to
Tableis, scored, fludrocortisone acetate 100 micrograrms
prolong absorption. Phenylpropionate esters allow absorp-
tion over about one week, whereas laurate and undecenoate
esters prolong absorption for 3 to 4 weeks.
HYDROCORTISONE
Anabolic steroids, particularly the alkylated compounds,
including ethylestrenol and methyltestosterone (see section
UK
8.2.4) must be administered with care because of potential
Indications. Glucocorticoid replacement in adrenocortical
hepatotoxicity.
insufficiency; shock
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See section
ETHYLESTRENOL
7.2.1
(Ethyloestrenol)
Dose. Dogs: adrenocortical insufficiency, by mouth, 500
micrograms/kg twice daily
UK
by intramuscuiar injection,5-10mg/kg
by intravenous injection,1-10 mg/kg
Indications. Supportive management of chronic renal
failure
Shock, by intravenous injection, 50 mg/kg, repeat after 3-6
 Contra-indications. Androgen-dependent neoplasia, preg-
hours if required
nant animals
POM) Efcortesol (Sovereign) UK
Side-effects. Virilism with high doses, hepatopathy, possi-
fnjection, hydrocortisone (as sodiurn phosphate) 100 rmg/mL
ble production of very odorous urine in cats
308 Endocrine system
Warnings. Caution in hepatic impairment
ciency of insulin results in a decreased utilisation of glu-
Dose. Dogs, cats: by mouth, 50 micrograms/kg daily in
cose, amino acids, and fatty acids by peripheral tissues,
divided doses if possible
including the liver, muscle, and adipose cells. The majority
of animals with diabetes mellitus require exogenous insulin
POM Nandoral (Intervet) UK
Tablets, scored, ethylestrenol 500 rmicrograrms, for dogs, cafs
to maintain satisfactory control.
Insulin is a polypeptide homone of complex structure. It is
NANDROLONE
 extracted mainly from beef or pork panicreas and purified by
crystallisation. Human insulins can be made biosyntheti-
UK
cally by recombinant DNA technology using Escherichia
 Indications. Supportive management of chronic renal fail-
ure; some cases of anaemia
(pyr). They may also be prepared semisynthetically by
Contra-indications. Androgen-dependent neoplasia, preg
enzymatic modification of porcine insulin and are termed
nant animals
emp. All insulin preparations may be immunogenic in ani-
 Side-effects. Virilism with high doses, hepatopathy, possi-
mals to a greater or lesser extent, but resistance to exoge-
ble production of very odorous urine in cats
nous insulin action by this method of inactivation is
Warnings. Caution in hepatic impairment; use in prepuber-
uncommon.
tal animals may result in early epiphyseal closure; operator
Insulin is inactivated by gastro-intestinal enzymes and
should wear gloves when handling the product
Dose. See preparation details
POM Laurabolin (Intervet) UK
ing diabetic ketoacidosis (see section 7.4.3), insulin should
Depot injectin (oily),mandrolonelarate 5 m/mL,50 mg/mL,for dgs,
be given by the intravenous or intramuscular route because
cats
absorption from subcutaneous depots may be slow and
Dose. Dogs, cats: by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection, 2-5 rmg/kg.
etratic. Insulin is usually administered using a specific
Repeat every 2l days if required 
 0.5 mL or 1 mL syringe calibrated in units (100 units/mL or
POM Nandrolin (Intervet) UK
40 units/mL). Insulin preparations should be stored in a
Depot injection (oily), rnandrolone phenylpropionate 25 rmg/mL, 50 rmg/mL,
refigerator at 2°C to 8°C because they are adversely
for dogs, cats
Dose.Dogs,cats:bysbaneusrinramsulrinjetin,25m/g.
affected by heat or freezing. Preparations should be shaken
Repeat every 6-7 days if required
gently to resuspend before use.
Management of diabetes mellitus. The aim of the treat-
POM Retarbolin (Novartis) U/K
ment is to achieve the best possible control of blood-glu-
Depot injection (oily), mandrolone cyclohexylpropionate 10 mg/mL, for
cose concentration throughout the day in order to maintain
dogs, cats
Contra-indications. Breeding bitches or quee ns
the patients ideal body-weight with normal water con-
Dose. Dogs, cats: by intramuscular injection, I rmg/kg. Repeat after 21
sumption and urine output while avoiding periods of
days if required
hypoglycaemia. Intermediate- or long-acting insulins are
usually used in doses of 0.5 to 1.0 unit/kg body-weight
7.4 Drugs used in diabetes mellitus
when initiating treatment. The dose is then tailored to the
individual requirements of the patient. It is recommended
7.4.1Insulin
that the maximum daily dose change, either increase or
7.4.2 Oral antidiabetic drugs
decrease, is 2 units.
7.4.3 Treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis
Anl animal will usually require 3 to 4 days to equilibrate to
7.4.4 Treatment of hypoglycaemia
changes in insulin dosage or preparation. The dose should
be increased gradually until optimal control of blood-glu-
Diabetes mellitus is characterised by polydipsia, polyuria,
cose is reached without periods of hypoglycaemia. There-
polyphagia, weight loss, and hepatormegaly. Some cases
after the owner should monitor the animals condition
may show signs of ketoacidosis (see section 7.4.3))
regularly by recording details of urine-glucose concentra-
Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus occurs because of a
tion, time and amount of insulin administered, daily water
deficiency of insulin and is recognised mainly in dogs and
intake, and time and amount of feed consumed. Measure-
cats. Non-insulin-dependenit diabetes mellitus arises follow-
ments of glycated proteins such as fructosamine and glyco-
ing resistance to the effects of insulin and is more typical of
sylated haemoglobin are used to monitor the response to
equine cases.
treatment and reflect the average blood-glucose concentra-
tion over the preceding few weeks.
Stabilisation requires understanding on the part of the
7.4.1 Insulin
owner and a regular fixed daily routine for the patient.
7.4.1.1 Short-acting insulin
Meals should be timed to coincide with the activity of the
7.4.1.2 Intermediate- and long-acting insulins
insulin preparation used. About one third to a half of the
daily ration is fed within the hour before subcutaneous
Insulin plays a key role in the regulation of carbohydrate,
 admi nistration with insulin. This applies whether the animal
fat, and protein metabolism. A relative or absolute defi-
is dosed once daily or twice daily. The remaining ration is
7.4 Drugs used in diabetes mellitus  309
given at the estimated peak activity of the insulin if dosing
Dose. Dogs, cats: by subcutaneous, intramuscular, or
once daily, and at a similar time after the second dose if
intravenous injection,or intravenous infusion,according to
dosing twice daily. The ration should consist of a constant
patient's requirements; see notes above
and measured diet to minimise postprandial hyperglycae-
mia. Increased dietary fibre intake is believed to improve
POM Insuvet Neutral (Schering-Plough) UK
injectin,slubleinslinbvinehighlyprified0uitsmog,
control of blood glucose. A regular and constant pattern of
cafs
exercise is also essential because the amount of exercise
will affect the daily insulin requirement.
Insulin requirements will be increased by infection, oestrus,
7.4.1.2 Intermediate- and long-acting insulins
pregnancy, glucocorticoid therapy, and ketoacidosis. Obes-
ity must be avoided because this will increase insulin
When given by subcutaneous injection, intermediate-act-
ing insulin has an onset of activity of approximately 1 to 2
resistarice.
hours, peak activity at 6 to 12 hours, and a duration of
The durations of action of different insulin preparations
action of 18 to 26 hours in the dog. The times for peak
vary considerably from one patient to another and need to
be assessed for each individual. The times indicated below
Intermediate-acting insulins are usually admirnistered once
are only approximations.
daily.
The range of authorised veterinary insulin preparations
Insulin Zinc Suspension (30% amorphous, 70% crystal-
available in the UK provides a short-acting insulin suitable
line) is a mixture of Insulin Zinc Suspension (Amor-
phous), which has an intermediate duration of action and
mediate- and a long-acting insulin preparation suitable for
Insulin Zinc Suspension (Crystalline), which has a more
stabilisation of the majority of dogs and cats with diabetes
prolonged duration of action. It has proved a useful prepara-
mellitus. These authorised veterinary insulin preparations
should be used in the first instance, although it is recognised
tion in the long-term management of diabetes mellitus in
 the dog and cat. Isophane Insulin is a suspension of insulin
 that some diabetic patients will require authorised human
insulin preparations to provide adequate glycaemic control.
complexed with protamine but is shorter acting and needs to
Insulin is also indicated in the management of equine
be administered twice daily in most patients to achieve
blood glucose control. Biphasic Insulins are ready-mixed
hyperlipaemia+ although its effects are limited by the insu-
combinations of an intermediate-acting insulin with soluble
lin-resistance existing in hyperlipaemic patients.
insulin and may require twice daily injection.
When injected subcutaneously long-acting insulins have an
7.4.1.1 Short-acting insulin
hours and duration of activity 32 to 36 hours. The long-act-
Soluble Insulin is a short-acting form of insulin. It is the
ing insulin preparations Protamine Zinc Insulin and Insu-
 only appropriate insulin for use in diabetic emergencies (see
lin Zinc Suspension (Crystalline) are particularly useful in
section 7.4.3) and may be used at the time of surgical opera-
tions. It is the only form of insulin that can be admiristered
hyperlipaemia in ponies+. Protamine Zinc insulin contains
intravenously. It can also be given intramuscularly and
an excess of protamine, and is not suitable for mixing with
subcutaneously.
soluble insulin preparations.
All types of insulin are used in veterinary practice, although
insulin has a rapid onset of action of 15 to 30 minutes, peak
Insulin Zinc Suspension, Isophane Insulin, and Protamine
activity between 2 and 4 hours, and a duration of action of
Zinc Insulins are used most commonly.
up to 8 hours. When injected intraveniously, soluble insulin
has a very short half-life and its effect disappears within 2
to 4 hours.
INSULIN ZINC SUSPENSION
(Insulin Zinc Suspension (Mixed); I.Z.S.)
SOLUBLE INSULIN
UK
(Insulin Injection; Neutral Insulin)
Indications. Diabetes mellitus
Side-effects. See riotes
above;overdosage
causes
UK
hypoglycaemia
Indications. Diabetes mellitus; diabetic ketoacidosis (see
Dose. Dogs, cats: by subcutaneous or intramuscular injec-
section 7.4.3)
tion, according to patienit's requirements; see notes above
Contra-indications. Hypoglycaemia
Side-effects. See
overdosage
POM Caninsulin (Intervet) U/K
notes
above;
causes
injection, insulin zinc suspension (porcine, highly purified) 40 units/mL,for
hypoglycaemia
dogs,cats
Warnings. Dosage requirements may change with gluco-
corticoids, hyperadrenocorticism, oestrus, pregnancy, Or
POM Insuvet Lente (Schering-Plough) UK
chronic infections
njection, insulin zinc suspension (bovine, highly purified) t00 units/mL, for
dogs,cats
310 Endocrine system
INSULINZINCSUSPENSION(CRYSTALLINE)
BIPHASIC ISOPHANE INSULIN
(Cryst. I.Z.S.)
(Biphasic Isophane Insulin Injection)
A sterile neutral suspension of bovine insulin or of human
A sterile buffered suspension of porcine insulin complexed
insulin irn the form of a complex obtained by the addition of
with protamine sulfate (or another suitable protamine) in a
a suitable zinc salt
solution of porcine insulin or a sterile buffered suspension
of human insulin complexed with protamine sulfate (or
UK
Indications. Diabetes mellitus
Side-effects. See under Insulin Zinc Suspenision
UK
Dose.Dogs, cats: by subcutaneous injection, according to
Indications. Diabetes mellitus
patients requirements; see notes above
Side-effects. See under Insulin Zinc Suspension
(sn o n u O
(njection, insulin zinc suspen sion, crystalline (human, pyr) I00 units/mL
patient's requirements; see notes above
Note. Long-acting
Highly purified animal insulin
POM(H) Humulin Zn (Lilly) UK
POM H Pork Mixtard 30 (Novo Nordisk) UK
fnjection, insulin zinc suspen sion, crystalline (human, prb) t00 units/mL
injection,biphasic isophane insulin (porcine, highly purified), 30% soluble,
Note. Interrmediate-acting
70% isophane, 100 urits/rmL
ISOPHANE INSULIN
Human sequence insulin
(Isophane Insulin Injection; Isophane Protamine
POM H Human Mixtard 30 (Novo Nordisk) UK
Insulin Injection; Isophane Insulin (NPH))
fnjection, biphasic isophane insulin (human, pyr), 30% soluble, 70% iso-
phane, I 00 units/rmL
A sterile suspension of bovine or porcine insulin or of
POM H Humulin M2 (Lilly) UK
human insulin in the form of a complex obtained by the
Injection, biphasic isophane insulin (human, prb), 20% soluble, 80% iso-
addition of protamine sulfate or another suitable protamine
phane, 100 units/mL; 10 mL
POM Humulin M3 (Lilly) UK
UK
injection, biphasic isophane insulin (human, prb), 30% soluble, 70% iso-
Indications. Diabetes mellitus
phane, 100 units/mL
Side-effects. See under Insulin Zinc Suspenisionl
Dose. Dogs, cats: by subcutaneous injection, according to
POM Humulin Ms (Lilly) UK
Injection, biphasic isophane insulin (hurmar, prb), 50% soluble, 50% iso-
patient's requirements; see notes above
phane, I 00 units/mL
Highly purified animal insulin
7.4.2 Oral antidiabetic drugs
POMH Hypurin Bovine Isophane (CP) UK
Injection, isophane insulin (bovine, highly purified) t00 units/mL
Treatment with oral antidiabetic drugs is rarely successful
POMH Pork Insulatard (Novo Nordisk) UK
injection, isophane insulin (porcine, highly purified) t00 units/mL
require insulin for control. Non-insulin-dependent diabetes
cani only rarely be controlled by diet alone. The two major
Human sequence insulin
groups of oral antidiabetic drugs are the sulphonylureas and
the biguanides.
Injection, isophane in sulin (hurman, pyr) 100 units/mL
The sulphonylureas, which include chlorpropamide, glip-
izide, glibenclamide, and tolbutamide, act mainly by aug-
POM(H Humulin I (Lilly) UK
fnjection, isophane in sulin (hurmarn, prb) t00 units/mL
menting insulin secretion and consequently are only
effective when some residual pancreatic beta-cell activity is
PROTAMINE ZINC INSULIN
present. These drugs have been used occasionally in dogs
(Protamine Zinc Insulin Injection)
and cats. Chlorpropamide may also enhanice the secretion of
antidiuretic hormone and has been used in the treatment of
UK
partial cranial diabetes insipidus (see section 7.5.2).
Indications. Diabetes mellitus in dogs and cats; hyperli-
The biguanides act mainly by decreasing gluconeogenesis
paemia in horses 
Side-effects. See under Insulin Zinc Suspension
only effective with some residual functioning pancreatic
Dose. Ponies ·: by subcutaneous injection, 0.15 units/kg
 islet cells. The biguaride metformin has also beer used for
twice daily in combination with carbohydrate treatment
the treatment of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.
Dogs, cats: by subcutaneous injection, according to
patients requirements; see notes above
CHLORPROPAMIDE
POM Insuvet Protamine Zine(Schering-Plough) UK
UK
Injection, protarmine zinc insulin (bovine, highly purified) 100 units/mL, for
Indications. Non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, dia-
dogs, cafs
betes insipidus (see section 7.5.2)
7.4 Drugs used in diabetes mellitus 311
Side-effects. Overdosage causes hypoglycaemia, vomit-
POM Metformin (Non-proprietary) UK
ing, hepatic enzyme induction
Tablet5, coated, metfommin hydrochloride 500 mg, 850 mg
Warnings. Use with caution in patients with hepatic Or
POMH Glucophage (Merck) UK
renal impairment
Tablets, f/c, rmetformin hydrochloride 500 mg, 850 mg
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 10-40 mg/kg daily in divided
doses. Adjust dose as necessary to produce normo-
TOLBUTAMIDE
glycaemia
UK
POM Chlorpropamide (Non-proprietary) UK
Indications. Non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
Fableis, chlorproparmide 100 mg, 250 rmg
Side-effects. Hepatopathy, overdosage causes hypoglycae-
GLIBENCLAMIDE
mia, vomiting
Warnings. Use with caution in patients with hepatic of
UK
renal impairment
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 20- 100 mg/kg daily. Adjust dose as
Indications. Non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
Side-effects. Overdosage causes hypoglycaemia, vomit-
necessary to produce normoglycaemia
ing, hepatic enzyme induction
POM H Tolbutamide(Non-poprietary) UK
Warnings. Use with caution in patients with hepatic or
Fablets, tolbutarmide 500 mg
renal impairment
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 200 micrograms/kg daily. Adjust
7.4.3 Treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis
dose as necessary to produce normoglycaemia
Clinical signs of diabetic ketoacidosis include anorexia,
POM Glibeneclamide (Non-proprietary) UK
yomiting, diarrhoea, lethargy, weakness, dehydration, and
Tablets, glibenclamide 2.5 mg, 5 mg
increased depth and rate of respiration.
POM Daonil(Hoechst Marion Roussel) UK
Soluble insulin may be used in the management of diabetic
Tablets, scored, glibenclarnide 5 rmg
ketoacidosis and hyperosmolar non-ketotic coma in dogs
POMH Semi-Daonil (Hoechst Marion Roussel) UK
and cats. It is the only form of insulin that may be given
Tablets, scored, glibenclamide 2.5 rmg
intravenously. It is necessary to achieve and maintain an
adequate plasma-insulin concentration until the metabolic
POM Euglucon (Aventis Pharma) UK
disturbance is brought under control.
Tablets, glibenclarmide 2.5 rmg, 5 rmg (scored)
n  n   i n 
GLIPIZIDE
because a single bolus dose will achieve an adequate con-
centration for only a short period of time. Plasma concenl-
UK
trations are effectively maintained with infusion rates of 0. 1
Indications. Non-insulin-dependent diabetes melli tus
unit/kg per hour (5 units/500 mL electrolyte infusion). Insu-
Side-effects. Overdosage causes hypoglycaemia, vomit-
lin is diluted in the replacement fluids taking care to ensure
ing, hepatic enizyme induction
Warnings. Use with caution in patients with hepatic or
tion port of the infusion bag and is thoroughly mixed with
renal impai rment
the replacement fluid. The infusion should be continued
Dose.Dogs, cats: by mouth, 250-500 micrograms/kg
until the blood-glucose concentration has fallen to 10
twice daily. Adjust dose as necessary to produce normo-
mmol/litre and the patient is willing to eat. Subcutaneous
glycaemia
administration of an intermediate- or long-acting prepara-
tion can then be started.
POMH Clipizide (Non-proprietary) UK
If facilities for administering insulin by continuous infusion
Tableis, glipizide 2.5 mg, 5 mg
are inadequate, 0.25 unit/kg of soluble insulin may be given
POM) Glibenese (Pfizer) UK
intravenously and 0.75 unit/kg intramuscularly. The dose
Tabieis, scored, glipizide 5 mg
should be repeated every 4 to 6 hours until the blood-glu-
POMH) Minodiab (Pharmacia) UK
cose concentration reaches 10 mmol/litre. Some clinicians
Fablets, glipizide 2.5 rmg, 5 mg (scored)
consider this is more likely than the infusion technique to
result in hypokalaemia.
METFORMIN HYDROCHLORIDE
Intravenous replacement of fluid and electrolytes with
sodium chloride 0.9% infusion is an essential part of the
UK
management of ketoacidosis. Potassium chloride should be
Indications. Non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
Side-effects. Overdosage causes hypoglycaemia; vomit-
laemia induced by the insulin. The rate of potassium admin-
ing: hepatic enzyme induction
istration should not exceed 0.5 mmol/kg body-weight per
hour. Sodium bicarbonate 2.74% infusion is only used in
renal impairment
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 250-500 mg twice daily with food.
life-threatening acidosis because the acid-base disturbance
Adjust dose as necessary to produce normoglycaemia
is normally corrected by insulin and fluid therapy.
312 Endocrine system
7.4.4 Treatment of hypoglycaemia
successful, or if hypoglycaemic episodes return after sur-
7.4.4.1 Acute hypoglycaemia
gery, medical therapy is indicated.
Initial medical management for chronic hypoglycaemia
7.4.4.2 Chronic hypoglycaemia
should include giving small frequent meals high in proteins.
Signs of hypoglycaemia include disorientation, weakness,
fats, and complex carbohydrates. Glucocorticoids are also
recommended. Prednisolone (see section 7.2.1) at a dose of
hunger, shaking, ataxia, convulsions and coma. The occur-
rence of clinical signs is thought to be dependent on the rate
0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg daily in divided doses is used most
of decline of plasma-glucose concentration as well as on the
frequently.
Diazoxide is a non-diuretic benzothiadiazine antihypertenl-
severity of hypoglycaemia.
 sss    e  
secretion by the pancreas. It is useful in treating hypogly-
7.4.4.1 Acute hypoglycaemia
caemia due to islet cell tumours, but is of no value in the
Acute hypoglycaemia occurs most commonly when a dia-
management of acute hypoglycaemia.
betic animal is given too much insulin or exercises too
Octreotide is a long-acting somatostatin analogue, which
strenuously. If mild signs of hypoglycaemia are seen, the
inhibits insulin synthesis and secretion. It has been effective
animal should be fed its normal food. Alternatively, glucose
in some but not all dogs with insulinoma. An attempt
or sugar dissolved in a little water may be given and
should be made to withdraw octreotide after amelioration of
repeated, if necessary, after 10 to 15 minutes. If severe signs
clinical signs while maintaining dietary control and gluco-
are observed, glucose (see section 16.1.2) should be given
corticoid therapy.
intravenously. A dose of 1 mL/kg of 50% glucose intrave-
nous infusion should be adequate to correct the hypoglycae-
DIAZOXIDE
mia. The dose of insulin should be adjusted to prevent
further episodes.
UK
Glucagon may be used as an alternative to parenteral glu-
 Indications. Chronic hypoglycaemia
Side-effects. Anorexia, vomiting, cataract formation
cose in acute hypoglycaemia. It is a polypeptide hormone
produced by the alpha cells of the islets of Langerhans. Its
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 10 mg/kg daily in divided doses
action is to increase plasma-glucose concentration by mobi-
increasing up to 60 mg/kg daily if necessary. Usually used
lising glycogen stores in the liver. Glucagon may be given
inl combination with frequent feeding and prednisolone (see
by subcutaneous, intramuscular, or intravenous injection
notes above).
and a response to treatment will usually be observed within
POMH Eudemine (Celtech) UK
10 minutes. If glucagon therapy is not effective within 15
Fablets, diazoxide 50 rmg
mi nutes, intravenous glucose should be administered.
OCTREOTIDE
GLUCAGON
UK
UK
Indications. Uncontrollable clinical signs due to islet cell
 Indications. Acute hypoglycaemia; insulin oyerdose
tumour (insulinoma)
Contra-indications. Insulinoma,
phaeochromocytoma,
Side-effects. Anorexia, vomiting, diarthoea
glucagonoma
Warnings. May increase depth and duration of hypogly-
Side-effects. Nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, and hypokalae-
caemia, patient should be monitored closely
mia reported in human patients
Dose. Dogs: by subcutaneous injection, 10-20 micro-
Dose. Dogs, cats: by subcutaneous, intramuscular,
Dr
grams/animal 2-3 times daily
intravenous injection, 20-30 micrograms/kg. Repeat as
POMH Sandostatin (Novartis) UK
necessary. If no response after 15 minutes, intravenous glu-
injection, octreotide (as acetate) 50 micrograrms/mL, 100 rmicrograrms/mL,
cose should be given
200 micrograrms/mL, 500 micrograrms/mL
POM) GlucaGen HypoKit (Novo Nordisk) UK
Injection, powder for recon stinution, glucagon (as hydrochloride) I mg (l rmg
 7.5 Pituitary and hypothalamic
=|unit)
hormones
7.4.4.2 Chronic hypoglycaemia
7.5.1 Anterior pituitary hormones
Chronic hypoglycaemia usually results from excess endog-
7.5.2 Posterior pituitary hormones
enous insulin secretion from an islet cell tumour (insuli-
7.5.3 Hypothalamic hormones
but slow growing. Surgical excision is the treatment of
choice, although virtually all islet cell tumours recur after
7.5.1 Anterior pituitary hormones
excision. The median survival time following excision is
The anterior lobe of the pituitary gland produces and
about one year. If surgical treatment is not possible or not
releases a number of trophic homones of which thyro-
7.5 Pituitary and hypothalamic hormones  313
trophin (TSH), corticotropin (ACTH), growth hormone
TETRACOSACTIDE
(GH), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinising hor-
(Tetracosactrin)
mone (LH), and prolactin are the most important.
Protirelin (thyrotrophin-releasing hormone, TRH) (see sec-
UK
tion 7.5.3) is used as a diagnostic agent to confirm the pres-
Indications. Diagnostic use; see notes above
Side-effects. See under Glucocorticoids (see section 7.2. 1)
and secondary forms of the disease. Recently recombinant
Dose.Horses: by intravenous injection,I mg
human thyrotropin (rhTSH) has been used to perform
Dogs: by intramuscular or intravenous injection, (< 5 kg
TSH stimulation tests in dogs to confirm the presence of
body-weight) 125 micrograms; (>5 kg body-weight) 250
hypothyroidism. Plasma-thyroxine concentration is meas-
m1crograms
ured before and at 4 to 6 hours after rhTSH administration.
Cats:by intravenous injection,125 micrograms
Tetracosactide (an active fragment of ACTH) is used
POM Synacthen (Allianoe) UK
mainly as a diagnostic agent to assess adrennocortical func-
Injection, tetracosactide (as acetate) 250 rmicrograrms/mL
tion. Failure of the plasma-cortisol concentration to
increase after administration of tetracosactide indicates
THYROTROPIN
adrenocortical insufficiency due to either hypoadrenocorti-
(Recombinant human thyrotropin, rhTSH)
cism (Addison's disease) or the exogenous administration
of glucocorticoids. An excessive elevation of plasma-corti-
UK
sol concentration following administration of tetracosactide
Indications. Diagniostic use; see notes above
indicates hyperadrenocorticism (Cushings syndrome). An
Side-effects.Vomiting
exaggerated response may also result from uncontrolled
Warnings. Anaphylactic reactions may occur
diabetes mellitus, pyometra, or chronic renal disease.
Dose. Dogs: by intravenous injection, 75- 100 micrograms
GH (somatropin) has been used in the treatment of pan-
hypopituitarism (pituitary dwarfism) and growth hormone-
POM (H) Thyrogen (Gen zyme) UK
responsive alopecia. Although GH assays are available for
Injection, thy rotropin alfa 900 rmicrograrms/mL
the dog, a GH stimulation test is oftenn required for diagno-
Note. Store in a refrigerator at 2°C to 8°℃
sis of deficiency. Clonidine (see section 7.8) 10 micro-
grams/kg, given by intravenous injection, or xylazine (see
7.5.2 Posterior pituitary hormones
section 6.1.3) 100 micrograms/kg, administered by intrave-
The posterior lobe of the pituitary gland releases stored
nous injection, is used for stimulation. It is important to
vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone, ADH) and oxytocin,
eliminate possible hypothyroidism or hyperadrenocorticism
which are synthesised in the hypothalamus. The domestic
because these conditions may induce a reversible GH defi-
species, like man, store arginine-vasopressin (argipressin)
ciency. The use of GH preparations in food-producing ani-
except for the pig, which has lysine-vasopressin (lypressin).
mals is prohibited in the UK. Potential side-effects to GH
Oxytocin (see section 8.4) is used mainly in obstetrics.
therapy include hypersensitivity reactions and diabetes
mellitus.
relative deficiency of vasopressin. It may result from a par-
Prolactin secretion may be decreased with the use of
tial or total failure to synthesise or release vasopressin (cra-
dopamine agonists (see section 8.6). In theory, prolactin
nial diabetes insipidus) or from a failure of the kidney to
secretion may be increased with the use of dopami ne antag-
respond to vasopressin (nephrogenic diabetes insipidus).
onists such as metoclopramide, although this drug is used
Clinical signs include marked poly dipsia and polyuria
clinically
to inhibit the side-effects of bromocriptine
 Desmopressin, a vasopressin analogue, has been used in
treatment.
the treatment of cranial diabetes insipidus and is particu-
larly indicated when the disease is severe. The dose should
SOMATROPIN
be adjusted to the requirements of the individual patient.
(Synthetic human growth honmone)
Desmopressin is considered to have a longer duration of
action than vasopressin and does not possess its vasocon-
UK
strictor activity. The intranasal solution is effecti ve if placed
Indications. Growth-hormone responsive alopecia
in the conjunctival sac. This route is preferred because
Side-effects. Hypersensitivity reactions, diabetes mellitus
repeated intranasal administration may prove difficult.
Warnings. Treatment should cease if glycosuria occurs
Dose. Dogs: by subcutaneous injection, 0.1 unit/kg 3 times
Desmopressin may be given orally using tablets but this
weekly for up to 6 weeks
regimen appears to be less effective than by using the intra-
nasal or injectable solutions. The maximal effect of the drug
POM Genotropin (Phammacia) UK
occurs from 2 to 8 hours after administration and its dura-
fnjection, powder for reconstitution, sormatropin (rbe) 16 units, 36 units
tion of action varies from 8 to 24 hours.
POM Humatrope (Lilly) UK
fnjection, powder for reconstitution, somatropin (rbe) 4 units, 12 units, 18
brand factor antigen concentrations and thus reduce the
units
bleeding time in von Willebrand's disease.
314 Endocrine system
Excessive desmopressin medication can lead to hyponatrae-
Urine samples should be collected 2-hourly following the
mia and water intoxication. Clinical signs may include
injection until maximum concentration is achieved.
depression, salivation, vomiting, ataxia, muscle tremors,
convulsions, and coma.
POM Pitressin (Goldshield) UK
njection, argipressin (synthetic vasopressin) 20 units/mL
Aqueous vasopressin is not sui table for long-term manage-
Note. Preparations of argipressin are not generally available. A written order,
ment of cranial diabetes insipidus because its duration of
stating case details, should be sent to the marufachurer to obtain a supply of
action is only a few hours.
the preparation.
Desmopressin injection and vasopressin are used in the dif-
ferential diagnosis of diabetes insipidus to distinguish the
7.5.3 Hypothalamic hormones
cranial form of the disease from the nephrogenic form. This
 Protirelin (thyrotrophin-releasing hormone, TRH) is used
mainly for diagnostic purposes in the evaluation of
tion test has confirmed that the animal cannot concentrate
hypothyroidism and equine pituitary adenoma. Thyroid
its urine. Restoration of the ability to concentrate urine con-
hormone concentrations are measured before and after
firms a diagnosis of cranial diabetes insipidus. Failure to
intravenous administration of protirelin. Failure to respond
respond is indicative of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.
adequately, as defined by the laboratory undertaking the
Chlorpropamide (see section 7.4.2) has also been used as
thyroid
an oral treatment of partial cranial diabetes insipidus and is
1 estimations, suggests primary or secondary
hypothyroidism. In dogs, serum-thyrophin concentrations
thought to act by potentiating the renal tubular effects of
 can be measured before and 30 minutes after injection of
remaining endogenous vasopressin. A suggested dose for
dogs is 10 to 40 mg/kg daily and cats 50 mg per day.
thyroidi sm.
Results are inconsistent and it may take 1 to 2 weeks of trial
Doses of protirelin greater than 100 micrograms/kg may
medication to obtain ani effect. Hypoglycaemia is a potential
produce salivation, vomiting, miosis, tachycardia, and
side-effect.
tachypnoea.
DESMOPRESSIN
PROTIRELIN
UK
(Thyrotrophin-releasing hormone, TRH)
Indications. Cranial diabetes insipidus; von Willebrand's
UK
disease; see notes above
Side-effects. See notes above
Indications. Diagnostic use in hypothyroidism in dogs and
Dose. Dogs, cats:
cats; diagnostic use in hyperthyroidism in cats; diagnostic
Cranial diabetes insipidus, by instilfation into the conjuncti-
use in equine pituitary adenoma
val sac, 2-4 drops (of intranasal solution desmopressin 100
Side-effects. See niotes above
Dose. Horses: by intravenous injection, 1 mg/horse. Blood
micrograms/mL) 1-2 times daily
samples should be taken for cortisol estimations before and
by mouth, 200 micrograms 1-3 times daily (but see note
at 15 to 30 minutes after injection
above)
by intramuscular injection, 1-4 micrograms 1-2 times daily
grams/kg according to the protocol used. Blood samples
Vasopressin (ADH) response test, by intramuscular injec-
 <so s (-oq y s>) 
should be taken for thyroid hormone estimations before and
body-weight) 4 micrograms. Urine samples should be col-
at 4 or 6 hours after injection.
lected 2-hourly following the injection until maximum con-
POM Protirelin (Non-proprietary) UK
centration is achieved
fnjection, protirelin 100 rmicrograrms/mL
Von Willebrand's disease, by intravenous injection,
Available frorm Carmbridge
microgram/kg if the patient is bleeding
Note. Preparations of protirelin are not generally available. A writtern order,
stating case details, should be sent to the manufacurer to obtain a supply of
the preparation.
POMDDAVP(Ferring) UK
Injection, desrmopressin 4 rmicrograrms/mL
7.6 Drugs used in
Intrangsal solut ion, desrmopressin acetate 100 rmicrograrms/mL
hyperadrenocorticism
VASOPRESSIN
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushings syndrome) is associated
with abnormal production or prolonged administration of
UK
glucocorticoids and is one of the most commonly diagnosed
Indications. See riotes above
endocrinopathies affecting dogs and horses. Clinical signs
Side-effects. Vasoconstriction and hypersensitivity Teac-
in dogs include polydipsia, polyuria, polyphagia, muscle
tions; see notes above
wasting and weakness, abdominal distension, poor exercise
Dose. Dogs, cats: vasopressin (ADH) response test, by
tolerance, and skin and hair coat changes. Hyperadrenocor-
intramuscular injection, 0.5 unit/kg (maximum 5 units).
ticism is seen rarely in cats. Clinical signs in horses include
7.6 Drugs used in hyperadrenocorticism  315
hirsutism, laminitis, polydipsia, polyuria, and hyper-
Selegiline (see section 6.11.5) is a monoamine oxidase
hidrosis.
inhibitor that inhibits ACTH secretion by increasing
Hyperadrenocorticism can be spontaneous or iatrogenic.
dopaminergic tone to the hypothalmic-pituitary axis. The
Spontaneously occurring hyperadrenocorticism may
be
     a     
associated with inappropriate secretion of corticotropin by
menit
of
pituitary-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism.
the pituitary gland (pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorti-
Although the effecti veness of treatment is variable, severe
cism) or associated with an adrenal tumour (adrenal-
side-effects including iatrogenic hypoadrenocorticism are
dependent
hyperadrenocorticism).
 Pitui tary-dependent
not seerl.
hyperadrenocorticism accounts for most cases in dogs and
Ketoconazole (see section 1.2), an imidazole deri vative
almost all cases in horses with naturally occurring hyper-
used primarily for its antifungal properties, is an alternative
adrenocorticism.
to mitotane in dogs. It has a reversible inhibitory effect on
Diagnosis is usually made using either an ACTH stimula-
 glucocorticoid synthesis while having negligible effects on
tion test or a low-dose dexamethasone suppression test for
mineralocorticoid production. Hepatotoxicity may occur in
screening in dogs and horses. A high-dose dexamethasone
some patients
suppression test may then be employed to differentiate pitu-
Cyproheptadine is an anti histami ne with serotonin-antago-
itary-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism
from
 adrenal-
nist and calcium-channel blocking properties. The action of
dependent hyperadrenocorticism. A combined dexametha-
cyproheptadine in endocrine disorders is unclear, although
sone suppression/ACTH stimulation test, although contro-
antagonism of serotonin has been suggested. Cyprohepta-
versial, has been used as a screening test in dogs and horses.
dine and bromocriptine may decrease the secretion of cor-
In addition, urinary cortisol:creatinine ratios may be used
ticotropin in some animals with pituitary-dependent
for screening in dogs and TRH-stimulation tests for diagno-
 hyperadrenocorticism. However, both appear to have lim-
sis in horses.
ited usefulness because of the small percentage of cases that
Although  pituitary-dependent  hyperadrenocorticism  has
do respond and the frequency with which relapses occur.
Pergolide is more potent than bromocriptine and has been
adrenalectomy, medical management is the treatment of
used in the treatment of pituitary-dependent hyperadreno-
choice. Trilostane and mitotane have been used most fre-
corticism in horses with variable results.
quently and long-term survival data are similar for both
Surgical adrenalectomy is considered the treatment of
agents. Trilostane is the authorised veterinary product in the
choice
for
 adrenal -dependent
hyperadrenocorticism,
UK for use in canine hyperadrenocorticism and has also
although mitotane therapy is also recommended. Presurgi-
beenl used to treat cats with hyperadrenocorticism.
cal treatment with trilostane may reduce the relatively high
Trilostane is a competitive inhibitor of 3β-hydrox ysteroid
morbidity and mortality associated with surgical extirpation
dehydrogenase, which blocks adrenal synthesis of gluco-
of the adrenal glands.
corticoids, mineralocorticoids, and sex hormones. Patient
monitoring (at 10 days, 4 weeks, 12 weeks and thereafter
BROMOCRIPTINE
every 3 months) is required during treatment with trilostane
UK
and the dose should be adjusted on the basis of ACTH stim-
Indications. Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism
ulation test results to achieve the optimum level of control.
 Side-effects. Vomiting, anorexia, depression, and behay-
The ACTH stimulation test should be performed 4 to 6
ioural changes
hours after administration of trilostane. In some cases twice
Dose. By mouth.
daily dosing is required to achieve adequate control of clin-
Horses: 100 micrograms/kg twice daily
ical signs. Side-effects do occur but most are mild and can
Dogs: up to 100 micrograms/kg daily in divided doses
be corrected by discontinuation or adjustment of trilostane
given in gradually increasing amounts
dosage. Serious side-effects such as adrenal necrosis have
POM H Bromocriptine (Non-proprietary) UK
starting trilostane therapy in animals previously treated with
Tabiets, brormocriptine (as rmesilate) 2.5 mg
mi totane because of possible reduced adrenal function.
POM Parlodel (Novartis) UK
Mitotane is a cytotoxic drug that selectively destroys the
Tablets, scored, brormocriptine (as mesilate) I mg, 2.5 mg
zona fasciculata and zona reticularis of the adrenal cortex
Capsules, brormocriptine (as rmesilate) 5 rmg, 10 rmg
CYPROHEPTADINEHYDROCHLORIDE
considerable care is required in its use, many cases have
been successfully managed with this drug in the long term.
UK
Some clinicians recommend routine replacement of gluco-
Indications. Pituitary-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism;
corticoids at the start of mitotane therapy. However, most
feline asthma (see section 5.2.1)
patients do not exhibit signs of glucocorticoid deficiency
Side-effects. Polyphagia
and do not require replacement therapy. Higher doses (up to
Dose. By mouth.
75 mg/kg) may be necessary to treat cases of adrenal-
Horses: hyperadrenocorticism, 0.6 mg/kgo7s increasing to
dependent hyperadrenocorticism.
1.2 mg/kg0.7s daily
316 Endocrine system
Dogs: hyperadrenocorticism, 0.3 mg/kg increasing to 3.0
 SELEGILINE HYDROCHLORIDE
mg/kg daily
UK
See section 5.2.l for preparation details
Indications. Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism+ ;
behaviour modification (see section 6.11.5)
Contra-indications. Concurrent diabetes mellitus, pancre-
KETOCONAZOLE
 atitis, cardiac impairment, renal impairment, or other severe
illness
UK
Warnings. Over 50% of dogs may fail to respond ade-
Indications. Pituitary-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism,
quately to treatment; Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1
Dose. Dogs: pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism +,
adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism (presurgery)
Side-effects. Anorexia, vomiting, diarrhoea, hepatopathy,
by mouth, 1 mg/kg daily. If inadequate response after 2
and jaundice
months, increase to 2 mg/kg daily. If ineffective, alternative
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 5 mg/kg twice daily for 7 days
treatment is necessary
increasing to 10 mg/kg twice daily for 7 to 14 days, then 15
mg/kg twice daily. Monitor response using the ACTH stim-
See section 6.1l .5 for preparation details
ulation test
TRILOSTANE
See section I .2 for preparatior details
UK
Indications. Pituitary-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism,
adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism
MITOTANE
Contra-indications. Hepatic impairment; suspected renal
(o.p' DDD)
impairment; pregnant or lactating animals; animals
intended for breeding
UK
Side-effects. Lethargy, depression, vomiting, anorexia,
Indications. Pituitary-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism,
hyperkalaemia, diarrhoea, acute pancreatitis, thromboem-
adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism
bolism, adrenal necrosis, acute Addisonian crisis and corti-
Side-effects. Lethargy, anorexia,
vomiting,
weakriess,
costeroid withdrawal syndrome
diarrhoea, and neurological signs such as ataxia, incoordi-
Warnings. Drug efficacy has not been fully evaluated;
nation, circling, blindness, facial paralysis, and seizures
operators should not handle product if pregnant or trying to
Warnings. Operators should wear disposable gloves when
conceive, capsules should not be divided, wash hands after
handling the product
use; animals should be monitored for hepatic impairment
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 50 mg/kg daily until thirst returns
renal impairment, thyroid disease, heart disease, and diabe-
to norimal (usually 7 to 10 days). Then 50 mg/kg every 1-2
tes mellitus before and during treatment; assess risk-benefit
weeks to prevent recurrence of clinical si gns (but see notes
before treatment of animals with heart disease, thyroid dis-
above). Treatment should be monitored using the ACTH
ease, or diabetes mellitus; Drug Interactions - see Appendix
stimulation test. Mitotane should be given with food to
1; allow at least 1 month after treatment with mitotane
improve absorption.
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 2-10 mg/kg. ACTH stimulation test
performed regularly initially in order to adjust dose for indi-
Mitotane (Available frorn IDIS, UK)
Mitotane preparations are not available in the UK. To obtain a supply, the
vidual patient
veterinarian should obtain a Special Treatrment Authorisation frorn the VMD
POM Vetoryl (Arnolds)
Capsules, trilostane 60 mg,for dogs more than 5 kg body-weight
Capsules, trilostane 120 mg, for dogs more than 20 kg body-weight
PERGOLIDE
7.7 Calcium regulating drugs
UK
Indications. Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism
7.7.1 Calcitonin
Side-effects. Anorexia, depression, sweating, dyspnoea,
7.7.2 Bisphosphonates
behavioural changes
Dose. By mouth.
See also calcium (section 16.5.1), phosphorus (section
Horses: 500 micrograms (0.5 mg) once daily increasing
16.5.3), and vitamin D (section 16.6.4).
gradually to 3 mg once daily
Ponies: 250 micrograms (0.25 mg) once daily increasing
7.7.1 Calcitonin
gradually until euglycaemia is re-established
Calcitonin is involved with parathyroid hormone in the
POM Celance (Lilly) UK
Tablets, scored, pergolide (as rmesilare) 50 micrograrms, 250 micrograrms,
regulation of bone turnover and hence in the maintenance of
I mg
calcium balance and homoeostasis. It is used to reduce bone
7.8 Clonidine 317
POM  Didronel (Procter & Garmble Pharrm.) UK
calciferol (see also Treatment of poisoning) and may be
Tableis, disodiurm etidronate 200 mg
useful in the treatment of navicular disease.
SODIUM CLODRONATE
CALCITONIN (SALMON)
(Dichloromethylene diphosphonate)
(Salcatonin)
UK
UK
Indications. Reduction of serum-calcium concentration in
Indications. Hypercalcaemia due to ergocalciferol poisonl-
primary hyperparathyroidism and hypervitaminosis D
Contra-indications. Moderate to severe renal impairment
ing
Side-effects. Nausea, diarrhoea, asymptomatic hypocal
Side-effects. Vomiting, anorexia
caemia, and skin reactions reported in humans
Dose.By subcutaneous or intramuscular injection.
Dose. Dogs: by intravenous infusion, 20-25 mg/kg diluted
Dogs, cats: poisoning, 8- 18 units/kg daily in divided doses
in 500 mL sodium chloride 0.9% and given as a single inifu-
POM  Forcaltonin (Straken) UK
sion over 4 hours
fnjection, calcitonin (salrmon) 100 units/mL
POM H Bonefos (Boehringer Ingelhei) UK
POMH) Miacaleic (Novartis) UK
njection, calcitonin (salrmon) 50 units/mL, 100 units/mL, 200 units/mL
Concentrate, for dilution and use as intravenous infusion, sodiurm clodronate
60 mg/mL
7.7.2 Bisphosphonates
TILUDRONIC ACID
Sodium clodronate and disodium etidronate are osteo-
See section 10.7
clast inhibitors, which have been used in dogs as a palliative
treatment for cancer-associated hypercalcaemia, primary
7.8 Clonidine
hyperparathyroidism, and hypervitaminosis D. Although
treatment of hypercalcaemia is based on identification and
Clonidine is an alphaz-adrenoceptor stimulant used for the
 management of the underlying disease, during investigation
diagnosis of growth hormone (GH) deficiency. The drug
symptomatic therapy to lower the serum-calcium concen-
induces production of endogenous growth hormone releas-
tration may be required to reduce renal toxicity.
ing factor thereby stimulating the release of GH.
Tiludronic acid has been used in the treatment of navicular
disease in horses (see section 10.7).
CLONIDINE HYDROCHLORIDE
DISODIUM ETIDRONATE
UK
Indications. Reduction of serum-calcium concentration in
Indications. Diagnostic use, see notes above
primary hyperparathyroidism and hypervitaminosis D
Side-effects.
.Transient sedation, bradycardia
Contra-indications. Moderate to severe renal impairment
Dose. Dogs: by intravenous injection, 10 micrograms/kg
Side-effects. Nausea, diarrhoea, asymptomatic hypocal-
(maximum 300 micrograms)
caemia, and skin reactions reported in humans
POMH Catapres (BoehringerIngelheim) UK
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 5 mg/kg daily
Injection, clonidine hydrochloride 1 50 rmicrograrms/rmL
319
8
Drugs acting on the
REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
Contributor:
Serum gonadotrophin (equine chorionic gonadotrophin,
Professor D E Noakes BVetMed, PhD, DVRep, DSc, DipECAR,
eCG) is also a complex glycoprotein. It is extracted from
FRCVS
mares’ serum during the first trimester of pregnancy (but
 8.1 Drugs used to promote gonadal function
not before 35 to 40 days). The effects of serum gonado-
8.2 Sex hormones
trophin (eCG) in animals most closely resemble those of
8.3 Prostaglandins
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) secreted by the anterior
pituitary gland, but with a much longer duration; it also has
8.4 Myometrial stimulants
some LH-like acti vity.
8.5 Myometrial relaxants
Serum gonadotrophin (eCG) is used to advance the onset of
8.6 Prolactin antagonists
follicular growth and ovulation, in cormbination with pro-
8.7 Non-hormonal abortificants
8.8 Drugs for uterine infections
goats ● (see section 8.2.2). In general, the earlier the time of
Many drugs are used at different stages of the oestrous
the onset of the breeding season is advanced and the lower
cycle to manage the response of the reproductive system;
the normal prolificacy of the flock, the higher the dose of
these are summarised in Table 8.1.
serum gonadotrophin (eCG) required. Therefore it is rec-
 ommended that accurate flock records are kept including
8.1 Drugs used to promote gonadal
breed, date and dose of drug administered, and lambs pro-
function
duced, so that the drug dose may be adjusted in future sea-
sons to provide optimal results. Serum gonadotrophin
8.1.1 Gonadotrophins
sd e ym onoo ui  sos st ()
 8.1.2 Gonadotrophin-releasing hormones
8.1.3 Melatonin
cal activity in acyclical cows. In combination with
chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG), serum gonadotrophin
8.1.1 Gonadotrophins
(eCG) can induce oestrus in bitches in anoestrus.
In males, serum gonadotrophin (eCG) promotes sperma-
Chorionic gonadotrophin (human chorionic gonado-
togenesis. Individuals may show a variable response to
trophin, hCG) is a complex glycoprotein excreted in the
serum gonadotrophin (eCG) and the degree of efficacy is
urine of women during pregnancy. It has a similar effect to
low. Recommended doses+ are as follows: stallions and
luteinising hormone (LH) secreted by the anterior pituitary
 bulls 1000 to 3000 units, rams and boars 500 to 700 units,
gland in both males and females.
and dogs 400 to 800 units. The drug is administered by
In veterinary practice, it is used to supplement or replace
intramuscular injection weekly for 4 to 6 weeks.
luteinising hormone in cases of ovulation failure or delay,
Serum gonadotrophin (eCG) is administered to induce
or to help control the timing of ovulation. In mares, chori-
superovulation in cattle used as donors in embryo transfer.
onic gonadotrophin (hCG) is used to induce ovulation in
The general procedure is: serum gonadotrophin (eCG) is
animals with prolonged oestrus during the transitional
given once on day 9 to 13 of a normal oestrous cycle. Lute-
phase from winter anoestrus to the onset of normal cyclical
 olysis is induced 48 hours later by administration of a pros-
ovarian activity, and before mating or A1.
taglandin F2α or analogue, given at 1.5 times the normal
In males, chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) stimulates the
dose. Oestrus will be evident within 48 hours. Artificial
secretion of testosterone by interstitial (Leydig) testicular
insemination is carried out at 60 and 72 hours after prostag-
cells. It is used to improve libido, with variable results, and
landin administration. Embryos are collected 6 to 8 days
also to identify the presence of a retained testis in
after insemination and transferred to suitable synchronised
cryptorchids.
recipients either directly or after freezing in liquid nitrogen.
Detection of a cryptorchid is most frequently employed in
The efficacy of this procedure is variable and an exagger-
horses. Two blood samples are taken: one before and the
ated response may occur due to the long half-life of serum
gonadotrophin
gonadotrophin (6000 units+ given by intravenous injec-
Follicle stimulating hormone is used to induce superovu-
tion). A serum-testosterone concentration greater than 100
 lation. Porcine or ovine follicle stimulating hormone is used
pg/mL, a rise in serum-testosterone concentration in
for superovulation of cattle, in preference to serum gonado-
response to chorionic gonadotrophin, or preferably both,
trophin, because it has a shorter half-life and is less likely to
confirms the presence of testicular tissue. This is known as
 produce an excessive superovulatory response. The super-
the hCG stimulation test. It carn also be used in other species
ovulatory response and the quality of recovered embryos
using a similar regimen but with different dosages (for
can be influeniced by the relative amounts of FSH and LH in
ex ample 50 units/kg + is used in dogs).
the product.
320Reproductive system
Table 8.1 Drugs affecting the reproductive system
Indications
Species
Drug
Synchronisation and
Horses
Altrenogest, Buserelin, Cloprostenol, Dinoprost,
regulation of the
Luprostiol
oestrous cycle and
ovulation
Cattle
Buserelin, Cloprostenol, Dinoprost, Etiproston,
Gonadorelin, Luprostiol, Progesterone (Eazi-Breed CIDR),
Progesterone + estradiol benzoate (Prid),
Sheep, Goats
Flugestone acetate, Medroxyprogesterone acetate
Pigs
Altrenogest
Stimulation of the
Horses
Altrenogest, Buserelin, Chorionic gonadotrophin,
onset of cyclical
Cloprostenol, Deslorelin, Dinoprost, Luprostiol, Serum
ovarian activity
gonadotrophin
Cattle
Buserelin, Chorionic gonadotrophin, Cloprostenol,
Dinoprost, Etiproston, Gonadorelin, Luprostiol,
 Progesterone, Progesterone + estradiol benzoate (Prid),
Serum gonadotrophin
Sheep, Goats
Flugestone acetate, Medroxyprogesterone acetate,
Melatonin, Serum gonadotrophin
Pigs
Altrenogest, Chorionic gonadotrophin + serum gonado-
trophin (PG600)
Dogs
Chorionic gonadotrophin, Serum gonadotrophin
Rabbits
Buserelin
Superovulation
Cattle
Chorionic gonadotrophin, Menotrophin, Serum gonado-
trophin, Follicle stimulating hormone (porcine, ovine,
recombinant)
Misalliance and
Horses
Cloprostenol, Dinoprost, Luprostiol
pregnancy
termination
Cattle
Cloprostenol, Dinoprost, Etiproston, Luprostiol
Dogs
Aglepristone, Cabergoline +, Estradiol benzoate
8.1 Drugs used to promote gonadal function 321
Table 8.1 Drugs affecting the reproductive system (continued)
Indications
Species
Drug
Induction of
Horses
Cloprostenol, Dinoprost, Luprostiol
parturition
Cattle
Cloprostenol, Dexamethasone (see section 7.2.1),
 Dinoprost, Etiproston, Luprostiol
Sheep+
Dexamethasone (see section 7.2.1)
Pigs
Cloprostenol, Dinoprost, Luprostiol
Overt
Horses (type 1 only)
Cloprostenol+, Dinoprost
pseudopregnancy
Goats
Cloprostenol+, Dinoprost
Dogs
Cabergoline, Methyltestosterone, Proligestone,
Testosterone esters (Durateston)
Suppression of
Dogs
Medroxyprogesterone acetate, Megestrol acetate,
ovarian activity
Methyltestosterone, Proligesterone, Testosterone esters
(Durateston)
Cats
Megestrol acetate, Proligesterone
322 Reproductive system
Menotrophin contains human menopausal gonadotrophins
 SERUM GONADOTROPHIN
ex tracted from the urine of postmenopausal women. It has
(Equine chorionic gonadotrophin, eCG)
both luteini sing and follicle-stimulating hormone acti vity in
equal amounts. It is an effective method of inducing super-
UK
ovulation.
Indications. See Dose under preparation details
CHORIONIC GONADOTROPHIN
doses, occasional anaphylactic reactions
(Human chorionic gonadotrophin, hCG)
 Dose. See preparation details
UK
POM Fostim 6000 (Pfizer) U/K
injection, powder for reconstitution, serurm gonadotrophin 6000 units, for
Indications. See under Dose
catle, sheep,gouts,pigs
 Warnings. Immune-mediated reduced effect after repeated
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk withdrawal
doses, occasional anaphylactic reactions; ensure that mares
period nil
Dose. By subeutaneous or intramuscular injection.
are not pregnant before treatment
Cattle: induction of oestrus in acyclic anirmals, anoestrus, 3001500 units
Dose. See also niotes above
Sheep: induction of oestrus outside normal breeding season, for synchro-
Horses: induction of ovulation, by intramuscular or intra-
nised mating, 300-800 units
venous injection, 1500-3000 units 24 hours before mating
Gouts: induction of oestrus outside normal breeding season, for synchronised
Or AI
mating, 400-600 units
Pigs: anoestrus, 1000- 1500 units
Suboestrus (follicles > 2 cm diameter), by intramuscular or
intravenous injection, 1500-3000 units. Repeat after 2 days
POM PMSG-Intervet (Intervet) UK
if required
Injection, powder for reconstiution, serum gonadotrophin 5000 units, for
cuttle,hep,pog
Cattle: repeated failure of conception, by intramuscular or
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: (superovulation) slaughter 28 days, rmilk 48
intravenous injection, 1500 units at mating or A1
hours after prostaglandin treatrment at tirme of embryo collection; (other con -
Cystic ovarian disease, by intravenous injection, 3000 units
ditions) slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk withdrawal period nil. Sheep,
 pigs: slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal period nil
Dogs.Females: anoestrus, by intramuscular or intravenous
Dose.
injection, 500 units on first day of oestrus after pretreatment
Catfle: oestrus control in acyclical maiden dairy heifers, by subc wtaneous or
with serum gonadotrophin by subcutaneous injection, 20
intramuscular injection, 400-700 units, following treatrment with pro-
units/kg daily for 10 days
gestogen (Prid, see section 8.2.5)
Oyulation failure·, by intramuscular injection, 100-500
Superovulation, by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection, 1500-4000
units, see notes above
units on day of mating
Sheep: induction of oestrus outside normal breeding season, by subcuiane-
Delayed ovulation, prolonged pro-oestrus, by intramuscular
ou5s or ntramuscular injection, 500 units at tirme of progestogen-irmpregnated
injection, 100-800 units daily or 20 units/kg+ until vaginal
sporge rerroval
bleeding ceases. Mate during behavioural oestrus
Pigs: anoestrus, by 5ubcutaneous or intramuscular injection, l000 units
Dogs: oestrus induction (subnormal oestrus with norn-acceptance), by subcu-
Males: deficient libido, by intramuscular injection, 100-
taneous injction, 20 units daily for 10 days, followed by intramuscwlar or
500 units twice weekly for up to 6 weeks or 6-12 hours
intra venous injection, 500 units chorionic gonadotrophin on day 10
before mating (temporary effect)
8.1.2 Gonadotrophin-releasing hormones
POM Chorulon (Intervet) U/K
Injection, powder for recon stitution, chorionic gonadotrophin 1 500 units, for
Endogenous gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) is a
horses, catfle, dogs
decapeptide secreted by the hypothalamus. Gonadotrophin
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk withdrawal
releasing-hormone causes release of both LH and FSH from
period nil
the anterior pituitary gland. Fertirelin and gonadorelin are
 synthetic forms of GnRH. Buserelin and lecirelin are syn-
FOLLICLE STIMULATING HORMONE
 thetic analogues of GnRH in which specific amino acid sub-
(PORCINE)
stitutions have been made in their molecular structure,
resulting in reduced susceptibility to proteolytic enzymes
UK
and greater affinity for binding to GnRH receptors; a ten-
Indications. Superovulation in cattle
fold increase in potency is claimed. Deslorelin is a synl-
Warnings. Immune-mediated reduced effect after repeated
thetic analogue with more than 100 times greater potency
doses, occasional anaphylactic reactions
 than naturally occurri ng GnRH.
Dose. See preparation details
The increase in LH concentration, that follows treatment
with GnRH, can be used to induce ovulation in horses, cat-
POM Super-Ov (Global Genetics) UK
injection, powder for reconstitution, follicle stirmulating hormone (porcine)
tle, and rabbits. In mares, ovulation is induced in animals
75 units, for cattle
with prolonged oestrus during the transitional phase from
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 28 days, milk should not be taken for
winter anoestrus to the onset of normal cyclical ovarian
hurn an consurmption within 24 hours of ermbryo collectior
activity, and also after mating. These drugs are used for
Dose. Catle: by intramusc ular injection, 25 units daily for 3 days. Prosta-
glandin F2。 is administered at time of 3rd injection. Ermbryos are recovered
treatment in cattle with follicular cysts. Administration at
frorn donor cows 6-8 days after AI. Prostaglandin F is adrninistered irnrme-
the time of service or insemination may improve conception
diately after ermbryo recovery
rates in mares and cows. In cows, administration 11 or 12
8.1 Drugs used to promote gonadal function  323
days post service may increase pregnancy rates. Gn RHs are
Contra-indications. Hypersensitivity to the drug; preg-
nant animals
din F2α in oestrus synchronisation treatment regimens to
Warnings. Avoid contamination of product with traces of
control follicular growth in cows, thereby improving preg-
disinfectant or alcohol
nancy rates.
Dose. Cattle: by intramuscular injection.
Buserelin is also used in the fish farming industry.
 Improvement of conception rate, 250 micrograms on day of
insemination
BUSERELIN
 Follicular cysts, 500 micrograms, repeat if required
Anoestrus post partum, 250 micrograms less than 40 days
UK
‘wed psod srep ot 1oye +sueisorou cos to umned ysod
Indications. See under Dose
repeat after 1-3 weeks
Warnings. Avoid contamination of product with traces of
Synchronisation of oestrus
disinfectant or alcohol
250 micrograms gonadorelin, followed by prostaglandin F2
Dose.
after 8 days, then 250 micrograms gonadorelin 54-56 hours
Horses: by subcutaneous, intramuscuiar (preferred),
or
after prostaglandin. Insemination 16 18 hours later
intravenous injection.
Use in conjunction with intravaginal progesterone (Eazi-
Induction of ovulation (see notes above), 40 micrograms 6
 Breed CIDR), 250 micrograms gonadorelin at the time of
hours before insemination, repeat after 1 day if required
insertion
Cattle:by subcutaneous,intramuscular (preferred),
intravenous injection.
POM Fertagyl (Janssen) UK
Anoestrus,
20 micrograms, repeat after 8-22 days if
Injection, gonadorelin 100 rmicrograrms/mL, for cattle
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk with-
required
drawal period nil
Delayed ovulation, 10 micrograms 6-8 hours before or at
time of insemination
 Improvement in pregnancy rate, 10 micrograms 6-8 hours
before or at time of insemination or li-12 days after
8.1.3 Melatonin
insemination
Follicular cysts, 20 micrograms, repeat after 10- 14 days if
Melatonin advanices the time of onset of cyclical ovarian
required
activity in the ewe and doe goat by mimicking the natural
Synchronisation of oestrus
production of melatonin by the pineal gland. This gives
("Bovsynch'), 10 micrograms buserelin, followed by pros-
improved reproductive performance in sheep flocks mated
taglandin F2α after 8 days, then 10 micrograms buserelin
early in the season. A single dose of 18 mg, in a modified-
after 2 days. Insemination 20-24 hours later
release formulation, is implanted behind the ear. This is car-
Use in conjunction with intravaginal progesterone (Eazi-
ried out 30 to 40 days before the introduction of the ram. It
Breed CIDR), 10 micrograms buserelin at the time of inser-
tion. Prostaglandin F2q on day 7, 8, or 9 followed by with-
rams and also male goats for no less than 30 days after
drawal of intravaginal device 24 hours later
impl antation.
In the UK, for Suffolk and Suffolk cross-breeds, the drug
Rabbits: by subcutaneous injection.
Induction of ovulation post partum, 800 nanograms
 should be administered from mid-May to late June, for ram
(0.2 mL) 24 hours after parturition, and followed by
introduction in late June and July. For Mule and Half-bred
insemination
flocks, melatonin should be admirnistered from early June to
 Improvement of conception rate, 800 nanograms at time of
late July, for ram introduction from mid-July to late August.
insemination
Rainbow trout: by intramuscular injection.
To facilitate stripping and to reduce mortality due to egg
 binding, 3-4 micrograms/kg. Stripping performed 2-3 days
MELATONIN
after treatment
UK
POM Receptal (In tervet) UK
Indications. Induction of ovulation
Injetion, buserelin 4 micrograrms/mL, for horses, cattle, rabbits, rainbow
Contra-indications. Sexually immature animals
trout
Warnings. Use of drug ini ewes suckling lambs at foot may
Withdrawal Periods. Horses, cafle, rabbits: slaughter withdrawal period nil,
milk withdrawal period nil. Should not be used in fish intended for hurman
not give optimum results. The drug should not be used at
consumption
times other than recommended, see notes above
Dose. Sheep: by subcutaneous administration, 1 implant
GONADORELIN
PML Regulin (Ceva) UK
UK
Implant,rm/, rmelatonin 18 mg,for sheep
WithdrawalPeriods.Sheep: slaughter withdrawal period rilrmilk with-
Indications. See under Dose
drawal period nil
324Reproductive system
8.2 Sex hormones
ESTRADIOL
(Oestradiol)
8.2.1 Oestrogens
8.2.2 Progestogens
UK
8.2.3 Antiprogestogens
 Indications. See Dose under preparation details; urinary
8.2.4 Androgens
incontinence (see section 9.4)
8.2.5 Compound hormonal preparations
Contra-indications. Cats
Warnings. Oestrogens, particularly if used repeatedly, may
cause aplastic anaemia, coagulopathies, increased risk of
cystic endometrial hyperplasia, and pyometra in bitches;
8.2.1 Oestrogens
owners should be warned that pregnancy may not be termi-
nated in 5% of treated bitches
Oestrogens are responsible physiologically for initiating
Dose. Dogs: misalliance, by subcutaneous or intramuscu-
behavioural signs of oestrus, preparing the female repro-
lar injection, 10 micrograms/kg administered on day 3, day
ductive tract for fertilisation and developing the secretory
5, and (if required) day 7 after mating (but see Warnings)
tissue of the mammary gland. They also have anabolic
activity.
POM Mesalin (Intervet) U/K
Oestrogens are used in the treatment of misalliance in the
fnjection (oily),estradiol benzoate 200 micrograrms/mL, for dogs
bitch. They act by inhibiting the transport of the fertilised
ETHINYLESTRADIOL
ova down the oviducts, in addition to causing hypertrophy
(Ethinyloestradiol)
of the uterine mucosa. Urinary inicontinence in the spayed
bitch may also be controlled with oestrogens (see section
UK
9.4).
Indications.
See notes above and under Dose
In males, oestrogens are used in the treatment of excess
Side-effects. Feminisationl
libido, anal adenoma, and, with caution, for prostate hyper-
Warnings. Overdosage may cause severe inhibition of
plasia.
pituitary function, anaemia and thrombocytopenia, squa-
The use of stilbenes, such as diethylstilbestrol (with the fol-
mous metaplasia of the prostate, cystic endometrial hyper-
plasia
because they have been found to be carcinogenic in humans
Dose. By mouth.
under some circumstances. Administration is allowed, if
Dogs. Males: prostatic hyperplasia, anal adenoma, 50- 100
prior steps are taken to ensure that the treated animal and
micrograms daily. If feminisation occurs, cease treatment.
its products are not available for human or animal consump-
Recommence therapy at half original dose
tion. This exemption allows the administration of author-
ised-human products to farm animals for research purposes
POM Ethinylestradiol (Non-proprietary) UK
and also to companion and laboratory animals.
Fablets, ethinylestradiol 10 rmicrograrms, 50 micrograrms, I mg
and cystic endometrial hyperplasia in bitches. Overdosage
8.2.2 Progestogens
can cause severe inhibition of pituitary function and cystic
Progestogens are steroids that mimic the effects of proges-
ovaries, particularly in cattle and pigs; repeated administra-
terone and thus prepare and maintain the female reproduc-
tion to treat misalliancee can cause coagulopathy in bitches.
development of the mammary glands to the point of lacta-
tion. Progestogens exert a negati ve feedback on the hypoth-
almic-pituitary  axis
suppressing
thesecretion
of
DIETHYLSTILBESTROL
gonadotrophins, and thereby cyclical ovarian activity,
(Stilboestrol)
which normally results in oestrus and ovulation. In male
animals, progestogens reduce testosterone production by
UK
the same action.
 In mares, cows, ewes, does+, and sows, progestogens are
section 9.4); behavioural modification (see section 6.11.11)
used to synchronise oestrus in groups of animals or enable
Contra-indications. See niotes above
Warnings. Overdosage may cause severe inhibition of
the occurrence of oestrus to be predicted. Administration of
a progestogen for 10 to 14 days will suppress cyclical ovar-
pituitary function, anaemia and thrombocytopenia, squa-
 mous metaplasia of the prostate, cystic endometrial hyper-
ian activity and oestrus. Longer periods of administration
may cause decreased fertility. On removal of the pro-
plasia
Dose. Dogs: prostatic hyperplasia, anal adenoma,
gestogen source, the negative feedback on the pituitary and
the hypothalamus is removed and oestrus with subsequent
mouth, up to l mg daily, reducing to maintenance dose
ovulation occurs. This facilitates the use of artificial insem-
POM  Diethylstilbestrol (Non-proprietary) UK
ination and stud males. This treatment may also be used in
Tablets, diethylstilbestrol I mg, 5 mg
individual animals.
8.2 Sex honmones 325
Altrenogest is administered in the feed to mares, gilts, and
cats, animals should be allowed to have a nomal cycle
sows. In sows and gilts, oestrus occurs 5 to 7 days after the
every 18 to 24 months.
last day of treatment. Flugestone and medroxyprogester-
 Progestogens antagonise the hypoglycaemic effects of insu-
one are administered as intravaginal sponges in ewes and
lin and therefore should not be given to diabetic animals.
does+. Or withdrawal of the sponge, serum gonadotrophin
The possi bility of pre-existing disease should be considered
may be admiristered as a single dose, the dose varying
according to breed and times of administration.
This
therapy. Some progestogenis, such as megestrol acetate, may
method is used to advance the time of onset of cyclical
induce profound adrenal cortical suppression and possibly
ovarian activity. Rams are introduced into the flock 48
hypoadrenacortical syndrome on rapid withdrawal. Pro-
hours after removal of sponges.
s
Progesterone is administered to cattle by using a progester-
Subcutaneous injection of progestogens may cause hair dis-
one-releasing intravaginal device (Eazi-Breed CIDR, see
coloration and localised alopecia and thinning of the skin.
also Prid section 8.2.5). Prostaglandin F2α or an analogue
 Injection should be given in an inconspicuous area, such as
may be administered before removal of the progesterone
 the inner fold of the flank or medial aspect of the thigh.
device to improve the accuracy of synchronisation. Pro-
Some patients given progestogens may develop a tendency
gestogens may be used to stimulate the onset of cyclical
for obesity or a change in temperament.
ovarian acti vity in anoestrus mares, cows, ewes, does + , and
sows. Their effect is evident following withdrawal.
 Preparations containing progestogens should be handled
Animals are usually mated at the synchronised oestrus,
with care, particularly by women of child-bearing age.
although ewes may be mated at the second oestrus after
Impervious gloves and suitable protective overalls
removal of a progestogen-impregnated sponge.
should be worn when iri conntact with such preparations.
In dogs and cats, medroxyprogesterone, megestrol, and
 proligestone are used to postpone or suppress oestrus. For
guidance, medical treatment (rather than surgical interven-
ALTRENOGEST
tion) may be used for prevention of oestrus in animals that
 are poor surgical risks for ovariohysterectomy and animals
UK
from which litters are temporarily not desired.
 In cats, eosinophilic granuloma and “miliary dermatitis"
Indications. See under Dose
Contra-indications. Male animals, immature animals, ani-
(crusting dermatosis) are responsive to progestogens
mals with uterine infection
because they have a glucocorticoid-like anti-inflammatory
effect, although their use for dermatitis is contra-indicated
safely destroyed and not given to any other animal; correct
(see section 14.2). Prolonged administration of megestrol
dose must be given because underdosing may lead to for-
acetate may lead to side-effects (see below), and oral corti-
mation of cystic ovaries. Care must be taken to avoid arly
costeroids or preferably elimination of the causative agent
contact between preparations of the drug and women of
are recommended for the treatment of 'miliary dermatitis'.
child-bearing age; the manufacturer recommends that
Megestrol and medroxyprogesterone+ may be given for
   n  e  o 
behavioural problems in dogs (see section 6.11. 11).
the use of these preparations; women with irregular men-
Delmadinone is used in the treatment of prostatic hypertro-
strual periods after exposure to these preparations should
 phy, prostatic carcinoma, and perianal tumours. It improves
consult their doctor; operators should wear protecti ve cloth-
 behaviour in some forms of aggression, nervousness, and
ing when handling the product
hypersexuality.
Dose. By addition to feed.
Hydroxyprogesterone has actions similar to other pro-
Horses: anoestrus (not deep anoestrus), suppression of pro-
gestogens and has been used to prevent recurrent abortion.
longed oestrus during the transitional phase before the
Progestogens should be used with caution. All synthetic
resumption of normal cyclical ovarian activity, 44 micro-
progestogens differ in their pharmacological profiles and
grams/kg daily for 10 days
their capacities to produce side-effects in different animal
Suppression and control of oestrus in cycling mares, 44
species. For example, although some progestogens may be
micrograms/kg daily for 15 days
used to inhibit or retard the growth of certain oestrogenl-
Pigs: (gilts) synchronisation of oestrus, 20 mg daily for 18
days; (sows) synchronisation of oestrus, 20 mg daily for 3
bitches, it is known that other progestogens can cause Or
days, starting on day of weaning
aggravate these conditions.
Progestogens stimulate the proliferative and secretory activ-
POM Regumate Equine (Intervet) U/K
ity of the uterine endometrium leading to cystic endometrial
Oral solution, for addition to feed, altrenogest 2.2 mg/mL, for horses
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for humarn
hyperplasia, mucometra, or pyometra. Therefore, pro-
gestogens should not be administered to animals with a his-
consurn ptior
tory of vaginal discharge or reproductive abnormalities,
POM Regumate Porcine (Jarn ssen) UK
sexually immature animals, or dogs and cats intended for
Orasuspension, for addition to feed, altrenogest 20 mg/unit dose,forpigs;
(u 5 = asop un 1) ojedde sop-paaau
breeding. When used for suppression of oestrus in dogs and
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter 15 days
326 Reproductive system
DELMADINONE ACETATE
mellitus; use in maiden ewes, ewes with vaginal discharge
 or just after abortion
UK
Side-effects. Thinning of skin, thinning and discoloration
Indications. Treatment of hypersexuality, relief of pros
of hair at injection site; mammary hyperplasia or nodules;
tatic hypertrophy, perianal (circumanal, hepatoid) gland
weight gain; cystic endometrial hyperplasia
tumours; certain behavioural problems (see section 6.11.11)
Warnings. Injection should be given in inconspicuous site;
Contra-indications. Concurrent administration of other
progestogens
variable after long-term treatment; operators should wear
Side-effects. Transient reduction in fertility and libido;
 protective gloves when handling sponges and take care to
transient increased appetite, polydipsia and polyuria; dis-
avoid damaging the vagina; the sponge should be removed
coloration of hair at injection site
and ewes examined if there is excessive straining after
Warnings. Clinical response to treatment is 2-4 days 
insertion or blood on the applicator; all sponges should be
Dose. Dogs, cats: by subcutaneous or intramuscular injec-
removed after 17 days
tion, 1-2 mg/kg depending on the weight of the animal and
Dose.
severity of the condition, repeat dose after 8 days if no
Sheep, goats +: synchronisation of oestrus, by intravaginat
improvement. Repeat dose every 3-4 weeks in animals
administration, one 60-mg sponge. Remove after 13-17
showing improvement
sAep
Induction of oestrus and ovulation during non-breeding sea-
POM Tardak (Pfizer) U/K
Injetion, delrnadinone acetate 10 mg/mL, for dogs, cafs
son, advancement of breeding season, by intravaginaf
adrinistration, one 60-mg sponge. Remove after 13-17
FLUGESTONE ACETATE
days and by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection,
(Flurogestone acetate)
serum gonadotrophin, 300-750 units, given at time of
sponge removal (dose dependent on breed and time interval
UK
to normal breeding)
Indications. See under Dose
Dogs: prevention of oestrus, by subcutaneous injection, 50
Contra-indications. Ewe lambs, ewes not previously bred
 mg given in anoestrus. Repeat after 6 months
Warnings. Operators should wear protective gloves when
handling sponges; the physical and nutritional state of the
POM Promone-E (Pfizer) UK
flock must be good for use in non-breeding seasonl
Injetion, medroxyprogesterone acetate 50 rmg/mL, for dogs
Dose. Sheep, goats +: synchronisation of oestrus during
 (az) g as xea o
the breeding season, by intravaginat administration, one
Vaging? sponge, rmedroxyprogesterone acetate 60 rmg, for sheep
30-mg sponge. Remove after 14 days
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 14 days after rermoval of sponge,
should not be used in sheep producing rmilk for hurman con surmption
Induction of oestrus and ovulation during non-breeding sea-
Note. After each application, the sponge applicator should be wiped clear
son, advancement of breeding season, by intravaginat
and washed in water containing a suitable disinfectant such as cetrirmide 0.5-
administration, one 30-mg sponge. Remove after 12 days,
1.0%. Do not use alcohols, cresols, phenols, or similar disinfectants
followed within 6 hours by serum gonadotrophin, by subcu-
taneous or intramuscular injection, 500 units
MEGESTROL ACETATE
POM Chronogest (Intervet) UK
UK
Vagingl sponge, flugestone acetate 30 mg, for sheep
Indications. See notes above and under Dose; behaviour
Disinfectant
modification (see section 6.11.11)
Liquid concentrate, benzalkoniurm brormide 5%. To be diluted before use
Dilute I volurme in 90 volurmes water
Contra-indications. Diabetes mellitus; male dogs initended
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 14 days after rermoval of sponge,
for breeding
should not be used in sheep producing milk for hurmar consurmption 
Side-effects. Rarely excess libido; occasionally lethargy,
Note. After each application, the sponge applicator should be wiped clearl
weight gain; mammary hypertrophy
and placed irn the supplied disinfectant. Do not use alcohols, cresols, phenols,
Warnings. Not more than 2 courses of treatment for post-
sheep dip or other disinfectants
ponement of oestrus should be given per 12-month period
in bitches; owners should be warned that the time interval to
MEDROXYPROGESTERONE ACETATE
the subsequent oestrus is variable
Dose. By mouth.
UK
Dogs. Females: prevention of oestrus, 2 mg/kg daily for 8
Indications. See under Dose; behaviour modification·
days or 2 mg/kg daily for 4 days then 500 micrograms/kg
(see section 6.11.11)
daily for 16 days, given at pro-oestrus
Contra-indications. Use in bitches primarily intended for
Postponement of oestrus, 500 micrograms/kg daily for up to
breeding purposes, use before first oestrus, pregnant ani-
 40 days given in anoestrus and 7-14 days before postpone-
mals, previous history of genito-urinary disease, persistant
 ment is required
Or abnormal vaginal discharge, iregular oestrus or nympho-
 Males: behavioural problems, see section 6.11.11
mania, pseudopregnancy, mammary tumours, pro-oestrus,
Cats: miliary dermatitis, eosinophilic granuloma, 2.5-5.0
oestrus, or metoestrous stage of oestrous cycle; diabetes
 mg every 2-3 days until lesions regress then once weekly
8.2 Sex honmones 327
until satisfactory response. Then maintenance dose of 2.5
POM Delvosteron (Intervet) UK
mg every 7- 14 days if required (but see section 14.2)
Injection, proligestone I00 mg/mL, for dogs, cats, ferrets
Femates: prevention of oestrus, 5 mg daily for 3 days givenl
in pro-oestrus
8.2.3 Antiprogestogens
Postponement of oestrus, 2.5 mg once weekly for up to 30
Antiprogestogens are used to terminate pregnancy in
weeks and given in anoestrus
bitches. They act in a number of different ways. Dopamine
POM Ovarid (Schering-Plough) UK
receptor agonists, such as bromocriptine and cabergoline
Tablets, scored, rmegestrol acetate 5 mg, 20 mg, for dogs, cafs
els, and hence progesterone secretion by the corpora lutea.
PROGESTERONE
 Some enzyme inhibitors such as epostane prevent the con-
UK
reduce plasma-progesterone concentration, which is neces-
Indications. See under Dose
sary for the maintenance of pregnancy. Aglepristone is a
Contra-indications. Side-effects. See notes above
progesterone receptor antagonist, which blocks the effect of
Dose. Cattle: induction of oestrus and ovulation in anoe-
 progesterone on the target tissues; progesterone concentra-
strus,by intravaginat administration, 1 device.Remove
tions in the peripheral circulation are not affected.
after 7-12 days
Aglepristone is used to terminate pregnancy in bitches up to
Synchronisation of oestrus and ovulation, by intravagina!
45 days after mating. Termination of pregnancy should be
administration, 1 device. Remove after 7-12 days and
confirmed by examination of animals 10 days after treat-
administration of prostaglandin F2α (see section 8.3 for dos-
ment and at least 30 days after mating. A partial abortion
age) at time of removal, or at any time from 6 days after
insertion. GnRH (buserelin and gonadorelin, section 8.1.2)
puppies, which may become macerated.
may be used in conjunction with intravaginal progesterone
 In animals treated after day 20 of gestation, abortion is
to stimulate follicular growth
accompagnied by physiological signs of parturition such as
fetal expulsion, slight anorexia, and mammary congestion.
POM Eazi-Breed CIDR (ART) UK
An early return to oestrus is seen in animals treated with
Intravaginal device, progesterone I .9 g, for cattle
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter 6 hours after rermoval of device, milk 
aglepristone with the oestrus to oestrus interval being short-
withdrawal period nil 
ened by one to three months.
PROLIGESTONE
AGLEPRISTONE
Indications. Pregnancy termination in bitches
UK
Contra-indications. Hypersensitivity to aglepristone
Indications. See notes above and under Dose
Side-effects. Transient pain at injection site
Contra-indications. Use in bitches treated previously with
Warnings. Owners should be warned that partial abortion
oestrogens or progestagens for pseudopregnancy
may occur in 5% of bitches; early return to oestrus after
Side-effects. Thinning of skin, thinning and discoloration
of hair at injection site; mammary hyperplasia; transient
treatment; physiological signs of parturition seen in bitches
treated after day 20 of gestation; may cause abortion in
weight gain and lethargy; cystic endometrial hyperplasia
Warnings. Injection should be given in inconspicuous site;
humans and women should take care to avoid accidental
self-injection
occasional anaphylactic reaction; use with caution in dia-
Dose. Dogs: by subcutaneous injection, 10 mg/kg. Repeat
betic animals; for suppression of oestrus bitches, should be
after 24 hours
in early pro-oestrus when treated; bitches may accept male
for a few days after treatment and contact with males should
POM Alizin (Virbac) UK
be prevented until signs of oestrus have regressed
Injection, {oily), aglepristone 30 mg/mL, for dogs
Dose. By subcutaneous injection.
Dogs: permanent postponement of oestrus, 10-33 mg/kg
Accidental self-injection with oil-based injections can
 (larger animals receive proportionally lower doses), repeat
cause severe pain and intense swelling, which may result
after 3, 4, and 5 months
in ischaemic necrosis and loss of a digit. Prompt medical
Temporary postponement of oestrus, suppression of oestrus
attention is essential. A copy of the warming given in the
at onset of pro-oestrus, 10- 33 mg/kg as a single dose
package leaflet or data sheet should be shown to the
 Pseudopregnancy, 10-33 mg/kg. May repeat after 1 month 
doctor (or nurse) on duty
if required
Cats: postponement and suppression of oestrus, 100 mg
Miliary dermatitis, 33-50 mg/kg, repeat every 4 months, 0r
 more frequently depending on response (but see section
8.2.4 Androgens
14.2)
Testosterone esters and methyltestosterone promote and
Ferrets: to prevent problems associated with prolonged
maintain primary and secondary anatomical, physiological,
oestrus, 50 mg/animal
and psychological male sexual characteristics. Anabolic
328 Reproductive system
steroids (see section 7.3) are synthetic derivatives of testo-
Cats. Females: certain hormonal alopecias, 500 micro-
sterone. In the female, they can be used to exert a negative
grams/kg (0.5 mg/kg) daily
feedback effect on the hypothalamic-pituitary axis thereby
Males: deficient libido,certain hormonal alopecias, 500
reducing gonadotrophin secretion.
micrograms/kg (0.5 mg/kg) daily
Although androgens are used in the treatment of deficient
POM Orandrone (Irntervet) UK
libido in males, they are generally unreliable and may result
Fablets, methyltestosterone 5 rng, for dogs, cafs
tered for the treatment of hormonal alopecia in dogs and
TESTOSTERONE ESTERS
cats and for mammary tumours and pseudopregnancy with
lactation in bitches. These drugs may also be used for sup-
UK
pression of oestrus.
Indications. See notes above and preparation details
Care should be taken to avoid inducing excess virilism.
Contra-indications. Pregnant animals, hepatic impair-
Androgen therapy should not be given to animals suffering
 ment, renal impairment, congestive heart failure, dogs with
from conditions known to be aggravated by testosterone,
prostatic hypertrophy or androgen-dependent neoplasia
such as prostatic hypertrophy in dogs.
Side-effects. Virilisation in females with overdosage; pos-
The effects of oral methyltestosterone last for 1 to 3 days,
sible spraying in male cats
while oily injections of testosterone phenylpropionate are
effective for 14 days.
animals
Mibolerone is arl orally active synthetic androgen-derived
 Dose. See preparation details
anabolic steroid with no progestogenic or oestrogenic activ-
ity. It inhibits luteinising hormone secretion, thereby pre-
POM Durateston (Intervet) U/K
Depot injection {oily), testosterone decanoate 20 rmg, testosterone iso.
venting oestrus. It will not postpone pro-oestrus or oestrus
caproate 12 mg, testosterone phenylpropionate 12 mg, testosterone propion-
once these have begun and it will not abort a pregnancy. If
ate 6 mg/mL,for dogs, cats
administered to pregnant bitches, it causes gross masculini-
Dose. By subcuianeous or intram
muscular injection. Repeat dose after 28
sation of female fetuses. It should not be used for more than
days, if required
Dogs. Femaies: suppresion of oestrus, pseudoprenancy,0.0-0.1 mL/kg
2 years.
Males: reversion of ferminisation due to Sertoli cell urmour, certain horrmonal
alopecias, 0.05-0.1 mL/kg
MESTEROLONE
Cats: skin conditions,0.05-0.l mL/kg
UK
8.2.5 Compound hormonal preparations
Indications.Dose. See Prescribing for pigeonis
A combination of hormones is used to induce a preseasonal
POMH) Pro-Viron (Schering Health) UK
ovulation, synchronise oestrus in a group of animals, or
Tablets, scored, rmesterolone 25 mg
enable prediction of the time of oestrus. Some compound
 preparations are also used in the treatment of ovarian cysts
or for the control of clinical signs of pseudopregnancy.
METHYLTESTOSTERONE
Their use is unlikely to produce satisfactory results in ani-
mals in deep anoestrus, immature animals, animals with
UK
genital-tract abnormalities, or when breeding problems
Indications. See notes above and under Dose
have resulted from severe rutritional deficiency or other
Contra-indications. Pregnant
 animals, hepatic
impair-
stresses.
ment, congestive heart failure
Side-effects.
Virilisation and aggression with overdosage;
cessation of spermatogenesis; masculisation in female
UK
POM PG 600 (Intervet) UK
animals
Injection, powder for reconstitution, chorionic gonadotrophin 200 units,
 Warnings. Use with caution in female animals intended for
serurm gonadotrophin 400 units, for pigs more than 5 months of uge
breeding, early epiphyseal closure may occur with pro-
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter withdrawal period nil
longed treatment in young animals resulting in stunted
Contra-indications. Injection into subcutaneous fat
Side-effects. Anaphylactic reactions
growth
Dose. Sows, gilts: anoestrus, suboestrus, by intramuscular injection, 5 rmL
Dose. Treat according to individual response with gradual
of reconstiuted solution
reduction of dose rather than abrupt cessation of treatment.
Sows, post weaning: to prormote early postpartum oestrus, by intramuscular
By mouth.
injection, 5 mL of recon stinuted solutior within 2 days of weaning
Note. Gilts more than 5 months of age, a single dose normally results in fer-
 Dogs. Females: treatment of oestrogen-dependent mam-
tile oestrus within 5 days
mary tumours (but see section 13.3), suppression of
Destrus, pseudopregnancy, certain hormonal alopecias, 500
POM Prid (Ceva) UK
Intravaginal device, progesterone 1.55 g,estradiol benzoate I0 rmg, for cows,
micrograms/kg daily
matureheifers
Males: deficient libido, reversion of feminisation after
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: milk withdrawal period nil
removal of testicular tumour, certain hormonal alopecias,
Note.For 24 hours after insertion, anials must rot be sent for slaughter and
500 micrograms/kg (0.5 mg/kg) daily
at all tirmes the intravaginal device should be removed at least 6 hours before 
slaughter
8.3 Prostaglandins 329
Contra-indications. Irmrmature heifers; cows calved less than 30 days
preparations are PoM and should be issued by a veterinarianl
except when using at 2l days onwards for late calving herds where, in
only to a farmer who is a bona fide client, on the basis that
healthy cows, eardy service is required; pregnant cattle; genital tract
infections
the named person(s) signs a receipt for the consignment and
Dose. Catfle: anoestrus, suboestrus, synchronisation of oestrus,by intravag-
is responsible for its proper storage, use, and accountability.
ingl administration, I device. Rermove after I2 days, and follow by insermi-
The veterinarian must advise the farmer that the product
nation either 2 tirmes, at 48 hours and 72 hours, or once at 56 hours, after
rermoval. May be used in conjunction with serum gonadotrophin and prostag
issued must be kept in a secure locked place except when
landin Fa or aralogues
required for administration. The veterinarian should issue
only sufficient of the product for immediate foreseeable use
on the farm, and periodic checks of the farmers stock and
8.3 Prostaglandins
amounts used should be carried out by the veterinarian. The
famer should be instructed on the safe handling of the
Alfaprostol,
 cloprostenol,
dinoprost,
etiproston,
 product as indicated above. Prostaglandins should not be
luprostiol, and tiaprost are synthetic prostaglandin F2α 0r
analogues. Prostaglandins, which are derivatives of arachi-
controlled circumstances.
donic acid, are ubiquitous substances and have an important
Their primary effect on the reproductive system of the non-
Prostaglandins of the Fz。 type can be absorbed through
the skin and may cause bronchospasm or miscarriage.
pregnant or early-pregnant animal is regression of the cor-
 Care should be taken when handling the product to avoid
pus luteum but they may have powerful direct effects on the
myometrium especially near term. In veterinary practice,
self-injection or skin contact. In the event of accidental
administration to a person, medical advice should be
they are used to control cyclical ovarian activity
in
 polyoestrous species, for termination of pregnancy, or for
sought promptly. Women of child-bearing age, asthmat-
induction of parturi tion. In addition, prostaglandins are used
ics, and persons with bronchial or other respiratory prob-
lems should avoid contact with, or wear disposable
gloves when administering, the product. Accidental
mummified fetus, pyometra, and luteal cysts in cattle, and
spillage on the skin should be washed off immediately
pseudopregnancy in goats+
with soap and water.
The corpus luteum is refractory to the action of prostaglan-
din F2α or analogues for at least 5 days post ovulation in
mares, cows, ewes, and does; in sows the refractory period
is up to 11 days; in bitches and queens the corpus luteum is
CLOPROSTENOL
generally unresponsive at any time after ovulation unless
subject to repeated doses. When used for pregnancy termi-
UK
nation, prostaglandins will only be effective when the cor-
Indications. See notes above and under Dose
pus luteum is responsive and before other sources of
 Contra-indications. Pregnant animals unless termination
progesterone synthesis become dominant, for example
required
between day 7 and about day 150 of gestation in cattle.
Warnings. Women of child-bearing age, asthmatics, and
For induction of parturition, prostaglandins may be given
 persons with bronchial or other respiratory problems should
within 7 days of full term in cattle and 3 days of full term in
avoid contact with, or wear disposable gloves when admin-
pigs, at which time changing hormone levels have greatly
istering, the product. Accidental spillage on the skin should
increased myometrial sensitivity to them.
be washed off immediately with soap and water.
Prostaglandin F2q also has an ecbolic effect and is some-
Dose. By intramuscular injection.
times used to treat ^open' pyometra in bitches +. It, or one
Horses: induction of oestrus in mares with persistent luteal
of the analogues, has been used to terminate pregnancy● in
function (prolonged dioestrus), type I pseudopregnancy
bitches in combination with cabergoline.
(associated with persistent luteal function in the absence of
Side-effects such as transient sweating and mild colic with
endometrial cups), pregnancy termination before 35 days,
or without diarrhoea occasionally follow the use of prosta-
induction of oestrus for service management, 250-500
 sunsd os sn w  un s
micrograms
Ponies, donkeys: 125-250 micrograms
tions, severe cellulitis, and systemic reactions sometimes
Cattle: induction of oestrus, pregnancy termination before
leading to death.
150 days, endometritis, pyometra, luteal cysts, fetal mum-
In general, treatment and administration of prostaglandins
 mification, synchronisation of oestrus, induction of parturi-
should be by the veterinarian but, for pigs, for induction of
tion, 500 micrograms
farrowing, the preparations may have to be dispensed for
Goats + : pseudopregnancy, 500 micrograms
Pigs: induction of parturition, 175 micrograms
pigs, prostaglandins must not be given more than 2 days
before expected parturition. The average gestation length
POM Estrumate (Schering-Plough) UK
fnjection, cloprostenol (as sodiurn salt) 250 rmicrograrms/mL, for horses,
should be calculated for each farm and prostaglandins used
ponies,donkeys,atle
only where accurate service records are kept. Prostaglandin
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmar cor-
surnption. Catle: slaughter I day, rmilk withdrawal period nil
330 Reproductive system
POM Planate (Schering-Plough) UK
Warnings. Women of child-bearing age, asthmatics, and
Injection, cloprostenol (as sodium salt) 87.5 rmicrograrms/mL, for pigs
persons with bronchial or other respiratory problems should
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter 4 days
take care when handling the product. Accidental spillage on
the skin should be washed off immediately with soap and
DINOPROST
water
UK
Dose. By intramuscular injection.
Catte: induction of oestrus, induction of parturition, preg-
Indications. See under Dose
Contra-indications. Pregnant animals unless termination
nancy termination, 5 mg
required; patients with acute or subacute disorders of the
Synchronisation of oestrus, 5 mg, may be repeated after 11
vascular system, gastro-intestinal tract, or respiratory
days
systen
Endometritis, 5 mg, may be repeated after 10- 14 days
Side-effects. Transient sweating, decreased rectal temper-
POM Prostavet Injectable Solution (Birmeda) UK
ature, increased heart rate, increased respiratory rate, and
Injection, etiproston trometharmine 2.5 mg/mL, for cale
some abdominal discomfort in horses; transient increased
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter I day, milk 6 hours
body temperature, respiratory rate, salivation, defecation,
urination, erythema, and restlessness in pigs; increased rec-
LUPROSTIOL
tal temperature, trarisient salivation, tremor, restlessness,
and mild diarrhoea in cattle
UK
Warnings. Women of child-bearing age, asthmatics, and
Indications. See notes above and under Dose
persons with bronchial or other respiratory problems should
Contra-indications. Pregnant animals unless termination
avoid contact with, or wear disposable gloves when admin-
required
istering, the product. Accidental spillage on the skin should
 Side-effects. Transient sweating and diarrhoea in horses,
abdominal discomfort in cattle
Dose. By intramuscular injection.
Warnings. Women of child-bearing age, asthmatics, and
Horses: induction of oestrus in mares with persistent luteal
persons with bronchial or other respiratory problems should
function (persistent dioestrus), type I pseudopregnancy
avoid contact with, or wear disposable gloves when admin-
(associated with persistent luteal function in the absence of
istering, the product. Accidental spillage on the skin should
endometrial cups), pregnancy termination before 35 days,
be washed off immediately with soap and water.
Dose.By intramuscular injection.
sy nichronisation of oestrus for service management, 5 mg
Cattle: induction of oestrus, luteal cysts, chronic metritis
Horses: induction of oestrus in mares with persistent luteal
and pyometra, pregnancy termination before 150 days,
 pregnancy termination before 35 days, induction of parturi-
induction of parturition on or after 270 days, 25 mg. May be
tion after day 330, induction of oestrus for service manage-
repeated after 10-12 days
Synchronisation of recipient cattle for embryo transplanta-
ment, 7.5 mg
tion, 25 mg, repeat after 10- 12 days
Cattle: induction of oestrus, synchronisation of oestrus,
Pigs: induction of parturition within 3 days of farrowing, 10
pregnancy termination before 150 days, induction of partu-
rition after day 270, endometritis, pyometra, cows: 15 mg:
mg
heifers: 7.5 mg
Stimulation of uterine contractions postpartum, 10 mg 1-2
Pigs: induction of parturition not earlier than 48 hours
days after parturition
Dogs+: ‘open' pyometra, 250 micrograms/kg daily for at
before expected farrowing, see preparation details
least 5 days
POM Prosolvin (Intervet) UK
Injection,upostiol7.5 mg/mL,forhorsescatle,pis
POM Enzaprost T (Ceva) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmar corn -
Injection, dinoprost 5 mg/mL, for horses, catle, pigs
surmption. Catle: slaughter4 days, milk 6 hours. Pigs: slaughter 4 days
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter I day, rmilk withdrawal period nil
Dose. Pigs: by intramuscular injection, 7.5 mg
POM Lutalyse (Pfizer) UK
POM Prostapar (Intervet) UK
Injection, dinoprost (as trormetharmine) 5 mg/mL, for horses, catle, pigs
Injection, luprostiol 1.5 mg/mL, for pigs
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter I day. Catfe: slaughter I day, rmilk
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter I day
withdrawal period nil. Pigs: slaughter I day
Dose.Pigs:by inramuscular injection, 3 mg
POM Noroprost (Norbrook) U/K
injection,dinoprost5mg/mL,forcatle
8.4 Myometrial stimulants
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter I day, milk withdrawal period nil
Myometrial stimulants include synthetic preparations of
ETIPROSTON TROMETHAMINE
oxytocin, and carbotocin, a synthetic analogue of oxy-
UK
tocin, which has a much longer half-life than oxytocin.
These agents stimulate contraction of the oestrogen-sensi-
Indications. Fertility disorders; control of oestrus
tised myometrium and mammary myoepithelial cells. This
Contra-indications. Pregnant animals unless termination
activity may be of benefit in dystocia due to secondary
required; concurrent treatment with oxytocin
8.5 Myometrial relaxants  331
uterine inertia. Myometrial stimulants should not be used
8.5 Myometrial relaxants
when dystocia is related to faulty fetal disposition or feto-
mater nal disproportion.
These drugs cause relaxation of the uterus, and are used to
Myometrial stimulants are also used in the control of post-
aid obstetrical manoeuvres during dystocia and to facilitate
partum haemorrhage, to hasten uterine involution immedi-
handling of the uterus during caesarean operation. They are
ately after parturition in all species, to aid clearance of
sometimes used to facilitate the recovery of embryos from
uterine discharge in mares, and to remove retained fetal
donors for embryo transfer, and to facilitate replacement of
membranes in mares, sows, bitches, and queens; they have
a prolapsed uterus. They can be used to delay parturition so
no effect on separation of the placenta in ruminant species.
that it may occur when greater observation and care are
Ox ytocin is also used to reduce the size of a previously pro-
available. In addition, when used in heifers, calving can be
delayed sufficiently to allow better relaxation of the birth
mares.
canal and perineum. Myometrial relaxants are sometimes
Myometrial stimulants are used for agalactia due to failure
used in the treatment of incomplete cervical dilation (ring-
of milk “let down'in all species.
womb) in sheep, although their effect is questionable.
Clenbuterol is a beta,-adrenoceptor agonist and therefore is
OXYTOCIN
antagonistic to the effects of oxytocin and prostaglandins. It
relaxes and (at low dosage) coordinates contractions in all
UK
species except cats.
Indications. See notes above and under Dose
When using clenbuterol, it is important to avoid ingestion
Contra-indications. Dystocia due to obstruction, closed
by refraining from eating, drinking, or smoking. Skin con-
pyometra; stress that causes reduced milk let down
tamination should be washed off immediately. Accidental
Side-effects. Swelling or sloughing at injection site
self-injection may result in tachycardia and tremor and
Dose. Horses: uterine inertia, agalactia due to failure of *let 
hence immediate medical treatment should be sought.
down', to promote uterine involution, by subcutaneous or
Clenbuterol has been used illegally in the livestock industry
intramuscular (preferred) injection, 10-40 units; by sfow
to improve carcass quality by reducing the fat content and
intravenous injection, 2.5-10.0 units of diluted solution
increasing muscle mass. It has also been used in show ani-
Retained fetal membranes+, by intramuscular injection,
mals. It is used extensively by body builders and athletes
20-40 units; by intravenous infusion, 50 units in sodium
wishing to increase their lean mass. Therefore it is impor-
chloride 0.9% given over 1 hour
tant that clenbuterol is stored securely to prevent misuse in
Expulsion of uterine fluid+, by intramuscufar injection, 25
animals and humans.
units
Vetrabutine is a papaverine-like drug. It interrupts the con-
Uterine prolapse·, by intravenous infusion, 2.5-10.0 units
tractions caused by oxytocin with periods of relaxation; if
ini sodium chloride 0.9%, or sodium chloride 0.18% + glu-
used concurrently with oxytocin a lower than usual dose of
cose 4% infusion
 oxytocin should be administered. Vetrabutine is not as
Cattle : uterine inertia, agalactia due to failure of “let down',
effective as clenbuterol; but may be used for ringwomb in
to promote uterine involution, by subcutaneous or intra-
sheep+. It should not be used in cats.
muscular (preferred) injection, 10-40 units; by stow intra-
Isoxsuprine is a vasodilator which also stimulates beta-
venous injection, 2.5-10.0 units of diluted solution
adrenergic receptors. It causes direct relax ation of vascular
Mastitis, by subcutaneous or intramuscular (preferred)
(see section 4.3.2) and uterine smooth muscle.
injection, initial dose 80 units before stripping out and ini-
tial intramammary treatment, then 20 units before each
CLENBUTEROL HYDROCHLORIDE
Uterine prolapse·, by intramuscular injection, 2.5-10 units
UK
Sheep, goats, pigs, dogs: uterine inertia, agalactia due to
Indications. Facilitating obstetrical manoeuvres
failure of let down', to promote uterine involution, by sub-
Contra-indications. Concurrent administration of atropine,
cutaneous or intramuscular (preferred) injection,2-10
 adrenoceptor stimulants, vasodilators, or general anaesthet-
units; by stow intravenous injection, 0.5-2.5 units of diluted
ics, oxytocin, prostaglandins; hypersensitivity to the
solution
product
Cats: uterine inertia, agalactia due to failure of “let down',
Side-effects. Transient vasodilation and tachycardia with
to promote uterine involution, by subcutaneous or intra-
sweating and muscle tremors with high dosage
muscular (preferred)injection,2-5 units; by slow intrave-
Warnings. Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1; operators
nous injection, 0.5- 1.25 units of diluted solution
should take care when handling the product because acci-
dental self-injection may cause tachycardia and tremors
POM Oxytocin-S (Irntervet) UK
Dose. Cattle: by intramuscular or stow intravenous injec-
Injection, oxytocin 10 units/mL, for horses, catle, sheep, gouts, pigs, dogs,
tion, 300 micrograms as a single dose
cats
 For intravenous injection dilute I volurme with 9 volurmes water for injection
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk withdrawal
POM Planipart (Boehringer Ingelheim) UK
Injection, clenbuterol hydrochloride 30 micrograrms/mL, for caffle
period nil
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter 6 days, rmilk 5 days 
332Reproductive system
VETRABUTINE HYDROCHLORIDE
Dose. Doe goats +, to suppress lactation, by mouth, 5
(Dimophebumine hydrochloride)
micrograms/kg
Dogs: by mouth, 5 micrograms/kg once daily for 4-6 days.
UK
May be mixed with food
Indications. Facilitating obstetrical manoeu vres
Contra-indications. Cats; ewes producing milk for human
POM Galastop (Ceva) U/K
Oral solution, cabergoline 50 rmicrograrms/mL, for dogs (3 drops = cabergo.
consumption
line 5 micrograrms)
Warnings. Pregnant women and women of child-bearing
age should exercise extreme caution to avoid self-injection
Dose. By intramuscular injection.
8.7 Non-hormonal abortificants
Sheep +: 3 mg/kg as a single dose
Pigs: 2 mg/kg as a single dose
Lotrifen is a phenyltriazole isoquinoline which causes
Dogs: 2 mg/kg. May be repeated at 30-60 minute intervals
embryopathy and abortion in many species such as rats,
for up to 3 doses
hamsters, guinea pigs, and dogs. It is most effective in dogs
when administered around 20 days of gestation and it is
POM Monzaldon (Boehringer Ingelheim) UK
used in dogs for pregnancy termination. The mode of action
Injection, vetrabutine hydrochloride 100 rmg/mL, for pigs, dogs
is unclear: the drug may be embryotoxic, it may reduce
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter 28 days
blood supply to the gravid uterus, or modify the animals
immune response.
8.6 Prolactin antagonists
Pregnancy in bitches is maintained by the presence of cor-
8.8 Drugs for uterine infections
pora lutea; if they regress, pregnancy will be terminated.
Bacteria will contaminate the uterus of most individuals
the luteotrophic support of pituitary-derived prolactin dur-
after normal parturition. However these micro-organisms
ing the second half of the luteal phase of metoestrus and
will soon be eliminated by natural defenice mechanisms.
The bacteria may originate from the environment and are
pregrianicy
opportunist pathogens or may be specific venereal patho-
The prolactin inhibitor cabergoline exerts its effect by
gens; failure to eliminate them due to impaired defence
of
dopamine receptors in prolactin-releasing cells in the ante-
mechanisms will result in infection. In addition, trauma
rior pituitary. As a consequence, the corpora lutea regress.
associated with dystocia and heavy bacterial contamination
Towards the end of metoestrus, as the corpora lutea start to
are also likely to predispose to infection. Uterine infection
regress, there is a concomitant rise in prolactin which is
may be acute, frequently involving all layers of the uterine
responsible for the overt signs of pseudopregnancy such as
wall
(metritis)
or chronic, usually involving
the
behavioural signs and mammary development and lacta-
endometrium (endometritis). The former may be fatal.
 Treatment of metritis includes the use of systemic antimi-
tion. Cabergoline reduces prolactin release and is used for
the treatment of overt pseudopregnancy in the bitch.
crobials such as potentiated sulphonamides, oxytetracy-
cline, or semisynthetic penicillins (see section 1.1),
agonist
 NSAIDs (see section 10.1), and supportive therapy. Chronic
(dopamine receptor stimulant), which inhibits prolactin
release from the anterior pituitary gland. Bromocriptine
infection involving the endometrium can be treated by the
commonly causes side-effects such as vomiting, anorexia,
intra-uterine infusion of broad-spectrum antimicrobials,
and behavioural changes, which may be severe.
admi nistered at the usual therapeutic dosage. In the cow, if a
 Metergoline is a serotonin agonist with actions similar to
corpus luteum is present, endometritis is best treated by
administration of prostaglandin F2 or an analogue.
bromocriptine; it is used to suppress lactation.
 In bitches, cystic endometrial hyperplasia and pyometra
most commonly occur in the luteal phase of the oestrous
CABERGOLINE
dilated cervix and vaginal discharge, dinoprost+ (see sec-
UK
tion 8.3) is administered at a dose of 250 micrograms/kg for
 Indications. Pseudopregnancy; suppression of lactation;
at least 5 days.It is contra-indicated in bitches with very
termination of pregnancy +; behavioural modification (see
enlarged uteri, animals with heart conditions, and patients
section 6. 11.11)
with *closed' pyometra. Side-effects occur within 15 min-
Contra-indications. Pregnant animals unless pregnancy
utes of administration and include panting, sali vation, vom-
ssdns ssn sie oi nn uogu
pe eisen ane sodas ssu unedum pue u
of lactation required; use directly after surgery while animal
cease within one hout.
still recovering from anaesthesia
In the UK, the Horserace Betting Levy Board publishes
Side-effects. Transient hypotension, occasionally vomit-
Codes of Practice on contagious equine metritis (CEM)
ing or anorexia, transient drowsiness
Klebsiella pneumoniae，Pseudomonas aeruginosa;equine
Warnings. Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1
viral arteritis (EVA); and equid herpesvirus-I（EHV-I),
8.8 Drugs for uterine infections 333
which include recommendations for disease prevention and
Dose. Catfle: by int ra-uierine administration, contents of one applicator.
control in breeding horses.
May be repeated after 7- 14 days 
POM Utocyl (Novartis) UK
UK
Pessaries, benzylpenicillin 62.7 mg, formosulphathiazole 1.75 g, streptormy-
POM Metricure (Irntervet) UK
cin (as sulfate) 50 rmg, for caffle
Intra-uterine suspension, cephapirin (as cephapirin benzathine) 500 mg, for
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle: slaughter 2 days, rmilk withdrawal period nil
caffle; dose applicator
Dose. Catle: by int ra-uterine administration, 6 pessaries for prophylaxis
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 2 days, milk withdrawal period nil
only
335
9
Drugs used in the treatment of disorders of the
URINARY SYSTEM
Contributor:
 In dogs and cats, the biochemical changes seen with chronic
P J Barber BVM&S, PhD, DSAM(Fel), DipECVIM-CA, MRCVS
renal failure may include azotaemia, hypoalbuminaemia,
hyperphosphataemia, metabolic acidosis, and changes in
9.1 Drugs used in the treatment of renal failure
9.2 Drugs for cystitis and urinary tract infection
plasma-sodium, -potassium, and -calcium concentrations,
accompanied by reduced urine concentrating ability. In
9.3 Drugs that alter urinary pH
horses, plasma-calcium concentration can be markedly
 9.4 Drugs for urinary retention and incontinence
elevated.
 9.5 Drugs for urolithiasis
Initial treatment of chronic renal failure, particularly if
accompanied by vomiting, diarrhoea, or dehydration may
9.1 Drugs used in the treatment of
require intravenous fluid therapy (see section 16.1.2).
Thereafter vomiting may be controlled by antiemetics such
renal failure
as histamine H,-receptor antagonists (see section 3.8.2),
metoclopramide (see section 3.4.1), or sucralfate (see sec-
The kidneys play a central role in maintaining and regulat-
tion 3.8.2) and diarrhoea with antidiarrhoeals (see section
ing fluid, acid-base, and electrolyte balance. They excrete
3.1). Alkalinisers (see section 16.1.2) may be used to con-
metabolic waste products including those of protein metab-
trol metabolic acidosis. Patients should be kept warm and
olism and are active in the production of erythropoietin,
comfortable and allowed unrestricted access to water
renin, and hydrox ylation of vitamin D. In renal impairment
(unless repeatedly vomiting).
the kidneys are unable to maintain normal function and the
consequences of reduced renal function are seen in many
The aim of treatment is to minimise the clinical and bio-
body sy sterms.
chemical consequences of reduced renal function.
Acute renal failure may result from severe cardiac and cir-
The diet should be assessed and changed according to the
culatory failure, extremes of temperature (heatstroke),
individual patient's needs. Dietary management of chronic
hypovolaemic and septic shock, prolonged anaesthesia,
ed ue sy se , eeoid us siney iei
bacterial infection, immune-mediated disease, hypercalcae-
to increase survival in both dogs and cats (see section 16.8).
mia, urinary tract obstruction, and drug or chemical induced
Azotaermic or uraemic animals require a diet containing
toxicity. The clinical signs of acute renal failure are depend-
restricted protein of high biological value and such diets
ent on the cause and severity of dysfunction and result from
may also be beneficial in animals with significant protein-
acute accumulation of uraemic toxins and dysregulation of
uria, although in all cases careful monitoring is required to
fluid, acid-base, and electrolyte balance. These are often
avoid the potential for malnutrition. The content of sodium
non-specific and may include anorexia, lethargy, polyuria to
and potassium in the diet should also be assessed on an indi-
anuria, vomiting, halitosis, oral ulceration, seizures, and
vidual patient basis. Oral potassium supplements (see sec-
dehydration.
tion 16.5.10) may be administered if necessary but should
The biochemical changes seen with acute renal failure
be used with care. Angiotensin-coniverting enizyme (ACE)
include azotaemia, hyperphosphataemia, metabolic acido-
inhibitors and potassium-sparing diuretics may potentiate
sis, and sodium, potassium, and chloride imbalances.
the risk of hyperkalaemia.
The phosphate retention seen in dogs and cats with chronic
renal failure leads to hypocalcaemia, decreased calcitriol
include correction of the fluid, acid-base and electrolyte
(active vitamin D) concentration, increased production of
imbalances, promotion of urine production, and the excre-
parathyroid hormone  (secondary renal hyperparathy-
tion of metabolic waste products. Rehydration, diuretics
roidism) and eventual parathyroid hyperplasia. Resorption
(furosemide  and mannitol)  and renal
vasodilators
of bone may occur (renal osteodystrophy) and soft tissue
(dopamine) have been suggested to restore adequate urine
calcification may result. Reduced dietary phosphorus is
output, although their efficacy in clinical cases of estab-
essential and special diets may be given (see section 16.8).
lished acute renal failure is controversial.
If necessary hyperphosphataemia may also be controlled by
Chronic renal failure results from primary glomerular,
the use of aluminium hydroxide (see section 3.8.1), which
tubular and interstitial diseases or combinations of these.
binds intestinal and dietary phosphorus. Oral calcitriol (see
Generalised renal neoplasia and chronic urinary outflow
section 16.6.4) may be used to control hypocalcaemia in
obstructions may also lead to chronic renal failure. The con-
some dogs and cats with renal disease.
Renal dysfunction affects the ability of the kidney to metab-
vitality, loss of body and coat condition, anorexia, polydip-
olise vitamin D, to its active form calcitriol, leading to
sia, polyuria, vomiting, uraemia, dehydration, oral ulcera-
reduced absorption of intestinal calcium and contributing to
tion, diarrhoea, secondary hyperparathyroidism,
and
secondary renal hyperparathyroidism. After hyperphospha-
anaemia. Hypertension may develop in some cases.
taemia has been controlled, in animals without hypercalcae.
336Urinary system
mia, active vitamin D supplements (see section 16.6.4) may
Immune-mediated glomerulonephropathies have beenl
be administered, although the efficacy of this form of ther-
treated with corticosteroids, such as prednisolone (see sec-
apy in renal hyperparathyoidism is controversial and close
tion 7.2.1) but there is no convincing evidence of their effi-
monitoring of plasma-calcium concentration is essential.
 cacy in this respect in domestic animals. Renal amyloidosis,
q a sa g  sdd uai
which can lead to protein losing nephropathy in dogs, cats
required to compensate urinary loss of water-soluble
and cattle, is difficult to treat and tends to cause progressive
vitamins.
renal damage. Dimethylsulphoxide (DMSO) and colchicine
If hypertension is confirmed, treatment with hypotensive
have both been suggested as treatments for renal amyloido-
drugs should be instituted. Usually ACE inhibitors (see sec-
sis although only limited data are available. Investigation
tion 4.3.1) are used in dogs and the dihydropyridine calcium
 and removal of any underlying inflammatory or neoplastic
channel blocker amlodipine (see section 4.4.1.4) is used in
disease is essential to the management of both immune-
cats. Independent of any effect on systemic blood pressure,
 mediated glomerulonephritis and amyloidosis.
ACE inhibitors have been shown to have a renoprotective
 Examination of renal biopsy material is required for diag-
effect by reducing glomerular capillary pressure, which
nostic confirmation of underlying glomerulonephropathies.
may prevent the intrinsic progression of chronic renal fail-
ure. The mechanism of this effect is unclear but may be
BENAZEPRIL HYDROCHLORIDE
haemodynamically mediated (by causing efferent arteriolar
UK
vasodilation) and via direct effects on the glomerular base-
Indications. Chronic renal failure in cats; congestive heart
ment membrane. Limited data are available on the efficacy
 of ACE inhibitors in the prevention of the progression of
failure (see section 4.3. 1); systemic hypertension+ (see sec-
tion 4.3.1)
naturally occurring chronic renal failure. Benazepril, unlike
 Contra-indications. Animals intended for breeding, preg-
enalapril, has significant hepatic metabolism and so may
nant or lactating animals; concurrent calcium channel
not require dose adjustment in renal failure.
blockers, beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs, diuretics, seda-
 In chronic renal failure, non-regenerative anaemia is mainly
tives, anaesthetics
caused by reduced renal production of erythropoietin. Epo-
Side-effects. Increased food intake and weight gain in cats
etin (recombinant human erythropoietin) may be used for
Warnings. Transient increase in plasma-creatinine concen-
treatment in dogs and cats, although due to the potential for
tration at start of treatment; plasma-urea and plasma-creati-
induction of anti-erythropoietin antibodies its use should be
nine concentrations should be monitored; Drug Interactions
restricted to those cases with clinical signs related to anae-
-see Appendix 1; safety in cats less than 2.5 kg body-
mia. Development of anti-erythropoietin antibodies may
weight has not been established
result in severe anaemia and treatment should be discontin-
Dose. Cats (more than 2.5 kg body-weight): by mouth,
ued if this is suspected. If hypertension is confirmed, epo-
0.5-1.0 mg/kg once daily
etin should not be used until the hypertension has been
controlled. The clinical efficacy of epoetin alfa and epoetin
POM Fortekor 2.5, 5 and 20 (Novartis) UK
beta is similar and they can be used interchangeably. Other
See section 4.3.1 for preparation details
factors that contribute to anaemia of chronic renal failure
such as iron or folate deficiency should also be corrected.
EPOETIN ALFA and BETA
Anabolic steroids (see section 7.3) may also be adminis-
(Recombinant human erythropoietin)
tered but their effectiveness in respect of anaemia caused by
UK
chronic renal failure is doubtful.
Indications. Anaemia associated with chronic renal failure
Clinicians should avoid administration of drugs that may
Contra-indications. Hypertenisiori; cases of anaemia where
there is likely to be pre-existing high concentration of
neys (see Prescribing in renal impairment).
endogenous
erythropoietin (for example, blood loss
Primary glomerulonephropathies may result in persistent
anaemia)
severe proteinuria and resultant hypoalbuminaemia, with
Side-effects. Some animals may develop an immune-
possible development of nephrotic syndrome, characterised
mediated response to the drug, which may reduce its effi-
by peripheral and body cavity fluid retention. Therapy that
cacy; local and systemic allergic reactions; develpment of
may reduce the magnitude of the proteinuria includes cau-
anti-erythropoietinantibodies
(discontinue treatment);
tious restriction of dietary protein intake and the admini stra-
erythrocytosis; hypertension
tion of ACE inhibitors. When fluid retention occurs,
Warnings. Regular haematological monitoring is required
diuretic therapy should be instituted using furosemide (see
to ensure that the PCV does not rise above normal
section 4.2.2) taking care not to exacerbate dehydration and
Dose. Dogs, cats: by subcutaneous injection, 50-100 units/
cause hypotension, and mainitained until after the oedema
kg 3 times weekly until packed cell volume is within nor-
and ascites have resolved. Consideration should also be
mal range. Then reduce to lowest effective dose or widen
given to the management of the hypercoagulable state
dosage initerval
caused by renal loss of the protein antithrombin Ill and
Note. The clinical efficacy of epoetin alfa and epoetin beta
uraemia.
is similar and they can be used interchangeably
9.2 Drugs for cystitis and urinary tract infection  337
POM Eprex (Janssen-Cilag) UK
with clavulanic acid, sulfadiazine and trimethoprim, and
fnjection, epoetin alf 1000 units, 2000 units, 3000 units, 4000 units, 5000
units, 6000 units, 8000 units, 10 000 units
fluoroquinolones.
Injection, epoetin alfa 40 000 units/mL
The urinary pH may affect the efficacy of antibacterials.
Note. May be difficult to obtain a supply of this preparatior
Erythromycin, streptomycin, sulfadiazine and trimetho-
POM) NeoRecormon (Roche) UK
prim, and fluoroquinolones are more effective at pH 8,
Injection, powder for reconstitution, epoetin beta 500 units, 1000 units, 2000
whereas penicillin, tetracycline, and nitrofurantoin are more
units, 5000 units, 10 000 units
active at pH 5.5.
Multidase injection, powder for recon stitution, epoetin beta 50 000 units,
The antimicrobial action of methenamine (hex amine) is due
100 000units
to formaldehy de, which is liberated during acid hydrolysis;
Note. May be difficult to obtain a supply of this preparation
low urinary pH is required.
9.2 Drugs for cystitis and urinary tract
9.3 Drugs that alter urinary pH
infection
Manipulation of urine pH requires normal renal function.
Changes in urine pH are generally relatively modest and are
Cystitis refers to inflammation of the bladder, which may be
sterile or result from a urinary tract infection (bacterial,
homoeostasis. Dietary management is the most frequent
viral, or fungal). It is important to distinguish urinary tract
and safest strategy for altering urine pH, drugs being used
infection from urinary tract inflammation, which may result
less commonly. Alteration of urine pH is indicated to
and urolithiais, as well as bacterial infection. Idiopathic cys-
titis is relatively common in young cats with lower urinary
the efficacy of a drug required to be active in urine, or in the
 management of certain types of urolithiasis. In all cases,
tract signs, but other causes of these signs should be
over-acidification or -alkalinisation should be avoided and
excluded by a thorough diagnostic inivestigation. Equally,
underlying inflammatory disease compromises urinary tract
acid-base and electrolytes, is required.
defence mechanisms and predisposes to urinary tract
infection.
9.3.1 Acidifiers
Idiopathic cystitis, especially in cats, is frequently self-lim-
iting although increasing water intake may decrease the fre-
Ascorbic acid, ammonium chloride, ammonium sulfate,
quency of recurrence of signs. A number of therapies have
ethylenediamine, methionine, or sodium acid phosphate
been suggested to manage these cases including behav-
may be used to acidify the urine. Acidifiers are used in the
ioural therapy, urethral antispasmodics, anti-inflammatory
dissolution and prevention of struvite calculi (see section
agents, amitriptyline and glycosaminoglycan supplements,
however definitive evidence for efficacy is lacking. It is
management of urinary tract infection to enhance antimi
crobial activity there is no evidence for efficacy of acidifi-
Cystaid, VetPlus) may replace the urothelial gly-
ers in the treatment of idiopathic cystitis.
cosaminoglycan layer, which is thought to be defective in
Ascorbic acid is inconsistent in lowering urinary pH and is
these cases.
usually unpalatable at the recommended dosages. Ammo-
Bacteria commonly implicated in urinary tract infections
nium sulfate is more palatable than ammonium chloride and
include Escherichia cofi and other coliforms, Proteus spp.,
has proved effective at the recommended dose.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Corynebacterium suis (pigs),
Corynebacterium renale (cattle), staphylococci, and strep-
tococci. Chronic, relapsing, or recurring infections should
ASCORBIC ACID
be investigated for underlying compromise of the systemic
UK
immune system or local defence mechanisms (complicated
Indications. Urine acidification; adjunct in the treatment of
urinary tract infections). Ascending infection may result in
paracetamol poisoning (see Treatment of poisoning)
-  (s e   
Dose. By mouth.
tion of the extent of infection is essential for the appropriate
Horses: 2 g/kg daily
management of cases.
Dogs: 100-500 mg 3 times daily
Treatment for acute, uncomplicated, lower urinary tract
Cats: 100 mg 3 times daily
infection (cystitis) usually requires a 10 to 14 day course of
a systemic antibacterial (see section 1.1) that is excreted
See section 16.6.3 for preparation details
unchanged by the kidneys. Chronic, complicated, and upper
urinary tract infections may require therapy for at least 3
weeks and possibly up to 6 weeks, with antibiotic selection
AMMONIUM CHLORIDE
based on bacterial culture and sensitivity testing, combined
UK
with eradication of any underlying cause. Effective drugs
Indications. Urine acidification
include amoxicillin, nitrofurantoin, cefalexin, amoxicillin
Dose. See preparation details
338Urinary system
Ammonium Chloride UK
9.4 Drugs for urinary retention and
Dose. By mouth.
Dogs: 100 rmg/kg I-2 tirmes daily
incontinence
Cats: 400 rmg/4.5 kg body-weight rwice daily with food. Adjust dose until
desired urinary pH change achieved
Urinary retention and incontinence may affect animals of
Uroeze (Arnolds) UK
all ages. Non-neurogenic causes include inherited lesions of
Oral powder, for addition to feed, armrmoniurm chloride 400 mg/650 rmg of
acquired conditions such as neoplasia or urinary calculi.
powder, for cats (650 mg of powder = % 5-mL spoonful)
 Neurological deficits may follow spinal trauma.
Contra-indications. Kittens; severe hepatic or renal irm pairment; acidosis
Side effects. May cause gastric irritation
Dose. Cats: by mouth, Cats: ya of 5-mL spoonful with food
or decreased accommodation of the urinary bladder, flac-
cidity of the urethral sphincter, or urethral incompetence.
AMMONIUM SULFATE
Bladder wall irritability leading to frequent micturition,
UK
which may be confused with incontinence, may be caused
Indications. Urine acidification
by cystitis (see section 9.2).
Rarely, idiopathic detrusor instability occurs and may
Dose. By mouth.
Horses: 175 mg/kg daily
respond to anticholinergic drugs. Propantheline is an
antimuscarinic drug, which reduces urinary urgency and
SODIUM ACID PHOSPHATE
frequency by diminishing unstable muscle contractions but
has a negligible effect on urethral sphincter pressure.
UK
Flaccidity of the urethral sphincter commonly affects
Indications. Urine acidification
ovariohysterectomised bitches and may be responsive to
Contra-indications. Hepatic or renal impairment; dehy dra-
oestrogen therapy (see section 8.2.1), which enhances the
tion; acidosis
sensitivity of the alpha-adrenoreceptors in the smooth mus
Warnings. Wash hands after handling the product
cle of the bladder neck and urethra to sympathetic stimuli.
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 1-2 tablets daily
Drugs used for treatment include oral estriol, a recently
POM Hexamine and Sodium Acid Phosphate Tablets (Arnolds) UK
introduced short acting natural oestrogen, and oral diethyl-
Tableis, rmethenarmine (hexarmine) 150 rmg, anhydrous rmonosodiurm phos-
stilbestrol at doses of up to 1.0 mg daily for 3 to 5 days, fol-
phate I16 rmg, for dogs
lowedby
weekly
treatment.
Alpha-adrerioreceptor
stimulants such as phenylpropanolamine may also be used
9.3.2 Alkalinisers
to improve urethral tone, either alone or in combination
Sodium bicarbonate, sodium citrate, and potassium cit-
with oestrogens. The dose of phenylpropanolamine should
be reduced if used concurrently with oestrogen therapy.
rate are used for urine alkalinisation. Alkalinisers are also
 Surgery may be necessary if medical treatment alone proves
used to manage some forms of urolithiasis (see section 9.5).
unsuccessful.
Excessive urinary retention that may lead to incontinence is
POTASSIUM CITRATE
caused by detrusor muscle paralysis or excessive urethral
UK
sphincter contraction. Paralysis of the bladder wall may
Indications. Urine alkalinisation for treatment of urinary
occur following spinal trauma, dysautonomia, or overdis-
tract infections; management of calcium oxalate, cystine,
tension of the bladder due to obstruction. Parasympathomi-
anid urate urolithiasis (see section 9.5)
metics, such as bethanechol, reproduce the effects of
Contra-indications. Renial or cardiac impairment
parasympathetic nerve stimulation; they possess the mus-
Dose. Dogs, cats: by mouth, 75 mg/kg twice daily or 2
carinic rather than the nicotinic effects of acetylcholine and
mmol/kg twice daily
improve voiding by increasing the tone and contractions of
PH Cystopurin (Roche Consurmer Health) UK
the detrusor muscle. Treatment should be initiated at the
Ora? powder, potassiurn citrate 3 g/sachet
lowest dose andincreasedafter 48 hours if no
CSL Potassium Citrate Mixture (BP) UK
improvement.
 Phenoxybenzamine and prazosin act by blocking alpha-
Oral solution, potassiurm citrate 30%, citric acid rmonohydrate 5%, contains
about 28 rmmol K+/10 mL
adrenoreceptors of the smooth muscle of the bladder neck
and proximal urethra allowing relaxation of the urethral
SODIUM BICARBONATE
sphincter. Oral diazepam (see section 6.9.2) may assist by
causing centrally mediated relaxation of the urethral skele-
UK
tal muscle and reduction of urethral resistance; the recom-
Indications. Urine alkalinisation
mended dose for dogs is 200 micrograms/kg (0.2 mg/kg) 3
Warnings. Avoid excessive sodium administration
Dose. Dogs, cats: by mouth, 10-50 mg/kg 2-3 times daily.
times daily and for cats is 1.25 to 5 mg/cat 3 times daily,
Adjust dose until desired urinary pH change achieved
although the duration of action is short lived. An alternative
drug is dantrolene, which acts peripherally and is used for
CSL ) Sodium Bicarbonate (Non-proprietary) UK
dogs and cats.
Capsules, sodiurm bicarbonate 500 mg
Many of the above drugs take some time to have a clinically
Tablets, sodium bicarbonate 600 mg
observable effect and treatment should be continued for up
9.4 Drugs for urinary retention and incontinence 339
to 3 to 4 weeks before deciding that the condition is unre-
PHENYLPROPANOLAMINE HYDROCHLORIDE
sponsive to a particular drug.
UK
Indications. Urinary incontinence secondary to urinary
sphincter incompetence
BETHANECHOL CHLORIDE
Contra-indications. Pregnant or lactating bitches; behav-
UK
ioural causes of inappropriate urination; concurrent non-
Indications. Urinary retention
selective monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Contra-indications. Urinary obstruction
Side-effects. Aggression; anorexia; hyperexcitability; leth-
Side-effects. Salivation, vomiting, diarrhoea
 argy; cardiac arrhythmias; collapse; hypertension; diarrhoea
Dose. By mouth.
Warnings. May produce clinical signs mimicking exces-
Horses: 50-100 micrograms/kg 2-3 times daily
sive stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system, hyper-
Dogs: 5-25 mg 3 times daily
Cats: 1.25-5.0 mg 3 times daily
caution in animals with cardiovascular disease, severe renal
POM Myotonine (Clenwood) UK
or hepatic impairment; diabetes mellitus, hyperadrenocorti-
Tableis, scored, bethanechol chloride 10 mg, 25 rmg
cism, glaucoma, hyperthyroidism or other metabolic dis-
eases; anatomical disorders contributing to incontinence in
bitches less than l year should be investigated before treat-
DANTROLENE SODIUM
ment; Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1; care with con-
UK
current administration of other sympathomimetic drugs,
anticholinergic drugs, tricyclic antidepressants, or type B
Indications. Urinary retention
Dose. Dogs, cats: by mouth, 2 mg/kg twice daily
monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Dose. By mouth. (Better absorption if animal fasted)
POM Dantrium (Proctor & Gamble Pharrm.) UK
Dogs: 1 mg/kg 3 times daily given with food
Capsules, darntrolene sodiurm 25 mg, 100 mg
Cats +: 1.0- 1.5 mg/kg twice daily
POM Propalin (Vetoquinol) UK
Syrup, phenylpropanolarmine hydrochloride 50 mg/mL, for dogs
ESTRIOL
PRAZOSIN
UK
Indications. Hormone-dependent urinary incontinence due
UK
to sphincter mechanism incontinence
Indications. Urinary
retention secondary to reflux
 Contra-indications. Intact bitches; animals showing poly-
dyssinergia
uria-poly dipsia syndrome
Contra-indications. Cardiovascular or renal disease
Side-effects. Occasionally swollenl vulva, swollen mam-
Side-effects. Hypotension
mary glands, attractiveness to males, and vomiting; rarely
Dose. By mouth.
vaginal bleeding
Dogs: (< 15 kg body-weight) 1 mg/dog 2-3 times daily;
Warnings. Animals should be re-examined every 6 months 
(> 15 kg body-weight) 2 mg/dog 2-3 times daily
Dose. By mouth. Dosage should be titrated according to
Cats : 0.25- 1.0 mg/cat 2-3 times daily
individual response. For guidance.
POMH Prazosin (Non-proprietary) UK
Dogs: initial dose, 1 mg daily. If response, reduce to 0.5 mg
Tablets, prazosin (as hydrochloride) 500 micrograrms, I mg, 2 rmg, 5 mg
daily or on alternate days. If no response to initial treatment,
2 mg once daily (maximum 2 mg/animal daily)
POMH Hypovase (Pfizer) UK
Fablets, prazosin (as hydrochloride) 500 rmicrograrms, I rmg, 2 rmg, 5 rmg
POM Incurin (Intervet)
Tablets, estriol I mg, for ovuriohysterectomised bitches
PROPANTHELINE BROMIDE
UK
 Indications. Urinary incontinence due to detrusor hyper-
PHENOXYBENZAMINE HYDROCHLORIDE
reflexia; adjunct in gastro-intestinal disorders characterised
UK
by smooth muscle spasm (see section 3.7); bradydysrhyth-
Indications. Urinary
/retentionsecondary
reflux
mias (see section 4.4.2)
dyssinergia
Contra-indications. Glaucoma, urinary obstruction
Contra-indications. Cardiovascular or renal disease
Side-effects. Dry mouth, increased intra-ocular pressure,
Side-effects. Hypotension
constipation, tachycardia
Dose. By mouth.
Dose. Urinary incontinence, by mouth.
Dogs: 0.25-0.5 mg/kg 2-3 times daily
Dogs: 400 micrograms/kg (0.4 mg/kg) 3-4 times daily
Cats: 0.5 mg/kg twice daily
Cats: 7.5 mg every 3 days
POM(H) Dibenyline (Goldshield) UK
POM Pro-Banthine (Hansam) UK
Capsules, phenoxybenzamine hydrochloride 10 mg
Fablets, s/c, propantheline brormide 15 rmg
340Urinary system
9.5 Drugs for urolithiasis
Side-effects. Predisposition to xanthine calculi
Warnings. Reduce dosage for patienits with renal impair-
 The management and treatment of urolithiasis will depend
merit
on the mineral composition and location of the urolith
Dose. Dogs: urate calculi, by mouth, 10 mg/kg 3 times
 present and may include surgery, dietary control, antibacte-
daily for 4 weeks then 10 mg/kg once daily
rial therapy, urinary acidifiers or alkalimisers in addition to
POM H Allopurinol (Non-proprietary) UK
specific drug therapy.
Tabiets, allopurinol 100 rmg, 300 mg
Struvite calculi may form when urease-positive bacteria
(especially Staphylococcus and Proteus) and high concen-
POM  Zyloric (GSK)
trations of magnesium or phosphate salts are present in the
Tablets, allopurinol 100 mg, 300 mg
bladder. Medical therapy includes appropriate antibacterials
PENICILLAMINE
(based on urine bacteriology and antibacterial sensitivity
testing) to eliminate bacteria, dietary control to reduce pro-
UK
 Indications. Cystine calculi; copper, mercury, and lead
nary acidifiers (see section 9.3.1).
 poisoning (see Treatment of poisoning); copper hepatotoxi-
Urate uroliths are more soluble in alkaline urine. Dietary
cosis (see section 3.10)
control to reduce protein intake and urine alkalinisers (see
Contra-indications. Concurrent administration of cyto-
section 9.3.2) are used as preventive treatment. Allopurinol
toxic drugs, phenylbutazone, and gold salts in dogs
reduces the formation of uric acid from purines by inhibit-
Side-effects.Anorexia,
vomiting:1
pyrexia;
nephrotic
ing xanthine oxidase.
syndrome
Penicillamine reacts with cystine to form a more soluble
Warnings. Penicillamine absorption decreased if concur-
sulfide compound that is more readily excreted. It is used as
rent administration with food, antacids, iron or zinc salts
an adjunct to dietary management and urinary alkalinisation
Dose. Dogs: cystine calculi, by mouth, 15 mg/kg twice
in the management of cystinuria. Penicillamine is best
daily preferably on an empty stomach. May be mixed with
given on an empty stomach because food interferes with its
food or daily dose divided if vomiting occurs (but absorp-
absorption. Common side-effects such as vomiting or diar-
tion may be impaired)
rhoea can be ameliorated by dividing the daily dose or by
POMH Penicillamine (Non-proprietary) UK
giving the drug with food.
Fablets, penicillarmine 125 mg, 250 mg
Thiazide diuretics (see section 4.2.1) may be used to reduce
 the recurrence of calcium-containing uroliths (for example,
POMH Distamine (Alliance)UK
Tablets, f/c, penicillamine 125 rmg, 250 mg
calcium oxalate calculi) in dogs. Patients undergoing
chronic thiazide therapy should be monitored for adverse
COMPOUND PREPARATIONS FOR
effects such as dehydration, hypokalaemia, and hypercal-
UROLITHIASIS
caemia. Thiazide diuretics are not currently recommended
for prophylaxis of feline calcium oxalate urolithiasis. Die-
UK
tary management and potassium citrate have also been used
POM Walpoles Buffer Solution (Arnolds) UK
in the control of calcium oxalate urolithiasis.
Solution, sodiurm acetate 1.17%, glacial acetic acid to pH 4.5, for male cats
Use undiluted to irrigate bladder by bladder lavage
Indications. Acute urethral obstruction due to struvite calculi
ALLOPURINOL
Contra-indications. Bladder injection
Warnings. Irritant
UK
Indications. Urate calculi; leishmaniosis (see section
1.4.7)
341
10
 Drugs used in the treatment of disorders of the
MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM and JOINTS
Contributors:
10.1 Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
Professor P Lees CBE, BPharm, PhD, DSc, CBiol, FIBiol, ILTM, Hon
Assoc RCVS, Dr hc (Gent), HonFellowECVPT
drugs
T S Mair BVSc, PhD, DEIM, DESTS, DipECEIM, MRCVS
Mechanism of action and pharmacokinetics. Almost all
10.1
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are weak
10.2
Corticosteroids
carboxylic or enolic acids. They are central and peripheral
10.3
Chrondroprotective compounds
analgesics, antipyretics, and have peripheral and central
10.4
Topical anti-inflammatory preparations
anti-inflammatory activity. Most act primarily by inhibiting
10.5
Cytotoxic immunosuppressants
cyclo-oxygenase leading to reduced synthesis of prosta-
10.6
Gold
glandins and related compounds. This mechanism probably
10.7
 Treatment of navicular disease
However, many studies have shown a number of additional
actions, including inhibition of superoxide radical genera-
Many classes of drugs are used to suppress or abolish one or
tion, inhibition of bradykinin action, blockade of lysosomal
more of the cardinal signs of acute inflammation (heat, red-
 and non-lysosomal enzyme release, inhibition of metallo-
ness, swelling, pain, and loss of function) in soft tissues and
proteinases, inhibition of release of pro-inflammatory
 joints. The principal value of these drugs is to relieve pain
cytokines and suppression of activation of the transcription
and reduce swelling.
factor NFkB, which may contribute to the therapeutic
effects. Studies have also revealed actionis of NSAIDs at the
Arthritis involves inflammation of certain vascularised tis-
spinal level, in particular analgesic actions that reduce the
sues and changes in other tissues of the joint, which may
CNS sensitisation, which occurs as a result of peripheral
result in pain. The inciting cause may be infecti ve, immune-
inflammation or trauma.
mediated, drug-induced, or due to trauma caused by sur-
Much recent interest has focused on demonstration of the
gery, injury, or poor conformation. Septic arthritis may
existence of two cyclo-ox ygenase isoforms. COX 1 is a con-
occur due to a localised or systemic infection. Infective
stitutive enzyme which is thought to subserve a range of
agents include Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae,Mycoplasma
physiological roles, inhibition of which accounts for the
spp, Streptococcus spp., Staphylococcus aureus, and Actin-
major toxic effects of NSAIDs. COX2 is predominantly an
omyces pyogenes. Dependent on the causative agent, anti-
inducible isoform, produced at inflammatory sites to genier-
bacterial drugs used for treatment include lincomycin,
ate inflammatory mediators, although COX2 is constitu-
tylosin, tiamulin, gentamicin, and oxytetracycline (see sec-
tively present in some tissues such as the kidney. Potency
tion 1.1). Vaccination against erysipelas (see sections 18.2.6
ratios for the inhibition of COX1:COX2 vary widely being
and 18.3.6) is available.
low for aspirin, naproxen, and piroxicam and higher for car-
Various drugs are used in the management of musculoskele-
 profen, etodolac, meloxicam, and nabumetone. The devel-
tal and joint disorders. These include anti-inflammatory
opment of selective COx2 antagonists has led to the
drugs, which interfere with the synthesis, release, or action
introduction of deracoxib. Selective inhibition of COX2
of mediators and modulators of inflammation and cartilage
 improves gastro-intestinal tolerance.
There is evidence that COX1:COX2 potency ratios may, for
metabolism. These mediators and modulators include sev-
eral cytokines, histamine, bradykinin, prostaglandins, leu-
several NSAIDs, vary betweenl species. Also limited evi-
kotrienes,
platelet-acti vating
factor,
dence is available for a proposal that COx1, as well as
complement
components, a range of lysosomal and non-lysosomal
COX2, may contribute to prostaglandin production at sites
enzymes, nitric oxide, and oxygen-derived free radicals.
of inflammation. Tepoxalin is relatively selective for the
COX1 isoform but also blocks 5-lipox ygenase and is there-
The many mediators that are implicated in acute and
fore descri bed as a dual inhi bitor. There is evidence in labo-
antagonistically. Anti-inflammatory drugs that antagonise
ratory animals that selective COX2 inhibitors do not cause
the action or release of a single mediator or group of media-
gastro-intestinal ulcers but may delay the healing of exist-
tors often suppress, but do not abolish, inflammatory
ing ulcers. The discovery of a third COX isoform, COX3
changes.
(actually a splice variant of COxl) in dog brain, the func-
Other agents used for conditions involving the muscu-
tional significance of which is yet to be determined but
loskeletal system and joints are *chondroprotective agents',
which may be preferentially inhibited by paracetamol, is of
which are also described as disease modifying agents.
interest. In human medicine, there has been the develop-
These compounds possibly retard the degradation and may
ment of nitroso NSAIDs, niovel compounds that release
promote the synthesis of cartilage matrix components in
nitric oxide and the parent NSAID in vivo and which have
joinits.
improved gastro-intestinal tolerance.
342Musculoskeletal system
Carprofen is considered a weak cyclo-oxygenase inhibitor
are recommended for use pre-operatively are carprofen and
in some species. Although the principal mechanism of
meloxicam.
action is unknown it may not be atributable to cyclo-oxy-
Differences in anti-inflammatory and analgesic effects
genase inhibition in horses and dogs.
between different NSAIDs are small, but there is considera-
Some NSAIDs, such as the 2-arylpropionic acid subgroup
 ble variation in indi vidual patient tolerance and response.
including carprofen, ketoprofen, and vedaprofen, contain a
 NSAIDs may ameliorate symptoms of endotoxic shock, for
sinigle chiral centre and therefore exist as two enantiomeric
example, in peracute mastitis and equine colic. Flunixin,
forms: R(-) and S(+). Such products are effectively drug
ketoprofen, carprofen, meloxicam, and tolfenamic acid
combinations, since the pharmacodynamic properties of the
have been used to reduce morbidity and mortality in calf
enantiomers may differ markedly from each other and there
are also significant species differences in enantiomer phar-
is authorised for use in the treatment of diarrhoea in calves.
macokinetics. Non-chiral NSAID pharmacokinetics also
 NSAIDs are also used to reduce pain in equine colic.
differ markedly between species, and dosing intervals for
Aspirin, unlike other NSAIDs, combines with COXl cova-
lently to produce irreversible enzyme blockade and thus
Most NSAIDs are well absorbed following administration
prevents the production of thromboxane by platelets. Vas-
by mouth, although drug-induced gastric irritation in dogs
cular endothelial cells, unlike platelets, are able to regener-
and cats may lead to persistent vomiting, particularly with
ate cyclo-oxygenase, and so produce prostacyclin, which
certain drugs such as ibuprofen, indomethacin, flunixin, and
has an anti-aggregati ve effect. This action has been utilised
aspirin. Absorption following oral administration may be
prevent platelet aggregation in thrombo-embolic
delayed in ruminants and, in horses, the formulation may
disor ders.
profoundly affect oral bioavailablity; absorption being
The pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of NSAIDs
reduced for some oil-based products. Parenteral formula-
vary between species, leading to inter-species differences in
tions of some drugs and compound analgesic preparations
dosage requirements. In general, the dosage interval should
may be given by subcutaneous, intramuscular, or intrave-
be increased in neonates and aged animals to avoid toxicity.
nous injection but phenylbutazone is too irritant for injec-
Side-effects.Toxicity of NSAIDs varies with the species,
tion by non-vascular routes. With the exception of sodium
the individual animal within the species, and the individual
salicylate, NSAIDs are highly bound to plasma proteins,
 drug and is therefore not readily predictable. The main side-
commonly in excess of 99%, which limits extravascular
effects of NSAIDs are gastro-intestinal irritation and ulcera-
penetration. However, penetration into acute inflammatory
tion, and renal failure. Lesions may occur throughout the
exudate is generally good and persistent partly because exu-
gastro-intestinal tract and high doses may lead to a life-
date is rich in ex travasated plasma protein.
threatening plasma protein-losing enteropathy in horses.
Lesions may occur after parenteral or oral administration
Clinical use. NSAIDs are used for their analgesic and anti-
and may be more prevalent in patients given NSAIDs in
oedematous actions in acute inflammatory
conditions
conjunction with corticosteroids. Treatment (see section
including postoperative pain and control of joint pain in
3.8.2) includes the H,-antagonists ranitidine or cimetidine,
various arthritides, particularly osteoarthritis.
the prostaglandin E, analogue misoprostol, or ‘proton
In recent years increasing attention has been given to the
pump’ inhibitors such as omeprazole. NSAIDs can induce
perioperative use of NS AIDs to control postoperative pain.
 direct renal papillary necrosis, or renal failure if adminis-
Drugs such as flunixin, carprofen, meloxicam, and ketopro-
tered in dehydrated, hypovolaemic, or hypotensive animals
fen have been shown to provide very effective postopera-
(see above).
tive analgesia comparable to, and sometimes better than,
Other side-effects include vomiting, blood dyscrasias,
some opioid analgesics. Analgesics (opioids and NSAIDs)
delayed blood clotting, hepatotoxicity due to cholestatic
have beeni shown to be more effective if administered prior
and parenchymal cell damage, and occasionally skin rashes.
to the onset of surgery. NSAIDs that are potert cyclo-oxy-
Some NSAIDs, such as aspirin, have beenn shown to be tera-
genase inhibitors, for example flunixin, can occasionally
togenic in animal studies. Some NSAIDs inhibit proteogly-
precipitate acute renal failure, most notably in dogs and
can synthesis particularly when increased, for example, in
cats. This is due to the fact that under anaesthesia, if there is
osteoarthritis. Howevet, carprofen increased proteoglycan
a degree of relative or absolute hypovolaemia, or if there is
synthesis in studies using equine and canine chondrocytes
hypotension, locally produced prostaglandins help to main-
and explants in vitro and this drug has also reduced carti
tain renal afferent arteriolar dilation. The admimistration of
a potent inhibitor of cyclo-oxygenase can remove the pro-
dogs.
tective effect of these prostaglandins, and leave the kidney
There is relatively little difference between NSAIDs in
vulnerable to damage. In these situations, the choice of a
terms of anti-inflammatory or analgesic efficacy, the choice
of NSAID should therefore depend on the incidence of side-
COX2 inhibitor is preferable, although the potential for
effects associated with use of the drug. However, unfortu-
renotoxicity of COX2 inhibition remains to be explored.
nately, there is insufficient information on the clinical
Most NSAIDs caninot be recommended for use until the
incidence of side-effects associated with NSAID use in
patient has regained consciousness. In dogs, NSAIDs that
animals.
10.1 Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs  343
ASPIRIN
Cats: by subcutaneous or intravenous injection,4 mg/kg as
(Acetylsalicylic acid)
a single dose given preoperatively
UK
POM Norocarp (Norbrook) UK
Tablets, carprofen 20 rmg, 50 mg, 100 mg, for dogs
Indications. Inflammation and pain; thrombo-embolic dis-
orders (see section 4.6)
POM Rimadyl Granules (Pfizer) UK
Contra-indications. See under Carprofen, treatment before
Oral granules, carprofen 210 mg/sachet, for horses, ponies
regaining consciousness after any general anaesthesia
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurman con 
Side-effects. Warnings. See under Carprofen
surm ption
Dose. Horses: by addition to a small amount of feed, I sachet/300 kg
Dose. By mouth.
Horses: 25 mg/kg twice daily
POM Rimadyl Large Animals Solution (Pfizer) U/K
Dogs: inflammation and pain, 10 mg/kg twice daily
injection, carprofen 50 mg/mL, for horses, ponies, catle less than 12
monthsofuge
Cats: inflammation and pain, 10 mg/kg on alternate days
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmar corl -
Thrombo-embolic disorders: up to 75 mg every 3 days
surmption. Catfe: slaughter 2l days, should not be used in cattle producing
milk for hurman con sumption
P  Aspirin (Non-proprietary) UK
Tablets, aspirin 75 rmng, 300 mg
POM Rimadyl Small Animal Injection (Pfizer) U/K
Tablets, dispersible, aspirin 75 mg, 300 mg
Injction, carprofen 50 mg/mL, for dogs, cats
Note. GSL if pack size 32 or less; POM if pack size I00 or rmnore
Note. Store unopened vial in refrigerator at 2-8°C; broached vial stable at up
[o 25°℃ for 28 days
GSL Rheumatine (Sherley's) UK
Tablets, scored, aspirin I20 mg,foradult dogs
POM Rimadyl Tablets (Pfizer) U/K
Contra-indications. Cats; pregnant bitches
Tablet5, scored, carprofen 20 mg, 50 rmg, 100 rmg, for dogs
Dose. I-3 tablets 3 tirmes daily given with a milky drink or food
POM Rimadyl Palatable Tablets (Pfizer) U/K
Tablets, scored, carprofen 20 mg, 50 rmg, 100 rmg, for dogs
Note. Due to palatable ralure, store in secure location
CARPROFEN
UK
Indications. Inflammation and pain; respiratory disease in
cattle (in combination with antibacterials)
Contra-indications. Patients with cardiac, renal, or hepatic
ELTENAC
disease, where there is the possibility of gastro-intestinal
ulceration or bleeding, hypersensitivity to the drug: blood
UK
dyscrasias, treatment with other NSAIDs concurrently or
within 24 hours; racehorses prior to racing; pregnant
 Indications. Inflammation 
 Contra-indications. Patients with cardiac, renal, or hepatic
animals
disease, where there is the possibility of gastro-intestinal
 Side-effects. Prolonged use may cause gastro-intestinal
lesions, inappetence, vomiting, and diarrhoea; rarely tran-
ulceration or bleeding, hypersensiti vity to the drug; blood
dyscrasias, treatment with other NSAIDs concurrently Or
sient swelling at injection site
within 24 hours; racehorses prior to racing; cattle, dogs;
Warnings. Caution with use in animals less than 6 weeks
of age, or aged animals; avoid use in dehydrated, hypovol-
pregnant mares; treatment before regaining consciousness
aemic, or hypotensive patients; avoid concurrent adminis-
anaesthesia; endotoxic or septic shock associated with gas-
has not been established; Drug Interactions - Appendix 1
tric torsion
Side-effects. Prolonged use may cause gastro-intestinal
(NSAIDs); patients on long-term treatment should be moni-
lesions, inappetance, vomiting, and diarrhoea
tored; concurrent antibacterials should be gi ven if bacterial
Warnings. Caution with use in animals less than 6 weeks
infection present
of age, or aged animals; avoid use in dehydrated, hypovol-
Dose.
Horses, ponies: by mouth, 700 micrograms/kg (0.7 mg/kg)
beenestablished;Drug Interactions-
Appendix
once daily for up to 4 or 9 days
1
(NSAIDs); avoid concurrent administration of potentially
by intravenous injection, 700 micrograms/kg (0.7 mg/kg) as
nephrotoxic drugs, plasma-protein bound drugs; patients on
a single dose. Repeat after l day if required
 long-term treatment should be monitored; concurrent anti-
Cattle:by subcutaneous or intravenous injection,1.4 mg/kg
 bacterials should be given if bacterial infection present
as a single dose
Dose. Horses: by intravenous injection, 500 micrograms/
Dogs: by mouth, 24 mg/kg daily as a single dose or in
kg (0.5 mg/kg) once daily for up to 5 days
divided doses for 7 days then 2 mg/kg once daily
by subcutaneous or intravenous injection, 4 mg/kg as a sin-
POM Telzenac (Schering-Plough) U/K
gle dose given preoperati vely. A further dose of 2 mg/kg
injection, eltenac 50 rmg/mL, for horses
may be given during 24 hours perioperatively
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmar
consurn ption
344Musculoskeletal system
FLUNIXIN
POM Finadyne Solution (Schering-Plough) U/K
Injetion, flunixin (as rmeglumine) 50 mg/mL,for horses, cattle
See section 1.1 for combination flunixin and antibacterial
Withdrawal Periods.Horses: slaughter 7days. Catfe: slaughter 5 days, milk
preparations
12hours
UK
POM Flunixin Injection (Norbrook) U/K
Injetion,flurixin(as rmeglumine) 50mg/mL,forhorses,catle
Indications. Inflammation and pain; respiratory disease in
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter 28 days. Casle: slaughter 14 days,
rmilk 2 days
cattle; mastitis in cattle, endotoxic shock; equine colic
Contra-indications. Patients with cardiac, renal, or hepatic
POM Hexasol LA (Norbrook) UK
disease, where there is the possibility of gastro-intestinal
See section l.1.2 for preparation details
ulceration or bleeding, hypersensitivity to the drug; blood
dyscrasias, treatment with other NSAIDs concurrently or
POM Meflosyl5 % Injection (Fort Dodge) UK
(njection, flunixin (as rmeglurmine) 50 rmg/mL, for horses, catfle
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter 7 days. Cafle: slaughter 7 days, milk
or bitches; treatment before regaining consciousness after
1.5 days
any general anaesthesia
Side-effects. Prolonged use may cause gastro-intestinal
lesions, inappetence, vomiting, and diarrhoea
Warnings. Caution with use in animals less than 6 weeks
KETOPROFEN
 of age, or aged animals; avoid use in dehydrated, hypovol-
aemic, or hypotensive patients; avoid concurrent adminis-
UK
tration of potentially nephrotoxic drugs, warfarin,
Or
Indications. Inflammation and pain
plasma-protein bound drugs; safety in pregnant animals has
Contra-indications. Patients with cardiac, renal, or hepatic
not been established; Drug Interactions -
Appendix
1
disease, where there is the possibility of gastro-intestinal
(NSAIDs); patients on long-term treatment should be moni-
ulceration or bleeding, hypersensiti vity to the drug; blood
tored; concurrent antibacterials should be gi ven if bacterial
dyscrasias, treatment with other NSAIDs concurrently Or
within 24 hours; racehorses 15 days prior to racing; preg-
ally recommended due to pain-masking effects
nant animals, treatment before regaining consciousness
Dose.
after any general anaesthesia
Horses: musculoskeletal disorders, by mouth or by slow
Side-effects. Prolonged use may cause gastro-intestinal
 intravenous injection, 1.1 mg/kg once daily for up to 5 days
lesions, inappetence, vomiting, and diarrhoea; transient
Equine colic, by intravenous injection, l.1 mg/kg (see
swelling at injection site in dogs and cats
Warnings above)
Warnings. Caution with use in animals less than 6 weeks
Endotoxaemia, by slow intravenous injection, 250 micro-
 of age, or aged animals; avoid use in dehydrated, hypovol-
grams/kg (0.25 mg/kg) 3-4 times daily
aemic, or hypotensive patients; safety in pregnancy has not
Cattle: acute inflammatory conditions, by sfow intravenous
been established; Drug I
Interactions
Appendix
1
injection, 2.2 mg/kg once daily for up to 5 days
(NSAIDs); avoid concurrent administration of potentially
Dogs: musculoskeletal disorders, post-operative pain and
nephrotoxic drugs or plasma-protein bound drugs; patients
inflammation, by subcutaneous injection, 1 mg/kg daily for
on long-term treatment should be monitored; concurrent
up to 3 days
antibacterials should be gi ven if bacterial infection present
Endotoxic shock,by stow intravenous injection,1 mg/kg up
Dose.
to twice daily for a maximum of 3 doses
Horses: musculoskeletal disorders, by intravenous injec-
tion, 2.2 mg/kg once daily for 3-5 days
POM Binixin Injection 5% (Bayer) UK
injection,flunixin (as meglumine) 50 mg/mL, for horses, catle
Equine colic, by intravenous injection, 2.2 mg/kg. Repeat
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurman cor -
dose once only
surmption. Cale: slaughter 7 days, milk 12 hours 
Cattle: by intramuscular or intravenous injection, 3 mg/kg
POM Cronyxin (Bimeda) UK
once daily for up to 3 days
Ijenxna0mm,fe
Pigs: by intramuscutar injection, 3 mg/kg as a single dose
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurman cor -
Dogs: by mouth, 1 mg/kg once daily for up to 5 days
surmption. Catle: slaughter 8 days, rmilk 12 hours 
by subcutaneous,intramuscular,or intravenous injection,
POM Finadyne Granules (Schering-Plough) U/K
2 mg/kg once daily for up to 3 days
Oral granules, for addition to feed, flunixin (as rmeglurmine) 25 mg/g, for
Cats : by mouth, 1 mg/kg once daily for up to 5 days
horses
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter 7 days
by subcutaneous injection, 2 mg/kg onice daily for up to
3 days
POM Finadyne Injection for Dogs (Schering-Plough) UK
Injection,flunixin (as meglumine) t0 mg/mL, for dogs
POM Ketofen (Merial) UK
Tableis, scored, ketoprofen 5 rmg,for dogs, cfs
POM Finadyne Paste (Schering-Plough) UK
Tabesf
Oral paste, flunixin (as meglumine) I l0 mg/division, for horses; metered-
dose applicator
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurman
POM Ketofen 1% (Merial) U/K
Injection, ketoprofen 10 mg/mL, for dogs, cats
consumptior
10.1 Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs  345
POM Ketofen 10 % (Merial) U/K
ment should be monitored; concurrent anti bacterials should
Injection, ketoprofen 100 mg/mL, for horses, cattle, pigs
be given if bacterial infection present
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter I day. Catfle: slaughter I day (by
intravenous injection), 4 days (by intrarmuscular injection), milk withdrawal 
Dose.
period nil. Pigs: 4 days
Cattle: by subcutaneous or intravenous injection, 500
micrograms/kg (0.5 mg/kg) as a single dose
MECLOFENAMIC ACID
Pigs: by intramuscular injection, 400 micrograms/kg (0.4
mg/kg) as a single dose
UK
Dogs: by mouth or by addition to food, 200 micrograms/kg
Indications. Inflammation and pain
(0.2 mg/kg) as a single dose for 1 day then 100 micrograms/
Contra-indications. Patients with cardiac, renal, or hepatic
kg (0.1 mg/kg) once daily. Should be given soon after feed-
disease; where there is the possibility of gastro-intestinal
ing when gi ven by mouth.
ulceration or bleeding; hypersensitivity to the drug; blood
by subcutaneous injection, 200 micrograms/kg (0.2 mg/kg)
dyscrasias; treatment with other NSAIDs, aminoglycosides,
as a single dose
Or methoxyflurane anaesthesia concurrently or within 24
Cats: by subcutaneous injection, 300 micrograms/kg (0.3
hours; concurrent warfarin treatment; racehorses 8 days
mg/kg) as a single dose
prior to racing; treatment within 5 days of administration of
 prostaglandins for breeding purposes; pregnant or lactating
POM Metacam 1.5% Oral Suspension (Boehringer Ingelheim) UK
Ora suspension, meloxicarm 1.5 mg/mL,for dogs (I drop = 50 micrograms)
animals
Side-effects. Prolonged use may cause gastro-intestinal
POM Metacam 5 mg/ml Solution for Injection (Boehringer IngeIheirm) U/K
lesions, inappetence, vomiting, and diarrhoea, colic; tran-
Injetion, meloxicam 5 mg/mL, for dogs, cats
sient swelling at injection site in dogs and cats
Warnings. Caution with use in animals less than 6 weeks
DK
of age, or aged animals; avoid use in dehydrated, hypovol-
injection,eloxicam20 m/mL,forcate,is
aemic, or hypotensive patients; safety in pregnancy has not
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter I5 days, milk 5 days. Pigs: slaughter 5
been established; Drug Interactions
Appendix
1
days
(NSAIDs); avoid concurrent administration of potentially
nephrotoxic or plasma-protein bound drugs; patients on
NIMESULIDE
long-term treatment should be monitored
UK
Dose. Horses: by mouth, 2.2 mg/kg once daily for 5-7
Indications. Inflammation and pain
days, then adjust dose frequency to suit each individual
Contra-indications. Patients with cardiac, renal, or hepatic
patient if further treatment is necessary
disease; where there is the possibility of gastro-intestinal
ulceration or bleeding, hypersensiti vity to the drug; blood
POM Arquel V Granules (Pfizer)
dyscrasias, pregnant or lactating bitches; puppies less than 4
Withdrawal Periods. Should mot be used in horses intended for hurman
months of age and less than 3.5 kg body-weight; cats
consurmption
Side-effects. Vomiting; diarrhoea; haematochezia; inappe-
tence; lethargy; discoloration of serum and urine
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 5 mg/kg once daily for 3-5 days
MELOXICAM
POM Zolan (Virbac) UK
UK
Tablets, scored, nirmesulide 50 mg, I00 mg, for dogs more than 3.5 kg body-
Indications. Inflammation and pain; respiratory disease,
weight
mastitis in cattle, diarrhoea in calves
Contra-indications. Patients with cardiac, renal, or hepatic
PHENYLBUTAZONE
ulceration or bleeding: hypersensitivity to the drug; blood
UK
dyscrasias; treatment with other NSAIDs, corticosteroids,
Indications. Inflammation and pain
or anticoagulants concurrently or within 24 hours; treatment
Contra-indications. Patients with cardiac, renal, or hepatic
of diarrhoea irn calves less than one week of age; cats less
 disease; where there is the possibility of gastro-intestinal
than 2 kg body-weight
ulceration or bleeding: hypersensitivity to the drug; blood
Side-effects. Prolonged use may cause gastro-intestinal
dyscrasias; treatment with other NSAIDs concurrently Or
lesions, inappetence, vomiting, and diarrhoea; transient
within 24 hours; treatment before regaining consciousness
swelling at injection site
after any general anaesthesia; thyroid disease
Warnings. Caution with use in animals less than 6 weeks
Side-effects. Prolonged use may cause gastro-intestinal
Of age, or aged animals; avoid use in dehydrated, hypovol-
lesions, inappetence, vomiting, and diarrhoea; occasional
aemic, or hypotensive patients; safety in pregnancy has not
 oedema of limbs
been established; Drug
Interactions
Appendix
1
Warnings. Caution with use in animals less than 6 weeks
(NSAIDs); avoid concurrent administration of potentially
of age, or aged animals; avoid use in dehydrated, hypovol-
nephrotoxic
drugs, anticoagulants,
aminogl ycosides,
aemic, or hypotensive patients; safety in pregnancy has not
plasma-protein bound drugs; patients on long-term treat-
beenl
1established;Drug
Interactions
Appendix
346Musculoskeletal system
(NSAIDs); avoid concurrent administration of potentially
 SUXIBUZONE
nephrotoxic drugs, aminoglycosides, methoxyflurane
Indications. Inflammation and pain
anaesthesia, or plasma-protein bound drugs; patients on
 Contra-indications. Patients with cardiac or hepatic dis-
long-term treatment should be monitored; concurrent anti-
ease, where there is the possibility of gastro-intestinal ulcer-
bacterials should be given if bacterial infection present;
ation or bleeding: dehydrated, hypovolaemic,
OT
coated tablets should not be broken or crushed
hypotensive patients; treatment with other NSAIDs or corti-
Dose. Dosages vary. For guidanice.
costeroids concurrently; concurrent or prior feeding of hay;
Horses: by mouth, 4.4 mg/kg twice daily on day 1 then 2.2
competi tion horses
mg/kg twice daily for 2-4 days, followed by 2.2 mg/kg
Side-effects. Gastro-intestinal changes after continuous
daily or on alternate days
use or use at high dosage
by slow intravenous injection, 4.4 mg/kg as a single dose
Warnings. Caution with use in animals less than 12 weeks
ponies: by mouth, 4.4 mg/kg on alternate days
 A sa) I xudd - s a 
by stow intravenous injection, 4.4 mg as a single dose
delay the absorption of suxibuzone; safety in pregnant and
Dogs: by mouth, dosages vary, see manufacturer's informa-
lactating animals has not been established; suxibuzone is a
tion. Reduce to lowest effective dose
prohibited substance under international equine competition
Cats: by mouth, 25 mg 1-2 times daily for up to 7 days.
rules
Then reduce dose to 25 mg daily or on alternate days
Dose. By mouth, given in a small amount of feed.
Horses: 12.5 mg/kg daily in 2 divided doses for 2 days then
POM Companazone 25 (Arnolds) UK
Tableis, s/c, phenylbutazone 25 rmg, for dogs, cats
6.25 mg/kg daily in 2 divided doses for 3 days, then 3.1 mg/
kg daily or on alternate days, then reduce to lowest effective
POM Equipalazone Powder (Arnolds) UK
dose
Oral powder, for addition to feed, phenylbutazone I g/sachet, for horses,
Ponies: 6.25 mg/kg daily in 2 divided doses for 2 days thenl
ponies
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmarl
3.1 mg/kg daily or 6.25 mg/kg on alternate days, then
consumption
reduce to lowest effective dose
POM Danilon Equidos (Jarn ssen) U/K
Injection, phenyIbutazone 200 rmg/mL, for horses, ponies
Ora granules,foraddition to feed, suxibuzone 150 mg/g,forhorses, ponies
Withdrawal Periods. Should rot be used in horses intended for hurman
Withdrawal Periods. Should mot be used in horses, ponies intended for
consurmption
hurman cor surm ption
POM Equipalazone Paste E-PP (Arnolds) UK
Oral paste, phenylbutazone l g/division, for horses, ponies; rmetered-dose
applicator
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmarl
consumptior
POM Phenylbutazone (Loveridge) UK
TEPOXALIN
Tablets, s/c, phenylbutazone 100 mg, for dogs 5-20 kg body-weighf
Indications. Inflammation and pain
Tablets, s/c, phenylbutazone 200 mg,for dogs more than 20kg body-weight;
Contra-indications. Patients with cardiac or hepatic dis-
POM Pro-Dynam Powder (LEO) UK
ease, where there is the possibility of gastro-intestinal ulcer-
Oral powder, for addition to feed (bran or oats), phenylbutazone I g/sachet,
ation or bleeding, hypersensitivity to the drug; dehydrated,
foc horses
hypovolaemic, or hypotensive patients; treatment with
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmar
other NSAIDs or corticosteroids concurrently; pregnant or
consurmption
Contra-indications. Feeding of hay concurrently or irmrmediately prior to
lactating bitches; bitches intended for breeding: admi nistra-
treatrment
tion in water or feed
Side-effects. Vomiting; diarrhoea; occasional alopecia and
PIROXICAM
erythema; haematochezia; inappetence; lethargy
Warnings. Caution with use in animals less than 6 months
UK
of age and less than 3 kg body-weight, or aged animals;
Indications. Transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder in
caution in animals with renal impairment; Drug Interactions
saop
-Appendix 1 (NSAIDs); avoid concurrent administration
Dose.Dogs: by mouth,300 micrograms/kg (0.3 mg/kg)
of diuretics, anticoagulants, or plasma-protein bound drugs;
once daily
operator should ensure hands are dry before handling
POMH Piroxicam (Non-proprietary) UK
product
Capsuies, piroxicam 10 mg, 20 mng
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 10 mg/kg administered within 1-2
hours after feeding. (Maximum duration of treatment 4
POM Brexidol (Trinity) UK
weeks)
Tablets, scored, piroxicarm (as betadex) 20 mg
POM Feldene (Pfizer) UK
POM Zubrin Oral Lyophilisates for Dogs (Schering-Plough) UK
-pg x    sop oy  o  o1  os ex 
Capsules, piroxicarm 10 mg, 20 mg
Tabiets, piroxicarm 20 rmng
weight
10.2 Corticosteroids 347
TOLFENAMIC ACID
Side-effects. Gastro-intestinal lesions, inappetance, vomit-
ing, diarrhoea, gastritis, erosions, lethargy
UK
Warnings. Care in dehydrated, hypovolaemic, or hypoten-
Indications. Inflammation and pain; febrile syndrome in
sive animals; Drug Interactions - Appendix 1 (NSAIDs);
cats
avoid concurrent administration of diuretics, anticoagu-
Contra-indications. Patients with cardiac, renal, or hepatic
lants, plasma-protein bound drugs; horses should be moni-
disease, where there is the possibility of gastro-intestinal
tored for oral lesions and treatment discontinued if
ulceration or bleeding, hypersensitivity to the drug; blood
necessary;
safety in lactating bitches has not been
dyscrasias, treatment with other NSAIDs concurrently or
established
within 24 hours; treatment before regaining conisciousness
Dose. By mouth.
after any general anaesthesia; pregnant animals
Horses: initial dose, 2 mg/kg, then 1 mg/kg twice daily for
Side-effects. Prolonged use may cause gastro-intestinal
up to 14 days, given before feeding
lesions, inappetence, vomi ting, and diarrhoea
Dogs: 500 micrograms/kg (0.5 mg/kg) once daily
Warnings. Caution with use in animals less than 6 weeks
of age, or aged animals; avoid use in dehydrated, hypovol-
POM Quadrisol for Dogs (Intervet) UK
 aemic, or hypotensive patients; safety in pregnancy has not
Oral gel, vedaprofen 5 mg/mL, for dogs more than 10 kg und 12 weeks of
αge; rmetered dose applicator
been established; Drug Interactions
Appendix
1
(NSAIDs); avoid concurrent administration of potentially
POM Quadrisol for Horses (Intervet) U/K
nephrotoxic drugs, and plasma-protein bound drugs
Oral gel, vedaprofen 100 mg/mL,for horses more than 6 months of uge
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter 12 days
Dose.
Cattle: mastitis, by intravenous injection, 4 mg/kg as a sin-
gle dose
10.2 Corticosteroids
Bacterial respiratory disease, by intravenous injection, 2
mg/kg, repeat once after 48 hours
Systemic and locally applied corticosteroids are exten-
Pigs: by intramuscular injection, 2 mg/kg as a single dose
sively used for the treatment of inflammatory conditions.
Dogs: chronic locomotor disease, by mouth, 4 mg/kg once
The general uses and side-effects of corticosteroids are
daily for 3 days given with food. May be repeated after 4
described in section 7.2.1.
sAep
 Some corticosteroid preparations are given by intra-articu-
by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection,4 mg/kg.May
lar administration in horses or dogs. Strict asepsis should be
be repeated once only after 24 hours if required
observed on administration by intra-articular injection; in
Cats: febrile syndromes, by mouth, 4 mg/kg once daily for 3
some instances antibacterials are gi ven concurrently
days given with food
Products for intra-articular injection are very effective anti-
by subcutaneous injection, 4 mg/kg. May be repeated once
only after 24 hours if required
ucts have been reported to cause steroid arthropathy. Some
clinicians prefer to use lower doses of shorter acting prepa-
POM Tolfedine Tablets (Vetoquinol) U/K
Tabes,icdmg
rations administered systemically for limited courses of
Tablets, scored, tolfenamic acid 20 mg, 60 mg, for dogs
treatment.
POM Tolfedine Injection 4% (Vetoquinol) UK
Injetion, tolfenarmic acid 40 mg/mL, for dogs, cats
POM Tolfine (Vetoquinol) U/K
Injection, tolfenamic acid 40 mg/mL, for cattle, pigs
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter 3 days, first rmilking after treatrment
should not be used for hurmar corsurmptior. Pigs: slaughter 3 days
CORTIcOSTEROIDS (intra-articular administra-
tion)
VEDAPROFEN
UK
UK
POM H Adeortyl Intra-articular/Intradermal (Squibb) UK
Indications. Inflammation and pain
Injection,triamcinolone acetonide 10 mg/mL
Contra-indications. Patients with cardiac, renal, or hepatic
Dose. Horses: by intra-aricular injection, I-l0 rmg
disease, where there is the possibility of gastro-intestinal
ulceration or bleeding, hypersensitivity to the drug; dehy
POM Depo-Medrone V (Pfizer) U/K
See section 7.2.1 for preparation details
drated, hypovolaemic, or hypotensive patients; parturi tion;
Dose. Horses: by intrasynovial injection, up to I 20 rmg
animals that are not eating: preganant or lactating animals;
by intratendinous injection, 80-400 mg
puppies less than 12 weeks of age or less than 10 kg body-
Dogs: by intrasynovial injection, up to 20 mg
weight; foals less tham 6 months of age; racehorses prior to
POM Dexadreson (Intervet) UK
racing; treatment with other NSAIDs or glucocorticoids
See section 7.2.1 for preparation details
concurrently
Dose.Horses:by intra-anicular injection,2-10 mg
348Musculoskeletal system
10.3 Chrondroprotective compounds
POM Adequan (Janssen) UK
Injection, polysulfated glycosarminoglycan 100 rmg/mL, for horses
10.3.1 Heparinoids
For intrarmuscular injection
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil
10.3.2 Sodium hyaluronate
10.3.3 Chondroitin and glucosamine
Injection, polysulfated glycosarminoglycan 250 rmg/mL, for horses
For intra-articular injection
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil
10.3.1 Heparinoids
10.3.2 Sodium hyaluronate
based on hexosamine and hexuronic acid and has a high
Sodium hyaluronate is a high molecular weight
molecular weight. Pentosan polysulfate sodium, also a
mucopolysaccharide. It is the sodium salt of hyaluronic
polymer, is a semi-synthetic glycosaminoglycan. These
acid, which is a constituent of the high molecular weight
compounds have been shown in some studies to improve
clinical outcome in animals with osteoarthritis. Several pos-
cartilage matrix molecules, aggregated proteoglycans, and
is also present in synovial fluid. This accounts for the high
sible modes of action have been identified. In vitro studies
viscosity of synovial fluid. In some forms of joint disease
have shown an enhanced production of proteoglycans and a
depolymerisation of hyaluronic acid occurs, which affects
decreased rate of proteoglycan loss by chrondrocytes and
 the thi xotropic properties of synovial fluid.
ex plants in tissue culture. The ability of these compounds to
 Sodium hyaluronate is administered by intra-articular Or
inhibit a range of proteolytic enzymes including metallo-
intravenous injection for the therapy of joint diseases in the
proteinases such as stromelysin may be of particular
horse, especially in cases associated with synovitis. The
importanice
These compounds are “heparin-like’ in structure and high
attributable to restoration of normal viscosity of synovial
dosages may inhibit clotting mechanisms. A fibrinolytic
fluid and partially due to its anti-inflammatory properties. It
action in subchondral bone capillaries may help alleviate
pain associated with osteoarthritis.
prostaglandin E2, blocks superoxide anion release by mac-
rophages, reduces polymorphonuclear neutrophil infiltra-
PENTOSAN POLYSULFATE SODIUM
tion into synovial fluid, and (in septic arthritis) reduces
(Pentosan polysulphate sodium)
glycosaminoglycar loss from articular cartilage
Indications. Non-infectious and non-immune arthritides
Contra-indications. Advaniced hepatic or renal impair-
SODIUM HYALURONATE
ment, uncontrolled bleeding, trauma, infection, neoplasia,
(Hyaluronate sodium)
concurrent treatment or within 24 hours of corticosteroids,
NSAIDs
UK
Side-effects. Occasional vomiting
Indications. Arthritides associated with synovitis; navicu-
Warnings. Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1; caution in
lar disease ● (see section 10.7)
animals with history of pulmonary lacerations
Contra-indications. No more than 2 joints should be
Dose. Dogs: by subcutaneous injection, 3 mg/kg, repeat 3
treated at one time
times at 5-7-day intervals
Side-effects. Transient local reactions
Dose. Horses: by intra-articular injection, 20-40 mg/joint,
POM Cartrophen Vet (Arthropharm) UK
repeat if required
Injection, pentosan polysulfate sodiurm I00 mg/mL, for dogs
by intravenous injection,40 mg
Note. Store in refrigerator
Note. For therapeutic purposes sodium hyaluronate and
POLYSULFATED GLYCOSAMINOGLYCAN
hyaluronic acid may be considered equivalent in effect.
(Polysulphated glycosaminoglycan)
POM Hy-50 Vet (Genitrix) UK
UK
Injection, sodiurm hyaluronate 50 rmg/3 rmL, for horses
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Indications. Non-infectious and non-immune arthritides;
Note. Store unopened vial in refrigerator at 2-8C
navicular disease+ (see section 10.7)
Contra-indications. Advaniced hepatic or renal impair-
POM Hyalovet 20 (Arnolds) UK
Injection, hyaluronic acid (as sodiurm salt) 10 mg/mL, for horses
ment, pregnant animals, injection into infected or actively
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter withdrawal period nil
inflamed joints
Side-effects. Increased oedema at joint site
POM Hylartil Vet (Pfizer) U/K
injection, sodiurm hyaluronate 10 mg/mL, for horses
Warnings. Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1; avoid con-
Withdrawal Periods. Should rot be used in horses intended for humar
current anticoagulants
consumption
Dose. Horses: by intramuscular injection, 500 mg, repeat
Note. Store uropened vial in refrigerator at 2-8°C
6 times at 4-day intervals
POM Hyonate Injection (Bayer) UK
by intra-articular injection, 250 mg/joint, repeat 4 times at
Injection, sodiurm hyaluronate 10 rmg/mL, for horses
weekly intervals
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Mote. For intra-articular or intravenous injectior
10.4 Topical anti-inflammatory preparations  349
10.3.3 Chondroitin and glucosamine
After 4 months, treatment should be changed to mercap-
Preparations  containing  glucosamine  and  chondroitin
topurine (see section 13.1.2) given at a dose of 20 mg/m2
on alternate days.
sulfate are admiristered orally and claimed to assist the
repair of cartilage by providing the “building blocks’ for
10.6 Gold
have shown a potential stimulating effect on gly-
cosaminoglycan synthesis and  weak anti-inflammatory
Drugs in this class include the gold salts sodium aurothio-
properties. A proportion of these ingested macromolecules
malate and auranofin. These drugs are used in humans to
may be absorbed intact, and some components penetrate the
 joint. Their beneficial effect on the course of disease in dogs
rheumatoid and other immune-based arthritides. The mech-
with osteoarthritis is uncertain. In addition, the effect of
anism of action has not been fully elucidated. Some of the
these ‘nutraceuticals’ when administered concurrently with
drugs have been used to treat immune-based arthritides in
other drugs such as NSAIDs is unknown.
dogs but the slow onset of action, difficulty in assessing
 Examples of these preparations include Arthrotabs (Geni-
efficacy, and potential toxicity to the haematopoietic system
trix), Cosequin (Vetoquinol), Easeflex (Alstoe), Maxigen II
have limited their veterinary usage.
(Arnolds), Seraquin (Boehringer Ingelheim), and Sy noquin
Sodiun aurothiomalate treatment regimens consist of pro-
(VetPlus).
although it is possible to modify dosage according to the
10.4 Topical anti-inflammatory
severity of the condition and the size and breed of the ani-
mal treated.
preparations
Auranofin is administered by mouth twice daily, generally
inl combination with a low dose of prednisolone. Urine-pro-
Dimethyl sulfoxide (dimethyl sulphoxide, DMSO) is a sol-
tein concentration and blood cell counts should be moni-
vent that readily dissolves both water-soluble and lipid-sol-
tored regularly in treated animals.
uble drugs and can be used to transport drugs through skin.
It also possesses some anti-inflammatory activity and
causes dissolution of collagen. Its mode of action as an anti-
inflammatory drug is unknown but it may act through scay-
AURANOFIN
enging free radicals.
Copper and copper-containing compounds may also act by
UK
similar mechanisms. They possess superoxide dismutase
Indications. Immune-based arthritides
activity. However, the therapeutic value of copper-contain-
Warnings. Potential haematopoietic system toxicity
ing compounds in joint disease remains to be established.
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, initially 0.5-2.0 mg twice daily.
Likewise, copper combined with a range of NSAIDs has
May be increased to a maximum dose of 9 mg daily and
been claimed to increase both efficacy and safety but these
may be used in combination with prednisolone (see section
claims have yet to be substantiated.
7.2.1) 0.5 mg/kg daily. Treatment should be discontinued
when the patient has been in remission for 6 months
POM H Ridaura (Yamanouchi UK
Tabieis, f/c, auranofin 3 mg
10.5 Cytotoxic immunosuppressants
Cytotoxic drugs with immunosuppressant properties such
as cyclophosphamide and mercaptopurine have been used
      
dogs. These drugs are usually given in combination with a
SODIUM AUROTHIOMALATE
corticosteroid such as prednisolone. Cytotoxics are poten-
UK
tially carcinogenic and precautions should be taken (see
Indications. Immune-based arthritides
section 13.1).
Warnings. Potential haematopoietic system toxicity
Cyclophosphamide (see section 13. 1. 1) is administered to
Dose. By intramuscular injection.
dogs at a dose of 25 mg/m2 for dogs weighing less than 10
Horses, cattle: 10 mg, then 20 mg, then 2 injections of 50
kg, 20 mg/m? for dogs weighing 10 to 35 kg, and 15 mg/m2
for dogs weighing more than 35 kg. Doses of up to 50 mg/
over 13 weeks
m2 have been used. Cyclophosphamide is given for 4 con-
-oofut 9 uaun pue ^su 0z jo suoyoeful 9 uey 'su 01 :s8og
secutive days every week or on alternate days for 4 doses,
tions of 50 mg, at weekly intervals over 13 weeks
inl combi nation with initial doses of prednisolone (see sec-
tion 7.2.1) 2 to 4 mg/kg daily decreasing to 0.5 to 2 mg/kg
POM Myocrisin (JHC) UK
on alternate days.
fnjection, sodiurm aurothiormalate 20 mg/mL, 40 rmg/mL, 100 rmg/mL
350Musculoskeletal system
10.7 Treatment of navicular disease
Tecommended. The improvement in clinical signis can per-
sist for up to l year after administration of isoxsuprine is
Navicular disease (navicular syndrome) is a cause of inter-
discontinued, especially when foot balance has been cor-
mittent forelimb lameness in horses between 4 and 15 years
Tected. However, in some cases continuous treatment at a
of age. The hindlimbs are rarely affected. Predisposing fac-
low dose is required.
tors include faulty conformation, foot imbalance, irregular
Propentofylline (see section 4.3.4) and pentoxifylline are
shoeing, and exercise on hard surfaces.
xanthine derivatives, which alter the physical characteris-
The precise aetiology of navicular disease is unknown. Vas-
tics of the blood by increasing erythrocyte flexibility, pre-
cular changes in the foot are thought to be a cause. Degerl-
venting
gaggregation of erythrocytes and platelets,
erative changes in the navicular bone are also thought to
 decreasing fibrinogen levels, and inhibiting the action of
occur as a result of increased tension acting through the
some inflammatory cytokines. Pentoxifylline has been
deep digital flexor tendon physically compressing the
shown to be erratically absorbed following oral administra-
navicular bone dorsally against the distal and middle
tion in horses. Propentofylline has been shown to be helpful
phalar ges.
in the treatment of navicular disease.
The pathological changes in navicular disease include
Corticosteroids (see section 7.2) are sometimes beneficial
enlargement of the synovial fossae of the distal border,
 as an adjunctive therapy in the treatment of navicular dis-
focal cartilage degeneration, cartilage erosion, subchondral
ease. These agents can be injected into the distal inter-
bonie sclerosis, focal areas of bone lysis, anid oedema, con-
 phalangeal joint or navicular bursa. Many clinicians utilise
gestion and fibrosis in the marrow spaces. Pain results from
 this treatment only in cases where initial treatment by cor-
degenerative changes in the bone, and from strain to the
rective trimming and shoeing, rest, isoxsuprine and phe-
surrounding soft tissue structures. Venous drai nage from the
niylbutazone has been unsuccessful. The choice of
marrow spaces of the navicular bones of affected horses is
corticosteroid is based on personal experience. For guid-
impaired, and the resultant venous distension and venous
ance, a dose of methylprednisolone 20 to 40 mg injected
hypertension may be an important cause of pain.
into the distal interphalangeal joint may be used.
A variety of treatments can be used in navicular disease. In
Warfarin has been used as a treatment of navicular disease
many cases, effective treatment probably only arrests or
in anl attempt to reduce and slow thrombosis. Serious side-
delays the progression of the disease and manages the pain,
effects of warfarin treatmennt such as the risk of haemor-
rather than cures the condition. Treatment usually involves
rhage and the interaction of warfarin with protein-bound
variable periods of rest, corrective trimming and shoeing,
drugs (including phenylbutazone) may occur. Warfarin is
medications to improve blood flow, anti-inflammatory anal-
now rarely used for the treatment of navicular disease.
gesics, and drugs to treat degenerative bone and cartilage
Sodium hyaluronate (see section 10.3.2) and polysulfated
changes.
glycosaminoglycan (see section 10.3.1) have been used in
Rest is important to allow time for soft tissue inflammation
the treatment of mavicular disease. Sodium hyaluronate may
to subside and for the horse to adapt to corrective trimming
be injected intrasynovially concurrently with a cortico-
and shoeing. Some horses respond favourably to corrective
steroid.
trimming and shoeing without the need for specific medical
In view of the bone remodelling changes identified in
therapy. The aims of trimming and shoeing are to restore
navicular disease such as excessive bone resorption and
normal hoof balance, to correct problems such as under-run
areas of sclerosis, drugs acting on the regulation of bone
heels, shearing of the hoof wall, and heel bulb contraction,
metabolism could be potentially useful. Calcitonin is a nat-
and to reduce biomechanical forces on the mavicular region.
ural hormone that inhibits bone resorption and regulates
A variety of different forms of trimming and shoeing can be
calcaemia in combination with parathyroid hormone. Posi-
used. Egg bar shoes are appropriate in some cases.
ti ve results have been published for the treatment of navicu-
lar disease but the dosage has not been established.
NSAIDs (see section 10.1), in particular phenylbutazone,
Bisphonates are regulators of bone metabolism, acting
are commonly used to provide pain relief. Phenylbutazone
 through inhibition of bone resorption. It is suggested that
can be helpful to allow pain-free adjustment to new shoes
and hoof angles following corrective farriery. The horse
such drugs could potentially help to restore a normal bal-
should also be rested during initial therapy. In some cases,
ance between bone resorption and formation. Tiludronic
 phenylbutazone can be used to manage pain long term, or in
acid (as tiludronate disodium) was shown to be clinically
effective in a randomised controlled clinical trial for the
association with specific athletic events.
treatment of navicular disease. The treatment was most
Isoxsuprine is commonly used in the treatment of navicular
effective when administered early in the course of the
disease. It is a beta-adrenergic agonist with vasodilatory
disease.
 properties and causes direct relaxation of vascular smooth
Surgical treatments can be used for horses with navicular
muscle. Reported success rates with this drug ranige from
disease that have not responded to more coniservative treat-
40% to 87%, with the best results in horses affected for less
than one year. However, in recent studies orally adminis-
ments. Three surgical treatments are described: palmar dig-
ital neurectomy; navicular suspensory desmotomy; and
tered isoxsuprine failed to produce any demonstrable phar-
desmotomy of the distal check ligament.
macological effects. Various dosage regimes have been
The treatment of laminitis is discussed in chapter 15.
10.7 Treatment of navicular disease  351
ISOXSUPRINE HYDROCHLORIDE
TILUDRONIC ACID
UK
France
Indications. Navicular disease, and other conditions of the
Indications. Navicular disease in horses
lower limb where vasodilatation may be beneficial;
Dose. Horses: by intravenous injection, 100 micrograms/
laminitis+
kg (0.1 mg/kg) daily for 10 days
Contra-indications. Recent arterial haemorrhage; pregnant
by intravenous infusion, 1 mg/kg in 1 litre sodium chloride
 d sod sm  n  s  s
0.9% solutior administered over 30 minutes
horses
Side-effects.Tachycardia
Tildron (Sanofi) Fr
 Dose. See preparation details
Injection, powder for recon stitution, tiludronic acid 50 mg, for horses
Note. To obtain a supply, the veterinarian should obtain a Special Treatrment
Laminitis +, by mouth, 0.6 to 4.0 mg/kg twice daily
Authorisation frorm the VMD
POM Navilox ( Vetoquinol) UK
WARFARIN SODIUM
Oral powder, isoxsuprine hydrochloride 30 rmg/g, for horses; (3 measures =
[0 g)
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmar
UK
consumption
Indications. Navicular disease (but see notes above); vas-
Dose. Horses: 600 rmicrograrms of isoxsuprine (20 mg of powder)/kg Lwice
daily for 6 weeks, then once daily for 3 weeks, then on alternate days for 3
cular thrombosis (see section 4.6.2)
weeks. Treatment should be adrministered orn an ermpty stormach 30 rmirutes 
 Contra-indications. Purpura, malnutrition, haemorthage,
before feeding
late pregnancy; Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1
Side-effects. Haemorrhage
 Warnings. One stage prothrombin time must be measured
PROPENTOFYLLINE
 before commencement of therapy; monitor effects of War-
farin therapy, see section 4.6.2; Drug Interactions - see
UK
Appendix 1
Indications. Navicular disease in horses +; dullness, leth-
 Dose. Horses: (but see notes above) by mouth, 20 micro-
argy in older dogs (see section 4.3.4)
   q   
Dose. Horses ·: by mouth, 7.5 mg/kg twice daily for 6
 the one stage prothrombin time is increased by 2-4 seconds
weeks
(usual dose range: 16- 170 micrograms/kg)
See section 4.3.4 for preparation details
See section 4.6.2 for preparation details
353
11
 Drugs used in the treatment of
MASTITIS
Contributor:
intramammary treatment. The build-up of endotoxin in the
P W Edmondson MVB, CertCHP, FRCVS
udder is reduced, thereby limiting the extent of tox aemia.
NSAIDs (see section 10. 1) such as flunixin meglumine at a
11.1 Intramammary preparations for lactating animals
dose of 2.2 mg/kg body-weight by intravenous injection or
11.2 Preparations for non-lactating animals
ketoprofen at a dose of 3 mg/kg by intramuscular or intrave-
11.3 Preparations for the care of teats and udders
nous injection are indicated for supportive therapy of
toxaemia.
Mastitis is of economic importance in dairy cows because it
Fluids (see section 16.1.2) such as sodium chloride 0.9% by
causes decreased milk quality and reduced milk yield,
which often leads to early culling. Peracute mastitis often
drated cows at a dose equal to or more than 5% body-
results in death. Other species affected include sheep, pigs,
weight. Alternatively, hypertonic saline (sodium chloride
dogs, cats, goats, and horses; male animals may also be
7.2%) at a dose of 3 litres may be administered by intrave-
affected. Treatment of mastitis in sheep and goats is similar
nous injection to aid rehydration. Intravenous administra-
to that employed for cattle.
tion of glucose is useful to counteract the hypoglycaemia
Generally, the infecting organisms enter the udder via the
that occurs with tox aemia.
teat canal during the milking process. Contamination may
Parenteral antibacterials (see section 1.1) such as procaine
arise from the teats and udders of infected cows, teat abra-
benzylpenicilin and dihydrostreptomycin in combination,
sions, environmental sources, faulty milking equipment,
potentiated sulphonamides, cephalosporins, or oxytetracy-
anid in the case of summer mastitis, the head fly Hydrotoea
cline may
/be given in addition to intramammary
irritans.
preparations.
The main pathogens causing mastitis are Staphyfococcus
Multivitamin preparations (see section 16.6.7) containing B
aureus,Streptococcus agalactiae,Strep. dysgalactiae,
vitamins may also aid recovery. Intravenous calcium may
Strep. uberis, Actinomyces pyogenes (summer mastitis);
also be given.
Escherichia coli, Klebsiella spp., Enterobacter aerogenes
In acute mastitis there is swelling and inflammation of the
(coliform mastitis); some fungi; and yeasts.
mammary gland with or without systemic reaction. The
These pathogens enter through the teat canal and cause
milk is found to be abnormal. Treatment consists of thor-
infection in the mammary gland, which may be either clini-
ough evacuation of the udder before administration of
cal or subclinical, depending on the number and type of
intramammary preparations for lactating cows (see section
pathogens involved. The majority of subclinical mastitis
11.1). Oxytocin may be used to assist emptying of the
staphylococci (CNS), Strep. agalactiae, Strep. uberis, and
parenteral
antibacterials and supportive therapy are
Strep. dysgalactiae. These are contagious mastitic organ-
indicated.
isms whose reservoir is within the udder itself and are
Staph. aureus is the most common cause of chronic masti-
spread from cow to cow during the milking process. Envi-
tis in the dairy cow. Some strains of this micro-organism are
ronmental organisms live outside the udder and are trans-
resistant to certain antibacterials (see section 11.1). After
ferred on to the teats bet ween milkings. A systemic reaction
treatment, there is frequently a clinical improvement but
may also occur in some cases. Early diagnosis and treat-
infection tends to persist. Chronic mastitis can also occur
ment of clinical mastitis will increase the rate of recovery,
with Strep. uberis and occasionally coliform infections. The
the return to normal milk production, and lessen the damage
best time to attempt to eliminate chronic mastitis infections
to the mammary gland.
is during the dry period (see section 11.2).
In peracute clinical mastitis, there is acute inflammation of
 In cases of subelinical mastitis no gross abnormality of the
the mammary gland with toxaemia. The causal bacteria
milk is evident. The constituents of milk will be altered and
may include coliforms, Staph. aureus, A. pyogenes, Bacillus
the cell count will be elevated. These cases are usually
cereus, or Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
Treatment should
treated when the animal is no longer lactating by using
include anti bacterials and supportive therapy. Infected quar-
long-acting
intramammary preparations (see section
ters should be stripped out frequently.
11.2.1). Subclinical mastitis caused by Strep. agalactiae
Oxytocin may be administered, by intramuscular or slow
may be treated successfully during lactation. If the entire
intravenous injection, to aid evacuation of the udder. Initial
herd is treated with intramammary antibacterials to elimi-
treatment consists of oxytocin 80 units, given by intramus-
nate Strep. agalactiae it is essential that basic mastitis con-
trol measures have been implemented before treatment.
treatment. Then ox ytocin 20 units given by intramuscular
Preparations for non-lactating animals are used to eliminate
injection before each stripping out, and concurrent
subclinical infection at the end of lactation and to prevent
354 Mastitis
the establishment of new infections during the dry period,
for indi vidual farms. Where no information is available, ini-
including summer mastitis due to A. pyogenes.
tial treatment is usually empirical and chosen to provide the
e o   s  
widest possible cover.
administering any intramammary preparation to avoid
 The most common pathogens responsible for climical masti-
introducing a more severe infection than that for which the
tis are Strep. uberis, coliforms, Staph. aureus, Strep. dysga-
original treatment was intended. This is especially impor-
lactiae, and Strep. agalactiae. Antibacterials included in
tant with treatment for the dry period. Careless administra-
intramammary preparations give either narrow- or broad-
tion may result in bacteria being infused into the udder
spectrum activity against mastitis pathogens.Details of
 leading to mastitis during the dry period or at the time of
antibacterial spectra of activity may be found in section 1.1.
calving.
Some compound preparations also contain corticosteroids
Before infusion, teat ends should be thoroughly cleaned and
to help reduce inflammation within the udder. The success
of treatment for Staph. aureus infection is very poor in older
industrial methylated spirit (IMS) until there is no sign of
animals due to the organisms surviving within micro
contamination on the cotton wool. The nozzle of the
 abscesses and macrophages, and antibacterial resistance. In
 e  n  s s 
addition, some strains are not killed by antibacterials if the
distance into the teat canal and the contents administered.
micro-organisms are in a state of dormancy.
After infusion, the preparation should be massaged up into
Pirlimycin hydrochloride is authorised only for the treat-
the udder and the teats dipped with a disinfectant solution
ment of cows during lactation with subclinical mastitis
(see section 11.3). It is important that antibacterial prepara-
caused by pirlimycin sensitive Gram-positive bacteria.
tions are infused into, and not through the teat canal,
 Pirlimycin has no effect on Gram-negative bacteria and so
because mastitis pathogens frequently colonise the canal.
scrupulous hygiene before infusion is required. In order to
This also helps to protect the lining of the canal from
select suitable cows for treatment the pathogen, age of the
mechanical damage caused by the end of the intramammary
cow, chronicity of the infection, and clinical mastitis history
applicator.
should be considered.
Mastitis causes a significant loss of production, and preven-
Many strains of Staphyfococcus aureus produce beta-lacta-
tion and control of the disease should be practised. Monitor-
 mase making them resistant to certain types of penicillin. It
ing of herd status using bulk and individual cow somatic
cell counts is important; under Directive 92/46EEC, imple-
effective
mented in the UK as the Dairy Products (Hygiene) Regula-
Improved resolution of Staph. aureus infection is achieved
tions 1995 (S1 1995/1086), it is a requirement that all1
when intramammary and systemic antibacterials are admin-
saleable milk has a three monthly rolling herd cell-count
istered concurrently. A full course of treatment should be
less than 400 000. In addition, use of pre- and post-milking
administered even if the milk returns to normal appearance
disinfectant preparations, attention to hygiene standards in
before the course is completed. Partial treatment may
the dairy and housing areas, and thorough plant cleaning are
increase the likelihood of infection recurring and may con-
essential. A culling policy, together with dry cow therapy
tribute to the development of bacterial resistance.
(see section 1l.2) and a 6-monthly check on milking
 In general, milk should not be used for human consumption
machine installations will help to reduce the level of masti-
 if the animal is in poor health or the cow has a milk yield of
tis in the herd. Guidance is provided in the following:
less than 5 litres per day. Medicinal and antibacterial resi-
MAFF. Treatment and prevention of mastitis in dairy
dues present in milk may interfere with manufacturing
cows. PB 4661. London: DEFRA,1999
processes and lead to hypersensitivity problems in humans.
BSI.Mitking machine installations: Construction and
Withdrawal periods for meat and milk are stated by the
performance.BS ISO 5707. London: BS1, 1996
manufacturer. If no withdrawal periods are given or a prod-
A vaccine is available for control of mastitis caused by
uct is used outwith the data sheet recommendations, stand-
environmental pathogens (see section 18.2.11).
ard withdrawal periods apply. In addition, in England,
Wales, and Scotland all milk should be withheld for the first
4 days after calving and, in Scotland, milk should be dis-
carded for 2 days after the administration of any medicine.
11.1 Intramammary preparations for
In any case of doubt, an antibacterial residue test should be
lactating animals
carried out on a milk sample from the individual cow and a
negative result obtained before milk from that cow is
These preparations are used to treat climical and subclinical
included in bulk milk for human consumption. The pres-
mastitis (see notes above). Bacterial culture and sensitivity
cence of antibacterials in the milk leaving the farm is likely
testing should be carried out on pretreatment milk samples
   s  s  
on a regular basis so that mastitic pathogens within a herd
purchasing company. See NOAH. Antibiotic residue avoid-
are identified and the most suitable therapy is administered.
ance in mitk for further information.
Pretreatment samples should be refrigerated or frozen. Vet-
 Intramammary preparations should be administered after
erinarians should keep records, such as results of antibacte-
milking using the recommended procedure (see notes
rial sensitivity testing and identification of bacterial isolates
above).
11.1 Intramammary preparations for lactating animals  355
CEFOPERAZONE
PIRLIMYCIN HYDROCHLORIDE
UK
UK
Indications. Mastitis, see notes above
Indications. Mastitis, see notes above
Contra-indications. Hypersensiti vity to penicillins
10
Contra-indications. Hypersensitivity to pirlimycin; treat-
cephalosporins
ment for infections due to enteric bacteria; treatment of
 Dose. See preparation details
cows with palpable udder changes due to chronic
subclinical mastitis
POM Pathocef (Pfizer) UK
 Dose. See preparation details
Intramammary suspension (oily), cefoperazone (as sodiurm salt) 250 mg/
dose,forcaffle
Withdrawal Periods. Cale: slaughter 2 days, millk 3.5 days
POM Pirsue (Pfizer) U/K
Dose. Catte: by intramammary infusion, one dose per infected quarter.
Intramammary solution, pirlimycin hydrochloride 50 rmg, for cattle
One dose is usually sufficient for treatment
Withdrawal Periods. Cale: slaughter 23 days, milk 5 days
Repeat 7 tirmes at 24-hour intervals 
CEFQUINOME
UK
Indications. Mastitis, see notes above
COMPOUND ANTIBACTERIAL PREPARATIONS
Contra-indications. Hypersensitivity
topemicillins
10
FOR LACTATING ANIMALS
cephalosporins
Dose. See preparation details
UK
Indications. Mastitis, see notes above
POM Cephaguard LC Intramammary (Intervet) UK
Contra-indications. Hypersensitivity to product active
Intramammary suspension, cefquirnome 75 mg/dose, for cutle
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter 2 days, millk 4 days
ingredients
Dose. Catfle: by intramammgry infusion, one dose per infected quarter.
Dose. See preparation details
Repeat rwice at I 2-hour intervals
POM Kloxerate Plus Milking Cow (Fort Dodge) UK
CLOXACILLIN
Intramammary suspension, armpicillin (as sodium salt) 75 mg, cloxacillin (as
sodiurm salt) 200 mg/dose, for caffle
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 7 days, rmilk 2.5 days
UK
Dose. Catfle: by intramammary infusion, one dose per infected quarter.
Indications. Mastitis, see notes above
Repeat twice at 12-hour intervals
Contra-indications. Hypersensitivity
topenicillins or
POM Lactaclox (Norbrook) UK
cephalosporins
Intramammary 5uspension, armpicillin (as sodium salt) 75 mg, cloxacillin (as
Dose. See preparation details
sodium salt) 200 mg/dose, for cattle
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 7 days, rmilk 2.5 days
POM Noroclox QR (Norbrook) UK
Intramammary suspension, cloxacillin (as sodiurn salt) 200 mg/dose, for caf-
Repeat wice at I2-hour intervals 
fle
Withdrawal Periods. Catfe: slaughter 7 days, milk 2.5 days. Sheep: slaughter
POM Lactatrim MC (Elanco) UK
7 days, should not be used in sheep producing rmilk for hurman consumption
Iniramammary suspension, sulfadiazine 200 mg, trimethoprirm 40 mg/dose,
Dose. Catfle: by intramammary infusion, one dose per infected quarter.
for catfle
Repeat rwice at I 2-hour intervals
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter 7 days, milk 2 days
Contra-indications. Hepatic irmpairment, blood dyscrasias 
POM Orbenin LA (Pfizer) UK
Intramammary suspension, cloxacillin (as sodium salt) 200 mg/dose, for
Repeat rwice at I2-hour intervals
cattle,sheep
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 7 days, milk 3.5 days. Sheep: slaughter
POM Lincocin Forte S (Pfizer) UK
7 days, should not be used in sheep producing rmilk for hurmar consurmption
Intramammary suspension, lincormycin (as hydrochloride) 330 rmg, neormy-
Dose. Catfle: by intramammary infiusion, one dose per infected quarter.
cin (as sulfate) t00 mg/dose, for catle
Repeat rwice at48-hour intervals
Withdrawal Periods. Catfe: slaughter 2 days, rmilk 3.5 days
Sheep: by ntramammary infusion, one dose perudder half at weaning
 Contra-indications. Concurrent use of rmacrolides
Dose. Catle: by intramammary infusion, one dose per infected quarter.
Repeat rwice at I2-hour intervals 
ERYTHROMYCIN
POM Nafpenzal MC (Irtervet) U/K
Intramammary suspension, benzylpenicillin sodium 180 mg, dihydrostrepto-
mycin (as sulfate) 100 mg, nafcillin (as sodium salt) 100 mg/dose, for catfe
UK
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 7 days, milk 3.5 days
Indications. Mastitis, see notes above
Dose. Catle: by intramammary infusion, one dose per infected quarter
 Dose. See preparation details
daily for 34 days
POM Streptopen Milking Cow (Schering-Plough) UK
POM Erythrocin Intramammary (Ceva) UK
-od gu oos (aeyns se) uofuodasopaup (o) aised Kaaaae
Intramammary solution, erythromycin 300 mg/dose, for catfle
Withdrawal Periods. Cale: slaughter 7 days, rmilk 1.5 days
caine benzylpenicillin I g/dose, for cafle 
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 7 days, milk 4.5 days
Dose. Catfle: by intramammary infusion, one dose per infected quarter.
Repeat twice at 12-hour intervals
Repeat twice at 12-hour intervals
356 Mastitis
POM Streptopen QR (Schering-Plough) UK
11.2.1 Intramammary preparations for non-
Intramammary paste (oily), dihydrostreptormycin (as sulfate) 100 rmg, pro-
lactating animals
caine benzylpenicillin t00 mg/dose, for catle
Withdrawal Periods. Catfe: slaughter 7 days, rmilk 3 days 
Dose. Catfle: by intramammary infusion, one dose per irnfected quarter
Non-lactating or dry cow therapy is administered to elimi-
daily for 3 days
nate any subclinical infection present at the end of lactation
and to prevent the establishment of new infections, includ-
POM Synermast LC (Bimamast MC) (Birmeda) UK
ing summer mastitis, during the dry period. Management
fntramammary suspension, armpicillin (as trihydrate) 200 mg, cloxacillin (as
sodiurm salt) 200 mg/dose,for catle
plays a major part in the control of mastitis during the dry
Withdrawal Periods. Catte: slaughter 7 days, millk 2.5 days
period and animals should be ex amined frequently, prefera-
bly twice daily
Repeat rwice at I 2-hour intervals
The choice of dry cow therapy depends on many factors:
the mastitic pathogens present in the herd, the length of the
dry period, and bacterial culture and sensitivity test results
from pretreatment mastitis samples and high cell count
COMPOUND ANTIBACTERIAL AND CORTICO-
cows. Staph. aureus is the most common cause of subclini-
STEROID
PREPARATIONS FOR LACTATING
cal infection and a dry cow preparation should contain an
ANIMALS
antibacterial that is effective for all strains of Staph.aureus.
The use of parenteral antibacterials ini conjunction with dry
UK
cow therapy may improve the recovery rate of quarters
POM Leo Yellow Milking Cow (LEO) UK
Intramammary paste, dihydrostreptomycin (as sulfate) 185 mg, frarmycetin
infected with Staph. aureus. Details of antibacterial spectra
sulfate 50 rmg, penetharmate hydriodide 150 mg, prednisolone 5 mg/dose, for
of activity may be found in section 1.1. Where no bacterial
catfle
culture or sensitivity data are available, a broad-spectrum
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 28 days, milk 3.5 days
 preparation is recommended. The main pathogens causing
Dose.Cattle:by intramamary infusion, one dose per irfected quarter
daily for 3 days
clinical mastitis during the dry period are Strep. uberis,
Strep. dysgalactiae, and Actinomyces pyogenes.
POM Multiject IMM (Norbrook) UK
Preparations are formulated with aluminium mono-stearate
Intramammary 5uspension (oily), neomycin sulfate 100 rmg, novobiocin (as
 or in an oily basis, which may prolong effecti ve tissue-anti-
sodiurm salt) 100 mg, prednisolone 10 mg, procaine benzylpenicillin 100 mg,
streptormycin sulfate 100 rmg/dose, for catfle
bacterial concentrations for up to several weeks. In herds
Withdrawal Periods. Catfe: slaughter 7 days, rmilk 3 days
where the expected calving date is unknown, it is unwise to
jan pai ad asop auo omu r u g  oso
use long-acting preparations. If calving does occur within
Repeat wice at 24-hour intervals 
the effective drug duration, milk must be discarded for the
POM Noroclav Lactating Cow (Norbook) U/K
remainder of the recommended milk withdrawal period
Intramammary suspension, amoxicillin (as trihydrate) 200 mg, clavulanic
and, in addition, for a specified time such as given in the
acid (as potassiurn salt) 50 mg, prednisolone 10 mg/dose, for cafle
Withdrawal Periods. Catte: slaughter 7 days, milk 2.5 days
farmer-purchaser contract (the statutory period is 4 days)
after calving. Some manufacturers recommend that in cows
Repeat rwice at I 2-hour intervals
with hypocalcaemia, it may be necessary to withhold milk
for a longer period than the milk withdrawal period. In any
POM Synulox Lactating Cow (Pfizer) U/K
[ntramammary suspension (oily), armoxicillin (as trihydrate) 200 mg, clavu-
case of doubt, an antibacterial residue test should be carried
lanic acid (as potassium salt) 50 mg, prednisolone l0 mg/dose, for cafle
out on a milk sample from the individual cow and a nega-
Withdrawal Periods. Catfe: slaughter 7 days, rmilk 2.5 days
ti ve result obtained before milk from that cow is included in
Dose. Catle: by intramammary infusion, one dose per infected quarter.
bulk milk for human consumption.
Repeat rwice at I 2-hour intervals 
POM Tetra-Delta (Pfizer) U/K
Intramammary 5uspension (oily), dihydrostreptormycin (as sulfate) 100 mg,
Intramammary preparations for non-lactating animals
neormycin (as sulfate) 105 rmg, novobiocin (as sodiurm salt) t00 rmg, pred-
 should not be used in animals with a dry period of less
nisolone 10 mg, procaine benzylpenicillin 100 mg/dose, for catle
Withdrawal Periods. Catfe: slaughter 7 days, rmilk 3 days 
 than the milk withdrawal period of the preparation
Dose. Catle: by int ramammary infusion, one dose per infected quarter.
Repeat after 24 or 48 hours if required 
Cows should be dried off abuptly and not milked once a day
before treatment. If high yielding cows (more than 25 litres/
day) are to be dried off they should be fed a reduced diet for
a week before and two days after drying off to help decrease
11.2 Preparations for non-lactating
the milk yield. Cows should be removed from the milkinig
animals
herd and sound of the milking machine to avoid milk let
down reflex and leaking of milk. Immediately after the last
11.2.1 Intramammary preparations for non-lactating
milking, one dose of dry cow therapy is infused into the teat
animals
canal by following the recommended procedure (see notes
11.2.2 Teat sealants
above in the introduction to section 11. 1).
11.2 Preparations for non-lactating animals
357
The head fly, Hydrotaea irritans, contributes to the spread
POM Kloxerate DC (Dry Cow) (Fort Dodge) U/K
of Actinomyces pyogenes. Therefore during the risk period
Intramammary suspension, cloxacillin (as benzathine salt) 500 mg/dose with
for summer mastitis, fly cornitrol measures are required (see
aluminium monostearate, for catle
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 28 days, rmilk not less than 28 days
section 2.2). Topical insecticide preparations are more
after administration plus 2.5 days after calving
effective if applied directly to the teats. Dry cows and
Contra-indications. Use within 28 days of calving
maiden heifers should graze fields away from shaded areas,
POM Orbenin Dry Cow (Pfizer) UK
woods, and stagnart water. They should be kept away from
Intramammary suspension, cloxacillin (as benzathine salt) 500 mg/dose with
known ‘summer mastitis’ pastures. Udders should be
alurminiurn rmonostearate, for catfle
ex amined daily to aid early detection of infection and thus
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 28 days, rmilk not less than 28 days
after adrninistration plus 4 days after calving
improve the likelihood of a good response to therapy. In
Contra-indications. Use within 28 days of calving
certain instances, treatment with a preparation for non-
lactating animals may be repeated after drying off in order
POM Orbenin Extra Dry Cow (Pfizer) UK
to help reduce the risk of A. pyogenes infection. In these
intramammary
y 5uspension (oily), cloxacillin (as benzathine salt) 600 rmg/
cases, particular care must be taken in selecting a suitable
dose, for caffle
Withdrawal Periods. Cale: slaughter 28 days, rmilk not less than 42 days
preparation to avoid problems with antibacterial residues in
after adrministration plus 4 days after calving
milk at calving.
Contra-indications. Use within 42 days of calving
CEFALONIUM
COMPOUNDANTIBACTERIALPREPARATIONS
FOR NON-LACTATING ANIMALS
UK
Indications. Mastitis, see notes above
UK
Contra-indications. Lactating animals, see notes above
Indications. Mastitis, see notes above
Dose. Cattle: by intramammary infusion, one dose pet
Contra-indications. Lactating animals, see notes above;
quarter after the last milking before drying off
hypersensitivity to product active ingredients
Dose. See preparation details
POM Cepravin Dry Cow (Schering-Plough) UK
intramammary paste, cefalonium 250 mg/dose, for catte
POM Bovaclox DC (Dry Cow) (Norbook) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 2l days, rnilk rot less than 54 days
Intramammary suspension, ampicillin (as trihydrate) 250 mg, cloxacillin (as
after administration plus 4 days after calving
benzathine salt) 500 mg/dose with alurminiurm rmonostearate, for caffle 
Contra-indications. Use within 51 days of calving
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter 28 days, milk not less thar 45 days
after adrministration plus 4 days after calving
Contra-indications.Use within 45days of calving
CLOXACILLIN
Dose. Catle: prophylaxis, by intramammary infusion, one dose per quarter
after the last nilking before deying off
Surmrmer rmastitis, repeatdose every 3 weeks during the dry period
UK
Indications. Mastitis, see notes above
POM Bovaclox DC Xtra (Norbook) UK
Contra-indications. Lactating animals, see notes above;
fntramammary suspension, armpicillin (as trihydrate) 300 mg, cloxacillin (as
 hypersensitivity to penicillins or cephalosporins
benzathine salt) 600 mg/dose, for catfle
Dose. Cattle: by intramammary infusion, one dose pet
  u s o  s  s  d 
after adrministration plus 4 days after calving
quarter after the last milking before drying off
Contra-indications. Use within 49 days of calving
Summer mastitis, before the first calving, one dose per
Dose. Catle: prophylaxis, sumrmer rmastitis, by intramammary infusion,
one dose per quarter after the last milking before drying off or before first
quarter
calving in heifers
POM Bimaclox Extra DC (Birmeda) U/K
POM Kloxerate Gold DC (Fort Dodge) UK
(ntramammary sspension (oily), cloxacillin (as benzathine salt) I g/dose,
fntramammary suspension, ampicillin (as trihydrate) 300 rmg, cloxacillin (as
for catfle
benzathine salt) 600 mg/dose, for cafle
Withdrawal Periods. Carfle: slaughter 30 days, rmilk not less than 28 days
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter 28 days, rmilk not less than 49 days
after administration plus 96 hours after calving
Contra-indications. Use within 28 days of calving
after administration plus 4 days after calving
Contra-indications. Use within 49 days of calving
POM Chanamast DC (Chanelle) UK
Dose. Catfle: prophylaxis, summer mastitis, by intramammary infusion,
one dose per quarter after the last milking before drying off or before first
(ntramammary suspension (oily), cloxacillin (as benzathine salt) 500 mg/
calving in heifers
dose,forcaffle
Withdrawal Periods. Ctle: slaughter 28 days, milk not less than 28 days 
POM Kloxerate Plus DC (Dry Cow)(Fort Dodge) UK
after administration plus 5 days after calving
Intramammary suspension, ampicillin (as trihydrate) 250 rmg, cloxacillin (as
Contra-indications. Use within 28 days of calving
benzathine salt) 500 mg/dose with alurminiurm monostearate, for caffe
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 28 days, rmilk not less tharn 45 days
POM Noroclox DC (Norbrook) UK
after adrministration plus 4 days after calving
Intramammarysuspensioncloxacillin (asbenzathine sal 00mg/dose with
Contra-indications. Use within 45days of calving
alurminiurm rmonostearate, for caffle
Dose. Cafle: prophylaxis, by intramammary infusion, one dose per quarter
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter 28 days, milk not less than 28 days
after the last milking before drying off
after administration plus 4 days after calving
Surmer mastitis, repeatdose every 3 weeks during the dry period
Contra-indications. Use within 28 days of calving
358 Mastitis
POM Leo Red Dry Cow (LEO) U/K
Warnings. Animals should be observed for clinical masti-
Intramammary paste, frarmycetin sulfate l00 mg, penetharmate hydriodide
tis during the non-lactating period; teat sealant must be
100 mg, procaine benzylpenicillin 300 mg/dose, for catte
Withdrawal Periods. Catfe: slaughter 28 days, millk 3.5 days after calving or
removed at calving or if clinical mastitis is suspected
rot less than 28 days after adrministration plus 3 days after calving
Dose. Cattle: by intramammary infusion, one dose per
Contra-indications. Use within 28 days of calving
udder immediately after last milking of the lactation. The
Dose. Cuttle: by intramammary infusion, one dose per quarter afer the last
milking before drying off
teat or udder should not be massaged after application
POM Nafpenzal DC (Intervet) UK
POM Orbeseal (Pfizer) UK
Intramammary suspension, dihydrostreptormycin (as sulfate) 100 mg, nafcil-
Intramammary paste,bismuth subritrate 65%,foc catle
lin (as sodium salt) 100 rmg, procaine benzylpenicillin 300 mg/dose, for
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk with-
drawal period nil
catfle
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 28 days, rmilk not less than 28 days
after administration plus 4.5 days after calving
Contra-indications. Use within 28 days of calving
11.3 Preparations for the care of teats
Dose. Cale: by intramammary infiusion, one dose per quarter afer the last
and udders
rnilking before drying off
POM Streptopen Dry Cow (Schering-Plough) UK
The care and hygiene of teats and udders are important fac-
-od u oos (aems se) uuodansopkup (ao) aisd xaaaauy
tors in mastitis control, as is proper maintenance of the
caine benzylpenicillin I g/dose, for catfle
milking machine to ensure blood circulation is maintained
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter I0 days, milk not less than 32 days
after adrministration plus 4 days after calving
throughout milking, and to avoid excessive pressure varia-
Contra-indications. Use within 32 days of calving
tions on the teat ends and damage to the teats.
Dose. Catle: prophylaxis, by intramammary infusion, one dose per quarter
Teat skin can act as a reservoir for mastitis pathogenis, espe-
after the last milking before drying off
Surn rmer rmastitis, repeat dose after 34 week s
cially Strep. dysgalactiae, coagulase-negative staphylococci
(CNS), and Staph. aureus, if cut or chapped. These patho-
gens may originate from the environment (infection trans-
ferred on to teats between milkings) or from infected cows
11.2.2 Teat sealants
(infection transferred during the milking process). Teat dis-
infection pre- and post-milking removes these organisms
Teat sealants are non-antibiotic products that form a physi-
and in so doing reduces the risk of mastitis. Hygiene in the
cal barrier at the bottom of the teat thereby reducing the risk
 milking parlour and accommodation areas in addition to the
of new infections entering the udder. It is essential that the
teat end is thoroughly disinfected before infusion to prevent
use of skin disinfectants will reduce the population of path-
ogenic micro-organi sms on the teats.
introduction of infection via the syringe nozzle. The correct
 Before milking, teats contaminated with mud or faeces
 method of application is described in the introductory text.
should be washed with running water, to which a disinfect-
Teat sealants may be used as anl alternative to antibiotic dry
cow therapy on selected animals provided they are free
ant such as iodine may be added. Clean teats should then be
wiped dry with a single-service paper towel. The use of
from subclinical infection. Teat sealants provide a physical
communal udder cloths to wash and dry teats before milk-
barrier to help prevent new infections, especially coliforms
and Strep. uberis, enter the udder during the dry period and
eliminate any risk of antibiotic resistance and residues.
tion from cow to cow, even if immersed in a disinfectant
solution between uses. Foremilk should be examined for the
Individual cow cell count data and clinical mastitis records
for the last lactation need to be assessed in order to decide
presenice of any clots or abnormalities.
whether animals should receive antibiotic dry cow therapy
The teats may be pre-dipped with a disinfectant solution.
Or a teat sealant. The individual cow cell count threshold for
Pre-dipping reduces the number of bacteria on the teat sur-
face before the milking unit is attached. Most of these bac-
selective use will vary between farms. Individual risk fac-
tors and mastitis history should be considered to make an
teria will be environmental in origin, and therefore the risk
of mastitis caused by environmental organisms will be
informed decision. The herd cell count above which finan-
sn predid sun cn pedde si uonnios dip-id y poonpai
cial penalties are applied by the milk buyer may influence
before milking for the recommended contact time. It is
the individual cow cell count threshold below which use of
essential that pre-dip solutions have a rapid rate of kill so
a teat sealant may be considered.
the speed of milking is not affected. The teats must be
The use of a teat sealant is not recommended if there is no
individual cell count data available. These data are essential
wiped dry before the milking unit is attached to avoid disin-
fectant residues entering the bulk milk supply and to
in identifying cows that are free of subclinical mastitis.
remove any environmental contamination on the teat.
UK
Post-milking disinfectants reduce the bacterial population
on the teats after milking and assist abrasions to heal. Bac-
Indications. Prevention of new intramammary infections
teria which may have been transferred on to the teats during
 throughout the non-lactating period
 Contra-indications. Lactating animals, administration dur-
the milking process will be killed thereby reducing this
ing lactation, animals with suspected or confirmed mastitis
potential source of infection. Each teat should be coated
at the end of the lactation
with teat dip or spray after every milking throughout
11.3 Preparations for the care of teats and udders  359
lactation. Cows should remain standing for 20 to 30 min-
many more bacteria than intact skin. Emollients may be
utes after milking to allow time for the teat canal to close,
applied to dry teats immediately after milking. When the
avoiding bacteria entering the open teat canal, helping to
emollient concentration exceeds 10%, the killing ability of
reduce the risk of environmenital mastitis. During this
 the post-dip solution is reduced. Other preparations used for
period, feed should be offered and access to the housing
area prohibited. Some farmers wrongly dilute a post-dip
udders (see section 14. 1).
solution and use it as both a pre- and a post-dip. Conven-
tional post-dip solutions do not kill bacteria fast enough to
BENZYL ALCOHOL
be effective as a pre-dip. When this diluted solution is then
used as a post-dip, its efficacy is likely to be compromised
UK
and its benefit will be reduced. It is only acceptable to use a
Indications. Cleaning and disinfection of teats
solution as a pre- and post-dip if the solution is authorised
Warnings. Do not contaminate ponds, waterways, Or
for that use.
ditches with disinfectants; avoid contact of product with
Cetrimide, chlorhexidine, and polihexanide are effective
 eyes and do not use internally
against  Gram-positive
pue
Gram-negative
bacteria,
GSL Deosan Thixodip BA (JohnsonDiversey) UK
although Pseudomonas spp. and Nocardia spp. are killed
Post-milking teat dip, benzyl alcohol 4%, for caffle. Use undiluted
slowly. These disinfectants are inactivated by soaps and
Withdrawal Periods. Cattie: slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk with-
anionic substances. Dodecylbenzenesulphonic acid  is
!u poad em
effective against most bacteria but ineffective against bacte-
rial spores. It has a longer duration of actior compared to
CETRIMIDE
many dips and is quite effective in the presence of organic
UK
matter. Glutaral (glutaraldehyde) is effective against
 Indications. Cleaning and disinfection of teats and udders
Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria; concentrated
solutions may cause dermatitis. Iodine compounds have
Contra-indications. Concurrent use of soaps and anionic
substances
broad-spectrum antibacterial activity and are advantageous
Warnings. Do not contaminate ponds, waterways, OT
because they stain teats and the operator can then check for
ditches with disinfectants; avoid contact of product with
coverage. Chlorine compounds have broad-spectrum anti-
bacterial activity but are extensively neutralised in the pres-
eyes and do not use internally
 ence of organic matter. Chlorous acid/chlorine dioxide are
GSL Cetriad (Fort Dodge) UK
effective against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria
Cream, cetrirmide 2%, glycerol, for catle
as well as viruses and fungi. COSHH regulations should be
Withdrawal Periods. Catte: slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk with-
!u poad em
adhered to when handling disinfectants.
Pre- and post-milking disinfectants can be applied by dip-
Vanodine Udder Cream (Evans Vanodine) UK
ping or spraying. Teat dipping tends to be more effective
Cream, cetrirmide 0.5%, glycerol, hydrous woolfat, for cattle
because the entire surface of the teat is coated in disinfect-
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk with-
!u poad em
ant, whereas with teat spraying, parts of the teat are fre-
dipping, on average approximately 10 mL of solution is
CHLORHEXIDINE
uses 15 mL per cow. Automatic teat sprayers are occasion-
UK
ally installed as a labour saving means of applying teat dis-
 Indications. Cleaning and disinfection of teats and udders
infectant after milking. These are not an acceptable method
Contra-indications. Concurrent use of soaps, anionic sub-
of application because the entire surface of the teat is not
stances,or other chemicals
coated and therefore teat disinfection is ineffective. During
Warnings. Do not contaminate ponds, waterways, Or
freezing and windy weather conditions, teat dips or sprays
 ditches with disinfectants; avoid contact of product with
should only be applied to cows provided solutions are
allowed to dry on to the teats before the cows exit the milk-
 skin after use
ing parlour; alternatively creams or ointments may be used.
GSL Alfa Blue Plus (DeLaval) UK
 All pre- and post-milking preparations must be stored so as
Post-miking teat dip or spray, chlorhexidine gluconate 0.425%, glycerol,
to avoid contamination. Any solution remaining in the teat
sorbitol. Use undiluted
dip cup at the end of milking should be discarded and the
GSL Alfa Red+ (DeLaval) UK
cup cleaned between milkings.
Pest-miking teat dip or spray, chlorhexidine guconate 0425%, glycerol,
Preparations for udder and teat hygiene are formulated as
sorbitol. Use undiluted
dips, sprays, or udderwashes, which may require dilution
beforeuse.(
Glycerol
(glycerine),
hydrous wool fat
GSL C-Dip (Kilco) UK
(lanoline), white and yellow soft paraffin, and sorbitol are
Post-miking teat dip or spray, chlorhexidine gluconate 0.5%, glycerol, for
catfle. Use undiluted
added to preparations to promote skin hydration, to softenl
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
skin, and allow lesions to heal. Cracked teat skin harbours
period nil
360 Mastitis
GSL Deosan Summer Teat Care Plus (Johrson Diversey) U/K
GSL Deosan Super Iodip (John sonDiversey) UK
Post-milking teat dip or spray, chlorhex idine gluconate 0.425%, glycerol, fly
Post-miking teat dip or spray, available iodine 2%, glycerol, sorbitol, for
repellents, for catle. Use undiluted
catfle
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk withdrawal
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
period nil
period nil
Teat dip. Dilute I volume with 3 volurmes water
CSL Deosan Teat Care Plus (Johnson Diversey) UK
Teat spray. Dilute I volurme with 4 volurmes water 
Post-milking teat dip or spray, chlorhexidine digluconate 0.425%, glycerol,
for catfle. Use undiluted
GSL Dipal Concentrate (DeLaval) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk withdrawal
Post-milking teat dip, spray, or udderwash, available iodine 1.5%, glycerol
period nil
Teat dip or spray. Dilute I volurme with 2 volurmes water 
Udderwash. Dilute 6.25 mL in I litre water
GSL Star Teat-Ex (JohnsonDiversey) U/K
Post-miking teat dip or spray, chlorhexidine digluconate 0.425%, glycerol,
GSL Glyeodip (Kilco) UK
sorbitol, for caffe. Use undiluted
Post-miking teat dip, spray, or udderwash, available iodine 0.5%, glycerol,
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
hydrous wool fat, for caffle
period nil
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
period nil
Deosan Uddereream (John sonDiversey) UK
Teat dip or spray. Use undiluted
Cream, chlorhexidine 2%, hydrous wool fat, for catfle
Uaderwash. Dilute I0 mL in I litre water
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
period nil
GSL Iosan CCT (Novartis) UK
Pos-miking teat dip, spray, or uddewash, available iodine 1.55%,forcatle
GSL Summer C-Dip (Kilco) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk with-
Post-miking teat dip or spray,chlorhexidine gluconate 0.5%,glycerol, fly
u poad emu
repellent, for catfle. Use undiluted
Teat dip or spray. Dilute I volurme with 2 volurmes water
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk withdrawal
Uade rwash. Dilute 25 mL in 4 litres water
period nil
CSL Iosan Superdip (Novartis) UK
GSL Superspray (Novartis) UK
Post-miking teat dip, spray, or udderwash, available iodine 0.5%, glycerol,
Post-miking teat dip or spray, chlorhexidine gluconate 0.425%, glycerol,for
for catle
catfle. Use undiluted
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk with-
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk withdrawal
period nil
Teat dip or spray. Use undiluted
Udde rwash. Dilute 75 rmL in 4 litres water
CSL Iosan Teat Dip (Novartis) UK
Post-miking teat dip, spray, or udderwash, available iodine I .55%, glycerol,
DODECYLBENZENESULPHONIC ACID
for catfle
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk with-
UK
 Indications. Cleaning and disinfection of teats and udders
Teat dip or spray. Dilute I volurme with 2 volurmes water
Uaderwash. Dilute 25 mL in 4 litres water
GSL Blu-Gard (Ecolab) UK
GSL Lanodip 4:1 (Kilco) UK
Post-miking teat dip, pray, ordderwash, available iodine 2.71%, hydrous
tol, for cafle. Use undiluted
wool fat, for cafle
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
GSL Blu-Gard (Ecolab) UK
period nil
Post-milking tegt spray, dodecylbenzenesulphonic acid I-2%, glycerol, sorb-
Dilute I volurme with 4 volurmes water
itol, for caffle. Use undiluted
GSL Lanodip Concentrate (Kilco) UK
Pest-miking teat dip, spray or udderwash, available iodine 1.5%, hydrous
wool fat, for catfle
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk with-
! poad emup
IODINE COMPOUNDS
Teat dip or spray. Dilute I volurme with 2 volurmes water
Udderwash. Dilute 3.125 mL in 1 litre water
UK
GSL Lanodip Gold (Kilco) UK
 Indications. Cleaning and disinfection of teats and udders
Pest-miking teatdip, pray, rddewash, avaible iodie0.53%, hyou
Contra-indications.Concurrent use of other chemicals
wool fat, for caffle
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
Warnings. Do not contaminate ponds, waterways,
Or
period nil
ditches with disinfectants; avoid contact of product with
Teat dip or spray. Use undiluted
eyes and do not use internally; wash hands and exposed
Udderwash. Dilute I0 mL in I litre water
skin after use
GSL Lanodip Readymix (Kilco) U/K
Post-miiking teat dip, spray or udderwash, available iodine 0.5%, hydrous
GSL Deosan Super Ex-Cel (Johr sonDiversey) UK
wool fat
Post-milking teat dip or spray, available iodine 0.5%, glycerol, sorbitol, for
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
caffle. Use undiluted
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk withdrawal
period nil
Teat dip or spray. Use undiluted
period nil
Udde rwash. Dilute I0 rmL in I litre water
11.3 Preparations for the care of teats and udders 361
GSL Lanodip Super Concentrate (Kilco) UK
GSL Super Concentrate Teat Dip or Spray (Kilco) UK
Post-milking teat dip, spray, or udderwash, available iodine 2%, hydrous
Post-miking teat dip, spray, or udderwash, available iodine I.5%, hydrous
wool fat, for caffle
wool fat, for catfle
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
period nil
period nil
Tegt dip. Dilute I volurme with 3 volurmes water
Teat dip or spray. Dilute I volurne with 2 volurmes water
Udderwash. Dilute 2 mL in I litre water
Uaderwash. Dilute 3.125 rmL in I litre water
GSL Masocare (Evans Vanodine) UK
GSL Superteat (DeLaval) UK
Post-miking teat dip,spry, or udderwash,available iodine 0.5%,glycerol,
Post-miking teat dip, spray, or wdderwash, available iodine 0.5%, glycerol,
sorbitol, for caffle
for catfle
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period mil, milk withdrawal
Teat dip or spray. Use undiluted
period nil
Udderwash. Dilute 18.75 rmL in I litre water
Teat dip or spray. Use undiluted
Udderwash. Dilute I2.5 mL in I litre water
Vanodine Udder Salve (Evans Vanodine) UK
Ointment, iodine 0.2%, hydrous wool fat
CSL Masocare Extra (Evans Vanodine) UK
period nil
sorbitol, for caffle
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk withdrawal
period nil
Teat dip or spray. Use undiluted
Udderwash. Dilute I 2.5 mL in I litre water
POLIHEXANIDE
(Polyhexanide)
CSL Masocare HV (Evans Vanodine) UK
Post-milking teat dip, spray, or udde rwash, available iodine 0.5%, glycerol,
UK
sorbitol, for caffle
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
Indications. Cleaning and disinfection of teats and udders
period nil
Contra-indications. Concurrent use of soaps and anionic
Teat dip or spray. Use undiluted
substances
Udderwash. Dilute I12.5 mL in I litre water
Warnings. Do not contaminate ponds, waterways, or
GSL Masodine 13 (Evans Vanodine)
ditches with disinfectants; avoid contact of product with
Post-milking teat dip, spray, or udderwash, available iodine 2%, glycerol,
eyes and do not use internally
sorbitol, for caffle
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
period nil
CSL Sapphire (Evans Vanodine) UK
Teat dip or spray. Dilute I volurme with 3 volurmes water
Pest-miking teat dip or sprypolihexanide0.5%,glycerol,for catle.Use
Udderwash. Dilute 2 rmL in I litre water
undiluted
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk with-
GSL Masodine 1:4 (Evans Vanodine) UK
drawal period nil
Pos-miing te di,spry,rewsh,ailable die2.%,gly
sorbitol, for caffle
GSL Sapphire Concentrate 1:9 (Evans Vanodine) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Carfle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk with-
Post-milking teat diporspray,polihexanide 5%,glycerol,foc cattle
drawal period nil
Dilute I volume with 9 volumes water
Teat dip or spray. Dilute I volurme with 4 volurmes water
Udderwash. Dilute 2.5 mL in I litre water
GSL Masodine RTU (Evans Vanodine) UK
Post-miking teatdip, spray, orudderwash, iodine0.%, sorbitol,glyol
COMPOUND DISINFECTANTS FORTEATSAND
for catfle
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
UDDERS
period nil
Teat dip or spray. Use undiluted
UK
Udderwash. Dilute I2.5 mL in I litre water
 Indications. Cleaning and disinfection of teats and udders
GSL QuarterMate (DeLaval) UK
Warnings. Do not contaminate ponds, waterways, Or
Pre-miking teat dip or spray, available iodine (as sodiurm iodide/iodine com-
ditches with disinfectants; avoid contact of product with
plex) 0.1 %, for cattle. Use undiluted
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
eyes and do not use internally
period nil
GSL Masodip (Evarns Vanodine) U/K
CSL Star Ready-Dip (JohnsonDiversey) UK
Post-miking teat dip, spray, or udderwash, benzalkonium chloride 0.01 %,
Post-milking teat dip or spray available iodine 0.5%, glycerol, sorbitol, for
chlorhexidine gluconate 0.425%, glycerol, sorbitol, for cattle
catfle
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk with-
drawal period nil
period nil
Teat dip or spray. Use undiluted
Teat dip or spray. Use undiluted
Udde rwash. Dilute 15 rmL in I litre water
CSL Star Iodocare Coneentrate (John son Diversey) UK
GSL Masodip Extra (Evans Vanodine) UK
Post-milking teat dip or spray, available iodine 2%, glycerol, sorbitol, for
Post-milking teat dip, spray, or udderwash, benzalkonium chloride 0.01 %,
catfle
chlorhexidine gluconate 0.425%, glycerol, sorbitol, for catfle
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk with-
period nil
drawal period nil
Teat dip. Dilute I volurme with 3 volurmes water
Teat dip or spray. Use undiluted
Teat spray. Dilute I volurme with 4 volurmes water
Udde nwash. Dilute 15 mL in I litre water
362 Mastitis
EMOLLIENTS FOR TEATS AND UDDERS
P Dermisol Cream (Pfi zer) U/K
See sectior 14.8.2
UK
GSL Golden-Udder (Shep-Fair) UK
There are many preparations available; this is not a compre-
Ointment, salicylic acid 1.5%, sulphur 10%, for cattle, sheep, gouts
hensive list
Lenimint (Nordic Star) UK
Ointment, Japanese peppermint oil, carmphor, liquid paraffin, glycerol, for
CSL Antiseptic Teat Ointment(Arnolds) U/K
catle
Ointment, zine oxide 7%, for catle
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk with-
Lenisan (Nordic Star) UK
drawal period nil 
Ointment, chlorhex idine, yellow soft paraffin, for cattle
363
12
 Drugs acting on the
EYE
Contributor:
Some patients may develop hypersensitivity to preserva-
S Turner, MA, VetMB, DVOphthal, MRCVS
ti ves in ophthalmic preparations, which may cause conjunc-
 Administration of drugs to the eye
tival hyperaemia or corneal epithelial ulceration with
12.1
Anti-infective eye preparations
frequent or prolonged administration.
12.2
The potential effects of systemic absorption of drugs such
12.3
Anti-inflammatory preparations
as atropine, corticosteroids, or chloramphenicol should be
12.4
Mydriatics and cycloplegics
considered.
12.5
Drugs used in glaucoma
Subconjunctival injections may be carried out in all species
12.6
 Drugs used in keratoconjunctivitis sicca
following the topical administration of a local anaesthetic.
12.7
Local anaesthetics
12.8 Diagnostic stains
One drop of the anaesthetic solution should be applied, then
repeated 5 minutes later prior to placing the subconjuncti val
injection under the bulbar conjunctiva. The palpebral con-
junctiva should not be used. The volume of injectable solu-
12.1 Administration of drugs to the
tion used is up to 0.5 mL for dogs and cats, and up to 1.0
mL for horses and cattle.
eye
Subpalpebral lavage systems, nasolacrimal canulation, ocu-
Many owners have difficulty in administering eye drops
lar inserts, and therapeutic contact lenses have all been used
and eye ointments to animals and therefore the procedure
should always be demonstrated to them. For example, eye
tact lenses (i-protex, Veterinary Speciality Products)
designed for use in horses, dogs, and cats may be useful for
drops should be applied to dogs as follows: the animal's
the management of corneal ulceration (superficial to one-
head should be gently raised by holding the muzzle. Then
with the bottle held in the other hand the upper lid should be
third stromal thickness), injury, and in the post-operative
period following corneal surgery, for example after superfi-
gently pulled back and one drop applied to the bulbar con-
cial keratectomy and correction of symblepharon.
junctiva. One drop is sufficient; more than one drop will
Systemic therapy may be undertaken in conjunction with
increase lacrimation and effectively wash the drug away. It
topical therapy in cases of severe intra-ocular infection and
is useful to keep the head elevated for a minute after instil-
inflammation. Systemic administration may be required to
lation or to block the ventral nasolacrimal punctum to
achieve adequate drug concentrations in the eyelid tissue
reduce immediate drainage. Eye ointment should be applied
into the conjunctival fornix inside the lower lid by everting
and also the posterior segment of the eye, for example for
the treatment of chorioretinitis. The penetration of systemi-
the lid with the index finger or thumb. The softer eye oint-
ments may be put on to the cornea but owniers may be afraid
cally administered drugs, such as sulphonamides, depends
on their ability to cross the blood-ocular barriers (blood-
of injuring the eye. Eye drops are easy to use in dogs and
aqueous and blood-retinal barriers). Generally, small lipid-
soluble molecules that are not bound to plasma proteins, for
species such as horses.
The frequency of administration of eye drops or eye oint-
example chloramphenicol, penetrate well. Inflammation
may cause the breakdown of the regional blood:ocular bar-
ment depends on the type and severity of the disease. The
rier allowing improved penetration of all drugs.
absorption and effect of a drug used topically may be
dependent upon the inflamed or diseased state of the con-
junctival and corneal epithelium.  Eye drops generally
12.2 Anti-infective eye preparations
require frequent application in order to achieve acceptable
ocular and intra-ocular concentrations. This is because
12.2.1 Antibacterial preparations
rapid elimination of solutions will occur from the conjuncti-
12.2.2 Antifungal preparations
val sac after dilution with tears (although some newer for-
12.2.3 Antiviral preparations
mulations may allow once daily application). When two
different eye drop formulations are to be administered, there
Care should be taken to distinguish superficial ocular dis-
should be an interval of at least 5 to 10 minutes between
ease caused by infections from other conditions that may
applications to avoid dilution and overflow. Drops must
result in a red or inflamed eye. Where possible the causative
always be instilled before ointments if both have been pre-
organism should be identified and any initial choice of a
scribed. Eye ointments have a longer contact time resulting
broad-spectrum antibacterial, or combinati on of antibacteri-
in higher ocular and intra-ocular drug concentrations
als, modified according to bacterial sensitivity data. The
thereby necessitating less frequent application. Eye oint-
severity of an infection may determine the choice of drug
ments may be preferred for night-time treatment.
and frequency of application. When dispensing antibacteri-
als, it is considered preferable to choose topical prepara-
364Eye
tions of drugs that are not usually used to treat systemic
some activity against Mycoplasma and Chlamydophila
infections. Primary bacterial conjunctivitis is usually acute
(Chtamydia) spp.
and corticosteroids are unnecessary. The normal conjuncti-
Oral clindamycin (see section 1. 1.4) has been used to treat
val flora of the dog consists of a number of species whereas
toxoplasmosis· in cats, at a dose of 25 mg/kg daily in
the cat conjunctiva harbours relatively few micro-organ-
divided doses, although the resulting destruction of tachy-
isms. Hence, with the exception of conjunctivitis due to
 zoites may lead to an increased inflammatory response. Sul-
Chlamydophila (Chlamydia) infection, primary bacterial
fadiazine in combination with pyrimethamine has been used
conjunctivitis is rare in cats; viral infections are the more
in the past but toxicity precludes treatment with this regi
frequent cause of conjunctivitis seen in this species.
men and better agents are available.
Where only one eye is inivolved but, for prophylactic rea-
The use of topical compound preparations containing an
sons, the other eye is also being treated, medication should
antibacterial and a corticosteroid requires careful considera-
 be applied first to the unaffected eye to minimise the possi-
tion and the potential deleterious effects of corticosteroids
bility of cross-infection.
(see section 12.3.1) should always be taken into account.
Subconjunctival injections may be advantageous. Chloram-
12.2.1 Antibacterial preparations
phenicol sodium succinate, amikacin, gentamicin, ampicil-
lin, benzylpenicillin, sulphonamides, and ox ytetracycline
Bacterial infections of the eye in animals may be caused by
may be administered by this route.
Staphylococcus,Streptococcus,Bacilfus,Actinobacillus,
A vaccine is available for protection against Chlamydophila
Chlamydophila (Chlamydia),Moraxella,Micrococcus,Or
(Chtamydia) psittaci infection (see section 18.5.2) in cats.
Clostridium spp. This list is not exhausti ve and the bacteria
involved vary between species. Ocular infections usually
CHLORAMPHENICOL
present as conjunctivitis, blepharitis, keratitis, keratocon-
juncti vitis, or uveitis.
UK
The aminoglycosides
gentamicin,  tobramycin
and
Indications. Bacterial eye infections, see notes above
framycetin have a broad-spectrum bactericidal activity but
Contra-indications. Hypersensitivity to chloramphenicol;
should not be used in food-producing animals
in effect and toxicity to neomycin and is active against Pro-
Warnings. Operators should wear impermeable disposable
teus spp. Tobramycin has been shown to be active against
gloves when handling the product and avoid contact with
strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa that have developed
skinl
resistance to gentamicin and is useful for the treatment of
 Dose. Eye drops, apply up to 8 times daily for at least 2
melting ulcers in horses.
days
Cloxacillin is acti ve against a wide-range of bacteria, the
POM  Chlorarmphenicol (Non-proprietary) UK
main indications are infections caused by Staphyfococcus
Eye drops, chlorarmphenicol 0.5%
spp. and Bacilfus spp. This drug is effective for the treat-
Eye ointment, chloramphenicol 1%
ment of infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis and conta-
POM Chloromycetin V Redidrops (Pfizer) U/K
gious ophthalmia (infectious keratoconjunctivitis) in sheep.
Eye drops, chlorarmphenicol 0.5%, for dogs, cats
Chloramphenicol has a broad spectrum of activity and is
lipid soluble and hence is particularly useful for intra-ocular
CHLORTETRACYCLINE HYDROCHLORIDE
infections.
Chlortetracycline has a bacteriostatic action against some
UK
staphylococci, streptococci, some Gram-negative bacteria,
Indications.Bacterial eye infections in dogs and cats,
and Mycoplasma. It is effective for the treatment of infec-
infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis
tious bovine keratoconjunctivitis (New Forest Disease,
Dose. Catle: apply 1/4 tube ointment at least once daily as
pinkeye) caused by Moraxella bovis. Chlortetracycline is
necessary
used to treat conjunctivitis due to Chlamydophila (Chlamy-
Dogs, cats: apply at least 3 times daily
dia) infection in cats. Oral doxycycline, at a dose of 5 mg/
POM Aureomycin Ophthalmic Ointment (Fort Dodge)UK
kg· once or twice daily for 21 to 28 days has also been
Eye ointment, chlortetracycline hydrochloride 1%, for cale, dogs, cats
advocated for the treatment of Chlamydophila (Chlamydia)
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk withdrawal
infections inn cats. Azithromycin may also be useful but fur-
period nil
ther studies are required before this drug may be recom-
CIPROFLOXACIN
mended. Amoxicillin with clavulanic acid has also been
used.
Fusidic acid has particular action against staphylococci,
UK
Indications. Superficial bacterial eye infections
which are common causes of bacterial blepharitis and con-
Warnings. Treatment recommended for a maximum of 21
 juncti vitis in dogs.
days in humans
The fluoroquinolones ciprofloxacin or ofloxacin have
Dose. Eye drops, apply 4 times daily. Increase frequency
broad-spectrum bactericidal acti vity against Gram-negative
 of application when treating serious bacterial corneal
and to a lesser extent Gram-positive organisms. They have
ulceration
12.2 Anti-infective eye preparations 365
POM() Ciloxan (Alcon) UK
POM Clinagel Vet (Janssen) U/K
Eye drops, ciproflox acin (as hydrochloride) 0.3%
Eye oiniment, gentarmicin (as sulfate) 0.3%, for dogs, cats
CLOXACILLIN
POM Tiacil (Virbac) UK
Eye drops, gentarmicin sulfate 0.3%, for dogs, cats, rabbits
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used on rubbits intended for hurman
UK
consurn ption
Indications. Bacterial eye infections, particularly Staphy-
lococcus spp., Bacillus spp., and Moraxella spp.
Contra-indications. Penicillin hypersensitivity
NEOMYCIN SULFATE
Dose. Horses: apply l4-l2 tube ointment as a single dose,
(Neomycin sulphate)
repeat daily as necessary
Cattle: apply 14-%2 tube ointment as a single dose, repeat
UK
after 2-3 days as recessary
Indications.Bacterial eye infections sensitive to neomycin
 Sheep: apply /4 tube ointment as a single dose, repeat after
sulfate
2-3 days as necessary
Contra-indications. Hypersensitivity to the product
 Dose. Eye drops, apply 2-4 times daily
daily as necessary
POM  Neomycin (Non-proprietary) UK
Eye drops, neormycin sulfate 0.5%
POM Opticlox (Norbrook) UK
Eye oiniment, neormnycin sulfate 0.5%
Eye oinimen, cloxacillin (as benzathine salt) 16.7%,for horses, catle,
sheep,dogs,cats
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period mil, rmilk withdrawal
period nil
OFLOXACIN
POM Orbenin Ophthalmic Ointment (Pfizer) UK
UK
s e    g s   
for horses,catle,sheep,dogs,cats
Indications. Bacterial eye infections
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
Warnings. Treatment recommended for a maximum of 10
period nil
days in humans
Dose. Eye drops, apply 4 times daily. May be applied more
FRAMYCETIN SULFATE
frequently if severe infection present
(Framycetin sulphate)
POMH Exocin (Allergan) UK
UK
Eye drops, ofloxacin 0.3%
Indications. Bacterial eye infections
Dose. Eye drops or ointment, apply 4 times daily
OXYTETRACYCLINE
POM Soframycin (Florizel) UK
UK
Eye drops, frarmycetin sulfate 0.5%
Eye ointment, frarmycetin sulfate 0.5%
Indications. Bacterial eye infections
Dose. Cattle: by subconjunctival injection, 25-50 mg
FUSIDIC ACID
(0.25-0.5 mL)
UK
POM Terramycin Q100 (Pfizer) U/K
Indications. Bacterial eye infections, in particular Staphy-
See section I.1.2 for preparation details
lococcus spp. infections
Contra-indications. Conjunctivitis due to Pseudomonas
spp. infection; hypersensitivity to fusidic acid
COMPOUND ANTIBACTERIAL OPHTHALMIC
Dose. Dogs, cats, rabbits: apply 1-2 times daily
PREPARATIONS
POM Fucithalmic Vet (LEO) UK
Eye drops (viscous),rm/r, fusidic acid 1%, for dogs, cats, rabbits
UK
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used on rabbits intended for human 
POM  Neosporin (PLIVA) UK
consumption
Eye drops, grarmicidin 25 units, neormycin sulfate 1700 units, polymyxin B
sulfate 5000 units/mL
Dose. Apply 4 tirmes daily
GENTAMICIN SULFATE
POM Polyfax (PLIVA) UK
(Gentamicin sulphate)
Eye ointment, polymixin B sulfate 10 000 units, bacitracin zinc 500 units/g;
Dose. Apply wice daily
UK
Indications. Bacterial eye infections, see notes above
POM Polytrim (PLIVA)UK
Dose. Dogs, cats, rabbits: apply 2-3 times daily. Drops
Eye drops, trirmethoprim 0.1 %, polymixin B sulfate 10 000 units/mL
Dose. Apply 2-4 tirmes daily
may be applied more frequently if severe bacterial infection
Eye ointment, trirmethopri 0.5%, polymixin B sulfate 10 000 units/mL
present
Dose. Apply rwice daily
366Eye
12.2.2 Antifungal preparations
LYSINE
Ocular fungal infections may be superficial, for example
(L-Lysine)
mycotic keratitis, or intra-ocular such as mycotic endoph-
UK
thalmitis; both conditions are rare in the UK.
Intra-ocular manifestations of systemic mycotic infections
Indications. Feline herpesvirus infection, see notes above
Warnings. Formulations containing propylene glycol are
in dogs and cats, such as blastomycosis, cryptococcosis,
toxic to cats and must not be used
geotrichosis, and histoplasmosis, usually present as a focal
Dose. Cats: by mouth, 250 mg daily. May be given during
granulomatous posterior uveitis, often involving the retina
clinical episode of FHV 1 infection and also long-term in
and other tissues of the eye.
carrier cats. Higher doses of 500 mg have also beenn used
Specialist antifungal preparations are available from Moor-
fields Eye Hospital, after identification of specific fungi by
Preparations containing lysine are available from health food shops
appropriate laboratory procedures.
Most topical antifungal drugs have poor corneal penetration
TRIFLURIDINE
and systemic antifungals (see section 1.2) such as ketocona-
(Trifluorothymidine)
zole and amphotericin B are used for treatment.
UK
Indications. See notes above
Dose. Cats: eye drops, apply 4-6 times daily for 3-4 days
12.2.3 Antiviral preparations
 until clinical improvement, then apply 3 times daily
Feline herpesvirus (FHV) is a common cause of acute conl-
junctivitis and chronic keratitis and is also a potential respi-
POMH Trifluridine Eye Drops 1%
ratory pathogen. Trifluridine has been shown to be
Eye drops containing trifluridine are not generally available. Contact the
local pharmacist or Moorfields Eye Hospital to obtain a supply in the UK
efficacious against feline herpesvirus-1 in vitro and appears
to be clinically useful. Aciclovir has very limited in vitro
effect thus its clirical use is limited in cats. Ganciclovir has
12.3 Anti-inflammatory preparations
been shown to be effective in human herpes simplex kerati-
tis but its use in cats remains to be investi gated. Oral lysine
12.3.1 Corticosteroids
has been shown in vitro to inhibit virus replication and
12.3.2 NSAIDs
12.3.3 Antihistamines
uncontrolled studies in both humans and cats seem to show
12.3.4 Immunosuppressants
a beneficial effect. Clinical trials in cats are currently in
progress to test the efficacy of this amino acid in FHV-1
infections.
12.3.1 Corticosteroids
Some forms of equine superficial punctate keratitis may be
The anti-inflammatory effects of corticosteroids are based
due to equine herpesvirus infection; aciclovir may be effec-
eosa uo rrede ssins on Ae rnn uon
tive in these cases.
exudation, leucocyte migration, and immunosuppression
regardless of the causati ve agent. In chronic conditions they
ACICLOVIR
inhibit neovascularisation and fibroblastic activity in the
eye. This may be useful in preventing scarring and pigment
(Acyclovir)
deposition in the cornea but disadvantageous by retarding
healing. In general, topical preparations readily penetrate
UK
 Indications. See notes above
the cornea. The ester of the corticosteroid used influences
Dose. Horses, cats: eye ointment, apply 5-6 times daily
corneal penetration, for ex ample, predrisolone acetate has a
superior corneal penetration  to predrisolone sodium
POM Zovirax (GSK) UK
phosphate.
Eye ointment, aciclovir 3%
Topical corticosteroids are particularly useful in the treat-
 ment of uveitis, various specific and non-specific inflam-
matory disorders of the cornea, such as chronic superficial
GANCICLOVIR
keratitis (CSK, pannus) in the German Shepherd dog. They
also assist in the reduction of post-surgical inflammation,
UK
such as that following cataract or lens ex traction.
Indications. See notes above
Following administration, therapeutic levels remain in the
Side-effects. Local irritation, conjunctival hyperaemia
eye for only about three hours and this may necessitate fre-
Dose. Cats: apply 1 drop 4-6 times daily. Maximum
quent application to prevent treatment failure. Low levels of
 period of treatment 21 days 
systemic absorption will occur after frequent application of
topical steroids and this should be considered in animals of
POM Virgan (Chauvin) UK
low body-weight and those with metabolic diseases such as
Eye drops,ganciclovir0.15% in gel basis
diabetes mellitus. Topical corticosteroids should not be used
12.3 Anti-inflammatory preparations 367
in the presence of corneal ulceration; systemic NSAIDs
POM Betnesol (Celltech) UK
should be considered. Corticosteroids may be used in the
Drops (for eye, ear, or nose), betarmethasone sodiun phosphate 0.1%
 presence of glaucoma in animals but care should obviously
Eye ointment, betarmeth asone sodiurm phosphate 0.1 %
be taken in the differential diagnosis of a 'red eye'. All cor-
POM  Vista-Methasone (Martindale) UK
ticosteroids should be used with care in pregnant animals
Eye drops, betarmethasonesodiurn phosphate 0. 1%
because there is a slight risk of intra-uterine growth
retardation.
Subconjunctival injections may augment, or replace, topical
DEXAMETHASONE
instillation. Preparations of methylprednisolone acetate or
UK
weeks. Their use may sometimes be effective for owners
Indications. See notes above
experiencing difficulty in applying drops. Subconjunctival
Contra-indications. Corneal ulceration, see riotes above
therapy may be used for the treatment of bovine iritis. Beta-
Warnings. Care in pregnant animals
methasone sodium phosphate (2 mg) or dexamethasone
Dose. Apply every 2-3 hours
      ) 
nisolone (10 to 20 mg, depot injection) every 7 to 14 days
POM Maxidex (Alcon) UK
may be administered by subconjunctival injection for the
Eye drops, dex armethasone 0.1%, hyprormellose 0.5%
treatment of inflammatory ocular conditions in horses.
POM Minims Dexamethasone (Chauvin) UK
However, subconjunctival granulomas, plaques, or mineral-
Eye drops, dex armethasone sodiurri phosphate 0.1 %
isation can occur at the injection site. It is recommended
that specialist advice be sought before using subconjuncti-
val corticosteroid treatment in equines.
FLUOROMETHOLONE
Care must be taken with the use of topical corticosteroids in
horses because the alteration in ocular micro-environment
UK
can predispose to fungal infections. Similar caution must be
 Indications. See notes above
exercised in cats with suspected herpetic keratitis because
Contra-indications. Corneal ulceration, see niotes above
local immunosuppression caused by the corticosteroid can
Warnings. Care in pregnant animals
allow recrudescence of the herpes virus.
Dose. Apply 4 times daily
The use of systermic corticosteroids for ophthalmic therapy
POMH FML (Allergan) UK
is limited because lower ocular concentrations are achieved
than with topical application. However, systemic therapy
Eye drops, fluorormetholone 0.1 %, polyvinyl alcohol 1.4%
may be useful for idiopathic partial serous retinal detach-
ments, posterior uveitis, and optic neuritis. There is an asso-
PREDNISOLONE
ciation between cataractogenesis and steroid therapy in
humans but this has not been described in animals. The
UK
Indications. See notes above
ticosteroids may be minimised by alternate day therapy
Contra-indications. Corneal ulceration, see notes above
Equine recurrent uveitis (periodic ophthalmia) is a disease
Warnings. Care in pregrant animals
of horses resulting in recurrent photophobia, lacrimation,
Dose. Apply 4 times daily
conjunctival injection, corneal changes (such as oedema
POMH Pred Forte (Allergan) UK
and vascularisation), hypopyon, miosis, synechiation, and
Eye drops, prednisolone acetate 1%
even blindness due to extensive synechiae, cataract forma-
tion, or phthisis bulbi. Some forms of the disease have been
POM H Predsol (Celtech) UK
linked to Leptospira infection, although in many instances
Drops (eye drops or ear drops), predrisolone sodium phosphate 0.5%
the aetiology remains obscure. Treatment consists of topical
POM  Minims Prednisolone (Chauvin) UK
and possibly subconjunctival corticosteroids, NSAIDs, and
Eye drops, prednisolone sodiurn phosphate 0.5% (single use)
if bacterial infection is suspected, systemic antibacterials.
Topical atropine is used to achieve a mid-dilated pupil.
RIMEXOLONE
BETAMETHASONE
UK
Indications.Treatment oflocal inflammation
UK
Warnings. Care in pregnant animals
Indications. See notes above
 Dose. Apply 1 drop 2-4 times daily for up to 4 weeks. May
Contra-indications. Corneal ulceration, fungal or viral
be used more frequently for severe uveitis
infections, see notes above
Warnings. Care in pregnant animals 
POM Vexol (Alcon) UK
Dose. Apply every 2-3 hours
Eye rops,rimexolone 1%
368Eye
COMPOUNDCORTICOSTEROIDANDANTI-
DICLOFENAC SODIUM
BACTERIAL OPHTHALMIC PREPARATIONS
UK
Preparations containing antibacterial and glucocorticoid
Indications. Pre-operati ve treatment for cataract extraction
agents in combination can be useful in cases of infected
Dose. Apply 1 drop once every 30 minutes starting 2 hours
inflammatory processes such as bacterial keratitis, and for
before surgery for a total of 4 drops
prophylaxis, for example following intra-ocular surgery
where control of inflammation is important but a risk of
POM Voltarol Ophtha (Novartis) UK
infection also exists. A specific diagnosis and rationale for
Eye drops, diclofenac sodium 0.1% (single use)
combination therapy should always be established.
FLURBIPROFENSODIUM
UK
UK
Indications. See notes above
Indications. Pre-operati ve treatment for cataract extraction
Contra-indications. Corneal ulceration
Dose. Apply 1 drop once every 30 minutes starting 2 hours
Warnings. Care in pregrant animals
 before surgery for a total of 4 drops
Dose. See preparation details
POM Oeufen (Allergan) UK
POM Maxitrol (Alcon) UK
Eye drops, flurbiprofen sodium 0.03%, polyvinyl alcohol 1 .4% (single use)
Eye drops, dexarmethasone 0.1%, hyprormellose 0.5%, neormycin (as sulfate)
0.35%, polyrmyx in B sulfate 6000 units/mL
Dose. Apply4 times daily
KETOROLAC TROMETAMOL
POM Maxitrol (Alcon) UK
UK
Eye ointment, dexarmethasone 0.1%, neormycin (as sulfate) 0.35%, poly-
Indications. Prophylaxis and reduction of inflammation
rmyxin B sulfate 6000 units/g
Dose. Apply 3 tirmes daily
following ocular surgery; treatment of anterior uveitis
Contra-indications. Hypersensitivity to ketorolac
POM Vista-Methasone N (Martindale) UK
Warnings. Caution in animals with bleeding disorders
Eye drops, betarmethasone sodiurm phosphate 0.1%, neormycin sulfate 0.5%
Dose. Apply 1 drop 3 times daily, starting 24 hours before
surgery
POM H Acular (Allergen) UK
Eye drops, kerorolac trometamol0.5%
12.3.2 NSAIDs
Systemic NSAIDs may be used instead of systemic corti-
12.3.3 Antihistamines
costeroids. If used peri -operatively adequate renal perfusion
Antihistamines may have a limited use in reducing inflam-
must be maintained to reduce the risk of kidney damage.
mation associated with immunoglobulin (IgE)-mediated
Carprofen is a useful analgesic anti-inflammatory agent and
immediate hypersensitivity reactions. Antihistamine ther-
may be used both for surgical and medical conditions. Aspi-
apy has been largely replaced by the use of corticosteroids.
rin is occasionally used, by mouth, pre-operatively
to
However, for allergic conjunctivitis in dogs, levocabastine
reduce inflammation during intra-ocular surgery, although
and lodoxamide have shown some efficacy, although treat-
adequate penetration is ex tremely unlikely and it has largely
ment should usually be given before the condition becomes
 been replaced by the newer anti-infl ammatory agents. Mel-
serious. It is possible to commence treatment with topical
oxicam may also be used. See section 10.1 for drug and
corticosteroids and then change to topical antihistamines for
product information.
long-term maintenance once the inflammation is in
Topical NSAIDs, such as diclofenac, flurbiprofen, and
remission.
ketorolac have been used as pre-operative treatment of
canine patients undergoing cataract extraction. They inhibit
intra-operative pupillary constriction which, if it occurs, can
LEVOCABASTINE
complicate cataract extraction. Additionally, their anti-
inflammatory actions are additive to those of the pre- and
UK
postoperative corticosteroids usually required in these
Indications. Seasonal allergic conjunctivitis
patients. They may also prove to be useful in the manage-
Contra-indications.Hypersensitivity to the product
ment of anterior uveitis in dogs. Topical applications of
Side-effects. Occasional local irritation
NSAIDs overcome the potentially serious side-effects
Dose. Apply 1 drop twice daily. May increase to 3-4 times
which may accompany systemic NSAIDs.
Howevet,
daily. Treatment should be stopped after 3-4 days if no clin-
ical improvement
NSAIDs may extend bleeding time and topical or systemic
preparations should probably not be used in procedures
POM (H Livostin (Novartis) UK
where intra-ocular haemorrhage is a likely complication.
Eye drops, levocabastine (as hydrochloride) 0.05%
12.4 Mydriatics and cycloplegics 369
LODOXAMIDE
ATROPINE SULFATE
(Atropine sulphate)
UK
 Indications. Allergic conjunctivitis
UK
Side-effects. Occasional mild transient stinging or itching
Indications. Relief of ciliary muscle spasm, maintenance
Dose. Apply 1 drop 2-4 times daily
of patent pupil
POM Alomide (Alcon) UK
Contra-indications. Keratoconjunctivitis sicca, glaucoma
Eye drops, lodoxarmide (as trormetarmol) 0. 1%
Side-effects. Bitter taste, see notes above
Warnings. Systemic toxicity if applied frequently to ani-
12.3.4 Immunosuppressants
mals of low body-weight
Dose. Apply up to 3-4 times daily
Ciclosporin (see section 12.6) has an anti-inflammatory
POM Atropine (Non-proprietary) UK
action by inhibiting T helper lymphocytes. The drug has
Eye drops, atropine sulfate 1%
been shown to be effective in treating carine ocular surface
Eye ointment, atropine sulfate 1%
POM  Isopto Atropine (Alcon) UK
keratoconjunctivitis sicca, chronic superficial keratitis (pan-
nus), and plasmacytic conjunctivitis of the third eyelid +.
Eye drops, atropine sulfate 1%, hypomellose 0.5%
POM Minims Atropine Sulfate (Chauvin) UK
Eye drops, atropine sulfate 1% (single use)
12.4 Mydriatics and cycloplegics
CYCLOPENTOLATE HYDROCHLORIDE
Adrenoceptor stimulants  (sympathomimetics) such
as
UK
epinephrine (adrenaline) and phenylephrine dilate the pupil
Indications. Mydriasis and cycloplegia
by stimulating the dilator muscle of the iris. Antimuscarinic
Contra-indications. Glaucoma
Side-effects. Conjuncti val irritation
and the ciliary muscle (cycloplegia).
Dose. Apply 1 drop. Repeat after 15 minutes if required
Atropine is frequently used to relieve muscle spasm, and
POM H Mydrilate (Intrapharm) UK
therefore pain, associated with anterior uveitis (iridocycli-
Eye drops, cyclopentolate hydrochloride 0.5%, 1 %
tis). It is also useful in maintaining an open pupil in the
presence of exudation and preventing the formation of ante-
POM H Minims Cyclopentolate(Chauvin) UK
rior and posterior synechiae. Treatment is aimed at achiey-
Eye drops, cyclopentolate hydrochloride 0.5%, 1 % (single use)
ing a moderately dilated pupil. The duration of action,
which is several days in the normal eye, is greatly reduced
PHENYLEPHRINE HYDROCHLORIDE
in uveitis and 3 to 4 applications daily may be necessary.
UK
However, the duration of action in horses may be much
      
extended compared to other species. Atropine is contra-
syndrome in dogs and cats
indicated in glaucoma and keratoconjunctivitis sicca. In
Warnings. Possible risk of systemic absorption and cardiac
addition, the potential risk of systemic effects should be
effects if frequently applied to animals of low body-weight
considered in animals of low body-weight. Atropine has a
with cardiac disease
bitter taste and hypersalivation may occur following naso-
Dose. Apply 1 drop
lacrimal drainage. Cats, in particular, dislike the taste of
atropine and ointment may be better tolerated than drops in
PPhenylephrine (Non-proprietary) UK
this species.
Eye drops, phenylephrine hydrochloride 10%
Cyclopentolate is a tertiary amine antimuscarimic agent
PMinims Phenylephrine Hydrochloride (Chauvin） UK
with actions similar to atropine. It has a long duration of
Eye drops, phenylephrine hydrochloride 2.5%, 10% (single use)
dogs is limited due to conjuncti val irritation and chemosis.
TROPICAMIDE
Tropicamide, a non-cycloplegic, has the most rapid onset
of action, and is the mydriatic of choice for intra-ocular
UK
ex amination and fundoscopy. The effect is maximal within
Indications. Mydriasis for intra-ocular examination and
30 minutes and persists for several hours.
fundoscopy
Phenylephrine is effecti ve as a my dri atic in dogs but not in
Conta-indications. Glaucoma, caution in breeds predis-
cats. Phenylephrine is useful in the investigation 
of
posed to primary glaucoma or goniodysgenesis. Intra-
Horner's syndrome. When Horner's syndrome is the result
ocular pressure should be monitored
of lesions in the third (postganglionic) neurone, the pupil on
Dose. Apply 1 drop. Repeat after 15 minutes if required
the affected side will dilate more rapidly (within 20 min-
POM Mydriacyl (Alcon) UK
utes) due to denervation hypersensiti vity.
Eye drops, tropicarmide 0.5%, 1%
370Eye
POMMinims Tropicamide (Chauvin) UK
Eye drops, tropicarmide 0.5%, 1% (single use)
bonic anhydrase inhi bitor, a topical prostaglandin analogue,
or both as follows:
 glycerol (see section 16.4) by mouth, 1-2 mL/kg
or
mannitol 20% solution (see section 4.2.5) by intrave-
nous injection given over 20 to 30 minutes, 5- 10 mL/kg
12.5 Drugs used in glaucoma
acetazolamide (see section 12.5.1) by intravenous
injection, 5-25 mg/kg
12.5.1 Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
latanoprost 0.005% (see section 12.5.2) 1 drop to
12.5.2 Prostaglandin analogues
affected eye(s). Should not be used if pupil block is
12.5.3 Miotics
present or miosis not desired (e.g. with anterior lens
12.5.4 Beta-blockers
luxation)
Glaucoma is a common condition in dogs and occurs, to a
12.5.1 Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
lesser extent, in other species. It almost invariably arises
through impairment of aqueous drainage. The causes are
These substances act by inhibiting the carbonic anhydrase
many and include acquired or inherited ocular disease,
enzyme present in the ciliary epithelium, which catalyses
uveitis, cataract, lens luxation, neoplasia, and intra-ocular
the reversible hydration of carbon dioxide and leads to
haemorrhage. In some breeds of dog, glaucoma is inherited
aqueous humour production. Acetazolamide administered
as a primary condition. Chronic open-angle glaucoma, as
orally results in a lowering of intra-ocular pressure within
seen in humans, is much less common in animals, but is
an hour and the effect may persist for at least 8 hours. The
enicountered occasionally. Clinical signs of the early stages
concentration of the available oral formulation precludes its
of glaucoma are difficult to assess and many cases present
use in animals of 1ow body-weight. Acetazolamide may be
 at a late stage of the disease when medical therapy alone is
admi nistered intravenously in emergencies.
unlikely to succeed. In such cases, surgical intervention to
Diclofenamide (dichlorphenamide), which may only be
facilitate aqueous drainage is the only practical alternative
administered orally, has a similar duration of action but has
to enucleation. The clinical history, presenting signs, intra-
the advantage of fewer side-effects. Administering the drug
ocular pressure, and gonioscopic findings will influence the
in divided doses may further minimise the side-effects.
choice of treatment. Medical therapy will not succeed in a
Dorzolamide and brinzolamide are topical carbonic anhy-
globe that has become enlarged, such as in hydrophthalmos
drase inhibitors, which have been shown to be efficacious in
or buphthalmos. Intra-ocular pressure should be measured
regularly in order to monitor the effects of treatmenit.
has been shown to be effective in cats and horses. Systemic
Depending on the aetiology, medical therapy for glaucoma
side-effects are far less common than with oral preparations
may include a combination of a miotic to increase aqueous
but care should be exercised in animals of low body -weight.
outflow and a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor to inhibit aque-
Combination preparations (carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
ous production. Beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs have
with beta-blockers) have not beenn evaluated in animals.
been shown experimentally to be of use in the treatment of
The concurrent use of both a systemic and topical carbonic
some forms of canine glaucoma, although the preparations
anhy drase inhibitor is not recommended.
found to be most efficacious were of higher concentration
than commercially available preparations. Cardiac side-
ACETAZOLAMIDE
effects, bronchoconstriction, or both may be seen with the
use of more concentrated preparations. Thus ex trapolation
UK
of topical drug efficacy in humans to animals is not
Indications. Glaucoma, see notes above
Side-effects. Lethargy, vomiting, diarrhoea, polydipsia,
recommended.
Currently the most widely used medical treatments for
polyuria, hypokalaemia
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 5- 10 mg/kg 2-4 times daily
canine glaucoma are a topical carbonic anhy drase inhibitor,
by intravenous injection, 5-25 mg/kg
 often combined with a prostaglandin analogue.
POMH Diamox (Goldshield) UK
Emergency treatment of glaucoma. Emergency lowering
Tablets, acetazolarmide 250 rng
of intra-ocular pressure is required when pupil block is
njection, powder for reconstiution, acetazolamide (as sodiurm salt) 500 mg
present (such as in anterior lens luxation, extensive poste-
BRINZOLAMIDE
rior synechiae) or in an acute rise in intra-ocular pressure
due to primary angle closure glaucoma. In these cases,
UK
emergency lowering of intra-ocular pressure is used to pre-
vent continuation of retinal and optic nerve head damage
Indications. Glaucoma, see notes above
Side-effects. Lethargy, vomiting, diarrhoea, polydipsia,
and as a pre-operative measure.
polyuria, hypokalaemia
12.5 Drugs used in glaucoma  371
Dose. Dogs: eye drops, 1 drop 2-3 times daily
Side-effects. Conjuncti val hyperaemia, superficial punc-
tate keratopathy, iris colour change
POM Azopt (Alcon) UK
Warnings. Store at 2-8° C. Once opened, may be stored at
Eye drops, brinzolarmide 10 mg/mL
room temperature for up to 6 weeks
DICLOFENAMIDE
Dose. Eye drops, apply l drop once daily (preferably at
(Dichlorphenamide)
might)
POM  Xalatan (Pharmacia) UK
UK
Eye drops, Iataroprost 50 micrograrms/mL (0.005%)
Indications. Glaucoma, see notes above
Side-effects. Lethargy,
vomiting, diarrhoea, polydipsia,
TRAVOPROST
polyuria, hypokalaemia
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 5-15 mg/kg daily in 2-3 divided
UK
doses
Indications. Glaucoma in dogs
Preparations of diclofenarmide are not generally available. A supply may be
Contra-indications. Uveitis
obtained as a 'Special Order'from Rosemont in the UK. However, it rmay be
 Side-effects. Conjunctival hyperaemia, superficial punc-
difficult to obtain a supply of this preparation
tate keratopathy, iris colour change
Dose. Eye drops, apply l drop once daily (preferably at
DORZOLAMIDE
might)
UK
POM  Travatan (Alcon) UK
Indications. Glaucoma
Eye drops, travoprost 40 micrograrms/mL (0.004%)
Dose. Dogs: eye drops, 1 drop 3 times daily
12.5.3 Miotics
POMH Trusopt (MSD) UK
Eye drops, dorzolarmide (as hydrochloride) 2%
Miotics alone are usually insufficient to lower intra-ocular
pressure significantly. The most useful drug is pilocarpine,
12.5.2 Prostaglandin analogues
a parasympathomimetic miotic. It penetrates the cornea,
produces miosis within 15 minutes and is effective for 6 to
Latanoprost is a prostaglandin F2, analogue, which exerts
anl ocular hypotensive effect by increasing uveoscleral out-
8 hours. Initially, frequent applications are required, there-
after it is instilled 3 to 4 times daily. Pilocarpine may pro-
flow of aqueous humour. Intra-ocular pressure is reduced
within 3 to 4 hours of instillation and lasts for 24 hours.
duce local irritation. Cats appear to be more susceptible to
 Mild conjunctival hyperaemia and iridal darkening have
the side-effects of pilocarpine. Carbachol has a longer
been reported in humans with the use of latanoprost. It can
duration of action than pilocarpine and can be used for
cause profound miosis in dogs. No intra-ocular lowering
open-angle glaucoma.
Miotics are contra-indicated if anterior uveitis or anterior
effect was reported in cats. Combination products (latano-
prost with beta-blockers) have not been evaluated in glau-
lens luxation is present, although it has been suggested that
comatous animals. Travoprost and bimatoprost are
the use of miotics immediately before surgical removal of
an anteriorly lux ated lens may help to prevent the lens moy-
similar agents, which have been recently introduced.
Prostaglandin analogues should not be used if concurrent
ing posteriorly during surgery.
uveitis is present.
CARBACHOL
BIMATOPROST
UK
UK
Indications. Glaucoma, see notes above
Indications. Glaucoma in dogs
Contra-indications. Anterior uveitis, anterior lens luxa-
Contra-indications. Uveitis
tion, see notes above
Side-effects. Conjunctival hyperaemia, superficial punc
Dose. Dogs: apply 2-3 times daily
tate keratopathy, iris colour change
POM H Isopto Carbachol (Alcon) UK
e Aigegeid) Aiep souo doip I ridde sdaip ag asoa
Eye drops, catbachol 3%,hyprormellose 1%
mnight)
PILOCARPINE
POMH Lumigan (Allergan) UK
Eye drops, bimatoprost 300 rmicrograrms/mL (0.03%)
UK
Indications. Glaucoma, see notes above; improvement of
LATANOP ROST
tear secretion (see section 12.6)
Contra-indications. Anterior uveitis, anterior lens luxa-
UK
tion, see notes above
Indications. Glaucoma in dogs
Side-effects. Local
irritation, nausea, hypersalivation,
Contra-indications. Uveitis
diarrhoea
372Eye
Dose. Eye drops, apply 1% or 2% solution 3-4 times daily
required frequency of application depends on the severity of
Long-acting eye gel, apply 4% solution once daily at night
the condition and the preparation used. For more severe
cases, frequent application of up to 8 to 10 times daily may
POM Pilocarpine Hydrochloride (Non-proprietary) UK
be indicated; in some patients this may prove impracticable.
Eye drops, pilocarpine hydrochloride 0.5%, 1 %, 2%
A mucolytic, such as acetylcysteine, may be beneficial
POM( Pilogel (Alcon) UK
where tears are particularly mucoid and viscous.
Long-acting eye gel, pilocarpine hydrochloride 4%, cabormer 940 (poly-
Pilocarpine (see section 12.5.3) has been used to improve
acrylic acid) 3.5%
tear secretion in patients that have some residual lacrimal
POM) Minims Pilocarpine Nitrate (Chauvin) UK
gland function. One to four drops of a 1% solution are
Eye drops, pilocarpine nitrate 1 %, 2% (single use)
administered by mouth, once or twice daily, for an initial
trial period of 4 to 6 weeks. The development of systemic
12.5.4 Beta-blockers
side-effects, such as hypersalivation and nausea, is possible
Beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs inhibit beta adrenocep-
particularly in animals of low body-weight.
tors in the ciliary epithelium to reduce the secretion of aque-
Topical corticosteroids may be beneficial in some cases of
KCS. They may be applied only when there is no corneal
ous humour. Although they are the mainstay of treatment in
ulceration. They probably have an anti-inflammatory action
human glaucoma, their efficacy in equine, canine, and
feline glaucoma is limited. However they may be used in
in the tear producing tissues and also control the superficial
association with a topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitor
pigmentary keratitis which results from chronicity of the
(combination preparations are availbale but have not been
condition. Owners should be warned of the potential of cor-
evaluated in animals). Timolol is the most commonly used
ticosteroids to exacerbate any corneal ulceration that may
beta-bloc ker.
occur and frequent monitoring is mandatory.
Topical antibacterials may also be indicated because sec-
TIMOLOL
ondary bacterial infectionis occur in some cases of KCS.
UK
ACETYLCYSTEINE
Indications. Glaucoma
UK
Dose. Eye drops, apply twice daily
Indications. Tear deficiency; collagenase ulcers
POM  Timolol (Non-proprietary) UK
Dose. Apply up to 8-10 times daily
Eye drops, tirmolol (as rmaleate) 0.25%, 0.5%
POMH Ilube (Alcon) UK
POM Timoptol (MSD) UK
Eye drops, acetylcysteine 5%, hyprormellose 0.35%
Eye drops, tirmolol (as rmaleate) 0.25%
CARBOMERS
12.6 Drugs used in
(Polyacrylic acid)
keratoconjunctivitis sicca
UK
Indications. Tear deficiency
Keratoconjuncti vitis sicca (KCS) occurs in dogs but is rare
Dose. Apply up to 8-10 times daily
inl other species. Treatment consists of the replacement of
tear secretions, or the improvement of tear secretion. Man-
P GelTears (Chauvin) UK
agement of the condition by surgical procedures may be
Eye drops, cabormer 940 (polyacrylic acid) 0.2%
necessary.
P () Viscotears (Novartis Ophthalmics) UK
Ciclosporin has been shown to be effective in the treatment
Eye drops, cabomer 940 (polyacrylic acid) 0.2%
of some cases of KCS. Ciclosporin appears to have several
 beneficial actions including modulation of immune-medi-
CARMELLOSE SODIUM
ated destruction of tear secreting tissue and stimulation of
tear production. It also acts on the cornea to control the pig-
UK
mentary keratitis that accompanies many cases of KCS. An
Indications. Tear deficiency
increase in tear production is expected within 10 days, but
Dose. Apply up to 4-6 times daily
in some dogs it may take up to 6 weeks for maximal
P H Celluvisc (Allergan) UK
improvement.
Eye drops, carmellose sodium 1 % (single use)
A number of tear replacement preparations are available.
Many of the preparations contain hypromellose but others
CICLOSPORIN
are available containing agents such as carbomers or poly-
(Cyclosporin A, Cyclosporin)
vinyl alcohol which are designed to improve spread over
the ocular surface and duration of contact of the drops. It
UK
d  o  e   su  
Indications. Chronic recurrent conjunctivitis due to auto-
to find the most satisfactory for the individual patient. The
immunie
disease,
keratoconjunctivitis sicca, chronic
12.7 Local anaesthetics 373
superficial keratitis (pannus), plasmacytic conjunctivitis of
P Liquifilm Tears (Allergar) UK
the third eyelid (plasmoma)+; immune-mediated disease+,
Eye drops, polyvinyl alcohol 1.4%
perianal fistula+, anal furunculosis+, sebaceous adenitis 
PH) Sno Tears (Chauvin) UK
(see section 13.2); atopy (see section 14.2)
Eye drops, polyvinyl alcohol 1.4%
Contra-indications. Application with suspected concur-
rent ocular fungal or viral infection; pregnant bitches
12.7 Local anaesthetics
Side-effects. Transient mild irritation - discontinue treat-
ment if irritation persists; blepharitis if excess ointment has
been allowed to contact the eyelids
Local anaesthetics should only be used for diagnostic and
Warnings. Operators should wear impervious gloves when
minor surgical procedures. They can be toxic to corneal epi-
thelial cells and also block the afferent arm of the lacrima-
applying ointment, avoid skin contact, wash hands after
tion reflex and corneal blink reflex. The preservatives in
use; safety in pregnant animals has not been established
Dose. Dogs: apply twice daily
 multidose preparations and the active drug itself may have
antibacterial actions and should not be applied before taking
POM Optimmune Ophthalmic Ointment (Schering-Plough) UK
swabs for bacterial culture. Proxymetacaine has a rapid
Eye ointment, ciclosporin 0.2%, for dogs
onset of action and the effect persists for 15 to 20 minutes.
Tetracaine has a more prolonged effect but often stings on
HYLAN A
admi mistration.
UK
PROXYMETACAINE HYDROCHLORIDE
Indications. Tear deficiency
(Proparacaine)
Contra-indications. Concurrent ocular infection
Dose. Apply 1 drop 2-4 times daily
UK
 Comfort Shield (i.com Medical) Ger
Indications. Topical local anaesthesia
Eye drops, hylan A 0.15%
required
HYPROMELLOSE
POM Minims Proxymetacaine (Chauvin) UK
UK
Eye drops, proxymetacaine hydrochloride 0.5% (single use)
Indications. Tear deficiency
 Dose. Apply up to 8-10 times daily
TETRACAINE HYDROCHLORIDE
(Amethocaine hydrochloride)
P(H Hypromellose (Non-proprietary) UK
Eye drops, hypromellose 0.3%
UK
P Isopto Alkaline (Alcon) UK
Indications. Local anaesthesia
Eye drops, hyprormellose 1 %
Dose. Apply 1 drop. May be repeated after 5-10 mirutes if
P Isopto Plain (Alcon) UK
required
Eye drops, hypromellose 0.5%
POM Minims Amethocaine (Chauvin) UK
P Tears Naturale (Alcon) UK
Eye drops, tetracaine hydrochloride 0.5%, 1% (single use)
Eye drops, dexran 70*0.1%, hypromellose 0.3%
12.8 Diagnostic stains
LIQUID PARAFFIN
The ophthalmic stains fluorescein sodium and rose bengal
UK
are used for the diagnosis of disorders of the cornea and
Indications. Tear deficiency
conjunctiva. Following instillation excess stain should be
Dose. Apply up to 4 times daily
washed out of the eye with sodium chloride solution 0.9%.
P Lacri-Lube (Allergan) UK
The main use of fluorescein sodium is in the diagnosis of
Eye ointment, white soft paraffin 57.3%, liquid paraffin 42.5%
corneal epithelial defects, in which areas denuded of epithe-
P Lubri-Tears (Alcon) U/K
lium are stained bright fluorescent green. It is also used to
assess the overall function of the nasolacrimal drainage sys-
Eye oiniment, white soft paraffin 60%, liquid paraffin 30%
tem (although the results of this test should be interpreted
POLYVINYL ALCOHOL
with care because false negatives are common), and in
fluorescein angiography of both anterior and posterior seg-
UK
ments of the eye.
Indications. Tear deficiency
Rose bengal stainis devitalised epithelial cells an intense
Dose. Apply up to 8-10 times daily
magenta. It can be useful in the detection of dendritic ulcers
that may result from feline herpesvirus infection in adult
P Hypotears (Novartis) UK
cats. Mucus is also stained and rose bengal is used in human
Eye drops, rmacrogol *8000 2%, polyvinyl alcohol 1%
374Eye
ophthalmology to aid in the diagnosis of keratoconjunctivi-
P(H) Fluorets (Bausch & Lormb) UK
tis sicca.
Impregnated-paer strips, fluorescein sodium I mg
P Minims Fluorescein Sodium (Chauvin) UK
Eye drops, fluorescein sodiurn I %, 2% (single use)
FLUORESCEIN SODIUM
ROSE BENGAL
UK
UK
Indications. Diagnosis of corneal epithelial defects and
Indications. Diagnosis of dendritic ulcers; see notes above
patency of rasolacrimal drainage systerm (see niotes above);
PMinims Rose Bengal (Chauvin) UK
angiography
Eye drops, rose bengal I % (single use)
375
13
 Drugs used in the treatment of
MALIGNANT DISEASE and for
IMMUNOSUPPRESSION
Contributor:
13.1 Cytotoxic drugs
JM Dobson MA, BVetMed, DVetMed, DipECVIM, MRCVS
13.1.1 Alkylating drugs
13.1 Cytotoxic drugs
13.1.2 Antimetabolites
13.2 Immunosuppressants
13.1.3 Antitumour antibiotics
13.3 Sex hormones and hormone
13.1.4 Vinca alkaloids
 antagonists
13.1.5 Platinum compounds
13.1.6 Other cytotoxic drugs
Conventional methods for cancer therapy in animals are
surgery, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy. These techniques
Cytotoxic drugs are classified according to their character-
need not be used in isolation, indeed the combination of
 istic sites or modes of action. Most cytotoxic drugs act upon
o ym s ed e o  ns
 the processes of cell growth and di vision.
directed at systemic disease is the most logical and poten-
These drugs are potent and potentially dangerous and
tially effecti ve way of managing malignant disease.
extreme care is required in their use. Careful consideration
Surgery is the the most effective form of treatment for solid
must be given to the pharmacology and toxicity of the drug,
tumours of skin, soft tissues, and bone. Advances in surgi-
the spectrum of drug activity, and the condition of the
cal technique mean that many primary tumours can be manl-
patient.
 The main indications for cytotoxic drugs in veterinary med-
resection are required to maximise the success of surgery.
Piroxicam (see section 10.1) may be used post-operati vely
after surgical debalking of a tumour. It has also been used
(lymphosarcoma), and multiple myeloma. Cytotoxic drugs
for palliative treatment of transitional cell carcinoma of the
 are of little value as sole agents in the management of large
bladder in dogs.
solid tumours such as mammary carcinoma or fibrosar-
The use of radiotherapy in veterinary medicine is limited by
coma. They may have a palliative role as adjuncts to sur-
the availability of and access to radiotherapy facilities.
  d     
 so s g   e 
metastatic disease associated with certain tumours, for
USA, UK, and rest of Europe are able to offer this tech-
example osteosarcoma or haemangiosarcoma. In this role
nique. The main role of radiotherapy is as a focaf treatment
chemotherapy is complementary to surgical excision of the
for malignant tumours, which cannot be controlled by sur-
primary tumour with the actions of the drugs directed at
gery alone. Radiotherapy cannot be used to treat wide-
 microscopic disease residual at the primary site or else-
spread disease because of its toxicity, although local lymph
where in the body in the form of micrometastases. The effi-
nodes may be included in treatment fields. (For further
cacy of adjunctive chemotherapy in tumours such as
    
Dobson J. Radiotherapy in small animal oncology. In Prac-
malignant carcinomas and melanoma has not been estab-
lished in veterinary medicine.
tice 1998; 20: 566-75.)
Generally, the use of cytotoxic drugs in combination proto-
The major indication for chemotherapy is in the treatment
cols is favoured as the most effective approach; by combin-
ing different drug classes that have different mechanisms of
lymphoproliferative and myeloproliferative diseases. The
action greater tumour cell kill may be achieved without
tumour cells in these diseases are reasonably chemosensi-
increasing normal tissue toxicity. For example, combina-
tive and the widespread nature of the disease necessitates a
tions of cyclophosphamide (alkylating agent), vincristine
systemic form of therapy. Chemotherapy is not effective
(vinca alkaloid), and prednisolone (corticosteroid) are
widely used in the treatment of canine and feline lym-
bone but may have a beneficial role as an adjunct to surgery
phoma. Many different protocols have been described using
in the management of some malignant solid tumours.
combinations of these and other drugs; three of the more
commonly used regimens are listed in Tables 13.1, 13.2,
and 13.3.
Ini
veteninary
medicine,
the
prescribing
and
 Intermittent or ‘pulse’ therapy is the conventionally pre-
administration of these drugs is usually confined to
ferred use of cytotoxic drugs because continual administra-
specialists in the field and empirical use is to be
tion of low doses of cytotoxic agents will select for tumour
discouraged.
cells that are resistant to those drugs. In tumour cells, drug
376Malignant disease and immunosuppression
Table 13.1 Combination cytotoxic therapy COP' (low dose)
Drug
Dose
INDUCTION
Cyclophosphamide
Vincrishine
0.5 mg/m² i.v. every 7 days
Prednisolone
MAINTENANCE AFTER A MINIMUM OF 2 MONTHS
Cyclophosphamide
50 mg/m² p.o. on altermate days or 50 mg/m²p.o. for the first 4 days of each second week
Vincristine
0.5 mg/m² i.v. every 14 days
Prednisolone
20 mg/m² p.o. on altemate days of each second week
MAINTENANCE AFTER 6 MONTHS (IF DISEASE IS IN REMISSION)
Cyclophosphamide2
50 mg/m² p.o. on altermate days or 50 mg/m²p.o. for the first 4 days of each third week
Vincristine
0.5 mg/m²i.v.every 21 days
Prednisolone
20 mg/m² p.o. on altemate days of each third week
MAINTENANCE AFTER 12 MONTHS3
Cyclophosph amide2
50 mg/m² p.o. on altermate days or 50 mg/m² p.o. for the first 4 days of each fourth week
Vincrishine
0.5 mg/m² i.v.every 28 days
Prednisolone
20 mg/m² p.o. on altemate days of each fourth week
1COP = cormbin ation cyclophospharmide, oncovin (vincristine), and prednisolone therapy
2 Chlorarmbucil (5 rmg/m²p.o. on alternate days) or rmelphalan (5 rmg/m²p.o. on alternate days) may be used as a substitute for cyclophosphamide in anirmals
Doxorubicin (30mg/miy.every 3weeks) orcrisantaspase (10 000-20000units/m²i.m.every 7days oras necessary)may be used for treatment of relas-
ing or recunrent disease
Table 13.2 Combination cytotoxic therapy COP (high dose)
Drug
Dose
INDUCTION
Cyclophosphamide
250-300 mg/m²p.0. every 21 days
Vincristine
Prednisolone
1 mg/kg p.o. daily for 4 weeks then 1mg/kg p.o. on alternate days
MAINTENANCE AFTER 12 MONTHS
Vincristine
Prednisolone
1 mg/kg p.o. on altemate days
Note. Treatment should be continued for a further 6 months
2 The max irmurm recorm rmended dose for cyclophospharmide in dogs is 250 rmg/m?
13.1 Cytotoxic drugs  377
Table 13.3 Cyclic combination treatment for lymphoma
Drug
Dose
INDUCTION
Week 1 (day 1)
Vincristinel
0.5-0.75 mg/m²i.v.
Cristantaspase
400 units/kg i.m.
± Prednisolone
2 mg/kg p.0. daily
Week 2 (day 8)
Cyclophospharmide
200 mg/m?i.v. or p.o.
± Prednisolone
1.5 mg/kg p.o. daily
Week 3 (day 15)
Vincristine
0.5-0.75 mg/m i.v.
± Prednisolone
1 mg/kg p.o. daily
Week 4 (day 22)
Dox orubicin
30 mg/m² i.v.
±Prednisolone
0.5 mg/kg p.o. daily
Week S(day 29)
NO TREATMENT
Week 6 (day 36)
Vincristine
0.5-0.75 mg/m² i.v.
Week 7(day 43)
Cyclophospharmide
200 mg/m2i.v. or p.o.
Week 8 (day 50)
Vincristine
0.5-0.75 mg/m2 i.v.
Week 9 (day 57)
Doxorubicin
30 mg/m i.v.
Week 10 (day 64)
NOTREATMENT
MAINTENANCE
Repeat above 8-week cycle twice with an interval of 2 weeks between between each drug administration and then for another 2 times with
an interval of 3 weeks between each drug adrministration.
Chlorambucil ( 1.4 mig/k g p.o.) may be substituted for cyclophosphamide during main tenance cycles
1 vincristine should be adrministered 1 2-24 hours before cristartaspase
resistance can arise through a variety of different mecharl-
suppression may lead to leucopenia, resulting in an
isms. Acquired drug resistance refers to the clinical situa-
increased risk of infection and sepsis. Infectious organisms
tion in which a previously drug-responsive tumour regrows
may gain entry to the body through the respiratory, urogeni-
and is no longer sensitive to further treatment with the orig-
tal, or gastro-intestinal tracts, or through normal barriers
inal drugs. Canine lymphoma often exhibits acquired resist-
such as skin and mucosa, which have been disrupted by the
ance at relapse. Drugs that have similar mechanisms of
tumour, surgery, or the placement of catheters. In animal
action, or similar chemical structure, are likely to share
cancer patients the most frequent source of infection is the
migration of enteric bacteria through damaged intestinal
treatment should be selected from different drug groups.
mucosa.Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae are
However, relapsing tumour cells can acquire resistance to
the most common pathogens. Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
drugs or drug groups to which the tumour has not been
Staphylococcus aureus, Bacteroides spp., Candida spp.,
exposed previously. This phenomenon, known as multi-
 and polymicrobial infections also occur.
drug resistance (MDR), is associated with a P-glycoprotein
Thrombocytopenia may also occur following chemother-
that acts as an export pump reducing the intracellular con-
apy; anaemia is generally less common. Peripheral blood
centration of certain drugs and thereby allowing the tumour
cell counts should be assessed before treatment and moni-
cell to survive exposure to the drug. Drugs that are sub-
tored regularly once therapy is commenced. Ideally the
strates for the pump include the vinca alkaloids, doxoru-
white blood cell count should be measured every two to
bicin, and epirubicin.
three weeks depending on the protocol used. Where less
Side-effects. Toxicity is the major treatment-limiting fac-
aggressive chemotherapy schedules are employed, four to
tor in chemotherapy. Cytotoxic drugs are not selective in
six weekly counts may be acceptable. Myelosuppression is
their actions on growing and dividing cells, hence organs
usually reversible on withdrawal of the drug(s). The dosage
that contain populations of rapidly dividing cells, for ex am-
of drugs that cause myelosuppression must be reduced or
ple the bone marrow and gastro-intestinal tract, are particu-
therapy withheld if critical blood cell counts are reached. It
larly susceptible to toxic effects. Myelosuppression is the
is usually recommended that the drug dosage should be
most common and potentially serious complication follow-
reduced by 50% if the neutrophil count falls below 3 x 109/
ing administration of many cytotoxic drugs. Bone marrow
litre and therapy should be withheld if the neutrophil count
378Malignant disease and immunosuppression
falls below 2 x 109/lire. The myelosuppressed patient
wearing gloves, should be taken when handling excreta
should also be givern prophylactic, broad-spectrum anti bac-
from such patients and, if cytotoxic drugs are dispensed, the
terials; potentiated sulphonamides (see section 1.1.6.2) or
owner should be warned of the dangers.
fluoroquinolone derivatives (see section 1.1.9) are pre-
Dosage. Due to the low therapeutic index of cytotoxic
ferred.
drugs, in veterinary medicine the commonly used dosages
Toxic effects may also manifest in the gastro-intestinal tract
and protocols are a compromise between efficacy and toxic-
and the skin. Anorexia, vomiting, and diarrhoea may occur
ity, being designed to cause minimal side-effects to the
following administration of many cytotoxic drugs. In most
patient. The intensive medical support often necessary for
human patients to manage the severe toxicity resulting from
aggressi ve chemotherapy is not routinely available or feasi-
Supportive care and fluid therapy may be required. For
 ble in veterinary practice. In this chaptet, only approximate
drugs that cause vomiting that is centrally mediated (for
guidelines are given regarding dosages and indications.
example, cisplatin) the use of anti-emetics acting on the
Doses of cytotoxic drugs are calculated as a function of
body surface area (m2) rather than body-weight because the
section 3.4. 1), is recommended.
blood supply to the organs responsible for detoxification,
Poor hair growth or alopecia may occur, particularly in fine
that is the kidney and liver, is more closely related to sur-
or curly-coated breeds such as poodles.
face area than body-weight. Tables of weight to surface area
Hypersensitivity reactions to cytotoxic drugs are rare but
for dogs up to 50 kg body-weight and cats up to 5 kg body-
weight are provided in Appendix 3.
to animals. Most cytotoxic drug hypersensitivities are
The mode of drug metabolism and excretion should be
immune-mediated reactions, for example the enzyme
known because drug dosage may need to be reduced in
crisantaspase is highly immunogenic. Some drugs such as
patients with hepatic or renal impairment.
doxorubicin may directly degranulate mast cells thus releas-
ing histamine and other vaso-active substances.
Several drugs, including vincristine, cisplatin, and doxoru-
13.1.1 Alkylating drugs
sue necrosis if extravasation occurs; intravenous catheters
In veterinary medicine, alkylating drugs are the most
should always be used for administratiorn of such agents and
these should be flushed with saline before removal.
ing with DNA replication.
Individual drugs may have specific toxic actions on other
Cyclophosphamide is widely used in the treatment of lym-
organs, for example cardiotoxicity of doxorubicin or neph-
phoproliferative diseases in cats and dogs. Use in the treat-
rotoxicity of cisplatin.
ment
of
multiple
myeloma
hasbeenl
1reported.
Cyclophosphamide may also have a role as an adjunct to
Extreme care is required in the handling, preparation,
surgery in the treatment of certain solid carcinomas and
and administration of cytotoxic drugs. Many cytotoxic
sarcomas.
substances are irritant to skin and mucous membranes
Cyclophosphamide is coniverted to acti ve alkylating metab-
and are suspected of having mutagenic, teratogenic, of
olites by the liver and primarily excreted by the kidney. One
carcinogenic potential. Cytotoxic drugs should never be
of the metabolites, acrolein, may cause a sterile necrotising
handled by pregnant women. Injectable preparations
haemorrhagic cystitis. This is a serious complication which
should be prepared in designated areas by specially
precludes further use of the drug. An increased water intake
trained staff wearing appropriate protective clothing.
may help to avoid this complication. Prolonged therapy
Animals must be adequately restrained by trained staff
may also result in insidious fibrosis of the bladder.
for administration of such drugs. Tablets must never be
Chlorarmbucil is the slowest acting and least toxic of the
broken or crushed. Information on the safe use of
alkylating drugs. It is primarily used for maintenance ther-
cytotoxic drugs may be found in:
apy in lymphoma, in the treatment of chronic lymphocytic
Control of substances hazardous to health. COSHH
leukaemia and multiple myeloma. The use of chlorambucil
Regulations 2002. Approved Code of Practice and
in the treatment of polycythaemia vera has been described.
Guidance L5. 4th ed. London: HSE Books, 2002
Myelosuppression is reversible on discontinuation of the
Safe handling of cytotoxic drugs. London: HSE,
drug. In humans, chlorambucil is biotransformed in the
2003. HSE Information Sheet MISC615
liver and excreted in the urine as inactive metabolites.
www.hse.goy.uk/pubns/misc615.pdf
Allwood M, Stanley A, Wright P (eds) The
ple myeloma, but is also useful in lymphoproliferative dis-
Cytotoxic Handbook 4th ed. Radcliffe Medical Press
orders. It has been included in combined protocols for
Ltd: Oxford, 2002
and mammary carcinoma. Myelosuppression is the major
side-effect and may be delayed in onset. Anorexia and vom-
receiving cytotoxic drugs may sometimes contain traces of
iting may also occur. In humans, melphalan is excreted in
the original drug or active metabolites. Precautions, such as
the urine, about 10% as unchanged drug.
13.1 Cytotoxic drugs  379
Busulfan has a selective action againist granulocytes and is
CARMUSTINE
almost exclusively used in the treatment of chronic granulo-
(BCNU, BiCNU)
cytic leukaemia. Use in the treatment of polycythaemia vera
has been described. Myelosuppression is the main side-
UK
effect although pulmonary fibrosis may occur rarely. In
Indications. Brain tumours (e.g. malignant glioma) in dogs
humans, busulfan is excreted in the urine as inactive
Contra-indications. Severe myelosuppressionl
metabolites.
Side-effects. Cumulati ve and delayed bone marrow toxic-
Thiotepa may be administered by instillation for topical
ity due to stem cell toxicity can lead to protracted myelo-
treatment of superficial transitional cell carcinoma of the
suppression, possible pulmonary fibrosis
bladder. However, most canine bladder tumours are too
Warnings.
There is limited veterinary experience of this
large at the time of diagnosis for such treatment to be effec-
drug and specialist use only is recommended
tive. It has beern used experimentally in the management of
Dose. Dogs: by slow intravenous injection (over 20 min-
malignant pleural and ascitic effusions.
utes), 50 mg/m? every 6 weeks
The mitrosoureas carmustine and lomustine also have an
POM H BiCNU (Bristol-Myers Squibb) UK
alkylating action. Unlike most other agents that do not cross
Injection, powderfor reconstitution, carmustine 100 rmg
the blood-brain barrier, these drugs are highly lipophilic and
pass into the CSF. They have been used widely in human
CHLORAMBUCIL
row toxicity which is difficult to manage has been reported
UK
and therefore the drugs have rot been commonly used in
 Indications. Lymphocytic leukaemia, multiple myeloma,
veterinary practice.
lymphoma, see notes above
Carmustine is used ir the treatment of malignant gliomas
Side-effects. Myelosuppression
in humans and the use of carmustine in the treatment of
Dose. Dogs, cats: by mouth, 2-5 mg/m? every 1-2 days
canine brain tumours has been reported. With increasing
POM H Leukeran (GSK) UK
use of computed tomography (CT) scans for the diagnosis
Fablets, f/c, chlorarmbucil 2 mg
of brain tumours in animals, the use of this drug in the ther-
CYCLOPHOSPHAMIDE
carmustine is rapidly degraded but the metabolites may be
active. The drug is mainly excreted in the urine.
UK
Lomustine has recently been shown to have some activity
Indications. Lymphoma, leukaemia, see notes above
in the treatment of canine lymphoma (following relapse)
 Side-effects. Myelosuppression, gastro-intestinal distur-
and canine mast cell tumours, however further validation is
bances, haemorrhagic cystitis
required before this use can be recommerided.
Dose. Dogs, cats: by mouth, 50 mg/m? on alternate days or
50 mg/m2 for the first 4 days of each week or 100-300 mg/
In general, alkylating drugs may cause myelosuppres-
 m2 every 3 weeks
sion. The gastro-intestinal system may be affected caus-
by intravenous injection, 100-300 mg/m? every 3 weeks
ing anorexia, vomiting, and diarrhoea. Gametogenesis
(max imum dose for dogs, 250 mg/m2)
 may be affected. Some breeds may show thinning of the
POM H Cyclophosphamide (Non-proprietary) UK
hair coat. Drug-specific side-effects are noted in the text
Fablets, s/c, cyclophospharmide (anhydrous) 50 rmg
 and under monographs.
injection, powder for recon stiution, cyclophospharmide 200 rmg, 500 mg, I g
POMH Endoxana (Baxter Oncology) UK
Tabieis, s/c, cyclophospharmide 50 mg
injection, powder for recon stitution, cyclophospharmide 200 mg, 500 rmg, I g
BUSULFAN
LOMUSTINE
(Busulphan)
(CCNU)
UK
UK
Indications. Chronic granulocytic leukaemia, see notes
Indications. Brain tumours (e.g. malignant glioma) in
above
dogs, mast cell tumours, canine lymphoma (following
 Side-effects. Myelosuppression, pulmonary fibrosis
relapse), see riotes above
Dose. Dogs, cats: by mouth, induction dose, 3-6 mg/m?
Contra-indications. Severe myelosuppression
daily until white blood cell count approaches normal values
Side-effects. Cumulative bone marrow toxicity due to
Maintenance dose, 2 mg/m2 daily, repeat as necessary to
stem cell toxicity can lead to protracted myelosuppression,
maintain the white blood cell count at 20-25 x 10/litre
possible neurological reactions
Warnings. There is limited veterinary experience of this
POM Myleran (GSK) UK
Tabieis, busulfan 2 mg
drug and specialist use only is recommended
380Malignant disease and immunosuppression
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 90 mg/m? as single dose every 3
 a preparation is also available for topical application, which
weeks
has beerl used for the treatment of superficial squamous cell
and basal tumours in horses. In humans, fluorouracil is
POM(H) Lomustine (Medac) UK
Capsules, lormustine 40 rmg
abolites are excreted in the uri ne.
MELPHALAN
Methotrexate competitively inhibits the enzyme dihydro-
folate reductase, which is essential for the synthesis of
UK
purines and pyrimidines. Methotrexate may be used in the
Indications. Multiple myeloma, lymphoma, see notes
treatment of lymphoproliferative and myeloproliferative
above
disorders. Its use has also been described in transmissible
Side-effects. Myelosuppression (may be delayed), ano-
venereal tumours, Sertoli cell tumours, osteosarcoma and
rexia, vomiting
other sarcomas.
 Dose. Dogs, cats: multiple myeloma, by mouth, 1-2 mg/m?
The “high-dose’ regimen described for humar use of meth-
on alternate
days until plasma-protein concentrations
otrexate is not generally advisable in veterinary medicine
approach normal values or 1-2 mg/m daily for 7-14 days
because of the resultant toxic effects. Even at low doses,
with repeat cycles at intervals of 2-4 weeks
many dogs will show side-effects of severe diarrhoea.
Lymphoproliferative disorders, by mouth, up to 5 mg/m? on
Methotrexate is primarily excreted unchanged by the kid-
alternate days
ney and renal tubular necrosis may occur with high-dose
POM Alkeran (GSK) UK
regimens. Myelosuppression and gastro-intestinal ulcera-
tion are common side-effects.
Fabieis, rmelphalan 2 rmg
Mercaptopurine and tioguanine are natural purine ana-
THIOTEPA
 logues that act by inhibiting a number of enzymes involved
UK
involved in the formation of adenine and guanine nucle-
Indications. Malignant effusions, transitional cell carcino-
otides. These drugs have niot been used extensively ini veter-
mas, see notes above
 inary oncology but there is evidence to suggest a role in the
Side-effects. Myelosuppression, vomiting
Dose. Dogs, cats: by instillation into the bladder, up to 60
eral, both drugs are well tolerated in dogs, but experience of
mg in 60-100 mL water, instilled and retained for 30 min-
utes every 7 days
toxicity with leucopenia, thrombocytopenia, and, on occa-
by intravenous injection, 9 mg/m2 as a single dose or 9 mg/
sion, anaemia. Leucopenia is not usually severe at the doses
m2 in 2-4 divided doses on successive days. Repeat dose
described but it can be a problem in leukaemic animals that
every 7-28 days
are already neutropenic due to the disease. Nausea and
yomiting have been reported although gastro-intestinal tox-
POM(H) Thiotepa (Goldshield) UK
icity is rare. Mercaptopurine and tioguanine are metabo-
Injection, powder for reconstitution, thiotepa 15 mg
lised in the liver.
 In general, antimetabolites may cause myelosuppres-
13.1.2 Antimetabolites
sion. The gastro-intestinal system may be affected caus-
Antimetabolites interfere with DNA and RNA synthesis by
ing anorexia, vomiting, and diarrhoea. Drug-specific
interaction with enzymes.
side-effects are noted in the text and under monographs.
Cytarabine acts by interfering with pyrimidine synthesis. It
is primarily used to induce remission in lymphoproliferative
Or myeloproliferative diseases and has been used intrathe-
cally for the treatment of CNS lymphoma in dogs. The drug
CYTARABINE
is rapidly degraded after injection and is therefore more
effective but also more toxic, if given by slow intravenious
UK
infusion. Cytarabine is a potent myelosuppressant leading
Indications. Lymphoma, leukaemia
to leucopenia, which is more severe when prolonged infu-
Side-effects. Myelosuppression
sions of the drug are used. Cytarabine is metabolised in the
Dose. Dogs, cats: by subcutaneous or intravenous injec-
liver and excreted in the urine as metabolites.
tion, 100 mg/m2 daily for 2-4 days
Fluorouracil has beerl used in the treatment of carcinomas
by intravenous infusion, 75- 100 mg/m? givenl over 24 hours
of the mammary gland, gastro-intestinal tract, liver, and
by intrathecat injection, 20 mg/m² every 1-5 days
lung in dogs, but is at best palliative. In addition to myelo-
suppression, fluorouracil causes neurotoxicity, manifest as
POM  Cytarabine (Non-proprietary) UK
fnjection, cytarabine 20 rmg/mL. For subcutaneous, intravenous, or intrathe-
cerebellar ataxia and seizures. These effects are transitory in
cal use
dogs butfatal in cats andfluorouracil is contra-indicated
injection, cytarabine 100 mg/mL. For subcutaneous or intravenous use; not
in this species. It is usually administered intravenously, but
for intrathecal injection
13.1 Cytotoxic drugs 381
FLUOROURACIL
myeloproliferative disorders. It is also a palliative in soft
tissue and osteogenic sarcomas and in carcinomas of mam-
UK
mary, thyroid, and prostatic origin.
Indications. Carcinomas but see notes above, squamous
Doxorubicin is administered by slow intravenous injection
cell and basal carcinomas
and is severely irritant if injected perivascularly. Tachyar-
Side-effects. Myelosuppression,
neurotoxicity,
gastro-
rhythmias, cutaneous anaphylaxis, and collapse may occur
intestinal disturbances
Contra-indications. Cats, see notes above
as chlorphenamine (see section 14.2.3), 5 to 10 mg given by
Dose.Dogs: by intravenous injection, 150-200 mg/m?
 slow intravenous injection, is advisable. Gastro-intestinal
every 7 days
 n  o   ue sua s ys Aix
 (oo)  
hours following administration of the drug and occasionally
Injection, fluorouracil (as sodium salt) 25 mg/mL, 50 mg/mL
dogs may develop haemorrhagic enterocolitis. It is myelo-
suppressive with the lowest leucocyte count occurring 10 to
POM Efudix (ICN) UK
14 days after treatment. Changes in hair coat can occur in
Cream, fluorouracil 5%
some dog breeds. Doxorubicin also causes myocardial dam-
MERCAPTOPURINE
age leading to a dose-dependent congestive cardiomyopa-
thy, and cardiac monitoring is advisable. Treatment with
UK
doxorubicin should be supervised by specialists familiar
Indications. Lymphoma, leukaemia
with its use. Doxorubicin is excreted in the biliary tract.
Side-effects. Myelosuppression
Epirubicin is a structural analogue of doxorubicin. The
Dose. Dogs, cats: by mouth, 50 mg/m? daily to effect then
tumoricidal activity of both drugs is similar but epirubicin is
50 mg/m? on alternate days or as necessary
reported to be less cardiotoxic than doxorubicin. The indi-
cations for epirubicin are essentially as for doxorubicin.
POMPuri-Nethol (GSK) UK
Epirubicin causes myelosuppression with leucopenia 10 t0
Tablets, scored, rmercaptopurine 50 mg
15 days post administration but the white blood cell count
usually returns to normal in about 21 days. Thrombocytope-
METHOTREXATE
UK
less common. Gastro-intestinal and dermatological toxicity
Indications. Lymphoma, leukaemia, see also notes above
are similar to doxorubicin. Epirubicin may also cause ana-
Contra-indications. Renal impairment
phylaxis and is irritant if extravasation occurs
Side-effects. Renal tubular necrosis,
gastro-intestinal
Mitoxantrone is an anthracenedione and is related to dox o-
disturbances
rubicin. Although mitoxantrone intercalates with DNA, its
Dose.Dogs, cats: by mouth or by intravenous injection,
main cytotoxic effect is through stimulating strand breaks in
 2.5 mg/m2 daily. Dose frequency should be adjusted accord-
DNA. Veterinary experience of this drug is limited although
ing to toxicity (see notes above)
preliminary results of its use in the treatment of a variety of
tumours in dogs and cats have been reported. In these spe-
POM Methotrexate (Non-proprietary) UK
cies, mitoxantrone appears to have a wide spectrum of
Tablets, rmethotrex ate 2.5 mg, 10 rmg
activity against lymphomas, sarcomas, and possibly carci-
Injection, methotrexate (as sodiurm salt) 2.5 rmg/mL, 25 rmg/mL, 100 mg/mL
(not for intrathecal use)
nomas, especially in cats. Mitoxantrone may cause myelo-
suppression, the main sign of which is a leucopenia that is
TIOGUANINE
(Thioguanine)
cardiotoxic but its cardiac effects are reported to be signifi-
cantly less severe than those of dox orubicin. Anorexia, nau-
Indications. Lymphoma, leukaemia
sea, and vomiting may also occur. Mitoxantrone is excreted
Side-effects. Myelosuppression
mainly by the liver.
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 50 mg/m2 every 1-2 days
Bleomycin has not been widely used in veterinary chemo-
therapy. It has been used in the treatment of lymphoprolifer-
UK
ative disorders and has shown some efficacy against
POM Lanvis (GSK)
Tablets, scored, tioguanine 40 mg
squamous cell carcinoma in dogs. Bleomycin causes mini-
mal myelosuppression but hypersensitivity reactions may
Occut. Lung changes including interstitial pneumonia, pleu-
13.1.3 Antitumour antibiotics
ral scarring, and pulmonary fibrosis have been reported
with high doses in the dog. In humans, bleomycin is
These drugs act by forming a stable complex with DNA and
degraded by tissue hydrolase but most of the drug is
interfering with the synthesis of nucleic acids.
excreted unchanged in the urine.
Doxorubicin is an anthracycline antibiotic, and is one of
Dactinomycin has not been extensively used in veterinary
the most effective of the cytotoxic drugs. In veterinary med-
chemotherapy. It has been included in rescue protocols for
icine, doxorubicin is used to treat lymphoproliferative and
treatment of canine lymphoma (for example, D-MAC) and
382Malignant disease and immunosuppression
there is limited investigational experience in the treatment
Side-effects. Myelosuppression, gastro-intestinal toxicity,
of carcinomas and sarcomas. Toxicities include leucopenia,
cardiac toxicity
anlorexia, vomiting, diarrhoea, and weight loss, due to selec-
Warnings. Drug should be handled with extreme care,
tive damage of the haemopoietic and intestinal tissues.
severely vesicant if extravasation occurs
Dose.Dogs:by stow intravenous injection,30 mg/m²every
BLEOMYCIN
3 weeks to a maximum cumulative dose of 240- 300 mg/m?
Cats: by slow intravenous injection, 20 mg/m2 every 3-6
UK
weeks
Indications. Lymphoma, leukaemia
POM H Pharmorubicin Rapid Dissolution (Pharmacia) UK
Side-effects. Hypersensitivity, pneumonitis, pulmonary
Injection, powder for reconstitution, epirubicin hydrochloride 10 rmg, 20 mg,
fibrosis; see notes above
Dose.Dogs: by intravenous injection, 10 000-15 000
50 mg
units/m? weekly to a maximum cumulati ve dose of 250 000
POMH Pharmorubicin Solution for Injection (Pharmacia) UK
units/m2
Injection, epirubicin hydrochloride 2 rmg/mL
POM Bleomycin (Non-proprietary) UK
MITOXANTRONE
njection, powder for reconstirution, bleomycin (as sulfate) 15 000 units
(Mitozantrone)
 s o      
labelled as containing *1 5 units' of bleomycin are now labelled as containing
15 000 units. The armount of bleormycin in the ampoule has not changed.
UK
Indications.Lymphoma, sarcomas, carcinomas
DACTINOMYCIN
Contra-indications. Hepatic impairment
(Actinomycin D)
Side-effects. Myelosuppression, cardiac toxicity, anorexia,
vomiting, diarrhoea
UK
Warnings. Drug should be handled with extreme care
Indications. Rescue protocol for lymphoma
Dose.Dogs: by intravenous infusion, 5 mg/m? every 3
Side-effects. See notes above
weeks
Dose. Dogs: by intravenous injection, 0.75- 1.5 mg/m?
Cats: by intravenous infusion,3-5 mg/m? every 3 weeks
every 7 days
POM  Mitoxantrone (Non-proprietary) UK
POM Cosmegen Lyovac (MSD) UK
Concentrate for ntravenous infusion, mitoxantrone (as hydrochloride) 2 mg/
Injection, powder for reconstitution, dactinomycin 500 micrograrmns
rmiL
POMH Novantrone (Lederle) UK
DOXORUBICIN HYDROCHLORIDE
Concentrate for intravenous infusion, mitoxantrone (as hydrochloride) 2 mg/
rmL
UK
POM  Onkotrone (Baxter Oncology) UK
Indications. Lymphoma, leukaemia, sarcomas, carcino-
Concentrate for intravenous infusion, mitoxantrone (as hydrochloride) 2 rmng/
mas, see notes above
rmL
Contra-indications. Hepatic impairment, cardiac disease
Side-effects. Myelosuppressiorn, gastro-intestinal toxicity,
13.1.4 Vinca alkaloids
cardiac toxicity
Warnings. Drug should be handled with extreme care,
These drugs are plant alkaloids. They bind to microtubular
severely vesicant if ex travasation occurs
proteins, causing metaphase arrest thus inhibiting mitosis in
Dose. Dogs: by stow intravenous injection, 30 mg/m2
the metaphase. They may also cause enzyme inhibition.
every 3 weeks to a maximum cumulative dose of 240 mg/
They are eliminated primarily by hepatic metabolism.
m2
Vincristine is the most widely used vinca alkaloid in veter-
Cats: by stow intravenous injection, 20 mg/m? every 3-6
inary medicine. The main indications are in the treatment of
weeks
lymphoproliferative disorders and transmissible venereal
tumour. The latter is extremely sensitive to vincristine. The
POM Doxorubicin Rapid Dissolution (Pharmacia) UK
experimental use of vincristine in the treatment of soft tis-
injection, powder for reconstitution, doxorubicin hydrochloride l0 mg,
50 mg
 sue sarcomas and carcinomas has also been reported. Vinc-
ristine is also of value in the management of
POMH Doxorubicin Solution for Injection (Pharmacia) U/K
thrombocytopenia by virtue of its stimulation of platelet
Injection, doxorubicin hydrochloride 2 mg/mL
release from megakar yoc ytes.
Vincristine causes virtually no myelosuppression but is
EPIRUBICIN HYDROCHLORIDE
severely vesicant if extravasation occurs. Peripheral and
autonomic neuropathies rarely occur in dogs and cats. Con-
UK
stipation may result from long-term therapy.
Indications. Lymphoma, leukaemia, sarcomas, carcino-
Vinblastine is less frequently used than vincristine. Its uses
mas; see notes above
include treatment of lymphoproliferative disorders, mast
Contra-indications. Hepatic impairment, cardiac disease
cell tumours, and solid carcinomas but efficacy in the latter
13.1 Cytotoxic drugs 383
case is limited. Unlike vincristine, vinblastine causes
A variety of controlled-release formulations of cisplatin are
myelosuppression, and will also cause severe perivascular
under investigation. OPLA-pt (polylactic acid impregnated
reactions.
 In humans, vincristine and vinblastine undergo hepatic
in the UK) has been used as an adjunict to surgical treatment
metabolism and biliary excretion.
of osteosarcoma in the dog. Cisplatin has also been used in
gel or oil preparations for local, intralesional application in
VINBLASTINESULFATE
equine melanoma and equine sarcoids; a potentially hazard-
 ous procedure and not recommended.
UK
Carboplatin is a second generation platinum analogue with
Indications. Lymphoma, leukaemia, mast cell tumours
a spectrum of antineoplastic activity similar to cisplatin.
Side-effects. Myelosuppression
Carboplatin has a much shorter elimination half-life than
Warnings. Severely vesicant if extravasation occurs
cisplatin and is significantly less nephrotoxic and eme
Dose. Dogs, cats: by intravenous injection, 2.0-2.5 mg/m?
togenic, however, myelosuppression can be severe. Carbo-
every 7 or 14 days
platin has been used in the treatment of canine
POMH Vinblastine (Non-proprietary) UK
osteosarcoma and some carciniomas. It has also been used in
Injection, vinblastine sulfate I mg/mL
cats. Carboplatin is excreted in urine.
POMVelbe (Clonmel) Eire
CARBOPLATIN
Injection, powder for reconstitution, vinblastine sulfate 10 rmg
UK
VINCRISTINE SULFATE
Indications.Canine osteosarcoma, some carcinomas ini
dogs
UK
Contra-indications. Patients with bone marrow depres-
Indications. Lymphoma, leukaemia, transmissible vene-
sion, renal impairment
real tumour, see notes above
Side-effects. Myelosuppression, vomiting, renal toxicity
Side-effects. Neuropathies, constipation
Dose. Dogs: by intravenous injection, 300 mg/m2, givenl
Warnings. Severely vesicant if extravasation occurs
over 15-30 mirnutes every 3-4 weeks
Dose. Dogs, cats: by intravenous injection, 500-750
Cats: by intravenous injection, 200 mg/m², given over 15-
micrograms/m? every 7 or 14 days
30 minutes every 4 weeks
POM Vineristine (Non-proprietary) UK
POMH Carboplatin (Non-proprietary) UK
Injection, vincristine sulfate I rmg/mL
Injection, carboplatin 10 mg/mL
POMH Oncovin (Clonmel) Eire
Injection, vincristine sulfate I rmg/mL
POM (H Paraplatin (Bristol-Myers Squibb) U/K
Injection, carboplatin 10 mg/mL
13.1.5 Platinum compounds
Platinum co-ordination compounds inhibit protein sy nthesis
CISPLATIN
by cross linking strands of DNA. These are potent drugs
UK
with a broad spectrum of activity against solid tumours.
Indications. Sarcomas, carcinomas
Contra-indications. Renal impairment; cats, see notes
veterinary medicine.
above
Cisplatin has beenl used systemically, by intravenious infu-
Side-effects. Renal toxicity, myelosuppression, vomiting
sion during saline diuresis, in the treatment of osteosar-
Dose. Dogs: treatment may be repeated 4-6 times at inter-
coma, soft tissue sarcoma, and various carcinomas.
vals of 3-4 weeks. Treatment should be combined with pre-
Cisplatin is nephrotoxic, causing acute proximal tubular
hydration, anti-emetics, and diuresis
necrosis. Vomiting and myelosuppression also occur. Pre-
Prehydration, by intravenous infusion, sodium chloride
treatment hydration and diuresis are recommended. Treat-
0.9% given at a rate of 25 mL/kg per hour for 3 hours
        
Treatment with cisplatin, by intravenous infusion, 50-100
familiar with its use. Approximately 80% of the drug is
mg/m? given over 15 minutes
excreted unchanged in the urine. Urine of dogs that have
Anti-emetics (see section 3.4) may be given 30-60 minutes
received cisplatin must therefore be treated as a chemical
after treatment. Chlorpromazine, by intramuscular injec-
spill for at least 24 hours following treatment. Persons han-
tion, 200-400 micrograms/kg or metoclopramide, by intra-
dling the animal during this time should wear appropriate
muscular injection, 0.5- 1.0 mg/kg
protective clothing and any contaminated bedding should
Diuresis, by intravenous infusion, sodium chloride 0.9%
be double-wrapped and sent for chemical disposal. Cispla-
 given at a rate of 15 mL/kg per hour for 3 hours. Furosem-
tin can cause severe puimonary reactions in cats and its
ide, by intravenous injection, 2.5-5.0 mg/kg may be given
useis contra-indicatedinthis species.
concurrently if urine production is reduced
384Malignant disease and immunosuppression
POM) Cisplatin (Non-proprietary) UK
CRISANTASPASE
injetion, cisplatin I rmg/mL
Injection, powder for reconstitution, cisplatin 50 mg
UK
Indications. Lymphoma, leukaemia, see notes above
Side-effects. Anaphylaxis, haemorrhagic pancreatitis
Dose. Dogs, cats: by intramuscular (preferred), intrave-
nous, or intraperitoneal injection, 10 000-40 000 units/m?
every 7 days or more
13.1.6 Other cytotoxic drugs
POM Erwinase (Ipsen) UK
Crisantaspase is the enzyme asparaginase produced by
Injection, powder for recon stitution, crisantaspase I0 000 units
Erwinia chrysanthemi. It hydrolyses asparagine, an essen-
tial amino acid, and is used in the treatment of lymphopro-
DACARBAZINE
liferative disorders. It has also been used in the treatment of
camine melanoma and mast cell tumours. Crisantaspase may
UK
be administered by the intravenous, intramuscular, or intra-
Indications. Lymphoma, see notes above
peritoneal routes but anaphylaxis may follow administra-
Side-effects. Myelosuppression, anorexia, vomiting, diar-
tion and the intramuscular route appears to be the safest and
rhoea, severe perivascular cellulitis
most effective. Premedication with an antihistamine such as
Dose.Dogs, cats: by intravenous injection, 200-250 mg/
chlorphenamine (see section 14.2.3), 5 to 10 mg given by
m² daily on days 1-5,repeat cycle every 21-28 daysor 100
slow intravenous injection, is necessary if crisantaspase is
mg/m² every 7 days
administered by other routes. Haemorrhagic pancreatitis
POM Dacarbazine (Non-proprietary) UK
has been reported irn dogs.
Injection, powder for reconstiution, dacarbazine (as citrate) 100 ng, 200
Dacarbazine has alkylating actions but also inhibits DNA
rmg, 500 mg,600 mg, l g
and protein synthesis. It is niot commonly used in veterinary
medicine due to its toxic effects. However dacarbazine has
POMH DTIC-Dome (Bayer) UK
injection, powder for recon stiution, dacarbazine 200 mg
been included in some combination protocols for the treat-
ment of lymphoproliferative disorders, in particular it is
HYDROXYCARBAMIDE
used in combination with doxorubicin for rescue treatment
(Hydroxyurea)
 of relapsed canine lymphoma. In addition to myelosuppres-
sion, gastro-intestinal toxicity has been reported. Dacar-
UK
bazine canl cause pain on injection and severe perivascular
Indications. Polycythaemia vera and chronic granulocytic
cellulitis.
leukaemia
Hydroxycarbamide inhibits the enzyme ribonucleotide
Contra-indications. Renal impairment
reductase. It is administered orally and is excreted by the
 Side-effects. Myelosuppression
      n   
Dose. Dogs, cats: 50 mg/kg daily or 80 mg/kg every 3
and chronic granulocytic leukaemia. Myelosuppression is
days
the main toxic effect.
        
POM  Hydroxycarbamide(Non-proprietary) UK
therapy. Corticosteroids have antirmitotic and cytolytic
Capsules, hydroxycarbarmide 500 rmg
effects on lymphoid tissues and are therefore used in the
POM Hydrea (Squibb) UK
treatment of lymphoproliferative disorders. They are also
Capsules, hydroxycarbarmide 500 mg
useful in the treatment of mast cell tumours and may be
indicated in brain tumours because these drugs are able to
13.2 Immunosuppressants
cross the blood-brain barrier. Corticosteroids may also be
used in the management of secondary complications of neo-
 Immune-mediated diseases seen in veterinary practice
plasia and palliation of advanced disease. Although they do
include haemolytic anaemia, immune-mediated thrombocy-
not directly affect a large solid mass, corticosteroids
decrease the inflammation around the mass.
arthritides, and pemphigus variants. Many of these may be
Toxic effects include pancreatitis and diarrhoea. Primary
improved by glucocorticoid administration and high dose
hyperadrenocorticism may occur during long-term therapy
prednisolone is the conventional method of treatment.
and pituitary-dependent hypoadrenocorticism may result
High doses of prednisolone should be used with extreme
from sudden withdrawal of treatment. Corticosteroids cause
caution in horses because of the risk of causing laminitis. It
 little or no myelosuppressior.
is recommended that expert advice is sought before treating
Mitotane (see section 7.6) selectively destroys the zona
'woissiddnsounuu su unbei sosoy
fasciculata and zona reticularis of the adrenal cortex and is
Many cytotoxics are potent immunosuppressants and some,
used in the medical management of pituitary-dependent
such as cyclophosphamide and mercaptopurine, are used in
hyper adrenocorticism.
treatment of immune-mediated conditions principally in
13.2 Immunosuppressants  385
dogs (see section 10.5). Azathioprine is a purine analogue
POM (H Azathioprine (Non-proprietary) UK
that contains the 6-mercaptopurine moiety. The breakdown
Tablets, azathioprine 25 mg, 50 rmg
of azathioprine causes slow liberation of mercaptopurine in
POMH Imuran (GSK) UK
the  tissues.  Superior  immunosuppressive 
activity
is
Fablets, f/c, azathioprine 25 mg, 50 rmg
achieved in comparison to mercaptopurine and therefore
azathioprine is used clinically as an immunosuppressive
CICLOSPORIN
agent rather than as a cytotoxic drug. In veteri nary medicine
(Cyclosporin)
the main indication for its use is in the treatment of
immune-mediated diseases that cannot be adequately con-
UK
trolled with corticosteroids alone.
Indications.Immune-mediated disease as an immunosup-
Danazol is a synthetic derivative of ethinyl testosterone,
 pressant+, atopic dermatitis (see section 14.2.2), perianal
 n   w s e  m
fistula+, anal furunculosis+, sebaceous adenitis+; ocular
control of immune-mediated thrombocytopenia or haemo-
disease (see section 12.6)
lytic anaemia. The proposed mechanism of action is medi-
Contra-indications. Dogs less than 6 months of age or less
ated by a reduction in the number of immunoglobulin (Fc)
than 2 kg body-weight; animals with history of malignant
receptors on the surface of macrophages and a decrease in
disease or progressive mali gnant disorders; vaccination dur-
the amount of antibody on the surface of target cells. The
ing or within 2 weeks of treatment; diabetes mellitus; con-
comitant use of other immunosuppressives; lactating
onset of this action may be slow and varies from 2 weeks to
2 months. Once the patient is stabilised, the dose of pred-
animals
nisolone may be carefully reduced and in some cases it may
Side-effects.
. Immunosuppression; mild and transient vom-
be possible to maintain the patient on danazol alone. Dana-
iting and diarrhoea; anorexia; gingival hyperplasia; verruci-
zol is principally metabolised in the livet.
form lesions of skin; change in hair coat; red and swollen
Ciclosporin is a cyclic polypeptide fungal metabolite and is
pinnae; muscle weakness or muscle cramps
a potent T cell selective, immunosuppressive drug. Devel-
Warnings. Serum-creatinine concentration should be mon-
oped for use in human organ transplant patients, it is now
itored in animals with renal impairment; risk/benefit should
being used increasingly in the treatment of immune-medi-
be assessed before use in breeding dogs; Drug Interations -
ated disease. Orally administered ciclosporin has been used
see Appendix 1
successfully in the treatment of canine anal furunculosis
Dose. Dogs: immunosuppression+, by mouth, 5 mg/kg 1
2 times daily
and atopic dermatitis and it is currently the subject of clini-
cal study in a variety of immune-mediated conditions. Opti-
Note. Due to differences in bioavailability of ciclosporin-
mal dosages for treatment of immune-mediated disease
containing products, the brand should be specified
have not been established, but these may be substantially
lower than those required in organ transplant patients. The
POM Atopica (Novartis) UK
drug is orally absorbed and elimination is primarily by bil-
Capsuies,ciclosporin 10 mg, 25 mg, 50 rmg, 100 mg,for dogs
iary excretion. Ciclosporin causes little myelosuppression
POM  Neoral (Novartis) UK
and the main adverse effect in humans is nephrotoxicity. In
Oral solution, ciclosporin i00 mg/mL
human patients, hepatotoxicity, hypertension, hypertricho-
sis, gingival hyperplasia, and other side-effects have been
reported and are mostly reversible with dose reduction.
DANAZOL
Nephrotoxicity and hepatotoxicity may be less of a problem
in dogs but gastro-intestinal toxicity, gingival hypertrophy,
UK
and papillomatosis have beenn reported.
Indications. Immune-mediated   thrombocytopenia  and
Topical ciclosporin (see section 12.6) is used in veterinary
haemolytic anaemia in combination with corticosteroi ds
medicine for the treatment of keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Contra-indications. Pregnant animals
 Side-effects. Hepatotoxicity in dogs, androgenic effects:
of tear secreting tissue and stimulates tear production. The
virilisation in females, increased muscle mass, testicular
pigmentary keratitis that accompanies many cases of KCS
atrophy, hirsuitism, alopecia
is also controlled.
Warnings. Teratogenic; avoid use in patients with cardiac,
renal, or hepatic impairment
Dose. By mouth.
AZATHIOPRINE
 Dogs: 4- 10 mg/kg 2-3 times daily. (Suggested initial dose
5 mg/kg 3 times daily)
UK
Cats : 5 mg/kg 3 times daily
Indications. Immune-mediated disease unresponsive to
POMH Danazol (Non-proprietary) UK
corticosteroid therapy alone; severe inflammatory bowel
Capsules, danazol 100 mg, 200 rmng
disease (see section 3.1.3)
Side-effects. Myelosuppression
POM H) Danol (Sanofi-Synthelabo) UK
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 1-2 mg/kg every 1-2 days
Capsules, danazol 100 rmg, 200 mg
386 Malignant disease and immunosuppression
PREDNISOLONE
and, on occasion, for the management of anal (perianal, cir-
cumanal, hepatoid gland) adenomata.If such therapy is
UK
beneficial, a hormonal dependency is demonstrated and
Indications. Immunosuppression, cancer therapy (see sec-
castration is usually recommended as the long-term treat-
tion 13.1.6 for indications); inflammatory and allergic dis-
ment of choice. These tumours often lose their hormonal
orders (see section 7.2.1); adrenocortical insufficiency (see
dependency with malignant transformation. In these cases
section 7.2.2); myasthenia gravis (see section 6.7.4)
castration is rarely of benefit and the efficacy of hormonal
Side-effects. Pancreatitis, diarrhoea, see also section 7.2.1
treatment is questionable.
Warnings. High doses of prednisolone should be used with 
 In bitches, mammary tumours occur commonly. The major
extreme caution in horses because of the risk of causing
ity of these are benign and cured by surgical resection. The
laminitis
role of hormones in the development and progression of
Dose.
canine mammary tumours is controversial. Studies indicate
Horses: immunosuppression, by mouth, 1 mg/kg on alter-
that there is hormonal influence on the development of
nate days (but see note above)
mammary tumours but the value of hormonal manipulation
Dogs, cats: immunosuppression, by mouth, induction 2-4
once a tumour has developed has niot been established.
mg/kg daily, maintenance 0.5-2.0 mg/kg on alternate days
Some canine mammary tumours do express oestrogen
Cancer therapy, by mouth, 20-60 mg/m? daily or on alter-
receptors but these tend to occur in differentiated (less
nate days
aggressive) tumours rather than poorly differentiated
See section 7.2.l for preparation details
(malignant) tumours. Therefore the use of androgens such
as methyltestosterone for the treatment of canine mammary
tumours is uncertain. The hormone antagonist, tamoxifen,
13.3 Sex hormones and hormone
is a complex drug having anti-oestrogenic and also oestro-
antagonists
genic activity depending on the target tissue and species.
The drug has been found to cause pyometra in entire bitches
In male dogs, oestrogens (see section 8.2.1) and pro-
and its efficacy in the treatment of canine mammary
gestogens such as delmadinone (see section 8.2.2) are used
tumours (where it acts as a partial agonist) has not been
for the medical treatment of benign prostatic hypertrophy
established.
387
14
 Drugs acting on the
SKIN
Contributors:
choice of vehicle depends on the type of lesion and conven-
S M E Cockbill PhD, LLM, BPharm, MPharm, DAgVetPharm,
ience of application.
MIPhamM, FCPP, FRPharmS
A Patel BVM, DVD, MRCVS
Creams are water-miscible and readily removed by licking
  n   a s    
14.1 Dermatological vehicles
ointments. Aqueous cream, which soothes and hydrates the
14.2 Preparations for allergic, i
inflammatory,
and
skin, is used as an emollient in the treatment of dry, scaling
other immune-mediated skin conditions
lesions. Frequent application is desirable.
14.3 Sunscreens
14.4 Anti-infective skin preparations
Aqueous Cream
14.5 Keratolytics and keratoplastic agents
ermulsifying ointment 30%, phenoxyethanol I %, in freshly boiled and cooled
14.6 Shampoos
purified water
14.7 Wound management
Ointments are greasy, normally anhydrous, insoluble in
14.8 Preparations for the ear
water, and more occlusive thani creams. Ointments are also
effective emollient preparations. Ointments are used for
The use of topical preparations acting on the skin is also
chronic dry lesions and should be avoided in exudative
described in Parasiticides (chapter 2), under Preparations
lesions. The more commonly used ointment bases consist of
for the care of teats and udders (section 11.3), and Drugs
soft paraffin or soft paraffin and liquid paraffin with hard
acting on feet (chapter 15).
paraffin. Such greasy preparations may not be suitable for
Systemic disorders may also be responsible for clinical
pets in household conditions because they may stain furni-
signs affecting the skin: hormonal disturbances including
ture, etc.
hypothyroidism or hyperadrenocorticism (see chapter 7),
Emulsifying Qintment
nutritional deficiency of for example zinc (see chapter 16),
ermulsifying wax 30%, white soft paraffin 50%, liquid paraffin 20%
or neoplasia such as exocrine pancreatic adenocarcinoma
Hydrous Wool Fat (lanolin)
ex hibited as feline paraneoplastic alopecia (FPA),
wool fat 50%, in freshly boiled and cooled purified water
White Soft Paraffin, (white petroleurn jelly)
Yellow Soft Paraffin,(yellow petroleum jelly)
14.1 Dermatological vehicles
Dusting powders are finely divided powders that may con-
tain one or more active ingredients. Generally, they absorb
The skin is amenable to treatment by local application
moisture, which discourages bacterial growth. Dusting
because there is immediate contact between drug and target
powders should not be used or wet, raw surfaces because
tissue. Both vehicle and active ingredients are important in
adherent crusts and caking may result; they may be used in
treatment. The vehicle affects the degree of hydration of the
the treatment of wound infections.
skin, may have a mild anti-inflammatory effect, and may
aid the penetration of the active ingredients into the skin.
Lotions are usually aqueous solutions or suspensions, for
Before application of a topical preparation, it is important to
application without friction to inflamed unbroken skin.
 prepare the area for treatment by clipping away hair or wool
They cool by evaporation of solvents, require frequent
and removing contaminating debris with disinfectants
OT
application, and may leave a thin film of drug on the skin
cleansing agents (see section 14.7.1). The importance 
of
(not oily calamine lotion). Lotions are used on hairy areas
skin preparation and regular application of treatment to the
and for lesions with minor exudation and ulceration. Care
affected area should be stressed to pet owners.
should be taken with nervous or excitable animals because
The tendency for animals to lick the affected area immedi-
lotions containing volatile substanices can sting on
ately after application can be a major problem, especially in
application.
cats, and may result in worsening of the skin condition.
Licking may be reduced by applying the preparation before
Calamine (Nor-proprietary)
feeding or exercise (which distract the animal), or by using
Lotion, calarmine 15%, zinc oxide 5%, glycerol 5%, bentonite 3%, sodiurm
citrate 0.5%, liquified phenol 0.5 %, in freshly boiled and cooled water to 200
methods of restraint such as an Elizabethan collar. Licking
rmL
of treated areas also makes it important to avoid using sub-
Oily lotion (BP 1 980), calarmine 5%, arachis oil 50%, oleic acid 0.5%, wool
stances that are potentially toxic if ingested.
fat I %, in calciurm hydroxide solutiorn to 200 mL
Hypersensitivity reactions to topical preparations may
Pastes are stiff preparations containing a high proportion of
occur, leading to both local and systemic manifestations.
finely powdered solids. They are less occlusive than oint-
For skin disorders, formulations are available as powders,
ments and are used mainly for circumscribed, ulcerated
sprays, shampoos, lotions, gels, creams, and ointments. The
lesions.
388Skin
Zinc oxide is a mild astringent and has soothing and protec-  and eliminated, if possible. If this can be done, long-term
anti-inflammatory therapy is unnecessary.
ment of minor skin infections.
Hypersensitivity reactions to environmental allergens,
including house dust mites, forage mites, danders, moulds,
Compound Zine Paste
zinc oxide 25%, starch 25%, white soft paraffin 50%
pollens, insect bites particularly fleas, and foods, are com-
Magnesium Sulfate Paste (Morison's Paste)
mon causes of chronic dermatitis in dogs and cats. Diagno-
dried rmagnesiurn sulfate, after drying, 45 g, phenol 500 rmg, anhydrous glyc-
sis for environmental allergens may be possible by
erol 55 g
provocative intradermal testing or by in vitro measurement
of allergen-specific IgE in serum. Phenothiazines may have
not greasy, miscible with water, and wash off easily.
arl antihistaminic effect and their use as sedatives should be
avoided before hypersensitivity testing. Contact allergy is a
Sprays are used as pressurised aerosols or in spraying units.
relatively uncommon cause of dermatitis. Irritant contact
They may be economical to use because of the ease of
reactions are more likely to induce inflammatory lesions on
application with little waste, and can be easily directed.
contact areas and relati vely hairless parts of the skin.
Sealed packaging means the risk of contamination of the
Ideally, allergies should be remedied by separation of the
remaining constituents is minimised. Additionally, the cool-
affected animal from the source of allergeris. This is usually
ing effect produced by the evaporation of solvents may be
possible in contact or food allergy but may be difficult to
beneficial in certain conditions. Some animals may show
achieve in the other allergic skin diseases.
a Aq poonpoid sstou au oi ssuodsai ui Aieixue jo suiis
Allergies to dusts and pollens (atopy) can be controlled by
spray.
hyposensitisation using vaccines containing the allergens to
which the animal has been shown to react. Various proto-
Shampoos are used as complementary therapy in associa-
 cols for vaccine administration are used but generally these
tion with other treatment or as sole preparations in the long-
 start with vaccination at short intervals over a period of
term management of certain disorders such as seborrhoea.
weeks during the induction phase and then at approximately
They help to clean the skin and remove crusts and debris.
monthly intervals during maintenance which continues
Shampoos are formulated to reduce any irritant effects and
indefinitely. Manufacturers supply appropriate protocols
are generally well tolerated. Effective rinsing is essential
with the vaccines. There is a risk of adverse reactions to the
after the recommended contact time. Shampoos are indi-
vaccines, including anaphylaxis, and thus vaccination
cated as vehicles for antipruritic and keratolytic drugs (see
 should be monitored carefully, although adverse effects are
section 14.5) and for skin disinfecting and cleansing prepa-
rarely seen. A good responise may be obtained in about 50%
rations (see section 14.7.1). Shampoos can be poor vehicles
of dogs.
for ectoparasiticides because they are rinsed off after use
and therefore afford no residual protection if the parasite is
signs ranging from urticaria and swelling to severe, acute,
still present in the environment; this is particularly impor-
generalised and often fatal diseases such as erythema multi-
tant in the treatment of flea infestation.
forme major and toxic epidermal necrolysis. Such reactions
Collodions are painted on to the skin and allowed to dry to
may occur in response to recently administered drugs but
leave a flexible film over the site of the application. In vet-
may also be caused by reactions to bacterial infections,
tumours, and agents incorporated in the diet.
erinary medicine their main use is to *seal’ the teats of non-
 Auto-immune dermatoses such as the pemphigus complex
lactating cows.
can be seen in drug reactions but may also arise when no
Flexible Collodion
causative factor can be identified. In general, hypersensitiv-
ca stor oil 2.5 %, colophony 2.5 % in a collodion basis, prepared by dissolving
ity diseases require much less aggressive therapy than the
pyroxylin I0%)inamixure of 3volumesof etherand Ivolumeof alcohol
auto-immune dermatoses.
（%06)
Warnings. Highly flarm rmable
14.2.1 Corticosteroids
14.2.2 Immunosuppressants
usuallyby
massage, that contain analgesics and
14.2.3 Antihistamines
rubefacients.
14.2.4 Topical anti-inflammatory skin preparations
14.2.5 Essential fatty acid preparations
14.2 Preparations for allergic,
14.2.6 Prostaglandin E, analogues
inflammatory, and other immune-
14.2.1 Corticosteroids
mediated skin conditions
Systemic corticosteroids (see section 7.2.1) are of great
A wide variety of causative factors may be involved in
value in the treatment of inflammatory and immune-medi-
 these skin conditions. The selection of the type and duration
ated skin conditions. Oral preparations with a short duration
of treatment depends on the inflammatory disease present.
of action are preferred because therapy can be discontinued
In every case, the underlying causes should be identified
swiftly if adverse effects are seenn. This is not possible with
14.2 Preparations for allergic, inflammatory, and other immune-mediated skin conditions  389
longer acting, injectable agents. In addition, fewer side-  of mast cell survival, activation and degranulation; and
effects are associated with the use of short-acting oral drugs
 reduction in the number of epidermal Langerhans cells and
than with other formulations of corticosteroids. However, in
Cytokine secretion from keratinocytes.
severe, acute disease short-acting injectable corticosteroid
Ciclosporin is a potent immunomodulator used for organl
formulations may be favoured. In chronic diseases when
 transplantation and immune-mediated dermatological con-
corticosteroids are indicated, alternate day therapy should
ditions in humans. More recenitly it has been used in dogs
be used to minimise the risk of adrenal suppression. Depot
for atopic dermatitis, perianal fistulas, sebaceous adenitis,
corticosteroids such as methylpredrisolone acetate should
 cutaneous lupus, and idiopathic sterile nodular panniculitis.
 be reserved for cases in which the use of short-acting prepa-
Initial study showed it to be ineffective as sole therapy for
rations is impractical, for example in dogs or cats that will
pemphigus complex.
not tolerate oral dosing and the patient cannot be medicated
 Despite its low cytotoxicity relative to its immunosuppres-
by mouth.
sive potency, patients should be closely monitored for
The dose and type of corticosteroid used depends on the
adverse effects. The more immediate side-effects include
form and severity of the disease present. Typically, allergic
gastro-intestinal disturbances such as anorexia, vomiting,
diseases are managed with oral prednisolone at a dosage in
diarrhoea, and abdominal discomfort, and also involuntary
dogs of 500 micrograms/kg (0.5 mg/kg) daily or methyl-
prednisolone at a dosage of 400 micrograms/kg (0.4 mg/kg)
 matosis, hirsutism, immunosuppression, nephropathy, and
daily until the pruritus is controlled and then the dose is
infections. Particular care should be taken in cats predis-
tapered to achieve the minimum effective alternate day
posed to viral infections, toxoplasmosis, and renal failure.
dose. The dose should be reduced once remission is
Nephrotoxicity and hypertension have been well docu-
achieved. Glucocorticoid therapy may lead to adverse
mented in humans on long-term therapy. They have not
effects (unacceptable polyuria, polydipsia, and polyphagia)
beerl well documented in dogs and cats, however monitor-
in some animals and alternative forms of therapy (see
ing blood pressure in predisposed animals is recommended.
below) may be needed as ani adjunct or a substitute for corti-
Interactions with drugs that inhibit cytochrome P-450
costeroids. Cats typically require double the corticosteroid
microsomal enzyme activity increase serum-ciclosporin
doses used in dogs.
concentration, which can potentiate toxicity. Most of the
Combinations of antihistamines and corticosteroids with
evidence is documenited in humans and mice, however
essential fatty acids have been shown to enhance their effi-
interaction with ketoconazole has been reported in dogs.
cacy and enable lower doses of corticosteroids to be used
Monitoring trough levels of ciclosporin in the blood is rec-
for allergic conditions.
ommended when combined with ketoconazole or other
In auto-immune diseases, much higher daily dosages are
drugs known to interfere with ciclosporin metabolism.
required (2 to 4 mg/kg prednisolone or 1.5 to 3.0 mg/kg
methylprednisolone for dogs). Such high dosages may be
poorly tolerated and other immunosuppressive drugs such
CICLOSPORIN
as azathioprine, gold salts, or chlorambucil may be needed
(Cyclosporin)
dose of glucocorticoids. However, the management of such
UK
severe diseases with potentially toxic drugs should be
Indications. Atopic dermatitis; ocular disease (see section
undertaken with caution.
12.6); immune-mediated disease as an immunosuppres-
Megestrol acetate (see section 8.2.2) should not be used to
sant+, perianal fistula+, anal furunculosis·, sebaceous
control feline miliary dermatitis’ (papular-crusting derma-
adenitis· (see section 13.2)
titis) or eosinophilic granuloma complex. The side-effects
Contra-indications. Dogs less than 6 months of age or less
are unacceptable and equally good effects can be obtained
than 2 kg body-weight; animals with history of malignant
with corticosteroids.
disease or progressive mali gnant disorders; vaccination dur-
ing or within 2 weeks of treatment; diabetes mellitus; con-
14.2.2 Immunosuppressants
comitant use of other immunosuppressives; lactating
animals
 Side-effects. Immunosuppression; mild and transient vom-
the fungus Tolypocladium inflatum. Ciclosporin blocks the
iting and diarrhoea; anorexia; gingival hyperplasia; verruci-
transcription of the gennes encoding several cytokines. Its
 form lesions of skin; change in hair coat; red and swollen
main effect is achieved by blocking transcription of IL-2
pinnae; muscle weakness or muscle cramps
and subsequently its synthesis. Secondary effects include
Warnings. Serum-creatinine concentration should be mon-
inhibition of IFN gamma, TNF-alpha, IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, IL-
itored in animals with renal impairment; risk/benefit should
8, and GM-CSF. As a result, cyclosporin affects the func-
 be assessed before use in breeding dogs; care with concur-
tion of mast cells, eosinophils, and antiger presenting cells.
rent ketoconazole, fluconazole, itraconazole, diltiazem,
These effects include inhibition of eosinophil survival,
erythromycin,(
clarithromycin, norfloxacin, phenytoin,
release of toxic granules, cytokine secretions, and recruit-
metoclopramide, vitamin E; Drug Interations -
see
ment of eosinophils to the site of inflammation; inhibition
Appendix 1
390 Skin
Dose. Administration at least 2 hours before or after feed-
CHLORPHENAMINE MALEATE
inig directly into the animals mouth
(Chlorpheniramine maleate)
Dogs: atopic dermatitis, by mouth, 5 mg/kg once daily unti1
clinical improvement (usually 4 weeks), then 5 mg/kg on
UK
alternate days or every 34 days
Indications. Pruritus in allergic skin disorders, premedica-
tion for drugs that may induce ani anaphylactic reaction (see
POM Atopica (Novartis) UK
section 13.i); mild sedation, compulsive scratching (see
Capsules, ciclosporin 10 rmg, 25 rmg, 50 mg, 100 rmg, for dogs
section 6.11.10)
Contra-indications. Urine retention, glaucoma, hyper-
thyroidism
Dose.
14.2.3 Antihistamines
 Dogs: pruritus in allergic skin disorders, by mouth, 4-8 mg
Antihistamines are antagonists of the histamine H, receptor
 2-3 times daily (maximum dose 500 micrograms/kg twice
and include chlorphenamine, clemastine, diphenhy-
daily)
dramine, hydroxyzine, promethazine, mepyramine,
Behaviour modification, by mouth, 220 micrograms/kg 3
tripelennamine, and alimemazine. H, receptor antagonists
times daily (maximum 1 mg/kg daily)
are ineffective. Antihistamines diminish or abolish the main
Premedication, by sfow intravenous injection over I minute,
actions of histamine in the body by competitive, reversible
5-10 mg diluted in syringe with blood
blockade of histamine receptor sites. Histamine is only one
Cats: pruritus in allergic skin disorders, by mouth, 24 mg
of many autacoids involved in hypersensitivity reactions
twice daily
and so antihistamines have limited use in the treatment of
Behaviour modification, by mouth, 1-2 mg/cat 2-3 times
allergic disorders in animals. The effects of antihistamines
daily (low dose), 24 mg/cat twice daily (high dose)
may niot be observed for l to 2 weeks and they are most
Premedication,by stow intravenous injection overI minute,
effective for preventing rather than for rapidly reducing
 5-10 mg diluted in syringe with blood
pruritus. Some authorities indicate initial use of glucocorti-
 Chlorphenamine (Non-proprietary) UK
coids in conjunction with antihistamines. Glucocorticoid
P Tabieis, chlorphernarnine maleate 4 rmg
therapy is stopped when pruritus is eliminated; antihista-
POralsltin,chlorheninealeae400mogras/m
 mine treatment is continued.
POM injection, chlorphenarmine maleate 10 rmg/mL
Systemic antihistamines may be used to control pruritus in
P  Piriton (GSK Consurmer Healthcare) UK
allergic reactions such as urticaria and allergic skin prob-
Tabieis,chlorphenamine maleate 4 mg
lems including food allergies. It is generally accepted that
Syrup,chlophenarmine maleate400 micrograms/mL
about 10% to 15% of dogs are likely to respond to treatment
with H, receptor antagonists but there is considerable indi-
CLEMASTINE
vidual variation between dogs and it is not possible to pre-
UK
dog. Orally administered antihistamines reported to be
Indications. Pruritus ini allergic skin disorders
effective include chlorphenamine, clemastine, diphenhy-
Dose. By mouth.
dramine, hydroxyzine, and alimemazine. In cats, efficacy
 Dogs, cats: 100 micrograms/kg twice daily
has been reported with chlorphenamine and clemastine.
P  Tavegil (Novartis Consumer Health) UK
Antihistamines are frequently sedative.
Tabieis, scored, clemastine (as hydrogen furmarate) I mg
Combination preparations of antihistamines and corticoster-
oids are available in some countries.
DIPHENHYDRAMINE HYDROCHLORIDE
UK
Indications. Pruritus in allergic skin disorders; relief of
ALIMEMAZINE TARTRATE
coughing (see section 5.2.1); mild sedation (see section
(Trimeprazine tartrate)
6.11.10); motion sickness (see section 3.4.2)
Contra-indications. Urine retention, glaucoma, hyper-
UK
thyroidism
Indications. Pruritus in allergic skin disorders
Side-effects. CNS depression; drowsiness
 Side-effects. CNS depression; drowsiness
Dose. By mouth.
Dose. By mouth.
Dogs: motion sickness, 24 mg/kg 3 times daily
Dogs: pruritus, 1-2 mg/kg 3 times daily
pruritus, 2 mg/kg 3 times daily
sedation, 2-4 mg/kg 2-3 times daily
POM Vallergan (Castlermead) UK
Cats: 2-4 mg/kg 2-3 times daily
Tabieis, alirmermazine tartrate l0 rmg
Syrup, alirmermazine tartrate l.5 rmg/mL
PH Nytol (CSK Consurmer Healthcare) UK
Syrup fore,alirmermazine artrate 6 mg/mL
Tablets, diphenhydramine hydrochloride 25 mg, 50 mg
14.2 Preparations for allergic, inflammatory, and other immune-mediated skin conditions  391
HYDROXYZINE HYDROCHLORIDE
POM Dermobion Green (Fort Dodge) UK
Ointment, neormycin sulfate 0.5%, nitrofurazone 0.09%, prednisolone 0.25%
in ointment base containing chlorophyll, for horses, dogs, cfs
UK
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used orn horses intended for hurmar
Indications. Allergic disorders, in particular pruritus in
consurm ptior
allergic skin disorders
Contra-indications. Pregnant anirm als
Dose. By mouth.
POM Fuciderm (LEO) UK
Horses: 1 mg/kg 3 times daily
Gel, betarnethasone (as valerate ester) 0.1%, fusidic acid 0.5%, for dogs
Dogs: 2 mg/kg 3 times daily
Contra-indications. Pregnant bitches, fungal infectiorns, deep pyoderma
POMH Atarax (Pfizer) UK
Tablets, s/c, hydroxyzine hydrochloride 10 mg, 25 rmg
See sectior 14.8.1 for preparatior details
POM(H) Ueerax (UBC Pharma) UK
POM Surolan (Janssen) UK
Tablets, f/e, scored, hydroxyzine hydrochloride 25 rmg
See section 14.8.1 for preparation details
Syrup, hydroxyzine hydrochloride 2 rmg/mL
POM Vetodale (Arnolds) UK
Cram,hyocortisn05%,myci sulfat0.%,fordg
14.2.4 Topical anti-inflammatory skinprepa-
Contra-indications. Pregnant anirm als.
rations
Topical corticosteroid preparations are used mainly to treat
 Corticosteroids may produce irreversible effects in the
limited areas of diseased skin. They are useful for therapy
skin; they can be absorbed and may have harmful
of areas where the coat is thin and the animal is unable to
effects, especially with frequent and extensive contact or
remove the product by licking.
in pregnancy.
Operators should wear sinigle-use
disposable
gloves
whenl
applying
preparations
absorption of these drugs particularly if lesions are abraded
contai ming a corticosteroid.
or licked. This may result in localised signs of hyperadreno-
corticism such as skin atrophy, alopecia, and in some cases
depigmentation. When used extensively and for prolonged
periods, topical corticosteroids can induce iatrogenic hyper-
14.2.5 Essential fatty acid preparations
adrenocorticism and impaired responses to exogenous
Essential fatty acids (EFAs) are polyunsaturated fatty acids
ACTH administration. See also section 7.2 for detailed
 that caninot be sy nthesised in the body. The parent EFAs are
text on the side-effects of corticosteroids
linoleic acid and alpha-linolenic acid, which are metabo-
In the UK, topical corticosteroids are available as com-
lised to form, respecti vely, the omega-6 and omega-3 series
 pound preparations with antimicrobials.
of fatty acids. The omega-6 series appears to be more
important and is involved in epidermal barrier function, in
COMPOUNDANTI-INFLAMMATORYANDANTI-
cell membranes, and in the control of inflammation. The
MICROBIAL PREPARATIONS
two series share erizymes and therefore compete with each
other. Of particular significance is delta-6 desaturase, which
These preparations should only be used for superficial,
converts linoleic acid to gamolenic acid (gamma-linolenic
localised inflammatory lesions. Treatment should be for a
acid), an important precursor of substances involved in
short period, lasting days rather than weeks. They should
inflammation including prostaglandins, thromboxanes, and
not be used where a diagnosis of the underlying disorder
leukotrienes. The fatty acid, dihomo-gamma-linolenic acid
has not been made.
(a derivative of gamolenic acid), is a precursor of the anti-
inflammatory l-series prostaglandins and thromboxanes.
UK
Eicosapentaenoic acid, an omega-3 fatty acid, is precursor
Indications. Pruritus, dermati tis
of the 3-series which are also anti-inflammatory but not as
 Contra-indications. Corticosteroids in pregnant animals,
potent as the I-series.
Delta-6 desaturase is lacking irn cats, which are therefore
Warnings. Locally-applied corticosteroids may cause thin-
theoretically more susceptible to EFA deficiency. There is
ning of the skin, may delay wound healing, exacerbate
existing disease, or induce laminitis in horses
other circumstances including inhalant allergy and old age.
Evening primrose oil, borage, and blackcurrant contain
Dermacool (Virbac) UK
Spray, benzalkoniurm chloride, harmarmelis extract, rmenthol, parachloro-
gamolenic acid. Cold water marine fish oils are rich in
metaxylenol, for dogs
eicosapentaenoic acid while sunflower oil and corn oil con-
POM Dermobion Clear (Fort Dodge) UK
Ointment, neormnycin sulfate 0.5%, nitrofurazone 0.09%, prednisolone 0.25%,
may be the most efficient oil at promoting the synthesis of
forhorses,dogs,cs
the anti-inflammatory 1-series eicosanoids. It is predicted
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used on horses intended for hurmar
that gamolenic acid and eicosapentaenoic acid should have
corsurmption
Contra-indications. Pregr ant animals
additive or synergistic effects and there is clinical evidence
392Skin
to support this. Zinc, niacin, retinol (vitamin A), and vita-
GSL EfaVet 330 (Schering-Plough) U/K
min C are cofactors favouring the coniversion of dihomo-
Capsules, docosahexaenoic acid 3.4 rmg, eicosapentaenoic acid 5.15 mg,
garmolenic acid 15.4 mg, linoleic acid 138.6 mg, vitamins, minerals, for dogs,
gammalinolenic acid to the anti-inflammatory l-series. EFA
cafs
deficiency leads to the development of a dry scurfy coat,
Dose. Dogs, cats: by mouth, I capsule/5 kg with food
hair loss, epidermal peeling and exudation, skin lichenifica-
GSL EfaVet 660 (Schering-Plough) U/K
tion, and increased susceptibility to infection. Frank EFA
Capsules, docosahexaenoic acid 6.8 rmg, eicosapentaenoic acid 10.3 rmg,
deficiency is uncommon in animals fed normal diets but
gamolenic acid 30.8 rmg, linoleic acid 277.2 mg, vitamins, rminerals, for dogs
may occur as a result of intestinal malabsorption, and
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, I capsule/l0 kg with food 
hepatic or pancreatic impairment. There is evidence that
GSL EfaVet Regular (Schering-Plough) UK
EFA supplementation can ameliorate allergic skin diseases,
Capsules, docosahexaenoic acid Il.6 mg, eicosapentaenoic acid 17.3 mg,
particularly atopy in the dog, and can lead to improvements
garmolenic acid 34.4 mg,linoleic acid 309.6 mg, vitarmin E 10 mg, for dogs,
inl coat condition. It may aid in the control of 'miliary der-
cats
matitis' (papular-crusting dermatitis) in cats.
Dose. Dogs, cats: by mowth, I capsule/l0 kg with food.
Dietary supplementation with evening primrose oil, and
supplermentation
 s s pe l ssd sua go sx y
has been shown to be effective in canine atopy. Although
      
 the effect appears to be dose related, optimum dosages and
Capsules, docosahexaenoic acid Il.6 mg, eicosapentaenoic acid 17.3 rmg,
the most effective combinations of these oils have niot yet
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, I capsule/20 kg with food.
been determined. Daily doses of 172 mg/kg of evening
Note. For maintenance following Efa VerTM 660 supplermen tatiorl
primrose oil with 44 mg/kg of marine fish oil have been
Nutriderm (Ceva) UK
used in dogs over periods of one year without ill effects. In
Capsules, docosahexaenoic acid 12 mg, garmolenic acid 40 mg,linoleic acid
cats, preliminary data indicate some efficacy in allergic skin
300 mg,eicosapentaenoic acid 18 mg,for dogs, cafs
disease at doses of evening primrose oil 0.5 to 1.0 g daily
Dose. Dogs: by mouth,(up to 12 kg body-weight) I capsule daily; (> 12 kg
and fish oil up to 107 mg daily. Side-effects are rare and
body-weight) 2 capsules daily
Cats: by mouth, I capsule daily
may include mild and transient diarrhoea and vomiting.
These effects can be minimised and absorption of the oils
GSL Pet-Coat (Pfizer) U/K
increased if they are given with food. Evening primrose oil
Oral liquid, polyunsarurated fatty acids 780 mg/mL, vitarmins, zinc, lecithin,
for dogs, cauts
may lower the seizure threshold and should be used with
Dose. Dogs, cats: by mouth, 1.25-7.5 mL
caution in epileptics. If there is evidence of intolerance to
fish then fish oil should be avoided. Recent studies have
Viacutan (Boehringer Ingelheirm) UK
Oral liquid, docosahexaenoic acid 6.6 mg,eicosapentaenoic acid 9.9 mg,
shown that high dosages of marine fish oil alone can be
effective in reducing inflammation in camine atopy.
garnolenic acid 105 mg, linoleic acid 190 mg, vitarmin E 10 mg/unit dose, for
dogs, cats. (I unit dose = 0.55 rmL)
Proprietary preparations of EFAs are available; these may
Dose. Dogs, cats: by mouth, I2 dose units/10 kg
also contain vitamins and minerals.
ESSENTIAL FATTY ACIDS
14.2.6 Prostaglandin E, analogues
UK
Indications. Pruritus, derrmati tis
The pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis is complex and sev-
eral different mechanisms are involved, not all of which are
There are many preparations available. This is not a com-
fully understood. There is evidence that several types of
prehensive list.
inflammatory cells including mast cells, B and T lym-
phocytes, neutrophils and eosinophils are involved in atopic
Coatex (VetPlus) UK
dermatitis. The late phase reaction, seen between 6 and 24
Capswles, oral liquid, docosahexaenoic acid 10.7 mg, gamolenic acid 110
hours, is due to infiltration of inflammatory cells by chemo-
sis at the site of inflammation following an immediate
cats
hypersensitivity reaction.
Complederm (Virbac) UK
In atopic humans, misoprostol, a synthetic analogue of
Oral liquid, docosahexaenoic acid 4.45 mg, eicosapen taenoic acid 6.75 mg,
prostaglandin E, selectively inhibits the late phase reaction
garmolenic acid 2.02 mg, linoleic acid 460 mg/mL, vitamins, minerals, for
dogs, cats
by blocking the secretion of cytokines by TH1 cells, granu-
Dose. Dogs, cats: by mouth, 525 rmL (depending on body-weight and cor-
locyte activation, and chemotaxis of inflammatory cells. A
randomised placebo controlled study in dogs showed a 30%
improvement in the level of pruritus and skin lesions after 3
GSL EfaCoat Oil (Schering-Plough) UK
Drops, gamolenic acid 18.4 rmg, linoleic acid 145 mg/5 drops, vitarmins, for
weeks of treatment with misoprostrol. This drug may be of
dogs, cats
value in dogs where adverse effects of glucocorticoids and
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 8 drops
the cost of ciclosporin preclude their use.
Cats: by mouth, 5 drops; kittens: 1-2 drops
14.3 Sunscreens 
393
MISOP ROSTOL
14.4.1 Topical antibacterial skin preparations
Bacteria commonly causing primary skin infections in ani-
UK
Indications. Canine atopic dermatitis; NSAID-associated
mals include Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and Proteus
spp.,Escherichia coli, and Dermatophilus congolensis
gastric and duodenal ulceration (see section 3.8.2)
Contra-indications. Pregnant animals
('mycotic' dermatitis, rain scald, mud fever).
Side-effects. Dose dependent and may include diarrhoea,
abdominal pain, nausea, abortion in pregnant animals
and is associated with wet weather. Ideally, affected animals
Warnings.Pregnant women should avoid exposure
should be housed; if lesions can be kept dry affected areas
to
misoprostol
will regress spontaneously in several weeks. The organism
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 5 micrograms/kg 3 times daily
remains viable in the environment and therefore crusts
should be disposed of carefully. Topical treatment is often
See section 3.8.2 for preparation details
employed using topical antibacterials, zinc sulfate, copper
sulfate, lime sulfur, and iodine-containing compounds. Der-
14.3 Sunscreens
als; see below for systemic treatment.
Exposure of the skin to ultraviolet light causes damage that
Antibacterials  incorporated  into  topical preparations
is related to the light intensity, duration of exposure, and
include chlortetracycline and oxytetracycline (see section
skin sensitivity. Phototoxic reactions occur in skin with low
15.1), which may be effective against superficial infections
caused by bacteria including Bacilfus,
Actinomyces,
The resulting solar dermatitis varies from a mild erythema-
Clostridium, streptococci, and staphylococci.
tous and scaling reaction to swelling with associated cysts,
Fusidic acid is particularly effective against infections
bullae, folliculitis, furunculosis, and scarring. Chronic light
caused by staphylococci, Actinomyces, Neisseria, and some
exposure may lead to the development of squamous cell
Clostridium spp.
carcinoma. Photosensitivity reactions are caused when pho-
An important aspect of topical therapy in skin infection is
todynamic agents in the skin are exposed to ultraviolet light
the removal of accumulated scales, crusts, and skin secre-
tions, which provide a habitat for the bacteria and contain
erated by abnormalities of hepatic function, aberrant pig-
irritant bacterial metabolites. Therefore, shampoos (see sec-
ment synthesis, or may be derived from substances ingested
tion 14.6) containing keratolytic, keratoplastic, and
(see Treatment of poisoning), injected, or absorbed through
degreasing agents may be useful as adjunctive treatment.
the skin. The increasing levels of ultraviolet light penetra-
Topical antibacterial treatment may be used alone or in
tion, which are now being experienced, are leading to an
combination with systemic therapy. Systemic antibacterial
increasing amount of damage to the skin. Animals that
treatment is necessary for all but the most superficial skin
Aiosieds ane youm pue sioop jo jno sun jo nol e pueds
infections. Treatment for several weeks may be necessary.
 Recurrence will be seen unless the underlying cause is
coated or lacking in pigmentation are especially at risk
Sun avoidance is the best solution but protective clothing
determined and treated.
and use of topically applied stains for example felt-tipped
 In horses, cattle, sheep, and pigs, systemic therapy is based
pen on depigmented skin are effective. Sunscreens which
mainly on the penicillins, erythromycin, and potentiated
are water resistant and have a sun protection factor (SPF) of
sulphonami des (see secti on 1. 1).
over 15 are useful and should be applied at least once daily
Cefalexin, clindamycin, amoxicillin with clavulanic acid,
but they do not eliminate damage totally and chronic effects
enrofloxacin, erythromycin, lincomycin, marbofloxacin,
may still occur. Pigs keept outdoors should be provided
potentiated sulphonamides, and tylosin (see section 1.1) are
with a mud bath. Tattooing does not prevent suni exposure
indicated for skin infections in dogs and cats.
because the pigment is introduced into the dermis under-
neath the susceptible surface layers of the skin.
CHLORTETRACYCLINE HYDROCHLORIDE
14.4 Anti-infective skin preparations
UK
14.4.1 Topical antibacterial skin preparations
Indications. Skin infections, see notes above; hoof lesions
14.4.2 Topical antifungal skin preparations
(see section 15.1)
14.4.3 Preparations for minor cuts and abrasions
Warnings. Operators should avoid inhalation of dust; wash
hands after handling the product
An infection may be the principal cause of a skin condition
Or may be secondary to skin trauma or an underlying disor-
POM Aureomycin Topical Powder (Fort Dodge) UK
der. These can include endocrine imbalances, hypersensitiv-
Dusting powder, chlortetracycline hydrochloride 2%, benzocaine 1 %
ity, immunosuppression, or nutri tional deficiencies.
period nil
394Skin
FUSIDIC ACID
Topical enilconazole, clotrimazole, and ketoconazole are
effective for Malassezia pachydermatis infection.However,
UK
the treatment of choice is a shampoo containing chlorhexi-
Indications. Skin infections caused by Gram-positive bac-
dine and miconazole (Malaseb, LEO). Shampoo containing
teria, see notes above; otitis externa (see section 14.8)
selenium sulfide (see section 14.5.1) may also be effective.
POMH Fucidin (LEO) UK
Cream,fusidic acid2%
junction with systemic griseofulvin for the treatment of
Ointment, sodium fusidate 2%
ringworm.
Povidone-iodine (see section 14.7.1) is also used as a
SILVER SULFADIAZINE
fungicide.
(Silver sulphadiazine)
 Natamycin is a polyene antifungal antibacterial, which
may be used for topical treatment and also for disinfection
UK
 of the ringworm-contaminated environment and horse
Indications. Bacterial and fungal skin infections, in partic-
tackle.
ular Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection; burns; otitis
A vaccine is available for immunisation against ringworm
externa
in cattle (see section 18.2.15).
 Contra-indications. Hypersensiti vity to sulphonamides;
neonates; pregnant animals
CLOTRIMAZOLE
Warnings. Operators should wear protective gloves; drug
may accumulate in patients with hepatic
renal
UK
impairment
Indications. Malassezia pachydermatis dermatitis; otitis
 Dose. Apply as necessary to affected area to an approxi-
externa
mate thickness of 1.5 mm
 Dose. Apply 2-3 times daily for 2-4 weeks to affected area
and massage gently
POM(H) Flamazine (S&N HIth) UK
Cream, silver sulfadiazine I %
P Clotrimazole (Non-proprietary) UK
Cream, clotrirmazole I %
14.4.2 Topical antifungal skin preparations
P) Canesten (Bayer Consumer Care) UK
Most fungal infections of the skin and keratin structures of
Cream, clotrirmazole 1 %
domestic animals are caused by Trichophyton and Micro-
Solution, clotrirmazole 1 % irn rmacrogol 400 (polyethylene glycol 400)
 sporum spp. They are commonly referred to as ringworm
and are zoonotic infections. Malassezia pachydermatis (Pit-
ENILCONAZOLE
 yrosporum canis) is a cause of pruritic skin disease in dogs,
particularly in seborrhoeic conditions and in otitis ex terna.
UK
Candida aibicans infection causes mucocutaneous ulcera-
Indications. Ringworm,
Malassezia
pachydermatis+
tions in dogs but is rare.
infection
Ringworm is usually a self-limiting disease. Drug therapy
Warnings. Operators should wear suitable protective
can often shorten the duration of the disease although in
clothing
some species, notably long-haired cats and dogs, response
Dose.
to treatment may be poor. Paronychial infections may also
Horses: by wash, 0.2% solution every 3 days for 4
berefractory to treatment.
applications
The success of drug therapy depends on additional manage-
Cattle: by wash or spray, 0.2% solution every 3 days for 3-
ment aimed at reducing and limiting infection such as care-
 4 applications
ful clipping around the lesions in dogs and cats, limiting
Dogs: by wash or dip, 0.2% solution every 3 days for 4
grooming, isolating the animal, and using antifungal washes
applications
on the affected animal and local environment.
Griseofulvin and ketoconazole are used for systemic treat-
P Imaverol (Janssen) UK
Liquid concentrate, enilconazole I0%, for horses, catle, dogs. To be diluted
ment of ringworm (see section 1.2). Ketoconazole is effec-
before use
tive in Malassezia pachydermatis infection of the skin.
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used on horses irntended for hurman cor-
Itraconazole (see section 1.2) is also effective against ring-
surmption. Catle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk withdrawal period nil
Dilute I volume in 50 volurmes water (= enilconazole 0.2%)
-oedey ssol yonul sq oi siedde pue sheo pue saop ul uom
toxic and associatedwith
fewer side-effects than
KETOCONAZOLE
ketoconazole.
Topical antifungals may be used for the treatment of ring-
UK
worm, although drug toxicity due to ingestion through self-
Indications. Malassezia pachydermatis infection
grooming, the necessity for clipping of the fur, and repeated
Warnings. Use with caution in pregnant animals, hepatic
application and limited efficacy of the preparation should
impairment
be taken into account.
14.5 Keratolytics and keratoplastic agents  395
P ) Nizoral (Jarssen-Cilag) UK
GSL Antiseptic Ointment (Bob Martin) UK
Shampoo, ketoconazole 2%
Ointment, chloroxylenol 2%, oil of camphor 4%, salicylic acid 0.5%, tere
bene I%,for dogs, cats
MICONAZOLE
GSL Antiseptic Wound Powder (Johnson's) UK
Dusting powder, chlorarmine 2%,fordogs, cts
UK
Indications. Malassezia pachydermatis and Staphylococ-
Cetrirmide Crearn
cus intermedius infection in dogs; ringworm in cats (in con-
Cetrirmide 0.5% in a suitable water-rmiscible basis such as cetostearyl alcohol
5%,liquid paraffin 50% in freshly boiled and cooled purified water
junction with systemic griseofulvin)
Warnings. Puppies or kittens should not come in contact
GSL Cetream (Pettifer) UK
with treated nursing bitches or queenis until the coat has
Cream, cetrirmide 0.5%, for horses
dried; rarely pruritic reaction in atopic dogs, or cats with
GSL Green Oils (Pettifer) UK
allergic skin disease; maximum treatment length in cats is
Liquid, arachis oil 36.03%, chloroxylenol 0.27%, gurm turpentine 31.71%,
16 weeks; should only be used ini conjunction with griseo-
for horses
fulvin in cats; operators should wear suitable protective
GSL Green Oils Healing Gel (Pettifer) UK
clothing when shampooing cats with ringworm
Gel, carm phor 0.43%, chloroxylenol 0.2%, eucalyptus oil 0.87%, for horses
POM Malaseb (LEO) UK
GSL Otodex Skin Cream (Petlife) U/K
Shampoo, chlorhexidine gluconate 2%, miconazole nitrate 2%, for dogs, cats
Cream, chlorocresol 0.5%, phenoxyethanol 0.72%, lidocaine hydrochloride
0.05%, zinc oxide 9%,for dogs, cats
GSL Hydrophane Protocon Gold (Battle Hayward & Bower) U/K
NATAMYCIN
Gel, sulfur 10%, salicylic acid t0%, for horses
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used on horses intended for hurmarl
UK
consurn ptior
Contra-indications. Application to white heels, application to racehorses
Indications. Ringworm
within I2 hours of competing; bandaging of treated areas
Warnings. Treated animals should not be exposed to sun-
light for several hours; galvanised or plastic containers
GSL Saniphor (Battle Hayward & Bower) UK
should not be used because natamycin reacts with metals
Spray, available iodine (as povidone-iodine) 0.5%, for horses
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used on horses intended for humarl
such as copper
consurm ption
Dose. Horses, cattle: by spray, using I litre per adult ani-
mal, or local application, 0.01% solution, repeat after 45
GSL Veterinary Antiseptic Spray (Battle Hayward & Bower) U/K
Aerosol spray,benzalkonium chloride 1.6l%,for sheep
days and again after 14 days if required
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
 period nil
PML Mycophyt (Intervet) UK
Suspension, powder for reconstitution and dilution, natarmycin 0.0 1%, for 
CSL Veterinary Wound Powder (Battle Hayward & Bower) UK
horses,cattle
Dusting powder, chlorarmine 2%, for horses
Reconstitute and dilute with 2 litres (for 2-g bottle) water or 10 litres (for 10-
g bottle) water (= natarnycin 0.0 1%)
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk withdrawal
period nil
Note. May also be used for envirornrmental contarmination
14.5 Keratolytics and keratoplastic
14.4.3 Preparations for minor cuts and abra-
agents
sions
14.5.1 Keratolytics
These preparations are used to treat minor skin infections
14.5.2 Retinoids
and abrasions, and to prevent infection following surgery or
Primary keratinisation disorders are skin diseases in which
of dusting powders, ointments, or sprays. Preparations con-
excessive scale formation occurs in epidermal structures
taining benzoic acid, cresol, or phenols should not be used
including the hair follicle and interfollicular epidermis.
They manifest as blocked follicles (comedones), superficial
ofl cats.
scale (dry, waxy, or greasy seborrhoea), and follicular casts.
UK
Indications. Minor cuts and abrasions
ydermatis) infections commonly occur. Treatment of pri-
mary keratinisation disorders may involve the use of topical
There are many preparations available. This is not a com-
Or systemic substances. Topical treatments include kerato-
prehensive list.
 lytic shampoos and antimicrobials. Systemic treatments
include vitamins and minerals, in particular zinc, and essen-
GSL Aeroclens (Battle Hayward & Bower) UK
tial fatty acids (see section 14.2.5). Oral and topical retinoid
Aerosol spray, benzalkoniurn chloride 1 .6 1%, suitable dye
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
therapy is also used for the treatment and control of some of
"pouad
these conditions.
396 Skin
14.5.1 Keratolytics
GSL Seleen (Ceva) UK
Shampoo, seleniurm sulfide I %, for dogs
Keratolytics promote the loosening or separation of the
horny layer of the epidermis. Keratoplastic agents are sub-
COMPOUND
ANTIPRURITIC
AND
KERATO-
stanices which can modify and normalise the process of
LYTIC PREPARATIONS
keratinisation. In order to exert this action they must be
capable of penetrating into the living epidermis
wheri
UK
applied topically; penetration is influeniced by the concen-
Coal Tar Solution, BP
tration of the active agent and duration of exposure.
Coal tar 20%, polysorbate *80′5%, in alcohol
Contra-indications. Cats
Coal tar, sulfur, and salicylic acid have keratoplastic
actions. Selenium sulfide has antiseborrhoeic properties.
P Dermisol Cream (Pfi zer) UK
Benzoyl peroxide is mildly keratolytic. Its antimicrobial
See section 14.8.2 for preparation details
action is probably due to its oxidising effect. Irritant and
P Dermisol Multicleanse Solution (Pfizer) UK
allergic reactions may occur, particularly with concentra-
See section 14.8.2 for preparation details 
tions above 3%.
Calamine has mild astringent and antipruritic actions. Zinc
Sebomild P (Virbac) UK
Shampoo, salicylic acid 2%, sodiurm thiosulfate 5%, for dogs, cats
oxide acts as a mild astringent and is available as compound
zinic paste (see section 14. 1).
14.5.2 Retinoids
In severely greasy or scaly seborrhoeic conditions, power-
ful keratolytic and keratoplastic preparations containing tar,
Retinoids are vitamin A, derivatives. Isotretinoin is used in
sulfur, and salicylic acid are indicated. However, dermatitis
Schnauzer comedo sy ndrome, sebaceous adenitis, and other
caused by Malassezia infection must be eliminated from the
diseases of the hair follicles and associated glands. Tretin-
differential diagnosis before keratolytic shampoos are used.
 oin can be used topically to control idiopathic nasal hyper-
 In milder conditions, preparations containing only salicylic
keratosis, ear margin dermatosis, and acanthosis nigrans in
acid and sulfur are appropriate. Shampoos containing tar,
dogs, and severe canine and feline chin acne. Acitretin, a
sulfur, or salicylic acid may have a drying effect and if not
metabolite of etretinate, has recently become available and,
formulated to combat this may require the subsequent use
although not fully evaluated, it is used in dogs.
of moisturisers. Often two applications of shampoo are rec-
ommended which allows degreasing and removal of super-
ACITRETIN
ficial scale at the first application and increased penetration
at the second. Prolonged exposure to the active ingredients
UK
before rinsing allows penetration and is particularly impor-
Indications. Primary idiopathic seborrhoea of Spaniels;
tant for keratoplastic action and to permit penetration of
sebaceous
adenitis; solar dermatosis; squamous cell
active ingredients in the hair follicles. Manufacturer's
carcinoma
instructions on the duration of exposure should be carefully
Contra-indications. Breeding animals
observed except in animals with sensitive skin when the
Side-effects.
.Keratoconjunctivitis sicca; decreased tear
duration of treatment should be reduced.
production; vomiting: diarrhoea; stiffness; pruritus; muco-
cutaneous erythema; elevation of serum-cholesterol, -trig-
lycerides,
-aspartate
aminotransferase,
-alkaline
BENZOYL PEROXIDE
phosphatase, and -alanine aminotransferase concentrations
Warning. Monitor changes in haematology, blood bio-
UK
chermistry, urine and tear production; female operators
Indications. Canine dermatitis, pyoderma, seborrhoeic
should take care when handling the product
dermatitis
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 0.5-1.0 mg/kg once daily, given
Side-effects. Sensitivity to the product
Warnings. Operators should wear impervious gloves when
applying shampoo
POM H Neotigason (Roche) UK
Capsules, acitretin 10 mg, 25 mg
POM Paxcutol (Virbac) UK
Note. Preparations of acitretin are not generally available. A written order,
Shampoo, benzoyl peroxide 2.5%, for dogs
stating case details, should be sent to the marufachurer to obtain a supply of
the preparatiorn.
SELENIUM SULFIDE
ISOTRETINOIN
UK
Note. Isotretinoin is an isomer of tretinoin
Indications. Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Warnings. Operators should wear impervious gloves when
UK
applying shampoo; animals should not be allowed to ingest
Indications. Primary keratinisation disorders; see notes
suspension; protect eyes of treated animal with liquid paraf-
above
fin or mild ophthalmic ointment
Contra-indications. Breeding animals
14.6 Shampoos 397
Side-effects. Keratoconjunctivitis sicca; joint and leg painl;
14.7 wound management
mild elevation of serum-alarine aminotransferase, -choles-
terol, and -triglycerides concentrations; inhibition of
14.7.1 Skin cleansers and disinfectants
spermatogenesis; possible extended teratogenic effect as a
14.7.2 Materials for wound management
result of tissue storage for long periods
Warning. Monitor changes in haematology, blood bio-
Animal wounds occur frequently and need to be assessed
chemistry, urine and tear production, and long bones; tera-
and treated similarly to wounds in humans. The objective of
togenic in humans
any wound management regimen is to heal the wound in the
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 1-2 mg/kg daily for 8- 12 weeks for
 shortest time possible and with minimum pain, discomfort,
control then reduce to alternate day therapy if possible
and scarring for the patient.
Open wounds (abrasions, lacerations, avulsions, ballistic,
POMH Isotretinoin (Non-proprietary) UK
penetrating, hernias, and excised or surgical wounds) are
Capsuies, isotretinoin 5 mg, 20 mg
most common in the domestic species and are characterised
POMH Roaccutane (Roche) UK
by a break in the skin. Closed wounds include contusions,
Capsules, isotretinoin 5 mg, 20 mg
bruises, ruptures, and sprains. At present, little is known
Note. Preparations of isotretinoin 20 mg are not generally available. A writ-
about the precise mechanism for wound healing in the dif-
ten order, stating case details, should be sent to the manufacurer to obtain a
ferent domestic animal species but sinice the same cell types
supply of the preparation.
are involved, it seem reasonable that the same fundamenital
principles are applicable. Wound healing in small mammals
occurs by the same processes seenn in other domestic mam-
mals such as dogs and cats. The main difference is cellular
TRETINOIN
repair time, which is frequently much shorter in small mam-
mals due to their accelerated metabolic rate.
UK
Any wound may be classified according to the number of
Indications. Primary keratinisation disorders; see notes
skin layers affected. Damage limited to the epidermis is
above
regarded as a superficial wound which will heal rapidly by
Side-effects. Occasional allergic or irritant reaction, par-
regeneration of epithelial cells. A partial thickness wound
ticularly in cats
involves the deeper dermal layer and includes vessel dam-
Warning. Gloves should be worn wheri applying the prepa-
age. Its repair is more complex.A full thickness wound
rations; should not be applied by pregnant women
affects the subcutaneous fat layer and beyond. Its healing
Dose. Dogs, cats: apply daily unitil remission then as nec-
will require the synthesis of new connective tissue and it
essary for maintenance
takes longer to heal because it contracts, whereas partial
POM) Retin-A (Janssen-Cilag) UK
thickness wounds do not.
Wound healing follows a specific sequence of phases which
Cream, tretinoin 0.025%
Gel, retinoin 0.01 %, 0.025%
result ultimately in connective tissue repair and the forma-
Lotion, tretinoin 0.025%
tion of a fibrous scar. The first phase is the inflammatory
(reaction) phase which is followed by the proliferative
(repair) phase, and finally by the maturation (regeneration)
phase. These phases are not independent and overlap
throughout the entire wound healing process. Wound heal-
14.6 Shampoos
ing may take from three weeks to two years, with granula-
tion tissue beginning to develop about four days after the
Shampoos are used as complementary therapy in associa-
original injury. In the distal limb, particularly of horses,
tion with other treatment or as sole preparations in the long-
large tissue deficits may lead to the production of excessive,
term management of certain disorders such as seborrhoea.
exuberant granulation tissue. The precise cause of this conl-
They help to clean the skin and remove crusts and debris.
dition is not known but some of the factors involved are
Shampoos are formulated to reduce any irritant effects and
thought to be increased movement, lack of soft tissue cover-
are generally well tolerated. Effective rinsing is essential
ing, excessive contamination, and a reduction in blood sup-
after the recommended contact time.
Shampoos are available for general cleansing, conditioning,
ply. The use of effective pressure bandaging or cast
application should be encouraged. The management of
and moisturising. They are formulated to be used alone or
excessive granulation tissue varies and includes application
in combination or with other treatments for skin disorders.
of topical steroid/antibacterial ointments, pressure bandag-
These preparations may also have emollient, humectant,
ing, sharp excision, or caustics (silver mitrate). Many
cooling, antiseptic, keratoplastic, keratolytic, astringent, or
wounds of the trunk and upper limbs heal well by secondary
antipruritic properties. Proprietary preparations are listed in
intention with good cosmetic results but those of the distal
Table 14.1. Ectoparasiticide-containing shampoos are given
in section 2.2. The efficacy of these is limited particularly
extremities tend to heal slowly with production of excessive
scar tissue and skin grafting is often useful.
for the control of flea infestation.
398Skin
Table 14.1 Shampoos and lotions!
Drug
Conditions
Preparations
Antibacterials
 Benzoyl peroxide!
Pyoderma
Paxcutol (Virbac)
Chlorhexidine
Skin cleansing
Nolvasan (Fort Dodge)
Ethyllactate
Superficial pyoderma
Eiderm (Virbac)
Hexetidine
Skin cleansing
Hexocil (Pfizer)
Piroctone olamine
Skin cleansing
Sebomild P (Virbac)
Antifungal drugs
Ketoconazole
Matassezia pachydermatis infection
 Nizoral (Janssen-Cilag), NorClear
(Norbrook)
Miconazole/chlorhexidine
Seborrhoeic dermatitis,Malassezia
Malaseb (LEO)
pachydermatis infection
Ectoparasiticides
Keratolytic and keratoplastic agents
Benzoyl peroxide2
Pyoderma,'seborrhoea'
Paxcutol (Virbac)
Salicylic acid
Mild 'seborrhoea'
Coatex Medicated (VetPlus), Sebomild P
(Virbac)
Seleniurm sulfde
Mild 'seborrhoea'
Seleen(Sanofi)
Immunomodulators
Linoleic acid,mono and oligosaccharides,
Allergy
Allermy] shampoo or lotion (Virbac)
vitamin E
Skin cleansers
Normal to sensitive skins
Allermyl (Virbac), Epi-Soothe (Virbac),
Logic Dry shampoo (Ceva), MalAcetic
sharmpoo (Derma Pet), Neutrale (LEO),
Sebocalm (Virbac)
Moisturisers
Chitosanide
Allermyl (Virbac), Sebomild P (Virbac)
Humilac Spray (Virbac), Mal Acetic
conditioner (Derma Pet)
IThere are many preparahons availabl. This is not a comprehenive lst
2 May be drying and irritant to the skin
14.7 Wound management399
Both systemic and local factors may challenige the success-
are often necessary. Antibacterial therapy and tetanus
ful continuation of each of the stages of wound repair. The
prophylaxis in horses are essential.
systemic factors include the nutritional status of the animal,
Non-surgical debridement involves use of agents such as
concurrent therapy such as corticosteroids, prostaglandin
 Intrasite Gel (S & N Hlth), @ Debrisan (Pfizer), Of
inhibition, oncolytic agents, and clinical conditions such as
 Aserbine (Distriphar), which remove debris without
anaemia and diabetes.
damage to new granulation tissue via the establishment of
The objectives of wound care are to prepare the wound for
an osmotic gradient within the wound. Although still often
surgical closure while minimising the risk of wound infec-
used in animals, wet to dry bandaging of wounds for non-
tion or to control wound infection thereby promoting
wound healing. The aim of any treatment is to return the
inivolves the use of moistened gauze swabs packed into the
animal to normal function and cosmetic appearance. The
wound and covered by open weave bandage or gauze and
selection of the wound treatments for each particular case
allowed to dry. When dry, removal of the packing will iney-
involves many interdependent factors. The duration of the
itably lead to destruction of some regenerating healthy
injury is important because wounds have a better prognosis
tissue.
the sooner they are sutured or treated. The cause of the
ALCOHOL
likelihood of infection. Sharp lacerations are generally less
prone to infection than shearing wounds caused by barbed
UK
wire, bite wounds, or degloving. Previous treatment by the
Indications. Skin preparation before injection or surgery
owner, for example the over-enthusiastic use of antiseptics
Warnings. Flammable; avoid broken skin
or local antibiotics, may mean that the wound may no
Industrial Methylated Spirit
longer undergo primary closure by suturing. The location,
A mixture of 19 volurmes of alcohol of an appropriate strength with I volume
depth and configuration of the wound; the degree of cori-
of approved wood naphtha
tamination; the intended use of the animal; and the co-oper-
ation of the patient and the owner should also be
CETRIMIDE
considered.
UK
Indications. Skin disinfection; footrot (see section 15.1)
14.7.1 Skin cleansers and disinfectants
Contra-indications. Concurrent use of soaps and anionic
detergents
The preparation of any wound before treatment is of funda-
mental importance. The hair should be clipped from a wide
Cetrirmide Solution
Cetrirmide 1 % in freshly boiled and cooled purified water
area around wound edges. Hair clippings that may enter the
Use undiluted
wound are very difficult to remove and may function as for-
Cetrimide Solution Strong
wound healing time. The wound should be protected during
 A 20% to 40% aqueous solution of cetrirmide, con taining not more than 10%
alcohol, isopropyl alcohol, or industrial rmethylated spirit. It rmay be per-
clipping by either the insertion of sterile moist swabs which
furmed and may contain colouring rmatter
are easily removed, or  K-Y Jelly (J & J) which will be
 Used to prepare cetrirnide solution 
subsequently rinsed off with sterile sodium chloride 0.9%
solution (Normal saline).
Alcohol 70% is commonly used for its solvent properties
CHLORHEXIDINE
for the removal of superficial contamination. Cetrimide,
chlorhexidine, and povidone-iodine are used for skin
UK
Indications. Skin disinfection and cleansing
disinfection
Contra-indications. Concurrent use of soaps and anionic
Contaminated wounds should be thoroughly lavaged with
detergents
isotonic solutions such as sodium chloride 0.9% solution
(Normal saline) or Ringer's solution. If the wound is less
Hibiserub Veterinary (Schering-Plough) UK
than three hours old, antibacterials in the lavage solution
Solution, Chlorhexidine Gluconate Solution BP 20% (= chlorhexidine gluco-
will decrease the occurrence of wound infection. After three
riate 4%)
hours antibacterials in lavage are no more effective than
Nolvasan Surgical Serub (Fort Dodge) UK
lavage alone. All gross contamination should be removed if
Solution,chlorhexidine acetate 2%
possible but lavage should not be continued excessively as
Nolvasan Shampoo (Fort Dodge) UK
this will cause tissue maceration.
Shampoo, chlorhexidine acetate 0.5%, for horses, dogs, cats
Infected wounds should be treated with hypertoric solu-
tions such as magnesium sulfate 10% solution or paste (see 
GSL Savlon Veterinary Antiseptic Concentrate (Schering-Plough) UK
section 14.1), or sodium chloride 5% to 10% solution. Fol-
Liquid concentrate, Chlorhexidine Gluconate Solution BP 7.5% (=chlorhex-
idine gluconate I .5%), cetrirmide 15%. To be diluted before use
lowing removal of debris, necrotic or obviously devitalised
 Dilute I volurme with 30 volurmes alcohol 70% for skin disinfection
Dilute I volume with 100 volumes water for wourd cleansing
400Skin
Vetasept Chlorhexidine Skin Serub Blue (Anirmalcare) UK
delayed and the wound dressed. The type of dressing
Solution, chlorhex idine gluconate 0.5%, industrial methylated spirits 70%
applied to open wounds varies depending on whether addi-
tional debridement is necessary and to what degree move-
HEXETIDINE
ment will disrupt wound healing.
UK
*Passive' materials, which plug and conceal, such as gauze
Indications. Skin cleansing
and absorbent cotton now have limited application in
wound management. The development of “interactive'
Hexocil (Pfizer) UK
Shampoo, hexetidine 0.55%
films, polymeric foams, hydrogels, xerogels, hydrocolloids,
collagens, superabsorbents, hydrofibres, and hydropoly-
HYDROGEN PEROXIDE
mers mark the progression towards the production of an
"ideal wound dressing' and are now used to enhance the
UK
healing cascade by controlling the micro-environment at the
Indications. Skin cleansing and disinfection of wounds
Hydrogen Peroxide Solution 3%
tive' materials are now being developed which will lead to
Hydrogen peroxide ( 10 volurmes)
 improved healing by direct stimulation of one or more steps
To be diluted before use, see notes above
in the healing cascade.
Wounds need to be continually assessed at all stages of the
I0DINE COMPOUNDS
healing process and an appropriate dressing regimen
devised for the wound at the time. No single dressing will
UK
meet all the criteria required in all of the healing stages.
Indications. Skin disinfection
Local factors which delay healing may be avoided by pro-
Contra-indications. Concurrent use of other antiseptics or
viding products that will produce the optimal micro-
detergents
environment for healing. This micro-enivironment should be
Pevidine Antiseptic Solution (Novartis) UK
moist at the wound interface but remove excess exudate to
Solurion, available iodine (as povidone-iodine) 1%. May be diluted before 
 avoid sloughing. The tissue temperature should be main-
lse
tained and the injury protected from infective organisms,
Use undiluted for wound cleansing
foreign particles, and toxic compounds. In addition, when
Pevidine Surgical Scrub (Novartis) U/K
the dressing is changed there should be no secondary
Sol ution, available iodine (as povidone-iodine) 0.75%
trauma due to adherence.
Use undiluted for skin disinfectior
The products used for wound management are categorised
Vetasept Povidone-lodine Aleoholic Tincture (Animalcare) U/K
by the materials from which the dressings are made. They
Sol ution, available iodine (as povidone-iodine) 1%
have the ability to create or maintain a moist local environ-
ment for wound healing without tissue maceration. They
Vetasept Povidone-lodine Antiseptic Solution (Animalcare) U/K
Solution, available iodine (as povidone-iodine) 1%
have variable absorbent and adhesive properties, conforma-
bility, and ability to rehydrate necrotic tissue.
SODIUM CHLORIDE
A primary dressing is one which is placed in direct contact
with the surface of the wound whereas a secondary dressing
UK
Indications. Skin and wound cleanising
place. An island dressing comprises a central absorbent pad
surrounded by an adhesive area.
Aquspray (Anirmalcare) UK
Unfortunately, the current presentation, packaging, and size
Aerosol spray, sodium chloide 0.9%
when being considered for use in veterinary wound
14.7.2 Materials for wound management
management.
14.7.2.1 Vapour permeable adhesive films
Within the following dressing categories, examples are cho-
14.7.2.2 Foam dressings
sen to illustrate the products available; this is not a compre-
14.7.2.3 Hydrogel dressings
hensive list.
14.7.2.4 Xerogel dressings
14.7.2.5 Hydrocolloid dressings
14.7.2.6 Collagen dressings
14.7.2.1 Vapour-permeable adhesive films
14.7.2.7 Silver dressings
These are polymeric, transparent films coated on one side
14.7.2.8 Tissue adhesives
with an adhesive. The adhesive is inactivated by contact
with moisture and will not therefore stick to moist skin or
Veterinary wound management is still in its infancy. If a
the wound bed. These films are permeable to water vapour,
wound cannot be closed primarily because of a large soft
Oxygen, and carbon dioxide but occlusive to water and bac-
tissue defect or because it is infected then closure must be
 teia. The film retains a moist enlvironment at the surface of
14.7 Woumd management 401
the wound, allowing epithelium regeneration to occur more
abrasionis where exudate levels are low and adherence a
rapidly.
hazard. They are also recommended for the management of
Vapour permeable films are used in wounds in which granu-
dry sutured wounds and minor lacerations.
lation tissue is established and wound exudate is declining.
Preparation of the skin before the film dressing is applied is
UK
        i    
Allevyn (S & N HIth) UK
in place. The skin can be degreased with an alcohol swab.
Allevyn Cavity (S & N HIth) UK
The presence of hair may also reduce adhesion and there-
fore wet shaving of the skin surrounding the wound is rec-
Cavi-Care (S & N HIth) UK
ommended before application of the dressing. The rate of
Lyofoam K (SSL In ternational) UK
hair growth (which regrows at approximately twice the rate
of human hair) can prove to be a problem both with mainte-
Tielle (J & J) U/K
nance of adhesion and removal of the dressing. Careful
monitoring of the film while it is in use is essential.
14.7.2.3 Hydrogel dressings
Film dressings are used in the treatment of a wide range of
Sheet hydrogel dressings (Geliperm, Intrasite Conformable)
conditions including pressure ulcers, burns, abrasions, and
are sheets of three-dimensional networks of cross-linked
donor sites. Recently, film dressings have been introduced
that are impregnated with an antibacterial (silver) for the
up to 96% bound water but they are insoluble in water.
management of infected wounds or a deodoriser (charcoal)
 They act by three-dimensional swelling with aqueous solu-
for malodorous wounds. The method of applying film
     s
dressings varies according to the manufacturet.
form a solid sheet which may make them feel moist but
compression of the sheet will not release any water. They
UK
have a thermal capacity which provides initial cooling to
Alldress (Molnlycke) UK
the wound surface. This, plus occlusion, transiently reduces
Bioclusive (J & J) UK
pain. A secondary dressing is required.
Sheet hydrogel dressings are used on thermal or other pain-
Opsite Flexigrid (S & N HIth) UK
fu1 wounds and inflamed skin where the avoidance of topi-
Tegaderm (3M) UK
cal agents is indicated.
Amorphous hydrogel dressings are similar in composition
14.7.2.2 Foam dressings
linked. They do not have the cooling properties of the sheet
Polyurethane foam dressings are a diverse group of prod-
dressings and have been used in animal wound management
ucts with a wide range of properties. They vary from
to treat cavity wounds. A secondary dressing is required.
foamed polymers that have been made into sheets to foams
They are used for hydration of dry, sloughing, or necrotic
that are formed in situ and used to treat large cavity wounds
wounds and autolytic debridement.
(Cavi-Care). The wound contact layer of sheet dressings is
often heat-treated to give a smooth surface which absorbs
UK
fluids by capillarity. Foaming the polymer creates small,
open cells which are able to hold fluids. Foam dressings
AquaForm (Unomedical) UK
have a non-adherent wound contact surface and are also
Geliperm (Geistlich) UK
available as adhesive island dressings and cavity fillers.
Foam dressings are used for wounds with moderate to
Intrasite Conformable (S & N HIth) UK
heavy exudation. Their structure and softness also provide a
Intrasite Gel (S & N HIth) UK
cushion which protects and contributes to thermal insula-
tion of the wound. They may be tailored for difficult areas.
NuGel (J &J) U/K
The non-adhesive foams will require a secondary dressing.
Purilon Gel (Coloplast) UK
Polyurethane foam expands into the contours of the wound
as it absorbs fluid. The material may be used in an island
14.7.2.4 Xerogel dressings
configuration with an adhesi ve backing (Tielle). This prod-
These materials have no water in their formulation but swell
uct can re-adhere once lifted enabling manipulation of the
to form a gel when in contact with aqueous solutions. Algi-
dressing for fit or assessment of the wound without dressing
nate dressings derived from Laminaria spp. of seaweed are
change. The foam conducts fluid into the upper layers of the
the most commonly used xerogel dressings. A biodegrada-
dressing by *wick' action. It then escapes through the back-
ble gel is formed via ion exchange when alginate is in con-
ing. The dressing is used for dynamic fluid management for
tact with ex udate and the released calcium contributes to the
heavily exuding wounds or where extended periods
wound clotting mecharism. The gel is removed with saline
between dressing changes are desirable. The polyurethane
foam layer is particularly effective in preventing adherence
Alginate dressings are flat, non-woven pads of either cal-
cium sodium alginate fibre or pure alginate fi bre. The algi-
and the dressings are recommended for minor wounds and
nate wound contact layer may be bonded to a secondary
402Skin
dressings are available for deeper cavity wounds and
 wounds and heavily exuding wounds.
sinuses. Alginates have been shown to be effective in the
Superabsorbent hydrocolloid dressings  (CombiDERM)
management of injuries where there has been substantial
have a highly absorbent capacity and entrap exudate. These
 products incorporate the highly absorbent material into an
number of surgical procedures which could normally have
 island pad which is covered by a nori-woven absorbent and
been expected in addition to accelerating healing. The non-
surrounded by anl extra thin hydrocolloid as the adhesive
adhesive formulatiors will require a secondary dressing.
portion. The covering acts as a transfer layer while its sur-
Xerogel dressings are used to manage lacerations, post-
face stays dry. This is used for heavily exuding ulcers.
operative wounds, donor sites, and non-bleeding wounds
Hydrofibre dressings, such as Aquacel, are non- woven pads
such as second degree burns or heavily exuding wounds
where long periods are required bet ween dressing changes.
a sheet hydrogel in that it does not dry out or conduct fluid
Dextranomers (for example, Debrisarn) are xerogel poly-
laterally. Therefore there is no maceration of the skin sur-
mers of the polysaccharide dextran and are available as
rounding the wound but moisture is maintained in contact
beads or paste. These are used for debridement of moist
with the wound bed. The highly absorbent capacity reduces
sloughing wounds whether clean or infected and small area
the frequency of dressing changes. They are used for heav-
burns.
ily exuding wounds or wounds where an extended wear
Collagen-contaiming xerogels (see section 14.7.2.6) contain
time is desired.
enzyme purification. Addition of collagen to a wound bed
UK
may accelerate wound repair by the provision of a matrix
Aquacel (ConvaTec) UK
for cellular migration. The dry materials absorb exudate to
CombiDERM (ConvaTec) UK
form a gel. The materials require a secondary dressing.
They are recommended for use in any recalcitrant wounds,
Comfeel (Coloplast) UK
moist sloughing wounds, ulcers whether clearn or infected,
Granuflex (ConvaTec) U/K
and small area burns.
GranuGel (ConvaTec) U/K
UK
Tegasorb (3M) UK
Algisite M (S & N HIth) UK
14.7.2.6 Collagen dressings
Algosteril (S & N HIth) UK
Collagen comprises approximately 30% of the body and is
Comfeel SeaSorb Filler (Coloplast) U/K
found in the connective tissue of skin, tendons, bones, and
Debrisan (Pharmacia) UK
cartilage. It is the major component of the extracellular
matrix (granulation tissue) and at least 10 different types of
Kaltostat (ConvaTec) UK
collagen have been identified. It is used as a haemostat, an
Sorbsan (Unormedical) UK
absorbable suture material, artificial skin, bone filling mate-
rial, and wound dressing. There is a small risk of antigenic-
Tegagen (3M) U/K
ity with collagen use but the benefits outweigh this risk. It is
available as sheets, particles, pastes, or gels. The dry mate-
rials absorb serous exudate to form a gel. VetBioSIST is an
14.7.2.5 Hydrocolloid dressings
invaluable aid to the healing of skin deficits and other
These dressings are flexible, highly absorbent, occlusive or
lesions in some exotic species. It is presented as single
semi-occlusive adhesive pads formulated from hydrophilic
lyophilised sheets and contains collagen types I, Ill, and V.
polymers incorporated into a hydrophobic adhesive. The
All collagen dressings require a secondary dressing and are
dressings may be backed by a polymeric film and may be
recommended for use with any recalcitrant wound, moist
contoured to fit difficult areas. However, they fail to adhere
sloughing wounds whether clean or infected, and small area
for any significant period to muscular areas of great flexion
burns.
such as the neck or shoulders. The pads do not require a
secondary dressing.
UK
When used to treat veterinary wounds, hydrocolloid dress-
Promogran (J & J) UK
ings applied to relatively immobile muscular areas have
VetBioSIST (Global Veterinary Products; distributed by Arnolds) U/K
resulted in a decrease of up to 30% in healing time from
injury to hair growth. The dressings are removed by soak-
14.7.2.7 Silver dressings
ing with sodium chloride 0.9% solution (Normal saline).
Hydrocolloids are used for wounds with moderate exudate
Advanced wound management products containing silver
such as pressure sores, minor burns, granulating wounds,
have been developed to treat difficult-to-heal wounds,
and wounds exhibiting slough or necrotic tissue. Hydrocol-
chronic ulcers, and extensive burns. Product development
14.8 Preparations for the ear 403
high bacterial counts, odour, and wound exudate. Nanocrys-
become inflamed as a result of insect bites. Self-inflicted
talline silver represents a new format of the metal for use inI
 trauma frequently complicates any painful or pruritic disor-
wound management. Silver is a broad spectrum antibacte-(
der of the pinna.
nial active against such micro-orgamisms as Pseudomonas
 The principal disorder of the ear canal is otitis externa. This
spp.,Staphylococcus aureus,Escherichia coli,and Candida
 is a multifactorial disorder with a variety of possible causes
aibicans and to which there has been little reported evi- and, without proper investigation and treatment, many cases
dence of resistance. In a wound environment, silver acts as  may become chronic. Chronic inflammation of the external
anl enzyme inhibitor as it combines with proteins, cell sur-
ear canal can result in perforation of the tympanic mem-
face receptors, and wound debris. Materials such as poly-
 brane and subsequent otitis media. Otitis externa commonly
mers, charcoal, and hydrocolloids, when formulated with 
 affects dogs, especially those breeds with pendulous ears
silver, not only aid wound management and healing but also
such as spaniels and those predisposed to allergic skin dis-
regulate its release into the wound environment and sur-
ease and keratinisation defects. The prevalence of ear dis-
Tounding tissues.
ease is significantly lower in cats and farm animals.
A variety of micro-organisms may act as opportunistic
UK
pathogens. The bacteria most often isolated include Staphy-
Acticoat (S & N HIth) UK
lococcus spp., Streptococcus spp., Proteus spp., Pseu-
domonas spp., and Escherichia coli. The yeasts Malassezia
Actisorb Silver 220 (J & J) UK
pachydermatis (Pityrosporum canis) and, less commonly,
Avance (SSL Irternational) UK
Candida spp. may also be encountered. The ear mite Oto-
dectes cynotis is a common cause of otitis externa in dogs
Contreet H (Coloplast) UK
and cats, while Psoroptes cunicufi may affect rabbits.
14.7.2.8 Tissue adhesives
14.8.1 Anti-infective ear preparations
These contain cyanoacrylate compounds such as bucrylate,
enbucrilate, or mecrylate that polymerise in an exothermic
Prevention of insect attacks requires the use of fly repel-
reaction on contact with a fluid or basic substance to form a
lents, fly sprays, or flea sprays (see section 2.2.2) to mini-
strong, flexible, and waterproof bond. Tissue adhesives are
mise repeated bites. If possible the affected animal should
be housed indoors away from flies while lesions heal.
generally applied to simple lacerations where they give sim-
ilar cosmetic results to suturing. The adhesives rapidly pro-
For otitis externa, a variety of topical antimicrobials is used
vide the strength of approximated, healed tissue as seenn at
to control bacterial and yeast infection. Neomycin is the
seven days after injury. It is essential that the wound edges
most frequently used antibacterial, but others such as poly-
are accurately apposed to ensure that no adhesive passes
myxin B sulfate, gentamicin, marbofloxacin, and fusidic
between them. There have beern no reports of carcinogenic-
acid are included in available preparations. Nystatin,
ity or toxicity when they are used topically. They should not
natamycin, cotrimazole, and miconazole are used for fungal
be used over joints because repetitive movement will cause
infections. Mites are controlled with ectoparasiticides such
the adhesive to peel off.
 as pyrethrins, monosulfiram and tiabendazole. Some prod-
ucts have proven efficacy against ear mites although they
UK
do not contain ectoparasiticides. Selamectin (see section
Dermabond (Ethicon) UK
2.2.1.1) may be used for the treatment of Otodectes in cats.
Otodectic mites may also be found on other areas of the
Epiglu (ICN) UK
body and it may be necessary to treat the whole animal.
 Indermil (Tyco) UK
Many topical preparations incorporate a corticosteroid or a
Histoacryl (Braun) UK
local anaesthetic such as tetracaine or benizocaine to aid res-
olution of pain and inflammation. Systemic glucocorticoids
LiquiBand (MedLogic) UK
may be necessary to control severe inflammation and
reduce self-trauma. Most preparations contain various com-
14.8 Preparations for the ear
binations of the above drugs. The product selected should
contain therapeutic agents likely to be efficacious against
14.8.1 Anti-infective ear preparations
the pathogens identified by cytology, culture, or both. Solu-
14.8.2 Ear cleansers and sebolytics
tions or lotions are preferred for exudative conditions, while
oil-based preparations or ointments are useful for dry
Diseases of the pinna and external ear canal more com-
lesions. The veterinarian should ensure that the tympanum
monly affect the smaller species of domestic animals. These
is not perforated before administering these preparations.
structures are specialised extensions of the skin and almost
 Systemic antibacterial therapy alone may be of limited
any dermatological disease can affect this region.
value in otitis externa because the organisms are present in
The pinna is a site of skin disease due to various causative
the cerumen and exudate. The ear should be prepared for
agents, including ectoparasitic, allergic, rutritional, and
1 treatment by cleansing.
404Skin
Otitis media is usually caused by bacterial infection extend-
POM Panolog Ointment (Novartis) U/K
ing from otitis externa. Systemic antibacterial therapy
Liqwid (oily), neormycin (as sulfate) 0.25%, nystatin 100 000 units/mL, thios-
trepton 2500 units/mL, triamcinolone acetonide 0.1%, fordogs, cafs
should be based on culture and antibacterial and fungal sen-
Warnings. Avoid adrministration to pregnant anirmals
sitivity tests. Systemic glucocorticoids may also be indi-
cated. Surgery may be necessary if the response to medical
GSL Ruby Veterinary Ear Drops (Spencer) UK
management is poor.
Ear drops, piperonyl butoxide 1%, pyrethrins 0.1 %, for dogs, cafs
Contra-indications. Puppies or kittens less than 12 weeks of age
POM Surolan (Janssen) UK
Corticosteroids may produce irreversible effects in the
Suspension (drops), miconazole nitrate 2.3%, polymyxin B sulfate 5500
skin; they can be absorbed and may have harmful
units/mL, prednisolone acetate 0.5%, for dogs, cafs
effects, especially with frequent and extensive contact or
Contra-indications. Pregnant anirmals
in pregnancy. Operators should wear single-use
disposablegloves when
applying preparations
14.8.2 Ear cleansers and sebolytics
containing a corticosteroid.
A significant proportion of otic disorders in animals will
improve with flushing and cleansing of the ear canal to
UK
remove wax and debris. Preparations are available using
 Indications. Otitis externa
e x bs ro d s ons s
Contra-indications. Corticosteroids in pregnant animals;
incorporating benzoic acid, acetic acid, boric acid, and sali-
cylic acid.
to the product
UK
Indications.Ear cleansinig
thinning of the skin
There are many preparations available. This is not a com-
POM Aurizon (Vetoquinol) UK
Ear drops (oily), clotrirmazole 10 mg/mL, dex armethasone (as acetate) 0.9
prehensive list.
rmg/rmL, marboflox acin 3 mg/mL, for dogs
Contra-indications.Pregnant orlactating bitches
Auroclens (Arnolds) UK
Liquid, vegetable oil emulsion, for dogs, cats
GSL Aurotex (Arnolds) UK
P Dermisol (Pfizer) U/K
Solution, chlorobutanol I .1%, phenoxyethanol 1 %, for dogs, cafs 
Cream, benzoic acid 0.025%, malic acid 0.375%, propylene glycol 1.75%,
salicylic acid 0.006%, for horses, cattle, dogs, cats
POM Auroto (Arnolds) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Catfe: slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk with-
Ear drops, neormycin sulfate 0.5%, tetracaine hydrochloride 1%, tiabenda-
drawal period nil
zole 4%, for dogs, cats
Contra-indications. Concurrent use of teat dips or other disinfectants
Contra-indications. Anirmals less than 4 kg body-weight in the first half
of pregnancy; treatrment for longer than 7 days
P Dermisol Multicleanse (Pfizer) U/K
Solution, benzoic acid 0.1 5%, malic acid 2.25%, propylene glycol 40%, sali-
GSL Canac Ear Drops (Sinclair) UK
cylic acid 0.0375%, for horses, catfle, dogs, cats
Ear drops, piperonyl butoxide 1%, pyrethrins 0.1 %, for dogs, cats
Withdrawal Periods. Cafle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk with-
Contra-indications. Puppies or kitterns less than 12 weeks of age
drawal period nil
Contra-indications. Concurrent use of teat dips or other disinfectants
POM Canaural (LEO) UK
Ear drops (oily), diethanolarmine fusidate 0.5%, frarnycetin 0.5%, nystatin
Epi-Otic (Virbac) U/K
100 000 units/g, prednisolone 0.25%, for dogs, cats
Solution, lactic acid 2.5%, salicylic acid 0.1%, for dogs, cats
Contra-indications. Pregn ant anirmals
GSL Logic Ear Cleaner (Ceva) UK
GSL Ear Drops (Johnson's) UK
Sotution, xylene 2%,for dogs, cats
Ear drops,piperonyl butoxide1%,pyrethrins 0.1%,for dogs, cats
MalAcetic Otic (DermaPet) UK
Contra-indications. Puppies or kittens less than 12 weeks of age
Solution, acetic acid 2%, boric acid 2%, for dogs, cats
POM Fucidin Qintment (LEO) UK
MalAcetic Wet Wipes (DerrmaPet) UK
See section 14.4.1 for preparation details
Wipes, acetic acid 2%, boric acid 2%, for dogs, cats
POM Oterna Ear Drops (Schering-Plough) UK
Nolvasan Otie (Fort Dodge) UK
Ear drops (oily), betarmethasone 0.1 %, monosulfirarm 5%, neormycin sulfate
Solution, chlorhexidine acetate 0.2%, for dogs, cats
0.5%,for dogs,cats
Contra-indications. Pregr ant anirmals
Sancerum (Schering-Plough) UK
Solution, chloroxylenol, docusate sodium, lactic acid, propylene glycol, sali-
CSL Otodex Veterinary Ear Drops (Petlife)UK
cylic acid
Ear drops, chlorobutanol 1.1 %, phenoxyethanol 1%, for dogs, cafs
Specicare LEO Cat Ear Cleaner (LEO)UK
POM Otomax (Schering-Plough) UK
Solution, glycerol, propylene glycol, for cafs
Ear drops , betarmethasone (as valerate) 0.88 rmg/mL, clotrirmazole 8.8 rmg/
Specicare LEO Dog Ear Cleaner (LEO) UK
mL, gentarmicin 2640 units/mL, for dogs
Solinboriacidisppanl, eglyol, dbrate (bax),
Contra-indications. Pregnant or lactating anirmals
for dlogs
405
15
Drugs acting on
FEET
Contributors:
removing the inciting cause if possible. Heparin (see sec-
R W Blowey BVSc, BSc, FRCVS
tion 4.6.1) at a dose of 25 to 100 micrograms/kg three times
Dr T S Mair BVSc, PhD, DEIM, DESTS, DipECEIM, MRCVS
daily by subcutaneous injection has been shown to reduce
the prevalence of laminitis associated with small intestinal
15.1 Anti-infective foot preparations
disease and endotoxaemia. Heparin is only effective when
15.2 Hoof care preparations
administered before any clinical signs of laminitis are
Disorders of the feet are typically characterised by lame-
apparent.
ness, although sometimes other clinical signs such as swell-
NSAIDs (see section 10.1), such as flunixin, ketoprofen,
ing, inflammation, and discharge may be seen. In farm
meclofenamic acid, and phenylbutazone, are used to man-
livestock, lameness is both a major economic and a welfare
age pain and control laminar inflammation, especially dur-
problem and in horses performance can be seriously
ing the acute phases of the disease. Systemic administration
impaired.
      is  
Conditions affecting horses. Thrush in horses can result
injection two to three times daily) has also been used to
from poor hoof care, unhygienic stabling, poor foot confor-
reduce inflammation and reperfusion injury in the laminae.
mation, and incorrect shoeing; Fusobacterium necro-
Maintenance of laminar blood flow is important to reduce
phorum is usually found in the lesion. Thrush is
some of the deleterious effects of acute laminitis. Peripheral
characterised by areas of necrotic frog exuding black, foul
vasodilation has been attempted by use of the alpha-adren-
smelling discharge. Treatment includes debridement of
ergic blockers such as acepromazine. These drugs may help
necrotic tissue and improved stable hygiene. The diseased
to reduce the hypertension associated with acute laminitis,
area can be dressed with anti-infective agents such as povi-
although the efficacy of these treatments is unproven.
done-iodine 1% solution, sulfanilamide powder, tetracy-
Isoxsuprine (see section 10.7) has also been used as a
cline spray, or zinc sulfate 10% solution. It may be
peripheral vasodilator in laminitis+ at a dose of 0.6 to 4 mg/
necessary to bandage severe cases for a short time. Atten-
kg orally twice dail y.
tion should be paid to foot balance.
Heparin and aspirin have been used to reduce inappropriate
Canker is a severe hypertrophic pododermatitis usually
intravascular coagulation and to maintain perfusion in the
affecting the frog, but sometimes extending to the wall.
laminar capillary network. Aspirin (see section 10. 1), given
Treatment consists of resection of the abnormal tissue fol-
at a dose of 20 mg/kg orally daily, blocks thromboxane-
mediated platelet aggregation. Heparin (see section 4.6.1)
 Pathogens involved in suppurative hoof lesions include F.
has an anticoagulant effect by enhancing the activity of
necrophorum, Actinomyces pyogenes, Bacteroides spp., and
antithrombin IHl and prolonging blood clotting times and
Escherichia coli. Foot abscesses in horses should be care-
also a potential beneficial effect on the laminar basement
fully drained and poulticed. Tetanus antitoxin or a booster
 membrane. It is given at a dose of 40 to 100 units/kg by
dose of tetanus toxoid should be administered as necessary.
subcutaneous injection three times daily.
As the tissues heal, iodine-based spray and magnesium sul-
 Nitric oxide donors have beenn used in an attempt to increase
fate paste (see section 14. 1) may be applied before bandag-
laminar blood flow. Glyceryl trinitrate (see section 4.3.3)
ing to keep the area dry and clean. Antibacterials are
ointment applied locally to the coronary band or the digital
generally not indicated for the treatment of subsolar
arteries has been shown to increase the laminar blood flow
abscesses. Deep penetrating wounds to the foot with sepsis
and to reduce the bounding digital pulse in acute laminitis.
involving the pedal bone, navicular bone, navicular bursa,
A dose of 2.5 cm of 2% ointment applied to each digital
or distal interphalangeal joint require surgical debridement,
vessel of affected feet is applied topically
lavage, and appropriate antibacterial therapy.
Virginiamycin (Founderguard, distributed by  Vetsearch
Laminitis in horses can present with a spectrum of clinical
 International, Aust.) suppresses the activity of D-lactic acid
signs ranging from mild lameness to severe disease with
producing gut flora thereby reducing the production of lac-
loss of the hoof capsule. Although the precise pathogenesis
tic acid, which can increase the risk of laminitis. The prod-
of the disease is uncertain, there appears to be decreased
uct is available only
Authorisation from the VMD. The STA application must
laminar perfusion, with varying degrees of inflammation
and necrosis of the sensitive laminae. Causes include carbo-
include the details of the horse including its body-weight, a
hy drate overload, endotoxaemia (such as caused by gastro-
calculation to indicate the amount of product required, and
intestinal disease, septic metritis and pleuritis), excessive
the owner's details.
 Correcti ve trimming and shoeing are essential components
work, and hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's syndrome).
The management of laminitis usually involves both physi-
 of the treatment of acute laminitis. Frog pads or styrofoam
cal support of the distal phalanx, and treatment of laminar
pads apply support to the frog and deeper structures of the
pain and inflammation. Imitial therapy should be aimed at
foot. The use of special shoes, such as heart bar shoes, and
406Feet
dorsal wall resection may be helpful in some cases. In
prompt, prolonged, and aggressive antibacterial therapy is
advanced cases and unresponsive cases, deep digital flexor
required. The local application of antibacterials such as
tenotomy may be performed to reduce the rotational forces
clindamycin, has also been suggested “Super foul' is most
on the distal phalanix.
commonly seen in herds infected with digital dermatitis.
Conditions affecting cattle. Sole ulcers and white line dis-
Digital dermatitis is a superficial erosive epidermitis caused
orders (haemorrhage, separation, and abscessation), are
by a spirochaete of the Treponema genius, the full identity of
associated with inflammatory changes within the foot,
which has yet to be determined. There are probably three
namely laminitis or more correctly coriosis. In some ani-
subtypes, two in cattle and one affecting sheep and cattle. A
mals clinical signs of acute coriosis may be seen and
reservoir of infection persists in the interdigital pouch (at
include pain, altered gait, and heat in the hooves. However
the rear of the interdigital cleft) and the typical lesion radi-
it is the sequelae of chronic coriosis (ulcers, white line dis-
ates circumferentially from this pouch. Other common sites
ease, and hoof abnormalities) which cause most of the
for dermatitis include the interdigital cleft, the anterior
lameness. The cow seems to have arn inherent phase of cori-
aspect of the hoof (where infection may involve the coro-
osis at parturition, although it is only when other factors
nary band and produce a vertical fissure), and the bulbs of
that predispose the animal to coriosis occur that severe dis-
the heels. Lesions in the interdigital cleft may be specifi-
ease is seen. These factors include nutritional imbalance,
cally referred to as 'interdigital dermatitis; Dichelobacter
excessive standing, poor cow comfort, and inadequate man-
nodosus may be involved in these lesions. Chronic
agement during the periparturient period. The sole of the
neglected lesions of the heel develop a proliferati ve epider-
hoof is 5 to 10 mm thick and as horn grows at approxi-
mitis known as "hairy warts' Treatment of individual ani-
mately 5 mm per month,it takes at least 4 to 8 weeks for the
mals is by topical antibacterial aerosol spray, usually
damaged horn, produced at the time of parturition and
oxytetracycline. Herd treatments involve the use of ar aniti-
immediately afterwards, to grow to the surface. Therefore
bacterial foot bath; ox ytetracycline+ (200 g to 600 g/100
peak incidence of lameness is seen 6 to 14 weeks after caly-
litres), lincomycin+ (100 g/100 litres), lincomycin and
ing. Many hoof lesions are essentially of a physical nature
spectinomycin+ Linco-Spectin 100, Pfizer (150 g of pow-
and treatment of uncomplicated cases involves paring away
der/150 litres), and erythromycin+ (46 g/100 litres) have all
under-run horn, draining abscesses, and allowing the
 been used. Lincomycin is rapidly degraded in the environ-
corium to regenerate new horn. *Blocks', for example Cow-
ment and may be preferred. Maximum benefit is obtained if
slip (Giltspur) or Demotec (Demotec Hoof Care Products),
the heels are washed with a pressure hose before entering
may be applied to the sound claw to remove weight-bearing
the foot bath, or if two foot baths are used in series, the first
from the affected digit. This reduces lameness and improves
containing water to wash the feet, remove superficial
 the rate of healing of the damaged hoof.
debris, and allow better penetration of the antibacterial.
Other lesions of the bovine hoof include foreign body pene-
Control of digital dermatitis is achieved by attention to
tration, vertical and horizontal fissures ('sandcracks),
environmental hygiene and regular footbaths with formal-
"false soles', and growth abnormalities, the most common
dehyde solution (=40% formaldehyde) diluted to maximum
of which is overgrowth. Laminitis/coriosis, leading to
5 to 10% in water. Cows should be footbathed daily for one
increased pressure within the foot, can produce growth dis-
week, repeated on alternate weeks. Formaldehyde solution
tortions such as “hardship grooves’ (concentric horizontal
should not be used where raw open lesions are present.
grooves encircling the anterior hoof wall) and a dorsal rota-
Interdigital skin hyperplasia may be a sequel to chronic
tion of the toe, producing a concave anterior wall. Severe
inflammatory conditions such as low-grade “foul' or digital
coriosis resulting from, for example, a toxic mastitis or
 dermatitis, although there is also a hereditary predisposi-
metritis, can produce a total, but temporary, cessation of
tion. Early lesions may resolve spontaneously after dishing
horn formation and may result in a complete horizontal fis-
the axial hoof wall to minimise compression of the lesion
sure. This carl cause lameness 6 to 8 months later when the
during locomotion; more advanced lesions required ampu-
distal fragment of hoof moves over the corium at the toe.
tation. Regular footbathing helps in control.
Dietary supplementation with biotin (20 mg/cow daily) has
Mud fever is uncommon in cattle.Extremely muddy and
been shown to decrease the incidence of white line disease
damp conditions are required. Treatment involves washing
and vertical fissures, especially irn older animals.
affected limbs with antiseptic and spraying with iodine teat
The main lesions affecting the skin of the bovine claw are
disinfectants containing an emollient. Parenteral anti bacte-
interdigital necrobacillosis (*foul'), digital dermatitis, inter-
rials may also be used.
digital skin hyperplasia ('corns, growths), and mud fevet.
Lesions within the foot mainly affect the pedal bone, for
"Foul’ is a necrotising bacterial infection of the dermis
 example fractures and necrosis, or are infections secondary
caused by Fusobacterium necrophorum, Porphyromonas
to ulcers, white line abscesses , or "foul'
spp., and Prevotella spp. (Bacteroides melaninogenicus).
 Conditions affecting sheep and goats. Footrot, a bacterial
The possible presenice of an interdigital foreign body should
infection caused by Dichelobacter nodosus (Bacteroides
be eliminated before using parenteral antibacterials for the 
 nodosus), is the main cause of lameness in sheep and goats.
treatment of‘foul: Concurrent topical treatment reduces
 Footrot is highly contagious and, if possible, treated sheep
the spread of infection. The peracute condition of 'super
should not be returned to infected ground for at least one
foul' appears to involve the same organisms, although more
week. Recent outbreaks of peracute disease, in some cases
Feet 407
leading to total shedding of the hoof, have also implicated
 conditions, long-standing erosions and other causes of skin
an organism similar to the spirochaete causing digital der-
damage predispose to a deeper infection of the footpads,
matitis. A dermatitis affecting the interdigital cleft ('scald',
often known as “bumble foot'and commonly involving sta-
"strip') is thought to be caused by the same organism and
phylococcal species.
can be treated with topical antibacterial aerosol spray (usu-
 In domestically-housed chickens, mange caused by Cnemi-
ally oxytetracycline). Typical lesions lead to separation of
docoptes mutans can be a problem, leading to 'scaly leg'
the horn wall from the underlying corium. For treatment, all1
Occasionally osteopetrosis (leucosis virus infection) may
under-run wall must be removed and the area sprayed with
 occur and is characterised by foot and leg swelling; there is
antibacterial or disinfectant. Parenteral antibacterials, such
no treatment.
as oxytetracycline, can also be used and promote healing.
D. nodosus is a strict anaerobe and exposing the lesion to
General treatmentoffootconditions.
air facilitates healing. Neglected lesions, leading to second-
Lesions of the hoof should be treated by removing all
ary joint infections with organisms such as A. pyogenes,
under-run horn, thereby exposing the underlying healthy
require more protracted parenteral antibacterial therapy.
corium. In most cases the corium will be covered by a layer
A proliferative dermatitis extending dorsally from the skin
of germinative epidermis and growth of new horn is rapid.
of the heel bulbs is often referred to as 'strawberry footrot'
Sole ulcers are the exception to this, because the corium
because of the nature of the lesion. A combination of the orf
itself will have been damaged. Opinions vary concerning
virus and Dermatophilus congolensis may be involved and
the value of dressings. In cattle there is a risk that they will
is exacerbated by wet muddy conditions under foot. Clearl-
be left on for too long, impede drainage, and therefore
ing the lesion, in addition to topical and parenteral antibac-
retard rather than improve healing. In addition, the presence
terials facilitates healing.
of a dressing may make the affected claw the major weight-
Conditions affecting pigs. In the first week of life the feet
bearing area. Fixing a block to the sole of the sound claw,
of piglets are highly susceptible to bruising, especially
thereby removing weight bearing from the affected claw, is
when concrete floors are rough, damp, or poorly bedded.
excellent practice and promotes both healing and comfort.
The junction of the abaxial wall with the bulb of the heel is
Blocks may be nailed on or glued on. A glue-on PVC shoe
a particularly common site of injury and often leads to a
(Cowslip Plus, Giltspur) gi ves excellent support. With such
secondary bacterial infection of the foot, requiring
support there is often no longer a need to house lame cows
parenteral antibacterial therapy. Similar lesions occur in
separately, although this is good practice while lameness
sows and are again associated with rough floors, wet condi-
persists because lame cows may find cubicles especially
tions under foot (leading to soft horn), and sudden foot
difficult to use.
movements (for example from aggression) leading to physi -
Topical antibacterials are commonly applied to sheep
cal separation of the wall from the heel bulb. The ideal
lesions such as scald and footrot, and lesions involving the
treatment is to lift the foot and remove all under-run horn.
digital skin of cattle such as digital dermatitis and “foul:
Unfortunately few farmers do this and a large number of
Disinfectants and antiseptics may also be used, although
cases develop secondary infections, leading to a swollen
 single applications are of limited value against digital der-
foot with a chronic discharge. These cases are known as
matitis because the causative organism is sited below the
"bush foot'.
surface of the epidermis: disinfectants (and particularly for-
Haemorrhages and fissures in the anterior hoof wall have
maldehyde) ‘seal’ the surface of the skir and although sur-
 been attri buted to biotin deficiency and biotin is often added
face contamination may be eliminated, the infection persists
to pig rations in an attempt to prevent lameness and to
deeper within the epidermis. Prolonged footbathing with
reverse hoof problems. Joint infections caused by Myco-
disinfectants may be beneficial.
Parenteral antibacterials help to resolve sheep footrot
occur. M. hyosynoviae is common and responds well to
lesions and long-acting oxytetracycline preparations (see
treatment with lincomycin or tiamulin.
section 1.1.3) are frequently used. They are becoming
 The other major causes of lameness and leg weakness in
increasingly common as part of the standard treatment,
sows are conditions affecting the bones and joints of the
even where no secondary infection exists. A wide range of
upper leg and spine.
antibacterials is effective against foul'in cattle, with long-
Conditions affecting dogs and cats. See chapter 14 for
acting penicillin (see section 1.1.1.1) or oxytetracycline
information on dogs and cats.
(see section 1.1.3) usually used in younger stock. Tilmi-
Conditions affecting chickens. In poultry, the majority of
cosin (see section l.l.4) is widely used for footrot and
causes of lameness are associated with bone and joint
"foul' in many countries. Ceftiofur (see section 1.1.1.5) is
abnormalities of the limb and do not involve the feet. The
 often used in lactating dairy cows because of its nil milk
most common foot lesion is erosion of the foot pad caused
withholding period; cefalexin, cefquinome, or tylosin may
by wet litter. Dietary changes resulting in scouring are often
also be used.
Mycoplasmal arthritis in pigs generally
implicated. The high fat content of partially digested faeces
responds well to lincomycin or tiamulin.
seems to be particularly erosive. Insufficient litter in high
 Ideally, deep-seated lesions in all species which involve the
humidity, poorly insulated, and poorly ventilated buildings
tendon sheaths, navicular bursa or even the pedal joint
in the winter can also be contributory factors. Under such
require drainage in addition to prolonged and aggressive
408 Feet
antibacterial therapy such as high doses for 7 to 14 days.
CETRIMIDE
Again a wide range of antibacterials is used including
 ox ytetracycline, tylosin, and lincomycin. High concentra-
UK
tions of tylosin and lincomycin are achieved in joints fol-
Indications. Footrot in sheep; wound cleansing and
lowing parenteral admi mistrati on.
dressing
A vaccine is available for footrot in sheep (see section
18.2.7)
Cetrimide Solution
See sectior 14.6 for preparatior details
Cetrimide Solution Strong
See section I4.6 for preparation details 
15.1 Anti-infective foot preparations
GSL Foot Rot Aerosol (Battle Hayward & Bower) UK
Spray, cetrirnide 10%, for sheep
These products can be applied by aerosol spray, hand spray,
or by foot bath and are commonly used for both the treat-
period nil
ment and prevention of foot lesions, particularly for scald
and footrot in sheep and goats, slurry heel, *fou1' and digital
dermatitis in cattle, and general foot problems in pigs.
COPPER SULFATE
 Paring away under-run horn and cleaning the lesions before
UK
application improves response to therapy. Individual cow,
Indications. Footrot in sheep; foot lesions ini cattle
Or evenl whole herd, treatments against digital dermatitis
Side-effects. Stainis wool
may be carried out using a hand-held garden sprayer, espe-
Warnings. Toxic, particularly to sheep; ineffective when
soonby pesn si uogeodde Aeids ueun seuei ef e jl A
solution is dirty; corrodes metal foot baths; ensure correct
solutions of oxytetracycline+ (10 g/litre) and lincomycin +
 disposal to avoid environmental contamination
(1 to 5 g/litre) are commonly used at a dosage of approxi-
Dose.
Cattle: foot bath, copper sulfate 2.5-5.0% solution or cop-
ous solution.
 per sulfate 5%-formaldehyde 5% solutiorn twice daily
Foot baths are more commonly used for group treatments.
Sheep: foot bath, copper sulfate 5- 10% solution
Ideally they should be under cover to avoid dilution with
 Locat application, ointment, powder, or 5% solution
rain water, and sited so that animals can be dispersed into a
clean dry area, thus allowing time for the chemical to work.
Copper Sulfate
The bath should allow a fluid depth of approximately 7 to
Powder, copper sulfate. To be prepared as a solutior for use
10 cm for cattle and 4 to 6 cm for sheep. Baths which are
GSL Lame-Less Copper Plus (Net-Tex) UK
too deep may cause scalding of the skin on the legs, con-
Foot bath, powder for reconstitution, copper sulfate, zinc sulfate, for cafle;
tamination and damage to teats, or both. Baths should be
10kg
2.5 m long for cattle and 3.0 m for sheep, that is long
Dilute I kg in 20 litres water
enough to prevent the animal from jumping over it. The
bath should be firmly fixed and the floor should be non-slip.
FORMALDEHYDE SOLUTION
Placing straw in the footbath makes it more acceptable to
(Formalin, Formol)
the animals.
The chemicals used in foot baths should kill the pathogeric
Forn aldehyde is available as formaldehyde solution (often called forrmalin or
formol), which is diluted before use, the percentage strength being expressed
organisms rapidly without causing damage to the skin and
in terrns of formaldehyde solution rather than formaldehyde (CH,O). For
other sensitive structures of the foot. Solutions commonly
exarnple, in the UK, formaldehyde solution or formalin 3% consi sts of 3 vol-
used include antibacterials (for digital dermatitis) and for-
with water and thus contains I.02 to I. 14% w/w of formaldehyde (CHO).
maldehyde, copper sulfate, and zinc sulfate. Zinc sulfate is
less toxic and less iritant than formaldehyde or copper sul-
UK
fate, the latter two having been banned from use in some
Indications. Hardening of hooves; footrot in cattle, sheep,
countries because of their potential effects on human health
and pigs +; digital dermatitis and interdigital skin hyperpla-
and the environment. All three products are claimed to
sia in cattle
Side-effects. Skin irritation may occur with excessive
harden the hoof as well as disinfect it. Lincomycin is highly
toxic to cattle if ingested. Care must be taken to enisure that
strength of solution or frequency of use
cows do not drink from the solution as they walk through
Warnings. Toxic and irritant. Operators should wear suita-
 ble protective clothing and use in well-ventilated area
the bath and animals should rot be allowed to linger beside
Dose. Cattle +, sheep, pigs +:
freshly made up foot baths. It is probably a wise precaution
Foot bath, 5-10% solution daily for treatment
to soil the bath slightly before the first cow approaches. In
Local application, 5-10% solution
general the foot bath should be emptied after each herd or
flock treatment. One study demonstrated a 50% reduction
GSL Formaldehyde Foot Rot Liquid (DeLaval) UK
in formalin concentration following 320 cow passages.
Foot bath, formaldehyde 38%, for sheep. To be diluted before use
Spent footbath solution should be disposed of correctly.
Dilute I volurme with 1 9 volurmes water
Feet 409
OXYTETRACYCLINE HYDROCHLORIDE
GSL Golden-Hoof Plus (Shep-Fair) U/K
Foot bath, powder for recorn stitution, zinc sulfate heptahydrate 98%, wetting
UK
agents, for catle, sheep
Indications. Footrot and topical infections in horses+, cat-
GSL Zincoped (Battle Hayward & Bower) UK
tle, sheep,and pigs
Foot bath, powder for reconstinution, zinc sulfate heptahydrate 95%, for
Warnings. Operators should wear suitable protective cloth-
sheep
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
ing and use in well- ventilated area
period nil
Dissolve I kg in I0 litres water
POM Alamyein Aerosol (Norbook) UK
Spray, oxytetracycline hydrochloride 3.6%, suitable dye, for catfle, sheep,
pigs
15.2 Hoof care preparations
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
period nil
 Many preparations are said to assist in maintaining the
POM Duphacyeline Aerosol (Fort Dodge) UK
integrity of hoof horn, although the efficacy of some is dif-
Spray, oxyeacycline hydrochloride 36%, suitable dye, for catte, sheep,
ficult to assess.
pigs
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
Beneficial effects on hoof structure have been demonistrated
period nil
when supplementary biotin is added to the diet. A daily
dose of 20 mg biotin per cow has been shown to reduce the
POM Engemycin Aerosol (Intervet) UK
Spray, oxytetracycline hydrochloride 3.58%, suitable dye, for catfle, sheep,
incidence of white line lameness in the UK, and vertical fis-
sures (sand cracks) in beef cattle in North America. In pigs,
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk withdrawal
pigs
biotin at a dose of 500 to 1500 mg/tonne is often added to
period nil
the feed in an attempt to prevent lameness due to poor hoof
POM Oxycare Aerosol (Animalcare) UK
Spray, oxytetracycline hydrochloride 3.6%, suitable dye, for catfle, sheep,
been used to reverse hoof problems. Biotin has been shown
pigs
to be beneficial in horses that are not biotin deficient. Long-
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
term biotin supplementation in horses may improve hoof
period
quality and certain hoof deficits when given either alone or
POM Terramycin Aerosol (Pfizer) UK
inl combination with additional calcium and good quality
Spray, oxytetracycline hydrochloride 3.92%, suitable dye, for sheep, cale
protein.
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk withdrawal
period nil
Zinc is often promoted as reducing lameness, and while it is
known to improve the rate of healing of skin lesions, its
POM Tetcin Aerosol (Vetoquinol) U/K
effect on the feet of livestock has yet to be provern. Chelated
Spray, oxytetracycline hydrochloride 3.6%, for sheep, pigs
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk withdrawal
 Or organic mineral complexes may give better absorption
period nil
and improve the effectiveness of mineral supplementation.
 Methionine also appears to assist in improving horse hoof
ZINC SULFATE
horn integrity but its efficacy is better when given in combi-
nation with biotin. Compound preparations containing vita-
UK
mins and minerals are available.
Indications. Footrot in sheep; foot infections in cattle
Application of vegetable oil-based products to the horse
Warnings. Operators should wear suitable protective
 hoof will improve appearance of the hoof but the efficacy of
clothing
these preparations is unproven and may even cause deteri-
Dose. Foot bath.
ation of the horn.
Cattle : zinc sulfate solution daily
Tar or Stockholm tar, which has antiseptic properties, may
Sheep: zinc sulfate solution after each trimming
be used following treatment of an infected frog in horses or
footrot in cattle and sheep. It is used alone or with a packing
GSL Golden-Hoof (Shep-Fair) UK
 material to fill defects in the wall, sole, or frog and helps to
Foot bath, powder for reconstinution, zinc sulfate heptahydrate 98%, for caf-
tle, sheep
prevent entry of gravel and reinfection.
Dissolve I kg in 10 litres water
411
16
Drugs affecting
NUTRITION and BODY FLUIDS
Contributors:
thus hyponatraemia and hypernatraemia primarily indicate
P A Harris MA, DipECVCN, VetMB, PhD, MRCVS
disturbances of water balance, rather than sodium balance.
Professor A R Michell BVetMed, BSc, PhD, DSc, MRCVS
While hyponatraemia is likely to be asymptomatic until the
P R Scott DVM&S, CertCHP, DSHP, FRCVS
C L Spencer BVetMed, MRCVS
decrease exceeds 15 mmol/L, it has another implication.
D J Taylor MA, VetMB, PhD, DipECVPM, MRCVS
Sodium is the osmotic skeleton of ECF, enabling it to resist
the osmotic pull of the intracellular solutes and dictating
16.1 Electrolyte and water replacement
ECF volume. The immediate effect of gain or loss of
16.2 Plasma substitutes
sodium is not a change in plasma concentration but in ECF
16.3 Parenteral nutrition
volume. Whenl plasma sodium falls, however, water is
16.4 Drugs for ketosis
yielded to intracellular fluid, causing additional loss of
16.5 Minerals
ECF, in addition to external losses.
16.6 Vitamins
Oral rehydration promotes cotransport of sodium with glu
16.7 Compound multivitamin and mineral
cose therefore favouring niet uptake of sodium and water
preparations
and engaging the underlying problem.
16.8 Complete dietetic foods
The key properties of an oral rehydration solution (ORS)
are that it should be efficiently absorbed, it should restore
16.1 Electrolyte and water
ECF volume (and correct hyponatraemia), and it should
correct acidosis (and thereby reduce hyperkalaemia). It may
replacement
 also be desirable to replace potassium deficits and, perhaps,
16.1.1 Oral administration
losses of calcium and magnesium.
16.1.2 Parenteral administration
The original principle underlying the World Health Organi-
sation (WHO) solution that transformed the treatment of
The main objectives of fluid therapy, whether oral or
cholera was an isotonic solution with a 1:1 sodium:glucose
parenteral, are the correction of extracellular fluid (ECF)
ratio, that is
yolume, plasma pH, and plasma concentrations of K+ and
glucose 2%
100 mmol/L
Na+; and the restoration of cellular K+.
Na+ 0.7%
100 mmol/L
Any severely dehydrated, shocked, or collapsed animal
Anions
100 mmol/L.
The energy content of 3 litres of milk could only be pro-
almost certainly requires parenteral, preferably intravenous,
fluid therapy before oral rehydration therapy.
vided by over 30 litres of ORS per day, whereas the usual
daily dose for cal ves is 4 litres. The glucose concentration is
optimal for sodium absorption but inadequate for metabo-
16.1.1 Oral administration
lism. A bicarbonate precursor, for example citrate, to repair
the acidosis is essential and calves receiving an ORS with-
Diarrhoea occurs whenn riet ennteric uptake of sodium and
out it may become rehydrated but severly acidotic. The
water, for whatever reason, is impeded to a degree that
optimum sodium:glucose ratio may differ between the spe-
overwhelms the substantial compensatory capacity of the
cies but it is necessary to provide 145 mmol of sodium for
colon. The most damaging effects are to contract extracellu-
every litre of ECF needing to be replaced; the lower its
lar fluid (ECF) volume, particularly plasma volume,
sodium concentration, the less likely an ORS is to replenish
together with metabolic acidosis. The latter results from
ECF,including plasma volume.
bicarbonate loss in diarrhoeic faeces, tissue ischaemia and
The ability to correct dehydration, hypovolaemia, and aci-
anaerobic metabolism, compromised renal function, enteric
 dosis are the attributes of a classic "Type 1 ORS' but subse-
fermentation and, perhaps, excess chloride delivery promot-
quently additional objectives have become attainable. A
ing increased colonic loss of bicarbonate. It may cause dan-
"Type 2’ solution has the properties expected of Type 1
gerous hyperkalaemia, despite the underlying tendency of
solutions, but avoids the energy deficits imposed by their
faecal potassium loss and reduced oral intake to produce
low (2%) glucose content. The most advanced “Type 3'
 cell potassium depletion. Additional potassium loss in urine
solution adds to the attributes of a Type 2 solution, the abil-
and faeces results from aldosterone-driven sodium conser-
ity to sustain villus structure and enterocyte function using
vation in response to hypovolaemia.
glutamine, and so assist recovery. Unlike other amino acids,
Hyponatraemia, rather than hypernatraemia, is the usual
outcome of calf diarrhoea and reflects renal water retention,
sodium uptake, glutamine has unique importance for the
under the influence of antidiuretic hormone (ADH), in
intestine, sustaining both enterocyte function and villus
response to hypovolaemia. Normally ADH secretion, like
architecture, thus supporting both enteric surface area and
thirst, protects the normal plasma sodium concentration,
activity. It also supports renal function, both glomerular
412 Nutrition and body fluids
Table 16.1 Oral rehydration solutions available in the UK
Miltimotes pertitre
Gtucose
Ca/
Other
Reconstitution/ditution
Product
Na+
+Y
Ct-
HCO
Precursorl
%
Mg
components
Species
detaits
Type 1 oral rehydration solutions
Effydra]
120
15
55
80 citrate
3.2
--
cal ves,
Dissolve 1 tablet in 1 litre
(Fort Dodge)
pigs
water
lonalyte
145
11
108
57acetate
0
++
foals, catle,Dilute l volurme with 15
(lntervet)
pigs, dogs,
volumes water
cats
Lectade (Pfizer)
73
16
73
4citrate
2.2
phosphate
horses,
Reconstitute paired
calves,
sachets 2-4 litres water
Jambs, pigs
Lectade Plus
50
20
39
29 citrate
3.1
--
glycine,
cal ves
Reconstitute paired
(Pfizer)
phosphate
sachets in 2 litres water
Lectade Small
73
16
73
4 citrate
2.2
--
phosphate
dogs,cats
Reconstitute paired
Animal (Pfizer)
sachets in 500 mL water
Life-Aid P
76
15
74
2 propionate
2.5
-/-
glycine,
calves,pigs
Reconstitute paired
(Norbrook)
phosphate
sachets in 2 litres water
Life-Aid Xtra
06
25
09
50 acetate,
3.2
--
phosphate
calves
Reconshitute 1 sachet in 2
(Norbrook)
citrate,
litres water
propionate
Liquid Lectade
74
16
73
13 citrate
2.2
--
phosphate
horses,
Dilute 1 volume with 11.5
(Pfizer)
cal ves,
volumes water; use undi-
sheep
luted for pregnancy tox-
aemia in sheep
Liquid Life-Aid
79
15
74
propionate
2.5
--
glycine,
cal ves,
Dilute 1 volume with 11.5
(Norbrook)
phosphate
sheep,pigs
volumes water, use undi-
luted for pregnancy tox-
aemia in sheep
Scourproof
88
15
48
52 acetate
1.6
-+
ispagula
calves
Reconshitute l sachetin
(Forum)
husk,
1.5 litres water
wheat bran
Type 2 oral rehydration solutions
Energaid
133
20
09
93 acetate,
6.76
--
calves
Reconstitute 1 sachet in 2
(Elanco)
citrate,
litres
propionate
Hydrolect HE
101
30
41
100 acetate,
7.55
-/-
cal ves
Reconstitute paired
(Pfzer)
citrate
sachets in 2 lires water
Type 3 oral rehydration solutions
Glutalyte
120
30
100
80 acetate,
6.8
++
glutamine
calves,
Reconstitute 1 sachet in 2
(Norbrook)
citrate,
Jjitres water
propionate
converted tobicarbonatein thebody
16.1 Electrolyte and water replacement  413
filtration rate and acid excretion. Unlike Type l solutions,
Fluid replacement
nutrient ORSs (Type 2 or 3) need not be restricted to 48
hour use at full strength because of their higher energy
The restoration of ECF vofume can be achieved only by
yield.
solutions of plasma-like sodium concentration (130-160
 It is important to emphasise that the key management of
mmol/litre), preferably admi nistered intravenously. Intrave-
acute diarrhoea is to stop the dehy dration. Sometimes diar-
nous infusions used include Hartmann's solution (lactated
rhoea may worsen transiently even though the patient is
 Ringer's solution, compound sodium lactate infusion), and
improving. Provided rehydration is successful, it does not
Darrow's solution. Darrow's solution contains a high potas-
matter if some additional fluid *overspills' into faeces pend-
sium concentration and low sodium concentration. It is not
ing recovery. While oral rehydration therapy is routinely
suitable for initial restoration of ECF volume in cases of
given to cal ves twice daily, "little and often', as in humans,
neonatal diarrhoea when, despite potassium depletion,
probably allows larger volumes to be given to greater effect.
hyperkalaemia is likely as a result of acidosis and poor per-
 In the future, oral rehydration therapy may be used in a
fusion of tissues generally and the kidneys in particulat.
[exe se yons suogeodde Xreud jo sauei repeog
 Darrow's solution is rarely used in veterinary medicine.
dehydration and in reducing the amount of parenteral fluids
While sodium chloride 0.9% is often used, it is a poor
choice since it is an acidifier and therefore best suited to
required in conditions such as severe hypovolaemia or
shock. Type 3 solutions seem potentially useful in avoiding
alkal otic patients.
ECF dituents provide a parenteral source of water that is
the extreme villus atrophy associated with total parenteral
nutrition. Concentrated solutions (with high glucose) may
made temporarily isotonic, such as contained in glucose 5%
be suitable to treat ovine pregnancy toxaemia.
intravenous infusion. Calorie content is trivial compared
Table 16. 1 shows the approximate composition (after recon-
with daily requirements although there is temporary relief
stitution) of oral rehydration solutions available in the UK.
of hypoglycaemia and glucose can facilitate uptake of
Most proprietary solutions are for use in calves but appear
potassium, which is promoted by insulin.
equally efficacious in all species. The volume of fluid
'Maintenance sofutions’ substitute for normal oral intake of
required and the frequency of administration generally
water and dietary electrolytes and are provided after initial
depend on the severity of the condition. Solutions should be
fluid balance is restored. They contain approximately 20%
prepared according to the manufacturer's instructions. Fur-
of the plasma-sodium conicentration plus other electrolytes,
 s x  sn g bi    
notably potassium, and sufficient glucose (usually about
Prescribing for exotic birds, Prescribing for reptiles).
 4%) for isotonicity. Intravenous glucose solution may be
used in lambs to provide energy for a short period.
The calculation offluid required is based on:
 Replacement of fluid deficits existing at time of preserl-
tation
Depends on degree of dehydration on presentation plus
16.1.2 Parenteral administration
accumulated daily maintenance losses plus accumulated
In evaluating an animal for possible fluid therapy, the state
losses through diarrhoea, vomiting, etc.
of hydration, electrolyte balance, acid-base balance, and
 Replacement of daily maintenance losses
renal function should be considered based on history, physi-
Daily fluid requirements including loss through skin,
cal examination, and laboratory data, especially base
respiratory tract, and urine are usually 44 to 66 mL/kg
daily (average 50 mL/kg) for an adult animal and 130
deficit.
Table 16.2 lists some typical clinical conditions and
mL/kg daily for a neonate. Such replacement is required
parenteral solutions that may be appropriate.
until the patient is able to utilise sufficient oral fluids
The potential effects of parenteral solutions are best judged
 Replacement of continuing abnormal losses
by comparing the composition with that of normal plasma.
Abnormal fluid losses such as through vomiting or diar-
 Parenteral solutions may be classified according to their
rhoea depend on the individual clinical case. As an esti-
clinical use: restoration of ECF volume, specific restoration
mate, fluid loss through vomiting is 2 mL/kg body-
of plasma volume (see section 16.2), acidifiers, alkalinisers,
weight per vomit and through diarrhoea may be up to
 200 mL/kg body-weight daily.
ECF diluents, 'maintenance solutions', nutrient solutions
(see section 16.3), and concentrated additives. Parenteral
Examples of fluid loss calculation.
solutions are preferably administered intravenously or intra-
A 20 kg dog vomiting 4 times daily for 3 days, having beenl
osseously. Non-irritant isotonic solutions may be given by
ill for 5 days will, at a conservative estimate, accumulate a
intraperitoneal or subcutaneous injection. Subcutaneous
deficit of at least 3.5 litres. This is calculated as follows:
injection is associated with poor absorption when peripheral
▪ Irreversible losses at 25 mL/kg/day for 5 days
perfusion is reduced.
25×20×5=2500 mL
Some solutions may be incompatible with particular drugs
▪ Urinary losses at 25 mL/kg/day for first day of illness only
or with other solutions, for example, calcium with bicarbo-
25 ×20×1 = 500 mL
nate-containing solutions (see Drug Incompatibilities
· Vomiting losses at 2 mL/kg/vomit for 3 days
Appendix 2) .
2 ×20 ×4 ×3 = 480 mL.
414Nutrition and body fluids
Table 16.2 Parenteral fluid therapy for various disorders
Condition
Disturbances
Fluid
Suggested additives
Anorexia
short-term
sodium chloride 0. 18% +
potassium chloride (20-30
glucose 4% or
mmol/L)
glucose 5%
long-term: depletion of
parenteral nutrition (see
calories and protein
section 16.3)
Drought, unable to drink/
primary water loss
sodium chloride 0. 18% +
potassium chloride (10-20
swallow, diabetes insipidus,
glucose 4%
mmol/L) if therapy longer than
polyuric renal failure,
3 days
pyrexia
Vomiting
loss of water, H+, Na+, Cl-,
Ringer's solution or
potassium chloride (10-20
K+, metabolic alkalosis
sodium chloride 0.9%
mmol/L) if therapy longer than
3 days
Vomiting (bile-stained)
loss of water, H+, HCO,
Hartmanin's solution
Cl-, Na+, metabolic acidosis
Diarrhoea
loss of water, Na+, HCO,
Hartmanin's solution
potassium chloride (10-20
Cl-, (K+ if long term),
mmol/L) if therapy is
metabolic acidosis
prolonged
bicarbonate (1-3 mmol/kg) if
 condition is severe and therapy
is prolonged
Bowel obstruction
loss of water, Nat, HCO-,
plasma expander +
bicarbonate (1-3 mmol/kg)
Cl-, metabolic acidosis
Hartmann's solution
Urethral obstruction,
accumulation of K+, H+,
sodium chloride 0.9% +
bicarbonate (1-3 mmol/kg) if
ruptured urinary bladder
metabolic acidosis
glucose 5% or
in hypovolaemic shock
sodium chloride 0.18% +
glucose 4% or
sodium chloride 0.9%
Haemorrhage
 blood loss, hypovolaemic
plasma expander or
shock
Hartmann's solution,
whole blood if PCV is
1ow
 Burns, peritonitis,
loss of plasma and ECF,
plasma expander +
bicarbonate (1-3 mmol/kg)
pancreatitis
hypovolaemic shock
Hartmanin's solution
16.1 Electrolyte and water replacement  415
A horse with acute diarrhoea, such as occurs with salmonel-
 potassium administration is potentially life threatening and
rates should not exceed 0.5 mmol/kg per hour.
more.
Initial clinical signs of hyperkalaemia include listlessness,
The rate of administration will depend on the severity of
weakness, and hypotension and may lead to cardiac
the clinical condition. Initially, fluids may be given rapidly
 arthythmias. Plasma-potassium concentration is not a true
(up to 50 mL/kg/hour) and subsequently reduced to 5 to 15
reflection of total potassium content of the body because
mL/kg/hour. Some manufacturers recommend that half the
 cell-potassium deficits can exist in the presence of hyper-
initial fluid deficit should be corrected in 1 to 2 hours. The 
 kalaemia. By providing intravenous fluid therapy to correct
maximum satisfactory rate (in the absence of cardiovascular
 metabolic acidosis and dehydration and restore renal func-
or pulmonary disease) of infusion may be calculated by:
tion, correction of hyperkalaemia is facilitated in the major-
ity of patients. In the short term, glucose solution 5% or
mL of fluid/hour = BW × 90
10% given at a dose of 1 mL/kg with insulin 0.5 unit/kg
BW = body-weight of patient in kg
promotes movement of potassium ions back into cells.
High infusion rates should only be used for resuscitation of
Acid-base balance
animals in shock, only for short periods of time (20 to 30
Acidifiers such as sodium chloride 0.9% contain no bicar-
minutes), and in the absence of pulmonary or cardiac dys-
bonate precursors and are used to repair metabolic alkalo-
function; pulmonary oedema due to increased venous pres-
sure is the main hazard. Cardiopulmonary function should
composition, by increasing ECF volume and thereby
be monitored during infusion at high rates and restoration of
improving renal perfusion and function. Metabolic alkalosis
urine output must be confirmed. Clinical signs of exces-
is initensified by the renal effects of potassium depletion and
sively rapid administration include restlessness, moist lung
 a combination of intravenous potassium chloride with
sounds, tachycardia, tachypnoea, nasal discharge, coughing,
vomiting, and diarrhoea.
sodium chloride 0.9% solution may be a more effective
treatment .
To convert the flow rate in mL/kg/hour to drops/minute, the
 Alkalinisers are required for the repair of metabolic acido-
following formula can be used:
sis. These solutions contain bicarbonate or one of its pre-
Drops/mL × FR × B W
curors such as lactate or acetate. Lactate is metabolised to
Drops/mi nute =
60
bicarbonate within 1 to 2 hours solely in the liver and is not
Drops/mL = number of drops delivered by the infusion set
existing lactic acidosis. Hartmann s solution contains lac-
per mL
tate at a concentration similar to normal plasma; higher con-
FR = flow rate in mL/kg/hour
BW = body-weight of patient in kg
centrations of bicarbonate or its precursor may be needed
for severe acidosis. To calculate the amount of bicarbonate
required to correct acidosis use the following formula:
Electrolyte replacement
HCO, (mmol) = (0.3-0.5) BW × base deficit (mmol/L)
Concentrated additives are added to existing solutions to
increase the content of one particular electrolyte, for exam-
Base deficit = normal plasma-bicarbonate concentration
ple, bicarbonate or potassium, with minimal change in vol-
 minus the actual plasma-bicarbonate concentration
BW = body-weight of patient in kg
ume. They must be adequately mixed before administration
to the animal.
In the absence of measured plasma-bicarbonate deficit, but
Disturbances of plasma-sodium concentration reflect water
with a history suggesting metabolic acidosis, an initial
rather than sodium imbalance. Therefore, hyponatraemia is
bicarbonate dose of 1-2 mmol/kg may be given and
generally corrected by repair of ECF volume and hypernat-
repeated if required after some hours. Excessively (and
o    s
unnecessarily) fast infusion rates impede oxygen delivery
use of glucose 5% intravenous infusion or sodium chloride
and predispose to hypocal aemia.
0.45% intravenous infusion, to avoid sudden changes in
Table 16.3 shows the approximate composition of
plasma-sodium concentration. Sodium chloride 0.45% is
parenteral fluids used in veterinary medicine.
also used for neonates.
because their normal diet contains high concentrations of
GLUCOSE
     o  s
(Dextrose monohydrate)
cats includes dietary supplementation with foods having a
high potassium content such as vegetables, fruit, and meat.
UK
If the plasma-potassium concentration falls below 2.5
Indications. See Table 16.2 and notes above
mmol/litre, parenteral solutions are required. Plasma-potas-
Warnings. Use with care in diabetic patients
sium concentrations and heart rate should be monitored
Dose. See Table 16.2 and notes above
See Table l6.3 for preparation details
416 Nutrition and body fluids
POTASSIUM CHLORIDE
lem is the inadequate supply of oxy gen and nutrients due to
UK
poor capillary flow.
Hypertonic saline may be used in the initial treatment of
Indications. See Table 16.2 and notes above
Contra-indications. Renal failure, hyperkalaemia; atrio-
shock in horses, cattle, dogs, and cats. Sodium chloride
7.2% solution is admimistered by intravenous infusion at a
ventricular block
Warnings. Rapid injection may be cardiotoxic, ECG
dose of 4 mL/kg. Hypertonic saline has a positive inotropic
should be monitored; must be diluted with not less than 50
times its volume of sodium chloride 0.9% or other suitable
its impact on ECF volume is small. It is important that treat-
diluent and mixed well
ment with hypertonic saline is followed by full replacement
Dose. Should not exceed 3-5 mmol K+/kg daily, given at
of fluid deficits. Hypertonic saline is contra-indicated in
maximum infusion rate of 0.5 mmol/kg per hour
horses suffering from ex haustion or water deprivation. High
dosage (30 mg/kg) corticosteroids administered by intrave-
See Table 16.3 for preparation details
nous injection (for example, methylprednisolone) may also
provide useful adjunctive therapy in shock.
SODIUM BICARBONATE
Plasma substitutes such as gelatin and dextrans are artifi-
UK
cial colloids that restore circulating volume by mimicking
Indications. See Table 16.2 and notes above
the action of plasma proteins such as albumin. Plasma sub-
Warnings. Rapid infusion is inappropriate and hazardous;
stitutes are retained in the circulation longer than electrolyte
incompatible with calcium-containing solutions (see Drug
solutions due to their higher molecular weight. The use of
Incompatibilities - Appendix 2)
colloids and electrolyte solutions in preference to whole
Dose. See niotes above
blood in the early stages of shock ensures that the ‘sludging
See Table 16.3 for preparation details
phenomenon', which occurs in the peripheral microcircula-
ti on, is mi nimised.
SODIUM CHLORIDE
Dextran 40 produces a greater expansion of plasma volume
than the higher molecular weight Dextran 70, although the
UK
expansion has a shorter duration because of more rapid
Indications. See Table 16.2 and notes above
Warnings. Not indicated for protracted use unless there is
renal excretion. Dextran 40 also inhibits sludging of red
intractable metabolic alkalosis; oral potassium supplements
blood cells and is used to improve blood flow and reduce
intravascular aggregation and thrombus formation in condi-
may be necessary
Dose. See notes above
tions associated with impaired circulation.
Solutions of hydroxyethyl starch, hexastarch, may also be
See Table I6.3 for preparatior details
used as plasma expanders in a similar manner to dextrans.
Hemoglobin glutamer also has plasma expander properties
SODIUM LACTATE
and is used in the treatment of anaemia.
Severe haemorrhage is life-threatening and restoration of
UK
circulating blood volume with plasma-replacemenit solu-
Indications. See Table 16.2 and notes above
tions is a priority. If packed-cell volume (PCV) falls below
 Contra-indications. Hepatic impairment; patients with 
150 mL/litre in cattle or 210 mL/litre in horses, dogs, or
cardiac arrhythmias
cats, whole blood transfusion should be considered to
Dose. See notes above
restore oxygen carrying capacity. These figures are variable
See Table I6.3for preparation details
because hypovolaemia will affect PCV and are given for
guidance only. PCV of less than 200 mL/litre is often toler-
ated in patients with chronic anaemia.
16.2 Plasma substitutes
Crossmatching of donor and recipient blood is not always
possible but, fortunately, reactions are rarely seen on first
Haemorrhage occurs most commonly as a result of trauma
transfusion in animals. However, it is advisable, where pos-
Jo simdni :Aoains sumooy Aieuui inooo osie Aeu ing
sible, that blood should be typed and cross-matched before
tumours, abdominal ulceration in cattle, or guttural pouch
infusion. A healthy adult animal of the same species as the
mycosis in horses; or post partum. Haemorrhage may be
patient must be used as a donor. Donor animals should be
regularly tested for infectious diseases, for example cats
to poisoning with warfarin or bracken, or acquired or con-
should be tested for feline leukaemia virus, feline immuno-
genital bleeding disorders.
deficiency virus, and Haemobartonella felis. One percent
Shock is peripheral circulatory failure. Causes of shock are
of the donor's body-weight (or 10 mL/kg) is the amount
numerous and include hypovolaemia (resulting from haem-
of blood that may be safely taken at one time.
orrhage, fluid and electrolyte loss due to vomiting and diar-
Before transfusion, corticosteroids (see section 7.2) such as
rhoea, heat stroke, and burns). Toxic shock carn result from
 dexamethasone may be administered to reduce transfusion
sepsis or endotoxaermia. Vasogenic shock is due to trau-
reactions such as dyspnoea, pyrexia, urticaria, and haemo-
matic injury, anaphylaxis, or electrocution. The core prob-
globinuria. Intravenous administration of blood into the
16.2 Plasma substitutes 417
Table 16.3 Composition of parenteral fluids in the UK (see monographs for contra-indications and wamings)
Millimoles per litre
Glucose
Other
+DN
K+
CI-
HCO
Precursor
%
Ca/Mg
components
Species
GLUCOSE
Vetivex 6 (1VEX)
5
-/-
horses, cattle, dogs,
cats
SODIUM CHLORIDE
Aqupharm No 1
150
150
--
dogs, cats
(Animalcare)1
Aqupharm No9
147
4
155
+/-
dogs, cats
(Animalcare)
Ringer's sotution
Vetivex 1 (IVEX)
150
150
--
horses, cattle, dogs,
cats
Veivex 9 (1VEX)
147
4
155.5
+/-
horses, cattle, dogs,
Ringer's sotution
cats
Vetivex 20 (1VEX)2
1232
1232
horses, cattle, dogs,
cats
SODIUM CHLORIDE and GLUCOSE
Aqupharm No 3
154
154
5
--
dogs, cats
(Animalcare)
Aqupharm No 183
30
30
4
-/-
dogs, cats
(Animalcare)
Duphalyte
18
3
5
18 acetate
5
++
vitamins,
horses, cattle, pigs,
(Fort Dodge)
amino acids
dogs,cats
Vetivex3(IVEX)
150
150
5
-/-
horses, cattle, dogs,
cats
Vetivex 18 (1VEX)3
30
30
4
--
horses, cattle, dogs,
cats
SODIUM LACTATE
Aqupharm No 11
131
5
111
29 lactate
+/-
dogs, cats
(Animalcare)
Hartmann's sotution,
Lactated Ringer's sotution
lsolec (1VEX)
131
5
111
29 lactate
+/-
horses, cattle, dogs,
Hartmann's sotution,
cats
Lactated Ringer's sotution
ADDITIVES
Potassium chloride solution,
2000
2000
--
strong
Sodium bicarbonate 1.26%
150
150
-/-
Min-l-Jet Sodium
00S
00S
--
Bicarbonate (Celltech) 4.2%
Min-l-Jet Sodium
1000
1000
-/-
Bicarbonate (Celltech) 8.4%
All entries:
POM or PML
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk withdrawal period nil
1Sodium chloride 0.9% (Normal saline) contains Na+ 150 mrmol/L and Cl 1 50 rmirmol/L
2 Sodiurm chloride 7.2% (hypertornic saline) contains Na+ 1232 rmmol/L arnd Cl  1232 mrmol/L
3Sodiurm chloride 0.18 % + glucose 4% con tains Na+ 30 rmmol/L, Cl 30 rmmol/L, and glucose 4%
418  Nutrition and body fluids
patient should be performed slowly, administering 10 to 20
HEMOGLOBIN GLUTAMER-200 (BOVINE)
mL/kg depending on the severity of the condition. More
rapid transfusion may be given depending on rate of ongo-
UK
ing haemorrhage. Intraperitoneal transfusion may be of
Indications. Plasma expansion in anaemic patients
value, especially in neonates.
Contra-indications. Patients previously treated with the
The amount of blood to be transfused may be calculated
from the following formulae:
Side-effects. Mild to moderate discoloration of mucous
membranes, sclera, skin, and urine; vomiting, inappetence,
Blood volume = K × BW (required PCV - recipient PCV)
fever, circulatory overload; diarrhoea, cardiac arrhythmias,
required
donor PCV
nystagmus; mild increase in PCV; artifactual changes to
BW = body-weight of patient in kg
serum chemistry tests
K = 90 for dogs and cats
Warnings. Care with administration to animals susceptible
PCV = packed cell volume
to circulatory overloading; concomittant treatment of the
cause of anaemia is necessary; safety in pregnant or lactat-
However, the clinician is reminded that the above equation
ing bitches or thrombocytopenia with active bleeding, olig-
should be used for guidance and close attention should be
uria, anuria, or cardiac disease has not been established
 paid to the response of the patient to therapy.
Dose. Dogs: by intravenous infusion, 15-30 mL/kg body-
If non-citrated blood is given at the same time as gelatiri-
weight at a rate of 10 mL/kg/hr
containing products, it can be given through the same giv.
ing set. They carn also be used to reconstitute packed red
POM Oxyglobin (Arnolds) U/K
Intravenous infusion, hemoglobin glutarmer-200 (bovine), foc dogs
cells.
DEXTRANS
HEXASTARCH
UK
 Indications. Plasma expansion in shock
UK
Dose. By intravenous infusion, volume equal to estimated
Indications. Plasma expansion in shock
plasma volume deficit
Dose. By intravenous infusion, volume equal to estimated
plasma volume deficit
POM(H) Dextran 40 (Baxter) UK
fntravenous infusion, dex tran 40 intravenous infusion in glucose intravenous
POM H) eloHAES (Fresenius Kabi) UK
infusion 5% or sodiurm chloride intravenous infusion 0.9%
Intravenous infusion, hexastarch (average rmolecularweight 200 000) 6% in
sodiurm ch loride 0.9% intravenous infusion
POM Dextran 70 (Baxter) UK
Intravenous infus ion, dex tran 70 intravenous infusion in glucose intravenous
infusion 5 % or sodiurm chloride intravenous infusion 0.9%
16.3 Parenteral nutrition
GELATIN
Parenteral nutrition is intended to provide calories and pro-
tein precursors to animals as a substitute for a normal diet.
UK
It should only be used as a short term measure or where arly
Indications. Plasma expansion in shock
method of enteral nutrition is contra-indicated. Parenteral
Contra-indications. Mixture with citrated blood
nutrition can be provided as a solution containing glucose
Side-effects. Mild urticarial reactions; anaphylactoid
and protein hydrolysates or amino acids or a lipid emulsion.
reactions
Daily calorific requirements should ideally be provided as
Warnings. Care with administration to animals susceptible
40 to 60% lipid with the remainder as carbohy drate. This is
to circulatory overloading; caution in patients treated with
cardiac glycosides
ment an imbalance in rutritiorn can lead to hyperlipidaemia
Dose. Horses, dogs, cats: by intravenous infusion, volume
or other metabolic problems.
equal to estimated fluid loss; see also manufacturers data
Lipid emulsions may be gi ven via peripheral veins, but glu-
sheet
cose and amino acid solutions are hypertonic and should
POM Gelofusine Veterinary (Braun) U/K
only be given via central veins. Nutrienit solutions increase
Intravenous infusion, succinylated gelatin (modified fluid gelatin, average
 the risk of systemic infection and thrombophlebitis. Cathe-
molecular-weight 30 000) 40 g/litre, containing Na+ 154 mmol, CI 125
ters and equipment used for parenteral nutrition should be
mmol/litre,forhorses,dogsats
placed and maintained using scrupulous asepsis.
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmar
consumption
UK
POM Haemaccel (Intervet) UK
Indications.Provision of nutrients where enteral rutrition
Intravenous infusion, polygeline (degraded gelatin, average rmolecular-
weight 35 000) 35 g/lire, containing Na+ [45 rmmol, K+ 5 rmmol, Ca2+ 5
is contra-indicated
mmol, Cl60 mmollite,forhorses, dogs, cats
Warnings. Increased risk of thrombophlebitis and systemic
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil
infections
16.4 Drugs for ketosis 419
Dose. Daily calorie requirements.
Starvation ketosis carn occur during late gestation in range
Dogs, cats:
beef cattle carrying twin fetuses when maintained on either
BER = 30 × BW + 70
very poor grazing or fed low energy value roughages with
no concentrate feeding. In sheep, energy requirements
BER = basal energy requirement in kcal/day
BW = body-weight of patient in kg
increase rapidly during the last 6 weeks of gestation, partic-
ularly in those ewes with 3 or 4 fetuses in utero, leading to
Note. Actual energy requirements may be 2 times BER in
 post operative patients and those with systemic sepsis.
ovine pregnancy toxaemia (twin lamb disease). Prognosis
for these conditions with symptomatic treatments in either
species is guarded unless the fetuses can be aborted. Ovine
Daily protein requirements.
pregnancy toxaemia is fatal in all but the earliest cases due
Dogs: 2-4 g of amino acids/kg
to the rapid accumulation of fat in the parenchymatous
Cats: 4-6 g of amino acids/kg
organs, especially the livet.
POM(H) Intralipid 10% (Fresen ius Kabi) UK
Rapid mobilisation of body fat in highly conditioned cows,
Emwision, total energy l098 kcal, fractionated soya oil 100 g, glycerol
that is body condition score greater than 4.0 on a scale 1.0
22.5 g, phosphate I 5 mmol/litre
(very thin) to 5.0 (obese), in the immediate post partum
POM) Intralipid 20% (Fresenius Kabi) UK
period can result in fatty liver disease (fat cow syndrome).
Emulsion, total energy 2006 kcal, fractionated soya oil 200 g, glycerol
 This syndrome is associated with an increased incidenice of
22.5 g, phosphate 1 5 mrmol/litre
periparturient metabolic disease such as parturient paresis
POM Intralipid 30% (Fresenius Kabi) UK
(milk fever) and infectious diseases such as mastitis and
Emuision, total energy 300l kcal, fractionated soya oil 300 g, glycerol
metritis due to environmental pathogens.
16.7 g, phosphate 15 rmrmol/litre 
Treatment of dairy cattle with ketosis is aimed at providing
POM) Plasma-Lyte 148 (Dextrose 5%)(Baxter) UK
Solution, total energy 200 kcal, K+ I6 rmrmol, Mg? I.5 mrmol, Na+ 40 rmmol,
glucose 50% w/v solution in addition to administration of
CI 40 rmmol, Ca?+ 2.5 mmol/litre
glucose precursors such as propionate, lactate, glycerol, or
POM Plasma-Lyte M (Dextrose 5%) (Baxter) UK
diarrhoea. A glucocorticoid by injection is given concur-
Solution, total energy 200 kcal, K+ I6 rmmol, Mg2+ I.5 mmol, Na+ 40 mrmol,
CI 40 mmol, Ca2+ 2.5 rmmol/litre 
rently. This further reduces milk yield thereby bringing the
cow into positive energy status, promotes gluconeogenesis,
POM  Synthamin 17 (Electrolyte-Free) (Bax ter) UK
and stimulates appetite. Dexamethasone+ may induce par-
Solution, armino acids I 04.5 g (nitrogen [6.5 g), Cl 40 rmmol/litre 
turition during the last 10 days of gestation in ewes with
POMH) Vamin 9 Glucose (Fresen ius Kabi) UK
 pregnancy toxaemia thereby improving prognosis. Many
Solution, armino acids 70.2 g (nitrogen 9.4 g), total energy 399 kcal, K+
ewes with pregnancy toxaemia develop metabolic acidosis
 20 mmol, Mg² I.5 rmrmol, Na+ 50 mmol, Cl 50 mmol, Ca²+ 2.5 rmrmol/litre 
and additional treatment with intravenous solutions contain-
POM) Vamin 18 (Electrolyte-Free) (Fresenius Kabi) U/K
ing sodium bicarbonate may be necessary.
Solution, armino acids I14 g (nitrogen 18 g)/litre
Ovine pregnancy toxaemia and starvation ketosis in cattle
16.4 Drugs for ketosis
tion of ketosis during lactation, cows should be in condition
(bovine acetonaemia; ovine pregnancy toxaemia, twin lamb
score 2.5 to 3.0 at cal ving and be provided with well bal-
disease)
 anced, energy rich feed.
AMMONIUM LACTATE
tle, when the animal experiences an inadequate energy
UK
supply.
Indications. Ketosis
In dairy cattle, primary ketosis results from high glucose
Dose. Cattle: by mouth, 200 g daily for 5 days
demand of the mammary gland for lactose synthesis. This
increased requirement for glucose causes a decreased
GLUCOSE
amount of available ox aloacetate for the oxidative metabo-
(Dextrose monohydrate)
lism of acetate via the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) or Kreb's
cycle and results in the accumulation of the ketone bodies
UK
acetoacetate, betahydroxybutrate, and acetone in blood,
Indications. Ketosis; pregnancy toxaemia in sheep
milk, and urine. Primary ketosis is generally self limiting
Contra-indications. Subcutaneous administration
with a precipitous drop in milk yield and considerable
Dose.
weight loss followed by gradual improvement in appetite
Cattle: by slow intravenous injection,400-800 mL of
and milk yield. In the early post partum period a reduced
glucose 40%
appetite secondary to mastitis, metritis, or left abomasal dis-
Sheep: by stow intravenous injection, 100-200 mL of
placement may result in secondary ketosis.
glucose 40%
420 Nutrition and body fluids
PML Glucose 40% (Amolds) U/K
16.5 Minerals
Injetion, glucose 40% (400 mg/mL), for cattle, sheep
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
period nil
16.5.1
Calcium
16.5.2
Magnesium
GLYCEROL
16.5.3
Phosphorus
(Glycerin)
16.5.4
 Compound calcium, magnesium, and
 phosphorus preparations
UK
16.5.5
Cobalt
Indications. Ketosis; glaucoma (see section 12.5)
16.5.6
Copper
Dose. Ketosis, by mouth.
16.5.7
lodine
Cattle: 180 mL twice daily for 2 days then 90 mL twice
16.5.8
lron
daily for 2 days
16.5.9
Manganese
Sheep: 90 mL daily
16.5.10 Potassium
16.5.11 Selenium
PROPYLENE GLYCOL
16.5.12 Sodium
16.5.13 Zinc
UK
16.5.14 Compound trace elements
Indications. Ketosis in cattle; pregnancy toxaemia in sheep
Dose. See preparatiorn details
Deficiencies of the major minerals can occur for one or
PML Battles Ketosis Drench (Battle Hayward & Bower) UK
Oral liquid, propylene glycol 0.8 rmL/mL, cobalt (as sulfate heptahydrate)
more reasons. There may be increased demand associated
210 micrograms/mL,forcatle, sheep
with certain metabolic states, for example higher calcium
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
requirements at the start of lactation, or individuals may
period nil
Dose. By mouth.
have differences in absorptive capacity or requirements.
Catle: 150-200 mL daily
There may be inadequate supply in the feed or reduced
Sheep: 2 mL/kg (rmaxirmurm 120 rml). May be repeated after 7-8 hours if
availability in the feed, caused by the interference from
required
other minerals such as occurs between magnesium and
CSL Forketos (Arnolds) UK
potassium after the use of fertilisers onn pasture.
Oral solution, propylene glycol 800 rmg, cobalt (as sulfate) 210 micrograrms/
The need for treatment with the major minerals in rumi-
mL,focatle,h
nants is restricted almost entirely to calcium, magnesium,
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk withdrawal
and phosphorus. Severe sodium deficiency in cattle may
period nil
Dose. Catfle: by mouth, 150-200 mL daily
occur on maize silage diets but deficiencies of the other
Sheep: 2 mL/kg (rmaxirmurn 120 ml). May be repeated after 7-8 hours if
major mineral elements such as potassium and sulphur are
required
rare in ruminants. Additional sodium, chloride, and occa-
GSL Ketol (Intervet) UK
sionally potassium plus calcium may be required by compe-
Oral liquid, for addition to drinking water or feed or to prepare an oral solu-
tition horses especially those that sweat copiously, compete
tion,propyleneglycol0.8mL/mL,forcattle,sheep
under adverse climatic conditions, or both.
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
 Ruminant diets which rely upon conserved forages and
period nil
cereal byproducts with inappropriate mineral supplementa-
Dose. By mouth.
Catfle: 225 mL rwice daily for I day then I 15 mL wwice daily for 3 days
tion can contain insufficient concentrations of trace ele-
Sheep: I15 rmL daily
ments and primary deficiencies of cobalt, copper, and
GSL Ketosaid (Norbrook) UK
selenium may occur. Secondary deficiency states may result
Oral solution, propylene glycol, for catle, sheep
from interference with the absorption of these trace ele-
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk withdrawal
ments by sulfate, molybdenum, or iron. A primary iron
period nil
deficiency is almost entirely restricted to the rapidly grow-
Dose. By mouth.
Catfle: 200 mL rwice daily for I day then I00 rmL wice daily for 3 days
ing piglet.
Sheep: 100 rmL daily for 4 days
The causes of many excessive plasma-mineral concentra-
tions include disorders of the endocrine system, neoplasia,
GSL Liquid Lectade (Pfizer) UK
See Table 16.1 for preparation details
accidental overdosage, and renal impairment.
Dose. Sheep: pregnancy toxaemia, by mouth, l60 rmL, repeat every 4-8
 Nutrient requirements of domestic species including horses,
hours as recessary
cattle, sheep, pigs, dogs, and cats are published by National
Academy of Sciences Press, Washington DC. The National
SODIUM PROPIONATE
Research Council (NRC) is a primary source of information
relating to recommended mineral levels. NRC bulletins
UK
have now been replaced by the annual official publication
Indications. Ketosis
on nutrient profiles for dog and cat foods produced by the
Dose. Cattle: by mouth, 100-250 g daily
Association of American Food Control Officials (AAFCO).
16.5 Minerals 421
16.5.1 Calcium
necrosis at the site of injection and in cattle subcutaneous
swelling may persist for several days. The amount of cal-
 Calcium is an important ion, a major component of bones
cium provided therapeutically is small in comparison with
and teeth, and is required for maintenance of a normal car-
the animal's daily requirement and it is essential to ensure
diac rhythm, blood clotting, and initiation of neuromuscular
that appetite is maintained. If eclampsia occurs in bitches,
and metabolic activities.
ideally puppies should not be allowed to feed from the dam
Homoeostasis of calcium is mainly regulated by parathy-
but should be hand-reared or at least separated from the
roid hormone, calcitonin, and vitamin D.
dam for the first 24 hours of treatment.
In dairy cows, short-term hypocalcaemia almost always
 In cattle, feeding an acidifying diet during the last 2 to 3
 occurs at, or soon after, parturition when mammary gland
weeks of gestation dramatically reduces the prevalence of
secretions more than double the cow's requirement for cal-
hypocalcaemia. Growing cattle fed high cereal rations with
cium. This increased demand is not always balanced by an
inappropriate mineral content are prone to pathological
increase in the intestinal absorption of calcium or by the
fractures.
mobilisation of calcium from bone, and the concentration of
 Bitches are at greatest risk of hypocalcaemia at peak lacta-
ionised calcium in the plasma may fall. In ewes, hypocal-
tion, rather than after whelping. In dogs and cats increasing
-s e        
dietary calcium intake during pregnancy may help to pre-
dern dietary change or stressful event such as gathering or
vent the condition. This is most easily achieved by feeding
movement to other pastures. In beef catle and sheep,
a good quality balanced growth diet during the last third of
hypocalcaemia may occur when animals are fed a diet high
pregnancy in the dam and throughout pregnancy in the
in oxalate-containing plants such as Oxalis species. Hypoc-
queen. The food should not contain excess calcium and
alcaemic tetany has occasionally been described in heavily
should provide a calcium:phosphorus ratio close to 1:1.
lactating mares especially those that have been recently
Growing animals, in particular dogs, may develop skeletal
stressed, for example by transportation. Mild hypocalcae-
undermineralisation if the diet is deficient in calcium or
mia has often been reported in horses with abdominal crises
contains a low calcium:phosphorus ratio. Hypocalcaemia
may also occur in association with renal failure and pancre-
atitis. Calcium supplementation, calcitriol, or both is some-
tationl.
times warranted.
Signs of hypocalcaemia in cattle are characterised by an ini-
Adequate minerals are obtained from a balanced commer-
tial short period of excitement, muscle tremors, and a stiff
 cial puppy food. Calcium excess is most detrimental in the
gait. The animal becomes ataxic followed by muscular
growing animal and additional mineral supplementation
weakness leading to sternal recumbency with a characteris-
should be avoided because it may lead to hypercalcitonin-
tic S bend of the neck or the head may be held averted
ism and bone deformation, especially in the large and giant
against the flank. In sheep the clinical signs of hypocalcae-
dog breeds with an expected adult body-weight ini excess of
mia are most commonly seen during the last month of preg-
25 kg. The percentage dry matter calcium content of a large
nancy and include weakness leading to sternal recumbency,
breed puppy food, while still higher than that contained in
depression progressing to stupor, and ruminal bloat.
an adult food, is slightly less than a normal puppy diet.
In mares signs of lactation tetany may include profuse
Synchronous diaphragmatic flutter is most commonly
sweating, muscle tremor, weakness, ileus, stiffness and
found irn exhausted dehy drated horses. Hypocalcaemia, in
incoordination, staggering high-stepping gait, synchronous
particular, as well as hypokalaemia, and alkalosis may all
diaphragmatic flutter, and may lead to tetanic seizures.
contribute to increased phrenic nerve irritability so that it
In dogs hypocalcaemia is characterised by behavioural
becomes stimulated in response to atrial depolarisation. As
aberrations, agitation, muscle twitches, ataxia, paresis, and
 hypocalcaemia is the most likely deficit, treatment includes
ultimately tonic convulsions and grand mal seizures.
the administration of calcium by sfow intravenous infusion
In hypocalcaemia, the amount of calcium provided thera-
(for example, for a 450 to 500 kg body-weight horse, 400
peutically is usually insufficient to counteract the increased
mL calcium borogluconate 20% diluted in 5 litres sodium
demand from the mammary gland, but the objective of ther-
chloride 0.9%) and given according to the patient's
apy is to correct the immediate imbalance to allow time for
response. During administration, the heart should be auscul-
the homoeostatic mechanisms to adapt. An almost immedi-
tated or the pulse palpated so that on detection of any car-
ate and dramatic response follows intravenous infusion of
diac irregularity, the infusion can be immediately stopped.
calcium in all species. In ruminants, either calcium boroglu-
In some cases restoration of the ECF and circulating blood
conate 20% (calcium 15.2 mg/mL) or calcium borogluco-
yolume may be sufficient to correct the abnormality. Cal-
nate 40% (calcium 30.4 mg/mL) is admiristered by slow
intravenous infusion while monitoring the heart rate and
tective properties in hyperkalaemic horses such as patients
rhythm. A similar volume of calcium borogluconate 40% is
- li ounue no sisaeed oipod oeeday ym
administered by subcutaneous injection behind the shoulder
ure; care should be taken with intravenous administration of
in two divided sites. In dogs, calcium gluconate 10% (cal-
calcium ini such patients as described above.
cium 8.9 mg/mL) is administered intravenously. Subcutane-
Hypercalcaemia is occasionally seen and tends to result
ous injection of calcium salts in dogs and cats may cause
from renal secondary hyperparathyroidism in chronic renal
422 Nutrition and body fluids
failure or neoplasia. It may occasionally occur in conjunc-
 Magnesium deficiency may occur in ruminants on lush pas-
tion with other conditions such as paraneoplastic syndromes
and vitamin D toxicosis.
cation containing nitrogen and potash. Grazing on such
pastures may lead to hypomagnesaemia irn ruminants but it
CALCIUM SALTS
does not appear to affect horses in a similar manner.
Hypomagnesaemia may also occur in outwintered cows
UK
exposed to adverse weather conditions.
Indications. Prevention and treatment of hypocalcaemia
Hypomagnesaemia may be a cause of sudden death in
Side-effects. Persistent swelling or necrosis at subcutane-
ous injection site; see notes above
more commonly seen in beef cows during early lactation.
Warnings. Administer calcium 40% to cows only by sub-
Affected cattle become ataxic and excitable and collapse
cutaneous injection if toxaemia or cardiac insufficiency
with tetanic convulsions of the limbs and neck. Tetany, sei-
suspected
zures, and death have been described in critically ill foals
Dose. Expressed as calcium; see also notes above
with profound hypomagnesaemia.
Horses+,cattle: by subcutaneous or slow intravenous
Chronic magnesium deficiency may be associated with a
injection, 3-12 g according to the patients response,
decreased appetite and a reduction in milk yield. Hypomag-
dependent on clirical signs and blood analysis
nesaemia is often encountered in dry cows in herds with a
Sheep:by subcutaneous or stow intravenous injection,0.5-
high prevalence of milk fever (hypocalcaemia). In horses,
1.5 g according to the patient's response, dependent on clin-
clinical hypomagnesaemia has been occasionally found in
ical signs and blood analysis
association with other electrolyte disturbances in conditions
Dogs, cats: treatment, by slow intravenous injection, 1-2
such as transit tetany and synchronous diaphragmatic
mg/kg according to the patients response, dependent on
flutter.
clinical signs and blood analysis
 Intravenous administration of magnesium sulfate may pre-
Prophylaxis, see oral preparati on details
cipitate fatal effects on the cardiovascular and neuromuscu-
Notes. 1 mg calcium = 11.2 mg calcium gluconate = 13.2
lar systems in cattle. Clinical experience suggests that slow
mg calcium borogluconate
intravenous administration of 50 mL of magnesium sulfate
25% solution added to 400 mL calcium borogluconate 40%
Calcium gluconate 10% = calcium (as gluconate) 8.9 mg/
solution reduces the possibility of seizures. After which 400
mL
mL of magnesium sulfate 25% solution is administered sub-
Calcium borogluconate 20% = calcium (as borogluconate)
15.2 mg/mL
due to a long-term dietary magnesium deficiency. It is
Calcium borogluconate 40% = calcium (as borogluconate)
essential to ensure adequate daily magnesium supplementa-
30.4 mg/mL
tion, particularly to lactating cattle. This metabolic disease
POM Caleium Gluconate (Non-proprietary) UK
is more commonly encountered in extensively managed
Injetion, calcium (as gluconate) 8.9 mg/mL
beef cows with inadequate dietary supplementation. Long-
term supplementation with magnesium may be achieved by
PML Caleibor CBG 20 (Arnolds) UK
Injection, calciurm (as borogluconate) 15 mg/mL, for cattle
compound feedstuffs containing high concentration of cal-
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk with-
cined magnesite, provision of adequate fibre in the ration,
drawal period nil
direct supplementation using slow-release magnesium alloy
PML Caleibor CBG 40 (Arnolds) UK
ruminal boluses or addition of magnesium compounds to
Injection, calcium (as borogluconate) 30 rmg/mL, for cafle
the drinking water.
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk with-
Certain disease conditions and medications, such as diuret-
drawal period nil
ics, can result in increased urinary or faecal magnesium
PML Caleiject 40 (Norbrook) UK
losses in dogs and cats. Modification of dietary magnesium
Injection, calciurm (as calciurm borogluconate, calciurm gluconate) 29.7 mg/
concentration is used as part of the management of urolithi-
mL, for catfle
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk with-
asis because restriction of dietary magnesium can help to
drawal period nil
prevent struvite urolithiasis. However, alteration of dietary
magnesium has to be carefully controlled because
Canovel Caleium Tablets (Pfizer) U/K
Tableis, calciurn, for dogs, cats
hypomagnesaemia can increase the risk of calcium oxalate
Dose. By mouth.
urolithiasis (see section 16.8).
Dogs: (<9 kg body-weight)  tablet daily; (>9 kg body-weight) I tablet/9 kg
daily
MAGNESIUM SALTS
Cats:  tablet daily
UK
16.5.2 Magnesium
Indications.Prevention and treatment of magnesium
Magnesium is ann essential electrolyte, a cofactor in numer-
deficiency
Warnings.
. Intravenous administration of magnesium salts
muscle contractility, and neuronal transmission.
may precipitate seizures
16.5 Minerals 423
Dose.
the management of horses following colonic resection. An
Cattle: by mouth, see preparation details
increased incidence of dyschondroplasia has beenl associ-
by subcutaneous injection, up to 400 mL of magnesium sul-
ated with excessi ve intakes of phosphorus in foals, although
fate 25% according to the patients response
clinical signs of nutritional secondary parathyroidism do
Sheep: by mouth, see preparation details
not tend to be seen providing adequate calcium is fed.
by subcutaneous injection, up to 75 mL of magnesium sul-
Nutritional secondary parathyroidism in horses due to an
fate 25% according to the patient's response
excessive dietary intake of phosphorus or oxalates coupled
with an inadequate supply of calcium may result, especially
PML Magnesium Sulfate Injection BP(Vet) 25% (Arnolds) U/K
Injection, magnesiurm sulfate 250 rmg/mL, for catle
in younger horses, in a shifting lameness or a condition
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk with-
referred to as “big head’: The latter is less commonly seenl
drawal period nil
today.
PML Magnijeet (Norbrook) UK
Injection, magnesiurm sulfate 250 mg/mL, for cattle, sheep
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle, sheep: slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk
of anorexia. This so called *re-feeding syndrome' is due to
withdrawal period nil 
an intracellular shift of phosphorus as calories are
introduced.
Rumag Aqua (Rurmenco) UK
Oral solution, for addition to drinking water, rmagnesiurm 50 mg/mL, for
In dogs and cats consuming a diet containing a high meat
catfle
Dose. Catle: by addition to drinking water, 0.33 litre/anirmal daily
occur. In renal disease, reduced phosphorus excretion will
PML Rumbul Magnesium Bullets (Agrirmin) UK
result in renal secondary hyperparathyroidism. Renal fail-
Rurminal bols, rm/, rmagnesium (as rmagnesiurm/alurminiurm/copper alloy) 15
ure will advance further unless dietary phosphate is
g, for calves more than 50 kg body-weight, sheep more than 30 kg body-
restricted and, in some cases, phosphorus binders are used.
weight
Phosphorus is also a mineral constituent of struvite and its
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
period nil
intake should be controlled in patients with a history of stru-
Dose. Calves: (> 50 kg body-weight) rwo 15-g boluses. Repeat after 3
vite urolithiasis.
weeks if calf predorminantly on rmilk diet
Sheep: (> 30 kg body-weight) one 1 5-g bolus given 2 days before period of
PHOSPHORUS SALTS
risk. Repeat affer 3 weeks if required 
Rurrinal bols, rm/r, magnesium (as magnesiurm/alurminiurm/copper alloy) 40
g,for dairy catle more than 300 kg body-weight
UK
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
Indications. Treatment and prevention of hypophosphatae
period nil
Dose. Cattle: (> 300 kg body-weight) rwo 40-g boluses given 2-3 days
mia
before period of risk. Repeat after 4 weeks if required
Contra-indications. Hyperphosphataemia
Warnings. Avoid perivascular injection
16.5.3 Phosphorus
POM Foston (Irntervet) U/K
Phosphorus is a key component in energy and protein
injection,toldimfos sodium 200 mg/mL,forcatle,dogs
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk with-
metabolism and also as a structural part of bone. Homoeo-
! poad emp
stasis may be controlled by vitamin D and calcium.
Dose. Acute hypophosphataermia. By subrutaneous, intramuscular, or
Acute phosphorus deficiency is uncommon in farm animals
intra venous injection.
Catfle:10-25 mL
but may be encountered in older beef suckler cows during
Dogs:I-3 mL
the first 6 weeks of lactation. Hypophosphataemia may
Chronic hypophosphataermia. By subcutaneous or intramusc ular injction.
occur in association with parturient paresis in dairy cows
Catfle: 2.5-5.0 rmL every 2 days for 5-10 doses
but specific supplementation is not usually required. Phos-
Dogs: 12 mL every 2 days for 5-10 doses
phorus deficiency in the lactating cow has been associated
POM Phosphorus Supplement Injection (Arnolds) UK
with the development of post-parturient haemoglobinuria
injectin,hosphos(ascalciuhypophosphite8/m,focte
after the onset of acute haemolysis. More commonly, phos-
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk with-
phorus deficiency causes chronic hypophosphataemia,
drawal period nil
Dose. Catle: by intravenous or subcutaneous injection,up to 400 rmL
which may result in skeletal defects, lameness, and low
milk production.
16.5.4 Compound calcium, magnesium, and
Phosphorus containing compounds may be used if animals
fail to respond to calcium therapy for parturient paresis.
phosphorus preparations
 Chronic hypophosphataemia may occur in ruminants. How-
Compound mineral preparations containing calcium with
this may only occur when certain byproducts are fed and
certain geographical areas with reported clinical efficacy.
Some cases of milk fever inn cows may be associated with
supplementation.
subclinical hypomagnesaemia before calving, and cows that
Additional oral phosphorus provision has been recom-
relapse repeatedly after treatment with calcium solutions
mended when re-feeding chronically starved horses or in
may be hypophosphataemic. The precise biochemistry of
424Nutrition and body fluids
the disorder should be determined by blood analysis before
PML Maxacal S (Novartis) U/K
treatment, if practicable. Sheep may exhibit similarly com-
Injection, calciurm (as calciurm borogluconate, calciurm gluconate, calcium
hydroxide) 41.66 mg, magnesiurm (as magnesiurm chloride) 7.8 mg/mL, for
plicated biochemical abnormalities for which compound
sheep
 mineral preparations may be beneficial.
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
Compound mineral preparations are often given by subcuta-
period nil
Dose. Sheep: by subcutaneous injection, 10-20 mL
neous administration shortly before calving for the prevenl-
tion of milk fever.
16.5.5 Cobalt
UK
Indications. Treatment and prevention of hypocalcaemia
occur in animals on pasture providing inadequate cobalt.
and hypomagnesaemia in cattle, sheep
Cobalt is a component of cyanocobalamin and hydroxoco-
Contra-indications. Hypermagnesaemia
balamin, which are forms of vitamin B (see section
Warnings. Avoid perivascular injection; rapid intravenious
16.6.2). Vitamin B,2 is synthesised by the rumen microflora
injection may result in cardiac arrhythmias, and in severely
and therefore cobalt supplements should be given by
toxaemic cows, collapse and death; warm solution to body
mouth.
temperature before use; transient swelling at injection site
PML Caleibor CM20 (Arnolds) UK
ruminants, however the signs of cobalt deficiency in rumi-
Injection, calciurm (as borogluconate) 15 mg, rmagnesiurn hypophosphite 50
nants are not specific. There is decreased appetite, loss of
rmg/rmL, for sheep
body-weight, and failure to thrive. Pica oftern develops and
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk withdrawal
wool growth is poor. There is non-specific reduction in
period nil
Dose. Sheep: by subewraneous injection, 50-100 rmL
immunity in sheep and an associated increased prevalence
of helminthiasis, and bacterial infections such as pasteurel-
PML Caleibor CM40 (Arnolds) UK
Injection, calciurm (as boroglucornate) 30 mg, rmagnesiurm hypophosphite 50
losis and clostridial disease. Growing cattle are less prone
mg/mL, foc cattle
to cobalt deficiency. Injection of cyanocobalamin (see sec-
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
tion 16.6.2) is useful for the treatment of the effects of
period nil
cobalt deficiency in ruminants.
Dose. Catle: by subcutaneous or slow int ravenous injection, 400 mL
Some endoparasiticide preparations contain cobalt and sele-
PML Caleiject 20CM (Norbrook) UK
nium. These ingredients should be regarded as rutritional
Injection, calciurm (as calciurm borogluconate, calciurm gluconate) 14.8 mg,
adjuncts, rather than substitutes for other measures to cor-
rmagnesiurn (as hypophosphite) 4.625 rmg/mL, for cattle, sheep
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
rect mineral deficiencies.
 Oral supplements are available to prevent cobalt deficiency.
period nil
Dose. Catle: by subcutaneous or slow int ravenous injection, 400-800 mL
Sheep: by subcutaneous injection, 50-80 rmL
COBALT OXIDE
PML Caleiject 40CM (Norbrook) U/K
Injection, calciurm (as calcium borogluconate, calciurm gluconate) 29.75 mg,
UK
magnesium (as hypophosphite) 4.625 mg/L, for cattle
 Indications. Prevention and treatment of cobalt deficiency
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
Contra-indications. Administration of ruminal boluses to
period nil
animals under 8 weeks of age
Dose. Catle: by subcutaneous injection, 200-400 mL
Aquatrace Cobalt (Brinicormbe) UK
PML Caleiject 20CMD (Norbrook) UK
Tableis, dispersible, cobalt 3 g/sachet, for caffle
Injection, calciurm (as calcium borogluconate, calciurm gluconate) 14.8 mg,
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk with-
rmagnesiurm (as hypophosphite) 4.6 rmg/rmL, glucose (as glucose rmonohy-
drate) 200 mg for sheep
drawal period nil
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
cient for 25 animals foc 7 days
period nil
Dose. Sheep: by subcwianeous injection, 50-80 mL
GSL SI-RO-CO Cobalt Pellets (Cox) UK
Rurmingl bolus, rm/r, cobalt oxide 3 g, for sheep
PML Caleijeet LV (Norbrook) UK
Dose. Sheep: one 3-g rurminal bolus
Injection, calciurm (as calcium borogluconate, calcium gluconate, calciurm
Rurinal bolus, m/r, cobaltoxide 9 g, for catle
hydroxide) 42 mg, magnesiurm (as chloride hexahydrate) 7.8 mg/mL, for
Dose. Cattle: one 9-g rurminal bolus
catfle
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
16.5.6 Copper
period nil
Dose.Cattle: by subcutaneous or siow intravenous injection, 100-200 mL
Copper is an integral component of several important
PML Maxacal (Novartis) UK
enzymes and essential for the production of bone, haemo-
Injection, calcium (as calcium borogluconate,calciurm gluconate, calcium
 globin, melanin, and keratin. Copper deficiency is common
hydroxide) 41.66 mg, magnesiurm (as magnesiurm chloride) 7.8 mg/mL, for 
catfle
inl young growing ruminants in certain geographical areas.
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period mil, rmilk withdrawal
Primary deficiency may occur as a result of inadequate die-
period nil
Dose. Cattle: (500 kg body-weight) by subcutaneous or slow intravenous
of molybdenum, iron, or sulphur in the diet. Increased
injection, 100 mL
16.5 Minerals 425
concentrations of molybdenum and sulphur favour the for-
Texel, Welsh, and rare breeds such as the Soay and North
mation of complexes, which reduce copper absorption.
Ronaldsay.
Excessive liver-copper storage, an inherited disease, may
ference with copper utilisation as ruminants and excessive
occur in Bedlington Terriers and rarely in other breeds such
molybdenum is not normally considered to be a significant
as the West Highland White Terrier and the Dobermann. It
factor in copper deficiency in equines.
may also occur in some patients with liver cirrhosis. Treat-
In growing cattle, primary and secondary copper deficiency
 ment of copper hepatotoxicosis includes the use of copper
can cause unthriftiness, loss of coat colour, and diarrhoea.
chelating agents, such as penicillamine or trientine (see sec-
"Pine' is sometimes used to describe unthriftiness due to
 tion 3.10). Control includes restriction of copper intake and
copper or cobalt deficiency in calves. If copper deficiency
 provision of a high fat diet to stimulate biliary secretion and
is prolonged, the structure of the collagen is altered result-
 copper excretion.
ing in deformity of long bones.
birth of lambs with enzootic ataxia ('swayback') due to
demyelination. It has been recommended that when a case
of swayback is confirmed in a flock, each lamb should be
S'71 (neuoidey 1eddoo se) 1eddoo jo Tu z'0) 1eddoo uea1
mg/mL for a lamb 5 kg body-weight). Delayed swayback
may be encountered in 2 to 4 month-old lambs. In growing
COPPER SALTS
lambs, copper deficiency is associated with failure to thrive
and a poor open fleece.
UK
Copper deficiency in young foals and gestating mares has
 Indications. Prevention and treatment of copper defi-
been suggested to be a contributory cause to certain forms
ciency; to improve growth rate in cattle (where impaired
 of developmental orthopaedic disease (DOD). Anecdotal
 growth rate is due to copper deficiency)
reports of oral copper supplementation being of benefit in
Contra-indications. Concurrent administration of other
certain cases of poor performance have not been scientifi-
copper-containing
preparations;
hepatic
10
renal
cally venified.
impairment
In ruminants, treatment of copper deficiency is by
Warnings. Administer only to animals at risk or suffering
jo uogensupe jo io sies roddoo go uogofut eueid
 from copper deficiency (confirmed by laboratory tests rec-
copper oxide needles. There is great variation in the suscep-
e pe Aixoi rddo on speag dous ne yo a
toxicity and caution is advised before treating housed sheep
 Or breeds susceptible to copper toxicity; care to avoid injury
diagnosis of copper deficiency must be established before
supplementation commences. Serum-copper concentration
to mouth or pharynix when administering bolus
 and assays for copper containing enzymes are helpful but
Dose. Dependent on copper-serum concentrations and
liver copper content remains the most useful indicator of
liver analyses before and after treatmernt
true deficiency.
Copper salts such as calcium copper edetate and cuproxo-
Aquatrace Copper (Brinicombe) UK
Tablets, dispersible, copper 30 g/sachet, for catle
line are rapidly mobilised from the site of intramuscular or
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk with-
subcutaneous administration and may be toxic in sheep
drawal period nil
The recommended doses for sheep provide only a small
 Contra-indications. Concurrent adrministration of iodine
Dose. Catte by addiion to drinking water in disenser, I sachet is suff-
amount of copper. Preparations based on methionine or
cient for 25 anirmals for 7 days
heptonate complexes are not so readily mobilised from the
GSL Copasure (Anirmax) UK
Rurminal bolus, copper (as copper oxide) 20.4 g, for caftle
sheep.
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk with-
The oral administration of copper can also correct copper
! poad emp
deficiencies but more slowly than parenteral treatment
Dose. Catle: ( 100- 300 kg body-weight) one 20.4-g ruminal bolus; (> 300
because of the time taken for intestinal absorption and pos-
kg body-weight) one or rwo 20.4-g rurmirnal boluses
sible inhibition by dietary sulfates, iron, and molybdenum.
GSL Copinox Ewe/Calf (Anirmax) UK
 In horses, oral administration of copper, where required, is
Ruminal bolus, copper 3.4 g, for calves 75-100 kg body-weight, sheep
recommended.
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle, sheep: slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk
withdrawal period nil 
OT
Dose. Caives: rwo 3.4-g rurminal bolus
Sheep: one 3.4-g rurminal bolus
nantly in the liver. In sheep, once the concentration of cop-
per in the liver has exceeded a critical value, sudden release
GSL Copinox Lamb (Anirmax) UK
Rurinal bolus, copper 1.7 g, for lumbs more than 10 kg body-weight and 5
- n       go
weeksofuge
sis leading to a haemolytic crisis and death. Some sheep
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk with-
breeds are especially susceptible, notably the Suffolk,
! poad emp
Dose. Lambs: one I.7-g bolus
426 Nutrition and body fluids
PML Copprite (Pfizer) UK
nerable animals are foals from mares given supplemental
Ruminal bolus, m/r, copper (as oxide) 1.7 g, 3.4 g, 20.4 g, for catfle, sheep
high levels of iodine. The iodine is concentrated across the
more than5 weeks ofage
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle, sheep: slaughter withdrawal period ril, rmilk
placenta and milk, and foals receive relatively higher
u poad pem
initakes than the mare. Insufficient iodine intake can, how-
Dose. Cattle: (< 100 kg body-weight) two 3.4-g rurminal boluses; (100-300
ever, also cause goitre.
kg body-weight) one 20.4-g rurminal bolus; (> 300 kg body-weight) one or
rwo 20.4-g rurminal boluses
Sheep: one 3.4-g murminal bolus; lumbs: one 1.7-g ruminal bolus 
aged cats, much remains to be learned about the cause(s) of
this endocrinopathy. Hypothyroidism is more prevalent in
POM Coprin (Schering-Plough) UK
dogs, probably due mostly to a genetic predisposition.
Injection, copper (as calciurm copper edetate) 100 mg/unit dose, for cale;
Iodine excess and deficiency may result in thyroid disor-
dose applicator
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 7 days, rmilk withdrawal period nil
ders. Iodine metabolism is linked to the metabolism of iron
Dose. Catle: by subewtaneous injection, (< 100 kg body-weight) V unit
and selenium.
dose; (> I00 kg body-weight) I unit dose every 4 rmonths as necessary (cale
more than Iyear of age, severely deficient as confirmed by laboratory
fests) 2 unit doses
IODINE
PML Swaycop (Novartis) UK
UK
Injection, copper (as heptonate) 12.5 rmg/mL, for sheep
WithdrawalPeriods.Sheep: slaughter7days
Indications.Iodine deficiency
Dose. Sheep: by intramuscular injection, 25 mg given 10 weeks before
larn bing
Aquatrace Iodine (Brinicormbe) UK
Tablets, dispersible, iodine Il .37 g/sachet, for cafle
PML Veticop (Virbac) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk with-
Injection, copper (as copper rmethionate complex) 20 mg/mL, for sheep
drawal period nil
WithdrawalPeriods.Sheep：slaughter28days
Contra-indications. Concurrent administration of copper
Dose. Sheep: by subcuianeous injection, 40 mg given 10 weeks before
Dose. Catle: by addition to drinking water in dispenser, I sachet is suffi
larmbing
cientfor 25 anirmals for 7 days
16.5.8 lron
Accidental self-injection with oil-based injections can
cause severe pain and intense swelling, which may result
Iron is an essential constituent of haemoglobin and is
in ischaemic necrosis and loss of a digit. Prompt medical
involved in many oxidative processes.
Acute iron deficiency affects piglets that are maintained
package leaflet or data sheet should be shown to the
under conditions of intensive husbandry and rely on an all
doctor (or rurse) on duty.
 milk diet. The recent rise in the weaning age to four weeks
 makes iron supplementation more necessary than before.
The piglets requirement for approximately 7 mg of iron
daily is not provided by the milk diet alone. Acute
16.5.7 lodine
hypochromic anaemia develops within the first three weeks
Dietary iodine is required for the synthesis of tri-iodothyro-
of life and clinical signs appear at 3 to 6 weeks of age. The
nine and thyroxine by the thyroid gland.
    ru  e  e s
Primary iodine deficiency occurs as a result of low dietary
rate decline and diarrhoea is common.
intake. Secondary deficiency may result from feeding
 In piglets, iron is always administered in the form of a com-
plants such as Brassica spp. containing thiocyanates, which
 plex such as iron dextran or gleptoferron, in order to avoid
inhibit iodine uptake by the thyroid gland.
 the toxic effects caused by free ionic iron. Iron supplements 
 are usually given in the first week of life. The iron is stored
thyroid gland (goitre), alopecia, prolonged gestation, and an
in body tissues until required for haematopoiesis. Occasion-
increased incidence of stilbirths and weak offspring.
.The
ally, there may be residual staining of the tissues at, or near,
association between weak calf syndrome and iodine defi-
the site of injection. Anaphylactic reactions have been
ciency is not well established.
reported occasionally.
Many concentrated foods and mineral supplements (see
 Iron deficiency resulting in iron-deficiency anaemia may
section 16.7) contain sufficient iodine to ensure that the
occur in any species. Iron deficiency in dogs and cats may
overall dietary concentration exceeds 1 mg/kg feed. How-
occur as a result of chronic blood loss, haemolysis, and sec-
ever, reliance on home-grown silage and lack of supple-
ondary to a number of clinical conditions such as feline leu-
mentation to pregnant cattle may result in iodine deficiency.
kaemia or chronic renal failure. Dietary iron deficiency is
Greater concentrations may be needed if the diet also con-
     s   
tains kale, rape-seed, linseed, groundnut, or soya bean.
centration found in meat-containing foods, especially food
Undesirable dietary intakes in horses (recommended maxi-
 containing liver. Young puppies and kittens are the most 
mum intake in feed for pregnant or lactating mares is 1 mg/
yulnerable because milk contains a low iron content.
100 kg body-weight daily) can result from excessive iodine
Chronic blood loss may be associated in some species with
or from feeding certain feedingstuffs high in iodine such as
gastro-intestinal parasites (for example haemonchosis) or
kelp and may result in toxic goitre in foals. The most vul-
ectoparasites (such as sucking lice). In horses, haemor-
16.5 Minerals 427
rhagic gastric ulceration and exercise induced pulmonary
nese. Deficiency is most likely to occur in herbivores corl-
haemorrhage are other possible causes of blood loss,
suming only herbage grown in regions where the soil is
 n       i 
deficient in manganese and high in calcium.
horses is associated with iron deficiency. Nutritional iron
The manganese requirements of horses are not well under-
deficiency is not considered to be a practical problem in
stood. Suggested effects of deficiency on bone development
foals or mature horses. The same can be said for dogs and
are currently unproven.
cats. One rare exception is the anorexic renal patient in
given of human recombinant erythropoietin. Dietary iron
MANGANESE
intake may be the limiting factor in correcting the anaemia
and iron supplementation may be of benefit.
UK
Treatment should not be instituted without prior confirma-
Indications. Manganese deficienicy
tion of iron deficiency. Excessive supplementation canl
 Dose. See preparation details
cause toxicity. For dogs and cats the AAFCO recommends
Aquatrace Manganese (Brinicormbe) UK
a daily dietary intake of 80 mg iron/kg of food on a dry mat-
Tablets,dispersible,manganese 35/sachet,foccatle
ter basis with a maximum not exceeding 3 g/kg food. Diag-
nosis of the cause and correction of chronic blood loss is
period nil
essential. Oral treatment should be used in dogs and cats
Dose. Catle: by addition to drinking water in dispenser, I sachet is suffi-
cientfor 25 anirmials for 7 days
unless continuing severe blood loss or malabsorption of
iron due to gastro-intestinal damage is present.
16.5.10 Potassium
IRON COMPLEXES
Potassium is an essential electrolyte that is important for the
maintenianice of intracellular osmotic pressure. In associa-
UK
tion with sodium, potassium helps maintain membrane
Indications. Prevention and treatment of iron-deficiency
potential and can influence nerve transmission and muscle
anaemia
function. Dietary sources of potassium include molasses
Contra-indications. Parenteral administration in dogs and
and vegetable matter.
cats with hepatic or renal impairment, cardiac disease
Potassium deficiency is uncommon in dogs and cats. How-
Side-effects. Occasionally residual staining at site of injec-
ever it has been seen in healthy adult cats on a low potas-
tion; oral treatment may cause vomiting, constipation and
sium vegetarian diet or an acidifying diet, and chronic
diarrhoea in dogs and cats; parenteral iron may cause
diarrhoea may result in increased faecal potassium losses.
arrhythmias, anaphylaxis, shunting of iron to reticulo-
endothelial stores in dogs and cats.
exic or inappetent, polyuric cats with renal failure or being
Dose. Piglets: by intramuscular injection, 200 mg
treated with non potassium-sparing diuretics. Hypokalae-
Dogs +: by mouth, 100-300 mg daily
mic polymyopathy has been reported in certain cat breeds,
by intramuscular injection, 25 mg/kg weekly (but see notes
in particular Burmese have an inherited predisposition to
above)
this condition. Clinical signs of deficiency are profound,
Cats +: by mouth, 50- 100 mg daily
episodic muscular weakness, cervical ventroflexion of the
by intramuscutar injection, 25 mg/kg weekly (but see notes
head and a stiff gait with no symptoms between episodes
above)
and relapses within days or weeks. A diagnosis should be
made after measurement of plasma-potassium concentra-
PML Gleptosil (Alstoe) UK
tion before supplementation is instituted.
injection,iron (as gleptoferran) 200 mg/mL,for piglets
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Potassium supplementation may be required when adminis-
tering some diuretics (see section 4.2), although in patients
PML Leodex 20% (LEO) UK
with mild hypokalaemia withdrawal of the diuretic and nor-
fnjection, iron (as iron dex tran) 200 rmg/mL, for piglets
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter withdrawal period nil
mal feeding may be sufficient.
Traditional forage-based horse diets are rich in potassium
PML Scordex (Novartis) UK
and no further supplementation is usually required when
Injection, iron (as iron dex tran) 200 mg/mL, for piglets 
such diets are fed except for horses working hard, sweating
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter withdrawal period nil
profusely, or both. Electrolyte supplements that compensate
16.5.9 Manganese
for losses of sodium, potassium, and chloride ini sweat may
be beneficial. Haylages and silages contain more moisture
A deficiency of manganese is uncommon, but may occur in
ruminants if the diet contains less than 20 mg manganese
 Replacement of hay with haylages or silages oni a weight for
per kg feed or high concentrations of calcium and phospho-
weight basis may result in a lower potassium intake espe-
rus. The clinical signs of deficiency include poor growth,
cially in horses on a low forage based diet such as race-
weakness, infertility, birth of stillborn or weak offspring,
horses. Care should be taken when giving potassium salts or
and an increase in the proportion of male offspring. Most
potassium rich feeds to horses prone to hyperkalaemic peri-
concentrated foods and dietary supplements contain manga-
odic paral ysis.
428 Nutrition and body fluids
Hyperkalaemia in dogs and cats is most likely to occur in
Confirmed deficiencies may be treated by the parenteral
patients with renal or cardiac disease and in hypoadrenocor-
administration of selenium salts, but amounts greater than
400 micrograms of readily available selenium per kg body-
medication should be discontinued and the potassium
weight may cause acute toxicity in sheep. There have been
anecdotal reports of anaphylactoid responses in horses to
fatal.
vitamin E/selenium preparations given by injection. The
 admi mistration of selenium containing anthelmi ntic prepara-
POTASSIUM SALTS
 tions may prevent the development of deficiency states in
rumi nants.
UK
Acute and chronic selenium toxicity can occur in horses,
Indications. Potassium deficiency
can be fatal, and is usually due to excessive supplementa-
 Contra-indications. Renal impairment, adrenal impair-
 tion. Climical signs of acute toxicity include respiratory dis-
ment
tress, diarrhoea, recumbancy, and death. Chronic toxicity is
 Side-effects. Gastro-intestinal irritation, vomiting, diar-
characterised by emaciation, lameness, hoof horn slough-
rhoea, melaena
ing, loss of mane and tail hair, or all these clinical signs.
Warnings. Caution in patients with cardiac disease, renal
Some endoparasiticide preparations contain cobalt and sele-
impairment
nium. These ingredients should be regarded as rutritional
 Dose. See preparation details
 adjuncts, rather than substitutes for other measures to cor-
PH Kay-Cee-L (Geistlich) UK
rect mineral deficiencies.
Syrup, potassiurm chloride 7.5% (K+ I rmmol/mL, Cl I mmol/mL)
Dose. By mouth.
SELENIUM SALTS
Dogs: 0.2-0.5 mrmol/kg three tirmes daily or I3 g/dog daily
Cats: 2-6 rmmol/cat daily
UK
PH Slow-K (Alliance) UK
Indications.Selenium deficiency
Fablets, s/c, potassiurm chloride 600 mg (K+ 8 rmrmol, Cl 8 rmrmol)
Side-effects. Transient painful nodule at site of injection
Dose.By mouth.
Dose. See preparation details
Dogs: 0.2-0.5 mrmol/kg three tirmes daily or I3 g/dog daily
Tumil-K (Amolds) U/K
Aquatrace Selenium (Brinicom be) UK
Tablets, dispersible, seleniurm 875 mg/sachet, for caffle
Tablei5, pota ssiurn gluconate 468 mg, for cat5
Oral powder, for addition to feed, potassiurm gluconate 468 rmg/650 rmg of
Withdrawal Periods. Catte: slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk with-
powder, for cats (650 mg of powder = % 5-mL spoonful)
drawal period nil
Dose.By mouth.
Dose. Cattle: by addition to drinking water in dispenser, I sachet is suffi-
Dogs: (> 20 kg body-weight) 1.872 g (one 5-mL spoonful or 4 tablets) rwice
cient for 25 anirmals for 7 days
daily with food
POM Deposel Injection (Novartis) UK
Cats: 468 rmg/4.5 kg body-weight (%a 5-rmL spoonful or I tablet) rwice daily
Depot injection (oily), selenium (as bariurm selenate) 50 mg/mL, for catfle,
with food
sheep
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
period nil
16.5.11 Selenium
Dose. Cuttle, sheep: by subeutaneous injection, I mg/kg
The essential role of selenium is as part of the erizyme glu-
Accidental self-injection with oil-based injections can
tathione peroxidase, whose function is to prevent free radi-
cause severe pain and intense swelling, which may result
cal damage to tissues.
in ischaemic necrosis and loss of a digit. Prompt medical
Deficiency is seen in young or rapidly growing calves and
attention is essential. A copy of the warning given in the
lambs causing muscular degeneration in cardiac, respira-
 package leaflet or data sheet should be shown to the
tory, or skeletal muscles; vitamin E/selenium responsive
myopathy may also affect skeletal and cardiac muscles
doctor (or nurse) on duty.
especially in young foals. It is reported that moderate sele-
nium deficiency may result in illthrift, reduced growth rate,
See also section 16.6.5 for Compound Selenium and Vita-
and compromised immunocompetence.
 min E preparations
Selenium status can be assessed by measuring the activity
of glutathione peroxidase in red blood cells. Plasma-sele-
16.5.12 Sodium
nium concentration tends to be a better indicator of very
recent selenium status and toxicity than glutathione peroxi-
 Sodium is an essential electrolyte. The concentration of
dase. Under European legislation, the maximum amount of
sodium in extracellular fluid is controlled by hormonal
selenium to be fed to horses daily is 1 mg/100 kg body-
mechanisms. Concentrated feed contains added salt for pal-
weight
atability and ruminants receiving this diet are unlikely to
There is a complex interaction between the requirements for
become sodium deficient.
selenium and vitamin E whereby either nutrient may substi-
 Sodium deficiency is unusual in species other than grazing
tute, in part, for the other.
herbivores not receiving concentrated feed supplements.
16.5 Minerals 429
Many pastures in the UK provide less than the required
 dromes. Certain breeds, notably Alaskan Malamutes and
1.5 g per kg feed to avoid deficiency in ruminants. The
 Siberian Huskies ,have a genetic defect impairing absorp-
requirement is higher for lactating animals and animals with
 tion of zinc from the intestine. In such dogs, the disease can
mastitis owing to the loss of sodium in the milk, although
occur despite feeding a well-balanced diet; it usually
milk yield is ofterl reduced.
appears in young animals. The coat is often dry and dull.
Sodium deficiency occurs in high yielding cattle subsisting
Erythema, scaling, crusting, and alopecia develop particu-
solely on a grass-based diet or receiving a high intake of
larly around the mouth, eyes, ears, scrotum, prepuce, and
maize silage. The body s initial response to sodium defi-
yulva; crusting and hyperkeratosis may be marked at pres-
cienicy, beyond that which can be countered by sodium con-
sure points including the elbows and footpads. A second
servation, is to reduce the extracellular fluid volume. This
 syndrome is seen in short coated, large breed puppies from
results in polycythaemia and an increase in PCV and hae-
a variety of breeds fed diets deficient in zinc or containing
moglobin concentration, which is commonly observed in
 substances that reduce its availability for absorption, such
grazing cattle in the UK during summer. Greater depriva-
as calcium. Malaise and secondary infections such as
tion results in pica for salt including drinking stagnant water
Malassezia are also seen.
and urine and ultimately polyuria and polydipsia due to
In the first syndrome, lifelong supplementation with zinc is
renal failure. Prevention and treatment are achieved by pro-
usually necessary. Zinc may be administered as zinc sulfate
viding salt blocks or compound mineral feed blocks.
Traditional diets and the majority of manufactured feeds
the dose should be reduced. In the second syndrome, sup-
contain insufficient sodium for many horses. A salt supple-
plementation with zinc may be required while a balanced
ment should be provided routinely. Additional sodium,
diet is introduced and may be recessary until the dog
chloride, and occasionally potassium may be required by
reaches maturity.
competition horses.
Zinc deficiency and excess have been suggested, but not
Salt poisoning can occur, particularly in pigs due to exces-
proven, to be implicated in developmental orthopaedic dis-
sive salt concentration eitherin the diet or water supply, and
ease (DOD) in young horses. Zinc has been suggested to
is more usually associated with swill feeding. Temporary
pe neddoo senbepv ssiy suos u Aenb yooy srond
 loss of water supply may cause hypernatraemia followed by
zinc should be provided and fed in the appropriate ratio
sudden death due to brain oedema once the water supply is
(currently suggested to be Zn:Cu 3-4:1).
restored.
Jo ssxe ui pooy neo pue sop ui juesaid Aieeue st wnpos
the AAFCO recommended level. However, sodium losses
and depletion can occur with vomiting and diarrhoea, espe-
cially in the presence of dehydration, heat stress, or in
patients that have an increased sodium requirement
ZINC SALTS
(growth, pregnancy, lactation).
UK
cats with hypertension, fluid retention (such as in cardiac,
Indications. Zinc deficiency; improvement of hoof quality
renal, or hepatic disease) and oxalate urolithiasis. In
(see section 15.2); diarrhoea ini pigs (see section 3. 1. 1)
patients with advanced cardiac disease, sodium restriction
should be effected gradually in order to safeguard against
Aquatrace Zine (Brinicormbe)UK
the possibility of hyponatraemia.
Tablets, dispersible, rmanganese 43.75 g/sachet, for catfle
16.5.13 Zinc
period nil
Dose. Cutle: by addition to drinking water in dispenser, I sachet is suff-
cientfor 25 anirmals for 7 days
Zinc has been shown experimentally to be important in the
P  Solvazine (Provalis) UK
lead to growth cessation. Pigs and certain breeds of cattle
Tabieis, zinc sulfate rmonohydrate 125 mg
may exhibit clinical signs of zinc deficiency when their diet
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 5 rmg/kg daily (target plasma-zinc concentration is
2-3 mg/L)
contains less than 50 mg per kg of feed of zinc and over 5 g
per kg of feed of calcium. Parakeratosis develops with the
Zincaderm (Virbac) UK
skin becoming crusty and cracked, and growth rate is
Fablets, rmethionine 35 rmg, vitarmin A 1250 units, zinc (as zinc rmethionine)
decreased. This condition is occasionally seen in young
15 rmg, for dogs, cats
Dose. Dogs, cats: by mouth, I tablet/l0 kg body-weight for at least 2-3
calves after protracted diarrhoea. Supplementation of the
weeks
diet with at least 100 mg of zinc per kg feed is usually effec-
Zincomed (Schwacz Pharma) UK
tive in treating and preventing deficiency. In Friesian cattle,
Capsules, zinc sulfate 220 mg
Dose. Dogs: by mouth, 10 mg/kg daily
has been recorded.
Skin disease in dogs responding to zinc supplementation
Zincosol (Bioceuticals) UK
(zinc-responsive dermatosis) occurs as two clinical syni-
Tableis, zinc sulfate rmonohydrate 220 rmg
Dose. Dogs: by mowth, 10 mg/kg daily
430 Nutrition and body fluids
16.5.14 Compound trace element
16.6 Vitamins
preparations
16.6.1 Vitamin A substances
Trace elements are essential dietary constituents, which are
16.6.2 Vitamin B substances
required in relatively small amounts. The main function is
16.6.3 Vitamin C substances
to act as cofactors in various enizyme systems. Deficiencies
16.6.4 Vitamin D substances
of copper, cobalt, and/or selenium may occur in young, rap-
16.6.5 Vitamin E substances
idly growing calves and lambs in certain well defined geo-
16.6.6 Vitamin K substances
graphical areas. Prevention by oral supplementation with
16.6.7 Multivitamin preparations
preparations containing combinations of all three elements
may be advisable, however the possibility of chronic copper
Traditionally, vitamins have been classified into water-solu-
UK
ble, such as the vitamin B group and vitamin C, and fat-sol-
uble including vitamins A, D, E, and K. Nutrient
All-Traee (Agrimin) UK
requirements for domestic animals are published by
See section 16.7 for preparation details
National Academy of Sciences Press, Washington DC.
Aquatrace Trio Cattle (Easi-calver) (Milk and Hold) (Brinicormbe) UK
   e d     
Fablets, dispersible, copper 35 g, iodine I1.37, seleniurm 875 mg/sachet, for
catfle
cific deficiency diseases and when the diet is known to be
Withdrawal Periods. Caftle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk with-
vitamin deficient. They are also often used for general sup-
drawal period nil
porti ve therapy and during recovery from debilitating dis-
Dose. Cutle: by addition to drinking water in dispenser, one 300-g sachet
eases such as chronic neonatal diarrhoea and helminthiasis
is sufficient for 25 anirmals for 7 days
in Tuminant species. The administration of excessive
PML Cosecure for Cattle (Telsol) UK
amounts of fat-soluble vitamins, especially vitamin A or
Rurrinal bolus, s/r, cobalt 500 mg and copper 13.4 g in sodiurn phosphate
vitamin D, can be harmful because they accumulate in the
glass rmatrix, seleniurm (as sodiurm selenate) 300 mg, for caffle more than f00
kg body-weight and 2months of age
body and may cause pathological changes.
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk with-
drawal period nil
Dose. Catfle: wo 100-g rurminal boluses
16.6.1 Vitamin A substances
Cosecure for Deer (Telsol) U/K
Ruminal bolus, s/r, cobalt 330 rmg and copper 8.84 g in sodiurn phosphate
glass rmatrix, seleniurn (as sodiurm selenate) 99 mg, for adult deers
growing plants, which form the primary source of the vita-
Dose. Deer: one 66-g ruminal bolus
mir. Synthetic water soluble beta-carotene sources may riot
Cosecure for Lambs (Telsol) U/K
be well utilised in horses. Vitamin A is also derived from
Ruminal bolus, s/r,cobalt 80 mg and copper 2.l g in sodiurm phosphate glass
animal fat products, in particular fish oils and liver. Cats,
-g   o  s o   (as os se) as x
weight and more than 5 weeks of age
unlike other species, are unable to convert beta-carotene to
Dose. Lumbs: one l6-g rurminal bolus
vitamin A and therefore require a dietary supply of vitamin
Cosecure for Sheep (Telsol) U/K
A such as is found in fish oils, liver, or synthetic vitamin A.
Runinal bolus, s/r, cobalt 165 mg and copper 4.4 g in sodiurm phosphate
 Deficiency is commonest in growing cattle fed poor quality
glass rmatrix, selenium (as sodiun selenate) 50 mg, for sheep more than 25
hay where much of the vitamin content of the forage has
kg body-weight; 33-g bolus 50
been lost due to bleaching and during storage. Deficiency is
Dose. Sheep: one 33-g ruminal bolus 
  n    n  
Zincosel for Lambs (Telsol) U/K
cereal-based diet without appropriate supplementation. The
Ruminal bolus, s/r, cobalt 80 mg and zinc 2.5 g in sodiurm phosphate glass
oo  s  s s sx
rate of absorption of vitamin A and other fat-soluble vita-
weight andmore than5weeks of age
mins is dependent on other fat constituents in the diet, bile
Dose. Sheep: one l6-g ruminal bolus
salts, and pancreatic enzymes. The liver can store large
Zincosel for Sheep (Telsol) UK
quantities of vitamin A and provides a reserve, particularly
Ruminal bolus, s/r, cobalt 165 mg and zinc 5 g in sodiurm phosphate glass
for carnivores. Diets deficient in vitamin A produce no ill
rmatrix, seleniurm (as sodiurm selenate) 50 rmg, for sheep more fhan 25 kg
effect until the liver stores are depleted and the plasma con-
body-weight; 33-g bolus
centration falls below 220 units/litre. The daily requirement
Dose. Sheep: one 33-g rurminal bolus
of vitamin A is 20 to 100 units/kg body-weight, or in dogs
Ionox (Bayer) U/K
and cats, 3000 to 8000 units/kg food on a dry matter basis,
Rumingl bolus, s/, cobalt 500 mg, iodine 3.4 g, seleniurm 500 mg, for cafle;
depending on the animals lifestage. Liquid paraffin can
55-g bolus
Dose. Catfle: (200-449 kg body-weight) one 55-g bolus; (450-600 kg
prevent the absorption of vitamin A from the intestine; ani-
body-weight) rwo 55-g boluses; (> 600 kg body-weight) rwo-three 55-g
mous  a ud pnb pd wa s
boluses
signs of vitamin A deficiency. There is minimal transfer-
Zincosel for Cattle (Telsol) UK
ence of vitamin A across the equine placenta. This means
Rurrinal bolus, s/r, cobalt 500 mg and zinc 15.4 g irn sodiurm phosphate glass
foals tend to be born with a relative vitamin A deficiency
matrix, selenium (as sodiurm selenate) 150 mg, for catfle more fhan f00 kg
especially if the mares are fed a vitamin A deficient diet,
body-weight and 2 months of age; 100-g bolus
Dose. Catle: Ewo l00-g ruminal boluses 
colostrum levels are low, or the foal fails to suckle.
16.6 Vitamins 431
A deficiency of vitamin A interferes with bone growth, and  min from the gastro-intestinal tract or increased body
with the maintenance of tissues, particularly secretory epi-
requirements.
thelial tissue, and the growth of the embryo. In young ani-
In all species, vitamin B, is required for maintenance of tis-
mals, deficiency arrests the growth of the skull causing
 sues, protein synthesis, and haematopoiesis. Climical signs
neurological effects such as blindness due to pressure on the
 of deficiency include anorexia, unthriftiness, anaemia, and
growing brain and cranial nerve roots. Older animals may
incoordination.
develop a rough coat with scaly, cracked skin, and dry
 It has been suggested that daily oral administration of folic
mucous membranes. They may fail to grow and reproduce
acid may be of benefit in stable fed, competition horses.
and may exhibit neurological dysfunction. Animals of al1
 Certain orally administered synthetic folic acid supplements
ages may develop right blindness due to a deficiency of ret-
may interfere with the absorption or utilisation of natural
inal rhodopsin. Vitamin A deficiency in horses has not been
forms of folate causing folate deficiency and therefore
reported to cause abnormal bone remodelling as seen in
inducing clinical problems when co-administered with cer-
other species.
tain therapeutic agents.
Dietary supplementation is a convenient way to prevent,
 It has been reported that additional long-term biotin supple-
and to some extent reverse, the effects of the deficiency,
mentation may improve hoof quality and certain hoof defi-
although the neurological deficits due to cranial growth
cits, particularly when given in combination with an
inhibition may not be completely reversible.
adequate and well balanced diet (see section 15.2). In pigs,
Overdosage from excessive dietary intake of liver or vita-
biotin may improve hoof horn quality and fertility and it is
min A-containing supplements most commonly occurs in
generally administered in the feed. The feeding of raw egg
cats and dogs; it may result in vertebral fusion and skeletal
white and the use of oral antimicrobial agents are the two
malformation in fetuses, spontaneous fracture, internal
haemorrhage, anorexia, slow growth, and skin thickening.
Thiamine deficiency may occur as a result of inadequate
The AAFCO maximum level in pet food is 250 000 units/
 dietary intake or destruction of the vitamin by excessive
kg food on a dry matter basis for dogs and 750 000 units/kg
 heating during processing of diets for carmivores. Second-
food on a dry matter basis for cats. Excessive vitamin A
ary thiamine deficiency may occur in carnivores such as
intake in young foals may result in a decreased growth rate
 cats or omnivores such as dogs because of the thiaminase
and has been suggested to increase the risk of developmen-
present in dietary raw fish, and in horses because of the thi-
tal orthopaedic disease (DOD). Mild vitamin A toxicity in
 aminase present in bracken and horsetails (Equisetum spp.).
horses may result in slowed growth, dull hair, and poor
 Bracken poisoning in horses is characterised by progressive
muscle tone. Severe toxicity may be characterised by
ataxia followed by convulsions or paresis and terminal
depression, alopecia, ataxia, severe bone deformation, and
coma. Treatment includes thiamine or dried brewer s yeast.
death.
 In ruminant species, particularly growing sheep aged 4 to 6
months, thiamine deficiency may result following increased
16.6.2 Vitamin B substances
thiaminase activity in the rumen. Changes in diet, recent
anthelmintic treatment, or other factors may disturb the
The complex of B vitamins includes thiamine (B,), nico-
rumen microflora with proliferation of thiaminase-produc-
tinic acid (niacin), riboflavin (B, riboflavine), choline, pan-
ing bacteria. Outbreaks of cerebrocortical necrosis (polio-
tothenic acid, pyridoxine (Bg), biotin, folic acid, and
encephalomalacia), attributed to thiamine deficiency, have
vitamin B2. All of these cani be synthesised by the micro-
been associated with diets containing a high concentration
flora in the gastro-intestinal tract of ruminants and hind gut
 of sulfur.
of horses and deficiencies are, therefore, uncommon in
 Secondary thiamine deficiency can be successfully treated
these species. However, absorption of the microbiologically
synthesised thiamine may not meet the total needs in horses
shortly after the onset of neurological signs. B group vita-
under some conditions. B vitamins, required by non-rumi-
mins are water soluble and non-toxic and treatment is often
nants, are derived from a variety of plant and animal
supplied using a combination product (see section 16.6.7).
sources. Dried yeast provides a rich supply of these vita-
mins. B vitamins are not stored in the body to any great
lead to a deficiency. Deficiencies affect the nervous and
CYANOCOBALAMIN
gastro-intestinal systems and skin.
Vitamin B,z is a collecti ve term for the cobalamins of which
UK
cyanocobalamin and hydroxocobalamin are the principal
Indications. Treatment of vitamin B, deficiency
compounds. They are cobalt-containing vitamins. Rumi-
Dose.By subcutaneous or intramuscular injection.Repeat
nants are able to use cobalt to synthesise vitamin B,z in the
 after 7 days if required
rumen and deficiency occurs when inadequate cobalt is 
Horses, cattle: 1-3 mg 1-2 times weekly
present in the diet. In carnivores, vitamin B, deficiency
foals, calves: 0.5- 1.5 mg 1-2 times weekly
may occur as a result of inadequate absorption of the vita-
Sheep: 250-750 micrograms 1-2 times weekly
432 Nutrition and body fluids
PML Anivit B, (Anirmalcare) U/K
nal absorption of certain forms of absorbic acid is very poor
Injection,cyanocobalarmin 250 micrograms/mL,forfoαls, calves, sheep
in horses.
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
period nil
 Recent studies, while supporting the fact that vitamin C is a
Injection, cyanocobalarmin I rmg/mL, for horses, cattle
non-essential vitamin in dogs and cats, have shown that
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
supplemental vitamin C plays an important role as a nutri-
period nil
tional antioxidant and can help to reduce free radical injury.
PML Intravit 12 (Norbrook) UK
The level of vitamin C content in food is subject to process-
injetion,cyanocobalamin 500micgramsmLforhorses,catte, sheep,
inig and storage losses.
pigs
ASCORBIC ACID
period nil
PML Vitbee (Arnolds) UK
UK
Injetion, cyanocobalamin 250 micrograrms/mL, forfouls, calves, sheep
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk withdrawal
Indications. See notes above; adjunct in the treatment of
period nil
 methaemoglobinaemia due to acetaminophen (paracetamol)
injection,mg/m,fohorses,ate
poisoning (see Treatment of poisoning); urinary acidifica-
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk withdrawal
tion (see section 9.3.1); adjunctive therapy in working dogs,
 period nil
dogs with hepatic impairment
THIAMINE
POM H Ascorbic acid (Non-poprietary) UK
(Vitamin B,)
Tablets, ascorbic acid 50 mg, 100 mg, 500 mg
injection, ascorbic acid 100 rmg/mL
UK
Indications. Treatment of thiamine deficienicy; treatment
16.6.4 Vitamin D substances
of cerebrocorticol necrosis in cattle and sheep; adjunct in
The termn vitamin D is
s used for a range of compounds
metabolic diseases ini cattle
including
ergocalciferol
(calciferol,
vitamin
D),
Dose.Horses·:by intramuscular or slow intravenous
colecalciferol
(vitamin
D),
alfacalcidol
(1α-
injection, 0.25-1.25 mg/kg twice daily for up to 7 days
hydroxycholecalciferol),
and
calcitriol
(1,25-
Catle,sheep:by intramuscular or stow intravenous injec-
dihy drox ycholecalciferol)
tion, 5-10 mg/kg, repeat every 3 hours for a total of 5 doses
 D vitamins are found in plants and animals as sterols, which
Pigs+:by intramuscular or slow intravenous injection,
are converted to vitamins by ultraviolet light. Ergocalciferol
0.25-1.25 mg/kg twice daily for up to 7 days
is derived from plants. Colecalciferol is synthesised from
Cats +: by intramuscular injection, 50 mg 1-2 times daily
the sterols present in skin on exposure to sunlight. It may be
POM Vitamin B1 (Bimeda) UK
converted to calcitriol in the liver and kidney. Calcitriol is
Injection, thiarmine hydrochloride I00 mg/mL, for cattle, sheep
now believed to be the active form of the vitamin and is 10
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period mil, milk withdrawal
times more potent than colecalciferol.
period nil
Vitamin D is absorbed and stored in tissues, in particular the
liver and fat. Low plasma-calcium concentration initiates
16.6.3 Vitamin C substances
the conversion of storedvitamin D to calcitriol by enizyme
(Ascorbic acid)
systems principally regulated by parathyroid hormone and
plasma-calcium concentrations. Calcitriol enhances the
Ascorbic acid is synthesised by all animals except primates
 absorption of calcium from the intestine and the reabsorp-
and guinea pigs. Deficiency may occur in these species
tion of calcium from the renal tubules and acts, together
when the diet contains inadequate supplies of fresh fruit and
with parathyroid hormone and calcitonin, to regulate the
vegetables or food is stored incorrectly.
processes of bone resorption and formation during remodel-
It is believed that the requirements for vitamin C in healthy
ling of the skeleton. Excess vitamin D provision in horses
horses are met by tissue synthesis. It has, however, been
d 1ood pue eixaiue uoy auauei suis ul nnssi Ae
suggested that horses that have been severely stressed may
formance, to hypercalcaemia, hyperphosphataemia, soft tis-
require additional sources although no dietary requirement
sue calcification, and bone resorption.
A deficiency of vitamin D results in the failure of bone to
shown that absorbic acid is the most important antioxidant
in the fluid lining of the lungs of horses. Horses suffering
calcify correctly and may lead to rickets in young animals
and osteomalacia in adults. These conditions may be treated
from recurrent airway obstruction (RAO) as well as lung
 and prevented by the administration of vitamin D prepara-
inflammation in general, may have a low level of antioxi-
 tions either parenterally or in the diet.
n    i   n u s
 Oral calcitriol may be used to control hypocalcaemia in
levels of oxidative stress. Appropriate balanced antioxidant
some dogs and cats with renal disease. It may also be of use
supplementation, which includes ascorbic acid from a bioa-
in cases of hypoparathyroidism or transient hypocalcaemia
vailable source, may be of value. The efficiency of intesti-
post thyroidectomy.
16.6 Vitamins 433
Excessive administration of vitamin D preparations may
Equine degenerative myeloenicephalopathy (EDM) or
result in metastatic calcification of the major blood vessels,
equine motor neurone disease (EMND) is believed to be
the kidney, and other organs. Sodium clodronate (see sec-
associated with a vitamin E deficiency. Cases tend to occur
tion 7.7.2) has been used in dogs as a palliative treatment
 in stabled horses, horses with access to dirt paddocks only
for hypercalcaemia of hyper vitaminosis D.
or horses fed mature grass hay usually with a high grain
ration. Lack of antioxidant action of vitaimin E in the CNS
CALCITRIOL
oxidative injury and death with subsequent degeneration of
UK
axons in the peripheral nerves and denervation atrophy of
Indications. Control of hypocalcaemia in renal diseasee
skeletal muscle, in particular type 1 muscles needed for
Dose. Dogs, cats: by mouth, 1.5-6.6 nanograms/kg
maintenance of posture. Decreased serum-vitamin E con-
centration is not always present. Treatment includes dietary
POM Caleitriol (Non-proprietary) UK
Capsules, calcitriol 250 manograrms, 500 nanograrms
vitamin E supplementation plus the feeding of fresh, green
forage. Affected animals may improve or stabilise but many
COMPOUND
CALCIUM
and
VITAMIN
D
do not fully recover. Recent research has suggested that
PREPARATIONS
increased provision of vitamin E (at about 160 mg/kg dry
 matter feed intake) to the mare during the peri-parturient
UK
period may beneficially influence colostrum concentrations
Caleivet (Bird Care Company) UK
of immunoglobulins.
Oral liquid, calcium borogluconate 400 mg, colecalciferol 625 micrograms,
The role of vitamin E supplementation in reducing free rad-
magnesium sulfate l0 rmg/mL, for birds
Dose. Birds: prophylaxis, 20 rmL/litre drinking water
ical induced damage during and following intensive exer-
Egg binding, by mouth, 0.2 rmL/l00 g body-weight hourly
cise in horses is under evaluation.
Prevention of vitamin E deficiency requires a daily intake
Pet-Cal (Pfizer) UK
Fablets, calciurm hydrogen phosphate 2.04 g, colecalciferol 5 micrograrms, for
of approximately 1 g of vitamin E for cows, 150 mg for
dogs, cuts
calves, 75 mg for ewes, and 25 mg for lambs.
Dose. By mouth.
 In pigs, deficiency of vitamin E alone causes mulberry heart
Dogs: (< 9 kg body-weight)  tablet daily; (> 9 kg body-weight) I tablet/9
kg body-weight daily
disease, a condition that is relatively common in the UK
Cats: % tablet daily
and characterised by sudden death with myocardial necro-
sis. It can occur in pigs of any age, but is most common in
weaners and growers. Inclusion of increased amounts 
of
d p id  sn sh si u g 
16.6.5 Vitamin E substances
treatment may be given to individual animals or groups at
Vitamin E or tocopherol is the group mame for substances
risk.
with vitamin E activity. The main naturally-occurring sub-
Subclinical deficiency of vitamin E may occur in dogs and
stance is d-alpha tocopherol and the principal compounds
used in preparations are d-alpha tocopheryl acid succinate
mentation with vitaimin E has recently been shown to
and df-alpha tocopheryl acetate. Vitamin E is present in
reduce free radical injury. Vitamin E is prone to processing
growing plants and in cereals. Vitamin E is an antioxidant
and storage losses.
and is necessary for the stability of muscular tissue. It has a
similar role to selenium (see section 16.5.11) and each can
to some extent replace the other.
VITAMIN E
idly growing calves and lambs aged 3 to 6 weeks. In grow-
(Tocopherols)
ing ruminants, vitamin E deficiency may occur in animals
UK
cles that are deficient in vitamin E become stiff, swollen,
Indications. See notes above
and painful, and degenerative changes are visible micro-
Dose. See preparation details
scopically. The disease is called *white muscle disease'
Both skeletal and heart muscle are susceptible causing a
Note. Vitamin E activity per 1 mg = df-alpha tocopheryl
stiff gait leading to inability to stand and sudden death
acetate 1 unit = d-alpha tocopheryl acid succinate 1.21 units
respectively. White muscle disease has also been reported
= d-alpha tocopheryl acetate 1.36 units = d-alpha tocophe-
in foals. Feeding propionic acid treated cereals or some
ro1 1.49 units
likelihood of white muscle disease in the offspring.
Tocovite 50, 100 (Amolds) U/K
Capsules, d-alpha tocopheryl acid succinate 4l rmg, 83 rmg, for horses,
Parenteral therapy with vitamin E and selenium often pro-
caives,lambs,dogs
duces a complete restoration of health when skeletal muscle
Dose.Bymouth.
is invol ved but recovery will depend on the extent of mus-
Horses: 0.83-2.48 g daily
Culives: 165-248 mng daily
cular damage and which muscles are affected.
Lambs, dogs: 41-83 mg daily
434 Nutrition and body fluids
COMPOUND
SELENIUM
and
VITAMIN
E
 Most sick, aphagic horses should be given vitamins includ-
PREPARATIONS
ing B vitamins because the gastro-intestinal flora may be
adversely disturbed, affecting normal production from the
UK
hindgut. A variety of dosages have been suggested but
Indications. Prevention and treatment of selenium/vitamin
experimentally it appears to take a long time to produce
E deficiency
clinical signs, if any, of a deficiency and a multivitamin B
s     q d  o
POM Vitenium (Novartis) U/K
vitamin B preparation alone.
Injection, dl-alpha tocopheryl acetate 150 rmg, seleniurm 500 micrograms/
mL,forhorses,cattle,shep
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurman corn -
surmption. Catfle, sheep: slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk withdrawal
UK
period nil
 There are many preparations available. This is not a com-
Dose. Horses: by intramuscular injection, up to 20 mL;fouls: 2-5 mL
Cattle: by subeutaneous or intramuscular injection, up to 15 mL; cal ves: 2-
prehenisive list.
5 rmL
Sheep: by subeutaneous or intramusc ular injection, up to 5 rmL; lumbs: 0.5-
Indications. See notes above
3.0rmL
Side-effects. Occasional anaphylactic reaction especially
POM Vitesel (Norbook) UK
in horses following
intravenous injection; intravenous
Injection, dl-alpha tocopheryl acetate 68 mg, seleniurm (as potassiurm
injections should be administered slowly
selenate) 1.5 mg/mL,for calves,lambs, piglets
Warnings. Overdosage may cause hypervitaminosis A,
Withdrawal Periods. Catte, sheep,pigs: slaghter withdrawal perid il
hypervitaminosis D, or both
Dose. Calves: by intramusc ular injection, I-2 mL/45 kg body-weight
Sheep: by subcutaneous or intramusc ular injection, 2 mL/45 kg body-weight
Dose. See manufacturer's data sheet
after third rmonth of pregnancy; lamhs: 0.5-1.0 rmL
Piglets: by intramuscular injection, I mL/25 kg body-weight
PML Anivit 4BC New Formulation (Anirmalcare) UK
Injection, ascorbic acid 70 mg, nicotinarmide 23 rmg, pyridoxine (as hydro-
See also section 16.5.11 for preparations containing
chloride) 7 rmg, riboflavin (as sodium phosphate) 500 rmicrograrms, thiarnine
(as hydrochloride) 35 mg/mL, forhorses, cattle, sheep
selenium
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk withdrawal
period nil
16.6.6 Vitamin K substances
BSP (Vetark) UK
Sources of vitamin K include green leafy plants, fish meal,
Oral liquid, ascorbic acid, biotin, colecalciferol, folic acid, nicotinic acid,
pantothenic acid, pyridoxine hydrochloride, riboflavin, thiarmine hydrochlo-
and liver. Phylloquinone in pasture or in good quality hay
ride,vitarmin A,for birds, reptiles
bacteria are believed to meet the needs of horses. Sufficient
PML Combivit (Norbrook) UK
Injection, ascorbic acid 70 rmg, nicotinarmide 23 rmg, pyridoxine hydrochlo-
amounts of vitamin K are synthesised and absorbed from
ride 7 mg, riboflavin sodiurm phosphate 500 rmicrograrns, thiarmine hydro-
the gastro-intestinal tract in most species, but not poultry.
chloride 35 mg/mL,forhorses, cattle, sheep
Vitamin K is necessary for the synthesis of blood clotting
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
factors in the liver.
period nil
Oral coumarin anticoagulants, used in many rodenticides,
PML Duphafral ADE Forte (Fort Dodge) UK
act by interfering with vitamin K metabolism in the hepatic
Injection, d-alpha tocopheryl acetate 50 mg, colecalciferol 1.25 mg, vitarnin
cells and their effects can be antagonised by giving vitamin
A500 o0o units/mL,forcatle, sheep,pigs
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter 28 days, should rot be used in anirmals pro-
K. Phytomenadione (vitamin K,) is usually administered
ducing milk for hurman consurmption
for 7 days but treatment may need to be continued for sey-
eral weeks in some cases (see Treatment of poisoning). In
PML Duphafral Extravite (Fort Dodge) UK
severe cases, blood transfusion may be required. One stage
Injection, ascorbic acid 70 rmg, nicotinarmide 23 mg, pyridoxine hydrochlo-
ride 7 mg, riboflavin sodiurm phosphate 500 rmicrograrms, thiarmine hydro-
 prothrombin time should be monitored. Menadione (vita-
chloride5mg/mL,forhorsescatt,sh
min K,) is ineffective and should not be used.
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk withdrawal
Vitamin K, may also be of benefit in dogs and cats with fat
period nil
malabsorption and other vitamin K dependent clotting fac-
PML Duphafral Multivitamin 9 (Fort Dodge) UK
tor abnormalities.
Injetion, dl-alpha tocopheryl acetate 20 rmg, colecalciferol 25 rmicrograms,
cyarnocobalarmin 20 rmicrograrms, dexpanthenol 25 rmg, nicotinarmide 35 rmg,
16.6.7 Multivitamin preparations
pyridoxine hydrochloride 3 mg, riboflavin 5 rmg, thiarmine hydrochloride 10
mg,vitamin5000uit/m,fohrsescatle,sheepis
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter 28 days, milk withdrawal period nil
Multi vitamin preparations may be used for the prevention
and treatment of vitamin deficiencies, particularly during
PML Multivitamin (Amolds) U/K
periods of illness, convalescence, stress, and unthriftiness.
Injection, dl-alpha tocopheryl acetate 20 rmg, colecalciferol 25 rmicrograrms,
When used in the short term, cod-liver oil is a rich source of
cyanocobalarmin 50 micrograrms, dexpanthenol 25 mg, nicotinarmide 35 mg,
pyridoxine hydrochloride 3 mg, ribofiavin sodium phosphate 5 mg, thiarmine
vitamin D and also a good source of vitamin A and several
hydrochloride 10 mg, vitarmin A 15 000 units/mL, for horses, cafle, sheep,
unisaturated fatty acids.
pigs
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter 28 days, rmilk withdrawal period nil
16.7 Compound multivitamin and mineral preparations  435
PML Multivitamin (Norbrook) UK
Aquatrace Ex-Sel Cattle (Brinicormbe) UK
Injection, dl-alpha tocopheryl acetate 20 rmg, colecalciferol 25 micrograrms,
Oral liquid, cobalt, colecalciferol, copper, iodine, manganese, niacin, pan -
cyanocobalarmin 25 micrograms, dexpanthenol 25 mg, nicotinarmide 35 mg,
tothenic acid, pyridoxine, selenium, thiarmine, vitarmin A, vitarmin Bl2, vita-
pyridoxine hydrochloride 3 rmg, riboflavin sodiurn phosphate 5 mg, thiarmine
min E, zinc, for catfle
hydrochloridemg,vitamin50uits/m,fohrse,cathe
pigs
period nil
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter 28 days, milk withdrawal period nil.
Sheep, pigs: slaughter 28 days
Aquatrace Ex-Sel Sheep (Brinicormbe) UK
Oral liquid, cobalt, colecalciferol, copper, iodine, manganese, niacin, pa-
SA Vits (Vetark) UK
tothenic acid, pyridoxine, selenium, thiarmine, vitarmin A, vitarmin Bl2, vita-
Oral liquid, ascorbic acid, biotin, colecalciferol, folic acid, nicotinic acid,
min E, zinc, for sheep
pantothenic acid, pyridoxine hydrochloride, riboflavin, thiarmine hydrochlo-
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
ride, vitarmin A, for rabbits, small pets; 50 mL
period nil
Arkvits (Vetark) UK
16.7 Compound multivitamin and
Oral powder, ascorbic acid, biotin, calciurm, colecalciferol, choline chloride,
cobalt, copper, folic acid, iodine, iron, manganese,nicotinic acid,pa-
mineral preparations
tothenic acid, phosphorus, pyridoxine hydrochloride, riboflavin, seleniurn,
sodiurm chloride, thiarmine hydrochloride, vitarmin A, zinc, for rubbits,
reptiles
Compound multivitamin and mineral preparations are used
as general tonics or supplements, although their therapeutic
Avimix (Vetark) U/K
Orgl powder, ascorbic acid, biotin, calcium, colecalciferol, choline chloride,
efficacy has niot been established.
cobalt, copper, folic acid, iodine, iron, manganese, nicotinic acid,pa
These preparations are useful in all species for the treatment
tothenic acid, phosphorus, pyridoxine hydrochloride, riboflavin, seleniurn,
of specific deficiencies and supporti ve therapy during con-
 sodiurm chloride, thiamine hydrochloride, vitarmin A, zinc, for birds
valescence, for example following septicaemia or toxaemia,
POM Haemo 15 (Arnolds) UK
parasi tic infections, malabsorption syndrome, hepatitis, and
Injection, biotin, choline chloride, cobalt gluconate, copper gluconate,
 post-operative stress. Continuous or excessive administra-
cyanocobalarmin, dexpanthenol, ferric armrmoniurm citrate, glycine, inositol,
tion should be avoided because interactions with other min-
lysine hydrochloride, nicotinarmide, pyridoxine hydrochloride, rmethionine,
riboflavin sodiurm phosphate, for horses
erals and vitamins in the normal diet can have adverse
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for human 
effects. Most proprietary diets contain adequate concentra-
consurm ptior
tions of minerals and vitamins.
Nutri-Plus (Virbac) UK
Some oral liquid preparations may contain caffeine and care
Oral gel, dl-alpha tocopheryl acetate, calciurm pantothenate, colecalciferol,
should be taken if administering them to animals used in
cyanocobalamin, folic acid, iodine, iron, magnesium, manganese, nicotina
competitions.
 rmide, pyridoxine hydrochloride, riboflavin, thiarmine hydrochloride, vitarmin
A, for dogs, cats
Nutrobal (Vetark) UK
UK
Orgl powder, ascorbic acid, biotin, calcium, colecalciferol, choline chloride,
 There are many preparations available. This is not a com-
cobalt, copper, folic acid, iodine, iron, rmanganese, nicotinic acid, pan-
tothenic acid, phosphorus, pyridoxine hydrochloride, riboflavin, selenium,
prehensive list.
sodium chloride, thiamine hydrochloride, vitamin A, zinc,for birds, reptiles
Pet-Tabs (Pfizer) U/K
Indications. Side-effects. See notes above
Fabiets, dl-alpha tocopheryl acetate, calcium, cobalt, copper, cyanocobala-
Dose. See manufacturer s data sheet
min, ergocalciferol, iodine, iron, linoleic acid, magnesium, manganese, nico
tinic acid, phosphorus, pyridoxine hydrochloride,riboflavin, thiarnine
ACE-High (Vetark) UK
mononitrate, vitamin A, zinc, for dogs
Oral powder, ascorbic acid, biotin, calcium, colecalciferol, choline chloride,
GSL Pet-Tabs Feline (Pfizer) UK
cobalt, copper, folic acid, iodine, iron, rmanganese, nicotinic acid, pan-
Tablets, dl-alpha tocopheryl acetate, calciurm pantothenate, choline, cobalt,
tothenic acid, phosphorus, pyridoxine hydrochloride, riboflavin, seleniurm,
copper, ergocalciferol, inositol, iodine, iron, linoleic acid, magnesium, man-
sodiurm chloride, thiarmine hydrochloride, vitarmin A, zinc, for fish, birds,
ganese, nicotinic acid, phosphorus, pyridoxine hydrochloride, riboflavin, thi-
reptiles
armine rmononitrate, vitarmin A, zinc, for cafs
Activol Liquid Supplement (Arnolds) UK
Poly-Aid (Bird Care Cormpany) UK
Oral emulsion, calciurm pantothenate, nicotinarmide, riboflavin, thiarmine,
Oral powder, dl-alpha tocopheryl acetate, ascorbic acid, colecalciferol, vita-
vitarmin A, vitarmin B, vitarmin E, fatty acids, for dogs
rmin A, rmineral salts, glucose polymers, vitarmins, for birds
Activol Multivitamin-Tabs (Arnolds) UK
SA-37 Tablets (Intervet) U/K
Fablets, calciurm, colecalciferol, cobalt, copper, iodine, magnesium, rmanga-
Tablets, d-alpha tocopheryl acetate, arachidonic acid, ascorbic acid, biotin,
nese, phosphorus, pyridoxine, riboflavin, nicotinic acid, sodiurm, thiarmine,
calcium,colecalciferol,choline,cobalt,copper,cyanocobalarmin,dexpanthe
vitamin A, vitamin B, vitarmin E, zinc, foc dogs
olfoliddinilcidlliidg
nicotinic acid, phosphorus, potassiurm, pyridoxine hydrochloride, riboflavin,
Activol Multivitamin Tabs (Amolds) U/K
thiamine hydrochloride, vitamin A, vitamin K, zinc, for dogs, cats
Tableis, calcium, colecalciferol, choline, cobalt, copper, iodine, inositol,
magnesium, manganese, pantothenic acid, phosphorus, pyridoxine, ribofla-
SA-37 Powder (Intervet) U/K
Oral powder, d-alpha tocopheryl acetate, arachidonic acid, ascorbic acid,
vin, nicotinic acid, sodiurn, thiamine, vitarmin A, zinc, for cafs
biotin, calciurm, colecalciferol, choline, cobalt, copper, cyanocobalarmin, dex -
All-Trace (Agrimin) UK
panthenol, folic acid, iodine, iron, lecithin, linoleic acid, linolenic acid, man-
Ruminal bolus, dl-alpha tocopheryl acetate, colecalciferol, cobalt, copper,
ganese, nicotinic acid, phosphorus, potassiurn, pyridoxine hydrochloride,
iodine, manganese, selenium, sulphur, vitarmin A, zinc, for cale 
riboflavin, thiarmine hydrochloride, vitarmin A, vitarmin K, zinc, for dogs,
cats, pet birds
436 Nutrition and body fluids
SA-37 Powder with Extra Vitamin E (Intervet) UK
logical value. Reduced appetite and catabolism are common
problems and increased levels of non-protein calories
tothenate, colecalciferol, cobalt sulfate, copper sulfate, cyanocobalarmin,
dicalciurm phosphate, ferrous carbonate, folic acid, iodo-casein, rmanganese
should be provided, fat being the most palatable and energy
sulfate, nicotinic acid, potassiurm chloride, pyridoxine hydrochloride, ribofla-
denise. Sodium intake should be reduced to control systemic
vin,thiarmine hydrochloride, vitarmin A, vitamin K, zinc oxide, for dogs
hypertension, and the intake of water soluble B vitamins
Trans-fer (Net-Tex) UK
inicreased to compensate for increased losses due to polyu-
Oral liquid, iron, copper, folic acid, vitarmin B cormplex, for piglets
Tia. There should also be an increase in the intake of buffer-
POM Vitatrace ( Vetoquinol) U/K
ing agents to control metabolic acidosis and, in cats, of
Injection, cobalt gluconate, copper gluconate, cyanocobalamin, dexpanthe-
 potassium to avoid hypokalaemia. Recent studies support
nol, ferric armmonium citrate, nicotinarmide, pyridoxine hydrochloride, ribo-
the inclusion of soluble fibre to improve intestinal health
flavinamhyoridforeatleheep
and help control blood urea. Supplemental essential fatty
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk withdrawal
period nil
acids may improve renal haemodynamics and nutritional
antioxidants can help to reduce free radical injury and fur-
16.8 Complete dietetic foods
ther worsening of the renal disease process. It is important
to provide adequate water either as fresh drinking water or
The modification of energy and nutrient intake is of value in
as moisture contained within a canined renal diet. Renal
the management of many conditions, and in some it is
patients tend to dehydrate due to persistent polyuria.
essential for a successful outcome. In addition to regulating
Chronic renal failure is a progressive disease and the opti-
the intake of specific nutrients, a dietetic food must con-
 mal nutritional requirements of an individual dog or cat will
tinue to meet the animal s requirements for energy, essential
vary over time. The anorexic renal patient is better nour-
amino acids, vitamins, and minerals. Special diets are fre-
ished using small amounts frequently of a critical care diet
quently required for long-term maintenance and therefore
because a suboptimal intake of a renal diet at this time may
 only complete diets have been included in this section.
result in protein energy malnutrition.
Diets should be selected on the basis of their nutritional
 In the typical liver disease (see section 12 of Table 16.4)
characteristics, and an accurate diagnosis of a disorder is
 patient, protein intake should be moderately controlled to
essential in order to choose the correct diet.
d  du   d  
In the UK, dietetic pet foods are regulated under the Feed-
encephalopathy, yet ensure a sufficient amount for liver cell
ing Stuffs Regulations 2000, which state the requirements
regeneration and the maintenance of plasma-protein con-
for labelling of diets for the nutritional management of clin-
centration (especially albumin). An increase in energy den-
ical cases. These are termed dietetic pet foods or feeding
sity, digestibility, and non-protein calories will improve
stuffs for particular nutritional purposes (parnut). However
appetite, support liver cell regeneration, and help increase
this legislation does not apply to any leaflet or other
lean body mass. A low sodium intake will discourage
literature.
ascites and portal hypertension. Ascites is more commonly
Table 16.4 lists complete dietetic pet foods for feeding to
due to hypoal buminaemia, rather than hypertension. With
dogs and cats classified under their appropriate nutritional
liver failure it is recommended that dogs should receive 14
purpose(s); some diets have more than one purpose. These
to 16% of calories from protein and 30 to 50% from each of
purposes are often expressed in official language, although
carbohydrate and fat. Cats should receive at least 20 to 30%
the meaning is sufficiently understandable. An important
 of their calories from protein because they are obligate
point to appreciate is that the legislature considered that
carni vores.
 In contrast to previous recommendations based on the die-
rary. Consequently manufacturers are obliged to state a rec-
tary management of gall stones in man, experts on canine
ommended maximum length of treatment, even 
ini
and feline liver disease niow believe the legislators'require-
situations where indefinite feeding of the diet would be both
ment for a low level of fat in the diet for patients with liver
justified annd desirable.
disease is unnecessary or even contra-indicated, with the
There are many dietary products available in the UK; Table
16.4 lists those for medical conditions (as stated by the leg-
precedenice.
islation) and those that are labelled in accordance with the
The management of liver disease is helped by the provision
Regulations. In addition, for ease of practical reference,
of highly digestible complex carbohydrates rather thar sim-
diets for nutitional purposes that are not mentioned in the
ple sugars. This reduces insulin requirements and the glu-
legislation are also included in Table 16.4. Some diets are
cose load presented to the liver. Carbohydrates also
available in different flavours.
promote an insulin to glucagon ratio that favours an ana-
Primary objectives in the dietary management of renal
bolic state in which amino acids absorbed from the small
insufficiency (see section 1 of Table 16.4) are firstly to
intestine are coniverted to protein rather than glucose. This
minimise the intake of phosphorus, reducing its accumula-
reduces the production of ammonia that accompanies the
tion, which is associated with disease progression. Secondly
utilisation of amino acids for gluconeogenesis. The inclu-
the diet should restrict protein intake reducing the accumu-
sion of both soluble and insoluble dietary fibre plays anl
lation of nitrogenous toxins that are responsible for most of
 important role in the management of hepatic encephalopa-
the clinical signs of uraemia. Protein should be of high bio-
 thy by modifying the production, absorption, and elimina-
16.8 Complete dietetic foods 437
tion of ammonia and other neurotoxic microbial byproducts
Highly digestible diets or limited antigern diets will control
from the large intestine.
many cases of colitis but some individuals respond better to
 Dietary supplementation with zinc and potassium is benefi-
a diet containing more fibre, which increases the water
cial. Restriction of copper will provide protection from fur-
 binding capacity and normalises colonic motility. See sec-
ther liver injury associated with hepatocellular copper
tions 8 and 9 of Table 16.4. Dogs and cats prone to consti-
accumulation in cirrhosis and copper storage disease
pation may benefit from a diet containing 1o% or more
patients.
fibre orn a dry matter basis, which promotes water retention
The requirement for B vitamins increases with energy
and stimulates normal peristalsis. Insoluble fibre also
intake and doubling of maintenance dietary requirements
shields the enteric mucosa from irritants contained within
has been recommended. A deficiency of vitamin E is
the intestinal lumenl.
thought to contribute to ongoing hepatic injury due to pro-
 The main manifestations of food allergy in the dog and cat
duction of superoxide radicals and peroxides. Dietary sup-
are skin lesions and, less often, gastro-intestinal distur-
plementationwith
nutritional antioxidants,
，including
bances. The most common allergens in the dog are beef,
vitamin E, is also considered to be of benefit. Patients with
 milk and dairy products, and wheat; in the cat, commonly
hepatic impairment should be fed small amounts frequently
reported allergens include beef, milk and dairy products,
to help reduce hyperammonaemia due to sudden intakes of
and fish. Dietary management (see section 7 of Table 16.4)
99 pinous sunsey jo spoued suol pue sjeou uranoid saiel
 involves elimination of the protein source(s) responsible for
       
 the hypersensitivity reaction. This is best achieved by feed-
because the fat soluble vitamins, usually stored in the liver, 
 ing a diet containing a limited number of novel proteins in
may become depleted. Coagulation abnormalities occur in
restricted amounts. To establish whether a particular trial
many patients with hepatobiliary disease. The vitamin-like
substance L-carnitine, is usually synthesised in the liver in
require feeding the diet for up to 10 weeks. Such a "hypoal-
dogs and cats. Supplementation helps reduce the risk of
lergenic' diet is valuable for both diagnosis and manage-
hepatic lipidosis, free radical injury, and helps enhance lean
 ment. Subsequent provocative exposure to different protein
body mass.
sources is required to determine which is/are responsible for
 In exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (see section 9 of
 the allergic response. A less laborious approach to the diag-
Table 16.4), the diet should be highly digestible, contaiming
 nosis and management of food allergic disorders is to feed a
only a small amount of fibre, and have a reduced concentra-
hydrolysed protein formula during the elimination diet trial.
tion of fat to avoid steatorrhoea. Supplemental high biologi-
The smaller the molecular weight of the protein, the less
cal value protein (such as unisalted cottage cheese or cooked
antigenic it is. Therapeutic diets indicated in the dietary
egg) may be required in individuals with a severe reduction
management of dermatoses are generally designed for
in lean body mass. Medium chain triglycerides can be uti-
patients with a food allergy. Patients with other forms of
lised to help increase body-weight in severely emaciated
allergy such as atopy or flea allergy, may none the less ben-
individuals but the taste tends to be bitter and they may be
 efit from this approach because the limited antigen intake
poorly accepted. It is important that owners should add the
helps bring them below their thershold to “itch' In non-
pancreatic enzyme to the food. Studies have shown that
 allergic forms of dermatoses, products with increased high
feeding dogs a dietetic food and enzyme gave significantly
biological protein and essential fatty acid content can aid
better results than feeding a standard petfood. Supplemental
healing of skin lesions. Dietary deficiency is not a common
fat soluble vitamins and essential fatty acids help to com-
cause of skin disease because most pets are fed a balanced
pensate for deficiencies that may have already developed.
proprietary diet.
Blood folate- and cobalamin-conicentration should be moni-
 Diets for the management of congestive heart failure (see
section 10 of Table 16.4) should contain restricted concen-
supplementatiorl.
tration of both chloride and sodium to control cardiovascu-
In cases of severe diarrhoea, or when vomiting accompa-
nies diarrhoea, parenteral electrolyte and water replacement
hypertension and fluid retention due to an increase in
(see section 16.1) should be considered. In acute diarrhoea
venous pressure. Grocery pet foods and commonly fed tit-
it is conventional to withhold all food for up to 24 hours and
bits and treats often contain high levels of salt. Many
then to feed small quantities 4 to 6 times daily. The cause of
sodium chloride restricted therapeutic diets have compara-
the gastro-intestinal disorder will determine the precise
 ble or better palatability than grocery diets. Sodium intake
dietary requirements of the individual dog or cat but a few
should be reduced progressi vely in patients with congestive
 heart failure to avoid any possibility of a hyponatraemic cri-
patients. An easily digestible bland and non-irritant food
sis due to impaired salt excretion. Increased intake of potas-
with a reduced concentration of fat should be provided. A
sium, magnesium, and vitamin B substances is desirable to
replace losses due to diuresis and a moderate level of pro-
inflammatory bowel disease. Alternatively, a hydrolysed
 tein restriction is beneficial when there is concurrent renal
 protein or hypoallergenic diet (based on dietary history) is
insufficiency. With the use of ACE inhibitors, renal func-
more appropriate to manage the hypersensitivity reaction
tion and screening for hyperkalaemia are very important.
which causes, or is caused by, inflammatory bowel disease.
Diets for cats with dilated cardiomyopathy should contain
438 Nutrition and body fluids
ex tra taurine. Recent studies show that taurine supplemen-
obese cats. This approach is believed to be effective in cats
because they are carnivores. Other rutrients of benefit in
opathy. Additional L-carnitine and nutritional antioxidants
 weight loss are L-carnitine and the nutritional antioxidants.
are also helpful. Body-weight and appetite will vary from
L-Carnitine helps avoid hepatic lipidosis, enhances lean
patient to patient. Management of obesity may be more
body mass, and improves the rate of weight loss in cats
important than salt restriction in the case of early congestive
when combined with exercise. Nutritional antioxidants help
heart failure. Sustaining caloric intake in patients with ele-
to reduce the free radical injury that occurs during weight
vated levels of tumour recrosis factor and interleukin 1
loss.
 becomes very important if cardiac cachexia is to be pre-
Nutritional support is vital to the survival of critically ill
vented. In this situation, a critical care diet or a diet pre-
patients (for example those suffering from trauma, burns,
pared for patients being treated for neoplasia is often more
sepsis, and pyrexia) as well as speeding the recovery of
appropriate.
convalescent patients (for example after surgery) and those
Clinical diets have an important role in the management of
suffering from debilitation, cachexia, and anorexia. Primary
canine and feline crystalluria and urolithiasis (often associ-
calorie sources should be proteins and lipids, with reduced
ated with feline lower urinary tract disease), involving not
concentration of carbohydrates (see section 16 of Table
only a reduction in the availability of their constituents and
16.4). There should be a high content of essential and
wogedioaid seinoosp on Hd Areuun sun jo juousnipe ue
branched chain amino acids, glutamine, essential fatty
 of the relevant mirneral type but also a product that will
acids, and zinc. Palatability and digestibility of the diet
 should be high. If an animal cannot be persuaded, for exam-
struvite (magnesium ammonium phosphate) crystals and
ple by hand feeding or *force feeding, to maintain an ade-
uroliths requires the use of diets that produce adequate uri-
quate intake of rutrients then tube feeding may be
nary acidification and contain restricted amounts of magne-
necessary. Information on parenteral nutrition is given in
sium and phosphorus, and (in the dog) protein (see sections
section 16.3
 2 and 3 of Table 16.4). It is imperative to eliminate urinary
 In dogs and cats suffering from diabetes mellitus (see sec-
 tract infections due to urease-producing orgarisms, which
tion 11 of Table 16.4) an increased dietary fibre content
will convert urea to ammonia and consequently elevate the
enhances cellular response to insulin, and promotes slower
uri nary pH.
and more consistant absorption of glucose (reducing post-
After surgical removal of calcium oxalate calculi, patients
prandial blood glucose fluctuations). A high concentration
are best managed by dietary alkalinisation of the urine and a
 of digestible complex carbohydrates accentuates the benefit
reduction in the intake of calcium and oxalate (see section 5
 of fibre, and the restriction of fat to 7 to 17% of dry matter
of Table 16.4). Urate calculi are controlled with diets that
mic control can be improved by feeding frequent small
alkalinisation (see section 4 of Table 16.4). Low protein
 meals throughout the period of insulin activity, especially in
diets are also advocated for cystine calculi (see section 6 of
 cats. Nutritional antioxidants are also of benefit in patients
Table 16.4). Nutritional antioxidants are also of benefit in
diagnosed with diabetes mellitus. Water must be available
these patients. However, vitamin C also plays a role as a
at all times because many diabetics are polydipsic due to
urinary acidifier and its level of inclusion needs to be care-
 their glucosuria. Ideally the daily routine should be main-
fully controlled, especially in patients with non-struvite
tained in relation to food, exercise, and insulin or hypogly-
urolithiasis. Obesity is a risk factor for urolithiasis and
caemic medication. Changing the type and amount of a diet
lower urinary tract disorders so the amount fed needs to be
will affect insulin requirements and may result in destabili-
determined as well as the choice of product.
sation. The food selected should be of a consistent formula,
To achieve weight reduction in obesity (see section 15 of
 which will facilitate a progression towards optimal body-
Table 16.4), the energy intake should be reduced to 40% of
weight. The choice of diet needs to take into consideration
the metabolisable energy requirement (at the ideal weight)
any intercurrent disease process.
for dogs, and 60% for cats. The energy density of the diet is
Recent studies show that the use of a low carbohydate,
reduced primarily by minimising its fat content. Decreasing
increased protein food may improve glycaemic control in
the density of the diet, and increasing the volume, will help
diabetic cats. Cats are obligate carnivores and blood sugar
promote a satisfying feeling of “fullness' (satiety) without
 is derived mostly from hepatic gluconeogenisis rather than
providing calories. This can be achieved by kibble extru-
intestinal absorption of glucose. This means that a diabetic
sion (dry diets), enhanced moisture content (canned diets),
cat can be allowed to follow their preferred feeding regime
or by inclusion of higher concentration of indigestible fibre.
rather than be given timed meals to coincide with parenteral
Ideally a rumber of small meals and several short periods of
insulin activity. It is noteworthy that a canned cat food gen-
exercise should be provided throughout the day. Recent
erally contains less carbohydrate and more protein than a
studies in cats show that modification of the energy sources
dry cat food product.
in the diet can alter metabolism to facilitate weight loss bet-
Hyperlipidaemia is a secondary finding in many patients
ter than relying on restricted calorie intake. Low carbohy-
with endocrine disorders. It is recommended that a fat
drate and increased protein intake will
1facilitate
restricted diet be fed that contains supplemental insoluble
mobilisation of fat and enhance lean body mass in some
fibre (see section 13 of Table 16.4).
16.8 Complete dietetic foods 439
Brain ageing in dogs (see section 18 of Table 16.4) is often The risk of development of orthopaedic disease is greatest
manifested through changes in behaviour such as disorien-  in dogs with ar expected adult weight of 25 kg or more.
tation, reduced interaction, disturbed sleep pattern, and loss  Nutrition plays a key role in aetiology of these conditions. It
 of house training. Studies have shown that increased rutri- is important to avoid excess calorie and calcium intake dur-
tional antioxidant intake can modify the course of disease
ing growth in order to reduce the risk of hip dysplasia and
and cognition (memory and learning) can be improved in
osteochondritis dissecans (OCD). In dogs affected by
some inidividuals.
degenerative joint disease, a variety of nutrients are
Diets with increased fibre and special alignment of fibre
 believed to be of benefit in managing stiffness and improv-
stain, tartar and associated malodour (see section 20 of  good body-weight control.
Table 16.4).
440 Nutrition and body fluids
Table 16.4 Complete dietetic pet foods for dogs and cats available in the UK1.2
Preparationsfor dogs
Preparations forcats
s    s       n 
Characteristics: low concentration of phosphorus and restricted concentration of protein but of high quality; used forinitially up to 6
months (termporary renal insufficiency: 2-4 week s)
Canine Diet Renal Failure, rmoist (Advance)
Eukanuba Renal Formula, rmoist (Iarms)
Canine Diet Renal Failure, dry (Advarce)
Eukanuba Renal Formula, dry (Iarms)
Canine Renal, moist (Royal Canin)
FelineDietRenalFailuremoist(Adva)
Canine Renal RF l6, dry (Royal Canin)
Feline Diet Renal Failure, dry (Advance)
Eukanuba Renal Phase I Formula, dry (Iarns)
Feline Renal, rmoist (Royal Canin)
Eukanuba Renal Phase II Forrmula, dry (Iarms)
Feline Renal RF 23, dry (Royal Canin)
Prescription Diet Canine k/d, rmoist (Hill's)
Prescription Diet Feline g/d, dry (Hills)
Prescription Diet Canine k/d, dry (Hill's)
Prescription Diet Feline k/d, rmoist (Hill s)
Prescription Diet Canine w/d, rmoist (Hill's)
Prescription Diet Feline k/d, dry (Hills)
Prescription Diet Canine w/d, dry (Hill's)
2Dissolutionofstruvitestones(and felinelower urinarytractdisease)
of high quality in dogs; used for 5- 12 weeks
Canine Diet Urinary, dry (Advance)
Feline Diet Urinary, rmoist (Advance)
Canine Urinary, moist (Royal Canin)
Feline Diet Urinary, dry (Advance)
Canine Urinary LP I8, dry (Royal Canin)
Feline Urinary LP 34, dry (Royal Canin)
Prescription Diet Canine s/d, moist (Hills)
Feline Urinary LP 34, rmoist (Royal Canin)
Prescription Diet Feline s/d, moist (Hill's)
Prescription Diet Feline s/d, dry (Hill's)
3 Reduction of struvite stone recurrence (and feline lower urinary tract disease)
Characteristics: urine acidifying properties and moderate concen tration of magnesium; used for up to 6 months
Canine Urinary, rmoist (Royal Canin)
Euk aruba Struvite Urirnary Forrmula, moist (Iarms)
Canine Urinary LP 18, dry (Royal Canin)
Eukanmuba Struvite Urinary Forrula, dry (Iarms)
Presciption Diet Canine /d, moist (Hills)
Feline Urinary, rmoist (Royal Canin)
Prescription Diet Canine c/d, dry (Hill's)
Feline Urinary LP 34, dry (Royal Canin)
Prescription Diet Feline c/d, rmoist (Hills)
Prescription Diet Feline c/d, dry (Hill's)
4 Reduction of urate stoneformation
Characteristics: low concen tration of purines, low concentration of protein but of high quality; used for up to 6 months but lifetime in
cases of irre versible disturbance of uric acid metabolism
Canine Renal RF l6, rmoist (Royal Canin)
Prescription Diet Feline k/d, rmoist (Hills)
Canine Renal RF l6, dry (Royal Canin)
Prescription Diet Feline k/d, dry (Hills)
Prescription Diet Canine wd, moist (Hill's)
 Prescription Diet Canine w/d, dry (Hills)
5 Reduction of oxalate stone formation
Characteristics: low concentration of calcium, low concentration of vitamin D and urine alkalising properfies; used for up to 6 months
Canine Renal RF I6, dry (Royal Canin)
Eukanuba Oxalate Urinary Formula, moist (Jarms)
Canine Urinary, moist (Royal Canin)
Euk aruba Oxalate Urinary Formula, dry (Iarms)
Canine Urinary LP 18, dry (Royal Canin)
Feline Diet RenalFailure, moist (Advance)
Prescription Diet Canine w/d, rmoist (Hill's)
Feline Diet Renal Failure, dry (Advarce)
Prescription Diet Canine w/d, dry (Hill's)
Feline Urinary, moist (Royal Canin)
Feline Urinary LP 34, dry (Royal Canin)
Prescription Diet Feline x/d, rmoist (Hill's)
16.8 Complete dietetic foods 441
Table 16.4 Complete dietetic pet foods for dogs and cats available in the UKi.2 (continued)
Preparationsfor dogs
Preparations for cats
 6 Reduction of cystine stone formation
Characteristics: low concentration of protein, moderate concentraion of sulfur amino acids, and urine alkalising properhies; used for inji-
tially up to 1 year
Canine Renal RF I6, dry (Royal Canin)
Prescription Diet Feline k/d, rmoist (Hills)
Prescription Diet Canine w/d, rmoist (Hill's)
Prescription Diet Feline k/d, dry (Hills)
 Prescription Diet Canine w/d, dry (Hills)
7Reductionofingredientandnutrientintolerances
feed can be used indefinitely
Carnine Diet Dermatosis Limited Antigen, dry (Advance)
Eukanuba Dermatosis LB Forrmula, rmoist (Iarm s)
Canine Diet Hypoallergenic, dry (Advance)
Feline Hypoallergenic DR 25, dry (Royal Canin)
Canine Hypoallergenic DR 21 , dry (Royal Canin)
Feline Sensitivity Corn trol, rmoist (Royal Canin)
Canine Sensitivity Control, moist (Royal Canin)
Feline Sensitivity Control SC 3l, dry (Royal Canin)
Canine Sensitivity Control, dry (Royal Canin)
Prescription Diet Feline d/d, rmoist (Hills)
Euk aruba Dermatosis FP Formula, rmoist (Iarms)
Prescription Diet Feline z/d Low Allergen, dry (Hill's)
Eukarnuba Dermatosis FP Formula, dry (Iarms)
Prescription Diet Canine d/d, moist (Hill's)
Prescription Diet Canine d/d, dry (Hills)
Prescription Diet Canine z/d UItra Allrgen Free, dry (Hills)
Prescription Diet Canine z/d Low Allergen, dry (Hill's)
8 Reduction of acute intestinal absorptive disorders
Characteristics: increased concen iration of electroly tes and highly digestible ingredients; used for 1-2 weeks
Canine Diet Gastroenteric, moist (Advance)
Euk anuba Intestinal Formula, moist (Iarms)
Canine Diet Gastroenteric, dry (Advance)
Eukanuba Intestinal Forrmula, dry (Iars)
Canine Sensitivity Control, moist (Royal Canin)
Feline Diet Diabetes Mellius, moist (Advance)
Canine Sensitivity Control, dry (Royal Canin)
Feline Intestinal GI 32, dry (Royal Canin)
Euk aruba Irtestiral Formula, moist (Iarms)
Feline Sensitivity Corn trol, rmoist (Royal Canin)
Eukanuba Intestinal Formula, dry (Iams)
Feline Sensitivity Corn trol SC 3l , dry (Royal Canin)
Prescription Diet Canine i/d, rmoist (Hill's)
Prescription Diet Feline i/d, moist (Hills)
 Prescription Diet Canine i/d, dry (Hills)
Prescription Diet Feline i/d, dry (Hill's)
9 Compensation for maldigestion (and exocrine pancreatic insufficiency)
Characteristics: highly digestible ingredients and low concentration of fat used for 3-12 weeks, but lifetime in chronic pancreatic
insufficiency
Canine Diet Gastroenteric, moist (Advance)
Eukanuba Intestinal Formula, moist (Iarms)
Canine Diet Gastroenteric, dry (Advance)
Eukauba Inte stinal Formula, dry (Iarms)
Carnine Digestive Low Fat, rnoist (Royal Canin)
Feline Intestinal GI 32, dry (RoyalCanin)
Canine Digestive Low Fat LF 22, dry (Royal Canin)
Prescription Diet Feline i/d, moist (Hills)
Canine Hypoallergenic DR 21, dry (Advance)
Prescription Diet Feline i/d, dry (Hill's)
Canine Intestinal GI 30, dry (Royal Canin)
Euk anuba Intestinal Forrmula, rmoist (Iarms)
Euk aruba Irte stinal Forrmula, dry (Iarms)
Prescription Diet Canine i/d, rmoist (Hill's)
Prescription Diet Canine i/d, dry (Hills)
Characteristics: low concen tration of sodium and increased potassium:sodium ratio; used initially for up to 6 months
Canine Diet Cardiovascular, moist (Advance)
Feline Diet Cardiovascular, moist (Advance)
Canine Cardiac, rmoist (Royal Canin)
Prescription Diet Feline k/d, rmoist (Hill s)
Canine Early Cardiac EC 26, dry (RoyalCanin)
Prescription Diet Feline k/d, dry (Hils)
Prescription Diet Canine h/d, rmoist (Hill's)
Prescription Diet Feline I/d, rmoist (Hill's)
Prescription Diet Canine h/d, dry (Hill's)
Prescription Diet Feline I/d, dry (Hill's)
442 Nutrition and body fluids
Table 16.4 Complete dietetic pet foods for dogs and cats available in the UK'.2 (continued)
Preparationsfordogs
Preparations for cats
11 Reduction of glucose supply (diabetes mellitus)
Canine Diabetic, moist (Royal Canin)
Feline Diabetic DS 46, dry (Royal Canin)
Canine Diet Diabetes Colitis, dry (Advance)
Feline Diet Diabetes Mellitus (Advance)
Canine WeightContol Diabetic 30, dry (Royal Canin)
Prescription Diet Feline m/d, oist (Hills)
Eukaruba Glucose Control Forrmula, dry (Iarns)
Prescription Diet Feline m/d, dry (Hills)
Euk aruba Senior Plus Forrmula, dry (Iarms)
Prescription Diet Feline w/d, rmoist (Hills)
Prescription Diet Canine w/d, rmoist (Hill's)
Prescription Diet Feline w/d, dry (Hills)
Prescription Diet Canine w/d, dry (Hill's)
12Supportof liverfunctionincaseofchronicliverinsufficiency
Characteristics: high quality protein, moderate concentration of protein, low concentration of fat in dogs, moderate concentrafion of fat in
cats, high concentration of EFAs and highly digestible carbohydrate; used for initially up to 6 months
Canine Diet Gastroenteric, moist (Advance)
Prescription Diet Feline I/d, rmoist (Hill's)
Canine Diet Gastroenteric, dry (Advance)
Prescription Diet Feline I/d, moist (Hil's)
Carnine Hepatic, moist (Royal Canin)
Carnine Hepatic HF 16, dry (Royal Canin)
Prescription Diet Canine I/d, rmoist (Hill's)
Prescription Diet Canine I/d, dry (Hills)
Characteristics: low concentration of fat and high concentration of EFAs; used for initially up to 2 months
Canine Digestive Low Fat, moist (Royal Canin)
Prescription Diet Feline r/d, moist (Hill's)
Carnine Digestive Low Fat LF 22, dry (Royal Canin)
Prescription Diet Feline r/d, dry (Hill's)
Euk anuba Intestinal Forrmula, rmoist (Iarms)
Prescription Diet Feline w/d, moist (Hills)
Eukanuba Intestirnal Forrmula, dry (Iarms)
Prescription Diet Feline w/d, dry (Hill's)
Prescription Diet Canine r/d, moist (Hills)
 Prescription Diet Canine r/d, dry (Hillts)
Preseription Diet Canine w/d, rmoist (Hills)
 Prescription Diet Canine w/d, dry (Hills)
14 Reduction of copper in the liver
Characteristics: low concentration of copper: initially used for up to 6 months
Canine Hepatic, moist (Royal Canin)
Prescription Diet Canine I/d, moist (Hill's)
Prescription Diet Canine I/d, dry (Hill's)
Prescription Diet Canine w/d, roist (Hill's)
Prescription Diet Canine w/d, dry (Hils)
15 Reduction of excessive body-weight
Characteristics: low energy density; used until target body-weight is achie ved
Canine Diet Obesity Managerment, rmoist (Advance)
Eukanuba Restricted Calorie Formula, dry (Iarm s)
Canine Diet Obesity Management, dry (Advance)
Feline Diet Obesity Manageent, moist (Advance)
Canine Obesity Managerment, rmoist (Royal Canin)
Feline Diet Obesity Managerment, dry (Advance)
Carnine Obesity Marnagerment DP 34, dry (Royal Canin)
Feline Obesity Managerment, rmoist (Royal Canin)
Canine Weight Con trol Diabetic 30, dry (Royal Canin)
Feline Obesity Managerment DP 42, dry (Royal Canin)
Eukanuba Restricted Calorie Formula, dry (Iarms)
Prescription Diet Feline r/d, moist (Hill's)
Prescription Diet Canine r/d, rmoist (Hills)
Prescription Diet Feline r/d, dry (Hills)
Prescription Diet Canine r/d, dry (Hills)
Prescription Diet Feline rm/d, rmoist (Hills)
Prescription Diet Canine w/d, rmoist (Hill's)
Prescription Diet Feline m/d, dry (Hills)
Prescription Diet Canine w/d, dry (Hill's)
Prescription Diet Feline w/d, rmoist (Hills)
Prescription Diet Feline w/d, dry (Hils)
16.8 Complete dietetic foods 443
Table 16.4 Complete dietetic pet foods for dogs and cats available in the UKi.2 (continued)
Preparationsfor dogs
Preparations for cats
 16 Nutritional restoration, convalescence (and hepatic lipidosis in cats)
Characteristics: highenergy density, high concentration ofessential nurients and highlydigesible ingredients;used unil restorationis
achieved
Canine Cornvalescence Support, moist (Royal Canin)
Canine/Feline Rehydration Support, liquid (Royal Canin)
Canine Convalescence Support, liquid (Royal Carnin)
Feline Convalescence Support, liquid (Royal Carin)
Canine/Feline Rehydration Support, liquid (Royal Canin)
Feline Convalescence Support, rmoist (Royal Canin)
Canine Diet Convalescence, rmoist (Advance)
Feline Diet Convalescence, rmoist (Advance)
Eukanuba High Caloric Formula, rmoist (Iarms)
Eukanuba High Caloric Formula, rmoist (Iarms)
Eukanuba High Caloric Formula, dry (Iarns)
Eukanuba HighCaloricForuladry (Ias)
Fortol Com plete Liquid Feed (Arnolds)
Feline Diet Cardiovascular, rmoist (Advance)
Prescription Diet Canine/Feline a/d, moist (Hill's)
Prescription Diet Canine/Feline a/d, moist (Hills)
Prescription Diet Canine n/d, moist (Hills)
Prescription Diet Feline p/d, dry (Hills)
Prescription Diet Canine p/d, rmoist (Hill's)
Prescription Diet Canine p/d, dry (Hill's)
17 Support of skin function in dermatosis and excessive loss of hair
Canine Diet Gastroenteric, moist (Advance)
Eukarnuba Dermatosis FP Forrmula , rmoist (Iarm s)
Canine Diet Gastroenteric, dry (Advance)
Eukanuba Dermatosis FP Formula, dry (Iarms)
Carine Diet Dermatosis Limited Antigen, dry (Advance)
Feline Hypoallergenic DR 25, dry (Royal Canin)
Canine Hypoallergenic DR 2l , dry (Royal Canine)
Feline Sensitivity Corn trol, rmoist (Royal Canin)
Canine Sensitivity Control, rmoist (Royal Canin)
Feline Sensitivity Control SC 31 , dry (Royal Canin)
Canine Sensitivity Control, dry (Royal Canin)
Prescription Diet Feline p/d, dry (Hill)
Eukaruba Dermatosis FP Forrmula ,rmoist (Iarms)
Euk anuba Dermatosis FP Formula, dry (Iarms)
Preseription Diet Canine p/d, rnoist (Hill's)
Prescription Diet Canine p/d, dry (Hill's)
18 Support of patient with cognitive decline (brain ageing)
Characteristics: senior canine diet with increased vitamin E and total antioxidants, omega 3 fatty acids, and supplemented with L carni-
tine, alpha-lipoic acid, carotenoids, and flavinoids; used initially for at least 4 week s
Prescription Diet Canine b/d, dey (Hills)
19 Support of joint mobility1
Characteristics: omega 3 fatty acids and moderate energy density; used initially for at least 6-8 weeks
Canine Mobility Support MS 25, dry (Royal Carin)
 Characteristics: increased fibre levels and mechanical tooth cleaning action by non-random alignment of fbres and increased kibble size
Prescription Diet Canine /d, dry (Hil's)
1 parnut classification; unless marked 1, categories are as defined in Feeding Stuffs Regulations 2000
2'moist'= canned, pouch, or alutray
445
17
 PRODUCTION ENHANCERS
Contributor:
respect to facilities and equipment, qualifications of person-
B R Cottrill
nel, production processes and quality control, storage, and
documentation concerning materials used, controls, com-
17.1 Antimicrobial production enhancers
plaints, and product recall. Zootechnical feed additi ves may
17.2 Probiotics
be incorporated in the feed at specified concentrations for
17.3 Enzymes
particular species as indicated under Regulation 1831/2003/
17.4 Other production enhancers
in accordance with the authorisation, for example at higher
A rumber of production enhancers have been developed
concentrations or for different species. Manufacturers may
aimed at increasing productivity, daily live-weight gain,
feed conversion efficiency, or both, of farmed livestock,
choose to market a production enhancer differently in vari-
ous countries, and this is permitted as long as it is done so
without compromising animal health or welfare or the
within the terms of the authorisation. Product information
safety of livestock products (milk, meat and eggs). For a
provided below is for preparations marketed in the UK.
number of these, environmental benefits in terms of
Feed additive preparations containing micro-organisms
reduced emissions (for example, nitrogen or phosphates)
(probiotics) or enzymes are also controlled under Regula-
tion 1831/2003/EC. Under this legislation, the identity and
used in pig and poultry diets, but are being increasingly
contents of permitted organisms or enzymes are listed in the
used in rations for intensively reared cattle. Use in rabbits
authorisation. These types of products are now considered
kept for meat production is also possible.
Within the legislative framework of the EU, production
authorisations for the first ten years.
enhancers generally fall within the scope of feed additive
legislation. In most cases they may not be put on the market
until authorisation has been granted following a scientific
17.1 Antimicrobial production
evaluation demonstrating that the additive has no harmful
effects on either humanl or animal health, or the environl-
enhancers
ment. Additi ves that have been approved for use for speci-
The use of antibiotics and antimicrobial agents at sub-thera-
previously in the Annexes of European Council Directive
peutic levels is widely practised in livestock production.
70/524/EEC. However, from October 2004 this Directive
Research has shown their use can result in increases in live-
was replaced by Regulation 183 1/2003/EC. Additives pre-
weight gain of up to 10% in poultry, pigs, and calves and by
viously authorised under Directive 70/524/EEC can con-
up to 16% in adult cattle, with associated improvements in
tinue in use, subject to initial registration under 183 1/2003/
feed conversion efficiency. In addition, environmental benl-
EC and eventual reassessment and reauthorisation. For now
efits such as reductions in the amount of nitrogen excreted
per unit production are also claimed. Although the mecha-
moters, coccidiostats and antibiotics used to promote
nism underpinning the action of these products is unclear, it
growth. However, the latter group will not be permitted
is believed that they suppress sensitive populations of bac-
after 31 December 2005. The authorisation of feed addi-
tenia
tives is separate from the authorisation of medicinal prod-
adsorption.
ucts, including those administered in feed, although it is
 It is a requirement of Directive 70/524/EEC that antibiotic
anomalous that coccidiostats are included under Directive
feed additives should not be used in combination. Directive
70/524/EEC. The similarity between additives is that they
95/69/EC further states that establishments and intermediar-
are all routinely included in finished feeds at the point of
ies producing or marketing zootechnical additives, mixtures
manufacture. Production enhancers, which were previously
of these additives or compound feedingstuffs containing
authorised as Pharmacists and Merchants’ List (PML) prod-
these additives are subject to approval by the appropriate
ucts in the UK, are now termed zootechnical feed additives
Competent Authorities in the member states of the EU. In
(The Feedingstuffs (Zootechnical Products) Regulations
practice, feed-compounding companies may routinely add a
1999).
specific production enhancer to their proprietary diets and
Authorised production enhancers are marketed as feed addi -
this practice often governs the animal producer's choice of
 -uid un 'sipunoduoo psoidde Aq ‘uoisnoul oy san
 agent. Often the production enhancer is changed regularly
tures or in bulk feedingstuffs at the time of their
every 6 to 12 months.
manufacture. Compounders, and intermediaries inivolved in 
Irn ruminants, the primary site of action is on the microflora
detailed in Council 95/69/EC (to be replaced by a Regula-
gluconeogenic fatty acid propionate, at the expense of
tion laying down requirements for feed hygiene) with 
 butyrate and to some extent acetate. Beyond the rumen in
446 Production enhancers
the small intestine, the production enhancer will have
AVILAMYCIN
actions similar to those suggested for monogastric species.
They may act by suppressing harmful bacterial metabolites,
UK
potentially pathogenic organisms, or by biasing competition
Indications.
. To improve growth-rate and feed conversion
efficiency
between organisms. Alternati vely, they may act by altering
Contra-indications. Concurrent other feed antibiotic Or
metabolic activity or enhancing the intestinal absorption of
nutrients. Most antimicrobial production enhancers are not
growth promoter
absorbed from the gastro-intestinal tract to any great extent.
Warnings. Operators should wear suitable protective cloth-
ing; product should be carefully mixed with the mineral
This, and their consequent absence from animal produce or
supplement or other feed ingredients prior to feed manufac-
presence in trace amounts of no toxicological concern,
 ture to ensure even distribution in the final feed
explains the prevalence of zero withdrawal periods for
Dose.
many of these preparations.
Pigs: (up to 16 weeks of age) 20-40 g/tonne feed; (16-26
The antimicrobial production enhancers currently available
weeks of age) 10-20 g/tonine feed
in the EU are antibiotics that are not used for therapeutic or
Broiler chickens, turkeys: 5 or 10 g/tonne feed
prophylactic purposes in animals or humans, and have
activity against Gram-positive bacteria only. However,
ZFA Maxus G200 (Elanco) UK
there has been increasing controversy over the use of antibi-
Premix,avilamycin 200 g/kg,forpigs, broiler chickens, turkeys
otics as growth promoters for food animals. Although these
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs, poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
products have been shown to improve both animal produc-
tion and the quality of animal products in many situations,
the use of antibiotics has been associated with the selection
of resistance in pathogenic bacteria. It has been suggested
FLAVOPHOSPHOLIPOL
(Bambenmycin)
that their use may result in the development of bacteria
resistant to antibiotics that may be used in clinical or veteri-
UK
nary practice, thus compromising the use of antimicrobial
Indications. To improve growth-rate and feed conversion
chemotherapy. This, and the increasing preference for *nat-
efficiency
ural’ systems of production, lead to five additives
Contra-indications. Concurrent other feed antibiotic Or
(avoparcin, bacitracin zinc, tylosin, spiramycin, and virgin-
growth promoter
iamycin) being prohibited and their authorisations for use in
Warnings. Operators should wear suitable protective
the EU withdrawn in 1997 and 1999. These substances
clothing
were prohibited at an earlier stage because they belong to
Dose.
classes of compounds that are also used in human medicine.
Cattle. Calves: (up to 26 weeks of age) 6-16 g/tonne feed
In its White Paper on Food Safety, the European Commis-
or 8-16 g/tonne mi1k replacer
sion announced its intention to recast and simplify the legis-
Fattening cattle: by addition to comptete feed, 2-10 g/
lation concerning feed additives. The
Commission
tonne
proposals were subsequently approved by the European
byaddition to supptementary feed orfree-access minerats,
Parliament and Council, resulting in Regulation 183 1/2003/
(100 kg body-weight) maximum daily dose 40 mg; (>100
EC. This Regulation sets out new rules for the authorisa-
kg body-weight) 40 mg plus 1.5 mg for each additional 10
tion, supervision, and labelling of feed additives and as
kg body-weight
 mentioned previously the authorisations of the remaining
by addition to feed blocks, 80 mg/kg feed block
antibiotic feed additives (avilamycin, flavophospholipol,
Pigs: (up to 6 months of age) 1-20 g/tonne feed; (up to 3
monensin sodium and salinomycin sodium) are to be
 months of age) 10-20 g/tonne milk replacer or piglet creep
phased out.
feed
Until 31 December 2005 the following substances are per-
Broiler chickens: (up to 16 weeks of age) 1-20 g/tonne
mitted for use as antimicrobial growth promoting additives
feed 
in the EU. Avilamycin is an oligosacchari de antibiotic used
Laying hens: 2-5 g/tonne feed
 as a production enhancer in pigs and broiler chickens. Fla-
Turkeys: (up to 26 weeks of age) 1-20 g/tonne feed
Rabbits: 2-4 g/tonne feed
in cattle, pigs, poultry, rabbits, and fur producing animals.
ZFA Flaveco 40 (ECO) UK
Monensin is an ionophore antibiotic used as an anticoccid-
Premix, flavophospholipol 80 g/kg, for catle, pigs, laying hens, broiler
chickens,turkeys,rabbits
ial (see section 1.4.1) and as a production enhancer in beef
Withdrawal Periods. Catle, pigs, poultry, rubbits: slaughter withdrawal
cattle and dairy heifers up to the time of first service. Inges-
period nil
tion of feed containing monensin has been fatal in horses
ZFA Flavomycin 80 (Intervet) U/K
  n    n  
Premix, flavophospholipol 80 g/kg, for catle, pigs, laying hens, broiler
Salinomycin, an ionophore, is also used for prevention of
chickens,turkeys,rabbits
coccidiosis (see section 1.4. 1), and for growth promotion in
Withdrawal Periods. Catle, pigs, poultry, rubbits: slaughter withdrawal
period nil
pigs.
17.2 Probiotics447
MONENSIN
17.2 Probiotics
UK
Probiotics, together with feed enzymes, play ann important
Indications. To improve growth-rate and feed conversion
role as alternative growth enhancers in the nutrition of farm
efficiency in cattle; prophylaxis of coccidiosis in poultry
livestock, in particular in young animals where the diges-
(see section 1.4.1)
tive system is still in development. Their development is
Contra-indications. Concurrent other feed antibiotic or
likely to increase in an effort to offset the production conse-
growth promoter; use within 7 days before or after the
quenices associated with the loss of antibiotic growth
administration of tiamulin; adult ruminant breeding stock or 
promoters.
adult cattle other than fattening cattle
Probiotics are live micro-organisms which, when adminis-
Warnings. Toxic to horses and other Equidae; introduce
tered in feed, have a positive effect on the health of the ani-
gradually, particularly in heavy cattle; operators should
mal and thereby help increase productivity. Probiotic
wear suitable protective clothing: Drug Interactions - see
products usually contain micro-organisms in vegetative or
Appendix 1
alrested states, but which are capable of forming colonies in
Dose.
the gut. Micro-organisms used in these products are mainly
Cattle: by addition to complete feed, 10-40 g/tonne
bacterial strains belonging to different genera and micro-
by addition to supplementary feed, (100 kg body-weight)
scopic fungi. Their mode of action has not been established,
maximum daily dose 140 mg, (>100 kg body-weight) 140
 although a rumber of mechanisms have been proposed.
mg plus up to 6 mg for each additional 10 kg body-weight
by addition to feed block, 400 g/tonine feed block
They include competitive exclusion, stimulation of the
immune system, or by influence on intestinal metabolic
ZFA Ecox 200 (ECO) UK
activities, such as increased production of vitamin B,z and
Premix, monensin (as rmonen sin sodium) t00 g/kg, for catfle, except lactaf-
propionic acid. Lactobacilli can reduce the concentrations
ing dairy cattle, poultry (see section I 4.1)
of microbial metabolites such as ammoria and amines that
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter withdrawal period nil. Poultry: slaugh-
ter 3 days
are potentially harmful to the host.
The use of micro-organisms in animal nutrition is control-
ZFA Romensin G100 (Elanco) U/K
led under Regulation 1831/2003/EC. Although guidelines
Premix, rmonensin (as rmonensin sodium) t00 g/kg, for catfle, except lactaf-
under the new legislation for the identification, characteri-
ingdairy catfle
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, should not be
sation, and evaluation of probiotic feed additives are not yet
used in lactating dairy cattle
available, guidance on the assessment of additives in animal
Note. See marufacturer's data sheet for further dosages
nutrition was modified by the Commission Directives 94/
40/EC and 95/11/EC to include probiotics. Authorisation
for a micro-organism product can only be granted follow-
ing a positive assessment by the European Food Safety
Authority (EFSA). Each product is assessed for its safety
for the animal (animal welfare), for the workers using it, for
the environment, and for consumers of the animal products.
SALINOMYCIN SODIUM
Many probiotic preparations are based on organisms nor-
mally resident in the gastro-intestinal tract, for example
UK
enterococci. A major safety concern is that probiotics
Indications. To improve growth-rate and feed conversion
should not introduce or aid in the dissemination of resist-
ance determinants. For similar reasons, neither should they
section 1.4.1)
produce an antibiotic. Other probiotic micro-organisms
Contra-indications. Concurrent other feed antibiotic or
belong to families, some members of which are toxin pro-
growth promoter; use within 4 days before or 7 days after
ducing, for example Bacillus cereus. Therefore approved
the administration of tiamulin or valnemulin
products are strain-specific and producers have to show
Warnings. Toxic to horses and other Equidae; operators
strain stability.
should wear suitable protective clothing; accurate mixing is
essential; Drug Interactions - see Appendix 1
Dose. Pigs: (up to 16 weeks of age and 35-40 kg body-
17.3 Enzymes
weight) 30-60 g/torne feed; (up to 26 weeks of age) 15-30
g/tonine feed
In-feed enzymes are routinely added to pig and poultry
feed. Non-starch polysaccharides, such as arabinox ylans in
ZFA Sal-Eco 120 (ECO) U/K
wheat and rye and B-glucans in barley and oats are only
Premix, salinormycin sodiurm 1 20 g/kg, for pigs, chickens (see section 1.4.1)
poorly digested in the non-ruminant gut and result 
ini
ter 5 days
increased viscosity in the gastro-intestinal tract of the ani-
mal, which impairs digestion. The addition of enzymes such
ZFA Salocin 120 (Intervet) U/K
as glucanases, xylanases, and amylases can significantly
Premix, salinornycin sodiurn 120 g/kg, for pigs
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter withdrawal period nil
improve digestion of these carbohydrate fractions. Such is
448 Production enhancers
the success of these products that over 90% of the poultry
17.4 Other production enhancers
diets containing wheat, barley, or both in the European
Community are supplemented with enzymes to degrade the
The inclusion of certain copper salts in the diet of pigs in
polysacchari de.
excess of nutritional requiremenits has been shown to have a
Another application of enzymes in animal feeding is the
growth promoting effect. However, these salts are author-
release of phosphate from phytic acid, which is the main
ised specifically as trace element additives. Although the
store of phosphorus in plant material. The addition of
precise mode of action is not clear, their effect is probably
phytase liberates this bound phosphorus fraction, thereby
related to their antimicrobial activity. Some reports have
reducing the need for phosphorus supplementation to the
shown that copper salts and antibacterial production
feed and reducing the environmental impact of phosphorus
enhancers have an additive effect and they may be com-
excretion in animal faeces. Other enzymes are available that
bined in pig feeds.
have been developed to reduce the impact of other antinutri-
Zinc (as zinc oxide), when included in the diets of younig
tional factors in feeds, such as galacto-oligosaccharides in
pigs at levels in excess of dietary requirements, has also
soya bearn meal.
been shown to increase growth rates and feed conversion
Enzymes are usually produced as single activities by spe-
efficiency.
Again the mode of action is not clear, but as
cialist biotechnology companies, and then assembled into
with copper it appears to act independently of antibiotics.
feed additive products, sometimes containing more than
 However, there appears to be no benefit from including
one enizyme activity. As with other feed additives, authori-
 both high copper and high zinc levels in the diet at the same
sation of enizyme additives requires a positi ve assessment of
time.
a product dossier by EFSA. For enizymes, an important tox -
Dietary levels of copper and zinc, significantly in excess of
icological concern relates to exposure of workers and
nutritional requirements, were authorised by Council Direc-
potential hypersensiti sati on and irri tant properties
ti ve 70/524/EEC, particularly in respect of growing and fat-
tening pigs. However, there has been increasing concern
and include active ingredients useful in animal nutrition
such as phytases, galactosidases, glucanases, xylanases,
concentrations of these metals. As a result these authorisa-
amylases, bacillolysin, aspergillopepsin, triacylglycerol
tions have now been amended by Regulation 1334/2003/EC
lipase, polygalacturonase, xylosidase, and subtilisin. All are
 in which maximum permitted levels in finished feeds have
fermentation products of either bacterial or fungal origin,
 beern reduced. The maximum copper content for pigs less
and are available as liquids, solids, powders, coated prepa-
 than 12 weeks of age is 170 mg/kg, but reduces to 25 mg/kg
rations, granulates, or microgranulates. Potency
is
for pigs more than 12 weeks of age (in contrast to 100 mg/
expressed as units of lytic activity against a stated substrate
kg previously under Directive 70/524/EEC). The maximum
per g or mL. For most products, the fermentation substrate,
authorised level of zinc has been reduced from 250 to 150
the producer strain, or both have been produced using
mg/kg complete feed for all farm livestock. It is possible
that the maximum permitted levels for both copper and zinc
is a genetically modified (GM) organism, the enzyme pro-
will be subject to further reassessment under Regulation
duced is categorised as a GM product and must be labelled
1831/2003/EC.
as such, as specified in Regulation 1829/2003/EC.
Steroid hormone growth promoters, the somatotrophinis,
and beta-adrenoceptor stimulants (beta-agonists) are used
for production enhancement in some countries. Under
Directive 96/22/EEC, implemented as the Animais and Ani-
mal Products (Examination for Residues and Maximum
Residue Limits) Regulations 1997 in the UK, hormonal
growth promoters and beta-adrenoceptor stimulants (under
certain circumstances) are banned for use in food-producing
animals within the EU.
449
18
VACCINES and IMMUNOLOGICAL
PREPARATIONS
Contributors:
frequently used to provide temporary protection, for exam-
S Dawson BVMS, PhD, MRCVS
ple, against tetanus. The intravenous injection of antiserum,
Professor P A Flecknell MA, VetMB, PhD, DLAS, DipECVA,
especially if repeated a number of times, may produce
DECLAM, MRCVS
hypersensitivity reactions. The potency of an antitoxic
P G G Jackson BVM&S, MA, DVM&S, FRCVS
serum is expressed in terms of the International Unit (IU)
S A Lister BVetMed, BSc, CertPMP, MRCVS
J D Slater BVM&S, MRCVS
defined by the World Health Organization and abbreviated
to ‘unit’ in The Veterinary Formutary.
D J Taylor MA, VetMB, PhD,DipECVPM, MRCVS
A E Wall BVM&S, MSc, CertVOphthal, MRCVS
Active immunity develops as a result of infection with a
micro-organism, or by administration of a vaccine prepared
18.1 Immunological preparations for horses
from live or inacti vated organisms, antigenic fractions, or
18.2 Immunological preparations for cattle,
sheep, and goats
isms. Vaccines are preparations of antigenic material, which
18.3 Immunological preparations for pigs
are administered to induce active immunity in the recipient
18.4 Immunological preparations for dogs
animal against specific bacterial, parasitic, or viral infec-
18.5 Immunological preparations for cats
tions. Vaccines may be single component or mixed (com-
18.6 Immunological preparations for birds
bined) preparations. Although the immune response is
18.7 Immunological preparations for rabbits
usually specific for each agent, cross-protection can occur,
18.8 Immunological preparations for fish
for ex ample between canine distemper and measles viruses.
The measles virus belongs to the same gerus as the distem-
Immunity in animals may be acquired by either passive or
 per virus but can be distinguished anti genically; the measles
active means. Passive immunity results from the transfer
vaccine, wher used to prevent distemper, is an example of a
of maternal antibodies to offspring or the injection of
heterotypic (heterologous) vaccine.
antiserum to an animal of any age. Antiserum is serum usu-
Live vaccines are usually produced with live micro-organl-
ally obtained from immunised animals and contains anti-
bodies to specific antigens. An antitoxin is antiserum
gentle heating, sublethal chemicals, passage through
contai ning antibodies to a specific bacterial toxin.
another host cell, or genetic modification. These are called
Domestic mammals acquire passive immunity by intestinal
modified live or attenuated vaccines. Live vaccines may
absorption of antibodies from colostrum ingested within the
also be non-pathogenic forms of the infecting organism
first few hours of life. In birds, maternal antibody is trans-
such as in toxoplasmosis vaccines, or related less patho-
ferred to the yolk, from whence the developing chick
genic organisms, for example Shope fibroma virus used to
absorbs it. There is no maternally-derived passive immumity
vaccinate rabbits against myxomatosis. Live vaccines retain
in fish. The degree of protection conferred depends upon
many of the surface antigenis of the organism from which
the amount and specificity of the antibodies transferred.
they are derived. They are capable of replication, which
Passive immunity lasts only as long as antibodies remain
may be restricted, and possibly dissemination throughout
reactive in the blood and mucosal surfaces, after which the
the host's body but do not normally cause disease. By virtue
animal loses immunity to that specific infection. Generally,
of being live antigen, they induce antigen presentation that
 passive immunity persists from 3 to 12 weeks in mammals,
triggers both humoral immunity (antibody production) and
depending on the genetic similarity of donor and recipient,
also cell mediated immunity (cytotoxic T lymphocytes); the
as well as the amount and quality of colostrum ingested by
latter being critical for elimination of virus-infected cells
the neonate. Immunity persists for up to 3 weeks in poultry.
and intracellular bacteria. Depending on the route of admin-
 If vaccines are given by parenteral administration during
istration, they are capable of stimulating systemic immunity
this period, they may be ineffective or induce only a short
and also local (mucosal) immunity. Temperature-sensitive
duration of immunity because of the interaction between
strainis of virus may be used in intranasal vaccines. These
 maternally derived antibodies and the immunising antigens.
viruses undergo replication in the lower temperature of the
This applies to all classes of vaccine but has been overcome
nasal mucosa and upper respiratory tract inducing local
in the case of mycoplasmal vaccines in pigs where injection
at 7 days of age is practised. Subsequent vaccination, given
perature inhibits replication at other sites in the body.
at suitable intervals to allow time for interfering antibodies
Immunity derived from live vaccines develops rapidly and
to decline, is required if long-term immunisation beyond
these vaccines may be used to protect uninfected suscepti-
 the meonatal period is recessary.
ble animals during a herd outbreak of a disease such as
Commercially available preparations of antisera are usually
bovine rhinotracheitis.
produced by immunising horses or cattle to obtain sera con-
The degree of protection afforded by live vaccines varies,
taiming the appropriate antibodies. Such preparations are
 depending upon the antigen and the animal, but is usually
450 Vaccines and immunological preparations
high and of long duration, although it is generally less than
ous properties without destroying their ability to stimulate
that following natural infection.
the formation of antibodies, for example tetanus toxoid.
Antibodies, especially maternally-derived, may inhibit the
Toxoid vaccines usually contain adjuvants.
replication of the live micro-organism in the vaccine and
A utogenous vaccines are prepared from cultures of material
thus interfere with the process of immunisation for several
derived from a lesion of the animal to be vaccinated, for
weeks. Therefore, further doses of vaccine may be recom-
mended, given at suitable intervals to allow time for inter-
from material taken from one animal for use solely in that
fering antibodies to decline.
same animal or group of animals. A UK emergency vaccine
Vector vaccines, such as canarypox vector vaccines, are
vaccines where some genetic material from the pathogen
used. Use of autogenous vaccine is only justified where
 that the animal is being vaccinated against is incorporated
there is no suitable authorised product and there is sufficient
into the vector genome. Canarypox vector vaccines are
need for vaccination. Applications should be made to the
available for several species including horses, dog, and cats.
VMD with a justificati on.
With these vaccines, the canarypox incorporates an immu-
Emergency vaccines are produced using micro-organisms
nogenic piece of genetic material from the pathogen against
from an animal, and are intended solely for administration
which the animal is to be protected. Although following
to the herd or flock to which the animal belongs. They are
vaccination the canarypox vector enters mammalian cells
used when commercial vaccines are not available. A UK
and starts to replicate, the replicati on is aborted and no fur-
emergency vaccine authorisation is required before a vac-
ther virus is produced. However, during this process there is
cine prepared from material taken from one animal is used
presentation of antigens on the surface of the cells and this
in animals from the same herd of flock. Applications should
be made to the VMD
advantage of these vaccines is that in the majority of cases
Contra-indications and side-effects of vaccines.
The
no adjuvant is required (see below).
possibility of undesirable side-effects should be considered
Inactivated (killed) vaccines are produced by chemical or
whenl vaccines are used and the manufacturer s data sheet
heat killing of live bacteria and viruses. The micro-organ-
Or package leaflet should be consulted. Unhealthy or febrile
isms are therefore not capable of replication and this means
animals should not be vaccinated.Animals should riot be
that antigen presentation occurs in a restricted manner and
yaccinated within several weeks (usually four) of receiving
immunosuppressi ve drugs or corticosteroids. When admin-
vaccines induce poor cell mediated immunity. Furthermore
istering live vaccines derived from bacteria, care should be
the inactivation process may result in modification of sur-
taken in the use of antibacterials. When herds or flocks are
face antigens. Inactivated vaccines contain sufficient anti-
being vaccinated with live vaccines, the transmission of
aini Aeeus inq uogonpoid Apognue sieinus on uoa
infection due to the organism in the vaccine should be borne
in mind, for ex ample the introduction of orf virus into a sus-
produce a satisfactory immune response and protection.
ceptible flock or infection of younger more susceptible
Other types of inactivated vaccines are subunit vaccines
stock in a multi-age flock or herd. With vaccines containing
that contain antigenic structures, usually surface proteins,
live herpesviruses the probability of latent infections and
prepared from the microbe, for ex ample some of the equine
influenza vaccines. Some subunit vaccines contain geneti-
require consideration. The full vaccination course as recom-
cally engineered subunits of the pathogen, for example
mended
by
the manufacturer should always be
administered.
is the DNA vaccine. Although not yet available commer-
 Some live vaccines, such as feline panleucopenia virus,
cially, DNA vaccines have been developed for a variety of
may be able to cross the placenta and cause abortion or fetal
veterinary pathogens, for example equine influenza virus
abnormalities. For live vaccines that are authorised for use
and canine papilloma virus.
in pregnancy, safety in pregnancy has been demonstrated.
Inactivated vaccines contain adjuvants that enhance the
For vaccines that are contra-indicated in preganant animals,
immune response. Adjuvants commonly used are alumin-
either safety has not been established or the vaccine is not
ium hydroxide, aluminium phosphate, alum, and carbomer,
safe. In general, inactivated vaccines are safer than live vac-
 Or an appropriate mineral oil such as liquid paraffin. There-
cines in pregnant animals but handling and vaccinating ani-
mals in late pregnancy is associated with some risk.
swelling at the site of injection. Asepsis on administration is
Stressing animals to be vaccinated should be avoided.
very important. These vaccines must always be adminis-
tion site, especially in horses, but this is usually self-limit-
Booster doses of inactivated vaccines are usually employed
ing and in most cases due simply to oedema. Some side-
to maintain an enduring immunity. These are often adminis-
 effects such as coat colour change or permanent loss of hair
tered annually and manufacturer s recommendations should
at the site of injection in certain cat breeds may be
be followed.
permanent.
Toxoids are toxins obtained from micro-organisms and
Temporary climical signs such as coughing may be seen
treated by heat or chemical means to destroy their deleteri-
after admiristration of some vaccines, for example canine
18.1 Immunological preparations for horses  451
tracheobronchitis vaccine administered by intranasal instil-
 is wiped with spirit after vaccination to reduce the potential
lation. Transient (12 to 26 hour) mild pyrexia may occur.
risk of ingestion.
Occasionally, animals exhibit a hypersensitivity reaction
post-vaccination. Clinical signs of hypersensitivity reac-
18.1 Immunological preparations for
tions are species-dependent and subject to individual varia-
tion. Signs tend to occur rapidly after injection and may
horses
include respiratory distress, vomiting, diarrhoea, salivation,
and urticaria. The risk of anaphylactic reaction is particu-
18.1.1 Enteritis
larly increased following repeated doses of heterologous
18.1.2 Equine herpesvirus
antiserum, such as tetanus antitoxin. Epinephrine (see sec-
18.1.3 Equine influenza
tion 4.5) or corticosteroids (see section 7.2.1) should be
18.1.4 Equine viral arteritis
administered promptly in the event of a reaction.
18.1.5 Rabies
  s e q   ondo je  
18.1.6 Tetanus
individuals that fail to respond fully to vaccination. How-
18.1.7 Combination vaccines for horses
ever, non-effectiveness of vaccines, that is failure to prevent
18.1.8 Immunoglobulins for horses
clinical disease in a group vaccinated with a specific vac-
cine, is regarded as an adverse effect and should be reported
The immurisation programme employed for individual
to the VMD (see BVA Code of Practice on Medicines).
horses depends on their use and amount of contact with
other horses. It is advisable that horses are always vacci-
Accidental self-injection with oil-based vaccines can
nated against tetanus and equine influenza. The Jockey
cause severe pain and intense swelling, which may result
Club and Federation Equestre Internationale (FEl) require
in ischaemic necrosis and loss of a digit. Prompt medical
horses to be vaccinated regularly against equine influenza.
attention is essential. A copy of the warning given in the
Vaccination against equine herpesviruses, which causes
package leaflet or data sheet should be shown to the
rhinopneumonitis, neurological disease, and abortion, is
doctor (or nurse) on duty.
sometimes recommended but is not required by the regula-
tory bodies.
Storage and handling of vaccines. Care must be taken to
From 30 June 2004, All owners of equids are required to
       
have applied for a passport from one of the passport issuing
preparations under the conditions recommended by the
authorities (Horse Passports (England) Regulations 2004).
manufacturer, otherwise the preparation may become dena-
The administration of all equine vaccines must be recorded
tured and totally ineffective. Vaccines should be stored
 by the veterinarian in the relevant section of the passport:
according to the manufacturer s recommendations. Refrig-
equine influenza vaccinations must be entered in section V;
erated storage at 2°C to 8°C is usually necessary. Some
all other vaccinations in section VI. Further information on
poultry vaccines are stored in liquid nitrogen. Unless other-
horse passports is available at:
wise specified, vaccines must not be frozen and should be
www.defra.gov.uk/animalh/tracing/horses/horses_index.htm
protected from light. Live antigens may be inactivated by
·
www.bev a.org.uk
disinfectants or alcohol and become ineffective.
DEFRA helpline: 020 7904 6216
Only sterile needles and syringes should be used for vacci-
·VMD: 01932 336911.
Generally, vaccines are injected intramuscularly or occa-
tions to avoid the possibility of abscess formation or the
sionally subcutaneously, into the neck, pectoral, or gluteal
transmission of incidental infections. Animals should not be
regions.
vaccinated through dirty, wet skin. The repeated use of sini-
Traditionally there has been a recommendation to avoid
gle needles and syringes within herds and flocks is not rec-
strenuous exercise particularly following primary equine
ommended. Containers that have held live vaccines can be
influenza vaccination but this appears to be unnecessary
potentially hazardous and should be made safe in accord-
with current equine vaccines. However, occasional local
ance with HSE and COSHH recommendations
anid
and systemic adverse reactions have been reported with all
regulations.
classes of equine vaccines and should be reported to the
Injectable vaccines should be stored and reconstituted as
VMD under the Suspected Adverse Reactions Surviellance
recommended by the manufacturer and liquid preparations
Scheme.
should always be adequately shaken before use to ensure
uniformity of the material to be injected. It is important that
18.1.1 Enteritis
vaccines are administered correctly. For example live vac-
cines (such as feline viral respiratory disease complex vac-
Rotavirus is the most common cause of diarrhoea in young
foals. Other causative agents include bacteria, protozoa,
accidently administered orally or intranasally. This may
occur if an aerosol is made during reconstitution of the vac-
An inacti vated vaccine, which is used as an aid in the pre-
cine or if a drop of vaccine is left on the skin and subse-
vention of disease caused by equine rotavirus in foals, is
quently licked off. Manufacturers recommend that the skin
available under a provisional marketing authorisation. Data
452
2  Vaccines and immunological preparations
relating to efficacy are collected. Pregnant mares are vacci-
POM Duvaxyn EHV 1,4 (Fort Dodge) U/K
nated to provide passive transfer of rotavirus antibodies to
Injection, equine herpesvirus vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorm EHV 1
foals. Mares are vaccinated at the 8th, 9th, and 10th months
strain 438/77 and EHV 4 strain 405/76 grown on continuous cellines, con -
of pregnancy.
taining carbomer as adjuvant, for horses und ponies more than 5 months of
age
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter withdrawal period nil
UK
Dose. Horses: by intramuscuiar injection, I dose. Repeat after 4-6 weeks.
Indications.Vaccination against equine rotavirus
Then a booster vaccination should be given every 6 rmonths. (Irmmurocorm-
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See notes at
prormised foals may receive a vaccination frorn 3 rmon ths of age which should
be followed by the prirmary course.)
beginning of chapter
Dose. See notes above and preparation details
18.1.3 Equine influenza
Accidental self-injection with oil-based vaccines can
Equine influenza is a respiratory disease caused by
cause severe pain and intense swelling, which may result
Orthomyxoviridae type A influeniza viruses. Influenza virus
in ischaemic necrosis and loss of a digit. Prompt medical
has two major surface proteins, a neuraminidase (N) and a
 attention is essential
as either H7N7 (formerly known as strain A Equi 1) or
POM Duvaxym R (Fort Dodge) UK
H3N8 (formerly known as strain A Equi 2). H7N7 viruses
Injection, rotavirus vaccine, inactivated, prepared from equine rotavirus
strain H2, containing a rmineral oil as adjuvant, for horses
have not circulated in the UK for several years and equine
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter withdrawal period nil
influenza currently appears to be caused by H3N8 viruses.
Dose. Horses: by intramuscular injection, I rmL
There are 2 lineages of H3N8 viruses, known as European
and American, and the current OlE recommendations are
18.1.2 Equine herpesvirus
that vaccines should contain representatives of both lin-
Infection with Alphaherpesviridae equine herpesvirus 1
eages. ISCOM (immune stimulating complex) vaccines are
(EHV 1) and equine herpesvirus 4 (EHV 4) may cause res-
available.
piratory disease, abortion, neonatal death, and paresis.
The disease is characterised by pyrexia, depression, and a
EHV 1 is capable of causing all of these whereas EHV 4 is
persistent dry hacking cough.
Vaccination against equine influenza is required for horses
viral rhinopneumoritis (caused by EHV 1) may be charac-
entering a property or competing under the rules of the
terised by depression, fever, lymphadenopathy, nasal and
 Jockey Club or the FEI. The Jockey Club and FEI specify
ocular discharge, and coughing. Clinical signs of both
the schedule required for influenza vaccination (see Pre-
EHV 1 and EHV 4 respiratory disease are more severe in
 scribing for animals used in competi tions).
foals and young horses; in many adult horses herpesvirus
The primary vaccination course consists of 2 injections
infection produces either subtle or subclinical respiratory
given 21 to 92 days apart, with a third dose given 150 to
disease. EHV 1 abortions and neonatal death are sporadic
 215 days later. Anrual booster vaccinations are given there-
but may occur as abortion storms on studs. Neurological
after. Horses may not race until 8 days after vaccination. If a
disease is also sporadic, occurring as either isolated cases 
 combination equine influenza and tetanus vaccine (see sec-
or, occasionally, outbreaks. Both EHV 1 and EHV 4 estab-
tion 18.1.7) is administered, it is recommended that a 4
lish lifelong latent infections that periodically reactivate
week interval is allowed between first and second primary
resulting in shedding of infectious virus from the horse and
yaccines to allow the tetanus component to be effective.
infection of susceptible in-contact horses and possibly abor-
Certification by a veterinarian that the horse is correctly
tion, neurological disease, or both in the reactivating horse.
vaccinated and identified is necessary. FEI and the Jockey
Inactivated vaccines are available, which may be used in
Club require certification to be stamped with the veterinary
horses of all ages except very young foals. For prevention
practice stamp. All equine influenza vaccination must be
of respiratory disease, the primary course consists of 2 vac-
recorded in section V of the Horse Passport relating to the
cines givenn at an interval of 4 to 6 weeks. Booster vaccina-
animal vaccinated.
tions should be given every 6 months.
Although Jockey Club rules specify that booster doses be
For prevention of abortion, pregnant mares are vaccinated
d cn   i n s i  
at the 5th, 7th, and 9th months of pregnancy. Vaccines are
 optimum immunity in young horses in training, an addi-
unlikely to eliminate latent infections but may reduce the
tional 6 month, rather than 12 month, booster after the third
spread of virus from reacti vating horses.
vaccination of the primary course may be required before
The Horserace Betting Levy Board publishes a Code of
adopting the routine of annual boosters. In the face of a
Practice on Equid Herpesvirus I (EHV-1).
severe epidemic, the third vaccination of the primary course
UK
should be given 2 to 3 months after the second vaccination
Indications. Vaccination against equine herpesvirus
and subsequent boosters should be given at 6 monthly
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See niotes at
intervals.
beginning of chapter
Mares may be vaccinated 8 to 4 weeks before foaling to
Dose. See preparation details
provide optimum levels of colostral antibody. Foals born to
18.1 Immunological preparations for horses  453
vaccinated mares should not be vaccinated for equinie influ-
body to EVA; available at the Centre for Preventive Medi-
eniza before 4 months of age.
cine, Animal Health Trust.
Combined equine influenza virus and tetanus vaccines (see
Under the Equine Viral Arteritis Order 1995 (S1 1995/1755)
section 18.1.7) may be used for the initial vaccination
and Equine Viral Arteritis Order (Northern Ireland) 1996
course and every alternate annual booster vaccination.
(SI 1996/34), the disease is notifiable in shedding stallions
and irn mares that have beeni served 14 days before the sus-
UK
pected presence of the disease. The legislation indicates the
Indications. Vaccination against equine influenza
procedures to follow concerming transport and use of a
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See notes at
restricted stallion.
beginning of chapter
Prevention and control of the disease in the UK is based on
Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
the Horserace Betting Levy Board Code of Practice on
tion programmes
Equine Viral Arteritis (EVA). Horses imported from a coun-
POM Duvaxyn IE Plus (Fort Dodge) UK
try where EVA is known to occur or suspected should be
Injection, equine influenza vaccine, inactivated, prepared from influenza A
isolated on arrival for 21 days. Blood samples taken on
virus strains H7N7 (A Equi 1, Prague 56), Armerican type H3N8 (A Equi 2,
arrival and 14 days later should be tested for antibodies. It is
Newmarket 1/93), European type H3N8 (A Equi 2, Suffolk 89), containing
also recommended that mares and stallions are tested for
carbomer as aduvant,forhorses und ponies more thun5 months ofage
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter withdrawal period nil
antibodies before mating. The British Equine Veterinary
Dose. Horses, ponies: by intramusc ular injection, I rmL
Association (BEVA) and the Horserace Betting Levy Board
(HBLB) have jointly published a leaflet (Equine Viraf
POM Equip F (Schering-Plough) UK
Arteritis. April, 1999) explaining how breeders can help
Injection, equine influenza ISCOM vaccine, inactivated, prepared from influ-
enza A virus strains H7N7 (A Equi I, Newmarket 77), Armerican type H3N8
reduce the risk of EVA spreading.
(A Equi 2, Kentucky 98), European type H3N8 (A Equi 2, Bordange 91), for
horses more than4months of age
18.1.5 Rabies
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Dose. Horses: by intramuscular injection, 2 mL
See section 18.4.8
POM Prevac Pro (Irntervet) UK
Injection, equine influenza vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorm influenza A
18.1.6 Tetanus
Newmarket 1/93), European type H3N8 (A Equi 2 Newmarket 2/93), con-
Tetanus is caused by the toxin of Clostridium tetani and
taining alurminiurm hydroxide as adjuvant, for horses and ponies more than 4
monthsofage
may affect all species. Horses are particularly susceptible to
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter withdrawal period nil
the neurotoxin. Animals are affected when wounds become
Dose. Horses, ponies: by intramuscuiar injection, 2 mL
infected with clostridial spores. However, the disease is mot
always associated with visible lesions in horses because
POM Proteqflu (Merial) U/K
bacterial growth from spores and toxin production requires
Injction, equine influenza ISCOM vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorm infu
eriza A virus strains Armerican type H3N8 (Kentucky 94) recormbinant
anl anaerobic environment such as a closed wound or mass
Canarypox virus vCP 1529, Europear type H3N8 (Newrmarket 2/93) recormi-
 of necrotic tissue. Climical signs include hyperaesthesia,
biant Canarypox virus vCP 1533, containing carbomer as adjuvant, for
third eyelid spasm, dysphagia, stiffness progressing to
horses more than 4months of age
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter withdrawal period nil
tetany, and tonic convulsions.
Dose. Horses: by intramuscular injection, I mL
Immunity to tetanus is generated by a primary course con-
sisting of 2 doses of toxoid given 4 to 6 weeks apart. A fur-
ther dose should be given 12 months after the primary
18.1.4 Equine viral arteritis
course, followed by booster doses every 1 to 2 years for
Equine viral arteritis (EVA) is a contagious disease of
horses and annually for other species. Previously immu-
worldwide distribution, which is particularly prevalent in
nised pregnant mares should be givenl a booster dose about
non-thoroughbred horses. Most horses develop subclinical
one month before foaling. Foals from immunised mares
infection but some may exhibit clinical signs of fever,
will generally not require vaccination until 4 months of age.
depression, and peripheral oedema. Mares may abort and
However, foals whose immune status is doubtful should be
stallions frequently become long-term carriers of the virus.
given tetanus antitoxin shortly after birth and again at 6
Transmission by the respiratory route occurs during acute
infection and by the venereal route through semen from
commeniced.
chronically infected stallions.
Animals that have niot been vaccinated or whose immune
There is no authorised vaccine against equine viral arteritis
status is doubtful should be given antitoxin prophylactically
available in the UK. Artervac (Fort Dodge) is available
when exposed to risk of infection, for example, following
under limited circumstances. The manufacturer should be
injury. If desired, toxoid may be given simultaneously at a
contacted for further information.
separate injection site using a different syringe. The anti-
 Some countries prohibit the importatior of animals seropos-
toxin may be given at the site of injury or point of entry of
iti ve to EVA without veterinary certification of vaccination.
the infection, if known. When used for treatment, antitoxin
Therefore veterinarians should always take a blood sample
should initially be given intravenously to neutralise circu
before vaccination and ensure that animal is tested for anti-
454 Vaccines and immunological preparations
POM Equilis Resequin (Intervet) UK
repeated daily as recessary.
Injection, combined equine influenza and equine herpesvins vaccine, inacti-
vated, prepared frorm influenza A virus strains H7N7 (A Equi I, Prague 56),
UK
Armerican type H3N8 (A Equi 2, Newrmarket 1/93) European type H3N8 (A
Equi 2, Newrmarket 2/93) and EHV I strain RAC-H and EHV 4 strain 2252,
Indications. Prevention and treatment of tetanus
containing aluminiurm hydroxide as adjuvant and Imrmunostirm, for horses
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See riotes at
more than 4 months ofuge
beginning of chapter
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Dose. See preparation details and notes above
Dose. Horses: by intramuscular injection, 2 rmL repeat after 6 weeks and
every 6 rmonths
Antitoxins
POM Prevac T Pro (Intervet) U/K
POM Tetanus Antitoxin Behring (Intervet) UK
Injection, combined equine influenza and tetarus vaccine, inactivated, pre-
Injection, Cl. tetani antitoxin, derived frorm horses, containing l000 units/
 pared frorm influen za A virus strains H7N7 (A Equi I , Prague 56), Armerican
mLfrsestlepi
rype H3N8 (A Equi 2, Newrmarket 1/93) European type H3N8 (A Equi 2,
Dose. Treatrment.
Newrmarket 2/93), Cl. tetani toxoid, containing alurminiurm hydroxide as
Horses, catle: by epidural or intravenous injection,30000 unitswith con
adjuvant,forhorsesundponiesmore than4monthsofage
cumrent adrministration of 15 000 units given by subcutaneous or intramusc α-
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter withdrawal period nil
lar injection. Repeat daily as necessary
Dose.Hores, ponies:by inrascular injection,2 mL
Prophylaxis. By subcuianeous or intramuscuiar injection.
Horses, cafle: 7500 units; foals, calves: 3000 units
POM ProteqFlu TE (Merial) U/K
Sheep: 3000 units
fnjection, cormbined equine influenza and tetanus vaccine, inactivated, pre-
Pigs: 1500-3000 units
pared frorn influenza A virus strains Armerican type H3N8 (Kenhucky 94),
Dogs: 500-1000 units
recormbinant Canarypox virus vCP 1529, European type H3N8 (Newrmarket
2/93), recormbinant Canarypox virus vCP 1533, and Cl. tetani toxoid, con-
Vaccines
taining carbomer as adjuvant, for horses 4 months of age or more
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Indications. Prevention of tetanius
Dose. Horses: by intramuscular injection, I mL
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See notes at
beginning of chapter
18.1.8Immunoglobulins forhorses
Dose. See preparation details and notes above
Immunoglobulins (or antibodies) combine with specific
POM Duvaxyn T (Fort Dodge) UK
antigens. Equine plasma (derived from normal horses) pro-
fnjection, tetanus vaccine, inactivated, Cl. tetani toxoid, containing alumin-
iurm phosphate as adjuvant, for horses und ponies more than 3 months of
vides a source of immunoglobulins, mainly IgG, suitable
uge
for providing temporary, passive immunity to foals (or
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter withdrawal period nil 
immunocompromised horses of any age) that have failed to
Dose. Horses, ponies: by intramusc ular injection, I mL
ingest sufficient colostrum in the neonatal period.
POM Equip T (Schering-Plough) UK
Endotoxin-specific immunoglobulins act by binding to
fnjection, tetanus vaccine, inactivated, Cl. tetani toxoid, containing alumin-
(neutralising) endotoxin produced by a wide variety of
iurn phosphateas adjuvant,forhorsesmore than3months ofge
Gram-negative bacteria including Saimonella spp., E. coli
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Dose. Horses: by intramuscular injection, 2 mL
serotypes, Serratia marcescens, Shigella flexneri, Kleb-
siella pneumoniae, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. These
POM Tetanus Toxoid Concentrated (Intervet) UK
bacteria may be a component of a number of diseases such
fnjection, tetanus vaccine, inactivated, Cl. tetani toxoid, containing alumin-
iurn hydroxide as adjuvant, for horses, other mammalian species
as gastro-enteritis, septic metritis, septicaemia, or shock.
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Other
antibacterials,
Dose. Horses, other mammalian species: by subc waneous or intramuscu-
 NSAIDs, and fluid therapy should also be instituted.
lar injection, I mL
Antitoxins for tetarus are available (see section 18.1.6).
UK
18.1.7 Combination vaccines for horses
POM Hyperimmune (Veterinary Immunogenics) UK
UK
Intravenous infusion, equine immunoglobulin-C 24 g/L, for fouls 24 hours-
6duys ofuge
POM Duvaxyn IE-T Plus (Fort Dodge) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Should not be used in horses intended for hurmar cori -
Injection, cormbined equine influenza and tetanus vaccine, inactivated, pre-
surmption
pared from influenza A vinus strains H7N7 (A Equi 1, Prague 56), Armerican
Note. Store in freezer; thaw in warrm water at 40° C; administer using blood 
type H3N8 (A Equi 2, Newrmarket I/93) Europear lype H3N8 (A Equi 2,
Suffolk 89), Cl. tetani toxoid, con taining aluminiurm hydroxide and carbormer
giving set
Indications.
. Increase level of irm rmunoglobulin C
as adjuvants, for horses und ponies more than 5 months of age
Side-effects. Rarely anaphylactic reactions, posible rmuscle fascicula-
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter withdrawal period nil
tions, weakness, cardiac abnorrmalities
Dose. Horses: by intramuscular injection, I dose
 once at 24-48 hour interval
POM Equip FT (Schering-Plough) UK
fnjection, cormbined equine influenza and tetanus ISCOM vaccine, inacti-
POM Stegantox 60 (Schering-Plough) UK
vated, prepared frorn influenza A H7N7 (A Equi I , Newrmarket 77), Armeri-
fnjection, powder for reconstitution, 3 mg endotoxin-specific irmmunoglobu-
7 a ) 8NH  ua (86 A  a ) NH  
lin G/mL, for horses
Borlange 9l), Cl. tetani toxoid, containing alurminium phosphate as adjuvant,
Indications. Treatment and prophylaxis of endotoxaemia
for horses
Warnings. Safety in pregnant anirmals has not been established
Withdrawal Periods. Horses: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Dose. Horses: by slow intravenous injection, 300 micrograms/kg. May be
Dose. Horses: by intramuscular injection, 2 mL
repeated twice at 24-hour intervals
18.2 Immunological preparations for cattle, sheep, and goats 455
18.2 Immunological preparations for
18.2.2 Bovine pneumonia
cattle, sheep, and goats
Enzootic pneumonia in calves is caused primarily by
viruses with secondary bacterial infection. The condition is
18.2.1Anthrax
exacerbated by poor housing and ventilation, inadequate
18.2.2
Bovine pneumonia
colostral immunity, and stress of various kinds. Causative
18.2.3
Clostridial infections
viruses include adenovirus, bovine herpesvirus 1 (causing
18.2.4  Contagious pustular dermatitis
bovine rhinotracheitis, IBR), parainfluenza virus 3 (PI3),
18.2.5
Enteritis
bovine respiratory syncytial virus (BRSV), and rhinovirus.
18.2.6
Erysipelas
Vaccinationwith live virus vaccines is generallyavery
18.2.7
Footrot
effective means of preventing disease caused by the specific
18.2.8
Leptospirosis
virus. A number of vaccines contain more than one viral
18.2.9
Louping ill
antigen and marker vaccines are niow available for IBR.
18.2.10 Lungworm
18.2.11 Mastitis
18.2.2.1 Bovine parainfluenza virus 3
18.2.2.2 Bovine herpesvirus 1
18.2.12 Ovine abortion
18.2.13 Ovine pasteurellosis
18.2.2.3 Bovine respiratory syncytial virus
18.2.2.4 Pasteurellosis
18.2.14 Rabies
18.2.2.5 Combination vaccines for bovine
18.2.15 Ringworm
18.2.16 Tetanus
pneumonia
18.2 17 Immunoglobulins for ruminants
18.2.2.1 Bovine parainfluenza virus 3
 The immunisation programme used for ruminants depends
 Depending on the age of the calf and therefore the concer-
on the management system, location, and the history of the
tration of maternally-derived antibody, the vaccine is
herd or flock.
admi nistered intranasally either as a single dose at 12 weeks
Cattle may be vacinated against blackleg and tetanus on
of age or more, or as a vaccination course with one dose
farms where these conditions are endemic. In some herds,
being given at 3 to 4 weeks of age followed by a second
dose at 10 to 12 weeks of age.
immunisation against other conditions, such as “husk'
(lungworm disease), rotavirus, and infectious bovine rhi-
notracheitis (IBR) is also necessary.
UK
Indications. Vaccination against bovine parainfluenza
Marker vaccines are now available for immunisation of cat-
tle against IBR. These vaccines enable the immunity
virus 3
induced by marker vaccines to be differentiated in the labo-
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See riotes at
ratory from immunity induced following infection by field
beginning of chapter
 Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
strains of bovine herpesvirus 1 virus. These vaccines can be
tion programmes
used in control and eradication schemes.
Sheep flocks are generally vaccinated to prevent clostridial
POM Imuresp (Pfizer) U/K
diseases and pasteurellosis but vaccination against other
Intranasal solution, powder for reconstitution, PI3 vaccine, living, prepared
diseases, such as ovine abortion and louping ill, is some-
frorm vimus strain RLB I03ts, tem perature-specific, for calves, growing caffe
Dose.Caves, growing catte:by intranasalapplication,2 mLinto one
times necessary depending on the flock and its history. Col-
lapse and death have been reported following vaccination of
oa si ssns Aue nn nuodi st i isme juuid
Vaccination in goats is similar to that employed for sheep.
18.2.2.2 Bovine herpesvirus 1
In cattle, the site for vaccination by subcutaneous injection
Bovine herpesvirus l is the causative agent of infectious
is usually the neck, while for intramuscular injection, the
bovine rhinotracheitis (IBR) characterised by an upper res-
neck or shoulder region is recommended. For sheep and
piratory-tract infection, which may lead to pneumonia. The
goats, the anterior third of the neck is usually recom-
      o  s
mended. Aseptic precautions should be observed especially
infectious pustular vulvovaginitis, and infectious balano-
with preparations in multidose contai ners.
posthitis. Vaccination provides immunity against both the
respiratory and genital forms of the disease. Although
18.2.1 Anthrax
calves can be vaccinated from 3 weeks of age using some
vaccines, for others a later vaccination age is recommended.
Anthrax is caused by Bacilfus anthracis and characterised
Vaccination will not prevent the disease in cattle that are
 by sudden death. Anthrax is a zoonotic infection. No com-
already infected but may reduce the extent and severity of
mercial vaccine is available for routine vaccination of
the disease in a developing outbreak. Intranasal vaccination
horses, ruminants, and pigs in the UK. DEFRA should be
will provide protection within 40 to 72 hours coinciding
contacted for information regarding emergency supplies of
with the presence of interferon in nasal secretions. Antibod-
vaccinie.
ies are detectable in serum by day 7 to 10 post-vaccination
456 Vaccines and immunological preparations
whether the vaccine is given by the intranasal or intramus-
18.2.2.3 Bovine respiratory syncytial virus
cular route. Maternally-derived antibody does not prevent
Live and inactivated vaccines are available for the immuni-
development of active immunity following intranasal vacci-
sation of calves against disease caused by the bovine respi-
nation in calves.
ratory syncytial virus (BRSV). The live vaccinie may be
Marker vaccines enable the immunity they induce to be dif-
used simultaneously with bovine parainfluenza virus vac-
ferentiated serologically from that induced by conventional
cine and infectious bovine rhinotracheitis vaccine.
vaccines and also by exposure to field strains of the virus.
For protection with either vaccine, calves are vaccinated 2
Following vaccination, some cattle develop pyrexia and
 or 3 times with an interval of 3 weeks betweern doses. When
clinical signs of respiratory disease, which may last for 3 to
using the live vaccine, calves under 4 months of age should
5 days.
be vaccinated similarly with an additional vaccination given
at 4 months of age.
UK
UK
Indications. Vaccination agai nst respiratory syncytial virus
Indications. Vaccination against infectious bovine rhi-
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See notes at
notracheitis
beginning of chapter; transient pyrexia
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See riotes at
 Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
beginning of chapter and notes above
tion programmes
Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
Live vaccines
tion programmes
POM Rispoval RS (Pfizer) UK
POM Bayovac IBR-Marker Inactivatum (Bayer) UK
Injetion, powder for reconstitution, BRSV vaccine, living, prepared from
Injection, IBR vaccine, inactivated, prepared from virus type I TBR-Marker
bovine virus, for calves more than I week of age
virus, containing aluminiurm hydroxide and saponine as adjuvants, for cafle
Dose. Calves: (< 4 months of age) by intramusc ular injection, 2 mL, repeat
more thun3monthsofuge
after 3 weeks, and at 4 rmoniths of age 
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk with-
(> 4 rmonths of age) by intramusc ular injection, 2 mL, repeat after 3 weeks
drawal period nil
Inactivated vaccines
Dose. Catfe: by subc utaneous injection, 2 mL, repeat after 3-5 weeks and
every 6 rmonths
POM Torvac (Novartis) UK
Injection, BRSV vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorn bovine virus, contain-
POM Bayovac IBR-Marker Vivum (Bayer) U/K
ing Quil-A as adjuvant, for caives
Injection or intranasal solution, TBR vaccine, living, prepared frorn virus
Withdrawal Periods. Catle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk with-
Eype I TBR-Marker virus, for cattle more than 2 weeks of age
! poad emp
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk with-
Contra-indications. Pregnant anirmals
Dose. Calves: by sube utaneous injection, 2 mL
drawal period nil
Dose. Cautle: (> 2 weeks of age) by intranasal application, 2 mL, then after
3-5 weeks and every 6 rmoniths, by intramusc ular injection, 2 rmL;
(>3 rmonths of age) by intramuscular injection, 2 mL, repeat after 35 weeks
18.2.2.4 Pasteurellosis
and every 6 rmonths
Vaccination is available to reduce the clinical signs and
POM Bovilis IBR (Intervet) UK
lesions resulting from respiratory disease caused by Man-
njection or intranasal soltion, powder for reconstirution, IBR vaccine, liv-
nheimia haemolytica (Pasteurella haemotytica) infection.
ing, prepared from virus, grown on cell-line tissue culure, for catfle more
Cattle are vaccinated at a minimum age of 4 weeks and
than 4 weeks of age
Note. Reconstitute with Unisolve
again 21 to 28 days later. Thereafter annual booster vacci-
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk with-
nations may be given at intervals of not more than 12
drawal period nil 
months.
Dose. Catle: by intramuscular injection, 2 mL; by intranasal application
(oreferred), I rmL into each nostril
UK
POM Bovilis IBR Marker (Intervet) UK
Indications. Vaccination agai nst pasteurellosis
Injection or intrangsal solution, IBR vaccine, living, prepared frorm BHV-1
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See niotes at
stcain GK/D,foccattlemore than2weeks of ge
 beginning of chapter and notes above; transient oedema or
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk with-
drawal period nil
granulomas at vaccination site in cattle; transient hyper-
Dose. Catle: (2 weeks-3 rmonths of age) by intrangsal application, I mL
thermia
into each nostril,then at 34 rmonths of age and every 6 months, by intramus-
Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
cular injection,2mL
tion programmes
(> 3 rmonths of age) by intranasal application or intramusc ular injection, 2
rmL, repeat every 6 rmonths
POM Pastobov (Merial) U/K
Injetion, pasteurellosis vaccine, inactivated, prepared from P haemolytica
POM Tracherine (Pfizer) UK
ype Al antigens,for cattle more than 4weeks of age
Intrangsal soltion, powder for reconstiution, TBR vaccine, living, prepared
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk with-
frorm virus strain RLB 106 ts, temperaure-sensitive, forcafle
drawal period nil
Dose. Cuttle: (<3 months of age) by intranasal application, 2 mL into one 
Dose.Catle:by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection,2 mL,epeat
rostril at 3 weeks of age, repeat at I0-1 2 weeks of age
after 3-4 weeks. Revaccinate before each risk period and no later than one
sou auo ou! 7u z 'uodde ypsueiu kg (ae jo sy uou g<)
year after the first vaccination
18.2 Immunological preparations for cattle, sheep, and goats 457
POM Rispoval Pasteuralla (Pfizer)
either alone or in combination, cause clostridial metritis.
Injection, pasteurellosis vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorm P. haemol ytica
Exotoxins of Cl. septicum are responsible for braxy and Cf.
biotype A serotype I, containing a suitable oil as adjuvant, for catfle more
than3monthsofage
tetani exotoxins cause tetanus (see section 18.1.6). Cl. sor-
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk with-
delli has been associated with sudden death and abomasitis
drawal period nil
in lambs and with gangrenous metritis in ewes. Cl. perfrin-
Dose. Catfle: by intramuscular injection, 2 mL. Revaccinate at least I week
gens type A has been identified as a source of illness and
before each risk period
mortality with enterotox aemia in sheep and other species.
 Single and multicomponent vaccines are available. Several
18.2.2.5 Combination vaccines for bovine
pneumonia
geographical area. Therefore, it is usual practice to vacci-
UK
nate routinely with combination vaccines capable of pro-
Indications.See individual vaccinies
ducing immunity to 4 to 8 clostridial infections. The
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See notes at
beginning of chapter
ommendations and provided these are followed vaccination
Dose. See preparati on details
against clostridial disease gives very effective protection.
Vaccination programmes for multicomponent vaccines may
POM Bovipast RSP (Interver) UK
vary with the degree of risk in an area. Generally, sheep are
Injection, cormbined RSV, PI3, and pasteurellosis vaccine, inactivated, pre-
given 2 doses with an interval of 4 to 6 weeks between
pared frorn RSV virus strain EV 908, PI3 virus strain SF-4, Pasteurella
haemolyrica serotype Al, containing alurminiurm hydroxide and Quil A as
doses and this primary course is completed 3 to 4 weeks
before a period of risk such as lambing. For subsequent
ad juvarts for catfle
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk with-
pregnancies, ewes are usually given a single injection 2 to 4
drawal period nil
weeks before lambing. Lambs born to vaccinated ewes are
Dose. Cutle: by subewtaneous injection, 5 mL at 2 weeks of age or more.
Repeat after 4 weeks. Annual revaccinatior should be given 2 weeks before 
protected by maternally-derived antibodies for up to 12 to
each risk period
16 weeks of age, when they should receive 2 doses of vac-
cine with an interval of 4 to 6 weeks between doses. Lambs,
POM Imuresp RP (Pfizer) UK
if born to unvaccinated ewes, should generally be vacci-
Intrangsal solution, powder for reconstiution, cormbined TBR and PI3 vac-
cine, living, prepared frorm IBR virus strain RLB 106 ts, PI3 vinus strain RLB
nated in the first 2 weeks of life, and again 4 to 6 weeks
[03ts, term peraure-specific, for calves, growing catfle
later. A booster dose each autumn is recommended but in
Dose.Caives, growing catle: by inranasal application, 2mL into one
areas of higher risk, a booster dose every 6 months may be
nostril at 3 weeks of age, repeat at l0 weeks of age. Anirmals rmore thar 12
weeks of age require I vaccination. Anmual revaccination is recormrmended
appropriate.
For cattle and goats, 2 doses are given at an interval of 3 to
POM Rispoval 4 (Pfizer)
6 weeks and administered 2 to 4 weeks before a period of
Injection, powder for reconstinution, combined BRSV, BHV-l, PI3, and
risk. Arnual booster doses are recommended. For pigs, ini-
BVDV vaccine, inactivated, prepared from viuses, for atle more tha 3
monthsof uge
tially 2 doses are administered at an interval of at least 3
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk with-
weeks. Thereafter sows are vaccinated once at approxi-
drawal period nil
mately 6 to3 weeks before eachfarrowing.
Contra-indications. Pregnant cattle
Dose. Catle: (<3 rmonths of age) by intramuscular injection, 5 rmL, repeat
after 3-4 weeks, and at 12 weeks of age
(>3 rmonths of age) by intramuscular injection, 5 rmL, repeat after 3-4 weeks
UK
Indications. Prevention and treatment of  clostridial
infections
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See notes at
beginining of chapter
 Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
18.2.3 Clostridial infections
tion programmes
See Table 18.1 for an alphabetical listing of the available
tionis; vaccination is also recommended for cattle, goats,
antitoxins and vaccines, and the diseases against which they
and pigs.
induce immunity.
The exotoxins produced by clostridial species exhibit a
variety of pathogenic effects. Cl. chauvoei (Cl. feseri)
PML Blackleg Vaccine (Intervet) UK
causes blackleg disease and post-parturient gangrene in
fnjection, inactivated, Cl. chawvoei cells and toxoid, containing aluminium
sheep. Cl. haemolyticum (Cl. novyi type D) is the causative
hydroxide as adjuvant, for catfle, sheep
Dose. Cale, sheep: by subc wtaneous or intramusc ular injection, 2 rmL
agent of bacillary haemoglobinuria and Cl. novyi (Cl. oede-
matiens) causes black disease. The various serotypes of Cf.
PML Blackleg Vaccine BP (Vet) (Schering-Plough) U/K
perfringens (Cl. welchi) cause different diseases; type B
Injection,inactivated, Cl. chauvoei cells and toxoid, containing alum as adj
causes lamb dysentery, type C causes struck, and type D
vant, forcatle, she
Dose. Catfle: by subcutaneous injection,2 rmL
causes pulpy kidney disease. Cl. chauvoei or Cl. septicum,
Sheep:by subeuianeous injection,I mL
458  Vaccines and immunological preparations
Table 18.1 Immunological preparations for clostridial infections available in the UK
Bacillary
Lamb
Btack
Btack
Putpy
haemo-
Braxy
8a1-
dysen
kidney
Struck
Tetanus
disease
Otherinfections
globinuria
-tery
 Antitoxins
Tetanus Antitoxin
Behring (lntervet)
Vaccines
Blackleg Vaccine
(lntervet)
Blackleg Vaccine
(Schering-Plough)
Covexin 8
(Schering-Plough)
Covexin 10
diseases caused by
(Schering-Plough)
Ct. sordeli and Ct.
perfringens type A
Duvaxyn T
(Fort Dodge)
Equip T
(Schering-Plough)
Heptavac
clostridial metmitis
(lntervet)
Heptavac-P Plus
clostridial memitis,
(lntervet)
pasteurellosis
Lambivac
(lntervet)
Ovivac-P Plus
pasteurellosis
(lntervet)
+
Tetanus Toxoid
Concentrated
(Intervet)
Tribovax-T
(Schering-Plough)
18.2 Immunological preparations for cattle, sheep, and goats 459
PML Covexin 8 (Schering-Plough) UK
flocks where orf is not a problem, nior used to vaccinate
Injection, combined bacillary haermoglobinuria, black disease, blackleg,
ewes less than 6 to 8 weeks before lambing.
braxy, larmb dysentery, pulpy kidney, stmuck, and tetarus vaccine, inactivated,
Cl. chauvoei toxoid, Cl. haemolyticum toxoid, Cl. novyi toxoid, Cl. perfrin-
The vaccines are administered by scarification of the skin
gens lype B, C, and D toxoids, Cl. septicum toxoid, Cl. tetani toxoid, con-
using a special applicator. Vaccinated sheep develop mild
taining alum as aduvant,forcatte, she
lesions of orf at the site of vaccination. Pregnant and lactat-
Dose. Catle: by subcutaneous injection, 5 mL
Sheep: by subc uraneous injection,(2-8 weeks of age) 2 mL; (> 8 weeks of
ing ewes are vaccinated on the outside of one of the skin
age) initial dose 5 mL then 2 mL
folds found under the tail, unweaned lambs are vaccinated
on the skin between the top of the foreleg and the chest
POM Covexin 10 (Schering-Plough) U/K
Injetin,combined bacillaryhaeglobinuria,black disase,blacke
wall, other sheep are vaccinated on the inner aspect of the
braxy, enterotoxaermia, gangrenous rmastitis, lamb dysentery, pulpy kidney,
thigh.
struck, and tetanus vaccine, inactivated, Cl. chauvoei toxoid, Cl. haemolyti-
Sheep will shed highly infective live field virus and virus-
cum toxoid, Cl. novyi toxoid, Cl. perfringens Lypes A, B, C, and D toxoids,
infected scabs for 3 to 8 weeks after vaccination. Therefore
Cl. septicwm toxoid, Cl. sordell toxoid, Cl. teian toxoid, containing alurm as
adjuvant,for catle, sheep
during this period vaccinated animals should not come in
Dose. Cutle: by subcutaneous injection, 2 mL
contact with unvaccinated sheep and should not be allowed
Sheep: by subcutaneous injection, I mL
access to the lambing pens or pasture where ewes and their
lambs will subsequently be grazed.
PML Heptavac (Intervet) UK
Contagious pustular dermatitis is a zoonotic disease.
Injetion, cormbined black disease, blackleg, braxy, clostrial rmetritis, larmb
dysentery, pulpy kidney, struck, and tetanus vaccine, inactivated, Cl. chaα-
Therefore care should be taken when handling infected
voei cells and toxoid, Ci. novyi type B toxoid, Cl. perfringens type B, C, and
sheep or the vaccine.
D toxoids, Cl. septicum toxoid, Cl. tetani toxoid, containing alurminium
hydroxide as adjuvant, for sheep, pigs
Dose. Sheep: by subc utaneous injection, 2 rmL
UK
Pigs: by subc wtaneous injection, 5 mL
Indications. Vaccination
against contagious pustular
PML Heptavac-P Plus (Intervet) U/K
dermatitis
Injection, cormbined black disease, blackleg, braxy, clostrial rmetritis, larmb
 Contra-indications. Use on farms where the disease is not
dysentery, pasteurellosis, pulpy kidney, struck, and tetanus vaccine, inacti-
endemic; vaccination of ewes less than 6-8 weeks before
vated, Ci. chauvoei cells and toxoid, Cl.novyi type B toxoid, Cl. perfringens
 lambing or during lactation; see also notes at beginning of
Lypes B, C, and D toxoids, Cl. septicum toxoid, Cl. tetani toxoid, antigens of
chapter
P haemolytica serotypes A, T, containing alurniniurm hydroxide as adjuvant,
focsheep
 Side-effects. Warnings. See notes above and at beginning
Dose. Sheep: by subc utaneous injection, 2 rmL
of chapter
PML Lambivac (Intervet) UK
Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
   yos u d  q pos 
tion programmes
cine, inactivated, Cl. perfringens types B, C, and D toxoids, Cl. tetani toxoid,
containing alurminiu hydroxide as adjuvant, forcatle, sheep, goats, pigs
POM Scabivax (Schering-Plough) UK
Dose.Cattle,sheep,gots:by subetaneous injection,2mL
Liquid for scarifcation, contagious pusular dematitis vaccine, living, pre-
Pigs: by sube utaneous injection, 5 mL
pared from scab material frorm sheep infected with a selected strain of virus,
for sheep
PML Ovivac-P Plus (Intervet) UK
Dose. Sheep: by scarification, I application
Injetion, cormbined blackleg, braxy, pasteurellosis, pulpy kidney, and teta-
mus vaccine, inactivated, Cl. chauvoei cells and toxoid, Cl. perfringens Lype
POM Scabivax Forte (Schering-Plough) UK
D toxoid, Cl. septicum toxoid, Cl. tetani toxoid, antigens of P haemelytica
Liquid for scarijfication, contagious pushular dematitis vaccine, living, pre-
serotypes A, T, P rehalosi, containing alurminiurm hydroxide as adjuvant, for
pared from scab material frorm sheep infected with a selected strain of virus,
sheep
for sheep
Dose. Sheep: by subc utaneous injection, 2 mL
Dose. Sheep: by scarijfication, I application
PML Tribovax -T Cormbined Cattle Vaccine (Schering-Plough) UK
Injection, cormbined bacillary haermoglobinuria, black disease, blackleg,
18.2.5 Enteritis
braxy, and retanus vaccine, inactivated, Cl. chauvoei toxoid, Cl. haemolyi-
cum toxoid, Cl novyi toxoid, Cl septicum toxoid, Cl. tetani toxoid, contain-
  n    s  sg
ing alurm as adjuvant, for cattle
including bacteria, viruses, and parasites. Vaccines are
Dose. Catle: by subcutaneous injection, 4 mL
available for the prevention and treatment of enteritis
caused by Escherichia cofi, Saimonella,Pasteurella, coro-
18.2.4 Contagious pustular dermatitis
navirus, rotavirus, and by clostridial organisms (see section
Contagious pustular dermatitis, commonly known as orf or
18.2.3). Vaccines may contain either serotypes of a single
scabby mouth, is caused by a parapoxvirus and character-
bacterium or a combination of bacterial serotypes, viral
ised by scabby, pustular lesions mainly on the muzzle and
serotypes, or both. A solution of immunoglobulins against
lips of sheep and goats.
E. coli F5 K99 is available to supplement the immunity of
Sheep and lambs should be vaccinated 3 to 4 weeks before
calves under 12 hours of age (see section 18.2.17).
the expected period of disease risk. Lambs can be vacci-
nated from 1 to 2 days of age. Duration of immunity is
18.2.5.1 Bovine viral diarrhoea
about 6 months therefore revaccination should be given
18.2.5.2 Salmonella infection
every 5 to 12 months depending on the degree of challenge
18.2.5.3 Combinationimmunological
preparations
in the area. The vaccine should not be used on farms or in
for enteritis in cattle and sheep
460Vaccines and immunological preparations
18.2.5.1 Bovine viral diarrhoea
instituted, where possible, to prevent transfer of infection
Calves born to cows, that have become infected with bovine
from one group to another.
virus diarrhoea virus (BVDV) when pregnant, may have
congenital defects or tolerance to the virus. Immunotolerant
UK
calves are persistently infected, continually excrete the
 Indications. Vaccination agai nst salmonella infection
virus, and are therefore a source of infection, particularly to
Contra-indications. See notes at beginning of chapter
Warnings. See notes at beginning of chapter
pregnant cows.
 Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
Breeding cows are vaccinated not less than 7 days before
tion programmes
service and the dose is repeated after 3 weeks. Calves may
be vaccinated from 3.5 months of age or 5 months if likely
POM Bovivac S (Intervet) UK
to be seropositive. An annual booster is recommended.
Injection, Salmonella vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorn S. dublin and S.
typhirurium, containing aluminium hydroxide as adjuvant, for catte
WithdrawalPeriods.Cate: slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk with-
UK
drawal period nil
Indications. Vaccination against bovine viral diarrhoea
Dose. By subeutaneous injection.
Contra-indications. See notes at beginning of chapter
Adult catfle: 5 mL; calves: 2 mL
Side-effects. Transient pyrexia, transient reaction at injec-
tion site for 2-3 weeks
Warnings. See notes at beginning of chapter
Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
tion programmes
18.2.5.3 Combination immunological preparations
POM Bovidec (Novartis) UK
Injection, bovine viral diarrhoea virus, inactivated, prepared frorm non-
for enteritis in cattle and sheep
cytopathogenic strain of virus, containing Quil-A as adjuvant, for female
breeding cafle, calves
Combination vaccines for enteritis contain important anti-
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk with-
gens of E. coli, such as K99 or selected, inactivated sero-
drawal period nil
types. Vaccines also contain Saimonella spp., P. muftocida
Dose. Catfle: by subcutaneous injection, 4 mL
serotypes, coronavirus, or rotavirus. Initial vaccination of
POM Bovilis BVD (Intervet) UK
cattle and sheep may involve a course of 2 vaccine doses
Injection, bovine viral diarrhoea virus, inactivated, prepared frorn cytopatho-
given at an interval of 14 to 21 days. Previously unvacci-
genic BVD virus strain C86, containing alurminiurm salts as adjuvant, for
nated cows and ewes should be vaccinated, with the second
cows andheifersfrom8monthsofage
Withdrawal Periods. Catte slaughter withdrawal period nil,milk with-
dose administered about 3 weeks before calving or the
lambing season so that the colostrum will contain protective
drawal period nil
Dose. Catfle: by intramuscular injection, 2 mL
antibodies. Thereafter, pregnant animals may be given an
annual booster approximately 3 weeks before the expected
POM Rispoval 4 (Pfizer)
date of parturition or earlier for rotavirus infectior.
See sectiorn 18.2.2.5
UK
18.2.5.2 Salmonella infection
Indications. Prevention and treatment of enteritis
Salmonella vaccine may be used in the face of a disease
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See notes at
 beginning of chapter
outbreak and may contribute to reduction of Saimonella
contamination of the environment. Where diagnosis has
Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
been confirmed, all at risk adult cattle that are not showing
tion programmes
overt clinical signs of salmonellosis are vaccinated and the
POM Lactovac (Intervet) UK
vaccination repeated after 21 days. Pregnant cows may be
Injection, combined coronavirus, bovine rotavirus and E coli vaccine, inacti-
vaccinated; if not calved within 8 weeks of the second dose
vated, prepared frorm coronavirus strain 800, rotavirus strains 1005/78 and
of vaccine, a third dose should be administered at 3 to 4
Holland, E col K99 and F4 l antigens, containing alurminiu hydroxide and 
weeks before calving. Healthy calves may be vaccinated
Quil A as adjuvants, for catle
Withdrawal Periods. Catfe: slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk with-
from 3 weeks of age; two vaccinations are given at an inter-
!u poad em
val of 14 to 21 days.
Dose. Catfle: by intramuscular injection, 5 mL given during the later
All cattle should receive a booster vaccination at least 2
stages of pregraricy, repeat after 45 weeks, the second dose being given 23
weeks before calving. Annual vaccination 2-6 weeks before calving
weeks prior to a period of risk or at intervals of not more
than 12 months. Pregnant cattle should be vaccinated 3 to 4
POM Rotavec Corona (Schering-Plough) UK
weeks before calving.
Injection, combined bovine rotavius, coronavirs, and E. coli vaccine,inac-
tivated, prepared frorn bovine rotavirus strain UK Cormpton serotype G6 P5,
All stock showing overt clinical signs of salmonellosis
bovine coronavirus strain Mebus, E. coli F5 K99 antigens, containing a light
should receive appropriate treatment and be fully vacci-
mineral oil as adjuvant, for catle
nated once they have recovered. Any unvaccinated stock
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk with-
must be managed separately to vaccinated stock, with no
drawal period nil
Dose. Catfle: by intramscular injection, 2 rmL as a single dose berween 12
contact between the groups. Hygiene precautions must be
and 3 weeks before calving
18.2 Immunological preparations for cattle, sheep, and goats  461
POM Trivacton 6 (Merial)
UK
Injection, cormbined coronavirus, bovine rotavirus and E. coli vaccine, inacti-
Indications. Vaccination against footrot
vated, prepared frorm bovine coronavirus, bovine rotavirus , E coli K99, Y,
31A, and F4l antigens, containing aluminiurm hydroxide as adjuvant, for
Contra-indications. Vaccination of lambs under 2 to 4
catfle
weeks of age, pregnant ewes within 4 weeks of lambing
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk with-
Side-effects. Warnings. See notes above, see notes at
drawal period nil
 beginning of chapter
Dose. Catle: by subcutaneous injection, 5 rmL I-2 rmonths before calving,
repeat after 2-4 weeks and givern at least 2 weeks before calving. Arinual
vaccination 2 weeks before calving
tion programmes
18.2.6 Erysipelas
PML Footvax (Schering-Plough) UK
Injection, footrot vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorn 10 strains of Dichelo-
Infection with Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae (Ery. insidiosa)
bacter nodosus, containing a suitable oil as adjuvant, for sheep
occurs in lambs and in older sheep as a joint infection and
Contra-indications. Lactating dairy sheep
bacteraemia and arises, for example, after dipping in con-
Dose. Sheep: by subcuianeous injection,I mL
taminated baths. Sheep may be vaccinated to increase their
immurnity. Two doses are given at an interval of 3 weeks,
18.2.8 Leptospirosis
with the second dose administered 2 weeks before the
Leptospirosis in cattle can be caused by Leptospira interro-
expected period of risk. In pregnant ewes, the second dose
gans serovar hardjo (hardjoPrajitno) and Leptospira borg-
is gi ven 3 weeks before lambing.
 peterseni serovar hardjo (hardjo Bovis). The latter appears
See section 18.3.6 for erysipelas in pigs and section 18.6.12
to be the predominant strain in cattle. Infertility, abortion,
for erysipelas in turkeys.
and agalactia can result from infection. Infected cattle
excrete leptospirae in urine which spread to other cattle
UK
through the mouth, eye, and nose. Vaccination of the entire
Indications. Vaccination against erysipelas
herd may be necessary to control the disease.
Contra-indications.Side-effects.Warnings. See notes at
Leptospirosis is a zoonotic disease generally acquired
beginning of chapter
from cattle urine or placentas. Vaccination does not
 Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
decrease the need for precautions to reduce the risk of trans-
tion programmes
mission of leptospirosis from animals to humans.
A primary vaccination course of 2 doses is gi ven at an inter-
PML Eryvac (Intervet) UK
val of 4 to 6 weeks and given to calves more than 5 months
Injection, erysipelas vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorn Ery. rhusiopgthiae
serotype I strain P1 5/10, serotype 2 strains CN3342 and CN346l, containing
 of age. If calves are vaccinated before 5 months of age, a
alurminiurm hydroxide as adjuvant, for sheep, furkeys (see section 18.6.12)
further course should be given starting at that age. The
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil
course should be completed before the main season of
Dose. Sheep: by subc utaneous injection, 2 mL
transmission. A single annual booster injection is recom-
 mended at turnout to spring pasture.
Vaccinated cattle may be seropositive and therefore may be
18.2.7 Footrot
unacceptable for export to some countries.
overall foot care programme (see Chapter 15). Vaccines
may be used to aid prevention or treatment of footrot. Sheep
UK
do not mount an immune response to footrot; the vaccine
Indications. Vaccination against leptospirosis
elicits a high level of circulating antibody that lasts for
Contra-indications.Side-effects.Warnings. See notes at
about 4 months before waning. For prophylactic use, the
 beginning of chapter and notes above; vaccination within 2
timing of vaccination is important and should be carried out
weeks of service may reduce coniception rates
before the expected period of disease risk.
 Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
Available vaccines are prepared from Dichelobacter nodo-
tion programmes
sus (Bacteroides nodosus, Fusiformis nodosus). Two doses
may be given at an initerval of 4 to 8 weeks. Lambs may be
POM Leptavoid -H (Schering-Plough) UK
vaccinated at 4 weeks of age. Pregnant ewes should not be
Injection, leptospirosis vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorm L. interrogans
serovar hardjo, containing alum as adjuvant, for caffle
vaccinated 4 weeks before or after lambing. Booster doses
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter withdrawal period nil
can be given at 4 to 6 monthly intervals if required.
Dose. Catle: by subcutaneous injection, 2 rmL
A persistent reaction, lasting for several weeks, may occur
Note. Vaccine should be well shaken to resuspend precipitate
at the site of injection and may produce local pignent
POM Spirovac (Pfizer) UK
changes in the wool. Therefore vaccination should be
Injetion, leptospirosis vaccine, inactivated, prepared from L borgpetersenii
avoided within 6 to 8 weeks of shearing or 6 months before
serovar hardjo (hardjo Bovis), containing alurminiurm hydroxide as adjuvant,
sale or showing. In pedigree flocks, vaccination of the resi-
for catfle
Withdrawal Periods. Catfe: slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk with-
dent flock will reduce the incidence of disease and show
drawal period nil
anid sale animals can be treated by conventional methods.
Dose.Catle:by subcutaneous injection, 2 mL
 462Vaccines and immunological preparations
18.2.9 Louping ill
Transient bouts of coughing may occur 7 to 10 days after
Louping ill is caused by a flavivirus transmitted by the tick,
cipitated in animals with subclinical infectious pneumonia.
Lxodes ricinus. The disease is characterised by fever, inco-
ordination, paralysis, and convulsions.
UK
Initial vaccinations for cattle should be completed 2 weeks,
Indications. Vaccination against lungworm
and for sheep and goats 4 weeks, before exposure to tick-
Contra-indications. Vaccination with other live vaccines
infested pastures. In cattle, 2 vaccinations are given at an
14 days before or after vaccination against lungworm; use
interval of 3 weeks to 6 months. In sheep and goats, a single
of anthelmintics 8 weeks before first dose and for 14 days
dose, administered by subcutaneous injection on the chest,
after second dose of lungworm vaccine; see also niotes at
suffices. The vaccination course should be completed
beginning of chapter
before the last month of pregnancy for cows, ewes, and
Side-effects. Transient coughing
does being immunised for the first time. Colostral immunity
Warnings. The shelf life of vaccine is short; storage, if
transferred to lambs will give protection for 2 to 3 months.
required, should be at 2-6°℃
Vaccination gives good protection and therefore a booster
 Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
dose need only be given to cattle every 12 months and to
tion programmes
sheep and goats every 2 years.
POM Bovilis Huskvac (Intervet) UK
UK
Oral suspension, lungworm vaccine, living, prepared fom thid-stae D.
viviparus larvae, for calves 8 weeks of age or older
 Indications. Vaccination against louping ill 
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See notes at
Dose. Calves: by mouth, 25 mL
beginning of chapter
 Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
18.2.11 Mastitis
tion programmes
Coliform mastitis is caused by Escherichia cofi, Klebsiella
PML Louping-Il Vaccine BP (Vet) (Schering-Plough) UK
spp., and Enterobacter aerogenes. These pathogens are
fnjection, inactivated, prepared frorm virus grown on tissue culure, contain-
found in the environment. A vaccine is available to control
ing a suitable mineraloil as adjuvant, for cafle, sheep, goufs
clirnical coliform mastitis by induction of antibodies to E.
Dose. Cutle: by subcutaneous injection, 2 mL
cofi. Good management practices are essential for control
Sheep, gouts: by subewtaneous injetion, I mL
of mastitis in the herd (see chapter 11). Coliform mastitis is
responsible for the majority of post-calving toxic mastitis
Accidental self-injection with oil-based vaccines can
cases in dairy cows. This vaccine uses a core antigen and
cause severe pain and intense swelling, which may result
provides immunity against all coliforms. It does not reduce
in ischaemic necrosis and loss of a digit. Prompt medical
the new infection rate, but decreases the severity of infec-
 attention is essential
tion and in so doing increases the proportion of cows who
self cure. Consequently the incidence of clinical coliform
mastitis is reduced.
18.2.10 Lungworm
Heifers and cows are vaccinated 3 times: at drying-off, 28
days after drying-off, and 2 weeks post partum. Animals
Lungworm ("husk', bovine verminous pneumonia)
must be vaccinated at the end of each lactation.
invasion. Vaccines contain a suspension of live, attenuated,
UK
larvae of Dictyocauius
sviviparus. The larvae
induce
Indications. Vaccination agai nst coliform mastitis
immunity while migrating from the gastro-intestinal tract to
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See notes at
the lung where they are destroyed. The vaccination course,
beginning of chapter
given to cattle over 8 weeks of age, consists of 2 doses
 Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
given at an interval of approximately 4 weeks. Following
tion programmes
the second dose, full immunity will not develop until 2
POM Enviracor (Pfizer) UK
weeks after vaccination and cattle should be kept away
Injection, mastitis vaccine, inactivated, prepared from E. coli strain J-5, con-
from contaminated pasture for this period.
taining alurniniurm hydroxide and mineral oil as adjuvants, for cale
Where the risk of infection is present, calfhood vaccination
Withdrawal Periods. Catfle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, milk with-
is advisable. However to enhanice the immunity induced by
! pod emup
Dose. Catfle: by subcutaneous injection, 2 mL
the vaccine, subsequent exposure to a contaminated pasture
is essential. Immunity may be interfered with by the use of
18.2.12 0vine abortion
certain anthelmintic programmes, such as modified-release
Tuminal boluses or simultaneous vaccination with live vac-
Abortions, embryonic deaths, stillbirths, and the birth of
cines, which may prevent infection of pasture. Vaccinated
weak, non-viable lambs can be caused by many factors.
stock should not be placed with unvaccinated animals on
Most serious problems are usually the result of infection by
the same pasture.
the protozoan Toxoplasma gondii, a Pestivirus (causing bor-
18.2 Immunological preparations for cattle, sheep, and goats  463
der disease) and micro-organisms such as Chlamydophila
POM Enzovax (Intervet) U/K
spp.,Saimonella spp.,Listeria,or Campylobacter spp.Vac-
Injection, powder for reconstinution, chlarmydophiliosis vaccine, living, pre-
pared from Chiamydophila psitaci strain IB, forsheep
cines are available for chlamydophiliosis (enzootic ovine
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep : slaughter 7 days
abortion) and toxoplasmosis, which are the most common
Note. Reconstitute with Unisolve 
infectious causes of reproductive loss in sheep.
Dose. Sheep: by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection, 2 rmL
Vaccines should be administered well in advanice of mating
Inactivatedvaccines
so that a satisfactory immunity can develop before the ewes
become pregnant or encounter the infectious agent.
POM Mydiavac (Novartis) UK
Injetion, chlarydophiliosis vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorm Chlamydo-
philnnalilnt
18.2.12.1 Chlamydophiliosis
Withdrawal PeriodsSheep:slaughter withdawal period nil
18.2.12.2 Toxoplasmosis
Dose. Sheep: by intramuscular injection, I mL
18.2.12.1 Chlamydophiliosis
Chlamydophila psittaci (Chtamydophila abortus,Chtamy-
18.2.12.2 Toxoplasmosis
dia psittaci) infection is an important cause of abortion in
Toxoplasmosis is a protozoal infection caused by Toxo-
the last 2 to 3 weeks of gestation and of lambs born dead or
plasma gondii (see section 1.4). In sheep, toxoplasmosis
weak. Irrespective of the time of infection the bacterium
canl cause heavy losses as a result of early embryonic death,
remains quiescent until after mid-pregnancy, when it multi -
abortion, or the birth of weak, infected lambs. A vaccine
plies in the uterus causing abortion. Massive numbers of
containing living tachyzoites of Toxoplasma gondii is used
orgarisms are shed which can infect in-contact ewes and
 in breeding sheep. Ewe lambs intended for breeding may be
lambs. Carrier ewes may introduce infection to a flock with
vaccinated from 5 months of age, and shearlings and older
serious consequenices
ewes during the 4-month period before mating. Animals
Ewe lambs that are intended for breeding may be vacci-
should not be vaccinated less than 3 weeks before mating.
nated from 5 months of age. Shearlings and older ewes
Vaccination maybe repeated every 2years.
should be vaccinated during the 4-month period before mat-
Toxoplasmosis is a zoonotic disease and living tachy zoites
ing with a live vaccine or one month before tupping with ann
in the toxoplasmosis vaccine are capable of causing disease
inactivated vaccine. Vaccination of ewes already infected
in humans. Therefore, appropriate precautions must be
with Chlamydophila will not prevent abortion although vac-
taken, including measures against self-injection and preven-
cination of ewes incubating the disease may reduce the inci -
tion of exposure to the vaccine through the eyes or mouth.
dence of abortion. The duration of immunity persists for
The vaccine should be administered under the direct super-
approximately 2 years following the use of an inactivated
vision of a veterinarian.
vaccine and for approximately 4 years following the use of
a live vaccine.
UK
Enzootic ovine abortion is zoonotic. Pregnant womenl are
Indications. Vaccination against toxoplasmosis
advised to avoid helping to lamb or milk ewes and avoid
Contra-indications. Pregnant animals, vaccination less
contact with aborted or new born lambs or the placenta.
than 3 weeks before mating, vaccination with other live
They should seek medical advice if fever or flu-like symp-
vaccines within 4 weeks of vaccination against toxo-
plasmosis
Side-effects. See notes above and at beginning of chapter
UK
Warnings. Toxoplasmosis vaccine should not be handled
Indications. Vaccination against chlamy dophiliosis
by pregnant women, women of child-bearing age, and
Contra-indications. Pregnant animals, animals less than 4
weeks before mating (live vaccine), animals currently being
immunocompromised people; operators should wear suita-
ble protective clothing
treated with anti bacterials, in particular tetracyclines
 Dose. See preparation details, see motes above for vaccina-
Side-effects. See notes at beginning of chapter
tion programmes
Warnings. Chlamydophiliosis vaccine should not be hanl-
dled by pregnant women, women of child-bearing age, and
immunocompromised people; operators should wear gloves
Accidental self-injection, ingestion, intranasal or intra-
ocular administration of living tachyzoites may cause
when handling the vaccine
Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
disease in humans and prompt medical attention is
essential
tion programmes
Live vaccines
POM Toxovax (Intervet) UK
POM Cevac Chlamydophila (Ceva) UK
Injection, toxoplasrmosis vaccine, living, prepared frorm Toxoplasmg gondii
Injection, powder for reconstiution, chlarmydophiliosis vaccine, living, pre-
strainS48,containing living tachyzoites,forsheep more than3weeksofge
pared frorm Chlamydophila psittaci strain tsl B, for sheep
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter at least 6 weeks 
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter 7 days
Note. Recorstinute with Unisolve
Dose. Sheep: by subc utaneous or intramusc ular injection, 2 mL
Dose. Sheep: by intramusc ular injection, 2 mL of diluted vaccine
 464 Vaccines and immunological preparations
18.2.13 Ovine pasteurellosis
18.2.16 Tetanus
Pasteurella haemolytica and P. trehalosi may cause either a
See section 18.1.6
 septicaemic or pneumonic form of pasteurellosis.
Sheep that have not been previously vaccinated should be
18.2.17 Immunoglobulins for ruminants
Thereafter annual booster vaccinations may be given at
Immunoglobulins (or antibodies) combine with specific
intervals of not more than 12 months. In adult breeding
antigens. A preparation containing specific immunoglobu-
ewes, the annual vaccination is given 4 to 6 weeks before
lin G against E. cofi F5 (K99) is available. If given within
lambing. In areas of high pasteurellosis incidence, an addi-
the first 12 hours of life, the product will protect calves
tional vaccination may be given 2 to 3 weeks before the
against enterotoxicosis caused by E. cofi. Normal colostrum
period of risk.
should also be given. The preparation is produced from
colostrum collected from cows kept under field conditions.
UK
Consequently it may also contain anti bodies to other organ-
Indications. Vaccination against pasteurellosis
isms, including BVD virus. This should be borne in mind
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See notes at
when planning subsequent vaccination protocols.
beginining of chapter and notes above
Antitoxins for tetanus are available (see section 18.1.6),
 Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
tion programmes
UK
Indications. Prophylaxis of enterotoxicosis
PML Ovipast Plus (Irntervet) UK
Dose. See preparation details
Injection, pasteurellosis vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorm P haemolytica
arid P. trehalosis serotypes, containing alurminiurm hydroxide as adjuvant, for
sheep
POM Locatim Oral Solution ( Vetoquinol)
Withdrawal Periods. Sheep: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Oral solution, E.coli F5 (K99) specific irmrmunoglobulin G, for calves up to
Dose. Sheep: by subc utaneous injection, 2 rmL
I2hoursold
Withdrawal Periods. Calves: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Dose. Culves: by mouth or by addition to milk or milk replacer, 60 mL
withirn 12 hours (preferably 4 hours) of birth
18.2.14 Rabies
See section 18.4.8
18.3 Immunological preparations for
pigs
18.2.15 Ringworm
18.3.1
Anthrax
Ringworm in cattle is caused by Trichophyton verrucosum.
18.3.2
 Atrophic rhinitis
Initially the whole herd should be given 2 vaccinations at an
18.3.3
Aujeszky's disease
interval of 10 to 14 days. Thereafter, in a closed herd, young
18.3.4
Clostridial infections
calves are vaccinated at 2 weeks of age and again 10 to 14
18.3.5
Enteritis
days later. Any newly introduced animals should receive a
18.3.6
Erysipelas
full vaccination course.
18.3.7
Porcine parvovirus
Ringworm is a highly contagious skin disease. Treatment is
18.3.8
 Porcine pneumonia
discussed under sections 1.2 and 14.4.2. It is important to
18.3.9
Porcine reproductive and respiratory
syndrome
and equipment. Ringworm is a zoonotic disease.
18.3.10 Tetanus
18.3.11 Combination vaccines for pigs
UK
 Immunisation programmes used for pigs depend upon
Indications. Vaccination against ringworm
which diseases are liable to be encountered. Breeding pigs
Contra-indications. Vaccination during the last 2 months
 are generally vaccinated against erysipelas. Fattening pigs
of pregnancy
are vaccinated against erysipelas when necessary. Vaccina-
Side-effects. Warnings. Occasional small crust formation
tion against parvovirus, Aujeszky's disease (only Northern
at the site of injection. See notes at beginning of chapter and
Ireland), colibacillosis, and clostridial disease may be
notes above
required in some herds, the latter especially in pigs reared
Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
extensively. Subcutaneous and intramuscular injections are
tion programmes
 usually given behind the ear in adult pigs, and in the flank
POM Bovilis Ringvac (Intervet) UK
or axillary region in piglets.
Injection, powder for reconstiution, ringworm vaccine, living, prepared
from Trichophyton verrucosum strain LTF- 130, for cale
18.3.1 Anthrax
Withdrawal Periods. Cattle: slaughter withdrawal period nil, rmilk with-
drawal period nil
Dose. By intramuscuiar injection.
No proprietary vaccine is available against anthrax (see sec-
Catle: 4 mL; culves 2-16 weeks of age: 2 rmL
tion 18.2.1)
18.3 Immunological preparations for pigs 465
18.3.2 Atrophic rhinitis
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Dose. Pigs: by intramuscular injection, 2 mL
The aetiology of atrophic rhinitis is complex. Immurisation
Note. For use in Northem Ireland only
against the bacterial components of atrophic rhinitis syn-
drome is possible with inactivated vaccines prepared from
POM Suvaxyn Aujeszky 738 + o/w (Fort Dodge) UK
Injection, powder for reconstitution, Aujeszky's disease vaccine, living, pre-
cultures of Bordetella bronchiseptica or Pasteurella mulitoc-
pared from virus srain NIA,-738, containing a suitable oil as adjuvant, for
ida toxoid.
pigs from 10 weeks of age
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Sows or gilts are given a primary course of 2 doses at an
Dose. Pigs: by intramuscular injection, 2 rmL
interval of 6 weeks. A single booster injection during each
Note. For use in Northem Ireland only
loy uooid sa rssed spiaond lm Aoueuid junesgns
the piglets. The interval between booster vaccination and
18.3.4 Clostridial infections
farrowing should not be greater than 150 days. The opti-
Clostridial infections can cause enteritis, hepatitis, or teta-
mum time for revaccinatior is 6 to 2 weeks before farrow-
ing, although pigs may be vaccinated at service, pregnancy
nus in pigs. The most important infections are Cl. perfrin-
testing, or weaning to reduce handling, especially in out-
gens type C enteritis in piglets and Cl. novyi sudden death
door units.
in sows. The ability of vaccines to protect against the
recently discovered toxin of β2 Cl. perfringens type C is as
UK
yet uncertain.
Indications. Vaccination against atrophic rhinitis
Active immunity can be achieved by the injection of tox oid.
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See riotes at
Two doses are recommended at an interval of about 3
beginning of chapter; occasional temporary swelling at site
weeks. Vaccination of sows 6 weeks and 3 weeks before
of injection
farrowing provides passi ve protection to piglets through the
Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
colostrum. In subsequent pregnancies a single booster dose
tion programmes
should be given to sows 6 to 3 weeks before farrowing.
PML Porcilis AR-T (Intervet) UK
Injection, atrophic rhinitis vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorm B. bronch isep-
UK
tica, P mulioc ida toxoid, corn taining a suitable oil as adjuvant, for pigs
PML Gletvax 6 (Schering-Plough) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter withdrawal period ril
See section 18.3.5.2 for preparation details
Dose. Pigs: by intramusc ular injection, 2 mL
PML Heptavac (Intervet) UK
See section 18.2.3 for preparation details
18.3.3 Aujeszky's disease
PML Lambivac (Intervet) UK
Aujeszky s disease is caused by a herpesvirus, porcine her-
See section 18.2.3 for preparation details
pesvirus 1, and is characterised by respiratory, reproductive,
and CNS signs. In Britain, a slaughter and eradication pol-
18.3.5 Enteritis
icy is in operation for the control of Aujeszky's disease.
Live vaccines are available in Northern Ireland for adminis-
18.3.5.1 Escherichia coli infections
18.3.5.2 Combination preparations for enteritis
tration to healthy piglets. The first dose is given from 8
weeks of age and the second vaccination 3 to 4 weeks later.
Enteritis in neonatal and young pigs may be caused by bac-
In gilts, sows, and boars, a third dose is given 2 weeks
teria including E. coli, Satmonella spp., Cl. perfringens,
before service or at 6 months of age for boars. A single
booster dose should be given not less frequently than every
viruses, parasites, and influenced by inadequate housing or
6 months.
management procedures.
A scheme to eradicate Aujeszkys disease inn pigs in North-
ease status of the individual herd, farmers may decide
18.3.5.1 Escherichia coli infections
whether to control the disease by vaccination or to employ
Vaccines are available for the protection of piglets againist
 blood testing of breeding stock and demonstrate the herd
E. cofi infections, which contain selected serotypes or
free from the disease.
strains of the organism or important anti gens. Vaccines con-
tain toxoids, cellular antigens, or both. Parenteral adminis-
UK
tration is not recommended during the last 2 to 3 weeks of
Indications. Vaccination against Aujeszky's disease
gestation. Combination preparations are also available.
 Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. Not for use
Sows and gilts are vaccinated to provide passive immunity
in Britain (see above). See also notes at beginning of
for piglets via the colostrum.
chapter
Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
UK
tion programmes
Indications. Vaccination against E. cofi infection
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See notes at
POM Porcilis Begonia DF (Intervet) UK
Injection, powder for reconstitution, Aujeszky's disease vaccine, living, pre-
beginring of chapter and notes above
pared frorn virus strain Begonia, for pigs
Dose. See preparation details
466
5Vaccines and immunological preparations
POM Neocolipor (Merial) UK
Side-effects. Warnings. Transient increased body temper-
Injection, E coli vaccine, inactivated, prepared from E. coli strains express-
ature, reluctance to move; see notes at beginning of chapter
ing F4ab (K88ab), F4ac (K88ac), F4ad (K88ad), F5 (K99), F6 (987P), and
F41l adhesions, containing alurminium hydroxide as adjuvant, for pigs
Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter withdrawal period ril
tion programmes
Dose. Pigs: by intrausular injction, 2 mL 5-7 weeks before farrowing.
repeat 2 weeks before farrowing. Revaccinate 2 weeks before each farrowing
PML Erysorb Plus ( Vetoquinol) UK
Injetion, erysipelas vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorm Ery rhusiopathiae
PML Porcilis Porcol s (Intervet) UK
serotype 2 strains CN3342 and CN346l and serotype I strairn P15/10, cor-
Injection, E. coli vaccine, inactivated, E. coli LT toxoid and antigens K88ab,
taining aluminium hydroxide as adjuvant, for pigs more than & days ofage
K88ac, K99, 987P, containing a suitable oil as adjuvant, for pigs
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Dose. Pigs: by intramuscular injection, 2 rmL
Revaccinate every 6 months
PML Porcilis Ery (Intervet) UK
Injection, erysipelas vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorm Ery. rhusiopathiae
PML Suvaxyn E. Coli P4 (Fort Dodge) UK
strain M2 serotype 2, containing dl-alpha tocopherol as adjuvant, for pigs
Injection, E. coli vaccine, inactivated, prepared from E. coli antigens F4l,
more than6weeksof age
K88, K99, 987P, containing a suitable adjuvant, for pigs
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter withdrawal period nil 
Dose.Pigs: by inramuscular injection, 2 mL at 4 weeks and 2 weeks
Dose.Pigs: by intramuscular injection, 2 mL
before farrowing. Revaccinate 2 weeks before each farrowing
18.3.7 Porcine parvovirus
Accidenital self-injection with oil-based vaccines can
Porcine parvovirus (PPV) infection is characterised by still-
cause severe pain and intense swelling, which may result
births, mummified fetuses, embryonic death, and infertility
in ischaemic necrosis and loss of a digit. Prompt medical
(SMEDI syndrome). Vaccines are used in breeding pigs to
 attention is essential
protect embryos and fetuses against the disease. Vaccina-
tion is usually delayed until about 6 months of age because
 maternally-deri ved antibodies interfere with the immune
18.3.5.2 Combination preparations for enteritis
response. Gilts more than 6 months of age are given a pri-
mary vaccination 2 to 8weeks before the first service.A
UK
subsequent dose is administered after farrowing and at least
PML Gletvax 6 (Schering-Plough) UK
 2 weeks before the next service. Sows are also vaccinated
Injection, cormbined E coli and Cl. perfringens vaccine, inactivated, E. coli
annually at least 2 weeks before service. Boars are vacci-
antigens K88ab, K88ac, K99, 987P, Cl. perfringens Lypes B, C, and D tox-
nated at 6 to 7 months of age and revaccinated 6 months
oid, containing aluminium hydroxide as adjuvant, for pigs
later. Booster doses are given annually thereafter.
Dose. Pigs: by subcutaneous or intramusc ular injection, 5 mL at service or
up to 6 weeks before farrowing, repeat dose 2 weeks before farrowing.
Revaccinate 2 weeks before each farrowing
UK
PML Colisorb (Intervet) UK
Indications. Vaccination
againist
porcine
parvovirus
See section I 8.3.ll for preparation details
infection
Contra-indications.Side-effects.Warnings. See notes at
18.3.6 Erysipelas
beginning of chapter
 Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
In pigs, erysipelas is characterised by acute septicaemia,
tion programmes
endocarditis, or chronic arthritis. The disease is caused by
Erysipelothrixrhusiopathiae andErysipelothrixtonsil
POM Suvaxyn Parvo (Fort Dodge) UK
larum. Vaccination consists of a course of 2 doses given at
Injection, porcine parvovirus vaccine, inactivated, prepared from virus
an interval of 2 to 4 weeks. Revaccination is usually neces-
grown on porcine tissue culure, containing a suitable adjuvant, for pigs from
6months ofage
sary every 6 to 12 months.
Dose.Pigs: by intramuscuiar injection, 2 rL
Piglets from non-immune sows may be vaccinated at
approximately 7 days of age and the dose repeated 2 to 3
18.3.8 Porcine pneumonia
weeks later. Piglets from immune sows may be vaccinated
at 6 or 8 weeks of age with the dose repeated after 2 weeks.
Many large pig herds encounter the problem of pneumonia.
Depending on the vaccine used, pregnant sows and gilts are
Primary viral infections can be complicated by secondary
vaccinated 6 and 2 or 3 weeks before farrowing and boost-
bacterial or mycoplasmal infections resulting in severe
ers administered 3 weeks before each farrowing. For vac-
pneumonia. Vaccines against mycoplasma and respiratory
cines that are contra-indicated for use in pregnant animals,
bacteria are available which, combined with therapeutic and
sows are revacci nated each lactation.
 management procedures, can be used to combat disease.
UK
18.3.8.1 Enzootic pneumonia
Indications. Vaccination against erysipelas
18.3.8.2 Pasteurellosis
 Contra-indications. Pregnant animals; see notes at begin-
18.3.8.3 Pleuropneumonia
ming of chapter and notes above
18.3.8.4 Glasser's disease
18.3 Immunological preparations for pigs 467
18.3.8.1 Enzootic pneumonia
in breathing, exhibit a frothy tracheal exudate and fever, and
Vaccination helps prevent respiratory disease associated
may die.
with Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae infection (mycoplasma-
induced respiratory disease, MIRD).
18.3.8.3 Pleuropneumonia
Piglets may be vaccinated from 5 days to 10 weeks of age,
Porcine pleuropneumonia is caused by Actinobacilfus pleu-
depending on the vaccine used. In general, vaccination con-
ropneumoniae. The acute disease is characterised by severe
sists of a course of 2 doses given at an interval of 2 to 4
dyspnoea, fever, and death; sporadic coughing is seen in
weeks. Animals of more than one week of age at the time of
animals with chronic pleuropneumonia. Poor ventilation
first vaccination may already have pulmonary lesions due to
and overcrowding may exacerbate the condition.
Mycoplasma infection.
UK
18.3.8.4 Glasser's disease
Indications. Vaccination against enzootic pneumonia
Glisser's disease is caused by Haemophilus parasuis infec-
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See notes at
tion and can affect non-immune pigs of all ages. It is most
beginning of chapter; transient increased respiratory rate,
common in pigs of 3 to 6 weeks of age but can affect gilts
hyperthermia
when being transported or animals recently introduced to
 Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
infected herds.
tion programmes
The disease is characterised by sudden death, high fever,
POM Hyoresp (Merial) UK
arthritis, or meningitis. Septicaemic lesions are found at
Injection, enzootic pneurmonia vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorm Myco-
post mortum in acutely infected animals and these may be
plasmg hyopneumoniae, containing aluminiurm hydroxide as adjuvant, for
so severe as to be confused with swine fever. In most cases,
pigs more than5 days of age
the lesions are those of pneumonia and fibrinous pleurisy
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Dose. Pigs: by intramuscular injection, 2 rmL, repeat after 3-4 weeks for
and pericarditis, which progress to cause a fibrous pericar-
arnirmals less tharn I0 weeks of age
ditis and perihepatitis that persist until slaughter. The per-
sistent fibrous lesions result in chronic cardiac failure in
POM Ingelvac M Hyo (Boehringer Ingelheirm) UK
Injection, enzootic pneurmonia vaccine, inactivated, prepared from Myco-
some animals and also remain until slaughter, causing eco-
plasma hyopneumoniae strain J, containing montanide ISA 708 as adjuvant,
nomic losses.
focpigsfrom3weeksofage
Pigs may be vaccinated from 5 weeks of age. The vaccine is
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter withdrawal period nil
repeated after an interval of 2 weeks. In addition to vaccina-
Contra-indications. Pregr ant or lactating anirmals
Dose. Pigs: by intramusc ular injection, 2 rmL as a single dose
tion, management factors and reduction of stress play a role
in the control of the disease.
POM M + PAC (Schering-Plough) UK
Injection, enzootic pneurmonia vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorm Myco-
plasma hyopneumoniae, containing a suitable oil as adjuvant, forpigs from 7
UK
daysofuge
Indications.Vaccination against Glasser s disease
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. Pregnant
Or
Contra-indications. Pregrant or lactating anirm als
lactating animals; see notes at beginning of chapter
Dose. Pigs: by intramusc ular injection, I rmL, repeat after 2-4 weeks
Side-effects. Warnings. See notes at beginining of chapter;
POM Stellamune Mycoplasma (Pfizer) UK
transient
hyperthermia, reduced activity, depression,
Injection, enzootic pneurmonia vaccine, inactivated, prepared from Myco-
vomiting
plasma hyopne wmoniae, containing a suitable oil as adjuvant, for pigs
Dose. Pigs: by intramuscular injection, 2 mL,repeat after 2-4 weeks
 Dose. See preparation details
POM Stellamune Once (Pfizer) U/K
POM Porcilis Glasser (Intervet) UK
Injection, enzootic pneurmonia vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorm Myco-
Injtin,lrsdiaccinctiadadfmHm
plasma hyopneumoniae, containing armphigen as adjuvant, for pigs from 3
parasuis serorype 5 strain 4800, for pigs from 5 weeks of age
weeksofuge
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Contra-indications. Pregnant or lactating anirmals
Dose. Pigs: by intramuscular injection, 2 mL
Dose. Pigs: by intramuscular injection, 2 mL as a single dose
POM Suvaxyn M.hyo (Fort Dodge) UK
18.3.9 Porcine reproductive and respiratory
Injection, enzootic pneurmonia vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorm Myco-
syndrome
plasma hyopneumoniae, containing a suitable adjuvant, for growing pigs
from I week of age
Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndome (PRRS)
Contra-indications.Pregnant animals
virus causes abortions, stillbirths, and weak newborn piglets
Dose. Pigs: by intramusc ular injection, 2 rmL, repeat after 2 weeks
ing on the vaccine used, sows and gilts are vaccinated or
18.3.8.2 Pasteurellosis
weaners and fattening pigs are vaccinated. Vaccination is
Pneumonia with pleurisy caused by Pasteurefla spp. can
not recommended on PRRS virus-free sites and must only
occur as a complication of chronic mycoplasmal pneumonia
be used where prevalence of PRRS has been established.
Vaccine virus may incidentally spread to in-contact pigs for
monia in younger pigs. Affected pigs have great diffculty
up to 5 weeks post vaccinatiorl.
468
3Vaccines and immunological preparations
Sows and gilts are vaccinated twice at an interval of 4
POM Suvaxyn M hyo - Parasuis (Fort Dodge) UK
weeks and given 3 weeks before mating. Thereafter females
Injection, cormbined en zootic pneurmonia and Glassers disease vaccine, inac-
are vaccinated at 60 to 70 days of pregnancy starting from
tivated, prepared from Mycopiasma hyopneumoniae, Haemophilus parasuis
serotypes 4 and 5, for growing pigs from one week of age
 the first pregnancy following the primary course.
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter withdrawal period nil 
Weaners and fattening pigs are vaccinated once using Porci-
Side-effects. Mild transient erytherma at the injection site, tran sient hyper-
lis PRRS (Intervet). This vaccine should not be used in in-
 thermia, lethargy, and malaise may follow vaccination
contact breeding animals including boars, or pregnant or
Contra-indications. Pregnant anirmals 
Dose. Pigs: by intramuscuiar injection, 2 mL at I-10 weeks of age,repeat
lactating sows. Strict hygiene precautions should be main-
after 2-3 weeks and at least 3 weeks before ex pected risk period
tained to ensure the virus is not transferred to breeding
boars anid sows.
POM Suvaxyn Parvo/E (Intervet) UK
Injectin,combnedysipelas and porcine avvius vacci,acid
prepared from Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae strain B7, porcine parvovirus
UK
strain S-80, containing a suitable oil as adjuvant, for gits from 5 months of
Indications. See preparation details
uge,sows
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See riotes at
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter withdrawal period nil
beginning of chapter
Contra-indications. Pregnant anirmals; vaccination less than 3 weeks
 Dose. See preparation details
before mating
Dose. Pigs: by subcutaneous injection, 2 rmL, repeat after 3-4 weeks. Both
POM Ingelvac PRRS KV (Boehringer Ingelheim) UK
vaccinations should be administered before rmating with the second given not
earlier tharn 4 weeks before rmating. Revaccinate during each lactatiorn 3-4
Injection, PRRS vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorm virnus strain P120, con-
taining a suitable oil as adjuvant, for sows and gilts
weeks before rmating
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Dose. Pigs: by intramuscular injection, 2 mL
POM Porcilis PRRS (Intervet) UK
Injection, PRRS virus vaccine, living, prepared frorm PRRS virus strain DV,
containing a suitable adjuvant, for pigs from 6 weeks of age
18.4 Immunological preparations for
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter withdrawal period nil
dogs
Contra-indications. Pregnant and lactating anirmals
Side effects. Tran sient lying down, dynpnoea, hyperthermia
Dose. Pigs: by intramusc ular injection, 2 rmL
18.4.1
Canine coronavirus
18.4.2
Canine distemper
POM Progressis (Merial) U/K
18.4.3
 Canine herpesvirus
Injection, PRRS vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorn virus, containing a suit-
able oil as adjuvant, for so ws and gilts
18.4.4
Canine parvovirus
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter withdrawal period nil
18.4.5
Infectious canine hepatitis
Dose. Pigs: by intramuscuiar injection, 2 mL
18.4.6
Infectious tracheobronchitis
18.4.7
Leptospirosis
18.4.8
Rabies
18.3.10 Tetanus
18.4.9
Tetanus
18.4.10 Combination vaccines for dogs
See section 18.1.6
18.4.11
1 Immunoglobulins for dogs
Many factors may affect fixed canine vaccination pro-
18.3.11 Combination vaccines for pigs
grammes such as the animals age, health, and maturity, the
presence of maternally-derived antibodies, the antigenic
UK
mass of the vaccine used, and the presenice of infection in
Indications. See preparation details
the environment. It is now considered better to devise
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See riotes at
schedules appropriate to individual circumstances. This
beginning of chapter and preparation details
should be taken into account when interpreting the guide-
 Dose. See preparation details
lines in the text below, and the manufacturers
PML Colisorb (Intervet) UK
recommendations.
Injection, cormbined E. coli and erysipelas vaccine, inactivated, cells of E.
Debate continues about possible side-effects of canine vac-
p d86 66 8 se agos o  ugo od yo sos 
cines. A link between vaccination and prevalence of auto-
labile toxin B fragment, and cells of Ery. rhusiopathiae serotypes l and 2,
containing alurmirium hydroxide as adjuvant, for pigs
immune haemolytic anaemia and immune-mediated throm-
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter withdrawal period nil
bocytopenia has been suggested but is unproven. The cur-
Dose. Pigs: by subcuianeous injection, 2 rmL at 6 and 3 weeks before far-
rent recomnendations are that booster vaccinations
rowing. Revaccinate 3 weeks before each farrowing
should be given in accordance with manufacturer's
POM Porcilis Ery + Parvo (Intervet) UK
instructions.
Injetion, combined erysipelas and porcine parvovirus vaccine, inactivated,
The National Greyhound Racing Club require that racing
prepared frorn Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae strain M2 serotype 2, porcine
greyhounds are vaccinated against distemper, infectious
parvovirus strain 014, containing a suitable adjuvant, for pigs
Withdrawal Periods. Pigs: slaughter withdrawal period nil
canine hepatitis, leptospirosis, and parvovirus (see Prescrib-
Dose. Pigs: by intramuscular injection, 2 mL at 2 weeks before first rmating
ing for arimals used in competitions).
18.4 Immunological preparations for dogs 469
18.4.1 Canine coronavirus
18.4.3 Canine herpesvirus
Canine coronavirus infection is associated with infection of
Canine herpesvirus infection is associated with clinical dis-
the lining cells of the intestinal villi. Damage to these cells
and resultant inflammation can lead to lack of absorption
disease or as one of the components of fading puppy syri-
from the intestinal tract and diarrhoea. Dogs of any age can
drome. The virus requires a lower body temperature to rep-
be infected and the virus can also infect pigs and cats.
licate and therefore severe disease is only seen in puppies
Vaccines for canine coronavirus are available in combina-
less than 2 to 3 weeks of age. As with other herpesvirus
tion with other canine vaccines (see section 18.4. 10).
infections, once infected, animals remain latent carriers and
can start to shed virus again following episodes of stress.
The transmission of the virus is often from bitches to pup-
pies either at birth or in the first few days of life. In some
adult dogs, the virus can be associated with genital lesions.
18.4.2 Canine distemper
 Protection is afforded to puppies by vaccination of bitches
Canine distemper virus (CDV) causes a highly contagious
while pregnant. Bitches are vaccinated either during oestrus
disease of dogs and other carnivores, which is characterised
or 7 to 10 days after the presumed date of mating and again
1 to 2 weeks before the expected date of whelping. This
by respiratory, gastro-intestinal and, occasionally, nervous
vaccination programme is carried out during each
signs. Respiratory signs alone may occur and distemper
virus can be involved in infectious tracheobronchitis (see
pregnancy.
section 18.4.6)
UK
The presence of maternally-derived antibody in puppies
Indications.Vaccinationagainist canine
will interfere with successful immunisation. Generally,
herpesvirus
infection
maternally-derived antibody will have declined to non-
interfering levels by 12 weeks of age, although some indi-
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See notes at
viduals will have lost this immunity by 8 to 9 weeks of age.
beginning of chapter
 Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
Therefore, when there is low risk of exposure, with puppies
tion programmes
in isolation, one vaccination at 10 to 12 weeks of age should
provide sufficient protection. An additional later vaccina-
POM Eurican Herpes 20s (Merial) UK
tion may be necessary for puppies born to bitches that expe-
Injetion, canine herpesvirus vaccine, inactivated, contains canine herpesvi-
rienced an active infection or had been vaccinated just
rus strain F205 gB glycoprotein antigens, for dogs
before pregnancy If young puppies are at risk, earlier vacci-
Dose. Dogs: by sube utaneous injection, I mL
nation schedules should be used. Accordingly, an initial
dose may be givenn at 6 to 8 weeks of age, and repeated at 10
18.4.4 Canine parvovirus
to 12 weeks, depending on the vaccine. Some authorities
Canine parvovirus (CPV) infection is an enteric disease that
advise routine vaccination at 8 and 10 or 12 weeks in all
first appeared in the canine population in 1978. The main
cases in order to reduce the immumity gap.
target sites for multiplication of virus are the lymphatic tis-
Where high and unavoidable levels of challenge virus are
sues and intestinal epithelium, and, in neonatal puppies, the
likely, such as in a pet shop or stray dogs' home, active
myocardium. Myocarditis is rare because most bitches are
immunity should be induced in puppies as early as possible.
now immune, puppies being protected by maternally-
Some canine distemper vaccines can overcome low to mod-
derived antibody. In older dogs, disease signs may vary
from subclinical infection to severe haemorrhagic gastro-
per vaccine may be used from 6 weeks, but puppies should
enteritis.
be vaccinated again at 10 to 12 weeks of age, depending on
CPV is closely related to feline panleucopenia virus (FPV)
the vaccine.
and, initially, FPV vaccines were used to protect dogs.
An initial booster vaccination should be given at one year of
However, these have riow been superseded by homologous
age and theoretically distemper titres should last for several
CPV vaccines, which generally induce a longer-lasting and
years. Recommendations for revaccination for complete
more consistent response.
protection vary from 1 to 3 years.
Most problems with CPV vacciniation have arisen because
Non-domestic carnivore species that are susceptible to
of the high level of challenge virus in the environment, and
canine distemper include foxes, mink, ferrets, and exotic
 zoo species. In general, clinical signs resemble those of dis-
 interfere with vaccination but not protect against infection.
temper in domestic dogs. Information from manufacturers
Puppies may become susceptible before they can respond to
should be sought before using vaccines in these species
vaccination. In addition, the duration of maternally-derived
because vaccination may cause disease. Quarantine meas-
antibodies to CPV may be quite variable and sometimes
ures, good hygiene, and good management are also impor-
long-lasting, ranging from 4 to 20 weeks, depending on the
tant in a control programme.
level of immunity in the dam.
Vaccines for canine distemper are available in combination
The duration of maternally-derived antibody in puppies
with other canine vaccines (see section 18.4. 10)
may be predicted from the bitchs titre and a known anti-
470Vaccines and immunological preparations
body half-life of approximately 9 days. However, where 
 recovered animals, the virus persists in the kidney and may
practicable, each puppy s antibody level should be assessed  be shed in the urine for at least 6 months.
individually to determine the optimum age for vaccination  In the UK, CAV 1 is also regarded as a possible cause of
between puppies within a litter. Alternatively, puppies may
 closely related CAV 2, which does not cause ICH, is also
be vaccinated at 2 to 4 week intervals from 6 to 12 or 18
involved in the aetiology of infectious tracheobronchitis.
weeks of age, the precise timing depending on when the
 Originally, modified live CAV 1 vaccines were used to conl-
puppy is presented, the exposure risk, and the vaccine used.
trol ICH, but in a small percentage of dogs the vaccines
Annual booster vaccination is advised. Immunity following
 induced ocular lesions similar to those seen in the natural
modified live vaccine administration may be of longer dura-
disease. Since dogs vaccinated with CAV 2 become
tion, and some manufacturers recommend revaccination
immune to both CAV 1 and CAV 2 infection, and CAV 2
every 2 or 3 years.
vaccines have the advantages that they do not induce blue
CPV is extremely resistant in the enivironment. Adequate
eye', or give rise to possible viral persistence with lesions in
disinfection procedures, in addition to vaccination, are
the kidney, and viral excretion in the urine, CAV 2 has
essential if a clinical case occurs.
replaced CAV 1 in canine adenovirus vaccines.
Vaccination may be caried out from 6 to 8 weeks of age,
UK
but a second dose should always be given at 10 or 12 weeks
Indications. Vaccination against canine parvovirus (CPV)
of age, depending on the vaccine. In general, maternally-
infection
derived antibody appears to be less of a problem with ICH
Contra-indications. Live vaccines should not be used in
vaccination in comparison with other major canine viral
pregriant animals, see notes at beginning of chapter
infectionis. Since the disease has been well controlled by
Side-effects. Warnings. See notes at beginning of chapter
vaccination, there is little challenge virus in the environ-
Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
ment, and the virus-host immunity balance is generally
tion programmes
stable.
Immunity following live virus vaccination probably lasts
POM Eurican P(Merial) UK
several years, but booster vaccination every 1 to 3 years is
Injection, powder for reconstiution, CPV vaccine, living, prepared frorm
virus strain CPU C780916, for dogs
recommended. Inactivated vaccines are also available,
Note. May be recor stituted with Eurican L
which may be given to pregnant animals. The immunity
induced is not so long-lasting and annual boosters are
Dose. Dogs: by subc wtaneous or intramuscular injection, I dose
required. Vaccines for infectious canine hepatitis are availa-
POM Nobivac Parvo-C (Intervet) UK
ble in combination with other canine vaccines (see section
Injection, powder for reconstinution, CPV vaccine, living, prepared frorm
vius grownncel-ine tissuecuure, fodogsfromweekfge
18.4.10).
Note. May be recon stituted with Nobivac Lepto
Dose. Dogs: by subc uianeous injection, I dose
18.4.6 Infectious tracheobronchitis
POM Quantum Dog CPV (Schering-Plough) UK
A number of agents are involved in canine infectious tra-
Injetin, C vaccine, living,prpared fro vius, fdgs
cheobronchitis, also known as the kennel cough syndrome.
Dose. Dogs: by subcutaneous injection, I dose
Although several viruses are implicated in the aetiology, the
major cause appears to be Bordetella bronchiseptica, hence
POM Vanguard CPV (Pfizer) UK
Injection, CPV vaccine, living, prepared from vinus grown on NL-DK-
the alternative name of bordetellosis. The bacteria appear to
established canine celline, for dogs
attach specifically to cilia of the trachea and bronchi, and
Dose. Dogs: by subcutaneous injection, I mL
persist in the dog several months after infection. However,
coughing occurs predominantly only in the first week or
18.4.5 Infectious canine hepatitis
two after infectiorn, when bacterial growth is greatest.
Viruses such as CDV (see section 18.4.2), canine adenovi-
Infectious canine hepatitis (ICH) is caused by canine adeno-
rus types 1 and 2 (CAV 1 and CAV 2), canine parainfluenza
virus type 1 (CAV 1). The virus has a predilection for
(PI) virus, and canine herpesvirus may also be involved in
hepatic cells, vascular endothelium, and lymphoid tissue.
 Disease signs may vary from inapparent to a severe form
the aetiology of the disease. Some of these agents only
cause very mild disease and the characteristic syndrome
characterised by depression, anorexia, thirst, abdominal
seen is often a result of combined viral and bacterial infec-
pain, and vomiting. In some cases, sudden death may occur,
tion. CAV 1 is also involved in infectious canine hepatitis
 especially in young puppies, and the virus may be involved
(see section 18.4.5). Combination (see section 18.4.10) and
 in the fading puppy' syndrome.
individual vaccines are available against several of these
Tranisient corneal opacity or “blue eye' may occur in some
viruses.
dogs 1 to 3 weeks after acute ICH infection and may be the
only clinical sign observed if acute infection is asympto-
18.4.6.1 Bordetella bronchiseptica
matic. This is due to virus-antibody complexes and gener-
18.4.6.2 Parainfluenza
ally heals spontaneously, although complications and,
18.4.6.3 Combination preparations for infectious
occasionally, blindness may result in some cases. In many
tracheobronchitis
18.4 Immunological preparations for dogs 471
18.4.6.1 Bordetella bronchiseptica
18.4.6.3 Combination preparations for infectious
Originally, systemic vaccination by injection against B.
tracheobronchitis
bronchiseptica was found not to be consistently satisfac-
A combined vaccine is available that affords protection
tory, and adverse reactions at the injection site were com-
about 72 hours after vaccination. Puppies may be vacci-
mon. Intranasal vaccines are reasonably effective, with few
nated from 3 weeks of age. Clinical signs of upper respira-
side-effects, although transient coughing may occur a few
tory tract disease may sometimes be seen post vaccination.
 If signs persist, the animal should be treated with appropri-
local immunity, which is not interfered with by maternally-
ate antibacterials.
derived antibody. Therefore, puppies over 2 weeks of age
may be vaccinated. Immunity takes 5 days to develop and
UK
thus dogs should be isolated during this period. Revaccina-
Indications. Vaccination against infectious tracheobron-
tion every 6 to 10 months is recommended, depending on
chitis
potential exposure. Pregnant animals and dogs under treat-
Contra-indications. Concurrent treatment with antibacteri-
ment with antibacterials active against B. bronchiseptica
als, see notes at beginning of chapter
should not be vaccinated.
Side-effects. Warnings. See notes at beginining of chapter;
mild transient respiratory signs after vaccination
UK
Dose. Dogs: (3 weeks of age or more) by intranasal instil-
Indications. Vaccination against infectious tracheobron-
lation, 0.4 mL into 1 nostril; see notes above for vaccination
chitis
programmes
Contra-indications. Pregnant animals, conicurrent treat-
POM Nobivac KC (Intervet) UK
ment with antibacterials active against B. bronchiseptica,
Intranasal solution, powder for reconstinution, cormbined living infectious
see notes at beginning of chapter
tracheobronchitis vaccine, prepared from 8. bronchiseptica strain B-C2, PI
Side-effects. Warnings. See notes at beginning of chapter;
strain Cornellfordogsmore than3 weeksofuge
transient coughing after vaccination
Dose. Dogs: (2 weeks of age or more) by intranasal instil-
lation, 1 mL into 1 nostril or 0.5 mL into each nostril; see
18.4.7 Leptospirosis
notes above for vaccination programmes
Leptospirosis in dogs is predominantly caused by the 2
POM Intrac (Schering-Plough) UK
serotypes of Leptospira interrogans: L. interrogans serovar
Intrangsa? solut ion, powder for recon stitution, infectious tracheobronchitis
vaccine, living, prepared frorn B. bronchiseptica strain S 55, for dogs more
canicola (primary host, the dog) or L. interrogans serovar
than2weeksof age
icterohaemorrhagiae (primary host, the rat). The disease is
characterised by acute haemorrhage, hepatitis and jaundice
18.4.6.2 Parainfluenza
usually caused by L. interrogans serovar icterohaemor-
rhagiae infection, or acute interstitial nephritis (mainly L.
Canine parainfluenza (Pl) virus is a major cause of infec-
interrogans serovar canicola infection). Often infection is
tious tracheobronchitis in North America and elsewhere and
subc linical. Leptospirosis is a zoonotic disease.
is considered to play some part in the aetiology of the dis-
Maternally-derived immunity to Leptospira interrogans is
ease in the UK.
not a problem in puppies with respect to vaccination,
because it is absent by 8 weeks of age. For primary vaccina-
tions, given at an interval of 3 to 4 weeks, with the second
tion, 2 doses are given at an interval of 2 to 6 weeks, start-
dose administered at 10 weeks of age or over. If required,
ing at about 8 weeks of age. Annual booster vaccination is
yaccination may be provided from 6 weeks of age. Annual
recommended.
booster vaccination is recommended as is revaccination
Although the organism may be spread by direct contact
before periods of risk such as kennelling, showing, or con-
with an infected animal, the main infection source is from
tact with other dogs of unknown vaccination history.
urine or urine-contaminated water or soil. Recovered ani-
mals may shed leptospirae into the urine for some time.
UK
Thus, while vaccination is generally effective in controlling
Indications. Vaccination against parainfluenza
the disease, if a clinical case occurs, antibacterial therapy
Contra-indications. Pregnant animals, see notes at begirl-
should be administered. Antibacterials recommended for
ning of chapter
Side-effects. Warnings. See notes at beginning of chapter
Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
injection 24 mg/kg twice daily, or oral ampicillin or amoxi-
tion programmes
cillin (see section 1. 1. 1.3) 10 mg/kg twice daily. Once renal
POM Nobivac Pi (Intervet) UK
weeks to eliminate infection from the kidneys; streptomycin
injection, powder for reconstitution, PI vaccine, living, prepared from PI
(see section 1.1.3) 15 mg/kg administered by intramuscular
virus strain Comell, for dogs from 6 weeks of age
Note. May be recon stitited with Nobivac Lepto, Nobivac Rabies
injection twice daily is used. In addition to therapy, contam-
Dose. Dogs: by subcutaneous injection, I dose
inated premises should be disinfected.
 472Vaccines and immunological preparations
UK
If rabies is suspected, the animal must be held in isolation
Indications. Vaccination against leptospirosis
on the premises where seen and the local DvO notified
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See notes at
immediately. Anyone coming in contact with the animal
beginning of chapter
should change contaminated clothing and undertake imme-
Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
diate personal disinfection. No other animals should enter
tion programmes
the premises and the names and addresses of any possible
contacts (for example, in the surgery waiting room) should
POM Canigen L (Virbac) UK
be recorded.
Injection, leptospirosis vaccine, inactivated, prepared from L. interrogans
serotypes, for dlogs
Most wild animals entering the UK (other than from the
Dose. Dogs: by subcuianeous injection,I mL
Republic of Ireland) can do so only under licenice and
POM Eurican L (Merial) UK
should, in general, undergo 6 months' quarantine. Quaran-
Injection, leptospirosis vaccine, inactivated, prepaed from L interrogans
tine will only apply to domestic animals such as horses, cat-
serotypes, for dogs
tle, sheep, pigs, if there is suspicion of contact with infected
Dose. Dogs: by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection, I dose
animals (but note that other disease-based restrictions may
POM Kavak L (Fort Dodge) UK
apply to these species). Under the Pets Travel Scheme
Injection, leptospirosis vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorm L. interrogans
(PETS) implemented in the UK, pet dogs and cats may be
serotypes, for dogs more than 6 weeks of uge
brought into the UK through certain routes without being
Dose. Dogs: by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection, I dose
placed under quarantine if certain requirements are met.
POM Nobivac Lepto 2 (Intervet) UK
The animal must be identified by microchip and vaccinated
Injection, leptospirosis vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorm L. interrogans
against rabies. Supplies of rabies vaccine in the UK are row
serotypes canicola strain Ca-12-000 and icterohaemorrhagiae strain 820K,
foc dogs more than 8 weeks of age
freely available to veterinarians. A blood sample should be
Dose. Dogs: by subcutaneous injection, I mL
taken from the animal and tested for rabies antibodies at anl
POM Vanguard Lepto ci (Pfizer) UK
authorised laboratory 30 days or more after vaccination. If a
Injection, leptospirosis vaccine, inactivated, prepared from L. interrogans
protective antibody titre of at least 0.5 units/mL is demon-
serotypes, for dogs
strated, the owner should then obtain a Pet Health Certifi-
Dose. Dogs: by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection, I rmL
cate from a LVI in the UK. Dogs and cats may not enter the
UK under PETS until 6 months have passed from the date
18.4.8 Rabies
that the blood sample was taken that led to a successful test
Rabies is a neurotropic disease capable of affecting virtu-
result. Manufacturers have indicated that some animals, in
ally all mammals. It exists worldwide, except in places such
particular young animals, may not show this level of anti-
body titre after one vaccination; veterinarians may consider
as the UK and Australasia where it has been excluded by
rigorous quarantine. In countries where the disease
giving two vaccinations to such animals.
is
enzootic, a number of species including dogs, jackals,
Further information on requirements for PETS may be
obtained from:
racoons, and bats are possible reservoir hosts. In Europe,
the red fox is the most important species involved, and may
 PETS Helpline
serve as a source of infection for other animals, including
telephone:0870 241 1710
facsimile: 020 7904 6206
dogs and cats, and thence to humans.
The incubation period for rabies in dogs and cats varies
e-mail: pets.helpline @ defra.gsi. gov.uk
from about 9 days to more than a year, but clinical signs
DEFRA website
www.defra.gov.uk/animalh/quarantine
usually develop within 2 to 4 weeks of exposure. The clini-
cal signs of classical rabies develop in 3 phases. The pro-
 In addition to vaccination, 24 to 48 hours before returning
dromal phase lasts 2 to 3 days and is characterised by subtle
to the UK, the animal must be treated for ticks using an
changes in temperament, mild pyrexia, slow corneal and
approved acaricide, and the tapeworm Echinococcus multi-
palpebral reflexes, and signs of irritation at the site of virus
focularis using praziquantel, and details recorded in the EU
entry. During the furious phase the animal becomes increas-
pet passport.
ingly irritable and aggressive, develops progressive disori-
 Dogs and cats may be vaccinated from 4 weeks of age, in
entation and muscular incoordination, and may have
which case a further dose should be giveni at 11 or 12 weeks
A inq os io p e ioy sise Ains sseud s 'siis
of age (vaccination from 3 months of age is required for
continue for up to one week, after which the animal enters
PETS). Dogs anid cats more than 11 or 12 weeks of age need
the dumb or paralytic phase and develops progressive and
only be given one dose of vaccine. Booster vaccinations
terminal paralysis. Laryngeal and pharyngeal paralysis lead
should be administered every 2 years in dogs and cats.
to drooling and frothing at the mouth and respiratory paral-
However health regulations and requirements in certain
 ysis causes coma and death after 2 to 4 days. Atypical or
countries specifiy that dogs and cats must be revaccinated
chronic rabies is believed to be rare, although more com-
annually.
mon than previously thought. In atypical rabies the prodro-
Horses and cattle are usually vaccinated at 6 months of age.
mal or furious phases can last for several months during
which virus may be shed in saliva; some dogs and cats are
revaccinated at 6 months of age. An annual booster vacci-
believed to have clinically recovered.
nation is required to maintain immunity in horses and cattle.
18.4 Immunological preparations for dogs 473
UK
POM Eurican DHPPi (Merial) U/K
Indications. Vaccination against rabies
Injection, powder for reconstitution, cormbined CDV, CPV, and ICH vaccine,
Contra-indications. Pregnant animals, see notes at begin-
Note. May be reconstituted with Eurican L
ning of chapter
Dose. Dogs: by subc utaneous injection, I dose
Side-effects. Warnings. See notes at beginning of chapter
Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
POM Kavak Galaxy (Fort Dodge) UK
fnjection, 2 fractions for reconstinution, Kavak DA,PiP69 and Kavak L, for
tion programmes
dogs
Dose. Dogs: by sube utaneous injection, I cormbined dose 
POM Nobivac Rabies (Intervet) UK
Injection, rabies vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorn virus grown on cell-line 
POM Nobivac DHPPi (Irntervet) UK
tissue culture, containing aluminiurn phosphate as adjuvant, for horses, caf-
Injection, powder for recon stinution, cormbined CDV, CPV, ICH, and PI vac-
fle, dogs, cats
cine,living, prepaed from CDV, CPV, CAV 2, and PI vius, all grown on
Dose.Horses, cattle:by intramuscular injection,I mL
cell-line tissue culture, for dogs from 6 weeks of age
Dogs,cats:by subcutaneousorinramusularinjection,l mL
Mote. May be reconstituted with Nobivac Lepto
Dose. Dogs: by subc wtaneous injection, I dose
POM Quantum Rabies (Schering-Plough) U/K
Injection, rabies vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorm Flury LEP virus grown
POM Nobivac PPi (Irntervet) U/K
on cell-line tissue culture, containing alurminium hydroxide as adjuvant, for 
Injection, powder for reconstitution, combined CPV and PI vaccine, living,
dogs, cats
prepared from virmuses grown on cell-line tissue culture, for dogs from 6
Dose. Dogs, cats: by subc wtaneous injection, I mL
weeksofage
Note. May be reconstituted with Nobivac Lepto
POM Rabisin (Merial) UK
Dose. Dogs: by subeutaneous injection, I dose
Injection, rabies vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorm vinus strain GS 57 Wis-
tar, containing alurniniurm hydroxide as adjuvant, for dogs, cats
POM Quantum Dog 7 (Schering-Plough) UK
Dose. Dogs: by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection, I mL
Injection, 2 fractions for reconstiution, cormbined living CDV, CPV, ICH,
Cats: by subcutaneous injection, I mL
and PI and inactivated leptospirosis vaccine, prepared frorm CDV, CPV, CAV
2, PI virus type 2, and L. interrogans serotypes, for dogs
Dose. Dogs: by subc wtaneous injection, I cormbined dose
18.4.9 Tetanus
POMQuantum Dog CPV.L(Schering-Plough) UK
See section 18.1.6
Injection, combined living CPV and inactivated leptospirosis vaccine, pre-
pared from CPV and L. interrogans serotypes, for dogs
Dose. Dogs: by subewtaneous injection, I dose
POM Vanguard 7 (Pfizer) UK
fnjection, 2 fractions for reconstiution, living CDV, CPV, ICH, and PI, and
18.4.10 Combination vaccines for dogs
inactivated leptospirosis vaccine, prepared frorm CDV strain Sryder-Hill,
CPV strain NL-35-D, CAV 2 strain CAV-2 Manhattan, PI virus NL-CPI-5
An alphabetical list of combination vaccines for dogs and
strain, grown on arn established canine celline, L. nte rrogans serotypes, for
the infections to which they confer immunity is given in
dogs
Dose. Dogs: by subc utaneous injection, I cormbined dose
Table18.2
 (azd) TAd enua Od
Injectin,cominedlivingCV and iactivatedltospiois accine,
UK
ssssd
Indications. See individual vaccines
Dose. Dogs: by subc utaneous injection, I mL
Contra-indications. Live vaccines should not be used in
pregnant animals, see notes at beginning of chapter
18.4.11 Immunoglobulins for dogs
Side-effects. Warnings. See notes at beginning of chapter
Endotoxin-specific immunoglobulins act by neutralising
 Dose. See preparation details, see manufacturer's details
for vaccination programmes
endotoxin produced by a wide variety of Gram-negative
bacteria including Satmonela spp., E. cofi serotypes, Serra-
POM Canigen DHPPi (Virbac) UK
tia marcescens,Shigella flexneri,Klebsiella pneumoniae,
Injection, powder for reconstiution, cormbined CDV, CPV, ICH, and PI vac-
and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. These bacteria may contrib-
cine, living, prepared frorm CDV, CPV, CAV 2, and PI virus type 2, all growr
on cell-line tissue culure, for dogs
ute to a number of diseases such as gastro-enteritis, septic
Mote. May be recorn stituted with Canigen L
metritis, septicaemia, or shock. Other appropriate treatment
Dose. Dogs: by subcuianeous injection, I dose
such as antibacterials, NSAIDs, and fluid therapy may be
 necessary to counteract the clinical signs of tox aemia.
POM Canigen PPi (Virbac) UK
Injection, powder for recon stitution, cormbined CPV and PI vaccine, living,
UK
prepared frorm viruses grown or cell-line tissue culture, for dogs
Indications. Treatment and prophylaxis of endotox aemia
Note. May be recon stituted with Canigen L
Dose. Dogs: by subcutaneous injection, I dose
Contra-indications. Pregnant animals
Warnings. Safety in pregnant animals has not been
POM Duramune DAPPi + LC (Fort Dodge) UK
established
Injection, powder for reconstinution, corm bined CDV, CPV, ICH, PI, canine 
Dose. See preparation details
coronavirus, and leptospirosis vaccine, prepared from live CDV strain
Onderstepoort, CPV strain SAH, CAV 2 strain V I97, and PI vinus strain FDL
POM Stegantox 10 (Schering-Plough) UK
and inactivated canine coronavirus strain TN449, L interrogans serotypes,
Injection, powder for reconstitution, 2 mg endotoxin-specific irmmunoglobu-
for dogs
lin G/mL, for dogs
Contra-indications. Pregnant or lacting anirmals
Dose. Dogs: by slow intravenous injection, 500 micrograms/kg (0.5 rmg/
Dose. Dogs: by subcuianeous injection, I dose
kg). May be repeated after 24 hours
474  Vaccines and immunological preparations
Table 18.2 Combination vaccines for dogs available in the UK
Canine
Infectious
distemper
Canine
Canine
canine
virus
parvovirus
coronavirus
hepatitis
Leptospirosis
Parainfluenza
Canigen PPi (Virbac)
★
Canigen DHPPi (Virbac)
+
Duramune DAPPi + LC
(Fort Dodge)
+
+
Eurican DHPPi
+
+
+
(Merial)
Kavak Galaxy
(Fort Dodge)
Nobivac DHPPi
(lntervet)
Nobivac PPi(lntervet)
Quantum Dog 7
(Schering-Plough)
Quantum Dog CPV-L
(Schering-Plough)
+
Vanguard 7 (Pfizer)
+
+
Vanguard CPV-L
(Pfizer)
+
18.5 Immunological preparations for cats  475
18.5 Immunological preparations for
The vaccine (available in combination vaccines, see section
18.5.7) protects reasonably well against clinical disease, but
cats
not infection. Specific antibacterials may also be used to
18.5.1 Bordetella bronchiseptica
control both disease and infection. Therapy should include
18.5.2 Chlamydophiliosis
both topical and systemic treatment. Antibacterial eye oint-
18.5.3 Feline leukaemia
ment (see section 12.2.1) containing chlortetracycline
18.5.4 Feline panleucopenia
18.5.5 Feline viral respiratory disease complex
oral doxycycline (see section 1.1.2) 5 mg/kg+ one to two
18.5.6 Rabies
times daily. Treatment should be continued for 4 weeks or
18.5.7 Combination vaccines for cats
until 2 weeks after cessation of clinical signs. All cats in the
group, whether clinically affected or not, should be treated.
Immunisation programmes for cats may depend on whether
the animal is kept in a multi-cat household or cattery. Post
18.5.3 Feline leukaemia
vaccination reactions have been reported in cats vaccinated
Infection with feline leukaemia virus (FeLV) may lead to
with inactivated vaccines. Clinical signs are notably marked
several outcomes, depending mainly on the age of the cat
lethargy of short duration. Vaccine induced fibrosarcomata
when it is infected and the dose of infecting virus. Follow-
at the site of injection have been reported in North America
ing exposure, some cats undergo transient infection and
and their incidence in the UK, although low, is increasing.
recover; some cats appear to recover but remain latenitly
infected, although most of these eventually eliminate the
18.5.1 Bordetella bronchiseptica
infection; and some cats develop persistent viraemia. Young
kittens are most susceptible to the virus, and only a minority
Bordetella bronchiseptica infection is rnow known to be
of cats exposed at over 16 weeks of age will develop per-
involved in upper respiratory tract syndrome in cats. The
disease is similar to that caused by the respiratory viruses
sistent infection. Most persistently viraeimic cats die within
2 to 3 years of exposure as a result of FeLV-related diseases
and although some cats cough, the main clinical signs are
sneezing and nasal discharge. In some cats, especially
such as lymphosarcoma, myeloid leukaemia, anaemia, and
immunosuppression.
may be increased mortality.
Cats may be vaccinated from 9 weeks of age with a second
dose given 2 to 4 weeks later, depending on the vaccine.
 Pregnant queens may or may not be vaccinated, depending
ticα is available. This vaccine can be used from 4 weeks of
age. Animals are vaccinated at least 72 hours before the
on the vaccine. Annual booster vaccination is recom-
expected period of risk and annual booster vaccination is
mended where cats are exposed to infection; if not exposed
recommended. The vaccine is particularly useful for cats in
Or exposure is predicted in previously unexposed cats, ear-
lier revaccination may be required, although there are no
 at risk groups such as rescue shelters, multi-cat households,
guidelines for this situation.
Or cats in contact with dogs with respiratory disease.
Vaccination will not induce protection in cats that are
UK
already viraemic. Therefore, it is sometimes recommended
Indications. Vaccination against Bordetella bronchisep-
that all cats should be tested for the presence of viraemia
before vaccination. This may be done using the widely
tica infection
Contra-indications. See notes at beginning of chapter;
available FeLV ELISA test, by virus isolation, or both. The
pregnant or lactating animals
vaccines do not interfere with methods for detecting the
Side-effects. See notes at beginming of chapter; transient
presence of p27 circulating viral anti gen.
mild sneezing, coughing, nasal and ocular discharge follow-
There has beenn considerable debate concerning the relative
ing vaccination. Antibacterial treatment may be required in
efficacy of the FeLV vaccines available in the UK. The pub-
more severely affected animals
lished evidence is largely contradictory with vaccines that
Dose. Cats: by intranasal instillation, O.2 mL into 1 nos-
tril, see notes above for vaccination programmes
other trials
Traditionally, control of FeLV infection in colonies has
POM Nobivac BB (Intervet) UK
 been successfully achieved by the testing and removal of
Intranasgl solution, Bordetella bronchiseptica vaccine, live, prepared frorm
B.bronchisepica strain -C2,foccats more thanImonthofge
persistently infected cats. Vaccination can be a useful
adjunct to control, but it is unwise to discontinue testing and
rely on vaccination alone, because a small proportion of
18.5.2 Chlamydophiliosis
infection. Such cats may develop FeLV-related disease and
bacterial infection caused by Chlamydophila felis (Chlamy-
will also be infectious to others.
dia psittaci), which results in severe and sometimes persist-
ent conjunctivitis, and marked ocular discharge. Other
UK
effects may include mild sneezing and nasal discharge.
Indications. Vaccination against feline leukaemia
476Vaccines and immunological preparations
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. Occasional
ural infection or disease. Young kittens from 6 to 8 weeks of
transient malaise and rarely pyrexia, inappetance, vomiting
age onwards may be vaccinated, but require additional
post vaccination; see notes above, see notes at beginining of
 doses at 2 to 4 week intervals, ensuring the last dose is at 12
chapter
weeks or later.
 Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
Antibody titres, following vaccination with live vaccine,
tion programmes
have been shown to persist for at least 4 years, and for over
one year following administration of inactivated vaccines.
POM Eurifel FeLV (Merial) U/K
Injection, feline leukaermia vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorm FeLV recorm-
An initial booster vaccination at one year of age is, how-
binant canarypox vinus (vCP97) CCTD50, for cats from 8 weeks of age
ever, advisable, with revaccination every 1 to 2 years there-
Contra-indications. Pregnant or lactating anirm als
Dose. Cats: by subcutaneous injection, I dose
boosting is unlikely.
POM Fevaxyn FeLV (Fort Dodge) UK
Following an outbreak of FPL, vaccination should be
Injection, feline leukaermia vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorn whole virus
accompanied by thorough cleansing of premises with an
subgroups A and B, containing a suitable adjuvant, for cafs 
appropriate disinfectant because the virus is extremely sta-
Contra-indications. Pregnant anirmals
ble and high levels of virus may accumulate in the
Dose. Cats: by subcutaneous injection, I mL
environment.
POM Leucogen (Virbac) U/K
Injction, feline leukaemia vaccine, inactivated, p45 FeLV envelope antigen,
containing aluminium hydroxide and a saponin derivative as adjuvants, for
UK
cats
Indications. Vaccination against feline panleucopenia
Contra-indications. Pregnant anirmals
(FPL)
Dose. Cats: by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection, I mL
Contra-indications. Live vaccines should not be used in
POM Leukocell 2 (Pfizer) UK
pregnant animals, see notes at beginning of chapter
Injetn,flieleukaemiavaccie,nactivatedlycoproteingnv
Side-effects. Warnings. See notes above, see notes at
antigen, viral antigens subtypes A, B, C, and FOCMA, containing a suitable 
beginning of chapter
adjuvant, for cafs
Dose. Cats: by subcutaneous injection, I mL
Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
tion programmes
POM Nobivac FeLV (Intervet) UK
Injection, feline leukaermia vaccine, inactivated, p45 FeLV envelope antigen,
POM Eurifel P (Merial) UK
containing alurminiurm hydroxide and a saponin derivative as adjuvants, for
cats
Injection, powder for reconstitution, FPL vaccine, living, prepared frorn
Contra-indications. Pregnant anirmals
vinus, for cats from 8 weeks of age
Dose. Cats: by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection, I mL
Note. May be reconstituted with Eurifel RC
Contra-indications. Pregnant anirmals
POM Quantum Cat FeLV (Schering-Plough) UK
Dose. Cats: by subcutaneous injection, I dose
injection,feline leukaemia vaccine,inactivated, viral antigens subtypes A, B,
C, and FOCMA, containing a suitable adjuvant, for cats
Dose. Cats: by subcutaneous injection, I dose
18.5.5 Feline viral respiratory disease
complex
18.5.4 Feline panleucopenia
Feline herpesvirus 1 (Feline viral rhinotracheitis, FVR) and
Feline panleucopenia (FPL), or feline infectious enteritis, is
feline calicivirus are the two main causes of upper respira-
a highly infectious disease of domestic cats, other Felidae,
tory-tract disease in cats and account for the majority of
and certain other species such as mink. There is only one
cases. Bacteria, particularly Bordetefla bronchiseptica, may
serotype of the virus and it is highly immunogenic. When
also be implicated in feline respiratory disease complex.
vaccination has been carried out, it has been ex tremely suc-
 Feline calicivirus infection is generally milder than feline
cessful in controlling the disease.
herpesvirus and is often associated with mouth ulceration
Live vaccines are available. Live vaccines probably induce
and also a febrile lameness syndrome. There is only one
a more rapid onset of protection than inactivated vaccines,
strain of feline herpesvirus, but there are a number of strains
and are more likely to be able to overcome low levels of
of feline calicivirus. Most are closely related antigenically,
maternally-derived antibody. Live vaccines are contra-indi-
and strains selected for vaccine use have broad anti genicity.
cated during pregnancy because FPL virus may cross the
Nevertheless, current vaccines do not protect against some
placenta and induce cerebellar hypoplasia in kittens.
strains and widespread use of particular vaccines may
Vaccination (especially with live vaccines) should not be
encourage selection for these.
performed in unhealthy animals because wild-type FPL
In previously healthy, unexposed cats, vaccines induce rea-
virus is immunosuppressive.
sonable protection against clinical disease, although not
In most kittens, maternally-derived antibody has declined to
necessarily against infection. Both respiratory viruses are
non-interfering levels by 12 weeks of age. Therefore, from
extremely widespread and clinically healthy carriers are
this age onwards, for most vaccines, one dose is usually suf-
common. Therefore, management measures, such as early
ficient. An additional dose should be given at 16 weeks of
weaning and isolation, are often necessary to ensure that
age when maternally-derived antibody is likely to be unusu-
kittens are not already incubating the disease, or are already
ally high, for ex ample if the queen has been exposed to nat-
carriers at the time of vaccination.
18.5 Immunological preparations for cats  477
Live virus vaccines (see section 18.5.7 for combination vac-
18.5.7 Combination vaccines for cats
cines) are normally quite safe but apparent vaccine reac-
An alphabetical list of combination vaccines for cats and
tions do sometimes occur. These may take the form of mild
the infections to which they confer immunity is given in
respiratory and oral signs, or sometimes lameness, some 6
Table 18.3.
to 7 days after vaccination. Most cases are probably caused
UK
due to vaccine virus itself. There are occasional reports that
 Indications. See individual preparations
if a vaccine is inadvertently given via the oral or respiratory
Contra-indications. Live vaccines should not be used in
route, for example, if a cat licks the injection site or an aero-
 pregnant animals; see notes at beginning of chapter
sol is made with the syringe, then clinical signs may
Side-effects. Warnings. Transient malaise, pyrexia; see
develop. Also, under some circumstances, live vaccines
notes at beginning of chapter
may occasionally generalise. Therefore, in completely
Dose. See preparation details, see manufacturers details
for vaccination programmes
preferable. It is inadvisable to vaccinate pregnant queens
with live vaccines.
 POM Eurifel RCPFeLV (Merial) UK
njetion, powder for reconstitution, cormbined feline calicivirus, FPL, feline
In genieral, kittens should be vaccinated initially at 9 weeks
herpesvius, and FeLV vaccine, inactivated, prepared from feline calicivirus
of age, when in most cases maternally-derived antibody has
FCV255, FPL virus PLI IV, feline herpesvirus C27, FeLV recormbinant
 declined to non-interfering levels. A second dose is given 2
canarypox virus, for cafs
to 4 weeks later. However, the duratior of maternally-
Contra-indications. Pregnant or lactating anirmals
Dose.Cats:by subcutaneous injection,I dose
derived antibody can be quite variable; for feline herpesvi-
rus, antibody may last for 2 to 10 weeks and for feline cali-
POM Feligen RCP (Virbac) UK
civirus, antibody may persist for up to 10 to 14 weeks. Little
Injection, powder for reconstitution, cormbined feline calicivirus, FPL, and
feline herpesvirus vaccine, living, prepared from FPL virus DSV strain
work has been done in relating maternally-deri ved antibody
LR72, felineherpesvius strainF2,felinecalicivirus strainF9, for cats
levels to either protection or interference with vaccinatiorl.
Dose. Cats: by subcutaneous injection, I dose
Annual revaccination is usually recommended, but in some
POM Felocell CVR (Pfizer) UK
high-risk situations, vaccination every 6 months may be
fnjection, powder for reconstinution, cormbined feline calicivirus, FPL, and
advisable.
feline herpesvirus vaccine, living, prepared frorm FPL virus strain 'Srow
Leopard', feline herpesvirus strain FVRrm, feline calicivirus strain F9, grown
UK
on NLFK-I feline kidney celline, for cats
Dose. Cats: by sube wtaneous or intramusc ular injection, I mL
Indications. Vaccination against feline calicivirus infection
and feline herpesvirus infection
POM Fevaxyn iCHPChlam (Fort Dodge) UK
Contra-indications. Pregnant animals, see notes at beginl-
fnjection, powder for reconstitution, corm bined feline calicivirus, FPL, feline
herpesvirus, and feline chlamydiosis vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorm
ning of chapter
vinuses and Chlarydophila felis, for cats
Side-effects. Warnings. See notes above, see notes at
Dose. Cats:by subcutaneous injection, I dose
 beginning of chapter
Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
POM Fevaxyn Pentofel (Fort Dodge) UK
njection,powder for reconstition, combined feline calicivius,PL,fele
tion programmes
herpesvinus, FeLV, and feline chlarmydiosis vaccine, inactivated, prepared
from feline calicivirus strain 255, FPL stcain CU4, feline herpesvirus strair
POM Eurifel RC (Merial) UK
605, FeLV strain 6lE, and Chlamydophila felis, containing suitable adju-
injection, combined feline calicivirus and feline herpesvirus vaccine, inacti-
vants, for cafs
vated, containing a suitable oil as adjuvant, for cafs 
Dose. Cats: by subcutaneous injection, I dose
Note. May be recon stituted with Feliniffa P
POM Katavac CHP (Fort Dodge) UK
Dose. Cats: by subcutaneous injection, I dose
njection, powder for reconstiution, combined feline calicivirus, FPL, and
felinehepesvius vacine,living, pared from viuses grow o an ea
lished feline cell line, for cafs
Accidental self-injection with oil-based vaccines can
Dose. Cats: by subcwtaneous injection, I dose
in ischaemic necrosis and loss of a digit. Prompt medical
POM Katavac Eelipse (Fort Dodge) UK
attention is essential
Injection, 2 fractions for reconstiution, Katavac CHP and Fevaxyn FeLV,
for cats
Dose. Cats: by subcwtaneous injection, I cormbined dose
POM Nobivac Tricat (Intervet) UK
njection, powder for reconstiution, cormbined feline calicivirus,FPL, and
feline herpesvirus vaccine, living, prepared from viruses grown on cellline
tissue culture, for cafs
Dose. Cats: by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection, I dose
POM Quantum Cat CVRP (Schering-Plough) UK
fnjection, powder for reconstinution, cormbined feline calicivirus, FPL, and
18.5.6 Rabies
feline hepesvirus vaccine, living, prepared from viruses grown on a continu-
ous cell line, for cafs
See section 18.4.8
Dose. Cats: by subcwtaneous or intramuscular injection, I dose
478Vaccines and immunological preparations
Table 18.3 Combination vaccines for cats available in the UK
Fetine
Fetine caticivirus and
Chtamydiosis
Fetine leukaemia
panteucopenia
fetine herpesvirus
Eurifel RCPFeLV
(Merial)
Feligen RCP
+
(Virbac)
Felocell CVR
+
(Pfizer)
Fevaxyn iCHPChlam
(Fort Dodge)
Fevaxyn Pentofel
+
+
(Fort Dodge)
Katavac CHP
+
+
(Fort Dodge)
Katavac Eclipse
(Fort Dodge)
Nobivac Tricat
(Intervet)
Quantum Cat CVRP
+
+
(Schering-Plough)
18.6 Immunological preparations for birds 479
18.6 Immunological preparations for
is reconnected, overcompensation of water intake, wet
birds
droppings, and deterioration in litter conditions. Drinking
water dispensers ('drinkers) should be checked to ensure
18.6.1
Avian coccidiosis
that there are sufficient available to allow birds to drink the
18.6.2
Avian encephalomyelitis
water containing the vaccine over 1 to 2 hours without
18.6.3
 Avian infectious bronchitis
undue competition. Vaccine can be administered in the
18.6.4
Avian infectious bursal disease
water via in-line dose medicators, the header tank, or by
18.6.5
Avian pneumovirus
filling of individual drinking water dispensers. This should
18.6.6
Avian reovirus
be done with the least disturbance to the birds, although
18.6.7
Chicken anaemia virus
birds should remain active and be encouraged to drink nor-
18.6.8
Duck virus enteritis
mally by simultaneously offering food as a stimulus to
Duck virus hepatitis
drink. The amount of water required varies with the age of
18.6.9
18.6.10 Duck septicaemia
bird, the type of bird, and the vaccine used. The manufac-
18.6.11 Egg drop syndrome 1976
turer's directions should be followed.
18.6.12 Erysipelas
Live virus vaccines may be administered by spraying. The
18.6.13 Fowl pox
vaccine is diluted using freshly boiled and cooled purified
18.6.14 Infectious laryngotracheitis
water, and sprayed over the birds using machinery adjusted
18.6.15 Marek's disease
to suit the particular environment and requirements. Spray
18.6.16 Mycoplasmosis
volumes and equipment should be regularly checked and
18.6.17 Newcastle disease
monitored. Operators should wear suitable face masks.
18.6.18 Ornithobacter rhinotrachealae
 Specialist advice should be sought from the vaccine manu-
18.6.19 Paramyxovirus 3 disease
facturer as to the most appropriate equipment to deliver
18.6.20 Pasteurellosis
 consistent and appropriate droplet size for the vaccine being
18.6.21 Pigeon paramyxovirus
18.6.22 Pigeon paratyphoid
administered.
18.6.23 Pigeon pox
Coarse spraying in the hatchery is suitable for day-old
18.6.24 Post-natal colibacillosis
chicks. For use on chicks, the amount of vaccine sufficient
18.6.25 Salmonellosis
for 1000 birds is diluted in 300 to 400 mL of water at 25°C.
18.6.26 Swollen head syndrome
18.6.27 Turkey haemorrhagic enteritis
When spraying, it is important that all the birds are wetted
18.6.28 Turkey rhinotracheitis
and then allowed to stand in their boxes to dry, avoiding
18.6.29 Combination vaccines for birds
draughts. If birds are kept under bright conditions during
this time it will encourage them to ^drink' vaccine from the
backs of others by pecking, which can improve uptake.
Vaccine administration. Vaccines may be administered to
birds in the drinking water, by spraying, by beak dipping,
Older birds are penned together in groups in dim light to
by intranasal or intra-ocular instillation, by injection of
keep them quiet and reduce movement. The vaccine is
birds, by injection of eggs during incubation, or by wing-
'ssp oi ed sn s'I 0i I o aei e pe sem ut penn
The birds are sprayed from a distance of approximately 45
stab or footstab techniques. To avoid any adverse interac-
tions vaccines should not be administered within 14 days of
centimetres from above ensuring that droplets fall on them.
a previous vaccination, unless administered simultaneously
The light intensity should be returned to normal to allow
birds to 'drink' droplets from the bodies of other birds.
as a recognised combination vaccine, and in any case only
in accordance with the marufacturer's recommendations.
Thereafter the birds are allowed to dry for 10 to 15 minutes,
When administering live virus vaccines in the drinking
avoiding direct heat because this may affect the efficacy of
water it is often advisable to add skimmed milk powder, at
the vaccine. Certain approved dyes can be used to help
the rate of 2 to 4 g/litre, to the water that is to be used to
demonstrate the efficiency of the technique.
dilute the vaccine. This prolongs the life of the virus and
Aerosol spraying is used on birds that are 10 days of age or
over. The vaccine is diluted in 30 to 40 mL of water per
rinators should be switched off during vaccination, and
1000 doses. After preparing the vaccine and machines, the
where possible, distilled bottled water should be used for
lighting is dimmed and the ventilation reduced. Spray is
vaccine preparation and mixing. Whole milk should not be
directed over the heads of the birds for about 2 minutes for
used for this purpose because the fat content may block
5000 birds, keeping the ventilation and lights off for a total
automatic drinking systems and lead to separation and
time of 10 minutes. Longer periods without ventilation may
hence poor distribution of the vaccine. Other stabilisers
stress the birds. Advice on the most appropriate droplet size
and volume, together with equipment, may vary for differ-
available from specific vaccine manufacturers.
ent vaccines and such advice should always be sought from
Before vaccination, water can be withheld for up to two
the manufacturer of a particular vaccine. Live vaccines will
hours. Withholding water for longer than this, especially in
have been atternuated to different degrees. Only healthy
birds should be vaccinated. As a guide, unless otherwise
 480Vaccines and immunological preparations
directed, it is not recommended to administer one live vac-
otics; operators should wear suitable protective clothing:
cine within 14 days of any other.
see notes at beginning of chapter
Other methods of vaccination include intranasal or intra-
Dose. See notes at beginning of section 18.6 for methods
ocular instillation. Sufficient vaccine for 1oo0 doses is
of administration, see notes above for vaccination
diluted in 40 to 50 mL of sterile water at 25°C such that one
programmes
drop contains the required dose. The vaccine is then
instilled into one eye or one nostril. In the latter case, the
POM Paracox (Schering-Plough) UK
By addit ion to drinking water or feed, avian coccidiosis vaccine, living, pre
other nostril is held closed until the bird has inhaled the
pared from Eimeria spp.,for chickensfromI day of age
vaccinie.
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Vaccines may also be administered by injection. Intramus-
cular injection of an inactivated oil-based vaccine is usually
POM Paracox 5 (Schering-Plough) UK
By addit ion to drinking water or feed, avian coccidiosis vaccine, living, pre-
given into the breast or thigh muscles. Other vaccine solu-
pared frorn Eimeria spp.,for chickens at one day or 3 days of age
tions may be gi ven by subcutaneous or intramuscular injec-
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
tion into the fold of the skin at the back of the neck in
poultry or the base of the neck in pigeons. Pigeons should
18.6.2 Avian encephalomyelitis
not be fed for 12 hours before vaccination because a dis-
tended crop may distort the anatomy of the injection site.
Viral encephalomyelitis or epidemic tremor is caused by a
Some living vaccines may be authorised for vaccination of
 picornavirus. The disease is manifested by CNS signs such
eggs during incubation.
as ataxia and tremors, which may affect young chickens or
turkeys. Infection in laying birds may result in reduced egg
production and hatchability.
Before vaccinating a flock, it is important that a veteri-
Vaccination of layers and breeders with a live vaccine will
nary surgeon with experience in dealing with poultry
 protect both laying birds and their progeny. Live vaccines
should be consulted because vaccination programmes
are administered in drinking water. All breeders and layer
vary from site to site.
hens should be vaccinated between 10 and 16 weeks of age.
Chicks under 3 weeks of age should not be exposed to vac-
cine or vaccinated stock.
18.6.1 Avian coccidiosis
UK
To avoid problems of drug resistance and the continuous
Indications. Vaccination against avian encephalomyelitis
use of medication to control Eimeria spp. in domestic poul-
Contra-indications. Eggs for hatching should not be taken
try, a live attenuated oral vaccine is available for the control
for the first 4-5 weeks after vaccination; chicks less than 3
of coccidiosis in chickens. The vacine consists of recog-
weeks of age should not be exposed to vaccine or vacci-
mised selected precocious strains of each of the pathogenic
nated stock; see also notes at beginning of chapter
species of coccidia that affect chickens. The precocious
 Side-effects. Warnings. May cause a clinical reaction in
chicks; decreased egg production in older birds; see also
means that they have short developmental stages and hence
notes at beginning of chapter
cause minimal damage to the intestines of birds but are
Dose. See notes at beginning of section 18.6 for methods
capable of stimulating immunity.
of administration, see notes above for vaccination
One vaccine (Paracox, Schering-Plough) covers all the
programmes
 pathogenic species of coccidian that affect chickens and is
 most suited to broiler breeders in rear and replacement layer
PML AE-Vac (Fort Dodge) UK
By addition to drinking water, powder for reconstitution, avian encephalo-
pullets. The other available vaccine (Paracox 5, Schering-
Plough) is a truncated version that covers the five species of
myelitis vaccine, living, prepared from virus, for chickens between I0 weeks
of age und 4 weeks before laying
coccidian most likely to affect young broilers and is recom-
mended for vaccination of 'standard’ broilers. For slower
PML Nobilis AE 1143 (Intervet) UK
By addition to drinking water, powder for reconstitution, avian encephalo-
growing broilers, especially those reared under organic pro-
rmyelitis vaccine, living, prepared frorm virus strain Calnek Il43, for chick-
grammes, which are likely to be marketed at an older age,
ens 8 weeks of age und over
the full Paracox vaccine may be the most appropriate.
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period ril, should not be
used in layers and at least I month before cormrmencerment of laying
The vaccine is given as a single dose at one day of age or
between 5 and 9 days of age, depending on the vaccine. A
single dose is sufficient to protect broilers, broiler breeders
18.6.3 Avian infectious bronchitis
in rear, and replacement layer pullets.
Avian infectious bronchitis is caused by a coronavirus and
infection can result in lesions in the respiratory tract, ovi-
UK
duct, and kidneys of chickens. More recent isolates have
Indications. Vaccination against avian coccidiosis
some tropism for the intestinal tract. Egg production may
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. Concurrent 
fall and egg quality problems are common in infected
use of feed containing anticoccidials or anticoccidial antibi-
layers.
18.6 Immunological preparations for birds 481
Live virus vaccines are available. A cloned live vaccine,
PML Poulvac H120 (Fort Dodge) UK
By addition to drinking water, coarse oraerosol spraying,powder for recor-
stitution, avian infectious bronchitis vaccine, living,prepaed frorm virus
fewer vaccine reactions,is also available (Nobilis IB Ma5,
Mass.typestrainH20,forhckensfromIdyofge
Intervet).
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
 All vaccination programmes for parent stock should com-
mence with a live vaccine at 3 weeks of age, followed by a
PML Poulvac IBMM (Fort Dodge) UK
By addition to drinking water (birds more than 4 days of age), by spraying,
booster dose at 7 weeks of age. These act as primers for
by intranasal or intra-ocular instillat ion, powder for reconstiution, avian
later inactivated combination vaccines (see section
infectious bronchitis vaccine, living, prepared frorm virus modified Mass.
18.6.29). Broilers are usually afforded protection by using a
strain,forchickens fromIday ofage
live vaccine administered by spray to day-old chicks in the
POM Poulvac IBMM + ARK (Fort Dodge) UK
hatchery, and also sometimes live vaccine given in the
By spraying, powder for recon stitution, avian infectious bronchitis vaccine,
drinking water or by spray at 2 to 4 weeks of age.
living, prepared frorm virus rmodified Mass. strain 1263 and Arkarsas strain
Infectious bronchitis variant infections have been identified
3168,forchickensfromIday of age
in poultry in the UK and other European countries. One
Withdrawal Periods. Poulry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
specific variant denoted variously as 793/B, 4-91, or CR88
POM Poulvac IB Primer (Fort Dodge) UK
has been associated with respiratory disease in broilers and
By addition to drinking water, by spraying, by intra-ocular nstillation, pow
egg production problems in layers. Live vaccines specifi-
der for reconstiution, avian infectious bronchitis vaccine, living, prepared
cally developed against this serotype are available (Nobilis
frorm virus modified Mass. strain and Dutch strains D207/D274, for chickens
fromI day ofage
IB 4-91, Intervet and Gallivac IB 88, Merial). Vaccination
programme recommendations are specific for the different
vaccines. Some combination live vaccines are available to
18.6.4 Avian infectious bursal disease
afford protection against more than one infectious bronch-
 In the UK, infections occur with serotype 1 avian infectious
itis serotype (Poulvac IB Primer, Fort Dodge and Poulvac
bursal disease virus, which may show varying pathogen-
IBMM + ARK, Fort Dodge). Other variants continue to
icity. Since 1988, an acute highly virulent strain has been
 emerge and specific new variant vaccines will be sought.
active in broilers and replacement layers. Early infection of
UK
susceptible birds can result in immunosuppression, while
Indications. Vaccination
against
avian
infectious
later infection can result in very high mortality.
 Live vaccines may be classified as mild, intermediate, Or
bronchitis
Contra-indications. See notes at beginning of chapter
hot depending on their inherent effect on the bursa of Fabri-
Side-effects. Warnings. See notes at beginning of chapter,
cius. There are currently no mild vaccines authorised in the
vaccination during the laying period may be accompanied
UK. Intermediate strength vaccines such as Poulvac Burs-
by a transient drop in egg production; transient slight respir-
ine 2 (Fort Dodge), Gallivac IBD (Merial), or Nobilis Gum-
atory symptoms
boro D78 (Intervet) are effective in protecting broilers or
Dose. See preparation details, see notes at beginning of
may be used as a primer for inactivated vaccines given to
section 18.6 for methods of administration, see notes above
replacement layers and breeders. Hot strain vaccines
for vaccination programmes
including Nobilis Gumboro 228E (Intervet) and Poulvac
Bursa Plus (Fort Dodge) are effective in broilers.
POM Gallivac IB 88 (Merial) UK
Broilers with no maternally-derived antibodies may be vac-
By spraying, powder for recon stirution, avian infectious bronchitis vaccine,
living, prepared frorm virus strain CR88121 (793B), for chickens αf I4 days
cinated from one day of age with live virus vaccine. Birds
ofage
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
weeks of age, depending on the level and spread of the
Note. Should not be used in future layers or breeders, or chickens in lay
maternally-derived antibody. Breeding stock receive live
POM Nobilis IB 4-91 (Intervet) U/K
virus vaccine at 4 to 5 weeks and, ini some cases at 8 weeks,
By addition to drinking water, by coarse spraying, by intranasal or intra
followed by inactivated vaccine at 14 to 18 weeks of age.
oc ular instilation, powder for reconstiution, avian infectious bronchitis vac-
cine, living, prepared frorm virus strain 4-9l, for chickens more than & days
Replacement layer pullets are vaccinated similarly to broil-
ofage
ers; live vaccine is administered via the drinking water from
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
14 days of age.
Note. Should not be used in layers or broiler breeders 
Accidental self-injection with oil-based vaccines can
PML Nobilis IB H-120 (Intervet) U/K
By addition to drinking water, powder for reconstitution, avian infectious
cause severe pain and intense swelling, which may result
bronchitis vaccine, living, prepared fron virus Mass. type strain HI20, for
in ischaemic necrosis and loss of a digit. Prompt medical
chickens
 attention is essential
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil, egg with-
drawal period nil
PML Nobilis IB Ma5 (Intervet) UK
UK
By addition to drinking water, by spraying, by intranasal or intra-ocular
Indications. Vaccination against avian infectious bursal
instillation, powder for reconstiution, avian infectious bronchitis vaccine,
disease
living, prepared frorm virus Mass. type strain Ma5, for chickens
Withdrawal Periods. Poulry: slaughter withdrawal period nil, egg with-
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See riotes at
drawal period nil
beginning of chapter
482Vaccines and immunological preparations
Dose. See preparation details, see notes at beginning of
piratory disease, and enteric disease. Clinical disease
section 18.6 for methods of administration, see notes above
 depends on the virus pathotype invol ved.
for vaccination programme
Breeding stock are vaccinated at 16 to 20 weeks of age in
Live vaccines, intermediate
Birds should not be vaccinated less than 4 weeks before
POM Gallivac IBD (Merial) U/K
commencement of lay. The optimal effect will be seen in
By addition to drinking water, or by cogrse spraying (day-old chicks only),
birds primed by live reovirus challenge.
powder for reconstiution, infectious bursal disease vaccine, living (potenti-
ateditemdiate),epared from virus stain06,forchickensfrom Idy
ofuge
UK
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil, egg with-
Indications. Vaccination against avian reovirus
drawal period nil
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See notes at
POM Nobilis Gumboro D78 (Irntervet) UK
beginning of chapter
By addition to drinking water, powder for reconstinution, infectious bursal
Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
disease vaccine, living (intermediate), prepared frorm virus strain D78, for
tion programmes
chickensmore than14 daysof age
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil, egg with-
POM Nobilis Reo (Intervet) UK
drawal period nil
fnjection, avian reovirus vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorn virus strains
1733 and 2408 grown in cell-line tissue culure, containing a suitable oil as
POM Poulvac Bursine 2 (Fort Dodge) UK
adjuvant,forchickenbreeding stock
By addition to drinking water, or by cogrse spraying (day-old chicks only),
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
powder for reconstinution, infectious bursal disease vaccine, living (interrme-
Dose. Poultry: by subcutaneous or intramusc ular injection, 0.5 mL
diate),prepared fcon vius,for broiler chickensfromIdey ofage,layer
hensfrom14daysofuge
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil, egg with-
drawal period nil
POM TAD Gumboro vac T (Lohrmann) UK
By addition to drinking water, powder for reconstitution, infectious bursal
18.6.7 Chicken anaemia virus
disease vaccine, living (intermediate), prepared frorm virus strain Cu IM, for
chickensfrom7days ofage
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
circoviridae virus, is a very resistant virus, and the cause of
Live vaccines, hot
avian infectious anaemia, first described in Japan in 1979.
Disease is usually seen in broilers up to 3 weeks of age and
POM Nobilis Gumboro 228E (Irntervet) U/K
results from vertical transmission from infected breeders,
By adition to drinking water, powder for reconstinution, infectious bursal
with no circulating antibody. Affected birds show signs
disease vaccine, living (hot), prepared from virus strain 228E, for chickens
more thanI0 days of age
associated with immunosuppression, such as gangrenous
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil, should not be
dermatitis due to secondary bacterial skin infection, and
used in birds in lay
anaemia. Effective vaccination of breeders prevents virae-
POM Poulvac Bursa Plus (Fort Dodge) UK
d  n    
By addition o drinking water, powder for reconstiution, infectious bursal
The vaccination programme will depend on the site. Poultry
disease vaccine, living (hot), prepared frorm low attenuation virus, for chick-
should be vaccinated at least 6 weeks before the commence-
ens from 14 days of age
ment of lay and should be at least 6 weeks of age.
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil, egg with-
drawal period nil
UK
18.6.5 Avian pneumovirus
Indications. Vaccination agai nst chicken anaemia virus
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. Do not vac-
The avian pneumovirus originally associated with turkey
cinate birds in lay or less than 6 weeks before commerice-
rhinotracheitis infection in turkeys (see section 18.6.28) has
ment of lay; see notes at beginning of chapter
 been demonstrated as a cause of respiratory disease in broil-
 Dose. See preparation details, see manufacturer's informa-
ers, which is often referred to as swollen head syndrome
tion for vaccination programmes
(see section 18.6.26). Egg production problems and nervous
POM Nobilis CAV P4 (Intervet) UK
signs have also been reported in commercial layers, layer
Injection, powder for reconstiution, chicken anaermia virus vaccine, living,
breeders, and broiler breeders following infection with the
prepared frorm virus,forbroiler breeder chickensmore than6weeks ofαge
same virus. Live and killed vaccines have been used in both
Note. Reconstitute with specific diluent
chickens and turkeys for these conditions and further details
Withdrawal Periods. Poulry: slaughter withdrawal period nil, should rot be
used in birds in lay or at least 6 weeks before cormrmencerment of laying
can be found in sections 18.6.26, 18.6.28 and 18.6.29.
Dose. Poultry: by subcutaneous or intramusc ular injection, 0.2 mL
18.6.6Avian reovirus
POM Thymovac (Lohrmann) UK
Reoviruses have beenl isolated from a variety of tissues in
vinus vaccine, living, prepared from virus strain Cux-I, for chickens between
12and 16 weeksof age
chickens affected by assorted disease conditions including
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil, should not be
viral arthritis, tenosynovitis, malabsorption syndrome, res-
Used in birds in lay or at least 6 weeks before cormrmencerment of laying
18.6 Immunological preparations for birds 483
18.6.8 Duck virus enteritis
Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
Duck virus enteritis (duck plague) is an acute highly conta-
tion programmes
gious disease caused by a herpesvirus.
PML Nobilis EDS (Intervet) UK
A live virus vaccine is available for vaccinaton of healthy
Injection, egg drop syndrorme 1976 vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorm virus
flocks. It can also be used in case of emergency for the vac-
BC14, containing a suitable oil as adjuvant, for chickens I418 weeks of age
cination of healthy birds where the disease is present in
Withdrawal Periods. Pou ltry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Dose.Poultry: by subcutaneous {preferred if vaccinated within 2 weeks of
order to limit the spread of the disease. Before vaccination
slaughter) or intramusc ular injection, 0.5 mL
of diseased flocks, clinically affected birds should be
culled.
Birds are vaccinated at 4 weeks of age whenn disease chal-
Accidental self-injection with oil-based vaccines can
lenge is mild or absent. When expected risk of infection is
cause severe pain and intense swelling, which may result
high, birds may be vaccinated from one day of age; these
in ischaemic necrosis and loss of a digit. Prompt medical
birds should be revaccinated at 4 weeks of age or later when
 attention is essential
maternal anitibody levels have declined.
18.6.12 Erysipelas
UK
Indications. Vaccination against duck virus enteritis
Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae (Ery. insidiosa) causes infec-
Contra-indications. Side-effects.Warnings. See notes at
tion in turkeys resulting in sudden mortality. Birds are vac-
beginning of chapter
cinated before they reach 14 weeks of age.
 Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
tion programmes
UK
Indications. Vaccination against erysipelas
PML Nobilis Duck Plague (Intervet) UK
Injection, powder for reconstitution, duck vinus enteritis vaccine, living, pre-
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. Should not
pared frorm virus strain Utrecht, for ducks, geese
 be used in birds in lay or within 6 weeks of commencement
Withdrawal Periods. Ducks, geese: slaughter withdrawal period nil
 of laying; see notes at beginming of chapter
Dose.Ducks,geese:by subutaneousorintramuscularinjection,025 mL
 Dose. See preparation details 
18.6.9 Duck virus hepatitis
PML Eryvac (Intervet) UK
Injetinyil,tiatd,adfmry
Duck virus hepatitis is an acute highly contagious disease of
serotype I strain P15/10 and serotype 2 strains CN3342 and CN346l, con-
ducklings during the first 3 weeks of life. No vaccines are
taining aluminiurm hydroxide as adjuvant, for sheep (see section 1I8.2.6), tur-
keys more thun6weeks ofage
currently available in the UK.
Withdrawal Periods. Slaughter withdrawal period nil
Dose. Turkeys: by intramuscular injection, 0.5 rmL. Repeat dose after 4
18.6.10 Duck septicaemia
weeks
Duck septicaemia is caused by Riemerella anatipestifer
18.6.13 Fowl pox
(Pasteurella anatipestifer, Moraxella anatipestifer).Emer-
Fowl pox causes cutaneous lesions and diphtheritic lesions
(licensed by the VMD) for use on individual farms where
of the mouth and upper respiratory tract. No vaccines are
this condition is a problem. The following are manufactur-
currently available in the UK. A pigeon pox vaccine is
ers of emergency vaccines in the UK:
authorised for use in pigeons (see section 18.6.23).
Axiom Veterinary Laboratories
Leeds Veterinary Laboratories
18.6.14 Infectious laryngotracheitis
Ridgeway Biologicals.
 Infectious laryngotracheitis is caused by a herpesvirus capa-
ble of causing variable disease, loosely termed acute, mild,
18.6.11 Egg drop syndrome 1976
 Or asymptomatic. The virus exhibits typical herpesvirus
 Egg drop syndrome 1976 is caused by an avian adenovirus.
latency where persistent infection and intermittent excretion
 iu ie us l e  peso si ss u
are significant in the spread of the disease. Lesions are
loss of shell strength and pigmentation. Replacement breed-
restricted to the trachea and range from frank blood clots
ing and layer flocks are vaccinated before commencement
with exudate to more chroric caseous diphtheritic changes.
of lay at 14 to 18 weeks of age. One vaccination is usually
Chickens are vaccinated at more than 4 weeks of age. The
sufficient to provide immunity, although in some circum-
vaccine is usually given by intra-ocular instillation. Incor-
stances a second vaccination may be necessary.
poration into the drinking water is less effective, while use
of the spraying method may result in severe losses.
UK
If rearing and laying sites are contaminated, the first vacci-
Indications. Vaccination against egg drop syndrome 1976
nation at 4 to 5 weeks of age will need boosting with a fur-
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See notes at
ther vaccination at 16 to 20 weeks of age. If there are no
begirnning of chapter
problems on the rearing site, birds are vaccinated by intra-
484Vaccines and immunological preparations
ocular instillation when they are moved to the laying farms.
more effective than the ‘dry' vaccines. In some circum-
All birds on the site should be vaccinated.
stances, day-old chicks may need to be gi ven a dose of each
Advice should be taken from a veterinary surgeon with
vaccine form.
ex perience of dealing with poultry before a vaccination pro-
To address more recent problems of virulent Mareks dis-
gramme is started against this infection. Vaccination of
ease in poultry breeding and commercial laying stock in the
UK, vaccines incorporating the Rispens strain of Mareks
production.
disease virus such as Cryomarex Rispens (Merial), Poulvac
Vaccinated birds should not be taken to a site where there
Marek CVI (Fort Dodge), or Nobilis Rismavac (Intervet)
are any non-vaccinated birds because the virus is shed from
have been successful, often in combination with THV
 vaccinated birds during the laying period.
vaccines.
UK
Indications.Vaccination
against
infectious
laryngo-
tracheitis
UK
Contra-indications. Side-effects.Warnings.See notes at
Indications. Vaccination against Mareks disease
beginning of chapter and notes above
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See riotes at
Dose. See notes at beginning of section 18.6 for methods
beginning of chapter. Liquid mitrogen causes serious freeze
of：
administration, see notes above for
vaccination
burns and thawing ampoules may occasionally explode
programmes
appropri ate protecti ve clothing
PML I L T Vaccine (Fort Dodge) U/K
Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
By intra-oclar instiltion, infectious laryngotracheitis vaccine, living, for
chickensfrom4weeksofuge
tion programmes
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil, egg with-
drawal period nil
PML Cryomarex Rispens (Merial) U/K
Injection, powder for reconstiution, Marek's disease vaccine, living, deep-
frozen, cell-associated, prepared frorm virus stain Rispens CVI988, for day-
oldchicks
Note. Reconstitute with specific diluent
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
18.6.15 Marek's disease
Dose. Poultry: by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection, 0.2 mL
Marek s disease is a lymphoproliferative disease of chick-
PML Nobilis Marek THV lyo (Irtervet) UK
ens caused by a lymphotropic herpesvirus. Mortality and
Injection, powder for recon stitution, Marek's disease vaccine, living, freeze-
clinical signs are variable and peripheral nerve involvement 
died, cell-fee, prepared frorm turkey herpesvirus strain PB-THV I, for day-
oldchicks,chickens up to3weeksofage
may lead to leg and wing paralysis.
Note. Reconstitute with specific diluent
Freeze dried vaccines prepared from turkey herpesvirus
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
(THV) and ‘wet’ cell-associated live vaccines prepared
Dose. Poultry: by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection, 0.2 mL
from turkey herpesvirus, atteniuated Marek's virus, or non-
PML Nobilis Marexine CA 126 (Intervet) UK
pathogenic Mareks viruses, are available. The "wet’ vac-
fnjection, powder for recon stitution, Marek's disease vaccine, living, deep-
n  o ib ue sod ue s  s
frozern, cell-associated, prepared frorm urkey herpesvinus strain FC 126, for
these conditions (-196.5°C) may be expected to retain their
day-old chicks, chickens up to 3weeks ofage
Note.Reconstitute with specific diluent
potency for 2 years. The diluent supplied by the manufac-
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
turer is stored at 2°C to 8°C. When required for use, the
Dose. Poultry: by subeutaneous or intramusc ular injection, 0.2 rmL
vaccine is rapidly thawed in water at 37°C and then mixed
gently with the diluent using a wide bore needle to avoid
PML Nobilis Rismavac (Intervet) UK
Injetion, powder for recon stinution, Marek's disease vaccine, living, deep-
damage to the vaccine. Reconstituted vaccine should be
frozen, cell-associated, prepared from virus strain CVI 998, for chickens
used within one hour. Because of the nature of the storage
Note. Reconstitute with specific diluent
conditions, ampoules may shatter, and operators handling
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
these vaccines should be suitably protected, especially from
Dose. Poultry: by subcutaneous or intramusc ular injection, 0.2 mL
the possibility of glass particles penetrating the eyes. As an
PML Nobilis Rismavac + CA126 (Intervet) UK
Injection, powder for reconstiution, Marek's disease vaccine, living, deep
may be stored in solid carbon dioxide in which case it may
frozen, cell-associated, prepared frorm Marek's disease virus strain CVI 998,
urkey herpesvirus strain FC 126, for chickens
be expected to retain its potency for one month from the
Note. Reconstitute with specific diluent
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
cines are also available, which are easier to handle; vac-
Dose. Poultry: by subcutaneous or intramusc ular injection, 0.2 rmL
cines are stored at 2°C to 8°C, and the diluent in a cool
PML Poulvac Marek CVI (Fort Dodge) UK
place below 18°C.
Injection, powder for recon stitution, Marek's disease vaccine, living, deep-
Chicks are ideally vaccinated at day-old in the hatchery,
frozen, cell-associated, prepared frorn Mareks disease virus strain Risperns
although chickenis up to 3 weeks of age may be vaccinated.
CVI 988 grown on tissue culure, for day-old chicks
Vaccination is occasionally repeated at 2 to 4 weeks of age.
Note. Reconstitute with specific diluent
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
In conditions of severe challenge, the ‘wet’ vaccines are
Dose. Poultry: by intramuscular injection, I dose
18.6 Immunological preparations for birds 485
PML Poulvac Marek CVI + HVT (Fort Dodge)
Replacement pullets receive a live virus vaccine at 3 weeks
njetin,wstiio,diaeiin
and 10 weeks of age, followed by an inactivated vaccine
frozen, cell-associated, prepared frorn Marek's disease virus strain Rispens
CVI 988 grown on tissue culure, turkey herpesvirus, for day-old chicks
between 16 and 18 weeks of age. In areas of high challenge,
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
broilers are vaccinated with live vaccines at one day of age,
Dose. Poultry: by sube utaneous injection, 0.5 mL
3 weeks, and 5 weeks of age. Replacement pullets receive
by intramuscular injection, 0.2 mL
the same regimen followed by a further course of live vac-
PML Poulvac MD-Vac (Fort Dodge) UK
cine at 10 weeks and inactivated vaccine at 16 weeks.
injectnowdeforcotitonaeksiseaseaccielvingfe
Revaccination with live vaccine during lay may be neces-
o a ss uo o uo s  o pd p
 sary in exceptional circumstances. Similar programmes
day-old chicks
Note. Reconstitute with specific diluent
may be recommended for game birds where challenge from
Dose. Poultry: by intramuscular injection, 0.I mL
wild birds is considered a risk.
PML Poulvac MD-Vac (Frozen-Wet) (Fort Dodge) UK
The live vaccine can be more effective whern administered
Injection, powder for reconstitution, Marek's disease vaccine, living, deep-
 by the aerosol spraying method than via the drinking water.
frozen, prepared frorn urkey herpesvirus Witter strain, for day-old chicks
More birds are covered and a more rapid immune response
Note. Reconstitute with specific diluent
is produced in individual birds. The response depends on
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Dose. Poultry: by intramuscular injection, 0.2 mL
 droplet size, previous priming, and the strain of live vaccine
used. It is important to follow the manufacturer s directions
on these aspects.
18.6.16 Mycoplasmosis
The Diseases of Poultry Order 1994 (S1 1994/3141) gives
Mycoplasmal infections can cause a variety of respiratory,
 procedures to be followed regarding movement of birds,
locomotor, and hatchability problems in chickens, turkeys,
disinfection of premises, and vaccination to ensure contin-
and other avian species. A live vaccine (Nobilis MG 6/85,
ued protection from Newcastle disease.
Intervet) is available for future layer chickens to reduce air
sacculitis and tracheal lesions caused by Mycoplasma gaffi-
UK
septicum. A single vaccination is given to chickens of 6
weeks or older.
Indications. Vaccination against Newcastle disease
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See niotes at
beginning of chapter. Live Newcastle disease vaccines may
UK
Indications. Vaccination against mycoplasmosis
cause conjunctivitis in humans and operators should wear
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. Not to be
appropriate protecti ve clothing
used within 4 weeks of egg production or during lay;
Dose. See preparation details, see notes at beginning of
administration of antimycoplasmal drugs within 5 days
section 18.6 for methods of administration, see notes above
before or 2 weeks after vaccination may affect efficacy of
for vaccination programmes
vaccine; see notes at beginning of chapter
Dose. See preparation details, see notes at beginning of
Live vaccines
section 18.6 for methods of administration, see notes above
PML Nobilis ND Clone 30 (Intervet) U/K
for vaccination programmes
Newcastle diseasevaccine,ivingpepared fovirus stainClone30,fr
POM Nobilis MG 6/8s (Intervet) U/K
chickens
By spraying, powder for reconstitution, rmycoplasrmosis vaccine,living, pre-
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
pared from M. gallisepticum strain MG 6/85, for chickens from 6 weeks of
uge
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil, should not be
PML Nobilis ND Hitchner (Irntervet) U/K
used in future breeders or during lay
By addition to drinking water, powder for reconstiution, Newcastle disease
vaccine, living, prepared frorm virus strain Hitchner B l, for chickens 
Withdrawal Periods. Poulry: slaughter withdrawal period nil, egg with-
18.6.17 Newcastle disease
drawal period nil
Note. May be administered by spraying or beak dipping in ermergency after
Newcastle disease ("fowl pest) is a notifiable disease of
prior consultation with the manufachurer
 poultry. The disease is caused by a group of closely related
viruses, which form the avian paramyxovirus type I (PMV-
PML Poulvac Hitchner B1 (Fort Dodge) U/K
1) serotype. Viruses vary in their virulence from lentogenic
By addition to drinking water, by spraying, by intranasal or intra-ocular
(mild) to velogenic (highly virulent). Strains may show a
instillation, powder for econstiution, Newcastle disease vaccine, living,
prepared from virus strain Hitchner Bl, for chickens, furkeys, game birds
tendency to cause nervous, visceral, or respiratory disease.
Withdrawal Periods. Poulry: slaughter withdrawal period nil, egg with-
Live freeze-dried vaccines and oil-based inactivated vac-
drawal period nil
cines are available for vaccination against Newcastle dis-
ease in chickens, turkeys, and game birds. PMV-1 vaccines
PML Poulvac NDW (Fort Dodge) UK
are also available for use in pigeons (see section 18.6.21).
By spraying, by int ranasal or intra-ocular instillation, powder for recon sti-
Vaccination programmes depend upon the degree of chal-
tion, Newcastle disease vaccine, living, prepared frorm attenuated strain of
vinus, for chickens
lenge in any geographical area. In areas of little or no chal-
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil, egg with-
lenge, chicken and turkey broilers are not vaccinated.
drawal period nil
 486Vaccines and immunological preparations
Inactivated vaccines
forward, if challenge occurs at ann earlier age. There is very
little protection from the first dose of vaccine. It is inadvisa-
Accidental self-injection with oil-based vaccines can
ble to give the oil-based vaccine to birds in lay.
cause severe pain and intense swelling, which may result
Fattening turkeys and breeding chickens are given 2 vac-
in ischaemic necrosis and loss of a digit. Prompt medical
cines at an interval of 4 to 5 weeks, with the initial vaccine
attention is essential
administered at 8 to 12 weeks of age.
Outbreaks of disease may still occur following this type of
PML Nobilis Newcavac (Intervet) UK
Injection, Newcastle disease vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorm virus strain
Clone 30, containing a suitable oil as adjuvant, forchickens, turkeys, guineα
covered by the available vaccines.
fowl,pheusunts,ducks
Emergency vaccines (see section 18.6.10) may be prepared
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
by licensed laboratories where the Pasteurella serotype is
Dose.Poultry, gume birds: by subcuwtaneous or intramuscwlar injection,
niot covered by those in the commercial vaccinies.
0.5 mL
UK
18.6.18 Ornithobacter rhinotrachealae
Indications. Vaccination against pasteurellosis
Contra-indications. Birds in lay
infection
Side-effects. Warnings. See notes at beginning of chapter
Ornithobacter rhinotrachealae (ORT) infection in turkeys
Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
 and chickens can result in respiratory, locomotor, or nery-
tion programmes
ous disease.
PML Pabac (Fort Dodge) UK
An inactivated vaccine is available for female broiler
Injection, pasteurellosis vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorn polyvalent types
breeder chickens to induce passive immunisation in broiler
of Pasteurella miocida, containing a suitable oil as adjuvant, for chickens,
progeny to reduce infection in broilers. A first vaccination
turkeys, geese, ducks
is given between 6 and 12 weeks of age, and the second at
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter 6 weeks; should not be used in layer
least 6 weeks later, between 14 and 18 weeks of age.
birds
Dose. Poultry: by subcuianeous injection,0.5 mL
UK
Indications. Vaccination against ORT infection
18.6.21 Pigeon paramyxovirus
Contra-indications. Birdsin lay
Paramyxovirus type 1 (PMV-1) infection canl cause profuse
Side-effects. Warnings. See notes at beginning of chapter
diarrhoea, marked nervous signs, and mortality, especially
Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
inl young birds. The virus can potentially infect poultry.
tion programmes
Pigeons may be vaccinated at any time over 3 weeks of age
using single component PMV-1 vaccines or after 6 weeks
POM Nobilis OR-inac (Intervet) UK
Injection,ORT infection vaccine,inactivated, pepared from Orn rhinotrg-
of age using a combined PMV-1/pigeon pox vaccine. Initial
chealae serotype A strain B3263/9l, containing a suitable oil as adjuvant, for
vaccination consists of a single subcutaneous injection at
chickens
the base of the dorsal neck surface. All pigeons in the loft
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Dose. Poultry: by subc utaneous or intramusc ular injection, 0.25 mL
should be vaccinated. Pigeons should be vaccinated at least
14 days before coming into contact with birds from other
18.6.19 Paramyxovirus 3 disease
lofts. Racing pigeons should be vaccinated at least 3 or
preferably 4 to 6 weeks before the start of the racing season,
 In turkeys, avian paramyxovirus type 3 (PMV-3) infection
 breeding birds 4 to 6 weeks before mating, and show birds 4
has been associated with reduced egg production and mild
to 6 weeks before showing. A booster vaccination should be
respiratory disease in breeding henis. Protection of birds in
given every 12 months.
Live Newcastle disease vaccine· (see section 18.6.17)
cine TUR3, Merial (see section 18.6.29).
Hitchner B1 strain may be administered during an acute
outbreak of paramyxovirus disease by intra-ocular instilla-
18.6.20 Pasteurellosis
tion to pigeons to stimulate a rapid immune response
against paramyxovirus; simultaneously with an injection of
Pasteurellosis covers a variety of conditions associated with
the inactivated vaccine. Live vaccine gives protection for a
Pasteurella spp. infections. The predominant condition is
short period only and revaccination should be carried out
fowl cholera due to P. muitocida infection.
every 3 months. This vaccine should not be given in the
Inactivated vaccines for fowl cholera alone and combina-
drinking water to pigeons because they may receive an
tion vaccines against erysipelas and Pasteurella are availa-
inadequate dose by this method. Vaccines used in poultry or
ble. The latter (see section 18.6.29) appears to give better
 game birds to protect against Newcastle disease are not
protection against fowl cholera than the former. They are
approved or authorised for use in racing pigeons by any
mainly used in turkeys, although they are occasionally nec-
route of application.
essary for broiler breeder flocks and pheasants.
Under The Diseases of Pouitry Order 1994 (S1 1994/3141),
Turkey breeding flocks may be vaccinated at 12, 16, and 28
 all racing pigeons entered in races or shows, which take
weeks of age. Occasionally vaccination has to be brought
 place wholly or partly in Great Britain, must be vaccinated
18.6 Immunological preparations for birds 487
against avian paramyxovirus type lwith a vaccine
vaccinations during and for 21 days after second dose of
vaccine; see notes at beginining of chapter
details procedures to be followed regarding the movement
Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
of birds, disinfection of premises, and vaccination to ensure
tion programmes
conti nued protection of poultry from Newcastle disease.
The six regulating bodies controlling pigeon racing in Great
POM Colombovac Paratyphus (Fort Dodge) UK
Injection, pigeon paratyphoid vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorm Salmc
Britain also have strict codes of practice regarding PMV-1
nella typhimurium var Copenhagen, containing a suitable oil as adjuvant, for
vaccination procedure and record keeping (see Prescribing
pigeons
for animals used in competiti ons).
Withdrawal Periods. Pigeons: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Dose. Pigeons: by subcutaneous injection, 0.2 mL
A combination vaccine with pigeon pox component is
available (see section 18.6.29).
18.6.23 Pigeon pox
UK
Pigeon pox is caused by a poxvirus and is characterised by
Indications. Vaccination against pigeon paramyxovirus
lesions of the mouth and eyes.
infection in racing, breeding, and show pigeons
Birds are vaccinated from 5 weeks of age and all birds in
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See rotes at
the loft should be vaccinated at the same time. Annual vac-
beginning of chapter
cination is given outside the racing season between 30 Sep-
Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
tember and 3 1 December.
tion programmes
Birds are vaccinated on the lower leg or breast. A few feath-
ers are removed and the vaccine is brushed into the plucked
P Colombovac PMV (Fort Dodge) UK
follicles; the vaccine should be applied in one direction
Injetion, pigeon paramyxovirus vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorn aviarl
pararmyxovirus (PMV-1), containing a suitable adjuvant, for pigeons
only. A reaction should be observed in about 4 days. In
birds that produce little or no reaction,the vaccination may
Withdrawal Periods. Pigeons: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Dose. Pigeons: by subcutaneous injection, 0.2 rmL
be repeated in 5 to 7 days; birds that are already immune
Note. POM in Northern Ireland
from previous vaccination are unlikely to show any
reaction.
P Nobilis Paramyxo P201 (Irtervet) UK
During the period between vaccination and healing of the
Injection, pigeon paramyxovirus vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorn aviar
pararmyxovius (PMV-1) strain P20l, containing a suitable oil as adjuvant,
vaccination site,birds are infectious and should be isolated
for pigeons
from other stock until the reaction has subsided.
Withdrawal Periods. Pigeons: slaughter withdrawal period nil
 A combination vaccine with pigeon paramyxovirus compo-
Dose. Pigeons: by subcutaneous injection, 0.25 mL
nent is available (see section 18.6.29).
Accidental self-injection with oil-based vaccines can
UK
cause severe pain and intense swelling, which may result
Indications. Vaccination against pigeon pox
in ischaemic necrosis and loss of a digit. Prompt medical
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See notes at
attention is essential
beginning of chapter
Dose. See preparation details, see notes above for vaccina-
tion programmes
18.6.22 Pigeon paratyphoid
PML Nobivac Pigeon Pox (Irtervet) UK
Paratyphoid in pigeons is caused by infection with Saimo-
By topical application, powder for recon stittion, pigeon pox vaccine, living,
nella typhimurium, and is one of the most widely occurring
prepared frorm virus, for pigeons more than 5 weeks of age
diseases of pigeons and frequently causes severe outbreaks
Withdrawal Periods. Pigeons: slaughter withdrawal period nil
in lofts in Great Britain. The disease is characterised by sep-
ticaemia but clinical signs present as mainly articular (swol-
18.6.24 Post-natal colibacillosis
len joints) or as nervous tissue damage (torticollis,
E. coli infection with recognised avian serotypes can lead to
abnormal head movements), or predominately
entenic
significant mortality after local and generalised infection of
(severe acute weight loss and profuse green diarrhoea).
broilers, and it contributes to peritonitis and septicaemia in
A vaccine is available for pigeons. Pigeons are vaccinated
commercial layers and broiler breeders. Vaccination of
  p  r u   g s g w  
breeding stock will help reduce challenge to young chicks
weeks. The vaccine is reported to cause significant stressful
and may afford protection in laying birds.
effects on pigeons so that supportive measures such as rest,
Breeder birds are vaccinated at 6 to 12 weeks of age and
probiotics, and multivitamins are advised.
again at 14 to 18 weeks of age. There should be an interval
of at least 6 weeks between vaccinations. Vaccination of
UK
broiler breeders provides partial immunisation of broiler
chickens up to one month of age.
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. Avoid stress
Emergency vaccines (see section 18.6.10) for laying flocks
before, during, and after vacccination; avoid use of other
 may be prepared by licensed laboratories.
488  Vaccines and immunological preparations
UK
POM TAD Salmonella vac T (Lohrmann) UK
Indications. Vaccination against post-natal colibacillosis
By addition to drinking water, powder for reconstitution, salmonella vaccine,
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See notes at
living, prepared from Salmonella typhimuriur strain Na 12/Rif9/Rtt, for
chickensfromIday of age
beginning of chapter
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter 2l days
 Dose. See preparation details, notes above for vaccination 
programmes
Inactivated vaccines
POM Nobilis Salenvac T (Intervet) UK
POM Nobilis E. coli inac (Intervet) UK
injetin, post-natal colibacillosis vaccine, inactivated, pepaed fco F-
Injection, salmonella vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorn Salmonella enteri-
tiis phage Lype 4 and Salmonella typhimurium DT104, containing alumin-
and FT E. coli antigens, containing a suitable oil as adjuvant, for broiler
ium hydroxide as adjuvant, for poultry
breeder chickens
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Dose.Poultry: by subcutaneous or intramusc uiar injection,0.5 mL
Dose.Poultry: by intramuscwlar injection, 0.1 mL at I day of age, 0.5 mL
at I2 weeks of age, and 0.5 rmL at l6 weeks of age
18.6.25 Salmonellosis and salmonella
18.6.26Swollenheadsyndrome
infection
The avian pneumovirus originally associated with turkey
Salmonellosis as a specific disease of poultry is rare, except
rhinotracheitis (TRT) in turkeys has been demonstrated as a
in broilers where there is heavy site contamination and early
contributory factor in acute respiratory syndromes of broil-
challenge or through vertical transmission from a breeder
ers. Egg production problems and nervous signs have been
flock. Such disease is usually the result of infection with
reported in commercial layers, layer breeders, and broiler
one of the so called "invasive' strains.
breeders following infection with the same virus. Vaccines
In poultry, the most significant serotypes remain Saimo-
based on the original turkey isolate (Nobilis TRT, Intervet,
nella enteritidis and Saimonella typhimurium. Efficient vac-
or Poulvac TRT, Fort Dodge) and one based on a specific
cination of layer breeders, broiler breeders, and commercial
chicken isolate (Nemovac, Merial) are available to vacci-
layers is considered one of a number of useful control strat-
nate broilers.
egies in limiting spread of infection both in poultry and to
Live vaccines may also be used as live primers for breeding
people, when used in combination with other measures.
stock and commercial layers, followed with an injectable
Live and inactivated vaccines are available. The usual dos-
inactivated vaccine.
age regimen for inactivated vaccines for breeders and com-
mercial layers is 2 doses given at an interval of 6 weeks,
UK
from 6 to 10 weeks of age.
Indications.Vaccination against swollen head syndrome
Live vacccines for broilers, future layers, and breeders can
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See notes at
be given from one day of age, followed by 1 or 2 booster
beginning of chapter
Dose. See notes at beginning of section 18.6 for methods
on the site.
of administration. Vaccination programmes will depend on
the site and advice should be sought from the site veterinar-
UK
ian, the manufacturer, or both
Indications. Vaccination against salmonellosis
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. Vaccination
Live vaccines
of birds in lay; see notes at beginning of chapter
Dose. See preparation details
POM Nemovac (Merial) UK
By addition to drinking water, swollen head syndrorme vaccine, living, pre-
Live vaccines
pared frorn pneurmovirus, for broiler chickens
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil, should not be
POM Gallivac SE (Merial) UK
used in layer hens
By addition to drinking water, powder for reconstitution, salrmonella vaccine,
living, prepared from Salmonella enteritidis strain 44l/014, for chickens
POM Nobilis TRT (Intervet) UK
fromIdayofage
By spraying,intrangsa, or intraocular instilltion,turkey chinotracheitis
Withdrawal Periods. Poulry: slaughter 6 weeks, eggs 3 weeks
vaccine, living, prepared frorm virus, for turkeys (see section 18.6.28),
broilerchickens
POM Nobilis SG 9R (Intervet) UK
Withdrawal Periods. Pou ltry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Injection, salmonella vaccine, living, prepared frorm Salmonella enteritidis
and Salmonella gallinarum 9R, for chickens
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil, should rnot be
POM Poulvac SHS (Fort Dodge) UK
By spraying, intra-ocwlar instillation, powder for reconstiution, avian pneu
used in birds in lay
rmovirus vaccine, living, prepared from virus strain Clone K, for chickens
Contra-indications. Breeding birds, birds in tended for breeding, or birds 
in lay
fromIday ofage
Dose. Poultry: by subcutaneous injecion, 0.2 mL at 6 weeks of age, 0.2
Withdrawal Periods. Pou ltry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
rmL at berween 14 and l6 weeks of age
POM Poulvac TRT (Fort Dodge) UK
POM TAD Salmonella vac E (Lohmarn) U/K
By spraying or intraoc ular instillation, powder for recon stitution, hurkey rhi-
By addition to drinking water, powder for reconstitution, salmonella vaccine,
notracheitis vaccine, living, prepared frorm virus strain Clone K, for furkeys
living, prepared frorm Salmonella enteritidis strain Srm24/Rifl2/Ssq, for
from I day of age (see section 18.6.28), broiler chickens from I day of age
chickens from I day of age
Withdrawal Periods. Poulry: slaughter withdrawal period nil, should not be
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter 2l days
used in birds in lay
18.6 Immunological preparations for birds
489
Inactivated vaccines
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Dose. Turkeys: vaccination programme will depend orn the site ard advice
POM Nobilis TRT inac (Intervet) UK
should be sought
Injection, hurkey rhinotracheitis vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorm turkey
rhinotracheitis virus strain Butl#8544, containing a suitable oil as adjuvant,
POM Poulvac TRT (Fort Dodge) UK
for turkeys (see section 18.6.28), broiler chickens
By spraying or eyedrop instillation, powder for reconstitution, urkey rhi-
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil, should not be
notracheitis vaccine, living, pepared from virus strain Clone K, for turkeys
used in layer birds or within 4 weeks before cormrmencerment of lay
fromIdayfagebroilechickensfromdyofage(seesectio6.6）
Dose. Poultry: by intramuscular injection, 0.5 rmL at 14-20 weeks of age
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil, should not be
and rot less than 4 weeks before cormrmencerment of lay
used in birds in lay
Inactivated vaccines
18.6.27 Turkey haemorrhagic enteritis
POM Nobilis TRT inac (Intervet) UK
Haemorrhagic enteritis in turkeys is caused by an adeno-
Injection, hurkey rhinotracheitis vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorn urkey
virus and is characterised by acute diarrhoea and high
rhinotracheitis virus strain Butl#8544, containing a suitable oil as adjuvart,
mortality.
for turkeys, broiler chickens (see section I 8.6.26)
A live vaccine is available in the UK under ani exceptional
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil, should not be
lsed in layer birds or within 4 weeks before cormrmencerment of lay
marketing authorisation. The vaccine is available only on
Dose. Turkeys: by intramuscular injection, 0.5 rmL at 28 weeks of age and
specific order from Merial. Use of the vaccine must be
mot less than 4 weeks before cormmencerment of lay
monitored by the company and reported to the VMD.
Broiler turkey poults are vaccinated from 4 weeks of age.
UK
18.6.29 Combination vaccines forbirds
Indications. Vaccination against turkey haemorthagic
enteri tis
An alphabetical list of combination vaccines for poultry and
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See niotes at
the infections to which they confer immunity is given in
beginning of chapter; not for vaccination of breeders and
Table 18.4.
future layers; avoid other vaccination within 14 days; avoid
UK
stress prior to vaccination
Indications. See preparation details
POM Dindoral (Merial)
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See notes at
beginning of chapter
prepared frorm virus strain Dormermuth, for broiler furkey poults
Dose. See niotes at beginning of section 18.6 for methods
Withdrawal Periods. Poulry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
 of admi nistration, see manufacturer s details for vacci nation
programme
18.6.28Turkeyrhinotracheitis
P Colombovac PMV/Pox (Fort Dodge) UK
Turkey rhinotracheitis (TRT) is caused by pneumovirus
Injection, cornbined pararmyxovirus and pigeon pox vaccine, prepared frorm
infection. Live and inactivated vaccines are available. The
inactivated avian pararmyxovirus (PMV-1), live pigeon pox virus strain DD,
for pigeons
live vaccine is available for protection of turkeys against
Withdrawal Periods. Pigeons: slaughter withdrawal period nil
rhinotracheitis and broilers against the adverse effects of
Dose. Pigeons: by subc wtaneous injection, 0.2 mL
TRT virus infectiornl.
The live vaccination programme will depend on the site and
PML Nobilis IB + G + ND (Intervet) U/K
Injetion, combined avian infectious bronchitis, avian infectious busal dis-
advice should be sought. The vaccine should not be used
ease, and Newcastle disease vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorn avian irnfec-
onl sites where TRT has niot been diagnosed unless chal-
tious bronchitis virus strain M4l, avian infectious bursal disease virus strain
-dde s nou eu suiooea sun jo ssn pedinue si 
D78, Newcastle disease virus strain Clone 30, containing a suitable oil as
adjuvant,forchickens 1420 weeksofuge
priate on some multi-age sites.
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
The inactivated vaccine is used in birds of 28 weeks of age.
Dose. Poulry: by subcutaneous or intramusc ular injection, 0.5 mL
The birds should receive the live TRT vaccine, followed 4
to 6 weeks later by vaccination with the inactivated vaccine.
POM Nobilis IB + ND + EDS (Intervet) UK
Injection, cormbined avian infectious bronchitis, egg drop syndrome 1976,
and Newcastle disease vaccine, inactivated, prepared from avian infectious
UK
bronchitis virus strain M4l, egg drop syndrome virus strain BC 14, Newcas-
Indications. Vaccination against turkey rhinotracheitis
tle disease virus strain Clone 30, containing a suitable oil as adjuvant, for
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Warnings. See niotes at
chickens14-20 weeksofuge
beginning of chapter
Withdrawal Periods. Poulry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Dose. Poultry: by subcutaneous or intramusc ular injection, 0.5 mL
Dose. See notes at beginning of section 18.6 for methods
 of admi nistrati on
POM Nobilis IBmulti + ND + EDS (Intervet) UK
Injection, combined avian infectious bronchitis, egg drop syndrorme 1976,
Live vaccines
and Newcastle disease vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorn avian infectious
bronchitis vinus serotypes Mass. and D274, egg drop syndrorme virus strain
POM Nobilis TRT live (Intervet) UK
BC14, Newcastle disease virus strain Clone 30, containing a suitable oil as
By spraying, intrangsal, or eyedrop instillation, powder for reconstinution,
adjuvant,forchickens I6-20 weeksof age
urkey rhinotracheitis vaccine, living, prepared from virus, for turkeys,
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
broiler chickens (see section 18.6.26)
Dose. Poulry: by subeutaneous or intramusc ular injection, 0.5 rmL
490Vaccines and immunological preparations
PML Nobilis Ma5 + Clone 30 (Intervet) U/K
POM Nobilis RT+ IBmulti + G + ND (Intervet) UK
By spraying, intranasal or eyedrop instillation, oraddition to drinking water,
Injection, combined avian infectious bronchitis, avian infectious bursal dis-
powder for recon stitution, cormbined avian infectious bronchitis and Newcas-
ease, Newcastle disease, and urkey rhinotracheitis vaccine, inactivated, pre-
tle disease vaccine, living, prepared frorn infectious bronchitis strain Ma5,
pared frorn avian infectious bronchitis vinus strains Mass. strain M4l and
Newcastle disease virus strain Clone 30, for chickens more fhan I day of
strain D274/D207, avian infectious bursal disease virus strain D78, Newcas-
tle disease virus strain Clone 30, hurkey chinotracheitis virus strain
Withdrawal Periods. Pouitry: slaughter withdrawal period nil, egg with-
Bu#8544 subgroupA,containing a suitable ilas adjuvant,for chickens
drawal period nil
14-20 weeks ofage
Side-effects.
.Vaccination during laying period rmay cause transient drop irn 
Withdrawal Periods. Pou ltry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
egg production
Dose. Poultry: by intramuscular injection, 0.5 mL
PML Nobilis Pasteurella Erysipelas (Intervet) UK
POM Nobilis RT + IBmulti + ND + EDS (Intervet) UK
Injetion, inactivated, prepared frorn Ery. rhusiopathiae strains, P. mulocida
fnjection, cormbined avian infectious bronchitis, avian pneurmovirus, egg
Roberts types 2, 4 of avian origin, containing alurminium hydroxide as adju-
drop syndrome 1976, and Newcastle disease vaccine, inactivated, prepared
vant, for turkeys,othervian species
frorm avian infectious bronchitis virus strain M4 I and 249g, avain pneumovi-
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
rus strain Butl#8544, egg drop syndrorme virus strain BC14, Newcastle dis-
Dose. Poults more than 6 weeks of age: by subcutaneous or intramuscular
ease virus strain Clone 30, containing a suitable oil as adjuvant, for chickens
injection, 0.5 mL
14-20weeksofuge
Adults: by sube utaneous or intramusc ular injection, I mL
Withdrawal Periods. Poulry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Dose. Poultry: by intramuscular injection, 0.5 mL
POM Nobilis REO + IB + G + ND (Intervet) UK
Injection, combined avian infectious bronchitis, avian infectious bursal dis-
POM TUR 3 (Merial) U/K
ease, Newcastle disease, and reovinus vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorn 
Injection, cormbined Newcastle disease, pararmyxovinus 3, and urkey rhi-
avian infectious bronchitis virus Mass. strain M4l, irnmunogenic strains of
notracheitis vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorn viuses, containing a suitable
avian infectious bursal disease virus, Newcastle disease virus strain Clone 
oilasadjuvant,forfuture breederturkeys
30, reovirus strains 1733 and 2408, containing a suitable oil as adjuvant, for
Withdrawal Periods. Turkeys: slaughter withdrawal period nil, should rot be
chickens16-20weeksofage
used in laying birds
Withdrawal Periods. Poultry: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Dose. Turkeys: by int ramuscular injection, 0.3 mL at 8- 10 weeks before
Dose. Poulry: by subcutaneous or intramusc ular injection, 0.5 rmL
onset of laying. Repeat at 24 weeks before onset of laying
18.6 Immunological preparations for birds
491
Table 18.4 Combination vaccines for poultry available in the UK
Avian
Avian
Egg drop
infectious
Avain
Para-
infectious
bursat
syndrome
pneumo-
1976
Ery-
Newcastte
myxo
Pasteur-
bronchitis
Reo-
disease
virus
sipetas
disease
virus 3
ettosis
virus
Nobilis1B+G
+ND
(lntervet)
Nobilis IB +
ND + EDS
(lntervet)
Nobilis
]Bmulti + ND
+ EDS
(lntervet)
Nobilis Ma5 +
Clone 30
(Intervet
Nobilis
Pasteurella
Erysipelas
(lntervet)
Nobilis REO
+ IB +G +
ND (lntervet)
Nobilis RT +
++m
ND (lntervet)
Nobilis RT +
1Bmulti + ND
+ EDS
(lntervet)
TUR3
(Merial)
492 Vaccines and immunological preparations
18.7 Immunological preparations for
UK
rabbits
Indications. Vaccination against viral haemorrhagic dis-
ease (VHD)
18.7.1 Myxomatosis
Contra-indications. See niotes at beginning of chapter
18.7.2 Viral haemorrhagic disease
Side-effects. Occasional local reaction at injection site,
transient general malaise
Dose. Rabbits: (at least 10-12 weeks of age) by subcutane-
Vaccines are usually given for the prevention of disease in
ous injection, 1 mL
ex hibition rabbits and those kept for meat or fur production.
Risk of infection high, (less than 10 weeks of age), by sub-
With the increase in popularity of pet rabbits, vaccination is
cutaneous injection, 1 mL. Repeat after 1 month
in rural or semirural locations.
POM Cylap (Fort Dodge) UK
fnjection, VHD vaccine, inactivated, prepared from virus, containing a suita-
ble oil as adjuvant, for rubbits
18.7.1 Myxomatosis
Note. May be used in pregnant anirmals if animals handled with care
Myxomatosis infection affects rabbits and hares, although
the English hare is not susceptible to the disease. The dis-
Accidental self-injectior with oil-based vaccines can
ease is caused by myxoma virus, which resembles fibroma
cause severe pain and intense swelling, which may result
virus contained in the vaccine. The virus is transmitted from
in ischaemic necrosis and loss of a digit. Prompt medical
wild rabbits by mosquitoes and rabbit fleas to domestic
 attention is essential
animals. The incubation period is 2 to 8 days, and affected
animals usually develop swelling of the eyelids and peri-
orbital tissue, and purulent conjunctivitis. Subcutaneous
18.8 Immunological preparations for
swelling then extends to the face, ears, and anogenital area.
fish
Death usually occurs 11 to 18 days after development of
clinical signs. Occasionally an animal will survive and
18.8.1 Enteric redmouth disease
lesions regress over a 1 to 3 month period.
18.8.2 Erythrodermatitis
Vaccination is an aid in prevention of my xomatosis. Control
18.8.3 Furunculosis
during an outbreak also includes use of ectoparasiticides
18.8.4 Vibriosis
(see section 2.2.1)
18.8.5 Combination vaccines for fish
UK
Although effective vaccines have been developed for fish,
Indications. Vaccination against myxomatosis
little is known of the immune response in these animals and
Contra-indications. Pregnant animals
its relationship to the protection afforded by vaccination.
Side-effects. Occasional transient reaction at injection site
Cellular protection appears to be more important than
Dose. Rabbits: by intradermal injection, O.1 mL and by
humoral immune resporise.
subcutaneous injection, 0.9 mL. Revaccinate every 6-12
Vaccines are administered to fish by intraperitoneal injec-
months
tion, by dipping in a vaccine solution (immersion), by pass-
POM Nobivac Myxo (Intervet) UK
ing under a spray of vaccine solution, or by addition to feed.
Injection,powder for reconstiution, myxomatosis vaccine,living,prepared
Fish should be anaesthetised before vaccination by injection
frorm Shope fibroma vinus grown on cell-line tissue culure, for rabbits more
(see Prescribing for fish)
than6weeksof uge
Withdrawal Periods. Rabbits: slaughter withdrawal period nil
The dip method is less stressful and less time-consuming
than intraperitoneal injection. Dipping allows mass vacci-
nation of small fish (less than 15 g body-weight) and is
18.7.2 Viral haemorrhagic disease
cost-effective. However, the protection afforded by dipping
Viral haemorrhagic disease (VHD) is caused by a calicivi-
is not as great as that by intraperitoneal injection. Spraying
rus and characterised by an acute, often fatal infection. The
is not a commonly used method of vaccination.
incubation period is 1 to 3 days and rabbits may die sud-
 In general, the higher the water temperature, the quicker the
denly without development of clinical signs. In other ani-
development of immunity. At water temperatures of 10°℃
mals clinical signs include anorexia, pyrexia, apathy,
immunity will develop within 14 to 21 days. Temperatures
prostration, severe signs of CNS disturbance such as con-
below 5°C may result in an inadequate immune response.
vulsions or opisthotonus, dyspnoea, and a mucoid foaming
For effective vaccination of fish and to minimise failure,
or haemorrhagic nasal discharge. Animals that survive the
water temperature should be above 3.5°C and preferably
acute phase of the disease develop jaundice and die a few
above 5°C. Time should be allowed for immunity to
weeks later. Pathological findings include hepatic necrosis
develop.
and haemorrhages in various organs.
Fish should be large enough for vaccination. The minimum
Domestic rabbits may be vaccinated against the disease.
body-weight is 1 g for dipping and 20 g for intraperitoneal
The vaccination programme varies depending on the risk of
injection. Fish over 5 g body-weight will develop immunity
infection. Revaccination every 12 months is recommended.
that will last longer than those of 1 to 5 g. For this reason, it
18.8 Immunological preparations for fish 493
may be necessary to give fish weighing 1 to 2 g a booster
Withdrawal Periods. Fish: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Dose. Fish: by addition o feed, 0.0l mL/fish daily for days I5, repeat orl
Fish should be handled carefully, avoiding stress,which
days 1115
could result in a disease outbreak. In particular, vaccination
PML Ermogen (Novartis) UK
n n s n p o o  
Dip, enteric redmouth vaccine, inactivated, prepared from Y. ruckeri strain
Hagerman, for ruinbow trout 5 g body-weight or more
Care must be taken to control this infection in recently vac-
Dose. Fish: dilute I volurme with 9 volurmes water.
cinated fish. Clean water should be used and fish should be
By dip (fish 5 g body-weight or rmore), for 30 seconds
healthy. Bacterial gill disease and excess mucus in the gills
will prevent vaccine uptake and result in inadequate
The water temperature of the vaccine solution should not
immune response. In general, protection lasts for one year.
vary more than 2°C to 5°℃ from the water temperature
Salmon in the sea for longer than one year may have wan-
in the original holding facility
ing immunity and revaccination should be considered after
one year. This will also apply to rainbow trout broodstock
and some carp.
18.8.2 Erythrodermatitis
In salmon, vaccination in the spring before transfer to sea-
Erythrodermatitis (ulcer disease) is caused by Aeromonas
water may not be possible if the freshwater temperature is
saimonicida and affects cyprinids such as carp; it may also
too low. It may, therefore, be necessary to vaccinate fish in
affect goldfish. The organism is a variant of the one that
the previous autumn and if possible give a booster dose in
causes furunculosis in salmonids (see section 18.8.3).
the following spring. Development of immunity may be
reduced because of osmotic changes in salmon undergoing
smoltification.
18.8.3 Furunculosis
18.8.1 Enteric redmouth disease
Furunculosis caused by the Gram-negative orgarnism
Enteric redmouth disease (yersiniosis) caused by the bacte-
Aeromonas saimonicida affects all salmonid species such as
ria Yersinia ruckeri is mainly a disease of rainbow trout and
rainbow trout and salmon. Atlantic salmon are most suscep-
exhibits the usual clinical signs associated with Gram-nega-
tible whereas rainbow trout are comparatively resistant to
tive septicaemia such as extensive haemorrhages of the
infection. The disease often presents as an acute condition
skin, fins, and internal organs. Chronic forms of the disease
in young fish and a chronic condition in older stock. Clini-
are characterised by skin darkening, exophthalmia, and
cal signs include skin darkening, haemorrhages throughout
blindness.
the internal organs, and characteristic skin furuncles OT
Vaccination provides good protection and dipping is the
"boils'
commonly used method. Dip vaccines are effective but are
Improved husbandry techniques and the use of more effi-
usually repeated when the fish are over 5 g body-weight.
cient oil-based vaccines have helped to reduce the effect of
Annual revaccination is recommended. However rainbow
this serious economic disease. However protection against
trout harvested at 300 to 400 g (table size) will be ade-
furunculosis is difficult to achieve. Dip vaccination results
quately protected during their short lifetime by one vaccina-
in the development of a very low level of immunity. It has
tion. Atlantic salmon fry at 2 grams body-weight
are
not beenn effective in the field and is largely superseded by
occasionally vaccinated where the disease is endemic.
vaccination by injection.Injectable vaccines containing an
Oral vaccine is sprayed on to pelleted feed. It is used in fish
of 26 g body-weight or more that have received dip vaccine
agement have dramatically reduced the incidence of furunc-
4 to 6 months previously. A 10-day course is givern over 15
ulosis on salmon farms. Oral vaccination provides at best
days.
temporary protection against furunculosis. It should be used
for booster vaccination or temporary protection before
UK
effective long-term protection provided by injectable vac-
Indications. Vaccination against enteric redmouth
cines. Second or repeat vaccination is not required with oil-
Contra-indications. Side-effects. Safety in brood stock
adjuvated injectable vaccines.
not established; see niotes at beginning of chapter
Diseased fish should rot be vaccinated because the organi-
Dose. See preparation details
ism can produce a rumber of cellular products that may be
PML AquaVac ERM (Schering-Plough) UK
immunosuppressi ve.
Dip, enteric redmouth vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorn Y. ruckeri strain
Hagerman I, for rainbow trout 2 g body-weight or more
UK
Withdrawal Periods. Fish: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Indications. Vaccination against furunculosis
Contra-indications. Vaccination at water termperahure < 5° C
Dose. Fish: dilute I volurme with 9 volurmes water.
Contra-indications. Vaccination during
smoltification
By dip (fish 2 g body-weightor rmore), for 30 seconds
process; see notes at beginning of chapter
Side-effects. Intraperitoneal injection with oil-adjuvanted
PML AquaVac ERM Oral (Schering-Plough) UK
vaccine will cause peritoneal reaction which may result in
Oral liquid, for addition to feed, enteric redrmouth vaccine, inactivated, pre-
visceral adhesions and pigmentation; slight increase in
pared from Y. ruckeri strain Hagerman I , for rainbow frout 26 g body-weight
ormore
cases of fin rot
494Vaccines and immunological preparations
PML Alphaject 1200 (Alpharma) U/K
salmon. The immersion (dip) vaccine used in rainbow trout
Injection, furunculosis vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorm A. saimonicida,
destined for the sea is effecti ve. However these fish are usu-
containing suitable oil as adjuvant, for Aflantic suimon I6 g body-weight or
ally transferred to the sea at one year of age and over 100 g
more
Withdrawal Periods. Fish: slaughter withdrawal period nil
body-weight when their immunity will be waning. A
Dose. Fish: by intraperitoneal injeciion, 0.2 mL to anaesthetised fish
 booster vaccination+ at this time may be necessary.
PML AquaVac FNM Plus (Schering-Plough) U/K
The bacteria Vibrio viscosus has been implicated in the
Injection, furunculosis vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorn A. salmonicida
wintersore disease' lesions seen in Atlantic salmon smoults
strains MT004, MT423, containing a suitable adjuvant, for Aflantice salmon
recently introduced to seawater. This disease mainly occurs
more than25g body-weight or more
in colder winter months, and is characterised by large
Withdrawal Periods. Fish: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Contra-indications.Vaccination at watertemperature< [° C
eroded areas of skin over the flanks leading to deeper mus-
Dose. Fish: by int raperitoneal injection, 0.l mL to anaesthetised fish
cle lesions and death.
PML AquaVac Furovac 5 (Schering-Plough) U/K
Injection, furunculosis vaccine, inactivated, prepared from A. saimonicida
UK
strain MT004, for Atlantic salmon, cyrinids, and trout 25 g body-weight or
Indications. Vaccination against vibriosis
more
 Contra-indications. Side-effects. See notes at beginning
Withdrawal Periods. Fish: slaughter withdrawal period nil
of chapter
Dose. Fish: by int raperitoneal injection, 0.l rmL to anaesthetised fish
POM Furogen 2 (Novartis) UK
PML AquaVac Vibrio (Schering-Plough) U/K
Injection, furunculosis vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorm A. salmonicida,
Dip, vibriosis vaccine, inactivated, prepared frorm V. anguillarum biotype I
containing a suitable oil as adjuvant, for Aflantic salmon
 m () q  ()
Withdrawal Periods. Fish: slaughter withdrawal period nil
weightund more
Dose. Fish: by intraperitoneal injection, 0.l mL to anaesthetised fish
Withdrawal Periods. Fish: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Dose. Fish: dilute I volume with 9 volurmes water.
Accidental self-injection with oil-based vaccines can
By dip (fish 3 g body-weight or rmore), for 30 seconds
in ischaemic necrosis and loss of a digit. Prompt medical
18.8.5 Combination vaccines for fish
attention is essential
UK
PML Alphaject 4000 (Alpharma) UK
18.8.4 Vibriosis
fnjection, cormbined furunculosis, vibriosis, and cold water vibriosis vaccine,
inactivated, prepared frorm A. salmonic ida var salmonicida, V anguillarum
Vibriosis is caused by Vibrio anguiflarum and affects many
serotypes 0l, 02, V. saimonicida, containing a suitable oil as adjuvant, for
species of marine fish. Rainbow trout farmed in the sea are
Atlantic saimon 45g body-weight ormore
particularly susceptible. Other Vibrio spp. can be involved
Withdrawal Periods. Fish: slaughter withdrawal period nil
Dose.Fish: by intraperitoneal injection,0.2 mL to anaesthetised fish
in secondary infection. V. saimonicida causes cold water
vibriosis (Hitra disease) in Atlantic salmon. Usually seen at
POM Alphaject S200 (Alpharma) UK
colder temperatures, this disease has beenl observed in fish
Injection, cornbined furunculosis, vibriosis, cold water vibriosis, and *winter-
in Norway and the Shetland Isles. Affected fish are dark and
sore disease' vaccine, irnactivated, prepared frorm A. salmonicida var saimon-
anorexic with distinct haemorrhages on the viscera and also
icida, V anguillarum serotypes Ol, 02, V salmonicida, V yiscosus,
have ascites and anaemia.
containing a suitable oil as adjuvant, for Aflantic salmon 42 g body-weighf
Vaccination against Vanguillarum is more commonly
ormore
Withdrawal Periods. Fish: slaughter withdrawal period nil
undertaken in marine-grown rainbow trout than Atlantic
Dose. Fish: by intrape ritoneal injection, 0.2 mL to anaesthetised fish
495
19
HERBAL MEDICINES
Contributor:
potential risk. In particular, great caution should be exer-
CEI Day MA, VetMB,MRCVS
cised in the treatment of pregnant animals.
Preparation and administration of herbal medicines.
Alternative or complementary therapies are becoming
Herbal medicines are available in several different forms.
widely used particularly in Europe and the USA. The main
The most common form is whole plant or the active portion
forms of therapy included under this title are: acupuncture
of the plant, dried and chopped or powdered. This may be
(not discussed here), homoeopathy, aromatherapy, and
administered via the food, made into tablets, or incorpo-
ns u s si  (  
rated in a sugar coating for ease of administration. The herb
of this chapter. In the UK, the prescriptiorn and use of non-
may alternatively be made into a liquid formulation by
proprietary herbal, homoeopathic, and aromatherapy medi-
extraction in several ways. It can be made into a tea or
cines in animals is restricted to veteri narians.
tisane by infusion. Plants containing those active ingredi-
Modern drug medicine owes much to its herbal origins,
ents that are more difficult to extract can be decocted (pre-
many powerful and effective drugs being the result of
pared slowly over a low heat in a pan). Those containing a
ex traction, purification, and modification from traditional
significant proportion of volatile oils may best be prepared
by maceration (soaked in cold water for about twelve
losophy and practical use from modern conventional medi-
hours), the resultant mixture is warmed gently, strained to
cine. It involves the use of plants in therapeutic doses, oftenl
remove residual plant debris, and may be sweetened with
using a number of different herbs in combination, to treat a
honey or syrup for palatability. Alternatively, an alcoholic
patient's clinical signs. The herbs are selected according to
extract (tincture) of a plant may be made and stored in glass
the indi vidual animal's percei ved needs on the basis of their
 dropper bottles for simplicity of dosing. This form is not
direct pharmacological actions, in a broadly similar way to
widely acceptable to animals (particularly cats) unless
modern drugs but are used in a more holistic fashion than
diluted or added to food.
modern conventional medicines (see below).
Herbal medicines may also be employed for external use,
Homoeopathy is often confused with herbal medicine. This
 being made into compresses, ointments, or creams for direct
is because many homoeopathic medicines are derived from
application to lesions. Poultices of various herbs are a tradi-
plants. Homoeopathy, however, is based on the principle of
tional form of treatment for injuries and ulcers.
"like should be treated by like’ and involves the administra-
 In a more modern approach, the pharmacologically-active
tion, usually in extreme dilutions, of those remedies that, in
 ingredients from plant material may be identified, ex tracted,
purified, and used as the medicine, the remainder of the
individual most closely mimicking those expressed by the
plant being discarded. This is not the traditional and empiri-
diseased patient. The mechanism of action is unclear but
cally developed method and the resultant medicine is
research based on energy realms continues. It is almost cer-
clearly different in nature from the original plant substance.
tain that it will be in the complex field of bioenergetics that
 Arguments surround this method. Proponents believe it is a
answers will develop. Side-effects and drug residues are not
safer, more effective, more easily controlled means of
an issue when using the usual ex treme dilutions of homoeo-
applying herbal medicine. Opponents maintain that the
pathic medicines. Specific postgraduate study in veterinary
method removes a plant *drug' from its holistic whole-plant
homoeopathy is available and should be undertaken prior to
context, thus changing its mode of action, removing syner-
using this exacting form of therapy, in order to ensure
gists, and rendering the resultant medicine more likely to
responsible and effective use of homoeopathic medicines.
produce side-effects.
Aromatherapy or the use of essential oils is also frequently
Traditional herbal medicines are selected to help the body
confused with herbal medicine. The aromatic (volatile)
to regain balance and restore homoeostasis. Modern drugs
compounds (not just oils, as the name might suggest) that
modify specific biochemical and physiological processes of
are used in aromatherapy are indeed extracted from plants 
the body. This is the fundamental difference between tradi-
but those oils are pharmacologically very powerful and
tional herbal medicine and modern science. It is in this
have specific effects which are different from those of the
more complex and esoteric field that the concurrent use of
whole plant. The potential side-effects or toxicity of plants
either modern drugs or chemically extracted active ingredi-
may be enhanced by the method of extraction in some
ents of plants, alongside herbal medicines, may disturb the
cases. Exposure of the olfactory mucosa to volatile medi-
 delicate intended purpose of the traditional herbalist. Con-
cines for example will result in detectable blood concentra-
currently administered modern medicines have the potential
tions almost immediately.]
Effective
transcutaneous
to delay or to destroy the balancing action of herbal medi-
absorption also occurs and is an accepted means of adminis-
cines and, as a general rule, should not be used at the same
tration. The use of and the principles of action of *essential
time. It is recommended to allow at least one week to elapse
between the use of modern drugs and herbal medicines,
496 Herbal medicines
unless there has been an intended depot or residual effect of
the modern drug, in which case the period should be
recei ve a marketing authorisation for use in that application.
extended accordingly.
The formulae are based on traditional practice and the wis-
Herbs are classi fied in modern herbal medicine according to
 dom behind the selection is based upon years of human
their spheres of action. Many herbs contain ingredients
experience and practice. However, the use of these ^off-the-
which provide the whole plant with several such actions
shelf’ medicines does not recognise the importance of the
combined in the one medicine. Recognised actions include
individual patient in the same way as does traditional herb-
alterative, anodyne, anthelmintic, anticatarrhal, antiemetic,
alism nor does it select combinations of plants according to
 anti-inflammatory, antilithic, antibacterial, antifungal, anti-
 the perceived unique needs of the individual patient. Never-
spasmodic, aperient/laxative, aromatic, astringent, bitter,
theless, the products have been used for many years with
cardiac, carminative, cathartic/purgative, cholagogue and
success in their stated fields and serve as a useful bridge to
anticholagogue, demulcent, diaphoretic, diuretic, ecbolic,
herbal medicine for the practitioner not experienced or
emetic, emollient, expectorant, febrifuge, galactagogue,
trained in the folklore wisdom of traditional herbal
hepatic, hypnotic, nervine, rubefacient, sedative,
sial-
medicine.
ogogue, soporific, stimulant, styptic, tonic, vesicant, and
Side-effects of herbal medicines. The safety of herbal
yulnerary.
medicines is of paramount importance. For proprietary
Alternatively, herbal medicines may be classified according
preparations the manufacturers guidelines on dosage
to the category of constituents in the composition. Constitu-
should be strictly observed. If concurrent coniventional
ents include acids, alcohols, alkaloids, anthraquinones, bit-
 medication is being administered for the same purpose, the
ters, carbohydrates, cardiac glycosides,
coumanins,
flavones, flavonoid glycosides, phenols, saponins, tannins,
be taken into account if the modern drug is likely to have a
and volatile oils. The individual context of these com-
similar action or is related to the herbal medicine.
pounds in each plant species, however, makes for difficul-
 The administration of more toxic agents such as aristolo-
ties in adopting this as a medically valid classification.
chia, bryony, deadly nightshade, foxglove, hemlock, horse-
Many herbs provide a useful source of minerals and vita-
tail, lobelia, monkshood, mugwort, and Saint John s Wort
minis and, in herbivores, some may be essential dietary
Jo ae uogedde pue saesop ssneog pepioae sg pinous
components.
critical importance and because experience, skill, and close
Herbal medicines are traditionally selected according to the
monitoring of the patient are required for their safe usage.
perceived needs of the patient and based upon the individ-
Plants may contain toxic substances and care must be
ual herbs constituents in relation to the above mentioned
employed in their use. They should only be used in combi-
actions. Whether single herbs are used or a combination of
nation if their effects are known to be synergistic, since
herbs is selected depends upon the spread of activity of each
their actions have the potential to counteract each other, or
herb and whether or not it supplies the necessary spectrum
to combine in a more toxic whole. Similar warnings apply
of action in the body.
to the concurrent use of conventional drugs, in that the
It is of fundamental
1 importance in herbal medicine that
properties of the two can combine, the sum of the whole
plants are identified correctly. An example of simple and
being different in quality from the parts or even potentially
dangerous  confusion  is 比
between foxglove (Digitalis
toxic. It is therefore also strongly recommended to avoid
purpurea) and comfrey (Symphytum officinale),before their
the simultaneous use of conventional medicines and herbal
flowering stages. They should be harvested from unpolluted
medicines unless the combined acti vity is quite clear and is
areas (where possible) and should, if cultured, be grown
not potentially harmful.
without the use of modern agrochemicals. It is advisable
Finite quantities of pharmacologically active substances are
that, where possible, indigenous species should be used
used in herbal medicines and blood and tissue residues must
rather than exotic herbs (for example, Chinese herbs)
be taken into consideration when treating animals used in
because they may prove more suited to the patient's consti-
competitions or food-producing animals. Herbal medicines
tution that has developed in a similar climate and geograph-
should not be used before slaughter of food-producing ani-
ical context.
mals or before competition unless they are known to be
Use of herbal medicines. The types of conditions 
for
potentially available as part of that animals naturat diet in a
which herbal medicines are commonly used in veterinary
grazi ng context.
 practice include anxieties and mental conditions, locomotor
Herbal ‘substitutes' for modern drugs are currently being
disorders, digestive or cardiovascular disturbances, parasit-
marketed. These should only be used if the claims can be
ism, pregnancy and parturition, and skin conditions. A full
 supported by data of quality, safety, and efficacy and if they
list for an experienced herbalist could cover the entire spec-
are not likely to suppress signs of disease such that proper
trum of disease.
medical attention may be delayed.
Proprietary preparations of herbal medicines are available
As with the use of all medicines, warnings should always be
(see below). These preparations contain ingredients that
given to observe the animal carefully during the administra-
 conform to the identification and specifications given in the
tion of herbal medicines in order to identify any allergic or
British Herbal Pharmacopoeia. Single herbs and combina-
idiosyncratic reaction. In additon, herbal medicines should
tions of herbs are tested in the context of certain disease sit-
be used with caution during pregnancy. Many nervines,
497Herbal medicines
stimulants, or tonics may affect the fetus or may induce
GSL Greenleaf Tablets (Denes) UK
uterine contractions. If there is doubt, herbal medicines
Fabiets, chlorophyll 32.8 mg, ferrous sulfate 32 mg, nettles 4l mg, for dogs,
should not be administered to pregnant animals.
cafs
Indications. Traditional herbal rermedy for prophylaxis against disease;
Storage of herbal medicines. In genieral, herbs should be
inflarmrm atory conditions, particularly derrmatitis and arthritis
collected fresh each year and stocks not accumulated such
Contra-indications. Pregnant and lactating arimals
that supplies overrun the year s requirements. Dried herbs
GSL Kelp Seaweed Tablets (Dorwest Herbs) U/K
should be stored in glass containers in a warm, dry, dust-
Tablets, s/c, extract Fucus 5:1 20 rmg, Fucus I50 rmg, for dogs and cats more
free atmosphere, protected from light. They should not be
than 10 kg body-weight
tightly packed and should be dated for ease of stock control.
Indications. Traditional herbal rermedy for symptormatic relief of rheumatic
Proprietary preparations should be stored in accordance
pain, poor hair growth and pigrmen tation; aid in treatrment of obesity
Contra-indications. Anirmals less than I0 kg body-weight 
Warnings. Care with administration during hot weather to anirmals prone to
ex piry date specified.
overheating and who have a skin disorder
GSL Kidney Tablets (Denes) UK
Tableis, aqueous extract of buchu 45 mg, aqueous extract of cascara BP 30
mg, aqueous extract of parsley piert 45 rmg, aqueous extract of Uva ursi 45
UK
mg, cayenne 15 rmg, colophony BP 7.5 mg, juniper oil 0.00l rmL, for dogs,
 Indications. See preparation details
cafs
Indications. Traditional herbal rermedy for kidney problerms, cystitis, blad-
Contra-indications. Allergy to any of the raw ingredients;
der stones, and other urinary problerms
see preparation details
Contra-indications. Pregnant and lactating animals
Side-effects. See preparation details
Warnings. Consult a veterinarian if condition fails to
GSL Malted Kelp Tablets (Dorwest Herbs) UK
improve; see preparation details
Tablets, extract rmalt 90 rmg, Fucus 360 mg, for dogs αnd cats more fhan 5 kg
body-weight
Dose. See manufacturer s information
Indications. Traditional herbal rermedy for symptormatic relief of poor hair
growth and pigrnentation; loss of appetite
CSL Damiana and Kola Tablets (Dorwest Herbs) UK
Contra-indications. Anirmals less than 5 kg body-weight
Tablets, s/c, extract darmiana 4:1 57.5 mg, extract saw palrmetto 6:1 7.5 mg,
kola nuts 45 mg, for dogs, cats
GSL Mixed Vegetable Tablets (Dorwest Herbs) UK
Indications. Tradition al herbal remedy for for relief of lack of alertness and
s  e y      d  
starmina
20 mg, watercress 70 mg, for dogs, cafs
 Contra-indications. Male breeding anirmals, pregnant anirmals 
Indications. Traditional herbal remedy for symptormatic relief of rheuma-
tisrm, arthritis, skin, and kidney disorders; diuretic to aid norrmal urinary
CSL Denex (Denes) UK
elirmination
Tableis, aqueous extract of barbery 32.4 mg, aqueous ex tract of dandelion
root 32.4 rmg, aqueous extract of kava kava 32.4 rmg, eucalyplus oil PhEur
GSL Natural Herb Tablets (Dorwest Herbs) U/K
10.8 mg, for dogs, cafs
Tabieis, aloes 45 mg, cascara 30 rmg, dandelion root 30 ng, senna leaf 90 mg,
Indications. Traditional herbal rermedy for liver disorders, some kidney
valerian root 30 mg, for dogs, cafs
problerms, cystitis and other similar diseases
Indications. Traditional herbal rermedy for symptormatic relief of constipa-
Contra-indications. Pregrnant and lactating anirmals
tion; aid in treatment of furballing in cats
Contra-indications. Pregnant and lactating animals
CSL Garlie Tablets (Denes)UK
Tablets, garlic 194.4 mg, gadic oil 0.56 mg, for dogs, cats;, 50, 100, 400
CSL Nerve Tablets (Denes) UK
Indications. Traditional herbal remedy for prophylaxis for infection,
Tabiets, Asafetida tinchure BP 21 .6 mg, gentian 64.8 rmg, hops 8.1 mg, scull-
worms, and fleas
cap 48.6 mg,valerian 64.8 mg,for dogs and cats more than 6 months of αge
Contra-indications. Concument an ticoagulants
Indications. Traditional herbal rermedy for excitability, nervousness, hyste-
ria, arnd other nervous disorders 
GSL Garlie Tablets (Dorwest Herbs) UK
Contra-indications. Pregnant and lactating anirmals; anirmals less than 6
Fablets, s/c, garlie 30 mg, garlic oil 0.00l mL, for dogs, cats
rmonths of age
Indications. Traditional herbal rermedy for prophylaxis for general health,
GSL Raspberry Leaf Tablets (Denes) UK
respiratory conditions
Tablets, raspberry leaf 129.6 mg, for dogs, cats
Indications. Traditional herbal rermedy for pregnancy and pseudo-
CSL Garlic and Fenugreek Tablets (Dorwest Herbs) UK
pregnancy
Fablets, s/c, fenugreek 16 mg, garlic oil 220 rmicrograrms, for dogs, cats
Indications. Traditional herbal rermedy for symptormatic relief of rheurma-
GSL Raspberry Leaf Tablets (Dorwest Herbs) UK
tisrm, arthritis, skin conditions, coughs, and rminor infections
Tableis, extracted raspberry leaf 3:150 mg,for dogs, cts
Indications. Traditional herbal rermedy for syrm ptorm atic relief of problerms
GSL Gastric Tablets (Denes) UK
Fabieis, light kaolin 1 60 mg, liquorice 10 rmg, peppermint oil PhEur 0.00 1
rmL, sodiurn bicarbonate 40 mg, for dogs, cats
GSL Seullcap and Valerian Tablets (Dorwest Herbs) UK
Tablets, s/c, extract gentian 2:1 24 mg, extract rmistletoe 3:1 50 mg, extract
disorders, travel sickness 
valerian 5:1 50 rmg, scullcap 30 rmg, for dogs, cafs
Contra-indications. Pregr ant and lactating anirmals 
nervousress, excitability, and travel sickness; adjunct in the treatrment of
epilepsy
Contra-indications. Pregnant and lactating anirmals
499
Appendix 1: Drug Interactions
Contributor:
ated with the action of one drug on the plasma-protein
R G Cooke BSc, PhD
 binding of another. Plasma-protein binding sites are non-
specific and any drug that binds to plasma proteins is
In veterinary practice, multiple drug therapy is fre-
capable of displacing another, thereby increasing the
quently used. It is important to realise that particular
proportion of free drug able to diffuse from plasma to its
site of action. However, it is only drugs that exhibit a
their independent effects. The interaction may result
high degree of protein binding that demonstrate an
either in a loss of therapeutic activity or an increase in
increase in effect when displaced. This becomes particu-
the therapeutic, toxic, or side-effects of one or both of
larly significant if the drug displaced has a low therapeu-
the drugs.
tic index. An example of this type of drug is warfarin,
Drug interactions in vivo may be either pharmacody-
which may be displaced by compounds such as sul-
 namic or pharmacokinetic. A pharmacodynamic inter-
phonamides or NSAIDs, leading to an enhanced antico-
action occurs when one drug has an agonistic
agulant effect and a risk of haemorrhage.
antagonistic action on an effect of the other drug. An
Interactions affecting drug metabolisrm may occur in the
interaction may occur when two drugs act at the same
 liver. The presence of some drugs in the liver can result
receptor site or when they act at different receptor sites
in an increase in the liver enzyme concentration after
 that produce similar or opposing effects on a tissue. This
only a few days. Induction of the hepatic microsomal
type of interaction is normally predictable on the basis of
enzyme system by one drug can gradually increase the
the mechanism of drug action and may be expected in all
rate of metabolism of another, resulting in lower plasma-
cases of concurrent administration of the two drugs. Fur-
drug concentrations and reduced effect. For example,
thermore, it can be expected to occur with all similar
administration of phenobarbital may lead to 
the
drugs within a particular group. An example of this type 
of interaction is that between aminoglycoside antibacte-
phenytoin, and
1 hydrocortisone and consequently a
rials and non-depolarising muscle relaxants at the neu-
leading
reduction in their therapeutic activity.
romuscular
junction,
to
an
enhanced
More rarely, inhibition of liver enzymes may occur For
neuromuscularblockade.
example,chloramphenicol may increase the effects of
 A pharmacokinetic interaction occurs when one drug
barbiturates by inhibiting their breakdown by liver
modifies the absorption, distribution, metabolism, or
enzymes. This may continue for several weeks after
treatment with chloramphenicol has ceased.
not be seen in every case of co-administration and may
Interactions affecting drug excretion may be seen when
depend on variables such as the state of health or age of
a drug or an active metabolite is excreted in the urine.
the patient and the time interval between administration
Drugs that cause alkalinisation of the urine will facilitate
of the two drugs. There may also be differences in sus-
the ionisation of weak acids and increase their excretion
ceptibility to such interactions between various species.
and conversely reduce the excretion of weak bases.
Drug interaction at the site of subcutaneous, intramuscu-
Drugs that acidify urine will have the opposite effects.
lar, or intravenous injection is rare and the majority of
Drugs that render the urine more alkaline include
interactions affecting absorption are seen following oral
sodium bicarbonate and sodium citrate, while ammo-
administration. Absorption of drugs from the gastro-
nium chloride or ascorbic acid will make the urine more
intestinal tract will depend on their solubility and degree
acidic. Examples of drugs that are weak bases include
of ionisation. Factors that affect these variables may
quinidine and
1 pethidine, and weak acids include
modify the extent of drug absorption. For example, the
sulphonamides,
salicylates,
barbiturates,
and
absorption of tetracyclines from the gastro-intestinal
phenylbutazone.
tract can be reduced in the presence of various metal
Considering the frequent use of multiple drug therapy in
ions, with which they form insoluble chelates.
veterinary medicine, it is surprising how infrequently
The absorption of a drug may be dependent on its gastro-
drug interactions are reported. This may be because non-
intestinal transit time. A drug that increases gastro-intes-
fatal interactions are not considered noteworthy, that
tinal motility may adversely affect the absorption of
therapeutic failure is accepted, or that interactions are
another drug. This usually leads to lower plasma-drug
not considered as a cause of adverse effects. However, if
concentrations being achieved resulting in apparent ther-
practitioners consider the general pharmacology of the
apeutic failure. Less frequently, an interaction may occur
drugs involved when they are using multiple drug ther-
in which a reduction in gastro-intestinal motility may
apy then it should be possible to reduce the incidence of
lead to higher plasma-drug concentrations resulting in
drug interactions. Undoubtedly, many interactions
toxicity.
remain to be discovered and any suspected interaction
Interactions affecting drug distribution are often associ-
should be reported to the manufacturer and the VMD.
500 Appendix 1: Drug Interactions
Table of Drug Interactions
The following is an alphabetical list of drugs and their interactions. Each drug or group is listed in the alphabetical list and
also against the drug or group with which it interacts. The interaction may only be listed once. Therefore, when checking
for a potential interaction, it may be necessary to refer to the entries for each of the drugs involved. These drug interac-
tions are potentia! hazards and may not have been proven in particular species or breeds; the symbol · denotes interactions
listed in UK veterinary data sheets. This list is not comprehensive; absenice from the list does not imply safety
Drug
Interacting drug(s)
Drug interaction(s)
ACE inhibitors
· Diuretics
increased risk of hyperkalaemia with potassium
sparing diuretics; increased risk of hypotension
· General anaesthetics
increased risk of hypotension
Insulins
possible hypoglycaemic activity with reduce insulin
requiremenit
NSAIDs
risk of acute renal failure
Acepromazine
see Phenothiazine derivatives
Acetazolamide
Aspirin
reduced excretion of acetazolamide
Corticosteroids, corticotropin
increased risk of hypokalaemia
Diuretics
increased risk of hypokalaemia with loop and thiazide
diuretics
Quinidine
inicreasedplasma-quinidine conicenitrationreported
rarely
Adrenoceptor
Beta-adrennoceptor blocking drugs
enhanced hypertensi ve effect especially with non-
stimulants
selective beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs
· Clomipramine
enhanced effect of adrenoceptor stimulants
·Halothane, isoflurane, methoxyflurane
Insulins
possible increase in insulin requirement
· Selegiline
risk of either reduced or enhanced effect of
adrenoceptor stimulants
· Theophylline
synergistic effects leading to increased side-effects
such as cardiac arrhythmias
· Tilmicosin
reduced efficacy with dobutamine
Alfacalcidol
· Vitamin D contaiming preparations
enhanced effect
Alimemazine
see Phenothiazine derivatives
Allopurinol
Cyclophosphamide
enhanced bone-marrow toxicity
Mercaptopurine
enhanced effect of mercaptopurine
 Oral anticoagulants
enhanced effect of interacting drug
Alpha,-
 General anaesthetics, potentiated
increased risk of cardiac arrhythmias
adrenoceptor
sulphonamdes
stimulants
Altrenogest
see Progestogens
Aluminium hydroxide see Antacids
Appendix 1: Drug Interactions 501
Table of Drug Interactions (continued)
Drug
Interacting drug(s)
Drug interaction(s)
Aluminium salts
· Fluoroquinolones
reduced bioavailability of fluoroquinolones
Ambutonium
see Antimuscarinic drugs
Amiloride
see Diuretics
Aminoglycosides
Amphotericin B, *cephalosporins
increased risk of nephrotoxicity
Cisplatin
ototoxicity
·Diuretics
increased risk of ototoxicity with loop diuretics
Enflurane, ether
enhaniced neuromuscular blockade
Methox yflurane
enhanced neuromuscular blockade; increased risk of
nephrotoxicity
Muscle relax ants
enhanced neuromuscular blockade with non-
depolarising muscle relax ants
Neostigmine
antagonism of interacting drug
·Potentially nephrotoxic or ototoxic
increased risk of toxicity
drugs
· Thiopental
enhanced effect of thiopental with kanamycin or
streptomycin
Amphotericin B
Aminoglycosides
increased risk of nephrotoxicity
Anabolic steroids
Insulins
possible hypoglycaemic activity with reduced insulin
requiremenit
Warfarin
enhanced anticoagulant effect
Antacids
Aspirin
large doses of antacids increase aspirin excretion
Barbiturates, chlorpromazine,
antacids cause reduced absorption of interacting drug
·fluoroquinolones, ketoconazole,
penicillamine, phenylbutazone,
*tetracyclines
Quinidine
increased plasma-quinidine concentration reported
rarely
Sucralfate
reduced effecti veness of interacting drug
Anti-
Combinations of 2 or more anti
enhanced my ocardial depression
arrhythmic drugs
arrhythmic drugs
See also under individual drugs
Anticholinergics
see Antimuscarinic drugs
Anticholinesterase compounds see Organophosphorus compounds; see also under individual drugs
502 Appendix 1: Drug Interactions
Table of Drug Interactions (continued)
Drug
Interacting drug(s)
Drug interaction(s)
Antidiabetic drugs Beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs
enhanced hypoglycaemic effect
· Corticosteroids, corticotropin,
antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect
levothyroxine, progestogens
Diuretics
antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect with loop and
thiazide diuretics
Antiepileptic drugs · Phenothiazine derivatives
antagonism of anticonvulsant effect
See atso under individual drugs
Antihistamines
Combination with any other CNS
enhanced depressant effects
depressant drug
Antimuscarinic
·Clenbuterol
tachycardia with atropine
drugs
· Clomipramine
enhanced effect of antimuscarinics
Ketoconazole
reduced ketoconazole absorption
* Metoclopramide
antagonism because interacting drugs have opposing
effects on gastro-intestinal motility
· Phenothiazine derivatives
reduced plasma-phenothiazine concentration
Apramycin
see Aminoglycosides
Aspirin
Acetazolamide
reduced excretion of acetazolamide; increased
salicylate toxicity
Antacids
large doses of antacids increase aspirin excretion
Diuretics
antagonism of diuretic effect with spironolactone
Heparin
enhanced anticoagulant effect
Insulins
requirement
Methotrexate
reduced methotrexate excretion
Metoclopramide
increased aspirin absorption
NSAIDs
avoid concurrent administration of other NSAIDs
 Phenytoin
transient potentiation
Warfarin
increased risk of bleeding due to antiplatelet effect
Atenolol
see Beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs
Atropine
see Antimuscarimic drugs
Appendix 1: Drug Interactions 503
Table of Drug Interactions (continued)
Drug
Interacting drug(s)
Drug interaction(s)
Barbiturates
Antacids
reduced barbituate absorption
· Clomipramine
enhaniced effect of barbiturates
· Corticosteroids, corticotropin
increased risk of potassium loss; increased
corticosteroid metabolism
* Chloramphenicol, * metronidazole,
barbiturates cause reduced plasma concentration of
 progestogens, *theophylline
interacting drug
·Doxycycline
reduced half-life and effect of doxycycline
· Phenylbutazone
Teduced metabolism of barbiturates
Warfarin
reduced anticoagulant effect
See also under individual drugs and Antiepileptic drugs
Benazepril
see ACE inhibitors
Bendroflumethiazide see Diuretics
Benzodiazepines
· Clomipramine
enhanced effect of benzodiazepines
·Isoflurane
reduced isoflurane requirement for induction and
maintenanice
 Other CNS depressants
enhanced sedation or respiratory and cardiovascular
depression
Beta-adrenoceptor
Antidiabetic drugs
enhanced hypoglycaemic effect
blocking drugs
Adrenoceptor stimulants
enhanced hypertensi ve effect, especially with non-
selective beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs
Calcium-channel blockers
atrioventricular block
Cimetidine
increased plasma concentrati on of beta-adrenoceptor
sanp
· Clenbuterol
antagonism of effect
Diuretics
increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias in the
presence of hypokalaemia
General anaesthetics
enhanced hypotensive effects
Lidocaine and similar anti -arrhythmic
increased risk of myocardial depression and
drugs
bradycardia
Neostigmine
antagonism of interacting drug
·Tilmicosin
increased effect of tilmicosin
Beta-blockers
see Beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs
Betamethasone
see Corticosteroids
Bromocriptine
Metoclopramide
antagonism of hypoprolactinaemic effect
Bromophos
see Organophosphorus compounds
Buprenorphine
see Opioid analgesics
504  Appendix 1: Drug Interactions
Table of Drug Interactions (continued)
Drug
Interacting drug(s)
Drug interaction(s)
Butorphanol
see Opioid analgesics
Butyrophenones
· Cabergoline
reduced effect of cabergoline
· Metoclopramide
increased risk of extrapyramidal effects
Cabergoline
·Butyrophenones, metoclopramide,
reduced effect of cabergoline
· phenothiazines
· Hypotensi ve drugs (e.g. alpha-
enhanced effect of interacting drug
adrenoceptor blocking drugs, calcium-
channel blockers)
Calcium salts
Cardiac glycosides
large doses of intravenous calcium can precipitate
arrhythmias
Diuretics
increased risk of hypercalcaemia with thiazide
diuretics
• Fluoroquinolones, * tetracyclines
reduced absorption of interacting drugs
Captopril
see ACE inhibitors
Carbamazepine
· Clomipramine
increased plasma-carbamazepine concentration
Phenytoin
reduced plasma-phenytoin concentration
Carbaril
Combinations of 2 or more compounds
enhanced toxicity
with anticholinesterase activity
e.g. organophosphorus compounds
Cardiac glycosides Calcium salts, * polygeline
large doses of intravenous calcium can precipitate
arrhythmias
·Diuretics
increased toxicity if hypokalaemia occurs; enhanced
effect of digoxin with furosemide or spironolactone
Muscle relax ants
arrhythmias with depolarising muscle relax ants
Phenobarbital, *phenylbutazone,
reduced effect of digitoxin
phenytoin
Quinidine
enhanced effect of digoxin
Cephalosporins
· Aminoglycosides
increased risk of nephrotoxicity
·Diuretics
enhanced nephrotoxicity with loop diuretics
· Barbiturates
reduced plasma-chloramphenicol concentration;
Teduced barbiturate metabolism and prolonged
durati on of pentobarbi tal anaesthesia
·Clindamycin
antagonism of effect
·Phenylbutazone,*phenytoin
reduced metabolism of interacting drug
Sulphonylureas
enhanced hypogl ycaemic effect
Chloramphenicol
Warfarinl
enhanced anticoagulant effect
Chlorpropamide
see Sulphonylureas and Antidiabetic drugs
Appendix 1: Drug Interactions 505
Table of Drug Interactions (continued)
Drug
Interacting drug(s)
Drug interaction(s)
Chlorpyrifos
see Organophosphorus compounds
Ciclosporin
· Aminoglycosides, fluoroquinolones,
enhanced nephrotoxicity
· trimethoprim
· Antiepileptics, * potenti ated
decreased plasma-ciclosporin concentration
sulphonamides
* Ivermectin, * milbemycin
clinical signs of CNS toxicity
Diltiazem, fluconazole, itraconazole,
increased plasma-ciclosporin concentration
*ketoconazole, *macroli des,
metoclopramide, vitamin E
Cimetidine
Beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs,
increased plasma concentration of interacting drug
·clomipramine, diazepam, fluorouracil,
metroni dazole, pethidine, propranolol,
quinidine, theophylline
Erythromycin, phenytoin
reduced metabolism of interacting drug
Ketoconazole
reduced ketoconazole absorption
Lidocaine
increased risk of lidocaine toxicity
Warfarin
enhanced anticoagulant effect
Cisplatin
Aminoglycosides
increased risk of nephrotoxicity and possibly
ototoxicity
Clenbuterol
·Atropine
tachycardia
· Beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs
antagonism of effect
* General anaesthetics, *other
enhanced hypotensive effect
adrenoceptor stimulants, * vasodilators
• Dinoprost (PGF), *oxytocin
e uisoo au snp oi se se
on uterine moti lity
Clindamycin
* Chloramphenicol, * macrolides
antagonism of effect
· Muscle relaxants
enhanced neuromuscular blockade with non-
depolarising muscle relax ants
Clomipramine
· Adrenoceptor stimulants,
enhanced effect of interacting drug
· antimuscarinics, *barbiturates,
· benzodiazepines, *coumari n
· neuroleptics, *quinidine
• Carbamazepine, *phenytoin:
increased plasma concentration of interacting drug
* Cimetidine
increased plasma-clomipramine concentration
·Monamine oxidase inhibitors
enhanced effect of clomipramine
(e.g. selegiline)
506 Appendix 1: Drug Interactions
Table of Drug Interactions (continued)
Drug
Interacting drug(s)
Drug interaction(s)
CNS depressants
Antihistamines, opioid analgesics,
enhanced depressant effects
* phenothiazine derivatives
Acetazolamide
increased risk of hypokalaemia
· Anticoagulants
reduced effect of anticoagulants
· Antidiabetic drugs (e.g. insulin)
antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect
·Barbiturates, *phenylbutazone,
increased risk of potassium loss; *increased
· phenytoin, *rifampicin
corticosteroid metabolism
Corticosteroids
·Diuretics
antagonism of diuretic effect; increased risk of
hypokalaemia with loop and thiazide diuretics
Metoclopramide
aggression
•NSAIDs
increased risk of gastro-intestinal ulceration
· Pentosan polysulfate sodium
antagonism of effect
Corticotropin
Acetazolamide,barbiturates, diuretics,
increased risk of hypokalaemia
 phenytoin
Antidiabetic drugs
antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect
Metoclopramide
aggression
Coumafos
spunoduoo snoydsoydoueo aas
Cyclophosphamide
Allopurinol
enhanced bone-marrow toxicity
Cythioate
see Organophosphorus compounds
Danofloxacin
see Fluoroquinolones
Detomidine
· Potentiated sulphonamides
increased risk of cardiac arrhythmias
• Pethidine
generalised excitement
Dexamethasone
see Corticosteroids
Dichlorvos
see Organophosphorus compounds
Diethylcar-
· Levamisole, *organophosphorus
enhanced toxicity
bamazine
compounds
Diethylstilbestrol
see Oestrogens
Difloxacin
see Fluoroquinolones
Digoxin
see Cardiac glycosides
Dihydrostreptomycin see Ami noglycosides
Diltiazem
·Beta-adrenoceptor blocking drug,
increased deepression of cardiac conduction with risk
·digoxin
of bradycardia and A-V block
· Cimeti dine
increased plasma-diltiazem concentration
· Antiepileptics
increase plasma-antiepileptic (carbamazine,
phenytoin) concentration with potential toxicity
Appendix 1: Drug Interactions  507
Table of Drug Interactions (continued)
Drug
Interacting drug(s)
Drug interaction(s)
Diltiazem
· Immurosuppressant drugs
increase plasma-ciclosporin concentration
(continued)
·Lithium
increase plasma-lithium concentration with potential
neurotoxicity
• Muscle relaxants
enhanced effect of non-depolarising muscle relax ants
·Aminoglycosides
enhanced neuromuscular blocking activity
·Enflurane, ·halothane, *isoflurane
enhanced effect of diltiazem
Insulins
possible increase in insulin requirement
Dimpylate
see Organophosphorus compounds
Dinoprost
see Prostaglandins
Diuretics
· ACE inhibitors, potassium supplements 
increased risk of hyperkalaemia with potassium
sparing diuretics
Acetazolamide
increased risk of hypokalaemia with loop and thiazide
diuretics
·Aminoglycosides
enhanced ototoxicity with loop diuretics
Antidiabetic drugs
antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect with loop and
thiazide diuretics
Aspirin
antagonism of diuretic effect of spironolactone
Beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs
increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias in the
presenice of hypokalaemia
Calcium salts
increased risk of hypercalcaemia with thiazide
diuretics
· Cardiac glycosides
*increased toxicity if hypokalaemia occurs; enhanced
effect of digoxin with furosemide or spironolactone
·Cephalosporins
increased risk of nephrotoxicity with loop diuretics
· Corticosteroids, corticotropin
antagonism of diuretic effect; *increased risk of
hypokalaemia with loop and thiazide diuretics
Insulins
diuretics
Lidocaine
lidocaine effect antagonised by hypokalaemia with
loop and thiazide diuretics
Mannitol
decreased effect of loop diuretics
NSAIDs
antagonism of diuretic effect; increased risk of
hyper kalaemia with potassium-sparing diuretics
Oestrogeris
antagonism of diuretic effect
Quinidine
toxicity of quinidine increased by hypokalaemia with
loop and thiazide diuretics
• Sulphonamides
increased risk of sulphonamide allergy
Dobutamine
see Adrennoceptor stimulants
508 Appendix 1: Drug Interactions
Table of Drug Interactions (continued)
Drug
Interacting drug(s)
Drug interaction(s)
Doxapram
*Halothane, *isoflurane,
increased risk of cardiac arrhythmias
• methox yflurane
·Morphine
may induce convulsions
Doxycycline
·Barbiturates, *carbamazepine,
reduced half-life and effect of doxycycline
* diphenylhydantoin, *ethanol,
*phenytoin
• General anaesthetics
hypotension
• Other antibiotics
possible antagonism of the action of beta-lactams and
other bactericidal drugs
Ecothiopate
Muscle relax ants
enhanced neuromuscular blockade with depolarising
muscle relaxants
Eltenac
see NSAIDs
Enalapril
see ACE inhibitors
Enrofloxacin
see Fluoroquinolones
Epinephrine
see Adrenoceptor stimulants
Erythromycin
·Lincomycin
anitagonism of effect
Erythromycin
Ciclosporin, digoxin, midazolam,
 enhanced effects of interacting drug
phenytoin, quinidine, terfenadine,
•theophylline, warfarin
Estradiol
see Oestrogens
Ethinylestradiol
see Oestrogens
Ethylestrenol
see Anabolic steroids
Etiproston
see Prostaglandins
Fentanyl
see Opioid analgesics
Fenthion
see Organophosphorus compounds
Flumetasone
see Corticosteroids
Fluorogestone
see Progestogens
Fluoroquinolones
· Alumi nium salts, *antacids, *calcium
reduced bioavailability of fluoroquinolones
salts, *iron salts, *magnesium salts
· Nitrofurantoin
impaired efficacy of fluoroquinolones when used for
urinary tract infection
*NSAIDs
increased risk of seizures
·Theophylline
reduced clearance of theophylline
· Ciclosporin
enhanced nephrotox icity
·Cimetidine
impaired metabolism of fluoroquinolones
· Oral anticoagulants
enhaniced effect of oral anticoagulants
Appendix 1: Drug Interactions 509
Table of Drug Interactions (continued)
Interacting drug(s)
Drug interaction(s)
Fluorouracil
Cimetidine
increased plasma-fluorouracil concentration
Fluoxetine
·Selegiline
enhanced toxicity of fluoxetine
Fluvoxamine
Anti-arrhythmic drugs
enhanced myocardial depression
Antiepileptics
decreased efficacy due to lowering of seizure threshold
MAOIs (selegiline)
severe, possibly fatal, effect; respiratory failure;
seizures
 Propranolol
decreased metabolism of propranolol, bradycardia,
potential heart block
Folic acid
 Phenytoin
reduced plasma-phenytoin concentration
Framycetin
see Aminogl ycosides
Furosemide
see Diuretics
Gentamicin
see Aminoglycosides
Glibenclamide
see Sulphonylureas and Antidiabetic drugs
Glipizide
see Sulphonylureas and Antidiabetic drugs
Glycopyrronium
see Antimuscarinic drugs
Griseofulvin
·Phenobarbital,*phenylbutazone
increased griseofulvin metabolism 
Progestogens
reduced plasma-progestogen concentration
Warfarin
reduced anticoagulant effect
Halothane
·Acepromazine, * alpha -adrenoceptor
reduced halothane required for induction and
stimulants, *benzodiazepines, * opioids
maintenance
· Adrenoceptor stimulants
·Doxapram
increased risk of cardiac arrhythmias
·Ketamine
half-life of ketamine prolonged
·Muscle relaxants
increased effect of non-depolarising muscle relax ants
· Theophylline
arrhythmogenic effects
Haloxon
see Organophosphorus compounds
Heparin
Aspirin
enhanced anticoagulant effect
Hydrochlorothiazide see Diuretics
Hydrocortisone
see Corticosteroids
Hyoscine
see Antimuscarinic drugs
Ibafloxacin
see Fluoroquinolones
Imidapril
see ACE inhibitors
510 Appendix 1: Drug Interactions
Table of Drug Interactions (continued)
Drug
Interacting drug(s)
Drug interaction(s)
Insulins
beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs,
requirement
mebendazole, oxytetracycline
Beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs (less
possible increase in insulin requirement
common interaction), diltiazem,
dobutamine, epinephrine, levothyroxine,
thiazides, thyroid hormones
Iodofenphos
see Organophosphorus compounds
Iron salts
Penicillamine
reduced penicillamine absorption
· Fluoroquinolones, tetracyclines, zinc
reduced absorption of interacting drugs
salts
Isoflurane
· Acepromazine, *alpha -adrenoceptor
reduced isoflurane required for induction and
stimulants, * benzodiazepines, * opioids
maintenance
Adrenoceptor stimulants
arrhythmias with epinephrine or isoprenaline
·Doxapram
increased risk of cardiac arrhythmias
·Muscle relaxants
increased effect of non-depolarising muscle relax ants
Isoprenaline
see Adrenoceptor stimulants
Itraconazole
• Digoxin, * methylprednisolone
increased plasma concentration of interacting drug
· Phenobarbital
decreased plasma-itraconazole concentration
Kanamycin
see Aminoglycosides
Kaolin mixtures
Lincomycin, tetracyclines
reduced absorption of interacting drugs
Ketamine
·Halothane
half-life of ketamine prolonged
·Theophylline
reduced seizure threshold
Ketoconazole
Antacids, antimuscarinic drugs,
reduced ketoconazole absorption
cimetidine, ranitidine
Phenytoin
increased plasma-phenytoin concentration; reduced
plasma-ketoconazole concentration
Warfarin
enhanced anticoagulant effect
Ketoprofen
see NSAIDs
Levamisole
· Organophosphorus compounds,
enhanced toxicity
• diethylcarbamazine
Levothyroxine
Insulins
increased requirement for insulin
· Phenylbutazone
falsely low total plasma-levothyroxine concentration
Phenytoin
increased levothyroxine metabolism
Warfarin
enhanced anticoagulant effect
Appendix 1: Drug Interactions  511
Table of Drug Interactions (continued)
Drug
Interacting drug(s)
Drug interaction(s)
Lidocaine
Beta-adrenioceptor blocking drugs
increased risk of myocardial depression and
bradycardia
Lidocaine
Cimetidine
increased risk of lidocaine toxicity
Diuretics
lidocaine effect antagonised by hypokalaemia with
loop and thiazide diuretics
Lincomycin
Kaolin mixtures
reduced lincomycin absorption
· Erythromycin
antagonism of effect
Muscle relax ants
enhanced neuromuscular blockade with non-
depolarising muscle relax ants
Neostigmine
antagonism of interacting drug
Macrolides
·Clindamycin
antagonism of effect
Magnesiun salts
Muscle relax ants
enhanced neuromuscular blockade with non-
depolarising muscle relax ants
• Fluoroquinolones, * tetracyclines
reduced absorption of interacting drugs
Malathion
see Organophosphorus compounds
Marbofloxacin
see Fluoroquinolones
Meclofenamic acid
see NSAIDs
Mebendazole
Insulins
possible hypoglycaemic activity with reduced insulin
requirement
Medroxyprogesterone see Progestogens
Megestrol
see Progestogens
Meloxicam
see NSAIDs
Mercaptopurine
 Allopurinol
enhanced effect of mercaptopurine
Methohexital
see Barbiturates
Methotrexate
Aspirin, *phenylbutazone
reduced methotrexate excretion
Phenytoin
enhanced anti-folate effect
Methoxyflurane
*Acepromazine, *alpha -adrenoceptor
reduced methoxyflurane required for induction and
stimulants, *benzodi azepines, * opioids
maintenance
Adrenoceptor stimulants
arrhythmias with epinephrine or isoprenaline
Aminoglycosides
enhanced neuromuscular blockade; nephrotoxicity
·Doxapram
increased risk of cardiac arrhythmias
Methylprednisolone see Corticosteroids
512  Appendix 1: Drug Interactions
Table of Drug Interactions (continued)
Drug
Interacting drug(s)
Drug interaction(s)
Metoclopramide
onl gastro-intestinal motility
Aspirin
increased aspirin absorpti on
Bromocriptine
antagonism of hypoprolactinaemic effect
· Butyrophenones, *phenothiazi nes
increased risk of extrapyramidal effects
Cabergoline
reduced effect of cabergoline
Corticosteroids, corticotropin
aggression
Paracetamol
increased paracetamol absorption
Metoprolol
see Beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs
Metronidazole
·Barbiturates
increased metabolism of metronidazole
Cimetidine
increased plasma-metronidazole concentration
Phenytoin
reduced phenytoin metabolism
· Warfarin
enhanced anticoagulant effect
Miconazole
 Phenytoin
reduced phenytoin metabolism
Sulphonylureas
enhanced hypogl ycaemic effect
Warfarin
enhanced anticoagulant effect
Monensin
· Tiamulin
reduced monensin metabolism; severe growth
retardation
·Valnemulin
severe growth retardation
Morphine
see Opioid analgesics
Muscle relaxants
Aminoglycosides, *clindamycin,
enhanced neuromuscular blockade with non-
•halothane, isoflurane, lincomycin,
depolarising muscle relax ants
magnesium salts, polymyxin B sulfate
Cardiac glycosides
arrhythmias with depolarising muscle relax ants
Chl orpromazine, diphenhydramine,
enhanced neuromuscular blockade with depolarising
neostigmine, *organophosphorus
muscle relaxants
compounds, promethazine
Quinidine
enhanced neuromuscular blockade
Nadolol
see Beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs
Nandrolone
see Anabolic steroids
Narasin
* Tiamulin, * valnemulin
severe growth retardation
Neomycin
 Phenox ymethylpenicillin
reduced penicillin absorption
Warfarin
enhaniced anticoagulant effect
Appendix 1: Drug Interactions  513
Table of Drug Interactions (continued)
Drug
Interacting drug(s)
Drug interaction(s)
Neostigmine
Aminoglycosi des, beta-adrenoceptor
antagonism of neostigmine
blocking drugs, lincomycin, quinidine
Muscle relax ants
enhanced neuromuscular blockade with depolarising
muscle relaxants
Nicergoline
* Alpha,-adrenoceptor stimulants
antagonism of effect
·Vasodilators
enhancement of effect
NSAIIDs
·Aminoglycosides,*corticosteroids,
enhanced effects of interacting drug
*other NSAIDs, *pentosan polysulfate
sodium, *potentially nephrotoxic drugs,
·* warfarin and other anticoagulants
Diuretics
antagonism of diuretic effect; increased risk of
hyper kalaemia with potassium-sparing diuretics
·Fluoroquinolones
increased risk of seizures
·Methoxyflurane
 possible toxic effect on kidneys
Oestrogens
Diuretics
antagonism of diuretic effect
 Phenytoin
reduced plasma-oestrogeni concentration
Warfarin
impaired action
Omeprazole
· Warfarin
delayed elimination of interacting drug
Opioid analgesics
* Combi nation with any other CNS
enhanced depressant effects
depressant drug
Metoclopramide
antagonism as interacting drugs have opposing effects
on gastro-intestinal motility
·Doxapram
convulsions may be induced with morphine
·Selegiline
enhanced depressant effect of morphine
Orbifloxacin
see Fluoroquinolones
Organophosphorus · Combinations of 2 or more
enhanced toxicity
compounds
organophosphorus compounds or
compounds with anticholinesterase
activity, *diethylcarbamazine,
· levamisole, phenothiazine derivatives
• Muscle relaxants
enhanced neuromuscular blockade with depolarising
muscle relaxants
See also under individual drugs
Oxytocin
· Clenbuterol
antagonism as interacting drugs have opposing effects
on uterine motility
Paracetamol
Metoclopramide
increased par acetamol absorption
Warfarin
enhanced anticoagulant effect with regular high doses
of paracetamol
514  Appendix 1: Drug Interactions
Table of Drug Interactions (continued)
Drug
Interacting drug(s)
Drug interaction(s)
Penicillamine
Antacids, iron salts, zinc salts
reduced penicillamine absorption
Penicillins
· Phenylbutazone
alteration in half-life and tissue penetration
Pentazocine
see Opioid analgesics
Pentosan
* Corticosteroids
antagonism of effect
 polysulfate sodium
·NSAIDs
enhanced effects of interacting drug
Oral anticoagulants
potentiation of action
Pethidine
Cimetidine
increased plasma-pethidine concentration
·Detomidine
generalised excitement
·Selegiline
enhanced toxicity of pethidine
See also under Opioid analgesics
Phenobarbital,
Cardiac glycosides
reduced effect of digitoxin
primidone
+ Chloramphenicol, + metronidazole,
phenobarbital (or primidone) causes reduced plasma
concentration of interacting drug
progestogens
* Griseofulvin
increased griseofulvin metabolism
Phenytoin, sodium valproate
increased sedation
Warfarin
reduced anticoagulant effect
See aiso under Barbiturates
Phenothiazine
· Antiepileptic drugs
antagonism of anticonvulsant effect
derivatives
Antimuscarinic drugs
reduced plasma-phenothiazine concentration
· Blood pressure reducing drugs (e.g.
enhanced effect of interacting drug
beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs, ACE
inhibitors, hydralazine, calcium-channel
blockers, nitrates)
·Cabergoline
reduced effect of cabergoline
· Metoclopramide
increased risk of extrapyramidal effects
·Isoflurane
reduced isoflurane requirement for induction and
 maintenance with acepromazine
· Organophosphorus compounds
inhibition of acetylcholinesterase and enhanced
toxicity
• Procaine hy drochloride
enhanced hypotension, enhanced prolonged-acting
activity
* Combination with any other CNS
enhanced depressant effects
depressant drug (e.g. general anaesthetics,
sedatives, opioids)
Phenoxymethyl-
Neomycin
reduced penicillin absorption
penicillin
Appendix 1: Drug Interactions 515
Table of Drug Interactions (continued)
Drug
Interacting drug(s)
Drug interaction(s)
Phenylbutazone
· Barbiturates
reduced metabolism of interacting drug
·Cardiac glycosides, *griseofulvin
inicreased metabolism and reduced effect of interacting
drug
* Chloramphenicol
reduced phenlylbutazone metabolism
Antacids, * colestyramine
reduced enteral absorption of phenylbutazone
· Corticosteroids, *other NSAIDs,
displacement from plasma proteins and enhanced
* sulphonamides
effect of interacting drug
* Levothyroxine
falsely low total plasma-levothyroxine concentration
·Methotrexate
reduced methotrexate excretion
· Penicillins
 alteration in half-life and tissue penetration
•Phenytoin
reduced phenytoin metabolism
·Sulphonylureas
enhanced hypoglycaemic effect
· Warfarin
enhanced anticoagulant effect
See aiso under NSAIDs
Phenylephrine
see Adrenoceptor stimulants
Phenytoin
Aspirin, sodium valproate
transient potentiation
Carbamazepine, folic acid, ·theophylline reduced plasma-phenytoin concentration
Cardiac glycosides
reduced effect of digitoxin
· Chloramphenicol, cimetidine,
reduced phenytoin metabolism
diazepam, ketoconazole, metronidazole,
miconazole,*phenylbutazone,
sulphonamides (some)
* Clomipramine
increased plasma-phenytoin concentration
·Corticosteroids, corticotropin
increased potassium loss; inicreased corticosteroid
metabolism
· Doxycycline
reduced half-life and effect of doxycycline
Ketoconazole
increased plasma-phenytoin concentration; reduced
plasma-ketoconazole concentration
Levothyroxine
increased levothyroxine metabolism
Methotrexate
increased anti-folate effect
Phenobarbital, primidone, sodium
increased sedation
valproate
 Oestrogen, progestogens, *theophylline, reduced plasma concentration of interacting drug
vitamn D
Warfarin
both enhanced and reduced anticoagulant effects
reported
516 Appendix 1: Drug Interactions
Table of Drug Interactions (continued)
Drug
Interacting drug(s)
Drug interaction(s)
Phosmet
see Organophosphorus compounds
Pimobendan
* Propranolol, *verapamil
reduced action of pimobendan
Pindolol
see Beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs
Polymyxin B
Muscle relax ants
enhanced neuromuscular blockade with non-
sulfate
depolarising muscle relax ants
Polysulfated
· Other anticoagulants
enhanced anticoagulant effect
glycosaminoglycan
Potassium
Diuretics
increased risk of hyperkalaemia with potassium-
sparing diuretics
 Potentiated sulphonamides see Sulphonamides, potentiated
Prednisolone
see Corticosteroids
Primidone
see Phenobarbital
Procaine
·Sulphonamides
antagonism of effect
benzylpenicillin
Procaine
·Phenothiazines
enhanced hypotension and prolonged activity
hydrochloride
· Sulphonamides
antagonism of effect
Prochlorperazine
see Phenothiazine derivatives
Progesterone
see Progestogenns
Progestogens
Antidiabetic drugs
antagonism of hypoglycaemic effect
Barbiturates, griseofulvin, phenytoin
reduced plasma-progestogen concentration
Theophylline
increased plasma-theophylline concentration
Warfarin
reduced anticoagulant effect
Proligestone
see Progestogens
Propantheline
see Antimuscarinic drugs
Propoxur
Combinations of 2 or more compounds
enhanced toxicity
with anticholinesterase activity
e.g. organophosphorus compounds
Prostaglandins
· Clenbuterol
antagonism as interacting drugs have opposing effects
on uterine moti lity
·Oxytocin
enhanced ecbolic effect
Pyrantel
·Piperazine
mutual antagonism
Quinidine
Acetazolamide, antacids
increased plasma-quinidine concentration reported
rarely
Cardiac glycosides
enhanced effect of digoxin
Cimetidine
increased plasma-quinidine concentration
·Clomipramine
enhanced effect of quiridine
Appendix 1: Drug Interactions 517
Table of Drug Interactions (continued)
Drug
Interacting drug(s)
Drug interaction(s)
Quinidine
Diuretics
toxicity increased by hypokalaemia with loop and
(continued)
thiazide diuretics
Muscle relax ants
enhanced neuromuscular blockade
 Neostigmine
antagonism of neostigmine
Warfarin
enhanced anticoagulant effect
Rifampicin
Anti-arrhythmics, anticoagulants,
increased metabolism of interacting drug
antiepileptics, beta-adrenoceptor blocking
drugs, * corticosteroids
Salinomycin
* Tiamulin, * valnemulin
severe growth retardation
Selegiline
· Clomipramine
enhanced effect of clomipramine
· CNS active drugs (e.g. alpha2-
risk of either reduced or enhanced effects of interacting
adrenoceptor stimulants, tranquillisers,
drug
general anaesthetics)
• Fluoxetine, pethidine
enhanced toxicity of interacting drug
•Morphine
enhanced depressant effect of interacting drug
Selenium
· Ionophore anti bacterials
increased risk of selenium toxicity
 Sertraline
see Fluvoxamine
Sevoflurane
·Acepromazine, *alpha -adrenoceptor
reduced sevoflurane required for induction and
maintenance
Sodium valproate
 Phenobarbital, phenytoin, primi done
increased sedation
See atso under Antiepileptic drugs
Spectinomycin
see Aminoglycosides
Spironolactone
see Diuretics
Streptomycin
see Aminoglycosides
Sucralfate
Antacids
impaired activity
Warfarin
impaired absorption
Sulphonamides
·Diuretics
increased risk of sulphonamide allergy
·Phenylbutazone
displacement from plasma proteins and enhanced
effect of sulphonamides
Phenytoin
reduced phenytoi n metabolism with some
sulphonamides
· Procaine group local anaesthetics,
antagonism of effect
* procaine benzy lpenicillin, * vitamin B
complex
Thiopental 
enhanced effect of thiopental
Warfarin
enhanced anticoagulant effect
518  Appendix 1: Drug Interactions
Table of Drug Interactions (continued)
Drug
Interacting drug(s)
Drug interaction(s)
Sulphonamides,
· Detomidine, halothane, *romifidine,
increased risk of cardiac arrhythmias
potentiated
*xylazinie
Sulphonylureas
Chloramphenicol, miconazole,
enhanced hypogl ycaemic effect
*phenylbutazone
See also under Antidiabetic drugs
Suxamethonium
Carbamates, levamisole, neostigmine,
enhaniced effect of sux amethorium
organophosphorus compounds
See aiso under Muscle relaxants
Sympathomimetics see Adrenoceptor stimul ants
Tamoxifen
Warfarin
enhanced anticoagulant effect
Tetracyclines
• Antacids, ·dairy products (not
reduced tetracycline absorption
dox ycycline), kaolin mixtures
· Aluminium salts, * calcium salts, +citric
Creduced absorption of interacting drugs
acid, *iron salts, *magnesium salts, zinc
salts
* Corticosteroids
increased risk of gastro-intestinal toxicity (especially
in horses)
Insulins
 possible reduced insulin requirement with
ox ytetracycline
 Other antibiotics
possible antagonism of beta-lactams and other
bactericidal
Warfarin
enhanced anticoagulant effect
Theophylline
· Adrenoceptor stimulants
synergistic effects leading to increased side-effects
such as cardiac arrhy thmias
• Barbiturates, *pheny toin
reduced plasma-theophylline concentration
Cimetidine,*erythromycin,
increased plasma-theophylline concentration
 marboflox acin, progestogenis
·Halothane
arrhythmogenic effects
*Ketamine
reduced seizure threshold
Thiopental
·Chloramphenicol, * kanamycin,
enhanced effect of thiopental
* streptomycin, sulphonamides
See aiso under Barbiturates
Thyroid hormones   Insulins
possible increase in insulin requirement
Tiamulin
* Narasin, * salinomycin
severe growth retardation
·Monensin
teduced monensin metabolism; severe growth
retardation
Appendix 1: Drug Interactions 519
Table of Drug Interactions (continued)
Drug
Interacting drug(s)
Drug interaction(s)
Tilmicosin
· Beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs
increased effect of tilmicosin
* Dobutamine
reduced effect of tilmicosin
· Epinephri ne
increased potential lethality of tilmicosin in pi gs
Timolol
see Beta blockers
Tolbutamide
see Sulphonylureas and Antidiabetic drugs
Tolfenamic acid
see NSAIDs
Triamcinolone
see Corticosteroids
Trihexyphenidyl
Trimethoprim
see Sulphonamides, potentiated
Valnemulin
Monensin, *narasin, *salinomycin
severe growth retardation
Vedaprofen
see NSAIDs
Verapamil
Beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs
atrioventricular block
Vitamin B
• Sulphonamides
antagonism of effect
Vitamin D
·Alfacalcidol
enhanced effect
Phenytoin
reduced plasma-vitamin D concentration
Vitamin K
Warfarin
reduced anticoagulant effect
Warfarin
Aspirin
increased risk of bleeding due to antiplatelet effect
Barbiturates, griseofulvin, oestrogens,
reduced anticoagulant effect
progestogens, phenobarbital, primidone,
vitamin K
Anabolic steroids, aspirin,
enhanced anticoagulant effect
chloramphenicol, cimetidine,
erythromycin, ketoconazole,
levothyroxine, metronidazole,
miconazole, nalidixic acid, neomycin,
paracetamol (regular treatment with high
doses), quinidine, sulphonamides,
tamoxifen, tetracyclines,
* phenylbutazone and possibly other
NSAIDs
Phenytoin
both enhanced and reduced anticoagulant effects
reported
·Omeprazole
delayed elimination of warfarin
Sucralfate
impaired absorption
Zinc salts
Fluoroquinolones, iron salts, tetracyclines reduced absorption of interacting drugs
 Penicillamine
reduced penicillamine absorption
520
Appendix 2: Drug Compatibilities and Incompatibilities
Contributor:
ity of additions may also be checked by reference to
RG Cooke BSc, PhD
manufacturer's literature.
Where drug solutions are added together they should be
Drugs intended for parenteral administration may interact in
thoroughly mixed by shaking and checked for absence of
vitro due to physical or chemical incompati bility. This may
particulate matter before use. A strict aseptic procedure
should be adopted in order to prevent accidental entry and
adverse effects. The solution may become opalescent or
subsequent growth of micro-organisms in the infusion con-
tainer or syringe. Ready prepared solutions should be used
visual indication of incompatibility. Precipitation reactions
whenever possible.
are numerous and varied and may occur as a result of pH
changes, concentration changes, ‘salting-out’ of insoluble
Drugs should not be mixed in infusion containers or
anion-cation salts, complexation, or other chemical
syringes unless the components are of known
changes.
compatibi lity.
 In general, drugs should only be added to infusion contain-
ers when constant plasma concentrations are needed or
In veterinary practice, due to the size and weight of the vari-
when the administration of a more concentrated drug solu-
ety of species treated, it often niecessary to further dilute
tion would be harmful.
ready prepared solutions in order to administer the correct
 In general, drugs should not be added to blood, mannitol,
drug dosage. Therefore, the list below also includes some
lipid emulsions, or sodium bicarbonate solutions. Informa-
information on compatible drugs and intravenous infusion
tion on drug incompatibilities is given below. The suitabil-
solutions.
List of Drug Compatibilities and Incompatibilities
The following is an alphabetical list of drugs and their incompati bilities with other drugs and intravenous infusions. Some
compati bilities are also listed, in particular appropri ate intravenous solutions to make up intravenous infusions indicated
in the chapters. To avoid excessi ve cross-referencing, those drugs that should not be mixed with any other drugs are only
listed once. Therefore, when checking a potential incompatibility, it may be necessary to refer to the entries for each of
the drugs or fluids involved. This list is niot comprehensive; absence from the list does not imply safety.
Drug
Compatibilities
Incompatibilities
Acepromazine
phenylbutazone
Aminoglycosides
beta-lactam antibiotics, heparin
sodium, hydrocortisone sodium
succinate, norepinephri ne acid tartrate
Amphotericin B
reconstitute ini water for injections then
sodium chloride intravenous infusionl,
infuse in glucose 5% intravenous
should not be mixed with other
infusion
solutions
Ampicillin (and other semi-synthetic
sodium chloride 0.9%, compound
dextran solutions, glucose
penicillins)
sodium lactate, water for injections
intravenous infusion
Apramycin
should not be mixed with other
solutions
Atropine sulfate
acepromazine maleate,
chlorpromazine hydrochloride,
heparin sodium, methohexital sodium
Appendix 2: Drug Compatibilities and Incompatibilities 521
List of Drug Compatibilities and Incompatibilities (continued)
Drug
Compatibilities
Incompatibilities
Barbiturates
all other drugs
 Benzylpenicillin sodium
sodium chloride 0.9%, water for
glucose intravenous infusion', other
injections
drugs
Bretylium
glucose 5% intravenous infusion
Calcium borogluconate (and possibly
men butone, methy lpredri solone
other calcium-containing solutions)
sodium succinate, prednisolone
sodium phosphate, promethazine
hydrochloride, sodium bicarbonate
intravenous infusion, streptomycin
sulfate, tetracyclines
all drugs in the form of carbonate,
phosphate, or sulfate salts
Carbenicillin
aminogl ycosides, gentamicin sulfate,
hydrocortisone sodium succinate,
vitamins B and C
Ceftiofur
water for injections
Cephalosporins
gentamicin sulfate, tetracyclines
Chloramphenicol sodium succinate
aminophylline, chlorpromazine
hydrochlori de, erythromycin,
gentamicin sulfate, heparin sodium,
hydrocortisone sodium succinate,
penicillins, sux amethonium,
tetracyclines, vitamins B and C
Cisplatin
sodium chloride 0.9% + glucose 5%
Cloxacillin sodium
sodium chloride 0.9%, Ringer's solution
glucose intravenous infusion >5%,
sodium lactate intravenous infusion
 Compound sodium lactate
methylpredrisolone sodium
intravenous infusion
succinate, sodium bicarbonate
intravenous infusion
Cytarabine
water for injections (protect from light)
Dextran solutions
ampicillin, oxytocin
Diazepam
glucose 5% or sodium chloride 0.9%
should not normally be mixed with
intravenous infusions at concentrations
other intravenious infusions or drugs
not exceeding 40 mg diazepam in 500
mL (use within 6 hours)
Dobutamine
sodium chloride 0.9%, glucose 5%
Doxapram hy drochloride
alkaline solutions such as
aminophylline, furosemide,
thiopental
Electrol yte solutions
sulfadiazine sodium, sulphisox azole
diolamine
522Appendix 2: Drug Compatibilities and Incompatibilities
List of Drug Compatibilities and Incompatibilities (continued)
Drug
Compatibilities
Incompatibilities
 Epinephrine
sodium chloride 0.9%
potassium chloride, sodium
bicarbonate intravenious infusion,
other solutions with pH > 5.5
Erythromycin
chloramphenicol sodium succinate,
tetracyclines
Esmolol
sodium chloride 0.9%, glucose 5%
Furosemide
should not be mixed with other
solutions
Gelatin
sodium chloride 0.9%, glucose, Ringer's
citrated blood
solution, heparinised blood
Gentamicin sulfate
carbenicillin and other penicillins,
cephalosporins, chloramphericol
sodium succinate, heparin sodium,
any solution irn which the
concentration of gentamicin exceeds
1 g/litre
Glucose intravenous infusionl
ampicillin, benzylpenicillin sodium,
clox acillin sodium, heparin sodium,
sulfadiazine sodium, tetracyclines
Heparin sodium
aminoglycosides, atropine sulfate,
benzylpenicillin sodium,
chloramphenicol sodium succinate,
gentamicin sulfate,glucose
intravenous infusions',
hydrocortisone sodium succinate,
pethidine hydrochloride,
promethazine hydrochloride,
streptomycin sulfate, tetracyclines,
tylosin
Hydrocortisone sodium succinate
aminogl ycosides, chloramphenicol
sodium succinate, chlorpromazine
hydrochlori de, heparin sodium,
norepinephrine acid tartrate,
promethazine hydrochloride,
tetracyclines, tylosin
Insulin (soluble)
sodium chloride 0.9%
Isoprenaline
water for injections (protect from light)
Ivermectin
propylene glycol, water for injections
(use immediately, do not store)
Ketamine
medetomidine
should not be mixed with other drugs,
excluding medetomidine
Lincomycin
penicillins
Magnesium sulfate
sodium bicarbonate intravenous
infusion, tetracyclines
Appendix 2: Drug Compatibilities and Incompatibilities 523
List of Drug Compatibilities and Incompatibilities (continued)
Drug
Compatibilities
Incompatibilities
Medetomidine
ketamine
should rot be mi xed with other drugs,
excluding ketamine
Menbutone
calcium salts, procaine
benzylpenicillin, vitamin B complex
Methylpredrisolone sodium
water for injections
benzylpenicillin sodium, calcium-
 For intravenous infusion, reconstitute in
containing solutions, compound
water for injections, then infuse in
sodium lactate intravenous infusion,
glucose 5%, glucose 5% + sodium
pethidine hydrochloride, tetracycline,
chloride 0.9%, sodium chloride 0.9%
thiopental sodium, vitamins B and C
Metoclopramide
water for injections (protect from light)
Mitoxanthrone
sodium chloride 0.9%, glucose 5%
Norepinephrine acid tartrate
glucose 5% intravenous infusion
aminoglycosides, hydrocortisone
sodium succinate, sodium
bicarbonate intraverious infusion,
sodium chloride 0.9%, sulfadiazine
sodium
Oxytocin
sodium chloride 0.9%, sodium chloride
dextran solutions
0.18% + glucose 4%
Penicillins
aminogl ycosides, chloramphenicol
sodium succinate, lincomycinl,
tetracyclines
Pethidine hydrochloride
aminophylline, barbiturates,
furosemide, heparin sodium,
methylprednisolone sodium
succinate, sodium bicarbonate
intravenous infusion, tetracyclines
Phenylbutazone sodium
acepromazi ne maleate,
chlorpromazine hydrochloride
Polysulfated glycosaminoglycan
should not be mixed with other drugs
Potassium chloride
epinephrine, sulfadiazine sodium
Predrisolone sodium phosphate
 calcium gluconate, promethazine
hydrochloride
Procaine benzylpenicillin
menbutone
Promethazine hydrochloride
should not be mixed with other drugs
Ringer s solution
sodium bicarbonate intravenous
infusion
Sodium bicarbonate intravenous
calcium-contai ning solutions,
infusion
compound sodium lactate intravenous
infusion, epinephrine, magnesium
sulfate, norepinephrine acid tartrate,
pethidine hydrochloride, Ringer s
solution, streptomycin sulfate,
tetracyclines, vitamins B and C
524 Appendix 2: Drug Compatibilities and Incompatibilities
List of Drug Compatibilities and Incompatibilities (continued)
Drug
Compatibilities
Incompatibilities
Sodium chloride intravenous infusion
norepinephrine acid tartrate
0.9%
Sodium clodronate
sodium chloride 0.9%
 Sodium nitroprusside
glucose 5% (use immediately, protect
from light)
Streptomycin sulfate
calcium gluconate, heparin sodium,
penicillins, sulfadi azine sodium,
sodium bicarbonate intravenous
infusion, tylosin
Sulfadiazine sodium
electrolyte solutions, glucose 10%
intravenous infusion, potassium
chloride
Sulfafurazole diolamine
electrolyte solutions
Sulfamethoxazole with trimethoprim
sodium chloride 0.9%, glucose 5%
 Sulphonamides
should not be mixed with other drugs
Suxamethonium chloride
thiopental or other alkaline solutions
Tetracyclines
calcium gluconate, cephalosporins,
chloramphenicol sodium succinate,
chlorpromazine hydrochloride,
glucose intravenous infusion',
heparin sodium, hydrocortisone
sodium succinate, penicillins,
pethidine hydrochloride, sodium
bicarbonate intravenious infusion,
tylosin; any solution with high
calcium, magnesium, or sodium
content, or al kaline pH
Thiopental sodium
sodium chloride 0.9%, water for
methylprednisolone sodium
injections
succinate, suxamethonium chloride,
acids, acid salts, oxidising agents,
dextrose-saline solution
Tylosin
heparin sodium, hydrocorti sone
sodium succinate, streptomycin
sulfate, tetracyclines
Vitamin B complex
should not be mixed with other drugs
Vitamins B and C
chloramphenicol sodium succinate,
chlorpromazine hydrochloride,
methylpredrisolone sodium
succinate, sodium bicarbonate
intravenous infusion
Zidovudine
water for injections
lcaution: conflicting literature
525
Appendix 3: Conversions and Units
Mass
g
OZ
28.3
1.0
1tonne
1000 kilograms (kg)
454.0
16.0 (1 1b)
1 kilogram (kg)
1000 grams (g)
1 gram (g)
1
1000 milligrams (mg)
kg
ib
1 milligram (mg)
1000 micrograms (μg)
1.0
2.2
1 microgram (μg)
1000 nanograms (ng)
2.0
4.4
1 nanogram (ng)
1000 picograms (pg)
3.0
6.6
4.0
8.8
5.0
11.0
6.0
13.2
6.35
14.0 (1 stone)
 Conversion fi gures for imperial to metric
10.0
22.05
20.0
44.1
ounices
×
28.349
一
g
50.0
110.23
pounds
×
0.453
=
kg
50.8
112.0 (1 hundredweight, 1 cwt)
stones
×
6.350
=
kg
100.0
220.46
hundredweights
×
50.802
=
kg
200.0
440.9
toris
× 1016.050
=
kg
500.0
1102.3
toris
×
1.016
tonnes
1000.0
2204.6
1016.0
2240.0 (1 ton)
Volume
mL
floz
50
1.8
1litre
：
1000 millilitres (mL)
100
3.5
1 millilitre
1000 microlitres (μL)
150
5.3
200
7.0
500
17.6
568
20.0 (1 pint)
1000
35.2
Conversion figures for imperial to metric
litres
gallons
1.0
0.22
fluid ounces
×
28.413
=
mL
4.55
1.0
fluid ounces
0.028
=
litres
十
10.0
2.2
pints
0.568
=
litres
100.0
22.0
gallons
4.546
litres
220.0
十
1000.0
Other conversions and units
Temperature
1 kilocalorie (kcal)
三
4186.8 joules (J)
°℃
°F
°F
1 gallon of water
二
10.0 pounds
0
32
39
102.2
二
4.55 kg
10
50
40
104.0
1 gallon
0.16 cu. feet
25
77
41
105.8
1 inch (in)
二
25.4 mm
35
95
42
107.6
1 foot (ft)
=
0.305 metre (305.0 mm)
36
96.8
43
109.4
1 yard (yd)
=
0.914 metre (914.0 mm)
37
98.6
44
111.2
1 metre (m)
=
39.37 in
38
100.4
45
113.0
二
3.28 ft
=
1.09 yd
526  Appendix 3: Conversions and Units
Parts per million (ppm)
Parts per billion (ppb)
1 ppm
= 1 mg/litre
1 ppb
=1 microgram/lite
1 mL/1000 litres
1 microgram/kg
1 g/1000 litres
= 1 mg/kg
Conversion tables from body-weight to surface area
Weight (kg) to surface area (m') for dogs
kg
m2
kg
m2
kg
m²
0.5
0.06
17.0
0.66
34.0
1.05
1.0
0.10
18.0
0.69
35.0
1.07
2.0
0.15
19.0
0.71
36.0
1.09
3.0
0.20
20.0
0.74
37.0
1.11
4.0
0.25
21.0
0.76
38.0
1.13
5.0
0.29
22.0
0.78
39.0
1.15
6.0
0.33
23.0
0.81
40.0
1.17
7.0
0.36
24.0
0.83
41.0
1.19
8.0
0.40
25.0
0.85
42.0
1.21
9.0
0.43
26.0
0.88
43.0
1.23
10.0
0.46
27.0
0.90
44.0
1.25
11.0
0.49
28.0
0.92
45.0
1.26
12.0
0.52
29.0
t6'0
46.0
1.28
13.0
0.55
30.0
0.96
47.0
1.30
14.0
0.58
31.0
0.99
48.0
1.32
15.0
0.60
32.0
1.01
49.0
1.34
16.0
0.63
33.0
1.03
50.0
1.36
Weight (kg) to surface area (m') for cats
kg
m2
kg
m2
kg
m2
2.0
0.159
3.0
0.208
4.0
0.252
2.2
0.169
3.2
0.217
4.2
0.260
2.4
0.179
3.4
0.226
4.4
0.269
2.6
0.189
3.6
0.235
4.6
0.277
2.8
0.199
3.8
0.244
4.8
0.285
5.0
0.292
Appendix 3: Conversions and Units  527
Moles, millimoles, and
Tonicity
millequivalents
A mole (mol) is the amount of substance that contains as
When two solutions, each containing the same number of
many entities (atoms, molecules, ions, electrons, or other
 solute particles are separated by a perfect semipermeable
particles or specified groups of particles) as there are atoms
membrane, they are stated to be iso-osmotic, that is they are
in 0.012 kg of carbon- 12. It approximates (for all normal
 in osmotic equilibrium. There is no net movement across
purposes) to a weight, in grams, equal to the molecular
the membrane. However, in biological systems semiper-
weight of the substance. A millimole (mmol) is one thou-
sandth of this amount and for ions is the ionic mass (the
 cles. When two solutions, separated by such a membrane,
sum of the relati ve atomic masses of the elements of an ion)
 are in osmotic equilibrium they are said to be isotonic with
ex pressed in milligrams. A milliequivalent is this quantity
respect to that membrane. Solutions administered parenter-
divided by the valency of the ion. Non-ionic compounds
ally or applied to mucous surfaces should be isotonic if used
such as dextrose caninot be expressed in terms of milliequiv-
in large volume. For small volumes, such as eye drops,
alents. Thus one mole of NaCl (molecular weight 58.45)
nasal drops, or subcutaneous injections, isotonicity is desir-
weighs 58.45 g, and 58.45 mg of NaCl contains one milli-
 able but not essential.
mole. This amount of NaCl contains 23.0 mg of Na+ (1
mmol of Na+) and 35.45 mg of Cl (1 mmol of Cl) and
therefore l milliequivalent each of sodium and chloride
ionis.
528
ppendix 4: Weights of Animals
The weight of an individual within a species or breed varies greatly, and ideally each animal should be accu-
ance only and refer to adult animals.
Species
Body-weight
Species
Body-weight
Horses
400-1000 kg
African grey parrot
310-530g
Cattle
600-700 kg
Amazon parrot
250-500 g
Sheep
45-100 kg
Budgerigar
30-85 g
Goats
45-100 kg
Canary
12-29 g
Deer
200-300 kg
Cockatiel
70-108 g
Pigs
60-200 kg
Lesser sulphur crested cockatoo
228-315 g
Dogs
 50-80 kg (Saint Bermard)
Lovebird
42-55 g
25-32 kg (Labrador Retriever)
Macaw
850-1500 g
7-10 kg (Fox Terrier)
 2-4 kg 'toy' breeds (e.g. Dachshund,
Mynah bird
180-260 g
Maltese Terrier, Yorkshire Terrier)
Zebra finch
10-16 g
Cats
3-5 kg
Pigeons
350-500 g
Ferret
500-1500 g
Ostriches
120-170 kg (male)
90-130 kg (female)
Chinchilla
400-800 g
Gerbil
50-130 g
Guinea Pig
750-1500 g
Body-weight estimation for horses
Hamster
100-150 g
1.78
 Golden Chinese Hamster
40-60 g
W (kg) =
3011
Mouse
20-40 g
length = point of elbow to point of buttock
Rabbit
girth = umbilical girth
Dwarf
1-2 kg
Others
3-6kg
Rat
300-800 g
529
Appendix 5: Dosage Estimation from Body-weighi
Contributor:
Rates of drug absorption, metabolism, and excretion tend to
J K Kirkwood, BVSc, PhD, FIBiol, MRCVS
increase with body temperature and decrease with body-
size between species. However, the metabolic rate of rep-
This section addresses the problem of estimating drug dos-
tiles is at least 10 times lower than that of mammals of com-
age for species of animals for which there are no measure-
parable body-size, even when they are kept at high ambient
ments of disposition kinetics available and limited
temperatures. This may cause a difference in drug-clearance
availability of species-specific authorised preparations.
rate. Therefore it may be appropriate, in the absence of spe-
cific information, to reduce the frequency of drug adminis-
There are approximately 4000 species of mammals, 9000
tration in reptiles compared to that used in mammals.
species of birds, and 7000 species of reptiles and amphibi-
ans. Therapy of many species has to be based upon extrapo-
The rates of many physiological processes are also depend-
lation from treatment regimens that have been studied and
ent on body-size. For example, between species the rate of
found effective in other species. While species may be sim-
three-quarter power of body- weight (wo.s). In general, vol-
ilar enough to justify attempts to extrapolate from one to
ume per time functions, such as glomerular filtration rate
another, differences between them make the task difficult
and at times hazardous. In addition to the difficulty of dose
and volume of urine produced per hour, increase with wo.7s
estimation, the nature of the non-domestic species and the
The duration of physiological events, such as blood circula-
s o  ae un yum un p yo ssss
tion time or the time taken for the clearance of substances
from the circulation, tend to increase with approximately
constraints on administration regimens. Readers are
reminded that if the animal is a food-producing species,
W02s, Therefore, it could be predicted that, if all else is
only products authorised for use in food-producing animals
equal, the half-life of a drug would be 10 times shorter in an
may be administered or dispensed. A veterinarian uses any
animal of 5 g than one of 50 kg (that is 10 000 times
heavier).
sheet on his or her personal responsibility, and obtaining
Estimation of dosage regimen. The
dangers
of
written informed consent from the animal's owner or keeper 
extrapolating dosage from one species to another have been
is recommended.
well documented, but until there has been more research
into drug kinetics in all species of terrestrial vertebrates,
In the absence of known contra-indications to drug treat-
there is often no alternati ve but to ex trapolate.
ment, the simplest approach to estimating an appropriate
dosage regimen is to ex trapolate from recommendations for
The dose required, in mg/kg, to produce a given peak
closely related species of a comparable body size. For
yim wogodond ui Aea Aeu uogenusouoo snip-eusid
ex ample, doses for the horse may be a basis for extrapolat-
body-size. For example, there are indications that smaller
ing to other Equidae or more broadly to other Perissodac-
 doses in mg/kg of drugs such as ketamine may be required
tyla. If a drug has been found to be safe and effective in a
n ng sa  nns un wn s is u
has not been fully substantiated. For several other drugs,
range of domestic species and humans, it is likely to be safe
in other species although there may be exceptions. For
however, initial plasma concentration, following adminis-
example, ivermectin is safe in many species of birds and
tration of a givenn dose in mg/kg, does not appear to vary in
mammals but is toxic in collie dogs and also Chelonia.
relation to body-size in different species
The dose frequency may be more readily predicted using
When prescribing a drug for a species in which it has not
the following equation:
been evaluated, it is important to consider the taxonomic
position of the animal. Closely related species are more
W
likely to have similar metabolic pathways. Metabolic path-
W
ways of major importance in one species may be unimpor-
tant or non-existent in another. Such variation can influence
the kinetics of some drugs. For example, the elimination of
salicylates, such as aspirin, is much slower in the cat than in
other domestic species. Cats, being virtually obligate carni-
where W, and F, are the body-weight (kg) and recom-
cies and there is a much greater likelihood of zero order
known, and W, and F, are body-weight and estimated dose
frequency for the animal for which the information is
attendant risk of overdosage leading to accumulation
required.
530
Appendix 5 Dosage estimation
-d s  s n sn u wa n s
Estimation of dose frequernicy
dicted dose frequency alters with the weight ratio W,/W
As anl example, suppose it is well established that for one 
W,/W
F2/F,
species with a body-weight of 100 kg, the dose of a drug
10:000
10.0
needed to sustain therapeutic levels is 12 mg/kg once daily.
Assuming that drug clearance is related to wo.2s and that all
1000
5.6
else is equal, it would be appropriate to adjust the frequency
100
3.2
of administration of the same dose to an animal of a differ-
10
1.8
enit species with a body-weight of 1 kg by 3.2 times, that is
1.0
1.0
every 7.5 hours.
0.1
0.56
0.01
0.32
0.001
0.18
0.0001
0.10
Anirmal = dose frequency known
Anirmal = dose frequerncy required
W = body-weight (kg)
F= dose frequency
531
Index of Manufacturers and Organisations
This index comprises a list of manufacturers of preparations listed in The Veterinary Formulary and organisations
associated with veterinary practice.
AAFC, Canad.
Alcon, UK.
Animalcare, UK.
Arthropharm, UK.
Agriculure and Agrifoods Canada,
Alcon Laboratories (UK) Ltd,
Anirmalcare Ltd, Cormmon Road,
Arthropharm (Europe) Ltd, 42
Race Track Division, Sir John Car-
Pentagon Park, Boundary
Way,
Dunnington, York, YO19 5RU, UK.
Upper Rarmone Park, Portadown,
ling Building, 930 Carling Avenue,
Hermel Hermpstead, Hertfordshire,
Telephone: +44 (0) 1904 487687
Co. Arrmagh, BT63 5TD, Northern
Ottawa, Ontario, KIA 0C5, Canada.
HP2 7UD, UK.
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1904 487611
Ireland.
Telephone: +l (613) 759 1000
Telephone: +44 (0)1442 341234
Ermail:
Telephone: +44 (0)2838 331078
Facsimile: +l (613) 759 6726
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1442 34 1200
anirmalcare@ anirmalcare.co.uk
Facsirmile: +44 (0)2838 331078
Email: info@agr.gc.ca
Website: www.agr.gc.ca
 Allergan, UK.
Animax, UK.
ART,UK.
Allergan Ltd,
Coronation Road,
Animax
Ld,
Shepherds Grove
Unit
一，
Mortor
Farm,
Eye,
AAFCO, USA.
High Wycormbe, Buckingharmshire,
West, Stanton, Bury St Edrmunds,
 Leorminster, HR6 0DP, UK.
Association
of
Armerican Food
HP12 3SH, UK.
Suffolk, IP31 2AR, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1568 612402
Control Officials
Telephone: +44 (0) 1494 444722
Telephone: +44 (0)1359 252181
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1568 616088
Website: www.aafco.org
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1494 473593
Facsimile: +44 (0)1359 252182
Email: artltd@cix.co.uk
Email: enq @anirmax-vet.com
Abbeyvet, UK.
 Alliance, UK.
Website: www.animax-vet.corm
AstraZeneca, UK.
AbbeyvetLrd, 310 Chester Road,
Alliance
Ph arrmaceuticals
Ltd,
AstraZeneca
UK Ltd， Horizon
Hartford,
Northwich,
Cheshire,
Avonbridge House, 2 Bath Road,
Anpharm, UK.
Place, 600 Capability Green, Luton,
CW8 2AB, UK.
Chippenharm, Wiltshire, SN 15 2BB,
Corn tact: Antigen
Bedfordshire, LU I 3LU, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1 977 685777
UK.
Telephone: 0800 78 30033
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1977 685111
Telephone: +44 (0) 1249 466966
Antigen, UK.
Facsimile: +44 (0) 1582 838003
Ermail: drm ac @abbeyvet.corm
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1 249 466977
Antigen Pharmaceuticals (UK),
Ermail: medical.informationgb
Website: www.abbeyvet.corn
Antigen House, 82 Waterdoo Road,
@ astrazeneca.corm
E-maill:
info@alliancepharm.co.uk
Hillside, South port, PR8 4QW, UK.
Abbott, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0) 1704 562777
AVA, Austral.
Abbott Laboratories Ltd, Abbott 
 Alpharma, UK.
Facsimile: +44 (0) 1704 562888
Australian Veterinary Association,
House, Norden Road, Maidenhead,
 Alpharma Anirmal Health, Unit 15,
134 Harmpden Road, Artarrmon,
Berkshire, SL6 4XE, UK.
APBC,UK.
2064, NSW, Australia.
Sandleheath
Industrial
Estate,
Fordingbridge,
Association
Behaviour
Telephone: +61 (0)2 9411 2733
Facsimile: +44 (0)1628 644185
Harmpshire, SP6
of
Pet
Counsellors, PO Box 46, Worce ster, 
Facsirmile: +61 (0)2 9411 5089
IPA, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0) 1425 656081
WR8 9YS, UK.
Website: www.ava.com.all
Abbott Animal Health, UK.
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1425 655309
Telephone: +44 (0)1386 751151
Abbott
Laboratories
Ltd,
Facsimile: +44 (0)1386 750743
Aventis Pharma., UK.
Queenborough, Kent, MEll 5EL,
Ermail:
Aventis Pharma Ltd, Aventis House,
 askanirmalheaIth.uk@ alpharma.corm
E-mail info@apbe.org.uk
UK.
50 Kings Hill Avernue, Kings Hill,
Website: www.apbc.org.uk
Telephone: +44 (0)1795 580303
West Malling, Kent, ME19 4AH,
Alstoe, UK.
UK.
 Alstoe Ltd Anirmal Health, Sheriff 
APDT, UK.
AEVA, Austral.
Telephone: +44 (0)1732 584000
Hutton Industrial Park, 
Sheriff
Association of Pet Dog Trainers,
Australiar
Equine
Veterinary
Northchapel,
Facsimile: +44 (0)1732 584080
Hutton, York shire, YO60 6RZ, UK.
Peacock's
Far,
Association,
PO
Box
1570,
Telephorne: +44 (0)1347 878606
Pelworth, West Sussex, GU28 9JB,
Artarmon, NSw 2064, Australia.
Axiom, UK.
Facsirmil: +44 (0)1 347 878333
UK.
Telephone: +61 (0)2 9411 5342
Axiorn Veteriniary Laboratories,5
Email: info@ alstoe.co.uk
Telephone: +44 (0) 1428 707620
Facsirmile: +61 (0)2 9413 3765
Ceorge Street, Teignmouth, Devon,
Facsimile: +44 (0)1428 708190
Ermail: aeva@ava.corm.all
TQ14 8AH, UK.
 American Heartworm Society
Ermail:
Telephone: +44 (0)1626 778844
Website: www.aeva.ava.corml.au
www.hearrworrmsociety.org
 guarddog @ bropenworld.com 
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1626 779570
Agricultural  and
Veterinary
Website: apdt.co.uk
Email: admin@axiomvetlab.co.uk
Pharmacists Group, UK.
Andermatt Biocontrol, Switz.
Website: www.axiormvetlab.corm
Armitage, UK.
RPSGB, I Larmbeth High Street,
Andermatt
Biocontrol
Armitage
Bros
Ltd, Armitage
London, SEI 7JN, UK.
Nottingharm,
Battle Hayward & Bower, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)20 7735 9141
Stahlerrmatter
6,
CH-6146,
House,
Colwick,
Battle
Grossdierwil, Switzerland.
Nottingharm shire, NG4 3BA, UK.
：Hayward & Bower
Ltd
Facsirmile: +44 (0)20 7735 7629
Crofton Drive, Lincoln, LN3 4NP,
Telephone: +41 (0)6 29 175005
Telephone: +44 (0)115 9381200
Facsimile: +41 (0)6 29 175006
Facsimile: +44 (0)115 96 17496
UK.
Agrimin, UK.
Erm ail: sales@ biocontrol.ch
Telephone: +44 (0)1522 529206
Agrimin Ltd,
llc The Flarepath
Email: enquiries @ armitages.co.uk
Website: www.biocorn trol.ch
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1522 538960
Elsharm Wold
1 Industrial Estate,
Ermail: bhb@ battles.co.uk
Bgg,inolshieN0SP,UK
Arnolds, UK.
Website: www.battles.co.uk
Telephone: +44 (0)1652 688046
Animal Health Trust, UK.
Arnolds
Veterinary Products Ltd,
Facsimile: +44 (0)1652 688049
Centre for Preventive Medicine,
Cartrmel
Drive,
Harlescott,
Bausch & Lomb, UK.
Email: enquiries @agrimin.co.uk
Anirmal Health Trust, Landwandes
Shrewsbury, SY I 3TB, UK.
Bausch & Lormb Surgical UK Ltd,
Website: www.agrirmirn.co.uk
Park,
Kentford,
Newmarket,
Telephone: +44 (0)1743 441632
Bausch & Lormb House,
901
Suffolk, CB8 7UU, UK.
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1743 462111
London Road, Kingston-upor-
A&H, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1638 750659
E-rmail: technical@ arnolds.co.uk
Tharmes, Surrey, KT2 6TN, UK.
Allen & Harburys Ltd
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1638 750794
Website: www.arnolds.co.uk
Telephone: +44 (0)20 878 1 0000
Contact: GSK
Facsirmile: +44 (0)20 8781 0001
532 Index of Manufacturers and Organisations
Baxter, UK.
BEVA,UK.
Boehringer Ingelheim, UK.
British Rabbit Council, UK.
Baxter Healthcare Ltd, Caxtor Way,
British
Equine
Veterinary
Boehringer
Ingelheirn
Ltd,
Purefoy
House,
7
Kirkgate,
Thetford, Norfolk, IP24 3SE, UK.
Association,
Wakefield House, 46
Ellesfield
Averue,
Bracknell,
Newark, Nottingharm, NG24 IAD,
Telephone: +44 (0)1842 767189
High
Street,
Sawstor,
Berk shire, RG12 8YS,UK.
UK.
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1842 767099
Carmbridgeshire, CB2 4BG, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0) 1344 424600
Telephone: +44 (0) 1636 676042
Telephone: +44 (0)1223 836970
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1344 74 1349
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1636 611683
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1223 835287
Ermail:
Website: www.thebrc.org
Baxter Oncology, UK.
Em ail: info@ beva.org.uk
Baxter Healthcare Ltd, Wallingford
vetrmedica.uk @ boehringer-
Website: www.beva.org.uk
ingelheim.corm
British
Veterinary
Poultry
Road,
Compton,
Newbury,
Berkshire, RG20 7QW, UK.
Website:
Association, UK.
www.boehringer-ingeIheirm.co.uk
Telephone: +44 (0)1635 206161
BHS, UK.
Ermail: bvpa @bvpa.org.uk 
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1635 206103
British Horse Sociery, Stoneleigh
on authorised
Website: www.bvpa.org.uk
For information
Deer
Park,
Kenilworth,
hurman rmedicines:
British
Whippet
Racing
Warwick shire, CV8 2XZ, UK.
Boehringer Ingelheirm Ltd,El
Bayer, UK.
Telephore: +44 (0)8701 202244
field Averue, Bracknell, Berkshire,
Association
Bayer plc, Animal Health Division,
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1 926 707800
Secretary,
32
Whickam
RG12 4YS, UK.
Road,
Bayer House,
，Strawberry
Hill,
Ermail enquiry @bhs.org.uk
Hardwick Estate, Stockton-on-Tees,
Newbury, RG 14 IJA, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0) 1344 424600
Website: www.bhs.org.uk
Facsimile: +44 (0) 1344 74 1444
Cleveland, TS19 8NU, UK
Telephone: +44 (0)1635 563000
Telephone: +33 (0)1642 889381
Facsimile: +44 (0)1635 562270
BP(Vet),UK.
Ermail: anirmal.heaIth @ bayer.co.uk
BHB, UK.
Website: www.bayer.co.uk
British Pharmacopoeia
British Horseracing Board, PO Box
Cormm-
BSAVA, UK.
ission, UK.
British Small Aniral Veterinary
4013, London, WI A 6NG, UK.
For information on authorised
Telephone: +44 (0)20 7273 0561
Telephore: +44 (0)8700 721724
Association, Woodrow House,
Facsirmile: +44 (0)20 7273 0566
hurm an medicines:
Em ail: info@ bhb.co.uk
Telford Way, Waterwells Business
Email: bpcom@mca.gsi.gov.uk
Bayer ple, Pharm aceutical Division,
Website:
Park, Quedgeley, Cloucestershire,
Bayer House, Strawberry Hill,
www.britishhorseracing.corm
Web site:
GL24AB, UK.
Newbury, Berkshire, RG14 IJA,
www.pharrm acopoeia.org.uk
Telephone: +44 (0) 1452 726700
UK.
Facsimile: +44 (0)1452 726701
BIBBA, UK.
Braun, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1635 563000
B Braun (Medical) Ltd, Brookdale
Website: www.bsava.corm
Facsimile: +44 (0)1635 563393
 Bee Irmprovermenit and Bee Breeders 
E-rmail:
Association, Secretary,
50 Station
Road,
Thorncliffe Park Estate,
rmedical.sci-
Road,
Cogerhoe,
Northants,
Sheffield, S35 2PW, UK.
BSI, UK.
erice @bayer.co.uk
NN7ILU, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)114 2259000
British Standards Institute, 389
Telephone: +44 (0) 1604 890117
Facsimile: +44 (0)114 2259111
Chiswick High Road, London, W4
Bayer Consumer Health, UK.
Erm ail: rmermbership@bibba.corm
Email:
4AL, UK.
Contact: Bayer
Website: www.bibba.corm
enquiry @bbmuk.demon.co.uk
Telephone: +44 (0)20 8996 9000
custormercare.bbrmuk @ braun.corn
Facsimile: +44 (0)20 8996 700 1
Website: www.bbraur.corm
Email: cservices @bsi-global.corm
BBKA, UK.
Bimeda, UK.
Website: www.bsi-global.corm
British
Beekeepers
Association,
A division of Cross Vetpharrm
BreathEazy, UK.
Natioral
Agriculral
Centre,
Group (UK)
Ld,
Bryn Cefni
BreathEazy Ltd, 8 Woodford Road,
Stoneleigh
Park,
Kenilworth,
Business Park, Llangefni, Anglesey,
South Woodford, London, E18
BVA, UK.
Warwickshire, CV8 2LG, UK.
LL77 7XA, UK
2BH, UK.
British Veterinary Association,
7
Telephone: +44 (0)2476 696679
Telephone: 0800 526769
Telephone: +44 (0)20 8530 8650 
Mansfield Street,
London, WIG
Facsirmile: +44 (0)2476 690682
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1 248 725416
Facsirmile: +44 (0)20 8530 8650
9NQ, UK.
Ermail:
E-rmail: sales@ birmeda.co.uk
Ermail: sales @breatheazy.co.uk
Telephone: +44 (0)20 7636 6541
bbka@ britishbeekeepers.com
Website: www.breatheazy.co.uk
Facsirmile: +44 (0)20 7436 2970
Website:
Email: bvahq @ bva.co.uk
www.britishbee kee pers.corm
Bioceuticals, UK.
Bioceuticals Ltd, 26 Zennor Road,
Brinicombe, UK.
Website: www.bva.co.uk
Denis
Brinicormbe,
Fordtor
London, SW 12 0Ps, UK.
Industrial Estate, Crediton, Devor,
BCM Specials, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)20 8675 5664
EX 17 3BZ, UK.
BVA Publications, UK.
BCM Specials rmarufachuring, D10
Facsirmile: +44 (0)20 8675 5664
MeMillan-Scott,
6
Bourne
Telephone: +44 (0)1363 775 115
First I14, Nottingharm, NG90 2PR,
Facsimile: +44 (0)1363 772114
Enterprise Centre, Wrotharm Road,
UK
Bird Care Company, UK.
E-rmail: sales @brinicormbe .co.uk
Borough Green, Kent, TN15 8DG,
Telephore: 0800 9521010
The Bird CareCompany,Adivisin
Website: www.brinicorm be.co.uk
UK.
Facsirmile: 0800 0850673
of Vetafarm Europe Ld,21-22
Telephone: +44 (0)1732 884023
Ermail:
Bristol-Myers Squibb, UK.
Facsimile: +44 (0) 1732 884034
bcrm-specials @bcm-ltd .co.uk
Spring  Mill Industrial
Estate,
Avening
Nailsworth,
Bristol-Myers
Squibb Pharma-
Road,
Gloucestershire, GL6 0BS, UK.
ceuticals Ltd,
[41-149 Staines
Cambridge, UK.
BCVA, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1453 835330
Road, Hounslow, Middlesex, TW3
Cambridge
British
Cattle
Veterinary
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1453 834302
3JA, UK.
House, Kingfisher Way, Silverlink
 Association, The Green, Frarmpton-
Email: advice @birdcareco.com
Telephone: +44 (0)20 8572 7422
Business Park, Wallsend, Tyne &
on-Sevemi,
Gloucestershire, GL2
Website: www.birdcareco.corml
Facsirmile: +44 (0)20 8754 3789
Wear, UK.
7EP, UK.
Ermail:
Telephone: +44 (0)191 2969369
Telephone: +44 (0)1452 740816
rmedical.inform ation @bms.com
Facsirmile: +44 (0)191 2969368
Facsimile: +44 (0)1452 741117
Bob Martin, UK.
Email: enquiries @camb-labs.corm
E-rmail: office @cattlevet.co.uk
 Bob Martin (UK) Ltd, Wermberharm
Britannia, UK.
Lane, Yatton, N. Sormerset, BS49
Britannia Pharmaceuticals Ltd, 41-
4BS, UK.
51 Brighton Road, Redhill, Sumey,
Castlemead, UK.
Beesy, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1934 831000
RHI 6Ys, UK.
Castlermead Healthcare Ltd, PO Box
Beesy Ltd, ll St Jarmes Park,
Facsimile: +44 (0)1934 83 1050
Telephone: +44 (0)1737 773741
57, Ware, SG10 6LL, UK.
Chelrm sford, Essex, CMI 2JG, UK.
Facsimile: +44 (0) 1737 762672
Telephone: +44 (0) 1462 454452
Telephone: +44 (0)1245 259288
E-rmail:
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1462 435684
rmedicalserv ices @ forurm group.co.uk
Index of Manufacturers and Organisations
533
Celltech, UK.
Coloplast, UK.
Demotec Hoof Care Products,
DSM,UK
Celltech Pharmaceuticals Ltd, 208
Coloplast
Ltd,
Peterborough
Ger.
DSM Nutritional Products, Heanor
Bath Road, Slough, Berkshire, SL1
Business Park, Peterborough, PE2
Brentanostc. 21, D-61130 Nidderau,
Cate, Heanor, Derbyshire, DE75
3WE, UK.
6FX, UK.
Cermany.
7SG, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1753 534655
Telephore: +44 (0) 1733 392000
Telephone: +49 (0)6187 21200
Telephone: +44 (0)1773 536500
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1753 536632
Facsirmil: +44 (0)1733 233348
Facsimile: +49 (0)6187 21208
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1773 536600
Ermail:
Erm ail: gbcareteam @ coloplast.com
Ermail: demotec@dermotec.corm
rmedicalinform ationuk@
Website: www.demotec.corm
Duck Producers Association,
celltechgroup.corm
Concord, UK.
UK.
Concord Pharmaceuticals Lrd, PO
Denes, UK.
Duck Producers Association Ltd,
Cephalon, UK.
Box 5970, Durrmow, Essex, CM6
Denes Natural
Pet Care Ltd,2
Irmperial House, 15-19 Kingsway,
Cephalon UK Ltd, II-13 Frederick
IFY, UK.
Osrmond Road, Hove, East Sussex,
London, WC2B 6UA, UK.
Sanger Road, Surrey Research Park,
Telephorne: +44 (0)845 602 0137
BN3 ITE, UK
Telephone: +44 (0)20 7240 9889
Guildford, Surrey, GU2 7YD, UK.
Facsirmile: +44 (0)870 2412335
Telephone: +44 (0)1273 325364
Facsirmile: +44 (0)20 7240 7757
Telephone: 0800 7834869
E-rmail:
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1273 325704
Facsimile: +44 (0)1483 453324
enquiries @concord-pharma.com
Email: info@ denes.corm
ECO,UK.
Email: ukmedinfo@cephalon.corm
Website: www.denes.corm
Eco Anirmal Health Ltd, 78 Coormbe
ConvaTec, UK.
Road, New Malden, Surrey, KT3
CeNeS, UK.
ConvaTec Ltd, Harrington House,
4QS, UK.
CeNeS Pharrmaceuticals, Cormpass 
Milton Road, Ickenharn, Uxbridge,
Derma Pet,UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)20 8447 8899
House, Vision Park, Chivers Way,
Middlesex, UB 10 8PU, UK.
DermaPet
UK,
54 Cowley Hill
Facsirmile: +44 (0)20 8447 9292
Histon, Carmbridgeshire, CB4 9ZR,
Telephone: +44 (0)1895 628400
Lane, St Helens, Merseyside, WA10
Ermail:
UK.
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1895 628456
2AW, UK.
sales@ ecoanirmalhealth.corm
Telephone: +44 (0)870 241 3674
Telephone: +44 (0)1744 458 162
Website:
Facsirnile: +44 (0)1744 458163
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1223 266467
Cox, UK.
www.ecoanirmalhealth.com
Email: enquiries @ dermapeuk.corm
Email: medinfo@cenes.co.uk
Cox, Unit I, Greencroft Industrial
Website: www.dermapetuk.comm
Park, Stanley, Co Durharm, DH9
Ecolab, UK.
Ceva, UK.
7YA, UK.
Ecolab Ltd, Dukes Averue, Stanley
Ceva Anirmal Health Ltd, 90 The
Telephone: +44 (0) 1207 529000
Dista, UK.
Green Trading Estate, Cheadle
Broadway,
Chesharn,
Facsimile: +44 (0)1 207 529966
Dista Products Ltd, UK.
Hulme, Cheadle, Chester, SK8
Buckingharmshire, HP5 IEG, UK.
E-mail: sales@ cox agri.corm
Con tact: Lilly, UK.
6RB, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1494 78 1510
Website: www.coxagri.com
Telephone: +44 (0)161 4867000
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1494 781519
Facsimile: +44 (0)161 4861018
Website: www.ceva.corm
CP, UK.
Distriphar, UK.
CP Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Ash Road 
Distriphar
(UK),
Division
JO
EHS,UK
Avenitis
Pharma
Ltd,
10
Environrment and Heritage Service
Chanelle, UK.
North, Wrexharm Industrial Estate,
Chanelle Animal Health Ltd, 7
Wrexharm, Clwyd, LLI3 9UF, UK.
Aver tis Pharma
Telephone: +44 (0)28 9025 1477
Website: ehsni.gov.uk
Rodney Street, Liverpool, Ll 9HZ,
Telephone: +44 (0)1978 661261
UK.
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1 978 660130
DOE, UK.
Elan, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)568 750432
E-rmail: mail@cppharma.co.uk
Department of the Environrment irn
Elan Pharma Ltd, Abel Srmith
Facsirmile: +44 (0)568 750432
Northern Irelend, Clarence House,
House,
Gunnels
WoodRoad,
Crawford, UK.
10-18 Adelaide Street, Belfast, BT2
Stevenage, Hertfordshire, SCl 2FC,
Chauvin, UK.
Crawford Pharmaceuticals, Furtho 
8GB, UK.
UK
Chauvin Pharmaceuticals Lrd, 106
House, 20 Towcester Road, Milton
Telephone: +44 (0)28 9054 0540
Telephone: +44 (0)1438 765100
Londor
Road,
Kingston-upon-
Keynes, MK 19 6AQ, UK.
Website: www.doeni.gov.uk
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1438 765008
Tharmes, Surrey, KT2 6TN, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0) 1908 262346
Email: medinfouk @elan.corm
Telephone: +44 (0)20 8781 2900
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1 908 567730
Facsirmile: +44 (0)20 878 1 2901
Dogs Trust, UK.
National Carine Defence League,
Elanco,UK.
DARD, UK.
Elanco Animal Health, Eli Lilly and
Chemicals LAIF, Italy.
Departrment of Agriculure and
I7 Wakley Street, London, ECIV
Company
Lirmited,
Kingsclere
Chermicals LAIF, Industria Bio-
Rural Development, Dundonald
7RQ, UK.
Road,
Basingstoke,
Harmpshire,
chirmica, Via dellartigianato 13,
House, Upper Newtownards Road,
Telephone: +44 (0)20 7837 0006
Email: info@ dogstrust.org.uk
RG21 6XA, UK.
35010 Vigonza, Ttaly.
Belfast, BT4 3SB, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1256 353131
Telephone: +44 (0)28 9052 4999
Website: www.dog strust.org.uk
Telephone: +39 (0)49 626281
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1256 315081
Facsirmile: +39 (0)49 6285011
Facsirmile: +44 (0)28 9052 5546
E-mail: elanco.uk .info@lilly.com
Ermail: info@chermicalslaif.it
Website: www.dardni.gov.uk
Donkey Sanctuary, UK.
Website: www.elanco.corm
Website: www.chermicalslaif.it
The Donkey Sanchuary, Sidmouth,
Devon, EX i0 0NU, UK.
EMEA, UK.
DEFRA, UK.
European
Chugai, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1395 578222
Agenicy
for
the
Chugai Pharma UK Ltd, Mulliner
 Departrment for Envirorrment, Food 
Facsimile: +44 (0)1395 579266
Evaluation of Medicinal Products, 7
& Rural Affairs, Nobel House, 17
Westferry Circus, Canary Wharf,
House, Flanders Road, Turnharm
Smith Square, London, SWIP 3JR,
Ermail:
enquiries @thedon keysanchuary.corr
London, E14 4HB, UK.
Green, London, W4 INN, UK.
UK
Website:
Telephone: +44 (0)20 7418 8400
Telephone: +44 (0)20 8987 5680
Telephone: +44 (0)20 7238 6951
Facsirmile: +44 (0)20 74 18 8416
Facsirmile: +44 (0)20 8987 5661
Facsirmile: +44 (0)20 7238 6609
www.thedorikeysarichlary.corr
Ermail: rmail @ermea.eu.int 
Erm ail: helpline @defra.gsi.gov.uk
Website: www.ermea.eu.int
Clonmel, Eire.
Website: www.defra.gsi.gov.uk
Clonrmel Healthcare Ltd, Waterford 
Dorwest Herbs, UK.
Dorwest Herbs Ltd, Shipton Gorge,
Epicore BioNetworks, USA.
Road, Clonrmel, Co. Tipperary,
Bridport, Dorset, DT6 4LP, UK.
Epicore BioNetworks Inc, 4 Lina
Ireland.
DeLaval, UK.
Telephone: +44(0)870 733 7272
Lane,
Eastarmpton, New Jersey,
Telephone: +353 (0)52 77777
DeLaval Lrd, Pascal Close, St.
Facsimile: +44 (0)870 733 7929
08060, USA
Facsirmill: +353 (0)52 77799
Mellows, Cardiff, CF3 OLW, UK.
E-mail: info@dorwest.co.uk
8116 197 609 1+ :auo4d
Ermail:
Erm ail: gb.info @delaval.corm
Website: www.dorwest.corm
Facsirmile: +1 609 267 9336
info@clonmelhealthcare.corm
Website: www.delaval.co.uk
Email: epicore @ gbsias.corm
Website: www.epicorebionet.corm
534 Index of Manufacturers and Organisations
ESAVS, Ger.
Florizel, UK.
Genitrix,UK.
Harkers,UK
European School
forAdvanced
Florizel Ltd,
PO
Box
138,
Genitrx Ltd, Unit 25, Station Road
Contact Petlife
Veterinary Studies, Office Cermany,
Stevenage, SG2 8YN, UK.
Industrial Estate,
Southwater,
Schadtengasse
2,
D-55765
Telephone: +44 (0)1462 436156
Horsharm, RH13 9UD, UK.
Hawgreen, UK.
Birkenfeld, Gerrmany.
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1462 457402
Telephone: +44 (0)1403 734555
Hawgreen Ltd, The Maltings, 2nd
Facsirmile: +49 6782 4314
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1403 734588
Floor, Bridge Street,
Hitchin,
E-rmail: info @esava.net
E-mail: mail@ genitrix.co.uk
Hertfordshire, SG5 2DE, UK.
Website: www.esava.ret
Forest, UK.
Website: www.genitrix.co.uk
Telephone: +44 (0)1462 441831
Forest Laboratories UK Ltd, Bourne
Road, Bexley, Kent, DA5 INX,
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1462 435868
Ethicon, UK.
Genzyme, UK.
Ethicori
Ltd,
PO
408,
UK.
Genzyme Ltd,
4620 Kingsgate,
Box
Telephone: +44 (0)1322 550550
HBLB, UK.
Bankhead Avenue,
Edinburgh,
Cascade Way,
Oxford Business
Horserace Betting Levy Board, 52
EHII 4HE,UK.
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1322 555469
Park, Oxford, OX4 2SY, UK
Crosvenor
Cardenis,
London,
Telephone: +44 (0)131 453 5555
Ermail: rmedinfo @forest-labs.co.uk
Telephone: +44 (0)1865 405210
SWIW 0AU, UK.
Facsirmile: +44 (0)131 442 5114
Giltspur, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)20 7333 0043
Fort Dodge, UK.
Giltspur
Scientific
Ltd,
6-8
Facsimile: +44 (0)20 7333 004 1
Evans Vanodine, UK.
0d
Dodge
Anirmal
Health,
Avondale
Industrial
Estate,
E-rmail: hblb@ hblb.org.uk
Evans Vanodine International plc,
Flarders
Road,
Hedge
End,
Ballyclare, Co Antrim, Northem
Website: www.hblb.org.uk
Brierley Road,
Waltori
Summit,
South armptor, SO30 4QH, UK.
Prestori, PR5 8AH, UK.
Ireland, BT39 9AU, UK.
Telephore: +44 (0)1489 781711
Telephone: +44 (0) 1960 322040
Hill's, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1772 322200
Facsirmil: +44 (0)1489 788306
Facsimile: +44 (0) 1960 354885
Hill's Pet Nutrition Ltd, Wingfield
Facsimile: +44 (0)1772 626000
Court, Croxley
Business Park,
E-rmail:sales @evarisv anodine.co.uk
Glenwood, UK.
Hatters Lane, Watford, WD1 8 8YL,
Website: www.evansvanodine.co.uk
Forum, UK.
Glenwood
Laboratories
Ltd,
UK.
Forurm
(Holdings)
Ltd,
41-5 1
 Jenkins Dale, Chatharn, Kent, ME4
Telephone: +44 (0)1923 8 14400
Environment Agency, UK.
Brighton Road, Redhill, Surrey,
5RD, UK.
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1923 814401
www.environment-agency.gov.uk
RH1 6YS, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1737 773711
Telephone: +44 (0)1634 830535
Website: www.hillspet.corm
Facsimile: +44 (0)1634 831345
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1737 773116
E-rmail: g.wooduk@virgin.net
Hoechst Marion Roussel, UK.
Farriers Registration Council,
Website: www.forurm.co.uk
Contact: Aventis Pharrma
UK.
Global Genetics, UK.
Sefton House, Adarn Court, Newark
Fresenius Kabi, UK.
Urit
，
Morton
Farri,
Eye,
HPA, UK.
Road, Peterborough, PEI 5PP, UK.
Leormin ster, HR6 0DP, UK.
The Hurlingharm Polo Association,
11661 10) + ou
Fresenius
Kabi Ltd,
Hamptorn
Court, Tudor Road, Manor Park,
Telephone: +44 (0)1568 612402
Manor Farm,
Little Coxwell,
Facsimile: +44 (0)1733 3 19910
Facsimile: +44 (0) 1568 616088
Faringdon, Oxon, SN7 7LW, UK.
Ermail frc @farrier-reg.gov.uk
Runcom, Cheshire, WA7 IUF, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1367 242828
Website: www.farrier-reg.gov.uk
00265 82610) + 1041
Golds hield, UK.
Facsimile: +44 (0) 1367 242829
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1928 594314
Goldshield Pharmaceuticals Ltd,
Ermail: enquiries @hpa-polo.co.uk
Ermail:
FAWC,UK.
NLA Tower,
[2-l6 Addiscormbe
Website: www.hpa-polo.co.uk
rmed info-uk @ fre senius-kabi.corm
Farm Anirmal Welfare Council,
Road, Croydon, CRo 0XT, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)20 8649 8500
HSA, UK.
Area 5ll, IA Page Street, London
Facsimile: +44 (0)20 8686 0807
Hurmane Slaughter Association, The
SWIP 4PQ, UK.
FVE, Belg.
Federatior
Veterinarians
Old  School,
Brewhouse
Telephone: +44 (0)20 7904 6534
Hill,
Europe,
GSK, UK.
Wheatharmpstead,
Hertfordshire,
Facsirmile: +44 (0)20 7904 6993
rue Defacqz l， l000
GlaxoSmithKline,
Brussels
Stockley Park
AL4 8AN, UK.
Ermail:
Telephone: +32 2538 2963
West, Uxbridge, Middlesex, UBII
Telephone: +44 (0)1582 831919
erm rma.harding @defra.gsi.gov.uk 
Website: www.fawc.org.uk
Facsirmile: +32 2537 2828
IBT, UK.
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1582 8314 14
Erm ail: info@fve.org
Telephone: 0800 22 1441
Website: www.hsa.org.uk
Website: www.fve.org
Facsirnile: +44 (0)20 8990 4328
FCl, Belg.
Email:
HSE, UK.
custormercon tachuk @ gsk.com
Health
Safety
Federatior
Cynologique  Inter-
Executive
nationale, Place Albert ler 13,
Galen, UK.
Iriform atior
Services,
Caerphilly
Galen Ltd, Seagoe Industrial Estate,
GSK
Consumer
Healthcare,
6530, Thuin, Belgium.
Business Park, Caerphilly, CF83
Telephone: +327159 1238
Craigavon, Northern Ireland, BT63
UK.
3CGUK.
Facsirmile: +32 7159 2229
5UA, UK.
GlaxoSmith Kline
Consurmer
Telephone: +44 (0)8701 545500
Email info@fcibe
Telephorie: +44 (0)28 3833 4974
Healthcare, GSK House, 980 Great
Facsimile: +44 (0)2920 859260
Website: www.fci.be
Facsirmile: +44 (0)28 3835 0206
West Road, Brentford, Middlesex,
Ermail:
TW8 9GS, UK.
hseinformalionservices@ natbrit.com
Telephone: +44 (0)500 888 878
Website: www.hse.gov.uk
FEl, Switz.
GCCF,UK.
Facsimile: +44 (0)20 8047 6860
Federation Equestre Internationale,
Coverning Council of the Cat
Ermail: custormer.relations@ gsk.corm
HSE Books, UK.
Avenue Mon-Repos 24, PO Box
Fancy,
4-6
Penel
Odieu,
PO B0x 1999,
Sudbury, Suffolk,
157, 1000 Lausanne 5, Switzerland.
Bridgewater, Sormerset, TA6 3PG,
Hansam, UK.
CO10 2WA, UK.
Telephone: +41 21 310 47 47
UK.
Hansarm Healthcare Ltd, PO Box
Telephone: +44 (0) 1787 881165
Facsirmile: +41 21 310 47 60
 81 + 
 23876, London, SE15 4WT, UK.
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1787 313995
Ermail: info@horsesport.org
Ermail info@ gccfcats.org
Telephone: +44 (0)870 241 30 19
Website: www.hsebooks.co.uk
Website: www.gccfcats.corm
Facsimile: +44 (0)20 7207 68 50 
lams, UK.
Happykeeper, Fr.
Procter & Carmble， The Heights,
Ferring, UK.
Geistlich, UK.
20 avenue des acacias, 92500 Rueil-
Brooklands,
Weybridge, Surrey,
Ferring Pharrmaceuticals UK, The
Ceistlich Pharma, Newton Bark,
Malrmai son, France.
KT13 0XP, UK.
Courtyard,
Waterside
Drive,
Long Lare, Chester, CH2 2PF, UK.
Telephone: +33 (0)1 47 14 10 52 
Telephone: 0800 426 785
Langley, Berkshire, SL3 6EZ, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1244 347534
Facsirmile: +33 (0)1 47 08 29 22
Ermail:
Telephone: +44 (0)1753 214800
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1244 319327
Email: j-p.lepabic @aist.enst.fr
Euk anuba-carelineUK@ iarm s.corr
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1753 2 14801
Web site:
Website: wwww.iarrsco.corm
www.eukamuba-scienceonline.corm
Index of Manufacturers and Organisations:
535
IBRA, UK.
IVAX,UK.
Johnson's,UK
LEO,UK.
Interm ational
Bee
Research
IVAX
Pharrmaceuticals UK Ltd,
Johnson's Veterinary Products Ltd,
LEO
Anirmal Health, Longwick
Association,
Director,
18North
IVAX Quay, Albert Basin, Royal
5 Reddicap Trading Estate, Suttor
Road,
Princes
Risborough,
Road, Cardiff, CF10 3DT, UK.
Docks, London, E16 2QJ, UK.
Coldfield, West Mildlands, B75
Buckingharn shire, HP27 9RR, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)29 2037 2409
Telephore: +44 (0)8705 020304
7DF, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1844 347333
Facsirmile: +44 (0)29 2066 5522
Facsirmile: +44 (0)8705 323334
Telephone: +44 (0)121 3781684
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1844 274832
Ermail mail@ ibra.org.uk
Facsirmile: +44 (0)121 3111758
E-mail:
Website: www.ibra.org.uk
IVEX, UK.
E-rmail info@johnsons-vet.corm
ah.ukenquiries@ leopharrma.corm
Website: www.johnsons-vetcom
ICN, UK.
Old Blefast
road,
Mill Brook,
For information
Pharmaceuticals
Larne, BT40 2SH, N. Ireland , UK.
NDI
Ltd,
JohnsonDiversey, UK.
hurmar rmedicines:
Telephone: +44 (0)28 2827 3631
Cedarwood, Chineharm
Business
John sonDiversey,
Westori
Favell
Leo Pharrma, Longwick Road,
Park, Crockford Lane, Basingstoke,
Centre, Northarmpton, NN3 8PD,
Princes Risborough, Buckingharm-
Harmpshire, RG24 8WG, UK.
 James A Mackie (Agricultural),
UK.
shire, HP27 9RR, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1 256 374607
UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1604 783505
Telephone: +44 (0)1844 347333
Facsimile: +44 (0)1256 707334
 Jarmes A Mackie (Agricultural), PO
Facsimile: +44 (0) 1604 783506
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1844 342278
Email: icnuk @icnpharm.corm
Box l477l, Alloa, Clackmann-
Website:
Ermail:
anshire, FK 10 2EW, UK.
www.johnsondiversey.co.uk
rmedical-info.uk @leo-pharma.com
i.com Medical, Ger.
Telephone: +44 (0) 1259 215 136
Medical
Grmbh,
Beirm
Facsimile: +44 (0)1259 211053
KBS, UK.
Lilly, UK.
Sarmesbauner
4,
D-87700
E-rmail:
Brede Valley Bee Farm, Cottage
Eli Lilly & Co Ltd,Lilly House,
Mernrmingen, Germ ary.
rmackieaquacultur@tory.org.uk
Lae,Wesfld,Hastings,TH
Priestley
Road,
Basingstoke,
Website:
4RT, UK
Harmpshire, RG24 9NL, UK.
IdIS, UK.
subscriber.scool.co.uk/jaes_a_mackie
Telephone: +44 (0)1424 870737
Telephone: +44 (0)1256 3 15999
IDIS World Medicines, Millbank
Facsimile: +44 (0) 1424 870729
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1256 775858
House,
173-185 Ewell
Road,
Email: kbs @btintemet.corm
Surbiton, Surey, KT6 6AX, UK.
Janssen, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)20 8410 0700
Janssen Anirmal Health, PO Box 79,
The Kennel Club, UK.
Lohmann, Ger.
Facsimile: +44 (0)20 8410 0800
Saurderton,
High
Wycormbe,
1Clarges
 Street, London, WIY
Lohrmarn Arirmal Health GrmbH X
E-mail: idis@ idis.co.uk
Buckingharmshire, HP14 4HJ, UK.
8AB, UK.
Co KG, Heinz-Lohrmarn Strausse 4, 
Telephone: +44 (0) 1494 567567
Website: www.idispharrm a.con
Telephone: +44 (0)870 6066750
D-27472 Cuxhaven, Germany
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1494 567556
Erm ail: ahealth@jacgb.jnj.corm
Facsimile: +44 (0)20 7518 1058
International Donkey Protec
Web site:
Loveridge, UK.
tion Trust, UK.
www.the-kernel-club.org.uk
J M Loveridge plc, Southbrook
Contact: The Donkey Sanchuary,
 Janssen-Cilag, UK.
Road, Southarmptor, SO15 IBH,
UK.
Jarssen-Cilag
Ltd, PO Box 79,
Kent Marine, USA.
UK.
Saunderton,
High
Wycormbe,
Kent Marine Inc, Il00 Northpoint 
Telephone: +44 (0)2380 222008
Intrapharm, UK.
Buckinghamshire, HP14 4HJ, UK.
Parkway, Acworth, Georgia 30102,
Facsimile: +44 (0)2380 22117
Intrapharm Laboratories Ltd, 60
Telephore: +44 (0) 1494 567567
USA.
E-mail: admin@jmloveridge.corm
Boughton Lane, Maidstone, Kent,
Facsimile: +44 (0) 1494 567568
Website: www.jmloveridge.com
ME 15 9QS, UK.
Facsimile: +l 770 966 7848
Telephone: +44 (0)1622 749222
JHC, UK.
Email:
Facsimile: +44 (0)1622 744672
tech support@ ken trmarine.corn
3M, UK.
JHC Healthcare Ltd, The Maltings,
Ermail: sales @intrapharmlabs.corm
Website: www.kentmarine.corm
3M Health Care Ltd, 3M House,
Bridge
Street,
Hitchin,
Morley
Street,
Loughborough,
Hertfordshire, SG5 2DE, UK.
Intervet, UK.
Kilco, UK.
Leicestershire, LEII IEP, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1462 432533
Initervet UK Ltd, Walton Manor,
Kilco,
, Broormhouses 2 Industrial
Telephone: +44 (0)1509611611
Keynes,
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1462 432535
Waltor,
Miltor
Estate,
Old
Glasgow
Road,
Facsimile: +44 (0) 1509 237288
Buckingharmshire, MK7 7AJ, UK.
Lockerbie, Durmfries and Galloway,
Telephone: +44 (0)1908 685685
J&J, UK.
DGII 2 SD, UK.
Maisemore Apiaries, UK.
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1908 685555
 Johnson & Johrnson Ltd, Foundation
Telephone: +44 (0)1576 205480
Old Road, Maisemore, Gloucester,
E-rmail: support.uk@ intervet.corm
Park,
Rox borough
Way,
Facsimile: +44 (0) 1576 205483
GL2 8HT, UK.
Website: www.in tervet.co.uk
Maidenhead, Berkshire, SL6 3UC,
Ermail: sales @kilcogroup.com
Telephone: +44 (0) 1452 700289
UK.
Website: www.kilco.co.uk
Ermail:
Ipsen, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1628 822222
enqui ries @bees-online.co.uk
Ipsen Ltd, 190 Bath Road, Slough,
Facsimile: +44 (0)1628 821222
LAB, UK.
Website: www.bees-orline.co.uk
Berkshire, SLI 3XE, UK.
Laboratories for Applied Biology,
Telephone: +44 (0)1 753 627777
J&J MSD, UK.
91 Amhurst Park, London, Nl6
Facsimile: +44 (0)1753 627778
5DR, UK.
Martindale, UK.
Johnson
&
Johnson
Email:
MSD,
Telephone: +44 (0)20 8800 2252
Martindale Pharrmaceuticals Ltd,
Enterprise
House,
Station Road,
Facsirmile: +44 (0)20 8809 6884
Hubert Road, Bren twood, Essex,
 rmedical.information @ ipsen .Itd.uk
Loudwater,
High
Wycormbe,
CM14 4LZ, UK.
Buckingharmshire, HPl0 9UF, UK.
Irish Greyhound Board (Bord
Lederle, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1277 266600
Telephone: +44 (0)1494 450778
Contact: Wyeth, UK.
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1277 848976
na gCon)
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1494 450487
104 Henry Street, Lirmerick, Eire.
Ermail:
Telephone: +353 (0)61 316788
Leeds
Veterinary
Labora-
info @rmartindalepharma.co.uk
Facsirmile: +353 (0)61 316739
Jockey Club, UK.
tories, UK.
Ermail: admin @igb.ie
The Jockey
Club,
42 Portrman
 Leeds Veterinary Laboratories Ltd,
Meadow, UK.
Website: www.igb.ie
 Square, Loridon, WIH 0EN, UK.
Millcroft, Gate Way Drive, Yeador,
Meadow
Laboratories
Ltd,
81
Telephone: +44 (0)20 7486 4921
Leeds, LS19 7Xy, UK.
Avenue Road, Chadwell Heath,
Irish Homing Union, UK.
Erm ail: info@ thejockeyclub .co.uk 
Telephone: +44 (0)113 2507556
Rornford, Essex, RM6 4JF, UK.
38BallyhattyRad,Bfast,
Website: www.thejockeyclub.co.uk
Facsimile: +44 (0)113 2500198
Telephone: +44 (0)20 8597 1203
8LE, UK
E-mail: Ivl@lvlabs.corm
Ermail:
Website: www.lvlabs.co.uk
enquiries @meadowlabs.fsnet.co.uk
536 Index of Manufacturers and Organisations
Medac,UK.
National Bee Supplies, UK.
Nights hade, UK.
Novartis,UK.
Medac
(UK),
E1
Lynedoch
Merrivale
Road, Exeter Road
Scientific Publishing Sales, Sir
For infommation
Crescent, Glasgow, G3 6EQ, UK.
Industrial Estate,
，Okeharmpton,
Joseph Banks Building,
Royal
hurman medicines:
Telephone: +44 (0)141 332 8464
Devon, EX20 IUD, UK.
Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richrmond,
Novartis Pharmaceuticals UK Ltd,
Facsirmile: +44 (0)141 332 8619
Telephore: +44 (0)1837 54084
Surrey, TW9 3AE, UK.
Frirmley Business Park, Frirmley,
Ermail info@medac-uk .co.uk
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1 837 54085
Telephone: +44 (0)20 8332 5219
Carm berley, Surrey, GU 16 5SG, UK.
Email: info@ beekeeping.co.uk
Facsirmile: +44 (0)20 8332 5646
Telephone: +44 (0)1276 692255
MedLogic, UK.
Website: www.beekeeping.co.uk
E-mail: book s@ rbgkew.org.uk
Facsimile: +44 (0) 1276 692508
MedLogic Global Ltd, Western
Website: www.rbgkew.org.uk
Wood Way, Langage Science Park,
National Bee Unit, UK.
Novartis
Consumer
Health,
 Plymouth, Devon, PL7 5BG, UK.
Central Science Laboratory, Roorm
Nishikoi, UK.
UK.
02Gll, Sand Hutton, York, YO4
Nishikoi Aquaculture Ltd, White
Novartis
Consumer
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1752 209 956
ILZ, UK.
Health,
Hall, Wethersfield, Essex, CM7
Wirmblehurst Road, Horsharm, West 
Email: enquiries @ mlgl.co.uk
Telephone: +44 (0)1904 462510
4EP, UK.
Sussex, RH12 5AB, UK.
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1904 462240
Telephone: +44 (0)1371 851424
Merck, UK
Telephone: +44 (0)1403 210211
E-rmail: science @esl.gov.uk 
Merck Pharmaceuticals,
Harrier
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1371 85 1429
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1403 323939
Website: www.nationaIbeeurnit.corm
House, High Street, West Drayton,
Website: www.nishikoi.com
Ermail:
Middlesex, UB7 7QG, UK.
National Coursing Club, UK.
rmedicalaffairs.uk @ ch.novartis.com
Telephone: +44 (0)i 895 452307
National
Coursing
Club,
NOAH, UK.
16
Facsimile: + 44 (0)1895 452296
Clocktower
Newmacket,
 National Office of Animal Health
Mews,
Novartis Ophthalmics, UK.
Ltd,
3
Crossfield
Chambers,
Ermail:
Suffolk, CB8 8LL, UK.
Contact: Novartis
rmedinfo@ merckpharma.co.uk
Telephone: +44 (0)1638 667381
Gladbeck Way, Enfield, Middlesex,
Telephone: +44 (0)1276 692255
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1638 669224
EN2 7HF, UK
Merial, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)20 8367 3131
Email:
Novo Nordisk, UK.
Merial Anirmal Health, Ltd, PO Box
enquiries@ nationalcouringclub.org
Facsimile: +44 (0)20 8363 1155
Novo Nordisk Ltd, Broadfield Park,
327, Sandringharm House, Harlow
Website:
Email: noah@noah .co.uk
Brighton
Road, Pease Pottage,
Business Park,
Harlow, Essex,
www.nationalcoursingclub.org
Website: www.noah.co.uk
Crawley, West Sussex, RHll 9RT,
CM19 5TG, UK.
UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1 279 775858
 National Farmers Union, UK.
Norbrook, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1293 613555
Facsimile: +44 (0)1279 775888
Agriculure House, 164 Shaftesbury
Norbrook Laboratories (CB) Ltd,
Facsimile: +44 (0)1293 613535
Ermail: ukenquiry @ merial.com
Avenue, London, WC2H 8HL, UK.
The Green, Great Corby, Carlisle,
Cumbria, CA4 8LR, UK.
Ermail:
Website: www.merial.com
Telephone: +44 (0)20 7331 7200
custormercare @novonordisk.com
Facsirmile: +44 (0)20 7331 7313
Telephone: +44 (0)1228 599991
Millpledge,UK.
Ermail: nfu@ nfuonline.com
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1228 810968
Millpledge
NPTC,UK.
Pharrmaceuticals,
Website: www.nfu.org.uk
E-mail: enquiries @norbrook.co.uk
Clarborough,
National Proficiency Tests Council,
Whinleys
Estate,
Website: www.norbrook.co.uk
National Sheep Association,
Avenue J', National Agriculure
Retford, Nottingharmshire, DN22
Centre,
Nordic Star, UK.
Stoneleigh, Kenilworth,
9NA, UK.
UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1 777 708440
Sheep
Centre, Malvern,
Warwickshire, CV8 2LG, UK
The
Nordic
Star Ltd,
32 Portway,
Telephone: +44 (0)24 7685 7300
Facsimile: +44 (0)1777 860020
Worcestershire, WRI 3 6PH, UK.
Frorme, Sormerset, BAll IQU, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1684 892661
Facsimile: +44 (0)24 7669 6128
E-rmail: sales @millpledge.corm
Telephone: +44 (0)1373 455585
Ermail: information @ nptc.org.uk
Website: www.rmillpledge.corm
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1684 892663
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1373 455584
Website: www.nptc.org.uk
Ermail:
Ermail: sales @nordicstar.co.uk
Milupa, UK.
enquiries @nationalsheep.org.uk
Website: www.nordicstar.co.k
Milupa Ltd, Division of Nutricia,
Website: www.nationalsheep.org.uk
NT Labs., UK
Newrmarket Avenue, White Horse
NT Laboratories Ltd, Manor Farm,
Trowbridge,
National Trainers Federation,
Norgine, UK.
Torbridge
Business
Park，
Road,
Wateringbury,
Wiltshire, BA14 0XQ, UK.
UK.
Norgine
Ltd,
Chaplin  House,
Kent, ME 18 5PP, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1 225 76838 1
9
High
Street,
Lambourn,
Moorhall
Road,
Harefield,
Telephone: +44 (0)1622 8 17692
Facsimile: +44 (0)1225 768847
Hungerford, Berkshire, RG17 8XN,
Middlesex, UB9 6NS, UK.
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1622 817271
UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1895 826600
Website: www.rntlabs.co.uk
Molnlycke, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1488 71719
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1895 825865
Molrlycke Health Care Ltd, The
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1488 73005
NWRF, UK.
Ermail info@ racehorsetrainers.org
National
Whippet
Racing
Arenson Centre,
Arenson Way,
North
of England Homing
Dunstable, Bedfordshire, LU5 5UL,
Federation,
Union
Secretary,
UK.
NCDL, UK.
Freshwater
Road,
Cosharr,
58 Ennerdale Road, Walkerdene,
Telephone: +44 (0)870 606 0766
Contact: Dogs Trust
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, NE6 4DG,
Portsrmouth, Harmpshire, PO6 3TH,
Facsimile: +44 (0)870 608 1888
UK.
UK.
Email: info.uk@molnlycke.net
Net-Tex,UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)191 262 5440
Telephone: +44 (0)2392 642545
Net-Tex Industries Ltd, Priesrwood,
Facsirmile: +44 (0)191 262 5388
Moorfields Eye Hospital, UK.
Harvel, Nr Meopharm, Kent, DA13
OATA, UK.
Moorfields
Eye
Hospital NHS
ODA, UK.
Ornarmental
Aquatic
Trade
Trust, City Road, London, ECIV
Telephone: +44 (0)1474 813999 
North West Homing Union
Association,
Wessex House, 40
2PD, UK.
Facsimile: +44 (0)1474 812112
10 Ward Street, Lostock
Hall,
Station Road, Westbury, Wiltshire,
Tele phone: +44 (0)20 7566 2363
E-rmail: info@ net-tex.co.uk 
Pre ston, Lancashire, PR5 5HR, UK.
BA13 3JN, UK.
Facsimile: +44 (0)20 7566 2367
Website: www.rnet-tex.co.uk
Telephone: +44 (0)1772 468 748
Telephone: +44 (0)870 04340 13
Email:
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1373 301236
alan.krol@ rmoorfields.nhs.uk
NGRC, UK.
Novartis, UK.
E-mail info@omarmentalfish.org
National Greyhound Racing Club,
Novartis Anirmal Health UK Ltd,
MSD, UK.
Twyman House, l6 Bonny Street,
New Carnbridge House, Litlington,
Organon, UK.
Merck
Sharp
Dohme
Ltd,
London, NWl 9QD, UK.
Nr Royston,
Hertfordshire,
SC8
Organon
Laboratories
Ltd,
Hertford
Road,
Hoddesdon,
Telephone: +44 (0)20 7267 9256
oss, UK.
Carmbridge Science Park, Miltor
Hertfordshire, ENIt 9BU, UK.
Facsirmile: +44 (0)20 7482 1023
Telephone: +44 (0) 1763 850500
Road, Carm bridge, CB4 0FL, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1 992 467272
Email: mail@ngrc.org.uk
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1763 850600
Telephone: +44 (0) 1223 432700
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1992 451066
Website: www.nge.org.uk
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1223 424368
Index of Manufacturers and Organisations 
537
Parke-Davis, UK.
PLIvA, UK.
Ridgeway Biologicals, UK.
RVC,UK.
Contact: Pfizer
PLIVA Pharma Ltd, Vision House,
Ridgeway Biologicals Ltd, Instinute
Department
of Pathology and
Bedford Road, Petersfield, Harmp-
for Anirmal Health, High Street,
Infectious
Diseases,
Royal
Pet
Food
Manufacturers'
shire, GU32 3QB, UK.
Cormpton, Berkshire, RG20 7NN,
Veterinary College, Royal College
Association, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0) 1730 710900
UK.
Street, London, NWl 0TU, UK.
Pet
Food
Marufachrers'
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1730 710901
Telephone: +44 (0)1635 579516
Telephone: +44 (0)20 7468 5000
Association, 20 Bedford
Street,
rmedinfo@ pliva-pharma.co.uk
Facsimile: 44 (0)1635 579517
Facsirmile: +44 (0)20 7388 2342
London, WC2E 9HP, UK.
Ermail:
Telephone: +44 (0)20 7379 9009
PPI, UK.
T_wallis @ndgeway.fsbusiness.co.uk
Sandoz, UK.
Facsirmile: +44 (0)20 7379 8008
Sandoz Ltd, 37 Woolrmer Way, Bor-
Email: info@pfma.org.uk
 Pet Products International Ltd, Ped-
igree House, Carn ston, Nottingharm,
Roche Consumer Health, UK.
don, Harm pshire, GU35 9QE, UK.
Website: www.pfm a.corm1
Cor tact: Roche, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1420478301
NG2 6NQ, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)115 98 11088
Telephone: +44 (0)1707 366000
Facsimile: +44 (0)420 474427
Pet Health Council, UK.
Facsimile: 0800 394353
Pet Health Council， l Bedford
Facsirmile: +44 (0)115 9455561
Email: welwy n.rch @roche.corm
Sanofi-Synthelabo, UK.
Avenue, London, WCi B 3AU, UK.
Website: www.petproducts.co.uk 
Sanofi-Syn thel abo,
Onslow
Telephone: +44 (0)20 7255 5408
Roche, UK.
Street, Guildford, Surrey, GUI 4YS,
Facsimile: +44 (0)20 763 I 0602
Procter & Gamble, UK.
 Roche Products Ltd, PO Box 8, 40
UK.
www.pethealthcouncil.co.uk
Procter
&
Garmble
UK,
The
Broadwater Road, Welwyn Garden
Telephone: +44 (0) 1483 5055 15
Heights,
Brooklands,
Weybridge,
City, Hertfordshire, AL7 3AY, UK.
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1483 535432
Petlife, UK.
Surrey, KT13 0XP, UK.
Telephone: 0800 328 1629
Petlife International Ltd, Minster
Telephone: +44 (0)1932 896000
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1707 390378
Sara Lee, UK.
House, Western Way, Bury St
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1932 896200
Ermail: medinfo.uk @ roche.com
Sara Lee UK Ltd Household &
Edrmunds, Suffolk, IP33 3SP, UK.
Body Care, 225 Bath Road, Slough,
1119810)+
Rosemont, UK.
Berkshire, SLI 4AU, UK.
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1284 761139
Procter & Gamble Pharm., UK.
Rosermont
Pharm aceuticals
Ltd,
Telephone: +44 (0)1753 523971
E-rmail:
Procter
&
Garmble
Technical
Rosermont
House,
Yorkdale
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1753 570340
petlife@ vetbed-uk .dermor.co.uk
Centres, Medical Dept, Rusharm
Industrial Park, Braithwaite Street,
Website:
Park,
Whitehall Lare,
Egharrn,
 Leeds, LSII 9XE, UK.
Schering Health, UK.
www.vetbed-uk.dermor .co.uk
Surrey, TW20 9NW, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)113 244 1999
Telephone: +44 (0) 1784 474900
Facsirmile: +44 (0)113 246 0738
Brow, Burgess Hill, West Sussex,
Pettifer, UK.
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1784 474705
RH15 9NE, UK.
Thormas Pettifer & Company Ltd,
Royal Canin, UK
Telephone: +44 (0)845 6096767
Newchurch, Rormney Marsh, Kent,
Profile Respiratory, UK.
Crown Pet Foods, 25 Bryrmpton
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1444 465878
TN29 0DZ, UK.
Profile Respiratory Systerms Ltd,
Way, Yeovil, Sormerset, BA20 2JB,
Ermail:
Telephone: +44 (0)1 303 874455
Heath Place, Bognor Regis, West
UK.
customercare @schering.co.uk
Facsimile: +44 (0)1303 874801
Sussex, PO22 9SL, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1935 600800/
Ermail marketing @wgate.co.uk
Telephone: +44 (0)870 7703434
516109 S861(0)
Schering-Plough, UK.
Website: www.wgate.co.uk
Facsirmile: + 44 (0)870 7703433
Facsimile: +44 (0) 1935 414447
Schering-Plough  Anirmal
Health,
Email: info@ profilehs.corm
Website: www.royalcanin.co.uk
Division of Schering-Plough Ltd,
Pfizer, UK.
Breakspear Road South, Harefield,
Pfizer Ltd,
Rarmisg ate
Road,
Royal Pigeon Racing Associa-
Uxbridge, Middlesex, UB9 6LS,
Sandwich, Kent, CT13 9NJ, UK.
Provalis, UK.
tion
UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1304 616161
Provalis Healthcare Ltd, Newtech
The Reddings House, Cheltenharr,
Telephone: +44 (0) 1895 626000
Facsimile: +44 (0)1737 332521
Square, Deeside Industrial Park,
Gloucestershire, GL5 I 6RN, UK.
Facsirmille: +44 (0)1895 672429
E-rmail: UKVetLine@ pfizec.corm
Deeside, Flintshire, CH5 2NT, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1244 288888
Telephone: +44 (0)1452 713 529
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1452 857 119
Schwarz Pharma, UK.
For information
onauthorised
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1 244 280342
Website: www.pigeonracing.cornl
Schwarz Pharma Ltd, Schwarz
hurman rmedicines:
Ermail enquiries@ provalis.plc.uk
House, East Street,
Chesharm,
Pfizer Ltd, Walton Oaks, Dorking
RSPCA, UK.
Buckingharn shire, HP5 IDG, UK.
Road, Walton-on-the-Hill, Surrey,
Quay Equestrian, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0) 1494 797500
Royal Sociely for Preventiorn of
KT20 7NS, UK.
Quay Equestrian Ltd, St Ceorges's
Cruelly to Anirmals, Head Office,
Facsimile: +44 (0) 1404 773934
Telephone: +44 (0)1304 616161
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1304 656221
Quay, Lancaster, Lancashire, LAl
Causeway, Horsharm, West Sussex,
Scottish Homing Union, UK.
5QJ, UK.
RHI2 IHG, UK.
Telephore: +44 (0)1524 381821
Telephone: +44 (0)1403 264 181
 23 IA, Low Waters Road, Harmilton,
Pfizer Consumer, UK.
Facsimile: +44 (0)1524 32080
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1403 24 1048
 Lanarkshire, ML3 7QN, UK
Pfizer
Consurmer
Healthcare,
E-rmail:
Website: www.rspca.org.uk
Telephone: +44 (0) 1698 286983
Walton
Oaks,
Dorking
Road,
Walton-on-the-Hill, Sumey, KT20
horses @quayequestrian.corm
Website: www.quayequestrian.corr
Searle, UK.
7NS, UK.
 RUMA Alliance, UK.
Contact: Pfizer
Telephone: +44 (0)1304 616161
Responsible Use of Medicines in
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1304 656221
RCVS, UK.
Agriculture Alliance
SEPA,UK.
Royal
College
of
Veterinary
Email: info@ muma.org.uk
Scottish
Environment Protection
Surgeons, Belgravia House, 62/64
Website: www.rurma.org.uk
Agency,
Erskine Court, Castle
Pharmacia, UK.
Horseferry Road,London, SWIP
Business Park, Stirling, FK9 4TR,
Contact: Pfizer
UK
Telephone: +44 (0)1 304 616161
2AF, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)20 7222 2001
Rumenco, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1786 457700
Facsimile: +44 (0)1304 656221
Rumenco
Facsirmile: +44 (0)20 7222 2004
Ltd,
Strotten House,
Facsimile: +44 (0)1786 446885
 Derby Road, Stretton, Burton-on-
Website: www.sepa.org.uk
Pinewood, UK.
E-mail adrmin @ rcvs.org.uk
Website: www.rcvs.org.uk
Trent, Staffordshire, DE13 0DW,
Pirnewood Healthcare, Ballyrmaca-
UK.
Sera, Ger.
bry, Clonmel, Co Tipperary, Eire.
Telephone: +44 (0)1283 524257
PO Box 1466, D-52518 Heinsberg,
Telephone: +353 5236253
Rhone- Poulenc Rorer, UK.
Facsimile: +44 (0)1283 511013
Cermany.
Facsirmile: +353 5236311
Contact: Aventis Pharrma.
Website: www.rurmenco.co.uk
Email: info@ sera.de
Website: www.sera.de
538 Index of Manufacturers and Organisations
Seven Seas, UK.
Sovereign, UK.
Thorne (Beehives), UK.
Unomedical, UK.
Seven Seas Ltd,
Hedon Road,
Sovereign
Medical,
Sovereign
E H Thome
(Beehives)
Ltd,
Unormedical Ltd, Thomhill Road,
Marfleet, King stori-upon -Hull, HU9
House, Miles Gray Road, Basildorn,
Beehive Works,
Wragby, Market
Redditch, B98 7NL, UK.
5NJ, UK.
Essex, SS 14 3FR, UK.
Rasen, Lincolnshire, LN8 5LA, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0) 1527 587700
Telephone: +44 (0)1482 375234
Telephone: +44 (0)1268 535200
Telephone: +44 (0)1673 858555
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1527 592111
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1482 787865
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1 268 535299
Facsimile: +44 (0)1673 857004
Website: www.petshealthcare.com
E-rmail: sales @thorne.co.uk
VDS, UK.
Website: www.thorne.co.uk
The Veterinary Defence Sociery
Shep-Fair, UK.
Spencer, UK.
Ltd, 4 Haig Court, Park Gate Estate,
Shep-Fair Products, Trewyscoed,
Briar G Spencer Ltd, I9-21 IIke stor
Thornton & Ross, UK.
Krutsford, Cheshire, WAl6 8XZ,
Coalpit,
Abergaveriny,
Road, Heanor, Derbyshire, DE75
Thornton & Ross Lrd, Linthwaite
UK.
Marn rmouthshire, NP7 7LWUK.
7DT, UK.
Laboratories,
Huddersfield, HD7
Telephone: +44 (0)1565 652737
Telephone: +44 (0)1 873 890855
Telephone: +44 (0)1773 533330
5QH, UK.
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1565 751079
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1873 890822
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1773 535454
Telephone: +44 (0)1484 842217
Email: info@shepfair.co.uk
Ermail:
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1484 847301
Vetark, UK.
Website: www.shepfair.co.uk
robert.mcdon ald @ vet-rmedic.corm
 Email: mail@thom ton ross.corm
Vetark Products Ltd, PO Box 60,
Winchester, Harmpshire, SO23 7LS,
Sherley's, UK.
Squibb, UK.
Thoroughbred
Breeders'
UK.
Beaphar UK Ltd, Hormefield Road,
Contact: Bristol Myers Squibb, UK.
Association, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)870 2430384
Haverhill, Suffolk, CB9 8QP, UK.
Thoroughbred
Breeders'
Assoc-
Facsirmile: +44 (0)870 2430382
Telephone: +44 (0)1440 715700
iation,
Staristead
House,
The
Ermail: info@ vetark.co.uk
 SSL International, UK.
Avenue, Newmarket, Suffolk, CB8
Website: www.vetark.co.uk
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1440 7 13940
E-rmail: info @sherleys.corm or
SSL
International pkc,
Canute
9AA, UK.
Court, Toft Road, Krutsford, WAl 6
Telephone: +44 (0)1638 661321
Veterinary Immunogenics, UK.
inifo @ be aph ar.corm
Website: www.sherleys.corm or
ONL, UK.
Email: info@ tbassoc.co.uk 
Veterinary
Irmrmunogenics
Ltd,
www.beaphar.corm
Telephone: +44 (0)1565 625000
Web site:
Carleton Hill,
Penrith, Curmbria,
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1565 625050
www.thoroughbredbreedersa ssociat
CAI1 8TZ,UK
Shire, UK.
Ermail:
ion.co.uk
Telephone: +44 (0)1768 863881
Shire
 rmedical.information
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1768 891389
Pharmaceutical
Ltd,
Harmpshire International Business
@ssl-in ternational.corm
The Toxoplasmosis Trust, UK.
Ermail:
Park,
Chineh arm,
Basirngstoke,
The
Toxoplasrmosis Trust, 61-71
torm barr@ careton hill.-net.corm
Strakan, UK.
Collier Street, London, N1 9BE,
Website:
Harmpshire, RG24 8EP, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1 256 894000
Strakari
Ltd,
Buckholm Mill,
UK.
www.carletonhill.u-net.com
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1256 894708
Buckholrm Mill Brae, Galashiels,
Telephone: +44 (0)20 77 13 0599
TDI 2HB, UK.
Facsirmile: +44 (0)20 7713 06 11
Veterinary Speciality
Telephone: +44 (0) 1896 668060
Website: www.toxo.org.uk
Products, UK.
Sinclair, UK.
Sinclair Arnirmal  and Household
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1 896 668 061
POBox
[，
Rosermary
lane,
E-rmail: medinfo@ strakan.corn 
Trinity, UK.
Whitchurch,
Ropery
Shropshire，
SY14
Care
Ltd,
Road,
Gainsborough, Lincolnshire, DN21
Trinity Pharrmaceuticals Ltd, The
7WF, UK.
 Swedish Orphan, UK.
Old Exchange, 12 Cormpton Road,
Telephone: +44 (0) 1948 780624
2QB, UK.
 Swedish Orphan Irternational (UK)
Wirmbledon, London, SW19 7QD,
Facsimile: +44 (0) 1948 780623
Ltd, The White House, Wilderspool
UK.
Ermail: jhales @bytecraft.net
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1274 8 10837
Park, Greenalls Averue, Stocktor
Telephone: +44 (0)20 8944 9443
Website: www.sjh ales.co.uk
Ermail:
customer.services @ sinclair-sahe.com
Heath, Warrington, Cheshire, WA4
Facsirmile: +44 (0)20 8947 9325
6HL, UK.
Vetoquinol, UK.
Website: www.sinclair-sahc.corn
Telephore: +44 (0)1925 438028
Tulivin, UK.
Vetoquinol UK Ltd,Vetoquinol
Tulivin
Laboratories Ltd,
35
House, Creat Slade, Buckingharn
S&N HIth., UK.
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1925 438001
Abbeydale Park, Newtownards, Co.
Industrial
Park,
Buckingharm,
Srmith & Nephew Healthcare Ltd,
Down, Northern Ireland, BT23
MK18 IPA, UK.
Healthcare House, Goulton Street,
Telsol, UK.
8RE, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1280 8 14500
Hull, HU3 4DJ, UK.
Telsol Ltd, PO Box HH7, Leeds,
Telephone: +44 (0)28 9182 0999
Facsimile: +44 (0)1280 825460
Telephone: +44 (0)1482 222200
LS8 2YE, UK.
Facsimile: +44 (0)28 9182 0227
E-rmail: office@ vetoquinol.co.uk
Facsimile: +44 (0)1482 222211
Telephone: 44 (0)113 226 0666
E-mail: univet@lineone.net
Website: www.vetoquirnol.co.uk
Email advice@ smith-nephew.com
Facsimile: +44 (0)113 226 0999
E-rmail: enquiries@ telsol.co.uk
Tyco, UK.
VetPlus, UK
Society of Greyhound Veteri-
Website: www.telsol.co.uk
Tyco Healthcare,
154Fareharn
VetPlus
Ltd,
Docklands,
Dock
narians, UK.
Road, Gosport, Harmpshire, PO13
Road, Lytharm, FY8 5AQ, UK.
PO Box 1 99, Plyrmouth, PL5 4XN,
OAS, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0) 1253 667422
UK.
Tetra, UK.
Telephone: +44 (01329) 224000
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1253 667425
Website: www.greyhoundvets.co.uk
Tetra (UK) Ltd, The Clock House,
Email: info@ vetplus.co.uk
Caters mili, Mansbridge Road, West
UFAW, UK.
Solvay, UK.
End,
Southarmpton, SO18 3HW,
Universities Federation for Anirmal
Vetriscience, UK
Solvay Healthcare Ltd, Mansbridge
UK.
Welfare,
The
PIO
School,
Vetriscience
Laboratories,
West
Road, West End, Southarmptor,
Telephone: +44 (0)8700 554020
Brewhouse Hill, Wheatharmpstead,
Felton, Oswestry, SY II 4LZ, UK
SO18 3JD, UK.
Facsimile: +44 (0)8700 554010
Hertfordshire, AL4 8AN, UK.
Telephone: +44 (0)1691 6108 18
Telephone: +44 (0)23 8046 7000
Website: www.tetra-fish .co.uk
Telephone: +44 (0)1582 831818
Facsirmile: +44 (0)169 1 610785
Facsirmile: +44 (0)23 8046 5350
Facsimile: +44 (0)1582 83 1414
Website: www.vetriscience.co.uk
Ermail: rmedinfo.shl @solvay.corm
Thomson & Joseph, UK.
E-rmail: ufaw @ufaw.org.uk
yasowo
Website: www.ufaww.org.uk
Vetsearch
International,
Sorex, UK.
House,
611
Plurmstead
Road,
Austral.
Sorex Ltd, St Michaels Industrial
Norwich, NR I 4JT, UK.
UK Pond Products, UK.
Estate, Widnes, Cheshire, WA8 8TJ,
Telephore: +44 (0)1603 439511
UK
Pond
Products,
61-81
subsidiary of Virbac (Australia) Pty
UK.
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1603 700243
Riverside, Power Station Road,
Ltd, 6 Lenton Place, North Rocks,
1510110)+o
Erm ail: enquiries@ tandj.co.uk
Rugeley, Staffordshire, WS15 2YR 
NSW 215l, Australia.
Facsimile: +44 (0)151 4951163
Website: www.tandj.co.uk
Telephone: +44 (0)1889 570955
Telephone: +61 (0)2 9717 2000
E-mail: sales@sorex.corm
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1889 576883
Facsirmile: +61 (0)2 9683 5973
Index of Manufacturers and Organisations
539
Virbac, UK.
VMD, UK.
Warner Lambert, UK.
Wyeth Consumer, UK.
Virbac Ltd, Woolpit Business Park,
Veterirary
Medicines Directorate,
Cor tact Pfizer, UK.
Wyeth
Consumer
Healthcare,
Windrmill Avenue, Woolpit, Bury St
Woodharti
Lare,
Whitehall
New
Haw,
Laboratories
Lrd,
Edrmunds, Suffolk, IP30 9UP, UK.
Addlestone, Surrey, KT15
3BR,
Welsh Homing Union
Hurtercombe Lane South, Taplow,
Telephone: +44 (0)1 359 243243
UK.
3 Coed Cae, Tirfil, Mew Tredegar,
Maidenhead, Berkshire, SL6 OPJ,
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1359 243200
Telephone: +44 (0) 1932 336911
Gwent, NP24 6HH, UK.
UK.
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1932 336618
Telephone: +44 (0)1443 833 161
Telephone: +44 (0) 1628 669011
Vita (Europe), UK.
Website: www.vmd.gov.uk
Vita (Europe) Ltd,
21/23 Wote
WVA
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1628 669846
Street, Basingstoke,
Harmpshire,
VPIS (Leeds), UK.
PUOM
Veterinary
Association,
RG21 7NE, UK.
VPIS
(Leeds),
The
Ceneral
Roselunds
Alle
DK-2720
Wynne Jones, UK.
8,
Telephone: +44 (0)1256 473175
Infirmary, Great Ceorge St, Leeds,
Vanlose, Denrmark.
C Wynne Jones, Ty Brith, Pentece-
Facsirmile: +44 (0)1256 473179
LS 1 3EX, UK.
Telephone: +45 38 71 01 56
lyn, Ruthirn, Denbighshire, LL15
Ermail: rmax.watkins@
0550 5 110) + oy
Facsimile: +45 38 71 03 22
2SR, UK
vita-europe.corm
Facsimile: +44 (0)113 244 5849
E-rmail: wva @ddd.dk
Telephone: +44 (0)1978 790279
Website: www.vita-europe.corm
Ermail:
Website: www.worldvet.org
Facsimile: +44 (0)1978 790265
rmedicines.inforrmation
Email: jones@ tybrith.fsnet.co.uk
@leedsth.rnhs.uk
Wyeth, UK.
Wyeth Pharmaceuticals,
Huriter-
VPIS (London), UK.
South,
Yamanouchi, UK.
combe
Lare
Medical Toxicology Unit, Avorley
Maidenhead, Berkshire, SL6 OPH,
Yarmanouchi
Pharrma
Ltd,
Road, London, SE i4 5ER, UK.
UK.
Yarmanouchi House, Pyrford Road,
Telephone: +44 (0)20 7635 9195
Telephone: +44 (0) 1628 604377
West Byfleet, Surrey, KT14 6RA,
Facsimile: +44 (0)20 7771 5309
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1628 666368
UK.
E-rmail: vpis @ gstt.stharmes.nhs.uk
Telephone: +44 (0)1932 342291
Facsirmile: +44 (0) 1932 353458
541
Drug monograph titles are listed on the page numbers in bold type. Proprietary names (brand names) are printed in itafic
type.
4FteasCatCottar217
ACP264
Aglepristone 327
Allopurinol 340
4Fteas Househoid Spray 220
Acriflavine
pregnant animals 122
leishmaniosis 178
4Fteas Tabtets 210
amphibians 100
Atamycin 10152
preparations 340
Abacavir 171
ornamental fish 85
Atamycin A erosot 409
renal impairment 120
repiles 112
preparations 82
Atamycin LA 152
Att-Trace 435
Abamectin
Acrolein378
Atamycin LA 300 152
Attverm 4% 191
ectoparasitic in fections
poisoning by 130
Albendazole 190
Atomide 369
208, 209
ACTH see Corticotrophin
reptiles 114
Alpha,-adrenoceptor
endoparasic infections
Acticoat 403
Atbenit Low Dose 190
stimulants, parturition
187
Actidose-Agua Advance 129
Atbenit SC 190
121
Abbre viations xiv
Actinomycin D see
Atbersure 2.5% SC 190
Alphachloralose, poisoning by
Abomasal ulceration 233
Dactinomycin
Atbensure 10% 190
132
Abortion
Actisorb Sitver 220 403
Atbex 2.5% SC 190
Alphadolone see Alfadolone
induction 321
Activot Liquid Supptement 435
Atbex 70% 190
Atphaject 1200 494
ovine, vaccine 462
Activot Mutti-Tabs 435
Albuterol 256
Atphaject 4000 494
Acctain PlusFtea Controt220
Activot Muttivitamin Tabs 435
Alcohol
Alphaxalone see Alfadolone
Accolate 260
Acular 368
poisoning 134
Alprazolam 293
ACE inhibitors 243
Acute bovine pulmonary
skin 399
Atstomec 188
ACE-High 435
emphysema 258
Alcuronium,renal impairment
Altrenogest 325
Acepromazine 264
Acyclovir see Aciclovir
120
Atudex208
behaviour modification
Adcortyt 347
Atdactone 242
Aluminium hydroxide 232
292
Adder, poisoning by 137
Atfa Btue Ptus 359
Aluminium salts, antacids 232
etorphine with 273
Addison's disease
Atfa Red + 359
Amantadine 170
ferrets 71
diagnosis 313
Alfacalcidol 433
ferrets 70
hepatic impairment 118
treatment 306
Atfadex220
Ambroxol 261
lactahion 123
Ademeionine 236, 237
Alfadolone 277
AMEL1A 8 7
motion sickness 227
S-Adenosyl-L-methionine 237
alfaxalone and 277
Amethocaine 373
neuroleptanalgesia 272
Adequan 348
ferrets 71
Amfipen 148
rabbits 66
ADH see Antidiuretic hormone
rabbits 66
Amfipen 15% 148
renal impairment 120
Adrenal gland, tests 315
rodents 62
Amfipen LA 148
rodents 62
Adrenalin see Epinephrine
Alfaprostol 329
Amicarbalide 177
sedative 263
Adrenoceptor stimulants 250
Alfaxalone 277
Amidines 208
Acetarminophen 272
bronchodilators 256
see aiso Alfadolone
Amikacin 153
poisoning by 131
cardiac patients 250
Alfentanil 270
amphibians 100
Acetazolamide 370
eye 369
Algae, poisoning by 136
ferrets70
Acehic acid 91
obstetrics 331
Atgisite M 402
ornamental fsh 85
Acetonaemia see Ketosis
sedati ves 264
Atgosteril 402
reptiles 112
Acetylcysteine 261
re versal of effect 268
Alimemazine 390
Amikin 153
eye 372
Adsorbents 222
Atizin 327
Amiloride 242
poisoning 131
Advantage 210
Alkalinisers
renal impairment 120
Acetylpromazine see
Advantix Spot-on 217, 218
fluid therapy 415
Aminoglycosides 153-155
Acepromazine
Advertising of medicines 10
urinary 338
renal impairment 120
Acetylsalicylic acid see Aspirin
Advocin preparations 163
Alkalosis 415
Aminophylline 255, 256
Aciclovir 170
Aeroctens 395
Atkeran 380
feline asthma 258
eye 366
AeroKat spacer 259
Att in One Wormer 196
ferrets 72
repiles 112
AE-Vac 480
Allergic disorders
preparations 256
Acidifiers
Aflatoxins, poisoning by 135
food-induced 437
Amiodarone 248
fluid therapy 415
Agalactia, myometrial
respiratory 258
Amitraz 208
uninary 337
shimulants 331
skin 388
lactation 123
Acidosis 415
Ageing
Allergic rhinitis 258, 262
pregnant animals 122
Acitretin 396
dietary management 439
Attermyt 398
Amitriptyline 294
Acom, poisoning by 136
prescribing for 126
IOt suoyeuedaid uaa
Amlodipine 249
542 Index
Ammonium chloride
Anaemia (continued)
Antibacterials 139-167
Antihistamines (continued)
poisoning 129
iron defciency 426
amphibians 97,100
dermatitis 390
urinary acidification 337
renal impairment 336
aquatic invertebrates 94,
eye368
Ammonium lactate 419
Anaesthesia
96
Anti-inflammatory drugs
Ammonium molybdate,
aquatic invertebrates 95
chronic diarrhoea 223
corticosteroids 303
poisoning 133, 134
consent forms 20,21
compound preparations
non-steroidal 341
Ammonium sulfate 337,338
exotic birds105
167
polysulfated
Amoxicillin 145,146
eye373
cystitis 337
glycosaminoglycan 348
clavulanic acid with 147
fish 78
ear403
sodium hy aluronate 348
eyes 364
general 274281
exotic birds 104,106
topical
exotic birds 106
inhalation 279
eye 364
ear 403
farmed fish 74
injectable 276
ferrets 68, 70
eye366
ferrets 70
musclerelaxants
fsh 74, 80, 85
rmusculoskeletal
garme birds S1
281
game birds 49, 51
system 349
hepatic encephalopathy
pre-anaesthetic
hepatobiliary infections
skin 391
237
medication275
236
Antimicrobials 139-179
omamental fsh 85
hepatic irmpairment 1 18
masitis 354-358
amphibians 97, 100
pigeons S5
local 285
minor wounds 395
aquatic invertebrates 94,
reptiles 112
pigeons 54
pigeons 54, 55
96
rodents 61
rabbits 63, 66
poultry 47
ear 403
Amoxinsot preparations 146
rodents 59, 62
production enhancers 445
exotic birds 104,106
Amoxycare 146
Analgesics
rabbits 63, 64
eye 363
Amoxycare Injection 146
cormpound preparations
reptiles 109, 112
ferrets 68,70
Amoxycare LA Injection 146
272
respiratory infections 253
foot disorders 408
Amox ycillin see Amoxicillin
equine colic225
rodents 59, 61
game birds 49, 51
Amoxypen Irnjection 146
non-opioid 272
skin infections 393
ornamental fish 85
Amoxypen LA 146
NSA1Ds 342
therapy guidelines 140
pigeons 54, 55
Amoxypen Orat Suspension 146
opioid 268-272
Antibiotics see Antibacterials
poultry 47
Amphibians
parturition 121
Anticholinergics see
rabbits 63, 64
consent forms 20
teversal of effects
Antimuscarinic drugs
reptiles 109, 112
prescribing 97
273
Anticholinesterases 284
rodents 59, 61
Amphotericin B
rabbits 66
Anticoagulants 250
Anti-Mite & Insect Spray 215
amphibians 100
rodents 62
oral 251
Antimuscarinic drugs
aquatic invertebrates 96
Androgens 327
parenteral 250
bradycardia 249
exotic birds 106
Anectine283
Anhcoccidials 171-176
eye369
ferrets 70
Angiotensin-con verting
compound preparations
intestinal motility 230
fungal infections 168
enzyme inhibitors see
176
pre-anaestheic
leishmaniosis 178, 179
ACE inhibitors
Anticonvulsants see
medication 275
preparations 168
Animal Medicine Record Book
Antiepileptics
respiratory disorders 257
renal impairment 120
16
Antidepressants 294
Anti-Pest Insect Spray 215
repiles 112
Animals in compeitions 23
exotic birds 105
Aniprogestogens 327
Ampicaps148
herbal medicines and 496
Antidiabetic drugs 308-311
Antiprotozoal drugs 171-179
Ampicare148
Animec 188
oral 310
game birds 50, 51
Ampicillin 145, 148
Anivit 4BC 434
Antidiuretic hormone 313
pigeons 55
amphibians 100
Anivit B, 432
Antidotes 130-137
Antipruritics 388-393
ferrets 70
Anoestrus 320
Anti-emetics 226
Antipseudomonal penicillins
 omamental fsh 85
Anorexia
Antiepilepics 287
148
renal impairment 120
appetite stirmulation 293
behaviour modification
Antirobe 156
repiles 112
dietary management 438
296
Anti-Scratch Powder215
rodents 61
fluid therapy 414
hepatic impairment 1 18
Antisedan 268
Ampitab148
Antacids 232
Antifreeze, poisoning by 134
Antiseptic Ointment 395
Amprolium 171,174
Antepsin 235
Antifungal drugs 168-169
AntisepticTeat Ointment362
pigeons 55
Anthetpor 20 194
eye366
Antiseptic Wound Powder395
Amylase 235
Anthrax 455
fsh 75, 80
Antisera 449
Anabolic steroids 307
Anti Ftatutence Tabtets 232
skin
snake venom 137
hepatic impairment 118
Anti-arrhythrmics 246-249
parenteral 168
Antispasmodics 230
Anaermia
Class 1 246
topical 394
equine colic 226
anabolic steroids 307
Class Il 247
Anihistamines 260
Antithyroid drugs 302
chickenvirus,vaccine
Class 111 248
behaviour modification
Antitoxins 449
482
Class IV 248
297
tetanus 454
Index
543
Antitussives 261
Aspirin 343
Aurotex 404
Barbiturates (continued)
Antiviral drugs 170
ferrets72
Auroto 404
euthanasia 290
eye366
poisoning by 131
Auto-immune disease, skin 388
parturition 121
Antizot 135
preparations 343
Autoworm5withSystamex193
pregnant animals 122
Apiguard93
thrombo-embolism 250
Autoworm Big 5 with Systamex
Barium sulfate, ferrets 72
Apitife VA R 92
Asthma syndrome 258
193
Barricade 213
Apistan92
Atarax 391
Autoworm Big6with Systamex
Batte's Head Fty Protection
APO-go Ampoutes 129
Atenolol247
194
219
Apomorphine 128,129
ferrets 72
Avance 403
Baycox 2.5% 176
ferrets 72
preparations 247
Avatec 75% CC 175
Bayovac IBR-Marker
Appertex 174
Aipamezole 268
Avermectins
Inactivatum 456
Apralan G700 154
exotic birds105
ectoparasitic infections
Bayovac IBR-Marker Vivum
Apralan OratDoser154
ferrets 71
208
456
Apralan Sotubte Powder 154
hepatic impairment 1 18
endoparasitic infections
Baytrit 2.5% Orat Sotution 164
Apramycin 153
pregnant animals 122
187
Baytrit 10% Orat Sotution 164
game birds 51
rabbits 66
Avian encephalomyelitis,
Baytrit Injection 164
renal impairment 120
rodents 62
vaccine 480
Baytrit PigtetDoser164
Apresotine 245
Atopica
Avian infectious bronchitis,
Baytrit Tabtets 164
Aguacet 402
immunosuppression 385
vaccine 480
Bayvarot 92
AquaForm401
skin disease 390
Avianinfectious bursal disease,
BCK222
Aguarium Care Fungus 82
Atracurium 281, 282
vaccine 481
BCNU 379
Aguarium Care White Spot82
Atrial fibrillation 246
Avian pneumovirus, vaccine
Bectazone Easi-Breathe 259
Aguatet 75
cardiac glycosides 239
482
Bectoforte 259
Aguatrace Cobatt 424
quinidine247
Avian reovirus, vaccine 482
Beclometasone 259
Aguatrace Copper 425
Atrocare 275
Aviax 176
Beclomethasone 259
Aguatrace Ex-Set Catte 435
Atrophic rhinitis, vaccine 465
Avilamycin 446
Bee stings 137
Aguatrace Ex-Set Sheep 435
Atropine 275
Avimix 435
Bees, prescribing 6, 88
Aguatrace Iodine 426
antispasmodic 230, 231
Axid 234
Beet, poisoning by 135
Aguatrace Manganese 427
diphenoxylate with 223
Azamethiphos 210
Behaviour modi fiers 291
Aguatrace Setenium 428
eye 369
fsh 75
exotic birds 105
Aguatrace Trio Cattte 430
feline asthma 258
Azaperone 264
Benazepril
Aguatrace Zinc 429
ferrets 71, 72
behaviour modification
heart failure 243
AguaVac ERM 493
heart disease 249
292
renal failure 336
AquaVacERMOral493
lactation 123
Azapirones 292
lactation 123
AguaVac FNM Plus 494
poisoning 132,275
Azathioprine 385
pregnant animals 122
AguaVac Furovac 5 494
pre-anaesthetic
bowel disease 224
Bendiocarb 210
AguaVacVibrio 494
medication 275
Bendrofluazide see
Aqueous cream 387
rabbits 66
Azidothymidine 171
Bendroflumethiazide
Agueous Todine Orat Sotution
rodents 62
Azithromycin 155,156
Bendroflurmethiazide 241
303
Atropine Injection Large
eye 364
preparations 241
Agupharm preparations 417
Animat275
Azopt 371
renal impairment 120
Aguspray 400
Atypical interstitial pneumonia
AZT 171
Bentonite 132
Ark Ktens 77, 82
258
Benylin Chesty Cough 260
Arkvits 435
Aujeszky's disease, vaccine
Benzalkonium chloride
Aromatherapy 495
465
amphibians 100
Arguet VGranutes345
Auranofn 349
Babesiosis 177
fish 76, 77, 85
 Arrangement of information xii
Aureomycin Ophthatmic
Bacillary haemoglobinuria,
Benzathine benzylpenicillin
Arret 223
Ointment364
vaccine 457
procaine benzylpenicillin
Arsenamide 196
Aureomycin Sotubte Obtets 151
Bacillus thuringiensis 91
and 145
Arsenic
Aureomycin Sotubte Powder
Bacta-Pure 82
Benzathine penicillin 144
competitions 26
151
Bacta-pure 82
Benzimidazoles
poisoning by 133
Aureomycin Topicat Powder
Bacteriat Controt No 782
fluke infections 199
Artervac 453
393
Bactocide 82
pregnant animals 122
Arthrotabs 348
Auriptak 214
Baktopur 82
round worm in fechions
Asacot MR 224
Auriptak Fty and Scab Dip 213
Baktopur Direct 82
190
Ascorbic acid 432
Aurizon 404
Bambermycin 446
tapeworm infections 198
poisoning 131
Auroctens 404
Baquiloprim 159
Benzocaine 78
urinary acidifier 337
Aurofac 100 Granutar 151
Barbiturates
amphibians 102
Aspergillosis 168
Aurofac 200 151
anaesthesia 276
aquatic invertebrates 95
exotic birds 104
Aurogran 151
epilepsy 288
fsh 78
544 Index
Benzodiazepines
Biozine 197
Bracken, poisoning by 136
Cabergoline
beha viour modification
Birds
Bradycardia 275
behavioural modification
293
ectoparasitic infections
Bran 228
298
epilepsy 288
204
Brax y, vaccine 457
lactation 123
sedation 267
exotic
Brevibtoc 248
pregnant animals 122
reversal 268
body-weights 528
Brexidot346
pse udopregnancy 332
status epilepticus 290
prescribing 103
Brinzolamide 370
Caffeine
Benzoyl peroxide 396
 game birds, prescribing
Bromhexine 260, 261
competitions 24
Benzoyl phenylurea derivatives
48
exotic birds 109
poisoning by 131
216
pigeons,prescribing 52
Brominism 288
Cage 'n' Hutch Insect Spray
Benzydamine 343
poulry, prescribing 46
Bromocriptine 315, 332
220
Benzyl alcohol, mastiis 359
roundworm infections
lactation 123
Calamine 387, 396
Benzyl benzoate 216
187
pregnant animals 122
Catcibor CBG 20 422
pigeons 57
vaccines 479-491
preparations 315
Catcibor CBG 40 422
Benzylpenicillin 140, 144
Birp 225
Bromofenofos 199
Catcibor CM20424
aquatic invertebrates 96
Bisacody1230
Bronchitis
Catcibor CM40 424
rodents 61
Bismuth salts 222
avian infectious, vaccine
Calciferol see Ergocalciferol
Beta-adrenoceptor blocking
Bismuth subsalicylate, ferrets
480
Catciject 20CM 424
arugs
72
corticosteroids 259
Catciject20CMD 424
arrhy thmias 247
Bisotvon 261
mucolytics 260
Catcject 40422
behaviour modification
Bithionol 199
Bronchodilators 255
Catciject40CM424
296
Black disease, vaccine 457
adrenoceptor stirmulants
Catcject LV 424
glaucoma 372
Blackleg disease, vaccine 457
256
Calcitonin 316
hepatic impairment 118
preparations
antimuscarinics 257
navicular disease 350
pregnant animals 122
Bleach, poisoning by 130
methylxanthines 255
poisoning 132,317
renal impairment 120
Bleomycin 38 1, 382
Bronopol 76
Calcitriol 433
Beta-adrenoceptor sti mulants,
Bloat Guard 225
BSP 434
Calcium 421
poisoning by 131
Btu-Gard 360
Buffodine78
magnesium, phosphorus
Beta-blockers see Beta-
Body surface area, tables 526
Buparvaquone 179
and 423
adrenoceptor blocking
Body-weights 528
Bupivacaine 286
poisoning 136
drugs
Boldenone 307
Buprenorphine 269, 270
vitamin D and 433
Beta-Cardone 248
Bomathat277
ferrets 71
Calcium gluconate 422
Beta-lactam antibacterials 140
Bonefos 317
hepatic irmpairment 1 18
Calcium salts 422
Beta-lactamase resistant
Bordetella bronchiseptica,
pregnant animals 122
exoic birds 109
penicillins 145
vaccine 471
rabbits 66
Catcivet 433
Betatoc 248
Borgat24% 161
rodents 62
Calculi see Urolithiasis
Betamethasone 304,305
Botulism 135
Bums, fluid therapy 414
Canac Cat Ftea Cotlar214
eye367
Bovactox DC(Dry Cow) 357
Bursal disease, avian infechious,
Canac Cat Ftea Spray 215
ferrets 72
Bovactox DC Xtra 357
vaccine 481
Canac Dog Ftea and Tick
pigeons 54
Bovex 2.265% 194
Buscopan Compositum 232
Drops 214
 Betamox preparations 146
Bovidec460
Buserelin 322,323
Canac Dog Ftea Shampoo 215
Bethanechol338,339
Bovilis BVD 460
ferrets 72
Canac Dog Ftea Spray 215
Betnesot 367
Bovitis Huskvac 462
Buspar 293
Canac Ear Drops 404
Betsotan 305
Bovitis IBR456
Buspirone 292, 293
Canac Extra Long Lasting
Betsolan Sotubte305
Bovitis IBRMarker456
hepatic irmpairment 1 18
HousehotdFteaSpray
BiCNU 379
Bovitis Ringvac 464
renal impairment 120
220
Big Red Ftea Spray 210
Bovine herpesvirus, vaccine
Busulfan 379
Canac Househotd Ftea Powder
Biguanides 310
455
Butatex179
220
Bitosin 200 157
Bovine parainfluenza virus,
Butorphanol 270
Canaurat404
Bimactox Extra DC 357
vaccine455
analgesia 270
Cancer see Malignant disease
Bimamast MC 356
Bovine respiratory syncytial
cough 261
Candidiasis 168
 Bimatoprost 371
virus, vaccine 456
exotic birds109
exoic birds 104
Bimectin 188
Bovine verminous pneumonia,
ferrets 71
Canesten 394
Bimotrim Co 161
vaccine 462
hepatic irmpairment 1 18
Canigen L 472
Bimoxyt 146
Bovine viral pneurmonia
ornamental fsh 86
Canigen PPi 473
Bimoxyt LA 147
vaccine 455
rabbits 66
Canine Cardiac 441
Binixin 344
combination vaccines 457
rodents 62
Canine Convatescence Support
Bioallethrin 212
Bovipast RSP 457
Butox Swish 214
443
Bio-Cox 120G 176
Bovivac S 460
Butyrophenones 264
Canine coronavirus, vaccines
Biotin, hoof care 409
Bowel cleansers 230
C.E.T238
469
Index:
545
Canine Diabetic 442
Canusat 251
Catovet Patatabte Wormer 197
Ceporex Vet Orat Drops 149
Canine Diet Cardiovascutar
Capstar210
Cats
Cepravin Dry Cow357
441
Captopril,renalimpairment
body surface area 526
Cerebrocortical necrosis 431
Canine Diet Convatescence443
120
body-weight 528
Cestodes see Tapeworm
Canine Diet Dermatosis
Carazolol248
competitions 29
infections
Linited Antigen 441, 443
Carbachol 371
dietetic pet foods 436
Cetream 395
Canine Diet Diabetes Cotlitis
glaucoma 371
ectoparasitic infections
Cetriad359
442
intestinal mo6ility 231
204
Cetrimide
Canine Diet Gastroenteric 441,
Carbamates 210
lungworm infections 186
foot disorders 408
442, 443
poisoning by 132
prescribing 46
skin 399
Canine Diet Hypoattergenic
Carbamazepine 296
protozoal infections 172
teats and udders 359
441
hepatic impairment 1 18
roundworm infections
Cemimide Cream 395
Canine Diet Obesity
renal impairment 120
186
Cetrimide Solution 399
Management 442
Carbaril 210
tapeworm infections 197
Cevac Chtamydophita 463
Canine Diet Renat Faiture 440
ferrets 69
vaccines 475-478
Chanamast DC 357
Canine Diet Urinary 440
Carbesia 178
Cattle
Chanaverm 7.5%194
Canine Digestive Low Fat 441
Carbigran 175
body-weight 528
Chanazine267
Canine Digestive Low Fat LF
Carbimazole 302
ectoparasitic infections
Chanazote SC 193
22 441, 442
Carbomers 372
202
Chanoprim 160
Canine distemper, vaccine 469
Carbomix 129
fuke infections 199
Charcoal
Canine Earty Cardiac EC26
Carbon dioxide,aquatic
prescribing 35
diarrhoea 222
441
invertebrates 95
protozoal infections 172
poisoning 130
Canine Hepatic 440,442
Carbon monoxide, poisoning
round worm in fections
Charcodote129
Canine Hepatic HF 16 442
by 130
185
Chelonians, prescribing 109
Canine Hepatic Suppont Diet
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
tapeworm infections 197
Chemet 134
442
370
vaccines 455-464
Chemicals 6
Canine hepatitis, vaccine 470
Carboplatin 383
Cattle grubs 202
Cherry laurel, poisoning by 135
Canine Hypoallergenic DR 21
preparations 383
Cavi-Care 401
Chestnut, poisoning by 136
441, 443
renal impairment 120
CCNU 379
Chicken anaemia virus,vaccine
Canine Intestinat CI 30,dry
Carbotocin 330
C-Dip 359
482
441
Cardiac glycosides 239
Cefadroxil, ferrets 70
Chickens see Poultry
Canine Mobility Support MS 25
renal impairment 120
Cefalexin149
Chlamydiosis see
443
Cardiac see Heart failure
exotic birds 106
Chlarmydophiliosis
Canine Obesity Management
Cardiovascular system 239-
ferrets 70
Chlamydophiliosis
442
252
mashis 357
exotic birds 104
Canine Obesity Management
Carfentanil 270
pigeons 55
vaccine
DP34442
Carmellose sodium372
rabbits 64
cats 475
Carmustine 379
reptiles 112
sheep 463
Canine Rehydration Support
Carnidazole 177
rodents 61
Chtora-Cyctine 151
443
exotic birds106
Cefalonium, mastitis 357
Chlorambucil 378
Canine Renat 440
pigeons 55
Cefaseptin 149
Chlorammine
Canine Renat RF 16 440,441
Carpet Ftea Guard 220
Cefoperazone, mastitis 355
aquatic invertebrates 96
Canine Sensitivity Controt 441,
Carprofen 343
Cefquinome 149
farmed fish 76, 77
443
exotic birds 109
mashiis 355
ornamental fsh 85
Canine Urinary 440
rabbits 66
Ceftazidime 150
Chloramine-T 77
CanineUrinary LP 18440
rodents 62
reptiles 112
Chloramphenicol 158
Canine Weight Controt
Carr&Day& Mantin Killitch
Ceftiofur 150
amphibians 100
Diabetic 30 442
216
reptiles 112
aquatic invertebrates96
Caninsutin 309
Cartrophen Vet348
Cefuroxime 150
eye 364
Canker see Trichomoniosis
Carvedilol 247
reptiles 112
hepatic impairment 118
Cannabis, poisoning by 136
Cat EasyTapeWormer198
Cetance 316
ornamental fsh 85
Canovet Ftea Drops 214
Cat Ftea Cottar (Fett)214
Cetluvisc372
preparations 158
Canovet Insecticidat Powder
Cat Ftea Cottar (Fett-
Cephaguard 149
rabbits 64
214
Reflective)214
Cephaguard LC Intramammary
renal impairment 120
Canovet Insecticidat Shampoo
Cat Ftea Cottar(Ptastic) 211
355
reptiles 112
214
CatFtea Preparations
Cephalexin see Cefalexin
rodents 61
Canovet Insecticidat Spray 215
(Johnson's) 215
Cephalosporins 149- 150
Chlorhexidine
Canovet Palatabte Wormer 197
Catapres 317
renal impairment 120
oral hygiene 237
Canovet Pet Bedding &
Catovet InsecticidatPowder
Cephorum 149
skin 399
Househotd Spray 220
214
Ceporex149
teats and udders 359
546 Index
Chtoromycetin V Redidrops 364
Cisatracurium 282
Clotrimazole 394
Comptederm 392
Chlorothiazide 241
Cisplatin 383
exotic birds 106
Conjunctivitis 364
Chlorphenamine
preparations 384
preparations 394
Conkers, poisoning by 136
allergic skin disorders 390
renal impairment 120
Clove oil, amphibians 102
Consent forms 19
beha viour modification
Citanest 1%287
Cloxacillin 145
anaesthetics 20
297
Citronella oil 219
eye 364,365
euthanasia 21
ferrets 72
Clamoxyt LA 147
mashitis
exoic animals 20
premedicaion 381
Ctamoxyt Orat Muttidoser 147
lactating animals
medical treatment 20
Chlorphenirarmine see
Clamoxyt Ready to Use
355
rabbits and rodents 20
Chlorphenamine
Injection147
non-lactating
Constipation 228
Chlorprormazine 226
Clamoxyt Tabtets 147
animals 357
Contagious pustular dermatitis,
gastmitis 226
Clarithromycin 155,156
Coal tar 396
vaccine459
hepatic impairment 118
reptiles 112
poisoning by 130
Containers 11
mohon sickness 227
Clavulanic acid 146
Coal Tar Soluion 396
Contreet H403
preparations 227
ticarcillin with 148
Co-amoxiclav 147
Controlled drugs 3
renal impairment 120
Clazuril 174
Coatex 392
disposal19
Chlorpropamide 310
pigeons 55
prescription wriing 3
diabetes insipidus 314
Cleansers
398
record keeping 3
diabetes mellitus 310
bowel 230
Cobalt 424
sending by post 13
hepatic impairment 118
ear 404
Cobalt oxide 424
storage 11
parturition 121
skin 399
Coccidiosis 171
Conversions 525
preparations 311
Clemasine 390
exotic birds 104
Coopers Ectoforce Sheep Dip
Chlorpyrifos 210
Clenbutero]
game birds 50
211
Chtorsot50151
bronchodilators 256, 257
pigeons 54
Copasure 425
Chtortet FG 100 151
obstetrics 331
poultry 48, 171
COPD 258
Chlorte trac ycline 150
parturition 121
vaccine 480
Co-phenotrope 223
aquatic in vertebrates 96
pregnant animals 122
Codeine 261
Copinox Ewe/Catf 425
eye364
Clik217
analgesia 272
Copinox Lamb 425
game birds 51
Clinacin 156
cough 261
Copper 424
rabbits 64
Clinacox 174
diarrhoea 223
deficiency 425
skin 393
Clinaget Vet 365
hepatic impairment 1 18
joint disease 349
Chocolate, poisoning by 135
Clindacyt156
intestinal motility 222
poisoning by 133
Cholestyramine 237
Clindamycin 155,156
preparations 261
toxicity 425
Chondroiin sulfate 349
ferrets 70
Co-flumactone 242
Copper hepatotoxicosis 236
Chorionic gonadotrophin 319,
renal impairment 120
Colecalcifero] 432
Copper salts 425
320
reptiles 112
Colestyramine 237
hepatic impairment 118
equine 319,322
Clodronate sodium 317
preparations 237
Copper sulfate
ferrets 72
Clofenvinphos 210
rabbits 65
amphibians 101
human 319, 322
Clomicatm 294
Colic, equine 225
fsh 77
Choruton 322
Clomipramine 294
Colisorb 468
foot disorders 408
Chronic obstructive pulmonary
lactation 123
Colistin 166
Copprite 426
disease 258
Clonazepam 290
Colitis 223
Coprin 426
Chronogest 326
epilepsy 288
Collodion, flexible 388
Cordarone X 248
Ciclosporin
pregnant animals 122
Colloids 416
Cordilox249
immunosuppression 385
status epilepticus 290
Colombovac Paratyphus 487
Corticosteroids 303-307
ocular disease 372
Clonidine 313, 317
Colombovac PMV 487
allergic respiratory
renal impaiment 120
Clopidol 171,174
Colombovac PMV/Pox 489
disease 259
skin disease 390
rabbits 64
Colostrum replacers 125
bowel disease 223
Citoxan 365
Cloprostenol 329
Cotvasone 305
competitions 25
Cimetidine 233, 234
Clorazepate 293
Co-magaldrox 233
dermatitis 388, 391
equine melanoma 233
hepatic impairment 1 18
CombiDERM 402
eye 366
ferrets 72
Clorsulon199
Combinex Catte 200
feline asthma 259
pancreatitis 235
Closantel 199
Combinex Sheep 200
hepatic irmpairment 118
preparations 234
fluke infections 199
Combivit 434
hepatitis 236
uraermic gastritis 226
roundworm infections
Comfeet 402
intra-articular 347
Cinchocaine (ingredient) 291
196
Comfet SeaSorb Filter 402
navicular disease 350
Ciproflox acin
Clostridial infections, vaccines
Comfornt Shieid 373
parturition 121
eye infections 364
pigs 465
Companazone 25 346
pregnant animals 122
ferrets 70
ruminants 457
Competiions 2429
side-effects 304
reptiles 112
Clostridial metritis, vaccine 457
drug testing 25
Corticotrophin 307
Index 547
Corticotropin 313
Cypermethrin 212,213
Debrisan402
Desferat 132
Corventat-D 256
fish 75, 76
Decazote Fonte 194
Desferrioxarmine, poisoning
Cosecure for Catte 430
game birds 52
Deccox 174
131, 132
Cosecure for Deer430
Cyprinopur 82
Deccox25Individuat
Desipramine 294
Cosecure for Lambs 430
Cyproheptadine
Treatment Pack 174
Deslorelin 322,323
Cosecure for Sheep 430
feline asthma 259, 260
 Decon gestants 262
Desmopressin 313, 314
Coseguin 348
hyperadre nocoricism 315
Decoquinate 171, 174
Desox ycortone pivalate 307
Cosmegen Lyovac 382
Cyromazine 217
Dectomax 187,188
Destotit 237
Costapur 82
pregnant animals 122
Defencare 214
Detergents, poisoning by 130
Co-trimazine 160
rabbits 65
Defencat214
Detomidine 265
farmed fish 75
Cystinuria 340
Deferox amine, poisoning 13 1,
De velopmental orthopaedic
protozoal infechions 173
Cystitis 337
132
disease 425, 429, 431
Co-trimoxazole 162
Cystopurin 338
Defest 3Months 220
Devomycin 155
Cough
Cytarabine 380
Defest 12 Months 220
Devomycin-D 155
antitussives 261
Cythioate 211
Defest Powder 220
Dexadreson 305
mucolytics 260
Cytotec 234
Delmadinone 325, 326
Dexafort305
Coumafos210
Cytotoxic drugs 375-384
behaviour modi fication
Dexamethasone 304, 305
Covexin8459
a]kylahing 378
298
chronic granulomatous
Covexin 10459
antimetabolites 380
malignant disease 386
enteritis in horses 223
Cowstips+ 407
an titumour antibiotics 38 1
Deltamethrin 212,213
eye 367
Coxi Ptus 176
combination protocols
Detvoprin 160
ferrets 72
Coxistac 176
375, 376
Detvosteron 327
hypoadrenocoricism 306
Coxoid174
dosage 378
Dembrexine 260, 261
ornamental fsh 86
Coyden 25 174
immune-mediated
Demodectic mange 204
rabbits 65
Cream of Magnesia 229
arthritides 349
Denex 497
rodents 60
Creams
platinum co-ordination
Dentagyt 238
spinal injury 303
skin 387
compounds 383
Dental plaque
Dexamfetamine 297
udder 358
pregnant animals 122
special diets 439
Dexamphetamine 297
Creosote, poisoning by 135
side-effects 377
toothpaste 237
Dexedrine 297
Crisantaspase 384
vinca alk aloids 382
Dentifrice 237
Dextran 40 418
ferrets 72
Dentipet Premier238
Dextran 70 418
Cronyxin 344
Deosan Super Ex-Cet 360
Dextrans 416, 418
Cropropamide, crotethamide
Dacarbazine 384
Deosan Teat Care Plus360
De xtromethorphan 261
with 262
Dactinomycin 381,382
Deosan Thixodip BA 359
Dextrose see Glucose
Crovect213
Daffodil, poisoning by 136
Deosan Uddercream 360
Diabetes insipidus 313
Cryomarex Rispens 484
DatacinC156
Deosect213
fluid therapy 414
Cryptosporidiosis 174
Datophyltine 262
Depidex 188
Diabetes mellitus 308-312
Crystapen 144
Damiana and Kota Tabtets 497
Depociltin 145
dietary management438
Curazote 5% 191
Danazol 307
Depo-Medrone V 306
insulins 308
Curazote 10% 191
hepatic impairment 1 18
Depomycin Forte 167
management 308
Cushing's syndrome 314
pregnant animals 122
Deposet 428
non-insulin dependent
Cyanide,poisoning by 133
preparations 385
Deracoxib 341
310
Cyanocobalamin 431
renal impairment 120
Dermabond 403
oral antidiabefic drugs
Daniton Eguidos 346
Dermacoot 391
310
poisoning by 135
Danofloxacin 163
Dermatitis 388
Diabetic ketoacidosis 311
Cyclizine 227
Danot385
con tagious pustular,
Diagnoshic stains, eye 373
Cyclopentolate 369
Dantrium 339
vaccine 459
Diagnostic tests
Cyclophospharmide 378,379
Dantrolene sodium 339
miliary 389
adrenocortical function
arthritides 349
Dantron 230
Dermatological preparations
313
ferrets 72
Daonitl311
see Skin
diabetes insipidus 314
preparations 379
DAP 300
Dermatophyte infections 168
equine pituitary adenoma
Cycloplegics 369
Darrow's solution 413
Dermatoses
313
Cyclosporin see Ciclosporin
Day Son & Hewitt Dermotine
 dietary management 437
growth hormone
Cycostat66G 175
Louse Powder 214
see aiso Skin
deficiency 317
Cydectin 0.1%189
Day Son & Hewitt Dermotine
Dermisot 404
growth hormone
Cydectin 0.5% 189
Shampoo 215
Dermisot Mutticteanse 404
stimulation 313
CydectinI%189
Day Son & Hewitt Sweet Itch
Dermobion Ctear 391
hypothyroidism 313, 314
Cygro 175
Lotion 215
Dermobion Green 391
invertebrates 91
Cyhalothrin 212
Day Son & Hewitt Switch 214
Dermoline Louse Powder 214
cryptorchidism319
Cylap 492
DDAVP 314
Dermoline Shampoo 215
Diamox 370
548 Index
Diarrhoea
Diliazem 249
Dispensing (continued)
Doxapram 262
adsorbents 222
ferrets72
containers 11
amphibians 98
chronic 223
hepatic impaiment 118
labelling 12
exotic birds 109
dietary management 437
lactation 123
personne]10
ferrets 72
fluid therapy 414
pregnant animals 122
premises 10
hepatic impairment 118
motility reduction 222
Dimazon 242
Disposal of medicines 18
ornamental fsh 86
Diarrhoea Tabtets 222
Dimethicone 225
Dissociative anaesthetics 278
rabbits 66
Diazemuts 290
Dirmethyl phthalate 219
Distamine 340
renal impairment 120
Diazepam
Dimethyl sulfoxide 348
Distemper, vaccine 469
rodents 62
behaviour modification
cormpetitions 25
Diuretics 240-243
Doxepin 294
293, 296
Dirmeicone 225
loop 241
Doxirobe 238
epilepsy 288
Dimetmidazole 162, 176
osmotic243
Doxorubicin 381,382
exotic birds 109
bacterial infections 162
potassium and 240
ferrets 72
ferrets 71,72
hexamitiosis 178
potassium-sparing 242
hepatic impairment 118
hepatic impairment 118
histomoniosis 176, 177
potassium-sparing with
renal impairment 120
preparations 290
ornamental fish 85
thiazides 242
Doxorubicin Rapid Dissotution
rabbits 66
pigeons 55
thiazides 241
382
rodents 62
reptiles 112
DMSO see Dimethyl sulfoxide
Doxorubicin Sotution for
sedation 267
tnichomoniosis 177
Dobutamine 250
Injection382
status epilepticus 290
Dime vamide 230, 232
Dobutrex 250
Doxycycline 150, 151
urinary retention 338
Diminazene 177
DOCP 307
armphibians 100
Diazinon see Dimpylate
trypanosomosis 179
Docusate, constipation 230
exotic birds 106
Diazoxide 312
Dimophebumine see
Dodecylbenzenesulphonic acid
hepatic irmpairment 118
ferrets 72
Vetrabutine
359
pigeons 55
Dibenytine 339
Dimpylate 210, 211
Dog Ftea Cottar(Plastic)211
reptiles 112
Dichloromethylene
sheep dips 218
Dog Ftea Preparations
Doxyseptin 151
diphosphonate see
Dindorat 489
(Johnson's) 215
Dozic 292
Sodium clodronate
Dinitolmide 171
Dog Spot On 214
Draxxin157
Dichlorophen 198
Dinoprost 329, 330
Dogs
Droncit 198
Dichtorophen Tabtets BP 198
exotic birds 109
body surface area 526
Drontat Cat 200
Dichlorphenamide 370, 371
pyometra 332
body-weight 528
Drontat Ptus 200
Dichlorvos 195, 210
Diocaim Utra 223
competitions 28, 29
Drontat Ptus XL 200
exotic birds 108
Dipat Concentrate 360
dietetic pet foods 436
Drontat Puppy Suspension 200
Diclazuril 171,174
Dipentum 224
ectoparasitic infections
Droperidol 264
pigeons 55
Diphenhydramine
204
ferrets 71
Diclofenac368
beha viour modi fication
heartworm infections 186
Drug Incompatibilities 520
Diclofenamide 370,371
298
immunoglobulins 473
Drug Interactions 499
Dicural 163
ferrets 72
lungworm infections 186
Drug names xii
Dicyclanil 217
motion sickness 227,228
prescribing 44
Drug residues 17
Didronet 317
respiratory disease 260
protozoal infections 172
Dry eye 372
Dietetic pet foods 436
skin disease 390
roundworm infections
DTIC-Dome 384
Diethylcarbamazine 196
Diphenoxylate 222
186
Duat Wormer forCats 200
Diethylstilbestrol 324
atropine with 223
tapeworm infections 197
Duat Wormer for Dogs 200
beha viour modification
Diprenorphine 273
vaccines 468-473
Duck sepicaemia, vaccine 483
299
Diprophylline 255, 262
Dotethal 291
Duck virus enteritis,vaccine
pregnant animals 122
Dirofilariasis 186
Domitor266
483
preparations 324
Disease Ctear 82
Domosedan 266
Duck virus hepatitis, vaccine
urinary inconinence 338
Diseasotve Aguarium
Domperidone 226,227
483
Diethyltoluamide 219
Antiseptic 82
Donkeys, prescribing 8, 32
Ducks see Poultry
Difloxacin 163
Disinfectants
Dopamine agonists 332
Duphacillin 148
game birds 51
compound, for teats and
Dopram-V 262
Duphacort Q305
pigeons 55
udders 361
Doramectin
Duphacyctine 100 152
Diflubenzuron 216
poisoning by 130
ectoparasitic infections
Duphacyctine Aerosot 409
Diflucan 169
skin 399
208,209
Duphacyctine LA 152
Digitoxin 239
Disodium ehidronate 317
endoparasitic infections
Duphacyctine XL 152
ferrets 72
renal impairment 120
187,187
Duphafrat ADE Fore 434
Digoxin 239,240
Disophenol 196
Dorzolamide 370, 371
Duphafrat Extravite 434
exotic birds 109
Dispensary 10
Dose xi
Duphafrat Muttivitamin9434
Dihydrostreptomycin 153,155
Dispensing
esimation in exotic
Duphalac 229
streptomycin and 155
advice to clients 13
species 529
Duphatyte 417
Index:
549
Duphamox Drops 147
Ectoparasiticides 201-220
Endocrine system 301-317
Epanutin289
Duphamox Injection 147
amidines 208
Endomemiis 332
Ephedrine 256
Duphamox LA 147
armphibians 98
prostaglandins 329
Ephedrine, competitions 24
Duphamox Tabtets 147
benzyl urea derivatives
Endoparasitic infections 182-
Epigtu 403
Duphapen145
216
187
Epitease289
Duphapen + Strep 167
carbamates 210
Endoparasiticides 181-201
Epilepsy 287
Duphapen Fort 145
ear 403
amphibians 98, 101
Epitim 289
Duphatrim 160
environmentalcontro]
compound preparations
Epinephrine 250
Duphatrim Eguine Formuta
216, 220
199
feline asthma 258
160
exotic birds 104,108
exoic birds 104,108
haemostafics 252
Duphatrim Granutes for Horses
farmed fish 75
ferrets 68, 69
preparations 250
160
ferrets 68, 69
fish 81, 84
Epi-Otic 404
Duphatrim IS 160
organophosphorus
game birds 50, 52
Epiphen289
Duptocillin LA 145
cormpounds 210
pigeons 57
Epirubicin 381,382
Duramitex 220
ornamental fish 85
rabbits 65
hepatic impairment 118
Duramune DA PPi + LC 473
pigeons 57
reptiles 111, 114
Epi-Soothe398
Durateston328
pyrethroids 212
rodents 60
Epoetin 336
Durogesic 271
rabbits 63, 65
Endorid 197
Epostane 327
Dust, varroosis 93
reptiles 111, 114
Endospec 2.5% 191
Eprex337
Dusing powders, skin 387
rodents 59, 60
Endospec 10% 191
Eprinex 188
Duvaxyn EHV 1,4 452
sheep dips 218
Endoxana 379
Eprinomectin
Duvaxyn IE Ptus 453
Ectopur 82
Enemas 229
ectoparasites 208,209
Duvaxyn IE-T Ptus 454
EDM 433
bowel cleansers 230
endoparasites 187,188
Duvaxyn R 452
Edrophonium 284
Energaid 412
Epsiprantel 198
Duvaxyn T 454
EfaCoat Oil 392
Enfurane 279,280
Epsom salts 229
Dysect Cattte‘Pour-on'213
EFAs see Fatty acids
Engemycin 5% 152
Equest190
Dysect Sheep‘Pour-on'213
Efa Vet 330 392
Engemycin I0% (DD) 152
Eguifutvin 169
Dyspamet 234
Efa Vet 660 392
Engemycin I0%(DD)Farm
Eguilis Resequin 454
Dystocia
Efa Vet Regular 392
Pack 152
Eguimax 200
myometrial relaxants 331
EfaVet Regutar High Strength
Engemycin A erosot 409
Equine colic 225
myometrial stimulants
392
Engemycin LA152
Eqwine degenerati ve
330
Efcortesot 307
Enilconazole 394
myeloe ncephalopathy
Efydrat412
Enrofloxacin 163,164
433
Efudix381
amphibians 100
Equine herpesvirus, vaccine
Egg binding
exotic birds 106
452
E C Kll 220
exotic birds 105
ferrets 70
Eqwine influenza, vaccine 452
Ear disorders 403
reptiles 115
game birds 51
competitions 27
antibacterials 403
Egg drop syndrome 1976,
ornamental fish 85
Equine motor neurone disease
cleansers and sebolytics
vaccine 483
pigeons 55
433
404
Ehrlichiosis 150, 151
rabbits 64
Equine rotavirus vaccine 45 1
Ear Drops (Johnston's, Secto)
Elancoban G200 175
reptiles 113
Eqwine verminous arteritis 185
404
Electrolyte replacement 411
rodents 61
Equine viral arteritis, vaccine
Easeflex 348
etoHAES418
Enteric redmouth disease,
453
Easi-catver 430
Eltenac 343
vaccine 493
Eqwine viral rhinopneumonitis,
Easy Round Wormer for Cats&
Emamecin 76
Entenitis 221
vaccine 452
Kittens 197
Emeside289
vaccine
EquipF453
Easy Round Wormer for
Emetics 228
equine 451
EquipFT454
Puppies 197
poisoning 128
pigs 465
EguipT454
Easy Tape Wormer for Dogs
Emta 286
ruminants 459
Equipatazone346
198
EMND 433
turkey
Eguipatazone E-PP 346
Easy to Use Wormer 191
Emollients,teats and udders
haemorrhagic 489
Eguitape 198
Easy Wormer Granules 191
362
Enviracor462
Eguitrim Eguine Paste160
Eazi-Breed CIDR 327
Emulsifying ointment 387
Enzaprost T 330
Eguitrin Granutes 160
 Eclampsia 421
Enacard 244
Enzec Injection for Catte 187
Eqvatan188
Ecofleece Sheep Dip 213
Enalapril 243
Enzooic pneumonia, vaccine
Egvatan Duo 200
Econor 166
ferrets 72
467
Erad-Ick 82
Ecotet2.5%198
pregnant animals 122
Enzovac 463
Eraguetl 188
Ecox 200 175,447
 renal impairment 120
Enzymatic Toothpaste 238
Ergocalciferol 432
Ectoparasitic infections 20 1-
Encephalomyelitis, avian,
Enzymes 6, 447
poisoning by 132
204
vaccine 480
Eosinophilic granuloma 325
Ermogen493
550 Index
Erwinase 384
Eukanuba IntestinatFormuia
Eye disorders (continued)
Fetine Renat RF23440
Erysipelas, vaccine
441
miotics 371
Fetine SetectedProtein Diet
birds 483
EukanubaNutritionat Recovery
mydriatics 369
441, 442
pigs 466
Fommula 443
NSA1Ds 368
Fetine Sensitivity Controt 441,
ruminants 461
Eukanuba OxatateUrinary
Eye drops 363
443, 443
Erysorb Ptus 466
Formuta440
Eye ointments 363
Fetine Sensitivity Controt SC31
Erythrocin Intramammary 355
Eukanuba Renat Phase ]
441, 443
Erythrocin Proportioner 156
Fommula 440
Fetine Urinary 440
Erythrocin Sotubte 156
Eukanuba Renat Phase 2440
Feline Urinary LP 34 440
Erythrodermatitis, vaccine 493
Eukanuba Response Formuta
False pregnancy see
Feline urological syndrome 340
Erythromycin 155,156
FP 441,443
Pseudopregnancy
dietary management438
aquatic invertebrates 96
Eukanuba Response Formula
Famotidine 233, 234
Feline viral respiratory disease
gastric motility 231
LB 441, 443
ferrets 72
complex,vaccine 476
ferrets 70
Eukanuba Restricted-Catorie
preparations 234
Feline viral rhinotracheitis,
game birds 51
Fommula 442
Fampridine 268
vaccine 476
mastitis 355
EukanubaStruviteUrinary
Fascioliasis 198
Feliway 300
pigeons 55
Fommuta 440
Fasinex 5% 199
Fetocett CVR 477
Erythropoietin 336
Eurican DHPPi 473
Fasinex 10% 199
Fett Cat Ftea Collar 214
Eryvac
Eurican Herpes 205 469
Fat cow syndrome 419
Fenbendazole 190, 191
sheep 461
Eurican L 472
Fatty acids, essential 391
amphibians 101
poultry 483
EuricanP470
Fatty liver disease 419
exotic birds108
Escherichia coli infections,
Eurifet FeLV 476
Faverin 295
ferrets 69
vaccine 465
EurifelP476
Febantel 190
game birds 52
Esmeron 283
Eurifet RC 477
pigeons 57
giardiosis 178
Esmolol 247,248
Eurifet RCPFeLV 477
Fetdene 346
ornamental fish 84
Essential oils, bees 91
European vipervenom
Fetlifriend 300
pigeons 57
Estradiol 324
antiserum137
Fetigen RCP477
reptiles 114
Estriol 338, 339
Euthanasia 290
Felimazote303
Fenitrothion 210
Estrumate 329
consent forms 21
Feline asthma syndrome 258
Fenoterol 256
Etarmiphylline
fish 81
Feline calicivirus, vaccine 476
Fentany]
bronchodilators 255, 256
Euthatat 291
Fetine ConvatescenceSupport
analgesia 270, 271
respiratory stimulants 262
Evening primrose oil 391, 392
443
fluanisone and 273
Ethanol
epilepsy 288
Fetine Diabetic DS 46 442
ferrets 71
aquatic invertebrates 95
Excenet 150
Fetine Diet Cardiovascutar
rabbits 66
poisoning 134
Excenet RTU 150
441, 443
rodents62
Ethinylestradiol 324
Excis 76
Fetine Diet Convatescence 443
Fenthion 211
Ethinyloe stradiol 324
Exhetm 195
Fetine Diet Diabetes Metlitus
hepatic impairment 118
Ethion 210
Exocin 365
441, 442
pregnant animals 122
Ethosuximide 288
Exocrine pancreatic
Fetine Diet Obesity
renal impairment 120
pregnant animals 122
insufficiency 233, 235
Management 442
Fentrothion 212
Ethylene glycol, poisoning by
dietary management 437
Fetine Diet Renat Faiture 440
Fenvalerate 212
134
Exotic birds
Feline Diet Urinary 440
Fenzot 5% 191
Ethylenediamine 337
anaesthetics 105
Feline herpesvirus 476
Ferrets
Ethylestrenol 307
antimicrobials 104,106
Fetine Hypoattergenic DR 25
anaesthetics 69, 71
hepatic impairment 118
body-weight 528
441, 443
analgesics 71
pregnant animals 122
other drugs 105, 109
Feline Intestinat CI32441
antimicrobials 68, 70
Ethyloestrenol see
parasiticides 104, 108
Feline leuk aermia, vaccine 475
body-weight 528
Ethylestrenol
prescribing 103
Fetine Low Protein 440
fluid therapy 69
Etiderm 398
Expectorants 261
Feline miliary dermatitis389
other drugs 68, 72
Etiproston 329, 330
Exspot214
Fetine Obesity Management
parasiticides 68,69
Etorphine 273
Extra Tail 219
442
prescribing 67
phenothiazides and 273
Eye disorders 363-374
Feline Obesity Management
Ferric chloride solution 252
reversal ofeffects 273
antibacterials 364
DP 42 442
Ferrous sulfate,poisoning by
Etretinate 396
antifungal drugs 366
Feline panleucopenia, vaccine
131
Eudemine 312
antihistarmines 368
476
Feragyt 323
Eugucon 311
antiviral drugs 366
Feline paraneoplastic alopecia
Fertirelin 322
Eukanuba Gtucose Controt
corticosteroids 366
387
Fevaxyn FeLV 476
Fommuta 442
diagnostic stains 373
Feline pneumonis, vaccine
Fevaxyn iCHPChtam 477
Eukanuba High Catoric
drug administration 363
475
Fevaxyn Pentofet477
Formuta 443
local anaesthetics 373
Fetine Renat 440
Fin rot 75
Index:
551
Fin Rot and Fungus Controt No
Ftubenvet Intermediate 193
Fog fever 258
Fronttine Combo Spot On Cats
6 82
Flucloxacillin 145
Folic acid 431
220
Finadyne 344
Fluconazole 168
Folicle shimulation hormone,
Frontline Combo Spot On Dogs
Fin-Rot 82
Flucytosine 168, 169
porcine 322
220
Fipronil 212, 212
exotic birds 106
Fomepizole, poisoning 134,
Fronttine Spot On Cats 212
exotic birds108
hepatic impairment 1 18
135
Fronttine Spot On Dogs 212
repiles 114
pregnant animals 122
Food-producing animals
Fronttine Spray 212
Fish 7485
preparations 169
bees 6, 88
Frusecare 242
anaesthetics 78
 renal impairment 120
cattle 35
Frusemide see Furosermide
antibacterials 80, 85
Fludrocortisone 307
deer 41
Fuciderm391
antifungal drugs 80
Flugestone 326
definition 8
Fucidin 394
farmed 7479
Fluid therapy 411-416
donkeys 8, 32
Fucithatmic Vet365
hormonal preparations 78,
amphibians 98
farmed fish 73
Fuller's earth 132
323
exotic birds 103
garme birds 49
Fungal infections 168
omamental 79-85
ferrets 69
goats 39
ear 403
proprietary
rabbits 64
herbal medicines 496
eye366
preparations 82
reptiles 111
horses 8, 30
fsh 75
parasiticides 75, 80, 84
rodents 60
pigeons 53
skin 394
vaccines 492-494
Fluke infections 198
pigs 43
Fungizone168
Fitergot 245
fish 75
poultry 47
Furadantin 162
Ftagyt 163
Ftukiver 199
sheep 37
Furazolidone 162
Flagyt S 163
Flumazenil 268
Foot disorders 405-409
Furogen 2 494
Flaveco 40 446
Flumequine 163
Foot Rot Aerosot(Battle
Furosemide 241
Ftavomycin 80 446
Flumetasone 304
Hayward & Bower)408
ferrets 72
Flavophospholipol 446
Flumethrin 212
Footrot 406,407
hepatic impairment 118
Ftaxedit 282
bees 92
vaccine 461
lactation 123
Ftea & Tick Drops 214
Flunisolide 259
Footvax 461
renal impairment 120
Ftea & Tick Drops for Dogs 214
Flunixin 344
Forcaltonin 317
Furunculosis,vaccine 493
Ftea & Tick Spray Plus 215
equine colic 344
Forgastrin 222
Fusidic acid 166
Ftea Bomb 220
ferrets 72
Forketos 420
eye 364, 365
Ftea Cottar for Cats 211
infammation and pain
Form MLA 2 17
rabbits 65
Ftea Cottar for Dogs 211
343,344
Form MLA 252A 17
skin 394
Ftea Guard Ftea & Tick Cottar
mastitis 353
Fommalachite 82
for Dogs 211
Formaldehyde
Ftea Kill 220
rabbits 66
amphibians 101
Ftea Powder (Bob Martin) 215
respiratory disorders 260
aquatic invertebrate 96
Gatastop 332
Ftea Shampoo (Bob Martin)
rodents62
bees 92
Gallamine 281, 282
215
Fluorescein 373, 374
farmed fish 76, 77
renal impairment 120
Ftea Spray (Bob Martin) 215
Ftuorets 374
foot disorders 408
Galtivac IB88 481
Ftea Spray (Sherley's) 215
Fluorometholone 367
ornamental fsh 82-84
Gallivac IBD 482
Flecanide 246
Fluoroquinolones 163
Formaldehyde30% Sotution82
GaltivacSE488
Ftectron Fty Tags 213
lactation 123
FormaldehydeFoot RotLiguid
Game birds
Fletchers'PhosphateEnema
pregnant animals 122
408
antimicrobials 49, 51
230
Fluorouracil 380, 381
Formalin 408
parasiticides 50,52
Ftixotide259
preparations 381
Formic acid 92
prescribing 49
Florfenicol 158
renal impairment 120
Formo] 408
round worm in fections 50
fish 74, 75
Ftuothane 280
Formosulphathiazole
vaccines50
omamental fsh 85
Fluoxetine 294,295
(ingredient) 333
Gamma benzene hexachloride
Ftorinef 307
hepatic impairment 118
Fortekor 243,336
216
Florocot75
renal impairment 120
Forntot Comptete Liguid Feed
Ganciclovir366
Ftoxapen 145
Flurbiprofen 368
443
Gartic and Fenugreek Tabtets
Fluanisone see Fentany]
Fluro gestone 326
Fortum 150
497
Fluazuron 216
Fluticasone propionate 259
Fostin 322
Gartic Tabtets 497
Flubendazole 190, 192
Fluvalinate, bees 92
Foston 423
Gastric Tabtets 497
game birds 52
Fluvox amine 294, 295
Founderguard 405
Gastric ulceration 233
Ftubenot Easy 192
Fty Repettent Ptus for Horses,
Fowl pest 485
Gastritis 226
Ftubenot Individuat Treatment
Coopers 219
Fowl pox, vaccine 483
Gastrogard 234
Pack 193
Fly repellents 219
Framomycin15% 154
Gastro-intestinal system 221-
Ftubenot Intermediate193
Ftypor 214
Framycehin 153, 154
238
Ftubenot Premix Pack193
FML 367
eye 364, 365
Geese see Poultry
552 Index
Gelatin 416, 418
Glycero]
Halothane 279,280
Hexarinse 238
haemostasis 252
glaucoma 370
ferrets 71
Hexasot LA 152
Getiperm 401
ketosis 419,420
hepatic impairment 1 18
Hexastarch 416, 418
Getofusine Veterinary 418
Glycery] trinitrate 244,245
Hatothane Vet 280
Hexetidine, skin 400
Gels, skin 388
Clycodip360
Haloxon 195
Hexocitl 400
GetTears 372
Glycopyrrolate see
Hamsters see Rodents
Hibiscrub Veterinary 399
General anaesthetics 274-281
Glycopyrronium
Hapadex Catte Wormer 193
Histoacryt 403
injectable 276-279
Glycopyrronium 275
Hapadex Sheep Wormer 193
Histomoniosis 176
inhalational 279-281
ferrets 71
Harkanker Sotubte 177
Hitra disease 494
General sales list medicines 1
heart disease 249
Hartmann's solution 413, 417
Home Ftea Fogger Plus 220
Genotropin 313
ee sd s6
Harvest mite 204
Home Ftea Guard Trigger
Gentamicin 153,154
Gotden-Hoof 409
hCG stimulation test 319
Spray 220
amphibians 100
Gotden-Hoof Ptus 409
Head shaking syndrome 260
Home Ftea Spray 220
eye 364,365
Gotden-Udder 362
Head-To-Tait Ftea Powder,
Home Ftea Spray Ptus 220
ferrets 70
Gonadorelin 322,323
Coopers 214
Homoeopathic products 6
omamental fsh 85
Gonadotrophin-releasing
Heart failure
Hooeopathy 495
pregnant animals 122
hormones 322
cardiac glycosides 239
Hoof care preparations 409
rabbits 64, 65
Gonadotrophins 319
dietary management 437
Hormonal implants,
rodents 61
Granofen 192
diuretics 240
competitions 25
renal impairment 120
Granuflex 402
methylxanthines 240
Homer's syndrome 369
reptiles 113
GranuGet 402
vasodilators 243
Homet stings 137
Gerbils see Rodents
Grass staggers 422
Heartworm infecions 186
Horses
Geriatric animals
Green Oits 395
Hemoglobin glutamer-200
body-weight 528
Green Oits Heating Get 395
(bovine)416, 418
bot infections 201
prescribing 126
Greenteaf Tabtets 497
Heparin 250, 251
cormipetitions 26
Giardiosis 178
Griseofulvin 168, 169
hepatic irmpairment 1 18
ectoparasitic infections
exotic birds 104
aquatic invertebrates 96
overdosage 25 1
201
GillPure 83
ferrets 70
preparations 251
fluke infections 198
Glassers disease, vaccine 467
hepatic impairment 1 18
Hepatic encephalopathy 236,
Glauber's salt 230
pregnant animals 122
237
prescribing 8, 30
Glaucoma 370
rabbits 64
 Hepatic impairment
protozoal infections 172
emergency treatment 370
reptiles 113
acute 235
round worm in fections
Gteptosit 427
rodents 61
chronic 236
185
Gtetvax 6 466
Grisot-V 169
dietary management 436
tapeworm infections 197
Glibenclamide 310, 311
Grisovin 169
prescribing 118
vaccines 451-454
hepatic impairment 118
Grouse see Game birds
treatment 236
House Ftea Spray (Johnson's)
preparations 311
Growth hormone 313
Hepatitis
220
renal impairment 120
Growth promoters see
canine infectious, vaccine
Human Insutatard ge 310
Gtibenese 311
Production enhancers
470
Human medicines
Glipizide 310, 311
Guaifenesin 283
duck virus, vaccine 483
consent forms 20
hepatic impairment 118
coughing 261
see also Hepatic
prescribing 6
renal impairment 120
Guaiphenesin see Guaifenesin
impairment
supply 11
Glomerulonephropathies 336
Guinea fowl see Game birds
Hepatosyt 237
Human Mixtard 30310
CtucaGen 312
Guinea pigs
Hepsat 251
Human Uttratard 310
Glucagon 312
ectoparasites 207
Heptavac 459
Humatrope 313
Gtucantime 179
see aiso Rodents
Heptavac-P Plus 459
Humitac 398
Glucocorticoids 303
Heptenophos 210
Humutin1310
renal impairment 120
Herbal medicines 495-497
Humutin M2310
Gtucophage 311
Haemaccet 418
Herbicides, poisoning by 132
Humutin M3 310
Glucosamine 349
Haemo 15435
Herpesvirus
Humutin Zn310
Glucose
Haemorrhage
bovine, vaccine 455
Husk, vaccine 462
hypoglycaemia 312
blood transfusion 416
equine, vaccine 452
Hy-50 Vet 348
intravenous fluids 415,
fluid therapy 414
feline, vaccine 476
Hyatovet 20 348
417
plasma substitutes 416
in fectious
Hyaluronate sodium 348
ketosis 419
Haemostatics 252
laryngotracheitis, vaccine
Hyaluronic acid 348
Gtucose 40% 420
Hatdot Decanoate 292
483
Hydralazine 244, 245
Gtutatyte 412
Hatocur174
Hexamine (ingredient) 338
Hydrea 384
Glutaraldehyde, teats and
Halofuginone 171, 174
Hexamine and Sodium Acid
Hydrochlorothiazide 241
udders 360
Haloperidol 292
Phosphate338
pregnant animals 122
Glycerin see Glycerol
exotic birds 109
Hexamitiosis 178
renal impairment 120
Index 553
Hydrocortisone 306,307
Hypophosph atae mia 423
Infectious bursal disease,avian,
Intra venous region al
competitions 26
Hypotears 373
vaccine 481
anaesthesia 285
exotic birds 109
Hypothalarmic hormones 314
Infectious canine hepatitis,
Intravit72432
ferrets 72
Hypoth yroidism
vaccine470
Intubeaze 286
Hydrocortone307
diagnosis 314
Infectious haemopoietic
Invertebrates
Hydroflumethiazide 242
exotic birds 105
necrosis79
prescribing 87
Hydrogen peroxide
treatment 301
Infectious laryngotracheitis,
aquatic93-95
skin 400
Hypovase 339
vaccine 483
terrestrial87-93
Sotution 3% 400
Hypovitaminosis A 430, 43 1
Infectious pancreatic necrosis
lodide 302
Hydrotect HE412
reptiles 111
79
lodine 426
Hydrophane Protocon Goid
Hypovitaminosis B 431
Infectious salmon anaemia 79
deficiency 426
395
reptiles 111
Infectious tracheobronchitis,
exotic birds 109
Hydrous wool fat 387
Hypovitaminosis C 432
vaccine 470
fsh 76, 78
Hydroxocobalamin 431
reptiles 111
Ingetvac M Hyo 467
hyperth yroidism 302
Hydrox ycarbamide 384
Hypovolaermia 413
Ingelvac PRRS KV468
oral solution 303
preparations 384
Hypromellose 372, 373
Inhalational anae sthetics 279-
skin 400
renal impairment 120
HypurinIsophane310
281
teats and udders 360
lα-hydroxycholecalciferol see
pregnant animals 122
lohexol, ferrets 73
Alfacalcidol
Insecticidat Shampoo
Tonatyte 412
Hydrox yprogesterone 325
(Sherley's) 215
lonox 430
IL T Vaccine 484
Insutatard310
losan CCT 360
Hydrox yzine 390, 391
Ibaflin 164
lnsulin 308-310
losan Superdip 360
Hygromycin B 196
Ibafloxacin 163,164
ferrets 72
losan Teat Dip 360
Hylan A 373
Ibuprofen, poisoning by 131
intermmediate-acting 309
lpecacuanha 228
Hytartit Vet 348
Ichcide 83
isophane
Ipocol224
Hyonate 348
lleus 231
biphasic 310
lpratropium 257, 258
Hyoresp 467
Hube 372
NPH 310
lron
Hyoscine 275
Imaverot394
protamine 310
deficiency 426
antispasmodic 231
 Imidacloprid 210
long-aching 309
ferrets73
moion sickness 228
rabbits 65
protamine zinc 310
poisoning by 131
preparations 275
Imidapril 243, 244
short-acting 309
lron salts 427
Hyperadrenocorticism
Imidazothiazoles 194
soluble 309
Isenring's method 93
diagnosis 313
lmidocarb 177
zinc suspension
lsobutanol, aquatic
treatment 314
Imizot177
cry stalline 310
in vertebrates 95
Hypercard 10249
Immunity
mixed 309
Isocare 280
Hyperinmune 454
active 449
lnsulinoma 312
Isofane280
Hyperkalaermia 415
passive 449
Insuvet Lente 309
IsoFto281
Hyperkinesis 297
Immunoglobulins
Insuvet Neutrat 309
IsoFto Vet281
Hyperliidaemia,diry
calttle 464
Insuvet Protamine Zinc 310
Isoflupredone 304
management 438
dogs 473
Interferon 170
lsoflurane 279, 280
Hypernatraemia 4 15
ferrets 72
 Intra-articular injection 
amphibians 102
Hyperparathyroidism
horses 454
corticosteroids347
exoticbirds 105
renal impairment 335
Immunosuppressants
polysulfated
ferrets71
treatment 317
dermatitis 389
glycosaminoglycan 348
Isoflurane Vet281
Hyperthyroidism 302
malignant disease 384
sodium hyaluronate 348
Isoget 229
Hypnorm273
immune -based arthritides
Intrac 471
Isotec417
Hypnovet 268
349
Intradine 159
lsometamidium chloride 179
Hypoadre nocorficism
Imodium 223
Intra-Epicaine 287
lsoniazid, amphibians 100
diagnosis 313
Imuran 385
Intratipid preparations 419
Isopto Atkatine 373
treatment 306
Imuresp 455
Intramammary preparations
Isopto Carbachot 371
Hypocalcaermia 421
Imuresp RP457
lactating animals 354- 356
Isopto Ptain 373
Hypocupriosis 425
Inconinence,urinary 338
non-lactaing animals
lsotretinoin 396
Hypoglycaemia
Incurin 339
356-358
preparations 397
acute312
Inderat 248
Intrasite Conformabte 401
lsoxazolylpenicillins 145
chronic 312
Indermit 403
Intrasite Get 401
Isoxsuprine 351
Hypokalaermia
Industrial methylated spirit 399
Intravat Sodium 277
competitions 24
diureics and 240
Infectious bovine
Intra venous infusions 413-416
myometmial relaxants 331
fluid therapy 415
keratoconjunctivitis 364
addition to 415
navicular dise ase 350, 351
Hypomagnesaemia 422
Infectious bronchitis, avian,
competitions 25
pregnant animals 122
Hyponatraemia 415
vaccine 480
indications 414
vasodilator 244
554 Index
Ispaghula
Ketamine (continued)
Koi Care Wound Seat 83
Laxatives (continued)
constipation 228,229
hepatic impairment 1 18
Konakion 133
lubicant 228
diarrhoea 222
pigeons 54
Konakion MM 133
osmoic229
Istin 249
pregnant animals 122
Konakion MM Paediatric 133
stimulant 230
ltraconazole 168,169
rabbits 66
K-YJelly 399
Lead, poisoning by 133
amphibians 100
renal irmpairment 120
Lecirelin 322
exotic birds 106
rodents 62
Lectade412
ferrets 70
Ketaset279
Lectade Ptus 412
omamental fsh 85
Ketoacidosis, diabetic 311
Labelling 12
Lectade Smatt Animat 412
pigeons 55
Ketoconazole 168, 169
endoparasiticides 181
Leishmaniosis 178
repiles 113
amphibians 100
examples of 12
Lenimint 362
Itrafungot 169
exotic birds 106
Laboratory animals, prescribing
Lenisan 362
lvermectin
ferrets 70, 73
58
Leo Red Dry Cow 358
amphibians 101
hepatic impairment 1 18
Laburnum, poisoning by 136
Leo Yettow Mitking Cow 356
Chelonia 111
hyperadrenocoricism 315
Lacri-Lube 373
Leodex 20% 427
ectoparasitic in fections
pigeons 55
Lactaclox355
Leptavoid-H 461
208, 209
pregnant animals 122
Lactate 419
Leptospirosis, vaccine
endoparasitic infections
reptiles 113
Lactating animals, prescribing
cattle 461
187, 188
skin 394
123
dogs 471
exotic birds108
Ketofen 344
Lactatrim MC 355
Leteux-Meyer mixture 81,85
ferrets 69
Ketofen 1% 344
Lactic acid 92
Lethobarb291
game birds 52
Ketofen 10% 345
Lactovac 460
Leucogen 476
pigeons 57
Ketot 420
Lactugat 229
Leukaemia
rabbits 65
Ketoprofen 344
Lactulose229
treatment
repiles 114
exotic birds 109
exoic birds 109
cytotoxic drugs 375
rodents 60
mastitis 353
ferrets 73
interferon 170
Ivomec preparations 188
rabbits 66
laxatives 229
vaccines 475
IvomecSuper 200
respiratory disorders 260
preparations 229
Leukeran 379
rodents 62
Lamb dysentery, vaccine 457
Leukocetl 2 476
Ketorolac 368
Lambdacyhalothrin 212
Levacide 3% Drench 194
Ketosaid 420
Lambivac 459
Levacide Injection 194
Joints 341
Ketosis 419
Lame-Less Copper Ptus 408
Levacide Low Votume 195
mobility, special diets 439
Ketosis Drench 420
Laminitis 405
Levacur SC 195
Kidney see Renal impairment
Lamisil169
Levafas 200
Kidney Tabtets 497
Lamivudine 171
Levafas Diamond 200
Killitch 216
reptiles 112
Levamisole 194
Kattostat402
Kit-Pest215
Lanodip 4:7360
 
Kaobiotic 222
Kinidin 247
Lanodip Concentrate 360
exotic birds108
Kaoget VP 222
Kitten Easy-Worm Syrup 197
Lanodip Gotd 360
game birds 52
Kaolin 222
Kitzyme Ftearid Insecticidat
Lanodip Readymix 360
ornamental fish 84
Katalax228
Spray 215
Lanodip Super Concentrate 361
pigeons 57
Katavac CHP 477
Kitzyme Veterinary Combined
Lanolin see Wool fat, hydrous
pregnant animals 122
Katavac Ectipse 477
Wormer 200
Lanoxin 240
reptiles 114
Kavak Gataxy 473
Klaricid 156
Lanoxin-PG 240
Levasure 7.5% 195
KavakL472
Klean-Prep 230
Lanvis 381
Le vocabastine 368
Kay-Cee-L428
KloxerateDC 357
Largactit227
Le vothyroxine 301
KBrTabtets 289
Kloxerate Gotd DC 357
Large Animat Immobilton 273
ferrets 73
KCS 372
Kloxerate Ptus DC 357
Large Animat Revivon 273
Libido
Kefadin 150
Kloxerate Ptus Mitking Cow
Large animals, definition xi
androgens 328
Ketp Seaweed Tabtets 497
355
Lary ngotracheitis, infechious,
chorionic gonadotrophin
Kemicetine 158
Koi Bath 83
vaccine 483
319
Kenne] cough syndrome,
Koi Care Acriflavin 83
Lasalocid 171, 175
oestrogens 324
vaccine470
Koi Care F-M-G 83
garme birds 52
Lidocaine
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca 372
Koi Care Formatdehyde 30%
Latanoprost 371
arrhythmias 246
Keratolytics 396
Sotution 83
glaucoma 370
eyes373
Kerosene, poisoning by 135
Koi Care Gilt-Wash 83
Laurabotin308
hepatic impairment 118
Ketamine 278
Koi Care Koi Catm 83
Laxative Tabtets 230
lactation 123
amphibians 102
Koi Care Malachite 83
Laxati ves 228
local anae sthesia 286
exotic birds 105
Koi Care Permanganate 83
bulk-forming 228
poisoning 135
ferrets 71
Koi Care Utcer Swab 83
equine colic 226
Life-Aid P412
Index 555
Life-A id Xtra 412
Louping ill, vaccine 462
Matted Ketp Tabtets 497
Medicines (continued)
Lignadrin 286
Louse Powder215
Mammary tumours 386
lisposal 18
Lignocaine and Adrenatine
Lubricants
Man ganese 427
legal classification 1
Injection 286
eyes 372
Manganese, deficiency 427
nomenclature 2
Lignocaine see Lidocaine
laxatives 228
Mannitol 243
poisoning by 131
Lignot 286
Lubri-Tears 373
glaucoma 370
record keeping 15
Lincocin 156, 157
Lufenuron 216,217
preparations 243
residues 17
Lincocin Forte S 355
ornamental fish 85
Marbocyt 165
sending by post 13
Lincoject 157
Lugol's solution 303
Marbocyt P 165
storage 10
Lincomycin 155,156
Lumigan 371
Marbofloxacin 163,164
suspected adverse
ferrets 70
Lungworm
pigeons 55
reactions 17
game birds 51
see atso Roundworm
reptiles 113
Medrone V 306
pigeons S5
infections
Marcain 0.5% 286
Medroxyprogesterone 325, 326
reptiles 113
vaccine 462
Marek's disease, vaccine 484
behaviour modi fcahion
Lincosamides 155-158
Luprostiol 329, 330
Masocare 361
298, 299
hepatic impairment 118
Lustrat295
Masocare Exira 361
exoic birds 109
Linco-Spectin167
Lutatyse 330
Masocare HV 361
Meflosyt 5% Injection344
Linco-Spectin 100167
Lymphoproliferative disorders
Masodine I:3361
Megestrol 325, 326
Lindane 216
375
Masodine1:4361
behaviour modifcation
poisoning by 132
Lyofoam401
Masodine RTU 361
298, 299
Liniments, skin 388
Lypex 235
Masodip 361
hepatic impairment 118
Linoleic acid 391
Lysine 366
Masodip Extra 361
Meglumine antimonate 178,
Linolenic acid 391
Mastitis 353-362
179
Linseed oil 225
acute 353
hepatic irmpairment 118
Liothyronine 301
chronic 353
renal impairment 120
Lipase 235
M + PAC 467
coliform 353
Melarsomine 186, 196
LiguiBand403
Maatox 233
intramammary
Melatonin 323
Ligui-Char-Vet 129
Macrolides 155-158
preparations 354358
Mettonex91
Liguid Lectade 412
Maduramicin 171, 175
peracute353
Melox icam 345
Liguid Life-Aid 412
Magnesium
subclinical 353
rabbits 66
Liquid paraffn 
calcium, phosphorus and
summer 356,357
rodents 62
equine colic 226
423
Maxacal424
Melphalan 378, 380
eye373
defciency 422
Maxacat S 424
Menadione 434
lax atives 228
Magne sium carbonate 233
Maxiban G160 176
Menbutone 236
Liguifitm Tears 373
Magnesium hydroxide 233
Maxidex 367
Menotrophin 322
Lithium 294
Magnesiun Hydroxide Mixture
Maxigen I1 348
Meperidine see Pethidine
Liver fluke infections 198
229
MaxiGuard 238
Mepivacaine 286,287
Liver see Hepatic irmpairment
Magnesiurm oxide 233
Maximum Residue Limits 18
Mepyramine 390
Livostin 368
 Magnesium salts 422
Maxitrot368
Merbromin, amphibians 100
Lizards, prescribing 109
antacids 232
Maxolon 227
Mercaptopurine
L-Lysine 366
laxatives 229
Maxoton High Dose 227
arthriides 349
Locaine 287
Magnesium sulfate
Maxus G200446
malignant disease 380,
Local anaesthesia 285-287
laxatives 229
Mebadown Super 200
381
eye 373
minerals 423
Mebendazole 190, 193
Mercurochrome, armphibians
techniques 285
paste 388
amphibians 101
100
Locatin Orat Sotution 464
poisoning 133
ferrets 69
Mercury, poisoning by 133
Locovetic 287
Magnesium trisilicate 233
ornamental fsh 84
Mesalazine 223,224
Lodoxamide 368, 369
Magniject 423
reptiles 114
renal impairment 120
Logic Dentat Get 238
MatAceticConditioner398
Meclofenarmic acid 345
Mesatin 324
Logic Dry Shampoo 398
MalAcetic Otic 404
Medetomidine 265,266
Mesterolone 328
Logic Ear Cteaner 404
MatAcetic Shampoo 398
exotic birds 105
Mestinon 285
Lomotil223
MatA cetic Wet Wipes 404
ferrets 71
Metacam 345
Lomustine379
Malachite green
rabbits 66
Metaldehyde, poisoning by 132
preparations 380
amphibians 100
feversal of effects 268
Metamizole (ingredient) 232
Lopatot 500 196
aquatic invertebrates 96
rodents 62
Metaproterenol,poisoning by
Loperamide 222, 223
fish 8 1
Medicated feedingstuffs
131
Lopresor 248
preparations 83
prescription 4
Metergoline 332
Losec 234
reptiles 113
Medicines
Metformin 310, 311
Lotions, skin 387
Malathion 210
adverising and display 10
hepatic impairment 118
Lotrifen 332
Malignant disease 375- 386
annual audit 16
renal impairment 120
556 Index
Methadone 269,271
Metronidazole (continued)
Minims Rose Bengat 374
Muscle relaxants (continued)
Methandrio]307
giardiosis 178
Minims Tropicamide 370
re versal of effects 284
Methenamine 338
hepatic encephalopathy
Minocycline 150
Musculoskeletal system 34 1-
Methimazole see Thiarmazole
237
Minodiab 311
351
Methionine 409
hepatic impairment 1 18
Mintezot 194
Mustard, poisoning 128
urinary acidifier337
ornamental fish 85
Miotics 371
Myasthenia gravis 284
Methocarbamol 283
pigeons 56
M1RD 467
Mycophyt 395
Methohexital 276
preparations 163
Misalliance 320
Mycoplasma infection, vaccine
rabbits 66
renal impairment 120
Misoprosto]
pigs 467
rodents 62
reptiles 113
atopic dermatitis 392,393
poultry 485
Methoprene 217
trichomoniosis 177
gastric ulcers 233, 234
Mycopur83
lactation 123
Mexiletine 246
pregnant anirmals 122
Mydiavac 463
Methotrexate 380, 381
hepatic impairment 1 18
Mitotane 315,316
Mydriacyt 369
ferrets 73
Mexitit 247
ferrets 73
Mydriatics 369
renal impaiment 120
MFS 4
Mitoxan trone see Mitozantrone
Mydritate 369
Methox yflurane 280
Miacalcic 317
Mitozan trone 38 1, 382
Myeloproli ferative disorders
ferrets 71
Mianserin 294
hepatic irmpairment 1 18
375
hepatic impairment 118
Mibolerone 328
Mivacron 282
Myiasis see Myiosis
renal impairment 120
Mice see Rodents
Mivacurium 282
Myiosis 202
Methylated spirit, industal
Micotette Micro-Enema 230
Mixed Vegetabte Tabtets 497
rabbits63
399
Miconazole
Mole 527
Myteran 379
Methylbenzoquate 171
amphibians 100
Molybdenum, poisoning by 133
Myocardial shimulants 239
Methylene blue
skin 395
Monensin
Myocrisin 349
amphibians 100
Micotit 157
coccidiosis 171, 175
Myometrial relaxants 331
aquatic in vertebrates 96
Micratax Micro-Enema 230
production enhancers
Myometrial stimulants 330
fish 77,78,83
Midazolam 267
446,447
Myoneural blocking drugs see
poisoning 132, 135,137
exotic birds 105
Moniliasis see Candidiasis
Muscle relaxants
Methylphenidate 297
sedation 267
Monteban G700 175
Myotonine 339
Methylprednisolone 304, 306
Mitbemax Tabtets for Cats 200
Monzaidon 332
Mysotine289
spinal injury 303
Mitbemax Tabtets for Dogs 200
Morantel 195
Myxomatosis, vaccine 492
Methylsalicylate 92
Milbemycin 187, 189
Morison's paste 388
Methyltestosterone 328
ferrets 69
Morphine 269, 271
hepatic impairment 118
Milbemycins
competitions 26
malignant disease 386
ectoparasitic infections
ferrets 71
Nafpenzat Dry Cow 358
renal impairment 120
208
preparations 271
Nafpenzat MC 355
Methylthioninium chloride
endoparasitic infections
rabbits66
Naftalofos 195
armphibians 100
187
rodents 62
Nalbuphine 271
aquatic invertebrates 96
Miliary dermatitis 389
Motilium 227
ferrets 71
fish 77, 78
Mitk and Hoid 430
Motion sickness 227
rabbits 66
poisoning 132,135,137
Milk replacers 125
Moxidectin
rodents 62
Methylxanthines
Milliequi valent 527
ectoparasitic infections
Nalidixic acid 163, 165
bronchodilators 255
Millimole 527
208,209
amphibians 100
heart failure 240
Mittophyline-V 256
endoparasitic infections
Naloxone 273, 274
Meticlorpindol 17 1, 174
Minerals 420-430
187,189
behaviour modifcation
Metoclopramide 226, 227
poisoning by 133
game birds 52
297
exotic birds 109
vitamins and 435
Mucogel233
ferrets 71
pregnant animals 122
Minijet Lignocaine 246
Mucolytics 260
preparations 274
preparations 227
Minims Amethocaine
eye372
rabbits 66
rabbits 65
Hydrochtoride 373
Mud fever393
rodents 62
Metomidate 279
Minims Atropine Sutfate 369
Muttiject IMM 356
 Naltre xone, behaviour
Metoprolol 247, 248
MinimsCyclopentolate369
Muttivitamin (Arnolds) 434
modifcation 297
Metricure 333
Minims Dexamethasone 367
MutivitaminInjection
Nandorat308
Metrifonate 195, 210
MinimsFtuoresceinSodium
(Norbrook) 435
Nandrotin 308
Metritis 332
374
Multivitamins 434
Nandrolone 307, 308
Metrotyt 163
Minims Phenytephrine
minerals and 435
competitions 26
Metronex 163
Hydrochtoride 369
Muttiwormer for Cats 200
ferrets 73
Metronidazole 162
Minims Pitocarpine Nitrate 372
Muttiwormer for Dogs 201
Narasin 171, 175
amphibians 100
Minims Prednisotone 367
Muscle relaxants
Narcan 274
exotic birds 107
Minims Proxymetacaine
depolarising 283
Narcissus, poisoning by 136
ferrets 70
Hydrochtoride373
non-depolarising 28 1
Narcolepsy 297
Index:
557
Narketan 70279
Niacin see Nicotinic acid
Nobitis MG 6/85 485
Noromectin Mutti Injection 188
Nasal decongestants 262
Nicarbazin 171, 175
Nobiis ND Ctone 30 485
Noromectin Pour-On 189
Natamycin 394, 395
Nicergoline
Nobitis ND Hitchner485
Noroprost 330
National Surveillance Scherme
age-related disorders 245
Nobilis Newcavac 486
Norotyt LA 157
18
beha viour modi fication
Nobitis OR-inac 486
Notoedric mange 204
Natura Etasticated Insecticidat
299
Nobilis Paramyxo P201 487
Novantrone 382
Coltar for Cats 215
Niclosamide 198
NobitisPasteuretia Erysipetas
Novobiocin 166
Natura Insecticidat Cotlar for
amphibians 101
490
NSA1Ds 341
Dogs 215
Nicotinic acid 431
Nobilis Reo 482
eye368
Naturat Herb Tabtets 497
Nifursol 176
Nobilis Reo + IB + G + ND 490
hepatic impairment 118
Navicular disease 350
Night blindness 431
Nobilis Rismavac 484
lactation 123
Navicular syndrome 350
Nitvemn Gotd 195
Nobitis Rismavac + CA726 484
parturition 121
Navilox 350
Nitverm Super195
Nobilis RT+ IBmutti + G + ND
poisoning by 131
Nebcin 155
Nitzan Drench Super 201
490
renal impairment 120
Negram 165
Nitzan Gotd 201
Nobilis RT+ IBmutti + ND +
Nubain 271
Nematodes see Roundworm
Ninbex 282
EDS490
Nuflor 158
infections
Nime sulide 345
Nobitis Satenvac T488
Nuflor Swine 158
Nematodiniasis 185
Nisamox 147
Nobilis SG 9R 488
NuGet 401
Nemovac 488
Nishicare Anti-BacteriatFin
Nobilis TRT 488, 489
Nutriderm392
Neobiotic Sotubte Powder 154
Rot Treatment 83
Nobitis TRT inac 489
Nutri-Ptus 435
Neocotipor 466
Nishicare Anti-Fungus
Nobi-Vac A R-T 465
Nutrition
Neo-Mercazote 302
Treatment 83
Nobivac BB 475
dietetic pet foods 436
Neomycin 153, 154
Nishicare Anti-Parasite White
Nobivac DHPPi 473
hepatic disease 236
aquatic invertebrates 96
Spot Treatment 83
Nobivac FeLV 476
minerals 420
eye 365
Nishi-Cure Anti-Fin Rot 83
NobivacKC471
parenteral418
ferrets 70
 Nitenpyrarm 210, 216
Nobivac Lepto 2 472
vitamins 430
game birds 51
Nitrate, poisoning by 133, 135
Nobivac Myxo 492
Nutritional metabolic bone
hepatic encephalopathy
Nitrite, poisoning by 133, 135
Nobivac Parvo-C 470
disease 111
237
Nitrofurans 162
Nobivac Pi 471
Nutrobat435
omamental fsh 85
Nitrofurantoin 162
Nobivac Pigeon Pox 487
Nuvan Top 218
rabbits 64
Nitroimidazoles 162
Nobivac PPi 473
Nystan 169
renal impairment 120
Nitroprusside see Sodium
Nobivac Rabies 473
Nystatin 168, 169
reptiles 113
nitroprusside
Nobivac Tricat 477
aquatic invertebrates 96
rodents 61
Nitroscanate 196
Notvadent238
exotic birds 107
Neomycin Peniciltin 167
tape worm in fections 198
Notvasan Otic 404
pigeons 56
Neonates, prescribing 124
Nitrous oxide 280, 281
Notvasan Shampoo 399
preparations 169
Neoplasia see Malignant
Nitroxinil 199
Notvasan Surgicat Scrub 399
reptiles 113
disease
game birds 52
Non-medicinal curative
Nytot 390
Neorat385
roundworm infections
substances 6
NeoRecormon 337
196
Non-steroidal anti-
Neosporin 365
Nitroxynil see Nitroxinil
inflammatory drugs see
Neosporosis 173
Nizatidine 233, 234
NSAIDs
0,p' DDD 316
Neostigmine 284
Nizorat169,395
Norcuron 283
Obesity 438
Neotigason 396
Nobitis AE 1143 480
Norethandrolone 307
Occrycetin 152
Nephrotic syndrome 336
Nobitis CAV P4 482
Norobrittin 148
Octreotide 312
Nerve Tabtets 497
Nobitis Duck Ptague 483
Norocarp 343
Nervous system 263-300
Nobitis E. coti inac 488
Norocittin 145
Oedema
Netobimin 190, 193
Nobitis EDS483
Noroctav Injection 147
cerebral243
Neuroleptanalgesia 272
Nobitis Gumboro 228E 482
Noroctav Lactating Cow 356
diuretics 240
reversal ofeffects 273
Nobitis Gumboro D78 482
Noroclav Tabtets 147
Oesophageal reflux 231
Neuroleptics
Nobitis IB + G + ND 489
Noroctox DC 357
Oesophageal ulceration 233
behaviour modification
Nobitis IB 4-97 481
Noroctox QR 355
Oestradiol 324
292
Nobitis IB H-720 481
Norodine 160
Oestrogens 324
exotic birds 105
Nobitis IB Ma5 481
Norodine 24 160
malignant disease 386
Neuromuscular blocking drugs
Nobitis IB+ ND + EDS 489
Norodine Eguine Paste 160
Oestrous cycle,regulation 320
see Muscle relaxants
Nobitis IBmuti + ND + EDS
Norodine Granutes 160
Off-labe] medicines
Neutrate398
489
Norofutvin 169
consent form 20
New Forest disease 364
Nobitis Ma5 + Ctone 30 490
Noromectin 1.87% Orat Paste
prescribing 6
New monographs xi
Nobitis Marek THV tyo 484
for Horses 188
Ofloxacin, eye infechions 364,
Newcastle disease, vaccine 485
Nobitis Marexine CA 126 484
Noromectin Drench 188
365
558 Index
Oils
OrojetN154
Pabac 486
Parainfluenza
bloat 224
Osmonds Gotd Fteece Sheep
PaediatricIpecacuanha Emetic
bovine, vaccine 455
dermatitis 392
Dip211
Mixture 228
canine,vaccine 471
Ointrments
Osteomalacia 432
Panacur 1.5% Pettets 192
Parakeratosis 429
eye363
Ostertagiasis,Type ll 185
Panacur 2.5% Liguid Wormer
Paramyxovirus, vaccine
skin 387
Otema Ear Drops 404
178, 192
pigeons 486
udder 358
Oitis extema 403
Panacur 2.5% Suspension 192
turkeys 486
Olaquindox 447
Otodectic mange 204
Panacur 4% 192
Paraptatin383
Olsalazine 223, 224
Otodex Ear Drops 404
Panacur 10% Liguid Wormer
ParaPure 83
renal impairment 120
Otodex Skin Cream 395
178,192
Paraquat, poisoning by 132
Omega interferon 170
Otomax 404
Panacur 10% Suspension 192
Parasiticides 181-220
lactahion 123
Ovarian activity
Panacur Botus 192
amphibians 101
Omeprazole 233, 234
stimulation 320
Panacur Capsutes 192
exotic birds 104,108
Oncovin 383
suppression 321
Panacur Eguine Granutes 192
ferrets 68, 69
One Dose Easy Wormer for
Ovarid 327
Panacur Eguine Guard 192
fsh 75, 80
Dogs Size 1, 2, 3 196
Ovine pregnancy toxaermia 419
Panacur Eguine Guard
game birds 50, 52
One Dose Wormer 196
Ovipast Plus 464
Unflavoured 192
pigeons 54, 57
'One-eyed cold' 54
Ovispec S & C 10% 191
Panacur Equine Paste 192
poultry 48
Onkotrone 382
OvitetminS & C 193
Panacur Favouritesfor Cats
rabbits 63, 65
Opioid analgesics
Ovivac-P Ptus 459
192
reptiles 111, 114
parturition 121
Oxacillin 145
PanacurFavouritesfor Dogs
rodents 59,60
reversal ofeffects 273
Oxantel 195
192
Paratect Ftex 195
Opioid antagonists 273
Oxfendazole 190,193
Panacur Paste 178, 192
Pardate-V272
beha viour modification
amphibians 101
Panacur SC 2.5% 192
Parenteral infusions 413, 417
297
preparations 193
Panacur SC5% 192
Parenteral nutrition 418
Opsite Ftexigrid 401
reptiles 114
Panacur Wormer 178, 192
Partodet315
Optictox365
Oxibendazole 190
Pancreatic disease 235
Paromomycin 153,154
Opticorten 305
Oxolinic acid 163
Pancreatic insufficiency
amphibians 100
Optimmune 373
ornamental fish 86
cimetidine233
Partridges see Game birds
Orabase 80
Oxycare 152
dietary management 437
 Parturition
Orahesive 80
Oxycare Aerosot 409
Pancreatin 235
drugs to be avoided 121
Oral hygiene 237
Oxyclozanide 199
Pancreatitis 235
induchion 321
Orat Hygiene Rinse 238
Oxycomplex NS 152
fluid therapy 414
Parvaquone 179
Oramec189
Oxygen therapy, competitions
Pancrex-Vet235
Parvexon 179
Orandrone328
25
Pancuronium 281,282
Parvotex 131
Orbaxt 165
Oxyglobin418
hepatic impairment 118
Parvovirus
Orbenin Dry Cow357
Oxymorphone 269
renal impairment 120
canine, vaccine 469
Orbenin Extra Dry Cow 357
ferrets 71
Pangram5%154
porcine, vaccine 466
Orbenin LA 355
Oxytetracycline 150,151
 Panh ypopituitarism 313
Passerines, prescribing 103
Orbenin Ophthatmic Ointment
amphibians 100
Pannus 373
Pastes, skin 387
365
exotic birds107
Panotog Ointment 404
Pasteurellosis, vaccine
Orbeseal 358
eyes 365
Panomec189
birds 486
Orbifloxacin 163, 165
ferrets 70
Panomec Paste for Horses 189
pigs 467
 Orciprenaline, poisoning by
farmed fish 74, 75
Pantothenic acid 43 1
sheep 464
131
foot disorders 409
Paracetamol 272
Pastobov 456
Orf, vaccine 459
invertebrates 93, 96
hepatic impairment 1 18
Pathocef 355
Organochlorines, poisoning by
ornamental fish 86
poisoning by 131
Paxcutot396
132
pigeons 56
Paracide Ptus 211
PBT see Preferred body
Organophosphorus compounds
preparations 151
Paracox 480
temperature
ectoparasitic infections
rabbits 64
Paracox5480
Pectin (ingredient) 222
topical210
reptiles 113
Paradongyt LA Get 238
Pen & Strep 167
poisoning by 132
rodents 61
Paradongyt PolishingPaste
Penacare 145
roundworm infections
Oxytetrin 5152
238
Penethamate hydriodide 144
195
Oxytetrin 10 DD 152
Paradongyt Toothpaste 238
Penicillamine
Originat Extra Tait 215
Oxytetrin 20LA152
Parafend 2.265% 194
 Ormetoprim 159
Oxytocin 330, 331
Parafend 5% SC 194
236,237
Omicure 151
exotic birds 109
Parafend LV 194
exotic birds 109
Ormithobacter rhinotrachealae,
ferrets 73
 Paraffins
poisoning 133,134
vaccine486
rodents 60
laxatives 228
preparations 340
OrojetLamb167
Oxytocin-S 331
skin 387
urolithiasis 340
Index:
559
Penicillin G see
Pet Care Ftea Spray for Cats
Phenylephrine 369
Pine 425
Benzylpenicillin
215
Phenylpropanolamine, urinary
Pine oil, poisoning by 130
Penicillin Vsee
Pet CareFlea Spray forDogs
incontinence 338,339
Pinkeye 364
Phenoxymethylpenicillin
216
Phenytoin
Pipemidic acid 163
Penicillins 140-148
Pet Care PlasticFlea Bandfor
arrhythrmias 246
Piperacillin 148
antipseudomonal 148
Cats212
epilepsy 288,289
amphibians 100
beta-lactamase resistant
Pet Care PlasticFlea Bandfor
hepatic impairment 118
reptiles 113
145
Dogs212
pregnant animals 122
Piperazine 196
broad-spectrum 145
Pet Care Singte Dose Wormer
Pheromonatherapy
ornamental fsh 84
narrow-spectrum 140
196
canine300
pigeons S7
Pentacarinat 179
Pet-Cat 433
feline 299
pregnant animals 122
Pentarmidine 178, 179
Pet-Coat392
 Phosmet 211
preparations 197
hepatic impairment 118
Pethidine 269,271
Phosphate, enemas 229
rabbits 65
renal impairment 120
ferrets 71
Phosphorus 423
renal impairment 120
Pentazocine 269, 271
pregnant animals 122
calcium, magnesium, and
rodents 60
ferrets 71
preparations 272
423
Piperonyl 212
rabbits 66
rabbits 66
deficiency 423
(ingredient) 215
rodents 62
renal impairment 120
Phosphorus salts 423
Pirbuterol 256
Pentobarbital
rodents 62
Phosphorus Supptement
Piriton 390
euthanasia 290,291
Petrol, poisoning by 135
Injection 423
Pirlimycin 355
general anaesthesia 276
Pets Travel Scherme 472
Phoxim 210, 212
Piroxicam 346
hepatic impairment 118
Pet-Tabs 435
Phytomenadione 434
Pirsue 355
poisoning
Pet-Tabs Fetine 435
poisoning 132,135
Pitressin 314
tetany 28
Pevidine AntisepticSotution
Phytotherapy 495
Pituitary adenoma, equine 314
Pentoject 291
400
PIE see Pulmonary infiltration
Pituitary dwarfism 313
Pentosan polysulfate sodium
Pevidine Surgicat Scrub 400
with eosinophilia
Pituitary hormones
348
PG 600 328
Pigeon Insect Preparations 216
anterior312
hepatic impairment 118
 Pharmacy and merchants list
Pigeon pox, vaccine 487
posterior 313
Pentostam 179
medicines 1
Pigeons
Pivampicillin 145
Pentoxifylline 350
Pharmacy only medicines 1
anaesthetics 54
Ptanate330
Pepcid234
Pharmorubicin preparations
antimicrobials 54, 55
Planipan 331
Pepcid AC 234
382
body-weight 528
Plants, poisonous 135
Pepto-Bismot 222
Pheasants see Game birds
competitions 29
Plasma substitutes 416
Percutol245
Phencyclidine,ferrets 71
parasiicides 54, 57
Plasma-Lyte preparations 419
Performex 5.0% SC194
Phenobarbital
prescribing 53
Pleuromutilins 165
Pergolide 315, 316
beha viour modi fication
protozoal infections 173
Pleuropneurmonia, vaccine 467
Peridate 229
297
round worm in fections
PLT 306
 Periodic ophthalmia 364
epilepsy 288,289
184
PMSG 322
Permethrin 212, 214
lactation 123
vaccines
Pneumonia 253, 254
pigeons 57
preparations 289
compeitions 28
enzootic,vaccine 467
rabbits 65
rodents 60
paramyxovirus 486
Poisoning
rodents 60
status epilepticus 290
pox 487
antidotes 130-137
Permethrin Ftea Powder 215
Phenobarbitone see
Pigs
in formation services 128
Permitted substances,
Phenobarbital
body-weight 528
treatment 128-137
competitions 27
Phenolphthalein 230
ectoparasitic infections
Polihexanide 361
Perphenazine 263
poisoning by 131
203
Polioencephalomalacia 431
 Personal importation 9
Phenols
prescribing 43
Poloxalene 225
Pesticides, poisoning by 132
poisoning by 130, 135
protozoal infections 172
Poty-Aid 435
Pet Care Duat Action Worming
skin 400
roundworm infections
Potyfax 365
Tabtets for Cats 201
Phenothiazines 263
186
Poly geline 418
Pet Care Duat Action Worming
etorphine and 273
vaccines 464468
Polyhex anide, teats and udders
Tabtets for Dogs 201
pregnant animals 122
Pigzin 222
361
Pet Care FettFtea Cottar for
Phenothrin 212
Pilocarpine 371
Polymixin B 166
Cats 215
Phenox ybenzamine 338, 339
keratoconjunctivitis sicca
reptiles 114
Pet Care Ftea and Tick Spray
renal impairment 120
372
Poly sulfated
218
Phenox yethanol 79
preparations 372
glycosaminoglycan 347,
Pet Care Ftea Powder for Cats
amphibians 102
Pitoget 372
348
215
Phenox ymethylpenicillin 144
Pimobendan 244
hepatic impairment 118
Pet Care Ftea Powder for Dogs
Phenylbutazone 345
lactation 123
pregnant animals 122
215
navicular disease 350
preparations 244
renal impairment 120
560 Index
Pol ytetrafluoroethylene,
Poutvac NDW 485
Prescription Diet Canine n/d
Procainamide 247
poisoning by 130
Poutvac SHS 488
443
renal impairment 120
Potytrin 365
Poutvac TRT488,489
Prescription Diet Canine pld
Proc aine 287
Polyvinyl alcohol 372, 373
Powder, varroosis 93
443
Procaine benzylpenicillin 144
Pond Aid Bacterad 83
Pralidoxime, poisoning 132,
Prescription Diet Caniner/d
benzathine
Pond Aid Eradick 83
133
442
benzylpenicillin and 145
Pond Care Bacterad 83
Praziquantel 197, 198
Prescription Diet Canine s/d
cormpetitions 25
Pond Pride No3-Parasite
amphibians 101
440
mashis 357
Controt83
exotic birds 108
Prescription Diet Canine U/d
Procaine penicillin 144
Pond PrideNo4-Fungus
ferrets 69
443
Procare277
Controt83
lactaion 123
Prescription Diet Canine u/d
Prochlorperazine 227, 263
Pond Pride No5-Fin and Tait
ornamental fish 84
440, 441, 442
gastritis 226
Rot Controt 84
pigeons 57
Prescription Diet Canine w/d
motion sickness 227
Porcitis Begonia DF 465
reptiles 114
442
Production enhancers 445-448
Porcilis Ery 466
Prazosin 339
Prescription Diet Canine Z/d
antibacterials 445
Porcilis Ery + Parvo 468
Pre-anae sthetic medication 275
441
 copper salts 448
Porcilis Glasser467
antimuscarinic drugs 275
Prescription Diet Canine/
enzymes 447
Porcitis Porcot 5 466
opioid analgesics 268
Fetine a/d 443
probiotics 447
PorcilisPRRS468
sedatives 263
Prescription Diet Fetine c/d
Pro-Dynam 346
PorkMixtard 30310
Pred Forte 367
440
Progesterone 325, 327
Posiject 250
Prednicare 306
Prescription Diet Fetine d/d
Progestogens 324-327
 Posting medicines 13
Prednisolone 304,306
441
behaviour modifcaion
Post-natal colibacillosis 487
arthritides 349
Prescription DietFeline g/d
298
Post-operative ileus 23 1
bowel disease 223
440
malignant disease 386
Post-parturient gangrene,
eye 367
Prescription Diet Fetine i/d 441
parturition 121
vaccine457
ferrets 73
Prescription Diet Fetine k/d
side-effects 325
Potassium 427
hypoadrenocorticism 307
440, 441
Program 40 217
Potassium bromide 288, 289
hypoglycaemia 312
Prescription Diet Fetine Ud
Program Ptus 201
exotic birds 109
malignant disease 384,
441, 442
Program Suspension for Cats
poisoning 288
98
Prescription Diet Fetine m/d
217
Potassium chloride 416, 417
spinal injury 303
442
Program Tabtets for Dogs 217
 Potassium citrate 338
Predsot 367
Prescription Diet Fetine p/d
Progressis 468
cyshis 338
Pre ferred body termperature,
443
Prohibited substance,
urinary alkalinisation 338
reptiles 109
PrescriptionDietFetiner/d442
competitions 26
Potassium iodide,omamental
Pregnancy toxaemia 419
Prescription Diet Fetine s/d 440
Prolacin agonists 332
fish 86
Pre gnancy, terrmination 320
Prescription Diet Fetine w/d
Prolapsed uterus 331
Potassium perman gan ate
Pregnant animals
442
Proligestone 325, 327
fish 77, 78
drugs to be avoided 122
Prescription Diet Fetine x/d
ferrets 73
Potassium salts 428
prescribing 121
440
Promazine, ferrets 71
Potencil 144
Pregnecot Injection 322
Prescription Diet Fetine z/d 441
Promethazine 390
 Potentiated sulphonamides 159
Prescribing
 Prescription writing 2
Promogran 402
Poultry
chemicals 6
con trolled drugs 3
Promone-E326
ectoparasitic in fections
emergency situation 7
example of 3
Pronestyt 247
208
human medicines 6
MFS 4
Propatin339
pre scribing 46
medicines for dart guns 9
prescription-only
Propantheline 338, 339
protozoal infecions 172
'off-label'6
medicines 2
antispasmodic 230,232
roundwom infecthions
traditional remedies 6
repeat prescription 3
brady dysrh ythmias 249
184
under the'cascade'6
Prescription-only medicines 2
urinary incontinence 339
vaccines 479-491
PrescriptionDiet Canine c/d
Prevac Pro 453
Proparacaine 373
Poutvac Bursa Plus 482
440
Prevac T Pro 454
Propentofylline
Poutvac Bursine 2482
Prescription Diet Canine d/d
PrevenderCollar212
age-related disorders 245
Poutvac H120 481
441
Preventef Cottar212
behaviour modifcation
Poutvac Hitchner B1 485
Prescription Diet Canine hd
Prid 328
299
Poutvac IBMM 481
441
Prilium 244
navicular disease 350, 351
Poutvac IBMM + ARK 481
Prescription Diet Canine i/d
Prilocaine 286, 287
Propetamphos 205, 210
Poutvac Marek CVI 484
441
Primidone 288,289
Propionate 419
Poutvac Marek CVI + HVT485
Prescription Diet Canine k/d
pregnant animals 122
Propoflo 277
Poutvac MD-Vac 485
440
Pro-Banthine339
Propofol 277
Poutvac MD-Vac(Frozen-Wet)
Prescription Diet Canine Vd
Probiotics 6, 447
amphibians 102
485
442
aquatic invertebrates 94
ferrets 71
Index:
561
Propofol (continued)
Pyrantel 195
Ramipril 243, 245
Rhinitis, allergic 262
hepatic impairment 118
ferrets 69
lactation 123
Rhinotracheitis
rabbits 66
Pyratape P 195
pregnant animals 122
feline viral, vaccine 476
renal impairment 120
Pyrethrins 212,215
Raniidine 233,234
infectious bovine, vaccine
rodents 62
exotic birds 108
RAO 258
455
status epilepticus 290
ferrets 69
Rapifen 270
turkey, vaccine 489
Propoxur 210
pigeons 57
Rapinovet 277
rhTSH 313
Propranolol 247, 248
Pyrethroids 212
Raptors, prescribing 103
Rhubarb, poisoning by 135
behaviour modification
poisoning by 132
Raspberry LeafTabtets 497
Riboflavin 431
296
Pyrethrum ex tract 212
Rats see Rodents
Riboflavine 431
ferrets 73
poisoning by 132
Rearguard 217
Rickets 432
hyperthyroidism 302
Pyridostigmine 285
Receptat 323
Ridaura 349
poisoning 135
Pyridoxine 431
Recombinant human
Ridect 215
preparations 248
Pyriproxyfen 217
th yrotropin 313
Rid-Mite 216
Propylene glyco] 419, 420
lactating animals123
Record keeping 15
Rifadin 166
Propylthiouracil 302, 303
controlled drugs 3
Rifampicin 166
Prosotvin330
farmers 16
amphibians 100
Prostaglandins 329-330
purchase and sale 16
Ritexine 149
cautions 329
veterinarians 15, 16
Rimactane 166
pregnant animals 122
Quadrisot 347
Recurrent airway obstruction
Rimadyt 343
supply of 13
Quail see Garme birds
258
Rimexolone 367
Prostapar 330
Quatimintic189
Redwater fever 177
Rimidys 266
Prostate hyperplasia
Quatimintic1%Injection189
ReflectiveFlea Collar215
Ringer's solution 417
oestrogens 324
Quantum Cat CVRP 477
Regutin 323
Ringworm
progestogens 325
Quantum CatFeLV 476
Regumate Eguine 325
treatment 394
Prostavet Injectabte Sotution
Quantum Dog7473
Regumate Porcine 325
vaccine 464
330
Quantum Dog CPV 470
Rehydration
Ripercot 3.2% 195
Prosutf252
Quantum Dog CPV-L473
oral 411, 412
Ripercot Pour-on 195
 Protamine sulfate 251
QuantumRabies473
parenteral413
Rispovat 4 457
Protease 235
QuarterMate 361
hypertonic solutions
Rispovat Pasteuratla 457
Protegflu453
Queensland itch 202
416
Rispovat RS 456
ProtegFtu TE 454
Questran237
Retaxit Micro-Enema 230
Ritatin 297
Protirelin 314
Quinalbarbitone see
Remifentanil 270, 272
Rivotril 290
Protoban 84
Secobarbital
Renal impairment
Roaccutane 397
Protozoal infections 172
Quinidine 246, 247
Robenidine 171, 175
Provid 195
hepatic irmpairment 1 18
diuretics 243
rabbits 64
Pro-Viron 328
fluid therapy 414
Robinut275
Proxy metacaine 373
Quinolones 163
prescribing 119
Robitussin Dry Cough 262
Prozac 295
treatment 335
Robitussin JuniorPersistant
Pseudoephedrine 262
Renegade213
Cough 262
Pseudopregnancy
 Repeat prescription 3
Robust213
androgens 328
Reproductive system 319-333
Rocuronium 282
progestogens 327
Rabbits
Reptiles
hepatic impairment 118
prostaglandins 329
anae sthetics and
anaesthetics 115,116
renal impairment 120
PSGAG see Polysulfated
analgesics 63, 66
antimicrobials 109, 112
Rodenticides, poisoning by 132
glycosarminoglycan
antimicrobials 63, 64
other drugs 111, 117
Rodents
 Psittacines, prescribing 103
body-weight 528
parasiicides 111, 114
anaesthetics and
Psittacosis 104
consent forms 20
prescribing 109
analgesics 59, 62
PTFE, poisoning by 130
ectoparasites 207
Respiratory disorders 253-262
antimicrobials 59, 61
Pulmonary infiltration with
parasiticides 63, 65
exotic birds 105
body-weights 528
eosinophilia 258
prescribing 63
reptiles 115
parasiticides 59, 60
PutmotitAC 157
protozoal infections 173
Respiratory shimulants 262
prescribing 59
Putmotit G700 157
vaccines 492
Respiratory syncytial virus,
Romensin G700 447
Pulpy kidney disease, vaccine
Rabies, vaccine 472
vaccine 456
Romifidine 265, 266
457
Rabisin 473
Respiratory systerm 253-262
Rompun 267
Puppy Easy-Worm Syrup 197
Radiot Insecticidat Shampoo
Retarbotin 308
Ronaxan 151
Puppy Ftea Powder216
216
Retin-A 397
Ronidazole 177
Purilon Get 401
Rafoxanide 199
Retinoids 396
Rose bengal 373, 374
Puri-Nethot 381
Ragwort, poisoning by 136
Retrovir 171
Rotavec Corona 460
Pyceze76
Rain scald 393
Rheumatine 343
Rotavirus, vaccine 451
562 Index
Roundworm infecions 185-
Sapphire Concentrate I:9 361
Sex hormones
Sodium bicarbonate
197
Sarafloxacin 163
antagonists 386
(continued)
avermmecins 187
Sarcopic mange
behaviour modification
fluid therapy 416, 417
benzimidazoles 190
cattle202
298
urinary alkalinisaion 338
imidazothiazoles 194
dogs 204
cormpound preparations
Sodium calciumedentate 133,
milbemycins 187
horses 202
328
134
organophosphorus
pigs 203
malignant disease 386
exoic birds 109
compounds 195
sheep 203
pregnant animals 122
preparations 134
other drugs 196
SARSS 17
reproductive system 324
Sodium carbonate, emesis 228
tetrahy dropyrimidines
SavtonVeterinary Antiseptic
Shampoos 388, 397
Sodium chlorate,poisoning by
195
Concentrate 399
Sheep
132
Roundworm Tabtets 197
Scabby mouth, vaccine 459
ectoparasitic infecfions
Sodium chloride
Roundworn Tabtetsfor Cats
Scabivax 459
202
amphibians 101
197
Scabivax Forte 459
fluke infections 199
emesis 228
RubyOratWormerSyrup 197
Scatibor Cotlar 214
prescribing 37
farmed fish 76, 78
Ruby Paragard 216
Scaly Lotion 216
protozoal infections 172
intravenous infusion 417
RubyVeterinary Ear Drops404
Scopolarmine see Hyoscine
round worm in fections
ornamental fsh 86
Rug-de-Bug 220
Scordex 427
185
skin 400
Rumag Agua 423
Scourproof 412
tapeworm infections 197
Sodium citrate, enemas 230
Rumbut Magnesium Buttets 423
Scullcap andVaterian Tabtets
vaccines 455-464
Sodium clodronate317
Runny nose syndrome 115
497
Sheep dips 218-219
Sodium cromoglicate 260
Rycoben Catte 191
Sea lice 75
disposal 19, 219
pregnant animals 122
Rycoben SC for Sheep 191
Sebocat 398
Sheep scab 203
Sodium hyaluronate 348
Rycomec189
Sebolyhics 404
Shock
Sodium iodide 168
Rycomec Drench 189
Sebomild P396
fluid replacement 414
Sodium lactate 417
Secobarbital (ingredient) 291
glucocorticoids 303
Sodium nitrite, poisoning 133,
Securon 249
plasma subsitutes 416
134
Sedatin 264
 Show animals, competitions 29
Sodium nitroprusside 244, 245
Sedatives 263-268
Sitent Ftea Spray 216
Sodium propionate, ketosis 420
SA Vits 435
antagonists 268
Silver sulfadiazine 394
Sodium stibogluconate 178,
S4-37 435
Sedivet 266
Sinequan 295
179
Saffan 277
Selarmectin
SI-RO-COCobattPellets424
hepatic impairment 118
Satazopyrin 224
ectoparasitic infections
Skin 387-403
renal impairment 120
Salbutamol 256, 257
208,209
 Skin preparations
Sodium sulfate, laxati ves 229,
Salcatonin317
endoparasitic infections
antibactenial 393
230
Sat-Eco 720 176,447
187,190
anti fungal 394
Sodium thiosulfate
Salicylates
Seteen396
compound anti-
ornamental fsh 86
poisoning 131
Selegiline
inflammatory and
poisoning 133,134
pregnant animals 122
behaviour modification
antimicrobial 391
Sodium valproate 288, 289
Salicylic acid
295
essenfial fatty acids 392
Soframycin 365
compeitions 26
lactaion 123
keratolytics 396
Sotoxine 302
skin preparations 396
pitui tary -depe ndent
Slice 76
Sotu-Cortef 307
Salinomycin
hy peradre nocorticism
Slime disease 75
Sotu-Medrone V 306
coccidiosis 171, 176
315,316
Stow-K 428
Sotvazinc 429
production enhancers
Selenium 428
Small animals, definition xi
Somatotropin 313
446, 447
defciency 428
SMEDl syndrome 466
Somutose 291
Salmeterol 257
exotic birds 109
Smoke injury 130
Sorbsan 402
Salmonellosis, vaccine 488
vitamin E and 434
Snakes
Sotacor248
Satmosan 76
Selenium salts 428
poisoning by 137
Sotalol 248
Satocin 720447
Selenium sulfide 396
prescribing 109
SPAOPD 258
Satofatk 224
Setgian 296
Sno Tears 373
Spartrix 177
Salt
Semduramicin 171, 176
Sodium 428
Special diets see Dietetic pet
emesis 228
Semi-Daonil 311
deficiency 428
foods
poisoning 128
Seraguin 348
toxicity 429
Special Treatment
poisoning by 429
Serenace 292
Sodium acid phosphate 337,
Authorisation 9
SAMe 236,237
Serevent 257
338
consent form 20
Sarcerum 404
Sertraline 294, 295
Sodium aurothiomalate 349
Special-order products 6
Sandostatin 312
Serum gonadotrophin 319, 322
Sodium bicarbon ate
con sent form 20
Saniphor395
SevoFto 281
antacids 232,233
Specicare LEO Cat Ear
Sapphire 361
Sevoflurane 279,281
cystitis 338
Cteaner404
Index 563
Specicare LEO Dog Ear
Strongid Caramet 196
Summer Fty Cream 220
Tagamet 234
Cteaner404
Strongid Paste for Dogs 196
Summer mashitis 357
Taktic 208
Spectam Injectabte 166
Strongid-P Granutes 196
Summer pasture-associated
Tamodine 78,83
Spectam Scour Hatt 167
Strongid-P Paste 196
obstructi ve pulmonary
Tamodine-E 78,84
Spectinormycin 166
Struck,vaccine457
disease 258
Tamoxifen 386
game birds 51
Strychnine, poisoning by 132
Summer Teat Care Ptus 360
Tapeworm infections 197
pigeons 55
Subtimaze 271
Sunscreens 393
Tar 409
Spina] cord injury,
Succimer 133, 134
Supaverm 201
poisoning by 135
glucocorticoids 303
Succinylcholine 283
Super Concentrate Teat Dip or
Tardak326
Spironolactone 242
Sucralfate 233, 235
Spray 361
Tavegit 390
preparations 242
ferrets 73
Super lodip 360
Tears Naturate 373
renal impairment 120
preparations 235
Super-Ov 322
Teats
Spironucleosis 178
uraemic gastritis 226
Superspray 360
care of 358
Spirovac 461
Sudafed262
Superteat 361
sealants 358
Sporanox 169
Sulfadiazine
Sure LD 195
Tegaderm 401
Spot On 214
trimethoprim with 160
Surotan 404
Tegagen 402
Sprays, skin 388
exotic birds 107
Suspected Adverse Reaction
Tegasorb 402
Spring viraemia of carp 79
farmed fish 75
Surveillance Scheme 17
Tegretot 296
Sputolosin261
ferrets 70
Suvaxyn Aujeszky 465
Tetmin 193
STA 9
game birds 51
Suvaxyn E.Coti P4 466
Tetmin Paste 193
Stabox 5% Premix 147
ormamental fish 86
Suvaxyn M hyo -Parasuis 468
Tetzenac 343
Stanozolol 307
protozoal infections
Suvaxyn Parvo 466
Temefos 211
Star lodocare Concentrate361
171
Suvaxyn Parvo/E 468
Tenormin 248
Star Ready-Dip 361
rabbits 64
Suxamethonium 283
Tepox alin 346
Star Teat-Ex360
rodents 61
hepatic impairment 118
Terbin afine
Starcare C359
Sulfadimethoxine, pigeons 56
Suxibuzone 346
exoic birds 107
Starches, plasma expanders 4 16
Sulfadimidine 159
Swayback 425
fungal infections 168, 169
Status asthmaticus 258
amphibians 101
Swaycop 426
Terbutaline 256,257
Status epilepticus 290
coccidiosis 176
S weet itch 202
poisoning by 131
Stegantox 10 473
exotic birds 107
SweetItch Lotion 215
Terramycin Aerosot 409
Stettamune Mycoplasma 467
pigeons 56
Sweet Itch Plus 216
Terramycin LA 152
Stetlamune Once 467
rabbits 64
Sweet vemal grass, poisoning
Terramycin Q-100 152
Sterculia
rodents 61
by 135
Terramycin Sotubte Powder
constipation 228, 229
 Sulfadoxine, trimethoprim with
Switch 214
153
diarrhoea 222
reptiles 114
Swollen head syndrome,
Terramycin Sotubte Powder
Sterigel 401
Sulfadoxine with trimethoprim
vaccine 488
Concentrate153
Steroid anaesthetics 277
161
Symbols xiv
Terrapins, prescribing 109
Stilboestrol see
Sul famethoxazole,
Symmetret 170
Tertroxin 301
Diethylstilbestro]
trimethoprim with, ferres
Sympathomimetics see
Testosterone 327, 328
Stockholm tar 409
70
Adrenoceptor stimulants
competitions 26
Stomorgyt 2 167
Sulfamethox ypyridazine,
Synacthen 313
Tetanus
Stomorgyt 10 167
reptiles 114
Synemmast LC356
antitoxin 454
Stomorgyt 20 167
Sulfamonomethoxine 159
Synoguin 348
competitions 27
Storage
Sulfaquinoxaline 159
Synthamin 17419
vaccine 453,454
medicines 10
tri methoprim with 
Synutox 500 mg Botus 147
Tetanus Antitoxin Behring 454
sheep dips 219
coccidiosis 176
SynuloxLactating Cow356
Tetanus Toxoid Concentrated
vaccines 451
game birds 51,52
SynutoxPalatabteDrops147
454
Strangles 253
Sulfasalazine 223, 224
Synutox Patlatabte Tabtets 148
Tetcin Aerosot409
Strepiacare 167
Sulfathiazole 159
Synutox Ready to Use Injection
Tetrac aine 373
Streptormycin 153
Sutfatrim75
148
Tetrachlorvinphos 211
aquatic invertebrates 96
Sul fatrox azole, trimethoprim
Synutrim Fortesot 161
Tetracosactide 313
preparations 154
with, pigeons 56
Synutrim Granutar 161
Tetracosactrin 313
rabbits 64
Sulfur396
Systamex 2.265 194
Tetracycline 150,153
rodents 61
Sulphonarmides 159- 162
amphibians 101
Streptopen 167
coccidiosis 171
aquatic invertebrates 96
Streptopen Mitking Cow 355
hepatic impairment 1 18
ferrets 70
Streptopern QR 356
potentiated159-162
game birds 51
Stresnil 264
renal impairment 120
TAD Gumboro vac T482
pigeons 56
Strinacin I 161
Sulphonylureas 3 10
TAD Satmonetla vac E 488
rabbits 64
Stronghotd 190
Summer C-Dip 360
TAD Satmonetla vacT 488
rodents 61
564 Index
Tetracyclines 150-153
Tiacil 365
Tramazote 191
Trodax 34% 199
hepatic impairment 118
Tiamulin 165
Tranexamic acid 252
Tropical canine pancytopenia
pregnant animals 122
game birds 51
Trans-fer436
204
renal impairment 120
pigeons 56
Transitional call carcinoma 346
Tropicamide 369
Tetra-Detta 356
Tiamutin 165
Tranxene 293
Troscan 196
TetraFin Gotdfish Disease
Tiaprost 329
Travatan 371
Trusopt 371
Treatment 84
Ticarcillin 148
Travel sickness 227
Trypanosomosis 179
TetraFin GotdMed 84
clavulanic acid with 148
Travoprost 371
Tryplase 235
Tetrahydropyrimidines 195
Tielte 401
Trematodes see Fluke
TSH stimulation test 313
TetraMedica ContraSpot84
Tildron351
infections
Tulathromycin 157
TetraMedica FungiStop 84
Tiletamine 278
Tretinoin 396, 397
Tumit-K 428
TetraMedica Generat Tonic 84
amphibians 102
TRH see Protirelin
TUR 3 490
Tetramin153
ferrets 71
Triamcinolone 304
Turkey haemorrhagic enteritis
Tetramisole 194
Tilmicosin 155, 157
Tribex 5% 199
vaccine489
TetraPond Medifin 84
lactaion 123
Tribex 10% 199
Turkey rhinotracheitis, vaccine
Tetroxy LA 153
Tiludronic acid, navicular
Tribovax-T459
489
Tetsot 800153
disease 350, 351
Tribrissen 161
Turkeys see Poultry
Theileriosis 179
Timentin 148
Tribrissen(SQX)Poultry
Turpentine oil 225
Theobrormine, competitions 26
Timolol 372, 372
Formula 162
Turpentine, poisoning by 135
Theophylline 255, 256
Timoptol372
Tribrissen Orat Paste 161
Twin lamb disease 419
ferrets 73
Tioguanine 380, 381
Tricaine mesilate
Twin Wormer for Cats 201
hepatic impairment 118
Tivafot 277
amphibians 102
Twin Wormer for Dogs 201
Thiabendazole see
Toad, poisoning by 137
aquatic invertebrates95
Tylan200157
Tiabendazole
Tobramycin 155
fsh 78, 79
Tytan G20 157
Thiacetarsarmide 196
exotic birds107
Trichlorfon195
Tylan G50 157
Thiacetarsamide, hepatic
eye 364
Trichlormethiazide 241
Tylan G250 158
impairment 1 18
Trichomoniosis 176
Tylan Sotubte 158
Thiamazole 302,303
reptiles 114
exotic birds 104
Tylosin 155,157
hepatic impairment 118
Tocainide 247
game birds 50
exotic birds 107
lactation 123
Tocovite 433
pigeons 54
ferrets 70
pregnant animals 122
Tolbutamide 310, 311
Triclabendazole 199
game birds 51
Thiamine 432
hepatic impairment 1 18
Trientine 236, 237
pigeons 56
deficiency 136,431
parturition 121
Trifluorothy midine 366
reptiles 114
Thiamphenicol 158
preparations 311
Trifluridine 366
rodents 61
Thiazides
renal irmpairment 120
Tri-iodothyronine see
Tytuvet-20 158
diabetes insipidus 241
Toffedine347
Liothyronine
diurelics 241
Tolfenamic acid 347
Trilostane 315, 316
renal impairment 120
Totfine 347
hepatic impairment 118
Toltrazuril 171, 176
lactation 123
Ucerax 391
Thiopental 276
exotic birds107
pregnant animals 122
Udders, care of 358
ferrets 71
game birds 52
renal impairment 120
Ulcer disease see
hepatic impairment 118
ornamental fish 86
Trimacare 161
Ery throdermatitis
rabbits 66
pigeons 56
Trimacare 24% 161
Ulcerative stomatitis 115
rodents 62
Tonicity 527
Trimediazine 15161
Uttiva 272
Thiopentone see Thiopental
Toothpaste 237
Trimediazine BMP 161
Uttrapen LA 145
Thiophanate 190
Torbugesic 271
Trimediazine Paste161
Uniprim150161
Thiotepa 379, 380
Torbutrot 261
Trimediazine Plain 161
Uniprim for Horses 161
Thiovet 277
Tortoises, prescribing 109
Trimedoxine 161
Units 525
Thrombosis 250
Torvac 456
Trimedoxine 4S 161
Uraermia 226
Thrush 405
Toxoids 450
Trimeprazine see Alimemazine
Urdox 237
Thymovac 482
Toxoplasmosis
Trimethoprim 159
Uriben 165
Thyrogen313
treatment 173
sulfadiazine with 160
Urinary incontinence 338
Thyroid hormones 301
vaccine, sheep 463
sulfadoxine with 161
Urinary retention 338
Thyrosyn 302
Toxovax 463
sulfamethazole with 162
Urinary system 335-341
Thyrotrophin-releasing
Trace elements 430
sulfaquinoxaline with 162
Uroeze 338
hormone see Protirelin
Tracheobronchitis, infectious,
Trinacot 161
Urolithiasis 340
e udon
vaccine 470
Trioxyt LA 147
dietary management 438
Thyroxine see Levothyroxine
Tracherine 456
Tripelennamine 390
oxalate 340
Tiabendazole 190, 194
Tracrium282
Trivacton 6 461
struvite340
amphibians 101
Traditional remedies 6
Trizivir 171
urate 340
Index:
565
Ursodeox ycholic acid 236, 237
Vaccines(continued)
Vaccines (continued)
VetBioSISt402
Ursodiol 237
equine herpesvirus 452
rabbits 492
Vetergesic 270
Ursofatk 237
equine influenza 452
rabies 472
Veterinary Antiseptic Spray 395
Ursogat 237
equine viral arteritis 453
ringworm 464
Veterinary drug, definition 1
Uterine infections 332
erysipelas
salmonellosis 488
VeterinaryPoisons Information
Uterine prolapse 331
birds 483
sheep 455-464
Service 128
Utocyl 333
pigs 466
swollen head syndrome
Veterinary Surgeons Health
rurminants 461
488
Support Programme 3
erythrodermatitis 493
tetanus 453
Veterinary Wound Powder 395
Vaccination, competitions
Escherichia coli, pigs 465
toxoids 450
Vetflurane 281
cats 29
feline leukaemia 475
toxoplasmosis, sheep 463
Veticop 426
greyhounds 28
feline panleucopenia 476
turkey rhinotracheitis 489
Vetivex }417
horses 27
feline viral respiratory
vector450
Vetivex 18417
pigeons 29
disease complex 476
vibriosis 494
Vetivex 20417
show dogs 29
fish 492-494
viral haemorrhagic
Vetivex 3417
Vaccines 449-494
footrot 461
disease 492
Vetivex 6417
anthrax 455
fowl pox 483
Vatbazen 10% 191
Vetivex 9417
atrophic rhinitis 465
goats 455-464
Vatbazen SC 2.5% 191
Vet-KemBreakaway Ftea
Aujeszky's disease 465
horses 451-454
Vatte rg an 390
CotlarforCats 210
autogenous 450
hyposensitisation 388
Valnemulin 165
Vetmedin Capsutes 244
avian encephalomyelitis
inacivated450
lactation 123
Vetodale391
480
infectious canine hepatitis
Vatoid 227
Vetoryt316
avian in fectious
470
Vamin 9 Gtucose 419
Vetothane 280
bronchitis 480
infectious
Vamin78419
Vetrabuine 33 1, 332
avian infectious bursal
laryngotracheitis 483
Vancocin 167
Vetrazin 217
disease 481
infectious
Vancomycin 166, 167
Vetremox Fish 74
avian pneumovirus 482
tracheobronchitis 470
aquatic invertebrates 96
Vetremox Pouttry 147
avian reovirus 482
killed 450
Vanguard 7473
Vetridine78
birds 479-491
Jeptospirosis
Vanguard CPV 470
Vetrimoxin 147
Bordetella bronchisepica
cattle 461
Vanguard CPV-L 473
Vetzyme Ftearid Insecticidat
471
dogs 471
Vanguard Lepto ci 472
Spray 216
bovine herpesvirus 455
Jive 449
Vanodine Udder Cream 359
Vetzyme JDS Insecticidat
canine coronavirus 469
pregnant animals
Vanodine Udder Satve 361
Shampoo 215
canine distermper 469
122
Vapona, exotic birds 104
Vetzyme Veterinary Combined
cats 475-478
louping ill 462
Vasodilators 243
Wormer 201
cattle 455-464
lungworm 462
cerebra] 245
Vexot 367
chicken anaermia virus
Marek's disease 484
Vasopressin 314
Viacutan 392
482
mycoplasmosis 485
Vasotop 244
Vibriosis, vaccine 494
chlarmydophiliosis
myxormatosis 492
Vecoxan 174
Vinblastine 382, 383
cats 475
Newcastle disease 485
Vectin 189
Vincristine 382,383
sheep 463
Ornithobacter
Vectin 0.08% 189
ferrets 73
clostridial infections
rhinotrachealae 486
Vecuronium 283
preparations 383
pigs 465
ovine abortion 462
Vedaprofen 347
Vinegar, hepaic
ruminants 457
parain flue nza
Vetbe 383
encephalopathy 237
tetanus 453
bovine 455
Vetvet Controt No 8 84
Viral haemorrhagic disease,
coccidiosis 480
dogs 471
Velvet disease 75
vaccine492
dogs 468-474
paramyxovirus
Vetvet Ftea Cottar 215
Viral haemorthagic septicaemia
duck septicaemia 483
pigeons 486
Ventiputmin257
79
duck virus enteritis 483
turkeys 486
Ventiputmin TMP/S 161
Viral infections 170
duck virus hepatitis 483
parvovirus
Ventotin 257
eye 366
egg drop syndrome 1976
dogs 469
Veramix Sheep Sponge 326
Virbagen Omega 170
483
pigs 466
Verapamil 249
Virbamec 189
emergency 450
pasteurellosis
Vet Helpline 3
Virbamec Pour-On 189
enteric redmouth disease
birds 486
Vetatar 279
Virbaxyt 267
493
pigs 467
Vetasept Chtorhexidine Skin
Virgan 366
enteritis
sheep 464
Scrub Btue 400
Virginiamycin 405
pigs 465
pigeon pox 487
Vetasept Povidone-lodine
Viscotears 372
ruminants 459
pigs 464-468
Alcohotic Tincture 400
Vista-Methasone 367
enzootic pneumonia, pigs
pleuropneumonia 467
Vetasept Povidone-lodine
Vista-Methasone N 368
467
poultry 479-491
Antiseptic Sotution 400
Vita AFB Test Kit91
566 Index
Vita EFB Test Kt91
Vomiing 226
Wormaway Levamisote
Zerofen 4% 192
Vitamin A 430
fluid therapy 414
Injection 195
Zerofen 10% 192
deficiency 430
induction 128,228
Wormazote 192
Zerofen 22% 192
exotic birds 109
motion sickness 227
Worming Cream 197
Zidovudine 170, 171
Vitamin B 43 1
treatment, anti-emeics
Worming Granutes for Cats 192
 combin ation preparation
Vitamin B, see Thiamine
226
Worming Granutes for Dogs
171
Vitamin B, see Riboflavine
Von Willebrand's disease 313
192
renal impairment 120
Vitamin Bg see Pyridoxine
Voren 305
Worming Syrup 197
reptiles 112
Vitamin B1432
Voren 14 306
WS3 White Spot Terminator 84
Zinacef150
Vitamin C432
VSHSP3
Xatatan371
Zinc
Vitamin D 432
Xanax 293
deficiency 429
calcium and 433
Xenex Uttra 215
foot disorders 409
deficiency 432
WatpotesBufferSolution340
Xylacare2%267
hepatic disease 236
ointments, poisoning by
Warble fly infestation 202
Xytapan 267
Zinc oxide 222
131
Warfarin 251
Xylazine 264, 266
Zinc paste 388
Vitamin Dsee Ergocalcifero]
navicular disease 350, 351
emesis228
Zinc salts 429
Vitamin Dsee Colecalciferol
poisoning by 132
ferrets 71
Zinc sulfate 409
Vitamin E 433
pregnant animals 122
growth hormone
Zincade rm 429
deficiency 433
preparations 251
stimulation test 313
Zincomed 429
exotic birds 109
Washing soda, poisoning 128
rabbits66
Zincoped 409
selenium and 434
Wasp stings 137
rodents 62
Zincoset for Cattte 430
Vitamin K 434
Waste 18
Zincoset/Densecure for Sheep
exotic birds 109
Water, fresh, aquatic
430
Vitarmin K, see
invertebrates 96
Zincosot429
Phytomenadione
Weights of animals 528
Yersiniosis see Enteric
Zithromax 156
Vitamin K, see Menadione
White muscle disease 433
redmouth disease
Zotan 345
Vitamins 430-435
White spirit, poisoning by 135
Yew, poisoning by 136
Zolazepam 278
minerals and 435
White spot 75
amphibians 102
Vitatrace 436
White Spot Controt No 5 84
ferrets 71
Vitbee 432
Wittcain 287
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome
Vitenium 434
Withdrawal periods
Zafrlukast 260
234
Viteset 434
definition 18
Zantac 234
Zootechnical feed additi ves 5
Vivitonin 245
fish 74
Zantac 75 234
Zubrin 346
Voltarol Ophtha368
minimum standard 18
Zarontin 289
Zytoric 340
Wool fat, hydrous 387
Zenecarp 343
Wormaway Levam 195
Zerofen 2.5% 192
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs
IN CONFIDENCE
VMID
Veterinary Medicines Directorate,
For Official Use Only
FREEPOST 4503, Woodham Lane, New Haw, Addlestone,
Adverse
Surrey KT15 3BR
reaction No.
Tel.No.01932338427Fax:01932 336618
Suspected Adverse Reaction Surveillance Scheme (SARSS)
SAR fle
Animal suspected adverse reaction report
Date rec'd
This form should be completed in BLOCK LETTERS if hand written and sent to the
FREEPosT address given above, whenever a suspected adverse reaction is observed
Date ack.
in animals (including birds and fish) during or after the use of a veterinary medicine.
All reporters MUST complete this section
Full name and address of the person sending this form to VMD
Full name of product
County:
Product number (on label)*
Batch number
Postcode:
Date:
Full address where reaction(s) occurred
* the product number is preceded by PL, VM or MA.
This form will be copied to the Company (Marketing Authorisation
holder) in order that they are aware of any reported suspected
adverse reaction to their product. They may wish to contact you for
County:
further details. If you do not want the name(s) and address(es) on
Postcode:
the form to be revealed to the Company, please tick this box.
Full name and address of veterinarian involved
Has the Company already been informed? YEs 
NOL
Your reference No. (if any)
County:
Postcode:
P.T.O.
Details of animal suspected adverse reaction(s)
Reason for using product
No. of animals treated
No.ofanimals
No. of deaths
Actual amount of product
on this occasion
reacting 
administered
Administered by
Date of first
Duration of
(occupation)
administration
treatment
Site and route of
Previous use of product in this
If YEs, number of 
administration
animal(s) YEs  No
occasions
Date of reaction(s)
Species/Breed
Weight
Age
Sex
Nature of reaction including time of onset and duration of
kg
(M/F)
symptoms (continue onanother sheetif necessary)
Full details of products given concurrently (if any)
Immediate treatment given (if any)
Previous vaccination history (if immunological product involved in suspected adverse reaction) product No.* and batch No.
Post mortem and/or laboratory tests:
Comments:
Have any post mortems or relevant diagnostic
If you have any comments or further information, please continue
 tests been performed ?..
YES
No口
on another sheet.
If YES, please attach copies or forward to VMD in due course 
Receipt of this form will be acknowledged
MLA 252A (11/02)
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs
IN CONFIDENCE
VMD
Veterinary Medicines Directorate,
For Official Use Only
FREEPOST4503,WoodhamLane,NewHaw,Addlestone,
Adverse
ASSURING THE SAFETY,QUALITY AND EFICACY
DFVETERIN
MEDICINES
Surrey KT15 3BR
reaction No.
Tel. No.01932 338427 Fax: 01932 336618
Suspected Adverse Reaction Surveillance Scheme (SARSS)
SAR fle
Report on suspected adverse reaction(s) in humans
Date rec'd
This form should be completed in BLOCK LETTERS if hand written and sent to the
FREEPOST address given above, whenever a suspected adverse reaction is
Date ack.
observed in humans during or after the use of a veterinary medicine.
All reporters MUsT complete this section
Full name and address of the person sending this form to VMD
Full name of product
County:
Product number (onlabel)*
Batch number
Postcode:
Date:
* the product number is preceded by Pl, VM or MA.
This form will be copied to the Company (Marketing Authorisation
Full address where reaction(s) occurred
holder) in order that they are aware of any reported suspected 
adverse reaction to their product. They may wish to contact you for
further details.If you do not want the name(s) and address(es) on
the form to be revealed to the Company, please tick this box....
County:
Has the Company already been informed? YEs  No
Postcode:
Your reference No.(if any)
P.T.O.
Details of person experiencing reaction(s)
Title
Initials
Surname
male
female
Age
0-56-1718-2425-4445-6465+
Occupation
(e.g. farmer, vet, pet owner)
Details of suspected adverse reaction(s) in humans
Date of exposure
Date of onset of symptoms
Species of animal being treated
 No. of animals treated
Details of exposure/contact with veterinary medicine. If accidental. please give details of haw accident occurred.
If self injection,pleasegive detailsofamount injected.(continue on anothersheetif necessary)
Did yau seek medical advice?...
.YES 
NOL
Duration of symptoms
(e.g. 20 minutes, 5 days, ongoing 1+ month etc.)
If YEs, did the doctor confirm that your
symptoms were associated with exposure
Details of first symptoms
to the veterinary medicine?.
..YES 
No口
Give details of any treatment received:
Were you suffering from any illness (e.g. flu)
or taking medication prior to exposure?
YES
No
If YES, give details (continue on another sheet if necessary)
 Details of symptoms occurring afterwards
Receipt of this form will be acknowledged and further details
may be requested.
MLA 252A (11/02)