DONALD L.PIERMATTEI
KENNETH A.JOHNSON
AnAtlasof
SURGICALAPPROACHESTO
THEBONESANDJOINTSOF
THEDOGAND CAT
FOURTH EDITION
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.co m
DONALD L. PIERMATTEI, D.V.M., PH.D.
Diplomate, American College of Veterinary Surgeons
Professor of Surgery, Department of Clinical Sciences
 College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences
Colorado State University, Ft. Collins. Colorado
llustrationsby
F. Dennis Giddings, A.M.l.
An Atlas of
Surgical Approaches
to the Bones and Joints
of the Dog and Cat
THIRD EDITION
W.B. SAUNDERS COMPANY
A Division of Harcourt Brace & Company
Philadelphia London Toronto MontrealSydney Tokye
W.B. SAUNDERS COMPANY
A Diuision of
Harcourt Brace& Company
The Curtis Center
Independence Square West
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19106
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Piermattei, Donald L.
An atlas of surgical approaches to the bones and joints of the
dog and cat / Donald L. Piermattei : illustrations by F. Dennis
Giddings. -- 3rd ed.
p.
cm.
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-7216-1012-9
J. Dogs-—Surgery--Atlases.
2. Cats-—
-Surgery--Atiases.
3.Veterinary surgery
-Atlases.
4.Veterinary
 orthopedics—-Atlases.
J. Title.
SF981.P54
1993
636.7'0897471-dc20
92-25778
An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 3rd edition
ISBN 0-7216-1012-9
Copyright @ 1993, 1979, 1966 by W. B. Saunders Company
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any forim or by any
means, elctronic or mechanical,including photocopy, recording,or any information storage and retrieval
system, without perimission in writing froin the publisher.
Printed in the United States of America.
Last digit is the print number:   9
8
了
6
Dedicated to those veterinary surgeons
who pioneered the anatomic approach to surgery
and made this volume possible, especially WOB and RBH.
Preface
In the preface to the frst edition of this atlas, which appeared 26 years ago, we stated
"in the course of several years? experience teaching smail animal surgery to veterinary
students, a need for well-illustrated material on the surgical anatomy of the skeletal
system became very apparent. . . . It is our hope, therefore, that this book will fill a void
in the student's and the practitioner's bookshelves and allow them to have available in
one place directions for approaches to all bones." Although many things have changed
in veterinary orthopedic surgery in the intervening years, the above statements still
refect the reason for, and the goal of, this third edition. We have done everything in
our power to improve this version to meet this goal.
The most obvious changes in the current edition are the drawings, each one of which is
a new rendering by F. Dennis Giddings. I am sure that every reader will appreciate the
clarity, realism, and beautiful detail of the new plates. Additionally, Dennis was
invaluable in helping ensure the anatomic accuracy of each drawing and a constant
encouragement in the long and arduous revision process.
A Jarger variety of approaches to the long bones and joints are depicted in highly
 detailed and labeled drawings. allowing a choice of approaches to ft the clinical situation
 or personal preference of the surgeon. The largest increase in the number of approaches
is in the joints, refecting the increased importance of reconstructive joint surgery in
areas where leash laws have resulted in fewer fractures to roaming dogs. Other changes
have been made to make the book easier to use and more complete. The primary
indications are listed for each approach, and cross referencing ("Alternative/Combination
Approaches") allows easy comparison of approaches to the same area or the combination
of approaches to treat multiple injuries. Each approach has one plate number, no matter
how many parts, and thus can be referenced by thc platc number rather than by page.
All the approaches except those for the lower limbs have been drawn using the left limb
in order to simplify the use of Miller's Anatomy of the Dog (Evans HE, Christensen GC,
 2nd ed. Philadelphia, W. B. Saunders Co., 1979). The right side was used for approaches
to the lower limbs in deference to the preponderance of lower limb injuries to the racing
Greyhound.
vii
vii · Preface
Section I has been expanded and revised to refect current practice. This section suggests
and illustrates standard surgical instruments useful for performing open approaches to
the bones and joints in small animals. Also covered are recommendations for aseptic
technique as it applies to orthopedic procedures, and many suggestions are made for
appropriate draping procedures. Ancillary procedures such as osteotomies and lenoto-
mies that are a routine part of many approaches are covered here so that they do not
have to be included in the description of each approach. Also included is a brief
illustrated review of surgical principles involved in the typical approach and a short
section on musculoskeletal anatomy.
 Anatormic nomenclature has been revised to refect current Nomina Anatomica Veteri-
 naria terminology and to be consistent with Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, cited above. 1
Veterinary Anatomy, Texas A&M University, for his most incisive and helpful critiques
in this area. At the same time I must add that in a few cases widely accepted and
understood surgical terms have been used where in my judgment they were more useful
than offcial names, and I bear responsibility for these excursions. In keeping with
previous editions, anatomically descriptive names have been used for each approach to
avoid use of eponyms, and in the face of increasing numbers of approaches to the same
area, some of the nanes used jin previous editions have been changed to allow inore
 precise description. Although an attempt was made to cite the original source for each
approach, in many cases this was not traceable, and for any onissions or errors I ask
your understanding.
Thanks are due to many people for their help and support, primarily to my wife Marcia,
and to Linda Mills, Editor, and the entire production staff of W. B. Saunders Company:
who were, as always, patient and helpful.
 DONALD L. PIERMATTE1, D.V.M., PH.D.
Fort Collins, Colorado
Contents
Section I · General Considerations, 1
Attributes of an Acceptable Approach to a Bone or Joint, 2
 Factors to Consider When Choosing an Approach, 2
Aseptic Technique, 3
 Surgical Principles, 14
Anatomy, 24
Section Il ■ The Head, 31
Approach to the Rostrai Shaft of the Mandible, 32
Approach to the Caudal Shaft and Ramus of the Mandible, 34
Approach to the Ramus of the Mandible, 36
Approach to the Temporomandibular Joint, 38
Approach to the Dorsolateral Surface of the Skull, 40
Approach to the Caudal Surface of the Skull, 42
Section Ill · The Vertebral Column, 45
Approach to Cervical Vertebrae 1 and 2 Through a Ventral lncision, 46
Approach to Cervical Vertebrae 1 and 2 Through a Dorsal lncision, 50
Approach to Cervical Vertebrae and Intervertebral Disks 2-7
Through a Ventral lncision, 54
Approach to the Midcervical Vertebrae Through a Dorsal Incision, 60
Approach to the Caudal Cervical and Cranial Thoracic Vertebrae
Through a Dorsal Incision, 64
 Approach to the Thoracolumbar Vertebrae Through a Dorsal lncision, 70
 Approach to the Thoracolumbar lntervertebral Disks Through a
 Dorsolateral Incision, 76
ix
X ■ Cantents
Approach to the Thoracolumbar Intervertebrai Disks Through a Lateral Incision, 80
Approach to Lumbar Vertebra 7 and the Sacrum Through a Dorsal Incision, 84
Approach to the Caudal Vertebrae Through a Dorsal Incision, 88
Section IV ■ The Scapula and Shoulder Joint, 91
Approach to the Body, Spine, and Acromion Process of the Scapula, 92
Approach to the Craniolateral Region of the Shoulder Joint, 94
Approach to the Craniolateral Region of the Shoulder Joint by Tenotomy of the
Infraspinatus Muscle, 98
Approach to the Caudolateral Region of the Shoulder Joint, 102
Approach to the Caudal Region of the Shouider Joint, 180
Approach to the Craniomedial Region of the Shoulder Joint, 114
Approach to the Cranial Region of the Shoulder Joint, 118
Section V ■ The Thoracic Limb, 122
Approach to the Proximal Shaft of the Humerus, 124
Approach to the Shaft of the Humerus Through a Craniolateral Incision, 128
Approach to the Shaft of the Humerus Through a Medial Incision, 132
Approach to the Distal Shaft of the Humerus Through a Craniolateral Incision, 138
Approach to the Distal Shaft and Supracondylar Region of the Humerus Through a
Medial Incision, 142
Approach to the Lateral Aspect of the Humeral Condyle and Epicondyle, 146
Approach to the Lateral Humeroulnar Part of the Elbow Joint, 150
Approach to the Supracondylar Region of the Humerus and the Caudal Humeroulnar
Part of the Elbow Joint, 154
Approach to the Humeroulnar Part of the Elbow Joint by Osteotomy
of the Tuber Olecrani, 158
Approach to the Elbow Joint by Osteotomy of the Proximal Ulnar Diaphysis, 164
Approach to the Head of the Radius and Lateral Parts of the Elbow Joint, 168
Approach to the Head of the Radius and Humeroradial Part of the Elbow Joint by
Osteotomy of the Lateral Humeral Epicondyle, 172
Approach to the Medial Humeral Epicondyle, 176
Approach to the Medial Aspect of the Humeral Condyle and the Medial Coronoid
Process of the Ulna by an Intermuscular Incision, 178
Approach to the Medial Aspect of the Humeral Condyle and Medial Coronoid Process
of the Ulna by Osteotomy of the Medial Humeral Epicondyle, 182
Approach to the Proximal Shaft and Trochlear Notch of the Ulna, 186
Approach to the Tuber Olecrani, 188
Approach to the Distal Shaft and Styloid Process of the Ulna, 190
Approach to the Head and Proximal Metaphysis of the Radius, 192
Approach to the Shaft of the Radius Through a Medial Incision, 196
Approach to the Shaft of the Radius Through a Lateral Incision, 200
Approach to the Distal Radius and Carpus Through a Dorsal Incision, 204
Approach to the Distal Radius and Carpus Through a Palmaromedial Incision, 206
Contents ■ xi
Approach to the Accessory Carpal Bone and Palmarolateral Carpal Joints, 210
Approaches to the Metacarpal Bones, 214
Approach to the Proximal Sesamoid Bones, 216
Approaches to the Phalanges and Interphalangeal Joints, 218
Section Vl ■ The Pelvis and Hip Joint, 221
Approach to the Wing of the lium and Dorsal Aspect of the Sacrum, 222
Approach to the Ilium Through a Lateral Incision, 224
Approach to the Ventral Aspect of the Sacrum, 228
Approach to the Craniodorsal Aspect of the Hip Joint Through a
Craniolateral Incision, 230
Approach to the Dorsal Aspect of the Hip Joint Through an Intergluteal Incision, 236
Approach to the Craniodorsal and Caudodorsal Aspects of the Hip Joint by Osteotomy
of the Greater Trochanter, 240
Approach.to the Craniodorsal and Caudodorsal Aspects of the Hip Joint by Tenotormy
of the Gluteal Muscles, 246
Approach to the Caudal Aspect of the Hip Joint and Body of the Ischium, 248
Approach to the Os Coxae, 252
Approach to the Ventral Aspect of the Hip Joint of the Rarmus of the Pubis, 254
Approach to the Pubis and Pelvic Symphysis, 258
Approach to the Ischium, 262
Section Vll ■ The Hindlimb, 264
Approach to the Greater Trochanter and Subtrochanteric Region of the Femur, 266
Approach to the Shaft of the Femur, 270
Approach to the Distal Femur and Stife Joint Through a Lateral Incision, 272
Approach to the Stife Joint Through a Lateral Ineision, 276
Approach to the Stife Joint Through a Medial Incision, 278
Approach to the Stife Joint with Bilateral Exposure, 282
Approach to the Distal Femur and Stife Joint by Osteotomy of the
Tibial Tuberosity, 286
Approach to the Lateral Collateral Ligament and Caudolateral Part of
the Stiffe Joint, 288
Approach to the Stife Joint by Osteotomy of the Origin of the
 Lateral Collateral Ligament, 290
Approach to the Medial Collateral Ligament and Caudomedial Part
of the Stiffe Joint,292
Approach to the Stiffe Joint by Osteotomy of the Origin of the
 Medial Collateral Ligament, 296
Approach to the Shaft of the Tibia, 298
Approach to the Lateral Malleolus and Talocrural Joint, 302
Approach to the Medial Malleolus and Talocrural Joint, 304
Approach to the Tarsocrural Joint by Osteotomy of the Medial Malleolus, 306
Approach to the Calcaneus, 308
ll  Contents
Approach to the Calcaneus and Plantar Aspects of the Tarsal Bones, 310
Approach to the Lateral Bones of the Tarsus, 312
Approach to the Medial Bones of the Tarsus, 314
Approach to the Proximal Sesamoid Bones, 314
Approaches to the Phalanges and Interphalangeal Joints, 314
Approach to the Metatarsal Bones, 316
References, 319
Index, 321
SECTION
General
Considerations
■ Attributes of an Acceptable Approach to a Bone or Joint
■ Factors to Consider when Choosing an Approach
■ Aseptic Technique
■ Surgical Principles
■ Anatomy
2  General Considerations
Attributes of an Acceptable Approach to a Bone or Joint
The bones and joints must be exposed in a manner that ensures the preservation of the
anatomic and physiologic functions of the area invaded. Major blood vessels, nerves,
ligaments, and tendons must be avoided or protected. Maximal use must be made of
muscle separation, with incision of muscies being avoided whenever possible. Transec-
tion of muscle bellies must be kept at an absolute minimum; tenotomy or osteotomy of
the muscles at their origin or insertion is much preferred. Skin incisions must be made
in such a manner that the vascular supply to the incisions is not impaired and so that
underlying implants such as bone plates do not create tension on the skin closure. No
pedicles or sharp angles should exist in the incision, because these points commonly
undergo avascular necrosis and produce excessive scar formation. A cosmetically
acceptable scar should be the goal when operating on pet animals.
 In general, the procedure should not add unnecessary trauma to that which the injured
area has already sustained. Although the incision may be longer, an adequately large
 a nsodxa s e  o sse sis hg a  'si a
smaller approach, the surgeon tends to exert excessive pressure when retracting muscles,
Factors to Consider When Choosing an Approach
THE AREA TO BE EXPOSED
The problem of choosing the best approach is easily solved in some instances. For
example, there is only one logical way to expose the midshaft of the femur (see the
Approach to the Shaft of the Femur, Plate 69), and therefore the decision is easily
made. Other areas do not lend themselves to such clear-cut answers. In some instances,
joint perhaps illustrates this best, there being many choices for exposure of this general
area. Ultimately, it rests with the surgeon to try all approaches and to adapt those
most suitable.
The exposure required for bone plating is generally more extensive than for bone.
pinning techniques. In this instance, it may be useful or necessary to combine two or
more of the approaches illustrated. This is discussed further in the section on "The Type
of Fracture or Luxation," below.
BREED, SIZE, AND CONFORMATION OF THE ANiMAL
The area of the hip may also be used to illustrate the relationship of the animal's
physique to thc problem. We are speaking here not only of the size, but also of the body
type and the degree of obesity of the patient. Chondrodystrophied breeds are a particular
challenge. The shapes and contours of many muscles in the limbs are distorted, and
close attention is required to ensure that you end up where you really want to be.
The obese patient is also a serious problem for the surgeon, for it is difficult to identify
muscles when their fascial sheaths are obscured by fat. The only help for this problerm
is to dissect fat off the deep fascia with the skin to allow better visualization of the
underlying muscles. A longer skin incision may be required to achieve adcquatc cxposure
at the level of the bones.
General Considerations3
THETYPE OF FRACTURE ORLUXATION
Multiple injuries will require multiple approaches or perhaps a combination of methods.
By scanning the approaches to various areas of a bone, one can easily note those which
lend themselves to combining. An cxample might be a combination of one of the
 procedures for the hip or pelvis with the Approach to the Shaft of the Femur (Plate 69).
 The most likely alternative/combination approaches are listed for each procedure.
ASSOCIATED SOFT-TISSUE DAMAGE OR INFECTION
When a choice of approaches exists, the extent and location of associated injuries can
through an existing skin wound or sinus tract. The purpose of this is to prevent the
transfer of infected or infective material to the bone and the surrounding deep structures.
The same reasoning is applied to open (compound) fractures of more than a few hours'
duration. When there is no alternative to approaching through such an area, the wound
must be meticulously debrided and lavaged. It is then prepared again for surgery and
redraped, and fresh gloves and instruments are used for the fracture repair.
Aseptic Technique
The keystone upon which success or failure of open bone and joint surgery rests is
meticulous devotion to the ritual of aseptic technique. True enough, gentle handling of
tissues and an anatomicaly sound approach are of utmost importance, but they go for
nought in the presence of wound infection or osteomyelitis. The incidence of these
sequelae can be reduced to less than 3% by attention to rigid asepsis and the proper
use of antibiotics. In clean cases, where no contamination or infection is suspected, a
large dose of a bactericidal antibiotic (e.g., cephalosporin, penicillin) is given intrave-
nously at the time of anesthesia and repeated in 90 minutes. No antibiotics are given
postoperatively. If contamination or infection is suspected, or if serious tissue damage
is noted during surgery, then antibiotics are continued several days postoperatively. It
must be understood that to be effective at the time of surgery, the antibiotic must be
given preoperatively with suffcient time to allow effective serum levels of the drug to
bepresent.
A detailed discussion of the methods of sterilization of packs, gowns, and other supplies
is beyond the scope of this book. In general, autoclaving at 250°F and 15-lb pressure
and with a contact time of 12 to 15 minutes is the most practical way of sterilizing
instruments and cloth materials such as drapes and gowns. Sterilizer indicators* that
undergo a color change when exposed to proper sterilization conditions should be used
in every pack. Total time in the autoclave is different from contact time; total time is
that which is suffcient for steam penetration of the largest pack for the minimum
contact time of 12 to 15 minutes. Sterilizer indicators are the only means of establishing
the correct total time. Ethylene oxide is also a very useful sterilization method, because
it allows sterilization of items that would be damaged by heat and therefore allows the
use of electric drills and other hardware store items in surgery.
Proper skin preparation, positioning, and draping of the patient are critical elements of
aseptic technique that are frequently neglected. For all procedures on limbs, including
*Steam-Clox, Aseptic-Thermo Indicator Co., North Hollywood, CA.
4GeneralConsiderations
the hip or shoulder region. a stockinette draping procedure is advised. Draping the
whole limb in sterile, double-thickness stockinette allows the limb to be handled by the
surgeon and manipulated in any way necessary. When reducing fractures, the need for
alignment of the total limb in all planes is obvious. When reducing luxations, the whole
limb can be used to supply additional leverage or torque to aid in reduction.
The limb is clipped circumferentially from the groin or axillary area with a #40 blade
and electric clippers, to some distance distal to the proposed skin incision. For approaches
to the hip or shoulder, the clipping extends proximally to the midline of the back. When
the approach is below the elbow or stife, the clipping usually starts just above the toes
toes or foot to form a stirrup from which the leg can be suspended. The remaining
unclipped area is covered with gauze or a rubber plastic glove and adhesive tape (Figure
1A and B).
The animal is next placed on the surgery table with the clipped leg uppermost and the
leg suspended by adhesive tape attached to the stirrup and to an infusion stand or a
hook in the ceiling (Figure 2). A 45- to 60-degree angle is adequate to allow skin
disinfection and draping.
Povidone iodine* ("organic iodine") or chlorhexidinet preparations have proven most
efficacious for disinfection of the patient's skin. Using sterile gauze sponges immersed
in surgical scrub preparation diluted 50% with water, the patient's skin is scrubbed.
starting in the area of the incision and working outward to the limits of the clipped
area. After 1 minute of scrubbing, the suds are wiped off with dry, sterile sponges.
Again, the wiping starts in the area of the incision and proceeds toward the periphery
*Betadine surgical scrub and Betadine antiseptic solution, Purdue-Frederick Co., Norwalk, CT.
+Nolvasan surgical scrub, Fort Dodge Laboratories, Fort Dodge. IO; Hibiclens skin cleanser, Stuart Pharma-
ceuticals, Wilmington, DE.
Figure 1
A. The unclipped portion of the
lower limb is covered with roller
gauze bandage or a rubber plas-
tic glove from the toes proxi-
mally to the clipped area.B.
Adhesivetape isused tomakea
stirrup and to cover the gauze
or glove.
B
General Considerations 5
Figure 2
 Suspension of the clipped limb
preparatorytoskindisinfection.
An infusion stand or a hook in
the ceiling is used. Adhesive
tape can be run directly to the
infusion stand from the tape
stirrup, but an elongated S-
shapedmetalrodisinterposed
between the ceiling and the foot.
of the clipped area. This cycle is repeated five times, and after the final rinse the whole
area is sprayed or wiped with 70%-80% isopropyl alcohol, which is allowed to stand
and dry on the skin. The same materials are also highly effective for the scrubbing of
the surgeon's hands.
The animal is now ready for draping, as soon as the surgeon or assistant is gowned and
gloved. Four sterile towels are frst placed around the leg at the groin or axillary region
(Figure 3). The circulating assistant now grasps the leg on the unprepped area and cuts
Figure 3
Pattern for laying towels around
the groin or axillary region.
6General Considerations
C
Figure4
A. The surgeon grasps the suspended foot through a sterile towel that has been folded and rolled. The
care to cover all of the unprepped area.Afer folding the towel over the toes,it is secured to the limb with
towel clamps. C. The surgeon grasps the foot through a sterile, double-thickness, rolled stockinette.
the suspending tape while holding the leg in position. The surgeon grasps the foot
through a sterile towel that has been partially rolled (Figure 4A), and then wraps the
towel around the unprepped area, while holding the limb up and away from the table.
The towel is folded over the toes and secured with towel clamps (Figure 4B). Now the
rolled stockinette is placed over the foot (Figure 4C) and unrolled down the leg, taking
care not to touch any unprepped areas in the process. When the stockinette meets the
towels, the two are joined together and attached to the skin with towel forceps (Figure
5A). A method for the hip or shoulder region is shown in Figure 5B and C. (The
stockinette is previously prepared and sterilized. Cut the stockinette twice as long as
the leg, using a suitable diameter for the thigh or brachium. Pull half the stockinettc
inside the other half and tie or tape the cut ends together to make an elongated bag.
Roll the uncut end toward the closed end as if rolling a stocking. Wrapping and
sterilizing complete the preparation.)
The leg can now be allowed to rest on the table, atop the sterile towels. If the towel
under the leg does not cover the table top, a fifth towel is added (Figure 6). The animal
and table are next covered with a large fenestrated drape with the stockinette-draped
limb protruding through the fenestration. The large drape is accordion-folded to allow
General Considerations  7
Figure5
A.Four towels are attached to the stockinette and
skin with towel forceps.B.When the stockinette must
Michel
clips
be rolled proximally to the midline over the hip or
shoulder region, the distal towel forceps are attached
to the medial half of the rolled stockinette, and the
lateral half of the roll is cut close to the forceps. C.
The lateral half of the rolled stockinette is rolled
proximally and clipped to skin and towels proximal
to the hip or shoulder. Michel skin clips can be used
to supplement the towel forceps.
Figure 6
When the four towels do not
cover the surgical table, a ffth
towel is used to allow the stock-
inetted limb to rest on the table
preparatory to final draping.
8General Considerations
Figure 7
A fenestrated and fan-folded
outer drape is positioned on the
stockinetted limb by the sur-
geon.
Figure 8
The left half of the fan-folded
drape has been spread and the
right half is positioned to com-
plete the draping procedure.
General Considerations9
Figure 9
Four large sheets. used in 8
manner similar to the initial
towels, can be used as an outer
drape.
easy opening (Figures 7 and 8). Alternative methods of applying the large drape are
available. Four large sheets can be placed around the limb as in Figure 9, or the split-
sheet method shown in Figure 10 can be used. The choice of cotton muslin drapes or of
impregnated paper materials is one of personal choice. In any case, the large drape
should adequately cover the table and the animal. For smaller dogs and cats. this means
a drape of 48 × 48 inches (120 x 120 cm) minimum, and for larger breeds, 48 × 72
inches(120x 180 cm)minimum.
The stockinette is cut over the proposed skin incision. After the skin is incised the cut
edges are folded under and are attached to the stockinette with 16-mm Michel skin
clips (Figure 11A) or by suturing (Figure 11B). Skin towels can be attached if preferred.
Adhesive plastic drapes* have some qualities that make them useful in certain situa-
tions, although their cost has somewhat limited their use in veterinary surgery. Because
they are both impervious to 1moisture and transparent, they are useful around areas
that are difficult to prepare, such as the feet and the perineal region, and where
visualization of a large area is essential during surgery, as in corrective osteotomies.
Unfortunately. these drapes do not adhere well to animal skin. even when it is well
clipped and scrubbed. Additional adhesivei must be sprayed on the skin to create good 
adhesion (Figure 12A), but even with this there is considerable loosening of the plastic 
from the skin if there is much movement of the area during surgery. When used with
a stockinette for limb draping, the stockinette is applied as usual, and then a rather
large hole is cut in it to expose a generous area of skin for adhesion of the drape.
Alternatively, the stockinette is unrolled only part way proximally and the plastic drape 
is used to cover the rest of the area proximally to the four towels. In the hip and
shoulder regions, the stockinette can be attached to the towels medially but not laterally.
leaving an open area laterally for the adhesive drape (Figure 12B).
Preparation and draping of the lower limbs present some special problems in aseptic
technique. If the surgery is to be in the area of the carpus or tarsus, the limb is clipped
*Barrier Sterile Surgical InciseDrapes,Surgikos Inc.,Arlington,TX.
+Vi Drape Adhesive. Deseret Medical Inc., Parke Davis & Co., Sandy, UT.
10 General Considerations
Drape
Drape1
B
Figure10
A. The split-sheet method for an outer drape.Drape 1 is split for a distance of 18 to 24 inches perpendicular
to the short end,and the limb is placed on topof one half of the sheet.B.Drape 2 is applied in a similar
manner so that an 18-to 24-inch overlap of the two sheets occurs.
GeneralConsiderations11
Figure11
A. A skin incision has been made after cutting the stockinette along the proposed line of incision. The
stockinette is then clipped to the skin with 16-mm Michel wound clips.B.The stockinette can be sutured in
place. Note that the suture is placed in the dermis, not the skin, and then through the rolled edge of the
stockinette.A taper-point needle ispreferred.
12· General Considerations
B
A
Figure12
Placing a transparent plastic adhesive drape. A. Sterile adhesive material is sprayed over the prepped area
in the region where the adhesive drape will be applied. B. After removing the paper backing. the adhesive
plastic drape is placed on the prepared skin and pressed in place to stick it to the skin. Stockinette will be
placed over the limb distal to the plastic drape.
distally to the proximal phalanges,and the toes are wrapped in adhesive tape to allow
 suspension of the limb for scrubbing. Because the toes are not prepped. they must be
covered intraoperatively in such a way as to prevent strike through of fuids and
 contamination of the surgical feld. As the technician cuts the suspending tape, the
surgeon supports the limb by grasping the foot through a sterile towel (Figure 13A)
 and then placing a stockinette on the limb as described above (Figure 13B). A sterile
 surgical glove is then used to cover the toes and part of the metacarpus (metatarsus)
(Figure 13C). The glove is secured to the foot with a wrapping of sterile elastic bandage
material.
 If the surgical feld extends into the midportion of the metacarpus (metatarsus), the
entire foot must be prepared, because there is no way to isolate the field from the rest
of the foot. Following clipping, the limb is suspended by a Backhaus towel forceps
clamped through a toenail (Figure 14). During scrubbing, particular attention should
be paid to the pads. because they are very difficult to cleanse adequately. A final prep
 of the pads with tincture of iodine is quite effective. The limb and foot are then covered
with stockinette as before, but there is now no need for the surgical glove. because the
entire foot is prepped. Adhesive plastic drapes can be substituted for stockinette quite
effectively, especially when the entire foot is not prepped, because they eliminate the
 need for placing the surgical glove to prevent strike through.
For incisions on the trunk, neck, and head, the draping technique is considerably
simplified. After skin preparation, the area of the incision is delineated by laying four
General Considerations · 13
A
C
Figure 13
Draping the foot when the region of the toes has not been prepped. A. The surgeon grasps the suspended foot
through a sterile towel. The suspending tape is cut close to the foot by the technician. B. The stockinette is
So as to cover the unprepped portion and is secured in place with sterile elastic bandage imaterial (Vetrap.
Animal Care Products, 3-M. St. Paul, MN). Bandage material, glove, and stockinette are incised over the
area of the skin incision.
14General Considerations
Figure14
When the entire foot is to be prepped. the foot is suspended with a Backhaus
towel forceps placed intoa toenail.
sterile towels around the area, which are then attached to the skin with towel forceps.
Thc large drape, similar in size to that described above, is simply placed over the area
and opened. Skin towels are clipped or sewn to the skin after the skin incision is
completed. When using disposahle paper drapes, it is often convenient to clip the drape
directly to the incised skin and thus dispense with skin towels.
It is a point worth stressing that adequate draping simplifes the workload of the
surgeon by eliminating the need to worry about where a hand or instrument may come
to rest in an unguarded moment. lf the drape is large enough, any area within a
reasonable distance from the incision is “safe." The longer the procedure, the more
important draping and all other aspects of asepsis become. Procedures lasting longer
than 1 hour are significantly more prone to wound infections than are shorter operations.
Surgical Principles
Assuming that aseptic technique is scrupulously practiced, the success or failure of an
open approach rests on the surgeon's skill in handling tissues atraumatically. Although
General Considerations  15
many of the methods herein described are well known to the experienced surgeon. it is
hoped that this review will be useful to the practicing surgeon, in addition to serving
as an introduction to this subject for the student.
INCISINGAND RETRACTINGSKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUSTISSUES
The skin and dermal fascia are incised cleanly and complctcly before an attempt is
made to pick up bleeding vessels. The incision will gape widely when the fascia is
completely cut. and subsequent eversion of the cut edges facilitates thc clamping of
bleeders. Meticulous hemostasis is necessary for optimal skin healing. The use of an
electrosurgical apparatus for coagulating smaller bleeders is invaluable as a time saver
and as a way of achieving a dry surgical feld. Regrettably, this technique is not often
enoughusedbyveterinary surgeons.
In most cases, suhcutaneous fat is incised on the same line as the skin. The fat is incised
down to the deep fascial layer, which lies directly on the muscles. It is usually necessary
to bluntly separate fat from fascia by the undermining technique shown in Figure 15.
This method allows the skin to be widelyretractedwithminimal interferencewith its
Figure15
Undermining skin and subcutaneous fascia and fat by using Mayo scissors and blunt dissection technique
I6General Considerations
Hohmann
Senn
Meyerding
Gelpi
retractor
retractor
laminectomy
self-retaining
retractor
retractor
Figure 16
blood supply and exposes the fascia to allow the visualization necessary for the proposed
fascialincision.
Hemostatic tcrushing) clamps should never be applied to the cut edges of the skin, and
even Allis forceps are best fastened to subcutaneous fascia to avoid possible trauma.
The use of retractors is highly encouraged as a means of avoiding tissue damage. Useful
examples of these are shown in Figure 16. The Gelpi self-retaining retractor is virtually
a third hand for the surgeon working alone. Hohmann and Meyerding laminectomy
retractors are particularly valuable in the region of the pelvis and hip joint. When
selecting rake-type retractors like the Volkman. Senn. or Mathieu, those with sharp
teeth are to be preferred over those with rounded teeth. The points on the latter tend
to slip more. resulting in more trauma than the sharp points produce.
Deep fascia may be loosely adherent to the musculature and may actually slide freely
over the muscles, as with the fascia lata, or it may be tightly adherent to the deep
structures and diffcult to separate from the muscle sheaths. The latter condition is
particularly true distal to the elbow and the stife joint.
A method of incising movable fascia to avoid damaging deep structures is depicted in
Figure 17. Tightly adherent fascia is incised with the scalpel. with care being taken to
make the incisions directly over muscle separations whenever possible. Fascia is rarely
retracted by itself, but is usually retracted with the muscles exposcd by the fascial
incision.
MUSCLESEPARATION,ELEVATION,ANDRETRACTION
Muscles are separated and elevated from the bone in order to obtain exposure of the
bone. The incision of muscles is avoided wherever possible, and tenotorny is held to a
General Considerations  17
Figure 17
Artery.vein.
Method of incising deep fascia.
and nerve
The muscle sheathis grasped
with forceps and lifted to elevate
the fascia from deeper strur-
tures.
Muscle
Bone
minimum. Nothing contributes more to an early return of function than the intelligent
and gentle handling of muscles.
Muscles are held against the bone by the deep fascia that surrounds the trunk and
limbs like a tube. When this fascia is incised, muscles are relatively free except at their
 origins and insertions. The space between muscles, called the intermuscular septum, is
 occupied by rather loose fascial tissue. Bellies of adjacent muscles rarely adhere to one
another. Therefore, to separate muscles after the incision of the deep fascia, it is
necessary to divide only the intermuscular septa. This is accomplished as shown in
Figure 18.
Once the muscles have been separated from one another. they must be elevated and
retracted. In some cases, muscles are easily elevated from underlying bone because
there are no extensive periosteal attachments in the area. As an example, the belies of
the vastus lateralis and vastus intermedius muscles are easily separated from the shaft
of the femur (see Approach to the Shaft of the Femur. Plate 69) by bluntly separating
the loose periosteal attachments of the muscular fascia in a manner similar to that
shown in Figure 18.
In areas where the muscle is more firmly adherent to the bone, it must be elevated in
a different manner. Subperiosteal elevation allows muscle to be freed from bone at its
origin or insertion without disturbing the muscle fibers. The periosteum is incised and
undermined with a periosteal elevator (Figure 19). A narrow, slightly curved, and sharp
elevator such as the Langenbeck or A.S.1.F. pattern works well. Because the periosteum
of the dog is rather thin and firmly attached in the area of muscular attachments, its
elevation is difficult in skeletally mature animals. In immature animals, the periosteum
18 General Considerations
Figure 18
Blunt dissection of an intermus.
cular septum.
Muscle
Bon
Periosteal
incisions
Periosteal
elevator
Figure 19
Subperiosteal elevation of a muscle.
General Considerations19
B
Figure 20
Elevation of muscle from bone in a mature animal. A. When the elevating instrument and the muscle fbers
form a “V” relative to each other. the muscle peels cleanly from the periosteum. B.When the elevating
instrument and muscle fibers form an “X" relative to each other. the muscle fbers are cut irregularly before
they peel away from the bone
 One form of muscular attachment to bone of interest is the Aeshy attachment. in which
 muscular fascia is attached to the periosteum over a large area, as is well illustrated
by the origin of the middle gluteal muscle on the iliac wing and crest. Fleshy attachments
 are elevated by the incision of the fascial connection with the periosteum. The periosteal
elevator, scalpel blade, or bone chisel is held almost fat against the bone and the
muscle is separated with a “shaving" action. It is important that this elevation be done
in the correct direction relative to the direction of the muscle fibers. The elevation
should proceed in the same direction as the fbers, because this allows muscle fibers to
be peeled off the periosteum of the mature dog with less fraying and tearing than does
elevation in the opposite direction (Figure 20). Such areas cannot be sutured back to
the bone. but will reattach by fibrosis if the primary tendinous origin or insertion is
left intact or sutured.
 In some cases. muscles are freed by incising their tendon or aponeurosis of origin or
insertion on the bone. This technique is called tenotomy. In some cases, suffcient stump
is left attached to the bone so that sutures can be placed to reunite the tendon (see Part
E of Plate 23, and Figure 21). Because in some cases the tendons may be too short for
 convenient suturing, they are sometimes cut close to the bone and reattached directly
to the bone with sutures (Figure 22). In other cases. the tendon or aponeurosis is severed
close to the bone and no attempt is made at suturing. The best example of this is the
elevation of the lumbar muscles from the lumbar vertebrae in the Approach to the
Thoracolumbar Vertebrae Through a Dorsal Incision (Plate 17). Finally, the bony
insertion of the tendon can be osteotomized to allow refection of the tendon and muscle
(see Plate 74). Osteotomies can be performed with power oscillating or reciprocating
 saws, hand saws, Gigli wire saws, or osteotomes. Although these bone fragments might
be reattached in many ways, some of the most useful are shown in Figures 23 and 24.
20 · General Considerations
Figure 21
Tendon and ligament suture patterns. A. Modified Bunnell-Mayer suture pattern used in a small
tendon cut close to the bone.B. Horizontal mattress suture pattern used in a large,flat tendon.
C.The locking-loop (Kessler) suture creates a very secure closure ofeither tendon or ligament.
D.The pulley suture is easy to place in small tendons (or ligaments)and has very good holding
rotated 120 degrees from 1 and 2 and are placed midway between the near and far positions.
Passes 5 and 6 are rotated 120 degrees from3 and 4 and are placed in the far-near pattern.
(After Berg RJ. and Egger EL: In vutro comparison of the three loop pulley and locking loop
suture patterns for repair of canine weightbearing tendons and coilateral ligaments. Vet Surg
15:107-110, 1986.)
Figure 22
A large tendon cut at its inser-
tion isreattachedwitha lock-
ing-loopsuturepassedthrough
holes drilled in the bont.
GeneralConsiderations.21
：
A
Figure23
Examples of two pins or Kirschner wires and tension band wire used to reattach osteotomized bone that is
subject to tension forces. A. Greater trochanter. B. Medial malleolus. C. Olecranon.
B
A
Figure24
 Other methods of securing osteotomized bone. A. A lag screw placed through the medial humeral condyle. No
screw threads cross the osteotomy line. B. Wire fixation of an osteotomized acromion process on the scapuiar
spine.
22  General Considerations
After the muscles have been elevated, they are retracted and held with muscle retractors.
The retractors shown in Figure 16 are quite adequate, although there are many other
types available. At least one self-retaining and one hand-held retractor are necessary
for adequate exposure. A person operating without an assistant could well use two self-
retaining retractors.
 In the course of separating and elevating muscles, many large blood vessels and major
 nerve trunks will be encountered in the fascial planes hetween muscles. These structures
must obviously be preserved at all cost. The anatomy of the area should be kept frmly
in mind or reviewed if necessary bcfore each procedure. See the section, "Anatomy,"
below for more discussion on this subject.
Whenever possible, the nerve or vessel is retracted with an adjoining muscle; this
technique takes advantage of the muscle as padding and also prevents undue stretching
of the nerve or vessel. On occasion, these structures must be retracted by themselves in
order to achieve adequate exposure of underlying structures. In such a case, the vessel
 or nerve is carefully freed from its enveloping fascia by blunt dissection. A mosquito
hemostat is very useful for this dissection, because its use avoids the accidental severing
 of structures that is possible with dissection scissors. When the vessel or nerve has been
sufficiently loosened, ya-inch Penrose tubing is passed around the structure and is then
 used to maintain traction. This practice is considerably less traumatic than retraction
with a metal instrument.
CLOSURE
 Suture materials have been dramatically improved in their handling qualities and
 performance in recent years. Catgut has been virtually replaced by synthetic absorbable
materials, and the monoflaments have emerged as the nonabsorbable materials of
choice. Selection of suture materials and patterns seems to be a highly personal matter
with surgeons, and one would have a difficult time arriving at a consensus, but the
following selections have served the author well.
Suture Material. Nonabsorbable. Any material that is to be buried must be sterilized
by steam or ethylene oxide. Chemical sterilization or dispensing from cassettes is not
reliable. Monofilament materials such as nylon and polypropylene have a lower infection
rate and less local reaction associated with them than do braided materials, and are
the choice for most applications where long-lasting strength is important and for skin
closure.
Absorbable. Two styles of synthetic materials are available. The first are the braided
materials characterized by polyglactin (Vicryl—-Ethicon) and polyglycolic acid (Dexon-
 Davis & Geck). They have pleasant handling qualities and a half-life of about 14 days
in situ, and they elicit less local reaction than does catgut. The second synthetic material
is polydioxanone (PDS-Ethicon), which is a monoflament material with an in situ
half-life of about 50 days. Although its handling qualities are not as good as those of
the braided materials, it is a very versatile suture that will maintain its strength long
enough for healing in almost. any situation. lt can therefore replace nonabsorbable
material in many cases and thereby decrease the infection rate associated with nonab-
sorbable materials, especially in the larger sizes.
Generat Considerations · 23
Joint Capsule. This tissue supports sutures well. Interrupted stitches are generally
used because of their reliability and safety. Suture material selection for joint capsule
closure is the subject of a wide variety of opinions. Some general rules are:
· When the closure can he made without tension and the capsule is not important in
stahilizing the joint, use continuous sutures of small gauge (2-0 to 4-0) absorhable
material or an interrupted pattern with nonabsorbable materials.
· If the capsule must he closed under tension or is being imbricated to add stability,
use interrupted sutures of nonabsorbable material in sizes 3-0 to 1. The choice of
material is not critical; however, monofilament materials such as nylon or polypro-
pylene are not as prone to becoming infected as are the braided materials. It is
important with any nonabsorbable material that the suture not penetrate the synovial
membrane in an area that would allow the suture to rub on articular cartilage. Such
imbrication, whereas the simple interrupted pattern allows edge-to-edge apposition.
Muscles. Sutures tend to cut and pull through this relatively soft tissue. A horizontal
mattress pattern offers the best resistance against heing pulled out should it be necessary
to sulure feshy portions of muscles. The external fascial sheath of the muscle is the
strongest part of muscle tissue and thus is most important in supporting sutures.
Tendons and Ligaments. Although tendons are dense and strong because of the
longitudinal and parallel arrangement of their fibers, most stitches tend to cut through
them. A selection of the most-used patterns is shown in Figure 21. Monofilament
material works best in these tissues, because it glides through tissue easily and allows
all slack to be removed from the pattern before tying.
Osteotomized bone with tendon or ligaments attached must be securely fixed in place
for rapid fracture healing to occur. Because of muscle pull, there is a tendency for these
bone fragments to be unstable and for delayed union to occur, with a resulting delay in
   s  s   o      
wire sutures can also be used in certain sltuations, as illustrated in Figure 24.
Deep Fascia. No special precautions need to be taken here, because this tissue holds
sutures well. Simple interrupted or simple running patterns work equally well. The use
of synthetic absorbable material combined with good knot-tying technique makes
Subculaneous Fascia and Dermal Fat. Proper closure of this layer is important for
two reasons: (l) the space created by incising and undermining the fat fills with serum
unless the space is obliterated, and (2) closure of the fascia can relieve most of the
tension on skin sutures. Simple interrupted or continuous patterns are used. The method
of placing the suture is illustrated in Figure 25.
Skin. Simple interrupted sutures are the usual choice in the closure of skin, although
many prefer one of the mattress patterns—either horizontal or vertical. Interrupted
stitches are preferred by most, although continuous intradermal closures using synthetic
absorbable sutures have worked well in the hands of the author.
24General Considerations
Derrmal
fascia
A
Muscle
B
Figure 25
Method of placing sutures in subcutis. A. Simple stitch engages dermal fascia, fat, and muscular or deep
fascia. B. When stitch is pulled tight. it apposes all subcutaneous uissues. eliminates dead space. and thereby
prevents the formation of serum pockets.
Anatomy
Plates 1 through 5 are included here to provide ready reference to the major muscles.
vessels, and nerves of the fore- and hindlimbs. These plates are not intended to substitute
for detailed study in a suitable anatomy text. For this, these books are highly
 recommended. although many others are suitable:
Evans HE. Christensen GC: Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: W. B.
Saunders Co., 1979.
Crouch JE: Text-Atlas of Cat Anatomy. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1969.
 An experienced surgeon who uses open approaches on a daily basis soon has the anatomy
of each one well in mind. but the surgeon who is exposed only occasionally to a given
area often will find difficulty in performing in it. A major problem for all. but more so
for the less experienced, is the distortion of normal anatomy due to trauma. Subcuta-
neous tissues and muscles become hemorrhagic and swollen, making identification
diffcult. In addition, points of origin and insertion of muscles and tendons are often
 displaced because of fractures. A good grasp of regional anatomy is absolutely essential
in these situations.
 Do not be apologetic about reviewing the anatomy of a region before surgery. Consider
it not an admission of ignorance, but instead the badge of a dedicated and conscientious
surgeon who has the welfare of the patient uppermost in mind.
Plate 1
Subcutaneous Musculature of the Canine Forequarter
Parotid salivary gland
Cleidocephalicusm.
cervicalpart
Deltoideus:
Acromialpart
Scapular part
Latissimus dorsi
Ext. jugular v.
Trapezius
Sternohyoideus
Sternocephalicus
Omotransversarius
Clavicular tendon
Cleidobrachialis
Superficial pectoral
Biceps brachll
Ext.
Cephalic v
abdominal
Deeppectoral
oblique
triceps brachii:
Medial muscles of-
the antebrachium
Longhead
(seePlate 3)
Lateralhead
Brachialis
Lateral muscles of
the antebrachium
(see Plate 2)
Note:
Thecutaneoustrunci
and platysma muscles
are not depictec
25
Deep Musculature of the Canine Thoracic Limb,
Lateral View
Supraspinatus
Infraspinatus
Acromionof
Subscapular a
scapular spine
Teres minor
Axillary n.
Caudal circumtlex
humeral a.
Cranial circumflex
Radial n.
humerala.
Mediann
Brachialis
Ulnar n.
Biceps brachii
Anconeus
Extensor carpi
fadialis
Common digital
Flexorcarpiulnaris.
extensor
ulnar head
Lateral digital
Ulnaris lateralis
Abductor pollicis
longus
Note:Allmusclesof the shoulder
girde,thedeltoideus.and
thetricepsbrachihave
beenremoved
26
Plate 3
Deep Musculature of the Canine Thoracic Limb,
Medial View
Attachment of
rhomboideus
Spinal nerves:
Attachmentof-
T1
serratusventralis
C8
C7
Subscapularis
C6
Teres major
Latissimusdorsi
Supraspinatus
Coracobrachialis
Tensor fasciae
antebrachii
Brachial a.
Triceps brachii:
Long head-
Biceps brachii
Medial head
Mediann
UInar n
Extensorcarpi
Flexor carpi
radialis
radialis.
ulnar head
Pronator teres
Superlicial
digital flexor
Cephalicv
Flexor carpi
radialis
Deep digital
flexor
Tendonof abductor
pollicis longus
27
Plate 4
Subcutaneous Musculature of the Canine Hindquarter
Longissimus
Middle gluteal
lliocostalis
dorst
Superficial
gluteal
Biceps femoris
Semitendinosus
Sartorius:
Cranial belly
Caudal belly
Vastus medials
Tensorfasciae latae
Fascia lata
Gracilis
Peroneuslongus
Semitendinosus
Gastrocnemius
Gastrocnemius
Deep digital flexor.
lateral par
Popliteus
Superficial digital
Deep digital flexor.
flexor
Lateral part 
Medial part
Cranial
Lateralsaphenousv
tibial
Long digital
extensor
Note:Cutaneous muscles
have been removed
28
Plate 5
Deep Musculature of the Canine Hindquarter
Deep gluteal
Piriformis
Sacrotuberous ligament (absent in cat)
Sciaticn
Trochanter major
Tendon of int. obturator
-Gemelli
Tuber ischium
Tensor fasciae
latae
Quadratusfemoris
Rectus temors
Adductor
Pectineus
Semimembranosus
Adductor
Semitendinosus
Vastus medials
Caudal cutaneoussuraln
Vastus lateralls
Tibial n.
Commonperoneain
Semitendinosus
Gastrocnemius
Gastrocnemius
Popliteus
-Deep digital flexor.
Superficial digital-
lateral part
flexor
Peroneus longus
Deep digital flexor:
Long digital extensor
Lateral part
Medial part
Superticial cigital
Abductordigiliquinti
Cranial tibial
Extensor
retinaculum
Proximal
Distal
Note:
Muscles removed on the lateral side include the middle ang
deep gluteals.tensor fasciae latae,and bicepstemoris.
Musclesremovedfromthemedial sideincludethesaronus
and gracilis.
29
SECTION
The Head
● Approach to the Rostral Shaft of the Mandible
■ Approach to the Caudal Shaft and Ramus of the Mandible
■ Approach to the Ramus of the Mandible
● Approach to the Temporomandibular Joint
● Approach to the Dorsolateral Surface of the Skull
● Approach to the Caudal Surface of the Skull
32The Head
Approach to the Rostral Shaft of the Mandible
Based on a Procedure of Rudy 32
INDICATION
 Open reduction of comminuted fractures of the mandible.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATIONAPPROACH
Plate 7
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The skin incision is made slightly lateral to the ventral midline of the mandible
from the level of the canine tooth to the level of the molar teeth.
The fat and very thin platysma muscle will he incised with the subcutaneous
fascia, and is then retracted with the fascia and skin.
B. Dorsal retraction of the platysma and skin exposes the shaft of the mandible.
Subperiosteal elevation of the mylohyoideus muscle can be used to increase the
exposure of the medial side of the bone.
CLOSURE
Elevated muscles are sutured to fascia on the surface of the mandible. The platysma
and subcutaneous fascia are closed in one layer.
The Head33
Plate 6
Approach to the Rostral Shaft of the Mandible
Geniohyoideus m.
Myelohyoideus m.
Shaft of
mandibie
Br.facial a. and v.
Digastricus m
Platysma m
Inferiorlabial
a.and v
34  The Head
Approach to the Caudal Shaft and Ramus of the Mandible
INDICATION
Open reduction of fractures in this region.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 6 and 8
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. With the dog in dorsal recumbency, the incision is centered on the ventral surface
of the mandible, extending from the angular process of the mandible cranially.
approximately one half the length of the mandible.
B. The platysma muscle is incised with the skin to reveal the superfcial portion of the
masseter muscle laterally and the digastricus muscle lying ventromedially over the
shaft of the mandible. An incision is made in the intermuscular septum between the
 masseter and the digastricus muscle. Lateral to this incision is the large facial vein
 and accompanying nerve trunks. The periosteal insertion of the digastricus muscle
 on the shaft of the mandible is incised and elevated.
C. Lateral retraction of the masseter and subperiosteal elevation of part of its insertion
in the masseteric fossa allow good exposure of the lateral side of the shaft and
ventral part of the ramus, and medial retraction of the digastricus and deeper lying
 mylohyoideus muscle gives exposure of the medial side of the shaft. The myelohyoi-
deus and rostral insertion of the masseter muscle both can be elevated for more
exposure of the ventral border of the mandible.
CLOSURE
The intermuscular septum between the digastricus and masseter muscles is closed, care
being taken not to impinge the facial vessels. Platysma muscle is included with
subcutaneous fascia in a separate layer.
The Head = 35
Plate 7
Approach to the Caudal Shaft
and Ramus of the Mandible
Shaft of
mandible
Myelohyoideus m
Periosteal
incision
Masseter m.
superficial
Platysma m.
portion
Ventral
buccal br.
of tacial n
Masseter m.
middle anddeep
portions,elevated
frommasseteric
Digastricus m.
fossa
elevatedfrom
mandible
Masseter m.
superficial
portion
C
36  The Head
Approach to the Ramus of the Mandible
INDICATION
Open reduction of fractures.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATIONAPPROACHES
Plates 7 and 9
DESCRIPTION.OF THEPROCEDURE
A. The skin incision starts dorsally over the temporomandibular joint and extends
rostrovcntrad to end over the mandibular shaft at the level of the last molar.
 B. The incision is deepened through subcutaneous tissue and platysma muscle. The
duct are identifed and preserved. An incision is made across the fbers of the
superficial layers of the masseter muscle, roughly paralleling the caudal border of
the mandible.
C. After cutting through the superfcial layer of the masseter muscle, the middle and
deep layers can be elevated from their insertion on the caudal and ventral parts of
the masseteric fossa. Careful dorsal dissection and retraction allow exposure of the
ramus to the level of the temporomandibular joint.
CLOSURE
The middle and deep layers of the masseter muscle fall back against the mandible when
the superficial layer incision is closed. Horizontal mattress sutures are placed in the
strong aponeurosis covering the superficial layer of the masseter muscle. Platysma
 muscle and skin are closed in separate layers.
The Head  37
Plate 8
Approach to the Ramus of the Mandible
Parotidduct
Parotid glana
IncisionIn
superficial
layerof
masseterm
Buccal brs.
facial n.:
Dorsal
Ventral
Platysmam
B
Superficial, middle.
and deeplayersof
themasseterm
Massetericlossa
of the mandible
38 The Head
Approach to the Temporomandibular Joint
INDICATIONS
1. Open reduction of luxations.
 2. Open reduction of fractures.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACH
Plate 8
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The skin incision follows the ventral border of the zygomatic arch and crosses the
temporomandibular joint caudally.
B. The platysma muscle, directly under the skin, is incised on the same line. A
 periosteal incision is made along the origin of the masseter muscle on the zygomatic
arch.
C. Subperiosteal elevation of the masseter muscle exposes the joint. The mandibular
capsule.
CLOSURE
The masseter muscle is sutured to fascia on the dorsal edge of the zygomatic arch.
Platysma and skin are closed in separate layers.
The Head · 39
Plate 9
Approach to the Temporomandibular Joint
Superlicialtemporal
a. and v.
Palpebral n.
Zygomaticarch
Dorsal buccal br
of facial n.
Incision
crossedby
smallnerveto
tactile hairs
Maxillary
a.and v
Parotid duct
Palpebral n
Zygomatic
Platysma m
arch
Incision in
Joint capsule
muscle
incised
uibuo
Masseter m
Dorsal br.
offacial n
Masseter m
Platysmam
Condyle of
mandible
C
40  The Head
Approach to the Dorsolateral Surface of the Skull
Based on a Procedure of Hoeriein, Few, and Petty 14
INDICATIONS
1. Open reduction of fractures of the frontal and parietal bones and the dorsal parts of
the sphenoid and temporal bones.
 2. Exposure of cerebral hemispheres.
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The midline skin incision extends from the external occipital protuberance to the
level of the eyes. Alternate incisions are also shown and are superior for reaching
the more basilar area of the skull.
B. As the subcutaneous fascia is incised and retracted, three musclcs are immediately
encountered. Rostrally, these are the frontalis and interscutularis, the fbers of
which run transversely, and caudally, the occipitalis with its fibers running parallel
to the midline. These muscles are incised on the midline and retracted with the
skin.
C. The temporalis muscle is covered by a layer of dense fascia, which is incised on the
 lateral side of the sagittal and frontal crests. The incision is then deepened to include
the periosteum. One or both sides are incised, depending on the type of exposure
desired.
 D. The temporalis is elevated from the skull subperiosteally and retracted laterally.
For bilateral exposure, both muscles are elevated and retracted.
CLOSURE
 The temporal fascia is joined at the midline along the sagittal crest. Because the
incisions curve laterally to follow the frontal crests, the temporal fascia is sutured to
the loose fascia lying between the frontal crests. The frontalis, interscutularis, and
occipitalis muscles are closed on the midline.
The Head 41
 Plate 10
Approach to the Dorsolateral Surface of the Skull
External occipital
protuberance
Normal
Alternateincisions
IncISIon.
Incisions through
muscle fascia and
periosteum
Incision
Sagittal
Temporalis m
crest
Occipitalis
m.
Interscutularis
m.
Frontal
Frontalis m.
crest
B
Temporal
fossae
42TheHead
Approach to the Caudal Surface of the Skull
Based on a Procedure of Hoerlein, Few, and Petty14
INDICATIONS
1. Open reduction of fractures of the occipital bone.
 2. Exposure of the caudal portion of the cerebellum and the cranial portion of the brain
stem.
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The midline portion of the skin incision extends caudally from the external occipital
protuberance to the spinous process of the axis (C2). The transverse incision follows
the nuchal crest of the occiput and ends just short of the base of the ears.
 The subcutaneous fascia is incised in the same lines as the skin and is undermined
with thc skin to allow lateral retraction of each skin fap. The platysma muscle will
be incised and retracted with subcutaneous fascia.
B. The frst muscles seen upon retraction of the skin are the cervicoscutularis and
superficial cervicoauricularis. Originating on the exposed area of the cervical midline
and passing cranially toward the ears, these muscles resemble a chevron with the
point situated caudally. The muscles are incised on the midline and each muscle
belly allowed to retract. The temporal muscles, the external occipital protuberance.
and the dorsal cervical musclcs inserting on the occiput can now be visualized.
C. The splenius capitis and rhomboideus muscles are transected close to their origin
on the nuchal line of the occiput. The use of electrocautery for this cutting is very
helpful in minimizing hemorrhage. Enough tissue is left on the occiput to allow
resuturing of the muscles. The midline incision runs from the external occipital
protuberance to the spinous process of the axis (C2).
D. Muscle elevation continues laterally and ventrally to expose the occipital bone, the
foramen magnum, and the dorsal arch of the atlas (C1).
CLOSURE
 The cervical muscles are attached to the occiput by using mattress sutures that engage
the fibrous muscle insertions remaining on the bone. The external sheath of the temporal
muscles may also be used to securely anchor these sutures.
COMMENTS
The caudal brain stem and cranial spinal cord may be exposed by elevating the muscles
from the atlas and performing a dorsal laminectomy on this vertebra.
The Head43
Plate 11
Approach to the Caudal Surface of the Skull
Occipitalis m
External
occipital
protuberance
Cervicoscutularis
m
Cervicoauricularis
superlicialism
Dorsal arch
Foramen
of allas (C1)
magnum
Splenius
capitis and
Temporalism
rhomboideus
Occipital
mm.
bone
Nuchalcrest
suas
capitis m
C
Spinous process
Rhomboideus
D
of axis (C2)
m
SECTION
The Vertebral
Column
■ Approach to Cervical Vertebrae 1 and 2 Through a Ventral Incision
■ Approach to Cervical Vertebrae 1 and 2 Through a Dorsal incision
■Approach to Cervical Vertebrae and Intervertebral Disks 2-7 Through
a Ventral Incision
■ Approach to the Midcervical Vertebrae Through a Dorsal Incision
■ Approach to the Caudal Cervical and Cranial Thoracic Vertebrae
Through a Dorsal Incision
 Approach to the Thoracolumbar Vertebrae Through a Dorsal Incision
■ Approach to the Thoracolumbar Intervertebral Disks Through a
Dorsolateral Incision
■ Approach to the Thoracolumbar Intervertebral Disks Through a Lateral
Incision
■ Approach to Lumbar Vertebra 7 and the Sacrum Through a Dorsal
Incision
■ Approach to the Caudal Vertebrae Through a Dorsal Incision
46  The Vertebral Column
Approach to Cervical Vertebrae 1 and 2 Through a Ventral
Incision
Based on a procedure of Sorjonen and Shires 38
INDICATIONS
1. Treatment of fractures of the ventral aspect of cervical vertebrae 1 and 2.
2. Arthrodesis of C1-C2 articulation for atlantoaxial instability.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACH
Plate 14
DESCRIPTION OF THEPROCEDURE
A. The animal is placed in the supine position with a sandbag under the neck to cause
 marked exlension of the cranial cervical vertebrae. Placing the animal in a V-trough
will elevate the shoulder region and increase the extension of the cervical spine.
The skin incision begins on the midline between the angles of the mandible and
ends in the midcervical region.
 B. The incision is deepened through the subcutis and between the paired bellies of the
sternohyoideus muscles to expose the trachea.
C. Retraction of the sternohyoideus muscles exposes the larynx and its muscles. The
right sternothyroideus muscle is isolated and detached from its insertion on the
thyroid process of the larynx. The thyroid gland should be protected during this
dissection.
TheVertebral Column47
Plate 12
Approach to Cervical Vertebrae 1 and 2
Through a Ventral Incision
Wing of
atlas (C1)
Cricothyroideus m
Sternohyoideusm
C2
Thyroid
cartilage
B
Trachea
Thyroid
cartilage
Thyroid gland
Trachea
Cricothyroideus m.
C2
Wing of atlas
(C1)
48  The Vertebral Column
Approach to Cervical Vertebrae 1 and 2 Through a Ventral
Incision continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE cOntinued
D. Retraction of the larynx and trachea to the left side (medially) is preceded by
ligation or cautery of several small vessels running between the carotid artery/
internal jugular vein and the thyroid gland or trachea. The recurrent laryngeal
nerve must be protected during this dissection and retraction. Muscle retraction to
the right side (laterally) also includes the carotid artery, the internal jugular vein,
and the vagosympathetic trunk. The longus colli muscles are now exposed. The
ventral tubercle of C1 is Jocated by palpation, and the longus colli muscle fibers are
transected close to the tubercle.
E. Elevation of muscle fbers from the ventral arch of C1 and the body of C2 proceeds
 laterally until the articulations are exposed.
CLOSURE
Neither the deep fascia in the region of the trachea nor the longus colli muscles are
sutured. The sternothyroideus muscle is reattached to the thyroid process by sutures,
and the sternohyoideus muscles and subcutis are closed on the midline in layers.
The Vertebral Column49
Plate 12
Approach to Cervical Vertebrae 1 and 2
Through a Ventral Incision continued
Sternothyroideusm
Cricothyroideusm
Thyrohyoideusm
Incisior
Longus
capitis m
Carotid a. and
int. jugular v
Longus colli m.
Thyroidgland
C1-C2
Longus coll m
articulation
Ventral
tubercle,C1
Dens.
C2
50  The Vertebral Column
Approach to Cervical Vertebrae 1 and 2 Through a Dorsal
Incision
Based on a Procedure of Funkquist11
INDICATIONS
1. Open reduction of atlantoaxial luxation.
 2. Open reduction of fractures of vertebrae C1 and C2.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATIONAPPROACHES
 Plates 15 and 16
DESCRIPTION OF THEPROCEDURE
A. The skin incision is made on the dorsal midline starting at the level of the occipital
 protuberance, extending caudally to the level of the third or fourth cervical vertebra.
 B. Skin is undermined and retracted and subcutaneous fascia incised on the midline to
expose the occipitalis, cervicoscutularis, and cervicoauricularis superficialis muscles.
Caudal and lateral to these muscles are the thin fbers of the platysma muscle.
These muscles are incised on the midline fibrous raphe to allow elevation and lateral
retraction of these muscles.
The Vertebral Column51
Plate 13
Approach to Cervical Vertebrae 1 and 2
Through a Dorsal lncision
External occipital
protuberance
Incisionin midline
Occipitalis m
fibrousraphe
Platysmam
Cervicoscutularis
and cervicoauricularis
superficialis mm.
Cutaneous branch
spinal nerveC3
52 The Vertebral Column
Approach to Cervical Vertebrae 1 and 2 Through a Dorsal
Incision continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE continued
C. Deepening the midline incision wil allow separation of the paired bellics of the
biventer cervicis superfcially and the deeper rectus capitis attached to the dorsal
spine of C2. The insertion of the rectus capitis muscle is incised along the lateral
 border of the spine of C2 to allow its elevation from the bone by combined sharp and
blunt dissection.
D. As the dissection is carried deeper onto the lamina of C2, care should be taken to
 avoid the vertebral artery, which courses through the muscles slightly ventrolateral
to the articular processes. The interarcuate (yellow) ligament covering the forarnina
between C1 and C2 is carefully incised to expose the spinal cord and the root of
spinal nerve C1. The interarcuate of the foramen magnum may also be incised to
expose the cranial rim of the dorsal arch of C1.
CLOSURE
Each muscle layer is closed on the midline to its opposite member.
COMMENTS
This exposure may be done bilaterally, using the same technique, where exposure of
the entire dorsal aspect of the vertebrae is desirable.
The Vertebrat Column53
Plate 13
Approach to Cervical Vertebrae 1 and 2
Through a Dorsal Incision contimued
Biventer cervicis m
Cervicoscutularis and
cervicoauricularis
Rectus capitis m
superficialis mm
retracted
Periostealincision
on spinous process
of axis (C2)
Spinal n. C2
Dorsal arch ot
Spinous process of
atlas(C1)
axis(C2)
Elevatedrectus
capitis m.
Allanto-occipital
membrane incised
over foramer
magnum
Interarcuate (yellow)
lig. incised at C1--C2
foramen
D
54  The Vertebral Column
Approach to Cervical Vertebrae and Intervertebral Disks 2-7
Through a Ventral Incision
Based on a Procedure of Olsson26
INDICATION
Fenestration and curettage of intervertebral disks C2-C7.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATIONAPPROACH
Plate 12
DESCRIPTION OF THEPROCEDURE
A. The animal. with tracheal catheter in place, is secured in the supine position. A
sandbag is placed under the neck to cause definite extension of the cervical vertebral
column. It is often useful to elevate the body by positioning the animal's trunk in a
V-shaped trough, in order to gain more extension of the cervical spine. The skin
incision extends from the manubrium to the larynx.
B. The incision is deepened by midline separation of the paired bellies of the mastoid
part of the sternocephalicus muscle and underlying sternohyoideus muscle.
C. Lateral retraction of these muscles exposes the trachea. esophagus, deep cervical
fascia. carotid sheath, and internal jugular vein.
Plate 14
Approach to Cervical Vertebrae and Intervertebral
Disks 2-7 Through a Ventral Incision
Sternohyoideusm.
Trachea
Sternocephalicus m..
mastoidpart
Esophagus
Carotidsheath
Int. jugular v.
55
56  The Vertebral Column
Approach to Cervical Vertebrae and Intervertebral Disks 2--7
Through a Ventral Incision continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE continued
 D. Left lateral retraction of the trachea and esophagus allows blunt dissection close to
the trachea, taking care not to injure the recurrent laryngeal nerve, through the 
deep cervical fascia to the longus colli muscle, which covers the ventral surfaces of
the cervical vertebrae. The midline ventral crest of the vertebrae can be palpated
through this muscle. A short transverse incision is made through the longus colli
tendon of insertion just caudal to the crest.
E. Separation of longus colli muscle fbers overlying each ventral crest exposes the
disk.
The Vertebral Column 57
Plate 14
Approach to Cervical Vertebrae and Intervertebral
Disks 2-7 Through a Ventral Incision continued
Trachea
Esophagu
Incisioninorigin
of longus colli m
Caudal aspect
ventralcrestof
cervical vertebra
Clearingmusclefibers
from ventral surface
of dish
E
58  The Vertebral Column
Approach to Cervical Vertebrae and Intervertebral Disks 2-7
Through a Ventral Incision continued
F. By working caudally from the prominence, the tendon is gently scraped from the
bone until the ventral longitudinal ligament is exposed. The exact location of the
intervertebral space can be identified by cxploration with a 22-gauge needle, which
is walked off the crest caudally until it penetrates the ventral longitudinal ligament
 and the annulus fibrosus of the disk.
G. Fenestration is accomplished by a stab incision through the ventral longitudinal
ligament and the annulus fbrosus. This opening into the disk may have to be
enlarged for disk cureltage.
CLOSURE
The deep fascia is not sutured. The sternohyoideus and mastoid part of the stermoce.
phalicus muscle are closed along the midline, and the subcutaneous fascia is likewise
united.
COMMENTS
Care must be used in the retraction of tissues to avoid damage to the carotid sheath,
the esophagus and trachea, and the right recurrent laryngeal nerve, which lies on the
right dorsolateral aspect of the trachea. The location of a specifc intervertebral space
is determined by first identifying the caudal borders of the wings of the atlas by
palpation. The ventral midline crest that lies on a line directly between the wings is
the ventral tubercle of the atlas (C1). Other vertebrae can then be numbered by counting
caudally from C1. Alternatively, the large transverse processes of C6 are easily palpated.
 The C5-C6 disk is between and slightly cranial to the cranial edges of the processes.
The Vertebral Column·59
Plate 14
Approach to Cervical Vertebrae and Intervertebral
Disks 2-7 Through a Ventral Incision continued
Intervertebral
disk
Caudai aspect.
ventral crest
Fenestration of disk
with#14blade
Caudal aspect.
ventral crest of
cervicalvertebra
Transverseprocess
60 ~ The Vertebral Column
Approach to the Midcervical Vertebrae Through a Dorsal
incision
Based on a Procedure of Funkquistl1
INDICATIONS
 1. Open reduction of fractures and luxations of vertebrae C2-C5.
2. Dorsal laminectomy of vertebrae C2-C5.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 13 and 16
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
 A. The animal is positioned in sternal recumbency, with a sandbag placed under the
neck to elevate it and to cause fexion of the cervical spine: A tracheal catheter is
imperative to maintain a patent airway in this position.
 The midline skin incision extends from the external occipital protuberance to the
first thoracic vertebra.
 B. As the subcutaneous fascia is incised and the skin margins retracted, the almost
transparent fibrous aponeurosis of the platysma muscle comes into view.
An incision is now made through the median fibrous raphe. This incision is
deepened until the nuchal ligament (missing in the cat) is exposed.
The Vertebral Column · 61
Plate 15
Approach to the Midcervical Vertebrae
Through a Dorsal lncision
A
Superficial br.
Cleidocephalicus m.,
cervical spinal n.
cervical part. deep
to platysma m.
Platysma m
Incisionin dorsal
tendinousraphe
Cervicoauriculars
superficialism
62  The Vertebral Column
Approach to the Midcervical Vertebrae Through a Dorsal
Incision continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE continued
C. The dorsolateral cervical muscles separated by this incision are retracted laterally
to expose the nuchal ligament. The spinous processes can now be palpated under
theligament.
An incision is made in the rectus capitis, spinalis et semispinalis cervicis. and
multifidus muscles along one side of the nuchal ligament. The incision is deepened
along the lateral side of the spinous processes to the vertebral laminae.
D. Elevation with a periosteal elevator and retraction of the muscles from the vertebrae
are done frst on the side that was incised. The insertion of the nuchal ligament is
now elevated from the spinous process of the axis, and the ligament is retracted
with the muscles on the side opposite the incision. The ligament reinains frmly
 attached to the muscles of one side and cranially to the axis.
Lateral elevation of muscles from the laminae should be limited to the lateral
aspect of the articular processes in order to avoid branches of the vertebral artery
coursing ventrolaterally to the processes.
CLOSURE
The nuchal ligament is secured to the axis by two sutures of nonabsorbable material.
These sutures are passed through holes drilled transversely through the spinous process
of the axis.
The external fascia of the deep muscles can now be sutured to the nuchal ligament. The
median fibrous raphe is closed next, followed by the subcutaneous fascia.
COMMENTS
 lf the spinous process of the axis has been removed in the course of laminectomy. the
nuchal ligament is secured to the rectus capitis muscle by mattress sutures that bite
deeply into thismuscle.
The Vertebral Column ● 63
Plate 15
Approach to the Midcervical Vertebrae
Through a Dorsal Incision continued
Nuchal ligament
Semispinalis capitis m.
Biventer
Hectus capitis
Complexus
dorsalismajor m.
Incision
Spinalis et semispinalls
cervicis m
Spinous process of
Multitiduscervicis
axis (C2)
Nuchal ligament
Spinous process
of axis (C2)
D
64 ● The Vertebral Column
Approach to the Caudal Cervical and Cranial Thoracic
Vertebrae Through a Dorsal Incision
Based on a Procedure of Parker29
INDICATIONS
 1. Dorsal laminectomy for decompression of the spinal cord for ruptured intervertebral
disk or vertebral fractures of C5 through T3.
 2. Resection of tumors of the spinal cord or vertebral lamina and dorsal spines of C5
through T3.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATIONAPPROACHES
Plates 13, 15, and 17
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. With the animal in sternal recumbency, the forelegs are crossed under the chest
and tied to the opposite sides of the table. Sandbags are useful to prevent shifling
of position and to position the head, which can lie on the table. A skin incision is
made on the dorsal midline from the midcervical to the cranial thoracic region,
approximately C4 to T6.
B. The dorsal midline tendinous raphe is seen after incision of subeutaneous tissues on
the midline. At this point a decision must be made as to which side of the midline
will be chosen for the dissection. This may be dictated by pathology present or may
be the choice of the surgeon. An incision is made in the tendinous raphe slightly
toward the side selected (right side is illustrated).
The Vertebral Column65
Plate 16
Approach to the Caudal Cervical and Cranial Thoracic
Vertebrae Through a Dorsal Incision
on in dorsal
lendinousraphe
Trapezius m.
cervical par!
Trapeziusm.
thoracic par
66  The Vertebral Column
Approach to the Caudal Cervical and Cranial Thoracic
Vertebrae Through a Dorsal Incision continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE cOntinued
C. Trapezius and rhomboideus muscles can be retracted to reveal the medial surface of 
the subscapularis muscle, the splenius muscle cranially, and the serratus dorsalis
muscle caudally. The right scapula can now be rctracted latcrally. Incisions are now
made in the origin of the splenius and the serratus dorsalis muscles on the tendinous 
raphe. A portion of the cranial serratus muscle may originate from fascia of the
splenius.
The Vertebral Column 67
Plate 16
Approach to the Caudal Cervical and Cranial Thoracic
Vertebrae Through a Dorsal Incision continued
Rhomboiceusm.
Scapula
Serralus
dorsalis m.
SpinousprocessT1
68  The Vertebral Column
Approach to the Caudal Cervical and Cranial Thoracic
Vertebrae Through a Dorsal Incision continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE continued
 D. Lateral retraction of the splenius and serratus dorsalis muscles exposes the nuchal
ligament, the dorsal thoracic spines, and the underlying long spinal muscles. These
muscles, the longissimus thoracis et Jumborum, the spinalis et scmispinalis thoracis,
and the spinalis cervicis, are separated from the midline by a combination of sharp
and blunt dissection. As this dissection proceeds ventrally along the latcral surfaces
of the dorsal vertebral spines, the dorsal laminae of the vertebrae will come into
view.
E. Continued dissection of the long spinal muscles and the multifdus muscle will
completely expose the dorsal laminae and pedicles of the vertebrae. The surgeon
must be aware of the danger of incising or tearing the vertebral artery ventral to
the articular processes. This artery can be damaged when elevating muscle bellies
from C7 and T1. Once torn, ligation is difficult and pressure must be used for
hemostasis. The large interarcuate space between C7 and T1 can be palpated and
it an ideal starting point for dorsal laminectomy, as does the space between C6--C7.
CLOSURE
All muscle bellies are attached to the midline tendinous raphe or nuchal ligament in
layers. The considerable subcutaneous tissues merit special care in closure to prevent
seroma formation.
COMMENTS
In order to perform a dorsal laminectomy, the dorsal spines of the affected vertebrae
must be removed. This creates some apparent diffculty with the thoracic vertebrae,
because the nuchal ligament originates on the spines of Tl-T3. These spines can,
however, be cut with no ill effects, because the nuchal ligament is somewhat continuous
with the supraspinous ligament. This gives the effect of lengthening the nuchal
ligament's origin caudal to the dorsal spine of T3.
The Vertebral Column -69
Plate 16
Approach to the Caudal Cervical and Cranial Thoracic
Vertebrae Through a Dorsal Incision continued
Spinous
process T1
Spinalis
cervicis m
Longissimus
thoraciset
lumborum m.
Nuchal
ligament
Spinalis et
semispinalis
D
thoracis m.
Longissimus.semispinalis.
1st rib
andmultidusmm.
retracted
Spinal process T1
Nuchal
ligament
Dorsal lamina
Yellowligament
E
of C7
incised (C7-T1)
70 ● The Vertebral Column
Approach to the Thoracolumbar Vertebrae Through a Dorsal
Incision
Based on a Procedure of Redding31
INDICATIONS
1. Open reduction of fractures and luxations of the vertebrae.
2. Dorsal laminectomy and hemilaminectomy.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 16, 18, and 20
EXPLANATORY NOTE
The exposure for hemilaminectomy is unilateral and is illustrated and described in
 A-E below. For laminectomy, a bilateral exposure is needed and is achieved by repeating
steps B--E on the contralateral side. The final results are illustrated in Part F.
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The length of the dorsal midline incision is determined by the number of vertebrae
that are to be exposed. In order to obtain sufficient muscle retraction, it is necessary
to extend the incision the length of two vertebrae cranial and caudal to the vertebra
in question. The incision shown here centers on Ll, extends from T12 to L3, and is
made 5 to 10 mm from the midline.
 B. Subcutaneous fat and fascia are incised until the dense lumbodorsal fascia is reached.
The fat is undermined to free it from the fascia and to allow its retraction with the
skin.
The fascia and supraspinous ligament are incised around each spinous process
and on the midline between each process. The incision js deepened to the laminae
to complete the midline muscle separation.
The Vertebral Column = 71
Plate 17
Approach to the Thoracolumbar Vertebrae
Through a Dorsal Incision
Incision in superficial and deep
external fasciae of the trunk
Spinousprocess
LI
T13
72TheVertebral Column
Approach to the Thoracolumbar Vertebrae Through a Dorsal
Incision continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE continued
C. The multifidus lumborum muscle is sharply elevated from each spinous process and
then bluntly elevated from the laminae laterally to the mamillary processes. This
is sufficient exposure for a dorsal laminectomy when done bilaterally. Elevation is
 most easily done from a caudal-to-cranial direction. See Part F.
D. For hemilaminectomy, the multifdus must be incised and freed from the mamillary
processes. The incision should be made directly on the bone to limit hemorrhage,
and the underlying dorsal nerve root and vessels must be protected.
The Vertebral Column = 73
Plate 17
Approach to the Thoracolumbar Vertebrae
Through a Dorsal Incision continued
Incision in muscle inserion on
spinousprocess
Longissimus m.
Multifiduslumborumm
Incision of multifidus m. on
mamillary process
74  The Vertebral Cotumn
Approach to the Thoracolumbar Vertebrae Through a Dorsal
Incision continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE contin ued
E. Lateral retraction of the muscles exposes the mamillary processes, nerve roots and
vessels, and the rib head or transverse processes.
F. The exposure as done for laminectomy. Compare to Part D.
CLOSURE
The lumbodorsal fascia is sutured at ihe dorsal midline. The subcutaneous fat and
fascia are closed with a second layer of sutures, followed by closure of the skin.
The Vertebral Column · 75
Plate 17
Approach to the Thoracolumbar Vertebrae
Through a Dorsal Incision continued
Dorsal br. spinal nerve and
vessels (L1-L2)
MamillaryprocessL2
13th rib
76  The Vertebral Column
Dorsolateral Incision
Based on a Procedure of Yturraspe and Lumb43
INDICATION
Fenestration and curettage of intervertebral disks T10 through L5.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACH
Plate 19
DESCRIPTION OF THEPROCEDURE
A. The dog is positioned in ventral recumbency with the hindlimbs flexed to maintain
the normal curvative of the spine. The skin incision is made slightly to the left side
of the midline for a right-handed surgeon. A left-handed surgeon should operate
from the dog's right side. The incision extends from the eighth thoracic to the
seventh lumbar vertebra.
B. Subcutaneous fat is elevated from the deep fascia of the trunk for a distance of 1.5
cm lateral to the dorsal spinous processes. This exposes the spinalis et semispinalis
muscle cranially and the superficial layer of the deep external fascia of the trunk
caudally. Both the deep and superficial layers of this fascia originate on the dorsal
spinous processes. Both layers of the fascia are incised 5 to 10 mm from the dorsal
spines in the midlumbar area, and this incision is continued caudally to the limits
of the skin incision. As the fascial incision approaches the spinalis et semispinalis
muscle cranially, it is directed medially so that it ends only 1 to 2 mm lateral to the
spinous processes. A portion of this muscle must be incised in order to extend the
incision cranially over the ribs.
The Vertebral Column · 77
Plate 18
Approach to the Thoracolumbar Intervertebral Disks
ThroughaDorsolateral Incision
Incision in superficial and
deeplayersofexternal
fasciae ot the trunk
Spinalis et semispinalis m.
(deeptofascia)
78 ● The Vertebral Columh
Approach to the Thoracolumbar Intervertebral Disks Through a
Dorsolateral Incision continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE continued
C. The multifidus and longissimus muscles are separated by blunt dissection of the
intermuscular septum. This septum is the first distinct muscle division lateral to
the spinous processes and is most obvious in the midlumbar region. This separation
is done with sweeping strokes with dissection scissors partially opened and directed
in a craniomedial direction. Proceeding from caudal to cranial is advantageous
during this dissection.
D. As the dissection deepens, small tendons will be encountered, crossing the dissection
in a craniomedial direction, and they should be preserved. The tendons are attach-
ments of the longissimus muscle to the accessory processes of the vertebrae. In the
thoracic region, the tendon divides and attaches both to the rib and the accessory
process. The dorsal branches of the spinal nerves emerge just ventral to these
tendinous insertions, and the intervertebral disk space is located caudoventral to
the insertions.
E. Exposure of disks is best done with a small curved periosteal elevator. Using the
thirteenth rib as a landmark, the elevator is used to remove muscle and fascia
overlying each disk. The insertions of the longissimus tendons are used as landmarke
for locating the disk spaces, A nerve root retractor aliows the spinal nerves to be
retracted cranially and protected from the elevation and fenestrating instruments.
 T10-T11 is the most cranial disk accessible, and L5-L6 the most caudal.
CLOSURE
Both layers of the deep external fascia of the trunk are closed together. Subcutaneous
fat and fascia and skin are closed in separate layers.
The Vertebral Column = 79
Plate 18
Approach to the Thoracolumbar Intervertebral Disks
Through a Dorsolateral Incision continued
Spinalis et
Rotatores mm
Longissimus dorsi m
Multitidus 
semispinalis m.
Deep tascla
Superficialfascia
Intervertebraldisk
(T12-T13)
Nerveroot
retractor
Transverse
12th rib
process L1
13thrib
Inlercostal m
Dorsal br. spinal n.
and vessels(T13-L1)
Tendonsof longissimus
dorsi m.
80  The Vertebral Column
Approach to the Thoracolumbar Intervertebral Disks Through a
Lateral Incision
Based on Procedures of Flo and Brinker,1 and Seeman 33
INDICATION
Fenestration of thoracolumbar disks T10-L5.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATIONAPPROACH
Plate 18
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The skin incision is slightly oblique, extending from the base of rib 10 toward the
cranioventral iliac spine. The subcutaneous fat is usually quite thick here and is
incised on the skin line to reveal the superficial thoracolumbar fascia.
B. The superfcial thoracolumbar fascia is incised along the same line.
TheVertebral Column=81
Plate 19
Approach to the Thoracolumbar Intervertebral Disks
Through a Lateral Incision
Incisioninsuperficial
thoracolumbarfascia
82 ● The Vertebral Column
Approach to the Thoracolumbar Intervertebral Disks Through a
Lateral Incision continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE cOn tinued
C. The deep thoracolumbar fascia is incised to reveal a second layer of fat and tht
underlying muscles. The lateral processes can now be palpated quite easily. To
approach the thoracic spaces, it is necessary to transect some bundles of the serratus
dorsalis muscle.
 D. The thirteenth rib is a good place to start, because it allows counting cranially and
caudally to identify the other vertebrae. Blunt dissection and separation of the fibers
of the iliocostalis lumborum muscle allow the proximal end of the thirteenth rib to
be exposed. A periosteal elevator is used to clear soft tissues from the cranial border
of the rib and the lateral surface of the disk. Staying close to the cranial edge of the
rib and strong cranial retraction of the muscle will protect the spinal nerve and
vessel (see inset drawing). Care must be taken to prevent penetrating the thoracic
pleura when clearing the disk surface.
 The lumbar disks are exposed by blunt separation of muscle tissue over the end
of the appropriate lateral process. Confining the dissection and elevation to the
dorsal surface of the process will protect vessels running along the cranial and
caudal borders of the tip of the process. The elevation of muscle tissue is continued
approached, all elevation and retraction should be from a caudal-to-cranial direction
to protect the spinal vessel and nerve. A blood vessel will be seen crossing the
surface of the disk in the lower lumbar spaces, and it is usually lacerated during
the fenestration process.
CLOSURE
The superficial and deep layers of the thoracolumbar fascia are closed with a continuous
pattern and absorbable material. They can both be closed in one layer if the intervening
fat is not too thick. Subcutaneous and skin layers are closed routinely.
COMMENTS
The choice between this approach and the dorsolateral approach (Plate 18) is a matter
of personal choice. The exposure obtained is similar in both.
The Vertebral Column ● 83
Plate 19
Approach to the Thoracolumbar Intervertebral Disks
Through a Lateral Incision continued
13thrib
Spinous process L1
Longissimus lumborum m.
lliocostalis m.
Serratus dorsalis m.
Internal aboominal
oblique m.
Incision through deep
Transverse
thoracolumbar tascia
processL2
C
andmuscle
13thrib
Intervertebral
diskT12-T13
Orientation
Spinalnerves
andvessels
Incision for L1-L2
IncisionforT13-L1
D
84  The Vertebral Column
Approach to Lumbar Vertebra 7 and the Sacrum Through a
Dorsal Incision
INDICATIONS
1. Laminectomy of L7-S1.
 2. Open reduction of fractures of L7 or S1.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATIONAPPROACHES
Plates 17 and 21
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. A dorsal midline incision is made between the spine of the sixth lumbar vertebra
and the caudal median sacral crest. Subcutaneous fat and superficial fascia are
incised on the same line to expose the deep gluteal and caudal fasciae, which are
also incised on the midline and around each spinous process.
 B. The sacrocaudalis dorsal medialis muscles are freed from the spinous processes by
incising around each process, then along the midline between processes. Elevation
of the muscles is done with a sharp periosteal elevator, working from caudal to
cranial.
Plate 20
Approach to Lumbar Vertebra 7 and the Sacrum
Through a Dorsal Incision
Regionot
spinous process L6
Region of
mediansacralcrest
Multifidus m.
SpinousprocessL6
ncisionsinlumbosacral
ascia
SpinousprocessL7
Sacrocaudalis
dorsalis lat. m
Median sacral crest
Sacrocaudalis
dorsalis med. m
85
86  The Vertebral Column
Approach to Lumbar Vertebra 7 and the Sacrum Through a
Dorsal Incision continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE continued
C, D. Muscle elevation is continued laterally to the region of L6-L7 and L7--S1 articular
 processes cranially and to the intermediate sacral crests caudally. Just lateral to
the crests are the dorsal sacral foramina, through which pass the dorsal branches
 of the sacral nerves and vessels. The interarcuate (yellow) ligament between the
Jaminac of L7-S1 is incised to expose the cauda equina nerves.
CLOSURE
The gluteal and caudal fasciae are closed on the midline. Because of its considerahle
depth, the subcutaneous fat may need to be closed in two layers.
Plate 20
Approach to Lumbar Vertebra 7 and the Sacrum
Through a Dorsal Incision continued
Incision ininterarcuate
(yellow) lig
Region of intermediate
Mediansacraicrest
sacralcrests
Intermediate sacral
crests
Dorsal sacral
toramina
87
88  The Vertebral Colurmn
Approach to the Caudal Vertebrae Through a Dorsal Incision
INDICATIONS
1. Open reduction of fractures and luxations of the caudal vertebrae.
 2. Treatment of malunion fractures or congenital malformation of the vertebrae by
osteotomy.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATIONAPPROACH
Plate 20
DESCRIPTION OFTHE PROCEDURE
A. The skin and subcutaneous fascial incision is made along the dorsal midline of the
tail and extends the length of one vertebra proximal and distal to the vertebra to
be exposed.
 B. Undermining and retraction of the skin margins reveal the sacrocaudalis muscles
under a layer of deep caudal fascia. This fascia is incised on the midline between
the paired medial sacrocaudalis dorsalis muscles. The incision is continued into the
intermuscular septum, until the dorsal surfaces of the vertebrae are reached.
C. A combination of sharp and blunt dissection is used to elevate the muscles from the
vertebrae.
D. Only by working close to the bone during the muscular elevation can the dorsal
lateral caudal arteries and nerves be avoided.
CLOSURE
 Deep and subcutaneous fasciae are closed in one layer of sutures, followed by closure of
the skin.
COMMENTS
The tail should be bandaged to minimize movement as much as possible for 5 to 7 days
postoperatively.
The Vertebral Column · 89
Plate 21
Approach to the Caudal Vertebrae
Through a Dorsal Incision
Incision in deepcaudal
fascia
Sacrocaudalisdorsalis
med. m
at.m
Vertebralcanal
Dorsal lat
caudal a.
Transverse
process
Transverseprocess
process
Ventral caudal a.
Median caudal
C
D
SECTION
IV
The Scapula and
Shoulder Joint
● Approach to the Body, Spine, and Acromion Process of the Scapula
Approach to the Craniolateral Region of the Shoulder Joint
 Approach to the Craniolateral Region of the Shoulder Joint by
Tenotomy of the Infraspinatus Muscle
■ Approach to the Caudolateral Region of the Shoulder Joint
■ Approach to the Caudal Region of the Shoulder Joint
■ Approach to the Craniomedial Region of the Shoulder Joint
■ Approach to the Cranial Region of the Shoulder Joint
92  The Scapula and Shoulder Joint
Approach to the Body, Spine, and Acromion Process of the
Scapula
Based on a Procedure of Alexanderl
INDICATION
Open reduction of fraetures of the scapula.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 23 and 28
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The skin and subcutaneous fascial incision is made directly on the spine of the
scapula. The skin and fascia are retracted following the undermining of the edges
 of the incision. The length of the incision is adjusted to fit the area of interest in the
exposure.
B. An ineision is now made in the deep fascia along the spine of the scapula and is
deepened to free the origin of the scapular part of the deltoideus and the insertions
of the omotransversarius and trapezius museles. These muscles are freed and
retracted sufficiently to expose the spine and spinatus muscles.
C. The infraspinatus and supraspinatus muscles are elevated from the spine of the
scapula. The bellies of the muscles can then be bluntly undermined and retraeted
from the body of the scapula. Near the acromion, an incision can be made a short
distance into the septum between the acromial and scapular parts of the deltoideus
to allow retraction of the scapular part.
CLOSURE
A single row of sutures will suffice to close all the incised deep structures. The suture
line runs directly along the spine and includes the deep fascia and the omotransversar-
ius, trapezius, and deltoideus muscles. Subeutaneous tissues and skin are closed in
separate layers.
COMMENTS
Elevation of the infraspinatus muscle from the scapular spine is complicated by the
 presence of the metaeromion in the cat. This caudally prqjecting protuberance, located
on the spine 1 to 2 cm proximal to the acromion, overhangs the infraspinatus slightly,
The Scapula and Shoulder Joint · 93
Plate 22
Approach to the Body, Spine, and Acromion Process
of the Scapula
Trapezius m.
Incision on spine
otscapula
Omotransversariusm.
Scapular part
deltoideus m
Supraspinatus m
Suprascapular
a. and n.
A
Intraspinatus m
Acromionprocess
Long head. triceps m
Acromialpart.
deltoideus m.
C
94 = The Scapula and Shoulder Joint
Approach to the Craniolateral Region of the Shoulder Joint
INDICATIONS
1. Open reduction of fractures of the neck and glenoid cavity of the scapula
 2. Open reduction of luxations of the shoulder joint.
 3. Osteochondroplasty for osteochondritis of the humeral head.
4. Open reduction of fractures of the humcral hcad.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 22 and 28
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The curved incision begins at the middle of the scapula and follows the spine distally,
crossing the joint and continuing over the lateral surface of the humerus to the
midpoint of the shaft. The skin margins are undermined and retracted after the
subcutaneous fascia and fat are incised in the same line as the skin incision.
 B. An incision is made in the deep fascia, starting distally at the omobrachial vein and
centered over the belly of the acromial part of the deltoideus. It continues proximally
toward the acromial process, passing through the craniodistal insertion of the
encompasses the distal one third of the spine and is deepened both dorsal and ventral
to the spine to include the insertions of the omotransversarius and trapezius and
the origin of the scapular part of the deltoideus muscle. Take care not to incise the
underlying spinatus muscles.
C. The omotransversarius and trapezius are retracted craniodorsad. An incision is
made between the two parts of the deltoideus (shown in illustration A of the plate)
and is developed bluntly to allow freeing of the scapular part of the deltoideus and
its caudoventral retraction. Use care during this dissection to preserve as many as
possible of the muscular branches of the axillary nerve that will be found in this
area. The area of the acromion is cleared of adherent tissue to allow an osteotomy.
The Scapula and Shoulder Joint · 95
Plate 23
Approach to the Craniolateral Region
of the Shoulder Joint
Trapezius m.
Omotransversarius
m.
Fascial incisions
cranial and caudal
toscapular spine
Acromion
process
Deltoideus m.
scapular part
Incisionbetween
parts of deltoideusm.
deep to fascia
Deltoideus m.
acromialpart
Incisionin deep
brachial fascia
A
B
Intraspinatus m.
Supraspinatusm.
Scapular pan,
Line of osteolomy
deltoideus m.
ofacromionprocess
Long head.
triceps m.
Acromial par
deltoideus m.
Greater tubercle
of humerus
C
96  The Scapula and Shoulder Joint
Approach to the Craniolateral Region of the
Shoulder Joint continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE cOntinued
D. The acromion is osteotomized to include all the origin of the acromial part of the
deltoideus. Either an osteotome or a bone-cutting forceps can be used for the cut; in
either case, care must be used to protect the underlying suprascapular nerve. Some
surgeons prefer and some circumstances dictale tenotomy of the origin of the
deltoideus near the acromion (see "Comments" below). Protect the branches of the
axillary nerve entering the deep surface of the muscle as it is retracted distally.
E. The supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscles are bluntly elevaled from the spine
and body of the scapula sufficiently to allow their retraction as shown. Nole the
position of the suprascapular nerve and avoid this structure during the elevation
and retraction of the infraspinatus.
Exposure of the joint requires tenotomy of the infraspinatus muscle. This cut is
 made near the muscle's insertion on the humerus, with enough stump being left to
receive one or two sutures. In some cases it may be necessary to treat the teres
 minor muscle in a like manner, thus allowing grealer exposure of the ventrolateral
aspecl of the joint capsule.
CLOSURE
A modified Bunnell-Mayer or locking-loop suture (Fig. 21A, C), reinforced with one or
two rmattress sutures, is used to join the severed infraspinatus. The acromion is attached
lo the spine by two 20- to 22-gauge monofilament stainless steel sutures placed through
holes drilled in the bones. Several sutures are placed between the two parts of the
deltoideus muscle. A single tier of sutures may be used to close the remaining muscles
and deep fascia. Starting at the proximal end of the incision the stitch engages the deep
fascia, the trapezius, the scapular part of the deltoideus, and the deep fascia. This
pattern is continued distally, with the ormotransversarius replacing the trapezius as the
 acromion is approached. Distal to the acromion, the deep fascia alone is closed.
COMMENTS
Elevation of the infraspinatus muscle from the scapular spine is complicated by the
 presence of the metacromion in the cat. This caudally projecting protuberance, located
1 to 2 cm proximal to the acromion, overhangs the infraspinatus slightly, but it does
not actually alter the procedure.
In very young animals the acromion may not yet be ossified. In these cases, a tenotomy
 of the acromial part of the deltoideus is done close to the acromion. This is also probably
more satisfactory in small dogs and cats. Holes drilled in the acromion allow for
reattachment of the tendon.
The exposure provided here is generally much greater than is needed for osteochondritis
dissecans surgery. It is advised for this only when the surgeon has no assistant to
retract and position the limb, as is needed in the other recommended approaches.
The Scapula and Shoulder Joint · 97
Plate 23
Approach to the Craniolateral Region
of the Shoulder Joint continued
Suprascapular n
Axillary n. and caudal
circumflex humeral a.
and v.
Infraspinatus m
Triceps brachi m..
Longhead
Accessoryhead
Lateralhead
Osteotomizedacromion
process and acromial
part. deltoideus m.
Glenoid
Incisionin
joint capsule
Intraspinatus m.
Humeralhe
98 = The Scapula and Shoulder Joint
Approach to the Craniolateral Region of the Shoulder Joint by
Tenotomy of the Infraspinatus Muscle
Based on a Procedure of Hohni6
INDICATIONS
1. Osteochondroplasty of humeral head for osteochondritis dissecans.
 2. Tenolomy for contracture of the infraspinatus muscle.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 23 and 25
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. A curved incision begins at the distal one third of the scapular spine and folows
the spine distally, crossing the joint and continuing over the craniolateral surface
of the humerus to the midshaft region. Skin margins are undermined and retracted
after the subcutaneous fat and fascia are incised in the same line as the skin.
B. Deep fascia is incised, beginning at the acromion and continuing distally over the
cranial border of the acromial part of the deltoideus. This incision is continued to
the insertion of the acromial part of the deltoideus on the humerus.
C. The belly of the acromial part of the deltoideus is retracted to allow tenotomy of the
infraspinatus tendon 5 mm from its humeral insertion. Elevation of a portion of the
insertion of the deltoideus may be necessary to obtain adequate retraction of this
muscle.
The Scapula and Shoulder Joint·99
Plate 24
Approach to the Craniolateral Region of the Shoulder
Joint by Tenotomy of the Infraspinatus Muscle
Incisionindeep
brachalfascia
Deltoideus m.
Scapularpar!
Acromial part
Acromionprocess
Supraspinatus n
Intraspinatus m
Deltoideus m
acromial part
Tenotomy
Tricepsbrachii mi
laleralhead
Teres minor m
100The Scapuia and Shoulder Joint
Approach to the Craniolateral Region of the Shoulder Joint by
Tenotomy of the Infraspinatus Muscle continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE cOntinued
 D. Retraction of the infraspinatus tendon and acromial part of the deltoideus will allow
Additional exposure can bc obtaincd by tenotomy of the tendon of the teres minor
muscle.
E. After retraction of the joint capsule, the humerus is strongly rotated internally to
increase exposure of the caudal portion of the hcad. The humeral head can be
CLOSURE
The joint capsule is closed with interrupted absorbable sutures of 3/0 size. The tendon
 of the infraspinatus is reattached with a modified Bunnell-Mayer suture (Figurc 21A)
and reinforced with one or two mattress sutures, nonabsorbable material of 0 or 2/0 size
being used. The deep fascial incision, subcutaneous fat and fascia, and skin are closed
in separate layers.
COMMENTS
This approach gives better exposure to the humeral head than the caudolateral approach
to the shoulder (Plate 25), but poorer access to the caudal compartment of the joint for
removal of joint mice.
Plate 24
Approach to the Craniolateral Region of the Shoulder
Joint by Tenotomy of the Infraspinatus Muscle continued
Incision in
Infraspinatus
joint capsule
tendon
leres
Deltoideus m.
acromialpart
D
Headofhumerus
Rimofglenoid
Jointcapsule
Internal rotation
ofhumerus
一
101
102  The Scapula and Shoulder Joint
Approach to the Caudolateral Region of the Shoulder Joint
INDICATIONS
1. Osteochondroplasty of humeral head for osteochondritis dissecans.
2.
 Open reduction of caudoventral luxations of the shoulder.
 3. Open reduction of fractures of the ventral portion of the glenoid cavity.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 23, 24, and 26
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. A curved incision begins at the middle of the scapula and follows the spine distally,
crossing the joint and continuing over the lateral surface of the humerus to the
 midpoint of the shaft. Skin margins are undermined and retracted after subcutaneous
fascia and fat are incised in the same line as the skin incision.
B. Deep fascia is incised over the ventral border of the distal scapular spine to free the
origin of the scapular part of the deltoideus muscle. This fascial incision is continued
distally over the acromial part of the deltoideus to the omobrachial vein. The incised
fascia is elevated and retracted cranially and caudally from the underlying deltoideus
muscle.
C. An incision is made on the ventral border of the spine of the scapula and continued
distally between the spinous and acromial parts of the deltoideus muscle.
The Scapula and Shoulder Joint · 103
Plate 25
Approach to the Caudolateral Region
of the Shoulder Joint
Deltoideus m.
spinous part
Acromionprocess
Deltoideusm
Fascial incision
acromialpart
Omobrachialv
ncision
A
Deltoideus m.
(Line of elevation
Scapularpar
ofmuscle
Acromial part
trom bone tfor Par F)
Axillobrachialv
Omobrachial v
1 04 The Scapula and Shoulder Joint
Approach to the Caudolateral Region of the
Shoulder Joint continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE continued
D. The division between the two parts of deltoideus muscle is developed by blunt
dissection to allow freeing of the spinous part of the muscle and its caudal retraction
with the deep fascia. A muscular branch of the axillary nerve is found between the
two parts of the deltoideus. It is usually possible to preserve this structure.
N.B. There are two possible ways to proceed from this point. Part E illustrates
 Continuing as in Parts F and G will give additional exposure.
 E. Strong dorsocranial retraction of the teres minor muscle will expose the joint capsule.
 An incision is made parallel and close to the rim of the glenoid cavity. Care is taken
to protect the subscapular vessels and axillary nerve lying between the joint capsule
and the long head of the triceps muscle. Internal rotation and adduction of the
humerus provides maximal exposure of the humeral head.
The Scapula and Shoulder Joint · 105
Plate 25
Approach to the Caudolateral Region
of the Shoulder Joint continued
Infraspinatus m.
Triceps m.
accessoryhead
Muscular br. of
axillary n..
caudal circumflex
humeral vessels
Deltoideus m..
acromialpart
Deltoideus m.
scapular part
D
leresminorm
Humeral head
Glenoic
Joint capsule
106  The Scapula and Shoulder Joint
Approach to the Caudolateral Region of the
Shoulder Joint continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE continued
F. The belly of the acromial part of the deltoideus is undermined and elevated from
the underlying humerus (see incision in illustration C). The deltoideus is then
retracted caudally to expose the tendons of insertion of the infraspinatus and teres
 minor muscles on the greater tubercle of the humerus. Fascia overlying the tendon
of the teres minor is incised to allow tenotomy about 5 mm from its insertion. It is
helpful to place a modifed mattress or locking-loop suture in the tendon before its
transection. Nonabsorbable suture material is used.
G. The tendon suture is passed caudally under the acromial part of the deltoideus, and
the two bellies of this muscle are retracted. The tendon suture in the teres minor is
used to apply traction as the muscie is dissected free from the underlying joint.
capsule. The infraspinatus is retracted dorsally and the joint capsule is incised
 parallel to the rim of the glenoid. As this incision is carried caudally to the fexor
surface of the joint, care must be taken to preserve the subscapular artery and
axillary nerve that lie very close to thc joint. Internal rotation of the humerus will
provide maximum exposure of the caudal surface of the humeral head.
CLOSURE
 The joint capsule is closed with interrupted sutures of 3/0 absorbable material. If the
teres minor tendon was cut, the preplaced tendon suture is placed through the tendon
insertion and tied. External rotation of the humerus will facilitate tying this suture.
Additional small mattress sutures are used in the tendon if necessary to gain adequate
P s s  ro sd o a q s   n
sutured with any suture materia] of choice and the cranial border of the acromial part
of the deltoideus is reaitached to the fascia on the proximal portion of the humeral
shaft. The next step is to suture the fascial origin of the spinous part of the deltoideus
to the spine of the scapula. This suture line is continued distally to close the fascia
overlying the acromial part of the deltoideus. Subcutaneous closure is made with care.
due to a tendency for subcutaneous seroma formation.
COMMENTS
This approach gives good exposure for removal of joint mice in the caudal compartment
of the shoulder joint, although exposure of the humeral head lesion of osteochondritis
is more limited than in the craniolateral approaches (Plates 23 and 24).
The Scapula and Shoulder Joint ? 107
Plate 25
Approach to the Caudolateral Region
of the Shoulder Joint continued
Tendonof
infraspinatus m.
Deltoideus m.
acromialparts
Triceps m..
lateral head
Tenotomy ot
teres minor m
and preplaced suture
Teres munor m
Jointcapsule
Triceps m.
Accessoryhead
Lateral head
Humeral head
Deltoideus m.
Scapularpart
Acromialpart
G
108 The Scapula and Shoulder Joint
Approach to the Caudal Region of the Shoulder Joint
Based on a Procedure of Gahring12
INDICATION
Osteochondroplasty for osteochondritis dissecans of the humeral head.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATIONAPPROACHES
Plates 23, 24, and 25
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The skin incision extends from the middle of the scapular spine to the midshaft of
the humerus.
 B. Subcutaneous fat and deep fascia of the shoulder are incised and elevated to reveal
the scapular par of the deltoideus muscle and the lateral:and long heads of the
lriceps brachii muscle. An incision is made in the intermuscular septum between
the caudal border of the deltoideus and the long head of the triceps, and continued
distally over the lateral head of the triceps.
C. Blunt dissection under the deltoideus and strong elevation of that muscle will reveal
thc caudal circumfex artery and vein and a muscular branch of the axillary nerve.
The teres minor muscle and the joint capsule lie directly under these structures.
The Scapuia and Shoulder Joint·109
Plate 26
Approach to the Caudal Region of the Shoulder Joint
Deepfasciaof
shoulder
Scapular par
deltoideusn
Incisionin
intermuscular
septum
Acromialpart,
deltoideusm
Long head.
triceps brachli
Lateral heao
tricepsbrachiim
Scapular part.
deltoideus m.
Muscular br. of
axillary n.
Caudal
circumtlex
humerala
and v.
Teres minor m.
Accessoryhead,
Long head
triceps brachi
triceps
m.
brachii m.
Lateral head.
triceps brachi
m.
C
110 The Scapula and Shoulder Joint
Approach to the Caudal Region of the Shoulder Joint continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE cOntinued
 D. Craniodorsal retraction of the teres minor will expose the axillary nerve.
E. The axillary nerve and accompanying vessels are elevated and retracted with a
 rubber Penrose drain or umbilical tape. Palpation will identify the inferior rim of
the glenoid cavity and the caudal aspect of the humeral head. The joint capsule is
incised 5 mm from and parallel to the rim of the glenoid cavity.
Plate 26
Approach to the Caudal Region of the Shoulder Joint continued 
Incisionin
joint capsule
Axillary n
Rimofglenoid
Rubberdraintube
retractingaxillaryn.
andvessels
：111
112 The Scaputa and Shoulder Joint
Approach to the Caudal Region of the Shoulder Joint continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE continued
F. Retraction of the joint capsule gives good exposure of the caudal cul-de-sac of the
joint. Strong internal rotation of the limb, combined with varying degrees of fexion
and extension of the shoulder, will provide exposure of the osteochondritis lesion.
CLOSURE
The joint capsule is closed with interrupted sutures of 3/0 absorbable material. The
intermuscular septum between the deltoideus and triceps muscles is closed, followed by
closure of the deep fascial layer, subcutaneous tissues, and skin.
COMMENTS
This approach gives good exposure of the humeral head and the caudal cul-de-sac, where
loose cartilage fragments gravitate. It has the advantage of not involving any tenoto-
mies.
The Scapula and Shoulder Joint = 113
Plate 26
Approach to the Caudal Region of the Shoulder Joint continued
Stay sulure in
joint capsule
Hohmannretractor
betweenglenoidand
humeral head
Joint capsule
ana nerve retracted
114  The Scapula and Shoulder Joint
Approach to the Craniomedial Region of the Shoulder Joint
Based on a Procedure of Hohn et al.19
INDICATIONS
1. Open reduction of medial shoulder luxations.
 2. Open reduction of fractures of the neck and glenoid cavity of the scapula.
 3. Open reduction of fractures of the lesser tubercle of the humerus.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATIONAPPROACHES
Plates 23 and 27
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The skin incision starts medial to and slightly caudal to the acromion of the scapula.
It continues distally, medial to the midline of the humerus, and ends at the midshaft.
of this bone. The dog is in dorsal recumbency.
B. After incision and retraction of the subcutaneous tissues with the skin, the brachi-
Ocephalicus muscle is identified. This muscle is retracted medially, following a fascial
incision along its lateral border for the entire length of the exposure. The omobrachial
vein is ligated to allow this incision.
C. The limb is externally rotated and the insertion of the superficial pectoral muscle is
freed from the humerus from its proximal border distally to the cephalic vein, which
crosses the muscle. This muscle will not be reattached at its insertion, so it can be
cut very close to the bone.
The Scapula and Shoulder Joint · 115
Plate 27
Approach to the Craniomedial Region
of the Shoulder Joint
Acromionprocess
Deltoideus m.
Supraspinatus m.
acromial par
Brachrocephalicus
Axillobrachia
m
Omobrachialv
Cephalic
B
Supraspinatusm
A
Medialview
Incision in
nsertion of
deep pectoral m.
Incision
Superficial
pectoral m
C
116 · The Scapula and Shouider Joint
Approach to the Craniomedial Region of the
Shoulder Joint continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE continued
D. The deep pectoral is similarly incised to free its entire insertion. After separating
the fascial attachments between the supraspinatus and the deep pectoral, both
pectoral muscles are retracted medially. When separating the deep pectoral from
the supraspinatus muscle, be aware of the position of the suprascapular nerve (see
illustration A, Plate 28). The tendon of the coracobrachialis muscle is incised near
its insertion. This exposes the tendon of insertion of the subscapularis muscle on
the lesser tubercle of the humerus.
E. The tendinous insertion of the subscapularis muscle on the lesser tubercle of the
humerus is cut close to the bone, but enough tendon is left on the bone to allow
suturing. The joint capsule is incised parallel to the medial rim of the glenoid cavity.
 Retraction of the belly of the subscapularis muscle exposes the medial joint capsule.
which is incised as needed to gain access to the interior of the joint.
CLOSURE
The joint capsule js sutured with 2/0 to 3/0 interrupted absorbable sutures. Mattress
sutures of 0 to 2/0 nonabsorbable material are used to reattach the tendon of the
subscapularis muscle. Both pectoral muscles are advanced cranially to attach to
deltoideus and deep brachial fascia. The brachiocephalicus muscle is sutured to brachial
fascia, and subcutaneous tissues are closed in layers.
The Scapula and Shoulder Joint = 117
Plate 27
Approach to the Craniomedial Region
of the Shoulder Joint continued
Supraspinatusm
Incision in insertior:
of subscapularis m.
Transverse humeral
retunaculum
Incisionintendon
otcoracobrachialls
Deep pecioral m
Bicepsbrachii m
Superficial pectoral ni
D
Humeral head
Medialrimot
glenoid cavity
Joint capsule
retracted
Coracobrachialis m
Biceps brachii
Deeppectoral m
E
118  The Scapula and Shoulder Joint
Approach to the Cranial Region of the Shoulder Joint
Based on a Procedure of De Angelis and Schwartz*
INDICATIONS
1. Open reduction of cranial luxations of the shoulder.
 2. Open reduction of fractures of the neck and glenoid of the scapula (see “Comments"
below).
3. Open reduction of fractures of the head of the humerus.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 23 and 27
EXPLANATORY NOTE
The procedure is initiated as shown in Parts A through D of Plate 27, Approach to the
Craniomedial Region of the Shoulder Joint.
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A, B. Following elevation and retraction of the superficial and deep pectoral muscles,
the fascial attachments between the deep pectoral and supraspinatus muscles are
divided suffciently to allow retraction of the supraspinatus. An osteotome is used
to osteotomize the greater tubercle containing the tendinous insertion of the supra-
spinatus muscle. Note that the cut is made at two different angles, in order to better
resist the shearing forces of muscle pull after reattachment. Care must be taken to
not cut the tendinous insertion of the infraspinatus muscle and to protect the tendon
of the biceps muscle during the osteotomy.
The Scapula and Shouider Joint  119
Plate 28
Approach to the Cranial Region of the Shoulder Joint
Supraspinatus m
Suprascapular n
Incision in joint
capsule
Subscapularis m.
Transverse humeral
retinaculum
Coracobrachialism
Deeppectoral m
Biceps brachii m
Superlicial pectoral m.
Position of osteotome for
osteotomyofthegreater
tubercle (see alsoPart D)
120 = The Scapula and Shoulder Joint
Approach to the Cranial Region of the Shoulder Joint continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE continued
 as p ad n q au   sss  
dissecting it free of the joint capsule. Continued elevation of the muscle from the
scapula will expose the scapular neck and glenoid. Identify and protect the supra-
scapular nerve (also see Part E, Plate 23).
CLOSURE
The greater tubercle is reattached with two lag screws or two Kirschner wires of 0.045-
to 0.062-inch diameter as shown in illustration D. The superficial and deep pectoral
 muscles are sutured to the fascia of the deltoideus muscle. The remaining fascial layers,
subcutaneous tissues, and skin are closed separately.
COMMENTS
For total exposure of the scapular neck and most of the glenoid cavity, this approach is
combined with the Approach to the Craniolateral Region of the Shoulder Joint (Plate
231.
The Scapula and Shoulder Joint 121
Plate 28
Approach to the Cranial Region of the Shoulder Joint continued
Osteotomyo!
Supraspinatusm
greater tubercle
Suprascapularn
Supraglenoid
tuberosity
Humeralhea
Tendonofbiceps
brachii m.
Joint capsule
Kirschner wire
Osteotomyof
(orlagscrew)
greatertubercle
fixatior:
D
SECTION
V
The Thoracic Limb
 Approach to the Proximal Shaft of the Humerus
 Approach to the Shaft of the Humerus Through a Craniolateral
Incision
■ Approach to the Shaft of the Humerus Through a Medial Incision
 Approach to the Distal Shaft of the Humerus Through a Craniolateral
Incision
■ Approach to the Distal Shaft and Supracondylar Region of the
Humerus Through a Medial Incision
■ Approach to the Laterat Aspect of the Humeral Condyle and
Epicondyle
■ Approach to the Lateral Humeroulnar Part of the Elbow Joint
 Approach to the Supracondylar Region of the Humerus and the Caudal
Humeroulnar Part of the Elbow Joint
■ Approach to the Humerouinar Part of the Elbow Joint by Osteotomy of
the Tuber Olecrani
B Approach to the Elbow Joint by Osteotomy of the Proximal Ulnar
Diaphysis
■ Approach to the Head of the Radius and Lateral Parts of the Elbow
Joint
 Approach to the Head of the Radius and Humeroradial Part of the
Elbow Joint by Osteotomy of the Lateral Humeral Epicondyle
 Approach to the Medial Humeral Epicondyle
■ Approach to the Medial Aspect of the Humeral Condyle and the
Medial Coronoid Process of the Ulna by an Intermuscular Incision
The Thoracic Limb  123
· Approach to the Medial Aspect of the Humeral Condyle and the
Medial Coronoid Process of the Ulna by Osteotomy of the Medial
Humeral Epicondyle
· Approach to the Tuber Olecrani
· Approach to the Distal Shaft and Styloid Process of the Ulna
· Approach to the Head and Proximal Metaphysis of the Radius
 Approach to the Shaft of the Radius Through a Medial lncision
· Approach to the Shaff of the Radius Through a Lateral Incision
· Approach to the Distal Radius and Carpus Through a Dorsal Incision
 Approach to the Distal Radius and Carpus Through a Palmaromedial
Incision
· Approach to the Accessory Carpal Bone and Palmarolateral Carpal
Joints
■ Approaches to the Metacarpaf Bones
■ Approach to the Proximal Sesamoid Bones
■ Approaches to the Phalanges and Interphalangeal Joints
124  The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Proximal Shaft of the Humerus
INDICATIONS
Open reduction of fractures of the proximal half of the shaft of the humerus.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 30 and 31
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The skin jncision is made slightly lateral to the cranial midline of the bone and
extends from the greater tubercle of the humerus distally to a point near the
midshaft of the bone.
B. Following undermining and retraction of the skin, an incision is made through the
deep fascia along the lateral border of the brachiocephalicus muscle. The insertion
of the acromial part of the deltoid muscle is also incised.
The Thoracic Limb ? 125
Plate 29
Approach to the Proximal Shaft of the Humerus
Supraspinatusm
Deltoideusm.
acromialpart
Brachiocephalicus
Omobrachialv
Periosteal
incision
Cephalicv
Axillobrachial
126  The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Proximal Shaft of the Humerus continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE continued
C. The brachiocephalicus can be retracted cranially following blunt dissection between
the muscle and the bone. The deltoideus muscle is retracted caudally to reveal the
tendons of insertion of the teres minor and infraspinatus muscles. If more exposure
of bone is needed, the insertions of the superficial pectoral muscle and the lateral
head of the triceps muscle can be incised.
D. Periosteal elevation of the lateral head of the triceps exposes the lateral and caudal
aspects of the shaft. If the craniomedial shaft must be exposed, a portion of the
insertion of the deep pectoral muscle can be elevated. This muscle insertion is just
 medial to that of the superficial pectoral muscle.
CLOSURE
The deep pectoral and triceps muscles are not reattached, because they are only partially
superfieial pectoral and deltoideus muscles are sutured to each other over the cranial
muscle, followed by closure of the subcutaneous tissues and skin.
Plate 29
Approach to the Proximal Shaft of the Humerus continued 
Supraspinatusm
Infraspinatus m
Deltoideusm.
acromial par
Periostealincisions
Supericial pectoral
m1.
Teresminorm
Tricepsbrachii
m., lateral head
Brachiocephal
Cephalic
Tricepsbrachii m.
lateral head
Deep pectoral m.
Tricipital line Ot
humerus
Superficial pectoral
D
127
128  The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Shaft of the Humerus Through a Craniolateral
Incision
INDICATION
 lnternal fixation of shaft fractures.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATIONAPPROACHES
Plates 29, 31, and 32
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The skin incision extends from the greater tubercle of the humerus proximally. to
the lateral epicondyle distally, following the craniolateral border of the humerus.
 B. Subcutaneous fat and fascia are incised on the same line and mobilized and retracted
with the skin. Fat and brachial fascia are incised and dissected away to allow
visualization of the cephalic vein. Brachial fascia is incised along the lateral border
of thc brachiocephalicus muscle and distally over the cephalic vein.
 The cephalic vein is ligated at the distal end of the field and again proximally
where it disappears under the edge of the brachiocephalicus muscle. The axilobra-
chial and omobrachial veins are similarly ligated and the isolated venous segment
is removed.
An jncision is made in the craniomedial fascia of the brachialis muscle and in the
jnsertion of the lateral head of the triceps brachi on the humerus.
TheThoracic limb129
Plate 30
Approach to the Shaft of the Humerus
Through a Craniolateral lncision
Greatertubercle
ofhumerus
Deltoideus m.
acromial par
IncIsion
Triceps brachil m..
lateral head
Omobra
Axillobrachialv
Brachialis m
Radialr
Cephalicv
Ext. carpi radialis m.
Anconeusm.
B
130 · The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Shaft of the Humerus Through a Craniolatera
Incision continued
DESCRIPTIoN OF THE PROCEDURE continued
C. An incision is next made in the periosteal insertion of the superficial pectoral and
brachiocephalieus muscles on the humeral shaft. The radial nerve should be identi-
fied and protected when making these incisions.
 D. Hohmann retractors are used to retract the brachialis and triceps muscles caudally
and expose the musculospiral groove of the humerus. Cranial retraction will elevate
the biceps, superficial pectoral, and brachiocephalicus muscles from the shaft. Again,
the radial nerve must be protected during retraction.
CLOSURE
 The insertions of the superficial pectoral and brachiocephalicus muscles are sutured to
the superficial fascia of the brachialis muscle distally and to the deltoideus muscle
 proximally. The insertion of the lateral head of the triceps is attached to the brachioce-
phalicus. Brachial fascia, subcutaneous fat and fascia, and skin are closed in separate
layers.
COMMENTS
 This approach is used primarily for bone plating or when a long exposure is needed. lf
additional exposure of the proxirmal lateral portion of the shaft is required, the deltoid
muscle can be elevated subperiostally, as shown in Plate 29. Further exposure of the
distal humeral shaft can be obtained by cranial retraction of the brachiocephalicus
muscle and radial nerve (see Plate 32, Part E).
Plate 30
Approach to the Shaft of the Humerus
Through a Craniolateral Incision continued
Incision
Superficial
pectoral m.
Brachiocephali
Brachiocephalicus
Superficial
pectoral m.
Bicepsbrachiim.
Brachialism
Radialn
D
131
132 · The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Shaft of the Humerus Through a Medial
Incision
Based on a procedure of Montgomery, Milton, and Mann 23
INDICATION
Open reduction of fractures of the shaft of the humerus
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 30, 32, 33, and 34
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The medial skin incision begins proximally at the level of the greater tubercle and
extends distally to the medial epicondyle. Subcutaneous fat and fascia are incised
on the same line and elevated with the skin.
B. Deep brachial fascia is incised along the caudal border of the brachioccphalicus
muscle and along the distal border of the superficial pectoral muscle. The distal part
of this incision is made carefully to preserve the underlying neurovascular structurcs.
The Thoracic Limb·133
Plate 31
Approach to the Shaft of the Humerus
Through a Medial Incision
Superficial
Brachiocephalicusm
pectoralm
incisions
Brachial a. ana v.
median anc
musculocutaneous nn.
Collateral-
ulnar a. and v..
ulnar n.
134  The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Shaft of the Humerus Through a Medial
Incision continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE continued
C. Fascia distal to the superficial pectoral muscle is carefully dissected from the vessels
and nerves. The brachiocephalicus muscle is retracted cranially to expose the
insertion of the superficial pectoral muscle on the shaft of the humerus. This
insertion is incised close to the bone from its distal end proximally to the level of
the cephalic vein.
vein by blunt dissection between muscle fibers.
Plate 31
Approach to the Shaft of the Humerus
Through a Medial Incision continued
Cephalicv
Superficial
pecloral m
Brachiocephalicusm
Incision
Medianand
musculocutaneous nn,
Triceps brachil
Brachial a.andv
medialhead
Biceps brachin m
Collateral ulnar
a. and v. ulnar n.
Superticial pectoral m.
Cephalicv
Biceps brachii m.
C
135
136 · The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Shaft of the Humerus Through a Medial
Incision continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE cOntinued
E. Exposure of the proximal and midportion of the bone is optimal if the proximal
brachiocephalicus muscle is retracted cranially and the biceps brachii muscle is
retracted caudally. The remaining attached portion of the superficial pectoral muscle
is retracted as necessary, and bone plates are placed under it. If essential, the
cephalic vein can be ligated and the entire insertion of the muscle incised.
F. The middle and distal regions of the humerus are best exposed by cranial retraction
of the biceps brachii muscle, which requires careful dissection along the caudal
border of the muscle to separate it from the neurovascular structures. The proximal
and distal branches of the musculocutaneous nerve must be protected where they
penetrate the muscle.
CLOSURE
The superficial pectoral muscle is sutured to its insertion or to fascia of the brachialis
muscie. The deep fascial incisions are closed, followed by subcutaneous fat and fascia,
and skin.
COMMENTS
This approach allows visualization of the entire humerus, which is valuable when
applying a bone plate to a highly comminuted fracture. For intramedullary pin fixation,
the more limited approaches are usually sufficient.
The Thoracic Limb + 137
Plate 31
Approach to the Shaft of the Humerus
Through a Medial Incision continued
Bicepsbrachlim
Brachiocephalicus m
Humeral shatt
Musculocutaneousn.
proximalbranch
Triceps brachii m..
medialhead
Bicepsbrachiim
Humeral shaft
Musculocutaneous n.
distal branch
138· The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Distal Shaft of the Humerus Through a
Craniolateral Incision
Based on a Procedure of Brinker4
INDICATION
Open reduction of fractures between the midshaft and the supracondylar area of tht
humerus.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 30, 33, 34, and 36
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The craniolateral border of the humerus is the guide for this incision, which
commences at the midshaft and ends at the lateral epicondyle.
incised in the same line as the skin avoiding the cephalic and axillobrachial veins.
The deep fascia of the brachium is incised along the cranial border of the triceps.
The incision parallels the cephalic and axillobrachial veins, to allow their mobili-
zation. The radial nerve must be protected when the distal end of this incision is
opened.
C. The deep fascia is undermined to allow cranial retraction of the brachiocephalicus
muscle and the cephalic vein and exposure of the radial nerve. An incision is made
in the periosteal insertion of the superficial pectoral muscle.
Plate 32
Approach to the Distal Shaft of the Humerus
Through a Craniolateral Incision
Omobrachialv
Axillobrachialv.
Cephalic
Incisionindeepfascia
ofthebrachium
Brachio
W
Triceps brachii m.
lateral head
Superficial pectoral m
Brachialis m.
Radial n
Brachioce
Anconeusm
Extensor carpi
radialis m
139
140  The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Distal Shaft of the Humerus Through a
Craniolateral Incision continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE continued
D. The superfcial pectoral muscle is elevated at its insertion on the humerus as
necessary to allow cranial retraction. The brachialis muscle is freed from the bone
by blunt dissection and is retracted caudally with the triceps and the radial nerve.
E. To obtain better exposure of the distal portion of the bone, the laterai head of the
triceps brachii muscle can be retracted caudally and the brachialis muscle and radial
nerve retracted cranially.
CLOSURE
 Interrupted sutures are placed between external fascia of the brachialis and brachioce-
phalicus/superfcial pectoral muscles. Deep brachial fascia is attached to the triceps.
 and subcutaneous tissue and skin are closed in layers.
COMMENTS
 Great care must be taken at all times to protect the radial nerve.
Plate 32
Approach to the Distal Shaft of the Humerus
Through a Craniolateral Incision continued
Brachialism
Superficial
Radialn
pectoral m
BIc
Tricepsbrachilm.
Brachialis m
lateralhead
Supericial
pectoral m
Radial n
141
142  The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Distal Shaft and Supracondylar Region of the
Humerus Through a Medial Incision
Based on a Procedure of Brinker4
INDICATION
Open reduction of fractures of the humerus at midshaft or distally.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
 Plates 31 and 41
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The skin incision extends from the medial epicondyle proximally along the cranial
border of the humerus to the midshaft of the bone.
B. The skin is undermined and the subcutaneous fat is elevated sufficiently to allow
visualization of the brachial and collateral ulnar vessels. The ulnar and median
nerves that accompany these vessels are not yet visible; they lie slightly deeper. An
incision is made in the deep fascia directly over the distal shaft of the humerus and
between the blood vessels. It will be necessary to continue the incision proximally
over the vessels.
C. Blunt dissection of the subfascial fat will expose the underlying structures.
The Thoracic Limb ·143
Plate 33
Approach to the Distal Shaft and Supracondylar Region
of the Humerus Through a Medial Incision
Collateral
-Brachial a.
ulnar a.
andv.
andv.
Incisionin
deepfascia
of brachium
B
Musculocutaneous
Brachial
Collateral
a. and v.
ulnar a.
andv.
Mediann
Triceps
Biceps
brachi m.
brachii m.
medialhead
Ulnar n
Pronator
teres m.
Brachiocephalicus
m
Humerus
144  The Thoracic Limb
Humerus Through a Medial Incision continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE continued
D. The manner in which the vessels and the nerves are mobilized depends on the area
of the bone that is to be exposed. The method illustrated is used when the extreme
distal portion of the bone is involved. If the proximal portion of the exposed area is
of more interest, the vessels and nerves may be freed and retracted caudally with
the triceps and the collateral ulnar vessels.
The biceps brachii and triceps brachi muscles are elevated from the shaft of the
bone. The periosteal branches of blood vessels are ligated or coagulated as required.
Subperiosteal elevation of a portion of the insertion of the superficial pectoral and
brachiocephalicus muscles is necessary to fully expose the cranial surface of the
bone.
E. In the cat, retraction of the neurovascular components is complicated by the passage
of the brachial artery and median nerve through the supratrochlear foramen of the
humerus. Note also the short part of the medial head of the triceps brachii muscle
running caudal to the medial aspect of the humeral condyle and inserting on the
medial side of the olecranon process, If this muscle is elevated to expose a fracture
line, care must be taken to protect the ulnar nerve deep to it.
CLOSURE
The deep fascia, subcutaneous tissues, and skin are closed in separate layers.
COMMENTS
If great care is taken to protect the vessels and nerves, some exposure of the shaft
 proximal to the midportion can be obtained. This exposure is suffcient to allow insertion
of the proximal screws in a bone plate. Better exposure is detailed in Plate 31.
Plate 33
Approach to the Distal Shaft and Supracondylar Region
of the Humerus Through a Medial Incision continued
Brachiocephalicus
m.elevated
Anconeus
Supracondylar
foramen
Tricepsbrachiim.
shortipartofmedial head
CAT
145
146 · The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Lateral Aspect of the Humeral Condyle and
Epicondyle
Based on a Procedure of Turner and Hohn40
INDICATIONS
1. Open reduction of fractures of the humeral capitulum.
 2. Open reduction of lateral elbow luxation.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 35, 36, and 39
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The skin incision extends along the lower fourth of the humerus and crosses the
joint to end distally on the ulna. The incision passes over or slightly caudal to the
lateral epicondyle. The subcutaneous fascia is incised on the same line.
 B. As the skin and subcutaneous fascia are retracted, the deep brachial and antebrachial
fascia and the lateral head of the triceps muscle are exposed. An incision is made
through the deep fascia near the cranial border of the triceps and is continued
distally over the extensor muscles.
C. Retraction of the fascia exposes the condylar region of the humerus. Although it is
 proximal to the main area of exposure, it is well to note the location of the radial
nerve. An incision is started distally in the intermuscular septum between the
extensor carpi radialis and the common digital extensor muscles. This incision
continues proximally into the periosteal origin of the distal half of the extensor
carpi radialis muscle.
Plate 34
Approach to the Lateral Aspect of the Humeral Condyle
and Epicondyle
Triceps brachii
m.. lateral head.
deepto fascia
Incisionin
brachial and
antebrachial
tascia
Region of the
epicondyle
Triceps
brachii m..
lateral head
Radialn
Periosteal
Extensor carpi
incision
radialis m.
P
Intermuscular
incision
Commondigital
extensor m.
C
147
148The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Lateral Aspect of the Humeral Condyie and
Epicondyle continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE continued
 D. The extensor carpi radialis muscle is elevated from the bone and underlying joinf
capsule, and the capsule is opened with an L-shaped incision. Care must be taken
to protect the cartilage of the condyle.
E. Retraction of the joint capsule reveals the humeral condyle.
CLOSURE
The joint capsule is closed with interrupted sutures. A continuous pattern can be used
in the intermuscular incision. If there is no tissue available to reattach the extensor
carpi radialis to the humerus, the muscle can be sutured to the external fascia of the
anconeus muscle. The brachial and antebrachial fascia is closed. with a continuous
pattern.
TheThoracicLimb·149
Plate 34
Approach to the Lateral Aspect of the Humeral Condyle
and Epicondyle continued
Extensorcarpi
radialis m.
Elevatedpart
Origin
Incisionin
joint capsule
Commondigital
extensor m.
Lateralaspectof
humeralcondyle
Trochiea
Medialaspectof
humeralcondyle
150  The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Lateral Humeroulnar Part of the Elbow Joint
Based on a Procedure of Snavely and Hohn 37
INDICATIONS
1. Excision or fixation of ununited anconeal process.
2. Open reduction of lateral elbow luxation.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATIONAPPROACHES
Plates 33, 34, and 36
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The skin incision is centered on the lateral humeral epicondyle, which is easily
 palpated. The incision curves to follow the lateral epicondylar crest and the proximal
radius.
B. Subcutaneous fascia is incised on the same line as the skin. The fascia of the
brachium is incised along the cranial border of the lateral head of the triceps brachi
to its insertion on the olecranon
The Thoracic Limb · 151
Plate 35
Approach to the Lateral Humeroulnar Part
of the Elbow Joint
Triceps
brachii m.
lateral head
Incision
inbrachial
fascia
Region of
lateral humeral
epicondyle
152  The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Latera! Humeroulnar Part of the
Elbow Joint continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE cOntimued
C. Elevation of the triceps brachii exposes the anconeus muscle, which is incised at its
D. Subperiosteal elevation of the origin of the anconeus muscle exposes the caudolateral
conpartment of the elbow and the anconcal process of the olecranon.
CLOSURE
The origin of the anconeal muscle is sutured to the origins of the extensor muscles of
the antebrachium. The fascia of the triceps brachii, subcutaneous fascia, and skin are
closed in separate layers.
The Thoracic Limb = 153
Plate 35
Approach to the Lateral Humeroulnar Part
of the Elbow Joint continued
Periosteal incision
Radial n.
Lateral head.
triceps brachii m.
Anconeus m
Extensor carp
radialis m.
Lateralepicondyle
Common digital
extensor m.
leralism
Lateral digital
exlensor m
Anconeus m
Anconeal process
of olecranon
D
154 The Thoracic Limb
Caudal Humeroulnar Part of the Elbow Joint
Based on a procedure of Chaiman and Slocum?
INDICATIONS
1. Reduction of supracondylar or lateral condylar fraclures of the humerus.
2. Reduction of lateral luxation of the elbow joint.
3. Excision or fixation of ununited anconeal process
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 33, 34, 35, 37, and 38
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The skin incision starts just distal to the midshaft of the humerus and follows the
caudal edge of the bone distally. At the level of the lateral humeral epicondyle, the
 p     r r   so sm
distally along the ulna
B. Subcutaneous fat and fascia are incised on the same line as the skin and then
elevated fron the deep brachial fascia to allow wide retraction of the skin margins.
An incision is made in the deep brachial fascia over the division between the long
roughly parallel to the shaft of the humerus. Distally, it extends into the tendon of
where a few millimeters of tendon are left on the olecranon to facilitate closure.
Plate 36
Approach to the Supracondylar Region of the Humerus
 and the Caudal Humeroulnar Part of the Elbow Joint
Triceps brachi m...
longhead
Incisionin deep
brachial fascla
Tricepsbrachii m.
lateral head
Medialhumeral
Tuberolecrani
epicondyle
Incision in tendon
oftricepsbrachim..
lateral head
155
156  The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Supracondylar Region of the Humerus and the
Caudal Humeroulnar Part of the Elbow Joint continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE cOntinued
C. The separation between the heads of the triceps is developed by blunt dissection; it
is limited by the collateral radial vessels and a muscular branch of the radial nerve
proximally and by the tuber olecrani distally. Blunt dissection is also used to
separate the long head of the triceps brachii muscle from the anconeus muscle. The
periosteal insertion of the anconeus muscle is incised on the ulna and tuber olecrani
 and on the medial epicondylar crest.
D. Retraction of the elevated anconeus muscle and the long head of the triceps brachi
muscle exposes the anconeal process, the lateral aspect of the humeral condyle, and
the supracondylar region of the humerus.
CLOSURE
The anconeus muscle is sutured to fascia and remnants of periosteum on the medial
epicondylar crest and ulna. The deep antebrachial fascia and tendon of insertion of the
triceps brachii muscle are closed in the next layer. Subcutaneous tissues and skin are
closed in two layers.
COMMENTS
This approach is particularly useful for supracondylar fractures, where it may eliminate
the need for a combined medial and lateral approach. A variation is elevation of the
 anconeus muscle from the lateral epicondylar crest, similar to that shown in Plate 35D.
Plate 36
Approach to the Supracondylar Region of the Humerus
and the Caudal Humeroulnar Part of the Elbow Joint continued
Triceps brachin m.
long head
Collateral radial a.
and muscular br.
of radial n.
Triceps brachi m..
lateralhead
Periosteal incision
Epicondylar crest
of humerus:
Medial
Lateral
Anconeal process
of ulna
Anconeusm
D
157
158 0 The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Humerouinar Part of the Elbow Joint by
Osteotomy of the Tuber Olecrani
Based on a Procedure of Mostosky, Cholvin, and Brinker24
INDICATIONS
1. Open reduction of fractures of the condylar and supracondylar region of the humerus.
 2. Open reduction of chronic luxations of the elbow joint.
 3. Exploration of the caudal compartment of the elbow joint.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 31, 32, 33, 34, and 36
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. A skin incision is made slightly lateral to the caudal midline of the leg. The incision
extends from the distal third of the humerus to the proximial third of the ulna, and
crosses the elbow joint between the olecranon process and the lateral epicondyle.
B. Subcutaneous fat and fascia are incised and then widely undermined to allow
retraction of the cranial skin margin beyond the Jaterai epicondyle and the caudal
margin medial to the olecranon process. An incision is made in the fascia of the
triceps brachi along the cranial border of the lateral head to allow elevation of its
tendon from the olecranon.
C. The leg is elevated and the elbow flexed to allow dissection of the medial side of the
joint.
The Thoracic Limb · 159
Plate 37
Approach to the Humerouinar Part of the Elbow Joint
by Osteotomy of the Tuber Olecrani
Triceps
brachil m..
lateralheac
Incision
in brachiall
fascia
Regionot
lateral
epicondyle
ofhumerus
160  The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Humeroulnar Part of the Elbow Joint by
Osteotomy of the Tuber Olecrani continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE cOntinued
D. Undermining of the subcutaneous fat and fascia continues around the joint to the
medial side, until the caudal skin margin can be retracted beyond the medial
epicondyle. After incising the triceps fascia, the cranial border of the medial head
of the triceps is undermined from proximal to the medial condyle to the olecranon.
The ulnar nerve and collateral ulnar vessels lie parallel to the cranial border of the
nerve and vesseis should be identified and protected throughout the procedure by
retracting them distally.
When operating on the cat, refer at this point to Part E of Plate 33.
E. A Gigli wire saw is pulled between the two fascial incisions, cranial to the tendon
 of the triceps brachii on the olecranon, resting on the bone in the notch between the
olecranon and anconeal processes. Care must be exercised at this point to be certain
the ulnar nerve and collateral ulnar vessels are free from the wire. The olecranon
 process is then osteotomized with the wire saw at approximately a 45° angle to the
shaft of the ulna. A power saw can also be used, but osteotomes should be avoided.
The bone is so hard that it shatters easily.
The Thoracic Limb ● 161
Plate 37
Approach to the Humeroulnar Part of the Elbow Joint
by Osteotomy of the Tuber Olecrari continued
Trceps brachi m...
Caudal cutaneous antebrachial
medial head
n.andvesselsbeneathfascia
Incision in brachial
Ulnarn.and collateralulnar
fascia
vessels beneath fascia
Flexor carpi ulnaris m.
Superficial diqital
flexor m.
Flexorcarpi
radialis m
Region of medial
epicondyleof
humerus
D
Caudal cutaneous
Tuberolecrani
antebrachial n
Gigli wire saw
and vessels
Ulnar n. and
collateral
Approximately45
uinar vessels
Anconeusm
Triceps brachit m..
medialhead
E
162 · The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Humeroulnar Part of the Elbow Joint by
Osteotomy of the Tuber Olecrani continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE continued
F. The oleeranon process with the attached triceps brachii muscle can now be refected
proximally to reveal the entire caudal surface of the joint. If the anconeus muscle is
intact, an incision is made through the muscle and the underlying joint capsule
near their attachments from just proximal to the medial aspect of the humeral
condyle, continuing distally onto the olecranon. If possible, the branch of the
collateral ulnar vessel that penetrates the muscle is preserved.
G. Maximum exposure of the intraarticular area is gained by complete fexion of the
joint and retraction of the anconeus musclc.
CLOSURE
No atlempt is made to close the incision in the anconeus. The olecranon process is
reattached by the tension band wire technique (Figure 23). The cranial borders of the
triceps are sutured to the surrounding deep fascia, and subcutaneous sutures are used
to pull the fat and fascia together and to take some of the tension off the skin sutures.
The Thoracic Limb  163
Plate 37
Approach to the Humeroulnar Part of the Elbow Joint
by Osteotomy of the Tuber Olecrani continued
Cut porlion of
flexorcarpi
ulnaris m.
Tuberolecrani
Cut portion
offlexor carpi
ulnaris m
Collateral
ulnar a.and v
Anconeusm
Olecranonfossa
Medialepicondyle
Anconealprocess
ofolecranon
G
164  The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Elbow Joint by Osteotomy of the Proximal
Ulnar Diaphysis
Based on a Procedure of Lenehan and Nunamaker21
INDICATIONS
1. Open reduction of multiple intraarticular fractures of the humeral condyle.
 2. Open reduction of luxations of the elbow joint.
 3. Exploration of multiple compartments of the elbow joint.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 34, 37, 41, and 44
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The skin incision starts proximally at the level of the lateral epicondyle, halfway
between it and the tuber olecrani. The incision curves distally following the lateral
epicondylar crest, ending at the junetion of the proximal and middle thirds of the
ulna lateral to that bone.
B. Two incisions are made in the deep antebrachial fascia covering the muscles and
ulna. The lateral incision runs between the ulna and the caudal border of the ulnaris
lateralis muscle distally and through the insertion of the anconeus muscle on the
tuber olecrani proximally. The medial incision is between the fexor carpi ulnaris
and the ulna.
C. The anconeus and fexor carpi ulnaris muscles are subperiosteally elevated from the
ulna. Retraction of the muscles will reveal the ulnar nerve and collateral ulnar
vessels medially, running on the deep surface of the fexor muscles. The cranial
interosseous vessels and interosseous nerve cross the field between the radius and
ulna. The ulnar head of the deep digital fexor and the abductor pollicis longus
muscles are subperiosteally elevated from the ulna to reveal the interosseous
 membrane and ligament. The ulnar collateral ligament (caudal crus) and annular
ligament are incised on the lateral aspect of the radioulnar joint.
Plate 38
Approach to the Elbow Joint by Osteotomy
of the Proximal Ulnar Diaphysis
Uinaris
lateralis. m.
Periosteal
incisions
Flexor carpi
ulnaris m
Tuberolecrani
E
Abductor
pollicis
w snbuoi
Radial n.
Periosteal
incision
UInaris
lateralis m.
Deep digital
flexor m.
ulnarhead
Incision
Lateral
Uinar n. and
collateral lg-
collateral
caudal crus
ulnarvessels
Annularlig.
Flexorcarpi
Lateral
ulnaris m.
epicondyle
of humerus
Anconeus m.
C
165
166  The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Elbow Joint by Osteotomy of the Proximal
Ulnar Diaphysis continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE continued
D. Osteotomy of the ulna is performed just proximal to the interosseous ligament,
taking care to protect the interosseous vessels and nerve. The osteotomy can be
performed with a Gigli wire saw, as illustrated, or with a power saw. An osteotome
should not be used, because it tends to fragment the ulna.
E. Medial rotation of the proximal ulnar segment exposes the humeral condyle and
radial head. Transection of the olecranon ligament will allow additional rotation of
the ulna if required. Distraction of the humeroradial joint allows inspection of the
articular surface of the radius, and extreme fexion of the joint exposes the humeral
condyle fully.
CLOSURE
The proximal ulnar segment is reduced and fixed with one or two Steinmann pins or
Kirschner wires driven from the tuber olecrani. lnterfragmentary compression is
supplied with a figure-of-8 wire (see Figure 23). No attempt is made to repair the ulnar
collateral or annular ligament. Adeguate stability of the elbow is afforded by the intacl
cranial crus of the collateral ligament and the muscles. The superficial fascia of the
fexor carpi ulnaris is sutured to the fascia of the ulnaris lateralis and anconeus muscles.
 Proximally, the anconeus muscle is sutured to remnants of periosteum and fascia.
COMMENTS
Passive range of motion exercises and early weight bearing should be encouraged to
restore function to the joint. Although this approach seems radical, it is less traumatic
than combining approaches if generous exposure is needed.
Plate 38
Approach to the Elbow Joint by Osteotomy
 of the Proximal Ulnar Diaphysis continued
Deep digital fiexor m.
ulnar head
liwiresaw
Cranial interosseousa
v., and n
Ulnar
collateral lig
Radial hcad
Annular lig
Uinarislateralis
Cranial interosseous
a., v.. and n
Abductorpollicis
w snbuoi
Tendons of insertion 
ofl biceps brachi and
Supinator m
brachialis mm.
Radial head
Capitulum ot
Medialcollateral lig
humerus
Olecranonlg.
167
168  The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Head of the Radius and Lateral Parts of the
Elbow Joint
INDICATIONS
1. Open reduction of lateral luxations of the head of the radius.
2. Open reduction of fractures of the head of the radius.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 40, and 47
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The curved incision commences proximal to the lateral humeral epicondyle, crosses
the joint following the lateral surface of the radius, and ends at the proximal fourth
of the radius. Subcutaneous fascia is incised on the same line.
B. After retraction of the skin and subcutaneous fascia, the deeper lying brachial and
antcbrachial fascia is incised on a similar line.
C. Incision and retraction of the fascia of the triceps brachi allows retraction of the
lateral head of the triceps muscle and incision of the origin of the anconeus muscle
along the lateral cpicondylar crest. The tendon of origin and proximal portion of the
ulnaris lateralis muscle are isolated and the tendon cut, leaving enough tendon
proximally to allow suturing.
The Thoracic Limb · 169
Plate 39
Approach to the Head of the Radius
and the Lateral Parts of the Elbow Joint
Incisionin
brachial and
antebrachial
fasciae
Lateral
epicondyle
ofhumerus
Triceps
Radial n
brachii m.
long head
Ext. carpi
radialis m.
Incision in
origin of
Anconeusm
Intermuscular
incision
Incision in
tendon of
Ulnaris
lateralis m.
Lateral
digital
ext.m.
+
Common
digital
ext.m.
170 · The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Head of the Radius and Lateral Parts of the
Elbow Joint continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE cOntinued
 D. Subperiosteal elevation of the anconeus muscle exposes the caudolateral humeroul-
nar joint compartment.
E. The remaining extensor muscles are elevated with a Hohmann retractor. The tip of
 l a n ap ra on aq au uo day aq  a n
Transection of the annular and collateral ligaments may be necessary to gain
adequate exposure of the head of the radius.
CLOSURE
Transected portions of the collateral ligament are sutured to the remaining portions of
the ligament. The tendon of the ulnaris lateralis muscle is reattached with a modified
Bunnell-Mayer or locking-loop stitch (see Figure 21). The origin of the anconeus muscle
 is sewn to the origins of the extensor muscles and the cranial edge of the triceps brachii
is attached to the brachial fascia. The two fascial layers and skin are closed routinely,
in separate layers.
Plate 39
Approach to the Head of the Radius
and the Lateral Parts of the Elbow Joint continued
Anconealprocess
coneusm
Tendonofulnaris
lateralism.
Lateral digital
ext.m.
Supinator
Annularlic
dofradius
171
172 = The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Head of the Radius and Humeroradial Part of
the Elbow Joint by Osteotomy of the Lateral Humeral
Epicondyle
Based on a Procedure of Hohn17
INDICATIONS
1. Open reduction of lateral luxation of the head of the radius.
2. Open reduction of fractures of the head of the radius.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATIONAPPROACHES
Plates 34, 36, 36, 37, 38, 39, and 47
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The curved incision commences proximal to the lateral humeral cpicondyle, crosses
the joint following the lateral surface of the radius, and ends at the proximal fourth
of the radius. Subcutaneous and deep antebrachial fascia is incised on the same
line.
B. Antebrachial and intermuscular fasciae are jncised from the cranioventral borders
 of the lateral head of the triceps brachii distally, along a line that separates the
extensor carpi radialis from the common digital extensor muscle. A similar incision
is made between the anconeus and ulnaris lateralis muscles. These incisions are
deepened to coimpletely free the three enclosed extensor muscles from the underlying
bone. If the epicondyle is to be reattached by a lag screw (see "Closure" below), a
suitable glide and tap hole should be drilled now, just distal to the epicondyle.
The Thoracic Limb ? 173
Plate 40
Approach to the Head of the Radius and Humeroradial
Part of the Elbow Joint by Osteotomy
of the Lateral Humeral Condyle
Extensor carpi
Incisionsin deep
antebrachialfascia
radiallis m.
Commondigital
extensor m
Lateral digital
extensor m
Anconeusm
B
174TheThoracicLimb
Approach to the Head of the Radius and Humeroradial Part of
the Elbow Joint by Osteotomy of the Lateral Humeral
Epicondyle continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE continued
C. The lateral humeral epicondyle is osteotomized so as to include the origins of the
three extensor muscles. The angle of the osteotomy from a cranial perspective is
shown in Part C1. No articular cartilage should be included in the osteotomy.
D. Retraction of the osteotomized epicondyle with attached collateral ligaments and
extensor muscles is possible after incision of the joint capsule where necessary.
Elevation of the supinator muscle will further expose the head of the radius. Care
should be taken to protect the radial nerve, which crosses under the deep surface of
the supinator muscle
CLOSURE
The humeral epicondyle is reattached to its origin by a lag screw or pins and tension
band wire (see Figures 23 and 24). Incisions in the intermuscular septa, deep antebra-
chial fascia, subcutaneous fascia, and skin are each closed in separate layers.
COMMENTS
This approach is very similar to that shown in Plate 39. Slightly better exposure of the
radial head is gained here. The choice of tenotomy or osteotomy is primarily a matter
of personal preference. Simultaneous access to the caudal compartment of the elbow
joint can be gained by elevation of the origin of the anconeus muscle (see Plate 35).
Plate 40
Approach to the Head of the Radius and Humeroradial Part of the Elbow
Joint by Osteotomy of the Lateral Humeral Condyle continued
Osteotomy
ofepicondyle
withosteotome
C1
angleof the
osteotomy
Drill hole in
epicondyletor
screw fixation
Extensor carpi
radialism
Supinator m
Radial head
Lateralcollateral
g.
Osteotomizedlateral
epicondyleand
extensor mm.
D
175
176 ● The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Medial Humeral Epicondyle
INDICATIONS
1. Reduction of fractures of the medial aspect of the humeral condyle.
 2. Reduction of medial luxations of the elbow joint.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 31, 33, 42, and 43
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The skin incision is centered on the medial humeral epicondyle and follows the
humeral shaft proximally and the shaft of the ulna distally. It may be useful to
lengthen the incision in some cases. The subcutaneous fat and fascia are incised on
the same line and retracted with the skin.
B. The deep antebrachial fascia is incised in each direction from the epicondyle on the
same line as the skin. Be aware of the neurovascular tissues deep to the fascia, ae
illustrated in Part C.
C. Retraction of the deep fascia and clearing of areolar tissue will expose the epicondyle
and the attached fexor muscle group. Dissection in the craniomedia] direction must
take into account the median nerve and brachial vessels, whereas the ulnar nerve
 and collateral ulnar vessels lie caudolateral to the epieondyle.
CLOSURE
The deep antcbrachial and brachial fascia is closed, followed by closure of the subcuta-
neous tissues and then closure of the skin.
COMMENTS
This approach forms the basis for several other approaches to the medial side of the
elbow joint and will be cross-referenced in those approachcs.
The Thoracic Limb · 177
Plate 41
Approach to the Medial Humeral Epicondyle
Incision in brachial
and antebrachial
fascia
Flcxor muscle
group
B
Uinar n. and
rachialisrm
collateral ulnar
a.andv
Mediann.anc
brachial a. and v
Medialhumera
epicondyle
Tendon ofbiceps
brachii m
Pronatorteres m.
Deep digital
flexor m..
humeral head
Flexor carpr
radialis m.
Superlicial
digital flexor m.
178 ■ The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Medial Aspect of the Humeral Condyle and the
Medial Coronoid Process of the Ulna by an Intermuscular
Incision
Based on a Procedure of Probst, et al.30
INDICATION
Exploration of the medial elbow joint for osteochondritis dissecans and fragmented
medial coronoid proccss.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACH
Plate 43
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. This approach starts similarly to that shown in Plate 41, but the skin incision
extends further distally. Deep antebrachial fascia is incised on the same line as the
skin and retracted to expose the fexor muscle group, as in Plate 4l, Parts B and C.
Protect the ulnar nerve during the fascial incision and elevation.
B. The intermuscular septum between the fexor carpi radialis and deep digital fexor
The division between these muscles is often not very distinct, but can be found by
blunt dissection. The intermuscular incision can alternatively be made between the
pronator teres and fexor carpi radialis muscles (see "Comments" below).
C. Strong retraction between the muscles exposes the joint capsule, which is incised
parallel to the muscles. Protect the underlying articular cartilage when making this
incision.
Plate 42
Approach to the Medial Aspect of the Humeral Condyle
and the Medial Coronoid Process of the Ulna
by an Intermuscular Incision
Deep antebrachial
fascia
Recurrent
Uinar n. and
ulnar a. and v..
collateral ulnar
muscular branch
a. and v.
Pronator
teres m
Flexor carpi
radialis m.
Medial humeral
epicondyie
Deep digital
flexor ni.
humeral head
Flexorcarpi
ulnaris m.
B
Superficial
Incisionin
digital flexorm.
intermuscular
unidas
Incisionin
A
Flexor carpi
radialis m.
Deep digital
flexor m.
humeral head
179
180 ? The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Medial Aspect of the Humeral Condyle and the
Medial Coronoid Process of the Ulna by an Intermuscular
Incision continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE continued
 D. Retraction of the joint capsule exposes the articular surfaces of the humeral condyle
and the ulna. Osteochondritis dissecans lesions will be evident on the condyle at
this point. Exposure of the medial coronoid process may require extension of the
joint capsule incision parallel to the trochlear notch of the ulna, but the incision
should not cross the medial collateral ligament.
E. Visualization of the medial coronoid process is facilitated by strong pronation and
abduction of the antebrachium to open the joint on the medial side. A sandbag under
the drapes or a folded towel on the lateral side of the joint creates a fulcrum for this
manuever. A small Hohmann retractor hooked over the coronoid process is also
Useful.
CLOSURE
Several interrupted sutures are placed in the joint capsule, followed by closure of the
intermuscular fascia and the deep fascia. The subcutis and skin are closed in layers.
COMMENTS
This approach as described by Probst and his coworkers placed the intermuscular
incision between the pronator teres and fexor carpi radialis muscles. There is little
difference in our hands, but there seem to be fewer vascular branches in the intermus-
cular space used here, and the collateral ligament may be better protected.
The Thoracic Limb 181
Plate 42
Approach to the Medial Aspect of the Humeral Condyle
and the Medial Coronoid Process of the Ulna
by an Intermuscular Incision continued
Trochlear notch
Medialaspectot
of ulna
humeral condyie
Joint capsule
D
Extensionol
Tendon of biceps
joint capsule
brachii and
incision
brachialis mm.
Medial coronoid
processofulna
Medialcollateral
lig
Pronation and
abduction of
antebrachium
182 · The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Medial Aspect of the Humeral Condyle and
Medial Humeral Epicondyle
Based on a Procedure of Stoll39
INDICATIONS
1. Osteochondroplasty of the medial aspect of the humeral condyle for osteochondritis
dissecans.
2. Excision of fragmented medial coronoid process of the ulna.
 3. Open reduction of medial luxation of the head of the radius.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACH
Plate 42
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
This procedure is initiated as shown in Parts A, B, and C of Plate 41.
A. After incising the deep antebrachial fascia and removing alveolar fat, the epicondylar
osteotomy is planned. The osteotomy should include all of the origin of both the
separate fbers of the fexor carpi radialis from the adjacent digital fexor muscles.
lf the epicondyle is to be reattached with a lag screw (see “Closure" below), a
suitable glide and tap hole should be drilled now, just distal to the epicondyle.
B. An osteotome of 10- to 12-mm width works well for a 50- to 70-lb (22- to 32-kg) dog.
Incisions 1 and 2 are first made to a depth of approximately 5 mm, and then incision
3 is made parallel to the surface of the condyle, taking care to not include articular
cartilage.
Plate 43
Approach to the Medial Aspect of the Humeral Condyle
and the Medial Coronoid Process of the Uina by
Osteotomy of the Medial Humeral Epicondyle
Deep brachial
fascia
Mediann
Plannedosteotomy
Brachialis m
sitE
Biceps m.
Brachiala.andv.
UInar n. ano
collateral
ulnar vessels
Drill hole
ineminenceof
medial
epicondyle
Pronatorteresm
Deep digital
Flexol
flexor m..
carpi radialis m.
humeral head
Superficial digital
flexor m.
Deepantebrachial
tascia
3rd osteotomy
2nd osteotomy
1stosteotomy
Incision in
intermuscular
septum
B
183
184The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Medial Aspect of the Humeral Condyle and
Medial Coronoid Process of the Uina By Osteotomy of the
Medial Humeral Epicondyle continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE cOntinued
C. The osteotomized bone with attached muscles and collateral ligaments can be
retracted distally after incising the joint capsule. Small Hohmann retractors are
useful to expose the condyle and the medial coronoid process. The process is best
visualized by abduction and pronation of the forearm.
CLOSURE
Interrupted absorbable sutures are placed in the joint capsule. The osteotomized
epicondyle is reattached to its origin by a lag screw or pins and tension-band wire (see
Figures 23 and 24). lncisions in the intermuscular septa, deep antebrachial fascia,
subcutaneous fascia, and skin are each closed in separate layers.
COMMENTS
The choice of osteotomy or muscle separation is primarily a matter of personal
s     a  s aa   
approach.
The Thoracic Limb · 185
Plate 43
Approach to the Medial Aspect of the Humeral Condyle
and the Medial Coronoid Process of the Ulna by
Osteotomy of the Medial Humeral Epicondyle continued
Medialaspectof
humeralcondyle
Jointcapsule
Radial head
Medialcollateral
61
Medial coronoid
process of the ulna
C
186 · The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Proximal Shaft and Trochlear Notch of the
ulna
INDICATIONS
1. Open reduction of fraclures in the region of the shaft or trochlear notch of the ulna.
 2. Open reduction of fracture of ulna and luxation of head of radius (Monteggia fracture)
3. Lengthening and shortening osteotomies of the proximal ulna.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATIONAPPROACHES
Plates 34 through 40, 45, and 46
DESCRIPTION OFTHEPROCEDURE
A. The caudal skin incision starts medial to the tuber olecrani and follows the shaft of
the ulna distally to the midshaft region. The incision should be 5 to 10 mm medial
to the ulnar midline. Subculaneous and deep antebrachial fascia is jncised on the
same line.
B. A periosteal incision is made in the origin of the fexor carpi ulnaris muscle on the
medial side of the tuber olecrani and shaft of the ulna. A short incision is also
necessary in the insertion of the anconeus muscle. This incision continues distally
through the fascia between the ulna and the ulnaris lateralis muscle.
C. Subperiosteal elevation and medial retraction of the flexor carpi ulnaris and lateral
retraction of the extensor carpi ulnaris muscles expose the ulna. Joint capsule
incisions are made as necessary to expose the interior of the joint.
CLOSURE
 External fasciae of the fexor and carpi ulnaris and ulnaris lateralis muscles are sutured
over the caudal border of the ulna. Deep antebrachial fascia, subcutaneous tissues, and
skin are closed in laycrs.
The Thoracic Limb · 187
Plate 44
Approach to the Proximal Shaft and Trochlear Notch
of the Ulna
UIna
Ulnaris
lateralis m
Flexor carpi
ulnaris m..
ulnar head
Anconeus m.
Periosteal
incisions
Tuberolecrani
B
Flexor carpi
ulnaris m.
Ulnaris lateralis
ulnar head
m
Radial head
Lateral aspect of
humeral condyle
Joint capsule
Medial coronoid
incisions
process of uina
Anconeusm.
Medial aspect of
humeralcondyle
C
188  The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Tuber Olecrani
INDICATIONS
1. Open reduction of fractures of the tuber olecrani
 2. Open reduction of fractures of the anconeal process.
3. Excision or fixation of ununited anconeal process.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 34 through 40, and 44
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The incision is centered between the lateral humeral epicondyle and the tuber
olecrani and curves to follow the humeral condyle proximally and the olecranon
distally. Subcutaneous fascia is incised on the same line and elevated with the skin.
B. Brachial fascia is incised parallel to the lateral head of the triceps brachi. A
periostcal incision is made in the insertion of the anconeus muscle on the tuber
olecrani. This incision continues proximally into the muscle, parallel to its fibers
and ncar the edge of the lateral head of the triceps brachii muscle.
C. Elevation of the anconeus muscle exposes the humera) condyle, anconeal process,
and tuber olecrani. If the medial side of the tuber must be exposed to allow for
fracture reduction or placement of intcrnal fixation, the fexor carpi ulnaris muscle
can be elevated by incising fascia between the muscle and the bone. More proximal
elevation of this muscle will require periosteal clevation, as in Plate 44, Part C.
CLOSURE
The intramuscular incision in the anconeus is closed. The insertion of the muscle is
sutured to remnants of its insertion or to fascia on the olecranon. The medial fascial
incision is closed next, followed by closure of the brachial and subcutaneous fascia and
then closure of the skin
COMMENTS
For excision of an ununited anconeal process, the choice between this approach and the
lateral humeroulnar approach shown in Plate 35 is primarily a matter of personal
choice.
The Thoracic Limb = 189
Plate 45
Approach to the Tuber Olecrani
Lateral humeral
epicondyle
Ulnaris
lateralis m
Tricepsbrachi m.
lateral head
Tendon of triceps
Flexor carpi
brachim
ulnaris m.
ulnar head
Incisions
Anconeus m.
B
Tuber olecrani
Lateral aspect ot
humeralcondyle
conealprocess
Flexor carp
ulnaris m..
ulnar head
C
190  The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Distal Shaft and Styloid Process of the Ulna
INDICATIONS
1. Ostectomy or osteotomy of the ulna for treatment of premature distal ulnar physeal
closure.
2. Open reduction of fractures.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
 Plates 48, 49, and 50
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The skin incision is made directly over the lateral surface of the bone, from the
styloid to about the midshaft.
B. Incision of the subcutaneous tissues allows visualization beneath the antebrachial
fascia of the tendon of the ulnaris lateralis muscle directly over, or slightly caudal
to, the bone. Likewise, deep to the fascia is the tendon of the lateral digital extensor
muscle cranial to the bone. The fascia is incised between the tendons.
C. Retraction of the tendons and fascia exposes the bone. If necessary, part of the origin
of the abductor pollicis longus muscle can be elevated from its origin on the cranial
border of the ulna and the interosseous ligament (see also Plate 49C and D).
CLOSURE
Closure of the antebrachial fascia is followed by closure of the subcutis and the skin.
The Thoracic Limb · 191
Plate 46
Approach to the Distal Shaft and Styloid Process
of the Ulna
Tendonof lateral
digital extensor m.
deep tofascia
Incisionin
antebrachial tascia
Styloid process
of ulna
Uina
Tendon of
ulnaris lateralis m.
B
deep to fascia
Abductor pollicis
longus m
Tendonoflateral
digital extensor m.
Tendon of deep
digital flexor m..
ulnar head
Tendon of ulnaris
lateralis m.
192 · The Thoracic Limb
INDICATIONS
1. Open reduction of fractures
 2. Open reduction of luxation of the radial head.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 34, 35, 36, 39, and 40
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The skin is incised from the lateral epicondyle of the humerus on a line following
the craniolateral border of the radius to the junction of the proximal and middle one
third of the bone.
B. The deep antebrachial fascia is incised on the same line as the skin. The extensor
muscles, collateral radial vessels, and a cutaneous branch of the radial nerve will
  n s     s    
carpi radialis and common digital extensor muscles. This incision starts just distal
to the nerve. The vessels must be ligated.
C. Dissection between the extensor muscles allows their retraction and exposure of the
supinator muscle. It is important that the deep ramus of the radial nerve be
identified and protected throughout the rest of the procedure. Subperiosteal elevation
 of the supinator's insertion on the radius is begun.
The Thoracic Limb 193
Plate 47
Approach to the Head and Proximal Metaphysis
of the Radius
Deepantebrachial
Lateral humeral
tascia
epicondyle
Radial n.
muscular branch
Extensor carpi
radialism
Collateralradial
Incision
a.andv.
Commondigital
extensor m.
Brachialis m.
Biceps brachi
Headot
radius
Extensor carpi
Radial n
radialism.
Supinator m.
Incision
Commondigital
extensorm
194 · The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Head and Proximal Metaphysis of the
Radlus continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE continued
 D. Elevation of the proximal portion of the muscle insertion must be done carefully to
avoid the radial nerve.
E. The radial nerve can be elevated and gently retracted with the supinator to expose
theradius.
CLOSURE
There is usually very little of the supinator insertion left on the radius into which
sutures can be placed. Sutures are placed in the external fascia of the supinator and
attached to any other muscle fascia in the area, such as the pronator teres. The
intermuscular septum is closed between the extensor muscles, followed by the deep
antebrachial fascia, subcutaneous tissues, and skin.
The Thoracic Limb · 195
Plate 47
Approach to the Head and Proximal Metaphysis
Of the Radius continued
Supinator m
Periostealelevalo
Supinatorm
 Annular ligament 
Radial head
Radial n
Lateralcollateral
ligancnt
196The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Shaft of the Radius Through a Medial Incision
INDICATIONS
1. Open reduction of fractures.
2. Osteotomy of the radius for treatment of radius curvus.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 49 and 50
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The skin incision extends from the medial epicondyle of the humerus to the styloid
process of the radius. The cephalic vein crosses beneath the distal portion of the
incision and is protected during the incision.
 B. Subcutaneous fascia is incised on the same line as the skin, and the skin edges are
 retracted to expose the underlying muscles. The deep antebrachial fascia is incised
 between the extensor carpi radialis and pronator muscles proximally, with the distal
portion of the incision paralleling the extensor muscle. Note the proxirnity of the
nsu st jo pu eixond an ie aaau uip pe ua pue rrae renog
(shown in more detail in Plate 43, Part A, and below).
The Thoracic Limb ■ 197
Plate 48
Approach to the Shaft of the Radius
Through a Medial Incision
Tendon of biceps
brachii m
Extensor carpi
Flexor carpi
radialis m.
radialis m
Pronatorteresm
Superficial
digital fiexor m.
Incision in antebrachial
fascia
Deep digilal
flexor m..
humeral head
Shaft otradius
Radiala
Median a.and n.
Abductor pollicis longue
tendon andfascia
Cephalicv
B
198 1 The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Shaft of the Radius Through a
Medial Incision continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE continued
C. Retraction of the extensor muscles laterally reveals the supinator muscle. lf needed
for exposure of the proximal radius, the insertions of the pronator and supinator
muscles are incised on the radius.
D. Elevation of the pronator and supinator muscles completes the exposure of the
proximal portion of the radius. The radial nerve lies deep to the proximal supinator
and should be protected (see Plate 47, Part C).
CLOSURE
The pronator and supinator muscles are sutured to their insertions. lf insufficient tissue
remains at the insertion, these muscles are sutured to adjacent muscles, the pronator
quadratus for the supinator and the medial edge of the extensor carpi radialis for the
pronator. The deep antebrachial fascia and subcutaneous fascia are cjosed in separale
layers.
COMMENTS
The fexor carpi radialis and deep digital fexor muscles can be elevated caudally for
exposure, if necessary, but caution is needed to avoid severing the radial and caudal
interosseous arteries that pass between the radius and these muscles. lf more exposure
is required distally, the skin incision can be curved toward the dorsal surface of the
paw. It is then possible to combine this approach with the Approach to the Distal Radius
and Carpus Through a Dorsal Incision (Plate 50).
The Thoracic Limb - 199
Plate 48
Approach to the Shaft of the Radius
Through a Medial Incision continued
Tendonofbiceps
Supinator m.
brachii m
Brachial a.. v.
and mediann
Pronatorteresm
Extensorcarpi
radialis m.
Perosteal
Pronator
quadratus ni
Median
Radial a
200  The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Shaft of the Radius Through a Lateral lncision
INDICATIONS
1. Open reduction and internal fixation of fractures of the shafts of the radius and ulna.
 2. Osteotomy of the radius and ulna.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 46, 47, 48, and 50
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
 A. The incision is centered over the lateral edge of the radius, starting near the radial
head and extending to the distal end of the bone. The subcutaneous fat and supcrficial
antebrachial fascia are incised on the same line.
B. After retracting the skin margins, the shaft of the radius will come into view
through the deep antebrachial fascia. This fascia is incised along the cranial border
of the common digital extensor muscle to free this muscle for retraction.
The Thoracic Limb · 201
Plate 49
Approach to the Shaft of the Radius
Through a Lateral lncision
Extensor carpi
radialis m.
Commondigital
extensor m
Lateral digital
extensorm.
Cephalicv
Shaft of radius
Abductorpollicis
longus m.
Incisionindeep
antebrachial fascia
202 ? The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Shaft of the Radius Through a
Lateral Incision continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE continued
C. Caudal retraction of the common and lateral digital extensor muscles exposes most
of the shaft of the radius laterally. Better views of the cranial aspect are obtained
by medial retraction of the extensor carpi radialis muscle. If more exposure of the
caudolateral aspect of the radius and the ulna is needed, an incision is made through
the abductor pollicis longus muscle near its origin on the ulna and parallel to tht
muscle extensor pollicis longus et indicis proprius.
D. Retraction of the extensor muscles provides complete exposure of the shafts of the
radius and ulna.
CLOSURE
The abductor pollicis longus muscle is either reattached to its origin on the ulna or
sutured to the cranial border of the extensor pollicis muscle. The deep antebrachial
fascia is closed separately from the superficial fascia/subcutaneous fat layer. The skin
is closed routinely.
COMMENTS
In the case of fractures, the choice between this lateral approach and the medial
approach (see Plate 48) is often simply personal preference. However, if there is a need
ynondde stun 'uonexy [eipeu aun jo zioddns un eun at on uoexy fidde pue anpai 0
is superior to the medial approach. Soft tissue injuries may dictate which side to choose.
When doing a distal radial and ulnar osteotomy, this approach is easily combined with
the lateral approach to the ulna (see Plate 46) to allow both osteotomies through a
single skin incision.
The Thoracic Limb· 203
Plate 49
Approach to the Shaft of the Radius
Through a Lateral Incision continued
Extensorpollicis
longus et indicis
Extensor carpi
w snudoid
radialis m
Commonandlaterai
digitalextenso
mm.retractec
Incisionnear
ulnar origin of
abductorpollicis
longus m
Shaftofradius
Shaft of ulna
Extensorpollicis
longus et indicis
proprius m
Abductorpollicis
longus m
204·The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Distal Radius and Carpus Through a Dorsal
Incision
Based on a Procedure of Hurov et al.20
INDICATIONS
 1. Open reduction of fractures of the distal radius or carpal bones
 2. Open reduction of luxations of the joint.
3. Arthrodesis of the carpus.
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. An Esmarch bandage and tourniquet can be used below the elbow. The skin incision
is made on the mid-dorsal surface of the joint and extends from the juncture of the
cephalic and accessory cephalic veins to the middle of the metacarpus. The incision
is lateral to the accessory cephalic vein and curves laterally at its distal end to
follow the vein.
     s    n e  
being left on the vein to allow the placing of sutures in this tissue during closure.
The vein and fascia are undermined and retracted medially with the skin.
B. The deep antebrachial fascia is incised midway between the tendon of the extensor
carpi radialis and the tendon of the common digital extensor. The usual limits of
incision are the abductor pollicis longus muscle proximally and the proximal
metacarpal bones distally isee “Comments" below). The incision is then deepened to
penetrate the periosteum on the distal end of the radius.
C. The periosteum is elevated medially and laterally to allow the retraction of the
tendons without disturbing their sheaths. The fat pad attached to the extensor carpi
radialis tendon may be trimmed, if necessary, to allow visualization of the joint
cavity. The styloid process of the u)na may be exposed by continued lateral elevation
of the periosteum and retraction of the lateral digital extensor tendon. Synovial
incisions are made at the desired joints.
D. Because the synovium is adherent to the dorsal surfaces of individual carpal bones,
the joint capsule must be incised around each bone in order to expose it. Exposure
 of the various joint spaces is enhanced by fexion of the carpus.
CLOSURE
There is usually little synovium available for closure. Simply close the deep and
superficial fascial layers over the tendons, before closing the skin.
COMMENTS
The exposure can be increased proximally by incising the abductor pollicis muscle; this
will usually be necessary for bone plate application. The muscle is sutured with mattress
sutures.
The ThoracicLimb·205
Plate 50
Approach to the Distal Radius and Carpus
Through a Dorsal lncision
Abduclor pollicis
longus m
Tendon ot common
Tendonofextensor
digital extensor m
carpi radialis m.
Metacarpal
Tendonotlateral
bones
digitalextensorm
Accessorycephalic
Dorsal common
digital vv.
Radius
Abductor
pollicis
longus m
Joint capsule
Tendon of
Tendonot
common digital
extensorcarpi
extensor m
CF
radialisn
206 · The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Distal Radius and Carpus Through a
Palmaromedial lncision
INDICATIONS
1. Panarthrodesis of carpus with palmar bone plate.
 2. Fixation of caudal fractures of distal radius.
3. Removal of bone fragments from carpal joints
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATIONAPPROACHES
Plates 50 and 52
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The longitudinal skin incision is equidistant between the radial styloid process and
B. The cephalic vein is double ligated and divided. An incision is made in the midportion
of the fexor retinacular fascia and lengthened proximally into the antebrachial
fascia as needed.
C. Upon retracting the retinacular fascia, the tendons of the fexor carpi radialis and
the digital fexor muscles, as well as the median artery and nerve, will be visible.
Branches of the vessels and nerves to the first digit are isolated and the vessels
exposure required.
N.B. Due to the anatomic complexity of this region, considerable license has been
taken with Parts D and E. Omitted for clarity are the lumbricales, interosseus.
adductor digiti secundi. and adductorlflexor pollicis muscles. Also deleted are the
incised and retracted as necessary to achieve the exposure depicted here.
Plate 51
Approach to the Distal Radius and Carpus
Through a Palmaromedial Incision
Shaftofradius
Flexorcarp
radialis m1
ncisionin
flexorretinaculum
B
Flexor carp
radialis m.
Mediann
Median 6.
Superficial
Deep digital
digital
flexor m.
flexor m.
Flexor
retinaculum
Paimar digital
Palmar common
digitala
207
208The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Distal Radius and Carpus Through a
Palmaromedial Incision continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE cOntinued
D. Retraction of the digital fexor tendons cxposes the palmar carpal region superficially.
The entire region will be covered by a combination of joint capsule, ligaments, and
palmar carpal fibrocartilage. The desired joint spaces arc identifed by probing with
a hypodermic needle. Incisions in the appropriate spaces are then made. Be aware
 of the deep palmar arch and palmar metacarpal arteries as thcsc incisions are made.
E. Incisions in the joint capsules of the various joints are extended as nccdcd.
CLOSURE
Unless an arthrodesis has been done, the joint capsule/ligament/fbrocartilage incisions
are closed with interrupted sutures of' nonabsorbable or polydioxanone/polyglyconale
materials. The fexor retinaculum and deep antebrachial fascia are similarly closed.
There is usually not enough subcutaneous tissue to warrant suturing.
COMMENTS
 External support by cast or splint is needed for several weeks to allow healing of the
palmar carpal structures.
The Thoracic Limb · 209
Plate 51
Approach to the Distal Radius and Carpus
Through a Palmaromedial Incision continued
Radius
Uina
Caudalinterosseous
a.
Incisionin
joint capsule
Uinar n.
Ulnar carpal
Radial carpal
Carpalll
Carpal Il
Carpal IV
Jointcaps
Radius
Radial carpal
Furtherincisions
in jointcapsule
as needed
210  The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Accessory Carpal Bone and Palmarolateral
Carpal Joints
INDICATIONS
1. Internal fixation of fractures of the accessory carpal bone.
 2. Internal fixation of fractures of the palmar process of the ulnar carpal bone.
3. Ligamentous reconstructive procedures.
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The skin incision is made from the caudomedial border of the distal ulna, curving
laterally around the accessory carpal bone and ending distally over the palmar side
  an to psn si s saunn a   a 
B. Deep fascia intimately connects the carpal pad to the free end of the accessory carpal
bone. This fascia is partially dissected to allow medial retraction of the skin and
pad. Extending laterally from the free end of the accessory carpal and inserting on
the tendon of the ulnaris lateralis tendon is the lateral fexor retinaculum. which is
incised near the accessory carpal bone. This will allow sharp dissection to free the
abductor digiti quinti muscle from its origin on the accessory carpal bone. The
muscle is freed from between the two accessory metacarpal ligaments and refected
distally tsee “"Comments" below)
C. Retraction of the accessory metacarpal ligaments will reveal the distomedial surface
of the accessory carpal bone, the most common site of fractures.
Plate 52
Approach to the Accessory Carpal Bone and
Palmarolateral Carpal Joints
Tendon offiexo
carpi uinaris n
Lateral flexo'
retinacuur.
AccessorymetacarpalV
Freeendofaccessory
lic
carpal bont
Abductor digiti ouinti n.
(lasciaremoved)
B
Accessorymelacarpai
Vlc
Base ol accessory
carpal bon
IVic
Palmarprocess of
ulnar carpal bont
UInar n
Caudal interosseous
Abductor digit
quintI r:
aandv
C
211
212 · The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Accessory Carpal Bone and Palmarolateral
Carpal Joints continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE continued
 D, E. To open the palmarolateral aspect of the antebrachiocarpal joint, the accessory
carpal bone is retracted medially to help identify the join1 space along its lateral
border. This joint capsule is incised from the ulnar styloid process around the lateral
side of the accessory carpal and onto the palmar process of the ulnar carpal bone.
Try to leave some capsule tissue on the accessory carpal to allow for suturing. Strong
medial and distal retraction of the free end of the accessory carpal bone will expose
most of the articular surface and allow removal of small bone fragments.
CLOSURE
 The joint capsule incision is closed with interrupted-pattern 3/0 or 4/0 nonabsorbable or
 polydioxanone/polyglyconate sutures. The abductor digiti quinti muscle is reattached 10
the accessory metacarpal lipaments; the Hexor retinaculum is likewise closed with
interrupted sutures, followed by closure of the skin.
COMMENTS
 The abductor digiti quinti muscle does not need to be detached to make the joint capsule
incision. The only purpose of refecting the muscle is to allow jnspection of the
distomedial surface of the accessory carpal bone.
Plate 52
Approach to the Accessory Carpal Bone and
Palmarolateral Carpal Joints continued
Incision injoint
capsult
Ulnarstyloic
process
Flexorretinaculum
Medialretractiono
tree end ot accessory
Accessory metacarpa
carpal bonf
lge
Accessorycarpal bone
articular surface
Palmarprocess of uinar
carpal bone
213
214  The Thoracic Limb
Approaches to the Metacarpal Bones
INDICATION
Open reduction of fractures.
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The anatomy shown here is considerably simplified compared to that in a live
animal. Only the important structures are shown: other elements, such as small
tendons and blood vessels. have been omitted. ln an average-sized dog, these vesligial
structures are so small that their identification and preservation are not practical
during surgery
B, C, D. The incisional technique varies according to the bone or bones to be exposed.
A single bone is approached by an incision directly over the bone, and two adjoining
bones by an incision between them. lf more than two bones need be exposed, two
parallel longitudinal incisions (Part B) or a single curved incision (Part C) can be-
used. The curved incision commences at the proximal end of metacarpal II, rune
laterally to the midshaft of metacarpal V. and then curves medially again to end
over the distal end of metacarpal II. The crescent-shaped skin flap can be elevated
and retracted to expose a large part of all four bones. Another alternative is two
 To expose metacarpals Il and IIl, the deep iascia is incised over bone ll, and the
vessels and tendons are then undermined and retracted laterally. Deep fascia if
incised over bone V to expose bones IV and V. Tendons and vessels are again
undermined and retracted medially. Exposure of bone IV sometimes requires an
incision between tendons, followed by sufficient dissection of the tendons from the
surrounding lascia to allow their separation and retraction.
CLOSURE
Deep fascia is closed to ensure that tendons and vessels are securely held in their proper
positions.
COMMENTS
A deep layer of small metacarpal blood vessels is found on and between the bones.
These vessels are too small to avoid in most animals. and the resulting hemorrhage
 must be controlled by tamponade. Use of an Esmarch bandage and a tourniquet is very
helpful. Do not leave the tourniquet in place for more than 112 hours, and apply a snug
bandange for 72 hours posioperatively to control oozing hemorrhage at the operative
site.
Plate 53
Approaches to the Metacarpal Bones
Tendon of abd uctor
pollicis iongus m
Tencon ot common dipital
extensor m
Tendons ot exiensot
carpiradialism
Tendon of lateral digitai
extensor m
Cranial superlicial
antebrachial a. and v.
Dorsalcommondigital
MetacarpalIl
and
C
门
METACARPAL INCISION:
215
216  The Thoracic Limb
Approach to the Proximal Sesamoid Bones
INDICATION
Excision of fractured sesamoid bones.
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The most commonly fractured sesamoid bones, in both the fore and hind paws. are
those of metacarpal or metatarsal l and V. The skin incision curves around the
metacarpal or metatarsal pad. A medial incision can be used for metacarpals
(metatarsals) Il and Il. and a lateral incision for IV and V.
B. After refection of the skin. the sesamoid bones are palpated at the metacarpopha-
langeal (metatarsophalangeal) joint. A vertical incision is made in the manica
fexoria and the sheaih of the superficial digital flexor tendon directly over the
sesamoids.
C. Retraction of the manica fexoria and sheath of the superficial digital flexor tendon
reveals the paired sesamoid bones under the digital fiexor tendons. The lendons can
be retracted in either direction to expose the sesamoid bones. If the bone is fractured
at ahout the midportion. the entire bone is removed. If fractured toward the end of
the bone. only the smaller fragment is removed. Removal consists of sharply
dissecting away the jntersesmoidean, lateral, medial. and cruciate ligaments of the
sesamoid bones.
CLOSURE
lnterrupted sutures of 3/0 to 4/0 nonabsorbable or polydioxanone acid material are
placed in the manica flexoria superficial digital flexor tendon sheath incision. The skin
is closed next, it being unnecessary to close ihe subcutaneous tissue.
COMMENT
A padded bandage should be worn for 10 daye.
The Thoracic limb · 217
Plate 54
Approach to the Proximal Sesamoid Bones
Manica fiexoria
Tendonsheathof
superficial digita
fiexor
Metacarpalpac
Metacarpal
bonf
Proximal
sesamoid
bones
Metacarpa
Manica fiexori
pac
Tendon of superficial
Proximalsesamoic
digital tiexor m.
bones
Tendon of dcep
digitaltiexor m
218 o The Thoracic Lirmb
Approaches to the Phalanges and Interphalangeal Joints
INDICATIONS
1. Open reduction of fractures of phalanges.
 2. Open reduction of luxations of metatarso- or metacarpophalangeai and interphalan-
geal joints.
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
 aui 'q rmo an uo pasn aq u nanun pue a h u 
incision starts at the distal end of the appropriate metacarpal bone, proceeds distally
over the dorsal surface of the phalanges, and ends over the distal phalanx, If the
distal interphalangeal joint is to be exposed. a transverse incision can be made at
the distal end of the vertical incision to form a "T."
B. Sharp dissection is used to refect skin faps away from underlying bones and
tendons.
CLOSURE
 Due to the scarcity of subcutaneous tissues, the skin is often the only layer to be closed.
COMMENTS
A snug, padded bandage should be worn for 10 days, unless the foot is splinted.
The Thoracic Limb 219
Plate 55
Approaches to the Phalanges and
Interphalangeal Joints
Metacarpal bone:
Proximalphalanx
Middlephalanx
Metacarpophalangeal
JOint
Proxmal interphalangeal
joint
Distal interphalangeal
joint
Tenaonsotcommonanc
lateral digital exlensormri.
Lateral collateral g
Tendon of interosseous
ot proximal interphalangeal
n
joint
Tcndonotsuperficial
digital fie xorm
Dorsal elastic lig
B
SECTION
VI
The Pelvis and
Hip Joint
 Approach to the wing of the llium and Dorsal Aspect of the Sacrum
■ Approach to the llium Through a Lateral Incision
· Approach to the Ventral Aspect of the Sacrum
· Approach to the Craniodorsal Aspect of the Hip Joint Through a
Craniolateral Incision
Incision
■ Approach to the Craniodorsal and Caudodorsal Aspects of the Hip
Joint by Osteotomy of the Greater Trochanter
 Approach to the Craniodorsal and Caudodorsal Aspects of the Hip
Joint by Tenotomy of the Gluteal Muscles
 Approach to the Caudal Aspect of the Hip Joint and Body of the
lschium
 Approach to the Os Coxae
· Approach to the Ventral Aspect of the Hip Joint or the Ramus of the
Pubis
 Approach to the Pubis and Pelvic Symphysis
· Approach to the lschium
222 · The Pelvis and Hip Joint
Approach to the Wing of the llium and Dorsal Aspect
of the Sacrum
Based on a Procedure of Alexander, Archibald and Cawley?
INDICATIONS
1. Open reduction of sacroiliac luxations.
2. Open reduction of fractures of the wing of the ilium.
3. Collection of autogenous cancellous bone chips for grafting.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 20 and 58
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The animal can be positioned in either lateral (illustrated) or sternal recumbency.
The skin incision starts cranially over the cranial dorsal iliac spine and continues
caudally parallel to the midline to near the hip joint. Subcutaneous tissues and
gluteal fascia and fat are incised on the same line to expose the cranial and caudal
dorsal iliac spines.
B. If only the lateral (gluteal) surface of the wing of the ilium need be exposed, as for
fractures or cancellous bone collection, an incision is made in the periosteal origin
of the middle gluteal muscle on the Jateral edge of the ilium near the cranial dorsal
iliac spine and ending beyond the caudal dorsal spine. If the sacrum must also be
exposed. a second incision is made in the periosteal origin of the sacrospinalis muscle.
at the medial edge of the ilium. These incisions merge as they continue caudally.
and it will be necessary to incise through some fibers of the superficial gluteal
muscle in this area.
C. The middle gluteal muscle is elevated subperiosteally in young animals. or simply
scraped from its origin on the ilium in older animals. The elevation continues
caudally to the caudal dorsal iliac spine. Continuing further caudal dissection will
result in severance of the cranial gluteal artery. vein, and nerve texposure of the
shaft of the ilium is better done by the Approach to the Ilium Through a Lateral
 Incision, Plate 57). Similar elevation of the sacrospinalis muscle on the medial side
of the ilium gives limited exposure of the dorsal surface of the sacrum. Muscular
elevation on the sacrum should be confined to the area lateral to the jntermediale
crests to avoid damage to dorsal nerve roots emerging through the dorsal foramina
of the sacrum.
CLOSURE
Superficial fascia of the sacrospinalis and middle gluteal muscles is joined by a row of
sutures crossing the wing of the ilium. Caudal to this, the fascia of the superficial
gluteal muscle is sutured. This is followed by laver closure of the gluteal fascia, the
gluteal fat and subcutaneous fascia, and the skin.
The Peivis and Hip Joint · 223
Plate 56
Approach to the Wing of the Hium and
Dorsal Aspect of the Sacrum
Periosteai
Middiegluteaim
incisions
Sartorusm
Cranial dorsal
iliac spine
Supericial
gluteal m.
Sacrum
Cutaneous
trunci m
Caudaldorsal
iliacspine
Sacrospi
Incised deep
gluteal fascia
and tat
Middle gluteal m
Gluteal surfaceo
wing of iliur:
Dorsal surlace
of sacrum
Intermediate
sacral crests
C
224  The Pelvis and Hip Joint
Approach to the llium Through a Lateral Incision
Based on a Procedure of Hohn and Janesie
INDICATIONS
 1. Open reduction of fractures of the wing and shaft of the ilium.
 2. Combined with dorsal approaches to the hip. for exposure of the os coxae.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATIONAPPROACHES
Plates 59, 61, 62, and 64
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The skin incision extends from the center of the iliac crest and ends just caudal and
distal to the greater trochanter.
 B. Subcutaneous tissues, gluteal fat, and superficial fascia are incised and elevated
with the skin. Incision of the deep gluteal fascia on the same line as the skin allows
incision of the intermuscular septum between the tensor fasciae latae and middle
gluteal muscles. This incision extends from the ventral iliac spine to the cranial
border of the biceps femoris muscle. Fascia is also incised along the cranial border
of the biceps femoris muscle to create a T-shaped fascial incision.
C, D. Retraction of the middle gluteal muscle exposes the deep gluteal muscle and a
portion of the iliac shaft. An jncision is made in the origin of the middle gluteal
muscle on the ilium, starting at the cauda] ventral iliac spine and continuing
cranially and dorsally as needed. Some sharp dissection may be needed between the
middle glutcal and sartorius muscles. The iliolumbar vessels are ligated at the
ventral edge of the ilium. An incision is started in the origin of the deep gluteal
muscle, to allow caudal retraction of the muscle.
The Pelvis and Hip Joint  225
Plate 57
Approach to the llium Through a lateral Incision continued
Incisions In
deep gluteal
Middlegluteal
fascia
m.
Biceps temoris
m
Incisionbetween
middle gluteal and
tensortasciae
latae mm.
Tensorfascia
latae m
B
Middlegluteal m
Gluteal surface
of wing of ilium
Superlicial
gluteal m.
Sartorius m
Deepgluteal
Cranial gluteal
m.
a., v.. and n.
Biceps temorie
m.
lliacus m.
Tensorfasciae
C
latae m
226  The Pelvis and Hip Joint
Approach to the Ilium Through a Lateral Incision continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE COntinUed
E. Subperiosteal elevation of the gluteal muscles exposes the crest, wing, and shaft of 
the ilium.
Maximal exposure of the shaft of the ilium. cranial to the acetabulum, mav
 necessitate sacrificing branches of the cranial gluteal artery, vein, and nerve that
supply the tensor fasciae latae muscle. Elevation of the iliacus muscle along the
vcntral border of the iliac shaft usually results in severing a nutrient artery on the
ventral aspect of the shaft. The severed artery must then be cauterized or plugged
with bone wax.
CLOSURE
Sutures are placed between fasciae of the umiddle gluteal muscle and the sartorius
muscle. This suture line continues caudally between middle gluteal and tensor fasciae
latae rmuscles. Deep gluteal fat and fascia, subcutaneous tissues, and skin are approxi.
mated in layers.
COMMENTS
Consideration must be given to the sciatic nerve when retracting muscle or using bone
holding forceps on the ilium. The nerve lies close to the dorsomedial aspect of the iliat
shaft. With care in retracting, the cranial gluteal vessels and nerve can usually be
preserved.
The Pelvis and Hip Joint · 227
Plate 57
Approach to the llium Through a Lateral Incision
continued
Middleglutealm.
tliolumbar a. and 
ligatian
Deep gluteal m.
Periosteal incisians
Wing of ilum
Cranial gluteal
a.. v.. and r.
Deep gluteal mi
Shaftofill
228  The Pelvis and Hip Joint
Approach to the Ventral Aspect of the Sacrum
Based on a Procedure of Montavon, Boudrieau, and Hohn2?
INDICATION
lnternal fixation of sacroiliac joint fracture-Juxation.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 56 and 57
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
This approach is an extension of the Approach to the Hlium Through a Lateral Incision
(Plate 57), and parts A-C should be completed as shown. Part D is modifed to eliminate
elevation of the deep gluteal muscle.
A. The iliacus muscle is incised at its origin along the ventromedial border of the ilium
and is subperiostealy elevated suffciently to allow insertion of a fnger into the
pelvic canal. The nutrient artery of the ilium may be disrupted during this elevation
and is best controlled by bone wax.
B. The body of the sacrum is palpable now; in the case of a sacroiliac luxation, the
whole ilial body and wing are mobile enough that the region of the synchondrosis
can be palpated on the medial side of the ilium. and the smooth articular surface
can be felt on the sacrum.
CLOSURE
Sutures are placed between the fasciae of the middle gluteal and sartorius muscles, and
this suture line is continued caudally between the middle gluteal and tensor fasciae
latae muscles. Deep gluteal fascia and fat, subcutis, and skin are closed in layers.
COMMENTS
Direct visualization of the sacroiliac joint is useful when fractures are present. This can
be accomplished by extending the muscle elevation craniodorsally around the iliac crest
to join with the Approach to the Wing of the Ilium and Dorsal Aspect of the Sacrum
(Plate 56).
The Pelvis and Hip Joint229
Plate58
Approach to the Ventral Aspect of the Sacrum
Middle gluteal m.
Outine of boay
of sacrum.
Deepgluteal m
of iliacus m
Tensorfasciae
latae m
Palpationof
ventralaspect
ofsacrum
B
230 I The Pelvis and Hip joint
Approach to the Craniodorsal Aspect of the Hip Joint Through a
Craniolateral Incision
Based on Procedures of Archibald et al.3 and Brown and Rosen6
INDICATIONS
1. Femoral head and neck resection.
 2. Open reduction of fractures of the femoral head and neck.
 3. Opcn reduction of coxofemoral luxations.
 4. Installation of total hip prosthesis.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATIONAPPROACHES
Plates 60, 61, and 62
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The skin incision is centered at the level of the greater trochanter and lies over the
cranial border of the shaft of the femur. Distally, it extends one third to one half
the length of the femur; proximally, it curves slightly cranially to end just short of
the dorsal midline.
B. The skin margins are undermined and retracted. An incision is made through the
superficial leaf of the fascia lata, along the cranial border of the biceps femoris
muscle.
the fascia lata to free the insertion of the tensor fasciae latae muscie. The incision
continues proximally through intermuscular septum between the cranial border of
the superficial gluteal muscle and the tensor fasciae latae muscle.
The Pelvis and Hip Joint = 231
Plate 59
Approach to the Craniodorsal Aspect of the Hip Joint
Through a Craniolateral Incision
Middle
/ gluteal m.
Superticial
glutealm
Greater
trochanter
Biceps
Tensor fasciae
femoris m.
latae m.
Incision in
superficialleaf
of fascia lata
B
Superticial gluteal m.
Sciatic n. and caudal
gluteal a. and v.
Biceps femoris m
Greatertrochantet
Tensorfasciaelataem.
Incision in deep leaf
offascia lata
Lateralcircumflex
femoral a. and v.
C
232  The Pelvis and Hip Joint
Approach to the Craniodorsal Aspect of the Hip Joint Through a
Craniolateral Incision continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE continued
D. The fascia lata and the attached tensor fasciae latae muscle are retracted cranially
 and the biceps caudally. Blunt dissection and separation along the neck of the femur
with the finger tip allows visualization of a triangle bounded dorsally by the middle
and deep gluteal muscles, laterally by the vastus lateralis muscle, and medially by
the rectus femoris muscle.
E. The joint capsule is covered by areolar tissue, which must be cleared away by blunt
dissection. An incision is then made in the joint capsule and continued laterally
along the femoral neck through the origin of the vastus lateralis muscle on the neck
and lesser trochanter. Exposure can be improved by tenotomy of a portion of the
deep gluteal tendon close to the trochanter, leaving enough tendon on the bone to
allow suturing. The muscle is split proximally, parallel to its fibers, and the pedicle
is allowed to retract.
The Pelvis and Hip Joint·233
Plate 59
Approach to the Craniodorsal Aspect of the Hip Joint
Through a Craniolateral Incision continued
Supericialglutealm
Middle gluteal ni
Deepgluteal m
Greatertrochanter
Vastus lateralis m
Rectusfemorism
D
Middle gluteal m
Incision in deep
gluteal m.
Greater trochanter
Articularis coxae m.
Incisionin origin
of vastus lateralis
m.
Rectus temoris m
Incision in
一
joint capsule
234The Pelvis and Hip Joint
Approach to the Craniodorsal Aspect of the Hip Joint Through a
Craniolateral lnclslon continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE continued
F. The origin of the vastus lateralis muscle is elevated from the femoral neck and
 refected distally. The muscle comes free most easily if the elevation proceeds from 
distal to proximal. This elevation can be subperiosteal in the immature animal or
extraperiosteal in the mature patient. Hohmann retractors are placed intracapsularly
ventrally and caudally to the femoral neck, to allow visualization of the femoral
head. Caution is needed to be certain that the caudal retraetor is intracapsular, or
at Jeast between the deep gluteal muscle and the femoral neck, in order to avoid
entrapping the sciatic nerve on the caudodorsal surface of the deep gluteal musele.
CLOSURE
 One or two mattress sutures are placed in the dcep glutcal tendon incision, and the
origin of the vastus lateralis muscle is sutured to the cranial edge of the deep gluteal
 muscle. Continuous sutures are placed in the insertion of the tensor fasciae latae musclc
distally and continued proximally along the cranial border'of the superficial gluteal
 muscle. The superficial leaf of the fascia lata distally and the gluteal fascia proximally
are closed to the cranial border of the biceps femoris with a continuous pattern. The
rest of the area is clused routinely in layers.
The Pelvis and Hip Joint  235
Plate 59
Approach to the Craniodorsal Aspect of the Hip Joint
Through a Craniolateral Incision continued
Middle gluteal m.
Deep gluteal m.
ointcapsule
Femoral head
Vastus lateralis m
retracted
236 · The Pelvis and Hip Joint
Approach to the Dorsal Aspect of the Hip Joint Through an
Intergluteal Incision
Based on a Procedure of Wadsworth and Henry41
INDICATION
Internal fixation of fractures in the central part of the acetabulum.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 59, 61, 62, and 63
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. Conmencing distal to the greater trochanter of the femur, the skin incision crosses
the trochanter and curves in a craniomedial direction proximally, ending about
halfway between the trochanter and the dorsal midline.
B. Skin and subcutaneous fat are undermined and retracted to allow visualization of
the gluteal fascia, which is incised along the cranial border of the biceps femoris
 and superficial gluteal muscles. These two incisions meet in the region of the greater
trochanter.
The Pelvis and Hip Joint · 237
Plate 60
Approach to the Dorsal Aspect of the Hip Joint
Through an Intergluteal lncision
Middle
/ gluteal m.
Superticial
gluteal m.
Greater
trochanter
Biceps
Tensorfasciae
femoris m.
latae m.
Incision in
superficialleaf
offascialata
B
238 + The Pelvis and Hip Joint
Approach to the Dorsal Aspect of the Hip Joint Through an
Intergluteal Incision continucd
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE continucd
C. The belly of the superficial gluteal muscle is elevated preparatory to tenotomizing
it near its insertion on the third trochanter of the femur. The sciatic nerve will be
visualized as this muscle is elevated. Cranial retraction of the middle gluteal muscle
S s  s a  i   s n n s
trated), or they may remain attached and retract as a single muscle.
 D. Elevation and retraction of the superficial gluteal muscle will allow retraction of
the sciatic nerve with a Penrose rubber drain. The origin of the deep gluteal muscle
on the shaft of the ilium is incised, starting at its caudal border near the ischiatic
spine. This incision continues cranially as needed to allow elevation and retraction
of the muscle belly in a craniolateral direction to expose the dorsal rim of the
acetabulum. Pointed Hohmann retractors are placed cranial and caudal to the
femoral head, the latter serving to retract the internal obturator and gemelli muscles.
The joint capsule can be incised now to aid in orientation.
CLOSURE
Interrupted absorbable sutures, size 2/0 or 3/0, are placed in the joint capsule. The deep
gluteal muscle is reattached to its origin if any tissue is available for suturing; otherwise,
the muscle is simply placed back in position and allowed to heal by fbrosis. Mattress
sutures of nonabsorbable material are used in the superfcial gluteal tendon; fascia,
subcutaneous tissues, and skin are closed routinely in layers
COMMENTS
fracture must be in the center of the joint and noncomminuted.
The Pelvis and Hip Joint · 239
Plate 60
Approach to the Dorsal Aspect of the Hip Joint
Through an Intergluteal Incision continued
Deep gluteal m
Piriformis m
Sciatic n.
Superficial
gluteal m.
Tenotomy
Middle glute al m
Bicepstemorism.
Greater trochanter
Superficial glutealm.
Dorsal lip ot
acetabulum
 Sciatic n. retracted
Incision in
jointcapsule
Int.obturator and
gemelli mm.
Elevatedportion
oforiginof
deep gluteal m.
D
240  The Pelvis and Hip Joint
Approach to the Craniodorsal and Caudodorsal Aspects of the
Hip Joint by Usteotomy of the Greater Irochanter
Based on a Procedure of Gormanl3
INDICATIONS
1. Open reduction of coxofemoral luxations.
2. Open reduction of fractures in the cranial half of the acetabulum or the caudal body
of the ilium.
3. Open reduction of fractures of the femoral head and neck (see "Comments" below).
4. Installation of total hip prostheses.
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The skin incision is centered on the cranial aspect of the greater trochanter of the
femur, curving craniomedially to near the midline, and following the cranial border
of the femur distally to near midshaft. The alternative curved fap incision is
 preferred by some.
B. Subcutaneous tissues are reflected with the skin. An incision is made in the
for the entire length of the exposure.
C. The biceps femoris muscle is retracted caudally and the sciatic nerve identifed. An
incision is made in the deep leaf of the fascia lata to free the insertion of the tensor
fasciae latae muscle. This incision is continued proximally along the cranial border
of the superficial gluteal muscle. The tendon of insertion of this muscle is cut close
to the third trochanter, leaving enough tissue on the bone to allow suturing.
The Pelvis and Hip Joint241
Plate 61
Approach to the Craniodorsal and Caudodorsal Aspects
of the Hip Joint by Osteotomy of the Greater Trochanter
Middle
/ gluteal m.
Superficial
gluteal m.
Greater
trochanter
Biceps
Tensorfasciae
femoris m.
lataem.
Incision in
superficial leaf
offascia lata
B
Greater trochanter
 Superficial gluteal m
Sciaicn
Biceps femoris m.
retracted
Tensortasciaelataem.
Tenotomyofsuperficial
gluteal tendon
Incision of deep layer
of fascia lata
C
242  The Pelvis and Hip Joint
Approach to the Craniodorsal and Caudodorsal Aspects of the
Hip Joint by Osteotomy of the Greater Trochanter continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE COntinued
D, E. The superficial gluteal muscle is retracted craniodorsally. The greater trochanter
is osteotomized by placing the osteotome on the lateral surface of the greater
trochanter, just proximal to the superficial gluteal muscle insertion on the third
trochanter. The osteotome is positioned to form a 45° angle with the long axis of the
 pq   n m q  n a m s os (a  a
insertions of the middle and deep gluteal muscles. Alternatively, a Gigli wire saw
can be used for the osteotomy.
The Pelvis and Hip Joint243
Plate 61
Approach to the Craniodorsal and Caudodorsal Aspects
of the Hip Joint by Osteotomy of the Greater Trochanter
continued
Superticial gluteal m
Middleglutealm.
Deep gluteal m.
Tensor fasciae
latae m.
Osteotomy of
greater trochanter
Rectus temoris m.
Vastus lateralis m.
D
Inserionot:
Middle gluteal m.
 Deep gluteal m.
Osteotomy of
greater trochanter
Osteotome
Cranial
244 The Pelvis and Hip Joint
Approach to the Craniodorsal and Caudodorsal Aspects of the
Hip Joint by Osteotomy of the Greater Irochanter continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE cOntinued
F. The middle and deep gluteal muscles are refected dorsomedially as a unit with the
greater trochanter. The deep gluteal muscle must be sharply dissected from the joint
capsule and can then be subperiosteally elevated from the ilium as desired for
exposure. The sciatic nerve must be protected during this dissection.
CLOSURE
The greater trochanter is attached to its bed by two Kirschner wires or with the tension
the superficial gluteal muscle and continuous sutures in the insertion of the tensor
fascia lata muscle. The superficial leaf of the fascia lata distally and the gluteal fascia
proximally are closed to the cranial border of the biceps femoris with a continuous
pattern. Subcutaneous tissues and skin are closed in separate layers.
COMMENTS
The choice between this approach and the Approach to the Craniodorsal and Caudodorsal
Aspects of the Hip Joint by Tenotomy of the Gluteal Muscles (Plate 62) is primarily
one of personal preference of the surgeon. There is no difference in the exposure
obtained. Although popular for repair of fractures of the femoral neck, adequate exposure
can usually be obtained by the Approach to the Craniodorsal Aspect of the Hip Joint
Through a Craniolateral Incision (Plate 59), a somewhat quicker procedure.
ThePelvis and HipJoint245
Plate 61
Approach to the Craniodorsal and Caudodorsal Aspects
of the Hip Joint by Osteotomy of the Greater Trochanter
continued
Incision in
Supericial
jointcapsule
gluteal m.
Sciatic n.
Tendon of internal
obturator m.
liur
Osteotomyot
greater trochanter
Gemelli m
Articularis
coxae m
Tendon of insertion of
supericial gluteal m.
+
246 ? The Pelvis and Hip Joint
Approach to the Craniodorsal and Caudodorsal Aspects of the
Hip Joint by Tenotomy of the Gluteal Muscles
Based on a Procedure of Brown5
INDICATIONS
1. Open reduction of coxofemoral luxations.
 2. Open reduction of fractures of the cranial half of the acetabulum or the caudal body
of the ilium.
3. Open reduction of fractures of the femoral head and neck (see "Comments" below).
4. Installation of total hip prostheses.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATIONAPPROACHES
Plates 59, 60, 61, 63, and 64
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
This approach is started as depicted in Plate 61, Parts A-C.
A. The superficial gluteal muscle is retracted proximally to expose the middle gluteal
muscle, and the belly of this muscle is undermined near its insertion on the
trochanter. The tendinous insertion is transected as close as possible to the bone.
Protect the sciatic nerve during these procedures.
The freed middle gluteal and attached piriformis muscles are retracted dorsally to
allow the deep gluteal muscle to be undermined similarly to the middle gluteal
muscle. The insertion of the deep gluteal exlends nore cranially and distally on the
B. Sharp dissection is required to free the deep gluteal muscle from the joint capsule,
following which it can be subperiosteally elevated from the ilium as desired for
exposure
CLOSURE
 Interrupted sutures are placed in the joint capsule. The tendons of the deep and middle
 gluteal muscles are reattached to the trochanter by passing suture through holes drilled
in the trochanter, as illustrated in Figure 22. Locking-loop or mattress sutures are
placed in the tendon of the superfcial gluteal muscle. and a continuous layer in the
insertion of the tensor fasciae latae muscle. The superficial leaf of the tensor fascia lata
distally and the gluteal fascia proximally are closed to the cranial border of the biceps
femoris with a continuous pattern.
COMMENTS
Because of the tenotomies, function is not regained as quickly with this approach as
with the osteotomy of the greater trochanter (Plate 61). This approach may be preferable
to osteotomy in the skeletally immature animal, because there is no disruption of the
physis of the greater trochanter.
The Pelvis and Hip Joint · 247
Plate 62
Approach to the Craniodorsal and Caudodorsal Aspects
of the Hip Joint by Tenotomy of the Gluteal Muscles
Tenotomy of:
Middle gluteal m
Deep gluteal m.
Greater trochanter
Superticial gluteal
m.
Sciaticn
Vastuslateralism
Biceps temoris m.
retracted
Tenotomy of
Superticial gluteal m.
 Superticial gluteal m.
Middle gluteal m.
Deep gluteal m
Incision in joint
llum
Greater trochanter
Articularis
coxae m.
Tendon ot superticial
gluteal m.
B
248  The Pelvis and Hip Joint
Approach to the Caudal Aspect of the Hip Joint and
Body of the Ischium
Based on Procedures of Hohni5 and Slocum and Hohn36
INDICATIONS
 1. Femoral head resection and other arthroplastic procedures.
 2. Open reduction of fractures of the caudal region of the acetabulum and of the cranial
body of the ischium.
 3. Open reduction of craniodorsal coxofemoral luxations.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 59, 60, 61, 62, and 64
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The curved incision is centered on the caudal surface of the greater trochanter. It
starts near the dorsal midline, continues caudal to the trochanter, and extends
through the proximal one fourth to one third of the femur.
B. The subcutaneous fat is undermined and retracted with the skin. The fascia of the
biceps muscle is incised at the cranial border of the muscle from the sacrotuberous
ligament proximaily, and distally to the end of the skin incision.
C. The tendinous insertion of the superficial gluteal muscle is cut near its attachment
on the third trochanter, and the incision is continued into the deep leaf of the fascia
Jata. This muscle is now retracted craniodorsally and the biceps caudally to expose
the external rotator muscles of the hip.
The Pelvis and Hip Joint = 249
Plate 63
Approach to the Caudal Aspect of the Hip Joint
and Body of the lschium
Middle
/gluteal m
Supericial
 gluteal m.
Greater
trochanter
Biceps
Tensorfasciae
femoris m.
latae m.
Incision in
superficial leaf
of fascia lata
 Biceps femoris m.
Middle gluteal m
Tenotomy ot superficial
gluteal m.
Greater trochanter
Incision in deep
Tensorfasciae
lealoffascia lata
latae m.
C
250 · The Pelvis and Hip Joint
Approach to the Caudal Aspect of the Hip Joint and
Body of the Ischium continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE continued
D. With the femur internally rotated, the combined tendon of insertion of the internal
obturator and gemelli muscles is cut close to its attachment in the trochanteric
fossa.
E. A stay suture in the tendon of the internal obturator and gemelli muscles will aid
in its retraction. As it is retracted, it also retracts and protects the sciatic nerve as
the deep gluteal muscle will enhance the exposure of the caudodorsal labrum of the
acetabulum. A Hohmann retraclor placed ventral to the femoral head will help
retract the external obturator and quadratus muscles. Care must be taken to protect
the sciatic nerve and circumflex femoral vessels
CLOSURE
 Nonabsorable suture is used to place a modified Bunnell-Mayer or locking-loop suture
(Figure 21A, C) in the tendon of the internal obturator and gemelli muscles. It is usually
jmpossible to suture to the small portion of the insertion that remains in the trochanteric
fossa, so the suture is attached to the insertions of the deep and middle gluteal muscles
at the trochanter. Alternatively, twin holes can be drilled through the femoral neck as
illustrated in Plate 64, Part D, and the suture is passed through these holes and tied.
COMMENTS
When used in the open reduction of a craniodorsal coxofemoral luxation, this approach
provides good exposure of the acetabulum, allowing it to be easily cleaned of debris
before reduction is attempted. In these situations, this approach can be combined with
the Approach to the Craniodorsal and Caudodorsal Aspects of the Hip Joint by Osteotomy
of the Greater Trochanter (Plate 61).
The Pelvis and HipJoint·251
Plate 63
Approach to the Caudal Aspect of the Hip Joint
and Body of the Ischium continued
Sciatic n.
Tendon of internal
obturator m
Gemelli m.
Superlicial gluteal m.
Tenotomy
Middle gluteal m.
Tendon ol external
obturator m.
Deep gluteal m.
Quadratus temoris m.
Tensor tasciae latae m.
Rectus femoris m.
Adductor magnus m.
Vastus lateralis m
Superticial gluteal m.
Conjoined tendon ol
lium
int. obturator and
gemelli mm.
Incisioninjoint
capsule
Sciaticnotch of
ischium
Deep gluteal m
Sciatic n.
Greater trochanter
252 · The Pelvis and Hip Joint
Approach to the Os Coxae
INDICATION
Open reduction and internal fixation of muitiple fractures of the hemipelvis
EXPLANATORY NOTE
 This procedure combines elements of three approaches: Approach to the Ilium Through
a Lateral Incision (Plate 57), Approach to the Craniodorsal and Caudodorsal Aspects of
the Hip Joint by Osteotomy of the Greater Trochanter (Plate 61), and Approach to the
Caudal Aspect of the Hip Joint and Body of the Ischium (Plate 63). They should be
studied before proceeding.
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The skin incision begins near the center of the iliac crest, runs caudally to a point
distal to the greater trochanter of the femur, and then curves dorsally to end near
the ischiatic tuberosity. Subcutaneous tissues and gluteal fascia are incised along
the same line as the skin. Additional gluteal fascial incisions are made as shown in
Plate 57, Part B, and Plate 61, Parts B and C. The superficial gluteal muscle is
tenotomized near its insertion and the greater trochanter is osteotomized as in Plate
61, Parts D and E.
B. Middle and deep gluteal muscles are elevated from the wing and shaft of the ilium
and refected dorsomediaily with the trochanter. This is suffcient. exposure for the
iliac shaft and cranial acetabular areas.
C, D. For exposure of the caudal acetabular and ischial regions, the combined tendon
of the internal obturator and gemelli muscles is cut at its insertion in the trochanteric
fossa. Caudomedial retraction of these muscles protects the sciatic nerve and exposes
the region of the ischiatic notch. Note that the modified Bunncll-Mayer suture to be
used in closure has been inserted in the tendon to aid in retraction of these muscles.
CLOSURE
Illustration D shows how the internal obturator/gemelli tendon is attached to the
femoral neck. Two holes drilled through the femoral neck allow the tendon to be securely
approximated. The greater trochanter is attached to the femur by means of Kirschner
wires and tension band wire (see Figure 23A). The tendon of the superficial gluteal
muscle is sutured to its insertion of the third trochanter. Fascial incisions, subcutaneous
tissues, and skin are closed in separate layers.
The Pelvis and Hip Joint 253
Plate 64
Approach to the Os Coxae
Middle gluteal m.
Osteotomy of greater
Deep gluteal m.
tubercle
Superficial gluteal
m
Sciaticn.
Tendon ofinternal
obturator m.
Gemelli m.
Shaft of ilum
Tenotomy incision
Tensorfasciae
latae m.
Tendon ot exlernal
obturator m
Quadratusfemorism
Rectustemorism
Adductor magnus m.
Vastuslateralism.
Biceps femoris m.
Elevated middle
gluteal m
Conjoined tendon ol
int.obturator anc
Conjoined tendon otf
gemellimm
int.obturator
and gemell mm
Sciatic notch ot
ischium
Elevated aeep
Sciaticn
gluteal m
Shaft ofiliun
Tendonofexternal
obturator m
D
254 The Pelvis and Hip Joint
Approach to the Ventra! Aspect of the Hip Joint or the Ramus
of the Pubis
Based on Procedures of Hohn's and Slocum and Devine 35
INDICATIONS
1. Open reduction of ventral luxations of the femoral head.
 2. Open reduction of fractures of the ventral aspect of the acetabulum.
 3. Ostectomy of the femoral head and neck.
4. Ostectomy of the ramus of the pubis for triple pelvic osteotomy.
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The skin incision is made over the cranial border of the pectineus muscle, starting
at the ventral lip of the acetabulum. The incision runs distally along the pectineus
for a distance of one third the length of the femur.
B. The fascia is opened in line with the skin incision and the skin faps undermined
and retracted. The helly of the pectineus muscle is mobilized by blunt dissection.
with care being taken to protect the femoral artery, vein, and saphenous nerve that
run along the cranial horder of the muscle. The pectineus is transected near its
origin on the prepubic tendon.
C. The pectineus muscle is reflected distally to reveal the iliopsoas muscle and the
 acetabular portion of the pelvis. lt may be necessary to free these vessels from the
  s   r n o  s 
vessels may be disrupted during retraction.
The Pelvis and Hip Joint 255
Plate 65
Approach to the Ventral Aspect of the Hip Joint or the
Ramus of the Pubis
Obturatorn.
Pectineus m
lllopsoas m
Medial circumflex
femoral a.and v.
Femoral a. and v.
Adductor magnus m.
Rectus temoris m.
Tensor fasciae latae m.
Vastusmedialis m.
Saphenous br. of
lemoraln.
Sartoriusm
opsoasm
A
Pectineus m.
256  The Pe!vis and Hip Joint
Approach to the Ventral Aspect of the Hip Joint or the Ramus
of the Pubis continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEOURE cOntinued
D. If only the pubic ramus is to be exposed, go directly to Part E. An interval between
the iliopsoas and the adductor longus inuscle is developed by blunt dissection.
Retraction of the iliopsoas cranially and the adductor caudally exposes the rim of
the acetabulum. The joint capsule is shown incised so as to reveal the femoral head.
Best exposure of the neck of the femur can be developed by placing Hohmann
retractors cranial and caudal to the femoral neck.
E. Exposure of the ramus of the pubis is accomplished by retraction of the iliopsoas
muscle with a Hohmann retractor placed craniomedially to the iliopectineal emj-
 nence. Some of the origin of the adductor longus muscle is elevated from the ramus
 and another retractor is placed in the obturator foramen. Care must be taken to
prevent trapping the obturator nerve between the retractor and the bone.
CLOSURE
Mattress sutures of nonabsorbable material are used to attach the pectineus tendon to
the prepubic tendon. A layered closure follows. Alternatively, the muscle can be
transected as far distally as possible and the muscle discarded. This is usually done in
the triple pelvic osteotomy procedure.
COMMENTS
Exposure of the joint by this approach is quite sparse, and its use is therefore quite
because the integrity of the structures dorsal to the joint is maintained.
The Pelvis and Hip Joint = 257
Plate 65
Approach to the Ventral Aspect of the Hip Joint or the
Ramus of the Pubis continued
Femoralhead
Ventral lipof acetabulum
Joint capsuleincised
D
Illiopsoas m.
Ramus of the pubis
eminence
Adductorionousm
llopsoasm
258 + The Pelvis and Hip joint
Approach to the Pubis and Pelvic Symphysis
INDICATIONS
1. Open reduction of fractures of the pubis.
2. Pubic symphysiotomy.
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The skin incision on a male dog is made alongside the penis and extends from the
' u op ag an un sqnd an o uno ( 9z) qu I hunod e o ao.s
the incision is made from the vulva cranially on the midline. The latter technique
can also be applied to the male cat.
 B. The penis is retracted past. the midline, following the incision of the fascia alongside
the penis and blunt dissection under the organ. A large branch of the external
pudendal arlery must be ligated to make the fascial incision.
C. Deep fascia and fat are incised and retracted.
The Pelvis and Hip Joint ● 259
Plate 66
Approach to the Pubis and Pelvic Symphysis
Externalpudendal
a.andv
ascialincision
Superficial inguinal
lymphnode
underfascia
Penis
Cranial border
of pubis
A
Superficial inguinal
lymph node
Spermaticcord-
Obturator foramen
Adductor m
Gracilis m
260  The Pelvis and Hip Joint
Approach to the Pubis and Pelvic Symphysis continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE cOntinued
D. A midline incision commencing just cranial to the pubis is made through the linea
alba and continued caudally through the subpelvic tendon to the surface of the pubic
symphysis.
E. The gracilis and adductor muscles are elevated from the pubic syrnphysis. Avoid
opening the peritoneum if possible.
CLOSURE
The gracilis and adductor muscles are joined at the symphysis by sutures. Any disruption
of the insertion of the prepubic tendons must be securely sutured. Attachment to the
fascia of the adductor and gracilis muscles is satisfactory. Care must be taken to ensure
closure of the peritoneum cranially to the pubis if the peritoneum has been disrupted.
COMMENTS
Excessive abduction of the hindlegs should be prevented for several days by loosely
hobbling the legs together.
The Pelvis and Hip Joint  261
Plate 66
Approach to the Pubis and Pelvic Symphysis continued
Prepubic tendon
Peclineus m
Rectusabdominism
Incisioninsubpelvic
tendon
Adductorm
Gracilism
Ventral sheath ot
rectus abdominis
m
Cranial border of
Rectus abaominis m.
pubis
Peritoneum
Prepubic tendon
Pelvic Symphysis
Etevated andretracted
adductor and gracilis
m
Obturator foramina
262 = The Pelvis and Hip Joint
Approach to the Ischium
INDICATIONS
1. Open reduction of fractures of the ischium.
 2. Osteotomy of the ramus for triple pelvic osteotomy
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 60 through 63
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
 A. For exposure of fractures. the skin incision is made over the sacrotuberous ligament
(absent in cats), which is located by palpation. The incision extends from the leve]
of the greater trochanter to the ischiatic tuberosity. For osteotomy of the ramus, the
incision is parallel to the midline, starting caudally at the medial angle of the
ischiatic tuberosity and exiending cranially only half the distance to the level of the
greater trochanter (for osteotomy only, go directly to Part D).
B. For exposure of the cranial aspect of the spine of the ischium and visualization of
the sciatic nerve, an intermuscular incision is made between the superfcial gluteal
muscle and the biceps femoris muscle.
C. Caudal retraction of the biceps femoris muscle and cranial retraction of the super-
ficial gluteal muscle provides good exposure of the spine of the ischium and the
sciatic nerve.
D. To expose the entire ramus of the ischium, the caudal edge of the origin of the
internal obturator muscle is elevated cranially from the table surface until the
obturator foramen is visible.
CLOSURE
The elevated internal obturator muscle is sutured to fascia and remnants of periosteum
along the ramus. The rest of the incisions are closed in layers.
The Pelvis and Hip Joint 263
Plate 67
Approach to the Ischium
Biceps femoris m
Sacrotuberous
Intermuscular incision
IC
t0 expose cranial aspect
of spine of ischium
Internal
obturatorm
Coccygeus m
B
A
Sacrotuberous
lg.
Gemellt and internal
obturator mm
Sciaticn
Ischiaticspine
Ramus of
ischium
Bicepsfemoris m
Internal obturator m
Ischiatic spine ot
elevated trom ischium
body of ischium
Retractor in
C
Caudal gluteal a.
obturator toramer
andv
D
SECTION
VII
The Hindlimb
● Approach to the Greater Trochanter and Subtrochanteric Region of
the Femur
鲁 Approach to the Shaft of the Femur
■ Approach to the Distal Femur and Stile Joint Through a Lateral Incision
 Approach to the Stifle Joint Through a Lateral Incision
 Approach to the Stifle Joint Through a Medial Incision
■ Approach to the Stifle Joint with Bilateral Exposure
● Approach to the Distal Femur and Stifle Joint by Osteotomy of the Tibial
Tuberosity
■ Approach to the Lateral Collateral Ligament and Caudolateral Part of
the Stifle Joint
■ Approach to the Stifle Joint by Osteotomy of the Origin of the Lateral
Collateral Ligament
 ● Approach to the Medial Collateral Ligament and Caudomedial Part of
the Stifle Joint
● Approach to the Stifle Joint by Osteotomy of the Origin of the Medial
Collateral Ligament
■ Approach to the Shaft of the Tibia
● Approach to the Lateral Malleolus and Talocrural Joint
鲁 Approach to the Medial Malleolus and Talocrural Joint
■ Approach to the Tarsocrural Joint by Osteotomy of the Medial
Malleolus
β Approach to the Calcaneus
264
The Hindlimb265
■ Approach to the Calcaneus and Plantar Aspects of the Tarsal Bones
 Approach to the Lateral Bones of the Tarsus
· Approach to the Medial Bones of the Tarsus
■ Approach to the Proximal Sesamoid Bones
■ Approach to the Phalanges and Interphalangeal Joints
■ Approaches to the Metatarsal Bones
266 · The Hindlimb
Approach to the Greater Trochanter and Subtrochanteric
Region of the Femur
INDICATION
Open reduction of fractures in the trochanteric and subtrochanteric regions of the femur.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 59, 61, 62, 64, and 69
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The skin incision runs from a point dorsal and slightly cranial to the trochanter.
extends over the lateral surface of the trochanter, and ends distally at the proximai
one third of the shaft of the femur.
B. The subcutaneous fat and fascia are incised and cleared from the area so that the
superficial leaf of the fascia lata can be clearly visualized. An incision is made
through the fascia lata along the cranial border of the biceps femoris muscle.
C. The biceps is reflected caudally and the skin and fascia lata cranially. The borders
of the superfcial gluteal muscle are developed by dissection from the surrounding
fascia, and the tendon of insertion of this muscle is cut near the femur. Sufficient
tendon is left distally to allow suturing at closure.
The Hindlimb ·267
Plate 68
Approach to the Greater Trochanter and
Subtrochanteric Region of the Femur
Middle
glulealm
Superliciai
gluteal m.
Greater
trochanter
Biceps
Tensorfasciae
temoris m
lataem
Incisionin
superlicialleat
oflascialata
A
Middle
 gluteal m.
Supericiai
gluteal m
Tenotomy
InCISion
Tensorfasciae
latae m.
Vastus
lateralis m
Biceps
femoris m.
C
268  The Hindimb
Approach to the Greater Trochanter and Subtrochanteric
Region of the Femur continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE cOntinued
 D. The superficial gluteal muscle is retracted proximally to expose the greater trochan-
ter and the middle gluteal muscle. An incision is now made through the fibers of
origin of the vastus Jateralis muscle along the ridge of the third trochanter of the
femur. This ineision is deepened to include the periosteum in young animals.
E. Subperiosteal elevation of this proximal lateral portion of the vastus lateralis muscle
exposes the proximal shaft of the femur. The adductor muscle on the caudal side of
the bone can also be elevated from the bone to give additional exposure.
CLOSURE
The vastus lateralis muscle is reattached medially to the middle or deep gluteal tendons
the tendon of the superficial gluteal muscle. The fascia lata is then sutured to the biceps
femoris, followed by subcutis and skin.
Plate 68
Approach to the Greater Trochanter and
Subtrochanteric Region of the Femur continued
Tendon of superlicial
gluteal n.
Incisioninorigin
ofvastuslateralism
on3rd trochanter
D
Area of elevationot
vastuslateralism
Vastus lateralis m
retracted
269
E
270  The Hindlimb
Approach to the Shaft of the Femur
Based on a Procedure of Brinker
INDICATION
Open reduction of fractures of the femoral shaft proximal to the supracondylar area
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The skin incision is made along the craniolateral border of the shaft of the hone
from the level of the greater trochanter to the level of the patella. The subcutaneous
B. The skin margins are undermined and retracted and the superficial leaf of the fascia
lata is incised along the cranial border of the biceps femoris muscle. This incision
extends the entire length of the skin incision. If muscle fbers are encounlered, the
incision should be directed more cranially.
C. Caudal relraction of the biceps femoris reveals the shaft of the femur. It is necessary
to incise the fascial aponeurotic septum on the lateral shaft of the bone in order to
adequately retract the vastus lateralis.
D. The vastus lateralis and intermedius muscles on the cranial surface of the shaft are
retracted by freeing the loose fascia beiween the muscle and the bone
CLOSURE
Closure consists of suturing the fascia lata to the cranial border of the biceps muscle in
one tier and the subcutaneous fat and fascia in a second tjer.
COMMENTS
ILimit elevation of the adduclor muscle on the caudal one third of the shaft to the extent
necessary for visualization of fracture lines, placement of cerclage wires. etc. Thit
muscle js a valuable source of periosteal blood supply lo thie fracture line caudally
The Hindlimb  271
Plate 69
Approach to the Shaft of the Femur
Tensorlasciae
lataem
Bicepstemorisr
Incision in
superficiallea
offascialate
Vastus lateralism
Vastus lateralis m.
letraclec
Shati ot temur
Vastusintermedius m
Incision in
Bicepstemorism
aponeuroticleaf
oftascia lata
C
272~ The Hindlimb
Approach to the Distal Femur and Stifle Joint Through a Lateral
Incision
Based on a Procedure of Paatsama2e
INDICATIONS
1. Open reduetion of supracondylar. lateral condvlar, intercondylar. and distal physea]
fractures of the femur.
2. Exploration of the stifie join1
3. Medial patellar luxation reconstructions.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 69, 71, 72, 73, and 74
DESCRIPTION OF PROCEDURE
A. After palpation of the patella and lateral trochlear ridge, a curved parapatellar skin
incision is made extending from the tibial tuberosily to the level of the patella, and
then an equal distance proximally. The subcutaneous fascia is incised in the same
line as the skin incision. The fascia lata and lateral fascia of the stife joint are
exposed by undermining the subeutancous fat and fascia, which are then retracted
with the skin.
B. Another curved incision, similar to that in the skin, is made through the fascia lata
along the cranial border of the biceps. The incision continues distally into the lateral
fascia of the stifie joint. As it crosses the trochlear ridge, it curves to parallel the
lateral edge of the patella to receive sutures when the joint is closed.
The Hindlimb · 273
Plate 70
Approach to the Distal Femur and Stifle Joint
Through a Lateral Incision
Tendonotthe
quadriceps temons
m
Fascia lata
Bicepsfemorsn
Patella
Incisioninlateral
retinacuiartascia
Patellar lig
274  The Hindlimb
Approach to the Distal Femur and Stifle Joint Through a Lateral
Incision continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE cOntinued
C. The biceps and attached lateral fascia are retracted caudally. ln separating the
biceps from the vastus lateralis. an intermuscular septum formed from 1he fascia
lata is found attached to the femur. This fascia must be incised to allow mobilizalion
of the quadriceps and biceps. The vessels crossing the area must be ligated in some
D. With the joint extended, the patella and quadriceps can be Juxated medially. Lateral
retraction of the joint capsule with the biceps and lateral fascia fully exposes the
 a   n  o      jo 
CLOSURE
The joint capsule and lateral fascia of the stife joint are closed in one layer with
interrupted sutures of nonabsorbable or polydioxanone suture material. Sutures must
be placed to preven1 any suture material from penetrating the joint capsule in a region
where it could abrade articular cartilage. The fascia lata incision proximal to the patella
can be closed with a continuous-pattern absorbable suture.
COMMENTS
 ( g  p  an 0 q    sn o a
the entire bone can be exposed. It should be noted that the joint capsule usually need
not be incised to expose supracondvlar fractures. but it is always incised when the
fracture is at the phvseal line, which is intracapsular. To allow for conversion to
bilateral exposure of the joint when needed. this procedure can be done with the animal
in dorsal recumbency isee Plate 73).
The Hindlimb = 275
Plate 70
Approach to the Distal Femur and Stifle Joint
ThroughaLateralIncision continued
Lateralretinacular
tascia and bicep:
Ligatures
i
temoris m.retractec
Branch ot
caudal femoral
Joint
capsule
Patella
Femoral
condyle
Tenoonot
Incision In
joini capsule
ext.n:
Cianial
cruciatelic
Laleral
collateral
Intrapatellar
lIo
Gastrocnemiusm.
tatpac
lateralhead and
letiactec
tegion oflaleral
sesamoid
276 ? The Hindlimt
Approach to the Stifle Joint Through a Lateral Incision
INDICATIONS
1. Cranial cruciate ligament reconstructions
2. Meniscectomy
3. Exploration of the stife joint
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 70, 72, 73, 74, and 75
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. This approach can be done either in lateral or dorsal recumbency. The skin incision
Starts over the tibial tuberosity lateral to the patellar ligament, continues proximally
to the level of the patella, and then an equal distance proximally following the
crania] border of the femur.
B. The arthrotomy incision follows the same line as the skin. The distal portion it
made in the lateral fascia first with the scalpel, slarting opposite the distal pole of
the patella and a few millimeters lateral to the patellar ligament, and continuing
distally to the tibia. A stab incision is made into the joint at the proximal end ol
this incision, which will allow entry into the joint with little danger of damaging
articular cartilage of the femoral condyle. One blade of a scissor is inserted into the
joint and the scissor is advanced proximally. cutting joint capsule, lateral parapa.
lellar fibrocartilage. and fascia lata. As the proximal parl. of the incision is started.
it is directed slightly lalerally so as lo cut through the vaslus lateralis parallel to
the muscle fibers and to leave enough tissue on the lateral side of the patella to
permit suturing
C. The patella can now be luxated medially. If the patella will not stay in position
medially. the proximal end of the incision is lengthened. Distal retraction of the fat
pad exposes the cruciate ligaments and menisci.
CLOSURE
Distally. the joint capsule and lateral fascia of the stifle joint are closed in one layer
with interrupted sulires of nonabsorbable or polydioxanone material. Sutures must be
placed so as to prevent any suture material from penetrating the joint in a region where
it could abrade articular cartilage. Proximal to the patella the fascia lata can be closed
with a continuous-pattern absorbable suture. Subcutis and skin are closed routinely
COMMENTS
For cosmetic reasons, this skin incision is often made medially. as in Plate 72. The skin
can easily be undermined and retracted laterally to make the lateral arthrotomy.
reconstructions, the author favors a medial approach tsee Plate 72), particularly in
chronic injuries. These cases often have damage to the caudal horn of the medial
meniscus. and meniscectomy is more easily done from the medial side.
Plate 71
Approach to the Stifle Joint Through a Lateral lncision
Fascialate
Biceps
lemors ni
Fatella
Incisioninlateral
retinacular fasci
and ioinl capsul
Patellarligament
B
Incised tascla
late
Incised vastus
lateralisn.
Joint capsule
Femoral
trochiear sulcus
Cranial cruciate
Tendonof lonc
digitalexlensor
Fal pad anc
intermenisca
lig.retracleq
277
278 ● The Hindlimb
Approach to the Stifle Joint Through a Medial lncision
INDICATIONS
1. Cranial cruciate ligament reconstructions
2. Exploration of the stifle joint.
 3. Medial meniscectomy.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 71.73, 74. and 77
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The skin incisjon starts over the tibial tuberosity medial to the patellar ligamenl,
continues proximally to the level of the patella. and then an equal distance
proximally following the cranial border of the femur.
B. The arthrotomy incision follows the same line as the skin. The distal portion in the
medial fascia is made first with the scalpel. starting opposite the distal pole of the
patella and a few millimeters medial 1o the patellar ligament. and continuinp
distally to the tibia. A stab incision is made into the joint at the proximal end of
this incision. which will allow entry into 1he joint. with little danger of damaging
 articular cartilage of the femoral condyle. One blade of a scissor is inserted into the
joint and the scissor is advanced proximally. cutting joint capsule, medial parapa-
tellar fibrocartilage, medial fascia. and the vastus medialis and cranial part of the
sartorius imusc]es (also see Plate 71, Part B). As the proximal part of the incision is
started. it is directed medially so as to cut through the cranial sarlorius and vastus
medialis muscles parallel to their fibers. and to leave enough tissue on the medial
side of the patella to permit suturing.
The Hindlimb = 279
Plate 72
Approach to the Stifle Joint Through a Medial Incision
Saroriusm
cranial par:
Patella
Incisioninmedial
retinaculartascie
Sartorus ni
sarorius m.. anc
caudal par
jointcapsule
Patellar lic
A
280 · The Hindlimb
Approach to the Stifle Joint Through a Medial Incision continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE COntinUed
C. The patela can now be luxated laterally. If the patella will not stay in position
laterally. the proximal end of the incision is lengthened. Distal retraction of the fat
pad exposes the cruciate ligaments and menisei
CLOSURE
Distally, the joint capsule and medial fascia of the stife joint are closed in one layer
with in1errupted sutures of nonabsorbabie or polydioxanone material. Sutures must b(
placed so as lo prevent any suture matcrial from penetrating the synovial membrane
in a region where it could abrade articular cartilage. Proximal to the patella. the cranial
part of the sartorius and the vastus medialis muscles can be closed with a continuous-
 pattern absorbable suture. Subcutis and skin are closed routinely.
COMMENTS
Medial exposure is preferred over the lateral approach whenever possible. Scar formation
is hidden. the interior of the joint is more widely exposed. and medial meniscectomy js
more readily performed through a medial incision.
The Hindlimb ·281
Plate 72
Approach to the Stifle Joint Through a Medial Incision
continued
Saroriusm
cianial part
Vastusmedialis
Patella
Femoralcondyle
Cranialcruciate
5
Medialmeniscus
Mec
collatcral
Intrapateliar
lio
tal pad
282  The Hindlimb
Approach to the Stifle Joint with Bilateral Exposure
INDICATIONS
1. Open reduction of fractures of the distal femur.
2. Double Rush pin fxation of the femur.
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
This procedure is a combination of the Approach to the Distal Femur and Stife Joint
Through a Lateral Incision and the Approach to the Stife Joint Through a Medial
Incision 1see Plates 70 and 72).
A. The skin incision is as shown in Plate 70, Part A, although slightly elongaled
proximally to allow for easier retraction to the medial side. The skin and subcutis
are undermined and retracted medially sufficiently lo allow access to the medial
arthrotomy. If desirable, the skin incision can be placed medially as in Plate 72.
Part A, again lengthened proximally to allow easier retraction to the Iateral side.
B. Entrance to the lateral side is shown in Parts B, C, and D of Plate 70.
The Hindlimb·283
Plate73
Approach to the Stifle Joint with Bilateral Exposure
Incised tasci
lata
Incisedvastus
lateralsm
Femoral
trochlearsulcus
Tendon of long
IC
digitalextensor
m.
Fat pad and
intermeniscal
lg. retracted
284The Hindlimb
Approach to the Stifle Joint with Bilateral Exposure continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE cOntinued
C. To cxpose the mcdial side, see Parts B and C of Plate 72.
D. The entire condylar and supracondylar portion of the fenur and the cranial
compartment of the slife joint are now exposed.
CLOSURE
 Suturing is done as previously explained for the medial and lateral approaches
Plate 73
Approach to the Stifle Joint with Bilateral Exposure
continued
Sartorius n.
cranial par
Patelle
Incisioninmedial
retinacularfascia
Sarlorius m.
sarorius m.. and
jointcapsule
caudal par
Patellar lig
Ouadricepstendon
Sartorius m.
cranial part. and
vastusmedialism.
Biceps femoris m.
Medialtrochlear
Lateralcollateral
lg.
Medial collateral
lIC
Lateral trochlear
ridge
Intrapatellar
Tendonof long
fal pad
digital extensor m.
Patellar lig.
285
286 · The Hindlimb
Approach to the Distai Femur and Stifle Joint by Osteotomy of
the Tibial Tuberosity
Based on a Procedure of Nunamaker?5
INDICATIONS
Open reduction of multiple fractures of the femoral condyles or supracondylar region.
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
This procedure is a modification of the Approach to the Stifle Joint with Bilateral
Exposure (Plate 73!.
A. An osteotome or Gigli wire saw is used to remove the tibial tuberosity, containing
the insertion of the patellar ligament, from the tibia. Care must be excrcised to
damage neither the articular cartilage of the femoral condyles nor the meniscal
carlilages while performing this osteotomy.
B. The dctached tibial tuberosity, palellar ligament, and patella are now refected
proximally to expose the femoral condyles, cruciate ligaments, and menisci. If the
supracondylar area of the femur must also be exposed, the medial and lateral
incisions can be extended proximally as needed.
CLOSURE
The libial tuberosity is attached to the tibia with Kirschner wires and tension band
wire (Figure 23). Subcutaneous tissues and skin are closed in layers. The medial and
lateral joint capsules and fascia are closed in one layer, using nonabsorbable or
polydioxanone suture material in an interrupted pattern. Fasciae of the quadriceps and
biceps muscles are sutured with a continuous pattern and absorbable material.
Plate 74
Approach to the Distal Femur and Stifle Joint
by Osteotomy of the Tibial Tuberosity
Tibial
tuberosity
Osteotomy
Tibialtuberositv
Patella
Tendonofquadriceps
temoris m
Femoral trochlear
suicus
Cranial cruciate
Intermeniscal lig
Infrapatellar
tat pao
Tibial tuberosity
osleotomysite
287
288 · The Hindlimb
Approach to the Lateral Collateral Ligament and Caudolateral
Part of the Stifle Joint
INDICATIONS
1. Removal of the caudal horn of the lateral meniscus.
 2. Repair of the lateral collateral ligament or tendon of the popliteus muscle
 3. Open reduction of fractures of the caudal articular surface of the lateral femoral
condyle.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 70, 71, 73, and 74
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The skin incision is made directly over the distal femur and proximal tibia. Tht
incision commences at the lower third of the femur and continues distally through
the proximal fourth of the tibia.
B. Subcutaneous tissues are incised on the same line and retracted with the skin. An
incision is made in the aponeurosis of the biceps femoris muscle just cranial to the
muscle fibers. lt is not necessary lo penetrale the joint capsule, although this may
be preferable in order to visualize the cranial compartment of the joint (see Plate
70, Part C1.
C. As the biceps muscle and attached fascia lata are undermined and retracted caudally,
the lateral collateral ligament and tendon of the popliteus muscle are exposed,
although still covered by fascia. Note the position of the peroneal nerve and protect
it from excessive tension
D. The caudolaleral compartment of the joint is exposed by incising the joint capsule
caudally from the collateral ligament. The popliteal tendon and a portion of the
joint capsule are elevated to increase exposure. Take care not to damage the meniscns
in making this incision.
CLOSURE
 Interrupted absorbable sutures are placed in the joint capsule. The aponeurosis of the
biceps femoris and the rest of the lateral fascia arc closed with either continuous
absorbable or interrupted nonabsorbable sutures. Closure of subcutaneous tissues and
skin is routine.
Plate 75
Approach to the Lateral Collateral Ligament and
Caudolateral Part of the Stifle Joint
Incision in fascie
lata
B
Bicepsfemorism
honperonealn
Tendon ot
Gastrocnemius m.,
popliteus m.
lateralheac
Gastrocnemius m.
Lateral
lateral head
collateral lig
Peroneus
longus m
Tibialis
cranialis m.
Incision in
jointcapsule
Lateral
lemoralcondyle
Popliteus m
Lateral
collaleral lg
289
290 · The Hindlimb
Approach to the Stifle Joint by Osteotomy of the Origin of the
Lateral Collateral Ligament
INDICATIONS
1. Reduction of fractures of the caudal part of the lateral femoral condyle.
2. Exploration of the caudolateral part of the stife joint.
3. Avulsion of the insertion of the caudal cruciate ligament
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 70, 71, 74. and 75
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
This procedure is a continuation of the Approach to the Lateral Collateral Ligament
and Caudolateral Part of the Stife Joint (Plate 75).
A. lncision of the joint capsule is continued cranially after elevating the lateral
collateral ligament from the joint capsule and lateral retinaculum. This will expose
the tendon of the popliteus muscle and its insertion on the femoral condyle. An
osteotome is used to outline a block of bone that contains the entire origin of the
lateral collateral ligament.
B. The block of bone is freed from the underlying condyle. Bc sure to take an adcquate
amount of bone, because too small a block is diffcult to fix securely in place. Note
the wedge shapc of the bonc block; this will have some inherent stability when
replaced. Adduction and internal rotation of the tibia will expose the interior of the
joint.
CLOSURE
The bone block origin of the ligament is reattached to the femur by means of a lag
screw (Figure 24A). This can be simplified by predrilling before cutting the bone block
Interrupted sutures are placed in the joint capsule. The aponeurosis of the biceps femoris
and the rest of the lateral fascia are closed with either continuous absorbable or
interrupted nonabsorbable sutures. Closure of the subcutaneous tissues and skin is
routine.
The Hindlimb · 291
Plate 76
Approach to the Stifle Joint by Osteotomy of the Origin
ofthe Lateral Collateral Ligament
Osteotomy lines around
origin of ligament
Incisioninjointcapsule
Dsleotor
ateralcollaterallig
oliteustendon
Lateral meniscus
Lateral collateral lig.
Bone block
292  The Hindlimb
Approach to the Medial Collateral Ligament and Caudomedial
Part of the Stifle Joint
INDICATIONS
1. Removal of the caudal horn of the medial meniscus.
2. Repair of the 1nedial collateral ligament.
3. Open reduction of fractures of caudal part of the medial femoral condyle.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 72, 73, 74, and 78
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The skin incision extends from the distal fourth of the femur distally to the proximal
fourth of the tibia, crossing the joint between the medial tibial condyle and tibial
tuberosity. Subcutaneous tissues are incised on the same line and mobilized with
the skin.
 B. An incision is made in the deep fascia along the cranial border of the caudal part of
the sartorius muscle.
The Hindlimb · 293
Plate 77
Approach to the Medial Collateral Ligament and
Caudomedial Part of the Stifle Joint
Sartoriusm.
Cranialpart
Caudal part
Incisionindeepfascia
294 The Hindlimb
Approach to the Medial Collateral Ligament and Caudomedial
Part of the Stifle Joint continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE cOnLinued
C. The caudal part of the sartorius muscle is retracted to expose the collateral ligaments.
The joint capsule can be incised in a transverse direction on each side of the collateral
ligament to expose the interior of the joint and the medial meniscus. Sharp dissection
between the ligament and joint capsule is necessary in order to elevate it and protect
it during the capsule incision.
CLOSURE
Interrupted absorbable sutures are placed in the joint capsule, and either continuous
absorbable or interrupted nonabsorbable sutures are used to close the deep fascial
incision. Subcutaneous tissues and skin are closed routinely.
COMMENTS
This approach is usually combined with the standard medial approach to the stifle
(Plate 72) for total exposure of the stife joint. The transverse joint capsule incision is
an exlension of the incision seen in Plate 72, Part C.
The Hindlimb · 295
Plate 77
Approach to the Medial Collateral Ligament and
Caudomedial Part of the Stifle Joint continued
Medialcondyle
Branchesof
of temur
saphenous n.
and temoral a.
Medial collateral
lIC
Incision in joint
Gastrocnemiusm
Sartorius m.
caudal part
296 · The Hindlimb
Approach to the Stifle Joint by Osteotomy of the Origin of the
Medial Collateral Ligament
Based on a Procedure of Daly and Tarvin?
INDICATIONS
1. Reduction of fractures of the caudal part of the medial femoral condyle.
 2. Exploration of the caudomedial part of the stifle joint.
3. Avulsion of the insertion of the caudal cruciate ligament.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plates 72, 73, 74, and 77
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
This procedure is a continuation of the Approach to the Medial Collateral Ligament.
and Caudomedial Part of the Stife Joint (Plate 77).
A. After completely freeing the ligament from the joint capsule, an osteotone is used
to outline a block of bone that contains the entire origin of the medial collateral
ligament.
B. The block of bone is freed from the underlying condyle. Be sure to take an adequate
amount of bone, because too small a block is diffcult to fix securely in place. Note
the wedge shape of the bone block; this will have some inherent stability when
replaced. Abduction and external rotation of the tibia will expose the interior of the
joint.
CLOSURE
The bone block origin of the ligament is reattached to the femur by means of a lag
screw (Figure 24A). This can be simplifed by predrilling before cutting the bone block.
Interrupted sutures are placed in the joint capsule. The fascial incision is closed with
either continuous absorbable or inlerrupted nonabsorbable sutures. Closure of the
subcutaneous tissues and skin is routine.
The Hindlimb - 297
Plate 78
Approach to the Stifle Joint by Osteotomy of the Origin
of the Medial Collateral Ligament
Branches ot
Osteotomylines
saphenous n.
aroundorigin of
and temorala
ligament
Incision in
jointcapsule
Medialcollateral
lig
Medial meniscus
Medialtemoral
condyie
Medial temoral
condyle
Boneblockandmedial
collateral lig.
298 + The Hindlimb
Approach to the Shaft of the Tibia
Based on Procedures of Brinker* and Wilson 4?
INDICATION
Open reduction of fractures of the shaft of the tibia.
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The skin incision can be varied to suit the situation. For maximal exposure of both
the medial and lateral corlices and for bone plate application, the curved incision
  a  se  is   sg a sd 
intramedullary pinning but would result in the plate being direcily under the skin
incision with only scanty subcuticular tissue to cover it if used in plating procedures.
A curved, laterally based incision can be used if a plate is to be applied laterally
The medially based incision shown here starts proximally over the medial tibial
condyle and curves cranially to the midline of the tibia at midshaft. It then curves
Although not essenlial, an effort is made lo preserve the saphenous vessels and
nerve crossing the tibia.
B. The bone is exposed by incision of the crural fascia over the medial shaft of the
bone. Elevaling the fascia exposes the muscles.
C. The cranial tibial and medial digital fexor muscles can be retracted by incising
fascia along their borders to free them from the bone.
The Hindlimb·299
Plate 79
Approach to the Shaft of the Tibia
Incision in crural
fascia
Cranial branch.med
saphenous a: and v.
Saphenousn
Tibialis Cranialis r
Shatt ot
tibia
Deep digital
flexor m..
med. par
Tibialls
cranialismi.
300  The Hindlimb
Approach to the Shaft of the Tibia continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE continued
D. To expose the lateral cortex, the crural fascia is incised along the cranial border of
the cranial tibial muscle, starting at the tibial tuberosity and extending distally to
the tendinous portion of the muscle.
 E. The cranial tibial and long digital extensor muscles are retracted caudolaterally 10
expose the tibial shaft. The cranial tibial artery courses between the tibia and fbula,
and can be damaged by the Hohmann retractors' tips if they are placed over the
arlery.
 Exposure of the distal lateral region of the tibia can be gained by incising fascia lateral
to the tendons of the cranial tibial and long digital extensor muscles. Cranial retraction
of these tendons provides visualization of the tibia.
CLOSURE
The deep crural fascia must be closed securely. Continuous absorbable or interrupted
nonabsorbable sutures are used here and in the subcutaneous tissues. Skin and subcutis
are closed routinely.
The Hindlimb · 301
Plate 79
Approach to the Shaft of the Tibia continued
Tibialls
cranialis m.
Cranial border
(crest) of tibia
Incision in
crural fascia
Cranialbranch.
lat.saphenous
a.and v.
Cranialtibialm
Long digital ext. m.
Shaftof tibia
302 · The Hindlimb
Approach to the Lateral Malleolus and the Talocrural joint
INDICATIONS
1. Open reduction of fractures of the lateral malleolus of the fibula.
 2. Open reduction of supramalleolar fractures of the tibia.
 3. Open reduction of lhuxatjons of the talocrural joint.
 4. Repair of lateral collateral ligaments.
5. Osteochondroplasty for osteochondritis dissecans of the lateral trochlcar ridge.
DESCRiPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. A curved skin incision is centered over the lateral surface of the talocrural joint. It
commences proximally at the level of the lateral saphenous vein and continues
distally to the level of the tarsometatarsal join1.
B. The subcutaneous and crural fascia is incised on the same line as the skin and is
retracted with the skin. The extensor retinaculum overlying the lateral malleolus
is incised parallel to the dorsal edge of the peroneus longus tendon, taking care to
 avoid cutting this small tendon. The tendon can now be retracted in any direction.
C. The lateral trochlear ridge of the talus is exposed by extending the joint and jncising
the joint capsule from the tibia distally, dorsal and parallel to the collateral ligament.
This incision can be extended beyond what is shown here. The plantar aspect of the
lateral talar ridge can be exposed by an incision in the joint capsule after retracting
the tendons of the peroneus brevis and lateral digital extensor muscles and fexing
the joint. A portion of the lateral extensor retinaculum must be elevaled to make
this incision and care must be taken to preserve as much as possible of the shorl,
deep part of the latera] collateral ligament.
CLOSURE
The extensor retinaculum and joint capsule are closed with interrupted sutures. The
crural and subcutaneous fascia is closed with a continuous pattern using absorbable
sutures, followed by routine skin closure.
Plate 80
Approach to the Lateral Malleolus and Talocrural Joint
Incisionincrural
fascia
Peroneus longus m.-
Lateral digital
extensor m.
Peroneus brevis
m.
Caudal branch
Proximalextensor
lateral saphenous
retinaculum
a. and v.
Saphenousv
Tendon of long
Lateralmalleolus
digital e xtensor m.
Incision in
lateralextensor
retinaculum
B
Distalextensor
retinaculum
Tendon ot deep
digital flexor
m.. med. part
Tendon ot peroneus
longus m.
Lateralextensor
Lateralmalleolus
retinaculum
Lateralcollateral
lig.. long part
Tenaonoflateral
digital extensol
Lateraltrochlear
m.
ridge of talu
Incision in joint
Tendon of peroneus
capsule
brevis m
C
303
304The Hindlimb
Approach to the Medial Malleolus and the Talocrural Joint
INDICATIONS
1. Open reduction of fractures of the medial malleolus of the fibula.
2. Open reduction of supramalleolar fractures of the tibia.
3. Open reduction of luxations of the talocrural joint.
4. Repair of medial collateral ligaments.
5. Osteochondroplasty for osteochondritis dissecans of the medial trochlear ridge.
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. A curved skin incision is centered over the medial surface of the talocrural joint. It
commences proximally at the distal fourth of the tibia and continues distally to the
level of the tarsometatarsal joint.
B. The subeutaneous and crural fascia is incised on the same line as the skin and is
retracted with the skin. The medial ridge of the talus is exposed by a joint capsule
incision that starts proximally on the tibia, continues parallel to the collateral
ligament, and ends distally on the neck of the talus.
C. Retraction of the joint capsule and extension of the joint expose the dorsal aspect of
the medial trochlear ridge of the talus. The plantar aspect of the ridge is accessed
 by a joint capsule incision plantar to the collateral ligament. The tendons of the
tibialis caudalis and deep digital fexor muscles must be elevated and protected as
this incision is made; this requires incising the overlying medial retinacular tissues
parallel to the tendons. Varying degrees of fexion, extension, and rotation of the
tarsus are required to visualize the talus.
CLOSURE
 The extensor joint capsule incisions are closed with interrupted sutures. The crural and
subcutaneous fascia are closed with a continuous pattern using absorbable sutures;
followed by routine skin closure.
Plate 81
Approach to the Medial Malleolus and Talocrural Joint
Proximalextensor
retinaculum
Medial malleolus
Medial
collateral lig.
Tendon of tibialis
Long par
caudalis m.
Short paris
Tendonof deep
digitalflexorm.
Incision in
-Lal. part
jointcapsule
Med.par
Tendonof
tibialis
Cranialis m.
Caudalbranch.
medialsaphenaus
a. and v.
Incision in
joint capsule
Medialridge
of talus
305
306 The Hindlimb
Approach to the Tarsocrural Joint by Osteotomy of the Medial
Malleolus
Based on a Procedure of Sinibaldi34
INDICATION
Open reduction of fractures of the trochlea of the talus.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACH
Plate 81
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
This procedure is a continuation of the Approach to the Medial Malleolus and the
Talocrural Joint (Plate 81).
A, B. The collateral ligament is isolated from joint capsule by incisions along the
dorsal and plantar aspects of the ligament. These incisions should completely
penetrate the joint capsule in order to allow sufficient visualization of the interior
of the joint to judge the angle of the osteotomy, shown in Part B.
C. The medial malleolus is removed with an osteotome, placed as shown in Part B. The
osteotomy angle should encompass enough of the malleolus to include most of the
origin of the collateral ligament but must not be so deep as to intrude on the weighl-
bearing articular surface of the tibial cochlea. Care must also be taken to avoid
cutting into the medial ridge of the talus. It may be necessary to incise part of the
proximal extensor retinaculum to obtain the proper angle of the osteotome. Retrac-
tion of the malleolus and attached ligaments and pronation of the tarsus allow
visualization of the entire surface of the trochlea of the talus.
CLOSURE
The malleolus is reattached with pins and tension band wire (Figure 23B) or a lag
snonuguos e pue ornsdeo nunot aun u pasn ane saunans pandnaiun (viz aunlid) mauos 
pattern is used in the crural and subcutaneous fascia.
COMMENTS
 Experience indicates that this approach is somewhat. traumatic to the joint and should
bc rcserved for trochlear fracture repair, where maximal exposure is necessary. Osteo-
chondroplasty for osteochondritis dissecans of the talus is best done through the other
approaches shown in Plates 80 and 81.
The Hindlimb ·307
Plate 82
Approach to the Tarsocrural Joint by Osteotomy
of the Medial Malleolus
Osteotome
Incisionsin
joint capsule
Tendons of
tibialis
caudals and
deep digital
fiexor mm.
Collateral
Osteotomy ol
lg.
medialmalleolus
long part 
Collaterallig
Tendonol
tibialis
cranialis m
Medial trochlear
ridge of talus
Proximalextensor
retinaculum
Tibia
Trochlear ridges
of thetalus
Lateral
Joint
Medial
capsule
Medial malleolus and
collateral hg
C
308  The Hindhimb
Approach to the Calcaneus
INDICATIONS
1. Open reduction of fractures of the body and tuber calcanei of the calcaneus.
 2. Avulsion of gastrocnemius tendon from tuber calcanei.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATIONAPPROACH
Plate 84
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The skin incision begins on the lateral side of the common calcanean tendon just
proximal to the tuber calcanei. As it curves distally, it remains lateral to the plantar
midline of the calcaneus and ends at the level of the fourth tarsal bone.
B. The skin and thin subcutaneous fascia are refected to expose the deep fascia. The
lateral border of the tendon of the superficial digital fexor muscle is located by
palpation or visualization through the fascia. An incision is made parallel to the
laleral border of the tendon, through deep fascia and the laleral retinacular
attachment of the tendon to the calcaneus, and is continued proximally to allow
 separation of the tendon from the gastrocnemius tendon.
C. Medial retraction of the tendon of the superficial digital fexor muscle completes the
exposure
CLOSURE
Interrupted, nonabsorbable sutures are used to approximate the deep fascial and
retinacular incision. This part of the closure must be very secure to prevent the tendon
from slipping medially over the calcaneus. Subcutis and skin are closed routinely.
Plate 83
Approach to the Calcaneus
Incision in
deepcrural fascia
andlateral
retinacular
attachment ot
the superficial
digital flexor
tendon to
the calcaneus
Caudal br.of
lateral saphenous
a.and v.
Tendon ot deep
digital flexor m.
med. part
Tendonol
gastrocnemius m.
Tendon of
superticial digital
flexor m.
Abductor
digiti quinti m.
309
310  The Hindimb
Approach to the Calcaneus and Plantar Aspects of the Tarsal
Bones
INDICATION
Arthrodesis of the calcaneoquartile or tarsometatarsal joints.
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
This approach is based on the Approach to the Calcaneus (Plate 83).
A. Beginning on the lateral side of the cormmon calcanean tendon, the skin incision
curves ventrally along the calcaneus and then turns medially to cross the ventra]
midline at the level of the proximal metatarsal bones.
B. Elevation of the superficial digital fexor tendon is depicted in Plate 83, Parts B and
C. The tendon is elevated distally to just beyond its bifurcation. A small branch of
the plantar nerve will be found medial to the plantar midline in the fascia covering
the deep digital fexor tendon. lncising this fascia lateral to the nerve will expose
the deep digital fexor tendon.
C. The tendon of the deep digital fexor is elevated and retracted medially with the
superfcial tendon. The plantar ligament structure and tarsal bones come into view.
but individual tarsal bones are diffcult to discern visually. Probing with a needle
will allow individual joint spaces to be located and incised.
CLDSURE
Interrupted, nonabsorbable sutures are used to approximate the deep fascial and
retinacular incisions and bring both digital fexor tendons back to their normal positions.
Plate 84
Approach to the Calcaneus and Plantar Aspects
of the Tarsal Bones
Tendonotperoneus
longus m
Tendon otlateral
digital extensor m.
Tendonofperoneus
brevis m.
Incision in
deep tascia laleral
Caudal branch. lateral
to tendon of
saphenous a.and v.
deep digital flexot
m., lateral part
一
Sustentaculumtal
Tenoonofdeep
digital flexor m..
lateralpart
Calcaneus
Central tarsa
Tarsal IV
311
312 0 Fhe Hindlimb
INDICATIONS
 1. Open reduction of fractures or luxations of the base of the calcaneus or fourth tarsal
bones.
 2. Arthrodesis of the calcaneoquartile joint or laleral part of the tarsometatarsal joint
 3. Repair of injuries of the lateral ligaments of the calcaneoquartile joint or lateral part
of the tarsometatarsa] joint.
ALTERNATIVE/COMBINATION APPROACHES
Plales 80, 83, and 84
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. A lateral incision is made from midcalcaneus to the base of the fifth metatarsal
bone.
B. The plantar metatarsal vessels can be seen in the deep fascia and positioned either
superficial or plantar to the collateral ligaments of the tarsocrural joint. The deep
fascia is incised dorsal to these vessels.
C. Retraction and elevation of the fascia reveal the underlying bones, lendons, and
ligaments.
CLOSURE
Deep fascia is closed with interrupted sutures, followed by closure of the skin. There is
usually insuffcient subcutaneous tissue to close as a separate layer. A padded bandage
should be used for several days to prevent serum accumulation in the subcutis.
Plate 85
Approach to the Lateral Bones of the Tarsus
Fascial
incision
Plantar
metalarsalv
Calcaneus
TarsalIV
MetatarsalV
Collateral ligaments
Tendonof
Tendonof
peroneus longus m.
superficialdigital
extensor m.
Tendon of
lateral digital
extensor m.
Tendon of
peroneusbrevis
m.
313
314  The Hindlimb
Approach to the Medial Bones of the Tarsus
INDICATIONS
Open reduction of fractures or luxations of the neck and head of the talus, the central
tarsal, or the second and third tarsal bones.
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. A vertical incision is made starting near the medial malleolus and extending to the
base of metatarsal II. The length of the incision can be adjusled to fit the specific
area of interest.
B. The subcutaneous fascia and skin are undermined and retracted. The deep fascia is
incised between the tendon of the cranial tibial muscle and the branching metatarsal
vessel from the saphenous vein. The metatarsal vein crossing the tendon is ligated.
C. The fascia lying on the surface of the tarsal bones is incised after retracting the
tendon.
D. Elevation of the fascia reveals the tarsal bones and Jigaments. A small Hohmann
retractor can be placed under the fascia to expose the dorsal surface of the centra]
pedal artery can be avoided.
CLOSURE
The deep fascia is joined by one row of interrupted sutures, followed by the skin. The
subcutaneous tissues are usualy too scant to require a separate layer. A padded bandage
soans aui ur uone nane unas suaaad mn sep  o g roy Aiaaneradonsod pasn st
COMMENTS
Fractures of the central tarsal bone occur most commonly in track-raced greyhounds
and usually in the right, or outside, foot.
Approach to the Proximal Sesamoid Bones
This procedure is identical to the approach to the proximal Sesamoid Bones illustrated
in Plate 54 of Section V, The Forelimb.
Approach to the Phalanges and Interphalangeal Joints
This procedure is identical to the procedure illustrated in Plate 55 of Section V, The
Forelimb.
The Hindlimb · 315
Plate 86
Approach to the Medial Bones of the Tarsus
Tibialls
caudalislendor
Collateral
ligaments
Talus
Metatarsal
Tendonof
II v.
deep digital
flexor m.:
Tibialis
Lateralpart
cranialis
Medial par
tenaon
Incision
Centraltarsal
Talus
Central
Fascial
tarsal
ncisior
Tibialis
Tarsal III
cranialis
D
tendon
Central
tarsal
Tarsal Il
316  The Hindlimb
Approaches to the Metatarsal Bones
INDICATION
Openreduction of fractures
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE
A. The anatomy shown here is considerably simplifed compared to that in the live
animal. Only important structures are shown; other elements such as small tendons
and blood vessels have been omitted. In an average-sized dog, these vestigial
structures are so small that their identification and preservation are not practical
during surgery.
B, C, D. The incisional technique varies according to the bone or bones to be exposed.
A single bone is approached by an incision directly over the bone, and two adjoining
bones by an jncision between them. lf more than two bones need be exposed, two
parallel longitudinal incisions (Part B) or a single curved incision (Part C) can be
used. The curved incision commences at the proximal end of metatarsal Il, runs
laterally to the midshaft of metatarsal V, and then curves medially again to end
over the distal end of metatarsal JI. The crescent-shaped skin flap can be elevated
and retracted to expose a large part of all four bones. An H-shaped incision (Part D)
is useful on occasion.
Metatarsals II and V can be approached directly, without elevation of any important
tendons or vessels. The deep fascia is incised and elevated to allow visualization of
these bones. Exposure of metatarsal bones II and IV requires the undermining and
 retraction of the tendon of the long digital extensor tendons and the accompanying
blood vessels.
CLOSURE
 Deep fascia is closed to ensure that tendons and vessels are securely held in their proper
positions
COMMENTS
A deep layer of small metatarsal blood vessels is found on and between the bones. These
vessels are too small to avoid in most. animals, and the resulting hemorrhage must be
controlled by tamponade. The use of an Fsmarch bandage and a tourniquet is very
helpful. Do not leave the tourniquet in place for more than 1y2 hours, and apply a snug
 bandage for 72 hours postoperatively to control oozing hemorrhage at the operative site.
Plate 87
Approaches to the Metatarsal Bones
Tendonof long
digital exiensor m
Tarsal
Metatarsalll
Dorsal common
Tendonoflateral
digital extensoi m.
digital vv.
B
D
317
References
1. Alexander JE: Upen reduclhon and fixation of a
20. Hurov Ll, Lumb WV. Hankes GH, Smith KW:
shoulder Juxation. Sm Awm Clin 2:379, 1962.
Wedge grafting of the canine carpus. J Am Vet
2.Alexander JE. Arehibald J. Cawley AJ: Pelvic
Med Assoc 148:260. 19G6.
fractures and their redurl uon m small animals.
 21. Lenehan TM. Nunamaker DM: Lateral approach
Mod Vet Prret 43:41. 1962
 to the canine elbow by proximal ulnar diaphyseal
Archibald J.IBrown NM. Nasti E.Medway W:
osteotomy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 180:523, 1982.
Open reduetion for correri.on of coxofemoral dis-
22. Montavon PM, Boudrieau RJ. Hohn RB: Ventro-
location. Vet Med 48:273. 1953.
lateral approach for repair of sacroiliac fracture-
4.
Brinker WO: Fractures. In Mayer K. Lacroix JV.
dislocation in the dog and cat. J Am Vet Med
Hoskins HP tedsi: ('ame Shrgery. 4th ed. Santa
Assoc 186:1198, 1985.
Barbara: Ameriean Veterinary Publications,
23. Montgomery RD, Milton JL, Mann FA: Medial
1957, ch. 29.
approach to the humeral diaphysis. J Am Anim
5.Brown RE: A surgieal approach to the
0X03
Hosp Assoc 24:433, 1988.
femoral joint cof dogs. North Am Vet 34:420. 1953.
24. Mostosky UV, Cholvin NR. Brinker WO: Trans.
6. Brown SG. Rosen H: C'ramiolateral approach to
olecranon approaeh to the elbow joint. Vet Med
the canine hip: A nirulified Watson-Jones ap.
54:560, 1959.
proach. J An Vet Med Assox 159:1117. 197].
25.
Nunamaker D: Personal communication, 1975.
7. Chalnan JA. Slocum I3: Thw caudolateral ap-
26.
 Olsson SE: On disk protrusion in the dog. Acta
proach to the canine ellxow joint. J Am Anum
Orthop Scand Suppi Vll1, 1951.
Hosp Assoc 19:637,1983.
27.
Olsson SE: Lameness in the dog. Sei Proc Am
8. Daly WR. Tarvin GB: Medial condyle osteotomy
Anim Hosp Assoc 1:366, 1975.
as an approach to repuir nf medial condyle frac.
28. Paatsama S: Ligament injuries in the canine
tures in dogs. Vet Surg 1ti:119, 1981.
stife joint: A clinical and experimental sludy.
9. De Anpelis M. Schwartz. A: Surgical correction of
Thesis. Royal Veterinary College, Stockholm.
a cranial dislueattion of the stapulohumeral joint
1952.
In a dog. J Am Vet Mei Asso 156:435,1970.
29. Parker A: Surgical approach to the cervicotho-
10. Flo GL. Brinker WO: Lateral fenesiration of
racic junction. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 9:374,
thoracolumbar dhse.J An Anim Hosp Assor
1973.
11:619, 1971.
30. Probst CW, Flo GL. McLoughlin MA, et al: A
11. Funkquist B: IDeemmpression laminectomy for
simple medial approach to the elbow for treat-
cervical disk protrusion in the dog. Acta Vet
ment. of fragmeated coronoid process and osteo.
Scand 3:88.1962
chondritis dissecans. J Am Anim Hosp Assor
12. Gahring DR: A modilied caudai approach to the
25:331, 1989.
canine shoulder joint. J Am Auum Hosp Assoc
31.
Redding RW: Laminectomy in the dog. Am J Vet
21:613. 1985
Res 12:123, 1951.
13. Gorman HA: 1iip joint prosiheses. Vet Scope 7:3.
32.
 Rudy RL: Fractures of the maxilla and mandible.
#2,1962.
ln Bojrab, J (ed): Currert Techriques in Small
14. Hoerlein BF. Few AB. Putty MF: Braim surgery
in the dog—preliminary sturdes. J Am Vet Med
1975, p 369.
Assoe 143:21, 1963.
33. Seeman CW: A lateral approach for Lhoracolum-
15. Hohn RB: Surgical apprvarhes Io the canine hip.
har disc fenestralion. Mod Vet Pract 49:73.
Anin Hosp 1:48.196
1968.
16. Hohn RB: (Osterochondrilin disseeans of the hu-
 34. Sinibaldi K: Unpublished paper read at 4th an-
meral head. J Am Vet Mard Assor 163:69. 1973.
nual conference of the Vet Ortho Soc, Vail, CO.
17.Hohn RB: linpublished paper read at. Fifth An-
Feb 21-24, 1977.
nual course on lnturnal Fixation of Fractures,
35.
 Slocum B, Devine T: Pelvic osteotomy technique
Ohio SLate University. Mar 27.-30. 1974
for axial rotation of the acetabular segment in
18. Hohn RB, Janes JM: laterul upproach lo the
dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 22:331, 1986.
canine ilium. Amim fosp 2:111. 1966
19.Hohn RB. Rosen H. Bahning RiH. Brown SG:
caudal aspect of the acetabuium and body of the
Surgical stabilizalrn uf rerurrent shoulder lux-
ischium in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 167:65.
ation. Vet Clin North Am I:537, 1971
1975.
319
320  References
37. Snavely DA, Hohn RB: A modified lateral sur
repair of condylar fractures or joint exploration.
gical approach to the elbow of the dog. J An Vet
J Am Vet Med Assoc 176:1264, 1980.
Medl Assoc 169:826, 1977.
41. Wadsworth PL, Henry WB: Dorsal surgical ap.
38.
Sorjonen DC, Shires PK: Atlantoaxial instability:
proach to acetabular fractures in 1he dog. J Am
A ventral surgical technique for decornpression.
Med Assoc 165:908, 1974.
fxation, and fusion. J Am Coll Vet Surg 10:22,
42.
Wilson JW: An anterior approach to the tibia. J
1981.
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 10:67, 1974.
39.
 Stoll SG: L npublished papcr read at 5th annual
43.
 Yturraspe DJ, Lumb WV: Dorsolateral musclt
conference of the Vet Ortho Soc. Snowmass. CO.
separating approach for thoraco-lumbar interver.
Feb 11-18. 1978.
tebral disk fenestration in the dog. J Am Vet
40. Turner TM, Hohn RB: Craniolateral approach for
Med Assoc 162:1037,1973.
Index
Page numhers in italics refer to illustrations; those followed by the letter "t” refer
to tables.
Abdominal oblique muscle. external, 25
Brinker procedure /Continued;
Cervical vertebrae(Conzinued!
Abduetor digiti guinti muscle, 29
for exposure of distal shaft of hu.
C5-C7, dorsal approach to. 6468.
Abductor pollicis longus muscle. 26
merus,138-140,139,141
65.67.69
tendon of, 27
for exposure of femoral shaft, 270.
palpation of, 58
Absorbable suture materials, 22
271
Chalman and Slocum procedure, for
 Accessory carpal bone, approach t0.
for exposure of tibial shaff, 298-300.
exposure of elbow joint, 154-156,
210-212,211,213
299,301
155,157
Acromion.26
Brown prucedure, for exposure of dorsal
Chlorhexidine, in skin disinfection, 4
osteotomy of. 96
aspects of hip joint, 246,247
Circumfex humeral arteries, 26
Alexander,Archibald,and Cawley
 Brown and Rosen procedure, for
Clavicular tendon, 25
procedure, for exposure of wing of
craniodorsal exposure of hip joini.
Cleidobrachialis muscle, 25
ilium and dorsal sacrum, 222.223
230-234,231, 233,235
Cleidocephalicus muscle, 25
Anatomy,24
Bunnell-Mayer suture pattern, 20
Clipping, as preparation for surgical
of forelimb,25,26
procedures,4
of hindlimb, 27, 28. 29
Closures, of different tissues, 23
Anconeus muscie, 26
suture malerial used in, 22
Antibiotics, preoperative
Calcaneus, approach to.308,309
Collateral ligament of stife joint,
administration of, 3
plantar aspects of tarsus and, ap.
lateral,approach lo,288,289
Archibald, Brown, Nasti, and Medway
proach to, 310, 31]
medial, approach to. 292-294, 293.
procedure, for craniodorsal
Canine forequarter, subcutaneous
295
exposure of hip joint, 230-234, 231.
musculature of, 25
Common digital extensor musce, 26
Canine hindquarter, dcep musculature
Common peroneal nerve, 29
233,235
Artery. See specifc artery.
of,29
Coracobrachialis muscle, 27
Aseptic technigue,3-14
subcutaneous musculature of, 28
Cranial cireumflex humeral artery, 26
Atlas. See also Cervical vertebrae.
Canine thoracic limb, deep musculature
Cranial tibial muscle, 28, 29
ventral approach to,46-48.47,49
of, 26.27
Cutaneous sural nerve. caudal. 29
wings of, palpation of, 58
Carotid sheath, exposure of, 54,55
Carpus,dorsal approach to,204,205
Autoclaving, 3
Axillary nerve, 26
palmarolateral approach to, 210-212.
 Daly and Tarvin procedure, for
Axis. See also Cervical uertebrae.
211,213
 paimaromedial approach to, 206-208.
cxposure of stife joint, 296, 297
ventral approach to,46-48,47,49
De Angelis and Schwartz procedure. for
207,209
Cartilage fragments, in shoulder, 106.
exposure of shoulder joint, 118-
120,119,121
112
Deep digital fexor muscle, 27, 28, 2
Biceps brachii muscle, 25, 27
Caudal circumfex humeral artery. 26
Caudal cutaneous sural nerve, 29
Deep gluteal muscle, 29
Biceps femoris muscle, 28
Deep pectoral muscle. 25
Bone. See specifc bone.
Caudal vertebrae, dorsal approach 10.
Deltoideus muscle, 25 
Bone plating, 130
88.89
Dermal fat, closure of, 23, 24
palmar,206
Cephalic vein, 25, 27
Cervical fascia, deep, exposure of. 54
Digital extensor muscle. common. 2t,
Brachial artery, 27
lateral, 26
Brachialis muscle, 25
Cervical spinal nerves, in canine
Jong, 28,29
Braided suture materials, 22
thoracic limb, 27
Digital fexor muscle, deep, 27, 2. 2!
Brain stem, caudal, exposure of, 42
Cervical vertebrae, C1 and C2, dorsal
superficial,27,28,29
Breed of animal, as factor in choosing
approach to,50-52,51,53
Disks.See Interuertebral disks
ventral approach to, 46-48, 47, 49
approach, 2
Draping, 0f animal, 5-14, 5- J
Brinker procedure, for exposure of
C2-C5, dorsal approach to, 60-62.
distal shaft and supracondylar
61,63
region of humerus, 142--144, 143.
C2-C7. ventral approach to, 54-58.
55,57,59
Eighth cervical nerve, 27
145
321
322fndex
Elbow joint, approach to,by ostcotomy
Greater trochantcr and subtrochanterie
Ilumerus /Continued;
of proximal ulnar diaphysis, 164-
region of femur, approach to. 266-
 medial epicondyle of, approach to.
166,165,167
268,267,269
176,177
caudal humeroulnar part of, ap.
proximal shaft of, approach to, 124-
proach to, 154-156, 155, 157
126,125,127
exercises and weight bearing for, 166
shaft of, craniolateral approach to,
humeroradial part of, approach by
Head, surgical approaches to, 31-43
128-130,129,131
osteotorny of lateral humeral
Hemilaminectomy, of thoracolumbar
medial approach to, 132-136, 133.
epicondyle, 172-174,173, 175
vertebrae. dorsai exposure for.70-
humeroulnar part of, approach to.
135.137
74, 71,73, 75
supracondylar region of, approach to.
158-162, 159. 161, 163
Hindlimb, 264-317
154-156, 155, 157
lateral humeroulnar part. of, ap-
anatomy of, 27,28,29
Hurov, Lumb, Hankes, and Smith
proach to,150-152,151.153
Hindquarter, canine, deep musculaturt
procedure, for exposure of distal
of, 29
radius and carpus, 204, 205
170.169, 171
subcutaneous musculature of, 28
medial aspect of, approach to, 176.
Hip bone, approach to, 252, 253
221
Hip joint, 221-263
Esophagus, exposure of. 54, 55
craniodorsal and caudodorsal parte
Iliocostalis muscle, 28
Exercises and weight bearing. for elbow
of, approach by osteotomy of
lium, lateral approach to, 224-226.
joint, 166
greater trochanter, 240-244, 241,
225.227
Extensor carpi radialis muscle, 26, 27
Extensor retinaculum, 29
243,245
wing of, approach to. 222. 223
approach by tenotomy of gluteal
Infection, as factor in choosing
External abdominal obligue muscle, 25
muscles, 246.247
External jugular vein, 25
approach,3
craniodorsal aspect of, cranioiateral
Infraspinatus muscle, 26
approach to, 230-234, 231.233.
leno1omy of, 98-100, 99, 101
235
Interior obturator muscle. tendon of. 29
dorsal aspect of, intergluteal ap-
Internal jugular vein, exposure of, 54.
Fascia, deep. closure of. 23
proach to, 236-238, 237,239
55
incision of, 17
ischium and, approach to, 248-250.
lnterphalangeal joints, of forelimb.
subcutaneous, closure of, 23, 24
249,251
Fascia lata, 28
approaches to,218,219
ventral aspect of, approach to, 254..
Fat, dermal. closure of,23,24
 of hindlimb, approach to, 314
Femur distal part of, approach through
256,255,257
Intervertebral disks, C1-C2—C5-C6.
Hoerlein, Few, and Petty procedure, for
lateral incision, 272-274, 273,
ventral approach to, 54-58, 55, 57.
275
exposure of caudal surface of
59
skull, 42,43
T10-T11--L5-L6,dorsolateral ap-
approach through osteotomy of tih.
for exposure of dorsolateral surfact
ial tuberosity. 286, 287
proach to, 76-78, 77, 79
of skull, 40,41
lateral approach to, 80-82, 81, 85
greater truchanter and subtrochan-
Hohn procedure, for exposure of
Intervertebral space, speciic, location
teric region of, approach to, 266-
268,267, 269
craniolateral shoulder joint, 98-
of, 58
100,99,101
Iodine, organic, in skin disinfection. 4
shaft of, approach to, 270, 271
for exposure of elbow joint. 172-
First thoracic nerve, 27
Jschium, approach to, 262, 263
Flexor carpi radialis muscle, 27
174, 173, 176
hip joint and, approach to, 248-250,
Flexor carpi ulnaris muscle, 26
for exposure of hip join1. and ie-
249,251
Flo and Brinker procedure, for
chiurm, 248-250, 249, 251
tuherosity of, 29
for exposure of hip joint or ramus
exposure of thoracolumbar disks.
80-82.81,83
of pubis, 254-256, 255.257
Forelimb. See Thoracic limb.
Hohn, Rosen, Bohning, and Brown
Forequarter, canine, deep musculature
procedure, for exposure ol
 oint. See specific joint.
craniomedial shoulderjoint,114
of, 26, 27
Joint capsule, closure of, 23
subcutaneous musculature of. 25
116,115, 117
 Joint mice, in shoulder, 106
Fracture, type of. as factor in choosing
Hohn and Janes procedure. for
 Jugular vein, external, 25
exposure of iljum, 224-226. 226.
approach.3
internal, exposure of, 54, 55
Funkquist procedure, for exposure of
227
vertebrae C1 and C2, 50-52, 51,
Horizontal mattress suture pattern, 20
53
Hurmeral arteries, circumfex, 26
for exposure of vertebrae C2-C5,
Humerus, approach for bone platinf.
Kessler (locking-loop) suture, 20
136
60-62,61, 63
Kirschner wire, for reattaching
 condyle and epicondvle of, lateral ap-
osteotomized bone, 20
proach to, 146-148, 147, 149
condyle of, approach by osteotomy of
Gahring procedure, for exposure of
medial epicondyle, 182-184, 183.
shoulder joint, 108-112, 109, 111,
185
L.ag screw, for reattaching osteotomized
113
distal shaft. and supracondylar region
bone, 20
Gastrocnermius muscle, 28,29
of. medial approach to, 142-144.
Larminectomy, dorsal, 68
Gemellus muscles. 29
143,145
 of thoracolumbar vertebrae, dursal
Gluteal muscle, deep, 29
distal shaft of, craniolateral approach
exposure for, 70-74, 71, 73. 75
middle,28
to, 138--140, 139, 141
Lateral collateral ligament of stifit
 superficial. 28
full exposure of, 136
joint, caudolateral stife joint and.
Gorman procedure, for exposure of
lateral epicondyle of, osteotomy of.
approach to, 288,289
dorsal aspects of hip joint, 240-
172-174, 173, 175
Lateral digital extensor muscle. 26
244,241,243,245
medial aspect of, intermuscular ap
Lateral humeral epicondyle, osteotomy
Gracilis muscle, 28
proach to, 178-180, 179, 181
of, 172-174, 173, 175
Index323
Lateral malleolus, talucrural joint and.
Omotransversarius muscle,25
Redding procedure, for exposure of
approach 10,302-304.303, 30.
Os coxae. See also Hltum; Ischium:
thoracolumbar vertehrae, 70-74.
Lateral saphenous vein, 2
Pubis.
71,73, 75
Latissimus dorsi muscle, 25. 2:
approach to, 252.253
Retractors, types of, 16. 22
Ligamentis), See aiso specific ligamen1
Ogteotumy, 19
Rhomboid muscle, attachment of, 27
suturing of, 20, 23
Rudy procedure, for exposure of rostra!
Locking-loop (Kessler) suture. 2(
shaft of mandible. 32. 33
Long digital extensor muscle, 28. 21
Longissimus dorsi muscle.28
Paatsauna procedure, for expusure o!
Lumbar vertebra(e), L7. dorsul
 distal femur and stife joint, 272-
approach to, 84-86, 85, 87, 8s
274.273,276
Sacroiliac joint. direct visualization of.
L1-L3. dorsal approach to, 70-74.
Palmar bone plating. 206
877
71, 73, 75
Palmar carpal region, superficial
Sacrotuberous hgament, 29
exposure of, 208
 Sacrum, approach to dorsal aspect of.
Pal marolateral carpal joints, approach
222,223
to,210-212,211,213
 approach to ventral aspect of, 228.
Mandible, caudal shaf and ramus (.
Pa lpation, of verlebrae, 58
229
approach to,34,35
Parker procedure. for exposure o!
vertebra L7 and. dorsal approach to.
ramus of, approach to, 36. 3
vertebrae C5-T3. 64-68, 65, 67
84-86, 85.87. 89
rostral shafl of, approach lo. 32, 3
Parotid salivary gland. 25
Salivary gland, parotid. 25
Mattress suture pattern, horizontal, 21!
Passive range of motion exercises, for
Saphenous vein. lateral, 28
Medial collateral ligament of slift
elbow join1, 166
Sartorius muscie, 28
joint, approach to, 292-294, 295.
Pectineus muscle.29
Seapula, body, spine. and aeromion
295
1ectoral muscle, deep.25
process of, approach to. 92, 93
Medial coronoid process of ulnu
superficial, 25
neck and glenoid cavity of, approacht
approach to, by osteotomy ol
Pelvis, 221 263
symphysis of, approach to, 258-260,
10,120
medial humeral epicondyle.182
 Sciatic nerve. 29
184, 183,185
259.261
Seeman procedure, for exposure of
jntermuscular approach to, 178- 1H(!
Peroneal nerve, common, 29
thoracolumbar disks, 80-82, 81, 83
Peroneus longus muscle, 28. 29
Semimembranosus muscle, 28, 29
Medial humeral epicondyle. approar
Phalanges, of forelimb, approaches to.
Semitendinosus musele, 28, 29
to, 176, 177
218,219
Serratus ventralis muscle. attachmenl
Median nerve, 26, 27
of hindlimb, approach to, 314
Metacarpal bones, approaches to. 214
I'ins, for reattaching osteotomized bone.
220
 Sesamoid bones. of forelimb, approach
216
06
Metacromion, in cat,.92. 91:
Piriformis muscle, 29
to, 216,217
Metatarsal bones, approaches tu. 311
Popliteus muscie.29
of hindlimb, approach 1o, 314
317
Povidone iodine, for skin disinfection, 4
Seventh cervical nerve, in canine
Middle gluteal muscle, 2
I'robst. et al. procedure, for exposure of
thoracic limb. 27
Monoflament suture materials, 22
medial elhow joint, 178-180, 179,
Shoulder joint, caudal region of.
Montavon, Boudrieau, and Hohu
181
approach to, 108-112, 109, 111.
procedure, for exposure ol ventrnl
Pronator teres muscle, 27
113
aspect of sacrum, 228,22
Pubis, pelvic symphysis and, approach
caudolateral region ol, approach Lo.
Monteggia fracture, exposure for, 18
to、258-260,259.261
102-106,103.105,107
Montgomery, Milton. and Mann!
ramus of, approach to. 254-256. 255.
Cranial repion of, approach to, 118
procedure, for exposure of shaf !
257
120, 119.121
humerus, 132-136, 133, 735. 1:32
Pulley suture, 20
craniolateral region ol, approach tu.
Moslosky, Cholvin, and Brinke1
94-96, 95, 97. 98-100. 99, 101
procedure, for exposure ol elhv
craniomedial region of, approach t).
joint,158-162,159,161.16j
114-116. 115. 117
Musclets). See also specilie musel
Quudratus femoris muscle. 29
exposure of for removal of cartilnpt
closure of, 23
fragments. 106, 112
deep,of canine thoracic liml, 26,2
Sinibaldi, procedure of, for exposure ol
elevation of, 16, 17, 18. 19
tarsocrural joint, 306, 307
retraction of, 16, 22
Rudial nerve, 26
Sixth cervieal nerve, in canine lhorncie
separation of, 16-17
Kadius, distal part of. dorsal approach
limb, 2~
subcutaneous, of canine torequartu!.
to, 204, 205
Skin, closure of, 23
25
palmaromedial approach 1o. 206-
of canine hindquarter. 22
disinfection of, 4
208,207,209
head and proximal metaphysis of, ap-
incision and retractjon of, 15
preparation of. for surgical proxr
proach 1o,192-194,193,195
head of, humeroradial part of elbou
dures. 3--5
Skull, caudal surface of, approwrh tu!
Nerve. See specific nerve.
joint and, approach to, 172-174.
Nonabsorbable suture materials, ?:
173,175
42,4.3
lateral elbow joint and, approach
dorsolateral surface of, approuel tu.
to, 168-170, 169, 171
40, 41
shaft of lateral approach to, 200-
 Slocum and Devine procedure. la
bturator muscle, interior. lenl 1
202,201,203
exposure ol ventral aspert of jup
medial approach 10, 196-198, 197.
joint or pubic ramus, 2h4 2hi. 2ht.
29
Occipital bone, open reduction o1 
199,202
257
fractures of, 42, 43
Range of rmotion exercises, for elbow
 Slocum and Hohn procedurr, lot
Olecranon. See Elbow joint: T'utnr.
joint, 166
exposure of hip joinl und sxcl
olecrani.
 Reclus femoris muscle, 29
248-250,249, 25:
324Index
Snavely and Hohn procedure, for
Surgery, principles of, 14-24
Tuberosity of ischium, 29
exposure of elbow joint, 150-152.
Suspension of limb, stirrup for, 4, 4
Turner and Hohn procedure, for
151.153
Suture materials, 22
exposure of elbow joint. 146-148,
Soft-tissue damage, as factor in
Suturing. of different tissues, 20. 23
147,149
choosing approach, 3
patterns for, 20
Sorjonen and Shires procedure, for
exposure of vertebrae C1 and C2,
46-48,47,49
Ulna. distal shaft and styloid process
 Spinal column. See also Verteorare!.
 Talocrural joint. lateral malleolus and.
of, approach to, 190. 191
 surgical approaches to, 45--67
approach to, 302-304, 303, 305
medial coronoid process of, approach
Spinal cord, cranial, exposure of, 42
Tarsocrural joinl, approach by
to, 182-184, 183, 185
Spinal nerves, in canine thoracic limb.
osteotomy of medial malleolus. 306.
intermuscular approach to. 178-
27
307
180,179, 181
Sterilization. of surgical supplies, 3
 Tarsus, lateral bones of, approach to.
proximal diaphysis of, osteotomy of.
Sternocephalieus muscle, 25
312,313
164-166, 165, 167
Sternohyoideus muscle, 25
Medial bones of, approach to, 314.
proximal shaft and trochlear notch
Stife joint, approach through
315
of, approach to, 186, 187
osteotomy of lateral collateral
 plantar aspects of, approach to, 310.
Ulnar nerve, 26, 27
ligament, 290, 291
311
Ulnaris lateralis muscle, 26
approach through osteotomy of me-
Temporomandibular joint, 36
dial collateral ligament, 296. 297
Tendon(s). See also specific tendon.
bilateral approach to, 274. 282-284,
closure of, 23
283.285
suturing of, 19, 20
Vastus lateralis muscle, 29
caudolateral part of, approach to,
Tenotomy. 19
Vastus medialis muscle, 28. 29
Tension band wire, for reattaching
Vein. See specifc yein.
288,289
caudomedial part. of, approach to,
osteotomized bone, 20
Vertcbra(e). See also Atlas; Axis.
292-294, 293. 295
Tensor fasciae antebrachii muscle, 27
C1 and C2, dorsal approach to. 50-
distal femur and, approach through
Tensor fasciae latae muscle, 28. 29
52,51,53
lateral incision, 272-274, 273.
Teres major muscle, 27
ventral approach to, 46-48, 47, 49
275
Teres minor muscle, 26
C2-C5, dorsal approach to, 60-62.
approach through osteotomy of tib-
Thoracic limb, approaches to, 122-219
61.63
ial tuberosity, 286, 287
canine, deep museulature of, 26. 27
C2-C7, ventral approach to, 54-58.
lateral approach to, 276, 277
subcutaneous musculature of, 25
55,57,59
lateral collateral ligament of, ap-
Thoracic spinal nerve, 27
C5-T3, dorsal approach to, 64 68.
proach to. 288,289
Thoracic vertebrae, T1-T3, dorsal
65,67,69
medial approach to. 278-280, 279.
approach to.64-68,65.67,69
caudal, approach to,88,89
T12 and T13,dorsal approach to,70
281
L7. dorsal approach to, 84-86, 85, 87.
medial collateral ligament of, ap-
74,71, 73, 75
89
proach to, 292-294,293,295
Thoracolumbar intervertebral disks
numbering of, 58, 82
total exposure of, 294
(T10-T11—L5-L6), dorsolateral
T12-L3, dorsal approach to, 70-74.
Stirrup, for suspension of limb, 4, 4
approach to, 76-78, 77, 79
71, 73, 75
Stockinette, for surgical procedures, 4,
Jateral approach to,80-82,81,83
Vertebral column, surgical approaches
6, 6, 7,8,9. 10, 11, 12, 13
Thoracolumbar vertebrae (Ti2-L3).
to,45-67
Stoll procedure, for exposure of medial
dorsal approach to, 70-74, 71, 73.
elbow joint, 182-184, 183, 185
Subcutaneous fascia, closure of, 23, 24
Tibia, shaft of, approach to, 298-300.
Wadsworth and Henry procedure, for
 Subeut.aneous musculature, of eanine
299,301
 foreguarter, 25
Tibial muscle. cranial, 28, 29
exposure of dorsal aspect of hip
of canine hindquarter, 28
Tibial nerve, 29
joint, 236-238, 237, 239
Weight bearing and exercises, for elbow
 Subcutaneous tissue. ineision and
Tissue damage. as factor in choosing
retraclion of, 15-16
jnint,166
approach, 3
Trachea, exposure of, 54, 55
Wilson procedure, for exposure of tibial
suturing of, 24
shaft, 298-300, 299, 301
 Subscapular artery. 26
Trapezius muscle, 25
Wires, for reattaching osteotomized
Subscapularis muscle, 27
Triceps brachii muscle, 25,27
Trochanter, greater, 29
bone, 20
Superficial digital fexor muscle, 27, 28.
29
approach to, 266-268, 267, 269
Superfcial gluteal muscle, 28
Trochlear notch of ulna, approach to.
 Superficial pectoral muscle, 25
186.187
Yturraspe and Lumb procedure, for
Supraspinatus inuscle, 26, 27
Tuber oleerani, approach to, 188,189
exposure of thoracolurnbar disks.
 Sural nerve, caudal cutaneous, 29
osteotomy of,158-162,159,161,163
76-78, 77, 79
ISBN -721-102-9
90038
"780721"610122'