Nutritional
Supplements
for the
Veterinary Practice
A Pocket Guide
AAHA
press
Shawn Messonnier, DVM
ebook
Nutritional
Supplements
for the
Veterinary Practice
A Pocket Guide
Shawn Messonnier, DVM
Edited by Nancy Scanlan, DVM, MSFP, CVA
AAHA
press
This book is dedicated to the two most important
people in my life: Sandy and Erica.
@ 2012 by Shawn Messonnier
All rights reserved. Electronic edition published 2012. This electronic
publication is intended for use only by the original purchaser. No part
of this electronic publication may be reproduced or transrmitted in any
systern, without permission in writing from the publisher.
Disclairmer: Neither the Author nor AAHA shall be held liable for either
inforrmation including,but not limited to, supplerment identification,
usage, dosage, or equivalency resulting from any misstaterment or error
contained in this Work. The condition of a specific patient or individual
circurmstance may warrant alterations in dosages or treatrments frorm
those set forth in this Work. Package and label inforrmation provided
byrmanutacturersshould alwaysbe reviewedbefore adrministration
aupipaw Aeuuaiaa ui sanueapy luawaddns Aue jo uoeedaud jo
rmay cause inforrmation contained herein to become outdated, invalid,
or subject to debate by various veterinary professionals. Neither the
Author nor AAHA shall be held responsible for inaccuracies, omissions,
editorial errors, or for any consequence resulting therefrorm. The Author
and AAHA shall both be held harmless frorm any and all clairms that may
arise as a result of any reliance on the inforrmation provided.
AAHA
press
Armerican Anirmal Hospital Association Press
12575 West Bayaud Avernue
Lakewood, Colorado 80228
Acquisitions Editor: Bess Maher
Developrmental/Medical Editor: Stacey Oke
Book design: Laura Hartgerink/Signify, LLC
ehhauner ehahoioudyoois!  salanous jequau sabew!Jaao
silhouette @ istockphoto/pixitive;dog silhouette  istockphoto/lgor
Diurovic.
[SBN[pririt] 978-1-58326-174-3
SBN [ebook] 978-1-58326-175-0
Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available frorm the Library of Congress.
Printed in Canada
121314/10987654321
CONTENTS
Preface
V
Acknowledgments
vii
Introduction
ix
HowtoUse ThisBook
XV
NUTRITIONALSUPPLEMENTS
ALPHA-LIPOICACID
3
BEE POLLEN
7
BREWER'SYEAST
11
CARNITINE
15
CHOLINE/PHOSPHATIDYLCHOLINE
19
CHONDROITIN
21
COENZYME Q0
25
COLLOIDAL SILVER
29
COLOSTRUM
33
DEHYDROEPIANDROSTERONE
35
DIMETHYLGLYCINE
39
ECHINACEA
41
FISH OIL
45
FLAXSEED OIL
51
GARLIC
55
GINGER
61
GINKGO
65
GINSENG
69
GLUCOSAMINE
73
GLUTAMINE
77
GREENTEA
81
HAWTHORN
85
HYALURONIC ACID
68
KAVA
93
LYSINE
97
MEDICINAL MUSHROOMS
66
MELATONIN
101
METHYLSULFONYLMETHANE
105
PHOSPHATIDYLSERINE
107
PREBIOTICS
109
PROBIOTICS
111
S-ADENOSYLMETHIONINE
117
SILYMARIN/MILKTHISTLE
121
ST. JOHN'S WORT
125
SUPER GREEN FOODS:
SPIRULINA/BLUE-GREENALGAE
129
TAURINE
131
TRYPTOPHAN
133
VALERIAN
137
VITAMINA/CAROTENOIDS
139
VITAMIN C
143
VITAMIN D
147
VITAMIN E
153
Appendix 1: Additional Information on Antioxidants
157
Appendix 2: List of Supplements That May Affect
Blood Coagulation
161
Appendix 3: List of Supplements That May Interact
with Anesthetics,Sedatives,orAntidepressants
163
Appendix 4: List of Supplements That May Reduce
Side Effects from and/orEnhance Cytotoxicity of
Chemotherapy and Radiation Therapy
165
List of References
167
Further Reading
171
About the Author
173
iv
CONTENTS
PREFACE
The use of nutritional and herbal supplements continues to grow
each year. Most (if not all) veterinarians currently recommend
such as fish oil, glucosamine, and antioxidants. Unfortunately,
many pet owners continue to use supplements (for themselves as
well as their pets) with no medical supervision. This can result
in inadequate dosing, misdiagnosis because the pet has poten-
tially never been examined by a veterinarian, toxicity from the
supplement,interactions with other supplements or medications
prescribed by the veterinarian or given to the pet by the owner,
and/or the development of side effects causing patient morbidity
and possibly mortality. This book, Nutritional Supplements for
the Veterinary Practice: A Pocket Guide,was written to address
these concerns.For the first time, veterinarians and veterinary
technicalandsupport staff have at their disposalinformation
on natural supplements presented in a concise and easy-to-use
fashion.Typical of a true handbook, Nutritional Supplements
for the Veterinary Practice:A Pocket Guide is not meant to be a
thorough, in-depth discussion of everything that is known about
natural supplements. Instead, this handbook is meant to be a
user-friendlyresource that can help provide essential and accu
rate information as quickly as possible for the busy practitioner
and office staff, as well as resources for readers who wish to obtain
additionalinformation.
Although there is an ever-increasing amount of accurate infor-
mation on the topic of natural supplements in people, there is still
scant literature involving well-researched studies on the use of
many of the commercially available natural supplements in pets.
Much of the information in the veterinary literature is based on
extrapolated from the human literature. Nonetheless, veterinar-
ians are sharinginformation about potentially efficacious doses of
supplements that seem to be helping their patients. Still, natural
therapies can be used safely despite the deficiencies in our knowl
edge base (because of the lack of well-designed,controlled clini
cal studies). With more experience and (hopefully) more research
our knowledge base will continue to grow. Until then, Nutritional
Supplements for the Veterinary Practice:A Pocket Guide will help
guide you in your endeavors to use natural therapies.
@20 12 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
Several copies of this handbook might benefit your veterinary
hospital. One can serve as a reference in the library, one or more
information. Finally, one copy can be placed in the waiting room
to encourage pet owners to feel comfortable discussing the topic of
natural therapies witheither the veterinarians or veterinary techni
cal staff. This will instill confidence in the pet owners that the staff
is able to accurately recommend appropriate supplements for their
pets.
While writing this book, I attempted to be as accurate as
possible and provide as many references as possible regarding the
use of nutritional supplements in pets. I believe that Nutritional
Supplements for the Veterinary Practice: A Pocket Guide will serve
the needs of the veterinary community and will be frequently used
in clinical practice. My hope is that this book will serve as a start-
ing point for future books on the topic and will encourage more
of a ny recommendations or suggestions for future editions. You can
contact me at shawnvet@sbcglobal.net.
Shawn Messonnier, DVM
February2012
Vi
PREFACE
This electronic publication is intencled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank the wonderful people at AAHA Press, espe-
cially my editor Bess Maher. Thank you for believing in this project
and making it come to life. I'm looking forward to working with
you on many more such projects in the future. I would like to thank
my colleague Dr. Nancy Scanlan for her valuable review of the
manuscript at various stages and her assistance in providing addi-
tional references for the supplements included in this book, all my
mentors in the world of naturopathic medicine and naturopathio
veterinary medicine,my wonderful staff at Paws & Claws Animal
Hospital for running a tight ship when I'm busy writing and am not
able to be at the office, and the wonderful clients who seek natural
healing for their pets at my hospital. Your dedication to your pets
is amazing. Finally, I would like to thank God for giving me the
wonderful opportunity to discover the natural healing ability he
put in all of us.
vii
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
INTRODUCTION
What Is a Nutritional Supplement?
The term “nutritional supplement" refers to any product taken by
 s r,    s  
to supplement the diet. These dietary ingredients can include
vitamins; minerals; herbs or other botanicals (also referred to
as natural products); amino acids; substances such as enzymes,
organ tissues, glandulars, and metabolites; and extracts or concen-
trates. Nutritional supplements are available in many forms, such
as tablets, capsules, softgels, gelcaps, liquids, and powders. They
are also available as tasty treats (e.g., dog biscuits and chews).
Nutritional supplements, also referred to as dietary supplements or
food supplements, are considered complementary and alternative
medicine (CAM), which is one of many medical healthcare prod-
ucts or techniques that can be used either instead of or in conjunc-
tion with conventional medical practices. Other examples of CAM
are acupuncture and chiropractic.
In veterinary medicine,just as in human medicine,the use
of nutritional supplements has become extremely popular over
the past few decades. Surveys show that more than 20% of all dog
owners and 15% of cat owners currently offer some type of nutri-
tional supplerment to their pets. The most popular nutritional
skin/coat,and digestive health.By 2015,annual U.S.sales of pet
nutritional supplements are expected to exceed $2 billion, of which
60% of the market.As described below and mentioned earlier in
the Preface, not all supplements are created equal. For that reason,
the advice and guidance of a veterinarian.
Natural Versus Synthetic
The term“natural” is used extensively when referring to noncon-
ventional medical therapies such as nutritional supplements.
Natural therapies are also referred to as “"holistic,” “complemen-
tary”and"alternative”therapies.To my knowledge there isno one
ix
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
agreed-upon definition of the term “natural." In general, the term
u, on pasoddo se au wo, d on sua st leiu,
made or chemically derived." For example, consider white willow
bark and its conventional medical derivative, acetylsalicylic acid
(aspirin).White willow bark contains salicin plus numerous other
ingredients, but salicin is the active ingredient responsible for the
pharmacologic properties of white willow bark. History records
Hippocrates prescribing the leaves and bark of the white willow tree
to relieve pain and fever in 400 BC. In 1897, the Bayer Company
extracted salicin from white willow bark and chemically modifiedit
to form acetylsalicylic acid. The main difference between the salicin
contained in white willow bark and acetylsalicylic acid contained
in aspirin is one acetyl group (a small organic moiety with a carbon
molecule double bonded to an oxygen and single bonded to another
carbon with three hydrogens). This small modification resulted in a
the formation of blood clots), which is not a property of white
willow bark. A naturopathic practitioner who wants the pharma
cologic benefits of aspirin, such as the anti-inflammatory effects
white willow bark to his or her patients,whereas a conventional
doctor would prescribe the chemically made conventional drug
acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin),
This example may make the distinction between natural and
man-made relatively straightforward, but in reality things are not
nearly so cut and dry, and sometimes the lines between the two
types of products are blurred. For example, consider the herb milk
thistle. The active ingredient in milk thistle is silymarin. There are
currently several commercially available silymarin supplements
for pets. These supplements might be considered “natural" to some
consumers, but for them to be considered truly "natural," a practitio-
ner would have to prescribe the raw herb milk thistle rather than a
silymarin supplement that is made from chemically extracting the
silymarin from the raw herb. Unless the practitioner is well versed
in herbal medicine, itis unlikely that he or she would prescribe the
raw herb. Instead, he or she would likely recommend one of the
several currently marketed silymarin supplements. The problem
is that silymarin supplements often contain only one ingredient
(silymarin). In contrast, the raw herb milk thistle contains many
other ingredients that might be beneficial. Some of the commer-
cially available silymarin supplements might also contain other
X
INTRODUCTION
This electronic publication is intendled for Luse only by the original purcha.ser
ingredients, such as artificialdyes or flavors,which may or may not
be“natural." Thus, doctors and pet owners who want to use more
"natural" products than chemically derived or synthetic products
however, most of our supplements (except for raw herbs) are not as
"natural" as we might like or expect.
ArtVersus Science
Veterinary practitioners are well versed in the scientific aspects of
medicine, so it is easy to forget that medicine is also an art. As you
read this book,it willbecomeapparentthatwell-designedcontrolled
research studies are often lacking for many of the supplements that
are discussed, particularly in veterinary medicine. This is where
the “art” part of medicine comes into play. By understanding the
biochemistry of a particular supplement and seeing how it might
be used in people (where there are more well-designed controlled
studies), veterinarians can extrapolate and identify medical condi
tions that might be amenable to supplementation with a particular
product or ingredient.
Not Perfect,but the Science Is There
One of the most common complaints from those who express
opposition to the use of natural therapies such as nutritional
supplements is the lack of credible scientific evidence“proving” the
efficacy of such therapies. This complaint is valid at times; however,
this lackof evidence should not preclude the use of natural thera
pies that may help veterinary patients.
While researching for Nutritional Supplements for the
Veterinary Practice:A Pocket Guide, several issues regarding the
amount of scientific evidence quickly became apparent. First,
there are many studies in the human medical literature showing
the effectiveness of natural therapies, including nutritional supple-
ments. Second, there is a relative deficiency of the same type and
quality of evidence in the veterinary medical literature. Third, as a
result of this deficiency in the veterinary medical literature, recom
mendations regarding the use of natural therapies, including nutri-
tional supplements, in pets must be based on the available scientific
evidence, including extrapolation from the human medical litera
ture as well as case reports, clinical experience, historical usage,
Nutritional Supplements for the Veterinary Practice
Xi
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
and anecdotal usage of these therapies. This approach is problem-
atic at times, and common sense must be used to offer sound guide
lines based on whatever credible scientific evidence exists in order
to be able to help our veterinary patients. Fourth, even the credible
scientific evidence in the human medical literature is not perfect.
For example, in researching various herbs it became apparent that
there were (at times) conflicting studies based on the form of herb
used as well as the dose used. It is not always easy to extrapolate
how various forms and doses of a particular nutritionalsupplement
these cases, common sense coupled with a scientific understanding
ofthe potential actions and side effects of the herb (or other ingredi-
ent) is needed to attempt to apply research findings to clinical prac-
tice. Fifth, and finally, there are side effects reported with various
supplements that may not really exist. For example, isolated case
reports of certain herbs interfering with blood clotting are replete
with improperly recorded information,such as concurrent herb
    q e   e e    
ment (not all parts of the herb are equally effective or equally toxic).
Althougha theoretical concern may exist about interactions among
various supplements or medications,it is clear that because of
tion, a definitive conclusion cannot be made. Thus, the practitioner
is left to decide for him- or herself how to proceed.
fairly limited. Future studies (which require funding) will likely
alter our current recommendations.Despite these deficiencies,
there are clear indications and safety issues that are adequately
addressed in the medical literature to guide our prescribing of
natural therapies. With these deficiencies in mind,Nutritional
Supplements for the Veterinary Practice:A Pocket Guide contains
up-to-date scientific information and can therefore guide prac-
titioners as they seek to help their patients with nutritional
supplements.
"Natural" Is Not Necessarily "Safe"
pies is that all natural therapies are safe. Somehow we have equated
"natural” with “safe." When properly used, natural therapies tend
Xii
INTRODUCTION
This electronic publication is intended for use only by the oniginal purcha.ser
to have a greater safety profile than most conventional medications
do. It is equally true, however, that natural therapies can and do
cause problems in patients. As an example, improperly diluted tea
tree oil can be toxic and even fatal to dogs and cats.Nutritional
supplements, such as herbs, often have numerous ingredients and
therefore numerous pharmacological actions. Not all of these
actions are known or understood. Throughout this book, I have
attempted to point out safety issues most likely to be of concern to
the veterinarian and veterinary support staff. Potential side effects
caused by the supplement and interactions with other medications
or supplements that may adversely affect the patient are important
to appreciate and relay to clients.
References
1. US. Department of Health and Human Services United States Food and Drug
Administration. Overview of Dietary Supplements. Available at: http://www.fda
gov/Food/DietarySupplements/ConsumerInformation/ucm110417.htm#what.
Accessed January 15, 2012.
2. National Institutes of Health National Center for Complementary and
Alternative Medicine. What is complementary and alternative medicine?
Available at: http://nccam.nih.gov/health/whatiscam/. Accessed January 15,
2012.
3. Packaged Facts. Pet Supplements and Nutraceutical Treats in the U.S., 3rd
edition. February 2011. Available at: https:// www.packagedfacts.com/Pet
-Supplements- Nutraceutical-2588715/. Accessed January 15, 2012.
Nutritional Supplements for the Veterinary Practice
xif
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
This book is organized alphabetically by the commonly used names
ofvarious nutritionalsupplements andincludes 42 supplements
that are most commonly used by either veterinarians or pet owners.
The following categories appear in the description and discussion
ofeach supplement: background, indications, recommended doses,
side effects, contraindications, and interactions.
The "Background" section provides generalinformation about
that allows the healthcare professional to have a clear (but brief)
understanding of the biochemistry of the supplement (i.e., how the
supplementis thought to work).
The “Indications" section lists one or more suggested uses
for each supplement for humans, dogs, and cats. These uses are
based on research and/or clinical experience. Information on the
use of each nutritional supplement is also provided for humans
performed in humans. In addition, there may be a use for a particu-
lar supplermentin people that does not occur in pets (such as AIDS);
however, similar conditions in pets (such as FIV) could potentially
benefitfrom the supplement.
The“Recommended Doses"section provides dosesfor humans,
dogs, and cats wherever possible. This is because some doses for
some supplements used in people have been established through
been studied in pets. In many instances, the doses listed in this
handbook for pets are those that have been reported in the litera-
ture or listed on the manufacturer-derived labels for a specific prod.
uct. For all supplements, every attempt has been made to provide as
much accurate information as possible regarding doses. In many
cases, the clinician must use his or her own judgment in deciding
cians should start with a dose at the lower end when a dose range
is given and adjust the dose based on the response of the patient.
For each dose, the standard format is presented (q 8, 12, 24 hr, for
example)or the dose/day is described ifthe supplement is divided
into one or more doses or administered in a single dose.
Several supplements listed in Nutritional Supplements for the
Veterinary Practice: A Pocket Guide are Western herbal supplements
XY
@20 12 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
i.e.,supplements with aWestern name rather than a Chinese
name). In some cases,especially in pets, there is no agreed-upon
dose for herbs. As a rule, herbalists generally recommend starting
at the low end of the dose range (where available) and adjusting
the dose as needed based on patient response, side effects, and/or
toxicity.
It is imperative that readers appreciate that all doses are guide-
lines. To be safe, clinicians should prescribe herbal therapies using
the following guidelines only if they are familiar with the biochem-
ical and toxicologic properties of the herbs, because even these
 ls  sio ") si  r  o q a sa
In addition, variability because of growing conditions of the herbs,
harvesting times, and preparation methods can impact both the
required and safe doses. These factors must be taken into consider-
ation when using herbal supplements in veterinary patients.
The “Side Effects” section describes potential concerns for each
supplement.The supplements included in NutritionatSupptements
for the Veterinary Practice:A Pocket Guide are considered safe
when used as recommended, so long as any potential contraindica-
tions and interactions with other medications or supplements are
considered. In general, there are no studies assessing nutritional
supplements in pregnant or nursing animals, and generalizations
young animals are based on information from the human litera-
ture. Although many nutritional supplements (such as fish oil and
flax) are routinely used in pregnant or nursing humans and are
likely safe to use in pregnant or nursing animals, the use of herbs
in these populations is more likely to be associated with possible
side effects. Following label guidelines regarding the use of specific
nutritional supplements in pregnant or nursing animals is helpful,
but ultimately, the decision to use the supplement or herb is left to
the practitioner. Initial doses should be at the low end of the recom-
mended dose range, and patients should be carefully observed for
resolution of the clinical signs and/or toxicity. Caution is recom-
mended when using supplements in pregnant or lactating
animals and usage should be based on clinical experience with
the specific supplement.
Any known contraindication(s) associated with the adminis
tration of each supplement are described in the“Contraindications'
section. Usually these contraindications apply to humans, but may
be extrapolated to veterinary patients.
X?i
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
This electronic publication is initendled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser
Finally, an “Interactions” section has been included for each
nutritional supplement. Although supplements are“natural" thera-
pies and are generally thought to be safer than conventional medi-
extrapolated to veterinary patients.
It is my hope that the information contained in Nutritional
Supplements fortheVeterinary Practice:A Pocket Guidewillhelp
veterinary practitioners to safely and comfortably prescribe nutri-
tional supplements to their patients.
Nutritional Supplements for the Veterinary Practice Xi
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
Nutritional
Supplements
ALPHA-LIPOIC ACID
{LIPOIC ACID, ALA]
Background
Alpha-lipoic acid (ALA) is a vitamin-like substance and enzyme
cofactor that is both fat and water soluble.ALA is synthesized by
the body and is therefore not required in the diet, but is also found
in a variety of foods such as red and organ meats and vegetables
(e.g., potatoes, carrots, spinach, broccoli, beets, yams). Chemically,
ALA is a carboxy acid (i.e., a weak acid containing a carbon double
bonded to an oxygen molecule and the general chemical structure
R-COOH) with two sulfur atoms.ALA can therefore be either
oxidizedor reduced,which means it can accept or donate elec
trons. This ability to accept electrons makes ALA a potent antioxi
dant because it can protect cells from damage because of free radi
cals, which are highly reactive chemicals because of the presence of
spare electrons. In addition, ALA chelates (binds to) heavy metals
such as iron and lead. Like many drugs, chemicals, and biolog-
mirror images of the same compound. Isomers are usually referred
to as either R and S or D and L. The R-isomer of ALA is the form
synthesized naturally within the body and is the only form that
functions as an enzyme cofactor.?
As an antioxidant, ALA not only protects cells against damag-
ing free radicals but also preserves or recycles other antioxidants
such as vitamin C, vitamin E, coenzyme Q。(CoQ10), and gluta-
  ,    s
an enzyme cofactor (in the Krebs/citric acid cycle).23 ALA is effi-
ciently absorbed and easily crosses cell membranes, including the
blood-brain barrier.² ALA also inhibits HIV viral replication (via
inhibition of reverse transcriptase and/or increasing glutathione
levels).'ALA regulates nuclear factor kappa B (NF-xB),which is a
protein that affects the rate at which certain genes are transcribed
(expressed).² Together, these mechanisms suggest that ALA may
influence a number of processes such as inflammation, atheroscle-
rosis, diabetes, hypertension, cancer, and acquired immunodefi-
ciency syndrome (AIDS). ALA reportedly helps protect against
ocular lens damage and glaucoma, diabetic neuropathy, and
cardiomyopathy.
@20 12 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
· Decreases blood glucose levels
·Decreases cataract formation
·Improves open-angle glaucoma
•Assists in the management of diabetic neuropathy
•Supports liver function, assists liver detoxification, and is hepato-
protective (i.e., protects against chemical-, alcohol-, and Amanita
mushroom poisoning-induced liver damage)
*Chelates heavy metals
·Protects against age-related cardiomyopathies
·Limits macular degeneration
 Supports cognitive function in the elderly
 Helps AIDS patients
·Supports patients with multiple sclerosis
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
*Assists animals with cognitive disorders
Helps manage diabetes mellitus and feline diabetic neuropathy
Supports patients with peripheral neuropathy
·Limits cataracts and glaucoma
·Supports liver function in animals with chronic active hepatitis,
cholangiohepatitis,and other liver diseases
*Supports patients with immune deficiency syndromes (e.g., feline
immunodeficiency virus based on recommendations for treat-
ment in people with HIV/AIDS)
Recommended Doses
Doses in people range from 100 mg to 1,800 mg q 24 hr. In general,
the recommended dose of ALA is approximately 300-600 mg q 24
hr. The recommended dose for AIDS patients is 150 mg q 8 hr. In
of 200 mg q 24 hr have been reported. The dose for cats is up to 25
mg/cat q 24 hr. It is suggested to divide the daily dose rather than
giving a single dose/day.24
SideEffects
In humans, ALA is generally considered a safe supplement.? One
notable exception is the neurologic toxicity/hepatotoxicity that
ALPHA-LIPOIC ACID
This electronic publication is intended for use only by the oniginal purcha.ser
can occur in cats if the daily dose exceeds 25 mg/cat/day becauise
of ammonia accumulation. Clinical signs of ALA toxicity in cats
include irritability, anorexia, ataxia, and hypersalivation.d Blood
glucose-lowering medications should be carefully monitored to
prevent hypoglycemia. In people, doses of 1,200 mg q 24 hr for 2
years and 1,800 mg q 24 hr for 3 weeks produced no adverse effects.2
Maximum safe doses in pets (other than cats) have not been estab-
ing supplementation with ALA. There has also been one report of
toxicity in two dogs supplemented with ALA.
Contraindications
None reported. Careful observation of diabetic patients taking
glucose-lowering medications is recommended. There is (unproven)
concern regarding antioxidants such as ALA possibly interfering
with chemotherapy or radiation therapy, although this remains
able with the concurrent use of antioxidants and chemotherapy/
radiation therapy with careful monitoring of the patients (see
Appendix 1 for a lengthier discussion of this topic).
Interactions
The antioxidant activity of ALA appears to protect people from
ototoxicity and peripheral sensory neuropathy associated with the
use of platinum chemotherapy medications (such as cisplatin). The
use of ALA with platinum chemotherapy medications does not
appear to compromise the effectiveness of the chemotherapeutics,
but patients should be monitored during coadministration of ALA
and platinum therapy.² The coadministration of ALA and amino
glycoside antibiotics (e.g., gentamicin, amikacin) may decrease renal
and ototoxicity.² Coadministration of ALA and the antipsychotic
haloperidol may reduce the haloperidol-induced glutathione deple-
tion.² Coadministering ALA and angiotensin 2 receptor antagonists
such as irbesartan (which are not routinely used in anirmals) may
reduce oxidative damage in endothelial tissue, and administering
ALA with insulin or oral hypoglycemic medications could result
effects also likely occur with coadministration of ALA and other
Nutritional Supplerments for the Veterinary Practice
5
@20 12 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
antioxidants (including vitamins C and E), milk thistle, acetyl-L-
carnitine, coenzyme Q。(CoQ10), and omega-3 fatty acids.2
References
1. Pizzorno J, Murray M. Textbook of naturar redicine. 3rd ed. St. Louis (MO):
Churchill Livingstone; 2006:1094-5, 1633, 1933.
2.Stargrove M,Treasure J, McKee D. Herb, rutrient, and drug interacfions:
linical implications and therapeutie strategies. St. Louis (MO): Mosby Elsevier;
2008:71824.
3.Broadfoot PJ, Palmquist RE, Jonston K,et al. Integrating complementary
medicine into veterinary practice. Goldstein R, ed. Blackwell; 2008:518-32.
Available at: www.mediafire.com/?2s13ctmvv7tyb2k. Accessed January 15,
2011.
tradition. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2002:236, 480, 500, 510-11.
5. Li CJ, Zhang QM, Li MZ, et al. Attenuation of myocardial apoptosis by alpha-
lipoic acid through suppression of mitochondrial oxidative stress to reduce
diabetic cardiomyopathy. Chin Med J |Engl| 2009;122(21):2580-6.
6. Loftin EG, Herold LV. Therapy and outcome of suspected alpha lipoic acid
toxicity in two dogs. J Vet Emrerg Crit Care San Antonio 2009;19(5):5016.
6
ALPHA-LIPOIC ACID
This electronic publication is intencled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser
BEE POLLEN
{POLLEN,PROPOLIS,ROYALJELLY,HONEY]
Background
Bee pollen is produced from the pollination of various flowers by
honeybees. Pollen comes from the male germ cell of flowering
plants. Bee-related products include propolis, royal jelly, and honey.
Propolis is the resinous substance collected from the leaf buds and
bark of trees (especially conifer and poplar trees) used to construct
the hive. Propolis possesses antimicrobial properties, which protects
the hive from bacteria,viruses, and other disease-causing micro-
organisms. Royal jelly is a thick, milky substance produced by
Bee pollen and some bee products (excluding honey) contain sugars
proteins,essential amino acids, deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA),ribo
metabolite), plant hormones, and vitamins and minerals, which is
why they are sometimes referred to as“nature's perfect food."
Bee pollen and bee-related products, especially honey, are
purportedly helpful in relieving allergies.² The rationale is that
because honey, being made from pollen, contains a number of aller-
genic substances, ingesting honey exposes the allergy sufferer to
small doses of allergens, which may make the person more tolerant
to these allergens (a theory similar to injectable antigen therapy). In
the author's experience, the best response, when it occurs, is likely
from the environment in which the patient lives and to which the
patient is most likely to develop an allergic response.
In vitro propolis has been shown to have antibacterial, anti-
fungal, antiviral, anticancer, and anti-inflammatory properties.
Topically, propolis has shown benefit in treating wounds and burns
and in healing genital herpetic lesions in people. In people, bee
pollen is associated with improverments in menopause symptoms,
royal jelly may help with hypercholesterolemia, and propolis may
be of va lue in patients with irritable bowel syndrome.
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
·Improves allergies
@20 12 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
·Enhances energy
*Alleviates menopause symptoms (pollen)
· Supports cancer patients
·Supports the immune system and fights bacterial, viral, and other
infections (propolis)
·Acts as a topical anti-inflammatory agent (propolis)
·Ameliorates hypercholesterolemia (royal jelly)
·Helps manage inflammatory bowel disease
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
· Improves allergies
·Helps control infectious diseases
Recommended Doses
In both people and pets, the recommended dose varies depend-
ing on the product. No standard dosing is available. Examples of
approximate doses for hurmans are as follows: 15-45 mL (1-3 table-
spoons) bee pollen q 24 hr, 100-500 mg propolis q 8 hr, 50-250
mg royal jelly q 12-24 hr, and 15-45 mL (1-3 tablespoons) honey
q 24 hr.' In pets there is no agreed-upon dose. Empirically, doses
suggested for people are used or modified for the veterinary patient.
Side Effects
Bee pollen and bee-related products are considered very safe.
Allergic reactions are the most common side effect.
Contraindications
Bee products should not be used in patients with known allergies to
bees, bee products, or poplar and conifer trees.
Interactions
None reported.
References
1.Pizzorno J, Murray M. Textbook of rafural redicine. 3rd ed. St. Louis (MO)
Churchill Livingstone; 2006:767-8.
BEE POLLEN
This electronic publication is initencled for Lse only by the origina.l purcha.ser.
2.Wynn S, Marsden S. Marual of ratura veterinary redicine: science an
fracition. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003: 133, 189, 509.
3.Broadfoot PJ, Palmquist RE, Jonston K, et al. Integrating comptementary
medicine into veterinary pracfice. Goldstein R, ed. Blackwell; 2008:752.
Available at: www.mediafire.com/?2s13ctmvv7tyb2k. Accessed January 15,
2012.
4.Fetrow CW, Avila J. Professionat's handbook of complementarye altemative
81, 675.
Nutritional Supplements for the Veterinary Practice
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
BREWER'SYEAST
(SACCHAROMYCESCEREVISIAE)
Background
Brewer's yeast consists of the ground, dried cells of the fungus
hol in the brewing of beer.' Brewer's yeast contains amino acids.
vitamins, minerals, and high levels of chromium. The chromium
 s  s       
type 2 diabetes. Brewer's yeast is also thought to improve skin
and hair health, control diarrhea, decrease serum cholesterol, and
repel insects such as mosquitoes (because of its thiamin [vitamin
B] content). The insect-repelling properties make brewer's yeast
popular in veterinary medicine as a natural alternative for flea
control. The hypothesis is that insect-repelling components of
brewer's yeast, such as thiamin, are excreted through sweat glands.
Many owners report that brewer's yeast effectively controls fleas;
however, these are only anecdotal reports. Controlled studies have
demonstrated the ineffectiveness of brewer's yeast for controlling
fleas in pets.* Nevertheless, administration of brewer's yeast is safe
and its use as a natural method of flea control could be encouraged
if the owner is concerned about the safety of medications marketed
for flea control.
The quality of brewer's yeast varies depending upon the ma nu-
facturer. Some packaged brewer's yeasts are processed to remove
the alcohol and chemical by-products that are left behind in the
of the yeast. High-quality brewer's yeast is grown on either molas
ses or sugar beets.
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
 Helps regulate blood sugar levels
· Improves the appearance of skin and hair
·Helps resolve diarrhea
·Controls hypercholesterolemia
·Functions as an insect repellent
11
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
Suggested Uses inDogs and Cats
·Controls fleas
RecommendedDoses
In both people and pets, the recommended dose varies from prod
uct to product. In the author's opinion, the recommended dose
  q i  si r  q 
thiamin (vitamin B) content of the supplement.
Side Effects
Brewer's yeast is considered very safe.
Contraindications
None reported.
Interactions
any interactions with brewer's yeast and other drugs, supplements,
or herbs, there are some interactions for chromium and thiamine
(both of which are found in brewer'syeast).For chromium,human
lipoprotein levels (HDL,“good" cholesterol) when taking chro-
mium and beta-blockers (i.e., β-1-adrenoreceptor antagonists). In
addition, chromium supplementation may decrease the develop-
ment of steroid-induced (oral corticosteroid) diabetes. Further,
chromium isbelieved to be involved in glucose and fat metabolism,
and chromium supplementation may enhance the activity of insu-
lin and oral hypoglycemic medications (but patients must be closely
monitored for hypoglycemia). Finally, there is a small amount
of indirect evidence that chromium picolinate (a specific form of
tryptophan in the brain to benefit individuals with depression.
For thiamine, several interactions are recognized. First, antacids
areknown to interfere with the absorption ofthiamine.Second,
broad-spectrum antibiotics can destroy the “good" bacteria
(commensals) in the gastrointestinal system that produce B vita-
12
BREWER'SYEAST
This electronic publication is intended for use only by the oniginal purcha.ser
pharmacokinetics of the antibiotic tetracycline. Thiamine supple-
mentation should therefore be avoided with tetracyclines. Third,
thiamine can interfere with the chemotherapeutic agent 5-fluoro-
uracil (5-FU) and should therefore be avoided during treatment.
Fourth, furosemide and other loop diuretics can increase the excre-
tion of thiamine. If the diuretics are administered for patients with
heart failure, thiamine deficiency can contribute to cardiac insuf-
ficiency and worsen congestive heart failure. Coadministration
of thiamine with diuretics is indicated. Fifth, administration of
tricyclic antidepressants concurrently with thiamine results in
improved responses. Sixth, anticonvulsants such as phenytoin can
deplete thiamine. Supplementation is warranted.
References
1.Fetrow CW, Avila J. Professionals hanabook of complermentary altermative
medicines. 3rd ed. Philadelphia (PA): Lippincott williams & wilkins;
2004:132-4.
2. Baker NF, Farver TB. Failure of brewer's yeast as a repellant to fleas on dogs. J
Ar Vet Med Ass0c 1983;183(2):2124
3.Wynn S, Marsden S. Maruat of raturat veterinary medicine: science and
fradifior. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003:1423
4.Stargrove M, Treasure J, McKee D. Herb, rutriert, and drug interactions
2008:253-62
Nutritional Supplements for the Veterinary Practice
13
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
CARNITINE
{L-CARNITINE)
Background
Carnitine is an amino acid (a building block for proteins) found
in high concentration in the heart and skeletal muscles, liver, and
kidneys. The body can synthesize carnitine from lysine and methi
onine and is therefore not an essential nutrient. Carnitine can also
be obtained through the diet and is mainly foundin foods ofanirmal
origin, such as meat, milk, eggs, and dairy products. As a supple
ment, carnitine is available as L-carnitine, propionyl-L-carnitine,
and L-acetylcarnitine (LAC), the latter of which has been used in
patients with Alzheimer's disease.'.?
Carnitine actsa carrier for long-chain fatty acids and acyl-coen-
Specihcally, carnitine transports these compounds into the mito
chondria (special energy-producing organelles found inside cells),
especially in skeletal and cardiac muscle, where they are oxidized to
ance and improve cardiac performance.a.4 In addition, carnitine
supports hepatic detoxification and excretion of toxins/drugs/
chemicals, helps dispose of glucose, improves insulin resistance, and
plays an important role in the synthesis and release of the potent
neurotransmitter acetylcholine, which is important for nerve trans-
mission.' A number of clinical trials have also demonstrated that
carnitine improves both angina and heart disease.
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
· Improves/protects against heart disease (e.g., angina, rmyocardial
insufficiency, arrhythmias, atherosclerosis, etc.)
·Enhances physical endurance
·Helps patients with Alzheimer's disease
·Facilitates weight loss
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
·Improves/protects against heart disease
·Supports cognitive function
·Accelerates weight loss in cats
15
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
Recommended Doses
In humans, 1,500-4,000 mg/day in three divided doses is recom-
mended.' In dogs with heart disease, 50-100 mg/kg q 8 hr has been
used. In the author's experience, 100-2,000 mg/day in divided
doses is appropriate for heart disease.
Side Effects
Even at high doses, L-carnitine is considered a very safe supple
side effects include nausea and vomiting and sleeplessness if taken
at night.D-carnitine and products containing both forms (DL
carnitine) should be avoided as the D formis notactive and may block
the action of L-carnitine, producing signs of carnitine deficiency.
Contraindications
Humans with low thyroid levels or hypothyroidism might consider
avoiding carnitine supplementation, as it may impair the action of
with hypothyroidism.
Interactions
There are several important interactions worthy of mention. For
example, L-carnitine may prevent or reduce cardiotoxicity asso-
ciated with the administration of anthracycline chemotherapy
occur with retinoids, and may prevent hearing loss when admin
istered with aminoglycosides, especially gentamicin. In patients
with hyperthyroidism, carnitine may partially block the activity of
thyroid hormone, and a positive additive (synergistic) effect occurs
when L-carnitine supplementation is given to patients taking
nitrates for cardiac disease. Carnitine supplementation may be
helpfulin patients treated with anticonvulsa ntsto prevent carnitine
depletion.' Improved memory and metabolic function may occur in
patients treated with L-carnitine and α-lipoic acid (ALA).' Patients
supplements, including carnitine, coenzyme Q。 (CoQ10), fish oil,
taurine, and hawthorn. Finally, when given with choline, carnitine
16
CARNITINE
This electronic publication is intended for μuse only by the original purcha.ser
References
1. Stargrove M, Treasure J, McKee D. Herb, nutrient, and drug interactions:
clinical implications and therapeutic strategies. St. Louis (MO): Mosby
Elsevier; 2008:661-76.
2.Pizzorno J, Murray M. Textbook of natural medicine. 3rd ed. St. Louis (MO)
Churchill Livingstone Elsevier; 2005:813-8.
3.Wynn S, Marsden S. Manual of natural veterinary medicine: science and
tradition. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003:8191, 200, 248, 323
4. Broadfoot PJ, Palmquist RE, Jonston K, et al. Integrating complementary
medicine into veterinary practice. Goldstein R, ed. Blackwell; 2008:209, 216,
225. Available at: www.mediafire.com/?2s13ctmvv7tyb2k. Accessed January 15,
2012.
Nutritional Supplements for the Veterinary Practice
17
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
CHOLINE/PHOSPHATIDYLCHOLINE
Background
Choline is a nitrogen-containing essential nutrient that is criti-
cal for normal cell membrane structure and function.It is used tc
synthesize acetylcholine, an important neurotransmitter involved
in nerve signaling.'² In the diet, choline is predominantly found in
phosphatidylcholine and lecithin, which are found in milk, eggs,
is one carbon atom bound to three hydrogen atoms) and can there-
fore convert homocysteine to methionine,which may reduce the
Studies have shown that choline supplementation helps irmprove
memory in Alzheimer's patients and the elderly and may also help
patients with other brain-related disorders or conditions. This
is presumably attributable to the fact that, as mentioned above,
choline is converted to acetylcholine in the brain.' Choline has also
demonstrated some anticonvulsant properties.'In animals,choline
supplementation may prevent fatty liver syndrome (in diabetics)
and may help prevent or treat cognitive disorder.d Choline is also
believed to support liver function; reduce insulin requirements in
diabetics; function as a constituent of plasmalogens (long fat chain
containing phosphorus),which are abundant in mitochondria and
lining of nerves); and reduce seizure frequency.
Indications
Specific Uses in People
·Improves signs of Alzheimer's disease
· Supports patients with liver disease
Specific Uses in Dogs and Cats
·Helps with cognitive disorders
·Supports patients with epilepsy
·Improves diabetes
·Supports patients with liver disease
19
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
Recommended Doses
In people, the recommended dose of choline is 500-1,000 mg q 24 hr.'
In dogs and cats, 20-40 mg/animal administered q 12-24 hr is recom-
mended for cognitive disorders. Choline can also be administered at
a dose of 10-15 mg/0.45 kg body weight q 24 hr.d When choline is
supplied as lecithin, the dose is either 1.23 mL (% teaspoon)/11.34 kg
body weight q 12 hr or 1 g/9.1 kg body weight q 24 hr.s
Side Effects
Supplementation with choline is very safe. In dogs and cats, rare
instances of excitability/nervousness have been reported, which
can be resolved by lowering the dose.’ In the author's experi-
ence, other side effects (which are only rarely reported in humans
discomfort, increased salivation, decreased appetite, sweating, and
a “fishy" body odor because of the excessive production and excre-
tion of trimethylamine, a metabolite of choline.
Contraindications
None reported.
Interactions
None reported.
References
1.Pizzorno J, Murray M. Textbook ofnafaural medicine. 3rd ed. St. Louis (MO)
Churchill Livingstone; 2005:817, 853, 856, 1603, 1654.
2. Hand M, Thatcher C, Remillard R, et al. Sma animal clirica rutritior. 5th ed.
Topeka (KS): Mark Morris Institute; 2010:93-4
3.Messonnier SP. The rafurat heath bibte for dogs  cats: your A-Z guicde to over
200 Perbs, vitamins, drd saupplerents. New York: Three Rivers Press; 200l:56-7,
233.
4.Wynn S, Marsden S. Manuat of natural veterinary medicine: science and
fracifion. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003:323.
5. Broadfoot PJ, Palmquist RE, Jonston K, et al. Integrating complementary medicine
into veterirnary pracfice. Goldstein R, ed Blackwell; 2008:541. Available at: ww w
mediafire.com/?2s13ctmvv7tyb2k. Accessed January 15, 2012.
20
CHOLINE/PHOSPHATIDYLCHOLINE
This electronic publication is intended for μse only by the original purcha.ser
CHONDROITIN
CHONDROITINSULFATE,CHONDROITIN-4-SULFATE
CHONDROITIN-6-SULFATE
Background
Chondroitin sulfate (CS) is a glycosaminoglycan (GAG), which
is a long chain of disaccharides (sugar molecules) linked together
and sulfated at either the fourth or sixth carbon atom (hence chon
droitin-4-sulfate and chondroitin-6-sulfate).'.? CS is found in the
articular cartilage that lines the ends ofbones within joints. It is the
most abundant GAG in the body, located in a variety of connective
tissues. In cartilage, CS absorbs water and holds nutrients, enhanc-
ing the thickness and elasticity of cartilage and increasing the
ability of the cartilage to absorb and distribute compressive forces
during locormotion. CS also stimulates chondrocytes (cells in artic-
hyaluronic acid production, and inhibits degradative enzymes that
break down cartilage and synovial fluid.' In articular cartilage, CS
is synthesized and secreted by chondrocytes.
Animal cartilage is one of the only dietary sources of Cs.
Nutritional supplements containing CS are therefore derived from
animal cartilage, such as bovine trachea or shark and fish carti
lage. Even though CS isa large molecule, studies show itis absorbed
from the digestive system. However, low-molecular-weight supple-
ments are preferred when available because of their superior
bioavailability.
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
·Manages or prevents osteoarthritis
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
·Manages or prevents osteoarthritis
Recommended Doses
In humans, the typical dose of CS is 300-600 mg q8-24 hr.^ The typi-
pue nu 5-71 b S 0g Aaneuxdde si 8y L'7< sop 1oy aso 1e
approximately 200-400 mg q 12-24 hr for small and medium-sized
21
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
dogs and cats. In general, CS is not usually the sole supplement for
pets with OA. Typically, joint supplements contain CS as well as
(MSM). Quality joint supplements should deliver these doses of CS
regardless of the other ingredients included in the supplement.
Side Effects
Chondroitin is considered a safe supplement. Clinical reports of
adverse reactions in dogs and cats are lacking. In humans, there
are rare reports in people of gastrointestinal side effects such as
diarrhea, constipation, abdominal pain, and very rarely headache
edema/swelling of the legs and eyelids,heart arrhythmias, and hair
loss.6
Contraindications
In canine experiments, decreased red blood cell counts, white
blood cell counts,and platelet counts occurred after 30 days of
administration, but these side effects are not typically reported in
clinical practice and the significance is unknown.7 Nevertheless,
chondroitin-containing supplements for short periods of time
before and after surgery and in patients at risk for bleeding (e.g,
hemophiliacs and individuals prescribed anticoagulants).
There is some preliminary evidence suggesting that chondroi-
tin sulfate supplements should be avoided in people (and probably
pets) either at risk or diagnosed with certain cancers (e.g., prostate).
This is because nonsulfated chondroitin sulfate is thought to play a
role in the growth and spread of certain cancer cells.Other joint
uronic acid, can be used safely in patients with these conditions.
Interactions
Chondroitin is often included in glucosamine-containing nutri
are some in vitro data that suggest that using CS and glucosamine
together achieves better results than using either alone.2.s.o In addi-
tion, primary research shows that coadministration of chondroi-
tin sulfate supplements with platinum-based chemotherapy drugs
22
CHONDROITIN
This electronic publication is intendled for μuse only by the original purcha.ser
therapy drugs without decreasing their effectiveness.'? There is also
an important interaction between CS and NSAIDs. Patients with
OA might require lower doses of NSAIDs, which is beneficial for the
patient considering the cost and potential adverse reactions associ-
ated with NSAID administration.
References
1. Stargrove M, Treasure J, McKee D. Herb, rutrient, and drug interactions:
) sssdap su
Elsevier; 2008:725-9.
2. Pizzorno J, Murray M. Textbook of natural medicine. 3rd ed. St. Louis (MO):
Churchill Livingstone; 2006:615-6, 1966-7.
3. Pizzorno J, Murray M, Joiner-Bey H. The clinician's handbook of natural
medicine. 2nd ed. St. Louis (MO): Churchill Livingstone; 2008:559
4.Wynn S, Marsden S. Manuat of naturat veterinary medicine:science and
fradition. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003:369
5. Messonnier SP. The raturat heath bibtefor dogs  cats: your A-Z guide t
Over 200 rerbs, vifarrins, and saupplerments. New York: Three Rivers Press;
2001:14, 181.
6. Sawitzke AD, Shi H, Finco MF, et al. Clinical effcacy and safety over two
years use of glucosamine, chondroitin sulfate, their combination, celecoxib
or placebo taken to treat osteoarthritis of the knee: a GAIT report. Ann
Rheum Dis 2010;69:1459-64. Available at: http:/www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles
/PMC3086604/pdf/nihms267850.pdf. Accessed February 19, 2010
7. McNamara PS, Barr SC, Erb HN. Hematologic, hemostatic, and biochemical
effects in dogs receiving an oral chondroprotective agent for thirty days. A mT
I Vet Res 1996;57:1390-4.
8. Fetrow CW, Avila J. Professionals Fardbook of corrplerrrentary e alterative
redicines. 3rd ed. Philadelphia (PA): Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2004:205-9.
9. Teng YH, Tan PH, Chia SJ, et al. Increased expression of non-sulfated
chondroitin correlates with adverse clinicopathological parameters in
prostate cancer. Mod Pathor 2008;21(7):893901.
10. Graeser AC, Giller K, Wiegand H, et al. Synergistic chondroprotective effect
of alpha-tocopherol, ascorbic acid, and selenium as well as glucosamine and
chondroitin on oxidant induced cell death and inhibition of matrix metal-
loproteinase-3—studies in cultured chondrocytes. Molecales 2009;15:2739
Nutritional Supplerments for the Veterinary Practice
23
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
COENZYME Q
Background
Coenzyme Q。 (CoQi0) is an antioxidant synthesized in most
tissues in the body. The highest concentrations are in the heart,
kidneys, liver, and pancreas.' In the diet, CoQ10 is found in foods
such as organ meats, poultry, fish, meat, nuts, soybean oil, canola
oil, fruits, vegetables, dairy products, and eggs.
CoQi0 is one of several fat-soluble coenzymes used in elec
tron transport in mitochondria—small organelles inside cells
that produce energy. CoQ10 located in the inner mitochondrial
membrane is required for the conversion of energy from carbo-
hydrates and fats in the synthesis of adenosine triphosphate (ATP
energy).² Because CoQ10 is involved in reduction/oxidation reac
tions (i.e., able to accept and donate electrons), it can prevent the
depletion of substrates required for the synthesis of ATP and
tissue from ischemic cellular damage.?
Deficiencies of CoQi0 levels can occur (in people) for the
following reasons: failure of biosynthesis caused by a gene muta-
tion; inhibition of biosynthesis by statins, which are used to reduce
cholesterol levels in people; aging; diabetes; and cancer.2
Studies in people with hypertension showed a reduction in
systolic blood pressure when administered CoQ10. Benefits of
CoQ10 therapy are reported in people with heart failure (via
increased left ventricular ejection fraction [a measure of how much
blood is being pumped out of the heart], increased cardiac output
and stroke volume, positive inotropy, and vasodilation).' CoQ10
also increases circulating immunoglobulin levels (IgG) and infec-
tion fighting CD4+ cells in the blood.? Considering the potential
infection-fighting properties of CoQ10, there is also some evidence
that it may help in gingivitis and stomatitis and may be useful for
function, CoQ10 hasbeen considered a possible anticancer agent in
people (e.g., prostate cancer).? CoQ10 is a powerful antioxidant and
holds therapeutic potential in the treatment of Parkinson's disease.
Patients with diabetes mellitus have low CoQi0 levels, potentially
because of mitochondrial dysfunction.d
CoQ10 supplements are available in two forms: fully oxidized
ubiquinone and ubiquinol (the active reduced metabolite
25
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
containing two hydroxyl groups). Most CoQ10 supplements use
the more stable ubiquinone form, although a new patented human
product utilizes stabilized ubiquinol. Studies in people and labo
ratory animals show that lower doses of the ubiquinol form can
be used to achieve therapeutic blood levels. Ubiquinol is better
absorbed and lasts in the body longer (is metabolized and excreted
less quickly)thanubiquinone.
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
Improves cardiovascular diseases (e.g., cardiomyopathy, angina,
arrhythmias, following cardiac surgeries, mitral valve disease)
Helps manage hypertension
·Acts as an anticancer agent
·Improves diabetes mellitus
·Helps gingivitis/periodontal disease
·Supports patients with immune disorders (e.g., HIV)
·Helps Parkinson's disease
·Assists geriatric patients
Suggested Uses in Pets
Improves cardiovascular diseases (as described above for hu-
mans) and hypertension
·Acts as an anticancer agent
·Helps gingivitis/periodontal disease
·Supports geriatric patients
·Improves immune dysfunction
·Controls diabetes mellitus, hyperthyroidism, and hypothyroidism
·Improves muscular conditions such as degenerative myelopathy
Recommended Doses
In people, the recommended dose is 50-300 mg/day given in divided
doses (e.g., 30-60 mg q 8-12 hr).' In pets, a reported dose for dogs
and cats is 2-20 mg/kg/day in divided doses.* In the author's experi-
ence, however, a typical clinical dose is 2-4 mg/kg/day in divided
doses.It is generally recommended that CoQi0 be taken with a
meal or small amount of oil-containing fatbecauseit isa fat-soluble
supplement and will be better absorbed.?
26
COENZYME Q
This electronic publication is initencled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser
SideEffects
CoQ10 is a very safe supplement. No significant adverse effects of
toxicities have been reported in people or pets taking the recom
mended doses. In people, rare side effects include mild nausea,
anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea, and flu-like symptoms.2
Contraindications
None reported.
Interactions
A number of important interactions are worth mentioning here.
First, beta-blocking drugs inhibit mitochondrial CoQ10 activity
to various degrees. Supplementation with CoQ10 may therefore be
beneficial for patients prescribed beta-blockers.? Second, pheno-
with CoQi0 may be beneficial for these patients because it is
involved in energy production.2 Third, aglycone I, the major metab-
olite of anthracycline chemotherapeutic agents such as doxorubicin
(but not liposome-encapsulated doxorubicin), exhibits negligible
cardiotoxicity and generates free radicals through an iron-depen-
dent process. Oxidative damage ensues, resulting in both acute and
chronic cardiotoxicity. Anthracyclines also cause a reduction in
the CoQ10 levels in mitochondrial (energy-producing organelles
inside cells)membranes andinhibit the mitochondrial synthe
with CoQ10 before, during, and after use of chemotherapeutic
anthracyclines can prevent or reduce cardiotoxicity.² Fourth,
statin drugs (HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors, chemicals that help
reduce cholesterol) reduce CoQ10levelsbecause cholesteroland
CoQ10 share the same biochemical pathway for their formation.
Side effects caused by statin administration may occur as a result
of decreased CoQ10 levels.Supplementation with CoQ10 may be
warranted.² Fifth, in diabetic patients, some oral hypoglycemic
agents may reduce already low CoQ10 levels, which might be abro-
be reversed with supplementation.2 Seventh, CoQ10 and vitamin K
Nutritional Supplements for the Veterinary Practice
27
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
share a similar chemical structure, ma king it theoretically possible
that CoQ10 might interfere with warfarin or other vitamin K antag-
onist anticoagulants.Patients taking vitamin K antagonist antico-
agulants should be monitored if they are also receiving CoQ10.
Eighth, patients taking levothyroxine (or other thyroid hormones)
require monitoring if supplemented with CoQ10 as hormone levels
might be impacted by supplementation. Ninth, and finally, a posi-
tive additive effect may occur with concomitant administration of
L-carnitine and CoQ10.
References
1.Fetrow CW, Avila J. Professionals haabook of cormplerentary e altemafive
redicines. 3rd ed. Philadelphia (PA): Lippincott williams & wilkins;
2004:220-4.
2.Stargrove M, Treasure J, McKee D. Herb, rutriernt, and drug interactions:
clinical irmplications and therapeutic strategies. St. Louis (MO): Mosby Elsevier;
2008:732-45.
tradifior. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003:80, 189
4.Pizzorno J, Murray M. Textbook ofnafaral rmedicine. 3rd ed. St. Louis (MO)
Churchill Livingstone; 2005:859-61
28
COENZYME Q
This electronic publication is initencled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser
COLLOIDAL SILVER
Background
Historically, silver was used as a germicidal agent. Colloidal silver,
marketed as an effective alternative to conventional antimicrobi-
als for a variety of conditions. Colloidal silver is available for oral
use (for various internalinfections) or topically for use on wounds
(including ophthalmic and otic uses). There are numerous anecdotal
reports regarding the efficacy of colloidal silver for various infec-
tious conditions; however, theseclaims have notbeen substantiated
or proven in controlled studies..2
The use of colloidal silver supplements for medicinal purposes
is not supported by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA).2
Specifically, no colloidal silver ingredients or products are considered
either safe or effective, and the FDA has taken serious action against
many companies for making unsubstantiated drug claims for their
over-the-counter (OTC) colloidal silver products. According to the
FDA's website, "None of the silver salts evaluated as part of the FDA's
OTC drug review was found to be generally recognized as safe and
effective for its intended use(s). FDA is not aware of any substan-
tial scientific evidence that supports the use of OTC colloidal silver
ingredients or silver salts for disease conditions."3
The FDA issued a final ruling in 1999 on colloidal silver prod
ucts categorizing colloidal silver as an unclassified drug. Therefore,
any colloidal silver products marketed as having medicinal prop-
erties are in violation of federal law.* However, because silver is a
natural substance, nota controlled substance, substances labeled as
a dietary supplement without drug-like claims are available.
In the author's experience, there are pet owners who insist on
using colloidal silver products. Topical products applied to wounds
may be effective for controlling infections and assisting in heal-
ing and are likely safe. Ingestion of oral products and the use of
ophthalmic products (to the eyes) is of more concern as these colloi
dal silver products can cause irritation or toxicity. Erring on the
side of safety prevents most doctors (human and veterinary) from
prescribing oral and ophthalmic products containing colloidal
silver.
Silver binds to proteins to denature them by forming hemisil
ver complexes with certain functional groups on the proteins (such
29
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
as sulfhydryl, amino, carboxyl, phosphate, and imidazole groups).
Silver also alters the activities of certain enzymes such as lactate
dehydrogenase and glutathione peroxidase, which causes lipid
peroxidation (e.g., in cell membranes).
Indications
Suggested Uses in Hurmans
·Helps various topical infections, including otitis
·Ophthalmicconditions
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
· Helps various topical infections, including otitis
·Ophthalmic conditions
Recommended Doses
There is no recommended dose for colloidal silver and there is no
standardization of products among manufacturers. In dogs and
cats, topical application of small amounts of colloidal silver as part
of the treatment of minor wounds appears to be safe. In the author's
experience, many pet owners have reported no serious side effects
when using colloidal silver orally per package instructions.
Side Effects
Side effects have been reported in people using colloidal silver
products that either contained high doses of silver or were used
for extended periods of time.s-sPotential side effects following oral
administration include status epilepticus (seizures), renal damage,
headache, and fatigue, among others. Skin irritation has been
reported following topical use as well as argyria—a permanent
blue-gray discoloration of the skin, nails, and organs because of
the buildup of silver in the body.2s.6Because of the lack of estab
lished effectiveness and potential toxicity of these products, colloi-
dal silver products are generally not recommended without strict
medical supervision. Owners are encouraged to wear gloves when
ments containing colloidal silver. It may also be prudent to prevent
Elizabethan collar).
30
COLLOIDAL SILVER
This electronic publication is intencled for μse only by the original purcha.ser
Contraindications
None reported. Because of safety concerns, colloidal silver prod-
ucts should not be used in either infants or pregnant or lactating
women. Similar precautions likely apply to pets.
Interactions
Colloidal silver products may interact with some medications
including penicillamine, quinolones, tetracycline, and thyroxine.
References
1. Mayo Clinic. Consumer health. Question: colloidal silver: is it safe or effective?
Available at: www.mayoclinic.com/health/colloidal-silver/ AN01682. Accessed
January 9, 2012.
2. National Institutes of Health. National Center for Complementary and
Alternative Medicine (NCCAM). Backgrounder: colloidal silver products.
3. U.S. Food and Drug Adrministration. Colloidal silver not approved. Available
at: http:// www.fda.gov/ Animal Veterinary/NewsEvents/CVMUpdates
/ucm127976.htm. Accessed February 19, 2012.
4. Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. Colloidal silver. herbs, botanicals &
other products. Available at: http:// www.mskcc.org/cancer-care/herb/colloidal
silver. Accessed March 12, 2012.
5.Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR). ToxFAQs for
Accessed January 9, 2012.
6. Fung MC, Bowen DL. Silver products for medical indications: risk-benefit
assessment. f Toxicol Clir Toxicol 1996;34(1):119-26.
7. Gulbranson SH, Hud JA, Hansen RC. Argyria following the use of dietary
8. White IM, Powell AM, Brady K, et al. Severe generalized argyria secondary to
ingestion of colloidal silver protein. Clin Exp Dermatot 2003;28(3):254-6.
Nutritional Supplerments for the Veterinary Practice
31
@20 12 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
COLOSTRUM
Background
Colostrum, the first fluid secreted by the mammary glands imme
diately following parturition, contains infection-fighting antibod
ies, growth factors,nutrients, cytokines (inflammatory mediators)
glycoproteins,lactoferrin,
lactalbumin,leukocytes (infection
fighting white blood cells), lysozymes, vitamins, and insulin-like
growth factors. These ingredients stimulate cell growth, tissue
repair, and provide immune support to the recipient.? Colostrum
also contains“transfer factors,”which are small peptides (short
infection-fighting white blood cell.a
The level of immunoglobulins (antibodies) is approximately 100
times higher in bovine colostrum than in regular bovine milk, and
bovine colostrum contains higher levels of immunoglobulins and
growth factors than human milk. Cows are commonly used when
dried colostrum.? The immune and growth factors in colostrum,
ing essential if colostrum supplementation is to be of any benefit.
When possible, independent assays should be available to ensure
that the immune growth factors are still viable in the colostrum
products selected. Standardization of colostrum products would be
helpful to ensure quality.2
Colostrum supplementation is thought to improve intesti-
nal health,balance intestinal flora, and improve digestion. It alsc
can improve the immune status of the intestinal tract, which can
be weakened by intestinal parasites. Colostrum is also used for
infections, cancers, as an antiaging product, and for diarrhea.
Colostrum may be beneficial in these conditions; more research
is needed to confirm effcacy before widespread recommendations
can be made (as with many nutritional supplements).
Indications
Suggested Usesin Humans
Supports immune function
·Enhances recovery after exercise
*Decreases intestinal perrmeability (leakiness) that may occur after dam-
age to intestinal cells by toxins, microorganisms, and medications
33
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
Suggested Uses in Pets
·Supports the immune system
·Enhances recovery after exercise
*Decreases intestinal permeability (leakiness) that may occur fol-
lowing damage to intestinal cells by toxins, microorganisms, and
medications
·Controls intestinal parasites
·Helps patients with pancreatitis, periodontitis, and stomatitis
Recommended Doses
The dose typically varies with the product, as no standard dosing is
available. In dogs and cats, 1.65 mL (% teaspoon) of powdered colos-
trum/11.3 kg body weight q 12 hr isa recommended starting dose.
Side Effects
Colostrum is considered a safe supplement.
Contraindications
None reported.
Interactions
None reported.
References
1.Hand M.,Thatcher C, Remillard R., et al. Srraf anirra clirica rutrition. 5th
ed. Topeka (KS): Mark Morris Institute; 2010:2446, 331 2.
2.Fetrow CW, Avila J. Professionals haabook of cormplerentary e alterafive
medicines. 3rd ed. Philadelphia (PA): Lippincott williams & Wilkins;
2004:230-3.
3.Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. Transfer factor. About herbs
botanicals & other products. Available at: http://www.mskcc.org/cancer-care
/herb/transfer-factor. Accessed March 12, 2012.
4. Broadfoot PJ, Palmquist RE, Jonston K, et al. Integrafing complemenfary
medicine into veterinary practice. Goldstein R, ed. Blackwell; 2008:294-8,
373-7, 626-8. Available at: ww w.mediafire.com/?2s13ctmvv 7tyb2k. Accessed
January 15, 2012.
34
COLOSTRUM
This electronic publication is intended for μse only by the original purcha.ser
DEHYDROEPIANDROSTERONE
(DHEA)
Backgraund
DHEA (and its sulfated metabolite, DHEA-S) are among the
most abundant naturally occurring steroids in the body.' DHEA
is synthesized in the adrenal gland (located near the kidney), the
central nervous system, gonads (testes and ovaries), skin, and
gastrointestinal tract.!-* The exact role of DHEA remains largely
unknown at this time, but DHEA does serve as a precursor for
the synthesis of >50 different hormones, including androgenic
and estrogenic steroids..² Peak production of DHEA by the adre-
nal gland occurs between 25 years and 30 years of age in humans.
Levels decline with age and possibly during timesof eitherstress or
severe illness.
DHEA administration has been suggested to prevent or reverse
conditions associated with low endogenous DHEA levels, includ-
ing aging, diabetes, cancer, and autoimmune diseases.? DHEA may
also help with both hyper- and hypoadrenocorticism (Cushing's
and Addison's disease, respectively), potentially improve mood and
feelings of well-being in people with depression; and may reduce
the risk of developing diabetes or enhance the treatrment of patients
with diabetes.!.9s
Supplements are usually prepared from DHEA precursors
isolated from wild yams or soy, which are then chemically synthe-
sized into DHEA.
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
·Slows the aging process
·Helpsimmune/autoimmune diseases and HIV/AIDS
·Supports patients with diabetes mellitus, Addison's disease (ad-
renal insufficiency, hypoadrenocorticism), hypogonadism, and
menopause
·Helps patients with Alzheimer's disease
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
*Supports cancer patients
·Helps patients with hyper- or hypoadrenocorticism
35
@20 12 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
Recommended Doses
In healthy people, doses range from 10 to 30 mg/day, and people
  h   s  e   ss e m
There is currently no agreed-upon dose, and most doctors recom-
mend starting at a low dose, then adjusting the dose based on the
patient's clinical response.6
In dogs and cats, a dose of 5 mg/9 kg of body weight q 24 hr is
suggested, with a stated range of 5-50 mg q 24 hr. As with people,
dividing the dose and administering q 12 hr may be preferred to
maintain blood levels and more accurately reflect endogenous
hormone secretion.
Side Effects
DHEA is not considered appropriate for use in people under the
age of 18 unless clinically applicable (e.g., adrenal insufficiency)
because it may interfere with hormones involved in develop-
ment.26 The long-term safety has not been established through
well-designed clinical studies in any species. DHEA is a precur-
sor to a large number of hormones in the body and unintended
side effects are certainly possible.? Side effects that have been
reportedin people include abnormal liver function,slightly
decreased hemoglobin and red blood cell counts, hirsutism
(excessive hair growth in women, masculinization of women),
gynecomastia (abnormal development of large ma mmary glands
in males), aggressiveness, fatigue, headache, irritability, insom-
nia, and nasal congestion.
Contraindications
DHEA should not be used in patients with cancers under the
influence of testosterone or estrogen, although the 7-keto vari-
ant of DHEA may be safe to use in these patients." DHEA may
be particularly beneficial in older patients; the elderly are more
likely to have conditions such as benign prostatic hyperplasia and
should be screened for these conditions before beginning DHEA
supplementation.’ Until more research is done, DHEA supple
mentation is not recommended for patients with insulin-depen-
dent diabetes. If used, close supervision and regular monitoring
are advocated.
36
DEHYDROEPIANDROSTERONE
This electronic publication is intencled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser
Interactions
DHEA should be avoided with benzodiazepines (e.g.,diazepam
[Valium*]} medications. This is because there is a potential for
DHEAtoinhibit the metabolism of benzodiazepines andfor
benzodiazepines to increase endogenous DHEA levels. Close
may affect coagulation.?Although anticonvulsant medications may
lower serum DHEA levels, elevated DHEA levels that result from
supplementation with DHEA may inhibit the therapeutic action
of anticonvulsant medications. Caution should be used in patients
coadministered DHEA and an anticonvulsant medication.
Some positive interactions have also been described. There is
a potential therapeutic benefit from DHEA supplementation with
clonidine and fluoxetine.² Oral corticosteroid therapy lowers serum
levels of both DHEA and DHEA-S. DHEA supplementation for
patients on long-term corticosteroid therapy may therefore coun-
teract some of the negative side effects of corticosteroid therapy
(such as muscle wasting) without losing the benefits of cortico-
steroid therapy.d Combining DHEA with estrogen may enhance
therapeutic efficacy and reduce side effects seen in women taking
However, administering DHEA with estrogen has the potential
to increase adverse effects resulting from elevated levels of either
estrogen or DHEA. The same potential for reducing side effects and
increasing eficacy as well as possibly producing adverse effects is
also applicable to patients taking methyltestosterone and related
medications.? Finally, DHEA may potentiate thyroid medications,
recommended for use in cats with uncontrolled hyperthyroidism.
References
1.Pizzorno J, Murray M, Joiner-Bey H. The clinicians handbook ofnatural
medicine. 2nd ed. St. Louis (MO): Churchill Livingstone; 2008:45.
2.Stargrove M, Treasure J, McKee D. Herb, rutrient, and drug interactions
clinical implications and therapeutic strategies. St. Louis (MO): Mosby Elsevier;
2008:746-56
3.Fetrow CW,Avila J. Professionals andbook of complementary  altermative
redicines. 3rd ed. Philadelphia (PA): Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2004:280-5.
4.Wynn S, Marsden S. Marual of rafura veterinary rredicine: scierce and
fradition. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003:200, 265, 272
Nutritional Supplements for the Veterinary Practice
37
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
5.Broadfoot PJ,Palmquist RE,Jonston K,et al. Integrafing complemenfary
rmcicine into veterinary practice. Goldstein R, ed. Blackwell; 2008:21-2, 513,
515. Available at: www.mediafire.com/?2s13ctmvv7tyb2k. Accessed January 15,
2012.
6.Pizzorno J, Murray M. Textbook of nafural medicine. 3rd ed. St. Louis (MO):
Churchill Livingstone; 2006:899-904.
DEHYDROEPIANDROSTERONE
This electronic publication is intendledl for Lse only by the original purcha.ser.
DIMETHYLGLYCINE
(DMG)
Background
DMG is synthesized in the body from the amino acid glycine. It
is also synthesized from choline and betaine. Specifically,betaine
has three methyl groups (one carbon atom with three hydrogen
atoms). Once one of the methyl groups is removed, the remain-
ing product is DMG. DMG is then oxidized to produce the armino
acid glycine and two formaldehyde atoms. The formaldehyde
atoms are used to produce folic acid (vitamin B).' The methyl
groups of DMG are also used to produce other compounds, such
as choline, S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe), methionine, hormones,
neurotransmitters, and DNA.3
As an antioxidant, DMG offers protection from radiation
therapy,d and may reverse some of the negative effects of autoim-
mune diseases.* DMG also exerts an anti-inflammatory effect and
may be helpful in treating patients with inflammatory diseases such
as osteoarthritis.d DMG may help patients improve their (athletic)
performance and endurance,^ improve circulatory and heart func-
tion, provide higher energy levels, and allow patients to eliminate or
significantly reduce their cardiac medications.* DMG is considered
experiencing stress.*Studies have shown that DMG can improve the
immune response by potentiating both cell-mediated and humoral
immunity (the two main "branches" of the immune system), as well
as stimulating the production of inflammatory mediators (cyto-
kines) such as interferon, tumor necrosis factor, and various inter-
leukins. DMG is found in low levels in foods such as meats, seeds.
and grains.
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
·Supports the immune system
·Helps patients with cancer
·Fights infections
Suggested Uses in Pets
·Supports the immune system
39
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
·Helps patients with cancer
·Fights infections
Recommended Doses
Anecdotal doses of 100-200 mg q 6-8 hr have been recommended
in humans. In dogs and cats,450 mg/11.3 kg body weight q 12-24 hr
is suggested.d In the author's experience, 125 mg/2.3-18.1 kg body
weight q 12-24 hr may also be appropriate.
Side Effects
DMG is extremely safe.
Contraindications
None reported.
Interactions
None reported.
References
1. Pizzorno J, Murray M. Textbook of natural medicine. 3rd ed. St. Louis (MO):
Churchill Livingstone; 2005:613, 1655.
2. Scthoen AM, Wynn SG. Complermentary and altermative veterinary medicine:
principles and practice. St Louis (MO): Mosby ; 1998:367.
4.Broadfoot PJ, Palmquist RE, Jonston K,et al. Integrating corplerrertary
medicine into veterinary pracfice. Goldstein R, ed. Blackwell; 2008:509,722-3
Available at: www.mediafire.com/?2s13ctmvv7tyb2k. Accessed January 15.
2012.
40
DIMETHYLGLYCINE
This electronic publication is initencled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser
ECHINACEA
TECHINACEAANGUSTIFOLIA,E.PURPUREA
E. PALLIDA]
Background
Echinacea nutritional supplements, usually made from the roots
and flowers, are commonly used for immunomodulation (stimu-
lation of the immune system).' Echinacea enhances cell-mediated
isms, such as bacteria or viruses, by infection-fighting white blood
cells in the circulation).' Echinacea increases natural killer cell (a
specific type of white blood cell that kills tumor cells and virus-
containing cells) numbers and activity.2 Echinacea also has anti-
properties and aids in wound healing.3
Echinacea contains a number of active ingredients, such as
flavonoids (plant secondary metabolites), polysaccharides (long
sugar chains), alkaloids (secondary metabolites), and caffeic acid (a
product produced by plants with anticancer and anti-inflammatory
properties) and its derivatives.d
In addition, echinacea may assist bone marrow recovery follow
ing myelosuppressive chemotherapies.
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
·Fights infections (viral and bacterial infections, particularly up-
per respiratory tract infections, candidiasis)
· Supports patients with chemotherapy-induced immunosuppres-
sion1
·Helps control (chronic) inflammatory conditions
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
·Fights infections (viral and bacterial infections, particularly up
per respiratory tract infections, candidiasis)
Recommended Doses
In humans, 1-5gq24 hr ofthedried root, 2.5-6gq24 hr ofthe dried
flowers, and 3-6 mL q24 hr of a 1:1 fluid extract are recommended.
41
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
It should be noted that the dose may vary widely depending on the
type and source of the echinacea.d In dogs and cats, 25-300 mg/
kg in divided doses is recommended. Alternatively, 0.5-1.5 mL of a
1:2-1:3 tincture/10 kg divided daily is recommended.
SideEffects
Echinacea is considered a safe herb when properly administered.
Side effects are uncommon and can include minor gastrointesti-
nal symptoms (which may be relieved by the coadministration
of probiotics, in the author's opinion), increased urination, and
mild allergic reactions.Rarely, severe allergic reactions occur in
atopic human patients exposed to echinacea. This is thought to
be an immunoglobulin E-mediated (type 1 allergic reaction, like
peanut allergies) adverse drug reaction in susceptible individu-
als (such as those with allergies to other members of the daisy
fa mily).s.6
Contraindications
Echinacea should be avoided in patients allergic to the herb.
Echinacea use in patients with autoimmune diseases is controver-
sial and should be used with caution in these patients.
Interactions
A number ofimportant interactions have been reported. For exam-
ple,echinacea mayincrease the anticancer effectsoflow-dose cyclo
(CYP2C9), which means that patients supplemented with echina-
cea concomitantly with drugs that are metabolized by this enzyme
(e.g., phenytonin, S-warfarin, sulfonylureas) may pose a potential
risk.Further research is needed to determine the exact effects of
echinacea on various drug-metabolizing enzymes. Echinacea
can also inhibit CYP1A2 and its use should be avoided in patients
taking drugs metabolized by this enzyme (e.g, tacrine, theophyl-
line, caffeine,tricyclic antidepressants).
It is not recommended to use echinacea for >8 weeks at a time
because of the possibility of hepatotoxicity because of the potential
presence of trace amounts of hepatotoxic alkaloids.s However, the
usual alkaloids found in the roots of echinacea lack the necessary
42
ECHINACEA
This electronic publication is initendled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser
ring structure to be hepatotoxic. Thus, using echinacea for extended
periods of time is unlikely to cause hepatotoxicity.6
It has also been recommended not to administer echinacea
for >8 weeks at a time because of the possibility of suppression of
immune function (which isbased on the German Commission E
recommendation for short-term lse because of immune stimula
evidence of immunosuppression with long-term echinacea use
in other individuals, and echinacea may be lsed for >8 weeks if
needed.'
References
1.Wynn SG, Fougere B. Veterinary herba redicine. St. Louis (MO): Elsevier;
2007:934, 2956, 3834, 53840
2.Broadfoot PJ, Palmquist RE, Jonston K, et al. Irtegrating complerrentary
medicine into veterinary practice. Goldstein R, ed. Blackwell; 2008:660, 700,
708. Available at: www.mediafire.com/?2s13ctmvv7tyb2k. Accessed January 15,
2012.
3.Mills S, Bone K. Principles and practice of phytotferapy: roderr erba
medicine. St. Louis (MO): Churchill Livingstone; 2000:354-61.
4.Stargrove M, Treasure J, McKee D. Herb, nutrient, and drug interactions:
liricat irplications and therapeutic strategies. St. Louis (MO): Mosby Elsevier;
2008:32-8.
5.Fetrow Cw, Avila J. Professionals Fandbook ofcorrplerentary and altermative
redicines. 3rd ed. Philadelphia (PA): Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2004:293-9.
6.Pizzorno J, Murray M. Textbook of ratural medicine. 3rd ed. St. Louis (MO):
Churchill Livingstone; 2005:907-16.
Nutritional Supplements for the Veterinary Practice
43
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
FISH OIL
IOMEGA-3FATTYACIDS,EIC0SAPENTAENOICACID
DOCOSAHEXAENOICACID
Background
Fish oilis one of the most commonly recommended supplements for
both people and pets and is a popular source of omega-3 fatty acids.
Other sources of omega-3 fatty acids are flax oil, wheat germ oil,
and canola oil.Fish oil contains docosahexaenoicacid(DHA) and
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA).' Omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids (the
numbers simply refer to where the carbon-carbon double bonds are
in the molecules) are metabolized by the arachadonic acid pathway.
Omega-6 fatty acids, which are found in warm-weather vegetable
oils, produce pro-inflammatory mediators such as prostacyclin
prostaglandin E2,and thromboxane A2. The principal metabo-
lites derived from the metabolism of EPA and DHA, in contrast,
tend to be anti-inflammatory. The typical American diet contains
more omega-6 fatty acids than omega-3 fatty acids. Because omega-6
and omega-3 fatty acids compete with each other to be converted to
active metabolites (pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory) in the
body, decreasing the intake of omega-6 fatty acids and/or increasing
tion with fish oil) is thought to be beneficial. That said, the optimal
ratio of omega-6:omega-3 fatty acids has not been conclusively deter-
mined (but most recommendations are for a ratio of <2.5:1).4
In addition to the effect of the generation ofinflammatory medi
ators, a number of other beneficial effects of fish oil supplementa-
tion have been noted.EPA and DHA replace other fatty acids in cell
membranes. Asa result, fish oil improves blood-flow characteristics
and decreases platelet aggregation thatbenefits patients with athero
sclerosis and those at risk for strokes. DHA is concentrated in gray
matter (in the brain) and the retina (in the eye) and plays a role in
Fish oil has been shown to have a beneficial effect in people
with bipolar disorder and depression, may exhibit antithrombotic
effects,° and is beneficial in the treatrment of heart disease. Fish oil
may reduce atherosclerosis,thrombosis, coronary heart disease,
myocardial infarction, sudden cardiac death, and stroke. Fish oil
may reduce side effects of cancer chemotherapy (including cardio-
toxicity) and radiation therapy, reduce the growth and metastasis
45
@20 12 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
of cancer, and reduce cachexia in undernourished patients.In
addition, fish oil may potentiate the cytotoxicity of certain chemo-
therapeutic agents (making them more effective).'
Fish oil may be beneficial in gastrointestinal diseases, includ-
ing inflammatory bowel disease by modulating inflammation,' may
cause a modest lowering of blood pressure, and may be useful in
people with hypertensive disorders. In humans, fish oil is report-
edly superior to statin therapy for lowering mortality in patients
with cardiovascular disease despite having only modest effects
on lipids. Fish oil may lower lipid levels (especially triglycerides)
but may cause minor elevations in LDL concentration (the "bad
cholesterol).' Fish oil may be protective against gastrointestinalside
aspirin).' Finally, fish oil can help with atopy, seborrhea, and psoria-
sis, presumably because (at least in part) of its anti-inflammatory
properties.s
For supplements, fish oil tends to be derived from cold-water
fish that are rich in EPA and DHA (e.g., wild salmon, mackerel
sardine, anchovy, and herring). Occasionally, cod liver is used as
a source of fish oil. Wild fish tend to have higher concentrations of
EPA and DHA than farm-raised fish because of their food source
(processed fish food fed to farm-raised fish may not contain high
levels of EPA and DHA and may have a different balance of fatty
acids).*
To minimize oxidation, fish oil products should be kept refrig-
erated after opening. Because the EPA in fish oil takes time to
become incorporated into cell membranes, it may take 4-6 months
or longer before a clinical improvement is noted. Fish oil supple-
mentation may produce better clinical improvement than flax oil
or other ALA fatty acid supplements, as these other sources of fatty
acids need to be metabolized to form EPA and DHA.
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
·Minimizes inflammation
·Helps patients with certain heart disease
·Supports patients with arthritis
·Helps control depression
46
FISH OIL
This electronic publication is intencled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser
Suggested Uses in Pets
·Minimizes inflammation
*Helps patients with certain heart disease
·Supports patients with arthritis
·Controls kidney disease
·Improves atopy/skin disorders
Recommended Doses
Dosing is based upon the EPA and DHA content and not the "fish
oil" content. In general, 1,000 mg of fish oil contains 180 mg EPA
and 120 mg DHA. Commercial products vary widely in their
concentrations of EPA and DHA; it is important to read the label to
determine how much EPA and DHA is in the supplement.'
In humans, clinical trials usually use 3,000-4,000 g of EPA plus
DHA (or more) daily. For general supplementation, usually 1,000-
2,000 mg ofEPA plus DHA is recommended/day. For dogs and cats
In the author's experience, veterinarians typically recommend
250-500 mg q 8-12 hr in small dogs and cats, 500-1,000 mg q 8-12
hr in medium-breed dogs, and 1,000-2,000 mg q 8-12 hr in large-
and giant-breed dogs.
Side Effects
Fish oil is generally considered to be very safe. The most commonly
reported side effects are a generalized fishy body odor, belching,
nausea, and loose stools. Gastrointestinal side effects can be mini
mized if fish oil supplements are taken with food. If side effects
persist, lowering the dose of fish oil supplements usually resolves any
side effects. Skin rashes are rarely reported in people taking fish oil,
as are reports of mild elevation in the liver enzyme alanine amino-
transferase (ALT) in people. Elevated blood glucose levels have been
reported in humans taking >3,000 mg fish oil/day for extended peri-
ods of time.' Fish liver oils (cod liver oil), but not fish oils, contain
high levels of vitamins A and D and toxicity could be an issue (e.g.,
nausea, vomiting, weakness, etc.).' Concerns exist regarding heavy
metal accumulation, especially methylmercury, in fish; however, fish
meat contains considerably more toxins than fish oil. In fact, fish oil
is generally considered to be free from heavy metal contarmination,
and molecular distillation is used to remove polychlorinated biphe
nyls (PCBs) and other toxins from fish oil. Nonrefined fish oil may
Nutritional Supplerments for the Veterinary Practice
47
@20 12 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
contain pesticides or pollutants, and toxins have been found in both
farm-raised and wild fish.
Fish oil may decrease platelet aggregation,° prolong bleeding
time, increase fibrinolysis, and diminish von Willebrand factor, all
of which theoretically could increase the risk of bleeding in supple-
mented patients. In particular, there have been some reports of seri
oil (usually ≥9 g fish oil/day), especially when these high doses of fish
oil are combined with other drugs (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs, warfarin) or supplements (garlic, Ginkgo biloba,ginseng) that
also exert anticoagulant activities.
Contraindications
Although fish oil is considered safe, patients with cardiac arrhyth
mias need to be monitored closely when introducing supplemental
fish oil. Some patients have an increased chance of developing atrial
other cardiovascular diseases should be closely monitored. Patients
cumulative dose of the fat-soluble vitamins (especially A and D).
Interactions
Fish oil can potentiate the cytotoxicity of vincristine, cisplatin, and
doxorubicin.' Administering fish oil with cyclosporine after organ
transplant can improve renal function and decrease hypertension.
Fish oil administered with statin medications achieves greater
reductions in cholesterol and triglyceride concentrations than
when either agent is used alone.' Extremely high doses of fish oil
may increase bleeding, especially in patients taking anticoagulant
vitamin E from the body.* There is also limited evidence suggesting
that fish oil may help reduce the rate of renal injury in patients with
Immunoglobulin A (IgA) nephropathy, and may be beneficial when
administered with angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibi-
tors.Finally, fish oil can be coadministered with anticonvulsant
48
FISH OIL
This electronic publication is initendled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser
References
1.Stargrove M,Treasure J, McKee D. Herb, rufrient, and drug interactions:
linical irplicafions and fherapeufic strategies. St. Louis (MO): Mosby Elsevier;
2008:783-806.
2.Broadfoot PJ, Palmquist RE, Jonston K, et al. Irtegrating cormplerrentary
medicine into veterinary pracfice. Goldstein R, ed. Blackwell; 2008:210, 545,
548. Available at: www.mediafire.com/?2s13ctmvv7tyb2k. Accessed January 15,
2012.
3.Pizzorno J, Murray M. Textbook of ratural medicine. 3rd ed. St. Louis (MO):
Churchill Livingstone; 2005:946-61, 2098-2100.
4. Wander RC, Hall JA, Gradin JL, et al. The ratio of dietary (n-6) to (n-3) fatty
acids influences immune system function, eicosanoid metabolism, lipid
peroxidation and vitamin E status in aged dogs. J Nutr 1997;127(6):1198-205.
5.Pizzorno J, Murray M, Joiner-Bey H. The cinicians handbook ofrafara
edicine. 2nd ed. St. Louis (MO): Churchill Livingstone; 2008:22, 23, 93, 350,
488, 716, 702-7.
6.Wynn S, Marsden S. Maraal of rafurat veterinary rredicine: science anα
fradition. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003:286-7, 378, 523, 532
7.Hand M,Thatcher C, Remillard R,et al. Sraf arirra clirica rutrition. Sth ed.
Topeka (KS): Mark Morris Institute; 2010:909-16
Nutritional Supplerments for the Veterinary Practice
49
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
FLAXSEED OIL
ILINSEEDOIL,LINUMUSITATSSIMUM]
Background
Flaxseed and flaxseed oil contain large amounts of unsaturated
fatty acids, including linoleic acid (LA), alpha-linolenic acid (ALA),
and oleic acid.' Most activities of flaxseed oil are similar to those of
fish oil, and the sa me uses apply (see the “Fish Oil" section for more
detailed information). In addition, flaxseed is thought to help with
constipation,² and studies in mice have shown that lignans in flax
seed can be helpful for cancer, especially breast and lung cancer.-s
Flaxseed may also have weak antiestrogenic, estrogenic,a46 and
steroid-like activity.'
Flaxseed oil should be refrigerated to prevent breakdown of the
essential fatty acids. Ground flaxseeds should be consumed withir
24 hours, as their unsaturated fatty acids degrade through oxidation.
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
·Helps resolve constipation
·Improves dry skin
·Benefits patients with diabetes
·Controls cardiovascular disease, hypertension
· Manages inflammatory bowel disease and irritable bowel syn-
drome
·Decreases serum cholesterol and low-density lipoproteins ("bad
cholesterol) levels
·Improves signs of menopause
· Supports cancer patients
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
·Improves skin and hair coat
·Supports cancer patients
Recommended Doses
In humans flaxseed is generally administered as an oil (liquid
forrm) to deliver 7-14 g ALA/day. Typically this is achieved by
administering 15-30 mL (1-2 tablespoons) of flaxseed oil q 8-12 hr.
51
@2012 by Shawn Messonier, DVM
Capsules rather than liquid can be used but typically contain only
500 mg of ALA/1,0o0 mg capsule, requiring numerous capsules
to be taken daily to achieve this dose. In dogs and cats, 5 mL (1
teaspoon) of flax oil/11.3 kg body weight q 12-24 hr is recom-
mended. In the author's experience, 5-15 mL (1 teaspoon - 1 table-
spoon)/11.3 kg body weight of freshly ground flaxseed q 12-24 hr is
also recommended.
Side Effects
Flaxseed is very safe. Rare side effects include diarrhea, flatulence,
and nausea. Allergic reactions can occur in patients who are aller-
gic to flax. Immature and raw seedpods are poisonous because of
increased levels of cyanogenic nitrates,' which can result in signs
Contraindications
Because of the phytoestrogen content there is a concern about flax
administration in pregnant or lactating patients; however, this has
not been fully demonstrated. Animal studies have suggested possi-
ble side effects. Nonetheless, many pregnant and lactating women
do consume flax products without noticeable effectin themselves or
their infants.'Administration of flaxseed may diminish absorption
of oral medications. Avoid administering flax at the same time as
other medications, approximately 7 hours before or after.
Interactions
None reported.
References
1.Fetrow Cw, Avila J. Professionals hancdbook of complerentary and altemative
medicines. 3rd ed. Philadelphia (PA): Lippincott williams & wilkins;
2004:327-31
2.Wynn SG, Marsden S. Maruat of ratural veterinary medicine: science ad
fradition. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003:158
3.Mills S, Bone K. Principles and practice of phytotherapy: rocern herba
redicine. St. Louis (MO): Churchill Livingstone; 2000:54, 56, 157)
52
FLAXSEED OIL
This electronic publication is intencled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser
4.Wynn SG, Fougere B. Veterinary herbal medicine. St. Louis (MO): Elsevier;
2007:199, 301.
5.Broadfoot PJ,Palmquist RE, Jonston K,et al. ntegrating complementary medicine
into veterinary practice. Goldstein R, ed Blackwell; 2008:708, 749. Available at:
www.mediafire.com/?2s13ctmvv7tyb2k. Accessed January 15, 2012.
6.Pizzorno J, Murray M, Joiner-Bey H. The cinicians hanabook of ratura
medicine. 2nd ed. St. Louis (MO): Churchill Livingstone; 2008:22, 47, 935,
350,488,716.
7. Stargrove M, Treasure J, McKee D. Herb, rutrient, and drug interactions:
clinical irmplications ard therapeutic strategies. St. Louis (MO): Mosby Elsevier;
2008:786.
Nutritional Supplerments for the Veterinary Practice
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
GARLIC
[ALLIUMSATIVUM)
Background
Garlic is one of the leading herbal supplements in humans,and
is available in various forms, including fresh raw or cooked garlic
garlic oil, dried powder, and aged garlic extract. The active ingredi-
ents in garlic include allin and -gluta myl cysteine peptides. Alliin
is converted by the enzyme allicinase (in the garlic) to allicin, which
is an unstable product that rapidly degrades.The allicin is mainly
responsible for garlic's pungent odor.2.3
Numerous scientific studies and clinical trials show a number
of positive benefits of garlic. For example, garlic is used for cardio-
vascular disease,4s for infectious diseases (broad-spectrum anti
biotic and antifungal, antiviral, and antiparasitic activities),s as
an antioxidant, and as an immunostimulating agent.? Garlic may
lower serum cholesterol and lipids via inactivation of the enzyme
hydroxymethylglutaryl coenzyme A (HGM-CoA) reductase, the
same enzyme that is inhibited by cholesterol-lowering statin
drugs. Garlic exhibits antiplatelet activity? although the risk of
bleeding and interaction with antiplatelet or anticoagulant medica-
tions appears to be very low.?
Garlic may interact with various cytochrome P450 (CYP450)
enzymes, which are involved in myriad metabolic pathways.
Current evidence suggests that garlic inhibits CYP450 2E1, which
is considered to be the main mechanism for garlic's hepatoprotec
tive and chemoprotective properties.** Garlic may induce cell cycle
arrest, inhibit inflammatory cytokines, inhibit P-glycoproteins
(transporter proteins found in various tissues), and induce apop-
tosis in cancer cells.* Other mechanisms of garlic include a reduc-
tion in chemotherapy-induced mucositis (painful inflammation of
the mucous membranes lining the gastrointestinal tract) associ-
ated with the chemotherapeutics methotrexate and 5-fluorouracil;
the ability to minimize cardiac arrhythmias, both ventricular and
supraventricular;* a mild blood glucose-lowering effect; and the
ing glycation.*Garlic may lower diastolic blood pressure and reduce
pylori, which is the bacterium involved in gastric ulcer forma-
tion.Anecdotally,it was used topically in World War II to reduce
55
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
infection. Finally, garlic purportedly helps prevent stomach and/
or colorectal cancers.A direct toxic effect on sarcomas and gastric,
colon, bladder, and prostate cancer cells was demonstrated in tissue
culture.Garlic decreases nitrosamine and nitrite accumulation
 n a   i sd s p
cancer cells.s
Different garlic preparations exhibit different constituent
profiles and clinical effects. Enteric-coated preparations release
only a fraction of their allicin content and are not recommended.
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
·Improves heart disease
· Supports patients with diabetes
·Controls hypercholesterolemia
.Inhibits cancer
·Fights H. pylori infection
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
·Manages infections, including bacterial, fungal, and parasitic (in-
ternal and external)
·Inhibits cancer
Recommended Doses
In humans, the recommended dose for fresh garlic is 2.7-4 g/day.
For the dried powder, the dose is 0.4-1.2 g/day, and the dose of
garlic oil is 2-5 mg/day. The standard extract of garlic powder
(Kwai) is dosed at 200-300 mg q 8 hr and the dose of aged garlic
extract (Kyolic) is 300-800 mg q8 hr. Other preparations are dosed
based on the allin concentration or the allicin-equivalent concen-
tration.The desired alliin concentration is 4-12 mg/day and the
allicin-equivalent concentration is dosed at 2-5 mg/day." In dogs
and cats, a variety of recommended doses appear in the veteri-
nary and herbal literature. One reported dose is one clove of raw
ence,1 clove of either raw or cooked garlic/9-22.7kg body weight/
day (%-% clove of garlic/4.5 kg cat or small dog/day) is an alternate
dose. The dried herb can be administered at a dose of 15-20 mg/kg/
day (divided into three doses). Suggested ranges are 50-100 mg for
56
GARLIC
This electronic publication is initendled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser
cats and small-breed dogs, 100-300 mg for medium-breed dogs,
300-600 mg for large-breed dogs, and 600-900 mg for giant-breed
dogs.°A tincture (1:2 or 1:3) can be dosed at 0.5 mL/10 kg/day
(divided into three doses).
SideEffects
Garlic is generally considered a safe supplement when used at the
ularly cats.d An overdose of garlic products in dogs and cats can
cause oxidative injury to hemoglobin,resulting in methemoglo
bin formation and anemia, a low red blood cell count (because of
the allicin content).The LD。(the dose required to kill 50% of the
test population) of allicin in mice is 120 mg/kg. The LDs of garlic
or cats.Pets known to be supplemented with garlic that experience
decreases in red blood cell parameters on complete blood counts
(eccentrocytosis appears to be a major diagnostic feature of garlic
induced hemolysis in dogs) should have their garlic dose adjusted
accordingly and have their complete blood counts rechecked peri
odically to determine if garlic is the cause of the decreased red
blood cell parameters.
In one study, four dogs administered 1.25 mL of garlic extract/
kg body weight(5 g of whole garlic/kg) q 24 hr for 7 daysexperienced
decreased erythrocyte counts, packed cell volumes, and hemoglo-
bin concentrations 9-11 days following administration. Heinz body
formation (red blood cells containing clumps of precipitated and
thione concentration, and eccentrocytes (red blood cells with the
hemoglobin shifted to the side) were also detected in these dogs.
None of the dogs developed hemolytic anemia.0
Deter mining a “safe" dose of garlic is difficult. First, it is diffi-
cult to find a reported “safe" recommended dose in the litera-
ture, despite suggested doses by herbalists and veterinarians who
recommend garlic. Second, many herbalists and naturopathic
veterinarians use garlic in their patients at varying doses with
out obviously reported side effects. Third, many pet owners, often
without the knowledge of their veterinarians, use fresh garlic or
garlic supplements for their pets in varying amounts without
obvious clinical signs prompting veterinary care. Because of
Nutritional Supplements for the Veterinary Practice
57
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
the large number of pets receiving garlic products in some form
without apparent side effects,it seems obvious that garlic may be
used safely in pets.
Contraindications
None reported for humans; however, caution is advised in cats and
small-breed dogs. Careful monitoring is recommended. Caution or
avoidance is recommended in pets with anemia, and itis sometimes
recommended to stop garlic or garlic supplements approximately
10 days before scheduled surgery (or to at least perform a complete
blood count and, if needed,bleeding time).
Interactions
Because of potential antiplatelet and/or anticoagulant effects (but
should be used carefully or avoided with anticoagulant medica-
tions (e.g., warfarin, aspirin) and herbs or supplements with simi-
lar activity (e.g., Ginkgo biloba, fish oil).as With careful monitor-
ing, the use of garlic in patients being treated with anticoagulant
or antiplatelet medications may result in a lowering of the dose of
these medications. Garlic may also potentiate the effects of insu-
against the cardiotoxicity of doxorubicin and related anthracycline
chemotherapy medications because ofan antioxidant effect.* Garlic
may allow for reduceddoses of statin medications because of its
ability to inactivate the enzyme HGM-CoA reductase.Because of
garlic'sinhibition of one of the cytochrome enzymes (CYP450 2E1),
elevated serum levels of medications that rely on this enzyme for
metabolism may occur, such as acetaminophen.
References
1. Packaged Facts. The U.S. herbal supplements market. 2001. Available at: http://
www.packagedfacts.com/Herbal-Supplements-235863/. Accessed January 15,
2012.
2. Pizzorno J, Murray M. Textbook of naturat medicine. 3rd ed. St. Louis (MO):
Churchill Livingstone; 2005:726-34
BS
GARLIC
This electronic publication is intencled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser
3.Stargrove M, Treasure J, McKee D. Herb, rutriert, and drug interactions:
clinical implications and therapeutic strategies. St. Louis (MO): Mosby
Elsevier; 2008:53-61
4.Wynn SG,Marsden S. Manuat of natural veterinary medicine:science and
fradition. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003:279
5.Schoen A, Wynn SG. Complementary and altemative veterinary rmedicine:
principles and pracfice. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 1998:103, 315,3423, 3689,
394.
6.Wynn S, Fougere B. Veterinary herbal medicine. St. Louis (MO): Elsevier;
2007:328-9, 555-8.
7.Brmadfoot PJ,Palmquist RE, Jonston K, et al. Integrating complementary
medicine into veterinary practice. Goldstein R, ed. Blackwell; 2008:654-5, 706.
Available at: www.mediafire.com/?2s13ctmvv7tyb2k. Accessed January 15,
2012.
8.Fetrow Cw, Avila J. Professiorals Fandbook of corplerentary and altenative
medicines. 3rd ed. Philadelphia (PA ): Lippincott williams & wilkins;
2004:342-9.
9.Pizzorno J, Murray M, Joiner-Bey H. The clinicians handbook ofnatura
medicine. 2nd ed. St. Louis (MO): Churchill Livingstone; 2008:218
10. Lee KW, Yamato O, Tajima M, et al. Hematologic changes associated with the
appearance of eccentrocytes after intragastric administration ot garlic extract
to dogs. Arrr J Vet Res 2000;61(11):1446-50.
Nutritional Supplerments for the Veterinary Practice
59
@20 12 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
GINGER
[ZINGIBEROFFICINALE)
Background
Ginger, either the fresh or dried rhizome, is used as a nutri-
tional (herbal) supplement. Ginger has potent anti-infla mmatory
effects via eicosanoid metabolism, has digestive and circula-
tory effects,and functions as an antioxidant with antineoplas
tic and antimicrobial properties.2 The active ingredients in
ginger are compounds called gingerols, as well as monoterpenes
and sesquiterpenes.' Because of its anti-inflammatory effects
ginger is often used by patients with osteoarthritis—a painful,
tion with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs such
as aspirin) or other anti-inflammatory herbs (e.g., garlic). Ginger
tors, without producing side effects typically seen with COX or
LOX inhibitors (e.g., ulcers).* In Chinese medicine, ginger has
been used to stop bleeding in cases of “deficiency” or “cold";
however, as described below, there is some speculation that ginger
consumption results in an increased risk of bleeding. Ginger also
exerts antinausea effects in patients treated with chemotherapy,
and may be helpful both before and after chemotherapy to reduce
or prevent nausea in patients treated with cisplatin or other drugs
effects. There is also some evidence supporting its use for treating
heartworm in dogs.
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
·Acts as an anti-inflammatory agent and controls pain
·Controls nausea
·Minimizes gastrointestinal ulcers
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
·Acts as an anti-inflammatory agent and controls pain
·Controls nausea
*Minimizes gastrointestinalulcers
61
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
Recommended Doses
Doses in humans range from 2 g/day to 4 g/day of either the fresh
or dried rhizome or standardized extract. Alternatively, 1.25-3 mL
of a tincture (1:5) can be administered q 8 hr or 0.25-0.75 mL of a
fluid extract (1:1) q 8 hr.* Doses in dogs/cats/pets are extrapolated
from doses used in people.
Side Effects
Ginger is considered a very safe herb and toxicity is minimal. Ginger
is free of adverse effects at the recommended doses.
Contraindications
although in vitro studies are inconclusive and in vivo studies failed
to consistently show definitive inhibition of platelet aggregation.
At this time, no clear contraindications exist preventing the use of
ginger in patients with hemostatic disorders or those taking antico-
agulant or antiplatelet medications.a
Interactions
Despite the effects of ginger on COX and LOX inhibition, detect-
able clinical effects are unlikely and have not been reported. This
suggests that ginger can be used safely with COX and LOX inhibi
tors, but monitoring the patient is prudent. Because of the antinal-
sea/antiemetic effects of ginger, patients can be administered garlic
with medications such as certain chemotherapeutic agents (e.g
been used in Chinese medicine to stop bleeding. At recommended
taking oral vitamin K antagonists or antiplatelet medications,
but patient monitoring is encouraged if these drugs are coad-
that when coadministered with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs, ginger has an additive effect, and can benefit patients with
osteoarthritis.*
62
GINGER
This electronic publication is intencled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser
References
1.Fetrow CW, Avila J. Professiorals Fardbook ofcorrplerertary and alterrative
recicines. 3rd ed Philadelphia (PA): Lippincott Williams & wilkins; 2004:3528.
2. Mills S, Bone K. Principles and practice of phytotherapy: roderm herba
medicine. St. Louis (MO): Churchill Livingstone; 2000:394-402.
3.Stargrove M, Treasure J, McKee D. Herb, nutrient, and drug interactions:
clinical irmplications and therapeutie strategies. St. Louis (MO): Mosby Elsevier;
2008:62-9
4.Wynn S, Marsden S. Maruat of raturat veterinary medicine: science and
fradition. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003
5.Pizzorno J, Murray M, Joiner-Bey H. The cinicians hadbook of ratura
medicine. 2nd ed. St. Louis (MO): Churchill Livingstone; 2008:535, 537
6.Broadfoot PJ, Palmquist RE, Jonston K, et al. Integrating complemenfary
medicine into veterinary practice. Goldstein R, ed. Blackwell; 2008:302, 313
Available at: www.mediafire.com/?2s13ctmvv7tyb2k. Accessed January 15,
2012.
7. Merawin LT, Arifah AK, Sani RA, et al. Screening of microflaricidal effects of
plant extracts against Diroflaria imitis. Res Vet Sei 2010;s8(1):1427.
Nutritional Supplemments for the Veterinary Practice
63
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
GINKGO
[GINKGO BILOBA)
Background
The ginkgo leaf is used as a nutritional supplement as the active
constituents include terpenes(ginkgolides) and flavonoids.'Most of
the clinical research has used concentrated standardized extracts;
however, the whole-leaf dry extracts or liquid extracts of the whole
leaf are often used in clinical practice.?
Gin kgo leaf extract has been used in patients with Alzheirmer's
disease and other forms of dementia because it increases cere-
bral blood flow.34 Ginkgo, however, has not shown any benefit in
tion. Ginkgo increases cerebral blood flow and tissue perfusion as
a result of arterial vasodilation, and ginkgolide B inhibits platelet
aggregation and inhibits platelet-activating factor (PAF).23 Other
tective, neuroprotective, and anti-ischemic effects.s
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
*ImprovesAlzheimers disease/dementias
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
·Supports patients with cognitive disorders
·Controls feline asthma patients
·Helps patients with heart failure
Recommended Doses
In humans, 3-8 mL/day of a 1:1 fluid extract or 120-240 mg/day in
divided doses (q 8-12 hr) ofa sta ndardized dry whole-leafextract are
recommended.° In dogs and cats, recommended doses are 25-300
mg/kg q 8 hr of a powder or capsule; 0.5-1 mL/10 kg q 8 hr of a
1:2-1:3 tincture; and 10-50 mg/10 kg q 8-12 hr of a standardized
extract (50:1). In the author's experience, an alternative dosing regi
men is a 100 mg capsule/11.4 kg dog or 4.5 kg cat q 8-12 hr; and %-v
teaspoon of powder/11.4 kg dog or 4.5 kg cat q 8-12 hr; and 5-10
drops of a 1:5 tincture/4.5-9 kg dog or4.5 kg cat q 8-12 hr.
65
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
SideEffects
Ginkgo is considered a safe herb with an excellent safety profile.
However, there are safety concerns because of the potential for
large amounts of ginkgo seeds are consumed.3
Contraindications
None reported.
Interactions
In vitro, ginkgo extracts show platelet inhibition.7 Clinically,
there are no reliable reports of spontaneous bleeding as a result of
gin kgo administration by itself. However, individual patient assess-
ties. In the author's experience, because ginkgo may exert protective
effects on the gastrointestinal system against the formation of ulcers,
ginkgo may be a better choice than other medications (e.g., aspirin)
when mild anticoagulation is needed. Additionally, the use of ginkgo
might permit a reduction in other anticoagulants.° Ginkgo extracts
may shorten the duration of anesthesia.It is therefore advised to
cyclosporine- and aminoglycoside-induced nephrotoxicity, as well as
the ototoxicity associated with aminoglycoside administration and
the cardiotoxicity that may be seen with doxorubicin or other anthra-
may increase blood pressure if administered concurrently with thia-
zide diuretics.6.7
References
1.Broadfoot PJ, Palmquist RE, Jonston K, et al. Integrafing corplerentary
mmedicine into veterinary pracfice. Goldstein R, ed. Blackwell; 2008:654-5, 707
Available at: www.mediafire.com/?2s13ctmvv7tyb2k. Accessed January 15,
2012.
2.Wynn SG, Marsden S. Marual of ratural veterinary redicine: science an
fracdition. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003:58, 78, 244-5, 533
66
GINKGO
This electronic publication is intencled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser
3.Wynn SG, Fougere B. Veterinary herbal medicine. Mosby Elsevier; 2007:300,
356, 562-4.
4. Pizzorno J, Murray M, Joiner-Bey H. The clinicians handbook of rafura
medicine. 2nd ed. St. Louis (MO): Churchill Livingstone; 2008:457.
medicine. St. Louis (MO): Churchill Livingstone; 2000:90, 119, 197, 404-15.
6. Stargrove M, Treasure J, McKee D. Herb, rutrient, and drug interactions:
clinical implications and therapeutic strategies. St. Louis (MO): Mosby Elsevier;
2008:69-79.
7.Fetrow Cw, Avila J.Professionals handbook of complerentary and altemative
edicines. 3rd ed. Philadelphia (PA): Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2004:358-65
Nutritional Supplerments for the Veterinary Practice
67
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
GINSENG
(PANAXGINSENG)
Background
Ginseng is an herb commonly used in traditional Chinese medi
cine.Confusion has existed regarding what constitutes“ginseng"
because of the different species of plants that are called ginseng.
Currently, Panax ginseng is the genus and species of plant used
ginseng). Common names for this plant include ginseng, Korean
ginseng, Chinese ginseng, Asian ginseng, and Oriental ginseng
  (   n   
quinquefolius. Siberian ginseng is a different plant that currently
goes by the name eleuthero (Eleutherococcus senticosus). White
ginseng (Ren shen) is the dried peeled root, whereas red ginseng
(Hong shen, considered warmer and stronger or more Yang than
white ginseng) is the root steamed before drying.'
The active ingredients in ginseng are steroid saponins called
ginsenosides. More than 30 ginsenosides have been identified to
date, which make up approximately 3% of the herb.
Ginseng is unique among herbs because it is considered
an adaptogen. By definition, adaptogens are nonspecific and
nontoxic, normalize homeostasis, and help the patient adapt to
various stressors.' Ginseng has a wide range of actions, includ-
ing immunomodulation, antineoplastic properties, neuroendo-
crine effects, and positive effects on cognitive, athletic, and sexual
performance.'Ginseng can be used in almost any patient as an aid
to adapt to any type of stress/illness.d Ginseng enhances cell-medi
ated immunity (one of the main branches of the immune system),
especially natural killer (NK) cell activity.? This makes ginseng
useful anytime enhanced immune activity (e.g, infections,
neoplasia, etc.) is required. Ginseng may increase the effectiveness
of some vaccines, possibly from enhanced antigen presenting cell
(APC) activity, although the clinical significance remains to be
established.' Ginseng may also be beneficial to cancer patients by
inducing cellular differentiation and by an antimutageniceffect.
In addition, ginseng is beneficial in reducing toxicity from both
chemotherapy (probably from protecting against leukopenia,
and radiation therapy.
69
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
It is important for consumers to note that there is often vari-
able quality and composition of commercial products claiming to
contain ginseng. Adulteration with contaminating species (such as
Periploca sepium,a cardiotoxic herb) has been identified, especially
in supplements imported from China.
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
*Helps people adapt to stress/illness
·Enhances stamina
·Increases mentalalertness/cognitive performance
·Serves as an adjunct to radiation/chemotherapy
·Acts as an immunoprotective agent/immunomodulator
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
·Helps animals adapt to stress/illness
·Serves as an adjunct to radiation/chemotherapy
·Acts as an immunoprotective agent/immunomodulator
RecommendedDoses
In humans, 3 mL/day of a 1:1 fluid extract, 2-10 g/day (divided and
administered q 8-12 hr) of the dried root, and 100 mg of a 5:1 4%
ginsenoside solid extract q 12 hr are recommended doses.' In dogs
and cats, a recommended dose is 250-500 mg/kg.² In the author's
experience, an alternative dose is one 100 mg capsule/11.4 kg dog or
4.5 kg cat q 8-12 hr, 1.25-2.5 mL (%-% teaspoon of powder)/11.4 kg
dog or 4.5 kg cat q8-12 hr, 5-10 drops of a 1:5 tincture/4.5-9 kg dog
or 4.5 kg cat q 8-12 hr, or 1-2 drops/0.45-0.9 kg q 8-12 hr.
Side Effects
Ginseng is among the safest herbs usedin natural medicine. Toxicity
is minimal and the herbs are free of adverse effects at the recom-
mended doses. Isolated case reports of people taking “ginseng" and
experiencing adverse effects while taking other medications (such
as warfarin or digitalis glycosides) do exist; however, these case
reports are problermatic because the exact species of the plant that
constitutes"ginseng”in the actual herbal formula ingested is often
not clear.
70
GINSENG
This electronic publication is initendled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser
Contraindications
None reported.
Interactions
Experimental evidence suggests a modulating effect of ginseng on
P-glycoprotein, a transporter protein involved in phase Ill drug
metabolism.The mechanisms of drug resistance modulation or
pump-mediated interactions between ginseng and conventional
medications have not been fully explained.'Doxorubicin cardio
toxicity may be reduced when coadministered with ginseng, and
intestinal bacteria may hydrolyze ginseng into novel metabolites
that possess antineoplastic activity.' A synergistic effect between
amoxicillin and related beta-lactam antibiotics administered with
ginseng results in increased antibacterial effect.
antitumor antibiotics and platinum medications), ginseng may
ties. Proposed mechanisms of action include multidrug resistance
disabling, potentiation of cytotoxic activity, protection of healthy
cells, and enhancement of the immune system during myelosup
pression (suppression of bone marrow).' Ginsengmay interfere with
the analgesic effects of morphine and related medications and may
inhibit the uptake of the neurotransmitters glutamate,dopamine,
norepinephrine, serotonin, and -aminobutyric acid (GABA) in a
dose-dependent fashion. Care should be exercised when combining
References
1.Stargrove M,Treasure J, McKee D.Herb, rutrient, and drug interaction:
linical implications and therapeutie strategies. St. Louis (MO): Mosby Elsevier;
2008:80-7.
2.Wynn SG, Fougere B. Veterinary herbal redicine. St. Louis (MO): Mosby
Elsevier; 2007:303, 332-3, 3513
3.Mills S, Bone K.Prirciples and practice ofphytotrerapy: roderr rerba
medicine. St. Louis (MO): Churchill Livingstone; 2000:418-30, 538.
4.Pizzorno J, Murray M. Textbook ofnatural medicine. 3rd ed. St. Louis (MO):
Churchill Livingstone; 2005:707, 923.
Nutritional Supplements for the Veterinary Practice
71
@20 12 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
GLUCOSAMINE
(GLUCOSAMINESULFATE GLUCOSAMINE
HYDROCHLORIDE,N-ACETYL-D-GLUCOSAMINE]
Background
Glucosamine is an aminosugar (a molecule that contains a sugar as
well as nitrogen) made from glucose that isincorporated into artic
ular cartilage. Glucosamine is the most common chondroprotective
(joint-protecting) supplement used in patients either diagnosed or
suspected of having osteoarthritis—the painful degeneration of the
articular cartilage that lines the ends of long bones. Glucosamine
can be synthesized in the body, but significant amounts of glucos
amine are not normally found in most diets. Glucosamine supple-
ments are derived from the exoskeletons of shrimp,lobsters,and
crab. Glucosamine is available in three forms: glucosamine sulfate
glucosamine hydrochloride, and N-acetyl-D-glucosamine. All three
forms of glucosamine may be effective; however, glucosamine
sulfate is the form most commonly used in research and therefore
probably the preferred form. It is speculated that the sulfur portion
of glucosamine sulfate, rather than the glucosamine portion, may
be more important for joint health and may be an important reason
why glucosamine sulfate supplements appear to be effective in help-
ing pets with arthritis.2
Glucosamine activates chondrocytes (cartilage cells) via modu
stimulates the production of various components of cartilage such
as proteoglycans, polysulfated glycosaminoglycans, and colla
gen.? Glucosamine sulfate increases serum sulfur concentrations,
which further allows the production of cartilage, as well as inhib.
ases, collagnease, superoxide radicals, and phospholipase A2.2
Glucosamine sulfate exerts an anti-inflammatory effectby a mecha
nism different from inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis, most
A number of studies in humans and animals show that glucos-
amine is as effective as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs, e.g., aspirin-related drugs) for patients with osteoarthri
tis. In addition, glucosamine sulfate is free of the potentially seri
ous side effects that can occur with NSAID administration, such as
gastric ulcers and kidney damage.4s Nonetheless, there are some
73
@20 12 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
reports that question the effectiveness of glucosamine for relieving
joint pain. Careful evaluation of those negative reports indicated
that many of the participants were permitted to take acetarmino-
phen along with the glucosamine. It was proposed that acetamin
ophen in some way interfered with the participants receiving the
full benefit of the glucosamine supplement.It is also potentially
likely that study design or some other factors resulted in a lack
of perceived benefit to glucosamine supplementation. To date,
research,including clinicalstudies and clinical experience from
myriad people and pets using glucosamine supplements, support
the efficacy of the supplements in relieving pain, inflammation, and
helping torebuild damaged cartilage.
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
*Supports patients with osteoarthritis
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
·Supports patients with osteoarthritis
·Helps feline patients with bladder diseases such as feline lower
urinary tract disease (FLUTD) and chronic cystitis
Recommended Doses
The typical dose in humans is 500 mg q 8 hr. For acute pain and
injury and to accelerate tissue repair, initial doses of 3,000-4,500
mg/day for 3-5 days are often recommended.² In dogs and cats,
recommended doses vary depending on the product. As a guide-
line, a starting dose of 250-1,500 mg/day (in divided doses) is
recommended. In the author's experience, an alternative start-
day for a 22.7-45.5 kg dog and 250-500 mg/day for smaller dogs
and cats. Doses of joint supplements are typically reduced after
4-8 weeks once clinical signs improve or resolve, to help mini-
rmize costs.
74
GLUCOSAMINE
This electronic publication is intencled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser
SideEffects
Glucosamine is very safe. Mild gastrointestinal upset is rarely
observed, which may be avoided by taking glucosamine with food.
There have been some concerns about using glucosamine supple-
mellitus. Studies in humans demonstrate that supplementation with
glucosamine at recomrmended doses does not interact adversely with
a lterations in glucose metabolism.27
Contraindications
Glucosamine may be contraindicated in people or pets with aller-
gies to shellfish.2
Interactions
Human patients prescribed diuretics may require higher doses of
glucosamine supplements to obtain the full therapeutic benefits.
This is likely also true in pets. Additionally, because glucosamine
sulfate is stabilized with a mineral salt (sodium chloride or potas-
sium chloride) electrolyte alterations may occur in patients taking
both diuretics and glucosamine. Such patients should be monitored
for electrolyte imbalances.Acetaminophen may interfere with
the actions of glucosamine sulfate because of consumption of the
sulfate provided by glucosamine sulfate during sulfate metabolism
of the acetaminophen. A synergistic effect between glucosamine
sulfate and NSAIDs may allow for a reduction in NSAID dose in
patients with osteoarthritis.^ Glucosamine joint supplements often
contain other potentially synergisticingredients,includingvitamin
C, manganese, chondroitin sulfate, and methylsulfonylmethane
(MSM). These combinations are safe and effective and may be more
effective than supplements containing only glucosamine sulfate.
More research is needed to address this issue.² Finally, oligomeric
proanthocyanidins (OPCs), which are plant secondary metabolites
(most widely provided by grapeseed extract and pine bark extract),
bind to collagen and elastin. These compounds reportedly protect
collagen and elastin from the degradative enzymes collagenases
result they may have a synergistic effect with supplements contain-
ing these OPCs with glucosamine sulfate.
Nutritional Supplements for the Veterinary Practice
75
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
References
1.Pizzorno J, Murray M. Textbook of ratural medicine. 3rd ed. St. Louis (MO):
Churchill Livingstone; 2005:987-91
2.Stargrove M, Treasure J, McKee D. Herb, rutrienf, and drug interactions:
clinical irrplicafions and fferapeufic strategies. St. Louis (MO): Mosby Elsevier;
2008:75763.
3.Wynn SG, Marsden S. Marat of ratara veterinary rrredicine: science aα
fraditior. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003:368-9, 447-8
4.Scthoen A,Wynn SG. Corrplerertary and alferrative veterinary rredicine
principles and praetice. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 1998:54-7, 64-5.
5. Broadfoot PJ, Palmquist RE, Jonston K, et al. Integrating commplementary
redicine into veterinary practice. Goldstein R, ed. Blackwell; 2008:21, 132, 424,
434. Available at: www.mediafire.com/?2s13ctmvv7tyb2k. Accessed January 15,
2012.
6.Pizzorno J, Murray M, Joiner-Bey H. The clinicians handbook ofnatura
redicine. 2nd ed. St. Louis (MO): Churchill Livingstone; 2008:558, 563
7.Simon RR, Marks V, Leeds AR, et al. A comprehensive review of oral
glucosamine use and effects on glucose metabolism in normal and diabetic
individuals. Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2011;27(1):1427. Available at: http://
Accessed February 20, 2012.
76
GLUCOSAMINE
This electronic publication is intended for use only by the original purcha.ser
GLUTAMINE
{L-GLUTAMINE)
Background
Glutamine is the most abundant amino acid in blood and muscle
and is a preferred energy source for rapidly dividing cells, especially
those lining the gastrointestinal tract (enterocytes). Glutamine
serves as an intermediary for gluconeogenesis (the production of
are released by skeletal muscles during stress.
Glutamine is available eitherin the diet or through supplemen-
tation and is made by the body from glutamate and ammonia. Food
sources include animal and plant proteins (e.g., meat, fish, dairy
products, cabbage, legumes).' Supplementation may be necessary
because of increased needs by the body and during times of stress
such as illness and exercise.' Although the terms“glutamine” and
"L-glutamine”(one of the two forms or“isomers”of glutamine) are
used interchangeably, the other isomer, D-glutamine, possesses no
biologic activity.'
Glutamine stimulates intestinal mucosal growth, decreases
mucosal atrophy,serves as a fuel source for enteroctyes, decreases
bacterial and toxin translocation across the intestinal mucosa or
lining (i.e., decreases “leaky gut syndrome"), plays a role in acid-
base balance by removing ammonia from the blood, regenerates
glutathione, decreases muscle protein loss, modulates the immune
(a particular type of infection-fighting white blood cell) function,
and is used to improve/limit cachexia. Glutamine has anabolic
effects on skeletal muscle and may therefore be helpful in the form
containing glutamine purportedly reduces stomatitis (inflamma-
tion of membranes in the mouth, including gums, tongue, cheeks
etc.) associated with chemotherapy.2.3.4
Indications
Suggested Usesin Humans
·Helps gastrointestinal diseases
·Minimizes side effects (e.g., stomatitis, mucositis, gastroenteritis)
associated with chemotherapy and radiation therapy
77
@20 12 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
·Minimizes/improves cachexia
·Supports patients with severe illnesses such as infection with HIV,
sepsis, cardiac diseases
·Supplements individuals during exercise/weight lifting
·Helps trauma patients
·Improves severe burns
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
·Helps gastrointestinal diseases
·Minimizes side effects (e.g., stomatitis, mucositis, gastroenteritis)
associated with chemotherapy and radiation therapy
· Supports patients with critical illnesses
·Helps trauma patients
·Supplements elite athletes
Recommended Doses
In humans, the usual dose is 100 mg q 8 hr; however, doses up to 30
g q24 hr have been used in patients with severe illness.' In dogs and
cats, the typical dose is 250-3,000 mg/day (divided).
Side Effects
Glutamine is very safe, even at high doses.
Contraindications
Many anticonvulsant medications block glutamate activity in the
brain. Because glutamine can be converted to glutamate, caution
should be used when supplementing patients with glutamine, espe
cially at high doses, concurrently with anticonvulsant medications.
There are some data indicating increased glutamine levels in certain
brain diseses, and excessive glutamate may serve as a stimulus for
the growth of malignant brain tumors. Additionally, ca ncer cells use
glutamine to grow and metastasize in vitro.Until more informa
tion is available, patients with nerve-damaging, chronic neurologi
cal diseases (e.g., multiple sclerosis or recent neurological surgeries,
such as for brain tumors) are encouraged to limit their intake of
supplementalglutamine to approximately5-10g/day.
BL
GLUTAMINE
This electronic publication is intencled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser
Interactions
None reported.
References
1. Pizzorno J, Murray M. Textbook ofnatural medicine. 3rd ed. St. Louis (MO):
Churchill Livingstone; 2005:993-9.
2.Wynn SG, Marsden S. Marual of rafural veterinary rmedicine: science ad
raditior. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003: 163,204, 190, 194, 204, 399.
3.Schoen A, Wynn SG. Complementary and altemative veterinary medicine:
principles and practice. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 1998:98, 102.
4. Brmoadfoot PJ, Palmquist RE, Jonston K, et al. Integrating complementary
redicine into veterinary praetice. Goldstein R, ed. Blackwell; 2008:301, 323,
339, 722, 735. Available at: www.mediafire.com/?2s13ctmvv7tyb2k. Accessed
January 15, 2012.
5. Dharmananda S. Amino acid supplements l: glutamine. with reference to the
Related Compound Glutamate. Available at: http://www.itmonline.org/arts
/glutamine.htm. Accessed March 13, 2012
Nutritional Supplements for the Veterinary Practice
79
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
GREEN TEA
(CAMELLIASINENSIS]
Backgraund
Green tea (young leaves, leaf buds, and tips) is a commonly
"Medicinal" green tea is stabilized, dried immediately after
harvesting, androlled, which means thecrude herb isapproximately
equivalent to its natural state at the time of harvesting. Green
tea includes various flavonoids, vitamins, minerals, amino
acids, caffeine, and polyphenols (a type of antioxidant). The
four principal polyphenolic compounds in green tea are called
catechins (epicatechin [EC], epigallocatechin [EGC], epicatechin
gallate [ECG], and the principal compound epigallocatechin
gallate [EGCG]), which are responsible for most of the observed
beneficial clinical effects.² In contrast, black tea is dried after being
rolled, which allows oxidative enzymatic changes to take place.
These changes result in the formation of red-brown theaflavins,
thearubigins, and polymeric tannins, which are all absent from
greentea.
Although people often drink green tea for its health benefits,
extremely high volumes are required because of the poor oral
bioavailability of the active polyphenols. Approximately 10 cups of
green tea/person/day would be necessary to begin to approach the
therapeutic dose. Therefore, the supplermental form of green tea is
usually consumed for health benefits.2
EGCG promotes cancer cell apoptosis (programmed cell death)
and inhibits angiogenesis (formation of new blood vessels) by inter-
fering with vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) function.2.3
EGCG exhibits synergistic effects with chemotherapeutics and
modifies drug resistance (through inhibition of P-glycoprotein, a
transported protein involved in drug metabolism).² EGCG inhib
tumors caused by cisplatin usage. Green tea also exhibits anti-
inflammatory and antibacterial (e.g., against various bacteria,
including methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus) activities.
Finally, green tea may reduce cholesterol, abrogates atherosclero-
sis,exhibits antiplatelet effects,decreases the formation of dental
caries, and inhibits tumor metastasis (distant spread).3-s
81
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
·Functions as an antioxidant
·Benefits cancer patients
·Helps patients with atopic dermatitis
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
·Functions as an antioxidant
·Benefits cancer patients
Recommended Doses
In humans, traditional Chinese medicine guidelines recommend
4-12 g of dried powder/day (divided).2 Approximately 300-750
mg of polyphenols/dose is recommended.2s Green tea extracts are
often standardized to 60% polyphenols and contain 1-4% caffeine.
In dogs and cats, 10-20 mg/kg q 12 hr ofa standardized 34% EGCG
product is suggested.
Side Effects
Green tea is a very safe supplement with no reported side effects.
Contraindications
None reported.
Interactians
response in refractory atopic dermatitis,which permits a reduced
dose of corticosteroids (and a concomitant decrease in possible
side effects associated with corticosteroid use).? EGCG may reduce
doxorubicin-induced cardiomyopathy and increases cancer
cell sensitivity by inhibiting P-glycoprotein.² EGCG functions
synergistically with beta-lactam antibiotics (e.g, penicillin, etc.)
and can reverse beta-lactam antibiotic resistance by modulating
the bacterial phenotype in methicillin-resistant strains of
Staphylococcus aureus.Tamoxifen-induced (a chemotherapeutic)
apoptosis is increased by EGCG in vitro. Historically, there has
been a concern that green tea might antagonize anticoagulant
82
GREEN TEA
This electronic publication is initendled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser
drugs such as warfarin. There are currently no credible reports
supporting thisspeculation; however, the current practice is to avoid
and antithrombotic medications.?
References
1.Schoen A, Wynn SG.Complementary and altermative veterinary medicine:
principles and praetice. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 1998:103.
2.Stargrove M, Treasure J, McKee D. Herb, nutrient, and drug interactions
dlinicat implications and therapeutic strategies. St. Louis (MO): Mosby Elsevier;
2008:91-8.
3.Bradfoot PJ, Palmquist RE, Jonston K, et al. Integrating complemenfary
medicine into veterinary practice. Goldstein R, ed. Blackwell; 2008:660, 706,
710. Available at: www.mediafire.com/?2s13ctmvv7tyb2k. Accessed January 15,
2012.
4.Fetrow CW, Avila J. Professionals hardbook of cormplerrentary ad altermafive
medicines. 3rd ed. Philadelphia (PA): Lippincott williams & Wilkins;
2004:398-402.
5.Pizzorno J, Murray M. Textbook of ratural medicine. 3rd ed. St. Louis (MO):
Churchill Livingstone; 2005:800.
6.Wynn SG, Marsden S. Manuat of naturat veterinary medicine: science and
fradition. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003:401
Nutritional Supplerments for the Veterinary Practice
CB
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
HAWTHORN
(CRATAEGUSLAEVIGATA,C.MONOGYNA,
C. OXYACANTHA]
Background
Hawthorn is an herb well-known for its use in the treatment of heart
disease because of the flavonoid and oligomeric proanthocyanidin
(OPC) content.' Typically the leaves and flowers are used, although
raditionally fruits andberries have alsobeenused.Hawthorn
exhibits several clinically beneficialeffects on the heart, including
antiarrhythmic properties (to maintain a normal heart rhythm),
positive inotropic effects (to increase force of contraction),
increased coronary blood flow, decreased myocardial energy
utilization, decreased atrio-ventricular conduction time, and
decreased cardiac excitability.- Hawthorn inhibits the enzyme
phosphodiesterase,° increases nitric oxide-mediated endothelial
relaxation (causing dilation of blood vessels), inhibits platelet
aggregation, inhibits phospholipase A2, exhibits antioxidant
properties, exhibits hypolipidemic (lipid-lowering) properties, acts
similarly to angiotensin-1-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors to
help regulate blood pressure, and increases the duration of cardiac
muscle action potential by blocking potassium channels.!7
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
·Improves heart disease
· Supports cancer patients during chemotherapy
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
·Improves heart disease
· Supports cancer patients during chemotherapy
Recommended Doses
In humans, the dried leaf and flower is administered at a dose of
1,500 mg q 6-8 hr. The tincture is dosed at 3-7 mL q 12-24 hr, and
the dose of the standardizedextract(2.2% flavonoids or 18.75%
OPC) is 600-900 mg q8-24 hr.7 In dogs and cats, 25-300 mg/kg/
day (divided doses) is recommended.
85
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
SideEffects
Hawthorne is considered a very safe supplement in both people and
pets.
Contraindications
None reported. Avoid administering hawthorn to patients allergic
to the plant.&
Interactions
Because of similarities between hawthorn and digitalis-type
cardiac glycosides (which stimulate the heart muscle), there is
the potential to cause adverse reactions when both hawthorn and
digitalis glycosides are coadministered.2$ However, this interaction
has not been observed clinically. Further, combining hawthorn
with digitalis glycosides may permit a lower dose of the digitalis
glycosides because of the additive positive inotropic effects.
To date,hawthorn has not been shown to interact negatively or
cause any adverse effects when prescribed with any other cardiac
medications.Hawthorn may reduce the cardiotoxicity seen with
doxorubicin and other anthracycline chemotherapeutic agents.
Combining hawthorn with diuretics in patients with congestive
heart failure may lead to further reduction of symptoms and
reduced adverse effects associatedwithdiruetics.
References
1.Wynn SG, Fougere B. Veterinary herbal medicine. St. Louis (MO): Mosby
Elsevier; 2007:311, 57981
2.Sctoen A, Wynn SG. Corplerentary ard alfermative veterinary redicine
principles and practice. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 1998:318, 347-8.
3.Wynn SG, Marsden S. Maruat of naturat veterinary medicine: science and
fracition. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003:77, 90.
4.Broadfoot PJ, Palmquist RE, Jonston K,et al. Integrating complemmenfary
medicine into veterinary praetice. Goldstein R, ed. Blackwell; 2008:653-4
Available at: www.mediafire.com/?2s13ctmvv7tyb2k. Accessed January 15,
2012.
5. Pizzorno J, Murray M, Joiner-Bey H. The clinicians handbook of ratura
recdicine. 2nd ed. St. Louis (MO): Churchill Livingstone; 2008:53-5
86
HAWTHORN
This electronic publication is intencled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser
6. Mills S, Bone K. Principles and practice of phytotherapy: roderm herbat
medicine. St. Louis (MO): Churchill Livingstone; 2000:439-46.
7.Stargrove M, Treasure J, McKee D. Herb, nutrient, and drug interactions:
linical irplicafions and therapeufic strategies. St. Louis (MO): Mosby Elsevier;
2008:99-103.
8.Fetrow Cv, Avila J. Professiorals rancdbook of corplerertary ard alterrative
medicines. 3rd ed. Philadelphia (PA): Lippincott williams & wilkins;
2004:414-16.
Nutritional Supplements for the Veterinary Practice
87
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
HYALURONIC ACID
(Ha, Hyaluronan]
Background
Hyaluronicacid(HA)isa high-molecular-weightglycosaminoglycan
composed of long chains of glucuronic acid and N-acetyl-
glucosamine.' HA iscommonly used as a joint supplement extracted
from rooster combs or bovine tracheas, or (more commonly)
generated using a patented
1process byfermentation using
nonpathogenic Streptococcus spp.2 These organisms produce an
outer coatingof hyaluronicacidthatis sloughedoffin the media and
then purified. An approved preservative is required or the bacteria
will degrade the HA, making it pro-inflammatory. Approved
preservatives (by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, FDA)
that are safe to include in HA products include 1,2-propanediol
methyl paraben,and propyl paraben. Commercial HA products
may also contain other preservatives/ingredients, including vita min
C;ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA);potassium or sodium
sorbate; potassium, sodium, or calcium citrate; grapeseed extract;
tea tree extract; and citric acid.These ingredients on their own
do not adequately stabilize the HA. Adding stabilizers such as
xantham gum, carbopol, or guar gum increases the viscosity so
that the HA degradation cannot be detected (when HA degrades
it becomes thinner).
The concentration of HA in nutritional supplements should
be 1% (10 mg/mL),which is the highest concentration of high
molecular-weight HA that can be put into solution. Products that
HA (often <20o,000 daltons),which is pro-inflammatory, not
anti-inflammatory.d
The proposed mechanisms of action of HA include reduced
swelling at the site of injury by decreasing white blood cell
migration and infiltration into the affected tissue (via binding to
the CD44 binding site on white blood cells), decreasing the number
of white blood cells at the site of trauma (resulting in reduced
    n  d  
blocking serine protease (enzyme) activity so that lysyl bradykinin
bradykinin, and arachidonic acid cannot be produced (resulting in
decreased pain).s HA inhibits the formation of pro-inflammatory
interleukins (IL-4 and IL-6) as well as tumor necrosis factor (TNF)
89
@20 12 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
blocking both acute and chronic inflammation.*Clinically, HA has
been used to improve joint fluid in arthritis, as a surgical aid in eye
surgery, and to facilitate the healing and regeneration of surgical
wounds.° It has also been used in various skin diseases such as
actinic keratitis and to improve wound healing (e.g., diabetic
ulcers, skin inflammation from radiation treatments).7 Finally, HA
is involved in embryogenesis, metastasis, tumor progression, and
tissue turnover.
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
·Improves osteoarthritis, bursitis, muscle soreness, fibromyalgia
·Improves skin tone and suppleness, reduces wrinkling/aging of
skin, minimizes sunburns, helps with wound healing and healing
postsurgically
·Slows hair loss (HA appears to thicken hair and/or result in hair
growth)
·Normalizes elevated liver enzymes
·Reduces plaque on teeth
·Controls postsurgical pain
·Assists during cataract surgery
·Supports patients with heart disease
· Supports patients with cancer
·Helps patients with Alzheimer's disease
Suggested Uses inDogs and Cats
·Improves osteoarthritis
·Normalizes elevated liver enzymes
·Helps control Cushing's and Addison's disease
Recommended Doses
An anecdotal dose in humans is 50 mg (1 teaspoon ofa 1% solution)
q 8-12 hr. No specific recommendations in dogs and cats appear to
have been established.
Side Effects
None reported.
90
HYALURONIC ACID
This electronic publication is intendedl for use only by the oniginal purcha.ser.
Contraindications
None reported, except that some cats have shown sensitivity to
1,2-propanediol, which is also called propylene glycol (one of the
FDA-approved preservatives used in HA supplements). Feline
products should have a reduced concentration of this preservative.
Interactions
None reported.
References
1. Strauss EJ, Hart JA, Miller MD, et al. Hyaluronic acid viscosupplementation
and osteoarthritis: current uses and future directions. Arr J Sporfs Meα
2009;37(8):1636-44.
2.Kalman DS, Heimer M, Valdeon A, et al. Effect of a natural extract of chicken
combs with a high content of hyaluronic acid (Hyal-Joint*) on pain relief and
quality oflife in subjects with knee osteoarthritis: a pilot randomized double-
blind placebo-controlled trial. Nutr J 2008;7:3.
3. Vazquez JA, Montemayor MI, Fraguas J, et al. Hyaluronic acid production
by Streptococrus zooepidemicus in marine by -products media from mussel
processing wastewaters and tuna peptone viscera. Microb Cefl Facf 2010;9:46
4.Cooper C, Brown K, Meletis C, et al. Inflammation and hyaluronic acid
A tem CorpI Ther 2008;14(2):7884.
5. Alejandro A, Stamenkovic I, Meinick M,et al. CD44 is the principal cell
surface receptor for hyaluronate. Ceff 1990;61:1303-13
6. Brown MB, Jones SA. Hyaluronic acid: a unique topical vehicle for the
localized delivery of drugs to the skin. J Eur Acad Derratot Venereo
2005;19(3):308-18
7.Weindl G, Schaller M, Schafer-Korting M, et al. Hyaluronic acid in
pharmaceutical and clinical aspects. Skin Pharaco Physiol
2004;17(5):207-13.
8.Olczyk P, Komosiriska-Vassev K, Winsz-Szczotka K, et al. |Hyaluronan:
structure, metabolism, functions, and role in wound healingl. Postepy Hig Mec
Dosw (Online). 2008;62:6519 |in Polish|
Nutritional Supplerments for the Veterinary Practice
91
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
KAVA
(PIPERMETHYSTICUM)
Background
Kava is used as an herbal anxiolytic (to relieve anxiety).' Clinical
trials have shown that the roots and rhizome of kava are safe and
effective alternatives to traditional benzodiazepines (diazepam
etc.).² Kava may also be helpful for urogenital problems such
as interstitial or bacterial cystitis (inflammation of the urinary
bladder), prostatitis (inflammation of the prostate gland), muscular
relaxation, and the relief of menopausal symptoms.2 These effects
are thought to be attributable to anti-inflammatory and analgesic
effects of kava on the urogenital tract.d.s
The active ingredients in kava are called kavalactones.°
Although the exact mechanism(s) for kava's activities remains
unknown, kavalactones may somehow modify receptor domains
rather than interact specifically with receptor binding sites. Other
studies suggest that kavalactones act primarily on the limbic system
(the part of the brain associated with emotions and drive), and
kava may inhibit cytochrome P450 enzymes (which are involved in
drug metabolism).° Kava may also exert antiseizure effects.
Indications
Suggested Uses in Hurmans
·Helps control anxiety, insomnia, restlessness
·Controls seizures
·Minimizes urogenital tract inflammation
·Helps patient with muscular pain
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
·Helps control anxiety
·Improves idiopathic cystitis
Recommended Doses
In humans,45-70 mg of kavalactones q 8 hr is prescribed for use as
an anxiolytic or 180-210 mg of kavalactones 1 hr before retiring.
In dogs and cats, a 1:2 or 1:3 tincture can be administered at a dose
of 0.5-1.5 mL/10 kg/day (divided into three doses).' In the author's
93
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
experience, the dried herb can be administered at 25-75 mg/kg/day
(divided into three doses). Alternatively, the following general
dosing guidelines can be used in pets: one 100 mg capsule/9 kg dog
kg dog or 4.5 kg cat q 8-12 hr, or 5-10 drops of a tincture/11.3 kg
dog or 4.5 kg cat q 8-12 hr.
Side Effects
Kava is a very safe herb when used as directed. Because of its
inhibition of cytochrome P450 enzymes and the potential for
hepatotoxicity (especially when combined with other drugs that
are known or suspected hepatotoxins), caution is warranted when
combining kava with medications or herbs that depend upon
cytochrome P450 enzymes for metabolism and/or that exhibit
hepatotoxicity as a side effect.'Kava dermatopathy syndrome has
been described in people (i.e., scale-like lesions on the palrms of the
hands, soles of the feet, and back).' People consuming alcohol should
avoid kava usage.° There have been reports of severe hepatotoxicity
in a few cases of people taking kava. Careful examination of these
reports reveals that many of these patients had underlying liver
problems, were using hepatotoxic medications, or were drinking
alcohol.°Additionally, there may have been differences among
products containing kava (varying doses or different parts of
the kava plant used) or contamination/adulteration of the kava
products with hepatotoxicherbs.
Contraindications
Kava should be avoided in patients taking medications, herbs, or
other products with known hepatotoxic side effects (e.g., alcohol).
Interactions
Part of the mechanism for kava's efficacy may be weak binding to
y-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and benzodiazepine receptors as well
as mixed effects on central dopaminergic pathways. It is therefore
prudent to avoid combining kava with benzodiazepines and dopa-
mine agonists or antagonists.° Kava may potentiate anticonvulsa nt
medications and increase adverse effects.° Large doses of kava may
exert a digitalis-like effect (stimulates the heart muscle) and should
94
KAVA
This electronic publication is intended for μse only by the original purcha.ser
be avoided in patients taking digitalis glycosides. Avoid kava in
coadministration of these medications has been associated with
acute hepatitis and liver failure. Theoretically, kava may inter-
act with vitamin K antagonist anticoagulants (such as warfarin),
although this has not been proven clinically.° As with other herbs
that depress the central nervous system, it would be prudent to
conclude that kava should be withdrawn approximately 10 days
before anesthesia.
References
1.Wynn S, Marsden S. Maruat of natural veterinary medicine: science and
fracdition. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003:51-2.
2.Broadfoot PJ, Palmquist RE, Jonston K, et al. Integrafing complementary
mecicine into veterinary pracfice. Goldstein R, ed. Blackwell; 2008:648-9, 687,
697. Available at: www.mediafire.com/?2s13ctmvv7tyb2k. Accessed January 15,
2012.
3.Wynn SG, Fougere B. Veterinary herbal redicine. St. Louis (MO): Mosby
Elsevier; 2007:377:586-8.
4.Mills S, Bone K. Principles and practice of phytotherapy: rodem herbat
medicine. St. Louis (MO): Churchill Livingstone; 2000:456-63
5.Fetrow CW, Avila J. Professionals hanabook of cormplerentary and altemative
redicines. 3rd ed. Lippincott williams & wilkins; 2004:472.
6.Stargrove M, Treasure J, McKee D.Herb, nutrient, and drug interactions:
clinical irrplicafions ard fherapeufic strafegies. St. Louis (MO): Mosby Elsevier;
2008:106-12.
7.Pizzorno J, Murray M. Textbook of ratural medicine. 3rd ed. St. Louis (MO):
Churchill Livingstone; 2005:1168-72.
Nutritional Supplements for the Veterinary Practice
95
@20 12 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
LYSINE
{L-LYSINE)
Background
Lysine is an essential amino acid (it is not synthesized in the
body) that is obtained through the diet by eating meat, poultry,
fish, wheat germ, soy, and dairy products.' Lysine competes with
the amino acid arginine, which is required by viruses for viral
replication (particularly herpesviruses). Thus, supplementing with
lysine reduces viral replication by competing with arginine (to be
absorbed into cells),and can be usedin patients infected with feline
herpesvirus 1.a4 In humans lysine has been used for heartburn,
diverticulitis, hypertension, infertility, and as a wound healing aid.
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
Inhibits viral replication in patients with herpes simplex infection
 Improves heartburn and diverticulitis
·Controls hypertension
·Improves infertility
·Aids wound healing
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
· Inhibits viral replication in patients infected with feline herpes-
virus 1
Recommended Doses
In humans, 1-6 g/day is recommended for herpes simplex infec-
tions. The recommended dose for catsis 250-500 mg q 12-24 hr.d A
similar dose has been recommended in dogs. Regular supplementa-
tion with lysine may decrease recurrences of herpesvirus in cats.
Side Effects
    u i si  s 
elevate cholesterol levels.
97
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
Contraindications
None reported.
Interactions
Lysine and arginine competitively inhibit each other and compete
for absorption into cells. Lysine supplementation should be avoided
in patients that require additional arginine and vice versa.2
References
1.Fetrow CW, Avila J. Professionals hanabook of cormplerentary ealtemative
medicines. 3rd ed. Philadelphia (PA): Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2004:
524-5.
2.Stargrove M,Treasure J, McKee D. Herb, rutrient, and drug interacfions:
linical rmplications and therapeutic strategies. St. Louis (MO): Mosby Elsevier;
2008:659.
3.Broadfoot PJ, Palmquist RE, Jonston K, et al. Integrafing complementary
medicine into veterinary pratice. Goldstein R, ed. Blackwell; 2008:612-28.
Available at: www.mediafire.com/?2s13ctmvv7tyb2k. Accessed January 15,
2012.
4.Wynn SG, Marsden S. Marat of ratara veterinary rrredicine: science ad
fradifior. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003:504, 512, 540.
86
LYSINE
This electronic publication is intencled for μse only by the original purcha.ser.
MEDICINAL MUSHROOMS
(BETA GLUCANS]
Background
There are a number of different mushroom species that have
been shown to exhibit various immunostimulating properties.
Although it is beyond the scope of this book to examine each of
these, some of the species most likely to be used as nutritional
supplements are maitake (Grifola frondosa), coriolus (Coriolus
versicolor), reishi (Ganoderma lucidum), agaricus (Agaricus blazei),
shiitake (Lentinula edodes),and cordyceps (Cordyceps sinensis)
Medicinal mushrooms are useful for general immune support in a
variety of medical conditions but are mostcommonly recommended
for patients with ca ncer. Doctors interested in using these types of
supplements can prescribe either medicinal mushrooms or purified
beta glucans, the active ingredients in medicinal mushrooms.' Beta
glucans are polysaccharides (long chains of sugar molecules) and
are the major structural components of cell walls of various fungi,
including yeast and mushrooms.
As with many supplements, determining the “"right dose” is
difficult. The chosen dose should result in maximal TNF-α release.
However, high concentrations may cause an apparent suppression
of TNF-α activity.
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
 Supports the immune system
Helps patients with cancer
·Improves diabetes
·Helps patients with hepatitis and liver diseases
·Controls cystitis
·Acts as a diuretic
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
·Supports the immune system
·Helps patients with cancer
99
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
Recommended Doses
Anecdotal doses in people range from 200 mg to 750 mg/day. In
dogs and cats, 20-200 mg/0.45 kg/day (divided) is recommended.2
Side Effects
Medicinal mushrooms (beta glucan) consumption is considered
safe (maitake mushrooms are used in cooking). Because of the
possibility of slightly lowering blood glucose levels, there is theoret-
ical concern about the use ofbeta glucansin diabetic patients taking
insulin or oral hypoglycemic medications. These patients should be
carefully monitored when coadministered medicinal mushrooms/
beta glucan supplements (even though there are no reports of prob.
lems in the literature).
Contraindications
None reported. Use should be avoided in patients who are allergic
to mushrooms.
Interactions
None reported.
References
1.Pizzorno J, Murray M. Textbook of rafural redicine. 3rd ed. St. Louis (MO):
Churchill Livingstone; 2005:562-3
fracition. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003:400
100
MEDICINAL MUSHROOMS
This electronic publication is initencled for Lse only by the origina.l purcha.ser.
MELATONIN
{N-ACETYL-5-METHOXYTRYPTAMINE]
Background
Melatonin is a hormone produced in the brain by the pineal gland
Melatonin is often referred to as the“biological timekeeper” of
hormone secretions as it regulates a number of hormones that, in
turn, regulate other hormones.
Melatonin production by the pineal gland rises slowly at night
and falls during the day in response to increasing dark and light
cycles.' In addition to the pineal gland, lymphocytes (a type of
white blood cell) synthesize and release large amounts of melato-
nin, inducing restful sleep and acting as an antioxidant.^ In fact
melatonin is reportedly a potent free radical scavenger that reduces
skin damage caused by ultraviolet radiation (when applied topi
erative side effects caused by elevated levels of corticosteroids,
and is used in the management of hormone-induced neoplasms.4
At high doses, melatonin can be used for reducing side effects of
as well as enhancing the cytotoxicity of chemotherapy and radia-
tion therapy by promoting apoptosis (prograrmmed cell death of
the immune system, and increases the beneficial effects of inter-
leukin-2 (IL-2).'.² It is also noteworthy that melatonin levels are
decreased in pets with Cushing's disease (hyperadrenocorticism).*
Melatonin supplements are often either prepared from bovine
pineal glands or synthesized from 5-methoxyindole.
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
with jet lag
·Acts as a potent antioxidant
·Kills cancer cells
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
·Induces restful sleep
101
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
·Acts as a potent antioxidant
·Benefits patients with Cushing's disease
· Kills cancer cells
* Improves various alopecias (e.g, alopecia X, seasonal flank alope-
cia,boxer alopecia,which arehormone-related disorders)
RecommendedDoses
In humans, the typical therapeutic dose is 3 mg/day (range, 0.5-6.0
mg/day). In cancer patients, doses of up to 40 mg/day are used.
In dogs and cats, the suggested dose is 1 mg/10 kg body weight/
day to a maximum of 5 mg/animal/day. Alternate doses are 1-5
mg/animal before bed, 3-12 mg q 8-24 hr for alopecia (alopecia X,
seasonal flank alopecia, boxer alopecia, which are hormone-related
disorders), and 0.2 mg/0.4 kg/day in cancer patients.6
Side Effects
Melatonin is generally considered safe when used at the
recommended doses. Because it regulates hormones, extended
use may interfere with the actions of other hormones. Regular
monitoring is advised if melatonin is used for extended periods
of time.' As expected, excessive drowsiness can occur in patients
treated with melatonin, particularly at higher doses.' Melatonin
or lactation because ofits effects on other hormones and its ability
to cross the placenta.' Rarely, increased seizure activity in children
suffering from neurological disorders affer administration of
melatonin has been reported.
Contraindications
In humans, contraindications include pregnancy, nursing, depres
sion, patients with nocturnal asthma, adolescents, patients
using corticosteroids for anti-inflammatory or immunosuppres-
sive effects (see below), fibromyalgia, and diabetes. Experimental
patients with autoimmune diseases. In a small percentage of people
taking melatonin at night to induce restful sleep, the opposite effect
is seen and insomnia occurs. Using a lower dose or administering
melatonin in the morning may be helpful.' If used as a sleep aid, use
102
MELATONIN
This electronic publication is initendled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser
the lowest effective dose possible, especially for those patients for
whom higher doses would be contraindicated.
Interactions
Melatonin may be depleted in patients treated with benzodiaz-
epines; however, melatonin may act synergistically with benzo-
diazepines (because of a similar mechanism of action) and may
permit a dose reduction of the benzodiazepine.' Beta-adrenergic
antagonists (e.g-, propranolol) may suppress melatonin synthesis,
especially with chronic use of beta-blockers.Melatonin admin
istration maybebenehicialtopatients takingbeta-blockers
especially those with disturbances in sleep-wake cycles.' Admin-
istration of corticosteroids may suppress melatonin synthesis,
but administering melatonin may counter the side effects of
corticosteroids, such as alterations in sleep-wake cycles. Patients
taking corticosteroids for immunosuppressive effects should be
monitored closely for adverse reactions (e.g., decreased efficacy of
corticosteroid therapy) when melatonin is coadministered.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) such as fluox-
may decrease melatonin levels.Currently there is no recommen-
dation about whether melatonin administration during fluox
etine therapy is recommended or contraindicated.'Nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID, e.g.,aspirin) administration
may inhibit melatonin synthesis. Therefore, administering mela-
tonin may counter the side effects associated with NSAID admin-
istration, including alterations in sleep-wake cycles. Melatonin
may also enhance the efficacy and reduce side effects seen with
tamoxifen (an antagonist to the estrogen receptor in breast
tissue) therapy. Calcium channel blockers (such as verapamil)
may result in increased urinary excretion of melatonin,which
may disturb sleep-wake cycles. Administering melatonin during
calcium channel blocker therapy may be indicated. Because of
the possibility of melatonin interfering with the activity of anti-
depressant medications, its use should probably be avoided in
patients taking these medications, or patients should be closely
monitored if melatonin is used with antidepressant or antianxi-
ety medications. In laboratory rats, coadministration of mela-
tonin and cyclosporine A may reduce the nephrotoxic effects of
the cyclosporine. Finally, caution (or avoidance) with melatonin
Nutritional Supplements for the Veterinary Practice 103
@20 12 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
is indicated in patients taking antihypertensives, as combining
the two compounds may result in uncontrolled blood pressure.
References
1. Stargrove M, Treasure J, MeKee D. Herb, rutrient, and drug interactions:
linicat mplications and therapeutic strategies. St. Louis (MO): Mosby Elsevier;
2008:769-82.
2.Wynn SG, Marsden S. Maruat of nafurat veterinary mredieine: science and
tradition. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003:399.
3.Broadfoot PJ, Palmquist RE, Jonston K, et al. Integrating complemenfary
mcicine into veterinary practice. Goldstein R, ed. Blackwell; 2008:42, 513, 515,
787. Available at: www.mediafire.com/?2s13ctmvv7tyb2k. Accessed January 15,
2012.
4. Pizzorno J, Murray M, Joiner-Bey H. The clinicians handbook of natural
redicine. 2nd ed. St. Louis (MO): Churchill Livingstone; 2008:45, 130, 134.
5.Fetrow CW, Avila J. Professionals handbook of complementary and altermative
Mecicines. 3rd ed. Philadelphia (PA): Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2004:515-7.
6.Scott D, Miller W, Griffn C. Mller and Kirk's sall aimat deatotogy. 6th
ed. Philadelphia (PA): WB Saunders Company; 2001.
104MELATONIN
This electronic publication is intended for use only by the oniginal purcha.ser.
METHYLSULFONYLMETHANE
(mSm)
Backgraund
that is a metabolite of dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO),which is often
recommended for patients with musculoskeletal disorders such
as osteoarthritis. MSM also supplies sulfur to the body.? Studies
in people showed improved joint flexibility,reduced stiffness and
swelling, and reduced pain following administration with MSM.34
Animals with rheumatoid arthritis that were given MSM showed
no cartilage degeneration. MSM may have other benefits in dogs
and cats; however, more research is needed.
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
 Improves arthritis
·Supports the musculoskeletal system in the elderly
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
Improves arthritis
·Supports the musculoskeletal system in the elderly
Recommended Doses
Anecdotal doses in people range from 100 mg 1-3 times/day to
1,000-4,000 mg q 12-24 hr. In dogs and cats, one suggested dose
of 100-1,000 mg/animal q 12-24 hr is recommended. The author
q 12-24 hr.
Side Effects
MSM is considered very safe.
Contraindications
None reported.
105
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
Interactions
MSM is often administered in conjunction with glucosamine.
of analgesia (pain relief) and anti-inflammatory effects in patients
with osteoarthritis than did either agent alone.
References
1.Fetrow Cw, Avila J. Professionals hardbook of corrplerentary and altermative
medicines. 3rd ed. Philadelphia (PA); Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2004: 557.
2.Kim LS, Axelrod LJ, Howard P, et al. Efficacy of methylsulfonylmethane
(MSM) in osteoarthritis pain of the knee: a pilot clinical trial. Csteoarfhrifis
Cartilage 2006; 14(3):286-94.
3. Usha PR, Naidu MU. Randomised, double-blind, parallel, placebo-controlled
study of oral glucosamine, methylsultonylmethane, and their combination in
osteoarthritis. Clirn Drug Investig 2004;24(6):353-63
4.Wynn SG, Marsden S. Maruat of naturat veterinary medicine: science and
fradition. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003:341-7.
5. Hixson O. Acute intragastric toxicity (LD-50). Dimethyl sulfone
(methylsulfonylmethane, MSM). Laboratory of Vitamin Technology, Inc.,
Chicago, Illinois, August 21, 1958.
6.Stargrove M, Treasure J, McKee D. Herb, nutrient, and drug interactions:
clinica irrplicafions and ferapeufic strategies. St. Louis (MO): Mosby Elsevier;
2008:762
106
METHYLSULFONYLMETHANE
This electronic publication is intended for μse only by the original purcha.ser
PHOSPHATIDYLSERINE
Background
cellular metabolism. Phosphatidylserine is particularly important
for brain-related functions. It is abundant in tissues of the nervous
system and facilitates the initiation of an electrical stimulus during
nerve transmission, integrates electrical circuits across the brain,
and initiates cell-to-cell nerve stimuli transmission via synapses
(the junction between nerves). Phosphatidylserine protects nerve
circuits against age-related atrophy.
Given the described mechanisms of action, reports indicate
that phosphatidylserine is clinically effective in senile dementia
and positively affects anxiety and motivation.'.*
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
·Improves signs of Alzheimer's disease and dementia
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
*Ameliorates various cognitive disorders
Recommended Doses
The recommended dose in humans is 100 mg q8 hr with food.* The
recommended dose in dogs and cats is 100-500 mg/day (divided)
or 2 mg/kg q 12 hr with food.'
Side Effects
Phosphatidylserine is considered very safe. Minor side effects such
as those seen with phosphatidylcholine supplementation (e.g
occurs with choline supplementation in animals, supplementation
with phosphatidylserine has the potential to produce excitability/
nervousness. Lowering the dose in dogs and cats exhibiting
this side effect is indicated. Nonetheless, phosphatidylserine
107
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
supplementation was well tolerated by dogs administered up to 70
g/day for 1 year.2
Contraindications
None reported.
Interactions
None reported.
References
1. Broadfoot PJ, Palmquist RE, Jonston K, et al. Integrating complementary
medicine into veterinary practice. Goldstein R, ed. Blackwell; 2008: 180, 301
304, 500, 537, 550, 553. Available at: www.mediafire.com/?2s13ctmvv7tyb2k
Accessed January 15, 2012.
2. Pizzorno J, Murray M. Textbook of naturar redicine. 3rd ed. St. Louis (MO):
Churchill Livingstone; 2005:1163-4, 1466-9.
3.Pizzorno J, Murray M,Joiner-Bey H. The clinicians handbook ofraturat
medicine. 2nd ed. St. Louis (MO): Churchill Livingstone; 2008:44-7, 599, 604.
4.Wynn SG, Marsden S. Manuat of naturar veterinary medicine: science and
fradition. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003:57
108
PHOSPHATIDYLSERINE
This electronic publication is intencled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser
PREBIOTICS
Background
Prebiotics are functional foods (i.e., foods that serve a function, in
this case, serving as a nutritive source for probiotics) that contain
nondigestible ingredients that benefit the patient by encouraging
the growth/activity of one or more symbiotic (beneficial, non-
disease-causing) micro-organisms that reside in the gastrointesti-
nal tract.Prebiotics serve as food for the commensal (symbiotic
gastrointestinal bacteria, yeasts, and other micro-organisms. The
such as fructooligosaccharides (FOSes), which are usually supplied
in supplemental form, but are also found in various foods such
as asparagus, Globe and Jerusalem artichokes, leeks, onions, and
chicory.² Other prebiotics are inulin (another long-chain of saccha-
rides); sugar alcohols such as lactitol, maltitol, and xylitol; and
galactose oligosaccharides (GOSes).
In addition to serving as a food source for probiotics (the “good"
Or
 symbiotic bacteria/commensals in the gastrointestinal tract),
pathogens (disease-causing organisms), modulates immune develop-
ment by favoring T-helper cell 1 (TH1) and inhibiting T-helper cell 2
(TH2), and may play a role in reducing or preventing allergies (e.g.
eczema, atopic dermatitis), especially when administered to infants.
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
·Supports the immune system
·Contributes to the health of the gastrointestinal tract
·Feeds probiotics and commensal gastrointestinal micro
organisms
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
· Supports the immune system
· Contributes to the health of the gastrointestinal tract
·Feeds probiotics and commensal gastrointestinal micro-
organisms
109
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
Recommended Doses
In humans, a typical dose of FOS is 5-20 g/day (usually q 8-12 hr
published as yet.
Side Effects
Prebiotics are extremely safe. To date, no safety issues have been
published. At higher doses, they can cause bloating, flatulence, and
gastrointestinal discomfort in people. Mild side effects are common,
but are less common at lower doses and decrease over time.
Contraindications
None reported.
Interactions
Some experts trained in nutritional therapeutics recommend
"fertilizing" the gastrointestinal tract with prebiotics before
starting probiotics. This is thought to maximize the effectiveness
of probiotic therapy.*
References
1.Broadfoot PJ, Palmquist RE, Jonston K,et al. Integrating compleentary
mcdicine into veterinary practice. Goldstein R, ed. Blackwell; 2008:372.
Available at: www.mediafre.com/?2s13ctmvv7tyb2k. Accessed January 15,
2012.
2.Pizzorno J, Murray M. Textbook ofnatural medicine. 3rd ed. St. Louis (MO):
Churchill Livingstone; 2005:1185-7, 1191.
3.Stargrove M, Treasure J, McKee D. Herb, rutrient, and drug interactions:
clinical irrplicafions and fferapeufic strategies. St. Louis (MO): Mosby Elsevier;
2008:815, 822-3.
110
PREBIOTICS
This electronic publication is initencled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser
PROBIOTICS
Background
probiotic bacteria include various species of Bifidobacterium (e.g.
B. bifdus), Lactobacillus (e.g.,L.acidophilus), Streptococus (e.g,
S.thermophilus),and Enterococcus (e.g.,E.faecium).Probiotic
yeasts include Saccharomyces (e.g., S. bulgaricus).' Probiotics
can also be found in live-culture foods such as yogurt and kefir.
The function of probiotics is to improve the “balance” of the
intestinal microflora by favoring the growth of nonpathogenic
(non-disease-causing) organisms in the gastrointestinal tract.?
Positive benefits associated with probiotics include increased
endogenous synthesis of vitamins (e.g., B vita mins and vita min
K); enhanced synthesis of short-chain fattyacids and amino acids;
reduced intestinal permeability; reduction in antimicrobial
induceddiarrhea
1(especially
from
treatingClostridium
difficileinfections);enhancedimmune function (possibly by
preventing or controlling asthma, allergies, systemic infections,
and autoimmune disorders); reduced serum cholesterol; and
improvement in various gastrointestinal disorders (e.g., diarrhea
irritable bowel syndrome, inflammatory bowel syndrome,
"leaky gut," Helicobacter pylori infection, gastrointestinal
parasitism, etc).'? Other suggested mechanism of action include
increased secretory immunoglobulin A (IgA), promoting
cytokine (inflammatory mediator) synthesis to improve the
gastrointestinal environment, restoring normal intestinal flora
(population of micro-organisms in the gastrointestinal tract),
and producing metabolites such as hydroxide that are toxic to
pathogenic bacteria. Finally, probiotics purportedly neutralize
dietary carcinogens.
Probiotics can be adrministered either with or following therapy
with various medications, including antibiotics, antifungals, corti-
costeroids, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs, e.g,
aspirin),and cancer chemotherapeutic agents. Improperly stored or
outdated probiotic products may not be efficacious because of brea k
down of the micro-organism(s). In the author's experience, such
products may cause minor gastrointestinal distress and nausea. In
order for a probiotic to be efficacious, living micro-organisms must
be present in the products, and viable micro-organisms must survive
111
@20 12 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
passage through the acidic environment of the stomach and adhere
to the intestinal epithelium in order to exerta beneficial effect.
There is some debate about whether pets need different strains
of micro-organisms in their probiotics supplement tha n huma ns.
Unfortunately, more research is needed before this question
can be answered. At this time, it appears that the use of any
probiotic product may help both people and pets. For example,
Lactobacilli spp., Enterococci spp., and Bifidobacteria spp. are all
part of the normal gastrointestinal microflora of healthy dogs
and cats (like humans), and probiotic supplements containing
these species may be effective in those species. Laboratory
analysis ofvarious probiotic products,including pet foods that
organisms in the products. Specifically, one study examined 19
commercial pet foods claiming to contain probiotics. Not one
of the products contained all of the listed organisms, and no
relevant growth of bacteria on culture media was present in 5
out of 19 (26%) products. Average bacterial growth ranged from
0 to 1.8 x 10 colon-forming units/g (which is at the low end of
the recommended dose of probiotics for people and pets). That
study concluded that the probiotic content of the diets was not
accurately represented by the label descriptions. Additionally,
the labels of five pet foods had misspellings of the names of the
micro-organisms contained in the food, raising concerns about
the quality of the products.6
The company ConsumerLab.com recently reported the results of
their analysis of both human and pet probiotic supplements.7 Only 2
out of 13 human probiotic products accurately listed the number of
viable micro-organisms on their labels. For pet probiotic products,
very large differences were noted in the number of micro-organisms
in the supplerments compared with the suggested daily doses on the
labels. Results of those studies do not necessarily suggest that the
products were inaccurately or fraudulently labeled at the time of
manufacturing, althoughthat is certainly possible.A large percentage
u d e aoq a  nadns rd e un sso jo
even purchased. Products should be stored in sealed containers and
away from heat, light, and humidity. In addition, if a label indicates
that a product should be refrigerated prior to opening, it should be
sold in a refrigerated condition and kept that way. Probiotic products
should be purchased from reputable manufacturers and stored
according to manufacturer recommendations.
112
PROBIOTICS
This electronic publication is initendled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
Supports gastrointestinal health (e.g, patients with H. pylori
infection) and protects against diarrhea, including antibiotic-
induced diarrhea, traveler's diarrhea, chemotherapy-induced
diarrhea, irritable bowel syndrome, inflammatory bowel disease,
and Crohn's disease
·Protects against "leaky gut" syndrome
*Improves Candida infections (especially vaginal)
·Helps patients with allergies (e.g., eczema, atopic dermatitis, food
allergies)
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
Supports gastrointestinal health (e.g., patients with H. pylori
infection) and protects against diarrhea, including antibiotic
induced diarrhea,traveler's diarrhea,chemotherapy-induced
diarrhea, irritable bowel syndrome, inflammatory bowel disease,
and Crohn's disease
·Protects against "leaky gut" syndrome
·Helps patients with allergies (e.g., eczema, atopic dermatitis, food
allergies)
RecommendedDoses
Successful results in people have been attained using between
10? and 10" viable bacteria/day.d Dose requirements for probiotic
organisms have not been evaluated adequately in dogs and cats and
a minimum of 10 viable micro-organisms (colony-forming units)
is recommended.According to one source,5oo million colony
forming units/11.4 kg is appropriate.8
Side Effects
Probiotics are among the safest supplerments currently available for
people and pets. In humans, mild flu-like symptoms, flatulence,
bloating, loose stools, and nausea can occur. If side effects do occur,
they usually develop within the first 1-2 weeks of administration.
Clinical signs can be alleviated by reducing the dose of probiotics or
temporarily stopping the supplement.
Nutritional Supplements for the Veterinary Practice 113
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
Contraindications
If probiotics are used in people and pets with immunosuppressive
conditions, there is a slight (theoretical) possibility ofinfection with
Interactions
Various herbs (ginseng, etc.) may require the action of intestinal
micro-organisms to become biologically active. Probiotic admin-
istration may therefore enhance the activity of these herbs (which
otherwise might not be activated to their active formsin the absence
of normal gastrointestinal microflora).Echinacea may stimulate
the growth of certain pathogenic Bacteroides organisms and probi
otic administration may counteract this effect.
In vitro, L. acidophilus may accelerate the metabolism of
sulfasalazine, although this has not been noted in vivo.
"fertilizing” the gastrointestinal tract with prebiotics before start-
probiotic therapy.
References
1.Stargrove M, Treasure J, McKee D. Herb, rutrient, and drug interactions:
linicat rmplications and therapeutic strategies. St. Louis (MO): Mosby Elsevier;
2008:815-23.
2.Wynn SG, Marsden S. Maruat of naturat veterinary medicine: science and
fracition. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003:163, 184, 193-4, 271.
3.Fetrow Cw, Avila J. Professionals Hardbook of corrplererntary arnd aterrative
redicines. 3rd ed. Philadelphia (PA): Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2004: 15.
4.Pizzorno J, Murray M. Textbook of ratural medicine. 3rd ed. St. Louis (MO)
Churchill Livingstone; 2005:1195-1209
5.Hand M, Thatcher C, Remillard R, et al. Srafl arirrat cinica rutrition. Sth ed
Topeka (KS): Mark Morris Institute; 2010:761.
to contain probiotics. Can Vet J 2003:44(3):212-5. Available at: http:// w ww
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC340078/pdf/20030300s00016p212.pdf.
Accessed February 20, 2012.
7. ConsumerLab.com. Product review: probiotics for adults, children and pets.
Available at: https:// www.consumerlab.com/reviews/Probiotic_Supplements
_Lactobacillus_acidophilus_Bifdobacterium/probiotics/. Accessed February 21,
2012.
114
PROBIOTICS
This electronic publication is intended for use only by the original purcha.ser
8.Broadfoot PJ, Palmquist RE, Jonston K, et al. Integrafing corplerertary
mTedicine into veterinary practice. Goldstein R, ed. Blackwell; 2008:240, 298.
Available at: www.mediafire.com/?2s13ctmvv7tyb2k. Accessed January 15,
2012.
Nutritional Supplements for the Veterinary Practice1115
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
S-ADENOSYLMETHIONINE
[SAME)
Background
SAMe is formed in the body (mainly in the liver) from the amino
acid methionine and adenosine triphosphate (ATP, the body's
storage form of energy). SAMe is therefore an essential nutrient,
not supplied in the diet. SAMe functions as a methyl donor (one
carbon and three hydrogen molecules) to assist in the formation
of a variety of compounds such as neurotransmitters, proteins,
membrane phospholipids,nucleic acids,and choline. After
donating a methyl group, SAMe is converted to S-adenosylhomo-
cysteine (SAH), which, in turn, donates sulfur to form amino acids
(e.g., taurine, glutathione, cysteine), donates adenosine, and is then
rapidly metabolized to homocysteine.
A number of trials have examined the benefits of SAMe. These
studies suggest that SAMe increases levels of serotonin and dopa-
mine metabolites. Thus, SAMe supplementation in people with
depression purportedly increases the neurotransmitters serotonin
and dopamine, improves neuron membrane fluidity, improves
depression like the tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs)."In arthritic
patients, SAMe is utilized in cartilage synthesis, shows mild anal-
gesic and anti-inflammatory effects, and reduces medical symp-
drugs (NSAIDs).*SAMe has a beneficialeffect on the liver and may
enhance the elimination of certain drugs (e.g, acetaminophen).
injury similar to that of the pharmaceutical drug misoprostol in
rodent studies. This protective effect was thought to be because of
increased synthesis of nonprotein sulfhydryl compounds in the
gastrointestinal tract.d Finally, SAMe has an anti-inflammatory
(scarring).s
SAMe levels decline and are typically low in the elderly. In
addition, SAMe levels are often low in patients with osteoarthritis
depression, and various liver disorders. Because of the first
pass effect (i.e., it is metabolized first by the gastric and liver
enzymes before reaching the target site, resulting in a decreased
concentration of the compound in circulation), SAMe is poorly
117
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
absorbed and has poor bioavailability. The major drawback of
SAMe supplementation isits expense.
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
·Improves depression
·Improves Alzheimer's
·Helps patients with epilepsy
·Supports patients with arthritis
·Helps patients with multiple sclerosis and spinal cord disease
· Offers liver support and decreases severity of intoxications (e.g-,
acetaminophen)
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
· Offers liver support and decreases severity of intoxications (e.g,
acetaminophen
·Improves cognitive disorders
·Supports patients with arthritis
Recommended Doses
In humans, 1,200 mg/day (usually 400 mg q 6-8 hr) is most often1
used in clinical trials. In practice, the most common dose is 400
mg/day, likely because of the high cost of the supplement.' In dogs
and cats, the recommended dose is 10-20 mg/kg/day."
Side Effects
Approximately 20% of people taking SAMe develop side effects.
Most side effects are minor and associated with the gastrointestinal
tract (e.g., dry mouth, nausea) or skin (rashes).' Restlessness
has alsobeen observed.People with a history of bipolar/manic
disorder(s) should avoid SAMe because of a possible risk of a manic
or hypomanic episode. Homocysteine levels may be elevated
during SAMe supplementation. Elevated homocysteine levels
place individuals at risk for coronary disease and thrombosis.' The
safety of SAMe administration in infants and children has not been
there are currently no reports of serious side effects associated with
SAMe supplementation.
118
S-ADENOSYLMETHIONINE
This electronic publication is intended for use only by the oniginal purcha.ser.
Contraindications
In people, contraindications include bipolar disorder, migraine
headaches, Parkinson's disease, and in patients with active bleed-
ing. Caution is warranted in people with coronary artery disease,
as SAMe is a precursor to homocysteine and elevated homocys-
teine levels have been implicated in coronary artery disease.' No
direct contraindications are currently noted in dogs and cats.
Interactions
Caution should be exercised in patients taking monoamine oxidase
(MAO) inhibitors, foods with high tyramine content, and certain
opioid derivatives such as meperidine and dextromethorphan
because of possible interactions. SAMe and tricyclic antidepres
sants (TCAs) exert similar influences on the central nervous
system. Thus, when they are used together, an additive or syner-
gistic effect may be noted, potentially resulting in an excessive
pharmacologic response. Caution should be taken if patients taking
TCAs are also prescribed SAMe.' In people, SAMe may contribute
to Parkinsonian-like motor impairments by interfering with the
action of L-dopa. Although some patients with Parkinson's disease
erbated by administration of SAMe.' In women, SAMe acts as an
istration (i.e., oral contraceptives).
SAMe supplementation may result in a synergistic or additive
effect on hepatobiliary function when given with ursodeoxycho.
lic acid (Ursodiol, a drug used to reduce symptoms associated
with severe hepatobiliary disease).' Patients with active bleeding
disorders or taking anticoagulants should use SAMe with caution
because of the possibility of increased bleeding. Finally, coad-
ministration of SAMe and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs, used as antidepressants and antipsychotics) can enhance
the effectiveness of treatrment for depression. Caution must
be used, as some patients may be at a higher risk of serotonin
syndrome, a potentially life-threatening condition associated with
increased serotonin levels.Extreme caution should be taken when
SAMe is combined with MAO inhibitors (e.g., selegiline) because
ofthe theoretical possibility of severe side effects (despite the
lack of published evidence that such side effects have occurred).
Finally, caution should be used when administering SAMe with
Nutritional Supplements for the Veterinary Practice119
@20 12 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
5-hydroxytyptophan (5-HTP) or other supplements or herbs
with an antidepressant effect because of the theoretical possibil
ity of an interaction between the supplements.
References
1. Stargrove M, Treasure J, McKee D. Herb, nutrient, and drug interactions:
clinical implicatiors ard therapeutic strategies. St Louis (MO): Mosby Elsevier;
2008:824-1.
2.Pizzorno J, Murray M, Joiner-Bey H. The clinician's handbook of natural
medicine. 2nd ed. St. Louis (MO): Churchill Livingstone; 2008:17, 20, 559-60.
3.Pizzorno J, Murray M. Textbook of natural medicine. 3rd ed. St. Louis (MO)
Churchill Livingstone; 2005:1235-8.
4.Fetrow CW, Avila J. Professionals hanabook of cormplerentary and altemative
rmedicines. 3rd ed. Philadelphia (PA): Lippincott Williams & Wilkins:
2004:73058.
5. Broadfoot PJ, Palmquist RE, Jonston K, et al. Integrating complementary
medicine into veterinary practice. Goldstein R, ed. Blackwell; 2008:348, 605,
607. Available at: www.mediafire.com/?2s13ctmvv7tyb2k. Accessed January 15,
2012.
120
0S-ADENOSYLMETHIONINE
This electronic publication is intended for use only by the original purcha.ser
SILYMARIN/MILK THISTLE
(SILYBUM MARIANUM)
Background
Milk thistle,occasionally called holy thistle or St.Mary's thistle
contains silymarin—a complex of silibinin (silybin), isosilybin
silidianin, and silychristin. Silibinin is the primary compound;
histamine, oleic acid, stearic acid, palmitic acid, and myristic acid.2
Silymarin inhibits several liver enzymes,including cytochrome
P450 (CYP450), CYP3A4-,and CYP2C9-in vitro,which are
enzymes involved in drug metabolism. Theoretically, because many
hepatotoxins require activation by CYP enzymes, any compound
that inhibits cytochrome enzymes would reduce or eliminate the
toxicity of the hepatotoxins. More research is needed to determine
enzymes and therefore increase the clearance of certain drugs (such
as metronidazole), resulting in reduced plasma levels and possible
decreased drug efficacy. Studies have also shown that silymarin
protects the liver from damage by cyclopeptide-containing
mushrooms (e.g.,Amanita, Galerina,and Lepiota spp.);however
a clinical response usually requires intravenous administration
ofsilymarin(whichis
not
talways clinically
feasible).The
hepatoregenerative ability of silymarin occursthrough stimulation of
RNA polymerase A, which may enhance ribosome protein synthesis
and cell development. Silymarin also exerts a hepatoprotective
effect by altering the outer hepatocyte cell membrane so that toxins
cannot enter the cell. Silymarin causes an increase in low-density
lipoprotein (LDL,“bad") cholesterol, a decrease in liver cholesterol
concentration, and a decreased level of serum cholesterol.' Silymarin
acts as an antioxidant/free radical scavenger.° Thus, administration
increases the intracellular concentration of the antioxidants
glutathione and superoxide dismutase, and inhibits the formation
of leukotrienes (inflammatory mediators) by inhibiting the
5-lipoxygenase (5-LOX) pathway. Supplementation with silymarin
addition, silymarin modulates P-glycoprotein (a transport protein)
and exerts an anticirrhotic effect by inhibiting transformation of
hepatocytes into fibroblasts.° Silymarin administration is often used
to improve/normalize elevated liver enzymes and chelate heavy
121
@20 12 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
metals.7 Silymarin is also considered a chemopreventive agent by
inhibiting intestinal beta-glucuronidases, modulating carcinogen
metabolizing enzymes, and inhibiting epidermal growth factor
receptor and kinases. Silymarin inhibits the growth of certain
human cancer lines in vitro, and topical application of silymarin
reduces tumor formation in laboratory mice.' Finally, one recent
meta-analysis found that Silybum marianum may in fact improve
glycermic control in type 2 diabetes, as widely hypothesized.&
Commercial supplements are prepared from the seeds (also
called the fruit) of S. marianum.  Extracts are usually standardized
to 70% silymarin.° It should be noted that the bioavailability of
silibinin in milk thistle supplements is extremely low.
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
· Supports the liver, decreases liver enzymes, and serves as an anti-
dote for hepatotoxins
·Exerts antineoplasticeffects
·Minimizes diabetic complications in people
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
·Supports the liver, decreases liver enzymes, and serves as an anti-
dote for hepatotoxins
·Exerts antineoplastic effects
RecommendedDoses
In humans, the recommended dose is 200-800 mg q 24 hr or q 8-12 hr
of the standardized extract. Thus, a 20 g dose of milk thistle standard-
ized to 70% silymarin/silibinin contains 140 mg of silymarin/silib-
inin. In dogs and cats, administer 10-15 mg/kg/day (divided) of the
dry extract(standardized to 70% silymarin) or 1-2 mL/10 kg(divided)
of a 1:1 extract." In the author's experience, higher doses can be used
to treat intoxications (start with 100-300 mg/11.3-22.7 kg q 12 hr)
SideEffects
Milk thistle/silymarin is regarded as a very safe supplement with
only very rare side effects, such as a mild laxative effect and uterine
stimulation.' Allergies are also possible but only rarely reported.
122
SILYMARIN/MILKTHISTLE
This electronic publication is initendled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser
Contraindications
Caution should be used in patients with known hypersensitivity to
plants belonging to the Asteraceae family.
Interactions
Because of possible inhibition or induction of hepatic cytochrome
inhibited or have reduced plasma concentrations and patients
should be monitored closely. Silymarin reduces the nephrotoxicity
of cisplatin and carboplatin without reducing their effectiveness.
This action can possibly increase the effectiveness of these
chemotherapeutic agents in certain cancers. In fact, silymarin may
actually sensitize certain cancers to treatment with this class of
chemotherapeutic agents.' Silymarin may reduce adverse effects of
anthracyclines, such as doxorubicin, by reducing lipid peroxidation
and by stabilizing membranes. Insulin requirements in patients
of silymarin. There may also be a protective effect in type 1 and
metronidazole when coadministered with silymarin for giardiasis.
Finally, one nutritional supplement that contains a combination
levels of silibinin."
References
1.Stargrove M,Treasure J, McKee D. Herb, rutrient, and drug interactions:
clinical implications and therapeutic strategies. St. Louis (MO): Mosby Elsevier;
2008:123-30
2.Fetrow CW, Avila J. Professionat's handbook of complementary and altermative
redicines. 3rd ed. Philadelphia (PA): Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2004:55862
3.Wynn SG, Fougere B. Veterinary herbal redicine. St. Louis (MO): Mosby
Elsevier; 2007:332, 600-2.
4.Schoen A, Wynn SG. Complementary and altemafive veterinary rredicine:
principles and praefice. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 1998:323, 3512.
5.Wynn SG, Marsden S. Manuat of natura veterinary medicine: science and
fradition. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003:317-31.
6.Mills S, Bone K. Prirciples and practice ofphytotherapy: rodem Ferbal
medicine. St. Louis (MO): Churchill Livingstone: 2000:553-62
Nutritional Supplements for the Veterinary Practice 123
@20 12 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
7.Pizzorno J, Murray M. Textbook of ratural medicine. 3rd ed. St. Louis (MO):
Churchill Livingstone; 2005:125-35.
8. Suksomboon N, Poolsup N, Boobkaew S, et al. Meta-analysis of the effect of
herbal supplement on glycemic control in type 2 diabetes. J Ethnopharmacot
2011;137(3):1328-33.
124
SILYMARIN/MILK THISTLE
This electronic publication is intendledl for Lse only by the original purcha.ser.
ST. JOHN'S WORT
SJW,HYPERICUMPERFORATUM]
Background
The flowering tops of St. John's wort (SJW) were traditionally
used to relieve anxiety and depression as well as internally and
ingredients, including hypericin, hyperforin, essential oils, and
proanthocyanins (secondary plant metabolites).2
SJW exhibits several significant pharmacologic interactions
that affect drug metabolism, including cytochrome P450 and
other cytochrome oxidases that are involved in drug metabolism,
transporter proteins, and conjugases and transferases (involved in
metabolic reactions).Therefore,this herb directly affects various
stages of drug metabolism and detoxification for ma ny drugs.* SJW
induces P-glycoprotein (a transporter protein) and activates the
In addition to those mentioned above, SJW has several
unusual and complex mechanisms of action. As an antidepressa nt,
hyperforin (and likely other constituents) actas an uptakeinhibiton
for the neurotransmitters serotonin,noradrenaline, dopamine-L
glutamate, and y-aminobutyric acid (GABA).'4
SJW has been shown to be as effective as traditional (phar-
maceutical) antidepressants for patients with mild to moderate
depression, usually accompanied by fewer side effects.? In addi
tion, hypericin exhibits antiviral activity as well as broad-spectrum
antibacterial activity. In HIV/AIDs patients, SJW inhibits protein
kinase C and viral production.
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
·Functions as an antidepressant
·Helps patients with seasonal affective disorder (SAD)
·Improves insomnia
·Possesses antimicrobial activities (e.g., against HIV)
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
*Functions as an antidepressant
125
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
RecommendedDoses
Suggested doses in humans are 2-5 g/day of the dried plant, 1-3
mL/day of the tincture or fluid extract, and 900 mg/day (divided,
In dogs and cats, the following general guidelines have been
recommended: 25-30 mg/kg/day (divided), 0.5-1.5 mL of 1:2-1:3
tincture/10kg(divided).2
SideEffects
Phototoxicity/photosensitization is a possible adverse effect of SJW
in both humans and animals,' and is a recognized side effect called
hypericism in herbivores that consume SJW. Photosensitization is
unlikely to develop in patients prescribed standard doses of SJW.6
Nonetheless, it may be prudent to limit overexposure to the sun.
Caution is warra nted when combining SJW with other medications,
especially conventional antidepressants (see below).Because of the
numerous potential drug interactions with SJW, caution is always
advised when using conventional medications and SJW, especially
thoseconventional medications (or herbs) with similar mechanisms
ofaction.It maybe prudent to slowlyintroduce/slowly reduce/taper
the dose of any drug or herb that is coadministered with SJW.
As mentioned above,SJW works through severalunusualand
complex mechanisms and acts as an uptake inhibitor for serotonin,
noradrenaline, dopamine L-glutamate, and GABA. Interactions
with medications or herbs that also inhibit the reuptake of these
neurotransmitters is possible.6
Contraindications
No specific contraindications exist, but numerous potential
safety issues and interactions are described (see“Side Efects” and
“"Interactions”sections).
Interactions
SJW lowers plasma levels of benzodiazepines (e.g, alprazolam,
midazolam,and diazepam)because of cytochrome P4 50 induc
tion. Regular monitoring of blood levels and adjusting doses of
benzodiazepines are needed. SJW should be avoided in patients
prescribed tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) and antiretroviral
126
ST.JOHN'SWORT
This electronic publication is initended for Luse only by the original purcha.ser
medications because of probable negative interactions.' Caution is
warranted when SJW is prescribed to patients taking monoamine
oxidase (MAO) inhibitors and selective serotonin reuptake inhib
itors (SSRIs).' SJW may be used safely with general anesthesia;
caution is warranted,as SJW may interact with benzodiazepines
and anesthetic drugs (especially halogenated anesthetics). Cessa-
tion of SJW approximately 10 days prior to anesthesia (to allow
complete reversal of enzyme induction) is suggested.3
Administration of SJW to patients taking cyclosporine will
result in significant reduction in blood levels of cyclosporine.
Careful monitoring of circulating levels of cyclosporine is
recommended. Short-term increases in digoxin levels may
occur in patients coadministered SJW. In addition, long-
term use of SJw in patients taking digoxin may result in
a decline in digoxin levels. SJW may also reduce levels of
the chemotherapeutic imatinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor,
and interfere with the actions of microtubule stabilizing
chemotherapy medications (e.g., paclitaxel) because ofinduction
ofhepatic cytochrome enzymes.* SJW may lower serum levels of
omeprazole and other proton pump inhibitors as well as certain
statin drugs because of increased metabolism. In contrast,
serum levels of tacrolimus (an immunosuppressant drug) may
be decreased with SJW because of increased metabolism. Please
note that the nephrotoxicity of tacrolimus increases if the
tacrolimus dose was increased to compensate for the decreased
serum levels during coadministration of SJW. Therefore, the
combination of tacrolimus and SJW should be avoided." Serum
levels of verapamil and other calcium channel blockers may also
decrease when administered with SJW,as well as serumlevels of
triazole antifungal medications (e.g., itraconazole, fluconazole)
because of enzyme induction by SJW.* Finally, decreased levels
of warfarin or other vitamin K antagonist anticoagulants can be
decreased when coadministered with SJW.Careful monitoringof
patients using anticoagulants and SJW is necessary.
Please note that the homeopathic dilutions of SJW are useful
for nerve pain and trauma. The precautions and potential drug
herb interactions listed above do not apply to homeopathic
dilutions.
Nutritional Supplements for the Veterinary Practice127
@20 12 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
References
1.Wynn SG, Marsden S. Marat of ratara veterinary rrredicine: science ad
fradition. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003:52, 67, 150, 460, 480.
2.Wynn SG, Fougere B. Veterinary herbal redicine. St. Louis (MO): Mosby
Elsevier; 2007:1-3, 345, 355, 643-5
3.Stargrove M, Treasure J, McKee D. Herb, rutrient, and drug interactions:
clinical irmplications and fherapeutic strategies. St. Louis (MO): Mosby Elsevier;
2008:140-59.
medicine into veterinary pracfice. Goldstein R, ed. Blackwell; 2008:647, 700
Available at: www.mediafire.com/?2s13ctmvv7tyb2k. Accessed January 15,
2012.
5.Pizzorno J, Murray M, Joiner-Bey H. The cinicians handbook of ratura
medicine. 2nd ed. St. Louis (MO): Churchill Livingstone; 2008:320, 333
6.Mills S, Bone K. Principles and practice of phytotherapy: mocern herba
medicine. St. Louis (MO): Churchill Livingstone; 2000:542-50.
7.Fetrow CW, Avila J. Professionals handbook of corplerertary  atermative
medicines. 3rd ed. Philadelphia (PA): Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2004:798-802.
128
ST.JOHN'S WORT
This electronic publication is initencled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser
SUPER GREEN FOODS:
SPIRVLINA/BLUE-GREEN ALGAE
[SPIRULINAPLATENSIS,S.MAXIMA]
Background
Spirulina spp. are components of "super foods" that contain amino
acids, peptides, proteins, vitamins, minerals, sugars, fatty acids
(25-30% y-linolenic acid [GLA] compared with only 10-15% GLA
for evening primrose oil), and nucleic acids. Spirulina are blue-
green algae with immune-enhancing properties. For example,
Spirulina enhance natural killer (a type of infection-fighting white
blood cell) functions. One compound isolated from Spirulina
called C-phycocyanin (C-PC, a protein found in certain bacteria
and algae that capture light) possesses potent antioxidant, anti-
inflammatory, anticancer (via induction of apoptosis), and anti-
viral properties.!
Supplerments made with these super foods may vary in their
exact compositions as a result of cultivation, harvesting, and
processing.
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
·Helps patients with cancer
·Reduces radiation/chemotherapy side effects
·Fights infection
· Supports the liver
·Helps patients with either Crohn's disease/ulcerative colitis or
constipation
·Improves ulcers
·Alleviates halitosis
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
· Provides general nutritional support
·Supports the immune system
·Fights infection
·Helps patients with cancer
129
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
RecommendedDoses
Between 200 mg and 500 mg q 8 hr has been recommended
in humans.' In dogs and cats, super green foods are most
commonly used as a general nutritional supplement. Use the dose
recommended on the label of the specific product chosen.
Side Effects
safety concerns exist. First, certain species of Spirulina produce
toxins that can contaminate nutritionalsupplements, making them
unsafe for consumption.²Second, Spirulina may contain mercury,
which is a toxic heavy metal.
Contraindications
None reported.
Interactions
There are some potential interactions, but none have been clinically
proven to date. There is the potential for antagonism with vitamin
K antagonist anticoagulants such as warfarin because of the high
green foods may potentially interact with immunosuppressant
medications and angiotensin 1 converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
(which are used to help control blood pressure).
References
1.Fetrow CW, Avila J. Professionals hanabook of cormplerentary and altemative
medicines. 3rd ed. Philadelphia (PA): Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2004:78790.
2.Habib M, Parvin M, Huntington TC, et al. A review on culture, production
and use of Spirlina as food for humans and feeds for domestic animals and
hsh. FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Circular No. 1034. 2008. Available at:
ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/011/i0424e/i0424e00.pdf. Accessed March 12,
2012.
130
0SUPER GREENFOODS: SPRULINA/BLUE-GREEN ALGAE
This electronic publication is intencled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser
TAURINE
{L-TAURINE)
Background
Taurine is a nonessential sulfur-containing amino acid found
naturally in meat, fish, and milk. Taurine synthesis occurs in the
liver and the brain from the amino acid cysteine.² In fact, taurine
is one of the most abundant amino acids in the mammalian brain.
Taurine functions with y-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and
the amino acid glycine as a neuroinhibitory transmitter. It also
protects/stabilizes brain cell membranes and exhibits antianxiety
and anticonvulsant activity, making it useful for the treatment of
seizures.3
In addition to the above-described mechanisms of action,
taurine acts as a metabolic transmitter, exerts a detoxifying effect,
strengthens cardiac contractility, and plays an important role in
bile acid metabolism (it is incorporated into bile acids)." In cats
taurine is the only conjugate for bile acids, whereas the livers of
other species are also able to use glycine.2d Taurine is essential in
cats diets. It is also noteworthy that in cats, taurine deficiency was
determined to be the primary cause of dilated cardiomyopathy
(in 1987). As a result, the Association of American Feed Control
Officials (AAFCO) revised taurine requirements in cat food:
dry food should have a minimum of 0.1% taurine and wet food
shouldhave a minimum of 0.2% taurine.²Taurine is helpfulin the
treatment of retinal degeneration in cats as well as heart disease,
cardiac arrhythmias, and congestive heart failure.
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
·Helps manage heart disease
·Reduces seizures
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
·Minimizes chances of developing dilated cardiomyopathy
·Protects against retinal degeneration (cats)
·Reduces seizures
131
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
Recommended Doses
In humans, the recommended dose is 750 mg q 34 hr for intractable
epilepsy. In dogs and cats, a dose range of 50-1,000 mg q 24 hr
(or 50-100 mg/kg q 8-24 hr) is recommended. For cocker spaniel
cardiomyopathy, a suggested dose is 500 mg q 8 hr.d
Side Effects
Taurine is a very safe supplerment. Reported side effects in people
include diarrhea and constipation.
Contraindications
None reported.
Interactions
Two interactions are worth noting here. First, a beneficial effect of
deficiency anemia with both taurine and slow-release iron was
noted. Second, an “amplifying” effect of taurine supplermentation
  s   s  
metabolism) and urinary excretion of vitamin C has been reported.
This finding suggests that taurine supplementation may have
potentially significant clinically effects on drugs or chemicals that
are metabolized by those enzymes.
References
1.Pizzorno J, Murray M. Textbook of Naturat Medicine. 3rd ed. Churchill
Livingstone Elsevier; 2005:1654
2. Hand M, Thatcher C, Remillard R, et al. Sma animal clirica rutritior. 5th ed
Topeka (KS): Mark Morris Institute; 2010:300-2, 539-40
3. El Idrissi A, Messing I, Scalia J, et al. Prevention of epileptic seizures by taurine.
AdvExp Med Biol 2003;526:515-25.
4.Wynn SG, Marsden S. Maruat of natural veterinary medicine: science and
fradition. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003:81, 323, 483, 500, 516, 589.
5.Stargrove M, Treasure J, McKee D. Herb, rufrient, and drug interacfions:
clinical irplications ard therapeufic strafegies. St. Louis (MO): Mosby Elsevier;
2008:397, 553.
132
TAURINE
This electronic publication is intencled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser
TRYPTOPHAN
IL-TRYPTOPHAN,5-HYDROXYTRYPTOPHAN,5-HTP]
Background
Tryptophan is an essential amino acid that is used to synthesize
niacin (vitamin B), the neurotransmitter serotonin (5-hydroxy-
tryptarmine), and the hormone melatonin (in the retina and pineal
gland in the brain).' The richest sources of tryptophan are fish, meat
(especially turkey), dairy, eggs, nuts, and wheat germ. Most (98%)
dietary tryptophan is metabolized into niacin.
The primary use of L-tryptophan is for depression and related
disorders. The effectiveness of both L-tryptophan and 5-HTP as
antidepressants is based on their ability to elevate serotonin levels.
In certain patients, supplementation with L-tryptophan is as effec-
tive as antidepressant drugs.?
L-tryptophan can
enhance serotoninlevels;however,
5-HTP is even more likely to elevate serotonin levels and cause
“serotonin syndrome”(an autonomic dysfunction characterized by
neuromuscular abnormalities and altered mental state), especially
if combined with other medications that elevate serotonin levels.
Eating a diet high in L-tryptophan (i.e., protein-based
foods) does not significantly increase 5-HTP levels. Synthetic
L-tryptophan is manufactured by a fermentation process using
glucose and 5-HTP is manufactured by extraction from the seeds
of the African shrub Grifonia simplicifolia.
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
·Acts as an antidepressant
·Helps patients with bipolar disorder, dementia, insomnia, mi-
graine headaches, and various neuroses/psychoses
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
*Acts as an antidepressant
·Helps minimize aggression (dogs)
·Curtails obsessive-compulsive disorder
133
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
Recommended Doses
In humans 0.5-12 g q 6-8 hr of L-tryptophan is recommended.
The daily dose of L-tryptophan should not exceed 1 g/45 kg body
weight. Toxicity is more likely when the daily dose exceeds 7 g/68
kg/day. It may take up to 60 days before a full clinical response
is seen' The recommended dose of 5-HTP is 50-200 mg q 8-12
useful to enhance sleep.' In the author's experience, 10 mg/kg of
L-tryptophan q 12 hr for dogs and 15-20 mg/kg q 12-24 hr for
cats is recommended. Because of the potential for side effects and
adverse reactions (described below) begin supplementation at the
low end of the dose range.
SideEffects
L-tryptophan and 5-HTP are generally considered safe if the
contraindications and potentialinteractionswithother medications
or herbs are followed (described below).? In the late 1980s and
early 1990s, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
removed tryptophan from the market because of severe illness (i.e.,
eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome) and death resulting from intake of
tryptophan. It waslater determined that one manufacturer in Japan
had used a new bacterial strain to synthesize the tryptophan and
that this bacterium introduced toxic by-products that contaminated
the supplement. Similar reactions from other supplements were
identified, and it was determined that the contaminant rather than
the tryptophan was responsible for these reactions.
The main side effects typically reported by people taking
nausea, dry mouth), anxiety, dizziness, drowsiness, headache, and
muscle pain. These symptoms tend to be observed at the higher
end of the dose range. People with liver disease may have a limited
ability to metabolize 5-HTP. People with autoimmune diseases
may be more susceptible to adverse reactions when taking 5-HTP
     sd  n
symptoms with administration of 5-HTP.
Contraindications
L-tryptophan should be avoided in patients with cataracts, diabetes,
psoriasis, bladder cancer, or achlorhydria (low or absent production
134
TRYPTOPHAN
This electronic publication is initendled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser
of acid by the stomach). L-tryptophan may exacerbate rheumatoid
arthritis.
Interactions
L-tryptophan should be used cautiously (if at all) in patients
ta king medications that may elevate serotonin levels (e.g., selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors, SSRIs). Although in some cases
tryptophan may be helpful when used with SSRIs (such as fluoxetine
Prozacl}to enhance the effectiveness of these medications in
the treatment of depression, it should be used very cautiously to
prevent serotonin syndrome. Tryptophan should not be used with
monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors because of the possibility
of increased risk of serotonin syndrome. Tryptophan may also be
useful when coadministered with tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs
such as clomipramine, imipramine, and amitriptyline) to enhance
the effectiveness of the TCAs in the treatment of depression, but
should be used very cautiously to prevent serotonin syndrome.
5-HTP should be avoided in patients taking any medications
that may elevate serotonin levels (SSRIs, MAO inhibitors, TCAs)
because of the high probability of inducing serotonin syndrome.
Althoughdrugsthatincreaseserotonin levels arelesslikely to beused
in veterinary medicine than in human medicine, there are several
MAO inhibitors that are commonly used in veterinary practice
(e.g., amitraz,selegiline).Otherdrugsthat mightincrease serotonin
5-HTP (e.g, clomipramine [Clomicalm], fluoxetine [Reconcile])
should be avoided.In contrast, allopurinol increases levels of
tryptophan in the brain and could possibly be helpful when used
with supplemental tryptophan for depression.More research
is needed and close observation should be undertaken when
using allopurinol with dietary tryptophan.' Combining lithium
carbonate and tryptophan elevates levels of serotonin and cortisol
(and may require dose reductions in lithium), but caution should be
exercised to prevent serotonin syndrome and adverse alterations in
cortisol level' Large doses of tryptophan might interfere with the
actions of the diazepam clorazepate.
Tramadol has several mechanisms of action,including
blocking serotonin reuptake in the brain. Simultaneous use of
5-HTP and L-tryptophan may increase the risk of side effects,
including serotonin syndrome. Caution should be used with the
Nutritional Supplements for the Veterinary Practice 135
@20 12 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
coadministration oftramadoland5-HTP or L-tryptophan. Caution
should also beused when combining 5-HTP with melatonin, SAMe,
adverse effects. L-tryptophan is considered a safer supplement
than 5-HTP (i.e.,less likely to cause significantly increased
serotonin levels), and 5-HTP has a narrower therapeutic dose
range and is much more likely to cause adverse reactions. Currently
L-tryptophan is available only as a prescription medication, but
5-HTP is available as an over-the-counter supplement.
References
1.Stargrove M, Treasure J, McKee D. Herb, rutrienf, and drug interactions:
clinical implications and therapeutic strategies. St Louis (MO): Mosby Elsevier;
2008:6907, 706-17.
2.Pizzorno J, Murray M. Textbook ofnafaural medicine. 3rd ed. St. Louis (MO):
Churchill Livingstone; 2005:1436-8.
136
TRYPTOPHAN
This electronic publication is initencled for Lse only by the origina.l purcha.ser.
VALERIAN
[VALERIANAOFFICINALIS)
Background
Valerian, specifically the freshor dried rhizomes,roots,and stolons,
is a commonly used herb in people and pets as a mild sedative-
hypnotic/anxiolytic.? The active ingredients in valerian include
valepotriates, valerenic acid, amino acids, y-aminobutyric acid
(GABA), glutamine, lignans, flavonoids, alkaloids, and essential oils
(sesquiterpenes).* The sedative effects of valerian are likely because
of interactions with GABA receptors (i.e., GABA agonism).s Other
effects may be associated with the melatonin receptors, serotonin
receptors, H1 (histamine) receptors, and dopamine receptors.
to benzodiazepine) but did not cause daytime sedation.7 Valerian
also has weak anticonvulsant properties.&
Valerian supplements typically have a characteristic strong
odor. This herb can be administered alone, but in the author's
experience,valerian is often combined with other sedative herbs,
such as lemon balm, passionflower, and hops.
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
·Provides sedation
·Alleviates anxiety
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
·Provides sedation
·Alleviates anxiety
Recommended Doses
In humans,recommended doses are 3-9gof dried root orrhizome/
day,° 2-6 mL of a 1:2liquid extract/day, and 1-3 mL ofa 1:1 tincture
q 8 hr. In dogs and cats, the dose of dried herb is 25-300 mg/kg/
day (divided) and the tincture is dosed at 0.5-1.5 mL/10 kg/day
(divided).
137
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
SideEffects
Valerian is generally safe when used at recommended doses.
Contraindications
Valerian may potentiate the effects of central nervous system
(CNS) depressants, and its use with similarly acting medications is
generally contraindicated.
Interactions
Cormbining valerian with other CNS depressa nt medications (e.g,
benzodiazepines, anticonvulsants, anesthetics) should be avoided
because of additive effects. But valerian may be useful when
attempting to reduce doses ofmedicationssuch asbenzodiazepines.6
As with other CNS depressant herbs, it would be prudent to
s
before anesthesia.
References
1.Wynn SG, Fougere B. Veterinary Herbat Medicine. St. Louis (MO): Mosby
Elsevier; 2007:657
2.Broadfoot PJ, Palmquist RE, Jonston K, et al. Irtegrating corplerertary rredicine
into veterinary pracfice. Goldstein R, ed Blackwell; 2008:649-707. Available at:
www.mediafire.com/?2s13ctmvv7tyb2k. Accessed January 15, 2012
3.Pizzorno J, Murray M. Textbook of natural medicine. 3rd ed. St. Louis (MO):
Churchill Livingstone Elsevier; 2005:1371-3.
4.Wynn SG, Marsden S. Maruat of naturat veterinary medicine: science and
fradition. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003:51, 55, 86
5.Scthoen A, Wynn SG. Corrplerentary and alenative veterinary rredicine
principles and practice. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 1998:3334
6.Stargrove M, Treasure J, McKee D. Herb, ratriert, and crug irteractiors: clirica ir
plicafiors ad fherapeufic strafegie. St. Louis (MO): Mosby Elsevier; 2008:167 70
7.Pizzorno J, Murray M, Joiner-Bey H. The cinicians Mandbook of ratura
medicine. 2nd ed. St. Louis (MO): Churchill Livingstone; 2008:4312.
8.Fetrow CW, Avila J. Professionals handbook of complementary and altermative
redicines. 3rd ed. Philadelphia (PA): Lippincott Williams & wilkins;
2004:835-9
9.Mills S, Bone K. Principles and practice of phytotherapy: rodern herbat
medicine. St. Louis (MS): Churchill Livingstone; 2000:5818
BEL
VALERIAN
This electronic publication is intended for use only by the oniginal purcha.ser.
VITAMINA/CAROTENOIDS
Background
"Vitamin A" is a generic term for a class of compounds that exhibit
the same biologic activities as retinol—a yellow compound found
in green and yellow vegetables, egg yolk, and fish liver oil that
is essential for growth and vision. There are >600 carotenoids
(highly colored plant pigments) that are considered “provitamin
A nutrients."Examples include α-carotene, β-carotene,lutein
lycopene,cryptoxanthin,and zeaxanthin.'Mammals are able to
convert carotenoids into retinol (vitamin A), except for cats, who
cannot convert beta-carotene into vitamin A (they are lacking the
necessary enzyme). Cats require preformed vitamin A in their diets
to prevent deficiency.2 Even if not converted to vitamin A in the
body, carotenoids act as potent antioxidants.3.4
Retinoids (i.e., retinol, retinal, retinoic acid) occur only
in animal products and are considered preformed vitamin A.
Synthetic analogs ofvitamin A include isotretinoin and acitretin
among others.’ Vitamin A occurs in both a cis and a trans
configuration (which refers to the“shape”of the molecule because
of carbon-carbon double bonds). Both forms are biologically
active,although vitamin A dietary supplements are typically the
trans configuration. Vitamin A is found in a number of dietary
sources, including fish liver oil (especially cod liver oil), organ
meats, egg yolk, and whole milk. Carotenoidsare found in a variety
of fruits and vegetables including yellow, red, and dark leafy green
vegetables and yellow fruit.
The liver stores 90% or more of the body's vitamin A content.
In people, it can hold approximately 2 years’worth of vitamin
A required by an adult.' Vitamin A is necessary for the body to
fight infection, maintain immunity, and maintain integrity of the
epithelium, and for bone growth, cellular differentiation, cellular
proliferation, normal vision, and testicular and ovarian function.
Vitamin A is acofactor in numerous biochemicalreactions.
Vitamin A and the carotenoids are often indicated as part of the
supportive care for patients with cancer.° The rationale for this
recommendation is based on the fact that decreased intake of
antioxidants is associated with increases in the adverse effects of
chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Although this use of vitamin
A and carotenoids remains controversial, integrative practitioners
139
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
recommend using a mixture of antioxidants in chemotherapy and
radiation therapy patients (please refer to Appendix 1 for a more
in-depth discussion of this topic).
Vitarmin A deficiencies are associated with impaired ability to
mount an effective antibody response, decreased levels of helper T
cells, and alterations in the mucosal linings of the respiratory and
gastrointestinal tracts.$
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
·Functions as an antioxidant
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
·Functions as an antioxidant
Recommended Doses
In humans, the recommended therapeutic dose of vitamin A is
25,000 international units (IU)/day. A maximum of 15,000 IU/
day may be safer for older patients and those with liver disease,
hypercholesterolemia, or diabetes (these patients are more likely
to be predisposed to toxicity).' In dogs and cats, 625-7,500 IU/0.45
kg/day is recommended for the treatment of various cancers.°
Alternatively, 5,000 IU/0.45 kg by injection q 3 weeks for various
cancers (especially osteosarcoma) has been used successfully and
safely by Dr. Steve Marsden (see reference list) as part of his vitamin
therapy for cancer treatment.
Side Effects
Vitamin A and the carotenoids are generally considered safe when
used as directed.
Contraindications
Large doses of vitamin A and most retinoids are contraindicated
effects; however, some studies have failed to detect an increase in
pregnancy. Retinol supplementation is contraindicated in patients
140
VITAMINA/CAROTENOIDS
This electronic publication is intendedl for use only by the oniginal purcha.ser
with liver disease, and synthetic all trans β-carotene has been
associated with an increased risk of lung cancer in smokers.
Interactions
Oral neomycin impairs the absorption of vitamin A; therefore,
supplemental vitamin A may be warranted in patients prescribed
oral neomycin.' Similarly, patients being treated with antacids
To prevent toxicity, patients using synthetic retinoids should
humans) without medical supervision. Combining vitamin A with
tetracycline antibiotics may increase the risk of benign intracranial
hypertension (pseudotumor cerebri) in people.Administering
vitamin A with antibiotics may provide a synergistic effect.
Vitamin A may increase the potential for bleeding when combined
with anticoagulant medications, and vitamin A is synergistic with
chemotherapeutic cisplatin for head and neck cancersin humans.'7
References
1.Stargrove M,Treasure J,McKeeD.Herb,rutrient,and dginteractis:
clinical irrplicafions ard fherapeufic strafegies. St. Louis (MO): Mosby Elsevier;
2008:235-52.
2.Schoen A, Wynn SG. Complementary and alterrative veterinary mecdicine:
prirnciples and practice. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 1998:54, 60
3.Hand M, Thatcher C, Remillard R, et al. Safl arirma clinica rutrifior. 5th ed
Topeka (KS): Mark Morris Institute; 2010:84, 465
4.Bradfoot PJ, Palmquist RE, Jonston K, et al. Integrating commplemenfary
medicine into veterinary practice. Goldstein R, ed. Blackwell; 2008:31-2, 137,
171, 721. Available at: w ww.mediafire.com/?2s13ctmvv7tyb2k. Accessed
January 15, 2012.
5. Pizzorno J, Murray M. Textbook of nataral mrecdicine. 3rd ed. St. Louis (MO):
Churchill Livingstone; 2005:771-3, 1382
6.Wynn SG, Marsden S. Maruat of ratural veterinary rmedicine: science and
fradition. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003: 121, 397
7.Pizzorno J, Murray M, Joiner-Bey H. The cinicians handbook ofnafara
medicine. 2nd ed. St. Louis (MO): Churchill Livingstone; 2008:131
Nutritional Supplements for the Veterinary Practice 141
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
VITAMIN C
(ASCORBIC ACID)
Background
Vitamin C is a water-soluble vitamin found primarily in fruits
(especially citrus fruits) and vegetables' as well as organ meats. Most
animals, including dogs and cats, can meet their dietary require-
ments for vitamin C from endogenous synthesis (i.e., from glucose
via the glucuronic acid pathway) and do not have a specific dietary
requirement for vitamin C. In times of illness, stress, and disease
such as cancer), an increasedintake ofvitamin C maybe beneficial.
Vitamin C helps restore vitamin E's antioxidant activity, is required
for the synthesis of adrenal hormones and carnitine, and plays an
essential role in the metabolism of a number of other compounds
such as folic acid and tryptophan. Vitamin C protects cholesterol
from oxidative damage and lowers low-density lipoprotein (LDL
lipoprotein-alpha to help reduce/dissolve atherosclerotic plaques.
Other important mechanisms of vitamin C relate to the immune
system. Specifically, vitamin C increases lymphocyte production,
macrophage activity, and antibody and interferon production.4
In addition, vitamin C is important for the synthesis of collagen
and elastin (in connective tissues) and inhibits hyaluronidase (the
enzyme that breaks down hyaluronic acid). Thus, vitamin C is
often included in joint supplements. Additionally, vitamin C
acts as a nitrate scavenger and may reduce nitrosamine-induced
cancers,'² and is necessary for the optimal activity of cytochrome
mixed-function oxidases.
It should be noted that high doses of vitamin C may cause
copper depletion. In contrast, vitamin C enhances the absorp-
tion of iron, but this benefit is likely to be of little clinical signifi-
When administered in concert with vitamin K, the combination
is considereda pretreatment for radiation therapy and purportedly
reduces tumor volume. Vitamin C has also been used in patients
with certain cancers.6
143
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
·Possesses antioxidant properties
· Supports cancer patients
·Helps resolve infections
·Irmproves symptoms of osteoarthritis
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
·Possesses antioxidant properties
· Supports cancer patients
·Helps resolve infections
•Improves clinical signs of osteoarthritis
Recommended Doses
In humans, the dose of vitamin C is quite variable; 400 mg/day
is thought to fully saturate plasma and cells.' In dogs and cats,
similar doses are used. In the author's experience vitamin C is
administered at the "bowel tolerance” dose (i.e., the amount of
vitamin C the patient can tolerate before loose stools or diarrhea
is seen).
Caution must always be used when using megadoses of
antioxidant vitamins and minerals in cancer patients (especially
if isolated antioxidants are used). It is unknown what dose is
considered safe, effective, or the "best."It is also unknown in what
dose the vitamin or mineral acts as an antioxidant rather than as
a pro-oxidant. More research is needed to answer these important
questions.
SideEffects
No major side effects secondary to vitamin C supplementation have
been reported. That said, any antioxidant (vitamin or mineral) may,
at high doses, act as a pro-oxidant rather than as an antioxidant.
The following mild side effects have been reported in people:
gastrointestinal discomfort, flatulence, increased urination, skin
rashes, and loose stools/diarrhea.' Chronic intake of high doses
of vitamin C may result in a copper deficiency.' Many vitamin C
supplerments are synthesized from glucose by derivation from
Vitamin C supplements made from other sources (sago palm)
144
VITAMINC
This electronic publication is intended for use only by the oniginal purcha.ser
would be safe to use in such patients. Finally, supplemental vitamin
C, especially at higher doses, may produce the following laboratory
abnormalities: false negative results on fecal occult blood; false
elevations of bilirubin, creatinine, aspartate aminotransferase
(AST), and uric acid; false decreases in lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH); and false negative or false positive results on urinary
glucose tests (depending upon the methodology used).
Contraindications
Supplemental vitamin C should not be administered to patients
with cystinuria (a genetic condition causing cysteine stones to form
in the urinary bladder) or hemosiderosis or hemochromatosis (iron
overload disorders). In humans, doses ≥1,0o0 mg/day should not
be used by patients with recurrent nephrolithiasis or oxalate cystic
calculi (formation of stones in the urinary tract). Doses >4,000
mg/day should not be used by people with renal failure.' Similar
precautions likely apply to dogs and cats as well. In people, it is
recommended not to exceed 400 mg/day for at least 1 week prior to
surgery because of the possibility of increased bleeding.
Interactions
A number of interactions are worth mentioning here. Vitamin
C has the potential to either increase or decrease serum levels of
acetaminophen.Although acetaminophen is rarely used in veteri
nary medicine, extreme caution must be used ifit is prescribed to
patients also ta king vitamin C supplements.' High-dose vita min
C may decrease endothelial damage in patients with hyperten-
sion.' High-dose intravenous vitamin C selectively kills cancer
cells and reduces toxicity from chemotherapy medications. On
the downside, vitamin C may aggravate the cardiac toxicity of
doxorubicin and other anthracyclines (chemotherapeutics) via
mobilization of iron, which increases levels of iron-catalyzed free
radicals.' Vitamin C is depleted during (prolonged) corticosteroid
therapy, and supplementation might be beneficial.' Vitamin C can
enhance the bioavailability of cyclosporine (an immunosuppres
sant) and may allow for decreased levels of cyclosporine as well
as decreased side effects associated with cyclosporine.' Patients
taking the diuretic furosemide might have a greater response
to therapy when supplemented with vitamin C.' Patients taking
Nutritional Supplements for the Veterinary Practice 145
@20 12 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
statin drugs (to control blood pressure) may show improvement
in lipid/cholesterol levels when they are coadministered with vita-
min C. Vitamin C may reduce the risk of Helicobacter pylori infec
should be avoided during therapy to treat H. pylori, as it may reduce
therapeutic efficacy.' Vitamin C may have a synergistic effect if coad-
ministered with nitroglycerin to help maintain/promote vasodila-
tion.' Vitamin C may enhance the bioavailability and elevate blood
levels of tetracycline (and potentially other antibiotics).' Vitamin
C should not be administered with aluminum-containing antac
ids, asit can increase the absorption of aluminum.' Finally, patients
C, as anticonvulsant medications may increase urinary excretion
of vitamin C.
References
1.Stargrove M, Treasure J, McKee D. Herb, nutrient, and drug interations:
clinical irrplicafions and fferapeufic strategies. St. Louis (MO): Mosby Elsevier;
2008:356-98
2.Hand M, Thatcher C, Remillard R, et al. Srrall arira clirica rutritior. 5th ed.
Topeka (KS): Mark Morris Institute; 2010:94, 518, 895.
3.Wynn SG, Marsden S. Maruat of naturat veterinary medicine: science and
fracition. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003:137, 157
redicine into veterinary practice. Goldstein R, ed. Blackwell; 2008:32-3, 132
137. Available at: www.mediafre.com/?2s13ctmvv7tyb2k. Accessed January 15,
2012.
5.Pizzorno J, Murray M, Joiner-Bey H. The ciniciars Mandbook of ratura
medicine. 2nd ed. St. Louis (MO): Churchill Livingstone; 2008:134.
6.Scthoen A, Wynn SG. Corrplerertary and alferrative veterinary rredicine
principles and praetice. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 1998:94, 101, 115-6, 118, 128.
7.Pizzorno J, Murray M. Textbook of rafural redicine. 3rd ed. St. Louis (MO)
Churchill Livingstone; 2005:567, 1491-5, 1764-75.
146
VITAMIN C
This electronic publication is intencled for μse only by the original purcha.ser.
VITAMIN D
(CALCIFEROL,CALCITRIOL
1,25-DIHYDROXYCHOLECALCIFEROL,
Background
Vitamin D is a fat-soluble vitamin and hormone."Vitamin D"is
a generic term for compounds that resemble, and have the activ-
ity of, calciferol, including vitamin D, (ergocalciferol), vitamin
D,(cholecalciferol)1-a-hydroxycholecalciferol (alfacalcidol)
25-hydroxyvitamin D, (calcidiol, calcifediol), 1,25-dihydroxycho
lecaliferol (calcitriol), and dihydrotachysterol. Plant-based vitamin
D, is called ergocalciferol, but is not as potent or bioavailable as
cholecalciferol (vitamin D,).
Vitamin D either is available by absorption (from dietary
sources) from the small intestine or is synthesized in the skin
following exposure of cholesterol to ultraviolet B (UVB) radiation
in sunlight.Dogs and cats cannot rely on exposure to sunlighi
for vitamin D,as they have low activation of cholesterol in the
skin by UVB light because of very low concentrations of choles-
terol (7-dehydrocholesterol) in the skin.²Vitamin D, from dietary
sources (e.g., cod liver oil, oily cold-water fish, butter, egg yolk),
supplerments, or following activation of cholesterol in the skin is
In turn, 25-hydroxycholecaliferol is converted to the active form
of vitamin D (i.e., calcitriol, 1,25-dihydroxycholecaliferol) in the
kidneys.2
Current research indicates that many people are deficient
in vitamin D. Vitamin D deficiency may be associated with an
increased risk of diseases, including cancers, heart disease,
hypertension, decreased immunity, multiple sclerosis, and diabe-
tes.' Vitamin D deficiency can also result from Cushing's disease
(hypoadrenocorticism), Crohn's disease/inflammatory bowel
disease, hypothyroidism, kidney disease, liver disease, and anti
convulsant drug therapy. Reduced exposure to sunlight, nonsup-
plementedvegetarian diets(vegetables are usuallylow in vitamir
D), and the use of sunscreens that block ultraviolet B light rays
are likely contributing factors.Because of the supplementation of
processed pet foods, it is unlikely that either dogs or cats would
ofa problem with homemade diets that are not properly prepared.
147
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
Vitamin D is necessary for absorbing calcium and phosphorus
frorm the intestine, regulating blood levels of calcium and
phosphorus, facilitating mineral deposition into bone, maintaining
adequate blood levels of insulin, assisting in metabolism of sugar,
promoting healthy thyroid function (it may have a mechanism of
action similar to that of thyroid hormone), assisting in regulation
of cell growth and development, and promoting development,
activity, and response of T cells against antigens and autoimmune
disorders.' Naturopathic doctors are beginning to see the benefits
of vitamin D in certain cancers, such as breast, prostate, lung,
skin (melanoma), and bone. Vitamin D is also being used as part
of an integrated therapeutic approach to the treatment of a variety
of autoimmune diseases in people, especially type 1 diabetes,
rheumatoid arthritis, and multiple sclerosis.
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
·Benefits cancer patients
*Minimizes development of osteoporosis
*Ameliorates autoimmune diseases
•Helps patients with psoriasis (red, irritated skin) when used
topically
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
·Benefits cancer patients
·Minimizes development of osteoporosis
RecommendedDoses
The current recommended dietary allowance (RDA) of vitamin
D, for adults aged 19-50 years is 600 international units (IU)/day.
Most naturopathic doctors recommend a minimum daily intake
of 1,000-2,000 IU for healthy adults (and higher doses are used as
part of integrative therapies for medical conditions). The exact dose
is best determined by regularly monitoring plasma levels of vitamin
D. Toxic vitamin D levels in adult humans are generally not reached
until blood levels of at least >200 ng/mL are seen, which is unlikely
with the usual recommended supplemental doses. Cod liver oil is
often recommended as an excellent dietary source of vitamin D(5
148
VITAMIND
This electronic publication is intencled for μse only by the original purcha.ser
μg] of vitamin D}.2
In humans, the dose of vitamin D for cancers and immune
diseases is best determined by serial monitoring of plasma vita-
min D levels. In general, doses from 2,000 IU to 10,000 IU/day are
for various cancers and immune diseaseshas not been determined.
the treatment ofvarious cancers in dogs)is 750 IU/0.45kg body
weight administered q3-4weeks.
SideEffects
Supplementation of vitamin D,is considered safe if excessive doses
are not administered. Excessive doses from dietary sources and
sunlightare considered highly unlikely. In people,it isbelieved that
even oral vitamin D, doses >10,000-50,000 10/day are unlikely to
be associated with toxicity; however, adverse effects in people have
IU/day. Reported side effects in people include headache, kidney
stones, and weight loss. Excess amounts of vitamin D may result
in hypercalcemia and subsequent mineralization of blood vessels
and body organs.
In dogs and cats, vitamin D intoxication is most often the
result of accidental or intentional poisoning through ingestion of
cholecalciferol-containing rodenticides or human medications
containing calcipotriol. A single oral toxic dose of cholecalciferol
s  (/ 2) /i 0o0g Axode s op  e u!
oral toxic dose of calcipotriol in dogs is 50 μg/kg.s6
Contraindications
People and pets with pre-existing conditions, including primary
hyperparathyroidism, granulomatous disease, sarcoidosis,heart
disease, arteriosclerosis, dehydration, primary renal failure,
hypoadrenocorticism (i.e., Addison's disease), and lymphoma, are
more susceptible to vitamin D intoxication. Supplementation with
excessive amounts of vitamin D should be done cautiously (if at all)
in these patients. People (and possibly pets) with granulomatous
diseases and certain types of lymphoma may quickly develop
Nutritional Supplements for the Veterinary Practice149
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
elevatedlevelsof1,25-dihydroxycholecaliferolbecauseof
autonomous conversion of its precursor, 25-hydroxyvitamin D.
Human patients successfully treated (who achieve a complete
vitamin D, (however, regular monitoring of plasma levels of
vitamin D is essential) because vitamin D deficiency is associated
with increased risk of developing lymphoma and other cancers.s6
Interactions
Anticonvulsant medications (such as phenobarbital) that induce
cytochrome P450 and mixed-function oxidases (particularly
CUP3A4) may result in decreased levels of vitamin D, leading
to an increased risk of osteoporosis.' Cimetidine decreases the
synthesis of vitamin D, resulting in decreased blood levels of
vitamin D.'Long-term use of (oral) corticosteroids may cause
osteoporosis because of reduced calcium absorption, decreased
vitamin D availability, interference with vitamin D activa-
tion and metabolism, and decreased blood levels of vitamin D
(inhaled and topical corticosteroid-containing medications
are less likely to produce osteoporosis). Thiazide diuretics may
cause hypercalcemia by reducing calcium excretion and increas-
ing blood levels of vitamin D. Antituberculosis medications
(e.g., isoniazid, rifampin, etc.) may cause vitamin D deficiency,
especially when used for longer than 1 month.' Long-term use of
neomycin can decrease absorption and/or increase elimination
ofvitamin D and other nutrients.'Calcium channelblockers
such as verapamil, can theoretically be antagonized by vitamin D
supplementation, although this has not been reported clinically.
Nonetheless, caution should be exercised when treating patients
ta king calcium channel blockers if vitamin D supplementation
becomes necessary.
The effects of doxorubicin chemotherapy may be enhanced
when combined with supplemental vitamin D. In addition to
promoting cell diferentiation, supporting apoptosis (programmed
cell death), and minimizing the chance of metastases and angio-
genesis on its own, vitamin D may enhance the susceptibility of
cancer cells (especially breast cancer cells in people) to doxoru-
bicin-induced oxidative damage.Because vitamin D increases
calcium absorption and elevated blood calcium levels may potenti-
ate the effects of cardiac glycosides, caution should be exercised in
150
VITAMIND
This electronic publication is initendled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser
patients taking cardiac glycosides who may also benefit from vita-
min D supplementation to ensure that cardiac glycoside toxicity/
cardiac arrhythmias do not occur.' Finally, vitamin D deficiency
may develop in patients taking ketoconazole for extended periods
of time because of inhibition of the P450 enzymes that metabolize
vitamin D, inhibition of 1,25-dihydroxycholecaliferol (calcitriol)
synthesis, and decreased blood levels of calcitriol.
References
1.Stargrove M, Treasure J, MeKee D. Herb, rtrient, ad cug interatiors: linica i
plicafiors ard fherapeufic strafegies. St. Louis (MO): Mosby Elsevier; 2008:399—421
2.Hand M, Thatcher C, Remillard R, et al. Srafl anira cliical rutrition. 5th ed.
Topeka (KS): Mark Morris Institute; 2010:84-6.
3. Life extension. Available at: http://www.lef.org/magazine/mag2006/mar2006
_report_vitamind_01.htm?source=search&key=vitamin%20D%20cancer and
http://www.lef.org/magazine/mag2010/sep2010_Michael-Holick-The-Pioneer
of-Vitamin-D-Research_01.htm?source=search&key=vitamin%20D%20
cancer. Accessed February 21, 2012.
4.Wynn SG, Marsden S. Manuat of naturar veterinary medicine: science and
fracdition. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003:398, 436, 452
5. Peterson M, Talcott P. Sral arirral toxicology. Philadelphia (PA): W B
Saunders; 2001:452-65.
6.Gfeller R, Messonnier S. Handbook of smal animat oxicology and poisonings
2nd ed. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2004:316-20, 431-3.
Nutritional Supplements for the Veterinary Practice 151
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
VITAMIN E
[ALPHA-TOCOPHEROL,Q-TOCOPHEROL)
Background
Vitamin E and α-tocopherol,although used synonymously,are
not synonymous. Vitamin E is technically a combination of four
tocopherols (D-α-tocopherol, D-β-tocopherol, D-y-tocopherol
andD-&-tocopherol)andfourtocotrienols(a-tocotrienol
D-β-tocotrienol, D-y-tocotrienol, and D-&-tocotrienol).' Vitamin
E is synthesized only in plants. The richest sources are vegetable
oils,followed by seeds and cereal grains. Tocopherol concentra
tions are highest in green leaves, whereas tocotrienols are found
in the bran and germ parts of the plant.? There are two forms
of α-tocopherol: D-α (natural} and DL-α (synthetic) forms.' As
an antioxidant,vitamin E prevents lipid peroxidation,protects
the stability of cell membranes, and protects fatty acids against
oxidative damage.' Vitamin E reduces the formation of lipofus-
cin, which is an oxidized fat that contributes to aging.' Vitamin
E is required to prevent oxidation of essential fatty acids (poly-
unsaturated fatty acids such as omega fatty acids).' Vitamin E
inhibits platelet aggregation, affects the activity of immune and
inflammatory cells, inhibits protein kinase C, and enhances vaso-
dilation (dilation of blood vessels).'Vitamin E is necessary for
normal neurological function and increases the metabolic activ-
ity of pregnane X receptors (thereby increasing detoxification of
foreign substances/toxins).' Vitamin E also reduces the activity
of cytochrome P450 enzymes.There are reports that vitamin
E acts as a pro-oxidant rather than an antioxidant when used
in the synthetic form (DL-α-tocopherol} or when used as a sole
antioxidant.
Indications
Suggested Uses in Humans
·Acts as a potent antioxidant
Suggested Uses in Dogs and Cats
*Acts as a potent antioxidant
153
@20 12 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
Recommended Doses
In humans, the recommended supplemental dose of vitamin E (i.e.,
α-tocopherol, D-α-tocopherol, or mixed tocopherols) is 400-2,500
IU/day. In dogs and cats, recommended doses range from 400 IU to
Side Effects
Vitamin E is considered safe and is one of the least toxic vitamins.
Most animals and people can tolerate high levels without side effects
doses). Rare side effects seen in people taking high doses ofvitamin
E for extended periods of time include fatigue, headache, bleeding,
nausea, gastrointestinal distress, and muscular weakness.
Contraindications
High doses of vitamin E in people (≥1,800 IU/day) may cause
bleeding. High doses of vitamin E should not be used in patients
min E is used as the sole antioxidant, as it may cause an increased
risk of heart failure in patients taking angiotensin 1 converting
enzyme [ACE] inhibitors).'
Interactions
Combining vitamin E with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs such as acetylsalicylic acid [aspirin]) or anticoagulants
may increase bleeding tendencies. Topicalvitamin Eoil may reduce
radiation therapy.' Combining vitamin E with cisplatin may reduce
the peripheral neuropathy that can occur with cisplatin therapy.
In addition, combining vitamin E with the immunomodulating
drug cyclosporine may enhance the bioavailability of and decrease
the clearance of cyclosporine, reduce side effects associated with
cyclosporine, and allow lower drug dose levels. Haloperidol may
decrease vitamin E levels in the body. Combining vitamin E with
haloperidol can prevent vitamin E deficiency (which occurs only
rarely in dogs and cats). Vitamin E may reduce the adverse effects
154
VITAMINE
This electronic publication is intendled for μuse only by the original purcha.ser
of and enhance the therapeutic action of statin (blood pressure)
medications.' Combining vitamin E with omeprazole may reduce
mucosal damage because of erosive esophagitis. Vitamin E may
reduce ototoxicity and vestibular toxicity that can be seen with
aminoglycoside medications (presumably because aminoglycosides
induce free radical formation).
Vitamin E administered with griseofulvin can elevate serum
levels of griseofulvin, thus necessitating a reduced dose of griseoful.
vin.' Vitamin E may improve glucose tolerance in diabetics, possi-
bly necessitating a reduced dose of insulin or oral hypoglycemic
agents.'Combining vitamin E with synthetic retinoids can reduce
dermatological side effects often seen with synthetic retinoids.
Anticonvulsant medications may lower serum levels of vitamin E;
thus vitamin E supplementation could be considered for patients
prescribed anticonvulsants.' Vitamin E, particularly if used as
the sole antioxidant, may cause an increased risk of heart failure
in patients taking ACE inhibitors. Intake of high levels of poly
unsaturated fatty acids/omega-3/omega-6 fatty acids can decrease
vitamin E levels. For this reason, patients taking omega-3 fatty acid
supplements should consider also supplementing with vitamin E;
(making additional supplementation unnecessary).
References
1.Stargrove M, Treasure J, McKee D. Herb, rutrient, ard drug interacfions: clinica
implications and therapeutic strafegies. St. Louis (MO): Mosby Elsevier; 2008:
422-46.
2.Hand M, Thatcher C, Remillard R, et al. Sra arira clirica rtrition. Sth ed
Topeka (KS): Mark Morris Institute; 2010:86-7, 466, 895.
3.Wynn SG, Marsden S. Manuat of naturar veterinary medicine: science and
fradition. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003:57, 80, 137-8, 370, 398
Nutritional Supplements for the Veterinary Practice 155
@20 12 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
APPENDIX 1
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
ON ANTIOXIDANTS
The term “antioxidant" refers to any substance (e.g., herb, nutri-
tional supplement,vitamin,mineral, or endogenous chemical such
mizes oxidation. Oxidation is a reaction in which a molecule loses
electrons and becomes unstable or"reactive."Molecules routinely
become oxidized during cellular metabolism.' There are a number
of antioxidants that can be used in clinical practice. A few of the
more commonly used antioxidants are described throughout this
book, including α-linoleic acid, and coenzyme Q (CoQ10).
Antioxidants are reportedly effective for a variety of medical
problems in both people and animals. Common uses include auto-
immune disorders,asthma,bronchitis, cognitive disorders,cardia
disease, renal disease, diabetes mellitus, degenerative myelopathy,
osteoarthritis, atopic dermatitis, and seizures.23
One area of controversy worth noting is the use of antioxi
dants as part of the therapeutic regimen for patients with cancers.2.4
Some doctors, especially oncologists and radiation therapists, are
concerned that antioxidants might interfere with chemotherapy
and/or radiation therapy. This is because of the fact that a few
chemotherapy medications and all radiation therapies cause oxidi
zation within the cancer cells that ultimately leads to the death
of these cells (e.g, by lipid peroxidation and damaging DNA).
Additionally,the administration of only a few select (chemical)
antioxidants (rather than using a balanced approach with multiple
antioxidants), especially in patients consuming diets low in anti-
oxidants, can cause some supplermental antioxidants to act as pro
oxidants rather than as antioxidants,which could contribute to
worsening of the cancer.In fact, some studies singisolated antiox
idants such as β-carotene (a colorful pigment in plants and precur-
these antioxidants are used along with chemotherapeutic agents or
157
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
radiation therapy. These are the types of studies that doctors who
are against the use of antioxidants in patients undergoing chemo-
therapy or radiation therapy cite when stating that antioxidants
can be harmful when used in cancer patients. For example, one
alsosmoked.
However, several other types of cancer were reduced.°
Additionally, synthetic β-carotene can reduce liver stores of other
carotenoids, which are more important in cancer prevention than
β-carotene (making synthetic β-carotene less desirable).° Studies
that report an increase in cancer when antioxidants are used
concomitantly with either chemotherapy or radiation should be
closely scrutinized. These studies usually use an isolated, high dose
of synthetic vitamins and may not be controlled for outside envi
ronmental factors such as smoking. Additionally, it should be kept
in mind that cancer cells are not normal cells in their biochemistry,
physiology,or metabolism. As such, cancer cells may react differ-
ently when exposed to various nutrients,including antioxidants
than normal cells. Because the interrelationship among antioxi
dants is complex, better results tend to occur when mixtures of
antioxidants are lsed rather than when only one antioxidant is
used. For example, better results (i.e., clinical improvement) may
occur when vitamins A,C,and E are used together rather than
when only one of these antioxidant vitamins is used,because of the
interactions among these vitamins. Whenever possible, mixtures
of antioxidants (especially natural antioxidants such as palm oil,
whichprovides a mixture of tocopherols and tocotrienols rathet
than synthetic DL-a tocopherol, which is often referred to as"vita
min E") should be used to provide the best clinical improvement.
In the author's opinion,many conventional oncologists do not
properly address the nutritional needs of cancer patients and often
recommend diets that tend to be antioxidant neutral or antioxidant
S     si  s
rather than reduce or inhibit it.
When discussing cancer in general, it should be noted that
in its own individual and unique way to both conventional cancer
therapies and natural cancer therapies. This makes it difficult to
make blanket or general recommendations for using antioxidants
in specific cancers without well-designed clinical studies. For
example,it may be that melanoma is best treated with a certain
158
APPENDK1
This electronic publication is intencled for μse only by the original purcha.ser
mixture of antioxidants whereas squamous cell carcinoma might
be better treated with a different group ofantioxidants. Much more
research is needed to fully elucidate the effects of various nutrients on
each type of cancer.
Veterinarians are often forced to apply in vitro results to
patients or to extrapolate recommendations from in vivo studies
in people.Alas, there are inherent difficulties with this approach.
Once again, further research in each species of patient using a vari-
ety of antioxidants for each type of cancer will provide more infor-
mation to better guide veterinariansin selecting the most appropri
ate supplement(s) to use in patients.
Despite all of these concerns,doctors practicing integrative
medicine often employ antioxidants as part of their integrative
therapy for treating a patient with cancer. The rationale behind
antioxidant usage as part of a balanced therapeutic approach to the
patient with cancer is as follows:
1. Chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy, because of its
oxidizing effect on cells through the generation of free
radicals, often causes decreased levels of antioxidants
within the cells and/or plasma.
2.  Antioxidants induce cell differentiation and growth inhi-
bition by blocking damage from free radicals (protecting
healthy cells) and inhibiting the enzyme protein kinase
C activity.' In turn, tumor cell division and proliferation
are inhibited, the expression of cancer-promoting genes
is inhibited, transforming growth factor β and p21 genes
are induced, and the growth-inhibiting effects of radiation
therapy and chemotherapy are enhanced.
3.
Certain conventional medicines (such as CoQl0) are often
employed in concert with chemotherapy because of their
antioxidant effects that limit tissue damage caused by the
oxidizing effects of the chemotherapy medication. These
antioxidant medications in no way interfere with the
cancer cell-killing ability of chemotherapy.
To date, there are no credible reports or controlled clinical studies
to support the fear that antioxidant usage interferes with the cancer-
killing effects of chemotherapy or radiation therapy. On the contrary,
the use of antioxidants during conventional cancer therapies will
more likely be helpful (or at worst exhibit negligible efficacy) than
harmful. Supplement usage during chemotherapy and/or radiation
therapy, especially supplement therapy with antioxidants, often
Nutritional Supplements for the Veterinary Practice 159
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
increases the efficacyoftheconventional therapy while minimizing
side effects from the conventional therapy.²Theoretically,antioxi
dant usage during chemotherapy with certain chemotherapeutic
agents might actually allow for a reduced dose of the chemothera-
to all cells (not just cancer cells) during chemotherapy or radiation
therapy. Because excessive oxidation is a known cause of cancer,
the use of antioxida nts is likely to protect noncancerous cells from
damage.
At this time, research plus clinical experience tends to support
the use of a balanced antioxidant regimen when combined with a
proper diet for patients treated with chemotherapy and/or radiation
therapy, regardless of the type of cancer present. The practitioner
is encouraged to constantly monitor the cancer patient to assess
efficacy of the conventional therapies (as well as any natural
therapies) and to note any side effects that may arise during
integrative cancer therapy.
References
1.Broadfoot PJ, Palmquist RE, Jonston K,et al. Integrating corrplerrertary
redicine into veterinary practice. Goldstein R, ed. Blackwell;2008:706-7,
15, 2012
2.Wynn SG, Marsden S. Maruat of ratural veterinary medicine:science and
fracition. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2003:51, 57, 271, 420, 532
3.Scthoen A, Wynn SG. Complerentary and alfermafive veterinary rredicine:
principles anct practice. St Louis (MO): Mosby; 1998:1159.
4.Pizzorno J, Murray M, Joiner-Bey H. The clinicians handbook of ratura
medicine. 2nd ed. St. Louis (MO): Churchill Livingstone; 2008:1345.
5.Stargrove M, Treasure J, McKee D. Herb, rutriernt, and drug interactions:
linical irrplicafions and fherapeufic strategies. St. Louis (MO): Mosby Elsevier;
2008:179-80, 2423.
6.Blaylock R. Natura strategiesfor cancer patients. New York: Kensingtor
Publishing Corp:; 2003:132-3, 156-9.
160
APPENDK1
This electronic publication is intencled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser
APPENDIX 2
LIST OF SUPPLEMENTS THAT MAY
AFFECT BLOOD COAGULATION
·Coenzyme Q
·Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA)
·Fish Oil (Linseed oil, Linum usitatissimum)
Garlic(Allium sativum)
·Ginkgo (Ginko biloba)
·Green Tea (Camellia sinensis)
·Hawthorn (Crataegus laevigata,C.monogyna, C.oxyacantha)
·Kava(Piper methysticum)
·S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe)
·St. John's Wart (Hypericum perforatum)
·Super Green Foods: Spirulina/Blue-Green Algae (Spirulina
platensis,S.maxima)
·Vitamin A
·Vitamin C
·Vitamin E
161
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
APPENDIX 3
LISTOF SUPPLEMENTS THAT MAY
INTERACTWITH ANESTHETICS
SEDATIVES, AND ANTIDEPRESSANTS
·Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA)
·Ginkgo (Ginko biloba)
·Kava(Piper methysticum)
·S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe)
·St.John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum)
·Valerian(Valeriana officinalis)
163
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
APPENDIX 4
LIST OF SUPPLEMENTS THAT MAY
REDUCE SIDE EFFECTS FROM
AND/OR ENHANCE CYTOTOXICITY
OF CHEMOTHERAPY AND
RADIATION THERAPY
·Carnitine (L-carnitine)
·Chondroitin (may also be contraindicated depending on the type
of neoplasm)
.Coenzyme Q
·Fish Oil (Linseed oil, Linum usitatissimum)
·Garlic (Allium sativum)
·Ginkgo (Ginko biloba)
·Green Tea (Camellia sinensis)
·Melatonin (N-acetyl-5-methoxytryptophan)
·Silymarin/Milk Thistle(Silybum marianum)
165
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
LIST OF REFERENCES
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (A'TSDR). ToxFAQs for silver
Available at: http:// www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/tf.asp?id=538&tid=97. Accessed
January 9,2012.
Alejandro A, Stamenkovic I, Meinick M, et al. CD44 is the principal cell surface
receptor tor hyaluronate. Cett 1990;61:1303-13.
Baker NF, Farver TB. Failure of brewer's yeast as a repellant to fleas on dogs. J Amr
Vet Med Ass0c 1983;183(2):212-4
Blaylock R. Naturat strategies for cancer patients. New York: Kensington
Publishing Corp.; 2003:132-3, 156-9.
Broadfoot PJ, Palmquist RE, Jonston K, et al. Infegrafing corrplerentary redicine
into veterinary practice. Goldstein R, ed. Blackwell; 2008:541. Available at:
www.mediafire.com/?2s13ctmvv7tyb2k. Accessed January 15, 2012
delivery of drugs to the skin. J Eur Acad Derrafo Venereol 2005;19(3):30818.
ConsumerLab.com. Product review: Probiofics for aclts, children and pets
Available at: https://ww w.consumerlab.com/reviews/Probiotic_Supplements
_Lactobacillus_acidophilus_Bifdobacterium/probiotics/. Accessed February
21, 2012.
Cooper C, Brown K, Meletis C, et al. Inflammation and hyaluronic acid. A tern
Compl Ther 2008;14(2):78-84.
Dharmananda S. Arrrino acid supplerrents l: glatarrine. With Refererce to tfe
Related Compound Gtutamate. Available at: http://www.itmonline.org/arts
/glutamine.htm. Accessed March 13, 2012.
El Idrissi A, Messing J, Scalia J,et al. Prevention of epileptic seizures by taurine
Adv Exp Med Biol 2003;526:51525.
Fetrow CW, Avila J. Professional's hardbook of cormplerrentary e alermative
medicines. 3rd ed. Philadelphia (PA): Lippincott Williams & wilkins; 2004.
Fung MC, Bowen DL. Silver products for medical indications: risk-benefit
assessment. J ToxicoI Clix Toxico 1996;34(1):11926.
Gfeller R, Messonnier S. Handbook of small aniral toxicology and poisonings
2nd ed. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2004:316-20, 431-3.
Graeser AC, Giller K, Wiegand H, et al. Synergistic chondroprotective effect
of alpha-tocopherol, ascorbic acid, and selenium as well as glucosamine
and chondroitin on oxidant induced cell death and inhibition of matrix
metalloproteinase-3—studies in cultured chondrocytes. Molecules 2009
15:27-39
Gulbranson SH, Hud JA, Hansen RC. Argyria following the use of dietary
supplements containing colloidal silver protein. Cutis 2000;66(5):373-4.
167
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
Habib MAB, Parvin M, Huntington TC, et al. A review on culture, production and
use of Spirulina as food for humans and feeds for domestic animals and fish
FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Circular No. 1034. 2008. Available at: ftp://ftp
fao.org/docrep/fao/011/i0424e/i0424e00.pdf. Accessed March 12, 2012
Hand M, Thatcher C, Remillard R, et al. Sraf arirra clirica rutrition. Sth ed
Topeka (KS): Mark Morris Institute; 2010.
sulfonylmethane, MSM). Laboratory of Vitamin Technology, Inc., Chicago, IL,
August 21, 1958
Kalman DS, Heimer M, Valdeon A, et al. Effect of a natural extract of chicken
quality oflife in subjects with knee osteoarthritis: a pilot randomized double-
bind placebo-controlled trial. Nutr J 2008;7:3.
Kim LS, Axelrod LJ, Howard P, et al. Efficacy of methylsulfonylmethane (MSM)
in osteoarthritis pain ofthe knee: a pilot clinical trial. Csteoarthritis Carfilage
2006 14(3):286-94.
Lee KW, Yamato O, Tajima M, et al. Hematologic changes associated with the
Li CJ, Zhang QM, Li MZ, et al. Attenuation of myocardial apoptosis by alpha
lipoic acid through suppression of mitochondrial oxidative stress to reduce
diabetic cardiomyopathy. Chin Med J |Engl| 2009;122(21):2580-6.
in two dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit Care |San Antonio| 2009;19(5):5016
Mayo Clinic. Consumer health. Question: colloidal silver: is it safe or effective?
Available at: www.mayoclinic.com/health/colloidal-silver/ AN01682. Accessed
January 9, 2012.
Vet Res 1996;57:13904.
Memorial Sloan- Kettering Cancer Center. Transfer factor. About herbs, botanicals
/transfer-factor. Accessed March 12, 2012
Messonnier SP. The nafurat heath bible for dogs e cats: your A-Z guide to over 200
Ferbs, vitarins, dand supplements. New York: Three Rivers Press; 2001.
Mills S, Bone K. Principles and practice of phytotherapy: modem herbat rmecdicine.
St. Louis (MO): Churchill Livingstone; 2000
National Institutes of Health. National Center for Complementary and Alternative
Medicine (NCCAM). Backgrounder: colloidal silver products. Available at:
http://nccam.nih.gov/health/silver/. Accessed January 9, 2012
168LIST OF REFERENCES
This electronic publication is initended for Luse only by the original purcha.ser.
National Institutes of Health. National Center for Complementary and Alternative
Medicine. What is complementary and alternative medicine? Available at:
http://nccam.nih.gov/health/whatiscam/. Accessed January 15, 2012
Olczyk P, Komosiriska-Vassev K, Winsz-Szczotka K, et al. |Hyaluronan: structure,
metabolism, functions, and role in wound healingl. Postepy Hig Med Dosw
{Orine). 2008;62:6519 |in Polish|
Packaged Facts. Pet supplements and rnutraceutical treats in the U.S. 3rd ed.
Nutraceutical-2588715/. Accessed January 15, 2012
Peterson M, Talcott P. Srafl arirrat toxicofogy. Philadelphia (PA): WB Saunders;
2001:452-65
Pizzorno J, Murray M. Textbook ofnafurat medicine. 3rd ed. St. Louis (MO):
Churchill Livingstone; 2006
Pizzorno J, Murray M, Joiner-Bey H. The clinicians handbook ofnafural medicine
2nd ed. St. Louis (MO): Churchill Livingstone; 2008:559.
of glucosamine, chondroitin sulfate, their combination, celecoxib or placebo
taken to treat osteoarthritis of the knee: a GAIT report. Arn Rheurr Dis
2010;69:1459-64. Available at: http:// www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles
/PMC3086604/pdf/nihms267850.pdf. Accessed February 19, 2010
Schoen AM, Wynn SG. Complementary and altermative veterinary medicine:
prnciples and pracfice. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 1998.
Scott D, Miller W, Grifhn C. Mutter ard Kirk's srratl arirral derrafotogy. 6th ed
Philadelphia (PA): WB Saunders Company; 2001.
Simon RR, Marks V, Leeds AR, et al. A comprehensive review of oral glucosamine use
and effects on glucose metabolism in normal and diabetic individuals. Dabefe
Metab Re Rev 2011;27(1):1427. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ pmc
/articles/PMC3042150/pdf/dmrr0027-0014.pdf. Accessed February 20, 2012
Stargrove M,Treasure J, McKee D. Herb, nufrient, and drug interactiors: cliicad
rplicafions dnd fherapeufie sfrafegies. St. Louis (MO): Mosby Elsevier; 2008
Strauss EJ, Hart JA, Miller MD, et al. Hyaluronic acid viscosupplementation
and osteoarthritis: current uses and future directions. Arr J Sporfs Med
2009;37(8):1636-44.
Suksomboon N, Poolsup N, Boobkaew S, et al. Meta-analysis of the effect of
2011;137(3):1328-33.
Teng YH, Tan PH, Chia SJ, et al. Increased expression of non-sulfated chondroitin
Pafhol 2008;21(7):893-901
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. United States Food and Drug
Administration. Overview of dietary supplements. Available at: http://www
fda.gov/Food/DietarySupplements/ConsumerInformation/ucm110417
htm#what. Accessed January 15, 2012
Nutritional Supplements for the Veterinary Practice169
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Colloidal silver not approved. Available at:
http:// www.fda.gov/ Animal Veterinary/NewsEvents/CVMUpdates/ucm127976
htm. Accessed February 19, 2012.
Usha PR, Naidu MU. Randomised, double-blind, parallel, placebo-controlled
osteoarthritis. Clir Drug Investig 2004;24(6):35363
Vazquez JA, Montemayor MI, Fraguas J, et al. Hyaluronic acid production by
Strepfococcaus zooepiderricus in marine by -products media from mussel
processing wastewaters and tuna peptone viscera. Microb Cell Fact 2010;9:46.
Wander RC, Hall JA, Gradin JL, et al. The ratio of dietary (n-6) to (n-3) fatty
acids influences immune system function, eicosanoid metabolism, lipid
Weese JS, Arroyo L. Bacteriological evaluation of dog and cat diets that claim to
contain probiotics. Can Vet J 2003;44(3):212-5. Available at: http:// ww w
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC340078/pdf/20030300s00016p212.pdf
Accessed February 20, 2012.
Weindl G, Schaller M, Schafer-Korting M, et al. Hyaluronic acid in the treatment
and prevention of skin diseases: molecular biological, pharmaceutical and
cinical aspects. Skir Pharmaco Physiol 2004;17(5):207-13.
White JM, Powell AM, Brady K, et al. Severe generalized argyria secondary to
ingestion of colloidal silver protein. Clin Exp Dermatot 2003;28(3):254-6.
Wynn SG, Fougere B. Veterinary Merbal rrredicine. St. Louis (MO): Elsevier; 2007.
Wynn SG, Marsden S. Maruat of natural veterinary medicine: science and
fracition. St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 2002
170
LIST OF REFERENCES
This electronic publication is intendec for Luse only by the oniginal purcha.ser.
FURTHER READING
Alejandro A, Stamenkovic I, Meinick M, et al. CD44 is the principal cell surface
receptor for hyaluronate. Ceff 1990;61(7):1303-13.
Andrews GP, Laverty TP, Jones DS. Mucoadhesive polymeric platforms
for controlled drug delivery. Eaur J Pharmaceutics and Biopharraceutics
2009;71(3):505-18
Arthur J, O'Brien ME, Subak-Sharpe G, eds. Nufraceuficals: fhe corrplete
ercyelopedia of supplements, herbs, vitarrins, and healingfoods. New York:
Perigee; 2001.
Bosworth TR, Scott JE. A specifc fluorometric assay for hexosamines in
Biochem 1994;223(2);266-73.
Bratman S, Kroll D. The rafarat Peatf bible:your A-Z guide fo over 200 herbs,
vitarins, and supptements, Prima; 1999.
Cooper R, Kronenberg F, eds. Botanical rmedicine: frorm bench fo bedside. New
Rochelle (NY): Mary Ann Liebert, Inc. Publishers; 2009
Fundukian L, ed. The Gale ercyctopedia ofaltermafive rrredicine. 3rd ed. Gale
Cengage;2008.
Hill AS, Werner JA, Rogers QR, et al. Lipoic acid is 10 times more toxic in cats
2004;88(3-4):150-6.
Ialenti A, Di Rosa M. Hyaluronic acid modulates acute and chronic inflammation
Agenfs Actfions 1994:43(12):44-7
Kawcak CE, Frisbie DD, Trotter G W, et al. Effects ofintravenous administration
of sodium hyaluronate on carpal joints in exercising horses after arthroscopic
surgery and osteochondral fragmentation. Am J Vet Res 1997;58(10):1132-40.
Lininger S, Gaby A, Sutin S, et al. The rafaurat pharracy: corrplete Porre reference
fo rafural rrredicine. New York: Three Rivers Press; 1999.
Medleau L, Hnilica K. Srall animal dermatotogy: a cotor affas and therapeutic
guide. St. Louis (MO): Elsevier; 2006.
Meletis C, Zabriskie N, Rountree R. Clinical rafural redicine handbook. New
Rochelle (N Y): Mary Ann Liebert, Inc. Publishers; 2008.
Schenck P. Hore-prepared dog and cat diets. 2nd ed. Ames (IA): Wiley- Blackwell;
2010.
Schwartz S. Psyehoactive Ferbs in veterinary behavior medicine. Ames (IA):
Blackwell Publishing; 2005.
Sobocinski PZ, Canterbury WJ, Jurgens KH. Improved continuous-flow method
for determination of total serum hexosamines. Clin Cher 1976;22(8):1394-6
171
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM
Tilford G, Wulf-Tilford M. Herbs for pets: the naturat way to enhance your pets
lfe. 2nd ed. Irvine (CA): BowTie Press; 2009
Washington K, Gottfried MR, Telen MJl. Expression of the cell adhesion molecule
CD44 in gastric adenocarcinomas. Hum Pathor 1994;25(10):1043-9.
Wright KE, Maurer SG, DiCesare PE. Viscosupplementation for osteoarthritis.
Ar J Orffrop 2000;29(2):1889.
Wynn SG. Ermerging therapies: using herbs and rutraceuticat supplerments forsrat
drimals. Lakewood (CO): AAHA Press; 1999
Yarnell E, Abascal K, Rountree R. Clirica botarica rredicine. 2nd ed. New
Rochelle (NY): Mary Ann Liebert, Inc. Publishers; 2009.
172
FURTHERREADING
This electronic publication is initendled for Lse only by the original purcha.ser.
ABOUT THEAUTHOR
Shawn Messonnier, DVM, graduated from Texas A&M College
of Veterinary Medicine in 1987. He is an award-winning author of
30books including The NaturalHealth Bible for Dogs  Cats:Your
A-ZGuideto over2o0 Conditions,Herbs,Vitamins,andSupplements
(Three Rivers Press),The Natural Vet's Guide toPreventing and Treat-
ing Cancer in Dogs (New World Library), The Natural Vet's Guide
to Preventing and Treating Arthritis in Dogs and Cats (New World
Library),8Weeks to a HealithyDog(Rodale),The Allergy Solution for
Dogs:Natural and Conventional Therapies to Ease Discomfort and
Enhance Your Dog's Quality of Life (Three Rivers Press), and Unex-
pected Miracles: Hope and Holistic Healing for Pets (Forge Books).
Messonnier is also a radio show host of Dr. Shawn-The Natural Vet,
on Martha Stewart Living Radio (on Sirius/XM radio). His website,
www.petcarenaturally.com, is consistently ranked number one on
search engines. He is a sought-a fter speaker on the topic of natural
award-winning magic/mentalist act.
173
@2012 by Shawn Messonnier, DVM