UROLOGICAL
DISORDERS
OFTHE
DOG & CAT
Investigarion.Diagnosis&Treatment
PETER EHOLT
MANSON
PUBLISHING
UROOGCA
DISORDERS
OF THE
DOG anD CAT
NEAIAEI ONN SISONOAONOIIVOIISAN
Peter E Holt
BVMS, PhD, DipECVS, CBiol, FIBiol, FHEA, FRCVS
Professor of Veterinary Surgery
School of Clinical Veterinary Science
University of Bristol
Langford, Bristol, UK
MANSON PUBLISHING/THE VETERINARY PRESS
 s         n   o 
for my work was, and still is, a constant source of encouragement to me; my Mum
for allowing her first born the chance to stay on at school and go to University,
contrary to family tradition; my wife, Sylvia, my best friend, supporter and, when
required, critic; my sons, Brandon and Andrew, who would probably have liked to
have seen more of their Dad as children and of whom I am immensely proud;
Alan Case, who got me through A-level Physics but then died too young;
John Lamb (drummer extraordinaire), Cappy' Powell and an anonymous
newsagent who helped teach me about selflessness, values and compassion; and my
mentors Sir William Weipers, Professor Donald Lawson, Professor Jimmy
Campbell, Professor Harold Pearson and Dr Christine Gibbs.
Copyright @ 2008 Manson Publishing Ltd
ISBN: 978-1-84076-095-8
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system or transmitted in any form or by any means without the written permission of the
copyright holder or in accordance with the provisions of the Copyright Act 1956 (as amend-
ed), or under the terms of any licence permitting limited copying issued by the Copyright
Licensing Agency, 33-34 Alfred Place, London WC1E 7DP, UK.
Any person who does any unauthorized act in relation to this publication may be liable to
criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
 For full details of all Manson Publishing Ltd titles please write to:
Manson Publishing Ltd, 73 Corringham Road, London NW11 7DL, UK.
Tel: +44(0)20 8905 5150
Fax: +44(0)20 8201 9233
Email: manson@ mansonpublishing.com
Website: www.mansonpublishing.com
Commissioning editor: Jill Northcott
Project manager: Ayala Kingsley
Copy editor: Peter Beynon
 Cover and book design: Ayala Kingsley
Layout and illustration: DiacriTech, Chennai, India
 Colour reproduction: Tenon & Polert Colour Scanning Ltd, Hong Kong
Printed by: Grafos SA, Barcelona, Spain
Contents
Dedication
2
Differential diagnosis and
PART 2
treatment
57
Foreword
.4
Abbreviations
 Chapter 4 Non-prostatic dysuria 
59
Diagnosis 59
PArt 1
Investigation of animals
with urological signs
7
Treatment 63
Chapter 1  Clinical assessment 
Chapter 5 Prostatic disorders
6
91
Diagnosis  91
Chapter 2 Radiographic investigations . . .. . 14
Treatment 94
Plain films  14
Chapter 6 Urinary tract trauma
106
Intravenous urography  18
Renal trauma  106
Retrograde, positive contrast vagino.
Uroperitoneum 112
Lurethrography   25
Treatment of urinary tract
Retrograde, positive contrast
trauma 112
urethrography 29
Cystography  32
Chapter 7 Other causes of haematuria . . . . 123
Chapter 3 Other diagnostic aids . . .
Diagnosis  123
..36
Treatment 128
Ultrasonography   36
Urethral catheterization  38
Chapter 8  Urinary incontinence
134
Centesis  45
Urinary incontinence in
Cytology  46
juvenile animals  134
 Biopsy techniques  48
Urinary incontinence in
adult animals 142
Blood and urine analyses  5l
 Urethral sphincter mechanism
Urodynamics  53
incompetence   145
Endoscopy 55
References and further reading
160
Index . .
. . 169
Appendices
176
Foreword
Be carefil about reading health boohs. You may die of a misprint.
Mark Twain (1835-1910)
THIS BOOK IS AIMED first and foremost at being a
●Mr Alasdair Hotston Moore for permission to use
practical guide for the small animal veterinary practi-
figures 365-367.
● Dr Dick White and Mr Jonathan Bray for allowing
surgical techniques described are those that the author
 me to use their figures as a basis for figures
considers practicable in a reasonably well-equipped vet-
313-317.
erinary practice. The book is not intended to be read
●My surgical colleagues and clinical scholars at 
from cover to cover. Apart from certificate or diploma
Langford for keeping me on my toes, especially Mr
examination candidates, I am aware of few people who
Hotston Moore, Dr Martin Owen, Dr Eithne
do this. Rather, this book is meant to be referred to for
Comerford and Mr Christopher Shales.
practical information on a specific problem as and
● Mr John Conibear, Mr Malcolm Parsons and Ms
when the need arises, and copious cross-referencing is
 Tracey Dewey who took most of the photographs 
used to direct the reader to related material within the
used in this book.
book. I have always investigated as well as treated my
● T'he anaesthetists and veterinary nurses who helped
own cases and no apology is made for allocating a large
in the management of the cases used to illustrate
section of this book to the investigation of animals
this book.
with urological signs. An accurate diagnosis is the
● T'he students who helped to care for many of these
foundation upon which any treatment plan is built.
animals.
Detailed descriptions of advanced techniques such as
● Special thanks to Professor Elizabeth Stone and Mr
scintigraphy and MRI or CT scanning will not be
Rob White, who reviewed the draft of this book for
described. Apart from the lack of facilities in most
the publishers, for their constructive comments.
practices, these are specialized techniques requiring
specialized equipment and expertise in their use and
 The evidence base in many areas of veterinary urology
interpretation.
is thin and, sometimes, controversial (e.g. the necessi-
Mark Twain, if he was alive, would be reassured by
ty to ligate the renal artery and vein separately or not
the professional assistance I have had in the production
during nephrectomy). This book is therefore based
 of this book and I am gratefil to the following for their
almost entirely upon my own experiences, good and
help and support:
bad, and I would commend to the reader the following
●Dr Frances Barr for assistance with
quotation by Carolyn Coats (1988) in her book
ultrasonographic illustrations (figures 85,
*Things Your Dad Always Told You But You Didn't
259-262) and advice.
Want To Hear':
● Dr Kostas Papasouliotis for advice on normal
laboratory values.
Learn from the mistahes of others; you may not live
● Mr A Skuse for advice on the staining of
long enough to mahe them all yourself.
cytological specimens.
● The late, great Professor Harold Pearson for
permission to use figures 432, 433.
Abbreviations
5
CT
computed tomography
DHTest
dihydrotestosterone
DNA
deoxyribonucleic acid
ECG
electrocardiogram
FLUTD
feline lower urinary tract disease
FSH
follicle stimulating hormone
FUS
feline urological syndrome
IVU
intravenous urography
LH
luteinizing hormone
LHRH
luteinizing hormone releasing hormone
LMN
lower motor neurone
MCH
mean corpuscular haemoglobin
MCHC
mean corpuscular haemoglobin concentration
MCV
mean corpuscular volume
MRI
 magnetic resonance imaging
ND:YAG
neodymium: yttrium aluminium garnet (laser)
NSAID
 non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug
PCV
packed cell volume
RBC
red blood cell(s)
RNA
ribonucleic acid
testosterone
UMN
upper motor neurone
WBC
white blood cell(s)
This page intentionally left blank
INVESTIGATION
Part
OF ANIMALS WITH
UROLOGICAL SIGNS
Clinical assessment
Radiographic investigations
Other diagnostic aids
This page intentionally left blank
Clinical assessment
9
But most physical defensive reactions are of the same scarcely recognisable and, so to speah,
indirect nature, and their purposeful character also has only been recognised through deep investigation
and exact observation.
Carl Jung (1875-1961)
IN THIs CHAPTER, a brief account is given of the
these signs are listed in Tables I-5. Some sex predis-
 clinical assessment of small animals presented with
positions are obvious (e.g. prostatic disease), but
signs of urological disease.
symbols based on the author's experiences appear
Most animals with urological presenting signs
alongside conditions potentially responsible for the
can be divided into those presenting primarily
urological signs; m = commoner in male animals;
with dysuria, haematuria, urinary incontinence or
f = commoner in female animals;  = no apparent sex
 frequency/urgency. The main conditions leading to
 predisposition.
 Table 1  Dysuria 
Table 3 Congenital urinary incontinence
 Urethral prolapse (m]
Ureteral ectopia (f)
Prostatic disorders (m]
Congenital urethral sphincter mechanism
 Blodder neck neoplasia (f)
incompetence (f)
Urethral neoplasia (f)
Blodder hypoplasia (m)
 Pervious urachus (n] 
 Urethral trauma (n)
Intersexuality (n) 
Urethritis (f)
Urethral stricture (n)
Congenital neurological abnormalities (n)
 Neurogenic dysuria (n) 
Table 4 Acquired urinary incontinence
Bladder displacement/entrapment (m)
Acquired urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence (f)
Functional disorders (e.g. dyssynergia [m],
Prostatic disorders (m] 
bladder atony [ml]
 External resistance to urine oufflow (e.g. ureterocoele
Blodder/urethral neoplasia (f)
[rarely] [m] 
Uretero- or vesicovaginal fistula (f)
Acquired neurological conditions (n]
Table 2 Haematuria
Overflow incontinence with chronic retention (m]
 Detrusor overactivity/hyperactivity/instability (n ]
 Urinary tract infection (n)
Urolithiasis (n] 
Prostatic disorders (m]
Table 5 Frequency/urgency (pollakiuria)
Urinary tract neoplasia (n)
Cystitis/urethritis (f)
Cystolithiasis (f)
Urinary tract trauma (n) 
Idiopathic renal haemorrhage (n)
Bladder/urethral neoplasia (f) 
Urethral prolapse (m)] 
 Prostatic disease (m]
Bladder hypoplasia/detrusor overactivity/hyperactivity!
instability (n)
Lower urinary tact trauma (n]
10
Investigation of animals with urological signs
The clinical assessment of animals with these signs
●Pyuria. Determine if a purulent urethral dlischarge
can be divided into history taking (1) and clinical
 is also present (e.g. the dog with prostatic
examination (2-15) for the purposes of description,
abscessation).
but these two activities are closely interrelated; fiurther
● Urethral discharge. Differentiate from preputial or
questioning of the owner may be suggested by clinical
 vaginal discharge and urinary incontinence:
findings, whilst the history may point to a particular
determine nature of dlischarge.
I type of examination.
●Oversexuality (in males).
● Vulval/preputial licking.
●Neurological signs.
1 A good history is essential. In many animals with
urological signs, especially incontinent dogs and cats,
2 A detailed clinical examination in animals with
there may be few or no detectable abnormalities on
 obstructive dysuria is less of a priority than relief of the
clinical examination, but a good history will usually
dysuria. Prolonged bladder distension may result in
suggest which part of the urinary tract merits more
bladder wall ischaemia. Initially, this affects the
detailed ancillary investigations. As well as the breed,
urothelium, which may become necrotic and slough,
sex and age of the animal, the presence or absence
as illustrated in this dog five days after acute dysuria.
and, where relevant, frequency and severity of the
Sloughed urothelium may be a further cause of
following should be determined:
 obstructive dysuria. If acute bladder distension is
● Entire or neutered animal.
prolonged, the ischaemia may involve all layers of the
●Anorexia/inappetence.
bladder wall and the result may be a bladder that is a
●Polydipsia/polyuria.
non-functional, fibrotic sac. In addition, bladder nerve
●Dysuria. Differentiate straining to pass urine in
stretching, demyelination and breakdown of tight
obstructed animals from faecal tenesmus or urinary
junctions may occur, resulting in neurogenic dysuria
tenesmus with the bladder small or empty.
following relief of the obstruction. Dysuria should be
●Anuria.
relieved by catheterization or cystocentesis (see
● Oliguria.
Chapter 3, Centesis).
●Nocturia.
● Urinary incontinence. Differentiate from
3 Urinary incontinence. A continuous dripping
inappropiate micturition (e.g. behavioural or the
incontinence in a juvenile animal may suggest ureteral
untrained puppy).
ectopia, which was present in this Golden Retriever,
● Urinary frequency/urgency (pollakiuria).
but it can also be associated with uretero- or vesico-
●Haematuria. Differentiate from haemoglobinuria
vaginal fistula and paradoxical overflow incontinence
and determine the phase of urination during which
associated with obstructive or neurogenic dysuria.
most blood is present; for example, in male dogs
with prostatic disease the first part of the stream
 4 Intermittent, more copious incontinence, which
may be most bloody, bladder urothelial tumours
 Occurs predominantly during recumbency, is sugges-
often bleed towards the end of micturition and the
tive of urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence.
urine is usually equally bloody throughout micturi-
 These signs are not pathognomonic and clinical,
tion in cases of renal haemorrhage. However, these
 contrast radiographic and laboratory examinations
are not hard and fast rules.
are required to make an accurate diagnosis
Clinical assessment
11
 5 A bloody urethral discharge in male dogs is
sometimes mistaken by the owners for haematuria or
incontinence of bloody urine. A good history should
differentiate these and clinical examination will
exclude lesions of the prepuce and/or penis as the
source of haemorrhage. If the urine is said to be clear
 of or to contain much less blood, such a discharge
suggests a prostatic or urethral disorder. Bleeding in
this dog originated from the prostate gland.
 6 A bloody preputial discharge may be due to a
 preputial or penile lesion. In the case of this Bulldog,
a urethral prolapse was the source of the
haemorrhage.
7  Clinical examination revealed that the purulent dis-
charge in this dog was urethral rather than preputial in
origin. Cytological and bacteriological examinations
of the discharge should be performed to confirm its 
nature, obtain antibiotic sensitivities and look for the
 presence of malignant cells. T'his Boxer had a prostatic
abscess.
12
Investigation of animals with urological signs
8 The urethra should be palpated for abnormal
masses. This dysuric German Shepherd Dog has a firm
mass at the caudal end of the os penis (just cranial to
the scrotum). Masses in this region may be large
urethral calculi, but these are not always palpable. This
dog has a tumour of the os penis (a chondrosarcoma).
Its treatment is illustrated later (see 187-199).
T'he pelvic urethra can be palpated per rectum in males
and females and examination of the female urethra can
be performed per vaginam in large bitches. In male
and female cats, external and rectal palpations only are
practicable, although rectal examination of this species
usually requires sedation or general anaesthesia.
9 In male dogs the prostate is best examined by
a combination of abdominal and rectal palpations.
 In the case of a right-handed person, the left hand is
used to push the prostate caudodlorsally onto the
finger of the right hand, which is in the rectum. If the
animal is recumbent, palpation is easier in right lateral
recumbency (as shown) for a right handed person.
Left-handed clinicians should reverse this advice.
T'he prostate is examined for size, symmetry, texture
and pain; the value of the findings in differential
diagnosis is summarized in Table 11 (p. 91).
10, 11 Bladder palpation is best performed with one
10
hand (unless the size of the animal or bladder makes
this impossible) (10). The size, degree of turgidity and
thickness of the bladder wall and the presence of
abnormal masses should be determined. The
detection of crepitation suggests the presence of
multiple cystoliths or bladder wall mineralization.
Blacldler wall thickness can be assessed (as long as the
bladder is not distended with urine) between the
thumb and fingers as the (doubled) bladder wall is
pinched between them (1l) .
11
Blocdldler woll
Clinical assessment
13
12 T'he kidneys can be palpated in the craniodorsal
12
 part of the abdomen. If the animal is sufficiently
relaxed, it is possible to palpate deep to the costal
 arch, as illustrated. T'his may be necessary to locate the
right kidney which is more cranial than the left.
13 T'he kidneys of cats are more easily located than
those of dogs and, in cats and small dogs, may be
13
palpated using one hand. The kidney position, size,
texture and shape should be assessed. In the author's
experience, renal pain is difficult to assess in small
 animals. Dogs and cats with renal lesions that one
would expect to be painful frequently show no signs 
of pain, while spinal pain in animals is sometimes
misdiagnosed as renal pain.
14 Micturition and urinary continence control
Socral segments 
14.
depend upon complex neuromuscular activity and
coordination. During micturition the impulse of the
pelvic nerve causes contraction (+); that of the
pudendal and hypogastric nerves causes relaxation (-).
Coudol mesenteric
 Pudendal
Most clinicians are familiar with the animal with
 gonglion 
nerve
Hypogostric 
Pelvic
 thoracolumbar spinal disease that cdevelops urinary
nerve
nerve
retention as part of a more widespread problem, but
 neurogenic urological problems can occur without
 Striated muscle
 Smooth muscle 
overt neurological limb abnormalities. T'his is
 Somatic nerve
 particularly true if the sacral segments of the spinal
 Sympathetic nerve
cord or their nerve roots are affected. If so, much of
Parasympat hetic nerve
the nerve supply to hindllimb musculature may be
intact (since it originates from caudal lumbar spinal
cord segments and is cranial to the lesion) and the
animal may show little, if any, hindlimb gait
 abnormalities. However, evidence of cauda equina
disease may be detectable (i.e. bladder and possibly
 rectal paralysis, tail paresis or paralysis and perineal
skin desensitization).
15 A blackboard or wipe-clean board is a useful
addition to the consulting room. It greatly facilitates
explanations of possible diagnoses, further investi-
gative procedures, potential treatments and
complications to the owner of the animal.
2 Radiographic investigations
14
Isn't life a series of images that change as they repeat themselves?
Andy Warhol (1928-1987)
RADIOGRAPHIC INVESTIGATIONS are frequently
and interpretation and how to avoid them. No details
required in the differential diagnosis of conditions
of radiographic exposure will be given, since these will
leading to urological presenting signs in small animals.
vary considerably depending on the equipment
Plain abdominal radiographs are mandatory and
available to the reader. In addition, a level of radio-
 thoracic radiography should not be neglected in cases
 graphic competence by the reader is assumed.
of suspected malignancy (to examine for the presence
It is vital that all radiographs are taken when the
of pulmonary metastases). In the majority of cases,
animal is still. This is particularly important when
plain radiographs alone are insufficient for diagnostic
examining the kidneys, which move caudally and
purposes and contrast radiographs are required.
cranially during inspiration and expiration, respec-
In this chapter, intravenous urography, vagino-
tively, due to diaphragmatic movements. Radio-
Lurethrography, Lurethrography and cystography will be
graphic exposures should, therefore, be made
described. These are the commonest techniques
immediately after expiration, during the respiratory
employed in urological cases and they are applicable in
pause when the animal is not moving. The exception
 general practice. The descriptions will concentrate on
is thoracic radiography, which is usually performed at
 indications, techniques and problems in technique
[ fiuill inspiration.
Plain films
16
Indications
● Urolithiasis (16-18).
● Determination of organ size, shape and position
(19).
● Evidence of local or distant tumour metastases
(20-23).
● As control films, prior to contrast radiography
16 Bladder calculi can usually be seen on plain films.
Radliographs should be made before the bladder is
emptied, as the calculi show up better in a full, rather
than an empty, bladder. Non-radiopaque calculi can 
be demonstrated by double contrast cystography but,
somewhat surprisingly, they are not well-outlined by
pneumocystography alone. If plain radiographs are
not made before positive contrast radiographic
techniques, vesical calculi may be obscured by the
 contrast medium and remain undetected.
Radiographic investigations
15
17
18
6L
17, 18 (17) Renal calculi are also easily seen on plain
ventrodorsal radiographs. However, care should be
taken in bitches not to confuse large nipples with
renal calculi.
(18) Lateral abdominal radiography will distinguish
between large nipples and renal calculi; the nipples will
now be on the ventral abdominal wall, whereas the
calculus or calculi will still be in the region of the renal
 pelvis/pelves in the craniodorsal abdomen.
19 The size, shape and position of urinary tract
organs can sometimes be seen on plain films. In many
cases, however, contrast radiographic techniques are
required more accurately to dlistinguish urinary tract
organs from surrounding soft tissues. In addition,
although this dog appears to have an enlarged left
kidney on this plain ventrodorsal abdominal radio-
 graph, additional techniques (intravenous urography,
ultrasonography, urine laboratory examinations) are
required before the reason for the enlargement can be
determined (see 32, 33).
20 T'horacic radiography should always be performed
in cases of possible urinary tract malignancy. T'his aged
 Poodle was treated by castration and oestrogens for
12 months for benign prostatic enlargement.
On presentation, the dog screamed during any
attempt to examine or handle it. T'he reason for the
 pain is apparent in the next two illustrations, but a
simple thoracic radliograph would have demonstrated
that this was not a benign condition.
16
Investigation of animals with urological signs
21
21, 22 (21) A plain lateral caudal abdominal radio-
 graph of the dog in 20. The periosteal bone reactions 
on the pelvis and sublumbar/sacral vertebrae are
highly suggestive of intrapelvic malignancy (in this
case, prostatic carcinoma), but are frequently not
neoplastic themselves.
(22) Postmortem specimen from the dog in 20 and
21. The periosteal bone reactions can be seen. A
 metastasis from the prostatic carcinoma is present in
the body of the 6th lumbar vertebra.
 23 In cases of suspected malignancy, the soft tissues
ventral to the caudal lumbar and sacral vertebrae
should be examined for evidence of sublumbar/iliac
lymph node enlargement, suggesting lymphatic
22
spread. Ultrasonography is a more sensitive method
of detecting subtle enlargement. In some instances
 the enlargement of the sublumbar lymph nodes may
be responsible for the urological signs. Dysuria and
dyschezia in this dog are due to external pressure on
the bladder neck/proximal urethra and rectum by a
 neoplastic sublumbar lymph node (lymphosarcoma).
Techniqnes
THE POsITIONING TECHNIQUES for radiography of
 urinary tract organs are illustrated in the sections on
contrast radiographic procedures (see 36-44). Thoracic
and distal male canine urethral radiography are illustrat-
23
ed below (24-26).
24, 25 T'horacic radiographs should be made at full
inspiration, as this improves the radliographic contrast
between pulmonary masses and surrounding air. In
anaesthetized animals, this is achieved by forcibly
inflating the lungs via the endotracheal tube.
(24) For ventrodorsal radiography, the animal is
supported in a sponge (or other radiolucent) cradle.
T'he forelimbs are extended using sandbags and the
X-ray beam is centred midway along the sternum.
(25) During lateral thoracic radiography, the forelimbs
are again extended and the sternum is elevated to the
level of the vertebral column with a radiolucent
wedge. T'he X-ray beam is centred at the levels of the
caudal edge of the scapula and just over a third of the
way up the thoracic wall from the sternum. Right and
left lateral thoracic radiographs are usually performed
for the cliagnosis of pulmonary metastases.
 26 T'he penile and ischial urethra in the male dog is
best radliographed with the hindlimbs flexed cranially
using sandbags and the X-ray beam centred on the
penile/ischial urethra. In this way the stifle joints
and/or femurs are not superimposed on the caudal
penile urethra (see also 29, 30).
Radiographic investigations
17
Problems
24
MANY PROBLEMS are due to incorrect radiographic
 exposure or positioning. The latter is described below
 si saxa n o u sds a p
wasted. Other problems are associated with the
 presence of overlying viscera or abnormal, but clinical-
ly insignificant, tissues (27-30).
 27 Care should be taken in interpretation when other
viscera overlie urinary tract organs. T'he problem of 
nipples being miscliagnosed as renal calculi has already
been mentioned (17, 18). In this illustration, mineral-
ized material in overlying bowel may be confused with
vesical calculi; a radiograph made in the other plane
(in this case, a ventrodorsal radiograph) would clarify
25
the situation.
28 Bony reactions or separate centres of ossification
of the caudal os penis may be mistaken for urethral
calculi in dysuric animals, but they are of no clinical
significance (see also Urethral catheterization, p.38).
In fact, they are dorsal to the urethra itself and, in case
 of doubt, this will be apparent if a retrograde positive
 contrast urethrogram is performed.
26
28
18
Investigation of animals with urological signs
29
ntravenous urography
Indications
● Urinary incontinence.
● Suspected renal or ureteral lesions.
● Suspected lesions of the bladder trigone.
●An abdominal mass in an otherwise healthy animal.
Some indications for the use of intravenous urography
(TVU) are illustrated (31-35).
31  IVU is very useful in cases of urinary inconti-
nence. In this example, a dilated ectopic ureter is
demonstrated terminating beyond the bladder neck.
30
(NB: Retrograde contrast techniques are frequently
required to identify the exact site of the ectopic
opening.)
32, 33 (32) Gross renal lesions are usually demon-
strated by IVU. Hydronephrosis may result in bizarre
racliographs, as illustrated in this juvenile male Golden
Retriever with ureteral ectopia, hydroureter and
hydronephrosis (this is the same dog as shown in 19).
(33) The reason for the bizarre appearance can be
seen in this specimen of the excised kidney and ureter
from the animal in 32. T'he contrast medium accumu
lates in the dependant pockets of the hydronephrotic
29, 30 (29) Urethral calculi proximal to the caudal
kidney cavity. It is always a surprise that there is any
 Os penis may be obscured by the stifle joints when the
significant excretion of contrast medium at allin cases
dog is positioned with the hindlimbs extended for
such as this in which there is only a thin layer of renal
caudal abdominal radliography (see 44). However, this
tissue remaining.
position is useful for demonstrating the vesical calculi
that are usually also present.
34 Ureteral lesions are rare, but rupture of the
(30) The problems are overcome by repeating the
proximal right ureter following ureterolithiasis is
radiograph with the limbs flexed forward and the X-
 demonstrated by IVU in this Golden Retriever (the
ray beam centred on the ischial and penile urethra (see
 radiodensity in the cranial abdomen is barium,
26). This is the same dog as in 129 and the urethral
 administered by mouth to investigate the presenting
calculus responsible for the dysuria can now be seen.
sign of vomiting in this dog). T'he bilateral nephroliths
and the ureteral calculus responsible for the rupture
are now obscured by the contrast medium of the
 IVU, underlining the need for plain radiographs
before administration of contrast medium.
35 IVU may prevent unnecessary surgery. In this
German Shepherd Dog a mass was palpated in the
 caudal abdomen during a routine examination. IVU
 demonstrates that this is an ectopic kicdney (arrow),
which is of no clinical significance. Ultrasonography, if
available, could also have been used to determine the
nature of this mass.
Radiographic investigations
19
32
33
20
Investigation of animals with urological signs
Technique
36
IT Is IMrORTANT that the gastrointestinal tract is empty
since the presence of ingesta makes radiographic inter-
 pretation difficult. This is achieved by the use of
enemata. Soapy water enemas are not suitable, as
bubbles in the large bowel may be confused with
Lureters. Proprietary enemas usually work well and the
author routinely uses phosphate enemas in medium
and large sized dogs and sodium citrate enemas in toy
breeds and cats. A third of a phosphate enema is suffi-
cient for a medium-sized dog, half an enema for a large
breed and a full enema for giant breeds.
IVU is usually performed under general anaesthesia
except in debilitated patients. As with all contrast radio-
 graphic techniques, plain radiographs should be made
37
of the area of interest before contrast medium is uused.
The radiographic timings and positionings illustrated
(36-45) are for a standard intravenous urogram, but
some flexibility is necessary, as dictated by the radiolog-
 ical features that are demonstrated (46). The technique
is demonstrated in an incontinent (but otherwise
normal) bitch, but is identical in cats and in both sexes.
36-45 (36) Under general anaesthesia, a plain lateral
abdominal radiograph is made centred on the
sublumbar region at the level of the umbilicus. Right
lateral recumbency is preferred, as this results in better
separation of the kidneys than left lateral recumbency
due to the relative mobility of the left kidney
38
compared with the right. In addition, it is important 
to standardize the technique. Note the use of a
 sponge wedge (blue) to lift the sternum to the same
level as the spine and a sponge between the hindlimbs
to avoid pelvic tilting. T'hese measures are to ensure
that a true lateral radiograph is made. Soft sandbags
(green) are used to extend the hindlimbs, and a piece
of lead sheet (brown) has been used to absorb X-rays
ventral to the abdomen in order to reduce scattered
radiation. For caudal abdominal radiography, the film
should be centred as shown in 44.
(37) The resultant radiograph is examined for
evidence of any abnormalities and can be compared
with those obtained after contrast administration. It is
also used to determine the efficacy of the enema. In
this case, some faecal material remains in the
 descending colon and rectum and should be removed
by lavage with saline.
(38) The dog is then placed in dorsal recumbency and
 a ventrodorsal radiograph made, again centred on the 
umbilicus. Note the use of a sponge cradle to support
the thorax. It is not necessary to support the
abdomen, so the possibility of a dirty cradle intro-
ducing artefacts on the radiograph is avoided. Soft
sandbags are again used to extend the hindlimbs. It is
important to prevent spillage of urine onto the X-ray
Radiographic investigations
21
39
40
table or/and the animal's coat, particularly after
volume of air is introduced into the bladder. It is
administration of contrast medium. Spilled urine
inadvisable to overdistend the bladder during IVU, as
containing contrast medium will show up on sub-
the increased intravesical pressure may compress the
sequent radiographs and may make radiographic
intramural part of the ureters, making interpretation 
 interpretation difficult.
of their terminations difficult. One ml of air/kg body
(39) The radiograph is also examined for evidence of
weight is usually sufficient. A water-soluble, iodine-
any abnormalities (particularly of the kidneys). The
 based contrast medium containing the equivalent of
kidneys, particularly the right kidney, are not always
approximately 400 mg iodine per ml of contrast
visible but, if they are, their position can be assessed
and the centring (relative to the umbilicus) adjusted
ing about 200 mg iodine per ml are suitable for cats
for the next film, the nephrogram.
and toy breeds of dog. A bolus of 400 mg/kg of
(40) The dog remains in dorsal recumbency and the
iodine equivalent is acdministered by rapid intravenous
 radiographic beam is centred over the kidneys. If
injection. T'he positioning of the dog is quickly
these are not visible on the plain ventrodorsal radio-
checked (and corrected if the dog has been inadver-
 graph, the beam should be centred on a point midway
tently moved during the injection) and the radiograph
between the umbilicus and the xiphisternum, as illu-
made immediately. T'he time is noted, as all further
strated. The bladder is emptied of urine (which is
radiographic timings are relative to the time of
submitted for laboratory examinations) and a small
intravenous injection.
22
Investigation of animals with urological signs
41
(41) The radiograph made immediately after
intravenous injection of contrast medium (the
 nephogram) should result in good renal opacification.
 Poor opacification should be interpreted as a sign of
possible poor renal function and is an indication for
biochemical renal function tests, if these have not
already been performed. The nephrogram is examined
for number of kidneys, renal position, size and shape,
and abnormal filling with contrast medium. If any
apparent lucent areas are seen within the kidney(s),
the plain radiographs should be examined to ensure
that such lucency is not just due to overlying loops of
gas-filled bowel.
(42) Five minutes after administration of contrast
 medium, a ventrodorsal radiograph is made, centred
again on the umbilicus. This should show the kidneys,
renal pelves and at least the proximal ureters. T'he
renal pelves often appear as small triangles (as illus-
trated), but fine, aditional lines may sometimes
be seen extending from the non-ureter corners of
the triangle; retrograde filling of normal renal pelvic
diverticula may also be observed. T'he author used to
use compression of the caudal abdomen in the belief
that this improved the radiographic evaluation of
 the renal pelves, but he no longer considers this to
be necessary. With experience in interpretation,
abdominal compression is not required. T'he normal
ureters usually appear as broken lines. This is perfectly
 normal and is due to ureteral peristaltic waves, which
42
 originate in the renal pelves. T'he five minute radio-
 graph is useful for detecting renal pelvic abdormalities
(dilation, abnormal masses such as calculi or tumours,
pyelitis/pyelonephritis) and lesions of the ureters such
as obstruction by calculi and tumours, hydroureter
and rupture. It is of little value in the diagnosis of
ureteral ectopia (apart from demonstrating any
associated hydroureter/hydronephrosis or
pyelonephritis).
Radiographic investigations
23
(43) T'he animal is placed in right lateral recumbency
43
and a lateral radiograph made, centred on the
umbilicus, ten minutes after administration of contrast
 medium. As well as providing an alternative view of
the kidneys, the distal ureters can now be seen. If one 
is fortunate, the ureters will be seen emptying into the
urinary bladder, as illustrated. While this is facilitated
by the degree of contrast between the positive 
contrast-filled distal ureters and the air-filled bladder,
 and also by the fact that the colon and rectum are now
empty of faeces, a certain amount of luck is involved.
 Unless one happens to make an exposure just as a
 ureteral peristaltic wave propels urine through the
distal ureter into the bladder, the termination of the
 ureter may not be seen. T'he availability of radio-
44
 graphic screning facilities overcomes this problem;
however, if this is not available, several consecutive
radliographs may have to be made before the termi-
nations of the ureters can be seen. In addition, if the
 bladder neck is intrapelvic, as in this bitch, it may be
difficult to decide if the ureters are terminating
beyond the bladder neck, hence the necessity for
the next film.
(44) Fifteen minutes after administration of contrast
medium, a right lateral radiograph is made, centred
just cranial to the greater trochanter of the hip and
 ensuring that the perineum is included on the
radiograph.
(45) The 15 minute film is made mainly to examine
for the location of the bladder neck and the presence
45
of ureteral ectopia. Leakage of urine from the bladder
may be observed and this may suggest other abnor-
malities that require further investigations using
 retrograde techniques. For example, urine leaking
into the urethra may demonstrate the presence of
abnormal diverticula or outline radiolucent masses.
46 The radiographs obtained in 36-45 are usually
sufficient in most animals, but in some cases further
radiographs will be required, some at dlifferent times
and/or in different positions (e.g. oblique views). In
this example, a radiograph has been made 24 hours
after administration of contrast medium to show the
grossy dlilated ureter and kidney of the dog with
hydroureter and hydronephrosis illustrated previously
(19, 32, 33). In such cases, poor renal excretion into a
large volume of residual urine make the normal IVU
timings inappropriate.
24
Investigation of animals with urological signs
47
Problems
ADVERsE REACTIONs to the contrast medium occur
uncommonly. In lightly anaesthetized or conscious
animals, vomiting may occur immediately after admin-
 istration of contrast medium. Although this is transient,
it underlines the need for adequate starvation of the
animal prior to general anaesthesia, the use of an endo-
tracheal tube during maintenance of anaesthesia, and an
adequate depth of anaesthesia (unless the patient is
debilitated or sick).
 Other adverse reactions to the contrast medium are
 anaphylaxis (47, 48) and acute renal shutdown (49).
47, 48 Anaphylactic reactions to contrast media can
48
occur and were manifested in this Springer Spaniel as
acute palpebral oedema (47) and in this Boxer as acute
urticaria (48). Such reactions are obviously more
serious if they are more generalized, especially if lung
 Oedema develops. Fortunately, they are extremely rare
(these are the only two examples the author has
experienced in 37 years) and if they do occur, they
respond rapidlly to intravenous hydrocortisone.
49 Acute renal shutdown is an unusual complication
49
 of IVU. Following administration of contrast
medium, a nephrogram is obtained but the ureters
fail to be opacified. T'he nephrogram persists, with no
evidence of further excretion, as shown in this radio-
 graph made 15 minutes after administration of
contrast medium. T'his problem can be successfiully
 treated by diuresing the animal using intravenous
fluids (normal saline or glucose-saline) combined
with intravenous frusemide.
Radiographic investigations
25
50
Retrograde, posifive contrast
vagino-urethrography
Indications
● Vaginal abnormalities, particularly where these
 prevent physical examinations.
● Suspected urethral lesions.
●Dysuric female dogs and cats.
● Incontinent female dogs and cats.
● Assessment of urethral length and bladder neck
position in bitches with suspected urethral sphincter
mechanism incompetence .
Some indications for the use of this technique are illus-
trated (50-53). In incontinent bitches with a suspected
 diagnosis of urethral sphincter mechanism incompe-
 tence, vagino-urethrography is the preferred radio-
graphic method of assessing urethral length and
bladder neck position, since it is the technique least
lilkely to alter these parameters.
50, 51 Extensive vaginal neoplasia in this bitch (50)
 prevented aclequate digital or endoscopic examina-
tions. Vagino-urethrography (51) was used to deter-
mine the sites and extent of the tumours before
surgical intervention.
52  Vagino-urethrography demonstrates marked
51
urethral irregularity in this dog with urethral
malignancy. If urethrography had been performed,
part of the lesion would have been obscured by the
catheter used to introduce contrast medium.
53 In this example, vagino-urethrography has been
used to demonstrate the termination of an ectopic
ureter in the distal urethra. T'his might have been
missed during urethrography if the urethral catheter
cuff was obscuring the ureteral orifice. In addition,
urethrography alone fails to demonstrate vaginal
terminations of ectopic ureters.
52
53
26
Investigation of animals with urological signs
Technique
 54  The principle of vagino-urethrography is that
THE PATIENT SHOULD BE prepared as for an IVU (see
contrast medium is introduced into the vestibule,
p.20). General anaesthesia is required for vagino-
usually using a Foley catheter. Once the vagina is
urethrography The radiographic positioning is shown
filled, contrast enters the urethra. T'he advantage of
 in 44 and, as with any contrast radiographic technique,
this technique over urethrography is that the whole
 a plain film of the area should be made first. Air can be
length of the urethra is demonstrated without the
used as a contrast medium, but water-soluble iodine-
 presence of a catheter, which might obscure or distort
based positive contrast media are preferable. The
a lesion.
technique is illustrated below (54-59),
55 As with any retrograde radiographic contrast
technique, the catheter should be filled with contrast
medium before being inserted. If this is not done, air
bubbles may be introduced into the urethra and can
be misdiagnosed as calculi or tumours. T'he Foley
54
catheter is designed to take a wide-nozzle syringe or
adapter, but this end of the catheter can be trimmed
to allow a Luer syringe nozzle to be attached directly.
Approximately 1 ml/kg body weight is required to fill 
the vagina to the point when the urethra begins to fill.
T'his volume is larger in entire bitches than in spayed
bitches and is less if the bitch is incontinent. It is also
larger if the bitch is under the influence of endo-
genous or exogenous sex hormones, particularly
 oestrogens, and in incontinent bitches any oestrogen
therapy should be discontinued for at least one month
before vagino-urethrography (see 60). Unlike the 
situation in IVU, the contrast medium is seen
undiluted on the radiograph and so a high iodine
 content is unnecessary. Solutions containing approxi-
55
 mately 150 mg iodine equivalent per ml are suitable.
T'he syringe is filled with a volume of contrast medium
equivalent to 2 ml/kg body weight. T'he second
syringe is used to inflate the Foley catheter cuff. An
 8Fr catheter is suitable for cats and toy breeds of dog
and a l0Fr catheter for most other sizes of patient. In
animals with short and/or narrow vaginas, especially
cats, it is useful to remove the tip of the Foley catheter
to facilitate adequate insertion.
56 T'he Foley catheter cuffed tip is inserted into the
vestibule and the cuff inflated. Very little air is
required in the cuff of Foley catheters used in cats
(0.5-1.0 ml), but the volume of air needed to inflate
56
the cuff in dogs varies from 5 ml (5-15 kg dog) to
10 ml (15-40 kg dog). T'he cuff should be inflated
sufficiently to prevent contrast medium escaping from
the vagina, around the catheter. However, over-
inflation should be avoided to prevent the inflated cuff
from obstructing the external urethral orifice, thus
impeding flow of contrast medium. The vulva is then
closed caudal to the inflated cuff to prevent the
catheter leaving the vagina during filling (the inflated
cuff alone is often insufficient to prevent this). T'he
author uses two Allis tissue forceps in bitches and one
in cats for this purpose. T'he first tissue forcep is
Radiographic investigations
27
placed just ventral to the catheter, which is against the
57
dorsal commisure of the vulval lips. It is important
that the animal is adequately anaesthetized for
vagino-urethrography in order to prevent artefacts
(see 62). Toleration of Allis tissue forcep placement
without response is one sign that it is!
 57 Once the second tissue forcep has been applied,
 contrast medium can be introduced into the vagina.
The radiographic exposure is made during the
injection of the last quarter of the calculated dose.
If fluoroscopic screening facilities are available, the
exposure is madle once the urethra is adequately filled.
If such facilities are not available, it is safest to inject
1 ml/kg body weight and make an exposure during
the last part of the injection. T'he resultant film can be
examined and, if urethral flling has not occurred, may
give an impression of how much more contrast
medium is required. It is best to fill incrementally,
exposing the film during each injection until adequate
urethral flling is obtained. T'his is to avoid the possi-
bility of damage to the lower urogenital tract due to
overdistension or introduction of large volumes of
contrast medium into ectopic ureters (in incontinent
animals), with possible resultant renal pelvic damage.
 58 A vagino-urethrogram in a normal Standard
Poodle. T'here is often a narrowing at the junction
between vestibule and vagina, just cranial to the
58
external urethral orifice, but in approximately a
quarter of bitches, a stricture or perforate hymen may
be detected at this site. T'he dorsal midline filling
defects in the cranial vagina are normal and represent
dorsal midline folds in the paracervical region. These
 are more prominent in entire bitches and in entire or
neutered bitches under the influence of sex hormones.
particularly oestrogens. They should not be confused
with vaginal tumours. T'he urethra usually appears to
be widest in its caudal quarter and, sometimes,
urethral folds are delineated by the contrast medium
as longitudinal striations. T'he apparent flling defect in
the bladder is an artefact due to indentation by
adjacent viscera. If the bladder was adequately filled,
this artefact would disappear.
59
 59 A normal feline vagino-urethrogram. Note the
narrow, short vagina and the long urethra (compared
with the bitch).
28
Investigation of animals with urological signs
Problems
60 Vagino-urethrography should not be performed
THERE ARE FEW problems associated with vagino-
in bitches under the influence of endogenous or
urethrography (60-62) and most can be avoided using
 exogenous sex hormones. T'his is particularly true
a correct technique (see 54-59). There is a theoretical
of incontinent bitches that are being treated with
risk of introducing vaginal and/or urethral organisms
 Oestrogens. T'he vagina of such animals requires
into the bladder. However, the author has used this
considerably more contrast medium to fill it. T'he
technique on over 1,000 bitches, without the use of
 result is that by the time the vagina is full enough for
prophylactic antibiotics, and has not encountered the
urethral flling to commence, the urethra is under
problem of urinary tract infection after vagino-
pressure from the distended vagina, contrast medium
urethrography.
 cannot pass cranially down the urethra and urethral
lesions may remain undetected. In addition, the
abnormally distended intrapelvic vagina displaces the
bladder cranially, making interpretation of bladder
neck position inaccurate in bitches with suspected
urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence.
60 
A distended rectum can have the same effect,
underlining the need for the use of an enema
before contrast radiography.
61  If vagino-urethrography is performed at the
end of an IVU study, care should be taken not to
misinterpret ureteral filling due to the IVU as that
resulting from reflux of contrast medium introduced
during vagino-urethrography. In this example, the
distal ureter is overlying the contrast-filled cranial
vagina. T'his may be misdiagnosed as a ureterovaginal
fistula. However, apart from the fact that if such a
fistula was present the dlistal ureter would be dilated,
retrograde filling would result in denser filling of the
61
ureter compared with the filling due to the more
diluted contrast medium of the IVU. In addition, care
should be taken not to overfill the Foley catheter cuff
or to insert the catheter too far into the vagina, as is
the case in this bitch. T'he result is that the contrast
 medium is unable to overflow from the vagina into
the urethra; therefore, if sufficient contrast medium is
introduced, iatrogenic vaginal rupture can occur.
62 It is important that the animal is adequately
anaesthetized for vagino-urethrography. If this is not
the case, contraction of the constrictor vestibuli
muscles may occur, giving the appearance of a
vestibulovaginal stricture, as illustrated. The urethralis
62
muscle also contracts, preventing urethral filing.
 Under adequate anaesthesia, the bitch will not
respond to the placement of tissue forceps on the
vulva (see 56, 57).
Radiographic investigations
29
63
Retrograde, positive contrasi
urethrography
Indications
● Suspected urethral lesions in male dogs and cats.
● Suspected urethral lesions in female animals in
which vagino-urethrography fails adequately to
 demonstrate the urethra.
● Dysuric animals.
● Incontinent animals.
●Animals with urethral discharges.
● Animals with suspected prostatic disease.
Some indications for the use of retrograde, positive
64
contrast urethrography are illustrated (63-69).
63 Urethral lesions are well defined by positive
contrast retrograde urethrography. In this cat the
technique demonstrates accurately the site and extent
 of urethral rupture, essential information in deciding
the best form of treatment.
64, 65 The additional time spent on contrast
radiography is seldom wasted. In this dysuric Pug a
 plain radiograph had demonstrated the ischial urethral
calculus (64). T'his prevented the passage of a urethral
 catheter, but a retrograde, double contrast urethro-
 cystogram (65) revealed that the prognosis was much 
65
worse than that associated with urolithiasis. In
addition to the urethral calculus, this dog has a
transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder neck 
extending into the pelvic urethra.
66 Urethrography performed in a dysuric bitch in
which vagino-urethrography failed to outline the
urethra (some contrast medium from the attempted
vagino-urethrogram remains in the vagina).
 A destructive urethral carcinoma is present and was
compressed by the vagina as contrast medium was
introduced for vagino-urethrography, thus preventing
urethral filling. The urethrogram demonstrates the
destructive nature of the disease, although the caudal
 urethra is obscured by the catheter used to introduce
66
the contrast medium. In the presence of a less exten-
sive lesion, a biopsy may be required to differentiate
neoplasia from urethritis, since both can have similar
contrast radliographic appearances (see 52 and 140).
30
Investigation of animals with urological signs
67
68
67, 68 (67) Urethrography is useful in incontinent
 male animals. In this example, congenital prostatic
1
urethral diverticulae are demonstrated in an
incontinent juvenile male Golden Retriever.
T'he postmortem appearance is shown (68)
69 In prostatic disorders, urethrography is useful
in demonstrating abnormalities of the prostatic
urethra, abnormal cavities within the gland that
communicate with the urethra (e.g. neoplasia, absces-
sation) and asymmetry of the gland. The urethra
 should bisect the gland on a lateral urethrogram (see
72). Asymmetry is indicative of possible neoplasia,
 abscessation or intraprostatic cysts. In this Rottweiler,
 more prostatic soft tissue density can be seen dorsal to 
the urethra than ventral to it, and the urethra can be
seen to be stretched by the enlarged prostate gland.
T'he dog has a large intraprostatic cyst.
Radiographic investigations
31
Technique
THE PATIENT should be prepared as for an IVU (see p.
70
12). General anaesthesia is required for retrograde ure-
thrography  The  radiographic positioning  is  as
 illustrated in 44, but in male dogs an additional radi-
ograph should be made centred over the penile/
 ischial urethra with the hindlimbs flexed cranially (see
26). As with any contrast radiographic technique,
plain films of the area should be made first. Air can be
used as a contrast medium, but water-soluble, iodine-
 based positive contrast media are preferable.
The technique varies slightly between dogs (70-72)
and cats (73, 74) because of the small size of the feline
urethra, which does not allow the use of a Foley
catheter.
 If suffcient contrast medium is introduced, a ure-
 throcystogram can be obtained (see also Cystography,
p. 32).
70-72 (70) In male dogs, the tip of an 8Fr Foley
catheter, which has been pre-filled with contrast
medium, is inserted into the penile urethra. As in
vagino-urethrography, the Foley catheter can be
trimmed to allow direct insertion of the nozzle of a
 Luer ftting syringe. T'he volume of contrast medium
that will be required varies from approximately 5 ml
in toy dogs to 30 ml in giant breeds. The cuff of the
catheter is inflated with air to prevent leakage of
 contrast medium from the distal urethra; approxi-
mately 1-5 ml of air is sufficient for dogs from 5-30
ZL
kg body weight.
(71) The dog is then positioned for radliography. For
the pelvic and ischial urethra, the position shown in 44
is suitable, but for suspected lesions of the penile
urethra, the hindlimbs should be flexed cranially, as 
illustrated in 26, and the X-ray beam centred on the
area of interest. As in vagino-urethrography, the
radiograph should be made while the urethra is
distended with contrast medium. This is accomplished
by making the radiographic exposure as the last
quarter of the estimated amount of medium is being
introduced.
(72) In a normal dog the penile urethra is fairly
uniform in outline and diameter, but the urethra
usually narrows as it passes round the ischial arch. T'he
pelvic urethra is usually wider than the dlistal urethra,
but the appearance of the urethra as it passes through
the prostate is variable. Although its outline should be
smooth, there is often some variation in the diameter
and, sometimes, urethral folds can be seen as longi-
tudinal striations in the contrast column. In a normal
dog the urethra should perfectly bisect the prostate on
the lateral radliograph.
32
Investigation of animals with urological signs
73
Cystography
Indications
● Location of bladder when not visible on plain
radiographs.
●Suspected bladder lesions.
● Incontinent animals.
●Dysuric animals.
● Animals with haematuria.
 Some examples of indications for cystography are illus-
trated (75-79).
75, 76 Retrograde positive contrast urethro-
74
cystography (75) in an Old English Sheepdog with a
bilateral perineal rupture and an inguinal hernia (76).
T'he urethrocystogram shows that the bladder, which
was not visible on plain abdominal films, is in the
inguinal hernia rather than the perineal rupture.
In such cases, urethrocystography is preferable to
cystography since, if the bladder is displaced, the
urethra may be kinked and attempts to catheterize
the blader may result in iatrogenic urethral damage
(see also Chapter 4, Non-prostatic dysuria).
73 Urethrography in male cats is identical to that in
dogs, except that the small diameter of the urethra
precludes the use of a Foley catheter. A 3Fr or 4Fr cat
catheter is therefore inserted into the penile urethra.
To prevent leakage but avoid the risk of penile trauma,
the prepuce (not the penis) is occluded around the
catheter using Allis tissue forceps.
74 The urethrogram of a normal male cat. The penile
urethra is much narrower than the membranous
(pelvic) urethra and the urethra narrows again as it
 passes through the prostate.
Problems
THE PROBLEM OF air in the catheter being introduced
with the contrast medium and air bubbles being
misdiagnosed as tumours or urethral calculi has been
mentioned under  the description  of  vagino-
urethrography.
 Iatrogenic damage to the lower urinary tract is rare
unless complete urethral obstruction is present or an
excessive amount of contrast medium is used (see 81).
As with any retrograde technique, there is the potential
for introducing organisms, in this case into the
proximal urethra or bladder. In practice, and with good
technique, the risk of this happening appears to be
slight.
Radiographic investigations
33
77 The site of bladder rupture demonstrated in a
 male Flat-coated Retriever by retrograde positive
77
contrast urethrocystography. Urethrocystography is
 preferable to cystography alone in traumatized cases
because of the posibility that the urethra may be
 damaged. Passage of a catheter into the bladder and
 cystography alone would not demonstrate such
damage.
78, 79 (78) Transitional cell carcinoma of the
bladder neck demonstrated by double contrast
cystography in a Corgi. An IVU had also been
performed to determine if there was any ureteral
involvement in the neoplasia. T'he tumour has
retained positive contrast medium and is clearly
78
outlined by the surrounding air. Although the
tumour is close to the trigone, there is no evidence
that the ureters or adjacent bladder wall are involved
 in the neoplasia, an important pre-operative
consideration.
(79) This dog was euthanased and the postmortem
appearance of the tumour can be seen. (NB: This dog
has an enlarged prostate due to castration and
excessive treatment with oestrogens, leading to
 squamous metaplasia of the gland).
Technique
NEGATIvE, rOsITIvE and double contrast techniques
are applicable to the urinary bladder. Plain radiographs
79
should be made first. It may be necessary to compare
these with the cystogram(s) but, also, the contrast
medium may obscure abnormalities such as calculi,
which are usually best seen on plain radiographs.
Negative contrast medium is usually air, although
other gases such as carbon dioxide can be used. In the
author's experience, negative contrast cystography is of
little value apart from improving radiographic contrast
during IVU and demonstrating gross bladder lesions or
bladder position. It is unsuitable for assessing the
position of the bladder in bitches with suspected
urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence, as the air-
filled urinary bladder tends to float’ and, on lateral
projections, often appears to be located further
cranially than it actually is. This can be misleading if one
is trying to determine if the bladder neck is intrapelvic
or not. Negative contrast cystography is a poor
technique for demonstrating subtle bladder urothelial
abnormalities.
 Positive contrast cystography (using the same
 contrast media as used in vagino-urethrography and
urethrography) is useful for demonstrating bladder
ruptures (77) and diverticula, but it may obscure other
      
calculi.
34
Investigation of animals with urological signs
The best technique is to perform retrograde positive
from the bladder around the catheter. In some
 instances (e.g. a bitch with poor urethral sphincter
female animals) and then to catheterize and empty the
tone) this may be useful in allowing adequate inflation
bladder of most of the positive contrast medium that
of the bladder, but it also increases the risk of iatro-
has been introduced. The bladder is then filled with air
 genic bladder rupture. If an IVU is being performed
via the same catheter to obtain a double contrast
at the same time, the positive contrast medium
cystogram (80). This has the advantage that no lesions
entering the bladder from the ureters can track along
are obscured by positive contrast medium, but this
the outside of the inflated Foley catheter cuff and
contrast medium adheres to bladder urothelial abnor-
resemble an ectopic ureter on subsequent radiographs.
malities and radiolucent calculi, which then are seen
clearly against the surrounding negative contrast
Problems
medium.
RARELY, PNEUMOCYSTOGRAPHY has been assOciated
with fatal air embolism. This is more likely if bladder
80 A normal double contrast cystogram. Most of the
wall damage is present. Other problems are iatrogenic
positive contrast medium that entered the bladder
bladder rupture or/and vesico-ureteral reflux (81) and
during urethrography has been removed (it is almost
misdiagnoses of vesical masses (82), or bladder wall
imposible to remove all of it). The bladder has then
thickening (83, 84) when neither are present. The latter
been filled with air. The volume required varies
is most likely if the bladder is inadequately filled with
considerably and it is difficult and inadvisable to give
 contrast medium
dose rates'. Bladder volume varies between animals of
different and even the same sizes and the volume
81  Iatrogenic bladder rupture and vesico-ureteral
required adequately to fill the bladder, while not
reflux in a West Highland White Terrier puppy during
leading to iatrogenic bladder rupture and/or vesico-
retrograde positive contrast urethrocystography.
ureteral reflux, has yet to be determined. The bladder
Unknown to the author, this dog had bladder
should be palpated during filling and flled until it
hypoplasia, and a relatively small amount of contrast 
begins to feel turgid. It is best to er on the side of
 medium was required to cause the damage illustrated.
caution, make a radiograph and introduce more
T'his type of bladder rupture usually takes the form of
contrast medium if required. Contrast medium can be
several urothelial slits through which contrast finds its
introduced via polyurethane catheters or using the
softer Foley catheters (see Chapter 3, Urethral
defects in the detrusor muscle through which the
catheterization). However, the cuff of the Foley
contrast has leaked and these do not usually overlie
catheter should not be inflated. T'he inflated cuff may
the urothelial slits. Obviously, prevention by careful
obscure bladder neck lesions and make interpretation
 cystography is best but, if iatrogenic rupture occurs, it
difficult. In addition, it may obstruct the ureteral
can be treated by using an indwelling vesical catheter
 orifices if overinflated and will also prevent air leaking
for 7-l0 days until the bladder has healed.
80
Radiographic investigations
35
82
 82 ‘Cerate’ calculi demonstrated by double contrast
 cystography in a dog. ^Cerate' calculi are the result of
the previous insertion of a cattle intramammary
 preparation into the bladder. The same artefacts can
 be generated by using oil-based lubricants on the
urinary catheter used to introduce the contrast
medium.
83, 84 Apparent thickening of the bladder wall due
83
 to inadequate bladder filling (83). One hundred ml of
air has been instilled into the bladder, the wall of
which appears thickened, especially ventrally. When a
further 100 ml of air is introduced, the apparent
bladder wall thickening disappears (84). The use ofa
 metal catheter, as in this case, is not recommended;
 apart from the increased risk of iatrogenic catheter
damage, the radiodense catheter may obscure a
significant lesion. Other artefacts can be due to
adjacent viscera, such as loops of small intestine, which
may indent the wall of an inadequately filled bladder.
Such apparent thickening and/or indentations
 disappear as further air is introduced (compare 83
with 84), illustrating the need for adequate bladder
84
filling during cystography.
2
3 Other diagnostic aids
36
With a little help from my friends
John Lennon (1940-1980) and Paul McCartney (1942-)
IN THIS CHAPTER, other aids to diagnosis in small
biopsy techniques, blood and urine analyses and
 animals with suspected urological abnormalities are
lrodynamics. More specialized procedures such as
presented. These include ultrasonography, urethral
scintigraphy and MRI or CT scanning are not
 catheterization, fluid collection and examination,
Idescribed here.
Uitrasonography
Indications
ANY SUsrECTED ABNORMALITIES of urinary tract
ULTRASONOGRAPHY has revolutionized the diagnosis
viscera suggested by clinical or/and radiographic inves-
of urological disorders. It is the perfect partner to good
tigations (85-86 and 255-263).
radiography, since the contrast of ultrasound pictures is
often best at times when radiographic contrast is
85 Hydronephrosis demonstrated ultrasonographi-
-d si ii pm jo ouasad ou u aduexa ioy npai 
 cally in a dog. T'he black, anechoic centre represents
ticularly useful in demonstrating abnormalities of the
the fluid (f) in the dilated renal pelvis. T'his is
internal architecture of soft tissue organs and in the 
 surrounded by the hypoechoic, dark grey renal
diagnosis and localization of collections of fluid within 
 parenchyma within which can be seen an area of
or around viscera. It is especially helpful in the differen--
 hyperechoic, white tissue (arrowed). T'his may
tiation of prostatic disorders, especially cysts and
 represent the fibrous tissue of the wall of the renal
abscesses. Ultrasonography allows accurate localization
 pelvis or scarring within the kidney parenchyma.
of a lesion so that meaningful and safer (ultrasound-
guided) biopsy or fluid samples can be obtained.
Other diagnostic aids
37
86 Ultrasound-guided centesis of the prostate.
86
Ultrasonography allows needles to be inserted
accurately into quite small intraprostatic cyts and
abscesses for drainage of fluid for cytology,
bacteriology, etc. It can also be used to guide biopsy
needles into urinary tract organs and to ensure that
the region to be biopsied is not fluid-filled (e.g. an
abscess), thus reducing the risk of peritonitis.
Technigue
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC PRACTICE and interpretation
requires considerable expertise, based on experience.
The would-be veterinary ultrasonographer is referred
to the latest reworking of Frances Barr's excellent book
 pe () uo Aped q nns u u
87
descriptions that follow are merely overviews of the use
(-a) nn Arn a u Adeouosm go
In the urinary tract, real-time B mode ultrasono-
graphy is most commonly employed to examine the
internal structure of the kidneys, bladder and prostate.
The patient preparation is the same for all organs and
involves clipping of the coat from the area to be
scanned, cleaning the skin with surgical spirit to remove
dirt and grease, and application of liberal quantities of
commercial accoustic gel to ensure good contact
between the skin and transducer.
The urinary bladder and prostate are imaged from a
 prepubic (in the case of male dogs, parapenile) site, as
used in the dog shown in 86. Rectal ulrasonography of
88
the prostate is possible in large dogs, but requires a
 transducer specifically designed for rectal work.
87, 88 The kidneys are usually imaged from the
flanks. (87) The site for the left kidney is just caudal to
the last rib, ventral to the sublumbar muscles (cranial
is to the left in this illustration). (88) The right kidney
is further cranial and so is imaged between the last two
or three ribs on the right (cranial is to the right in this
 illustration). However, the presence of the ribs means
that accoustic shadlows due to the ribs may be cast on
the renal image, preventing the whole kidney from
being imaged at once.
Problems
THERE ARE FEW problems associated with ultrasono-
 graphy of the urinary tract apart from those encoun-
tered’ in technique and interpretation due  to
inexperience. The presence of the ribs can lead to diffi-
culties imaging the right kidney and similar problems
are encountered if gas-filled bowel is interspaced
 between the transducer and the organ being imaged.
38
Investigation of animals with urological signs
Urethral catheterization
89 A catheter can be used temporarily to relieve
dysuria, allowing the animal to recover from the
Indications
systemic consequences and the local effects on the
● T'o obtain urine samples for laboratory analyses.
bladder of urinary obstruction before the cause is
●To relieve dysuria (89).
 treated. While passage of a urethral catheter is suitable
(su ean ea) sd-aq Aun pd o o
in cases of neurogenic dysuria or obstruction by soft
or drainage (e.g. bladder paralysis) (90-91).
tissue masses, it should be performed with care in
●To detect urethral obstruction (inaccurate - see
cases of suspected urolithiasis. Attempts forcibly to
139)
pass a catheter in such cases are likely to result in
O To introduce contrast media into the urinary tract.
iatrogenic urethral trauma (see 107-110). Foley
catheters can be used in animals without urethral
obstruction (see 90), but they may be dlifficult to pass
in animals with urethral narrowing, are too large for
cats and are sometimes not long enough for large
68
male dogs. Polyurethane catheters can be used for the
short-term relief of dysuria. Once the bladder has
been drained, the catheter can be sutured in situ and
maintained as an indwelling catheter until the animal
is fit for elective surgery, if this is necessary to treat the
cause of the dysuria. In dogs the catheter can be fixed
to the perivulval (in bitches, as illustrated) or cranial
 preputial (in male dogs) skin using a butterfly tape
macle from adhesive dressing.
90 A Foley catheter can be used as an indwelling
catheter, provided that it can be passed along the
urethra. If this is not possible, a prepubic tube
cystostomy catheter can be used for urinary bypass (see
90
231-234). Any urine obtained should be submitted for
laboratory examination. Urine samples are useful in the
dlifferential diagnosis of the cause of dysuria (e.g.
cytology in the case of suspected malignancy) and
urinary tract infections are common in animals with
urinary retention. However, because of the potential
for introduction of urethral organisms into the bladder
(and thus the urine sample), low bacterial counts in
and should be ignored. Ideally, indwelling catheters
should be connected to closed urine collecting systems,
and this should be the goal. While this is possible in
recumbent (e.g. as in 113-114) or paraplegic patients 
using, for example, sterile intravenous drip tubing and
and the system may have to be left open. In the
author's experience, significant urinary tract infections
in animals with such open systems are remarkably
uncommon, although he routinely uses prophylactic
antibiotics in such cases. There is some argument
about the use of prophylactic antibiotics, and some
authors are concerned that they may lead to
proliferation of resistant organisms. Bacteriological
cultures of urine and/or the catheter tip are
recommended following catheter removal.
Other diagnostic aids
39
91
91  In dysuric cats the Jackson's catheter is designed
for use as an indwelling catheter. Once the catheter
 has been passed, it is sutured to the prepuce using the
holes in the catheter flange. An Elizabethan collar
should be fitted to the cat, since many cats are able to
detach the catheter from the flange and remove it.
 reach the bladder lumen of male cats. This means that,
if the catheter is attached to a closed collecting system,
the tip of the catheter may be withdrawn into the
cranial urethra (preventing drainage) if the animal is
 ambulatory and pulls on the collecting system.
Technique
92
THE TECHNIQUE VARIEs between the sexes and
between dogs and cats (92-105). Most dogs can be
catheterized without chemical restraint, but cats, espe-
cially males, usually require sedation or anaesthesia.
92 A variety of catheters are available for urethral
catheterization of small animals. In general,
 polyurethane and Foley catheters are suitable for use
in both sexes of dogs and cats, although Foley
catheters may be difficult to introduce. T'he catheter
examples illustrated below are, with one exception,
suitable for most urological situations in small animals.
From left to right they are:
●12Fr, 10Fr and 8Fr Foley catheters: the 12Fr and
10Fr sizes are suitable for introducing contrast
medium during vagino-urethrography and the
10Fr and 8Fr sizes can be used for urethral
catheterization and urethrography (the 10Fr in
large bitches). Foley catheters may be used as
indwelling catheters, although the longer Foley
 catheters may be difficult to insert in dysuric male
dogs, as they tend to bend within the urethra if
they meet an obstructive lesion.
● 8Fr and 6Fr polyurethane catheters: suitable for
 male and female dogs.
● 3Fr and 4Fr polyurethane catheters: suitable for
catheterization of small dogs (the longer catheter)
and cats. T'he right-hand catheter is a Jackson's
catheter designed for use as an indwelling catheter
in cats.
● A metal bitch catheter: metal catheters are more
likely to traumatize the urethra and/or bladder and,
 in the author's opinion, should never be used.
40
Investigation of animals with urological signs
93, 94 In male dogs the caudal os penis is grasped
95-99 A variety of vaginal specula are available to
with one hand and the other hand used to retract the
facilitate passage of a urinary catheter in bitches (e.g.
prepuce caudally, exposing the glans penis. One of the
 Kilians, Sims and McIntyre specula). T'he speculum
fingers of the hand holding the penis (the little finger, 
 viewed from above in 95 is designed with an open slit,
in this case) is looped dorsal to the retracted prepuce 
which is apposed to the vaginal floor. The speculum is
and used to keep the glans exposed whilst the catheter 
inserted into the vagina, slit side ventrally as shown in
is inserted (93). Catheters should be lubricated with
96 (taking care to avoid the clitoral fossa) and the
sterile, water-soluble jelly and inserted into the urethra
raised external urethral orifice identified on the floor
under aseptic conditions. T'he use of oil-based
of the vagina, at its junction with the vestibule, as can
lubricants is inadvisable, particularly if contrast
be seen on this endoscopic view (97). T'he bitch can
radiography is to be performed (see 82). The catheter
be positioned in dorsal or lateral recumbency for this
should be handlled through its sterile polythene bag
procedure. If the dorsal recumbent position is used,
(as illustrated) or a sterile surgical glove should be
the hindlimbs should be flexed and if difficulty is
worn on the hand used to insert the catheter. Once
encountered in locating the external urethral orifice
the catheter has been inserted to the level of the
with the bitch in this position, catheterization in right
caudal os penis, the grip of the hand holding the penis
lateral recumbency (if one is right-handed; left lateral
is relaxed slightly during further passage of the
recumbency if one is left-handed) should be
catheter (this hand may be kinking the urethra,
attempted since this is often easier. Location of the
making catheter passage more difficult), as shown
external urethral orifice and passage of the catheter is
(94). Passage of the catheter is discontinued as soon as
often facilitated if an assistant pulls the ventral vulva
the catheter tip enters the bladder and urine appears at
caudally (96). T'his has the effect of flattening the
the catheter hub.
vestibular floor, which is advantageous, particularly if
there are vestibular and vaginal mucosal folds (these
are more pronounced in some breeds [e.g. Bulldogs]
 or in bitches under the influence of endogenous or 
exogenous sex hormones). The catheter is then
inserted into the urethra aseptically (98) and advanced
until urine just begins to flow. T'he view through the
speculum of the catheterized external urethral orifice
is shown (99).
93
94
Other diagnostic aids
41
95
96
66
42
Investigation of animals with urological signs
100, 101 (100) In male cats the thumb and index
100
finger of the left hand (if one is right-handed) are used
to push the prepuce cranially and expose the glans
penis. T'he catheter tip is inserted into the penile
urethra. Further attempts at passage at this stage are
inadvisable; the left hand fingers almost invariably kink
the urethra, making further passage difficult and
increasing the risk of iatrogenic urethral trauma.
(101) Further passage of the catheter is accomplished
by gripping the prepuce with the left hand and pulling
it caudally. This has the effect of aligning the penile
and mem branous urethrae and the catheter can now
usually be passed without dlifficulty.
101
102 In obstructed male cats, urinary catheters are
102
not suitable for flushing calculus material from the
penile urethra. It is not usually possible to introduce
the catheter so that both side holes are within the
penile urethra. Therefore, any flushing liquids merely
pass out of the catheter side hole outside the urethra,
as illustrated, and fail to dislodge calculus material.
103 Initially, it is better to use a lacrimal cannula to
flush the obstructed feline penile urethra. Before
doing so, however, it is important that the bladder is
as being part of the pre-operative management of
obstructed animals, this will ensure that the flushing
fluids are not working against a high intravesical
103
pressure. Once the penile urethra has been cleared, a
 catheter can then be passed, used to flush remaining
calculus from the membranous urethra, and main-
tained as an indwelling catheter to allow the animal to
recover from the effects of the obstruction and to
introduce calculus clissolution or flushing fluids into
the bladder. In the author's view, it is the flushing
itself that dislodges the calculus from the urethra
rather than any dissolution by the flushing solution.
He therefore prefers to use sterile saline to proprietary
solutions such as Walpole's solution, which may
irritate an already inflamed urethra.
Other diagnostic aids
43
104
104, 105 Female cats can often be catheterized
blind'. Unlike the situation in the bitch, the feline
 external urethral orifice is not raised on a papilla, but is
a midline aperture on the vaginal floor. A catheter
 placed in the midlline on the vestibular floor and
 passed cranially will often enter the urethra (104). If
this does not happen, an auroscope makes a useful
vaginoscope for female cats through which the
external urethral orifice can be identified and a
catheter passed (105).
Pvoblems
URETHRAL CATHETERIZATION is associated with two
main problems, both of which can be overcome by
attention to technique. These are introduction of
 organisms into and iatrogenic trauma to the lower
urinary tract (106-110).
If catheterized urine is to be examined for the
 presence of blood, the urine should be allowed to flow
freely into the sample bottle (106).
105
106 Urine for laboratory analyses (particularly if
haematuria is suspected) should be allowed to flow
 passively from the catheter. Manual compression of
the bladder with the catheter in situ or suction on the
catheter may both result in iatrogenic haematuria,
which may lead to misinterpretation of the laboratory
results. For this reason, some authors prefer
 cystocentesis but this can also lead to iatrogenic
haematuria.
106
44
Investigation of animals with urological signs
107
107 Ischial urethral abscess, draining through the
perineum, due to attempts to catheterize a dysuric
male dog with urolithiasis (this dog had also had a
prescrotal urethrotomy). T'his could have been
avoided by attention to aseptic technique and
avoidance of excessive pressure during attempts to
pass the catheter. If a catheter cannot be passed easily,
attempts to pass it should be abandoned and the
reason for the apparent urethral obstruction
ascertained. A tortuous groove of the os penis may
prevent passage of a urinary catheter and feel like an
obstruction due to a urethral calculus. In fact, it is of
no clinical significance, but this underlines the
inadvisability of using a urinary catheter to detect
urethral obstruction. If in doubt, urethrography
should be performed.
108 If the catheter is introduced too far, it may
follow the contour of the bladder wall and begin to
exit into the proximal urethra alongside itself. Even
worse, it may form a knot inside the bladder. Under
these circumstances, the catheter may be very difficult
or even impossible to remove via the urethra. The
catheter illustrated was passed too far into a dog's
 bladlder via a perineal urethrostomy and became
knotted. Fortunately, because of the urethrostomy, it
could be removed via the urethra, but this resulted in
urethral damage and haemorrhage, as can be seen
from the blood clots attached to the catheter.
108
109, 110 Unless severely debilitated, cats should
never be catheterized without adequate chemica
restraint. T'he skin loss from the lateral (109) and
medial (110) aspects of this cat's hindlimbs are due to
the effect of subcutaneous urine affter urethral rupture.
T'he rupture was iatrogenic and due to attempts to
catheterize this cat conscious when it became dysuric
(because of urethritis) two days after perineal
urethrostomy.
109
110
Other diagnostic aids
45
111
112
Centesis
113
Indications
● Collection of fluids for laboratory examinations
(111).
● Drainage of fluids from the abdomen or urinary
tract organs (112).
111 Centesis can be used to obtain samples for
laboratory examinations. In this example, urine is
being obtained from a sick, aged cat for bacteriology.
T'his avoids the need for sedation or anaesthesia for
catheterization and, in the view of many veterinary
urologists, is the preferred method of obtaining urine
113, 114 (113) For abdominocentesis, the author's
samples for bacteriological examinations.
preferred site is just caudal to the umbilicus: attempts to
drain abdominal fluid from sites cranial to the umbilicus
112 In this dysuric dog, cystocentesis is being used as
usually fail because the end of the draining needle or
an emergency procedure to drain the urinary bladder
catheter becomes obstructed by falsiform fat.
(see also 211-213). In addition to bladder drainage,
Fenestrated abdominal drains can be used but, if these
the metabolic consequences of the dysuria should be
are not readily available, large bore (14-18G) over-the-
corrected; these measures take priority over
needle cannulae are suitable for abdominocentesis. T'he
determination of the cause of the dysuria.
bladder can be drained via a prepubic, median (female
animals and male cats) or paramedian (male dogs) site
Technigues
and the needle angled caudally towards the bladder
THE TECHNIQUE VARIEs slightly depending on the site
 neck (see 1l1). For bladder emptying, the needle
of the fluid; centesis of the abdomen, urinary bladder
 should be inserted into the caudal bladder; otherwise,
and prostate gland is described (113-115). In all cases,
 as the bladder empties it may retract caudally off the
attention should be paid to aseptic and atraumatic
needle. A fine (21-25G) needle should be used to
technique.
 reduce the posibility of urine leakage from the
 puncture site. Cystocentesis is easy to perform if the
bladder is palpable, but may be difficult if the bladder is
empty and/or caudally positioned, as it may be in cases
 In these cases, ultrasonography is helpful in locating
accurately the cystocentesis needle. T'he Flat-coated
Retriever shown in 113 has a ruptured bladder; the
urethrocystogram is illustrated in 77. The dog is not
sedated, but rather is collapsed due to the metabolic
consequences of uroperitoneum (i.e. hyperkalaemia,
acidosis and azotaemia).
46
Investigation of animals with urological signs
114
115
Problems
POTENTIAL
 PROBLEMs include introduction of
 infection into the area from which fluid is being
removed, leakage of fluid from a viscus into the sur-
rounding tissues or peritoneum, and iatrogenic visceral
trauma. The risk of these complications can be
minimized by aseptic, atraumatic technique and the use
of the smallest needle/cannula compatible with the fluid
to be removed. For example, urine can be drained from
the bladder using fine needls (2l-23G), whereas a
larger bore may be necessary to remove thick, viscous
pus from a prostatic abscess or adequately to drain fluid
from the abdomen. The use of ultrasonography makes
 any attempt at centesis much safer, since the draining
(114) T'he effects of the acidosis and hyperkalaemia
needle can be placed more accurately (see 263)
on the heart can be appreciated from the ECG.
An over-the-needle intravenous cannula has been
inserted just caudal to the umbilicus and is being used
both to drain urine from and to introduce dialysing
Cytology
fluids into the peritoneal cavity. In this example,
abdominocentesis is being used (along with
Indications
intravenous fluid therapy and the insertion of an
IN UROLOGY, cytology is mainly used to differentiate
indwelling urethral catheter) to relieve the
inflammatory and malignant conditions (116-117)
uroperitoneum and its metabolic consequences.
Although syringe suction may speed the rate of fluid
116 Cytology of fluid (H&E x300) obtained by
removal, it is frequently counterproductive, since
ultrasound-guided centesis from a prostatic cavity of a
omentum or other abdominal viscera may be sucked
 dog. T'he large numbers of inflammatory cells and
onto the end of the drain/catheter, preventing the exit
 bacteria present suggest a diagnosis of prostatic
of fluids. It is often better to allow the fluid to drain
abscessation or infected prostatic cyst.
 passively through the drain/catheter.
117 Cytology of fluid (H&E x300) obtained from a
115 Large prostatic cysts or abscesses can be drained
 canine prostatic cyst, illustrating the presence of
by centesis (see also 263 and 302). As well as
neoplastic cells. This animal had a carcinoma of the
providing fluid for laboratory examinations, such
cyst lining.
drainage may also be used as a first aid measure to
relieve dysuria and reduce toxaemia (in the case of
abscesses), thus allowing the animal to be stabilized
before any surgery is performed. The site for centesis
is chosen by palpation of the location of the fluid-filled
cyst or abscess, although small lesions can be more
accurately located using ultrasound (see 86).
Other diagnostic aids
47
Techniques
Table 6 Rapid H & E stain
CrTOLOGICAL EXAMINATIONS can be performed on
1 Fix slide in acetic alcohol (3% acetic acid in 95%
cellular material in fluids such as urine, ascitic fluid or
alcohol for one minute.
prostatic secretions, on that obtained by urethral
2  Wash in water.
washings and on material resulting from brushings
3 Sain in Harris' haematoxylin for one minute.
 during endoscopy of the lower urinary tract.
 4  Wash and 'blue' (wait until the stain turns blue) in running 
 Several smears of the sample should be made on to
tap water for one minute.
microscope slides. The retrieval of cells is higher if the
 5 Stain in eosin (1% in tap water] for two minutes.
smears are made of the material at the bottom of the
6Wash in water.
container after standing or if a cytospin/cytoslide
 7 Dehydrate in 100% alcohol, rinse in xylene and mount in 
system is used. The slides are then air dried and, in most
DPX.
 practice situations, packaged according to mailing reg-
Results: nuclei - blue; other cellular components - shades
ulations and forwarded to a diagnostic laboratory. If
of red and pink.
such a laboratory is not available and/or a veterinary
surgeon with an interest or training in pathology is
Table 7  Leishman stain
 employed within the practice, the slides may be stained
 1  Put slide[s] on a rack and cover with one squirt of 
and examined immediately.
Leishman stock (made up of 0.15% Leishman powder in 
A number of staining techniques can be used for
100% methanol - use within 24 hours); leave for
cytology, but rapid haematoxylin and eosin and
20 seconds.
Leishman stains are usually adequate and most likely to
 2 Add two squirts of pH 6.8 buffer and tip rack up and 
down to ensure mixing: leave for seven minutes.
be available in general practice. The staining techniques
3 Rinse quickly in distilled water and recover with pH 6.8
are summarized in Tables 6 and 7.
buffer for two minutes.
4  Rinse quickly in distilled woter.
 5 Blot dry. Do not use alcohol.
6 Clear and mount.
Results:
nuclei
adind-
acidophils 
- pink/red 
basophils 
-blue
eosinophils 
- red/orange
116
mast cells 
- purple (granules)
Problems
THE PREPARATION of good, diagnostic slides and their
 interpretation comes only with practice and experience.
This is unlikely to be acquired in most practices and so
the reader is advised to concentrate on preparing an
 even, air-dried smear on a slide for staining and inter-
 pretation at a veterinary pathological diagnostic labora-
tory. Even then, the results may be unreliable. In most
 cases, cytology is being used to differentiate malignant
117
from benign conditions as a guide to treatment and
prognosis. While the finding of malignant cells is diag-
nostic of malignancy, the converse is, unfortunately, not
true. The absence of malignant cells on cytology does
not exclude a diagnosis of malignancy;, such cells are not
always found. In the author's experience, cytology is
less reliable than the biopsy techniques described below
in the differentiation of malignant and non-malignant
lurological disorders.
48
Investigation of animals with urological signs
118, 119 (118) Renal cortical biopsies can be taken
Biopsy technigues
using a biopsy needlle. A Tru-cut biopsy needle is
being used to take a biopsy of this cat's left kidney.
Indications
Accurate placement of the needlle is necessary in order
●To differentiate inflammatory and neoplastic
to obtain a meaningful biopsy while minimizing renal
lesions of the urinary tract (e.g. urethritis vs
 trauma. Therefore, although a biopsy can be taken 
urethral carcinoma).
from a sedated animal using local analgesia, the
● To determine the nature of the disease present,
author prefers to perform the technique under
more accurately to prescribe treatment and/or
general anaesthesia, if possible. Ideally, biopsy should
obtain a prognosis (e.g. malignancies, glomerular
be performed using an automated Tru-cut biopsy
renal dliseases).
instrument under ultrasound guidance, since this
makes the procedure less hazardous for the animal.
Techniques
T'he skin over the kidney (see 87-88) is prepared for
ALTHOUGH BIOPSY MATERIAL can be obtained by
aseptic surgery and sterile ultrasound gel applied. In
surgical exposure of the organ concerned, less invasive
this illustration, surgical drapes have been omitted to
 methods include needle biopsies and biopsies taken
facilitate orientation. T'he biopsy needle is inserted
endoscopically (see Endoscopy p. 55) or using
a
through a stab incision in the skin into the renal
urethral catheter.
 cortex under ultrasonic guidance and the biopsy
 The kidney and prostate can be biopsied using a
taken, in this case using an 18Fr Biopty-cut needlle
"Tru-cut’ disposabie biopsy needle (Travenol)
 and automatic biopsy ^gun'. If such facilities are not 
(118-123), preferably under ultrasonic guidance, while
available and a manual T'ru-cut needle has to be used,
the catheter biopsy technique (124-126) is suitable for
it is important to be familiar with the functioning of
lower urinary tract urothelial lesions and the para-
the biopsy needle before inserting it. This may seem
urethral prostate.
obvious, but most veterinary surgeons perform needle
biopsies infrequently and once the needle has been
inserted, the effects of manipulations cannot be seen.
The novice is advised to have two needles available;
118
one to take the biopsy and the other in case he/she
forgets what to do once the first needle has been
inserted! T'he biopsy needle is introduced via a small
stab skin incision and inserted into the kidney cortex,
taking care to avoid the medulla or corticomedullary
junction. In cats the kidneys are usually sufficiently
palpable and mobile to be held through the skin and
abdominal wall. The kidneys of dogs, on the other
hand, may be difficult to locate and fix adequately and
some authors suggest making a small flank incision
through which a finger can be inserted into the
abdomen, better to fix the kidney. In both species the
left kidney is easier to biopsy than the right because of
its more caudal location; therefore, this is the author's
kidney of choice in cases of generalized renal disease
(e.g. glomerulonephropathies). However, other prac-
119
titioners prefer the right kidney, since this is less
mobile than the left. T'he author prefers to hold the
kidney in one hand (the left if one is right-handed)
and to insert the needle with the other. Unless one
has access to a biopsy gun', this means that an
assistant is required to manipulate the needle in order
to obtain a biopsy. Once the needle is withdrawn, it
should be examined to ensure that the amount of
tissue obtained is adequate for laboratory examina-
tions (histology, electron microscopy and immunohis-
tochemistry) and pieces of tissue should be transferred
to suitable containers.
Other diagnostic aids
49
(119) Kidney specimen (from a dog with benign,
120
idiopathic renal haemorrhage) illustrating the correct
(solid lines) and incorrect (broken lines) positions of
insertion of the biopsy needle.
120-123 (120) A needle biopsy of the prostate
gland is usually obtained through the perineum, as
illustrated in the diagram, but a similar technique can
 be used prepubically to biopsy an intra-abdominal
 prostate gland. The prostate is fixed, in the case of
trans-perineal biopsy using a gloved finger in the
rectum. T'he finger is also used to guide the needle
Prostate
Urethra
into the area of the gland to be biopsied. Care is taken
to avoid the urethra
(121) T'he rectum is evacuated, either by the
121
 administration of an enema or by digital removal of
faeces. The anaesthetized dog is placed in lateral
recumbency with the side to be biopsied uppermost.
T'he perineum is prepared for aseptic surgery and
sterile drapes applied, leaving the anus and perineum
exposed (the drapes have been removed from this dog
to facilitate orientation). T'he prostate is fixed with the
index finger of the left hand (right-handed people).
T'he biopsy needle or needle for centesis (as shown in
this Boxer with a prostatic cyst extending caudally into
the perineum) is introduced into the perineum 
adjacent to the anus and above it, as shown. T'his
 reduces the risk of contamination of the needle by
faecal organisms, since any material leaving the anus
will tend to fall downwards, away from the needlle.
122
Once the needle is inserted into the prostate, fluids
can be withdrawn or a Tru-cut biopsy taken in an
identical way to a renal biopsy. The centre of the gland
is avoided to prevent iatrogenic prostatic urethral
trauma and the biopsy needle is usually inserted into
the dorsolateral region of the prostate.
(122) If the prostate is cranial to the pubic brim, it can
be biopsied via a prepubic approach as shown (again,
the surgical drapes have been removed to facilitate
orientation). The prostate is fixed with the left hand
(if one is right-handed) and the right hand used to
introduce the biopsy needle, taking care to avoid the
urethra in the centre of the gland.
123
(123) The resulting biopsy is illustrated. The
prostatic enlargement, alopecia and feminization in
the dog in 122 are due to excessive, prolonged
oestrogen therapy, leading to squamous metaplasia
of the prostate gland.
50
Investigation of animals with urological signs
Problems
124
THE MAIN PROBLEMs with needle biopsy techniques
Prostate
are haemorrhage from or into the organ biopsied and
iatrogenic trauma to this or adjacent organs (127, 128).
In addition, attempts to biopsy infected (especially
o uss u ss  s (ss
infection. The risk of introducing infection with the
Cutheter
biopsy needle itself can be minimized by careful
Biopsy
attention to sterile technique.
The catheter biopsy technique shares the problems
 associated with urethral catheterization described previ
 Ously, but otherwise is free of complications.
Syringe suction
127, 128 (127) Postmortem appearance of a feline
kidney, one week after a Tru-cut biopsy. Note the pale
124 Diagram illustrating the catheter biopsy
areas associated with renal infarction.
technique of Melhoff and Osborne (1977). T'he
(128) A section through the kidney demonstrates that
catheter tip is introduced to the level of the tissues to
the biopsy needle had been introduced too deep,
be biopsied (in this case, the prostatic urethra), as
damaging the renal arcuate vessels at the
judged from previous clinical and radiographic investi-
corticomedullary junction and leading to thrombosis
gations. A syringe is attached to the catheter and used
 and infarction.
to apply suction. Pieces of tissue are sucked into the
side holes of the catheter and dislodged by moving the
catheter to and fro. T'he catheter is then withdrawn
and the pieces of tissue flushed out of the catheter
(using formol saline) into a container of formol saline.
Experience suggests that it is easier to obtain biopsies
from diseased (e.g. neoplastic or inflammed) tissues
than from normal urothelium and its surrounding
fissues. T'he small pieces of tissue obtained are
125
aggregated by centrifugation, fixed, sectioned, stained
and examined (see 125, 126). The pieces are not
 always large enough to allow orientation of the sample
by a veterinary pathologist, but this is often not
essential. In most cases the differentiation of
neoplastic from inflammatory tissue is sufficient for
diagnostic purposes. Tiny fragments may be treated as
cytology samples and smeared on a slide to be
examined microscopically.
125, 126 Histological appearance of material
obtained from a catheter biopsy: H&E x100 (125)
and x300 (126). This catheter biopsy was from a nine-
 year-old castrated male German Shepherd Dog with a
126
prostatic urethral carcinoma.
Other diagnostic aids
51
127
128
Blood and urine analyses
eliminated before urological surgery is carried out. This
is particularly true in animals in which ureteral trans-
Indications
plantation is to be performed (see Chapter 8, p. 134).
HAEMATOLOGICAL AND BIOCHEMICAL examination of
Dogs with prostatic infections frequently shed
blood are indicated in animals with dysuria or haema-
Organisms into the urine and, therefore, urine bacteri-
turia. They are of less value in incontinent animals
 ology is valuable in such cases, particularly if it is not
(unless the animal's incontinence is related to poly-
possible to sample prostatic secretions or abscesses
dipsia/polyuria). Haematology is mainly of use in
directly.
 assesssing the degree of anaemia (in animals with severe
 haematuria or renal disease), dehydration (for example,
Aguideto normalpalues
the vomiting dysuric patient) and toxaemia/bacter-
THERE IS A VAsT ARRAY of commercial laboratories
aemia (e.g. acute prostatitis or prostatic abscessation).
offering a service for the analysis of veterinary samples,
Biochemistry can be used to evaluate the degree of
although the increasing availability of desk top
pre-renal, renal or post-renal azotaemia in dysuric
analysers means that even those practices without
animals, but it is also valuable in assessing renal
 practice laboratories are now perfoming routine labora-
finction before nephrectomy or nephrotomy is
 tory examinations. The analytical techniques required
performed. In cases of suspected bladder rupture, com-
 parison of blood and ascitic fluid creatinine levels is a
described here. A few basic principles are worth men-
useful diagnostic aid. If uroperitoneum is present,
tioning, however.
ascitic fluid levels of creatinine will be markedly higher
It is important to know the range of normal values
than those in the blood (comparisons of urea levels are 
for the varia bles being assessed for that particular labo-
less reliable, since urea diffuses readily across the peri-
ratory or analyser. Most commercial laboratories
toneum and thus blood and peritoneal fluid levels tend
will supply details of their 'normal values, as may the
 to equilibrate).
manufacturers of some analysers. However, in the latter
Urine biochemistry may provide further informa-
instance, experience with the use of the analyser will
tion on the nature and degree of renal damage, but it is
lead to a knowledge of the ranges of normality that can
 mainly of value (along with urine cytology) in detecting
be expected. Variations in normality should also be
the presence of microscopic haematuria. Urine bacteri-
considered. For example, young animals often have a
ology is mandatory in most animals with urological
lymphocytosis and lower packed cell volume (PCV)
signs; even if urinary tract infections are not the main
and haemoglobin levels: fit, working dogs (e.g.
cause of the clinical signs, they are frequently present as
Greyhounds, Whippets) normally have PCVs that
secondary complications and, if possible, should be
would be considered high for other dogs.
52
Investigation of animals with urological signs
Table 8  Normal biochemical ranges 
Table 9  Normal haematological values
Analyte
Units
60g
Cat
Estimation
Units
Dog
Cat
 Albumin 
1/6
32-38
24-35
PCV
0.35-0.45
0.25-0.48
Globulin
1/6
20-35
21-51
RBCS
x1012/
5.4-8.0
5.5-10.0
A:G ratio
0.6-1.5
0.4-1.3
Hoemoglobin 
9/1
120-180
80-150
ALT
I,n
20-60
15-45
MCH
6d
22.0-25.0
12.5-17.0
Ammonia 
μmol/l 
0150
0150
MCHC
g/1 
350-370
300-350
Amylase
I/n
450-1,000
450-1.000
MCV
f
65.0-75.0
40.0-55.0
Lipase
I,n
0-300
0-300
Platelets
x109/1
170-500
200-700
AST
I/n
20-35
0120
WBCS
x109/1
5.5-17.0
4.9-19.0
Bile acids 
umol/l
0120
0120
Differentia!
Calcium 
2.3-2.6
2.3-2.5
WBCcounts
mmol/
Neutrophils
x109/
Cholesterol 
mmol/1
3.5-7.0
4.0-10.0
3.0-11.5
2.4-12.5
 Triglycerides
mmol/l
0-1.0
Lymphocytes
x109/
0-1.0
0.7-3.6
1.4-6.0
75-230
Monocytes 
x109/1
CK
I,n
0.1-1.5
50-150
0.1-0.7
70-110
110-160
Eosinophils
x109/1
Creatinine
/oun
0.2-1.4
0.1-1.6
Glucose
mmol/l
Basophils 
x109/1
3.5-5.0
3.5-5.5
0-0.1
0-0.1
 Phosphate
mmol/l
0.75-1.25
0.95-1.55
LDH
I/n
35-450
130-470
 Table 10 Normal urinalysis values
Lipase
u/1
0-300
01300
Estimation
Dog
Cat
Magnesium
mmol/l
0.8-1.1
0.8-1.1
pH
5.0-7.0
5.0-7.0
 Potassium 
 mmol/l 
3.5-4.5
4.0-5.0
Specific grovity
1.015-1.045
1.015-1.060
ALP
u/1
0-110
15-60
Sodium
Protein
negative 
negative
mmol/l
135-150
149-157
Blood
0-10
 negative
 negative
Total bilirubin
μmol/l
0-10
Haemoglobin 
 negative
negative
Total proteins 
1/6
63-71
77-91
Glucose
negative
negative
Urea
mmol/1
2.0-7.0
6.5-10.5
Ketones 
 negotive
negative
Bilirubin 
negative/trace
negative/trace
 Urobilinogen
negative
 negative
Urine production 
24-40 ml/kg/doy
22-30 ml/kg/day
The reference ranges of normal values used in the
urine sample in a receptacle containing boric acid
clinical laboratories at the Bristol Veterinary School are
 powder in the proportion of 20 ml of urine to 200 mg
 given as a guide (Tables 8-10).
of boric acid powder. There is increasing evidence that
urine bacteriology should be quantitative as well as
Problems
qualitative and that low counts of bacteria are of no
 IF BLOOD AND URINE SAMPLES are to be posted, they
clinical significance. Opinions vary on what is meant by
Aem aendoidde ue u paxoed pue paedad aq pnous
 low counts', but in general, if a sample is obtained by
Most laboratories prefer blood to be clotted and the
aseptic catheterization, counts of <1,000 and <100
serum decanted and submitted for analysis rather than
 organisms per ml are taken to be due to contamination
whole blood. Apart from the obvious problem that the
Aq uxen si ades a f Aasa se pe sho u
sample may haemolyse, serum levels of potassium in
cystocentesis, this figure is <100 organisms per ml in
whole blood tend to increase during transit (as
both species.
potassium leaks from blood cells). This may lead to a
 If samples are posted to a commercial laboratory, it
 misdiagnosis of hyperkalaemia and inappropriate
is a legal obligation that the post office guidelines are
therapy.
followed for their package and labelling. Apart from the
 If turine is posted to a laboratory for bacteriological
illegality of inadequate packing and labelling and the
culture, there may be overgrowth of organisms of low
health hazards to handlers, urine and blood samples
pathogenicity during transit, masking the significant
 squeezed from sodden envelopes are of little diagnostic
bacteria. This can be prevented by placing the fresh
value.
Other diagnostic aids
53
129
Urodynamics
Sensor
Blodder
Urethra
Catheter.
Indications
[DMD P4I/M O]
SUSPECTED ABNORMAL FUNCTIONING of the lower
 sn,pioddo
urinary tract such as urethral sphincter mechanism
incompetence, detrusor instability, reflex dyssynergia
 and neurogenic abnormalities.
Technigues
TECHNIQUES INCLUDED within urodynamics are:
[a)
● Urethral pressure profilometry ('resting’ or
'stressed').
●Cystometry.
[b]
●Electromyography.
 In small animal practice, most work has been done on
resting urethral pressure profilometry and indications
for other urodynamic techniques are uncommon.
Moximum urethral
closure pressure 
However, all of these techniques are subject to a wide
Maximum
Functional
variety of artefacts and variations in the results
pressure
profile length
obtained. Apart from the fact that they are not available
 in most veterinary practices (and unlikely to be so in the
foreseeable future), they have proved to be of less diag-
Blodder pressure
nostic value than was first hoped. Therefore, a brief
 description only will be given of urethral pressure pro-
Distance
filometry (129, 130). There is additional information in
the Further Reading section at the end of this book.
130
129 During urethral pressure profilometry, a catheter
[a]
with a pressure-measuring device at or near the tip is
 inserted into the bladder and then withdrawn along
the urethra (a). The pressure can be measured by the
resistance to outflow of fluid from catheter side holes
lrethrapress
ure profile (u)
(perfusion profilometry), pressure changes within
balloons or using microtip pressure transducers. The
latter are preferable but are expensive. As the catheter
passes along the urethra, a graph of pressure against
distance is produced on a recorder: this is the resting
Intravesiool pressure()
urethral pressure profile (b). A number of variables,
 defined by the International Continence Society, can
be measured from the graph.
130 Subtracted urethral pressure profile recordings
Subtrocted profle (u - i)
from a continent bitch (a) and an incontinent bitch
(b). A ^subtracted’ profile makes allowances for
(b]
variations in intravesical pressure such as those due to
respiration (regular small peaks). Subtracted profilom-
etry involves the simultaneous measurement of intra-
urethral and intravesical pressures. T'he intravesical
 pressure is continuously subtracted from the intra-
urethral pressure to give a more accurate representa-
tion of the urodynamic event, the subtracted urethral
 pressure profle. This is summarized in a, but b shows
only the subtracted profile. T'he profile from the
54
Investigation of animals with urological signs
131
continent animal conforms to the previous diagram
(129), but urethral resistance in the incontinent bitch
is less than intravesical pressure throughout the
profile. It would be nice if all profiles were as
dliagnostic of good or poor urethral function as these
two examples, but, unfortunately, this is not the case.
Problems
IN ORDER TO MINIMIZE VARIATIONS, it is imperative
that a standard technique is used. Following study of
variables such as the position of the animal, orientation
of the catheter within the urethra, method of chemical
restraint, size of catheter, catheter material, catheter
withdrawal rate and degree of bladder filing, the 
132
following standards have been suggested:
● T'he animal should be positioned in right lateral.
recumbency.
● T'he catheter should be orientated so that the side
hole (if a perfusion technique is used) or microtip
 transducer is facing dorsally within the urethra.
● T'he catheter should be as narrow and soft as
possible; in practice, this usually means a 3-4Fr
 polyurethane catheter in cats and a 6-8Fr silicone
CM
rubber catheter in dogs. Softer catheters are
available, but they are more dlifficult to insert and,
if microtip catheters are used, more liable to
damage.
● A standard method of chemical restraint should be
used in all cases. However, a perfect anaesthetic or
relaxant (i.e. one that has no effect on the
urodynamic variables being measured) has yet to
be discovered.
● T'he catheter should be withdrawn at a speed of
131]  T'he problems of inadvertent pulling of the
I mm/second or less.
catheter from the urethra and catheter rotation are
●T'he bladder should be filled with sterile saline or
overcome by the use of a rod driven device that clips
emptied of urine to achieve a resting intravesical
directly onto the catheter.
 pressure of 5 cm H2O.
132 Double sensor catheter used to measure
 Once the method has been standardized, it is important 
(simultaneously) intravesical and urethral pressures.
to determine the range of normality using that method,
T'he microtip transducer at the tip of this silicone
 n  an  a  s 
rubber catheter remains in the bladder throughout
conclusions can only be drawn when normal values are
profilometry, while the second sensor starts in the
known.
bladder but then passes along the urethra during
Belt driven catheter withdrawal devices are unsuit-
withdrawal. An electronic subtraction unit in the
able, since they do not prevent the weight of the
recorder continuously subtracts the intravesical
catheter or its lead from pulling the catheter from the
pressure from the urethral pressure, resulting in a
urethra. It is preferable to use a rod driven device,
more accurate ^subtracted' pressure profile (see 130).
which clips directly on to the catheter (131).
 In most animals in which urethral pressure profilo-
The use of a single sensor on the catheter makes the
 metry is indicated (i.e. incontinent large breeds of
 assumption that intravesical pressure remains constant
female dog with suspected urethral sphincter
 as the sensor passes along the urethra. This problem can
mechanism incompetence), the tip and second sensors
be overcome by the use of two sensors - 'simultaneous
should be separated by 8 cm to allow the tip sensor to
urethral pressure profilometry (130-132).
remain in the bladder throughout proflometry.
Other diagnostic aids
55
Endoscopy
Techniques
A vARIETY OF EQUIPMENT is available and mOst is
Indications
designed for use in humans rather than animals. It is
ALTHOUGH LAPAROsCOPY can be applied to small
also rather expensive. Urethrocystoscopy technique will
animal urological cases, the most commonly used endo-
not be described in this book; rather, the reader is
scopic technique is urethrocystoscopy (133, 134). The
referred to the more extensive descriptions of the
indications, therefore, are suspected lesions of the
apparatus available and its use in the sections on
bladder or urethra. In humans, surgical procedures (e.g.
urethrocystoscopy by Brearley et al (1991), Senior
transurethral prostatic resection) can be performed
(1999) and McCarthy (2005).
endoscopically. Unfortunately, the smaller size of the
canine urethra means that endoscopic procedures
Problems
are usually limited to obtaining biopsy material (unless 
URETHROCYsTOscOPY is associated with the same
the endoscope is inserted via a cystotomy), since the
potential problems as introduction of other instru-
diameters of resectoscopes are usually too great to
ments into the lower urinary tract (see Urethral
permit introduction into the urethras of small animals.
catheterization, p. 38) and is contraindicated in the
Smaller, paediatric resectoscopes are  becoming
 presence of acute bacterial infections, which it may
available, which may allow resection techniques in 
exacerbate.
small animals in the fiture.
The main advantage of urethrocystoscopy is the
133 Urethroscopic appearance of a urethral
ability to visualize, and thus take an accurate biopsy
carcinoma in a bitch. T'his bitch was dysuric and the
from, urethral or bladder lesions. If lithotrypsy
urethra can be seen to be almost completely occluded
equipment is available, endoscopic fragmentation of
by abnormal, white, vascular tissue. This lesion was
vesical calculi can be performed. The cystoscope can
readily detectable on retrograde positive contrast
also be used to guide catheters into the ureters, thus
vagino-urethrography and the diagnosis was
allowing sampling of urine from individual kidneys
 confirmed by means of a catheter biopsy.
(e.g. in suspected cases of idiopathic renal haemor-
rhage) as a less traumatic alternative to cystotomy
134 Urethrocystoscopy does allow more accurate
collection of biopsy material if the lesion is more
discreet, as in this case of localized, diphtheritic
cystitis. In this German Shepherd Dog bitch, double
contrast cystography had revealed a proliferative lesion
near the bladder neck ('skylined’ in this illustration).
It would have been difficult to obtain an accurate
biopsy using the catheter biopsy technique in this
case.
133
134
This page intentionally left blank
57
DIFFERENTIAL
Part
DIAGNOSIS AND
TREATMENT
Non-prostafic dysuria
Prostatic disorders
Urinary tract trauma
Other causes of haematuria
Urinary incontinence
This page intentionally left blank
4 Non-prostatic dysuria
59
A stream ran small and terrible and shrill; it was so still;
Hilda Doolittle (1886-1961)
FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, dysuria is
 Neurogenic dysuria (upper or lower motor
defined as difficulty in urination. The differential
neurone lesions).
diagnosis of dysuria in the dog is:
Bladder displacement/entrapment.
Urethral calculus.
● Functional disorders (e.g. dyssynergia, bladder 
●Prostatic disorders (see Chapter 5).
atony).
●Bladder neck neoplasia.
●“External resistance to urine outflow (e.g.
●Urethral neoplasia.
ureterocoele [rarely]).
● Urethral trauma (see Chapter 6).
●Urethritis.
In the cat, dysuria other than that associated with
●Urethral stricture (see Chapter 6).
FUS/FLUTD is rare.
Diagnosis
Once the animal's condition is stabilized, a
diagnosis can be attempted. The examination should
A DIAGNOsIs often has to wait. In cases of complete
 include the above catheterization plus detailed clinical,
urinary retention, the bladder must be emptied by
radiographic and laboratory techniques (see Part 1).
catheterization (see 89-101) or centesis (see 112) to
prevent secondary vesical problems. There are a
number of experimental papers detailing the effects of
obstruction on the bladder and some are listed in the
135 Effects ofischaemia on the bladder. Dysuria
Further Reading section at the end of this book.
recurred in this cat one week after relief ofa urethral
Clinically recognizable problems include urothelial
obstruction. On the second occasion the bladder neck
sloughing, deeper ischaemic damage and paralysis (see 
 became obstructed by necrotic urothelium secondary
 2 and 135). The metabolic effects of uraemia, acidosis
to bladder wall ischaemia. The dead tissue had
- asn pn aq pus eey 
 sloughed into the bladder lumen and is shown during
venous fluids, bladder drainage and, if uroperitoneum
the cystotomy to remove it.
is present, abdominocentesis and peritoneal dialysis
(see ll3, 1l4). There is some argument about the use
135
of intravenous Hartmann's solution (compound
sodium lactate) in such cases. Although Hartmann's
solution contains potassium, and thus might be
expected to make the hyperkalaemia worse, it also tends
to correct the acidosis. The author's approach is to use
fluids without potassium initially (normal saline or
dextrose saline) and then, once the potassium levels
 enter the upper end of the normal range, to change to
Hartmann's, since many animals that were initially
hyperkalaemic may become hypokalaemic as acid-base
balance is restored. If the animal is severely acidotic,
bicarbonate can be added to the initial fluids
60
Differential diagnosis and treatment
 In some animals the lesion may be palpable (e.g.
136
bladder neck or urethral masses and calculi) or even
visible (136). The most usefiul radiographic technique is
retrograde positive contrast urethrocystography or
vagino-urethrography, which will demonstrate most
urethral (and some prostatic) conditions including non-
radiopaque calculi. The extra time taken performing
contrast radiography is often well spent (137, 138).
Subsequent introduction of air into the bladder will
result in a double contrast cystogram, useful in the
diagnosis of bladder neck neoplasia and bladder dis-
placement (see 75, 76, 78, 79). Occasionally, bladder
neck tumours will show up on pneumocystography
alone (139), but double contrast cystography is better.
Differentiation of urethral tumours from urethritis
137
may be difficult (140), but biopsy via a catheter is a
valuable, non-invasive diagnostic aid (see 124-126)
Bladder neck tumours are usually urothelial in
origin and are frequently malignant carcinomas (see 78.
79). However, in young, large breeds of dogs,
malignant bladder rhabdomyosarcomas may occur,
albeit rarely (141). There are occasional reports of their
successful removal, but all cases seen by the author have
been inoperable. Benign tumours are papillomas,
polyps and leiomyomas (139, 142-144).
136 The calcium carbonate calculus causing the
penile urethral obstruction in this rabbit is obvious
138
and was removed via a urethrotomy. The rabbit
subsequently underwent a cystotomy to remove a
vesical calculus that was also present.
137, 138 Plain radiograph (137) and retrograde
positive contrast urethrogram (138) of the penile
urethra of a dysuric German Shepherd Dog. The
 Osseous reaction at the caudal end of the os penis
seen on the plain radiograph is not calculus material;
the calculi can be seen outlined by contrast medium
on the urethrogram. The urethrogram also illustrates
 a urethral stricture just ventral to the ischium
(possibly due to attempts to push the calculi back
 into the bladder using a catheter). This stricture
would have been missed if urethrography had not
139
been performed.
139 A bladder neck tumour (leiomyoma) demon-
strated by pneumocystography. This tumour was
acting as a ball valve at the bladder neck, resulting in
intermittent dysuria. A catheter was passed easily in
this dog and failed to indicate any obstruction. T'his
tumour was excised by suburothelial resection via a
cystotomy.
Non-prostatic dysuria
61
140
141
142
143
140 Chronic urethritis in an adult Rough Collie
 bitch demonstrated by retrograde positive contrast
vagino-urethrography. Note the similarity in radio-
graphic appearance to urethral cancer (see 52).
A catheter biopsy technique (see 124-126) is a useful
way of dlifferentiating these conditions.
14]  Rhabdomyosarcoma of the dorsal bladder wall
 and bladder neck demonstrated by double contrast
cystography in a male one-year-old Doberman
Pinscher.
142-144 T'he large mass demonstrated by lateral
(142) and ventrodorsal (143) double contrast cysto-
 graphy in this dog proved to be a benign polyp, which
was exteriorized via a cystotomy (144) and excised
144
 across its pedicle. Such polyps appear to be associated
with chronic irritation (e.g. chronic infections or 
uroliths). However, in many cases the exact
predisposing cause cannot be determined and the
masses may recur. It is worth culturing excised tissue
(as well as urine) in addition to submitting it for
histopathology. Sometimes, organisms can be
 detected in the polyp tissue but not in the urine, and
 appropriate antibiotic therapy can be instituted.
T'his may be a form of interstitial cystitis.
62
Differential diagnosis and treatment
Neurogenic dysuria associated with an upper motor
145
neurone (UMN) lesion (e.g. thoracolumbar disc
disease) is due to lack of higher control of the micturi-
tion reflex, whereas in cases of a lower motor neurone
(LMN) lesion, the pathways of the reflex itself are
affected. Without MRI or CT scanning, LMN lesions
can be difficult to diagnose unless other signs of cauda
equina disease are present (145-148). A form of LMN
dysuria may follow obstructive dysuria after the
obstruction is relieved. This is presumably due to
bladder wall stretching, inflammation and reduced
perfusion, leading to bladder wall ischaemia, break-
down of tight junctions and reduced neuromuscular
function.
146
145-147 Examples of LMN disorders leading
to dysuria (urinary retention with overflow
incontinence); all of these dogs walked into the
consulting room.
(145) Fracture of the caudal sacrum of a German
Shepherd Dog after a road traffic accident. Sacral
fractures and sacrococcygeal injuries are more
common in cats.
(146) Extradural osteosarcoma of the cauda equina
seen post mortem in a cross-bred dog. On initial
presentation, this dog showed no neurological
 deficits apart from loss of bladder function and
dysuria. Three weeks later, the animal began to carry
the tail to one side. A myelogram at that time was
147
suspicious of a cauda equina lesion and the dog was
euthanased.
(147) Lumbosacral disc prolapse in a great Dane.
The diagnosis in all of these cases would have been
greatly facilitated by more sophisticated imaging
modalities such as MRI scanning.
148 In animals with urinary retention, urinary tract
148
infection is more likely. Although double contrast
cystography has been performed in this English Setter
with neurogenic dysuria, the air within the bladder
wall tissues is due to the presence of gas-producing
organisms; this dog has secondary emphysematous
cystitis.
Non-prostatic dysuria
63
149
Treatment
ONCE THE ANIMAL IS STABILIZED, treatment can be
carried out. In dogs with urethral calculi it should be
  a ss   p n 
Calculi
 present. Urethrotomy should be a last resort because of
the risks of complications (see below). It is safer to
Foley catheter
return any urethral calculi to the bladder using
the technique of retrograde hydropropulsion (149) and
then to remove all stones via a cystotomy (150-160).
Calculi
Saline
149 Diagram illustrating retrograde hydropropulsion
of urethral calculi (after Piermattei and Osborne,
150
1977). The bladlder is emptied by cystocentesis.
 A gloved finger is inserted per rectum and used to
 compress the pelvic urethra against the pubis. An 8Fr
Foley catheter is inserted into the penile urethra and
its cuff inflated with 2-3 ml of air (alternatively, a
 polyurethane catheter can be used and the urethra
occluded around it with digital pressure). Sterile saline
is injected through the catheter. T'his results in
dlilation of the urethra (which can be appreciated
beneath the ball of the finger in the rectum), thus
freeing the calculi from the surrounding urethral wall.
T'he digital pressure on the pelvic urethra is released
(while saline continues to be injected), allowing the
calculi to be flushed retrogradely into the bladder.
Several attempts may have to be made before all the
urethral calculi are returned to the bladder, and the
success of the technique should be confirmed radio-
 graphically. If all the calculi are seen to have been
returned to the bladder on a radiograph, the urethra is
catheterized (to empty the bladder and to prevent
calculi from returning to the urethra) and the animal
taken to theatre for cystotomy to remove the vesical
uroliths (see 150-158).
 150 During cystotomy for removal of calculi,.
retrograde flushing should be used to remove calculi
from the bladder neck and proximal urethra. T'hese
are not detectable by palpation. Sterile saline should
be used to flush small stones onto a swab placed
adjacent to the laparotomy wound, as shown.
64
Differential diagnosis and treatment
151-153 Diagrams illustrating the author's preferred
154-160 Closure of the bladder using continuous
method of bladder closure. A two-layered closure is
Czerny followed by continuous Cushing suture
used. The first layer is a continuous Czerny suture,
patterns. All sutures begin and end beyond the ends
shown in a section through the bladder incision (151),
 of the bladder wall incision. T'he author prefers to use
to appose the bladder wall incisions. T'he bladder wall
synthetic absorbable suture material, which should be
is then inverted using Lembert (152) or Cushing
swaged on to the needle.
(153) suture patterns (the Cushing suture pattern is
(154) The Czerny suture is begun by taking a bite
illustrated on an external view of the bladder incision).
through the bladder wall (but not into the lumen) just
If the bladder wall is grossly thickened, inversion may
beyond one end of the incision. After tying the knot,
not be possible and one may have to rely on
the short end of the suture is not cut, but is grasped
appositional closure alone. If simple interrupted
with clamps. T'his can then be used to support that
sutures are used, the bladder should be filled with
part of the bladder and to provide something to pull
sterile saline after closure to confirm that no leakage
against as the suture is tightened.
occurs between sutures.
(155) T'he Czerny suture is used to appose the edges
of the wound without passing through the urothelium
(i.e. the suture is taken through the bladder serosa and
detrusor muscle down to the suburothelium only).
T'he suturing continues from left to right (in this
Figure) to beyond the right hand end of the incision
and is then tied. T'he suture is left attached to the right
hand end knot and an inverting suture placed in a
continuous fashion from right to left.
(156) Here, a continuous Cushing pattern is being
used. The suture is taken in and out of the bladder
wall adjacent to the far side of the incision and parallel
to it without entering the bladder lumen.
(157) T'he suture is then taken into the bladder wall
on the near side of the incision (see 153). Again, it is
151
passed through the bladder wall parallel to the
incision.
Bladder urothelium
(158) To illustrate the inversion effect of the Cushing
Bladder
seromuscular
suture, a number of bites of suture have been placed
loyer
but not tightened. T'he Czerny sutures are still visible.
(159) When the suture is tightened, the bladder wall is
inverted, thus burying the layer of Czerny sutures.
(160) When the inverting layer has been completed.
the suture can either be tied to itself or to the short
end of the suture material that remained attached to
the initial knot of the Czerny suture.
152
153
Non-prostatic dysuria
65
155
157
6
66
Differential diagnosis and treatment
If retrograde hydropropulsion is not successful,
161-166 (161) The commonest site for urethrotomy
urethral calculi should be removed via a urethrotomy
is at the caudal end of the os penis, since this is the
(161-166) and the vesical calculi removed later when
most likely location of urethral calculi. T'he incision
the urethrotomy has healed. Urethrotomy and cysto-
should not be too close to the scrotum; this reduces
tomy should not be performed simultaneously; if the
the risk of urine tracking subcutaneously into the
Lurethrotomy becomes obstructed with blood clots, the
scrotum, resulting in scrotal necrosis.
(162) T'he retractor penis muscle (which is somewhat
d  o    r 
vestigial in the dog compared with ruminants) is
toneum. Complications after urethrotomy include:
 identified. It can be incised in the midline or retracted
● Haemorrhage. Bleeding from the wound is usually
to one side to allow access to the penis.
stimulated by urination or overexcitement and can
(163) In this case the retractor penis muscle is being
last up to ten days.
held aside with forceps and the penis lifted. T'his allows
● Infiltration of ventral abdominal tissues with urine.
the ventral groove of the os penis to be seen (or
Related to malalignment of skin and urethral
palpated) and used as a guide for a midline incision.
 incisions. Associated with urine scaldling and
(164) The penis is incised in the midline. Textbooks
possibly occlusion of the skin incision. May need
often describe an avascular median raphe, but this is
further surgery to create a larger opening. If the
rarely located during surgery. The incision should
scrotum becomes infiltrated with urine, scrotal
 pass between the corpora spongiosa and through the
necrosis may occur and castration with scrotal
ventral urethral urothelium into the urethral lumen,
ablation (see 288-294) may be required.
as shown. Once the penis is no longer lifted,
●Blood clots. May obstruct the urethra. Clear using
haemorrhage usually occurs from the corpora
a catheter.
spongiosa. T'his can be controlled by direct pressure.
● Non healing. A permanent urethral fistula results
 In the author's experience, local adrenaline has little,
(rare). Remedy by suturing.
if any, effect on the haemorrhage.
●Scar tissue formation. Postsurgical and/or calculus
(165, 166) T'he calculi are removed from the urethra
trauma. May lead to stricture (167). A more
using alligator forceps. Urethral patency is then
proximal urethrostomy may be needed to bypass
confirmed by passage of a urinary catheter distally and
the stricture (see 187-199 and 352-355).
proximally from the urethrotomy incision.
● Rarely, a urethral diverticulum can develop at the
T'he urethrotomy incision is left open to heal by
site of a urethrotomy (168).
secondary intention and the owners warned to expect
haemorrhage, particularly after the dog urinates.
The wound usually heals within 5-7 days.
167 Repeated urethrotomies for recurring uro-
lithiasis in this German Shepherd Dog have resulted
in urethral stricture. T'he retrograde positive contrast
urethrogram demonstrates the severe disruption of
normal urethral anatomy. T'his case underlines two
points: urethrotomy should be avoided if possible
and any calculi obtained should be analysed so that
suitable prophylactic measures can be instituted and
the possibility of recurrence minimized.
168 A urethral diverticulum containing over 30 calculi
in a Basset Hound. T'he diverticulum resulted from
closure of a previous urethrotomy skin incision (in an
alftempt to control postoperative haemorrhage) and
subsequent outgrowth of urethral urothelium into the
subcutaneous space to form a pouch. As further calculi
from the bladder travelled down the urethra, they
passed into the pouch, which, when full, resulted in
compression of the urethra and further dysuria. T'he
pouch and calculi had to be excised.
Non-prostatic dysuria
67
161
162
163
164
165
166
167
168
68
Differential diagnosis and treatment
In male cats with urolithiasis, discrete calculi may
 The author prefers sterile normal saline as a flushing
be returned to the bladder by retrograde flushing and
solution.(
Once the obstruction is relieved, an
removed as described for the dog (see above). In the
indwelling catheter is inserted (and the cat fitted with
case of sabulous obstruction of the urethra, the
an Elizabethan collar) to allow the animal and its
crystals are flushed retrogradely into the bladder (see
bladder to recover from the effects of the obstruction.
100-103) and then removed by bladder lavage using a
The catheter is left in situ for 3-4 days. In some cats,
catheter or dissolution in situ after their nature has
Lrethral obstruction and the resulting increase in intrav-
been identified. The sabulous material obstructing the
urethra may prevent adequate insertion of a cat
ticula, which may be detected during contrast
catheter to allow flushing (because of the side holes).
radiography or ultrasonography These rarely require
In such patients, lacrimal cannulae are useful (see
surgical treatment; they usually resolve spontaneously
100-103).
 after the obstruction is relieved.
 In cats which repeatedly obstruct and/or develop
penile urethral strictures (169, 170), perineal urethros-
tomy may be required, but preferably this should be
169
 done as an elective rather than emergency procedure
(169-181).
169, 170 (169) The worst time to have to perform a
feline perineal urethrostomy. T'his cat's urethra was so
impacted with crystals that attempts at retrograde
flushing failed. A catheter could not be passed until
the urethra was incised during an emergency perineal
urethrostomy. T'he presence of the sabulous uroliths
causes secondary urethritis, making tissue identi-
fication more difficult. In addition, the friable tissues
 do not hold sutures very well.
(170) Priapism is another indication for perineal
urethrostomy in the cat; ultimately, drying of the
penis results in stricture of the external urethral orifice.
171-179 Perineal urethrostomy in the cat is
performed with the animal in the same position as for
the dog. T'he operation is best done as an elective
procedure rather than at the time of urethral
 obstruction. Apart from allowing the cat to recover
from the systemic and local effects of urethral
obstruction, this also means that a feline 3Fr or 4Fr
urethral catheter can be inserted to facilitate
identification of the urethral lumen and to empty the
bladder of urine (171). If a catheter cannot be passed,
the blacdder must be emtied by cystocentesis, since a
170
full urinary bladder makes surgery very dlifficult (its
weight tends to pull the mem branous urethra
 cranially). T'he anus is closed with a purse-string
suture.
Non-prostatic dysuria
69
171
172
(172) A vertical skin incision is made from just dorsal
173
to the scrotum to the preputial tip. If the animal is
 entire, it is castrated. If excessive scrotal skin remains,
this is excised elliptically. T'he incision is continued
ventrally around the tip of the penis, leaving a small
amount of preputial mucosa attached to the ventral
part of the skin.
(173) The penis is freed from surrounding fat and
fascia by blunt and sharp dissection and the
ischiocavernosus muscles identified. In the 
 photograph, Metzenbaum scissors have been placed
behind the cat's left ischiocavernosus muscle. Each
ischiocavernosus muscle is sectioned at its origin on
the tuber ischium; haemorrhage is usually minimal
 and can be controlled with direct local pressure.
70
Differential diagnosis and treatment
(174) T'he penis has been reflected dorsally to
174
demonstrate the two, sectioned ischiocavernosus
muscles. T'he ventral fascial attachments of the penis
and urethra to the pelvis are broken down by blunt
and sharp dissection to allow mobilization of the
urethra in a caudal direction. This is virtually
impossible if the bladder is full, hence the need to
empty the bladder of urine pre-operatively.
(175) The penis and pelvic urethra are freed until the
paired bulbo-urethral glands can be identified.
These can be seen as bilateral bulges on the dorso-
lateral urethra, proximal to the attachments of the
ischiocavernosus muscles.
(176) At the level of the bulbo-urethral glands, the
narrow penile urethra widens into the membranous
urethra and so a urethrotomy is performed at or
cranial to this site and not caudal to it on the penile
urethra. The urethrotomy incision should be as long
as possible to allow for the formation of a large stoma.
(177) T'he dorsal urethral wall at the proximal end of
the urethrotomy is sutured to the dorsal end of the
skin incision to prevent tension on the suture line
postoperatively. T'he urethral urothelium is sutured to
the skin on both sides of the stoma. As the urothelium
is rather delicate, it is necessary to include a small bite
into the corpus spongiosum to prevent the sutures
from tearing out. In the past, the author used
absorbable sutures to avoid the necessity of suture
175
removal. These irritated some cats, which licked and
traumatized the area sufficiently to result in local
Oedema and partial obstruction of the stoma. Silk was
then tried as a suture material (as shown). Although
less irritating, it absorbed blood leaking from the
stoma postoperatively. The sutures became entangled
in blood clots, which made suture identification and
removal difficult. The author now prefers to use 3/0
 or 4/0 monofilament nylon. This leads to minimal
reaction and is easily identified. Simple interrupted
sutures are used in all cases.
(178, 179) The penis is now amputated level with the
ventral part of the stoma. The urethrostomy is
completed by suturing the fascia ventral to the stoma
closed from side to side (using synthetic absorbable
material) and then folding the ventral edge of the
perineal skin incision (with preputial mucosa attached)
dorsally. T'he preputial mucosa is sutured to the
ventral urothelium of the penile stump. T'he two small
 open skin wounds at 4 and 8 o'clock to the stoma are
closed with simple interrupted sutures. The purse-
string suture is removed from the anus and the
catheter removed from the urethra. A large (6Fr)
urinary catheter should be easily passable through the
stoma and into the bladder after surgery. Skin sutures
are removed after ten days, under sedation or general.
anaesthesia.
Non-prostatic dysuria
71
176
177
Purse-string suture
in onus
Urethrotomy
Bulbo-urethrol glond
178
179
 Subcuto neous fot/foscio
Preputiol
mUDO
72
Differential diagnosis and treatment
180 Stenosis of the stoma may occur. In this cat the
180
perineal urethrostomy is being revised to excise the
stenosed stoma. T'he urethra has been opened and
the narrowing of the urethra can be seen distal to the
patent membranous urethra. T'he stenosis in this case
was associated with stomatizing the urethra at an
inappropriate site, resulting in a small stoma on a
narrow portion of urethra (the stoma was made into
the penile urethra rather than the wider membranous
urethra). This was corrected by creating a larger stoma
into the membranous urethra, as shown, and excising
the stenosed penile urethra and previous stoma.
181 Stricture of the stoma is less likely after perineal
181
urethrostomy in cats if the ventral part of the penile 
urothelium is joined to preputial mucosa rather than
preputial skin. In addition, the preputial mucosa
ventral to the stoma acts as a ^drainage board’ and is
less likely to be scalded by urine than skin. In this cat
(in which perineal urethrostomy is being performed to
relieve urethral stenosis after air gun pellet trauma to
the penis), the fascia ventral to the stoma has been
closed. T'he preputial mucosa (arrowed), which was left
attached to the prepuce, will be reflected dorsally and
attached to the ventral edge of the urethral urothelium
to complete the stoma, as described in 179.
Non-prostatic dysuria
73
 In the case of neurogenic dysuria associated with
182
intervertebral disc prolapse, mildly affected animals
 may respond to conservative treatment, but severe cases
such as those with complete loss of motor, bladder ±
sensory function should be treated as emergencies and
decompressive surgery (fenestration or laminectomy)
 performed within 24 hours.
 Minor urethral trauma may heal if urinary bypass
is provided using an indwelling urethral or tube cyst-
Ostomy catheter (see 89, 90 and 231-234) and conser-
vative treatment, but more extensive urethral ruptures
should be treated surgically If uroperitoneum
develops, such cases may have the same metabolic
 problems as animals with bladder rupture (hyper-
kalaemia, acidosis and azotaemia) and this must be
183
corrected before surgical intervention or anaesthesia
for insertion of tube cystostomies. Urethral repair
(especially intrapelvic) is difficult and the exposure is
facilitated by transpubic combined with caudal laparo-
tomy approaches. An indwelling catheter may be
useful as a urethral 'splint' postoperatively. In animals
with gross, irreparable trauma, it is possible to
perform an antepubic urethrostomy but postopera-
tive scalding of the ventral abdomen with urine and
incontinence may occur and the results are often unac-
ceptable to the 0wner (see 367-369). See Chapter 6
(Urinary tract trauma) for further details of urethral
repair, including the treatment of urethral strictures.
Most bladder neck/urethral tumours are malignant
182, 183 Urethral carcinoma demonstrated
(see 78, 79, 141 and 182, 183) and only 0ccasionally is
by retrograde positive contrast vagino-urethrography
the tumour benign and/or operable (see 139, 142-144
in a cross-bred bitch (182). The tumour has
and 184-199). In animals with lower urinary tract
completely obstructed the urethra and the animal can
malignancy if the main clinical sign is urinary
 only urinate (with difficulty) because the tumour has
frequency/urgency rather than difficulty, some pallia-
eroded through the floor of the vagina, seen from
tion may be obtained with non-steroidal anti-inflam-
above in the postmortem picture with the vaginal
matory drugs (NSAIDs), especially cyclooxygenase
roof opened (183)
inhibitors such as piroxicam or meloxicam. Tube cys-
tostomies, endoscopic or Nd: YAG laser debulking and
urethral stents have also been used to provide palliation
in animals with urethral/prostatic or bladder neck
malignancies.
 Urethritis is best treated by means of bypass using
 89, 90 and 231-234) and parenteral antibiotic therapy
based on bacteriological sensitivities. In some cases,
corticosteroid therapy may also be required. This
 condition is termed “chronic urethritis² because it has a
tendency to recur. The condition can be severe enough
that a urethral caruncle develops and it can be even
 more difficult to differentiate from malignancy.
74
Differential diagnosis and treatment
184-186 Ischial urethral narrowing in a dysuric male
184
Labrador Retriever demonstrated by retrograde
positive contrast urethrography (184). This was due to
 an intramural leiomyosarcoma, which was excised via
the perineum (185). T'he excised (sectioned) tumour
is shown in 186. Although leiomyosarcomas are
malignant, they are slow to metastasize and this dog
was alive and well with no recurrence of signs four
years after surgery.
187-199 This adult German Shepherd Dog has a
chondrosarcoma of the caudal os penis (187).
Although malignant, these tumours are slow to
metastasize. No metastases were detected and the
tumour was excised by penile ablation and scrotal
185
urethrostomy.
(188) An eliptical skin incision is made around the
penis and scrotum. The branches of the caudal
superficial epigastric and external pudendal vessels,
which supply the prepuce and scrotum, are identified,
clamped and ligated along with other subcutaneous
vessels.
(189) T'he penis is freed from subcutaneous fat and
fascia by a combination of blunt and sharp dissection
and is elevated.
(190) As the penis is reflected caudally, the spermatic
 cords can be identified, each covered in its tunic.
A closed castration is performed. The cords are ligated
individually just outside the external inguinal rings and
then clamped and sectioned distal to the ligatures (see
272-294). In the photograph, the dog's right
spermatic cord has been ligated and sectioned (and is
grasped in the nearest hand) and the lef cord has been
freed from surrounding fascia, prior to ligation.
(191) The dorsal penile artery is identified, ligated and
 clamped. It is then sectioned between the ligature and
clamps.
(192) T'he penis is transected just distal to the penile
 artery ligature and the penis, prepuce, testes and
scrotum removed. A urinary catheter is inserted into
the urethra.
(193) To reduce the risk of postoperative stenosis of
the stoma, the urethra is spatulated by incising it
186
ventrally with scissors.
Non-prostatic dysuria
75
187
188
189
061
191
192
193
76
Differential diagnosis and treatment
194
(194) A suture of 2/0 synthetic absorbable material is
placed between the ventral wall of the urethra at the
caudal end of the stoma and the subcutaneous tissues.
T'his is to prevent tension on the suture line after
stomatization.
(195) The urethral urothelium is sutured to the skin
with simple interrupted sutures of 3/0 monofilament
nylon.
(196) The ventral abdominal subcutaneous tissues and
skin cranial to the stoma are closed in separate layers.
(197) Closure is completed by suturing the skin to the
urethral urothelium at the cranial edge of the stoma.
(198, 199) Although it might not be necessary to
excise the penis in many cases, the cosmetic effect of
this operation is quite good, as can be seen from these
195
follow-up photographs taken three years after surgery.
A recent case report dlescribed amputation of the penis
with preservation of the prepuce (the remaining penile
urethral opening is anastomosed to the caudal fornix
of the preputial mucosa), but it remains to be proven
if this technique provides a more effective barrier to
ascending urinary tract infections than conventional
urethrostomy techniques.
96L
97
198
661
Non-prostatic dysuria
77
Bladder displacement usually occurs either ventrally
200
(into an inguinal hernia or ventral rupture) (200, 201)
or caudally (into a perineal rupture) (209, 210).
 Treatment involves stabilizing the patient, replacement
of the organ (211-213) and hernia or rupture repair
(202-208 and 214-230).
200, 201 This dysuric Old English Sheepdog has
 bilateral perineal ruptures and a right inguinal hernia
(200). Retrograde positive contrast urethrocysto-
 graphy revealed that the bladder is displaced into the
inguinal hernia (201).
 202 Diagrammatic representation of inguinal hernia
repair. Although twisting of the vaginal tunic during
201
reduction of hernia contents is often recommended
(to prevent viscera from re-herniating during
 reduction and repair), it is not always necessary.
estis (males)
Herniated viscus (e.g. bladder)
Externol pudendal
vessels
Cronial
inguinal ring
78
Differential diagnosis and treatment
203-208 (203)A skin incision is made directly over
203
the hernia and the subcutaneous inguinal fat bluntly
separated and reflected medially. In this male Dandie
 Dinmont, the dog's head is to the right and the penis
is below the upper surgical drape. T'he fat has been
reflected medially (upwards in the illustration) to
expose the external inguinal ring. The craniomedial
part of the ring is formed by the edge of the external
abdominal oblique muscle (arrowed). Most of the
hernia has been reduced, but some omental fat can 
still be seen through the vaginal tunic, just to the left
of the point of the forceps.
(204) When the vaginal tunic is displaced
craniolaterally, the large external pudendal vessels can
be seen (arrowed). These and their adjacent (invisible)
204
lymphatics must be avoidled.
205
206
207
208
Non-prostatic dysuria
79
(205) T'he tunic-covered testis and spermatic cord are
209, 210 (209) Retroflexion of the urinary bladder
exteriorized by blunt dissection of fascial attachments
 into a perineal rupture is not always associated with
and the hernia contents returned to the abdomen
dysuria. T'he only sign in this dog was unilateral
(if this has not already been carried out). In the bitch
 perineal swelling, which reduced in size during
the vaginal tunic sac is freed from surrounding fascial
micturition
attachments by blunt dissection. In both sexes, care is
(210) Retrograde positive contrast urethrocysto-
taken to avoid the external pudendal vessels and their
 graphy (and/or ultrasonography) is the best way of
branches, inclucding the caudal epigastric vessels. If the
confirming retroflexion of the bladder into a perineal
viscera are incarcerated and non-reducible, it may be
rupture.
necessary to incise the proximal vaginal tunic and
enlarge the inguinal ring. T'his is best accomplished by
incising the proximal tunic on its cranial border, just
distal to the external inguinal ring, and continuing the
incision cranially through the external abdominal
oblique muscle.
(206) After reduction of the hernia contents, a closed
209
castration is performed in male animals (see 272-294).
T'his effectively obliterates the hernia sac. In bitches.
the vaginal tunic is ligated just ventral to the external
inguinal ring. T'he sac is sectioned just distal to the
ligature and removed. The ligated sac remnants are
now reduced through the inguinal canal.
(207) The external inguinal ring is now closed. Simple
interrupted sutures of monofilament nylon or synthetic
absorbable suture material are used to appose the
edges of the external inguinal ring, formed by the
 caudal edge of the external abdominal oblique muscle
craniomedially and the inguinal ligament caudolat-
erally. Sutures should be pre-placed, as shown, and a
 0.5-1.5 cm space left (depending on the size of the
animal) at the caudal end of the ring to avoid stran-
 gulation of the external pudendal vessels and
lymphatics.
(208) The sutures are now tied to complete the repair
and the gap at the caudal end of the ring checked to
ensure that it is large enough to prevent strangulation
of vessels and lymphatics but not allow prolapse of
viscera adjacent to these structures. T'he subcutaneous
fat, fascia and skin are closed routinely. Ifa large dead
 space is present, it is prudent to use a Penrose or
 active suction drain for 3-5 days to minimize swelling.
210
80
Differential diagnosis and treatment
211-213 If retroflexion of the bladder into a perineal
211
rupture results in dysuria, the priority for treatment is
relief of the dysuria. It is dangerous to attempt
forceful catheterization of the bladder; the tortuous
course of the urethra (see 210) means that iatrogenic
 trauma by the catheter is highly likely. Initially,
therefore, the bladder should be drained by needle
centesis through the perineum (2ll). A catheter is
then inserted gently per urethram to the level of the
ischial arch of the urethra (212). After drainage by
centesis, the bladder can then usually be returned to
the abdomen by direct digital pressure through the
perineal defect (213) and the catheter advanced into
it. T'he catheter is retained as an indwelling catheter
for 4-5 days. This allows the bladder and perineum to
212
recover from the effects of bladder entrapment and
distension while the animal is treated for the metabolic
effects of dysuria. In addition, the use of a
 polyurethrane catheter, which is soft but stiff, tends to
prevent the bladder from returning to the perineum.
213
Non-prostatic dysuria
81
 214 For perineal rupture repair, a knowledge of
214
local anatomy is imperative. In this dissection of a
dog (positioned as in 215), the gluteal musculature
has been removed from the caudal, right lateral
 pelvis. T'he tail has been elevated. Note the position
of the following structures and their relationships to
each other: EAS = external anal sphincter muscle;
 LA/C = levator ani (caudomedial)/coccygeus
(craniolateral) muscles; CR = caudal rectal
(haemorrhoidal) vein, artery and nerve;
ST' = sacrotuberous ligament; SN = sciatic nerve;
CG = caudal gluteal artery and vein; GT' = greater
trochanter of proximal femur. The breakdown of the
 perineum usually occurs at the junction between the
external anal sphincter and the levator ani muscles
(separated on this dissection). Rarely, breakdown
occurs between the levator ani and coccygeus muscles.
215 T'he dog should be positioned for surgery in
215
sternal recumbency, with the hind quarters raised by
extending the hindlimbs over a sandbag placed under
the proximal thighs. T'he tail should be elevated using
tapes.
216, 217 The tails of short-docked breeds are
 difficult to elevate. In these animals, a large cutting
 needlle can be used to pass no. 2 monofilament nylon
ventral to the tail, as illustrated (216). T'he nylon is
then tied to itself as a loose loop. Tapes are placed
through this loop and used to elevate the remnants of
the tail (217).
216
217
82
Differential diagnosis and treatment
218, 219 The ^best′ example of a perineal rupture
218
(218). T'he right perineum has been opened revealing
the defect between the external anal sphincter (EAS)
and levator ani (LA) muscles into which a rectal
deviation (R) protrudes. White, lobulated pelvic fat
can be seen on the floor of the pelvis and, beneath this
fat, is the internal obturator muscle. It is extremely
unusual to be able to see this much anatomy, and so
the technique of perineal rupture repair is illustrated
 below on the type of case more likely to be
encountered by the reader. The repair technique is a
matter of personal preference (based on experience
and results obtained). It is well-recognized that
dlifferent surgeons, apparently performing an identical
45
repair technique, get different results and so, if one
finds a method which works, one tends to stick with
it. While the use of an internal obturator muscle flap is
popular for the repair, the author prefers the
technique of re-apposing the external anal sphincter to
the levator ani cranially (but including the
internal obturator muscle ventrally. T'his is
summarized in the diagram (219), although only
three sutures are shown in this figure.
220-230 (220) This is a more typical case.
219
The animal has been anaesthetized, its rectum
 evacuated of faeces and the anal sacs emptied. T'he dog
is positioned for surgery in ventral recumbency with
the hindlimbs extended caudally over a sandbag and
the tail elevated (see 215). A temporary purse-string
suture is used to close the anus. After routine aseptic
 skin preparation and draping, an incision is made just
lateral to the region of the external anal sphincter
muscle. T'his can frequently be judged by palpating the 
defect in the perineum but, if not, the skin is incised
just lateral to the lateral margin of the glandular
circumanal skin, which corresponds to the lateral edges
Caudal
ectal nerve
of the external anal sphincter muscle. T'he incision is
extended ventrally to a level just above the pelvic floor
Socrotuberous
(this can be judged by palpating the tuber ischium on
ligament
the affected side). T'he subcutaneous fat and fascia are
separated by blunt dlissection and the perineal defect
exposed. This dog has a right-sided perineal rupture
with no anatomy visible apart from fat and fascia. This
Externol anal
is fairly typical.
sphincter 
Tuber ischium
Non-prostatic dysuria
83
220
221
222
(221) Here, an index finger has been inserted into the
defect, medial to the levator ani muscle. T'he sacro-
tuberous ligament is palpated through the muscle; this
is always possible, even when the muscle is not visible,
as in this case. With the ball of the finger on the
ligament, the finger tip is bent slightly ventrally and
laterally into a small depression. A pulse should now
be palpable by the tip of the finger. T'his pulse is in the
caudal gluteal artery and gives an indication of how
close the sciatic nerve and caudal gluteal vessels are to
the ligament (refer to 214). A curved round-bodied
suture needle with swaged-on No. 0 monofilament
polyamide is inserted dorsally, lateral to the ligament.
Taking care to stay as close to the ligament as possible,
the needle is curved cranially around the ligament.
Automatically, the tip of the needle exits medially
(222) T'he external anal sphincter muscle is now
through the levator ani muscle remnants. The needle
identified beneath the medial part of the skin incision.
tip is palpated as it emerges from the levator ani
T'he muscle is usually visible but, if not, its position
muscle and is braced against the finger tip. T'his is to
can be determined by placing an index finger on the
prevent the needle point from damaging the rectum 
lateral wall of the rectum and curling it caudally until a
and also to avoid losing it in the lateral pelvic soft
thickening is appreciated. This is the cranial edge of
tissues when the needle holders are released. T'he
the external anal sphincter muscle. A bite is now taken
needle holders are now used to grip close to the point
through the cranial edge of the muscle, as shown.
of the needle and pull the suture around the
sacrotuberous ligament.
84
Differential diagnosis and treatment
223
(223) Sutures continue to be pre-placed between the
sacrotuberous ligament and the external anal sphincter
muscle, as described above. However, care should be
taken to avoid placing sutures around or through the
caudal rectal nerve as it enters the external anal
sphincter muscle. T'he location of this nerve can usually
be identified by detecting the pulse in its adljacent artery
but, if not, it should be assumed to be entering the
sphincter at the “8 o'clock′ (left side) or ^4 o'clock"
(right side) positions on the cranial edge of the
 sphincter muscle. T'he nerve is not apparent in this dog,
but the needle holders are being used to point to the
location of its entry into the sphincter. T'his area must
be avoided during suture placement, as illustrated by
the position of the middle of the three sutures in 219
(224) When the last suture has been placed between
the ventral end of the sacrotuberous ligament (close
to its insertion into the tuber ischium) and the
external anal sphincter muscle, a defect remains in the
ventral perineum, as shown. T'his can be closed by
suturing the external anal sphincter muscle to the
internal obturator muscle.
(225) A suture is placed in the internal obturator
muscle, as shown. T'he suture enters the muscle caudal
to the internal pudendal vessels (the pulse in the
 artery can be palpated on the pelvic floor overlying
the internal obturator muscle). It is preferable to
insert the needle in a craniocaudal direction, as
illustrated. T'his is slightly more dlifficult than passing
224
the needlle lateromedially, but greatly reduces the risk
of trauma to the urethra. If the muscle cannot be
seen, the needle is passed ventrally until it contacts the
bone of the ischium and is then continued caudally
and dorsally to exit the muscle. In doing so, it has to
have passed in and out of the internal obturator
muscle.
(226) If one is unsure of the suture placement in the
internal obturator muscle, tension should be applied
to the suture, as illustrated. If the suture has passed
through fat and fascia only, it will tear out and should
be replaced.
225
Non-prostatic dysuria
85
226
227
228
229
230
(227) T'he suture is then taken through the ventral
(230) Once the muscular defect has been closed
part of the cranial edge of the external anal sphincter
(illustrated), the remaining tissues are apposed.
 muscle, taking care to avoid the caudal rectal nerve.
The fascia is closed with a simple continuous
(228) When all the sutures have been placed, they can
synthetic absorbable suture. Frequently, there is little
be tied. T'he author prefers to commence at the
fat and fascia medially. In this case, the lateral fat and
ventral part of the defect, since this tends to prevent
fascia are sutured to the superficial fibres of the
viscera such as pelvic fat from prolapsing through the
external anal sphincter muscle. The skin is closed
defect as the remaining sutures are tied.
 routinely and the purse-string suture removed from
(229) Care should be taken to tie all sutures tight.
the anus. T'he dog can now be repositioned and
T'he dorsal-most sutures in a large dog will be tied
castrated(see 272-294).
some 6-8 cm from the perineal skin wound edges and
so finger tip tightening of the suture knots at this
depth is required, as shown.
86
Differential diagnosis and treatment
Occasionally, animals are presented in which the
Rarely, enlargement of other, adjacent viscera may
dysuria appears to be a fiunctional disorder. This is
 cause pressure on the urethra or bladder neck, leading
      m ps 
to dysuria. Examples are ureterocoeles (235, 236),
contract (bladder atony) or/and a failure of the urethra
vaginal floor tumours (237, 238) or cysts (239-244)
to relax during attempts to micturate (dyssynergia).
and sublumbar lymph node enlargement (245). Even
Bladder atony may result from a previous bout of
rarer is congenital narrowing of the genital tract
dysuria and urinary retention causing overdistension of
impairing urine outflow (246, 247).
the bladder The bladder may appear large and atonic
(like a partly inflated football) during contrast radiogra-
231 Tube cystostomy in a male dog using a Foley
phy. Such overdistension, especially if acute, results in
catheter (photograph taken at the time of tube
bladder wall ischaemia (see 2 and 135), breakdown of
removal).
tight junctions and stretching (and thus demyelination)
of nerves coursing over the bladder wall. All of these
may result in a loss of function. If severe, this may be
231
irreversible. Such cases are best treated by keeping the
bladder empty for 5-10 days, using an indwelling
     )  
junctions to reform and remyelination of nerves to
     s  
wall. In the author's experience, cholinergic drugs such
as bethanechol are rarely effective in these cases.
Dyssynergia can be voluntary (a failure of urethral
striated muscle to relax) or involuntary (a failure of
relaxation of urethral smooth muscle) and is difficult to
diagnose. In theory, urodynamics should be beneficial
for confirming the diagnosis but, in the absence of
 patient cooperation and the need for sedation/anaesthe-
sia, it is difficult to interpret the results. The diagnosis
usually rests on the history and elimination of physical
Or neurological causes for the dysuria by imaging and
laboratory examinations. Voluntary dyssynergia may be
seen in bitches after colposuspension; it responds
Uis pn 1o pq o/d sy/su z'o) uedazep on Apidei
20-30 minutes before exercising the dog to urinate).
Idiopathic dyssynergia is commoner in large breed male
dogs such as Labrador Retrievers and may be difficult
to treat. If there is no response to treatment
for voluntary dyssynergia using diazepam or other
striated muscle relaxants, therapy for involuntary
dyssynergia using c-adrenergic blocking agents such as
phenoxybenzamine hydrochloride (for dogs, 0.25
mg/kg p/o bid or tid) can be attempted. The response
may be poor and some affected dogs require long-term 
management using tube cystostomies (231-234).
In a few of these dogs, normal function may return
and so, periodically, the owners should leave the
Ji aaiasqo pue sou zi8 d paddes aqni Auisos
the animal is able to urinate and how much urine is
passed. The success of apparent urination should be
checked by draining what urine is left in the bladder
after urination (via the tube) and reporting the residual
yolume to the veterinary surgeon, who can then assess
the efficacy of urination.
 Non-prostatic dysuria
87
232
232-234 (232) Mushroom tip catheters are
preferred to Foley catheters for tube cystostomies.
T'hey have the advantage that they can be shortened
 after insertion and are less likely to come out
 prematurely. If they are difficult to remove, the
mushroom tip (233) can be distorted into a more
linear shape by carefully inserting a blunt probe and
stretching the tip (234) during removal.
233
234
 235, 236 Ectopic ureterocoele demonstrated during
IVU (235). If these become large enough, they can
obstruct the bladder neck (236).
235
236
88
Differential diagnosis and treatment
237, 238 Extensive vaginal neoplasms demonstrated
237
by retrograde vaginography (237) and during episio-
tomy (238) in a Cocker Spaniel bitch. Depending on
their size and position, these may compress the distal
urethra or inhibit exit of urine from the vagina (238),
but this is rare. T'hese tumours are usually leiomyomas
or, rarely, leiomyosarcomas or carcinomas.
239 Vagino-urethrogram (performed shortly after
IVU) of an adult Airedale bitch presented with
dysuria. A soft-tissue density can be seen in the ventral
part of the vaginal lumen, extending cranially and
compressing the urethra and bladder neck. Ultra-
sonography revealed that this was a fluid-filled
swelling. Bacteriological and cytological examinations
238
 of the fluid confirmed that this was a vaginal wall cyst.
240-244 Vaginal floor cysts can be marsupialized
into the vagina via an episiotomy. The bitch is placed
in ventral recumbency with the hindquarters raised
(iz ass) aedau aa ruad ui se equs e rao
T'he tail is elevated and the perineum prepared for
aseptic surgery.
(240) T'he anus is closed using a purse-string suture.
A vertical skin incision is made, extending from just
ventral to the external anal sphincter muscle to the
 dorsal commissure of the vulval lips.
(241) The incision is continued through the dorsal
vaginal wall using scissors.
(242) The urethra is catheterized. The cyst can be
seen bulging into the vagina just cranial to the
external urethral orifice.
(243) T'he vaginal mucosa over the cyst is incised,
revealing the cyst wall, as shown. T'he cyst wall is then
incised and the cyst drained.
239
Non-prostatic dysuria
89
240
241
90
Differential diagnosis and treatment
244
(244) The cyst and vaginal mucosal incisions are
then apposed using a simple continuous pattern of
synthetic absorbable suture material, resulting in a
stoma between the cyst and vaginal lumina (the tip
of the Kilner needle holder has been inserted into
the stoma). Repair of the episiotomy is routine and
 involves closure of the dorsal vaginal wall using
synthetic absorbable material in a simple continuous
pattern, followed by simple interrupted sutures of
monofilament nylon in the skin. The purse-string
suture is then removed from the anus. T'he urethral
catheter is also removed unless there is the
possibility of postoperative dysuria resulting from
urethral or peri-urethral swelling, in which case it
can be sutured in situ as an indwelling catheter (see
(06'68
 245 Sublumbar lymph node enlargement
245
(lymphosarcoma) resulting in bladder neck and rectal
compression, demonstrated radiographically
(a pneumocystogram has been performed to
 demonstrate the position of the bladder). This dog
exhibited dysuria and dyschezia.
246, 247 Congenital narrowing of the preputial
orifice in a puppy resulting in dysuria (246). During
urination, the prepuce filled with urine, which then 
gradually dripped out through the tiny preputial
 orifice. This was treated by spatulation (247) to give
the dog a larger orifice.
246
247
5 Prostatic disorders
91
Within the hallowed gland...
Dylan Thomas {1914-1953)
Diagnosis
The clinical signs in dogs with prostate disorders
include haematuria, dysuria, urinary incontinence,
PROsTATE DIsORDERs in small animals are most
dyschezia, pain and weight loss. These signs are not
common in the dog. Prostate disorders in cats are
pathognomonic and so must be differentiated from
extremely uncommon, although cats will occasionally
similar signs due to non-prostatic disorders. A useful
develop prostatic malignancies. Problems affecting the
sign is if the dog bleeds from the urethra between
 canine prostate include:
  n    s 
●Benign enlargement (hyperplasia/metaplasia)-
rhage is coming from distal to the bladder neck, most 
● Prostatitis (acute or chronic).
commonly from the prostate, although the urethra,
●Abscessation.
penis and prepuce should be examined to eliminate
●Prostatic cysts - intraprostatic (prostatic retention
Other areas of possible haemorrhage. Once it is known
cysts) or paraprostatic.
that the signs are associated with a prostatic condition,
●Neoplasia (usually adenocarcinoma, although it
the nature of that condition should be determined.
 may be diffcult to differentiate primary prostate
Palpation of the prostate is best performed using
 cancer from urethral carcinomas invading the
two hands (see 9). Useful differential features are that
 prostate gland without histopathology).
 only acute prostatitis (± abscessation) and neoplasia are
●Idiopathic haemorrhage.
painful conditions; prostatic abscesses, cysts and
● Displacement of the prostate into ruptures or
tumours result in asymmetrical prostatic enlargement
hernias.
(Table ll); in some dogs with prostatic tumours a
●Trauma.
small, irregular, painful prostate is present.
Table ll Differential clinical findings in prostate disorders
Eniorged
Symmetrica!
Painfu!
Firm {FM} or
Urethral discharge
Fluctuoting {FL}
[noture of any discharge]
Hyperplasia/metaplasia
+
FM
±(semen] 
Prostatitis 
+
FM
[snd pooq) ≠
Abscessation 
+
+
FL
±(pus]
Cysts
+
FL
一
Neoplasia 
FIM
ldiopathic haemorrhage 
FM
+(blood)
usually present 
usually absent 
± may be present or absent
92
Differential diagnosis and treatment
248
Prostate cancer is also one of the few (if not the only)
prostate conditions to affect castrated dogs. Indeed,
some authors believe prostate cancer to have a higher
 prevalence in castrated versus entire animals. As with
any suspected malignancy, examination for metastases
is mandatory (see 20). Animals with prostate cancer
(and other intrapelvic malignancies) will sometimes
have abnormal periosteal reactions on the bones of the
pelvis, femurs and/or the ventral lumbar and lum-
bosacral vertebrae (see 21, 22).
Apart from clinical examination, useful investigative
techniques include contrast radiography (especially
retrograde positive contrast urethrocystography), ultra-
 sonography, fine needle aspirates and biopsies, cytology
and histology (see 69 and 248-263).
249
248, 249 The enlarged prostate visible on the plain
lateral abdominal radiograph (248) of this Springer
 Spaniel shows asymmetry during retrograde positive
contrast urethrography (249), with more prostatic
tissue dorsal to the urethra than ventral to it. T'his was
due to an intraprostatic abscess.
250, 251 The gas-filled bladder in this dog (250) is
250
due to gas-producing organisms. T'he dog had
retention cystitis associated with the enlarged prostate
gland. The gland shows asymmetry during urethro-
 graphy (251). This dog had a large intraprostatic cyst.
252 Urethrocystogram of the dog illustrated in
20-22. T'he gross spillage of contrast medium into
irregular cavities within the prostate is almost
 pathognomonic for prostatic or prostatic urethral
malignancy.
251
252
Prostatic disorders
93
253
254
255
256
253, 254 A further example of prostatic cavitation in
257
a dog associated with malignancy (253). T'he post-
 o    s
can be seen in 254.
255-258 Sometimes, contrast radliography alone is
insufficient. In this Springer Spaniel with an enlarged
 abdominal prostate and a soft tissue swelling in a
perineal rupture, plain abdominal radiography (255)
and urethrography (256) gave no indication of the
nature of the abnormality. However, abdominal (257)
and perineal (258) ultrasonography revealed the
presence of fluid swellings. T'hese proved to be an
intraprostatic cyst and a paraprostatic cyst that had
 extended caudally into the perineal rupture.
258
94
Differential diagnosis and treatment
259
260
259 The ultrasonographic appearance of a normal
261
canine prostate (red arrow) in longitudinal section.
(T'he urinary bladder is indicated by a white arrow.)
Note that the prostate tissue is homogeneous.
260 The ultrasonographic appearance of a normal
canine prostate in transverse section. T'he gland tissue
is homogeneous and the lobes are symmetrical in size
and shape.
 261  Ultrasonographic appearance of canine
intraprostatic cysts (centesis and fluid
cytology/bacteriology would be needed to
differentiate these definitively from abscesses)
262
 262 Ultrasonographic appearance of a canine
prostatic malignancy, showing heterogenicity and
asymmetry.
263 Ultrasonography makes aspiration of the
contents of prostatic cysts and abscesses more accurate
and safer.
Treatment
IF THE PROsTATE DISORDER results in dysuria, the
priority is to alleviate the dysuria before diagnosis
and treatment of the disorder (see Chapter 4 and 264).
263
Benign prostatic enlargement is usually due to
acinar hyperplasia associated with an excess of
androgens, although oestrogens can also lead to
prostatic enlargement, since they result in squamous
metaplasia (particularly of the ducts) and fibromuscular
hyperplasia of the gland stroma. If severe, the
squamous metaplasia of the ducts may result in duct
obstruction and retention of prostatic secretions,
leading to retention (intraprostatic) cysts. Prostatic
 hyperplasia responds to oestrogen or anti-androgen
therapy (265-271) and, more permanently,
to
castration (272-294)
Prostatic disorders
95
264
265
Hypophysis
estes
Hypothalamus
 264 Postmortem appearance of prostate cancer in a
266
 dog. T'his resulted in obstructive dysuria leadling to
Prostate epithelial cell
 bladlder ischaemia, the effects of which can be seen.
T'he priority in this case would have been to relieve the
Test
pressure within the bladder (see Chapter 4).
Cell nucleus
265 In the normal animal, luteinizing hormone
5o-reductase
releasing hormone (LHRH) from the hypothalamus
Transcription
 of androgen-
stimulates release of the gonadotrophins luteinizing
dependent genes 
hormone (LH) and follicle stimulating hormone
Androgen
(FSH) from the hypophysis. LH has the effect on the
eceptor
 testes of stimulating testosterone production. T'here is
a negative feedback mechanism on the hypophysis, so
that increasing levels of testosterone reduce the
 amount of LHRH, thus keeping testosterone levels in
267
check.
Hypophysis
 266 In the prostate epithelial cells, testosterone
14
(Test) is converted into dihydrotestosterone (DHtest)
Oestrogens
by the enzyme 5a-reductase. DHtest is about twice as
 potent as Test; it has greater binding affinity for and
slower dissociation from intracellular androgen
Testes
 receptors. Within the nucleus, the DHtest-androgen
FSE
 receptor complex interacts with specific DNA binding
 sites and initiates transcription of androgen-dependent
Hypothalamus
 genes. T'he resultant messenger RNA is translated and
Testo sterone
cellular protein increased. In the prostate this leads to
cellular hypertrophy and hyperplasia of the epithelial
component of the gland.
268
267, 268 The action of oestrogens. Oestrogens are
Prostate epithelial cell
sometimes used to treat prostatic hyperplasia. T'heir
lest
action is to suppress LHRH release, block androgen
receptors and inhibit 5a-reductase. Long-term
Oestrogens
Oestrogen therapy should be used with caution. Apart
Cell nucleus
from potential toxicity effects, it may lead to prostatic
bo-reductose
enlargement due to squamous metaplasia and
fibromuscular hypoplasia.
Androgen
eceptor
96
Differential diagnosis and treatment
269, 270 Steroidal anti-androgens such as delmadi-
272-287 Castration with retention of the scrotum.
none acetate are used for the medical treatment of
(272) The anaesthetized dog is positioned in dorsal
 prostatic hyperplasia. T'heir action is to suppress
recumbency, with the hindlimbs abducted. T'he
 release of LHRH and block androgen receptors.
scrotum and surrounding skin are prepared for aseptic
 surgery, avoiding the use of strong antiseptics such as
271 In breeding males, it may be tempting to use
 surgical spirit if the scrotum is to be retained. T'he area
 5c-reductase inhibitors such as finasteride to preserve
is draped (caudal is to the left in this photograph).
circulating testosterone levels (and thus libido)
(273) To avoid postoperative scrotal skin irritation,
However, there is a posibility that these drugs may be
the skin incision is made prescrotally. T'he second
teratogenic.
finger of the left hand (if one is right-handed) is used
to push one of the testes to a prescrotal position.
(274) While the second finger maintains the testis in
that position, the first finger and thumb are used to
 tense the testis upwards and immobilize it against the
269
Hypophysis
prescotal skin.
LH
(275) T'he skin and subcutaneous fascia are incised to
expose the tunica vaginalis over the testis. Usually,
 a small amount of fat (external to the tunic) appears 
Steroidal anti-
androgens
in the incision site when the incision has reached the
 required depth. T'he fat can be seen at the cranial end
FSH
Testes
of the incision.
(276) The thumb and index finger of both hands are
-Hypothalamus
the testis.
estosterone
(277) T'he testis is grasped firmly in the left hand and
the cremaster muscle and tunic-covered vas deferens
and pampiniform plexus are identified at the cranial
270
end of the testis.
(278) A dry swab is used to push fascia proximally
Prostate epithelial cell 
from the lateral side of the testis.
(279) T'he same procedure is used to debride the
medial side of the testis.
Cell nucleus
5α-reductose
 Steroidal onti-
Androgen androgens
eceptor
271
Prostate epithelil cell 
5α-reductose
 inhibitors
Cell nucleus
Soa-reductase
Androgen
eceptor
Prostatic disorders
97
272
273
274
275
278
279
98
Differential diagnosis and treatment
280
(280) T'he gubernaculum can now easily be broken
down and the testis and spermatic cord exteriorized,
as shown.
(281) Any remaining fascia is cleared from the tunic
over the spermatic cord by wiping with a swab from
dlistally to proximally.
(282) The spermatic cord is now ligated. The author
prefers to use a transfixing ligature of synthetic
absorbable material. It is important that transfixing
ligatures do not enter hollow viscera (such as, in this
case, the vas deferens) in order to avoid the risk of
granuloma formation. T'he ligature is therefore taken
through the tunic and between the spermatic vessels
(cranially) and the vas (caudally), as illustrated.
(283) The ligature is tied cranially to ligate the
spermaticvessels.
(284) The ends of the ligature are then taken caudally,
around each side of the spermatic cord, and again tied.
(285) The result is that during placement of the
transfixing ligature the vascular component of the
 spermatic cord is ligated twice, thus minimizing
the risk of haemorrhage.
281
283
282
Prostatic disorders
99
284
285
286
287
(286) Vascular clamps are applied to the spermatic
vessels while the testis is exteriorized may prevent
 cord just distal to the ligature. A second pair of clamps
haemorrhage from occuring. If haemorrhage does
is used to grasp a caudal, non-vascular part of the 
 occur when the tension on the spermatic cord
spermatic cord (in this case the cremaster muscle).
remnants is released, the cord can be re-exteriorized
The spermatic cord is sectioned between the ligature
using the forceps and religated. If, as should happen,
and the first pair of clamps and the testis is removed.
 no haemorrhage occurs, the forceps are removed.
(287) T'he ligated spermatic cord is allowed to retract
 Castration is completed by displacing the remaining
through the incision towards the external inguinal
testis cranially to the skin incision, incising the
ring. The adequacy of the ligation is unknown until
common vaginal tunic and repeating the procedure
this stage since, even if the ligature has not been
 described above. T'he skin and subcutaneous fascia are
placed tight enough, the tension on the spermatic
then closed routinely.
100
Differential diagnosis and treatment
288
289
067
291
292
293
294
Prostatic disorders
101
288-294 Castration including scrotal ablation.
295
(288) The dog is positioned and the surgical site
 prepared as in 272. An eliptical skin incision is made
 around the base of the scrotum.
(289) The subcuticular fascia is undermined and
incised, freeing the edges of the scrotal skin. Any
bleeding subcutaneous tissue vessels are ligated or
cauterized using diathermy.
(290) Each testis is identified within its tunic. Its
 spermatic cord is cleared of extraneous fascia, ligated
and sectioned, as described in 286.
(291) After both cords have been ligated, the remain-
ing fascia is separated by blunt and sharp dissection.
(292) T'he testes and scrotum can now be removed.
(293) The subcutaneous fascia is closed using a simple
296
 continuous suture pattern of synthetic absorbable
material.
(294) T'he skin wound is closed routinely, in this case
with simple interrupted monofilament polypropylene
sutures. A subcuticular suture of synthetic absorbable
 material would also be suitable.
The vast majority of prostatic tumours are malignant
(usually adenocarcinomas), with local and distant
invasion and spread (see 20-22, 252-254 and 295-299)
and the prognosis is hopeless.
167
295 Extensive local spread of a prostatic tumour in a
dog. Note the appearance of the bladder due to
ischaemia after the urethral obstruction and bladder
distension caused by the tumour.
296-299 Prostatic adenocarcinoma in a cat
demonstrated by lateral (296) and ventrodorsal (297)
radiographs during urethrography. The postmortem
appearance is shown in 298 and 299. Note the cavita
tion of the prostate gland and the local extension of
the tumour into surrounding tissues, and also the
similarities to the canine condition (see 252-254).
298
299
102
Differential diagnosis and treatment
 Prostatectomy in dogs with prostatic malignancy is
300
not to be recommended in the author's view, although
some palliation may be obtained in some animals with
NSAIDs, particularly cyclo-oxygenase inhibitors such
as piroxicam or meloxicam. Other palliative measures
(mainly in dysuric dogs) include the use of transurethral
resection, partial prostatectomy (either surgical or
using a Nd:YAG laser) tube cystostomies (see 231-
234) and/or urethral stents. Unlike the situation in
humans, oestrogen or anti-androgen therapy or castra-
 tion appear to have no beneficial effects in increasing
the quality of life or longevity in dogs with prostate
cancer.
 Mild prostatitis may respond to antibiotics and cas-
tration, but abscesses and cysts require surgical
drainage. The prognosis associated with prostatic cysts
and abscesses is guarded and no one form of treatment
is 100% successful. Treatment of prostatic cysts and
abscesses has included excision (300, 301), repeated
 needle drainage and castration (302), Penrose drainage,
marsupialization (303-308), tube drainage (309-312)
and omentalization ± partial resection (313-317).
300, 301 Pedunculated, canine paraprostatic cysts
being excised from the abdomen (300) and a perineal
rupture (301). Great care needs to be taken during
excision of intra-abdominal cysts in order to avoid
damage to the ureters (which may be adherent to the
cyst) and the blood and nerve supplies to the bladder
301
and urethra.
302 Needle drainage of a prostatic abscess in a
perineal rupture. In cases of small, intraprostatic cysts
or abscesses, repeated needle drainage and castration
may resolve the problem.
303-305 (303) During marsupialization, the cyst/
abscess is stomatized to the skin adjacent to the
prepuce. Note the appearance of the tissue of the cyst
wall in this dog; this proved to be a carcinoma of the
cyst lining and the dog was euthanased three weeks
later.
(304) In most cases (as in this dog), the cyst/abscess
302
cavity is obliterated and the stoma heals. However, in
some dogs the stoma remains patent, draining a tacky,
serous secretion for the remainder of the dog's life.
(305) Prostatic cysts/abscesses in the perineum, which
cannot be excised or returned to the abdomen for
 omentalization, can be marsupialized into the
perineum.
Prostatic disorders
103
303
304
305
306
307
306-308 Problems may arise if the prostatic
308
cyst/abscess cavity is communicating with the prostatic
urethra. Drainage of this dog's prostatic abscess via
the urethra (306) is obvious and care should be taken
with the choice of technique in such cases. After
marsupialization, for example, a urethrocutanous
fistula may develop (307); the communication
between the urethra and the cyst cavity of this dog can
be seen on the urethrocystogram (308). Potentially,
uroperitoneum could occur if Penrose drainage or
omentalization techniques are used in these cases,
unless the communication is closed at the time of
surgery.
104
Differential diagnosis and treatment
309
311
312
 309-312 One possible way of treating a prostatic
Of all the techniques used, omentalization ± partial
cyst/abscess that communicates with the urethra and
resection (313-317) appears to give the best results.
in which the communication cannot be found and
A biopsy should always be taken during surgery, since a
closed, is to use tube drainage. Although Foley
proportion of prostatic cysts and abscesses have a
catheters can be used for this purpose (309),
carcinoma of the lining (see 117 and 303). Compli-
mushroom tip catheters (310) are better. T'hey are less
cations of prostatic cyst/abscess treatment include
likely to come out prematurely and the tube can be
urethral trauma, peritonitis and uroperitoneum or ure-
shortened. If there is local wound swelling, the
throcutaneous fistulation (if there is communication
shortened tube tends to be displaced subcutaneously.
with the prostatic urethra and depending on which
T'his can be prevented by the use of an external flange
surgical procedure has been performed) (see 306-308).
or, as in this case (310), a safety pin (this was padded
Idiopathic prostatic haemorrhage responds to
but is shown just prior to removal). Water-soluble,
oestrogens, anti-androgens and castration (see 272-
iodine-based contrast medium can be introduced
294) and probably represents a form of benign disease,
through the tube from time to time to check the size
but without obvious enlargement.
of the cyst cavity and to determine that the commun-
The prostate can become displaced, usually into
ication with the urethra has closed (311) before the
perineal ruptures (3l8) and sometimes into inguinal
tube is removed (312).
hernias or abdominal ruptures. Treatment involves
reduction and repair of the hernia/rupture (see 202-
230)
Finally a word of warning. Trauma to the prostate
is rare but may be iatrogenic. The most distressing
event is when the prostate is inadvertently excised as a
complication of cryptorchidectomy. It can also occur
when a 'mass' in a perineal rupture is excised and proves
to be a displaced prostate gland. The outcome is usually
disastrous and euthanasia is required in most cases, with
the threat of reporting for professional incompetence
Prostatic disorders
105
313
314
Omentum
Cyst/abscess
Urethra
315
316
Paraprostatic cyst
and/or litigation looming. This complication is more
317
likely to happen if cryptorchidectomy is attempted
through small laparotomy incisions; therefore, explo-
ration of the abdomen for retained testes should take
o 3  a  on   
 orientation. Masses in perineal ruptures should not be
excised until ultrasonography and/or contrast radiogra-
phy has revealed what they are.
313-317 Omentalization of prostatic cysts and
 abscesses gives good results. In the original
description of the technique by White and Williams
(1995), multiple intraprostatic abscesses were
illustrated and the omentum completely encircled the
 urethra through communications generated between
318
these (313, 314). However, if the cyst/abscess cavity is
 more localized, such encirclement may not be 
 necessary (315). In the case of large cysts, partial cyst
resection can be performed before omentalization, as
described by Bray et al (1997) (316, 317)
318 Displacement of the prostate and bladder into a
 perineal rupture. T'his can be confirmed pre-operatively
using ultrasonography and/or urethrocystography
(see Chapters 2 and 3).
Urinary tract trauma
106
And because Iam hapy, C dance, C sing, they thinh they have done me no injury
William Blake (1757-1827)
S       N 
kidneys of 25% of small animals in road traffic
In order of the incidence in which trauma is
accidents are traumatized; the fact that these are not
diagnosed, these areas are the bladder, urethra,
diagnosed with the same frequency suggests that
kidney and ureter. However, it is estimated that the
 most heal spontaneously.
Renal trauma
and then a transfixing ligature distal to that. The second
controversy is about whether removal of the ureter is
THE MAIN PROBLEMS associated with renal trauma are
required or not. If the ureter is involved in the disease
blood loss and reduction in renal function, although the
process or is diseased itself, ureteronephrectomy should
latter is only a clinical problem in the rare event of
be performed. If not (e.g. renal trauma cases), the
bilateral renal trauma or injury to the kidney(s) of an
  d  q o ran
animal with pre-existing renal disease or which has only
Renal trauma may result in serious intra-abdominal
one kidney Depending on the extent of the damage,
 or retroperitoneal haemorrhage, but rarely results in
subcapsular, retroperitoneal and intraperitoneal haem-
uroperitonelum; lower urinary tract damage is the more
usual cause of this.
intensive care (intravenous plasma expanders, blood)
319-337 Nephrectomy technique.
sufficient. Organized subcapsular haematomata are
(319) T'he kidneys can be approached from flank
occasionally found incidentally in older cats in which
 or ventral abdominal incisions. T'he author prefers a
the initial trauma was not noticed by the owners.
ventral midline abdominal approach, extending from
 In severe cases of unilateral renal trauma, nephrectomy
the xiphisternum to just caudal to the umbilicus
may be required. If damage is confined to one renal
(for nephrectomy alone) or to the pubis
pole, partial nephrectomy can be performed by
(for ureteronephrectomy). The advantage of the
stripping the peritoneum and renal capsule from the
 midline approach over a flank approach is that it
traumatized portion. Following removal of damaged
 allows access to a greater area of the abdomen. This is
tissue and ligation of arcuate vessels at the cut surface,
important in cases of renal neoplasia (to examine for
the renal capsule and peritoneum are repaired over the
the presence or absence of metastases) and/or if the
site of excision. Haemostasis during surgery is accom-
ureter is also diseased and requires removal.
plished by digital compression of the renal vessels by an
In adition, most surgeons are more familiar with this
assistant.
 approach than the use of flank incisions. Once the
There is controversy concerning the total nephrec-
abdomen is opened, the kidneys must be located.
tomy technique (319-337). It is suggested that the
(320) The right kidney is found by locating and
renal artery and vein should be ligated separately to
elevating the duodenum, as illustrated.
 avoid the risk of an arteriovenous fistula developing.
(321) If the duodenum is now reflected medially, the
The author has yet to meet anyone who has seenn such
right kidney is exposed and the mesoduodenum is
 a fistula and he believes the risk of haemorrhage during
used to prevent the intestines from returning to the
dissection and separation of the artery and vein is
 right side of the cranial abdomen.
higher than the risk of arteriovenous fistula; he ligates
(322) The left kidney is located similarly, except that
the vessels as one, first with a proximal simple ligature
the descending colon is found and elevated.
Urinary Tract Trauma
107
319
320
322
108
Differential diagnosis and treatment
(323) T'he descending colon is reflected medially, the
Prolonged tension on the kidney should be avoided
 mesocolon retaining the intestines and allowing access
because the transference of traction to the renal vessels
to the left kidney. The kidneys are attached to the
may result in tension on the major abdominal vessels,
dorsal abdominal wall by the overlying peritoneum
particularly the vena cava, reducing venous return of
and cannot immediately be raised to the level of the
blood to the heart. Any tension placed on the renal
abdominal incision. Access can be improved if an
hilus during surgery should only be intermittent.
assistant cdepresses the ipsilateral side of the incision,
(325) The peritoneum overlying the kidney and the
reducing the distance between incision and kidney.
hilar fat are freed from the kidney, allowing the renal
(324) The kidney is gently elevated and the
vessels (cranial to the left in the illustration) and ureter
surrounding viscera packed off with moistened swabs.
(caudal to the right in the illustration) to be isolated.
I'his particular animal has severe chronic
Once the peritoneum is incised, blunt, finger dissec-
 pyelonephritis associated with ureteral ectopia.
tion is the safest way to free these tissues. T'he
peritoneum may be firmly attached to the kidney by
323
the disease process, making separation dlifficult and
resulting in haemorrhage from multiple points on the
kidney surface. Such haemorrhage is usually minor
and ceases when the renal vessels are ligated. More
severe haemorrhage should be controlled by direct
application of pressure (it is not usually possible to
 clamp and ligate vessels, since the bleeding points are
often on the surface of the kidney) or local diathermy.
Large peritoneal vessels should be ligated. Great care
should be taken when dissecting around the hilus to
avoid damage to the major renal vessels.
(326) Once the kidney, its vessels and proximal ureter
are freed from their attachments, the renal vessels are
ligated, with the first (simple) ligature placed
 proximally around both the artery and vein. It has
been suggested that the renal artery and vein should
be ligated separately to avoid the possibility of
postoperative arteriovenous fistulation. However,
such fistulation seems more of a theoretical than a
practical consideration and, in cases of gross renal
enlargement and dlisease, it would be hazardous to
attempt to separate the renal vessels.
(327) Once the first ligature has been tied, a transfix-
ing ligature is placed distal to (i.e. the kidney side of)
it. T'he second ligature is transfixed by taking it
between the renal artery and vein. If this is not 
possible, the ligature can be taken through one of
these vessels, since haemorrhage is prevented by
means of the first, simple ligature and by clamping of
324
the vessels adjacent to the renal hilus.
(328) The transfixing ligature is now tied as shown.
T'he material used for ligation is a matter of personal
preference; the author prefers to use synthetic
absorbable material. It should be noted that such
double ligation of the renal vessels is not always
possible, particulary if the kidney is grossy enlarged
and grossly diseased (see 32, 33 and 378). In such
cases the enlarged kidney and presence of local
adhesions may make access to and identification of
renal vessels dlifficult, and sometimes single ligation
only is possible.
Urinary Tract Trauma
109
325
326
327
328
110
Differential diagnosis and treatment
329
(329) With the vessels sectioned between the distal,
transfixing ligature and the clamps, only the ureter
now remains attached to the kidney. If the ureter is
not diseased (as in this case), it can be clamped at the
hilus and a simple ligature applied approximately two
centimetres distally. The kidney can now be removed
by sectioning the ureter between the clamps and
ligature. Some authors suggest that the ureter should 
be excised down to its insertion into the bladder, as
 otherwise it may act as a reservoir for stagnant urine
(especially if vesico-ureteral reflux is present),
predisposing to urinary tract infections. However,
normal ureteral peristalsis in an undiseased ureter
results in ureteral emptying; the author has
experienced no difficulties in animals in which healthy
ureters have not been excised during nephrectomy.
(330) If the ureter is diseased, it should be removed
along with the kidney. In this example, both hydro-
nephrosis and hydroureter are present. If the ureter is
 not removed, it may act as a reservoir for urinary tract
infections. If gentle traction is applied to the ureter, it
 can be pulled from its retroperitoneal position. Note,
however, that the distal ureter passes beneath the
uterine horn and its broad ligament (or vas deferens in
the male). T'here is no need to perform traumatic
dissection to the uterus or broad ligament; the distal
ureter can be freed as illustrated in 331-337.
(331) The distal ureter is identified (arrowed) as it
pue jusuesy peouq pue snuain sui qieusq sssed
330
inserts into the dorsal wall of the bladder. Caudal is to
the left in this photograph.
(332) The tip of a pair of artery forceps is passed
through the peritoneum and beneath the ureter as it
enters the dorsal wall of the bladder (the ureter is
viewed from the opposite side in this and subsequent
photographs and so caudal is now to the right).
(333) T'he forceps are used to place ligature material
beneath the ureter as they are withdrawn.
(334) The ureter (and its associated vessels) are ligated
adjacent to the bladder wall, clamped approximately
one centimetre cranially and sectioned between the
clamps and ligature.
(335) The freed, distal ureter is now ligated as shown
to prevent urine leakage following removal of the
clamps.
(336) The ureter cranial to the uterus is now grasped
and gentle cranial traction applied.
(337) The distal ureter can be pulled retroperitoneally
below the uterus and broad ligament (or vas cleferens 
in the male) until it is completely freed. T'he kidney
and ureter can now be removed from the abdomen.
T'he stumps of the renal vessels are checked for the
absence of bleeding before the abdomen is closed
routinely.
Urinary Tract Trauma
111
331
332
333
335
336
337
112
Differential diagnosis and treatment
Uroperitoneum
Treatmenf of urinary fract frauma
IN ORDER OF INCIDENCE, bladder, urethral or ureteral
GROss RENAL TRAUMA usually results in haemoperi-
rupture may occur. Initially, at least, the ruptured ureter
 toneum rather than uroperitoneum and has previously
Or urethra may leak retroperitoneally, delaying the
 been discussed in this chapter. Repair of the ruptured
metabolic effects of urine leakage (urea and potassium
 bladder involves debridement (340) followed by repair
and hydrogen ions are absorbed much more slowly
of the defect (see 151-160),
from the retroperitoneum than they are from the
 Mild cases of urethral trauma may respond to the
peritoneal cavity). In animals with rupture of the
use of an indwelling urethral catheter (see 89-91) or
urinary organs and uroperitoneum, the metabolic
 sq   e ( )  
disorders of uraemia, acidosis and hyperkalaemia are
order to allow healing, but severe urethral ruptures
 life-threatening and must be corrected before surgery.
should be treated surgically. Such cases may have the
Intravenous fluids (initially without potassium) and
same metabolic problems as animals with bladder
sodium bicarbonate, coupled with peritoneal drainage
rupture (although these may be more insidious in onset
and dialysis (or lavage), are most usefiul. Alternatively,
if leakage is initially into the retroperitoneum), which
    q  s  n
must be corrected before surgical intervention.
potassium ions back into the cels. In addition, an
indwelling urinary catheter is helpful, particularly in
cases of bladder rupture (338, 339), to minimize
further urine leakage into the abdominal cavity
338-339 Ruptured bladder management.
338
(338) This Flat-coated Retriever has a ruptured
bladder; the urethrocystogram is illustrated in 77.
T'he dog is not sedated, but rather it is collapsed due
to the metabolic consequences of uroperitoneum (i.e.
hyperkalaemia, acidosis and azotaemia). T'he effects of
the acidosis and hyperkalaemia on the heart can be
appreciated from the ECG (339). An over-the-needle
intravenous cannula has been inserted just caudal to
the umbilicus and is being used both to drain urine
from and to introduce dialysing fluids into the
peritoneal cavity.
In this example, abdominocentesis is being used
(along with intravenous fluid therapy and the
insertion of an indwelling urethral catheter) to relieve
the uroperitoneum and its metabolic consequences.
Although syringe suction may speed the rate of fluid
removal, it is frequently counterproductive, since
omentum or other abdominal viscera may be sucked
onto the end of the drain/catheter, preventing the exit
of fluids. It is often better to allow the fluid to drain
passively through the drain/catheter.
339
Urinary Tract Trauma
113
340
341
However it can be hard to determine the exact extent
of the tear. Contrast radiography may define the
location of the defect but rarely its size, making the
342). If in doubt, it is better to explore the area surgi-
cally. There are, sometimes, poor results in animals with
severe rupture using bypass alone, especially if the
rupture continues to leak (343-348). Urine in the
342
retroperitoneum leads to severe necrosis (343-350).
The tube cystostomies illustrated in 232-234 and 343,
344 were used to treat animals with urethral trauma. In
the case of the cat in 232-234, surgical repair was
required after the urethra failed to heal, and the dog in
343 and 344 developed an inoperable urethral stricture 
and had to be euthanased.
 340 Rupture of the dorsal wall of the bladder in an
Irish Setter bitch after a road traffic accident. Note the
devitalized tissue, which should be debrided before
 repair of the defect. Bladder repair in these cases
should be deferred until the patient is stabilized
(see 338, 339).
341, 342 Lateral (341) and ventrodorsal (342)
radiographs illustrating rupture of the urethra in a
 male Springer Spaniel after a road traffic accident. The
pelvic fracture just caudal to the right acetabulum is
fairly innocuous, but the urethra is damaged in two
 sites. The retrograde positive contrast urethrogram
shows damage to the urethra just proximal to the
ischial arch, and the accumulation of contrast medium
within the pelvic cavity is due to contrast medium
leaking retroperitoneally and around the prostate
 before entering the peritoneal cavity. At surgery, the
pelvic urethra was found to have completely torn away
from the caudal prostatic urethra. T'his was treated by
s   uss n o 
using a urethral catheter (see also 351, 352).
114
Differential diagnosis and treatment
343
343, 344 A Foley catheter has been used for tube
 cystostomy in this dog with a urethral rupture to
provide urinary bypass (343). The catheter has been
secured using a Chinese finger trap suture (344). The
photograph was taken at the time of catheter removal
affer two weeks. Although the urethra healed, the dog
was dysuric due to urethral stricture at the site of the
rupture and periurethral fibrosis of intrapelvic soft
tissues after urine-induced necrosis.
345-348 (345) Attempts to treat a urethral rupture
in a cat using tube cystostomy with a Jackson's
catheter. Note the early perineal necrosis associated
with the necrotizing effects of leaked urine.
(346) Further necrosis, including the anus, occurred
in this cat.
(347) T'he cat was dlyschezic and faecal passage was
 obstructed within the pelvis.
(348) A barium enema revealed this to be due to
complete rectal obstruction resulting from rectal
necrosis and fibrosis. This cat was euthanased.
349 The necrotizing effect of urine can be seen in
this Dachshund with a rupture of the pelvic
urethra. Sloughing of intrapelvic tissues and
perineal skin has occurred. This was treated as an
open wound until the defect was filled with healthy
 granulation tissue and then primary skin closure
was performed (see also 355, 356).
344
350 Identification of the site of urethral rupture
during surgery can be difficult because of leakage of
urine into surrounding soft tissues. Pre-operative
contrast radliography is essential to allow a planned
surgical approach and to minimize trauma to the area.
 In this bitch, contrast radiography had demonstrated a
 tear in the proximal urethra close to the neck of the
bladder. This enabled repair to be performed without
the need for pubic osteotomy, although the animal's
progress meant that this technique had to be
performed later (see 359, 360). The discolouration of
the perivesical fat is due to infiltration by urine.
Urinary Tract Trauma
115
345
346
347
348
350
116
Differential diagnosis and treatment
351
352
Urethral repair (especially intrapelvic) is difficult
353
and splitting of the pubis may be required to facilitate
exposure. An indwelling catheter should be used as a
turethral 'splint² postoperatively. Long-term problems
with urethral ruptures include strictures (35l-354.
359-364), possibly as a result of inadequate tissue
debridement before repair (355, 356).
351, 352 (351) Follow-up retrograde positive
contrast urethrogram in the dog in 341 and 342, two
months after urethral repair. The dog is dysuric due to
urethral strictures at the sites of previous urethral
damage and repair (the caudal and cranial pelvic
urethra). Urethral stricture is a common complication
of urethral trauma. T'his dog was treated by dilation of
354
the strictures via a perineal urethrostomy and the use
of a 22Fr Foley catheter during healing (352). This
dog subsequently did well. Perineal urethrostomies
can be used to bypass untreatable, more distal urethral
injuries or obstructions, but they are associated with
long-term problems in some dogs (see 353, 354).
353, 354 Perineal urethrostomy may result in urinary
tract infection and skin scalding. A perineal urethros-
tomy stoma in a Doberman Pinscher five years after
surgery is shown (353). Apart from minor dampness
of the hairs around the stoma after urination, this
animal has experienced no ill effects. At the other
extreme, the Golden Retriever illustrated (354) (also
five years after perineal urethrostomy) has serious
chronic problems. T'he skin around the perineal stoma
is scalded and the scrotum is ulcerated. Struvite
crystals can be seen attached to the hairs around the
stoma and are associated with chronic, recurring
Cystitis associated with infection by Proteus spp.
Urinary Tract Trauma
117
355
356
355, 356 The author is convinced that part of the
357
cause of urethral strictures after repair is inaclequate
debridement of the torn ends of urethra before
suturing. Devitalized urethral tissues may remain after
 repair, leading to breakdown of the repair and/or
secondary intention rather than primary wound
healing. T'hese radiographs were taken at the time this
Dachshund was presented after a road traffic accident
(355) and two weeks after surgical repair (356). The
pelvic urethra of this dog was virtually transected, with
less than a quarter of the urethral circumference
remaining intact. Urine-induced tissue necrosis
affected the intrapelvic tissues and perineal skin (see
 349). A pubic osteotomy provided good exposure of
the urethral tear and the torn edges of urethra were
debrided back to healthy tissue before repair (this
 meant resecting up to l cm of urethra from each
edge). As the follow-up racliograph shows, the urethra
 has healed in a normal anatomical configuration
without stricture formation.
357, 358 Urethrostomy should be performed as
358
distally as possible.
(357) This male cross-bred is dysuric due to a stricture
of the terminal penile urethra associated with previous
urolithiasis at that site (which is unusual). T'his is
treated by extending the ventral part of the external
urethral orifice caudally. A ventral midline incision is
made in the urethra from the external urethal orifice
to proximal to the stricture using Metzenbaum
scissors. A urinary catheter has been placed in the
urethra proximal to the stricture. T'he granulation
tissue responsible for the urethral narrowing can be
seen in the terminal penile urethra.
(358) The penile integument is now sutured to the
urethral urothelium, as shown, using a simple
continuous pattern of synthetic absorbable material
(in this case, 3/0 polyglactin). In effect, this creates a
large external urethral orifice which extends distal to
the site of obstruction, thus relieving the dysuria
118
Differential diagnosis and treatment
If strictures are severe, they can be bypassed
359, 360 Contrast radiographic (359) and
(if distal) by means of more proximal urethrostomies
urethroscopic (360) appearance of a urethral stricture
(see 180, 187-199 and 357-358). Intrapelvic strictures
resulting from urethral trauma and repair in the
can sometimes be resected (359-364).
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel bitch in 350. Urothelial
In animals with gross, irreparable intrapelvic
 polypoid masses, such as the one illustrated just distal
ndad e ud on aqissod s an rnn [an
to the stricture in 360, are not uncommonly found in
Lurethrostomy (365-367) but postoperative scalding of
the urethra after trauma.
the ventral abdomen with urine, incontinence and
stoma stricture may occur and the long-term results are
361-364 (361) A pubic osteotomy has been
disappointing and often unacceptable to the owner.
performed on the bitch illustrated in 359, 360. The
Ureteral tears are difficult to locate and IVU is a
bladder is in the bottom right of the picture and the
useful pre-operative diagnostic aid (368). During
pelvic fat and fascia ventral to the urethra have been
surgery it may be necessary to perform a ventral
separated in order to locate the urethral stricture
cystotomy and catheterize the affected ureter (a 3Fr
(the lower forceps are pointing to the stricture).
catheter is suitable for most dogs). The ureter can then
(362) The strictured length of urethra is resected and
be detected in its retroperitoneal position and the site of
a urinary catheter inserted through the external
leakage demonstrated by retrograde infusion of sterile
urethral orifice and across the gap between the cut
saline via the catheter (369). Following repair (using
ends of urethra into the proximal urethra and bladder.
4/0 or 5/0 synthetic absorbable material), the catheter
 Bleeding urethral vessels are clamped at the levels of
is left m situ as a splint for l-3 days. Distally, the
the cut urethral ends, as shown, and subsequently
catheter is passed out via the bladder and urethra and
ligated. Initially, it is useful to leave the vascular
 sutured to the vulva or prepuce. Follow-up contrast
clamps on the vessels, since this facilitates orientation
radiography is useful to determine the progress of
 of the urethra, thus preventing rotation of one
healing (370-372).
urethral segment relative to the other during repair.
(363) The first two sutures (in this case, 3/0 poly-
glactin) are placed 180° apart in the lateral walls of the
urethra. This facilitates subsequent suture placement
 and, if the ends of these sutures are left long, as
359
shown, they can be used to rotate the urethra dluring
placement of sutures in the dorsal urethral wall.
(364) Suturing is continued around the circumference
of the urethra until the urethral ends are joined.
Sutures should be placed close together
(approximately 2 mm apart) and tied tight enough to
achieve apposition without crushing the urethral
tissues. Once suturing is completed, the pubic
osteotomy and ventral, caudal laparotomy are closed
routinely. T'he catheter can be left iw situ as an
indwelling catheter for urinary bypass for 7-10 days.
365-367 (365) Prepubic urethrostomy. In this
360
example, irreparable membranous urethral damage
occurred when the cat was shot; the air gun pellet
entry hole can be seen on the caudal right thigh.
A tube cystostomy had been performed for urinary
bypass. T'he photograph was taken ten days after a
prepubic urethrostomy.
(366) A close-up view of the area. The urethra cranial.
to the damaged area has been transected, tunnelled
through the caudal abdominal wall, spatulated and
 sutured to the prepubic skin to form a stoma
(arrowed).
Urinary Tract Trauma
119
362
364
366
367
(367) The long-term results of this procedure may be
disappointing. In this cat (a dlifferent animal from that
shown in 365 and 366), urine leakage and skin
scalding are chronic postoperative problems, although
they were tolerated by this particular owner.
120
Differential diagnosis and treatment
 Ureteral tears in cats are extremely difficult to repair,
368
even with an operating microscope, because of the 
small size of the ureter, and ureteronephrectomy may
be required in such cases (368). The author has no
experience of tube nephrostomies as ureteral bypass
procedures.
 It should also be remembered that urinary tract
trauma may be iatrogenic (see 127, 128 and 373-375).
368 Proximal ureteral rupture in a cat after a road
 traffic accident, demonstrated by IVU. Note the
increase in soft tissue density surrounding the left
kidney due to retroperitoneal leakage of urine.
Ureteronephrectomy was performed in this cat.
369 The laparotomy appearance of a ruptured
369
ureter in the Golden Retriever bitch illustrated in
34. Urine can be seen leaking from the retroperitoneal
tissues, the swelling of which (due to infiltration of
urine and cellulitis) prevents visualization of the
ureter. Retrograde ureteral catheterization was used in
this case to facilitate identification of the ureter and
the tear during dissections through the swollen peri-
ureteral tissues. In fact, the urolithiasis, which led to
the rupture, was associated with bilateral ureteral
ectopia, and the right ureter was transplanted into the
bladder after repair.
Urinary Tract Trauma
121
370
371
370-372 (370) A follow-up radiograph (IVU)
(at the time of transplantation of the second ureter),
taken four days after repair of the ruptured ureter
the renal pelvis and ureter had returned to normal
illustrated in 34 and 369. Renal pelvic dilatation is still
sizes (371, 372). The renal calculi (struvite) had
apparent and the site of repair appears narrowed.
 dissolved after elimination of the associated urinary
When the IVU was repeated six weeks postoperatively
tract infection.
372
122
Differential diagnosis and treatment
373, 374 Lateral (373) and ventrodorsal (374)
373
urethrocystograms illustrating 180° iatrogenic bladder
torsion. T'his was produced during cystopexy in a male
dog with perineal rupture, and resulted in dysuria.
374
375 Gross hydro-ureter and hydronephrosis resulting
375
from adhesion of the ureter to the linea alba after
 Ovariohysterectomy. It is dlifficult to imagine how this
could have been produced. Most trauma to the ureter
during ovariohysterectomy is usually associated with
ligation of the uterine/cervical stump and results in a
ureterovaginal or, rarely, vesicovaginal fistula rather
than uroperitoneum (see 441-449).
Other causes of haematuria
123
As must have rung the harvest-song of Linos, of bloody water in a heap of stones
Allen Tate (1899-1979)
As MENTIONED IN the previous chapter, trauma to
Urolithiasis.
the urinary system may result in haematuria. In this
● Urogenital
chapter, other causes of haematuria are described.
? inflammation/infection.
Animals with frank blood in the urine are often
* neoplasia.
 presented as emergencies by their owners. In most
· trauma.
cases urgent treatment is not required, but exceptions
● Idiopathic renal haemorrhage.
are animals with severe blood loss, trauma or
● Prostatic disease.
infection. Once again, it is the pre-operative support-
● Urethral prolapse.
ive care of these animals that is most important.
Haematuria may be associated with a vast array of
Many of these conditions are discussed elsewhere in
conditions. In general terms haematuria may occur
this book, so the diagnosis and treatment of only the
 as a result of:
remainder will be described.
Diagnosis
upper urinary tract bleeding. The cause of the haemor-
rhage is more difficult to determine and usually requires
THERE ARE TwO main questions to answer:
contrast radiographic, ultrasonographic and laboratory
●Where is the haemorrhage coming from?
examinations aimed at the area of the urinary tract
●What is the haemorrhage due to?
suggested by the history. For example, if the dog has
other lower urinary tract signs, lower urinary tract
The history often suggests if the bleeding is from the
 radiographic and ultrasonographic studies are usually
lower or upper urinary tract. Animals with macroscopic
performed first. Bacteriological examination should
lower urinary tract bleeding usually have other lower
also include antibiotic sensitivity testing in cases where
urinary tract signs such as dysuria, pollakiuria, nocturia
there is infection.
and incontinence, whereas these are usually absent in
If renal calculi (376) are detected, it should be
determined that they alone are responsible for the
haematuria before they are treated (see 16 and 377).
Kidney stones are sometimes detected incidentally on
376
 radiographs of clinically normal dogs, but beware big
nipples; they may be mistaken for nephroliths on
ventrodorsal films if they overlie the kidneys (see 17.
18).
376 Renal calculus (struvite) removed from a
Labrador Retriever bitch. T'he calculus conforms to
the shape of the renal pelvis, with the “beak'
 corresponding to the proximal ureteral orifice.
124
Differential diagnosis and treatment
Bladder and urethral neoplasia have been described
377
in Chapter 4. The commonest kidney tumour in small
animals is renal lymphosarcoma in the cat. In affected
cats there may be other evidence of leukaemia/lym-
phosarcoma such as lymph node enlargement and
positive FeLV testing. Renal neoplasia is rare in the
dog. The commonest primary canine renal tumour is
the carcinoma (378), but the clinical signs may be non-
 specific. For example, gross haematuria may be absent,
unless the neoplasm is a haemangiosarcoma (379), and
the renal tumour may be detected as a craniodorsal
abdominal mass in a dog being examined for weight
loss. Sometimes, the detection of lung metastases is the
first indication that an animal has a primary renal
377 Lateral abdominal radiograph of the Cavalier
tumour so, if lung metastases are detected in an animal
King Charles Spaniel in l6, made four months later.
with no obvious primary tumour, the kidneys should be
T'his dog had been presented with severe, acute
 examined carefully. Animals with renal carcinoma may
abdominal pain. Abdominal radiography revealed
have polycythaemia. Thoracic and abdominal radio-
renal and vesical calculi (see l6), which were assumed
graphy (including IVU), ultrasonography urine and
to be the cause of the signs. However, blood
blood laboratory examinations and, possibly, scinti-
laboratory analyses revealed that the pain was
graphy are required to check for metastases and assess
associated with acute pancreatitis for which the animal
the presence and function of the other kidney if surgery
was treated with prophyllactic antibiotics (ampicillin)
is contemplated, as well as for diagnosis. If available,
and a bland diet (chicken and rice). This radiograph
other modalities suich as MRI/CT scanning are
reveals that all the calculi have disappeared. T'his
extremely usefiul.
animal had triple phosphate crystals and bacteria in its
urine; presumably the calculi were of the same
 material and dissolved in response to elimination of
urinary tract infection and a high biological value,
low-protein dliet. T'his case underlines two points: the
378
renal calculus or calculi may not be responsible for the
presenting signs, and nephrotomy may not be
required to eliminate them (see also 370-372)
378 Renal carcinoma excised from a German
Shepherd Dog. Unusually, this dog did well after
 surgery (most carcinomas of this size are associated
with local and distant metastatic disease; this was
absent in this case). Location and double ligation of
the renal vessels during nephrectomy (see 319-337)in
 cases such as this is more challenging.
Other causes of haematuria
125
Laparotomy, biopsy or excision and pathology may
379
be required for a definitive diagnosis in some instances,
although, if available, ultrasound-guided biopsies are
Lseful to indicate if surgery is likely to be worthwhile
(see 118, 119). During laparotomy, the abdominal
cavity should be examined for tumour spread, especial-
ly to the local renal lymph node and blood vessels.
Invasion of renal vasculature or the vena cava, for
 example, makes the prognosis poorer (because of the
likelihood of intravascular seeding of malignant cells)
 and the surgery more diffcult if not impossible. Other
 primary kidney tumours in the dog are lymphosarco-
mas, haemangiomas (or sarcomas) (379) and nephrob-
lastomas (380, 381). It should also be borne in mind
that the kidney is a common site for metastases of non-
renal tumours to develop and that neoplasia of
pararenal organs (e.g. adrenal gland) may spread to
involve the kidneys.
Two interesting conditions are prostatic haemor-
rhage and idiopathic renal haemorhage. The former
379 Severe haematuria in a German Shepherd Dog
leads to blood loss via the urethra between micturitions
with a renal haemangiosarcoma. Despite the severity
and is diagnosed on this history and the elimination
of the haematuria, these tumours may be quite small
of other causes of haematuria and prostatic bleeding
and difficult to detect.
(see Chapter 5). Blood loss in cases of idiopathic renal
haemorrhage can be severe (382) and the main differ-
380, 381 (380) Renal tumour demonstrated
ential diagnosis is renal haemangiosarcoma (379),
ultrasonographically in an adult Golden Retriever
bitch. T'he tumour is obstructing the renal pelvis,
resulting in hydronephrosis. The accummulation of
urine in the renal pelvis improves the ultrasonographic
380
contrast, enhancing demonstration of the hilar mass.
(381) The excised kidney (sectioned sagittally).
I'his proved to be a nephroblastoma. T'he section of
tumour from the right half of the kidney has been
removed to demonstrate the secondary hydro-
nephrosis that was present. Ectopic nephroblastomas
can occasionally occur in the spinal cord.
382 Severe haematuria in a Labrador Retriever with
idiopathic renal haemorrhage. T'his can mimic the
level of haematuria found in cases of renal
haemangiosarcoma (see 379).
381
382
126
Differential diagnosis and treatment
Earlier reports suggested that this problem was
383
confined to young animals and was only unilateral.
While this is mainly the case, the author has also seen
the condition in mature dogs and as a bilateral
condition. Previously (after all other investigations
were inconclusive), the diagnosis relied on demonstra-
tion of renal haemorrhage by ureteral visualization
(383-385) and catheterization during cystoscopy or
cystotomy (386, 387). The kidney was then removed in
case an undiagnosed neoplasm was present, and idio-
 pathic haemorrhage was only confirmed when histo-
pathology revealed no abnormalities apart from the
bleeding (388, 389). The increased availability of ultra-
sonography in veterinary practice, coupled with
contrast radiographic and laboratory examinations,
means that veterinary surgeons can be more confident
that this is not a neoplastic condition and avoid unnec-
essary laparotomies. Nowadays, therefore, unless the
 dog is becoming anaemic from the renal bleeding, most
a sunssea iye iau uauq Aq paean are sae s
owners that this is not a malignant condition.
Occasionally, the bleeding will resolve spontaneously. It
is prudent to perform haematology on these dogs on a
 regular basis to ensure that anaemia is not developing.
since this would be an indication for nephrectomy.
383-385 (383) In cases of renal haemorrhage, the
384
ureter (arrowed) may be visualized at laparotomy,
filled with blood and resembling a blood vessel, but
this is unusual. The condition is intermittent in many
animals and any investigations, including exploratory
laparotomy, are a waste of time unless performed on a
day when haematuria is present.
(384) The blood clots entering the bladder from the
ureters are often vermiform, as are some of the clots in
this dog's bladder, and they may be seen on contrast
cystography.
(385) Sometimes, the vermiform clots are passed by
the dog.
385
386, 387 Diagnosis is usually made by ureteral
catheterization via a ventral cystotomy (386) and urine
sampling from each ureter (387). Ifbleeding is
unilateral, nephrectomy may be required to prevent
further blood loss if the dog is becoming anaemic.
T'he excised kidney should be submitted for
histopathological examination; idiopathic renal
 haemorrhage can only be diagnosed by eliminating
other possible diagnoses on pathological examination.
388, 389 The excised kidneys from two dogs with
idiopathic renal haemorrhage.
Other causes of haematuria
127
386
387
M14702
R
388
Urethral  prolapse usually  results  from  excessive
389
masturbation. It appears as a 'red pea? on the tip of the
penis (390) and results in blood dripping from the
prepuce, especially when the dog is (sexually) excited.
This may be confused with haematuria (by the owners)
and has to be differentiated from prostatic disease.
Examination of the penis is diagnostic.
390 Urethral prolapse in a seven-month-old Bull
390
Mastiff. T'he prolapse appears as a ^red pea’ on the tip
of the penis. During surgery, the prepuce can be 
retracted and the penis supported by the use of a
bandage, loosely tied around the base of the penis and
pulled caudally (see 6).
128
Differential diagnosis and treatment
391
Treatment
URINARY TRACT INFECTION should be treated with
intensive antibiotic therapy based on bacteriological
sensitivities for a period of at least four weeks, unless
the  antimicrobial  manufacturer's  recommendation is
for a shorter period of treatment. Any disorders that
be corrected (391-397). Response should be assessed
by repeating urine cultures. Bladder calculi may require
surgical removal (398); non-responding cases of diph-
theritic cystitis may require debridement of dead
392
bladder mucosa (399, 400); severe pyelonephritis
(if confined to one kidney) may necessitate nephrec-
tomy (319-337); and prostatitis may respond to the
use of appropriate antibiotics and castration (see
Chapter 5).
391-395 Congenital recto-urethral (illustrated in a
cat [391]) or rectovaginal fistulae (shown in a Vizla
 puppy [392]) usually present as cases of dyschezia,
since anal atresia is usually also present. These cases
carry a guarded to poor prognosis if atresia ani is
 present. In the absence of atresia ani, affected animals
may be presented because of recurring urinary tract
infection secondary to contamination of the lower
urinary tract by faecal organisms. T'he dog illustrated
in 393 is leaking urine from the rectum, especially
393
during micturition, and it also has cystitis. A catheter
has been passed per rectum into the fistula and on into
the bladder (394). This facilitates identification of the
fistula for ligation during surgery (395). The prog
nosis in cases uncomplicated by atresia ani is good
394
Other causes of haematuria
129
399, 400 Occasionally, chronic, localized cystitis fails
396
to respond to antibiotic therapy and it may be
 necessary to debride ulcerated, necrotic and/or
diphtheritic urothelium before healing can take place.
Cystotomy in this Great Dane bitch with chronic
haematuria has revealed the nature of a urothelial
lesion (399) detected on double contrast cystography.
T'he infected, necrotic urothelium was excised (400)
and the bitch made an uneventful recovery. It is
important that any excised tissues are submitted for
histopathological and bacteriological examination to
determine the exact nature of the disease process and
obtain a prognosis.
398
65
668
396, 397 Contamination of the lower urogenital
tract with faecal organisms can also occur in cases of
congenital anovaginal cleft, as in this juvenile Persian 
cat (396). T'his is treated using a reconstructive
400
technique to give the cat a perineum (397). The cases
illustrated in 391-395 and 396, 397 are rarely
 encountered in general practice and so are best
referred for treatment.
 398 Bladder calculi can be removed via a cystotomy.
Older texts dlescribe a dorsal cystotomy for this
procedure, but there is no advantage over a ventral
cystotomy. An alternative approach would be to
attempt calculus dissolution, but in male dogs there is
the potential risk that small calculi remnants may pass 
into the urethra and cause obstruction.
130
Differential diagnosis and treatment
Nephrotomy to treat renal calculi (401-403) is this
401-403 (401) During nephrotomy, the kidney is
author's last resort and he rarely performs this surgery
 approached and located as illustrated in 319-337.
nowadays, preferring dietary dissolution if possible.
It is essential that intravenous fluids are started pre
Nephrotomy is reserved for animals in which dietary
operatively and that whole blood or plasma expanders
dissolution has failed, the calculi appear to be the main
 are to hand in case of unexpected intra-operative
cause of the animal's signs and there is no evidence of
haemorrhage. In the author's opinion, nephrotomy
renal failure. All other cases are treated or managed
(like nephrectomy) requires the help of a surgical
medically In the author's experience, renal calculi are
 assistant. The asstant grasps the hilus of the kidney
often an indication of a chronic renal problem and not 
between the thumb and index finger of one (gloved)
the main cause of the animal's symptoms per se. Great
hand and uses the other hand to depress the ipsilateral
care should be taken to assess renal function pre-opera-
 side of the abdominal incision to improve access to the
tively since, in animals in compensating renal failure,
kidney by the surgeon. As well as supporting the
 nephrotomy may precipitate an acute crisis (404).
kidney for surgery, the assistant can feel the pulse in
If no metastases are detected and the contralateral
the renal artery through the perihilar peritoneum and
kidney is functioning well, nephrectomy of a neoplastic
fat and can thus occlucle the renal vessels during
kidney may be performed (see 319-337 and 378, 380,
surgery (for haemostasis). Similarly, pressure on the
381), but (depending on the tumour type) the
hilus will occlude the ureter, preventing fragments of
prognosis is usually guarded to poor, although some
the calculus from passing into the ureter during
animals do well after surgery.
surgical manipulations. T'he alternatives to the use of
Cases of prostatic haemorrhage usually respond well
an assistant's finger and thumb involve dlissecting
to castration (see Chapter 5) and nephrectomy is
through the perihilar tissues, isolating the renal vessels
 indicated when idiopathic renal haemorrhage is present
and occluding them temporarily with atraumatic
and resuulting in severe blood loss (see 382-389)
vascular clamps or loops. Using an assistant is quicker,
easier and less traumatic, and there is no need to move
the kidney during surgery if it is desirable to resume
renal blood flow; the assistant merely relaxes his/her
grip slightly. An incision is made through the
peritoneum, renal capsule and renal parenchyma into
the renal pelvis. T'he location of the renal pelvis can be
appreciated when the scalpel blade contacts the
calculus. T'he size of the incision is related to that of
the calculus, but usually extends approximately over
the middle third of the greater curvature of the kidney.
401
402
Other causes of haematuria
131
404
T'he calculus is removed using forceps and submitted
for analysis. Any remaining fragments of calculus are
removed with forceps and by flushing the renal pelvis
with sterile saline. If the surgery thus far has taken
more than ten minutes, the assistant should allow
 blood to flow through the kidney for a minute or so.
Haemorrhage from the nephrotomy can be reduced
 by gently holding the incision closed during this
period.
(402) The nephrotomy incision is closed by apposing
the renal parenchyma using horizontal mattress
sutures of synthetic absorbable material. T'he sutures
should be placed through the peritoneum, renal
capsule and renal cortex, but they should not be
sseuep pioae oi 1ap1o u1 1uo1 ooi 1o deap ooi paoeld
to the arcuate vessels at the corticomedullary junction.
T'hey should be placed to a depth approximately half
that of the renal cortex.
(403) After apposition of the renal parenchyma, the
renal capsule and peritoneum are closed in a single
layer using a simple continuous suture, again of
 synthetic absorbable material. T'he abdomen is closed
routinely. Some authors compromise between the
technique described here and non-suturing methods
by closing only the renal capsule and peritoneum.
404 Ventrodorsal nephrogram during IVU on an
pyelonephritis, and nephrotomy to remove the calculus
1l-year-old debilitated Pug with chronic haematuria.
was sufficient to induce acute, fatal renal failure. T'his
A large renal calculus is present in the right renal pelvis.
case illustrates the potential hazards of nephrotomy
However, note also the irregular outline of both
and the need for good laboratory work-up before
kidneys and the poor renal opacification by contrast
 surgery is considered. This case would have been
medium. T'his animal had severe, chronic, bilateral
better managed medically.
403
132
Differential diagnosis and treatment
406
Although prolapse reduction and purse-string
suturing of the external urethral orifice have beenn used
to attempt to treat urethral prolapse, they are not to be
recommended, and the best form of treatment is
prolapse amputation (405-410), after which the dog is
sedated for 5-7 days to prevent excitement and
erections (and thus more bleeding) during healing of
the area. Recently, prolapse reduction and full-thickness
sutures placed into the urethral lumen to prevent
necurrence have been used suiccessfully to treat this
condition. The dog's oversexuality should also be
treated to prevent recurrence.
406-410 (406) To improve access during urethral
405
prolapse amputation, the penile urethra is catheterized
and the penis elevated (as shown in 6). T'he penis is
prepared for aseptic surgery using dilute antiseptics
followed by sterile saline and avoiding the use of
 concentrated solutions and irritants such as surgical
spirit.
(407) The prolapse is elevated and the penile
integument incised at the base of the prolapse. T'he
incision is continued through the urethral urothelium
 to expose the catheter in the urethral lumen
(408) T'he urethral urothelium and penile integument
 are apposed using fine synthetic absorbable sutures.
A simple interrupted pattern or continuous suture (as
 shown) can be used. If a continuous pattern is used, it
is advisable to place the suture over a third of the
circumference, tie it and then use two further, separate 
405 The risk of postoperative stricture during
continuous sutures to complete the remainder of the
 urethral prolapse amputation can be reduced by
repair in order to reduce the risk of stenosis.
attention to suturing. T'his is the immediate 
(409) Once the incised section is sutured, a further
postoperative appearance of the penis of the dog
section is incised around the circumference of the base
shown in 6. T'he urethral urothelium has been sutured
of the prolapse and the urethral urothelium and penile
to the penile integument using simple interrupted
integument apposed as described in 408. Eventually,
sutures of 5/0 polyglactin placed closely together.
the prolapse will be attached to the penis by only a
If a continuous pattern is used, it should not be used
small section of tissue, as shown.
unbroken around the whole circumference of the
(410) T'he final section of tissue is sectioned and the
repair (406-410); if the sutures are pulled too tight,
prolapse removed. The remaining defect is closed by
a purse-string suture may result, leacling to stenosis.
apposition of the urethral urothelium and penile
integument. T'he remaining suture ends are cut short
after tying. Note the oozing haemorrhage that occurs.
T'his is not serious, but it may persist as a postopera-
tive problem and alarm and/or inconvenience the
 owners if they are not made aware of its possibility
 Postoperative haemorrhage can be minimized by
prevention of trauma to the surgical site and treatment
of the dog's excitement, especially if sexual.
Other causes of haematuria
133
407
408
409
410
 Urinary incontinence
134
O Geordie, Jingling Geordie, it was grand to hear Baby Charles laying down the guilt of
dissimulation, and Steenie lecturing on the turpitude of incontinence.
Sir Walter Scott (1771-1832)
Iwill incontinently drown myself
Wiliam Shakespeare (1564- 1616)
 ANIMALS wITH URINARY incontinence are presented
 incontinence, lurethral sphincter mechanism incompe-
either as juveniles with congenital causes or as adults
tence, are areas where most progress has been made
with acquired causes of incontinence. These two
Over the past 25 years. This is described in more detail
 groups are dealt with separately. The pathophysiology
at the end of this chapter.
and treatment of the commonest cause of urinary
Urinary incontinence in juvenile
There is a species difference in that most canine ectopic
animals
ureters run an intramural route through the bladder
wall, whereas those of cats are usually extramural to the
 In juvenile animals, urinary incontinence may be asso-
bladder wall (411, 412). Incontinence may be continu-
ciated with:
Ous (see 3) or intermittent and, even in bilateral cases,
● Ureteral ectopia.
 normal micturition usually occurs. Diagnosis is by
● Congenital urethral sphincter mechanism
contrast radiography (see 31and 53) and/or ultrasonog-
incompetence.
raphy, when a dilated intramural ureter (an uretero-
● Bladder hypoplasia.
coele) may be detected (see 235, 236,). Most ectopic
● Pervious urachus.
ureters terminate in the urethra (in the male dog, they
● Intersexuality.
all terminate in the prostatic urethra); sometimes, they
● Congenital neurological conditions.
terminate in the vagina. Contrary to earlier opinion,
there is no relationship between the side and the termi-
Uveteval ectopia
nation of ectopic ureters.
THIS Is MAINLY a problem of dogs (but is also reported
Sns so Ann  un 
in cats, horses and cattle). The cause is unknown but
(413-425) or, in cats, transplanting (426, 427) the
hereditary factors and vitamin imbalance in the dam  ureter into the bladder It is vital that any pre-existing
may play a role. In the UK, Labrador and Golden
 urinary tract infection is eliminated before stomatiza-
 Retrievers (see 3) and Skye Terriers are at risk for this
 tion or transplantation. Excision of the ureter and asso-
condition. The condition is much commoner in bitches
 ciated kidney is required if severe secondary disease is
than in male dogs. The condition may present later in
present (see 32, 33 and 319-337). The average veteri-
life in male dogs; it is possible that the stronger male
 o s   d    
urethral sphincter mechanism allows male dogs to cope
 of ureteral ectopia in approximately five years, and so
with this problem without leakage until it deteriorates.
these cases are best referred.
Urinary incontinence
135
411, 412 Ureteral ectopia in the dog and cat. Note
411
that in the dog (41l) the ectopic ureter usually enters
the bladder wall at the normal site, but travels
intramurally, beyond the trigone and bladder neck, to
open ectopically (arrowed), in this case into the distal
urethra. In the cat (412) the ectopic ureter completely
bypasses the bladder. T'his cat also has a congenital
failure of the millerian ducts to fuse, and so the body
 of the uterus and vagina are absent, the uteri opening
individually into the vestibule.
412
413, 414 Diagrams summarizing the stomatization
technique used to treat an intramural ectopic ureter
(413). T'he ureter is stomatized into the bladder at the
level of the trigone and ligated just distal to the stoma
(414). The technique is described in detail in
415-425, although these cases are best referred.
413
414
Ureter
Urethra
Blodder wall
136
Differential diagnosis and treatment
415-425 (415) The intramural part ofthe ectopic
415
ureter is approached via a ventral cystotomy (after
emptying the bladder of urine by centesis or
catheterization), just cranial to the bladder neck.
 Alms self-retaining retractors are useful for keeping
 the edges of the bladder incision apart. Alternatively,
retention sutures can be used.
(416) T'he urothelium of the dorsal bladder wall is
incised over the intramural ureter at the level of the
trigone. If the ureter is dilated (e.g. as in 429), the site
of incision is easy to identify, but difficulty may be
encountered in identifying the location of intramural
ureters of normal size. Applying pressure to the
bladder neck may result in retention of urine in the
ureter and facilitate identification, as may passage of a
416
small (3 or 4Fr) urinary catheter up the ectopic ureter
from its termination, if possible.
(417) T'he ureter is then located within the bladder
wall. It is usually much paler in colour than the bladder
wall tissues and feels firmer when grasped with forceps.
(418) A ligature is passed around the ureter using
synthetic absorbable ligature material.
(419) Gentle traction is applied to the ligature in a
caudal direction. This supports the ureter while the
ureter is incised.
(420) A 3 or 4Fr catheter can be passed cranially into the
ureter through the incision to facilitate identification of
the ureteral stoma and to divert urine from the surgical
site. Note the ooze of blood from small suburothelial
417
vessels; although not serious, this makes visualization
dlifficult and necessitates frequent swabbing.
(421) T'he edges of the stoma in the ureteral wall are
anastomosed to the edges of the bladlder urothelial
incision using simple interrupted sutures of fine,
synthetic absorbable suture material; the author prefers
to use 5/0 polyglactin. Suturing is greatly facilitated
and the degree of surgical trauma reduced by the use
of fine ocular instruments.
418
419
Urinary incontinence
137
420
421
422
423
(422) Suturing is continued along one edge of the
424
stoma.
(423) Once stomatization of the ureter into the bladder
lumen has been completed by anastomosis of the
 ureteral and bladder urothelial incisions, the ligature is
tied just caudal to the stoma. In an attempt to prevent
 recannalization after surgery, some authors double
ligate the ureter at this point and section it between the
ligatures. However, this involves further dissection
close to the bladder neck and may increase the risk of
 postoperative swelling and bladder neck obstruction.
(424) The catheter is removed from the proximal
ureter and used to confirm that the ureter distal to the
 stoma has been occlucled by the ligature.
(425) T'he knot of the ligature is buried within the
bladder wall by suturing the bladder urothelium over 
425
it with a further suture of 5/0 polyglactin. The
ventral bladder incision is then closed routinely
(see 151-160).
138
Differential diagnosis and treatment
426
Approximately 50% of animals are completely
cured and, in most of the remainder, the incontinence
 is markedly reduced. A few animals show no improve-
Ureter
ment after surgery, possibly due to undiagnosed
bilateral ectopia, recannalization of the ectopic
 portion of the ureter after stomatization, concomitant
urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence (428)
anomalous ureteric branches (429) or bladder
hypoplasia (430).
Urethra
 Some authors believe that the intramural ectopic
Bladder wall
ureter remnant within the urethral wall may
adversely affect sphincter function, leading to a poor
result and advocating excision. This author remains
to be convinced and avoids this because of the risk of
 postoperative urethral stricture leading to dysuria.
427
428 This vagino-urethrogram demonstrates that, as
well as having an ectopic ureter, the urethra of this
five-month-old Golden Retriever is very short and
wide. Incontinence in this dog may be complicated
by congenital urethral sphincter mechanism
incompetence.
429 Distal ureteral branches have been reported as
a cause of persistence of urinary incontinence after
ureteral transplantation using tunnelling techniques.
 In these cases the distal ureter opens ectopically,
but also communicates with the bladder lumen.
Thus, following transplantation using a tunnelling
technique, urine may pass from the bladder into the
426, 427 Diagrams summarizing the tunnelling
ureteral remnant and exit distally from the
technique used to transplant a ureter that com
termination of the ectopic ureter, bypassing part of
pletely bypasses the bladder (426). The ureter is
the urethral sphincter mechanism and leadling to
ligated, transected and tunnelled through the
persistence of the incontinence. While such
bladder wall (427). Its terminal opening is then
branches may be congenital, they may also be
stomatized into the bladder. T'his procedure is rarely
 acquired if a ureterocele ruptures into the bladder.
performed, except in cats or in dogs in which the
A case of bilateral ureteral ectopia is illustrated
intramural ureter cannot be found during attempted
A ventral, caudal cystotomy has been performed
intravesical stomatization.
revealing a dilated intramural ureter (uppermost).
428
429
Urinary incontinence
139
Note the appearance of the second (lowermost)
430
ectopic ureterocele, which is separated from the
bladder by only a thin layer of tissue. T'his ruptured
as soon as the overlying tissue was grasped with fine
rat-toothed forceps. Rupture of a ureterocele into
the bladder lumen may result in so-called distal
ureteral branches. The potential problem of distal
ureteral branches is overcome if a stomatization
technique is used; all that is required is ligation of
the intramural ureter distal to its opening into the
bladder.
Congenitalurethralspbinctermechanism
incompetence
DETAILS ARE PROVIDED on this condition under
 Urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence² (see
p. 145).
Bladder bypoplasia
 A DIAGNosis of bladder hypoplasia? assumes that we
p am pue ^su isdu, pq em mo
not. There is no information about bladder sizes and
their variations in normal animals of different sizes,
breeds or ages. It is likely that we are talking about
failure of normal bladder development. All bladders
begin small and increase in size as the animal grows and
produces more urine. In some young animals this does
not happen, possibly as a result of insufficient stimula-
tion by increasing urine volumes. This is, therefore, not
431
uncommonly associated with other congenital causes of
incontinence (430), but some juvenile animals rarely
 u iopa leus (aanlqns) e aa on redde
absence of other abnormalities. The diagnosis is
confirmed by contrast radiography; only a small
amount of contrast medium is required to fill the
bladder during retrograde techniques (431). It is
important to eliminate other causes of incontinence
that may also be present. Treatment of this condition is
unsatisfactory. In some animals, following treatment of
a concomitant cause of incontinence (e.g. ectopic
treter), the bladder will develop to a normal size. In
theory, anticholinergic drugs should help the small
bladder to develop by allowing it to fill more before a
micturition response occurs, but their efficacy has not
been adequately evaluated.
 430 Postmortem appearance of a juvenile bitch with
431‘Bladder hypoplasia' demonstrated by retrograde
ureteral ectopia and congenital urethral sphincter
positive contrast urethrocystography in a juvenile male
mechanism incompetence. T'he bladder is very small.
 Italian Greyhound with congenital urethral sphincter
Although this is often termed blacdder hypoplasia', it
mechanism incompetence.
is morelikely to represent a failure of normal
development because of the small amount of urine 
entering and remaining in the bladder during storage.
T'he severe vestibulitis is associated with the
 continuous incontinence in this dog.
140
Differential diagnosis and treatment
Pervious urachus
432
THIS CONDITION IS easily diagnosed, since inconti-
nence occurs through the umbilicus, which may be
scalded with urine (432). Contrast cystography
confirms the diagnosis. Treatment involves excision of
the urachus (433) and repair of the resulting cranial
bladder wall defect.
432, 433 Pervious urachus in a Basset Hound
 puppy. This is rare in small animals (compared with
horses and farm animals). Affected animals show
urinary incontinence through the umbilicus, with
urine scalding of the surrrounding skin (432). This is
treated by excision of the umbilicus and urachus
(433), followed by repair of the resulting cranial
433
bladder wall defect (see 151-160) and routine
 abdominal wall and skin closure.
Intersexuality
RARELY, INTERSEX ANIMALS may be incontinent. There
are a variety of anatomical abnormalities that may
result in incontinence in intersex animals; the
commonest is illustrated (434). Diagnosis relies on
contrast radiography (435). Treatment involves
excision of the vagina, uterus and gonads (436) via a
laparotomy, taking care to preserve the blood and
nerve supply to the bladder.
434
434 The commonest anatomical abnormality in
intersex dogs, resulting in urinary incontinence.
This animal has an apparent male urethra
(although this may be short and the os penis
absent), but has female internal genitalia, the
Gonads
vagina of which opens into the pelvic urethra.
Uterus
During micturition, urine passes from the urethra
vagina
into the vagina. Leakage of urine from this vaginal
Bladder
reservoir between micturitions results in the sign
Penis
of incontinence. T'he gonads can be ovaries, testes
or ovotestes, and sex chromosome abnormalities
Pubis
Urethra
may also be present.
435 Retrograde positive contrast urethrocystography
is a good way of demonstrating the abnormalities 
435
illustrated in 434. The vagina (V) is filing retrograde
from the pelvic urethra.
Urinary incontinence
141
436 T'he excised internal genitalia from an
436
incontinent intersex German Shepherd Dog. In
this case the gonads were testes. Great care has to
 be taken when dissecting the vagina free of its
peritoneal covering to preserve the blood and
nerves supplies to the urethra and bladder in order
to avoid postoperative loss of lower urinary tract
function. Note also the presence of struvite
uroliths in the lumena of the uteri associated with
infection of urine stagnating in the genital tract.
Congenital neurological conditions
THESE INCLUDE MYELODYSPLASIAS, spina bifida and
hemivertebrae. Affected animals usually present as
 obvious neurological cases (e.g. paraparetic). However,
437
some animals may have reasonable ambulation, but
faecal and urinary incontinence may be present; this is
more likely if an LMN lesion is present (437, 438).
LMN lesions result in interruption of the sacral reflex
arc. Thus, reflex bladder contraction and urethral relax-
ation do not occur and urine is retained in the bladder,
with overflow incontinence. As well as locomotory dis-
turbances, UMN lesions result in spasticity of the
external urethral sphincter muscle. Increased urethral
resistance leads to urinary retention with overflow
incontinence.
 Spinal radiography and MRI scanning may confirm
 the diagnosis. The prognosis for most of these puppies
or kittens is poor and euthanasia ofthe animal is usually
 required. It is rare for even a dedicated owner to be able
to cope with the lifelong need for regular bladder
expression and enemas for the animal and, even if this
is possible, it raises quality of life issuues for the dog/cat.
437 Ventrodorsal pelvic radiograph of a juvenile
Manx cat that had exhibited urinary and faecal
retention and incontinence since birth. Myelodysplasia
(abnormal development of the spinal cord) may be
accompanied by vertebral spinal abnormalities, which
can be detected radiographically. However,
racliography itself is not always diagnostic, since many
normal Manx cats have this radiographic appearance.
Pathological changes (hydromyelia, syringomyelia,
438
meningocele, demyelination and neuronal necrosis)
occur in the lumbosacral region and so the condition
follows the pattern of LMN disease.
438 Spina bifida in the lumbosacral region of a kitten
with LMN signs. The neurological changes are
 irreversible and, in its severest form, this results in a
myelomeningocele.
142
Differential diagnosis and treatment
Urinary incontinence in adulf animals
Acquired urethral spbinctermecbanism
incompetence
CAUSES OF ACQUIRED URINARY incontinence in adult
See below (p. 150)
dogs are listed below. Rarely, a congenital abnormality
may also result in incontinence, which develops when
Pvostatic disease
the dog is adult; for example, some dogs with ureteral
ALTHOUGH HAEMATURIA and dysuria are the most
ectopia may not exhibit signs as a puppy if the ectopic
common presenting signs, nearly a quarter of dogs
ureter opens proximally in the urethra and there is a
referred to the author with prostatic disease were said
competent sphincter mechanism distal to that.
by their owners to be incontinent. In more than half of
 Acquired urethral sphincter mechanism
these cases, prostatic haemorrhage had been mistaken
incompetence.
for incontinence of bloody urine (see 5), but true
●Prostatic disease.
incontinence, with or without urinary retention, also
● Bladder/urethral neoplasia.
Occurred. This was associated with paraprostatic cysts,
● Uretero- or vesicovaginal fstula.
prostatitis or malignancy, but prostatic hyperplasia may
● Acquired neurological conditions.
also result in incontinence.
● Overflow incontinence associated with chronic
The diagnosis and treatment of prostatic disorders
retention.
are described in Chapter 5.
● Detrusor overactivity/hyperactivity/instability.
Bladdey/uvethvalneoplasia
Many of these conditions have been discussed in
OcCASIONALLY, ANIMALS with bladder neoplasia
previous chapters of this book (since they result in signs
 exhibit urinary incontinence. In the author's experi-
other than incontinence) and so only those features
 ence, this has been confined to dogs with carcinomas at
relevant to urinary incontinence will be mentioned in
various sites in the bladder.
this section.
In dogs with bladder neck tumours, urinary
retention with overflow incontinence can occur, but
incontinence in these cases can also occur without
neck/urethral  neoplasia have  impairment of the
439
sphincter mechanism (439), whereas bladder wall
tlimours (440) probably result in detrusor instability
(see below).
 Diagnosis is confirmed by contrast radiography
ultrasonography cystoscopy and/or cytology/biopsy,
but the possibility of malignancy should be eliminated
before surgical excision is attempted. Even in the
absence of evidence of malignancy, histopathological
examination of the excised tumour is essential to obtain
a prognosis.
439 Carcinoma of the bladder neck and proximal
urethra (demonstrated by double contrast
cystography) of an incontinent dog.
440 Carcinoma of the cranioventral bladder wall
(demonstrated by double contrast cystography) of an
incontinent dog. Despite the abnormal appearance of
the prostatic urethra and prostate gland, there were
 no abnormalities of these at postmortem examination.
Urinary incontinence
143
Uretero-or vesicovaginal fistula
441
URETEROVAGINAL FISTULATION IS a cOmplication of
 spaying in bitches and queens and probably results
from inclusion of a ureter during ligation of the
cranial vaginal/cervical/uterine stump. An acquired
ectopic ureter draining into the vagina results and this
((htt) Audeioien iseuoo Aq pasouep aq ue
Treatment is identical to that for congenital ureteral
ectopia (i.e. ureter transplantation or, if severe
secondary ureteral and renal problems are present,
ureteronephrectomy), although, sometimes, the
adhesed ureter/vagina granuloma can be excised and
the ureter ends re-joined (442-447).
Rarely, after spaying, vesicovaginal fistulation can
occur (448). Even rarer, both conditions can occur in
442
the same animal (449).
441  Ureterovaginal fstula demonstrated by
retrograde positive contrast vagino-urethrography.
442-447 Ureterovaginal fistulectomy and ureteral
anastomosis in a juvenile Cocker Spaniel bitch with an
iatrogenic ureterovaginal fistula (following
ovariohysterectomy).
(442) T'he bladder has been reflected caudally (to the
left) and its dorsal wall exposed. The vagina (V) has
been elevated and the site of fistulation exposed.
Cranial to the granuloma on the anterior vagina, the
ureter is identified (arrowed) surrounded by peri-
443
toneum and fat. In this animal the insertion of the
caudal ureter into the bladder can also be seen (also
arrowed); this was not cletectable on pre-operative
contrast radiography. An intra-operative decision was
made to resect the cranial vaginal granuloma and
traumatized section of ureter and to perform ureteral
anastomosis. If insufficient caudal ureter remains
in these cases and/or gross hydroureter (± hydro-
nephrosis) exists, re-implantation of the ureter into
the bladder (see 426, 427) or ureteronephrectomy
(see 319-337) is required.
(443) The cranial vagina is ligated and sectioned
caudal to the granuloma, as shown.
(444) The granuloma containing the ureterovaginal
fistula is excised, leaving caudal and cranial sections of
444
 ureter, which require anastomosis. Any bleeding
ureteral vessels should be clamped and ligated level
with the ends of the ureter. T'he hub of a 3Fr urinary
catheter has been cut off and the catheter passed, hub
end first, through the caudal ureter (identified by the
 artery clamps on the ureteral vessel), bladder and
urethra to exit at the vulva.
144
Differential diagnosis and treatment
(445) The catheter tip is introduced into the
445
cranial section of ureter (being held by fine rat-
toothed forceps) and passed cranially to a level just
distal to the ureteropelvic junction.
(446) The ureter is anastomosed, taking care to
avoid rotation of the ureteral sections around their
longitudinal axis. Simple interrupted sutures have
been placed 180° apart to facilitate orientation and
handling. Fine synthetic absorbable sutures (e.g.
5/0 polyglactin) should be used in a simple
interrupted pattern. Ureteral surgery is less
traumatic and suture placement improved if fine
ocular instruments are used.
(447) Anastomosis is completed and the ureter
 observed for leakage during peristalsis.
446
Alternatively, if ureteral peristalsis is poor, a few
millilitres of sterile saline can be gently injected up
the catheter to test for leaks. Any leakage sites
should be sealed by further suturing, as required.
Following routine abdominal closure, the catheter
is sutured to the paravulval perineal skin, as
illustrated in 89, and left in situ for 3-5 days.
In some animals, despite being sutured in place,
the indwelling ureteral catheter will come out
within 72 hours, presumably as a result of ureteral
peristalsis and urine flow pressures.
448 Vesicovaginal fistula (arrowed) demonstrated by
retrograde positive contrast vagino-urethrography in
447
an incontinent bitch.
449 In this bitch the bladder neck had apparently
been included in the vaginal ligature during spaying,
resulting in ureterovaginal fistulation and a fistula
between the remnants of the bladder (arrowed) and
the vagina. T'he other kidney had ceased to function
because of severe hydronephrosis due to the
 obstruction of the ureter at the trigone. Euthanasia
was required in this case.
44
449
Urinary incontinence
145
Acquived neurological conditions
As
WITH CONGENITAL
neurological
conditions,
Urethral sphincter mechanism
 acquired urinary retention with overflow incontinence
incompetence
 may result from UMN or LMN dysfunction, usually as
a sequela to spinal lesions (e.g. intervertebral disc
DURING URINE STORAGE, urethral resistance is main-
prolapse, tumours).
tained by a complex mechanism of factors. These
Other  neurological  abnormalities  are usually
include tone in the urethral smooth muscle (the
apparent, but if the lesion affects the cauda equina,
internal’ sphincter), tone in the urethral striated muscle
ambulation may not be grossly affected (see 145-147).
(the “external sphincter), the natural elasticity of the
The diagnosis may be confirmed by radiography and
urethral wall tissues (not only musculature), the
 advanced imaging techniques such as CT scans or MRI.
physical properties of the urethra (length and diameter)
Treatment
is
conservative or  surgical
(spinal)
and the degree of engorgement of suburothelial venous
depending on the cause, severity and duration of signs.
plexuses. Since no true bladder neck sphincter exists in
 In the case of tumours, euthanasia is usually performed.
the bitch and continence is maintained by a complex
mechanism of interacting factors, the term "urethral
Overflow incontinencewithchronicretention
sphincter mechanism incompetence? is used to describe
ANIMALS wITH URETHRAL obstruction (e.g. calculi,
a weakness of the urinary sphincter.
tumours) may, paradoxically, become incontinent when 
The neuromuscular function of the lower urinary
the intravesical pressure becomes high enough
to
tract in the dog is complex and not completely under-
overcome the urethral resistance. Such cases
are
stood. Our current understanding is summarized in 450.
primarily presented with dysuria and should be investi-
 gated and treated as such (see Chapters 4 and 5).
450 Summary of neuromuscular control of urinary
continence. It is likely that most urethral tone is due to
Detvusor overactivity/byperactivity/instability
the smooth muscle, innervated by the sympathetic
THESE CONDITIONS APPEAR to be very rare in animals.
nervous system, with the striated muscle being used to
 In affected cases, uncontrollable bladder contractions
augment urethral resistance during times when the
Occur, resulting in voiding. Detrusor overactivity is the
barking). In the
e cat and human there is also
tions, the aetiology of which is unclear. Detrusor hyper-
sympathetic innervation to the urethral striated muscle,
activity (hyperreflexia) denotes involuntary detrusor
but this has yet to be demonstrated in the dog. This
contractions due to neurological conditions. Detrusor
diagram is an oversimplification of continence control;
 instability is used to describe involuntary detrusor con-
for example, sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves
tractions that are not due to neurological causes.
meet and interact at the same ganglia on the urethral
In dogs, detrusor overactivity may be secondary to
 and blacdder walls, making understanding of function
lesions leading to excessive bladder wall stimulation
(to this author at least) difficult.
(e.g. cystitis, bladder tumours). Such stimulation may
also occur in animals with bladder hypoplasia, especially
if they are housed for long periods and unable to inhibit
the detrusor reflex. The owners of such animals may
450
Coudol mesenteric
Socral segments 
report nocturia or marked bed-wetting overnight.
gonglion 
Detrusor instability can occur with no obvious
Pelvic
nerve
underlying cause. It may be present alone or in conjunc-
 tion with urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence.
 Diagnosis depends upon the taking of a detailed history
Pudendal
nerve -
and elimination of other causes of incontinence. In
humans the urodynamic diagnosis of this condition
requires considerable patient co-operation and feed-
Hypogastric
 back, something that is lacking in veterinary patients!
nerve
In cases secondary to other disorders, such as
cystitis, treatment of the primary condition alone
usually results in a return to continence. Animals with
Striated muscle
ae Aesu nosnp Ared pue eisedody npp
Smooth muscle
Somatic nerve
much more difficult to treat, but anticholinergic
Sympat hetic nerve
+ causes contraction
(parasympatholytic) or smooth muscle antispasmodic
Parasympathetic nerve
- couses relaxation
drugs may be beneficial.
146
Differential diagnosis and treatment
Urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence occurs
Congenital urethval spbincter mechanism
 in dogs and cats, although it is rare in the latter. In dogs
incompetence
referred for investigation of urinary incontinence,
IN DOGs, THIs TENDs to be a problem of large breeds,
urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence is the
predominantly bitches. Leakage of urine is more
commonest diagnosis made in adults and is second only
copious compared with animals with ureteral ectopia
to ureteral ectopia in juveniles, particularly in females
and it occurs predominantly when the dogs are
(451, 452)
recumbent (453).
It can present as a congenital or acquired condition.
The urethra may be abnormally short or even
The acquired form is extremely rare in the cat; in cats
absent, especially in cats (454-456), and urethral
 most cases of urethral sphincter mechanism incompe-
 diverticula and dilatations may be present in juvenile
tence are congenital. Although urethral pressure pro-
male dogs (457-461).
filometry can be used to demonstrate incompetence of
the urethral sphincter mechanism (see Chapter 3), this
technique is not readily available in general practice and
453
is predisposed to a number of artefacts that can make
interpretation difficult. In general practice, therefore,
the diagnosis is usually made on the basis of the breed
and history and by the elimination of other possible
diagnoses using imaging and laboratory techniques.
451, 452 Urethral sphincter mechanism
incompetence is diagnosed in 80% of dogs referred
for the investigation of urinary incontinence (451)
and is the second commonest cause of congenital
urinary incontinence in juvenile dogs (452)
453 Passive leakage of urine during recumbency (in a
451
Rottweiler bitch), typical of urethral sphincter
Other diognoses
 Urethrol sphincter mechanism
mechanism incompetence.
incompetence
20%
454-456 Congenital urethral sphincter mechanism
incompetence in cats is associated with severe urethral
shortening (454) or even absence (455), with the
%08
bladder neck apparently opening directly into the
vestibule. Many of these cats have no vagina (455);
the streak of contrast medium visible dorsal to the
bladder neck in this cat represents retrograde filling of
the uterine horns, which insert directly into the
bladder. A vagino-urethrogram of a normal female cat
is shown for comparison (456).
452
457-458 Prostatic urethral diverticulae and a dilated
Other diognoses
Urethral sphincter mechanism
pelvic urethra demonstrated during urethrography
incompetence
(457) and at postmortem examination (458) in a
21% 
juvenile Golden Retriever.
35%
44%
Ectopic ureters
Urinary incontinence
147
454
455
456
457
458
148
Differential diagnosis and treatment
459
460
459, 460 Prostatic and pelvic urethral dilatations in
 an incontinent juvenile German Shepherd Dog
461
demonstrated during urethrography (459) and at
postmortem examination (460).
 461  T'he worst case of a prostatic urethral dilatation
(arrowed) the author has seen (in a juvenile German
Shepherd Dog) demonstrated at postmortem
examination.
Urinary incontinence
149
 In many bitches, no gross abnormalities are
462
detected on contrast radiographic investigations, apart
from a caudally positioned bladder, and the diagnosis
Ureter
frequently relies on the history and elimination of other
Blodder neck _
possible causes of incontinence. Approximately half of
affected bitches become continent following their first
or second oestrus and so should not be neutered before
then. Those that do not may be candidates for medical
Or surgical management (see Acquired urethral
sphincter mechanism  incompetence in bitches).
Oestrogens are contraindicated in juvenile bitches with
this condition because of possible adverse feed-back?
effects on the pituitary, but alpha-adrenergics such as
phenylpropanolamine could be used, pending oestrus.
 In cases of severe urethral hypoplasia, especially in
463
cats, partial bladder neck resection (462-465) or recon-
struction may be beneficial. Bladder neck reconstruc-
tion is more complicated, but the results are no better
than partial bladder neck resection and so the latter is
 preferred. Approximately half of these cats will be cured
by the surgery, although, if the uterine horns insert into
the bladder (see 455 and 466), these can cause problems
after surgery (467, 468).
462, 463 Diagrams illustrating bladder neck
resection technique. The ventral portion of the
bladder neck is excised as far cranially as just distal
to the ureteral orifices, to avoid creating an ^ectopic
ureter' into the new portion of urethra (462). The
resulting defect is then repaired to create a longer
464
urethra (463).
464, 465 Pre-operative (464) and postoperative
(465) vestibulo-urethrocystography in a cat with
 urinary incontinence due to severe urethral
hypoplasia.
465
150
Differential diagnosis and treatment
466
468
467
466 In cats with urethral hypoplasia and vaginal
Acquived urethral spbinctey mecbanism
aplasia, the uterine horns insert into the bladder at the
incompetence in bitches
level of the trigone.
ACQUIRED URETHRAL SPHINCTER mechanism incom-
petence usually (but not always) follows spaying in the
467, 468 Postoperative lateral (467) and
bitch and castration in male dogs. Before treatment can
ventrodorsal (468) vesti bulo-urethocystograms in a
be contemplated, an understanding of the pathophysi-
cat with urethral hypoplasia and vaginal aplasia. The
 ology of urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence is
uterine horns were excised during surgery, but the
 required. The exact abnormality leading to urethral
uterine horn remnant (arrowed) is acting as a bladder
 sphincter mechanism incompetence and the region of
dliverticulum, predisposing this cat to recurring
the urethra in which it occurs are unknown. It is a
urinary tract infections.
multi-factorial problem and a variety of factors are
festation of urinary incontinence. These factors include
urethral tone, urethral length, bladder neck position,
body size and breed, ovariohysterectomy/ovariectomy,
hormones and obesity.
 The introduction of urethral pressure profilometry as
an investigative aid in the bitch has allowed confirma-
 tion of the belief that poor urethral tone is implicated in
urinary incontinence  due to urethral sphincter
mechanism incompetence. Urethral tone is maintained
by a complex interaction of neuromuscular, vascular
and passive elastic components, and it is unclear which
and/or to what extent each of these is deficient in
sphincter mechanism incompetence.
Urinary incontinence
151
469
There is considerable variation in urethral length
between bitches of different sizes. However, taking
body size into consideration, bitches with urethral
sphincter mechanism incompetence tend to have
shorter urethras than continent animals.
Bladderneckposition
A number of authors recorded the radiographic finding
of a 'pelvic bladder' during the investigation of inconti-
nent animals (469, 470). The significance of this
finding was disputed in the past, but there is now good
evidence that an intrapelvic bladder neck contributes
significantly to urinary incontinence due to urethral
sphincter mechanism incompetence. The caudal
 bladder position in affected dogs is associated with the
470
shorter urethral length and also the fact that the bladder
 moves caudally when a bitch moves from a standing to
 a relaxed recumbent position. This movement is more
pronounced in bitches  with urethral  sphincter
 mechanism incompetence than in normal animals, sug-
gesting a deficiency in supporting mechanisms in the
lower urinary tract of affected animals. The role of
bladder neck position in bitches with urethral sphincter
mechanism incompetence is thought to be due to
 oi sanssaid peuupqe o aujsun u ss
urethra (471, 472).
469, 470 (469) The s0-called μpelvic bladder'
471, 472 In a bitch with an intra-abdominal bladder
demonstrated by retrograde positive contrast vagino-
neck (471), any pressure changes in the abdomen
urethrography in an adult, spayed Rough Collie with
(grey arrows) are transmitted to both the bladder and
urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence (this
the urethra (brown arrows), so tending to cancel each
bitch also has a vestibulovaginal stricture).
other out. Such an animal may be able to cope better
(470) A vagino-urethrogram of an adult, spayed,
with an incompetent urethral sphincter mechanism. In
 continent Rough Collie is provided for comparison.
most bitches with an incompetent bladder sphincter,
the bladder neck is intrapelvic (472) and so intra-
abdominal pressures are transmitted more to the
bladder than the urethra, creating a pressure gradient.
If the urethral sphincter mechanism is incompetent,
this can result in urine leakage when intra-abdominal
pressure rises, for example during recumbency.
471
472
Vogino
Blodder
 Pubis
Urethro
Pressure on
Intra pelvic 
abdomen
blodderneck
152
Differential diagnosis and treatment
Body size and breed
of  vestibulovaginal stenosis  between normal  and
LARGE AND GIANT BREEDS are at risk. Urethral
incontinent bitches, and the author now believes that
sphincter mechanism incompetence is commonest in
vestibulovaginal stenosis per se is not a cause of inconti-
 the UK in Dobermanns and Old English Sheepdogs,
nence, although if a bitch is already incontinent and
and there is evidence that these breeds and also
leaking urine into the vagina, some may accumulate
 Rottweilers, Weimaraners, Springer Spaniels and Irish
cranial to the stenosis, exacerbating the signs and pre-
Setters, are particularly at risk.
incontinence is due to other causes such as urethral
Ovariobysterectomy/ovariectomyand bormones
sphincter mechanism incompetence and that if the
THERE IS AN AssOCIATION between spaying and
incontinence due to these can be cured, the vestibulo-
urinary incontinence and this is probably due to a lack
vaginal stenosis is irrelevant.
of circulating oestrogens, although a recent paper
 suggests that an excess of gonadotrophins may also be
Urethval sphincter mechanism incompetence
a factor. In general terms, spayed animals are nearly
in male dogs
eight times more likely to develop this form of urinary
URETHRAL SPHINCTER mechanism incompetence in
incontinence than entire bitches. However, this should
 male dogs is uncommon. As in the bitch, the condition
be considered in terms of dog years. In simple terms, if
can occur as either a congenital or an acquired
100 bitches were not spayed, ten years later, two of
condition. The congenital condition is often associated
them would be incontinent. If 100 bitches were spayed,
with gross prostatic/pelvic urethral deformities (urethral
about l6 of them would be incontinent after ten years.
dilatations and prostatic urethral diverticulae) and is
Spaying before the first season may increase the risk,
unlikely to be successfully treated (see 457-461). Again,
although this could not be proved conclusively in a
as in the bitch, the acquired form is associated with
 prospective study, probably because of the low number
neutering and larger breeds appear to be at risk.
of animals examined. A recent paper suggested that if
Incontinence is likely to occur when intra-abdominal
early gonadectomy of female dogs is practised, it should
pressure increases (e.g. during recumbency) and affected
be delayed until the animal is at least three months of
 animals tend to have intrapelvic bladder necks, although
age. The function and morphometry of the lower
a short urethra does not appear to be a factor in males.
urinary tract are affected by the changes in hormone
 Conservative management is frequently disappointing.
balance that occur during the oestrus cycle.
In comparison with the bitch, the condition is less likely
to respond to medical therapy. The pathophysiology of
Obesity
 male urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence is
WHILsT NOT A CAUSE of the condition, obesity may
 poorly understood, making rational treatment difficult.
worsen the degree of incontinence and weight loss may
Drugs used in its management include androgens,
improve the situation.
 Oestrogens and alpha-adrenergics. Of these, alpha-
adrenergics ± estrogens give the best results, but, even
Vestibulovaginal stenosis in relation to urethral
then, more than half of the dogs fail to respond to
sphinctermechanismincompetencein bitches
therapy. Attempts have been made to relocate the
VESTIBULOVAGINAL STENOSIS, due tO a true stricture
 intrapelvic bladder neck to an intra-abdominal position.
(see 469) or persistent perforate hymen, has been linked 
 These have involved pexy of the deferent ducts to the
 abdominal wall or prostatopexy (in castrated males) to
suggested that the incontinence might be associated
 the prepubic tendon. As with medical treatment, the
with urine accumulating cranial to the stenosis during
 impression in a limited number of cases is that surgical
micturition and subsequently dribbling out. However,
treatment alone of urethral sphincter mechanism incom-
 petence is less successful in males than in bitches.
Urinary incontinence
153
Treatmentofurethralsphinctermechanism
473
incompetence
THE TREATMENT OF congenital urethral sphincter
mechanism incompetence has been mentioned previ-
ously. Since it is a multifactorial problem, the treatment
of acquired urethral sphincter mechanism incompe-
 tence may be difficult and most therapies correct only
one of the factors described previously. It is unlilkely,
therefore, that any one form of treatment alone will
cure 100% of cases in the long term. A good figure to
bear in mind is 50%. A close look at the literature
suggests this is the cure rate that can be expected for any
 One form of treatment of this condition, be it medical
 Or surgical, although most of the remaining animals are
improved by treatment.
474
 In theory, sympathomimetic or parasympatholytic
agents should improve continence control by increasing
urethral tone or reducing intravesical pressure respec-
tively (see 450). Oestrogens have also been used to
improve urethral tone. Most published clinical trials
have involved the efficacy of alpha-adrenergics or
Oestrogens and tend to have short follow-up periods.
In addition, possible long-term adverse systemic effects 
 have not been evaluated. Currently, the most popular
 propanolamine or oestrogens such as oestriol. In some
animals that respond initially to alpha-adrenergics or
Oestrogens, the response ceases eventually, in the case of
Oestrogens possibly due to desensitization of oestrogen
receptors. Oestrogens sensitize the urethral smooth
muscle to alpha-adrenergic stimulation and so a combi-
nation of oestrogen and alpha-adrenergic therapy may
 be useful in animals that have failed to respond to an
individual drug and may reduce the dose of each indi-
vidual drug, lessening the chances of side-effects.
 Androgens have been employed in castrated male dogs
but, in the author's experience, the results are disap-
 pointing.
 The main options for surgical treatment are to
attempt to:
473 Urethral resistance can be increased by injection
● Increase urethral resistance (e.g. peri-urethral
of urethral bulking agents (polytetrafluoroethylene or
 surgical slings or artificial sphincters; intra-urethral
collagen) - indlicated above by yellow ellipses - into
injection of bulking agents [473]).
the urethral wall. Polytetrafl uoroethylene has been
● Increase urethral length, using bladder neck
associated with formation of distant granulomas in
reconstruction techniques; this is more commonly
 humans and so collagen is preferable. T'his technique
used in cats with severe urethral hypoplasia than in
 requires specialized (urethrocystoscopic) equipment.
dogs (see 462-465).
● Relocate the bladder neck to an intra-abdominal
474 During colposuspension, the vagina (V) on
position by means of colposuspension (474-484),
either side of the urethra is anchored to the prepubic
urethropexy (485), vas deferentopexy or
 tendon in order to move the lower urogenital tract in
prostatopexy (486-489).
a cranial direction and relocate the bladder neck in an
intra-abdominal position; this improves the trans-
The author's preferred technique in bitches is colposus-
ference of abdominal pressures to the bladder neck
pension, and this will be described in more detail
and proximal urethra (see 471, 472).
(474-484).
B = bladder; P = pubis.
154
Differential diagnosis and treatment
475
476
475-484 Colposuspension technique. (475) Under
general anaesthesia, the bitch is placed in dorsal
recumbency with the hindlimbs flexed. T'he ventral
abdominal skin and vagina have been prepared for
 aseptic surgery, the vagina by douching with dilute
aqueous povidone iodine. An 8Fr (smaller bitches) or
10Fr (larger bitches) Foley catheter is inserted via the
urethra into the bladder and the cuff inflated. T'he
catheter is then gently withdrawn until the cuff rests in
the bladder neck. T'he presence of the catheter
facilitates identification of the urethra and bladder
neck cduring surgery.
(476) A midlline, caudal abdominal approach is made.
T'he prepubic fat and fascia are separated by careful
blunt and sharp dlissection on both sides of the
midline and the prepubic tendons and external
 pudendal vessels identified. In the photograph, the
bitch's vulva is in the top right corner and the artery
forceps point to the left prepubic tendon. Just lateral
to the prepubic tendon, the external pudendal vessels
can be seen on the edge of the prepubic fat. T'hese
 vessels must be identified and avoided during
subsequent placement of sutures around the prepubic
tendon.
(477) The midline incision is continued through the
linea alba of the abdominal muscle wall and extended
caudally to the pubic brim. Self-retaining retractors
are used to separate the abdominal musculature and
the bladder is identified.
Urinary incontinence
155
(478) Cranial traction on the bladder allows the
478
intrapelvic bladder neck (N) to be pulled cranially and
identified by the presence of the inflated Foley
catheter cuff. Note the presence of the retroperitoneal.
fat around the bladder neck and urethra.
(479) T'he vagina is displaced cranially and cleared of
fat and fascia on either side of the urethra. Vaginal
 displacement is most easily accomplished by inserting
a finger into the vagina. The urethra can be palpated
through the ventral vaginal wall and displaced to the
bitch's left, while the vaginal wall (V) over the finger
tip to the right of the urethra is pushed cranially and
ventrally towards the caudal end of the incision. T'he
vaginal wall can then be exposed by pushing off the
 overlying fat and fascia in a caudal direction using a
dry swab. The bladder neck (N) can be seen as a
swelling due to the presence of the Foley catheter cuff
in the bladder. T'he vaginal wall is grasped with tissue
forceps. T'he technique is repeated on the other side of
the urethra. T'he surgeon then changes his/her gloves
and the vulva is covered with a large sterile swab or
surgical drape throughout the remainder of the
 procedure. In bitches in which one's finger and the
vagina are of incompatible sizes (very large or very
 small bitches or those with gross vaginal strictures or
 septae), the vagina has to be located by blunt and
sharp dissection of the overlying fat and fascia on
either side of the urethra, grasped with tissue forceps
and then pulled cranially. Placement of a long, thin
479
blunt instrument (e.g. a Poole suction tip) into the
vagina facilitates identification. T'his is more difficult
than the use of a finger in the vagina and, fortunately,
most bitches with urethral sphincter mechanism
incompetence are of a size that is usually compatible
with one's finger, depending on the size of the finger,
ofcourse.
156
Differential diagnosis and treatment
480
(480) In this illustration the vagina on either side of
the urethra has been grasped with Allis tissue forceps
and pulled cranially. As can be seen, this results in
 movement of the bladder neck and proximal urethra
from an intrapelvic to an intra-abdominal position.
(T'he swab in the abdomen is not essential and was
used to prevent small intestine from obscuring part of
the photographic field).
(481) If the tension on the tissue forceps is released,
the cranial vagina and bladder neck move back to an
intrapelvic position. The vagina must therefore be
anchored cranially to maintain the bladder neck in an
intra-abdominal position.
(482) T'he vagina is sutured to the prepubic tendon on
each side of and approximately 1-1.5 cm away from
the midline. T'he sutures (monofilament nylon) are
taken through the abdominal wall caudal to the
tendon, in and out of the vaginal wall (as far laterally
as possible) and back out of the abdominal wall cranial
to the tendon. T'he placement of a suture attaching
the left vaginal wall to the left prepubic tendon is
illustrated. It is possible that the sutures may enter the
vaginal lumen during this procedure, hence the need
for preparation of the vagina for aseptic surgery.
481
482
Urinary incontinence
157
(483) T'he number of sutures that can be placed
483
around the prepubic tendon depends on the size of
the bitch and is limited by the external pudendal
vessels laterally. Most bitches are medium to large
breeds and the optimum number of sutures is two on
each side, as illustrated. No. 0 nylon is suitable for
 most bitches but no. l nylon should be used in very
large breeds. On the rare occasions when colpo
 suspension is performed in small or toy breeds, it may
only be possible to place one suture through the
vagina and around the prepubic tendon on either side
of the mid-line. Once the sutures have been placed,
they are pulled tight to ensure that after they are tied,
the urethra will not be compressed against the pubis
 by an arch of vagina, since this may result in post-
 operative dysuria. It should be possible to insert the
tip of a blunt-ended instrument, such as Mayo scissors
or Kilner needle holders, easily alongside the urethra
between the vaginal arch and pubis. If the urethra is
 compressed, the sutures should be repositioned, but
this is not usually necessary if the sutures have been
placed as laterally on the vagina as possible. If all is
well, the sutures are tied, the Foley catheter removed
and the abdomen closed routinely.
(484) T'he vagina will form adhesions to the
abdominal wall near the prepubic tendon. T'his is the
B ae seaa uia qq e yo sueide iosod
colposuspension. A metal probe has been inserted 
into the urethra and used to elevate it, better to
484
demonstrate the vaginal adhesion (arrowed).
V = vagina; B = bladder; P = pubis.
485 During urethropexy, the urethra is anchored
to the prepubic tendon or abdominal muscle wall
485
(arrowed).
V = vagina; B = bladder; P = pubis.
158
Differential diagnosis and treatment
486-489 Prostatopexy is the male equivalent of
486
colposuspension, except that the prostate is anchored
to the prepubic tendon on either side of the urethra
rather than the vagina. After the suture has been
introduced through the abdominal wall caudal to the
 prepubic tendon (486), a bite is taken through the
caudoventral edge of the prostate gland on the same
side (487). T'he same suture is then taken back out
though the abdominal wall, cranial to the prepubic
tendon (488). This is repeated on the opposite side
with two sutures being placed on each side and
assessed to ensure there is no urethral compression, as
in colposuspension (489).
487
488
489
Urinary incontinence
159
The potential problem with techniques intended
Clinical observations and the response to diazepam
 to increase urethral resistance is that they may increase
no au si errssp Area xai zun isns 
 n     
likely cause of dysuria after colposuspension. It may be
 Similarly, increasing urethral length carries potentially
serious surgical risks and, in the author's view, should
Oestrogen therapy should cease at least one month pre-
be reserved for animals with severe congenital urethral
 s n ass r o
 pl on A ial nn u eisdo
diazepam at a dose of0.2 mk/kg by mouth two or three 
serious complications is to relocate the bladder neck to
times daily. The drug has a short duration of action and
an intra-abdominal position by means of colposus-
so each dose should be given 15-20 minutes before the
pension. The greater experience of medical urologists
animal is walked to urinate. An indwelling urinary
treating incontinent women suggests
sthatcolpo-
catheter can be used for a few days, if necessary, in the
suspension provides firmer anchorage of the lower
minority of animals that are unable to urinate at all. A
further potential cause of dysuria is compression of the
trauma. It may also prevent the caudal movement of
lurethra against the pubis by the vagina. Care should be
the bladder that occurs during recumbency and is
taken during surgery to avoid
placement of vaginal
 more pronounced in bitches with urethral sphincter
sutures too close to the uurethra (see 483). Bitches that
mechanism incompetence. However, a review of
 are allowed to be very active after colposuspension may
  e    
 tear the sutures from the vagina. This is more likely to
mechanism incompetence in 100 bitches revealed
happen if they are allowed to run and jump, and owners
similar results to colposuspension, although
the
should be advised of the necessity for restricting the
prevalence and severity of urethral complications
exercise of their animals to walks on the lead only for
was higher. The author believes that cystopexy
1S
One month after surgery. Hymen formation and accu-
contraindicated in these cases, since it may result
mulation of vaginal secretions causing dysuria and/or
in detrusor instability, a further cause of urinary
dyschezia is an extremely rare, longer-term complica-
incontinence.
tion of colposuspension. It is due to breakdown of a
The complications after colposuspension are few
 pre-existing vestibulo-vaginal stricture during the
and most are relatively minor. Since the surgery
 operation and subsequent healing of apposing raw
involves trauma to intrapelvic structures, some animals
areas of vagina to form a barrier across the vaginal
are stimulated to strain, usually immediately after
lumen.
recovery from the general anaesthetic. This can be con-
Although great progress has been made over the
 trolled by the administration of appropriate analgesics
 past three decades in our understanding of the patho-
pre-, peri- and postoperatively. Rarely, some bitches
 physiology and, thus, the treatment of canine urethral
find the first defaecation after surgery to be uncomfort-
sphincter mechanism incompetence, a recent editorial
able if the faeces are firm and bulky. This can be con-
by one of the world's most respected urologists
trolled with stool softeners. The commonest
suggests we still have a great deal to learn. Despite
complication is dysuria, but this occurs in less than 3%
over 200 procedures being described for the treatment
of cases in the author's experience. It may be due to
 of human stress incontinence, the author was left
vaginal stimulation by the surgery leading to suppres-
asking, when it comes to his own patients, what
shoild he do?
References and further reading
160
Part 1: Investigation of animals with
Cannizzo KL, McLoughlin MA, Mattoon JS et αl. (2003)
urological signs
Evaluation of transurethral cystoscopy and excretory
urography for diagnosis of ectopic ureters in female dogs:
Atalan G, Barr FJ, Holt PE (1998) Assessment of bladder
25 cases (1992-2000).Journal ofthe American Veterinary
MedicalAssociation223,475-481.
measurements.AmericanFowrnalofVeterinaryResearch
Gatoria IS, Saini NS, Rai TS et αl. (2006) Comparison of
59, 10-15.
three techniques for the diagnosis of urinary tract
Atalan G, Barr FJ, Holt PE (1998) Assessment of bladder
infections in dogs with urolithiasis Jourmal of Small
volume using ultrasonographic determination of cross-
AnimalPractice 47,727-732.
sectional areas and linear measurements. Veterinory
Gregory SP, Holt PE, Parkinson TJ (1992) Comparison of
Radiology Cr Ultrasound 39, 446-450.
two catheter withdrawal speeds during simultaneous
Atalan G, Holt PE, Barr FJ (1999) Effect of body position
 urethral pressure profilometry in anesthetized bitches
on ultrasonographic estimations of bladder volume.
AmericanJourmal ofVeterinaryResearch53,355-358.
Jowrnal ofSmall Animal Practice 40,177-179.
Gregory SP, Cripps PJ, Holt PE (1996) Comparison of
Atalan G, Holt PE, Barr FJ ( 1999) Ultrasonographic
urethral pressure profilometry and contrast radiography
estimation of prostate size in normal dogs and
 in the diagnosis of incompetence of the urethral sphincter
relationship to bodyweight and age.Jourmal of Small
mechanism in bitches. Vterinary Record 138, 58-61.
Animal Practice 40, 119-122.
Grooters AM, Cuypers M-LD, Partington BP et al. (1997)
Atalan G, Barr FJ, Holt PE (1999) Comparison of
Renomegally in dogs and cats. Part I. Diagnostic
ultrasonographic and radiographic measurements of
approach.Compendiumon ContinuinyEducationfor the
canine prostate dimensions. Veterinary Radiology C
Practising Veterinarian 19, 1213-1229.
Ultrasownd 40, 408-412.
Hamaide AJ, Verstegen JP, Snaps FR et αl. (2003) Validation
Barr FJ, Holt PE, Gibbs C (1990) Ultrasonographic
and comparison of the use of diuresis cystometry and
 measurement of normal renal parameters. Jowmal of Small
retrograde filing cystometry at various infusion rates in
Animal Practice 31, 180-184.
female Beagle dogs. American Jowrmal of Veterinary
Barthez PY, Smeak DD, Wisner ER et αl. (2000) Ureteral
Research 64, 574-579.
obstruction after ureteroneocystostomy in dogs assessed
Henry CJ, Tyler JW, McEntee MC et αl. (2003) Antigen
by Technetium Te 99m diethylenetriamine pantaacetic
testing for transitional cell carcinoma in dogs. American
acid (DTPA) scintigraphy. Veterinary Surgery 29,
JoumalofVeterinary Research 64,1017-1020.
499-506.
Holt PE (1989) Positive contrast vagino-urethrography for
Billett JR, Hotson Moore A, Holt PE (2002) Evaluation of a
diagnosis of lower urinary tract disease. In Current
bladder tumour antigen test for the diagnosis of lower
Veterinary Therapy X.Small Animal Practice.(ed RW
urinary tract malignancies in dogs. American Jowrmal of
Kirk) WB Saunders, Philadelphia, Pp. 1142-1145.
VeterinuryResearch63,370-373
 Holt PE (1990) Simultaneous urethral pressure profilometry
Brearley MJ, Cooper JE, Sullivan M (1991) A Colour Atlas of
Small Animal Endoscopy. Wolfe Publishing, London, pp.
comparison of catheter materials.Jowrnal ofSmall Animal
77-86.
Practice 31, 431-436.
References and further reading
161
Holt PE, Gibbs C, Latham J (1984) An evaluation of
Part 2: Differential diagnosis and
 positive contrast vagino-urethrography as a diagnostic aid
treatment
in the bitch. Journal ofSmall Animal Practice 25,
531-549.
Chaptey4:Non-prostaticdysuvia
Holt PE, Gibbs C, Wathes CM (1990) Simultaneous
Albasan H, Lulich JP Osborne CA et αl. (2005) Evaluation
urethral pressure profilometry using a microtip transducer
 of the association between sex and risk of forming urate
catheter in the bitch: effects of bitch position and
urolithsinDalmatians.Journal ofthe AmericanVeterinary
transducer orientation. Neurowrology amd Urodyramics 9,
MedicalAssociation227,565-569.
281-296.
Atalan G, Barr FJ, Holt PE (1999) Frequency of urination
Holt PE, Gregory SP (1993) Resting urethral pressure
and ultrasonographic estimation of residual urine in
profilometry in bitches: artefact or reality? Compendium
normal and dysuric dogs. Research in Veterinary Science
OnContinwinyEducationforthePractisingVeterinarian15
68, 295-299.
1207-1215.
Bass M, Howard J, Gerber B et αl. (2005) Retrospective
Mannion P (2006)(ed) Diognostic Ultrasound in Small
study of indications for and outcome of perineal
Animal Practice. Blackwell Publishing, Oxford.
urethrostomy in cats.Jourmal ofSmall Animal Practice 46,
227-231.
McCarthy TC (2005) Cystoscopy. In Veterinary Endoscopy for
Bernarde A, Viguier E (2004) Transpelvic urethrostomy in
the Small Animal Practitioner.(ed TC McCarthy) Elsevier
Science, St. Louis, Pp. 49-135.
1l cats using an ischial ostectomy. Veterinary Swrgery 33,
246-252.
Melhoff T, Osborne CA (1977) Catheter biopsy of the
urethra, urinary bladder and prostate gland. In Current
Bradshaw JM, Brown PJ, Pearson GR et αl. (1996) Dysuria
Veterinary Therapy VI.Small Animal Practice.(ed RW
associated with urethral caruncle in the dog. Jowrmal of
Kirk) WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 1173-1175.
Comparative Pathology 115, 77-84.
Rivers BJ, Walter PA, Polzin DJ (1997) Ultrasonographic-
Davidson EB, Ritchey JW, Higbee RD et αl. (2004) Laser
 guided, percutaneous antegrade pyelography: technique
lithotripsy for treatment of canine uroliths. Veterinary
and clinical application in the dog and cat. Joural of the
Surgery 33, 56-61.
AmericanAnimalHospitalAssociation33,6l-68.
Davis GJ, Holt D (2003) Two chondrosarcomas in the
Rozear L, Tidwell AS (2003) Evaluation of the ureter and
urethra of a German Shepherd Dog. Jourmal of Small
AnimalPractice 44,169-171.
saop Auy u Audeaan Aaxa ouderso
Diaz Espineira MM, Viehoff FW, Nickel RF (1998)
Veterinary Radiology erUltrasound 44, 155-164.
Idiopathic detrusor-urethral dyssynergia in dogs:
 Senior DF (1999) Cystoscopy In Small Animal Endoscopy.
a retrospective analysis of 22 cases. Jowrnal of Small
(ed TR Tams) Mosby, St. Louis, Pp. 447-459.
AnimalPractice 39,264270.
Vaden SL, Levine JF Lees GE et αl. (2005) Renal biopsy: a
Dudley RM, Wilkens BE (2004) Urethral obstruction as a
retrospective study of methods and complications in 283
complication of staged bilateral triple pelvic osteotomy.
dogs and 65 cats.Journal ofVeterinary Internal Medicine
JournaloftheAmericanAnimalHospitalAssociation40,
19, 794-801.
162-164.
Vonderen IK van, Kooistra HS, Rijnberk A (1997) Intra-
Elwick KE, Melendez LD, Higbee RG et αl. (2003)
and interindividual variations in urine osmolality and
Neodmium: Yttrium-Aluminum-Garnet (Nd: YAG) laser
urine specific gravity in healthy pet dogs of various ages.
ablation of an obstructive urethral polyp in a dog. Journal
JournalofVeterinary InternalMedicine1l,30-35
oftheAmericanAnimalHospitalAssociation39,506-508.
Weaver AD (1977) Transperineal punch biopsy of the canine
Finkbeiner A, Lapides J (1974) Effect of distension on
prostate gland. Jourmal of Small Animal Practice 18,
blood flow in dog's urinary bladder. Investigative Urology
573-577.
12, 210-212.
Welles EG, Whatley EM, Hall AS et αl. (2005) Comparison
Fischer JR, Lane IF, Cribb AE (2003) Urethral pressure
 Of Multistix PRO dipsticks with other biochemical assays
profile and haemodynamic effects of phenoxybenzamine
for determining urine protein (UP), urine creatinine
and prazosin in non-sedated male Beagle dogs. Canwdion 
(UC) and UP:UC ratio in dogs and cats. Veterinory
Journal ofVeterinary Research67,30-38.
ClinicalPathology 35,31-36.
Gerber B, Boretti FS, Kley S et αl. (2005) Evaluation of
clinical signs and causes of lower urinary tract disease in
European cats.Journal ofSmall Animal Practice 46,
571-577.
162
References and further reading
Greenberg CB, Davidson EB, Bellmer DD et αl. (2004)
Lulich JP Osborne CA, Thumchai R et αl. (1998)
Evaluation of the tensile strengths of four monofilament
Management of canine calcium oxalate urolith recurrence.
absorbable suture materials after immersion in canine
CompendiumonContinwinyEaucationforthePractising
urine with or without bacteria. American Jowrnal of
Veterinwrian 20,178-189.
Veterinary Research 65, 847-853.
Mannikarottu A, Lin AD-Y, Whitebeck C et αl. (2006) Effect
Gunn-Moore D (200l) Pathophysiology of feline lower
of partial bladder outlet obstruction on nitrotyrosine
urinary tract disease (FLUTD). UK Vt 6(5), 20-32.
levels and their correlation with contractile function.
Gunn-Moore D, Brown PJ, Holt PE et αl. (1995) Priapism
Neurowrology andUrodynamics25,397-401.
in seven cats.JournalofSmall AnimalPractice 36,
Papadopoulos G, Tommasini Degna M (2006) Two cases of
262-266.
dysuria as a complication of single-session bilateral triple
Haugaard N, Wein AJ, Chandy B et αl. (1996) Properties of
pelvic osteotomy. Jourmal of Small Animal Practice 47,
Ca2+-Mg2+ ATP-ase in rabbit bladder muscle and mucosa:
741-743.
effect of urinary outlet obstruction. Newrourology and
Pavletic MM, O'Bell SA (2007) Subtotal penile amputation
Urodymwmics 15, 555-561.
and preputial urethrostomy in a dog. Journatl ofthe
Hayashi, K, Hardie RJ (2003) Use of cystostomy tubes in
AmericanVeterinary MedicalAssociation230,375-377.
small animals. Compendium on Continwing Education for
Piermattei DL, Osborne CA (1977) Urohydropropulsion:
thePractisingVeterinarian25,928-934.
non-surgical removal of urethral calculi in male dogs. In
Hypolite JA, Longhurst PA, Haugaard N et αl. (1997) Effect
CurrentVeterinary Therapy VI.Small AnimalPractice.(ed
 of partial outlet obstruction on 14C-adenine incorporation
RW Kirk) WB Saunders, Philadelphia, Pp. 11941196.
in the rabbit urinary bladder. Neurowrology and
Saito M, Ohmura M, Kondo A (1996) Effects of long-term
Urodynamics 16,201-208.
 partial outflow obstruction on bladder function in the rat.
Kato K, Lin AT-L, Haugaard N et αl. (1990) Effects of
Newrowrology and Urodynamics 15, 157-165.
outlet obstruction on glucose metabolism of the rabbit
Salinardi BJ, Marjs SL, Davidson JR et αl. (2003) The use of
urinary bladder. Journal ofUrology 143, 844847.
a low-profle cystostomy tube to relieve urethral
Kim JC, Yoon JY, Seo S 1I et αl. (2000) Effects of partial
obstruction in a dog.Journal of theAmericanAnimal
 bladder outlet obstruction and its relief on types I and III
Hospital Association 39,403-405.
collagen and detrusor contractility in the rat. Neurourology
Seaman R, Bartges JW (200l) Canine struvite urolithiasis.
ndUrodynamics19,29-42.
CompendiumonContinwinyEaucationforthePractising
Lane IF, Fischer JR, Miller E et αl. (2000) Functional
Veterinarian 23,407-420.
urethral obstruction in 3 dogs: clinical and urethral
Simpkin P (2005) The Dalmatian defect. Arthritis wnd
pressure profile findings. Journal ofVeterinary Internal
Rhewmatism 52,2257-2262.
Medicine 14,43-49.
Stifler KS, McCrackin Stevenson MA, Sanchez S et αl.
Lekcharoensuk C, Osborne CA, Lulich JP et αl. (2002)
(2006) Prevalence and characterization of urinary tract
Associations between dietary factors in canned food and
infections in dogs with surgically treated type I
formation of calcium oxalate uroliths in dogs. America
thoracolumbar intervertebral disc extrusion. Veterinary
JournalofVeterinaryResearch63,163-169.
Swrgery 35, 330-336.
Levin RM, Malkowicz SB, Wein AJ et αl. (1985) Recovery
Takagi S, Kadosawa T, Ishiguro T et αl. (2005) Urethral
from short-term obstruction of the rabbit urinary bladder.
transitional cell carcinoma in a cat. Jourmal of Small
Jowrnal ofUrology 134,388-390.
Animal Practice 46,504506.
Levin RM, Hypolite JA, Haugaard N εt αl. (1996)
Williams JM, White RAS (1991) Tube cystostomy in the
 Comparative response of rabbit bladder smooth muscle
dog and cat. Jowal of Small Animal Practice 32,
and mucosa to anoxia. Newrowrology and Urodynamics 15,
598-602.
79-84.
Wolffenbuttel KP, Kok DJ, Minekus JPJ et αl. (2001)
Lin AD-Y, Levin R, Kogan B et αl. (2006) Estrogen induced
Urodynamic follow-up of experimental urethral
functional hypertrophy and increased force generation of
obstruction in individual guinea pigs. Nenrorology amd
the female rabbit bladder.Neurourology and Urodynamics
Urodymamics 20,699-713.
25,473-479.
Lin AT-L, Yang CH, Chen K-K et αl. (2005) Detrusor
mitochondrial lipid peroxidation and superoxide
dismutase activity in partial bladder outlet obstruction of
rabbits.Neurourology and Urodynamics 24,282-287.
Lipscomb V (2004) Surgery of the lower urinary tract in
dogs: 2. Urethral surgery In Practice 26, 13-19.
References and further reading
163
Chapter5:Prostaticdisorders
Wasmer ML, Rogers KS (1996) Pharmacologic androgen
Boland LE, Hardie RJ, Gregory SP et αl. (2003)
deprivation.CompendiumonContinwing Eaucationfor the
 Ultrasound-guided percutaneous drainage as the primary
PractisingVeterinarian 18,267-277.
 treatment for prostatic abscesses and cysts in dogs.
White RAS, Williams JM (1995) Intracapsular prostatic
FournaloftheAmericanAnimalHospitalAssociation39,
omentalisation: a new technique for management of
151-159.
prostatic abscesses in dogs. Veterinary Surgery 24,
Bommer N (2006) A review of the pathophysiology of
390-395.
prostatic diseases. UK Vt 1l(3), 20-26.
Williams J, Niles J (1999) Prostatic disease in the dog. I
Bommer N (2006) Treatment of prostatic diseases. UK Vt
Practice 21, 558-575.
11(4), 17-23.
Bray JP White RAS, Williams JM (1997) Partial resection
Chapter 6: Urinavy tract tvawma
and omentalisation: a new technique for management of
prostatic retention cysts in dogs. Veterinary Surgery 26,
Anderson RB, Aronson LR, Drobatz KJ et α. (2006)
Prognostic factors for successful outcome following
202-209
urethral rupture in dogs and cats. Jowrmal ofthe American
Caney SMA, Holt PE, Day MJ et αl. (1998) Prostatic
Animal HospitalAsociation 42,136-146.
carcinoma in two cats.JournalofSmall AnimalPractice
39, 140-143.
Baines SJ, Rennie S, White RAS (200l) Prepubic
urethrostomy: a long-term study in 16 cats. Vterimary
Gobello C, Corrada Y (2002) Noninfectious prostatic
Surgery 30, 107-113.
diseases indogs.CompendiumonContinwing Education for
 Bernarde A, Viguier E (2004) Transpelvic urethrostomy in
thePractisingVeterinarian24,99-107.
ll cats using an ischial ostectomy Vterinary Swgery 33,
Holt PE, White RAS (2000) Prostatic cysts and abscesses in
246-252.
the dog: treatment options. Veterinary Intermational 12,
11-18.
Hamilton MH, Sissener TR, Baines SJ (2006) Traumatic
bilateral ureteric rupture in two dogs. Journal of Small
LEsplattenier HF Nimwegen SA Van, Sluijs FJ Van et al.
AnimalPractice 47,737-740.
(2006) Partial prostatectomy using Nd: YAG laser for
management of canine prostate carcinoma. Vterinary
Hay CW, Rosin E (1997) Repair of an intrapelvic urethral
 tear in a bitch caused by iatrogenic trauma. Veterinary
Surgery 35, 406-411.
Record 140, 48-49.
Liptak JM, Brutscher SP, Monnet E et α. (2004)
Transurethral resection in the management of urethral
Moores AP, Bell AMD, Costello M (2002) Urinoma (para-
and prostatic neoplasia in 6 dogs. Veterinary Swgery 33,
ureteral pseudocyst) as a consequence of trauma in a cat.
Jowrnal ofSmall Animal Practice 43,213-216.
505-516
Mullen HS, Matthiesen DT, Scavelli TD (1990) Results of
Nwadike BS, Wilson LP, Stone EA (2000) Use of bilateral
surgery and postoperative complications in 92 dogs
temporary nephrostomy catheters for emergency
treated for prostate abscessation by a multiple Penrose
treatment of bilateral ureter transection in a cat.Joumal of
drain technique.Journal of the American Animal Hospital
theAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation217,
Association26,369-379.
1862-1865.
Schulz KS, Waldron DR, Smith MM εt αl. (1996)
Weisse C, Aronson LR, Drobatz KD (2002) Traumatic
rupture of the ureter: 10 cases.Jowmal ofthe American
Inadvertent prostatectomy as a complication of
Cryptorchidectomy in four dogs.Jowral of the American
AnimalHospitalAssociation 38,188-192
AnimalHospital Association 32,211-214.
Sirinarumitr K, Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV et αl.
(200l) Effects of finasteride on size of the prostate gland
Chapter 7: Other causes of haematuria
sd u ua sp u anb us pue
Agut A, Laredo FG, Belda E et αl. (2004) Left perinephric
hypertrophy.JournaloftheAmericanVeterinaryMedical
abscess associated with nephrolithiasis and bladder calculi
Association 218, 1275-1280.
in a bitch. Wterinary Record 154, 562-565.
Sirinarumitr K, Sirinarumitr T, Johnston SD et αl. (2002)
Bolliger C, Walshaw R, Kruger JM et αl. (2005) Evaluation
Finasteride-induced prostatic involution by aptosis in
of the effects of nephrotomy on renal function in
dogs with benign prostatic hypertrophy. American Jowrmal
clinically normal cats. American Jourmal of Veterinary
ofVeterinary Research63,495-498.
Research 66, 1400-1407.
Vlasin M, Rauser P, Fichtel T et αl. (2006) Subtotal
Bryan JN, Henry CJ, Tumquist SEet αl. (2006) Primary
intracapsular prostatectomy as a useful treatment for
renal neoplasia of dogs.JourmalofVeterinaryInternat
advanced-stage prostatic malignancies. Jourmal of Small
Medicine 20,1155-1160.
AnimalPractice 47,512-516.
164
References and further reading
Buffington CAT, Chew DJ, Woodworth BE (1999) Feline
Kalkstein TS, Kruger JM, Osborne CA (1999) Feline
interstitialcystitis.Jowrnal oftheAmericanVeterinary
idiopathic lower urinary tract disease. Part IV
MedicalAssociation215,682-687.
Therapeutic options. Compendium on Contining
Buffington CAT, Westropp JL, Chew DJ et αl. (2006) Risk 
EducationforthePractisingVeterinarian21,497-509.
factors associated with clinical signs of lower urinary tract
King MD, Waldron DR, Barber DL εt αl. (2006) Effect of
disease inindoor housed cats.Jowrnal oftheAmerican
nephrotomy on renal function and morphology in
VeterinaryMedicalAssociation228,722-725.
normal cats. Veterinary Surgery 35, 749-758.
Castellano MC, Idiart JR (2005) Multifocal renal
Kirsch JA, Hauptman JG, Walshaw R (2002) A urethropexy
 cystadenocarcinoma and nodular dermatofibrosis in dogs.
technique for surgical treatment of urethral prolapse in
CompendiumonContinwingEducationforthePractising
the maledog.Journal oftheAmericanAnimal Hospital
Veterinarian27,846-853.
Association 38,381-384.
Chun R, Knapp Dw, Widmer WR et αl. (1996) Cisplatin
Knapp DW, Richardson RC, Chan TCK et αl. (1994)
treatment of transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary
Piroxicam therapy in 34 dogs with transitional cell
bladder in dogs: 18 cases (1982-1993). Jowrmal ofthe
carcinoma of the urinary bladder. Jourmal of Veterinary
AmericanVeterinary Medical Association 209,1588-1591
InternalMedicine8,273-278.
Cuypers M-LD, Grooters AM, Williams J et αl. (1997)
Knottenbelt C, Chambers G, Gault Eet αl. (2006) The i
Renomegally in dogs and cats. Part I. Differential
vitro effects of piroxicam on canine cell lines. Jowrmal of
diagnoses.Compendiumon Continuing Eaducationfor the
Small Animal Practice 47, 1420.
PractisingVeterinarian 19,1019-1032.
Knottenbelt C, Mellor D, Nixon C et αl. (2006) Cohort
Dobson JM, Samuel S, Milstein H et αl. (2002) Canine
study of COX-1 and COX-2 expression in canine rectal
neoplasia in the UK: estimates of incidence rates from a
and bladder tumours. Jowmal of Small Animal Practice 47,
population of insured dogs. Jownal of Small Animal
196-200.
Practice 43,240-246.
Kyles AE, Hardie EM, Wooden BG t αl. (2005) Clinical,
Dunning M, Stonehewer J (2002) Urinary tract infections
clinicopathologic, radiographic, and ultrasonographic
in small animals: pathophysiology and diagnosis. In
abnormalities in cats with ureteral calculi: 163 cases
Practice24,418-432.
(19842002).JournaloftheAmericanVeterinary Medical
Dunning M, Stonehewer J (2002) Urinary tract infections
Association226,932-936.
in small animals: therapeutic options and management of
Kyles AE, Hardie EM, Wooden BG t αl. (2005)
problem cases. In Practice 24, 518-527.
Management and outcome of cats with ureteral calculi:
Eddlestone S, Taboade J, Senior D et αl. (1999) Renal
153 cases (19842002). Jourmal ofthe American
haemangioma in a dog.Jourmal of Small AmimalPractice
VeterinaryMedicalAssociation226,937-944
40, 132-135.
Mellanby RJ, Chantrey JC, Baines EA t αl. (2004) Urethral
Farrell M, Philbey AW, Ramsey I (2006) Ureteral
haemangiosarcoma in a Boxer. Jourmal of Small Amimal
fibroepithelial polyp in a dog. Jowrmal of Small Animal
Practice 45, 154-156.
Practice 47, 409-412.
Moe L, Lum B (1997) Hereditary multifocal
Gasser AM, Bush WW, Smith S et αl. (2003) Extradural
cystadenocarcinomas and nodular dermatofibrosis in 51
spinal, bone marrow, and renal nephroblastoma. Jowraf
German shepherd dogs. Jourmal of Small Animal Practice
oftheAmericanAnimalHospitalAssociation39,80-85
38, 498-505.
Holt PE, Lucke VM, Pearson H ( 1987) Idiopathic renal
Phillips BS (1999) Bladder tumors in dogs and cats.
haemorrhage in the dog. Jowmal of Small Animal Practice
CompendiumonContinwingEducationfor thePractising
28, 253-263.
Veterinarian21,540-547.
Jens B, Bjorling DE (200l) Suture selection for lower
Sale CSH, Skerritt GC, Smith KC (2004) Spinal
wrinary tract surgery in smallanimals.Compendium ot
nephroblastoma in a crossbreed dog. Jowrmal of Small
ContinuinyEducationforthePractisingVeterinarian23,
AnimalPractice45,267-271.
524-531.
Saridomichelakis MN, Koutinas CK, Souftas V et αl. (2004)
 Kalkstein TS, Kruger JM, Osborne CA (1999) Feline
Extensive caudal vena cava thrombosis secondary to
idiopathic lower urinary tract disease. Part I1. Potential
unilateral renal tubular cell carcinoma in a dog. Jowrmal of
causes.CompendiumonContinwiny Educationfor the
Small Amimal Proactice 45,108-112.
PractisingVeterinarian 21,148-155.
Senior DF, Lawrence DT, Gunson C et αl. (1994) Successful
Kalkstein TS, Kruger JM, Osborne CA (1999) Feline
treatment of botryoid rabdomyosarcoma in the bladder
idiopathic lower urinary tract disease. Part Il1. Diagnosis.
Ofa dog.Journal ofthe AmericanVeterinary Medical
Compendium onContinuingEducationfor thePractising
Association 29,386-390.
Veterinarian21,387-394,448.
References and further reading
165
Stone EA, Robertson JL, Metcalf MR (2002) The effect of
Crawford JT, Adams WM (2002) Influence of
vestibulovaginal stenosis, pelvic bladder, and recessed
Veterinary Surgery 31,391-397.
vulva on response to treatment for clinical signs of lower
Westropp JL, Kass PH, Buffington CAT (2006) Evaluation
urinary tract disease in dogs: 38 cases ( 1990-1999).
of the effects of stress in cats with idiopathic cystitis.
JownaloftheAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation221
AmericanJournalofVeterinaryResearch67,731-736
666-566
Dean PW, Novotny MJ, O'Brien DP (1989) Prosthetic
sphincter for urinary incontinence: results in three cases.
Chapter 8:Uvinary incontinence
JournaloftheAmericanAnimalHospitalAssociation25
Aaron A, Eggleton E, Power C et αl. (1996) Urethral
447-454.
sphincter mechanism incompetence in male dogs:
Gregory SP, Holt PE (1992) Effect of body position on
a retrospective analysis of 54 cases. Veterinary Record 139,
intravesical pressure in the anaesthetised bitch. Veterimary
542-546.
Record 130, 288-290.
Arnold S, Jager P DiBartola SP et al. (1989) Treatment of
Gregory SP, Parkinson TJ, Holt PE ( 1992) Urethral
conformation and position in relation to urinary
Teflon.Journal oftheAmericanVeterinary Medical
incontinence in the bitch. Vterinary Record 131,
Association,195,1369-1374.
167-170.
Arnold S, Hubler M, Lott-Stolz G et αl. (1996) Treatment
Gregory SP, Holt PE (1993) Comparison of stressed
 of urinary incontinence in bitches by endoscopic injection
simultaneous urethral pressure profiles between
of glutaraldehyde cross-linked collagen. Jowmal of Small
anesthetized continent and incontinent bitches with
Animal Practice 37, 163-168.
urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence. American
Atalan G, Holt PE, Barr FJ (1998) Ultrasonographic
Jowrnal ofVeterinary Research54,216-222.
assessment of bladder neck mobility in continent bitches
Gregory SP, Holt PE (1994) The immediate effect of
and bitches with urinary incontinence attributable to
colposuspension on resting and stressed urethral pressure
urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence. Americat
profiles in anaesthetized incontinent bitches. Vterinary
JournalofVeterinaryResearch59,673-679.
Surgery 23,330-340.
Bacon NJ, Oni O, White RAS (2002) Treatment of urethral
Gregory SP, Holt PE, Parkinson TJ et αl. (1999) Vaginal
sphincter mechanism incompetence in 1l bitches with a
Sueds o dusueau yq  u u pue uoisd
sustained-release formulation of phenylpropanolamine
and urinary incontinence. Journal ofSmall Animal Practice
hydrochloride.Veterinury Record 151,373-376.
40, 180-184.
Barth A, Reichler IM, Hubler M εt αl. (2005) Evaluation of
Hamaide AJ, Verstegen JP, Snaps FR et αl. (2005) Influence
long-term effects of endoscopic injection of collagen into
of the estrous cycle on urodynamic and morphometric
the urethral submucosa for treatment of urethral
measurements of the lower portion of the urogenital tract
sphincter mechanism incompetence in female dogs: 40
in dogs.AmericanJournal ofVeterinary Research66
cases (1993-2000).Jounalofthe American Veterinary
1075-1083.
MedicalAssociation226,73-76
Hardie RJ, Schmiedt C, Phillips L et αl. (2005) Ureteral
Blavais JG (2005) What to do? Newrowrology ond
papilla implantation as a technique for
Uroaynamics 24, 201
neoureterocystostomy in cats. Wterinary Surgery 34,
Cannizzo KL, McLoughlin MA, Mattoon JS et αl. (2003)
393-398.
 Evaluation of transurethral cystoscopy and excretory
Holt PE (1983) Urinary incontinence in the dog. In Practice
urography for diagnosis of ectopic ureters in female dogs;
5, 162-173.
25 cases (1992-2000).Journal ofthe American Veterinary
Holt PE (1984) Efficacy of emepronium bromide in the
MedicalAssociation223,475-481.
treatment of physiological incontinence in the bitch.
Carofiglio F, Hamaide AJ, Farnir F et αl. (2006) Evaluation
Veterinary Record 114, 355-356.
of the urodynamic effects of orally administered
Holt PE (1985) Urinary incontinence in the bitch due to
phenylpropanolamine and ephedrine in female dogs
sphincter mechanism incompetence: prevalence in
AmericanJournal ofVeterinaryResearch67,723-730
referred dogs and retrospective analysis of sixty cases.
Chen X, Creed KE (2004) Histochemical and contractile
Journal of Small Animal Practice 26,181-190.
properties of striated muscles of urethra and levator ani of
Holt PE (1985) Importance of urethral length, bladder neck
dogs and sheep. Newrourology and Urodynamics 23,
position and vestibulovaginal stenosis in sphincter
702-708.
mechanism incompetence in the incontinent bitch.
Research inVeterinary Science39,364372
166
References and further reading
Holt PE (1985) Urinary incontinence in the bitch due to
Holt PE, Jones A (2000) In vitro study of the significance of
sphincter mechanism incompetence: surgical treatment.
bladder neck position in incontinent bitches. Veterinary
JournalofSmallAmimalPractice26,237-246.
Record 146, 437-439.
Holt PE (1988) ^Simultaneous’ urethral pressure
Holt PE, Thrusfield MV, Hotson Moore A (2000) Breed
 profilometry: comparisons between continent and
predisposition to ureteral ectopia in bitches in the UK.
incontinent bitches.Jourmal ofSmall AnimalPractice29,
Veterinary Record146,561.
761-769.
Holt PE, Coe RJ, Hotson Moore A (2005) Prostatopexy as
Holt PE (1990) Urinary incontinence in dogs and cats.
a treatment for urethral sphincter mechanism
Veterinary Record 127,347-350.
incompetence in male dogs. Journal of Small Animal
Holt PE (1990) Long-term evaluation of colposuspension 
Practice 46, 567-570.
in the treatment of urinary incontinence due to
Kyles AE, Vaden S, Hardie EM et αl. (1996)
incompetence of the urethral sphincter mechanism in the
Vestibulovaginal stenosis in dogs: 18 cases (1987-1995).
bitch. Wterinary Record 127, 537-542.
Fournal oftheAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation209,
Holt PE (1993) Surgical management of congenital urethral
1889-1893.
sphincter mechanism incompetence in eight female cats
Laverty PH, Salisbury SK (2002) Surgical management of
and a bitch. Eterinary Surgery 22, 98-104.
true patent urachus in a cat. Journal of Small Animal
Holt PE (1994) Feline urinary incontinence. In Kirk's
Practice 43,227-229.
Current Veterinary Therapy XII. Small Animal Practice.
Lose G, Griffths D, Hosker G et αl. (2002) Standardisation
(eds JD Bonagura, RW Kirk) WB Saunders,
of urethral pressure measurement: report from the
Philadelphia, pp. 1018-1022.
Standardisation Sub-Committee of the International
Holt PE (2000) FECAVA LECTU RE. Investigation and
Continence Society. Newrowrology and Urodynamics 21,
therapy of incontinent animals. European Jourmal of
258-260.
Compamion Animal Practice 10, 1ll-116.
Mandigers PJJ, Nell T (200l) Treatment of bitches with
Holt PE, Sayle B ( 1981) Congenital vestibulo-vaginal
acquired urinary incontinence with oestriol. Vterinary
stenosis in the bitch.JowrnalofSmall AnimalPractice 22,
Record 149,764-767.
67-75.
Massat BJ, Gregory CR, Ling GV et al. ( 1993)
Holt PE, Long SE, Gibbs C (1983) Disorders of urination 
Cystourethropexy to correct refractory urinary
associated with canine intersexuality. Jowrnal of Small
incontinence due to urethral sphincter mechanism
AnimalPractice24,475-487.
incompetence. Preliminary results in ten bitches.
Veterinary Surgery 22, 260-268.
Holt PE, Gibbs C (1992) Congenital urinary incontinence
in cats: a review of 19 cases. Veterimary Record 130,
McLoughlin MA, Chew DJ (2000) Diagnosis and surgical
management of ectopic ureters. Clinical Technigues it
437-442.
Small AnimalPractice15,17-24.
Holt PE, Gibbs C, Wathes CM (1990) Simultaneous
Mehl ML, Kyles AE, Pollard R et αl. (2005) Comparison of
catheter in the bitch: effects of bitch position and
3 techniques for ureteroneocystostomy in cats. Vterinary
transducer orientation.Neurouroiogy and Urodynamics 9,
Swrgery 34, 114-119.
281-296.
Michell AR (1984) Ins and outs of bladder function.
Holt PE, Gregory SP (1993) Resting urethral pressure
JowrnalofSmallAnimalPractice25,237-247.
profilometry in bitches: artefact or reality? Compendium
Muir P Goldsmid SE, Bellenger CR ( 1994) Management of
onContinwingEducationforthePractisingVeterinarian15,
urinary incontinence in five bitches with incompetence of
1207-1215.
the urethral sphincter mechanism by colposuspension and
Holt PE, Thrusfield MV (1993) Association in bitches
a modified sling urethroplasty. Veterinary Record 134,
between breed, size, neutering and docking, and acquired
38-41.
urinary incontinence due to incompetence of the urethral
Nickel RF (1999) Oestriol: pharmacology and effects on
sphincter mechanism. Wterinary Record, 133, 177-180.
lower urinary tract function. European Society of Veterinary
Holt PE, Hotson Moore A (1995) Canine ureteral ectopia:
InternalMedicineNewsletter9,13-15
an analysis of 175 cases and comparison of surgical
Nickel RF Wiegand U, Van Den Brom WE (1998)
treatments. Vterinary Record 136, 345-349.
Evaluation of a transpelvic sling procedure with
Holt PE, Stone EA (1998) Colposuspension for urinary
and without colposuspension for treatment of femlae
incontinence. In Current Technigues in Small Animal
dogs with refractory urethral sphincter mechanism
Swrgery (4rh edn). (ed MJ Bojrab). Williams and Wilkins,
incompetence. Veterinary Surgery 27, 94-104.
Baltimore, Pp. 455-459.
References and further reading
167
Nickel RF Van Den Brom WE, Vink-Noteboom M (1999)
Sutherland-Smith J, Jerram RM, Walker AM et αl. (2004)
Clinical and radiographic findings compared with uro-
Ectopic ureters and ureteroceles in dogs: presentation,
dynamic findings in neutered female dogs with refractory
cause and diagnosis. Compendium on Continwing
urinary incontinence. Wterinwry Record 145, 1l-15.
Educationfor thePractisingVeterinarian26,303-310.
Okkens AC, Kooistra HS, Nickel RF (1997) Comparison of
Sutherland-Smith J, Jerram RM, Walker AM et αl. (2004)
 long-term effects of ovariectomy versus
Ectopic ureters and ureteroceles in dogs: treatment.
Ovariohysterectomy in bitches.Journal of Reproduction
CompendiumonContinuingEducationforthePractising
andFertility Supplements51,227-231.
Veterinarian26, 311-316.
Power SC, Eggleton KE, Aaron AJ et αl. (1998) Urethral
Thrusfield MV, Holt PE, Muirhead RH (1998) Acquired
sphincter mechanism incompetence in the male dog:
urinary incontinence in bitches: its incidence and
importance of bladder neck position, proximal urethral
relationship to neutering practices. Journal of Small
length and castration.Jowrmal of Small Amimal Practice 39,
AnmalPractice39,559-566.
69-72.
Weber UT, Arnold S, Hubler M et al. (1997) Surgical
Rawlings CA, Mahaffey MB, Chernosky AC et αl. (2000)
treatment of male dogs with urinary incontinence due to
Immediate urodynamic and anatomic response to
urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence. Vterinary
colposuspension in female Beagles. American Jowrnal of
Surgery 26, 51-56.
Veterinary Research 61, 1353-1357.
White RAS, Pomeroy CJ (1989) Phenylpropanolamine: an
Rawlings CA, Barsanti JA, Mahaffey MB et αl. (2001)
C-adrenergic agent for the management of urinary
 Evaluation of colposuspension for treatment of
incontinence in the bitch associated with urethral
incontinence in spayed female dogs. Jowrmal of the
sphincter mechanism incompetence. Wterinary Record
AmericanVeterinary Medical Asciation 219,770-775.
125, 478-480.
Rawlings CA, Coates CR, Purinton PT et αl. (2005)
White RN (2001) Urethropexy for the management of
Evaluation of a selective neurectomy model for low
urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence in the bitch.
urethral pressure incontinence in female dogs. American
JowrnalofSmallAmimalPractice42,481-486
Jowrnal ofVeterinaryResearch66,695-699
Reichler IM, Hubler M, Jochle W et αl. (2003) The effect of
GnRH analogs on urinary incontinence after ablation of
the ovaries in dogs. Therigenology 60, 1207-1216.
Richter KP Ling GV (1985) Clinical response and urethral
 pressure profle changes after phenylpropanolamine in
dogs with primary sphincter incompetence. Journal of the
AmericanVeterinary Medical Association 187,605-611.
Robinson D, Register TC, Carter LR (1998) The effects of
 delayed hormone replacement therapy on estrogen
receptors of the cynomolgus monkey bladder and vagina.
Neurourology and Urocynamics 17, 241-247.
Salomon JF, Cotard JP Viguier E (2002) Management of
urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence in a male
dog with laparoscopic-guided deferentopexy. Jowrmal of
SmallAmimalPractice 43,501-505
Schafer W, Abrams P Liao L et αl. (2002) Good urodynamic
practices: uroflowmetry filling cystometry, and pressure-
flow studies.Newrouroiogy and Urodynamics 21, 261-274.
Scott L, Leddy M, Bernay F et αl. (2002) Evaluation of
phenylpropanolamine in the treatment of urethral
sphincter mechanism incompetence in the bitch. Jowrnal
ofSmallAnimalPractice43,493-496.
Spain CV, Scarlett JM, Houpt KA (2004) Long-term risks
and benefits of early-age gonadectomy in dogs. Jowrmal of
theAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation224,
380-387.
This page intentionally left blank
169
 Note: Page numbers in italic refer
B
bladder hypoplasia 34, 139-40, 145
to tables
bladder neck
bacteriology, urine 51, 52
quantitative 52
external/abdominal pressure 16,
A
86, 88, 151
barium enema 114
 abdominal pressures 151
neoplasia 60, 61, 73, 142
bethanechol 86
 abdominal tissues, urine infiltration
bicarbonate 59
position 151
66
biochemistry
relocation in colposuspension
abdominocentesis 45-6, 112
153-7
blood 51, 52
acidosis 45-6, 59, 112
resection 149
urine 51, 52
correction 59
tumours 29,33
biopsy
adhesions
bladder rupture 33, 45-6, 113
catheter technique 50
ureteral122
blood/ascitic fluid analysis 51
indications 48
vaginal 157
iatrogenic 34
kidney 48-9
 air embolism, associated with
management 46, 112
problems 50
cystography 34
 bladder wall
alligator forceps 66
prostate 37, 49
ischaemia 59
Allis tissue forceps 26-7, 156
techniques 48-50
thickness 12
0-adrenergic agents 149, 153
Tru-cut needle 48-9
blood
α-adrenergic blocking agents 86
ultrasound-guided 37
biochemistry 51, 52
biopsy ~gun’ 48
anaesthesia
haematology 51, 52
 intravenous urography (IVU) 20
bladder
sample preparation 52
vagino-urethrography 27, 28
atony 86
blood clots, vermiform 126
anal atresia 128
centesis 42, 45-6, 80
body size, and urethral sphincter
 displacement into hernia/rupture
 anaphylactic reactions, contrast media
mechanism incompetence 152
32,77,79-80,105
24
bone reactions 16, 17, 60, 92
distension 10, 21
androgens 153
bowel
 anovaginal cleft, congenital 129
drainage 80
emptying prior to intravenous
iatrogenic torsion 122
anti-androgens 96
urography 20
antibiotics 38, 124
lavage 68
overlying urinary tract on
 anticholinergic drugs 145
palpation 12
radiography 17
'pelvic' 151
arteriovenous fistula, renal vessels
breeds at risk
106, 108
size/volume 34, 35, 139
 congenital neurological disorders
surgical closure 645
141
ascitic fluid, analysis 51
ultrasonography 37
ureteral ectopia 143
 assistant, surgical
bladder calculi 12, 124
urethral sphincter mechanism
nephrectomy 108
`cerate′ 35
incompetence 152
nephrotomy 130
surgical removal 129, 63-5
170
Index
bulbo-urethral glands 70, 71
 congenital disorders
cystoliths, see bladder calculi
bulking agents, urethral 153
anal atresia 128
cystopexy 122,159
anomalous ureteral branches 138
cystostomy tube 86-7, 113, 114,
C
anovaginal cleft 129
118, 119
calculi, see bladder calculi;
bladder hypoplasia 139-40
cystotomy 63-5, 129
renal calculi; ureteral calculi;
causing urinary inconti nence
cysts
urethral calculi
13441
prostatic 30, 37, 46-7, 91, 92, 93,
castration
intersexuality 140-1
94, 102-5
benign prostatic hyperplasia
pervious urachus 140
vaginal wall/floor 88-90
96-101
 preputial orifice narrowing 90
cytology 46-7
inguinal hernia 79
 prostatic urethral diverticula 30
diagnosis of malignancy 47
 perineal urethrostomy 69
recto-urethral/rectovaginal fistulae
 staining techniques 47
and prostate cancer 92
128
Czerny suture 64-5
retention of scrotum 96-9
ureteral ectopia 10-1l, 18, 19,
with scrotal ablation 100-1
25,87, 134-8
D
catheter biopsy technique 50, 60
urethral sphincter mechanism
delmadinone acetate 96
catheterization, se urethral
incompetence 138, 139,
detrusor hyperactivity 145
catheterization
146-50, 152
detrusor instability 145
catheters
vaginal aplasia 146, 147, 150
detrusor overactivity 145
cystography 34, 35
 constrictor vestibuli muscles 28
diazepam 86, 159
Jackson's 39, 114, 115
contrast media
diet, low-protein 124
metal 35, 39
mushroom tip 87, 104
iodine-based 21, 26, 31
disc prolapse 62, 73
polyurethane 39
IVU 21
diverticulae, urethral 30, 66, 67,
tube cystostomy 86, 87
urethrography 31
146-7
urethral catheterization 38-9
vagino-urethrography 26
dyschezia 90, 91, 114, 128
urethral pressure profilometry 53,
corpora spongiosa 66
dyssynergia 86
54
corticosteroid therapy 73
 after colposuspension 159
see aiso Foley catheter
creatinine
dysuria
cauda equina lesions 13, 62, 145
blood/ascitic fluid 51
catheterization in 38
centesis
normal values 52
causes 9, 59
indications 45, 112
crepitations, bladder 12
following colposuspension 159
problems 46
cryptorchidectomy, iatrogenic
functional 86-7
techniques 45-6
 prostate injury/excision 1045
neurogenic 10, 62, 73
ultrasound-guided 37, 46
Cushing suture 64-5
 prostate disorders 94
chemical restraint, catheterization
 cyclo-oxygenase inhibitors 73, 102
in cat 44
cystitis
E
Chinese finger trap suture 114
diphtheritic 55, 128, 129
 ECG, see electrocardiogram
cholinergic drugs 86
interstitial 6l
ectopic ureters, see ureteral ectopia
chondrosarcoma, os penis 12, 74-6
recurrent after perineal
electrocardiogram (ECG), in acidosis 
clinical examination 10-13
urethrostomy 116
 and hyperkalaemia 46, 112
collagen 153
secondary emphysematous 62
Elizabethan collar 39, 68
colposuspension
cystocentesis 42, 45-6, 80
endoscopy 55
complications 159
cystography 32-5
enemas 20, 28
rationale 153
double contrast 34, 60, 61
episiotomy 88-90
small/toy breeds 157
indications 32-3
external anal sphincter muscle 82, 83,
surgical technique 154-7
negative contrast 33
84, 85
positive contrast 33-4
problems 34-5
techniques 33-4
Index
171
F
haemorrhage
intersexuality 140-1
faeces, removal prior to radiography
idiopathic renal 125-6, 130
intervertebral disc prolapse 62, 73
20,22
prostatic 91, 125, 130
intraprostatic cyst/abscess 30, 91, 92,
finasteride 96
urethral prolapse amputation 132,
94
fistula
133
intravenous fluid therapy 24, 59, 112,
urethrotomy 66
130
recto-urethral/rectovaginal 128
haemostasis
intravenous urography (IVU)
ureterovaginal 143-4
nephrectomy 106, 108
complications 24
vesicovaginal 143, 144
fluid therapy intravenous 24, 59,
nephrotomy 130
indications 18-19, 87, 131
112, 130
Hartmann's solution, intravenous 59
techniques 20-3
Foley catheter
hernia
iodine-based contrast media 21, 26,
inguinal 32, 77-9
31
 colposuspension 154-5
ischiocavernosus muscles 69, 70
hydropropulsion of urethral
see aiso rupture
calculi 63
hindimb, nerve supply 13
IVU, see intravenous urography
 as indwelling urinary catheter 38,
history taking 10
J
39
hydronephrosis 18, 19, 23, 36, 110,
prostatic cyst/abscess drainage
122
Jackson's catheter 39, 114, 115
104
hydropropulsion, retrograde, urethral
tube cystostomy 86-7, 114
calculi 63
K
urethrography 31
hydroureter 18, 19, 23, 110
kidneys
vagino-urethrography 26, 28
hymen
biopsy
follicle stimulating hormone (FSH)
 formation after colposuspension
complications 50, 51
95
159
technique 48-9
forceps
persistent perforate 152
ectopic 18, 19
alligator 66
hyperkalaemia 45-6, 59, 112
 enlarged 15
Allis 26-7, 156
correction 59
IVU 22
artery 110-11
 palpation 13
fractures, sacrum 62
surgical approach 106, 107
frequency, causes 9
iatrogenic injuries 120
trauma 106-11
frusemide 24
in biopsy procedures 50, 51
ultrasonography 37
FSH, see follicle stimulating hormone
bladder torsion 122
see αiso renal
in cryptorchidectomy 104-5
Kilner needle holders 157
G
in ovariohysterectomy 122,
gas-producing organisms 62, 92
1434
L
glucose administration 112
 prostate gland 104-5
laboratories, commercial 51, 52
granuloma, ureterovaginal fistula 143
ureterovaginal fistulation 143-4
lacrimal cannula 42, 68
in urethral catheterization 43-4
leiomyoma
H
in urethrocystography 34
bladder neck 60
haemangiosarcoma 124, 125
vesicovaginal fistula 143, 144
vagina 88
haematology
iliac lymph node enlargement 16
leiomyosarcoma
indications 51
infection risk
urethral 74
normal values 51, 52
centesis 46
vagina 88
haematoma, renal 106
urethrography 32
Leishman stain 47
haematoxylin and eosin staining.
urinary catheterization 38
Lembert suture 64
rapid 47
vagino-urethrography 28
levator ani muscle 82, 83
haematuria
inguinal hernia 32, 77
LH, see luteinizing hormone
diagnosis and causes 9, 123-7
repair 77-9
LHRH, see luteinizing-hormone
history taking 10
insulin administration 112
releasing hormone
iatrogenic 43
internal obturator muscle 84
172
Index
ligation
0
congenital orifice narrowing 90
renal vessels 108-9
obesity 152
 preservation in penile amputation
spermatic cord 98-9
76
oestrogens
ureters 110
 prostatic hyperplasia 95
pressure
linea alba, adhesion of ureter 122
external on urinary tract 86, 88
urethral sphincter mechanism
 lower motor neurone (LMN) lesions
incompetence 149, 153
intra-abdominal 151
62, 141
and vagino-urethrography 27, 28
 pressure profilometry, urethral 53-4
lung metastases
 omentalization, prostatic cyst/abscess
priapism 68
prostate cancer 93
104, 105
prolapse, urethral 11, 127, 132-3
renal carcinoma 124, 125
os penis
prostate
luteinizing hormone (LH) 95
osseous reactions 17, 60
biopsy 49
luteinizing hormone releasing
tumours 12, 746
cavitation 92-3, 101
hormone (LHRH) 95
urinary catheter passage 44
displacement 104, 105
lymph node enlargement 16, 90
 Osteosarcoma, cauda equina 62
haemorrhage 11, 91, 125, 130
lymphosarcoma 16, 90, 124
iatrogenic injury/excision 1045
trauma 122, 143-4
palpation 12, 91
M
oversexuality dog 127, 132
squamous metaplasia 33, 49, 94
Manx cats 141
ultrasonography 37, 94 
 marsupialization, prostatic
P
ultrasound-guided centesis 37
cyst/abscess 102-3
 packed cell volume (PCV) 51, 52
urethrography 30
masturbation, dog 127, 132
 palpebral oedema, acute 24
prostate cancer 15-16
Mayo scissors 157
pancreatitis, acute 124
adenocarcinoma 10l
Metzenbaum scissors 69
penis
in castrated dogs 92
micturition, neuromuscular control
amputation in urethrostomy
in cat 101
13, 145
70-1, 76
diagnosis 91-4, 91, 95
mushroom tip catheter 87, 104
urethral prolapse 127
local spread 101
myelodysplasias 141
Penrose drain 79, 102
 postmortem appearance 95
perineal rupture
N
in prostatic cyst lining 46
displacement of prostate/bladder
treatment 102
necrosis, urothelial 10, 59, 114,115,
32,77, 79-80, 104-5
 prostatectomy 102
129
prostatic cyst/abscess 93, 102
prostate disorders
nephrectomy
repair 81-5
cats 91
indications 106, 130
perineal urethrostomy 116-17
clinical findings 91, 91
feline 68-72
diagnosis 91-4
 nephroblastoma, renal 125
stoma stenosis 72
e αiso individual disorders
nephrogram 22
periosteal bone reactions 16, 92
prostatic abscess 11, 46
 nephrotomy 130-1
peritoneum, dissection in
cytology 46, 47
 neurological conditions 13
nephrectomy 108, 109
diagnosis 91, 92
acquired 145
phenoxybenzamine hydrochloride 86
treatment 46, 102
causing dysuria 10, 62, 73
phenylpropanolamine 149, 153
congenital 14 1
 prostatic cysts
pneumocystography 60, 90
neutering, see castration; spaying
 pollakiuria, causes 24
communication with prostatic
urethra 103-4
 nipples, confusion with renal calculi
polycythaemia 124
cytology 46-7
15,123
 polyp, bladder neck 61
diagnosis 30, 91, 92, 93
 non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
polytetrafluoroethylene 153
drainage 37, 46
drugs (NSAIDs) 73, 102
 prepubic tendon 156-7
normal values,
persistent stoma 104
haematology/biochemistry 51, 52
prepuce
treatment 102-5
bloody discharge 11
Index
173
 prostatic hyperplasia, benign 94
renal pain 13
sublumbar lymph node enlargement
castration 96-101
renal pelves 22
16, 90
hormonal/drug treatment 94,
renal shutdown, acute 24
suction drain 79
95-6
resectoscopy 55
surgical assistant
prostatitis 102
retractor penis muscle 66, 67
nephrectomy 108
 clinical findings 91
retractors, Alms self-retaining 136
nephrotomy 130
treatment 102
retroperitoneum, urine 113, 114
sutures
prostatopexy 158
rhabdomyosarcoma, bladder 60, 61
bladder closure 64-5
Proteus spp. 116
road traffic accidents
colposuspension 157
pubic osteotomy 117, 118-19
bladder rupture 113
inguinal hernia repair 79
pudendal vessels
sacral fracture 62
perineal rupture repair 84-5
external 78
ureteral rupture 120
perineal urethrostomy 70
internal 84
urethral rupture 113
renal capsule closure 131
pulmonary metastases
rupture
ureterovaginal fistulectomy 144
prostate cancer 93
bladder 33, 34, 45-6, 51, 112,
 urethral prolapse amputation 132,
renal carcinoma 124, 125
113
133
 pyelonephritis, chronic 131
perineal 32, 77, 79-80, 93, 102,
104-5
T
pyuria 10
ureteral 18, 19, 120-1
tail, elevation 81
R
urethral 29, 44, 73, 113-19
testosterone 95
rabbit, urethral calculi 60
thoracic radiographs 15, 16
S
radiography plain films 14-18, 60
tissue forceps, A1lis 26-7, 156
indications 1416
sacral fracture 62
 transitional cell carcinoma, bladder
problems 17-18
sacrotuberous ligament 83, 84
neck 29, 33
techniques 16
sandbags 20
trauma
thoracic 15, 16
scrotum
bladder 112, 113
rapid haematoxylin and eosin stain 47
infiltration with urine 66
iatrogenic, see iatrogenic injuries
rectal compression 90
removal during castration 100-1
kidneys 106-11
rectal nerve, caudal 84
retention in castration 96-9
ureteral 118, 120-1, 122
recto-urethral fistula 128
skin scalding 116, 119
urethral 112-19
spatulation 90
Tru-cut needle biopsy
rectovaginal fistula 128
spaying
complications 50, 51
5α-reductase 95
5a-reductase inhi bitors 96
iatrogenic trauma 122, 143-4
procedure 48-9
 renal artery/vein, ligation in trauma
and urinary continence 149
tube cystostomy 86-7, 113, 114,
106, 108-9
speculum, vaginal 40
118, 119
tube drainage, prostatic cyst/abscess
renal calculi
spermatic cord, ligation 98-9
104
 differentiation from large nipples
 spina bifida 141
15, 123
spinal disorders 13
tumours
haematuria 123, 124
bladder 60, 61
developmental 141
 intravenous urography 18, 19
disc prolapse 62, 73
bladder neck 29, 33
causing pressure on urinary tract
plain radiographs 14, 15
sponge cradle 20
16, 86, 88
surgical removal 130-1
staining techniques 47
cytology 46, 47
urinary tract infection 124
stenosis
os penis 12, 746
renal capsule, surgical closure 131
 perineal urethrostomy 72
renal carcinoma 1245
renal carcinoma 1245
vestibulovaginal 152
urethral 25, 29, 55, 73, 74
renal function, renal calculi 130, 131
see also stricture
 renal haemorrhage, idiopathic 125-6,
urinary incontinence 142
stomatization, ectopic ureter 135-8
130
vagina 25, 89
stricture, urethral 60, 66, 67, 116-17
renal infarction 50, 51
see also prostate cancer
struvite calculi 1l6, 121
174
Index
U
surgical removal 66-7
urethrocystography, retrograde
ultrasonography 18
urethrography 29
positive contrast 33
urethral catheter, as postoperative
bladder *hypoplasia’ 139
centesis 45, 46
urethral 'splint 116
bladder rupture 34
indications 36-7
urethral catheterization 38-44
dysuria 60
problems 37
catheters 38,39
intersexuality 140
prostate 37, 94
cats 39, 42, 43, 44
technique 37
uroperitoneum 112
functional dysuria 86
urethrocystoscopy 55
upper motor neurone (UMN) lesions
iatrogenic injuries 43-4
62, 141, 145
urethrography retrograde positive
problems 44
contrast 29-32
urachus, pervious 140
retrograde 120
indications 29-30
uraemia 45-6, 112
technique 39-43
problems 32
ureteral calculi 18, 19, 120
ureteral ectopia
urinary tract trauma 112
technique 31-2
uroperitoneum 112
urethropexy 157, 159
cat 135
urethral discharge 10, 91
urethrostomy
causes 10, 134
bloody 11, 91
antepubic 73
clinical presentation 10-1l, 134
urethralis muscle 28
perineal 68-72, 116-17
diagnosis 18, 19, 25, 87, 134
urethral pressure profilometry 534
prepubic 118-19
dog 135
urethral prolapse 11, 127
scrotal 74-6
treatment in cat 138
treatment in dog 134-7
amputation 132-3
urethrotomy 66-7
ureterovaginal fistula 143-4
urethral resistance 145
urgency, causes 9
methods of increasing 153-9
urinalysis
ureters
urethral rupture
indications 51
anomalous branches 138
cat 29, 114
normal values 52
excision in nephrectomy 110, 111
dog 113-14
urinary bypass 38, 112, 113, 118
trauma 118, 120-1, 122
iatrogenic 44
urinary continence, neuromuscular
visualization in IVU 22-3
control 13, 145
urethra
long-term problems 116-17
traumatic 112, 113-19
urinary inconti nence
abscess 44
treatment 73
bladder/urethral neoplasia 142
absence 147
urethral sphincter mechanism
causes 9
bulking agents 153
incompetence 10, 11, 145-50
causes in adult dogs 142
diverticulae/dilatations 30, 66,
acquired 146
clinical examination 10, 11
67, 146-7
in bitch 150-2
history taking 10
external pressure, causes 16, 86,
in male dog 152
in juvenile animals 9, 10, 11,
88
body size and breeds at risk 152
134-41
hypoplasia 149-50
overflow 141, 142, 145
length 138, 151
cats 146, 147, 150
congenital 138, 139, 146-50, 152
prostatic disease 142
palpation 12
investigation 25, 28
urinary retention 141
plain radiographs 16-17
medical treatment 153
overflow incontinence 14l, 142,
shortened 146, 147
and neutering 152
145
tone 150
urinary tract infections 62
tumours 25, 29,55, 73, 74
surgical treatment 153-9
after perineal urethrostomy 116
urethral calculi
urethral stricture 60
renal calculi 124
cats 68
after trauma repair 116-17
87 Ayde.aauan-ousta u! ys
dog 29
after urethrotomy 66, 67
urethral catheterization 39
flushing 42
urethritis
urinary catheterization 38
 passage of urinary catheter 38, 44
^chronic/recurrent 6l, 73
differentiation from neoplasia 29,
urine bacteriology 51, 52
plain radiographs 18
rabbit 60
60, 61
retrograde hydropropulsion 63
treatment 73
Index
175
urine samples
vestibulo-urethrocystogram 149, 150
collection from urethral catheter
vestibulovaginal stenosis 152
43
viscera
 preparation and postage 52
inguinal hernia 78,79
urodynamics 53-4, 86
overlying urinary tract on
uroperitoneum 45-6, 112
radiography 17
evaluation 51
management 112
W
 metabolic disturbance 46, 112
Walpole's solution 42
urothelium, necrotic/sloughed 10, 59,
129
urticaria, acute 24
uterocoele 87
V
vagina
absence (aplasia) 146, 147, 150
adhesion formation after
colposuspension 157
 anomalous in intersex animal 140,
141
cysts 88-90
displacement in colposuspension
154-7
mucosal folds 27, 40
 oestrogens and 27, 28
 passage of urinary catheter 40-1
tumours 25, 89
vaginal tunic 77, 78, 79
vaginoscope, cat 43
vagino-urethrography
anaesthesia 27,28
indications 25, 60
normal canine 27
normal feline 27, 147
problems 28
techniques 26-7
ureteral ectopia 138
ureterovaginal fistula 143
urethral carcinoma 73
urethral sphincter mechanism
incompetence 147
urethritis 61
vaginal wall cyst 88
vertebrae, bone reactions/metastases
16
vesico-ureteral reflux, in
Aydeson
vesicovaginal fistula 143, 144
Appendices
176
Appendix 1 Drug trade-names
Appendix 2 Conversion factors
Haematology
Sf units
Factor
Old units
Phosphate and sodium
Feet ready-to-use enema
PCV
[/1 
100
%
citate enemas 
(133mll. EC De Wift & Co Ltd:
RBCS
x 1012/1
1
x 106/l
Micralax Micro-Enema, UCB 
Haemoglobin 
Pharmos Ltd 
9/1
0.1
IP/6
 Frusemide injection
 Dimazon 5% solution, Intervet 
MCHC
9/1
0.1
IP,6
Water-soluble, iodine-
 Omnipaque 300 and 350, GE
 Patelets 
x 109/
x 103/ul
based, positive contrast 
Healthcare:
WBCS
x109/
1
x 10*/l
medium
Urografin '150, Schering 
 K-Y Lubricating Jelly, Johnson 
Neutrophils
x 109/
1
x103/l
 Water-soluble lubricating
jelly
Losuqor puD
lymphocytes
x 109/
1
x 10*/μl
Cytospin/cytoslide
 Shandon Cytospin/Cytoslides 
Monocytes 
x 109/1
1
x 10/μul
system
Eosinophils 
x 109/
1
x 10/μul 
 Sterile ultrasound gel 
Ultra/phonic Conductivity Gel,
Basophils
x 109/
x 10/μul
 Pharmaceutical Innovations
Inc
Biochemistry
Boric ocid powder
 Boricon Sterile Tube, Medical
Albumin 
1/6 
0.1
IP/6
Wire and Equipment Company
Globulin 
9/1
0.1
IP/6
Ltd 
Gycolide/lactide suture 
Vicryl, Ethicon,
ALT
I/n
1
u/l 
material
Polysorb, Iyco
Ammonia
l/oun
1.3636
μug/dl
 Polydioxanone suture
 PDS*Il Ethicon 
Amylase
I/n 
1
I/n
material
AST
u/1
1
I/n
 Phenylpropanolamine 
Propalin, Vetoquinol.
 Urilin, Dechra 
Bile ocids
umol/l
0.41
jμg/ml
Cestriol
Incurin, Intervet
 Calcium
 mmol/l
4
 mg/dl
Diozepam
Valium, Roche
Cholesterol
mmol/l
38.61
mg/dl
Triglyceride
mmol/1
88.6
mg/dl
CK
u/1
1
I/n
Creatinine
μmol/
0.0113
mg/dl
Glucose
 mmol/l
18
mg/dl
 Phosphorus
mmol/l
3.1
mg/dl
LDH
I/n
I/n
Lipase
u/1
I/n
Magnesium 
mmol/
mEq/l
Potassium
mmol/l
mEq/l
ALP
I/n
1
I/n
 Sodium 
mmol/
1
mEq/l
Total bilirubin
μmol/
0.059
mg/dl
Total proteins
9/1
0.1
IP/6
 Urea nitrogen 
mmol/
2.8
IP/6U