DENNISJ. CHEW
STEPHENPDIBARTOLA
PATRICIASCHENCK
canlne
Canine
and
Feline Nephrology and Urology
Feline
Nephrology
Urology
Soond Edtien
Second Editlon
BLSEVIER
ELSEVIER
SHONMS
Canine
Feline
Nephrology
Urology
Second Edition
DENNIS J. CHEW, DVM, DACVIM
Professor of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
The Ohio State University
Columbus, Ohio
STEPHEN P. DIBARTOLA, DVM, DACVIM
Professor of Medicine
Associate Dean for Administrafion and Curriculum
Department of Veterinary Clirical Sciences and Veterinary Admiristrafion
College of Veterinary Medicine
The Ohio State University
Columbus, Ohio
PATRICIA A. SCHENCK, DVM, PHD
Endocrine Section
 Diagnostic Center for Population and Animal Health
 Michigan State University
Lansing, Michigan
ELSEVIER
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
SAUNDERS
3251 Riverport Lane
St. Louis, Missouri 63043
CANINE AND FELINE NEPHROLOGY AND UROLOGY, SECOND EDITION
ISBN: 978-0-7216-8178-8
Copyright @ 2011, 1986 by Saunders, an imprint of Elsevier Inc.
aa 'sueau ue Aq ro wo ue un pasue ao panoida aq Aeu uoneqnd stut jo hed on
or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system,
without permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further infor-
mation about the Publisher's permissions policies and our arrangements with organizations such as
the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our website:
www.elsevier.com/ permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the Pub-
lisher (other than as may be noted herein).
Notice
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experi-
ence broaden our understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical
treatment may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evalu-
such information or methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of others,
including parties for whom they have a professional responsibility.
With respect to any drug or pharmaceutical prod ucts identified, readers are advised to check the
most current information provided (i) on procedures featured or (ii) by the manufacturer of each
product to be administered,to verify the recommended dose or formula, the method and dura-
tion of administration, and contraindications. It is the responsibility of practitioners, relying on
their own experience and knowledge of their patients, to make diagnoses, to determine dosages
and the best treatment for each individ ual patient, and to take all appropriate safety precautions.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors,
snpoid jo iaeu e se Aiuadoud io suosiad ot aseuep xo/pue Aunfu Aue soy Ailqei Aue aunsse
liability,negligence or otherwise,or from any use or operation of any methods,products,instruc
tions, or ideas contained in the material herein.
Vice President and Publisher: Linda Duncan
Acguisitions Editor: Heidi Pohlman
Senior Developmental Editor: Shelly Stringer
Publishing Services Manager: Catherine Jackson
Senior Project Manager: Mary Pohlman
Senior Book Designer: Amy Buxton
Working together to grow
libraries in developing countries
Printed in the United States of America
www.elsevier.corm |www.bookaid.org |www.sabre.org
FLSFVIFR
Sabre loundation
Last digit is the print number: 9 8 76 54 3 2 1
Jnterrational
Preface
anine and Feline Nephrology and LIrology is intended to be used by veterinary students, recent
graduates, and seasoned veterinarians who want to review disorders of the urinary system.
 Although this manual may have value for specialists and residents training in internal medi-
cine, it was not written specifically for that audience. We have worked together and developed our
approach to dogs and cats with diseases of the urinary tract over the past 30 years at The Ohio State
University Veterinary Teaching Hospital. This book reflects our experience and opinions. Dr. Patricia
  e s s   s     
to the final development of the book.
correct. Ultimately, each practicing veterinarian must decide if these approaches to diagnosis and treat-
 ment are consistent with his or her own philosophy of practice before implementing specific manage-
opinions about the approaches we have recommended in this manual. Every book contains errors, so
please make us aware of any you discover.
The second edition includes five new sections that appear at the end of each chapter. We have
enjoyed putting them together and hope that you find them interesting and helpful. These sections are
enititled, What Do We Do?, Thoughts for the Future, Common Misconceptions, Summary Tips, and Frequently
Asked Questions. Thoughts for the Future sections briefly discuss what lies ahead in the areas of urinary
tract research and therapeutics. The other sections, are composed of personal experiences from within
 our practices and our interactions with students and fellow veterinarians to present real-life scenarios
to you and to answer the questions we most commonly encounter. The material in this manual is not
extensively referenced, but a suggested reading list is provided for each chapter.
Dennis J. Chew
StephenP.DiBartola
Acknowledgments
he wisdom of the original giants of veterinary nephrology and urology is reflected in this
manual. We specifically acknowledge the pioneering work of Drs. Ken Bovee, Del Finco, Gerry
Ling, Don Low, and Carl Osborne. Likewise, we have been influenced by many contemporary
colleagues such as Larry Adams, Tim Allen, Susi Amold, Jeanne Barsanti, Joe Bartges, Scott Brown,
 r  as af  a o f 'mo  'g 
Langston, George Lees, Meryl Littman, Jody Lulich, Dave Polzin, Linda Ross, Mike Schaer, Dave
Senior, and Shelly Vaden. We also have learned much from several generations of veterinary students,
interns, and internal medicine residents who have trained in OSU's Veterinary Teaching Hospital.
 Helio deMorais, Bernie Hansen, and Jodi Westropp are previous residents we are happy to have seen
 adopt our enthusiasm for veterinary nephrology and urology. We hope the subjects discussed in this
 manual will prompt another generation of veterinary internists to explore and teach nephrology and
urology. Replacements for our generation are sorely needed.
Special thanks to Ray Kersey who had the original vision for this manual many years ago. After
 Ray's retirement, Tony Winkel inherited the project at Elsevier and pushed us to keep the project going.
we appreciate their efforts to see the project through to completion. Dr. Amanda Owen deserves credit
for organizational writing of the chapters on feline interstitial cystitis and urinary neoplasia. Finally,
we appreciate the excellent artwork of Mr. Tim Vojt who has been our colleague all of these years.
Dennis J. Chew, DVM
Stephen P. DiBartola, DVM
Columbus, Ohio
Acknowledgments
vili
am particularly grateful to Drs. Arthur Lage and Richard Scott who have had a great influence
 on my early training in nephrology and urology. Dr. Richard Scott's unique thinking and deci-
L sion making influence me to this day. "Scotty" always emphasized the importance of examining
fresh urinary sediment and passed this practice on to a generation of veterinarians at the Animal
Medical Center in the 1970s. He was decades ahead of the veterinary profession in his approach
to what we now consider standard practice. He is more recognized today for his development of
guidelines for supplementation of parenteral fluids with potassium (called "Scott's Sliding Scale").
Two colleagues at our umiversity who consistently think "outside of the box" deserve special menn-
tion. Dr. Larry Nagode's passion for understanding the relationships between parathyroid hormone,
calcitriol, and renal patholophysiology has had a major impact on me and has positively affected
delivery of advanced patient care. Dr. Tony Buffington deserves tremendous credit for shifting the
paradigm of idiopathic/interstitial cystitis of cats from that of a nutritional disease to one of com-
plex neurological, endocrine, and envirormental effects. The late Dr. Charles Capen inspired me to
advance my understanding of disorders of calcium homeostasis, an area of great interest in nephrol-
extensively to develop surgical procedures for the urinary tract, especially management of ectopic
work on ectopic ureters.
I am especially thankful that Dr. Stephen P. DiBartola and I were able to develop our thinking in
veterinary nephrology and urology together during the past 30 years at The Ohio State University
College of Veterinary Medicine. We have had quite a ride together teaching and practicing veteri-
nary urology-vive les nephronauts! We have had a lot of fun (and very few disagreements) in the
 process-seeing cases, researching projects, writing papers and books, and sharing in the teaching of
more than 3500 veterinary students. We both love the pathophysiology of fluid, electrolyte, and acid-
base derangements and have been able to be sounding boards for each other on difficult and interesting
cases. I feel blessed to have been his colleague, but our relationship extends beyond that of colleagues.
Most who meet us think we are very different, but we are surprisingly similar in our approach to life
and work. I am thankful for Steve's support and friendship during both the good and dlifficult times.
Dr. Patricia Schenck also has been a great colleague and special friend along my journey.
Dennis J. Chew, DVM
Columbus,Ohio
I echo all of Dennis' comments about the past 30 years of working together. Dennis was the first
person I met when I arrived as an internal medicine resident at the College of Veterinary Medicine at
the Ohio State University in 1977 and it was his genuine love of nephrology as well as fluid, electrolyte,
and acid-base balance that captured my interest and sparked my enthusiasm. Everyone who meets
Dennis likes him instantly and instinctively, and I was no exception. However, unlike many others, I
was fortunate enough to make a career out of my association with Dennis. In addition, I want to thiank
my wife Dr. Maxey Wellman for standing by me for more than 30 years despite my quirks and imper
fections, and my children, Matthew, Michael, Alex, and Stephanie, for all they have taught me about
the most important job in the world-being a parent.
StephenP.DiBartola,DVM
Columbus,Ohio
vili
Acknowledgments
I came to The Ohio State University in 1992 with a background in lipid and nutrition research.
There I met Dr. Dennis Chew, and I became rapidly drawn into the world of calcium and renal disease.
Several positions and many years later, I'm still involved in calcium research with both Drs. Chew
 as  p    i s a a ie   a o   
veterinary profession. I am also thankful to all the veterinary students and veterinarians that I interact
with and continue to learn from every day. Music is an integral part of my being, and I'm thankful for
the musicians that surround me and fill that part of my soul. Special thanks to Dermis Chew who has
been my friend for so many years—what a long, strange trip it's been, and I hope there are many more
years in the journey! Finally, I am grateful to my parents for their love and support.
Patricia A. Schenck,DVM,PhD
Lansing,MI
This book is dedicated to
fthe memories of Neil Presnell
and Paul Dunkle.
CHAPTER
Urinalysis
INTRODUCTION
A. Routine urinalysis is simple and inexpensive.
those with systemic disease affecting many other body systems.
C. Results of serial urinalyses can reflect progression or resolution of disease.
 D. Abnormalities on urinalysis often occur before changes occur in serum biochemistry (i.e., uri-
nalysis can be very sensitive).
E. Urine should be submitted for analysis at the same time blood is submitted for biochemical
analysis.
F. Complete urinalysis consists of three parts: Physical properties, chemical properties, and
urine sediment findings.
COLLECTION OF URINE
A. Urine collection technique influences interpretation of the results. Urine specimens should be
placed in containers that are clean and free of chemical contaminants (e.g. detergents, disin-
fectants, bleach). Ideally, collect 10 to 12 mL of urine for analysis. At a minimum, 3 mL should
be submitted.
Midstream Voided Sample
1.  The goal of this approach is to allow the initial stream of urine to flush contaminants from
the urethra and genital tract.
Technique
DOGS
(1) Male dogs may be more difficult to collect due to short duration of voiding
(i.e. "marking").
CATS
(1) Use non-resorbable cat litter.
(2) Cellophane wrap over a tilted liter pan containing a gradient of cat litter.
Advantages
a. No risk of complications for the patient.
b. Client can collect the sample.
c. Suitable for initial screening.
d. Method of choice to evaluate hematuria (other collection methods may result in addi-
tion of red blood cells [RBCs] to the urine from trauma).
Disadvantages
a.Subject to contamination by the urethra and genital tract despite precautions.
b. Subject to contamination from the environment.
2
CHAPTER 1  Urinalysis
Manual Expression of Urine by Digital Palpation of the Bladder
Technique
a. Gradually increase pressure in the bladder, compressing the bladder wall by abdomi-
nal palpation until urine is expelled.
b. Many times the animal will void urine after bladder palpation failed to produce a urine
sample. Thus, the clinician should be prepared to collect a voided sample.
Advantages
a. Ease of use in anesthetized patients.
Disadvantages
a. Not recommended except in anesthetized animals.
b. Red blood cells (RBCs) and protein may enter the urine sample as a result of the force
required to expel urine.
C.
 Collection of urine by manual expression carries a risk of bladder rupture.
d. Infected bladder urine can reflux into the ureters during manual expression thus
increasing the risk of upper urinary tract infection (UTl)
Catheterization
Technique
a. Maintain sterile technique while using a catheter, gloves, and proper patient cleansing
 and disinfection. A gentle approach is necessary to minimize trauma to the urinary
tract. The catheter should never be advanced by force, and a ruptured urethra or blad-
der can be a consequence of poor technique.
(1) Male dogs (Figure 1-1): Catheter types include polypropylene, polyvinyl, and bal-
loon-tipped ureteral catheters for use in humans. Softer catheters are chosen for
indwelling urinary catheterization. A catheter size of 3.5 to 10 French (1 French unit =
0.33 mm) is recommended, depending on the size of animal. The appropriate
length of catheter to insert is chosen by estimating the length from the external ure-
thral orifice to the bladder neck by over-laying the catheter on the animal's body
The patient is positioned in lateral recumbency, excessive hair near the tip of the
 prepuce clipped, and the penis extruded by an assistant. The penis and external
urethral orifice are gently cleansed and rinsed with a mild disinfectant (e.g., ben-
zalkonium chloride) and sterile saline. The packaging containing the sterile cath-
eter can be cut to facilitate manipulation of the catheter without contamination
Liberally coat the end of the catheter with sterile lubricating jelly and insert the
catheter into the external urethral orifice. The catheter should be directed parallel
to the abdominal wall to facilitate its passage. Resistance may be encountered in the
perineal region and also at the level of the ischial arch. If necessary, external peri-
neal palpation or rectal palpation can be used to redirect the catheter tip. To avoid
 trauma to the bladder, the catheter is passed only as far as needed to obtain urine
drainage. In cases of obstruction the catheter may be advanced farther to allow bet-
ter drainage of urine.
(2) Female dogs (Figure 1-2): Direct visualization of the urethral orifice using a specu-
lum is preferred over a blind technique so as to avoid contamination of the urinary
tract with genital bacterial flora. A variety of types and sizes of specula are avail-
able; those with self-contained light sources are preferable. Anuscopes designed
for humans are easily adapted for use in most female dogs. Otoscopic and vaginal
specula of various sizes also can be used. Catheters described above for use in
male dogs can be used in females, as can Foley catheters and metal bitch catheters.
Stylets are necessary for polyvinyl catheters and for small-caliber polypropylene
Urinalysis CHAPTER 1:
E
FGURE 1-1  Sterile handling of a urinary catheter for a male dog. The sterile catheter package has been cut with
scissors to facilitate passage of the catheter while at the same time maintaining sterile techmique. This technique
allows the catheter to be manipulated without the use of sterile gloves.
catheters. The patient usually is placed in sternal recumbency, but different body
positions may facilitate catheter passage in some circumstances. The external geni-
talia should be clipped of hair, cleansed, and disinfected. Pass the speculum or anu-
scope dorsally and then cranially, minimizing vaginal contamination. It is easier
to pass the speculum beyond the urethral orifice and then retract it slowly until
the orifice comes into view. Liberally coat the end of the catheter with sterile lubri-
cating jelly and insert it into the extermal urethral orifice. The urinary catheter is
advanced under direct visualization until urine is obtained.
(3) Male cats: Catheter types include medical grade Silastic, Jackson-style (Cook Vet-
erinary Catheters), polyvinyl, and polypropylene catheters. Tom cat catheters are
rigid polypropylene catheters available in 3.5 F as open-end or side-holes variet-
ies. The open-end catheter is shorter than the side-hole catheter and consequently
is not always reliable for draining the bladder. Polyvinyl catheters are available
in 3.5 F or 5 F sizes. The cat is placed in lateral or dorsal recumbency with its
hind limbs pulled caudally. The penis should be extended caudally to eliminate
the natural curvature of the urethra. A perception of distal urethral obstruction
may be created if the penis is not sufficiently extended. Coat the end of the cath-
eter with sterile lubricating jelly and advance it into the urethra until urine is
obtained.
(4) Female cats: A small otoscope can be used to visualize the urethral orifice. The
vestibule of most female cats can accommodate a small anuscope speculum. Small
female cats can be catheterized blindly. Rigid polypropylene or polyvinyl catheters
generally are used. Rarely, small Foley catheters are used. Generally, a 6 to 8 F cath-
eter can be accommodated. Female cats almost always require sedation to allow
urinary catheterization. The cat is placed in ventral recumbency with its hind limbs
over the edge of the table, and the tail extended dorsally. Some operators prefer
dorsal recumbency. The catheter should be gently inserted and directed slightly
dorsally along the ventral floor of the vestibule to enter the external urethral orifice.
A small otoscope speculum can be used to visualize the external urethral orifice
and facilitate catheterization passage.
4
CHAPTER 1 Urinalysis
B
C
FIGURE 1-2  Anuscopes (Welch-Allyn) to facilitate urinary catheterization in female dogs. A, One of three
sizes of anuscope will accommodate most female dogs to facilitate passage of a urinary catheter (shown with
obturators in place). B, The self-contained light source of the anuscope provides an advantage over a vaginal
speculum without its own light source. C, Assembled anuscope with light source in place.
Urinalysis  CHAPTER15
5
Advantages
a. Simple to perform in most male dogs.
Disadvantages
a. The normal bacterial flora of the distal urethra can be introduced into the bladder dur-
ing passage of the catheter.
b. Approximately 20% risk of introducing UTI in female dogs.
c. May result in increased numbers of RBC and epithelial cells in the sediment due to
trauma.
 d. Rupture of the urethra or bladder may occur if excessive force is used to pass the cath-
eter or if the tissues are friable
e. Never chosen for routine collection of urine from male cats due to the risk of urethral
trauma and subsequent obstruction.
f. Sedation or light anesthesia may be necessary to provide adequate restraint and
analgesia.
Cystocentesis
Technique (Figure 1-3)
STANDARD (BLADDER PALPABLE AND CAN BE STABILIZED)
(1) Restrain animal in lateral or dorsal recumbency (cat, small dog) or allow animal to
remain standing (large dog).
(2) Sedate aggressive animals as necessary.
(3) Clipping or wetting the hair with water to expose skin at puncture site is preferred
by some operators but is not necessary. Do not disinfect the skin before cystocente-
sis because this carries a risk of contamination of urine by disinfectant and possible
false negative culture results.
(4) Stabilize the bladder's position by palpation. Compressing the bladder from
the opposite side of the abdomen often facilitates its identification on
palpation.
(5) Perform bladder puncture using a 22-gauge needle connected to a 6- or 12-mL
syringe. Aim the needle toward the pelvic inlet to minimize bladder trauma
because the bladder will decrease in size as urine is aspirated. Gentle negative pres
sure on the syringe during puncture allows urine to be aspirated immediately after
penetration of the bladder lumen.
BLIND (BLADDER NOT PALPABLE)
(1) Restrain animal in dorsal recumbency.
(2) Visualize a point on the ventral midline between the fourth and fifth teats and
make needle puncture at this location.
(3) Choose a more caudal insertion site (i.e., closer to the pubis) if the bladder is very
small.
(4) Choose a more cranial insertion site (i.e., closer to the fourth teat) if the bladder is
very large.
(5) Push the viscera caudally with the fingers of one hand as necessary to allow a slight
bulging of the bladder to be seen.
(6) Deflect the penis and prepuce in male dogs to one side before midline puncture.
(7) Blind technique is successful in approximately 50% of attempts in dogs but is not
recommended in cats because the position of the bladder in cats is considerably
more variable than in dogs.
(8) Ultrasound guidance can be helpful when difficulty is experienced using the blind
technique.
6
CHAPTER 1  Urinalysis
A
B
FIGURE 1-3  Cystocentesis techniques in the cat and dog. A, Cystocentesis in the cat using lateral recumbency.
The cat is restrained in lateral recumbency while the operator stabilizes the bladder followed by puncture with a
22-gauge needle and gentle aspiration of urine. Note that the needle is aimed toward the pelvic inlet to minimize
the risk of trauma during the procedure. B, Cystocentesis in a large standing dog. The operator stabilizes the
bladder just cranial to the hind limb with the left hand while an assistant elevates the skin of flank dorsally and
caudally. With the right hand, the operator punctures the lateral wall of the bladder. (Drawn by Tim Vojt.)
Advantages
a. Contamination from the distal urethra, vagina, vestibule, prepuce, or perineum is
avoided.
 b. Simple to perform when the bladder is palpable.
C.
 Negligible risk of introducing infection.
d. Usefui in animals at high risk for infection (e.g., diabetes mellitus, hyperadrenocor-
ticism).
e. Well tolerated by both dogs and cats.
Disadvantages
a. Should not be attempted if cystotomy has been performed in the past week, if the ani-
mal has an atonic bladder, or if transitional cell carcinoma is likely present.
b. Potential risk of urine leakage if the bladder remains distended after the procedure.
Leakage also may occur if the bladder wall is devitalized.
C.
 Puncture of other abdominal viscera may occur.
d. RBCs may be introduced into the sediment due to iatrogenic trauma, which may be
confused with pathologic hematuria.
Complications
a. Complications are rare.
b. Transient macroscopic or microscopic hematuria.
Urinalysis  CHAPTER 1
C
D
HGURE 1-3, cont'd  C, Cystocentesis in a male dog in dorsal recumbency. The penis is deflected from the
midline by the operator with the nondominant hand while also pushing the abdominal viscera caudally. This
caudal shift of the viscera often causes the bulging bladder to become more obvious as the site to choose for needle
puncture. When the bladder is not palpable with either the male or female dog in dorsal recumbency, the needle
is advanced on the midline at the intersection of an imaginary "X" drawn from the fourth and fifth teats on each
side of the abdomen. D, Angle and depth of cystocentesis needle. The needle should penetrate into the bladder
lumen sufficiently deep so that the needle stays in the lumen as the bladder contracts in size as urine volume
is withdrawn. Theoretically, the needle should enter the bladder at an angle so that a longer transmural tract is
created that will seal the needle tract more readily. (Drawn by Tim Vojt.)
c. Seeding of tumor cells from transitional cell carcinoma potentially can occur, but the
frequency and importance of this problem is not known.
d. Some cats salivate excessively or vomit after cystocentesis (i.e., vagovagal response).
e. Rarely a cat will collapse after cystocentesis, possibly due to catecholamine release,
f. <25,000u platelet count increases the risk for bleeding; <10,000u platelet count is an
absolute contraindication.
g. Avoid if the patient is known to have emphysematous cystitis, as this may increase the
chances for urine leakage.
PERFORMANCE OF THE URINALYSIS
A. Examine fresh urine whenever possible to identify elements that are lost over time (e.g., cel-
lular elements) and to avoid artifacts that develop in urine that is refrigerated or held at room
temperature (e.g., crystal precipitation).
B. Collect urine specimens from dogs in the morning to obtain maximally concentrated urine.
Timing of collection is not as important in cats.
C.
Refrigerated urine should be warmed to room temperature before performing urinalysis because
the color reactions of the chemical reagent pads on the dipstrips are temperature sensitive.
 D. Always note how the sample was obtained on the laboratory report because technique of col-
lection may influence interpretation (Figure 1-4).
8
CHAPTER 1  Urinalysis
Collection and storage
Source
Voided Catheterized Cystocentesis
Elapsed time from collection to analysis
minutes 
hours
Refrigeration
YES.NO
Preservatives
YES, NO, Type:
Physical and chemical analysis
Color
Straw, yellow, or light amber
 Appearance
Clear
Specific gravity
1.015 to 1.050 (dogs,random)
>1.030 first AM before eating or drinking
1.035 to 1.070 (cats, dry food)
1.025 to 1.050 (cats, canned food)
pH
5.5 to 6.5
Protein
Negative, trace.
+1 (SG 1.040 to 1.050), 0[
+2 (SG > 1.060)
Occult blood
Negative to trace
Glucose
Negative
Ketones
Negative
Bilirubin
Negative to 1 + (dogs, especially males with high SG)
Negative (cats)
Microscopic sediment evaluation
Casts (per Ilpf)—-Normal values
Hyaline
0-2
Granular
0-1
Cellular, RBC
None
Cellular, WBC
None
Cellular, renal epithelial
None
Other (e.g., Hb, Mb)
None
RBCs (per hpf)
Voided
0-8
Catheterized
0-5
Nontraumatic cystocentesis
0-3
Routine cystocentesis
<10
Traumatic cystocentesis
>50
WBCs (per hpf)
Voided
<10
Catheterized
<7
Cystocentesis
<3
Clumps?
No
FIGURE 1-4  Urinalysis Form and Expected Results from Normal Dogs and Cats.
Urinalysis  CHAPTER 1
6
Epithelial cells (per hpf)
Squamous
0 to few
Transitional
0 to few
Clumps
None
Caudate (with tails)
None
Strap or stirrup cells
None
Bacteria (per hpf)
Voided
Rare
Catheterized
Rare
Cystocentesis
None
Type (if present)
Rods
Cocci
Both
Crystals (per hpf)—struvite, oxalate, urate, cystine
Type if present)
Struvite
Oxalate
Urate
Cystine—never normal
Amorphous (unidentified)
Drug
 Number, fresh urine
0 to few
 Number, stored urine
Few to many
Size (small, medium, large)
Free or aggregated
Hb, hemoglobin; hpf. high-power field; fpf low-power field; Mb. myoglobin; RBC, red blood cell; SG, specific gravity: WBC, white blood cell.
FGURE 1-4,cont'd
INTERPRETATION OF THE URINALYSIS
Physical Properties
Color
a. The normal yellow color of urine is due to urochrome and urobilin.
b. Very concentrated urine may be deep amber in color whereas very dilute urine may be
almost colorless.
ABNORMAL URINE COLORS
(1) Unusual colors may be due to drugs or their metabolites.
(a) Deep amber.
(i)Highly concentrated urine.
(ii) Increased amounts of bile pigments.
(b) Red or reddish-brown color.
(i) Usually due to intact RBC, hemoglobin (from lysed RBCs in urine or sys-
temic hemolysis) or myoglobin.
(ii)Dry food dye (rare).
(iii) Porphyrins (rare).
(c) Dark brown to black color.
(i) Usually represents conversion of hemoglobin to methemoglobin in acid urine.
10
 CHAPTER 1 ■ Urinalysis
(d) Yellow-brown to yellow-green color.
(i)  Usually due to bilirubin.
(e) Green color.
(i) UTI with Pseudomonas.
(ii) Oxidation of bilirubin to biliverdin.
(ii) Methylene blue administration results in greenish-blue urine.
Appearance
a. Normal urine usually is clear but occasionally it can be cloudy
b. Cloudy urine often contains increased cellular elements (white blood cells [WBCs],
RBCs, epithelial cells), crystals, mucus, or showers of casts. Bacteria or fungal organ-
isms, sperm, and prostatic secretions sometimes account for cloudy urine.
c. Flocculent urine may contain aggregates of WBCs, epithelial cells, very small calculi,
 or aggregates of crystals (so-called sand).
Odor
a.The normal odor of urine is due to volatile fatty acids.
b. The most common abnormal odor is ammoniacal due to the release of ammonia by
urease-producing bacteria.
c. Putrefaction of proteins in urine can also cause malodorous urine.
Specific Gravity
a. Urine specific gravity (USG) is the weight of the urine compared to that of an equal
volume of water. It reflects both the total number of solutes and their weight (heavier
molecules contribute more to USG than smaller ones)
Urine specific gravity provides the most meaningful information about renal function on the urinalysis.
(1) 1000 mg/ dL glucose increases the USG approximately 0.004.
(2) 1000 mg/ dL protein increases the USG approximately 0.003.
b. USG estimated by dipstrip pads is not accurate over a wide range of USG and should
not be used.
c. USG is estimated by refractometry (refraction of light in solution is affected by the
number and size of the particles in the solution).
(1) The refractometer should be temperature compensated for accurate and consistent
estimates of USG.
(2) Dog and cat urine have different refractometric properties, and scales specifically
 developed for use in dogs or cats should be used for most accurate results.
(3) Optical and digital refractometers designed for veterinary use have scales that
allow determination of USG values up to 1.060.
(4) Commonly available refractometers desigmed for use in humans only measure
USG up to 1.035.
(5) USG should not simply be reported as >1.035 in dogs and cats. When the initial
USG reading exceeds the refractometer's scale, mix equal volumes of urine and
distilled water and determine the USG. Multiply the numbers to the right of
the decimal point by a factor of 2 to determine the actual USG
d. Use the USG as a guide to interpret the relative concentration of abnormal elements or
chemical constituents in the sample.
(1) 4+ (1000 mg/dL) proteinuria in a urine sample of 1.010 USG represents more severe
proteinuria than 4+ (1000 mg/dL) proteinuria in urine of 1.045 USG.
Urinalysis  CHAPTER 1 11
(2) 4 WBCs/high-power field (hpf) in urinary sediment from a urine sample of 1.060
USG may be less clinically relevant than 4 WBCs/hpf in urine sediment from a
urine sample of 1.015 USG.
e. USG should be determined before treatment with fluids, diuretics, corticosteroids, or
other medications.
f. Repeated production of submaximally concentrated urine in dogs and cats usually
 indicates abnormal renal function (see Chapter 2).
g.The first urine of the morning is most likely to have the highest solute concentration.
USG will vary based on diet moisture content, amount of water consumed, excess
dietary solutes requiring renal excretion, renal function, and hydration status (see
Chapter 15, Approach to Polyuria and Polydipsia).
(1) First urine of the morning should have USG >1.035 in cats consuming dry foods
and >1.025 in cats consuming canned foods.
(2) Average USG throughout the day should be >1.020 in dogs.
(a) In dogs, often USG is >1.030 to 1.040 in samples of the first urine of the morning
before consumption of food or water.
(b) The USG of some dogs may vary widely throughout the day presumably as a
result of eating, drinking, and activity.
h. Dehydrated dogs and cats should elaborate maximally concentrated urine (>1.040
USG) if the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal-renal axis is normal.
Chemical Properties
Dipstrip Evaluation
 a. Chemical properties usually are measured semiquantitatively by dipstrip tests
(Box 1-1).
 b. Reactions for analytes (except pH) should be interpreted with consideration of the
USG (i.e., smaller quantitative reactions in dilute urine are potentially of more signifi-
cance than similar reactions in highly concentrated urine).
c. Dipstrip reactions ideally are performed on the urine supernatant after centrifugation.
d. Heavily pigmented urine (e.g, presence of blood or bilirubin) can make it difficult to
accurately read the color reaction of the reagent pads on the dipstrip.
B0X 1-1
SOURCES OF POSSIBLE ERROR WHEN USING DIPSTRIP REAGENT PADS
· Refrigerated sample not returned to room temperature
● Contamination of urine with disinfectant
● Outdated dipstrip reagent pads
● Loss of chemicals from dipstrip reagent pads after prolonged immersion in urine
●Leakage of reagent chemicals from adjacent reagent pads if dipstrips are held vertically {i.e., they are designed to
be read while holding the strip horizontally)
● Dipstrip reagent pads contaminated by materials from the technician's fingers
● Reading dipstrip reagent pads at incorrect time intervals (i.e., the reagent pads are time sensitive)
●Poor ambient lighting
● Poor visual acuity of laboratory technician to detect color changes
● Difficulty in reading reagent pad color reaction due to highly pigmented urine
12
CHAPTER 1 ■ Urinalysis
pH
a. Substantial variation occurs between pH values determined by dipstrip as compared
to pH meter in dogs and cats and measurement by pH meter is superior.
b. Normal urine pH of carnivores (dogs and cats) is 5.0 to 7.5.
c. Urine pH varies with diet and acid-base balance but urine pH is not a reliable indicator
of systemic acid-base imbalance.
d. Causes of acidic urine pH.
(1) Meat diet.
(2) Administration of acidifying agents.
(3) Metabolic acidosis.
(4) Respiratory acidosis.
(5) Paradoxical aciduria in metabolic alkalosis with potassium and chloride depletion
(6) Protein catabolic states.
e. Causes of alkaline urine pH.
(1) Plant-based diet.
(2) Urine exposed to air for prolonged time at room temperature.
(3) Postprandial alkaline tide
(4) UTI by a urease-positive organism (acidic urine pH however does not rule
out UTI).
(5) Contamination of the urine sample with bacteria during or after collection.
(6) Administration of alkalinizing agents.
(7) Metabolic alkalosis.
(8) Respiratory alkalosis (including stress-induced respiratory alkalosis in cats)
(9) Distal renal tubular acidosis.
Urine Protein Concentration: Proteinuria May Be Categorized as Prerenal, Renal
(Glomerular or Postglomerular), or Postrenal
a. Dipstrip test results are reported as negative, trace (10 mg/dL), 1+ (30 mg/dL),
(TP/8W 0001) + 10 (TP/%W 000) +C TP /8W 001) +Z
b. Randomly collected urine samples with relatively high USG from normal dogs contain
small amounts of protein (trace to 1+ or 10 to 30 mg/dL).
(1) Urine with USG >1.060 may result in +2 (100 mg/dL) reading for protein that does
not sigrify pathologic proteinuria.
(2) Highly concentrated urine magnifies the concentration of small amounts of protein
normally found in the urine.
(3) In cats, highly concentrated urine may directly activate the dipstrip reagent pad in
the absence of pathologic proteinuria.
c. Commonly used dipstrip methods are much more sensitive to albumin than globulin.
d.  False positives may occur in very alkaline urine (> 8.0 pH) or urine contaminated with
the antiseptic agent benzalkonium chloride (Zephiran).
2.
 False negatives may occur in very acidic or dilute urine.
f. Results must be interpreted in view of urine specific gravity.
Proteinuria may indicate a pathologic process anywhere in the urinary tract. It also indicates renal disease
 when lower urinary tract sources of protein are excluded.
g. The origin of the proteinuria must be localized (i.e., kidney, ureter, bladder, urethra,
 genital tract) by careful consideration of the history, physical examination findings,
method of urine collection, and urine sediment evaluation.
Urinalysis  CHAPTER 1 13
h. Pathologic renal proteinuria may result from:
(1) Increased glomerular filtration of protein.
(2) Failure of tubular reabsorption of protein.
(3) Tubular secretion of protein.
(4) Protein leakage from damaged tubular cells.
(5) Renal parenchymal inflammation.
(6) Any combination of the above.
i. In diseases of the glomerulus, increased glomerular filtration of protein due to loss of
 glomerular barrier function is the major cause of proteinuria and albumin is the pri-
mary protein lost early in the course of the disease.
j.Persistent, moderate to heavy proteinuria in the absence of urine sediment abnormali-
ties is highly suggestive of glomerular disease (e.g., glomerulonephritis, amyloidosis).
k. If the sediment is active and proteinuria is mild to moderate, consider inflammatory
renal disease or disease of the lower urinary tract or genital tract.
1. The finding of proteinuria should be integrated with urinary sediment findings (i.e.,
RBCs, WBCs, bacteria, epithelial cells, and casts in the sediment may provide clues to
the origin of the proteinuria).
m. Causes of prerenal proteinuria include:
(1) Bence-Jones proteins (i.e., immunoglobulin light chains) in multiple myeloma.
(2) Hemoglobinuria when hemolysis is present.
(3) Myoglobinuria when rhabdomyolysis is present.
Glucose
a. Glucose in the glomerular filtrate is almost completely reabsorbed in the proximal
tubules and is not normally present in the urine of dogs and cats.
b. If blood glucose concentration exceeds the renal threshold (approximately 180 mg/ dL
in the dog and 300 mg/dL in cats), glucose will appear in the urine (i.e., glucosuria,
glycosuria).
c. Most dipstick tests utilize a colorimetric test based on an enzymatic reaction specific
for glucose (i.e., glucose oxidase).
(1) Peroxide and hypochlorite may give false-positive reactions.
(2) False-positive reactions on dipstick testing may also be seen in animals receiving
cephalexin. If copper-reduction-based testing is used (such as Clinitest), then false-
positive reactions may be noted in animals receiving amoxicillin, clavulanate enro-
floxacin, or nitrofurantoin.
(3) Refrigerated urine or urine containing formaldehyde or vitamin C may give false-
negative reactions.
d.Causes of glucosuria (glycosuria).
(1) Diabetes mellitus (most common).
(2) Stress or excitement (especially cats).
(3) Chronically sick cats in the absence of hyperglycemia (i.e., altered tubular transport
of glucose).
Glucosuria is an important abnormal finding on urinalysis necessitating prompt diagnosis or exclusion of
diabetes mellitus.
(4) Administration of glucose-containing fluids
(5) Renal tubular disease.
(a) Primary renal glucosuria.
(b) Fanconi syndrome (e.g., Basenji dogs)
14
 CHAPTER 1 ■ Urinalysis
(c) Tubular injury due to acute renal failure.
(d) Tubular injury due to familial nephropathy (uncommon).
(e) Tubular injury due to chronic renal failure (uncommon).
  1soopsd si An - so os  osgo a aaa ()
some nonglucose oxidizing substance.
Ketones
a. Ketones (i.e., beta-hydroxybutyrate, acetoacetate, acetone) are the products of exces-
sive and incomplete oxidation of fatty acids. They are not normally present in the urine
of dogs and cats.
b.  Inadequate consumption of carbohydrates or impaired endogenous utilization of car-
bohydrates for energy can increase oxidation of fatty acids.
c. The nitroprusside reagent pad on the dipstrip reacts with acetone and acetoacetate to
 produce a lavender color. Nitroprusside is much more reactive with acetoacetate and
does not react with beta-hydroxybutyrate.
d. Causes of ketonuria.
(1) Diabetic ketoacidosis in association with glucosuria (most common).
(2) Starvation or prolonged fasting in an immature animal (fasting dogs and cats do
not become ketotic as readily as do humans).
(3) Glycogen storage disease (rare).
(4) Low-carbohydrate, high-fat diet.
(5) Persistent hypoglycemia (decreased insulin secretion increases ketone formation).
Occult Blood
a. The dipstrip reagent pad test is based on the ability of hemoglobin or myoglobin to
release oxygen moieties from peroxide and this reaction is linked to a chromogen.
b. Dipstick tests are sensitive but do not differentiate among intact erythrocytes, hemo-
globin released from RBCs in urine, hemoglobin liberated as a consequence of systemic
hemolysis, and myoglobin. A positive test should be interpreted in light of the urine
sediment findings (i.e., presence or absence of RBC in the urine sediment) and the
color of the serum (i.e., presence or absence of hemolysis). Serum is pink if hemolysis
is present but clear if the pigmenturia is a result of rhabdomyolysis. Reagent pads from
some manufacturers can distinguish intact RBCs (i.e., speckled color reaction) from
free hemoglobin in urine (i.e., diffuse color reaction).
c. If necessary, ammonium sulfate precipitation or urine protein electrophoresis can be
used to differentiate hemoglobinuria from myoglobinuria.
d.  Causes of hemoglobinuria arising as a consequence of systemic hemolysis include:
(1) Transfusion reaction.
(2) Autoimmune hemolytic anemia.
(3) Disseminated intravascular coagulation.
(4) Postcaval syndrome of dirofilariasis.
(5) Splenic torsion.
(6) Heat stroke.
(7) Severe hypophosphatemia.
(8) Zinc toxicity.
(9) RBC enzyme deficiencies (e.g. phosphofructokinase, pyruvate kinase).
e. Myoglobinuria is less common but may occur as a result of severe rhabdomyolysis.
(1) Persistent muscular contractions due to status epilepticus.
Urinalysis  CHAPTER115
(2) Crushing injury (e.g. vehicular injury).
(3) Post-exertional (e.g. racing greyhounds).
(4) Heat stroke.
(5) Severe hypokalemia (especially in cats).
f. Dilute or alkaline urine may cause RBC lysis and an occult blood-positive reaction. The
urine sediment should contain RBC "ghosts" in this situation.
 g. Vitamin C and formalin may produce false-negative reactions.
h. Contamination of the sample with flea feces uncommonly may cause a positive occult
blood reaction.
Bilirubin
a.Bilirubin is derived from the breakdown of heme by the reticuloendothelial system. It
is transported in blood bound to albumin to the liver where it is conjugated with glu-
curonide and excreted in the bile.
 b. Only direct-reacting (conjugated) bilirubin appears in the urine.
c. The renal threshold for bilirubin is low in dogs, and bilirubin may be detected in the
urine in dogs with liver disease before hyperbilirubinemia occurs.
d. Small amounts of bilirubin (trace to +1) may be found in concentrated urine samples
from normal dogs (especially males). +2 to +3 reactions are likely to be abnormal in
concentrated urine samples and trace to +1 reactions may be abnormal in dogs with
dilute urine.
e. Bilirubin is not normally found in the urine of cats, and its presence in feline urine
samples should be considered a sigm of underlying disease.
f. The kidney of the dog (especially males) can degrade hemoglobin and conjugate bili-
rubin to some extent.
g. Bilirubin is unstable in urine allowed to stand exposed to air at room temperature. Bili-
rubin concentration should be determined using fresh, uncentrifuged urine because
calcium-containing crystals may adsorb bilirubin and bilirubin can undergo oxidation
over time to biliverdin or be hydrolyzed to unconjugated bilirubin, which will not be
detected by the reagent pad.
h. Causes of bilirubinuria.
(1) Hemolysis.
(a) Autoimmune hemolytic anemia.
(b) Secondary to liver dysfunction after anemia and hemosiderosis.
(c) Metabolism of hemoglobin to bilirubin by the kidney in dogs after glomerular
filtration.
(2) Liver disease.
(3) Extrahepatic biliary obstruction.
(4) Fever.
(5) Starvation.
Leukocyte Esterase Reaction (Not Useful in Veterinary Medicine)
 a. Indoxyl released by esterases from intact or lysed leukocytes reacts with a diazonium
salt and is detected as a blue color reaction after oxidation by atmospheric oxygen.
as Au suas m su inq sads a aun u emad non oadg q
results).
c. Very frequent occurrence of false-positive results (low specificity) for WBCs in feline
urine.
Specific Gravity Reagent Pad Reaction (Not Useful in Veterinary Medicine)
a. Does not correlate with USG results obtained using a refractometer.
b. Should not be used in veterinary patients.
16
 CHAPTER 1 ■ Urinalysis
Urinary Sediment
Normal urine contains very few formed elements and little should be seen during microscopic examination.
1. Do not omit the sediment examination as much meaningful information may be over-
looked. Evaluation of the urinary sediment is comparable to performing a differential
blood count as part of a complete hemogram. Many conditions may go umdiagnosed if a
complete urinary sediment examination is not performed.
2. A complete urinary sediment examination requires proper identification of cells (RBCs,
WBCs, epithelial cells), casts, organisms (bacterial, fungal), crystals, mucus, and artifacts
or contaminants.
 3. Perform the sediment examination on fresh urine sample because casts and cellular ele-
ments degenerate rapidly at room temperature.
4. Centrifuge 5 to 10 mL of urine at 1000 to 1500 rpm for 5 minutes. Too much force will
 disrupt delicate elements (e.g., cellular casts). Stain with Sedi-Stain or examine unstained
depending on preference. Examine under reduced light (i.e., condenser down, reduced
diaphragm aperture).
5. Whenever possible, use the same volume when comparing results from the same patient.
6. Keep the method of urine collection in mind because it can influence interpretation.
 7. Keep the urine specific gravity in mind.
a.The USG will influence the relative numbers of formed elements.
b. High USG will cause crenation of cells in urine.
c. Low USG will cause ballooning and lysis of cells in urine.
 8. Numbers of casts are recorded per low-power field (lpf, 10x) and numbers of RBCs, WBCs,
and epithelial cells are recorded per hpf (40x).
 9. The presence or absence of bacteria, crystals, amorphous material, lipid droplets and
sperm is noted. Positive findings should be further characterized as few, moderate, or
many. Results from an average of 10 microscopic fields are reported.
10. Urine sediment examination is facilitated (especially if personnel are inexperienced) if
fresh urine and supra-vital staining (Sedi-Stain) are used in evaluation. These procedures
will ensure preservation of fragile cellular elements and enhiance ability to identify abnor
mal components in the sediment.
11. It is not always possible to accurately identify all elements in a urinary sediment sample
due to the altered morphology of cellular elements that may arise as a consequence of the
relatively wide pH and osmolality range of normal urine.
12. Normal values for urinary sediment evaluation cannot be easily provided because of
methodological differences among laboratories (e.g., volume of sample processed, time
and force of centrifugation, size of drop used in making coverslip preparation, presence or
absence of staining).
Red Blood Cells (RBCs) (Figure 1-5)
a.Occasional RBCs are considered normal in the urine sediment.
(1) Voided sample: 0 to 8 per hpf.
(2) Catheterized sample: 0 to 5 per hpf.
(3) Cystocentesis sample: 0 to 3 per hpf (up to 50 RBCs/hpf may be normal if urine
was collected by cystocentesis and the procedure was traumatic).
b. Excessive numbers of RBCs in urine is called hematuria. Hematuria may be micro-
scopic or macroscopic (i.e., visible to the naked eye). Detection of excessive numbers
of RBCs in urine does localize the site of entry into the urinary tract umless RBCs are
observed in RBC casts (i.e., renal origin).
Urinalysis  CHAPTER 1
17
FIGURE 1-5  Red blood cells (RBCs). Note difference in uptake of stain by RBCs. Large numbers of RBCs can enter
the urine as a result of trauma, inflammation from infection or urolithiasis, and neoplasia, but can also be an artifact
of cystocentesis. Arrows point to refractile lipid droplets that are easily confused with RBCs. (Sedi-Stain, x400).
(1) Presence of so-called dysmorphic RBCs indicates renal origin in humans but this
finding has not yet been studied in veterinary patients.
(2) Precipitates of hemoglobin in the urine sediment can be confused with RBC, but
hemoglobin precipitates have a distinctive orange-brown color and vary widely in
diameter.
(3) Lipid droplets are often confused with RBCs, especially in cats.
c. Hematuria may arise from the kidney, ureter, bladder, urethra, prostate gland, uterus,
vestibule, vagina, vulva, penis, prepuce, or perineum. The history, physical exami-
nation findings, and method of urine collection all must be considered in localizing
hematuria.
d. Urinary causes of hematuria.
(1) Trauma (including renal biopsy).
(2) Urolithiasis.
(3) Neoplasia.
(4) UTI.
(5) Inflammatory disease of the urogenital tract.
(6) Idiopathic lower urinary tract disease of cats (i.e. feline idiopathic cystitis).
(7) Chemically-induced lesions (e.g. cyclophosphamide-induced cystitis)
(8) Systemic diseases associated with hemorrhage.
(a) Warfarin intoxication.
(b) Disseminated intravascular coagulation.
(c) Thrombocytopenia.
(9) Renal infarction (rare).
(10) Nephritis or nephrosis.
(11) Parasites (e.g., Dioctophyma renale, Capillaria).
(12) Renal pelvic hematoma.
e. Nonurinary causes for hematuria: Genital tract contamination.
(1) Prostatic disease.
(2) Penile or preputial contamination.
(3) Vaginal, vestibular, or vulvar contamination.
18
 CHAPTER 1 ■ Urinalysis
(4)Estrus.
(5) Uterine disease (e.g, pyometra, endometritis)
White Blood Cells (WBCs) (Figure 1-6)
a. Occasional WBCs are considered normal in the urine sediment.
(1) Voided sample: 0 to 8 per hpf.
(2) Catheterized sample: 0 to 5 per hpf.
(3) Cystocentesis sample: 0 to 3 per hpf.
b. WBCs are 2- to 2.5-times the size of RBCs in urine (depending on USG) (Figure 1-7). It
can be difficult or impossible to accurately identify WBCs in the urine sediment if cel-
lular degeneration has occurred.
FIGURE 1-6  White blood cells (WBCs). Urinary tract infection (UTI) or inflammation from urolithiasis or
neoplasia may cause pyuria. Clumping of WBCs in the urine may indicate infection. Arrows point to epithelial
cells. (Sedi-Stain, x400).
FIGURE 1-7 ■ Urine sediment containing RBCs, WBCs, and epithelial cells. Note that WBCs (btack arrows) are
approximately twice the size of RBCs (white arrows), and epithelial cells (white arrowheads) areusually twice the size
of WBCs. (Sedi-Stain, x400).
Urinalysis  CHAPTER 1 19
c. Increased numbers of WBCs in the urine sediment is called pyuria and indicates
inflammation somewhere in the urinary tract or contamination from the genital tract
It also is important to note clumping of WBCs because this finding may indicate the
presence of UTI
d. Examine the urine sediment carefully for organisms that may account for the pyuria
Bacteria may be visible as free-floating organisms between clumps of WBCs or may be
present as phagocytized organisms in WBCs.
e.  Fungal organisms or yeast are rarely the cause of pyuria.
f. Swollen WBCs containing intracellular material undergoing Brownian motion have
been called gliter cells. Their presence has been associated with pyelonephritis, but
they also may be observed in patients with USG <1.015 for other reasons.
g. Causes of pyuria.
(1) Urinary tract inflammation including but not limited solely to UTI. Urinary tract
infection, however, is the most common cause of pyuria. WBCs can enter urine
from the kidney, ureter, bladder, or urethra.
(2) Genital tract contamination or inflammation. WBCs can arise from the vulva, ves-
tibule, vagina, uterus, prostate gland, testes, epididymis, vas deferens, penis, pre-
puce, or perineum.
h. The presence of WBCs in the urine sediment does not localize the site of inflammation
 or infection unless they occur in WBC casts indicating renal origin.
i. Trauma does notnecessarily contribute WBCs to the urine sediment but RBCs are com-
monly found in the urine sediment as a consequence of trauma.
Epithelial Cells
SQUAMOUS EPITHELIAL CELLS
(1) Squamous epithelial cells are large, polygonal cells with small round nuclei. They
tend to fold on themselves and sometimes are confused with casts. Their large size
allows them to be easily distinguished from casts.
(2) Common in voided or catheterized samples due to urethral or vaginal contamination
(3) Small numbers can be a normal finding and increased numbers may be found in
the urine sediment of females during estrus.
(4) Sometimes observed in urine sediment of samples obtained by cystocentesis, pre-
sumably as a result of aspiration of epithelial cells from skin.
(5) Usually of no diagnostic sigrificance.
TRANSITIONAL EPITHELIAL CELLS (Hgure 1-8)
(1) Transitional epithelial cells are variable-sized urothelial cells that enter urine any-
where from the renal pelvis to the urethra.
(2) Small numbers normally are found in the urine sediment as a result of normally
occurring senescence of the urothelium.
(3) The size of transitional cells increases from the renal pelvis to urethra. Normally,
they are slightly larger to twice the size of WBCs. Small transitional cells usually
originate from the kidney, but small transitional cells also can originate from the
ureter, bladder, and urethra. Large transitional cells do not arise from the kidney.
(4) Increased numbers of transitional cells may be present in the urine sediment with infec-
tion, mechanical trauma (e.g., urolithiasis), chemical irritation (e.g., cyclophosphamide),
idiopathic inflammation (e.g., feline idiopathic cystitis), or neoplasia of the urinary tract.
(5) Rafts are clumps of epithelial cells (either alone or in association with increased
numbers of RBCs) observed most commonly in patients with neoplasia. Rafts of
epithelial cells also can be observed as a reaction to inflammation, usually in the
presence of WBCs and RBCs.
20
CHAPTER 1  Urinalysis
200μm
FlGURE 1-8  Transitionalepithelialcellcells. Transitionalepithelialcellscanenter the urine asa result ofinflammation
in the renal pelvis, ureter, bladder, or proximal urethra. They are rarely encountered in cats with idiopathic cystitis.
Clumps of transitional epithelial cells can be observed after severe urinary tract inflammation, and can occur in animals
with neoplasia. (Sedi-Stain, x400). (Courtesy Dr Michael Horton, Fairborm Animal Hospital, Fairborn, Ohio.)
(a) Large nuclei, multiple nucleoli, coarse nuclear chromatin, mitotic figures, and
cytoplasmic basophilia are features of neoplasia that can be observed in wet-
mount cytological preparations of urine sediment.
(b) Neoplastic epithelial cells are best identified using conventional stains used for
hematology (e.g., Wright-Giemsa). Dry mount cytology can be performed on
urine sediment with or without supra-vital staining.
RENAL EPITHELIAL CELLS
(1) Renal cells are small epithelial cells that originate from the renal pelvis or tubules.
(2) There is no definitive way to be certain that small epithelial cells observed in the
 n aq a   s a   a  a
having a renal origin when observed in cellular casts.
(3) Caudate cells are small transitional cells with tapered ends (so-called tails) thought
to originate from the renal pelvis.
(4) The presence of renal epithelial cells in urine is abnormal. They are observed most
 often in patients with ischemic, nephrotoxic, or degenerative renal disease, usually
in patients with acute renal failure.
Casts
 a. Casts are cylindrical molds of the renal tubules composed of aggregated protein matrix
with or without embedded cells. A spectrum from nearly all matrix to nearly all cells
 Or granules may occur depending on the disease state associated with cast formation.
Casts are classified on the basis of the predominating component (Figure 1-9).
b. Casts form by precipitation of protein and any intact cells, intracellular organelles,
brush border, or cellular debris that may be present in the tubular lumen. They form
 in the distal tubules as a consequence of maximal acidity, highest solute concentration,
and lowest flow rate in this segment of the nephron.
C. Casts are large cylindrical structures with well-defined, parallel borders. The length of
the cast is expected to be several times its width. The ends of casts often are rounded.
Do not confuse a linear strand of mucus with a cast. Strands of mucus do not have
parallel sides.
Urinalysis ■ CHAPTER 1
21
00000-000
Renal tubular epithelial cell
0006000000000000600000006000060000000000060000
Red blood cell
Degenerating
Coarsely
Finely
Waxy
cellular
granular
granular
0000000000
000000000000
0000000000000000000000000000000000000000
White blood cell
Hyaline
FGURE 1-9  Addis theory of cast formation. According to this theory, granular casts result from the breakdown
of cells and waxy casts from additional degeneration of granular casts. Hyaline casts are pure precipitates of Tamm
Horsfall mucoprotein (THP). (Drawn by Tim Vojt.)
(1) Very wide casts form either in the collecting duct or in dilated portions of the distal
tubule, whereas very thin casts may form in areas of tubular compression associ-
ated with interstitial inflammation or edema.
(2) Convoluted casts reflect the course of distal convoluted tubules
d.  The presence of abnormal numbers of casts in the urine sediment is called cylindruria.
e. Cylindruria reflects activity in the kidney and thus is of localizing value.
f. Tamm-Horsfall mucoprotein is secreted by the distal tubular cells and is the most
important matrix protein in casts. Increased amounts of this protein in the distal
tubules facilitate cast formation. Increased amounts of filtered plasma protein (e.g.
albumin, hemoglobin, myoglobin) in the tubular fluid favor precipitation of Tamm-
Horsfall mucoprotein.
 g. Zero to 2 hyaline casts per lpf and 0 to 1 granular casts per lpf are considered normal,
but no cellular casts should be observed in normal urine sediment.
TYPES OF CASTS
Hyaline casts (Hgure 1-10)
(a) Hyaline casts are pure protein precipitates of Tamm-Horsfall mucoprotein.
(b) Are of low optical density and often are not identified in urine sediment as a
consequence.
(c) Dissolve rapidly in dilute or alkaline urine.
(d) Are transparent and sometimes confused with waxy casts, which are translucent.
(e) May contain a small number of lipid droplets or granules.
(f) Usually are of minimal pathologic significance and may be formed transiently
in many situations (e.g., fever, exercise, passive renal congestion).
(g) Commonly seen in glomerular diseases associated with marked proteinuria
(e.g, amyloidosis, glomerulonephritis).
(h) Sometimes seen in renal tubular diseases that decrease reabsorption of proteins
or add inflammatory proteins to urine.
22
CHAPTER 1 ■ Urinalysis
5
®
 FIGURE 1-10  Hyaline cast. Notice the transparent nature of this hyaline cast. Arrows point to the parallel walls
of this cast. Hyaline casts are precipitates of the matrix protein that forms them. They are easily missed if the urine
sediment sample is examined under excessive transillumination. (Sedi-Stain, x400).
(i) Dehydration with loss of negative charge from glomeruli (negative charge
of the glomerulus normally repels serum proteins). Cylindroids are hyaline
casts that are longer and thinner than normal and have tapered ends. A cyl-
indroid potentially can form when the tubular lumen has been narrowed due
to swelling of tubular cells or compression from interstitial edema or cellular
infiltrates.
Cellular casts
(a) Named according to the predominant cell type present in the casts (e.g., WBCs,
RBCs, epithelial cells).
(b) The cells in cellular casts undergo rapid degeneration and the casts themselves
disintegrate quickly. Examination of fresh urine sediment (within 15 minutes
of collection) usually is needed to verify the presence of cellular casts. Cellular
casts will rarely be reported by remote reference laboratories to which urine
samples have been shipped.
(c) WBC casts (pus casts) are suggestive of pyelonephritis (Figure 1-11). Acute to
subacute interstitial nephritis, nephrosis, and exudative glomerulonephritis
(rare) also may be considered. Degeneration of WBCs in the casts can make it
impossible to differentiate WBCs from renal tubular epithelial cells. Confusion
 may arise if WBCs adhere in a linear fashion to strands of mucus or fibrin dur-
ing centrifugation of the urine sample.
(d) RBC casts are the most fragile of the cellular casts and are rarely observed in
the urine of dogs and cats. They may be seen in acute glomerulonephritis, after
renal trauma (e.g., renal biopsy) or after strenuous exercise. RBC casts must be
 differentiated from free RBCs arranged in a linear fashion in the urine sediment.
(e) Hemoglobin casts are variants of RBC casts in which the RBCs have lost their
cell membranes but the hemoglobin persists (sometimes called blood casts).
Blood casts are best seen in unstained urine sediment and have the same clini-
cal relevance as do intact RBC casts.
(f) Renal epithelial cell casts (Figure 1-12) occur most commonly in patients with
acute tubular necrosis or pyelonephritis and they imply severe tubular injury.
Urinalysis  CHAPTER 1
23
FGURE 1-11 ■ WBC cast. White blood cell (WBC) casts indicate renal inflammation, often from bacterial
individual WBCs in urine to fibrin or mucus strands. (Sedi-Stain, x400). (Courtesy of Nancy Facklam, ATH, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.)
A
X
HGURE 1-12  A, Renal epithelial cell cast from the urine sediment of a dog being treated with gentamicin. The
presence of renal epithelial cell casts often indicates severe acute renal tubular injury. B, Another cellular epithelial
cell cast comprised of renal tubular epithelial cells. Note free small round epithelial cells (black arrows) that are the
same size as those within the cast — renal tubular epithelial cells. There is no way to definitively prove the origin
of small free epithelial cells in the urine unless they are within a cast. (Sedi-Stain, x400). (A, Courtesy of Dr. Brian
Luria, Florida Veterinary Specialists, Tampa, Fla.)
They often are associated with nephrotoxic or ischemic renal injury but also
and pyelonephritis.
(g) Renal fragments are variants of epithelial cell casts that represent portions of
the renal tubules that have sloughed into urine without matrix protein precipi-
tation. Their presence indicates severe disruption of tubular basement mem-
 branes and more severe renal injury than implied by the presence of epithelial
cell casts.
(h) Mixed casts contain more than one identifiable cell type (e.g., WBCs, RBCs,
epithelial cells).
24
CHAPTER 1 ■ Urinalysis
(i) Degenerative cell casts refer to casts in which cellular outlines can still be seen,
but the cell type canmot be identified because of changes in size and loss of
nuclear detail.
(j) Coarsely and finely granular casts (Figure 1-13) represent the degeneration of cells
in other casts or precipitation of filtered plasma proteins according to the Addis
theory of cast formation. Excessive numbers of granular casts suggest accelerated
tubular degeneration, but they also may be seen in patients with glomerular dis-
ease when large amounts of filtered plasma protein precipitate in urine.
(k) Fatty casts are coarsely granular casts containing lipid granules and may be
seen in patients with glomerular disease or diabetes mellitus.
(l) Waxy casts (Figure 1-14) represent the final stage of degeneration of granular
casts and are relatively stable over time in dilute and alkaline urine. Waxy casts
A
FIGURE 1-13  Granular casts. Granular casts represent renal cellular degeneration (Addis Theory) or
precipitation of filtered plasma proteins. A, Finely granular cast. B, Coarsely granular casts. (Sedi-Stain, x400).
FIGURE 1-14 ■ Waxy casts. Waxy casts are translucent and represent the final transformation of cellular
 breakdown within the renal tubules. Their presence indicates substantial and prolonged intrarenal stasis. Black
arrow points to a crack in one of the waxy casts — this is commonly observed because of the brittle nature of the
protein that comprises this cast. (Sedi-Stain, x400).
Urinalysis  CHAPTER 1
25
are easily identified because of their high refractive index and homogenous
translucent appearance. They can be convoluted and often contain cracks and
blunt ends due to their britle nature. Staining of waxy casts is variable, but
they may appear dark purple when the urine sediment is stained using Sedi-
Stain. The presence of waxy casts suggests substantial chronic intrarenal stasis
because these casts take considerable time to form. They are associated with
chronic renal failure and consequently have been called reral failure casts. They
are associated with advanced chronic renal disease and their presence is consid-
ered an ominous finding.
(m) Broad casts are unusually wide casts that form in the collecting ducts or dilated
portions of the distal tubules. Tubular flow normally is rapid in the collect-
ing ducts, making cast formation difficult in this segment. Thus, the presence
 of broad casts suggests severe intrarenal stasis or tubular obstruction. Abrupt
appearance of broad casts may be a favorable prognostic sigm when conversion
from oliguria to normal urine output or polyuria occurs and previously formed
broad casts enter the urine.
Organisms
a. Normal bladder urine is sterile. The distal urethra and gerital tract harbor bacteria,
and voided or catheterized urine samples may be contaminated with bacteria from the
distal urethra, genital tract, skin, or collection container.
b. Contamination of voided or catheterized urine samples by the urethra usually does
 not result in sufficient numbers of bacteria to be visualized microscopicaly during
urine sediment examination. If however such a specimen is allowed to stand at room
temperature these bacterial contaminants may proliferate.
C. To be seen microscopically in the urine sediment there must be:
(1) >104 rods/mL urine.
(2) >105 cocci/mL urine.
d. Large numbers of bacteria in urine collected by catheterization or cystocentesis strongly
suggests the presence of UTI (Figure 1-15). Usually pyuria accompanies bacteriuria on
urine sediment examination.
FGURE 1-15 ■ Bacteria. The bacteria pictured are rod-shaped and filamentous, which facilitates their
identification. Many artifacts in urine sediment can resemble bacteria, especially cocci. Suspected cocci should be
carefully differentiated from artifacts (e.g., stain precipitates, cellular debris). (Sedi-Stain, x400).
26
CHAPTER 1  Urinalysis
(1) Rod-shaped bacterial are more easily and accurately identified in the urine sedi-
ment than are cocci which sometimes can be confused with particulate debris.
(2) Enteric bacteria sometimes have filamentous morphology in urine which should
not be confused with fungal hyphae.
(3) The presence of bacteria without pyuria on urine sediment examination suggests
tion or preservatives.
(4) Dogs with hyperadrenocorticism, diabetes mellitus, and those treated with immu-
nosuppressive drugs may have bacterial UTI without pyuria.
(5) Cats with chronic renal failure also may have bacterial UTI without pyuria.
(6) Particulate debris in the urine sediment may be confused with bacteria (especially
cocci) and cause false-positive results. Precipitates of stain also may resemble
cocci. Finally, stored stain preparations may be contaminated with bacteria. A
drop of stain may be examined separately to evaluate this possibility.
(7) Amorphous debris, small crystals, and lipid droplets in urine are subject to Brown-
ian motion and can be confused with bacteria.
 ps  no srs p jo s en-  (o
facilitate detection of bacteria suspected by evaluation of a wet mount of urinary
sediment.
(9) The absence of bacteria on microscopic urine sediment examination does not
eliminate the possibility of UTI. Suspected UTI should be confirmed by Gram
stain and quantitative urine culture.
(10) Yeast and fungal hyphae in the sediment usually are contaminants. Fungal UTI
rarely may occur (e.g, immunocompromised patients treated long-term with
involvement (e.g., blastomycosis, aspergillosis).
Crystals
a. Crystals are commonly present in urine of normal dogs and cats and often are of little
diagnostic significance. Struvite, amorphous phosphate, and oxalate are examples of
crystals that may be found in normal urine samples.
b.  Persistent crystalluria in fresh urine is a risk factor for recurrent urolithiasis and for
urethral plug formation in male cats.
c. Crystal solubility depends on urine pH, temperature, urine osmolality (specific gravity),
presence or absence of crystal inhibitors or promoters, and the concentration of crystalloids.
(1) Struvite crystals are much more common in the urine of cats fed dry foods as com
pared with cats eating primarily canned food. This difference presumably is due
to the effect of lower osmolality and decreased concentration of crystalloids in cats
with higher total daily water intake.
d. The concentration of crystalloids in urine is influenced by dietary intake, systemic
acid-base imbalance, specific metabolic abnormalities (e.g., hypercalcemia, portosys-
temic shunt), and proximal renal tubular function (e.g., cystinuria).
e. Crystals observed in urine may form de novo during transport to the laboratory or
during storage at room or refrigerator temperature. Crystals present in urine at the
time of the collection may increase in number and size during storage at room tem-
perature. Refrigeration increases the precipitation of all types of crystals.
(1) Crystals formed during storage and cooling of the sample before analysis do not
readily go back into solution when the sample is re-warmed.
(2) Crystals that form after collection of the urine sample are of no clinical relevance
for urolith or urethral plug formation.
Urinalysis ■ CHAPTER 1 27
(3) If the presence or absence of specific crystals in urine is important in the clini-
cal decision-making process, conclusions should be based on immediate evalu-
ation of a fresh urine sample that has not been stored at room or refrigerator
temperature.
f. Crystals should be reported according to type (i.e., chemical composition), quantity,
size, and whether they are aggregated or individual (i.e., crystal habitat). The time
elapsed from sample collection to urine sediment evaluation and whether or not refrig-
eration was used also are important to note. Large numbers of crystals, crystals that
are individually larger, and crystals that have aggregated during evaluation of a fresh
sample have more clinical relevance for urolith formation.
g
 Crystalluria is not synonymous with urolithiasis.
(1) Crystals may be present without uroliths.
(2) Uroliths may be present without crystals.
(3) When uroliths are present, the type of crystal found in the urine sediment may not
match the chemical composition of the uroliths.
Crystals reported on urinalysis often are artifacts of storage at room or refrigerator temperature. Crystals that
 form during storage are of no clinical relevance. Crystals may form and increase in number and size during
storage.
h. Crystals found in acid urine.
(1) Uric acid.
(2) Calcium oxalate (Figure 1-16)
(3) Cystine (Figure 1-17).
i. Crystals found in alkaline urine.
(1) Struvite (MgNH4PO4-6HO or so-called triple phosphate) (Figure 1-18)
(2) Calcium phosphate.
(3) Calcium carbonate.
(4) Amorphous phosphate ammonium biurate (Figure 1-19).
 j. Characteristic crystals also may be found in the urine sediment of animals on specific
drugs, especially sulfonamides, enrofloxacin, and amoxicillin.
k. Bilirubin crystals may be found in concentrated samples of normal dog urine.
1.Associations.
(1) Urates or uric acid: Dalmatians.
(2) Urates: Liver disease, portosystemic shunt.
(3) Cystine: Cystinuria.
(4) Struvite: Normal arimals, animals with struvite uroliths.
(5) Calcium oxalate monohydrate (i.e., whewellite, hippurate-like or picket fence) or cal
cium oxalate dihydrate (i.e., weddellite, Maltese cross or square envelope): Acute renal
failure due to ethylene glycol (EG) ingestion.
Miscellaneous Elements and Artifacts
a. Sperm from the urine of normal intact male dogs and cats. Voided samples from
recently bred females also may contain sperm.
b. Amorphous debris can arise from small crystals or cellular debris. Large amounts of
amorphous debris may be seen in patients with acute intrinsic renal failure, presum-
ably due to necrosis of renal cells.
c. Mucus threads and or fibrin strands may be seen in patients with lower urinary tract
or genital inflammation.
28
CHAPTER 1 ■ Urinalysis
B
C
FlGURE 1-16  A, Oxalate crystals. The dihydrate form of calcium oxalate is relatively easy to recognize
because of its rhomboid shape with intermal Maltese cross patterm. There are many different forms of calcium
oxalate that are not as easy to identify. Oxalate crystals may be an artifact of storage and refrigeration or may
 be associated with urolithiasis, hypercalcemia, or EG ingestion. B, Calcium oxalate monohydrate crystals can
assume a picket fence form. C, Calcium oxalate monohydrate. Note the hemp-seed shape to the one crystal in the
lower right panel. This crystal also has a budding daughter crystal (black arrow). The other picket fence-shaped
Crystals are another monohydrate form. (Sedi-Stain, x400). (A, Courtesy of Dr. Michael Horton, Fairborn Animal
Hospital, Fairborn, Ohio.)
d.Rarely, ova of the parasites D. renale or Capillaria plica are seen in the urine sediment.
Microfilaria from dogs with dirofilariasis sometimes are observed in the urine sedi-
ment if bleeding into the urinary tract has occurred.
e. Lipid droplets can be seen in patients with cellular degeneration. Lipid droplets often
 are found in the urine of normal cats. Lipid droplets can be distinguished from RBCs
by their refractile nature, which can be identified by altering the depth of focus of the
 microscopic field. Sudan stain also can be used to confirm that suspected droplets con-
tain lipid.
f. Foreign material often contaminates urine collected by voiding or catheterization.
Plant material, spores, pollen, hair, straw, fecal matter, and talcum powder from sur-
 gery gloves may be observed and confused with other urinary elements. Lubricants 
can contribute refractile droplets to the urine.
Urinalysis  CHAPTER 1
29
 FGURE 1-17  Cystine crystals. These hexagonal crystals are never normal and are associated with cystinuria or
cystine urolithiasis. These crystals may be confused with struvite crystals, but cystine crystals are flat and display
little intermal architecture. Arrows point to RBCs in background. (Sedi-Stain, x400).
A
B
urine that has been refrigerated. They also are observed in association with alkaline urine and struvite urolithiasis.
o Asao) (sx '-)  as a ie a p s r ae ssr  a
Dr. Michael Horton, Fairborm Animal Hospital, Fairborm, Ohio.)
g. Urinary stain precipitates can be confused with urinary crystals, especially when the
stain has been subject to evaporative loss (i.e., low humidity environment). Stain pre-
cipitation is most prominent near the edge of the coverslip in wet mount preparations.
h. Rolled squamous epithelial cells may resemble casts, but they are more intensely
stained and much larger than casts.
i.
 Clumps of RBCs, WBCs, or epithelial cells can be confused with casts. These clumps
usually are more irregular in width and are not linear as expected with casts.
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS
· Dipstrip tests for identification of WBCs are reliable for detection of WBCs in canine and feline urine
samples. (They are not.)
· Dipstrip tests for urine specific gravity are reliable in dogs and cats. (They are not.)
CHAPTER 1 ■ Urinalysis
(Sedi-Stain, x400).
· Crystalluria is always of major concern. (It is not.)
(o si i) taa Hd Aq pamsea se Hd aum ym paeaos Ao si Hd dinsdi ·
· Sending a urine sample to a remote reference laboratory is better than having a urinalysis performed
in-house by a well-trained technician. (It is not. Transport and storage may introduce artifacts such
as clinically irrelevant crystals.)
· The site of origin in the urinary tract of WBCs, RBCs, and or epithelial cells observed in the urine
sediment can be accurately determined based on their cellular morphology. (It cannot. Only when
cellular elements occur in casts can origin from the kidney be concluded.)
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
Q: Can I re-warm a previously refrigerated urine sample in which crystals have been observed
during urine sediment examination?
A: Re-warming the sample will not necessarily allow the crystals to go back into solution.
Q: Why doesn't our laboratory ever report cellular casts from patients suspected to have acute renal
failure?
A: Cellular casts are very fragile and frequently degenerate during transport to a reference labora-
tory. Urine sediment should be examined within 15 to 30 minutes of collection to facilitate identifica-
tion of cellular casts.
Q: We frequently get reports of bacteria on urinalysis without pyuria and often these patients have
negative urine cultures. Do these patients have UTl caused by a fastidious organism?
A: Usually not. Normal urine sediment may contain many artifacts that resemble bacteria. Most
often, these reports are false positives. Corynebacterium urealyticum is an exception. It is a fastidious,
 slow-growing organism but usually is associated with very alkaline urine pH, struvite crystalluria,
and bladder encrustation with struvite.
Urinalysis  CHAPTER 1  31
Q: Do I really need to use a supra-vital urine stain (Sedi-Stain) to get the most from my urinary
sediment examination?
A: In general, using a supra-vital stain makes it easier to identify cells with greater accuracy,
especially for novices. Experienced personnel, however, are able to identify elements in urine sedi-
ment whether it is stained or not, and some prefer to examine unstained urine sediment under low
illumination.
centrifuge to process urine samples for sediment examination?
A: Not if you hope to identify delicate sediment elements such as cellular casts, because the force
generated for centrifuging blood is very high and will disrupt cellular casts. A centrifuge that generates
less centrifugal force is desirable for preparation of urine sediment.
 SUGGESTED READINGS
Albasan H, Lulich JP, Osborne CA, et al: Effects of storage time and temperature on pH, specific gravity, and crystal forma
tion in urine samples from dogs and cats, I Am Vet Med Assoc 222:176-179, 2003.
Chew D], DiBartola SP: Handbook of canine and feline urinalysis, St Louis, 1998, Ralston Purina Co.
Holan KM, Kruger JM, Gibbons SN, Swenson SL: Clinical evaluation of a leukocyte esterase test-strip for detection of
feline pyuria, Vet Clin Pathol 26:126-131, 1997.
Heuter K], Buffington CA, Chew Dj: Agreement between two methods for measuring urine pH in cats and dogs,  Am Vet
Med Assoc 213:996998, 1998.
Osborne CA, Stevens JB, Lulich JP,et al: A clinician's analysis of urinalysis. In Osborne CA, Finco DR, editors: Canine and
feline nephrology and urology, Media, Pa, 1995, Williams and Wilkins.
cats,  Feline Med Surg 3:81-85, 2001.
89:1451-1453, 1986.
http: / /www.diaglab.vet.cornell.edu/clinpath/ modules/ua-sed /ua-intro.htm
CHAPTER
Clinical Evaluation
of the Urinary Tract
INTRODUCTION AND TERMINOLOGY
A. Azotemia is defined as an increased concentration of nonprotein nitrogenous compounds in
blood, usually urea and creatinine.
 1. Prerenal azotemia is a consequence of reduced renal perfusion (e.g., severe dehydration,
heart failure).
 2. Postrenal azotemia results from interference with excretion of urine from the body (e.g-
obstruction, uroabdomen).
 3. Primary renal azotemia is caused by parenchymal renal disease.
4. Combinations of prerenal with primary renal or postrenal azotemia are common.
5. The differentiation of prerenal, renal, and postrenal azotemia is summarized in Table 2-1.
B. Renal failure refers to the clinical syndrome that occurs when the kidneys are no longer able to
maintain their regulatory, excretory, and endocrine functions, resulting in retention of nitrog-
enous solutes and derangements of fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base balance. Renal failure
 Occurs when 75% of more of the nephron population is nonfunctional.
C. Lremia refers to clinical sigms and biochemical abnormalities associated with a critical loss of
 functional nephrons, and includes the extrarenal manifestations of renal failure (e.g., uremic
gastroenteritis, hyperparathyroidism).
 D. Renal disease refers to the presence of morphologic or functional lesions in one or both kidneys,
regardless of extent.
E. The following questions should be answered when evaluating patients with suspected uri-
nary tract disease:
1. Is renal disease present?
a.  Is the disease glomerular, tubular, interstitial, or a combination?
b. What is the extent of the renal disease?
C. Is the disease acute or chronic, reversible or irreversible, progressive or nonprogressive?
d.What is the current status of the patient's renal function?
e. What nonurinary complicating factors are present and require treatment (e.g., infec-
tion, electrolyte and acid-base disturbances, dehydration)?
f. Can the disease be treated?
g._What is the prognosis?
2. Is lower urinary tract disease present?
a. Does the disease affect the ureters, bladder, or urethra?
b. Is urinary tract obstruction present (see Chapter 11 for additional information on uri-
nary tract obstruction)
C. Can the disease be treated?
d. What is the prognosis?
32
Clinical Evaluation of the Urinary Tract  CHAPTER 2
TABLE 2-1
 Differentiation of Prerenal, Intrinsic, and Postrenal Azotemia
Intrinsic-Renal
 Intrinsic-Renal
Postrenal
 Postrenal
Feature
Prerenal
Acute
Chronic
Obstruction
Uroperitoneum
BUN
↑
↑
↑
↑
↑
Serum creatinine
↑
↑
↑
↑
↑
Urine:
>1.030 D
<1.030 D
<1.030 D
Variable
Variable
SG
>1.040 C
<1.040 C
<1.040 C
RBC, WBC,epi
RBC, WBC, epi
 Sediment
+，-casts
+
+
Protein
+，-
+，一
Renal size
W
↑, or N
↓, or N
↑, or N
N
Hematocrit (anemia)
N
N(early)
N JO ↑
N(early)
N
BUN/SCrafterIVfluids
Rapid decrease
Little change
Little change
Little change
Little change
PU/PD (long standing)
+
-(acute)
Oliguria
+,or-
-, Or + (terminal)
Variable
Variable
Hypothermia
一
+ If nephrosis
Renal pain
一
+，
+，一
-, + If renal tear
Ischemic episode
+
+ (trauma)
1
Nephrotoxinexposure
Renal ultrasound
N
↑Echo
↑ Echo/calcinosis
↑ Pelvis/diverticula
N
Contrast urography
N
Absent, or delayed
↓Excretion
↑ Pelvis/diverticula
Contrast leakage
and persistent
 nephrogram
Serum calcium
N
↓, or N
N, ↓, or I (rarely)
N, or ↓
↑ JO 'N
Serum phosphorus
N, or ↑
↑
↑
 Serum potassium
N
↑, or N
N, or ↓, or ↑
N, or ↑
N, or ↑
(terminal)
Metabolic acidosis
Moderate to severe
 Mild to moderate
- early, + late
- early, + late
Abdominal fluid
None
+ (if overhydrated)
None
+
Blood pressure
↓, or N
N, or ↑
↑, or N
N, or I (chronic)
N, or ↓
Renal biopsy
N
Abnormal
Abnormal
N, early
N
Fnding fromhistry,hysical examinatin,serubichemistry,rinalysishmatolgy,radigraphy,rnahistopatholgy, andpecial dansti 
be necessary to distinguish conc usively the type of azotemia. Usually it is relatively easy to decide if azotemia is from postrenal causes after physical
examination and routine abdominal radiography. Urinary specific gravity is the most important single test to differentiate prerenal and intrinsic renal azo-
temia. Urinary sediment, renal size, and hematocrit also are helpful. Results listed in this table are those prior to drug,fluid, or surgical treatments. Wwhen
two results are listed, the one noted first is most common. Findings willvary in severity according to the stage at which the disease process is investigated.
gavity; WBC, white blood cell; -, negative result; +, positive result; I, value increased above normal; I, value decreased below normal.
CLINICAL APPROACH
A. The diagnosis of urinary tract disease begins with a careful evaluation of the history and
physical examination findings and is further refined by consideration of urinalysis, serum
biochemistries, diagnostic imaging, and in some instances histopathology.
History
1. Presenting complaint.
a.
Onset (acute or gradual).
b. Progression (improving, unchanging, worsening).
34
 CHAPTER 2 ■ Clinical Evaluation of the Urinary Tract
c. Response to previous therapy such as surgery, diet, and drugs (e.g., antibiotics, corti-
costeroids, non steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs).
Husbandry
a.Animal's immediate environment (indoor, outdoor, or both).
b. Animal's use (pet, breeding, show, or working animal).
c. Geographical origin and travel history.
d. Exposure to other animals in the household and environment.
e. Type of diet including type (i.e., dry, canned, semi-moist) and specific brands.
f. Litter box management for cats (i.e., number and location of litter boxes, litter sub-
strate, cleaning schedule).
Medical History
a. Information about previous trauma, illness, or surgery (especially of the urinary tract).
b. Vaccination history (e.g., specific infectious agents, numbers of vaccinations received,
time of last vaccination). In dogs, determine the specific leptospiral serovars against
which the animal has been vaccinated.
Urination
a.Frequency and volume.
(1) Pollakiuria (usually an indicator of lower urinary tract disease).
(2) Polyuria (usually an indicator of upper urinary tract disease). Normal urine output
ranges from 10 to 20 mL/lb/ day in dogs and cats.
(3) Dysuria (usually an indicator of lower urinary tract disease).
(4) Nocturia (may be an early sigm of polyuria, but also can occur as a result of incon-
tinence).
(5) Oliguria (may be indicative of partial obstruction, dehydration, and some forms of
acute renal failure).
(6) Anuria (often indicates total urinary obstruction or severe acute renal injury)
b. Initiation of urination. How easily does the animal initiate urination? Difficulty starting
the urine stream could be due to partial obstruction, inflammation, or neurologic disease
c.Diameter of urine stream, with or without interruption of flow. A narrow stream could
 indicate partial obstruction, urethral spasm, or neurologic disease.
d. Hematuria.
(1) Blood at the beginning of urination may indicate a disease process in the urethra or
genital tract.
addn io appeq au raa un uanqoid e Ayuis Aeu uogeun jo pua au ie pooig (z)
urinary tract (kidneys or ureters).
(3) Dripping of blood unassociated with urination usually indicates a urethral or geni-
-d a  s   s s a p u s i 
tate gland (e.g., benign prostatic hyperplasia).
Normal water intake in dogs is up to 40 mL/lb/day, and in cats is up to 20 mL/lb/day.
Water Intake
a.Dogs: Normal water intake may be as much as 40 mL/lb/day.
b. Cats: Normal water intake may be as much as 20 mL/lb/day.
c.A cup is approximately 250 mL, and a quart is approximately 1 liter.
d. Exposure to nephrotoxins such as ethylene glycol (EG) in antifreeze, Easter lily (cats
only), aminoglycosides (e.g., gentamicin), and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
uria (e.g., glucocorticoids, diuretics) also should be determined.
Clinical Evaluation of the Urinary Tract ■ CHAPTER 2  35
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
A. Evaluation of hydration status is important for interpretation of laboratory data, especially
urine specific gravity (USG). Dehydration is suggested by decreased skin turgor, dry mucous
membranes, and sumken appearance of the eyes in their orbits.
B. Ascites or subcutaneous edema may accompany nephrotic syndrome (i.e., glomerular disease).
C. The oral cavity is examined for ulcers, tongue tip necrosis, and pallor of the mucous mem-
branes that may occur in uremia.
 D. Presence of retinal edema, detachment, hemorrhage, or vascular tortuosity noted during funr
dic examination is compatible with systemic hypertension, which may accompany renal dis-
ease. The animal may be blind or have impaired vision.
E. Musculoskeletal evaluation.
 1. Fibrous osteodystrophy may develop in young animals with renal failure, but is rare in
older dogs.
 2. Fibrous osteodystrophy is characterized by enlargement and deformity of the maxilla and
mandible (so-called rubber jaw).
3. Pathologic fractures are rare.
F. Kidneys.
sp as u au na a pe ss s u aied aq un saaup yo t
2. Kidneys should be evaluated for size, shape, consistency, pain, and location.
G. Urinary bladder
 1. Unless empty, the bladder can be palpated in most dogs and cats.
 2. The bladder should be evaluated for degree of distension, pain, wall thickness, and pres-
Ence of intramural (e.g., tumors) or intra-luminal (e.g, calculi, clots) masses.
 3. In the absence of obstruction, a distended bladder in a dehydrated animal suggests abnor-
mal renal function or administration of drugs that impair urinary concentrating ability
(e.g, glucocorticoids, diuretics).
H. The prostate gland of male dogs and pelvic urethra of males and females are evaluated by
rectal examination. The prostate gland should be within the pelvic canal, smooth, bilobed
moveable, and free of pain. Rectal examination is not routine in cats, but should be performed
in cats with persistent lower urinary tract signs. The normal pelvic urethra is difficult to iden-
tify on rectal palpation.
I. Reproductive organs.
1.  The penis should be exteriorized and examined fully to its base and the testes palpated.
 2. The vulva is examined for any discharge that suggests inflammation elsewhere in the geni-
tourinary tract. Examination of the vestibule and urethral orifice is not part of the routine
physical examination.
LABORATORY EVALUATION OF RENAL FUNCTION
Glomerular Function (values for glomerular function tests in the dog and cat
are presented in Table 2-2)
1. Glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is directly related to functional renal mass. GFR is the
 gold standard for the assessment of renal function and detection of renal disease progres-
sion. Determination of renal blood flow (RBF) also can be useful in detecting progression
of renal disease, but is less commonly evaluated than GFR. Unfortunately, GFR is not
routinely measured in the evaluation of renal function. Instead, surrogates for GFR such
as blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and serum creatinine concentrations are used because they
are more easily determined than is GFR. An ideal substance for estimation of GFR should
36
CHAPTER2Clinical Evaluation of theUrinary Tract
TABLE 2-2
 Normal Values for Clinical Tests of Glomerular Function
Test (units)
Dog
Cat
Blood urea nitrogen (mg/dL)
8-25
15-35
Serum creatinine (mg/dL)
0.3-1.3
0.8-1.8
Serum cystatin C (mg/dL)
0.5-1.5
NA
Endogenous creatinine clearance (mL/min/kg)
2-5
2-5
Exogenous creatinine clearance (mL/min/kg)
3-5
2-4
lohexol clearance (mL/min/kg)
1.7-4.1
1.3-4.2
24-hour urine protein excretion (mg/kg/d)
<30
<20
Up/Ucr
<0.4
<0.4
Microalbuminuria (mg/dL)
<1
<1
NA, not available.
be produced at a constant rate in the body, have little binding to plasma proteins, be freely
filtered, and not undergo tubular reabsorption or secretion.
a.BUN concentration. Normal BUN concentrations are 8 to 25 mg/dL in the dog and 15
to 35 mg/dL in the cat.
(1) Renal excretion of urea occurs by glomerular filtration, and BUN concentrations
are inversely proportional to GFR. Urea clearance is not a reliable estimate of GFR
and, in the face of volume depletion, decreased urea clearance may occur without
a decrease in GFR due to increased tubular reabsorption of urea.
(2) Production and excretion of urea are not constant.
(a) Production and excretion increase after a high protein meal. A BUN concentra-
tion of 30 to 40 mg/dL may occur 4 to 8 hours after feeding a high-protein meal
in dogs. Therefore, an 8- to 12-hour fast is recommended before measurement.
(b) Gastrointestinal bleeding can increase BUN concentration because blood repre-
sents an endogenous protein load.
(c) Clinical conditions characterized by increased catabolism (e.g., starvation,
infection, fever) also can increase BUN concentration.
(d) Some drugs may increase BUN concentration by increasing tissue catabolism
(e.g., glucocorticoids, azathioprine) or decreasing protein synthesis (e.g., tetra-
cyclines) but these effects are minimal.
(e) BUN concentration can be decreased by low-protein diets, anabolic steroids,
severe hepatic insufficiency, or portosystemic shunting.
b.Serum creatinine concentration. Normal serum creatinine concentrations are 0.3 to 1.3
mg/dL in the dog and 0.8 to 1.8 mg/dL in the cat. An individual patient's serum cre-
atinine concentration will increase over time with progression of renal disease, and
 increasing serum creatinine concentrations should not be ignored even if the results
still are within the reference range.
(1) Methods of measurement.
(a) Automated colorimetric method (Jaffe reaction): Up to half of the measured
creatinine actually may represent noncreatinine chromogens.
(b) Lloyd's reagent may be used to remove non-creatinine chromogens and pro-
vide a more accurate determination of the true serum creatinine concentration.
(c) Enzymatic methods specific for creatinine also are available to improve the
accuracy of the measurement.
Clinical Evaluation of the Urinary Tract  CHAPTER 2 37
(2) Young animals have lower serum creatinine concentrations, whereas males and
well-muscled individuals have higher concentrations.
(a) Serum creatinine concentration in puppies younger than or equal to 16 weeks
of age often is 0.4 to 0.5 mg/ dL
(b) Serum creatinine concentration is slightly lower in very small breed dogs and
slightly higher in giant breed dogs.
(3) Cachectic animals that have experienced severe loss of lean muscle mass often have
lower serum creatinine concentrations than they otherwise would have if their
muscle mass were normal.
(4) Normal reference ranges may differ somewhat among breeds. Greyhound dogs
have slightly higher serum creatinine concentrations than do other breeds. In one
study, serum creatinine concentrations were 1.8 ± 0.1 mg/dL in greyhounds and 1.5
± 0.1 mg/dL in other breeds and in another study serum creatinine concentrations
ranged from 1.2 to 1.9 mg/dL (mean, 1.6 mg/dL) in greyhounds as compared with
0.6 to 1.7 mg/dL (mean, 1.0 mg/dL) in non-greyhound dogs.
IA normal BuN or serum creatinine concentration does not necessarily imply normal renal function.
(5) Serum creatinine concentration (in contrast to BUN concentration) is not affected
appreciably by diet.
(6) Creatinine is not metabolized and is excreted by the kidneys almost entirely by
glomerular filtration. Serum creatinine concentration varies inversely with GFR.
c. BUN and serum creatinine concentrations often both increase during disease pro-
cesses. Neither one is more sensitive than the other.
(1) A normal BUN or serum creatinine concentration does not exclude the possibility
of renal disease.
(2) A normal BUN or serum creatinine concentration implies that at least 25% of renal
mass is functional, but how much more renal mass is functional cannot be deter
mined by these tests.
(3) In some situations, either the BUN or serum creatinine concentration is increased,
but not both at the same time. It is not always possible to explain discordant results
between BUN and serum creatinine concentrations (Table 2-3).
(4) Individual patient BUN or serum creatinine concentrations may increase progres-
sively during development of chronic renal disease, but the results still may remain
within the normal reference range.
 Increases in serum creatinine concentration over time may indicate progressive loss of renal mass even if
 results still are within normal limits.
(a) If available, serial test results should be evaluated to identify a trend toward
progressively increasing concentrations.
(b) Considerable variation may occur in serum creatinine concentrations from dif-
ferent laboratories using the same sample but results from the same laboratory
typically are very repeatable.
d. The relationship of BUN and serum creatinine concentrations to GFR is a rectangular
hyperbola.
(1) The slope of the curve is small when GFR is mildly or moderately decreased but
large when GFR is severely reduced (Figure 2-1). Thus, large changes in GFR early
in the course of renal disease cause small increases in BUN or serum creatinine
8C
CHAPTER 2 ■ Clinical Evaluation of the Urinary Tract
TABLE 2-3
 Discordant Results Between Blood Urea Nitrogen (BuN) and Serum Creatinine (SCr) Concentration
Disproportionate ↑ BUN Relative to SCr
Disproportionate ↑ SCr Relative to BUN
Severe dehydration and volume depletion(common)
Liver disease
Gastrointestinal hemorrhage
Anorexia or low protein diet
Emaciated animal
Massive muscle injury (acute)
Young animal 
Well-muscled individual
8-
7
6-
/dL)
5
eatinine
3-
Cre:
2
1
C
B
0
25%
50%
75%
100%
% Functional nephrons
FIGURE 2-1  Steady-state relationship of GFR to BUN and serum creatinine. Note the exponential relationship
between loss of functioning renal mass and changes in renal function assessed by BUN or serum creatinine. At
least 75% loss of excretory renal function must occur before the BUN or serum creatinine leave the normal range.
With more than 75% loss of excretory renal function there are correspondingly larger increases in BUN or serum
creatinine while on the rise of the exponential curve. Consequently, small increases or decreases in GFR along this
region of the curve can create large numerical change in BUN or creatinine. When two thirds of renal mass has
been lost most dogs elaborate urine that is considered isosthenuric (1.007-1.018 USG); many cats with this degree
of renal mass loss continue to be able to elaborate urine that is at least moderately concentrated to more than 1.030
specific gravity. The area up to 50% loss of renal mass is referred to as that of decreased renal reserve, from 50% to
75% loss that of renal insufficiency, and 75% loss that of renal failure associated with azotemia. Area A represents
diminished renal reserve with advancing chronic renal disease (Intermational Renal Interest Society [IRIS] Stage 1).
Areα B represents renal insufficiency (late IRIS Stage l and early IRIS Stage 2). Areα C represents azotemic renal
failure (IRIS Stages 3 and 4).
in BUN or serum creatinine concentration.
(2) An increase in BUN or serum creatinine concentration above normal implies that at
least 75% of the nephrons are not functioning.
(a) The magnitude of a single BUN or serum creatinine concentration cannot be
used to predict whether azotemia is prerenal, primary renal, or postrenal in
origin, and cannot be used to distinguish between acute and chronic, reversible
and irreversible, or progressive and non-progressive processes.
Clinical Evaluation of the Urinary Tract  CHAPTER 2 39
(b) The BUN /creatinine ratio usually is 20:1 to 30:1.
o nmsan e se eaoze [asod pue [anand u pasa aq Ae i ()
increased tubular reabsorption of urea at lower tubular flow rates or easier
absorption of urea than creatinine across peritoneal membranes in animals
with uroabdomen.
(i) Hyperthyroid cats also may have an increased ratio due to increased GFR
and loss of lean muscle mass.
(ili) It may be increased during cachexia as a result of lower serum creatinine
concentration due to loss of lean muscle mass.
(iv)  It may be decreased after fluid therapy as a result of increased tubular flow and
decreased tubular reabsorption of urea rather than as a result of a change in GFR.
(1) Cystatin C is a protease inhibitor that is freely filtered by the glomeruli. It does not
undergo tubular secretion, and filtered cystatin C is almost completely reabsorbed
by the proximal tubular cells.
(2) Cystatin C is produced at a constant rate in all tissues and its excretion is not depen
dent on age, sex, or diet.
(3) Serum cystatin C concentration may serve as a useful marker of GFR.
(4) Serum cystatin C concentration may be affected by the presence of inflammation or
neoplasia.
(5) Cystatin C determinations are not routinely available from commercial diagnostic
laboratories.
Renal Clearance
1.  The renal clearance of a substance is that volume of plasma that would have to be filtered
by the glomeruli each minute to account for the amount of that substance appearing in the
secreted by the tubules is equal to the GFR. Thus, GFR = UV/Px
 2. Creatinine is produced endogenously and excreted by glomerular filtration. Thus, its
dlearance can be used to estimate GFR
3. Endogenous creatinine clearance determination:
a.Collect all urine for 12 or 24 hours and record volume (failure to collect all urine pro-
duced will decrease the calculated clearance value).
b. Determine animal's body weight.
c. Determine serum and urine creatinine concentrations
d.  Normal endogenous creatinine clearance is 2 to 5 mL/min/kg in the dog and cat.
e.The main indication for determination of endogenous creatinine clearance is suspicion
of renal disease in a patient with polyuria and polydipsia, but normal BUN and serum
creatinine concentrations.
4. Exogenous creatinine clearance.
a. Administer creatinine (100 mg/kg) SQ or IV to increase serum creatinine concentration
approximately 10-fold.
b. Approximately 40 minutes later, collect at least 1 timed urine sample using an indwell-
ing urinary catheter (e.g., all urine produced in 20 minutes). The average of three
20-minute collection periods is recommended to minimize collection errors.
c. Determine the animal's body weight and serum and urine creatinine concentrations.
d. Exogenous creatinine clearance exceeds endogenous creatinine clearance and approxi-
mates inulin clearance (the gold standard for determination of GFR) in the dog. In cats,
Exogenous creatinine clearance may be slightly lower than inulin clearance.
40
 CHAPTER 2 ■ Clinical Evaluation of the Urinary Tract
Single Injection Methods for Estimation of Glomerular Filtration Rate
1. Single injection plasma clearance methods using inulin, iohexol, or creatinine have beer
used to estimate GFR. Inulin clearance is the gold standard, but it is not easily measured
and not available at commercial laboratories.
lohexol clearance can be used to estimate GFR clinically.
2. Plasma clearance of the substanceis calculated using the area under the plasma-concentration
versus-time curve.
3. These methods do not require urine collection, but accuracy depends on the number of
plasma samples and the timing of their collection.
4. Iohexol is readily available for clinical use, but a laboratory equipped to measure it must
be available.
a. Iohexol is given at dosage of 300 mg/kg IV (using a 300 mg/mL solution), and plasma
samples are collected 2, 3, and 4 hours after administration.
od s loxauoi on Aaisuasiady 'sien pue sop u paodan Aeads jou unou q
sible.
c. Because 1 mL/kg of iohexol is given IV relatively rapidly, caution should be used in
overhydrated patients or those with marginal cardiac function.
d. Several commercial diagnostic laboratories offer iohexol determinations (e.g, Diag-
nostic Center for Population and Animal Health, Lansing, Mich.).
Effects of Sedatives and Anesthetics on Glomerular Filtration Rate
1. In one study, GFR was similar in dogs sedated with butorphanol and diazepam, aceproma-
zine and butorphanol, and diazepam and ketamine. GFR in sedated dogs was not sig-
rificantly different from that of awake dogs. Ketamine and acepromazine have minima.
effects on GFR in cats.
 2. A combination of medetomidine, butorphanol, and atropine has been evaluated in dogs
using technetium-labeled diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (?mTe-DTPA) renal scin-
tigraphy as an estimate of GFR and was found to have effects on GFR similar to those
observed after saline alone.
Radioisotopes
1. Radioisotopes (e.g., 125]- or 131I-iothalamate, 5lCr-ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid [EDTA],
DTPA) have been used to estimate GFR in dogs and cats using both plasma clearance and
dynamic renal scintigraphic methods.
2. Plasma clearance of isotopes.
a. The plasma clearance approach has the same advantages and limitations as described
earlier for iohexol or exogenously administered creatinine.
b. Procedures using radioisotopes require technical expertise and equipment available
primarily at referral institutions.
c.Methods using 9mTe-DTPA to estimate GFR are clinically useful because the short half-
life (6 hours) of 99mT allows the animal to be released within 24 to 48 hours after the
procedure. Very low dose protocols allow the animal to be released safely on the same
day. The percentage of an injected dose of 9mTc-DTPA extracted by the kidneys over a
finite time period correlates well with inulin clearance.
 3. Dynamic renal scintigraphy.
a.This method correlates less well with inulin clearance than does the plasma clearance
method in dogs with renal disease. Renal scintigraphy is less accurate than plasma
clearance because a very short sampling period (usually 1 to 3 minutes postinjection) is
ais apeans poaan aaese jou A au hous e yns raao paurqo eep pue 'pasn
GFR. Characteristics of the gamma camera itself can lead to inaccuracies, and partial
obstruction can delay excretion of the tracer from the kidneys and lead to overestima-
tion of GFR
 b. Nuclear imaging using 99mTc-DTPA has been employed to determine GFR in normal
dogs, dogs with renal disease, and in normal cats and those with renal dysfunction.
c. Quantitative renal scintigraphy and determination of plasma disappearance after
single-injection using 99mTc-mercaptoacetyltriglycine have been used to estimate renal
plasma flow in dogs. Hepatic uptake of 9mTe-mercaptoacetyltriglycine in cats may
limit the value of this tracer for evaluation of renal plasma flow in this species.
d.The major advantage of this technique is that it is the only method that allws indi-
vidual analysis of the left and right kidneys.
Serum Phosphorus Concentration
1. Measurement of serum phosphorus concentration can provide information about renal
fumction in addition to that obtained from determination of BUN and serum creatinine
concentrations.
 2. Increased serum phosphorus concentration is not seen until >85% of the nephrons are
nonfunctional.
1In chronic renal disease,increased serum phosphorus concentration is not seen until > 85%
 of the nephrons are nonfunctional.
3. Phosphorus is filtered by the glomeruli and reabsorbed by the tubules. Tubular reabsorp-
tion of phosphorus is regulated by parathyroid hormone, and renal secondary hyper
promoting excretion of phosphorus into urine umtil renal disease is advanced.
4. A serum phosphorus concentration that is disproportionately increased relative to serum
creatinine concentration may be observed in acute renal failure. Rust inhibitors in anti-
freeze products may account for an increase in serum phosphorus concentration in ani-
mals shortly after EG ingestion.
5. Thyroxine increases proximal renal tubular reabsorption of phosphate and may contribute
6.
Serum phosphorus concentrations may be as high as 8.5 mg/dL in immature animals
as a consequence of bone growth. Most laboratories do not determine separate normal
reference ranges for adults and immature animals resulting in a somewhat higher than
Urine Protein
1. The presence of protein in the urine may indicate a disease process anywhere in the uri-
nary tract, or may be a consequence of gerital contamination. When the urinary sediment
is inactive, the presence of protein in the urine is suggestive of renal disease.
2. Dipstick screening measures mostly albumin and often produces positive results in highly
concentrated urine. Trace to +1 proteinuria (i.e., 10 to 30 mg/dl) may be normal in highly
concentrated urine. With dipstick screening, a protein concentration of 20 to 30 mg/dL is
required for a positive reaction. Dipstick screening for proteinuria may be negative despite
the presence of pathologic amounts of protein if the urine is dilute.
42
CHAPTER 2 ■ Clinical Evaluation of the Urinary Tract
3. If persistent proteinuria is present on dipstick analysis in the absence of hematuria and
pyuria, the severity of proteinuria may be assessed by measuring 24-hour urine protein
excretion or performing a urine protein-to-urine creatinine ratio (Up, /Ucr).
4. Urine protein excretion (normal values for 24-hour urine protein excretion and Up,/Uc
ratio are presented in Table 2-2).
a.  Normal values for 24-hour urine protein excretion in dogs and cats are < 20 to 30 mg/
kg/day.
b. Dogs with primary glomerular disease (e.g, glomerulonephritis, glomerular amyloi-
dosis) often have markedly increased 24-hour urine protein excretion and those with
a  a  s a   s
c. 24-hour protein excretion is not often performed due to the requirement for a timed
collection of urine.
5. Urine protein/urine creatinine ratio (Up, /Uc).
a.Determination of Up,/Uc, eliminates the necessity of a 24-hour urine collection and is
highly correlated with 24-hour urine protein excretion.
b.
Normal Up,/Uc, ratios in dogs and cats are < 0.4.
c. Up,/Uc, ratios often are normal in animals with high USG and positive dipstick pro-
tein reaction. Urine protein and creatinine concentrations are increased to the same
extent in highly concentrated urine, and the Up,/Uc, is unaffected because it is a ratio
of the 2 concentrations.
d. In dogs, Up/Uc. results are not affected by differences in sex, method of urine collec-
tion, fasted versus fed state, or by time of day of collection.
e. Pyuria and marked blood contamination of urine samples can result in abnormal Up/
Uc, ratios in the absence of glomerular disease. Thus, both the urine protein concen-
tration and Up,/Uc, ratio must be evaluated in conjunction with urinary sediment
findings.
(1) Visibly pink or red urine should not be evaluated by Up,/Uc, ratio.
(2) If there are more than 3 white blood cells per high-power field (WBCs/hpf) in con-
centrated urine, do not evaluate the Up./ Uc, ratio unless urine culture results are
kmown to be negative, because even a small increase in WBC in the urine sediment
can increase the Up,/Uc, ratio.
f. Induction of renal failure in experimental studies in cats increased mean Up,/Uc, ratio
from 0.13 to 0.36, and in both groups of cats Up, /Uc. ratios were higher on 52% as com-
pared with 28% protein diets. Administration of prednisone to normal dogs increased
Up,/Uc, ratios from normal to a mean of 1.2 at 30 days and 0.9 at 42 days.
g.Dogs with proteinuria on screening urinalysis have increased Up,/Uc, values. There is
overlap between dogs with glomerulonephritis and those with amyloidosis, and renal
biopsy remains the only reliable way to differentiate these two diseases.
Microalbuminuria
1. Microalbuminuria may be an early indicator of glomerular damage and loss of normal
glomerular barrier function.
 2. Microalbuminuria in dogs and cats is defined as a urine albumin concentration of > 1 mg/ dL
but < 30 mg/dL.
Microalbuminuria may be an early indicator of glomerular damage.
Clinical Evaluation of the Urinary Tract  CHAPTER 2  43
a. Methods used in dogs and cats to detect microalbuminuria are based on species-
specific enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA)*, and methods used to detect
microalbuminuria in humans are not reliable for use in dogs and cats.
 b. Urine is diluted to USG 1.010. Dilution prevents false-positive reactions for protein due
to highly concentrated urine.
c. Urine that is negative for proteinuria on dipstick reaction may be positive for microal-
buminuria when evaluated by ELISA.
d. Results using in-house test kits are reported as negative, mildly positive, moderately
positive, or highly positive. Positive results on the in-house test kit should be quanti-
fied in mg/ dL.
e.  Positive reactions for microalbuminuria should be repeated in 2 weeks to determine if
microalbuminuria is persistent.
3. Microalbuminuria has been detected in heartworm-infected dogs and in dogs with famil
ial renal disease (e.g., soft-coated Wheaten terriers with glomerular disease, male dogs
with X-linked hereditary nephritis). In these specific disorders, microalbuminuria pre-
cedes detection of an increased Up,/Uc, ratio.
4. The presence of microalbuminuria or increased Up,/Uc, ratio in the absence of lower uri-
nary tract inflammation provides evidence for glomerular damage but does indicate that
progressive renal damage or chronic renal failure will occur.
 5. In one study, the prevalence of microalbuminuria in normal healthy dogs was approxi-
mately 19%, and prevalence in a hospital population of dogs was 36%. Microalbuminuria
was not induced by exercise (i.e., treadmill running) in normal dogs. Microalbuminuria
 may be associated with increasing age and presence of systemic disease in dogs.
6. It is not knowm whether seemingly normal dogs with microalbuminuria are at increased
 risk for development of progressive renal disease. Sequential monitoring of these animals
is warranted.
 7. Presumably, microalbuminuria precedes the development of overt proteinuria and moni-
toring is warranted in at-risk individuals (e.g., diabetics, hypertensives).
8.  An animal with microalbuminuria should be monitored to determine if the finding is
repeatable and whether or not it is progressive. Progressive glomerular injury should be
suspected if the magnitude of microalbuminuria increases over time. Other tests of renal
fumction should be considered to determine if increasing microalbuminuria is associated
with loss of excretory renal function.
Bladder Tumor Antigen (BTA) Test
1. The first-generation Bard BTA test (V-BTA Test, Bion Diagnostic Sciences, Inc., Redmond,
Wash., distributed by Polymedco Inc., Courtland Manor, N.Y.) detects a glycoprotein anti-
gen complex associated with bladder neoplasia in human patients. In a prospective study
of 65 dogs with transitional cell carcinoma and other urinary tract disorders, the Bard BTA
test had a sensitivity of 90% and specificity of 78%.b
 2. False positives occur in urine samples with marked proteinuria or glucosuria and in those
with pyuria or hematuria.
 3. Its most appropriate use is as a routine screening test in geriatric dogs at risk for develop
ment of transitional cell carcinoma.
4.
Second-generation (BTA Stat) and third-generation (Bard Trak) Bard BTA tests should not
 be used as these use human monoclonal antibodies that give false-negative results in dogs.
a. ERD-Screen Urine Test, Heska Corp, Fort Collins Colo.
b. V-BTA Test, Bion Diagnostic Sciences, Inc, Redmond Wash. (distributed by Polymedco, Inc, Cortlandt Manor, N.Y.)
44
CHAPTER 2 ■ Clinical Evaluation of the Urinary Tract
Tubular Function
1. Normal urinary concentrating ability is dependent upon ability of hypothalamic osmo-
receptors to respond to changes in plasma osmolality, release of antidiuretic hormone
(ADH) from the neurohypophysis, and response of the distal nephron to ADH. Addition-
ally, medullary hypertonicity must be generated and maintained by the countercurrent
multiplier and exchanger systems of the kidney, and an adequate number of functional
nephrons must be present to generate the appropriate response to ADH (Figure 2-2).
Urine Specific Gravity (UsG) and Osmolality (Uosm)
Total urine solute concentration.
(1) Measured either by USG (estimated by refractometry) or urine Uosm. The latter
depends only on the number of osmotically active particles, regardless of their size.
Modified
Distaltubule
Tubular
Collecting duct
Interstitial
ultrafiltrate
fluid
principal cell
fluid
Corte
Urea
AQP2Vesicle
AQP3
medulla
HO
5'AMP
Inactive
NaC
rea
PKA
PDE
Outer
HC
FCAMP
H.0
Na
Urea
Active
AQP2
PKA
Medullary
ATP
HO
medulla
NaCl
H,O
collecting
Gs-GTP
ADH
Urea
Urea
duct
NaCl
NaCl
NaCl
P
Gs-GDP
her
Urea
Basolateral
NaCl
membrane
L
Phosphorylated
0HO
AQP4
Loop of Henle
Collecting duct
AQP2vesicle
FlGURE 2-2  Factors involved in the elaboration of concentrated or dilute urine. The major factors needed to
 elaboratemaximally concentrated urine are shown in this illustration. Acriticalminimalnumber of healthy nephrons
is needed to make concentrated urine if the body is capable of making and releasing ADH in adequate quantity.
The major stimulus for the release of ADH is an increase in plasma osmolality perfusing the hypothalamus—most
animals have evolved to produce concentrated urine for much of the day. The ability to concentrate or dilute the
urine centers on the ability of the medullary thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle's ability to actively reabsorb
sodium and chloride without water. The ascending limb of the loop of Henle is impermeable to water so that
osmolality of tubular fluid progressively decreases during ascent of the loop. At the same time, the osmolality of
the interstitium increases. ADH increases the permeability of the cortical collecting duct to water but not urea, so
the concentration of urea progressively increases as it descends the collecting duct. ADH increases the medullary
collecting duct's permeability to urea, which diffuses into the medullary interstitium, contributing importantly
to the hyperosmolality of this region. The presence of a hypertonic interstitium is an overarching requirement to
allow water to move out of the descending loop of Henle and out of the collecting duct under the influence of ADH.
ADH binds to a specific receptor on the basal side of the collecting duct from the blood, which then activates cyclic
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and a series of intracellular events that lead to phosphorylation of aquaporins
that then migrate to the luminal membrane of the collecting duct, where they are inserted and act as channels to
facilitate water transport across these cells. AC, adenylcyclase; AQP,aquaporin; Gs, stimulatory guanine nucleotide
regulatory protein; GDP, guanosine diphosphate; GTP, guanosine triphosphate; PDE, phosphodiesterarse; PKA,
protein kinase A; V2, vasopressin receptor. (Dra wn by Tim Vojt.)
Clinical Evaluation of the Urinary Tract  CHAPTER 2  45
(2) USG is defined as the weight of a solution compared with an equal volume of
distilled water and is dependent on both the number and molecular weight of the
solute particles. It has the advantage of requiring only simple, inexpensive equip
ment (refractometer) for measurement.
b. Normally, a roughly linear relationship exists between urine osmolality and specific
gravity. If urine contains appreciable amounts of larger molecular weight solutes such
as glucose, mannitol, or radiographic contrast agents, these substances will have a pro-
portionally greater effect on USG than on Uosm-
c. Isosthenuria (USG 1.007-1.015, Uosm 300 mOsm/kg) refers to urine of the same total
solute concentration as unaltered glomerular filtrate.
a a u pauo auun ue Ae oads ayy e sey buuow au ui paego auun sop u
d.Hyposthenuria refers to urine of lower total solute concentration than glomerular fil-
trate (USG <1.007, Uosm <300 mOsm/kg).
e. Hypersthenuria (baruria) refers to urine of higher total solute concentration than glo-
merular filtrate (USG >1.015, Uosm >300 mOsm/kg).
f. The normal range of total urine solute concentration for dogs and cats is wide (USG
1.001-1.080)
 g. Urine samples obtained from dogs in the morning have higher USG values than those
 obtained in the evening. In dogs, urine concentration decreases with age, but there is
no effect of sex on USG.
Water Deprivation Test
a.Indicated in evaluation of animals with polydipsia and polyuria or umknowm cause.
b. Most often performed in animals with hyposthenuria (USG <1.007) suspected to have
central or nephrogenic diabetes insipidus or psychogenic polydipsia. The water depri
vation test also may be useful in evaluation of patients suspected to have partial cen
tral diabetes insipidus (USG 1.008-1.017).
c. Water deprivation testing should not be performed on a dehydrated animal that
has dilute urine, as these animals have already reached the endpoint of this test
and additional water deprivation could be harmful. Failure to concentrate urine
likely is due to structural or fumctional renal dysfunction or administration of drugs
that interfere with urinary concentrating ability (e.g, glucocorticoids, diuretics).
Water deprivation testing should be performed with extreme caution in animals
with severe polyuria, because such patients may rapidly become dehydrated dur
ing water deprivation if they have defective urinary concentrating ability and con-
tinue to prod uce large volumes of urine.
d. The water deprivation test also is contraindicated in animals thiat are azotemic, because
the reason for their submaximally concentrated urine already is known. Water depri-
vation in these instances could result in additional injury to the kidneys.
Do not perform water deprivation testing if the animal is already dehydrated or azotemic.
e. Water deprivation testing potentially is dangerous in patients with hypercalcemia and
should be avoided.
f. Water deprivation testing also is not necessary in patients with underlying disorders
(e.g, liver disease, pyometra, Escherichia coli pyelonephritis, severe hypokalemia)
kmown to be associated with impaired urinary concentrating ability.
g.Technique.
46
 CHAPTER 2 ■ Clinical Evaluation of the Urinary Tract
(1) Placement of an indwelling catheter provides the best opportunity for accurate
collection of urine samples and measurement of USG or Uosm and minimizes the
opportunity for newly produced concentrated urine to mix with previously pro-
duced dilute urine.
(2) Empty the bladder at the beginming of the test, and collect baseline data (i.e., body
weight, hematocrit, plasma protein concentration, skin turgor, serum osmolality,
Uosm, USG).
(3) Withhold water and monitor these variables every 2 to 4 hours.
(a) Urine and serum osmolalities are the best tests to follow, but osmolality results
often are not immediately available. Thus, USG and body weight assume the
greatest importance for decision making during performance of the test.
(b) An increase in total plasma protein concentration is a relatively reliable indica-
tor of progressive dehydration, but increases in hematocrit and changes in skin
turgor are not as reliable.
dond e Sunmp aseanut ou pmous suonenuasuon Nna pue auueano umias (n)
erly conducted water deprivation test.
(4) The test is concluded when the patient either demonstrates adequate concentrating
ability or becomes dehydrated as evidenced by loss of 5% or more of its original
body weight. It is important when weighing the animal to use the same scale each
time and to empty the bladder at each evaluation. Maximal stimulation of ADH
release will be present after loss of 5% of body weight.
h.Dehydration usually becomes evident within 48 hours in normal dogs and cats, but
usually become dehydrated within 12 hours
i.By the time dehydration is evident, USG usually exceeds 1.045 in normal dogs and cats.
j. Failure to achieve maximal urinary solute concentration does not localize the level of
the malfunction, and a structural or functional defect may be present anywhere along
the hypothalamic-pituitary-renal axis.
k.Animals with medullary solute washout may have impaired concentrating ability
regardless of the underlying cause of polyuria and polydipsia.
1. ADH challenge.
(1) If there has been a <5% increase in urine osmolality, or <10% change in USG for
3 consecutive determinations, or if the animal has lost 5% or more of its original
weight, 0.1 to 0.2 U /lb aqueous vasopressin (Pitressin) (up to a total dose of 5 U) or 5
 μg desmopressin (DDAVP) may be given subcutaneously and urinary concentrating
ability moritored every 30 minutes for 2 to 6 hours after ADH injection.
(2) Additional increases in Uosm after administration of ADH should not exceed 5% to
10% in normal dogs and cats.
(3) A large increase in Uosm after ADH suggests partial or complete central diabetes
insipidus (CDI).
Gradual Water Deprivation
a.Gradual water deprivation can be performed to eliminate diagnostic confusion caused
by medullary solute washout.
b. Methods.
(1) Restrict water consumption to 60 mL/lb/day 72 hours before, 45 mL/lb/day 48
hours before, and 30 mL/lb/day 24 hours before the scheduled water deprivation
 test. In dogs with psychogenic polydipsia, this will promote endogenous release of
ADH, increased permeability of the inner medullary collecting ducts to urea, and
restoration of the normal gradient of medullary hypertonicity.
Clinical Evaluation of the Urinary Tract ■ CHAPTER 247
TABLE 2-4
 Normal Values for Fractional Electrolyte Clearance (%)
Analyte
Dog
Cat
Sodium
<1
<1
 Potassium
<20
<24
Chloride
<1
<1.3
Phosphorus
<39
<73
(2) Reduce water consumption by approximately 10% per day over a 3- to 5-day
period (but not <30 mL/lb/day). This approach should only be used in animals
that are otherwise healthy on initial clinical evaluation (no evidence of renal dis-
ease or dehydration). Dry food should be provided ad libitum, and the dog should
be weighed daily to monitor for loss of body weight.
(3) A standard complete water deprivation testis carried out after completion of grad-
 ual water restriction to restore the medullary gradient.
Fractional Clearance of Electrolytes
a. The fractional clearance of electrolytes is defined as the ratio of the clearance of thie
electrolyte in question to that of creatinine:
FCx=(UxV/P)/(Uc.V/Pc)=(UxPc)/(UcPx)
This ratio usually is multiplied by 100 and the fractional clearance value expressed as ?
percentage. Normal values for urinary fractional clearance of electrolytes in dogs and
cats are summarized in Table 2-4.
b. The advantage of this measurement is that a timed urine collection is not necessary
In normal animals, the fractional clearances of all electrolytes are much <1.0 (100%)
implying net conservation, but values are higher for potassium and phosphorus than
for sodium and chloride.
c. The fractional clearance of sodium may be useful in the differentiation of prerenal and
primary renal azotemia.
(1) In animals with prerenal azotemia and volume depletion, sodium conservation
should be avid and the fractional clearance of sodium very low (<1%).
(2) In animals with azotemia due to primary parenchymal renal disease, the fractional
clearance of sodium will be higher than normal (≥1%).
d. Fractional clearance of potassium may be useful in the evaluation of hypokalemic
patients to determine if the kidneys are contributing to the hypokalemia.
e.
 Fractional clearance of phosphorus may be useful during treatment of chronic renal
failure (CRF) to see if dietary management and treatment with phosphorus binders
have been effective in decreasing the fractional clearance of phosphorus as serum para-
thyroid hormone (PTH) concentration decreases (see Chapter 5 for additional informa-
fion about chronic renal failure).
MICROBIOLOGY
A. Clinical signs and urinalysis findings provide supportive evidence, but quantitative microbi-
ology is required to conclusively diagnose urinary tract infection (UTI).
1. The kidneys, ureters, bladder, and proximal urethra of normal dogs and cats are sterile,
whereas a resident bacterial flora populates the distal urethra, prepuce, and vagina.
48
 CHAPTER 2 ■ Clinical Evaluation of the Urinary Tract
2. UTI occurs when bacteria colonize areas of the urinary tract that normally are sterile
3. Quantitative bacterial culture of urine allows determination of the number of bacterial
colonies (colony-forming units or cfu) that grow from one mL of urine (cfu/mL).
4. Aerobic gram-negative bacteria account for the majority of U'Tl in dogs and cats, and the
remainder are caused by gram-positive organisms. E. coli is the most common organism
implicated in UTI of dogs and cats. Other organisms isolated include Proteus spp, coagulase-
positive staphylococci, and streptococci. Pasteurella multocida occasionally is isolated from
cats with UTI. Enterobacter spp, Kebsiella spp, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa are observed less
commonly in dogs and rarely in cats. See Chapter 8 for additional information about UTI.
Method of Urine Collection
1. Voided urine has the greatest potential for bacterial contamination.
a.  Bacterial culture of midstream-voided urine samples from normal dogs and cats often
results in growth of <10? to ≥10 cfu/mL. Therefore, culture of voided urine is not rec-
ommended in evaluation of patients for UTI.
 b. If, however, no growth is obtained from a voided urine sample, UTI can be excluded as
a diagmosis.
2. Catheterization may inoculate the bladder with bacteria from the distal urethra.
a. Bacterial growth of ≥105 cfu/mL may result from culture of urine obtained from cath-
eterization in 20% of normal female dogs. Thus, using 105 cfu/mL as indication of UTI in
female dogs will result in a substantial number of false-positive results.
b. Also, the procedure of urethral catheterization itself may resultin UTI in 20% of normal
female dogs.
Urine collected by cystocentesis should be sterile.
C.  Isolation of bacteria from urine collected by catheterization of male dogs is uncommon,
and more than 103 cfu/mL is recommended for establishing a diagnosis of UTI in urine
samples collected by catheterization from male dogs.
d.  In both male and female cats, growth of more than 103 cfu/mL in samples collected by
catheterization is considered compatible with UTI.
3. Urine collected by cystocentesis should be sterile in normal animals.
a. Cystocentesis is recommended for establishing a diagnosis of UTI.
b. Urine samples obtained by cystocentesis from normal dogs and cats should yield no
growth because this procedure bypasses the normal bacterial flora of the urethra and
genital tract. Consequently, results obtained by cystocentesis are the standard against
which results obtained using voided or catheterized samples are compared.
c. Small numbers of organisms from the skin or environment occasionally contaminate
samples obtained by cystocentesis, and growth of <l0² cfu/mL may be considered
suggestive of contamination.
4. Isolation of bacteria from urinary tissues obtained during surgery indicates UTI regardless
of number.
5. Urine should be submitted for culture within 30 minutes of collection. If this is not possible, the
sample may be refrigerated for up to 6 hours without significant loss of bacterial growth. Some
6.  Microscopic examination of Gram-stained smears of urine also may be helpful in diagnosis
of UTI. In one study, one drop of uncentrifuged urine was allowed to dry, Gram-stained,
bacterial counts of ≥10? cfu/mL
Clinical Evaluation of the Urinary Tract  CHAPTER 249
DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING
Radiography
1. Radiography provides quantitative information about renal size and shape that frequently
cannot be obtained from physical examination. The animal should be properly prepared
for abdominal radiography by fasting and enemas to cleanse the colon and maximize the
 amount of information obtained. Proper positioning is essential to ensure that the kidneys,
ureters, bladder, and the entire urethra are visible on the image obtained.
 2. To correct for variation in patient size and radiographic magnification, renal size is evalu
ated in reference to surrounding anatomic landmarks, usually the second lumbar vertebra
(L2) on the ventrodorsal view.
 3. The left kidney normally is well visualized in the dog, but the right kidney often cannot
be seen as clearly, especially its cranial pole. In the dog, the left kidney (near vertebra L2 to
L5) is 1ocated caudal to the right kidney (near vertebra T13 to L3). In the cat, the kidneys lie
 near vertebra L3 with the right kidney positioned slightly cranial to the left. Renal size in
dogs and cats can be assessed radiographically and compared to the length of vertebra L2.
On the ventrodorsal view, the kidney-to-L2 ratio is 2.5 to 3.5 in dogs and 2.4 to 3.0 in cats.
a.Abnormal renal shape or contour suggests the posibility of renal infarct, cyst, neopla-
sia, or focal inflammatory change.
b. Normal renal size does not ensure normal renal tissue.
c.  Marked changes are necessary for renal size to decrease below the lower limit or increase
above the upper limit of normal radiographic renal size. Also, the kidneys may become
wider in some renal diseases before they exceed the upper limit of normal length.
d.Small kidney size typically is associated with chronic renal disease.
e. Enlarged kidneys may indicate acute intrinsic renal failure, neoplasia, polycystic kid-
ney disease, or hydronephrosis.
4. The ureters cannot be seen on plain abdominal radiographs, but radiopaque ureteral cal-
culi may be seen. Radiopaque ureteral calculi are observed commonly in cats. See Chapter
9 for additional information on urolithiasis.
5. The bladder of the dog and cat usually is visible within the abdominal cavity if it is suffi-
ciently full. When more than 50% of the area of a sufficiently full bladder is located within
the pelvic canal on the lateral abdominal radiograph, it is referred to as a "pelvic bladder'
and this finding may have some clinical relevance in female dogs with urinary inconti-
nence. See Chapter 13 for additional information on urinary incontinence.
6. The urethra often can be seen extending caudally from the bladder neck when gravity
pulls a full bladder cranially into the abdomen. This finding is especially prominent in cats.
7.1
Radiopaque calculi may be identified in the pelvic, perineal, or penile portions of the male
urethra. See Chapter 9 for additional information on urolithiasis.
 8. The prostate gland may be identified on the lateral abdominal radiograph in intact male dogs
Excretory Urography
1. Excretory urography is performed by taking sequential abdominal radiographs after intravenous
administration of an iodinated organic compound. The contrast medium is filtered and excreted
by the kidneys, and the quality of the study is partially dependent upon the patient's GFR.
 2. Radiographs should be taken at appropriate intervals (e.g. <1 min, 5 min, 20 min, 40 min)
to obtain maximal information about the renal parenchyma and collecting system.
3. Excretory urography is useful in evaluation of abnormalities in renal size, shape, or location;
filling defects (e.g., calculi) in the renal pelvis or ureters; certain congenital defects (e.g., uni-
lateral agenesis); renomegaly; acute pyelonephritis; and, rupture of the upper urinary tract.
50
 CHAPTER 2 ■ Clinical Evaluation of the Urinary Tract
4. Excretory urography is useful for evaluation of patients suspected to have ectopic ureters.
More valuable information is obtained when a pneumocystogram also is performed to
provide negative contrast for the ureter as it traverses the bladder. Oblique views facilitate
identification of the site of ureter termination.
 5. Excretory urography should not be performed in dehydrated patients or in those with
kmowm hypersensitivity to contrast media.
6. Decreased GFR may persist for several days after intravenous administration of contrast
agents to normal dogs, and acute renal failure (ARF) has been observed rarely in dogs and
cats after excretory urography.
 7. Ultrasound-guided percutaneous antegrade pyelography can be used to localize ureteral
obstruction in dogs and cats and does not depend on GFR for delivery of contrast to the
collecting system.
Contrast Urography of the Lower Urinary Tract
Positive ContrastUrethrography
TECHNIQUE
(1) Performed with the bladder full so that the urethra can fill and distend with con-
trast material.
(2) Typically performed in a retrograde fashion (i.e., from the distal to the proximal
portion of the urethra) using iodinated contrast material.
(a) In males, a balloon-tipped catheter can be placed in the distal urethra (near the
os penis) to prevent leakage of contrast material distally.
(b) In females, the catheter can be placed in the bladder and then withdrawm incre-
mentally into the urethra with injection of contrast material.
(3) Ideally, performed under fluoroscopy to obtain a dynamic study.
(4) Sedation is recommended in males, and sedation with or without anesthesia is nec-
essary in females for good results.
ABNORMALITIES
(1) ntraluminal filling defects (e.g., air bubbles, calculi, blood clots).
(2) Intramural lesions (e.g., neoplasia, inflammation, stricture).
(a sr  s) s g )
(4) Ruptured urethra.
(5) Reflux of contrast material into an abnormal prostate gland.
(6) Fistulas (e.g., urethrovaginal, urethrorectal).
Positive Contrast Cystography
TECHNIQUE
(1) Typically performed by passage of a urinary catheter and instillation of iodinated
contrast material
(2) Positive contrast cystography is the procedure of choice when bladder rupture is
suspected.
(3) Obtaining oblique views in addition to routine lateral and ventrodorsal views may
enhance ability to detect some abnormalities (e.g., ectopic ureters).
ABNORMALITIES
(1) Ruptured bladder.
(2) Intraluminal filling defects (e.g., air bubbles, large calculi, blood clots). Small cal-
culi may be concealed by contrast material.
(3) Intramural lesions (e.g., neoplasia, polypoid cystitis).
(4) Abnormal bladder position (e.g., "pelvic bladder," perineal hernia).
Clinical Evaluation of the Urinary Tract  CHAPTER 2 51
(5) Urachal diverticulum.
(6) Permeation of contrast material into bladder wall with altered permeability (e.g.)
feline interstitial cystitis).
Double Contrast Cystography
TECHNIQUE
(1) Generally preferred over positive and negative contrast studies due to improved
ability to identify and interpret abnormalities, especially mucosal irregularities
caused by chronic inflammation or small intramural masses. It allows assessment
of bladder wall thickness.
(2) A urinary catheter is passed and a small amount of iodinated contrast material intro-
duced into the bladder followed by gas (e.g., room air) distension of the bladder.
ABNORMALITIES
(1) Mucosal irregularities and intramural lesions (e.g., polypoid cystitis, neoplasia
chronic cystitis).
(2) Intraluminal flling defects (e.g., air bubbles, calculi).
(3) Urachal diverticulum.
Negative Contrast Cystography
TECHNIQUE
(1) Of limited usefulness as a solitary technique.
(2) Provides good assessment of bladder position and wall thickness.
(3) A urinary catheter is passed and the bladder distended with air, CO2, or nitrous
oxide. This technique carries the risk of air embolism. CO2 and nitrous oxide are
preferred because of increased solubility in blood.
ABNORMALITIES
(2) Allows assessment of bladder wall thickness (e.g. chronic cystitis).
(3) Not a valuable technique to identify ruptured bladder (positive contrast studies are
preferred).
Ultrasonography
Kidneys
ADVANTAGES
(1) Noninvasive imaging technique that does not depend on renal function.
(2) No kmown adverse effects on the patient.
(3) Allows characterization of internal renal architecture.
ECHOGENICITY
(1) Normally, the kidney is less echogenic than the liver or spleen.
(2) The renal capsule, diverticula, and sinus are the most echogenic structures in the kidney.
(3) The renal medulla normally is less echogeric than the cortex.
(4) There normally is a good corticomedullary distinction.
(5) The hyperechogenicity of renal cortex relative to medulla varies among normal cats and
has been attributed to variations in the amount of fat present in proximal tubular cells.
RENAL SIZE
(1) Renal length and volume as determined by ultrasonography are linearly related
to body weight in dogs. Guidelines for renal length measurement on ultrasound
examination for dogs weighing between 5 and 44 kg are presented in Table 2-5.
(2) In cats, renal length as determined by ultrasonography is normally reported to be
between 3.0 and 4.3 cm. However, at The Ohio State University, normal cats typi-
cally have a renal length of 3.5 to 4.2 cm.
52
CHAPTER 2  Clinical Evaluation of the Urinary Tract
TABLE 2-5
 Renal Length on Ultrasound Examination According to Body Weight in Adult Dogs
Weight (kg)
Number of Dogs
Range of Length (cm)
Mean Length (cm)
Standard Deviation (cm)
5-9
16
3.2-5.2
4.4
0.50
10-14
10
4.8-6.4
5.6
0.60
15-19
20
5.0-6.7
6.0
0.40
20-24
20
5.2-8.0
6.5
0.72
25-29
44
5.3-7.8
6.9
0.58
30-34
32
6.1-8.7
7.2
0.60
35-39
24
6.6-9.3
7.6
0.72
40-44
12
6.3-8.4
7.6
0.54
Adapted from Barr FJ, Holt PE, and Gibbs C: Uitrasonographic measurement of normal renal parameters. J Smaff Anim Pract 1990;31:180-184.
Data limited to groups with ≥10 dogs.
(3) Measurements of renal size determined by excretory urography exceed those
obtained by ultrasonography.
UTILITY
(1) Useful for differentiating solid from fluid-filled lesions (e.g., abscess, cysts) and for
determining the distribution of lesions within the kidney (i.e., focal, multifocal, dif-
fuse).
(2) A pattern of multiple anechoic cavitations is highly suggestive of polycystic kidney
disease. Cysts are smooth, sharply demarcated, anechoic lesions that demonstrate
through transmission.
(3) The renal pelvis is dilated with anechoic fluid in hydronephrosis, and the kidney is
surrounded by an accumulation of anechoic fluid in cats with perinephric pseudo
cysts.
(4) Organized hematomas, abscesses, and necrotic nodules result in a pattern of mixed
echogenicity.
(5) Focal or diffuse lesions of mixed echogenicity that disrupt normal anatomy often
are tumors.
(6) Poorly vascular tumors of homogenous cell type (e.g. lymphosarcoma) may pro-
duce hypoechoic lesions that occasionally may be misinterpreted as cysts.
(7) Diffuse parenchymal renal diseases characterized by cellular infiltration with pres-
ervation of normal renal architecture (e.g., chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis) may
produce diffuse hyperechogenicity, but occasionally are characterized by a normal
ultrasonographic appearance.
(8) Normal renal ultrasonography does not eliminate the possibility of renal disease or
renal failure.
(9) Fine needle aspiration of focal or diffuse lesions may confirm the diagnosis of lym-
phosarcoma, renal cyst, renal carcinoma, or renal abscess.
ETHYLENE GLYCOL INTOXICATION
(1) Within 4 hours of EG ingestion, renal cortical echogenicity can exceed that of liver
and approach that of spleen. Medullary echogenicity is increased to a lesser extent.
(2) Increased cortical and medullary echogenicity with relative hypoechogenicity of
the corticomedullary junction and inner medulla results in a "halo" sign that corre-
lates with the onset of anuria. Although unproven, renal hyperechogenicity in EG
Clinical Evaluation of the Urinary Tract  CHAPTER 2 53
intoxication is attributed to deposition of calcium oxalate crystals in the kidneys.
   e  x    a nq a n a a
MEDULLARYRIMSIGN
(1) An echogenic line in the outer zone of the medulla and paralleling the corticome-
dullary junction has been observed in EG intoxication but also in acute tubular
necrosis, hypercalcemic nephropathy, granulomatous nephritis due to feline infec-
tious peritonitis, and in chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis.
(2) This lesion also has been observed in normal cats and has been associated with
mineralization of tubular basement membranes. Dogs with medullary rim sign as
their sole ultrasonographic finding may have no evidence of renal dysfumction.
Dogs with medullary rim sign and other ultrasonographic abnormalities (e.g.,
reduced renal size, increased medullary echogenicity, pyelectasia) often have clini-
cal evidence of renal dysfunction.
INTRARENAL RESISTANCE TO BLOOD FLOW
(1) Intrarenal resistance to blood flow may be assessed and evaluated by calculation of
the resistive index.
(a) Values for renal resistive index in normal, nonsedated dogs are approximately 0.6.
(b) Somewhat lower values have been reported in normal, sedated dogs and cats.
(c) Higher-than-normal values for resistive index have been reported in some renal
diseases of dogs and cats, but not in experimentally induced aminoglycoside
nephrotoxicosis.
COLORFLOWDOPPLERULTRASONOGRAPHY
(1) Color flow Doppler ultrasonography can be used to determine the patency of renal
arteries, evaluate focal areas of decreased blood flow (e.g., infarcts), and evaluate
areas of increased blood flow (e.g., some tumors).
RENAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
(1) Renal ultrasonography also has been used to monitor the status of renal allografts
after transplantation in dogs and cats.
Ureters
a.The normal ureter is not usually identified on ultrasound examination.
b. The ureteral orifice in the trigone region of the bladder normally has a mound-like
appearance that can be confused with a mass, especially when the bladder is not fully
distended. Intermittent jets of urine being expelled from the ureter into the bladder can
be identified using color flow Doppler technique.
c. Dilatation of the ureter proximal to an obstructing calculus may be seen, but it is dif-
ficult to image the calculus itself due to the small size of ureteral calculi.
d.Hydroureter can be identified in patients with distal obstruction and in some animals
with ectopic ureter.
e. A ureterocele in the bladder rarely may be seen in some patients with ectopic ureters.
Bladder
a.  Easily identified when moderately full due to the presence of anechoic urine.
b.Bladder wall thickness may be overestimated when the bladder contains only a small
amount of urine.
c.  Bladder wall thickness should not exceed 3 mm when the bladder is moderately full.
Causes of increased bladder wall thickness include cystitis and neoplasia.
d.  Intramural lesions (e.g., neoplasia, polyps) may be identified. Generally, polyps are
attached to the bladder wall by a stalk, whereas transitional cell carcinomas have a
broader attachment.
54
 CHAPTER 2 ■ Clinical Evaluation of the Urinary Tract
e.  Intraluminal lesions include cystic calculi (>2-4 mm diameter) and blood clots. Calculi
may produce shadowing whereas blood clots do not.
f. A urachal diverticulum is not likely to be identified by ultrasound examination unless
it is very large.
g. Echogenic debris may be identified. It may indicate inflammatory material or sus-
pended crystals. In many cases, its clinical relevance is uncertain. Many normal cats
have echogenic debris in their bladders that has no clinical explanation.
Urethra
a. The proximal urethra can be visualized by ultrasound examination but the caudal ure-
thra usually cannot be evaluated because of presence of the bony pelvis.
b. Dilatation of the proximal urethra may be identified in patients with distal urethral
obstruction.
c. Intramural (e.g., neoplasia, proliferative urethritis) or intraluminal (e.g, calculi, blood 
clots) lesions may be identified.
Prostate Gland
a. Readily identified on ultrasound examination in intact male dogs and occasionally
identified in neutered male dogs. Not identified in intact male cats with the rare excep-
tion of prostatic neoplasia in a cat.
b. Size, shape, and echotexture are evaluated. The prostate gland normally is a symmetri-
d saoa snoou  as oos m so g
c. Lesions that may be identified include cyst, abscess, and mineralization.
d. Complex echogenic patterns can be observed in a variety of prostatic diseases (e.g.
chronic prostatitis, neoplasia).
CYSTOSCOPY
A. Uroendoscopy is a useful tool for the diagnosis of many lower urinary tract disorders (e.g.
ectopic ureter, proliferative urethritis, polypoid cystitis, transitional cell carcinoma). It also is
employed in treatment of urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence to allow submucosal
injection of collagen in the urethra. See Chapter 13 for additional information on the use of
uroendoscopy in patients with urinary incontinence.
Utility
 1. Uroendoscopy provides a magnified view of the mucosal surfaces of the vestibule, vagina,
urethra, ureteral openings, and bladder.
 2. It remains the gold standard for the diagnosis of ectopic ureter, and for accurately deter-
mining the termination of ectopic ureters.
3. Uroendoscopy is useful in the definitive evaluation of the lower urinary tract for anatomic
abnormalities including stricture, neoplasia, polypoid cystitis, urachai diverticulum, and
inflammatory lesions such as proliferative urethritis.
4.  Uroendoscopy is very sensitive for the identification of transitional cell carcinoma and can
identify the tumor when other techniques such as double contrast cystography and ultra-
 5. Uroendoscopy is an important tool in the evaluation of patients with recurrent bacterial
UTI in order to exclude the presence of anatomic abnormalities.
6. Uroendoscopy allows visualization of glomerulations (i.e., petechial mucosal bladder
hemorrhages) in cats with interstitial cystitis either at low pressure or after a provocative
increase in bladder pressure.
Clinical Evaluation of the Urinary Tract  CHAPTER 2 55
Technique
more than 3 kg using a rigid cystoscope. It can also be used in males that have had a peri
neal urethrostomy.
a.  Minimally invasive, requires the least equipment, and readily allows examination of
the urinary tract.
b. General anesthesia is preferred to give adequate muscular relaxation.
c.Right lateral recumbency is most comfortable for right-handed examiners.
d.Scrub the perineal region, and wear sterile gloves. Minimize any contamination of the
urinary tract.
e. The scope is advanced by infusing the vaginal vestibule with 0.9% saline. Urine in
the bladder is drained and the bladder then distended with sterile 0.9% saline which
improves the optical quality of the images.
f. Antibiotics are administered for 5 days affer the procedure to prevent development of UTI.
 2. Flexible transurethral uroendoscopy is used in male dogs and cats. It can also be used in
larger female dogs.
a.General anesthesia is preferred.
b. Flexible scopes are fragile and require careful handling and storage to avoid breakage.
c. Patient preparation is similar to that for rigid transurethral uroendoscopy. Complete
Examination of the bladder is difficult due to the small size of the cystoscope.
d. Antibiotics are administered for 5 days after the procedure to prevent development of UTI
RENAL BIOPSY
Utility
 1. Renal biopsy allows the clinician to establish a histologic diagnosis and should be consid-
ered when the information obtained is likely to alter patient management or prognosis.
Examples of such situations include differentiation of protein-losing glomerular diseases.
differentiation of ARF from CRF, determination of the status of tubular basement mem
branes in ARF, and establishing the response of the patient to therapy or the progression
 of previously documented renal disease.
2. A renal biopsy should not be performed until thorough clinical evaluation of the patient
has been completed.
Techniques
1. Techniques include blind percutaneous, laparoscopic, open, and ultrasound-guided
approaches.
a. The blind percutaneous technique works well in cats because their kidneys can be
readily palpated and immobilized.
requires special equipment and expertise.
edet eia Asdonq apam 'panuanadxaui si roeado an ro 'panmban si andes raarel e f 'j
rotomy is recommended. Advantages of this procedure include the ability to visually
inspect the kidneys and other abdominal organs, to choose the specific biopsy site, to
take an adequately sized sample, and to observe the kidney for hemorrhage.
 d.Utrasound-guided needle biopsies can be obtained under sedation. At our hospital, renal
biopsy in dogs and cats usually is performed under ultrasound guidance using the Bard7
biopsy instrument with the animal sedated using a combination of medetomidine, butor-
phanol, and atropine. Altermatively, an intravenous infusion of propofol ( with endotracheal
56
CHAPTER 2  Clinical Evaluation of the Urinary Tract
 intubation) or gas anesthesia may be used. If tissue architecture is not considered essential
for diagnosis (e.g, renal lymphosarcoma, feline infectious peritonitis), aspiration of the
kidney using a 23- or 25-gauge needle may provide sufficient material for cytology.
e.  Before biopsy, an IV catheter should be placed, and clotting ability should be evalu-
ated (buccal mucosal bleeding time and estimation of platelet numbers). Hematocrit
and plasma proteins should be determined before biopsy but after adequate rehy-
dration with parenteral fluids. Hematocrit and plasma proteins should be monitored
after biopsy to detect hemorrhage.
f.Biopsy instruments.
(1) Franklin-modified Vim Silverman needle and the Tru-Cut biopsy needlec are most
commonly used.
(2) Avoid penetration of the kidney with the outer cannula prior to penetration of the
cutting needle to prev ent retrieval of an insufficient amount of renal cortex.
g. Avoid the renal hilus and major vessels when directing the biopsy instrument. It is rec-
ommended to direct the biopsy needle along the long axis of the kidney, solely through
cortical tissue (Figure 2-3). Due to the small size of feline kidneys, it is common to
obtain relatively large amounts of medullary tissue and this has been associated with
infarction and fibrosis. The goal is to obtain sufficient renal cortex so that at least 5
glomeruli are present in the biopsy sample. Ideally, 8 to 12 glomeruli will be available
for histopathologic interpretation.
h.  After using the open approach or keyhole technique, the kidney should be digitally
compressed for 5 minutes and, after release, the abdomen inspected for hemorrhage.
！
口L
比
FGURE 2-3  Recommended technique for directing the renal biopsy needle. The ideal path for the needle is
along the renal cortex where there is likely to be a higher density of glomeruli. Penetration of the needle into the
medulla should be avoided because injury to vessels at the corticomedullary junction may occur and lead to renal
infarction or serious hemorrhage. The needle should never be directed toward the renal hilus because damage to
the renal pelvis with leakage of urine could occur or life-threatening hemorrhage could occur as a consequence of
damage to the renal artery or vein.
c. Bard Biopty Biopsy System C.R. Bard Inc., Covington Ga.
Clinical Evaluation of the Urinary Tract  CHAPTER 2  57
i. Dislodge the biopsy sample from the biopsy instrument using a stream of sterile saline
from a syringe or, alternatively, the biopsy instrument may be immersed directly in
fixative.
j. For routine histopathology, the sample should be fixed in buffered 10% formalin for at
least 3 to 4 hours.
k.For immunofluorescence studies helpful in the evaluation of immune-mediated glo
 merular injury (immune complexes), the sample can be preserved in Michel's transport
medium. Immunopathology studies also may be performed by a peroxidase-antiper-
oxidase method using formalin-fixed samples without need for special preservation of
the sample.
1.  In special circumstances (e.g., early familial nephropathy, glomerulonephritis), sam-
 ples processed in glutaraldehyde may be submitted for electron microscopy.
m. After renal biopsy, a brisk fluid diuresis should be initiated to prevent clot formation
in the renal pelvis. Monitor hematocrit and plasma proteins over the next 12 to 24
hours to detect serious hemorrhage. Doppler blood flow at the biopsy site should be
evaluated shortly after the biopsies, and then again at 1 and 3 hours to ensure that
active bleeding from the site is not a problem. Patients that undergo early morning
Aa an u ao o on paseaan aq un uao uondon jnoum Asdoa leuan
evening.
Complications
Hemorrhage
a. The most common complication of renal biopsy is hemorhage.
b. Subcapsular hemorrhage commonly occurs at the site of biopsy, and many patients
experience microscopic hematuria during the first 48 hours after biopsy. Macroscopic
hematuria is less common.
c. Severe hemorrhage into the peritoneal cavity is rare and usually associated with improper
 abdomen, fresh whole blood transfusion, and exploratory surgery if necessary.
Linear Infarcts
a. Linear infarcts in the path of the biopsy needle are observed commonly after renal
biopsy. These are small and superficial when the biopsy is limited to renal cortex. If,
however, an arcuate artery is damaged by passage of the biopsy needle through the
corticomedullary junction, a wedge-shaped infarct may occur.
b. This complication is more common in cats because of the small size of the kidneys in
relation to the length of the biopsy needle.
Hydronephrosis
a.  If the renal pelvis is penetrated by the biopsy needle, bleeding may occur and clot for-
mation can lead to obstruction of the kidney and hydronephrosis.
b. This complication should be considered if the biopsy report indicates the presence of
transitional epithelium at one end of the biopsy or if progressive renal enlargement is
detected after renal biopsy.
c.The risk of this complication is minimized by limiting the biopsy site to the renal cortex
and instituting a fluid diuresis afterward.
BLADDER AND URETHRAL BIOPSY
A. Urethral or bladder masses may be biopsied at the time of surgery, cystoscopy, or using
catheter aspiration techniques (blind or with ultrasound guidance).
B. Samples obtained by cystoscopy may be very small when using smaller cystoscopes.
89
 CHAPTER 2 ■ Clinical Evaluation of the Urinary Tract
C. Tissue samples may be obtained by passing a urinary catheter to the site of the lesion, aspi-
rating against the mass using a 6- or 12-mL syringe containing saline, and agitating the
preservation and histopathologic evaluation. Tissue samples adequate for diagnosis often
can be obtained using this technique, especially for the diagnosis of transitional cell carci-
noma.
D. Ultrasound guidance can be used to direct the biopsy instrument to the lesion after it has been
introduced into the bladder.
E. Bacterial culture of biopsy samples is indicated if chronic or recurrent UTI is suspected.
WHAT DO WE DO?
· Evaluate BUN and serum creatinine concentrations concurrently.
● Evaluate urine specific gravity in conjunction with BUN and serum creatinine concentrations before
administering fluid therapy.
● Carefully differentiate prerenal, primary renal, and postrenal azotemia using all diagnostic informa-
tion available.
· Use clearance methods to estimate GFR in nonazotemic patients with polyuria and polydipsia
san nsou auni jo ueneaa rahe juaredde pou si sis rnr asa o asnen a raaauam
results.
● Use fractional clearance to resolve the pathophysiology of otherwise unexplained serum electrolyte
abnormalities (e.g., unexplained hypokalemia).
● Use the urine protein-creatinine ratio and microalbuminuria test to investigate unexplained protein
uria taking into account the advanfages and limitafions of these tests.
that each provides different but potentially valuable diagnostic information.
· Use uroendoscopy to diagnose and sometimes treat (e.g., collagen injections) lower urinary tract
disorders.
THOUGHTS FOR THE FUTURE
● Practical tests to estimate GFR (e.g., iohexol clearance, cystatin C) will become more widely avail-
able to pracfifioners.
and treatment of urinary tract disease.
· Veterinarians will develop a better understanding of the prognostic value of the microalbuminuria
test in the diagnosis and prognosis of animals with mild asymptomatic proteinuria.
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS
· Patients with normal BUN or serum creatinine concentrations must have normal renal function.
Certainly, this statement could be true, but more specifically normal BUN and serum creatinine
concentrations mean only that 25% or more of its nephrons are functioning normally. It takes loss of
function of 75% or more of the nephrons before BUN and serum creatinine concentration increase
above the upper limit of their normal reference range.
· Determination of GFR to more precisely evaluate renal function is best left to secondary or tertiary
referral centers and not primary care practices. With commercial availability of iohexol measure.
ment, it is reasonable for practitioners to administer iohexol, collect 3 timed plasma samples aftel
Clinical Evaluation of the Urinary Tract ■ CHAPTER 259
injection, and submit plasma samples to a reference laboratory for determination of iohexol clear
ance as an estimate of GFR.
· Detection of proteinuria signifies serious renal disease. Although the protein in the urine may be
originating from the kidneys and indicate cause for concern, it also may have originated from the
lower urinary tract in response to inflammation or infection. Whenever evaluating proteinuria, the
method of urine collection, urine specific gravity, and urine sediment changes must all be taken into
consideration.
● Water deprivation test results are used in the evaluation of dogs and cats thought to have underly-
ing chronic renal disease. Actually, a water deprivation test should not be performed in an animal
suspected to have underlying renal disease because dehydration that arises may pose a risk to the
remaining nephrons if renal ischemia occurs. The risk of renal damage from ischemia is greater in
patients with diseased kidneys than in those with normal kidneys. In some instances, it is not clear
im the nonazotemic patient if the cause of low urine specific gravity is chronic renal disease or some
other underlying disease associated with polyuria and polydipsia. In such instances, careful moni-
toring during water deprivation is crucial.
 FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
Q: A 5-year-old dog with chronic renal disease has a serum phosphorus concentration of 7.1 mg/dL.
This result is not cause for concern because it falls within my diagnostic laboratory's normal refer
ence range for phosphorus (i.e., 3.5-8.5 mg/dL), right?
A: Unfortunately, many diagnostic laboratories have reference ranges for serum phosphorus con-
centration that go up to 8 mg/dL or even slightly higher. The reason is because young growing animals
have been included in the population used to determine the normal reference range. A normal mature
Tp/aw g'g ueu raleano ou uogenuasuon snioydsoqd wmas e aaeu pmous jeo 1o Sop
Q: Which is better in the evaluation of patients with suspected renal disease, BUN or serum creati-
nine concentration?
A: Neither one is better than the other. Both BUN and serum creatinine concentration are insensi
tive tests for evaluation of renal function during the early stages of nephron loss. Both BUN and serum
creatinine concentration begin to increase when 75% or more of the nephrons are non-functional. BUN
however, is affected by more nonrenal factors than is the serum creatinine concentration,but both have
pitfalls in their interpretation. Hence it is recommended that clinicians evaluate both BUN and serum
creatinine concentration at the same time.
Q: On preoperative screening, a seemingly healthy dog has a BUN of 40 mg/dL and a serum creati-
renal disease.
A: The most likely cause for such results is that the blood samples were taken within a few (4 to 8)
hours after a protein-rich meal, which can result in an increased BUN without a corresponding increase in
serum creatirine concentration. A blood sample should be collected after a 12-hour fast and resubmitted
to the laboratory. Dehydration also can result in an increased BUN concentration relative to serum creati-
nine concentration because urea can be passively reabsorbed into the blood from the renal tubules during
decreased tubular flow whereas creatinine cannot. In this instance, the urine specific gravity is expected
to be high due to renal conservation of water if renal function is normal. Gastrointestinal hemorrhage is
another possible reason why the BUN concentration could be increased disproportionately because bac
teria in the intestinal tract hydrolyze urea to carbon dioxide and ammonia, and the ammoria is converted
to urea in the liver. Alternatively, the increased BUN concentration may accurately reflect poor renal func
tion while the lower serum creatinine concentration reflects reduced muscle mass in a cachectic animal
60
 CHAPTER 2 ■ Clinical Evaluation of the Urinary Tract
Q: Is there any reason to order a Up/Uc or microalbuminuria test if the dipstick for protein is nega-
tive or only shows only a trace?
A: In animals with suspected renal disease, systemic hypertension, hyperadrenocorticism, or
hyperthyroidism, the Up,/Uc. or microalbuminuria test may detect proteinuria indicative of early
renal damage because these tests detect much lower concentrations of protein than does the dipstick
methodology.
Q: Is there any reason to order a Up/Uc or microalbuminuria test if the dipstick for protein is 1+
or 2+ on a urine sample with a specific gravity of 1.050 and negative urine sediment examination?
A: This magnitude of proteinuria on dipstick evaluation could be pathologic or could be a conse-
quence of the concentrated nature of the urine sample. The microalbuminuria test corrects the sample
to a standard 1.010 specific gravity and thus removes this variable from consideration. Similarly, divid-
ing the urine protein concentration by the urine creatinine concentration corrects for the concentrated
nature of the urine sample
Q: Urinalysis on a voided urine sample from a dog with stranguria shows pink color, 50 to 60 red
blood cells per high-power field (RBCs/hpf), 10 to 15 WBCs/hpf, and 3+ proteinuria on dipstick
analysis. The urine Up/Uc was 8.5 (normal, <0.5) and the microalbuminuria test result was 12 mg/dL
(normal, <l mg/dL). Are these results of concern?
A: There are abnormal amounts of protein in the urine sample, but the urine Up,/Uc, and microal-
buminuria test results are not helpful because the urine sediment is active (i.e., many RBC and WBC
are present) which can explain the abnormal results. The presence of inflammation and bleeding any-
where along the urinary tract can add protein to the urine. The urine Up,/Uc. and microalbuminuria
tests are most useful to indicate renal origin proteinuria when the urine sediment is inactive. It is of no
 s s            
or pyuria on sediment examination.
Q: I am trying to decide whether to perform ultrasound examination of the urinary tract or contrast
urography in an older male cat with persistent stranguria. Which procedure is preferable?
A: These methods are not mutually exclusive and both may identify underlying bladder lesions.
-x aaap on asadxa leuat aqeapisuon pue puadba pazads saman Auderouose
mal value, but it is less invasive than contrast urography, which necessitates sedation and passage of a
urinary catheter. Ultrasonography does not provide much information about the urethra because of its
primarily intra-pelvic location. Contrast urethrocystography allows more complete evaluation of the
urethra and may provide more definitive information about small lesions in the bladder and urethra
than can be obtained during ultrasound examination. Ultrasonography also is very dependent on how
full the bladder is during the study, and over interpretation of bladder wall thickness may occur if the
bladder is minimally distended during the examination. The extent of bladder filling can be controlled
during cystography.
Q: Should we be recommending renal biopsy more often? If so, what protocol should we use?
A: Renal biopsy should not be approached lightly because complications are possible. You should
only biopsy the kidney if you believe the results are likely to change how you treat the patient. Exam-
ples of situations in which the information obtained from renal biopsy may change your approach
to management include: differentiating acute from chronic renal failure when this distinction is not
apparent after thorough clinical evaluation, establishing a prognosis in ARF when the clinical course
has been protracted, and differentiating glomerulonephritis from glomerular amyloidosis. It seldom is
helpful to perform renal biopsy in patients with stage 3 or 4 chronic kidney disease. In these instances,
the primary renal lesion may not be apparent due to extensive tubular atrophy, glomerular sclerosis
Clinical Evaluation of the Urinary Tract  CHAPTER 2  61
and interstitial fibrosis. Whether or not biopsy earlier in the course of disease would be helpful is
 not clear. Clinical outcome after therapeutic intervention in animals with stage 1 or 2 chronic kidney
disease is not well studied, although it is commonly thought that treatment at this early stage has thie
potential to limit progression.
Q: A 12-year-old female dog has had stranguria and recurrent UT1. Urine cultures have sometimes
been positive; antibiotic treatment helps, but the clinical signs never completely resolve. The dog
seems otherwise healthy. Ultrasound examination was normal except for a mildly thickened blad-
der wall. A double contrast cystogram was normal. What now?
A: The dog described would be a good candidate for urethrocystoscopy. This procedure provides
excellent direct visualization of the vestibule, urethra, and bladder. Lesions not readily identified on
ultrasonography or contrast cystography often are identified during uroendoscopy.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Adams LG, Polzin D], Osborne CA, et al: Correlation of urine protein/creatinine ratio and twenty-four-hour urinary
protein excretion in normal cats and cats with surgically induced chronic renal failure, β Vet Interm Med 6:36-40, 1992.
Adams WH, Toal RL, Breider MA: Ultrasonographic findings in dogs and cats with oxalate nephrosis attributed to
ethylene glycol intoxication: 15 cases (1984-1988), I Ar Vet Med Assoc 199:492496, 1991.
Adams WH, Toal RL, Walker MA, et al: Early renal ultrasonographic findings in dogs with experimentally induced
ethylene glycol nephrosis, Amm I Vet Res 50:1370-1375, 1989.
Barr Fj: Evaluation of ultrasound as a method of assessing renal size in the dog, I Small Anim Pract 31:174-179, 1990.
ue o apea e ussn eoes a deuosue aues jo uoiaa  su  audoisu ta uossog
urine dipstick test, Vet Clin Pathol 28:33-38, 1999.
Brown SA, Finco DR, Boudinot FD, et al: Evaluation of a single injection method, using iohexol for estimating glomerular
filtration rate in cats and dogs, Am ∫ Vet Res 57:105-110, 1996.
Cannizzo KL, McLoughlin MA, Chew D], DiBartola SP: Uroendoscopy: Evaluation of the lower urinary tract, Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 31:789-807, 2001.
Drost WT, Couto CG, Fischetti AJ, et al: Comparison of glomerular filtration rate between Greyhounds and non-Grey
hound dogs, I Vet Intern Med 20:544-546, 2006.
42, 2003.
Finco DR, Braselton WE, Cooper TA: Relationship between plasma iohexol clearance and urinary exogenous creatinine
clearance in dogs, I Vet Interm Med 15:368-373, 2001.
Finco DR, Brown SA, Crowell WA, et al: Exogenous creatinine clearance as a measure of glomerular filtration rate in dogs
with red uiced renal mass, Am#  Vet Res 52:1029-1032, 1991.
Finco DR, Tabaru H, Brown SA,et al: Endogenous creatinine clearance measurement of glomerular filtration rate in dogs,
A  Vet Res 54:1575-1578, 1993.
8t punosnr op aa 'sies pue shop Aueay us aouese eseid poxaui ie ia's assa ' anogeu 'troui-ro
173,2006
Grimm JB, Grimm KA, Kneller SK, et al: The effect of a combination of medetomidine-butorphanol and medetomidine,
butorphanol, atropine on glomerular filtration rate in dogs, Vet Radiol Lltrasound 42:458-462, 2001.
Heiene R, Moe L: Pharmacokinetic aspects of measurement of glomerular filtration rate in the dog: A review, I Vet Intern
Med 12:401-414, 1998.
Newell SM, Ko JC, Ginn PE, et al: Effects of three sedative protocols on glomerular filtration rate in clinically normal dogs,
A  Vet Res 58:446-450, 1997.
Pressler BM, Vaden SL, Jensen WA,et al: Detection of canine microalbuminuria using semiquantitative test strips designed
for lse with human urine, Vet Clin Pathol 31:56-60, 2002.
Rogers KS, Komkow A, Brown SA, et al: Comparison of four methods of estimating glomerular filtration rate in cats,
A#  Vet Res 52:961-964, 1991.
ity in healthy pet dogs of various ages, / Vet Intem Med 11:30-35, 1997.
62
CHAPTER 2 ■ Clinical Evaluation of the Urinary Tract
Vet Res 48:596-599, 1987.
(1981-1986), / A Vet Med Assoc 191:999-1007, 1987.
Walter PA, Johnston GR, Feeney DA, et al: Applications of ultrasonography in the diagnosis of parenchymal kidney
disease in cats: 24 cases (1981-1986), I Am Vet Med Assoc 192:92-98, 1988.
Waters CB, Adams LG, Scot-Moncrieff JC, et al: Effects of glucocorticoid therapy on urine protein-to-creatinine ratios and
renal morphology in dogs, I Vet Interm Med 11:172-177, 1997.
Wise LA, Allen TA, Cartwright M: Comparison of renal biopsy techniques in dogs,  A Vet Med Assoc 195:935-939, 1989.
Yeager AE, Anderson Wl: Study of association between histologic features and echogenicity of architecturally normal cat
kidneys, A I Vet Res 50:860-863, 1989.
CHAPTER
3
Acute Renal Failure
INTRODUCTION
A. Acute renal failure (ARF) is a clinical syndrome characterized by an abrupt increase in serum
creatinine and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) concentrations to above normal (azotemia).
 1. ARF also may be associated with abnormal regulation of electrolytes, acid-base, and fluid
balances.
2. ARF may be catastrophic for renal function or patient survival if resolution does not occur
within a reasonable time period.
B. Acute renal failure can be prerenal, intrinsic (primary), or postrenal in origin.
Acute renal failure is characterized by an abrupt increase in serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen
 concentrations.
1. The term acute renal failure is commonly used to refer to acute intrinsic renal failure (AIRF),
but prerenal and postrenal causes also should be considered.
2. Prerenal azotemia is the most important differential diagnosis to consider along with
intrinsic causes of azotemia.
3. Postrenal causes of ARF usually are easily excluded from consideration after complete
physical examination and appropriate diagnostic imaging.
C. Early recognition of AIRF is crucial because it can be reversed in patients with enough surviv-
ing nephrons when treatment is instituted early on in the course of the disease.
D. AIRF probably occurs more frequently than appreciated and may go undiagnosed or be con-
fused with chronic renal failure. Although AIRF can sometimes be successfully treated, many
affected patients do not survive. Recogmizing situations in which AIRF is likely to develop and
taking appropriate preventive measures are preferable to treating established AIRF.
E. The frequency of underlying conditions associated with AIRF varies with the location and
nature of veterinary practice.
1. Nephrotoxicity is the most common cause of AIRF at The Ohio State University Veterinary
Hospital, followed by nephritis (e.g., leptospirosis) and ischemia.
 2. The aggressive use of potentially nephrotoxic antibiotics, especially aminoglycosides, con-
tributes to the frequency of nephrotoxic AIRF.
 3. Indiscriminate use of or accidental exposure to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) and exposure of veterinary patients to extensive surgical procedures and aggres-
sive posttraumatic resuscitative maneuvers also may contribute to an increased frequency
of ischemic AIRF.
63
64
CHAPTER 3 Acute Renal Failure
PATHOGENESIS AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF ACUTE RENAL
FAILURE
Prerenal Acute Renal Failure (Figure 3-1)
1. Reduced perfusion of the kidneys results in retention of nitrogenous wastes. A substantial
 decrease in hydrostatic pressure in the glomeruli results in decreased glomerular filtration
rate (GFR) and solute retention.
 2. Early in the process of volume depletion, renal autoregulation preserves excretory func-
tion and continued excretion of waste products. Autoregulation eventually is overcome
and azotemia develops.
3.
 The most common causes of reduced renal perfusion are dehydration, hypotension, shock,
and reduced cardiac output.
4.
 Early prerenal ARF is associated with physiologic oliguria (assuming normal kidneys ini-
tially), which is a normal response to decreased renal perfusion.
5.
 Decreased renal perfusion is detected in the kidney and by peripheral baroreceptors, and
results in increased reabsorption of salt and water from the glomerular filtrate.
6.
 Severe and prolonged hypoperfusion of the kidneys can produce primary lesions in the 
kidneys (ischemic nephrosis or ischemic acute tubular necrosis).
7.
 Prerenal azotemia readily resolves after correction of decreased cardiac output and circu-
lating blood volume.
8.
 A component of prerenal azotemia often contributes to the total magnitude of azotemia in
Volume depletion
Acute
Embolic
prerenal failure
Leptospiral
Heart failure
Pyelo-
Nephritis
Glomerulo-
Acute
Acute
renal failure
intrinsic failure
Ischemia
Nephrosis
Nephrotoxicity
Uroabdomen
Acute
postrenal failure
Bilateral obstruction
FIGURE 3-1  Classification of acute renal failure: Prerenal, intrinsic renal, and postrenal causes must be
considered.
Acute Renal Failure ■ CHAPTER 3
65
Postrenal Acute Renal Failure (See Chapter 1l, Obstruction Uropathy and
Nephropathy, and Chapter 12, Urinary Tract Trauma and Uroperifoneum)
Causes
a. Bilateral renal obstruction.
(1) Urolithiasis.
(2) Bilateral ureteral or urethral obstruction.
(3) Urethral plugs in cats.
b. Uroabdomen (rupture of urinary tract with accumulation of urine).
Pathogenesis
a.Obstruction results in failure to filter waste products due to back pressure in the nephron.
b. Uroabdomen results in recycling of waste products across the peritoneum.
Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure (primary ARF)
Causes of Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure (see Chapter 4, Specific Syndromes Causing Acute
Intrinsic Renal Failure)
NEPHROTOXICITY
(1) Ethylene glycol (EG).
(2) Antimicrobials.
(a) Aminoglycosides.
(b) Amphotericin-B.
(c) Sulfonamides administered to a dehydrated patient
(d) Tetracyclines administered IV.
(e) Nafcillin administered intraoperatively.
(3) Easter lily (cats).
(4) Grape or raisin toxicity (dogs).
(5) Hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria.
(a) Cholecalciferol rodenticide (Quintox, Rampage).
(b) Calcipotriene (Dovonex).
(6) Anticancer drugs.
(a) Cisplatin.
(b) High dose doxorubicin (Adriamycin).
(7) Radiocontrast agents administered IV.
(8) Heavy metals (e.g., zinc, arsenic, lead).
(9) Hydrocarbons.
(10) Fluorinated inhalation anesthetics.
(11) Calcium ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA).
(12) Mycotoxins (e.g., ochratoxin, citrinin).
(13) Tainted food (melamine and cyanuric acid).
RENAL ISCHEMIA
(1) Dehydration.
(2) Trauma.
(3) Anesthesia.
(4) Sepsis.
(5) Heat stroke.
(6) Pigment nephropathy.
(a) Hemolysis.
(i)  Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia.
(ii) Envenomation.
66
CHAPTER 3 ■ Acute Renal Failure
(°) Coral snake.
(°) Hymenoptera (bee sting).
(b) Myoglobinuria.
(7) Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors.
(8) Shock.
(9) Hemorrhage.
(10) Surgery.
(11) Burns.
(12) Hypothermia.
(13) NSAIDs.
(14) Acute papillary necrosis (e.g., medullary renal amyloidosis, Fanconi syndrome).
NEPHRITIS
(1) Leptospirosis — acute tubulointerstitial nephritis.
(2) Borrelia — rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis.
(3) Acute bacterial pyelonephritis.
(4) Embolic nephritis.
(5) Allergic interstitial nephritis.
ACUTE HYPERPHOSPHATEMIA
(1) Tumor lysis syndrome.
(2) Phosphate enema.
(3) Phosphate acidifier.
(4) Massive soft tissue trauma.
Pathophysiology of Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure Due to Nephrosis
a. Exposure to nephrotoxins or ischemia causes tubular injury along a spectrum from
 degeneration to necrosis and is referred to as nephrosis or acute tubular necrosis (ATN)
(Figure 3-2). Some patients have minimal to no light microscopic lesions but experi-
ence severe renal excretory failure
(1) Early lesions may be distributed preferentially in tubules of the outer medulla, an
area that is not easily biopsied.
(2) Renal tubular lesions may be subtle in nature and patchy in distribution making
them easy to overlook on routine microscopy.
(3) Subtle tubular lesions can cause decreased sodium reabsorption proximally which
 can promote sustained vasoconstriction in parent glomeruli as sensed at the mac-
ula densa (so-called vasomotor nephropathy).
b. Factors that contribute to azotemia and oliguria during AIRF (Figure 3-3, A-E)
(1) Tubular backleak (across or between damaged tubules).
(2) Intraluminal tubular obstruction by casts, debris, or tubular swelling.
(3) Extraluminal tubular obstruction by interstitial edema or cellular infiltrates
(a) Increased pressure inside tubular lumen.
(b) Decreased interstitial blood supply (i.e., as a consequence of edema).
(4) Primary filtration failure.
(a) Vasomotor nephropathy.
(i) Afferent arteriolar vasoconstriction.
(ii) Efferent arteriolar vasodilatation.
(b) Decrease in glomerular permeability.
(i)  Decreased size or number of endothelial pores.
(ii) Decreased surface area of glomerular membranes.
c.The mechanism(s) that initiates AIRF may not be the same one(s) that maintains AIRF.
A combination of mechanisms likely is operative in clinical patients.
Acute Renal Failure ■ CHAPTER367
FGURE 3-2  Photomicrograph of acute tubular necrosis. A, Normal glomerulus with areas of tubular necrosis
 Note some tubules with loss of tubular epithelium, some with flattened epithelium (suggesting restitution), and
tubular lumens filled with necrotic debris. B, Note relatively normal tubules in upper left field (focal areas of
attenuation exist here). Just below the normal tubules are several tubules with complete loss of epithelium and
abundant intraluminal detritus (hematoxylin and eosin stain, x200). (Courtesy of Dr. Steve Weisbrode, Columbus,
Ohio.)
d.Renal ischemia consists of a spectrum from prerenal azotemia to acute tubular necrosis
and in its most devastating form, bilateral cortical necrosis.
(1) The renal cortex is richly supplied with adrenergic innervation, which results in
vasoconstriction during renal ischemia. Due to a large reserve of blood supply,
temporary or mild reductions in renal blood flow do not result in tubular necrosis.
(2) Deprivation of blood supply, if severe and prolonged, results in loss of cellular
e   m sa   go ss e u a
Xiddns uasAxo paonpai Sunmp Amfun jo xstu isaieaia je are
(a) It is not necessary for systemic hypotension to occur for the kidneys to experi-
ence intrarenal hypotension.
NSAIDs do not directly damage the kidney. Acute renal injury only occurs if mediators of vasoconstriction
have been activated by the body's perception of volume depletion.
(b) The outer medullary region of the kidney is the most metabolically active and
is supplied with the lowest amount of oxygen. The last part of the proximal
tubule (pars recta, P3) and the medullary thick ascending limb of the loop of
Henle are located here and these areas are at increased risk for early injury
during hypoxia. The medulla already is an area of low blood supply that is at
increased risk when blood flow is further reduced.
e. NSAIDs block renal production of vasodilatory prostaglandins that maintain renal
blood flow during dehydration resulting in renal ischemia (Figure 3-4).
f. True nephrotoxins exert their deleterious effects directly on the kidney after binding
to tubular cell membranes. Reduced energy production and cell death follow. Some
 nephrotoxins also cause renal vasoconstriction, but the major effect is direct cell injury
rather than ischemia.
89
CHAPTER 3 ■ Acute Renal Failure
Normal
Afferent Arteriolar Constriction
Normal glomerular
Decreased
plasma flow
plasma flow
Afferent
Efferent
Normal
Normal
glomerular
- glomerular
Decreased
Diminished
hydrostatic
filtration
hydrostatic
GFR
pressure
rate
pressure
Normal
intratubular
A
pressure
B
Obstruction
Normal glomerular
Normal glomerular
plasma flow
plasma flow
Normal
Diminished
Diminished
pressure
GFR
Normal
GFR
pressure8
Loss of
Loss of
microvilli
Increased
microvilli
intratubular
pressure
C
FIGURE 3-3  General mechanisms contributing to decreased GFR and oliguria in AIRF. The illustration
represents all nephrons in the kidneys. The mechanism or mechanisms that initiate the injury may differ from those
that cause ongoing injury and maintain the state of AIRF. Multiple mechanisms may be operative simultaneously.
It is almost never clinically possible to identify the specific operative mechanism in an individual patient. A,
 Normal nephron. Normally, about 30% of the blood entering the glomerulus is filtered into the Bowman's space.
Glomerular filtration pressure normally is not impeded to any appreciable extent by the normally low intratubular
pressure. The healthy renal tubular epithelium prevents tubular fluid from leaking between or across tubular
cells. No obstructing material is present within the tubular lumen, and the lumen is completely patent. B, Afferent
arteriolar constriction (vasomotor nephropathy). Glomerular filtration is severely decreased by constriction of
the afferent arteriole. Decreased intraglomerular pressure can result in azotemia and decreased urine production.
Sympathetically mediated vasoconstriction may result from systemic hypotension, pain, tissue handling during
surgery, and anesthesia. Damaged afferent arteriolar myocytes perpetuate vasoconstriction as calcium enters the
cells and results in contraction. Sustained vasoconstriction not only decreases GFR but also impairs oxygen delivery
to the tubular cells via the post glomerular vessels, which can result in acute tubular necrosis. C, Obstruction,
increased intratubular pressure. Increased intratubular pressure occurs proximal to the obstructed segment of
the nephron. The obstruction can be intraluminal or extraluminal, and the resultant increase in pressure opposes
 glomerular filtration. The obstructing material can be cellular debris (e.g., sloughed brush border cell membranes,
regurgitated organelles), precipitated proteins, or, occasionally, crystalline precipitates. Interstitial edema or
cellular infiltrates can cause extraluminal obstruction and decrease renal blood flow by compressing interstitial
 blood vessels. Tubular swelling can also contribute to increased intraluminal pressure.
Acute Renal Failure  CHAPTER 3
69
Tubular Leak
Diminished Permeability
Normal glomerular
Normal glomerular
plasma flow
plasma flow
Diminished
permeability
Normal
Normal
Diminished
Normal
GFR
pressure
GFR
pressure
Leakage
D
B
E
FGURE 3-3,cont'd  D, Tubular backleak In this situation, the filtration pressure may be normal, but filtered fluid leaks
back across the damaged tubular epithelium into the interstitium. Some fluid also may accumulate within the damaged
tubule. Tubular backleak occurs in patients with more severe tubular injury. Backleak is increased by any concurrent
increase in tubular pressure. E, Decreased glomerular permeability In this example, the disease process has decreased
the surface area available for glomerular filtration. Decreased glomerular permeability can arise as a consequence of
mesangial cell contraction and decreases in the number or diameter of the glomerular fenestrae. (Dra wm by Tim Vojt.)
g. The term nephrotoxicant refers to a chemical or drug that can result in renal injury
regardless of whether it is by direct nephrotoxic injury (e.g., aminoglycosides) or by
renal ischemia (e.g., NSAIDs, myoglobin).
h. Patients with underlying renal disease develop episodes of AIRF more readily than
patients that had normal kidneys before the insult.
(1) The ability of diseased kidneys to autoregulate blood flow and GFR is decreased,
placing them at greater risk for renal ischemia. They cannot undergo compensatory
vasodilatation to compensate for systemic hypotension.
(2) The ability to synthesize renal vasodilatory prostaglandins is reduced, placing
them at risk for renal ischemia.
Animals with pre-existing renal disease develop AlRF more readily than do normal animals.
(3) The increased tubular metabolic rate of remnant nephrons places them at risk due
pue enausi Sump pamu Apean anou are Kaul peoom paseau rau o
exposure to toxins.
(4) Increased single nephron GFR in remnant nephrons provides an increased filtered
load of potential toxins per remaining nephron.
(5) Hypertrophy of tubular membranes in remnant nephrons provides increased sur-
faces for exposure to potential nephrotoxins.
i. Dehydration magnifies the propensity for and severity of AIRF after exposure to renal
ischemia or nephrotoxins.
Simultaneous exposure to nephrotoxins and renal ischemia dramatically increases the risk of renal injury.
(1) Dehydration promotes maximal water and solute reabsorption along the nephron.
Toxins that are filtered across the glomeruli progressively increase in concentration
70
CHAPTER 3Acute Renal Failure
along the course of the proximal tubule as water and sodium are iso-osmotically
reabsorbed.
(2) The slow tubular flow rate associated with dehydration favors formation of
 obstructing casts after renal ischemia or exposure to a nephrotoxin.
(3) Dehydration already has activated vasoconstrictor signals to the kidneys, which
facilitates additional ischemic damage to the kidneys.
j. Loss of integrity of the cytoskeleton of the renal tubular cell and actin dysregulation are
pivotal early events in nephrosis. Loss of microvilli occurs with loss of the cytoskeleton.
Cell adhesion is impaired at tight junctions (loss of occludin) and along basolateral mem-
branes (loss or redistribution of integrin). These events facilitate detachment of tubular
cells from one another and from the tubular basement membrane. Relocation of Na+-K+
adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) from the basolateral to luminal cellular membranes
impairssodium reabsorptionand resultsin activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
system and afferent arteriolar vasoconstriction (i.e., vasomotor nephropathy). Depletion
Hemodynamic Insult
 Sodium depletion
Nephrotic syndrome
Volume contraction
Renal disease
Congestive heart failure
Anesthesia
Cirrhosis/Ascites
↑ Renin-angiotensin
↑ Adrenergic
system
nervous system
↑ Angiotensin-ll
↑ Norepinephrine
↑Renal
prostaglandin
synthesis
↑Renal
↑Renal
vasoconstriction
vasodilation
Little change in renal blood flow
FIGURE 3-4 ■ Renal blood flow during times of hemodynamic insult. Normal renal vascular resistance and
renal blood flow are relatively well maintained during times of vasoconstriction if synthesis of renal vasodilator
substances is normal. Renal vasoconstriction, however, proceeds unopposed if the synthesis of renal vasodilatory
prostaglandins has been blocked by NSAID administration. Progression to AIRF may occur.
Acute Renal Failure  CHAPTER 3
71
of intracellular adenosine triphosphate (ATP) triggers a cascade of events that alters cell
membrane permeability, increases calcium influx, and impairs cell function ultimately
causing in cell death. The balance between nitric oxide and endothelin, which maintains
normal renal blood flow, is altered (decreased nitric oxide and increased endothelin)
favoring renal vasoconstriction. Damaged myocytes of afferent arterioles allow calcium
influx which potentiates vasoconstriction. Growth factors (e.g., epidermal growth fac-
tor, hepatocyte growth factor, insulin-like growth factor, transforming growth factor) and
k.Phases for AIRF (Figure 3-5).
(1) The latent phase represents the time after exposure to a nephrotoxin or renal
ischemia but before the onset of azotemia. It is associated with increasing number
 and severity of renal tubular lesions over time if the renal insult is not stopped.
(a) Lethal and sublethal renal tubular injury occurs.
(b) The latent phase usually is not detected because clinical sigms are absent or
minimal.
(c) Early removal of the inciting cause of injury will result in rapid return to nor-
mal renal function.
Ischemia
nephrotoxin
Latent phase
Induction
Lethal cell injury
Oliguria 
Maintenance
 Non-oliguria
Death from
uremia
Recovery
Near normal
Chronic
renal function
renal failure
FGURE 3-5  Phases of AIRF. The progression from the latent to the fixed renal failure of the maintenance phase
can be halted if the ischemic or toxic injury is corrected before azotemia has developed. Oliguria occurs in patients
with more severe acute renal injury. Many patients do not survive without dialysis due to the metabolic effects of
remia. Recovery is possible, however, but often with substantial reduction in functional renal mass. Some patients
survive and go on to develop chronic renal failure. Recovery is facilitated by the onset of diuresis in patients that
initially were oligoanuric.
2
CHAPTER 3 ■ Acute Renal Failure
(d) The latent phase is most likely to be detected in closely monitored hospitalized
patients with critical illness.
IIt's not the quantity of urine, but rather the quality of urine produced that matters most.
(e) Older definitions of AIRF required that oliguria be documented during the clin-
ical course, but this is no longer a requirement. Oliguria, normal urine produc-
tion, or polyuria all may occur depending on the specific cause and severity of
renal injury and the phase of AIRF.
(f) Physiological oliguria is common during the latent phase and early mainte-
nancephase.
(2) The maintenance phase of AIRF is characterized by a persistently increased serum
creatinine concentration despite correction of all prerenal factors (i.e., restoration of
extracellular fluid volume and cardiac output).
(a) Oligo-anuria occurs in patients with the most severe intrarenal injury (e.g
those with EG or lily toxicity).
(b) Nonoliguria is typical of AIRF caused by exposure to aminoglycosides.
(c) Entry into the maintenance phase signifies that a critical amount of lethal
injury has occurred in the renal tubules and a course of 1 to 3 weeks of AIRF is
expected before restoration of renal function can occur.
(d) Removal of the inciting cause will not result in the immediate returm of normal
renal function.
(e) Renal injury may be so severe that it may not be possible for the patient to ever
leave the maintenance phase.
 Preservation of some RBF allows for potential recovery of damaged renal tissue. Otherwise, complete
 necrosis of renal tissue would occur.
(f) Severe reduction in RBF and even further reduction in GFR characterize AIRF
RBF may be restored early or even may exceed normal in some patients when
treated by volume expansion, but GFR remains very low during the mainte-
nance phase in animals with well-established AIRF.
(3) During the recovery phase, BUN and serum creatinine concentration return to
normal as GRF and RBF recover in animals capable of surviving the maintenance
phase. Functional renal mass, however, has been reduced.
(a) Diuresis ensues during the recovery phase in patients that were previously
anuric or oliguric.
(b) Complete return of BUN and serum creatinine concentrations to normal may
not be possible for patients that have sustained the greatest renal injury. They
 of life as a chronic renal failure patient.
(c) Nephron dropout and subsequent renal fibrosis occur, resulting in chronic renal
failure (CRF).
(d) Remaining renal tissue is not completely normal even when BUN and serum
creatinine concentrations have returned to normal. Some nephrons invari-
ably have been lost and replaced with fibrous tissue. Renal hypertrophy and
hyperplasia have enabled the kidney to restore some RBF and GFR with fewer
remaining surviving nephrons
Acute Renal Failure ■ CHAPTER 3 73
(e) Maximal urinary concentrating ability and urinary acidification do not
return entirely to normal, but these limitations are not usually of clinical con
sequence.
HISTORY AND CLINICAL SIGNS
Prerenal Acute Renal Failure
1. Oliguria is the most common sign of prerenal acute renal failure
2. Patients with prerenal ARF usually have supporting historical or physical findings of
dehydration, shock, hypotension, or reduced cardiac output.
Postrenal Acute Renal Failure (see Chapter 1l, Obstructive Uropathy and
Nephropathy, and Chapter 12, Urinary Tract Trauma and Uroperitoneum)
1. Patients with postrenal ARF usually have obvious supporting historical, physical, and
diagnostic imaging findings.
 2. Urinary outlow obstruction or urine accumulation in the peritoneum must be promptly
ruled out as potential causes of ARF.
Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
 1. Clinical signs are those of uremia, including anorexia, lethargy, vomiting, and diarrhea.
These signs are not specific for AIRF.
2. Signs will be of recent onset, and a longstanding history of polyuria or polydipsia should
not be present.
3. Based on clinical studies,approximately18% of affected patientsare expected tohaveanuria
43% to have oliguria (urine output of 0.1-1 mL/kg/hr), 25% to have normal urine outpuf
(1-2 mL/kg/hr), and 14% to have polyuria (urine output >2 mL/kg/hr).
4. Lack of urinations may be noted in animals with oliguric AIRF or polyuria may be noticed
in those with nonoliguric ARF.
 5. Recent trauma, shock, surgery, or anesthetic procedures suggests the possibility of ischemic
nephropathy.
 6. Recent administration of known nephrotoxins (e.g., aminoglycosides) should lead to a
suspicion of nephrotoxic AIRF.
 7. Recent administration or accidental ingestion of NSAIDs should lead to a suspicion of
ischemic AIRF.
8. Access to EG or actual observation of EG consumption indicates nephrotoxic AIRF, but
often a positive history cannot be obtained.
9. Postural changes (e.g., hunching of the back) or reluctance to move may be indicative of
renal pain.
10. Lack of food and water intake associated with systemic illness arouses suspicion of
ischemic nephropathy or nephritis (e.g., leptospirosis).
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Prerenal Acute Renal Failure
1. Dehydration often is detected by assessment of skin turgor and observation of dryness of
the mucous membranes.
 2. Poor quality femoral pulses may be detected.
3. Kidneys are normal-sized and nonpainful.
4. The lower urinary tract is normal.
4
CHAPTER 3 ■ Acute Renal Failure
Postrenal Acute Renal Failure (see Chapter 11, Obstructive Uropathy and
Nephropathy, and Chapter 12, Urinary Tract Trauma and Uroperitoneum)
Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
a. Signs of uremia tend to be more severe than those observed with prerenal azotemia.
and include uremic breath and oral ulceration.
b. Mucous membrane pallor should not be observed (as may be the case with CRF).
C.
Fever may be present in animals with intra renal ARF due to nephritis (e.g., leptospirosis).
d.Hypothermia is commonly encountered in animals with ARF due to nephrosis, but
hypothermia can be encountered in any animal near death, regardless of the cause of
azotemia.
e. Dehydration frequently is present in animals with primary AIRF due to fluid
losses from vomiting, diarrhea, and lack of food and water intake. Dehydration
may be exacerbated by excessive urinary loss of fluid in animals with nonoliguric
or polyuric AIRF
Dehydration is frequently present in animals with primary AlRF due to fluid losses from vomiting, diarrhea,
and lack of food and water intake.
f. Overhydration may be present in animals with severe oliguria that have received
excessive amounts of intravenous fluids.
g.Abdominal palpation.
(1) Renal swelling and pain may be identified when palpating the costovertebral
angles in patients with nephritis and nephrosis, but is not a consistent finding.
(2) Kidneys are normal or enlarged with normal contour and not small and irregular
as commonly encountered in animals with CRF.
(3) The bladder may be very small if the animal is oliguric, or it may be normal or large
if the animal is in nonoliguric AIRF.
(4) No evidence for urinary obstruction is found
h. Bradycardia or other arrhythmia may be auscultated or pulse deficits palpated when
hyperkalemia is present.
DIAGNOSIS
Prerenal Acute Renal Failure
1. Confirmation that azotemia is renal.
a. Highly concentrated urine is expected from normal kidneys. Urine specific gravity
should be ≥ 1.030 or more and often is >1.040.
b. Results of urinalysis are normal.
(1) Small numbers of hyaline casts may be seen because of an increased concentration
of urinary mucoprotein.
(2) During severe dehydration, a small amount of protein may leak across the glom-
eruli temporarily.
C.
 Renal size, shape, and texture are normal on radiography and ultrasound examination.
d.Restoration of effective circulating blood volume results in increased urine volume and
improved renal function. If oliguria and poor renal function persist, suspect primary
renal failure.
2. Confirmation of prerenal azotemia obligates the clinician to search for a nonrenal cause
for dehydration and renal hypoperfusion. Historical, physical examination, radiographic,
Acute Renal Failure  CHAPTER 375
ultrasonographic, or laboratory test results may help identify the system responsible fon
prerenal azotemia:
a. Severe vomiting of any cause.
b. Hypoadrenocorticism.
c. Severe diarrhea of any cause.
 d. Obstructive gastrointestinal disease with sequestration of fluid in lumen of the bowel.
e.Hypovolemic shock of any cause.
f. Heart failure.
g.Any other cause of dehydration.
Postrenal Acute Renal Failure (see Chapter ll, Obstructive Uropathy and
Nephropathy, and Chapter 12, Urinary Tract Trauma and Uroperitoneum)
Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
a.  No single test reliably differentiates AIRF from other forms of renal failure, and the
diagnosis usually is established after information from the history and physical exami
nation are integrated with results of urinalysis, renal imaging, serum chemistry and
hematology (e.g., hematocrit).
 b. Blood and urine samples should be collected before therapy because fluids and drugs
can alter laboratory results and confuse interpretation. Serial evaluation of renal func
tion during fluid therapy is necessary to determine an accurate diagnosis and prognosis
c. Hemogram.
(1) Anemia should not be present early in the course of AIRF, but occult hemorrhage can
Occur early in the course of AIRF as a consequence of uremic gastrointestinal ulceration.
(2) A mild to moderate regenerative red cell response can be seen early in AIRF if acute
blood loss occurs.
(3) Total protein concentration may be normal or high, depending on degree of dehy-
dration, and may be decreased if iatrogenic overhydration is present.
(4) The leukogram may be normal or show a stress response with mature neutrophilia
and lymphopenia. Leukocytosis with left shift may be seen in patients with nephritis.
d.Urinalysis.
(1) Urine becomes dilute very early in the clinical course, regardless of whether the
animal is oliguric or nonoliguric. Urine specific gravity often is fixed in the isosthe-
nuric range (1.007-1.017).
I Dilute urine is typical in early AIRF, but also in CRF and consequently does not distinguish AIRF from CRF.
(2) Dipstrip tests may show proteinuria, hematuria, glucosuria, or some combination
of these findings.
(3) The urine sediment may be very active in nephritis and nephrosis with many casts seen.
(a) Fine and coarse granular casts.
(b) Cellular casts.
(i) Renal tubular epithelial casts.
(ii) White blood cell casts are more likely to be seen in nephritis, especially pyelo
nephritis.
(iii) Rarely, red blood cell casts will be observed. If seen, suspect acute glomerulo
nephritis.
(iv) Mixed cellular casts.
(v) Degenerating cellular casts.
(c) Hyaline and waxy casts.
76
 CHAPTER 3  Acute Renal Failure
(4) The absence of casts does not exclude a diagnosis of AIRF.
(5) Excessive numbers of red blood cells, white blood cells, and small renal tubular
epithelial cells can be seen due to non-specific release of these cells into the urine
after renal injury.
(6) Excessive numbers of white blood cells may be seen in association with visible
bacteria in animals with pyelonephritis.
(7) Presence of oxalate or hippurate-like crystals in the urinary sediment of animals with
AIRF supports a diagnosis of EG poisoning.
e. Urine culture usually is submitted to exclude a role for active bacterial urinary infec-
tion in the course of AIRF.
f. Serum biochemistry.
(1) BUN and serum creatinine concentrations are high and continue to increase until a
plateau is established, when the decline in renal function has reached its maximum
(maintenance phase).
(a) It may take days to reach a steady-state serum creatinine concentration after a
single massive renal insult.
 tional lethal renal cell injury occurs (i.e., ongoing undetected ischemia or neph-
rotoxic insult).
Rapid increases in BUN, serum creatinine, and serum phosphorus concentrations may be observed during
ARF.
(2) The magnitude of increase in BUN or serum creatinine concentration is not helpful
in the differentiation of AIRF from CRF or in the differentiation of prerenal, intrin-
sic renal, and postrenal azotemia.
(3) Rapid increases in BUN, serum creatinine, and serum phosphorus concentrations
may be observed during AIRF. This finding is particularly helpful to document
AIRF in the absence of recent serum biochemistry results for comparison. For
example, sequential serum creatinine concentrations of 4.3 mg/dL, 6.0 mg/dL, and
7.5 mg/dL over 3 consecutive days support a diagnosis of AIRF. Serum creatinine
period in a hydrated patient with CRF.
(4) Serum potassium concentrations can be high (>5.5 mEq/L) or at the high end of
the reference range due to a reduction in renal excretory function (normal or low
concentrations generally are found in CRF patients). Serum potassium concentration
was <5.0 mEq/L in 75% of dogs with AIRF in one large study despite the presence
of oligoanuria in more than 60% of these dogs. Severe hyperkalemia is more likely in
dogs with urethral obstruction, uroabdomen, or hypoadrenocorticism.
(5) Serum phosphorus concentration usually is high (>6.0 mg/dL) and may be dis-
hyperparathyroidism maintains phosphorus balance despite a slow progressive
decrease in GFR as a result of the effect of parathyroid hormone (PTH) on renal
tubular cells, an effect that does not have sufficient time to develop in AIRF patients
with severely injured renal tubular cells.
(6) Serum total calcium concentration usually is normal or low.
(7) Blood gas analysis during the maintenance phase usually shows moderate to
severe metabolic acidosis. The acidosis in ARF is more severe than that seen in
compensated CRF
Acute Renal Failure  CHAPTER 377
(8) Other less commonly used tests to distinguish ARF from CRF include plasma car-
bamylated hemoglobin concentration and nail creatinine content. A diagnosis of
ARF is supported when these tests are within normal limits; a diagnosis of CRF is
supported when test results are high.
g. Urine enzymology.
(1) Small amounts of enzymes are found in the urine of normal animals and finding
 increased amounts may support a diagnosis of AIRF.
(2) Urine gamma glutamyl transferase (GGT) arises from the brush border of the tubu-
lar cells and increased urinary GGT is very sensitive for developing renal injury. It
may signal impending tubular necrosis or initially may arise from displacement of
enzymes from the brush border.
(3) The use of urinary enzymes has been evaluated in experimental studies in animals,
but clinical use has been limited. Measurement of urinary enzymes could facilitate
early diagnosis of acute renal injury in clinical patients.
(4) Urine GGT may be measured or urine GGT-to-creatinine ratio calculated.
(5) Other urinary enzymes that arise from the cytoplasm of tubular cells include
N-acetyl-glucosamine (NAG) and β-glucuronidase.
h. Renal imaging studies.
(1) Kidneys are normal-sized or enlarged and have normal shape in patients with
AIRF. Assessment of kidney size based on length is insensitive because enlarging
kidneys in AIRF tend to become plump before length increases.
(2) Intravenous pyelography (IVP) is contraindicated due to the potential for contrast-
associated nephrotoxicity in kidneys with underlying damage.
(3) Renal ultrasonography.
(a) Increased cortical or medullary echogenicity may be seen.
(b) Normal ultrasound findings do not exclude AIRF.
(c) AIRF and CRF carnot be differentiated if normal-sized kidneys are seen.
(d) No specific cause of AIRF can be inferred from ultrasound, with the possible
exception of EG toxicosis (extremely hyperechoic kidneys).
i.Serology.
(1) Submit acute and convalescent serum samples for leptospirosis titers if nephritis is
a possible cause for AIRF.
(2) Submit serum samples for Borrelia titers if rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis
is suspected as cause for AIRF.
Renal biopsy may be helpful to confirm that azotemia is due to primary renal lesions and to characterize the
 changes as acute or chronic
j.Renal biopsy.
(1) Renal biopsy may be helpful to confirm that azotemia is due to primary renal
lesions and to characterize the changes as acute or chronic.
(2) Renal biopsy may be necessary to confirm a diagnosis of AIRF in some animals or
to evaluate the healing process in animals that have a protracted course of AIRF.
(3) Renal lesions compatible with AIRF include degenerative tubular changes, tubu-
lar necrosis, desquamation of renal tubules, denuding of tubular basement mem
branes, disruption of tubular basement membranes, and intrarenal cast formation.
In ARF caused by nephrosis, interstitial inflammation is minimal, but in ARF due to
nephritis, it is substantial. Lack of fibrosis and nephron loss is supportive of AIRF
in its early clinical course rather than CRF.
8
8CHAPTER3Acute Renal Failure
(4) Few or no obvious changes are seen by light microscopy in some animals with
established primary AIRF. In these instances, ultrastructural changes may be
responsible for renal dysfunction or the lesions may be deeper within the kidney
than the site at which the biopsy sample was taken (i.e., medullary versus cortical).
(5) Renal biopsy during a protracted recovery phase can be helpful to evaluate whether
healing is occuring by fibrosis and nephron drop-out or by tubular regeneration
and repopulation of the basement membranes with new tubular cells.
TREATMENT
A. The ultimate goal of management of the maintenance phase of AIRF is to provide adequate
supportive care and allow time for healing to occur (Box 3-1).
The management goal of the maintenance phase of AlRF is to provide adequate supportive care and allow
 time for renal healing to ocur.
1. Treatment takes considerable time and effort.
2. No treatment presently available can change the lesions already present in the kidney.
 3. Prevention of conversion from sublethally injured cells to lethally injured cells is a major
goal of treatment.
4.  Prevention of additional renal cell injury is another important goal of treatment, and one
that requires conscientious fluid therapy to provide optimal renal perfusion while at the
same time avoiding overhydration.
B. It may take as long as 3 weeks of supportive care to determine if adequate renal function is
likely to return.
1. Ideally, BUN, serum creatinine concentration, serum phosphorus concentration and uri-
nary concentrating ability will return to normal or nearly normal.
 2. When renal injury is more severe, permanent nephron loss and residual azotemia result.
The magnitude of residual azotemia will determine whether or not the animal can be man-
aged successfully as a CRF patient.
C. Initially, identify and correct the most life-threatening disturbances while searching for the
underlying cause of AIRF.
1. Stop administration of any nephrotoxin and do not prescribe any drugs with nephrotoxic
potential.
BOX 3-1
● Manage uremic crisis—-initial stabilization.
+ Attempt to convert oliguria to nonoliguria.
● Prevent overhydration.
● Optimize environment for renal healing.
●Minimize additional renal damage.
●Manage the internal milieu to allow survival for 1 to 3 weeks.
●Consider dialysis early rather than late.
Acute Renal Failure  CHAPTER 379
2. Avoid hypotension, anesthesia, and surgery. Due to loss of renal autoregulation, the post
ischemic or post-nephrotoxic kidney may be unable to protect itself against ongoing epi-
sodes of reduced renal perfusion. Additional renal injury may result if hypotension occurs
systemically or locally within the kidney.
D. Initial stabilization.
 1. Place an indwelling intravenous catheter to administer fluids and drugs necessary to man-
age AIRF.
a.  Iritially, a jugular catheter is preferred so that central venous pressure (CVP) can be
monitored during aggressive fluid administration.
b. Fluid administration should be decreased or discontinued temporarily if CVP exceeds
13 cm HzO or increases rapidly by 2 cm or more HzO in any 10 minute period.
c.A volume challenge of 22 mL/kg administered over 10 minutes can be given to assess
the likelihood of impending volume overload. CVP should not increase more than
2 cm HO if the heart is normal.
d. Measurement of pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (although not commonly fea-
sible) can provide earlier information about the development of overhydration.
 2. Rapidly correct dehydration, ideally within 6 to 8 hours to prevent additional renal injury
as a result of ongoing ischemia.
a.Dehydration can be calculated by the formula: Estimated dehydration (%) x Body
Weight (kg) = dehydration (L).
b. Alternatively, 2 to 3 times maintenance fluid needs (130 to 200 mL/kg/day) can be given
c.Hypovolemic shock should be reversed with fluids at 88 mL/kg/hr with or without
monitoring of CVP until cardiovascular status has been stabilized.
d. Additional fluids are given to match sensible (urinary volume), insensible (respiratory
losses at approximately 22 mL/kg/day) and contemporary (estimated volume from
vomiting and diarrhea) fluid losses.
 3. Place an indwelling urinary catheter to monitor urine output and facilitate fluid therapy in
the initial 24 to 48 hours.
4. Prompt recognition of oliguria is important because it limits the volume of intravenous
fluids that can be given safely.
a. Oliguria at initial evaluation may be due to hypovolemia arising from lack of food and
water intake, vomiting, and diarrhea, severe intrarenal lesions or both.
Prompt recognition of oliguria is important because it limits the volume of intravenous fluids that can be
 given safely.
b. Oliguria occasionally develops later during the maintenance phase of AIRF.
c. Oliguria at any time requires meticulous attention to additional fluid infusion to pre-
vent overhydration.
d. Normal urine output is 1 to 2 mL/kg/hr for animals that are eating and drinking.
e. Absolute oliguria is urine production of <1.0 mL/kg/hr.
f.Dehydrated animals are expected to have physiologic oliguria that is transient (i.e.,
responds to IV fluid infusion)
g
 Urine production of <2 mL/kg/hr in an adequately hydrated animal receiving fluid
therapy is considered relative oliguria. Urine output of 2 to 5 mL/kg/hr is expected of
normal dogs and cats receiving adequate fluid volume expansion.
h.  Oliguria most commonly is encountered in AIRF. Normal urine volume, anuria, and poly-
uria are encountered in decreasing order of frequency Nonoliguric AIRF has been increas-
ingly recognized in veterinary medicine, often with aminoglycoside nephrotoxicity.
08
 CHAPTER 3  Acute Renal Failure
5. Choice of fluid for rehydration.
a. Normal saline (0.9% NaCl) usually is the initial fluid of choice for intravascular rehy-
dration because it contains abundant sodium (154 mEq/L) and is devoid of potassium.
b. When rehydration has been accomplished, hypotonic fluids (0.45% sodium chloride in
2.5% dextrose) usually are provided for maintenance needs in order to prevent hyper
natremia
c. Potassium supplementation, if required, must be adjusted frequently based on serum
potassium concentration.
(1) Serum potassium concentration depends on urine output, renal excretory function,
degree of metabolic acidosis, and oral intake.
(2) Potassium usually is not supplemented during the initial days of stabilization until
renal excretory function has been maximized unless otherwise indicated based on
serum potassium concentration.
6. Treatment of hyperkalemia may be necessary.
a.  Electrocardiography (ECG) can be useful in detecting the physiologic effects of hyper-
kalemia, including bradycardia, prolongation of the P-R interval, widening of the QRS
complexes, blunting or absence of P waves (atrial standstill), tenting of T waves, bipha-
sic T waves, sinoventricular rhythm, ventricular fibrillation, and asystole (Figure 3-6).
(1) ECG abnormalities usually are present when serum potassium concentration
exceeds 8 mEq/L, but may be present with potassium concentration of 6 to 8 mEq/L
when hyponatremia, hypocalcemia, or severe acidemia also are present.
 Treatment of hyperkalemia may be necessary. ECG can be useful in detecting physiologic effects
 of hyperkalemia.
(2) Serum potassium concentrations of 8 to 10 mEq/L are considered dangerous foi
cardiac function, and concentrations of 10 mEq/L or more are incompatible with
life.
B
FlGURE 3-6  Manifestations of hyperkalemia on the electrocardiogram. A, Note the slow heart rate, absence
of P waves, and tall tented T waves typical of advanced hyperkalemia. This ECG was recorded from a dog with a
serum potassium concentration of 8.2 mEq/L. B, Sinoventricular rhythm indicative of advanced, life-threatening
hyperkalemia. The serum potassium concentration in this patient was 8.8 mEq/ L. (Courtesy of Dr. Karsten Schober,
Columbus, Ohio.)
Acute Renal Failure  CHAPTER 381
b. If ECG changes associated with hyperkalemia are present, treatment should be insti-
tuted to stabilize cardiac abnormalities
(1) Sodium bicarbonate at a dosage of 0.5 to 1.0 mEq/kg IV usually is infused first,
especially if metabolic acidosis is present.
(2) Alternatively, infusion of 20% to 30% hypertonic glucose can stimulate endogenous
release of insulin and translocation of potassium into cells. Glucose infusion may
be selected over sodium bicarbonate when total or ionized calcium concentration
is low, if seizures are a problem, or if metabolic alkalosis is present. Administration
of insulin in combination with hypertonic glucose infusion is controversial.
(3) A 10% calcium gluconate solution (0.5-1.0 mL/kg) can be infused to counteract the
effects of potassium on the heart, but does notlower serum potassium concentration.
Calcium salts may be beneficial in patients with hypocalcemia, but also may pro-
mote mineralization of soft tissues when serum phosphorus concentration is high.
c. The ECG should become normal within minutes of these treatments, but they only
 provide temporary relief from the effects of hyperkalemia.
d.1
 Maximizing renal excretory function and maintaining serum pH and bicarbonate con-
centration in the normal range will bring about more prolonged decreases in serum
potassium concentration.
e.  Chronic hyperkalemia may be treated with an ion exchange resin (sodium polystyrene
sulfate, 2 g/kg divided into 3 doses per day and administered orally or as a retention
enema) or may require dialysis.
 7. Metabolic acidosis may be severe and require treatment during the maintenance phase of
AIRF.
 Metabolic acidosis may be severe and require treatment during the maintenance phase of AIRF.
a. If blood gas analysis is not available, total CO2 concentration (<15 mEq/L) can be
used to identify metabolic acidosis. Additional alkali should be provided if total CO2
is<15 mEq/L
b. To correct metabolic acidosis, sodium bicarbonate (1-6 mEq/kg depending on the
severity of acidosis) is added to maintenance fluids that do not contain calcium.
c. The bicarbonate deficit can be calculated from blood gas analysis using the follow-
ing formula: Bicarbonate required (mEq) = 0.3 × Body weight (kg) × base deficit. This
method requires use of serial measurements of blood gases and additional alkali are
administered as needed.
d. Hypernatremia, hyperosmolality, metabolic alkalosis, ionized hypocalcemia with
resultant seizures, and paradoxical cerebrospinal fluid acidosis are potential complica-
tions of alkali therapy.
 8. Hyponatremia or hypocalcemia may require specific treatment during the maintenance
phase, especially if accompanied by seizures or progressive dementia.
9.
 Control of serum phosphorus concentration.
a. Hyperphosphatemia frequently occurs and may be severe during the maintenance
phase of AIRF.
b.1
 Hyperphosphatemia may contribute to worsening of renal lesions and excretory func
tion by several mechanisms including renal mineralization, direct nephrotoxicity, and
vasoconstriction.
c. Hyperphosphatemia contributes to metabolic acidosis and serum ionized hypocalcemia
d. Intestinal phosphate binders may be used in patients with AIRF.
82
2CHAPTER 3  Acute Renal Failure
(1) Phosphate binders should be given with food if possible
(2) Intestinal phosphate binders may lower serum phosphorus concentration to some
degree even in anorexic patients by binding with phosphorus in gastrointestinal
secretions.
(3) Aluminum hydroxide gel and aluminum carbonate gel at 30 to 90 mg/kg/day
in divided doses most often are recommended. The dosage should be modified
according to the results of serial serum phosphorus measurements.
(4) Excessive administration of aluminum-containing phosphate binders may result in
aluminum toxicity, which is manifested as dementia that may be difficult to distin
guish from the effects of uremia.
10. Conversion from oliguria to nonoliguria.
a. In some reports in the human medical literature, AIRF patients who received diuretics
faired more poorly than those not treated with diuretics.
 b. Diuretics are recommended to convert oliguria to nonoliguria after rehydration and
body weight gain.
c. It is easier to manage nonoliguric patients because hyperkalemia and overhydration
 are less likely to occur, and the severity of retention of nitrogenous waste products may
be less.
d.  Patients that remain oliguric despite diuretic therapy have a poor prognosis because of
limited access to dialysis in veterinary practice.
e.  Decreased renin release and inhibition of glomerulotubular feedback are desirable
effects of some diuretics used for treatment of AIRF.
f.  Reduced transport of sodium across damaged tubules after diuretic therapy may limit
damage to sublethally injured tubular cells, especially those located in areas of relative
hypoxia (e.g., outer medulla, pars recta, thick ascending limb of Henle's loop).
g.  Most often, conversion to nonoliguria occurs without a detectable increase in glomeru-
 lar filtration, as typified by an increase in urine volume with no concomitant decrease
in BUN and serum creatinine concentrations
h. To prevent dehydration and additional renal injury, it is important to replace exces-
sive fluid losses in patients that respond vigorously with increased urine volume after
diuretic administration.
i. Types of diuretics and sites of action.
(1) Osmotic diuretics. Osmotic diuretics are freely filtered, low-molecular-weight sub-
stances that undergo little or no reabsorption (i.e., nonreabsorbable solute). The
increased osmolality of plasma, glomerular filtrate, and tubular fluid obligates
water excretion and lowering of the concentration gradient for luminal sodium
entry.
(a) Mannitol.
IDo not administer mannitol if the patient is already overhydrated.
(i) 10%, 15%, and 20% solutions are available commercially
(i)Administered intravenously at a dosage of 0.25 to 0.50 g/kg and repeated
once if no increase in urine volume is observed within 30 to 60 minutes. Do
not exceed a total daily dose of 2 g/kg due to possible adverse effects on
the nervous system and possible development of renal lesions.
（iii}
 Once filtered, exerts its osmotic effect throughout the nephron.
(iv)
 Effects exceed those observed with isotonic volume expansion (e.g., 0.9%
NaCl) and are more potent than those achieved with hypertonic dextrose.
Acute Renal Failure ■ CHAPTER 3 83
(°) Free radical scavenging.
(°) Attenuation of renal tubular mitochondrial calcium accumulation.
() Reduction of renal edema.
(°) Enhanced atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) release.
(o) Decreased renin release.
(v) Adverse effects include volume overload and hyperosmolality, especially if
not immediately filtered (e.g., congestive heart failure, primary renal disease).
(b) Glucose.
(i) A 10% or 20% solution is administered intravenously.
(ii) As its reabsorptive TMax is exceeded, glucose acts as a nonreabsorbable solute.
(2) Benzothiadiazides and related agents (i.e., thiazides) generally are not potent
enough for use in AIRF patients.
(3) Loop diuretics.
(a) Most important and most widely used diuretics in AIRF patients (e.g, furosemide).
 The most widely used diuretics in AlRF patients are loop diuretics (e.g., furosemide). Potassium-sparing
 diuretics are contraindicated because of the development of hyperkalemia.
(b) Used intravenously at a dosage of 1 to 2 mg/kg IV followed by an infusion
of 1 mg/kg/hr for up to 6 hours in an attempt to convert oliguria to non-
oliguria.
(c) If urine output increases, administer a constant rate infusion of 0.1 mg/kg/hn
furosemide or administer higher intermittent doses as necessary to maintain
urine output.
(d) If urine output does not increase, discontinue furosemide or consider adding
dopamine.
(e) Peak diuresis is much greater than that achieved with other diuretics in normal
animals.
(f) Major site of action is the thick ascending limb of Henle's loop.
(i) Inhibits co-transport of sodium along luminal surfaces.
(ii)  Reduces renal vascular resistance and increases renal blood flow, but not as
much as it increases GFR.
(ili) Impairment of tubuloglomerular feedback by furosemide may be benefi-
cial if impaired sodium reabsorption has activated renal vasoconstriction.
(g) Furosemide must be secreted by the proximal tubular cells to enter tubular
fluid and exert its effect in the thick ascending limb Henle's loop.
(h) Severe proximal tubular injury may limit secretion of furosemide into tubular
fluid.Toxicity may include:
(i) Metabolic alkalosis.
(ii) Dehydration.
(ii)Deafness (ototoxicity).
(s s u ) an are go  (a)
(4) Potassium-sparing diuretics are contraindicated in AIRF patients due to their
propensity to cause hyperkalemia.
(5) Dopamine.
(a) Dopaminergic receptors are found in renal cortical vasculature and renal tubules.
Cats originally were thought to lack dopaminergic receptors in their renal vas
culature but recent reports have documented their presence. Diuresis in normal
cats previously had been attributed to effects on tubular receptors and increased
84
 CHAPTER 3  Acute Renal Failure
cardiac output. RBF is increased in dogs due primarily to efferent arteriolar
dilatation.
(b) Only available for intravenous use.
(c) Increases RBF and occasionally GFR in normal animals.
(i) This effect is seen only at low dosages (<10 μg/kg/min).
(ii) At high dosages, dopamine causes vasoconstriction which reduces GFR
and RBF.
(d) Causes natriuresis by blocking sodium reabsorption in the proximal tubules.
(e) "Renal-dose dopamine" usually is defined as 2-5 μg/kg/min. The effectiveness
cine to be superior to supportive care. Intravenous administration requires
dilution of dopamine and an infusion pump to provide accurate delivery of the
calculated dose.
(f) Newer dopaminergic drugs have specific DA-2 receptor effects and do not acti-
vate vasoconstrictor receptors and require less constraint of dosage.
(i) Fenoldopam and zelandopam are more potent and selective dopamine
 DA-1 receptor agonists that cause little activation of alpha or beta adrenore-
ceptors. Much higher doses of these agents can be used to create renal vaso-
dilatation compared with dopamine without the activation of beta or alpha
adrenoreceptors that limits the usefulness of higher doses of dopamine.
Kaiaa ui panodan naaq lou se shae oiarauedop asa jo asn al ()
patients with AIRF.
(g) Perform a baseline ECG, and monitor ECG during infusion because dopamine
can be arrhythmogenic, especially during dose escalation.
(h) Serial measurement of blood pressure should be performed to detect activation
of adrenoreceptors at higher doses of dopamine.
(6) Combination diuretic treatment.
(a) Mannitol and furosemide.
(i) Not specifically studied in veterinary medicine.
(ii) Some patients respond to this combination when they have failed both
drugs when used separately.
(b) Furosemide and dopamine.
(i) Potent conversion to from oliguria to nonoliguria in experimental studies in
dogs with severe nephrotoxicity
(ii) Our experience indicates this combination may be most effective when
other treatments have failed.
11. Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP).
 a. ANP causes diuresis, natriuresis, increased GFR, and maintenance of RBF during peri-
 ods of increased vasoconstriction.
b. ANP promotes both vasodilatation of the afferent arteriole and vasoconstriction of the
efferent arteriole, which increases GFR independently of RBF.
C. ANP also may protect the kidneys independently of its hemodynamic effects because
renal tubular cell exfoliation, necrosis, and cast formation are reduced and ATP regen-
eration is enhanced.
d.ANP exerts beneficial effects immediately after ischemia and also during established
postischemic ARF in which sustained increases in GFR and tubular function may occur.
e. ANP prevented radiocontrast-induced renal vasoconstriction in a study of dogs and
proved beneficial in models of ischemic and nephrotoxic ARF. ANP also has been
shown to ameliorate the effects of ischemic injury in dogs.
Acute Renal Failure  CHAPTER 3 85
f.ANP has been used to treat human patients with oliguric AIRF, and it was most benefi-
cial when administered early in the course of the disease.
g. High doses of ANP cause peripheral vasodilatation which can result in systemic hypo
tension as a limiting factor. A combination of ANP and dopamine may provide the
beneficial effects of ANP without the hypotension.
h. Use of ANP has not been reported in the treatment of dogs or cats with AIRF. Addi-
 tional study of ANP appears to be warranted based on its potential benefits.
12. Nutritional support.
a. Not proven in veterinary medicine to make a difference in survival of AIRF patients
but strongly suspected to have a beneficial effect.
b.  Provides nutrients and energy for renal healing.
C. Increased insulin release promotes anabolism and decreases catabolism.
d.  Initially, nutrition may be provided by a nasogastric tube, but parenteral nutrition may
 be necessary in patients with severe uremia and vomiting.
e. Nutritional support should be started as early as possible in the course of AIRF.
13. Control of systemic blood pressure.
a.Control of hypotension is important because the damaged kidneys have lost their
 autoregulatory ability, which normally lessens the impact of low renal perfusion pres-
sure. Systemic hypotension may result in additional lethal injury to cells.
b. Systemic hypertension can contribute to worsening of intrarenal lesions and also cause
End-organ damage to the eyes and brain.
c. Hypertension occurs in the majority of dogs with AIRF. In one study, the incidence of
systolic and diastolic hypertension was reported to be 78% and 84%, respectively, in
dogs with AIRF at presentation.
d. Hypertension is defined as systolic blood pressure >150 to 160 mm Hg, diastolic blood
pressure >80 to 90 mm Hg, or both.
e. The presence of hypertension does not appear to be affected by etiology of AIRF,
hydration status, or urine production.
f. Physical examination and clinical monitoring are no substitute for direct or indirect
blood pressure measurements.
g. Some animals with AIRF may have normal systolic blood pressure at presentation, but
progressive increases in blood pressure may occur during intravenous fluid therapy.
 q  n   n assd ss sa) sn a 
orrhage, deterioration in brain function) occurs in some patients with AIRF and requires
immediate and aggressive management (see Chapter 16, Miscellaneous Syndromes).
E. Success of therapy. Improvement in renal function and clinical status is the desired endpoint
oftreatment.
 1. Decreased BUN, serum creatinine, and serum phosphorus concentrations.
 2. Serum potassium concentration stabilized within the normal range.
 3. Returm of serum bicarbonate concentration into the normal range.
4. Decreased signs of uremia (e.g., less vomiting, increased food intake).
 5. Improved body condition score.
6. Return of urine output into the normal range from previous oligoanuria or polyuria.
F. Therapeutic failure.
1.B
BUN, serum creatinine, and serum phosphorus concentrations fail to decrease despite
adequate fluid therapy and supportive care.
2.
 Severe hyperkalemia or metabolic acidosis persists during treatment.
 3. Severe uremic signs do not resolve to an acceptable level during aggressive treatment.
4. Overhydration develops during fluid therapy.
98
 CHAPTER 3  Acute Renal Failure
5. Uremic encephalopathy develops and is unresponsive to treatment.
6. Uremic pneumonitis develops during treatment (rare).
 7. Thromboembolism develops as a consequence of multiple intravenous catheters and pro-
longed recumbency.
8. Severe malnutrition develops.
9. Sepsis develops as a consequence of long-term use of intravenous catheters, urinary cath-
eters, and prolonged recumbency.
10. Aspiration pneumonia develops.
11. Severe anemia develops due to blood loss from gastrointestinal ulcerations.
12. Gastrointestinal ulcers perforate.
13. Bacterial urinary tract infection develops.
G. Dialysis treatment for AIRF.
1.  A discussion of hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis is beyond the scope of this book.
 2. Dialysis treatment may be the only way for a dog or cat with AIRF to survive the metabolic
consequences of advanced uremia, especially in the presence of oliguria or anuria.
3.
 The availability of dialysis treatment for dogs and cats is limited to a few treatment
centers.
 4. Hemodialysis removes uremic waste products and retained water very efficiently. It is
technically demanding, very expensive, and available for dogs and cats only at a limited
number of treatment facilities.
 5. Peritoneal dialysis requires less technical expertise, is less expensive, and more widely
available than hemodialysis. Peritoneal dialysis is less efficient than hemodialysis for
removal of most solutes but still can be very effective in removal of uremic waste products
and retained water.
6. At The Ohio State University Veterinary Teaching Hospital, Columbus, Ohio, perito-
neal dialysis (rather thian hemodialysis) has been used to perform dialysis treatments of
AIRF patients. The Ash Advantage T-Fluted peritoneal dialysis catheter (Medigroup, Inc.
Naperville, Ill) allows more complete drainage of the peritoneal cavity and facilitates per-
formance of peritoneal dialysis (Figure 3-7)
A
D
FIGURE 3-7  A, Ash Advantage T-Fluted peritoneal dialysis catheter. B, Close-up showing troughs in catheter
that facilitate fluid outflow.
Acute Renal Failure ■ CHAPTER 387
7. Dialysis should be considered earlier in the clinical course for patients with AIRF in
attempts to improve survival. Historically, dialysis has been attempted late in the clinical
course of dogs and cats with AIRF when fluid, acid base and electrolyte abnormalities,
and azotemia are advanced. Early institution of dialysis in severe AIRF provides greater
opportunity for survival and recovery for affected patients.
8. Dialysis should be considered for dogs and cats that have missed the early window of
opportunity for antidote treatment of EG intoxication (See Chapter 4, Specific Syndromes
Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure) because EG and its metabolites can be removed
with short-term dialysis.
 9. Short-term dialysis also may be helpful in the management of dogs with AIRF caused
leptospirosis that do not improve adequately with standard medical treatment.
PROGNOSIS
Prerenal Acute Renal Failure
1.  Prognosis is excellent if the extrarenal cause of renal hypoperfusion is recognized and cor
rected early enough.
Postrenal Acute Renal Failure
1.  Ruptured bladder. Prognosis is good to excellent if recognized and repaired early
 2. Ruptured kidney or ureter. Prognosis is guarded to good.
3. Ruptured urethra. Prognosis is guarded.
4. Urethral obstruction. Prognosis is good if the cause of obstruction can be identified and
removed.
5. Ureteral obstruction. Prognosis is guarded.
Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
1. Oliguria or anuria that persists or develops during treatment is associated with poor to
grave prognosis.
 2. The underlying cause of AIRF affects prognosis because some causes of AIRF are worse
than others
a.EG carries a grave prognosis without long-term dialysis.
amd supportive care.
c. Bacterial pyelonephritis carries a fair prognosis with appropriate long-term antibiotic
treatment.
d. Aminoglycoside nephrotoxicity generally carries a poor prognosis.
e. NSAID-induced AIRF carries a guarded to poor prognosis.
f. Easter lily-induced AIRF in cats generally carries a poor to grave prognosis.
 g. Acorn intoxication is reported to carry a grave prognosis.
 3. Severity of stable azotemia. Patients with severe unresponsive azotemia are more difficult
to manage with conservative medical treatment.
4. Severity of intrarenal damage.
Patients with severe stable azotemia during the maintenance phase of AIRF often are not successfully
managedwithout dialysis.
 a. Renal biopsy can help determine if tubular basement membranes are intact. Intact
basement membranes are required as scaffolding for tubular cell repopulation.
88
CHAPTER 3 ■ Acute Renal Failure
b. Renal biopsy can help determine the extent of tubular necrosis and degeneration of
renal tubules. Patients with severe necrosis involving all examined tissue have little
chiance for renal repair and survival.
5. Severity of associated biochemical or hematologic abnormalities and presence of other
Organ system diseases.
a. Patients with major alterations in acid-base balance, electrolytes, or hematology are
less likely to be successfully managed.
b. Other organ system disease or failure also detracts from the prognosis (e.g., heart fail-
ure, diabetes mellitus, liver disease, pancreatitis, disseminated intravascular coagula-
tion, neoplasia, sepsis).
6.Level of medical care available.
a.AIRF patients require intensive care and major surveillance. The prognosis is worse if
such support is not available.
b. Availability of dialysis.
(1) Early institution of hemodialysis has improved survival of AIRF patients at some
referral centers.
(2) Newer peritoneal dialysis techniques may improve survival in AIRF patients.
(3) Dialysis may be needed for several months in patients with severe AIRF
7. Severity of initial azotemia predicts survival in some, but not all, studies of AIRF.
a. In one large series of dogs, death or euthanasia occurred in more than 50%, 24% sur-
vived with chronic renal failure, and 19% returned to normal as evaluated by serum
creatinine concentration.
b. In another series, 69% of the dogs died, another 11% were euthanized, and 20%
survived.
C. Chances for survival in dogs were less with varying combinations of serum creatinine
>10.0 mg/dL, serum calcium concentration <8.6 mg/dL, packed cell volume (PCV)
<33%, proteinuria, EG ingestion, and multiple organ system disorders.
d. Hyperphosphatemia is associated with decreased survival in some studies but not in
others.
e. In a study of 25 cats with AIRF (most with nephrotoxicity), azotemia did not affect
outcome but urine output was a crucial determinant. Mortality was 56% and
all of the non-oliguric cats survived whereas none of the oliguric or anuric cats
survived.
f. In a series of dogs with hospital-acquired AIRF, 24% died, 38% were euthanized, and
38% survived.
8. Why are death and euthanasia common outcomes in animals with AIRF?
 o   yo sis i go s a cn  a a se  s
rapidly improve during initial treatment.
b. Electrolyte imbalances, acid-base disturbances, uremic solute retention, hormonal dys-
function, and hematologic abnormalities can be severe and difficult to manage simul-
taneously
c. The attending veterinarian and client often have unrealistic expectations for immedi-
ate improvement after treatment. In some cases, the maintenance phase of AlRF' per-
sists for weeks before renal repair occurs and adequate renal function returns. In other
cases, adequate renal function never returns.
d. The most common causes for death or euthanasia during initial management of AIRF
in the maintenance phase are hyperkalemia, metabolic acidosis, and severe azotemia
e. Overhydration with resultant pulmonary edema as a consequence of aggressive fluid
therapy is another important cause of death or euthanasia.
Acute Renal Failure  CHAPTER 389
WHAT DO WE DO?
· Make sure the diagnosis is accurate — definitive diagnosis and treatment must proceed simultaneously.
· Collect serum and urine samples before any treatments are administered
· Submit serology for infectious diseases such as leptospirosis or borreliosis if appropriate.
· Perform a test for EG or measure serum osmolality, and calculate the osmolal gap to promptly
identify and appropriately treat cases of EG poisoning. If there is a reasonable chance there has been
exposure to EG within the past 12 to 24 hours, administer 4-methylpyrazole or ethanol as a potential
antidote even in absence of definitive information.
·Place an intravenous catheter and rehydrate the patient rapidly (within 6 to 8 hours).
● Place a urinary catheter for the first 24 to 48 hours to measure urine output.
· Adjust fluid prescription orders based on urine output and serum electrolyte concentrations.
· Administer ampicillin initially if AIRF is thought to be associated with leptospirosis.
· Provide optimal fluid volume replacement and mild volume expansion.
· Monitor the patient carefully to avoid overhydration. Adjust fluid volume accordingly.
● Measure arterial blood pressure frequently. Fluctuations between hypotension and severe hyperten
sion may occur.
· Perform renal biopsy early to differentiate AIRF from CRF if necessary, to differentiate nephritis and
nephrosis, and to provide a prognosis by determining the extent of intrarenal damage.
· In patients with urine output of <2.0 mL/kg/hr, start diuretics in an attempt to convert oliguria to
nonoliguria. If the attempt is successful, continue maintenance diuretics. If the attempt is not suc
cessful, discontinue diuretics and closely monitor fluid volume infused.
 o a s r pe pasad si ze araas j raan si iead e a 
placement of a dialysis catheter if azotemia is increasing markedly despite adequate fluid vol-
ume replacement. To improve efficiency, combine renal biopsy with peritoneal dialysis catheter
olacement.
· Start dialysis early rather than waiting for more advanced uremia to develop.
● Start total parenteral nutrition (TPN) for the first week of hospitalization. It may be needed for 3 to
4 weeks.
●Try to maintain serum phosphorus concentration within the normal range by a combination of fluid
therapy and oral phosphate binders to minimize additional renal cell injury.
· Monitor renal function and serum electrolyte concentrations daily for first the several days and ther
every other day if the patient is relatively stable.
● Remember that, if they occur at all, renal healing and return of normal renal function may take sev-
eral weeks.
· Treat appropriately for CRF if azotemia resolves to a level compatible with survival. Surviving
nephrons may be able to increase their excretory function over time to further minimize retention of
nitrogenous wastes.
 THOUGHTS FOR THE FUTURE
· Evidence continues to emerge that early hemodialysis improves the chance for survival in veteri-
nary patients with AIRF and regional dialysis centers are becoming available. Even some anuric
dogs with EG poisoning can survive with return of nearly normal renal function after 6 to 9 months
of hemodialysis.
to increase renal blood flow and perhaps increase GFR in patients with AIRF.
ANP are warranted in veterinary patients with AIRF.
90
CHAPTER 3 ■ Acute Renal Failure
· Felodopine and other calcium charmel blockers may allow greater survival during AIRF.
· More selective and potent dopaminergic agents such as fenoldopam and zelandopam may prove
useful in management of AlRF' patients.
· Increased use of the Ash Advantage T-fluted peritoneal dialysis catheter appears warranted in
veterinary medicine.
 SUMMARY TIPS
· Make sure all prerenal azotemia has been resolved by correcting dehydration and optimizing renal
perfusion.
· Make sure any postrenal azotemia has been identified and eliminated from consideration.
lins early in the course of AIRF.
· If rapid improvement does not occur during the first several hours of fluid therapy or if adequate
urine output cannot be determined, place an indwelling urinary catheter. Measurement of urine
output provides pivotal information in the decision-making process.
● Consider early referral for renal biopsy and dialysis if substantial improvement does not occur after
2 to 3 days of conventional treatment.
 COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS
· Three to 5 days of fluid therapy is enough time to make a decision about the likelihood that AIRF
will resolve. This is often not enough time—it may actually take 1 to 3 weeks and, in some instances,
months.
· Hyperkalemia only develops in patients with oligoanuria. It is true that hyperkalemia develops
more readily in those with oligoanuria, but it can also develop in those with nonoliguria when the
GFR has been severely reduced.
● The prognosis for all animals with AIRF is guarded to poor in general. Although the prognosis is
guarded to poor in general for those with high level azotemia, surprisingly, some animals will survive.
· It really isn't important to measure urine output. Actually, it is vital to measure urine output espe-
cially during the first 48 hours of therapy as this can dramatically change the IV fluid therapy pre-
scription. Without the kmowledge of urine output it is easy to underestimate or overestimate the
· Diuretic use frequently changes the course of AIRF. There are no placebo-controlled studies to show
that any diuretic therapy improves outcome for survival or level of renal function that is achieved.
of evidence for a salutary effect, we continue to use diuretics for those with severe oliguria or anuria
because patients that produce little urine have a poor chance for survival.
· Nutritional support is needed only after every other option has failed. We do not have any evidence-
based outcome studies to show the impact of early or late nutritional support. Despite this, it makes
sense to consider early nutritional intervention to provide nutrients that will be needed for renal
healing
· Dialysis does not make a difference in the outcome. Studies in veterinary medicine have shown that
early intervention with dialysis improves survival and level of recovery for renal fumction.
· AIRF is relatively straightforward and predictable. Actually, AIRF is not predictable from one
patient to the next, even in those with the same level of initial azotemia. The prognosis can be better
established if the cause for the AIRF is known.
Acute Renal Failure  CHAPTER391
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
Q: How long should I wait to see if renal function will return in my patient with AIRF?
P    s        h    s  
sufficient renal healing. The conventional wisdom has been to treat the patient for 3 to 5 days and then
to make a decision regarding outcome - this often is not enough time to allow an accurate assessment
for the likelihood of renal healing.
Q: Is the prognosis for AIRF in veterinary patients the same regardless of cause?
A: No. Progmosis varies depending on the underlying cause of AIRF as well as the severity of
azotemia in the maintenance phase. In patients with EG poisoning, return of adequate renal function
frequently does not occur in severely azotemic, oligoanuric animals. Some animals with severe AIRF
caused by EG poisoning can survive for many months when treated by hemodialysis. Dogs with
leptospirosis and AlRF usually have a good prognosis if treatmenf is started early
Q: When should I consider renal biopsy in patients with suspected AIRF?
A: If the diagnosis of AIRF is readily apparent, renal biopsy may be unnecessary. If the diagnosis of
AIRF is not clear, renal biopsy is helpful to rule out underlying chronic renal lesions and to document
 a osxa a axase  sa nu pe   sd r si
between AIRF caused by nephrosis or that caused by nephritis can be helpful, especially for patients
suspected to have leptospirosis.
Q: When should I consider dialysis in patients with AIRF?
A: Patients with AIRF and rapidly escalating azotemia are more likely to survive and regain renal
function when dialysis is started early. Too often, dialysis is not considered until supportive treatment
with fluids and diuretics has failed. Dialysis may be the only hope for survival in dogs and cats with
AIRF and severe azotemia, anuria, overhydration, hyperkalemia, and metabolic acidosis. Correcting
the metabolic derangements of uremia however does not guarantee renal recovery or patient survival.
Q: I measured urine output in a patient with AIRF and it is 0.6 mL/kg/hr despite aggressive intra
venous fluid therapy. What should I do now?
A: Normal animals (not receiving intravenous fluids) produce urine at a rate of 1.0 to 2.0 mL/
kg/hr. Normal animals on intravenous fluids usually produce urine at a rate of 2.0 to 5.0 mL/kg/hr.
Animals with AIRF receiving intravenous fluids that produce urine at rates <2.0 mL/kg/hr are said to
have relative oliguria whereas those that produce <1.0 mL/kg/hr have absolute oliguria. If the patient
has been adequately hydrated, a challenge with diuretics can be considered to see if urine output can
be increased. Patients that do not produce an adequate volume of urine are more difficult to manage
than those that have more urine production. If urine volume remains low despite proper fluid therapy
and diuretic challenge, it is important to decrease the daily volume of intravenous fluids to reduce the
risk of serious overhydration.
Q: The serum potassium concentration in my AIRF patient has increased from 5.5 to 6.5 mEq/L and
then to 7.8 mEq/L over the course of 3 days. The cardiotoxic effects of hyperkalemia are apparent on
anl electrocardiogram. What should I do now?
A: Potassium supplementation of intravenous fluids should be discontinued immediately. Hyper
kalemia can be treated acutely using infusions of alkali, glucose (with or without insulin), or calcium
salts, but the effects of these treatments are short-lived if renal excretory function cannot be improved
92
CHAPTER 3 ■ Acute Renal Failure
Exchange resins administered orally or rectally can be considered for sub-acute management of hyper-
kalemia with the hope that renal function will return. Ultimately, dialysis may be necessary to prevent
nostic sign.
Q: I am concerned about giving gentamicin to a dog that has a resistant urinary tract infection. How
should I monitor this patient to detect early renal injury so the drug can be discontinued before
development of AIRF?
 A: Aminoglycosides can put the patient at risk for development of AIRF, especially if underlying
chronic renal disease is present or if the patient is dehydrated. Unfortunately, when AIRF develops,
it often does so after the aminoglycoside has been discontinued. Patients given aminoglycosides once
daily suffer less renal injury than those treated several times per day. Early signs of toxicity are the
appearance of granular or cellular casts in the urine sediment, a finding that can occur before azotemia
or other changes on the urinalysis. Measurement of urinary Y-glutamyl transferase (GGT) to urinary
creatinine ratio has been shown to be sensitive for recognition of renal injury arising as a consequence
of aminoglycoside administration in dogs.
Q: What usually results in the euthanasia of an animal with AIRF?
and high cost of the prolonged care needed to treat these animals. Overhydration, hyperkalemia, and
severe metabolic acidosis contribute to death as do sepsis associated with prolonged use of intrave-
nous and urinary catheters.
Suggested Readings
Behrend EN, Grauer GF, Mani I, et al: Hospital-acquired acute renal failure in dogs: 29 cases (1983-1992), I Am Vet Med
Assoc 208:537-541, 1996.
Chew D], Gieg J: Fluid therapy during intrinsic renal failure. In DiBartola SP, editor: Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders,
ed 3, St Louis, 2006, Elsevier, pp 518-540.
Grauer GF: Early detection of renal damage and disease in dogs and cats, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 35:581-596,
2005.
Labato MA: Strategies for management of acute renal failure, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 31:1265-1287, 2001.
Stokes JE, Forrester SD: New and unusual causes of acute renal failure in dogs and cats, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 34:909-922, 2004.
Vaden SL: Renal biopsy: Methods and interpretation, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 34:887-908, 2004.
Vaden SL, Levine J, Breitschwerdt EB: A retrospective case-control of acute renal failure in 99 dogs, } Vet Intern Med
11:5864, 1997.
CHAPTER
4
Specific Syndromes
Acute
-ausing
Intrinsic Renal Failure
Ethylene Glycol (EG) Toxicity
INTRODUCTION AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
A. Consumption of EG is an important cause of acute intrinsic renal failure (AIRF) in dogs and
cats, and should always be considered in geographic regions and during times of the year in
which antifreeze is used. Ingestion usually occurs as a consequence of improper storage or
disposal of radiator fluid. It is the most common cause of AIRF in most veterinary practices,
depending on the region.
B. EG toxicity is dose dependent.
1.The minimal lethal dose in dogs is 4.4 to 13.2 mL/kg. Dogs that rapidly ingest large doses
of EG frequently vomit, which may limit exposure.
 2. The minimal lethal dose in cats is 1.5 mL/kg.
Ethylene glycol by itself is not very toxic, but its metabolites are toxic. Toxicity is time- and dose-dependent.
C. Some brands of antifreeze contain propylene glycol as a replacement for EG. Propylene glycol
does not cause nephrotoxicity, but its ingestion can be confused with EG intoxication because
-qe N i isa a a uo suon aisod un nmsan 'de ieoso a aseai o
tories, Pensacola, Fla.) as well as cause central nervous system (CNS) depression, osmotic
 diuresis, and metabolic acidosis with increased anion gap.
D. EG is readily ingested by dogs and cats because it is viscid and sweet.
E. EG is readily absorbed from the gastrointestinal (Gl) tract within 1 hour after ingestion and
achieves peak serum concentrations in dogs and cats 3 hours later. EG remains detectable in
the circulation for at least 12 hours, but usually cannot be detected 48 hours after ingestion.
1. EG rapidly disappears from the circulation due to a combination of renal clearance and
metabolism
2. EG is rapidly biotransformed into intermediary metabolites (Figure 4-1).
3. About 50% of EG is excreted unchanged into the urine in animals with normal renal func
tion. Peak concentrations of EG in urine occur approximately 6 hours after ingestion in
dogs. Delayed renal clearance may occur in animals with pre-existing renal dysfunction,
which may magnify EG toxicity because more conversion to cytotoxic metabolites may
occur.
 F. Dogs and cats of any age can be poisoned by EG but animals younger than 6 months of age
may be less susceptible to permanent renal injury.
G. Unmetabolized EG is not very toxic. CNS depression can arise from hyperosmolality as EG is
absorbed from the GI tract. Vomiting, which frequently occurs soon after EG ingestion, may be
93
94
 CHAPTER 4  Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
 Ethylene glycol
Aicoholdehydrogenase
(iver, kidney)
Glycoaldehyde
Aidehydedehydrogenase
Glycolate
Glyoxol
Lactate dehydrogenase
(rate-fimiting step)
Glyoxalate
Glycine
Oxalate
Formic acid
and CO2
FIGURE 4-1  Metabolic pathways for ethylene glycol conversion to cytotoxic metabolites. The intermediary
metabolites cause nearly all of the clinical signs, rather than ethylene glycol or oxalate.
caused by direct mucosal irritation or may be a due to the rapid increase in plasma osmolality.
The polyuria that occurs soon after ingestion of EG is a result of osmotic diuresis.
H. Hepatic metabolism of EG rapidly produces circulating metabolites that are extremely toxic
(see Figure 4-1). Renal metabolism of EG may result in local accumulation of nephrotoxic
metabolites. The toxic metabolites of EG (in order of decreasing toxicity) are:
1. Glyoxylate.
2. Glycoaldehyde.
3. Glycolate.
4.EG.
5.Oxalate (the direct toxicity of oxalate is limited).
1. Large quantities of acid are produced as EG is metabolized. The resultant metabolic acidosis
can be life-threatening.
 J. Oxalate crystal accumulation in tissues is a marker of EG poisoning and not a major cause of
tissue damage or organ failure.
K. All of the hallmark findings of EG poisoning can be reproduced by the metabolites of EG
without oxalateaccumulation.
L. The half-life of EG is <12 hours in dogs and <2 to 5 hours in cats; soon after ingestion it metab-
olizes to its very harmful end products.
M. Cats develop EG toxicity at lower dosages and develop crystalluria and renal failure earlier
than do dogs. The metabolism of EG may be more rapid in cats than in dogs, and feline renal
tubular cells may be more sensitive to the cytotoxic effects of EG metabolites.
N. The enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase (primarily in the liver) is important in the initial degrada-
tion of EG. This enzyme can be inhibited pharmacologically in an attempt to reduce produc-
tion of toxic metabolites. Alcohol dehydrogenase also is located in the kidney, which may
account for local generation of cytotoxic metabolites.
O. Clinically, the syndrome occurs in three phases each affecting a different body system: CNS,
cardiopulmonary, and renal. Death can occur during any of these phases.
 ii  s g s   s   ss  so s 
12 hours.
Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure  CHAPTER495
FGURE 4-2 ■ A, Renal histopathology following ethylene glycol poisoning in a dog. B, Note the presence of
intraluminal crystals that are easily seen under polarizing light (hematoxylin and eosin stain, x400). (Courtesy of
Dr. Steven Weisbrode, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.)
a.Clinical signs are attributed to cytotoxic metabolites. Hyperkalemia, hypocalcemia,
 and metabolic acidosis also may contribute.
b. Histopathology includes:
(1) Brain edema and petechiae.
(2) Vascular engorgement.
(3) Sterile meningoencephalitis.
(4) Calcium oxalate crystal accumulation in the brain.
 2. Cardiopulmonary signs can develop at a variable time after EG ingestion depending on
how much was ingested.
a. Cardiopulmonary involvement may not be seen as a separate phase and may be
 obscured by initially severe CNS involvement and developing renal failure.
b. The mechanisms for development of cardiopulmonary failure are obscure.
c. Histopathology includes:
(1) Petechiae of the lungs, pleura, and heart.
(2) Degenerative changes in the myocardium.
(3) Pulmonary edema.
(4) Sterile bronchopneumonia.
(5) Congestive heart failure.
 3.Renal involvement can be detected within hours of EG ingestion, but confirmation of renal
failure based on increased serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) concentrations
is not apparent until 24 hours after ingestion.
b. Obvious light microscopic lesions in the kidney are not identified until after 72 hours in
some patients (evidence for ultrastructural damage occurs within hours) (Figure 4-2):
(1) Dilated proximal tubules, due to downstream obstruction of the nephron by cal-
cium oxalate crystals.
(2) Tubular degeneration and necrosis.
(3) Intracellular oxalate crystal accumulation.
(4) Interstitial inflammation.
(5) Edema.
96
5CHAPTER4 Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
c.Nephrotoxicity is largely due to the metabolites of EG. Crystals contribute to tubular
obstruction and may disrupt cellular function when deposited intracellularly. Severe
pathology and renal dysfunction, however, can occur without any contribution from
calcium oxalate crystals.
4. Calcium oxalate crystals may be deposited in blood vessels anywhere and may contribute
to clinical signs.
 DIAGNOSIS OF ETHYLENE GLYCOL POISONING
Signalment
shop ut raiea pasoueip pue pazquosan Aisea anou s inq 'sien pue shop yoq ur smooo 't
2. Animals of any age may ingest EG.
 3. Animals that roam free are more likely to ingest EG, but indoor pets sometimes gain access
to it in the house.
History
 1. Direct observation of consumption of the toxin may be made before the onset of any clini-
cal signs, but this is not common. When exposure to EG is described by the owner, try to
estimate the volume consumed and the time interval from consumption until presentatior
to your office, because the outcome for EG intoxication is both dose- and time-dependent.
Prognosis is directly affected by this knowledge.
 2. Owners should specifically be asked about access to EG when an acutely and severely ill dog
asn st pm  m u sai eeo ui ds no l ae u paasad si pen 
Questions such as, "Did you or your neighbors recently change radiator fluid?" and "Are
 3. History will vary according to the stage of poisoning observed by the owner and the
amount of EG ingested.
a.Early effects after ingestion (within 6-8 hours).
(1) CNS effects.
(a) Inebriation may be the earliest finding. The animal may suddenly appear con-
fused or depressed, with staggering and incoordination due to the direct effects
of unmetabolized EG.
(b) Severe depression or rapid progression to coma ("acute collapse") may occur
due to the metabolic effects of EG and the metabolic acidosis associated with its
metabolism.
(c) Seizures may be due to rapid onset of hypocalcemia as the oxalates generated
by metabolism of EG chelate calcium.
(d) Vomiting at this stage may be due directly to CNS effects.
(e) Sudden death may occur
(2) Cardiopulmonary effects.
(a) Very variable.
(b) Owners may notice rapid or difficult breathing.
(3) Urinary effects.
(a) Polyuria may be noted soon after ingestion of EG due to the osmotic effects of
rapid GI absorption of EG and its subsequent filtration through the kidneys,
which results in osmotic diuresis. EG (similar to ethanol) also may inhibit antid-
iuretic hormone, which may contribute to diuresis.
IRapid progression from polyuria to oligoanuria is typical of EG poisoning.
Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure  CHAPTER497
(b)Polyuria may not be observed by the owner if sufficient time has elapsed since
ingestion.
(c)Polydipsia can result from a sudden increase in serum osmolality after rapid
absorption of EG and stimulation of osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus, an
effect that is pronounced in dogs during the first hour after ingestion. Polydip-
sia can persist beyond this stage because dehydration and volume depletion
stimulate water consumption until the animal becomes severely depressed.
b.  Later effects after ingestion (12-24 hours or longer) are largely attributable to renal fail-
when picked up or may be reluctant to move because of pain arising from swollen
muscles or kidneys.
(1) The initial phase of polyuria may not have been observed.
(2) Urine volume at this later stage usually is severely decreased, often nearly to the
point of anuria.
(3) If the renal insult has been mild, normal urine volume or polyuria may continue,
but this manifestation is rare.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
A. CNS depression to coma.
B. Hypothermia may be severe.
C. Dehydration is common due to polyuria accompanied by anorexia and vomiting, especially if
the animal is presented 24 hours or more after ingestion of EG.
D. Signs of cardiopulmonary failure may be present in severely affected animals.
1. Tachypnea, increased bronchovesicular sounds or crackles associated with pulmonary
edemaorsterilebronchopneumonia
 2. Signs consistent with congestive heart failure, including tachycardia and venous distension.
3. Cyanosis.
E. Palpation of the costovertebral angles may disclose painful kidneys or muscle pain. The kid-
neys may be swollen or normal in size.
F. Uremic oral ulcers and foul oral odor may be present. A sweet oral odor may be detected
immediately after consumption of EG.
G. Seizures may be observed.
 H. Occasionally, vomitus and diarrhea may have a metallic, green sheen compatible with inges-
tion of radiator fluid.
LABORATORY FINDINGS IN ETHYLENE GLYCOL POISONING
 A. Abnormalities will be present on urinalysis soon after ingestion of EG (as early as 4 to 6 hours
after ingestion).
1.  Urine specific gravity is decreased into the isosthenuric range regardless of urine volume.
 2. Dipstrip analysis may show positive reactions for protein, blood, and sometimes glucose.
3. Calcium oxalate crystals may be seen on urinary sediment examination.
a. Often noted in experimental studies in animals but reported in <50% of naturally
occurring cases.
b. Crystals may be present in the kidneys even if they are not seen in the urine.
c. Oxalate crystals may be observed in the urine of normal dogs and cats as a result of diet,
s s  a  s a p as si r
86
CHAPTER 4 ■ Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
d. The physical appearance of oxalate crystals varies from the commonly recognized rect-
 x   s as, r a s r 
drate) to themany morphologic forms of calcium oxalate monohydratethat can be
more difficult to identify.
4. Unidentified crystals often are reported from the laboratory in animals with EG
poisoning.
 a.These unidentified crystals initially were thought to be hippurate, an alternative path-
Way metabolite.
b. These hippurate-like crystals are now known to be forms of calcium oxalate
monohydrate.
(1) They often assume a picket fence appearance.
(2) They may be observed to have small budding structures on them when examined
carefully.
c.Calcium oxalate monohydrate crystals form more frequently in EG poisoning than do
calcium oxalate dihydrate crystals.
5. Cylindruria may be present.
a. The presence of epithelial cell casts, mixed cell casts, and granular casts supports a
diagnosis of nephrosis from any cause.
b. Casts also may be absent from the urinary sediment because anuria or severe oliguria
may prevent their appearance in urine. Showers of casts may be seen if the patient
converts from oliguria to diuresis
B. Measured urine output.
1. Very small urine volume is a hallmark of EG poisoning 12 to 24 hours after ingestion of a
toxic dose.
 2. Transient polyuria may be observed in peracute cases.
 3. A return to normal urine volume or polyuria can be observed in animals that survive.
4. Animals that initially had normal urine volume or polyuria can convert to oligoanuria
days later.
C. Serum biochemistry.
1. BUN and serum creatinine concentrations usually are increased by the time clinical signs
have developed and the animal is presented to the veterinarian for evaluation.
a. Some of the azotemia may be prerenal as a consequence of dehydration, but most of it
is primary renal azotemia by 12 hours after EG ingestion.
b. BUN and serum creatinine concentrations are normal in animals that are presented
very soon after EG ingestion (within 8 to 12 hours).
c.  Initially normal BUN and serum creatinine concentrations do not accurately reflect the
severity of renal injury. Typically, 24 to 48 hours are required before they increase to
new steady state abnormal concentrations.
2. Serum phosphorus concentrations may be disproportionately high compared with BUN
and serum creatinine concentrations, possibly due to absorption from the GI tract of phos-
phate-containing rust inhibitors that are added to some antifreeze formulations. Later,
hyperphosphatemia is primarily a consequence of renal failure.
3. Serum osmolality may be dramatically increased soon after EG ingestion due to the pres-
ence of unmetabolized EG
be confused with the calculated osmolality that is supplied with serum biochemistry
results by many commercial laboratories.
b. Calculated osmolality (mOsm/kg) may be determined by the following formula:
2(Na + K) + glucose/18 + BUN /2.8.
Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure  CHAPTER499
c. The difference between measured and calculated serum osmolality has been referred
to as the osmolal gap. Normally, calculated serum osmolality is similar to measured
serum osmolality and the normal osmolal gap is <10 mOsm/kg.
d.EG is rapidly absorbed from the GI tract into the blood and increases measured serum
osmolality. Calculated serum osmolality, however, is unchanged because EG is not a
component of the equation for calculated osmolality. Thus, EG ingestion increases the
osmolal gap.
e. A high osmolal gap (often >50 mOsm/kg) is common in early EG poisoning in dogs
and cats. Values of >100 mOsm/kg are not observed in any other disease in veterinary
medicine.
f. In animals treated with ethyl alcohol, this solute also will contribute to serum osmo-
lality measured by freezing point depression osmometry and will contribute to the
increased osmolal gap. Ethyl alcohol is a volatile solute and will not contribute to
osmolality measured by vapor point elevation osmometry.
g. Treatment with mannitol will increase the osmolal gap.
4.
. Serum potassium concentration may be increased, and hyperkalemia, if severe, can be life-
threatening.
a.  Early in the course of the intoxication, hyperkalemia may occur as a consequence of
severe metabolic acidosis associated with EG metabolism.
 b. Hyperkalemia is further exacerbated as renal potassium and net acid excretion are cur-
tailed by AIRF and development of oligoanuria. Hyperkalemia will persist until urine
output increases.
5. Serum calcium concentration often is decreased as a result of several factors:
a.Chelation of calcium from plasma by oxalates.
b. Deposition of calcium oxalate crystals in tissues (e.g., kidneys, blood vessels).
c. Loss of calcium oxalate in urine.
 d. As renal failure becomes established, hyperphosphatemia contributes to a reciprocal
fall in serum calcium concentration
e. Seizures may result from rapid severe decreases in serumionized calcium concentration.
6. Detection of EG
a.Measurements of serum and urine EG concentration are not available from most com-
mercial diagnostic laboratories.
b. High concentrations of EG in either serum or urine will confirm poisoning. EG how-
ever does not persist long, and concentrations may fall below detectable levels before
clinical samples are obtained for analysis
c. The EGTest Kit is an in-house test kit designed for veterinarians to allow rapid detec
tion of unmetabolized EG.
(1) A colorimetric reaction based on generation of formaldehyde in the presence of EG
will identify concentrations as low as 50 mg/dL
(2) False-negative reactions can occur with patient samples obtained <30 minutes or
more than 12 hours after ingestion.
some antifreeze preparations), metaldehyde (present in snail bait), or pharmaceu-
tical products that contain glycerol (e.g., diazepam, phenobarbital, pentobarbital,
dexamethasone, activated charcoal).
d. Samples of urine or vomitus may fluoresce under Wood's lamp illumination due
to the presence of fluorescein added to antifreeze to facilitate detection of radiator
leaks.
 7. Measurement of EG metabolites by chromatography
100
CHAPTER 4  Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
a. Increased concentrations of EG metabolites may be detectable for days after EG has
disappeared.
b. Results of such tests are unlikely to be available quickly enough to allow treatment
decisions to be made.
 8. Blood gas analysis may support a diagnosis of EG poisoning
The combination of high anion gap and high osmolal gap in a patient with severe metabolic acidosis
supports a diagnosis of EG poisoning.
a. The metabolites of EG result in severe metabolic acidosis early in the course of intoxi-
cation (within hours).
b. Later, as renal failure becomes established, decreased excretion of acid by the kidneys
contributes to the acidosis.
c.
 Respiratory compensation (hyperventilation) and decreased pCO2 are expected unless
cardiopulmonary complications are present or the animal is comatose.
d.A high anion gap is supportive of EG intoxication.
(1) The increased anion gap occurs due to titration of bicarbonate by acid metabolites
of EG and accumulation of the associated unmeasured anions (e.g., glycoaldehyde,
glyoxylate).
sdoaaap amiey [euan anojaq Xiiea smooo de uone u aseanoui isarel au (z)
Phosphates and sulfates contribute to the anion gap after renal failure has been
established.
aaaas ym puaned e u de eouso uu pue de uone y jo uouqon au (e)
metabolic acidosis supports a diagnosis of acute EG poisoning.
 D. Plain radiographs show normal to slightly enlarged kidneys. Excretory urography is contra-
indicated.
 E. Ultrasonography may disclose abnormalities soon after EG ingestion (Figure 4-3).
[adxa un ugsaun rae sou  o e Aq pasau si Auoa enro lea 'l
studies in dogs.
FIGURE 4-3  Renal ultrasonography of dog with ethylene glycol poisoning. Note the extreme hyperechogenicity
of the renal cortex which is nearly pathognomonic for this intoxication.
Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure  CHAPTER 4101
2. Renal medullary echogenicity is increased by 5 hours after ingestion and continues to
increase until 8 to 10 hours after ingestion.
3.A halo sign at the corticomedullary junction may be associated with anuria.
An extreme increase in renal cortical echogenicity in normal-sized or enlarged kidneys is typical of EG
toxicity.
4.  An extreme increase in renal cortical echogenicity in normal-sized or enlarged kidneys is
nearly pathognomonic for EG ingestion.
 F. Renal biopsy findings vary according to the time interval after ingestion of EG.
1. Lesions typical of nephrosis are seen.
 2. Intraluminal and intracellular calcium oxalate crystals may be observed under polarized
light.
3. Histologic features of renal tubular regeneration indicate the possibility of renal healing.
4.
 When biopsied <72 hours after ingestion, renal lesions may be minimal. Interstitial edema
may be noted in some cases.
5.
When biopsied more than 7-10 days after ingestion signs of healing by regeneration or
healing by fibrosis and mononuclear cell infiltration may be observed.
6. Some animals have minimal lesions even when biopsied late in the course of the disease
 and despite severe excretory failure, suggesting the possibility of an ultrastructural defect.
TREATMENT
14-MP is the antidote of choice for EG poisoning in dogs. New protocols for use of 4-MP in cats show promise
 that it will also become the antidote of choice in cats.
A. The time interval for starting treatment is extremely critical because the half-life of EG is very
short.
 1.  The prognosis for survival is best when treatment is initiated within 3 hours of ingestion.
 2. Treatment initiated more than 24 hours after ingestion is associated with a grave
progmosis.
 3. Treatment for presumptive EG poisoning should be instituted immediately in patients
with compatible clinical signs if exposure is possible and ingestion suspected.
a.If suspicion is high, do not wait for confirmatory evidence that EG has been ingested.
b. A delay of even a few hours may make the difference between survival and death or
euthanasia.
B. Therapy differs according the time that has elapsed between ingestion of EG and presentation
to the veterinarian.
1. Induction of vomiting and gastric lavage should be considered in animals presented
within 1 to 2 hours after EG ingestion. These procedures are not considered if the animal
is severely depressed or comatose because of increased risk for aspiration. Administration
of activated charcoal is of questionable value because EG is not well adsorbed by charcoal.
The effect of activated charcoal on adsorption of intermediary metabolites in the intestinal
lumen after enterohepatic recirculation is not well known.
2. Animals presented within 24 hours of probable ingestion should have therapy directed
against any further metabolism of EG, measures taken to enhance EG excretion or removal
from the body, and supportive measures to help combat metabolic abnormalities already
present.
102 CHAPTER 4 ■ Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
3. Animals presented more than 24 hours after ingestion are not likely to benefit from
therapy aimed at reducing metabolism of EG because most of the parent compound will
have already been metabolized. If however EG is still detectable in body fluids, antidote
disturbances should be carried out.
4. Comatose or severely obtunded patients may require endotracheal intubation and ventila-
tory support.
C. Multiple approaches to treatment should be employed to increase the likelihood of survival,
especially in animals in the early phases of EG poisoning.
D. Place an indwelling IV catheter. Even if the animal is presented early and does not appear
critically ill, an IV line still should be placed because these patients can deteriorate rapidly
 complicated metabolic disturbances.
E. Administer fluid therapy.
1. Correct dehydration.
2. Provide fluids for maintenance needs but be very careful not to overhydrate the animal,
because oliguria or anuria often is present or will develop soon after presentation.
 F. Monitor urine output using an indwelling urinary catheter.
G. Correct hypocalcemia, as necesary to control tetany or seizures, with infusions of calcium
gluconate or calcium chloride.
H. Correct metabolic acidosis immediately.
 1. Severe metabolic acidosis occurs early in the course of EG poisoning and can result in death.
 2. Infuse sodium bicarbonate as needed to correct acidemia, ideally by monitoring serial
blood gas determinations.
3. Ongoing acid production from continued metabolism of EG and acid retention as a con-
sequence of developing renal failure can make the management of metabolic acidosis
challenging.
4. Overzealous alkali administration may contribute to the occurrence of seizures or tetany,
especially if the animal is already hypocalcemic due to chelation of calcium by metabolites
 or as a result of developing uremia.
I. Decrease breakdowm of EG to toxic metabolites.
1. Increased survival of dogs and cats poisoned with EG in experimental studies was
demonstrated when early treatment with ethanol was provided. Similar results were
demonstrated with 4-methylpyrazole (4-MP; fomepizole) in experimental studies of dogs
poisoned with EG.
 2. Both ethanol and 4-MP compete with EG as a substrate for the enzyme alcohol dehydroge-
nase, thus decreasing its metabolism to toxic compounds. This treatment results in higher
plasma concentrations of EG and increased excretion of unchanged EG into urine when
renal function is normal. Treatment with ethanol or 4-MP within 24 hours of ingestion is
warranted.
3. Ethanol therapy.
a.The goal of treatment is to maintain ethanol concentrations high enough to effectively
compete with EG as a substrate for alcohol dehydrogenase. The required ethanol con-
centration will vary with the individual patient and amount of EG ingested. Ethanol
concentrations of 100 mg/dL are recommended for efficacy in human medicine but
commercial veterinary diagnostic laboratories do not routinely provide this measure-
ment. Ethanol concentrations >60 mg/dL are necessary for effective treatment of cats
whereas concentrations as low as 35 mg/dL may provide effective inhibition of EG
metabolism in dogs.
Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure  CHAPTER 4103
b. Never give undiluted ethanol IV because death can occur from acute myocardial
depression.
c. The traditional high dose protocol for dogs consists of 5.5 mL/kg of a 20% ethanol
solution IV every 4 hours for 5 treatments and then every 6 hours for 4 treatments. This
protocol is equivalent to 1.1 g/kg of ethanol given intermittently.
d.Constant rate infusion (CRI) of ethanol after administration of a loading dose is likely
to be superior pharmacologically. This method has not been reported in the veterinary
literature but it has been used successfully in our hospital:
(1) 1.1 g/kg loading dose using 20% ethanol.
(2) 0.30 g/kg/hr ethanol for the first 20 hours.
(3) 0.20 g/kg/hr ethanol for next 24 hours.
e.  The following low dose CRI protocol for dogs is designed to maintain ethanol concen-
trations of 50 mg/dL using 30% ethanol:
(1) 1.31 mL/kg loading bolus (300 mg/kg).
(2) 0.42 mL/kg/hr for 48 hours (100 mg/kg/hr).
f. The dosage of ethanol for cats is 5 mL/kg intraperitoneally using a 20% ethanol solu-
tion and given every 6 hours for 4 treatments and then every 8 hours for 4 treatments.
Although this regimen was developed in experimental studies of cats, it has been mod-
ified for IV use in cats:
(1) 1.0 g/kg loading bolus.
(2) 0.17 g/kg/hr for 24 hours.
(3) 0.12 g/kg/hr for 32 hours.
g. Ethanol can be given orally by the owmer in an emergency before departing for a
veterinary hospital if the evidence for EG ingestion is conclusive. The dose is 1.0 to
1.4 mL/kg of a 40% (i.e., 80 proof) alcoholic beverage (e.g., vodka). Vomiting may
occur after rapid administration of this dose.
h. Disadvantages of ethanol therapy.
(1) Depressed or comatose animals are given another CNS depressant.
(2) The ethanol infusion can produce a nearly comatose state for 72 hours.
(3) Respiratory arrest is common with intermittent bolus treatments.
(4) Obligatory polyuria follows ethanol treatments and can cause or worsen dehydration.
(5) Animals that have ingested large quantities of EG may not be completely protected
from EG metabolism by this regimen.
4. 4-Methylpyrazole therapy.
a.Marketed commercially as Antizol-Vet, 4-MP is a specific antidote for EG poisoning if
given early enough after ingestion.
b. Rescue with 4-MP is superior to that achieved with ethanol in dogs and it does not
produce CNS depression.
c. Dosage of 4-MP (the following protocol provides a total dosage of 50 mg/kg):
(1) 20 mg/kg given at admission.
(2) 15 mg/kg given 12 hours after admission.
(3) 10 mg/kg given 24 hours after admission.
(4) 5 mg/kg given 36 hours after admission if necessary.
d. 4-MP is less effective in cats than in dogs when at standard dosages. Neither 4-MP nor
ethanol rescue is very effective 3 hours after a lethal dose of EG in cats, but ethanol
appears to be superior to 4-MP.
e. Preliminary studies indicate that higher dosages of 4-MP can be given to safely and
effectively inhibit alcohol dehydrogenase in cats:
(1) 125 mg/kg initially, followed by 31 mg/kg 12, 24, and 36 hours later
104
CHAPTER 4  Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
(2) Mild sedation is an adverse effect.
(3) AIRF was prevented in cats when 4-MP was given within 3 hours of EG
ingestion.
f.Provide supplemental thiamine and pyridoxine to encourage metabolism to less harm
ful intermediates by alternate metabolic pathways. The value of this theoretical treat-
ment has not been proven.
g. Administer ethanol or 4-MP until EG is no longer detectable (negative EG TestKit
result or normal osmolal gap).
J. Induce diuresis with IV fluids and some combination of furosemide, mannitol, and
dopamine.
 1. Increasing or maintaining glomerular filtration rate (GFR) will facilitate renal excretion of
EG and its metabolites.
2. Mannitol may be the diuretic of choice before anuria has become established because
of its superior effects on renal edema. Mannitol will be detected when serum osmo-
lality is measured using either freezing point depression or vapor point elevation
osmometry.
 3. If oxalate crystalluria was present initially, diuresis should be continued until it disappears.
 4. Diuresis should be attempted even if the animal has been presented long after ingestion of
EG.
a.Diuresis at this time does nothing to enhance excretion of EG because it has already
been metabolized but may enhance excretion of metabolites.
b. Successful conversion of oligoanuria to polyuria will facilitate patient management
 including fluid therapy and treatment of hyperkalemia and metabolic acidosis.
K. Eliminate EG from the body.
1. Maintain diuresis to promote excretion in urine.
2. Induce emesis if ingestion of EG has occurred recently and the patient does not have CNS
depression or coma (i.e., high risk of aspiration).
 3. Administer an aqueous slurry of activated charcoal (5 g/kg) via stomach tube if the animal
is not severely depressed. Otherwise the risk for aspiration increases.
a.Some EG still in the lumen of the GI tract may be adsorbed and no longer available for
absorption.
b. EG may undergo some enterohepatic circulation and be bound by charcoal even after
it was initially absorbed into the body.
c. Improved survival has been reported in dogs with experimental EG poisoning when
activated charcoal was added to standard therapy consisting of bicarbonate, ethanol,
andfluids.
d.Commercially available activated charcoal may contain propylene glycol and glycerol.
Absorption of these vehicles can increase measured serum osmolality and osmolal
gap, and cause confusion in the diagnosis of EG intoxication. A positive test result on
the EG test kit can result from the propylene glycol.
4.Dialysis is beneficial in removing EG and its toxic metabolites.
a. Consider temporary peritoneal dialysis for several exchanges of peritoneal fluid.
Dialysis may be necessary for <24 hours if started early enough.
b. Long-term dialysis may be helpful or necessary if severe oliguria or anuria is present.
c.  Long-term dialysis can result in recovery from EG nephrotoxicity but dialysis may be
(s h on g) a go poad  A ue rg Ass
d.Short-term hemodialysis removes both EG and toxic metabolites and may allow sur-
Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure  CHAPTER 4105
intoxication. Overhydration, hyperkalemia, severe metabolic acidosis, and retention of
uremic toxins not manageable by conventional medical therapy will require dialysis if
the patient is to have a chance for survival.
PROGNOSIS FOR PREVENTION OF ACUTE INTRINSIC RENAL FAILURE
FROM ETHYLENE GLYCOL POISONING
A. Ultimately depends on the amount of EG consumed and the time from ingestion until defini-
tive therapy is started.
 B. Survival was 12% in one large study of dogs and cats with EG poisoning. Half of the survivors
were nonazotemic animals treated <12 hours after EG ingestion whereas the other half were
in renal failure but all were younger than 6 months of age. Thus, young age may be a factor
favoring survival.
C. Prognosis for dogs after ingestion of a toxic dose of EG:
 1. Excellent if treatment initiated <1 to 5 hours after ingestion.
2. Good if treatment initiated 5 to 8 hours after ingestion.
 3. Fair if treatment initiated 8 to 10 hours after ingestion.
 4. Poor to grave if treatment initiated more than 10 but <24 hours after ingestion.
 5. Grave if treatment initiated more than 24 hours after ingestion.
D. Prognosis for cats after ingestion of a toxic dose of EG:
 1. Excellent if treatment initiated up to 1 hour after ingestion.
 2. Fair to good if treatment initiated more than 1 but <3 hours after ingestion.
 3. Poor if treatment initiated more than 3 hours after ingestion.
E. Progmosis for recovery from intrinsic renal failure.
1. Prognosis should be considered grave if persistent oliguria or anuria characterizes the
initial course after IV fluids.
2. Prognosis is grave for animals presented with established AIRF and more than 24 hours
after ingestion of EG.
metabolic acidosis, or overhydration.
4. Rarely, some dogs will recover from nonoliguric AIRF due to EG intoxication
 5. Survival after EG-induced AIRF is more likely in puppies than in adult dogs.
Leptospirosis
 INTRODUCTION
 Infection in cats does not result in recognized clinical disease, but serologic evidence of expo
sure exists in cats.
1.  Many infected animals do not develop clinical disease.
 2. Leptospiral organisms are thin, coil-shaped, gram-negative, aerobic, and microaerophilic.
Pathogenic strains are classified as Leptospira interrogans or L. kirschneri with at least 8
serovars in dogs and cats.
3. Classically, clinically relevant infections have been attributed to serovars L. canicola and
L.icterohemorrhagiae.
106
CHAPTER 4  Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
4. Recently, clinical cases have most often been associated withinfection by serovars L. pomond
or L. grippotyphosa. Serovars L. bratislava, L. australis, and others may be the causative agent
depending on locale.
 5. Diagnosis of leptospirosis has been increasingly made at veterinary teaching hospitals and
diagnostic laboratories throughout the world over the past two decades.
 6. Infection with specific serovars varies by geographic location:
a. In California, L. pomona and L. bratislava are most common.
b. In New Jersey and Michigan, L. pomona, L. grippotyphosa, and L. autumnalis are most
common and L. bratislava is not reported.
c. In Massachusetts, L. pomona and L. grippotyphosa are most common.
d.In upstate New York, L. pomona and L. grippotyphosa are most common.
e.
 In Ilinois, L. grippotyphosa is most common.
f.In Ontario, Canada, L. autumnalis is most common, but L. bratislaua, L. grippotyphosa,
and L. pomona also occur.
In Italy, L. bratislaua and L. icterohaemorrhagiae have been most common but L. australis
has been recently described.
B. Hosts that have adapted to leptospiral serovars act as a reservoir for maintenance of the infec-
a are ss i is p u sae ro p ae raa sis i 
C. Source of leptospiral transmission and pathogenesis.
1. Sources of leptospiral organisms.
a.Leptospiral organisms don't replicate outside of the host.
b. The urine of infected animals can contain 105 organisms/mL.
c. Shedding occurs in the urine of asymptomatic carriers and convalescent patients.
d. Greater shedding of organisms occurs in hosts that have been adapted to the organism.
e. Leptospiral organisms that are shed into water can survive for extended periods of time
2. Initially, the organism enters the host by:
a. Conjunctival, nasopharyngeal, oral, esophageal, or genital mucous membranes.
b. Physical contact, ingestion, venereal, or transplacental transmission.
C.Urinary contamination of water, sewage, or food.
 3. The virulence of the various leptospiral serovars is influenced by several factors.
a.
Type of toxin elaborated (e.g., hemolysins, lipases).
b.
Severity ofvasculitisthatdevelops.
c.Degree of immunologic injury elicited (i.e., the response will be less severe in an
adapted host).
 TABLE 4-1
  Leptospiral Organisms and Their Associated Domestic or Wildlife Host
Serovar
Domestic (wildlife) Host
L.icterohaemorhagiae
Dog (rat)
L. canicola
Dog
L. pomona
Cattle, pig (deer, skunk, opossum)
L. hardjo
Cattle
L. grippotyphosa
Cattle,(raccoon, opossum)
L. autumnalis
Mice
L. bratislava
Horse, swine (rat, raccoon, opossum, skunk, vole)
L. bataviae
Dog (rat, mouse)
Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure  CHAPTER 4107
4. A seasonal distribution (late summer to fall) occurs and increased rainfall is a risk factor
 D. Clinical manifestations of leptospirosis depend on several factors.
1. The infecting serovar.
2. Potency of the strain of serovar.
3. Age of the dog.
a.  Puppies younger than 3 months of age are particularly susceptible.
4. Serologic response to previous vaccination (if any). Vaccination against serovars L. canicola
and L. icterohaemorrhagiae decreases the likelihood of clinical disease with these serovars.
 5. Severity of specific organ dysfunction after leptospiremia.
E. Syndromes.
1. The peracute syndrome is a fulminant form of the disease, most often seen in puppies, that
causes septicemia and death.
Leptospirosis is the most important inflammatory cause of AIRF in dogs. It is underdiagnosed and often
 undiagnosed.
 2. The acute systemic syndrome causes septicemia and severe illness with localization of
organisms to various organs resulting in:
a. Vasculitis.
b. Myositis.
C. Acute nephritis resulting in azotemia and oliguric AIRF
d. Hepatitis.
 3. The subacute syndrome is a less severe form of the disease in which renal failure may be
the orly obvious clinical manifestation.
a.Easily confused with chronic renal failure (CRF).
b. Polydipsia and polyuria may be the only clinical signs.
4. The chronic renal syndrome is characterized by chronic shedding of organisms in urine
after recovery, and its contribution to development of CRF is controversial. Most veteri
nary nephrologists do not believe infecfion with leptospiral organisms is a major cause oi
CRF.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
 A. Clinical signs are either inapparent or mild in animals that already have high or intermediate
titers from previous vaccination against the infecting strain.
 B. Organisms initially penetrate mucous membranes, often after the animal drinks contaminated
water. (Figure 4-4).
C. Organisms multiply in the bloodstream for up to 7 days after exposure (leptospiremic phase).
D. Organisms are distributed to the tissues after achieving critical numbers in the bloodstream.
 E. By 1 week after exposure, organisms often are shed into the urine (leptospiruric phase).
 F. Damage to vascular endothelium, liver, and kidney occur. The severity of this damage depends
on the virulence of the infecting serovar.
1. Variably severe vasculitis, hepatitis, and nephritis occur during this stage.
2.
 Organisms penetrate blood vessels to enter the renal interstitium and then renal tubular
cells and tubular fluid. Mononuclear interstitial inflammation occurs in response to the
invading organisms. Interstitial hemorrhage and edema as well as multifocal tubular necro-
sis may occur as a consequence of ischemia and toxins from the organisms. Defects in excre-
3. Chroric hepatitis is a rare complication
108
CHAPTER 4 ■ Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
Organism in environment
Days
Penetration (mucosa)
post-
exposure
Increasingnumberoforganisms
+
Vaccination
Blood
0
1
Low or absent
Intermediate antibody titer
High antibody titer
antibody titer
2
 Multiplication
Mild or shortened
 Organism eliminated
4
(Leptospiremia)
leptospiremia
5
Kidneys (renal failure)
Vascular damage
(thrombocytopenia)
Liver (jaundice)
Mild or inapparent
No clinical signs
clinical signs
7
Clinical Disease
Coagulopathy
8
Antibody titer
Death
6
increases
(clears blood and
10
tissues of leptospires)
12
Chronic active hepatitis
Renal colonization
13
(antibody-free site)
14
Leptospiruria
Eliminate organism
+15
(carrier state)
fromkidney
FIGURE 4-4  Pathogenesis of leptospirosis in dogs—leptospiremia and leptospiruria. (From Greene, C: Infectious
disease ofthe dog and cat, ed 3, St Louis, 2006, Elsevier, p 405.)
G. During the second week after exposure, antibodies against the infecting serovar are produced and
the organisms are cleared from the bloodstream and most tissues except for the kidneys and eyes.
H.1
Death may occur before an adequate antibody response develops.
I. Due to the absence of antibodies in the kidneys, organisms are not rapidly cleared from the
kidneys and a carrier state develops in which the organisms live in the kidneys after recovery
from initial nephritis.
J. The carrier state may last for months to years and is much more common than previously
 appreciated based on recent polymerase chain reaction (PCR) data. The carrier state may arise 
 after clinically obvious illness or after recovery from an inapparent infection.
 K. Recovery from leptospiral nephritis may be complete with resolution of azotemia, may
 progress to CRF due to substantial nephron loss, or may result in death from AIRF.
SIGNALMENT
A. Puppies are more susceptible to experimental infections than are adult dogs.
 B. No age predisposition to natural infection is observed when unvaccinated dogs are exposed
to a virulent strain of leptospiral organisms.
Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure  CHAPTER 4109
C. Peak age at diagnosis is very variable and has ranged from 4 to 10 years.
 D. German shepherd dogs and German shepherd mixed breeds were over-represented in some
studies of infection with serovars L. pomona and L. grippotyphosa.
E. Increased incidence in male dogs (i.e., male:female ratio of 2:1 to 10:1).
HISTORY
A. Working and herding breeds had increased risk in some studies, whereas companion animals
showed decreased risk.
suoonei ci amsodxa 'seare pazrueqm Auasan saa) apiim oi amsodxa Suaeu no reau suail d
and opossums) increases risk of exposure.
C. Clinical signs may be non-specific.
1.Anorexia.
2. Lethargy.
 3. Vomiting (sepsis and azotemia may be contributory factors).
4. Diarrhea with or without blood (constipation may precede diarrhea).
 5. Icterus in animals with severe hepatic involvement.
7.
Occasional polydipsia and polyuria.
 8. In many cases, clinical signs are minimal and most dogs have mild or inapparent
infection.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION FINDINGS IN SEVERELY AFFECTED DOGS
A. Sepsis-associated findings.
1. High fever (1059 F to 107 F) may progress to hypothermia within 48 hours.
2. Lethargy.
3.Weakness.
 4. Congested oral mucous membranes and injected sclera.
B. Normal-sized or enlarged kidneys.
C. Pain.
1. Renal.
2. Muscle.
 3. Abdominal pain may be difficult to differentiate from renal pain.
D. Tonsillitis and pharyngitis (petechiae may be seen on tonsils).
E. Icteric mucous membranes (e.g., oral, scleral, penile, vulvar).
 F. Findings associated with uremia (e.g., oral ulcers, uremic breath).
G. Urine volume.
1.  Initially, physiologic oliguria (i.e., prerenal) due to dehydration.
 2. Pathologic oliguria due to severe nephritis.
 3. Polyuria during recovery from nephritis.
LABORATORY EVALUATION
A. Hematology findings are compatible with a response to sepsis.
1. Leukocytosis with left shift.
2. Absence of anemia early in the course of the disease.
3. Hemoconcentration as a result of dehydration.
4. Thrombocytopenia.
110 CHAPTER 4 ■ Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
B.Coagulation studies.
1. Dogs with severe leptospirosis have been observed to have a tendency to bleed
excessively.
2. Thrombocytopenia is noted in some patients early in the course of the disease.
 3. Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) is suspected in some patients by the pres-
ence of fibrin degradation products. Some serovars (e.g., L. australis) are more likely than
others to be associated with DIC.
4. One stage prothrombin time (OSPT) and activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) are
normal, and serum fibrinogen concentration is increased.
C. Serum chemistry.
1. Increased BUN and serum creatinine concentrations.
a. Early increases are due to prerenal azotemia and later increases to both prerenal and
primary (intrinsic) renal azotemia.
b. Hyperphosphatemia occurs with severe decreases in renal function.
 2. Hyperkalemia occurs when pathologic oliguria is present.
 3. Serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity usually is increased, even in milder cases
without icterus.
4. Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) activities are vari-
ably increased.
D. Urinalysis findings depend on the extent of renal involvement.
1. Urine specific gravity (USG).
a. Urine is concentrated early in the clinical course or if renal involvement is minimal.
b. Urine becomes progressively more dilute as the severity of intrarenal lesions increases.
(1) Disruption of countercurrent mechanism by inflammatory infiltrates.
(2) Increased osmotic load in surviving nephrons.
(3) Decreased urine specific gravity is associated with oliguria during severe nephritis
and with diuresis during recovery from nephritis.
(4) USG is <1.030 in most affected dogs at the time of diagnosis
2. Dipstrip chemistry.
a.Proteinuria in most.
b. Glucosuria in up to 50% or more of affected dogs
The combination of AlRF with icterus or increased liver enzyme activity suggests leptospirosis.
 3. Urinary sediment often is active due to ongoing renal tubular necrosis and inflammation.
a.Cylindruria occurs in many cases.
(1) Epithelial cell casts.
(2) Coarse and finely granular casts.
b. Renal tubular epithelial cells.
c. Hematuria.
d. Pyuria.
DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING
A. Normal-sized to enlarged kidneys are observed on radiographs or ultrasound examination.
Enlarged kidneys have been identified in 20% to 50% of affected dogs.
B. Other ultrasonographic findings include hyperechogericity in 75% of cases, perinephric
effusion in 20%, pyelectasia in 50%, and medullary rim sign in 33%. Evidence for renal miner-
alization occurs in 10% to 20% of cases.
Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure  CHAPTER 4111
FGURE 4-5  Renal histopathology—leptospiral nephritis in a dog. Note the intense interstitial infiltration
with lymphocytes and plasma cells. A, A punch biopsy specimen, magnified 40x. B, Image magnified 200x.
(Hematoxylin and eosin stain). (Courtesy of Dr. Steven Weisbrode, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.)
RENAL BIOPSY RESULTS
A. Renal biopsy is useful to ensure the acute nature of the disease process, differentiate nephritis
from nephrosis, and evaluate the extent of healing in patients with a protracted clinical course.
(Figure 4-5).
B. Variable acute tubular cell degeneration and necrosis.
C. Acute inflammation characterized by lymphoplasmacytic, neutrophilic, and occasionally
eosinophilic cellular infiltrates.
D. Rarely, leptospiral organisms can be demonstrated using special stains (e.g., Warthin-Starry
silver stain).
LIVER BIOPSY
A. Often not necessary unless clinical (e.g., icterus) and laboratory findings (e.g., increased liver
B. A cholestatic pattern with "dissociation of hepatocytes" often is described
CONFIRMATORY TESTS
A. Demonstration of increasing antibody titer on the microscopic agglutination test using acute
and convalescent serum presently is considered the gold standard for diagnosis of leptospirosis
1. Afourfold increase in titer is considered diagnostic.
2. A single very high titer (>1:400, >1:800, or >1:3200 depending on the study) has been con-
sidered supportive for the diagnosis of active leptospirosis.
 3. Leptospiral serovar L. hardjo is less immunogenic than other strains and lower antibody
titers against this serovar may indicate active infection.
4. Titers against more than one serovar occur commonly because of some cross reactivity of
antibodies. The infection typically is attributed to the serovar against which the patient has
the highest antibody titer
112 CHAPTER4  Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
B. Demonstration of leptospires by histopathologic evaluation of renal biopsy specimens occurs
infrequently.
C. Isolation of leptospires from blood or urine rarely is successful. Special techniques are required
and cultures usually are not successful.
D. PCR using urine.
1. Positive results have been obtained in some but not other studies.
2. Positive results may occur before seroconversion and thus may be useful in early diagnosis
3. The negative predictive value of PCR is nearly 100%.
4. Based on PCR results, shedding of leptospires in urine may be more common than previ
ously suspected on the basis of serology results, regardless of the animal's apparent health
status.
 5. A positive PCR result using currently available assays verifies presence of leptospires, but
does not identify the responsible serovar. Quality control for laboratories performing PCR
 is crucial because contamination by leptospiral DNA in the laboratory can result in false-
positive test results
6.
 The potential ability of PCR to identify pathogenic serovars without cross-reactions by
of leptospirosis.
TREATMENT
A. Leptospiremia is readily resolved by administration of penicillins (e.g., ampicillin, amoxicillin).
 B. Penicillins readily clear leptospires from all organs except the kidney and occasionally the eye.
C. Doxycycline is used to clear the organism from the kidneys and eliminate the carrier state.
 D. Traditionally, streptomycin has been used to clear the organism from the kidney and eliminate
the carrier state, but it is nephrotoxic (see aminoglycoside nephrotoxicity below) and is no
longer available.
E. Supportive treatment with IV fluids to correct dehydration, maintain hydration, and support
renal perfusion is essential.
F. Diltiazem administered intravenously, in addition to standard therapy, may improve renal
 
G. Dialysis support may be needed for survival of some patients with severe azotemia and oligu-
ria. Often, <2 weeks of dialysis is required before renal function adequate for survival returns.
therapy.
CLINICAL COURSE AND PROGNOSIS
Short-term dialysis may be needed to support some dogs with oliguric AIRF due to leptospirosis.
A. Death may occur from the cumulative effects of systemic disease including nephritis and
major damage to other organs.
B. Death also may result from uremia as well as fluid (e.g., overhydration) and electrolyte (e.g.
hyperkalemia) imbalances that develop before and during treatment, especially in patients
with pathologic oliguria.
C. Prognosis for survival depends on the severity of the systemic illness and whether or not
severe liver and renal failure coexist.
Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure  CHAPTER 4113
care (e.g., fluids, peritoneal dialysis).
 E. In one large study, more than 80% of dogs with leptospirosis survived.
1. More than 85% of dogs with severe azotemia treated with hemodialysis survived.
 2. More than 80% of dogs with mild to moderate azotemia survived with conservative
medical management.
 F. In other studies, 78% to 88% of treated dogs were released from the hospital.
G. In one study, infection with serovar L. pomona was associated with more severe azotemia,
hyperphosphatemia, and failure to survive.
H. The chronic prognosis for survival and recovery of renal function in dogs with leptospirosis is
less clear.
1. For decades, veterinary clinicians have suspected that some dogs can recover from acute
nephritis caused by leptospirosis only to die from CRF a few years later. This suspicion has
neither been substantiated nor refuted in the veterinary literature.
2. In one study, 3 of 15 dogs that survived an acute episode of AIRF caused by leptospirosis
died from CRF 10 to 22 months later.
3. In another study, 8 of 10 of dogs survived AIRF. Two of the 8 had no evidence of renal
insufficiency after recovery whereas 6 had varying degree of CRF.
 4. In yet another study, dogs with experimental infections caused by serovars L. canicola and
L. icterohemorrhagiae were followed over a 3-year period. No differences in renal function
or renal histopathology were identified between infected and control dogs.
5. Yet another group of investigators concluded that experimental infection of dogs with
serovar canicola led to development of CRF over a period of 2 years.
I. Possible reasons dogs that have recovered from leptospiral nephritis may develop CRF include:
1. Persistence of the organisms in the kidney may elicit a chronic disease response (i.e.
inflammation, fibrosis)
 2. Healing of nephritis may have caused permanent loss of many nephrons with subsequent devel-
 J. The prognosis for complete recovery of liver function appears to be excellent for most dogs
that survive although chronic active hepatitis has been reported in a kennel of dogs where
leptospirosis occurred.
PUBLIC HEALTH SIGNIFICANCE
A. Leptospirosis is a zoonotic disease, and many individuals must be considered.
1. The owmers and their family members.
2. The veterinarian and the veterinary staff.
B. Good personal hygiene and appropriate precautions (e.g., gloves, masks, goggles) when
handling urine are necessary to reduce risk of infection.
C. Risk for transmission of live leptospires in urine is reduced or eliminated after penicillin treatment.
VACCINATION
Most recent reports attribute canine leptospirosis to serovars L. pomona and L gippotyphosa.
A. Traditional bacterins provide protection for a maximal period of 6 monthis.
B. Protective titers may only last 1 to 3 months in some dogs but cell-mediated immunity lasts
longer.
114CHAPTER 4 ■ Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
C. The bacterin available for many years was only directed against serovars L. canicola and
L.icterohemorrhagiae.
D. Newer vaccines using subunit technology to isolate antigens protect against serovars
L. canicola,L. grippotyphosa,L. icterohemorrhagiae,and L. pomona.
E. More frequent vaccination should be considered for working or herding dogs, show dogs, and
dogs living in environments exposed to raccoons and opossums.
Aminoglycoside (AG) Toxicity
INTRODUCTION
A. Aminoglycoside nephrotoxicity (AGNT) is occasionally reported in dogs and cats, almost
always after parenteral use of these drugs, but systemic absorption and nephrotoxicity after
topical treatment of open wounds and otitis externa have been suspected in rare cases
All aminoglycosides potentially are nephrotoxic.
B. The incidence of AGNT is decreasing due to availability of newer potent antibiotics that are
not nephrotoxic. Increased awareness and surveillance also have allowed earlier diagnosis
and treatment.
C. AGs traditionally have been used to treat resistant gram-negative infections.
D. All AGs potentially are nephrotoxic, the risk of nephrotoxicity varies among different AGs.
1. Neomycin is the most nephrotoxic AG and should never be given systemically.
2. Streptomycin is the least nephrotoxic AG.
3. Tobramycin, netilmicin, and amikacin are less toxic than gentamicin. Gentamicin actually
represents a group of compounds, consisting of gentamicins C1, C1a, and C2. Gentamicin
C2 has greater nephrotoxicity than the other gentamicins, and gentamicin lots may vary in
their nephrotoxic potential depending on how much C2 is present.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
A. AGs undergo litle metabolism after parenteral administration.
 B. They are distributed in the extracellular water with little protein binding.
C. AGs are eliminated from the body predominantly by glomerular filtration with a small but
clinically important amount of AG reabsorbed by the tubules.
D. AGs accumulate in renal tissue, especially the renal cortex.
E. After glomerular filtration, AGs are concentrated in the proximal tubular fluid as water and
solutes are reabsorbed. Injury to the luminal membranes occurs as AGs bind to the brush bor-
der (i.e., microvilli) of the proximal tubular cells.
F. Membrane binding leads to permeability changes that alter transport of solutes and water
across the tubular cell membranes.
G. Adsorptive pinocytosis of the bound AG then occurs with subsequent lysosomal process
 ing and resultant intracellular injury (i.e., myeloid body formation and lysosomal enzyme
release).
H. AG also can bind to membranes of the distal and collecting duct cells with the potential for
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus to develop.
1. In the glomeruli, AG may decrease the size of endothelial fenestrations and decrease glomeru
lar surface area, which may reduce GFR directly, independent of tubular damage.
Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure  CHAPTER 4115
 J. Neonatal puppies (<7 days old) are less susceptible to AG-induced tubular toxicity (i.e., no
increases in serum creatinine concentration despite histopathologic evidence of tubular necro-
sis) compared with older puppies and adult dogs.
K. Fever can increase the volume of distribution of AG throughout the body, which in turn may
increase delivery and deposition of AG to renal tissue.
RISK FACTORS
Patient Factors
1. Age (i.e., older animals more susceptible).
2. Obesity.
 3. Dehydration increases serum AG concentration by volume contraction and decreased renal
clearance. Although GRF is decreased, the higher plasma concentration of AG enables AG
entry into tubular fluid and the concentration of AG is further increased in tubular fluid as
water is reabsorbed.
4. Hypokalemia and potassium depletion.
 5. Pre-existing renal disease increases plasma peak and trough AG concentrations and
decreases renal clearance of AG.
6. Liver disease.
7. Metabolic acidosis.
Aminoglycoside Factors
1. Specific AG used.
2. Excessive dose.
 3. High plasma trough concentrations of AG.
4. High plasma peak concentrations of AG.
5. More frequent administration of AG during a given day.
6.  Longer duration of AG administration over time (e.g., weeks).
7. Prior administration of AG (i.e., AGs persist in renal cortex for months).
Concurrent Medications
1. Other AGs.
 2. Cephalosporins, especially cephaloridine.
3.Amphotericin B.
 4. Furosemide (especially with volume depletion) enhances renal cortical accumulation of AG.
5. Thiacetarsemide.
6. Cisplatin.
7.Cytotoxic drugs.
8. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
The Typical Veterinary Patient with Aminoglycoside Nephrotoxicity
1. Has an increased number of risk factors.
2. Has not been monitored closely while receiving AG (or has been monitored only by
determination of BUN or serum creatinine concentrations).
3. Develops progressive azotemia (often after the medication has been discontinued).
4. Can be oliguric, nonoliguric or polyuric.
a. The prognosis is grave for dogs with oliguric AGNT.
b. Nonoliguric renal failure is expected in 50% to 70% of patients with AGNT and more
than 50% fail to survive despite a lack of oliguria.
116
6CHAPTER 4 Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
c. Humans often recover from AGNT with intense medical support but mean hospital-
ization is more than one month.
DIAGNOSIS
A. AGNT is characterized by a sudden increase in serum creatinine concentration some time
after administration of AG.
 B. Serum creatinine concentration continues to increase for several days after initial detection.
Mean peak serum creatinine concentration was 10.0 mg/dL (6.2 mg/dL to 21.0 mg/dL)
in one clinical study.
C. Hypokalemia may be a prominent feature (60% of dogs in one study had serum potassium
concentrations <2.5 mEq/L) but hyperkalemia also may develop (in up to 50% of affected
(soop
AG nephrotoxicity is characterized by a sudden increase in serum creatinine concentration after
 administration of AG.
D. Urine becomes dilute early in the course of AGNT as a consequence of nephrogenic diabetes
insipidus and before the onset of renal failure. The presence of dilute urine does not necessar-
ily mean that renal failure will develop.
E. Casts, small epithelial cells (presumably renal in origin), glucosuria, hematuria, and protein-
uria are other urinalysis findings seen in AGNT that can occur before increases in BUN or
serum creatinine concentrations occur
F. The urinary enzyme Y-glutamyl transferase (GGT) is very sensitive in the detection of AG
injury to the brush border of the proximal tubular cells.
1. The ability of urinary enzyme measurements to predict development of renal failure after
exposure to AG has yet to be demonstrated in clinical patients.
2. Urinary enzymes may be excessively sensitive to the effects of AG on the tubular cells (i.e.,
their appearance in the urine may merely indicate displacement of brush border enzymes
as opposed to lethal cellular injury).
 3. The GGT-to-creatinine ratio increased twofold during exposure to normal doses of genta-
micin in dogs and a threefold increase in this ratio preceded increases in serum creatinine
concentration.
 4. Measurement of other urinary enzymes such as N-acetyl-glucuronidase (NAG) can be use-
ful to determine further extent of acute renal tubular cell injury. NAG is present in tubular
 cell cytoplasm, and its presence in urine indicates more severe injury.
G. Normal to enlarged kidneys are expected on radiography during early AGNT if the kidneys
were normal before exposure to AG.
H. Renal biopsy shows changes typical of nephrosis, predominantly affecting the proximal
tubules and no specific findings are pathognomonic for AGNT at the level of light microscopy.
1. Loss of brush border staining early in AGNT can be demonstrated with periodic acid-
Schiff (PAS) staining.
 2. Electron microscopy may show increased numbers of myeloid bodies, but these also are
observed in AG-treated animals that do not develop renal failure.
 3. Renal biopsy can be helpful to evaluate the extent of tubular injury and the nature of the
healing process. Healing by fibrosis and failure of glomerular filtration to return to an
adequate level warrants a poor prognosis.
Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure  CHAPTER 4117
PREVENTION OF AMINOGLYCOSIDE NEPHROTOXICITY
A. Aminoglycosides should be chosen for antibacterial therapy only when specifically necessary.
B. Rapid correction of volume depletion and maintenance of normal hydration by fluid therapy
are essential when AGs are to be administered.
C. Concurrent use of cephalosporins is thought by some to be a risk factor for AGNT and is not
recommended, but this is controversial.
D. If at all possible, do not administer any other drug with nephrotoxic potential concurrently with AG.
 E. Do not concurently administer diuretic therapy during AG treatment because furosemide
F. Consider administering the total daily dose of AG as a single dose because this approach has
been shown to be less nephrotoxic than administering the total daily dose divided into two or
three doses throughout the day.
IAG should be used only when specifically indicated.
G. Although limiting duration of treatment will not necessarily prevent AGNT, consider using
AG for fewer than 10 days.
H. Consider avoiding AG entirely if the animal is known to have major risk factors for AGNT.
As an altermative, choose a third-generation cephalosporin, antipseudomonal penicillin (e.g.,
ticarcillin, piperacillin), or a carbapenem (e.g., imipenem, meropenem) if indicated.
 1. Monitor the animal's serum potassium concentration carefully during AG treatment. Hypo
kalemia and potassium depletion can develop as a consequence of AG toxicity, but they also
can aggravate AG toxicity.
J. Monitor urinalysis frequently and do not depend solely on BUN and serum creatinine con-
centrations to identify early AGNT. Loss of urinary concentrating ability and appearance of
treatment is continued.
 K. Adjust the dosage of AG in animals known to have decreased GFR. Dose reduction should
be accomplished by interval extension rather than dose reduction. Remember that cachectic
animals may have lower serum creatinine concentrations that can lead to overestimation of
their level of glomerular filtration.
L. Obese animals should be dosed with AG according to their estimated lean body mass to avoid
overdosage.
M. Other experimental methods of renoprotection include dietary protein conditioning (high
dietary protein intake before and during administration of AG increases clearance of the drug
and reduces nephrotoxicity) as well as supplementation with calcium, magmesium, potas-
sium, and thyroxine. Administration of a thromboxane synthetase inhibitor reduced AGNT in
dogs exposed to gentamicin.
The dosage of AG to be administered to obese dogs should be determined according to estimated lean body
 weight.
N. AGNT is partially mediated by generation of angiotensin II in some species. Experimentally,
inhibition of angiotensin I production may prevent decreases in GFR during AG administra-
tion. The clinical usefulness of this approach has not been investigated.
O. AG and verapamil compete for transport across the brush border of the proximal tubular cells
via the organic cation transport system. Verapamil or other calcium channel blockers could
provide renal protection by this mechanism, but this approach has not been investigated.
118 CHAPTER 4 ■ Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
Grape or Raisin Toxicity
INTRODUCTION
A. Since 1999, reports of AIRF in dogs after ingestion of grapes or raisins have emerged from
various regions of the United States and Great Britain. Toxicity has not been reported in cats,
but cats are considered far less likely to eat grapes or raisins than are dogs.
B. Vomiting after ingestion of variable quantities of raisins or grapes (sometimes trivial quanti-
ties) occurs in some dogs and is followed by development of AIRF within 48 hours (range
 24-72 hours). Lethargy, anorexia, and diarrhea also are common findings.
IIngestion of small quantities of grapes or raisins can result in AIRF in dogs.
 sp as  ro sis in doaap suin no sadeo a p sop le no 
been observed to consume large quantities of grapes or raisins without il effects. About 3%
of dogs have no clinical signs or azotemia after ingestion of grapes or raisins, 15% develop
clinical signs but no azotemia, and 50% develop clinical signs and AIRF.
 D. The effect on development of AIRF of chronic ingestion of small numbers of grapes or raisins
as compared to acute ingestion of larger quantities has not been studied.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
A. Many toxic principles have been proposed to explain grape- or raisin-induced AIRF in dogs
including fungicides, herbicides, pesticides, heavy metals, vitamin D, fungus or mold, but
thus far no specific cause has been identified. Ochratoxin has been associated with renal fail-
ure and may be present in grapes and raisins.
B. The dosages of grapes and raisins known to have caused AIRF range from 3 to 36 g/kg of
raisins and from as few as 4 or 5 grapes to 148 g/kg. In a recent study, no association was
identified between survival and ingested dose (g/kg).
C. Exposure to a nephrotoxin in the grapes or raisins, renal ischemia (e.g, arising from
dehydration), and hypercalcemia are potential factors that could contribute to AIRF.
D. Tubular degeneration and necrosis of varying severity are consistently described, and are
most pronounced in the proximal tubules. Tubular basement membranes usually are intact
'sases jo %os inoqe un juaredde st uogerauagau remqnt pue
E. Mild to severe hypercalcemia either is present initially or develops during treatment in more
 or raisins remains to be determined. Whether hypercalcemia is associated with ionized hyper-
calcemia, which could damage the kidneys, or with changes in calcium regulatory hormones
has not been determined. Other factors that may contribute to changes in serum calcium con-
centration include changes in extracellular fluid volume and presence of severe hyperphos
phatemia (i.e., complexing of calcium with phosphate)
RISK FACTORS
A. Labrador retrievers comprise approximately 40% of reported cases. The reason for this
observation is unknown and may reflect breed popularity, a genetic predisposition to a
specific nephrotoxicity, or a tendency to eat more grapes and raisins than other breeds
BopJo
Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure  CHAPTER 4 119
DIAGNOSIS
A. Affected dogs have a history of recently ingesting grapes (e.g., fresh red or white grapes from
stores or vineyards, fermented grapes from wineries) or raisins.
B. Partially digested grapes or raisins may be observed in the dog's vomitus or diarrhea.
C. The typical history is one of acute onset of vomiting with azotemia and AIRF. Median
reported initial and peak serum creatinine concentrations have been approximately 10 mg/dL.
D. Median initial and peak serum calcium concentrations typically are only mildly increased, but
severe hypercalcemia may occur (i.e., serum total calcium concentration >20 mg/dL).
E. Median initial and peak serum phosphorus concentrations have been >10 mg/dL and
sometimes >20 mg/dL.
F. Urine specific gravity is <1.030 in most affected dogs. About half of the affected dogs have
mild proteinuria and variable glucosuria. Cylindruria is found in approximately 20% of
affected dogs within 72 hours of ingestion.
G. In one study, renal ultrasonography was abnormal in 7 of 13 affected dogs (e.g., renal hyper-
echogenicity, renal pelvic dilatation, renomegaly).
affecting the proximal tubules. Mineralization of necrotic epithelial cells or tubular basement
membranes is observed in more than 50% of cases. Rarely, an affected dog will lack obvious
tubular lesions. Mineralized tubular debris and granular or proteinaceous casts typically are
present. Tubular basement membranes are intact, and regeneration of tubular epithelium is
observed in 50% of cases. More than 50% of the cases exhibit a golden-brown globular intra-
cellular pigment that varies in amount, size, and staining with Prussian blue. The significance
of this pigment is unknown.
TREATMENT AND PREVENTION
A. Because of the unpredictability and severity of this toxicity, aggressive treatment is recom-
mended for any dog suspected of having ingested grapes or raisins. Treatment as soon as
possible after exposure should include induction of emesis, gastric lavage and administration
of activated charcoal, and intravenous fluid therapy for a minimum of 48 hours. Induction of
diuresis by fluid therapy and diuretic treatment provides renoprotection by reducing the time
renal tubules are exposed to the putative nephrotoxin, dilutes the concentration of the neph-
rotoxin in fubular fluid, and maintains adequate urine oufput.
Aggressive treatment is recommended for any dog suspected of having ingested grapes or raisins.
B. Dialysis may be helpful for dogs with intractable uremia but it does not guarantee survival.
C. Until more is known, clients should be advised not to allow their dogs to eat grapes or raisins.
PROGNOSIS
A. Approximately 50% of dogs with AIRF after grape or raisin ingestion can be expected
to survive with treatment. In about two thirds of these survivors, complete resolution of
azotemia and full clinical recovery occur. Several weeks of hospitalization with intensive
sii o adero ym paeiosse v aanams peu shop asou u papaau aq Ae saean
ingestion.
sa d   ssn r -a  s go   
oliguria or anuria. At least 75% of these dogs will not survive.
120 CHAPTER 4 ■ Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
C. Oligoanuria, ataxia, and weakness were negative prognostic indicators, and dogs that did not
survive had higher serum total calcium and potassium concentrations and calcium-phospho-
rus products at presentation than did dogs that survived.
Lily Toxicity
INTRODUCTION
 A. Ingestion of lilies is highly toxic to cats. The specific toxic principle is unknown but all parts of
the lily are toxic to cats. Prognosis for recovery often is poor after lily-induced AIRF.
Ingestion of lilies is highly toxic to cats
B. Three Lilium species have caused nephrotoxicosis in cats: Easter lilies, Tiger lilies, and Asiatic
hybrid lilies. Other related plants suspected of causing nephrotoxicity include the day lily
sm  s    p  A   A A (s si)
lily, and wood lily. The Lilium genus contains nearly 100 species and hundreds of hybrids that
often are maintained indoors but some are maintained outdoors. The Hemerocallis genus has
fewer species but thousands of cultivars usually planted outdoors. Fresh cuttings (e.g., stems,
leaves, flowers) are also a source for ingestion, and all should be considered potentially toxic
C. Calla lily and peace lily are not real lilies and are not associated with AIRF in cats. They do
contain oxalates, but stomatitis from the ingestion limits intake so that oxalate nephrosis does
not occur. Lily of the valley does not contain a nephrotoxin, but does contain a digitalis-like
toxin.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
A. Ingestion of a nephrotoxin present in lilies results in AIRF in cats. Nephrotoxicity has been
observed in cats that have chewed only a small portion of a single lily leaf. Aqueous extracts of
the flower and leaf from the Easter lily contain the toxic principle, with the flower being more
potent. Very small doses of aqueous extracts from the flower portion of the plant are needed to
induce clinical signs. The toxic fraction can be identified in urine by high performance liquid
chromatography but the actual toxic principle remains unknown.
B. Lilies are not reported to be toxic for dogs, but it is uncertain if lilies are not toxic to them,
as lilies have not been fed to dogs in experimental studies as they have to cats. Dogs do not
commonly eat houseplants as do cats. We have observed two dogs that developed AIRF
following the ingestion of lily bulbs-both recovered with aggressive treatment.
C. Between 33% and 50% of cats that ingest lilies will develop AIRF.
1. Anuric renal failure frequently occurs 18 to 24 hours after exposure.
            
Auoissoo 'pue emio on sasaond je enmaiod Aq pamoy msno eisdipaiod
seizures.
aan are mraa snq samqnt iexond a u uaas ae saueuo sronoedois 
Pyknotic nuclei, swollen mitochondria with disrupted cristae, lipid infiltration, and
edema have been described. Ultrastructurally, the most distinctive lesion was the pres-
ence of enlarged mitochondria along with loss of apical microvilli, disruption of basement
membrane, and interstitial edema. Disruption of the basement membranes was described
Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure ■ CHAPTER 4121
4. Pancreatic histopathology is observed in some cats and includes moderate, diffuse cyto
plasmic vacuolation affecting most cells in the acini. No inflammatory cells are seen, and
no changes have been described in the pancreatic islet cells except for the presence of
enlarged mitochondria. Pancreatitis has been described in two clinically affected cats at
necropsy.
DIAGNOSIS
 A. The cat may be observed chewing on lily plants or fragments of the plant may be observed in
the cat's vomitus.
ui lenoi on anp sal jo usau rae uoos mso Ae sua pue uanesiad d
effects on the GI tract.
C. Common clinical findings include vomiting and lethargy 1 to 5 days after plant ingestion
E. Laboratory findings include severe azotemia, isosthenuria, and cylindruria. Serum cre-
atinine concentration often is in the range of 15 to 20 mg/dL when AIRF is diagnosed.
Some clinical reports have described a disproportionate increase in serum creatinine con-
centration as compared with BUN, but BUN and serum creatinine concentrations have
increased proportionately in other instances. Occasionally, increases in creatine kinase
(CK) are noted.
F. On urinalysis, isosthenuria, proteinuria, glucosuria, cylindruria, and occasionally ketonuria
are present but crystalluria is notably absent.
G. Oliguria or anuria may persist despite intravenous fluid therapy.
H. Renal biopsy shows moderate to severe tubular nephrosis characterized by proximal tubular
epithelial cell degeneration and necrosis with some interstitial edema. Occasional birefrin-
 gent crystals that resemble calcium oxalate may be found in the renal tubules. Oxalate crystal
accumulation can be a nonspecific finding in cats with either AIRF or CRF. In one clinical
study, basement membranes were reported to be intact as compared with an experimental
study in which disrupted basement membranes were observed. Mitotic figures also have been
observed in renal tubular epithelium, an observation that suggests the possibility of tubular
regeneration and recovery from AIRF.
TREATMENT
up to 6 hours after ingestion of lilies. Decontamination 18 hours or more after lily ingestion
does not prevent development of AIRF.
B. Induction of vomiting followed by administration of activated charcoal and a cathartic is rec
ommended by the Animal Poison Control Center. Vomiting should not be induced in cats that
already are vomiting as a consequence of lily ingestion.
C. No antidote is available to counteract effects of the absorbed nephrotoxin.
D. Aggressive supportive therapy with IV fluids and attempts to maintain or increase urine out-
put with diuretics are recommended in affected cats with AIRF.
Cats that survive AIRF after lily ingestion typically go on to develop CRF.
E. Dialysis may be necessary to manage complications of uremia or fluid overload. Some cats
have survived severe lily-induced AIRF with peritoneal dialysis or hemodialysis
122 CHAPTER 4 ■ Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
PROGNOSIS
A. Mortality rate for cats presented in AIRF is 50% to 100%, depending on when treatment is started.
B. Nearly all cats presented early with GI sigms alone survive after decontamination and induc-
tion of diuresis.
C. Magnitude of azotemia does not predict survival, but urine output does
1. Cats with AIRF that are polyuric are more likely to survive.
 2. Cats with AIRF and persistent oliguria or anuria are unlikely to survive.
D. Cats that survive severe AIRF after lily ingestion tend to have substantial permanent loss of
renal mass and go on to develop CRF.
E. Pancreatitis may complicate the clinical course in some cats.
Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drug (NSAlD) Toxicity
INTRODUCTION
A. Accidental ingestion or therapeutic use of NSAID is the most common poisoning by a thera-
peutic product in dogs and cats. GI upset is the most common effect of NSAID exposure, but
AIRF occasionally may occur, and an idiosyncratic hepatotoxicity also may occur in dogs.
B. Cats do not metabolize NSAID as well as dogs due to low glucuronyl transferase activity and
are at greater risk to develop adverse reactions to NSAIDs.
C. Clearance rates for NSAIDs vary considerably in normal dogs, and this effect is greater in cats.
Some animals demonstrate accelerated clearance and others slow clearance depending on the
individual animal or the specific NSAlD used.
Accidental ingestion or therapeutic use of NSAIDs is the most common poisoning by a therapeutic product in
dogs and cats.
D. Most cases of AIRF after NSAID ingestion occur as a consequence of improper drug storage.
Dogs are more likely than cats to find and consume such medications. Also, some owners
administer NSAIDs designated for human use to their dogs or cats without veterinary advice.
E. For unknown reasons, AIRF occasionally results after NSAID administration despite proper
usage according to recommended dosages. This outcome is more common in cats than dogs.
F. NSAIDs are increasingly used for treatment of pain before and after surgery. Increased use
of NSAIDs is expected to result in increased occurrence of AIRF, especially in animals with
specific risk factors.
G. NSAIDs cause AIRF as a result of intrarenal ischemia rather than by direct nephrotoxicity.
AIRF can sometimes occur after chronic NSAID exposure if sufficient necrosis of medullary
interstitial cells occurs.
H. Nonselective NSAIDs (i.e., no preferential inhibition of cyclooxygenase-2 [COX-2]) include
acetaminophen, aspirin, indomethacin, phenylbutazone, banamine, ibuprofen, naproxen,
piroxicam, and ketoprofen. COX-2-selective NSAIDs include carprofen, etodolac, meloxicam,
deracoxib, and firocoxib.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
A. Two well-studied isoforms of cyclooxygenase (COX-1 and COX-2) generate prostanoids and
other COX classes also exist. COX-1 historically has been considered the isoform produced
by tissues for normal physiological (so-called housekeeping) functions (i.e., "constitutive"
Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure  CHAPTER 4123
isoform). Excessive inhibition of COX-1 is associated with gastric ulceration, hepatotoxicity
impaired platelet function, and decreased renal function. COX-2 also functions constitutively
in some tissues, and its expression is upregulated in many disease states (i.e., it is inducible).
especially inflammatory disease states. Inhibition of COX-2 provides desirable analgesic, anti-
inflammatory, and antipyretic effects. COX-2-specific NSAIDs (i.e., COX-1 sparing NSAIDs)
have been developed to minimize the adverse effects associated with COX-1 inhibition. The
degree of COX-2 selectivity depends on species being treated, dose, and target tissue. The
administration of COX-2-selective NSAIDs has decreased the GI adverse effects associated
with NSAID use. Presumably, less AIRF also should occur, because fewer animals will experi-
ence hypotension from GI bleeding.
B. Local production of prostaglandins in the kidney affects renal blood flow (RBF), intraglomerular
pressure, and tubular handling of electrolytes and water as well as providing cytoprotection to
medullary interstitial cells. Renal prostaglandins also affect the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone sys-
tem (RAAS) because they promote renal renin release, especially in patients with volume deple-
tion. Historically, COX-1 was thought to be constitutively expressed and COX-2 to be induced by
the presence of inflammation. The production of counter-protective vasodilatory prostaglandins
that maintain RBF and GFR when vasoconstrictor signals are present (i.e., effective extracellu-
lar volume depletion activates angiotensin-II, epinephrine, and vasopressin) is under control of
COX-1. It is now known that both COX-1 and COX-2 are constitutively expressed in the kidney
in several locations. In addition to inflammation, COX-2 expression is increased in high renin
states (e.g., extracellular fluid volume contraction, systemic hypotension, salt restriction, chronic
renal disease, anesthesia, and during administration of angiotensin-converting erzyme [ACE]
inhibitors and calcium charnel blockers). Whether COX-2-selective NSAIDs exert fewer delete-
rious effects on the kidney has not yet been established. Because COX-2 is expressed in normal
renal tissue, it is likely that any NSAID has the potential to result in AIRF.
C. Most of the dangerous acute effects of NSAIDs on the kidney occur as a result of hemody-
namic changes in special circumstances. Either effective extracellular fluid volume depletion
or systemic hypotension is necessary to produce AIRF associated with NSAID exposure. In
this setting, signals for renal vasoconstriction predominate at a time when the kidney's ability
to synthesize protective vasodilatory prostaglandins has been impaired by NSAIDs. NSAIDs
can be toxic to medullary interstitial cells, but the relative importance of this toxicity to acute
as compared with chronic renal disease is uncertain.
D. GI erosions commonly occur after NSAID use in some dogs. Anorexia, hypodipsia, and
bleeding from GI ulcers can lead to decreased effective circulating volume and activation of
the RAAS. Thus, renal vasoconstriction can occur at the same time administered NSAIDs
are decreasing production of vasodilatory prostaglandins and limiting the kidney's ability
to maintain intrarenal perfusion. NSAIDs have minimal effects on intrarenal hemodynamics
when effective circulating volume and systemic blood pressure are normal.
E. Short-term administration of NSAIDs to normal dogs for 7 days has no deleterious effect on
GFR. Some NSAIDs (e.g., ibuprofen), however, have a narrow margin of safety in dogs with
repeated dosing.
 F. Administration of meloxicam or carprofen just before or during anesthesia has minimal to
no effect on GFR in healthy dogs. Transient azotemia has been observed in some dogs that
received ketorolac or ketoprofen during anesthesia for routine ovariohysterectomy.
dogs, but meloxicam or carprofen can be administered safely to most cats during anesthetic
induction or in the immediate postoperative period to prevent pain after ovariohysterectomy
or onychectomy. Safe protocols for long-term use of NSAIDs in cats have not been developed,
but use of meloxicam or ketoprofen for up to 5 days has been reported.
124 CHAPTER 4  Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
H. Some normal young cats undergoing routine surgery for neutering without administration of
IV fluids or monitoring of blood pressure developed AIRF in association with use of NSAIDs
(e.g., carprofen, meloxicam, ketoprofen) given at the time of or shortly after surgery. Half of
the affected cats survived with return of normal BUN and serum creatinine concentrations
 after hospitalization and IV fluids for 1 to 5 days.
I. Administration of an NSAID concurrently with furosemide can decrease GFR in dogs by as
much as 30%.
 J. Based on calls to the Animal Poison Control Center concerning dogs with ibuprofen ingestion,
approximately 45% of affected dogs can be expected to develop GI ulceration with hemateme-
sis or melena without progression to AIRF whereas approximately 28% of dogs with ibupro-
fen exposures developed AIRF.
K. A precise relationship between dose of NSAID and development of AIRF does not exist, but
imental studies in dogs.
sabesop ot pareduos se ssop ul IMIv aonpoid ot paimbar aie uajcidnqI Jo sagesop rau8 "7
that cause GI ulceration.
M. Papillary necrosis was observed in experimental studies in dogs treated with ibuprofen at
50 mg/kg/day for 5 weeks.
 RISK FACTORS
Avoid NSAIDs in animals with pre-existing chronic renal disease.
A. NSAID use is most likely to be associated with development of AIRF when the animal is in
a clinical situation characterized by dependence on vasodilatory prostaglandins to maintain
intrarenal perfusion. Specific risk factors include:
1. Dehydration and hypotension of any cause.
 2. Anesthesia and relative hypovolemia, especially without IV fluid support
3.  Pre-existing renal disease.
4. Overdosage of NSAID.
 5. Access to NSAID prescribed for human or veterinary use.
6. Chronic NSAID use with sudden development of GI bleeding
 7. Chronic NSAID use with sudden development of medullary interstitial cell necrosis.
associated with ibuprofen ingestion whereas Labrador retrievers are at decreased risk.
9. Combination of NSAID with other drugs such as cisplatin, furosemide, ACE inhibi-
tors, or calcium channel blockers. The risk of combining NSAIDs with antihypertensive
 'a su  u s a a  m n s p si s
in one study there was no change in GFR in dogs treated with enalapril and tepoxalin for
28days.
DIAGNOSIS
A. Any animal that develops AIRF soon after treatment with or accidental consumption of an
NSAID should be considered to have NSAID-associated AIRF until proven otherwise.
B. Some combination of anorexia, vomiting, hematemesis, and melena is likely to be seen early
during NSAID toxicity leading to AIRF.
 D. No specific laboratory markers predict development of AIRF during chronic NSAID treatment
and no specific urinary markers of NSAID-associated AIRF have been evaluated in veterinary
patients.
TREATMENT
 A. Induce emesis and administer activated charcoal to prevent further GI absorption if accidental
ingestion or acute oral overdosage is recognized within 2 hours.
B. Administer IV fluids for 48 to 72 hours after acute exposure to NSAID (regardless of dose
ingested) if anorexia or vomiting is present.
C. Vomiting animals should receive nothing per os for 24 to 72 hours.
D. Sucralfate and the prostaglandin analogue misoprostol should be administered to provide
gastroprotection.
PROGNOSIS
A. The longer the delay between NSAID exposure and treatment, the more unfavorable the out-
come for recovery from AlRF!
PREVENTION
A. High risk patients should be screened by baseline laboratory tests (e.g., complete blood count,
serum biochemistry, urinalysis) in addition to routine history and physical examination before
NSAID treatment.
S asas ln  sa-ad ar on um s u sr jo asn pron d
such animals may have impaired ability to synthesize renal vasodilatory prostaglandins. The
risk may be greater in patients with established azotemia.
C. Use the lowest effective dosage of an NSAID.
D. Do not prescribe more than one NSAID at a time and provide at least one week of
washout time after the last dose of one NSAID before beginning treatment with another
one.
E. Do not prescribe NSAIDs concurrently with corticosteroids because of increased risk of GI
ulceration and hemorrhage.
F. Do not prescribe NSAIDs with other potentially nephrotoxic drugs.
G. Educate clients that over-the-counter NSAIDs can be toxic to dogs and cats. Discuss early sigms
of NSAID toxicity (e.g., anorexia, vomiting, hematemesis, melena) so that early intervention
and treatment can be sought.
 H. Provide IV fluid support intraoperatively when NSAIDs are administered in the peri-opera
tive setting.
 I. Avoid prolonged anesthetic periods for animals being treated with NSAIDs.
 J. Detect and correct dehydration promptly in any patient being treated with NSAIDs.
K. COX-2-selective NSAIDs may have less association with AIRF, possibly as a result of
less GI toxicity. However, use of highly COX-2-selective NSAIDs may be dangerous to
the kidney because constitutive functions of COX-2 are excessively inhibited in some
patients.
 L. In the future, use of dual cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase inhibitors such as tepoxalin may
decrease the incidence of AIRF as a result of decreased GI toxicity.
126
 CHAPTER 4 ■ Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
Hypercalcemia
INTRODUCTION
A. Hypercalcemia is more likely to be associated with chronic renal injury than AIRF.
B. The toxic effects of calcium on the kidney only occur when serum ionized calcium concentra-
tion is increased. Serum ionized calcium concentration is not predictable based on serum total
calcium concentration, especially in animals with azotemia.
The toxic effects of calcium on the kidney only occur when serum ionized calcium concentration is
 increased.
C. When hypercalcemia is associated with AIRF, hypercalcemia has developed rapidly and
serum ionized calcium concentrations usually are very high.
D. The functional effects of hypercalcemia on the kidneys usually are readily reversible, but
structural lesions are not completely reversible when advanced (Figure 4-6).
E. Acute azotemia may occur as a result of any cause of ionized hypercalcemia, but is more
frequent in patients with hypervitaminosis D (e.g., exposure to cholecalciferol, calcitriol, or
calcipotriene).
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
A. Azotemia caused by hypercalcemia may be due to a combination of factors.
1. Prerenal azotemia due to decreased extracellular fluid volume (e.g., anorexia, hypodipsia,
vomiting, polyuria).
 2. Renal vasoconstriction as a consequence of ionized hypercalcemia.
3. Decreased glomerular permeability coefficient (i.e., altered ultrafiltration coefficient
[Kf]).
FIGURE 4-6  Renal histopathology- severe mineralization (dark staining of tubules) from acute hypercalcemia
and AIRF in medulla (x100). (Courtesy of Dr. Steven Weisbrode, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.)
Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure  CHAPTER 4127
4.  Acute tubular necrosis from ischemic and toxic effects of ionized hypercalcemia.
5. CRF due to nephron loss, nephrocalcinosis, tubulointerstitial inflammation, and intersti-
tial fibrosis.
B. Defective urinary concentrating ability results from a combination of reduced tubular reab-
sorption of sodium and impaired action of antidiuretic hormone (ADH) on tubular cells of the
collecting duct in dogs.
1. The effect of hypercalcemia on the kidney is a form of nephrogeric diabetes insipidus
characterized by hyposthenuria if the diluting segment of the nephron (i.e., medullary
thick ascending limb of Henle's loop) is unaffected.
2. These effects arise from the intrinsic response of the kidney to hypercalcemia and are
mediated by calcium-sensing receptors on the renal epithelial cells.
 3. Many cats with ionized hypercalcemia still are able to concentrate to specific gravities of
more than 1.030. Why cats differ from dogs and experimentally treated animals in this
regard is unknown.
C. Additional direct effects of hypercalcemia on the kidney include reduced tubular calcium
reabsorption and antagonism of the actions of parathyroid hormone (PTH). These responses
facilitate calcium excretion and ameliorate the clinical effects of hypercalcemia.
D. Renal medullary blood flow is increased in dogs with hypercalcemia and can result in medul-
lary washout, which represents another mechanism contributing to hyposthenuria.
 E. Tubular degeneration, interstitial fibrosis, and mineralization of renal tubules, basement mem-
branes, and interstitium may occur secondary to hypercalcemia and contribute to impaired
urinary concentrating ability.
 F. Renal azotemia during hypercalcemia can be due to functional or structural changes in the kidney.
 1. Hypercalcemia can induce renal vasoconstriction resulting in decreased RBF and GFR.
 2. Reduced RBF and GFR are observed consistently when serum total calcium concentration
exceeds 20 mg/dL. More than 50% of dogs have significant reductions in RBF and GFR
when serum total calcium concentration is between 15 and 20 mg/dL
3. The effects of chronic hypercalcemia on RBF and GFR have not been studied.
G. Hypercalcemia may impair renal autoregulation and result in azotemia early in dehydration
because the afferent arteriolar vasodilatation that would normally maintain GFR is inhibited
H. The toxic effects of ionized hypercalcemia are enhanced by high PTH concentrations in ani-
mals with CRF because PTH increases calcium entry into cells.
1.  The ascending limb of Herle's loop and distal convoluted tubule show the earliest struc
tural lesions, but lesions in the collecting ducts ultimately are the most pronounced.
 2. Thickening and mineralization of tubular basement membranes are most apparent in the
proximal tubule.
 3. Tubular atrophy, mononuclear cell infiltration, and interstitial fibrosis occur chronically.
4. Granular and tubular cell casts contribute to intrarenal obstruction.
 1. Hypervitaminosis D (cholecalciferol or ergocalciferol) refers to poisoning from vitamin D (e.g-
cholecalciferol, ergocalciferol) or its metabolites (e.g., calcitriol, calcipotriene). Vitamin D and
its metabolites create hypercalcemia by increasing GI absorption of calcium, increasing bone
resorption, and decreasing renal excretion of calcium. Both cholecalciferol and ergocalciferol
are metabolized similarly in the dog and cat.
1.
 Cholecalciferol poisoning in dogs and cats occurs after accidental ingestion of specific
types of rat bait. Toxicity can be observed with ingestion of as litle as 10 mg/kg. High
risk groups include dogs younger than 9 months and weighing 12 kg or less. Cats appear
to be more resistant to the toxic effects of cholecalciferol than are dogs. Recovery from
previous cholecalciferol rat bait toxicity can be a risk factor for subsequent occurrence
because removal of the source from the premises may be difficult or impossible. Bluish
128
CHAPTER 4  Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
discoloration of feces or vomitus may be reported by owmners or observed during hospital
ization of animals that have ingested formulations of rat bait containing a dye commonly
used in cholecalciferol-containing products.
IHypervitaminosis D is a common cause of hypercalcemia-induced AIRF.
2. Rarely, dietary misformulation can result in hypervitaminosis D and hypercalcemia, but
chronic renal injury is more common in these instances.
during treatment of dogs and cats with primary hypoparathyroidism is common because
these compounds have a narrow margin of safety and long half-lives that make accurate
dosing difficult. AIRF or more commonly CRF may occur as a consequence of excessive
vitamin D administration in patients with primary hypoparathyroidism.
4.Excessive use of vitamin supplements that contain vitamin D also may cause hypercalce-
mia and CRF
J.Toxicity follows transformationof cholecalciferolto 25(OH)-cholecalciferol, thatis25-hydroxyvi-
at pharmacological doses (physiologic concentrations have low binding affinity for the vitamin
D receptor). 25(OH)-D is converted to 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol (1,25(OH)-vitamin D or
calcitriol). In some instances, calcitriol is generated at higher than normal concentrations and
contributes to genesis of hypercalcemia.
1. Cholecalciferol and ergocalciferol are rapidly transformed to 25(OH)-D, which is very
lipid soluble. 25(OH)-D can be slowly released from fat depots into the circulation over
weeks to months.
 2. Activation of vitamin D receptors in the intestine and bone can result in increased serum
phosphorus concentrations as well as hypercalcemia.
 3. Hypercalcemia develops 24 hours after ingestion and often is severe (i.e., serum total cal-
o (p/u g on ) enaqdsoydradu P (ip/ oz oh 51 go suonuasuo wmn
also is found simultaneously.
4.Azotemia develops later, usually serum creatinine concentration is < 3 mg/dL unless treat-
ment has been delayed, in which case azotemia may be marked. It may take as long as 72
hours for azotemia to develop as a consequence of renal lesions caused by hypercalcemia.
5. Measurement of serum 25(OH)-D concentration provides conclusive evidence of hypervi-
taminosis D after exposure to cholecalciferol or ergocalciferol.
a. Serum concentrations of 25(OH)-D are increased to at least twice the upper limit of
normal, sometimes as high as 10 times normal. Serum 25(OH)-D concentration is
increased for weeks to monthis in some cases because the half-life of cholecalciferol is
 approximately 1 month in dogs (based on experimental studies in dogs).
b. Serum calcitriol concentration also is increased early in the course of the disorder in
some dogs.
 6. Death occurs in nearly 50% of dogs after development of hypercalcemia and renal failure
in association with hypervitaminosis D if early treatment is not provided. The survival
rate is approximately 80% when aggressive treatment is instituted soon after ingestion of
a toxic dose. Approximately 80% of the survivors return to normal renal function, whereas
20% survive with development of CRF.
 Death occurs in up to 50% of dogs with hypercalcemia-induced AlRF associated with hypervitaminosis D if
 treatment is not instituted early.
Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure  CHAPTER 4129
7. Aggressive treatment with IV fluids (e.g., 0.9% NaCl) and some combination of furose-
mide, corticosteroids, and calcitonin often is needed for initial control of hypercalcemia.
 ssr         
is needed along with a low calcium diet to limit vitamin D-mediated GI absorption of
calcium.
renal secondary hyperparathyroidism in the management of CRF At recommended dos-
ages of 2.5 to 3.5 ng/kg daily, mild hypercalcemia occasionally may develop, but usually
 does not result in superimposition of AIRF on underlying CRF Rarely, severe hypercalce-
mia can occur after seemingly normal doses of calcitriol because of calcitriol formulation
errors.
L. Overdosage with calcitriol sometimes occurs during treatment of primary hypoparathyroid-
ism as attempts are made to increase serum calcium concentrations.
M. Measured serum calcitriol concentration is sometimes normal when excessive administration
of calcitriol is the underlying cause of hypercalcemia because, although its biological effects
last days, the circulating half-life of calcitriol is hours. Thus, serum calcitriol concentration
may or may not be increased, depending on the timing of the sample. Return of serum calcium
concentration to normal within 5 to 7 days after discontinuation of calcitriol confirms exces-
sive calcitriol administration as the cause of the hypercalcemia.
N. Ingestion of the toxic house plant Cestrum diurnum or day blooming jessamine (which con-
tains calcitriol-like glycosides) is another potential cause of hypercalcemia.
O. Accidental ingestion of topical antipsoriasis creams containing the calcitriol analogue calci-
potriol or calcipotriene (e.g., Dovonex) can result in rapid development of severe hypercalce-
mia, AIRF, and death (even before development of AIRF) in dogs.
1. Dovonex contains 0.005% calcipotriene. It is available in 30, 60, and 100 gram tubes that
may be accidentally ingested when stored improperly.
 2. In dogs, the estimated minimal toxic dose of calcipotriene is 10 μg/kg, the minimal lethal
dose is 65 μg/kg, and the oral median lethal dose (LD50) is between 100 and 150 μg/kg.
Ingestion of more than 1.3 grams of Dovonex cream per kg body weight (which represents
 65 μg calcipotriene per kg body weight) is considered potentially life threatening. Conse-
quently, it is important to approximate the ingested dose so as to determine an accurate
prognosis and provide aggressive treatment.
IAccidental ingestion of topical antipsoriasis creams containing calcipotriene can rapidly result in
hypercalcemia, AIRF, and death.
3. Exposure is more common during months when psoriasis is more severe (i.e., fall and
winter in North America)
4. Toxicity is more likely in young and very small dogs because ingestion will be greater on
a per-kilogram basis.
5. Approximately 30% of dogs that ingest calcipotriene die and 50% develop AIRF.
6. Hypercalcemia usually does not develop in the first 8 to 12 hours after exposure. Hyper-
calcemia does develop by 24 hours in all dogs that have ingested a toxic dose. Serum
calcium concentration peaks within 48 hours and then begins to decline by 72 hours with
appropriate treatment. Depending on when in the course of the toxicity it is measured,
serum calcium concentration may have returned to normal and only evidence of AIRF will
be present.
 7. Serum calcium concentration often is >15 mg/dL at the time of diagnosis and may exceed
20 mg/ dL.
130
0CHAPTER4  Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
8. Hyperphosphatemia is present in more than 75% of affected dogs at the time hypercalce
mia is identified. Severe soft tissue mineralization can occur as a consequence of a very
high calcium-phosphorus product.
9.  The affinity of calcipotriene for the vitamin D receptor is similar to that of calcitriol. Calci
potriene binding to circulating vitamin D binding protein, however, is minimal and con-
siderably more unbound calcipotriene is available for vitamin D receptor binding. This fact
accounts for the rapid onset of hypercalcemia and hyperphosphatemia. Limited protein
binding in plasma also accounts for the rapid catabolism and short duration of calcemic
effect of calcipotriene. The hypercalcemic effect of calcipotriene diminishes after several
days similar to what is observed with calcitriol and dissimilar to the prolonged calcemic
effect of cholecalciferol (i.e., a week to months).
10. 25(OH)-cholecalciferol concentrations should be normal in dogs that have ingested calci-
 potriene. Currently, it is unknown if assays for calcitriol cross-react with calcipotriene. If
not, serum calcitriol concentrations would be expected to be normal or low in dogs with
calcipotriene intoxication.
CLINICAL SIGNS INITIALLY ARE CAUSED BY HYPERCALCEMIA AND
LATER BY DEVELOPMENT OF AIRF
 A. In dogs, decreased concentrating ability and polyuria are early functional effects of hypercal-
cemia on the kidneys.
1. The concentrating defect often is out of proportion to the observed reduction in GFR and
increase in BUN and serum creatinine concentrations.
2.Urine specific gravity consistently is <1.030.
 3. Isosthenuria occurs if the diluting segments have been structurally altered by long-
standing hypercalcemia.
Polyuria and polydipsia are common in dogs with hypercalcemia.
B. Polydipsia develops as compensation for the obligatory polyuria, but there is some evidence
that polydipsia can occur as a result of direct stimulation of the thirst center by hypercalcemia.
C. Dehydration is common due to increased fluid losses from vomiting and polyuria.
1. Initially, extracellular fluid volume contraction decreases GFR and increases BUN and
serum creatinine concentrations (i.e., prerenal azotemia)
 2. The clinical principle that dilute urine in association with azotemia indicates primary paren-
chymal renal disease is not necessarily true in animals with hypercalcemia because the uri-
nary concentrating defect can occur without structural renal lesions. Thus, not all dogs with
hypercalcemia, dilute urine, and azotemia have renal parenchymal disease, at least initially.
 3. If hypercalcemia and volume depletion persist, AIRF and renal azotemia develop.
D. Lethargy, weakness, anorexia, and GI signs can occur as a direct consequence of hypercalce-
mia or secondary to development of AIRF Systemic signs of AIRF may be difficult or impos
sible to differentiate from those of hypercalcemia.
DIAGNOSIS
A. Documentation of an acute, moderate to severe increase in serum total calcium concentration
before onset of azotemia is evidence that hypercalcemic nephropathy is the cause of AIRF.
Serum ionized calcium concentration should be measured. Dogs and cats with CRF often have
increased serum total calcium concentration without an increase in ionized calcium because
other calcium fractions (e.g., complexed, protein-bound) account for the increase in serum
total calcium concentration.
rat bait, vitamin D products, antipsoriasis cream).
C. Hypervitaminosis D caused by cholecalciferol or ergocalciferol can be confirmed by measure
ment of serum 25(OH)-D concentration.
TREATMENT
A. Aggressive IV fluid therapy to correct dehydration, maintain hydration, and enhance renal
perfusion and urine output. (Figure 4-7).
 B. Specific measures to lower serum ionized calcium concentration should be provided:
1. Furosemide enhances calciuresis and has a rapid onset of action.
2. Corticosteroids reduce serum calcium concentration by effects on bone, intestine, and kid-
ney and they have a relatively prompt onset of action.
3. Calcitonin decreases the activity of osteoclasts. It has a rapid onset of action but its dura-
tion of effect is limited to a few days due to development of tachyphylaxis.
4.B
 Bisphosphonates (e.g., pamidronate) may not be necessary if hypercalcemia abates with
the first few days of treatment. Their use may be indicated if hypercalcemia is severe and
persistent.
 5. A low-calcium diet is effective only in hypercalcemia caused by excessive amounts of
vitamin D metabolites.
Rapidly Progressive Glomerulonephritis (RPGN) Associated With
Borreliosis (Lyme Nephritis)
INTRODUCTION
A. Glomerulonephritis usually is chronic in domestic animals, and acute glomerulonephritis is
rarely recogmized.
B. Borreliosis (Lyme disease) can be associated with chronic glomerulonephritis.
C. Less commonly, Lyme nephritis can be an acute disease. What appears to be a form of RPGN
in dogs has been observed in areas of New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland, Delaware, Con-
necticut, Vermont, and Minnesota that are endemic for borreliosis.
 D. Nearly all dogs reported to have RPGN have been serologically positive for Borrelia burgdor-
feri, the causative agent of Lyme disease.
E. The disease has been uniformly progressive and fatal.
1Lyme nephritis is characterized by acute glomerulonephritis and renal tubular necrosis. It is rapidly
 progressive and fatal.
 PATHOPHYSIOLOGY AND RENAL PATHOLOGY
A. The relationship of positive serology for B. burgdorferi to development of RPGN is not clear.
B. A relationship between vaccination for Lyme disease and development of RPGN has been
suggested but not conclusively established.
C. The cut surface of the kidneys at necropsy often shows pronounced bulging of the medulla.
The cortex is smooth and sometimes contains pinpoint red foci.
132
CHAPTER 4 ■ Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
Treatment of Clinically Ill Patients
with lonized Hypercalcemia
Dilute calcium
↑ Renal calcium
in plasma
excretion
Mildvolumeexpansion
2to3timesmaintenance
Correct
IV Fluids
IEN %60
dehydration
± Add KCI
Calcitonin -
 Furosemide
Quick
salmon
Bolus IV 1 mg/kg
 onset of
4-6 U/kg SQ
effect
TID to QID
CRI 0.2-1 mg/kg/hr
"Vomiting"
Monitor urine
Match
Short-lived
effect
output
"ins and outs"
and anorexia
Prednisolone
1-2.2 mg/kg BID
PO, SC, or IV
Avoid if definitive
Tachyphylaxis
Dexamethasone
diagnosis UNKNOWN
0.1-0.22 mg/kg
PO, SC, or IV
IF HYPERCALCEMIA
IF GENESIS
EXPECTED to be
of HYPERCALCEMIA
PROCTRACTED
= BONE ORIGIN
IV fluids
before,
Subacute onset of
IV
during, after
effect
Bisphosphonates
Pamidronate
1.3-2 mg/kg IV
over 4 hours
Expectmajor
Repeat every
↓ ionized calcium
Zolendronate
1-4 weeks
within 72 hours
if needed
=alternative
FGURE 4-7  Algorithm for treatment of severe hypercalcemia.
Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure  CHAPTER 4133
D. In affected dogs, more than 80% of cortical tubules are affected by severe dilataion, scattered
necrosis, and evidence of active epithelial regeneration. Tubular atrophy, interstitial inflam-
mation, and interstitial fibrosis are present but not prominent (Figure 4-8).
E. Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis with subendothelial deposits of immunoglobu-
lins IgG, IgM, and C3 is observed in more than 80% of cases. Deposits of IgA have not beer
detected. Membranous glomerulonephritis occurs in approximately 10% of cases and amyloi-
dosis has been reported in an isolated case.
 F. Silver staining of renal tissue may identify the presence of small numbers of spirochetes, but
this finding is uncommon.
G. Necrosis of the glomerular tuft with influx of neutrophils is observed in some cases and glo-
merular crescents are seen in about 30% of cases.
H. Periglomerular fibrosis with a lamellar pattern is commonly identified.
 I. Fibrinoid necrosis of small to medium-sized renal vessels may develop in some cases.
J. The combination of acute glomerulonephritis and severe cortical tubular necrosis with lack of
interstitial inflammation or fibrosis is typical.
HISTORY
A. Clusters of cases occur from early spring through late fall.
B. Young dogs are affected (glomerulonephritis usually affects older dogs).
C. Labrador retrievers and golden retrievers are more commonly affected by Borrelia-associated
RPGN but also by other forms of glomerulonephritis.
 E. The acute illness is characterized by a sudden onset of vomiting, anorexia, and polyuria asso
ciated with azotemia that increases in magnitude relatively rapidly. A prior history of polyuria
and polydipsia usually is not documented.
 F. The 6 to 8 week clinical course characterized by sudden onset of systemic illness may be fol-
lowed by weight loss.
G. Peripheral edema may develop due to vasculitis and hypoproteinemia. Peripheral edema is
very common at presentation or develops soon after IV fluid administration. Edema cannot be
attributed to the hypoalbuminemia alone in most affected dogs.
HGURE 4-8  Renal histopathology—acute Lyme nephritis in a dog. Notice membranoproliferative
glomerulonephritis and areas of focal tubular necrosis.
134CHAPTER 4 ■ Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
DIAGNOSIS
 A. Affected dogs have severe azotemia and hyperphosphatemia due to primary renal disease.
B. Hyperkalemia, hyperglobulinemia, and hyperbilirubinemia may be observed in some
cases.
C. Hypoalbuminemia and hypercholesterolemia are present in association with glomerulone-
phritis.
D. Evidence for hypercoagulability and thromboembolic disease may be documented in some
affected dogs.
I Prognosis is poor in Lyme nephritis, and no treatment is known to be effective.
E. Urinalysis shows moderate to severe proteinuria, and may also show hematuria, glucosuria,
and cylindruria.
 F. Urine protein/creatinine ratio is increased.
G. Urine culture is negative.
H. Renal biopsy reveals the distinctive lesions of RPGN.
 I. Systemic hypertension is present in most cases.
TREATMENT
A. No treatment is known to be effective.
PROGNOSIS
A. Affected animals typically die or are euthanized within 1 week of treatment
B. Some affected dogs survive for up to 3 weeks.
Heatstroke
INTRODUCTION
A. Failure to dissipate heat, increased generation of heat, or both may contribute to rising core
body temperature.
B. Clinically, heatstroke may be exercised-induced or may be from exposure to a hot environment.
1. Extremely high temperatures are not required, and relatively short periods of exercise can
create heatstroke in some dogs.
 2. In other dogs, heatstroke may occur due to lack of acclimation to warm temperatures or
due to poor ability to dissipate heat.
Major organ damage occurs when core body temperature exceeds 106° F and is sustained.
C. Multiple organ damage and failure occurs with progressive heat damage. Affected organs
and systems include bone marrow, liver, GI tract, brain, coagulation system, heart, muscles,
e an pue ameadai aron yead a oq ch leuonnodond si aoep uro shaup pue
increased body temperature is maintained.
Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure ■ CHAPTER 4 135
D. In dogs, sustained core body temperatures above 106° F cause major organ damage and death
results at core body temperature of 109° F.
E. The temperature inside of vehicles with closed windows and no air conditioning can easily
reach or exceed 120? F on hot summer days. Arimals should never be left unattended in vehi
cles on hot days. Other enclosures with poor ventilation and high humidity may also promote
development of heatstroke.
 F. Dogs confined outside on hot, humid days without access to adequate shade or water also are
at increased risk.
G. Approximately 33% of dogs with heatstroke develop AIRF despite aggresive treatment
within 2 hours of presentation.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
 A. More common in dogs than cats; cats have the same risk as do dogs when left unattended in
hot vehicles.
B. Most common during hot days with high humidity. Increased humidity reduces the animal's
ability to dissipate heat.
C. Belgian Malinois may be especially susceptible to develop heat stroke. Golden retrievers, Lab-
rador retrievers, and brachycephalic breeds (especially English bulldogs) also are at increased
risk. Small breed dogs may have decreased risk.
e se lam se Axoioio [ea ioanp jo anuanbasuon e se smooo jeay aaissnxa woy Amiu 'd
complex cascade of responses to endotoxins, inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, endo-
thelial cell activation, and altered coagulation with microvascular thrombosis.
E. Exposure to heat causes vasodilatation. Decreased cardiac output and poor tissue perfusion
arise from effective circulating volume contraction as well as decreased myocardial function
and ventricular premature contractions due to heat damage. Fluid losses from hyperventila
tion, vomiting, and diarrhea also contribute to dehydration and poor renal perfusion.
F. Poor renal perfusion results in ischemic AIRF. The body's attempts to correct systemic vasodi-
latation may result in intrarenal vasoconstriction and myoglobinuria also may contribute.
G. Tubular necrosis may occur as a direct cytotoxic effect of heat injury.
H. Obesity, long hair coat, laryngeal paralysis, cardiovascular disease, and neurologic disease
may not allow for control of adequate heat dissipation and thus increase risk for heatstroke.
CLINICAL SIGNS
A. Panting.
B. Hypersalivation (increases evaporative loss).
Approximately 33% of dogs with heatstroke develop acute renal failure.
C. Severe thirst.
D. Vomiting.
E. Collapse with inability to rise.
F. Neurologic signs.
1. Mental dullness.
2. Confusion.
3. Stupor.
4. Coma.
5. Seizures (rarely).
G. Mucous membranes may be dark or bright red due to systemic vasodilatation
H. Occasionally, red or brown urine due to myoglobinuria as a consequence of rhabdomyolysis
I. Hyperthermia. The patient may be normothermic or even hypothermic at the time of clini-
cal examination if the owners have made attempts to cool the animal and sufficient time has
elapsed before presentation.
 DIAGNOSIS
Aou are suis ienu ane aeduon pue amnadan y on ansdxa jo Aros "v
suggestive.
B. A history of vigorous exercise is suggestive, but minimal exercise can induce heatstroke in
some individuals on hot, humid days.
C. Rectal temperature of >106° F but hypothermia (<100° F) may occur if attempts have been
made to cool the patient before presentation.
D. Increased numbers of nucleated red cells are observed on complete blood count in more than
50% of cases likely as a result of premature release from damaged bone marrow.
E. Mild, moderate, or severe increase in serum CK activity in all affected dogs due to muscle
damage.
 F. Increased liver enzyme activity (e.g., AST, ALT, ALP) in most affected animals.
G. Hyperbilirubinemia in some patients.
H. Thrombocytopenia occurs in more than 8S0% of affected dogs, probably as a result of endothe-
lial cell damage. Increased OSPT and partial thromboplastin time (PTT) and evidence of DIC
(fibrin degradation products) are present in some patients.
I. Serum creatinine concentration initially may be mildly increased due to release of creatinine
from damaged muscles or from dehydration and prerenal azotemia. Serum creatinine concen
tration increases much more in affected animals that go on to develop AIRF. Serum creatinine
concentration is increased in approximately 50% of affected animals at initial examination,
usually due to decreased renal perfusion and prerenal azotemia.
J. Hypoglycemia (blood glucose concentration <50 mg/dL) is observed in about 40% of affected
dogs.
K. Urinalysis may show a positive reaction for occult blood, which may really be reacting to the
presence of myoglobin released from damaged muscles. The presence of renal tubular casts
may be observed from tubular damage. The presence of hyaline casts may be seen due to high
body temperature, which increases movement of plasma protein across glomeruli.
TREATMENT
 A. Place an IV catheter and provide supportive fluid therapy to correct dehydration and support
perfusion of damaged organs.
B. Patients with high core body temperatures should be sprayed with cool water, and a fan
should be directed at the wet hair coat. This approach increases evaporative loss and can
effectively cool patients safely.
C. Ice water baths are not very efficient because the resultant cutaneous vasoconstriction and
shivering limit the ability of the animal to dissipate heat.
D. Discontinue cooling efforts when core temperature has decreased to <104° F to prevent exces-
sive correction and hypothermia.
E. Administer bolus doses of lidocaine to control ventricular arrhythmias and follow with a
constant rate infusion (CRl) of lidocaine as needed. Lidocaine also may fumction as a free
radical scavenger.
Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure  CHAPTER 4137
F. Monitor urine output during the initial 48 hours after presentation.
G. Provide symptomatic treatment as necessary for multisystemic organ system failure.
PROGNOSIS
A. Overall, a 50% to 65% survival rate is expected.
ISurvival in heatstroke is 50% to 65% if AlRF is not present.
1. Survival rate decreases to approximately 20% in animals with AIRF.
2. DIC alone also lowers the survival rate.
3. Only 10% of patients with both AIRF and DIC are expected to survive.
e shuad un uon ano ae eaaodu pue suuon aand ronua a
don't survive.
C. Other predictors of failure to survive include hypocholesterolemia, hypoalbuminemia,
hypoproteinemia, hyperbilirubinemia, and increased serum creatinine concentration.
D. Mild to moderate increases in serum creatinine concentration are common in survivors. More
severe increases in serum creafinine concenfrafion presenf 24 hours after inifial treatment
often are found in nonsurvivors.
E. Oliguria or anuria after adequate volume replacement with IV fluids also is a negative predic-
tor for survival.
F. Patients treated within 90 minutes of heat exposure are more likely to survive than those
treated later.
G. Death often occurs in the first 24 hours of hospitalization. Patients surviving for 48 hours or
more are more likely to survive to discharge.
H. Additional factors that are correlated with mortality include coma, hypothermia, hypoglyce-
mia, prolonged APTT and OSPT, seizures, and obesity.
Food-Associated Toxicity (Melamine/Cyanuric Acid-Associated
Renal Failure; MCARF)
INTRODUCTION
A. Outbreaks of renal failure associated with the ingestion of toxin-containing pet foods occurred
in 2004 and 2007.
B. In 2o07, renal failure resulted in animals that consumed pet foods containing melamine
and cyanuric acid, which were present in wheat gluten, rice protein, and corn glu-
ten that had been imported from China. These pet foods were primarily canned food
products.
C. In 2004, renal failure was initially reported to be caused by mycotoxins, but retrospectively
has been shown to have been caused by melamine and cyanuric acid. This outbreak affected
primarily dogs and a few cats in Asia.
 D. Melamine is a nitrogen-rich compound that is used in the manufacture of plastics and as
a fertilizer. Cyanuric acid is also nitrogen-rich, and is a chemical stabilizer. Melamine and
cyanuric acid were intentionally added to feed ingredients in China to increase the nitrogen
content. Increasing the nitrogen gives the appearance of a product with a higher protein con-
tent, which has more monetary value.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
A. Melamine alone does not cause renal failure, but in combination with cyanuric acid, insoluble
crystals form that obstruct and damage renal tubules.
B. Crystals are present in the distal tubules and collecting ducts. Crystals are polarizable, light
green to slightly basophilic, with radiating striations.
C. Renal distal tubular necrosis is present, and some have interstitial fibrosis and lymphoplasma-
cytic inflammation, indicating a more chronic stage.
1. Inflammation surrounding crystal-containing tubules is more prominent in chronic stages.
 2. Large crystals in the medulla are more common in chronic cases, with occasional tubular rupture.
CLINICAL SIGNS
A. Acute anorexia, vomiting, lethargy, polyuria, and polydipsia are common.
 B. Oral ulcers, mineralization of the gastric mucosa, and mineralization of pulmonary smooth
muscle and alveolar walls have occurred in some patients.
C. Some animals may have a more chronic onset after ingesting contaminated food for 1 month
or more.
D. Cats appear to be more sensitive to developing MCARF, though this may be related to a higher
shnpoid pooy paes pag saq sies po aseuanrad
DIAGNOSIS
 A. Azotemia and hyperphosphatemia are consistent findings. Serum hepatic enzyme activities
are typically not increased.
B. Polarizable crystals may be identified in urine (Figure 4-9). These crystals appear similar to
have a radiating linear pattern.
C. A dietary history of consuming affected foods, along with clinical signs of acute renal failure
is diagnostic.
A
FIGURE 4-9  A, Crystals in the urine of a cat with melamine/cyanuric acid-associated renal failure (MCARF) B,
Renal histopathology showing acute distal renal tubular necrosis with distinctive intratubular polarizable crystals
(A, Courtesy of Clinical Pathology, The Ohio State University College of Veterinary Medicine, Columbus, Ohio. B,
Courtesy of Dr. Cathy Brown, University of Georgia, Athens, Ga.)
Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure  CHAPTER 4139
TREATMENT
A. Aggressive treatment of the acute renal failure is necessary.
B. Treatment is mainly supportive.
PROGNOSIS
A. Many affected animals die or are euthanized due to the severity of the renal failure.
 B. If an affected animal survives the acute episode with aggressive medical therapy, long-term
treatment of CRF is necessary.
WHAT DO WE DO?
· Monitor urine output in all patients with AIRF to facilitate optimal fluid therapy and establish a
prognosis for patients without access to dialysis.
· Provide definitive antidote therapy with 4-MP or ethanol in dogs (or ethanol in cats) suspected to
have EG intoxication until a definitive diagnosis is established.
● When dialysis is not feasible, provide a realistic prognosis (i.e., grave) early in the disease process for
Owners of animals with AIRF caused by EG, especially those patients with severe oliguria or anuria.
· Always consider leptospirosis as a cause for AIRF in dogs, unless specific evidence indicates other-
wise.
· Aggressively treat dogs with leptospirosis-induced AIRF because most of them will survive if
prompt treatment is provided.
· Do not use AGs unless no other effective antibiotics are available.
● Provide fluid therapy for any dog or cat that has been receiving NSAIDs and becomes suddenly ill
Appropriate fluid therapy will prevent activation of vasoconstrictor signals that could otherwise
cause severe renal ischemia in NSAID-treated patients due to synthetic blockade of renoprotective
vasodilatory prostaglandins.
· Treat all cats known to have ingested any amount of lily as potential AIRF patients.
· Don't abandon treatment prematurely in cats with lily-induced AIRF because some survive despite
severe azotemia and oliguria.
o sursin jo unb Aue pasau Auasan se je Sop i Anapns Aue oy sm AI apiao ·
grapes.
● Provide 3 to 5 days of fluid therapy for dogs that have ingested calcipotriene (Dovonex) until hyper-
calcemia abates.
● Measure serum ionized calcium concentration in all patients with increased serum total calcium
concentration.
● Biopsy the kidney when it is not clear clinically if the diagnosis is nephritis or nephrosis or to dif-
ferentiate AIRF from CRF.
● Use bisphosphonates to treat severe and prolonged hypercalcemia in patients with hypervitaminosis D
● Use calcitonin to treat severe hypercalcemia in patients that have not responded adequately to fluid
therapy and furosemide
 THOUGHTS FOR THE FUTURE
· Regimens to optimize the use of 4-MP as a treatment for EG toxicity in cats are on the horizon.
· Early dialysis, including short-term peritoneal dialysis by primary care practitioners or emergency
services, may find increased use in efforts to decrease circulating EG and its toxic metabolites and to
improve survival in patients with EG ingestion
140 CHAPTER 4 ■ Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
· Addition of nontoxic substances that decrease palatability to antifreeze products could decrease the
risk of EG toxicity in dogs and cats.
● Use of PCR may become more routine in the diagnosis of leptospirosis in dogs.
· Additional epidemiological studies are needed to determine the association of Borrelia with rapidly
progressive glomerulonephritis in dogs.
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
Q: A dog is determined to have ingested EG at least 24 hours ago and now is semi-comatose with
BUN concentration of >1o0 mg/dL and serum creatinine concentration of >10 mg/dL. What is the
chance of saving this dog?
A: The odds are very low. If the owner wishes to proceed, resuscitative efforts with fluids and
management of acid-base and electrolyte disturbances should be undertaken. The prognosis (without
dialysis) is grave if urine output is minimal despite rehydration, administration of a fluid volume chal-
if recovery of renal function is possible.
Q: Is there any role for dialysis early in the course of EG intoxication even if azotemia is minimal?
A: Dialysis can remove both EG and its toxic metabolites and consequently there is a role for dialy-
sis even if azotemia is not yet severe. Even in animals with renal azotemia, dialysis may be useful to
prevent additional renal toxicity caused by retention of toxic metabolites. Early peritoneal dialysis for
 ld  s h po pa s s ar Ad rn ais si s  on 1
improve clinical outcome.
Q: What is the best way in primary care practice to identify EG intoxication?
A: The combination of a high osmolal gap and high anion gap is very suggestive of EG intoxi-
cation. Measured osmolality is not readily available in primary care practice, but is available from
most commercial diagnostic laboratories. Most laboratories provide a calculated osmolality on the
serum biochemical profile. The osmolal gap is the difference between the measured and calculated
serum osmolality and normally is <10 mOsm/kg. Other clinical features that suggest the presence
of EG include hyperphosphatemia that is out of proportion to observed increases in BUN and serum
creatinine concentrations (due to the presence of phosphorus-containing rust inhibitors in antifreeze
preparations). Hypocalcemia also may occur in affected animals when EG has been rapidly metabo-
lized to toxic intermediates. The EGTest Kit may identify unmetabolized EG in whole blood soon after
ingestion.
Q: What is the best way to definitively diagnose leptospirosis as the cause for AIRF?
A: Documentation of increasing serologic titers based on microscopic agglutination testing is pres-
ently the standard method. A titer that rises between the acute and convalescent serum samples by a
factor of at least 4 is considered diagnostic. An single titer of >1:800 also can be very suggestive in a
 dog that has not been vaccinated in the past 6 to 12 months against the serovar identified by serology.
Some dogs have no measurable titer in serum samples collected during the acute phase, but have diag-
nostic titers a few weeks later. Depending on the phase of the disease, PCR of blood or urine likely will
become the gold standard for diagnosis in the future.
Q: Why is it clinically relevant to know that AIRF is caused by leptospirosis ratherthan some cause
of acute tubular necrosis (e.g., toxins or ischemia)?
A: The prognosis for leptospirosis is considerably better than that of most other causes of AIRF.
Thus, if the diagnosis of leptospirosis is certain, aggressive treatment is warranted because successful
Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure  CHAPTER 4141
outcome is very possible. Also, antibiotic treatment to eliminate the carrier state is necessary in AIRF
caused by leptospirosis.
Q: How can I know for sure that a dog recently treated with gentamicin for 9 days has AIRF caused
by AGNT?
A: No definitive laboratory, imaging, or histopathologic findings establish the diagnosis of
AGNT with certainty. If renal function was normal before and severe azotemia has developed after
administration of AGs (especially in a critically ill hospitalized animal), the diagnosis of AIRF caused
by AGNT is quite likely.
Q: Which NSAID is least likely to produce AIRF?
A: All NSAIDs have the potential to cause AIRF if hypotension occurs while the NSAID is present
in therapeutic concentrations. NSAIDs do not cause AIRF unless vasoconstriction has been activated,
as is likely to occur during hypotension or shock. Unfortunately, GI bleeding is common with NSAID
administration, and hypotension may occur as a result. Newer NSAIDs may be less likely to provoke
GI bleeding and consequently may be less likely to result in AIRF.
Q: I have a 3-year-old dog in my practice that was normal until 2 days ago. Now, the dog is mori-
low power microscopic field in the urinary sediment. Abnormal serum chemistry results include
 'i r   dd s i     s 
lite such as cholecalciferol in rat bait or calcipotriene in antipsoriasis cream. How much azotemia is
primary and how much is prerenal cannot be determined at the time of presentation because hyper-
calcemia interferes with urinary concentrating ability. Repeated measurement of serum creatinine con-
centration after IV fluid therapy has corrected dehydration will allow you to determine how much, if
any, of the azotemia was prerenal in origin. Assuming the history is correct, ionized hypercalcemia is
likely to be present and measurement of serum ionized calcium concentration would be useful. Persis
tence of ionized hypercalcemia in the face of azotemia increases the risk for development of additional
primary renal lesions. Thus, ionized hypercalcemia should be treated promptly. IV fluids alone or
minosis D is the underlying cause. Adding calcitonin to rapidly decrease serum ionized calcium con-
centration is advisable, but its effect is limited in magnitude and duration. Intravenous administration
of pamidronate is valuable in the rescue treatment of hypercalcemia caused by hypervitaminosis D.
 Rapid reversal of hypercalcemia is crucial to successful treatment of this dog.
Q: I have a 5-year-old female Labrador retriever in my clinic. She presented to our office with a
sudden onset of anorexia, vomiting, and lethargy. Her physical examination was unremarkable.
There was no history of previous polyuria or polydipsia. Her urine specific gravity is 1.015 with 3+
casts are present. Her serum biochemistry results include a serum creatinine concentration of 9.3
mg/dL, serum phosphorus concentration of 8.5 mg/dL, and hypoalbuminemia (1.5 g/dL). Her serum
creatinine concentration has not responded to an IV fluid challenge. Her kidneys are normal-sized
with normal renal pelves but hyperechoic on ultrasonography. Her Lyme disease titer is positive. Is
this AIRF or CRF, and what is the prognosis?
A: Hypoalbuminemia is not usually a feature of AIRF except in RPGN associated with Borrelit
infection. Severe proteinuria is compatible with glomerular disease and is not common with other
causes of AIRF. Differential diagnosis at this point should include leptospirosis, rapidly progressive
142 CHAPTER 4 ■ Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
glomerulonephritis, amyloidosis with acute medullary necrosis, or a chronic glomerulopathy with
acute exacerbation. Renal biopsy will be an important tool to establish a definitive diagnosis and offer
a more realistic prognosis. Unfortunately, advanced azotemia associated with renal amyloidosis or
 RPGN has a grave prognosis. The positive Lyme titer is not necessarily helpful because many normal
indicate exposure rather than active disease.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Ethylene Glycol Intoxication
Adams WH, Toal RL, Breider MA: Ultrasonographic findings in dogs and cats with oxalate nephrosis attributed to
ethylene glycol intoxication: 15 cases (1984-1988), I Am Vet Med Assoc 199:492-496, 1991.
Adams WH, Toal RL, Walker MA, et al: Early renal ultrasonographic findings in dogs with experimentally induced
ethylene glycol nephrosis, Am / Vet Res 50:1370-1376, 1989.
Connally HE, Thrall MA, Hamar DW: Safety and efficacy of high-dose fomepizole as therapy for ethylene glycol
intoxication in cats,  Vet Emerg Crit Care 12:191, 2002.
 Dial SM, Thrall MA, Hamar DW: 4-Methylpyrazole as treatment for naturally acquired ethylene glycol intoxication in
dogs, I Am Vet Med Assoc 195:73-76, 1989.
 aa ag sua se aoza- pe ha jo osd  r    l
intoxication in cats, A  Vet Res 55:1771-1782, 1994.
Gaynor AR, Dhupa N: Acute ethylene glycol intoxication. Part I. Pathophysiology and clinical stages, Compendium for
Continuing Education21:1014-1023,1999.
Compendium for Continuing Education 21:1124-1133, 1999
Grauer GF, Thrall MA, Henre BA, et al: Early clinicopathologic findings in dogs ingesting ethylene glycol, Am J Vet Res
45:22992303, 1984.
Lascelles BD, Court MH, Hardie EM, Robertson SA: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in cats: A review, Vet Anaesth
Analg 34:228-250, 2007.
Tarr BD, Winters LJ, Moore MP,et al: Low-dose ethanol in the treatment of ethylene glycol poisoning, I Vet Pharmacol Ther
8:254262, 1985.
Thrall MA, Grauer GF, Mero KN: Clinicopathologic findings in dogs and cats with ethylene glycol intoxication, I Am Vet
Med Assoc 184:3741, 1984.
Leptospirosis
Adin CA, Cowgill LD: Treatment and outcome of dogs with leptospirosis: 36 cases (1990-1998), I Arm Vet Med Assoc
216:371375, 2000.
Birnbaum N, Barr SC, Center SA, et al: Naturally-acquired leptospirosis in 36 dogs: Serological and clinicopathological
features, I Small Anim Pract 39:231236, 1998.
Brown CA, Roberts AW, Miller MA, et al: Leptospira interrogans serovar grippotyphosa infection in dogs, I Am Vet Med
Assoc 209:12651267, 1996.
Forrest Lj, O'Brien RT, Tremelling MS, et al: Sonographic renal findings in 20 dogs with leptospirosis, Vet Radiol Lltrasound
39:337340, 1998.
Goldstein RE, Lin RC, Langston CE, et al: Influence of infecting serogroup on clinical features of leptospirosis in dogs, I Vet
Interrm Med 20:489494, 2006.
Klaasen HL, Molkenboer MJ, Vrijenhoek MP, Kaashoek Mj: Duration of immunity in dogs vaccinated against leptospirosis
with a bivalent inactivated vaccine, Vet Microbiol 95:121-132, 2003.
Mastrorilli C, Dondi F, Agnoli C,et al: Clinicopathologic features and outcome predictors of Leptospira interrogans Australis
serogroup infection in dogs: A retrospective study of 20 cases (2001-2004), f Vet frterr Med 21:3-10, 2007.
Rentko VT, Clark N, Ross LA,Schelling SH: Canine leptospirosis: A retrospective study of 17 cases, I Vet Int Med 6:235-244,
1992.
Canada: 677 cases (1970-1998), I An Vet Med Assoc 220:53-58, 2002.
Ward MP, Guptill LF, Prahl A, Wu CC: Serovar-specific prevalence and risk factors for leptospirosis among dogs: 90 cases
(1997-2002),  Ar Vet Med Assoc 224:1958-1963, 2004.
Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure  CHAPTER 4143
Ward MP, Guptill LF, Wu CC: Evaluation of environmental risk factors for leptospirosis in dogs: 36 cases (1997-2002), I Am
Vet Med Assoc 225:7277, 2004.
Aminoglycoside Nephrotoxicity
Albarellos G, Montoya L, Ambros L, et al: Multiple once-daily dose pharmacokinetics and renal safety of gentamicin in
dogs,  Vet Pharmacol 1her 27:21-25, 2004.
Brown SA, Barsanti JA, Crowell WA: Gentamicin-associated acute renal failure in the dog, I Am Vet Med Assoc 186:686-690,
1985.
Med 95:463-474, 1980.
Frazier DL, Aucoin DP, Riviere JE: Gentamicin pharmacokinetics and nephrotoxicity in naturally acquired and experi
mentally induiced disease in dogs, I Am Vet Med Assoc 192:57-63, 1988.
Greco DS, Turnwald GH, Adams R, et al: Urinary gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase activity in dogs with gentamicin-
induced nephrotoxicity, A J Vet Res 46:2332-2335, 1985.
Rivers BJ, Walter PA, O'Brien TD, et al: Evaluation of urine gamma-glutamyl transpeptid ase-to-creatinine ratio as a diag
nostic tool in an experimental model of aminoglycoside-induced acute renal failure in the dog,  Am Anim Hosp Assoc
32:323336, 1996.
               
electron microscopy, Vet Pathol 17:206-217, 1980.
Grape and Raisin Nephrotoxicity in Dogs
Eubig PA, Brady MS, Gwaltney-Brant SM, et al: Acute renal failure in dogs after the ingestion of grapes or raisins: a retro
spective evaluation of 43 dogs (1992-2002), β Vet Intern Med 19:663-674, 2005.
 I 'so t ui uosasui adel 1o usie ym pateiosse aine deuai anoy ie a di haeh 'vd iqna 'a ouajezz
Emerg Crit Care 14:203-212, 2004.
Morrow CM, Valli VE, Volmer PA, Eubig PA: Canine renal pathology associated with grape or raisin ingestion: 10 cases,
 Vet Diagn Inoest 17:223231, 2005.
Lily Nephrotoxicity in Cats
Hadley RM, Richardson JA, Gwaltney-Brant SM: A retrospective study of day lily toxicosis in cats, Vet Hum Toxicol 45:38-
39,2003.
Langston CE: Acute renal failure caused by lily ingestion in six cats, I Am Vet Med Assoc 220:49-52, 2002.
Rumbeiha WK, Francis JA, Fitzgerald SD, et al: A comprehensive study of Easter lily poisoning in cats, J Vet Diagn Inoest
16:527-541, 2004.
Tefft KM: Lily nephrotoxicity in cats, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 26:149-157, 2004.
Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs
Interr Med 19:633-643, 2005.
Forsyth SF, Guilford WG, Pfeiffer DU: Effect of NSAID administration on creatinine clearance in healthy dogs undergoing
anaesthesia and surgery, / Small Anim Pract 41:547-550, 2000.
Jones RD, Baynes RE, Nimitz CT: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug toxicosis in dogs and cats: 240 cases (1989-1990),
A Vet Med Assoc 201:475477, 1992.
Jones CJ, Budsberg SC: Physiologic characteristics and clinical importance of the cyclooxygenase isoforms in dogs and
cats, I An Vet Med Assoc 217:721-729, 2000.
 Lascelles BD, Court MH, Hardie E: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in cats: A review, Vet Anesth Analg 34:228-250,
2007
Lascelles BD, McFarland JM, Swann H: Guidelines for safe and effective use of NSAIDs in dogs, Vet Ther 6:237-251, 2005.
Poortinga EW, Hungerford LL: A case-control study of acute ibuprofen toxicity in dogs, Preo Vet Med 35:115-124, 1998.
drug (NSAID) in juvenile cats undergoing routine desexing - 16 cases 1998-2005 (abstract), I Vet Intern Med 20:740, 2006.
Stichtenoth DO, Frolich JC: COX-2 and the kidneys, Curr Pharm Des 6:1737-1753, 2000.
Wilson JE, Chandrasekharan NV, Westover KD, et al: Determination of expression of cyclooxygenase-1 and -2 isozymes in
144CHAPTER 4  Specific Syndromes Causing Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
Hypercalcemia
Med Assoc 196:1269-1272, 1990.
Fooshee SK, Forrester SD: Hypercalcemia secondary to cholecalciferol rodenticide toxicosis in two dogs, } Am Vet Med
Assoc 196:1265-1268, 1990.
Gunther R, Felice LJ, Nelson RK, Franson AM: Toxicity of a vitamin D3 rodenticide to dogs, I Am Vet Med Assoc 193:211-
214, 1988.
Hare WR, Dobbs CE, Slayman KA, Kingsborough BJ: Calcipotriene poisoning in dogs, Vet Med 95:771-778, 2000.
Hostutler RA, Chew DJ, Jaeger JQ, et al: Uses and effectiveness of pamidronate disodium for treatment of dogs and cats
with hypercalcemia, / Vet Intern Med 19:29-33, 2005.
Kruger JM, Osborne CA, Nachreiner RF, Refsal KR: Hypercalcemia and renal failure. Etiology, pathophysiology, diagno-
sis, and treatment, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 26:1417-1445, 1996.
in dogs, Am I Vet Res 61:9-13, 2000.
Rumbeiha WK, Kruger JM, Fitzgerald SF, et al: Use of pamidronate to reverse vitamin D3-induced toxicosis in dogs, Am
J Vet Res 60:10921097, 1999.
Vet Res 40:73-83, 1979.
Rapidly Progressive Glomerulonephritis
Dambach DM, Smith CA, Lewis RM, Van Winkle TJ: Morphologic, immunohistochemical, and ultrastructural
characterization of a distinctive renal lesion in dogs putatively associated with Borrelia burgdorferi infection: 49 cases
(1987-1992), Vet Pathol 34:85-96, 1997.
Heat stroke
Bruchim Y, Klement E, Saragusty J, et al: Heat stroke in dogs: A retrospective study of 54 cases (1999-2004) and analysis of
risk factors for death, I Vet Interm Med 20:3846, 2006.
Drobatz K], Macintire DK: Heat-induced illness in dogs: 42 cases (1976-1993), / Amm Vet Med Assoc 209:1894-1899, 1996
lated air transport environmental stress, Am ∫ Vet Res 38:955-958, 1977.
Shapiro Y, Rosenthal T, Sohar E: Experimental heatstroke. A model in dogs, Arch Intern Med 131:688-692, 1973.
Food-Associated Toxicity
Brown CA, Jeong K-S, Poppenga RH, et al: Outbreaks of renal failure associated with melamine and cyanuric acid in dogs
and cats in 2004 and 2007, I Vet Diagn Invest 19:527531, 2007.
CHAPTER
5
Chronic Renal Failure
INTRODUCTION
A. Chronic renal failure (CRF) occurs when the compensatory mechanisms of chronically dis-
eased kidneys are no longer able to maintain adequate functions to excrete waste products;
regulate electrolyte, water, and acid-base homeostasis, degrade hormones; and synthesize
electrolyte, and acid-base balance; and failure of hormone production constitute the syndrome
of CRF.
 1. Azotemia does not develop until 75% or more of the nephron population has become
nonfunctional. Isosthenuria occurs when greater than 66% of the nephron population has
become nonfunctional; the ability to elaborate maximal urine concentration is lost earlier.
2. CRF is thought to affect 0.5% to 1.0% of geriatric dogs and 1.0% to 3.0% of geriatric cats.
CRF is the third most common cause of death in dogs and the second most common cause of death in cats
with chronic disease.
B. Renal functions affected are:
1. Excretory: Retention of solutes handled by glomerular filtration rate (GFR) (e.g., urea, cre-
atinine).
2. Regulatory: Derangements in solutes handled by GFR and some combination of reabsorp
tion and secretion can result in abnormalities of water, electrolytes, and acid-base balance.
Depending on the solute in question, retention or loss can result.
3. Degradative: Many small peptides (e.g, gastrin) normally are filtered by the kidney.
reabsorbed, and degraded in the proximal tubular cells. Loss of this clearance function
can result in metabolic derangements because many of these small peptides are hor
mones.
4. Endocrine: Diminished production of the hormones erythropoietin and calcitriol occurs in
CRF.
C. Intermational Renal Interest Society (IRIS) staging of chronic kidney disease (CKD).
1. IRIS is an international special interest group seeking to identify and disseminate infor-
mation on better methods for the diagnosis and treatment of dogs and cats with renal
disease.
2. The term CKD is recommended over chronic renal disease (CRD) or CRF to avoid confu-
sion during conversations with pet owners.
3. IRIS has proposed a staging system for CKD based on the serum creatinine concentration
of the stable patient on at least two occasions (Table 5-1). A substage then is assigned based
on whether or not the animal is proteinuric (Table 5-2) and the absence or presence (and
extent) of hypertension (Table 5-3)
145
146
CHAPTER 5  Chronic Renal Failure
TABLE 5-1
  Serum Creatinine Concentrations for Assignment of International Renal Interest Society Stage
of Chronic Kidney Disease in Dogs and Cats
Serum Creatinine
Serum Creatinine
Stage
Concentration (mg/dL)
Concentration (μmol/L)
Comments
<1.4(dog)
<125(dog)
Nonazotemic. Often discovered fortuitously during routine
<1.6 (cat)
<140 (cat)
examination. May have evidence of decreased urinary
concentrating ability or proteinuria. Usually no obvious
clinical signs. May be polyuric.
1.4-2.0 (dog)
125-179 (dog)
Mildly azotemic. Decreased urinary concentrating capac-
1.6-2.8 (cat)
140-249 (cat)
ity. May have proteinuria. Clinical signs minimal. May
have polyuria and polydipsia.
2.1-5.0 (dog)
180-439 (dog)
Moderate azotemia. Decreased urinary concentrating
2.9-5.0 (cat)
250-439 (cat)
capacity. May have proteinuria. Many systemic clinical
signs may be present.
>5.0 (dog)
>440 (dog)
Severe azotemia.Decreased urinary concentrating
>5.0 (cat)
>440 (cat)
capacity, proteinuria. Systemic clinical signs present
and may be severe.
TABLE 5-2
 Proteinuria* for Assignment of International Renal Interest Society Substage of Chronic Kidney
Disease in Dogs and Cats
Urine Protein/Creatinine Ratio
Classification
<0.2 (dogs)
Nonproteinuric
<0.2 (cats)
0.2-0.5 (dogs)
Borderline proteinuric
0.2-0.4 (cats)
>0.5 (dogs)
 Proteinuric
>0.4 (cats)
*Assessed by urine protein/creatinine ratio
TABLE5-3
 Systemic Blood Pressure for Assignment of International Renal Interest Society Substage of Chronic
Kidney Disease in Dogs and Cats
Systolic Blood Pressure (mm Hg)
Diastolic Blood Pressure (mm Hg)
Risk Level
<150
<95
Minimal
150-159
95-99
Low
160-179
100-119
Moderate
≥180
≥120
High
Chronic Renal Failure  CHAPTER 5 147
a.  Serial measurements of serum creatinine concentration should be made by the same
laboratory. Interassay variability for creatinine determinations is minimal within a
given laboratory but not among laboratories.
b. Serum creatinine concentration should be measured using standard automated meth-
ods (i.e., Jaffe colorimetric reaction). The serum creatinine concentrations proposed in
the IRIS guidelines do not refer to creatinine determined by enzymatic methods.
4. Staging of CKD should allow more rational treatment strategies to be employed based on
stage of disease. The goal of treatment is to slow or prevent progression of disease.
a. Most studies of treatment for CKD have been reported for dogs and cats with overt
azotemia and clinical sigms (i.e., IRIS stages 3 and 4; see Table 5-1).
b. More cats than dogs with CKD are identified in IRIS stages 1 and 2. Most dogs with
CKD are not identified until IRIS stage 3 or 4.
 5. The low cutoff values for maximal serum creatinine concentration considered to be normal
will allow identification of more animals with CKD but also occasionally will include nor
mal animals (see Table 5-1).
I The use of a lower cutoff value for maximal normal serum creatinine concentration will allow identification
 of more patients with earlier CKD.
6. Many laboratories report reference ranges for serum creatinine concentration much wider
than those proposed in the IRIS guidelines and some animals with serum creatinine con-
 aaey Aa sauei aaaan yns go pa raddn a pe soera
7. Guidelines for serum creatinine concentrations are based on average-sized adult dogs.
Extremely small or large dogs may have lower or higher normal serum creatinine concen-
trations. Breed-specific results for serum creatinine concentration are not addressed in the
IRIS guidelines (e.g., normal Greyhounds tend to have higher serum creatinine concentra-
tions than other breeds). Also, young dogs normally have lower serum creatinine concen-
trations than mature dogs.
8. Prerenal and postrenal conditions also must be excluded based on results of history, physi-
cal examination, urinalysis, and urinary tract imaging as necessary.
9. Complete IRIS classification requires assessment of proteinuria (see Table 5-2) and sys
temic blood pressure (see Table 5-3).
CAUSES OF CHRONIC RENAL FAILURE IN DOGS AND CATS
I Most often, the underlying cause of CKD in dogs and cats is not determined.
Dog
1.Chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis of unknowm cause (most common pathologic diagnosis).
2. Chronic pyelonephritis (can be difficult to distinguish histologically from chronic tubu-
lointerstitial nephritis).
3. Chronic glomerulonephritis (can be difficult to distinguish histologically from chronic
tubulointerstitial nephritis)
4.Amyloidosis (familial in Shar-pei dogs; see Chapter 6, Familial Renal Diseases of the Dog
and Cat).
5. Hypercalcemic nephropathy.
6.Chronic obstructive uropathy (hydronephrosis).
7. Familial renal disease (see Chapter 6, Familial Renal Diseases of the Dog and Cat).
148 CHAPTER 5 ■ Chronic Renal Failure
8.  Progression after acute renal failure (ARF)
9. Chronic toxicity (e.g, food-associated, drugs, environmental toxins).
10. Neoplasia.
11.  Primary systemic hypertension.
Cat
1. Chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis of unknown cause (most common pathologic
diagnosis).
 2.  Chronic pyelonephritis (can be difficult to distinguish histologically from chronic tubu-
lointerstitial nephritis).
 3. Chronic glomerulonephritis (can be difficult to distinguish histologically from chronic
tubulointerstitial nephritis).
4.Amyloidosis (familial in Abyssinian cats; see Chapter 6, Familial Renal Diseases of the
Dog and Cat).
5.
 Polycystic kidney disease (familial in Persian cats; see Chapter 6, Familial Renal Diseases
of the Dog and Cat).
6.Hypercalcemic nephropathy.
7. Progression after ARF.
 8.Chronic obstructive uropathy (e.g., hydronephrosis as a consequence of ureteral urolithiasis)
9. Neoplasia (e.g., renal lymphoma).
10.  Acromegaly (excessive growth hormone production) resulting in renomegaly.
11. Pyogranulomatous nephritis due to feline infectious peritonitis.
12. Hypokalemic (kaliopenic) nephropathy.
13. Chronic toxicity (food-associated, drugs, environmental toxins).
14. Primary systemic hypertension.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF CHRONIC RENAL FAILURE
Uremia
1. Uremia is a syndrome that occurs after substantial reduction in renal function so that azo-
temia develops in conjumction with clinical signs. A variety of laboratory findings (hema-
tologic, endocrine, serum biochemistry) usually accompany clinical signs recognized by
the owner (lethargy, weight loss, decreased appetite, and vomiting).
2. A uremic toxin is any compound that accumulates in excess due to decreased renal func-
tion and contributes to the clinical sigms of uremia.
a.  Urea, guanidine compounds, products of bacterial metabolism (e.g., polyamines, ali-
phatic amines, indoles), myoinositol, trace elements, and "middle molecules" (i.e.,
some hormones and other compoumds with molecular weights of 500-3000) have been
considered as potential uremic toxins.
b. Many compounds are involved in the pathophysiology of uremia, and no single com
pound is likely to explain the diversity of uremic symptoms.
Intraglomerular hypertension and hyperfitration are compensatory mechanisms that likely contribute to the
progression of CKD.
c. Parathyroid hormone (PTH) is the best characterized uremic toxin. It exerts adverse
effects on the brain, heart, bone marrow, and other tissues. Its role in the develop-
ment of renal osteodystrophy (i.e., "rubber jaw") is well known (see "Renal Secondary
Hyperparathyroidism").
Chronic Renal Failure  CHAPTER 5
149
Hyperfiltration
1. Hyperfiltration occurs as a result of an increase in single nephron GFR (SNGFR) above the
associated with increased transglomerular pressure (Figures 5-1 and 5-2).
a.A fixed and dilated afferent glomerular arteriole allows delivery of increased pressure
to the glomerular capillaries.
b.  Although not well documented, efferent arteriolar vasoconstriction could contribute to
increased transglomerular pressure.
c. Intraglomerular hypertension is a term used to describe increased hydrostatic pressure
 in remnant nephron glomerular capillaries. Intraglomerular hypertension is not neces-
sarily related to the presence of systemic hypertension.
Normal
Chronic Renal Failure
Afferent
Efferent
Afferent
Efferent
Normal
Normal
Increased
Increased
glomerular
 glomerular
glomerular
glomerular
hydrostatic
filtration
hydrostatic
filtration
pressure
rate
pressure
rate
FGURE 5-1■ Development of the Super nephron-
-renal adaptation in the remnant kidney following substantial
loss of renal mass. Increased single nephron GFR (SNGFR) is accomplished by vasodilation of the afferent arteriole.
Some increase in GFR is also attributed to an increase in glomerular volume which increases surface area for
filtration. (Drawn by Tim Vojt.)
75
60
Normal
Renal failure
FGURE 5-2  Note the presence of intraglomerular hypertension in cats with substantial loss of nephron mass
compared with normal cats (pressure measurements obtained by micropuncture). (Brown SA, Brown CA: Single
nephron adaptations to partial renal ablation in cats. Arm / Physiol 269: R1002-R1008, 1995.)
150
0CHAPTER 5  Chronic Renal Failure
d. Increased glomerular volume in glomeruli of remnant nephrons also may con-
tribute to hyperfiltration, but does not necessarily increase glomerular pressure.
Increased glomerular volume itself may contribute to adverse consequences such as
proteinuria.
e.
 Increased SNGFR facilitates excretion of waste products, but has ad verse effects on the
long-term survival of remnant nephrons.
 2. Renal disease tends to be inexorably progressive once a critical number of nephrons has
been destroyed, even when the initial cause of renal injury has been removed.
3. Total GFR represents the sum of the SNGFR for all nephrons of both kidneys. There are
 approximately 1,000,000 nephrons in a dog (500,000 per kidney) and 400,000 nephrons in 
a cat (200,000 per kidney). In a healthy animal, the range of SNGFR is fairly narrow.
4. During progressive renal disease, the decline in total GFR is offset by an increase in
SNGFR in functional remnant nephrons (so-called glomerular hyperfiltration). Thus, the
normally narrow range of SNGFR widens during development of CRF because diseased
ular hyperfiltration has been incriminated as one important factor contributing to the
progressive nature of renal disease based on experimental studies in animals.
5. Glomerular hyperfiltration has been demonstrated to occur experimentally in dogs
and cats and in the few clinical dogs and cats it which it was measured. It is assumed
that glomerular hyperfiltration is present in azotemic dogs and cats with primary renal
disease.
6. The mechanisms responsible for this increase in SNGFR result from alterations in the
 normal determinants of SNGFR. In dogs, hyperfiltration results primarily from increases
in the glomerular ultrafiltration coefficient (Kf) associated with increased glomerular
volume by hypertrophy and increased glomerular capillary plasma flow and increased
mentally, dogs and cats develop glomerular hyperfiltration after ablation of 75% or more
of renal mass.
 7. Following nephron loss, adaptation occurs to recoup lost GFR. This is to such an extent
 that total GFR wil increase approximately 40% to 60% in the remnant renal tissue over a
period of 4 weeks after renal ablation. For example, if one kidney is removed from a dog
with GFR of 40 mL/min, GFR will immediately decline to 20 mL/min but within one
month will stabilize at approximately 30 mL/min due to the effects of hyperfiltration in
remnant nephrons.
8. Proteinuria and glomerular sclerosis in remnant nephrons are adverse functional and
morphological consequences of glomerular hyperfiltration that may lead to progressive
deterioration of the remaining renal tissue. These glomerular lesions are more prominent
in rats with experimental renal disease than in dogs and cats in which tubulointerstitial
lesions predominate. Also, proteinuria often is mild in dogs and cats with experimental
 renal disease and its contribution to progression is less certain than in rats.
9. The extent of renal damage that results in progressive deterioration of the remnant kid-
ney is not known for all species. In dogs, 85% to 95% of renal tissue must be destroyed to
 result in progression, whereas progression occurs in rats after 75% to 80% renal ablation.
 Cats with 83% reduction in renal mass did not show evidence of progression over a one-
year period of time in an experimental study.
10. In rats, dietary intervention (restriction of protein, phosphorus, and calories) can abro-
gate this maladaptive response by reducing glomerular hyperfiltration. Dietary restric-
fion of protein to the same degree in dogs with experimental models of renal failure does
not prevent hyperfiltration.
Chronic Renal Failure ■ CHAPTER 5
151
Factors Contributing to the Progression of Chronic Renal Disease
Species Differences
a. Clinical experience indicates that naturally occurring renal disease often is progres-
sive in dogs. In experiments in dogs with subtotal nephrectomy, renal disease may not
become progressive until 85% to 95% reduction in renal mass has occurred.
b. Limited information is available in cats. Naturally occurring renal disease often is pro-
 gressive in cats, but it seems to progress much more slowly than in dogs. Cats with
Experimentally induced renal disease (5/6 nephrectomy) showed minimal evidence of
progression over a 1-year period of time, but longer study may be needed to identify
progression.
Functional and Morphologic Changes in Remnant Renal Tissue
a. Hyperfiltration increases movement of protein across the glomerular capillaries into
 Bowman's space and the mesangium, a process referred to as "protein trafficking."
 Increased protein trafficking across glomeruli and protein processing by renal tubules cause adverse reactions
 in the mesangium, tubules, and interstitium contributing to tubulointerstitial nephritis and glomerulosclerosis.
b.  Increased filtration of proteins through the glomeruli is toxic to the kidney and may
correlates with rate of progression of renal disease in dogs and cats but whether or not
proteinuria causes progression or is simply a marker of progression is not resolved.
(1) The increased filtered load of protein may overload the proximal tubular cells
leading ultimately to rupture of lysosomes and exposure of tubular cells and renal
interstitium to damaging enzymes.
GFR
Adaptation/Maladaptation
Glomerular pressure
and plasma flow
Glomerular volume
Protein traffic acrossglomerulus
Mesangial
Tubule
reaction
processing
Glomerulosclerosis
 Tubulointerstitial nephritis
FGURE 5-3  A unifying hypothesis for the progressive loss of GFR and increased renal lesions in CRF. Protein
leakage into the mesangium leading to glomerulosclerosis and protein leakage into the tubular lumens resulting in
tubulointerstitial fibrosis are central to this hypothesis.
152
CHAPTER 5  Chronic Renal Failure
FIGURE 5-4  Chronic renal disease histopathology-early lesions. (Hematolxyin and eosinstain, x600). (Courtesy
of Dr. Steven Weisbrode, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.)
(2) Tubular cells possess receptors for hormones and growth factors, some of which
are small molecular weight proteins (e.g., insulin-like growth factor 1 [IGF-1],
transforming growth factor β) that are filtered excessively and taken up by the
proximal tubular cells where they may promote cellular proliferation and extracel-
lular matrix deposition leading to tubulointerstitial damage.
(3) Tubular cells overloaded with protein upregulate inflammatory and vasoactive
genes (e.g., monocyte chemoattractant protein-1, endothelin), which have potential
toxic effects on the kidney.
c. Increased filtration of serum proteins also occurs into the mesangial space, which
results in proliferation of mesangial cells and accumulation of increased mesangial cell
matrix, both of which contribute to the development of glomerulosclerosis.
d.  Accumulation of lipids in the mesangium also may promote mesangial cell prolifera
tion, excess production of mesangial matrix components such as collagen and proteo-
glycans and ultimately glomerular sclerosis.
e。
Hyperphosphatemia and hyperparathyroidism are associated with progression.
Proinflammatory and fibrogenic cytokines are important in the pathophysiology of progression of CKD.
f.Typical lesions of CKD in dogs and cats include a varying degree of lymphoplas-
 macytic tubulointerstitial nephritis, fibrosis, tubular dropout, hypertrophy of some
tubular epithelium, mineralization of tubular basement membrane and interstitium,
glomerulosclerosis, and obsolescent glomeruli (Figures 5-4 and 5-5).
Dietary Intake
a.  Dietary intake of varying levels of protein, phosphorus, calories, and lipids can have
either protective or adverse effects on the progression of CRF (see "Treatment").
Chronic Renal Failure ■ CHAPTER 5
153
FIGURE 5-5 ■ Chronic renal disease histopathology—advanced lesions. (Hematolxyin and eosinstain, x600).
(Courtesy of Dr. Steven Weisbrode, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.)
Systemic Complications
a.Systemic complications of renal insufficiency may affect progression.
 r g pa a    a  a  (
tension.
(2) Urinary tract infection (UTI).
(3) Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base imbalances.
(4) Unidentified uremic toxins likely contribute to renal disease progression because
nonspecific adsorbent treatment ameliorates progression in rats with experimen-
tally induced renal disease and humans with naturally occurring CRF.
(5) Therapeutic interventions with modified dietary intake, phosphorus binders,
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and other antihypertensive
agents, and treatment of secondary hyperparathyroidism with calcitriol also poten-
(, as)  eo ssr p sis g r s A
Solute Balance
1. Despite distortion of renal architecture by disease, glomerular and tubular functions in
remaining functional nephrons are as closely integrated in diseased kidneys as in normal
kidneys (i.e., glomerulotubular balance is maintained).
2. For any given solute, the diseased kidney maintains glomerulotubular balance as GFR
 declines by decreasing the fraction of the filtered load of that solute that is reabsorbed and
increasing the fraction of the filtered load of that solute that is excreted.
3. In some instances, the mechanisms of the adaptive changes have adverse effects
price to be paid for maintaining external solute balance for a given solute as renal dis-
ease progresses is the induction of one or more abnormalities of the uremic state."
The classic example of the trade-off hypothesis is maintenance of normal calcium and
phosphorus balance at the expense of renal secondary hyperparathyroidism and bone
demineralization. Other examples include bone buffering by carbonate at the expense
154CHAPTER 5 ■ Chronic Renal Failure
of bone demineralization, and increasing SNGFR by glomerular hyperfiltration at the
expense of proteinuria, glomerular sclerosis, and progressive destruction of remnant renal
tissue.
4. Some of these ultimately maladaptive mechanisms and their consequences can be pre-
vented by a proportional reduction in the intake of the responsible solute. This strategy
will avoid the need for the kidneys to alter the fractional reabsorption and excretion of the
been shown to prevent or reverse renal secondary hyperparathyroidism.
Water Balance
1. Both the ability to produce concentrated urine (i.e., to conserve water) and the ability to
excrete a water load are impaired in CRF.
2. The development of this concentrating defect is noted clinically by the onset of polyuria
 3. Increased solute load per residual functioning nephron rather than architectural damage
to the tubules and interstitium probably is the most important factor contributing to the
concentrating defect (i.e., the remnant nephrons experience an osmotic diuresis).
4. Another contributing factor is the limited ability of the distal nephron to respond to
antidiuretic hormone (ADH), possibly due to higher tubular flow rate in remnant neph-
rons.
 5. In most instances, impairment of concentrating ability develops when 67% of the nephron
population has become nonfunctional. This concentrating defect is recognized clinically
by the presence of isosthenuria (urine osmolality of 300-600 mOsm/kg or urine specific
gravity [USG] of 1.007-1.015) when obvious azotemia has developed.
6. For unkmown reasons, some cats with CRF retain considerable concentrating ability even
after development of azotemia. In one study, cats with 58% to 83% loss of functional nephr
rons could produce concentrated urine (USG 1.022-1.067). Thus, cats with azotemia and
relatively concentrated urine do not necessarily have prerenal azotemia.
7. Urinary concentrating ability also may be preserved in the presence of renal azotemia in
some dogs with CRD and early CRF. In these instances, GFR is decreased but postglo-
merular blood flow is thought to be sufficiently preserved so that concentrated urine still
can be produced.
 8. In some diseases, damage to the distal nephron or distortion of the normal architecture of
the medullary interstitium may play a more important role in the concentrating defect and
loidosis in cats, pyelonephritis, polycystic renal disease, obstructive nephropathy, hyper-
calcemic nephropathy).
 9. Animals with CRD usually retain the ability to produce dilute urine (i.e., to excrete solute-
free water) but ability to excrete a sudden increase in water load may be impaired.
 DIAGNOSIS OF CHRONIC RENAL FAILURE
Clinical History in Chronic Renal Failure
Polyuria and Polydipsia
a.Polyuria and polydipsia may be the first abnormalities noted by observant owners of
dogs and cats. Nocturia may be the first thing noticed in dogs when they awaken their
owners so as to be allowed outside to urinate during the right. Polydipsia and poly.
uria frequently are not noticed by owners of cats. Polyuria in cats may be identified if
questions about the weight of the litter box are included in the history.
Chronic Renal Failure  CHAPTER 5
155
b. Some owners misinterpret polyuria as incontinence or pollakiuria because the animal
is urinating in the house when it never did so in the past. The owner must be ques
tioned to differentiate incontinence (lack of voluntary control; dribbling) from polyuria
(normal voluntary control; increased volume of urine) and pollakiuria (mormal control,
urinating small volumes frequently and sometimes accompanied by straining or pain).
a aq  eam jo sis adsuu pazioan jou are eisdpaod pue emaod  '
first abnormalities the owner detects.
Gastrointestinal Signs
a.Vomiting: Common in uremic dogs but much less so in cats. Stimulation of the chemo-
receptor trigger zone by a uremic toxin may be the cause. Gastrointestinal ulcers also
may contribute, as may increased gastric hyperacidity.
b. Gastroenteritis with hemorrhage (especially in uremic dogs) can occur. Many factors
may contribute to uremic gastropathy:
 go sisn q asnn  a sn un sona sn (
(2) Bleeding due to platelet dysfunction.
(3) Erosions or ulcers due to ammonia production from urea by bacteria in the gastro-
 intestinal tract are less common in dogs and cats than in humans with CRF.
(4) Ischemia due to vascular lesions (uremia induced vasculitis), but gastric necrosis is
mcommon.
(5) Edema and thickening of the gastric mucosa.
(6) Increased concentration of circulating gastrin due to impaired renal degradation
has been documented in both dogs and cats. Excess gastrin stimulates acid secre-
tion in the stomach and contributes to uremic gastroenteritis.
(7) Gastric mineralization.
c.Diarrhea: A relatively uncommon late finding in uremic dogs.
Anorexia
a. Centrally mediated impairment of appetite.
 b. Oral erosions or ulcers and uremic gastroenteritis contribute.
Wreight Loss
a. May be due to lack of adequate caloric intake but also can be associated with catabolic
processes that are activated even when adequate calories are consumed.
b. Excess glucagon may contribute to negative nitrogen balance and increased tissue
catabolism.
c.Metabolic acidosis can activate protein catabolic pathways in muscle.
Lethargy, Weakness, and Neurologic Signs
a. Centrally mediated mental dullness in uremic patients
b. Loss of lean muscle mass.
c. Uremic encephalopathy.
(1) Uremic encephalopathy may occur when GFR decreases to less than 10% of nor
mal. Encephalopathy is more readily recogmized when the onset of uremia is rapid
(as in ARF) but it also can be severe in CRF.
(2) Calcium influx in the brain mediated by high PTH concentration may play a role
in uremic encephalopathy of CRF. Amino acid alterations due to malnutrition or
accumulation of uremic toxins may alter neurotransmitter function. Electroen-
cephalographic abnormalities in dogs with experimentally induced and naturally
occurring renal failure have been noted that parallel the severity of the observed
clinical signs.
(a) Low serum ionized calcium concentration may contribute in some cases.
 s      (s
156
CHAPTER 5  Chronic Renal Failure
(c) Aluminum accumulation in the brain also may contribute, especially in patients
treated with aluminum-containing intestinal phosphate binders for extended
periods of time (poorly documented in veterinary medicine).
(3) Clinical signs reported in affected dogs include facial twitching, head bobbing,
abnormal behavior, tremors, and seizures.
d. Uremic neuropathy is an insidious, distal, symmetrical polyneuropathy (i.e., "dying
 back neuropathy") indistinguishable from other metabolic neuropathies.
(1) Occurs when GFR decreases below 10% of normal.
(2) Decreased nerve conduction velocity may be present in the absence of any obvious
clinical signs.
(3) Sometimes has been associated with high PTH concentrations.
Physical Findings in CRF
Weight Loss Including Loss of Lean Muscle Mass
Poor Hair Coat (i.e., Dull, Dry)
Oral Lesions (More Common in Dogs Than Cats)
a. Foul oral odor may be due to accumulation of ammonia and aliphatic amines.
b. Erosions and ulcers of the buccal mucosa and tongue (often the lateral margins of
tongue) may be observed. Ulcers may be due to excretion of urea into saliva and break-
down to ammonia by oral bacteria.
C. Tongue tip necrosis may result from fibrinoid necrosis and arteritis with focal ischemia,
necrosis, and ulceration. This lesion is much more common in dogs than in cats. It is
more commonly described in patients with CRF but also can develop in those with ARF.
d.Pallor of mucous membranes due to anemia.
Dehydration with Loss of Skin Elasticity and Dryness of Mucous Membranes
a. Occurs as a result of the lack of fluid intake and increased fluid losses in urine and from
the gastrointestinal tract (e.g., vomiting)
 b. Extent of dehydration may be overestimated based on skin turgor when evaluating
cachexic animals.
Abnormal Auscultation
a.Heart murmurs and gallop rhythms are relatively common.
(1) These may occur as a consequence of systemic hypertension.
(2) Anemia in patients with advanced CRF also may contribute to the development of
a heart murmur.
(3) Heart failure usually is not present.
 b. Crackles arising from pulmonary edema and congestive heart failure or uremic pneu-
monitis are very rare.
Abdominal Palpation
a. Small, normal, or enlarged kidneys may be identified, depending on the underlying
disease process.
b. The kidneys in patients with CRF usually are not painful.
c. Small, hard, irregular kidneys are consistent with CRF, but normal to enlarged kidneys
do not rule out CRF (especially in cats).
d.  The presence of an enlarged bladder in a patient known to be urinating indicates poly-
uria of CRF. If an enlarged bladder is palpated, it is essential to ensure that urinary
 obstruction is not a contributing factor.
Osteodystrophy
a. Fibrous osteodystrophy is most dramatic in young growing dogs with uremia
(so-called rubber jaw)
Chronic Renal Failure  CHAPTER 5
157
(1) Loose teeth and loss of lamina dura dentes in maxilla and mandible
(2) Expansion of the maxillary bones is common.
b. Pathologic fractures are rare.
Subcutaneous Edema
a. Subcutaneous edema or ascites suggests the possibility of glomerular disease with
severe loss of plasma proteins (see Chapter 7, Diseases of the Glomerulus).
Blindness
a.  Blindness may occur as a consequence of systemic hypertension.
 (1) Hypertension may not be identified by blood pressure measurement at presenta-
tion if severe volume depletion also is present.
(2) Retinal detachments occasionally may occur even with minimal hypertension and
hypoalbuminemia.
(3) Fundic examination findings include:
(a) Retinal detachment.
(b) Retinal hemorrhages.
(c) Retinal vascular tortuosity.
(d) Optic disc cupping.
Systemic or Local Infections
a. Chemotaxis is impaired in uremia.
 b. Cell-mediated immunity is impaired to a greater extent than humoral immunity.
Hemostasis Defects
 a. Uremia is characterized by abnormal hemostasis and a predisposition to hemorrhage.
Systemic Hypertension
s mo se aq ch paodan aq s  m sop un nonsad go aaaa au '1
9% and as high as 93%, and in cats with CKD the prevalence of hypertension has been
reported to range between 19% and 65%. Many factors including differences in the types
of renal diseases present, methodological differences, differences in body size, and interac-
tion with human beings, (so-called wohite coat effect) all likely have contributed to variability
in the reported range of prevalence of hypertension in dogs and cats with CKD. We esti-
mate that 20% to 30% of cats and dogs with CKD have systemic hypertension at the time of
diagnosis in our hospital, and that another 10% to 20% develop hypertension within a year
 of the initial diagnosis. Standardization of blood pressure measurement methodology and
 longitudinal studies will be required to better understand the natural history of hyperten-
sion in dogs and cats with CKD.
l ooiss 'a') suaq unu jo je ot res si sies pue sop ui anssand pooa ieon z
mm Hg, diastolic 80 mm Hg). The white coat effect can increase the blood pressure of dogs
and cats.
3.  Because of white coat artifact, it is difficult to diagnose hypertension in dogs and cats.
a. Some studies have used a systolic blood pressure of >175 mm Hg on 2 occasions or
>175 mm Hg in the presence of ocular lesions as indicating hypertension in cats.
e  u 9i oi 9i o samssa poq iss lsou pue  ym so q
considered mildly to moderately hypertensive and those with systolic blood pres-
sures of 165 to 200 mm Hg are considered moderately to severely hypertensive.
Those with systolic blood pressures >200 mm Hg are considered to have severe
hypertension.
c. Patients with CKD may be at greater risk for end organ damage from systemic hyper
tension because the normally protective autoregulatory mechanism is not operative in
afferent arterioles of glomeruli of remmant nephrons.
158
CHAPTER 5  Chronic Renal Failure
4. Factors contributing to hypertension in CKD include:
a. Sympathetic nervous system stimulation.
b.
 Renal ischemia with activation of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS).
C.
 Plasma volume expansion when sodium excretion is impaired at very low levels of
GFR (i.e., <5% of normal).
d.An intrarenal mechanism for sodium retention plays an important role in glomerular
disease (see Chapter 7, Diseases of the Glomerulus).
5. Clinical and pathologic manifestations of systemic hypertension include adverse effects
on the eyes, heart, nervous system, and kidneys.
Laboratory Findings in CRF
Hemogram
a.  A nonregenerative (normochromic, normocytic; hypoproliferative) anemia is common
the severity of the CRF as judged by serum creatinine concentration. Anemia may
be masked by dehydration, which causes hemoconcentration. Thus, the hematocrit
should be evaluated in conjunction with the serum total protein concentration.
(1) The primary cause of anemia in CRF is an absolute or relative deficit in the produc-
tion of erythropoietin in diseased kidneys by peritubular interstitial cells so that the
uremic patient cannot meet the demand for new red cells necessitated by loss from
hemolysis, hemorrhage, and normal turnover. Erythropoietin stimulates the final
differentiation of committed erythroid progenitor cells in the bone marrow into
mature red blood cells.
(2) The life span of red cells in uremic patients is approximately 50% that of healthy
individuals. The decreased life span is thought to be due to a toxic factor (possibly
PTH) in uremic plasma that promotes hemolysis.
(3) Some uremic toxins may impair erythropoiesis (e.g., polyamines, ribonuclease, PTH).
(4) Increased red blood cell (RBC) 2,3-diphosphoglycerate due to hyperphosphatemia
This partially compensates for the anemia but reduces the hypoxic stimulus for
erythropoiesis.
(5) Platelet dysfunction promotes insidious ongoing blood loss (e.g., gastrointestinal
hemorrhage).
(6) Some dogs and cats with CRF have microcytosis and iron deficiency based on eval-
uation of serum iron concentrations.
(7) Serum erythropoietin concentrations are decreased or normal in dogs and cats with
 CRF. A normal concentration of erythropoietin in an anemic animal with CRF rep-
resents an inadequate response. Assays for erythropoietin in dogs and cats are not
available from commercial diagnostic laboratories.
b. Mature neutrophilia and lymphopenia (i.e., stress of chronic disease).
c.  Normal platelet numbers but platelet function may be abnormal.
(1) The qualitative platelet function defect (platelet numbers are normal) is most
important, and risk of hemorrhage is best correlated with the buccal mucosal bleed-
ing time (normally <2-3 min). Other coagulation tests (e.g., one stage prothrombin
time [OSPT], activated partial thromboplastin time [APTT], activated coagulation
time [ACT]) usually are normal.
(2) Abnormalities of platelet function include abnormal platelet aggregation, abnor-
mal platelet factor 3 release, abnormal platelet adhesiveness, decreased clot retrac-
tion, and decreased thromboxane production by platelets.
Chronic Renal Failure  CHAPTER 5
159
(3) Platelet dysfunction is thought to be caused by a uremic toxin. Guanidines and
PTH are suspected but not proved to be involved.
Routine Serum Biochemistry
BLOOD UREA NITROGEN (BUN) AND SERUM CREATININE CONCENTRATIONS
(1) By definition, to be in renal failure, BUN and serum creatinine concentrations are
increased above normal. Usually, both are increased simultaneously.
(a) Early in the course of CRF in some cats, the serum creatinine concentration may
be increased while the BUN concentration remains normal. Anorexia or poor
appetite may contribute to the lower BUN concentration in this situation.
(b) In animals with substantial muscle wasting, serum creatinine concentration
may not reflect the severity of CRF.
        
tion to serum creatinine concentration.
SODIUM
observed in some patients with decompensated CRF due to dehydration or alterna-
tively due to sodium retention with advanced loss of nephron mass and extremely
low GFR (i.e., <5% of normal). Hyponatremia occurs sporadically in CRF if water
retention has occurred (e.g., administration of hypotonic fluids and impaired renal
excretion of an acute water load).
(a) To maintain balance for sodium as renal disease progresses, the kidneys must
reduce the fraction of filtered sodium that is reabsorbed (and increase the frac
tion that is excreted). Natriuretic hormones play an important role in this adap-
tive process. For example, a higher concentration of atrial natriuretic peptide
enhances sodium excretion by the kidneys in CRF.
(b) Patients with CRF are able to maintain sodium balance despite very low GFR
but they are much less flexible than normal individuals in their response to
abrupt changes in sodium intake (i.e., they take longer to excrete an abrupt
sodium load). If sodium intake is gradually reduced over several months,
patients with CRF can gradually reduce sodium excretion.
(c) The fractional reabsorption of sodium can only be reduced so far. When GFR
falls below 5% of normal, positive balance for sodium may develop with con-
sequent expansion of extracellular fluid volume, hypernatremia, and rarely
edema.
POTASSIUM
(1) Most animals with CRF have normal serum potassium concentrations. Hyperkale
mia usually does not develop unless the animal becomes oliguric or anuric. Hypo
kalemia may occur in 10% to 30% of dogs and cats with chronic CRF due to some
combination of anorexia, loss of muscle mass, vomiting, and polyuria.
(a) A significant body deficit of potassium can exist without the development of
hypokalemia. Serum potassium levels can underestimate total body potassium
since most of the body's potassium lies within the cells. As potassium is lost
Excessively from the plasma, potassium leaches out of the cells down a concen-
tration gradient masking the initial loss of potassium.
(b) One study of cats with CRF and normokalemia revealed decreased potassium
content (kaliopenia) of muscles.
(2) Potassium balance is maintained by an adaptive increase in the fractional excretion
of potassium as renal disease advances. Increased secretion of potassium per func
tional remnant nephron occurs in the distal nephron. Adaptive changes include
160
CHAPTER 5  Chronic Renal Failure
increases in the activity of Na+-K+ adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) and in the
basolateral surface area of principal cells in the cortical collecting ducts. This adap-
tive response is facilitated by (but does not require) aldosterone.
(3) Patients with CRF are less flexible in their response to added potassium. They have
a reduced ability to tolerate an acute potassium load and may require 1 to 3 days to
reestablish potassium balance when the intake of potassium is abruptly increased.
(4) Hypokalemic (kaliopenic) nephropathy has been described as a specific syndrome
in clinical cats either as a result of CKD or resulting in CKD.
Hypokalemia can be a consequence of CKD but also can contribute to worsening of lesions in animals with
 pre-existing CKD
(a) Whether kaliopenia without hypokalemia can result in CKD in cats has not
been established.
   o s  s g s a a  (
 mia was discovered at the same time in cats fed a marginally replete urinary
(b) Hypokalemia can contribute to anorexia, depression, and weakness indepen
dent of the effects of CRF. Severe muscle weakness (the "hanging-head" pos-
ture, truncal ataxia) is seen in many cats with serum potassium <2.5 mEq/L and
in some with <3.0 mEq/L (Figure 5-6).
(c) The fractional excretion of potassium into urine is high despite the low serum
potassium. Cats with normokalemic CKD also have high fractional excretion
for potassium as part of the adaptive nephron response to maintain potassium
balance.
(d) Hypokalemia can be associated with functional and or structural changes in the
kidneys.
(i) Reduced ability to concentrate the urine-initially functional, structural
later.
(ii)  Decreased GFR initially can be a result of hemodynamic changes, later due
to structural changes.
Chronic Renal Failure  CHAPTER 5 161
(ii) Structural lesions of tubulointerstitial inflammation and fibrosis associated
with CRF have been reported to develop in cats fed marginally potassium
replete diets that are highly acidifying and magnesium restricted.
  r         ()
function following correction of the hypokalemia. Whether this improve-
ment is due to correction of prerenal factors, intrarenal hemodynamics, or
resolution of some intrarenal lesions is not clear.
(v) Some cats with CRF periodically develop hypokalemia during the course of
their disease.
PHOSPHORUS
(1) In early stages of CKD (i.e., IRIS stage 1 and early stage 2), serum phosphorus
concentration often is normal due to the corrective effect of renal secondary hyper-
parathyroidism.
(2) Hyperphosphatemia develops with advancing CRF when 85% and more of the
nephrons become nonfunctional. At this point, the corrective effect of high PTH
concentration is overwhelmed.
(3) Serum phosphorus concentration in normal adult dogs and cats should be <5.5
mg/dL. Many laboratories report a higher upper end of the normal range for
serum phosphorus concentration, presumably because young animals with active
bone growth have been included in the population used to determine the normal 
reference range.
CALCIUM
(1) Serum total calcium concentrations are normal in the majority of CRF patients but
can be low or high in some patients.
(2) Serum total, ionized, protein-bound, and complexed calcium concentrations vary
considerably in dogs and cats with CRF. Differences in total calcium concentration
tend to be attributable primarily to changes in the complexed calcium component.
The complexed calcium fraction can vary from 6% to 39% of serum total calcium in
dogs with CRF
Errors in interpretation of calcium status occur when serum total calcium concentration is evaluated instead
of ionized calcium concentration. Serum ionized calcium concentration cannot be predicted from total
calcium concentration or any other combined parameters.
(3) Serum total calcium concentrations are an unreliable predictor of ionized calcium
status in CRF. Measurement of serum ionized calcium concentration is the method
  so e ss   s    s
(a) Dogs. In a recent study, 22% of 490 CRF dogs were classified as hypercalcemic
and 19% were classified as hypocalcemic on the basis of serum total calcium
concentrations. Using serum ionized calcium concentrations, however, 9%
of the CRF dogs were classified as hypercalcemic and 36% were classified as
hypocalcemic. Serum total calcium concentration incorrectly predicted serum
ionized calcium concentration in 36% of dogs with CRF. Use of an adjustment
the amount of misdiagnosis.
(b) Cats. In 102 cats with CRF, 20% were classified as hypercalcemic, and 11% were
classified as hypocalcemic based on serum total calcium concentration. Using
serum ionized calcium concentrations, 29% were classified as hypercalcemic, and
10% were classified as hypocalcemic. Serum total calcium concentration incor-
rectly predicted serum ionized calcium concentration in 32% of cats with CRF.
162
CHAPTER 5  Chronic Renal Failure
(4) Hypocalcemia.
(a) Dogs. The percentage of hypocalcemic CRF dogs is underestimated when
using serum total calcium concentration to evaluate calcium status. Based on
serum ionized calcium concentration, between 30% and 40% of CRF dogs can
be expected to be hypocalcemic.
(b) Between 8% and 15% of cats with CRF have been reported to be hypocalce-
mic based on serum or plasma total calcium concentration determinations. In a
study of 102 cats with CRF, 10% were found to have ionized hypocalcemia.
(c) The Mass Law Effect decreases serum calcium as a consequence of increased
serum phosphorus concentration. The amounts of calcium and phosphorus
that can remain in solution together are defined by the [Ca(mg/dL)] × [Pi(mg/
dL)] product. When this value is greater than 60 to 70, soft tissue mineraliza-
tion may occur. Decreased production of calcitriol by the diseased kidneys also
results in impaired intestinal absorption of calcium.
(d) Vitamin D activation (conversion of 25-hydroxycholecalciferol to 1,25-dihy-
droxycholecalciferol) occurs primarily within mitochondria of the proximal
tubules. This activation becomes limited with advanced loss of nephron mass
and phosphorus retention.
(e) Hypocalcemia in CRF usually is asymptomatic (i.e., tetany is not observed)
because metabolic acidosis leads to an increase in the ionized component of total
serum calcium. This occurs because of a decrease in net negative charge on plasma
 proteins that occurs during acidosis which reduces protein binding of calcium
(5) Hypercalcemia.
(a) Dogs. In 490 dogs with CRF, 22% were classified as hypercalcemic based on
serum total calcium concentration. When ionized calcium concentration was
evaluated, only 9% were hypercalcemic. Hypercalcemia was greatly overesti-
mated in dogs with CRF when serum total calcium was measured.
(b) Cats. In 102 cats with CRF, 20% were classified as hypercalcemic based on
serum total calcium concentration. When ionized calcium concentration was
evaluated, 29% were hypercalcemic. Hypercalcemia was underestimated in
cats with CRF when serum total calcium was measured.
Hypercalcemia can contribute to CKD, and CKD can result in hypercalcemia. Measurement of serum ionized
 calcium concentration is helpful because only ionized hypercalcemia can cause CKD.
(c) Hypercalcemia may further damage the kidney by causing renal vasoconstric-
tion and mineralization of the interstitium and tubular basement membranes.
(d) Possible mechanisms of ionized hypercalcemia in renal failure include reduced
urinary excretion of calcium due to very low GFR, decreased renal degradation
of PTH, unregulated parathyroid gland secretion of PTH, and increased PTH
set point for calcium. Decreased numbers of calcium-sensing receptors due to
loss of tubular mass or decreased receptor upregulation due to calcitriol deficits
also could contribute to decreased urinary excretion of calcium.
(e) In some hypercalcemic patients with renal failure it can be difficult to deter-
mine which occurred first, the renal failure or the hypercalcemia. Careful con-
sideration of historical, physical, laboratory, and radiographic findings usually
facilitates this decision. Measurement of serum ionized calcium concentration
is essential in these instances. If the serum ionized calcium concentration is
normal or low, then the noted increase in serum total calcium concentration
was most likely a consequence of CRF and not the cause of CRF.
Chronic Renal Failure  CHAPTER 5163
GLUCOSE
(a) Peripheral insulin resistance and mild fasting hyperglycemia (<200 mg/dL) are
common in uremia.
decreased insulin secretion.
(c) This finding usually is not clinically relevant.
Acid-Base Balance
a. Mild metabolic acidosis (decreased pH) that is well compensated (decreased pCO2) is
common in patients with stable CRF.
(1) The metabolic acidosis of CRF usually is not severe despite development of posi
tive balance for H+ ions. The relatively mild decrease in plasma HCO- concentra
tion observed in CRF is a consequence of the large reservoir of buffer (e.g., calcium
carbonate) in bone. The metabolic acidosis of CRF contributes to renal osteodystro
phy and represents yet another example of the trade-off hypothesis.
(2) In a recent study, metabolic acidosis was documented in 53% of cats with advanced
CRF but in only 15% of cats with mild CRF.
(3) The metabolic acidosis of CRF is hyperchloremic (normal anion gap) early in its
course and normochloremic (high anion gap) later in its course when acid metabo-
lites that titrate HCOs- have accumulated as unmeasured anions (e.g., phosphate,
sulfate, organic anions).
(4) Effects of the metabolic acidosis of CRF that are "adaptive" include preservation
of serum ionized calcium concentration by the effects of acidosis on the charge
of plasma proteins and shifting of the hemoglobin-oxygen saturation curve to the
right with improved tissue delivery of oxygen. The latter effect partially compen-
sates for the anemia of CRF.
b. The main cause of metabolic acidosis in progressive renal disease is limitation of renal
ammonium excretion.
(1) The chronically diseased kidney maintains H+ ion balance primarily by enhanced
renal ammoniagenesis from glutamine. Absolute ammonium excretion falls during
progressive CKD, but ammonium excretion is markedly increased when expressed
per remnant nephron. On a per nephron basis, the diseased kidney can increase its
ammonium excretion threefold to fivefold.
(2) This adaptive mechanism is maximal when GFR falls to 10% to 20% of normal.
 a  ao a  c  s s a d s 
fixed acid load and a new steady state is established at a lower than normal plasma
HCO- concentration. Compensation may remain adequate until GFR falls to 5%
of normal but such patients are in a precarious state of balance that easily may be
disrupted by other disease states (e.g., acute diarrhea).
Hormonal Status
PARATHYROID HORMONE
(1) Hyperparathyroidism is a consistent finding in progressive renal disease when
sensitive and specific assays are used to detect PTH. PTH concentrations cannot
be predicted from creatinine, calcium, or phosphorus concentrations, and must be
measured for accurate assessment.
A single serum measurement of PTH in the normal range cannot rule out the possibility of an increase from
 the animal's own normal baseline concentration. Repeated measurements may be helpful in documenting
renal secondary hyperparathyroidism.
164
CHAPTER 5 ■ Chronic Renal Failure
(2) PTH is increased above the normal range in patients with more advanced CRF.
(a) PTH may be increased in an individual animal but still be within the labora-
tory's reference range.
(b) Small increases in PTH in dogs and cats with early renal disease may not be
detectable unless the individual animal's baseline PTH concentration was
determined previously.
 s iss  s r p  ()
explained by the effect of phosphorus retention on serum ionized calcium
roidism has been elucidated.
(i) Reduction in GFR decreases phosphate excretion and results in hyperphos-
phatemia.
(ii)  Hyperphosphatemia causes a reciprocal decrease in serum ionized calcium
concentration by the Mass Law Effect ([Ca] × [Pi] = constant). The contribu-
tion of the Mass Law Effect currently is thought to be small because a very
Araa e annpcnd ci pambar si uogenuanuon snroudsoud ui aueu aen
 small change in serum calcium concentration.
(i) Ionized hypocalcemia stimulates the parathyroid glands to synthesize and
secrete PTH.
(iv) The increase in PTH stimulates increased renal excretion of phosphate
and increased release of calcium and phosphate from bone, which returns
serum phosphorus and ionized calcium concentrations to normal. Some of
the increased calcium is due to an indirect effect of PTH on the intestine
from increased synthesis of calcitriol.
GFR
ml/min
PO4
4.02-
mg/dL
4.00
10.00-
Ca
mg/dL
9.98
PTH
40-
units
20-
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Time (months)
FIGURE 5-7 Development ofrenal secondary hyperparathyroidism—classic theory. Step 1 is the loss of nephron
mass by some chronic disease process. With every loss of nephron mass there is a small increase in circulating
phosphorus (step 2). Ionized calcium decreases (step 3) as a consequence of the increase in the serum phosphorus.
PTH increases (step 4) in response to the decreased ionized calcium. This theory ignores the important genomic
effects of calcitriol required to inhibit PTH synthesis (shown in Figure 5-8).
Chronic Renal Failure ■ CHAPTER 5
165
(v) PTH decreases the fractional reabsorption of phosphate in the kidney by
decreasing the tubular reabsorptive maximum (Tmax) for phosphate. This
effect initially decreases serum phosphorus concentration to within normal
limits as more phosphorus is excreted into the urine. The limit of this com-
0h %et Aaexoidde oi saupap Y uaum pauoean si asudsan Aroesuad
 20% of normal. As GFR declines further, hyperphosphatemia occurs.
(d) The effect of phosphorus retention and loss of tubular mass on renal calcitriol pro-
Arepuonas leuan jo puaopaaap roy uoneuendxa aneae ue sisaans uoonn
hyperparathyroidism called the calcitriol trade-off hypothesis in which the genomic
effects of calcitriol on the synthesis of PTH are most important (Figure 5-8).
(i)Phosphorus retention and hyperphosphatemia inhibit renal 1α-hydroxylase,
which impairs conversion of 25-hydroxycholecalciferol to 1,25-dihydroxy-
cholecalciferol (calcitriol).
(ii)  Calcitriol normally causes decreased synthesis and secretion of PTH by the
Cl anp d u panied si dool yeqpaay aaneaau s puelo pioraueied
decreased renal production of calcitriol. In addition, there are decreased
numbers of parathyroid gland calcitriol receptors in uremia with a resultant
 decrease in the responsiveness of the parathyroid glands to the inhibitory
effect of calcitriol on PTH synthesis and release.
Loss of Nephron Mass
During Chronic Renal Failure
↓ Proximal
↓GFR
↑Ca+
tubules
↑Serum
phosphorus
↑ Calcitriol
↓Activity
↑Activity
1,Alpha
1,Alpha
hydroxylase
hydroxylase
↑ PTH
Ca++
↓ Calcitriol
synthesis
release
↓Gene inhibition
in parathyroid gland
FGURE 5-8  Development of renal secondary hyperparathyroidism—calcitriol trade-off hypothesis. Chronic
renal diseases result in the loss of tubular mass. Since calcitriol is synthesized within the renal tubules, deficits of
calcitriol synthesis occur. Increases in phosphorus burden within the body also contribute to decreased calcitriol as
activity of the l-alpha-hydroxyalse system within the renal tubules is impaired. Circulating calcitriol provides an
 important negative effect on PTH synthesis by inhibition of gene transcription within the parathyroid gland cell
mucleus. The combination of low calcitriol and low ionized calcium allows high levels of PTH to be synthesized
and secreted. The higher levels of PTH upregulate the activity of the l-alpha-hydroxylase system within the renal
tubules, returming calcitriol production to normal (if there is sufficient residual renal tubular mass). The restored
calcitriol concentrations in the circulation are maintained at the expense of a higher-than-normal PTH. There is a
 negative impact from chronically high PTH levels on a variety of organs including the kidneys.
166
CHAPTER 5 ■ Chronic Renal Failure
(ii) The effects of calcitriol on PTH secretion normally arise, in part, from its
ability to induce synthesis of the calcium receptor in parathyroid gland
cells.
(iv) Thus, decreased calcitriol production, decreased numbers of parathyroid
gland calcitriol receptors, and decreased numbers of calcium receptors all
play roles in the development of renal secondary hyperparathyroidism.
CALCITRIOL
(1) Serum calcitriol concentrations are normal in most dogs and cats in the early stages
of CRF due to the stimulatory effect of high PTH concentration on renal production
of calcitriol. Given the high PTH concentration, however, even normal concentra-
tions of calcitriol may be considered inappropriate. In fact, the high PTH concen-
tration maintains relatively normal serum calcitriol concentration during early to
moderate CRF.
(2) Serum calcitriol concentrations are low in patients with advanced CRF.
THYROID HORMONE CONCENTRATIONS
(1) Thyroid hormone concentrations may be decreased in patients with CRF.
(a) CRF is a nonthyroidal illness that results in lower measured concentrations of
thyroid hormones.
(b) Lower thyroxine (T4) concentrations can cause confusion in the diagmosis of
hyperthyroidism in older cats with CRF and hyperthyroidism (see Chapter 16,
Miscellaneous Syndromes).
of hypothyroidism and inappropriate treatment with L-thyroxine.
PLASMA CORTISOL CONCENTRATIONS
(1) Plasma cortisol concentrations may be normal to slightly increased in patients with
CRF.
RENIN-ANGIOTENSIN-ALDOSTERONE SYNDROME ACTIVATION (RAAS)
(1) RAAS activation contributes to systemic hypertension and to adverse effects in
chronically diseased kidneys.
ERYTHROPOIETIN
(1) Erythropoietin is discussed below under endocrine replacement therapy.
Urinalysis
a. Isosthenuria develops when 67% of nephrons become nonfunctional (USG 1.007-
-asa (aaoqe aas) eanoze jo iasuo rane Aqe unuauon uan n sie (io1
b. Submaximally concentrated urine (USG <1.040 in cats and <1.030 in dogs) in associa-
tion with azotemia suggests intrinsic renal disease. Some cats with intrinsic CKD still
can concentrate urine to USG >1.045.
c. Proteinuria may indicate increased disease severity or progression in patients with
CKD. Persistent severe proteinuria without active sediment suggests primary glomer
ular disease (see Chapter 7, Diseases of the Glomerulus)
d. Pyuria and bacteriuria suggest UTI but do not localize it.
(1) Bacterial UTI is common in cats with CRF.
(2) UTI may be present despite the presence of an inactive urinary sediment, especially
in cats with CRF.
Diagnostic Imaging
a.Decreased renal size is compatible with CRF but normal renal size does not rule out
CRF (Figure 5-9).
b. Irregularly shaped kidneys suggest CRF.
Chronic Renal Failure ■ CHAPTER 5
167
B
FGURE 5-9  Chronic renal disease radiology. Note small and irregular kidneys. A, Both kidneys are small
compared with the length of L2. Arrows point to irregular flattened areas. B, Note disparity between left and right
kidney sizes. The left kidney (arrow heads) is small compared with the length of L2, while the right kidney is slightly
enlarged (srmall arrows). (Courtesy of Dr. Paul Barthez, Ghent, Belgium.)
RtKidney
Dist2.60cm
FGURE 5-10  Chronic renal disease ultrasonography of a cat. Note hyperechogenic and irregular renal cortex,
loss of corticomedullary junction definition, and small size (2.6 cm length shown between + signs). (Courtesy of
Dr. Valerie Samii, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.)
c. Renal ultrasonography often shows increased echogenicity of renal tissue, but echo-
 genicity can be normal despite advanced renal disease (Figure 5-10).
d.
 Some CKD (especially in cats) can be associated with enlarged kidneys (e.g. polycystic
renal disease, renal lymphoma).
e.
 Enlargement of the left ventricle may be observed on thoracic radiographs or echocar
diography as a consequence of systemic hypertension.
Differentiation of Acute Renal Failure from Chronic Renal Failure
a.
 Sometimes it is difficult to determine whether the animal is suffering from ARF or CRF.
b. Differentiation is essential because ARF is a potentially reversible disease process
whereas CRF is not.
168  CHAPTER 5 ■ Chronic Renal Failure
c. The magnitude of azotemia does not differentiate ARF from CRF.
d. Renal size is small to normal in CRF and normal to large in ARF. Some CRDs in
[e 'assp Kau osaskiod a) shau pareua m paenosse are se
lymphoma).
e. A history of previous polyuria and polydipsia often (but not always) is present in
patients with CRF and should be absent in patients with ARF.
f.Nonregenerative anemia often (but not always) is detected at presentation in patients
with CRF but not initially in patients with ARF. Patients with ARF can, however.
develop anemia as a result of ongoing blood loss and repeated collection of blood
samples.
g.
 Weight loss and poor hair coat often (but not always) are present at presentation in
patients with CRF but usually (although not always) absent in patients with ARF.
h. Enlarged parathyroid glands on ultrasound examination may be observed in patients
(  1-a)  s   m o s ao 1n  
parathyroid glands than did normal dogs (2.0-4.6 mm length) and those with ARF
(2.4-4.0 mm length). The size of parathyroid glands in dogs seems to be related to body
weight.
i. Increased carbamylated hemoglobin concentration or nail creatinine concentration. In
one study, carbamylated hemoglobin concentrations were higher in dogs with ARF
and CRF than normal dogs, and dogs with CRF had significantly higher concentrations
than did dogs with ARF. Neither test is routinely performed by commercial diagnostic
laboratories.
j.Hypothermia occasionally is present in patients with ARF, but is absent in patients
with CRF except terminally.
k. Hyperkalemia may be observed with development of oliguria or anuria in patients
with ARF or CRF. Hyperkalemia should be absent in patients with polyuric renal fail-
ure whether it is CRF or ARF.
1. Blood pressure may be low in both decompensated CRF and ARF before treatment,
presumably as a consequence of dehydration and volume depletion. Hypertension
may be present after volume expansion in both patients with ARF and CRF.
m.  Renal biopsy may be the only way to differentiate CRF from ARF. Renal biopsy is not
warranted when the kidneys are small and irregular and azotemia is advanced
TREATMENT OF CHRONIC RENAL FAILURE
A. Box 5-1 provides a checklist of possible treatments for CRF, and Box 5-2 provides a status
checklist to review during treatment of CRF.
General Principles of Management
1. Ideally, match treatment to the IRIS stage of renal disease. Most available studies of treat-
ment have been performed in dogs and cats in IRIS stages 3 and 4 of CRD.
 2. Search for potentially reversible causes of renal failure (e.g. pyelonephritis, hypercalce-
mia, obstructive nephropathy).
 3. Eliminate reversible factors that may be aggravating renal failure.
a.Do not pass judgment on the animal until it has been rehydrated. Appropriate intrave-
nous fluid therapy should be provided to resolve prerenal azotemia. Complete rehy-
dration may require 1 to 5 days.
b. Concurrent systemic or urinary tract bacterial infections should be treated with appro-
priate antibiotics.
Chronic Renal Failure ■ CHAPTER 5169
B0X5-1
CHECKLIST OF POSSIBLE TREATMENTS FOR COMPENSATED CHRONIC RENAL FAILURE
First Level of Treatment
Change to renal therapeutic diet——-reduced phosphorus intake is most important — commercially available or
homemade-wet foods better than dry if possible
Fresh water available at all times
Use intestinal phosphate binders to effect of serum phosphorus concentration——aim for mid-normal range;
aluminum or calcium salts used most often
Treat urinary or systemic infection
Avoid anesthesia or exposure to nephrotoxicants when possible
Second Level of Treatment
Subcutaneous fluids if not maintaining hydration
Potassium supplementation if hypokalemia is overt or borderline
Optimize phosphate restriction (diet or binders) based on PTH or serum Pi — consider dose or class change for
phosphate binders
surgical procedures
Third Level of Treatment
Provide ACE inhibition for renoprotection and antiproteinuric effects, independent of normal systemic blood pressure
Blood pressure control optimized for renal patient—multiple drug therapy or dose escalation as needed to maintain
systolic blood pressure at <145 mm Hg
Calcitriol—daily or intermittent dosing protocol to control PTH and prevent parathyroid gland hyperplasia——base
doses on ionized calcium and PTH
EPO if patient approaches transfusion dependency—not for minor anemia
Fourth Level of Treatment
Renal transplantation——consider for selected cats
Chronic dialysis—acute on chronic decompensation—-temporary stabilization
Emerging or Unproven Treatments
Epakitin—chitosan&calcium carbonate powder for intestinal phosphate binding
 d  g    e l
Azodyl—probiotic to reduce azotemia following bacterial utilization
Kremezin (Covalzin or AST-120)—nonselective sorbent to remove uremic toxins from intestinal lumen
Cinacalcet ——calcimimetic to lower PTH, calcium, and phosphorus
170
CHAPTER 5 ■ Chronic Renal Failure
BOX 5-2
STATUS CHECKLIST DURING TREATMENT OF THE PATIENT WITH CHRONIC RENAL FAILURE
Nutritional Status
Body weight
Body condition score
Muscle condition score
Serum albumin
Total protein
BUN
Cholesterol
Poor,acceptable,excellent;worse,stable,improving
Serum Phosphorus Control
Poor,acceptable,excellent;worse,stable,mproving
Serum Calcium Control
Serum total calcium
Serum ionized calcium (preferred)
Poor,acceptable,excellent;worse,stable,mroving
Serum Potassium Control
Poof, acceptable, excellent; worse, stable, improving
Acid-Base Control
Blood gas (preferred); HCOg on profile
Poor,acceptable,excellent;worse,stable,improving
Systemic Blood Pressure Control
Poor, acceptable,excellent; worse, stable, improving
Proteinuria Control
Urinary protein-to-creatinine ratio; microalbuminuria testing
Poor, acceptable, excellent; worse, stable, improving
PTH Control
Poor, acceptable,excellent; worse, stable, improving
CKD Progression Control
BUN
Creatinine
Phosphorus
Proteinuria
Renal size
Systemic blood pressure
Poor,acceptable,excellent;worse,stable,improving
Chronic Renal Failure ■ CHAPTER 5
171
4. Maintain fluid, electrolyte, acid base, and caloric balance while preventing accumulation
of metabolic waste products.
 5. Counteract the effects of the lost endocrine functions of the kidney.
Dietary Management
 1. Provide free access to water at all times. Do not restrict water in patients with polyuria and
polydipsia because dehydration will rapidly ensue.
2.1
 Diets designed to be helpful in the management of CRF in dogs and cats are restricted
in protein, phosphate, and sodium while containing supplemental potassium, alkali, and
omega-3 fatty acids.
a.
 Several pet food manufacturers (Hill's, Nestle-Purina, Royal-Canin, Iams) provide
renal therapeutic diets for dogs and cats.
 b. Homemade diets may be preferred by some owners who wish to prepare food for their
pets (Tables 5-4, 5-5, and 5-6). We recommend the purchase of an inexpensive diet scale
that measures grams or ounces to facilitate preparation of these recipes.
TABLE 5-4
 Homemade Diet for Dogs in Chronic Renal Failure
Ingredients
Grams
Cooked white rice
May substitute rice baby cereal
Can flavor either above with meat broth during cooking
237
Regular cooked beef, retain the fat
78
Large boiled egg
20
White bread
50
Vegetable oil
3
Calcium carbonate
1.5
lodized salt 
0.5
Total
390
Aso feed one human adult vitamin-mineral tablet daily
Nutrient Analysis - Dry Matter Basis
Dry matter %
41.0
 Energy kcal/100g
445
Protein %
21.1
Fat %
13.7
Linoleic acid %
1.8
Crude fiber %
1.4
Calcium %
0.43
 Phosphorus %
0.22
 Potassium %
0.26
Sodium %
0.33
Magnesium %
0.091
Balanced reduced-protein/low-phosphorus homemade formula for an 18-kg adult dog. Daily food as fed.
(Remillard RL, Paragon BM, Crane SW, et al: Making pet foods at home. In Hand MS, Thatcher CD, Remillard RL, Roudebush P, editors: Smaf animaf
Qinicaf nutrition, ed 4, Marceline Mo., 2000, Walsworth Publishing, p 169.)
172
CHAPTER 5 Chronic Renal Failure
TABLE 5-5
 Homemade Diet for Cats with Chronic Renal Failure
Ingredients
Grams
Cooked white rice
May substitute rice baby cereal
Havor either with meat broth during cooking
98
Cooked chicken liver
21
Cooked white chicken
21
Vegetable oil
7
Calcium carbonate
0.7
lodized salt
0.5
 Salt substitute (KCI)
0.5
Total
149
Also feed one-half human adult vitamin-mineral tablet daily.
Add one-half to one 500 mg taurine tablet
Nutrient Analysis-Dry Matter Basis
Dry matter %
37.8
 Energy kcal/100g
458
Protein %
24.4
Fat %
17.5
Linoleic acid %
7.9
Crude fiber %
0.85
Calcium %
0.54
Phosphorus %
0.29
Potassium %
0.66
 Sodium %
0.42
 Magnesium %
0.09
Balanced reduced-protein/low-phosphorus formula for a 4.5 kg adult cat. Daily food as fed. (Remillard RL, Paragon BM, Crane SW, et al: Making
pet foods at home . In Hand MS, Thatcher CD, Remillard RL, Roudebush P, editors: Smaff animaf clinicaf nutrition, ed 4, Marceline Mo., 2000,
Walsworth Publishing, p 169.)
3. Protein restriction.
a.Although widely advocated, the ability of dietary protein restriction to ameliorate clin-
b. Potential benefits are a reduction in uremic symptomatology by decreasing the pro-
duction of toxic metabolites of protein metabolism in patients with overt azotemia and
decreasing hyperfiltration in remnant nephrons.
c. Moderate protein restriction is indicated to relieve uremic symptomatology and pro-
 mote patient well-being in patients with moderate to severe azotemia, but moderate
 protein restriction does not appear to prevent hyperfiltration in dogs and cats. Protein
restriction as a single dietary change does not seem to provide protection against pro-
 gression of renal disease in dogs and cats with advanced CRD. Low protein diets should
(see Chapter 7, Diseases of the Glomerulus). Low protein diets also are restricted in
phosphorus, which may provide benefits previously attributed to the protein restriction.
Chronic Renal Failure ■ CHAPTER 5
173
TABLE 5-6
 Homemade Diet for Either Dogs or Cats with Chronic Renal Failure
Ingredients
Amount
Cooked meat:beef,chicken,pork,eggs
1.5 cups
Substitute:
2% Cottage cheese
2 cups
Salmon, tuna 
1.5 cups
Peanut butter
12 tablespoons
Soybean curd (tofu)
3 cups
Cooked starch: rice, pasta, potato
4 cups
Vegetable oil
1 teaspoon
Calcium carbonate-Tums, 500 mg tablets
2
Children's complete vitamin-mineral supplement
1
For cats, taurine, 500 mg tablet
Small amounts of fruits, vegetables, fats (butter, margarine,
mayonnaise, salad dressing), and desserts (cake, cookies,
unsalted popcom, sherbet may be added to increase
palatability as needed
Approximate Nutritional Analysis
Calories
1200 kcal (20% protein, 40% carbohydrate, 40% fat)
Protein
60 g
Calcium
600mg
Phosphorus
400mg
 Potassium
500mg
Sodium
140mg
Reduced-phosphonus, reduced-protein diet for dogs and cats. This diet is designed to combine six servings of protein with four servings of carbo-
hydrates. Servings are derived from standards of human nutrition that can be consulted for alternate sources.
(Buffington CA, Holloway C, Abood S: Clinical dietetics. In Manuaf of veterinary dietetics. St Louis, 2004, Elsevier, p 108).
d.The development of protein-calorie malnutrition always is a concern in dogs and cats
with CKD, but even more so when such patients are consuming low protein diets.
e. When in the course of CKD protein restriction should be started is uncertain. It is not
recommended early in the course of CKD before nitrogenous waste products accu-
mulate. If there is evidence of progression (e.g., progressively less concentrated urine,
increasing proteinuria, progressive changes in the kidneys on repeated ultrasound
examinations) even in patients without overt azotemia, dietary intervention may be
 prescribed before the animal becomes systemically ill. Once the animal becomes sys-
temically ill, it will be less likely to tolerate a change in diet.
f.
 Original guidelines for protein restriction in dogs with CRF were introduced in 1972.
At that time, 0.6 g/lb/day of high quality (biologic value 90-100) protein was recom-
mended. Guidelines for institution of this diet were as follows:
(1) BUN stable and >80 mg/dL.
(2) Serum creatinine stable and >2.5 mg/dL.
T/ t'g< pue aqs snoqdsoqd mas (e)
174
4CHAPTER5ChronicRenal Failure
This degree of dietary protein restriction may lead to malnutrition in dogs and is
currently not recommended. Today, a minimum protein intake of nearly twice this
amount (i.e., 1 g/lb/day) is recommended for dogs with CRF.
 g. Current guidelines for instituting dietary therapy are BUN stable and >60 to 80 mg/
dL and serum creatinine concentration stable and >2.0 to 2.5 mg/dL. There is no clear
evidence that dietary intervention provides any benefits to dogs or cats that are not yet
azotemic
h. Feeding moderately restricted protein diets (e.g., 15%-17% protein) to dogs with CRF
is preferable to feeding extremely high or low protein diets. A gradual transition from
the previous diet to the prescribed diet over 2 to 4 weeks is recommended.
i. While consuming a low protein diet with adequate caloric intake, BUN will decrease
due to dietary maripulation alone and will no longer be a good indicator of renal
function. A decrease in BUN when the animal is on a low protein diet does not imply
improved renal function, however. Serum creatinine concentration is not affected to
any relevant extent by a change in dietary composition.
 j.The nutritional needs of cats differ from dogs. Dogs require that a minimum of approx-
imately 4% to 5% of calories come from protein whereas cats require that a minimum of
20% of calories come from protein. These represent minimum requirements and do not
provide for bodily nitrogen reserves. Cats also seem to prefer diets higher in fat and
require a source of taurine in their diet. It has been recommended that cats with renal
failure receive a minimum of approximately 2 g/lb/day protein.
k. Stable body weight, stable serum albumin concentration, and decreased BUN are indi-
cations that a low protein diet is being used successfully.
 ( g-) s  m a g as  ps  ss  1
slowing the rate of progression of renal disease whereas others have not found a ben-
eficial effect of protein restriction.
(1) A low protein diet may limit interstitial inflammation and fibrosis and glomerulo-
sclerosis by decreasing proteinuria and its deleterious effects in rats with experi
mentally induced models of renal failure.
(2) As a single dietary modification, however, protein restriction has not been deter-
mined to prevent progression of CRD.
(3) Prevention of hyperfiltration by feeding an extremely low protein diet may not be
feasible in dogs without induction of malnutrition.
m.  Low protein diets may ameliorate uremic symptomatology in patients with marked
azotemia, but this effect has not been specifically studied in dogs and cats with natu-
rally occurring CRF.
4. Dietary phosphorus restriction.
a.Dietary phosphorus restriction is the most valuable dietary modification for dogs and
cats with CRF The beneficial effect of phosphorus restriction is independent of protein
restriction in dogs and cats with experimental CRF.
 Dietary phosphorus restriction alone or in conjunction with intestinal phosphate binders is the most
 important therapeutic intervention in dogs and cats with stable compensated CRF.
(1) Dietary phosphorus restriction in CRF has been shown in cats and dogs to blunt or
reverse renal secondary hyperparathyroidism. Renal lesions are less severe, GFR is
better maintained and survival time is longer.
Chronic Renal Failure ■ CHAPTER 5
175
Maintenance vs. Renal Diet
300-
ake
250
int
kcal
200
8
150
ed
100
50
1
Dog
Cat
Renal
RenalHumans
diet-
diet-
high
low
 FGURE 5-11  Dietary phosphorus intake between dogs and cats eating commercial or renal therapeutic foods
compared with average westerm diet of humans. Note that dogs and cats consume five and six times as much
phosphorus as the average human, which makes it difficult to achieve adequate dietary phosphorus restriction.
(Developed by Nutritional Support Services, The Ohio State University College of Veterinary Medicine, Dr. Tony
Buffington, 2006.).
(2) Dogs consume five times more, and cats six times more phosphorus than humans
consuming a typical Western diet. With such a high initial consumption of phos
phorus, it is difficult to achieve the degree of phosphorus restriction in dogs and
cats that is recommended for human patients with CKD (Figure 5-11).
 b. Although the role of dietary protein restriction is less clear, diets restricted in protein
are by nature also restricted in phosphorus and represent the orly practical method to
provide dietary phosphorus restriction.
(1) Extremely phosphorus-restricted diets are unpalatable because of the extent of pro
tein restriction necessary to provide adequate phosphorus restriction.
c.A 0.44% phosphorus diet caused less renal disease progression than a 1.5% phospho-
rus diet in experimental studies with dogs, with 94% reduction in renal mass. Both
groups were fed identical amounts of protein.
d.1
Hyperphosphatemia can be prevented or reversed in dogs with experimentally induced
CRD by reducing dietary intake of phosphorus in proportion to the decrease in GFR.
e. Dogs with naturally occurring CRF managed with a diet that contained restricted
 phosphate (as well as restricted protein and sodium), however, did not show improve-
ment in renal secondary hyperparathyroidism based on measurement of serum PTH
concentrations. In a study of cats with naturally occurring CRF, treatment with a pro-
tein- and phosphorus-restricted diet and phosphate binders did correct renal secondary
hyperparathyroidism based on serum PTH concentrations in most cats.
f. Dietary phosphate restriction relieves the inhibition of renal 1α-hydroxylase caused
by phosphorus retention and results in increased calcitriol production by the kidneys.
The increase in calcitriol enhances intestinal absorption of calcium, increases ionized
calcium concentration, and results in decreased PTH synthesis and secretion as a result
 of the negative feedback effects of calcitriol on the parathyroid glands.
g. Later in the course of progressive CKD, the kidneys are unable to produce sufficient cal-
citriol to promote normal intestinal absorption of calcium or suppress PTH synthesis.
Regardless, phosphorus restriction in advanced CKD still decreases PTH secretion by
mechanisms that are independent of serum iorized calcium or calcitriol concentrations.
176
CHAPTER 5  Chronic Renal Failure
h. Parathyroid hyperplasia during CKD is partially dependent on action of transforming
 growth factor alpha (TGFα) on the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). Calcitriol
blocks this effect, whereas phosphorus stimulates it. This effect is thought to be the
major antiproliferative mechanism that calcitriol exerts on the parathyroid glands.
i.  Phosphorus restriction may prevent the progression of renal disease by blunting renal
secondary hyperparathyroidism, thus preventing renal interstitial mineralization,
inflammation, and fibrosis. Phosphorus restriction also may have direct benefits that
are independent of PTH control.
j. These observations form the basis for the use of phosphorus restriction in the medical
management of CRF. Dietary phosphate restriction alone may be adequate in patients
with IRIS stage 1 and early IRIS stage 2 CKD.
k. Renal secondary hyperparathyroidism was documented in 84% of cats with naturally
occurring CRF and responded (as assessed by serum phosphorus and PTH concen-
trations) to dietary phosphorus restriction in most cats. Some cats required intestinal
phosphate binders to achieve adequate phosphate restriction.
1.  Diets moderately restricted in phosphorus may be adequate (based on normal serum
phosphorus and PTH concentrations) during the early stages of CKD. Diet alone, how-
ever, is unlikely to be successful in adequately controlling phosphorus as CRD becomes
more advanced. In these instances, serum phosphorus concentration increases into or
above the upper limit of the normal reference range.
m.  Renal diets may successfully control serum phosphorus concentrations in dogs and
cats with naturally occurring CRF, but serum PTH concentrations do not necessarily
return to normal. In one study of dogs with naturally occurring CRF and another of
cats with stage 2 or 3 CRF, feeding commercial veterinary renal diets did not result in
decreases in serum PTH concentrations over a 2 year period in either species.
 n. When CRF is diagnosed, phosphorus restriction is initiated by feeding a low phospho-
rus, low protein diet.
0. If necessary, orally administered phosphorus binding agents are added to the treat-
ment regimen as necessary to maintain adequately decreased phosphorus and PTH
concentrations (see below)
5. Reduction of intestinal phosphate absorption.
a. Phosphorus-binding agents trap phosphorus in the lumen of the intestinal tract and
increase its excretion in feces (Figure 5-12). These products generally should be given with
meals or within 2 hours of feeding to maximize their ability to bind dietary phosphorus.
Dietary phosphorus binders work best when given with food or within 2 hours of feeding to maximize
 phosphorus binding in the gastrointestinal tract.
b. Aluminum hydroxide (Amphojel) initially is used at a dosage of 30 mg/kg every 8
hours or 45 mg/kg every 12 hours given with food. An attempt should be made to
maintain serum phosphorus concentration of <6.0 mg/dL. Higher doses are employed
as needed. Constipation is the most common adverse effect encountered during treat-
ment with aluminum-containing phosphorus binders, especially in cats. Treatment
with lactulose may alleviate constipation in affected cats.
(1) In human patients, chronic aluminum intoxication with resultant bone disease and
encephalopathy has been recognized as an important complication of aluminum-
containing phosphorus binders. In human medicine, it is felt that there is no safe
dosage of aluminum-containing phosphorus binder that will provide sufficient
phosphorus restriction without risk of aluminum intoxication. Consequently
Chronic Renal Failure ■ CHAPTER 5
177
Phosphate
Phosphates
binder
B
Vein"
A
B
In feces
Infeces
FGURE 5-12  Effect of orally administered phosphate binder to bind phosphate within the intestinal lumen,
preventing its absorption across the intestinal tract. Some binders undergo absorption across the intestine and
others do not. (Drawn by Tim Vojt.)
calcium-containing phosphorus binders replaced aluminum-containing phospho-
rus binders in human patients with CRF. It is not clear yet that aluminum intoxica-
tion is a problem in dogs and cats with CRF because they do not live as long with
their disease as human patients do. Consequently, aluminum-containing phos-
phorus binders are still used by most veterinary clinicians. The use of aluminum-
containing phosphorus binders in veterinary practice should be reassessed in the
 go puaean paaondu um rauol ai sien pue shop se aing
C. Sucralfate contains 200 mg aluminum per gram and can help lower serum phosphorus
in CRF.
d. Calcium carbonate (Tums: 500 mg CaCO; per tablet; Os Cal 500: 1.25 grams CaCO3
per tablet) also may be used at a starting dosage of 30 mg/kg every 8 hours or
45 mg/kg every 12 hours given with food. Calcium-based intestinal phosphorus bind-
ers were developed for use in human medicine because of concerns about aluminum
intoxication.
e. Calcium acetate is more effective than other calcium-containing phosphorus binders
 amd may be used ata slightly lower dosage. It is available in 667 mg capsules (PhosLo)
 or tablets (Calphron). The recommended dosage in human patients is 20 to 40 mg/kg
with each meal.
f. Animals should be monitored for development of hypercalcemia whenever calcium-
 containing phosphorus binders are used. Development of hypercalcemia is more likely
when calcium-containing phosphorus binders are used simultaneously with calcitriol.
 Non-calcium-containing phosphorus binders are preferred when dogs and cats with
CRF are also being treated with calcitriol.
 g. Sevelamer HCl (Renagel) is a relatively new phosphorus binder used in human
ou aae d uoo aeu m sien pue sop uo siaa si sisiep uo suaed
been reported.
(1) Sevelamer is a cross-linked polymeric resin that binds phosphorus and releases
chloride. It does not contain aluminum or calcium and is not systemically absorbed.
178CHAPTER 5■ Chronic Renal Failure
(2) Sevelamer lowers low density lipoprotein and total cholesterol concentrations, and
reduces the risk of vascular and renal calcification that occurs in human patients
(3) It is expensive, causes some ad verse gastrointestinal effects (e.g., constipation), and
has the potential to bind other substances (e.g., bile acids, cholesterol, vitamins) as
well as phosphorus. At extremely high dosages (6 to 100 times the recommended
dosage in humans), it may be associated with impaired absorption of folic acid and
vitamins K, D, and E.
(4) Initial reports suggested that sevelamer was similar in effectiveness to calcium
acetate in binding phosphorus, but with less risk of hypercalcemia. A recent study.
temia and calcium-phosphorus product.
(5) In humans, the dosage is 800 to 1600 mg taken with meals. Based on this dosage,
10 to 20 mg/kg every 8 hours given with food may be considered for use in small
animals.
(6) Tablets or capsules should not be crushed or opened because sevelamer is hydro-
philic and will expand in water.
h. Lanthanum carbonate (Fosrenol).
(1) Contains no aluminum and no calcium, is not absorbed from the gastrointestinal
tract, and acts as an efficient phosphorus binder. It is very expensive.
(2) IHts effects are similar to those of calcium carbonate but without risk of hypercalcemia
(3) Lanthanum is excreted primarily in bile and should not accumulate in patients
with renal failure, but its long-term safety is unknown.
(4) Toxicity studies in dogs show that lanthanum accumulates in many tissues (espe-
cially gastrointestinal tract, bone, and liver) during treatment. Tissue concentrations
remained high for longer than 6 months in dogs after treatment was discontinued.
(5) The use of lanthanum carbonate as a phosphorus binder has not been reported
in dogs and cats with naturally occurring CRF, but its use could be considered in
veterinary patients that fail to respond or experience adverse effects with other
phosphorus binders.
(6) The starting dosage in human patients is 250 to 500 mg orally with each meal.
The dosage is titrated every 2 to 3 weeks until an acceptable serum phosphorus
concentration is obtained. Most humans require between 500 and 1000 mg with
each meal to achieve serum phosphorus of <6.0 mg/dL. Thus, a starting dosage of
3 to 7 mg/kg every 8 hours with food could be considered in veterinary patients.
(7) The carbonate moiety of the salt also may be beneficial for control of metabolic
acidosis
(8) Lanthanum carbonate octahydrate (Lantharenol) has been recently approved in the
European Union as a feed additive for all feline diets, serving to reduce the phos
phorus availability.
i. Epakitin is a nutraceutical marketed to veterinarians for phosphorus control in CRF
patients.
(1) Contains the adsorbent chitosan (8% crab and shrimp shell extract) and 10% cal-
cium carbonate.
(2) Digestibility of dietary protein and phosphorus was decreased when it was admin-
istered to 10 normal cats and 6 cats with CRF.
(3) Its beneficial effects in dogs and cats with naturally occurring CRF have yet to be
demonstrated.
Chronic Renal Failure ■ CHAPTER 5
179
j.Due to the possibility that intestinal phosphate binders could impair absorption of
drugs, it is advisable to give other drugs 1 hour before or 3 hours after intestinal phos
phatebinders are administered.
k. If the patient is not hyperphosphatemic at the time of initial evaluation, phosphorus
restriction still may be beneficial in reversing existing renal secondary hyperparathy-
roidism. Fractional excretion of phosphorus can be monitored but is not a very sen-
sitive indicator of renal hyperparathyroidism. Al serum phosphorus determinations
should be made in the fasting state. Serial PTH determinations are an ideal but costly
6. Caloric needs.
a. Adequate nonprotein calories to maintain body condition should be provided by
carbohydrate and fat. Approximately 30 kcal/lb/day are recommended as a general
guideline, but older animals may eat fewer calories normally (e.g., 20 kcal/lb/day).
b. One study of rats with the remnant kidney model indicated that improvement in pro
teinuria and renal morphologic changes was due to reduced caloric intake and not
reduced protein intake. The mechanism of this effect is unknown, and its relevance for
cats and dogs with naturally occurring CRF is unclear.
7.Lipids.
a. Supplementation of the diet with omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) may
hasten progression of CRD whereas supplementation with omega-3 PUFA may be
renoprotective.
b. The ideal ratio of omega-6 to omega-3 PUFA in the diet is not known. Studies demon-
strating beneficial effects of omega-3 PUFA in dogs with renal ablation have employed
very low ratios (e.g., 0.2:1) that are not commercially achievable. An omega-6 to
omega-3 ratio of somewhere between 5:1 and 15:1 may be reasonable. Alternatively,
h z go wmn y vind g-eamo jo Aep/ g o I ym pauaanddns aq ues ap a
 4 weeks is thought to be necessary for potential benefits to be observed and additional
beneficial effects may occur over longer periods of time.
c. Increasing the amount of omega-3 PUFA relative to omega-6 PUFA in the diet decreases
 production of the pro-inflammatory, platelet aggregating, vasoconstrictive prostaglan-
din Thromboxane A2 (TXA2) and increases production of vasodilatory prostaglandins
(PGE, PGI) that have the potential to increase GFR and renal blood flow (RBF). These
effects may slow renal disease progression.
The ratio of omega-3 to omega-6 fatty acids impacts diseased kidneys. Larger amounts of omega-3 fatty
 acids confer renoprotection to patients with CKD.
d. Studies of dogs with the remnant kidney model of CRF have demonstrated benefi-
"g'a) uoneuauanddns vnd g-eauo oi pasoddo se vind c-eauo jo sioaa [e
decreased cholesterol and triglycerides, lower urinary eicosanoid excretion, reduction
in proteinuria, preservation of GFR, less severe renal morphologic changes).
e.  In a recent study of cats with CRF fed several different modified diets desigmed for cats
in CRF, median survival was 16 months in cats fed the modified diets compared with
7 months in cats fed conventional diets. Survival on one of the modified diets with a
very high content of eicosapentaenoic acid was 23 months, suggesting benefit from
omega-3 PUFA supplementation.
8. Sodium chloride.
a. Increased fractional sodium excretion in CRF allows maintenance of sodium balance
during the course of progressive renal disease.
081
CHAPTER5ChronicRenalFailure
 b. In dogs and cats with CRF and hypertension and in those with glomerular disease that
have sodium retention and edema, sodium restriction is advisable.
c. In the absence of edema, hypertension, primary glomerular disease, or congestive
heart failure, no abrupt changes in sodium intake should be made.
d. In one experimental study of cats with the remnant kidney model of CRF, sodium
supplementation had minimal effects on blood pressure but low sodium intake was
associated with decreased GFR, activation of RAAS, kaliuresis, and hypokalemia.
These results suggest that sodium restriction in cats with CRF could contribute to
 study, systemic hypertension was not adequately controlled by dietary salt restriction
alone.
e. Patients with CRF are less able to adjust to changes in dietary sodium load. Any
changes should be made slowly, beginning with a dietary intake of sodium similar to
the animal's previous diet and changing gradually over the next month to the desired
level of sodium intake. Many commercial pet foods provide more sodium than needed
(often approximately 1%), and commercial products marketed for dogs and cats with
 CRF often provide approximately 0.2% to 0.3% sodium. Gradually switching an ani-
 mal to one of these latter products will result in gradual sodium restriction.
9.Sodium bicarbonate.
a. The metabolic acidosis of CRF often is well compensated, and routine treatment may
not be necessary.
b. If metabolic acidosis is severe (serum bicarbonate concentration 12 mEq/L or less),
NaHCO may be added to the treatment regimen. The dosage should be adjusted to
maintain the serum bicarbonate concentration of 14 mEq/L or more. One teaspoor
of NaHCO; contains approximately 5 g of NaHCO; and 1300 mg sodium. Potassium
gluconate or potassium citrate are alternative sources of alkali that provide potassium
and do not pose the potential problem of additional sodium.
c. Consider adding sodium bicarbonate treatment only after a renal diet has been fed for
several weeks, because these diets are usually supplemented with alkali precursors
such as potassium citrate that may be sufficient to ameliorate the acidosis.
10. Potassium.
a.Hyperkalemia usually is not a problem in CRF. The kidneys can maintain normal
 serum potassium concentrations even when GFR is approximately 5% of normal if
urine volume is adequate.
b. Hypokalemia in dogs and cats with CRF may be treated with oral potassium gluco-
nate or citrate. The necessary dosage of potassium in cats usually is 2 to 4 mEq/day
whereas dogs may require as little as 2 or as much as 40 mEq/day depending on their
body size.
11.  Water-soluble vitamins (B complex and C) should be supplied in the diet of dogs and cats
with CRF because the ability of the diseased kidney to conserve these vitamins is dimin-
ished. Standard manufacturer-recommended dosages for multivitamin products can be
used on a daily or alternate day basis. Caution should be exercised to avoid oversupple-
mentation with fat-soluble vitamins A and D.
12. Several studies of dogs and cats with naturally occurring CRF have shown the benefits of
feeding veterinary renal diets as compared to maintenance diets. Feeding veterinary renal
diets was associated with increased survival time (up to as much as a twofold or more
increase in survival) and decreased occurrence of uremic crises. Veterinary renal diets dif-
fer from maintenance diets in many nutrients and minerals including protein, fat, cal-
cium, phosphorus, sodium, potassium, vitamin D, and omega-3 PUFA. It is unclear which
Chronic Renal Failure ■ CHAPTER 5
181
nutrient or mineral or combination of nutrients and minerals is responsible for these ben-
eficial effects.
Control of Vomiting and Inappetence
Suppression of Gastric Acid Production
a.H-receptor antagonists may have beneficial effects in CRF patients. Gastrin concen-
trations are increased in uremic dogs and cats. H-receptor antagonists block gastrin-
mediated increases in gastric acid secretion and may be helpful in the treatment of
hemorrhagic gastroenteritis in uremic dogs and cats. Although there are no studies
to document the clinical efficacy of this treatment, H-receptor antagonists have been
used in this setting for more than 20 years in our hospital and we subjectively feel they
decrease episodes of vomiting and increase food intake in dogs and cats with CRF We
usually prescribe H-receptor antagonists initially in CRF patients that have a history
of anorexia, vomiting, or weight loss. If serum gastrin is measured, the administration
 of H-receptor antagonists may cause an increase in circulating gastrin.
(1) The dosage of cimetidine is 5 to 10 mg/kg every 12 hours followed by 5 mg/
kg every 12 to 24 hours. Cimetidine inhibits hepatic metabolism of many drugs
by interference with microsomal enzymes or decreased hepatic blood flow and
caution should be exercised when using cimetidine with other drugs especially
ketoconazole, theophylline, phenytoin, propranolol, lidocaine, quinidine, procain-
amide, metronidazole, warfarin, and meperidine.
(2) Other H-blockers (e.g., ranitidine [Zantac], famotidine [Pepcid]) are less likely to
result in adverse drug reactions when used in combination with other drugs. In
addition, famotidine may be used every 24 hours at a dosage of 1 mg/kg in dogs
and cats.
b. Proton pump inhibitors (e.g., omeprazole [Prilosec]).
(1) These agents generally have been used when Hz-receptor antagonists have not
been effective.
(2) Reduction in cost now allows consideration for their more routine use in treatment
of uremic gastroenteritis.
(3) Proton pump inhibitors may be a preferred treatment for long-term control of acid
production.
Anti-Emetics
a.Metoclopramide.
(1) Some clinicians prefer metoclopramide as initial treatment for uremic gastroenteri-
tis instead of an Hz-receptor antagonist.
(2) Useful to decrease nausea and vomiting in patients with severe vomiting that is
thought to be centrally mediated.
(3) Can be used in conjunction with Hz-receptor antagonists if necessary.
(4) The recommended starting dosage is 0.2-0.4 mg/kg subcutaneously every 6 hours,
but a longer dosage interval (e.g., every 12 hours) may be necessary in CRF patients.
b. Chlorpromazine (0.5 mg/kg intramuscularly in dogs and cats) or promazine (2.2 mg/
kg intramuscularly in dogs and cats) may be used as a centrally acting anti-emetic in
hospitalized patients in uremic crisis. Central nervous system depression may be an
adverse effect due to the sedative properties of these drugs.
C.
- an ps e se ro (s p so u Asn  1o gong
sion (0.1 mg/kg/hr) may be effective for intractable vomiting in dogs.
d. Ondansetron is a serotonin antagonist that can be used as a very effective anti-emetic
at a dosage of 0.1-0.2 mg/kg subcutaneously in dogs or cats.
182 CHAPTER 5 ■ Chronic Renal Failure
Gastroprotectants
a.Sucralfate (0.25 to 1.0 g orally every 8-12 hours depending on the size of the animal)
may provide gastroprotection for patients with gastrointestinal bleeding.
b. Zinc-carnosine (GastriCalm) adheres to the gastric mucosa and may provide addi-
tional gastrointestinal barrier protection.
Percutaneous Esophagostomy (PEG) or Esophagostomy Feeding Tubes
a. Long-term feeding with percutaneous esophagostomy (PEG) or esophagostomy feed-
ing tubes may be considered when nutritional intake is inadequate and owners are
cially cats).
Esophagostomy and PEG tube feedings improve the lives of some cats and dogs with CKD and should not be
 considered a treatment of last resort.
(1) PEG tube feedings can be used for months to years (especially in cats) and provide
ready access for administration of medications and fluids.
(2) Consider esophagostomy tube feeding initially, and, if successful, a PEG tube can
be considered for longer term care.
(3) Body weight and body condition score can be maintained or improved in many
animals with CRF.
 s m s  so    o  a c a ()
rine concentrations of >5.0 to 6.0 mg/dL, feeding tubes may be the only effective
method to maintain adequate nutrition in some CRF patients.
(5) Quality of life may be improved considerably after provision of PEG feedings in
some animals.
Endocrine Replacement Therapy
Recombinant Human Erythropoietin (rhEPo; Epogen)
a.This drug has been successfully used to correct the nonregenerative anemia of CRF in
some dogs and cats.
b. Dogs and cats treated with Epogen demonstrate resolution of anemia, weight gain,
improved appetite, improved hair coat, and improved sociability with their owners
within a few months of treatment (depending on the severity of anemia at the outset of
treatment).
Because of development of anti-human EPO antibodies, human recombinant EPO treatment should be
reserved for CRF dogs and cats that have severe, transfusion-dependent anemia.
- jo xsu %os o %oz e si aa p seu u asn y paaodde 1o si uaodg 'j
erythropoietin (EPO) antibody formation that may result in severe anemia and subse-
quent transfusion dependence. Antibodies tend to form 30 to 90 days after initiation of
therapy and are heralded by a marked increase in the myeloid:erythroid (M:E) ratio of
the bone marrow. In some cases, in addition to formation of antibodies against human
EPO, autoantibodies may form against native erythropoietin. In this situation, an ani-
mal may develop a more serious anemia than before treatment and become transfu-
sion dependent until autoantibodies are cleared which can take up to 6 months after
stopping treatment. Darbepoetin (Aranesp) may be less likely to generate an antibody
 response in animals.
d.  The starting dosage is 100 U /kg SC 3 times a week
Chronic Renal Failure  CHAPTER 5 183
e. Hematocrit must be monitored closely during therapy and the dosage adjusted to
achieve and maintain a target hematocrit of 30% to 40%. The frequency of adminis-
tration is decreased to 2 times per week as soon as the animal's hematocrit enters the
target range. Always measure the hematocrit by the same method, so that the values
obtained can be compared with one another (i.e., do not compare packed cell volumes
[PCVs] determined by table-top centrifuge to hematocrits calculated on a Coulter
 Counter). Small sequential decreases in hematocrit or PCV while an animal is being
treated with Epogen are presumptive evidence of anti-EPO antibody formation.
vomiting, seizures, hypertension, uveitis, and mucocutaneous hypersensitivity-like
reactions.
 g. Because of adverse effects and expense, Epogen is reserved for animals with severe
and symptomatic anemia (e.g., PCV <12% to 15%).
 h. Iron supplementation should be provided during (and ideally before) Epogen treat-
ment to ensure that the animal is iron replete.
i. Recombinant canine (rcEPO) and feline (rfEPO) erythropoietin has been produced
and used to successfully correct the anemia in dogs and cats with CRF. These products
also were somewhat successful in treating animals that had experienced red cell apla-
sia after treatment with recombinant human erythropoietin (rhEPO). Unexpectedly,
some CRF cats that initially responded to rfEPO (including some that had previously
been treated with rhEPO and some that had not) later developed anemia that was
refractory to continued treatment with rfEPO. The mechanism for this effect is not
kmown.
Calcitriol (activated vitamin D; 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D) Therapy
a.In the kidney, 25 hydroxyvitamin Dg is converted to the active form of vitamin D3, 1,25
dihydroxyvitamin D3 (calcitriol) by the enzyme 25 hydroxyvitamin D 1α-hydroxylase
(1α-hydroxylase), which is found in the tubular cells (Figure 5-13). Do not confuse
vitamin D with the "triol" contained in calcitriol as there is no equivalence.
b. The quantity and activity of 1α-hydroxylase are closely regulated in the kidney.
(1) The number and activity of enzyme molecules are increased by PTH.
(2) Phosphorus genomically inhibits 1α-hydroxylase formation and inhibits its activity.
(3) Its synthesis is repressed by its product (calcitriol).
(4) There is an inverse relationship between dietary calcium intake and the activity of
the enzyme. Hypercalcemia impairs and hypocalcemia stimulates calcitriol pro
duction.
c. The major effects of 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D (calcitriol) are:
(1) Increased intestinal absorption of calcium and phosphate.
(2) A permissive effect on PTH-mediated bone resorption of calcium and phosphorus
(3) Negative feedback control on PTH synthesis by the parathyroid glands (relative
 lack of this effect plays an important role in the development of renal secondary
hyperparathyroidism in patients with CRF) (Figure 5-14).
(4) Increased renal tubular reabsorption of calcium and phosphate.
d. Serum calcitriol concentrations are decreased in dogs with renal failure as compared
with normal dogs. Initially in CRF, calcitriol synthesis is impaired due to inhibition of
1α-hydroxylase by hyperphosphatemia. This may be relieved by dietary phosphorus
restriction and, if necessary, administration of phosphorus binders. Later in CRF, there
may be insufficient renal mass to produce adequate amounts of calcitriol. Calcitriol
supplementation is indicated in management of CRF patients both before and after
the amount of functional renal mass becomes insufficient to produce calcitriol, because
184
CHAPTER 5 Chronic Renal Failure
25-OH Cholecalciferol
Vit D
binding
protein
VitD
binding
Renal
protein
hydroxlase
15
@0
system
Cholecalciferol
1,25(OH), Cholecalciferol
(calcitriol)
FIGURE 5-13  Vitamin D metabolism in dogs and cats. Inactive vitamin D (cholecalciferol or Ds) is absorbed
 across the intestine and transported to the liver where a 25-alpha hydroxy group is added, 25-hydroxyvitamin D3
is transported to the kidney where a tightly controlled hydroxylase system adds a 1-alpha hydroxy group resulting
in the activated vitamin D compound 1,25(OH)-cholecaciferol (calcitriol). (Drawn by Tim Vojt.)
1. DNA Synthesis
1,25 Vit D3
INNNNNNNNNNNNND.ININNNN
INNNNN
+ Normocalcemia
2. Transcription
No Transcription
 Pre mRNA
 3. Posttranscription Processing
mRNA
4.Translation
PosttranslationalProcessing
Secretion
5
6.
8.
PreProPTH
ProPTH
> PTH-
PTH
1
Amino acids
7.
FIGURE 5-14 ■ Calcitriol's effect to genomically control the synthesis of PTH. Note that the basal condition in
the parathyroid gland is to synthesize PTH unless adequate calcitriol and ionized calcium are present. Calcitriol
 in concert with ionized calcium and other transcription factors serves as an "off" switch by binding to a silencing
region of the DNA. (Dra wn by Tim Vojt.)
Chronic Renal Failure  CHAPTER 5 185
increased serum PTH concentration was maintaining calcitriol production before
renal mass became inadequate to produce sufficient amounts of calcitriol, and PTH is
kmown to be a uremic toxin. Calcitriol has intrinsic value by virtue of its ability to feed
back to calcitriol receptors in the parathyroid glands and decrease PTH synthesis and
secretion.
e. Calcitriol must only be used after hyperphosphatemia has been adequately controlled
by a low protein/phosphorus diet and oral phosphorus binding agents if necessary.
f. If the Ca (mg/dL)× P (mg/dL) solubility product is > 60 to 70, calcitriol therapy should
be decreased or discontinued because of the risk of soft tissue mineralization.
(1) Intestinal phosphorus binders should be added if not presently being used, thein
dosage should be increased, or the type of phosphorus binder changed to provide
optimal phosphorus control.
(2) Calcitriol provides most efficient negative feedback on the parathyroid glands
when serum phosphorus concentration is <6.0 mg/dL
g. Daily dosing method: A very low dosage of calcitriol (2.5 to 3.5 ng/kg/day) has been
Aerediady Arepunas leua asiaaar ro puaaard on  uim sien pue sop u pasn
roidism. Serial serum calcium concentrations are monitored to avoid development of
hypercalcemia and measurement of serum ionized calcium is preferred for this pur
pose. Serum PTH concentrations either decrease or remain stable in dogs and cats with
CRF treated with calcitriol.
h. Intermittent dosing method: We have recently used calcitriol at a dosage of 9.0 ng/kg
twice weekly for dogs and cats with CRF The suppressive effects of calcitriol on PTH
synthesis and secretion last up to 4 days, and this interval should not be exceeded. We
Nd Aepsaupam pue nv Aepumg uo se yns sep g'g Araaa lonies Susop puaosan
to stay within this time frame.
(1) This regimen may be preferable to daily dosage with respect to client compliance.
(2) This regimen may reduce the risk of hypercalcemia that accompanies daily dosing
regimens.
(3) Calcitriol programs enterocytes that are leaving the intestinal crypts for calcium
absorption. Daily dosing of calcitriol programs more enterocytes than does inter
mittent dosing. Intermittent dosing allows continued use of calcitriol when the
Ca x P solubility product is at its upper limit of normal.
i. Pulse dosing method: Pulse dosing should not be confused with intermittent dosing.
(1) The same time interval is used for both intermittent and pulse dosing.
(2) The pulse dosage is 20 ng/kg twice weekly.
(3) Pulse dosing is used if intermittent or daily dosing has failed to control serum PTH
concentration.
(4) The goal of pulse dosing is to induce more vitamin D receptors in the parathyroid
glands and make them more responsive to lower doses of calcitriol that can be used
in the future.
Angiotensin Il and Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors
Treatment with ACE inhibitors is considered standard care for dogs and cats with CKD and proteinuria.
 Beneficial effects also may occur in CKD patients without overt proteinuria.
a.Potential detrimental effects of angiotensin II
(1) Increased efferent arteriolar vasoconstriction relative to afferent arteriolar vaso
constriction increases hydrostatic pressure within glomeruli and potentially causes
intraglomerular hypertension.
186
 CHAPTER 5  Chronic Renal Failure
Chronic Renal Failure
ACE Inhibitor
Afferent
Efferent
Afferent
Efferent artery
 dilatation
Increased
Increased
Restored
Normal
glomerular
glomerular
glomerular
glomerular
hydrostatic
filtration
hydrostatic
fltration
pressure
rate
pressure
rate
FIGURE 5-15  ACE inhibition provides glomerular afterload reduction. High pressures of the super nephron
(left parel) are created by dilatation of the afferent arteriole. In the right panel, intraglomerular pressure has been
restored to normal during treatment with ACE inhibition. ACE inhibitors reduce the effect of angiotensin-II to
cause intrarenal vasoconstriction but the effect is greater on the efferent arteriole, which lowers resistance to
outflow from the glomerular beds. (Drawn by Tim Vojt.)
(2) Contraction of mesangial cells decreases glomerular surface area available for
filtration.
(3) Increased protein traffic in the mesangium due to hyperfiltration of proteins.
(4) Stimulation of mesangial cell proliferation leading to glomerular sclerosis.
 b. ACE inhibitors (e.g., enalapril, benazepril) may have protective effects in patients with
CKD due to their ability to block adverse effects of angiotensin II
(1) Reduction in proteinuria.
(2) Limitation of glomerular sclerosis and slower progression of renal disease.
(3) Improvement in systemic blood pressure.
C. The ability of ACE inhibitors to slow the progression of renal disease is independent of
their effects on systemic blood pressure and may be related to their ability to decrease
intraglomerular pressure and proteinuria (Figure 5-15).
d.ACE inhibitors should not be used patient is well hydrated, and they should be discon-
tinued during periods of uremic crisis.
 ACE inhibitors preferentially decrease efferent arteriolar tone, an effect that decreases transglomerular pres-
 sure. Relief from intraglomerular hypertension is beneficial for the long-term survival of diseased nephrons.
e.  In one study of dogs with biopsy-proven, naturally-occurring idiopathic glomerulone-
phritis, enalapril stabilized renal function (serum creatinine concentration), decreased
 proteinuria, and decreased systolic blood pressure compared to placebo over a period
of 6 months. Similar results have been found in Samoyed dogs with X-linked heredi-
tary nephritis treated with enalapril.
(1) Enalapril was used at a dosage of 0.5 mg/kg orally once daily in most patients, and
twice daily in some.
(2) Dogs were included if the serum creatinine concentration was <3.0 mg/dL and
urine protein-creatinine ratio (UPC) was >3.0.
Chronic Renal Failure  CHAPTER 5
187
(3) An increase in serum creatinine concentration of 0.2 mg/dl or greater over baseline
was seen at 6 months in 13 of 14 placebo-treated dogs and in 3 of 16 dogs treated
with enalapril.
(4) During treatment with enalapril, 9 dogs improved, 4 had no progression, and 3 had
progression of their renal disease. With placebo treatment, 0 dogs improved, 4 had
no progression, and 10 had progression of their renal disease. Two of the enalapril-
treated dogs were euthanized due to severe decreases in their renal function.
f. In another study of naturally-occurring CKD in dogs, significantly higher veterinarian-
rated health scores, higher GFR and decreased proteinuria were seen at day 180 of treat-
ment with benazepril compared to baseline, effects not seen with placebo treatment.
(1) Benazepril was used at a dosage of 0.5 mg/kg once daily orally.
(2) Dogs were included in the study if their serum creatinine concentration was >1.3
a uo paseq paipalas jou anam soq ox/unu/Tu 9'z> sem Y naut pue Ip/ou
severity of their proteinuria as in the study previously mentioned.
g.  In a study of 192 cats with naturally-occurring CKD, benazepril at a dosage of 0.5 to 1.0
mg/kg once daily orally was compared to treatment with placebo (BENRIC study).
(1) Cats were included in the study if the initial serum creatinine concentration was
stable and ≥2.0 mg/ dl with urine specific gravity ≤1.025.
(2) Survival time did not differ sigrificantly between benazepril (mean, 637 days) and
placebo treatments (mean, 520 days).
(3) Survival time also did not differ by treatment in a sub-group of cats with protein
uria (UPC ≥1.0).
(4) Cats with UPC ≥1.0 had improved appetite during benazepril treatment compared
to placebo.
(5) Plasma protein concentration was higher in cats with initial UPC <1.0 when treated
with benazepril compared to placebo.
(6) The magnitude of proteinuria was decreased in cats treated with benazepril com-
pared to placebo. This effect was seen even in those cats with initial UPC <0.2.
h. Benazepril treament demonstrated benefits compared to placebo for naturally-occur
ring CKD in 61 cats of another study.
(1) Cats were included for study if the urine specific gravity was ≤1.025 in association
with a serum creatinine concentration ≥2.0 mg/dl or urine protein concentration ≥
2+ by dipstick.
(2) Urine protein excretion based on UPC was lower at days 120 and 180 for cats
treated with benazepril compared to placebo.
(3) Rapid deterioration in renal function occurred in 3 cats receiving placebo treatment
and in one cat receiving benazepril.
(4) More cats stayed within IRIS stage 2 or 3 rather than progressing to IRIS stage 4
when treated with benazepril (93%) compared to placebo (73%) despite the short
study period.
i. Survival time of cats with CKD is associated with the severity of proteinuria, even mild
proteinuria that previously has been considered trivial. Cats with CKD and UPC >0.4
lived for the shortest time, those with UPC 0.2 to 0.4 had intermediate survival times, and
those with UPC <0.2 lived the longest. Whether targeted intervention with ACE inhibitors
to lower their urinary protein excretion will increase survival times has yet to be proven.
j.General guidelines for use of ACE inhibitors in CKD
(1) Recheck renal function 1 week after beginning ACE inhibitors to make sure GFR
has not decreased too much. It is common to see a small increase in serum cre-
atinine concentration at this time (20% to 30% increase over baseline). If serum
881
CHAPTER 5  Chronic Renal Failure
creatinine concentration has increased more than 20% to30%, decrease the dosage
of the ACE inhibitor. Some dogs and cats are relatively intolerant of ACE inhibitors
in that their renal function will be much worse during initial treatment and treat
ment must be discontinued.
(2) Recheck the UPC 1 and 3 months after the start of ACE inhibition. The goal is to
achieve a 50% decrease in UPC in patients in which UPC initially was increased.
(3) There is minimal to no difference between benazepril and enalapril for clinical use
in dogs and cats with CKD. Benazeprilat is cleared by both the kidney and liver
compared to enalaprilat which is cleared only by the kidney.
Blood Pressure Detection and Control
Effect of Hypertension on Progression of Clinical Renal Disease
a. Dogs with naturally occurring CRF and hypertension have been reported to undergo
more rapid progression of their renal disease and are more likely to develop uremic
crises and die than those with lower blood pressure.
b. Experimentally, dogs with the remnant kidney model of CRF and high systolic blood
 pressure (165-170 mm Hg) tend to have lower GFR, higher urine protein/creatinine
ratios, and higher scores for kidney lesions such as increased mesangial matrix, tubular
damage, and fibrosis, than remnant kidney dogs with lower systolic blood pressure.
General Guidelines for Treatment of Hypertension in Dogs and Cats
a. Summarized from American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine (ACVIM) Con-
sensus Statement of 2007:
(1) Blood pressure of <150/95 mm Hg: re-evaluate in 3 to 6 months.
(2) Blood pressure of 150/95 mm Hg or more and no evidence of target organ (e.g.
ocular) damage.
(a) Re-evaluate blood pressure in 7 days. If blood pressure remains increased, anti-
hypertensive therapy may be considered, depending on magnitude of increase.
(b) If <150/95 mm Hg: re-evaluate in 1 to 3 months.
(3) Blood pressure of 150/95 mm Hg or more and evidence of target organ (e.g., ocu-
lar) damage: initiate (or escalate) antihypertensive therapy.
b. Previous guidelines in cats with hypertension suggested initiating treatment (with
amlodipine) if systolic blood pressure was >175 mm Hg on two separate occasions
seven days apart or one reading of >175 mm Hg was obtained in a cat with ocular
disease at presentation (i.e., acute onset blindness).
Treatment of Hypertension
a. A low-salt diet is not an effective treatment for persistent hypertension secondary to
CRF. Feeding of a low-salt diet to cats with experimentally-induced renal failure led to
kaliuresis, hypokalemia, and reduced GFR.
b. Diuretics such as furosemide and thiazides are not effective for control of hypertension
tion of prerenal azotemia on an already azotemic patient.
c.ACE inhibitors (e.g., enalapril, benazepril) and amlodipine are the most commonly
employed safe and effective antihypertensive medications for use in dogs and cats
with CRF.
d.  Benazepril and enalapril (0.5 mg/kg PO every 12 to 24 hours) can be used for initial
management of hypertension in dogs with CRF. A mild increase in azotemia is expected
due to decreased intraglomerular pressure associated with ACE inhibition and is
not a reason to discontinue or change treatment as long as the animal is otherwise
doing well.
Chronic Renal Failure  CHAPTER 5189
e. In cats with CRF and hypertension, treatment usually is begun with 0.625 to 1.25 mg
amlodipine PO every 24 hours. Amlodipine is well tolerated by cats with minimal evi
dence of adverse effects.
Anabolic Steroids
1. Many products (e.g., methyltestosterone, stanozolol, oxymetholone, nandrolone decano
ate) are available but there are no long-term studies demonstrating their efficacy in dogs
and cats with CRF.
 2. Stanozolol had equivocal effects in one short-term study of dogs with experimentally
induced CRF. Total amount of food consumed, lean body mass, and nitrogen balance
 increased but there was no significant effect on body fat, bone mineral, or food consump-
tion per kg of body weight.
 3. Stanozolol has a narrow margin of safety in cats and is hepatotoxic. It resulted in increased
liver enzyme activities and vitamin K-responsive coagulopathy. Hepatic lipidosis and cho-
lestasis were observed histologically.
 4. We do not recommend the use of anabolic steroids in cats with CRF. If used in dogs, pre-
treatment and posttreatment evaluation of liver enzymes and liver function should be
carefully evaluated to ensue toxic hepatic effects are not developing.
Emerging Treatments
Azodyl (Vetoquinol)
         n 
degradation of urea and creatinine by colonic bacteria.
b. BUN and serum creatinine concentrations were modestly reduced in a small study of
CRF cats after 30 and 60 days of treatment.
c. Decreased BUN and serum creatinine concentrations do not imply improved renal
function, but rather suggest a reduction in production and accumulation of uremic
waste products.
d. The product must be kept refrigerated and the capsules not broken before administra-
tion to ensure that the living organisms in the product will survive.
e.  Transient diarrhea has been observed as an adverse effect of Azodyl
f. Beneficial effects on renal function, clinical signs, and survival have not been estab-
lished in dogs and cats with CRF.
Kremezin (Covalzin)
 a. An orally administered, nonselective adsorbent that relies on carbon-based granules to
remove uremic toxins from the gastrointestinal tract.
b. Widely used in Japan to treat humans and cats with CRF.
c. Studies in humans and experimental studies in rodents with renal failure suggest that
kremezin may slow the progression of renal disease and additional benefits may be
gained by use of kremezin in conjunction with ACE inhibitors.
d. During 8 weeks of treatment, a reduction in signs of uremia was observed in more than
65% of CRF cats treated with kremezin at a daily dose of 400 or 800 mg compared to
15% of cats treated with placebo. The rate of disease progression also was reported by
the manufacturer to have been decreased over this time period.
Spironolactone
a.  Aldosterone may contribute to the pathogenesis of progressive renal disease beyond
its role in the RAAS.
 b. Aldosterone and angiotensin II both play roles in maintaining glomerular hyperten
sion and contribute to glomerular sclerosis in the remnant kidney.
190 CHAPTER 5 ■ Chronic Renal Failure
c. Selective blockade of aldosterone decreases proteinuria and glomerular sclerosis in
experimental studies in rats with remnant kidneys.
d.  No controlled studies of the use of aldosterone as a treatment for dogs and cats with
CRF have been reported.
e. Spironolactone often is considered as additional therapy to further decrease proteinuria
in patients treated with ACE inhibitors. Hyperkalemia is a possible adverse effect of treat-
ment with spironolactone in such patients. Serum potassium concentration should be
 monitored in all patients receiving spironolactone in conjunction with an ACE inhibitor.
Cinacalcet (Sensipar)
a.Calcimimetic drug designed to increase the sensitivity of the calcium-sensing receptor
 in the parathyroid gland.
b. Decreases PTH secretion as well as serum phosphorus and calcium concentrations.
C. Approved for use in humans to control renal secondary hyperparathyroidism and usu-
ally used in conjunction with calcitriol to obtain better control of serum PTH concen-
tration.
 d.  Limited experience in veterinary medicine but may be considered when dietary phos-
phorus restriction, phosphorus binders and calcitriol are not sufficient for control of
Chronic Dialysis
 a. Rarely performed in patients with CRF because of expense and long term complica-
tions.
 b. _Occasionally performed during uremic crisis to give the patient time to recompensate.
Renal Transplantation
a. Considered for some cats but not dogs with CRF.
b. Expense and long-term complications presently limit its recommendation.
Stressful Situations
1. Situations that may be stressful to the animal (e.g., boarding, extensive absence of the
owner) should be avoided if possible.
a.The animal should be managed on an outpatient basis as much as possible. Uremic
crises requiring intravenous fluid therapy represent an exception.
b.Owners can be taught to administer subcutaneous fluids to their animal at home
to prevent dehydration and facilitate excretory renal function during times of
e a so ns p sn un s  si aan s 'ssas
tional fluid support can have important beneficial effects on the animal's quality of
life.
COURSE AND PROGNOSIS
A. Ultimately, prognosis is poor if renal disease is documented to be progressive by serial evalu-
ation of history, physical examination, and laboratory findings.
1. Rate of progression varies among individuals, but affected animal may live many
months to several years. Plotting 1/serum creatinine versus time gives a crude indica-
tion of the rate of progression of CRF (i.e., the slope of the line is an indication of rate of
progression).
2. In a study of dogs with naturally occurring CRF, urine protein/creatinine ratio >1.0 was
associated with greater risk of uremic crisis, progression of renal disease, and death. Sys-
tolic hypertension may contribute to proteinuria and also is associated with increased risk
of uremic crisis and decreased survival.
Chronic Renal Failure■ CHAPTER 5191
3.Ihn cats with naturally occurring CRF, even mild proteinuria (urine protein/creatinine
ratios <1.0) was associated with disease progression and decreased survival. It is unclear if
disease progression is a consequence of the proteinuria or simply a marker of the underly
ing renal disease.
4. Increased proteinuria as a result of glomerular hyperfiltration has been identified as a
contributing factor to renal disease progression in animal models of CRF.
B. Findings suggestive of a poor prognosis.
 1. Extensive endstage lesions on renal biopsy.
2. Advanced osteodystrophy (rarely a problem in adult animals with CRF).
 3. Progressive proteinuria despite treatment.
4. Progressive loss of lean muscle mass, with or without weight loss.
5. Progressive weight loss.
6. Severe intractable anemia that cannot be managed with rhEPO due to antibody
formation.
 7. Unmanageable systemic hypertension.
9.1
Inability to maintain fluid and electrolyte balance despite supplementation with
subcutaneously administered fluids.
WHAT DO WE DO?
· Classify patients with CKD using the IRIS scheme of classification (see Table 5-1).
● Collect blood from fasted CKD patients at the same time of day to facilitate comparison of results
overtime.
· Evaluate patients with CKD for proteinuria.
· Measure systolic blood pressure (usually by Doppler method) in all patients with CKD and deter-
mine their risk for end-organ damage including progressive renal injury.
● Serially evaluate patients with CKD using clinical tools such as body weight, body condition score,
systemic blood pressure, and parameters of renal function.
● Closely monitor phosphorus control and aim to keep serum phosphorus concentration <5.5 mg/dL
using a combination of dietary phosphorus restriction and phosphate binders.
· Measure serum PTH and serum ionized calcium concentration to evaluate renal secondary hyper-
parathyroidism and make therapeutic decisions.
 increase in serum creatinine concentration, progressive increase in urine protein/creatinine ratio,
progressive loss of urinary concentrating ability, decreasing renal size, development of nephrocalci-
nosis) regardless of the presence or absence of overt azotemia.
· Consider renal transplantation as a therapeutic option in selected cats with CRF
THOUGHTS FOR THE FUTURE
 ou nq snaoudsod u paioinsan axe are je  m shaed roy spoog po puadoaaa ·
protein.
· Development of new phosphate binders that provide excellent phosphate control even when a non-
renal diet is fed.
· Development of methods to more accurately measure blood pressure in animals so that early onset
of hypertension can be detected and treated.
· Development of balanced antihypertensive treatment protocols that include control of both sys-
temic and intraglomerular hypertension.
192 CHAPTER 5 ■ Chronic Renal Failure
· Development of antifibrotic protocols that can minimize progression.
· Development of better protocols to decrease renal proteinuria.
· Evaluation of aldosterone inhibitors (e.g., spironolactone, eplerenone) to decrease progression of
renal disease.
· Evaluation of selective and nonselective gastrointestinal adsorbents to better manage uremic sigms
and to slow progression of renal disease.
· Development of long-acting ACE inhibitors that have selective renal effects.
● More common use of calcimimetics (e.g., cinacalcet) to provide optimal control of renal secondary
hyperparathyroidism.
· Intermittent dosing of calcitriol will replace daily dosing for safer control of renal secondary hyper-
parathyroidism.
Development of erythropoietin products that will not stimulate the immune system of dogs or cats
 Development of antirejection medications that protect transplanted kidneys while not placing the
host at major risk for systemic infection.
Efficient temporary methods of dialysis will become more available as a means to periodically
remove uremic waste products.
· Development of species-specific PTH assays that are sensitive and specific for dogs and cats.
· A greater understanding of the role of the calcium-sensing receptor in CKD will be achieved.
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS
● Normal serum creatinine concentration means that renal disease is not present. Actually, serum
creatinine concentration is not sensitive for the detection of CKD because more than 75% of neph-
rons must be nonfunctional before serum creatinine concentration is increased above normal. Other
parameters must be evaluated to determine extent of renal disease before loss of 75% of renal mass
(e.g., iohexol clearance, proteinuria, cylindruria, decreased renal concentrating ability, renal paren-
chymal changes on imaging).
· Stable serum creatinine concentration over a few months means that renal disease is not progressive.
This could be true, but animals with severe muscle mass loss and otherwise stable renal function
should experience a decrease in serum creatinine concentration. Stable serum creatinine concentra-
tion in the presence of severe muscle mass loss could mask progression of renal disease.
· A decrease in BUN while the patient is eating a renal diet means that renal function has improved.
Actually, when the animal is eating a diet low in protein but adequate in calories, BUN concentra-
tion decreases because less nitrogenous waste products are generated. In such a situation, BUN
concentration is not good indicator of renal function.
 Blood pressure monitoring is not that important in dogs and cats with CKD. False. Systemic hyper
 tension has no outward clinical signs. Blood pressure must be measured to determine if hyperten-
sion is present and to monitor response to treatment. Good blood pressure control may prevent
end-organ damage and slow progression of renal disease.
· Renal diets help all patients with CKD regardless of their stage of disease. Although studies have
shown that feeding a renal diet, as compared with a maintenance diet, can help both dogs and cats
with CKD, some patients may be harmed by this treatment. This outcome is especially likely in dogs
and cats that are not eating well at the time of transition to the new diet. Continued anorexia will
cause protein-calorie malnutrition and loss of lean muscle mass.
· A renal diet should be fed as soon as it has been documented that the patient has renal disease
Actually, there is no evidence to indicate that any dietary intervention is helpful in patients with
nonazotemic renal disease (IRIS Stage 1). Evidence is strongest that renal diets are helpful in
slowing progression of CKD when fed to moderately to severely azotemic patients (IRIS stage 3
and 4).
Chronic Renal Failure ■ CHAPTER 5193
s ss    s  n  sn s s -
is helpful in any CKD patient with hypokalemia. Hypokalemic nephropathy has been well docu-
potassium deficits is more controversial. Given in small amounts with a gradual increase in dos
age over time likely is not harmful to patients with CKD because the diseased kidney can adapt to
handle the additional potassium
· Anabolic steroids should be considered in all CKD patients, especially if they have poor appetite
loss of lean muscle mass, or progressive anemia. There is little evidence in dogs and cats with CKD
 to support the use of anabolic steroids. Stanozolol has been shown to increase lean muscle mass in
 dogs with experimental renal disease without a change in appetite. Stanozolol can be hepatotoxic in
cats, and we do not recommend its use in cats with CKD.
adequately controlled. False. Persistently high serum phosphorus concentration in a patient with
CKD likely means that serum PTH concentration is abnormal, but a normal serum phosphorus
concentration does not necessarily mean that serum PTH concentration is normal. There really is no
way of knowing if serum PTH concentration is being adequately controlled without measuring it.
· Administration of fluids subcutaneously is helpful in all CKD patients. Subcutaneous administra-
tion of fluids is helpful only for patients that do not maintain optimal hydration on their own. Opti-
mal hydration enhiances renal excretory function and less uremic waste is retained. CKD patients
do not benefit from subcutaneous administration of fluids if they maintain hydration on their own.
· Calcitriol treatment should only be considered for CKD patients if they have metabolic bone dis-
ease, hypocalcemia, or very high serum PTH concentrations. These advanced situations are indi-
cations for the use of calcitriol, but calcitriol has potential advantages when used earlier in the
course CKD
SUMMARY TIPS
· Serially measure BUN, serum creatinine, and serum phosphorus concentrations as surrogates of
renal fumction and to monitor the effects of therapeutic interventions.
· Serially measure serum albumin, total protein, and cholesterol concentrations as indicators of the
patient's nutritional state during feeding of protein-restricted renal diets.
· Serially monitor serum potassium concentration in patients (especially cats) with CKD. Provide
potassium supplementation for patients with overt or marginal hypokalemia.
· Serially measure urine protein ratio to identify trends, and change therapy if necessary.
· Aim to maintain systolic blood pressure of <145 mm Hg in patients with CKD. CKD patients
have limited ability to protect their kidneys against fluctuations in systemic blood pressure due to
impaired renal autoregulation.
● Perform urine culture in cats with CKD every 3 to 6 months because many cats with CKD have bac-
terial UTl, often without clinical signs. UTI poses a threat of pyelonephritis to the already damaged
kidney and any documented UTI should be treated with antibiotics.
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
Q: What is the value of probiotics in the treatment of azotemic dogs and cats with CKD? Should
we be using these products?
A: There is little evidence on which to judge these products. The premise is that bacteria in the pro
biotic will populate the colon and decrease the BUN and creatinine concentrations as a consequence
of their metabolism. This process has been called "enteric dialysis" but it really has nothing to do with
dialysis.
194CHAPTER 5 ■ Chronic Renal Failure
Q: Chitosan-based products recently have been advocated as intestinal phosphate binders. How
does this kind of product compare with other phosphate binders?
A: A small study in cats with CRD indicated that cats eating food supplemented with chitosan had
decreased serum phosphorus concentrations as a consequence of decreased digestibility. No studies have
Q: I can't get many of my patients to eat phosphorus-restricted renal diets. Is it reasonable to
sp rean un snudsou jo jue ar a asna ppua jou si ydde s 
makes it unlikely that the added phosphate binder will be effective.
Q: When should ACE inhibitors be used in patients with CKD? Should they only be used in
renal failure regardless of the presence or absence of proteinuria?
and proteinuria. ACE inhibitors lower high intraglomerular pressure in dogs and cats with experimen-
tal renal failure. Assuming that most animals with naturally occurring renal disease also suffer from
and cats have been limited to patients with azotemia. ACE inhibitors also may provide renoprotection
in nonazotemic dogs and cats with progressive renal disease.
Q: Doesn't treatment with ACE inhibitors aggravate azotemia?
A: Intraglomerular pressure will decrease during treatment with ACE inhibitors, and single neph-
ron GFR will decline. Thus, BUN and serum creatinine concentrations can be expected to increase
during treatment. In human patients, a 20% increase in serum creatinine concentration above baseline
is considered acceptable. Interestingly, in cats with experimentally induced renal failure, benazepril
lowered intraglomerular pressure without decreasing GFR, presumably because glomerular surface
area increased as mesangial cells relaxed with blockade of angiotensin II.
Q: Is benazepril preferable to enalapril for treatment of CKD in dogs and cats?
A: Both benazepril and enalapril are pro-drugs. Benazeprilat and enalaprilat are the active forms
of the drug, and both are cleared by the kidneys. Benazeprilat undergoes more clearance by the liver
than enalaprilat, and less benazeprilat accumulates in the serum in patients with CKD. Both drugs
have similar ability to inhibit ACE.
Q: Is calcitriol more useful in dogs with CRF than in cats with CRF?
A: Dogs with naturally occurring CRF fed renal diets and treated with calcitriol survived longer
than those treated with placebo. Similar studies in CRF cats did not demonstrate a difference in sur-
vival after one year of treatment. CRD often progresses more slowly in dogs than in cats, and cats with
CRF may need to be followed for 2 years or more to identify a beneficial effect of calcitriol treatment.
We use calcitriol to treat both dogs and cats with progressive CKD.
Q: Do I need to measure both serum ionized calcium and PTH concentrations during treatment of
CRF patients with calcitriol?
 A: Doing so is the ideal way to monitor treatment of renal secondary hyperparathyroidism. Deter
mination of serum PTH concentration is necessary to document the effectiveness of therapy. It also
is important to determine if serum PTH concentrations previously within the normal range have
increased. Serum ionized calcium concentrations also should be monitored to identify toxicity from
Chronic Renal Failure ■ CHAPTER 5195
ionized hypercalcemia. Trends in serum total calcium concentration may be useful, but serum ionized
calcium concentrations are needed to accurately assess calcium status.
Q: Does routine vaccination in cats increase their risk for the development of CKD?
A: Recent studies have shown that vaccinated cats can develop antibodies against renal tubular
antigens, presumably because the viruses used in vaccine development are grown in feline kidney
cells. Although antibodies may develop, there is no evidence that CKD results as a consequence. At the
present time, there is no evidence to support changing routine vaccination practices.
Q: Is calcitriol beneficial in dogs or cats with CKD and hypercalcemia?
A: Not usually, but if the diagnosis of hypercalcemia is based on serum total calcium concentration
rather than serum ionized calcium concentration, it is possible that better control of renal second-
ary hyperparathyroidism by calcitriol treatment will result in decreased serum complexed calcium
concentration with a corresponding decrease in serum total calcium concentration. If serum ionized
calcium concentration is increased, all of the possible causes for hypercalcemia must be considered. It
is very uncommon for high serum ionized calcium concentration to be a result of tertiary hyperpara-
thyroidism. In these instances, very high serum PTH concentration is likely to be present, and calcitriol
treatment may improve the ability of the parathyroid gland to decrease PTH secretion in response to
hypercalcemia. Some cats with idiopathic hypercalcemia have CKD, and calcitriol treatment is not
indicated in these cats because serum PTH concentration typically is normal or low.
Q: Is there one brand of renal veterinary diet that you consistently recommend over others?
A: Two pet food companies have reported evidence-based medicine outcomes studies of dogs and
cats with CRF that were treated either with a renal diet or a maintenance diet. In one study of cats with
CRF, all 7 of the studied renal therapeutic diets had resulted in prolonged survival compared with a
switching from one brand of veterinary therapeutic diet to another is appropriate to maintain adequate
nutrient intake based on palatability. Itis advisable to switch to a diet with less phosphorus in patients
in which serum phosphorus or PTH concentrations are not well controlled. Comparison of nutrient
intake corrected for energy density for therapeutic foods is maintained by the OSU Nutrition Support
Service and is available for review at http: / /vet.osu.edu/nssvet (select Diet Manual).
Suggested Readings
Adams LG, Polzin D), Osborne CA, et al: Effects of dietary protein and calorie restriction in clinically normal cats and in
cats with surgically induced chronic renal failure, Am  Vet Res 54:1653-1662, 1993.
Barber PJ, ElliottJ: Feline chronic renal failure: Calcium homeostasis in 80 cases diagnosed between 1992 and 1995, I Small
Anim Pract 39:108-116, 1998.
 Barber PJ, Rawlings JM, Markwell PJ, et al: Effect of dietary phosphate restriction on renal secondary hyperparathyroid-
ism in the cat,} Small Anim Pract 40:62-70, 1999.
Bourgoignie Jl, Gavellas G, Martinez E, et al: Glomerular function and morphology after renal mass reduction in dogs,
} Lab Clin Med 109:380-388, 1987.
Brenner BM, Meyer TW, Hostetter TH: Dietary protein intake and progressive nature of kidney disease: The role of hemo-
dynamically mediated glomerular injury in the pathogenesis of progressive glomerular sclerosis in aging, renal abla
tion, and intrinsic renal disease, N Engl I Med 307:652-659, 1982.
Brown S, Atkins C, Bagley R, et al: Guidelines for the identification, evaluation, and management of systemic hyperten-
sion in dogs and cats, / Vet Irtern Med 21:542558, 2007.
fatty acids in dogs with renal insufficiency,  Lab Clin Med 131:447-455, 1998
of functional renal mass, I Am Soc Nephrol 1:1169-1179, 1991.
196  CHAPTER 5 ■ Chronic Renal Failure
258:F495-F503, 1990.
Buranakarl C, Mathur S, Brown SA: Effects of dietary sodium chloride intake on renal function and blood pressure in cats
with normal and reduced renal function, A  Vet Res 65:620-627, 2004.
Cowan LA, McLaughlin R, Toll PW, et al: Effect of stanozolol on body composition, nitrogen balance, and food consump-
tion in castrated dogs with chronic renal failure, I Am Vet Med Assoc 21l:719-722, 1997.
Cowgill LD, James KM, Levy JK, et al: Use of recombinant human erythropoietin for management of anemia in dogs and
cats with renal failure,  Am Vet Med Assoc 212:521-528, 1998
Pract 39:78-85, 1998.
30 cases, I Small Anim Pract 42:122129, 2001.
ElliottJ, Rawlings JM, Markwell PJ, et al: Survival of cats with naturally occurring chronic renal failure: Effect of dietary
management, I Small Arim Pract 41:235-242, 2000.
Elliott J, Syme HM, Markwell Pj: Acid-base balance of cats with chronic renal failure: Effect of deterioration in renal func-
tion,  Small Anim Pract 44:261-268, 2003.
ElliottJ, Syme HM, Reubens E, et al: Assessment of acid-base status of cats with naturally occurring chronic renal failure,
 Small Ani Pract 44:65-70, 2003.
Grauer GF, Greco DS, Getzy DM, et al: Effects of enalapril versus placebo as a treatment for canine idiopathic glomerulo-
nephritis, / Vet Intern Med 14:526-533, 2000
Jacob F, Polzin DJ, Osborne CA, et al: Association between initial systolic blood pressure and risk of developing a uremic
crisis or of dying in dogs with chronic renal failure, I Am Vet Med Assoc 222:322-329, 2003.
renal failure in dogs, / Am Vet Med Assoc 220:1163-1170, 2002.
Jacob F, Polzin D], Osborne CA, et al: Evaluation of the association between initial proteinuria and morbidity rate or death
in dogs with naturally occurring chronic renal failure, J Am Vet Med Assoc 226:393400, 2005.
King LG, Giger U, Diserens D, et al: Anemia of chronic renal failure in dogs, I Vet Intern Med 6:264-270, 1992.
King IN, Gunn-Moore DA, Tasker S, et al: Tolerability and efficacy of benazepril in cats with chronic kidney disease, / Vet
Interm Med 20:10541064, 2006.
Mizutani H, Koyama H, Watanabe T, et al: Evaluation of the clinical efficacy of benazepril in the treatment of chronic renal
insufficiency in cats, / Vet Intern Med 20:1074-1079, 2006.
Plantinga EA, Everts H, Kastelein AM, et al: Retrospective study of the survival of cats with acquired chronic renal insuf-
ficiency offered different commercial diets, Vet Rec 157:185-187, 2005.
Polzin D], Osborne CA, Hayden DW, et al: Influence of reduced protein diets on morbidity, mortality, and renal function
in dogs with induced chronic renal failure, Am  Vet Res 45:506-517, 1983.
Polzin D), Osborne CA, Stevens JB,et al: Influence of modified protein diets on the nutritional status of dogs with induced
chronic renal failure, Am Vet Res 44:16941702, 1983.
etin, Am / Vet Res 65:13551366, 2004.
Reusch CE, Tomsa K, Zimmer C, et al: Ultrasonography of the parathyroid glands as an aid in differentiation of acute and
chronic renal failure in dogs, I Am Vet Med Assoc 217:1849-1852, 2000.
Ross LA, Finco DR, Crowell WA: Effect of dietary phosphorus restriction on the kidneys of cats with reduced renal mass,
A*#  Vet Res 43:1023-1026, 1982.
kidney disease in cats, I A Vet Med Assoc 229:949-957, 2006.
Schenck PA, Chew Dj: Prediction of serum ionized calcium concentration by use of serum total calcium concentration in
dogs, A*  Vet Res 66:13301336, 2005.
Schenck PA, Chew D): Calcium fractionation in dogs with chronic renal failure, Am I Vet Res 64:1181-1184, 2003.
Schenck PA, Chew DJ, Nagode LA, Rosol Tj: Disorders of calcium: Hypercalcemia and hypocalcemia. In Dibartola S, edi-
tor: Fluid therapy in smallanimal practice, ed 3, St. Louis, 2006, Elsevier, pp 122-194.
Syme HM, Markwell PJ, Pfeiffer D, Elliott J: Survival of cats with naturally occurring chronic renal failure is related to
severity of proteinuria,  Vet Intern Med 20:528535, 2006.
Tenhundfeld J, Wefstaedt P, Nolte I]: A randomized controlled clincial trial of the use of benazepril and heparin for the
treatmet of chronic kidney disease in dogs.  AM Vet Med Assoc 234(8): 1031-1037, 2009.
CHAPTER
6
Familial Renal
Diseases of Dogs
and Cats
INTRODUCTION AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
A. Most familial renal diseases result in chronic renal failure (CRF) at a young age (<5 years) but
some are characterized by renal tubular defects (e.g., Fanconi syndrome in the Basenji) or mor-
 phologic abnormalities that result in hematuria (e.g., renal telangiectasia in Pembroke Welsh
corgi dogs).
B. A familial disease is one that occurs in related animals with a higher frequency than would be
expected by chance.
C. Congenital diseases are present at birth and may be genetically determined or result from
exposure to adverse environmental factors during development.
 D. In many familial renal diseases of dogs, the kidneys are thought to be normal at birth but
undergo structural and functional deterioration early in life.
 E. Some familial renal diseases of dogs probably are examples of renal dysplasia.
1. The term renal dysplasia refers to disorganized development of renal parenchyma due to
abnormal differentiation and is characterized by the presence of structures in the kidney
inappropriate for the stage of development of the animal.
 2. Lesions suggestive of renal dysplasia include asynchronous differentiation of nephrons
(indicated by persistence of immature or "fetal" glomeruli; Figure 6-1) and persistent
mesenchyme (usually in the medullary interstitium).
3. Persistent metanephric ducts, atypical tubular epithelium, and dysontogenic metaplasia
 are observed less frequently.
 F. Many familial renal diseases are very variable in severity and rate of progression among
individual animals.
G. Most of these diseases are progressive and ultimately fatal, and therapy usually is limited to
conservative medical management of CRF
H. The mode of inheritance and specific pathogenesis for many of these diseases are unknown.
SIGNALMENT
A. Familial renal disease has been reported in many breeds of dog (Table 6-1) and may occur
sporadically in mixed breed animals.
B. The clinician should consider the possibility of familial renal disease whenever CRF occurs
in immature or young adult animals.
C. Most of these diseases have no clear sex predilection.
197
198
CHAPTER 6  Familial Renal Diseases of Dogs and Cats
FIGURE 6-1  Fetal glomerulus with decreased lobulation and closed capillary loops from a Standard poodle
with familial renal disease (Hematoxylin and eosin stain, x160.)
TABLE 6-1
 Familial Renal Diseases of Dogs and Cats
Inheritance;
Progressive Renal
Breed
 Disease Description
Age at Presentation
Mutation
Failure?
Abyssinian cat
Amyloidosis
1-5 years
 Autosomal dominant
Yes
(incomplete
penetrance)
Beagle
Amyloidosis
5-11 years
Unknown
Yes
English foxhound
Amyloidosis
5-8 years
Unknown
Yes
Oriental
Amyloidosis
<5 years
Unknown
Variable; severe
shorthair cat
liver involvement
Shar pei
Amyloidosis
1-6 years
Unknown
Yes
 Siamese cat
Amyloidosis
<5 years
Unknown
Variable;severe
liver involvement
Bull terrier
Basement membrane
<1-10 years
Autosomal
Yes
dsorder
dominant
Bullmastiff
Basement membrane
2.5-11 years
Autosomal
Yes
dsorder
recessive
Dalmatian
Basement membrane
<1-8years
 Autosomal dominant
Yes
dsorder
Doberman
Basementmembrane
<1-6 years
Unknown
Yes
pinscher
dsorder
 English Cocker 
Basement membrane
<2years
Autosomal recessive;
Yes
spaniel
dsorder
COL4A4 mutation
Newfoundland
Basement membrane
<1 year
Unknown
Yes
disorder
Rottweiler
Basement membrane
≤1 year
Unknown
Yes
dsorder
Samoyed
Basement membrane
<1 year (males)
X-linked dominant
Yes (males)
dsorder
Familial Renal Diseases of Dogs and Cats  CHAPTER 6
199
 TABLE 6-1
 Familial Renal Diseases of Dogs and Cats—cont'd
Inheritance;
 Progressive Renal
Breed
Disease Description
 Age at Presentation
Mutation
Failure?
Texas NAV dogs
Basement membrane
<1 year (males)
 X-linked dominant
Yes (males)
disorder
1-3 years (females)
Beagle
Glomerulopathy
2-8years
Unknown
Yes
basement
membrane
disorder?)
Bernese
 Membranoproliferative 
2-5 years
Autosomal recessive'
Yes
 mountain dog
glomerulonephritis
Brittany spaniel
 Membranoproliferative 
4-9 years
Autosomal recessive
Variable
glomerulonephritis
(C3 deficiency)
Soft-coated
Membranoproliferative
2-11 years
Unknown
Yes
Wheaten terrier
 glomerulonephritis 
German shepherd
Multiple renal
5-11 years
Autosomal dominant'
Variable
cystadenocarcinomas
Norwegian elkhound
Periglomerular fibrosis
<1-5 years
Unknown
Yes
Bull terrier
Polycystic kidney
<1-2 years
Autosomal dominant
Yes; valvular heart
disease
disease
Cairn terrier
Polycystic kidney
6 weeks
Autosomal
Not reported
disease
recessive'
Persian cat
Polycystic kidney
3-10years
Autosomal dominant;
Yes
disease
polycystin!
mutation
West Highland
Polycystic kidney
5 weeks
Autosomal
 Not reported
white terrier
disease
recessive'
Alaskan malamute
Renal dysplasia
<1 year
Unknown
Yes
Chow
Renal dysplasia
<1-5 years
Unknown
Yes
 Golden retriever
 Renal dysplasia
<1-3years
Unknown
Yes
Lhasa apso
Renal dysplasia
<1-5years
Unknown
Yes
 and Shih tzu
Miniature Schnauzer
Renal dysplasia
<1-3 years
Unknown
Yes
Soft-coated
Renal dysplasia
<1-3 years
Unknown
Yes
Wheaten terrier
Standard poodle
Renal dysplasia
<1-2 years
Unknown
Yes
Pembroke Welsh
Renal telangiectasia
5-13 years
Unknown
No
corgi
Basenji
Tubular dysfunction
1-5 years
Unknown
Variable
(Fanconi syndrome)
Norwegian
Tubular dysfunction
 Not reported
Unknown
No
elkhound
(renal glucosuria)
Beagle
Unilateral renal
Incidental finding
Unknown
No
agenesis
'Suspected.
200  CHAPTER 6 ■ Familial Renal Diseases of Dogs and Cats
D. The age of onset of familial renal disease usually is 6 months to 5 years, with many animal
presented before 2 years of age.
1. Renal amyloidosis in beagles and English foxhounds, suspected glomerular basement
membrane disease in beagles, and telangiectasia of the Welsh corgi, however, occur in
older dogs (>5 years).
 2. Polycystic kidney disease (PKD) in Cairm and West Highland white terriers is detected at
(syaam g o1 g) a8e SumoA A1aa e
 HISTORY
A. Signs of CRF occur in many of these familial diseases:
1.Anorexia.
2.Lethargy.
 3. Stunted growth or weight loss.
4. Polyuria, nocturia, polydipsia.
5. Vomiting.
6. Poor hair coat.
7. Diarrhea (less common than vomiting).
8. Foul breath.
 B. Clinical findings in Basenji dogs with Fanconi syndrome may include polyuria, polydipsia
weight loss, dehydration, and weakness.
C. Hematuria, dysuria, and apparent abdominal pain may be reported by owners of Pembroke
Welsh corgi dogs with renal telangiectasia
carcinomas.
 PHYSICAL FINDINGS
A. Poor body condition.
B. Dehydration.
C. Pallor of the mucous membranes.
D. Foul oral odor.
E. Uremic ulceration of the oral cavity.
 F. Small, irregular kidneys (Cairn and West Highland white terriers and Persian cats with PKD
[isud uo paoaap aq sauaos un (mt iaan soa) Adonspoaiso snoa jo suis 
ae Anaen Audonspoaiso leuan jo sus d wm shop umon umon jo uonuexa
apparent in older dogs with CRF.
H.
 Blood pressure should be measured and fundic examination performed to evaluate for
complications of hypertension (e.g., retinal hemorrhages, retinal detachments).
LABORATORY FINDINGS
Hemogram
1.Anemia.
a. When present in animals with CRF due to familial renal disease, anemia usually is
nonregenerative (normochromic, normocytic).
b. Blood loss anemia may occur in Welsh corgi dogs with renal telangiectasia.
2. Lymphopenia (indicative of chronic stress).
Familial Renal Diseases of Dogs and Cats  CHAPTER 6  201
Serum Chemistry
1. Increased blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and serum creatinine concentrations.
2. Hyperphosphatemia.
3.
Variable serum total calcium concentration (decreased, normal, increased).
a. Hypercalcemia may be more common in young dogs with renal failure than in older
ones according to some investigators.
4. Compensated metabolic acidosis.
5. Presence of hypoalbuminemia and hypercholesterolemia (along with proteinuria) should
 prompt suspicion of primary glomerular disease.
Urinalysis
1. Isosthenuria.
 2. Proteinuria in animals with glomerular disease.
a.Beagles with glomerular amyloidosis.
us si ara jn sisoine n m siop iad rus pe sien unssq q
glomerular involvement.
C.
 Bernese mountain dogs with membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis.
3.Glucosuria.
a.Norwegian elkhounds with primary renal glucosuria.
b. Basenji dogs with Fanconi syndrome (will also have proteinuria, isosthenuria, and
aminoaciduria).
4. Hematuria in Welsh corgi dogs with renal telangiectasia or German shepherd dogs witl
multifocal renal cystadenocarcinomas.
5. Pyuria and other evidence of urinary tract infection (UTI) may occur (e.g., Welsh corgi
dogs with renal telangiectasia).
IMAGING
A. In many dogs and cats with familial renal disease the kidneys are small on radiographs and
show irregular contour, increased echogenicity, and decreased corticomedullary distinction
on ultrasound examination.
B. Renal cysts in animals with PKD have a characteristic ultrasonographic appearance (i.e., mul-
tiple round anechoic lesions with distal acoustic enhancement in both kidneys).
C. Welsh corgi dogs with renal telangiectasia may have evidence of nephrocalcinosis or hydrone-
phrosis if ureteral obstruction by a blood clot occurs.
PATHOLOGIC FINDINGS
A. Familial renal disease is characterized by the presence of primary dysplastic lesions, compen-
satory lesions, and degenerative lesions.
 B. In many cases, the secondary degenerative lesions overshadow the underlying primary dys-
plastic lesions, making the correct diagnosis difficult.
C. Primary dysplastic lesions that have been observed in some familial renal disease of dogs
include:
1. Immature or "fetal" glomeruli (see Figure 6-1).
 2. Hyperplasia or adenomatoid proliferation of the medullary collecting ducts.
 3. Persistent mesenchyme in the renal medulla.
D. Primary dysplastic changes are most prominent in the Lhasa apso, Shih tzu, soft-coated
Wheaten terriers with renal dysplasia, standard poodle, chow, and miniature Schnauzer.
202 CHAPTER 6 ■ Familial Renal Diseases of Dogs and Cats
E. Juvenile renal diseases in the Samoyed, English Cocker spaniel, and bull terrier result
from abnormalities of type IV collagen in glomerular basement membranes and represent
animal models of X-linked dominant, autosomal recessive, and autosomal dominant heredi-
tary nephritis in humans, respectively.
F. Secondary degenerative lesions that are observed commonly in familial renal disease include
interstitial fibrosis, interstitial infiltration by mononuclear inflammatory cells, dystrophic
mineralization, and cystic glomerular atrophy.
Abyssinian Cat (Amyloidosis)
INTRODUCTION AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
A. Difficulty in determining the mode of inheritance arises from variability in severity and pro-
 gression of amyloidosis among affected Abyssinian cats, but the disease appears to be inher-
ited as an autosomal dominant trait with variable penetrance.
B. Amyloid deposits in the kidneys of affected Abyssinian cats contain amyloid protein AA.
C. The amino acid sequence of the amyloid AA protein in affected Siamese cats differs slightly
from that found in affected Abyssinian cats and this difference may explain the predilection
for hepatic deposition in affected Siamese cats (see later).
SIGNALMENT
 A. Abyssinian cats with familial amyloidosis usually are presented between 1 and 5 years of
age.
B. Male and female cats are equally affected.
CLINICAL COURSE
A. Amyloid deposits first appear in the kidneys between 9 and 24 months of age and, in many
cats, amyloid deposition leads to CRF within the first 3 years of life.
B. Amyloid deposition in the kidney may be mild, and some affected cats may live to an advanced
age without detection of their amyloid deposits.
an  g s a si p   a e si  
FIGURE 6-2  Medullary amyloid deposits in an Abyssinian cat with familial amyloidosis (Congo red stain,
polarized, x100.)
Familial Renal Diseases of Dogs and Cats  CHAPTER 6
6203
PATHOLOGIC FINDINGS
A. The principal pathologic lesions in the kidneys of Abyssinian cats with familial amyloidosis
are medullary amyloid deposits (Figure 6-2), papillary necrosis (Figure 6-3), chronic tubuloin-
terstitial nephritis characterized by lymphoplasmacytic infiltration and fibrosis, and variable
glomerular amyloid deposits.
B. Glomerular amyloidosis is mild and often difficult to detect in many affected cats, but occa-
sionally it can be severe.
C. Medullary amyloid deposition was found in all affected Abyssinians whereas glomerulan
deposits were found in 75%
 D. Medullary interstitial amyloid deposits interfere with blood flow to the renal papilla, resulting
in papillary necrosis and secondary interstitial medullary fibrosis and mononuclear inflam-
mation.
E. Amyloid deposition is not restricted to the kidneys in Abyssinian cats with amyloidosis, and
deposits frequently are found in other organs (e.g., adrenal glands, thyroid glands, spleen,
stomach, small intestine, heart, liver, pancreas, colon).
1.
contribution to the clinical syndrome, which is that of CRF.
2. In Siamese cats (including the Oriental Shorthair cat, which is a color variant of the Sia-
mese) severe deposition of amyloid in the liver can result in hepatic rupture and hemoab-
Alaskan Malamute (Suspected Renal Dysplasia)
 1. CRF in 3 sibling malamute pups (4 to 11 months of age) was associated with histologic evidence
of renal dysplasia.
I1. The lesions observed included immature ("fetal") glomeruli, cystic glomerular atrophy, glomeru
lar sclerosis, periglomerular fibrosis, adenomatoid hyperplasia of tubules, and persistent mesen
chymal tissue.
B
FGURE 6-3  Gross (A) and microsopic (B) appearance of papillary necrosis in an Abyssinian cat with familial
amyloidosis (x4.25).
204 CHAPTER 6 ■ Familial Renal Diseases of Dogs and Cats
Basenji (Tubular Dysfunction)
 1. Histologic findings in the kidneys of Basenji dogs with Fanconi syndrome are not consistent.
A. Nonspecific findings include tubular atrophy and interstitial fibrosis.
B. One morphologic marker for this disease may be enlarged, hyperchromatic nuclei in renal
tubular cells (renal tubular cell karyomegaly).
I1.Affected animals may deteriorate rapidly and die of acute renal failure with papillary necrosis or
pyelonephritis.
I1.
. See Chapter 17, Miscellaneous Syndromes, for more information about Fanconi syndrome in
Basenji dogs.
Beagle (Amyloidosis, Suspected Basement Membrane Disorder)
I. A family of adult beagles developed glomerular amyloidosis and nephrotic syndrome charac-
terized by proteinuria, hypercholesterolemia, and renal failure. Some dogs had mild medullary
deposition of amyloid. The amyloid deposits were sensitive to permanganate oxidation, suggest-
ing the presence of amyloid protein AA.
II. In another study, a family of beagles with proteinuria, late-onset renal failure, and multilaminar
splitting of the glomerular basement membranes was described.
Bernese Mountain Dog (Familial Glomerulonephritis)
1. Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis resembling membranoproliferative glomerulone-
phritis type I in human beings was described in young (2-to-5-year-old) male and female Bernese
moumtain dogs.
 II.Affected dogs had typical laboratory abnormalities of renal failure as well as marked proteinuria,
hypercholesterolemia, and hypoalbuminemia.
 II.  Pedigree analysis suggested an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance.
IV. Ultrastructural lesions included a double-layered glomerular basement membrane and electron-
dense deposits, primarily in a subendothelial location.
V. Immunoglobulin M and the third component of complement were identified by immunofluores-
cence in glomeruli of affected dogs.
VI. Most of the dogs had high serologic titers against Borrelia burgdorferi, but the organism could not
be detected immunohistochemically in the tissues of affected dogs.
Brittany Spaniel (Familial Glomerulonephritis)
 1.  Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis has been reported in Brittany spaniels with deficiency
of the third component of complement.
Bull Terrier Basement Membrane Disorder (Hereditary Nephritis)
 1.  Familial renal disease leading to CRF has been reported in bull terriers aged 1 to 8 years
I1. Both male and female dogs are affected.
Ill. Inherited as an autosomal dominant trait.
IV.  Proteinuria is an early manifestation and correlates with underlying glomerular lesions in affected
bull terriers. Repeated urine protein-to-creatinine ratios of >0.3 are considered to be supportive
ia paao inouim inq aoe jo sieak z ueu rapio sianan imq ioadsns ui aseasip au jo auapiaa
dence of renal failure.
Familial Renal Diseases of Dogs and Cats  CHAPTER 6  205
V. Hematuria also may occur.
VI. Light microscopic lesions include glomerular sclerosis, periglomerular fibrosis, interstitial fibro-
sis with minimal inflammation, and cystic dilatation of Bowman's space.
VII. Characteristic ultrastructural lesions of the glomerular basement membranes included lamel-
lations, subepithelial frilling, vacuolation, and intramembranous electron-dense deposits. Foot
process effacement and mesangial matrix expansion also were observed in glomeruli of affected
dogs.
VIII. Immunohistochemical staining demonstrated presence of type IV collagen in the kidneys of
affected dogs.
Bull Terrier Polycystic Kidney Disease
I. Inherited as an autosomal dominant trait.
I1. Multiple cysts occur in the cortex and medulla of both kidneys.
II. Affected dogs did not have hepatic cysts.
 IV. The epithelial cysts are of nephron or collecting tubule origin and secondary renal lesions include
atrophic glomeruli, dilatation of Bowman's space, tubular loss, tubular dilatation, interstitial
fibrosis, and inflammation.
V. Renal failure does not occur until middle to owd age.
VI. There is evidence that PKD and hereditary nephritis can occur simultaneously in some bull
terriers.
Bullmastiff (Suspected Basement Membrane Disorder)
 s sias rra pas aq pza ara rn  1
described in bullmastiffs.
II. Pedigree analysis suggested autosomal recessive inheritance.
Ill. Both males and females were affected.
IV. Age at euthanasia or death ranged from 2.5 to 11 years.
V. Clinical signs were nonspecific and related to chronic renal failure
Vl. Onset was insidious, and several dogs appeared healthy until shortly before death.
 Vll. Severe proteinuria on urinalysis and increased urine protein-to-creatinine ratios were observed.
VII. Glomerular lesions included segmental expansion of mesangial matrix by collagen (i.e., sclero
sis), increased numbers of cells in the expanded areas, and marked dilatation of Bowman's space
(cystic glomerular atrophy)
 IX. Secondary lesions included interstitial fibrosis, tubular atrophy, and lymphoplasmacytic cellulal
infiltrates.
 X. Immunoglobulin deposition was mild and thought to be a secondary lesion.
Xl. Suspected to be a glomerular basement membrane disorder.
Xll. Histologic findings resemble focal segmental glomerular sclerosis in humans.
Cairn and West Highland White Terrier (Polycystic Kidney
Disease)
I. Autosomal recessive PKD in the young (6-week-old) Cairn terrier is characterized by the pres-
ence of multiple cysts in the liver and kidneys.
I. Autosomal recessive PKD also has been reported in young (5-week-old) West Highland white
terriers.
206  CHAPTER 6 ■ Familial Renal Diseases of Dogs and Cats
Chow (Suspected Renal Dysplasia)
 1. CRF in 6 young related chows (5 male and 1 female) was suggestive of renal dysplasia
 II. Renal failure developed in four dogs by 6 months of age and in two dogs after 1 year
ofage.
Il. Renal dysplasia was suspected based on presence of immature ("fetal") glomeruli and pseu-
 dostratified columnar epithelium in renal tubules of some dogs.
English Cocker Spaniel (Basement Membrane Disorder)
I. Juvenile renal disease in the English Cocker spaniel is an animal model of autosomal recessive
hereditary nephritis in human beings. Hereditary nephropathies can arise from mutations in any
one of three genes that code for the type IV collagen heterotrimer component chains found in the
glomerular basement membranes (i.e., COL4A3, COL4A4, COL4A5).
 II. Autosomal recessive hereditary nephritis of the English Cocker spaniel is a type IV collagen
defect caused by a mutation in exon 3 of the COL4A4 gene.
IIl. Absence of the type IV collagen heterotrimers α3.α4.α5(IV) in the glomerular basement mem-
branes of affected dogs accounts for the observed progressive ultrastructural renal pathology. This
pathology is the same as described in Samoyeds and Navasota Texas (NAV) dogs with X-linked
dominant hereditary nephritis that lack α3.α4.α5(IV) in their glomerular basement membranes as
a consequence of mutations in the COL4A5 gene (see later).
IV. The disease affects both male and female English Cocker spaniels and manifests itself between 6
and 24 months of age.
V. The earliest detectable abnormality (5 to 8 months of age) is proteinuria followed by reduced
Vl. The primary lesion is thickening and multilaminar splitting of the glomerular basement mem-
brane. This lesion is identical to that observed in Samoyeds with X-linked hereditary nephritis
(Figure 6-4).
Vl1. The disease ultimately leads to diffuse glomerular sclerosis and periglomerular fibrosis with sec-
ondary tubulointerstitial disease and is invariably fatal.
FIGURE 6-4 ■ Endothelial cell separation (thin arrow, teft panel, x8000) and bilaminar splitting of glomerular
basement membrane (thick arrowhead, right panel, x17,300) in a 1-month-old male Samoyed dog with hereditary
nephritis. (From: Jansen B, Thormer P, Baumal R, et al: Samoyed hereditary glomerulopathy (SHG). Evolution of
splitting of glomerular capillary basement membranes. Amt / Patho! 125:536, 1986.)
Familial Renal Diseases of Dogs and Cats  CHAPTER 6  207
Dalmatian (Basement Membrane Disorder)
 1.  Autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance affecting males and females equally.
 II. Mean age of onset of renal failure was 18 months.
II1.May be identified initially by increased urine protein-to-creatinine ratios (>0.3).
IV. Renal histopathology includes segmental glomerular sclerosis, tubulointerstitial inflammation,
and interstitial fibrosis.
V. Utrastructural findings consist of lamellation of the glomerular basement membrane with sub-
epithelial frilling, vacuolation, and occasional intramembranous deposits.
V1. All α1(IV) to α5(IV) type IV collagen chains were identified in the kidneys of affected dogs by
immunohistochemistry.
Doberman Pinscher (Suspected Basement Membrane Disorder)
 I.  Diffuse thickening or multifocal irregular thickening with lamellation of the lamina densa has
been observed in the glomerular basement membranes of Doberman pinschers with glomeru
lopathy.
I1. Occasionally, deposits of immunoglobulins have been detected in the glomerular capillary wall,
 but these are thought to result from nonspecific trapping of immune complexes in basement
membranes with some underlying structural defect.
Ill.  Unilateral renal aplasia has been observed in some affected female Doberman pinschers
IV. Additional glomerular lesions include lobular accentuation of glomerular capillary loops,
increased mesangial matrix, hypercellularity, intraglomerular adhesions, fibroepithelial crescent
formation, and periglomerular fibrosis.
English Foxhound (Amyloidosis)
 I. Renal amyloidosis was reported in related adult English foxhounds
I. The disease had an acute presentation characterized by renomegaly and papillary necrosis in
some affected dogs.
II. Amyloid deposits were sensitive to permanganate oxidation, suggesting the presence of amyloid
protein AA.
German Shepherd (Renal Cystadenocarcinoma)
1. German shepherd dogs with bilateral multifocal renal cystadenocarcinomas are presented
e 'eisdphod 'ssoi am 'exaroue se yns sis ooadsu no ae jo srea il pue g uaamiaq
gastrointestinal disturbances.
 I. The renal lesions were accompanied by cutaneous and subcutaneous nodules (dermatofibrosis)
 and multiple uterine leiomyomas in affected female dogs.
II.  The disorder is thought to be inherited as an autosomal dominant trait.
Golden Retriever (Suspected Renal Dysplasia)
1.  CRF has been reported in young golden retrievers (<3 years of age).
I1.Hypercholesterolemia was a common finding despite lack of other evidence of primary glomerulal
disease in most affected dogs.
ll. Hypercalcemia also was common and attributed to increased serum complexed calcium
concentration.
208  CHAPTER 6 ■ Familial Renal Diseases of Dogs and Cats
IV. Cystic glomerular atrophy and periglomerular fibrosis were common histologic lesions whereas
immature ("fetal") glomeruli were uncommon.
V. Adenomatoid proliferation of the collecting ducts suggestive of primitive metanephric ducts was
observed in several dogs and supports a diagmosis of renal dysplasia.
VI. Pyelonephritis occasionally complicated the disease in affected dogs.
Lhasa Apso and Shih Tzu (Suspected Renal Dysplasia)
 I. In the Lhasa apso and Shih tzu, microscopic findings include a reduced number of glomeruli,
glomerular atrophy, and small, immature ("fetal") glomeruli, which are hypercellular and have
inconspicuous capillary lumens (see Figure 6-1).
I1. Tubular changes include atrophy, dilatation, and epithelial hyperplasia.
Il. Interstitial fibrosis is particularly severe in the renal medulla, whereas interstitial inflammation is
minimal.
and, along with the immature glomeruli, is evidence of a primary renal dysplasia.
Miniature Schnauzer (Suspected Renal Dysplasia)
age from 4 months to 3 years.
II. Immature ("fetal") glomeruli, glomerular sclerosis, and severe interstitial fibrosis were
observed.
Newfoundland
1. A glomerulonephropathy characterized by expansion of the mesangium by collagen (glomerular
sclerosis) was observed in three male and female Newfoundland dogs younger than 1 year of
age from one litter of eight dogs.
I1. Clinical findings included proteinuria, hypoalbuminemia, and severe renal failure at a very
young age.
A
B
FIGURE 6-5 ■ Gross appearance of Persian cat kidneys with polycystic disease. A, Kidney from a younger
affected cat. B, Kidney from an older affected cat with advanced disease (notice hemorrhage in some cysts).
Familial Renal Diseases of Dogs and Cats  CHAPTER 6
209
Norwegian Elkhound (Suspected Renal Dysplasia, Renal
Glucosuria)
1. In the Norwegian elkhound, periglomerular fibrosis is an early histologic lesion that may be
detected in some dogs before the onset of azotemia.
sis with glomerular sclerosis and atrophy.
 II. Hyperplasia of the collecting ducts also has been observed and may represent a primary dys-
 IV. Norwegian elkhounds may also develop primary renal glucosuria that is not associated with
CRF.
Persian Cat (Polycystic Kidney Disease)
 I. PKD is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait in Persian cats.
I1. The prevalence of PKD in Persian cats in various countries has been observed to be between
35% and 57% as determined by ultrasonography. Worldwide, approximately one third of Per
sian cats appear to be affected.
III. Cysts originate from both the proximal and distal tubules, occur both in the renal cortex and
medulla, and increase in number and size over time (Figure 6-5).
IV. Cysts can be detected by ultrasound examination of affected kittens as early as 6 to 8 weeks
of age, but the absence of cysts at this early age does not preclude their development at a later
age. In one study, ultrasound examination had a sensitivity of 75% and specificity of 100%
when performed at 16 weeks of age and a sensitivity of 91% and specificity of 100% when
performed at 36 weeks of age.
V. Although common in human patients with PKD, hypertension has been absent or mild in
cats with PKD that have been evaluated.
VI. Affected Persian cats usually do not develop renal failure until later in adult life (average,
7 years), and renomegaly may be an incidental finding on physical examination.
VII. Occasionally, cysts may be found in the liver.
VIII. A mutation in exon 29 of the polycystin I gene has been identified in affected Persian cats. No
cats homozygous for the mutation have been identified, suggesting that the mutation is lethal
to the developing fetus. Genetic tests for the disease have been developed.
Rottweiler (Suspected Basement Membrane Disorder)
 1. CRF was reported in 8 Rottweilers (five females and three males) ranging in age from 6 to 12
months. Several of the reported dogs were related to one another.
 II. Affected dogs were azotemic, hyperphosphatemic, hypoproteinemic, and some had hyper
cholesterolemia.
III. Isosthenuria, proteinuria on dipstrip analysis, and high urine protein-to-creatinine ratios
were observed.
matrix expansion, irregular thickening of glomerular capillary loops, occasional crescents,
glomerular sclerosis, tubular atrophy, and interstitial fibrosis were described.
V. On electron microscopy, glomerular basement membranes had extensive thickening and
splitting of the lamina densa. Podocyte foot process effacement also was described. The
ultrastructural findings were considered compatible with a primary basement membrane
disorder.
210
CHAPTER 6  Familial Renal Diseases of Dogs and Cats
Samoyed (Basement Membrane Disorder)
1. Juvenile renal disease in this family is a hereditary glomerulopathy arising from a mutation
in exon 35 of the COL4A5 gene for the 5(IV) collagen chain on the X chromosome.
I1. Male Samoyed dogs with hereditary nephritis develop proteinuria, glucosuria, and isosthe-
nuria by 2 to 3 months of age, azotemia by 6 to 9 months of age, and die due to renal failure
usually by 12 to 16 months of age.
II1. Because affected male dogs have a single mutated copy of the COL4A5 gene, they completely
lack 3. 4. 5(IV) in their glomerular basement membranes.
IV. Mesangial thickening, glomerular sclerosis, and periglomerular fibrosis are observed by light
microscopy in affected males by 8 to 10 months of age.
V. Carrier female dogs have two copies of the COL4A5 gene, one mutated and one normal.
Because of normal random inactivation of one X chromosome in each cell of the female
embryo during development, their glomerular basement membranes contain mosaic expres-
sion of α3.α4.α5(IV); that is, the normal collagen IV network is present in some areas and
completely absent in others, at least initially.
VI. Carrier female dogs develop proteinuria at 2 to 3 months of age but remain clinically normal
as young adults (<5 years of age) other than sometimes failing to achieve normal adult body
weight.
VIl. At birth, the glomerular basement membranes of affected male Samoyed dogs are morpho-
logically normal, but reduplication and bilaminar splitting of the lamina densa are detected
by electron microscopy at 1 month of age and progress to multilaminar splitting, thickening.
and glomerular sclerosis by 8 to 10 months of age (see Figure 6-4). Carrier female dogs have
only focal splitting of their glomerular basement membranes and generally do not develop
juvenile-onset progressive disease.
VIII. Proteinuria and progressive renal disease presumably result from wear and tear on glomeru
lar basement membranes weakened by abnormal cross-linking of type IV collagen.
 IX. Deterioration of basement membranes and onset of renal failure in affected male dogs can
be delayed but not prevented by feeding a diet low in protein and phosphorus beginning at 1
monthof age.
 X. Treatment of affected dogs with angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or cyclospo-
rine A has slowed (but not prevented) progression of the disease.
B
3
FIGURE 6-6  Gross appearance (A) of Shar pei dog kidney with medullary amyloid deposition (stained dark
blue with Lugol's iodine) and microscopic appearance (B) of glomerular amyloid deposition (Congo red stain,
nonpolarized, x40).
Familial Renal Diseases of Dogs and Cats  CHAPTER 6  211
XI. Juvenile renal disease in the mixed breed (Navasota) dog kindred is a hereditary glomerulopa-
thy arising from a mutation in exon 9 of the COL4A5 gene for the α5(IV) collagen chain on the
X chromosome. This family of dogs has been perpetuated in a research colony (at Texas A&M
University) to study the disease. The clinical, histopathologic, ultrastructural, and immunohis
tologic features of this disease are basically the same as those described above for the Samoyed
kindred.
Shar Pei (Amyloidosis)
 1. Familial amyloidosis resulting in CRF at a young age (mean, 4 years) occurs in male and female
Shar pei dogs.
I1. Proteinuria and laboratory evidence of nephrotic syndrome (e.g., hypoalbuminemia, hypercho-
lesterolemia) may be present, depending on the severity of glomerular involvement.
 II. Some affected Shar pei dogs had a previous history of episodic joint swelling (usually the tibio-
tarsal joints) and high fever that resolves within a few days, regardless of treatment.
IV. Recurrent fever and joint swelling, culminating in CRF due to reactive systemic amyloidosis in
young Shar pei dogs may represent an animal model of familial Mediterranean fever in man.
V. There is some evidence that amyloidosis in the Shar pei dog is inherited as an autosomal reces-
sive trait.
VI. Affected Shar pei dogs have moderate to severe renal medullary deposition of amyloid, but
only two thirds have glomerular involvement (Figure 6-6). These findings are similar to those
observed in Abyssinian cats with familial amyloidosis
VII. The remaining renal lesions are those of end-stage renal disease.
VIIl. Amino acid sequence analysis has demonstrated that the amyloid deposits in affected Shar pei
dogs contain amyloid A protein.
IX. In addition to the kidney, amyloid deposits may be observed in many other organs
(e.g., liver, spleen, gastrointestinal tract, thyroid gland).
X. Icterus, hepatomegaly, and occasionally hepatic rupture with hemoabdomen may occur in Shar
pei dogs with severe deposition of amyloid in the liver.
Familial Renal Disease in the Soft-Coated Wheaten Terrier (SCWT)
1. May Take the Form of Renal Dysplasia or Membranoproliferative Glomerulonephritis.
A. Pathologic findings in some SCWT with juvenile renal disease are suggestive of renal dysplasia.
1. Histologic lesions include interstitial fibrosis, periglomerular fibrosis, cystic glomerular
atrophy, decreased numbers of glomeruli, and the presence of immature ("fetal") glom-
eruli (see Figure 6-1).
 2. Adenomatous proliferation of the collecting duct epithelium also is a prominent feature.
 3. Multiple small cysts, renal cortical hyperechogenicity, and decreased corticomedullary
distinction may be observed on ultrasonography.
B. SCWT also are predisposed to protein-losing enteropathy (PLE), protein-losing nephropathy
(PLN) or both
1. Food hypersensitivity and increased gut permeability presumably lead to immune com-
 plex glomerulonephritis that progresses to end-stage renal disease.
2.
Results of gastroscopic food sensitivity testing and dietary challenge support the hypoth-
esis of food hypersensitivity, but gluten hypersensitivity does not seem to be involved.
3. The disease is thought to be present in 10% to 15% of SCWT and affects middle-aged to
older dogs with a slight predilection for females.
4. The mode of inheritance is uncertain
212  CHAPTER 6 ■ Familial Renal Diseases of Dogs and Cats
5. Clinical findings include polyuria, polydipsia, vomiting, and weight loss in dogs with PLN,
and proteinuria, hypoalbuminemia, hypercholesterolemia, azotemia, hyperphosphatemia
and nonregenerative anemia are common laboratory findings.
6. Hypertension occasionally develops, and thromboembolism complicates the disease in 12%
of SCWT with PLN
7. Renal lesions consist of membranous to membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis that
progresses to glomerular sclerosis, periglomerular fibrosis, and chronic interstitial nephritis.
8. Mesangial deposition of immunoglobulin A (IgA), immunoglobulin M (IgM), and comple-
ment has been detected by immunofluorescence, suggesting that renal disease in the SCWT
9. The disease is progressive, treatment is palliative, and the progmosis is poor.
10. Treatment with sodium chromoglycate to stabilize mast cells and decrease intestinal perme-
ability and a protein hydrolysate diet (if not contraindicated due to the presence of renal
failure) has been tried in SCWT with PLE.
11. Dogs with CRF due to PLN should be fed an appropriate diet for renal failure patients.
SCWT with PLN also should be treated with an ACE inhibitor (e.g., enalapril) to reduce the
severity of proteinuria.
Standard Poodle (Suspected Renal Dysplasia)
I. In affected standard poodles, cystic glomerular atrophy and large numbers of imma-
ture ("fetal") glomeruli are observed, especially in dogs presented at 3 to 4 months of age
(see Figure 6-1).
II. The cortical interstitium contains segmental areas of fibrosis, whereas more diffuse lesions occur
in the medulla.
Welsh Corgi (Renal Telangiectasia)
 1. Welsh corgi dogs with renal telangiectasia have red to black nodules in the kidneys, especially in
the renal medulla adjacent to the corticomedullary junction.
II1. Clotted blood often is identified in these lesions and in the renal pelvis.
II1. Hydronephrosis (presumably due to ureteral obstruction) occurs in almost half of affected dogs.
IV. Similar nodular lesions may be identified in other tissues including the subcutis, spleen, duode-
num, anterior mediastinum, thoracic wall, retroperitoneal space, and central nervous system.
V. Histologically, these lesions are cavernous, blood-filled spaces lined with endothelium, and throm-
bosis is a frequent finding in the sinuses.
VI. These sinuses with their simple endothelial linings may represent vascular malformations rather
than benign tumors of vascular origin.
WHAT DO WE DO?
· Obtain renal biopsy specimens from young dogs and cats with clinical abnormalities suspicious of
familial renal disease before azotemia develops.
● Submit renal biopsy specimens from affected animals for special stains (e.g., Masson's trichrome,
periodic acid Schiff, Congo red), for immunohistochemistry to detect immunoglobulins, and for
transmission electron microscopy to evaluate ultrastructural morphology in addition to samples
for routine light microscopy. Samples should be submitted to a pathologist who is familiar with the
light and electron microscopic features of familial renal disease.
· Avoid renal biopsy in affected animals with very small kidneys and advanced azotemia
Familial Renal Diseases of Dogs and Cats  CHAPTER 6
6213
THOUGHTS FOR THE FUTURE
· The genes and mutations responsible for additional familial renal diseases of dogs and cats will be
identified, and genetic tests to identify animals at risk will be developed.
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
Q: A 3-month-old dog of a specific breed is presented for evaluation of polyuria, polydipsia,
dilute urine (urine specific gravity [USG] 1.012), and moderate azotemia (serum creatinine con-
centration, 3.7 mg/dL). Proteinuria (2+) is found on urine dipstrip evaluation. The health status
of the other littermates cannot be determined. What is the chance that this dog has a familial
nephropathy?
A: It is very possible that the dog indeed has a familial nephropathy. It is also possible, however,
that renal disease was acquired in utero or soon after birth as a result of nongenetic factors. Informa
tion from diagnostic imaging and renal histopathology would allow an accurate diagnosis to be made.
Q: A 5-year-old dog of a specific breed is presented in what appears to be chronic renal failure.
Could a genetic disease be responsible for chronic renal failure in this dog?
A: The age of onset of many familial renal diseases is very variable and clinical signs can be manr
ifested later in life. Proving the underlying cause for chronic renal failure in middle-aged animals
can be challenging. Some renal histopathologic findings may suggest familial renal disease (e.g., fetal
glomeruli). Absence of such changes however does not necessarily exclude familial renal disease.
Q: What can be done to preserve renal structure and function as well as to prolong survival in dogs
and cats with familial renal disease?
A: Dietary intervention using a veterinary renal diet and ACE inhibition have been shown to be
beneficial in some forms of familial nephropathy (e.g., X-linked familial nephropathy in Samoyed
dogs). ACE inhibition may be beneficial to decrease intraglomerular pressure and proteinuria in many
SUGGESTED READINGS
General
Picut CA, Lewis RM: Microscopic features of canine renal dysplasia, Vet Pathol 24:156-163, 1987
Abyssinian Cats
Boyce JT, DiBartola SP, Chew D], et al: Familial renal amyloidosis in Abyssinian cats, Vet Pathol 21:33-38, 1984.
Chew D], DiBartola SP, Boyce JT, et al: Renal amyloidosis in related Abyssinian cats, I Amm Vet Med Assoc 181:139-142, 1982.
DiBartola SP, Benson MD, Dwulet FE, et al: Isolation and characterization of amyloid protein AA in the Abyssinian cat,
Lab Invest 52:485-489, 1985.
DiBartola SP, Tarr Mj, Benson MD: Tissue distribution of amyloid deposits in Abyssinian cats with familial amyloidosis
} Comp Pathol 96:387-398, 1986.
failure,  Small Anim Pract 39:442447, 1998.
Niewold TA, van der Linde-Sipman JS, Murphy C, et al: Familial amyloidosis in cats: Siamese and Abyssinian AA proteins
'666t '6oz-sozg pioiy uosodap jo uaed pue aouanbas Areud ui a
Alaskan Malamutes
Vilafranca M, Ferrer L: Juvenile nephropathy in Alaskan Malamute littermates, Vet Pathol 31:375-377, 1994.
214  CHAPTER 6 ■ Familial Renal Diseases of Dogs and Cats
Basenji
Bovee KC, Joyce T, Blazer-Yost B, et al: Characterization of renal defects in dogs with a syndrome similar to the Fanconi
syndrome in man, I A Vet Med Assoc 174:10941099, 1979.
Hsu BY, MeNamara PD, MahoneySG, et al: Membrane fluidity and sodium transport by renal membranes from dogs with
spontaneous idiopathic Fanconi syndrome, Metabolism 41, 1992:253-159.
ss paun a ui siuasa ui auouss quouen jo uonqsp oudeooal pue aualeaaid f Aey H ueuoon
} Am Vet Med Assoc 197:345349, 1990.
Beagle
Bowles MH, Mosier DA: Renal amyloidosis in a family of beagles, I Arm Vet Med Assoc 201:569-574, 1992.
Rha JY, Labato MA, Ross LA, et al: Familial glomerulonephropathy in a litter of beagles, I Amm Vet Med Assoc 216:46-50, 32,
2000.
Bernese Mountain Dog
Minkus G, Breuer W, Wanke R, et al: Familial nephropathy in Bernese Mountain dogs, Vet Pathol 31:421-428, 1994.
Reusch C, Hoerauf A, Lechner J, et al: A new familial glomerulonephropathy in Bernese mountain dogs, Vet Rec 134:
4T1415, 1994.
Brittany Spaniel
deficiency of the third component of complement, Clin Immunol Immunopathol 60:455470, 1991.
Bull Terrier
Burrows AK, Malik R, Hunt GB, et al: Familial polycystic kidney disease in bull terriers, } Small Arim Pract 35:364-369,
1994.
Hood JC, Dowling J, Bertram JF, et al: Correlation of histopathological features and renal impairment in autosomal
dominant Alport syndrome in Bull terriers, Nephrol Dial Transplant 17:1897-1908, 2002.
 ym st  ui asas ieu Aea go n e se e e ia    uos  po
nephritis, / Small Anim Pract 32:241-248, 1991.
Hood JC, Robinson WF, Huxtable CR, et al: Hereditary nephritis in the bull terrier: Evidence for inheritance by an
autosomal dominant gene, Vet Rec 126:456-459, 1990.
Hood JC, Savige J, Hendtlass A, et al: Bull terrier hereditary nephritis: A model for autosomal dominant Alport syndrome)
Kidney Int 47:758-765, 1995.
Hood JC, Savige J, Seymour AE, et al: Ultrastructural appearance of renal and other basement membranes in the Bull
7a I a Z N saat g u u Aedouda aissd p e ia T aea  a  sf
1989.
O'Leary CA,Ghoddusi M, Huxtable CR: Renal pathology of polycystic kidney disease and concurrent hereditary nephritis
in Bull Terriers, Aust Vet ∫ 80:353-361, 2002.
Robinson WF, Shaw SE, Stanley B, et al: Chronic renal disease in Bullterriers, Aust Vet I 66:193-195, 1989.
Bullmastiff
Casal ML, Dambach DM, Meister T, et al: Familial glomerulonephropathy in the Bullmastiff, Vet Pathol 41:319-325,
2004.
Cairn and West Highland White Terrier
McAloose D, Casal M, Patterson DF,et al: Polycystic kidney and liver disease in two related West Highland White Terrier
litters, Vet Pathol 35:77-81, 1998.
McKenna SC, Carpenter JL: Polycystic disease of the kidney and liver in the Cairn terrier, Vet Pathol 17:436-442,
1980.
Chow
Brown CA, Crowell WA, Brown SA, et al: Suspected familial renal disease in Chow Chows,  Am Vet Med Assoc 196:
12791284, 1990.
Familial Renal Diseases of Dogs and Cats ■ CHAPTER 6  215
English Cocker Spaniel
Davidson AG, Bell RJ, Lees GE, et al: Genetic cause of autosomal recessive hereditary nephropathy in the English Cocker
spaniel, / Vet Int Med 21:394401, 2007.
Lees GE, Helman RG, Homco LD, et al: Early diagnosis of familial nephropathy in English cocker spaniels, I Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 34:189-195, 1998.
Lees GE, Helman RG, Kashtan CE, et al: A model of autosomal recessive Alport syndrome in English cocker spaniel dogs,
Kidney Int 54:706-719,1998.
Lees GE, Wilson PD, Helman RG, et al: Glomerular ultrastructural findings similar to hereditary nephritis in 4 English
cocker spaniels, / Vet Interr Med 11:80-85, 1997.
Dalmatian
Hood JC, Huxtable CR, Naito I, et al: A novel model of autosomal dominant Alport syndrome in Dalmatian dogs, Nephrol
Dial Trarsplant 17:20942098, 2002
Doberman Pinscher
Chew DJ, DiBartola SP, Boyce JT, et al: Juvenile renal disease in Doberman pinscher dogs, Am Vet Med Assoc 182:481-485,
1983.
 Picut CA, Lewis RM: Juvenile renal disease in the Doberman pinscher: Ultrastructural changes of the glomerular base
ment membrane, } Comp Pathol 97:587-596, 1987.
Wilcock BP, Patterson JM: Familial glomerulonephritis in Doberman pinscher dogs, Car Vet ∫ 20:244-249, 1979.
English Foxhound
Mason NJ, Day Mj: Renal amyloidosis in related English foxhounds, / Small Anim Pract 37:255-260, 1996.
German Shepherd
Lium B, Moe L: Hereditary multifocal renal cystadenocarcinomas and nodular dermatofibrosis in the German Shepherd
Moe L, Lium B: Computed tomography of hereditary multifocal renal cystadenocarcinomas in German shepherd dogs,
Vet Radiol LIltrasound 38:335-343, 1997.
Moe L, Lium B: Hereditary multifocal renal cystadenocarcinomas and nodular dermatofibrosis in 51 German shepherd
dogs,} Small Anim Pract 38:498-505, 1997.
Golden Retriever
209:792-797, 1996.
Kerlin RL, Van Winkle Tj: Renal dysplasia in golden retrievers, Vet Pathol 32:327-329, 1995.
Lhasa Apso and Shih Tzu
 OBrien TD, Osborne CA, Yano BL, et al: Clinicopathologic manifestations of progressive renal disease in Lhasa apso and
Shih tzu dogs, I A Vet Med Assoc 180:658-664, 1982.
Miniature Schnauzer
Morton LD, Sanecki RK, Gordon DE, et al: Juvenile renal disease in Miniature Schnauzer dogs, Vet Pathol 27:455-458, 1990.
Navasota Texas (NAV) Dogs
Cox ML, Lees GE, Kashtan CE, et al: Genetic cause of X-linked Alport syndrome in a family of domestic dogs, Mamm
Ger10me 14:396403, 2003.
Lees GE, Helman RG, Kashtan CE, et al: New form of X-linked dominant hereditary nephritis in dogs, Am J Vet Res
60:373383, 1999.
Newfoundland
Koeman JP, Biewenga W], Gruys E: Proteinuria associated with glomerulosclerosis and glomerular collagen formation in
three Newfoundland dog littermates, Vet Pathot 31:188-193, 1994.
216CHAPTER 6 ■ Familial Renal Diseases of Dogs and Cats
Norwegian Elkhound
 Finco DR: Familial renal disease in Norwegian Elkhound dogs: Physiologic and biochemical examinations, Am J Vet Res
37:87-91, 1976.
Finco DR, Duncan JR, Crowell WA, et al: Familial renal disease in Norwegian elkhound dogs: Morphologic examinations,
Ar  Vet Res 38:941947, 1977.
Finco DR, Kurtz HJ, Low DG, et al: Familial renal disease in Norwegian elkhound dogs,  Am Vet Med Assoc 156:747-760)
1970.
Persian Cat
Barrs VR, Gunew M, Foster SF, et al: Prevalence of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease in Persian cats and
related breeds in Sydney and Brisbane, Aust Vet } 79:257-259, 2001.
 Barthez PY, Rivier P,Begon D: Prevalence of polycystic kidney disease in Persian and Persian related cats in France, I Feline
Med Surg 5:345-347, 2003.
Aust Vet  79:181184, 2001
Biller DS, Chew DJ, DiBartola SP: Polycystic kidney disease in a family of Persian cats, I Amm Vet Med Assoc 196:1288-1290,
1990.
Biller DS, DiBartola SP, Eaton KA, et al: Inheritance of polycystic kidney disease in Persian cats, I Hered 87:1-5, 1996.
9to   s ui asasp ial pue Aaup osio f uds-au iap ua s yun up u f alsog.
1998.
Vet Rec 149:409411, 2001.
Eaton KA, Biller DS, DiBartola SP,et al: Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease in Persian and Persian-cross cats,
Vet Pathol 34:117-126, 1997
Helps CR, Tasker S, Barr F], et al: Detection of the single nucleotide polymorphism causing feline autosomal-
dominant polycystic kidney disease in Persians from the UK using a novel real-time PCR assay, Mol Cell Probes 21:31-34,
2007.
15:25482555, 2004.
Miller RH, Lehmkuhl LB, Smeak DD, et al: Effect of enalapril on blood pressu re, renal function, and the renin-angiotensin-
aldosterone system in cats with autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease, Am J Vet Res 60:1516-1525, 1999.
Pedersen KM, Pedersen HD, Haggstrom J, et al: Increased mean arterial pressure and aldosterone-to-renin ratio in Persian
cats with polycystic kidney disease, / Vet Int Med 17:21-27, 2003.
Stebbins KE: Polycystic disease of the kidney and liver in an ad ult Persian cat, / Commp Pathol 100:327-330, 1989.
Rottweiler
Cook SM, Dean DF, Golden DL, et al: Renal failure attributable to atrophic glomerulopathy in four related rottweilers,
 A Vet Med Assoc 202:107109, 1993.
Wakamatsu N, Surdyk K, Carmichael KP, et al: Histologic and ultrastructural studies of juvenile onset renal disease in four
Rottweiler dogs, Vet Pathol 44:96-100, 2007.
Samoyed
Bernard MA, Valli VE: Familial renal disease in Samoyed dogs, Can Vet J 18:181-189, 1977.
Bloedow AG: Familial renal disease in Samoyed dogs, Vet Rec 108:167-168, 1981.
hereditary nephritis): Results from a canine model, I Am Soc Nephrol 14:690-698, 2003
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor, / Comp Pathol 117:209-225, 1997.
Jansen B, Thorner P, Baumal R, et al: Samoyed hereditary glomerulopathy. Evolution of splitting of glomerular capillary
basement membrane, Am }Pathol 125:536-545,1986.
Jansen B, Thorner PS, Singh A, et al: Animal model of human disease: Hereditary nephritis in Samoyed dogs, Am ∫ Pathol
116:175-178, 1984.
Jansen B, Tryphonas L, Wong J, et al: Mode of inheritance of Samoyed hereditary glomerulopathy: An animal model for
hereditary nephritis in humans,  Lab Clin Med 107:551-555, 1986.
Jansen B, Valli VE, Thorner P, et al: Samoyed hereditary glomerulopathy: Serial clinical and laboratory (urine, serum
biochemistry and hematology) studies, Can I Vet Res 51:387-393, 1987.
Familial Renal Diseases of Dogs and Cats  CHAPTER 6
6217
affected with Samoyed hereditary glomerulopathy and a carrier female, Can / Vet Res 51:475-478, 1987.
Thorner P, Baumal R, Binnington A, et al: The NC1 domain of collagen type IV in neonatal dog glomerular basement
Thorner P, Baumal R, Valli VE, et al: Abnormalities in the NC1 domain of collage type IV in GBM in canine hereditary
nephritis, Kidney Int 35:843-850, 1989
 Thorner PS, Baumal R, Valli VE, et al: Production of anti-NC1 antibody by affected male dogs with X-linked hereditary
sudau Aeaau ym sueunu pue sp u Ai a uaeno po uneu ln au sissasse aon aqond y rudau
Virch Arch A Pathol Anat Histopathol 421:467-475,1992.
Thorner P, Jansen B, Baumal R, et al: Samoyed hereditary glomerulopathy. Immunohistochemical staining of basement
membranes of kidney for laminin, collagen type IV, fibronectin, and Goodpasture antigen, and correlation with electron
microscopy of glomerular capillary basement membranes, Lab Iroest 56:435-443, 1987.
Thorner PS,Jansen B, Liang], et al: Quantitation of anionic sites in glomerular capillary basement membranes of Samoyed
dogs with hereditary glomerulopathy, Virch Arch A Pathol Anat Histopathol 411:79-85, 1987.
Thorner PS, Zheng K, Kalluri R, et al: Coordinate gene expression of the alpha3, alpha4, and alpha5 chains of collagen type
 IV. Evidence from a canine model of X-linked nephritis with a COL4A5 gene mutation, I Biol Chem 271:13821-13828, 1996.
Valli VE, Baumal R, Thorner P, et al: Dietary modification reduces splitting of glomerular basement membranes and
delays death due to renal failure in canine X-linked hereditary nephritis, Lab Invest 65:67-73, 1991.
Zheng K, Thorner PS, Marrano P, et al: Canine X chromosome-linked hereditary nephritis: A genetic model for humar
X-linked hereditary nephritis resulting from a single base mutation in the gene encoding the alpha 5 chain of collager
type IV, Proc Natt Acad Sci LI S A 91:3989-3993, 1994.
Shar Pei
DiBartola SP, Tarr MJ, Webb DM, et al: Familial renal amyloidosis in Chinese Shar pei dogs,  Am Vet Med Assoc 197:
483487, 1990.
 Johnson KH, Sletten K, Hayden DW, et al: AA amyloidosis in Chinese Shar-pei dogs: immunohistochemical and amino
acid sequence analysis, Amyloid 2:92-99, 1995.
Loeven KO: Spontaneous hepatic rupture secondary to amyloidosis in a Chinese Shar pei, I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 30:
577-579, 1994.
May C, Hammill J, Bennett D: Chinese Shar pei fever syndrome: A preliminary report, Vet Rec 131:586-587, 1992.
Rivas AL, Tintle L, Kimball ES, et al: A canine febrile disorder associated with elevated interleukin-6, Clin Immunol
Im uropathol 64:3645, 1992.
Rivas AL, Tintle L, Meyers-Wallen V, et al: Inheritance of renal amyloidosis in Chinese Shar pei dogs,  Hered 84:438-442,
1993.
Soft-Coated Wheaten Terrier
Afrouzian M, Vaden SL, Harris T, et al: Immune complex mediated proliferative and sclerosing glomerulonephritis in soft
Nephrol 12:670A, 2001.
Eriksen K, Grondalen J: Familial renal disease in soft-coated Wheaten terriers, J Small Anim Pract 25:489-500, 1984.
os un Aedonudau Suisol-uraond pue Auedoraua Suis-uaoid leh ie ia 'Ts uape a yequea dn ueu
Coated Wheaten Terriers: 222 cases (1983-1997), J Vet Int Med 14:68-80, 2000.
 Small Anim Pract 25:479-487, 1984.
Vaden SL, Hammerberg B, Davenport D], et al: Food hypersensitivity reactions in Soft Coated Wheaten Terriers with
cation, and fecal immunoglobulin E, J Vet Int Med 14:60-67, 2000.
Vaden SL, Sellon RK, Melgarejo LT, et al: Evaluation of intestinal permeability and gluten sensitivity in Soft-Coated
2000.
Standard Poodle
DiBartola SP, Chew D], Boyce JT: Juvenile renal disease in related Standard poodles, I Am Vet Med Assoc 183:693-696, 1983
Welsh Corgi
Moore FM, Thornton GW: Telangiectasia of Pembroke Welsh Corgi dogs, Vet Pathol 20:203-208, 1983.
CHAPTER
7
Diseases of the
Glomerulus
INTRODUCTION
A. Glomerular diseases affect primarily the glomeruli. However, destruction of the glomerulus
renders the remainder of the nephron nonfunctional and progressive destruction of glomeruli
can lead to decreased glomerular filtration rate, azotemia, and renal failure.
B. Glomerular disease is an important cause of chronic renal failure in humans and has been
increasingly recognized in veterinary medicine.
C. The two important glomerular diseases of domestic animals are glomerulonephritis (GN) and
glomerular amyloidosis.
D. Marked, persistent proteinuria is the hallmark of glomerular disease.
E. The term nephrotic syndrome traditionally has been used to describe patients with protein-
uria, hypoalbuminemia, hypercholesterolemia, and edema or ascites. Human patients excret-
ing more than 3.5 grams of protein per 1.73 m? body surface area per day in their urine are
said to have nephrotic range proteinuria. Patients with several different glomerular diseases
can present as having nephrotic syndrome.
NORMAL GLOMERULAR ANATOMY AND FUNCTION
A. The glomerulus is a unique vascular structure consisting of a capillary bed between two arte-
rioles (Figure 7-1).
a n paud si po se a a un arg si d o aenm u a
kidney by the heart.
C. The filtration barrier of the glomerulus consists of three layers (from the vascular space to the
urinary space) (Figure 7-2):
1. Endothelium.
a. The fenestrated capillary endothelium is 100 to 500 times more permeable to water and
crystalloids than are systemic capillaries.
b. Negatively-charged surface contributes to charge selectivity.
2. Glomerular basement membrane.
a. A trilaminar structure consisting of a central dense region (lamina densa) and outer
less dense regions (lamina rara interna, lamina rara exterma).
b. Contains type IV collagen, proteoglycans, laminin, fibronectin, and water.
c. Proteoglycans are large, highly negatively charged molecules consisting of a protein
backbone with polysaccharide (glycosaminoglycans) side chains. The proteoglycans
are responsible for the charge selectivity of the basement membrane.
d. Type IV collagen in the basement membrane forms a mesh that contributes to the size
selectivity of the glomerular capillary wall.
218
Diseases of the Glomerulus  CHAPTER 7
219
Capillary endothelium
Afferent arteriole
Glomerular
basement
membrane
Juxtaglomerular
cells
Proximal
Macula
tubule
densa
Distal
tubule
Bowman's
space
Efferent arteriole
Parietal epithelium
Visceral epithelium
FGURE 7-1 ■ Schematic representation of normal glommerular morphology at the light microscopic level.
(Drawn by Tim Vojt.)
3. Visceral epithelial cells (podocytes).
 a. Cover the filtration barrier on the urinary side by means of primary and interdigitating
secondary foot processes.
b. Secondary foot processes are separated by slit or filtration diaphragms.
      s      
surface (sialoglycoproteins).
d.
 Synthesize the glomerular basement membrane.
e. Podocytes are phagocytic and may engulf macromolecules trapped in the filtration
barrier.
D. The glomerular filter functions as a size and charge selective barrier.
1.
 Size selectivity: The glomerular filter excludes particles of <35 A in radius (serum albumin
has a molecular weight of 70,000 daltons and molecular radius of 36 A).
2.
 Charge selectivity: For any given size, negatively charged macromolecules will experience
greater restriction to filtration than neutral ones.
E. Other components of the glomerulus.
1. Mesangial cells provide structural support for the glomerular capillary loops and also pos-
sess contractile and phagocytic properties (Figure 7-3).
a. Reside in the glomerular interstitium in areas where the podocytes do not completely
surround the capillary endothelium.
b. Produce mesangial matrix, which is similar to the basement membrane in composition.
C.Are phagocytic and may clear filtration residues from the mesangial space.
d.
 Contain contractile elements that can alter the amount of glomerular surface area avail-
able forfiltration.
e.
May play a role in the normal tumover of the glomerular basement membrane.
f. May undergo fibrous metaplasia leading to glomerular sclerosis.
g. The mesangium is an early site of deposition of immune complexes and amyloid fibrils.
2. Parietal epithelial cells line the urinary side of the glomerular capsule (Bowman's capsule)
and are continuous with the visceral epithelial cells at the vascular pole of the glomerulus
and with the proximal tubule at the urinary pole.
220
CHAPTER 7  Diseases of the Glomerulus
Podocyte:
Primary process
Secondary processes
nucleus
Basement membrane
Fenestrated
endothelium
FGURE 7-2 ■ Schematic three-dimensional view of glomerulus demonstrating the scanming electronmiroscopic
 appearance of the glomerulus. The three layers of the glomerular capillary barrier are indicated in the cutaway
section. (Drawn by Tim Vojt.)
Podocyte
Endothelial cell
Fenestrated
end othelium
Basementmembrane
Podocyte feet
-Mesangial cell
Intercellular substance
Basementmembrane
FIGURE 7-3  Schematic transverse section of glomerulus showing the location of mesangial cells. (Drawn by
Tim Vojt.)
3. The juxtaglomerular apparatus, at the vascular pole, consists of specialized smooth muscle
cells of the afferent and efferent arterioles containing electron dense renin granules, and
the macula densa, a specialized segment of the distal tubule. The juxtaglomerular appara-
tus mediates tubuloglomerular feedback.
PATHOGENESIS OF GLOMERULAR DISEASE
Glomerular Injury May Be Either Immune-Mediated or Nonimmune
1. Immune-mediated GN is associated with immune complex deposition in the glomeruli.
 2. Nonimmune-mediated glomerular disease may be inflammatory (e.g., GN) or noninflam-
matory (e.g., amyloid fibril deposition, glomerular sclerosis secondary to hyperfiltration).
Diseases of the Glomerulus ■ CHAPTER 7221
Circulating
In Situ
Immune Complex Deposition
Anti-GBM
Epithelial cell
Subepithelial
deposit
Foot process
Antigen
Subendothelial
Antibody
deposit
Circulation complex
FGURE 7-4  Immune-complex GN: Deposition of subepithelial and subendothelial circulating immune
complexes (left panel) and intramembranous complexes formed in situ (right panel). GBM, glomerular basement
membrane. (Drawn by Tim Vojt.)
Immune-Mediated Glomerulonephritis
1.  Immune-complex GN is a disease of glomeruli caused by deposition of immunoglobulin
2. Immune complexes deposit in the glomerular filter in two ways (Figure 7-4):
a.
 Soluble circulating immune complexes are trapped in the glomerulus in conditions of
antigen-antibody equivalence or slight antigen excess (the classic example is serum
sickness). In antibody excess, immune complexes tend to be large and insoluble and
immune complexes do not readily bind complement and are less likely to produce
immune injury.
 b. Immune complexes may be formed in situ either in response to endogenous glomeru
lar antigens, endogenous nonglomerular antigens, or exogenous antigens deposited o1
'planted" in the glomerular filter.
 3. Immune complexes may be deposited in a subepithelial, subendothelial, or intramembra-
nous position. Complexes also may deposit in the mesangium.
4. Factors affecting the location of deposition include size of the complexes (dependent on
antigen-to-antibody ratio), charge of the complexes, removal of complexes by phagocyto-
sis, and damage to the basement membrane itself.
a. Subepithelial complexes are small and form at approximate antigen-antibody equiva-
lence.
b. Subendothelial complexes are large or highly negatively charged, and, therefore, do
not easily pass through the basement membrane.
c. Mesangial cells may remove large complexes and deposit them in the mesangium.
d.
Basement membrane damage may allow complexes to adhere or pass into intramem-
branous or subepithelial locations. Autoantibody directed against basement mem-
brane components may lead to intramembranous deposition.
5.
The location of deposition determines the histologic changes observed and the severity of
glomerular dysfunction.
a.
 Subepithelial complexes are associated with basement membrane thickening and
minimal inflammatory cell infiltration. Proteinuria may be severe.
222
CHAPTER 7  Diseases of the Glomerulus
FGURE 7-5  Lumpy bumpy immunofluorescent appearance of the discontinuous deposition of immune
complexes in GN. Note discrete areas of immune complexes positive for inmunoglobulin G (IgG). (Fluorescein
isothiocyanate-labeled rabbit anti-dog IgG, IgA, and IgM, x400.)
b. Subendothelial complexes are associated with recruitment of inflammatory cells and
basement membrane thickening, but proteinuria may only be moderate in severity.
c. Intramembranous deposition is most commonly associated with antiglomerular base-
ment membrane disease.
d.  Mesangial complexes may be asymptomatic.
6.  Immune complexes can be detected in the glomeruli by staining histologic sections with
fluorescein-labeled antibody against immunoglobulins or complement of the species being
o uaonu pmbi u uazo aq oi suauads Asdoq reuan sanmban anbruat sul papnis
stored for less than 7 days in special preservative solutions (e.g., Michel solution). More
recently, immunohistochemistry using peroxidase-antiperoxidase methods can be applied
to specimens preserved routinely in 10% buffered formalin.
a. Glomerular deposition of preformed immune complexes usually results in a lumpy
bumpy or granular discontinuous immunofluorescence pattern with mesangial and
subendothelial location of the immune complexes (Figure 7-5).
b. In situ formation of immune complexes can occur within glomeruli when circulating
antibodies react with endogenous glomerular antigens or "planted" nonglomerular
antigens in the glomerular capillary wall. In this instance, a smooth linear continuous
pattem of immunofluorescence usually results.
c. True autoimmune glomerulonephritis (anti-GBM GN) with antibodies against endog-
enous glomerular basement membrane antigens has not been conclusively identified
in domestic animals.
Mechanisms of Immune Injury
1. Deposition of immune complexes in the mesangium may or may not be associated with
pathologic lesions or glomerular dysfunction.
2.
 Immune complex deposition in glomeruli may reduce the amount of fixed negative charge
and enhance filtration of negatively charged circulating macromolecules (e.g., albumin).
3. Complement activation results in membrane damage and proteinuria. Soluble comple-
ment components also recruit inflammatory cells.
Diseases of the Glomerulus  CHAPTER 7 223
body interaction and exacerbate glomerular damage by release of a variety of mediators.
These mediators cause activation and proliferation of mesangial cells and endothelial cells,
vasospasm and increased coagulation.
5. Mesangial cells contribute to glomerular inflammation by release of eicosanoids, cyto
kines, and growth factors and by increased matrix production.
6. Inflammatory cells also contribute to glomerular injury.
a. Neutrophils and macrophages localize in the glomeruli in response to soluble media
tors including complement components, platelet activating factor, platelet-derived
growth factor, and eicosanoids.
b. Activated neutrophils release reactive oxygen species and proteinases, leading to fur
ther damage.
c. Macrophages produce proteinases, oxidants, eicosanoids, growth factors, cytokines,
complement fragments, and coagulation factors.
7. Many bioactive mediators may be involved in these interactions. Such mediators are
produced by resident glomerular cells (mesangial cells, endothelial cells) or by recruited
blood cells (neutrophils, platelets) in response to deposition of immune complexes in the
glomerular basement membrane. Important mediators include:
a. Eicosanoids (prostaglandins, thromboxanes, and leukotrienes) are products of arachi-
donic acid metabolism. Thromboxanes, and leukotrienes cause vasoconstriction and
mesangial cell contraction, both of which may result in decreased glomerular filtration
rate (GFR). These mediators also attract and activate neutrophils
b. Cytokines and growth factors are produced by inflammatory cells and resident glo-
merular cells. These include tumor necrosis factor, interleukin-1, interleukin-6, platelet
derived growth factor, transforming growth factor, and epidermal growth factor, and
contribute to mesangial cell activation (cellular proliferation, matrix production) and
incite inflammation.
c. Other factors such as platelet activating factor, endothelin, and nitric oxide contribute
 to glomerular damage via activation of inflammatory and mesangial cells or by stimu-
lating coagulation.
8.
 Several infectious and inflammatory diseases have been associated with glomerular depo-
sition or in situ formation of immune complexes in dogs and cats (Box 7-1). In most cases,
however, the antigen source or underlying disease process is not identified and the glo-
merular disease is referred to as idiopathic.
Nonimmune Glomerular Injury
1. Most idiopathic GN in animals is thought to be immune-mediated, but glomerular dam-
age also may occur by nonimmune mechanisms.
2.
Whereas the primary target for immune-mediated glomerular disease is the filtration bar-
rier, the primary target for nonimmune injury appears to be the endothelial cell.
3. Damaged endothelial cells release factors (e.g., endothelin) that have vasoactive,
proliferative and proinflammatory effects. Additionally, endothelial damage stimulates
coagulation.
4.  Factors that may damage endothelial cells are:
a. Hemodynamic factors: Intraglomerular hypertension secondary to hyperfiltration
may physically damage endothelial cells.
b. Coagulation followed by activation of the platelet release reaction may lead to endo
thelial damage.
c. Hyperlipemia may cause endothelial damage directly
224
CHAPTER 7  Diseases of the Glomerulus
BOX 7-1
CAUSES OFIMMUNE-MEDIATED GLOMERULONEPHRITISIN DOGS AND CATS
Dogs
 1.  Pyometra: Commonly associated with proliferative or membranoproliferative GN. Continuous high levels of
bacterial antigens are thought to be responsible for immune complex formation and deposition, although
these antigens have not been demonstrated in the kidney. The glomerular changes usually disappear once
ovariohysterectomy is performed.
Il.Dirofiaria immitis infection: Also commonly associated with GN and proteinuria. One theory is that immune
complexes form in response to shed microfilarial antigens. Another is that the mechanical presence or
products of the microfilaria damage the glomerular vessels.
tis. Dense deposits suggestive of immune complexes are seen in the glomerular basement membrane, and
tubular epithelial antigens are shed in the urine. Intranuclear inclusion bodies may be present in endothelial
cells.
IV. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE): Antinuclear antibodies are responsible for the complexes.
V.  Other infectious diseases:
A.Bacterial endocarditis
B.Ehrichiosis
C.Brucellosis
D. Borreliosis
 1. Membranoproliferative GN in Bernese Mountain dogs inherited as an autosomal recessive trait has
a strong association with seropositivity for Borrelia burgdorferi
E. Leishmaniasis
F. Rocky Mountain spotted fever
G. Trypanosomiasis
H. Other chronic bacterial infections
VIl. Neoplasia
A. Mastocytoma
B. Lymphosarcoma
C. Other
Vll. Other disease associations
A. Immune-mediated polyarthritis
B. Chronic skin disease
C. Chronic prostatitis
 D. Proteinuria has been observed in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism, and normal dogs treated with glucocor-
membranes, foot process fusion, glomerular adhesions) but no deposition of immune complexes.
E. Pancreatitis
F. Thickening of glomerular capillary wall but without proteinuria in dogs with congenital portosystemic
shunts
VIlll. Most cases of GN in dogs are idiopathic
IX. Familial glomerular disease
A. Familial membranous or membranoproliferative GN in soft-coated Wheaten terriers
 2. Progressive leading to glomerulosclerosis and end-stage renal disease
B.Membranoproliferative GN associated with hereditary deficiency of complement component ll in Brittany
spaniels
C. Autosomal recessive type IV collagen defect in English Cocker spaniels
Diseases of the Glomerulus ■ CHAPTER 7225
B0X7-1
CAUSES OF IMMUNE-MEDIATED GLOMERULONEPHRITISIN DOGSAND CATS-COnt'd
D. X-linked dominant type IV collagen defect in Samoyeds
E. Suspected basement membrane disorders in Doberman pinschers and Bull terriers
F.  Glomerulopathy with increased collagen deposition and glomerular sclerosis in young Newfoundland
sbop
Cats
1.  Feline leukemia virus infection: Frequently associated with membranous GN with or without signs of renal
dysfunction. These cats usually do not die from renal failure.
Il.Feline immunodeficiency virus
Ill.  Feline infectious peritonitis
IV.Chronic progressive polyarthritis (Mycoplasma gatae)
V. Most cases of GN in cats are idiopathic
Vl. Other:
A. Pancreatic fat necrosis
B. SLE
C. Hemolymphatic neoplasia (e.g., lymphosarcoma)
D. Familial: Sibling cats with GN
Progression of Glomerular Disease
1. Continued deposition of complexes and release of inflammatory mediators eventually
lead to glomerulosclerosis.
 2. Secondary antibodies directed against immune complexes may form in situ and exacer-
bate disease.
3. Glomerular disease may induce tubulointerstitial disease and progress to end-stage kid-
ney disease and chronic renal failure.
a. Obstruction of glomerular capillaries may result in ischemia of the tubules and tubu-
lointerstitial disease.
 b. Proteinuria may lead to an interstitial immune response resulting in tubulointerstitial
disease.
c. Protein in the ultrafiltrate is taken up and degraded by proximal tubular cells. Over-
load of the lysosomal systems of these cells may lead to hypoxia and cell death.
 Increased protein uptake also may lead to increased transcription of inflammatory
mediators.
 d. Inflammatory mediators from damaged glomeruli may lead to tubular and interstitial
damage.
Resolution of Glomerular Disease
1. GN may resolve by:
a. Solubilization of complexes via complement or excess antigen.
b. Phagocytosis of immune complexes by macrophages.
c. Degradation of immune complexes by extracellular proteases.
2. Removal of the causative antigen may result in resolution of GN (e.g., ovariohysterectomy
 in dogs with pyometra, treatment of heartworm disease).
226
CHAPTER 7  Diseases of the Glomerulus
 FIGURE 7-6  Membranous GN. Note distinct thickening of the capillary loops. (Periodic acid schiff, x400.)
LESIONS OF GLOMERULAR DISEASE
A. Histologic lesions of GN.
 1. Basement membrane thickening.
2. Hypercellularity.
3.Fibrosis.
B. GN is classified morphologically according the presence of basement membrane thickening.
hypercellularity, or both.
1.Disease characterized primarily by basement membrane thickening is called membranous
GN (Figure 7-6).
 2. Disease characterized primarily by increased glomerular cellularity (due to inflammatory
cell influx or mesangial cell proliferation) is called proliferative GN.
 3. Disease characterized by both basement membrane thickening and increased cellularity is
called membranoproliferative GN.
4.Disease characterized primarily by fibrosis of the glomeruli is called glomerulosclerosis
C. Chronic changes include glomerular and periglomerular fibrosis with eventual glomerular
sclerosis. Sclerotic glomeruli are nonfunctional.
D. Ultrastructural lesions of glomerular disease.
1. The presence of immunoglobulin deposits in the basement membrane and podocyte foot
2.
.Ultrastructural changes may include thickening or splitting of the basement membrane,
podocytes foot process fusion, changes in the number and types of cells in the mesangium,
presence of dense deposits, and other changes.
3.
 The clinical relevance of these changes is not known in dogs and cats with GN, because
ultrastructural examination is uncommonly performed.
4.
 In human medicine, specific ultrastructural changes may be helpful in the diagnosis of
specific disease syndromes.
E. Histologic lesions in other compartments.
1.
 The presence of tubular protein casts, often accompanied by hyaline droplets in proximal
tubular cells, is suggestive of glomerular disease.
 2. Chronic GN is accompanied by tubular dilatation and atrophy, interstitial lymphoplasma-
cytic inflammation, and interstitial fibrosis
Diseases of the Glomerulus  CHAPTER 7
227
8
二
B
R
B
二
R
二
R
B
R
B
R
FGURE 7-7 ■ β-Pleated sheet configuration of amyloid fibrils. R, side chain of amino acids comprising the
amyloid protein P.
CAUSES OF GLOMERULONEPHRITIS IN DOGS AND CATS
A. In dogs and cats, most GN is idiopathic, and the cause is never determined.
B. Specific syndromes and infectious agents can cause GN (see Box 7-1). Important causes in
dogs and cats include:
1. Feline leukemia virus (FeLV) and feline infectious peritonitis in cats.
 2. Pyometra and heartworm disease in dogs.
 3. Chronic bacterial, parasitic, and neoplastic diseases.
4.
Autoimmune diseases.
Amyloidosis
CHARACTERISTICS
A. Amyloidosis refers to a diverse group of diseases characterized by extracellular deposition of
fibrils formed by polymerization of protein subunits with a specific biophysical conformation
called the β-pleated sheet (Figure 7-7). This specific biophysical conformation is responsible
for the unique optical and tinctorial properties of amyloid deposits as well as their insolubility
and resistance to proteolysis in vivo.
lin and eosin and viewed by conventional light microscopy (Figure 7-8). They demonstrate
green birefringence after Congo red staining when viewed under polarized light. The clinical
diagnosis of amyloidosis is based on this finding.
 C. Amyloid fibrils are variable in length, nonbranching, and 7 to 10 nm in width when viewed by
transmission electron microscopy.
D. Congo-red-stained amyloid deposits from patients with reactive (secondary) amyloidosis
lose their affinity for Congo red after permanganate oxidation. This feature is useful in the
preliminary differentiation of reactive from other types of amyloidosis.
228
8CHAPTER 7  Diseases of the Glomerulus
FIGURE 7-8  Lightmicroscopicappearanceof advancedglomerular amyloidosis inadog.Notethehypocellularity
 of the glomerulus due to deposition of an eosinophilic extracellular material (amyloid). (Hematoxyln and cosin,
x160.)
E. Amyloid syndromes may be classified by distribution of the deposits (i.e., systemic or local-
ized) and by the nature of the responsible protein.
1. Localized syndromes usually affect one organ and are uncommon in domestic animals.
Examples of localized amyloidosis include pancreatic islet cell amyloid in domestic cats,
solitary extramedullary plasmacytomas of the gastrointestinal tract or skin that produce
immunoglobulin-associated amyloid, and amyloid deposits in the respiratory tract.
 2. Systemic syndromes affect more than one organ and include reactive, immunoglobulin-
associated, and heredofamilial syndromes.
a. Reactive (secondary) amyloidosis is a systemic syndrome characterized by tissue depo-
sition of amyloid A protein (AA amyloid). Naturally occurring systemic amyloidosis in
domestic animals is an example of reactive amyloidosis. Familial amyloid syndromes
in the Abyssinian, Siamese and Oriental shorthair breeds of cat and in the Shar pei,
-ss aaoean jo sanduexa rope are op jo spaaa puouxoy ustug pue aeaq
temic amyloidosis in veterinary medicine.
b.  Immunoglobulin-associated (primary) amyloidosis is characterized by tissue deposi-
tion of amino terminal fragments of immunoglobulin light chains (AL amyloid). In
human patients, immunoglobulin-associated amyloidosis usually is systemic (e.g,
amyloidosis complicating plasma cell dyscrasias such as multiple myeloma).
C. In human beings, amyloidosis associated with genetic variants of transthyretin (preal-
 bumin) may be systemic or localized. This type of amyloid has not been recognized in
veterinary medicine.
F. Tissue deposits from animals with reactive systemic amyloidosis contain amyloid A protein
which is an amino terminal fragment of an acute phase reactant called serum amyloid A protein
(SAA).
 1. SAA is one of several acute phase reactants synthesized by the liver in response to tissue
injury. Cytokines (e.g., interleukin-1, interleukin-6, tumor necrosis factor) released from
macrophages after tissue injury stimulate hepatocytes to synthesize and release SAA
 2. The normal serum concentration of SAA is approximately 1 mg/L but its concentration
increases 100-fold to 500-fold after tissue injury (e.g., inflammation, neoplasia, trauma,
Diseases of the Glomerulus  CHAPTER 7229
infarction). SAA concentration decreases to baseline by 36 to 48 hours if the inflammatory
stimulus is removed. If inflammation persists, SAA concentration remains increased.
3.
SAA presumably has a critical role in the body's response to tissue injury, but its actual
biological function remains a mystery.
4. SAA serves as the precursor of amyloid A protein in tissues and the concentration of
SAA is increased in plasma before amyloid deposits are observed in tissues.
5. Chronic inflammation and a prolonged increase in SAA concentration are necessary pre-
requisites for development of reactive amyloidosis. Despite this, only a small percentage
(<5%) of individuals with chronic inflammatory disease develop reactive amyloidosis
Thus, other factors must also be important in development of amyloidosis.
6. Among the domestic animals, reactive amyloidosis is most common in the dog. It is rela
tively uncommon in other species.
 7. Diseases that have been observed in association with reactive systemic amyloidosis in the
dog include chronic infectious or norinfectious inflammatory diseases and neoplasms,
but there is no discernible associated inflammatory or neoplastic disease in the majority of
dogs and cats presented with reactive systemic amyloidosis.
8. The cause of the specific tissue tropisms of different amyloid proteins is poorly
umderstood.
a.AA amyloid has a predilection for kidney, spleen, and liver.
 b. AL amyloid has a predilection for the kidney, spleen, liver, tongue, heart, and muscu-
loskeletal system.
heart.
9. The cause of species differences in the tissue tropisms of reactive amyloid deposits also is
unknown.
a. In the dog, amyloid AA deposits are most common in the kidney and clinical signs are
due to renal failure and uremia. The spleen, liver, adrenal glands, and gastrointestinal
tract also may be involved, but associated clinical sigms are rare.
to renal failure and uremia.
c. The Shar pei dog, Siamese cat, and Oriental shorthair cat are exceptions to these gen
eral rules. Severe liver deposition of amyloid can cause rupture of the liver and presen
tation as acute hemoabdomen in these breeds.
10. Within the kidney itself, the distribution of amyloid deposits varies among species. For
example, amyloidosis is primarily a glomerular disease in the dog whereas amyloid
deposits may have a predominant medullary distribution in the cat.
CLINICAL FINDINGS
Signalment
 1.  Most animals with glomerular disease are middle-aged or older at presentation
 2. There is no sex predilection in most species, but approximately 75% of cats with GN are
males.
3.  Any breed can be affected by glomerular disease but,
a. Familial forms of membranoproliferative GN have been reported in soft-coated
Wheaten terriers (thought to be associated with abnormal processing of dietary anti-
gens), Brittany spaniels (associated with hereditary deficiency of the third component
of complement), and Bernese Mountain dogs (often associated with positive serology
for Borrelia burgdorferi)
CHAPTER 7  Diseases of the Glomerulus
b. Hereditary defects of glomerular basement membrane type IV collagen occur as an
autosomal recessive trait in English Cocker spaniels and as an X-linked dominant trait
in male Samoyed dogs. Basement membrane defects are also suspected to occur in
Doberman pinschers and Bull terriers.
c. Familial renal amyloidosis occurs in young Abyssinian, Siamese, and Oriental short-
hair cats and in Shar pei dogs. Familial amyloidosis has also been reported in beagles
and English foxhounds. See Chapter 6 on Familial Renal Diseases of Dogs and Cats for
more information about familial glomerular disease.
History: Six Possible Presentations of Glomerular Disease
1. Signs may be related to presence of chronic renal failure if more than 75% of the nephron
population has become nonfunctional (e.g., anorexia, weight loss, lethargy, polyuria, poly-
dipsia, vomiting). This is the most common presentation.
 2. Signs may be related to an underlying infectious, inflammatory or neoplastic disease.
 3. Proteinuria may be an incidental finding detected during diagnostic evaluation of another
medical problem.
4. Signs may be related to classical nephrotic syndrome (e.g., ascites, subcutaneous edema).
 5. Signs may be related to thromboembolism (e.g., sudden onset of dyspnea with pulmonary
 6. Suddenblindnessmay occur dueto retinal detachment resulting from systemic hypertension
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION FINDINGS
 A. Usually related to the presence of chronic renal failure and uremia.
1. Poor body condition.
2. Poor hair coat.
3. Dehydration.
4. Oral ulceration.
 5. Small, firm, irregular but occasionally normal-sized kidneys.
B. Other physical findings may be related to the presence of underlying infectious, inflamma-
tory, or neoplastic diseases. Affected Shar pei dogs may have a previous history of so-called
Shar pei fever (episodic joint swelling usually involving the tibiotarsal joints and high fever that
resolve within a few days, regardless of treatment).
C.
 Some physical findings may be related to severe protein loss (e.g., ascites, edema, poor body
condition, poor hair coat).
 D. Retinal hemorrhages, vascular tortuosity, and retinal detachment may occur due to systemic
hypertension.
LABORATORY FINDINGS
Urinalysis
 1. Marked persistent proteinuria with an inactive sediment is the hallmark of glomerular
disease.
a.  Dipstick tests use a colorimetric method (tetrabromphenol blue indicator).
 b. Recognizes albumin more than globulins.
c. Semiquantitative and detects as little as 10 mg/dL protein in urine.
2. Hyaline and granular casts.
3. Lipid droplets.
Diseases of the Glomerulus  CHAPTER 7 231
4.Isosthenuria if more than 67% of the nephron population has become nonfunctional. Early
loss of concentrating ability may occur in animals with medullary deposition of amyloid
(Abyssinian cats, Shar pei dogs).
5. Red cell casts and dysmorphic red cells (red cells with abnormal shape due to passage
through the glomerular capillaries) may occur in human patients with GN but these find-
ings have not been reported in domestic animals with GN.
Biochemistry
1. Either GN or amyloidosis can lead to chronic renal failure (CRF) with the expected bio-
chemical abnormalities (e.g, azotemia, hyperphosphatemia, metabolic acidosis).
2. Hypoalbuminemia occurs in many dogs with glomerular disease (up to 75% of dogs with
amyloidosis and 60% of dogs with GN).
 3. Hypercholesterolemia occurs in most dogs with glomerular disease (up to 60% of dogs
m sies u uu sadsuou e si inq (sisopoame yhm soop yo %06 pue N ym
renal disease. Hypercholesterolemia may be due in part to increased hepatic synthesis
 of cholesterol-rich lipoproteins secondary to chronic hypoalbuminemia
Special Laboratory Tests
1. Urine protein-to-creatinine ratio.
a.Avoids the confounding effect of total urine solute concentration (i.e., specific gravity)
on qualitative assessment of proteinuria
b. Corelated with 24-hour urinary protein loss but easier to measure (ie., does not
require a 24-hour urine sample).
c. Magnitude of increase in urine protein-to-creatinine ratio is roughly correlated with
nature of glomerular disease.
d. Values are highest in dogs with glomerular amyloidosis (often >10) and lowest in those
with interstitial renal disease (usually <10). Animals with GN have very variable val-
ues (normal to >30).
e. Presence of hematuria or pyuria can make the urine protein-to-creatinine ratio difficult
to interpret (i.e., may cause a false-positive result).
f. Normal urine protein-to-creatinine ratio is <0.3 in dogs and cats.
 g. As glomerular disease advances and GFR decreases, less protein is filtered and the
urine protein-to-creatinine ratio can decrease. This decrease does not indicate improve-
ment, and is a poor prognostic sign.
h. Proteinuria is mild or absent in animals with renal medullary amyloidosis but without
glomerular amyloidosis (e.g., some cats and Shar pei dogs with amyloidosis).
2. Normal 24-hour urinary protein loss is <20 to 30 mg/kg/day in dogs and cats, but collect-
ing a 24-hour sample is cumbersome and this test has been replaced by the urine protein
to-creatinine ratio.
a. 24-hour urinary protein loss usually is <500 mg/kg/day in GN.
b. 24-hour urinary protein loss usually is >100 mg /kg/day in amyloidosis.
3. Renal biopsy is the only reliable way to differentiate GN from glomerular amyloidosis.
a. A renal cortical biopsy will reliably differentiate GN from glomerular amyloidosis.
b. Medullary tissue will be needed to diagmose renal medullary amyloidosis.
c. Congo red stain is used to diagnose amyloidosis histologically.
d. Light microscopic lesions may be minimal in GN. Immunopathologic methods using
fluorescence microscopy or peroxidase-immunoperoxidase staining are helpful to
diagnose and characterize immune complex GN.
232  CHAPTER 7  Diseases of the Glomerulus
e. Transmission electron microscopy allows recognition of the ultrastructural pathology
in GN but is not widely available to veterinarians.
4. Cytology of ascitic fluid reveals a pure transudate with low cell count and low total pro-
tein concentration.
 5. Measurement of fibrinogen and antithrombin II concentrations may identify animals at
risk for thromboembolism.
MANAGEMENT
General Principles
1. Identify and treat any underlying predisposing inflammatory or neoplastic disease pro-
cess (i.e., remove the offending antigen if possible).
 2. If CRF is present, it is treated according to the principles outlined in Chapter 5, Chronic
Renal Failure.
3. Supportive treatment of hypertension.
a.Low salt diet (<0.3% on a dry matter basis).
b. Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors (e.g., enalapril, benazepril) reduce
glomerular capillary hydraulic pressure by decreasing postglomerular arteriolar resis-
tance and, thus, reduce proteinuria. This beneficial effect must be balanced against their
potential to worsen azotemia. In one study, enalapril (0.5 mg/kg PO every 12-24 hours)
reduced proteinuria (as assessed by urine protein-to-creatinine ratio), reduced blood
pressure, and slowed progression of renal disease in dogs with GN.
c. Diuretics (e.g., furosemide) may be used in refractory cases but overzealous use may
result in dehydration and prerenal azotemia
d. Other drugs that may be used in the management of hypertension include amlodipine,
hydralazine, prazosin, and propranolol.
4. Prevention of thromboembolism.
a.Heparin may be of limited usefulness when antithrombin III concentration is low (hep-
arin requires AT IlI as a cofactor)
b. Coumadin (warfarin) is a vitamin K antagonist anticoagulant but its use is not recom-
mended because of the risk of hemorrhage and limited experience with it in domestic
animals.
c. Low dose aspirin therapy (0.5 mg/kg/day) has been used in dogs with GN to inhibit
platelet aggregation.
Glomerulonephritis
1. No studies in veterinary medicine are available to demonstrate effectiveness of any spe-
cific therapy for GN. Likewise, in human medicine, litle consensus exists on the treatment
of many types of GN that cause nephrotic syndrome.
 2. Immunosuppressive drugs (e.g., corticosteroids, azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, chlo-
rambucil, cyclosporine).
a. One controlled trial in dogs failed to show a benefit of cyclosporine treatment (15 mg/
kg PO every 24 hours).
b. Corticosteroid administration can cause proteinuria in dogs and one retrospective
study suggested that corticosteroid therapy actually may be detrimental in dogs with
idiopathic GN. Corticosteroids may be beneficial (or at least not detrimental) in cats
with GN.
c. Azathioprine (2.2 mg/kg PO every 24 hours) may be tried for immunosuppression
in dogs (but not cats) with idiopathic GN. Azathioprine should not be used in cats
Diseases of the Glomerulus ■ CHAPTER 7233
because they metabolize the drug very slowly and develop bone marrow suppres
d. Cyclophosphamide (2.2 mg/kg every 24 hours for 3 days then off for 4 days) also may
be considered but it is more likely than azathioprine to be associated with side effects
(e.g., myelosuppression).
e. Demonstration of effectiveness is confounded by variable biological behavior of dis-
ease (e.g., some animals spontaneously resolve, some have stable proteinuria for long
periods of time, and some progress to end-stage renal failure).
f. The immunosuppressive drug mycophenolate mofetil also has been used (along with
benazepril and aspirin) to treat GN in some dogs.
3.
Thromboxane synthetase inhibitors (e.g., CGS 12970) can reduce proteinuria in experi-
mental GN in dogs and may play a role in management of GN in the future.
4. Platelet inhibition (e.g., aspirin, dipyridamole) may reduce intraglomerular coagulation.
I dogs, an aspirin dosage of 0.5 mg/kg PO once a day may selectively inhibit platelet
cyclooxygenase without preventing the beneficial effects of prostacyclin formation (e.g.,
vasodilatation, inhibition of platelet aggregation).
5. Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (w-3 PUFA) (e.g., fish oil) may suppress glomerular
tanoids.
 6. Allopurinol (10 mg/kg PO every 12 hours) was useful in decreasing proteinuria and pre-
venting progression of renal disease in dogs with visceral leishmaniasis and GN.
Amyloidosis
1. No specific therapy has been shown to be beneficial.
2. Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO).
a. Experimentally, DMSO given during the rapid deposition phase will cause resolution
of amyloid deposits and a persistent decrease in SAA concentration.
 b. May improve renal function by reduction of interstitial inflammation and fibrosis in
the kidney.
c. May reduce concentration of the acute phase reactant precursor of amyloid protein A
(SAA).
d. One case report in a dog with amyloidosis showed a beneficial effect (e.g., less pro-
teinuria, improved GFR) of DMSO when used at a dosage of 80 mg/kg/wk adminis
tered SC.
e. Another study of several affected dogs showed no effect of DMSO (i.e., dogs had simi-
 lar amounts of amyloid in their kidneys at necropsy as in renal biopsies taken before
instituting DMSO treatment).
3. Colchicine.
a.  Impairs the release of SAA from hepatocytes by binding to microtubules and prevent-
ing its secretion.
 b. Prevents development of amyloidosis in human patients with familial Mediterranean
fever (FMF).
(1) FMF is a genetic disorder of people of Middle Eastern ancestry that is character-
ized by recurrent self-limiting febrile episodes associated with serosal inflamma-
tion (e.g., pleuritis, peritonitis, synovitis).
(2) FMF is caused by mutations in the pyrin (marenostrin) gene, which is expressed in
neutrophils and normally inhibits inflammation provoked by minor insults.
(3) If untreated, most people with FMF develop reactive amyloidosis, nephrotic syn
 drome, and renal failure in middle age.
234 CHAPTER 7  Diseases of the Glomerulus
(4) Colchicine prevents most febrile attacks and prevents development of amyloidosis
c. Colchicine (0.03 mg/kg/day) may be beneficial in Shar pei dogs with recurrent fever
and joint swelling (so-called Shar pei feuer) that may be at risk for development of sys
temic amyloidosis, but no prospective placebo-controlled study is available to support
this treatment. Adverse effects of colchicine include gastrointestinal upset and rare
development of neutropenia.
COMPLICATIONS OF GLOMERULAR DISEASE
Hypoalbuminemia
 1. The hypoalbuminemia of nephrotic syndrome is only partially explained by urinary loss
of albumin.
2. Hepatic albumin synthesis is increased in nephrotic syndrome but this increase is insuf-
ficient for the degree of hypoalbuminemia. In some other situations (e.g., chronic ambula-
tory peritoneal dialysis in humans), albumin loss can exceed that observed in nephrotic
syndrome, but increased synthesis of albumin by the liver in these situations is sufficient
to replenish the albumin loss.
3. Low plasma oncotic pressure is thought to be the primary stimulus for increased hepatic
synthesis of albumin in the nephrotic syndrome.
4. Renal catabolism of albumin is increased in nephrotic syndrome due to increased reab-
sorption of filtered protein.
 5. Although an increase in dietary protein stimulates hepatic albumin synthesis it does not
correct hypoalbuminemia in patients with nephrotic syndrome and only worsens the uri-
nary losses of protein.
Sodium Retention
1. The underfill hypothesis of edema and ascites formation in the nephrotic syndrome
involves activation of the renin angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS):
a. Progressive loss of albumin through the glomeruli and inadequate hepatic synthesis of
albumin lead to hypoalbuminemia.
b. Hypoalbuminemia leads to decreased oncotic pressure with loss of water and electro-
lytes from the vascular compartment.
c. Decreased circulating volume leads to decreased renal blood flow and activation of the
RAAS.
d.Activation of the RAAS leads to aldosterone production and release with consequent
renal conservation of sodium and water.
e.  Attempted restoration of circulating volume is unsuccessful because hypoalbuminemia
and decreased oncotic pressure prevent retention of water in the vascular compartment.
f. In addition to the RAAS, nonosmotic stimulation of antidiuretic hormone release and
 increased sympathetic nervous system activity could be invoked by decreased circu-
lating volume and also would promote renal water and sodium retention.
2.  The owerfill hypothesis is based on evidence for a primary intrarenal mechanism of sodium
retention in nephrotic syndrome.
a. Aldosterone concentrations frequently are normal or even low in human patients
with nephrotic syndrome, and treatment with ACE inhibitors does not always prevent
sodium retention.
b. Primary intrarenal sodium retention in nephrotic syndrome occurs in the distal neph-
ron (independent of aldosterone) and contributes to extracellular fluid volume expan-
sion and edema formation.
Diseases of the Glomerulus  CHAPTER 7235
FGURE 7-9  Iliac thromboembolism with thrombi in the iliac arteries and one iliac vein. The pulmonary artery
is another common location of thromboembolism in dogs with nephrotic syndrome.
c. Patients with nephrotic syndrome also demonstrate a blunted response to atrial natri-
uretic peptide (ANP).
3.  Reconciling the underfill and ouerfill hypotheses of sodium retention and edema formation
in the nephrotic syndrome:
a. Intrarenal sodium retention in nephrotic patients with adequate serum albumin con-
centration and intravascular oncotic pressure could result in expansion of circulating
volume and suppression of the RAAS (as described in the overfill hypothesis).
b. In patients with severe hypoalbuminemia and low circulating volume due to reduced
intravascular oncotic pressure, the RAAS would be activated (as described in the under
fill hypothesis) despite the presence of an intrarenal mechanism for sodium retention.
Thromboembolism (Figure 7-9)
1. The nephrotic syndrome is a hypercoagulable state. Occasionally, thromboembolic
phenomena are responsible for the major presenting signs and overshadow the under-
lying renal disease, thus complicating the clinical course and delaying the primary
diagmosis.
 2. Hypercoagulability and thromboembolism associated with the nephrotic syndrome occur
secondary to several abnormalities in the coagulation system.
a. Mild thrombocytosis and platelet hypersensitivity occur in association with hypoalbu-
minemia and result in increased platelet adhesion and aggregation. Plasma arachidonic
acid normally is protein-bound, and more arachidonic acid is free to bind to platelets in
the presence hypoalbuminemia. This may result in increased thromboxane production
by platelets and platelet hyperaggregability. Hypercholesterolemia also may contribute
platelet adenylate cyclase response to prostaglandins.
D.
Loss of antithrombin II (MW 65,000) in urine also results in hypercoagulability. Anti-
thrombin IHI acts in concert with heparin to inhibit serine proteases (clotting factors
I, IX, X, XI, and Xll) and normally has a vital role in modulating thrombin and fibrin
production.
236
CHAPTER 7  Diseases of the Glomerulus
c.  Decreased plasma concentrations of factors IX, X, and XI occur due to urinary loss of
these proteins.
d. Increased fibrinogen (factor I) concentration and decreased fibrinolysis contrib-
ute to hypercoagulability. Decreased fibrinolysis occurs as a result of decreased
concentration of plasminogen and increased concentration of α2 macroglobulin
(a plasmin inhibitor)
e. Increased concentration of large molecular weight coagulation factors (factors II, V)
VII, VIll, and X) may lead to a relative increase in coagulation factors as compared with
regulatory proteins. This increase may result from increased protein synthesis by the
liver as it attempts to correct hypoalbuminemia.
f. Animals with fibrinogen concentrations of >300 mg/dL and antithrombin III concen-
 trations of <70% of normal are considered at risk for thromboembolism and anticoagu-
lant therapy should be considered.
3. Thromboembolism occurs in 15% to 25% of dogs with nephrotic syndrome. It is rare (but
has been reported) in cats with glomerular disease.
4.
 The pulmonary artery is the most common site for thromboembolism, but emboli also
may lodge in mesenteric, renal, iliac, coronary, and brachial arteries as well as in the portal
vein. Dogs with pulmonary thromboembolism usually are dyspneic and hypoxic with
minimal pulmonary parenchymal radiographic abnormalities.
Hyperlipidemia
1. Hypercholesterolemia and hyperlipidemia are commonly associated with nephrotic
syndrome. Decreased plasma oncotic pressure due to hypoalbuminemia and possibly
increased loss of regulatory factors for lipid metabolism in urine cause increased hepatic
synthesis of lipoproteins and decreased peripheral catabolism of ipoproteins.
 2. Large molecular weight, cholesterol-rich lipoproteins that are not easily lost through the
damaged glomerular capillary wall accumulate, whereas smaller molecular weight pro
teins such as albumin and antithrombin IHI are lost in the urine.
 3. In nephrotic patients, plasma albumin concentrations are inversely correlated with plasma
cholesterol and triglyceride concentrations, and cholesterol and lipid concentrations tend
to increase as albumin concentration decreases.
4. Decreased hepatic catabolism of lipoproteins occurs due to abnormal lipoprotein lipase
function. Normal lipoprotein lipase fumction requires heparin sulfate as a cofactor and
concentrations of heparin sulfate frequently are decreased in nephrotic patients. The
decrease in heparin sulfate has been linked to increased urinary loss of another glycopro-
tein, orosomucoid. Diversion of necessary sugar intermediates as the liver replaces the lost
orosomucoid causes decreased production of heparin sulfate. Orosomucoid also has an
important role in maintaining normal glomerular permselectivity. Consequently, urinary
loss of orosomucoid not only contributes to the hyperlipidemia of the nephrotic syndrome
but also exacerbates proteinuria.
Hypertension
1. Systemic hypertension may occur in dogs and cats with glomerular disease due to sodium
retention, activation of the RAAS, and impaired release of normal renal vasodilator sub-
stances.
 2. Systemic hypertension has been associated with immune-mediated GN, glomeruloscle-
rosis, and glomerular amyloidosis and may occur in up to 50% or more of dogs with glo-
merular disease.
Diseases of the Glomerulus  CHAPTER7237
3. Retinal hemorrhage, retinal vascular tortuosity, and retinal detachment may result from
systemic hypertension, and blindness may be the presenting complaint in hypertensive
dogs and cats.
4.B
 Blood pressure measurements (by Doppler technique) should be obtained in all dogs and
cats with suspected glomerular disease because control of systemic hypertension may
slow progression of the glomerular disease.
5. Enalapril (0.5 mg/kg PO every 12-24 hours) is recommended for treatment of hypertension
in dogs and cats with glomerular disease because, in addition to reducing systemic hyperten
sion, enalapril may reduce proteinuria. P'atients treated with enalapril should be monitored tc
be sure their blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and serum creatinine concentrations remain stable.
PROGNOSIS
A. Amyloidosis is a progressive disease with a poor prognosis. Affected animals often are in
renal failure at the time of presentation and generally live less than 1 year after diagnosis.
 B. GN has a variable course, and a poor prognosis should not be given unless there is evidence
of progression to CRF. The following may occur:
1. Spontaneous remission.
 2. Stable course with ongoing proteinuria for several months to years.
3. Progression to CRF over months to years.
C. Lesions of GN can be observed at necropsy without there having been any clinical
evidence of renal failure during life.
WHAT DO WE DO?
● Diagnose protein-losing diseases before the development of azotemia. Early diagmnosis depends on
monitoring patients for development of proteinuria before clinical signs become apparent.
· Distinguish between GN and amyloidosis by renal biopsy because the prognosis for these diseases
is potentially very different (e.g., some patients with GN experience resolution of their disease
· Measure systolic blood pressure using Doppler methodology in all patients with protein-losing
glomerulonephropathy and treat hypertension as necessary.
· Provide a renal diet, low-dose aspirin, and ACE inhibitors to patients with GN.
· Follow the magmitude of proteinuria (as well as serum creatinine concentration) during treatment.
A suggested goal of therapy is to reduce the magnitude of proteinuria by 50% without a substantial
increase in serum creatinine concentration.
 n   a s  n n ha      r o
develop thromboembolism.
· Obtain renal tissue for microscopic examination before development of azotemia to determine a
morphologic diagnosis and identify the extent of interstitial inflammation and fibrosis.
· Screen for infectious diseases that potentially are associated with GN (e.g., dirofilariasis, ehrlichio-
sis, brucellosis, FeLV, feline immunodeficiency virus [FIV])
THOUGHTS FOR THE FUTURE
amimals with glomerular disease and in animals with chronic renal failure in general.
· Thromboxane synthetase inhibition could be a powerful tool should such drugs become commer
cially available in the future.
238 CHAPTER 7  Diseases of the Glomerulus
 SUMMARY TIPS
● Monitor urinary protein concentration as measured by urine protein-to-creatinine ratio or identifica-
tion of microalbuminuria
● Increases in the urine protein-to-creatinine ratio or microalbuminuria indicate the possibility of pro
gressive renal injury and justify additional diagnostic evaluation and more aggressive treatment
interventions.
· Renal biopsy should be obtained before azotemia develops to determine the nature of the underly-
ing glomerular disease.
· Evaluate the nutritional status of patients with protein-losing glomerulonephropathy that are fed
protein-restricted renal diets using serial body weight, body condition score, and serum albumin
concentration because these patients may be more likely to develop protein-calorie malnutrition
than animals with other causes of chronic renal failure.
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS
· Renal biopsy results are unlikely to change treatment. This statement sometimes is true, but it is
important to distinguish GN and amyloidosis because treatment and prognosis are substantially
different for these diseases. The severity of the glomerular lesion and associated tubulointerstitial
disease also may warrant a more aggressive treatment approach. The benefit-to-risk ratio has been
improved with the development of ultrasound-guided renal biopsy techniques.
·Nothing much can be done therapeutically when the glomerular lesion is advanced and proteinuria is
severe. Actually, treatment with ACE inhibitors can lower intraglomerular pressure, decrease protein-
uria, and slow progression of renal disease independent of their effects on systemic blood pressure.
· Any pathologist can adequately evaluate the renal lesions. Most pathologists should be able to pro-
vide a light microscopic diagmosis, but the light microscopic lesions of GN can be subtle and immu-
nohistochemical and ultrastructural studies carried out by a pathologist with a special interest in
nephropathology will provide more definitive and useful information.
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
Q: A dog with weight loss has reasonably concentrated urine (urine specific gravity [USG] 1.026)
and a urine protein-to-creatinine ratio of 12:1. The reference laboratory indicates that amyloidosis
is the likely diagnosis. Is this a reliable method to make a diagnosis of glomerular amyloidosis?
urine protein-to-creatinine ratios, glomerular amyloidosis cannot be reliably differentiated from GN
by the magnitude of proteinuria alone. Some animals with amyloidosis have lower urine protein-to-
creatinine ratios and patients with GN can have very high urine protein-to-creatinine ratios. Renal
biopsy with use of appropriate stains (e.g., Congo red) and techniques (e.g., immunohistochemistry
using peroxidase-antiperoxidase methodology) are necessary to accurately distinguish glomerular
amyloidosis from glomerulonephritis.
Q: An otherwise healthy 6-year-old spayed female mixed breed dog had normal hemogram and
serum biochemistry results. The USG was 1.032 and the urine sediment was inactive, but 2+ pro-
teinuria was identified by dipstrip analysis. The urine protein-to-creatinine ratio was 0.5 and micro-
albuminuria of 12 mg/dL was identified. Should this small amount of proteinuria be ignored until
the dog's next annual wellness visit?
A: The presence of microalbuminuria indicates some dysfunction of glomerular barrier function
The damage could have occurred in the past and be nonprogressive or the microalbuminuria could
Diseases of the Glomerulus  CHAPTER 7239
indicate an early stage of what may become progressive glomerular injury despite the absence of clini-
cal signs. Thus, follow-up monitoring of microalbuminuria in this asymptomatic dog is warranted.
 If microalbuminuria and the urine protein-to-creatinine ratio increase over time, glomerular injury is
omgoing and its cause should be investigated because the animals potentially is at risk for development
of chronic renal disease and failure. Blood pressure also should be evaluated to see if systemic hyper-
tension could be a factor contributing to the proteinuria.
Q: A dog with biopsy-confirmed glomerular amyloidosis has a serum creatinine concentration of 2.6
mg/dL, USG of 1.015, and proteinuria of 3+ dipstrip analysis. Hyaline and waxy casts are observed
 on urine sediment examination. Given the grave prognosis for amyloidosis, should euthanasia be
recommended to the owner?
A: Renal amyloidosis generally is a relentlessly progressive disease, and the presence of moderate
to severe azotemia warrants a grave prognosis. Most experience in veterinary medicine, however, has
been with dogs with amyloidosis and advanced renal failure. Such patients have relatively short sur-
 vival times (months). The prognosis may not be as grave when amyloidosis is discovered at an earlier
stage (i.e., proteinuria with minimal azotemia). In one recent study in human patients with AA amyloi-
dosis, median survival was correlated with serum amyloid A (SAA) protein concentration and patients
with the lowest SAA concentrations had very long median survival times. Similar studies have not been
performed in dogs. It is unknown whether or not treatment with ACE inhibitors is beneficial for dogs
with glomerular amyloidosis, as is the case with GN.
Q: Over the past month, a dog with renal failure has had a stable serum creatinine concentration
of 8.0 to 9.0 mg/dL. The urine sediment is inactive, the protein dipstrip reaction is 4+, and the urine
protein-to-creatinine ratio is greater than lo. The kidneys are hyperechoic and small on ultrasound
examination. Should a renal biopsy be performed?
A: A renal biopsy is unlikely to be helpful in this situation and may be harmful. Technical difficul
ties are more likely when performing a biopsy of a small kidney. Renal bleeding may be substantial.
Furthermore, the small kidneys may have extensive interstitial fibrosis and it may not be possible to
determine the underlying primary lesion (e.g., glomerular, interstitial, tubular) that led to chronic renal
failure. The likelihood of obtaining useful diagnostic information is small compared with the risk of
complications for the patient.
 SUGGESTED READINGS
Center SA, Smith CA, Wilkinson E, et al: Clinicopathologic, renal immunofluorescent, and light microscopic features of
glomerulonephritis in the dog: 41 cases (1975-1985), I Am Vet Med Assoc 190:81-90, 1987
Center SA, Wilkinson E,Smith CA,et al: 24-hour urine protein/creatinine ratio in dogs with protein-losing nephropathies,
 Am Vet Med Assoc 187:820-824, 1985.
Cook AK, Cowgill LD: Clinical and pathological features of protein-losing glomerular disease in the dog: A review of
137 cases, I A Aim Hosp Assoc 32:313322, 1996.
DiBartola SP, Benson MD: Review: The pathogenesis of reactive systemic amyloidosis, / Vet Int Med 3:31-41, 1989.
DiBartola SP, Tarr MJ, Parker AT, et al: Clinicopathologic findings in dogs with renal amyloidosis, I Am Vet Med AssoC
195:358364, 1989.
Grauer GF: Canine glomerulonephritis: New thoughts on proteinuria and treatment,  Small Anim Pract 46:469-478, 2005
Grauer GF, Greco DS, Getzy DM, et al: Effects of enalapril versus placebo as a treatment for canine idiopathic glomerulo
nephritis, /Vet Int Med 14:526533, 2000.
  sise  s n a e s e e a      
} Med 356:23612371, 2007.
CHAPTER
8
Istitis and Urethritis:
Jrinary Tract Infection
INTRODUCTION
A. Urinary tract infection (UTI) is defined as bacterial colonization of portions of the urinary tract
that normally are sterile (i.e., kidneys, ureters, bladder, proximal urethra).
1. UTI can occur superficially on luminal surfaces, deeper within the parenchyma, or in both
locations.
 2. Infection with fungal or chlamydial organisms is rare. Viral infections have not been con
clusively identified as a cause of lower urinary tract clinical signs.
 B. UTI most commonly is discovered when animals are presented with clinical signs of lower
urinary tract distress (i.e., symptomatic bacteriuria) such as hematuria, pollakiuria, and
increased frequency of urination.
1. UTI may exist without clinical signs (i.e., asymptomatic bacteriuria). In these instances,
infection is diagnosed fortuitously.
UTl may be asymptomatic
2. As many as 10% of hospitalized dogs (with a variety of illnesses) have asymptomatic UTI.
C. UTI is common in dogs, but not in cats.
1. UTI may be the most common infectious disease of dogs.
a. An estimated 10% of dogs presented to veterinarians for any reason have UTI.
b. Approximately 14% of dogs will have at least one UTI during their lifetime.
UTl may be the most common infectious disease in dogs.
c. Female dogs have a higher risk of developing UTI than do male dogs.
d. UTI occurs as a single episode in 75% of affected dogs.
e. Multiple episodes of UTI occur in some dogs, with predisposing factors favoring
recurrence. Of all dogs presented to a referral hospital, 0.3% were estimated to have
recurrent UTI.
2. UTI occurs in only 0.1% to 1% of all cats.
 UTl is uncommon in cats.
a. Geriatric cats are more commonly affected.
b. Siamese cats may have a higher risk for developing UTI than other breeds.
240
Cystitis and Urethritis: Urinary Tract Infection  CHAPTER 8
241
c. Increased incidence of UTI in male cats is related to the increased use of urinary
catheters to relieve urinary obstructions in males. When it does occur, UTI is a single
episode in 85% of affected cats.
d. In cats older than 10 years of age presenting with sigms of lower urinary tract irritation,
more than 50% are expected to have UTI. Most of these cats have underlying chronic
renal disease with submaximal ability to concentrate urine.
D. The term cystitis often is used to refer to bacterial UTI. The urinary bladder primarily is
involved in these disorders, but the urethra may also be part of the process. Cystourethritis
may be a better term.
1. It is difficult to assess the involvement of the urethra in UTI because of limitations of the
commonly used diagnostic tests.
2. Urethroscopy provides a method to determine the extent of urethral involvement.
PATHOGENESIS AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Bacteria Associated with Urinary Tract Infection
1.B
 Bacteria commonly associated with urinary tract infection in dogs and cats are shown in
Figures 8-1 and 8-2
2. Most UTIs are caused by a single organism (monomicrobic). A single organism is isolated
in 75% of cases, two organisms are isolated in 20%, and three organisms are isolated in 5%
of UTI.
Beta Streptococcus 1%
Enterobacter 3%
Enterococcus13%
Regular E. cofi 31%
GroupDNon-Enterococcus1%
Klebsiella 3%
 Lactose-negative E. cofi 1%
Non-groupD Streptococcus 1%
Proteus8%
Mucoid E. cofi 4%
pseudomonas aeruginosa 2%
Staphylococcusaureus/intermedius9%
Hemolytic E. cofi 18%
All others (less than 1%) 5%
FGURE 8-1 ■ Bacteria associated with urinary tract infection in dogs. Organisms isolated in significant
quantitative growth from cystocentesis samples in dogs. 5,060 urine samples were cultured yielding growth in
28% and no growth in 72%. Organisms listed as less than 1% each (<5% total) included Acinetobacter, Citrobacter,
Clostridium, coagulase-negative Staphylococcus, Corynebacterium sp, Klebsiella oxytoca, Lactobacillus, Malassezia,
Mycoplasma, Pasteurella multocida, Pasteurella sp, Pseudormonas sp, Serratia, and yeast. (Courtesy of The Ohio State
University Microbiology Laboratory, January 2000-April 2007.)
242
CHAPTER 8  Cystitis and Urethritis: Urinary Tract Infection
All others (less than 1%) 5%
Beta Streptococcus 2%
Pasteureflamuftocida2%
Proteus2%
Mucoid E. coff 3%
Enterococcus 19%
Staphyiococcus
aureus/intermedius5%
Coagulase-negative
Streptococcus 10%
Hemolytic E. coli39%
Regular E. cofi 13%
growth fromcystocentesis samples incats. 1429 urine samples were cultured yielding growth in 15% and no growth
in 85%. Organisms listed as less than 1% each (<5% total) included Corynebacterium, Enterobacter, Klebsiella,lactose
negative E. coli, Pasteurella sp, Moganella, Serratia, and yeast. (Courtesy of The Ohio State University Microbiology
Laboratory, January 2000-April 2007.)
3. Gram-negative bacteria cause UTI in 75% of cases.
a. Escherichia coli is the most common uropathogen in dogs and cats.
Escherichia cof is the most common uropathogen in dogs and cats.
(1) Coagulase-negative Staphylococcus species can be pathogenic in the urinary tract of
cats, accounting for about 20% of isolates in recent reports (Staphylococcus felis).
(a) Traditionally, coagulase-negative staphylococci have been considered contami-
nants. S. felis is a normal commensal organism of the skin, conjunctiva, and
saliva of cats.
(b) Most laboratories report staphylococci as"coagulase-negative" and do not fur-
 ther characterize as to species (which requires ribosomal RNA gene sequencing
technology)
(c) S. felis UTi is associated with a higher urinary specific gravity than that encoun-
tered with other causes of UTI. All S. felis isolates are urease-positive, which is
associated with alkaline urinary pH and struvite crystalluria.
b. Pasteurella is an occasional pathogen in cats.
4.Sex differences.
a. Multiple organism (i.e., polymicrobic) infections are more common in female dogs.
b. Male dogs have a higher incidence of Kebsiella infections than females.
c. Female dogs have a higher incidence of Proteus and Enterococcus infections than
males.
Cystitis and Urethritis: Urinary Tract Infection  CHAPTER 8  243
5.Breed differences.
a. German shepherd dogs, miniature and toy poodles, Labrador retrievers, dachshunds,
Doberman pinschers, and miniature Schnauzers may have increased incidence of
UTI.
b. In Labrador retrievers and Dalmatians, more males are affected than females.
males.
d. In dachshunds, males are unlikely to have UTI caused by Staphylococcus
e. Origin of bacteria (route of entry).
6. Ascent of bacteria.
a.  Ascension of fecal flora is the most common pathogenesis of UTI.
(1) Fecal flora contaminate the perineum, ascend the urethra, and enter the
bladder.
IAscent of fecal bacteria is the most common route of infection.
(2) Organisms that successfully gain entry into the bladder then have the potential to
ascend the ureters, cross the renal pelvic epithelium, and enter renal parenchymal
tissue.
(3) Fecal flora is the most common source of organisms for UTI though they can also
arise from the skin
b. Ascending organisms can originate from the environment (e.g., hospital flora).
C. Ascending organisms can arise from the vagina, prepuce, and distal urethra.
7. Hematogenous and lymphogenous.
a. These routes of infection occasionally are encountered, especially during septicemia.
b. Organisms can localize in the kidney initially, with the potential to inoculate the lower
urinary tract.
8.  Direct extension from an infected site near the urinary tract.
a.Uterine stump abscess.
 b. Laparotomy sponge infection.
c.Osteomyelitis.
d. Perirenal abscess.
9. Urinary catheterization.
a. Introduction of normal flora during catheterization; contamination with fecal or hospi-
tal flora is also possible.
b. Indwelling catheter (i.e., migration of bacteria between the catheter and urethral
mucosa or through the lumen of the catheter).
Normal Host Defenses Against Establishment of Urinary Tract Infection
1. Abrogation of some aspect of the normal host defense system may allow UTI to be
established.
2. Normal flora of the distal urethra, vagina, and prepuce may be protective. Normal flora
may occupy uroepithelial receptors and consume micronutrients, preventing pathogenic
bacteria from establishing an infection.
3.Urine from healthy animals inhibits the growth of bacteria.
a. Urea in urine has antibacterial properties.
 b. High urine osmolality inhibits bacterial growth. This mechanism may be particularly
important in cats.
244
CHAPTER 8  Cystitis and Urethritis: Urinary Tract Infection
c. Highly acidic urine can be bacteriostatic or bactericidal.
d.  Ammonia in urine may contribute antibacterial effects.
4. Host defense mechanisms exist for the perineum, vagina, prepuce, urethra, bladder, ure-
ters, renal pelvis, and renal parenchyma.
a.Very little is known about perineal host defense mechanisms.
b. Urethral host defense mechanisms.
(1) Epithelial cells lining the urethra (i.e., urothelium) can physically trap bacteria and
bar their ascent.
(2) The mid-urethra has a functionally important high-pressure zone that helps pre-
vent bacterial ascension.
(3) Urethral length, width, and distance from anus.
(a) The female urethra is wider and shorter than the male urethra, conceivably
making it easier for bacteria to ascend into the bladder. Since the anus is closer
to the urethral orifice of female dogs thian males, there is a greater chance of
soop aen sop aeay rog susuio jo uonenoou pue uoneunruon lesa
may have additional protective mechanisms due to antibacterial prostatic
secretions.
(4) Timely, forceful, and complete emptying of bladder urine mecharically flushes out
low numbers of bacteria that may have ascended the urethra (so-called hydroki-
netic washout).
c. Urinary bladder
IHost defense mechanisms must be decreased for UTI to occur.
(1) Hydrokinetic washout of small numbers of bacteria from the bladder may be
important.
(2) Normal glycosaminoglycans (GAG) on the uroepithelium inhibit attachment of
bacteria (antiadherence properties).
(3) Bladder urothelium has some inherent bactericidal properties, but bacteria must be
in close apposition for this effect to be valuable.
(4) Some poorly characterized secretions of the normal bladder are antibacterial.
(5) Local secretion of immunoglobulin can occur, but is not of major importance.
A systemic immunoglobulin response also can occur, but is not protective.
d.Ureters.
(1) The distal movement of urine (i.e., from kidney to bladder) inhibits ascent of
bacteria. However bacteria in the ureters can ascend by Brownian motion against
the flow of urine.
(2) The normal oblique intramural passage of the ureters into the bladder provides
functional closure of the ureters as the bladder fills.
e. Kidneys.
(1) Renal pelvic epithelium.
(2) Renal medulla.
(a) The renal medulla is much more susceptible to bacterial colonization after
ascending or hematogenous infection than is the renal cortex.
(b) Low medullary blood flow and high interstitial osmolality impair the inflam
matory response.
Cystitis and Urethritis: Urinary Tract Infection  CHAPTER 8
245
HGURE 8-3 ■ Uropathogenic Escherichia coli and uorepithelial cell.
 Structure with pili, adhesions, and
virulence factors. In order for a UTI to become established it is necessary for adhesins on the end of fimbria to
interact with specific receptors on the uroepithelial cells. 1, Supercoiled bacterial DNA; 2, Lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) of bacterial wall; 3, 4, and 6, show fimbria without adhesins that fit into uroepithelial receptors; 5, Shows
in allowing the establishment of UTl; 7, Flagellum; 8, Various virulence factors produced by the organisms that
favor pathogenicity. (Drawn by Tim Vojt.)
Requirements for Development of Urinary Tract Infection
1. Exposure to sufficient numbers of uropathogenic bacteria (Figure 8-3).
2. Presence of epithelial receptors for uropathogens.
3. Failure of normal urinary defenses.
a. Reduced anti-adherence properties of the uroepithelium.
b. Decreased antibacterial properties of urine.
C. Abnormal patterns of voiding.
d. Reduced integrity of intrinsic mucosal defenses.
e. Presence of anatomic abnormalities.
Increased Risk for Development of Urinary Tract Infection
 1. Anatomic abnormalities of the genitourinary system (Boxes 8-1 and 8-2).
a. Urachal remnants may provide a reservoir of stagnant urine, have decreased GAG,
and be associated with microabscesses.
b. Ectopic ureters.
(1) Most common in female dogs.
(2) Higher incidence in Siberian huskies, toy and miniature poodles, golden retrievers,
Labrador retrievers, fox terriers, West Highland white terriers, collies, soft coated
Wheaten terriers, and Welsh corgis.
(3) Low incidence in cats, but males are more commonly affected.
(4) Most ectopic ureters terminate in the urethra of females and may allow vaginal
bacteria to ascend the ureter into the kidney.
246
CHAPTER 8  Cystitis and Urethritis: Urinary Tract Infection
BOX 8-1
ANATOMIC AND FUNCTIONAL ABNORMALITIES PREDISPOSING TO OR PERPETUATING
URINARY TRACT INFECTION
Bladder atony (high residual urine volume)
Deep-seated cystitis (chronic bladder wall changes)
Ectopic ureters (developmental)
Emphysematous cystitis
Encrusting cystitis
Metritis or pyometra
Neoplasia of the bladder or urethra
Peri-urachal microabscesses
Polypoid cystitis
Poor vulvar conformation (developmental)
Prostatitis (sexually intact male dogs)
Pyelonephritis
 Small urinary calculi that have been previously missed
Urachal remnant (developmental)
Ureterocoele
Urethral fistula
Urethral sphincter incompetence with urinary incontinence
Urethral stricture
Vestibulovaginal stenosis (developmental)
BOX 8-2
METABOLIC CONDITIONS PREDISPOSING TO URINARY TRACT INFECTION
Chemotherapy
Diabetes mellitus
Exogenous corticosteroid adm inistration
Hyperadrenocorticism
Hyperthyroidism (cats)
Immunosuppression
 Renal failure (especially cats)
(5) Incontinence is the most common sign.
(6) UTI may be present without clinical signs.
Animals receiving long-term exogenous corticosteroids and those with hyperadrenocorticism or diabetes
 mellitus are at increased risk for developing UTl, with or without clinical signs. Cats with CRF are also at high
risk for developing UTI.
2. Exogenous corticosteroid use in dogs.
a. About 40% of dogs receiving long-term corticosteroid therapy (6 months or longer)
for chronic skin disease have UTI.
b. Greater risk in females, and castrated male dogs.
Cystitis and Urethritis: Urinary Tract Infection CHAPTER 8247
c. Many do not have clinical signs of UTl, and urinalysis can be normal. Pyuria often is
absent.
d. Urine culture is necessary for diagnosis.
3. Endogenous corticosteroids in dogs (i.e., hyperadrenocorticism).
a. UTI occurs in 46% of dogs with hyperadrenocorticism.
b. Many do not have clinical signs of UTI, and urinalysis can be normal.
c. Urine culture is necessary to identify UTI in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism.
4. Diabetes mellitus.
a. UTI occurs in 37% of dogs and 12% of cats with diabetes mellitus.
b. Many do not have clinical signs of UTl, and urinalysis can be normal.
c. Urine culture is necessary to identify UTI in dogs and cats with diabetes mellitus.
5. Decreased systemic immunity.
6. Abnormal mucosal defenses.
7. Abnormal micturition.
 8. Clitoral hyperplasia, especially in greyhounds.
9. Urolithiasis.
a. Urine culture obtained by cystocentesis may be negative in animals with urolithiasis.
 b. Bacteria may adhere to bladder mucosa or uroliths, and the bladder biopsy specimen
and uroliths should be cultured at surgery.
10. Perineal urethrostomy in dogs and cats.
11. ndwelling urinary catheter in dogs and cats.
Urinary catheterization increases the risk of UTl.
a. Persistent UTI often develops even when using a closed system of urine drainage.
b. In dogs and cats with indwelling catheters, 50% develop UTI within days, even if
receiving antimicrobials
c. Bacterial organisms migrate along the outside of the catheter in the periurethral
space.
d. Normal bacterial flora are carried into the urinary bladder during catheterization.
a. UTI develops in 20% of female dogs within 3 days after passage of a urinary catheter
13. Cats with chronic renal failure (CRF).
a. UTI occurs in approximately 30% of cats with CRF, often within 1 year of diagnosis.
b. Females with CRF are more likely to have UTI.
c. E. coli typically is isolated.
d. UTI may be a factor in the progression of CRF in cats.
14. Cats with hyperthyroidism.
a. UTI occurs in approximately 12% of cats with hyperthyroidism.
b. Urine culture is recommended, because many cats have no clinical signs of UTI.
15. Incontinence.
a.  Urine scalding may change the resident perineal bacterial population.
b. Wicking action of urine may allow ascent of organisms.
c. Excessive perivulvar skin folds and pyoderma (especially in recurrent UTI).
(1) Episioplasty or vulvoplasty increases exposure of external genitalia to air and elim
inates excessive skin folds.
248
CHAPTER 8  Cystitis and Urethritis: Urinary Tract Infection
(2) The bacterial population in the perivulvar region is reduced, thus decreasing the
likelihood of bacterial ascent.
f. Vestibulovaginal stenosis.
(1) So-called vestibulovaginal stenosis is unlikely to be a major predisposing factor in
development of UTI.
(2) What has been called stenosis most likely is a normal variant of the junction of the
vestibule with the vagina in the area of the cingulum.
HISTORY
Dogs
1.Age at presentation with first UTI ranges from 0.3 to 16 years, with a median of 7 years.
Cats
ae ueaut e aaeu saneag pue uogejuasand je srean d'9 jo ae u e aaeu sareu paoav '1
of 10.6 years.
 2. Cats older than 10 years of age that present for irritative voiding and signs of lower uri-
nary tract disease (LUTD) commonly have bacterial UTI, unlike young cats presented with
similar signs.
 Older cats with lower urinary tract disease (LUTD) signs commonly have bacterial UTI whereas young cats
 with LUTD signs typically do not have bacterial UTI.
3. Many affected cats have a history of dilute urine, perineal urethrostomy, or previous uri-
nary catheterization
 CLINICAL SIGNS
(i.e., symptomatic bacteriuria).
1.Hematuria.
2. Pollakiuria.
3. Stranguria or dysuria.
 4. Urination in inappropriate locations.
5. Incontinence.
6. Decreased volume of urine voided also may occur in animals with partial obstruction of
the urethra (e.g., granulomatous urethritis).
B. Animals with UTI may have no clinical signs (i.e., asymptomatic bacteriuria).
1. Eighty percent of all dogs with UTI have no clinical signs.
 2. As many as 10% of hospitalized dogs with a variety of illnesses have UTI without clinical
signis.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
A. A thickened or painful urinary bladder may be palpated.
 B. Thickening or induration of the urethra sometimes is detected during rectal examination
when the urethra is involved.
C. The prostate gland may be palpably abnormal in sexually intact male dogs.
Cystitis and Urethritis: Urinary Tract Infection  CHAPTER 8249
DIAGNOSIS
Hematology and Serum Biochemistry
1. Complete blood count (CBC) and routine serum biochemistry are normal if UTI is limited
to the lower urinary tract.
1Complete blood count (CBC) and serum biochemistry are normal if UTI is limited to the lower urinary tract
Urinalysis
Urine Specific Gravity (USG)
a. Urine usually is concentrated if UTI is limited to the lower urinary tract.
b. Dilute urine may occur in the presence of pyelonephritis or when lower UTI is associ-
ated with systemic absorption of bacterial endotoxin, which impairs the responsive
ness of the collecting ducts to antidiuretic hormone.
c. UTI caused by E. coli tends to be associated with USG of <1.025.
d. UTI caused by staphylococci or streptococci tends to be associated with USG of more
than 1.025.
 e. Varying combinations of hematuria, pyuria, proteinuria, and bacteriuria usually are
identified on urinalysis.
f. UTI caused by E. coli is associated with pyuria but not hematuria.
g. UTI caused by streptococci is associated with hematuria.
Pyuria
a. The combination of pyuria in association with bacteriuria increases the likelihood that
bacteria actually are present in the urine sample. Clumps of white blood cells (WBCs)
also add credence to the presence of bacteria.
(1) Dipsticks designed to detect neutrophils in urine do not work well in the urine of
dogs or cats (false negatives are common in dogs and false positives are common in
cats). The urine sediment must be evaluated microscopically to determine if pyuria
is present.
IDipsticks to detect wBCs in the urine are not accurate in dogs and cats. Urinary sediment examination must
be performed microscopically.
(2) The WBC response (i.e., severity of pyuria) may vary among individuals and over
time.
(3) Decreased WBC numbers are seen in animals with UTI that also have diabetes mel-
litus, hyperadrenocorticism, Pseudomonas UTl, or very dilute urine and in those
that have received exogenous corticosteroids or antineoplastic drugs.
Urine pH
a. Consistently alkaline urine pH (>7.0) can be supportive of UTI associated with urease-
producing organisms such as Staphylococcus aureus and Proteus spp.
b. Many UTI occur in acidic urine, however.
Urine Sediment
a. Failure to observe bacteria in wet mounts of urine sediment does not exclude their
presence (i.e., false negative).
IFailure to visualize bacteria in urine sediment does not rule out UTl, and presence of bacteria does not
 necessarily mean UTl is present
250
CHAPTER 8  Cystitis and Urethritis: Urinary Tract Infection
b. Bacteria also can be reported in wet mounts of urine sediment when they are not pres-
ent (i.e., false-positive). False-positive results are especially common in the urine of
cats, which may contain artifacts that resemble bacteria (pseudobacteria).
Direct Examination of Urine
a. Place one drop of well-mixed, fresh urine on a slide. Do not smear. Allow to air dry
b. Gram stain and examine under oil immersion (1000x).
c. Visualization of 2 bacteria or more per oil immersion field is indicative of bacterial UTI.
This method is very specific and sensitive for diagnosis of UTI.
Modified Wright Stain of Urine Sediment
a.  One drop of urine sediment applied to a slide. Air dry and stain with modified Wright's
stain.
b. Evaluate 20 fields at 1000x (oil immersion).
c. Enumerate as none, occasional (1-4), few (5-9), moderate (10-20), many (>20).
d. Good correlation with quantitative culture results—superior to that estimated by
routine wetmount of urine sediment. Less false-positive and false-negative results.
Urine Culture
a. Collect urine for culture by cystocentesis (highly preferred) or urinary catheterization.
(1) Do not culture voided urine due to the high likelihood of growth of bacterial
contaminants.
Do not culture voided urine.
(2) Culture of urine obtained by urinary catheterization is not recommended for
routine purposes.
b. Plate collected urine on blood agar and MacConkey media within 15 minutes of
collection.
(1) Most bacteria will grow within 18 to 24 hours at 37° C. Most veterinary isolates
of Mycoplasma grow within 3 days on routine blood agar plates (unusual strains
 dn armar u nao epa ads pue (au ro sep  amban 
4 days to grow following inoculation.
(2) If growth appears, the plate can be submitted to a microbiology laboratory for
identification and susceptibility testing.
c. Bacterial growth.
Quantitative urine culture is necessary to positively identify causative bacteria and to choose the most
 appropriate antibacterial treatment.
(1) Large quantitative bacterial growth occurs in approximately 75% of dogs with UTI
caused by one organism (Figure 8-4).
(2) 105 colony-forming units (cfu)/mL is seen in 74% of males and 79% of affected
females.
sop paioae yo % Aaxoadde ui soo ymo aanb ssat (e)
(4) 104 cfu/mL but <105 cfu/mL in 6% of males and females.
(5) 10? cfu/mL but <104 cfu/mL in 8% of males and 7% of females.
(6) <103 cfu/mL in 11% of males and 7% of females (growth of this magnitude can
indicate UTl, but also can arise from skin contamination during cystocentesis).
(7) If obtaining urine for culture through an indwelling urinary catheter, fewer num
bers of bacteria isolated on quantitative culture are supportive of a diagnosis of
true bacterial UTI.
Cystitis and Urethritis: Urinary Tract Infection  CHAPTER 8
251
FGURE 8-4  Substantial quantitative growth of a urinary pathogen on blood agar in a Petri dish after 24 hours
of incubation. The number of colonies that grow are counted and then multiplied by the dilution factor (usually
100 or 1000) to report growth in colony-forming units (cfu)/mL.
d. Bacterial characteristics.
(1) Gram staining.
(a) Gram-negative bacteria.
(i)E. coli.
(ii) Proteus spp.
(ii) Kebsiella spp.
(iv) Enterobacter spp.
(v)Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
(b) Gram-positive bacteria.
(i) Staphylococci.
(ii)Enterococci.
(ii) Pasteurella spp.
(iv) Streptococcus Group D non-enterococcus.
(c) Mycoplasma are too small to identify by Gram staining.
e. Presumptive in-house identification of urinary bacterial isolates.
(1) Rods in acidic urine: E. coli (Klebsiella spp, Pseudomonas sp, Enterobacter spp less often).
(2) Rods in alkaline urine: Proteus spp.
(3) Cocci in acidic urine: Streptococci or enterococci.
(4) Cocci in alkaline urine: Staphylococci.
DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING
A. Diagnostic imaging usually is not necessary for evaluation of dogs and cats with first occur-
rence of UTI.
pue reuooumg jo auasand a rog aenaa on in suanmsan u mgdiau st luei ssouae d
structural abnormalities.
C. Plain abdominal radiographs.
1. Useful to exclude or detect the presence of radiopaque urinary calculi.
2.  Useful for evaluation of bladder positioning if bladder is sufficiently full (i.e., exclude so-
called pelvic bladder).
252
CHAPTER 8  Cystitis and Urethritis: Urinary Tract Infection
FlGURE 8-5  Positive contrast urethrocystogram—urachal diverticulum. Note residual positive contrast. This
anomaly can make it impossible to permanently eradicate UTI.
3.Useful to evaluate before and after voiding (i.e., may help detect abnormal volume of
residual urine).
4. Useful for evaluation of kidneys to rule out upper UTI.
D. Contrast radiography.
1. Positive contrast urethrogram.
a. Useful to exclude urethral stricture.
b. May be useful in dogs with prostatic disease.
2. Double contrast cystogram.
a. Superior to ultrasound for detection of small lesions.
b. Useful in detection of small uroliths, polyps, masses, urachal diverticulum
(Figure 8-5) and for evaluation of bladder wall thickness.
3. Excretory urography (intravenous pyelography or IVP).
a. Useful to evaluate kidneys for evidence of pyelonephritis (e.g., pyelectasia, dilated
diverticula, dilated proximal ureter).
b. Useful to evaluate ureteral termination (i.e., exclude ectopic ureter).
4.Contrast vaginography.
a. Useful for diagnosis of ectopic ureter.
b. Useful to rule out so-called vestibulovaginal stenosis. Be careful not to over-interpret
the normal narrowing of the junction of the vestibule with the vagina (i.e., cingulum).
E. Ultrasonography.
 1. Useful to evaluate the kidneys (e.g., exclude nephroliths or pyelectasia, evaluate renal
contour and echotexture) (Figure 8-6).
2. Useful to evaluate the bladder (i.e., exclude uroliths and bladder masses).
a. Not useful to evaluate for presence of urachal diverticulum, unless it is very large.
b. Can be used to evaluate bladder wall thickness if bladder is adequately filled.
c. Useful to evaluate for polyps and masses (Figure 8-7).
d. Useful to evaluate for presence of uroliths, especially those that are radiolucent.
3. Occasionally useful to evaluate the urethra.
a. Some ability to evaluate the proximal urethra.
b. Cannot evaluate the remainder of the urethra.
Cystitis and Urethritis: Urinary Tract Infection  CHAPTER 8
253
343981
LKIDNEY
5
.5MHz
nDog
80
Abdo
OdBMI=0.7
T1/+2/3/4
A
KIDNEY
B
 FGURE 8-6  Renal sonogram—pyelonephritis. The diverticula (A) and renal pelvis (B) are dilated, findings
suggestive for pyelonephritis.
UBLADDER
CRAN
FGURE 8-7 ■ Urinary bladder sonogram—polypoid cystitis. Notice thin-based masses projecting into the
bladder lumen. Polyps can harbor bacteria, making it difficult to eradicate UTI.
254
CHAPTER 8  Cystitis and Urethritis: Urinary Tract Infection
4. Useful to evaluate the prostate gland.
a. Size and echotexture.
b. Presence of cyst, abscess, or paraprostatic cyst.
C. Fine needle aspiration for cytology and culture.
F. Special referral techniques.
1. IVP plus fluoroscopy for more definitive evaluation for ectopic ureter.
 2. Computed tomography (CT) plus IVP for further evaluation of urinary anatomy.
a. Small lesions.
b. Especially useful for exclusion of ectopic ureter.
3. Uroendoscopy.
a. May disclose small lesions missed by other imaging modalities.
b. Very useful to definitively exclude ectopic ureter, evaluate vaginitis, determine pres-
ence of urachal diverticulum, determine presence of polypoid cystitis or transitional
cell carcinoma.
TREATMENT
IDecide first if UTl is complicated or uncomplicated.
Urinary Tract Infection
Uncomplicated
a. History of only one or two episodes of UTI per year, or first occurrence.
b. Not immunosuppressed.
c. No underlying anatomic, metabolic, or functional abnormalities that would predis-
pose to continuing infection.
d. Has not been on antibiotics for UTI or other problem within the past 1 to 2 months.
Complicated
a. Has defects in host defense mechanisms, including anatomic defects.
b. Has mucosal damage due to urolithiasis or neoplasia.
c. Has an alteration in urine volume or composition.
d. Has a concurrent systemic disorder (e.g., diabetes mellitus, hyperadrenocorticism,
neoplasia).
e. Has received long-term treatment with corticosteroids.
f. Has a functional defect—-cannot fully empty the bladder.
Potential Consequences of Untreated Urinary Tract Infection
1. Upper urinary tract infection (UUTI).
2. Renal failure from UUTI.
 3. Urolithiasis, especially struvite urolithiasis secondary to urease-positive bacteria.
 4. Bladder or urethral thickening.
 5. Sepsis, especially after immunosuppressive treatment.
6.Infertility (both sexes).
7. Prostatitis.
8. Orchitis.
9. Discospondylitis.
10.  Recurrent uveitis (dogs)—immune mediated.
11. Polyarthritis—-immune mediated.
Cystitis and Urethritis: Urinary Tract Infection  CHAPTER 8
255
 TABLE 8-1
 Antimicrobial Agents, Dosages, and Urine Concentration Achieved in Normal Dogs
Drug
Dosage
Mean Urine Concentration (μg/mL)
Amikacin
 5 mg/kg SQ TID
342 ± 143
(10 mg/kg SQ or IM BID)
15 mg/kg SID to reduce nephrotoxicity
Amoxicillin
12 mg/kg PO TID
202 ± 93
Ampicillin
 25 mg/kg PO TID
309 ± 55
Cephalexin
 35 mg/kg PO TID
500
Chloramphenicol 
35 mg/kg PO TID
124 ± 40
Doxycycline
5 mg/kg PO BID
53 ± 24
Enrofloxacin
2.5 mg/kg PO BID
240
 Gentamicin
2.2 mg/kg SQ TID
107 ± 33
Hetacillin
 25 mg/kg PO TID
300 ± 156
Kanamycin
 5 mg/kg SQ TID
530 ± 151
Nitrofurantoin
4.4 mg/kg PO TID
100
Penicillin G
35,000 U/kg PO TID
295 ± 211(U/mL)
Penicillin V
 25 mg/kg PO TID
148 ± 99
 Sulfisoxazole
 22 mg/kg PO TID
1466 ± 832
Tetracycline
 20 mg/kg PO TID
138 ± 65
Tobramycin
2.2 mg/kg SQ TID
145 ± 86
Trimethoprim-sulfonamide
12.5 mg/kg PO TID
246 ± 150
2.5 mg/kg PO TID
55 ± 19
Data from Dr. G.v. Ling, School of veterinary Medicine, University of California, Davis, except doxycycline and nitrofurantoin.
Drug Therapy
1. Antimicrobial drugs remain the cornerstone of treatment of UTI (Table 8-1) but correction
of predisposing factors also is important.
a. The concentration of antimicrobial that is achieved in the urine (μg/mL) is the most
important factor in eradication of UTI.
he concentration of antimicrobial achieved in urine is the single most important factor in eradication of UTl.
b. Animals that produce large quantities of dilute urine may have decreased concentra-
tion of urinary antimicrobials.
c. Tissue concentrations of the antimicrobial are important in animals with renal and
 prostatic infections as well as in animals with markedly thickened bladder walls from
chronic infection.
2.  Duration of antibacterial treatment.
a. Uncomplicated UTI: 14 to 21 days.
b. Upper UTI: 30 to 60 days.
c. Sexually intact males with lower urinary tract infection (LUTI): 30 days.
3.
 Antimicrobial agents ideally should be selected after confirmation of UTI by quantitative
culture. UTI can be treated on the basis of susceptibility testing (or on the basis of pre-
 dicted biological behavior of the organism in animals with uncomplicated UTI).
Choose an appropriate antimicrobial based on the results of quantitative urine culture.
256
CHAPTER 8  Cystitis and Urethritis: Urinary Tract Infection
a. Most laboratories do not provide susceptibility testing for Mycoplasma. Typically.
Mycoplasma are sensitive to tetracyclines. Chloramphenicol or tylosin may be consid-
ered as alternative treatments.
4. Most UTI can be successfully treated by the oral route using penicillins (especially those
with clavulanate), trimethoprim-potentiated sulfonamides (Tribrissen), ormetoprim
 potentiated sulfonamides (Primor), or first-generation cephalosporins such as cephalexin
or cefadroxil.
a.  Adverse effects associated with trimethoprim-potentiated sulfonamides include kera-
toconjunctivitis sicca, cytopenias, hepatopathy, and immune-mediated polyarthritis.
b. Ormetoprim-potentiated sulfonamides are not effective in prostate-associated UTI.
 Trimethoprim-potentiated sulfonamides should be used in dogs with UTI and pros-
tatic disease.
 5. Sulfonamides of any kind should not be prescribed for animals in which medical calculo-
lytic protocols are in place. Sulfonamides can precipitate on the surface of the stone and
decrease the rate of stone dissolution.
6. Fluoroquinolones such as norfloxacin (Noroxin), ciprofloxacin (Cipro), enrofloxacin (Bay-
tril), orbifloxacin (Orbax), marbofloxacin (Zeniquin), and difloxacin (Dicural) can be used
orally to treat resistant bacteria.
a. The quinolones have a wide spectrum of antibacterial activity (except against entero-
cocci and anaerobes), achieve high tissue concentrations, and are not nephrotoxic.
(1) There is little difference in activity of the various fluoroquinolones against urinary
pathogens.
(2) The minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of orbifloxacin often is somewhat
higher than that of other fluoroquinolones, but adequate concentrations still are
readily achievable in urine.
(3) Marbofloxacin may have a lower MIC against Pseudomonas spp.
(4) Ciprofloxacin usually has the most activity against Pseudomonas spp.
(5) Difloxacin is excreted in bile, and consequently less is excreted in the urine.
b. Quinolones should not be given to young, growing dogs (less than 6 to 18 months of
age depending on breed) because of potential damaging effects on articular cartilage.
c. Quinolones should be reserved for treatment when other therapeutic agents have
failed.
d.  An association has been found between use of enrofloxacin and blindness in some
cats. Enrofloxacin was used for many years before this adverse effect was observed.
Mydriasis may be an early finding.
(1) Blindness has not been noted in cats receiving other fluoroquinolones, but caution
should be exercised.
(2) Reports of blindness have dramatically decreased since a maximal dose of 5mg/
kg once daily have been implemented. Fluoroquinolones exhibit retinal toxicity in
experimental studies in cats when given at high doses.
Do not use fluoroquinolones in young, growing animals.
(3) Increased risk to increase the concentration of drug and metabolites exist in those
qeu oh panpan aq pmous aesop ni 'uogoumgssp teuan no pneday m
decreases in liver or renal function.
Cystitis and Urethritis: Urinary Tract Infection  CHAPTER 8257
7. Aminoglycosides.
a. Reserved for highly resistant bacteria or for animals that have failed to respond to
aggressive treatment with other antibacterial agents.
b. Aminoglycosides can be nephrotoxic and are available for use only by injection.
8. Cephalosporins
a. Ceftiofur sodium (Naxcel, Excenel).
(1) A third-generation cephalosporin labeled for use in dogs with UTI.
(2) Effective in eradication of UTI when given by once daily injection.
(3) Good activity against E. coli and Proteus, but possesses litle activity against Pseudo-
monas or Enterococcus.
b. Cefpodoxime (Simplicef).
(1) Third-generation oral cephalosporin.
(2) Once daily.
(3) Not generally effective against Pseudomonas.
c. Cefovecin (Convenia)
(1) Third-generation injectable cephalosporin.
(2) Given subcutaneously once every 14 days.
9. In vitro susceptibility patterns of common uropathogens to antibiotics (Tables 8-2
and 8-3).
a. Kirby-Bauer susceptibility testing can yield misleading results.
 b. Discs placed on the culture plate approximate concentrations of the antibacterial agent
achievable in blood, whereas many antimicrobials achieve 10 to 100 times these con
centrations in urine.
C. An organism showing antimicrobial resistance by the Kirby-Bauer method may in fact
be susceptible to the antimicrobial in question. Those antimicrobials reported as sus
ceptible should be effective.
10. The likely response of uncomplicated UTI after appropriate antibacterial treatment is well
kmown for the common uropathogens. Treatment in these instances is based solely on
identification of the organism.
a. Nearly 100% success is expected in eradication of UTI caused by Staphylococcus aureus/
intermedius or Streptococcus after penicillin or ampicillin if the dog has not received
antibiotics in the previous 2 to 3 months.
b. Approximately 80% cure of UTI is expected after an appropriate course of potenti-
ated sulfonamides for E. coli, ampicillin for Proteus, cephalexin for Klebsiella, and
tetracycline for Pseudomonas. Doxycycline is not a good substitute for tetracycline
as a urinary antimicrobial because doxycycline is excreted primarily in the bile
though it still may be useful in special situations such as with encrusting cystitis.
Dietary Therapy
1. No diet has been shown to prevent development of UTI.
2. No diet has been showm to prevent recurrence of UTI.
a. Consider a change in diet if the urine pH consistently is more than 6.5 at a time when
the patient has sterile urine. Changing the diet to one that results in acidic urine (e.g.
meat-based diet) may provide benefit from the inhibitory effects of acidic urine on
bacterial growth.
3. Canmed foods increase water turnover and urine production. Increased hydroki
netic washout can be protective, and encouraging increased water intake is a reason-
 able recommendation, as long as increased opportunities to void urine are provided
concurrently.
258
CHAPTER 8  Cystitis and Urethritis: Urinary Tract Infection
11.9
81.1
2
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
97.2
Enterococcus
2
3
Total  Inter 
(%)
2
1
40.5
18
V
Inter
21.6
D
D
No.
185
6
5.5
68
18 12
o-oo suaoedon aue uus po adasns aepau pue Adassns heowu ahaiad 
Total
aureus/intermedius
94.4
93.5
91.7
No.
Staphylococcus
6
75
Inter
(%)
6
7
sns
10 5 4781
8
V
Proteus
Total
No.
10
18
18
8. 68
Inter
V
V
V
sns
16.7
38.9
8
Total
No.
g
10
101m0
6
Mucoid E coli
10
Inter
[%)
68
15.5
11.1
1.
28
626
6
6
648
6
Enterobacter
Total
No.
Inter
6
8
4
3
1.9
3
5.9
86.5
100
96.9
Hemolytic E coli
98
Total
'ON
8522２5２2
9.7
38.9
6.1
V
(se1os J0 %)
 sns
282
3
4
87.2
Total
100
22
5
Kebsiella
Sus (% of 
isolates)
(% of isolates)
～
2.
60.7
75.4
75
3
8
8
Inter
Inter, intermediate susceptibility; No., number; Sus, susceptible
Regular Escherichia coli
 Inter (% of 
isolates)
12.5
2
4
4
777
3
V
Sulfamethoxazole/Trimethoprim
Total
'ON
8
5.5
Amoxicillin/Clavamox
Sulfamethoxazole/
 TABLE 8-2
Trimethoprim
Cephalosporin
Cephalosporin
Clavamox
Enrofloxacin
Enrofloxacin
Antibiotic
Amoxicillin/
Ampicillin
Furadantin
Antibiotic
Ampicillin
Furadantin
Amikacin
Amikacin
Cystitis and Urethritis: Urinary Tract Infection  CHAPTER 8
259
100751010
5
(%) sns
88.9
2
72.2
66.7
Coag. Neg. Staphylococcus
Proteus
Inter
Inter (%)
No.
11.1
寸
寸
4
4
D
00
aureus/intermedius
sns
10
688
10
Staphylococcus
Total No.
Inter
18
D0
8
8
Total
No.
5555
(%) sns
4
Pseudomonasaeruginosa
100
6
sns
1025 1510
2
10
Mucoid E coli
Inter (%)
Inter
3
0
23
DD
Total
No.
寸
寸
Total No.
3333323
6
6
98.4
sns
6.4338
8
8
Hemolytic
(%) sns
E coli
Inter
1.7
5.5
2
6
Total
Enterococcus
68B88
8608
(%) a
2
3
Inter, intermediate susceptibility; No., number; Sus, susceptible
3
3
3
62.5
81.3
5
(large quantitative bacterial growth)
8
338
68
Escherichia coli
Regular
Inter
C
 Total No.
5.
。
26
配昭
Total
No.
16
16
16
16
16
Amoxicillin/Clavamox
Sulfamethoxazole/
Sulfamethoxazole/
1 TABLE 8-3
Trimethoprim
Trimethoprim
Cephalosporin
Cephalosporin
Clavamox
Enrofloxacin 
Ampicillin
Amoxicillin/
Enrofloxacin
Antibiotic
Furadantin
Antibiotic
Ampicillin 
Furadantin
Amikacin
Amikacin
260 CHAPTER 8  Cystitis and Urethritis: Urinary Tract Infection
Supportive Therapy
1.  Increase water intake sufficiently to result in polyuria
2. The animal should be provided with increased opportunities to urinate.
3. Correct predisposing factors (anatomic and metabolic) if possible.
Increase water intake with drinking water or canned foods to increase urine production.
a. Remove all uroliths if possible by surgery or voiding urohydropulsion.
b. Treat hyperadrenocorticism if present.
c. Maximize glycemic control in animals with diabetes mellitus.
d. Discontinue exogenous corticosteroids if possible. Consider alternative methods to
control inflammatory diseases or decrease the dosage of corticosteroid.
e. Partial cystectomy can be performed in animals with urachal diverticula and in animals
with severe cranial bladder wall thickening due to chronic cystitis.
f.Resect polyps in animals with polypoid cystitis.
(1) Full-thickness resection of polyps traditionally has been employed using partial
cystectomy.
(2) Submucosal saline injection facilitates removal of lesions. More than 50% of the
 aon c rnrans aq Ae yeondde st rssaau j paoa aq un eso
individual lesions.
g.  Episioplasty (vulvoplasty) for recurrent UTI.
(1) Some female dogs have increased risk for UTI associated with excessive perivulvar
skin folds.
(2) Many normal dogs however have similar excess perivulvar skin folds and do not
seem to develop recurrent U'Tl.
(3) Perivulvar dermatitis is common, but not necessarily present in dogs with exces-
sive perivulvar skin folds.
(4) Removal of the excessive skin folds may decrease recurrent UTI in affected dogs.
Alternative and Supplemental Treatments
Cranberry Extract
a. No protection from bacterial adherence was observed in a canine model of UTI.
b. No clinical data are available by which to judge this treatment.
Cranberry Juice
a. No clinical studies in dogs.
b. Prevents UTI in women, but does not facilitate resolution of existing UTI.
Gilycosaminoglycans
a. GAGs have anti-adherence properties in the urothelium of healthy animals.
b. No clinical studies are available of the prevention or resolution of UTI or on the pre-
vention of reinfection
c. No difference was found in resolution of UTI using GAG treatment versus placebo
in dogs with an induced UTI model but 7% of administered GAG was excreted in
urine.
Urinary acidifiers typically are not used because most commercial diets result in acidic urine.
Urinary Acidifiers
a. Highly acid urine can be antibacterial for some uropathogens.
b. This approach was more useful when the veterinary diets fed were not highly acidifying.
Cystitis and Urethritis: Urinary Tract Infection  CHAPTER 8 261
c. Urinary acidifiers can be dangerous if given concurrently with acidifying diets (i.e.,
risk of metabolic acidosis).
Alpha Agonists (e.g., Phenylpropanolamine, Ephedrine, Pseudoephedrine)
a.Dogs with urinary incontinence have been noted to be at increased risk for U'Tl due to
a wicking effect of the urine-soiled perineum that facilitates ascent of bacteria
b. Dogs with a history of urinary incontinence may have fewer UTI after control of incon-
tinence.
c. Some dogs with recurrent UTI but without obvious incontinence also seem to benefit
from drugs that increase urethral tone. This beneficial effect may be due to increased
pressure in the mid-portion of the urethra which may inhibit ascent of bacteria to the
bladder.
Estrogens (Diethylstilbestrol [DES], Conjugated Estrogens [Premarin])
a. May be helpful for reasons similar to those noted above for phenylpropanolamine.
b. Low concentrations of estrogens may be associated with decreased uroepithelial GAG.
If so, replacement of estrogens could enhance the host defenses of the urothelium.
c. Estrogen replacement increases vaginal blood flow and alters the vaginal epithelium
which may be helpful in preventing ascent of bacteria.
Prophylactic Therapy
1. Useful to prevent new infections after previous infection has been eliminated in patients
that have had multiple UTI.
 2. Low-dose intermittent antimicrobial therapy may be of value to prevent the occurrence of
new infections.
ILong-term prophylactic use of antibacterials may help prevent recurrence of UTlin some patients.
a. Subtherapeutic doses of antimicrobials are given, but may prevent development of
new UTI.
(1) Bacterial numbers may be decreased.
(2) Host defense systems may be able to handle the reduced number of bacteria.
(3) Bacteria that are not directly killed by the antimicrobial may not express fimbria nec
essary to attach to urothelium, and consequently may be eliminated during voiding.
 3.An appropriate antimicrobial is administered in the standard manner and then is followed
by chronic administration of one third to one half of the total daily dose given once daily.
 a. The owner is instructed to give the medication at bedtime. This protocol favors a high
concentration of the excreted antimicrobial in urine when it is being stored the most,
thus facilitating maximal prophylactic effect.
b. A trimethoprim-potentiated sulfonamide, cephalexin, or nitrofurantoin is recom
wsueano aageoau-ei e Aq pasnes st Ln J! papuau
(1) The risk of folate deficiency during long-term therapy with trimethoprim-potenti-
ated sulfonamides has not been fully evaluated in clinical patients. Periodic assess
ment of the CBC is recommended to detect anemia.
(2) Thrombocytopenia and hepatopathy rarely have been observed in patients receiv-
ing ritrofurantoin. CBC and liver function tests should be evaluated periodically
(3) A myasthenia gravis-type syndrome has also been reported in some dogs receiving
nitrofurantoin.
c. Use of ampicillin/clavulanate or trimethoprim-potentiated sulfonamide is effective if
UTI is caused by gram-positive bacteria.
262
 CHAPTER 8  Cystitis and Urethritis: Urinary Tract Infection
d. The antibiotic previously used to eradicate the most recent UTI should be considered
when desigming a prophylactic program.
e. A fluoroquinolone is prescribed to prevent ascent of highly resistant organisms.
4.  Prophylaxis may be necessary for at least 6 consecutive months to prevent reinfection.
a. Ideally, urine should be cultured monthly to ensure that it remains sterile.
b. If the urine remains sterile for 6 months, the animal's urinary defense mechanisms
may have improved, and further medication may no longer be needed. Most dogs that
respond with negative urine cultures for 6 months will maintain sterile urine when
prophylaxis is discontinued.
C. Some animals require life-long prophylactic antibacterial therapy.
d.If the urine remains sterile, administration of the drug every other day or twice weekly
may be possible.
e. High dose pulse (once weekly) antibacterial therapy also has been recommended for
chronic prophylaxis. No comparisons between daily and pulse dose prophylaxis have
been reported.
Treatment of Highly Resistant or Unique Organisms
Resistance
a. Increased resistance of urinary tract strains of E. coli has been recently noted. Drugs
that may overcome resistance include:
(1) Fluoroquinolones.
(2) Third-generation cephalosporins.
(3) Methenamine.
(4) Imipenem.
(5) Meropenem is especially good for quinolone-resistant E. coli. It is administered at 8
to 10 mg SC twice daily, and is stable for 25 days in the refrigerator.
(6) Aminoglycosides.
(7) Ticarcillin.
(8) Piperacillin.
Recurrent Proteus spp Infections
 a. Fluoroquinolones may provide increased tissue penetration.
Pseudomonas
a. Fluoroquinolones.
b. Tetracyclines other than doxycycline.
Enterococci
a.Amoxicillin-clavulanate.
b. Chloramphenicol.
c. Nitrofurantoin.
Mycoplasma, Ureaplasma, or Chlamydia
a. Tetracycline or doxycycline.
b. Chloramphenicol.
Corynebacterium (Urealyticum, Jeikeium)
a. Vancomycin—can be toxic.
b. Teicoplanin (vancomycin-related glycopeptide).
c.Tetracyclines (doxycycline controversial).
d. Chloramphenicol.
e. Fluoroquinolones—variable susceptibility.
Fungal Organisms
a. Fluconazole (eliminated primarily in urine)
Cystitis and Urethritis: Urinary Tract Infection  CHAPTER 8263
b. Flucytosine (renal elimination)
(1) Bone marrow toxicity possible.
(2) Resistance may develop rapidly.
c. Clotrimazole (intermittent bladder infusion).
Special Types of Urinary Tract Infections
 1. Corynebacterium urealyticum is associated with a unique form of relapsing UTI in both dogs
and cats in which encrustations of urinary tissue with struvite and calcium phosphate can
prevent eradication of the organism with medical treatment alone.
a.
Gram-positive, non-hemolytic, urease-positive, catalase-positive, non-spore forming
aerobic bacillus. Resistant to multiple common antibiotics including amoxicillin, ceph-
alosporins, and potentiated-sulfa. Susceptibility testing can be impossible, because
some organisms are so slow growing.
b. Normal skin flora of humans (suspected to be the same in dogs and cats).
-odes u aurs su se parapisuon p ,spioaud, se paroan uao 'j
phytes exist.
d. Sometimes referred to as "encrusting cystitis" since the urease-producing activity of
this infection is associated with struvite and calcium phosphate precipitations that can
adhere to the mucosal surface. Calculi can be free moving, or small stones may adhere
to the mucosal surface. Other UTI associated with urease-producing activity (S. aureus,
Proteus spp.) are not associated with adherent plaque formation.
e. Almost always discovered after several previous UTI with more common organisms
and following multiple courses of antibacterial treatment.
f. Nearly all have micturition abnormalities that predispose to this infection (e.g., chronic
urinary incontinence, neurogenic bladder, atonic bladder, cystostomy tube placement,
indwelling urinary catheterization, chronic recumbency from musculoskeletal or neu-
rological disorders) or immunosuppression with glucocorticosteroids.
 m mna-mos si wsro a aurs n rg asn e se poao aq u a
sidered to be contaminants.
may or may not be seen. Gram-positive reaction for rods.
(1) Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test for use in human medicine has not been eval-
uated in dogs or cats.
i. Radiography may reveal stones or irregular mineralization along the mucosal surface.
Contrast radiography usually shows a thickened bladder with an irregular mucosa,
sometimes with filling defects from the encrustations and small stones.
 j. Ultrasonography reveals thickening of the bladder with irregular-shaped mucosal pro
jections that are of varying echogenicity.
(1) Heavy sediment may be observed within the bladder.
(2) The mucosal surface may be highly hyperechogenic with or without shadow-
ing. This is distinguished from the shadowing of stones that are homogenous in
echotexture and shape.
(3) Hydroureter and hydronephrosis may be seen in those with obstruction from
severe cystitis. Dilatation of the renal pelvis is possible secondary to pyelitis or
pyelonephritis.
k. Cystoscopy reveals erythema and increased vascularity to the mucosa of the bladder
and urethra. Distinctive yellow or white plaques that are firmly attached to the mucosa
may be seen, as well as bands of encrusting debris.
264
 CHAPTER 8  Cystitis and Urethritis: Urinary Tract Infection
1. Bladder histopathology is expected to reveal suppurative, necrotizing, ulcerating cys-
titis. Mineralization along the mucosa may be pronounced.
m. Ensure that the urine culture plate and broth are evaluated up to 5 days for bacterial
 growth in those in which typical urinary sediment and imaging findings described
above are found.
n. Correction of the underlying predisposition to the UTI is necessary to achieve long
term urinary sterility
0.Tetracycline and chloramphenicol are often the first choice antibacterial treatment. Flu-
oroquinolones are sometimes effective. Vancomycin is a tertiary choice due to toxicity
and need to be given parenterally.
(1) Antibacterial therapy by itself is often ineffective, because the drug cannot eradi-
cate the organisms in the encrustations and stones.
p. Surgery to remove any encrustations (plaque debridement, submucosal resection, or
partial cystectomy) improves the chances that medical therapy can be effective.
q.  Local installation of acidifying solutions into the bladder can be considered as an ancil-
lary treatment.
r. Prognosis for long-term cure is guarded to poor for most cases.
definitive identification. Clinical features were similar to those described earlier.
2. Emphysematous cystitis is a very rare complication of a bacterial UTl, particularly
in diabetic patients or others with glucosuria. It has also been associated with other
immunosuppressive diseases such as hyperadrenocorticism. Some of these animals may
not demonstrate clinical signs but may have evidence of UTI on urinalysis.
a. Occurs when bacterial cystitis is caused by a gas-producing bacterium such as Clostrid.
iurm spp. These bacteria create pockets of gas within the wall of the bladder that are
apparent on radiographs and ultrasound. It has also been associated with Corynebacte-
rium infection.
 b. Can be diagnosed via abdominal ultrasound or survey radiographs (may see gas in the
bladder wall).
C. Care should be taken in performing cystocentesis in these patients because the integ
rity of the bladder wall may be affected by the presence of gas within the bladder
wall.
d.  Aerobic cultures may be negative if an anaerobic organism is responsible.
e. Treatment with appropriate antibiotic therapy usually results in resolution of these
lesions.
f. Surgical stripping of the bladder mucosa is rarely indicated.
Outcomes
1. Clinical signs resolve, and urine culture is negative. This occurs in most cases.
 2. Clinical signs resolve, then return, and urine culture is positive.
a. Reinfection.
(1) New bacterial organism (reinfection due to poor host defenses)
b. Relapse or persistent infection.
(1) Same organism with same susceptibility pattern (antibiotic is ineffective).
(a) Resistant organism may be protected in biofilms and survive therapy.
(b) Antibiotic not reaching the organism.
(2) Same organism with new susceptibility pattern (acquired resistance).
c. Super-infection (uncommon)—previous organism is gone but a new one is present.
3.Clinical signs continue (with or without positive culture).
Cystitis and Urethritis: Urinary Tract Infection  CHAPTER 8 265
a.Wrong diagnosis (sterile inflammation).
b. UTI superimposed on neoplasia.
c. Superinfection.
SUCCESS OF THERAPY
A. Success depends on maintaining sterile urine during treatment and after medication has been
discontinued.
B. Resolution of clinical and laboratory signs (e.g., hematuria, proteinuria, microscopic bacteri-
uria) can be misleading because these can resolve due to reduced activity of the UTI but not
necessarily its eradication.
C. Quantitative urine cultures are recommended 5 to 7 days, 1 month, and 3 months after medi-
cation has been discontinued to ensure that infection has been eradicated and urine sterility
maintained.
 D. It is difficult or impossible to resolve UTI in an animal with a predisposing anatomic factor.
Anatomic abnormalities must be corrected for treatment of UTI to be successful.
E. Urine should be cultured after the animal with a recurrent UTI has received antibiotics for 3 to
5 days, especially when it is unclear whether or not the urine has ever been sterilized.
1. This is an in vivo susceptibility test.
 2. Any growth of organisms of this time indicates that the infection is not likely to be steril-
ized with this treatment.
ADDITIONAL THERAPEUTIC CONSIDERATIONS
Therapeutic Failures (Box 8-3)
1. Incorrect diagnosis (UTI is not present).
2. UTI is present but secondary to another urinary tract disorder (e.g., neoplasia, ectopic
ureter, uroliths).
3. Medication was not given or was not absorbed (e.g., pills regurgitated, interfering sub-
stances in the gastrointestinal tract).
4. The wrong antibacterial was selected (based on the suspected biological behavior of a
specific pathogen).
In cats, the most common reason for failure of antibiotics to eliminate clinical signs is that the disease is not
bacterial.
 5. The wrong dose, interval, or duration of the antibacterial was prescribed.
6. Lower concentration was achieved in urine than expected (e.g., decreased glomerular fil-
 tration rate, impaired urinary concentrating ability).
7. The infecting organism is highly resistant.
 8. The organism has developed resistance during treatment.
9. A second pathogen has emerged.
10. The organism is not accessible to the antibacterial (e.g., sequestered due to polyps or fibrosis).
11. Predisposing host factors have not been identified.
a. Anatomic.
b. Metabolic.
c. Functional.
266 CHAPTER 8  Cystitis and Urethritis: Urinary Tract Infection
B0X8-3
QUESTIONSTO CONSIDERWHEN URINARYTRACTINFECTION RECURS
Are you certain that the disease really is bacterial?
Have you made sure that there are no important predisposing anatomic abnormalities?
Urolithiasis—lower and upper urinary tract
Ectopic ureters
Neoplasia of bladder, urethra, or prostate
Urachal diverticulum
 Polypoid cystitis
Recessedvulva
Chronic bladder thickening with extensive tissue changes
Pyelonephritis
Prostatitis
Have you made sure that there are no important functional abnormalities?
Can the animal completely empty its bladder? Is the residual volume normal?
Is primary sphincter mechanism incompetence present (i.e., low urethral tone with urinary incontinence and
wicking of bacteria)?
Have you made sure that there are no important metabolic conditions present?
Diabetes mellitus?
Hyperadrenocorticism?
In dogs, the most common reason for failure of antibiotics to eliminate clinical signs is that underlying
 anatomic, functional, or metabolic disorders have not been identified.
12. A new UTI has developed after urethral catheterization.
13. Systemic immunosuppression is present.
14. Failure of host urinary defense mechanisms has allowed a new UTI to develop.
Recurrent Urinary Tract Infection
1. Recurrent infections are repeated episodes of bacterial UTI (often associated with clinical
signs) usually after therapy. Recurrent infections either are reinfections or relapsing infec.
tions. Serial quantitative culture results allow the distinction between relapse or reinfec.
tion (Table 8-4).
a.Reinfection is another clinical episode of infection caused by a different organism than
previously. The offending organism may be an entirely different genus and species or
may be the same genus and species, but a different serotype (54% of recurrent U'Tl)
 Recurrent UTl occurs in approximately 0.3% of all dogs in a referral population; 5% of all positive urine
 cultures are from recurrent cases.
(1) This situation represents a new infection that typically occurs weeks to months
after discontinuation of drug therapy for a previous UTI.
(2) Long-term treatment usually is not indicated, because routine therapy will eradi-
cate the current infection.
(3) Multiple new infections suggest that the animal's host defense mechanisms are
not operating properly. A search for predisposing factors indluding anatomic
Cystitis and Urethritis: Urinary Tract Infection  CHAPTER 8
267
TABLE 8-4
  Schedule of Urine Cultures for Difficult or Recurrent Cases
Initial Presentation
Identify Organism and Determine Susceptibility
After 3-5 days on treatment
Document effective eradication in urine
Rule out persistent infection
Change in MIC if persistent?
Rapid emergence of resistance?
3 days before treatment ends
Rule out super-infection (rare)
New organism identified?
7-10 days after treatment ends
Rule out relapse
1, 2, 3, 6, and 12 months after treatment
Identify reinfection
defects, urolithiasis, urinary retention (e.g., neurologic dysfunction), neoplasia,
and metabolic disorders (e.g., hyperadrenocorticism, diabetes mellitus, immuno-
 suppression) should be undertaken. Often no predisposing factors are found, indi-
cating primary failure of host defense mechanisms.
b. Relapsing infection is another clinical episode caused by the same organism (i.e., same
serotype) and implies persistence of an organism that was never eradicated (44% of
recurrent UTI).
(1) This situation sugests that the infection is deep-seated within the tissues. Clinical
signs tend to occur soon after discontinuation of medications, usually within days
to a week.
It is important to distinguish between reinfection and relapsing infection because the causes and treatment
 are different.
(2) Long-term therapy for 30 to 60 days or longer is indicated.
(3) A search for predisposing factors should be undertaken to exclude:
(a) Pyelonephritis.
(b) Obstructive nephropathy.
(c) Urolithiasis.
(d) Chronic bladder wall changes allowing sequestration of bacteria.
(e) Anatomic defects.
(f) Urinary retention.
(g) Re-inoculation of the bladder from prostatic or uterine infection.
c. Persistent infection is a variant of relapsing infection in that the same organism is pres-
ent, but it has never been eradicated, even transiently.
(1) Persistent infection occurs in approximately 2% of all recurrent UTI.
(2) It implies severe abrogation of local host defenses or an organism highly resistant
to the antimicrobial agent presently being used to treat the infection.
2. Female dogs typically have recurrent infections with Staphylococcus, Enterococcus sp, or P.
aeruginosa.
 3. Male dogs with recurrent UTI are more likely to have Kebsiella, Providentia, Salmonella sp.
 Corynebacterium sp, Acinetobacter sp, or Actinomyces sp infections.
   ss   a s a g  'san s  1
have three isolated.
268  CHAPTER 8  Cystitis and Urethritis: Urinary Tract Infection
Diagnostic Imaging Studies
1. Diagnostic imaging studies (e.g.* plain radiography, contrast urography, ultrasonography.
cystoscopy) also are important in the evaluation of recurrent UTI.
WHAT DO WE DO?
· We quantitatively culture the urine of all dogs and cats with clinical signs related to the lower uri-
nary tract. This proced ure allows us to know if a bacterial UTI is present or not. Definitive identifica-
tion of the organism and the numbers present (cfu/mL) make a difference in our degree of certainty
that UTI is real and may provide a clue as to how dificult it will be to eradicate the organism.
· We culture urine from cats with CRF at initial presentation and periodically thereafter regardless of
whether or not they have clinical signs, because many CRF cats have a UTI at some point in their
clinical course.
· We institute surveillance of dogs with hyperadrenocorticism and those that have received long-term
examination.
· We pursue diagnostic imaging if more than one infection has occurred within a 6-month period.
●We culture urine during the administration of antibacterial agents in difficult cases to ensure that the
urine is sterilized while the animal is on medication.
● We culture the urine 5 to 7 days after stopping antibacterial agents and then again 1 and 3 months
later in arimals with recurrent UTI.
· We institute chronic prophylactic antibacterial treatment at subtherapeutic doses in animals with
 recurrent UTI in which no predisposing factors can be found after a full course of antibacterial treat-
ment has sterilized the urine. We culture the urine periodically to ensure that breakthrough infection
has not occurred.
● We select antimicrobial agents on the basis of susceptibility test results in animals with recurrent
UTI.
SUMMARY TIPS
DO's
DON'Ts
Culture urine in all dogs and cats with signs of lower
Don't blindly pick an antibacterial agent, unless financial
urinary tract disease.
constraints of the owner dictate otherwise.
Collect urine by cystocentesis for culture.
Don't culture voided urine.
 Don't ignore the likelihood of UTl in patients with CRF,
and cats receiving corticosteroids, and from those with
diabetes mellitus, and hyperadrenocorticims. UTl in such
diabetes mellitus or hyperadrenocorticism.
patients often is asymptomatic.
Perform a direct examination of fresh urine, and culture
Don't assume urine is sterile if bacteria are not seen in urine
the urine.
sediment. Don't assume that "bacteria" in sediment are
real, especially in the absence of pyuria.
Use urine sediment examination to visualize WBCs
Don't depend on dipsticks to detect WBCs in urine. They
are unreliable in dogs and cats.
Don't ignore the risk of U'fl after urinary catheterization.
cally necessary, but be aware of the risk of introducing
Don't carelessly administer antibiotics to animals with ind.
welling urinary catheters. Infection may be delayed but
not prevented, and resistant organisms are likely.
Culture urine after treatment to ensure sterility of urine.
Don't rely on resolution of clinical signs to indicate that
lurine is sterile
Follow a full course of antibacterial therapy.
Don't discontinue treatment early just because the patient
looks or feels better.
Treat all cases of UTl, even those that are asymptomatic.
 pateaun jo saouanbasuoo euaod au aout iuo
Cystitis and Urethritis: Urinary Tract Infection  CHAPTER 8  269
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS
· Bacterial urine cultures are of limited value. Actually, quantitative culture of urine is the gold standard
that indicates whether UTI actually exist or not. Many things look like bacteria in the urine; hence,
culture is necessary to confirm whether bacteria are actually present in abundance or not.
·It is reasonable to culture voided urine. Definitely not true in most instances,because of the high
degree of contamination of the urine sample from bacteria that reside in the distal urethra, vestibule,
orprepuce.
n sa asap asmxa aa s o an non lnn aq aau ana s o ·s
protect them against bacteria that could otherwise cause UTI. It may be that the cat's extremely high
● Urine culture is of no value while an animal is receiving antimicrobial agents. It is true that urine
culture taken while an animal is receiving antibacterial medication often results in no growth of bac
teria even when they are present, because their growth is inhibited in the laboratory by the presence
of the antimicrobial agent. However, during assessment of difficult cases with recurrent UTI, culture
of urine while on medication can be valuable. If an organism grows, it means that the organism is
either very resistant to the medication chosen or the agent is not getting to where the organism is
hiding.
· Dipstick WBC measurements are useful in the documentation of pyuria. Dipstick pads for WBC
Jo asuasaid a adsap shop u aageau Aanbane s ssan si aseraisa am ioaiap ch paaisap ane
WBC and positive in cats despite the absence of WBC
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
Q: Do I really need to culture urine on an animal's first episode of presumed bacterial UTI?
A: Ideally, yes, but it may not be essential the first time. Most animals with their first UTI will
respond to a routine course of antimicrobial treatment. If antimicrobial agents have been given for
another reason within the past few months, it is a good idea to culture the urine rather than assuming
the UTI will respond to treatment.
Q: Why do most of my urine cultures from cats with signs of LUTD come back negative?
A: Cats younger than 10 years of age with signs of irritative voiding rarely (<1% of the time) have
bacterial UTI. Cats have excellent urinary host defenses (such as high urine osmolality) that make it 
perineal urethrostomies or in those that have had urethral catheterization within the past 6 months.
Cats older than 10 years of age with signs of irritative voiding have a greater likelihood of having a bac-
terial UTI, often in association with CRF. Diagnosis of bacterial UTI in cats often is erroneously based
on the observation of so-called bacteria in urine sediment. Unfortunately, many things in the urine
sediment of cats can look like bacteria, but actually are not bacteria. Dipstrip tests for WBC in urine
based on leukocyte esterase reactions frequently are falsely positive in cats that do not have pyuria.
approach these differently?
A: Relapsing infection is diagnosed when the same organism is isolated a few days to one week after
discontinuing antibacterial medication. Presence of a relapsing infection means the original organism
was never completely eradicated, and that it is still present. A relapsing U'Tl implies a deeply seated
infection (e.g., one in the kidneys, prostate gland, or thickened bladder wall or one complicated by other
factors such as uroliths, polypoid cystitis, or a urachal remnant). Usually, the solution to a relapsing infec-
tion is to prescribe antimicrobial treatment for a much longer period of time or to enhance tissue penetra-
tion by switching to an antibiotic with better distribution to the affected tissue. Also, the organism may
270 CHAPTER 8  Cystitis and Urethritis: Urinary Tract Infection
have become resistant to the antibiotic that has been chosen. Reinfections are detected weeks to months
after antibiotic therapy. An initial follow-up urine culture taken 5 to 7 days after medication has been dis-
continued is sterile. The implication is that the organism was easy to eliminate, and that colonization by
a new organism has occurred. A routine course of antibiotic is indicated again, and longer courses do not
increase the likelihood that another infection will be prevented. Newer, more expensive antibiotics also
o o s  a si s a   a  a  as
Q: How often does UTl occur in the absence of pyuria? In the absence of visible bacteriuria in
urinary sediment?
A: Most UTI are accompanied by pyuria. The odds of a UTI being present are higher if the WBCs
are seen with bacteria. Cats with CRF and dogs with hyperadrenocorticism, diabetes mellitus, or exog-
eous corticosteroid administration can have a true bacterial UTI without pyuria or bacteriuria and
with or without lower urinary tract clinical signs. Such patients should have quantitative urine cul-
tures performed periodically. Bacteria may not be visible during evaluation of wet mounts of urine
sediment despite the presence of a true UTI. A critical number of bacteria must be present before the
human eye can detect them in the urinary sediment. Remember also that not everything reported to be
bacteria in the urinary sediment really is bacteria. Many particulate artifacts occur in urine sediment
and can be confused with bacteria.
Q: How often are bacteria really in urine, but fail to grow in the microbiology laboratory?
A: Most common uropathogens grow readily on blood agar within 12 to 24 hours in an incubator.
Similar results are achieved even if urine has been refrigerated for up to 6 hours. Refrigeration for 24
hours or more reduces bacterial growth, but usually the infecting organism can be isolated and a diag
nosis made. Typically, if the organism is there, it will grow using conventional methods. If you are con-
aaq se ymono pe ro sandes am jo aerois cn anp shmsai aaeau-asteg ua are noa pen paa
inhibited during transport to the laboratory, consider plating out the urine sample immediately after
collecfion, and send the plate fo the laboratory affer inifial incubafion if overnight growth is detected
Q: What are treatable predisposing factors that either initiate or potentiate UTl in dogs? In cats?
A: Inadequate opportunities for dogs to void, infection-related uroliths, urachal diverticulum,
ectopic ureter, polypoid cystitis, recessed vulva (dogs), diabetes mellitus, hyperadrenocorticism, exog-
Enous corticosteroid exposure, urinary incontinence, CRF (cats), and proliferative urethritis (dogs) are
some recognized predisposing problems.
Q: How frequently is UTI associated with highly resistant bacterial organisms?
A: Fortunately, most UTI are associated with organisms that are highly susceptible to routinely
used antibacterial agents. More resistant organisms are encountered in animals with recurrent UTI, in
which susceptibility testing is clearly indicated. Recent reports of bacterial susceptibility in dogs with
UTI indicate the emergence of increased bacterial resistance to enrofloxacin, possibly due to wide
spread use of this drug.
Q: In general, how long do you administer antimicrobials to an animal with UTI?
A: In umcomplicated cases, antibiotics usually are given for 2 to 3 weeks.
Q: How would you change the length of antimicrobial treatment in an upper UTI compared with
a lower UTI?
A: Upper UTI poses a special challenge to eradicate the bacterial organisms. It takes at least 4 to 6
weeks and possibly 2 to 3 months to sterilize renal tissue. In some instances, it is not possible to sterilize
thekidneys.
Cystitis and Urethritis: Urinary Tract Infection  CHAPTER 8271
Q: When do you re-culture urine during or after treatment for UTl?
A: In difficult cases, urine can be cultured during antibiotic treatment as a form of in vivo suscepti-
bility testing. If bacteria are present in urine during antibiotic treatment (i.e., persistent infection), then
the urine is not being sterilized by the selected therapy and a different antibiotic or dosing regimen
should be chosen. Urine culture should be performed after treatment in all cases, if possible and finan-
cially feasible for the owner. Clinical signs are not reliable to document successful eradication of UTI.
Q: How can it be that an organism is reported by the laboratory as resistant to a specific antimicro-
bial agent, when actually it is susceptible in the animal's urinary tract?
A: Kirby-Bauer testing uses discs that contain concentrations of the antibacterial agents comparable
to what can be achieved in serum. The concentration of the antimicrobial is likely to be much higher in
in question when in reality it is susceptible at concentrations of the drug that can be achieved in urine.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Bailiff NL, Westropp JL, Jang SS, Ling GV: Corynebacterium urealyticum urinary tract infection in dogs and cats: 7 cases
(1996-2003), / Amm Vet Med Assoc 226: 16761680, 2005.
Bartges J: Lower urinary tract diseases in geriatric cats, Proceedings of the ACVIM, Lake Buena Vista, Fla., 1997, 322-324.
Cooke CL, Singer RS, Jang SS, Hirsh DC: Enrofloxacin resistance in Escherichia coli isolated from dogs with urinary tract
infections,  A Vet Med Assoc 220:190192, 2002.
Davidson AP, Ling GV, Stevens F, et al: Urinary tract infections in cats: A retrospective study 1977-1989, Califomia Veteri
narian 5:3234, 1992.
corticism or diabetes mellitus or both, / Vet Intern Med 13:557560, 1999.
Gelatt KN, van der Woerdt A, Ketring KL, et al: Enrofloxacin-associated retinal degeneration in cats, Vet Ophthalmol 4:99-
106,2001.
Lightner BA, McLoughlin MA, Chew D], et al: Episioplasty for the treatment of perivulvar dermatitis or recurrent urinary
tract infections in dogs with excessive perivulvar skin folds: 31 cases (1983-2000), Am Vet Med Assoc 219:1577-1581, 2001.
and breed among 8,354 canine urinary tract infections (1969-1995), I Vet Intern Med 15:341-347, 2001.
Litster A, Moss SM, Honnery M, et al: Prevalence of bacterial species in cats with clinical signs of lower urinary tract
disease: Recognition of Staphylococcus felis as a possible feline urinary tract pathogen, Vet Microbiol 121:182-188, 2007.
Mayer-Roenne B, Goldstein RE, Erb HN: Urinary tract infections in cats with hyperthyroidism, diabetes mellitus and
chronic kidney disease,  Feline Med Surg 9:124-132, 2007.
Norris CR, Williams BJ, Ling GV, et al: Recurrent and persistent urinary tract infections in dogs: 383 cases (1969-1995)
 A Ai Hosp Assoc 36:484492, 2000
Seguin MA, Vaden SL, Altier C, et al: Persistent urinary tract infections and reinfections in 100 dogs (1989-1999), J Vet
Intern Med 17:622-631, 2003.
Swenson CL, Boisvert AM, Kruger JM, Gibbons-Burgener SN: Evaluation of modified Wright-staining of urine sediment
as a method for accurate detection of bacteriuria in dogs, } Arm Vet Med Assoc 224:1282-1289, 2004
Wilson BJ, Norris JM, Malik R, et al: Susceptibility of bacteria from feline and canine urinary tract infections to doxycycline
and tetracycline concentrations attained in urine four hours after oral dosage, Aust Vet  84:8-11, 2006.
CHAPTER
9
Urolithiasis
 INTRODUCTION, TERMINOLOGY, AND GENERAL PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Urine Is a Complex Solution Containing Many Organic and Inorganic
Solutes
1. More of a given solute can remain in solution in urine than in water because of the com-
plex interactions that occur among the various organic and inorganic constituents in urine.
2.
 For several possible reasons (e.g., diet, decreased water intake, altered urine pH, relative
lack of inhibitors, or presence of promoters of crystallization), the solubility product of a
particular solute may be exceeded, crystals may form, and these crystals may aggregate
and grow. (Figure 9-1.)
a. If the crystals precipitate spontaneously, the process is called homogenous nucleation.
Homogenous nucleation probably does not occur in urine.
b. If another substance (e.g., desquamated epithelial cells, inflammatory cells and debris,
bacteria, foreign body) acts as a nidus for crystal precipitation, the process is called
heterogenous nucleation.
c. Crystals must reside in the urinary tract for a sufficient time for a urolith to form, so
factors that predispose to urinary stasis play an important role in urolithiasis. Con-
versely, factors that increase voiding such as increased water intake may be protective
3.A crystalloid is a component of a crystal (e.g., an ion).
4. A urolith is an organized concretion found in the urinary tract and containing primarily
organic or inorganic crystalloid and a much smaller amount of organic matrix.
Most uroliths are identified in the lower urinary tract.
a. When 70% or more of the urolith is composed of one type of crystalloid it is named for
that crystal. Secondary crystalloids can comprise up to 30% of the total weight. Most
stones in dogs and cats have one major crystal component (Figures 9-2 and 9-3). More
than 90% of stones submitted for quantitative analysis are collected from the lower
urinary tract.
b. When <70% of the urolith is composed of one mineral but without identifiable nidus,
shell, or surface crystals, it is called a mixed urolith.
C.A matrix urolith contains organic matrix without appreciable crystalloid.
d. A urolith with an identifiable nidus composed of one mineral with one or more sur-
rounding layers of different mineral composition is called a compound urolith.
 5. Calculus is a general term referring to a solid concretion formed in ducts of hollow
organs.
6.  Matrix is the noncrystalline organic components of a urolith.
272
Urolithiasis ■ CHAPTER 9
273
FGURE 9-1 Note lamellar pattern of large urolith shown on radiograph after stone had been removed surgically.
06
1985
80
1995
■2005
70
60
Percentage
50
40
30
20
10
0
二
Struvite
Calcium
Purine
Cystine
oxalate
Feline UrolithDistribution
FGURE 9-2 ■ Percentage of urolith type from cats submitted to the Minmesota Urolith Center, Courtesy of
Minnesota Urolith Center, University of Minnesota College of Veterinary Medicine, St. Paul, Minn.
601
1985
1995
50
■2005
40
30
Pero
20
10
Struvite
Calcium
Purine
Cystine
oxalate
Canine Urolith Distribution
FGURE 9-3 ■ Percentage of urolith type from dogs submitted to the Minmesota Urolith Center, Courtesy of
Minnesota Urolith Center, University of Minnesota College of Veterinary Medicine, St. Paul, Minn.
274  CHAPTER 9 ■ Urolithiasis
a. Albumin, globulins, Tamm-Horsfall mucoprotein (uromucoid), hexose, hexosamine,
and matrix substance A have been identified in uroliths, but normally make up a very
small portion of the total weight of the urolith.
b. Calculi composed solely of dried solidified blood have been removed from all regions
of the upper and lower urinary tract of cats. Most affected cats also have hematuria
(> 100 red blood cells per high-power field [RBCs/hpf]).
Urine Is Commonly Supersaturated With Crystalloids
1. Urine is commonly supersaturated with crystalloids, and observation of individual crys-
tals does not necessarily mean the patient is at risk for urolithiasis. Cooling of the urine
specimen during storage promotes in vitro crystal precipitation, and observed crystals
may not have been present at the time the sample was collected. Supersaturation of urine
with crystalloids depends on:
Amount of solute ingested and excreted
Urine Yolume
a. Dogs and cats that drink smaller volumes of water may produce small volumes of
more concentrated urine, which potentially could predispose them to development of
urolithiasis.
b. In one study, miniature Schnauzers urinated less frequently and produced smaller
volumes of urine with higher pH and higher calcium concentration than did Labrador
retrievers consuming the same dry food diet.
Urine pH
a. Struvite, calcium carbonate, and calcium phosphate are less soluble in alkaline urine.
b. Cystine is less soluble in acid urine.
c. Uric acid is more soluble in alkaline urine, but urate is less soluble in alkaline urine.
 d. Urine pH does not appear to have a major effect on the solubility of silicate and oxalate.
Promoters of Urolithiasis
a.Abnormal urine proteins were once thought to promote aggregation and growth. No
conclusive evidence for (or against) this theory has emerged.
b. Precipitation of one crystal on the surface of another, a process called epitaxy, can pro-
mote growth of crystals with similar lattice configurations, such as uric acid, calcium
oxalate, and calcium phosphate.
Inhibitors ofUrolithiasis
a. Inhibitors of crystallization include pyrophosphate, citrate, and various cations
(e.g., Mg+2).
 b. Inhibitors of aggregation include pyrophosphate, citrate, diphosphonates, and glycos-
aminoglycans (GAGs).
c. A urinary inhibitor of crystal growth called nephrocalcin is biochemically altered in
aggregation in urine, but in some human patients it may self-aggregate and fail to pro-
tect against crystal aggregation.
Three General Theories of Urolithiasis
1. The precipitation-crystallization theory incriminates supersaturation of urine with
crystalloids as the primary factor in the precipitation and subsequent growth of calculi
(Figure 9-4).
I Calculi collected from the lower urinary tract are assumed to have formed there.
Urolithiasis  CHAPTER 9
275
Unstable: Oversaturated
spontaneouscrystal nucleation
-maximal crystal growth
 maximal crystal aggregation
 no crystal dissolution
D
6
6
Formation product
tance
Metastable: Supersaturated
ost
- heterogenous crystal nucleation
 minimal crystal growth
- minimal crystal aggregation
- no crystal dissolution
e2
T
Solubiity product
Stable: Undersaturated
-no crystal aggregation,growth, or nucleation
- crystal dissolution
FlGURE 9-4  Crystal dissolution, formation, and growth as a function of the concentration of crystalloids.
2.The matrix-nucleation theory implies that some abnormal substance in the urine is respon-
sible for the initial development of calculi
 3. The crystallization-inhibition theory suggests that the absence of some critical inhibitor
(or presence of a promoter) of crystal formation is the primary factor in the development
of calculi.
4.  It possible that elements of all three theories contribute to the development of urolithiasis.
5. It has been assumed that calculi initially identified in the lower urinary tract actually
formed in that location, but this has not been proven. Based on recent data about urolith
formation in human patients, it is thought that uroliths may originate from abnormal
processes in the kidneys themselves.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF INDIVIDUAL STONE TYPES
Struvite Urolithiasis
1. For many years, struvite was the most common type of urolith found in dogs and cats
comprising 60% to 70% of uroliths in dogs and up to 95% of uroliths found in cats.
Between 1981 and 2001, the frequency of calcium oxalate urolithiasis increased and
that of struvite decreased. Today, struvite comprises 40% to 50% of uroliths in dogs
and cats. The increase in calcium oxalate urolithiasis began to level off between 1998
and 2001. (see Figures 9-2 and 9-3.)
2.
The major crystalloid in these uroliths is MgNHPO-6HO (struvite). Calcium phosphate
as carbonate apatite often is present in small amounts (2%-10%). The presence of three
cations (i.e., Ca+2, Mg+2, and NH4+) detected by early qualitative analytical methods was 
responsible for the name "triple phosphate" previously used for these stones. They also
have been called magnesium ammonium phosphate stones.
3.9
Struvite uroliths are spherical, ellipsoidal, or tetrahedral in shape and may be present
singly or in large numbers of varying sizes. (Figure 9-5.)
276
CHAPTER 9  Urolithiasis
二
B
 FIGURE 9-5  A, Note multiple largecystic calculi composed of struvite from a dog with a urinary tract infection.
B, Large struvite stones from a dog. Notice how the surfaces of stones growing near each other mold to fit. C, Single
flat cystic calculus from a cat with sterile urine removed during surgery. They can appear wafer like.
4. In dogs and cats, the bladder is the most common site of struvite uroliths, although they
may occur at any site in the urinary tract.
5. In dogs, struvite calculi tend to recur after surgical removal, and the recurrence rate in one
study was 21%.
urolithiasis have sterile urine when their calculi are first recognized.
6. Infection of the urinary tract by urease-positive bacteria (especially staphylococci and Pro-
teus sp) plays the most important role in the pathogenesis of struvite urolithiasis in dogs.
More than 95% of dogs with struvite urolithiasis have infection as an underlying cause for
the urolith growth. In almost all cats with struvite urolithiasis, infection is not present and
Urolithiasis  CHAPTER 9
277
H,O
Ho0
H+
HN
H
pKa>10
HO
+
NH4 *
NH4
Urease
HGURE 9-6  How urease-positive UTI changes urinary chemistry to favor struvite crystal formation.
the calculi are thought to be metabolic in origin. However, a family of Cocker spaniels with
recurrent sterile struvite urolithiasis has been reported.
a. The solubility of struvite is markedly reduced in alkaline urine. Struvite becomes
 progressively less soluble as the pH increases above 6.7.
b.1
 Hydrolysis of urea by urease-positive bacteria liberates ammonia and carbon dioxide,
which alkalinizes the urine and increases availability of ammonium and phosphate
ions for struvite crystal formation (Figure 9-6).
C.
 Experimentally, induction of urease-positive staphylococcal urinary tract infection
(UTI) in dogs is followed in 2 to 8 weeks by the development of struvite calculi.
7. Struvite solubility is decreased in animals with persistently alkaline urine even in the
absence of UTI. In dogs that form struvite stones in the absence of UTI, predisposing fac-
tors that may be associated with alkaline urine (e.g., family history of struvite stones, diet
based on vegetable proteins, distal renal tubular acidosis) should be considered.
8. UTI usually is not present in cats with struvite stones. More than 95% of cats with struvite
urolithiasis have sterile urine.
9. Diets formulated with high magnesium, phosphorus, calcium, chloride, or fiber, and mod-
erate protein content are associated with increased risk of struvite urolithiasis in cats. Diets
with high fat content, low in sodium or potassium, and those formulated to maximize
urine acidity are associated with decreased risk of struvite urolithiasis in cats.
Oxalate Urolithiasis
1. Calcium oxalate stones are the most common type of urolith in humans, and their
frequency has increased in dogs and cats and during the past 25 years.
 2. Risk factors for development of oxalate urolithiasis in dogs.
a.Age older than 4 years. Affected dogs are older than 1 year of age and the highest risk
 occurs between 8 and 12 years of age. The average age of occurrence is between 8 and
9 years.
b. Neutered males are at highest risk.
c.Breeds at highest risk are miniature and standard Schnauzer, Lhasa apso, Yorkshire
terrier, Bichon frise, Shih tzu, miniature and toy poodle. Golden retriever, German
shepherd, and Cocker spaniel are at lowest risk for oxalate urolithiasis.
d. Overweight dogs have higher risk.
e. Pet dogs have higher risk than working dogs.
f. Hypercalcemia (usually as a consequence of primary hyperparathyroidism) is a
3. Risk factors for development of oxalate urolithiasis in cats.
a. The increase in frequency of oxalate urolithiasis in cats over the past 25 years does not
seem to be related to changes in the age, breed, sex, or reproductive status of the cat
population during this time.
278
CHAPTER 9  Urolithiasis
FIGURE 9-7  Calcium oxalate stone from the urinary bladder of a dog removed at surgery. Note the jagged
edges which are commonly seen in oxalates.
b. Exclusive feeding of an acidifying diet without provision of different brands of food
or table scraps is a strong risk factor for development of calcium oxalate urolithiasis
in cats.
C.  Middle-aged to older cats usually are affected.
d. Males (usually neutered) are affected more commonly than females.
e. Persian, Himalayan, Ragdoll, Havana Brown, and Scottish Fold breeds are at increased
risk for development of oxalate urolithiasis whereas Siamese and Abyssinian cats are
at decreased risk.
f.Cats kept indoors exclusively are at increased risk.
4. Calcium oxalate stones are composed of calcium oxalate monohydrate (whewellite) or cal-
cium oxalate dihydrate (weddellite). Oxalate often is not detected by qualitative analysis,
and quantitative analysis of stones is necessary for reliable identification.
5. Calcium oxalate calculi usually are white in color and very hard. They often have sharp.
jagged edges and may be single or multiple in number. (see Figure 9-7.)
6.
Oxalate stones often are found in the bladder and urethra, but they also are the most
common type of urolith found in the kidney and ureter of both dogs and cats. A 10-fold
increase in urolithiasis in the upper urinary tract of cats has been reported over the past
25 years.
7.  The recurrence rate for oxalate urolithiasis is high (between 25 and 48%).
8. Oxalate is derived both from the diet and endogenously from the metabolism of ascorbic
acid (vitamin C) and the amino acid glycine. In human beings, increased dietary oxa-
late, increased gastrointestinal absorption of oxalate, vitamin Bg deficiency, and inherited
Urolithiasis ■ CHAPTER 9
279
CalciumOxalateStoneFormation?
Acidifying diet
Systemic acidosis
Bone buffering
↓Plasma citrate
 ↑Ca++ Plasma
GFR
reabsorption
GFR
↑Ca++Urine
Urinary citrate
+
2
Mg Restricted diet
-
UrinaryMg
UrinaryHO
3
Crystal poison action
FGURE 9-8  Interaction of systemic acidosis, urinary calcium excretion,reduction in oxalate crystal poisons, and
reduced urinary water—a working hypothesis to explain an increased frequency of calcium oxalate urolithiasis.
GFR, glomerular filtration rate
defects of oxalate metabolism can predispose to development of calcium oxalate stones.
The role of such factors in development of calcium oxalate stones in animals is not known.
 9. Altered calcium metabolism may play a role in development of oxalate urolithiasis
(Figure 9-8).
a. Increased urinary excretion of calcium (hypercalciuria) can result from increased
absorption of calcium from the intestinal tract (absorptive hypercalciuria), from
increased urinary loss of calcium (reral leak hypercalciuria), or from increased release
 of calcium from bone (resorptive hypercalciuria). In absorptive as compared to renal
leak hypercalciuria, urinary calcium excretion is higher after feeding than during
fasting
b. In one study, miniature Schnauzers had higher urinary calcium excretion during
fasting than did beagles and urinary calcium excretion increased 3-fold after feeding
(i.e., hypercalciuria seemed to be absorptive).
calcium oxalate or calcium phosphate uroliths due to parathyroid hormone-mediated
mobilization of calcium from bone (resorptive hypercalciuria).
d. Chronic acidosis may be associated with increased urinary excretion of calcium due to
increased calcium release from bone as a buffering mechanism. Long-term feeding of
an acidifying diet may contribute to this resorptive hypercalciuria and may partially
explain the increase in calcium oxalate urolithiasis in cats during the past 25 years (i.e.
increased feeding of acidifying diets to prevent struvite urolithiasis). Decreased mag-
inhibitor for calcium oxalate.
e. Dogs with hyperadrenocorticism are predisposed to development of calcium oxalate
and calcium phosphate uroliths possibly as a result of decreased renal reabsorption
of calcium (i.e., renal leak hypercalciuria) and effects that increase bone resorption of
calcium (i.e., resorptive hypercalciuria).
.
 Hypercalcemia occurs in approximately one third of cats with calcium oxalate stones,
and idiopathic hypercalcemia in cats has become increasingly common in the past
CHAPTER9Urolithiasis
15 years. Many cats with idiopathic hypercalcemia also have calcium oxalate stones
Affected cats often have a history of having been fed acidifying diets, and chronic sub-
clinical acidosis may play a role in development of hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria, and
calcium oxalate urolithiasis. High fiber diets and prednisone therapy have been used
to manage cats with idiopathic hypercalcemia, but it is not yet clear if this approach
decreases occurrence of urolithiasis.
10. Citrate forms a soluble complex with calcium and normally may be an inhibitor of calcium
oxalate formation. Acidosis may be associated with decreased urinary citrate excretion
and, thus, may predispose to calcium oxalate stone formation.
11. The role of diet in oxalate urolithiasis in dogs and cats is unclear. The following
conclusions are based on recent studies of diet composition and risk of calcium oxalate
urolithiasis
a. One predictor of stone mineral crystallization and growth is the degree of urine super-
saturation with the crystalloid in question. Relative supersaturation (RSS) is the ratio
of the activity product to the solubility product for stone-forming salts such as calcium
oxalate and magnesium ammonium phosphate. RSS values of >1 indicate supersatura-
tion and values of <1 indicate undersaturation. Computer programs have been devel-
oped to determine RSS using urine pH and the concentrations of various inorganic and
organic urinary electrolytes (Robertson WG, et al. 2002).
b. Higher RSS of urine with calcium oxalate has been observed in dogs with a history of
forming calcium oxalate stones as compared with non-stone-forming dogs of similar
age, breed, and sex (Stevenson AE, et al. 2003).
c. In dogs, canned food diets with the highest amounts of protein, fat, calcium, phos-
phorus, magnesium, sodium, potassium, chloride, or moisture were associated with
decreased risk of calcium oxalate urolithiasis. Canned food diets with the highest
amount of carbohydrate were associated with increased risk of calcium oxalate uroli-
thiasis (Lekcharoensuk C, et al. 2002).
d. In cats, diets low in sodium or potassium or formulated to maximize urine acidity
and those with moderate fat or carbohydrate content were associated with increased
risk of calcium oxalate urolithiasis. Diets with high moisture or protein content and
with moderate magnesium, phosphorus, or calcium contents were associated with
decreased risk of calcium oxalate urolithiasis (Lekcharoensuk C, et al. 2001). Wide-
spread use of acidifying diets in cats may play a role in development of urolithiasis in
this species.
e. RSS of urine with calcium oxalate was compared in normal miniature Schnauzers and
Labrador retrievers fed a 7% moisture diet with 0.06 g sodium/100 kcal as compared
to the same diet supplemented with water (73% moisture) or sodium (0.2 to 0.3 g
sodium/1o0 kcal). Increased moisture decreased calcium oxalate RSS in the miniature
Schnauzers but not in the Labrador retrievers. Increased sodium contert decreased
calcium oxalate RSS in both breeds (Stevenson AE, et al. 2003). This study contradicts
 previous concerns that diets with large amounts of sodium may facilitate calciuresis
and predispose to calcium oxalate urolithiasis.
f. In dogs, dry food diets with the lowest concentrations of sodium, phosphorus, cal-
cium, chloride, protein, magnesium, or potassium were associated with increased risk
of calcium oxalate urolithiasis. Diets with high urinary acidifying potential and low
moisture content also were associated with increased risk of calcium oxalate urolithia-
sis (Lekcharoensuk C, et al. 2002).
g. In a comparison of nutrient intake and urine composition in calcium oxalate stone-
forming dogs as compared with healthy control dogs, stone-forming dogs had lower
Urolithiasis  CHAPTER 9 281
Uric acid
(lactam form)
pKa5.75 (9)
H
pKa2 10.3 (3)
Sodium acid urate
Ammonium acid urate
HN
Na
NH
FGURE 9-9  Different forms of urate in urine.
intakes of sodium, calcium, potassium, and phosphorus and higher urinary calcium
and oxalate concentrations, calcium excretion, and calcium oxalate RSS. Feeding Royal
Canin's Urinary SO Diet for 1 month resulted in increased intake of moisture, sodium,
 and fat and decreased intake of potassium and calcium and decreased urinary concen-
trations of calcium and oxalate, calcium excretion, and calcium oxalate RSS (Stevenson
AE, et al. 2004).
h. Although it may seem paradoxical that a low calcium diet would be associated with
a higher risk of calcium oxalate urolithiasis, this increased risk presumably occurs
because diets restricted in calcium but not oxalate can result in decreased formation of
insoluble, poorly absorbed calcium oxalate complexes in the gastrointestinal tract. As
a consequence, more oxalate is absorbed, leading to hyperoxaluria, which is a bigger
risk factor for calcium oxalate urolithiasis than hypercalciuria alone.
i. Healthy beagle dogs were fed a canned diet designed to decrease calcium oxalate
urolith recurrence (Hill's Prescription Diet u/d) with and without NaCl supplementa-
tion (1.2% versus 0.24% sodium on a dry matter basis). On the sodium-supplemented
diet, 24-hour urine volume and calcium excretion increased, but there was no change
in urine calcium concentration. Urine oxalate concentration and calcium oxalate RSS
were lower on the NaCl supplemented diet. Hence, propensity to calcium oxalate
crystallization was decreased on the NaCl-supplemented diet despite an increase in
24-hour urinary excretion of calcium (Lulich JP, et al. 2005).
j.The urine activity product for calcium oxalate was decreased in oxalate stone-forming
cats after feeding a diet designed to prevent recurrence of calcium oxalate stones (Hill's
Prescription Diet x/d).
12. UTl, when it occurs, is thought to be a complication rather than a predisposing factor to
oxalate urolithiasis.
Urate Urolithiasis
1. Urate stones in dogs usually are composed of the monobasic ammonium salt of uric acid
(ammonium acid urate) (Figure 9-9). In human beings, they usually are composed of
uric acid. Urate stones found in dogs with portosystemic shunts often contain struvite in
addition to urate.
2. Urate stones are found most often in the Dalmatian and English bulldog. Other breeds also
may be affected (e.g., miniature Schmauzer, Yorkshire terrier, Shih tzu). Urate stones may be
282
CHAPTER 9Urolithiasis
B
FGURE 9-10  A, Multiple small ammonium urate calculi removed from the bladder of a Dalmatian dog by
voiding urophydropulsion. B, Several small and a few large urate calculi were removed from the bladder of a dog
with a portosystemic shunt (PSS); the stones are shown in the palm of a hand.
found in dogs with portosystemic shunts, possibly due to reduced conversion of ammonia
to urea and uric acid to allantoin. Urate stones generally occur uncommonly in cats.
3. Males are clinically affected much more commonly than females (especially in Dalma-
tians) possibly because the small stones become lodged in the urethra of males, leading
to signs of urinary tract obstruction. Dalmatian dogs may be asymptomatic for their urate
 stones until an episode of obstruction occurs or the stones become quite large.
4.
 Urate calculi are small, britle, spherical stones with concentric lamination. They usually
are multiple in number and light yellow, brown, or green in color. (Figure 9-10.)
5.
They are found most often in the bladder and urethra.
6. The recurrence rate for urate urolithiasis in the dog may be as high as 30% to 50%.
 7. When it occurs, UTI is a complication of urate urolithiasis rather than a predisposing
cause.
Urolithiasis ■ CHAPTER 9
283
Adenosine
Inosine
H
Guanosine
H
Hypoxanthine
Guanine
Xanthine
oxidase
Xanthine
Xanthine
oxidase
Uric Acid
人
Allopurinol
Uricase
(Xyloprim)
Allantoin
HGURE 9-11  Generation of xanthine, uric acid, and allantoin during purine metabolism. Allopurinol acts as a
competitive inhibitor of the enzyme xanthine oxidase by virtue of its structural similarity to hypoxanthine.
 8. A defect in uric acid metabolism in the Dalmatian dog is a predisposing factor for urate
urolithiasis. This defect is a predisposing factor and not a primary cause of urolithiasis
because Dalmatian dogs that do not develop stones also excrete large amounts of urate in
their urine and other breeds (e.g., English bulldog) also may develop urate urolithiasis.
a. Uric acid is derived from the metabolic degradation of purines (Figure 9-11).
b. In dogs other than Dalmatians, uric acid is converted to allantoin in the liver by the
enzyme uricase.
c. Dalmatian dogs have higher plasma uric acid concentrations and excrete much more
uric acid in their urine than do other dogs.
d.  The defect in uric acid metabolism in the Dalmatian is not caused by absence of hepatic
uricase. The enzyme is present in the liver of Dalmatians in amounts comparable with
those found in other breeds. Impaired transport of uric acid into hepatocytes may
reduce the rate of hepatic oxidation in Dalmatians.
e. The proximal tubules of Dalmatians appear to reabsorb less and secrete more urate
than do the kidneys of other dogs, leading to increased urinary urate excretion.
Cystine Urolithiasis
 1. Cystine stones are uncommon in dogs and rare in cats.
'soopimq ustug supnnu sop jo spaanq Auu u panrodan uaaq aaey sauis aunsk 7
Newfoundlands, dachshunds, Irish terriers, Basset hounds, and bullmastiffs.
 3. In most studies, cystine stones are found almost exclusively in male dogs. However, both
male and female Newfoundlands are affected.
4.
 Affected dogs usually are middle-aged (4 to 6 years at presentation).
5.
 Canine cystinuria is an inherited disorder of renal tubular transport involving cystine or
cystine plus other amino acids (often ornithine, lysine, and arginine). Not all dogs with
cystinuria develop urolithiasis. Therefore, cystinuria is considered to be a predisposing
rather than a primary causative factor.
284CHAPTER 9 ■ Urolithiasis
FIGURE 9-12  Multiple silicate uroliths removed from the bladder of a dog. They characteristically have a jack
like appearance.
6. Cystinuria is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait in the Newfoundland and is associ-
ated with a mutation in the SLC3A1 amino acid transporter gene. Where tested in other
breeds of dog with cystinuria, the SLC3A1 gene was not involved, supporting the suspi-
e as u (ae go sr g asa) a  s u ss es 
dogs.
 8. Cystine stones are composed entirely of cystine. Qualitative kits for stone analysis may
give false positive reactions for cystine, which may have falsely increased the frequency of
 cystine stones in early surveys. Hence, quantitative analysis of stones is necessary.
 9. They are small, spherical, and light yellow, brown, or green in color.
10. They occur most commonly in the bladder and urethra and usually are multiple.
11. The recurrence rate for cystine urolithiasis may be as high as 47% to 75%.
12. When it occurs, UTI usually is a complication of cystine urolithiasis rather than a predis-
posing cause.
13. Cystine crystals have a characteristic hexagonal shape, and when observed in urine should
be considered abnormal.
Silicate Urolithiasis
 1. Silicate urolithiasis is uncommon in dogs and extremely rare in cats.
2. These stones are composed primarily of silica (as silicon dioxide) but small amounts of
other minerals such as struvite also may be present. Qualitative stone analysis kits do not
detect silica, and quantitative analysis is necessary.
 3. In dogs, silicate stones are gray-white or browmish and usually multiple in number They
frequently have a jack-like appearance. (Figure 9-12.) Not all silica stones have this
jack-like appearance, however, and not all jack-stones are silicates. Urate and struvite
stones also may have a jack-like appearance.
 4. Silica stones usually are found in the bladder and urethra of affected dogs.
 5. Silicate calculi occasionally recur following surgical removal.
 6. The role of diet in spontaneously occurring silicate urolithiasis of dogs has not been deter-
mined, but diets high in corn gluten or soybean hulls are suspected to be contributory.
          
resulted in silicate urolithiasis involving the kidneys, bladder, and urethra of dogs after as
short a time as 4 months on the diet.
Urolithiasis ■ CHAPTER 9 285
7. UTl, when it occurs, appears to be a complication of rather than a predisposing factor to
silicate urolithiasis.
8. There is no clear relation between silica urolithiasis and urine pH.
SIGNALMENT
Struvite Calculi
 1. Any breed of dog or cat, but increased risk in miniature Schnauzer, Bichon frise, Shih tzu,
Lhasa apso, Yorkshire terrier.
 2. Female dogs more commonly than males; no sex predilection in cats.
 3. No age predilection (middle-aged but generally younger than those with oxalate calculi).
as go s ae a a go r i u  so u  p  1
Oxalate Calculi
1. Any breed, but increased risk in miniature Schnauzer, Bichon frise, Shih tzu, Lhasa apso.
Yorkshire terrier.
2. Persian and Himalayan cats.
3. Male dogs and cats more commonly than females.
4.  No age predilection (generally older than those with struvite calculi).
Urate Calculi
 1. Most common in Dalmatians and English bulldogs.
2. Male dogs more commonly than females; no sex predilection in cats.
3. No age predilection.
4.  Young dogs with portosystemic shunts are predisposed to formation of urate stones and
there is no sex predilection in this clinical setting.
Cystine Calculi
1. English bulldog, Newfoundland, dachshund, Irish terrier, Basset hound, bullmastiff, Rott-
weiler, and many other breeds; very rare in cats.
2. Male dogs much more commonly than females (except in Newfoundlands).
3.Young to middle-aged dogs.
Silicate Calculi
1.German Shepherds, Old English sheepdog, and many other breeds.
 2. Male dogs much more commonly than females.
HISTORY
A. The history in animals with urolithiasis depends on the anatomic location of the calculi, the
duration of their presence, their physical features, the presence or absence of urinary tract
obstruction and if present whether it is partial or complete, and the presence or absence of
UTI. Risk of nephrolithiasis and ureterolithiasis is higher in cats than in dogs, where stones
more often occur in the bladder.
Cystic (bladder) Calculi
1. No clinical signs.
 2. Signs of bladder inflammation or infection (e.g, dysuria, increased frequency of urination,
hematuria).
286  CHAPTER 9  Urolithiasis
Urethral Calculi
1.  Urethral obstruction in the male (urethral obstruction is rare in females).
a. Frequent unsuccessful attempts to urinate.
 b. Passage of very small amounts of urine (paradoxical overflow of urine).
c. Dribbling of urine.
d. Nonspecific signs of postrenal azotemia (e.g., lethargy, anorexia, vomiting).
2. Signs of urethral inflammation.
a. Dysuria.
b. Increased frequency of urination.
c. Hematuria.
Renal Calculi
1. No clinical sigms.
2. Painless hematuria.
3. Signs of pyelonephritis or pyonephrosis.
a. Anorexia.
b.Lethargy.
c. Fever.
d. Polyuria/polydipsia.
e. Flank pain.
4.  Nonspecific signs of primary renal azotemia if there has been sufficient destruction
of renal parenchyma (e.g., bilateral renal calculi)
Ureteral Calculi
1. Ureteral calculi are uncommon in dogs but have become much more commonly diagnosed
in cats in the past 10 years.
2. May have no clinical sigms.
3.Flank pain associated with acute ureteral obstruction and hydronephrosis is most likely to
be observed in dogs.
 4. In most cats with ureteral calculi, signs are nonspecific and include anorexia, vomiting.
lethargy, and weight loss.
 5. Ureteral calculi are identified by radiographs or ultrasound in 90% of affected cats.
6. Ureteral obstruction is identified in 92% of cats with ureteral calculi.
 7. Most cats with ureteral calculi are azotemic even when calculi are unilateral, indicating
presence of renal disease in the contralateral kidney. This suspicion is confirmed by ultra-
sound examination.
8. On quantitative analysis, 98% of ureteral calculi removed from affected cats were calcium
oxalate stones.
9. Only 8% of affected cats had positive urine cultures.
10. Ureteroliths in dogs may be struvite, calcium oxalate, or calcium phosphate, and UTI is
common with struvite calculi.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION FINDINGS DEPEND ON THE LOCATION OF
 THE CALCULI
Urinary Bladder
1. Palpable stones.
a. May be difficult to palpate if the bladder is distended with urine. Palpation should be
repeated when the bladder is empty.
b. Many small stones palpated in the bladder will create a "crepitant" sensation.
c. Thickened bladder wall.
Urolithiasis  CHAPTER 9287
Urethra
1.  Large, distended bladder suggestive of urethral obstruction.
 2. Detection of a stone on rectal palpation of the urethra, external palpation of the peri-
neal urethra, and evaluation of the penile urethra (especially just proximal to the os
penis).
 3. If the bladder has ruptured before presentation, the diagnosis may be confused by inabil-
ity to palpate the bladder. In this instance, pain and tenderness may be noted on abdomi-
nal palpation in small animals.
Kidney
 1. Renomegaly if there is obstruction at the renal pelvis causing hydronephrosis or pyone-
phrosis.
 2. Physical examination findings compatible with uremia if there has been sufficient destruc-
fion of renal parenchyma.
 3. No abnormal physical findings.
Ureter
 1. Renomegaly due to hydronephrosis or pyonephrosis.
 2. Pain and tenderness on abdominal palpation due to uroabdomen if the ureter has ruptured.
3.No abnormal physical findings.
DIAGNOSIS
Urinalysis
Urine Sediment Findings Often Indicate Inflammation or Infection
a. Pyuria.
b. Hematuria.
c.Proteinuria.
d.Bacteriuria.
Urine pH Is Variable
a.In dogs with struvite calculi and UTI due to a urease-positive organism, the urine pH
often is alkaline.
b. The urine pH may be acidic in dogs with cystine stones.
C.The urine pH is variable in dogs with oxalate, silicate, and urate stones.
d. The urine pH of dogs with metabolic stones (e.g., urate, cystine, oxalate) may be
alkaline if a urease-positive UTI is present.
Crystals
a. Cystine crystals are not found in normal urine samples, but the presence of struvite,
oxalate, or urate crystals is not necessarily pathologic
 Crystalluria may be found in animals without urolithiasis and may be absent in animals with urolithiasis.
 The crystals present in the urine sediment may differ from the composition of the uroliths.
b. Struvite crystals have a "coffin-lid" appearance.
c.Calcium oxalate monohydrate crystals have a "picket fence" appearance whereas
 s, r  ,   s   s
appearance.
d. Urate crystals have a "thornapple" appearance.
e. Cystine crystals are flat and hexagonal in shape but can be confused with struvite
which have more of a three-dimensional appearance.
288
3CHAPTER9Urolithiasis
Microbiology
1. Urine culture and sensitivity should be performed in animals with urolithiasis to detect
 presence of UTI and formulate appropriate antibiotic therapy.
Ad (ds snaod no yooosoudes Aensn) usruero aainsod-aseam e Aq ln 'sop u Z
accompanies struvite urolithiasis.
 3. In cats with struvite urolithiasis, urine cultures usually are negative.
 4. In animals with urate, cystine, oxalate, and silicate stones, UTI is a complication of uroli-
thiasis rather than a predisposing cause.
5. If bacteriologic culture is negative on a urine sample obtained by cystocentesis, culture of
the bladder wall and the center of the calculus may provide more accurate assessment of
the bacteriologic status of the urinary tract.
Blood Count
1. Complete blood count (CBC) usually is normal in uncomplicated cases of urolithiasis. If
 pyelonephritis or pyonephrosis is present, leukocytosis with a left shift may be observed.
Serum Biochemistry
1. Increased blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, and phosphorus concentrations will be
present if there is postrenal azotemia secondary to urinary tract obstruction. Primary renal
azotemia may occur if there has been sufficient renal parenchymal destruction due to bilat-
 eral hydronephrosis, pyonephrosis, or pyelonephritis.
Stone Analysis
1. An educated guess ("guesstimate") about a urolith's composition can be made based
on signalment, diet, urine culture results, urine pH, and radiographic density of the
urolith, but such "guesstimates" can be inaccurate (especially considering the two
most common urolith types are both radiodense). Consequently, it is recommended to
submit all removed uroliths for laboratory analysis. In animals with recurrent urolithi-
asis, the current urolith may differ from the type previously identified (e.g., xanthine
urolith in a dog with previous urate urolithiasis treated with allopurinol; struvite uro-
lith in a dog with previous oxalate urolithiasis). Although not optimal, "guesstimates^
intervention.
 2. Uroliths should never be placed in 10% formalin, because doing so prevents accurate
quantitative analysis.
 3. In the past, qualitative analysis of stones using commercial kits was commonly performed.
Unfortunately, such kits often yield inaccurate results.
a. Xanthine and silicate are not detected.
b. Oxalate frequently is not detected.
C.
False-positive results may occur for cystine and urate.
d. Detection of secondary mineral components and failure to identify the primary crystal-
e.
With qualitative analysis there is no way to tell which minerals constitute the primary
component and which are secondary.
4. For these reasons, quantitative analysis by optical crystallography is recommended for
routine analysis.
5.  The nucleus of the stone as well as its outer shell should be analyzed. Primary metabolic
a Auo j uoisnuon on pean pmon um ahanns jo Suaaon rano ue aaeq Ae sas
outer portion of the stone were analyzed.
Urolithiasis ■ CHAPTER 9  289
IMAGING OF THE URINARY TRACT: RADIOGRAPHY AND
ULTRASONOGRAPHY
A. Radiodensity
1. Calcium phosphate, calcium oxalate, struvite, and silicate calculi are the most
radiodense.
2. Cystine and urate calculi are the least radiodense.
 3. In many instances, calculi will be dense enough to be observed on plain radiographs after
proper patient preparation (e.g., enemas to remove fecal material). Calculi as small as 3 to
4 mm can be observed radiographically if they are sufficiently radiodense.
4.If there is a clinical suspicion of urolithiasis but calculi carnot be observed on plain radio
usually will appear lucent when surrounded by the denser contrast agent.
B. Although calculi occur more commonly in the bladder and urethra of the dog and cat, a radio-
graphic evaluation of the entire urinary tract is recommended to rule out renal or ureteral
calculi.
C. Care should be taken not to confuse blood clots and bubbles of air for lucent calculi on con-
trast studies of the bladder and urethra.
 D. Objects that may cause confusion during radiographic interpretation:
1.Teats in female dogs.
2.  Radiodense material in the gastrointestinal tract.
3. Calcified mesenteric lymph nodes or adrenal glands.
E. Ultrasound examination of the urinary tract may identify uroliths that are not radiodense. Ultra-
sonography provides evaluation of only the most proximal portion of the urethra, and thus should
not be used in place of plain and contrast radiography of the urethra. In general, ultrasound
Examination is more sensitive and less specific than radiography for identification of uroliths.
F. Ultrasonography of the ureter and kidneys is useful to determine the presence or absence
of urinary tract obstruction in patients with uroliths. Obstruction can be identified when
hydroureter, hydronephrosis, or pyelectasia is observed. In cats, administration of furosemide
(1-3 mg/kg IV) will increase urine flow and can facilitate visualization of a dilated renal pelvis
or ureters.
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF MANAGEMENT
A. Relief of lower urinary tract obstruction and re-establishment of urine flow.
1. Decompressive cystocentesis can be used to decrease bladder pressure opposing the pas-
sage of a urinary catheter.
 2. Pass a well-lubricated, small diameter catheter alongside and beyond the obstructing ure
thral calculus and into the bladder
 3. A technique of retrograde urohydropulsion has been described for dislodgement of ure-
thral calculi in both male and female dogs. This technique involves fluid distension of the
urethra around the obstructing calculus using a combination of sterile saline and lubricat-
ing gel (Figure 9-13).
4. If these techniques fail, repeated decompressive cystocentesis may be needed, or emer-
 gency urethrotomy may be performed after medical stabilization.
B. Correction of fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base imbalances associated with obstruction and
postrenal azotemia (see Chapter 11, Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy). Medical treat-
ited effectiveness.
290
CHAPTER 9Urolithiasis
B
C
D
E
F
FIGURE 9-13  Retrograde urohydropropulsion to move urethral stones into the bladder. Retropulsion of urethral
calculus into urinary bladder of male dog. A, Calculus lodged in urethra. B, Passage of a standard urinary catheter
 into the distal urethra accompanied by digital oclusion of the urethra around the catheter by a gloved finger per
rectum. C, Dilatation of urethra and explusion of urethral calculus after injection of sterile irrigating solution under
pressure followed by removal of catheter. D, Calculus lodged in urethra. E, Passage of a standard urinary catheter
into the dista urethra accompained by digital occlusion of the urethra around the catheter by a gloved finger per
 rectum. F, Urethrolith has been successfully retropulsed into the urinary bladder. (Drawn by Tim Vojt.)
C. Nonsurgical retrieval of calculi for analysis or treatment.
1. Voiding urohydropulsion of bladder stones (Figure 9-14)
a. Stones should be small: <7 mm in female dogs, <5 mm in male dogs, <5 mm in female
cats, and <1 mum in male cats.
b. Procedure should be performed under general anesthesia.
c. The bladder is distended with sterile saline administered via a cystourethroscope
(preferable) or transurethral catheter (largest diameter possible).
d. The catheter or cystourethroscope then is removed. The following procedure requires
two operators: Hold the animal vertically relative to the table. Shake bladder. Apply
steady digital pressure transabdominally to induce micturition. Maintain pressure on
abdomen to facilitate flow and keep urethra dilated. Repeat as necessary until no more
uroliths are expelled.
e.
 Take abdominal radiographs to verify removal of stones.
f.
Submit stones for analysis.
g. Complications.
(1) Hematuria (common).
(2) Stones lodged in urethra.
(3) Bladder rupture (rare, but increased risk if previous bladder surgery).
Urolithiasis ■ CHAPTER 9
291
FGURE 9-14  Technique for voiding urohydropropulsion of small urinary stones. This technique is especially
effective in female dogs and cats. The patient is held vertically by an assistant and then the bladder (which has been
filled with sterile saline by catheter) is expressed with digital pressure to expell small stones that fall by gravity
from the bladder, into the urethra, and out into the container. Based on technique developed by Dr. Jody Lulich.
(Drawn by Tim Vojt.)
 2. Small stones in the bladder of male dogs also can be collected for analysis using catheter-
assisted retrieval even if larger cystic calculi cannot be removed. Quantitative analysis of
removed stones allows the clinician to determine whether or not medical dissolution is
likely to be successful and to design stone-specific prevention protocols.
3. Lithotripsy can be used to break up stones in dogs and facilitate their removal from the
urinary tract. This technique requires specialized equipment and expertise not available to
most veterinarians. During intracorporeal laser lithotripsy, the photoacoustic effects of the
laser create cavitation bubbles in the urolith that in turn generate shock waves when they
collapse and cause the stone to fragment. This procedure is used for urethral and bladder
calculi. In extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy the shock waves are generated outside
of the body and directed at the uroliths through water while the patient is partially sub-
merged in a water bath. This procedure usually is used for nephroliths and ureteroliths.
Some transient renal injury (e.g., hemorrhage) occurs during this procedure. Stone frag-
ments that enter the ureters usually pass into the bladder without complications. Cystine
nephroliths are resistant to fragmentation.
 SURGICAL REMOVAL OF CALCULI
A. At the time of surgery, a search for any predisposing anatomic abnormalities (e.g., urachal
diverticulum) or foreign bodies (e.g., suture material, catheter fragments) should be made and
such abnormalities corrected.
292CHAPTER 9Urolithiasis
 Radiographs should be taken in all animals after removal of multiple cystic or urethral calculi to confirm
that al stones have been removed.
 B. Radiographs should be taken after the procedure to ensure that all stones were removed.
C. Culture, sensitivity, and biopsy of the bladder wall also may be performed at this
time.
D. Surgery of the feline ureter is very difficult and best left to an experienced soft tissue surgeon.
Proximal ureteral calculi in cats are removed by ureterotomy whereas distal ureteral calculi are
removed by partial ureterectomy and ureteroneocystostomy. The complication rate was 31%
study of affected cats. Survival is limited by recurrence of obstruction postoperatively and by the
common presence and progression of chronic renal disease in both kidneys.
do not typically have serious umderlying renal disease in the contralateral kidney. However
infection of the obstructed kidney is common with struvite nephroliths or ureteroliths.
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF MEDICAL MANAGEMENT
A. Unless there is a contraindication for the use of salt (e.g, congestive heart failure), induction
of polyuria is recommended for dogs with struvite urolithiasis to reduce urine specific gravity
(USG) and increase frequency of urination, thus reducing the concentration of crystalloids in
the urine. The role of salt administration in calcium oxalate urolithiasis is unclear. Although
there has been concerm that induction of natriuresis will increase calciuresis, some studies
have showm that high sodium intake is associated with decreased risk of calcium oxalate uroli-
thiasis. There also has been concern that natriuresis may increase urinary excretion of cystine
1. Sodium chloride is added to the diet at an empirical dosage of 0.5 to 10 g/day depend-
ing upon the size of the dog (one teaspoon of table salt is approximately equivalent to 6 g
NaCl).
2.The aim is to reduce the USG to <1.025 or to double urine output.
 3. The animal should be allowed frequent opportunities to void to prevent bladder distension
and urine stasis
4. Controlled studies designed specifically to assess the effectiveness of salt therapy in the
 of urine in normal cats and dogs suggest increased salt intake may be useful as a preven-
tion strategy.
B. All dogs with urolithiasis should have their urine cultured. If UTI is present, appropriate antibi-
otic therapy and careful follow-up should be instituted to ensure elimination of infection.
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF INDIVIDUAL STONE TYPES
Struvite Stones
1. Because of the primary role of UTI by urease-positive organisms in struvite urolithiasis
of dogs, careful elimination of infection by appropriate antibiotic therapy and repeated
patient follow-up to demonstrate eradication of infection are the most important aspects
of medical management to prevent recurrence.
2. The use of urinary acidifiers to maintain urine pH in the range of 6.0 to 6.5 has been
suggested in dogs because struvite and hydroxyapatite are most soluble in acidic urine.
In most dogs with struvite urolithiasis, eradication of UTI will return urine pH to
Urolithiasis ■ CHAPTER 9293
the acidic range. Use of urinary acidifiers in the face of infection by a urease-positive
organism is not useful. If urine pH remains alkaline after elimination of UTl, other
potential causes (e.g., dietary, familial, metabolic) of alkaline urine should be investi-
gated. In cats with struvite urolithiasis without U'Tl, urinary acidifiers may play a more
important role. Many commercial cat foods have been reformulated to reduce urine pH.
Urine acidifiers should only be given to cats with urine pH of >6.5 measured under ad
libitum feeding conditions. Addition of acidifying compounds to cat foods may have
contributed to the increased incidence of calcium oxalate stones in this species over the
past 25 years.
3. One calculolytic diet (Prescription Diet Canine s/d, Hill's Pet Products, Topeka, Kans.) has
 been used successfully to induce dissolution of struvite calculi in dogs.
a. S/d for dogs is low in phosphorus and magnesium, and high in sodiur
chloride.
converting urea to ammonia and carbon dioxide.
c. The diet promotes undersaturation of the urine with ions necessary for formation of
struvite uroliths and, thus, promotes dissolution of existing struvite calculi.
d. The added NaCl induces diuresis and dilution of urine. Additional salt should not be
added to the diet of the dog unless diuresis does not occur on s/d.
e. Concurrent antibiotic therapy is recommended to eradicate UTI.
f. In dogs with struvite uroliths and UTI, dissolution is expected to take 2 to
3 months. The diet is used for 1 month beyond radiographic evidence of urolith
dissolution.
:p p/s uo soop ui paisadxa are soupu Aroienoqet pe jeon Sumony aul a
(1) Polyuria/polydipsia and dilute urine (urine specific gravities as low as 1.010 can be
expected in animals being fed s/d diet).
(2) Decreased BUN is expected soon after starting to feed s/d diet.
(3) Increased alkaline phosphatase (hepatic isoenzyme) may occur after several weeks
of feeding s/d diet.
(4) Decreased serum phosphorus concentration.
(5) Decreased serum albumin may occur after weeks to months of feeding s/d
diet.
h. The clinician can make an educated guess (i.e., "guesstimate") as to the likeli-
hood that a given stone is composed of struvite based on finding a urease-positive
UTI (usually staphylococci), alkaline urine, struvite crystalluria, and radiodense
calculus
i. Certain precautions should be observed when considering use of canine s/d diet.
Canine s/d should not be fed to cats because of its extremely low protein content, nor
should it be fed to growing puppies or to pregnant or lactating bitches. Occasionally,
nephroliths that have decreased in size after institution of s/d diet may pass into the
ureter causing ureteral obstruction and hydronephrosis.
 j.Feline s/d diet (an acidifying diet with a higher protein content than Canine s/d diet
but restricted magnesium content and supplemental sodium) has been used success-
fully to dissolve stones in cats with struvite urolithiasis
(1) The average time for dissolution of sterile struvite stones in affected cats fed Feline
s/d was about 30 days.
(2) Treatment was successful in 93% of cases in one study.
(3) Dissolution in cats with UTI and struvite stones (an uncommon occurrence) took
longer (60-90 days).
294
CHAPTER 9  Urolithiasis
(4) Urinary acidifiers should not be given to cats fed c/d, s/d, or soft-moist diets
because these foods already are acidified.
k. Similar results (i.e., dissolution of struvite cystic calculi within 30 days in 31/39 cats)
recently were obtained using canned and dry formulations of an acidifying.
magnesium-restricted diet manufactured by Veterinary Medical Diets (Guelph,
Ontario, Canada).
Oxalate Stones (Hgure 9-15)
1.  Attempts to dissolve calcium oxalate stones in dogs and cats so far hiave been unsuccessful
and surgery or voiding urohydropulsion typically is used to remove these stones.
 2. Several dietary recommendations have been considered in attempts to prevent recurrence
of calcium oxalate urolithiasis.
a. Water: Diets with high water content are associated with decreased risk of calcium oxa-
late urolithiasis. Thus, high moisture diets are preferred over dry formulations. High
moisture diets promote production of an increased volume of urine with decreased
concentration of calculogeric crystalloids.
b. Calcium: Based on theoretical considerations, a diet low in calcium and oxalate may be
helpful. Diets restricted in calcium but not oxalate, however, may be associated with
hyperoxaluria and increased risk of calcium oxalate urolithiasis. Nondietary calcium
supplements (given between meals) have minimal effect on gastrointestinal absorption
 of oxalate and may increase the risk of calcium oxalate urolithiasis by contributing to
hypercalciuria. Some studies have shown a decreased risk of calcium oxalate urolithiasis
in dogs consuming diets high in calcium and an increased risk in dogs consuming diets
low in calcium. Also, in one study, stone-forming dogs had lower calcium intake than
form in the gastrointestinal tract and avoid absorption. Thus, the role of dietary calcium
in calcium oxalate urolithiasis is uncertain.
C. Oxalates: Dietary ingredients (e.g., spinach, soy beans, sardines, sweet potatoes, aspar-
 agus, tofu) rich in oxalate should be avoided.
d. Phosphorus: Dietary phosphorus should not be restricted because reduced phosphorus
could result in increased activation of vitamin D; to calcitriol by 1-α-hydroxylase in the
kidney and cause increased intestinal absorption of calcium. Also, urinary pyrophos-
phate may function as an inhibitor of calcium oxalate formation.
e. Magnesium: Dietary magnesium should not be restricted because it may serve as an
inhibitor of calcium oxalate formation.
f. Sodium: Increased dietary sodium may be associated with increased urinary excre-
tion of calcium. The additional dietary sodium, however, increases urine volume,
and limits any increase in urinary calcium concentration that would otherwise
occur.
 g. Potassium: Diets with higher potassium content may be associated with decreased risk
of calcium oxalate urolithiasis due to decreased urinary excretion of calcium and for-
mation of potassium oxalate salts in the urine, which are more soluble than calcium
oxalate.
h. Protein: A diet with less animal protein may be beneficial because a diet high in animal
protein may be acidifying and could promote bone loss of calcium.
i. Citrate: Supplementation of the diet with citrate may be helpful because urinary citrate
may complex with calcium to form calcium citrate, which is much more soluble than
calcium oxalate. It is unclear if urinary citrate excretion can be increased in dogs and
cats using conventional dosages of citrate. The alkalinizing effect of citrate, however,
Urolithiasis ■ CHAPTER 9
295
Surveillance during treatment to prevent
recurrent calcium oxalate stone formation
Urine culture
1, 3, and 6 months
Image urinary tract
(rule out hypercalcemia and UTI first)
Urine
↑ RBC, WBC
examination
Specific gravity
pH
Fresh urine sediment
Target
Target 6.8 - 7.5
<1.020 Dogs
Target O or few crystals
pH meter
small, not aggregated 
<1.030 Cats
most accurate
(crystals will↑ during 
refrigeration)
Not
Not achieved
Not
Review
achieved
pH < 6.8
achieved
pH and USG
target goals
Add potassium citrate to
Prescribe
Increase
obtain desired urine pH
water
veterinary diet to
intake
undersaturate urine
50-100 mg/kg BID PO
SO - Royal Canin;
No evidence for effect
UR-StOx - Nestle Purina;
x/d - Hill's;
More
Add water
Moderate pH/O -lams
canned
to dry
food
food
Change diet - more alkalinizing
(less acidifying)
Consider higher salt 
Non-veterinary diets (grocery store)
veterinary food
canned
(SO - Royal Canin;
UR -StOx Nestle Purina)
Veterinary diets
 if no underlying renal
SO - Royal Canin;
 disease or systemic
UR - StOx - Nestle Purina;
hypertension
xd - Hill's;
Moderate pH/O - lams
A
FGURE 9-15  A, B, C,Algorithm for management of calcium oxalate stones.
296
CHAPTER 9  Urolithiasis
Surveillance - imaging urinary tract
Recurent calcium oxalate stone formation
Postremoval, 1, 3, and 6 months
regardless of urine results
Radiography target - 0 stones
then q 3-6 months if stable
Not achieved
Medical dissolution is never possible
Surgery now
Voiding urohydropropulsion
if stones too
if stones are small enough
large for
hydropropulsion
and patient has
Surgery later
clinical signs
if patient is showing no
clinical signs; oxalate
stones are slow
growing in nature
Surgery now
if client wants stones
gone, regardless
of signs
B
FGURE 9-15  cont'd
also may be useful if chronic acidosis associated with an acidifying diet has led to bone
loss of calcium and hypercalciuria (see later).
i.
Vitamins: Avoidance of excessive amounts of vitamin C is recommended because ascor-
bic acid is a metabolic precursor of oxalate. Excessive vitamin D should be avoided
because it will increase gastrointestinal absorption of calcium. The diet should contain
adequate amounts of vitamin B, because vitamin Bg, deficiency promotes endogenous
production of oxalate.
3.
Commercial diets that have been used in attempts to prevent recurrence of oxalate stones
include Hill's Prescription Diets u/d, k/d, w/d and x/d. Prescription Diet u/d often is rec-
ommended for dogs with a history of oxalate urolithiasis. U/d reduced both calcium and
oxalate excretion in dogs in one study. It is important to reduce both calcium and oxa-
late in the diet because reduction of calcium alone may result in increased gastrointestinal
Urolithiasis ■ CHAPTER 9
297
 Change to veterinary diet
Vitamin Bg
(no diet yet proven to prevent
2-10 mg/kg SID
new stone formation)
Calcium oxalate inhibition?
x/d - Hill's; SO - Royal Canin;
UR - StOx - Nestle Purina
Failure of initial diet and water treatment
to alter stone fomation risk
(none of these Rxs proven to
prevent new stone formation
Hydrochlorothiazide
Potassium citrate
1-2 mg/kg BID
rrespective of urinary pH
50-100 mg/kg BID PO
Hypocalciuric effects
Crystal poison effects
Continue to monitor urine
specific gravity, pH, and
crystal habitat (type, number.
size, aggregation)
and radiographs
Failure of all management to prevent new stone
formation
NOT possible to prevent new stone formation in
some individual patients
Surgery
Hydropropulsion
C
FIGURE9-15 cont'd
absorption of oxalate due to insufficient calcium in the diet to bind with oxalate and form
non-absorbable calcium oxalate complexes. Urinary SO Diet (Royal Canin, St. Charles,
Mo.) has been desigmed to undersaturate the urine with struvite and promote dissolution
 of struvite uroliths while at the same time decreasing RSS for calcium oxalate and helping
to prevent recurrence of calcium oxalate urolithiasis. Purina also makes veterinary diets
designed to manage struvite (Purina UR, Nestlé Purina Pet Care, St. Louis, Mo.) and stru-
vite or oxalate (Purina UR St/Ox) urolithiasis in cats.
4.
 Administration of citrate as potassium citrate has been recommended because urinary
citrate may act as an inhibitor of calcium oxalate aggregation and its alkalinizing effect
may reduce bone release of calcium. Beyond this effect, therapeutic manipulation of urine
pH is not known to be beneficial because oxalate solubility is relatively umaffected by a
298
3CHAPTER9UrolithiasiS
wide range of urine pH. The recommended dosage of potassium citrate is 50 to 75 mg/kg
PO every 12 hours but this dosage may not increase urinary citrate in dogs where a very
small portion (1% to 3%) of filtered citrate is eliminated in the urine. Do not substitute
           a 
cium. In one study, potassium citrate (150 mg/kg/day) had a limited effect on urine pH
in dogs. This dosage did not affect the RSS of calcium oxalate in the urine of normal dogs
but reduced it in three miniature Schnauzers and increased citrate excretion in these three
dogs. Thus, the specific role of citrate in dogs with oxalate urolithiasis is unclear but Pre-
scription Diet u/d is supplemented with potassium citrate and results in slightly alkaline
urine (pH 7.0 to 7.5)
5. Hydrochlorothiazide (2 mg/kg PO every 12 hours) reduced urinary calcium excretion
with no change in oxalate excretion in dogs. Its diuretic effect also caused increases in
sodium, potassium, and chloride excretion and increased urine volume. It may be used in
dogs and cats at a dosage of 2 to 4 mg/kg PO twice a day. Chlorothiazide did not reduce
urinary calcium excretion in dogs, but dogs were fed canned food with added water The
reduction in urine calcium by thiazides may depend on enhancement of proximal tubu-
lar reabsorption of calcium as a result of volume contraction induced by the diuretic. In
another study, hydrochlorothiazide (2 mg/kg PO every 12 hours) decreased urinary cal-
cium excretion in dogs with a history of calcium oxalate urolithiasis. The greatest decrease
in urine calcium concentration and excretion was obtained in dogs simultaneously fed a
low calcium, low protein diet (Hill's Prescription Diet u/d).
 6. Vitamin Ba promotes transamination of glyoxylate (a precursor of oxalate) to glycine,
but it is unknown if it is valuable to administer it to an animal that is not deficient in this
vitamin.
Urate Stones
1.Allopurinol is a competitive inhibitor of the enzyme xanthine oxidase which converts
hypoxanthine to xanthine and xanthine to uric acid in the course of purine metabolism
One of its own metabolites, oxypurinol, also is an inhibitor of xanthine oxidase.
a. Allopurinol therapy reduces the amount of uric acid formed from hypoxanthine.
b. It is recommended in dissolution protocols for urate urolithiasis at a dosage of
15 mg/kg PO every 12 hours. A dosage of 5 to 10 mg/kg PO every 12 hours has been
recommended for prevention of recurrence. The bioavailability of allopurinol is not
affected by feeding. Dogs on allopurinol, however, should be fed low purine diets
because feeding a high purine diet while on allopurinol places the dog at increased risk
for development of xanthine stones.
c. Xanthine stones may develop in some dogs receiving allopurinol at >15 mg/kg PO
ap aud y e unsu ae a j Aadsa 'smou z Aaaa
d.  Xanthine stones also have been reported to occur spontaneously as a familial trait (sus-
pected autosomal recessive) in Cavalier King Charles spaniels, possibly due to a defect
 in xanthine oxidase. Rare sporadic case reports also exist in other dog breeds (dachs-
humd) and in a cat.
e.Adverse effects of allopurinol administration in dogs are extremely rare (e.g., immune-
mediated reactions).
f.The dosage of allopurinol should be reduced in the presence of renal failure, because it
is excreted by the kidneys.
 2. The usefulness of NaHCO therapy in urate urolithiasis is uncertain.
a. Most urate calculi in dogs are composed of ammonium acid urate and rarely of uric
acid. In humans, most urate stones are uric acid. Uric acid becomes more soluble in
alkaline urine, but urate becomes less soluble
Urolithiasis ■ CHAPTER 9 299
b. Hydrogen and ammonium ions contribute to growth of ammonium urate crystals
in urine. Administration of NaHCO or potassium citrate increases urine pH and
decreases urinary ammonium ion concentration.
c.If additional urine alkalinization is required, potassium citrate (100-150 mg/kg PO
every 12 hours) may be preferable to sodium bicarbonate because of concern that natri-
uresis will enhance calciuresis.
 3. A dietlow in organ-derived meats reduces the ingested purine load because organ-derived
products are rich in nucleic acids, which are the metabolic precursors of purines. Feeding
a low protein, low purine diet has been shown to reduce urinary excretion of urate in nor
mal dogs.
4. A 10% to 11% casein-based low protein, low purine diet containing potassium citrate as an
alkalinizing agent without supplemental sodium (Hill's Prescription Diet u/d) has been
studied extensively in normal dogs and is recommended for dissolution of urate stones
and prevention of recurrence
a. U/d Diet (compared to p/d Diet) decreases urinary excretion of uric acid, ammonia,
and titratable acid and increases urinary excretion of bicarbonate resulting in an alka-
line urine pH of 7.0 to 7.5 (vs. 6.0 to 6.5 in dogs fed Hill's p/d).
b. Successful use of this diet should eliminate urate crystals from the urine sediment.
Owmer compliance can be identified by finding BUN of <10 mg/dL, USG of <1.020,
and urine pH >7.0 in the treated dog.
c.The protein content of u/d is very low and it should not be used in pregnant or lactat-
ing bitches, and it should be avoided in immature growing dogs. In young growing
dogs, surgery is recommended for removal of urate uroliths.
d. U/d diet is very low in protein, and serum albumin concentration, body weight and
body condition score should be monitored in patients fed this diet to evaluate for
development of protein depletion.
e. Also, low purine diets should not be used in English bulldogs, because of the risk of
developing dilated cardiomyopathy (this rarely may occur in Dalmatians as well). It
is hypothesized that English bulldogs with urate stones may also have defective renal
reabsorption of cystine and carnitine and that camitine deficiency may contribute to
the development of dilated cardiomyopathy.
f.Treatment of dogs with urate stones using Prescription Diet u/d and allopurinol results
in complete dissolution in 33% of affected dogs, partial dissolution in 33%, and no dis-
solution in 33%.
pue c uaamiaq jo aeaae ue um suuou oi oh I uon sauen uongossp oh au 3
4 months.
h. Success of the dissolution protocol in dogs with urate stones and portosystemic shunts
is less clear.
i. During attempted dissolution, the size of the urate stones should be monitored by
double contrast cystourethrography, and male dogs should be monitored for develop-
ment of urethral obstruction that could occur as stones become smaller.
5. The preventive protocol for dogs with a history of urate urolithiasis involves feeding the
low purine, low protein alkalinizing diet (Prescription Diet u/d) and monitoring patient
response (i.e., urate crystals in the urine sediment, urine pH, USG). If crystals still are seen
 in the urine sediment, allopurinol can be added at a dosage of 5 to 10 mg/kg PO every
12 hours. It is important to continue the low purine diet while the dog is on allopurinol so
as to avoid development of xanthine stones.
6. UTI is a common complication of urate urolithiasis and may occur in up to 33% of affected
dogs. UTI should be treated by appropriate antibiotic therapy and eradication of UTI
should be documented by follow-up urine cultures.
000
CHAPTER 9  Urolithiasis
Cysteine
Cystine
S
S
H
C
H
H
H
H
H
日
C
NH2
H2N
C
H
H
NH2
COOH
HOOC
COOH
Cysteine
d-Penicillamine
Cysteine
2-MPG (tiopronin)
S
S
S
S
H
HC
CH
H
H
CHa
H
NH
NH2
H
C
NH2
C
HNO
HOOO
HOOO
HOOO
C
-H2
COOH
Cysteine-penicillamine
Cysteine-2-MPG
mixed disulfide
mixed disulfide
S
S
S
S
HC
C
CH3
H
H
H
CHg
HN
H
H-
C
NH2
HN
H
C
ONH
HOOC
COOH
HOOC
C
H2
COOH
FGURE 9-16  D-penicillamine and 2-MPG interactions with cysteine that increase its solubility in urine.
(Drawn by Tim Vojt.)
7. The low protein, low purine diet (Prescription Diet u/d) results in increased urine out-
put and decreased USG presumably due to decreased concentrating ability resulting from
reduced renal medullary urea content. Thus, additional sodium usually is not necessary to
increase urine output. Increased sodium can increase urinary excretion of calcium, which
is not desirable (increased risk of calcium oxalate, sodium calcium urate, or ammonium
calcium urate stones).
8.
 In one study, male dogs with urate urolithiasis that were treated by cystotomy for stone
removal followed by scrotal urethrostomy and dietary modification had the best outcome
in terms of recurrent clinical sigmns.
Cystine Stones (Figure 9-16)
Thiol Disulfide Exchange Drugs (D-Penicillamine, 2-MPG)
a. D-penicillamine forms a disulfide with cysteine and, thus, reduces the cystine content 
of urine.
Urolithiasis ■ CHAPTER 9301
(1) Cysteine-penicillamine mixed disulfide is 50 times more soluble than cystine in the
urine. D-penicillamine is administered at a dosage of 15 mg/kg PO twice a day and
is most effective at neutral to alkaline urine pH.
(2) The major side effect in dogs is vomiting. Giving the drug with food, using anti-
emetics, or reducing the dosage slightly (10 to 20 mg/kg/day) may prevent this
adverse effect.
(3) Many toxic side effects have been observed in humans including fever, rash, pro-
teinuria, and blood dyscrasias, but these have not been reported in the dog.
(4) D-penicillamine has an antipyridoxine (vitamin Bg) effect and has been reported to
adversely affect wound healing by interfering with collagen cross-linking.
b. 2-mercaptopropionylglycine (2-MPG, tiopronin).
(1) 2-MPG acts by a thiol disulfide exchange reaction similar to that of D-penicillamine.
(2) 2-MPG also has adverse effects in dogs (about 13% of treated dogs). The most dis-
turbing include aggressiveness, myopathy, and proteinuria, thrombocytopenia,
and anemia (immune-mediated type reaction). Other adverse effects include skin
lesions (pustules, dry crusty nose), increases in liver function tests (enzymes, bile
acids), lethargy, and a sulfur smell to the urine. Adverse effects disappear when the
drug is discontinued.
(3) 2-MPG can be used at a dosage of 15 to 20 mg/kg PO every 12 hours to dissolve
cystine stones. Dissolution occurs in 60% of treated dogs and takes between
1 and 3 months. Consider surgery if dissolution has not occurred by 3 months.
(4) The protocol for prevention of cystine stones in dogs with a history of cystine uro-
lithiasis includes tiopronin (2-MPG) at 15 mg/kg PO every 12 hours along with
addition of water (not sodium) to food and alkalinization of urine using potas-
sium citrate (100 to 150 mg/kg/day). In one study, recurrence was prevented
in 86% of treated dogs. If recurrence occurs, the dissolution protocol should be
started again.
Alkalinization of Urine
a.Cystine has limited solubility in urine with a pH range of 5.5 to 7.0 and is twice as
soluble in urine of pH 7.8 as it is in urine of pH 6.5.
b. NaHCO can be administered at a dosage of 0.5 to 1g per 5 kg body weight PO every
12 hours for urine alkalinization. One-half teaspoon of baking soda is equivalent to
approximately 2g NaHCOs. Bicarbonate therapy may not be very effective based on
one study, and the increased sodium load may increase cystinuria.
C. Potassium citrate may be a preferable alkalinizing agent because the sodium in
NaHCO may increase urinary sodium excretion, which in human beings has been
shown to increase urinary cystine excretion.
d.The risk of struvite urolithiasis also may be increased if urine is maintained in an alka-
line range.
Diet
a.A low protein diet may result in lower urine specific gravity (less urea available to
contribute to medullary interstitial hypertonicity) and increased urine pH. Hill's Pre
scription Diet u/d has been recommended for this purpose.
Silicate Stones
1. The effects of urine pH on silicate solubility are not established, and no recommendations
can be made conceming therapeutic alterations of urine pH.
 2.. Diets high in plant proteins (e.g., soybean, corn gluten) may predispose to silicate uro-
lithiasis and should be avoided.
302  CHAPTER 9 ■ Urolithiasis
PROGNOSIS
 A. The prognosis for survival in dogs and cats with lower urinary tract urolithiasis is good.
 B. Complications are the major factors affecting prognosis in individual cases.
COMPLICATIONS
A. Recurrence is highest for the metabolic stones (i.e., oxalates, urates, cystine) and may be some-
what lower for struvite stones.
B. Postrenal azotemia.
C. Urethral obstruction.
1. Ruptured bladder.
2. Ruptured urethra.
D Adverse drug effects.
E. Urinary tract infection.
WHAT DO WE DO?
· Make every attempt to retrieve a urolith and submit it for quantitative analysis
· Make educated guesses ("guesstimates") about urolith composition only when none is available for
laboratory analysis.
· Take abdominal radiographs (and be sure to include the urethra) after surgery or urohydropulsion
to remove cystic and urethral calculi to ensure that all calculi were removed.
· Design a regular regimen of reevaluation visits (stone surveillance) for all dogs and cats with a history
of urolithiasis. USG, urine pH, and urine bacteriologic culture should be assessed during follow-up
visits, and dietary and treatment strategies should be modified as necessary to maintain moderately
dilute urine, appropriate urine pH (depending upon stone type), and sterile urine.
· Remember that UTI almost always precedes development of struvite stones in dog. Consequently.
obtain urine samples on a regular basis (regardless of the absence or presence of clinical signs) in
dogs with a history of struvite urolithiasis to be sure that their urine remains sterile.
● Remember that adequate water intake may be the single most important factor in determining
whether or not recurrent urolithiasis develops.
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS
· Stone analysis is optional. False, since the basis for medical dissolution or prevention of recurrence
of stones depends on knowing their chemical composition. Though "guesstimates" can frequently
line up with the chemical analysis quantitative analysis remains the gold standard.
· Qualitative stone analysis provides all of the necessary information for proper patient management.
False, as there are both false positives and negatives as to the presence of certain chemicals in the
stone and no idea of their relative presence is provided.
the most amenable to dissolution. Some urates and cystine stones can be dissolved using medical
protocols. A protocol has not been designed that effectively dissolves calcium oxalates.
· Medical and dietary protocols can be designed to prevent the recurrent of urolithiasis in all affected
animals. Protocols have been designed to prevent the recurrence of metabolic stones though shock
ingly little has actually been proven to be effective in doing so.
· The presence of crystalluria indicates that uroliths already are present or they are inevitable. Abso
lutely not true. Many normal animals have crystalluria and will never develop a stone. Crystalluria
Urolithiasis ■ CHAPTER 9303
can be a normal physiological phenomenon especially when the urine sample is stored under refrig-
eration (the crystals may not have been there at the time the sample was collected).
● The absence of crystalluria insures that no uroliths are present in the urinary tract. Not true. Many
amimals with confirmed urinary stones have no crystals at the time the sample was collected (they
may be all in the stone).
· When a urolith is present in the urinary tract, its chemical composition is always reflected in the
type of crystals observed in the urine sediment. Not true - a surprising number of animals with
confirmed stone type have a different type of crystal or none at all reported in their urinalysis.
· Radiography after surgery or urohydropulsion to remove cystic or urethral calculi is not routinely
necessary. Not true. A surprising number of cystic calculi are left behind after cystotomy for their
removal. It is in your best interest and that of the patient to guarantee that all stones were removed
at the time of surgery by taking radiographs immediately post-operatively If only one or two large
stones were initially present, radiographs are not necessary.
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
Q: Is it essential to submit uroliths for quantitative analysis?
A: Making an educated guess (a "guesstimate") is necessary if uroliths are not available for analy-
sis and the clinician intends to attempt medical dissolution. In this situation, information about spe-
cies, breed, urine pH, presence or absence of UTl, crystalluria, radiodensity of the urolith, and dietary
analysis remains the gold standard and should always be used to make treatment decisions when uro-
liths are available for laboratory submission.
Q: A dog with a radiodense cystic calculus, urine culture positive for Staphyfococcus aureus, and
urine pH of 6.8 has been treated using a diet advocated for dissolution of struvite uroliths. The
urolith has not changed in size after 8 weeks of feeding the diet and treating with amoxicillin on
the assumption that the urolith is composed of struvite. What is the explanation for treatment
failure?
A: First, determine whether or not the owner is feeding only the dissolution diet to the dog. Don't
forget to consider treats the owner may be feeding the animal. For a dissolution diet to be successful,
it must be fed exclusively. If the owner has been feeding the prescribed diet exclusively, the patient's
BUN is expected to be low and the USG should be in the range of 1.007 to 1.018. If the diet has been fed
Exclusively, it is possible that the urolith is composed of something other than struvite (e.g., oxalate). If
so, consider surgical removal (and quantitative analysis) of the urolith.
Q: Many uroliths were removed from a cat's urinary bladder two weeks earlier. The uroliths were
100% calcium oxalate based on quantitative analysis. At the time of suture removal 14 days after sur
gery, the cat was noted to be straining to urinate and additional abdominal radiographs were taken.
Three small uroliths were identified in the bladder. During surgery, a conscientious attempt was
made to lavage the bladder thoroughlly and all calculi were thought to have been removed. Do these
calculi represent new uroliths that have formed in the time between surgery and suture removal?
A: It is likely these calculi were left behind during surgery 2 weeks ago. A surprising number of
stones (especially small calcium oxalate uroliths) can be left behind after routine cystotomy. It takes
several months for new calcium oxalate stones to become large enough to be visible on radiographs,
and rapid growth of new calculi likely does not account for the appearance of these uroliths 2 weeks
after surgery. Failure to evacuate all calculi may be more likely to occur when the bladder is lavaged
antegrade (i.e., from bladder to urethra) rather than retrograde (i.e., urethra to bladder). Calculi also
sometimes can be moved into the urethra during removal of indwelling urinary catheters. Performance
304CHAPTER 9  Urolithiasis
of postoperative radiography (being sure to include the urethra on the film) provides reasonable
present preoperatively and carnot be definitively counted on the preoperative radiographs. If calculi
are not observed in the bladder or urethra on follow-up radiographs, acquired UTI or a suture reaction
should be considered as alternative explanations for the straining.
Q: A 9-year-old neutered male domestic shorthair cat has had three episodes of urolithiasis. Several years
ago a cystotomy was performed to remove struvite stones, and within the past year calcium oxalate stones
were removed from the bladder. Since that time, the cat has been fed a diet designed to prevent recur-
rence of calcium oxalate stones. The owner is reluctant to have a third surgery performed and asks about
medical treatment options. The urine specific gravity is 1.042, pH is 7.0, and urine culture is negative.
A: Older cats are more likely to form calcium oxalate stones than struvite stones. Based on the cat's
age, the likelihood of recurrent oxalate urolithiasis is high. Effective medical dissolution protocols for
calcium oxalate stones are not available. Surgery is likely still the best option for this cat because void-
ing urohydropulsion is less successful in males than in females. Alternatively, a 4- to 8-week trial of a
diet designed to dissolve struvite calculi could be fed in the event that the current stone is composed of
struvite. If this approach is not successful, another surgery remains the best option.
SELECTED READINGS
Abdullahi SU, Osborne CA, Leininger JR, et al: Evaluation of a calculolytic diet in female dogs with induced struvite
urolithiasis, Am  Vet Res 45:1508-1519, 1984.
Albasan H, Lulich JP, Osborne CA, et al: Evaluation of the association between sex and risk of forming urate uroliths in
Dalmatians, / A Vet Med Assoc 227:565569, 2005
Aldrich J, Ling GV, Ruby AL, et al: Silica-containing urinary calculi in dogs (1981-1993), I Vet Int Med 11:288-295, 1997,
Bartges JW, Osborne CA, Lulich JP, et al: Canine urate urolithiasis: Etiopathogenesis, diagnosis, and management, Vet Clin
N Amer 29:161191, 1999.
Anim Pract 34:969-987, 2004.
Case LC, Ling GV, Franti CE, et al: Cystine-containing urinary calculi in dogs: 102 cases (1981-1989), I Am Vet Med Assoc
201 :129133, 1992.
Case LC, Ling GV, Ruby AL, et al: Urolithiasis in Dalmatians: 275 cases (1981-1990),  Am Vet Med Assoc 203:96-100, 1993.
Collins RL, Birchard S], Chew D], et al: Surgical treatment of urate calculi in Dalmatians: 38 cases (1980-1995), I Am Vet
Med Assoc 213:833838, 1998.
Dalby AM, Adams LG, Salisbury SK, et al: Spontaneous retrograde movement of ureteroliths in 2 dogs and 5 cats, J Am
Vet Med Assoc 229:11181121, 2006.
Davidson EB, Ritchey JW, Higbee RD, et al: Laser lithotripsy for treatment of canine uroliths, Vet Surg 33:56-61, 2004.
Hoppe A, Denneberg T: Cystinuria in the dog: Clinical studies during 14 years of medical treatment, J Vet Int Med 15:
361367, 2001
Houston DM, Rinkardt NE, Hilton J: Evaluation of the efficacy of a commercial diet in the dissolution of feline struvite
bladder uroliths, Vet T7er 5:187-201, 2004
Kyles AE, Hardie EM, Wooden BG, et al: Clinical, clinicopathologic, radiographic, and ultrasonographic abnormalities in
cats with ureteral calculi: 163 cases (1984-2002),  Am Vet Med Assoc 226:932936, 2005.
Kyles AE, Hardie EM, Wooden BG, et al: Management and outcome of cats with ureteral calculi: 153 cases (1984-2002),
 Am Vet Med Assoc 226:937944, 2005
Lekcharoensuk C, Lulich JP, Osborne CA, et al: Association between patient-related factors and risk of calcium oxalate and
magnesium ammonium phosphate urolithiasis in cats, I Am Vet Med Assoc 217:520-525, 2000.
Lekcharoensuk C, Lulich JP, Osborne CA, et al: Patient and environmental factors associated with calcium oxalate uroli
thiasis in dogs, I Am Vet Med Assoc 217:515-519, 2000.
Lekcharoensuk C, Osborne CA, Lulich JP, et al: Association between dietary factors and calcium oxalate and magnesium
ammonium phosphate uurolithiasis in cats, I Am Vet Med Assoc 219:1228-1237, 2001.
Lekcharoensuk C, Osborne CA, Lulich JP, et al: Associations between dietary factors in canned food and formation of
calcium oxalate uroliths in dogs, Am  Vet Res 63:163-169, 2002.
Urolithiasis  CHAPTER 9 305
Lekcharoensuk C, Osborne CA, Lulich JP, et al: Associations between dry dietary factors and canine calcium oxalate uro-
liths, A  Vet Res 63:330337, 2002.
Lekcharoensuk C, Osborne CA, Lulich JP, et al: Trends in the frequency of calcium oxalate uroliths in the upper urinary
tract of cats, I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 41:3946, 2005.
Ling GV, Thurmond MC, Choi YK, et al: Changes in proportion of canine urinary calculi composed of calcium oxalate or
Lulich JP, Osborne CA: Catheter-assisted retrieval of urocystoliths from dogs and cats, J Am Vet Med Assoc 210:11l-113,
1992.
Lulich JP, Osborne CA, Carlson M, et al: Nonsurgical removal of uroliths in dogs and cats by voiding urohydropropulsion,
} An Vet Med Assoc 203:660-663, 1993.
Lulich JP, Osborne CA, Lekcharoensuk C,et al: Effects of diet on urine composition of cats with calcium oxalate urolithia-
sis, I Am Anir Hosp Assoc 40:185191, 2004.
Lulich JP, Osborne CA, Lekcharoensuk C, et al: Effects of hydrochlorothiazide and diet in dogs with calcium oxalate uro-
lithiasis, I A Vet Med Assoc 218:15831586, 2001.
supersaturation with calcium oxalate in healthy dogs, Am ∫ Vet Res 66:319-324, 2005.
Midkiff AM, Chew DJ, Randolph JF, et al: Idiopathic hypercalcemia in cats, I Vet Intern Med 14:619-626, 2000.
 Osborne CA, Lulich JP, Kruger JM, et al: Medical dissolution of feline struvite uroliths, Am Vet Med Assoc 196:1053-1063,
1990.
to calcium oxalate and magnesium ammonium phosphate (struvite), / Nutr 132:1637S-1641S, 2002.
Snyder DM, Steffey MA, Mehler SJ, et al: Diagnosis and surgical management of ureteral calculi in dogs: 16 cases
(1990-2003), N Z Vet  53:19-25, 2005.
 Sorenson JL, Ling GV: Diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of urate urolithiasis in Dalmatians, I Am Vet Med AssoC
203:863869, 1993.
Sorenson JL, Ling GV: Metabolic and genetic aspects of urate urolithiasis in Dalmatians, J Am Vet Med Assoc 203:857-862,
1993.
Stevenson AE, Blackburn JM, Markwell PJ, et al: Nutrient intake and urine composition in calcium oxalate stone-forming
dogs: Comparison with healthy dogs and impact of dietary modification, Vet 7her 5:218-231, 2004.
oxalate relative supersaturation in healthy miniature schnauzers and labrador retrievers, Res Vet Sci 74:145-151, 2003.
Stevenson AE, Markwell Pj: Comparison of urine composition of healthy Labrador retrievers and miniature schnauzers,
A*#  Vet Res 62:1782-1786, 2001.
Stevenson AE, Robertson WG, Marwell Pj: Risk factor analysis and relative supersaturation as tools for identifying
calcium oxalate stone-forming dogs, } Small Anim Pract 44:491-496, 2003.
Westropp JL, Ruby AL, Bailiff NL, et al: Dried solidified blood calculi in the urinary tract of cats, / Vet Int Med 20:828-834,
2006.
CHAPTER
10
Nonobstructive
Idiopathic or Interstitial
ystitis in Cats
TERMINOLOGY
Feline Urological Syndrome (FUS) and Feline Lower Urinary Tract Disease
(FLUTD)
1. Previously used terminology is confusing and reflects a lack of umderstanding of the etio-
pathogenesis of this syndrome.
2.
 These terms originally were used to describe a syndrome in cats characterized by pollaki-
uria, stranguria, hematuria, and inappropriate urination.
 3. They are nonspecific terms and do not indicate if clinical signs arise from the bladder, ure-
thra, or both.
4. In private practice, cats with idiopathic cystitis account for 1.5% to 6.0 % of all feline visits.
Feline Idiopathic Cystitis (FIC)
1.  Describes sigms of abnormal or irritative voiding behavior associated with absent or mini-
mal cellular inflammation in the lower urinary tract. This type of inflammation is called
neurogenic and is characterized by vasodilatation, edema, vascular leakage, diapedesis of
red blood cells, but minimal inflammatory cellular infiltration.
2. FIC is a diagnosis of exclusion made after ruling out urolithiasis, bacterial urinary infec.
tion, anatomic abnormalities, behavioral disturbances, and neoplasia.
3. The disease process is multifactorial and involves interactions among the bladder, other
organs (e.g., adrenal glands), the central nervous system (CNS), husbandry practices, and
the environment.
4. It can be an acute or chronic condition.
 5. In severe cases, affected cats may have a variety of comorbid disorders, and lower urinary
tract signs are a manifestation of some underlying disorder.
6. Most male cats with urethral obstruction have lower urinary tract signs related to FIC after
relief of the obstruction.
Interstitial Cystitis
1. Originally used to describe a bladder pain syndrome in humans that is very similar to FIC
 2. Original guidelines for diagnosis required visualization of glomerulations (submucosal pete-
chial hemorrhages) by cystoscopy, but these findings are no longer required for diagnosis.
 3. Interstitial cystitis refers to a chronic condition that waxes and wanes in severity and often
is exacerbated by stress. Flares are acute episodes of clinical signs superimposed on the
umderlying chronic condition.
4. The term feline interstitial cystitis was coined to include cats with FIC that had undergone
cystoscopic evaluation for the presence of glomerulations (submucosal petechial hemor-
rhages).
306
Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats ■ CHAPTER 10
307
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
A. The pathophysiology of chronic FIC is not completely understood, but appears to involve
abnormalities in many body systems including the bladder, nervous system, hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, and possibly other body systems. Bladder lesions observed in
cats with FIC may be a result of abnormalities in other body systems and not the actual cause
of the disease.
B. Little is knowm about the acute pathophysiology of FIC because clinical sigms often spontane
ously resolve in <5 to 7 days even without treatment. Most studies have focused on cats with
recurrent FIC.
C. Subclinical systemic abnormalities persist in cats with recurrent FIC even when clinical signs
are not present.
1. Urothelial integrity, bladder permeability, glycosaminoglycan (GAG) excretion, adrenal
function during stress, and CNS function are all abnormal in cats with FIC even when
detectable clinical sigms are not present.
 2. No correlation exists among clinical signs, cystoscopic appearance of the bladder, and his-
tologic findings. Cystoscopy often reveals severe changes in the bladder mucosa of cats
currently in remission
D. Histopathologic lesions in the bladder of affected cats are nonspecific (Figure 10-1).
1. Urothelium may be damaged or intact.
2. Submucosal edema.
 3. Dilatation of submucosal blood vessels with marginated neutrophils
4. Submucosal hemorrhage.
 5. Increased mast cell infiltration.
6. Minor increases in numbers of lymphocytes and plasma cells in the submucosa.
7. Neutrophilic infiltration is not common.
8. Fibrosis.
 9. Increased sensory nerve fiber density (identified by special stains).
E. Urothelial integrity is compromised in chronic FIC, and this change may be an initiating or
perpetuating factor in the disease process (Figure 10-2).
1. In a normal bladder, GAG (specifically GP-51) contributes to the mucous layer that coats
the intact urothelium and provides a barrier that inhibits bacterial attachment and repels
noxious substances in urine, thus preventing urothelial damage.
FGURE 10-1 ■ Histopathologic lesions in the bladder of cat with FIC. Note predominantly hemorrhagic
inflammation in the submucosa just below the uroepithelium. The submucosa is also edematous. Substantially
lacking is any identifiable infiltration with neutrophils
800
CHAPTER 10  Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats
A
Sensorynerve
B
Sensorynerve
Muscularlayer
Muscularlayer
Uroepithelium
Uroepithelium
GAGlayer
GAG layer
Urine
Urine
Mast cell
FlGURE 10-2  A, Normal bladder. Urine is repelled by the normal uroepithelium of the bladder and the
glycosaminoglycan (GAG) layer. B, Chronic FIC showing increased bladder permeability. The GAG layer (1) or the
GAG layer and the uroepithelium (2) have been damaged, allowing urine to permeate the bladder wall. Increased
permeability inchronic FIC cats has been demonstrated even whencats were not showing signs of active inflammation.
Infiltration with mast cells and increased mumbers of sensory nerve fibers are a result. (Drawn by Tim Vojt.)
2. Chronic FIC is characterized by a decrease in urinary GAG excretion. In some but not all
studies, this is seen to occur as a result of decreased GAG synthesis or increased GAG
adherence to damaged uroepithelial cells. The underlying reason for these changes in
GAG and the uroepithelium is unknowm. Whether the change is a primary abnormality or
secondary to other changes in the bladder remains to be determined.
3. Decreases in the urothelial GAG layer may lead to an increase in bladder permeability
allowing noxious substances in urine to permeate the bladder wall, causing tissue irrita-
tion and activation of the nervous system.
Urine can be damaging because of its high osmolality, low pH, and the presence of
noxious waste products.
b.
 No single urinary component has been identified as the cause of irritation to the blad-
der mucosa.
C.
Sensory neurons in the bladder wall are stimulated by urine and may contribute to
nervous system abnormalities.
 d.Sensory neuron stimulation also initiates pelvic pain.
F. Sensory neuron abnormalities.
1. C-fiber sensory neurons in the bladder are more sensitive in cats with FIC than in normal
cats and contribute to altered activation of neural pathways.
a. Sensory neurons innervate the bladder via the pelvic and hypogastric nerves,
which originate from the dorsal horn of the sacral and lumbar spinal cord,
respectively.
b. These nerves include unmyelinated, nociceptive fibers referred to as C-fibers.
Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats ■ CHAPTER 10
60
c.These fibers are more sensitive to bladder distension in cats with FIC than in normal
cats.
d. There are increased numbers of these sensory fibers in addition to increased sensitivity
to pain stimulation in cats with FlC.
2. Changes in sensory neuron excitability are not limited to the bladder and appear to rep-
resent a general neurologic malfunction, which, in turn, may explain why clinical signs of
FIC are not necessarily limited to the bladder
G. CNS alterations in FIC are associated with increased sympathetic nervous system activity.
Increased sympathetic nervous system outflow from the brain stem is a pivotal event in the neurogenic
model of inflammation in FIC.
1.  Altered activity in the locus coeruleus (LC), Barrington's nucleus, and the paraventricular
nucleus of the hypothalamus increase sympathetic outflow.
 2. The LC is the most important source of norepinephrine in the feline CNS.
a.Perception of threat or bladder distension stimulates activity in the LC
 b.  The LC increases sympathetic nervous system output to the periphery, including the
bladder.
c. Chronic activation of this pathway increases levels of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), the
rate-limiting enzyme for the synthesis of catecholamines, in the LC.
d.  Increases in TH contribute to increases in norepinephrine in cerebrospinal fluid and
nervous tissue, bladder and colon, plasma, and urine in cats with FIC.
e. Cats with FIC have increased tyrosine hydroxylase immunoreactivity (THIR) in the LC.
H. Stress, inflammation, and bladder pain are key components of FIC that are integrated at the
level of the sympathetic nervous system.
1. Stress, inflammation, and pain all activate the sympathetic nervous system.
2. Environmental stressors combined with increased sympathetic activity play a key role in
the disease process.
a. Even in healthy animals, stress activates the sympathetic nervous system, which may
initiate and perpetuate inflammation.
b. Norepinephrine contributes to vigilance, arousal, analgesia, and visceral responses to
stress in cats
c. In FIC, increased THIR and the corresponding increase in plasma norepinephrine con
centration indicate an exaggerated sympathetic response even in the absence of stress.
d. This finding may explain why cats with FIC often exhibit a disease course that waxes
and wanes and why environmental stressors intensify clinical signs.
e.  Development of clinical signs of FIC seems to result from a sensitive cat in α provocative
environment as depicted in Figure 10-3.
1. Increased sympathetic nervous system activity potentiates clinical signs in several ways.
1. Increased sympathetic nervous system activity promotes release of inflammatory media-
tors throughout the body, and these mediators are linked with pain that is not limited to
the bladder. Norepinephrine also initiates the release of prostaglandins.
1Increased sympathetic nervous system activity enhances the inflammatory potential of the bladder and
urethra.
2. Increased sympathetic outlow to the bladder alters urothelial permeability and initiates
neurogenic inflammation via C-fibers (Figure 10-4)
CHAPTER10 Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats
Environmentalstimuli
Higher
centers
Sympatheticoutput
Sensory input
Sensory
FIC = A"sensitive” cat in a
neuron
"provocative"environment
 FGURE 10-3  Interactions among environmental stimuli,the central nervous system, and the bladder can produce
clinical signs of FIC when a sensitive cat is exposed to a provocative environment. Over activation of the brain stem
from sensory nerve stimulation from the bladder activates adrenergic outflow from the locus coeruleus (LC) to the
spinal chord, dorsal root ganglia, and the bladder wal, which upregulates the inflammatory response. The LC also
can be activated directly from external stressors or through input from the cerebral cortex. (Dra wn by Tim Vojt.)
Environment
Epithelium
Brain-
GC
GAG
SNS
His
Pain
SNS
INFL 
<ORG
MO
SP
C-Fiber
↑ H+,K,Ca,toxins
SC>
: :↓ Mg+, growth factors
Axon
reflex
LUMEN
SP
Smooth muscle
FIGURE 10-4 ■ Neurogenic inflammation in FIC. Sensory neurons (C-fibers) transmit action potentials via the
 dorsal root ganglia (DRG) to the spinal cord (SC) and brain. These signals may be interpreted as pain by the
brain. Sensory fibers also can propagate a local axon reflex without central transmission. The local axon reflex
results in release of peptide neurotransmitters such as substance P (SP) by the nerve endings. Interaction of SP
with receptors on vessel walls results in vascular leakage, which can be augmented by SP-induced release of
histamine by mast cells. These actions may result in the submucosal petechial hemorrhages (i.e., glomerulations)
observed at cystoscopy. Receptors for SP also are present on smooth muscle. Also shown are the uroepithelium
and glycosaminoglycan (GAG) layer overlying the mucosa. Damage to either or both of these layers permits
hyperosmolar (>2000 mOsm/L) urine and its constituents (e.g., protons, potassium ions) to activate the sensory
fibers. Stress may result in descending efferent sympathetic (SNS) signals stimulating the DRG and inducing
peripheral release of neuropeptides. Local release of neurotransmitters by bladder sympathetic fibers also may
stimulate sensory fibers. (Dra wn by Tim Vojt.)
Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats ■ CHAPTER 10
LLE
a.
the bladder wall and activate C-fibers
b.  Increased C-fiber activity initiates local inflammatory pathways that lead to vasodila-
tation and mast cell infiltration.
c. Chronic C-fiber activation may overload the brain with sensory information, which
over time causes an increase in the density of C-fibers in the bladder
3.Alpha 2-adrenoceptors also appear to function abnormally in cats with FIC in ways that
may erhance inflammation.
a.Alpha 2-adrenoceptors are found throughout the CNS, including in the LC and spinal
cord. Receptors in the brain function to prevent catecholamine release and those in the
spinal cord dampen nociceptive input to the brain.
 Peripheral alpha 2-adrenoceptors can be found in the bladder and urethral mucosa,
where they regulate blood flow.
c.Alpha 2-adrenoceptors in the bladder and in the spinal cord of cats with FIC appear to
be relatively desensitized.
(1) In the bladder, there is an increase in the inflammatory response, because of changes
in blood flow.
(2) Nociceptive input to the brain increases, because the receptors in the spinal cord no
longer dampen sensory input.
 J.Abnormalities in the HPA axis help explain increased sympathetic activity.
1.Activity of the HPA axis in the healthy cat.
a.Corticotropin releasing factor is released by the hypothalamus and communicates with
the pituitary to initiate the release of adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) and also
activates the sympathetic nervous system in the brain stem.
Feline stressors often are unappreciated by the owner and attending veterinarian. Stress is a powerful
b.ACTH stimulates the release of cortisol and other corticosteroids from the adrenal cortex
limit activation of the sympathetic nervous system.
2. Increased concentrations of corticotropic-releasing factor and ACTH and an impaired cor
tisol response have been identified during periods of stress in cats with FIC (Figure 10-5).
 3. Decreased adrenal corticosteroid production may be involved in the pathogenesis of FIC.
a. During stressful situations in FIC cats, a disproportionate activation of sympathetic
outflow may occur because of the deficient adrenocortical response.
tight junction integrity.
4.  Glucocorticoid therapy does not provide any long-term benefit to cats with FIC, indicating
that inadequate production of other adrenal steroids may play a role in the pathophysiol-
Ogy Only cortisol has been studied thus far
5. Decreased adrenal gland volume per kilogram of body weight was found in cats with FIC
compared with healthy cats.
a.No histologic abnormalities were identified in the adrenal glands of FIC cats.
b. The zona fasciculata and zona reticularis of the adrenal cortex (areas responsible
for corticosteroid production) were significantly smaller in FIC cats compared with
healthy cats.
c. The adrenal medulla (the area responsible for catecholamine production) was slightly
larger in FIC cats compared with healthy cats
312
CHAPTER 10  Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats
B
tress
Hypothalamus
Hypothalamus
(-)
(-)
CRF
CRF
Anterior
 Brain stem 
Anterior
 Brain stem 
pituitary
（-)
pituitary
ACTH
ACTH
Sympathetic
Sympathetic
nervous
nervous
system
Adrenal
system
Adrenal
cortex
cortex
Steroids
Catecholamines
Steroids
Catecholamines
FIGURE 10-5 ■ Imbalances in the neuroendocrine system in FIC. . A, Normal stress response. B, Abnormal
stress response. Excitatory sympathetic nervous system (SNS) outflow is inadequately restrained by cortisol and
other adrenal corticosteroids. This enhanced sympathetic activity can increase tissue permeability, resulting in
 increased sensory afferent activity. Feedback inhibition at the level of the anterior pituitary and hypothalamus also
is decreased, which perpetuates release of corticotrophin releasing factor (CRF). Neurosteroid production by the
adrenal cortex, which normally enhances central nervous system (CNS) inhibitory tone during chronic stress, also
may be reduced. The bold sotid arrows indicate stimulation, and the dotted arrows indicate inhibition. Line thickness
indicates sigmal intensity.
 SIGNALMENT
Age
1.
 Range: 1 to 10 years of age.
2.
Peak occurrence: 2 to 7 years of age.
3. Decreased risk in cats younger than 1 year of age.
Sex
1. No difference in occurrence between males and females.
Breed
1. Persian cats may be at increased risk.
2. Siamese cats may be at decreased risk.
Behavioral Characteristics of Affected Cats
1. Over-reactive to their environment.
2. Nervous, fearful, defensive, or aggressive.
3. May have a neurotic attachment to their owners.
Factors That Have Been Associated With Increased Risk
1. Neutered (versus intact).
2. Indoor housing.
 3.Use of a litter box for urination and defecation.
4. Diet consisting of 75% to 100% dry food.
Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats ■ CHAPTER 10
ELE
5. Obesity.
6. Sedentary lifestyle.
7. Multi-cat household.
8.  Decreased water intake.
9.Stressful interactions with owners or environment.
10. Recent moves or changes in routine.
11.  Genetics and epigenetic modulation
CLINICAL SIGNS
 A. We use the acronym "FISH" to describe the principal lower urinary tract signs associated with
idiopathic cystitis:
1.Increased frequency.
 2. Inappropriate urinations. Also called periuria (i.e., urinating outside the litter box). This is
the most common clinical sign reported by owners, and in some cases may be the only
reported sign.
3.Stranguria.
4.Hematuria and howling (vocalization) during urination.
B. Clinical signs may be acute or chronic.
1. An attempt should be made to determine if the problem has been chronic.
 2. Chronic recurrent signs mandate a more extensive diagnostic evaluation and treatment
plan.
3. Urethral obstruction may be a sequela to FIC in male cats.
C. The development of clinical signs appears to require the presence of predisposing internal
abnormalities (i.e., brain, bladder, adrenal glands) as well as external factors (i.e., stressors)
that bring the cat to a threshold at which clinical signs will be exhibited.
D. Recent studies have shown that 50% or more of cats with FIC will develop episodic or persis
tent signs within 1 year of the first episode
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
Cats Younger Than 10 Years of Age
1. FIC accounts for 60% to 70% of cats presented for clinical signs of irritative voiding
(Figure 10-6).
FIC is the most common diagnosis in cats younger than 10 years of age with signs of rritative voiding.
2. Urolithiasis accounts for 10% to 20%.
 3.An anatomic abnormality (e.g., urachal diverticulum, urethral stricture) accounts for 10%.
4.Abehavioral disorder accounts for 10%.
5.
Bacterial urinary infection accounts for < 2%.
6. Neoplasia accounts for <1%.
Cats Older Than 10 Years of Age
1. FIC accounts for only 5% of cats presented for clinical signs of irritative voiding.
2. Bacterial urinary tract infection (UTI) accounts for more than 50%. Bacterial UTI in older
cats often occurs in association with urolithiasis or chronic kidney disease (with produc
fion of submaximally concentrated urine).
314
 CHAPTER 10  Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats
UTI (1%)
Unknown stone (1%)
Neoplasia (2%)
Oxalate (6%)
Struvite (7%)
Behavior
(9%)
Idiopathic (63%)
Anatomic
(11%)
 FGURE 10-6  Distribution of diagnoses in young cats presented for signs of lower urinary tract distress. (From
Buffington CA, Chew DJ, Kendall MS, et al: Clinical evaluation of cats with nonobstructive urinary tract diseases.
 Am Vet Med Ass0c 210:46-50, 1997.)
HISTORY
A. See Figure 10-7 for lower urinary tract (LUT) Environmental and Resource Questiornaire.
 B.  Effective client communication will facilitate accurate diagnosis and increase the likelihood of
successful treatment.
C. Establish a bond with the client, ask open-ended questions, practice reflective listening.
and provide empathic statements to obtain a thorough history and build client confi-
dence.
D. Ask questions about early adverse events the cat may have experienced and that may serve as
vulnerability factors (e.g., maternal stress, orphaned, bottle-fed, early neutering).
E. Attempt to identify comorbid conditions that may be present:
1. Gastrointestinal disturbances.
a. Regurgitation.
b. Vomiting (hair or food).
c. Soft stool.
d. Diarrhea.
 2. Skin lesions (e.g., a diagnosis of flea allergy dermatitis with no fleas present).
 3. Behavior problems (e.g., frightened, withdrawn, hiding, aggressive, overly attached).
4.Cardiac conditions.
a. Heart murmur.
b. Gallop rhythm.
c.Cardiomyopathy.
F.Gather information about litter box use and maintenance.
1. Number and location.
a.Cat owners should have one litter box for each cat (or cat group) in the household plus
 one additional box.
b. Boxes should be easily accessible and kept away from noisy household appliances that
may frighten the cat and keep it from using the litter box.
Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats ■ CHAPTER 10
315
Clinical Signs History Form
Owner Name:
Pet Name:
Date:
Directions: For items below, please use the following choices to describe how many times you
have seen your pet experience the symptom:
Score =
0= Ihave NEVER seen
3 = I've seen at least ONCE per MONTH
1 =I have seen ONCE
4 = I've seen at least ONcE per WEEK
2 = I've seen at least ONCE per YEAR
5 = I see it DAILY
Sign - please circle applicable signs and symptoms. Comments/explanation - as appropriate.
Score
How often does your cat:
Comments/explanation
Cough (±productive,sound)
Sneeze
Have difficulty breathing
Vomit (character/contents)
Have hairballs
Have diarrhea (color, consistency urgency)
Have constipation
Defecate outside the litter box
Strain to urinate
Have frequent attempts to urinate
Urinateoutsidethelitterbox
Have blood in the urine
Sprays urine on vertical surfaces
Grooms abdomen/perineum excessively
Have excessivehair loss
Scratchexcessively(please notelocations)
Have discharge from eyes(color,consistency)
Appear nervous (anxious)
Appear fearful
Appear aggressive
FGURE 10-7  Detailed Environmental History and Assessment Forms for use in cats with FIC. Results from
these forms are designed to assist the attending veterinarian in a comprehensive assessment of the cat's living
environment. A, Clinical Signs History Form.
2. Size and depthh.
a. Boxes may be too small for large cats or too deep for arthritic cats to easily enter.
b.As a rule of thumb the litter box should be as long as the cat.
3. Hooded or uncovered.
4.
Automatic cleaning. Although these devices keep litter boxes clean, some cats are fright-
ened by the noise created by the machine.
Type of litter used and how often the owmer changes the litter.
Clumping versus nonclumping.
b.
Scented versus nonscented.
C.
Cats sometimes demonstrate definite substrate preferences.
(1) Substrate preference can be determined by testing different substrates in separate
 boxes and allowing the cat to choose.
(2) The type of substrate should not be changed frequently, because doing so may
induce stress, unless the new substrate is provided in a separate litter box.
316
CHAPTER 10  Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats
"g-Lives" Checklist
The "9-Lives" checklist is intended to get an idea of the level of stress in the household that
might be affecting the cat. Positive responses to any of the top three suggest that empathic.
emotion-focused responses (may not be able to change the situation) may be indicated;
whereas the rest suggest that more action-focused responses may be useful.
OwnerName:
Cat's Name:
Date:
Just like people, some cats may be more sensitive to changes in their environment than others
Please review the attached checklist of common "life events" that can happen in the homes of
indoor-housed cats, and place a check mark next to any event your cat has experienced during
thepast 12 months.Please also indicate the approximate dateof the event.lfyou noticed that
any of the events affected the cat's disease symptoms, please put a V in the appropriate box in
the last columns next to any events that affected your cat's disease.
Scoring:
↓. = Much worse, ↓ = worse, = no change, ↑ = better, ↑↑ = much better
Check,if
Event
Approximate
Change in Disease
appropriate
During the past 12 months, my
Date
↑↑
→
cat has experienced
Deathor departureofapetfamily
member
Death ordepartureofahuman
family member
Serious hassle in the household
(injury, illness, other)
New human in the household
(spouse, baby, friend, child, other
relative)
New pet(s) in the household
Change in schedule (work, school,
travel, vacation, retirement)
Visitors (friends, relatives, etc.)
Construction around the house
(inside or outside)
 Changes of season
Weatherchanges/severe
storm/earthquake
New house/apartment
Frequent loud noises (house/car
alarms, neighbors, etc.)
Boarding
Remodeling
Moving/rearranging furniture
Neighborhood cats outdoors
Exam time (for students)
Holidays
 Change in diet
Change in litter
Travel (car, train, plane)
B
Other (please describe below)
FGURE 10-7,cont'd  B,"9-Lives"Checklist.
Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats  CHAPTER 10
317
The Resource Checklist and Client Action Plan is designed to be completed by clients
(except for the action column) and reviewed with them by the technician (veterinarian). I
primarily use the "No" and *DK" columns. Checks in the NO column are candidates for
intervention, whereas those in the DK column are opportunities for investigation (or a warning 
that the wrong person filled out the form).I suggest that turning items checked as NO or DK into
YES may help,and ask clients which of the item(s) checked they think may be most
important to change or which they want to change first. I do this to try to obtain "buy-in" and to
(hopefully) enhance compliance. Clients are then given detailed help in changing this factor
only to avoid information overload. They are told that when this is under control we can work on
other issues as needed.
Resource Checklist and Client Action Plan
The following questions ask about the indoor environment of your cat(s). There are no right or
wrong answers; we just want to learn more about your cat's environment. Please check Yes or
No after each question. If a question does not apply to your home, please check NA; if you don't 
know, please check DK. If you want to comment on any of the questions, please write the
number of the question and your comments in the space below the questionnaire
Diet-Wet food(checkone)
None
25%
50%
75%
100%
Diet -Dry food (check one)
None
25%
50%
75%
100%
How many hours each day.on
0-6hours
18-24 hours
average, does your cat spend
6-12 hours
 Indoor only
indoors? (check one)
12-18 hours
Howmanytotalcatsliveinyour
house?
If you have more than one cat, what is their relationship?(check one)
Not related
Parent-offspring
Littermate
 Single cat household
 Sibling
 Other
Where did you obtain your cat (source)?(check one)
Shelter
 Offspring from a pet I already own(ed)
  Obtained from a friend
Gift
 Purchased from a pet shop
 Purchased from a breeder
Stray/orphan
 Other
Food and Water
Yes
No
NA
DK
Action
Client Target
Date/Priority
Does each cat have its own food bowl?
Does each cat have its own water bowl?
Are the bowls located in a convenient location
that provides some privacy while it eats or
crinks
Are bowls located such that another animal
cannot sneak up on this cat while the cat eats or
drinks?
Are bowls washed regulary (at least weekly)
with a mild detergent?
Arebowlslocated awayfrom appliances and air
ducts that could make noise unexpectedly?
FGURE 10-7, cont'd  C, Resource Checklist and Client Action Plan. (Developed by the Indoor Cat Initiative,
The Ohio State University [www.vet.ohio-state.edu/indoorcat.htm] and used by permission.)
CHAPTER 10  Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats
Space
Yes
No
NA
DK
Action
Client Target
Date/Priority
Does each cat have its own resting area in a
convenient location that provides some privacy?
Does each cat have a safe hiding area?
Are perches provided so each cat can look down
on their surroundings?
Can each cat move about freely,explore,climb,
stretch, and play if it chooses to?
Is a radio or TV left playing when the cat is
home alone?
Social Contact
Yes
No
NA
DK
Action
Client Target
Date/Priority
How many hours a day are you in sight of your
(hours/day)
cat?
How many minutes a day do you spend petting
(min/day)
your cat?
How many minutes a day do you spend playing
(min/day)
with your cat?
Does each cat have a variety of toys to play
with?
Does each cat have many toys to choose from?
Do your cats like to play with toys?
Can each cat play with other animals or the
Owner if it chooses to?
Body Care
Yes
No
NA
DK
Action
Client Target
Date/Priority
Are horizontal scratching posts provided?
Are vertical scratching posts provided?
How many litter boxes are in your house?
Does each cat have its own litter box?
Are litter boxes located in a convenient, well-
ventilated location that still gives the cat some
privacy while using them?
Are litter boxes located on more than one level
in multi-level homes?
Are litter boxes located so that the cat has easy
access to and from the box?
Are litter boxes located away from appliances
and air ducts that could make noise unexpectedly?
Are litter boxes washed regularly?
Is unscented litter used?
Is clumping litter used?
Is the type of liter used kept consistent?
Is the litter scooped as soon after use as
possible (just as we flush after each use);: at
least daily?
FGURE 10-7, C, cont'd
Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats ■ CHAPTER 10
6LE
6. Cleaning schedule.
a.How often is the box scooped for urine and feces (i.e., once daily, twice daily, every
other day, weekly)?
b. How often is the litter completely removed and the box refilled?
7. Does the cat fully cover its urine and feces in the box? Failure to do so suggests an umsat-
isfactory litter box environment.
G. Ask detailed questions about inappropriate eliminations to identify periuria.
1. The location, number, and size of urine spots may help determine if FIC or a behavioral
problem is more likely.
a.Large spots may indicate polyuria with overflow.
 b. Small spots in numerous locations may indicate increased urgency and pain from
cystitis.
2. Distinguish litter box problems from inappropriate eliminations associated with FIC. Toi-
leting (defined as the deposition of normal urine and feces outside the litter box without
signs of irritative voiding) suggests litter box management problems.
Determine if inappropriate urinations are normal toileting events or related to irrtation of the lower
urinary tract.
a.  Characterized by the presence of a moderate amount of urine in one spot.
 b. Paw markings on the carpet around the urine spot suggest an attempt to cover the area
(a normal behavior associated with urination).
C.The cat may prefer the substrate in the area in which it is toileting (e.g., carpet texture).
d. Toileting problems indicate the litter box must be cleaned more frequently.
e. Toileting problems may indicate the cat has developed an aversion to the current lit-
ter. Aversion to a particular litter type can develop during acute episodes of FIC, after
which the cat may associate a particular litter type with painful attempts at urination
Toileting in only one location suggests litter box avoidance.
f.Urinations on vertical locations (e.g., walls) indicate spraying or marking behavior.
g. Litter box problems should be considered likely if the owner reports deposition of both
feces and urine outside of the litter box.
3.  Irritative voiding results in deposition of small volumes of urine in multiple places.
H. Stress in the cat's or owner's life should be identified if possible during the history because
of the degree of stress in an individual cat's life can be difficult.
1.  Moving to a new living space or a change in the owner's schedule are very stressful experi-
ences for a cat.
2. Many other stressors are possible and may arise from other animals, humans, the living
space itself, and husbandry (e.g., diet, water, litter box).
3. Earthquakes and dramatic changes in weather conditions (as seasons change) also have
also been reported to increase risk for episodes of FIC
4. The amount of activity in the cat's environment can affect the stress response.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
A. Perform a complete physical examination of all other body systems before focusing on the
urinary tract to ensure identification of all comorbid conditions that may be present.
B. Evaluate the cat for pain on abdominal palpation of the bladder or elsewhere.
320  CHAPTER 10  Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats
C. A thickened bladder wall may be identified in some cats with chronic disease. During flares of
FIC, the bladder will be small due to irritative voiding.
D. The remainder of the physical examination usually is normal.
E. Excessive grooming or biting of the hair on the caudal abdomen may be a sign of referred pain
 a wo s un no ru d m ose sin ao ( an-os) sin aos u
and tail base.
 F. Gallops, murmurs, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, obesity, odontoclastic resorptive dental
lesions, gastrointestinal disease, and nervousness potentially are comorbid conditions that
occur with increased frequency in cats with FIC.
DIAGNOSIS
Evaluation
1. An exhaustive diagnostic evaluation is not necessary in a young cat experiencing its first
 episode of FIC. A diagnosis of FIC however cannot be made until urolithiasis, bacterial UTI
and neoplasia have been excluded as possible causes of clinical signs. Most cats withi an acute
episode of FIC experience spontaneous remission of clinical signs within 1 week of onset.
a. Survey abdominal radiographs will allow exclusion of radiopaque cystic calculi
b.  A urinalysis will establish baseline results for urine specific gravity (USG), protein con-
centration, hematuria, and pyuria.
c.Although bacterial UTI is uncommon in cats younger than 10 years of age with lower
urinary tract signs, a urine culture will eliminate UTI as a diagnostic consideration.
Routine Laboratory Tests
Urinalysis
a. Urinalysis findings are neither sensitive nor specific for FIC
b. USG.
(1) Healthy cats eating canned foods typically have USG of >1.025.
o'I< go Dn aaey Aeidk spooy Aip Suea sies AieaH (z)
(3) Cats with lower urinary tract signs and USG of <1.025 should be evaluated for sys-
temic disease. Renal disease or renal failure, hyperthyroidism, and diabetes mel-
litus all impair the ability of the kidneys to produce concentrated urine.
(4) An extremely high USG (i.e., 1.060-1.080) may increase the risk for perpetuation of
FIC if therapy to lower the USG is not initiated.
c. Urine pH
(1) Urine pH is of no diagnostic importance in FIC.
(2) There is no scientific evidence to support the idea that urine pH contributes to
development of FIC or that manipulation of pH is useful in the treatment of FIC.
(3) Urine pH depends on the interaction of many factors including diet, postprandial
alkaline tide, stress-induced respiratory alkalosis, urease-producing bacteria in
 UTI, and the presence of plasma in the urine associated with bleeding.
(4) Most cats in North America eat commercial cat foods that acidify their urine.
(5) Stress induced by transport to the veterinarian's office has been shown to cause
acute respiratory alkalosis that results in alkaline urine in some cats.
d.
Hematuria and proteinuria are common in cats with FIC but often wax and wane over
time and even between urinations on the same day.
Hematuria is the predominant abnormal finding on urinalysis of cats with flares of FIC.
Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats ■ CHAPTER 10
321
FlGURE 10-8 ■ Many red blood cells in the urine sediment of a cat with acute FIC. This is sometimes called
hermorrhagic inrflammation because of the predominance of red blood cells and the absence of neutrophils. A few
struvite crystals are also in this figure, but they have no pathological significance in FIC.
e.So-called hemorrhagic inflammation (i.e., many red blood cells with few white blood
cells) is common in the urine sediment of cats with FIC (Figure 10-8). Red cells and pro-
tein can enter urine during cystocentesis. Therefore, it is difficult to assess the impor-
tance of hematuria in samples collected from cats using this method.
f. Crystals often are not present or are present in low numbers in fresh urine from cats
with FIC.
(1) Refrigeration can cause ex vivo formation of crystals that were not present
in vivo.
(2) The presence of crystals has no known diagnostic relevance in cats with nonob-
structive FIC.
(3) Crystal formation does not lead to lower urinary tract damage and lower urinary
tract signs. Struvite and calcium oxalate crystals do not appear to damage healthy
urothelium.
(4) Sterile inflammation initially damages the urothelium and allows plasma protein
exudation into urine, increasing urine pH and allowing struvite crystals to precipi-
 tate as a secondary event. Urine stasis due to incomplete voiding also may play a
role.
Microbiology
a.Bacterial culture reveals growth in 1% to 2% of cats younger than 10 years of age with
lower urinary tract sigms.
b. Cultures for ureaplasma and mycoplasma are also negative in most cats with lower
urinary tract signs.
Urine culture is negative in cats with FIC. The urine sediment may contain elements that look like bacteria,
but these elements usually are artifacts.
c. It generally is not necessary to submit urine cultures in cats younger than 10 years
of age that have a USG of >1.040 and <5 white blood cells per high power field in
their urine sediment. The likelihood for a bacterial UTI in this setting is low. How
ever negative results of a urine culture will eliminate bacterial U'Tl as a diagnostic
possibility.
322
2CHAPTER 10  Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats
d.Urine cultures always should be performed in cats older than 10 years of age with lower
urinary tract signs, USG of <1.040, azotemia, history of urethral catheterization within
the past 6 months, or a previous history of perineal urethrostomy.
Blood Count and Serum Profile
a.  The complete blood count and serum biochemistry profile usually are normal in cats
with non-obstructive FIC with the possible exception of signs of hemoconcentration (i.e.,
increased total protein concentration, increased hematocrit). Consequently, many clini-
cians do not perform these tests in young cats with acute onset of lower urinary tract signs
b.  In cats with recurrent episodes of lower urinary tract signs and in cats older than 10
years of age, serum thyroxine concentration and serology for feline leukemia virus
(FeLV) and feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) should be performed because hyper-
thyroidism and FeLV or FIV infection can result in abnormal urinary behavior.
IMAGING
Radiography
1. Survey radiographs will identify radiopaque cystic calculi (e.g., calcium oxalate, struvite)
 2 to 3 mm or more in diameter. Cats that experience recurrent episodes or persistent clini-
cal sigms require more extensive imaging.
se u asn ae ydebouosen pu Adeoans seo seyons sanba bubew pauep
 that fail to respond to initial treatment or in those with recurrent clinical signs.
2. Double contrast cystourethrography.
a.  Results are normal in approximately 85% of cats with recurrent FIC.
b.  Focal or diffuse thickening of the bladder is noted in cats with longstanding FIC.
c. Contrast material may be seen permeating the bladder wall or through the bladder
wall and into the peritoneal space in some cats with FIC.
d.Filling defects in the contrast pool may represent blood clots or cellular debris.
e.
 Focal urethral stricture sometimes is diagnosed in male cats with positive contrast ure-
thrography making this form of imaging extremely valuable in male cats. Stricture is
more likely in cats with sigms of FIC that have recently been catheterized. Stricture also
can develop in male cats that have not been catheterized, and may occur as a conse-
quence of chronic urethral inflammation.
f. Double contrast cystourethrography also facilitates identification of small or radiolu-
cent calculi, neoplasia, and urachal diverticula.
Ultrasonography
1. Ultrasound examination is a useful and less invasive form of imaging than contrast cysto-
urethrography but it does not replace radiographic studies.
2. Bladder wall thickness, which is increased in some cats with FIC, should be measured
when the bladder is adequately distended with urine. Inadequate distension of the blad-
der can result in overestimation of wall thickness (Figure 10-9).
 3. Both radiolucent and radiopaque calculi can be identified during an ultrasound examination
if they are >2 mm in diameter. Small stones may not shadow well and are difficult to distin-
guish from hyperechoic urinary debris that sometimes does shadow.
4. Ultrasonography allows for evaluation of the proximal urethra, but most of the distal ure-
thra is obscured by the pelvis on ultrasound examination
5. Polyps and neoplasia can be identified on ultrasonography
Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats ■ CHAPTER 10
323
A
B
FGURE 10-9  Disparity in perceived thickness of the bladder wall between ultrasonography (left) and contrast
cystography (right). Note the bladder is relatively empty in the image on the left, potentially resulting in the
impression that the bladder wall is markedly thickened. The bladder is more distended in the image on the right,
taken during positive contrast cystography. The bladder wall in the radiographic image on the right is thickened
but not as much as suggested by the ultrasound image on the left. Also note the urachal diverticulum at the
Cranioventral location of the bladder in the positive contrast cystogram.
Cystoscopy
1. Cystoscopy allows direct visualization of the bladder mucosa. It is rarely necessary but can
ensure that an underlying problem has not been missed. Cystoscopy can be used instead
of contrast cystography in female cats.
2. The most commonly identified bladder lesions in cats with FIC are increased vessel den
sity and tortuosity, edema and submucosal hemorrhage, and glomerulations (submucosal
petechial hemorrhages) (Figure 10-10).
 3. An increase in the number and size of glomerulations often occurs in cats with FIC when
higher bladder filling pressures (> 80 cm water) are used during cystoscopy. This finding does
not occur in normal bladders and allows for a specific diagnosis of interstitial cystitis.
4.  Arigid pediatric cystoscope is the instrument of choice to obtain images of the bladder and
urethra in female cats 3 kg or more. Small lesions are readily identified due to the degree
of magnification achieved. Biopsies obtained through the operating port often are not very
informative due to their small size.
Urethroscopy
1. The urethra of male cats can be evaluated for erosions, hemorrhages, and urethral stric-
tures using a small fiberoptic endoscope.
 2. Urethral lesions are identified in approximately 40% of male cats with FIC.
3. Female cats with FIC rarely have lesions in the urethra.
HISTOPATHOLOGY
A. Biopsy is not necessary in most cats with lower urinary tract signs suspected to have FIC
B. Biopsy of the bladder should be performed in cats in which neoplasia cannot be excluded (e.g.
highly irregular bladder mucosa or mass observed on cystography or ultrasonography).
324CHAPTER 10 Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats
HGURE 10-10  Cystoscopic findings in a cat with FIC. Note the cicular submucosal petechial hemorrhages
(also called glomerulations). Also note the edema that obscures normal background vessels.
for additional information).
D. When biopsy is performed, a toluidine blue stain should be requested in addition to routine
hematoxylin and eosin staining to identify mast cells that sometimes are present in the blad-
der wall of affected cats.
TREATMENT
A. Step-wise approach is taken in the management of FIC (Figure 10-11).
General Aims of Treatment for Cats With Feline Idiopathic Cystitis
1Cats with FIC are extremely sensitive to changes in their environment and their response to stress includes
exaggerated sympatheticnervous system activity.
1. Intra-episode: Decrease the severity and duration of clinical signs during acute episodes.
2. Inter-episode: Increase the interval betweern episodes of active disease (flares) in cats with
recurrent FIC
Aims of Treatment of Interstitial Cystitis in Humans
1.Decrease irritants in urine.
2. Improve barrier function of the bladder so that it becomes less permeable.
 3. Decrease mast cell activation in the bladder wall.
4. Decrease the stress response.
5. Decrease bladder and urethral spasms.
6. Provide analgesia.
Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats ■ CHAPTER 10
325
Lower Urinary Tract Signs
Minimum database: Urinalysis + Abdominal radiograph if signs >7 days
Urinary history (vertical vs. horizontal periuria? Iritative voidings?)
Detailed environmental history
 Provide analgesia/antispasmodics for "flare": Acepromazine + Buprenorphine
"Watchfur' waiting - spontaneous resolution
Signs recur
or persist?
+ Consistent diet (canned = best)
Client education -
+ Increased water intake
"From the cat's point of view"
+ Stress reduction
Litter box management
Signs recur
· Unscented litter/texture/depth
orpersist?
·Preferences/aversion
+：
·Location/ventilation/access to box
· Increased cleaning frequency
+ Facial pheromones
Clean up and eliminate “accident" odors
+ More water intake dynamics
+ More stress reduction
Extended database:
Urine culture
Contrast radiography
Ultrasonography
 Signs recur
or persist?
+ Amitriptyline (?)
+GAG replacers
+ More stress /
behavioral modification
+ More or greater analgesia
Cystoscopy (?)
Repeat MDB
FGURE 10-11  Step-wise approach to the management of FIC using the multimodal environmental modification
(MEMO) approach. MDB, minimum database.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
A. Based on the pathophysiology of the disease, decreasing sympathetic nervous system activity
is crucial in cats with FIC.
B. Modify husbandry practices to decrease stress.
C. Provide analgesia.
1. Like stress, chronic pain activates sympathetic nervous system activity.
TREATMENT
 A. Insofar as possible, treatment should address modification of extermal and internal risk factors.
1.  It may not be possible to modify internal risk factors (i.e., vulnerability of the brain, blad-
der, and adrenal glands) so as to increase the threshold at which clinical sigms occur in an
individual cat with FIC.
326
 CHAPTER 10 ■ Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats
2. Consequently, modification of husbandry practices and attempts to decrease environment
stressors become crucial components of effective therapy for FIC.
B. In a given cat with FIC, successful treatment depends on the willingness of the owmer and
veterinarian to work together to identify contributing husbandry practices and environmental
stressors and to implement effective control strategies.
C. Cats with severe, longstanding clinical signs are more difficult to manage than those in which
intervention has occurred earlier in the course of the disease.
D. Success of treatment is gauged by resolution or improvement of clinical signs and abnormali-
ties identified during the diagnostic evaluation. Examples may include:
1. The cat begins to use the litter box more often (i.e., fewer episodes of periuria).
 2. Increased frequency, stranguria, dysuria, and vocalization become less apparent.
3.The cat's interactions with the owner improve.
4. Comorbid conditions associated with FIC (e.g, vomiting, diarrhea, skin lesions, behav-
ioral problems) become less apparent.
 5. Proteinuria and macroscopic hematuria resolve, but microscopic hematuria may persist
even after clinical signs are no longer present.
 6. Bladder pain and bladder wall thickening are no longer noted on abdominal palpation.
E. Different levels of treatment are recommended based on the cat's clinical presentation and
initial response to management.
1. Cats suffering from a first episode of acute FIC and those experiencing an infrequent flare
of recurrent FIC should receive first level treatment
aposida (sep  <) paoenond e ro i go saposida janoai andnm won uams sie 7
of FIC should receive additional levels of treatment (e.g, more advanced environmental
modification, other medications).
 3. Keep in mind that clinical signs resolve in 85% of affected cats within 5 to 7 days of the
onset of an acute episode.
 4. Persistence of clinical signs beyond 7 days suggests that spontaneous resolution is unlikely.
5. First level treatment.
a.Analgesia should be provided, although it is not known whether or not providing
 analgesia during an acute episode has any effect on development of future episodes of
FIC.
og smoy 1 ol g Aaaa Od x/ oz 0 g jo aesop e ie pasn aq ueo aundiouaidng (1)
5 to 7 days for cats with acute episode of FIC. We have had success using the inject-
able preparation orally in many cats. This preparation appears to be odorless and
tasteless to cats.
(2) Butorphanol also has been used, but its effects are not as potent and do not last as
long as those of buprenorphine.
(3) Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).
Administration of buprenorphine and acepromazine for 5 to 7 days is a useful treatment for cats with an
 acute episode of FIC.
(a) No studies of the safety or effectiveness of NSAIDs for treatment of FIC have
been reported.
(b) Some anecdotal evidence supports their use.
(c) Chronic use of NSAIDs could predispose cats to the development of acute
intrinsic renal failure.
(d) NSAIDs have been ineffective in pain management of interstitial cystitis in
humans.
Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats ■ CHAPTER 10
327
b. Sedation is helpful for cats that are extremely anxious during an acute episode or flare
of FIC.
(1) Acepromazine.
(a) 0.05 mg /kg SC every 8 to 12 hours. Or,
(b) 1.25 to 2.5 mg per cat given PO every 8 to 12 hours to effect (i.e., mild sedation,
 prolapse of the nictitans membrane).
(c) Acepromazine also acts as an alpha-2 antagonist and has an antispasmodic
effect on the urethra.
c.  Cleaning of urine-soiled areas in the cat's environment.
(1) Ineffective cleaning can cause other cats in the household to begin urinating in the
same areas and may cause the affected cat to continue using these areas for urina
tion.
(2) Kits are available to inject enzymes that can break dowm urine that has soaked into
carpet padding. Chemical deodorizers may render these enzyme treatments inef-
fective.
(3) Products with strong odors are not recommended because they decrease the effec-
tiveness of feline facial pheromone preparations that can be used in the treatment
of FIC (see later)
I MEMo is the most important treatment for cats with FIC.
(4) It may not be possible to clean large, heavily soiled areas with injector kits. Replace-
ment of carpeting may be necessary.
(5) Properly cleaned areas should be treated with aversive stimuli such as aluminum
 foil, adhesive tape, or citrus deodorants to keep the cat from returning to these loca-
tions.
6. Second level treatment: Introduction to multimodal environmental modification (MEMO;
see Figure 10-11).
a. Behavioral studies suggest that captivity and a monotonous indoor lifestyle elicit a
stress response in cats because these features drastically differ from the lifestyle of cats
in the wild. However a chaotic umpredictable environment also can be stressful for
some cats.
b.  Cats did not evolve as pack animals as did dogs and humans. They are considered
C.In the wild, cats eat 10 to 20 small meals a day consisting of insects, birds, and rodents.
d. Large carnivores including dogs are the cat's natural predators.
e. Cats do not display any circadian rhythm in their daily activities in the wild.
f. House cats have limited space for hunting and roaming, are not provided with prey,
must adapt their activities to their owner's schedule and often must live in close prox-
imity to humans, dogs and other cats.
Living in close confinement with other cats may be stressful and can be a source of
conflict that goes urmoticed by cat owners and veterinarians.
ICats are solitary and not pack animals like dogs and humans.
h.  Indoor housing and monotonous environments do not cause FIC, but the associated
stress may play a role in its development and maintenance
328
 CHAPTER 10 ■ Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats
i. As a result of neuroendocrine abnormalities, cats with FIC are sensitized to stress and
may have more need for environmental enrichment than do healthy cats.
j. MEMO can take time to implement successfully. Many cats require 3 to 6 weeks and
owmers should be advised of this time course so as to expect gradual changes.
k.
 The goal of MEMO is to alter litter box management, diet, water intake and the indoor
environment to decrease anxiety, conflict, and stress in the cat's life
1. The goal of modifying these external factors is to increase the cat's threshold for devel-
opment of clinical signs (i.e., decrease the likelihood of episodes of FIC).
m.
Good client communication and education are essential to make MEMO successful.
(1) Any changes in the environment should be tailored to the individual limitations of
the cat, owner, and household
(2) Specific stressors should be identified and quantified by talking with the owner to
properly initiate MEMO.
(3) The veterinarian also must help keep the owmer calm as a maneuver to decrease
stress in the cat's life.
(a) Treating FIC is difficult and time-consuming, and many owners become frus
trated.
MEMO often decreases clinical signs of FIC and should be considered before drug treatments other than
analgesia and sedation for acute episodes.
(b) To make clients feel more secure, it is important to listen carefully, explain the
problem and treatment steps thoroughly, and show empathy and concem for
the owmer's fear and frustration.
 n. Successful MEMO may eliminate the need for drugs. Approximately 80% of cats with
recurrent FIC experience significant reduction in clinical signs during the year after
implementation of MEMO.
m a           o
 indoorcat.org) provides resources for clients and veterinarians wishing to implement
MEMO.
7. MEMO Level 1.
a.  Manage litter box practices effectively.
(1) The litter box should be an inviting place for the cat to use frequently. Anything
that discourages use of the litter box will favor urine retention and increase the
likelihood that noxious components of urine will permeate the bladder wall and
stimulate nociceptors (see earlier).
(2) Owners should follow the "1 plus 1" rule: One litter box for each cat (or cat group)
in the house plus one additional litter box.
(3) Litter boxes should be placed in quiet, easily accessible locations with an available
escape route. Providing an escape route will minimize the possibility of dominant
cats preventing access to less dominant cats.
(4) Place liter boxes in different locations and (if possible) on different levels of the
house to maximize use.
(5) Increase the frequency of scooping and cleaning of the litter boxes.
(a) Litter should be scooped twice daily.
(b) Litter should be discarded and replaced with new litter weekly.
(c) Do not use detergents with strong odors that may discourage use.
Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats ■ CHAPTER 10329
(6) The litter box must be large and deep enough to accommodate the cat. Experiment-
ing with different sizes and types may allow the owner to determine the kind of
litter box the cat prefers. For example, some cats may prefer the privacy of hooded
litter boxes. However owners may not clean them frequently enough because they
minimize odors and prevent owners from recognizing when the litter box needs to
be cleaned.
(7) Unscented clumping litters are recommended.
(a) Scented litters deter some cats from using the litter box.
soa  asn sh  r r  rand Aie si au ()
owners to clean the litter box more frequently and thoroughly is unknown.
(8) Trials with different litter substrates may allow the owner to determine the cat's
preferences.
(a) Place two boxes next to each other, each containing a different substrate.
(b) Failure to adequately cover urine and feces with litter may indicate the cat's
dislike for that particular substrate.
(c) It may take trials using several different types of litter to identify one the cat
prefers.
(9) One study reported that the use of an odor eliminator spray (Zero Odor) in the lit-
ter box appeared to increase the attractiveness of the litter box to cats.
b. Increase water intake.
(  
especially if they consume only commercial dry foods.
(2) Highly concentrated urine may be more irritating to the more permeable bladder
wall of cats with chronic FIC.
(3) Cats with lower USG produce more urine and urinate more frequently, which
decreases the amount of time potentially noxious urinary constituents spend in
contact with the bladder wall. Dilute urine also has lower concentrations of these
noxious substances.
(4) Feeding canned food (as compared with the same nutrients in a dry form)
significantly decreased signs of recurrent FIC over a 12-month follow-up
period.
(5) Adding water to the food will increase water intake and lower USG.
(a) The highest possible percentage of the cat's daily food intake should come from
carmed food (ideally 100%) and water should be added to the remaining semi-
moist and dry foods that the cat is consuming.
(b) Adding water to semimoist food in pouches generates gravy that often is very
palatable.
(6) Water intake potentially can be increased by altering the flavor, depth, freshness,
and movement of the water, as well as the water bowl shape, according to the cat's
preferences.
(a) Water fountains or dripping faucets can be used.
(b) Clam, tuna, or chicken juice from canned products designed for human con-
sumption can be added for flavor.
(c) Botled water may be more appealing to cats in areas where tap water is chlori-
nated or heavily mineralized.
(d) Some cats seem to prefer having their water bowls in unusual places.
(e) Some cats prefer large, wide water bowls.
(f) "Topping off" the water bowl several times a day seems to increase water intake
in some cats.
0CHAPTER 10  Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats
c.  Salt food to increase water intake and lower USG.
(1) Whether long-term increased dietary salt intake in cats is associated with increased
risk of hypercalciuria, hypertension, and renal injury is unclear.
(a) There is no evidence that feeding high salt diets to normal cats causes chronic renal
injury. There is some evidence that high dietary salt intake can exacerbate underly
ing chronic renal disease and contribute to renal disease progression.
(b) Feeding high salt diets may increase urinary calcium excretion but not its con-
centration in urine, because more water also is excreted. Thus, the risk for for-
mation of calcium-containing calculi should not be increased.
(2) Salt intake should be increased gradually until a target USG of 1.030 or less is
reached, but any decrease in USG potentially is helpful.
Increased water intake and increased production of more dilute urine are cornerstones of FiC management.
(3) Cats have been shown to tolerate foods containing up to 4% sodium chloride and
this level of salt supplementation was associated with a 70% increase in water con-
sumption.
d.Manage feeding practices.
(1) Feeding practices should not be drastically altered. In two studies, MEMO in the
absence of dietary modification resolved clinical signs of FIC.
(2) Dietary changes ultimately are the cat's choice.
(3) Diet changes should focus primarily on increasing water intake by transitioning
the cat to canned food.
(a) In the transition to canned food, both dry and canned should be offered.
(b) If the cat shows interest in the canned food, the dry food can slowly be withr
drawn as a choice.
 s     n     s  )
eaten dry food exclusively all of their lives.
(5) Some cats seem to prefer both dry and canmned foods to be fed.
(6) Some cats do not seem to like canned and dry foods mixed in the same bowl.
(7) Canned or semi-moist foods may provide a more positive feeding experience due
to how the food feels in the cat's mouth (so-called hedonics or mouth feel). This may
have a beneficial effect on the cat's nervous system.
(8) Feeding moist food allows for potentially beneficial feeding-related interactions
between the cat and owner due to the associated ritual of food preparation and
presentation.
(9) Provide opportunities for simulated predatory behavior by hiding small amounts
of food around the house or by placing it in containers from which the cat will need
to extract the food.
(10) Once a change is made, maintain the constancy (type of food), consistency (water
content), and composition (nutrient content) of the diet.
(11) Some cats develop an aversion to the foods they were eating at the time they devel-
 oped FIC and in these instances a dietary change is indicated.
(12) There is no need to further acidify the urine to prevent struvite crystalluria because
struvite crystals have not been shown to damage the urothelium or aggravate non
obstructive FIC
(13) The optimal diet for cats with FIC has not been identified, and currently there are
no veterinary prescription diets specifically for this condition.
Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats  CHAPTER 10
LEE
e. Decrease conflict among cats in multiple cat households.
(1) Conflict develops among cats as a result of perceived threats to their status or terri-
tory from other cats in the environment.
(2) Open conflict is easily identified, but silent conflict is much harder to recogmize
Threatened cats avoid other cats, decrease their activity, and spend time away from
the family in less-used areas of the house.
(3) Threatened cats are more likely to develop elimination problems.
(4) Competition for resources (e.g., food, space, water, litter boxes, perching spots)
is the most common cause of conflict among cats even when limitations of these
'aumo au on juaredde jou are sanmosa1
(5) Provide separate resources for each cat in an area where the resources can be
accessed without being seen by the other cats. Cardboard boxes work well to pro
vide hiding places during periods of stress.
(6) Neuter all cats in the household.
(7) Regularly trim the nails of all cats in the household.
(8) When supervision is not possible, the threatened cat should be provided its own
separate space for refuge.
(9) Outside cats also can be a source of conflict. Cats do not see windows as a barrier
or form of protection from the outside world. The owmer may consider making the
yard or garden less appealing to stray animals.
f.Offer toys that promote behaviors practiced in the wild.
(1) Small moving objects may mimic prey and provide opportunities for stalking and
pouncing behavior (e.g., laser pointers, bright objects on strings).
(2) Containers or toys that periodically release food stimulate hunting behavior.
(3) The owner may be able to identify the cat's prey preference (e.g., bird, small
mammal, insect) by paying close attention to the cat's responses to different
items.
(4) Expandable tunnels provide opportunities for play and also for hiding.
(5) Provide a variety of toys and bring them out at playtime to keep the cat interested.
(a) Toys should be available on different levels of the house.
(b) Toys on the ground or hanging from door knobs for the cat to swat can be use-
ful.
(c) As long as the owner is not a source of stress for the cat, he or she can be
involved in playtime.
(6) Catnip, honeysuckle, and valerian root produce relaxing behaviors in many cats.
Catnip also is available in a spray that can be used on scratching posts, sleeping
areas, and other preferred areas.
(7) DVDs that provide visual stimulation and images of prey seem to appeal to some
cats.
s aos rog uoos aq on radde pis jo sad ur (8)
g. Increase available space.
(1) Provide horizontal and vertical scratching posts.
(2) Areas should be available for hiding, climbing (e.g, boxes), playing, and rest-
ing.
(a) Wooden ladders can be effective for climbing and scratching, and can be used
for hanging toys.
(b) Cats prefer to monitor their surroundings from an elevated vantage points,
making climbing frames, hammocks, window seats, and kitty condos ideal
toys.
332
 CHAPTER 10 ■ Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats
h. Consider pheromone therapy.
(1) Cats normally rub their faces on objects in their environment to mark them with
naturally occurring pheromones that communicate familiarity and identify objects
as nonthreatening.
(2) Synthetic feline facial pheromones are available (Feliway, Abbott Laboratories,
Abbott Park, Ill.), and the room diffuser product will continually disperse the pher
omone for approximately 30 days.
(3) Place diffusers in areas of the home the cat seems to find most stressful (e.g., win-
dows, soiled furniture, litter box).
(4) Pheromones may decrease vigilance and have a calming effect on the cat. A
decrease in vigilance may reflect decreased sympathetic nervous system
activity.
(5) Although no statistically significant effect of pheromones as compared with pla-
cebo could be demonstrated in a study of facial pheromones, a positive trend was
noted and they may be useful in some cats with FIC.
i. Minimize stress from administration of medications as much as possible.
(1) Orally administered liquid or injectable medications should be considered over
tablets or capsules.
(2) Medications delivered in so-called pill pockets are well tolerated by many cats.
-uan aaisod jeuoppe apraond Keu sleau arojq suonenipau Supiaoi (e)
forcement.
8. MEMO Level 2 can be implemented if MEMO Level 1 strategies have not sufficiently
decreased clinical signs of FIC. At this point, it is important to review with the client what
modifications already have been made, how they were implemented, which worked, and
which did not. Alternative approaches to Level 1 MEMO can be discussed, and the cli-
ent may wish to make additional attempts. Alternatively, MEMO Level 2 can be imple-
mented.
Exposure to the outdoors sometimes effectively decreases linical signs of FIC.
a. Exposure to the outdoors for several hours each day results in dramatic improvement
in some cats. Enclosed patios, yards, or other contained areas can provide safe access
to the outdoors.
b.  Provide a safe haven for very sensitive cats with FIC. The approach presumably allows
the cat to feel more secure, and many cats will only use the safe haven when they feel
threatened by changes in their environment.
(1) The safe haven can be a room, a dog crate, the basement, or some other private area
designed by the owner
(2) Add the cat's favorite items to this area (e.g., bed, toys, food, perches).
(3) Add a Feliway diffuser nearby.
(4) Consider adding quiet music or video material.
(5) If a crate is used, and depending on its size, the litter box can either be placed in the
crate or nearby outside of it.
(6) The safe haven should be kept dark and quiet.
(7) The cat should not be disturbed for any reason (e.g., medication administration)
while in its safe haven.
(8) Other pets and children should be excluded from the safe haven.
Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats  CHAPTER 10
(9) Allow the cat to remain in its safe haven if it is experiencing an active flare of FIC
so as to avoid overstimulation. Resolution of this current episode of FIC often will
occur within a few days.
(10) Free access crate training (FACT) is available on the website www.mmilani.com for
owners who wish to establish a safe haven using a crate.
C.
 Beyond analgesia and sedation, we do not recommend additional drug therapy until
conscientious attempts have been made to implement all of the environmental modifi-
cations described above (MEMO Level 1 and Level 2). Drugs used in the treatments of
FIC are listed in Table 10-1.
TABLE 10-1
 Drugs Used in the Management of Feline Idiopathic Cystitis
Acurte Therapy
Potential Adverse
Drug
Class
Indications
Dosage
Effects
Acepromazine
Phenothiazine
Sedation, anti-
0.05 mg/kg TID SC
Sedation, hypotension
(PromAce)
derivative
spasmodic
Butorphanol
Synthetic partial opioid
Analgesia, acute
0.2-0.4 mg/kg TID PO
Sedation
{Torbugesic)
agonist
episode
or SC
Buprenorphine
 Synthetic partial opioid
Analgesia, acute
0.01-0.02 mg/kg BID to
Sedation
(Buprenex)
agonist
episode
q8h PO or SC
Fentanyl (Duragesic)
Opioid agonist
Analgesia, acute
25 μg/hr
Respiratory depression,
episode
bradycardia
Phenoxybenzamine
Alpha 1-adrenoceptor
Anti-spasmodic
2.5 mg per cat BID PO
Sedation, hypotension
(Dibenzyline)
antagonist
Prazosin (Minipress)
Alpha 1-adrenoceptor
Anti-spasmodic
0.5 mg per cat BID PO
Sedation,hypotension
antagonist
Chronic therapy
 Potential Adverse
Drug
Class
Indications
Dosage
Effects
Amitriptyline (Elavil)
Tricyclic antidepressant 
 Feline idiopathic
0.5 to 2.0 mg/kg per cat
 Sedation, anti-cholinergic
cystitis (FIC)
SID PO
effects, weight gain,
urine retention, urolith
formation
Buspirone (BuSpar)
Non-benzodiazpine
FIC, urine spray-
2.5 to 5.0 mg per cat
Rare: Sedation, other
anxiolytic
ing, anxiety
BID PO
neurologic effects
Comipramine (Clomi-
Tricyclic antidepressant
FIC, urine spray-
0.5 mg/kg SID PO
 Sedation, anti-cholinergic
calm, Anafranil)
ing
effects
F3 fraction of feline
Synthetic pheromone
Anxiety, FIC
1 spray in affected area
None reported
facial pheromones
SID orroom diffuser
(Feliway)
Huoxetine (Prozac)
Selective serotonin
FIC, urine
1 mg/kg SID PO
Rare: Decreased food
reuptake inhibitor
spraying
intake, vomiting,
lethargy
Pentosan polysulfate
Glycosaminoglycan
FIC
8 to 16 mg/kg per cat
Rare: Vomiting, diarrhea
 sodium (Elmiron)
(GAG) supplement
BID PO
334CHAPTER 10  Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats
(1) Tricyclic antidepressants (TCA).
(a) TCAs are classified as serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake
inhibitors.
(b) TCAs can decrease clinical signs in cats with the severe, recurrent FIC.
(c) Amitriptyline is the TCA that has been most studied in cats with FIC.
(i) Stabilizes mast cells that may infiltrate the bladder in cats with FIC.
(ii) Decreases detrusor contractions by anticholinergic actions.
(ii) Decreases sensory nerve fiber activity in the bladder.
(iv) Downregulates norepinephrine release from the brain.
(d) In a study of cats with recurrent FIC, amitriptyline resolved clinical signs for
one year in 60% of cases. A dose of 10 mg amitriptyline PO daily given in the
evering was used.
(e) Alternatively, 5 mg PO every 24 hours can be used and the dose
gradually increased in increments of 2.5 mg up to a maximal dose of
12.5 mg.
(f) Amitriptyline (or other TCA) should not be discontinued abruptly because
signs.
(g) No improvement in the cystoscopic appearance of the bladder was observed in
this study despite resolution of clinical signs.
(h) Other studies have shown no benefit of TCA when administered to cats with
acute FIC.
(i) Adverse effects.
(i) Somnolence may occur after the start of treatment, but dissipates with
time and usually is not problematic if the medication is given in the eve-
ning.
(ii) Behavioral changes such as decreased grooming may occur.
(iii) Weight gain.
(iv) Alterations in liver enzyme activity may occur and serum biochemistry
should be monitored while the cat is receiving amitriptyline.
(v) Chronic use rarely can cause neutropenia or thrombocytopenia and hemo-
grams should be evaluated periodically.
(vi) TCA may cause arrhythmias and should be used cautiously if at all in cats
with known heart disease.
(j) Clomipramine (Clomicalm) is another TCA that may be considered in cats with
refractory FIC at a dosage of 0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg PO every 24 hours.
(2) Fluoxetine (Prozac) is a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor that may be con-
sidered at a dosage of 0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg PO every 24 hours for cats with refrac-
tory FIC.
(3) GAG supplementation has not been shown to be of benefit in cats with FIC.
(a) No beneficial effect of glucosamine or pentosan polysulfate (PPS) supple-
mentation over placebo administration was observed in cats with FIC
despite the fact that GAG excretion has been shown to be decreased in cats
with FIC.
(b) Adverse effects of GAG supplementation occasionally include diarrhea (at
low dosages) and potentially coagulopathies (at high dosages). We have
observed diarrhea but not coagulopathies with GAG supplementation in
cats with FIC.
Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats  CHAPTER 10335
(c)In a multicenter study of FIC cats treated with PPS or placebo, no sigrificant dif-
ference between treatments was observed. Interestingly, all treated cats (PPS and
placebo) showed considerable improvement in their clinical signs. This observa-
fion emphasizes the importance of the cat's environment in FlC. The beneficial
and their owners that led to decreased stress.
d.Bacteria do not play a primary role in the pathogenesis of FIC and antibiotics are of no
value in cats with FIC unless it is complicated by other factors (e.g., predisposition to
e.Referral to an animal behaviorist should not be considered a last resort.
(1) Primary care veterinarians can provide information that can help clients better
understand feline husbandry (as described earlier for MEMO), but it can some
times be difficult to differentiate an inflammatory condition such as FIC from a
behavioral problem.
(2) Also, FIC and behavioral problems may coexist in the same cat.
(3) Reasonable diagnostic efforts to exclude bacterial UTl, urinary calculi, anatomic
abnormalities, and neoplasia should be performed before referral.
(4) Behaviorists have expertise in dealing with difficult clients. This expertise includes
issues of noncompliance by the owners, the human-animal relationship, and insta
bility in the household.
Some cats with severe refractory FIC cannot be helped despite MEMO and drug therapy. These cats often are
 euthanized because of the cat's distress and the owner's frustration.
WHAT DO WE DO?
● Rule out other causes of lower urinary tract signs (e.g., bacterial UTl, calculi, neoplasia) in cats sus-
pected of having FIC
a Sump (aunzendane s'a) uonezimbuen pin pue (audrouandnq "ga) eisaleue apiaoi ·
first few days of an acute episode of FIC.
· Do not prescribe antibiotics to cats with FIC.
● Promote increased water intake by dietary change (i.e., canned food) and other strategies to increase
water consumption.
· Emphasize multimodal environmental modification (MEMO) in an attempt to decrease stress in the
lives of cats with FIC.
● Consider alternative diagnoses in cats with low USG (e.g., hyperthyroidism, chronic renal failure).
● Consider use of feline facial pheromones (Feliway) as part of stress-reduction treatment.
· Prescribe amitriptyline for cats with severe recurrent FIC when MEMO alone is not successful.
· Consider potential beneficial clinical effects of GAG replacers despite litle scientific evidence of efficacy.
THOUGHTS FOR THE FUTURE
· Additional work may elucidate the salutary effects of the placebo arm of controlled clinical trials in
cats (i.e., possible beneficial effect of increased interaction of the owner with the cat).
· Adrenal steroids other than glucocorticoids will be shown to be important in the pathophysiology
of FlC and its treatment.
336 CHAPTER 10 Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats
· Additional work will resolve the question of whether or not infectious agents play a role in the
pathogenesis of FIC.
· The effect of maternal stress on the development of adrenal glands in the fetus and the role of small
adrenal glands in the pathogenesis of FIC will be better understood.
● The neurobiology of stress and its role in development of FIC will be better understood and lead to
improved treatment.
· It will become clear that FIC is just one of several chronic disease conditions in cats characterized by
excessive activity of the sympathetic nervous system.
· Diets specifically for FIC will become available and will be designed to increase water excretion in
the urine without excessive urinary acidification.
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS
· Struvite crystalluria plays an important role in the pathogenesis of FIC. Actually crystals play no
role in the nonobstructive forms of FlC. Crystals do contribute to urethral plug formation, but form
secondary to the underlying FlC. Neither struvite nor calcium oxalate crystals are known to "har-
poon" the mucosa.
● Antibiotic treatment is responsible for the resolution of acute signs of FIC. The acute signs of FIC
often abate within one week, many times within a few days, regardless of treatment. This disease
has a natural waxing and waning course.
· High urine pH plays an important role in the pathogenesis of FIC. Alkaline urine in and of itself is
not damaging to the bladder or urethral mucosa. It can contribute to the precipitation of struvite
· High magnesium content of the diet plays an important role in the pathogenesis of FIC. High mag
nesium content can contribute to struvite crystalluria, but this has no role in the development o1
maintenance of FIC
● Bacterial UTI is common in cats presenting for an initial acute episode of FIC. Bacterial UTls are
Some confusion about the diagnosis of UTI exists when urine that is collected by voiding or by uri-
nary catheterization is cultured (contaminants are isolated).
· Fastidious bacterial organisms that cannot be routinely cultured are important in the pathogen-
esis of FIC. As far as we can tell, this is not true, because special techniques to isolate fastidious or
umusual organisms have failed to do so.
SUMMARY TIPS
· FIC can be thought of as a disease of a sensitive cat in a provocative environment.
· Ideally MEMO should be the standard of care for all cats housed indoors.
· Most cats with FIC recover from their first episode in <5 to 7 days regardless of treatment. This fact
can be used to positively motivate clients to adopt MEMO and other treatments.
· More than 50% of cats with FIC will have a recurrent episode (or flare) within 1 year, especially
when MEMO is not implemented.
● Inappropriate urination (i.e., periuria) sometimes is the only clinical sign noted by the owner of cats
with FIC that later is documented by cystoscopy. Thus, a history of only inappropriate urinations
does not necessarily mean the cat has a behavioral disorder.
· Crystals often are an artifact of sample storage (i.e., refrigeration) and have no knowm role in the
pathophysiology of nonobstructive FIC. They do play a role in urethral plug and calculus formation.
· Although hematuria and proteinuria often are detected during a flare of FIC, their presence waxes
and wanes. Microscopic hematuria and proteinuria can persist despite resolution of clinical signs
Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats ■ CHAPTER 10337
or NSAIDs
can have umexpected salutary effects; thus, empowering the owner can be an effective tool in man-
agement.
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
Q: Almost every time I prescribe amoxicillin for a cat with FIC, it gets better and my clients are
happy. I have followed this practice for years with success. Now you are telling me that antibiotics
have no place in the treatment of FlC. How can you say that?
A: FIC is not a bacterial disease, and it is not rational to use antibiotics to treat it. In most cats with
an acute episode of FIC, clinical signs resolve in <5 to 7 days regardless of treatment. FIC is a waxing
and waning disease that often is self-limiting, at least initially. After an initial episode of FIC, the client
should be advised to institute dietary changes that will increase the cat's water intake and to institute
MEMO Level 1.
Q: Our practice has used meloxicam or piroxicam (off-label use) as a treatment for FIC. We give it
every other day for a few weeks after the initial episode. What is the role of NSAlDs in treatment
of FIC?
A: There is no evidence that NSAIDs have a beneficial effect in cats with FIC. A double-blind pla-
cebo-controlled clinical trial would be necessary to evaluate the use of NSAIDs in FIC. NSAIDs don't
(especially in cats with decreased water intake and possible dehydration) has made us reluctant to use
NSAIDs in FIC.
Q: I've heard that cranberry juice is beneficial for cats with recurrent FIC. Is this true?
A: Cranberry juice is unlikely to have a specific benefit for cats with FIC beyond the increase in fluid
by bacterial infection. The additional acid load may decrease urine pH, but this effect is unlikely to be
       i  a   d
Q: I have observed a few cats with chronic FIC that underwent remission of clinical signs after
contrast cystography. Is this just coincidental or is there an explanation for this effecf?
A: We have also observed this effect in some cats. One possibility is that distension of the bladder
during cystography has had a beneficial effect. Hydrodistension (to approximately 60 cm water pres-
sure) may deplete sensory neuropeptides from the chronically inflamed bladder and provide some
relief from pain. Is so, this effect is likely to be transient.
Q: Because GAG excretion is decreased in FIC, it makes sense that supplementation with GAGs
would be beneficial in these cats.
A: Decreased GAG excretion also may occur in some humans with interstitial cystitis, and pen-
tosan polysulfate (Elmiron) is licensed for use in these patients. It seems to provide a modest ben-
efit over placebo for a small percentage of people with interstitial cystitis. In a multi-center study
of cats with FIC, pentosan polysulfate had an effect no different from that of placebo. Interestingly,
both groups of cats (pentosan polysulfate-treated and placebo-treated) showed some improve-
 p ar  i a m rao an jo ua psun i Aiss sans 
positive effect.
338 CHAPTER 10 Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats
Q: Is surgery useful in the management of FIC?
A: Surgery doesn't play a role in the management of nonobstructive FIC. Rarely, a full-thickness
bladder biopsy is obtained by surgery when the bladder thickening is so severe or irregular that the
clinician is concerned about neoplasia. In young cats with such bladder thickening, FIC usually still is
the cause. Full thickness bladder biopsy can definitively exclude neoplasia and be supportive of (but
not pathognomonic for) FIC. A toluidine blue stain for mast cells should be requested because mast
cells cannot be identified with routine hematoxylin and eosin staining. Mast cells often infiltrate the
bladder in cats with FIC, but their pathophysiological significance is unknown. Surgical stripping of
oid anoe ue on ononuo e jiaauos, oh joa ue u aauods azne 1o apeq e Susn esoonu appeq au
cess" has not been effective and is not recommended. If a urachal diverticulum is present, its removal
occasionally alleviates clinical signs of FlC. However it is difficult to determine if improvement is a
Q: Are high salt diets useful in cats with FIC?
A: High salt diets are given to FIC cats because they have the potential to increase water intake,
increase urine volume, and decrease USG. More dilute urine is thought to protect against future epi-
sodes of FIC. Whether or not high salt diets contribute to hypertension, hypokalemia, and progression
of underlying chronic renal disease in cats is not clear. In general, high salt diets do not seem to be
dangerous in cats without underlying renal disease.
Q: I see cats with lower urinary tract signs in which the urine dipstick reaction is positive for white
cells but urine culture is negative. Should these cats be treated with antibiotics?
A: No. The dipstrip reaction for white cells was designed to detect the presence of leukocyte ester-
ase in human white cells. This color pad reaction often is positive in cats despite the absence of white
cells. Pyuria in cats (and dogs) needs to be identified based on microscopic evaluation of fresh urinary
sediment.
Q: I sometimes see bacteria in the urine sediment of cats with lower urinary tract signs but get
no growth on urine culture. I believe these cats have urinary tract infection caused by a fas-
tidious organism and treat them with antibiotics. They frequently recover with a week. Is this
reasonable?
A: Remember that most cats with an acute episode of FIC will recover in <5 to 7 days regardless of
treatment. Also, remember that particulate debris in the urine sediment can resemble bacteria and also
that urinary stains (e.g., Sedi-Stain, BD, Franklin Lakes, N.J.) can be contaminated by bacteria that then
can be observed in the stained urine sediment. FIC is not a bacterial disease and consequently antibiot
ics are not indicated in its treatment.
Q: How much effort should be put into differentiating periuria associated with a purely behav-
ioral condition from periuria associated with FIC? It sounds like the treatment approaches can
be quite similar. Is uncertainty about the underlying cause of periuria an acceptable clinical
approach?
A: Yes. In one study, cystoscopic abnormalities consistent with FIC were observed in more than
50% of cats with periuria even when no diagnostic abnormalities were identified on urinalysis and
diagnostic imaging. We recommend implementation of MEMO in all cats with periuria. The few cats
Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats  CHAPTER 10339
Q: A middle-aged female cat with a history of FIC that I manage had been doing well for some time
after implementation of MEMO. On the Fourth of July, the cat was stressed by the loud fireworks
I thought its clinical signs would abate, but unfortunately they have not. The owner has imple
mented all elements of MEMO. What else can we do?
A: You have identified a specific stressor (holiday fireworks) that precipitated an acute flare of FIC
 in this cat. Once a cat has an episode of FIC, it may be predisposed to future episodes for the remainder
of its life as a consequence of some individualized environmental sensitivity. Repeated exposure to
specific stressors can result in acute flares of FlC in such predisposed cats. Usually, treating such an epi-
sode using orally administered acepromazine and buprenorphine for 3 to 5 days often will break the
cycle of pain and inflammation. If not, additional reduction in stimulation can be achieved by provid-
ing the cat with a safe haven for a few days in a dark quiet room that contains all the cat's resources. The
cat then may be gradually reintroduced into its wider environment and praised by the owner. Wher
 all of these approaches fail, you may want to consider a tricyclic antidepressant such as amitriptyline
for the cat.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Barsanti JA, Brown J, Marks A, et al: Relationship of lower urinary tract signs to seropositivity for feline immunodefi
ciency virus in cats, I Vet Intern Med 10:3438, 1996.
Buffington CA: Comorbidity of interstitial cystitis with other unexplained clinical conditions, / Llrol 172:1242-1248,2004.
stitial cystitis,  LIrol 155:1801-1804, 1996.
Buffington CA, Chew Dj, Kendall MS, et al: Clinical evaluation of cats with nonobstructive urinary tract diseases, I Am
Vet Med Assoc 210:4650, 1997.
Buffington CA, Chew DJ, Woodworth BE: Feline interstitial cystitis, I Am Vet Med Assoc 215:682-687, 1999.
Buffington CA, Chew DJ, Woodworth BE: Interstitial cystitis in humans, and cats? LIrology 53:239, 1999.
Buffington CA, Pacak K: Increased plasma norepinephrine concentration in cats with interstitial cystitis, / LIrol 165:2051-
2054,2001
interstitial cystitis, / LIrol 167:1876-1880, 2002
Buffington CA, Westropp JL, Chew D), Bolus RR: Clinical evaluation of multimodal environmental modification (MEMO)
in the management of cats with idiopathic cystitis,  Feline Med Surg 8:261-268, 2006.
Vet Med Assoc 213:1282-1286, 1998.
Chew DJ, Buffington T, Kendall MS, et al: Urethroscopy, cystoscopy, and biopsy of the feline lower urinary tract, Vet Clin
North A Small Anim Pract 26:441462, 1996.
Cottam N, Dodman NH: Effect of an odor eliminator on feline litter box behavior, / Feline Med Surg 9:44-50, 2007.
Filippich Lj: Feline lower urinary tract disease: Dietary considerations, Aust Vet ∫ 71:326-327, 1994.
Small AnimPract 46:571-577,2005.
Griffith CA, Steigerwald ES, Buffington CA: Effects of a synthetic facial pheromone on behavior of cats, I Am Vet Med Asso
217:1154-1156, 2000.
Gunn-Moore DA, Cameron ME: A pilot study using synthetic feline facial pheromone for the management of feline idio-
pathic cystitis, I Feline Med Surg 6:133-138, 2004.
6:219-225, 2004.
Hostutler RA, Chew DjJ, DiBartola SP: Recent concepts in feline lower urinary tract disease, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 35:147-170, 2005.
Kruger JM, Conway TS, Kaneene JB, et al: Randomized controlled trial of the efficacy of short-term amitriptyline adminis
tration for treatment of acute, nonobstructive, idiopathic lower urinary tract disease in cats,  Am Vet Med Assoc 222:749-
/58,2003.
340CHAPTER 10  Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats
Kruger JM, Osborne CA, Goyal SM, et al: Clinical evaluation of cats with lower urinary tract disease,  Am Vet Med Assoc
199:211-216, 1991.
Lavelle JP, Meyers SA, Ruiz WG, et al: Urothelial pathophysiological changes in feline interstitial cystitis: A human model,
Am  Physiol Renal Physiol 278:F540-F553, 2000.
Vet Med Assoc 218:14291435, 2001.
Markwell P], Buffington CA, Chew D], et al: Clinical evaluation of commercially available urinary acidification diets in
the management of idiopathic cystitis in cats, / Am Vet Med Assoc 214:361-365, 1999.
tial cystitis: What's in a name?  A Vet Med Assoc 214:1470-1480, 1999.
urologic syndrome, Biochim Biophys Acta 1672:1-11, 2004.
Reche Junior A, Buffington CA: Increased tyrosine hydroxylase immunoreactivity in the locus coeruleus of cats with
interstitial cystitis, / LIrol 159:1045-1048, 1998.
45 cases (1993-1995), I A Vet Med Assoc 212:1907-1909, 1998.
Westropp JL, Buffington CA: In vivo models of interstitial cystitis, I LIrol 167:694-702, 2002.
Westropp JL, Kass PH, Buffington CA: Evaluation of the effects of stress in cats with idiopathic cystitis, Amm ∫ Vet Res
67:731-736, 2006.
Westropp JL, Kass PH, Buffington CA: In vivo evaluation of alpha(2)-adrenoceptors in cats with idiopathic cystitis, Am 
Vet Res 68:203207, 2007.
 r ss n a a s n s e      t d
2003.
CHAPTER
11
Obstructive Uropathy
and Nephropathy
INTRODUCTION
 A. Obstructive nephropathy refers to the functional and anatomical effects of obstruction on the
kidney.
B. Obstructive uropathy refers to local effects on the urinary tract at the site of obstruction as well
 as to effects on sites proximal to the obstruction, including the kidneys.
1. Urothelial damage.
2. Hemorrhage.
 3. Inflammation.
4. Necrosis.
5. Erosion.
6. Perforation.
 7. Rupture under pressure proximal to the obstruction.
C. Total obstruction of one kidney eventually results in the total destruction of the renal
parenchyma.
 D. Partial obstruction, or complete short-term obstruction, results in decreased renal function
that may be reversible if adequate urine flow can be re-established promptly.
E. Total obstruction of both kidneys is not compatible with life, and death occurs in experimental
animals with complete obstruction after 3 to 5 days.
 F.  A predictable sequential loss of renal function occurs during progressive obstruction.
1. Decreased concentrating ability.
2. Decreased acidifying ability.
3.I
Decreased glomerular filtration rate (GFR).
4.Decreased renal blood flow (RBF).
G. Types of obstructions.
1.  Unilateral (affecting one kidney)
2.B
Bilateral (affecting both kidneys).
3. Partial.
4. Complete.
5.Acute.
6. Chronic.
 7. Combinations of the above.
H. Location of obstruction.
1. Renal pelvis.
2. Ureters.
 3. Urinary bladder.
4. Urethra (most common site of obstruction).
341
342
 CHAPTER 11 ■ Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy
ETIOLOGY OF OBSTRUCTION
A.1
Urolithiasis (most common in dogs).
B. Urethral plugs (common in cats).
C. 1
Idiopathic urethral (most common in cats).
D. Functional (increased urethral tone).
1. Neurologic.
2. Idiopathic.
E. Neoplasia (intraluminal or extraluminal).
F. Strictures.
1. Postraumatic (including after indwelling urinary catheterization).
2. Postsurgical.
3. Idiopathic.
4. Congenital.
G.
Accidental placement of ligature around a ureter during ovariohysterectomy.
H.S
 Suture granuloma.
1.S
Severe ureteritis or cystitis.
1.]
Proliferative (granulomatous) urethritis.
K.1
Prostatic enlargement (severe).
L.1
Perineal hermia entrapment.
M.(
 Congenital anomaly (e.g., ectopic ureter, urethral abnormalities).
N. Dioctophyma renale (renal pelvic worm).
LOWER URINARY TRACT OBSTRUCTION
A. Obstruction within the urethra is the most common cause (Figure 11-1).
1. Urethral calculi in dogs.
a.Males more commonly are obstructed due to their long narrow urethra as compared
with females.
 b. Obstructing calculi often are trapped behind the os penis of male dogs.
 2. Idiopathic urethritis or urethral plugs in cats.
 3. Urethral or trigonal neoplasia in older animals.
B. Obstruction of urine outflow also can occur from masses in the trigone region of the bladder.
C.
 Clinical and laboratory abnormalities depend on the extent and duration of obstruction.
1. Signs of lower urinary tract distress (e.g., stranguria, pollakiuria).
2. Paradoxical (overflow) incontinence.
3. Oliguria or anuria.
Urethrospasm
Cystic
ldiopathicurethritis
calcufi
Urethral stricture
Idiopathic
Urethral
Urethral
Luminal
cystitis /
plug
calculi
diameter
urethritis
Urethral
obstruction
FGURE 11-1  Underlying causes and mechanisms of urethral obstruction.
Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy  CHAPTER 11
343
FGURE 11-2  Overdistended bladder-urethral obstruction. A, Lateral radiograph. B, Necropsy specimen.
4.Azotemia (acute postrenal failure and uremic syndrome).
5. Postobstructive diuresis
6.Bladder atony.
 7. Azotemia (chronic postrenal failure and uremic syndrome).
 8. Polyuria without azotemia as a result of impaired urinary concentrating ability.
D. Bladder overdistension decreases blood supply to the bladder wall (Figure 11-2).
1. Ischemia contributes to bladder injury when the bladder is distended and subject to
increased hydrostatic pressure.
2.1
 Referred to as detrusor atony (bladder atony) or hyporeflexia.
3.B
 Bladder overdistension disrupts the continuity of detrusor smooth muscle fibers.
a.Tight junctions between cells are separated.
b. Loss of detrusor reflex usually is temporary.
4. Urine retention results because the patient carmot urinate, despite relief of obstruction.
 URETHRAL OBSTRUCTION (UO) IN MALE CATS
Causes and Associations
1. Idiopathic urethritis/cystitis, urethral plugs, and uroliths are the most common causes
of UO in male cats. Urethral plugs and idiopathic urethritis/cystitis are responsible for
obstruction in more than half of affected cats (Table 11-1).
Urethral Plugs (Figure 11-3)
a. According to conventional wisdom, UO in cats usually is associated with urethral
plugs.
b. Recent studies, however, show that only 18% of UO episodes were associated with
urethral plugs. This is consistent with findings from an unpublished pilot study at The
Ohio State University using urethroscopy at the time of initial evaluation.
344
CHAPTER 11  Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy
 TABLE 11-1
  Frequency of Occurrence for Causes Associated With Urethral Obstruction in Male Cats
Characteristic
Kruger 1991
Barsanti 1996
Gerber 2008
Urethral plugs 
59%
42%
18%
ldiopathic
29%
42%
53%
Uroliths
12%
5%
29%
Strictures
0%
11%
0%
Kruger JM, Osborne CA, Goyal SM, et al: Clinical evaluation of cats with lower urinary tract disease. JAm Vet Med Assoc 199:211-216, 1991;
Barsanti JA, Brown J, Marks A, et al: Relationship of lower urinary tract signs to seropositivity for feline immunodeficiency virus in cats.
      i              
JFelineMedSurg 10:16-23,2008.
A
B
FIGURE 11-3  Urethral plug. A, Salubrious mucoid plug cm marker. B, Plug with mostly mineral component.
(No stain, x400) Dissecting scope.
Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy  CHAPTER 11
345
 Urethral plugs are less commonly associated with urethral obstruction in cats than has previously been
assumed.
c.1
 Urethral plugs have minimal intrinsic cohesive structure but often are cylinder-shaped
 after extrusion from the urethra.
d.Urethral plugs are fundamentally different from calculi that lodge within the urethra
(i.e., urethroliths).
(1) Uroliths have an organized internal structure with much less matrix and are not
easily compressed or distorted.
(2) Urethral plugs consist largely of matrix mucoprotein with embedded minerals.
(3) The predominant mineral composition in most plugs is magnesium ammonium
phosphate hexahydrate (i.e., struvite). This is true despite the fact that cats form
calcium oxalate and struvite uroliths with nearly equal frequency.
(4) Secondary components can contribute to plug formation, including inflamma-
 tory exudate (i.e., white cells, proteins), red cells, cellular debris, sloughed tissue
(i.e., epithelial cells), struvite crystals, and combinations of these (Figure 11-4).
(5) Virus-like particles resembling calicivirus and bacteria also have been observed in
os a ss  xa s 
(a) Finding virus-like particles within urethral plugs does not prove that viruses
create the plug or are contributory to the obstructive process.
(b) Virus particles can be shed into urine during periods of stress and after recent
vaccination.
e.  Most plugs are assumed to lodge within the penile urethra, but obstructions also can
occur at more proximal sites (Figure 11-5).
f. Definitive diagnosis of a urethral plug requires retrieval of the plug. Supportive evi-
dence for the presence of a urethral plug can be seen on radiographs in some cats with
UO (Figure 11-6).
(1) Many veterinarians assume that a urethral plug has been dislodged during hydropul-
sion and attempts to pass a urethral catheter when the catheter sudderly advances.
(2) This could indicate movement of a plug into the bladder or it could indicate that
resistance caused by urethral spasm has been overcome.
(3) Retrieval of a plug or retropulsion of the plug into the bladder does not always
result in restoration of normal urine flow (several other factors initiate or maintain
the obstructing process).
Epithelial
Urethral Plug Matrix
Viral
cells
particles
Cell debris
Crystals
RBC
Bacteria
WBC
Fibrin
Urethritis
Urethral
Edema,inflammation,erosion
Obstruction
Partia!
Tota!
FlGURE 11-4  Possible urethral plug composition. RBC,red blood cells; WBC, white blood cells.
346
CHAPTER 11  Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy
 g.Previously, the crystalline-matrix hypothesis proposed that plugs that then became
embedded in a matrix formed secondary to precipitation of struvite crystals in the
urine. According to this hypothesis, plugs created UO and urethritis.
h.
 It is now hypothesized that plugs form as a consequence of underlying idiopathic ure-
thritis and cystitis (i.e., inflammation occurs first, followed by plug formation).
Bladder
Vesical neck
Smooth muscle
Preprostaticsegment
Prostatic segment
Prostate
Striated muscle
Postprostatic segment
Bulbourethral gland
Penile
segment
Penis
FGURE 11-5  Possible locations for obstruction in male cats. (Drawn by Tim Vojt.)
A
FIGURE 11-6  Mineralized “"sand" within the bladder and proximal urethra. A, Lateral radiograph mineralized
material in a dependent location within the bladder. B, Mineralized debris within the urethra (arrow). (Courtesy of 
Dr. Edward Cooper, Columbus, Ohio.)
Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy  CHAPTER 11
(1) Urine pH increases as plasma exudes into urine and the alkaline pH favors struvite
precipitation.
(2) Urethral spasm and edema favor urine retention and struvite precipitation.
(3) Primary inflammatory changes (i.e., exudate, blood, edema) or changes within the
urethral wall secondary to the presence of lodged intraluminal urethral plugs may
contribute to the obstructive process.
Urethral plugs develop secondary to underlying idiopathic urethritis and cystitis rather than as a primary
event arising from crystalluria.
Urethral Calculi (Figure 11-7)
Idiopathic
a.Most common association in cats with UO.
b. This process is an extension of idiopathic/interstitial cystitis (see Chapter 10)
Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats).
IMost male cats with urethral obstruction have no identifiable cause (i.e., idiopathic).
(1) Some cats have signs of nonobstructive idiopathic /interstitial cystitis before UO.
(2) Many cats have signs of idiopathic /interstitial cystitis after relief of UO.
c. Obstruction is secondary to functional urethral spasm in addition to swelling of the
urethra due to edema and hemorrhage.
(1) Refers to pathologic or neurogenic proceses that cause contraction of the circular
smooth or skeletal muscle of the urethra or both.
(2) Part of urethral tone maintained by the skeletal muscle (so-called rhabdosphincter) is
influenced by sympathetic inmervation.
(3) Stimulation of adrenoreceptors (particularly α-1) within the urethra increases ure
thral tone in normal cats. Pain and stress after UO increase sympathetic outflow
from the central nervous system, leading to additional urethral spasm.
FlGURE 11-7  Radiopaque urethral stones in a male cat with urethral obstruction.
348CHAPTER 11  Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy
d. Bacterial urinary tract infection (UTI) is very uncommon before urethral catheteriza-
tion. UTI deserves more consideration in cats with recurrent UO that have undergone
urinary instrumentation.
e.Urethral stricture may occur (Figure 11-8).
(1) Especially in cats that have had previous indwelling urinary catheters.
(2) Severe recurrent episodes of nonobstructive idiopathic /interstitial cystitis.
f. Neoplasia of the urethra or bladder neck is rare.
g.
Phimosis is rare.
h. Catheter fragment foreign body in urethra or bladder is rare.
 SIGNALMENT AND HISTORY
A. The majority of cats with UO are relatively stable; approximately 10% are critically ill.
Increased client awareness that male cats can have a life-threatening emergency associated
B. Approximately 75% of cats presented with UO are experiencing their first episode.
C. The median age is 4 to 5 years old, but any age can be affected (0.5 to 16 years).
D. Most affected cats in the United States are neutered males. Intact males comprise 10% of cats
with UO.
E. In the United States, more than 80% of affected cats are housed exclusively indoors.
 F. Median duration of clinical signs before initial presentation was 3 days in a study of
 223 cats. Signs include those of cystitis and partial obstruction before development of complete
obstruction.
G. Clinical signs depend on the completeness of the obstruction and its duration. Cats with long
tion to signs referable to the lower urinary tract (e.g., stranguria, pollakiuria, hematuria, pain,
overflow incontinence).
FIGURE 11-8  Urethral stricture demonstrated on positive contrast urethrogram. (Courtesy of Dr. Jordan Jaeger
Carolina Veterinary Specialists Medical Center, Charlotte, N.C.)
Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy  CHAPTER 11
349
H. The time required to develop clinical signs of uremia after UO varies widely.
 Some cats with Uo continue to urinate small volumes. Urine overflow from a large bladder with total
or partial obstruction may occur.
1. Cats with experimental UO do not demonstrate signs of uremia until after 24 to
48 hours of complete obstruction (Figure 11-9).
2.B
By 48 hours, lethargy and vomiting are noted.
3.
 After 48 hours, clinical sigms become severe.
4.B
By 72 hours, many cats are moribund and some die. Some cats can survive periods
of UO up to 98 hours, however.
Urethral obstruction
Early
BUN or creatinine
Normal or mildly increase
Urethral obstruction
Advanced
Oligoanuria
Acute renal failure
 Postrenal uremia
Death
Relieve obstruction
Postobstructive
Bladder
diuresis
atony
FGURE 11-9  Potential syndromes associated with urethral obstruction. BUN, blood urea nitrogen. (Drawn by
Tim Vojt.)
350CHAPTER 11 Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy
5.  Azotemia develops at a variable rate among individuals with the same degree of obstruc
tion based on:
a. Rate of urine formation at the time of obstruction.
b. Distensibility of urinary tract proximal to the obstruction.
c.Integrity of the urothelium at the time of obstruction. Cats with damaged urothelium
develop azotemia more quickly as waste products traverse the bladder wall. This
may explain why cats that immediately re-obstruct become sick and azotemic very
quickly.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
A.A readily palpable bladder at a time when the cat is straining to urinate defines UO.
 B. Urine is not readily expressible from an enlarged bladder (only gentle pressure should be
applied). Failure to express urine, however, is not diagmostic for UO
IDo not rely on inability to express urine to diagnose UO.
C. A large, turgid bladder if obstruction has been long-standing.
 D. The penis may be reddened and self-traumatized from licking.
 E. A urethral plug may be seen protruding from the tip of the penis.
F. Already extruded plug material may be adhered to perineal hair.
G. Signs of dehydration as a consequence of anorexia and vomiting.
H. Bradycardia from the effects of hyperkalemia.
1. Median heart rate, 187 beats per minute (bpm); range, 40 to 296 bpm (Lee and Drobatz, 2003).
2. Severe bradycardia: <100 bpm in 5% of cases.
3. Moderate bradycardia: 100 to 140 bpm in 6% of cases.
4. Mild bradycardia: 140 to 160 bpm in 12% of cases.
5. Most cats without hyperkalemia that are presented with severe illness and stress are
expected to have heart rates of >160 bpm.
I. Arrhythmia was detected in 11%.
J. Hypothermia.
1. Normothermia (100° F to 102.5° F) in 50%.
2. Hypothermia (<100° F) in 39%.
3.Hyperthermia (>102.5° F) in 11%.
 K. Tachypnea (median, 36 breaths per minute). As respiratory rate increases, there is less likeli-
hood of severe hyperkalemia.
L. Rectal temperature of <95° F to 96.6° F and heart rate of <120 bpm was the most accurate
predictor of severe hyperkalemia. A combination of hypothermia and bradycardia was 98% to
100% predictive for severe hyperkalemia (> 8.0 mEq/L).
M. Twitching or seizures are very uncommon (0.5%) and related to ionized hypocalcemia.
1The combination of hypothermia and bradycardia is a good predictor of severe hyperkalemia.
N.
Systemic blood pressure most often is normal.
1. Median systolic blood pressure was 135 mm Hg, median mean arterial pressure was
120 mm Hg, and median diastolic blood pressure was 108 mm Hg in a study of 28 affected
cats (Malouin, Milligan, and Drobatz, 2007).
2. No cat was hypotensive, 71% were normotensive, and 29% were hypertensive.
Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy  CHAPTER 11
1351
3. Less seriously affected cats tended to be hypertensive.
4. Pain, stress, and anxiety likely increased blood pressure.
5.  Normal blood pressure at initial presentation may be misleading because of combinations
of major stress, hypovolemia, and bradycardia.
6. Mean arterial pressure correlated inversely with serum potassium and directly with total
serum calcium concentrations.
 7. Major abnormalities on physical examination and serum biochemistry were encountered
despite normal blood pressure.
 Normal systemic blood pressure does not preclude abnormal physical examination or biochemical findings.
DIAGNOSTICS
Serum Biochemistry
 1. Severity of abnormalities varies depending on duration and extent (partial or complete) of
obstruction.
2.  Blood urea nitrogen (BUN): Median, 25 mg/dL; range, 8 to 257 mg/dL; 33% were above
the reference range (Lee, Drobatz, 2003). We have observed BUN concentrations of
>300 mg/dL.
3. Serum creatinine concentration: Median, 1.5 mg/dL; range, 0.8 to 7.7 mg/dL; 29%
were above the reference range. We have observed serum creatinine concentrations of
>20 mg/dL.
Initial magnitude of BuN, serum creatinine, and serum phosphorus concentrations do not predict survival
 or failure to regain normal renal function. They may predict the severity of postobstructive diuresis.
4. Serum phosphorus concentration: Median, 5.0 mg/dL; range, 2.8 to 20 mg/dL; 25% were
above the reference range and 6% were below the reference range. We have observed
serum phosphorus concentrations between 20 and 30 mg/dL
 5. Serum potassium concentrations ranged from 3.4 to 10.5 mEq/L in 199 cats.
a.
 Six percent were below the reference range, 41% were above the reference range, and
 53% were in the reference range.
b. Serum potassium concentration was:
(1) <6.0 mEq/L in 66% of cases.
(2) >6.0 but <8.0 mEq/L in 12% of cases.
(3) >8.0 but <10.0 mEq/L in 12% of cases.
(4) >10.0 mEq/L in <1% of cases.
It is important to measure serum potassium concentration because some cats with severe hyperkalemia
 do not have classic ECG or physical examination findings.
C.
 Hyperkalemia most often was encountered with acidosis (pH <7.2 in 74% of cases) and
low serum ionized calcium concentration (<1.0 mmol/L in 75% of cases).
 Hyperkalemia does not occur in isolation and often is accompanied by acidosis and low serum ionized
calcium concentration.
352
 CHAPTER 11 ■ Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy
6.Blood gases.
a.Median venous pH was 7.29 in 198 cats (range, 7.02 to 7.45); 40% were below the refer-
 ence range and 4.5% were above the reference range.
(1) pH of >7.35 in 25% of cases.
(2) pH >7.2 but <7.35 in 60% of cases.
(3) pH >7.1 but <7.2 in 9% of cases.
(4) pH <7.10 in 6% of cases.
b.Median venous pCO2 was 40.2 mm Hg (range, 26.6 to 74.2 mm Hg); 13% were below
the reference range and 30% were above the reference range.
C.
Median venous bicarbonate concentration was 19.2 mEq/L (range, 7 to 27.8 mEq/L);
 30% were below the reference range and 7% were above the reference range.
 7. Serum ionized calcium concentration.
a.
 Median serum ionized calcium concentration was 1.10 mmol/L (range, 0.57 to 1.60
mmol/L) in 199 cats (median, 4.40 mg/dL; range, 2.28 to 6.44 mg/dL).
b. Normal serum ionized calcium concentration for cats is 1.10 to 1.22 mmol/L or 4.40 to
4.88 mg/dL.
C.
 Serum iorized calcium concentration was below the reference range in 34%, above the
reference range in 19%, and in the reference range in 47% of cases.
Approximately 33% of cats with U0 are expected to have clinically relevant hypocalcemia based on serum
 ionized calcium concentration.
d.  Serum ionized calcium concentration was:
(1) >1.2 mmol/L(> 4.8 mg/dL) in 23%.
(2) >1.0 but <1.2 mmol/L (>4.0 but <4.7 mg/dL) in 57%.
(3) >0.8 but <1.0 mmol/L (>3.2 but <4.0 mg/dL) in 14%.
(4) ≤0.8 mmol/ L (≤3.2 mg/dL) in 6%.
e. Serum total calcium concentration in 51 cats was below the reference range in 39%,
above the reference range in 0%, and within the reference range in 61%
f. Serum ionized calcium concentration was negatively correlated with BUN, serum cre-
atinine, serum phosphorus, and serum potassium concentrations.
g.Serum ionized calcium concentration was positively correlated with venous pH in con-
trast to the expected decrease in ionized calcium concentration associated with increas-
 ing pH under normal circumstances.
h.  Cats with low serum total calcium concentrations had moderate to severely decreased
cats were found to have hypocalcemia when defined by measurement of serum ion-
ized calcium concentration (75%) than when defined by serum total calcium concentra-
tion (27%).
i. Serum parathyroid hormone (PTH) concentration was increased in 63% of cats with
UO in one study, including 8 cats with low and 4 cats with normal serum ionized cal-
cium concentrations (Drobatz, Ward, Graham, et al., 2005). Serum PTH concentration
     s   s    s
cemia. Serum 25-hydroxycholecalciferol status was not correlated to serum ionized
calcium concentration.
j. Low serum ionized calcium concentration is not a consequence of deficient secretion of
PTH, nor does it appear related to serum concentrations of 25-hydroxycholecalciferol.
Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy ■ CHAPTER 11 353
potential role of decreased serum calcitriol concentration has not been studied.
Urinalysis
1. Urine specific gravity (USG) is unpredictable. USG can be >1.040 when evaluated early
during UO. In more advanced cases, submaximal urine concentration can occur due to the
effects of obstruction on renal tubular function.
2. Red blood cells (RBCs): Hematuria is almost always observed because of the presence of
umderlying idiopathic urethritis/cystitis and the effects of overdistension of the bladder
wall with resultant hemorrhage.
3. White blood cells (WBCs): A mild increase can be observed, but numbers of WBCs in the
sediment may be normal.
4. Epithelial cells: A mild increase can be seen; occasionally rafts of epithelial cells are
observed in the urine sediment.
5.
 Bacteria usually are not present, but often are described as presernt because particulate matter
in the urine sediment may resemble bacteria and be erroneously interpreted as such.
6. Crystals: Struvite crystals may be observed, especially if urine pH is alkaline. Crystals are
 more likely to be secondary to urine stasis or alkaline urine pH than a primary cause of
obstruction.
7. Proteinuria usually is present due to hemorrhage.
 8. pH often is neutral to alkaline due to anorexia and plasma protein exudation into urine
from bleeding.
 9. Glucosuria: Positive glucose oxidase dipstrip reactions are sometimes observed.
a.Detected in 74% of cats with severe UO in one study (Burrows, Bovee, 1978). Detected
in 40% of cats with less severe UO (Loeb, 1971).
b.  Thought to be a consequence of stress hyperglycemia. Moderate hyperglycemia occurs in
many cats with UO, but frequently not above the renal threshold for glucose.
C. Transient renal glucosuria may occur.
d.40% of cats with glucosuria actually had pseudo-glucosuria due to presence of a non
glucose, oxidizing substance that acts directly with the chromogen in the dipstrip pad;
60% had true glucosuria (Loeb, 1971).
Urine Culture
1.  Nearly all cats with UO have sterile urine on original presentation for obstruction.
 2. Bacterial culture at the time of urinary catheter removal is more likely to identify patho-
genic bacteria.
 3. Isolation of bacteria from cats with a previous history of UO is more likely than isolation
Expect no growth from urine culture in cats presented during their first episode of urethral obstruction.
Abdominal and Urinary Tract Imaging
Radiography
All cats with Uo should have radiography to determine if urolithiasis is contributing to obstruction.
a. Abdominal radiographs should be obtained in all cats with UO to rule out the pres-
ence of radiopaque calculi in the bladder or urethra. It is very important to include the
perineal region in the radiographs to identify urethral calculi.
354 CHAPTER 11 ■ Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy
b. Evaluation of the kidneys and ureters to be sure nephroliths or ureteroliths are not part
 of the overall process is important because upper urinary tract involvement can mark-
edly affect the overall progmosis.
c.Free fluid resulting in a loss of abdominal detail can be seen in some cats with severely
distended urinary bladders.
a ou ym u sien On aos u Asdoau pue Aams je paanasqo aaq se pm aar 'p
 in the bladder or urethral wall could be demonstrated. This fluid likely arises from trans-
mural movement across an inflamed and highly permeable bladder wal (i.e., underlying
idiopathic cystitis) subjected to increased hydrostatic pressure from UO.
Contrast Radiographic Studies
a. Useful for cats with recurent UO, especially after recent instrumentation of the
urethra.
 b. Positive contrast urethrography is helpful to rule out urethral stricture. It also is use-
ful to document the presence of urethral rupture after urethral catheterization.
c. Double contrast cystography is useful to demonstrate small urinary calculi and blood
clots.
Abdominal Ultrasonography
a.A small amount of free abdominal fluid sometimes is observed (more often on ultraso-
(Aqdeisoipen uo ueu Audeoou
b. Evaluation of bladder for blood clots and evaluation of bladder wall thickness are best
accomplished by ultrasonography.
c.  Small cystic calculi can be identified.
d.Urethral calculi are not reliably identified; only those in the proximal urethra can be
seen.
 A small amount of free abdominal fluid may be identified at initial presentation and may be more easily
 detected on ultrasonography when a large bladder has been emptied.
Urethroscopy
1. A small number of cats have what appears on endoscopy to be plugs.
 2. Many cats have urethral erosions and submucosal hemorrhage.
 3. Some cats have increased urethral vascularity.
4. Some cats have crystalline material adherent to denuded areas of the urethra
5. Cystoscopy at the time of obstruction usually is not rewarding due to the presence of hem-
orrhage and the need to use very small diameter flexible endoscopes.
TREATMENT OF URETHRAL OBSTRUCTTON
A. Diagnostic testing and treatment of UO are performed simultaneously (Figure 11-10).
 B. The severity of clinical signs from uremia, electrocardiographic (ECG) findings, and mag-
nitude of bladder distension dictate how quickly and in what order treatments must be
performed.
C. Cats in uremic crisis and those with very large turgid bladders are in need of prompt attention
(Figure 11-11).
 D. The causes of collapse and hypotension are multifactorial.
1.  Hyperkalemia leads to venous dilatation and pooling of blood.
2. Bradycardia leads to decreased cardiac output.
3.Acidosis decreases vascular sensitivity to catecholamines
Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy  CHAPTER 11
355
Urethral plug
Cystocentesis
decompression
Expel
Retropulse
pug
plug
Urethral patency
Passurethral catheter
Irrigate and drain
Urine stream
Blood /
quality?
debris?
Poor
Good
Clear
Very
bloody
Remove catheter
Leaveurethral catheter inplace
 FGURE 11-10  A decision-making algorithm for management of urethral obstruction due to a urethral plugs
in male cats.
4. Ionized hypocalcemia
vasodilatation.
5.
 Acute uremia contributes to myocardial depression and decreased cardiac output.
6. Hypothermia contributes to decreased mean arterial pressure, cardiac contractility, and
cardiac output.
999
 CHAPTER 11 ■ Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy
Moribund Cat
年
IV Line
 Therapeutic cystocentesis
ECG
Stat bloods
Radiograph
Dehydration
Abdominat/
Perineal
Hyperkalemia rescue?
Volume
Hypocalcemia rescue?
expansion
Pass urethral catheter
Collect urine/monitor urine output
FIGURE 11-11 ■ Overview of the approach to the moribund cat with advanced urethral obstruction. ECG,
electrocardiogram.
E. Stabilize the patient and treat the adverse effects of uremia, if present, before administering
any anesthetic agents. Hypovolemia, hyperkalemia, metabolic acidosis, and hypocalcemia
must be treated first.
1. Intravenous (IV) administration of fluids is needed for seriously ill cats with UO. Ten of
13 cats died after relief of advanced UO when not treated with IV fluids (Finco, Cornelius,
1977).
a.
 IV fluid therapy at 10 to 20 mL/kg/hr is started and the rate adjusted as the animal
becomes more stable
b. 0.9% NaCl often is recommended as the fluid of choice because it contains no
potassium.
c. 0.9% NaCl corrects chloride deficits faster than more balanced electrolyte solutions
(e.g, lactated Ringer's solution) due to the relatively high chloride concentration
(154 mEq/L) (Drobatz, 2008), but the high chloride concentration of 0.9% NaCl also
makes it an acidifying solution.
d. No difference in the rate of decline in serum potassium concentration was seen
in a randomized study of 68 cats with UO (22 with hyperkalemia and 31 with
metabolic acidosis) treated with 0.9% NaCl compared with a more balanced
polyelectrolyte solution containing 5 mEq/L of potassium as well as the base
precursors acetate and gluconate (i.e., Normosol-R, Abbott Laboratories, North
Chicago, Ill.).
e.  More rapid correction of acidosis was accomplished within 12 hours of treatment with
the more balanced polyelectrolyte solution compared with 0.9% NaCl.
f. From a practical point of view, both fluid types are acceptable for treatment of most
cats with UO.
 Severely affected cats with metabolic acidosis may benefit more from an alkalinizing
名
polyelectrolyte solution (e.g., lactated Ringer's solution, Normosol-R)
 2. Management of hyperkalemia will be needed in the approximately 12% of cats that have
severe hyperkalemia and may be warranted in another 12% that have moderate hyperka-
lemia. No specific treatment is needed for cats with mild hyperkalemia.
a.
 Restoration of normal renal function after relief of obstruction results in kaliuresis and
a rapid decrease in serum potassium concentration.
b.
 Calcium gluconate is the treatment of choice for cats with severe hyperkalemia
(>8.0 mEq/L), heart rate of >140 bpm, and especially in cats with ECG abnormalities.
Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy  CHAPTER 11
357
Serum potassium concentration decreases soon after relief of urethral obstruction and often is normal
 by the time substantial decreases in BuN and serum creatinine concentrations are observed.
(1) Conversion to a more normal ECG tracing is very rapid (minutes).
(2) This treatment stabilizes the heart, but does nothing to change the severity of the
hyperkalemia.
(3) 50 to 100 mg/kg of calcium gluconate (0.5 to 1.0 mL/kg of 10% calcium gluconate)
is given over 2 to 3 minutes with continuous ECG monitoring.
(4) The beneficial effects are short-lived (about 20-30 minutes), and other methods to
lower serum potassium concentration are needed.
c. IV dextrose is helpful for longer term control of hyperkalemia, especially if serum
potassium concentration initially is >8.0 mEq /L.
(1) 0.5 g/kg dextrose bolus (1 mL/kg of a 50% dextrose solution).
(2) Dextrose should be diluted to a final concentration of 10% to 20% before
IV injection.
asaan umsu snouaopna sams pe eanrady aean ch st eo aui (e)
with subsequent translocation of potassium into cells.
d.Some clinicians also give one unit regular insulin IV to further stimulate the
transcellular shift of potassium. Insulin should always be given with a bolus injection
of dextrose with or without a constant rate infusion of dextrose to prevent hypo-
glycemia.
e.Sodiumbicarbonate may be administered IV in cats with serum potassium concentration
>10.0 mEq/L
(1) 1 mEq/kg (1 mL/kg of an 8.4% sodium bicarbonate solution) is the standard dos-
age of sodium bicarbonate.
(2) 4 mEq/kg (4 mL/kg of an 8.4% sodium bicarbonate solution) is the maximal dos-
age of sodium bicarbonate.
(3) A potentially serious disadvantage to this treatment is development of ionized
hypocalcemia due to increased binding of calcium to albumin and intracellular
translocation.
3. Management of acidosis will be needed in approximately 6% of cats with severe acidosis
and may be warranted in another 9% with moderate acidosis. No specific treatment is
needed for cats with mild acidosis.
a.Restoration of normal renal function after relief of obstruction allows for rapid cor
rection of metabolic acidosis, especially when an alkalinizing polyelectrolyte crys
talloid solution (e.g., lactated Ringer's solution, Normosol-R) is used for IV fluid
therapy.
b.  In cats with severe metabolic acidosis, 1 mEq/kg of sodium bicarbonate is given by
IV infusion and then acid-base status is checked after 15 to 30 minutes to see if more
sodium bicarbonate should be given. A partial increase in blood pH back toward nor-
mal is the goal rather than full restoration of normal blood pH.
4.Management of hypocalcemia.
a.
 Specific treatment rarely is needed.
b. Relief of obstruction usually results in rapid correction of serum calcium concentration
as serum phosphorus concentration decreases toward normal.
c.An IV infusion of calcium gluconate is administered until the desired effect is achieved
im cats that have muscular twitching or seizures.
d. Stop any infusion of NaHCO because alkalinization will exacerbate ionized
hypocalcemia.
358 CHAPTER 11  Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy
F. Sedation and analgesia for relief of obstruction due to urethral plugs, idiopathic
urethritis/cystitis, or urethral stones (Table 11-2)
1. An IV catheter is placed before sedation, analgesia, and anesthesia in unstable cats
2. An IV catheter can be placed after sedation and analgesia in stable cats.
3. Nearly all cats benefit from preanesthetic analgesics to decrease pain and anxiety; these
usually are given before decompressive cystocentesis and before anesthesia to pass a uri-
nary catheter.
4. Urethral relaxation while the cat is sedated or under anesthesia may increase the likeli-
hood of urethral plug dislodgment or facilitate urethral relaxation.
5.  Little or no sedation is indicated for cats with severe uremia.
6. Many different sedation protocols are available, depending on the cat's condition and the
clinician's comfort and familiarity with their use (Figure 11-12).
a.Buprenorphine
b. Acepromazine.
C.
Hydromorphone or oxymorphone.
d. Fentanyl.
e.Diazepam or midazolam.
Decompressive (Therapeutic) Cystocentesis
1. Cystocentesis to empty the bladder should be performed as soon as possible in cats with
very enlarged bladders to prevent rupture of the bladder and to allow renal excretory
function to resume.
2. Cystocentesis allows for rapid reduction of urinary tract pressure and resumption of GFR
 s        
centesis may stabilize the cat before anesthesia for urinary catheter placement.
3. Relief of bladder pressure before urethral catheterization also may facilitate efforts to dis-
lodge urethral plugs, and allows collection of a superior urine sample for analysis before
manipulation of the urinary tract and contamination by irigation solutions.
4.  Decompressive cystocentesis is considered controversial by some clinicians who fear that
bladder rupture will occur or that urine will continue to leak from the bladder.
5. We have performed decompressive cystocentesis before passage of a urinary catheter in
cats with UO for more than 15 years and have found the procedure to be safe.
The benefits of decompressive cystocentesis outweigh potential adverse effects.
6. Some leakage of urine immediately after decompressive cystocentesis may occur, espe-
cially if the bladder is not adequately emptied.
7. The use of a 22-gauge needle on an extension set or use of a butterfly needle can minimize
trauma and urine leakage during the procedure.
8. The needle should be directed toward the pelvic inlet so that that needle trauma to the blad-
der mucosa will not occur as bladder volume decreases. Continuous gentle pressure on the
 bladder during drainage will allow a maximal volume of urine to be removed.
G. The volume of urine removed by cystocentesis or obtained after the initial passage of a uri-
nary catheter should be recorded.
 1. We have removed up to 260 mL of urine by cystocentesis during treatment of cats with UO.
 2. In one study, the median volume of urine removed by urinary catheter at the time initial
obstruction was relieved in 28 cats was 85 mL (range, 35 to 280 mL) (Malouin, Milligan,
Drobatz, 2007).
 3. Cats normally void urine at bladder fill volumes of approximately 20 to 50 mL.
Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy  CHAPTER 11
 TABLE 11-2
 Drugs Useful During the Management of Cats With Urethral Obstruction
 Indication/Mechanism of
Drug
Dose
Action
Side Effects
Acepromazine
0.02 to 0.05 mg/kg
Target smooth muscle alpha -2
Hypotension
Orally 0.25 to 0.50 mg/kg as
receptor (blocker)
needed
Decrease urethral tone
Provide tranquilization
Phenoxy-
0.5 mg/kg SID or divided BID
Apha blocker smooth muscle
Hypotension
benzamine
Sow onset of action orally
Increase dose after 4 days
Prazosin
V 0.1 mg/cat or 0.03 mg/kg
Apha-1 smooth muscle
Hypotension
Orally 0.25 to 0.50 mg per cat
blocker
BID to TID
Dantrolene
V1 mg/kg
Direct skeletal muscle relax-
Oral dose is unknown
ant—mid to distal urethra
Cats 0.5 mg/kg to 2.0 mg/kg
BID to TID
Diazepam
Orally 1.25 to 2.5 mg/cat BID
Acts on CNS——relaxes skeletal
Sedation; Transient hunger
to TID
muscle of mid to distal
Oral toxicity at 1.25 to 2.0 mg
Short duration of action; Give
urethra
SID or BID: Lethargy, anorexia,
pills 15 to 30 min prior to
ataxia, jaundice, increased ALT,
badder expression
increased glucose, increased
V 0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg
cholesterol
Oral may be fatal due to acute
hepatocellular damage
Anecdotes of the same type of
toxic reaction exist for the use
of Iv diazepam
Whether midazolam is a safer
altemative has not been studied
Propantheline
Orally 7.5 mg/cat every 72 hours
Anticholinergic——decrease
5.0 to 7.5 mg/cat BID to TID PO
bladder hypercontractility
Oxybutynin
Orally 0.50 to 1.25 mg/cat BID
Anticholinergic (weak) and
to TID
antispasmodic. Also has
some direct analgesic effect
in bladder; may be useful
for detrusor hyperreflexia
ALT, alanine aminotranferase.
090
CHAPTER 11  Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy
Stable Blocked Cat
Potential UO Protocol
IM
Buprenorphine
Place IV
Sick Blocked Cat
10 og/kg
Cystocentesis
Potential UO Protocol
Acepromazine
0.05 mg/kg
(decompressive)
Place IV
Cystocentesis
 fentanyl bolus
(decompressive)
2-4aog/kg
Radiographs
Radiographs
Fentanyl CRI
Assess KUBU
2-5 ag/kg/hr
(rule out stones)
Assess KUBU
(rule out stones)
 Pain manage
Fentanyl bolus #2
every 6 hours
Continue
2-4 og/kg
fentanyl CRI
IV
2-5 axg/kg/hr
Uitralow propofol
Oxygen
 propofol
1-3 mg/kg
2-4 mg/kg
mask 7
Hydropul sion
Intubate +
Intubate +
Hydropulsion
Place urinary catheter
oxygen
oxygen
Place urinarycatheter
A
± Isoflurane
B
±Isoflurane
Moribund Blocked Cat
Potential UO Protocol
Buprenorphine
Place IV Line
(5-10 αg/kg)
Stabilizefirst
 IV fluids
Cystocentesis
(decompressive)
Electrolytes
IV
IVKetamine
Epidural
*Hydromorphone
0.02-0.05 mg/kg
2-5 mg/kg
+
Mid azolam
0.1-0.2mg/kg
*No hydromorphone if
buprenorphine
 already ad ministered
Relieve obstruction
C
Passurinarycatheter
FIGURE 11-12 ■ A, B, and C, Examples of sedation/analgesia protocols for use in cats with urethral obstruction.
CRI, Constant rate of infusion; KLIBLf, kidney, ureter, bladder, urethra.
Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy  CHAPTER 11
1361
H. Plain abdominal radiographs (including the perineal region) should be obtained after decom
pressive cystocentesis to identify mineralized plugs, urethral calculi, or cystic calculi. Some
clinicians obtain radiographs after catheter passage, but the presence of an indwelling urinary
catheter can make it easier to miss urethral calculi.
Anesthesia Protocols (see Figure 1l-12)
1. Do not immediately anesthetize severely affected cats; they should be stabilized with IV
fluids and decompressive cystocentesis first (as described earlier).
2. The goal is to administer sufficient anesthesia to provide immobilization and urethral
relaxation, because less urethral trauma occurs umder these conditions.
protocols.
a. These combinations have been used for many years by primary care veterinarians.
b.The dosage of ketamine for IV use in combination with other drugs is 2 to 4 mg/kg.
C.The dosage of acepromazine for IV use in combination with other drugs is 0.02 to
0.05 mg/kg.
d.A fixed dose combination protocol works well: Combine 0.1 mL of a 100 mg/mL
solution of ketamine (10 mg) with 0.01 mL of a 10 mg/mL solution of acepromazine
(0.1 mg) in a 1.0 mL syringe for IV injection.
e. An additional dose of 10 mg ketamine (0.1 mL of a 100 mg/mL solution) can be given
if more time is needed or if the cat is very large.
f. Ketamine (100 mg/mL) plus diazepam (5 mg/mL) may be better in cats that are very
sick because diazepam is less likely to cause hypotension than is acepromazine.
(1) Give 2 to 4 mg/kg ketamine and 0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg diazepam in the same syringe
IV.
(2) A fixed dose combination protocol using equal volumes can be used: 0.25 mL of a
100 mg/mL ketamine solution (25 mg) and 0.25 mL of a 5 mg/mL diazepam solu-
tion (1.25 mg). Give 0.25 mL of the combined solution, and give the other 0.25 mL
only if needed.
g. Some cats are not relaxed enough with these ketamine combination protocols, and
adding inhalational anesthesia may be necessary.
4. Propofol can be useful, but severe hypotension can occur.
a.  It is best to intubate the cat even if it appears to be ventilating adequately.
b. This protocol is only recommended for personnel highly skilled in the relief of UO over
a short period of time.
5. Inhalation of isoflurane via endotracheal tube can be used after premedication and induc
tion with acepromazine and ketamine or diazepam and ketamine. This protocol provides
the most complete relaxation and affords time that may be needed by less experiencec
personnel.
Isoflurane may be the agent of choice to provide excellent relaxation and adequate time for inexperienced
personnel to relieve Uo.
6.Epidural.
a. This procedure is not recommended for routine use by primary care veterinarians.
b.The operator requires special training and skill to make the injection properly
c.This procedure is especially useful in cats that are metabolically unstable.
362CHAPTER 11 ■ Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy
d.  Up to 12 to 18 hours of postprocedure analgesia can be provided depending on the
amount of local anesthetic and opioid used. A combination of ropivacaine hydrochlo-
ride and morphine sulfate has been most commonly employed at The Ohio State Uni-
versity Veterinary Teaching Hospital.
e. Hypotension occasionally is encountered with this technique.
Plug Retrieval
 1. Plug retrieval should be attempted so as to document the cause of UO. Determining the
 mineral composition of the plug provides potentially useful information for future man-
agement to prevent recurrent plug formation.
a.
Spontaneous expulsion.
d ea e a  sd a go ass a ss ad a ()
located in the penile urethra, especially when the plug is near the external urethral
orifice. Gentle pulsatile bladder palpation after penile massage may cause a plug to
be expelled.
(2) Gentle bladder massage.
(3) Cystocentesis and gentle bladder massage.
(4) Massage of the pelvic urethra by means of rectal palpation also may contribute to
plug dislodgment.
(5) Gentle but persistent urethral lavage.
(6) Aspiration using a urethral catheter.
b. Submit urethral plugs for quantitative analysis of crystal and matrix content to a vet-
erinary urolithiasis laboratory.
C.Alternatively, make a coverslip wet mount of the plug and examine microscopically to
identify crystal type or types.
Hydropulsion and Placement of a Urinary Catheter (Retrograde Technique)
 1. Place cat in dorsal or lateral recumbency depending on operator preference. Sometimes
one position or the other facilitates extrusion and stabilization of the penis (especially in
obese cats)
 2. Gentle, aseptic technique should be used while placing a urethral catheter. Clip the peri-
neal area of hair and cleanse the region. Wear sterile gloves.
3.Extrude the penis.
a.  Place "stay" sutures at the junction of the penile and preputial epithelia to allow greater
control of the penis.
b. Alternatively, grasp the loose tissue at the base of the penis with a small mosquito
hemostat. Do not grasp the penis with the forceps.
c.The primary operator can maintain extrusion of the penis or have an assistant maintain
extrusion.
4. Ensure that the penis is maximally retracted caudally to allow straightening of the urethra,
otherwise the catheter cannot navigate the normal anatomic configuration of the distal
urethra.
a.One techrique that may facilitate straightening of the urethra is to pull the prepuce cau-
dally once the urinary catheter has been advanced into the extermal urethral orifice.
b. Another technique is to push the prepuce cranially and then pull the prepuce and
penis together caudally.
5. A well-lubricated urinary catheter is advanced into the urethra to the site of the obstruction.
a. This often is best accomplished using a relatively rigid urinary catheter such as 10 cm
polypropylene catheter (Figure 11-13)
Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy  CHAPTER 11
E9E
FIGURE 11-13 ■ Tomcat urinary catheters.
b.
 Open-end catheters are better for the initial irrigation efforts than are catheters with
side-holes because the latter tend to bend and become damaged.
c.A 22-gauge "over-the-needle" catheter is preferred by some for use as a urinary cath-
eter to advance and provide irrigation. These catheters, however, are not long enough
to provide bladder drainage.
6. Urethral irrigation using a sterile physiologic solution (e.g., lactated Ringer's solution,
0.9% saline) may allow the urethra to be dilated and the obstructing plug irrigated and
advanced distally between the catheter and urethral epithelium, and out the extermal ure-
thral orifice.
7. Hydropulsion (reverse irrigation) via the urethra may be attempted at this point if the
obstruction is not yet relieved. Sterile irrigating solution (e.g., 0.9% NaCl) is injected rap-
idly through the urinary catheter so as to advance plugs into the bladder or fatigue the
urethra.
a.Irrigating with a 50:50 mixture of water-soluble lubricant and sterile 0.9% NaCl
through the catheter can facilitate catheter advancement and decrease urethral
trauma by providing lubrication along the entire length of the urethra as the catheter
advances.
b.The increased viscosity of the solution associated with the presence of the lubricant
will increase the irrigation pressure generated and promote hydropulsion.
8.Advance the urethral catheter into the bladder.
a.Do not force the urethral catheter through the site of the obstruction.
b. Irrigate at the site of the obstruction.
c. The catheter should advance easily if enough irrigation of the urethra has already
occurred.
d. Remember to extend the penis and prepuce caudally.
e.Acombination of "pushing" the catheter and "pulling" the penis willfacilitate advance-
ment of the catheter.
f.Do not attempt to force the catheter through the site of obstruction. It should advance
easily after adequate irrigation.
g. The urethra is thoroughly irrigated to be certain all debris in the lumen
has been moved retrograde into the bladder or antegrade out the urethral
orifice.
364CHAPTER 11  Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy
FIGURE 11-14 ■ A flexible polyvinyl urinary catheter has been secured using sutures through a butterfly piece
of tape and the prepuce.
h.  Replace the shorter, stiffer (polypropylene) open end urinary catheter used to relieve the
obstruction with a longer, softer (polyvinyl) catheter to leave in place as an indwelling
urinary catheter and maintain bladder drainage. A urinary catheter that is at least 5 to 6
inches long is needed to adequately empty the bladder of most cats.
i. The bladder is then immediately drained to relieve pressure if previous drainage by
cystocentesis was not performed.
j. Failure to adequately remove debris from the bladder and urethra is an important
cause of re-obstruction soon after catheter removal.
 k. Place a 2-inch piece of adhesive tape over the urinary catheter near the prepuce in a
affixing the tape to the catheter (Figure 11-14).
1. Place one suture on each side of the tape butterfly and through the prepuce on each
side; make sure excessive traction is not placed on the prepuce by the sutures (do not
penetrate the mucosa with a needle).
m. Attach a sterile urine collection system.
n.
 Tape the collection line or long urinary catheter to the cat's tail. Make sure the cat can
lift its tail without putting excessive traction on the prepuce.
9. Do not use dental Cavitron attachments designed to vibrate putative plugs and facilitate
relief of obstruction. These devices may overheat and injure the urethra and penis. We
have observed thermal necrosis in some cats with use of these devices.
10. Causes of resistance to passage of the urethral catheter.
a.Inadequate penile extrusion caudally
b. Intraluminal urethral plug.
c. Urethrolith.
d. Urethritis with swelling and erosions.
e. Urethral tears.
f. Urethral spasm.
g. Urethral stricture.
h.Extraluminal compression of urethra (e.g, peri-urethral swelling).
I Resistance to passage of the urinary catheter is not synonymous with the presence of a urethral plug or stone.
i.Urethral foreign body (e.g., catheter fragment from previous attempts at catheterization).
Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy  CHAPTER 11
365
Place Indwelling Urethral Catheter
Administer urethral spasmolytics
· Smooth muscle
· Skeletal muscle
Remove urethral catheter
Patency
Reblock
Replaceurethralcatheter
 FGURE 11-15  Use of muscle-relaxing drugs with indwelling urinary catheter.
11.The urinary catheter is left in place to allow continuous urine drainage and allow inflam-
mation and urethral spasm to subside. A urinary catheter is always left in place until reso-
lution of azotemia occurs in cats that initially were azotemic.
a.
 Remove the catheter as soon as possible to minimize complications associated with
indwelling catheters (e.g., ascending UTI) (Figure 11-15).
b. The goal is to leave a urinary catheter in place for no more than 24 to 72 hours. Leave
the catheter in place until the urine has become clear, azotemia has resolved, and diure-
sis has subsided.
c. Despite use of Elizabethan collars and sedation, many cats manage to remove their
urinary catheters within 24 to 36 hours.
d.
 Studies in cats have shown that indwelling polyvinyl catheters create less urethral
trauma and inflammation than do indwelling polypropylene catheters. Silicone uri-
nary catheters have not been specifically studied in cats.
e.
place.
Do not administer glucocorticoids to a cat with an indwelling urinary catheter.
(1) The risk for bacterial pyelonephritis is great in this setting.
(2) Glucocorticoids are unlikely to control urethritis in this setting (i.e., continuous
trauma from an indwelling catheter).
366 CHAPTER 11  Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy
12. Connect the urinary catheter to a closed sterile urine collection system
a.It is not acceptable to leave an indwelling urinary catheter exposed to the environment
because of the high risk of bacterial contamination.
b. UTI can occur even with use of closed collection systems but less frequently.
C. The collection system provides a method to routinely measure urine output.
d.Insertion of a three-way stopcock between the catheter and collection line is useful for
collection of urine samples and troubleshooting an obstructed urinary catheter. Injec-
tion caps are placed over the two open ports. This method potentially compromises the
integrity of the sterile lines, and it is essential to disinfect the injection ports during any
maripulations.
Antegrade Placement of a Urinary Catheter
1.  Not recommended for use by primary care veterinarians.
2. Consider referral when conventional retrograde technique (described earlier) is not suc-
cessful in placement of a urinary catheter.
 3. In this minimally invasive interventional technique, the bladder is penetrated with a small
trocar and a guide wire is threaded distally into the urethra under fluoroscopic guidance.
Alternatively, minimally invasive placement of the cystoscope through the bladder wall
can be used. A urinary catheter is placed over the guide wire and advanced into the ure-
thra until it exits the urethral orifice.
Postobstructive Diuresis
1. Postobstructive diuresis of variable magnitude is expected in cats with substantial azote-
mia at fhe fime of relief of UO.
 2. The magnitude of diuresis often is proportional to the magnitude of azotemia at presentation.
3. Marked postobstructive diuresis can lead to hypovolemia and hypokalemia. Some cats
produce up to 20 mL/kg/hr of urine initially.
4. Much of the diuresis is attributed to retention of osmotically active solutes (e.g, urea,
electrolytes) that have accumulated before relief of obstruction and then are excreted when
GFR is restored.
 5. Other factors contributing to postobstructive diuresis include:
a.Transient insensitivity of the distal nephron to antidiuretic hormone (ADH).
b.  Decreased renal tubular reabsorption of sodium.
C.Excretion of previously retained water (especially after fluid therapy).
d.Hemodynamic changes favoring blood flow to nephrons that do not contribute to elab-
oration of highly concentrated urine.
6. Postobstructive diuresis usually decreases as azotemia resolves.
 7. Often it lasts 2 to 5 days in cats with substantial azotemia at presentation.
8. Some cats experience a delayed onset of diuresis until after hypovolemia has been cor-
rected.
 9. A poor prognosis may be warranted in cats with initially severe azotemia that do not
undergo postobstructive diuresis after relief of obstruction and rehydration.
10. Minimal to no postobstructive diuresis is expected in cats with minimal to no azotemia at
the time UO is relieved.
V Fluids After Relief of Obstruction
1. Continue IV fluids as indicated by assessment of hydration and monitor urine output as a
guide to the volume of fluids to be replaced. Use of an "ins and outs" protocol is helpful to
Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy  CHAPTER 11
1367
2. The "ins and outs" protocol is started a few hours after correction of hypovolemia
ndnsard pm r/tu ue aeaua o s loooid ,sno pue su, a jo eo au 
a.Consider a 5 kg cat with urine output of 320 mL for the past 4 hours (i.e., 80 mL/hr).
IConsider using the “ins and outs" protocol to determine how much IV fluids to administer after relief of UO.
b.  For the next 4 hours, the cat should receive IV fluids at a rate of 80 mL/hr to replace
urine output plus its insensible needs for that time period. The maintenance fluid
-xoidde pue (9/'0 8x × z1) Tu 09 Aaieunxondde aq pmom jes 8x 5 e jo spaau
mately one third of the maintenance need would represent insensible losses (150 mL)
Thus, to replace insensible losses, 25 mL would be required over a given 4-hour period
or approximately 6 mL/hr. Thus, 86 mL/hr would be administered during the upcom
ing 4-hour period.
C.
During the next 4 hours the cat produces 160 ml of urine (i.e., 40 mL/hr).
d.
Thus, for the next 4 hours the cat will receive fluids at a rate of 46 mL/hr.
e. Using this method to replace urine losses prevents development of dehydration in cats
with substantial postobstructive diuresis.
4.  Usually an alkalinizing polyelectrolyte crystalloid fluid (e.g., lactated Ringer's, Normosol-
R, Plasmalyte-R) will be given for the first 12 to 24 hours. After 12 hours, most cats will no
longer have appreciable metabolic acidosis and the fluid may be changed to a less alkalin-
izing fluid if desired.
5. Potassium supplementation of IV fluids usually is needed after 12 to 24 hours, especially
when postobstructive diuresis is substantial.
a.The extent of potassium supplementation should be based on serial measurement of
serum potassium concentration, at least twice daily for the first 24 to 48 hours.
b.  If serial serum potassium concentrations cannot be determined and the cat is undergo
ing appropriate postobstructive diuresis, add 10 to 20 mEq of potassium per liter of
infused crystalloid fluid as an estimate.
c. More aggressive potassium supplementation is needed for some cats during post-
obstructive diuresis, but access to serial measurements of serum potassium concen-
tration is necessary to make these decisions (lable 11-3).
Failure of Postobstructive Diuresis to Resolve
1. A spontaneous decrease in urine output typically accompanies resolution of azotemia.
 2. Occasionally, the large volume of IV fluids being administered actually is driving the diuresis.
TABLE11-3
 Scott's Sliding Scale: Guidelines for Supplementation of IV Fluids With Potassium
Serum K+ (mEq/L)
 mEq KCI to add to 250 ml
mEq KCI to add to 1000 mL
Maximal infusion rate (mL/kg/hr)
<2.0
20
80
6
2.1-2.5
15
60
8
2.6-3.0
10
40
12
3.1-3.5
7
28
18
3.6-5.0
5
20
25
'Do NOT exceed 0.5 mEq/kg/hr.
Courtesy of Richard C. Scott, Animal Medical Center, New York.
368 CHAPTER 11  Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy
3. To determine whether or not this is the case, taper IV fluids by 25%. If the urine output
decreases, continue to taper the fluid volume infused further If the urine volume does not
decrease, increase the fluid infusion to its previous rate and try again to taper the fluid
infusion after 24 to 48 hours.
Additional Medical Management During Hospitalization
1. Continue analgesics and antispasmodics while the cat is in the hospital and for 5 to 7 days
after release. We treat most UO cats with a combination of acepromazine and buprenorphine.
The combination of acepromazine and buprenorphine is recommended during hospitalization of cats with UO
 and for 5 to 7 days after discharge from the hospital.
2. Do not prescribe antibiotics while a urinary catheter is in place (unless you have docu
mented by bacterial culture that a UTI already is present).
a. Antibiotics do not prevent development of UTI in patients with indwelling urinary
catheters.
b.  Antibiotic use may promote development of resistant isolates when UTI does develop.
c. Consider culturing the urine when the urinary catheter is removed.
saaen eun buamu y suaned u lin po uadoaap aun aaad pou sap se po asn a
3. The cat should be housed in a low stress environment (i.e., quiet, dark, away from dogs and
frequent intrusions by humans) so as to limit activation of the sympathetic nervous system
that otherwise may have adverse effects on the urethra (e.g., increased urethral spasm).
4. Serially measure BUN, serum creatinine, and serum potassium concentrations at least
daily for the first 2 days after relief of UO.
Failure to Obtain Much Urine From the Indwelling Urinary Catheter
1. Mechanical problems are most common.
a. Kinked outflow lines.
b. Twisted or kinked urinary catheter.
C. Disconnected or improperly connected outflow lines; air bubbles in the line may be an
 indication of this problem.
d.Urinary catheter is not long enough to reach the bladder.
e. Urinary catheter has passed through a tear in the urethra.
f. Obstruction of the catheter or lines by clots, inflammatory debris, or crystals.
 g.Urinary catheter looped and tied into a knot after having been advanced too far into
the bladder.
 2. Large blood clots in the bladder may cause intermittent obstruction of the catheter by a
ball-and-valve effect (Figure 11-16).
3. Ruptured bladder.
4. Low urine volume due to hypovolemia or dehydration.
5. Low urine volume due to acute renal failure (acute tubular necrosis) from renal ischemia (rare)
 Failure to Urinate Adequately After Removal of the Urinary Catheter (Figure
11-17)
1. Recurrent UO from the same process initially identified.
 2. Recurrent UO from a different process than initially identified (e.g., swelling, infection,
clots, urethral tear, stricture).
Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy ■ CHAPTER 11
1369
FGURE 11-16  Large blood clot surgically removed from thebladder of a cat with recurrent urethral obstruction.
 Inability to urinate after removal of the urinary catheter may be caused by a problem different from the
problem that initiallycausedUo
3. Bladder atony.
4. Conventional management is to replace the indwelling urinary catheter.
5.  An alternative management strategy is to begin decompressive cystocentesis for the next
24 to 48 hours without replacing the urinary catheter and continue antispasmodic and
analgesic therapy (e.g., acepromazine and buprenorphine).
TREATMENT OF THE CAT WITH AN OVERDISTENDED URINARY
BLADDER AND BLADDER ATONY
A. Keep the bladder empty so as to decrease hydrostatic pressure and avoid bladder distension.
An indwelling urinary catheter will facilitate this goal.
B. Avoid manual expression of the bladder, which can exacerbate separation of the urothelial
tight junctions.
Avoid manual expression of an overdistended urinary bladder.
C. Consider repeated decompressive cystocentesis as an alternative to replacing the urinary catheter
D. Consider the use of parasympathomimetic drugs (e.g., bethanechol) to stimulate detrusor
contractions after relief of UO. Make certain no outflow obstruction is present when the detru-
sor muscle is stimulated.
Make certain no urinary outlow obstruction is present when detrusor contraction is being stimulated by
drugs.
COMPLICATIONS AFTER RELIEF OF URETHRAL OBSTRUCTION
IN MALE CATS
A. Persistent UO (ongoing episode has not resolved).
1. Original urethral plug or debris has not been adequately cleared.
 2. A urethral calculus has been bypassed by the catheter and still remains in the urethra.
3. Urethral spasm.
CHAPTER 11  Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy
Reobstructed Urethra
Reverse flush
Replace
Cystocentesis
indwelling
+ urethral
catheter
spasmolytics
BID to TID
Observe
Maintain
Remove
catheter
patent
urethra
Patency
Urethrostomy?
fails
 FIGURE 11 -17  Potential management approach following removal of an indwelling urethral catheter.
B. New episode of UO.
1. Additional urethral plug formation due to accumulation of some combination of RBCs,
protein, and crystals.
2.
Bladder outflow obstruction due to intraluminal blood clots.
3. Recurrent urethral spasm or swelling.
C. Ongoing or recurrent episodes of urethritis/cystitis (Figure 11-18).
D.B
 Bacterial UTI as a consequence of previous indwelling urethral catheterization.
E. Catheter-associated bladder or urethral trauma.
1. Mechanical.
2. Associated with irrigating agents.
3. Bacterial UTI.
4. Iatrogenic urethral rupture.
a.
 Bruising and edema of the leg and cutaneous necrosis may be observed.
F.
Bladder rupture.
1. Spontaneous (rare).
2. Iatrogenic (especially after palpation).
G.B
Bladder atony due to overdistension.
H. Urethral stricture.
 1. Prerenal or postrenal azotemia.
 J. Primary renal disease or failure due to pyelonephritis (ascending) or acute tubular necrosis
(rare).
K. Persistent postobstructive diuresis (usually resolves within 2 to 5 days.)
Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy CHAPTER 11
371
Mechanical:
Acquired
ldiopathic
Chemical
 plug, reverse flushing
bacterial infection
K
Urethritis
Pain
Urethral spasm
FGURE 11-18  Possible causes for urethritis and subsequent urethral pain and spasm following removal of a
urinary catheter.
MANAGEMENT AT HOME
A.Decreased GFR and RBF that occur during UO will persist for a variable time despite return
of BUN and serum creatinine concentrations to normal. Ability to maximally acidify the urine
also may be impaired after relief of UO. Submaximal urinary concentrating ability may persist
for 1 to 2 weeks after relief of UO.
1.  Dosages of drugs that are excreted by the kidneys may need to be decreased for a week or
more after relief of UO.
2. Acidifying diets should not be fed in the first 1 to 2 weeks after relief of UO.
 B. Continue antispasmodics and analgesics (e.g., acepromazine and buprenorphine) for 5 to 7 days.
C. Try to transition the cat's diet to one that has more water (e.g., canned food) as would be done
in management of idiopathic cystitis.
D. Stress reduction and environmental enrichment are warranted because cats with UO likely
have underlying idiopathic cystitis (see Chapter 10, Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial
Cystitis in Cats).
E. Administration of subcutaneous fluids is recommended to increase urine flow, but this
approach has not been specifically studied. We often give a subcutaneous bolus of fluids at
the time of discharge from the hospital.
F. Owners should be advised about the normal volume of urination to be expected for their cat.
G. Most cats will have stranguria and pollakiuria for several days after the urinary catheter has
been removed. Some hematuria may persist and potentially will be visible to the owner.
MEDICAL RE-EVALUATION AND PREVENTION OF RECURRENT
URETHRAL OBSTRUCTION
 A. Bladder size should be assessed by gentle palpation whenever the owner is not sure if the cat
is urinating an adequate volume of urine.
 B. If the cat shows systemic signs of illness in the first few weeks after relief of UO, recurrence of
UO or development of pyelonephritis should be considered.
C.
 Routine re-evaluation is recommended 7 to 14 days after discharge from the hospital. Factors
to consider include:
1. Has USG decreased (ideally to < 1.030)?
2. What is urine pH and are crystals present in the absence of UO?
372 CHAPTER 11  Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy
a.A previously high urine pH may return to a more acidic pH if underlying sterile
inflammation has resolved.
b. Crystalluria may diminish or disappear as underlying sterile inflammation resolves
and USG decreases from dietary intervention (e.g., transition to canmed food).
c.If urine pH is not low and substantial struvite crystalluria is present with inactive urine
   s    s a    a s
3. Is the extent of hematuria and proteinuria less than before?
5. Urine culture is recommended to ensure that UTI did not become established during and
after removal of the urinary catheter
D. Schedule 1- and 3-month reevaluations.
Acute Prognosis
1. Excellent prognosis with high survival rate is expected when treatment is started soon
enough. In a recent study, almost 94% of affected cats survived initial treatment and were
discharged from the hospital (Lee, Drobatz, 2003). Mortality of 16% was reported in an
older study (Bovee, Reif, Maguire, et al., 1979)
2. Good prognosis for being able to urinate voluntarily after removal of the urinary
catheter. Approximately 14% of affected cats re-obstructed soon after removal of the
urinary catheter in one study (Drobatz, 2003). Approximately 25% of affected cats in
our hospital are not able to adequately empty the bladder after removal of the urinary
catheter.
3. Depending on severity of the episode of UO, hospitalization may last 1 to 6 days.
a. The mean hospital stay was 1.8 days in one study (Lee, Drobatz, 2003)
b. In another study, median hospitalization was 4.5 days (Gerber, Eichenberger, Reusch)
2008).
c.Urinary catheters were in place a median of 2 days (and up to 6 days) in one study
(Gerber, Eichenberger, Reusch, 2008) and for a median of 1 day (and up to 7 days) in
another study (Lee, Drobatz, 2003).
4. Acute bacterial UTI develops in a small number of cats.
Chronic Prognosis
1. Eight of 22 (36%) cats with idiopathic UO re-obstructed after a median of 17 days in one
study (Gerber, 2007).
2. Three of seven (43%) cats with UO associated with urethral plugs re-obstructed within
 7 months (Gerber, Eichenberger, Reusch, 2008).
 3.Recurrent obstruction was the cause for euthanasia in 21% of cats in this study (Gerber 2007).
4. In an older study, the recurrence rate was 35% within 6 months (Bovee, Reif, Maguire,
et al., 1979).
 5. No studies on recurrence rates for UO have been reported prospectively after implemen-
tation of environmental modification. Recurrence rates may be lower in cats for which
environmental modification can be adequately implemented.
6. A small number of cats develop urethral strictures. This complication occurred in 11% of
affected cats in one study (Barsanti, Brown, Marks, et al., 1996)
7. Some cats develop bacterial UTI after instrumentation of their urinary tract (i.e., catheter-
ization), and this complication may occur as late as 6 months after relief of UO.
 8. Signs of ongoing idiopathic cystitis are expected in 30% to 50% of cats that have had an
episode of UO. In one study, 50% of cats with idiopathic UO developed lower urinary tract
signs after relief of obstruction (Gerber, Eichenberger, Reusch, 2008).
Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy  CHAPTER 11 373
Perineal Urethrostomy
1. Although discouraged by some veterinarians as a "mutilating procedure," judicious use
of perineal urethrostomy may make the difference between survival and euthanasia in
some cats. It should be considered as an option when medical management fails to prevent
recurrences.
Recurrent Uo is a common reason for euthanasia.
candidates for perineal urethrostomy.
2. This surgery is performed less commonly now than in past years, possibly due to advances
in the medical management of idiopathic cystitis in cats.
3. Perineal urethrostomy saves the lives of many cats that have failed diligent attempts at
medical management.
4. Perineal urethrostomy may be necessary after a first episode of UO if severe trauma to the
penis and urethra occur during relief of obstruction.
5. Considerable expense is associated with treatment of each episode of UO. Many owners
are not willing or able to endure these costs. Perineal urethrostomy is a reasonable option
for owners of such cats.
6. Urethrostomy also is indicated for cats that develop distal urethral strictures.
7. The option of perineal urethrostomy should be discussed with the owner during the first
presentation of a cat with UO.
 8. We usually recommend a perineal urethrostomy for a cat that is experiencing its third epi-
sode of UO. Some owners are unwilling to endure another episode of UO in their cat, and
will request perineal urethrostomy after the second recurrence.
9. Perineal urethrostomy prevents future episodes of UO.
10. Although recurent UO is prevented, signs of lower urinary tract disease still may be
observed due to umderlying idiopathic cystitis. Such sigms usually are less severe than
before.
11. Some cats will develop bacterial UTI up to a year after perineal urethrostomy despite
minimal or no signs of lower urinary tract disease. Urine culture should be performed at
1, 3, and 6 months after surgery to identify asymptomatic UTI.
12. A very small number of cats will develop stricture at the site of the urethrostomy. Most
often, stricture is the result of poor surgical technique, but it can occur even with excellent
surgical technique.
13.  Antepubic urethrostomy can be used successfully in some cats to rescue them from a failed
perineal urethrostomy.
14. Antepubic urethrostomy is an option for cats in which perineal urethrostomy cannot be
performed because of severe damage to the urethra or obstruction that is too far proxima.
in the urethra.
MANAGING URETHRAL OBSTRUCTION IN MALE CATS WITHOUT
URETHRAL CATHETERIZATION USING HOSPITALIZATION FOR 3 DAYS
A. This treatment is proposed only as an alternative to euthanasia due to financial constraints of
owners
374CHAPTER 11  Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy
As an alternative to euthanasia when owners cannot afford standard care, consider a protocol of decompres-
 sive cystocentesis, drug treatment, and a quiet environment for 3 days.
 B. Conventional treatment with passage of a urinary catheter and IV fluid infusion in the hospi-
tal should be offered as the first choice.
C. We have used this protocol with success in some cats over the past 20 years, and this
 approach as an alternative to euthanasia recently was reported (Cooper, Owens, Chew,
et al., 2010).
 D. This approach is not meant for cats with urethral calculi or those with severe metabolic
derangements.
 E. The severity of azotemia does not determine use of this protocol.
 F. A plain lateral abdominal radiograph is taken to exclude calculi.
G. Decompressive cystocentesis is performed initially and then as needed up to every 8 hours.
H. The urethra is not irrigated or catheterized.
I. No IV catheter is placed, and IV fluids are not administered
J. Drug treatments include:
1. Acepromazine (0.25 mg IM or 2.5 mg PO every 8 hours).
2. Buprenorphine (0.075 mg PO every 8 hours).
3. Medetomidine (0.1mg IM every 24 hours if no urinations are noted in the first
24 hours).
K. Place the cat in a quiet, low stress environment.
L. Some fluids may be given subcutaneously as needed, but the goal is to avoid excessive urine
production from full hydration.
 M. Treatment success was defined as spontaneous urination within 72 hours and subsequent
discharge from the hospital.
1. Treatment success occurred in 11 of 15 cats (73%).
2. Treatment failure occurred in 4 of 15 cats (27%) due to uroabdomen (3) or hemoabdo-
men (1).
 3. Cats that experienced treatment failure had significantly higher serum creatinine concen-
trations.
 4. At necropsy, severe bladder inflammation was found, but there was no evidence of blad-
der rupture.
Alternative Rescue Protocol
1.  Another rescue protocol can be tried as an alternative to euthianasia for clients who cannot
afford to hospitalize a cat with UO.
2. This protocol is less expensive than that described above because it does not involve
hospitalization.
 3. Outcomes from this protocol have not been specifically evaluated.
 4. A lateral abdominal radiograph is taken to rule out the presence of cystic or urethral
calculi.
5. Drug therapy includes:
a. Buprenorphine (10 μg/kg) intramuscularly.
b. Dexmedetomidine (4-5 μg/kg) intramuscularly.
6. Decompressive cystocentesis is performed.
7. A urinary catheter is passed, the urethra irrigated, the bladder emptied, and the catheter
removed.
8. A bolus of subcutaneous fluids is administered.
Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy  CHAPTER 11375
9. The cat is released to the owner with instructions to give buprenorphine (10-20 μg/kg)
PO every 8 hours and acepromazine (2 mg, total dose) PO every 8 hours for 5 days.
A convenient method that treats an average-sized cat is to combine both medications
in a syringe using 0.25 mL (75 μg) buprenorphine and 0.20 mL (2 mg) acepromazine.
10.  Environmental modification and enrichment recommendations are discussed should the
cat survive this episode of UO.
Amitriptyline
1. Arecent report suggests amitriptyline may be useful in relief of UO in male cats caused by
urethral plugs (Achar, Achar, Paiva, et al., 2003).
2. Obstructed cats had serum creatinine concentrations of >4.0 mg/dL and BUN concentra
fions of >120 mg/dL before treatment.
3. Treatment details were not provided in this report. More details were given by the autho1
by personal communication (2009).
a.Some cats had decompressive cystocentesis performed.
b.All were given IV 0.9% NaCl.
c.No cats had urethral flushing or placement of an indwelling urinary catheter.
 d.No other drugs or anesthetic agents were administered besides ampicillin for preven
tion of UTI.
e. This protocol has been used in the author's practice as the standard of care for several
years.
4.Amitriptyline (1 mg/kg) was given orally for 30 days.
 a. This time period was chosen to decrease the likelihood of recurrence of UO.
b. Amitriptyline should never be abruptly discontinued because of possible develop-
ment of "abrupt withdrawal syndrome.
 5. Urethral plugs were spontaneously eliminated and urinary flow was restored in all cats
within 72 hours.
6. Urethral plugs were analyzed and found to contain varying proportions of struvite, cal-
cium oxalate, and ammonium urates.
7. Transient somnolence was attributed to the use of amitriptyline, an effect that lessened
as azotemia resolved. This effect has been described when amitriptyline is used in cats
without azotemia.
 8. All cats had normal BUN and serum creatinine concentrations when measured 30 days
later.
9. No cats experienced recurrent UO during the 30 days of treatment.
10. The beneficial effects of amitriptyline in cats with UO appear to be mediated by relax
ation of urinary tract smooth muscle through mechanisms that involve voltage-dependent
potassium channels.
Tube Cystostomy
1.  Minimally invasive surgical technique for emergency treatment of 5 cats with UO or ure-
thral rupture (Bray, Doyle, Burton, 2009).
 2. An inguinal approach with muscle splitting and minimal soft tissue dissection facilitates
rapid placement of cystostomy tubes in metabolically unstable patients.
 3. The catheter is secured into the bladder with a purse-string suture.
 4. Cystopexy is performed to provide peritoneal protection should the cystostomy tube dis-
lodge prematurely.
5. May be considered as an alternative to placement of a urinary catheter in a metabolically
umstable patient.
376 CHAPTER 11 ■ Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy
Urethral Obstruction in Dogs
 1. The principles for diagnosis and management of UO in dogs are similar to those outlined for cats.
II.  The frequency and causes of UO in dogs differ from those in cats.
IIl. UO can be acute, subacute, or chronic depending on the completeness of obstruction. Dogs are
subject to many more causes of chronic UO than are cats.
A. Idiopathic obstruction due to urethral plugs is not a specific syndrome in dogs.
B.
 Outflow obstruction due to bladder or urethral neoplasia is relatively common in older dogs
(more often in females) as discussed in Chapter 14, Tumors of the Urinary System.
C. Obstruction from prostatic neoplasia is an occasional cause of UO in both intact and neutered
male dogs.
D. Proliferative (granulomatous) urethritis is an occasional cause of UO in female dogs.
 E. Detrusor-urethral-dyssynergia is an occasional cause of functional UO, especially in large
breed male dogs (see Chapter 13, Disorders of Micturition and Urinary Incontinence).
F. Urethral stricture occurs occasionally in dogs that have previously passed urinary calculi,
those that have had indwelling urinary catheters, and in those that have previously had ure-
thral surgery.
 G. Urethral stones are the most common cause of UO in dogs and cause obstruction almost exclu-
sively in male dogs.
HISTORY
A. Stranguria.
B. Pollakiuria.
C. Hematuria.
D. Paradoxical overflow incontinence.
E. Urine stream initially may be normal and then dramatically diminish in dogs with detrusor
urethral-dyssynergia.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
A. An enlarged, potentially painful, bladder is palpable.
 B. A mass in the bladder may be palpable if obstruction is related to bladder neoplasia.
C. Rectal examination.
1. A thickened, irregular urethra may be identified in dogs with urethral neoplasia or with
proliferative urethritis.
D. Bradycardia and hypothermia may be present if the UO has been long-standing and the dog
is hyperkalemic.
E. Dehydration may be present if the dog is uremic.
 DIAGNOSTIC TESTING
 A. Serum chemistry findings (abnormalities detected will depend on the duration and complete-
ness of UO).
1. Azotemia.
 2. Hyperphosphatemia.
 3. Hyperkalemia.
4. Hyponatremia.
Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy  CHAPTER 11
377
5. Hypochloremia (especially if there is a history of vomiting).
6. Metabolic acidosis.
B. Urinalysis.
1. Variable USG.
2. Proteinuria.
3. Hematuria.
4.Pyuria.
 5. Increased numbers of epithelial cells or rafts of epithelial cells.
6.Bacteriuria.
C. Imaging.
1. Survey radiographs may reveal urolithiasis, masses, or prostatic enlargement (in male dogs).
 2. Contrast urethrography may identify radiolucent urethral calculi, urethral mass, or
urethral stricture.
 3. Utrasonography may identify mass lesions in the bladder or bladder neck that may be
 contributing to UO but generally is not helpful for identifying urethral lesions.
4. Urethroscopy can identify urethral stones, proliferative urethritis, urethral tumors or
strictures.
D. Histopathology.
1. Necessary to differentiate neoplasia from proliferative urethritis in dogs with multiple
mass lesions in the urethra.
 2. Necessary to differentiate bladder neoplasia (e.g., transitional cell carcinoma) from polyp-
oid cystitis.
RELIEF OF OBSTRUCTION
A. Perform decompressive cystocentesis as described above for male cats with UO.
 B. If available, consider lithotripsy for urethral calculi followed by basket retrieval or voiding
urohydropulsion of fragments.
C. Perform retropulsion of urethral calculi with reverse irrigation.
1. Perform cystotomy to retrieve urethral calculi that were retropulsed into the bladder by
reverse irrigation.
2.  Alternatively, consider medical dissolution for calculi that were retropulsed into the bladder.
D. Pass a urethral catheter to empty the bladder whenever possible. Leave catheter in place to
maintain bladder decompression.
E. Consider tube cystostomy if a urethral catheter cannot be successfully advanced into the
bladder.
F. Consider temporary urethrotomy in male dogs if a urethral catheter canmot be successfully
advanced into the bladder. A temporary opening in the urethra is created at a site proximal to
the UO.
G. Permanent urethrostomy may be needed in some dogs.
1. Scrotal urethrostomy.
2. Perineal urethrostomy.
 3. Prescrotal urethrostomy.
H. Urinary diversion surgery can be considered in dogs with distal urethral masses.
 1. Treatment with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (e.g, piroxicam) with or
without adjunctive chemotherapy should be considered for dogs with transitional cell carci-
nomas that are causing UO.
J. Long-term treatment with antibiotics, glucocorticoids, or NSAIDs (e.g., piroxicam) should be
considered in dogs with proliferative urethritis.
378
CHAPTER 11 ■ Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy
Upper Urinary Tract Obstruction
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
A. Return of renal function after correction of complete umilateral renal obstruction.
1. 70% to 100% return of GFR after 1 to 2 weeks of obstruction.
2. 20% to 30% returm of GFR after 4 weeks of obstruction.
3.No return of GFR after 6 to 8 weeks of obstruction.
B. Acute to subacute obstruction.
1. Mild dilatation of renal pelvis and diverticula
2. Dilatation of renal tubules.
3. Interstitial edema may occur due to backleak of tubular fluid.
C. Chronic obstruction (unilateral, complete).
1. Moderate to marked enlargement of kidney (Figure 11-19).
2. Marked dilatation of renal pelvis with radiating fibrous septa visible.
3.Tubular dilatation.
4. Interstitial fibrosis.
 5. Loss of cortical and medullary tissue (atrophy) secondary to ischemia associated with
decreased RBF and pressure atrophy.
6. Pyonephrosis may develop if fluid in the obstructed kidney is infected.
D. Pathophysiology of decreased GFR and RBF during obstruction.
 1. Increased pressure is transmitted up the ureters and causes renal tubular pressure to increase.
 2. Increased renal tubular pressure opposes hydrostatic forces within the glomeruli that nor-
mally favor filtration.
3. RBF is decreased.
 4. Backleak of fluid across renal tubules occurs when renal tubular pressure is high.
 5. Decreased permeability of glomerular capillaries may occur.
6. Afferent arteriolar vasoconstriction decreases glomerular capillary plasma flow in
obstructed nephrons (the mediator of vasoconstriction is unknown).
7. Pressure within the ureter decreases and actually may fall to zero as GFR ceases.
8. Anatomic structures dilate with continuing obstruction, but pressure with the collecting
system decreases.
9. Decreased RBF parallels decreased GFR during obstruction, but the decrease in RBF is
most severe in the medulla.
 HISTORY AND CLINICAL SIGNS
A. Unilateral renal obstruction.
1.  Animal may be asymptomatic (i.e., renal obstruction is an incidental finding)
 2. Azotemia will not be present if the contralateral kidney is normal.
 3. Abdominal distension may be present if hydronephrosis is severe.
4.The enlarged kidney may be readily palpable.
5. Increased renal size on radiography.
6. Hydronephrosis can be confirmed by ultrasonography or excretory urography.
 7. Fever may occur if urine or renal tissue proximal to the obstruction becomes infected.
 8. Urine volume will be unchanged if the unilateral obstruction is complete, because the
contralateral kidney will compensate.
9. Urine volume may increase if unilateral obstruction is partial because partial obstruction
impairs concentrating ability in the obstructed kidney.
Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy  CHAPTER 11
379
A
B
FGURE 11-19  A, Moderate hydronephrosis secondary to a sponge granuloma causing obstruction to one
ureter in a dog. B, Severe hydronephrosis with complete atrophy of renal parenchyma in a cat. Only fibrous tissue
Asdooau uo uaas suads ssoa are s yog uar spq
10. Urinalysis is normal if outflow is completely obstructed.
11. Urinalysis may reflect the underlying cause if the obstruction is partial (e.g., hematuria,
proteinuria, pyuria, bacteriuria).
12. Urine may be more dilute with unilateral partial obstruction due to admixture of dilute
urine from the obstructed kidney with urine from the unobstructed kidney.
B. Bilateral renal obstruction.
1. Complete.
 a.Resembles oliguric acute intrinsic renal failure in many ways.
b. Uremia and death result after 3 to 5 days of complete bilateral obstruction.
C.Anorexia.
d. Vomiting.
e.Lethargy.
f. Hyperkalemia and metabolic acidosis become severe and lead to death.
g
 Progressive increases in BUN and serum creatinine concentrations.
h. Moderate to marked hyperphosphatemia.
088
 CHAPTER 11 ■ Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy
i.  Mild to moderate hypocalcemia.
i.
Enlarged, turgid bladder if the obstruction is in the urethra.
K.
Rectal examination may be abnormal if obstruction is in the urethra.
1.A bladder or urethral mass causing outflow obstruction may be palpable or visible on
m. Radiography may identify bilateral ureteral stones or stones within urethra causing
obstruction.
n.
 USG remains high during complete bilateral obstruction.
0.
 Urinalysis often shows hematuria and proteinuria due to distension of the bladder
from the process causing obstruction.
P.
 Bacteriuria and pyuria may be seen if the process is associated with infection.
2. Partial. (Figure 11-20).
a. Can resemble polyuric chronic renal failure in many ways.
b.
Azotemia may or may not develop, depending on the extent of obstruction. Total GFR (i.e.,
sum total of both kidneys) must decrease to 25% of normal or less for azotemia to develop.
C.
Hydronephrosis.
d.Dilute urine may be detected.
Ureterolithiasis in Cats
 1.  Ureterolithiasis has been increasingly recognized in cats since the early 1990s.
I1. Ureterolithiasis is unilateral 75% of the time and bilateral 25% of the time.
II1.  Clinical findings are nonspecific.
A. Inappetence.
B. Vomiting.
C. Lethargy.
D. Weight loss.
IV. About 75% of cats with unilateral ureterolithiasis are azotemic suggesting contralateral renal
parenchymal disease or prerenal azotemia.
A. Azotemia commonly persists after surgical removal of a unilateral ureterolith.
B. Chronic renal failure is a common reason for death or euthanasia later in the clinical course.
 C. Progressive renal damage may result from recurrent intermittent obstruction and relief of
obstruction (ball-and-valve effect).
1. Antegrade movement of the calculus causes it to lodge in the ureter with obstruction and
proximal ureteral dilatation.
2. Retrograde movement of the calculus into the dilated proximal ureter and relief of obstruc-
tion may occur with gravity when cat jumps down from a high place.
3. This sequence of events may lead to big kidney-litle kidney syndrome (i.e., one kidney is
enlarged due to acute obstruction and the other kidney is chronically diseased from previ-
of a ureterolith) (Figure 11-21)
IMAGING FINDINGS
A. Ureteroliths are identified by plain abdominal radiography (high specificity, low sensitivity)
or ultrasonography (high sensitivity, low specificity) in 90% of cases (Figure 11-22).
 B. Dilatation of the renal pelvis and ureter commonly are observed on ultrasonography indicat-
ing obstructive disease (Figure 11-23).
C. These two imaging procedures complement one another in the diagnosis of feline ureterolithiasis
Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy  CHAPTER 11
ImgTm:10:45:
二
FGURE 11-20  A, B, Bilateral renal obstruction due to bilateral congenital uretero-pelvic stricture. Note marked
dilatation of renal pelves and diverticula, but no dilatation of the ureter on this intravenous pyelogram (IVP).
(Courtesy of Drs. Aimee Kidder, Joao Galvao, and Brian Scansen, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.)
D. The contralateral kidney is observed to be smaller than normal in approximately 50% of
affected cats (see earlier explanation of big kidney-little kidney syndrome).
E. The majority of affected cats also have nephroliths.
 I. Nearly all of the retrieved uroliths are composed of calcium oxalate.
1I1.
<10% of affected cats have concomitant bacterial UTI.
III.
 Occasionally dried solidified blood clots occur in the upper urinary tract of cats.
A. Not visible on plain radiographs.
 B. May be a cause for otherwise unexplained renal pelvic and proximal ureteral dilatation on
abdominal ultrasonography.
C. No mineral content.
382
 CHAPTER 11 ■ Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy
FIGURE 11-21  Big kidney-little kidney syndrome. Lateral abdominal radiograph (Courtesy of Drs. Aimee
Kidder, Joao Galvao, and Brian Scansen, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.)
 FIGURE 11-22  Radiodense calculus overlying the kidneys and two calculi in the distal ureter, seen on a lateral
radiograph.
MANAGEMENT
A. Factors to consider when deciding upon medical versus surgical management.
1. Urolith size.
2. Urolith location.
3. Duration of clinical sigms.
4. Presence or absence of renal colic.
5. Severity of serum biochemical abnormalities
6.Evidence of renal damage.
7. Evidence of obstruction.
Conservative Medical Management
1. Fluid therapy to promote antegrade movement of the ureterolith.
 2. Diuretics (e.g., furosemide) to promote antegrade movement of the ureterolith.
 3. Tamsulosin (alpha-A1 adrenoceptor antagonist).
4. Ureteroliths can be expected to move into the bladder in 30% to 60% of cats managed
medically.
 5. Twelve-month survival with conservative medical management is approximately 70%.
Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy  CHAPTER 11
383
FGURE 11-23  Dilatation of the proximal ureter (black arrowheads) and renal pelvis (white arrow) secondary
to ureteral obstruction demonstrated on renal ultrasonography. (Courtesy of Dr. Paul Barthez, European School for
Advanced Veterinary Studies, Universite du Luxembourg.)
Surgical Management
 1. Ureterotomy recommended for calculi in the proximal ureter.
 2. Ureteroneocystostomy recommended for calculi in the distal ureter.
 3. Twelve-month survival with surgery (performed by a board-certified veterinary surgeon)
is approximately 90%.
4. Postoperative complications can be expected in approximately 30% of cases.
a.Uroabdomen.
b.Recurrence of obstruction (especially with ureteroneocystostomy).
c.Recurrence of ureterolithiasis
5. Complications are especially high when nephrostomy tubes are used in management.
a. Uroabdomen.
b. Tube dislodgment.
A. Lithotripsy can be considered on a referral basis if expertise and equipment is available and
expense is acceptable to the client.
B. Ureteral stenting can be considered on a referral basis if expertise and equipment is available
and expense is acceptable to the client (Figure 11-24).
C. Clinical evidence justifying conservative medical management.
1.  Minimal compromise of renal function.
2.
Absence of infection
 3. No apparent renal colic.
 4. Lack of progressive renal pelvic and ureteral dilatation (as documented by serial abdomi-
nal ultrasonography).
 D. Clinical evidence justifying surgical intervention, lithotripsy, or ureteral stenting.
1. Progressive azotemia.
 2. Infection (may require nephropyelocentesis to identify).
3. Suspicion of complete obstruction.
4.  Ureterolith is not observed to be moving distally on serial imaging studies.
5. Retrograde movement of ureterolith on serial imaging studies.
384CHAPTER 11  Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy
FIGURE 11-24  A stent has been placed from the renal pelvis to the bladder along theureter bypassing a ureteral
obstruction. (Courtesy of Dr. Allyson Berent, The Animal Medical Center, New York, N.Y.)
E. Challenges in clinical decision-making.
1. Usually the clinician will not know how long the kidney has been obstructed.
2. Often one cannot determine with certainty if obstruction is complete or partial.
 3. It is common to wait for 2 weeks in human patients when the onset of obstruction and
renal colic (i.e., passage of calculus into ureter) is known, and most calculi of <5 mm will
pass into the bladder.
4. The trend in affected cats has been for early surgical intervention (i.e., after a few days of
medical management).
WHAT DO WE DO?
● Provide sufficiently deep anesthesia to allow passage of a urinary catheter with minimal trauma in
male cats with UO.
·Inject sterile dilute aqueous lubricant through the urinary catheter before it is advanced.
· Use a gentle touch when attempting to introduce and advance a urinary catheter.
· Make sure the urinary catheter is long enough and has been advanced far enough to be in the blad-
der and not the proximal urethra.
· Attach a closed sterile collection system to the urinary catheter.
0n (auzeuidane sa) snip sipousedsue pue (aurudnouadnq 'o'a) ersaeue ro snrp aqosai 
decrease urethral spasm while the urinary catheter is in place and for several days after the cat has
been discharged from the hospital.
· Avoid the use of NSAIDs in cats with UO, especially dehydrated cats and those in renal failure.
· Make sure the cat can urinate adequately after removing the indwelling urinary catheter and before
discharging it from the hospital.
· Consider treatment protocols that do not require urethral catheterization or IV fluids in cats with
UO as an alternative to euthanasia.
● Perform abdominal ultrasonography on all patients when ureteral calculi have been detected on
abdominal radiography to determine if the calculi are causing obstruction or not (i.e., rule out
hydroureter or hydronephrosis).
· Perform rectal examination on all dogs with UO to evaluate the urethra for mass lesions (e.g., neo-
plasia, proliferative urethritis) that could be causing obstruction
Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy  CHAPTER 11
1385
THOUGHTS FOR THE FUTURE
sram aaq aa  s a  on o aaaap a  ss odoi go an am a o
· Percutaneous tube cystostomy techniques will be further developed for use in cats with UO at initial
presentation (as opposed to urethral catheterization).
· Pharmacologic management and decompressive cystocentesis will be offered as the initial treatment
for cats with idiopathic UO or UO caused by plugs, instead of placement of a urinary catheter.
· Minimally invasive medical protocols using amitriptyline to provide relief of idiopathic UO or UO
caused by urethral plugs in male cats will be further developed.
· Minimally invasive protocols using drugs that decrease ureteral smooth muscle tone and facilitate
passage of ureteral stones (e.g., amitriptyline, tamsulosin) will be developed.
will be developed.
· Stenting procedures to relieve ureteral obstruction due to calculi will become more widely available.
· Urethral stenting for relief of UO will become more widely used in animals with urethral neoplasia,
proliferative urethritis, and detrusor-urethral-dyssynergia.
· Techniques for laser ablation of urethral transitional cell carcinoma in dogs will become more widely
available.
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS
· Cystocentesis n cats with UO is dangerous. Actually, in the hands of a skilled operator, it is quite
passed through it. This is almost never true. It is safer to perform decompressive cystocentesis prior
'spm jo Suusnoeq pue aaes Areum e jo asessed au o
● It is necessary to pass a urinary catheter to determine if the urethra is really obstructed or not. Obstruc
tion is defined when there are signs of dysuria and increased urinary frequency with an easily pal-
pable bladder.
● Urethral plugs are the most common cause of UO in male cats. The cause of urethral obstruction is
most often idiopathic or functional.
● A serum creatinine concentration >15 mg/dL or serum phosphorus concentration >20 mg/dL war-
rants a grave prognosis for survival in cats with UO. Absolutely not true. The degree of azotemia at
the time of obstruction does not predict survival at all. Most cats with this degree of azotemia associ-
 ated with urethral obstruction survive to be discharged from the hospital if adequate fluid therapy
is given following relief of the obstruction.
● Use of a sterile collection system for attachment to a urinary catheter is an urmecessary expense.
Acquired bacterial urinary infections are quite common whena sterile collection device is not employed.
· Abdominal radiographs are not necessary in cats with UO. It is imperative to take abdominal radio-
graphs to know whether stones are in the urethra or not, as prognosis and treatment are altered.
Also, it is important to know if there are stones in the kidneys, ureters, or bladder that may be con
tributing to the obstructing process.
● Utrasonography (ULS) can be used instead of radiographs in cats with UO. ULS is complementary
to radiographs as different information is gained. Urethral stones are routinely missed if only ULS
 is performed, whereas these stones are easily seen with radiographs.
· Antibiotics are useful in treatment of male cats experiencing their first episode of UO. Cats that have
never had urethral obstruction or instrumentation of the urinary tract with catheters have an incred-
ibly low chance of having a bacterial UTI at the time the urinary obstruction is relieved. UTI does
ccur with some frequency following the presence of an indwelling urinary catheter
386 CHAPTER 11 ■ Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy
· Glucocorticoids are useful to decrease urethral inflammation in cats with idiopathic UO or UO due
cebo.
S  o s si     s  s   s o
with urethral obstruction will have hyperkalemia at the time of presentation, hyperkalemia rap-
idly resolves and hypokalemia emerges in those with intense postobstructive diuresis. Potassium
supplementation is needed for most cats by 24 hours post relief of urethral obstruction, otherwise
hypokalemia develops.
· Rectal examination is of limited value in dogs with UO. Rectal examination sometimes discloses the
presence of obstructing urethral stones or masses.
● Ureteral calculi in cats and dogs, whether causing obstruction or not, are extremely painful, as they
are in humans. Actually, dogs and cats do not often exhibit intense ureteral pain or colic, as do
 humans. Subtle pain is sometimes elicited during palpation of the affected kidney It is possible that
some malaise can be attributed to pain from the ureteral obstruction.
 SUMMARY TIPS
● Perform decompressive cystocentesis before attempting to pass a urinary catheter into the bladder
in male cats with UO.
· Extend the penis caudally to facilitate advancement of the urinary catheter
· Take abdominal radiographs that include the entire urinary tract (i.e., including the perineal region)
in cats with UO. Urinary calculi sometimes are found in several sites besides the urethra.
● Perform a positive contrast urethrogram if plain abdominal radiographs do not reveal the cause for
UO. The urethra is not well evaluated using ultrasonography.
·If necessary, adjust the rate of IV fluid administration using the "ins and outs" protocol for the first
24 to 48 hours after relief of UO due to the umpredictable magnitude of postobstructive diuresis.
· Do not administer glucocorticoids while an indwelling urinary catheter remains in place. Such
treatment will not resolve traumatic urethritis but increases the likelihood that bacterial UTI will
develop.
● Do not administer antibiotics while an indwelling urinary catheter remains in place unless bacterial
UTI has already been documented by bacterial culture of the urine.
· Do not manually express urine from the bladder after removal of a urinary catheter because doing
 so may promote additional injury to a bladder already traumatized by overdistension.
· Attempt to limit recurrent episodes of UO in male cats by implementing environmental enrichment
(see Chapter 10, Nonobstructive Idiopathic or Interstitial Cystitis in Cats)
· Culture urine 1 to 2 weeks after discharge from the hospital to identify bacterial UTI that may have
been acquired as a consequence of an indwelling urinary catheter.
● Consider ureteral stenting as treatment for obstructive ureteral calculi instead of ureteral surgery,
especially in cats and small dogs.
· Consider tube cystostomy in dogs with transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder or urethra that is
causing obstruction to urine outflow.
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
Q: When do you recommend perineal urethrostomy in cats?
A: We suggest this possibility during consultation at the first visit, and recommend it after the sec-
ond or third obstruction.
387
Q: How often does serious renal injury occur in cats with UO?
A: Very uncommonly. The azotemia (which can be severe) typically is postrenal and prerenal. Azo-
temia resolves in nearly all affected cats after relief of UO and medical management.
Q: How do you handle UO in a cat owned by clients who cannot afford standard medical care?
A: First we offer such clients standard care including hospitalization, IV fluids, anesthesia, passage
of an indwelling urinary catheter, and monitoring in intensive care. If the owner carnot afford this
approach, we offer a less expensive protocol as an alternative to euthanasia. This approach includes
decompressive cystocentesis, analgesic and antispasmodic drugs, and up to 3 days of hospitalization
m a quiet environment.
Q: Can relief of UO be carried out under sedation alone?
A: No. This is a painful procedure and full anesthesia facilitates nontraumatic passage of a urinary
catheter
Q: Do you add lidocaine to the irrigating fluid used for hydropulsion?
A: No. Substantial amounts of lidocaine can be absorbed across the mucosa, especially in the pres-
Ece of trauma and high hydrostatic pressure.
 Aen m sh u   e pad noA op moh o
A: An Elizabethan collar prevents the cat from licking excessively at its urethra. Care should be
taken to insure that the collar is wide enough-the cat's nose must not be able to extend beyond the
ergicblockade.
Q: Is there concern about re-obstruction of the urethra in the 12 to 24 hours after the urinary catheter
has been removed?
A: Yes. The cat should remain in the hospital and be carefully observed for 24 hours after remova.
of the urinary catheter. Use of antispasmodic drugs (e.g., acepromazine) during this time also may be
helpful.
Q: What about the use of glucocorticoids or NSAIDs after an indwelling urinary catheter is
placed?
A: There is little evidence that these drugs actually lessen urethral inflammation during an episode
of UO. The immunosuppressive effects of steroids may cause increased risk of development of bacte
nial UTI and ascension to the kidneys (i.e., pyelonephritis). NSAIDs impair renal blood flow in dehy-
drated animals and pose a risk for development of acute intrinsic renal failure.
Q: Do you clip and cleanse the perineal region before attempting to relieve UO?
A: Yes. Although contamination commonly occurs at some point during the procedure, we try
 hp saao aais m pre eare a sa pe dd Aq aao sh az o
procedure.
Q: Postobstructive diuresis sometimes continues even after BUN and serum creatinine concentra-
tions have returned to normal. What role does fluid therapy play in the duration of post-obstructive
diuresis?
A: Sometimes more fluids are given than actually are needed, and in these instances the clini-
cian is driving the diuresis. After the cat is feeling better and its renal function has improved, try
388 CHAPTER 11■ Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy
fapering the volume of fluid administered and monitoring urine output. f urine output decreases,
the fluid therapy has actually been driving the diuresis. If diuresis continues and the cat begins to get
dehydrated, the postobstructive diuresis has not yet resolved and fluid administration again must
be increased.
Q: Do you prescribe prophylactic antibiotics after relief of UO?
A: No, not while the urinary catheter is in place. However it is appropriate to culture the urine
when the catheter is removed and prescribe antibiotics as necessary to treat bacterial UTI that has
Q: How long should an indwelling urinary catheter be left in place after relief of UO?
A: This time can be quite variable. We often try to keep the catheter in place for 24 to 48 hours, but
some cats manage to dislodge their catheters within this time frame. In general, the urinary catheter is
removed when the cat is feeling better, hematuria is resolving, and azotemia has resolved.
Q: Does the volume of urine removed when UO is first relieved predict bladder atony?
A: Possibly, but this has not been specifically studied. It seems logical that bladders with very large
volumes would be most likely to be stretched and possibly have damage to intercellular junctions
Q: How important in the pathogenesis is the alkaline urine pH that I find in many cats with UO? Is
this a primary event leading to urethral plug formation?
A: Anorexia and exudation of plasma proteins into urine from an inflamed and hemorrhagic
bladder both may contribute to neutral somewhat alkaline urine pH. As urine pH increases, struvite
of food that has been fed to the cat. Finding a persistently alkaline urine pH after resolution of the
present episode of UO, however, is an appropriate reason to recommend a change to a more acidify-
ing diet.
Q Is amitriptyline effective in relief of UO in male cats?
A: One experimental study showed resolution of UO in 20 cats with urethral plugs within 3 days
of starting treatment with amitriptyline. This result has not been verified and this approach cannot be
recommended yet for standard treatment of cats with UO.
alternative drugs that may stimulate contraction of the detrusor muscle of the bladder in cats with
persistent bladder atony?
A: Cisapride may stimulate detrusor contraction and could be considered for this purpose
Q: Is laser ablation of urethral transitional cell carcinoma helpful in relieving UO caused by this
tumor?
neoplasia, thus preventing the need for tube cystostomy. However the procedure is not curative for
transitional cell carcinoma, and multiple laser ablation procedures will be needed over time as the
tumor recurs.
Q: What is the role of urethral stenting in dogs with UO due to urethral transitional cell
carcinoma?
A: Urethral stenting under these circumstances can relieve UO, but the procedure does not prevent
local tumor growth and some dogs will develop urinary incontinence after urethral stenting
1389
Q: What quality of life can be expected after placement of a cystostomy tube in a dog with UO due
to transitional cell carcinoma?
A: Some dogs do well after cystostomy tube placement. The owners must be trained how to man-
age urinary drainage in a sterile manner and how to bandage the catheter to protect it from being
 removed by the dog. Development of bacterial UTI is inevitable, and treating UTI becomes an ongoing
issue. Often, the infecting organisms become highly resistant to commonly used antibiotics.
 SUGGESTED READINGS
Lower Urinary Tract Obstruction
Achar E, Achar RA, Paiva TB, et al: Amitriptyline eliminates calculi through urinary tract smooth muscle relaxation, Kid-
rey Int 64:13561364, 2003.
Barsanti JA, Brown J, Marks A, et al: Relationship of lower urinary tract signs to seropositivity for feline immunodefi-
ciency virus in cats, I Vet Intern Med 10:3438, 1996.
indwelling u rethral catheters, I Vet Interr Med 6:64-70, 1992.
Bray JP, Doyle RS, Burton CA: Minimally invasive inguinal approach for tube cystostomy, Vet Surg 38:411-416, 2009.
Bovee KC, Reif JS, Maguire TG, et al: Recurrence of feline lrethral obstruction, I Am Vet Med Assoc 174:93-96, 1979.
Burrows CF, Bovee KC: Characterization and treatment of acid-base and renal defects due to urethral obstruction in cats,
 A Vet Med Ass 172:801805, 1978.
Cooper ES, Owens TJ, Chew DJ, Buffington CAT: A novel approach to treatment of urethral obstruction in male cats, I Am
Vet Med Ass (in press).
Corgozinho KB, HJMd Souza, Pereira AN, et al: Catheter-induced urethral trauma in cats with urethral obstruction,
} Feline Med Surg 9:481-486, 2007.
Drobatz KJ, Cole SG: The influence of crystalloid type on acid-base and electrolyte status of cats with urethral obstruction,
} Vet Emerg Crit Care 4:355-361, 2008.
Drobatz KJ, Hughes D: Concentration of ionized calcium in plasma from cats with urethral obstruction, I Am Vet Med
Assoc 211:13921395, 1997.
Drobatz KJ, Ward C, Graham P, Hughes D: Serum concentrations of parathyroid hormone and 25-OH vitamin D, in cats
with urethral obstruction, I Vet Emerg Crit Care 15:179-184, 2005.
Finco DR: Induced feline urethral obstruction: Response of hyperkalemia to relief of obstruction and administration of
parenteral electrolyte solution, / A*m Anim Hosp Assoc 12:198-202, 1976.
Finco DR, Barsanti JA: Diet-induced feline urethral obstruction, Vet Clin North Am: Smmall animal practice 14:529-536, 1984.
with feline urologic synd rome, Am  Vet Res 46:391400, 1985.
 Finco DR, Cornelius LM: Characterization and treatment of water, electrolyte, and acid-base imbalances of induced ure-
thral obstruction in the cat, Am  Vet Res 38:823830, 1977.
Gerber B, Boretti FS, Kley S,et al: Evaluation of clinical signs and causes of lower urinary tract disease in European cats,
 Small Arim Pract 46:571-577,2005.
Gerber B, Eichenberger S, Reusch CE: Guarded long-term prognosis in male cats with urethral obstruction, I Feline Med
Surg 10:16-23,2008.
Hostutler RA, Chew DJ, Eaton KA, et al: Cystoscopic appearance of proliferative urethritis in 2 dogs before and after treat-
ment, ∫ Vet Interm Med 18:113116, 2004
Kruger JM, Osborne CA, Goyal SM, et al: Clinical evaluation of cats with lower urinary tract disease,  Am Vet Med Assoc
199:211-216, 1991.
cats with urethral obstruction, β Vet Emerg Crit Care 13:227-233, 2003.
obstruction, } Vet Emerg Crit Care 16:104-111, 2006
Loeb WF, Knipling GD: Glucosuria and pseudoglucosuria in cats with urethral obstruction, Mod Vet Pract 52(13):4041,
1971.
 Malouin A, Milligan JA, Drobatz Kj: Assessment of blood pressure in cats presented with urethral obstruction,J Vet Emerg
Crit Care 17 :15-21, 2007.
390CHAPTER 11Obstructive Uropathy and Nephropathy
Marks SL, Straeter-Knowlen IM, Moore M, et al: Effects of acepromazine maleate and phenoxybenzamine on urethral
pressure profiles of anesthetized, healthy, sexually intact male cats, Am / Vet Res 57:1497-1500, 1996.
Mawby Dl, Meric SM, Crichlow EC, Papich MG: Pharmacological relaxation of the urethra in male cats: A study of the
effects of phenoxybenzamine, diazepam, nifedipine and xylazine, Can ∫ Vet Res 55:28-32, 1991.
Reif JS, Bovee K, Gaskell C], et al: Feline urethral obstruction: A case-control study, / Am Vet Med Assoc 170: 1320-1324, 1977.
Straeter-Knowlen IM, Marks SL: Use of muscle relaxants in feline obstructive lower urinary tract disease, Feline Pract
25:26-33, 1997.
 Straeter-Knowlen IM, Marks SL, Rishniw M, et al: Urethral pressure response to smooth and skeletal muscle relaxants in
Straeter-Knowlen IM, Marks SL, Speth RC, et al: Effect of succinylcholine, diazepam, and dantrolene on the urethral pres-
sure profile of anesthetized, healthy, sexually intact male cats, Am  Vet Res 55:1739-1744, 1994.
Upper Urinary Tract Obstruction
sas il rsteo un uosqo leaan paadsns rog Auderad aperaau e ia 'i pue 'fa asalia ' u
(1995-2001), / Am Vet Med Assoc 222:15761581, 2003.
 Block G, Adams LG, Widmer WR, Lingeman JE: Use of extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy for treatment of nephroli-
thiasis and ureterolithiasis in five dogs, I Am Vet Med Assoc 208:531-536, 1996.
Dalby AM, Adams LG, Salisbury SK, Blevins WE: Spontaneous retrograde movement of ureteroliths in two dogs and five
cats, I A Vet Med Assoc 229:11181121, 2006.
Kyles AE, Hardie EM, Wooden BG, et al: Clinical, clinicopathologic, radiographic, and ultrasonographic abnormalities in
cats with ureteral calculi: 163 cases (1984-2002), I Ar Vet Med Assoc 226:932936, 2005.
Kyles AE, Hardie EM, Wooden BG, et al: Management and outcome of cats with ureteral calculi: 153 cases (1984-2002),
 Amr Vet Med Assoc 226:937944, 2005.
Kyles AE, Stone EA, Gookin J, et al: Diagnosis and surgical management of obstructive ureteral calculi in cats: 1l cases
(1993-1996), / Am Vet Med Assoc 213:1150-1156, 1998.
Westropp JL, Ruby AL, Bailiff NL, et al: Dried solidified blood calculi in the urinary tract of cats, J Vet Intern Med
20:828-834, 2006.
CHAPTER
12
Urinary Tract Trauma
and Uroperitoneum
INTRODUCTION
A. Types of trauma to the urinary tract (Figure 12-1).
 1. Kidney: Renal trauma is not commonly recogmized in dogs or cats, possibly because the
kidneys are protected by a fibrous capsule and embedded in perirenal fat. Absorption
 of shock also is facilitated by the fact that both kidneys are relatively mobile in the dog
and cat. Further protection of the kidneys is provided by the ribs, epaxial musculature,
and spine.
 a. Contusion: Subcapsular bruising and ecchymosis.
(1) Hemorrhage stops spontaneously.
(2) Microscopic hematuria can be observed.
 b. Hematoma: Blood accumulates in the perinephric region between the renal capsule
and fascia.
(1) Hemorrhage may stop spontaneously.
(2) Perinephric cyst or abscess may form as hematoma is liquefied.
(3) Microscopic hematuria can be observed.
c. Fissure: Renal parenchymal tear that extends through the renal capsule resulting in a
perinephric hematoma (Figure 12-2).
d.Rupture: Tear that is extensive enough to allow blood to accumulate in the retroperito-
neal space or peritoneal cavity.
(1) Laceration: Sharp line of demarcation.
(2) Fracture or pulpifaction (Figure 12-3).
(3) Tear through renal pelvis: Extravasation of blood and urine.
e. Pedicle injury.
(1) Vascular avulsion: Severe and rapid loss of blood.
(2) Ureteral avulsion: Extravasation of urine.
2. Ureter.
a.Avulsion from kidney or bladder.
b. Rupture along its length.
3. Urinary bladder.
a. Rupture: More likely in males due to anatomy of urethra.
b. Contusion.
4. Urethra.
a. Avulsion from the bladder.
b. Rupture.
5. Periurethral: Swelling and compression may result in obstruction.
391
392
CHAPTER 12  Urinary Tract Trauma and Uroperitoneum
√
 FIGURE 12-1  Types of renal trauma. A, Contusion. B, Contusion with some bleeding into subcapsular space.
C, Bleeding into retroperitoneal space and into renal pelvis. D, Laceration of renal parenchyma. E, Pulpifaction of 
renal parenchyma. (Dra wn by Tim Vojt.)
FIGURE 12-2  Perinephric hematoma. Note the degree of retroperitoneal hemorrhage surrounding this kidney.
Urinary Tract Trauma and Uroperitoneum  CHAPTER 12
6
FGURE 12-3 ■ Pulpifaction of renal tissue following severe renal trauma. (Courtesy of Dr. William DeHoff
Med Vet, Worthington, Ohio.)
PATHOGENESIS AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Causes of Urinary Tract Trauma
1.Blunt abdominal trauma (e.g., hit by a car, fal from height, kicked) is most common.
2. Penetrating injury (e.g., knife, bullet wound).
3.Iatrogenic.
 a. Improper urinary catheterization technique.
b. Accidental tear of urinary tissues during surgery.
C. Improper cystotomy closure or breakdown of closure.
d.Overzealous attempts to manually express urine from the bladder.
e. Cystocentesis performed on a severely distended and devitalized bladder associated
with urethral obstruction.
f.Cystostomy tube leakage (very uncommon).
g. Cystoscopy technique errors.
4. Rupture of bladder, urethra, or ureter secondary to obstruction or erosion by a calculus.
 5. Urethral obstruction with secondary bladder rupture (rare).
6.B
 Breakdowm of friable neoplastic or infected tissue anywhere along the urinary tract.
 7. Spontaneous rupture of large intrarenal cysts (i.e., pre-existing cystic renal disease).
Syndromes Caused by Urinary Tract Trauma or Rupture
1. Direct tissue injury (hemorrhage, swelling, inflammation, necrosis).
2. Blood loss.
3. Urine extravasation into body cavity.
a. Uroperitoneum is the accumulation of urine in the peritoneal or retroperitoneal spaces
due to a rupture of the urinary tract anywhere along its course (i.e., kidney, renal pelvis,
ureter, urinary bladder, urethra).
b. Urinary bladder rupture is the most common traumatic disruption of the urinary tract
 and source of urine leakage.
4.1
 Urine extravasation into subcutaneous tissues from a tear in the urethra causes swelling.
bruising, and sloughing of tissues.
394CHAPTER 12  Urinary Tract Trauma and Uroperitoneum
5. Postrenal azotemia and failure. Azotemia develops as nitrogenous waste products accu-
mulate in the peritoneal cavity and are absorbed across the semipermeable peritoneal
membranes. Absorption of waste products also can occur from the subcutaneous tissues
when urine accumulates there.
6. Peritonitis.
a. Chemical peritonitis can occur from urine irritation in dogs and cats.
b. Bacterial peritonitis can occur from urinary tract infection or contamination of ischemic
tissue or blood.
HISTORY
A. Known trauma (e.g., observed as hit by a car).
B. Recent abdominal surgical procedure, especially cystotomy.
C. Recent attempts at manual bladder expression.
CLINICAL SIGNS
A. Increasing abdominal girth may be noted if enough time has elapsed since the rupture.
B. Lack of observed urinations or decreased volume of urine produced if rupture is in the lower
urinary tract.
1. Urine volume is variable in animals with ruptured bladder
2. Observation of voiding does not rule out ruptured bladder.
 Some animals continue to urinate despite the accumulation of urine in the abdomen due to ruptured bladder.
C. Dysuria, stranguria, and pollakiuria may occur with rupture of the bladder or urethra.
D. Hematuria may be observed, but is not specific or sensitive for rupture of the urinary tract.
E. Increased thirst sometimes is noted as a consequence of fluid shifts that occur as urine accu
mulates in the peritoneal cavity.
F.Reluctance to walk.
G. As uroperitoneum persists, the signs of uremia including vomiting, lethargy, and dehydration
become more apparent.
H. Because uroperitoneum frequently is associated with trauma, additional signs often will be
present due to other systemic injuries (e.g., musculoskeletal injuries).
I. Trauma associated with a fractured pelvis or femur increases the likelihood of bladder or ure-
thral rupture, especially in dogs.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
A. Pain near the site of rupture may be noted during palpation.
B. Abdominal fluid may be detected, especially after fluids are administered.
C. Evidence of extensive abdominal injury (e.g., bruising) or fractures (e.g, pelvis, femur) in
small animals (Figures 12-4 and 12-5).
D. A small urinary bladder may be palpable in dogs and cats with ruptured bladder.
1. Bladder fails to fill during fluid therapy because fluid continues to leak into the
abdomen.
 2. If the tear is in one kidney or ureter, the bladder still may fll adequately from urine formed
by the intact kidney.
Urinary Tract Trauma and Uroperitoneum  CHAPTER 12
2395
 FGURE 12-4  Deep bruising of caudal abdomen. This type of bruising should raise suspicion for the possibility
for severe damage to underlying organs, especially for rupture of the bladder or urethra.
11
B
HGURE 12-5  Radiogram showing severe trauma to the boney pelvis. This type of trauma is often associated
with rupture of the urethra or bladder. A, Lateral view of pelvis. Note multiple fractures. B, Ventrodorsal (VD) view
of pelvis. Note multiple fractures. (Courtesy of The Ohio State University Veterinary Medical Center Orthopedics
Program and Dr. Jon Dyce.)
3.If a bladdertearis small, a substantialvolume of urinecan distend thebladder and render
it palpable despite ongoing leakage of urine into the peritoneum.
E. Distal urethral rupture can result in urine accumulation in the soft tissues of the perineum,
caudal thighs, and inguinal region (Figure 12-6). Bruising, cellulitis, and sloughing of tissues
may be detected after 12 to 36 hours.
396CHAPTER 12Urinary Tract Trauma and Uroperitoneum
B
FIGURE 12-6  A, Sloughing of perineal skin in two areas due to urethral rupture in a cat and urine accumulation
in the subcutaneous tissues. B, Urethrogram showing communication of lateral urethra with lateral thigh.
F. Rectal examination.
1.  May reveal pain as a ruptured urethra or bladder neck is palpated.
2. May reveal fragments of fractured pelvis that can be associated with or have caused the
ruptured bladder.
Retrieval of a substantial volume of urine after passage of a urinary catheter does not exclude the possibility
of a ruptured bladder orurethra.
DIAGNOSIS OF UROPERITONEUM
Passage of Urethral Catheter
1. Retrieval of a substantial volume of fluid after urethral catheterization does not rule out
ruptured bladder.
a.The catheter may pass through the ruptured bladder and collect abdominal fluid.
 b. The bladder still can contain substantial residual urine depending on the size and loca-
tion of theleak
2. It may be difficult to pass a catheter if the urethra is ruptured.
Abdominocentesis
1. The ratio of the abdominal fluid creatinine concentration to the serum creatinine concen
tration (both in mg/dL) provides evidence that the suspect abdominal fluid is urine.
2. The concentrations of creatinine and urea in urine entering the peritoneal cavity from a
ruptured bladder are very high. Having a higher molecular weight than urea, creatinine
does not move across the peritoneal membranes into blood as rapidly as urea, and thus
accumulates to a greater degree in the abdominal fluid.
Urinary Tract Trauma and Uroperitoneum ■ CHAPTER 12
2397
3. The concentration of creatinine in a sample of the abdominal fluid can be compared with
abdominal fluid may be 16.0 mg/dLand serum creatinine concentration may be4.0 mg/dL.
This ratio of 4:1 is definitive evidence that the fluid is urine (a ratio of >2:1 is expected in
most cases of ruptured bladder).
4. Simultaneous determination of the abdominal fluid urea nitrogen concentration as
compared to blood urea nitrogen (BUN) concentration also can be performed but is
not as helpful. Urea has a lower molecular weight than creatinine and equilibrates
across the peritoneal membranes more rapidly, resulting in a lower ratio of abdominal
fluid urea concentration to BUN concentration. For example, the fluid urea nitrogen
concentration may be 90 mg/dL as compared with a BUN concentration of 80 mg/dL
(ratio of 1.1).
The ratio of peritoneal fluid creatinine concentration to serum creatinine concentration decreases over time
 as equilibration with blood occurs across the peritoneum.
5. Also due to molecular size differences, phosphate will be retained in the abdominal fluid
longer than potassium.
6. In a study of 13 dogs with ruptured bladder, abdominal fluid creatinine concentration was
at least four times greater than the upper limit of normal serum creatinine concentration in
all cases.
a.  The median abdominal fluid creatinine concentration to serum creatinine concenr
tration ratio was 4.0 (range, 1.4 to 19.2). A ratio of >2.1 identified 86% of dogs with
uroperitoneum. The median abdominal fluid creatinine concentration was 16 mg/dL
(range, 7.5 to 22.5 mg/dL) and median serum creatinine concentration was 4.4 mg/dL
(range, 0.6 to 11.4 mg/ dL).
b. As expected, the largest gradients were seen in animals that had minimal azotemia and
c. The median abdominal fluid potassium concentration to serum potassium concentra-
tion ratio was 2.7 (range, 1.4 to 3.3). A ratio of >1.4 predicted uroperitoneum accurately
in all of the dogs.
d. Dogs with ascites of other cause had a median abdominal fluid creatinine concentra
tion to serum creatinine concentration ratio of 1.1 and an abdominal fluid potassium
concentration to serum potassium concentration ratio of 1.0.
the abdominal fluid creatinine concentration was at least 4 times the upper limit of the
laboratory reference range for normal serum creatinine concentration, the abdominal
fluid potassium concentration to serum potassium concentration ratio was >1.4, and
the abdominal fluid creatinine concentration to serum creatinine concentration ratio
was >2.1.
f. Serum potassium concentration was >6.0 mEq/L in 31% of dogs with ruptured
bladder.
7. In a study of 26 cats with uroperitoneum, abdominal fluid chemistry was available in
5 affected cats.
a. Abdominal fluid creatinine concentration was 12.5 ± 4.9 mg/dL (range, 5.5 to 15.6 mg/
dL). Mean abdominal fluid creatinine concentration to serum creatinine concentration
ratio in 4 cats was 2.0 (range, 1.1 to 4.1).
86E
 CHAPTER 12 ■ Urinary Tract Trauma and Uroperitoneum
b. Abdominal fluid potassium concentration was 9.3 ± 7.4 mEq/L (range, 4.1 to
22.2 mEq/L). Mean abdominal fluid potassium concentration to serum potassium con-
centration ratio was 1.9 (range, 1.2 to 2.4).
c. Fifty-two percent of the affected cats had hyperkalemia at time of diagnosis and 95%
were azotemic.
8.  Abdominocentesis is performed with the patient in lateral recumbency. The ventral abdo-
 men is clipped and aseptically prepared. A syringe with a 20-gauge needle, a 19-gauge
butterfly catheter, or an over-the-needle intravenous catheter is inserted into the abdomi-
nal cavity slightly to one side of ventral midline and 2 to 3 cm caudal to the umbilicus
(i.e., a site cranial to the bladder and distal to the falciform fat). Fluid can be readily
removed using this technique if a moderate volume of peritoneal fluid is present. If dif-
ficulty is encountered when attempting to retrieve fluid, a 4-quadrant abdominal paracen-
tesis can be performed. Alternatively, drainage with a percutaneous dialysis catheter can
be attempted. Ultrasound guidance to locate small pockets of fluid for aspiration can be
very helpful when trauma has been recent.
Injection Through a Urinary Catheter
1. Injection of methylene blue through a urinary catheter and subsequent retrieval of blue-
colored fluid during abdominocentesis confirms a tear in the urinary tract.
 2. Hissing of air leaking from a ruptured bladder usually can be heard during pneumocys-
tography (it was heard in all experimental dogs in one study).
Imaging
1. Plain radiographs may show loss of abdominal detail due to fluid accumulation.
a. A ground glass appearance may be observed if a large amount of fluid (urine) has accu-
mulated (Figure 12-7)
b. Loss of retroperitoneal detail and inability to clearly identify the kidneys occurs when
rupture involves the renal parenchyma, renal pelvis, or ureter(s) and the retroperito-
neal space has not been disrupted by the trauma (Figure 12-8).
2. Ultrasound examination may disclose small amounts of abdominal and retroperitoneal
fluid soon after injury, but blood and urine cannot be differentiated.
FIGURE 12-7  Survey abdominal radiograph showing ground glass appearance of abdominal effusion, in this
case due to uroperitoneum from ruptured bladder.
Urinary Tract Trauma and Uroperitoneum  CHAPTER 12
399
B
C
FGURE 12-8  A, Survey abdominal radiographs showing loss of retroperitoneal detail. Note streaking within
the retroperitoneal space and loss of ability to clearly see the kidneys. This dog was hit by a car and was leaking
urine from one kidney into this area. B, VD and lateral projections. B and C, Excretory urography from a different
dog with renal trauma. Note extravasation of contrast into the retroperitoneal space confirming that loss of detail
in this region is from urine. (A, Courtesy of The Ohio State University Department of Radiology.)
a.May disclose hematomas and abnormal shapes or echoes associated withi renal trauma.
b. Often will disclose a collapsed bladder in patients with ruptured bladder.
c. May disclose an irregular structure of mixed echogenicity due to lesions from trauma
to the bladder.
d. Site of bladder rupture or urine leakage cannot always be determined.
3.Contrast radiography or ultrasound examination usually is required to localize the site of
urinary tract rupture. Demonstration of continuity between the urinary bladder and sur-
rounding fluid accumulation is conclusive.
a. Positive-contrast cystography is the procedure of choice in bladder rupture
(Figure 12-9)
 b. Radiographic images are much more difficult to interpret if a negative contrast (air or
CO2) study or pneumocystography is used.
c. Inability to distend the bladder adequately may be noted during contrast infusion.
d. False negative results may occur if insufficient contrast is injected to achieve adequate
bladder distention because leakage of contrast agent will not be demonstrated unless
the tear is large.
sa 1e mjasn aq ues (uderouosoiso isnuon) Audeioiss isenuon pumosn "a
instead of positive contrast cystography, because the ultrasound equipment can be
brought to the cage. Rapid infusion of microbubbles (3 mL air and 32 mL sterile saline
mixed using a 3-way stopcock just before infusion) allows easy visualization of swirl-
ing bubbles as they escape the bladder.
400
CHAPTER 12  Urinary Tract Trauma and Uroperitoneum
B
FIGURE 12-9 ■ A, Positive contrast cystogram—ruptured bladder in a dog. Notice that the bladder fails to
distend during contrast infusion because there is a large leak of contrast into the abdominal cavity. B, Positive
contrast cystogram—ruptured bladder in a cat. The bladder tear in this cat is considerably smaller than that in A.
f.Positive contrast urethrography is necessary to identify the site of urethral rupture
(Figure 12-10).
g.  Excretory urography is required to demonstrate rupture of the kidney or ureter.
h. Caution must be exercised in patients with dehydration or underlying renal insufi-
ciency because excretory urography can result in acute renal injury in rare instances.
4. Urethrocystoscopy also can be used to determine the site of bladder rupture or urethral
tear (Figure 12-11).
Serum Biochemistry
1.  BUN concentration is the first biochemical variable to become abnormal. Increases in BUN
 start as early as 5 hours after bladder rupture in experimental uroabdomen in dogs.
2.
 Serum creatinine concentration also increases but not as rapidly as BUN due to previously
discussed differences in molecular weight.
Calculation of abdominal fluid to serum creatinine concentration ratios and contrast radiography are the
most reliable methods for definitive diagnosis of uroperitoneum.
Urinary Tract Trauma and Uroperitoneum  CHAPTER 12
2401
HGURE 12-10  Urethrogram. Positive contrast urethrography to localize the site of urethral rupture. Notice
extravasation of infused contrast agent into the soft tissues in both the lateral (A) and ventrodorsal (B) views.
(Courtesy of The Ohio State University Veterinary Medical Center Orthopedics Program and Dr. Jon Dyce.)
FGURE 12-11  Cystoscopic view of ruptured bladder. Note the ragged edges of the bladder wall tear and the
abdominal cavity in the distant view. This bladder rupture occurred during cystoscopy when an assistant squeezed
on the bag of infusing fluids to clear the view but the bladder was already fully distended.
 3. The magnitude and rapidity of increase in BUN and serum creatinine concentrations may
"ga) eumn Aueduone Aoun j sioey [euarand juuon Aq paseaui aq
shock, hypotension).
4. Increased serum potassium concentration is a relatively late finding (2 to 3 days post-
rupture) in uroperitoneum cases, but can occur earlier if shock and severe metabolic aci-
dosis are present.
5. Serum sodium and chloride concentrations decrease progressively in experimen
tal dogs with bladder rupture. Similar changes occur in dogs with naturally occurring
402 CHAPTER 12  Urinary Tract Trauma and Uroperitoneum
uroperitoneum but hyponatremia and hypochloremia are less consistently observed in
 pe s nn snn an  nn u m s
ride typically are low compared with serum concentrations, and equilibration results in
hyponatremia and hypochloremia.
The combination of hyperkalemia, hyponatremia, and azotemia in uroperitoneum can be confused with
hypoadrenocorticism, especially when there is no clear history of trauma.
6. Progressive hyperphosphatemia also develops during uroperitoneum due to the high uri-
nary concentration of phosphorus.
7. Blood gases usually show metabolic acidosis with respiratory compensation. In some
instances, the pH is relatively normal and the pco2 is lower than expected for normal
compensation suggesting the possibility of a mixed disorder such as combined primary
metabolic acidosis and primary respiratory alkalosis, the latter possibility associated with
hyperventilation due to pain. The extent of metabolic acidosis may be much more severe
in animals with major trauma and shock (i.e., possible contribution of lactic acidosis).
 8. The presence of azotemia in a traumatized animal does not by itself indicate the presence
of uroperitoneum. Furthermore, the absence of azotemia in a traumatized animal does
not exclude the possibility of uroperitoneum if the animal has been presented soon after
the trauma.
Azotemia in a recently traumatized animal could be a result of prerenal (e.g., shock, dehydration), ischemic
acute renal, or postrenal (e.g., uroabdomen, obstruction) factors.
Urinalysis
1. It is difficult to know if a sample obtained by catheter is urine or a combination of urine
and modified peritoneal fluid
2.  Hematuria and proteinuria are common.
3. Some degree of pyuria also may be observed.
4. Urine specific gravity is variable and depends on the concentration of the urine that ini-
tially enters the peritoneal cavity, how long the fluid has been in the peritoneal cavity, and
the response of the body to modify the fluid.
 CLINICAL CASES OF UROABDOMEN IN SMALL ANIMALS
A. Twenty-six dogs and 14 cats were diagnosed with uroperitoneum over a 5-year period at the
University of Pennsylvania.
B. The cause of uroperitoneum was trauma in 84.6% of cases.
C. Mortality was 42.3%.
D. Pelvic fractures were identified in 46.2%
 SUMMARY OF EXPERIMENTAL UROABDOMEN IN DOGS (BurroWs, 1974)
A. Average survival was 65 hours (range, 47 to 90 hours).
B. Within 12 hours, central nervous system (CNS) depression, anorexia, reluctance to walk,
abdominal pain on palpation, increased water intake, increased packed cell volume (PCV),
stranguria, and hematuria were noted.
Urinary Tract Trauma and Uroperitoneum  CHAPTER 12
403
C. Vomiting was noted within 15 hours.
D. BUN was increased by 5 hours and was the first biochemical variable to become abnormal
1. Mean BUN of 52 mg/dL at 21 hours.
 2. Mean BUN of 75 mg/dL at 29 hours.
3. Mean BUN of 140 mg/dL at 69 hours.
E. Serum creatinine concentration (SCr) was clearly increased by 21 hours.
1. Mean SCr of 2.2 mg/dL at 21 hours.
2. Mean SCr of 2.8 mg/dL at 29 hours.
3. Mean SCr of 6.0 mg/dL at 69 hours.
F. Hyperkalemia is a relatively late finding. Serum potassium (K) concentration was slightly
increased at 53 hours and clearly increased by 69 hours.
1.Mean serum K of 5.9 mEq/L at 53 hours (range, 4.1 to 7.8 mEq/L).
2. Mean serum K of 6.4 mEq/L at 69 hours (range, 4.9 to 8.4 mEq/L).
G. Serum sodium (Na) concentration progressively decreases (hyponatremia).
1. Mean serum Na of 139 mEq/L at 29 hours.
2. Mean serum Na of 136 mEq/L at 45 hours.
3. Mean serum Na of 129 mEq/L at 53 hours.
4. Mean serum Na of 129 mEq/L at 69 hours.
H. Serum chloride (Cl) concentration progressively decreases (hypochloremia).
1. Mean serum Cl of 92 mEq/L at 29 hours.
2. Mean serum Cl of 83 mEq/L at 45 hours.
3. Mean serum Cl of 80 mEq/L at 53 hours.
4. Mean serum Cl of 76 mEq/L at 69 hours.
 I. Serum phosphorus (Pi) concentration progressively increases (hyperphosphatemia).
1. Mean serum Pi of 6.5 mg/dL at 21 hours.
2. Mean serum Pi of 8.1 mg/dL at 29 hours.
 3. Mean serum Pi of 10.7 mg/dL at 45 hours.
4. Mean serum Pi of 11.4 mg/dL at 53 hours.
5. Mean serum Pi of 12.8 mg/dL at 69 hours.
J. Blood gases.
 1. Minimal acidemia at 69 hours, similar to changes seen at 5 hours.
2. Relatively mild acidosis with respiratory compensation.
K. Abdominal fluid chemical analysis at 45 hours:
Factor
Abdominal Fluid
Serum
Creatinine
11.6 mg/dL
4.3 mg/dL
Urea nitrogen
107 mg/dL
113 mg/dL
Sodium
127 mEq/L
136 mEq/L
TREATMENT OF URINARY TRACT TRAUMA AND UROPERITONEUM
Renal Hemorrhage
 1. Maceration and hemorrhage into the retroperitoneal space makes gross inspection and
evaluation of the renal pedicle difficult.
2.
 Nephrectomy for ongoing hemorrhage, severe fractures or pulpifaction of renal tissue.
3.
Partial nephrectomy if parenchymal injury involves one pole of the kidney.
4.
         
 5. Pressure or Gelfoam applied to area of hemorrhage.
404
 CHAPTER 12 ■ Urinary Tract Trauma and Uroperitoneum
Ruptures
Urethra
a. Use of a stent with an indwelling urethral catheter for 7 days may suffice if the tear is small.
b. Tube cystostomy to allow some urethral healing and resolution of swelling.
c. Primary closure is required if the tear is large.
d. Fair to guarded prognosis for long-term success because urethral stricture and surgical
site breakdown can be a problem.
Urinary Bladder
a. Requires primary closure if the tear is large.
b. Good to excellent prognosis in most cases.
c. Some small tears can be managed by catheterization of the urinary bladder for several
days until bladder healing can begin.
Ureteral Rupture Repair Depends on Location (Proximal or Distal)
a. Use of stent for 7 days.
 b. Primary re-anastomosis is associated with a guarded prognosis because of stricture
formation and urinary leakage.
c. Ureteral transposition into new bladder location for more distal rupture location also
is associated with a guarded to fair prognosis.
d. Ureteronephrectomy if none of the other procedures is feasible or as a salvage pro-
ad st Auoaudauoraam uaum pauerem si sisouord poo on papreng v apan
formed if the remaining kidney is functioning well.
Kidney
 a. Renal pelvic tears are very dificult to close and nephrectomy usually is required.
b. Partial nephrectomy may be posible if leakage is occurring from one pole of the
kidney.
Stabilization of the Patient Before Surgery - Uroperitoneum
Patient Concerns
a. Dehydration and volume depletion.
b. Hyperkalemia.
c. Metabolic acidosis.
d.Azotemia.
Repair of the site of urine leakage is not a surgical emergency but drainage of urine from the peritoneal
 cavity is an emergency.
Anesthetic Risks Are a Concern When Anesthetizing Patients With Urinary Tract Trauma
a. Hypovolemia.
b. Arrhythmias due to acidosis and electrolyte disturbances.
Stabilization Before Surgery Is Necessary
 a. Determine if bacterial peritonitis is present using cytology as well as bacterial culture
and sensitivity of abdominal fluid. Broad spectrum antibiotics are warranted as appro-
priate based on gram stain and expected pathogens.
b. Fluid replacement to correct hypovolemia and dehydration.
(1) Balanced electrolyte solution (lactated Ringer'ssolution, Plasmalyte 148, Normosol-R).
(2) Consider addition of synthetic colloids if total protein concentration is low or col-
loid osmotic pressure (COP) is low.
(3) Blood products may be indicated if PCV is <20%.
Urinary Tract Trauma and Uroperitoneum  CHAPTER 12
2405
(4) Fresh frozen plasma (FFP) may be helpful in patients at risk for systemic inflam
matory response syndrome (SIRS) or when hemostatic dysfunction is present or
anticipated.
C. Acidosis should resolve with appropriate fluid therapy.
(1) Bicarbonate therapy is indicated if acidosis is persistent and as long as concurrent
respiratory acidosis is not present.
(2) Investigation of underlying reasons for persistent acidosis may be indicated.
d.Life-threatening hyperkalemia (e.g., bradycardia, shock).
(1) Fluid therapy wil have a dilutional effect on serum potassium concentration
("dilution is the solution to pollution").
(2) Protect the myocardium by administering 2 to 10 mL of a 10% calcium gluconate
solution intravenously.
(3) Intravenous regular insulin (0.25 to 0.5 U/kg) and dextrose (1 to 2 g per U of insu
lin administered) if life-threatening hyperkalemia is unresolved with the above
treatment.
(4) Bicarbonate therapy (1 to 2 mEq/kg) if life-threatening hyperkalemia is unresolved
with the above treatment.
e. Azotemia and hyperkalemia.
(1) Partial resolution of azotemia and hyperkalemia may be accomplished with
abdominal fluid drainage.
(a) Urinary catheter may be placed into abdominal cavity through the ruptured
bladder.
(b) A dialysis catheter may be placed into the abdominal cavity.
(2) More complete resolution of azotemia and hyperkalemia is accomplished with
peritoneal dialysis.
Drainage of Urine From the Abdomen
1. Pass a urinary catheter into the bladder-bladder decompression can decrease passage of
more urine into the abdominal cavity.
2.Pass a urinary catheter through the bladder tear into the abdominal cavity. This will allow
drainage of urine that has already accumulated in the peritoneal space. This can happen
by chance while passing a urinary catheter if the defect in the bladder is large. Fluoroscopy
can assist passage of the urinary catheter.
 3. Place a commercially available percutaneous dialysis catheter through the abdominal wall
into the peritoneal cavity. These catheters contain multiple fenestrations that help prevent
catheter occlusion and facilitate drainage.
4. Balloon-tipped or latex Penrose drains can be surgically placed into the abdominal cav-
ity to drain urine. The abdominal incision is closed around these drains. Penrose drains
are not optimal for abdominal fluid drainage because fluid cannot be collected in a sterile
manner. These drains should be covered with sterile bandaging to decrease the risk of
 ascending infection into the abdominal cavity.
5. Drainage of urine in addition to parenteral fluid therapy support usually results in resolu-
tion of azotemia within 24 to 48 hours (depending on the severity of azotemia at the outset
with more severe azotemia taking longer to resolve).
6. Dialysis can be started if the patient is severely azotemic. Dialysis is only necessary for a
few days. Resolution of azotemia occurs more rapidly that it does with passive drainage
of urine from the abdomen.
a.Many kinds of catheters are available (e.g., Tenckhoff, T-fluted).
406
6CHAPTER 12Urinary Tract Trauma and Uroperitoneum
b.Nonsurgical placement is important in patients with uroperitoneum due to thein
frequently unstable condition.
c. Dialysate solution can be commercially purchased or formulated by addition of dex
trose to a balanced electrolyte solution (lactated Ringer's solution, Plasmalyte-148 ol
Normosol-R).
d. Typically peritoneal dialysis is begun using a 1.5% dextrose solution.
e. A range of 10 to 40 mL/kg of dialysate fluid at body temperature (or 2 to 3 degrees
higher to enhance vasodilatation) is infused rapidly and allowed to dwell for 30 to
45 minutes and then drained by gravity. Hourly exchanges are recommended
initially.
f.A closed system of delivery and collection is ideal to prevent infection.
g. A 90% to 100% recovery of infused dialysate is the goal.
h.  Volume of infusate and dwell times can be modified as needed.
i. Tenckhoff catheters typically are occluded by omentum within 12 to 72 hours, but this
usually is enough time to control azotemia and hyperkalemia.
WHAT DO WE DO?
· Always rule out diaphragmatic hernia and ruptured urinary bladder or urethra in dogs and cats that
(es Aq ny 'aa) emen ieunopqe pmgq araaas pasuanadxa aa
· Always rule out ruptured bladder or urethra in dogs and cats with fractured pelvis.
· Analyze fluid retrieved by abdominocentesis using cytology, bacterial culture and sensitivity, and
serum biochemistry.
● Choose positive contrast cystography over pneumocystography in cases of suspected bladder rup-
ture because it is easier to interpret the results of positive contrast studies
THOUGHTS FOR THE FUTURE
· Ultrasonographic techniques will become more refined and this imaging modality will be
used routinely to conclusively identify bladder rupture much earlier after blunt abdominal
tra uma.
· Percutaneous transabdominal catheters will be used more extensively to drain urine from the peri-
toneal cavity of animals with uroabdomen.
· Better techniques will become available for placing stents in ruptured ureters and urethras
 COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS
· If a dog or cat can urinate a reasonable volume after blunt abdominal trauma, it cannot have a rup-
tured bladder. No. Depending on the size and location of the rupture in the bladder, the bladder may
partially fill and some urine may be voided.
· A palpable bladder on physical examination after blunt abdominal trauma excludes the possibility
 of rupture and uroabdomen. No. With small tears in the bladder, a substantial volume of urine may
still be retained in the bladder.
aa oi Aamq ou si aaui sisoueip rae smoq man e um paniedai aq isnu rappea pamidni v 
surgical closure of a bladder tear as long as the metabolic consequences of uroabdomen can be
adequately managed (urine drainage through a urinary catheter or through abdominal drain tubes
along with IV fluid therapy). It is better to stabilize the patient metabolically before anesthesia and
surgery.
Urinary Tract Trauma and Uroperitoneum  CHAPTER 12
407
SUMMARY TIPS
· Calculate the abdominal fluid creatinine concentration to serum creatinine concentration ratio to
determine if an abdominal effusion represents uroabdomen or not. The ratio is usually >2:1 if the
fluid is urine.
· If the abdominal fluid creatinine concentration to serum creatinine concentration ratio is equivocal
(i.e., ≤2:1), calculate the abdominal fluid potassium concentration to serum potassium concentration
ratio. Patients with uroperitoneum will have a ratio of >1.4 (dogs) or >1.9 (cats).
a positive contrast cystogram to determine the site of the rupture. If positive contrast cystography is
not definitive, excretory urography should be performed to determine if the kidneys or ureters are
the source of the urine leakage.
· Stabilize the patient for up to 48 hours before definitive repa ir of the urinary tract rupture.
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
Q: Last week, I euthanized a 17-year-old cat that was presented for evaluation of anorexia and
vomiting. Serum creatinine concentration was >20.0 mg/dL. The kidneys were slightly small on
cat was euthanized on the basis of a diagnosis of chronic renal failure. On necropsy, there was a
considerable amount of abdominal fluid and a small hole in the bladder surrounded by a large
bruise. Could all of these findings been the result of urine leakage from the bladder into the
abdomen?
A: Yes. The magnitude of azotemia does not differentiate among prerenal, primary renal, or postre
nal causes. Many older cats have chronic kidney disease, but older cats also may experience bladder
rupture as was the case in this particular cat.
Q: I performed a dental prophylaxis on a 7-year-old female spayed Greyhound. 1 knew the dog had
pre-existing renal disease with moderate azotemia and dilute urine. Intravenous fluids were admin-
istered before, during, and after the dental procedure for renoprotection. The dog was discharged
later that same day but was returned early the next day in extreme pain. The dog was referred, and
uroperitoneum was diagnosed. After one day of stabilization, the bladder rupture was repaired
surgically. How did this happen?
A: At the time of referral, the dog's serum creatinine concentration was 7.0 mg/dL whereas it
was 3.0 mg/dL before the dental procedure. Several possibilities were considered, including the
possibility of acute-on-chronic renal disease with exacerbation of pre-existing chronic renal dis
ease by anesthesia and possibly hypotension. Another possibility considered was that the sudden
increase in serum creatinine concentration could have represented prerenal azotemia due to dehy-
dration. Abdominal radiographs showed a slight loss of abdominal detail, and ultrasonography
showed some free abdominal fluid. Biochemical analysis of the fluid showed the fluid creatinine
concentration to be 37 mg/dL whereas the serum creatinine concentration was 7 mg/dL (i.e., fluid
to serum creatinine concentration ratio of >5:1) supporting a diagnosis of uroabdomen. At surgery.
the dog was observed to have a 2.5 cm tear in the dorsal bladder wall and the defect was closed.
appena s,sop aun ieun paaiap Arois aun jo manaay 'edan leoims nane lam pip Sop au
had been manually expressed while it was recovering from anesthesia for the dental procedure.
Urethral tone can be high during recovery and it is likely the bladder rupture occurred during this
time. After recovery from anesthesia, the dog was noted to be panting and she assumed the "posi-
tion of relief."
408CHAPTER 12  Urinary Tract Trauma and Uroperitoneum
SUGGESTED READINGS
Aumann M, Worth LT, Drobatz KJ: Uroperitoneum in cats: 26 cases (1986-1995), J Am Ani Hosp Assoc 34:315-324, 1998.
Beck AL, Grierson JM, Ogden DM, et al: Outcome of and complications associated with tube cystostomy in dogs and cats
76 cases (1995-2006), I Am Vet Med Assoc 230:11841189, 2007.
 I uy appeq Areun auuen aut go aindn panu Alluauadxa ot anp saueup sqeia  aaaoa t smong
Res 35:1083-1088, 1974.
an e ym yuauue Aed susn steo il u andna leuan seunen go suauaeuen  ateany 's neues't aian
thral catheter, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 21:76-84, 2008.
Schmiedt C, Tobias KM, Oto CM: Evaluation of abdominal fluid: Peripheral blood creatinine and potassium ratios for
diagnosis of uroperitoneum in dogs, I Vet Emerg Crit Care 11:275-280, 2001.
Stiffler KS, MeCrackin Stevenson MA, et al: Clinical use of low-profile cystostomy tubes in four dogs and a cat, Am Vet
Med Assoc 223:309310, 2003:325-329.
Weisse C, Aronson LR, Drobatz K: Traumatic rupture of the ureter: 10 cases, / Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38:188-192, 2002.
CHAPTER
Micturition and
Urinary Incontinence
 INTRODUCTION
A. Micturition is the process of urinary storage (filling) and voiding (emptying). Approximately
99% of the time, the bladder and urethra are occupied in the storage of urine whereas only 1%
of the time is occupied with voiding.
 B. Incontinence is the involuntary passage of urine. The affected animal typically appears to
be unaware of urine leakage, at least initially. Increased grooming of the perineum suggests
awareness of the problem at some point in its clinical course.
C. Urinary incontinence is an important disorder encountered in primary care practice.
D. Urinary incontinence is much more common in dogs than in cats. When encountered in cats,
urge incontinence from cystitis must be excluded as the most likely consideration.
E. Complex neurological input to the bladder and urethra are involved in coordinating the
proper times for filling and storage of urine (see details later).
 Bladder pressure exceeds urethral resistance in most forms of urinary incontinence.
 F. Most forms of incontinence occur only when bladder pressure exceeds urethral resistance
pressure. Incontinence may occur when bladder pressure is abnormally high (transiently or
persistently), urethral pressure is low, or a combination of these factors. Exceptions to this rule
 ss s (a a a) sp   a st a  m m
normal urethral sphincter mechanism.
PHYSIOLOGY OF URINATION
components of the nervous system.
B. Stretch receptors in the bladder carry afferent information (general visceral afferent [GVA]
and general proprioceptive [GP]) about bladder distension to the spinal cord.
C. This information is relayed to higher central nervous system (CNS) centers (e.g., brainstem,
cerebral cortex) via the spinothalamic tract and general proprioceptive tract in the fasciculus
 gracilis allowing conscious perception of bladder distension.
 D. If the circumstances are appropriate for urination, the emptying phase is initiated. The para-
sympathetic portion of the autonomic nervous system plays the dominant role in the empty-
ing phase (Figure 13-1).
1.  Motor information descends from the higher CNS centers via the tectospinal and reticulo-
spinal tracts to parasympathetic general visceral efferent lower motor neurons in the gray
matter of the sacral spinal cord (S1-S2).
409
410
CHAPTER 13  Disorders of Micturition and Urinary Incontinence
Sensation of filling
PARASYMPATHETIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
Brainstem and cortex
Fasciculus gracilis,
(tectospinal and
Bladder
Spinothalamic tract
reticulospinal tract)
GVA, GP
Stretch
 receptor
ACh
(Muscarinic)
ros
Smooth
Detrusor
muscle
GVE
 contraction
ACh
Pelvic nerve
(Nicotinic)
S1 - S2
Emptying
FGURE 13-1 ■ Role of the parasympathetic nervous system in urination. ACh, acetylcholine; GVE, general
visceral efferent; GVA, general visceral afferent; GP, general proprioceptive. (Drawn by Tim Vojt.)
2. These neurons reach the detrusor muscle of the bladder via the pelvic nerve and initiate
detrusor contraction and bladder emptying.
 3. This control is mediated by the parasympathetic nervous system and neurotransmission
is cholinergic at both the preganglionic and postganglionic fibers. The receptors at the
smooth muscle of the detrusor are muscarinic.
4.The GVA and GP afferent neurons from the bladder wall also synapse on the parasympa-
thetic general visceral efferent (GVE) lower motor neurons in the sacral spinal cord. This is
the basis for local spinal cord reflex voiding (see later).
 5. At the same time, efferent fibers from higher centers inhibit transmission in the sympa-
thetic nervous system, which normally facilitates bladder filling.
6. Also, there is inhibition of general somatic efferent (GSE) neurons located in the sacral spi-
nal cord (S1-S2) that exit in the pudendal nerve and normally maintain tone in the striated
muscle of the urethra (so-called external urethral sphincter). Failure of this inhibition con-
 tributes to increased urethral sphincter tone in patients with upper motor neuron (UMN)
bladders.
7. GSE neurons to the striated muscle of the abdomen are stimulated and initiate abdominal
wall contractions that increase intra-abdominal pressure and are important in the voiding
8. Injury that results in a CNSlesion cranial to the sacral spinal cord is associated with detru-
sor areflexia and increased urethral sphincter tone (due in part to loss of UMN inhibitory
influence).
a.
This results in loss of voluntary initiation of voiding.
b. Manual expression of the bladder is difficult due to the high urethral tone.
c. Within a few weeks of injury, local reflex voiding develops and is associated with
 incomplete bladder emptying and abnormally high residual volume.
d. Such a bladder is called an upper motor neuron (UMN or automatic) bladder.
 E. If the circumstances are inappropriate for urination, the filling phase continues. The sympathetic
portion of the autonomic nervous system plays the dominant role in the filling phase (Figure 13-2).
1. Efferent fibers descending from higher centers in the CNS inhibit the GVE lower motor
neurons of the parasympathetic nervous system that are located in the sacral spinal cord
(S1-S2).
Disorders of Micturition and Urinary Incontinence  CHAPTER 13
411
SYMPATHETICNERVOUSSYSTEM
Sensation of filling
Brainstem and cortex
Fasciculus gracilis,
(tectospinal and
Bladder
Spinothalamic tract
reticulospinal tract)
GVA, GP
Stretch
receptor
NE
βReceptor
→Filling
(Nicotinic)
ACh
Smooth
GVE
Hypogastric
muscle
nerve
contraction
L1 - L4
NE
Caudal
Receptor
Continence
mesenteric ganglion
十
Filling
HGURE 13-2 ■ Role of the sympathetic nervous system in urination. ACh, acetylcholine; GVE, general
visceral efferent; GVA, general visceral aferent; GP, general proprioceptive; NE, norepine phrine. (Drawn by
Tim Vojt.)
2. Sympathetic GVE neurons in the lumbar spinal cord (L2-L5) are stimulated and these
preganglionic fibers synapse at the caudal mesenteric ganglion (cholinergic mediation).
The postganglionic adrenergic fibers reach the bladder wall via the hypogastric nerve.
 3. The postganglionic fibers that reach the body of the bladder terminate primarily on beta-
adrenergic receptors. When these receptors (found primarily in the body of the bladder)
are stimulated there is relaxation of the detrusor smooth muscle and bladder filling is
facilitated.
4.
The postganglionic fibers that reach the bladder neck and proximal urethra terminate
mainly on alpha-adrenergic receptors. When these receptors (found primarily in the blad-
der neck and proximal urethra) are stimulated, contraction of smooth muscle in these
regions occurs, which facilitates bladder filling and maintains continence. The smooth
muscle in the proximal urethra is referred to as the interra! urethral sphincter.
 5. The distribution of beta- and alpha-adrenergic receptors in the bladder and proximal ure-
thra (see earlier) establishes the role of the sympathetic nervous system in the regulation
of urination.
6. Also during bladder filling, efferent fibers descending from higher CNS centers stimulate
GSE neurons of the sacral spinal cord (S1-S2) that travel in the pudendal nerve to inner-
vate the striated muscle of the urethra, the so-called external urethral sphincter. Neuro-
transmission at this striated muscle is cholinergic via nicotinic receptors. This somatic
component represents part of the voluntary control of urination (Figure 13-3).
7.
 Simultaneously, GSE fibers that innervate the striated muscles of the abdomen are
inhibited by higher CNS centers.
F. In summary, afferent information from the bladder about its state of distension ultimately
reaches higher CNS centers in the brainstem and cerebral cortex. The higher CNS centers inte-
 grate this information with other afferent input and institute the appropriate efferent response
with respect to urination.
412
CHAPTER 13  Disorders of Micturition and Urinary Incontinence
SOMATICNERVOUSSYSTEM
Bladder
Brainstem and cortex
S1-S2
Pudendal nerve
ACh
GSE
(Nicotinic)
Skeletal
Lumbar
muscle
contraction
ACh (Nicotinic)
→
Continence
Skeletal muscle of
abdomen (emptying)
Filling
FIGURE 13-3  Role of the somatic nervous system in urination. ACh, acetylcholine; GSE, general somatic
efferent. (Dra wn by Tim Vojt.)
G. It is important to understand how the GVE neurons of the parasympathetic and sympathetic
components of the autonomic nervous system and the GSE neurons of the somatic nervous
system interact in the control of bladder filling and emptying because the drugs that are used
H. Even a bladder that has lost its local sacral reflex arc consisting of the GVA and GVE parasym-
pathetic neurons in the sacral spinal cord and pelvic nerve eventually can develop the ability
to empty partially.
1. This effect is due to the intrinsic ability of smooth muscle to contract.
2. Urine overflow will occur when intravesical pressure exceeds the elasticity of the
urethra.
3. Such a bladder is called a lower motor reuron (LMN or autonomous) bladder and results
from lesions in the sacral spinal cord, cauda equina, or pelvic nerves. The caudal vertebral
and spinal cord malformations that occur in Manx cats represent a congenital condition
causing a LMN bladder.
4.
The residual volume of urine in a LMN bladder usually exceeds that in an UMN bladder.
Increasing the animal's intra-abdominal pressure by picking it up may initiate involuntary
voiding
5. There is no ability to voluntarily initiate bladder emptying.
6. Bladder contractions are weak and ineffective at bladder emptying.
 DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS FOR URINARY INCONTINENCE (B0X 13-1)
A. The causes of urinary incontinence classically are divided into neurogenic or non-neurogenic
categories. Non-neurogenic causes are most common, and a thorough neurological examina-
tion is important in making this distinction.
B. Another approach is to divide causes of incontinence into those associated with small to
normal-sized bladder and those associated with an enlarged bladder. Most cases of urinary
incontinence (especially non-neurogenic causes) are associated with a small to normal-sized
bladder at presentation.
Disorders of Micturition and Urinary Incontinence  CHAPTER 13
413
B0X 13-1
 CAUSES OF URINARY INCONTINENCE
Neurogenic
1.  Upper motor neuron
A. Brain/brainstem
1. Neoplasia
2. Dysautonomia
B. Spinal cord
1. Dysautonomia
2. Intervertebral disk protrusion
 3. Hbrocartilaginous infarct
4. Neoplasia
5. Infectious
6. Trauma
Il. Lower motor neuron 
A. Trauma
 B. Congenital anomaly (e.g., Manx cat)
Il. Reflex dyssynergy (detrusor-urethral dyssynergia)
Non-neurogenic
1. Primary sphincter mechanism incompetence
Il.Anatomic abnomalities
A. Ectopic ureter
B. Patent urachus
C. Bladder exstrophy
 D. Urethrorectal fistula
E. Ureterovaginal fistula (e.g., after spaying)
 F.  Female pseudohemaphroditism
G. Urethral diverticulum
H. Ureterocele
1.Other
Ill. Paradoxical (obstructive)
IV. Urge incontinence associated with UTl or inflammation
V. Post-prostatectomy incontinence (dogs)
Vl. Post-perineal urethrostomy incontinence (cats)
Vll. Feline leukemia virus (FeLv) or feline immunodeficiency virus (FIv)-associated incontinence (cats)
Vlll. Idiopathic detrusor hyperactivity (overactive bladder)
Clinical Approach to Patients Presented for Evaluation
of Abnormal Micturition
 SIGNALMENT
A. Congenital disorders are most commonly recognized in young animals. Certain large breed
 dogs are at increased risk for ectopic ureters. Manx cats have urinary incontinence associated
with congenital vertebral and spinal cord anomalies.
B. Hormone-responsive incontinence and urethral sphincter incompetence usually occur in
middle-aged, medium to large breed female dogs; certain breeds are at increased risk for this
disorder (see later).
414 CHAPTER 13  Disorders of Micturition and Urinary Incontinence
C. Reflex dyssynergy (detrusor-urethral-dyssynergia) occurs more frequently in large breed
male dogs.
HISTORY
A. It is important to differentiate loss of voluntary control from behavioral changes or recent
onset of polyuria and polydipsia.
1.  Development of polyuria as a result of an underlying disease such as chronic renal failure
may result in the animal urinating in the house because it is not being allowed outdoors
frequently enough.
2. Some owners may misinterpret this situation as the animal losing control of urinations.
B. It is important to question the owner about the presence of dysuria or hematuria suggestive of
urinary tract infection (UTl), inflammation or partial urinary tract obstruction.
C. It is important to identify any previous episodes of trauma or surgery adjacent to or involving
the urinary tract that could have affected micturition.
 D. Previous response to (or lack of response to) antibiotics or anti-inflammatory drugs may sug-
gest the nature of an underlying condition.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
A. Observe the animal urinating. Characterize the animal's ability to initiate a urine stream, the
diameter of the stream, any interruptions of the stream, and any apparent pain.
B. Observe the perineal region of females for wetness or foul odor.
C. Palpate the bladder, urethra, and the prostate gland in males.
1. Determine the size (i.e., small, normal, enlarged) and position of the bladder before
voiding.
sasne suabonau pno bun ui das ps ueodu ue s auop eue jo uogeajap pue uogeexa lea
 of urinary incontinence.
 2. Determine the presence or absence of pain associated with palpation of the bladder (and
prostate gland in males).
 3. Determine bladder size after voiding. An enlarged bladder after attempts to void suggests
urine retention.
4.  Identify any masses in the bladder or prostate gland in males that could be associated with
outflow obstruction, inflammation, or altered function.
5. Evaluate the urethra on rectal examination in both males and females.
formed to evaluate for presence of a mass in the region of the vestibule or external urethra.
E. Perform a complete neurologic examination to assess the cerebrum, brainstem, and spinal
cord. Pay special attention to the local sacral reflex arc including:
1.  Anal tone on rectal examination. Poor anal tone suggests the possibility of a LMN bladder.
2. Bulbocavernosus reflex (manual compression of the bulbus glandis or clitoris causes
contraction of the anal sphincter via the pudendal nerve).
 3.  Perineal reflex (pricking or stroking the skin of the perineum) causes ventroflexion of the 
tail and contraction of the anal sphincter).
 F. In animals with incontinence and an enlarged bladder, passage of a urethral catheter to rule
out intraluminal obstruction can be helpful. Extramural masses may not be identified by this
procedure.
Disorders of Micturition and Urinary Incontinence  CHAPTER 13
415
G. Collect and measure residual urine in the bladder after the animal has voided. Residual urine
volume of >0.4 ml/kg body weight suggests partial obstruction to urine outflow or functional
inability to empty the bladder.
LABORATORY FINDINGS
A. A minimal database for animals with incontinence should include a urinalysis and urine
culture.
aad aq Ae ad ienuonq umras pe wnoua e shuu rao Aq paen f d
to identify systemic disease processes.
URINARY TRACT IMAGING
A. Urinary tract imaging is performed if the diagmosis is not apparent after initial evaluation or
if empirical treatment has not been effective.
B. Survey abdominal radiography.
1.Determine the position of the bladder (i.e., intra-abdominal or intrapelvic).
2.Determine the size of the bladder (i.e., small, normal-sized, enlarged).
3. Determine the shape of the bladder: Is there a distinct vesicourethral junction or not?
4. Are radiopaque calculi present?
C. Contrast radiography is helpful to rule out anatomic abnormalities or radiolucent calculi
1. Excretory urography can be used to evaluate for the presence of ectopic ureters
(see later), ureteral dilatation, or dilatation of the renal pelvis.
2. Cystography and urethrography can be used to evaluate for the presence of anatomic
abnormalities (e.g., urachal remnant, urethral diverticulum) and masses or radiolucent
calculi in the bladder or urethra.
 D. Ultrasonography can help exclude anatomical abnormalities, masses, and calculi.
identify abnormal ureteral openings, masses, and other anatomic abnormalities (e.g., urachal
diverticulum).
ered when a definitive diagnosis has not been obtained by other imaging procedures.
SPECIAL STUDIES
 A. The cystometrogram (CMG) is a pressure-volume recording of the bladder's response to filling
with fluid or CO2 (Figure 13-4).
B. The urethral pressure profile (UPP) is a pressure tracing of the urethra as a catheter is slowly
withdrawn from the bladder at a constant speed (Figures 13-5 and 13-6).
C. The UPP and CMG are diagnostic procedures that typically are performed on a referral basis.
They require special equipment and technical expertise, and specific anesthetic regimens must
be followed in order for results to be valuable.
Urodynamic studies are not necessary for the diagnosis and management of most dogs with urinary
 incontinence seen in primary care practice.
D. The UPP and CMG are not needed to establish a presumptive diagnosis in most dogs with
urinary incontinence.
E. Important parameters for UPP evaluation (see Figures 13-5 and 13-6):
416
CHAPTER 13 Disorders of Micturition and Urinary Incontinence
75-
1 min
M
48 mL
60-
T - II
T -III
45
Thresh
15
Bladder volume (mL)
FIGURE 13-4  Cystometrogram showing bladder pressure (cm HzO) as the dependent variable (y-axis) and
bladder volume (mL) as the independent variable (x-axis). During the T-ll phase the bladder accommodates the
accumulation of volume by relaxing (no significant increase in pressure). The bladder approaches its maximal
capacity during the T-Ill phase (pressure begins to rise). The detrusor contracts to initiate voiding at the end of the
T-I phase (thresh). I.S. Initial spike; M, maximal contraction. (From Oliver JE, Young WO: Air cystometry in dogs
under xylazine-induced restraint. Am / Vet Res 34:1433-5, 1973.)
50
AGLA
40
Maximum
$
urethral
closure
Maximum
30
pressure
urethral
pressure
10
Bladder
Functional profile length-
pressure!
Total profile length 
1
2
3
4
5
6
Distance(cm)
FIGURE 13-5 ■ An idealized urethral pressure profile (UPP) from a female dog. Maximum urethral closure
pressure (MUCP) and functional profile length (FPL) are the two most reliable and widely used parameters in
assessment of the UPP (From Rosin A, Rosin E, Oliver J: Canine urethral pressure profile. Am J/ Vet Res41:1114, 1980.)
1.  Maximum urethral pressure (MUP): Highest pressure recorded during the profile.
2. Maximum urethral closure pressure (MUCP): Difference between MUP and intravesical
pressure.
3.
Fumctional profile length (FPL): Length of urethra over which urethral pressure exceeds
intravesical pressure.
 F. FPL is the most consistent parameter on the UPP. MUCP is more variable. MUCP occurs in the
 middle to distal urethra of female dogs and cats and in the postprostatic urethra of male dogs
and cats.
G. The urodynamic tests described above are confirmatory for urethral sphincter incompetence,
detrusor hyporeflexia, and detrusor hyperreflexia but typically are performed under chemi-
cal restraint and not during voiding. Consequently, they do not confirm or rule out reflex
dyssynergia.
Disorders of Micturition and Urinary Incontinence  CHAPTER 13
417
40
30
39
20
10
AAAA
A
40
10
20
10
B
m op areag pareds e uog pue (v) areag pareds reu e u ataid annssand qea  g-eh n
 primary sphincter incompetence (PSMI) (B). (Courtesy of Dr. Susi Armold, Zurich, Switzerland.)
 Primary sphincter mechanism incompetence (PSMl) is the most common cause of urinary incontinence
 in adult dogs seen in primary care practice.
ABNORMAL URINATION (DISORDERS OF MICTURITION)
Non-neurogenic Causes of Urinary Incontinence
Primary Sphincter Mechanism Incompetence (PSMI)
 a. PSMI is the most common non-neurogenic cause of urinary incontinence in dogs.
(1) Incontinence in spayed female dogs previously was called hormone-responsive, or
estrogen-responsive, incontinence.
(2) Occurs approximately 3 years after ovariohysterectomy in approximately 20% of
female dogs neutered between their first and second heat cycles.
(3) More common in large dogs (more than 20 kg). May occur in any breed of dog or in
mixed breed dogs but some breeds are over-represented:
(a) Doberman pinscher.
(b) Giant Schnauzer.
(c) Old English sheepdog.
(d) Rottweiler.
(e) Boxer.
(4) Urine leakage while the dog is sleeping or lying down is the most common histori-
cal finding in dogs with unicomplicated PSMI. Intra-abdominal pressure increases
when dogs lie on their sides and this factor may explain why many affected dogs
418
 CHAPTER 13 ■ Disorders of Micturition and Urinary Incontinence
have incontinence while sleeping (i.e., increased intra-abdominal pressure cannot
be transmitted to the bladder neck and proximal urethra if these organs lie outside
the abdominal cavity in pelvic canal as is the case in many affected dogs). Another
nervous activity while sleeping.
 Urine leakage while recumbent is typical in PSMI.
u a Ai ( ns  ps sa) s go s ()
present in dogs with PSMI unless complicated by UTI. UTI may develop in dogs
with PSMI due to the wicking effect of a urine-soaked perineum and decreased
host defenses against bacterial ascent associated with decreased urethral pressure.
Abnormal perivulvar anatomy (e.g., recessed vulva) also may predispose to UTI.
(6) Incontinence may develop in dogs predisposed to PSMI or may worsen in animals
with mild PSMI if polyuria and bladder distension develop as a consequence of
another underlying disease process (e.g., chronic renal failure, hyperadrenocorti-
cism, steroid administration, high salt diet).
(7) Physical examination findings usually are unremarkable in dogs with uncompli-
cated PSMI and routine laboratory tests such as urinalysis and urine culture are
normal or negative.
(8) Radiographically, the bladder neck is more caudally positioned (often within the
pelvic canal) in some female dogs with sphincter mechanism incompetence as
compared with continent female dogs. This radiographic feature has been referred
to as a pelvic bladder (Figures 13-7).
(9) MUCP is significantly lower and FPL significantly shorter on UPP in affected
(10) Incontinence is controlled in 75% to 90% of female dogs with PSMI treated with the
alpha-adrenergic agonist phenylpropanolamine (PPA).
FlGURE 13-7  Pelvic bladder (lateral abdominal radiograph). Note abnormal shape of bladder (lack of caudal
tapering) and displacement of bladder into pelvic canal. This abnormality of positioning can predispose the dog
to urinary incontinence
Disorders of Micturition and Urinary Incontinence ■ CHAPTER 13
419
 Phenylpropanolamine is the initial treatment of choice to restore urinary continence in dogs with PSMI
(a) PPA is used at a dosage of 1.0 to 1.5 mg/kg PO every 12 hours or every 8 hours
(standard preparation).
(b) PPA is also available as a sustained release product (Cystolamine, 75 mg cap-
sule). Once daily administration may be desirable for many owners. The rec
sop roy smou tz Aiaaa Od amsdes  st aunenonss go aoesop papuauno
weighing <18 kg. 1 capsule PO every 24 hours for dogs 19 to 45 kg. and 1 12
 sh ue arou uubram sho r smou  Araaa Od samsdes
(c) MUCP is increased on the UPP after treatment with PPA.
(d) Virtually all affected dogs have some improvement in continence after treat-
ment with PPA.
(e) The largest dose should be given at night to control incontinence while the dog
is sleeping. In dogs with incontinence only at night, dosing only at night can be
effective.
(f) PPA may become less effective with prolonged use (so-called tachyphylaxis)
 Occasionally, simply increasing the dosage of PPA is sufficient to regain control
of continence.
(g) Potential adverse effects include restlessness and hypertension.
(h) Relative contraindications to use include known underlying cardiac disease,
chronic kidney disease, or systemic hypertension.
with PSMI on PPA that have developed systemic hypertension.
(j) We recommend systemic blood pressure be measured before beginming PPA
treatment and periodically thereafter to identify the development of systemic
hypertension.
suaonsa yim panean soop panae jo %9g oh %og u paonuo st aouauuosu (in)
alone for PSMI.
(a) Estrogen increases the sensitivity of urethral alpha-adrenergic receptors to cat
echolamines; it also may increase the number of receptors.
Estrogens are an efective treatment for PSMl in many dogs and can be given much less frequentlythan PPA.
(b) MUCP is increased on the UPP after treatment with estrogens.
(c) Estrogen preparations.
(i) Diethylstilbestrol (DES)
(°) Dosage: 0.1 to 1.0 mg per dog PO for 3-5 days followed by 0.1 to 1.0 mg
PO every 3 to 7 days.
(°) DES has become more difficult to obtain because it is no longer used in
human patients.
(ii) Premarin (conjugated estrogens).
(°) Dosage: 20 μg/kg PO every 3 or 4 days.
(°) Obtained from pregnant mare's urine.
(°) Contains sodium estrone sulfate (50% to 65%), and sodium equilin
sulfate (20% to 35%).
(●) Estrone is converted to estradiol.
420
CHAPTER13DisordersofMicturitionandUrinaryIncontinence
(°) Although published information on the use of Premarin in dogs with
PSMI is lacking, we have had success with this product in our hospital.
(ili) Oestriol (lncurin).
(°) Dosage: 2 mg per day for 1 week followed by reduction to minimally
effective daily dose (0.25 to 2.0 mg) and finally alternate day dosing
(dose not related to body weight).
(°) Naturally-occurring, short-acting estrogen.
(°) Sixty-one percent of treated dogs achieved continence and 22% improved
for overall response rate of 83%.
(●) No hematologic abnormalities identified.
(iv) Potential complications of treatment with estrogens.
(°) Clinical signs of estrus.
(°) Perineal alopecia.
 sso t uaa-a e) uissarns mon ao (o)
seen after use of long-acting injectable estrogens such as estradiol cypi-
 onate, or with overdose). We have not encountered bone marrow sup-
 pression in dogs receiving low dose intermittent estrogens.
(12) Combination of estrogens with PPA.
(a) Clinical experience suggests that some dogs require both PPA and estrogens for
 optimal control of incontinence suggesting synergism of effect.
(b) One study indicated that adding PPA to estradiol did not result in additional
increases in urethral resistance.
(13) Combination of PPA with anticholinergic drugs. Some dogs that fail to respond to
PPA alone respond with the addition of flavoxate or oxybutynin. This finding sug-
gests that bladder detrusor instability may complicate PSMI in some dogs.
(14) Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) analogues.
(a) Decreased estrogen concentration after spaying lead to extremely increased
concentrations of gonadotropins: Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and
luteinizing hormone (LH)
(b) GnRH analogues decrease FSH and LH concentrations by downregulating
gonadotropin receptors in the pituitary gland.
(c) Treatment with GnRH analogues controlled incontinence in 60% of a small
group of dogs with PSMI that had failed PPA treatment or were not able to take
this medication due to side effects.
(d) The original hypothesis that increased FSH and LH concentrations in spayed
dogs affects urethral resistance has not been supported by further investigations.
(i) No correlation between MUCP on UPP and plasma concentrations of FSH
and LH was observed.
(ii) Spayed incontinent female dogs actually had lower FSH and LH concentra-
tions than did spayed continent female dogs.
(ii) GnRH analogues (i.e., leuprolide) had no effect on MUCP or other UPP
 parameters regardless of clinical response observed.
(e) GnRH analogues may have a direct effect on the bladder to cause detrusor
muscle relaxation.
(f) Leuprolide had no effect on UPP of spayed continent beagles before or 8 weeks
after treatment.
(g) Cystometrograms of treated dogs showed increased bladder threshold vol-
ume and increased compliance (i.e., increased volume without an increase in
pressure).
Disorders of Micturition and Urinary Incontinence  CHAPTER 13
421
(h) Dosage: 5 to 10 mg leuprolide (Lupron) intramuscularly.
(i) Advantages.
(i) No known adverse effects.
(ii) Single injection may last 6 to 8 months.
(iii) May be useful when dog does not respond to PPA or when PPA is contra
indicated.
(°) Systemic hypertension.
(0) Underlying cardiac disease.
(●) Nervousness on PPA.
(15) Dogs with refractory PSMI can be treated by submucosal urethral injections of col-
lagen injections.
(a) The goal is to create cystoscopically-visible 360-degree apposition of the urethral
mucosa by submucosal implantation of collagen at three sites: The 12-o'clock posi-
tion (0 degrees), 4-o'clock position (120 degrees), and 8-o'dlock position (240 degrees)
approximately 1 to 1.5 cm caudal to the vesicourethral junction (Figure 13-8).
Submucosal urethral collagen injections improve continence in most dogs that have failed PPA treatment
forPSMI.
(b) 50% to 80% response rate with collagen alone as treatment.
(c) Dogs that fail to respond to PPA can be treated with urethral collagen injections.
improvement in continence may be achieved by adding PPA to the treatment
regimen.
(d) In one study, collagen injections controlled incontinence in 27 of 40 dogs treated
for an average of 17 months (range, 1-64 months).
(e) Advantages: Avoids the need for daily medication.
(f) Disadvantages.
(i) Expensive and may not have long duration of effect in some dogs.
(ii) Requires special equipment and techmical expertise.
urinary incontinence.
422
CHAPTER 13 ■ Disorders of Micturition and Urinary Incontinence
(16) Surgical colposuspension (Figure 13-9).
(a) Distal aspect of the vagina is sutured to the pre-pubic tendon, which repositions
the bladder neck and proximal urethra cranially into the abdominal cavity.
(b) Facilitates transmission of intra-abdominal pressure to the bladder neck and
proximal urethra.
(c) Urethra is functionally lengthened and compressed against the pelvic brim.
(d) Immediately improves FPL and MUCP on UPP postoperatively.
(e) Response rate of approximately 50% is seen but relatively poor success rate
when evaluated one year after surgery.
(f) Medical treatment with PPA improved continence in dogs that relapsed after
colposuspension.
(g) Complications.
(i) Transient dysuria and stranguria associated with obstruction.
(i) Suture breakdowm and relapse.
(17) Sphincter mechanism incontinence occurs rarely in male dogs and is poorly respon-
sive to medical therapy.
(a) Long-acting testosterone injections may be tried.
(i) Testosterone propionate 2.2 mg/kg IM 3 times/ wk; or,
(ii) Testosterone cypionate 5.5 mg/kg IM every 30 days.
(ii) In a study of male dogs with PSMI a poor (20%) response to testosterone
was observed.
(b) PPA also may be tried but the response (40% to 50%) is much lower than the
response of females with PSMI.
 FIGURE 13-9  Colposuspension. The vagina is repositioned cranially from the intrapelvic position to an intra-
abdominal position by suture placement between the vagina and prepubic tendon. This procedure effectively
increases the length of the urethra and its closure pressure. (Drawn by Tim Vojt.)
Disorders of Micturition and Urinary Incontinence  CHAPTER 13
423
(c) Vasopexy is a surgical alternative to increase urethral tone in intact male dogs
with urinary incontinence.
(d) Collagen injection performed antegrade using a cystoscope inserted into the
Anatomic Abnormality
 a.  Ectopic ureter is the most common anatomic abnormality causing urinary incontinence
in dogs; it is very rare in cats.
(1) Usually young at presentation (less than 1 year of age; females tend to be presented
at a younger age than males).
(2) Females are diagnosed more often than males.
(3) Ectopic ureters may be more common in males than appreciated because affected
males frequently are not incontinent as a consequence of the length of urethra distal
to the opening of ectopic ureter.
(4) More common in certain breeds.
(a) Siberian huskies.
(b) Labrador retrievers.
(c) Golden retrievers.
(d) Soft coated Wheaten terriers.
(e) Newfoundlands.
(f) Poodles.
(5) Bilateral involvement is detected more often than unilateral; early reports of
 primarily unilateral involvement likely were affected by limitations of imaging
(i.e., lack of urethrocystoscopy).
(6) Most ectopic ureters in female dogs terminate in the urethra after tunneling from
more proximal locations (Figure 13-10).
(7) Extramural ectopic ureters are reported rarely. Extramural ectopic ureters fail to
attach and open at the bladder trigone. Extramural ectopic ureters bypass the
R
IUS
EUO
FGURE 13-10  Map of termination of ectopic ureteral openings. EU0, extermal urethral orifice; US, intermal
urethral sphincter; V vagina. (From Canmizzo KL, McLoughlin MA, Mattoon JS, et al: Evaluation of transurethral
cystoscopy and excretory urography for diagnosis of ectopic ureters in female dogs: 25 cases (1992-2000)
JAm Vet Med Ass0c 223:475-481, 2003.)
424CHAPTER 13  Disorders of Micturition and Urinary Incontinence
bladder and open directly into the urinary tract distal to the trigone or directly into
the vagina or vestibule. We have observed this form of ectopic ureter only rarely
(8) Ectopic ureters uncommonly terminate in the vestibule.
(9) Ectopic ureters may terminate in the vagina or uterus, but we have not encountered
this presentation in our hospital.
(10) Ectopic ureters in male dogs usually are bilateral (15 of 16 dogs of which more than
half were Labrador retrievers in a study recently completed at The Ohio State Uni-
versity). Four of the ectopic ureters were associated with ureteroceles. Three did
not have urinary incontinence. Surgical correction produced a satisfactory outcome
in 11 of 12 dogs.
(11) Positive results on excretory urography (Figure 13-11) can establish a diagnosis
of ectopic ureter but negative results do not eliminate ectopic ureter as a possible
diagnosis. Both false positive and false negative results may occur. Oblique posi-
all can aid in identification of an ectopic ureter. Observing the typical "T" configura-
tion of the ureter as it enters the trigone does not ensure that the ureter opens into
the bladder at the normal location.
Excretory urography can establish a diagnosis of ectopic ureter but failure to identify an ectopic ureter
on excretory urography does not eliminate the possibility of one being present.
(12) Computed tomography in combination with excretory urography is the gold
standard for diagnosis of ectopic ureter in male dogs because ectopic ureteral
openings can be missed during urethroscopy due to limitations of the procedure
in males.
ureter is dilated. Ultrasonography also is useful to identify hydroureter or hydro-
nephrosis. The presence of these abnormalities in patients with urinary inconti-
nence is compatible with a diagnosis of ectopic ureter. Hydroureter can result from
obstruction of the submucosal segment of the ectopic ureter in the urethra, a devel-
opmental abnormality of the ureter, or the effects of UTI. Ultrasonography also can
identify unilateral renal aplasia or hypoplasia that occasionally can be observed in
association withi ectopic ureter.
FIGURE 13-11  Excretory urogram with oblique positioning of a dog with an ectopic ureter. Note contrast in the
ectopic ureter passing beyond the trigone and terminating distally in the urethra (arrow)
Disorders of Micturition and Urinary Incontinence  CHAPTER 13
425
(14) Color flow Doppler ultrasonography can identify jets of urine entering the bladder
at the trigone. The presence of such urine jets usually excludes ectopic ureter as a
diagnosis, but it is not always possible to obtain the necessary images.
(15) Urethrocystoscopy is the gold standard for the diagnosis of ectopic ureters in
(i.e., two C-shaped openings facing each other) in the trigone conclusively rules
out ectopic ureter (Figure 13-12).
|Urethrocystoscopy is the gold standard for diagnosis of ectopic ureters in female dogs
(16) A definitive diagnosis of ectopic ureter is made during urethrocystoscopy by visu-
alization of additional openings in the urethra or vestibule. The ectopic ureter is
classified as proximal, mid, or distal urethra (Figure 13-13). The ectopic ureteral
openings in the urethra are always located dorsally or dorsolaterally as a conse-
quence of the abnormal embryologic development.
(17) Other abnormalities that can accompany ectopic ureter include:
(a) Hydronephrosis.
(b) Renal hypoplasia.
(c) Pyelonephritis.
(d) Hydroureter.
(e) Bladder hypoplasia (rare, associated with bilateral ectopic ureters)
(f) Urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence.
(18) Surgical transposition of the ureter is helpful in controlling incontinence in approx-
imately 50% of affected dogs. The owner must be warned that many affected dogs
 have coexisting sphincter mechanism incompetence and remain incontinent after
surgical correction.
(19) Surgical excision of the intramural portion of the ectopic ureter may improve the
surgical success rate to 70% to 80% (Figure 13-14)
(20) Endoscopic laser ablation of ectopic ureters has recently been reported. The laser
can be used to ablate the submucosal tunnel and create a neo-ureterostomy in a
more normal trigonal position.
(21) Submucosal urethral collagen injections can be used in some dogs with ectopic ure
ters that continue to have urinary incontinence after conventional surgery and can
be considered instead of surgery for dogs with proximally located ectopic ureters.
FGURE 13-12 ■ Normal ureteral openings in the bladder observed during cystoscopy. The presence of two
"C-shaped" ureteral openings facing one another in the trigone region rules out ectopic ureter.
426
CHAPTER 13  Disorders of Micturition and Urinary Incontinence
B
FIGURE 13-13  A, Bilateral ectopic ureters (arrows) terminating in the proximal urethra. Arrowhead points to a
dark region that represents the lumen of the bladder. B, Unilateral ectopic ureter opening in the middle section of 
the urethra (arrowhead). The arrow points to the urethra leading toward the bladder.
FlGURE 13-14  Intraurethral ureterectomy. The distal ureteral opening first is catheterized, the ureteral wall is
dissected, and the defect sutured closed. (Drawn by Tim Vojt.)
Disorders of Micturition and Urinary Incontinence ■ CHAPTER 13 427
b. Vestibulovaginal stenosis has been described in association with urinary incontinence
 ssq a   a s h  so an  n sn s
contrast radiographic measurements made during vaginography. Considerable vari-
ability inthe width of this region exists innormal dogs, making establishment the diag-
nosis by radiography difficult. Measurements also are affected by reproductive status
 un snsa go aeis an uo Suuadap Aiea u pue (pakeds no pun 'a)
female dogs. Cystoscopy rarely confirms narrowing that would be considered ste
notic. We do not believe so-called vestibulovaginal stenosis plays a causative role
in urinary incontinence in dogs. Procedures desigmed to enlarge this region are not
recommended.
Vestibulovaginal stenosis does not play a causative role in urinary incontinence in dogs. Procedures
 to enlarge this region are not recommended.
c. Other anatomic abnormalities that have been associated with urinary incontinence in
dogs and cats are rare.
(1) Patent urachus.
(2) Bladder exstrophy.
(3) Urethrovaginal fistulas.
(4) Ureterovaginal fistula (e.g., after spaying).
(5) Female pseudohermaphroditism.
(6) Urethral diverticulum.
(7) Ureterocele.
Paradoxical (Obstructive) Incontinence
a. Overflow incontinence occurs when intravesical pressure exceeds urethral tone. This
type of incontinence occurs in male cats with urethral obstruction and in dogs with
urethral stones or outflow obstruction caused by tumors.
(1) Incontinence has been reported after prostatectomy in male dogs with prostatic
disease. It can also be encountered after castration for treatment of prostatomegaly
(2) Idiopathic incontinence in feline leukemia virus (FeLV)-positive cats and feline
immunodeficiency virus (FTV)-positive cats.
(3) Idiopathic incontinence in FIV-positive cats.
(4) Incontinence after perineal urethrostomy in cats is thought to be a consequence of
(5) Urge incontinence associated with UTI (a form of detrusor hyperactivity or spastic
bladder).
(6) Idiopathic detrusor hyperactivity (involuntary smooth muscle contractions during
the filling phase).
Neurogenic Causes of Urinary Incontinence
Upper Motor Neuron (UMN or Automatic Bladder)
a. CNS lesions located cranial to sacral spinal cord segments S1-S2 can cause urinary
incontinence.
 b. Partial voiding may be observed because the local reflex arc is intact but the reflex only
is initiated at high bladder volume.
C.Ahigh residual volume typically is noted in the bladder.
d. It is difficult to express the bladder because the extemal urethral sphincter lacks UMN
inhibition.
428  CHAPTER 13  Disorders of Micturition and Urinary Incontinence
e. Inability to initiate voluntary voiding.
f. The underlying neurologic disease responsible for the incontinence should be identi-
fied and treated if possible.
rologic disorders not amenable to correction.
Lower Motor Neuron (LMN or Autonomous Bladder)
a. Due to a spinal cord lesion that interrupts the local reflex arc in sacral spinal cord seg-
ments S1-S2
b. Partial emptying is observed when intravesical or intra-abdominal pressure exceeds
the elasticity of urethra.
c. Residual volume usually is higher than that observed in an UMN bladder.
d.  It is easy to manually express the bladder because the external urethral sphincter pro-
vides minimal to no resistance.
e.
 Inability to initiate voluntary voiding.
f. The underlying neurologic disease responsible for the incontinence should be identi-
fied and treated if possible.
 g. Training the owner to perform intermitent catheterization at least twice per day in
males or teaching them to manually express the animal's bladder are options for
patients with neurologic disorders not amenable to correction.
Reflex Dyssynergy
a. Reflex dyssynergy or detrusor urethral dyssynergia occurs when detrusor muscular
contraction is not synchronized with urethral relaxation (i.e., the detrusor muscle con-
tracts but the urethra fails to relax)
b. The diagnosis is made by excluding mechanical obstruction (e.g., radiographic studies.
passing a urethral catheter) and by observation of urination. Dogs with reflex dyssyn
 ergy initiate urination normally but then urine flow stops abruptly and is followed by
dribbling.
lack of mechanical obstruction and high residual urine volume. Residual volume in
dogs normally is <0.4 ml/kg and dogs with reflex dyssynergy may have residual urine
volumes of 20 mL/kg or more.
d.  Middle-aged large to giant breed male dogs typically are affected.
benzamine followed by bethanechol in a few days if impaired bladder contractility is
suspected.
(1) Phenoxybenzamine.
(a) 0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg PO every 12 hours or every 8 hours.
(b) Lowers preprostatic urethral tone but has limited to no effect on postprostatic
and penile urethral tone in males (i.e., primary effect is on smooth muscle of
urethra).
(c) Primary adverse effect is hypotension.
(2) Bethanechol.
(a) 5 to 15 mg total dose PO every 8 hours in dogs; 1.25 to 5.0 mg total dose PO
every 8 hours in cats.
(b) Parasympathomimetic drug with primarily muscarinic effects used alone for
detrusor hypoactivity (bladder atony) or in combination with phenoxybenza-
mine for reflex dyssynergy.
Disorders of Micturition and Urinary Incontinence  CHAPTER 13429
(c) Adverse effects.
(i) Mild nicotinic effects may cause norepinephrine release at sympathetic
postganglionic terminals and result in increased urethral tone. Phenoxyben
zamine will block this effect.
(ii) Clinical sigms of parasympathetic excess: Anorexia, salivation, lacrimation,
abdominal cramping, vomiting, diarrhea.
(d) Bethanechol has become difficult to obtain due to limited use in human medicine.
(3) Intermittent catheterization to maintain low residual volume and encourage
recovery of bladder contractility is recommended during the first few days of
therapy.
(4) Specific alpha-2 blockers have little effect on canine urethral tone and specific
alpha-1 blockers may be preferable to nonspecific alpha blockers. The specific
alpha-1 antagonist prazosin may be used at a dosage of 0.1 mg/kg/day PO divided
f. If alpha blockers fail to relax the urethra, striated muscle relaxants such as diazepam
and dantrolene can be considered.
(1) Diazepam.
(a) Used for urethral striated muscle spasm.
(b) Dosage in dogs: 2 to 10 mg PO every 8 hours.
(2) Dantrolene.
(a) Direct acting skeletal muscle relaxant used for urethral striated muscle spasm.
Kiaaa oi smou Zl A1aaa Od Sx/Su g ol I sI ssop ul aesop papuauuosay (q)
8 hours.
monitored.
g. Chronic bladder hyporeflexia and recurrent chronic UTI are long term complications
home.
h. The condition can be frustrating to treat and may lead to euthanasia.
i. When medical treatments fail, consider placement of permanent tube cystostomy or
placement of a urethral stent if a focal area of urethral contraction can be identified.
WHAT DO WE DO?
· Make certain abnormal urine leakage is a result of incontinence rather than pollakiuria or polyuria.
· Perform a rectal examination to be sure masses of the urethra, pelvic canal, or caudal bladder are not
contributing to the problem. At the same time, evaluate for sublumbar lymphadenopathy as well as
critically evaluate anal tone and the bulbocavernosus reflex to be sure lower motor neuron disorders
are not the cause of urinary incontinence.
· Evaluate for urine retention and overflow by estimating the size of the bladder before and after
voiding. Catheterize the bladder after voiding to determine residual urine volume in animals sus-
pected of incomplete voiding.
ated overflow incontinence and also the urine sediment to identify any associated inflammation.
· Obtain bacterial culture of a urine sample collected by cystocentesis in animals without an obvious
diagmosis or in those not responding to treatment.
· Perform imaging of the urinary tract (e.g., plain and contrast radiography, ultrasonography) to iden
fify calculi, anatomical abnormalities or tumors that may be contributing factors.
430CHAPTER 13  Disorders of Micturition and Urinary Incontinence
· Use urethrocystoscopy as the definitive method to diagnose ectopic ureters in female dogs.
· Treat PSMI with PPA as the initial drug of choice.
· Consider treatment of PSMI with low doses of estrogens in dogs with PSMI that do not respond to
PPA or consider adding estrogen in addition to PPA
· Measure blood pressure before and during treatment with PPA.
● Consider submucosal urethral collagen injections to increase urethral tone in dogs with PSMI that
have not responded to PPA and estrogens.
· Consider submucosal urethral collagen injections as a treatment for proximal ectopic ureters
(i.e., those terminating in the proximal one third of the urethra) as an alternative to conventional
surgery.
· Use intraurethral ureteral remnant excision and reconstruction of the urethra and trigone as the
procedure of choice to treat ectopic ureters (rather than conventional ureteral transposition).
THOUGHTS FOR THE FUTURE
· New and better materials will become available to replace collagen for submucosal urethral injec-
 tions. Beneficial treatment effects will last longer.
● The role of high concentrations of FSH and LH in spayed female dogs with PSMI will be clarified
and more effective GnRH analogues will be discovered and become available.
· Drugs without serious adverse effects will become available to control detrusor hyperactivity (over-
active bladder).
· Urodynamics (UPP and CMG) will become more widely available as diagnostic tools to evaluate
dogs with urinary incontinence.
· Hydraulic occluder devices implanted around the urethra will become widely available to increase
urethral tone.
 COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS
we sometimes encounter those with proximal ectopic ureters that develop clinical signs as urethral
closure pressure declines with aging.
· Urinary incontinence from ectopic ureters occurs constantly rather than intermittently. This is gen
erally true, but some dogs with confirmed ectopic ureters (especially those with proximal urethral
terminations) incontinence is intermittent, possibly due to varying urethral tone from sympathetic
nervous system input.
· Ectopic ureter is usually a unilateral condition. Older literature states this to be the case but when
cystoscopic imaging is used, nearly all of the cases have bilaterial ectopia.
· A positive urine culture is not expected in dogs with ectopic ureter(s). True in most cases. Some
have a positive urine culture due to wicking of bacteria if the incontinence is severe..
· A positive urine culture almost never occurs in dogs with PSMI. True for most, but as discussed
previously, wicking of bacteria from severe incontinence and perineal wetting can occur. Also in
PSMI, mid-urethral pressure is decreased. High mid-urethral tone retards the ascent of bacteria in
normal dogs.
· It is OK to treat for presumed PSMI in dogs without results of a urinalysis. No, since UTI and sub-
 maximally concentrated urine will be missed as factors contributing to the incontinence.
· PPA is safe for use in all dogs. Though reputed to be safe in young experimental dogs, it is not
 always safe in clinical dogs. Some dogs become aggressive, lose their sleep patterns, or otherwise act
anxious. Some dogs develop systemic hypertension after PPA. PPA is not safe for use for dogs with
pre-existing CKD, heart disease, or systemic hypertension.
Disorders of Micturition and Urinary Incontinence  CHAPTER 13 431
Mol ne suaonsg 'soop un Isd rog juauean se snorasuep si onenshunpe uaonsa asop mol ·
doses are usually quite safe - we have never encountered a case with bone marrow suppression
related to low dose estrogen therapy when given for maintenance once or twice weekly.
· Imaging of the urinary tract is useless in those suspected with PSMI. Though many with PSMI will
have normal abdominal radiographic findings, some will have the presence of a pelvic-bladder
disclosed and others may reveal non-palpable urinary stones. Pelvic bladder can magnify the prob-
lems associated with PSMI and incontinence.
sh sisoeip si ssnsip ci yinoua si (s)raam sidoioa jo anuasard a roy dI roy shmsai aaesan ●
the cause for the urinary dribbling. Not necessarily. It is difficult to know for certain that an ectopic
ureter is present or not with this method of imaging. When an IVP is combined with fluoroscopy or
with CT, it becomes far less likely to mess the presence of an ectopic ureter.
· A negative ultrasound exam is great evidence that an ectopic ureter is not present. Not true. Ultra-
sound can be suggestive for ectopic ureter when the presence of hydroureter is found but not when
the ureter is normal in size.
· One does not need to perform a rectal exam routinely in dogs with urinary incontinence. Definitely
not true. Sometimes this is the only way to know that there is urethral disease (tumor, proliferative
urethrifis) that may be contribufing to urinary incontinence.
SUMMARY TIPS
· Obtain oblique views and perform negative contrast cystography at the time of excretory urography
to increase the likelihood of identifying an ectopic ureter.
● When urine specific gravity is <1.025, consider polyuria and overflow as factors potentially contrib-
ufing to urinary inconfinence.
· Remember that computed tomography can be used in combination with excretory urography to
confirm ectopic ureters in male dogs.
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
Q: I have a l-year-old spayed female Doberman pinscher that has had urinary incontinence for
at least 6 months. There is no history of dysuria or hematuria and the dog appears normal in all
other ways. Urinalysis shows a specific gravity of 1.044, negative dipstrip reactions and inactive
urine sediment. The dog was spayed at 6 months of age. Which is more likely, ectopic ureter or
PSMI?
A: A female Doberman pinscher with incontinence is presumed to have PSMl until proven other
Wise. In the United States, Dobermans have the highest frequency of PSMI, and some develop inconti-
 nence before they are spayed. Ectopic ureters are very rare in Doberman pinschers.
Q: I have a 6-year-old golden retriever that recently developed urinary incontinence when lying
down and during sleep. Physical examination is normal and urinalysis is unremarkable. Baseline
blood pressure is normal. I think she has PSMl. Should if treat her with PPA without further diag-
nostic evaluation?
A: That approach seems reasonable. Golden retrievers, however, are a breed commonly affected
by ectopic ureter, and she could have both PSMI and ectopic ureter. If an ectopic ureter is present,
it likely has a proximal urethral termination. After spaying and development of PSMI, urethral clo
sure pressure may decrease to a level that allows urine to leak out rather than refluxing back into
the bladder, as would occur when urethral pressure is higher. Thus, the decreased urethral pressure
associated with PSMI has allowed the ectopic ureter to manifest itself. If the dog's response to PPA
432 CHAPTER 13Disorders of Micturition and Urinary Incontinence
factor. If a proximal ectopic ureter is present, submucosal urethral collagen injections could be
performed.
Q: When are submucosal collagen injections indicated in the treatment of PSMI?
A: Submucosal urethral collagen injections usually are used in dogs that have not responded ade
quately to PPA or estrogen treatment. Collagen injections also may be used in dogs that cannot toler-
ate PPA (i.e., those with systemic hypertension or cardiac disease and those that develop undesirable
behavior changes on PPA)
Q: Submucosal urethral collagen injections for PSMI are expensive. My client wants to know how
successful this procedure is likely to be.
A: Nearly all dogs experience an improvement in urinary continence after collagen injections. Not
all dogs however will be completely continent after the procedure. Many dogs can achieve full con-
tinence when PPA treatment is added to the treatment regimen in addition to the collagen injections.
Urinary continence was maintained for an average of 17 months in one study. In some dogs, the treat-
ment effect lasts years, in others it only lasts months, and in some it doesn't work at all
Q: I have a large breed dog with an UMN bladder related to intervertebral disk disease. The dog
does not urinate on its own, and I put the dog on diazepam to make it easier to express the bladder.
Despite the diazepam, the bladder remains difficult to express. What else can I do?
A: Diazepam relaxes skeletal muscle in the urethra. Urethral tone is maintained to a large extent
such as acepromazine or prazosin can decrease urethral tone by virtue of their alpha-adrenergic recep-
tor blocking effects.
Q: I have heard about gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues such as leuprolide to treat
A: GnRH analogues initially were thought to work by increasing urethral resistance but recent
studies have shown that this original hypothesis may not be true. GnRH analogues had no effect on
 MUCP or other urethral pressure profile parameters regardless of clinical response. GnRH analogues
may have a direct effect on the bladder to cause detrusor muscle relaxation. GnRH analogues may be
useful in dogs with PSMI that do not respond to PPA or when PPA is contraindicated (e.g., high blood
pressure, underlying cardiac disease).
Q: I have just examined a 3-year-old intact male Gordon setter with a history of occasionally being
unable to urinate when the owner comes home from work. The dog is kenneled in the owner's
absence and never urinates in its kennel. When taken out of the kernel, the dog sometimes dribbles
urine and is only able to generate small spurts of urine when taken outside to urinate. The owners
note that the dog is very uncomfortable when the posturing to urinate and abdomen is very tense.
The growls when its abdomen is touched. Physical examination is normal. What should be done?
A: The history is classic for reflex dyssynergy. Reflex dyssynergy typically occurs in large breed
male dogs. Urinalysis and urine culture should be performed to rule out UTI. Sometimes urine flow
oad cn mou nen aq u rmo aui rappq a Ada on paoad aq pmous unzaae
intermittent clean catheterization to empty the bladder and keep it relatively small until reflex dys-
synergy resolves. Unfortunately, sometimes reflex dyssynergy is a permanent disorder. Treatment with
drugs that reduce urethral tone such as acepromazine or prazosin can be helpful in allowing spontane-
ous voiding to occur. Longstanding dyssynergy may result in bladder atony, which makes long term
 management very difficult. Inadequate opportunity to urinate over an extended period of time may be
Disorders of Micturition and Urinary Incontinence  CHAPTER 13 433
a risk factor for development of intermittent reflex dyssynergy. Providing increased opportunities to
void may decrease the occurrence of dyssynergy in these cases. Decreased water intake during periods
of limited opportunity to urinate (such as during kenneling) also may be a useful maneuver. We have
noticed increased risk for dyssynergy in male dogs that are kenneled for extended periods of time and
in nervous dogs.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Angioletti A, De Francesco I, Vergottini M, Battocchio ML: Urinary incontinence after spaying in the bitch: incidence and
oestrogen-therapy, Vet Res Commun 28(Suppl 1): 153-155, 2004.
Arnold S, Hubler M, Lott-Stolz G, Rusch P: Treatment of urinary incontinence in bitches by end oscopic injection of glutar-
aldehyde cross-linked collagen,  Small Anim Pract 37:163-168, 1996.
sis of 54 cases, Vet Rec 139:542-546, 1996.
Bacon NJ, Oni O, White RAS: Treatment of urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence in 11 bitches with a sustained-
release formulation of phenylpropanolamine, Vet Rec 151:373-376, 2002.
Barth A, Reichler IM, Hubler M, et al: Evaluation of long-term effects of endoscopic injection of collage into the urethral
submucosa for treatment of urethral sphincter incompetence in female dogs: 40 cases (1993-2000), I Am Vet Med Assoc
226:7376, 2005.
ectopia in male dogs: four cases (2006-2007), β A Vet Med Assoc 232:10261034, 2008.
Cannizzo KL, McLoughlin MA, Mattoon JS, et al: Evaluation of transurethral cystoscopy and excretory urography for
diagnosis of ectopic uureters in female dogs: 25 cases (1992-2000),  Arm Vet Med Assoc 223:475 481, 2003.
 Diaz Espineira MM, Viehoff FW, Nickel RF: Idiopathic detrusor-urethral dyssynergia in dogs: a retrospective analysis of
22 cases, / Small Ani Pract 39:264-270, 1998.
Gookin JL, Stone EA, Sharp NJ: Urinary incontinence in dogs and cats. Part 1. Urethral pressure profilometry, Compend
Contin Educ Vet 18:407418, 1996.
Hamaide AJ, Grand JG, Farnir F, et al: Urodynamic and morphologic changes in the lower portion of the urogenital tract
after administration of estriol alone or in combination with phenylpropanolamine in sexually intact and spayed female
dogs, Ar  Vet Res 67:901908, 2006.
urethral sphincter mechanism in the bitch, Vet Rec 127:537-542, 1990.
Lamb CR, Gregory SP: Ultrasonographic findings in 14 dogs with ectopic ureter, Vet Radiol Lltrasound 39:218-223, 1998.
and pharmacologic management in two dogs and a cat, } Am Vet Med Assoc 191:1439-1442, 1987.
 Nickel RF, van den Brom W: Simultaneous diuresis cysto-urethrometry and multi-channel urethral pressure profilometry
in female dogs with refractory urinary incontinence, Am J Vet Res 58:691-696, 1997.
Rawlings C, Barsanti JA, Mahaffey MB, et al: Evaluation of colposuspension for treatment of incontinence in spayed
female dogs, I A Vet Med Assoc 219:770-775, 2001.
Reichler IM, Jochle W, Piche CA, et al: Effect of a long-acting GnRH analogue or placebo on plasma LH/FSH, urethral
pressure profiles and clinical signs of urinary incontinence due to sphincter mechanism incompetence in bitches,
Theriogenology 66:1227-1236, 2006.
Reichler IM, Hubler M, Jochle W, et al: The effect of GnRH analogues on urinary incontinence after ablation of the ovaries
in dogs, Theriogenology 60:1207-1216, 2003.
Richter KP, Ling GV: Clinical response and urethral pressure profile changes after phenylpropanolamine in dogs with
primary sphincter incompetence, / Am Vet Med Assoc 187:605-611, 1985.
Scott L, Leddy M, Bernay F, Davot JL: Evaluation of phenylpropanolamine in the treatment of urethral sphincter mecha-
nism incompetence in the bitch, β Small Anim Pract 43:493-496, 2002.
 Stocklin-Gautschi NM, Hassig M, Reichler IM, et al: The relationship of urinary incontinence to early spaying in bitches
} Reprod Fertil (Suppl 57):233-236, 2001.
Weber UT, Arnold S, Hubler M, Kupper JR: Surgical treatment of male dogs with urinary incontinence due to urethral
sphincter mechanism incompetence, Veterinary Surgery 26:51-56, 1997.
CHAPTER
14 Tumors of the Urinary
System
Renal Neoplasia
1.Primary renal tumors are uncommon, comprising approximately 1% of all neoplasms in dogs and
1% to 1.5% of all neoplasms in cats.
A. Occur with equal frequency in the left or right kidney.
B. Approximately 4% are bilateral.
 II. Most are of epithelial origin (approximately 85%), metastasize, and are associated with a poor
prognosis.
I11.
 Problems at presentation:
A. Renal hematuria (painless).
B. Renal failure if bilateral involvement (e.g., as with lymphosarcoma [LSA]).
C. Mass effect: Based on abdominal palpation or finding on imaging with ultrasound or radio-
graphs (Figure 14-1).
 D. Paraneoplastic syndromes: Polycythemia, extreme leukocytosis, cachexia, hypoglycemia,
hypertrophic osteopathy.
E. Metastases: Bone, lung, lymph nodes.
 IV.  Definitive diagnosis requires biopsy in most instances.
A. LSA frequently can be diagnosed by fine-needle aspiration cytology.
B. Aspiration cytology can be highly suggestive for renal adenocarcinoma.
Renal Adenoma
1.Approximately 15% of primary renal epithelial tumors.
11.
Usually an incidental finding on necropsy.
1I.T
Typically solitary nodules <2 cm in diameter.
IV.  Arise from the epithelium of the proximal convoluted tubule.
Renal Carcinoma
 1. Most common primary renal tumor of dogs; occur sporadically in cats.
I1.
 Usually occurs in older dogs (average age, 8 years), but can occur in dogs younger than 2 years of
age. Affected cats typically are older than 9 years of age.
Male dogs are more commonly affected than female dogs; in cats there is no sex or breed
predilections.
 Renal carcinoma is the most common primary renal tumor of dogs.
434
Tumors of the Urinary System  CHAPTER 14
435
8C
LTKIDNEY
8.0
Ab
Ge
sto
A
RTKIDNEY
H8.0MHz
General
85dBT1/+2/3/
B
HGURE 14-1  Renal ultrasonography of normal and neoplastic kidney. Note normal left kidney in A (length
of 5.2 cm) compared with the very enlarged (length 8.5 cm) and misshapen right kidney, B. The right kidney
is also quite hyperechoic. The right kidney was enlarged due to a benign tumor (myxoma). (Courtesy of Dr.
Lisa Zekas and the Radiology Section of The Ohio State University College of Veterinary Medicine, Columbus,
Ohio.)
CLINICAL SIGNS
A. Include hematuria, palpable abdominal mass, and weight loss.
B. Polycythemia may be seen due to increased erythropoietin production.
C. Hypertrophic osteopathy may be present with or without pulmonary metastases.
D. Other paraneoplastic syndromes include disseminated intravascular coagulation, neutro-
philic leukocytosis, and bone infarcts.
E. Metastases often are present by the time of presentation.
GROSS OR ULTRASONOGRAPHIC APPEARANCE
A. Spherical or ovoid mass, usually on one pole of the kidney.
B. Typically well demarcated; the remaining renal tissue is atrophic and compressed
(Figure 14-2).
C. Usually gray or light yellow in color, with areas of necrosis and hemorrhage.
D. Can invade the renal pelvis, ureter, renal vein, and hilar lymphatics.
436CHAPTER 14Tumors of the Urinary System
RT KIDNEY
S
.35ch
FIGURE 14-2 ■ Renal adenocarcinoma in an older cat. Note well-demarcated nodular region on the cranial
pole of the right kidney of this ultrasound image (1.35 × 1.24 cm). The diagnosis was established by fine-needle
aspiration (FNA) and by surgical removal that followed.
Nodular Dermatofibrosis With Renal Cystadenocarcinoma in
German Shepherd Dogs
1.  Autosomal dominant syndrome; 6 % of German shepherd dogs in Norway are affected with
renal tumors.
I1.Cystadenocarcinoma is usually bilateral and can metastasize to lymph nodes, peritoneum, liver,
spleen, lung, and bone.
Il.  All breeds are potentially at risk but most commonly reported in German shepherds. No sex
predisposition.
IV. Lesions of the skin and subcutis are the main reason for presentation. Some dogs are lame as a
consequence of lesions on the paws that frequently are overlooked. Ulceration and inflamma-
tion can be associated with the skin lesions.
V. Fibrosis may occur both in skin and kidney. Tubular obstruction and cyst formation occur in the
kidneys. The lesion may progress from cyst to cystic adenomatous hyperplasia to cystadenoma
and ultimately to cystadenocarcinoma.
Vl.Affected kidneys may be enlarged and abnormally shaped on abdominal radiographs. Cysts of
varying size are identified on renal ultrasonography, which also confirms changes in renal size
and shape.
Vl1. Computed tomography identifies multiple cysts and tumor masses of varying size bilaterally.
The earliest lesions have been detected between 4 and 5 years of age, with the smallest cysts
being 2 to 3 mm in diameter. Small amounts of tumor tissue often can be identified inside the
cyst wall or renal parenchyma.
VIII.
 In one study, mean age at first detection of nodular dermatofibrosis was 6.4 years, renal cystad-
enocarcinoma with nodular dermatofibrosis was 8.2 years, and death occurred at 9.3 years.
 IX. Most intact females also have multiple uterine leiomyomas at the time of diagnosis.
 X. Euthanasia usually results, as a consequence of extensive renal lesions and metastases.
Nephroblastoma (Wilms Tumor, Embryonal Nephroma)
 I.  Occurs sporadically in dogs and cats.
II.More common in adult dogs than in young dogs (Figure 14-3).
Tumors of the Urinary System  CHAPTER 14 437
8.0MI
Abdo
85dB
Stor
FGURE 14-3  Nephroblastoma. Ultrasonographic image from an 8-year-old dog with renal enlargement. Note
irregular renal enlargement with both hyperechoic and hypoechoic regions within the kidney. Only the left kidney
was involved.
 IIl.  Originate from nephrogenic blastema and may contain epithelial and mesenchymal components.
 n sr a q  a t se  i  a  
kidney; occasionally they are bilateral.
V. Widespread metastasis to lung and liver is common in affected dogs.
Vl.  Prognosis is good if tubular or glomerular differentiation is observed; prognosis is poor if catego
rized as a sarcoma.
Other Tumors
 1. Transitional cell papilloma and carcinoma of the renal pelvis are very rare.
Il. Squamous cell carcinoma of the renal pelvis is uncommon, but has been associated with renal
pelvic calculi.
III.  Primary mesenchymal tumors have a poor prognosis.
A. Hemangioma is most common; hematuria is the most consistent clinical sign.
B. Hemangiosarcoma has been reported in the cat.
C. Angiomyolipoma has been reported in the cat.
 D. Interstitial cell tumors occur in old dogs in the renal cortex and medulla.
E. Benigm cortical fibroma.
F. Congenital mesoblastic nephroma.
G. Renal oncocytomas originate from the collecting ducts.
IV. Metastatic tumors are common.
A. Primary pulmonary adenocarcinomas are difficult to distinguish from primary renal adeno
carcinoma with pulmonary metastases.
B. LSA is common, and is the most common renal neoplasm in cats.
 1. Nodules are poorly defined and fatty in appearance at surgery or necropsy.
 2. If there is diffuse involvement, the kidney may appear fatty and enlarged.
 3. Hypoechoic nodules frequently are observed in cats with renal LSA during ultrasonography.
 4. A recent study showed that hypoechoic subcapsular thickening of the kidney is associated
with renal LSA in the cat (Figure 14-4).
5. Can occur in feline leukemia virus (FeLV)-negative or feline immunodeficiency virus
(FIV)-negative cats, but retrovirus status still should be checked because these viral infec-
fions can be associated with LSA.
438 CHAPTER 14  Tumors of the Urinary System
#116
10.0MHz
RTKIDNEY
Cat
T1/+2/3/3
OdB:
Dist=4.15cm
FIGURE 14-4  Subcapsular lymphosarcoma (LSA) in a cat. Note the hypoechoic region outside the kidney
 parenchyma. This could be confused with a perinephric pseudocyst, but a fine-needle aspiration (FNA) of this
region yielded a large population of malignant lymphocytes.
6.  Renal LSA usually is bilateral in cats. It can be associated with renal failure if infiltration
of the kidneys is extensive.
 In some instances, dramatic improvement in renal function has accompanied chemotherapy.
Treatment
 1. If renal neoplasia is umilateral with no metastases, nephrectomy is the treatment of choice. Efforts
with marginal renal function before surgery. Renal scintigraphy with determination of individual
kidney glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is ideal to make this assessment.
I1.Renal LSA is treated by chemotherapy.
III. Progmosis is not well defined. Survival time is usually short, but some have survived up to 4
years. Nephroblastoma is less metastatic, and nephrectomy can be curative. Benigm tumors may
also be cured with surgery.
BladderNeoplasia
 1.Bladder neoplasia accounts for approximately 2% of all reported malignancies in dogs.
 Bladder neoplasia accounts for approximately 2% of all malignancies in dogs.
11.
Primary malignant bladder tumors.
A. Epithelial.
1. Transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) is the most common tumor of the bladder in dogs.
2. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC).
3.Adenocarcinoma (ACA).
4. Undifferentiated carcinoma.
Transitional cell carcinoma (TCc) is the most common bladder tumor of dogs and cats.
Tumors of the Urinary System  CHAPTER 14
439
B. Mesenchymal.
1. Fibrosarcoma.
2. Leiomyosarcoma.
3.Rhabdomyosarcoma.
II. Primary benign tumors.
A. Fibroma.
B. Leiomyoma.
C. Papilloma.
IV.Secondary metastatic tumors of the bladder.
A. Hemangiosarcoma.
B. Lymphoma.
C. Adenocarcinoma.
V.Canine bladder neoplasia.
A. TCC is most common.
B. Papilloma.
C.
 Benign mesenchymal.
D. Unclassified carcinoma.
E. SCC.
F. ACA.
G. Rhabdomyosarcoma.
1. Young dogs.
2. Often large breed.
 3. Sometimes associated with hypertrophic osteopathy (HO).
4.  Usually located at trigone and not usually surgically resectable.
5. Often botryoid (grape-like cluster) in appearance (Figure 14-5).
6. Special immunohistochemical staining may be needed to confirm the skeletal muscle ori-
gin of the tumor. Desmin, sarcomeric actin, and vimentin are likely to be positive, whereas
cytokeratin and smooth muscle actin should be negative on immunohistochemistry. Cross
striations of skeletal muscle are sometimes seen on routine hematoxylin and eosin-stained
specimens.
U BLADDER
8.0MH
Abdor
Gener
A
B
FGURE 14-5  Botryoid rhabdomyosarcoma. Note the ultrasonographic appearance of this tumor in a young
Great Dane with significant obstruction to urinary outflow in A. Note the classic grape-like clusters of malignant 
tissue in the everted bladder following cystotomy in a young Bassett hound, B.
440CHAPTER 14Tumors of the Urinary System
Vl. Feline bladder neoplasia.
A. TCC is most common, but much less common than in dogs.
B. SCC.
C. Benign mesenchymal.
D. ACA.
E. Lymphoma.
F. Leiomyosarcoma.
G. Hemangiosarcoma.
H. Rhabdomyosarcoma.
Etiology and Risks
I. Etiology is multifactorial. Risk factors are related to chemical carcinogen exposure. The blad-
der is the storage site for eliminated waste products, and chronic exposure of bladder tissue to
carcinogeric compounds appears to play a role.
11.
 Obesity. Fat tissue acts as a storage site for lipophilic chemicals and pesticides allowing for pro-
longed exposure in the body.
Il.Previous treatment with the chemotherapeutic agent, cyclophosphamide. Cyclophosphamide
frequently causes sterile hemorrhagic cystitis. Chronic irritation of the bladder by this drug may
play a role in development of neoplasia.
IV. Bladder tumors are more common in industrialized parts of the world.
A. A direct correlation was found between level of industrialization and manufacturing in the
 United States and parts of Canada and the occurrence of bladder cancer in dogs.
B. Bladder neoplasms have been induced experimentally by administration of industrial
 chemicals containing aromatic amines (e.g., tryptophan, benzene, beta-naphthylamine) to
dogs.
V. Chemical Exposure.
A. Topical flea and tick dips, shampoos, powders, sprays and collars, and the dose applied were
directly correlated with disease in one study.
B. The use of spot-on flea and tick control products containing fipronil and imidacloprid did not
cause increased risk of TCC in Scottish terriers.
C. Scottish terriers exposed to phenoxy herbicide lawn treatments had increased risk of develop
ing TCC. Dogs with seasonal or year-round exposure had higher risk than those with only
sporadic exposure.
 D. Dogs living near areas that are frequently sprayed with insecticides to control mosquito popu-
 lations are more likely to develop TCC.
VI. The incidence of bladder neoplasia is unrelated to second-hand cigarette smoke exposure or to
chronic drinking of chlorinated water (knowm risk factors in humans).
Vll. Neutered female dogs are at higher risk for TCC than males, whereas neutered male cats are
at increased risk as compared with females. Potential reasons for this association have been
proposed.
A. Females void less frequently than male dogs. Marking behavior in male dogs leads to more
frequent urination. Prolonged urinary retention in female dogs increases contact time for tox-
ins with the bladder epithelium.
Female dogs and male cats are at a higher risk for development of bladder neoplasia.
B. Females have a higher percentage of body fat than males.
Tumors of the Urinary System ■ CHAPTER 14 441
Vlll. Bladder neoplasia is more common in dogs than cats.
A. Tryptophan metabolism differs between cats and dogs. Dogs metabolize this amino acid by
forming ortho-amino-phenol, which is similar in structure to chemicals known to induce
bladder tumors in dogs.
 B. Cats do not form the same metabolite from tryptophan and thus have less ortho-amino-
 phenol in their urine.
IX. Vegetable Consumption.
tion and risk of TCC.
1. Consumption of any type of vegetable at least three times per week decreased the risk of
developing TCC by 70%.
 2. Green, leafy vegetables and yellow-orange vegetables consumed at least three times
weekly decreased risk of TCC by 70% to 90%.
3. Consumption of cruciferous vegetables did not decrease the risk of TCC.
4. A dose response relationship was identified: The higher the frequency of vegetable con-
sumption, the greater the reduction in risk of TCC.
B. Green, leafy vegetables and yellow-orange vegetables have antitumor activity.
1. Plants contain phytochemicals or other bioactive compound that detoxify carcinogenic
chemicals and remove oxidizing agents.
2. These vegetables contain carotenoid and retinol that are hypothesized to control cell pro-
liferation and differentiation and stabilize cell membranes, making them less susceptible
to carcinogens.
Canine Transitional Cell Carcinoma (TCC)
I. TCC is a primary malignant neoplasm arising from the transitional cells of the bladder and is the
most common bladder tumor in dogs and cats.
A. Epithelial neoplasms account for 90% of canine bladder cancer.
B. Of the epithelial tumors, 75% to 90% are TCC
C. The prevalence of TCC in dogs increased more than 600% between 1975 and 1995.
SIGNALMENT
A. Older dogs (average age, 11 years at the time of diagnosis).
B. Females more commonly affected than males with a female to male ratio of 1.7:1.
C. Breed predispositions have been identified (Table 14-1). The reason for these associations is
unknowm, but genetic predisposition is suspected. Differences in metabolic activation and
detoxification pathways could account for increased risk in selected breeds.
 1. Scottish terriers have the highest prevalence of TCC and are 18 times more likely to develop
TCC than mixed breed dogs.
Scottish terriers have the highest prevalence of transitional cell carcinoma.
2.West Highland white terrier.
3. Airedale terrier.
4. Beagle.
5. Dachshund.
6. Shetland sheepdog
442
CHAPTER 14  Tumors of the Urinary System
 TABLE 14-1
 Breed Risk for Diagnosis of Transitional Cell Carcinoma in Dogs
Breed
Odds Ratio
95% Confidence Interval
Mixed breed
1.0
 All purebreds
0.74
0.62-0.88
Scottish terrier
18.09
7.30-44.86
Shetland sheepdog
4.46
2.48-8.03
Beagle
4.15
2.14-8.05
Wirehaired fox terrier
3.20
1.19-8.63
West Highland white terrier
3.02
1.43-6.40
Miniature Schnauzer
0.92
0.54-1.57
 Miniature poodle
0.86
0.55-1.35
Doberman pinscher
0.51
0.30-0.87
Labrador retriever
0.46
0.30-0.69
Goldenretriever
0.46
0.30-0.69
German shepherd
0.40
0.26-0.63
Modified from Knapp DW, Glickman WN,DeNicola DB, et al: Naturally-occurring canine transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder:A relevant
model of human invasive bladder cancer. Urof Oncof 5:47-59, 2000. Data in this table provides a summary from 1290 dogs with transitional cel
carcinoma (TCC) and 1290 institution and age-matched control dogs without TCC in the Veterinary Medical Data Base.
7. Collie.
8. German shepherd dogs are underrepresented.
CLINICAL SIGNS
 A. Lower urinary tract signs are most common.
1.Dysuria (84%).
2.Hematuria (50%)
3.Pollakiuria (37%).
4. Stranguria.
5. Urinary incontinence.
B. Polyuria and polydipsia may be associated with partial obstruction.
C. Oliguria or anuria, vomiting, and anorexia may be associated with azotemia if acute or chronic
obstruction is present.
D. Lameness may be caused by bone metastasis or HO secondary to metastatic lung lesions.
 1. Bone metastases often are lytic on radiographs.
2. Metastases from prostate neoplasia, mammary tumors, and bladder TCC are most com-
monly associated with lytic bone lesions.
E. Respiratory dificulty caused by pulmonary metastasis.
F. Lethargy.
G. Weight loss.
HISTORY
A. The history of treatment with antibiotics for chronic recurrent lower urinary tract infections
(UTIs) is often reported by owners. Minimal long-term clinical improvement is observed in
response to this therapy.
Tumors of the Urinary System  CHAPTER 14
443
Many dogs with transitional cell carcinoma have been treated for repeated urinary tract infections prior to
 diagnosis.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
A. Rectal examination may reveal a thickened urethra and enlarged sublumbar lymph nodes if
the tumor has spread to the urethra and metastasis has already occurred.
B. A mass in the caudal abdomen may be palpated in smaller dogs and cats.
C. Spinal hyperpathia caused by metastasis to lumbar vertebral bodies.
D. Physical examination can be normal in up to 30% of dogs with bladder tumors.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
Benign Tumors
1.Fibroma.
2. Papilloma.
3.Leiomyoma.
Non-Neoplastic Lower Urinary Tract Disease
1. Chronic cystitis.
2. Polypoid cystitis.
3. Eosinophilic granuloma.
 4. Proliferative (granulomatous) urethritis
5. Prostatitis.
 6.Benign prostatic hyperplasia.
DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
Laboratory Evaluation
1.  A complete blood count (CBC) and biochemical profile should be performed to rule out
other systemic diseases. The most common abnormalities recognized are azotemia and
anemia of chronic disease.
2. Do not obtain urine samples by cystocentesis. TCC tumors are exfoliative and tumor
cells can be seeded anywhere along the needle tract, including the skin (Figure 14-6).
If urinary bladder neoplasia is suspected, do notobtain urine samples by cystocentesis because of the risk
 of tumor seeding.
3. Urinalysis.
a.Proteinuria.
b. Pyuria.
c. Hematuria.
d. Bacteriuria.
e. Neoplastic transitional cells are identified in 30% of cases.
(1) Rafts of epithelial cells.
(2) Neoplastic cells are difficult to distinguish from reactive epithelial cells that result
from chronic inflammation.
(3) Results may be highly suggestive for TCC (e.g., anisocytosis, anisokaryosis, binu-
cleate cells, mitotic figures, clumps or rafts of epithelial cells) (Figure 14-7).
444
CHAPTER 14 ■ Tumors of the Urinary System
FlGURE 14-6 ■ Needle tract seeding of transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) from a cat that underwent multiple
episodes of cystocentesis. Note multiple nodules of carcinoma along the peritoneum at necropsy.
FGURE 14-7 ■ Wet mount microscopy of urine sediment from a dog with transitional cell carcinoma (TCC). Note
cellular atypia. Multinucleated epithelial cell is in the center of the field. The other large cells are also epithelial cells
(Sedi-Stain, x600).
(4) Clumps of epithelial cells may be clinically suggestive of TCC if they occur alone
 or with red blood cells especially in the absence of white blood cells or bacteria
(Figure 14-8).
 Clumps of epithelial cells (rafts) in the urine sediment should raise suspicion for TCC.
4. Urine cultures should always be performed when bladder neoplasia is suspected. Secondary
lower UTIs are extremely common in these patients due to disruption of normal host defenses.
Tumors of the Urinary System  CHAPTER 14
445
FGURE 14-8  Rafts of epithelial cells froma dog with transitionalcell carcinoma (TCC)-wetmounturinary sediment
microscopy. In panel A, only red blood cells and clumps of large epithelial cells are seen. This is very suggestive for TCC
in the absence of pyuria. Panel B shows more detail of cellular atypia in clumps of epithelial cells (Sedi-Stain, x400).
Radiographic and Ultrasonographic Findings
1. Thoracic radiographs should be obtained to evaluate pulmonary parenchyma for evidence
of metastatic nodules. Metastases are identified in 10% to 30% of affected dogs at the time
of diagnosis.
Thoracic radiograph should be obtained in all cases of TCC. Metastases (lung, bone, lymphnode) are found in 
10% to 30% of affected dogs at the time of diagnosis.
2.Abdominal radiographs.
a.Typically do not allow visualization of bladder tumors.
b. May allow identification of sublumbar lymphadenopathy and metastatic lesions in
lumbar vertebrae.
3. Abdominal ultrasound is the most commonly employed imaging tool (Figure 14-9).
a.Determines the location of the tumor within the bladder.
b. The urethra cannot be imaged adequately with this modality.
C.Allows for evaluation of the kidneys and ureters, to identify enlargement or hydrone-
 phrosis caused by tumor obstruction of the ureteral openings.
d.  Imaging of the liver, spleen, and abdominal lymph nodes allows identification of meta-
static lesions.
4.Contrast cystography.
a.Allows visualization and localization of the lesion within the bladder and identifica-
tion of any urethral involvement.
b. A thickened bladder wall is a common finding.
C. May show small lesions not seen on ultrasonography.
 5. Excretory urography aids in identifying hydroureter arising as a consequence of ureteral
obstruction by the tumor.
Cytology
1. Cytology can confirm the diagnosis of TCC but alone is not ideal because chronic inflam-
mation can create dysplastic changes in epithelial cells that often are confused with evi-
dence of neoplasia (Figure 14-10).
446
CHAPTER 14 Tumors of the Urinary System
15L8-S
U BLADDER
14.0MH2
Abdo
U BLADDER
Ger
85dB
+2/3/3
4=2
Storeinprogre
Dist=1.50cm
A
Dist=0.68cm
B
10V4-S
UBLADDER
UBLADDER
H8.5MH2
50m
TRANS
Abdom
85dB
t1/+2/3/3
Storein prog
Dist =0.70cm
A shows a 1.5 x 0.7 cm mass along the ventral wall of the bladder from a female dog. Another mass emanating
from the trigone is not so clearly seen. Panel B shows blood flow through this mass using Doppler. Panel C shows
 multiple fronds of TCC with the linear ulrasound probe from the same dog. Panel D shows extensive tumor mass
of TCC at the trigone and along the ventrum of the bladder wall, this is from a male dog, and this tumor extended
into the prostate.
a.
 Biopsy by so-called traumatic catheterization approaches 80% accuracy compared with
surgical biopsy.
b.
 Fine-needle aspiration through the abdominal wall. This technique yields a small sam-
ple and aspiration may lead to the seeding of tumor cells anywhere along the needle
tract, including the skin.
Diagnosis
1.
 Definitive diagnosis requires histologic examination of biopsy specimens. Samples can be
obtained by the following techniques:
a.Full thickness biopsy at exploratory laparotomy (Figure 14-11).
 Definitive diagnosis of TCC requires histologic examination of tissue. Cytology alone is not definitive because 
 chronic inflammation can create dysplastic changes that mimic neoplasia.
Tumors of the Urinary System  CHAPTER 14
¥447
A
FGURE 14-10  Cytology performed on dry mounts from urinary sediment of two different dogs affected with
transitional cell carcinoma (TCC). Cytology reveals more cytoplasmic and nuclear detail than is possible from
evaluation of wet mount microscopy of urinary sediment. Note wide variation in cell size as well as that for nuclear
size. Panel B has one multinucleated cell (Wright-Giemsa stain, x1,000).
FGURE 14-11  Full thickness bladder biopsy from a dog with invasive transitional cell carcinoma (TCC). Note
the degree of bladder wall thickening due to protrusion of TCC mass from the mucosa and also due to TCC
invasion into the submucosa.
(1) Bladder incision should be made farther than 1 cm from the tumor.
(2) Seeding of the abdomen or the incision with tumor cells can be a complication.
Change surgical packs and use new instruments during closure to limit tumor
seeding.
Seeding of the biopsy tract occurs much more often with TCC than with other tumors.
b.Forceps biopsy of the urothelium.
(1) Ultrasound-guided.
(2) By cystoscopy.
448 CHAPTER 14  Tumors of the Urinary System
FIGURE 14-12 ■ Cystoscopic findings from dog with bladder transitional cell carcinoma (TCC). Note typical
fronds projecting into the bladder lumen.
CYSTOSCOPY
 A. Cystoscopy provides direct visualization of the entire bladder and urethra that may aid in
identifying the location and extent of tumor growth and in diagnosing other abnormalities
of the lower urinary tract. Other imaging modalities tend to underestimate the extent of
disease.
Cystoscopy often reveals much more extensive disease than initially suspected from ultrasonography or
contrast urography.
B. Small tissue samples are easily obtained for histologic examination.
C. The technique requires special equipment and training.
D. Single fronds or groups of fronds are the most characteristic cystoscopic appearance of TCC
(Figure 14-12). Nodular masses also can be observed.
 BLADDER TUMOR ANTIGEN TEST (BTA)
 A. The BTA is a qualitative latex agglutination test using human antibodies that recognize a blad-
der tumor-associated glycoprotein complex present in the urine of animal patients with TCC.
Two theories concerming the origin of the glycoprotein complexes have been proposed:
1. Degradation of the urothelial basement membrane caused by tumor cell growth and
attachment leads to the release of the glycoprotein antigen.
 2. Tumor cells produce the antigen autonomously.
B. The BTA urine dipstick test originally was created as a screening test for TCC in humans. The
basement membrane of the glycoprotein complex may be similar among species allowing
human antibodies to recognize canine TCC antigens.
C. The BTA test should be used as a screening test rather than a diagnostic test in patients with
suspected TCC.
Tumors of the Urinary System ■ CHAPTER 14  449
1. The specificity of the veterinary BTA test was 94% and the sensitivity was 90% when com
paring normal dogs to those with lower urinary tract neoplasia. However, the specificity
decreased to 35% when comparing dogs with neoplasia to dogs with non-neoplastic lowel
urinary tract disease.
2. False-positive results are obtained in patients with proteinuria, pyuria, and glucosuria.
Diagnosis of TCC typically occurs late in the course of the disease when hematuria and
 pyuria are common secondary complications making interpretation of the results difficult
D. The other diagnostic tests and imaging methods mentioned above are more helpful in the
diagnosis of TCC than is the BTA urine test.
Urine Telomerase
1. Telomerase activity has been detected in urothelial cells of carcinomas, but not in the uro-
thelium of healthy humans.
2. The telomeric repeat amplification protocol (TRAP) assay can measure telomerase activity
in urine.
 3. In studies in humans, the specificity was 88% and sensitivity was 90%.
 4.  This test may be useful in the future as a screening test for dogs at a high risk of developing
TCC and as a diagnostic test in dogs in which TCC is suspected. The usefulness of this test
in dogs has not yet been studied.
sisuord wa-un pue ssanns juauan aaondu  sisou n 
Basic Fibroblastic Growth Factor (bFGF) Urinary Marker
1. bFGF is an angiogenic peptide involved in promoting tumor growth that has been detected
in the urine of humans with urinary tract and other malignancies.
2. An enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) test kit containing an anti-bFGF human
antibody is available to quantify the amount of bFGF in the urine.
 3. Dogs with bladder cancer had significantly higher urinary concentrations of bFGF com-
pared with normal dogs and dogs with lower UTIs.
4. May be useful in deciding if dogs with lower urinary tract signs need additional diagnos
tic tests for bladder neoplasia.
5. More research is needed to determine if detection of bFGF will lead to earlier diagmosis of
TCC and improved prognosis in dogs.
Recognition of Transitional Cell Carcinoma by Canine Olfaction of Urine
Samples
 1. Tumors produce substances that may have recognizable odors that dogs can detect with
their exceptional sense of smell.
2. Dogs can be trained to recogmnize a characteristic odor in the urine of human patients with
TCC as described in a 2004 study
a.Dogs correctly identified 41% of patients with TCC by the smell of their urine indepen-
dent of the presence of glucosuria, pyuria, proteinuria, and hematuria.
b. The success rate was statistically significant and greater than success expected by
chance alone.
3.1
Research into this phenomenon is preliminary. Continued work with this concept and
training of dogs for olfactory detection of TCC may lead to improved success rate in the
future.
ITCC usually is diagnosed at an advanced stage in dogs and cats as compared with humans, who often have
 very superficial and less invasive disease at presentation.
450
CHAPTER 14 ■ Tumors of the Urinary System
TABLE 14-2
 TNM Classification Scheme for Stages of Canine Bladder Cancer
Classification
Characteristics
T: PRIMARY TUMOR
Tis
Carcinoma in situ
T0
No evidence for primary tumor
T1
Superficial papillary tumor
T2
Tumor invading the bladder wall, with induration
T3
Tumor invading neighboring organs (prostate, uterus, vagina,
and pelvic canal)
N: REGIONAL LYMPH NODE (INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL
ILIAC LYMPH NODE)
NO
No regional lymph node involved
N1
Regional lymph node involved
N2
Regional lymph node and juxta regional lymph node involved
M: DISTANT METASTASES
MO
No evidence of metastasis
M1
Distant metastasis
At diagnosis about 80% of dogs are classified as T2, and 20% as T3.About 16% are classified as either N1 or N2 at diagnosis and 40% at time of
TNM, tumor, node, metastasis.
 STAGING
A. Confirm the diagnosis of TCC with histopathology.
 B. Thoracic radiography and abdominal imaging should be performed to identify metastases.
C. The tumor/node/metastasis (TNM) classification scheme created by the World Health Orga-
rization (WHO) is used to stage bladder cancers (Table 14-2).
 1. Classifies the degree with which the tumor has invaded the bladder wall and surrounding
structures.
2. Takes into account surrounding lymph node involvement as well as metastasis to other
parts of the body.
D. Other staging schemes have been used in dogs. These include histologic classification, growth
the tumor, and lymphoid reactivity within the tumor. Most dogs with TCC have papillary
infiltrative TCC of intermediate to high grade.
BIOLOGICAL BEHAVIOR
 ys  si a s   a g a   (  o  so 
ence for tumor location in cats, in which TCC occurs with nearly equal frequency in various
part s of the bladder.
Tumors occur most often in the trigone of the bladder in dogs. Local invasion of the urethra, prostate, and
ureters is common.
Tumors of the Urinary System  CHAPTER 14
451
HGURE 14-13  Histopathology of bladder showing papillary transitional cell carcinoma (TCC). (Courtesy of
Dr. Paul Stromberg, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.)
FGURE 14-14  Bladder polyp. Notice the large mass attached by a single stalk to the bladder mucosa. This
specimen was derived from a cystotomy and partial cystectomy.
B. Growthi patterns.
1. Papillary projections that protrude into the bladder lumen (Figure 14-13). This lesion must
be distinguished from that of a bladder polyp (Figure 14-14).
2. Flat, plaque-like lesions.
3. Infiltrating lesions.
a. Most common form of TCC (90%) in dogs and cats.
 b. Invades the bladder wall and may involve the submucosa and muscularis layers
(Figure 14-15). In more severe cases, surrounding structures can be involved.
 4. Non-infiltrating tumors do not penetrate the bladder wall
C. Metastasis eventually occurs in more than 50% of cases.
1. Regional lymph nodes (sublumbar, inguinal).
2.Bone.
452CHAPTER 14 Tumors of the Urinary System
HGURE 14-15  Infiltrating transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) of canine bladder. This tumor exhibits local tissue
invasion into the mucosa of the bladder wall. There areislands of tumor cells infiltrating from the base of the tumor
into the stroma and lymphatics often stimulates desmoplasia (xl00) (Courtesy of Dr. Paul Stromberg, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio.)
3. Lung.
4.Abdominal organs.
D. Local invasion of the urethra, prostate, and ureters is common. The urethra is involved in 56%
of affected dogs.
E. At the time of diagnosis, the lesions often are advanced.
1.Tumor may be found invading the muscular layer of the bladder wall or fixed to surround-
ing structures.
2. Metastasis has already occurred in 37% of affected dogs at presentation.
 F. Growth of the tumor can lead to ureteral obstruction and hydronephrosis or urethral outflow
obstruction (Figure 14-16).
1. Owners must be educated about the clinical sigms associated with obstruction and monitor
their pet's urinations on a daily basis.
 2. Urinary obstruction by the primary tumor causes death before metastases become lethal.
G. Survival with no therapeutic intervention averages 3 months.
  ss  m s  g a   a  s
  a   si  m   os s   s
son and a bladder mass is detected incidentally.
TREATMENT
Surgical Options Depend on the Location and Extent of the Tumor
1. Tumors located at the apex or body of the bladder offer the best chance for surgical
resection.
a. Partial cystectomy can be performed in these cases. Local or distant recurrence of
As s oa p sd yo  u s m r
b. More than 80% of the bladder can be removed with eventual return to near-normal
capacity.
Tumors of the Urinary System ■ CHAPTER 14
453
A
B
FGURE 14-16  Transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) and effects on ureters and kidneys. A, Extensive TCC in
bladder wall and lumen of dog. B, Note that the tumor mass is obstructing both ureters resulting in bilateral
hydroureter and hydronephrosis.
2.TCC located at the trigone is difficult to remove and the likelihood of urethral involvement
is great.
a. Surgical removal is impossible without performing total cystectomy and ureteral
diversion.
b. Palliative surgery and medical management to relieve obstruction are the best options.
3. At best, surgery only provides local control of tumor growth; curative surgical removal is
rare.
I Surgery for tumor removal is rarely curative.
a.TCC may have multiple foci within the bladder.
 b. Tumor size and stage usually are advanced at the time of diagnosis.
c. If surgical removal is attempted, clean margins are difficult to achieve.
4. The primary surgical goal should be to alleviate obstruction.
 5. Total cystectomy with or without urethrectomy and ureteral diversion has been performed
with limited success.
a. Ureterocolonic diversion is an invasive procedure with multiple, serious complications
 including hyperammonemia, hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis, uremia, and pyelo-
nephritis.
b.  This procedure is not a realistic surgical option in small animals.
c. Survival is approximately 5 months without other forms of treatment.
6.  Partial resection alone is associated with median survival of 4 monthis.
454CHAPTER 14Tumors of the Urinary System
7. Total resection alone is associated with median survival of 12 monthis.
 8. Surgical debulking has been helpful in some but not other studies as adjunctive therapy.
9. In one study, cystoscopically directed laser ablation surgery alleviated clinical signs in
affected dogs but did not increase survival time.
a. Laser ablation can effectively remove masses that impinge on the ureters and would
b. This technique also is helpful for patients with outflow obstruction from bladder
masses projecting into the proximal urethra.
c. Laser ablation surgery is not curative by itself or with chemotherapy
d. Repeated ablation is required as the tumor returns.
Chemotherapy
 1. TCC generally are poorly responsive to chemotherapy.
TCC generally are poorly responsive to chemotherapy. A response rate of 15% to 20% can be expected
 in dogs.
2. Cisplatin.
a.A cell cycle phase nonspecific heavy-metal compound that binds within and between
DNA strands, inhibiting transcription and protein synthesis.
b. Cisplatin is highly nephrotoxic. Treatments should be given concurrently with a 0.9%
NaCl diuresis. Renal function tests should be monitored before each treatment.
c.  Progressive azotemia and renal dysfunction are observed in 22% to 50% of treated dogs.
d. Vomiting is observed in 86% of dogs during cisplatin administration. Butorphanol
should be given 30 minutes before cisplatin administration to suppress vomiting.
e. Cisplatin is given at a dosage of 50 to 70 mg/m? intravenously over 20 minutes every
three weeks.
f. Average survival was 132 days in one study.
 g. Cisplatin treatment provided partial remission in 20% of patients.
3.Carboplatin.
a.Similar mode of action to cisplatin with less nephrotoxicity.
b. Carboplatin exhibited cytotoxic effects on TCC cells during in vitro studies.
c.  In vivo clinical studies did not provide complete or partial remission in any of the 11
dogs that received carboplatin.
d.The suggested dose of 300 mg/m? should be administered intravenously every 3 weeks
e. Average survival was 132 days.
f. Myelosuppression was observed in 50% of dogs but clinical signs associated with
myelosuppression were not observed.
g. Gastrointestinal toxicity was observed in 48% of dogs.
 4. Mitoxantrone: Partial remission is achieved in 17% of dogs.
 5. Adriamycin: Partial remission is achieved in 20% of dogs.
 6. Actinomycin D: Partial remission is achieved in 17% of dogs.
Piroxicam
Piroxicam is considered the standard of care for TCC in dogs and may have specific advantages over other
NSAIDs.
 1. Inducible cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) enzymes are not expressed in the normal urinary
bladder but are upregulated in tumors including TCC.
Tumors of the Urinary System  CHAPTER 14455
a. COX-2 is expressed in both primary and metastatic TCC.
b. COX-2 enzymes and their product, prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), a potent immunosuppres-
sive compound, promote tumor growth by preventing apoptosis, stimulating tumor
cell proliferation, and promoting angiogenesis.
c. PGE2 concentrations are increased in the bladder mucosa of patients with TCC growth
as compared with normal bladder mucosa.
2. Piroxicam, a COX enzyme inhibitor, has antitumor activity and decreases the size of
tumors when used in dogs with TCC.
a. The mechanism of action is not based on cytotoxicity.
b. COX inhibition may provide some immunomodulation by suppressing PGE2 and
thereby inducing apoptosis, inhibiting angiogenesis, and decreasing tumor cell prolif-
eration.
c. Decreased inflammation alone carmot account for the partial and complete remissions
achieved in vivo.
3. Piroxicam provides good control of clinical signs and improves quality of life in some
patients. Owners usually note increased activity and improvement in the attitude of their
pet while the dog is receiving piroxicam.
Clinical studies of piroxicam in dogs with TCC indicate an overall response rate of
16%.
IPiroxicam provides good control of clinical signs, improving the quality of life in many dogs with TCC.
a. Complete remission is achieved in 4% of treated dogs.
b. Partial remission is observed in 13%.
c. Disease remained stable in 58%.
d. Progressive disease was noted in 25%.
5. Gastrointestinal toxicity occurred in 17% of treated dogs.
a. Signs of toxicity included anorexia, melena, and vomiting.
b. Gastroprotectants may be used in combination with piroxicam.
(1) H receptor blockers.
(2) Proton pump inhibitors.
(3) Sucralfate.
(4) Misoprostol (prostaglandin E, analogue).
 6. Acute renal failure is a potential complication of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs). Renal function should be monitored regularly while prescribing this medica-
tion for dogs with TCC.
7. Piroxicam is used at a dosage of 0.3 mg/kg orally once daily if tolerated. It is given every
 other day to limit adverse effects in some patients.
a. Only 10 mg and 20 mg capsules are available.
 b. Compounding pharmacies can reformulate this medication into varying concentra-
tions to accommodate smaller animals
 8. Median survival with piroxicam as the sole form of treatment is approximately 6 months.
About 20% of treated dogs survived for one year.
9. Piroxicam may have unique effects against TCC as compared with other NSAIDs.
This possibility has not been studied in TCC, but it is well known that each NSAID
has its own profile of effect against a variety of other tumors in experimental studies
in mice.
456  CHAPTER 14  Tumors of the Urinary System
Combination of Mitoxantrone and Piroxicam
 The highest reported success rate for treatment of TCC has been with a combination of mitoxantrone and
 piroxicam.
1. A dose of 5 mg/m2 IV every 3 weeks of mitoxantrone with 0.3 mg/kg PO once daily of
piroxicam has produced the best results.
 2. Partial remission was observed in 35% of dogs.
3. Median survival was 9 to 10 monthis.
4.  75% of owners reported a subjective improvement in clinical signs and quality of life
Radiation Therapy
1.Difficult to perform without including other intermal organs in the radiation field.
2. Curative doses decrease quality of life and can even lead to perforation of the colon; the
target dose is the highest tolerated dose.
 3. Intraoperative radiation has been performed in combination with partial cystectomy to
minimize effects on other organs.
4. Adverse effects include pollakiuria, urinary incontinence, cystitis, stranguria, and irre-
versible bladder fibrosis.
 5. External beam radiation requires daily treatment for a total of 15 to 18 doses.
6. Treatment with intraoperative and external beam radiation provides a median survival
time of 4 monthis.
 7. Radiation only provides local control. Metastatic lesions still progress.
 8. Best results are achieved when used in conjumction with chemotherapy to treat both pri-
mary and metastatic disease.
Palliative Treatment to Manage Urethral Obstruction
1. Temporary urethral catheterization until stent or cystostomy tube can be placed or until
piroxicam becomes effective.
2. Permanent cystostomy catheter.
a.Should not be performed in arimals with ureteral obstruction or hydroureter
b.  A mushroom tip or Foley urinary catheter is placed in the bladder via a ventral midline
incision and passed outside of the body through a paramedian body wall incision.
c. Owners must drain the bladder with a syringe 3 to 4 times per day.
d.  Secondary bacterial cystitis is common and urine cultures should be performed every
2 to 4 weeks.
e. Continued growth of the tumor will eventually block the catheter.
f.A median survival time after catheter placement of 106 days has been reported.
g. Can be performed whether or not the owners elect to pursue further treatment.
h.
 Cystostomy catheters can be placed in dogs with outflow obstruction while monitor-
ing the response to other forms of medical management (Figure 14-17).
 3. Urethral stenting.
a. Balloon-expanding or self-expanding metallic stents are placed into the urethra with
the assistance of a guide wire and are seated across areas of obstruction using fluoros
copy to visualize placement (Figure 14-18).
b. Stent size should be 10% wider thian the maximal urethral diameter to allow for a
secure fit and decrease the chance of stent migration
Tumors of the Urinary System  CHAPTER 14
457
FGURE 14-17 ■ Cystostomy tube in place in dog. Note tube exiting from caudal lateral abdominal wall. This
type of tube is secured around the dog's body and urine is aspirated four to six times daily. This dog also has
sutures along the ventral midline following a celiotomy.
FGURE 14-18  Radiograph of urethral and ureteral stent in place in a male dog. The urethral stent was deployed
to bypass transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) in the urethra that was creating obstruction to urinary outflow. The
ureteral stent was placed to bypass obstruction of the ureteral opening into the bladder from the TCC. (Courtesy
of Dr. Allyson Berent, Animal Medical Center, New York.)
c.The stent should extend no more than 1 cm on either side of the obstruction to prevent
damage to the surrounding healthy urethra with the intent of maintaining urinary
continence.
d.
 The procedure requires special equipment and training.
e.
Stent placement has been successful at relieving obstruction.
f.Complications.
458
CHAPTER 14 ■ Tumors of the Urinary System
(1) Persistent obstruction.
(2) Atonic bladder (inability to urinate despite resolution of obstruction) caused by
detrusor muscle dysfunction.
(3) Incontinence.
(4) Stranguria.
(5) Stent displacement and migration.
4. Surgical tumor debulking. This procedure is controversial with regard to how helpful it
 can be in combination with chemotherapy.
5.  Antibiotic therapy to control secondary bacterial UTI
THERAPIES ON THE HORIZON
Photodynamic Therapy (PDT)
1. A photosensitive agent that concentrates and localizes within tumor tissue is used.
 b. The exact mechanism by which the photosensitizing agent localizes in tumor tissue is
unkmown.
C.The more hydrophobic the drug, the better it localizes in the tissue of interest.
d.Several different kinds of agents are available that target different components of the cell.
 2. Light of the appropriate wavelength is directed at the tumor with a laser light source.
a. The wavelength of light is chosen based on the photosensitive agent.
b. The depth to which the light penetrates is directly proportional to its wavelength.
c. The correct fluence (amoumt of light or number of photons measured in joules
[]]/cm?) and power density (rate at which light is delivered measured in watts [W]/cm?)
are chosen for the tumor.
d.  Superficial, interstitial, or intraoperative irradiation can be performed.
3. Tumor cells undergo necrosis and apoptosis by several mechanisms induced by PDT.
a. Activation of the photosensitizer by the light source generates oxidizing radicals that
overwhelm tumor cell repair mechanisms leading to cell death
b. Oxidative damage to tumor vasculature causes ischemic death.
 Cytokines and inflammatory mediators are released by damaged tissue creating an
immune response leading to nonspecific death of tumor cells.
tumor tissue. Damage to healthy tissue therefore occurs.
a.  Necrosis, fibrosis, and decreased bladder capacity can occur as a result of full bladder
PDT.
b. After PDT, patients will experience lower urinary tract irritation.
5. New research has focused on inducing tumor cells to produce an intracellular photosensi-
tizer to prevent damage to surrounding healthy tissue and minimize unwanted effects.
a.5-Aminolevulinic acid (ALA), a component of heme biosynthesis, is converted to pro-
toporphyrin IX (PpIX), a photosensitizer, by malignant cells.
 b. An in vitro study reported promising results after incubating cultured canine TCC
cells with ALA. TCC cells converted ALA into enough PpIX to cause cell death when
exposed to 635 nm light.
c.ALA was well tolerated when given orally.
d.In the bladder, ALA allowed for fluorescence only within the mucosa, sparing the mus-
cularis and serosa from damaging effects.
6. PDT has been used with success to treat TCC in human medicine.
7. Additional research to determine clinical effectiveness in animals is needed.
Tumors of the Urinary System ■ CHAPTER 14
459
Calcitriol (Activated Vitamin D)
1. Canine TCC cells express many vitamin D receptors (VDR).
 2. Calcitriol may act as an antiproliferative agent by inducing cell cycle arrest and apoptosis
 of TCC cells via alteration in tumor cell receptors and signaling pathways.
3. The effects of calcitriol were improved when combined with dexamethasone, which
improves binding of calcitriol to VDR.
4.  Doses required to cause antineoplastic activity are substantially higher than physiologic
doses; systemic hypercalcemia and its associated ad verse effects are therefore a concern.
a.Direct delivery of calcitriol into the bladder may prevent systemic hypercalcemia.
b.  Intermittent dosing may decrease adverse effects.
c. Co-administration of dexamethasone prevents binding of calcitriol to the receptors in
the intestinal tract that normally allow for vitamin D absorption.
PROGNOSIS
A. Regardless of the form of treatment, median survival is 1 year.
B. Factors not affecting prognosis:
 1. Age and breed did not correlate with survival.
 2. Histologic and immunohistochemical tumor variables did not corelate with prognosis.
Urethral Neoplasia
1. Most urethral tumors are malignant epithelial tumors (TCC or squamous cell carcinoma)
(Figure 14-19).
A. Fifty-six percent of dogs with bladder TCC also have TCC in the urethra.
 B. Twenty-nine percent of male dogs with bladder TCC also had prostatic involvement.
II1. Chondrosarcoma has been reported.
FGURE 14-19  Transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) in the urethra of a female dog. Note extensive tumor masses
in the urethra and also in the area of the junction of the bladder with the urethra. The bladder is thickened due to
the chronic effects of partial obstruction to outflow of urine.
460CHAPTER 14 Tumors of the Urinary System
URETHRA
FIGURE 14-20  Ultrasonography of urethra of a female dog. Notice large intraluminal mass due to transitional cell
carcinoma (TCC). This mass could also have been from lesions of proliferative urethritis, a nonmalignant condition
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
 A. Urethral tumors (Figure 14-20) must be distinguished from proliferative (granulomatous) ure-
thritis
TREATMENT
A. Most are not resectable.
B. Vaginourethroplasty, urethral reconstruction, and urethral stents have been used.
C. Urethral TCC responds to chemotherapy or piroxicam treatment in a manner similar to TCC
of the bladder
D. Cystoscopically directed laser ablation has been helpful in decreasing clinical signs and uri
nary obstruction. Laser ablation is not curative by itself and requires repeated treatments as
the tumor regrows.
E. Urethral stents and tube cystostomy can be used to bypass urethral obstruction.
WHAT DO WE DO?
· Always consider TCC as a possible diagnosis in an older dog that develops what appears to be a
bacterial UTI.
u  sis l  sin rg a aq s s o rao s   ri as o
abated.
· Evaluate the urinary sediment carefully to look for rafts of epithelial cells in the absence of white
blood cells as supportive for a diagnosis of TCC.
· Perform cytologic dry mount evaluation of urinary sediment with routine hematology stains. Much
fication.
° Consider botryoid rhabdomyosarcoma in young dogs with bladder masses, especially if the masses
are grape-like in appearance on diagnostic imaging.
· Confirm the cytological diagnosis of TCC by histopathology on tissue obtained by catheter aspi-
ration biopsy (so-called traumatic catheterization), cystoscopic guidance of biopsy instruments,
or surgical biopsy (full thickness biopsy of bladder wall during surgically attempted excision).
Tumors of the Urinary System  CHAPTER 14 461
·Avoid cystocentesis in dogs with known bladder masses likely to be TCC to avoid the possibility of
bladder tumor seeding along the cystocentesis tract.
· Perform fine-needle aspiration of nodules or masses of the kidney, especially in cats. This procedure
often is rewarding in the diagnosis of LSA
THOUGHTS FOR THE FUTURE
· We will learn how to diagnose TCC in dogs and cats before the tumor is advanced and invasive.
· Biomarkers in the urine are likely to be identified that indicate the presence of urinary neoplasia
These biomarkers will be positive long before clinical signs are obvious and could become part of
wellness screening examinations.
● Present tests that detect bladder tumor antigens are often falsely positive—new technology will be
developed to overcome these false-positive test results.
· Photodynamic therapy to eradicate TCC will become popular when we learn to diagnose TCC at an
earlier stage of the disease.
· We will learn how to successfully treat TCC using local installation of drugs into the bladder.
· Calcitriol or calcitriol analogues will be increasingly used for their anti-proliferative effects. They will
be given either systemically using methods that avoid hypercalcemia or locally within the bladder.
· Protocols for bladder installation of paclitaxel nanoparticles to coat TCC will become widely available.
· Newer NSAIDs will be identified that have greater activity against TCC.
· Local radiation therapy as a form of palliation will receive more attention as methods to decrease
local tissue damage become available.
· Practical methods of laser surgery to decrease the size of tumors will become available.
· Immunotherapy with injections delivered via cystoscopy will become feasible when TCC can be
diagnosed earlier in its clinical course.
● Urethral stenting technology will become more advanced and widely available to relieve urinary
tract obstruction in patients with TCC
· It will become clearer whether or not debulking surgery is helpful as an adjunctive treatment for
TCC.
 COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS
● Documentation of UTI in an older dog with lower urinary tract is not unusual and does not raise
particular concern for bladder cancer. Actually, many older dogs with bladder cancer do have a
bacterial UTI in addition to or because of the tumor.
· Surgery can be curative for TCC. Surgery can be helpful to decrease clinical signs in some patients,
formed. Surgical cure is very rare.
●Failure to find a mass lesion on double-contrast cystography or ultrasonography of the lower urinary
tract rules out bladder or urethral neoplasia. Sometimes early bladder neoplasia is missed with these
imaging techniques—they would however be seen with the use of cystoscopy. Ultrasonography is not
expected to disclose urethral neoplasia unless it is extensive and extends cranially toward the bladder.
SUMMARY TIPS
· Always culture the urine of dogs with TCC because bacterial UTI is common either at time of diag-
nosis or later during the course of the disease and its treatment.
nuanbasuon e aq pmon shop rapio u suis poen Areum ramoi ieu Aiqissod a rapison semi .
of underlying, undetected cancer of the bladder or urethra.
462CHAPTER 14Tumors Of the Urinary System
· Always perform a careful rectal examination in older dogs with signs of lower urinary tract disease
This procedure may be the best way to identify potential urethral invasion in a dog with a thickened
urethra.
 a g  aa  s u a aq r sais  i ra e
 der. Double-contrast radiographic imaging studies also can be negative. Cystoscopic examination
should be considered in such patients.
· Ultrasonography often is negative in patients with urethral tumors. The urethra is not well visual-
ized with ultrasonography because of its location.
· Use cystoscopy to find small lesions of TCC because the magnification associated with this proce-
dure facilitates identification of small lesions on the mucosal surface.
· Always consider that rafts of transitional epithelial cells indicate TCC and follow up with other
diagnostic tests.
· Consider cancer of the bladder and urethra as a possibility in dogs with lower urinary tract signs,
negative urine culture, and no evidence of urinary stones.
· Painless hematuria is the hallmark of upper urinary tract bleeding, and renal neoplasia must be
considered in these instances.
· Consider renal cell carcinoma as the diagnosis for patients with polar masses or nodules of the kid-
ney seen on ultrasonography.
· Perform fine-needle aspiration and cytology study of renal nodules or masses because results from
this procedure are very helpful in determining a diagnosis for renal neoplasia in many instances
(especially LSA).
· Remember that undetected bladder TCC may be the reason for unilateral or bilateral hydronephro
sis if sufficient tumor mass is present at the vesicoureteral junction.
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
Q: I just removed a histopathologically confirmed TCC from the apex of the urinary bladder of a
 I  o p an ss e ,,  s   iood  o
sider some kind of chemotherapy?
A: Even when it appears that the TCC has been completely removed based on inspection at surgery
and reports from histopathology, recurrence often occurs near the site of excision. For this reason, we
Q: Ihave a confirmed diagnosis of TCC in a female dog in which resection is not possible. I know
that NSAIDs can have some antitumor effect. Is any single NSAID better than the others?
A: Most of our experience is with piroxicam, an NSAID that is a nonselective COX inhibitor. Some
oncologists believe that piroxicam has more effect against TCC than other newer generation NSAIDs
that are "COX-sparing." Experimentally, the antitumor effect of NSAIDs can vary considerably by the
NSAID employed. We continue to recommend piroxicam at this time.
Q: I have clients who want to do everything possible to keep their female dog with obstructive TCC
alive as long as possible. The dog is already being treated with piroxicam and has had three courses
of mitoxantrone chemotherapy. The dog has improved somewhat, but still has urgency during void-
ing and her bladder remains relatively full after attempts to void.
A: This dog is a candidate for placement of a transurethral stent to bypass the obstructing tumor,
u inq soumi a iean on soads uaue op iusaop juais au sos Kiaa st jua si yno
does relieve the urinary obstruction. However, urinary incontinence may become a problem with this
approach. Laser ablation surgery can be considered as a means to mitigate dlinical signs, but typically
doesn't prolong the life of the dog. Permanent tube cystostomy could be used to relieve obstruction,
Tumors of the Urinary System  CHAPTER 14 463
but bacterial UTI is a common complication of this procedure. Unfortunately, there are complications
associated with all of these palliative treatments.
Q: I just diagnosed a dog with TCC. She had 3 days of hematuria and some urgency before we
established the diagnosis. The tumor mass is large on ultrasonography. There are no signs of distant
few days?
A: Unfortumately, this scenario is relatively common. Humans present much earlier in the course
of their disease because they identify hematuria earlier. Dogs usually present with advanced invasive
disease from TCC
Q: I have heard that local instillation of various chemicals into the bladder can "cure" bladder can-
cer in humans. Why don't we consider this type of treatment in dogs with TCC?
A: Local instillation of chemical agents into the bladder can be successful in humans with TCC
when there is only superficial involvement of the bladder mucosa with the neoplastic process. lf the
tumor is superficial, the infused drugs can make sufficient contact with and be effective against the
tumor Unfortunately, veterinarians do not often get the opportunity to diagnose dogs with superficial
TCC. In addition, even though it may appear that TCC is only in the bladder, it often is in the urethra
 as well and this becomes apparent when urethrocystoscopy is performed.
   smo  o a a a d o  aa  e o
with the complaint of limping and some straining to urinate. Physical examination showed thicken
ing of the distal long bones of all limbs and both rectal and abdominal palpation identified a blad-
der mass. What can explain all of these findings?
A: Young, large breed, dogs can be predisposed to develop botryoid rhabdomyosarcoma. Some of
 n a   si  p  o  ss a s ss
lameness and thickening of the distal extremities in this dog. Radiographs of the extremities and ultraso
nography or contrast urography of the bladder will determine if this clinical suspicion is correct or not
SUGGESTED READINGS
Upper Urinary Tract Tumors
Borjesson DL: Renal cytology, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 33:119-134, 2003.
Bryan JN, Henry CJ, Turnquist SE, et al: Primary renal neoplasia of dogs, I Vet Intern Med 20:1155-1160, 2006.
1999.
Vet Radiol LItrasound 38:335-343, 1997.
Moe L, Lium B: Hereditary multifocal renal cystadenocarcinomas and nodular dermatofibrosis in 51 German shepherd
dogs, / Small Anim Pract 38:498-505, 1997.
Mooney SC, Hayes AA, Matus RE, MacEwen EG: Renal lymphoma in cats: 28 cases (1977-1984), I Am Vet Med Assoc
191:1473-1477, 1987.
Valdes-Martinez A, Cianciolo R, Mai W: Association between renal hypoechoic subcapsular thickening and lymphosar-
coma in cats, Vet Radiol Llltrasound 48:357-360, 2007.
Lower Urinary Tract Tumors
Andreasen CB, White MR, Swayne DE, Graves GN: Desmin as a marker for canine botryoid rhabdomyosarcomas, I Comp
Pathol 98:23-29, 1988.
Backer LC, Coss AM, Wolkin AF, et al: Evaluation of associations between lifetime exposure to drinking water disinfectior
by-products and bladder cancer in dogs, / Am Vet Med Assoc 232:1663-1668, 2008.
44:518-520, 2007.
464CHAPTER 14  Tumors of the Urinary System
Beck AL, Grierson JM, Ogden DM, et al: Outcome of and complications associated with tube cystostomy in dogs and cats
76 cases (1995-2006), I Am Vet Med Assoc 230:11841189, 2007.
Dettlaff-Pokora A, Matuszewski M, Schlichtholz B: Telomerase activity in urine sediments as a tool for noninvasive detec-
tion of bladder cancer, Cancer Lett 222:83-88, 2005.
Erdem E, Dikmen G, Atsu N, et al: Telomerase activity in diagnosis of bladder cancer, Scand J LIrol Nephrol 37:205-209,
2003.
Glickman LT, Raghavan M, Knapp DW, et al: Herbicide exposure and the risk of transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary
bladder in Scottish Terriers, / Am Vet Med Assoc 224:1290-1297, 2004.
invasive urinary bladder carcinoma, Clin Cancer Res 9:906-911, 2003.
Kaewsakhorn T, Kisseberth WC, Capen CC, et al: Effects of calcitriol, seocalcitol, and medium-chain triglyceride on a
canine transitional cell carcinoma cell line, Anticarcer Res 25:2689-2696, 2005.
Khan KN, Knapp DW, Denicola DB, Harris RK: Expression of cyclooxygenase-2 in transitional cell carcinoma of the uri-
nary bladder in dogs, Am I Vet Res 61:478-481, 2000
bladder cancer, a relevant model of human invasive bladder cancer, Ado Exp Med Biol 507:377-380, 2002.
Knapp DW, Glickman NW, DeNicola DB, et al: Naturally-occurring canine transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary blad-
der. A relevant model of human invasive bladder cancer, LIrologic Oncology 5:47-59, 2000.
bladder,Vet InternMed 8:273-278, 1994
Mohammed SI, Bennett PF, Craig BA, et al: Effects of the cyclooxygenase inhibitor, piroxicam, on tumor response, apopto-
 s   q  s      sio  s
Mohammed SI, Craig BA, Mutsaers AJ, et al: Effects of the cyclooxygenase inhibitor, piroxicam, in combination with
 chemotherapy on tumor response, apoptosis, and angiogenesis in a canine model of human invasive urinary bladder
cancer, Mol Cancer Ther 2:183188, 2003.
Mutsaers AJ, Widmer WR, Knapp DW: Canine transitional cell carcinoma, / Vet Interm Med 17:136-144, 2003.
 Norris AM, Laing EJ, Valli VE, et al: Canine bladder and urethral tumors: A retrospective study of 115 cases (1980-1985),
 Vet Interm Med 6:145153, 1992.
Raghavan M, Knapp DW, Bonney PL, et al: Evaluation of the effect of dietary vegetable consumption on reducing risk of
transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder in Scotish Terriers, I Am Vet Med Assoc 227:94-100, 2005.
Raghavan M, Knapp DW, Dawson MH, et al: Topical flea and tick pesticides and the risk of transitional cell carcinoma of
the urinary bladder in Scottish Terriers, I Am Vet Med Assoc 225:389-394, 2004.
Ridgway TD, Lucroy MD: Phototoxic effects of 635-nm light on canine transitional cell carcinoma cells incubated with
5-aminolevulinic acid, Am  Vet Res 64:131-136, 2003.
Stiffler KS, McCrackin Stevenson MA, et al: Clinical use of low-profile cystostomy tubes in four dogs and a cat, I Am Vet
Med Assoc 223:309310, 2003:325-329.
cam treatment in dogs with transitional cell carcinoma, I Am Vet Med Assoc 228:549-552, 2006.
Van Rhijn BW, van der Poel HG, van der Kwast TH: Urine markers for bladder cancer surveillance: A systematic review,
Eur LIrol 47:736-748, 2005.
Vignoli M, Rossi F, Chierici C, et al: Needle tract implantation after fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) of transitional
cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder and adenocarcinoma of the lung, Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd 149:314-318, 2007.
 Weisse C, Berent A, Todd K, et al: Evaluation of palliative stenting for management of malignant urethral obstructions in
dogs, I A*r Vet Med Assoc 229:226-234, 2006.
Willis CM, Church SM, Guest CM, et al: Olfactory detection of human bladder cancer by dogs: Proof of principle study
BM} 329:712, 2004.
Wilson HM, Chun R, Larson VS, et al: Clinical signs, treatments, and outcome in cats with transitional cell carcinoma of
CHAPTER
and Polydipsia
NORMAL PHYSIOLOGY
Polydipsia
 1. Polydipsia (PD) is defined as consumption of a larger than normal amount of water per
day.
a. Normal water intake in dogs can be as high as 90 mL/kg/day (40 mL/lb/day) but
often is 60 mL/kg/day (30 mL/lb/day) or less.
b. As a general rule of thumb, normal dogs drink an average of about 1 ounce of water
 per pound of body weight per day.
Normal water intake in the dog is about 1 ounce of water per pound of body weight per day.
c. Normal water intake is more variable than urine output because of variations in envi-
ronmental conditions, dietary water intake, fecal water content, respiratory evapora-
tive losses, age, and physiologic status (e.g., pregnancy, lactation).
d. Cats typically drink less water than dogs, and maximal water intake for normal cats is
45 mL/kg/day (20 mL/lb/day).
e. Measurement of water intake at home by the owmer can be helpful to determine if PD
 is really present. This approach is practical primarily in dogs.
f. In most instances, PD occurs in association with increased urine production (see
later).
 g. A history of isolated polyuria (PU) or PD usually means the owmer has observed one
 abnormality and not the other or that the owner's initial impression was incorrect.
Polyuria
1. PU is defined as excretion of a larger than normal volume of urine per day.
 2. Normal urine production in dogs and cats is 26 to 44 mL/kg/day (10 to 20 mL/lb/
day).
 3. As a general rule of thumb, normal urine production in dogs and cats is 0.5 to 1.0 mL per
pound of body weight per hour (i.e., approximately 12 to 24 mL/lb/day).
Thirst
1. Osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus are responsible for stimulating or inhibiting thirst.
a.Hypertonicity stimulates thirst.
b. Hypotonicity inhibits thirst.
 2. Dryness of the mucous membranes of the mouth and pharynx causes increased thirst.
 3. Increased temperature of blood perfusing the hypothalamus increases thirst.
4. Hypotension and decreased effective extracellular fluid volume stimulate thirst.
465
466 CHAPTER 15  Approach to Polyuria and Polydipsia
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
General Features
1. Increased urine output (PU) and increased water intake (PD) usually occur together in the
animal.
2. In most instances, PU occurs first and is followed by compensatory PD.
 3. Occasionally, PD will be the primary problem with compensatory PU, as occurs in animals
with psychogenic polydipsia (PPD).
4.  Any derangement in the normal production of urine or the thirst mechanism can result in
PU /PD.
Mechanisms of Polyuria/Polydipsia
Four Organ Systems Must Be Considered in the Pathogenesis of Polyuria/Polydipsia
a. Nervous: Cerebral cortex, hypothalamus.
syndromes (Figure 15-1).
 c. Renal: Primary renal disease or secondary influences on renal function from disease in
 other organ systems.
d. Hepatic.
Psychogenic Factors
a.Acquired habit that may represent a form of neurosis.
b. Primary PD with secondary PU.
c. No recognizable organic brain lesions.
d.Also may occur as a result of stimulation of thirst centers by various metabolites, chem
 icals or hormones produced in non-neurologic diseases (e.g., hepatic encephalopathy).
Hypothalamic Lesions
a. May affect thirst control centers.
b. Stimulation of dipsic or drinking neurons or inhibition of satiety neurons may result in
primary PD.
c. Decreased synthesis or release of antidiuretic hormone (ADH, vasopressin) by the
supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei may impair concentrating ability and lead to
PU, as occurs in primary or central diabetes insipidus (CDI).
RTADRENA
T ADRENAL
85dB
Store in progres
ist:
Dist=0.83cm
ist=3.46cm
Dist=0.79cm
B
Dlst=1.62cm
FIGURE 15-1  A, Ultrasonographic appearance from a dog with polyuria (PU) and polydipsia (PD) due to
pituitary dependent hyperadrenocorticism. Note increased width of adrenal gland. B, Ultrasonographic appearance
of adrenal dependent hyperadrenocorticism. Note polar enlargement of the adrenal gland.
Approach to Polyuria and Polydipsia  CHAPTER 15
467
Antidiuretic Hormone (ADH)
a. Pituitary lesions that interfere with the release of ADH.
(1) CDI (see section "Hyposthenuric Disorders").
(2) Drugs.
(a) Ethanol (in humans consuming alcoholic beverages).
(b) Phenytoin (an anticonvulsant not commonly used today).
(c) Glucocorticoids.
          
required before ADH is released.
b. Interference with the action of ADH on the collecting ducts of the kidneys.
(1) Congenital nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI).
(2) Acquired NDI (see section on hyposthenuric disorders)
(a) Functional.
(b) Structural.
Loss of Renal Medullary Hypertonicity
a.The normal hypertonicity of the renal medulla is crucial for elaboration of highly con-
centrated urine. When medullary hypertonicity is decreased, the osmotic gradient
necessary for movement of water from the collecting ducts into the interstitium and
back into the bloodstream is disrupted, causing inappropriately dilute urine.
b. Although the major cause of impaired concentrating ability in chronic renal disease
is the necessity to excrete the daily solute load with a decreased number of functional
nephrons, several renal diseases are associated with structural (i.e., histopathologic)
abnormalities that also can contribute to impaired concentrating ability.
c. Renal medullary washout of solute.
(1) Long-standing PU/PD of any cause can result in loss of medullary solutes (e.g.
NaCl, urea) necessary for normal urinary concentrating ability.
(2) Structural lesions need not be present for impaired concentrating ability to occur.
(3) Increased medullary blood flow associated with long-standing PU/PD can acceler
ate removal of solutes by the systemic circulation.
(4) Decreased plasma osmolality associated with long-standing PPD impairs ADH
release and the relative lack of ADH impairs reabsorption of urea by the inner med-
ullary collecting ducts of the kidney.
(5) Aldosterone deficiency in hypoadrenocorticism impairs NaCl reabsorption in
the collecting ducts and contributes to medullary washout of solute. This effect
explains why dogs with hypoadrenocorticism often have impaired urinary concen-
trating ability at presentation despite having structurally normal kidneys.
d.  Impaired production of urea can contribute to inadequate renal medullary hyperto-
nicity.
(1) Urea normally accounts for approximately half of the osmolality of the medullary
interstitium.
(2) The liver is the primary site of urea synthesis in the body.
(3) Severe liver disease or portosystemic shunting can result in decreased urea produc-
tion and less urea available to maintain normal medullary hypertonicity.
1. Lack of adequate physiologic stimuli for ADH release.
a. Chronic hypotonicity of body fluids (e.g, PPD).
b. Volume expansion (e.g., prolonged intravenous fluid therapy).
2. Obligatory solute diuresis in the kidneys.
a. The filtered load of glucose in hyperglycemic diabetic patients exceeds the reabsorp-
tive capacity of the renal tubules and results in an osmotic diuresis and glucosuria
468
3 CHAPTER 15 ■ Approach to Polyuria and Polydipsia
Infusion of 5% or 10% dextrose in water can result in hyperglycemia and glucosuria
 Rarely, a defect in renal tubular reabsorption of glucose (i.e., renal glucosuria) can be the
cause.
b. To maintain fluid balance, the decreased number of functional nephrons in patients
with chronic renal disease must excrete the normal daily solute load and thus functior
under conditions of solute diuresis which results in PU and impaired urinary concen
trating ability.
c. Increased excretion of low molecular weight radiocontrast agents can result in a tran-
sient osmotic diuresis.
3. Iatrogenic factors.
a. Glucocorticoids.
b. Diuretics (e.g., furosemide, thiazides).
c. Intravenous or subcutaneous fluid administration.
d. Some inhalation anesthetics (e.g., halothane, methoxyflurane) and drugs (e.g., lithium,
demeclocycline) interfere with ADH action in the collecting ducts.
e. Nephrotoxic drugs (e.g., aminoglycosides).
f. High salt diets or treats.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF POLYURIA/POLYDIPSIA
 A. There are many causes of PU/PD in dogs and cats including renal disease and several endo-
crine diseases.
B. Diseases associated with PU/PD, the mechanisms of PU/PD in these diseases, and useful
diagnostic tests are listed in Table 15-1. An eponym to remember the causes of PU /PD is pre-
sented in Table 15-2.
1. The most common causes for PU/PD in the dog are:
a. Chronic renal disease (CRD) or chronic renal failure (CRF).
b. Diabetes mellitus.
c. Hyperadrenocorticism.
 2. The most common causes for PU/PD in the cat are:
a. CRD or CRF.
b. Diabetes mellitus.
c. Hyperthyroidism.
Most common causes of PU/PD:
 DOG: CRF, diabetes melitus, hyperadrenocorticism.
CAT: CRF, diabetes mellitus, hyperthyroidism.
HISTORY
A. The problem of PU/PD may be foremost in the client's mind or may only be elicited after care-
ful questioning when PU/PD occurs as part of a more complicated disease process.
 B. PU and PD most often are recognized together in an individual animal.
a. It is usually impossible to determine which came first, PU or PD.
b. The owner may recognize only one or the other, often the PD.
C. Recogmition of PD by the owner tends to be more reliable than recognition of PU.
1. A change in the number of times the water bowl needs to be filled often is noticed by the
owner.
Approach to Polyuria and Polydipsia CHAPTER 15
469
TABLE 15-1
  Causes of Polyuria and Polydipsia With Mechanisms and Confirmatory Diagnostic Tests
Disease
Mechanism of Polyuria and Polydipsia
Confirmatory Tests
Chronic renal disease* (S)
Osmotic diuresis in remnant nephrons
ECC
Profile
Urinalysis
Radiography
Ultrasonography
Hyperadrenocorticism* (W)
Defective ADH release and action
LDDST, HDDST
Psychogenic
 Plasma ACTH
Ultrasonography
Diabetes mellitus* (S)
Osmotic diuresis caused by glucosuria
Blood glucose
Urinalysis
Hyperthyroidism* (W)
Increased medullary blood flow and MSw
T4
Psychogenic
Technetium scan
Hypercalciuria
Pyometra (W)
Escherichia coli endotoxin
History
Immune complex glomerulonephritis
Physical
CBC
Abdominal radiographs
Postobstructive diuresis (S)
Elimination of retained solutes
History
Defective response to ADH
Physical examination
 Defective sodium reabsorption
Urinalysis
Hypercalcemia (W)
Defective ADH action
Serum calcium
Increased medullary blood flow
Impaired NaCI transport in loop of Henle
Hypercalcemic nephropathy
 Direct stimulation of thirst center
Liver disease (W)
Decreased urea synthesis with loss of medullary solute
Liver enzymes
Decreased metabolism of endogenous hormones (e.g.,，9
 Serum bile acids
cortisol, aldosterone)
Psychogenic (hepatic encephalopathy)
Liver biopsy
Hypokalemia
Blood ammonia
Pyelonephritis (W)
E. cofi endotoxin
Urinalysis
Increased renal blood flow
Urine culture
MSW
CBC
Renal parenchymal damage
Excretoryurography
Ultrasonography
Hypoadrenocorticism (W)
Renal sodium loss with MSw
Serum Na and K
ACTH stimulation
Hypokalemia (W)
Defective ADH action
Serum K
Increased medullary blood flow and loss of
medullary solute
Continued
470
CHAPTER 15  Approach to Polyuria and Polydipsia
TABLE 15-1
 Causes of Polyuria and Polydipsia With Mechanisms and Confirmatory Diagnostic Tests--cont'd
Disease
Mechanism of Polyuria and Polydipsia
Confirmatory Tests
Diuretic phase of oliguric ARF (S)
Bimination of retained solutes
History
Defective sodium reabsorption
CBC
Profile
Urinalysis
Ultrasonography
Renal biopsy
Partial urinary tract obstruction (S)
Redistribution of renal blood flow
History
Defective sodium reabsorption
Physical examination
Renal parenchymal damage
Drugs (W)
Various mechanisms depending on drug
History
Salt administration (S)
Osmotic diuresis caused by excess sodium administered History
Excessive parenteral fluid
Water diuresis caused by excess water administered
History
administration (W) (polyuria only)
Central diabetes insipidus (CD) (W)
Congenital lack of ADH (rare)
Water deprivation test
Acquired lack of ADH (idiopathic, tumor, trauma)
Exogenous ADH test
ADH assay
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDl) (w) Congenital lack of renal response to ADH (very rare)
Water deprivation test
Acquired lack of renal response to ADH
Exogenous ADH test
ADH assay
ECC
Psychogenic polydipsia (PPD) (W)
Neurobehavioral disorder (anxiety?)
Water deprivation test
Increased renal blood flow
Exogenous ADH test
MSW
Behavioral history
Renal glucosuria (S)
Solute diuresis caused by glucosuria
Blood glucose
Urinalysis
Primary hypoparathyroidism (W)
Unknown (psychogenic?)
Serum calcium
Serum phosphorus
Serum PTH
Acromegaly (W, S)
Insulin antagonism
Neuroradiography
Glucose intolerance
Insulin-like growth factor
Diabetes mellitus in affected cats
Polycythemia (W)
Unknown (increased blood viscosity?)
CBC
Multiple myeloma (W)
Unknown (increased blood viscosity?)
Serum electrophoresis
Renal MSw (W)
Depletion of medullary interstitial solute (urea, sodium,  Gradual water deprivation
potassium)
(3-5 days)
Hickey-Hare test
Adapted from Bruyette DS, Nelson Rw: How to approach the problems of polyuria and polydipsia, Vet Med 81:112-128, 1986.
*Most common causes of polyuria and polydipsia.
ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; ADH, antidiuretic hormone; ARF, acute renal failure; CBC, complete blood count; ECC, endogenous creatinine
clearance; HDDST, high dose dexamethasone suppression test; LDDST, low dose dexamethasone suppression test; MSW, medullary washout of
solute; PTH, parathyroid hormone; (S), solute diuresis; (W), water diuresis.
Approach to Polyuria and Polydipsia  CHAPTER 15
471
TABLE 15-2
 Differential Diagnoses to Be Considered With Polyuria/Polydipsia
C
Calcium, Cushing, Cancer, Corticosteroids
L
Liver insufficiency, Leptospirosis (subacute)
A
Adrenal (hyperadrenocorticism and hypoadrenocorticism)
Metabolic, Mellitus (Diabetes), Malignancy, Medullary washout
P
(hypoglycemia), Postictal
E
Endocrine, Electrolytes {increased or decreased calcium, decreased potassium)
D
Drugs, Diabetes, Diuresis (post-obstructive, hypertension-induced)
R
Renal insufficiency/failure
Insipidus (nephrogenic, central)
B
Brain
S
Salty treats, Salty diets
2. It can be helpful to ask the owner to estimate how much water the animal drinks in terms
they can easily visualize (e.g., bowls, cups, quarts).
 3. Less obvious sources of water (e.g., toilet bowls for large dogs, dripping faucets for cats)
also must be considered. These sources often will not be considered by owners.
4.(
Owners usually do not observe cats drinking more water, and measuring the actual
amount provided to the cat may be necessary.
 5. Multiple animal households pose a challenge to identify PD in an individual animal. If
necessary, the suspected animal may need to be isolated with its owm water source for a
few days to identify PD.
D. Rarely, PD may be present without PU (often transiently).
1. High ambient temperature (i.e., increased respiratory loss).
2. Excessive exercise.
3. Third space distribution of consumed water (e.g., sequestration of consumed water into
the gastrointestinal tract, peritoneal space, or pleural space).
4.  Large atonic bladder with increased residual capacity masking the observation of PU.
5.Correction of previous dehydration.
 E. Owners may or may not be able to assess the volume of urine their pet is producing.
1. A negative history does not exclude the possibility that PU/PD exists.
 2. Owner recognition of PU /PD is more common in dogs than cats.
 Owner recognition of Pu/PD is more common in dogs than in cats.
 3. Increased amounts of saturated litter in the litter box or increased odor may be clues sug-
 gesting PU/PD in a cat.
F. The volume of water consumed often is not helpful in determining the cause, however PU/
PD tends to be most severe with PPD, CDI, and NDI, and urine specific gravity (USG) in these
situations is typically in the hyposthenuric range (1.001 to 1.007).
G. Pollakiuria (i.e., increased frequency of urinations) may be confused with PU by the owner (i.e.,
owners sometimes assume that the animal is producing more urine if it is urinating more frequently
than usual). Pollakiuria must be clearly differentiated from PU when the history is obtained.
1. Pollakiuria indicates inflammation in the lower urinary tract (i.e., bladder, urethra) regard-
less of any change in urine volume. The causes of pollakiuria are very different from the
causes of PU.
472
2CHAPTER 15Approach to Polyuria and Polydipsia
2. Animals with PU may have a history of increased frequency of urinations because of thein
need to eliminate a larger volume of urine, but this increase in frequency usually is associ-
ated with passage of large volumes of urine whereas animals with pollakiuria pass small
amounts of urine often with straining and sometimes with hematuria (depending on the
umderlying cause).
 H. Nocturia (i.e., urinating during sleeping hours) often accompanies PU.
1. Nocturia may be the first sign detected by the owner of a dog with PU because urine is
found in the house in the morning.
2. Sometimes nocturia is the presenting complaint because PU/PD during the day is not
appreciated (e.g., outdoor dog with free access to water).
I.In the history, it is important to make sure that drugs (e.g., glucocorticoids, diuretics) that impair
the urinary concentrating mechanism are not being administered. Glucocorticoids, administered
either systemically or even topically (skin, eye, or ear), can cause marked PU/PD in dogs. This
effect is less pronounced in cats.
Make sure that drugs that impair urinary concentrating ability (steroids) are not being administered
II. Physical examination findings can provide helpful clues about the cause of PU/PD.
A. Identification of small irregular kidneys on abdominal palpation suggests underlying chronic
renal disease.
B. A neck mass in a cat suggests hyperthyroidism.
II1. Diagnostic evaluation in animals with PU /PD is directed at identifying the underlying disease
 n  a  n  
DIAGNOSTIC TESTING
A. A minimum database should be obtained in all animals in which PU /PD has been verified or
is strongly suspected (see Table 15-1).
1. Complete blood count (CBC).
2. Serum biochemistry profile.
3. Routine urinalysis.
4. Assessment of thyroid function should be included as part of the minimum data base for
cats with PU/PD.
B. If the animal's urine USG is low (<1.025 in a dog or <1.035 in a cat), clinicians often pro-
ceed directly to obtaining a minimum database, whereas if the USG is higher than expected
(i.e., >1.025 in a dog or >1.035 in a cat) they may recommend that the owner quantitate the
animal's water consumption at home for several days before proceeding with an extensive
diagnostic evaluation.
 C. Often, clinically important underlying disorders are identified by evaluation of the minimum
data base.
1. Renal failure.
2. Liver disease.
 3. Hypercalcemia.
4. Hyperthyroidism.
5. Diabetes mellitus.
D. If the diagnosis is not clear after evaluation of the history, physical examination, and mini-
mum database, further diagnostic evaluation is indicated. In dogs this evaluation includes
diagnostic tests to exclude hyperadrenocorticism. See Table 15-1 for a list of the confirmatory
tests to establish various causes of PU/PD
 History of polydipsia and polyuria 
Diagnosis
Rule out iatrogenic causes 
 Normal physical exam 
Apparently sick
Verify by measurerment at home, if necessary
CBC, biochemical profile, urinalysis
Negative
Positive
Rulle out (confirmn with specific tests):
*Hyperthyroidism 
Postobstructive diuresis
*Hepatic failure
*Renal failure
Pyometra
+Polycythermia
*Diabetes mellitus 
•Hypoadrenocorticism
*Hypercalcemia
Henal glucosuria
•Hyperadrenocorticism
*Hypokalemia
 Nondehydrated
Dehydrated
LRehydrate
￥
Water deprivation test
Creatinine clearance test
Positive
Negative
intermediate
Norma!
Decreased
APP
CDI
CDI
RI
Partial CDI
NDI
APP + MSW
NDI
APP+MSW
RI
APP
鼻
Exogenous ADH test 
Positive
intermediate
Negative
CDI
APP + MSW
NDI
APP + MSW
Partial water deprivation or Hickey-Hare test
Positive
Negative
APP
NDI
A
FIGURE 15-2  Algorithm for polyuria/polydipsia (PU/PD). APP, apparent psychogenic polydipsia; CBC,
complete blood count; CDI, central diabetes insipidus; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; MSW, medullary
washout of solute; NDI, nephrogenic diabetes insipidus; RI, renal insufficiency; LLS, ultrasound; LIPC, urine
protein-creatin ratio; LISG, urine specific gravity. (A, From Fenner WR: Quick reference to veterinary medicine, ed 2,
Philadelphia, 1991, JB Lippincott.)
474
CHAPTER 15  Approach to Polyuria and Polydipsia
Approach to Polyuria and Polydipsia
History
Continue
Yes
diagnostics
Convincing history for ↑
No
volume?
Intact ?
Measure water
Consider heat cycle
intake at home
Rule out pyometra
 Primary complaint
Anesthesia/surgery
History
 other than PU/PD
fluid administration
Work up
Rule out seizures,
primary complaint
neurological deficits,
 head trauma
Rule out toxins,
thyroxine,
Drugs capable of
vitamin D,
 concentration impairment
No
aminoglycosides,
lithium,
ethylene glylcol
Yes
Anticonvulsants
Diuretics
Glucocorticosteroids,
pills,
injections,
eye/ear,
topical
B
FIGURE 15-2  Cont'd.
E.1
 Figure 15-2 is an algorithm depicting our clinical approach to the evaluation of PU/PD in
dogs and cats.
F. Urine concentration most often is evaluated using USG as estimated by refractometry.
1. Although urine osmolality is the gold standard for evaluation of urine concentration,
excellent correlation has been reported in dogs between USG as determined by refractom-
etry and urinary osmolality.
2.
 Dipstrip tests to estimate USG are not reliable in either dogs or in cats.
Urine specific gravity should be evaluated by refractometry. Dipstrip tests to estimate USG are not reliable.
Approach to Polyuria and Polydipsia  CHAPTER 15
475
Approach to Polyuria and Polydipsia
Based on Initial USG
Rule out hyperadrenocorticism
High
↑ UPC
blood pressure
Consider
psychogenic,
polydipsia
Proteinuria
Culture urine
Repeat USG
.
↑ WBC
>1.035 cat
 Renal ULS
>1.025 dog
Rule out pyelonephritis,
 renal disease
Screening USG
<1.035 Cat
<1.025 dog
↑ Casts
Glucosuria
 Ammonium
urate crystals
Rule out renal glucosuria,
Bile acids rule out
diabetes mellitus,
portosystemic
stress
shunt
CBC,
serum biochemistry
thyroid profile,
blood pressure
C
FGURE 15-2  Cont'd.
3. Estimates of USG determined by refractometry may differ depending on several factors.
a.  Type and brand of refractometer used.
b. Temperature compensation.
C. Scale used to make the reading on the refractometer.
4.I
 Refractometers that use temperature compensation and scales calibrated specifically for
dogs or cats should be used.
G. The USG of normal animals (i.e., normal hypothalamic-pituitary-renal axis) depends on
dietary intake (food and water), hydration status, ambient temperature and humidity, and
activity level.
 H. Dogs can produce urine of widely varying concentration throughout the day. Urine should
 be collected in the morming before eating and drinking, because this urine sample is likely to
have the highest USG obtained during the day.
1. USG was 1.035 ± 0.010 (range, 1.009 to >1.050) in one study of 62 normal dogs.
476
CHAPTER 15  Approach to Polyuria and Polydipsia
Approach to Polyuria and Polydipsia
When Cause is Not Obvious
After History, Physical Examination, and Minimum Data base
Normal physical 
Normal biochemistry
 Normal urine chemistry
Normal urinary sediment
 Normal serum bile acids
Cortisol screening
Diagnostic for hyperadrenocorticism
No
Yes
Water deprivation testing
Adequate response
Failed response
>1.030 USG
<1.030 USG
Central diabetes insipidus
Psychogenic polydipsia
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
Meduallary washout
Renal insufficiency
ADH challenge test
"window"
before azotemia
Failed response
Adequate response
<1.030USG
↓GFR
>1.030 USG
Nephrogenic
Medullary
Central
lohexol clearance
diabetes insipidus
washout
diabetes insipidus
MRI brain and pituitary
D
FIGURE 15-2  Cont'd
Approach to Polyuria and Polydipsia  CHAPTER 15
477
2.  USG was higher in morning urine samples than in those collected in the evening.
USG decreased with advancing age.
Median USG was 1.042 and mean USG was 1.038 in 51 urine samples taken weekly from
13 apparently normal dogs eating a variety of foods. In that study, USG ranged from 1.003
to 1.068 and 37 of the 51 samples had USG >1.030. (Chew, unpublished observations.)
5. Pooled 24-hour urine samples from normal dogs usually have USG of 1.020 or more.
 USG can vary from as low as 1.006 to more than 1.040 in the same dog during a 24-hour period.
7.
The USG of normal cats varies much less throughout the day than does the USG of normal
dogs. Normal cats housed under laboratory conditions in our hospital usually produce
urine with a minimum USG of 1.035 when eating dry food and a minimum USG of 1.025
when eating canned food.
8.9
Submaximal concentration of urine is expected in patients with PU /PD. The USG of nor-
mal dogs that are water-deprived should be 1.050 to 1.076 and USG of 1.047 to 1.087 is
expected for normal cats.
9.
 A USG of 1.040 is considered the minimum expected value in dehydrated sick dogs or cats.
Although healthy dogs and cats can have USG values as low as 1.001, this is extremely
umcommon.
I. In dogs with PU/PD, water deprivation testing (WDT) is the next step after hyperadrenocorti-
cism has been ruled out. Responses to water deprivation testing are presented in Figure 15-3.
Urine
Urine
Osmolality
Specific
48 h
(mOsm/kg)
Gravity
(normal dogs)
2700
1.075
1.070
1.065
Normaf,PPDw/oMSW
Normal
1.060
range
1.055
1800
1.050
1.045
1400
1.040
PPD W/ MSW
1.035
Partial CDI
1100
1.030
1.025
700
1.020
Complete
CDI
500
1.015
JON
Isosthenuric
350
1.010
250
 range
1.007
200
1.005
50
1.001
ADH administration
Time (hours)
CDI, central diabetes insipidus; NDI, nephrogenic diabetes insipidus; MSW, medullary solute washout; PPD.
psychogenic polydipsia. (From Disorders of sodium and water: hypermatremia and hyponatremia. In DiBartola
SP, editor: Fluid, electrlyte and acid-base disorders in srall animal practice, ed 3, St Louis, 2006, Saunders-Elsevier.)
478CHAPTER 15Approach to Polyuria and Polydipsia
Water deprivation testing is often performed in dogs with apparent psychogenic polydipsia (PPD), central
 diabetes insipidus (CDl), or ND1.
1. WDT establishes the patient's physiologic response to the hypertonicity of plasma per-
fusing the hypothalamus, which normally stimulates release of ADH from the neurohy-
pophysis.
 2. Mild dehydration causes release of ADH into the peripheral circulation, where it can exert
its effects on the collecting ducts of the kidney to concentrate urine and increase USG.
 3. Empty the animal's bladder and weigh the animal accurately at the beginning of the study.
 4. USG should be determined by the same operator using the same refractometer to ensure
consistency of reported readings.
 5. Carefully monitor the progress during WDT so the patient does not become too dehy-
drated (i.e., lose more than 5% of body weight).
6. WDT should not be performed in patients that are already dehydrated, because they have
already failed the challenge to concentrate their urine.
 7. WDT also should not be performed in animals with azotemia, because dehydration may
cause further injury to the kidneys.
8. WDT should not be performed in animals with hypercalcemia because the severity of the
hypercalcemia will be increased.
Do not perform water deprivation testing if the patient is already dehydrated, azotemic, or hypercalcemic.
9. Although not contraindicated, it is not necessary to perform WDT in animals with other organ
system dysfuncfions or metabolic disorders that readily explain the presence of PU /PD)
 J. Unfortunately, ADH is not routinely measured, because of issues with method and handling
Even if this measurement were readily available, pulsatile secretion of ADH in dogs could
make its interpretation difficult
 K.Abrupt WDT involves sudden removal of all water from the patient and is performed in the
hospital.
 1. We recommend no food be fed during this time because moisture content and solute load
for renal excretion will influence urinary concentration.
2. The patient is weighed accurately before the start of the test and the bladder is completely
emptied by urinary catheterization. It is important to empty the bladder at the start of the
study to avoid confusion in the event thiat concentrated urine were to be elaborated by the
kidneys and added to a bladder containing very dilute urine.
 3. The abrupt WDT is stopped if the patient loses 5% of body weight or if adequately concen-
trated urine is produced.
4. Body weight and USG should be evaluated every 2 hours in patients with severe PU /PD
or every 4 hours in patients with less severe PU/PD.
5.  During WDT, achievement of USG of >1.040 indicates adequate concentrating ability. USG
of >1.030 may indicate adequate concentrating ability in patients with long-standing PU /
PD because prolonged PU/PD will cause renal medullary washout, which will impair
concenfrafion of urine until renal medullary hypertonicity has been restored.
Water deprivation testing is terminated if USG remains unchanged, when mild dehydration develops, or if 5%
 of body weight is lost.
 6. Obtaining serial USG measurements is facilitated by placement of an indwelling urinary
catheter.
Approach to Polyuria and Polydipsia  CHAPTER 15
479
 7. The effects of WDT and ADH administration in patients with common hyposthenuric
disorders (e.g., PPD, CDI, NDI) are presented in Figure 15-3.
aqoa e aq A 1d d si siso a 'a p '  ssa   8
ioral disorder, but also can occur secondary to portosystemic shunting, advanced liver
disease, polycythemia, paraneoplastic hypoglycemia, hypoparathyroidism with hypocal-
cemia, or hyperadrenocorticism.
9. WDT is terminated when the USG is relatively unchanged over sequential USG deter
minations or when mild dehydration develops (assessed based on loss of 5% of body
weight). Presence of 5% dehydration assures maximal stimulation of ADH release. A lack
of sequential change in USG is defined as a <10% increase in USG on three consecutive
urine samples taken at 2- to 4-hour intervals.
10. The WDT also is terminated if 5% or more of body weight has been lost, regardless of USG.
11. Failure to adequately respond to WDT occurs in patients with CDI, NDI, and in patients
with renal medullary washout of solute.
tered to differentiate failure of the kidneys to respond to ADH (NDI) from failure of the pitu-
itary gland to release ADH (CDI).
1. ADH testing begins immediately after WDT fails to result in production of concentrated
-us go woy snoanbe ue st (vaa ussandosea auuare-a-g-ounsap-n) ussardosaa z
pared with native ADH
3. One to 5 μg of the nasal formulation of DDAVP is given subcutaneously and USG evalu-
ated at 30, 60, 90, and 120 minutes after administration to determine response.
4. A marked increase in USG typically occurs in patients with CDI after exogenous adminis-
tration of DDAVP. Failure to respond to WDT followed by failure to respond to DDAVP is
  o     ss   
M. When a patient has very dilute urine and the suspicion is high for CDI, ADH testing instead
of WDT can be performed while the animal is at home with the owner.
1. DDAVP (either a 100 or 200 μg tablet) can be given PO every 8 hours for 3 to 7 days. A 100
μg tablet provides approximately 5 μg of DDAVP because orally administered DDAVP has
limited bioavailability compared with the nasal spray formulation.
2. The owner should collect urine samples several times throughout the day for measure-
ment of USG and to determine the effect of exogenous ADH.
3. Some renal medullary washout likely exists initially, however, so USG determinations
should be performed after a few days of treatment with DDAVP
4. Altermatively, 1 to 4 drops of the nasal spray (1 drop provides 1.5 to 4 μg of DDAVP) can
be placed in the conjunctival sac every 12 hours and USG monitored. Although the nasal
spray is not sterile, 2 to 5 μg (100 μg/mL; 0.05 mL = 5 μg) can be administered by subcu-
taneous injection twice daily (ideally after filtration through a Millipore filter), and the
effects monitored.
 5. All forms of DDAVP are expensive. Twice daily treatment with DDAVP is needed to ade-
quately increase USG and minimize PU, but it can be given once daily in the evening to
minimize cost. Also, larger doses may increase the magnitude of urinary concentration
and its duration of effect.
 6. Treatment with DDAVP isnot required if the arimal has free access to water, stays hydrated,
outdoor dog). Water restriction in the absence of DDAVP treatment and ongoing large
losses of water in the urine can lead to severe hypernatremia and hyperosmolality that
may have severe neurologic consequences for the pafient.
480CHAPTER 15 ■ Approach to Polyuria and Polydipsia
N. In patients that fail both abrupt WDT and ADH testing, renal medullary solute washout must
be considered in addition to NDI
1. In these instances, gradual WDT, either alone or in conjunction with DDAVP administra-
tion, should allow restoration of normal renal medullary hypertonicity.
 2. Gradual water deprivation involves progressive water restriction over several days. Water
intake is decreased over several days from its current level to approximately 100 mL/kg/day
3. Gradual WDT is discontinued if body weight decreases by 5% or if the animal shows clini-
cal sigms of illness.
4. After this gradual WDT, abrupt WDT again is performed. If the patient fails to adequately
concentrate its urine during the second WDT, renal medullary solute washout is excluded
from further consideration.
either CDI or PPD.
CLINICAL FINDINGS, DIAGNOSIS, AND TREATMENT
OF HYPOSTHENURIC DISORDERS
A. PU and PD are not diagmoses but rather clinical signs of an underlying disease process. Treat-
ment depends upon establishing an accurate diagnosis and instituting appropriate treatment
for the causative disease (see Table 15-1)
Psychogenic Polydipsia
PU/PD are not a diagnoses but rather clinical signs of an underlying disease process.
1. PPD is an uncommon but not rare disorder that usually occurs in large breed dogs. German
shepherds may be over-represented.
2. The owner may report that the dog has a nervous disposition or that PD developed after
some stressful event.
3. Some hyperactive dogs placed in an exercise restricted environment have developed PPD
a woy uogae jao on ronaeuaq pauieal e se hl padonaaap aaey oi waas soop aos pue
owner.
4. Rarely, PPD will be encountered in dogs with primary brain lesions.
5. Some dogs with PPD lower their water intake dramatically as a result of the stress of hos-
pitalization, and this is sometimes a useful diagnostic observation.
6. In one study, dogs with PPD had daily water consumption of 150 to 250 mL/kg, USG of
1.001 to 1.003, urine osmolality of 102 to 112 mOsm/kg, plasma osmolality of 285 to 295
mOsm/kg, and serum sodium concentration of 131 to 140 mEq/L. Although not consis-
tently present, slightly low serum sodium concentration in a dog with PU /PD and marked
hyposthenuria supports a diagnosis of PPD.
7. In the same study, approximately 67% of dogs with PPD had a normal response to water
deprivation, whereas the others had some degree of renal medullary washout of solute,
but responded to gradual water deprivation.
8. PPD appears to be extremely rare in cats (if it exists at all in this species).
approach should correct any renal medullary washout of solute that is present. The owner
must be careful to eliminate other less obvious sources of water such as toilet bowls or
dripping faucets.
Approach to Polyuria and Polydipsia  CHAPTER 15
481
Se:5
x18.0+0
1530
ROI:
P
FGURE 15-4  Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cranium of an 1l-year-old male Gordon Setter, "Fridge,
with severe polyuria (PU) and polydipsia (PD) and average urinary specific gravity of 1.004. This dog failed water
deprivation testing and immediately responded to exogenous ADH administration with concentrated urine. MR
shows a large pituitary mass on both the axial (A) and sagittal (B) views. "Fridge's" pituitary tumor was treated
with radiation therapy and he lived another year but required DDAVP tablets to allow him to control the degree
of PU and PD.
Central Diabetes Insipidus (Figure 15-4)
1. CDI, or pituitary diabetes insipidus, is due to a partial or complete lack of ADH (vasopres
sin) production and release from the neurohypophysis.
Central diabetes insipidus is due to a partial or complete lack of ADH production and release from the
neurohypophysis.
2. Causes of CDI.
a. Congenital (rare).
b. Idiopathic.
c. Neoplasia.
d.Trauma (may be transient).
e. Neuroanatomic abnormality (e.g., cystic craniopharyngeal duct).
f. Hypophysectomy for treatment of hyperadrenocorticism (often transient).
g.Visceral larval migrans (rare).
3. Diagnosis.
a.Animals with CDI have severe PU/PD.
b.
 Severe hyposthenuria (urine osmolality 60-200 mOsm/kg) is common. Urine osmolal-
ity may reach 400 to 500 mOsm/kg if the animal is severely dehydrated.
C.
Variability in USG and urine osmolality at the time of presentation is related to hydra-
 tion status and severity of ADH deficiency.
 d. In one study, dogs were classified as having complete or partial CDI based on the mag-
nitude of increase in USG and urine osmolality after induction of 5% dehydration.
482
2 CHAPTER 15 ■ Approach to Polyuria and Polydipsia
(1) Dogs with complete CDI had USG 1.001 to 1.007 that did not change substantially
after induction of 5% dehydration
(2) Dogs with partial CDI had USG 1.002 to 1.016 that increased to 1.010 to 1.018 after
induction of 5% dehydration.
(3) ADH administration leads to a substantial increase in USG within 2 hours after adminr-
istration, but the initial response may be less than expected because of renal medullary
washout of solute. In one study, USG increased to 1.018 to 1.022 after ADH administra-
tion in dogs withi complete CDI and to 1.018 to 1.036 in dogs with partial CDI
e. Increased plasma osmolality and hypernatremia may occur in dogs and cats with CDI
These results suggest that some affected dogs and cats do not obtain enough water to
 maintain water balance and are presented in a hypertonic state.
4. Treatment.
a. Treatment with ADH restores medullary hypertonicity and normal urinary concentrat-
ing ability in animals with CDI.
Daily administration of DDAVP (desmopressin) is the treatment for CDI.
(1) DDAVP is a structural analogue of ADH that has more potent antidiuretic effect but
minimal vasopressive effect and is relatively resistant to metabolic degradation.
(2) DDAVP is available as a nasal spray (0.1 mg/mL), injectable solution (4 μg/mL), or
tablet for oral administration (100 and 200 μg).
(a) The injectable solution is much more expensive than the nasal spray, and the
nasal spray has been used subcutaneously in dogs and cats with CDI at a dos-
age of 1 μg/kg every 12 hours without adverse effects.
(b) The nasal spray can be administered in the conjunctival sac at a dosage of 1.5
μg/kg every 8 hours. One drop of the nasal spray contains 1.5 to 4 μg of desmo-
 pressin, and duration of effect varies from 8 to 24 hours.
(c) In humans, the bioavailability of DDAVP after oral administration is 0.1% as
compared with 3% to 5% after intranasal administration, and gastrointestinal
absorption is improved when it is given in a fasted state. In dogs, an antidi-
uretic effect was observed even after oral doses as low as 50 μg.
b. Chlorpropamide is a sulfonylurea hypoglycemic agent that potentiates the renal tubu-
lar effects of small amounts of ADH and may be useful in management of partial CDI.
(1) The recommended dosage of chlorpropamide is 10 to 40 mg/kg/day orally and
hypoglycemia is a potential adverse effect.
(2) It has been useful in the management of CDI (up to 50% reduction in urine output)
in some reports but not in others, possibly because some animals have partial and
some have complete CDI.
c. The prognosis in animals with CDI depends on the underlying cause (e.g., idiopathic
versus neoplasia). Many older dogs with CDI have tumors in the region of the pitu-
itary gland and eventually develop neurologic signs.
Nephrogenic Diabetes Insipidus
Congenital Nephrogenic Diabetes Insipidus
a. Rare in dogs and cats.
(1) Affected animals are presented at a very young age for severe PU/PD.
(2) Urine osmolality and USG are in the hyposthenuric range.
(3) Affected animals show no response to WDT, exogenous vasopressin administra-
fion, or hypertonic saline infusion.
Approach to Polyuria and Polydipsia  CHAPTER 15
483
(4) Plasma ADH concentration was markedly increased in one case report in a dog.
 A e  rn rg asds aq c nno am sda   mo ()
Siberian huskies.
b. Congenital NDI is caused by mutations in the V2 receptor (X-linked recessive) or aqua
porin 2 (AQP2) charmel (autosomal recessive) in humans.
Acquired Nephrogenic Diabetes Insipidus
a.  Acquired NDI includes a diverse group of disorders in which structural or functional
abnormalities interfere with the ability of the kidneys to concentrate urine.
HUNCTIONAL
(1) Glucocorticoids (endogenous or exogenous)
(2) Diuretics.
(3) Hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria.
(4) Hypokalemia.
(5) Sepsis and endotoxemia (e.g., Escherichia coli urinary tract infection [UTI], pyelone-
phritis, pyometra).
Pyometra should be ruled out when PU/PD is present in an intact female.
(6) Altered medullary tonicity (e.g., hypoadrenocorticism).
(7) Nephrotoxic drugs (e.g., aminoglycosides).
(8) Postobstructive diuresis.
(9) Acromegaly.
STRUCTURAL
(1) Renal medullary interstitial amyloidosis
(2) Polycystic kidney disease.
(3) Chronic pyelonephritis.
(4) Chronic interstitial nephritis
Thiazide Diuretics
1. Thiazide diuretics (chlorothiazide 20 to 40 mg/kg PO every 12 hours or hydrochlorothia
zide 2.5 to 5.0 mg/kg PO every 12 hours) have been used to treat animals with CDI and
NDI.
a.  Diuretic administration results in mild dehydration, enhanced proximal renal tubular
reabsorption of sodium, decreased delivery of tubular fluid to the distal nephron, and
reduced urine output.
 b. Thiazides have been reported to result in a 20% to 50% reduction in urine output in
dogs with NDI and in cats with CDI.
c. In other reports, thiazides were reported to be ineffective in decreasing urine output in
a dog and a cat with CDI.
d. Restriction of dietary sodium and protein reduces the amount of solute that must be
excreted in the urine each day and thus further reduces obligatory water loss and poly-
uria. A low salt diet and hydrochlorothiazide (2 mg/kg PO every 12 hours) were used
sak z rog In luauo im op e ae c Amssns
WHAT DO WE DO?
apparent after a diagnostic evaluation that has included a CBC, serum biochemistry, urinalysis, and
urine culture.
484 CHAPTER 15  Approach to Polyuria and Polydipsia
· Weigh the animal every few hours during water deprivation testing and conclude testing if 5% of
body weight is lost during testing.
· Determine iohexol clearance in patients in which PU is suspected to be a consequence of underlying
nonazotemic renal disease (i.e., all other likely diagnoses have been excuded by other diagnostic tests)
· Consider psychogenic PD, especially in puppies and in young large breed dogs.
● Never perform water deprivation testing in an azotemic animal.
   go s  se r   n a o
· Administer exogenous ADH (DDAVP) to rule out CDI when the patient has failed to concentrate
 urine during water deprivation testing.
 THOUGHTS FOR THE FUTURE
· Assays for ADH will become more widely available, facilitating the diagnostic approach to PU
 and PD and overcoming difficulties in interpretation associated with pulsatile secretion of ADH
will be developed
· Measurement of urinary aquaporins will become available and will facilitate the diagnostic evalua-
tion of patients with PU and PD.
· Estimation of glomerular filtration rate (GFR) by iohexol clearance will become routine in primary
care practice and will help in the evaluation of nonazotemic patients with PU and PD in which pri-
mary renal disease is suspected of being the underlying cause.
SUMMARY TIPS
● Tailor water deprivation testing to each patient based on individual response rather than any set
time period.
· Make sure occult urinary tract infection and pyelonephritis have been ruled out by negative urine
culture in patients in which an obvious cause for PU and PD has not been identified.
· Perform abdominal imaging (i.e., abdominal radiographs, ultrasonography) to further evaluate the
 adrenal glands, kidneys, gastrointestinal tract, and liver in patients in which the initial diagnostic
evaluation has not identified the cause of the PU and PD.
 dus, nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, and apparent psychogenic PD.
adon ie raquaman pe Cd pue nd go asnen e se uonensnunpe pnoraisonnros mo ai sem ·
cal corticosteroids (i.e., those used on the skin and in the ears and eyes) also can result in PU
and PD
· Ask the owner to measure their pet's water intake at home over several days when the existence of
PD and PU is questionable
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS
· Water deprivation testing should be done for 12 or 24 hours. Actually, water deprivation should not
be carried out for any predetermined period of time. The duration of testing is determined by the
plasma proteins, and urine specific gravity).
· Water deprivation testing is needed to assess patients with hypercalcemia on routine serum bio-
chemistry testing. No. Water deprivation would be hazardous for a hypercalcemic patient, and other
determination) are more likely to yield valuable diagnostic information.
Approach to Polyuria and Polydipsia  CHAPTER 15
5485
· Most older dogs with PU and PD without obvious cause have hyperadrenocorticism or central diabe
tes insipidus. Such dogs may well have underlying chronic renal disease that has resulted in impaired
urinary concentrating ability but not azotemia (i.e., between 67% and 75% loss of functional nephrons)
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
Q: I have an 1l-year-old neutered male German shepherd dog. Hyperadrenocorticism has been
definitively diagnosed and treated with mitotane leading to a hypoadrenal crisis in the past (pre-
and post- adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) cortisol concentrations currently are within the nor-
mal range). Persistent severe PU and PD developed in the last month. Serum biochemistry results,
including BUN and serum creatinine concentrations are normal. Urinalysis was normal, with the
exception of a USG of 1.010. The USG was still 1.010 after water restriction to 30 mL/b/day. Results
of abdominal radiographs and abdominal ultrasound imaging are normal. The dog was given 0.2
mg DDAVP orally twice a day which resulted in a USG of 1.040. The USG retumed to 1.010 shortly
after the DDAVP tablets were discontinued. Does this dog have CDI?
A: Apparently so. The dramatic response to the DDAVP followed by a rapid return to much more
dilute urine in the absence of DDAVP supplementation supports a diagnosis of CDI.
A: Animals with complete CDI typically have hyposthenuria (USG 1.001-1.006), but some dogs
with complete CDI can concentrate into this range despite complete absence of ADH if they are dehy-
drated (but usually not above USG 1.017). An alternate explanation is that the dog has partial CDI. If
available, brain imaging (magnetic resonance imaging [MRI] or computed tomography [CT]) can be
performed to evaluate the hypothalamus and pituitary gland for diseases that could interrupt produc-
tion or secretion of ADH.
Q: The owners of a 13-week-old male Labrador retriever are having difficulty housebreaking the
puppy The dog seems to drink constantly and urinates while walking around the house. Urinalysis
was normal except for a USG of 1.003. Could this dog have CDI?
A: CDI is possible, but psychogenic PD is far more common in puppies. Some puppies drink water
in excess of their physiological need. They usually outgrow this tendency by the time they are 4 to
5 months old. If necessary, psychogenic PD can quickly be differentiated from CDI by during water
deprivation testing. This dog's USG was >1.040 after approximately 6 hours of water deprivation, con-
firming normal urinary concentrating ability. If the dog had CDI, its USG would have remained low
and certainly would not have increased to more than 1.015.
Q: We anesthetized an 1l-year-old spayed female mixed breed dog for dental extractions. Her history
indicated no problems, and she was normal on physical examination before the dental procedure.
CBC and serum biochemistry results also were normal before the procedure, but no urinalysis was
performed. Anesthesia and the dental procedure lasted approximately one hour and she received some
intravenous fluids during this time. The nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) carprofen and
thie antibiotic enrofloxacin were prescribed for one week after the procedure. A few days after release
from the hospital, the owners reported that the dog was drinking quite a bit of water and urinating
large volumes. Urinalysis at this time was normal except for a USG of 1.010 and trace proteinuria, and
urine culture showed no growth. Serum biochemistry results at this time were still normal. A low dose
dexamethasone test to evaluate for hyperadrenocorticism was normal. What can I tell the owner?
A: More information is needed. It would have been helpful to have urinalysis results (including
 USG) before anesthesia. In dogs with underlying renal disease, urinalysis results (especially USG) are
likely to be abnormal long before changes in serum biochemistry become apparent. Some dogs with
486 CHAPTER 15 ■ Approach to Polyuria and Polydipsia
hronic nonazotemic renal disease decompensate after anesthesia. NSAID administration could have
transiently affected urine concentration. Some dogs develop renal medullary washout (which can per-
would identify if GFR is decreased despite normal BUN and serum creatinine concentrations. If GFR
is decreased, the dog likely has nonazotemic chronic renal disease. If GFR is normal, gradual water
deprivation could be performed to determine if renal medullary washout has occurred. This procedure
also will correct renal medullary washout if it is present.
 SUGGESTED READINGS
Baas J], Schaeffer F, Joles JA: The influence of cortisol excess on kidney function in the dog, Vet Q 6:17-21, 1984.
Breitschwerdt EM, Verlander JW, Bribernik TN: Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus in three dogs, I Arm Vet Med Assoc 179:
235-238,1981
Dossin O, Germain C, Braun JP: Comparison of the techniques of evaluation of urine dilution/ concentration in the dog.
Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med 50:322-325, 2003.
and technical review, Vet Clir Pathol 30:201-210, 2001.
Harb MF, Nelson RW, Feldman EC, et al: Central diabetes insipidus in dogs: 20 cases (1986-1995), I Amm Vet Med Assoc
209:18841888, 1996.
Hardy RM, Osborne CA: Aqueous vasopressin response test in clinically normal dogs undergoing water diuresis:
technique and resuults, Am ∫ Vet Res 43:1987-1990, 1982.
Hardy RM, Osborne CA: Repositol vasopressin response test in clinically normal dogs undergoing water diuresis:
technique and results, Am / Vet Res 43:1991-1993, 1982.
Hardy RM, Osborne CA: Water deprivation test in the dog: Maximal normal values, I Am Vet Med Assoc 174:479-483, 1979.
Hendriks Hl, de Bruijne JJ, van den Brom WE: The clinical refractometer: a useful tool for the determination of specific
gravity and osmolality in canine urine, Tijdschr Diergeneeskd 103:1065-1068, 1978.
Joles JA, Rijnberk A, van den Brom WE, Dogterom J: Studies on the mechanism of polyuria induced by cortisol excess in
the dog, Tljdschr Diergeneeskd 105:199-205, 1980.
Kraus KH: The use of desmopressin in diagnosis and treatment of diabetes insipidus in cats, Compend Contin Educ Pract
Vet 9:752-755, 1987.
Lage AL: Apparent psychogenic polydipsia. In Kirk RW, editor: Current veterinary therapy VI, Philadelphia, 1977, WB
Saunders Co, p 1098.
Luzius H, Jans DA, Grunbaum EG, et al: A low affinity vasopressin V2-receptor in inherited nephrogenic diabetes insipi-
du1s,  Recept Res 12:351368, 1992.
Mulnix JA, Rijnberk A, Hendriks Hj: Evaluation of a modified water deprivation test for diagnosis of polyuric disorders
in dogs, I Am Vet Med Assoc 169:1327-1330, 1976.
 Nichols R: Polyuria and polydipsia. Diagnostic approach and problems associated with patient evaluation, Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract 31:833-844, 2001.
in cats, A* I Vet Res 42:1704-1710, 1981.
Takemura N: Successful long-term treatment of congenital nephrogenic diabetes insipidus in a dog, } Small Anim Pract
39:592-594, 1998.
the dog.], Ttjdschr Diergeneeskd 120:400-402, 1995.
Van Vonderen IK, Kooistra HS, Rijnberk A: Intra- and interindividual variation in urine osmolality and urine specificgrav
ity in healthy pet dogs of various ages, I Vet Intern Med 11:30-35, 1997.
its analogues, Eur } Pharmacol 93:201-204, 1983.
CHAPTER
Syndromes
Benign Essential (Idiopathic Renal) Hematuria In Dogs
INTRODUCTION AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
A. Bleeding originates in the kidney, but its cause is obscure.
B. The renal hemorrhage usually is unilateral, but occasionally it may be bilateral. Either kidney
may be affected but some reports suggest the left side is affected more frequently. At initial pre-
sentation, hemorrhage typically originates from one kidney. Nephrectomy resolves the clinical
signs, but hemorrhage can develop in the remaining kidney at a later time.
DIAGNOSIS
Signalment
1. Any age, but usually young dogs. Most affected dogs have been younger than 5 years of
age.
 2. Often large breed dogs (i.e., Weimaraners, boxers, and Labrador retrievers have been most
commonly reported). Five of 15 reported cases have been immature (<1 yr).
3. Male or females may be affected.
History
 1. The owner typically reports severe macroscopic hematuria that does not appear to cause
 any discomfort to the dog (i.e., no dysuria or increased frequency). Occasionally, however,
a history of stranguria may be obtained.
2. Hematuria occurs throughout urination.
3.B
 Blood clots may be present in the urine.
The typical history in benign idiopathic renal hematuria is one of painless, macroscopic hematuria.
4.B
Bleeding may be intermittent. It may occur for days or weeks and then disappear for
months only to return at a later time.
5.
 There is no history of trauma.
PHYSICAL FINDINGS
A. No abnormalities are detected on physical examination.
B. No other sites of hemorrhage are detected and there is no petechiation or bruising.
487
488 CHAPTER 16  Miscellaneous Syndromes
LABORATORY FINDINGS
A. Complete blood count (CBC) may show moderate to severe regenerative anemia. The ane-
mia may be acute (i.e., macrocytosis, polychromasia, reticulocytosis) or chronic with evidence
of iron deficiency (i.e., microcytosis, hypochromasia). Mild to moderate leukocytosis may be
present.
 B. Serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) concentrations are normal and urine specific
 gravity shows moderately concentrated urine (i.e., renal function is normal).
C.
 Coagulation tests and platelet counts are normal.
D. Urine culture is negative.
IMAGINGFINDINGS
A. Hydronephrosis and hydroureter have been observed by excretory urography on
the affected side. These abnormalities are a result of ureteral obstruction by blood
dlots.
B. Filling defects caused by blood clots can be observed on contrast cystography.
C. Hydronephrosis, hydroureter, and blood clots in the bladder also may be observed on ultraso-
nography.
CYSTOSCOPY
A. In female dogs, cystoscopy allows identification of the affected side by observation of normal
eral ureteral opening (Figure 16-1). If cystoscopy is not available, the affected side can be iden
tified at surgery by passing catheters into each of the ureteral openings in the trigone region
and determining from which side the hemorrhage arises.
A
B
FIGURE 16-1  A, Cystoscopic appearance of two normal ureteral openings in a dog before ureteral urine is
a dog with benign renal hematuria originating from one kidney. Furosemide can be given IV during the procedure
to increase urine flow to allow visualization of hematuria.
Miscellaneous Syndromes  CHAPTER 16 489
GROSS AND MICROSCOPIC PATHOLOGY
A. Examination of removed kidneys shows blood clots in renal pelvis, ureter, or both. No othei
gross or histologic abnormalities typically are observed.
B. One affected dog was reported to have histologic evidence of chronic pyelitis, but urine cul-
ture was negative.
C. Abnormal small blood vessels below the urothelial surface of the renal pelvis were observed
histologically in two affected dogs. These lesions resembled hemangiomas.
D. In one study, occasional small electron dense deposits were identified by electron microscopy
 in the glomerular mesangium in 5 of 9 affected dogs. The clinical relevance of these deposits
is umknown.
E. In one other case, wedge-shaped mature infarcts were observed histologically in the resected
kidney. These lesions were chronic (i.e., characterized by fibrosis) and not thought to have
contributed to the renal hemorrhage.
 DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
A. Renal neoplasia.
B. Renal trauma.
C. Urolithiasis.
 D. Renal vascular anomalies (e.g., renal telangiectasia of Welsh corgis).
TREATMENT
A. Nephrectomy should be considered if bleeding is documented to be unilateral and has been
intractable and severe with development of severe anemia.
B. Nephrectomy resolves hematuria in dogs with unilateral renal hemorrhage, but some
dogs have been reported to develop hemorrhage from the contralateral kidney some
time after nephrectomy. Thus, the decision to perform nephrectomy should be weighed
carefully.
C. Some affected dogs have intermittent periods of hemorrhage that are interspersed with long
asymptomatic time periods. Thus, if there is no anemia or if anemia is mild, observation of the
patient over time with monitoring of hematocrit may be preferable to nephrectomy.
D. In dogs with unilateral hemorrhage and severe anemia and in those with severe bilateral renal
hemorrhage, symptomatic treatment with transfusions may be necessary.
E. Hydronephrosis or hydroureter due to obstruction of the distal ureter by a blood clot is
another indication for surgery. In dogs with unilateral disease that have severe anemia and
ureteral obstruction by blood clots, nephrectomy may be warranted.
 F. Renal function typically does not deteriorate in affected dogs and consequently ureteral
obstruction and severe anemia are the primary indications for nephrectomy in dogs with uni-
lateral disease.
G. Selective infarction following catheterization of renal arteries is being explored as a less inva-
sive treatment.(Dr. Larry Adams, Purdue University.)
 PROGNOSIS
A. Good in dogs with severe bleeding due to unilateral disease that have undergone nephrec-
tomy. The owner should be advised before surgery that hemorrhage from the contralateral
kidney may occur in the future.
490 CHAPTER 16  Miscellaneous Syndromes
B. Fair to good in dogs with mild intermittent hematuria due to unilateral or bilateral
hematuria.
C. Guarded in dogs with bilateral disease and severe hemorrhage.
Perinephric Pseudocysts (PNP)
INTRODUCTION AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
A. Perinephric diseases are uncommon and consist of perinephric abscesses, hematomas, and
pseudocysts.
B. A PNP is a fluid-filled fibrous sac surrounding the kidney. A transudative fluid accumulates
between the renal capsule and the renal parenchyma. The term pseudocyst is used because the
structure does not have the epithelial lining typical of a true cyst. The cyst is attached at the
renal hilus (most commonly) or poles (less commonly) of the kidney.
C. The transudative fluid within the pseudocyst is characterized by a low cell count and low total
protein content. The urea nitrogen and creatinine concentrations of the cyst fluid are similar to
those of the peripheral blood.
(% A) rq ro (%o )  aq A1 sisopnsd a a
Either kidney may be affected. Cats with unilateral pseudocysts may later develop a pseudo-
cyst in the contralateral kidney.
E. Many affected cats also have mild to moderate chronic renal failure (CRF).
F. Pseudocysts can be identified first with CRF occurring months to years later or cats can be
diagnosed with CRF and develop pseudocysts 1 to 3 years later. Approximately 80% to 90%
of cats with pseudocysts have at least mild CRF at the time of diagnosis. The relationship
between PNP and CRF is unclear and may be incidental, as both are diseases of geriatric cats.
Up to 25% to 30% of cats that live beyond 10 years of age are thought to develop CRF, and PNP
are a rare complication even in this population of geriatric cats with CRF.
G. In rare instances, PNP have been associated with prior trauma or with an underlying renal
neoplasm (e.g., renal adenocarcinoma). Most are idiopathic, however.
DIAGNOSIS
Signalment
ae %os Aaexddy (srea h ae ua) pae are sies (rra) pio Araa iii '1
older than 8 years of age at presentation.
2. Early reports suggested male cats (80%) were more commonly affected than females (20%).
but later studies indicated that both males (60%) and females (40%) may be affected.
3. No breed predilection.
History
1. Progressive abdominal distension over weeks to months.
2. Often affected cats have minimal clinical signs and the first abnormality detected by the
owner is the abdominal distension.
Miscellaneous Syndromes  CHAPTER 16 491
 3. Systemic signs of illness if present often are related to the presence and severity of accom
panying CRF
a. Polyuria (PU), polydipsia (PD), or both.
b.Lethargy.
C. Weight loss.
d. Anorexia.
e. Vomiting.
4. Occasionally, vomiting has been reported in cats with PNP without evidence of CRF, and
it is speculated that pressure on or displacement of abdominal organs by the pseudocyst
may lead to vomiting.
 5. Some owners believe their cats are in pain based on increased vocalizations or difficulty
finding a comfortable resting posture.
 PHYSICAL FINDINGS
A. Abdominal distension.
 B. A large mass or masses can be detected on abdominal palpation. It typically seems that one or
-nasd e aeuanap oi aissodu si h (u zi o s 'a'l) paeua Aiaanxa are saup yoq
docyst from renomegaly on the basis of palpation alone.
C. In cats with unilateral pseudocysts, the contralateral kidney may be small and irregular sug-
gesting the presence of chronic renal disease.
D. Other physical findings (e.g., emaciation, dehydration, poor hair coat) are attributable to the
presence of CRF.
 E. Systemic blood pressure should be measured because hypertension is common in cats with
CRF.
F. Presence of a thyroid nodule should prompt evaluation for hyperthyroidism but CRF and
PNP are systemic nonthyroidal illnesses that can cause serum thyroxine concentrations to be
only mildly increased or within the normal reference range. Pertechnetate scanning may be
indicated to definitively diagnose hyperthyroidism.
 LABORATORY FINDINGS
 A. The hemogram usually is normal. Nonregenerative anemia may be present if advanced CRF
is present.
B. Serum biochemistry often shows evidence of mild to moderate CRF (i.e., mild to moderate
increases in BUN and serum creatinine concentrations). Occasionally CRF may be severe.
C. Urinalysis shows urine specific gravity (USG) in the isosthenuric range (average USG of
1.016).
D. Results of cytological analysis of fluid from the cysts almost always are typical of a transudate
or, rarely, of a modified transudate.
1. Cell count <400/μL
 2. Specific gravity 1.010 to 1.034.
3. Protein concentration <2.5 g/dL.
4. BUN or creatinine concentration similar to or slightly higher than that of peripheral
blood.
E. Urinary tract infection (UTI) may be present in 40% or more of cats with PNP, and urine
culture should be performed routinely as lower urinary tract signs typically are not
present.
F. Bacterial culture of the cyst fluid yields no growth.
492 CHAPTER 16  Miscellaneous Syndromes
 FIGURE 16-2  Ultrasound appearance of perinephric pseudocyst. Note anechoic fluid surrounding the kidney.
IMAGING FINDINGS
 A. Plain abdominal radiographs demonstrate what appears to be a severely enlarged kidney or
kidneys.
B. Excretory urography can be used to identify the PNP.
C. Abdominal ultrasonography is the diagnostic imaging procedure of choice and allows rapid
diagnosis of PNP (i.e., the kidney is seen to be separated from the renal capsule and sur-
rounded by anechoic fluid; the cyst typically occupies an area twice the size of the kidney
Figure 16-2). The presence of perinephric fluid of mixed echogenicity should prompt concern
about the possibility of a perinephric abscess, perinephric hematoma, or neoplasia. Occasion
ally, cats with renal lymphoma will have small accumulations of perinephric fluid, as well as
hypoechoic nodules in the renal parenchyma.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
A. Differential diagnosis includes other perinephric diseases (e.g., perinephric abscess or hema-
toma) and causes of renomegaly (e.g., hydronephrosis, polycystic kidney disease, renal lym-
phoma, granulomatous nephritis due to feline infectious peritonitis, pyonephrosis).
TREATMENT
A. Resection of the cyst wall is the most definitive treatment and allows any additional fluid
accumulation into the peritoneum to be reabsorbed into the general circulation (Figure 16-3).
In some cases, fluid accumulation may be mild to moderate and nonprogressive with minimal
ultrasound-guided drainage of the cyst as necessary may be a reasonable approach to man
agement. In extremely rare instances, fluid accumulation may be so severe that detectable
ascites may occur affer cyst wall resecfion.
I Resection of the cyst wall is the most definitive treatment for perinephric pseudocysts. The kidney
 on the affected side must be preserved.
Miscellaneous Syndromes  CHAPTER 16
493
B
 FGURE 16-3  Appearance of perinephric pseudocyst at surgery. The perinephric pseudocyst before incision (A)
and the opened cyst after fluid has been drained (B) are shown. Note presence of underlying chronic renal disease
in the kidney itself.
B. Do not remove the kidney on the affected side. Most of these cats have mild to moderate CRF
with interstitial fibrosis and lymphoplasmacytic interstitial nephritis. Removal of one kidney
predisposes to rapid progression of renal disease in the contralateral kidney.
C. The pseudocysts may be drained under ultrasound guidance but fluid re-accumulates over the
course of weeks to months. Drainage of the perinephric cyst has not been showm to improve
glomerular filtration rate (GFR) in the affected kidney. Rarely, repeated ultrasound-guided
drainage of a PNP will be associated with resolution of the cyst.
PROGNOSIS
s Aaup an se Sun se 'm ishs an jo [o [enms cn Ham pudsn si iso '
preserved.
B. The limiting factor in prognosis appears to be the rate of progression of the underlying chronic
renal disease.
Renal Tubular Acidosis (RTA)
INTRODUCTION
A. RTA is uncommonly recogrized in small animal practice.
 B. It is characterized by hyperchloremic (normal anion gap) metabolic acidosis caused by either
decreased bicarbonate reabsorption (proximal RTA) or defective acid excretion (distal RTA) in
the presence of a normal GFR.
IUnexplained hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis should prompt consideration of renal tubular acidosis.
494CHAPTER 16  Miscellaneous Syndromes
Distal (Type I) Renal Tubular Acidosis
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
A. In distal (classic or type 1) RTA, the urine cannot be maximally acidified because of impaired
hydrogen ion secretion in the collecting ducts, and urine pH typically is above 6.0, despite
moderately to markedly decreased plasma bicarbonate concentration.
B. Increased urine pH (>6.0) in the presence of acidosis is the hallmark of distal RTA.
C. Mutations in cytosolic carbonic anhydrase, the basolateral Cl-/HCO- anion exchanger, and
luminal H+-ATPase that affect function of the α-intercalated cells in the renal tubules have
been associated with inherited forms of distal renal tubular acidosis in humans.
DIAGNOSIS
A. UTI by a urease positive organism (e.g., Proteus sp, Staphylococcus aureus) must be ruled out
before considering distal RTA.
B. Urinary net acid excretion is decreased, but bicarbonaturia usually is mild because urinary
bicarbonate concentration is only 1 to 3 mEq/L in the pH range of 6.0 to 6.5.
C. Urinary fractional excretion of HCO-is normal(<5%) in distal RTA when plasma HCO- con-
centration is increased to normal by alkali administration.
D. A diagnosis of distal RTA can be confirmed by an ammonium chloride tolerance test during
which urine pH is monitored (using a pH meter) before and at hourly intervals for 5 hours
after oral administration of 0.2 g/kg NH4Cl. Under such conditions, the urine pH of normal
dogs decreased to a minimum value of 5.16 at 4 hours after administration of ammonium
chloride.
E. Nephrolithiasis (usually calcium phosphate stones), nephrocalcinosis (resulting from alka-
line urine pH and decreased urinary citrate concentration), bone demineralization (result-
ing from loss of bone buffer stores during chronic acidosis), and urinary potassium wasting
with hypokalemia are features of distal RTA in human patients.
F. Distal RTA has been reported in two cats with pyelonephritis caused by Escherichia coli
Clinical signs included PU, PD, anorexia, lethargy, enlarged kidneys, and isosthenuria. In
one cat, urine pH was 5.0 at the time pyelonephritis was first diagnosed, but distal RTA
was documented at a later time by the presence of hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis, alka-
line urine pH, and failure to lower urine pH after oral administration of NHCl. Findings
were similar for the other cat, but hyperphosphaturia and persistent hypokalemia also were
detected.
TREATMENT
A. The amount of alkali required to correct the acidosis in human patients with distal RTA is
variable but typically less than that required in proximal RTA. The required dosage of alkali
in distal RTA may be as little as 1 mEq/kg/day (i.e., that required to offset daily endogenous
B. Acombination of potassium and sodium citrate (depending on potassium balance) may be the
preferred source of alkali.
C. Cats with distal RTA should be investigated for the possibility of UTI (specifically, pyelone-
phritis).
Miscellaneous Syndromes  CHAPTER 16
6495
Proximal (Type 2) Renal Tubular Acidosis
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
A. In proximal (type 2) RTA, renal reabsorption of bicarbonate is markedly reduced and uri-
nary fractional excretion of HCOg- is increased (>15%) when plasma HCOg- concentration is
increased to normal.
B. Bicarbonaturia is absent and urine pH is appropriately low when metabolic acidosis is present
and plasma HCO concentration is decreased, because distal acidifying ability is intact.
C. When plasma HCOs- concentration is decreased, the filtered load of HCO3- is reduced, and
almost all of the filtered HCO- is reabsorbed in the distal tubules, despite the presence of the
proximal tubular defect. Thus, proximal RTA can be viewed as a "self-limiting” disorder in
which plasma HCOs- stabilizes at a lower than normal concentration after the filtered load
falls sufficiently that distal HCO3- reabsorption can maintain plasma HCO3 at a new but
lower steady state concentration.
D. Mutations in renal tubular transport proteins such as the electrogenic basolateral Na+ /3HCO3
co-transporter and one of the five forms of the luminal Na+/H+ antiporter have been impli
cated in the pathogenesis of inherited forms of proximal renal tubular acidosis in humans
E. Other abnormalities of proximal tubular fumction typically accompany impaired HCO3- reab-
sium, uric acid, and amino acid reabsorption. This combination of proximal tubular defects is
kmown as Fanconi syndrome (see later).
F. Serum potassium concentration usually is normal in affected human patients at the time of
diagnosis, but alkali therapy may precipitate hypokalemia and aggravate urinary potassium
wasting, presumably by increasing distal delivery of sodium and HCO3-.
DIAGNOSIS
A. The diagnosis of proximal RTA is made by finding an acid urine pH (<5.5 to 6.0) in the pres-
ence of hyperchloremic (normal anion gap) metabolic acidosis and normal GFR but increased
urine pH (>6.0) and increased urinary fractional excretion of HCO3- (>15%) after plasma
HCO- concentration has been increased to normal by alkali administration.
A high urine pH is expected in distal RTA but urine pH is low in proximal RTA in the presence of marked
 acidosis and low serum bicarbonate concentration.
normal blood glucose concentration) establishes the diagnosis.
TREATMENT
A. Correction of metabolic acidosis by alkali therapy is more difficult in proximal RTA than in
distal RTA because of the marked bicarbonaturia that occurs when plasma HCO3- concentra-
tion is increased to normal.
B. Alkali dosages in excess of 10 mEq/kg/day may be required to correct the plasma HCO3- con
centration, and such therapy may result in hypokalemia. Thus potassium citrate may be the
preferred source of alkali.
1The dosage of bicarbonate to control distal RTA usually is modest but the dosage required to control proximal
RTA is very high.
496 CHAPTER 16  Miscellaneous Syndromes
Iype 4 Renal Tubular Acidosis
 1. Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism, characterized by hyperkalemia with decreased plasma renin
and aldosterone concentrations, occurs in some human patients, notably those with diabetes mel-
litus who also have mild to moderate renal insufficiency.
II. The hyperchloremic (normal anion gap) metabolic acidosis observed in these patients has been
called type 4 RTA.
 IIl.  This syndrome has not been characterized in veterinary medicine but should be considered in
dogs and cats with hyperkalemia and mild to moderate hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis after
hypoadrenoco rticism has been ruled out by an adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) response
test.
IV. The diagnosis may be established by finding an inappropriately decreased plasma aldosterone
concentration in the presence of hyperkalemia
Fanconi Syndrome
INTRODUCTION
A. Multiple renal tubular reabsorptive defects resembling Fanconi syndrome have been reported
in young Basenji dogs.
B. The renal tubular disorder in affected Basenjis is thought to be the result of a metabolic or
membrane defect that affects sodium transport and secondarily affects transport of other
solutes that are cotransported with sodium in the proximal tubule (e.g., glucose, phosphate,
amino acids, bicarbonate).
C. In one study, brush border membranes isolated from Basenji dogs with Fanconi syndrome had
decreased sodium-dependent glucose transport but no abnormality of cystine uptake despite
the observed reabsorptive defect for cystine.
DIAGNOSIS
A. Fanconi syndrome may affect 10% to 15% of Basenji dogs in the United States.
B. Most affected Basenji dogs are diagnosed between 4 and 8 years of age.
C. Clinical findings include PU, PD, weight loss, dehydration, and weakness.
D. Affected Basenji dogs have abnormal fractional reabsorption of glucose, bicarbonate, phos-
phate, sodium, potassium, and urate, and isolated cystinuria or generalized aminoaciduria.
E. Hyperchloremic (normal anion gap) acidosis of variable severity may be present.
F. The finding of normal blood glucose concentration and glucosuria in a Basenji dog is pre-
sumptive evidence of the diagnosis. Confirmation requires identification of amino aciduria.
This can be accomplished by identifying cystine in the urine by an inexpensive screening test
(available at the Medical Genetics Division of the School of Veterinary Medicine, University
of Permsylvania, Philadelphia) or by quantification of individual amino acids in the urine (an
expensive procedure with limited availability).
The finding of glucosuria with normal blood glucose concentration is not diagnostic of Fanconi syndrome.
The presence of other abnormalities of tubular reabsorption (e.g., amino aciduria) must be documented.
G. Aminoaciduria and proteinuria are not synonymous. The finding of proteinuria is not diag-
nostic of Fanconi syndrome.
Miscellaneous Syndromes  CHAPTER 16
497
H. Hypokalemia may be observed late in the course of the disease.
1. Defective urinary concentrating ability leads to isosthenuria or hyposthenuria.
 J. GFR may be normal initially but decreased later in the course of the disease.
K. A distinctive histopathologic renal lesion is hyperchromatic karyomegaly of renal tubular
cells.
L. Fanconi syndrome has been observed sporadically in other breeds and has been reported in
association with administration of some drugs.
1. In one case, Fanconi syndrome developed in association with primary hypoparathyroid-
ism and resolved after treatment with calcium and calcitriol. Rickets in growing children
and osteomalacia in adults are features of Fanconi syndrome in human patients that usu-
ally are not observed in affected dogs. However, congenital Fanconi syndrome and renal
dysplasia were associated with histologic features of rickets in two Border terriers. The
skeletal abnormalities in one of the affected dogs resolved after treatment with calcitriol
and potassium phosphate.
 2. Transient Fanconi syndrome and proximal renal tubular acidosis also have been reported
 in a dog with high liver enzyme activities, and toxin exposure was considered as a possible
Explanation
3. Transient Fanconi syndrome has been reported in small breed dogs that have consumed
chicken-based jerky treats manufactured in China. Clinical signs include vomiting, diar
rhea, and lethargy. Liver enzymes are mildly elevated, with severe hypokalemia, acidosis,
glucosuria, and granular casts in the urine. Affected animals are not consistently azotemic
Treatment is supportive, and most appear to recover, though some develop more perma-
nent renal damage.
TREATMENT
A. A high quality diet that maintains good nutrition is recommended because affected dogs have
aminoaciduria of variable severity.
B. Correction of metabolic acidosis by alkali therapy may be difficult because of the marked
bicarbonaturia that occurs when plasma HCOs- concentration is increased to normal in
patients with proximal RTA (as occurs in Fanconi syndrome).
C. Alkali dosages in excess of 10 mEq/kg/day may be required to correct the plasma HCO3
concentration, and such therapy may result in hypokalemia. Thus, potassium citrate may be
preferred over sodium bicarbonate as a source of alkali in dogs with poor response to bicar
bonate or those that develop hypokalemia.
D. Because of the presence of renal glucosuria, the dog should be monitored for development of
UTI, and UTI that occurs should be treated with appropriate antibiotic therapy.
PROGNOSIS
A. Fanconi syndrome is due to a genetic disorder of renal tubular transport that cannot be
corrected.
B. Its severity and rate of progression seem to vary considerably among affected Basenji dogs.
C. Careful management of metabolic acidosis, hypokalemia, UTI, and the patient's
nutritional status offers the best chance of long-term survival.
d ae ro sisu rd p ae la a o shsan nnsn ya 
nephritis.
498CHAPTER16Miscellaneous Syndromes
Idiopathic Hypercalcemia (IHC) Of Cats
INTRODUCTION AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
IHC is the most common cause of ionized hypercalcemia in cats today.
A. Since 1990, unexplained hypercalcemia has been increasingly noted as an incidental finding
on serum biochemistry profiles of cats. It is now the most common cause of ionized hypercal-
cemia in cats.
B. In early reports, hypercalcemia in cats was associated with calcium oxalate urolithiasis.
C. Dietary acidification and metabolic acidosis may increase glomerular filtration of calcium,
decrease renal tubular reabsorption of calcium, and promote skeletal mobilization of calcium.
D. One hypothesis about the relationship between hypercalcemia and calcium oxalate urolithia-
sis in cats is that feeding magnesium-restricted, acidifying diets for the control of struvite uro-
lithiasis is associated with increased bone turnover of calcium, hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria,
and oxalate urolithiasis.
E. However, many cats are fed acidifying diets and presumably relatively few develop hypercal-
cemia and calcium oxalate urolithiasis. Consequently, other factors such as hyperabsorption
of calcium or oxalate from the gastrointestinal tract or renal tubular dysfunction characterized
cium oxalate urolithiasis in susceptible cats.
 F. IHC does not appear to be due to excessive parathyroid hormone (PTH), 25-hydroxyvitamin
normal and thus PTH secretion does not seem to have been inhibited by alterations in serum
ionized magnesium concentration.
DIAGNOSIS
Signalment
1. Cats of any age may be affected (mean age 10 years; range, 0.5 to 20 years)
2. No sex predilection.
3. Any breed and mixed breed cats may be affected. Long-haired cats may be over-repre-
sented (27% of affected cats in one retrospective study of 427 cats).
History
1. In a review of 427 cats with IHC, 46% had no clinical signs, 18% had mild weight loss with
no other clinical signs, 6% had inflammatory bowel disease, 5% had chronic constipation,
4% had a history of vomiting, and 1% were anorexic. Uroliths were observed in 15%, with
calcium oxalate stone identified in 10% of cases. Other clinical signs include dysuria, inap-
 propriate urinations, hematuria, and lethargy.
  u n  u a   n z
 3. Often there is a history of being fed an acidifying diet for control of struvite urolithia-
sis. However acidifying diets are widely fed to cats, and not all cats fed acidifying diets
been fed an acidifying diet.
Miscellaneous Syndromes  CHAPTER 16   499
4. There is no history of exposure to excess vitamin D, however, owners should be ques
tioned regarding the use of supplements and exposure to plants, antipsoriasis creams and
     s    s   
PHYSICAL FINDINGS
A. Often unremarkable.
B. Kidneys may be normal-sized or small and irregular.
LABORATORY FINDINGS
A. Serum total calcium concentrations are mildly to moderately increased (average, 12.5 mg/dL).
 B. Serum ionized calcium concentrations are moderately increased (average, 1.7 mmol/L or 6.8
mg/dL).
C. Serum PTH concentrations are in the lower part of the reference range (mean
1.1 pmol/L; reference range 0 to 4 pmol/L).
D. Serum parathyroid hormone-related polypeptide (PTHrP) concentrations are low
(< 1.0 pmol/L)
E. Ionized magnesium concentration is within normal limits (mean 0.6 mmol/L;
reference range 0.43 to 0.70 mmol/L).
F. Serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentrations are normal or slightly high (mean,
96 nmol/L; range, 22 to 198 nmol/L; reference range 65 to 170 nmol/L). Unlike calcitriol,
serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentrations are not closely regulated and variability most
likely reflects differences in dietary vitamin D intake.
G. Serum calcitriol concentration has been determined in a small number of cats with IHC, with
a mean of 45 pmol/L (reference range 50 to 100 pmol/L).
H. Serum phosphorus concentrations are normal.
 I. Venous blood gas analysis generally is normal in affected cats.
 J. BUN and serum creatinine concentrations are normal in most cats with IHC.
1. In most cats with IHC, CRF either does not develop during the course of their disease or
develops after the onset of hypercalcemia. Thus, CRF is unlikely to be the cause of IHC.
2. Occasionally, IHC and CRF with azotemia are identified concurrently.
 3. Occasionally, cats with IHC will develop CRF and azotemia 1 to 4 years later. Conse-
quently, the role of hypercalcemia in producing renal injury in cats with IHC warrants
further investigation.
K. Urinalysis findings.
1.Urine of affected cats usually is moderately concentrated (mean, 1.036; range, 1.012 to 1.060)
2. Urine pH ranges from 5.5 to 7.0.
 3. Hematuria occasionally is identified but pyuria is rare. Hematuria may be a consequence
of traumatic cystocentesis in some cats in which urine has been collected by this method.
4. Struvite or calcium oxalate crystalluria may be observed on urine sediment examination.
L. In the few cases in which it has been evaluated, the fractional excretion of calcium in the urine
has been increased (range, 0.8 to 2.8%; normal, <0.2%). It is possible that this increase in uri-
M. No evidence of malignancy as a cause of hypercalcemia has been found in affected cats despite
extensive diagnostic evaluations (i.e., negative feline leukemia virus [FeLV] and feline immu-
nodeficiency virus [FIV] enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay [ELISA] test results, normal
bone marrow cytology).
500 CHAPTER 16  Miscellaneous Syndromes
IMAGING FINDINGS
 A. Abdominal radiographs and ultrasonography show normal-sized (67%) or small kidneys
(33%).
B. Radiopaque uroliths may be observed in the kidneys, ureter, or bladder of more than 50% of
affected cats on abdominal radiography. When analyzed, calculi have been composed of cal-
cium oxalate.
 C. Abdominal ultrasonographic findings include nephrocalcinosis and renal pelvic dilatation in
some cats.
 D. Ultrasonography of the neck has been normal in cats in which this procedure has been
performed.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
A. Hypercalcemia of malignancy (e.g., lymphoma, squamous cell carcinoma, multiple myeloma).
B. Primary hyperparathyroidism. Cats with this disorder should have decreased
serum phosphorus concentration and increased serum PTH concentration. In many instances,
a cervical mass may be detected on physical examination or ultrasonography.
C. Vitamin D toxicosis (e.g., rodenticide ingestion, excessive calcitriol administration, inges-
increased.
D. Calcitriol synthesis by mononuclear cells in cats with granulomatous disease.
TREATMENT
A. Increased dietary fiber has decreased serum calcium in some cats. Some clinicians have had
success with low fat, high fiber diets such as Hill's w/d that have been used in an attempt to
reduce the availability of calcium for intestinal absorption. However, most pet food manu-
facturers increase the quantity of calcium in high-fiber diets to offset this decreased absorp-
tion.
Conventional treatment for IHC in cats consists of a high-fiber diet and oral administration of glucocorticoids
if necessary.
B. Feeding veterinary renal diets may result in normocalcemia, possibly due to the reduced cal-
cium content of these diets. Veterinary renal diets are alkalinizing, or at least less acidifying
than maintenance diets, and are generally low in calcium and phosphorus. Renal diets have
very different formulations compared with maintenance diets, and it is possible that other
dietary factors play a role.
C. Glucocorticoids (prednisone, 5 to 20 mg PO per cat per day) have been effective in decreasing
serum total and ionized calcium concentrations in many affected cats. In some cats, normo-
calcemia can be maintained after tapering and discontinuing treatment with glucocorticoids
 after an extended period of time.
1. Glucocorticoids exert a modulating effect in hypercalcemia by reducing bone resorption,
decreasing intestinal absorption of calcium, and increasing renal excretion of calcium.
2. The increased urinary excretion of calcium could enhance the formation of calcium-con-
taining calculi. However, the filtered load of calcium decreases as serum ionized calcium
concentration decreases, which offsets the formation of calculi.
Miscellaneous Syndromes  CHAPTER 16501
3. Some cats become refractory to glucocorticoid therapy with a return of ionized
hypercalcemia.
D. Surgical removal of two to three of four parathyroid glands has resulted in only very tran-
sient improvement (i.e., a few days) of hypercalcemia. Excised parathyroid glands have
showm no evidence of hyperplasia or neoplasia (e.g., adenoma, adenocarcinoma).
should be considered. Pamidronate (1.3 to 2.0 mg/kg) diluted in 0.9% sodium chloride has
been infused intravenously over at least 2 hours. Fluids should be given before, during, and
after the infusion of pamidronate. In most cats, however, oral administration of bisphospho
nates is adequate.
F. Beneficial effects of chronic administration of SC fluids or furosemide have not been evaluated.
G. In the future, treatment with other bisphosphonates (e.g., alendronate) or calciotropic agents
(e.g, cinacalcet) may be possible if efficacy and safety can be documented in cats with IHC.
Preliminary results from a small number of IHC cats treated with Alendronate for 6 months
    
PROGNOSIS
A. Some cats with IHC may survive many years with limited consequences.
B. Affected cats are likely at increased risk of calcium oxalate urolithiasis and its complications.
C. CRF may occur in some affected cats but the relationship of IHC and CRF is unclear.
Hyperthyroidism And The Kidney
I.The clinical evaluation and management of geriatric cats with concurrent hyperthyroidism and
chronic renal disease (CRD) are challenging.
Hyperthyroidism masks the presence of CRD, and CRD is a nonthyroidal illness that lowers serum thyroxine
concentration and confounds the diagnosis of hyperthyroidism
A. The tendency of nonthyroidal illness (CRD) to decrease serum thyroxine concentration makes
the diagnosis of hyperthyroidism difficult in a cat with CRD.
B. At the same time, the presence of hyperthyroidism in a cat with CRD increases GFR, which
decreases serum creatinine concentration and masks CRD.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
A. Hyperthyroidism increases cardiac output and decreases peripheral vascular resistance, lead-
ing to increased renal plasma flow (RPF) and increased GFR.
B. Increased GFR reduces serum creatinine concentration whereas increased body turnover of
protein may increase BUN concentration slightly.
C. Mild proteinuria may occur as a consequence of increased GFR, especially if accompanied by
intrarenal or systemic hypertension.
D. Reduction in muscle mass decreases total body stores of potassium, and muscle weakness due
from episodic translocation of potassium from extracellular to intracellular fluid.
E. Progressive weight loss and reduction in muscle mass also contribute to lower serum creati-
nine concentrations in hyperthyroid cats which, in turn, may mask underlying renal disease
in some affected cats
502  CHAPTER 16  Miscellaneous Syndromes
 F. Observed increases in serum creatinine concentration after treatment of hyperthyroidism may
reflect urmasking of preexisting renal dysfunction, a decrease in GFR with correction of the
hyperthyroid state, weight gain with increased muscle mass or some combination of these factors.
G. Whether the commonly observed simultaneous occurrence of hyperthyroidism and CRD in
older cats is coincidental or the result of some pathophysiologic interaction between these two
disorders is an intriguing but presently unanswered question.
H. Whereas most emphasis has been placed on the potentially adverse effects of treatment of
hyperthyroidism on renal function, it also is possible that hyperthyroidism may contribute
to development of CRD in older cats. In clinically normal cats, nearly 60% of renal perfusion
s aq  nsad o q ein rer a ch psn si assa
ent in some cats with hyperthyroidism. If failure of autoregulation occurs, a substantial por-
fion of systemic hypertension may be transmitted to glomeruli, resulting in intraglomerular
hypertension and glomerular hyperfiltration. These factors are recognized as contributing to
glomerular sclerosis and progression of renal disease in rats.
I. The possible pathophysiologic relationship between hyperthyroidism and CRD raises impor
tant questions about the treatment of hyperthyroidism. It could be argued that reducing serum
thyroxine concentrations in older cats with mild hyperthyroidism and CRD should be avoided
because treatment may reduce GFR and allow emergence of azotemia and uremia. On the
 other hand, if increased GFR results in glomerular hyperfiltration in hyperthyroid cats, it may
contribute to progression of renal disease. If so, hyperthyroidism in older cats actually may
predispose to CKD, and early effective treatment of hyperthyroidism may be important to
prevent pathophysiologic changes in the kidney that could lead to progressive renal disease.
DIAGNOSIS
A. Ideally, GFR should be measured in affected cats. The presence of lower than normal GFR
in a hyperthyroid cat indicates increased risk for adverse clinical outcome after treatment
of hyperthyroidism. Unfortumately, methods for measurement of GFR are not widely avail-
able or practical. Consequently, careful evaluation of routine serum chemistry and urinalysis
results must suffice in most instances.
B. Cats with normal BUN, serum creatinine, and serum electrolyte concentrations, and highly
concentrated urine are at minimal risk for adverse effects on renal function after treatment of
hyperthyroidism. Serum creatinine concentration, however, should be evaluated in light of
the cat's body condition and muscle mass. An emaciated cat is expected to have a somewhat
lower serum creatinine concentration than a well-muscled cat with similar renal function.
Availability of previous serum creatinine determinations in the cat in question may be helpful
in making this evaluation.
C. Occasionally, cats with considerable renal disease retain considerable renal concentrating abil-
ity. Consequently, the clinician cannot assume that mild azotemia with concentrated urine in
   si a   
D. In most cats, abdominal palpation of the kidneys is easily performed and yields considerable
information about the presence or absence of renal disease. Small, firm, irregular kidneys
suggest CKD.
E. Renal ultrasonography should be considered if questions remain about the cat's renal function
after physical examination and routine laboratory testing.
 F. More difficult yet is establishing a diagnosis of hyperthyroidism in geriatric cats with CRD.
Chronic renal disease is one of several nonthyroidal illnesses that may decrease serum
thyroxine concentrations to within the normal range, making the diagnosis of concurrent
hyperthyroidism difficult. The extent to which serum thyroxine concentration is decreased
Miscellaneous Syndromes  CHAPTER 16 503
in cats with nonthyroidal illness is related more to the severity than to the nature of the
illness. The clinician must therefore rely on the presence of a palpable thyroid nodule and
use alternate diagnostic methods (e.g., T3 suppression test, pertechnetate thyroid imaging)
to establish a diagnosis of hyperthyroidism in some cats with CRD.
G. The ability to consistently palpate a thyroid nodule on physical examination is a very practical
and valuable clinical tool, and its importance in diagnosis should not be ignored.
TREATMENT
A. The effects of methimazole on thyroid function are rapidly reversible, and it is prudent initially
to treat azotemic hyperthyroid cats with methimazole until it can be determined whether cor
rection of the hyperthyroid state will worsen azotemia and result in uremia.
A methimazole challenge should be performed in any hyperthyroid cat that has any evidence whatsoever
of underlying renal disease.
B. Affected cats can be treated with 2.5 mg methimazole PO every 24 hours for 7 to 10
days. If routine tests of renal function remain unchanged, the dosage is increased to
2.5 mg PO every 12 hours. If renal function tests remain stable after an additional 7 to 10 days,
the dosage is increased to 7.5 mg PO divided into 2 doses and administered every 12 hours. If
renal function tests remain stable after additional 7 to 10 days, the dosage of methimazole is
increased to 5 mg PO every 12 hours. If the cat's renal function remains stable for several weeks
on a dosage of methimazole that renders the cat euthyroid (i.e., serum thyroxine concentration
of approximately 1.0 mg/ dL), other treatments (e.g., surgery, radioiodine) may be considered.
This procedure is referred to as a methimazole challenge. If renal function deteriorates at any
point during this protocol, methimazole treatment is discontinued and the cat's clinical condi-
tion reassessed. Some increase in serum creatinine and BUN concentrations after correction of
the hyperthyroid state may be an unavoidable consequence of effective treatment of hyperthy
roidism in some cats. It is unknown what, if any, increase in serum creatinine concentration
would be safe during treatment of feline hyperthyroidism. Many older cats with serum creati-
rine concentrations of 2.0 to 3.0 mg/dL do very well clinically over a course of several years.
Provided their underlying CKD is nonprogressive or slowly progressive, cats with serum cre-
atinine concentrations in this range seem to be at minimal risk for adverse clinical outcome.
WHAT DO WE DO?
· Use cystoscopy in female dogs with idiopathic renal hematuria to determine whether the left or
right kidney is responsible for the hematuria.
· Drain perinephric pseudocysts and surgically remove the capsule, but preserve the kidney.
· Suspect and evaluate the animal for renal tubular acidosis if unexplained hyperchloremic metabolic
 acidosis is identified on serum biochemistry. Use blood gas analysis to facilitate the diagnosis.
● Use the University of Pennsylvania Division of Medical Genetics urine test for cystine as a method
to identify dogs suspected of Fanconi syndrome based on presence of glucosuria with normal blood
glucose and hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis.
· Use repeated determinations of both ionized and total serum calcium concentrations as well as
calciotrophic hormones (e.g., PTH, calcitriol, 25-hydroxycholecaliferol, PTHrP) to identify cats with
IHC. Evaluate cats with IHC for renal disease and the presence of urolithiasis.
● Perform a methimazole challenge in any hyperthyroid cat suspected of having underlying CKD
before making a decision about radioiodine therapy.
504CHAPTER 16 Miscellaneous Syndromes
THOUGHTS FOR THE FUTURE
· Increased usage of interventional radiology procedures wil allow identification and ablation of
· Ultrasound-guided drainage of perinephric pseudocysts will be increasingly used as a less invasive
procedure. Cysts can be expected to refill over weeks to months. Placement of a peritoneal-vascular
shunt can be considered for cats that develop ascites from fluid accumulation even after the cyst
capsule has been resected surgically
● More animals with hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism (type 4 RTA) will be identified as target pop-
ulations (e.g.* patients with diabetes mellitus and renal impairment) are evaluated.
· Mutations in cell membrane carrier proteins responsible for renal tubular acidosis will be identified.
· Mutations responsible for Fanconi syndrome in dogs will be identified.
· Newer drugs such as the calcimimetic cinacalcet and the bisphosphonate alendronate will be
increasingly used to treat IHC in cats if safety can be demonstrated.
· Better umderstanding of the bioavailability of topically administered methimazole will facilitate
medical treatment of cats with chronic renal failure and hyperthyroidism.
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS
· The offending kidney always should be removed in dogs with idiopathic renal hematuria. Actually,.
kidney should be removed only if the hematuria is severe and protracted with consequent severe
blood loss anemia.
· Clinical signs in cats with perinephric pseudocysts usually are directly attributable to the cysts
themselves. Actually, the presenting clinical signs often are a result of the underlying chronic renal
disease and failure present in many cats with perinephric pseudocysts.
● The urine pH must be high to diagnosis RTA. A high pH is typical of distal RTA, but urine pH is
appropriately low in animals with proximal RTA by the time metabolic acidosis is severe and the
filtered load of bicarbonate is low.
· Proteinuria in the presence of glucosuria with normal blood glucose concentration is diagnostic of
Fanconi syndrome. Proteinuria and amino aciduria are not synonymous! Diagnosis of Fanconi syn-
drome requires the presence of amino acids (e.g., cystine) in the urine, not protein.
· Malignancy is the most common cause of hypercalcemia in cats. Actually, IHC is the most common
cause of hypercalcemia in cats. Hypercalcemia of malignancy is much less common in cats than in dogs.
· Hyperthyroidism in cats with chronic renal failure should not be treated because the increased renal
blood flow and GFR are maintaining renal function. Actually, severe hyperthyroidism is a serious
multisystemic disorder and it is possible that the increased GFR may contribute to progression of
CKD by glomerular hyperfiltration. Thus, a "methimazole challenge" to determine how much con-
trol of hyperthyroidism can be safely achieved in a cat with CKD is warranted.
 SUMMARY TIPS
· Painless macroscopic hematuria (often pronounced) without obvious explanation on routine diag-
nostic evaluation suggests the possibility of idiopathic renal hematuria.
· Make every attempt possible to save the kidney at the time of surgery to drain perinephric pseudo-
cysts and resect the cyst wall. Many of these cats have underlying chronic renal disease and nephrec-
 tomy will hasten progression of renal disease in the contralateral kidney.
· Ultrasound examination is the most direct and simple way to diagnose perinephric pseudocysts in
cats.
Miscellaneous Syndromes ■ CHAPTER 16  505
· Titrate the dosage of bicarbonate to achieve control of acidosis in patients with RTA. High dos
ages many be necessary in patients with proximal RTA. Address complicating disturbances such as
hypokalemia as necessary.
· Pay careful attention to correction of acidosis and electrolyte abnormalities (e.g., hypokalemia) in
dogs with Fanconi syndrome. Vigilance to detect and treat UTIs and close attention to nutrition also
● Recognize that the historical and physical findings in cats with IHC often are mild or vague.
· Perform a methimazole challenge in hyperthyroid cats with any evidence whatsoever of CRD to
determine whether treatment of the hyperthyroidism can be safely achieved before resorting to
 irreversible forms of treatment of hyperthyroidism such as radioiodine or surgery.
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
Q: I have a 10-month-old female Weimeraner presented for a history of severe hematuria (identi-
fied when the dog urinated on a snow bank). Although shocking to the owner, the hematuria seems
to be of no concerm to the dog (no straining, no increased frequency, no apparent pain). Routine
urinalysis shows too numerous to count red blood cells (TNTC RBC) in the sediment, but urine
culture and imaging studies (plain radiographs, ultrasonography) are negative. Could this be a case
of idiopathic benign hematuria?
A: Idiopathic benign hematuria is rare, and the diagnosis should always be approached with
some skepticism. However, if no other cause for the hematuria can be identified, it should be con-
sidered. If possible, cystoscopy should be performed to evaluate the urine issuing from the ureteral
orifices in the trigone region. In most dogs with idiopathic benign hematuria, the blood comes only
from one kidney. The dog may be managed conservatively until it can be determined if the hem-
orrhage will be long-standing or severe enough to cause anemia. There is no rush to remove the
kidney!
Q: I have performed ultrasound-guided drainage of a perinephric pseudocyst in an elderly cat on
two occasions and both times the cyst refilled within a few weeks. Next, I resected the cyst wall
surgically and preserved the kidney. Now the cat is accumulating fluid in its abdomen and presents
for ascites. Is there anything else that can be done?
tion can be considered in this situation.
Q: I unexpectedly identified hyperchiloremic metabolic acidosis in a cat with a urine pH of 8.0. 1
suspect distal RTA. Is there anything else I should consider?
A: RTA is rare in both dogs and cats. Blood gas analysis will help characterize the acid base status of
the cat. A urine culture should be submitted and imaging studies to evaluate for pyelonephritis should
be carried out because, although rare in cats, distal RTA has been reported in association with chronic
pyelonephritis in this species.
Q: I have diagnosed Fanconi syndrome in a Basenji dog with a blood glucose concentration of
90 mg/dL, 3-plus glucosuria, and 1-plus proteinuria. Serum potassium is 3.4 mEq/L, serum chlo-
ride is 125 mEq/L, and serum bicarbonate is 12 mEq/L. How can I be sure the diagnosis is accu-
rate?
A: Fanconi syndrome is likely in this dog. However, remember that proteinuria and amino aciduria
a a on as am e pus ci si e c rn is ais po  snoos jo ae
sity of Pennsylvania Division of Medical Genetics to identify cystine. If the urine is positive for cystine
the diagmosis of Fanconi syndrome in this Basenji is assured.
506 CHAPTER 16  Miscellaneous Syndromes
Q: A 10-year-old female spayed Persian cat is presented for routine geriatric evaluation. The owner
reports no specific problems with the cat except for some mild weight loss. The cat has been fed a
diet that has been marketed to "promote urinary health." Serum biochemistry shows a total serum
calcium concentration of 12.1 mg/dL. Even after subcutaneous fluids overmight, the total serum cal.
cium concentration still is 1l.8 mg/dL. A plain abdominal radiograph shows a small radiopaque
ureteral stone on the right side. Ultrasound examination of the kidneys shows them to be slightly
other tests should be done, and how should the cat be managed?
A: Serum ionized calcium should be evaluated. The cat's neck should be carefully examined for
any possible parathyroid masses, and the mouth should be examined carefully for squamous cell car-
cinoma. A panel of calciotrophic hormones (e.g., PTH, calcitriol, 25-hydroxycholcalciferol, PTHrP)
should be determined. If the PTH and PTHrP are low and the vitamin D results normal, the cat should
be presumptively diagnosed as having IHC. A high-fiber diet can be tried first, but many affected cats
will also require prednisone therapy. The ureteral stone should be monitored for progression down the
ureter and development of pyelectasia in the kidney on the affected side.
Q: I have a 14-year-old spayed female domestic shorthair cat presented for PU, PD, and severe
weight loss, but with fairly normal appetite. A thyroid nodule is consistently palpable on the left
tion. Urine specific gravity is 1.019, serum creatinine is 2.0 mg/dL, and BUN is 38 mg/dL. Is it safe to
proceed with radioiodine treatment of the hyperthyroidism?
a n  a e m   a s s s r  
the effect on renal function of rendering the cat euthyroid (i.e., serum thyroxine of approximately 1.0
mg/dL). In an institutional setting, renal scintigraphy can be used to determine the cat's GFR, but this
procedure is not generally available in most pracfice seffings. lohexol clearance also may be used fo
estimate GFR and is available to practitioners by commercial diagmostic laboratories.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Idiopathic Renal Hematuria
Hitt ME,Straw RC, Lattimer JC,et al: Idiopathic hematuria of unilateral renal origin in a dog,J Am Vet Med Assoc 187:1371-
1373, 1985
Holt PE, Lucke VM, Pearson H: Idiopathic renal haemorrhage in the dog, I Small Anirm Pract 28:253-263, 1987.
Mishina M, Watanabe T, Yugeta N, et al: Idiopathic renal hematuria in a dog: The usefulness of a method of partial occlu
sion of the renal artery, I Vet Med Sci 59:293-295, 1997.
Stone EA, DeNovo RC, Rawlings CA: Massive hematuria of nontraumatic renal origin in dogs, } Am Vet Med Assoc
183:868-871, 1983.
Perinephric Pseudocysts
Beck JA, Bellenger CR, Lamb WA, et al: Perirenal pseudocysts in 26 cats, Aust Vet I 78:166-171, 2000.
ture, I Vet Intern Med 13:4755, 1999.
Renal Tubular Acidosis
189:1350-1352, 1986.
DiBartola SP, Leonard PO: Renal tubular acidosis in a dog, I Am Vet Med Assoc 180:70-73, 1982.
Drazner FH: Distal renal tubular acidosis associated with chronic pyelonephritis in a cat, Calif Vet 34:15-21, 1980.
Shaw DH: Acute response of urine pH following ammonium chloride administration to dogs, Arm J Vet Res 50:1829-1830, 1989.
Watson AD, Culvenor JA, Middleton DJ, Rothwell TL: Distal renal tubular acidosis in a cat with pyelonephritis, Vet Rec
119:65-68, 1986.
Miscellaneous Syndromes ■ CHAPTER 16  507
Fanconi Syndrome
Bovee KC, Joyce T, Blazer-Yost B, et al: Characterization of renal defects in dogs with a syndrome similar to the Fanconi
syndrome in man, / A Vet Med Assoc 174:1094-1099, 1979.
Breitschwerdt EB, Ochoa R, Waltman C, et al: Multiple endocrine abnormalities in Basenji dogs with renal tubular dys-
function, I Am Vet Med Assoc 182:1348-1353, 1983.
Easley JR, Breitschwerdt EB: Glucosuria associated with renal tubular dysfunction in three Basenji dogs, I Arm Vet Med
Assoc 168:938-943, 1976.
 Noonan CH, Kay JM: Prevalence and geographic distribution of Fanconi syndrome in Basenjis in the United States, / Am
Vet Med Assoc 197:345349, 1990.
Idiopathic Hypercalcemia
Midkiff AM, Chew Dj, Randolph JF, et al: Idiopathic hypercalcemia in cats, I Vet Intern Med 14:619-626, 2000.
Hyperthyroidism and the Kidney
Adams WH, Daniel GB, Legendre AM, et al: Changes in renal function in cats following treatment of hyperthyroidism
using 131-1, Vet Radiol Lltrasound 38:231-238, 1997.
Adams WH, Daniel GB, Legendre AM: Investigation of the effects of hyperthyroidism on renal function in the cat, Can J
Vet Res 61:53-56, 1997.
 Becker TJ, Graves TK, Kruger JM, et al: Effects of methimazole on renal function in cats with hyperthyroidism, I Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 36:215223, 2000.
Broussard JD, Peterson ME, Fox PR: Changes in clinical and laboratory findings in cats with hyperthyroidism from 1983
to 1993, I A Vet Med Assoc 206:302305, 1995.
DiBartola SP, Broome MR, Stein BS, et al: Effect of treatment of hyperthyroidism on renal function in cats, I Am Vet Med
Assoc 208:875-878, 1996.
Graves TK, Olivier NB, Nachreiner RF, et al: Changes in renal function associated with treatment of naturally-occurring
hyperthyroidism in cats, Arm J Vet Res 55:1745-1749, 1994.
 Nemzek JA, Kruger JM, Walshaw R, et al: Acute onset of hypokalemia and muscular weakness in four hyperthyroid cats,
 Ar Vet Med Assoc 205:65-68, 1994.
Peterson ME, Becker DV: Radioiodine treatment of 524 cats with hyperthyroidism, I Am Vet Med Assoc 207:1422-1428,
1995.
Peterson ME, Gamble DA: Effect of nonthyroidal illness on serum thyroxine concentrations in cats: 494 cases (1988),I Am
Vet Med Assoc 197:12031208, 1990.
 Peterson ME, Graves TK, Gamble DA: Triodothyronine (T3) suppression test: An aid in the diagnosis of mild hyperthy
roidism in cats,  Vet Int Med 4:233-238, 1990.
Peterson ME, Melian C, Nichols R: Measurement of serum concentrations of free thyroxine, total thyroxine, and total tri-
9-Lives checklist, 315f-318f
Acute intrinsic renal failure (Continued)
differential, 167-168
Abdominocentesis, in uroperifoneum, 396-398
hemogram in, 75
procedure of,398
 renal imaging studies in, 77
Abyssinian cat, familial amyloidosis in, 198t-199t,
serum biochemistry in, 76-77
202-203, 202f, 230
frequently asked questions about, 91-92
papillary necrosis in, 203f
future treafment of, 89-90
ACE (angiotensin-converting enzyme) inhibitors,
history and clinical signs of, 73
in treatment of chronic kidney disease, 182b,
hyperkalemia and treatment in, 80-81, 80f, 80b
185-187, 185b, 186f
hyponatremia and hypocalcemia and
Acepromazine
treatment in, 81
for feline idiopathic cystitis, 326, 326b, 333t
metabolic acidosis and treatment in, 81
for feline urethral obstruction, 359f
oligouria in, treafment of, 79, 79b
Acid-base balance, in chronic kidney disease, 163
pathophysiology of, 64, 66-73
Activated vitamin D. See Calcitriol therapy.
phases of, 71-73, 71f
Acute intrinsic renal failure (AIRF), 63, 65-73
physical examination in, 74
in animals with pre-existing renal disease, 69b
prognosis in, 87-88, 87b
causes of, 63, 65-66
renal blood flow in, maintaining, 72b
aminoglycoside nephrotoxicity, 114-117. See
serrum phosphorus confrol in treafment of, 81-82
also Aminoglycoside nephrotoxicity
suggested readings on, 92
ethylene glycol toxicity, 93-i05. See also
treatment of, 78-87, 89, 139
Ethylene glycol-induced renal failure
atrial natriuretic peptide in, 84-85
food associated toxicity, 137-139. See also
dialysis, 86-87
Melamine/cyanuric acid associated renal
diurefic uuse in, 82-84
failure
failure in, 85-86
frequently asked questions on, 140-142
fufure developments in, 89-90, 139-140
grape or raisin toxicity, 118-120. See also Grape
goals in, 78, 78b
and raisin nephrotoxicity
initial stabilization in, 79-85
heatstroke, 134-137. See also Heatstroke-
 misconceptions regarding, 90
induced renal failure
nutritional support in, 85
hypercalcemia, 126-131. See also
rehydrafion fluids in, 80
Hypercalcemia-indlced renal damage
success in, 85
leptospirosis, 105-114. See also Leptospirosis-
 systemic blood pressure control in, 85
induced renal failure
tips in, 90
lily toxicity, 120-122. See also Lily
urine enzymology in, 77
nephrotoxicity
urine quality in diagnosis of, 72b
Lyme nephritis, 131-134. See also Borreliosis-
Acute renal failure (ARF), 63. See also Acute
associated glomerulonephritis
intrinsic renal failure (AIRF).
nonsteroidal anfi-inflammatory drug (NSAID)
classification of, 63, 64f
toxicity, 122-125. See also NSAID-
diagnosis of, 74-78, 89
associated renal failure
history and clirical signs of, 63b, 73
dehydration in, 74b
 pathogenesis and pathophysiology of, 64-73
diagnosis of, 75-78, 89, 139
physical examination in, 73-74
Page number followed by b indicates box; f, figure; t, table.
509
510
Index
Acute renal failure (Continued)
Autonomous bladder, 428
 postrenal, 65. See also Postrenal acute renal
Azodyl, for chroric kidney disease, 189
failure
Azotemia,32
 prerenal, 64. See also Prerenal acute renal failure
differentiation of types of, 33f
prognosis in, 87-88
suggested readings on, 92
Bacteria, in urine specimen, 25-26, 25f
treatment of, 78-87, 89
culture of, 241-248. See also Urine culture
Acute tubular necrosis, 66-73, 67f
Basement membrane, of glomerulus, 218
Alaskan malamute, suspected familial renal
Basement membrane disorder, familial trait,
dysplasia in, 198t-199t, 203
198t-199t, 206f
Alpha agorists, in preventing urinary tract
in bull terrier, 204-205
infection, 261
in Dalmatian, 207
Aluminum hydroxide (Amphogel), as phosphorus
in English Cocker spariel, 206
binder, 176-177
in Newfoundland, 208
Aminoglycoside nephrotoxicity, 114-117
in Samoyed, 210-211
diagnosis of, 116, 116b
suspected
 pathophysiology of, 114-115
in beagle, 204
prevention of, 117, 117b
in bull mastiff, 205
risk factors for, 115-116
 in Doberman pinscher, 207
suggested readings on, 142
in Rofftweiler, 209
Aminoglycosides, for urinary tract infection, 257
Basenji, familial renal disease in, 198t-199t, 204,
Amitriptyline
496-497
for feline idiopathic cystitis, 333t, 334
Basic fibroblastic growth factor (bFGF) urinary
for urethral obstruction in male cats, 313
marker, 449
Ammonium urate calculi, 282f
Baytril. See Errofloxacin.
Amyloid syndromes, 228
Beagle, familial renal disease in, 198t-199t, 204, 230
Amyloidosis, 227-237. See also Glomerular disease.
Benazepril, in freafment of chronic kidney disease
familial trait, 198t-199t, 210f
in cats, 187
in Abyssinian cat, 202-203, 202f
in dogs, 187
in beagle, 204
Berign essential hemafuria, in dogs, 487-490
 in English foxhound, 207
diagrnosis of, 487-489, 487b
in Shar-pei, 211
cystoscopy in, 488, 488f
histopathology of, in dog, 228f
differential, 489
treafment of, 233-234
gross and microscopic pathology in, 489
Anabolic steroids, in treafment of chroric kidney
prognosis in, 489-490
disease, 189
treatment of, 489
Anafraril. See Clomipramine.
BENRIC study, 187
Angiotensin I therapy, for chronic kidney disease,
Bernese mountain dog, familial renal disease in,
185-186, 185b
198t-199t, 204, 229
Antegrade urinary catheter placement, in male
Bilirubin, in urine, 15
cats,366
Bladder
Anti-emefics, dosages for treafment in chroric
biopsy of, 57-58
kidney disease, 181
caleuli of
Antimicrobial agents, for urinary tract infections,
history in, 285
255-257
physica1 findings in, 286-287
dosages and urine concenfrations, in normal
digital palpation of, 2
dogs, 255t
infection of. See Cystifis; Urinary tract infection
response rate for appropriate treatment with, 257
neoplasia of, 438-441
uropathogen susceptibility to, 257, 258t-259f
benign, 439, 443
Anfizol-Vet. See 4-Methylpyrazole.
canine, 439, 439f. See also Canine transifional
Anuscopes, 2-3, 4f
cell carcinoma
Ash Advantage T-fluted peritoneal dialysis
 common misconceptions about, 461
catheter, 86, 86f
diagnosis of, 460-461
Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), in treatment of
etiology of, 440-441
acute intrinsic renal failure, 8485
feline, 440
Automatic bladder, 427-428
frequently asked questions about, 462-463
Index
511
Bladder (Continned)
Calcium oxalate calculi, 278
fufure diagnosis and freafment of, 461
formation of, 278f
incidence of, in dogs, 438b
Calcium oxalate crystalluria, 27, 28f
metastafic, 439
Calcium oxalate stone, management algorifhm
primary fumors in, 438
for, 295f
risk of
Caleuls, 272
 in female dogs and male cats, 440, 440b
Canine olfaction, and detection of transitional cell
vegetable consuumption and, 441
carcinoma, 449-450
summary tips on, 461-462
Canine fransitional cell carcinoma, 441459, 453f
transitional cellcarcinoma in,438b
breed disposition to, 436, 441b, 442t
Overdistension of, in male cats, 369
clinical signs of, 442, 443b
polyps of, 451f
common misconcepfions about, 461
rupfure of
diagnosis of, 443-450, 449b, 460-461
cystoscopy in, 401f
biopsy in definitive, 446-447, 447f, 447b
positive contrast cystography in, 400f
cystocentesis in, contraindication to, 441b,
treatment of, 404
443,443b
ultrasonography of, 53-54
cystoscopy in, 448, 448f
Bladder fumor anfigen (BTA) test, 43, 448-449
cytology in, 445-446, 447f
Borreliosis-associated glomerulonephrifis,
defiritive, 446-447, 446b
131-134, 131b
differential, 443
clinical signs and history in, 133
epithelial cell rafts in, 443-444, 444b, 445f
diagnosis of, 134
laboratory findings in, 443-444, 444b
pathophysiology of, 131-133, 133f
radiography and ultrasonography in, 445,
prognosis in, 134, 134b
445b, 446f
suggested readings on, 142
etiology of, 440-441
treatment of, 134
frequently asked questions about, 462-463
fufure diagnosis and freafment of, 461
Briftany spaniel, familial renal disease in,
histopathology of, 451f-452f
198t-199t, 204, 229
incidence of, in dogs, 438b
Bulbocavernosus reflex, 414
locafior of fumors in, 450452, 450b
Bull mastiff, familial renal disease in, 198t-199t,
metastatic, 439
205
physical findings in, 443
Bull terrier, familial renal disease in, 198t-199t,
primary tumors in, 438
204-205, 230
prognosis in, 459
BUN concenfration
risk of
in acute intrinsic renal failure, 76
 in female dogs and male cats, 440, 440b
in chroric kidney disease, 159
vegetable consumption and, 441
and glomerular filtration rate, 37-39, 38t
screening tests for, 448-449
laboratory evaluation of, 36, 37b
signalment of, 441-442
Buprenorphine (Buprenex), for feline idiopathic
staging of, 450,450t
cystifis,326,326b,333
summary tips on, 461-462
Buspirone (Buspar), for feline idiopathic cystitis,
treatment of, 452-458
333t
chemotherapy in, 454, 454b
Butorphanol
mitoxantrore and piroxicam in, 456, 456b
dosage, as anfi-emetic, 181
new and fufure, 458-459
for feline idiopathic cystitis, 333f
 palliative management of urethral obstruction
in, 456458, 457f
Cairn terrier, familial rernal disease of, 198t-199t,
piroxicam in, 454b, 455
205
radiation in, 456
Calcitriol poisoning, 129, 129b
surgical, 452-454, 453b
Calcitriol (activated vitamin D) therapy
Casts, in urinary sediment, 20-25
for canine transifional cell carcinoma, 459
cellular, 22-25, 23f
in chronic kidney disease, 183-185, 184f
classification of, 21f
Calcitriol trade-off hypothesis, 165-166, 165f
granular, 24, 24f
Calcium acetate, as phosphorus binder, 177
hyaline, 21-22, 22f
Calcium carbonate, as phosphorus binder, 177
waxy,24-25,24f
512
Index
Catheterization, urinary, 2-5
Chronic kidney disease (Continned)
in female cats, 3
home-made diet for eifher dogs or cats, 173t
in female dogs, 2-3, 4f
lipid supplementaftion in, 179
in male cats, 3
phosphorus restriction in, 174-176, 174b, 175f
in male dogs, 2, 3f
potassium levels and, 180
Cefadroxil, 256
protein restriction in, 172-174
Cefovecin, for urinary tract infection, 257
reduction of intestinal phosphate absorption,
Cefpodoxime, for urinary tract infection, 257
176-179, 176b, 177f
Ceffiofur sodium, for urinary tract infection, 257
sodium bicarbonate in, 180
Cellular casts, in urinary sediment, 22-25, 23f
sodium chloride restriction in, 179-180
Central diabetes insipidus, 466, 470t, 473f,
veterinary renal diets in, 180-181
481f, 481b
vitamin supplements in, 180
freatment of, 482
frequenfly asked questions about, 193-195
Cephalexin, for urinary tract infections, 256
histopathology of, 152, 152f
Cephalosporins, first generation, for urinary tract
hormonal stafus in, 163-166
infections, 256
hypertension and control in, 186b, 188
Chlamydia, in recurrent urinary infections, 262
IRIS staging of, 145-147, 146t
Chlorpromazine, dosage, as anti-emetic, 181
laboratory findings in, 158-168
Cholecalciferol poisoning, 127-128
acid-base balance, 163
Chow, familial renal disease of, 198t-199t, 206
BUN concenfrafion, 159
Chronic kidney disease (CKD), 145
hemogram, 158-159
avoiding stress in animals with, 190
hormones, 163-166
blood pressure and confrol in, 186b, 188-189
serum calcium concenfrafion, 161-162, 161b
causes of, 147-148
serum creatinine concenfration,159
in cats, 148
serum phosphorus concentrafion, 161
in dogs, 147-148
serum potassium concentration, 159-161
common misconceptions regarding, 192-193
serum sodium concenfrafion, 159
diagnosis of, 154-168, 191
thyroid hormone concenfration in, 166
anorexia in, 155
urinalysis, 166
clirical history in, 154 156
pathophysiology of, 148-154
gastrointestinal signs in, 155
intraglomerular hypertension and
lethargy, weakness, and neurological signs in,
hyperfiltration in, 148b, 149-150, 149f
155-156
renal functional and morphologic changes in,
physical signs in, 156-157
151-152, 151b
abdominal palpafion, 156
uremia in, 148
abnormal auscultafion, 156
progression of
blindness, 157
factors contributing to, 151-153, 151f, 152b
coat dullness and dryness, 156
dietary intake, 152
dehydrafion signs, 156
hypertension, 188
hemostafic defects, 157
systemic complicafions,153
oral lesions, 156
and prognosis, 190-191
osteodystrophy, 156-157
species differences in, 151
subcutaneous edema, 157
renal secondary hyperparathyroidism in,
systemic or local infections, 157
164-165, 164f
weight loss, 155-156
suiggested readings on, 195
 polyuria and polydipsia in, 154-155
thyroid hormone concenfration in, 166
serum biochemistry in, 159-163
treatment of, 168-191
serum creafinine concenfrafion cut-off values
ACE inhibitors in, 187
in, 146t, 147, 147b
anabolic steroids in, 189
systemic hypertension in, 157-158
benazepril in, 187
diagnostic imaging in, 166-167, 167f
blood pressure control in, 188-189
differential, 167-168
dietary management in, 171-181, 171t-173t
dietary management of, 171-181
enalapril in, 186
caloric needs in, 179
endocrine replacement therapy in, 182-186
home-made diet for cats, 172t
future developments in, 191-192
home-made diet for dogs, 171f
general management principles in, 168-171
Index
513
Chronic kidney disease (Continued)
Cystatin C concenfration, laboratory evaluafion, 39
levels of, 169b
Cysteine solubility, in urine, compounds that
new and emerging, 189-190
increase, 300f
patient stafus checklist in, 170b
Cysteine urolifthiasis, 27, 29f, 283-284
solute balance in, 153-154
medical treatment of, 300-301
summary tips on, 193
alkalinizafion of urine in, 301
vomiting and inappetence, 181-182
signalment in,285
water balance in, 154
Cystic caleuli
Chronic renal failure (CRF), 145-147. See also
history in, 285
Chroric kidney disease (CKD).
physical findings in, 286-287
Cinacalcet, for chronic kidney disease, 190
Cystiftis
Ciprofloxacin (Cipro), 256
in dogs, 240. See also Urinary tract infection
Cifrate formation, 280
non-obstrucfive, in cats, 306. See also Feline
Clinical evaluation, of urinary tract, 32, 58
idiopathic cystitis; Feline interstitial cystifis
approach to, 33-34
Cystocentesis,5-7
bladder and urethral biopsy in, 57-58
blind techrique for, wifth nonpalpable bladder, 5
common misconceptions about,58-59
complicafions of, 6-7
cystoscopy in,54-55
decompressive, 358-361
diagnostic imaging in, 49-54
for quantitative microbiology, 48, 48b
frequently asked questions about, 59-61
standard techrique for, with palpable bladder, 5
future developments in, 58
techniques in caf and dog, 6f-7f
history in, 33-34
techriques in male dog in dorsal recumbency,
laboratory evaluation of renal function in, 35-47.
6f-7f
See aiso Laboratory evaluation
Cystography
microbiology in, 47-48
double confrast, 51
physical examination in, 35
negative contrast, 51
questions to be answered in, 32
positive confrast, 50-51
renal biopsy in, 55-57
Cystometrogram (CMG), 415-417, 416f
suggested readings in, 61
Cystoscopy, 54-55
Clomicalm. See Clomipramine
Clomipramine, for feline idiopathic cystifis, 333t,
Dalmafian
334
familial renal disease of, 198t-199t, 207
Collagen injections, submucosal, for primary
urate urolithiasis in, 281-283
sphincter incompetence, 421, 421f, 421b
Dantrolene, for feline urethral obstruction, 359t
Color flow Doppler renal ultrasonography, 53
Darbepoetin (Aransep), 182
Colposuspension, in treatment of primary
DDAVP, for hyposthenuric disorders, 482, 482b
sphincter incompetence, 422, 422f
Decompressive cystocentesis, 358-361
 Congenital nephrogenic diabetes insipidus,
Dehydration, signs of
482-483
in acute intrinsic renal failure, 74b
Contrast urography, of lower urinary tract, 50-51
in chroric kidney disease, 156
Converia. See Cefovecin.
 Detrusor confraction, medical stimulafion of, 369,
Corynebacterinm urealyticum, in recurrent urinary
369b
infections, 262-264
 Detrusor urethral dyssynergia, 428-429
Covalzin. See Kremezin.
Diagnosis, of disease. See Clinical evaluafion, of
Crystalloid components, of uroliths, 272, 273f
urinary tract.
Crystalloid formation, 274, 275f
Diagnostic imaging, 49-54. See also Renal imaging
urine pH and, 274
studies.
urine volume and, 274
contrast urographic, 50-51
Crystalluria, as indicafor of urolithiasis, 287b
double contrast cystographic, 51
Crystals, in urine, 26-27. See also Urolithiasis.
as artifacts of storage, 27b
negative contrast cystographic, 51
calcium oxalate, 27, 28f
radiographic, 49
cystine, 27, 29f
ultrasonographic, 51-54
hippurate, 98
Dialysis treafment
struvite, 27, 29f
of acuite intrinsic renal failure, 86-87
urate, 27, 30f
in chroric kidney disease, 190
514
Index
Diazepam, for feline urethral obstruction, 359t
English sheepdog, primary sphincter
Dibenzyline. See Phenoxybenzamine.
incompetence in, 417-427
Dietary intake, and progression of chronic kidney
Enrofloxacin, 256
disease, 152
Enterococci, in recurrent urinary infections, 262
Dietary management
Epakitin, as phosphorus binder, 178
of chronic kidney disease, 171-181
Epithelial cells, in urinary sediment, 18f, 19-20, 20f
home-made feed, for cats, 172t
Erythropoietin, recombinant human, (rhEPO;
home-made feed, for dogs, 171t
Epogen), for chronic kidney disease, 182-183,
home-made feed, for either dogs or cats, 173t
182b
veterinary renal feed, advantages of, 180-181
Erythropoietin concenfrafion, in chronic kidney
of urinary fract infections, 257, 260-261, 260b
disease, 166
Difloxacin (Dicural), 256
Esophagostomy, percutaneous, in treaftment of
1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D. See Calcitriol (activated
chroric kidney disease, 182, 182b
vitamin D) therapy.
 Esophagostomy feeding tubes, in treatment of 
Dipstrip evaluation, of urine specimen, 11
chronic kidney disease, 182, 182b
 possible error sources in, 11b
Estrogens, in preventing urinary tract infection, 261
 Dipstrip screening, for urine protein, 41-42, 42b
Ethanol therapy, for ethylene glycol toxicity, 102
Diuretics
Ethylene glycol induced renal failure, 93-105
 in treatment of acute intrinsic renal failure, 82-84
clirical signs and history in, 96-97, 96b
types of, andl sites of action, 82-84
cardiopulmonary, 95
Doberman pinscher
diagnosis of, 96-101
familial renal disease of, 198t-199t, 207, 230
high anion gap and high osmolal
primary sphincter incompetence in, 417-427
gap in, 100b
Dopamine, for acute intrinsic renal failure, 8384
utility of renal ultrasonography in, 52-53
Double confrast cystography, 51
laboratory findings in, 97-101
Duragesic. See Fentanyl.
measured urine output, 98
Dynamic renal scintigraphy, 40-41
radiography, 100
renal ultrasonography, 100-101, 100f
Ectopic ureter, 423-427, 423f
serum biochemistry, 98-100
abnormalities associated with, 425
urinalysis, 97-98
diagnosis of
pathophysiology of, 93-96, 94f
computed tomography in, 424
phases of syndrome of, 9496
excretory urography in, 424, 424f
physical examination findings in, 97
ultrasonography in, 424
 prognosis for recovery from, 105
lrethrocystoscopy in, 425, 425f426f, 425b
renal histopathology in, 95f
intraurethral ureterectomy in freafment of, 425,
renal involvement in, 95-96
426f
suiggested readings on, 142
submucosal collagen injections in freatment of, 425
treatment of, 101-105, 101b
Elavil. See Amitriptyline.
4-methylpyrazole in, 103-104 
Electrolyte clearance, fractional, 47, 47t
dialysis in, 104-105
Elmiron. See Pentosan polysulfate sodium.
diuresis in, 104
Embyronal nephroma, 436-437
ethanol in, 102-103
Enalapril, in stabilization of dogs wifh chronic
Excenel. See Ceffiofur sodium.
kidney disease, 186
Excretory urography, 49-50
 Endocrine replacement therapy, in chronic kidney
disease, 182-186
Familial renal disease(s), 197, 198t-199t
angiotensin I and angiotensin-converting
diagnosis of, 212
enzyme inhibitors in, 185-186
frequentfly asked questions about, 213
calcitriol in, 183-185
future genetic identification of, 213
recombinant human erythropoietin in, 182-183
history and clinical signs of, 200
Endothelium, of glomerulus, 218
laboratory findings in, 200-202
English bulldog, urate urolithiasis in, 281-283
hemogram, 200
English Cocker spaniel, familial renal disease of,
histopathology, 201-202
198t-199t, 206, 230
imaging, 201
English foxhound, familial renal disease of,
serrum chemistry, 201
198t-199t, 207, 230
urinalysis, 201
Index
515
Familial renal disease(s) (Continued)
Feline idiopathic cystitis (Continued)
physical findings in, 200
differential diagnosis of, 313
signalment of, 197-200
in cats older than 10 years of age, 313
specific, 198t-199t, 202-212
in cats younger than 10 years of age, 313, 313b,
in Abyssiniarn cat, 202-203
314f
in Alaskan malamute, 203
frequenfly asked questions about, 337-339
in Basenji, 204
neurogenic inflammation in, 309, 309b, 310f
in beagle, 204
pathophysiology of, 307-311, 307f-308f
 in Bernese mountain dog, 204
adrenal deficits in, 311, 312f
in Briftany spariel, 204
alpha-2-adrenorecepfors in, 311
in bull mastiff, 205
envirormental stressors in, 309, 310f, 311b
in bull terrier, 204-205
HPA axis abnormalifies in, 311
in Cairn and West Highland white terriers, 205
sensory neuron abnormalifies in, 308-309
in chow, 206
signalment of, 312-313
in Dalmatian, 207
suggested readings on, 339
 in Doberman pinscher, 207
summary tips on, 336-337
 in English Cocker spaniel, 206
treatment of, 324-335, 325f
in English foxhound, 207
behavioral, 335
in German shepherd, 207
fluoxetine in, 334
in golden retriever, 207-208
fufure, 335-336
in Lhasa apso, and Shih tzu, 208
glucosaminoglycan supplementation in,
in miniafure Schnauzer, 208
334-335
in Newfoundland, 208
goals in, 324-335, 324b
 in Norwegian elkhound, 209 
level(s) of, 326
in Persiar cat, 209
first, 326, 326b
in Roffweiler, 209
second,327,327b
in samoyed, 210-211
successful, 326
 in Shar pei, 211
tricyclic antidepressants in, 334
in soft-coated Wheaten terrier, 211-212
lunsuccessful, 335b
in standard poodle, 212
Feline interstiftial cystitis, 306
in Welsh corgi, 212
Feline urological syndrome, 306
suggested readings on, 213
Feliway. See Pheromones.
Fanconi syndrome, 496-497
Fentanyl, for feline idiopathic cystifis, 333t
diagnosis of, 496-497, 496b
Fetal glomerulus, 198f
drug administration associated with, 497
Filtration barrier, of glomerulus, 218-219
prognosis in, 497
Fluoroquinolones, for urinary tract infection, 256,
treafment of, 497
256b
 Feline idiopathic cystitis, 306
Fluoxetine, for feline idiopathic cystitis, 333t, 334
chronic, 308
Fosrenol. See Lanthanum carbonate.
clinical signs of, 313
Fractional clearance of electrolytes, 47, 47t
common misconceptions about, 336
Fungal urinary tract infections, freatment of, 262-263
diagnosis of, 320-324, 335
blood count and serum biochemistry in, 322
Gastric acid production, suppression of, 181
cystoscopy in, 323, 324f
Gastroprotectants, 182
envirormental history and assessment form
German shepherd
in,315f-318f
familial renal disease of, 198t-199t, 207
hemafuria in, 320b, 322b
renal cystadenocarcinoma in, 436
histopathology in, 323-324
history in, 314-319
in, 417-427
inappropriate urination paftern in, 319, 319b
Glomerular capillary barrier, schematic of, 220f
physicai findings in, 319-320
Glomerular disease, 218
radiographic imaging in, 322, 322b,323f
amyloidosis in, 227-237
ultrasonographic imaging in, 322, 323f
calises of, 227
urethroscopy in, 323
clinical findings in, 229-232
urinalysis in, 320-321
history and possible presentations, 230
urine culture in, 321-322, 321b
signalment, 229-230
516
Index
Glomerular disease (Continned)
H2-receptor antagonists, 181
ommon misconceptions about, 238
Halo sign, at corticomedullary junction, 101
complicafions of, 234237
Hanging head posfure, in hypokalemic cat, 153f,
hyperlipidemia in, 236
160
hypertension in, 236-237
Heatstroke-induced renal failure, 134-137, 134b
hypoalbuminemia in, 234
clirical signs of, 135-136
sodium retenfion in, 234-235
diagnosis of, 136
thromboembolism in, 235-236,235f
pathophysiology of, 135
diagnosis of, 237
prognosis in, 137
frequently asked questions about, 238-239
suggested readings on, 142
laboratory findings in, 230-232
treatment of, 136-137
renal biopsy, 231-232
Hematoma, perinephric, 392f
serum biochemistry, 231
Hemafuria, idiopafhic renal, in dogs, 487-490. See
urinalysis, 230-231
also Berign essential hemafuria.
lrine protein-to-creafinine ratio, 231-232
Hemorrhage, in renal biopsy, 57
lesions of, 226, 226f
Husbandry, in clinical history, 34
pathogenesis of, 220
Hyaline casts, in urinary sediment, 21-22, 22f
in immune-mediated glomerulonephritis
Hydronephrosis, in renal biopsy, 57
221-222
Hydropulsion. See Urohydropropulsion.
 in nonimmune glomerulonephritis, 223
Hypercalcemia
physical examination findings in, 230
in chronic kidney disease, 162, 162b
prognosis in, 237
idiopathic, in1 cats, 498-501, 498b
progression of, 225
diagnosis of, 498-500
resolution of, 225
differenfial, 500
suggested readings on, 239
prognosis in, 501
treatment of, 232-234, 237
treatment of, 500-501, 500b
fufure, 237
Hypercalcemia-induced renal damage, 126-131,
summary tips in, 238
126b
Glomerular filtration rate (GFR)
carine mortality from, 128-129, 128b
decreased, in acute intrinsic renal failure, 64f, 73-75
clirical signs of, 130, 130b
in laboratory evaluation, 35-39
diagnosis of, 130-131
radioisotopic estimafion of, 40-41
histopathology of, 126, 126f
sedafive and anesthetic effects on, 40
pathophysiology of, 126-130
single injection estimaftion of, 40
calitriol poisoning in, 129, 129b
Glomerular function, 35-39, 36t
cholicalciferol poisoning in, 127-129
Glomerulonephritis, 218. See also Glomerular
suggested readings on, 142
disease.
treatment of, 131, 132f
familial trait, 198t-199t
Hyperkalemia
in Bernese mountain dog, 204
and treatment, in acute intrinsic renal failure,
in Briftany spaniel, 204
80-81, 80f
      s
in urethral obstruction in male cats, 350,
Glucosuria, pathology indicated by, 13b
350b-351b
Glycosaminoglycans, in preventing urinary tract
Hyperparathyroidism, in chronic kidney disease,
infection, 260
163-166, 163b
Golden retriever, familial renal disease of,
 Hyperphosphatemia, acute, causing acute intrinsic
198t-199t, 207-208
renal failure, 66
Gradual water deprivafion test, 46-47
Hypertension, in dogs or cats
Granular casts, in urinary sediment, 24, 24f
dietary and medical treafment of, 188-189
guidelines for treatment of, 188
118b
Hypervitaminosis D, in hypercalcemic renal
diagnosis of, 119
pathology,127-128,128b
pathophysiology of, 118
Hypocalcemia
prognosis in, 119-120
in chronic kidney disease, 162
risk factors for, 118
and treafment, in acute intrinsic renal
suggested readings on, 142
failure, 81
treatment of, 119, 119b
in refhral obstrucfion in male cats, 352, 352b
Index
517
Hypokalemia, in chronic kidney disease, 159-161,
Leptospirosis-induced renal failure, 107, 107b
160f, 160b, 180
clinical course and prognosis in, 112-113, 112b
Hyponafremia, and treatment, in acute intrinsic
clinical signs and history of, 109
renal failure, 81
diagnosis of
Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism, 496
imaging in, 110
Hyposthenuric disorders, treatment of, 480-483,
laboratory findings in, 109-112, 110b
480b
liver biopsy results in, 111
physical examination findings in, 109
Idiopathic glomerulonephritis, 223. See also
renal biopsy results in, 111f
Glomerular disease.
signalment in, 108-109
treafment of, 232-233
pathophysiology of, 101b, 107-108
Idiopathic hypercalcemia, in cats, 498-501, 498b
suggested readings on, 142
diagnosis of, 498-500
treatment of, 112
differenfial, 500
short-term dialysis in, 112b
prognosis in, 501
Leukocyte esterase reacfion, 15
treatment of, 500-501, 500b
Lhasa apso, familial renal disease Of,
 Idiopathic renal hematuria, in dogs, 487-490.
198t-199t, 208
See also Berign essenfial hemafuria.
Lily nephrotoxicity, in cats, 120-122, 120b
Immune-mediated glomerulonephritis, 221-222,
diagnosis of, 121
221f. See also Glomerular disease.
pathophysiology of, 120-121
caluses of, in dogs and cats, 224b-225b
prognosis in, 121b, 122
mechanisms of immune injury in, 222-223
suggested readings on, 142
treatment of, 232-233
treatment of, 121
 Inherited diseases. See Familial renal disease(s).
Linear infarcts, in renal biopsy, 57
Internafional Renal Interest Society (IRIS), staging
Lithotripsy, 291
of chronic kidney disease, 145-147
Loop diuretics, 83
proteinuria, 146t
Lower mofor neuron incontinence, 428
serum creatinine concentrafions, 146t
Lower urinary fract. See also Urinary fract disease.
systemic blood pressure, 146t
contrast urography of, 50-51
Intrinsic azofemia, 33f
Lyme nephrifis. See Borreliosis-associated
glomerulonephriftis.
Ketone concenfration, in urine, 14
Kremezin, for chronic kidney disease, 189
Mannitol, precaufions in use of, 82b
Marbofloxacin, 256
Laboratory evaluation, of renal function, 35-47
Matrix urolith, 272
bladder fumor anfigen test in, 43
Medical history, 34
BUN concenfration in, 36
Medullary rim sign, 53
cystatin C concentration in, 39
Melamine /cyanuric acid-associated renal
fracfional clearance of elecfrolytes in, 47
failure, 137
glomerular filtration rate in, 35-39, 36t. See also
clinical signs of, 138
Glomerular filtration rate(GFR)
diagnosis of, 138
gradual water deprivation test in, 46-47
pathophysiology of, 138, 138f
microalbuminuria in, 42-43
prognosis in, 139
renal clearance in, 39
suggested readings on, 142
serum creatinine concentration in, 36-37
treatment of, 139
serum phosphorus concenfration in, 41
Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis,
tubular function in, 4447
familial trait, in soff-coated Wheaten terrier,
urine protein in, 41-42
211-212
water deprivafion test in, 45-46
MEMO (multimodal environmental modification),
Lanthanum carbonate, as phosphorus
327,327b
binder, 178
level 1, 328-330
Leptospirosis, 105-107
 cat conflict management in, 331
hosts of organisms causing, 106, 106t
feeding practice management in, 330
public health sigrificance of, 113
increasing space in, 331
serovars of, 105-107
litter box management in, 328-329
vaccination against, 113-114, 113b
pheromone therapy in, 332
518
Index
MEMO (multimodal environmental modification)
Miniafure Schnauzer
(Continued)
familial renal disease of, 198t-199t, 208
promoting wild behaviors in, 331
urate urolithiasis in, 281-283
salt intake increase in, 330
Miripress. See Prazosin.
water intake increase in, 329, 330b
Mitoxantrone, and piroxicam, 456, 456b
level 2, 332
Modified Wright stain, of urine sediment, 250
analgesia and sedation in, 333-335
Mycoplasma, in recurrent urinary infecfions, 262
outdoor exposure in, 332, 332b
safe haven provision in, 332-333
Naxcel. See Cefftiofur sodium.
freatrment of
Negative confrast cystography, 51
drugs used in, 333t
Nephrifis, causing acute intrinsic renal failure, 66
Mesangial cells, 219, 220f
Nephroblastoma, 436-437, 437f
Mesenchymal tumors, primary, 437
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, 482-483
Metabolic acidosis, and treatment
Nephrosis, pathophysiology of, 66-73
in acute intrinsic renal failure, 81, 81b
Nephrotic syndrome, 218
in chroric kidney disease, 163
Nephrotoxicant, 69
Metastatic fumors, 437-438
Nephrotoxicity, renal, pathophysiology of, 64f,
Methimazole challenge, 503, 503b
66-73
4Methylpyrazole (4-MP; fomepizole),
Nephrotoxins, causing acute intrinsic renal
in treatment of ethylene glycol toxicity, 101b)
failure, 65
102-104
Newfoundland, familial renal disease of
Metoclopramide, dosage, as anfi-emetic, 181
198t-199t, 208
Microalbuminuria
Nonimmune glomerulonephritis, 223. See also
 as indication of glomerular damage, 42b
Glomerular disease.
laboratory evaluation of, 42-43
treafment of, 232-233
Microbiology. See also Urine culture.
Norfloxacin (Noroxin), 256
quantitative, in determining urinary tract
Norwegian Elkhound, familial renal disease of,
infection, 47-48, 250-251
198t-199t, 209
in differential diagnosis of urolithiasis, 288
NSAID-associated renal failure, 122-125
in vitro susceptibility pafterns,
diagnosis of, 124-125
to antibiotics, 257
pathophysiology of, 67, 67b, 122-124
for cats, 259t
prevention of, 125
for dogs, 258t
risk factors for, 124, 124b
Microorgarisms, in urinary sediment, 25-26, 25f,
suggested readings on, 142
250-251
 treatment of renal damage in, 125
Micturition disorders, 409, 409b
cmmon misconcepfions about, 430-431
Obstructive uropathy, and nephropathy, 341
diagnosis of
bilateral, 379-380, 381f
differential, 412, 413b
common misconcepfions about, 385-386
history in, 414
diagnosis of, 384
imaging in, 415
history and clinical signs in, 378-380
laboratory findings in, 415
etiologies of, 342
physical examination in, 414 415, 414b
frequently asked questions about, 386-389
signalment in, 413-414
future treatment of, 385
special sfudies in, 415-417, 415b
lower tract, 342-343
frequenfly asked questions about, 431-433
in cats, 342-343. See also Idiopathic urethritis;
suggested readings on, 433
Urethral plugs
treatment of, 429-430
 in dogs, 342-343. See also Cystic calculi;
in anafomic abnormalities, 423-427
Urethral calculi; Urolithiasis
fufure, 430
pathophysiology of, 378, 379f
in neurogenic causes, 427-429
suggested readings on, 389
in paradoxical (obstructive) incontinence, 427
summary tips on, 386
upper tract,378-380
summary tips on, 431
in cats. See Ureterolithiasis, in cats
vestibulovaginal stenosis in, in female dogs, 427
in dogs. See Renal calculi; Ureteral calculi
Midstream voided sample, 1
Occult blood, in urine, 14-15, 14b
Index
519
Omega-3 and omega-6 faffy acid supplementation,
Phosphorus restriction, in managing chronic
in chronic kidney disease, 179, 179b
kidney disease, 174-176, 174b, 175f
Ondansetron, dosage, as anfi-emetic, 181
 Photodynamic therapy, for canine transifional cell
Orbifloxacin (Orbax), 256
carcinoma, 458
Oriental short hair cat, familial renal disease of,
Physical examination, in clirical evaluation, 35
198t199t, 230
Piroxicam, 454, 454b455b
Ormetoprim-potenfiated sulfonamides, for urinary
Plasma clearance of isotopes, 40
tract infections, 256
 Plasma cortisol concentration, in chronic kidney
Oxalate calculi, 278
disease, 166
formation of, 279f
Polycystic kidney disease, familial trait, 198t-199t,
Oxalate crystalluria, 27, 28f
208f
Oxalate urolithiasis
in bull terrier, 205
medical treafment of, 294-298, 295f
in Cairn and West Highland white terriers, 205
pathophysiology of, 277-281
in Persiar cat, 209
prevention of
Polydipsia, 465
citrate administration in, 297-298
psychogenic, treatment of, 480
commercial diets in, 296-297
Polyuria, 465
dietary, 280-281, 294-296
Polyuria, and polydipsia
diuretic administration in, 298
cauises of, 468b, 469t-470t
risk factors for
diagnosis of disorders causing, 473f475f,
in cats, 277-278
483-484
dietary, 280-281
ADH response testing in, 479
in dogs, 277
adrenal uiltrasonography in, 466f 
signalment in, 285
cmmon misconceptions about, 484 485
urinary fract irfection and risk of, 281
differential, 468-472, 471t
Oxybutynin, for feline urethral obstruction, 359t
frequently asked questions about, 485-486
history in, 468-471
 Parathyroid hormone status, in chronic kidney
laboratory tests in, 472-480
disease, 163-166, 163b
renal medullary solute washout in, 480
Parietal epithelial cells, of glomerular capsule, 219
Suggested readings on, 486
Pelvic bladder, 418, 418f
summary tips on, 484
Penicillins, for urinary tract infections, 256
urine specific gravity in, 474, 474b
 Pentosan polysulfate sodium, for feline idiopathic
water deprivation testing in, 477, 477f, 478b
cystitis, 333t
pathophysiology of, 466-468
Percutaneous esophagostomy (PEG), in treatment
antidiuretic hormone in, 467
of chronic kidney disease, 182, 182b
hypothalamic lesions in, 466
Perineal reflex, 414
organ systems involved in, 466
 Perineal urethrostomy, for urethral obstruction in
psychogenic factors in, 466
male cats, 373, 373b
renal medullary hypertonicity decrease in,
Perinephric hematoma, 392f
467-468
 Perinephric pseudocyst, 490-493, 490b
treatment of disorders causing, 480-483, 480b
diagnosis of, 490-492
Posifive contrast cystography, 50-51
differential, 492
Positive confrast urethrography, 50
imaging in, 492, 492f
Posfrenal acute renal failure, 63, 65. See also
laboratory findings in, 491
Obstructive nephropathy /uropathy; Urinary
physical findings in, 491
tract trauma; Uroabdomen.
prognosis in, 493
calises and pathogenesis of, 65
surgical resection of, 492493, 492b, 493f
history and clinical signs of, 73
Persian cat, familial renal disease of, 198t-199t,
prognosis in, 87
209
Postrenal azotemia, 33t
Phenoxyberzamine
Prazosin
for feline idiopathic cystifis, 333t
for feline idiopathic cystitis, 333f
for feline urethral obstruction, 359t
for feline urethral obstruction, 359
Pheromones, for feline idiopathic cystifis, 333t
Prerenal acute renal failure, 64
Phosphorus binders, in freafment of chroric
causes and pathophysiology of, 64
kidney disease, 176, 176b, 177f
diagnosis of, 74-75
520
Index
Prerenal acute renal failure (Continned)
Recurrent urinary tract infections, 266-267
history and clinical signs of, 73
urine culfure scheduling in, 267t
physical examinafion in, 73
Red blood cells, in urinary sediment, 16-18, 17f
prognosis in, 87
Reflex dyssynergy, 428-429
Prerenal azotemia, 33t, 63
Rehydration fluids, in acute intrinsic renal failure,
80
incidence of, 417b
Relative supersafuration, 280
im male dogs, treatment of, 433
Renagel. See Sevelamer HCl.
refractory, treatment of
Renal adenocarcinoma, in cat, 436f
collagen injections in, 421, 421f, 421b
Renal adenoma, 434
surgical colposuspension in, 422, 422f
Renal biopsy, 55-57
treafrment of
in acute intrinsic renal failure, 77-78, 77b
 anticholinergics and phenylpropanolamine
complicafions of, 57
in, 420
techniques of, 55-57, 56f
estrogens and phenylpropanolamine in, 420
utility of, 55
estrogens in, 419,419b
Renal blood flow, during hemodynamic insult, 70f
 gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues
Renal calculi
in, 420-421
history in, 286
phenylpropanolamine in, 418, 419b
physical findings in, 287
urine leakage in, 418b
Renal carcinoma, 434436, 434b
 Primor. See Ormetoprim-potentiated
Renal clearance, 39
sulfonamides.
Renal cystadenocarcinoma, familial trait, in
PromAce. See Acepromazine.
German shepherd, 198t-199t, 207
 Propantheline, for feline urethral obstruction, 359t 
Renal disease, 32. See also Uropathy, and
Prostate gland, ultrasonography of, 54
nephropathy.
Protein restriction, in managing chronic kidney
acute, 63. See also Acute intrinsic renal failure;
disease, 172-174
Acute renal failure
Proteinuria
chronic, 145. See also Chronic kidney disease
dipstrip evaluation of, 12-13
familial, 197. See also Familial renal disease(s)
pathologic processes indicated by, 12b
glomerular, 218. See also Glomerular disease
Renal dysplasia, familial trait, 198t-199t
Prozac. See Fluoxetine.
in soff-coated Wheaten terrier, 211-212
Pseudocyst, perinephric, 490-493, 490b
suspected
diagnosis of, 490-492
in Alaskan malamute, 203
differential, 492
in chow, 206
imaging in, 492, 492f
in golden retriever, 207-208
laboratory findings in, 491
in Lhasa apso and Shih tzu, 208
physical findings in, 491
in miniafure Schnauzer, 208
prognosis in, 493
in Norwegian elkhound, 209
surgical resecfion of, 492-493, 492b, 493f
in standard poodle, 212
Pseudomonas, in recurrent urinary infections, 262
Renal epifhelial cell casts, in urinary sediment,
Psychogenic polydipsia, treatment of, 480
22-23, 23f
Purine metabolism, products of, 283f
Renal epifhelial cells, in urinary sediment, 20
Renal failure, 32. See also Acute intrinsic renal
Radiography, 49
failure; Chronic kidney disease.
Rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis, 131-134,
Renal function, laboratory evaluation of, 35-47
131b
bladder fumor anfigen test in, 43
clinical signs and history in, 133
BUN concenfration in, 36
diagnosis of, 134
cystatin C concentration in, 39
pathophysiology of, 131-133, 133f
fractional clearance of electrolytes in, 47
prognosis in, 134, 134b
glomerular filtration rate in, 35-39, 36t. See also
suggested readings on, 142
Glomerular filtration rate (GFR)
treatment of, 134
gradual water deprivation test in, 46-47
Recombinant human erythropoietin (rhEPO;
microalbuminuria in, 4243
Epogen), for chroric kidney disease, 182-183,
renal clearance in, 39
182b
serum creafinine concenfrafion in, 36-37
Index
521
Renal function, laboratory evaluafion (Continued)
Renal tubular acidosis (RTA), 493-496
serum phosphorus concenfrafion in, 41
distal (type I), 494
tubular function in, 44 47
treatment of, 494
urine protein in, 41-42
proximal (type I1), 495, 495b
water deprivation test in, 45-46
treatment of, 495, 495b
Renal glucosuria, familial trait, in Norwegian
type 4, 496
elkhound, 198t-199t, 209
Renal ultrasonography, 51-53
Renal hemafuria, idiopathic, in dogs, 487-490. See
color flow Doppler, 53
also Berign essential hemafuria.
infrarenal resistance to blood flow assessment
 Renal hemorrhage, treatment of, 403
in, 53
Renal hyperthyroidism, in cats, 501-503, 501b
medullary rim sign in, 53
diagnosis of,502-503
in monitoring renal allografts, 53
pathophysiology of, 501-502
utility of, 52
treatment of, 503, 503b
in ethylene glycol intoxication, 52-53, 100-101,
Renal ischemia
100f
causing acute infrinsic renal failure, 65-66
Renal-dose dopamine, 84
pathophysiology of, 66-73, 70f
 Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone syndrome, in
Renal length, and body weight, in adult dogs, 52t
chronic kidney disease, 166
Renal neoplasia, 434 438, 435f
Resistant bacterial urinary infections, treatment of,
adenomas in, 434
262-264
carcinomas in, 434-436
Resource checklist and client action plan, 315f-318f
clinical signs of, 435
 Retrograde urinary catheter placement, in male
nephroblastomas in, 436-437
cats,362-366,364f, 364b-365b
other types of, 437-438
Retrograde urohydropropulsion, for dislodging
treatment of, 438
urethral calculi, 289, 290f
ultrasonography of, 435, 435f
Rhabdomyosarcoma, 439, 439f
Renal pulpifaction, 393f
Roffweiler
Renal rupfure, treatment of, 404
familial renal disease of, 198t-199t, 209
Renal secondary hyperparathyroidism
 primary sphincter incompetence in, 417-427
development of, in chroric kidney disease,
163-166, 164f-165f
Samoyed, familial renal disease of, 198t-199t,
pathophysiology of, 148
210-211,230
Renal telangiectasia, familial trait, in Welsh corgi,
Sensipar. See Cinacalcet.
198t199t, 212
Serum amyloid A protein, 228-229
Renal transplantafion, in chroric kidney disease, 190
 Serum calcitriol concenfration, in chronic kidney
Renal trauma, 391, 392f
disease, 166
calises of,393
 Serum calcium concentration, in chronic kidney
 common misconceptions about, 406
disease, 161-162, 161b
diagnosis of, 406
Serum creatinine concenfration
history and clinical signs in, 394, 394b
in acute intrinsic renal failure, 76
physica1 findings in, 394-396, 395f-396f
in chronic kidney disease, 159
diagnosis of uroperitoneum in, 396-403
and glomerular filtrafion rate, 37-39, 38t
abdominocentesis in, 396-398
increased, in loss of renal mass, 37b
differenfial, 402b
laboratory evaluation, 36-37, 37b
imaging in, 398-400, 398f-400f
in uroperifoneum, 396-398, 397b, 400-402, 400b
methylene blue injection in, 398
 Serum phosphorus concentration
serum biochemistry in, 400-402
in acute intrinsic renal failure, 76
urethral catheter passage in, 396, 396b
in chronic kidney disease, 161
urinalysis in, 402
confrol of, in acute intrinsic renal failure, 81-82
frequenfly asked questions about, 407
laboratory evaluation of, 41, 41b
fufure freatment of, 406
 Serum potassium concentration
syndromes resulting from, 393-394
in acute intrinsic renal failure, 76
treatment of, 403-406
in chronic kidney disease, 159-161
stabilization before surgery in, 404 405
 Serum sodium concentration, in chronic kidney
summary tips about, 407
disease, 159
urine drainage from abdomen in, 405-406
Sevelamer HCl, as phosphorus binder, 177-178
522
Index
Shar pei, familial renal disease of, 198t-199t, 211, 230
Tricyclic antidepressants, for feline idiopathic
Shik tzu
cystifis,334
familial renal disease of, 198t-199t, 208
Trimethoprim-potentiated sulfonamides, for
urate urolithiasis in, 281-283
urinary tract infections, 256
Siamese cat, familial renal disease of, 198t-199t, 230
Tube cystostomy, for urethral obstruction in male
Silicate uurolithiasis, 284-285
cats, 375
signalment in, 285
Tubular backleak, 69f
treatment of, 301
Tubular dysfunction, familial trait,
Silicate uroliths, 275f
198t-199t
Simplicef. See Cefpodoxime.
in Basenji, 204
Single nephron glomerular filtrafion rate (SNGFR),
Tubular function, 44f
increased, 149-150, 149f
laboratory evaluation of, 44 47
 Sodium bicarbonate treatment, in chronic kidney
Tumors, urinary system, 434
disease, 180
bladder neoplasia in, 438 441
 Sodium chloride restriction, in chronic kidney
canine fransifional cell carcinoma in, 441-459
disease, 179-180
renal neoplasia in, 434 438
Soff-coated Wheaten terrier, familial renal disease
suggested readings on, 463
of, 198t199t, 211-212, 229
urethral neoplasia in, 459-460
Solutes, in urine, 272-274
Ultrasonography, 51-54
Specific gravity reagent pad reaction, 15
of bladder, 53-54
Spironolactone, for chronic kidney disease, 189-190
of prostate gland, 54
Squamous cell carcinoma, of renal pelvis, 437
renal, 51-53
Squamous epifhelial cells, in urinary sediment, 19
of ureters, 53
Standard poodle, familial renal disease of, 198t-
of urethra, 54
199t, 212
Upper motor neuron incontinence, 427-428
Struvite calculi, cystic, 276f
Upper urinary tract disease. See Renal disease.
Struvite crystalloid(s), 275
Urate calculi, 281, 281f
in urine specimen, 27, 29f
Urate crystalluria, 27, 30f
Struvite urolithiasis
Urate urolithiasis, 281-283
dietary treafment of, 293-294
medical treafment of, 298-300
medical treatment of, 292-294
allopurinol in, 298
pathophysiology of, 275-277, 276f, 276b
dietary therapy in, 299
signalment in,285
sodium bicarbonate in, 298-299
Subcapsular lymphosarcoma, in cat, 438f
signalment in,285
Sucralfate
Ureaplasma,in recurrent urinary
dosage, as gastroprotectant, 182
infections, 262
as phosphorus binder, 177
Uremia,32
Sulfonamides, confraindications to use of, 256, 256b
in chronic kidney disease, 148
Super nephron, 149f 
Ureter(s)
Systemic complicafions, and progression of chronic
calculi in. See also Ureterolithiasis
kidney disease, 153
history in, 286
Systemic hypertension, in chronic kidney disease,
physical findings in, 287
157-158
rupfure of, treatment of, 404
ulftrasonography of, 53
Terminology, used in clinical evaluation, 32, 33t
Ureterolithiasis, in cats, 380
Texas NAV dog, familial renal disease of, 198t-199t
imaging findings in, 385, 382f-383f
Thiazide diurefics, for hyposthenuric disorders, 483
treafment of, 380
Thiol disulfide exchange drugs (D-penicillamine,
 decision making regarding, 384
2-MPG), 300-301, 300f
Urethra
Thirst, 465
biopsy of, 57-58
Torbugesic. See Butorphanol.
infections of
Transitional cell papilloma, 437
in dogs, 240. See also Urinary tract
 Transitional epithelial cells, in urinary sediment,
infection
19-20, 20f
idiopathic, in cats, 342-343
Tribrissen. See Trimethoprim-potenfiated
neoplasms of, 459-460, 459f460f
sulfonamides.
rupfure of
Index
523
Urethra (Continued)
Urethral obstruction (Continued)
contrast radiography of, 401f
hyperkalemia management in, 356, 357b
treatment of, 404
hypocalcemia management in, 357
stricfure of, 348, 348f
pluig removal procedure for, 362
ultrasonography of, 54
sedation and analgesia in, 358, 359f
Urethral caleuli
stabilizafion of pafient in, 356
in cats, 347-348, 347f. See also Feline idiopathic
tube cystostomy in, 375
 cystiftis; Feline interstiftial cystitis
Urethral plugs, 343-347, 344f
in dogs, 272-305. See also Urolithiasis
composition of, 345, 345f
history in, 286
diagnosis of, 345, 346f
physical findings in, 287
differenfiafion of, from uroliths, 345
Urethral obstruction
frequency of obstruction by, 344t, 345b
in dogs, 240-271, 272-305, 376-377. See also
locafion of, 346f
Urinary tract infection; Urolithiasis
pathophysiology of, 346-347, 347b
treatment of, 377
Urethral pressure profile (UPP), 415-417, 416f-417f
in male cats, 343-375. See also Urethral calculi;
Urethritis
Urethral plugs
in dogs, 240. See also Urinary tract infection
alternatives to euthanasia for, 374-375, 374b
idiopathic, in cats,342-343
bladder overdistension in, 369
Urethrography, positive contrast, 50
caluses of, 343-348, 344t, 347b
Uric acid, metabolic derivafion of, 283, 283f
diagnosis of
Urinalysis, 1
contrast radiography in, 354
common misconcepfions about, 29-30
hyperkalemia and effects in, 350, 350b-351b
in diagnosis of acute intrinsic renal failure, 75-76
hypocalcemia and effects in, 352, 352b
in diagnosis of chronic kidney disease, 166
physical examinafion in, 350-351
and differenfiafion of acute and chronic renal
radiographic imaging in, 353-354, 353b
failure, 75-76, 75b
serum biochemistry in, 351-353, 351b
frequently asked questions about, 30-31
signalment and history in, 348-350, 348b
interpretation of, 9-29. See also Urine specimen
ultrasonography in, 354, 354b
chemical properfies in, 11-15
urethroscopy in, 354
physical properties in, 9-11
urinalysis in, 353
sediment in, 16-29
urine culture in, 353,353b
specimen data and observation in, 7
perineal urethrostomy in, 373, 373b
suggested readings on, 31
postobstructive diuresis in, 366-368
Urinary acidifiers, 260-261
 postprocedural intravenous fluid management
for struvite urolithiasis, 254
in, 366-367,367t, 367b
Urinary calculi. See also Urolithiasis.
 postprocedural medical management in, 368,
analysis of, 288
368b
nonsurgical retrieval of, for analysis or
postproceduural urine output in, 368-369, 369b
treafment, 289-291, 290f
prognosis for acute, 372
Urinary catheters, for male cats, 363f
prognosis for chronic, 372
Urinary incontinence, 409, 409b
recurrent, prevention of, 371-372
common misconcepfions about, 430-431
syndromes associated with,349,349f, 349b
diagnosis of, 429-430
treafment of, 354-375, 355f-356f
differenfial, 412, 413b
acidosis management in, 357
history in, 414
amitriptyline in,375
imaging in, 415
anesthesia protocols in, 360f, 361-362, 361b
laboratory findings in, 415
 antegrade urinary catheter placement in,
physical examination in, 414 415, 414b
366
signalment in, 413-414
complications affer, 369
special sfudies in, 415-417, 415b
decompressive cystocentesis in, 358-361
frequenfly asked questions about, 431-433
home care affter, 371
suggested readings on, 433
with hospitalizafion instead of
treatment of, 429-430
catheterization, 373-374
in anatomic abnormalities, 423-427
hydropulsion and urinary catheter
future, 430
placement for, 362-366, 364f, 364b-365b
in neurogenic etiology, 427-429
5241
Index
Urinary incontinence (Continued)
Urinary tract infection (Continned)
in paradoxical (obstructive) incontinence, 427
recurrent, 266-267
in primary sphincter incompetence, 417-427
reinfection and relaspse in, differentiation of, 32,
summary tips on, 431
33t, 47, 55
and vestibulovaginal stenosis, in female dogs,
resistant and urique pathogens in, treafment
427, 427b
of, 262-264
Urinary sediment, 16-29, 16b
risk for development of, 271, 245
casts in, 20-25
anatomic and functional, 246b
rystals in, 26-27, 27b, 28f29f
catheterization in, 247, 247b
epithelial cells in, 18f, 19-20, 20f
metabolic, 246b
formed elements in, 18f
treafment of, 254, 255b
microorganisms in, 25-26, 25f
alternative and supplemental, 260-261
red blood cells in, 16-18, 17f
antimicrobial agents and dosages in, 255-257,
white blood cells in, 18-19, 18f
255t
Urinary tract, clinical evaluation of, 32, 58
appropriate antimicrobial choice in, 255, 255b,
approach to, 33-34
257
bladder and urethral biopsy in, 57-58
dietary, 257
common misconceptions about, 58-59
outcomes in, 264-265
cystoscopy in, 54-55
prophylactic, 261-262, 261b
diagnostic imaging in, 49-54
sulccessful, 265, 265b
frequently asked questions about, 59-61
supportive, 260
fufure developments in, 58
unsiiccessful, considerations in, 265-268,
history in, 33-34
265b-266b
microbiology in, 47-48
uncomplicated, 254
physical examinafion in, 35
untreated, consequences of, 254
questions to be answered in, 32
Urinary tract trauma, 391
renal biopsy in, 55-57
calises of, 393
renal function findings in, 35-47. See also
 common misconceptions about, 406
Laboratory evaluation
diagnosis of, 406
suggested readings in, 61
diagnosis of uroperitoneum in, 396-403
Urinary tract infection, 240-241
abdominocentesis in, 396-398
asymptomatic, 240, 240b
differential, 402b
common misconceptions about, 269
imaging in, 398-400, 398f-400f
complicated, 254
methylene blue injection in, 398
diagnosis of
 serum biochemistry in, 400-402
hematology and serum biochemistry in, 249,
urethral catheter passage in, 396, 396b
249b
urinalysis in, 402
imaging in, 251, 53-54
frequentfly asked questions about, 407
summary tips in, 268-269
history and clirical signs of, 394, 394b
urinalysis in, 249-251, 249b
physical findings in, 394-396, 395f-396f
urine collection in, 48
syndromes resuilting from, 393-394
urine culture in, 4748, 250-251, 251f, 268
treatment of, 403-406
frequently asked questions about, 269-271
future, 406
gender differences in, 262
stabilization before surgery in,
history and clinical signs of, 248
404-405
host defenses against, 243-244, 244b
summary tips on, 407
incidence of, 240-241, 240b
urine drainage from abdomen
pathogenesis of, 241-248
in, 405-406
bacteria associated with, 241-243,
Urinafion
242b, 245f
evaluation for clinical history, 34
in cats, 242f
physiology of, 409-412
in dogs, 241f
 parasympathetic, 410f
common route of bacterial, 243b
somafic,412f
 resistant or unique microorganisms in,
sympathetic, 411f
262-263
Urine alkalinization, for cysteine urolithiasis
physical findings in, 248
therapy, 301
Index
525
Urine collection, 1-7
Urolithiasis (Continued)
catheterization in, 2-5
cystine, 283-284
cystocentesis in, 5-7
development of, theories of, 274-275, 275f
manual expression in, 2
diagnosis of, 302
midstream voided sample in, 1
hematology in, 288
for quantitative microbiology, 48
imaging in, 289
Urine culture
microbiology in, 288
in determining urinary tract infection, 47-48,
serum biochemistry in, 288
250-251
urinalysis in,287,287b
 in diagnosis of acute intrinsic renal failure, 76
frequently asked questions about, 303-304
in differenfial diagnosis of urolithiasis, 288
history in, 285-286
 scheduling, in recurrent urinary tract infections,
induction of, 274
267t
inhibition of, 274
urine collection for, 48
medical treatment of, 292
Urine osmolality (Uosm), and tubular function,
for cystine calculi, 300-301
44-45, 44f
for oxalate calculi, 294-298
Urine protein, laboratory evaluation of, 41-42, 42b
for silicate calculi, 301
Urine sediment, modified Wright stain of, 250
for struvite calculi, 292-294
Urine specific gravity (USG), 10-11, 10b
for urate calculi, 298-300
and tubular function, 44 45, 44f
oxalate, 277-281
variation in dogs, with time of day, 45b
physical findings in, 286-287
Urine specimen, 7
prognosis in, 302
appearance of, 10
selected readings on, 304
bilirubin in, 15
signalment of, 285
collection technique for microbiology, 48
silicate,284-285
color of, 9-10
struvite, 275-277
data form and expected results for normal cats
treafment of, 289-291
and dogs, 8
medical, 292
dip strip evaluation of, 11, 11b
slirgical, 291-292, 292b
glucose concentrafion in, 13-14, 13b
lrate, 281-283
ketone concentration in, 14
Uropathy, and nephropathy
leukocyte esterase reaction in, 15
canine cystitis and urethrifis in, 240. See aiso
miscellaneous elements and artifacts in, 27-29
Urinary tract infection
occult blood in, 14-15, 14b
canine obstructive, 272, 342-343.See also
odor of, 10
Urolithiasis
pH of, 12
feline non-obstructive, 306. See also Feline
protein concentration in, 12-13, 12b
idiopathic cystitis; Feline interstitial
sediment in, 16-29
cystitis
specific gravity of, 10-11, 10b
feline obstructive, 341. See also Urethral
specific gravity reagent pad reaction in, 15
obstruction; Urethral plugs
Urine telomerase test, 449
micturifion and urinary incontinence in, 409.
Uroendoscopy, 54-55
See also Micturition disorders; Urinary
Urohydropropulsion
incontinence
in male dog wifh urethral caleuli, 342f, 377
miscellaneous syndromes of, 487
retrograde, for dislodging urethral calculi, 289, 290f
polydipsia and polyuria as clinical signs of,
and urinary catheter placement, in feline
465-486. See also Polyuria, and polydipsia
urethral obstruction, 362-366
renal disease in, 32
voiding, of bladder stones, 290-291, 291f
acute, 63. See also Acute intrinsic renal failure;
Urolith(s), 272
Acute renal failure
crystalloid components of, 272, 273f
chronic, 145. See also Chronic kidney disease
lamellar paftern of, 273f
familial, 197. See also Familial renal disease(s)
locafion of, 272b
glomerular, 218. See also Glomerular disease
Urolithiasis, 272-275
after trauma,391.See also Renal trauma;Urinary
caleuli analysis in, 288
tract trauma; Uroperifoneum
common misconcepfions about, 302-303
fumors in, 434. See also Bladder neoplasia;
complicafions of, 302
Renal neoplasia; Urethral neoplasia
526
Index
Uroperitoneum, 393
Vomifting and inappetence, in chronic kidney
clirical cases of, in small arimals, 402
disease, 181-182
diagnosis of, 396-403, 406
treatment of
abdominocentesis in, 396-398
anfi-emetics in, 181
differential, 402b
 gastric acid suppression in, 181
imaging in, 398-400, 398f-400f
gastroprotectants in, 182
methylene blue injection in, 398
percutaneous esophagostomy in, 182, 182b
serum biochemistry in, 400-402
urethral catheter passage in, 396, 396b
Water deprivation test, 45-46
urinalysis in, 402
 contraindications to performance of, 45b
experimental, in dogs, data summary.
Water intake
402-403
increased, 466-468. See also Polyuria, and
frequently asked questions about, 407
polydipsia
treatment of, 403-406
normal, 34, 34b,465,465b
stabilization before surgery in, 404-405
Waxy casts, in urinary sediment, 24-25, 24f
summary tips about, 407
Welsh corgi, familial renal disease of, 198t-199t, 212
urine drainage from abdomen in, 405-406
West Highland white terrier, familial renal disease
of, 198t-199t, 205
Veloquinol. See Azodyl.
White blood cell casts, in urinary sediment, 22, 23f
Vestibulovaginal stenosis in, in female dogs, 427,
White blood cells, in urinary sediment, 18-19, 18f
427b
Wilms tumor, 436-437
Visceral epithelial cells, of glomerulus, 219
Yorkshire terrier, urate urolithiasis in, 281-283
Voiding urohydropropulsion, of bladder stones,
Zeniquin. See Marbofloxacin.
273f, 290-291, 291f
Zinc carnosine, dosage, as gastroprotectant, 182