CanineSports
Medicineand
Rehabilifation
Editedby
M. Christine Zink I Janet B. Van Dyke
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Canine Sports Medicine
and Rehabilitation
Edited by
M. Christine Zink, DVM, PhD, Dipl ACVP
Diplomate, American College of Veterinary Sports Medicine
and Rehabilitation
Janet B. Van Dyke, DVM
Diplomate, American College of Veterinary Sports Medicine
and Rehabilitation
WILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sonis, Iric., Publicatior1
This edition first published 2013 @ 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley & Sons, formed by the merger of Wiley's global Scientific, Technical and
Medical business with Blackwell Publishing.
Editorial offces:  2121 State Avenue, Ames, lowa 50014-8300, USA
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use of specific clients, is granted
ss aeedas e  q as adoud e pea uaaq aau ieue suzueo asu o ato v sa '
of payments has been arranged. The fee codes for users of the Transactional Reporting Service are ISBN-13:
978-0-8138-1216-8 /2013.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names and
owners. The publisher is not associated with any prod uct or vendor mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to
pinbai si aouersisse ladxa yauo io aape leuossajoid jI saaias euissajod Suapuai u paeua sou si lausqnd au
the services of a competent professional should be sought.
Library of CongressCataloging-in-Publication Data is awailable upon request
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be available in
electronic books.
Rychel; Dog in weaves image courtesy of Barry Rosen
Cover design by Meaden Creative
Disclaimer
The publisher and the author make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the
contents of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties, including without limitation warranties of fitness for a
contained herein may not be suitable for every situation. This work is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not
a competent professional person should be sought. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for damages arising
herefrom. The fact that an organization or Website is referred to in this work as a citation and/or a potential source of
further information does not mean that the author or the publisher endorses the information the organization or Website
may provide or recommendations it may make. Further,readers should be aware that Internet Websites listed in this work
may have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read.
12013
Contents
Contributors
vii
6 Manual Therapy
100
Foreword
X
Judy C. Coates, MEd, MSPT, CCRT
Preface
xii
Acknowled gments
xiii
7 Rehabilitation Physical Modalities
115
Krista Niebaum, MPT, CCRT
1 What Is a Canine Athlete?
1
M. Christine Zink, DVM, PhD, Dipl ACVP,
8 Therapeutic Exercise
132
Diplomate,American College ofVeterinary
Laurie McCauley, DVM, CCRT, CVA,
Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
CVC, and Janet B. Van Dyke, DVM,
Diplomate, American Colege of
2 Locomotion and Athletic Performance
19
Veterinary Sports Medicine and
M. Christine Zink, DVM, PhD, Dipl ACVP,
Rehabilitation, CCRT
Diplomate,American College ofVeterinary
Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
9 Aquatic Therapy
158
Jody Chiquoine, MSN, FNP, CCRT,
3 Musculoskeletal Structure and
Physiology
Laurie McCauley, DVM, CCRT, CVA,
32
CVC, and Janet B. Van Dyke, DVM,
Stuart Bliss, DVM, PhD, Dipl ACVS
Diplomate, American College of
Veterinary Sports Medicine and
4 The Role of Nutrition in Canine
Rehabilitation,CCRT
Performance and Rehabilitation
60
Joseph J. Wakshlag, DVM, PhD,
Dipl ACVN, Diplomate, American
10 Conditioning and Retraining the
College of Veterinary Sports Medicine
Canine Athlete
176
andRehabilitation
M Christine Zink, DVM, PhD,
Dipl ACVP, Diplomate,American
5 Introduction to Canine Rehabilitation
82
College of Veterinary Sports Medicine
Shari Sprague, MPT, CCRT
and Rehabilitation
Contents
11 Assistive Devices, Orthotics,
16 Diagnosis of and Treatment Options
Prosthetics, and Bandaging
201
for Disorders of the Spine
311
Haria Borghese, MS, MA, OTR/L,
H. Steven Steinberg, VMD, Dipl ACVIM
Lisa Fair,BS,CCRA,Martin Kaufmann,
(Neurology), CCRT, and Joan R. Coates, DVM,
C-Ped, BSBA,and Patrice M. Mich,
MS, Dipl ACVIM (Neurology)
DVM, MS, Dip! ABVP, Dipl ACVA
CCRT
17 Common Medical Disorders That
Can Affect Performance
338
12 Disorders of the Canine Forelimb:
H. Steven Steinberg, VMD, Dipl ACVIM
Veterinary Diagnosis and Treatment
223
(Neurology), CCRT
Sherman O. Canapp, Jr., DVM, MS,
Dipl ACVS, Diplomate, American College
18 Rehabilitation for Geriatric Patients
349
fVeterinary Sports Medicine and
Lisa Starr, DVM, CCRP, CVA, CVSMT
Rehabilitation,CCRT,andKristinKirkby,
DVM, MS,PhD,Dipl ACVS,CCRT
19 The Prevention and Management of
Pain in Dogs
370
13 Evaluation and Rehabilitation Options
Mark E. Epstein, DVM, Dipl ABVP (C/F),
for Orthopedic Disorders of the
Forelimb
250
Sasha A. Foster, MSPT, CCRT,
20 Imaging in Canine Sports Medicine
389
Judy C. Coates, MEd, MSPT, CCRT, and
Debra Canapp, DVM, Diplomate,
Jennifer Brown, DVM, Dipl ACVS
CCRT,and Kimberley Elizabeth Henneman,
American College of Veterinary Sports
DVM, FAAVA, DABT, CVA, CVC
Medicine and Rehabilitation, CCRT, CVA
 14 Disorders of the Pelvic Limb: Diagnosis
21 Emergency Medical Considerations
267
 in Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
402
and Treatment
Peter J. Lotsikas, DVM, Dipl ACVS,
Cynthia M. Otto, DVM, PhD,
Sherman O. Canapp, Jr., DVM, MS,
Dipl ACVECC,and Jennifer Brown,
Dipl ACVS, Diplomate, American College
DVM, Dipl ACVS, CCRT
ofVeterinary Sports Medicine and
Rehabilitation,CCRT,Jonathan Dyce,MA，
 22 The Role of Acupuncture in Canine
VetMB, MRCVS, DSAO, Dipl ACVS,
Rehabilitation
418
Kristin Kirkby, DVM, MS, PhD, Dipl ACVS,
Carolina Medina, DVM, CVA,
CCRT, Scott Christopher, VMD, CCRP, and
CVCH, CCRT
Patrick A. Ridge, BVSc, Cert VR,
Cert SAS, MRCVS
23 The Role of Physical Manipulation
(Chiropractic) in Canine Rehabilitation
427
15 Evaluation and Rehabilitation Options
Christine Jurek, DVM, CCRT, CVA, CVC
for Orthopedic Disorders of the
Pelvic Limb
296
Judy C. Coates, MEd, MSPT, CCRT
Index
447
Contributors
Stuart Bliss, DVM, PhD, Dipl ACVS
Jody Chiquoine, MSN, FNP, CCRT
Port City Veterinary Referral Hospital
CEO, Fitter Critters
Portsmouth, New Hampshire
Lee, Massachusetts 
Scott Christopher, VMD, CCRP
llaria Borghese, MS, MA, OTR/L
Thera-Paw, Inc.
Veterinary Orthopedic Sports Medicine Group
Lebanon, New Jersey
Annapolis Junction, Maryland
Joan R. Coates, DVM, MS, Dipl ACVIM
Jennifer Brown, DVM, Dipl ACVS, CCRT
(Neurology)
FEMA FL TF-2 US&R Team Veterinarian and K-9
Associate Professor of Neurology and
Search Specialist
Neurosurgery
K-9 Sports Vet
 Department of Small Animal Medicine and
Tampa, Florida
Surgery
Debra Canapp, DVM, Diplomate, American 
Missouri
College of Veterinary Sports Medicine and
 Columbia, Missouri
Rehabilitation, CCRT, CVA
Owner, Medical Director, Head Rehabilitation
Judy C. Coates, MEd, MSPT, CCRT
Therapist
Director of Rehabilitation
Veterinary Orthopedic and Sports Medicine
Coates Canine Physical Therapy
Group
Lebanon, New Hampshire
 Annapolis Junction, Maryland
Jonathan Dyce, MA, VetMB, MRCVS, DSAO,
Sherman O. Canapp, Jr., DVM, MS, Dipl ACVS,
Dipl ACVS
Diplomate, American College of Veterinary
Associate Professor
Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation, CCRT
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Chief of Staff
The Ohio State University
Veterinary Orthopedic and Sports Medicine
Columbus, Ohio
Group
Annapolis Junction, Maryland
/
vill  Contributors
Mark E. Epstein, DVM, Dipl ABVP (C/F), CVPP
Laurie McCauley, DVM, CCRT, CVA, CVC
 Senior Partner, Medical Director
Chief of Staff
Total Bond Veterinary Hospitals, PC
TOPS Veterinary Rehabilitation, Inc.
 Carolinas Animal Pain Management
Grayslake, Illinois
Gastonia and Charlotte, North Carolina
Carolina Medina, DVM, CVA, CVCH, CCRT
Lisa Fair, BS, CCRA
 Clinical Assistant Professor, Acupuncture and
 Director of Customer Service
Rehabilitation
DogLeggs, LLC
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Reston, Virginia
University of Florida
Rehabilitation Technician
Gainesville, Florida
VCA Veterinary Referral Associates
Gaithersburg, Maryland
Patrice M. Mich, DVM, MS, Dipl ABVP, Dipl
ACVA, CCRT
Sasha A. Foster, MSPT, CCRT
Affiliate Faculty
Clinical Director
Department of Clinical Sciences
Department of Rehabilitation
 Colorado State University
 Colorado State University Veterinary Teaching
Fort Collins, Colorado
Hospital
Owner and Medical Director
Fort Collins, Colorado
OrthoPets
 Denver, Colorado
Kimberley Elizabeth Henneman, DVM, FAAVA,
DABT, CVA, CVC
Krista Niebaum, MPT, CCRT
Owner
 Director of Rehabilitation Therapy
Animal Health Options
Scout's House Clinic
Park City, Utah
Menlo Park, California
Christine Jurek, DVM, CCRT, CVA, CVC
Cynthia M. Otto, DVM, PhD, Dipl ACVECC
Associate Veterinarian
Associate Professor of Critical Care
TOPS Veterinary Rehabilitation
 Director of Penn Vet Working Dog Center
Grayslake, Illinois
Department of Clinical Studies
School of Veterinary Medicine
Martin Kaufmann, C-Ped, BSBA
University of Pennsylvania
 Owner and Founder
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
OrthoPets
Denver, Colorado
Patrick A. Ridge, BVSc, Cert VR, Cert SAS,
MRCVS
Kristin Kirkby, DVM, MS, PhD, Dipl ACVS,
Founding Partmer and Surgeon
CCRT
Ridge Referrals
Staff Surgeon
Dawlish Water, South Devon
Seattle Veterinary Specialists
United Kingdom
Kirkland, Washington
Shari Sprague, MPT, CCRT
Peter J. Lotsikas, DVM, Dipl ACVS
 Director of Rehabilitation
 Crossroads Animal Referral & Emergency
 Coral Springs Animal Hospital
Frederick, Maryland
Coral Springs, Florida
Contributors
IX
Lisa Starr, DVM, CCRP, CVA, CVSMT
Joseph J. Wakshlag, DVM, PhD, Dipl ACVN,
Associate Veterinarian
 Diplomate, American College of Veterinary
TOPS Veterinary Rehabilitation
Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Grayslake, Illinois
Associate Professor of Clinical Nutrition
 Department of Clinical Sciences
H. Steven Steinberg, VMD, Dipl ACVIM
College of Veterinary Medicine
(Neurology), CCRT
Cornell University
Chief of Staff
Ithaca, New York
VCA Veterinary Referral Associates, Inc.
Gaithersburg, Maryland
M. Christine Zink, DVM, PhD, Dipl ACVP,
 Diplomate, American College of Veterinary
Janet B. Van Dyke, DVM, Diplomate, American
Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
College of Veterinary Sports Medicine and
President
Rehabilitation, CCRT
Canine Sports Productions
CEO and Founder
Ellicott City, Maryland
Canine Rehabilitation Institute
Wellington, Florida
Foreword
Sports-specific injuries often represent a unique
tion as charter diplomates in the American College
and complex clinical picture, and the diagnosis and 
 of Veterinary Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation.
 treatment of these conditions can be challenging. It
As editors of Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabili-
has been said that it is easier to repair a fracture
tation, Drs. Zink and Van Dyke have gathered
into anatomic position than to restore normal joint
together a stellar collection of veterinary health-
function once major soft-tissue structures 
are
care specialists, including surgeons, internists,
damaged. Like many advances in veterinary medi-
nutritionists, physical therapists, and rehabilitation
cine, the treatment of sports-related injuries and
specialists, to share their insight, experience, and
the application of scientifically based principles
Expertise in the care and treatment of the canine
of training and rehabilitation have evolved, in
athlete.Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
 part, from experiences in human athletes. However,
represents a state-of-the-art reference text, which
 modifications regarding the application, timing.
 not only provides a comprehensive review of the
duration, intensity, and specificity of these thera-
 diagnosis and treatment of sports-specific injuries,
peutic modalities and their adaptation to canine
but also discusses the practical application and
patients have been developed through the patience,
scientific rationale for a myriad of therapeutic
expertise, and dedication of a diverse and growing
modalities aimed at the management and reha-
 group of veterinary health-care professionals.
bilitation of the canine athlete. The importance of
 Drs. Christine Zink and Janet Van Dyke have
 integrating principles of medicine, surgery, and
been key figures in the evolution of veterinary
 physical therapy into a comprehensive approach to
sports medicine and rehabilitation, and their sig-
the treatment of the canine athlete is superbly illus-
nificant contributions to this developing specialty
 trated in the case examples that accompany each
have been recogmized by their peers in their selec-
 chapter. Thus, the text provides an important and
Foreword
XI
practical reference for students, practitioners, and
and their talented contributors for their dedication
all veterinary health-care professionals who treat
to the care and treatment of the canine athlete and
sports-related injuries.
for sharing their expertise in this superb text.
While this text focuses on the canine athlete, it
is important to remember that, just as in human
Steven Paul Arnoczky, Dipl ACVS
sports medicine, advances in the treatment of
Diplomate, American College of Veterinary
the canine athlete can also translate to improved
Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
health care in the general canine population. The
Wade O. Brinker Endowed Professor of
chapters addressing nutrition, pain management,
Veterinary Surgery
and rehabilitation of the geriatric patient are excel-
University Distinguished Faculty,
 lent examples of information that has broad appli-
Michigan State University
cation to all breeds.
 Director, Laboratory for Comparative
As noted by the editors, the specialty of canine
Orthopaedic Research
sports medicine and rehabilitation is constantly
Professor of Orthopaedic Surgery, College of
evolving, and I am confident that the information
Human Medicine
presented in Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilita-
Professor of Surgery, College of Osteopathic
tion will contribute significantly to the continued
Medicine
 growth of this discipline. I commend the editors
 Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI
Preface
For well over a decade, veterinarians, veterinary
The current veterinary approaches to common
technicians, physical therapists, occupational thera-
canine injuries and developmental disorders
pists, and physical therapist assistants interested in
 The current physical therapist's approach to
helping canine patients recover from injury, espe-
these injuries and impairments
cially those retuming to work or sport, have been
 Case examples in each chapter to better illus-
searching for the definitive textbook that could give
trate the concepts covered there.
them the information they need to better address
the myriad issues presented to them each day. In
This textbook provides basic science and in-
response, we gathered experts in the fields of veter-
troductory information regarding canine sports
 inary sports medicine and rehabilitation, asking
medicine and canine rehabilitation in the initial
each to provide their unique knowledge. Many of
two sections. Treatment options and rehabilitation
the contributing authors are among the founding
 approaches to canine injuries and disorders follow
diplomates of the American College of Veterinary
in the third section, with chapters alternating
Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation. Others bring
between impairments involving the forelimb,
years of experience working in the field of canine
 pelvic limb, and spine. The fourth section addresses
rehabilitation, witha focus on sporting and working
issues specific to sports medicine practice, includ-
dogs. We were overwhelmed by the willingness
 ing advanced imaging, emergency case manage-
of this highly motivated, but highly overworked
ment, and integrative medicine.
group to commit their knowledge and experiences
The evidence base available to us is incomplete,
 to paper. Their materials flowed in, broad in scope
but growing daily. We have compiled the evidence
 but deep in science and experience. It was a daunt-
currently available, adding those techniques that
ing task to compile this information and to trim it to
have proven successful in the hands of our highly
a size that was manageable in a single volume.
experienced authors. The editors and authors of
Our principal aim with this text is to provide
this textbook firmly believe that applying the cur-
residents, interns, veterinary students, practicing
rently available science, adapting techniques that
veterinarians, and physical therapy professionals
show promise in the field, and sharing our findings
with a resource for their daily practice as well as a
will help this field to grow to the level expected
basis for future research. This text addresses the
by our dog-owning clients, and deserved by our
 needs of this group by providing the following:
canine friends.
The basic science of exercise physiology, nutri-
M. Christine Zink
tion, and physical therapy concepts
Janet Van Dyke
xii
Acknowledgments
You would not be holding this book in your hands
Mary Ellen Goldberg provided expert technical
if it were not for the foresight of Erica Judisch
 and Nancy Turner, our editors at Wiley-Blackwell,
Most of all, we thank the 30 authors of this book,
who recognized the need for the information con-
each of whom agreed to share his or her knowl-
tained herein well before the formal organization
edge hard-earned through detailed reviews of the
 of the newest veterinary specialty college, the
current literature admixed with their own unique
American College of Veterinary Sports Medicine
experiences.
and Rehabilitation. Throughout the writing and
While they might not realize how grateful
production process they have been patient, con-
we are, we also thank all of the dogs that have
structive, accommodating, and most generous
taught the authors so much about canine sports
with their time.
medicine and rehabilitation throughout the years
We are grateful to Marcia Schlehr, a lifetime
 and that have posed interminably for photos and
student of canine structure and function, for her
videos.
 outstanding, anatomically correct illustrations.
 Finally, we give our personal thanks to Bruce
Thank you also to the graphic desigmers at Wiley.
Van Dyke, who is relieved to have his wife back,
who acquiesced to our desire for an easy-to-read,
and to Randy Armstrong, who made it possible
full color book and a cover that appropriately illus-
for Chris Zink to spend many more evenings at
trates the outcome of canine sports medicine and
the computer than would otherwise have been
rehabilitation: a healthy, active dog.
possible.
We are grateful to Samra Zelman for her excellent
help with manuscript review. Chris Bartizal and
MCZ and JVD
xii
What Is a Canine Athlete?
M. Christine Zink, DVM, PhD, Dipl ACVP, Diplomate, American
College of Veterinary Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Summary
Canine sports medicine and rehabilitation is the newest specialty in veterinary medicine. [t
encompasses and integrates a variety of fields, including orthopedics, exercise physiology,
conditioning, maintaining, and regaining fitness, is a critical partner to canine sports medicine.
Canine athletes include dogs that compete in performance events as varied as agility trials,
obedience trials, and disc dog competitions, as well as working dogs such as police/military
auipipaw spods auiueo palqesp aut loy saop aoueisisse pue 'ssop anosau pue yoieas saon
and rehabi litation professionals play a pi votal role in helping canine athletes and working dogs
recover after injury or illness. They work to prevent reinjury while moving the patient back to
a state of muscular ability, endurance, coordination, balance, and flexibility that allows them
to train and compete as well as or perhaps better than they did before. Understanding the
physical activities that are involved in the different performance events and the jobs that
injury or illness, and for retraining them to perform their specific duties. This is best accom-
plished by attending athletic/working dog training sessions and competitions.
Introduction to canine sports medicine
soldiers, detecting drugs and explosives, and
searching for lost humans.
Humans and dogs have been partmers for at least
With increases in disposable income and a
33,000 years (Galibert et al., 2011; Ovodov et al.,
change in attitudes toward work/life balance
2011). As working companions, dogs have assisted
beginning after World War II, there has been an
in hunting food, guarding family and property,
exponential growth in the number of sporting
moving and gathering livestock, patrolling with
events devised by people to challenge their
Carine Sports Medicire and Rehabilitation, First Edition. Edited by M. Christine Zink and Janet B. Van Dyke.
@2013 John Wiley &t Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
2  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Table 1.1   Fields that canine sports medicine encompasses
Table 1.2 Advantages of working with clients with canine
athletes and working dogs
Canine sports medicine fields of study
 Canine sports medicine and rehabilitation advantages
Anatomy and Biomechanics
Exercise Physiology
Opportunity to practice state-of-the-art
Sports Conditioning
rehabilitation medicine
Rehabilitation
Highly educated clients with significant financial
Orthopedics
and time investment in their dogs
Internal Medicine
High client compliance
Pulmonology
Work with healthier dogs
Cardiology
Higher success rate due to dogs' higher plane of
Neurology
fitness
Gerontology
 Measurable success returning dog to training and
Nutrition
competition
 Integrative Therapies
●
 Abundant research opportunities
abilities to train their dogs for competition. The
 Human athletes have entire teams of health pro-
field of canine sports medicine has grown tremen-
 fessionals who work on maintaining and regaining
dously in the last two decades, from its beginnings
their health and fimness. Canine sports medicine
and rehabilitation professionals likewise play a
racing Greyhounds or mushing dogs. Veterinari-
pivotal role in helping the owners and handlers of
ans now work with dogs that participate in dozens,
canine athletes and working dogs keep their dogs
if not hundreds, of different canine sports and
m athletic condition, prevent injury, and recover
working roles.
after injury or illness. They help move dogs back
 Canine sports medicine is the branch of medi-
to a state of muscular ability, endurance, coordina-
cine concerned with injuries sustained in canine
tion, balance, and flexibility that allows them to
athletic endeavor,
.including their
prevention,
 train and compete as well as or perhaps better than
diagmosis, and treatment. The field of canine sports
they did before.
medicine comprises many different aspects of vet-
 Clients with canine athletes and working dogs
 are generally highly compliant. Once given detailed
roles in canine care such as athletic training and
home exercise programs, clients will encourage
 conditioning (Table 1.1), and encourages sigmifi-
their dogs to perform those exercises diligently.
cant collaboration between individuals with differ-
 This is a key to success for the canine sports medi-
ent areas of expertise. In addition, canine sports
cine or rehabilitation professional, and brings sig-
medicine is intimately linked to canine rehabilita-
nificant job satisfaction, allowing the professional
tion, where veterinarians and physical therapists
to develop
relationships with clients that last
have an opportunity to work together to retum ill
through generations of dogs.
or injured canine athletes not only to health but to
Canine athletes and working (
dogs enter the
full function as athletes or working dogs.
rehabilitation program at a much healthier level
There are many advantages to veterinarians and
and a higher fitmess plane than most pet dogs. This
rehabilitation therapists working with canine ath-
 provides the canine sports medicine and rehabilita-
letes and working dogs (Table 1.2), as it involves
tion professional with the advantage and enjoy-
assisting clients who have invested a tremendous
 ment of working with health more than illness.
amount of time, emotion, effort, and money into
There is significant opportunity for research in
raising, training, and competing with their canine
the field
of
f canine sports medicine and rehabil-
parmers. These clients want the best care and the
itation. Opportunities abound for retrospective
best outcomes for their dogs, so there is significant
studies of outcomes as well as prospective studies
opportunity to practice state-of-the-art sports and
that formulate specific hypotheses and desigm test
rehabilitation medicine.
and control groups to address those hypotheses.
Chapter 1 What Is a Canine Athlete?  3
Owmers of canine athletes and working dogs are
Local competitions can easily be found by search-
committed to participating in studies that will help
ing the Internet. The sports medicine/rehabilita-
provide information that they can use to become
tion professional is strongly encouraged to attend
more efficient in training and more successful in
clients' training and practice sessions. Clients'
competition and that will result in more longevity
videos and photos of their dogs working or train-
in performance.
ing often capture evidence of potential tissue
As an example of the investments that clients
 stresses that can lead to injury.
have in their dogs, the annual cost to campaign a
The ability to communicate effectively with per-
show dog in conformation shows in 2010 was
formance and working dog clients cannot be over-
$80,000 for a dog that had a single Best in Show
emphasized. Often, these clients are as driven as
win and $500,000 for a dog that won more than 100
uonu Sop pue aipueu qoq 1eu os soop 1ra
Best in Show awards (Dugan & Dugan, 2011). This
igmnore a problem, working through it until it
included the costs of entries, travel to shows, exten-
becomes a major injury. This can result in critical
sive advertising of the dogs, and payments for pro-
downtime and even permanent loss of work or
fessional handlers. Many clients with competitive
performance ability. Clients with canine athletes
field trial dogs will spend $25,000-$50,000 per
and working dogs are looking for veterinary and
year if they have professional handlers train and
rehabilitation professionals who understand their
dogs' jobs and who can communicate with them
spend somewhat less than that because they do not
about that work.
 advertise, and they generally train and compete
with their own dogs. However, they do have sig-
nificant costs for lessons, entries, and traveling.
Types of canine performance and
working activities
$10,000-$20,000 per year on their chosen canine
sport (M.C. Zink, personal communication). This is
Canine sports and pleasure activities
concrete evidence of the significant temporal,
financial, and emotional investment on the part of
These can be divided into two categories: compan-
 people with canine athletes and working dogs. As
ion events and performance events. Companion
 a result, they are interested in finding the best pos-
    m n   s
sible care for their canine teammates. They look to
breeds as well) can participate. These are sports
events with rules devised by diverse organizations
sionals to help their dogs recover quickly and com-
and are usually meant to be inclusive—with events
pletely from injuries and to be able to once again
designed for the participation of as many dogs of
compete to their fullest potential.
different sizes and shapes as possible. Examples
To be most effective, canine sports medicine and
include the popular sport of agility, as well as obe-
rehabilitation professionals must become as famil-
dience, rally, and tracking.
iar as possible with the requirements for canine
 Performance everts are sports that are desigmed to
athletes' and working dogs' jobs. It is also impor-
recapitulate the original purposes of various breeds
tant that they are familiar with the training ter-
 or groups of breeds, and participation is often
 minology and techniques used with these dogs.
limited to those breeds. Examples of these sports
Training and practice methods can significantly
include herding competitions for breeds such as
contribute to the types of injuries that performance
Border Collies, Shetland Sheepdogs, and Austra-
and working dogs experience, sometimes more
lian Shepherds, and hunt tests for the retrievers,
than competition itself.
 setters, pointers, and spaniels.
In addition, understanding the functions of each
This chapter provides brief information on only
dog is critical to devising targeted rehabilitation for
a few of the most popular and most physical canine
sports/working dogs after injury or illness, and for
sporting events. However, Table 1.3 provides a
retraining them to perform their specific duties.
comprehensive list of popular companion and
This is best accomplished by attending athletic/
performance events with websites that provide a
working dog training sessions and competitions.
wealth of additional information.
Table 1.3 Canine sports websites
Sport
Brief description
Website(s) and description
 Companion events
Agility
A popular and fast-growing canine sport in which a
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dog_agility
handler directs a dog over an obstacle course, running
www.akc.org/events/agility
against time.
www.usdaa.com/
Obedience
A sport in which judges instruct handlers to have their
www.akc.org/events/obedience
dogs perform a number of exercises on command
including heeling, retrieving, jumping, etc. Dogs are
judged on the precision of their responses and teamwork
with their handlers.
Rally
A sport with components of both agility and obedience in
www.akc.org/events/rally/index.cfm
which the dog and handler complete a course that has
been designed by the rally judge. The dog and handler
proceed through a course of designated stations (1 0-20,
depending on the level), each of which has a sign
 providing instructions regarding a skill to be performed.
Conformation
 A competition in which purebred dogs are judged on
www.akc.org/index.cfm
their structure against a written description of the ideal
dog of that breed.
Tracking
A test in which a dog follows the scent of a person over a
www.akc.org/events/tracking
400- to 800-yard track aged from 1 to 5 hours.
AKC tracking regulations and listing of
tracking tests
Freestyle
A teamwork sport in which dogs and handlers perform a
www.canine-freestyle.org/
thematic routine, moving together to music.
www.worldcaninefreestyle.org/
 Flyball
A relay race in which dogs run over 4 small hurdles 10ft
www.flyball.org/
apart, retrieve a tennis ball that is ejected by pressing a
pedal on a box, then return over the hurdles.
Disc dog
A sport in which dogs retrieve flying discs while
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Disc_dog
 performing various movements, such as leaps and flips.
A game in which dogs compete by jumping for distance
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dock_jumping
' jo pog e oui yop e o niay jo
History and regulations of the sport
Weight pulling
A competition in which dogs pull a loaded sled across
www.iwpa.net
the ground for various distances.
Canine
 An urban sport in which dogs search rooms, a vehicle,
www.funnosework.com/
nosework
and an outdoor area for a specific scent. Dogs of all
 shapes and sizes can participate.
Performance events
Lure coursing
A sport in which sighthounds (Borzoi, Greyhounds,
www.k9web.com/dog-faqs/activities/
Whippets, etc.) chase three white plastic bags (to imitate
lurecoursing.html
rabbits) that are moved along the ground by a battery-
www.akc.org/events/lure_coursing/
operated string and pulley system.
www.asfa.org/
Chapter 1 What Is a Canine Athlete?
Table 1.3 (Continued)
Sport
Brief description
Website(s) and description
Greyhound
An ancient sport in which Greyhounds chase a lure on
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greyhound_racing
racing
an oval track. In many countries, Greyhound racing is
purely amateur and conducted for enjoyment. In the
United States, Australia, and some other countries,
Greyhound racing is part of pari-mutuel betting.
Herding
A competition in which herding breeds herd sheep.
www.usbcha.com/
cattle, or ducks over a specified course and move
 selected animals into a pen.
www.akc.org/events/herding/
Field trials/
Sports in which retrievers, setters, pointers, spaniels, and
www.akc.org/events/hunting_tests/retrievers
hunt tests
 Poodles retrieve upland game birds on land and in water
www.akc.org/events/hunting_tests/
pointing_breeds
www.akc.org/events/hunting_tests/spaniels
www.akc.org/events/field_trials/bea gles/
Earth dog tests
A test in which terriers and Dachshunds run through
members.tripod.com/-Jlerrier/Earthdog.html
underground tunnels to find a caged rat.
Coon dog tests
A competition that has many different facets, including
www.akccoonhounds.org/
bench shows, field trials, night hunts, and water races,
providing owners with the opportunity to demonstrate the
beauty and natural abilities of purebred coonhounds.
Fox hunting
An activity involving the tracking, chase, and sometimes
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fox_hunting
killing of a fox by trained Foxhounds or other scent
hounds, and a group of unarmed followers led by a
master of foxhounds, who follow the hounds on foot or
on horseback.
Schutzhund,
 Competitions that combine obedience, tracking, and
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Schutzhund
French ring
protection work.
History and current requirements of the
sport
jods
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_Ring_Sport
Mushing
An endurance competition in which dogs pull sleds (or
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dog_carting
woy Aien Aew ypm 'asinos paiads e iano (ssi puel
1 to 1150 miles.
Carting
A sport in which a dog pulls a cart filled with supplies,
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dog_carting
such as farm goods or firewood, and sometimes people.
Agility
the dog, but instead guides the dog by voice, move-
ment, and various body signals. This requires
Agility is an international sport in which handlers
exceptional training of the dog and coordination of
direct dogs over a course, desigmed by an agility
the handler. Dog-handler teams usually run out-
judge, consisting of 15-20 obstacles, including
doors on grass or indoors on artificial turf, dirt,
jumps (Figure 1.1), tunnels, weave poles, seesaws,
 or rubberized flooring. The handler can walk the
A-frames, dog walks, tables, and sometimes other
course ahead of time to determine strategies to
obstacles, in a race for both time and accuracy.
compensate for differences in his or her own
Dogs run of-leash and the handler carmot touch
running speed versus that of his or her dog, and
6 Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
AKC, the Canadian Kernel Club, the Kennel Club
(United Kingdom), the United States Dog Agility
Association, the Agility Association of Canada, the
United Kennel Club, the Fédération Cynologique
Internationale, North American Dog Agility
Council, Canine Performance Events, Teacup Dog
Agility Association, Australian Shepherd Club of
America, and Dogs on Course North America.
Since the sport of agility involves speed and
turning over jumps, agility dogs most commonly
suffer injuries to the shoulder, such as biceps and
supraspinatus tendinopathies and medial shoulder
syndrome, and to the hips and knees, such as ilio-
Figure 1.1 Border Collie jumping during agility
 psoas strain and cranial cruciate ligament (CCL)
competition.
insufficiency.
Obedience
AKCAgilityTrialStats2002-2011
 The sport of obedience started in the 1930s, arising
3000-
1,000,000
as an adaptation of the work of military dogs.
ofTrials
Entrie
Formal obedience competitions were originally
2500
designed to showcase a dog's ability to work with
humans and follow specific commands so that
Number
2000
500,000
Number
together they could go for a walk in a park, have
No.Entries
 good marmers in public, or take a pleasant ride
1500-
No. Trials
in the car. In 2011, there were 2573 AKC obedience
trials, with a total of 130,000 entries sponsored by
1000-
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
the AKC alone. Other organizations sponsor obedi-
Year
ence competitions nationally and intermationally.
Basic obedience skills include walking on the
Figure 1.2 The number of American Kennel Club agility
handler's left side and staying in place when the
trials and the total number of agility entries in those trials
handler turns or changes speed (Figure 1.3), sitting
has been increasing steadily in the last 10 years. This trend 
was unaffected by the economic downturn that occurred
 when stopped, coming when called, lying down
between 2008 and 2010.
 when asked, and staying in position in the pres-
ence of other dogs when the handler is about 50 ft
away. Higher levels of obedience competition
for the different physical and training strengths
 nclude retrieving a dumbbell or a glove when
and weaknesses of the handler and the dog. The
 directed, jumping various styles of jumps, select-
height that agility dogs are required to jump is
 ing a dumbbell with the handler's scent from a
determined by their height at the withers (a point 
 group of dumbbells scented by someone else, and
just cranial to the highest point of the scapula).
staying in place in the presence of other dogs when
Depending on the organization, dogs can compete
the handler is out of sight.
 in agility as early as 15 months of age, meaning that
Obedience dogs that are campaigned heavily in
they begin training much earlier.
the sport most commonly experience chronic strain
Agility is a rapidly growing spor, with over a
injuries to the shoulders, such as biceps tendinopa-
million entries in 2011 in events hosted by the
thy. This especially affects the left shoulder since
American Kennel Club (AKC) alone (an entry con-
more of the dog's weight is borne on the left shoul-
sists of one dog running one course; Figure 1.2).
 der when the dog is heeling with its head looking
There are at least 12 different organizations that
up and to the right toward the handler. Heeling is
host agility events intermationally, including the
 a major component of obedience at all levels.
Chapter 1 What Is a Canine Athlete?
Flyball
Flyball began as a sport in California in the late
1960s and early 1970s and quickly spread to become
 an international pastime. In this sport, teams of
four dogs race against each other from a start/
finish line, over a line of four jumps placed 10ft
apart, to a box that releases a ternis ball to be
caught when the dog presses a spring-loaded pad,
then back over the jumps to their handlers while
carrying the ball (Figure 1.4). Two teams run in a
heat against each other, with the winning team
jumps for all dogs is determined by the height at
the shoulder of the smallest dog on each team.
s   s an 
The world record speed for all four dogs perform-
ing a flyball run as of September 2011 was 14.690
seconds. Thus, each dog was averaging 18.6mph,
which included accelerating, turning 180 degrees
at the box while retrieving the ball, then accelerat-
ing again through to the finish line. This suggests
that the dogs are running at over 30mph when
Figure 1.3 Dog heeling during obedience competition.
they hit the box. In a typical tournament, dogs
Note the position of the dog's head as it watches the
might participate in 25-50 runs a day.
handler, ready to change directions when necessary, always
The injuries that flyball dogs typically experi-
staying in heel position at the handler's left side.
ence are related to chronic repetitive stress and
most often occur in the shoulder away from the
direction and the carpus and pelvic limb toward
B
Figure 1.4
1A. Dog heading over the row of jumps to the box. B. Dog leaving the box with the ball and heading back to the
jumps.
Photos by Steve Surfman.
8Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Table 1.4  Working dog activities
Category
Type of work
Search and
Wildland
rescue
Urban 
Cadaver
Avalanche
Detection
Drugs
Explosives
Food
Cancer
Figure 1.5 Golden Retriever returning to handler after
retrieving a duck during a hunt test.
Petroleum leaks
 Photo by Steve Surfman.
Mold
Insects (termites/bed bugs)
the direction in which the dog turns at the box.
Vapor wake (body-worn explosives)
Typical injuries include carpal desmitis, biceps ten-
Police, patrol,
Police and military patrols
dinopathy, medial shoulder syndrome, coxofemo-
protection
Police apprehension
ral arthritis, and iliopsoas strain.
Protection and security (secure
installations/public gatherings)
Field trials/hunt tests
Farm dogs
Herding sheep, cattle, ducks, chickens
Field trials and hunt tests require dogs to retrieve
Predator protection
upland game birds on land and sometimes water,
Geese police (golf courses)
simulating hunting situations where dogs find and
retrieve shot birds for hunters (Figure 1.5). Field
Service dogs
Dog guides for the blind
trials are competitive in that only the dogs placing
Hearing dogs
first through fourth are awarded points, and a
Mobility asstance dogs
certain number of points is required for a champi-
 onship title. Hunt tests use less complex hunting
General assistance dogs
scenarios and are graded as pass/fail. There are
Seizure/diabetes alert dogs
different rules and regulations for field trials and
 Psychiatric service dogs
hunt tests for the three different styles of hunting
Canine actors
Movies
dogs: retrievers, pointing dogs (pointers and
setters), and flushing dogs (spaniels).
Television
 Dogs that compete in field trials and hunt tests
 Print advertisements
are predisposed to injuries of the feet, carpus, and
shoulders, including sesamoiditis, carpal hyperex-
 tension/arthritis, and biceps tendinopathy.
dogs (Table 1.4). The work these dogs do is critical
for the security of national and local communities,
Working dogs
the safety of agriculture, and the health and safety
 of individuals with disabilities. Maintaining the
A vital aspect of canine sports medicine and reha-
health and full capabilities of these dogs can be a
bilitation is working with dogs that perform criti-
matter of life or death to their handlers.
cal functions for society, including police dogs,
When dealing with a working dog, it is impor-
detection dogs, search and rescue dogs, and service
 tant for the canine sports medicine or rehabilitation
Chapter 1 What Is a Canine Athlete?  9
 professional to ask the handler to describe the spe-
detailed anatomy of the bones, muscles, tendons,
cific activities his or her dog must perform as a part
ligaments, innervation, and vasculature of the
of its job, since the work that these dogs do varies
injured area can be obtained from textbooks (Miller
tremendously between jurisdictions. For example,
et al., 1979). Of equal importance to those working
while most police dogs are trained to be dual
with the canine athlete or working dog is an under-
purpose (patrol/apprehension as well as either
Sop lenpiaipui ue ym u sem a jo supus
drug or explosives detection), some dogs may
uses those structures to perform its particular job.
specialize in either apprehension or detection. The
It is also important to be conscious of other struc-
therapist should ask what type of equipment the
tures that might be affected as the dog compen-
dog wears. Some dogs may wear only a collar for
 sates for a primary injury.
their work, while others may wear specialized har-
This prospect is made much more complex by
nesses that might include additional weight from
the extreme variation in the structure of different
supplementary equipment. Many harnesses are
breeds of dogs. Canine sports medicine and reha-
designed with litle consideration of ergonomics
bilitation professionals can provide a significant
for the dog's body (Vanek, 2010).
service to their clients by helping them understand
Working dogs experience injuries and disorders
their individual dog's structural strengths and
that are related to either overuse (repetitive stress)
weaknesses for their chosen activities, how those
 or trauma because of the intense activities required 
structural components might comprise an advan-
for their jobs. They also can suffer from conditions
tage or disadvantage in the dog's activities, and
more commonly seen in the working dog breeds,
what can be done to mitigate the potential for inju-
such as gracilis myopathy, which is seen most often
ries. For example, a Corgi and a Toy Poodle have
in German Shepherd Dogs (Steiss, 2002).
to perform exactly the same obstacles on an agility
course—jumping the same height jumps, making
the same turns, all with the same maximum
Noncompetition athletes
allowed time—yet the Toy Poodle has a significant
biomechanical advantage over the Corgi simply
Thousands, if not millions of dogs in North America
because it weighs one fifth as much (Figure 1.6).
perform athletic activities that do not involve com-
This does not mean that Corgis cannot be success-
 petition. Dogs that run with their owners, romp
ful agility dogs—they are, in fact, very successful
freely on beaches or on hiking trails, or catch a
but it does mean that the client who plans to run
thrown ball or disc in the yard are all active and
Sop 1aq 1o siy ue pmous Aoe ui jio e
athletic and may, in fact, be doing more physical
 at peak fimess (particularly the core and pelvic
work than some competitive or working canine
limb muscles) and plan to train and compete
athletes. Many of them rest all week, and are
intelligently, with the dog's heavy-set structure
unprepared for the level of exercise they experi-
in mind.
ence on weekends, making them more susceptible
 to overuse injuries. These injuries often go unrec-
ognized and untreated for longer periods of time.
Itis easy to see that the majority of dogs can benefit
Overall body type
from the expert problem-solving abilities and
expert care of a canine sports medicine and reha-
One way to evaluate the stresses on the musculo-
bilitation professional.
skeletal system of a dog is to calculate a dog's
weight to height ratio using the following simple
formula of weight:height (W:H) ratio = body
Canine structure and its effects on
weight in pounds divided by height at the withers
canine performance
in inches. This is a useful determinant of the
amount of stress on a dog's body during rurming,
With each performance and working task come
jumping, and turning. For example, a typical male
specialized training and activities that create
Golden Retriever's W:H ratio is 70/24 = 2.9, while
unique physical demands on the canine body. The
a male Corgi's W:H ratio is 30/11 =2.7. This
10  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Figure 1.6 A Corgi (A) and a Toy Poodle (B) have very different body weights and structures, yet both breeds have the same
physical requirements in agility and obedience.
Photos by Steve Surfman.
suggests that, despite the obvious size differences
in these two breeds, their musculoskeletal systems
actually experience similar stresses. Clients with
dogs that have a W:H ratio above 2.5 should be
advised to train and compete only on surfaces that
are nonslip and highly compressible and to train at
full jump height only a percentage of the time to
reduce the effects of repetitive strain on the bones
and soft tissues.
The greater this distance
Pelvic limb structure
the more the rear anguletion
Different breeds of dogs and individuals within
those breeds can have substantial variation in the
structure of the pelvic limbs. The most obvious
Figure 1.7  Pelvic limb angulation can be assessed by
differences in the pelvic limb structure of dogs
positioning the dog with its tarsi perpendicular to the ground
are the angles at which the long bones meet one
then drawing a line perpendicular to the ground along the
another, a characteristic that is termed "rear an-
caudal aspect of the tarsi. The longer the distance is
between that line and the ischial tuberosity of the pelvis, the
gulation" by those who study canine structure
more pelvic limb angulation the dog has. Ilustration by
(Brown, 1986; Elliott, 2001). Rear angulation is
Marcia Schlehr.
best assessed by having the dog stand with the
metatarsals oriented perpendicular to the ground
amount of pelvic limb angulation. The longer
(Figure 1.7). The distance between a line drawn
that line is, the more rear angulation the dog has.
perpendicular to the ground along the caudal
Figure 1.8 shows two dogs of the same breed
aspect of the metatarsals and the ischial tuberosity
(Golden Retrievers) with substantially different
provides a rule-of-thumb approximation of the
rear angulation.
Chapter 1  What Is a Canine Athlete?  11
Figure 1.8 Two Golden Retrievers—one with abundant pelvic limb angulation (A) and one with minimal pelvic limb
angulation (B).
Figure 1.9 Dogs with abundant pelvic limb angulation tend to have less stability in the rear.
Illustration by Marcia Schlehr.
There are advantages and disadvantages to
lated pelvic limbs. For performance dogs, moder-
having abundant rear angulation. Dogs with a lot
 ate rear angulation is the best compromise.
of rear angulation are able to take longer strides
with the pelvic limbs, and thus expend less energy
moving from A to B because they take fewer steps.
Forelimb structure
More rear angulation is often associated with insta-
bility, however, since it can require tremendous
There are two different features to evaluate when
muscular strength and coordination to stabilize a
assessing the angulation of the canine forelimb:
very angulated rear (Figure 1.9). As a result, dogs 
the angle of the scapula from vertical and the
with straighter pelvic limbs tend to be more accu-
length of humerus (Brown, 1986; Elliott, 2001)
rate when placing their rear feet and tend to be able
Each of these components appears to be inher
to turn more sharply than dogs with very angu-
ited separately, and together they determine the
12  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Case Study 1.1  Carpal strain
Signalment: 4y.o. F/s (spayed at 6 months) Cerman
months, except when undergoing rehabilitation. The
Shepherd Dog that works as a search and rescue dog.
 patient was treated with laser therapy, acupuncture, joint
mobilizations, and therapeutic exercises twice a week
History: Dog was practicing on a rubble pile 10 days
for 4 weeks. Beginning 2 weeks after the initiation of
ago when she stumbled and became lame on the left
therapy, the dog was walked twice daily with gradually
 forelimb. The dog was significantly lame when getting
increasing distances and speeds. The client also per-
up from a rest, but the lameness became less severe over
formed proprioception training at home such as walking
the next minute or two if the dog kept moving. Owner
slowly forward and backward through a ladder placed
wanted the dog to be able to continue in search and
flat on the ground as well as on a slight gradation. The
rescue.
carpus was iced for 20 minutes after each rehabilitation
and exercise period. Six weeks after the initiation of
Clinical Findings: The patient was a large Cerman Shep-
therapy, the client began to walk the dog slowly over
herd Dog in excellent physical condition, at a correct
uneven surfaces, up and down low steps, and through
weight, and well muscled. The dog had the typical abun-
deep grass. During the next 4 weeks, the dog gradually
dant angulation that is seen in American-bred specimens
began to work on progressively more difficult rubble
 of this breed. The left carpus was enlarged, with pitting
piles that are used in training search and rescue dogs.
ederma present on the cranial aspect. Pain was elicited on
Five months after the injury, the dog was called up for a
palpation and flexion of the left carpus. Radiographs
search and rescue task and performed well. The client
showed no fractures but subcutaneous swelling in a loca-
chose to have the dog wear carpal wraps whenever it
tion consistent with the extensor tendons of the forelimb.
was training or working in the future.
Diagnosis: Left carpus-strain of the extensor carpi radi-
alis and the lateral and common digital extensor tendons.
are not uncommon in Cerman Shepherd Dogs. Under-
standing the unique structure of this breed helped the
Treatment: The patient was put on roort rest for the
decision-making process during rehabilitation and was a
initial 2 weeks of rehabilitation therapy and wore bilat-
significant cormponent of the client's decision to work the
eral carpal support wraps at all times for the next 6
dog in carpal wraps for the foreseeable future
efficiency with which the forelimb functions in the
athletic dog.
Angle of the scapula
To evaluate the angle of the scapula, the dog is
positioned with the radius and ulna perpendicular
to the ground and the head up with the nose point-
ing forward Figure 1.10. The forelimb is highly
mobile due to a lack of bony attachment to the
trunk; this positioning standardizes the location of
the forelimb relative to the spine for proper evalu-
ation of scapular angle. This is determined by mea-
suringtheanglebetween a line drawn perpendicular
to the ground through the greater tubercle of the
humerus and another line drawn from the greater
Figure 1.10 Shoulder angulation is determined by
tubercle of the humerus to the highest point of the
measuring the number of degrees from vertical at which the
scapula as in Figure 1.10. Ideally, this angle should
scapula lies. Ideally this should be 30 degrees.
be about 30 degrees (Elliott, 2001).
Illustration by Marcia Schlehr.
Chapter 1 What Is a Canine Athlete?
Figure 1.12 If a dog has a humerus of correct length, a line
from the most dorsal point of the scapula to the greater
tubercle of the humerus should be equal in length to a line
drawn from the greater tubercle of the humerus to the top of
Figure 1.11  Good shoulder angulation results in less
the olecranon process.
concussion when a dog is landing with the forelimb in
Illustration by Marcia Schlehr.
extension.
 In contrast to pelvic limb angulation, there are
of the radius and humerus. This line should
 no disadvantages to a dog having more angle of
intersect with the dog's topline in the area of
the scapula. Dogs with greater scapular angle are 
the withers. When a dog has a short humerus, this
able to take longer steps with each forelimb, thus 
line intersects further cranially along the neck
expending less energy going from A to B. In addi-
(Figure 1.13).
tion, they tend to have more muscle development,
Dogs with a humerus of the optimal length have
particularly of the supraspinatus and infraspinatus
less concussion, particularly on the elbow joint,
muscles, and less concussion on the shoulder joint 
pue sdasiq padopaaap-tram arow aaey ot pual pue
xa un q a m  m a
 triceps muscles. To the extent that both scapular
sion because the shoulder can better flex and
angle and humeral length deviate from ideal,
absorb the shock (Figure 1.11).
 forelimb function will be compromised. Two dogs
with contrasting forelimb structure can be seen in
Figure 1.14.
Length of humerus
Limb angulation is not a static feature of dogs;
A second structural variable of the canine forelimb
pue Amju ol asuodsan u aoueuo wen uonemoue
is the length of the humerus. Ideally, the humerus
 level of fimess. Dogs with injuries to the forelimb
should be long enough to place the dog's radius
or pelvic limb
generally tend to straighten the
and ulna well under the body when the dog is
limbs, letting the bones take over more of the func-
standing with the radius and ulna perpendicular
tion of supporting the limbs. In addition, dogs that
to the ground. If a dog's humerus is the optimal
are not optimally conditioned will have reduced
length, a line from the highest point of the scapula
 angles in the forelimbs and /or pelvic limbs because
to the greater tubercle of the humerus should be
they do not have the muscular strength to fully
equal in length to a line drawn from the greater
support the limb in the optimally angled position.
tubercle of the humerus to the olecranon process
 One way to monitor progress in rehabilitation after
(Figure 1.12). A simpler way of evaluating humeral
an injury is to observe the improvement in angula-
length is to draw a vertical line through the center
tion of the limbs when the dog is standing.
Appropriate
lengthhumerus
Shorthumeru
Figure 1.13 In a dog with an appropriate length humerus, a vertical line drawn through the radius and ulna intersects with
the dog's topline near the junction of the neck and back. In a dog with a short humerus, that line intersects with the topline
further cranially, along the neck.
Illustration by Marcia Schlehr.
Figure 1.14 Two dogs with contrasting humeral length: a Pointer with a short humerus (A) and a German Short-haired
Pointer with appropriate length of humerus (B).
Photos by Steve Surfman.
Chapter 1 What Is a Canine Athlete?
Case Study 1.2  Subclinical soft tissue shoulder injury
Signalment: 9y.o. F/S (spayed at 5 years of age) Golden
Treatment: Owner was advised to remove the patient
Retriever competing in agility, obedience, and hunt tests.
from sports competitions and keep it in a large pen or
room during the day. The owner walked the dog slowly
History: Patient had been competing in AKC agility at
for 20 minutes daily. Rehabilitation therapy, including
the excellent level approximately two to three weekends
laser, ultrasound, underwater treadmill work, and thera-
 per month over the previous year. The client noticed that 
peutic exercises, was instituted twice a week for 4 weeks,
when performing the weave poles, the dog was placing
then once a week for 4 weeks. The patient was then
two front feet on the ground between each pair of poles
gradually reintroduced to agility by working on short
instead of its usual one foot. The client requested a cormf-
sequences of low jumps with minimal turns, gradually
 plete examination to determine whether there were any
increasing the length of sequences, height of jumps, and 
orthopedic problems that might have resulted in this
tightness of tums over an 8-week period. weave poles
dange in performance.
were not added until 8 weeks after agility retraining had
been initiated. The dog was competing successfully in
 Qinical Findings: The patient was in excellent physical
agility 5 months after the diagnosis.
condition, at a correct weight, and generally well
muscled, though the semimembranosis/semitendinosis
muscles seemed bilaterally smaller than expected for a
dbg at that level of competition. Pain was elicited on
number of ways:
flexion of the right shoulder, on palpation of the teres
major muscles bilaterally, and on extension and internal
（1)
The presenting complaint frequently involves a
rtation of the pelvic limbs bilaterally. Radiographs
decline in performance of an obstacle or a reduction 
revealed no abnormalities of the limbs but moderate
in the yards per second at which the dog runs during
bridging osteophytes between L6-L7 and L7-51.
competition. Knowing the different techniques that
dogs use to perform the weave poles helped direct
Diagnosis:
the veterinarian toward a front limb injury.
Right supraspinatus tendinopathy
(2)
 Agility dogs frequently have subclinical abnormali-
Bilateral teres major strain
ties that do not present as overt lameness.
 Bilateral iliopsoas strain
Agility dogs frequently have more than  one
Lumbosacral spondylosis
abnormality.
The tail
Dewclaws
The tail provides a counterbalance for dogs when
Many dogs have their dewclaws removed at 3-5
they turn, either when rurning on land or swim-
days of age in the belief that dewclaws are
ming in water. It also helps raise the dog's rear
nonfunctional digits and out of concern that they
 during jumping, thus rotating the dog's front end
 might become injured in active dogs. Breeders who
downward after the apex of the dog's trajectory, so
compete in conformation often feel that the removal
that the dog will land on its front feet. Dogs use
 of these digits makes the legs appear straighter
whatever length of tail they have for a counterbal-
when viewed from the front.
ance. The shorter the tail is docked, the more acute
 The dewclaws appear to be nonfunctional when
the angle at which the tail is bent laterally
the dog is in a standing position because they
's p A a s o 
are not in contact with the ground. Examination of
such as Rottweilers and Australian Shepherds,
structures associated with the front dewclaws sug-
 angle their bodies sideways when turning, banking
gests otherwise, however. There are several tendons
 into turns like a racecar (Figure 1.15). The potential
attached to the front dewclaw indicating that dew-
long-term physical effects of this accommodation
claws do function in movement (Figure 1.16). That
 are not known.
fumction is likely to prevent torque on the leg. Each
16  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
B
Figure 1.15 Differences in the way that dogs without a tail (A) and with a tail (B) angle their bodies when turning.
Photos by SpotShots.
Extensor pollicis longus
et indicis proprius
Figure 1.17 when a dog's lead leg is on the ground during
the gallop or canter, the dewclaw is in contact with the
ground and acts to stabilize the carpus when the dog turns.
Flexor digitorum profundus,
tendon to 1st digit
time the foot lands on the ground, particularly
when the dog is cantering or galloping. the
dewclaw is in contact with the ground (Figure
1.17). When the dog turns, the dewclaw digs into
the ground to support the structures of the limb
and prevent torque. If the dog does not have dew-
claws, there is more potential for the carpal liga-
Figure 1.16 Anatomical diagram of the medial side of a
ments to stretch and tear. Over a lifetime, this can
dog's left forelimb demonstrating the tendons that attach to
the dewclaw. These tendons, with their associated muscles,
result in laxity and carpal arthritis. This is a
confirm that the dewclaw is a functioning digit.
common condition in field trial dogs that fre-
Illustration by Marcia Schlehr.
quently run over uneven ground and that have
Chapter 1 Wwhat Is a Canine Athlete? 17
their dewclaws removed as puppies. Note that
Difficulties in performance events
generally, the rear dewclaws do not have associ-
ated tendons and thus are nonfunctional, though
This can provide information about the specific
some breed standards require them to be present.
problem that the dog is experiencing that might
 not be obvious during a physical examination.
Dogs that knock bars when jumping, for example,
History-taking for the canine athlete
often have issues that involve the pelvic limbs.
Because of the variety of activities in which canine
athletes and working dogs participate, canine
Amount of exercise the patient experiences
sports medicine veterinarians and rehabilitation
in a typical week
professionals should query the client in detail
about specific aspects of the patient's training and
The client should be asked for specific details about
competition for all of the sports in which the patient
how much strength, endurance, proprioception,
participates. The following is additional informa-
flexibility, skill training, and competing the patient
tion that should be gathered when taking the
umdertakes during an average week. This gives the
history of a canine athlete.
canine sports medicine or rehabilitation profes-
sional an idea of the knowledge of the client about
exercise and the commitment of the client to the
Gonadectomy status
patient's success in athletics.
A number of orthopedic conditions have been
shown to be more common in gonadectomized
dogs, including osteosarcoma (Priester and McKay,
Diet and supplements
1980; Ru et al., 1998; Cooley et al., 2002), CCL insuf-
ficiency (Whitehair et al., 1993; Duval et al., 1999;
It is important to be sure that the patient is being
Slauterbeck et al., 2004; Duerr et al., 2007), hip dys-
provided with nutrients and supplements that are
plasia (Spain et al., 2004; van Hagen et al., 2005),
 appropriate for its physical tasks. This information
and patellar luxation (Vidoni et al., 2005). In addi-
also provides the canine sports medicine or reha-
tion, dogs that are gonadectomized before puberty
bilitation professional with information regarding
grow to be taller (Salmeri et al., 1991). This growth
the level of knowledge and commitment of the
can be disproportionate given that the growth
client, since developing a strong base of knowledge
regarding nutrition requires time and commitment
ing the prepubertally gonadectomized dog 
on the part of the client.
orthopedic injuries.
References
All athletic/working events in which the
dog participates
BROWN, C.M. 1986. Dog Locormotion and Gait Analysis.
Wheat Ridge, CO: Hoflin Publishing.
This provides information on the specific types of
COOLEY, D.M., BERANEK, B.C., SCHLITTLER, D.L.,
physical actions that the patient undertakes during
GLICKMAN, N.W., GLICKMAN, L.T., & WATERS
training, competition, and just for fun.
D.J. 2002. Endogenous gonadal hormone exposure
and bone sarcoma risk. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers
Prev, 11, 1434-1440.
Highest titles achieved in athletic events
DUERR, FM., DUNCAN, C.G., SAVICKY, R.S., PARK
R.D., EGGER, E.L., & PALMER, R.H. 2007.Risk factors
for excessive tibial plateau angle in large-breed dogs
This reveals how much training and competition
with cranial cruciate ligament disease. ∫ Ar Vet Med
the dog has experienced and provides information
Ass0c, 231, 1688-1691.
on the total amount of work the dog has performed
DUGAN, M. & DUGAN, C. 2011. Seven secrets of dog
at its age.
show success. Part 4. Have a lot of money or know
18   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
where to find it. Dogs in Review—DogCharnel.com,
effects on skeletal, physical, and behavioral develop-
August 201l.
ment. / A Vet Med Assoc, 198, 1193-1203.
DUVAL, JM., BUDSBERG, S.C., FLO, G.L., & SAM-
SLAUTERBECK, J.R., PANKRATZ, K.,XU,K.T.,
MARCO,J.L. 1999. Breed, sex, and body weight as risk
BOZEMAN, S.C., & HARDY, D.M. 2004. Canine ovar-
factors for rupture of the cranial cruciate ligament in
iohysterectomy and orchiectomy increases the preva-
young dogs. / Am Vet Med Assoc, 215, 811-814.
lence of ACL injury. Clin Orthop Retat Res, 429,
ELLIOTT, R.P. 2001. Dogsteps: A New Look. Irvine, CA:
301-305.
Doral Publishing.
SPAIN, C.V., SCARLETT, J.M., & HOUPT, K.A. 2004.
GALIBERT, F, QUIGNON, P, HITTE, C., & ANDRE,
Long-term risks and benefits of early-age gonadec-
C. 2011. Toward understanding dog evolutionary
tomy in dogs. / Am Vet Med Assoc, 224, 380-387.
and domestication history. C R Biol, 334, 190-
STEISS, J.E. 2002. Muscle disorders and rehabilitation in
196.
canine athletes. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract,
MILLER, M.E., CHRISTENSEN, G.C., & EVANS, H.E.
32, 267-285.
1979. Miller's Anatomy of the Dog. Philadelphia: W.B.
VAN HAGEN, M.A., DUCRO, B.J., VAN DEN BROEK,
Saunders.
J.,& KNOL, B.W. 2005. Incidence, risk factors, and
OVODOV, N.D., CROCKFORD, S.J., KUZMIN, Y.V.
heritability estimates of hind limb lameness caused by
HIGHAM, T.F, HODGINS, G.W., & VAN DER
hip dysplasia in a birth cohort of boxers. An / Vet Res,
ony Sop quadiu po-1e-0o0'e  'oz 'f 'LHId
66, 307-312.
the Altai Mountains of Siberia: evidence of the earliest
VANEK, J. 2010. The sled dog harmess. In: Duran, M.P.
domestication disrupted by the LastGlacial Maximum.
(ed.), 1Oth Biennial Meeting & Congress of the Interna-
PLoS ONE,6, e22821.
tional Sted Dog Veterinary Medical Association. Duluth,
PRIESTER, W.A. & MCKAY, F.W. 1980. The occurrence of
MN: ISDVMA, 16-22.
tumors in domestic animals. Natt Cancer Inst Monogr,
VIDONI, B., SOMMERFELD-STUR, 1.,& EISEN-
54, 1-210.
MENGER, E. 2005. Diagmostic and genetic aspects of
RU, G., TERRACINI, B., & GLICKMAN, L.T. 1998. Host
patellar luxation in small and miniature breed dogs in 
related risk factors for canine osteosarcoma. Vet §, 156,
Austria. Eur / Companion Anim Pract, 16, 149-158.
31-39.
WHITEHAIR, JG., VASSEUR, PB., & WILLITS, N.H.
SALMERI, K.R., BLOOMBERG, M.S.,SCRUGGS, S.L.,&
1993. Epidemiology of cranial cruciate ligament
SHILLE, V. 1991. Gonadectomy in immature dogs:
rupture in dogs. / Am Vet Med Assoc, 203, 1016-1019.
2
Locomotion and Athletic Performance
M. Christine Zink, DVM, PhD, Dipl ACVP, Diplomate, American
College of Veterinary Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Summary
It is critical to understand canine gait and in particular to recognize the differences in gait
between different breeds of dogs to be able to recognize subtle lamenesses, which are quite
common in canine athletes and working dogs. Structurally, dogs are quite different from
horses. Their flexible spine, 13 ribs (as compared with the 17 or 18 of horses), separate radius/
ulna and tibia/fibula, and feet that can grip mean that canine locomotion is quite different
from that of horses. Dogs use six basic gaits: walk, trot, transverse and rotary canter, and
transverse and rotary gallop. The walk and trot use the same order of footfall as the horse.
 However, whereas horses almost exclusively canter and gallop using the same lead legs in
the front and rear, dogs generally prefer to canter and gallop using the opposite lead legs in
leads in either the front or the rear to adapt to circumstances. There are a number of tools
that can be used to accurately analyze and quantify gait abnormalities, including high-speed
digital video cameras, electromyography, and kinematic and kinetic analysis systems.
Introduction
musculoskeletal anatomy of horses is very differ-
ent from that of dogs, and as a result, there are a
People have studied equine gaits much more in-
number of major differences in the ways that the
tensively than canine gaits. As a result, there is a
two species move. Dogs have a much more flexible
tendency for veterinarians and rehabilitation pro-
 spine than horses, parly due to the fact that they
fessionals to apply knowledge about equine gait to
have just 13 ribs as compared with the horse's 17
dogs. This is generally inadvisable because the 
 or 18, depending on breed. In addition, dogs have
@2013 John Wiley &t Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
6
20   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
a separate radius and ulna as well as tibia and
a simple point-and-shoot camera set on video
fibula, allowing them to rotate their limbs on their
mode, and watched in slow motion.
axes; they also have feet that grip.
There are four main gaits that both dogs and
Normal gaits
horses use: the walk, trot, canter, and gallop (Elliott,
 2001). Dogs and horses use the same movements
The walk
and order of footfall when walking and trotting, but
when cantering and galloping, the gaits that dogs
The walk is the slowest canine gait. The order of
use are substantially different from those of horses.
When evaluating a dog's gait, it is important to
footfall is as follows: left rear foot (LR), left fore
foot (LF), right rear foot (RR), right fore foot (RF),
keep in mind the original purpose for which the
 repeat. In other words, a pelvic limb always makes
dog was bred. For example, a racing Greyhound,
the first move, followed by the forelimb on the
with its arched lumbar spine, at the trot will look
same side. The dog places the rear foot down on
quite different from a Golden Retriever, which has
the ground in a spot just ahead of the location
a level topline. The arched spine of the Greyhound
where the front foot (which has now been lifted
allows the dog to reach far forward with the pelvic
and moved forward) had been located. The foot-
limbs when the spine is flexed, giving this breed a
prints of a walking dog appear as diagrammed in
much longer stride length at the gallop. However,
Figure 2.1. When a dog is walking, there are alter-
it also reduces the Greyhound's step length at a trot
because the more vertical slant of the pelvis pre-
vents full rearward extension of the pelvic limb
4
unless the spine is in full extension.
Different performance events require dogs to use
different gaits. Table 2.1 shows the gaits that dogs
most commonly use in various types of canine
athletic activities. It is critical for the veterinarian/
 rehabilitation professional to recognize how dogs
use their bodies when performing all of the normal
gaits so that they can recognize abnormalities, not
2
 just in the clinic but when viewing videos of dogs
 training or competing that will be sent to them by
clients. The value of viewing videos of clients' dogs
in gait such as a slight shortening of stride, not
visible to the naked eye, often can be captured with
Table 2.1
Gaits used by performance/working dogs
Event
1
2
E
4
Agility
Canter
101
Walk
Obedience
Trot
Canter
Walk
Amble
Rally
Walk
Trot
Canter
Hunting
Gallop
Canter
Trot
Tracking
Amble
Walk
Trot
A
Lure coursing
Gallop
Police dogs
Walk
Trot
Canter
Gallop
Figure 2.1 Footfall of a dog walking. A. Diagram of the
Detection dogs
Walk
Trot
footprints of a dog walking. B. Footprints in the sand left by
a walking Dingo. Each rear foot is moved forward and
Numbers 1 through 4 indicate the first through fourth most 
placed in a spot just ahead of where the front foot (which
common gaits used in each performance event.
has now lifted and moved forward) was.
Chapter 2 Locomotion and Athletic Performance  21
nately two feet then three feet on the ground. The
nal legs lifts off and before the other pair strikes
walk is the only gait in which there are moments
the ground (Elliott, 2001). This is true for most
during which there are three feet on the ground,
breeds, although breeds with extremely angulated
making this gait easy to identify (Figure 2.2).
rear legs, such as German Shepherd Dogs, may use
 a continuous support trot, in which one front leg
remains on the ground during the period when
The trot
other breeds would have a moment of suspension
(Lyon, 1968; Browm, 1986).
In the trot, the dog moves diagonal front and rear
When a dog is trotting, the pelvic limb that is
limbs (e.g., RF and LR, then LF and RR) forward,
 moving forward steps into the spot where the front
and they strike the ground at the same time. There
foot on the same side left the ground a moment
is a moment of suspension after each pair of diago-
before. This results in footprints as shown in Figure
2.3A. When viewing a trotting dog from the side,
the front foot should be seen lifting just before the
rear foot lands (Figure 2.3B).
The trot should be an efficient, ground-covering
gait. Viewed from the side, a dog that is trotting
efficiently will swing the forelimbs forward to
touch the ground at a point under the tip of the
dog's nose and kick the pelvic limbs back with full
extension of the coxofemoral joints (Figure 2.4).
When viewed from the front, the forelimbs and
 pelvic limbs should be straight and should con-
verge on a center point under the dog's body for
the best biomechanical efficiency (Figure 2.5). This
Figure 2.2 The walk is the only gait in which there are
 prevents the dog's weight from shifting from side
moments during which there are three feet on the ground.
to side, allowing the dog to use all of its muscular
Illustration by Marcia Schlehr.
energy to drive the body forward.
Figure 2.3 A. When a dog is trotting, the pelvic limb that is moving forward steps into the spot where the front limb on the
same side just left the ground a moment before. B. when viewed from the side, the front foot can be seen lifting just before
the rear foot lands.
Photo by Diane Larsen.
22   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Figure 2.4 This dog is moving efficiently at the trot,
swinging the front leg well forward and kicking the pelvic
limbs back.
Figure 2.6 Some breeds, particularly herding breeds, have
pelvic limbs with internally rotated tarsi, sometimes referred
to as being "cow hocked."
 Photo by George Brown.
tarsi are closer together than the feet, sometimes
referred to as "cow hocked" (Figure 2.6). This may
actually be an adaptation for herding; having this
type of rear conformation is thought to provide
 improved stability for lying down and standing up
and to reduce the rear leg motion required in
turning. Herding dogs frequently lie down to
A
B
reduce the pressure on moving sheep and have to
Figure 2.5 When viewed from the front or the rear, the
turn very sharply to cut off sheep that attempt
limbs should be straight and should converge on a center
to bolt from the flock.
point under the dog's body for the best biomechanical
The trot is the gait that is best used to detect
efficiency.This prevents the dog's weight from shifting from
lameness, because it is the only gait for which
side to side, allowing the dog to use all of its muscular
the forelimbs and pelvic limbs are never assisted
energy to drive the body forward.
 in bearing weight by the contralateral limb. Thus,
Illustration by Marcia Schlehr.
when a dog is experiencing pain or lack of sta-
bility in one limb, it is more clearly revealed by a
There are some breeds, however, that sacrifice
head nod (most obvious in forelimb lameness) or
efficiency at the trot to excel at other aspects of
asymmetrical motions of the pelvis (pelvic limb
performance. For example, many herding breeds,
lameness). In addition, the trot is a gait that is sym-
and most notably Border Collies, have pelvic limbs
 metrical and is slow enough for the experienced
with adducted and internally rotated tarsi and
human eye to observe stride length and foot
abducted/externally rotated paws such that the
placement.
Chapter 2  Locomotion and Athletic Performance 23
The canter
the left pelvic limb and the left forelimb. If the dog
were using the right legs as lead, the order of foot-
The canter is a somewhat complex gait, made more
fall would be LR, RR and LF, RF.
so by the fact that dogs use two different styles of
 Interestingly, dogs as well as wild canids much
canter, the transverse and the rotary canter. Dogs
more commonly use a rotary canter than a trans-
preferentially use the rotary canter whereas horses
verse canter. The order of footfall for the rotary
should always use the transverse canter.
canter is: RR, LR and LF (again the forelimb hits
The order of footfall for the transverse canter is
the ground just after the pelvic limb), RF (Figure
as follows: RR, LR and RF together (the forelimb
2.7B). In the rotary canter, the dog uses opposite
actually strikes the ground a little after the pelvic
leads in the rear (in this example, the left lead) and
limb), LF (Figure 2.7A). When cantering or gallop-
the front (in this example, the right lead). If the dog
ing, the second of the pair of front or rear legs to
were using the right lead in the rear and the lefft
strike the ground is called the lead leg. This is
lead in the front, the order of footfalls would be LR,
because the second leg strikes the ground in front
RR and RF, LF.
of the first. In the case of the transverse canter, the
The rotary canter gives the dog a rolling ap-
dog uses the same lead leg in both the front and
pearance, particularly when the dog is viewed
the rear—in the above example, the lead legs are
from the rear, as the two ipsilateral legs swing
laterally as they move forward together This
motion should not be mistaken for lameness. It
provides dogs with a distinct advantage in gaiting.
particularly when turning. When a dog is canter-
3
3
ing while tuming, regardless of whether it is using
a transverse or rotary canter, it uses the front
leg that is in the direction of the turn as lead.
In other words, if a dog is turning to the right, it
uses the right forelimb as lead. During the rotary
2
pue Aouaoa raeano wim umi ueo soop ra
accuracy. By using the front lead leg that is in
the direction of the turn, the dog is able to abduct
that forelimb and pull itself in the direction of the
turn. Because there is a point at which both rear
limbs are on the ground, by using the opposite
rear leg as lead, the dog effectively pushes itself
with both pelvic limbs in the direction of the turn
(Figure 2.8).
2
2
The gallop
At the gallop, the dog uses the power of its highly
muscular and flexible spine and abdomen produc-
ing two moments of suspension, each followed
alternately by the forelimbs or the pelvic limbs
A
striking the ground. Starting with the dog in the air
after the front limbs have left the ground, the dog
Figure 2.7 The Canter. A. Footprints of a dog using the
flexes the entire spine, bringing the pelvic limbs
transverse canter, in which the forelimb and the pelvic limb
forward under its body (Figure 2.9). They strike the
are both on the same lead (in this case the left)
B. Footprints of a dog using the more common rotary canter,
ground, one foot slightly ahead of the other. The
in which the dog uses a different lead in the rear (in this
dog then pushes off with the pelvic limbs and
case, the left) and the front.
extends the spine, reaching forward with the two
24   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
forelimbs. There is a moment of suspension as the
dog is driven through the air with its body in full
extension, then the front legs land on the ground,
one slightly ahead of the other. The dog then pulls
the front legs under the body and pushes off from
the ground, experiencing a period of suspension as
it again flexes the spine and brings the rear legs
forward to initiate the next stride.
As in the canter, the dog most often uses differ-
ent lead legs in the front and the rear when gallop-
ing. In contrast, horses use the same lead legs. The
pattern of footfall for the canine rotary gallop using
the RF leg as lead would be RR and LR, then LF
and RF (Figure 2.10).
The amble
When a dog is walking and begins to speed up
 gradually, the forelimb moves forward very soon
after the pelvic limb moves forward, and it starts
to appear as if both limbs on the same side of
the body are moving forward together. As long as
there are still moments, however brief, when there
are three feet on the ground, this gait is still con-
sidered a walk. This fast walk is referred to as an
amble. The amble is a normal, although not gener-
ally preferred gait. Dogs tend to use this gait when
they are tired but want to move quickly, to use a
Figure 2.8 A dog that is using the rotary canter can easily
abduct the right forelimb to pull itself in the direction to
different set of muscles from the trot, or when they
which it is turning, and also can push off in that direction
are not fit enough or are otherwise disinclined to
when both pelvic limbs are on the ground.
trot at a slow speed.
Figure 2.9 In the gallop, the dog uses the power of its highly muscular and flexible spine and abdomen, producing two
moments of suspension, each followed alternately by the forelimbs or the pelvic limbs striking the ground.
Illustration by Marcia Schlehr.
Chapter 2 Locomotion and Athletic Performance 2
25
5g
Figure 2.11 In the pace, both limbs on the same side of
the body move forward together until there are only two feet
on the ground, followed by a period of suspension.
Illustration by Marcia Schlehr.
Gait training/retraining
Itiscritical for canine sportsmedicine /rehabilitation
professionals to understand the normal canine
gaits so that they can recognize abnormalities of
gait. Many canine athletes are presented to the
Figure 2.10 The pattern of footfall for the rotary gallop. In
canine sports medicine/rehabilitation professional
this example, the dog is using the right lead in the front and
the left lead in the rear.
with very subtle alterations of gait—so subtle that
they may not be defined as lameness. An intimate
uderstanding of the complexities of canine gait
-oidde pue Ajuapi Sundlau u Aem Suol e oo uen
The pace
 Dogs first begin to think about putting their feet
 If the ambling dog gradually speeds up more, it
dowm in an ordered pattern at about 6 months of
might begin to pace. In the pace, both limbs on the
age, although they can improve their gaits and
same side of the body move forward together so
transitions between gaits at any age. Surprisingly.
that there are only two feet on the ground, fol-
the gait with which dogs most often struggle is the
 lowed by a period of suspension (Figure 2.11). The
one that seems the simplest to us—the trot. This is
 order of footfall is LR and LF, followed by a short
considered the preferred gait for most breeds and
 period of suspension, then RR and RF. The pace is
is the gait that wild canids such as wolves and
a very ungainly gait, with the center of gravity
foxes use for traveling long distances in an energy-
moving from side to side, requiring the dog to
efficient manner. Dogs that consistently amble or
waste effort centering the body, when it could use
pace in preference to trotting should first be thor-
that muscular effort to drive forward. Most dogs
oughly examined to rule out injuries that may
are not able to change speeds or turn very effec-
make it difficult for the dog to trot. This would
include most injuries that cause pain when bear-
 abnormal, particularly in performance/working
ing weight on one or more limbs. If physically
dogs. Dogs that routinely pace have either been
 sound, these patients should be trained how to trot 
     s   
properly so that they understand how to use this
leash at speeds that are in between ideal walk and
energy-conserving gait when appropriate. The trot
trot speeds, or they have a physical problem that
is the most effective gait for conditioning because
prevents them from feeling comfortable at a trot.
it forces the dog to bear all of its weight on only
26   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
one front and rear leg at a time, thus requiring the
dog to use the muscles on both sides of the body
equally. Dogs that have lost condition after surgery
 or a long period of lameness and rest benefit tre-
mendously from being retrained to trot.
Training or retraining a dog to trot is a simple
matter requiring minimal equipment. It does,
however, require regular, preferably daily, repeti-
tion over a period of several weeks to establish or
reestablish the neuronal pathways for this pattern
of movement (Zink, 2008). What we commonly
refer to as muscle memory is actually the effect of
gradual establishment of new connections between
neurons that results in a type of movement becom-
ing habitual, and is thus more accurately referred
to as neurological memory (Zehr, 2006). As a result,
it takes 4-6 weeks of daily, brief training sessions
to teach a young dog to trot consistently and 6-8
Figure 2.12 To train dogs to trot, lay poles parallel to each
weeks of daily sessions to retrain a dog to trot if it
other about as far apart as the dog's height at the most
 has been habitually pacing instead of trotting.
dorsal point of the scapula and have the dog trot over them,
 Interestingly, gait training has long been an es-
tarting 20ft away from the poles and continuing 20ft past.
tablished component of training for young horses,
whereas young canine athletes are generally left to
establish gait patterns on their own. With the
Have the owmer/handler move the dog in both
 increasing confinement and leash laws for dogs,
directions over the poles, working with the dog on
this frequently results in dogs that are urfamiliar
both its right and left sides. One training session
with even basic gait patterns.
consists of 12-15 passes. The dog should practice
 To train or retrain a dog to trot, place eight 5'-
on different surfaces and with a variety of distrac-
ed pmoa a uo sanod d ana-, I 'uo
tions. After 15-20 training sessions, the dog can
to each other approximately as far apart as the
begin to be weaned off the poles by having the
dog's height at the top of the scapula. The ends of
owner/handler move a pole from the middle to
the poles can be rested on empty soda cans that
the end, leaving a double-sized gap that requires
have been dented and laid on their sides or on any
the dog to cross by taking two strides.
other holder that will elevate them to a height of
After three to five training sessions, have the
 2-4" above the ground, depending on the size of
owner/handler move a second pole to the end,
the dog. The holders also keep the poles from
leaving another gap. Continue until there are
rolling out of place.
 double-length spaces between each pair of poles,
Have the owner/handler start with the dog on
at which time the poles can be randomly removed
leash about 20' from one end of the poles and move
every three to five training sessions until all are
at a moderate speed toward the poles with the arm
removed.
that is holding the leash outstretched so that the
Once the dog understands the basic trot, the
handler runs beside the poles while the dog trots
 same eight-pole exercise can be used as a condi-
over them as shown in Figure 2.12. Have the
tioning exercise for the forelimb, pelvic limb, and
handler continue about 20' past the poles so that
core musculature. Just have the owner/handler
the dog practices trotting over ground without
 increase the distance between the poles by 1" every
poles. The poles will force the dog to move in an
 One to two training sessions. Once the poles are at
efficient trot gait, picking its feet up and balancing
a distance that the dog finds difficult, have the
its center of gravity. The owner /handler should be
owner/handler reduce the inter-pole distance by
encouraged not to look at the dog so that the dog
1", then train for 7-10 days (12-15 passes/day),
will then look forward at the poles.
during which time the dog builds the musculature
Chapter 2 Locomotion and Athletic Performance  27
Case Study 2.1  Gait retraining
to be able to continue increasing the distance. Have
the owner/handler keep increasing the distance
between poles and reducing by 1" when necessary
Signalment: Buzz is a 4 y.o. Shetland Sheepdog that is
taining and competing in obedience and agility
until the dog cannot progress to a further distance.
In this author's experience, by this point, the dog's
History: Twice in the last 18 months, the dog has had
musculature will have been optimized, and its
 surgery to remove interdigital cysts, first between P4
ability to trot is completely second nature.
and P5 of the left forelimb, then between P3 and P4 on
the same foot. The pathology reports indicated that
both cysts consisted of granulomatous inflammation
Gait analysis tools
secondary to keratin and hairs that had been driven
through the interdigital epidermis. The owner men-
tioned that she is losing points in obedience competi-
tion because the dog is lagging during the heeling
the musculoskeletal system coordinated by the
exercise, especially when the owner is doing the
 nervous system. In the past, canine gait was evalu-
about tum and wondered whether it was related to
 ated subjectively. Such analysis was limited mainly
pain or discomfort in the left forefoot after the two
to the walk and the trot because of their slower
surgeries.
 speeds, and analysis was still limited due to the
inability of the human eye to follow rapid move-
Examination: Buzz is a large sheltie (18" at the withers;
ments. In the past 20 years, however, there has
breed standard indicates  maximum height  should
been a rapid expansion of technology-assisted gait
be 16" at the withers) and is moderately overweight,
analysis that has greatly improved our ability to
but otherwise, all body systems are normal. The surgi-
quantitatively define temporospatial gait charac-
cal sites are completely healed and other than small
teristics. Quantitative analysis of canine locomo-
scars, there is no evidence of the previous interdig
ital cysts. There is no evidence of lamreness or pain/
tion most commonly involves the measurement of
temporal characteristics, electromyographic sigmals,
discomfort on examination. However, when moved at
a trotting speed, the dog paces. when the owner moves
kinematics of limb segments, and /or kinetics of the
faster or pulls on the dog's collar to off-balance the
foot connecting with the floor/ground.
dbog. it trots for two to three strides then drifts back into
a pace.
Temporal characteristics of gait
Diagnosis: Gait abnormality—-pacing
Temporal analysis of gait is the simplest form of
Recommendation: The dog was put on a gait retraining
gait analysis. This includes assessment of average
 program, in which it was gaited daily through ground
velocities of the various gaits as well as time dura-
poles elevated approximately 3" off the ground and
placed parallel to each other approximately 18" apart.
tions for the two phases of gait for each leg: the
After 3 weeks of daily short training sessions, the dog
stance phase and the swing phase. The simplest
was weaned off the ground poles. Approximately a
temporal aspects of gait may be examined using
week after initiating the program, the dog stopped
inexpensive video cameras that provide frame
pacing while heeling in obedience, and its scores on
speeds of at least 30 frames per second. Experi-
heeling improved by 50%.
enced observers can identify dogs that have subtle
signs of lameness, such as minimal differences in
Comments: Many obedience dogs are inadvertently
trained to pace because their handlers start off walking
shorter stride lengths, in real time using this simple
slowly during training and gradually speed up. when
pacing, a dog's center of gravity shifts from side to side.
be quantified using ultra high-speed motion cam-
making the dog less able to adapt to the handler's gait
eras that produce videos that analyze the length
dianges. This also can put abnommal stress on the feet
 of the stance and swing phases in milliseconds
and might have been a contributor to the interdigita
 cysts that developed in this dog.
(Maes et al., 2008). An advantage of temporal analy-
sis is that these methods can be performed in
28   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
natural settings without encumbering the animal
tions, velocities, acceleration/deceleration, and
being studied.
angles of various anatomic structures in space.
Kinematic analysis can be performed in two dimen-
sions, which record data in the x and y axes normal
Electromyography
to the lens, or three dimensions, which include
data that are out-of-plane to the lens, thus pro-
Electromyography (EMG) is the study of electrical
viding rotational and circumduction data. Three-
impulses generated in active muscle. This is a
dimensional (3-D) data are proportionately more
useful method to determine which muscles are
accurate and more complex to obtain and analyze.
being used during different canine gaits, and is
These systems can be used to characterize normal
mainly a research tool. Electromyographic signals
 gait in dogs of various sizes and breeds, to analyze
may be unrelated to force, and electrical activity in
lameness of any cause, and to monitor response to
the muscle can be generated by passive stretches
surgical, medical, and rehabilitation therapy (Lee
as well as active contractions. A number of early
et al., 2007; Off & Matis, 2010).
studies have demonstrated the electromyographic
sn s sis  i 
patterns of dogs on a treadmill during the walk,
colored, retroreflective, or light-emitting diode
trot, and gallop (Tokuriki, 1973a, 1973b, 1974).
(LED) markers that identify specific anatomical
There have been surprisingly few EMG studies of
landmarks on the dog that are associated with the
canine locomotion in the last several decades,
limb or joint under study (Figure 2.13). The move-
perhaps due to difficulties in sampling techniques
ments of these markers when the dog is gaited are
and establishing controls. As technology advances,
followed by a series of cameras (minimum of three)
particularly with the use of telemetry, this gap in
that place the markers in space relative to a control
our knowledge is likely to be corrected.
3-D standard. The locations of the markers over
time are then used to create a 2- or 3-D model of
how the dog moves, with accurate calculations of
Kinematic analysis
bone and joint excursion.
An example of a 2-D kinematic measurement is
Kinematics is the science of the motion of objects,
shown in Figure 2.14, which shows carpal range of
and kinematic gait analysis quantifies the posi-
motion (ROM) during the trot (Gillette & Angle,
Figure 2.13 The typical kinematic analysis system uses colored, retroreflective, or light-emitting diode (LED) markers (A) that
identify specific anatomical landmarks on the dog that are associated with the limb or joint under study. Distances between
any pairs of markers and angles between groups of three markers (B) are calculated by computer.
Chapter 2 Locomotion and Athletic Performance  29
240
Joint X,2-DAngles
220-
200-
180
gree
160-
140
120-
D
100-
80-
60-
40+
Time (s)
Figure 2.14 2-D kinematic analysis of carpal range of motion during the trot.
Adapted from Gillette & Angle (2008).
150
Stance phase
Swing phase
15
Stance phase
Swing phase
140
10
20
130
ap
de
20
25
120
Ang
110
-30
0102030405060708090100
010 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90100
-30
010 20 30 40 50 60 70 8090100
Gait cycle (percent)
Gait cycle (percent)
Gait cycle (percent)
Figure 2.15
Kinematic report showing the angles of excursion of the hip joint in a trotting dog in the sagittal (flexion-
extension), transverse (internal-external rotation), and frontal (abduction-adduction) planes.
Adapted from Fu et af. (2010).
2008). In contrast, 3-D kinematic data generate
 number of techniques have been proposed to miti-
three graphs for every anatomical structure. For
gate or correct for skin movement in humans and
 example, the angles of excursion of the hip joint in
horses (van Weeren et al., 1992; Sha et al., 2004; Guo
a trotting dog are shown in the sagittal (flexion-
et al., 2005). It remains to be seen how these might
extension), transverse (internal-external rotation),
 apply to dogs with their more variable coat lengths
and frontal (abduction-adduction) planes as in
and textures.
Figure 2.15 (Fu et al., 2010).
A number of other kinematic systems are under
A major limitation of data from kinematic analy-
development, including radiostereometric analy-
sis systems is the tremendous breed variation in
sis, dynamic magnetic resonance imaging, dynamic
the structure of dogs, as well as variation between
computed
tomography,
individual dogs of the same breed, for example,
and electromagnetic motion tracking (Gillette &
 in the amount of angulation in the pelvic limbs
Angle, 2008). The next decade should provide the
(Bertram et al., 2000). This sigrificantly limits
canine sports medicine/rehabilitation professional
 comparisons between studies. In addition, there is
with many advanced tools for gait analysis.
some uncertainty as to whether healthy dogs truly
have right and left symmetry (Gillette & Zebas,
1999; Colborne et al., 2011). Further, there can be
Kinetic systems
 limitations with respect to the accurate placement
of markers, and the potential for skin movement
Kinetic systems measure forces in three dimen-
can add significant error to measurements.
:A
sions: vertical, craniocaudal, and mediolateral.
30   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Anterior/PosteriorForces
Lateral/MedialForces
225
Vertical Forces
())
200
175
150
125
100
75
60
hsS
25
Pre
25
Time (s)
Figure 2.16 Typical force plate report, showing the forces produced by the forelimb (first peak) and the pelvic limb (second
peak) in each of the three dimensions.
Adapted from Gillette & Angle (2008).
These systems generally are ground-based, with
and EMG simultaneously in one system (Ritter
the traditional system being force plates, which
et al., 2001; Gillette & Angle, 2008).
 measure forces by incorporating strain gauges as
All of the above quantitative gait analysis systems
the sensing elements or quartz crystals to generate
have the potential to provide substantial informa-
piezoelectric sigmals. A typical report from a force
 tion regarding most areas of locomotion research.
plate is seen in Figure 2.16, which shows the forces
However, for a number of reasons, only certain
produced by the forelimb (first peak) and the pelvic
aspects of these technologies can be harnessed by
limb (second peak) in each of the three dimensions.
the practicing veterinarian. Many of these systems
Force plate measurements have been the most
 are very expensive, in the hundreds of thousands of
dollars. In addition, they frequently have a signifi-
nary medicine to date (Voss et al., 2007).
cant learning curve, not only for the acquisition of
Recently, pressure mapping systems that are
data, but even more so for the analysis of data.
used to quantify human gait have been adapted for
Some systems require significant numbers of repeat
use in dogs (Light et al., 2010). When a dog moves
 enoeid jou si um oop as e uo samsea
 over a mat containing thousands of pressure
the clinical setting, and accurate analysis of the data
sensors, visual graphics of pressure distributions
 is often not possible in real time.
 of the paw appear on the computer screen. These
Nonetheless, a number of 2-D computer-assisted
systems quantify high and low pressure areas of
videographic gait analysis systems are finding
the paw, vertical forces involved in the stance
their way into specialty practices. These systems
phase, temporal aspects of gait such as velocity,
can be operated by technical staff and provide a
 and the lengths of the stance and swing phases of
videographic presentation of the dog's gait that
the stride, and calculate symmetries between limbs.
 can be understood by the educated owmer/handler.
 Limitations of kinetic systems include the poten-
New developments will continue to increase our
tial for habituation of dogs to the system, resulting
ability to quantify the kinematics and kinetics of
 in gait changes (Rumph et al., 1997), the need to
canine gait.
standardize the velocity of the subject and, as in
kinematic studies, the extreme variability in the
morphology of different breeds of dogs (Molsa
References
et al., 2010).
There are now systems that will analyze and
BERTRAM, J.E.A.,LEE, D.V.,CASE, H.N.,& TOD-
integrate methodologies using 3-D 
kinematic
HUNTER, R.J. 2000. Comparison of the trotting gaits
(motion) analysis (i.e., which includes analysis of
of Labrador Retrievers and Greyhounds. Am / Vet Res,
the third coordinate axis), kinetic (forces) analysis,
61, 832-838.
Chapter 2 Locomotion and Athletic Performance   31
BROWN, C.M. 1986. Dog Locomotion and Gait Analysis.
OFF, W. & MATIS, U. 2010.Excision arthroplasty of the
Wheat Ridge, CO: Hoflin Publishing.
hip joint in dogs and cats. Clinical, radiographic, and
COLBORNE, G.R., GOOD, L., COZENS, L.E., & KIRK,
L.S. 2011. Symmetry of hind limb mechanics in ortho-
gery, Veterinary Faculty of the Ludwig-Maximilians-
pedically normal trotting Labrador Retrievers. Am 
University of Munich, Germany. 1997. Vet Corrtp
Vet Res,72,336-344.
Orthop Traumatol, 23, 297-305.
ELLIOTT, R.P. 2001. Dogsteps: A New Look. Irvine, CA:
RITTER, D.A., NASSAR, PN., FIFE, M., & CARRIER,
Doral Publishing.
D.R. 2001. Epaxial muscle function in trotting dogs.
FU,Y-C.,TORRES,B.T.,& BUDSBERG,S.C.2010. Evalu-
Exp Biol,204,3053-3064.
ation of a three-dimensional kinematic model for
RUMPH, PF, STEISS, J, & MONTGOMERY, R.D.
canine gait analysis. Am / Vet Res, 71, 1118-1122.
1997. Effects of selection and habituation on vertical
GILLETTE, R.L.& ANGLE, T.C. 2008. Recent develop
ground reaction force in greyhounds. Arm ∫ Vet Res, 59,
ments in canine locomotor analysis: a review. Vet ∫,
375-378.
178, 165-176.
SHA, D.H., MULLINEAUX, D.R., & CLAYTON, H.M.
GILLETTE,R.L.& ZEBAS, C.J. 1999.A two-dimensional
 2004. Three-dimensional analysis of patterms of skin
displacement over the equine radius. Equine Vet J, 36,
Retrievers. ∫ Am Vet Med Assoc, 35, 515-520.
665-670.
GUO,Z., WANG, G., DING, H, & DING, H. 2005. Algo-
TOKURIKI, M. 1973a. Electromyographic and joint
rithm for recognizing marker in human motion detec-
mechanical studies in quadrupedal locomotion: I.
tion. J Biomed Eng,22, 312-315.
Walk. Jpn ∫ Vet Sci, 35, 433-436.
LEE, J.Y., KIM, G., KIM, J.-H., & CHOI, S.H. 2007. Kine
TOKURIKI, M. 1973b. Electromyographic and joint
matic gait analysis of the hind limb after tibial plateau
mechanical studies in quadrupedal locomotion: I1.
levelling osteotomy and cranial tibial wedge osteot-
Trot. fpr ∫ Vet Sci, 35,525-533.
omy in ten dogs. / Vet Med, 54, 579-584.
TOKURIKI, M. 1974. Electromyographic and joint
LIGHT, V.A., STEISS, J., MONTGOMERY, R.D.,RUMPH,
mechanical studies in quadrupedal locomotion: III.
PF, & WRIGHT, J.C. 2010. Temporal-spatial gait
Gallop. Ipn J Vet Sci, 36, 121-132.
analysis by use of a portable walkway system in
VAN WEEREN,PR.,SLOETVANOLDRUITENBORGH-
healthy Labrador Retrievers at a walk. Arm ∫ Vet Res,
OOSTERBAAN, M.M., & CLAYTON, H.M. 1992. Cor-
71, 9971002.
rection models for skin displacement in equine
LYON, M. 1968. The Dog in Action. New York: Howell
kinematic gait analysis. / Equine Sci, 12, 178-192.
Book House, Inc.
VOSS, K., IMHOL, J., KAESTNER, S., & MONTAVON,
MAES, L.D, HERBIN, M., HACKERT, R., BELS, V.L.,
PM. 2007. Force plate gait analysis at the walk and trot
& ABOURACHID, A. 2008. Steady locomotion in
du ia 'ssauauet quuy apea-sot yiim shop u
dogs: temporal and associated spatial coordination
Orthop Traumatol, 20, 299-304.
pattermns and the effect of speed. ∫ Exp Biol, 211,
ZEHR, E.P. 2006. Training-induced adaptive plasticity in
138149.
human somatosensory reflex pathways. / Appt Physiot,
MOLSA,S.H., HIELM-BJORKMAN, A.K., & LAITINEN-
101, 1783-1794.
VAPAAVUOIR, O.M. 2010. Force platform analysis in
ZINK, M.C. 2008. The Agility Adwwntage: Heatth and Fitress
clinically healthy Rottweilers: comparison with Labra-
for the Canine Athlete. South Hadley, MA: Clean Run
dor Retrievers. Vet Surg, 39, 701-707.
Productions.
Musculoskeletal Structure
and Physiology
Stuart Bliss, DVM, PhD, Dipl ACVS
Summary
The musculoskeletal system consists of a diverse set of specialized tissues that define overall
ate functional conditioning of the musculoskeletal system are essential for athletic perfor-
 mance. The response of musculoskeletal tissues to injury and disease, disuse, or conditioning
forms the basis upon which all athletic training and physical rehabilitation programs are
based. Effective sports medicine and rehabilitation practice depends on an understanding
 of musculoskeletal tissue structure, physiological adaptations to exercise, and maladaptive
responses to injury and disease. This chapter provides an overview of key concepts in mus
recovery from injury. The molecular and histologic structure, development, and functional
properties of bone, cartilage, synovium, tendon and ligament, and skeletal muscle are
reviewed. Basic mechanisms underlying injury and loss of function of musculoskeletal tissues
as well as healing responses will be outlined. Emphasis will be placed on structure-function
relationships and physiologic concepts that are relevant to the performance and rehabil itation
of the canine athlete.
Basic organization of musculoskeletal
mesenchymal cells distributed throughout a spe-
connective tissues
cialized extracellular matrix (ECM). Dense connec-
tive tissues consist predominantly of ECM and
With the exception of skeletal muscle, the tissues
contain relatively few cells. The ECM contains
that make up the musculoskeletal system are
an array of structural fibers made up of cross-
 generally classified as dense connective tissues.
linked fibrillar proteins, along with a hydrated
Connective tissues are composed of tissue-specific
 gelatinous interfibrillar matrix containing a variety
Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatiorn, First Edition. Edited by M. Christine Zink and Janet B. Van Dyke.
@2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
32
33
of nonfibrillar proteins, proteoglycans (PGs), gly-
independent activation of signaling receptors
coproteins, proteolipids, and polysaccharides. The
(Silver & Siperko, 2003; Bonewald, 2006). The
composition and molecular organization of the 
 response of a tissue to a mechanical stimulus may
ECM define the mechanical properties and func-
be either physiologic or pathologic, depending on
tionality of a given tissue. These properties vary
the state of the tissue and the nature of the stimu-
greatly among tissues, reflecting the diverse func-
 lus. Physiologic responses result in appropriate
tional roles to which different structures are
adaptive changes of the ECM that enhance a tis-
adapted.
sue's ability to meet the demands placed upon it.
 An example of adaptive remodeling is the hyper-
trophy and mitochondrial biogenesis that occurs
Cellular components of
within skeletal muscle in response to athletic
musculoskeletal tissues
conditioning.
Musculoskeletal tissues contain a variety of cell
Molecular components of
types. The tissue-specific cells within musculo-
extracellular matrix
skeletal structures are named in accordance with
the tissues they inhabit (tenocytes within tendon,
Collagen
chondrocytes within cartilage, etc.). The majority
of these are fully differentiated cells that are respon-
Collagen is the most abundant protein in the body,
sible for the synthesis and life-long turnover of the
and is a ubiquitous component of all connective
ECM that surrounds them. All connective tissues
tissues. All collagens are triple helical proteins
also contain small numbers of progenitor cells that
made up of three individual polypeptides called
represent variable stages of lineage commitment
alpha chains. Homotypic collagens are composed
from multipotent mesenchymal stem cells to tissue-
of three identical alpha chains. Heterotypic colla-
specific blasts forms (osteoblasts, tenoblasts, etc.).
gens are composed of various combinations of
Progenitor cells play important roles in repair,
alpha chains that differ in amino acid sequence. In
regeneration, and adaptive remodeling of connec-
mammals, there are 34 known alpha chain genes
tive tissues.
 and at least 28 distinct collagen types. Use of alter-
With the exception of articular chondrocytes,
native transcription start sites as well as alternative
musculoskeletal tissue cells are highly intercon-
 splicing of individual alpha chain transcripts
nected through adherens and gap junctions (Chi
results in a wide variety of collagen configurations
et al., 2005; Civitelli, 2008). These interconnections
with diverse structures and unique mechanical
are established during development and allow
properties (Hulmes, 2002).
dose intercellular communication. The broad con-
Collagens may be divided into several major
nectivity of the cellular network enhances the
 groups: the fibrillar collagens are of primary im-
ability of tissues to mount regional responses to
portance in the musculoskeletal system as they are
specific biological or mechanical stimuli (Ko &
the major structural components of connective
McCulloch, 2001; Wall & Banes, 2005). Connective
tissues such as tendon, ligament, cartilage, and
tissue cells are also highly responsive to mechani-
 bone. The major fibrillar collagens are types I, II,
cal stimuli. Mechanotransduction is the process by
and IIl. Type I collagen forms linear and exten-
which cells mount biological responses to mechan-
sively cross-linked macromolecular structures that
ical stimuli (Ramage et al., 2009). The mechanical
impart high tensile strength to tendons and liga-
stresses imposed upon musculoskeletal tissues are
 ments. It is also the most abundant collagen type
borne primarily by the ECM. The resulting strains
in bone. Type I collagen is the predominant col-
within the ECM may trigger cellular responses
lagen in hyaline cartilage. Within articular carti-
through a variety of mechanisms, including direct
 lage, type I collagen fibrils are cross-linked into
deformation of the plasma membrane and altera-
extensive three-dimensional (3-D) networks that
tion of transmembrane ion conductance, deflection
provide resistance to deformation in a multitude of
of the primary cilium, activation of cell-surface
directions. Other collagen groups include the fibril-
receptors by extracellular fluid shears, or ligand-
associated collagens with interrupted triple helices
34   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Tendon/Ligament
Fascicle
Fiber
Fibril
Microfibril
Figure 3.1 Schematic depiction of the hierarchical structure of collagen fibers in tendon and ligament
(FACIT collagens, types IX, XII, XIV, XVI, XIX, XX,
Within the ECM, fibrillar tropocollagen mole-
XXI, and XXII), filamentous collagens (type VI),
cules further assemble in a staggered fashion into
short-chain collagens (types VII and X), and base-
nascent fibrils. These fibrils are stabilized by inter-
 ment membrane collagens (types IV, VII, XV, and
molecular cross-links catalyzed by lysyl-oxidase
XVIII). Nonfibrillar collagens do not assemble
 enzymes. Numerous nonfibrilar collagens, other 
 into discrete fibrils; however, many associate with
 proteins, PGs, and proteolipids associate closely
fibrillar collagens and regulate fibril assembly.
with the surfaces of collagen fibrils and regulate
fibril   diameter, and  interfibrillar  interactions
 interfibrillar cohesion and interactions (Chapman,
(FACIT collagens) (Kadler et al., 1996; Zhang et al.,
1989). Groups of fibrils are further organized in
2005). Others contribute to the unique mechanical
hierarchical fashion into fascicles, which are them-
properties of specific tissues (filamentous and
 selves further bundled into fibers (Figure 3.1). Col-
basement membrane collagens).
lagen fibers are the basic macroscopic structural
 Biosynthesis of collagen involves transcription
units of many musculoskeletal structures such as
 and translation of the alpha chain gene, and pro-
tendons and ligaments.
 duction of a pre-pro-collagen peptide. During
translation, specific proline and lysine residues
Elastin
within this molecule are hydroxylated by ascorbic
acid- and iron-dependent prolyl and lysyl hy-
 Elastin is an important component of many mus-
droxylases. B
Hydroxylated pre-pro-alpha chains
culoskeletal tissues, including tendons, ligaments,
undergo intracellular  self-assembly
into triple
myofascial structures, joint capsule, and articular
helical procollagen. The globular amino- and
cartilage. Elastin provides tissues with elasticity,
carboxy-termini of the procollagen molecules are
which refers to the ability of a tissue to undergo
subsequently cleaved by various metalloprotein-
reversible deformation. The content of elastin within
ases resulting in the formation of tropocollagen.
musculoskeletal tissues varies greatly depending
Tropocollagen molecules are secreted from the cell
on the requirement for elasticity. Elastin is a minor
 component of bone where it occurs predominantly
structures according to specific tissue
 require-
with the walls of blood vessels; however, it is par-
ments. Extracellular tropocollagen molecules are
ticularly abundant within the ECM of structures
further stabilized by intermolecular cross-links as
that undergo repeated cycles of elongation and
well as noncovalent association with other ECM
elastic recoil such as joint capsules or the nuchal
components.
ligament.
Chapter 3 Musculoskeletal Structure and Physiology
5E
Elastin is a high molecular weight insoluble
by an organized coat of microfibrillar glycopro-
protein biopolymer made up of numerous tro-
teins rich in fibrillin.
poelastin subunits (Mithieux & Weiss, 2005).
Elastic fibers are highly extensible and can with-
Tropoelastin is a 65kDa hydrophobic protein.
stand up to 200% increases in length from the
Biosynthesis of elastin involves transcription and
resting state. Elastic fibers are also extremely
translation of a single tropoelastin gene. Tropo-
durable, and are capable of virtually unlimited
elastin is secreted from the cell as a complex with
numbers of cycles of elongation and elastic recoil
specific elastin-binding proteins. Within the ex-
without loss of strength (Keeley et al., 2002). Pro-
tracellular environment, tropoelastin undergoes
duction of elastin (elastogenesis) is prominent
 temperature-dependent  conformational  changes
during growth, as well as during the repair and
that expose hydrophobic residues within the mol-
remodeling phases of tissue healing. However,
 ecule that allow its incorporation into a developing
once formed, elastic fibers are extraordinarily
elastin macromolecule through hydrophobic inter-
stable and may persist throughout adulthood
actions (Indik et al., 1989; Vrhovski & Weiss, 1998).
without turnover.
This process is facilitated by many ECM compo-
 nents, most notably the glycoproteins fibrillin and
Proteoglycans
fibronectin. Following assembly, elastin polymers
are stabilized by covalent intermolecular cross-
Proteoglycans (PGs) are glycosylated proteins that
links, the formation of which is catalyzed by
are prominent components of the ECM of all con-
various copper-dependent lysyl oxidases. Groups
nective tissues. The basic structure of a PG consists
of elastin polymers are further assembled in hier-
of a core protein to which a variable number of
archical fashion into higher order fibers that consist
glycosaminoglycan (GAG) side chains are cova-
of a central core of cross-linked elastin surrounded
lently attached (Figure 3.2). Core proteins vary
Aggrecan
Chondroitin sulfate
Keratansulfate
Coreprotein
Linkprotein
Hyaluronicacidbackbone
Figure 3.2 Aggrecan structure. Multiple proteoglycan monomers are bound by specific link proteins to a backbone of
hyaluronic acid to form macromolecular aggregating proteoglycans.
36   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Table 3.1  Chemical composition of major glycosaminoglycans
Glycosaminoglycan 
Hexose/hexuronic acid
Hexosamine
Chondroitin sulfate
(2-sulfo-) Glucuronic acid
(4/6-sulfo-) N-acetyl-glucosamine
 Dermatan sulfate
Glucuronic acid, or (2-sulfo-) iduronic acid
(4/6-sulfo-) N-acetyl-glucosamine
Heparan sulfate
Glucuronic acid, or (2-sulfo-) iduronic acid
(6-sulfo-) N-acetyl-glucosamine, or (6-sulfo-)
N-sulfo-glucosamine
Keratan sulfate
(6-sulfo-) Galactose
(6-sulfo-) N-acetyl-glucosamine
Hyaluronic acid
Glucuronic acid
N-acetyl-glucosamine
greatly in length and amino acid sequence. The
associate with fibrillar elements of the ECM such
GAG side chains are long, linear polysaccharide
as collagen and elastin and have many functions,
polymers composed of repeating disaccharide
including modulation of the assembly and interac
units. The disaccharide units are composed of two
tion of collagen and elastin fibers, modulation of
6-carbon sugars, the first of which is either a hexose 
ion transport through the ECM, and regulation of
or a hexuronic acid, and the second of which is an
growth factor effects on connective tissue cells
amino sugar (hexosamine) (Table 3.1). The sugars
(Schaefer & Iozzo, 2008).
within most GAGs are sulfated, which renders the
PG synthesis involves transcription and transla-
 polysaccharide chains highly negatively charged.
tion of a core protein, GAG conjugation of the
GAGs are covalently linked to serine residues
 protein, and secretion of mature PG into the extra-
within a core protein. Hyaluronic acid (HA), a
cellular environment. In comparison to the fibrillar
ubiquitous component of ECMs throughout the
components of the ECM, PGs undergo rapid turn-
body, is unique within the family of GAGs since
over. Existing PGs are degraded by a variety of
it is neither sulfated nor covalently linked to
proteases and polysaccharidases. In tum, PG bio-
proteins.
symthesis is a highly regulated anabolic process
 Several classes of PGs are recognized, the most
that can be triggered by exposure of cells to a
thoroughly characterized of which are the intersti-
variety of biological mediators as well as some
tial PGs. This class includes the aggregating PGs
pharmacological agents. The ability to alter the
 and the small leucine-rich PGs (SLRPs) (Harding-
types and concentrations of PGs within the ECM
ham & Fosang, 1992). The aggregating PGs include
 in response to specific stimuli allows resident cells
aggrecan, versican, brevican, and neurocan. These
to adjust many properties of the ECM in accor-
 PG species are massive macromolecular complexes
dance with tissue demand. PG turnover thus
in which many individual PG molecules are assem-
represents
an important mechanism of tissue
bled in a brush-like array along a backbone of HA
adaptation, and targeted stimulation of PG pro-
(Figure 3.2). Dueto their extremelynegative charge,
 duction in vivo is an area of great clinical therapeu-
aggregating PGs have a high affinity for water.
tic interest.
 Aggregating PGs are immobilized within a given
tissue through association with collagen fibrils.
-m a sanam uoepu go aaap u rau
Musculoskeletal ontogeny
gidity and resistance to compression of several
musculoskeletal tissues such as hyaline articular
 Regeneration is the reestablishment of the original
cartilage, meniscal fibrocartilage, and the nucleus
form and function of a tissue after injury or loss.
pulposus of the intervertebral disk.
Within the musculoskeletal system, bone and
The SLRPs are a structurally diverse group of
muscle are capable of regeneration, while the
PGs with variable degrees of GAG conjugation and
healing of tendon, ligament, and cartilage results
thiat are expressed in tissue-specific patterns. SLRPs
 in mechanically inferior tissues. Currently, there is
5/
great interest in clinical strategies, including reha-
bilitative programs, designed to promote or accel-
erate regenerative healing (Ambrosio et al., 2010).
LPM
Tissue regeneration often involves a close recapitu-
lation of developmental morphogenesis; thus, an
understanding of basic developmental processes
is relevant to physical rehabilitation. A thorough
NO
review of musculoskeletal development is beyond
DM
the scope of this chapter; however, several key con-
cepts are outlined as they relate to rehabilitation,
 especially of the canine athlete.
B
The mammalian musculoskeletal system derives
predominantly from mesoderm. During develop-
tion, as cells of the deep surface of the epiblast
delaminate from the ectodermal portion of the
primitive streak to populate the mesenchyme
between the ectodermai and endodermal germ
DT
layers. During neurulation, these cells organize
along the lateral aspects of the developing neural
tube to form the paraxial mesoderm. Secretion of
morphogens by cells of the neural tube and adja-
M
cent ectoderm triggers segmentation of the par-
axial mesoderm into somites. The ventromedial
aspect of the somite forms the sclerotome, from
which vertebrae and ribs derive. The dorsolateral
aspect of the somite forms the dermomyotome,
which further organizes into superficial dermoto-
mal and deep myotomal components. The cells of
the myotome undergo myoblastic differentiation
and give rise to the axial musculature. The lateral
aspect of the paraxial mesoderm develops into the
 lateral plate mesoderm, which divides into super-
Figure 3.3 Schematic cross-sectional depiction of
ficial somatic and deep splanchnic layers (Figure
embryologic origins of musculoskeletal structure.
3.3). The limbs originate as focal thickenings of
A. Segmentation of paraxial mesoderm adjacent to the
neural tube (N) and notochord (NC) leads to the formation
the somatic lateral plate mesoderm (limb buds).
 The early limb bud is populated by myoblastic
of somites (S) and lateral plate mesoderm (LPM). B. Each
somite segregates into a ventromedial sclerotome (SC) and a
cells that migrate into the lateral plate mesoderm
dorsolateral dermomyotome (DM). C. The dermomyotome
from the somitic myotomes, and that ultimately
separates into a corsolateral dermatome (red) and a
 give rise to the appendicular musculature. Out-
ventromedial myotome (blue). Appendicular musculoskeletal
 growths of cells of the neural tube enter the limb
structures derive from mesodermal precursors that migrate
bud in conjunction with myoblasts to innervate
into the limb bud (LB) from the ventrolateral dermomyotome
developing limb structures. Outward growth and
and lateral plate mesoderm (arrows). Axial musculoskeletal
structures derive from the sclerotome. Dermatome (DT).
patterning of the limb is guided by gradients of
Myotome (MT).
 signaling molecules produced by the surrounding
ectoderm.
Myoblastic differentiation within the myotome
 is the earliest musculoskeletal fate specification to
occur during development. Muscle development is
triggered by the activation of a myogenic transcrip-
38Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
tional program that culminates in the expression of
(Archer et al.,z
2003). Separation of the articular
a core set of myogenic factors, including myogenic
surfaces and development of a fully mobile symo-
factor 5 (MYF5), muscle-specific regulatory factor-4
vial joint requires continuous mobilization of the
(MRF-4), myoblast determination protein (MYOD),
nascent joint by contraction of associated develop-
and myogenin (Pownall et al., 2002). The timing
 ing musculature, as well as distention of the joint
and sequence of expression of these myogenic
cavity with HA. The HA within the interzone is
factors varies with anatomical site during develop-
initially secreted by cells of the articular surfaces
ment. Contractile myofibers first appear in the
and later by the developing synovium. Mechanical
limbs at approximately mid-gestation, prior to
strain of joint tissues stimulates production of HA
limb innervation. These primary fibers persist as
through upregulation of some isoforms of HA syn-
type I (slow-twitch or oxidative) fibers in the adult.
thase, an effect that persists through adulthood
Secondary myofibers develop later concomitant
(Itano & Kimata, 2002; Momberger et al., 2005).
with the establishment of limb innervation and
Tendon and ligament primordia arise as conden-
become type I (fast-twitch or glycolytic) fibers.
sations of mesenchymal cells that initially reside
Muscle contractility is robust throughout the latter
immediately subjacent to the basal lamina of
half of gestation, and the mechanical forces pro-
the developing dermis (Benjamin & Ralphs, 1995).
duced by developing muscle are essential to the
These cells initially organize into parallel longitu-
appropriate development of all other musculoskel-
 dinal rows and subsequently become separated as
etal structures.
they elaborate collagen-rich ECM. During differen-
With the exception of the craniofacial skeleton
tiation, they develop long cytoplasmic processes
that is largely of neural crest origin, bones originate
by which cell-to-cell contact is maintained despite
as condensations of mesenchymal cells that ini-
deposition of large quantities of intercellular ECM.
tially differentiate into chondrocytes to form a car-
The bony prominences that form attachment sites
tilaginous model of the developing skeleton. As the
for tendons and ligaments are defined during
chondrocytes undergo interstitial growth, hypoxia
formation of the cartilaginous anlage of a bone;
develops within the central region of the avascular
however, full maturation of both the bony tuberosi-
Audonady srainn st rosmoard snoulere
ties at which tendons and ligaments insert, as well
of chondrocytes, and stimulates production 
of
as their enthesial architecture, is dependent upon
angiogenic growth factors and vascular invasion
of the cartilage model. Vascularization marks the
muscles. In the proximal portion of the limbs, con-
onset of endochondral ossification as the cartilage
nections with bone are established during the early
 model becomes populated with osteoprogenitors
stages of tendon differentiation. In contrast, distal
 and as chondroid matrix is resorbed and replaced
tendons initially lack connection with bone but
with osteoid. Endochondral ossification continues
establish insertions later in development through
throughout postnatal growth, primarily within the
fusion with enthesial outgrowths of a target bone.
physes of the long bones. This process of develop-
During development, all musculoskeletal tissues
mental endochondral ossification is recapitulated
 are populated with small but significant numbers
with remarkable fidelity during indirect fracture
of undifferentiated progenitor cells or mesenchy-
healing (see below).
mal stem cells (Figure 3.4). These cells include
The initial mesenchymal condensation that pre-
osteoblasts of bone, satellite cells of skeletal muscle,
 cedes appendicular bone formation is initially con-
and stem cells of tendon, ligament, and cartilage.
tinuous along the length of the elongating limb
Mesenchymal stem cells are multipotent, capable
bud. As chondrogenic differentiation occurs, this
 of undergoing osteogenic, chondrogenic, adipo-
 mesenchymal column undergoes a process of seg-
 genic, or neurogenic differentiation in response to
mentation marked by the appearance of discrete
 appropriate signals. They also are capable of self-
interzones that mark the sites of future diarthrodial
renewal through asymmetric cell division. They
joints. Apoptosis of cells within the interzone leads
are activated by injury or conditioning stimuli, and
to the formation of a fluid-filled joint space, a
 play important roles in the healing and functional
process termed cavitation (Khan et al.,2007). Wnt14
adaptation of tissues (Wu et al., 2007; Fan et al.,
is a key morphogen expressed at these interzones
2009; Tapp et al., 2009; Lim et al., 2010; Reich et al.,
Chapter 3 Musculoskeletal Structure and Physiology
55
Stress
Failure point(u)
Yieldpoint
Physiologicalrange
Toeregion
→Strain
Figure 3.5  Idealized stress-strain curve highlighting key
mechanical parameters of musculoskeletal tissues. The slope
of the linear region describes the stiffness (modulus) of the
Figure 3.4 Canine bone marrow-derived mesenchymal
material. The area under the curve (shaded region)
stem cells in primary culture show characteristic
represents the total energy introduced into the material to
mesenchymal morphology. These cells are capable of
cause mechanical failure.
chondrogenic, osteogenic, adipogenic, or neurogenic
differentiation in response to specific signals.
The body is subject to two basic categories of
force. Intrinsic forces originate from within the
2012). Stem cell therapy involving harvest and
body due to muscular contractions or the inherent
orthotopic implantation of autologous mesenchy-
elasticity of connective tissues such as ligaments or
mal stem cells is an area of active orthopedic
 myofasciae. Extrinsic forces arise from outside the
research and has become an accepted treatment for
body and include ground reaction forces due to
progressive osteoarthrosis in the dog (Black et al.,
 gravity as well as forces imposed on the body
2007, 2008; Guercio et al., 2012).
through contact with other objects.
When subjected to force, objects deform. This
Structure-function relationships of
relationship can be represented graphically as
musculoskeletal tissues
a force-deformation curve, which describes the
-r uaum oalqo naai e jo saraond qnns
Basic concepts
malized to the cross-sectional area of an object,
the applied force and resulting deformation are
The tissues of the musculoskeletal system are
referred to as stress and strain, respectively. Stress-
highly responsive to mechanical strains. From a
strain relationships thus describe the mechanical
biomechanical perspective, physiologic adaptation
properties of a particular material. An idealized
refers to the process by which musculoskeletal
stress-strain curve pertaining to musculoskeletal
tissues adjust their biochemical composition,
tissues is illustrated in (Figure 3.5). The initial non-
 molecular architecture, and mechanical properties
linear portion of the curve is the toe region and
in accordance with the demands placed upon
represents an early phase of deformation that
them. Both athletic training and rehabilitative
occurs as stress is first applied to the material. In
therapy involve the application of controlled forces
connective tissues, the toe region typically reflects
to the musculoskeletal system to facilitate physio-
the straightening of crimped collagen fibrils or the
logic adaptations that are specifically suited to a
elongation of elastin fibers. The linear portion of
given athletic or therapeutic objective. Here we
 the curve represents a zone of elastic deformation,
introduce several basic concepts related to the
where the material will return to its original state
mechanical properties and functional adaptations
upon removal of the applied stress. The slope of
of musculoskeletal tissues.
this region of the curve is called the modulus, and
40   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
describes the stiffness of the material. The yield
marily elastic. Strains experienced by the ECM are
point represents the transition from elastic to
nevertheless sensed by resident cell populations
plastic deformation; beyond the yield point, struc-
and trigger constitutive ECM remodeling activity
tural alterations within the material prevent it from
by which the structural integrity of a given tissue
returning to its original state despite removal of the
is1
maintained (Kjaer, 2004). In tissues such as
applied stress. The failure point represents com-
muscle, tendon, and ligament, sustained or high-
plete loss of structural integrity and macroscopic
intensity activity, such as occurs during athletic
breakdown of the material such as would occur
training or performance, may cause greater degrees
with bone fracture or tendon rupture. The area
of plastic deformation of the ECM. This type of
umder the curve represents the total amount of
 strain represents a form of ECM microinjury (Kjaer,
energy introduced into the material to cause failure.
2004; Mackey et al., 2008). Mild inflammatory
The maximum strength of the material is indicated
responses may occur in vascularized tissues in
by mu, the level of applied stress at the point of
 response to stress-induced plastic deformations of
failure.
the ECM. Inflammatory mediators may in turn
Musculoskeletal tissues are anisotropic and vis-
trigger anabolic cellular responses that result in
coelastic. Mechanical properties of  anisotropic
adaptive changes in ECM composition and a net
materials vary depending upon the direction of
 gain in tissue strength (Vierck et al., 2000). This
applied stress. For example, tendons are capable
type of cellular response underlies the physiologic
of resisting high tensile loads, but deform readily
adaptation of musculoskeletal tissues and is the
when subjected to compressive stress. Mechanical
 basis for athletic conditioning.
 properties of viscoelastic materials vary depending
upon the rate at which stress is applied. Viscoelas-
ticity is a melding of the basic properties of viscos-
s jo Anad e si Ansos sa pue A
Skeletal muscle
that reflects the resistance of molecules to strain
Organization and motor activity
(flow) in response to a given force. Highly viscous
fluids are resistant to flow, but will do so linearly
Collectively, the skeletal musculature is the largest
and irreversibly over time in response to a constant
organ in the body. Skeletal muscle is a complex
force. Elasticity is a property of solids that deform
and highly organized tissue composed of repeating
e inq ssans padde ue on asuodsan u Aueisu
units called sarcomeres. Individual muscles are
return to their original state following removal
organized into beds containing numerous fascicles
of the stress. Viscoelastic materials demonstrate
surrounded by perimysium, and each fascicle is
elastic deformation in response to rapid loading
composed of multinucleated myofibers enclosed
but undergo permanent change of shape in re-
by an endomysium (Figure 3.6). The epimysium is
sponse to sustained stress. The progressive strain
the collagen-rich sheath that surrounds a whole
that occurs in viscoelastic materials in response to
muscle; epimysium is continuous with the dense
a constant stress is called creep. Stress relaxation is
aponeurotic fascial sheets that enclose some muscle
a related property that refers to the gradual dissi-
 groups. The perimysium is the primary component
pation of internal stress that occurs in response to
of the ECM through which the force of contrac-
a constant strain.
tion is transferred from a muscle to its associated
The viscoelasticity of musculoskeletal tissues
tendon.
derives from their composite structure: within the
 Single myofibers act in concert through the
ECM, collagen and elastin fibrils form the solid
sliding filament model of actin and myosin within
component and impart tensile resistance and elas-
 Organized sarcomeres (Figure 3.7). Within the sar-
ticity, while the hydrated PG-rich extrafibrillar
comere, structural proteins anchor actin, troponins,
matrix behaves as a viscous fluid that allows
and tropomyosin to the Z-line that contains actinin.
 gradual interfibrillar shear and permanent strain in
 Multimeric myosin proteins are suspended as in-
response to sustained stress (Elliott et al., 2003).
tercalating filamentous strands with globular head
Under normal conditions, the responses of muscu-
umits that function as ratchets along adjacent actin
loskeletal tissues to physiologic stresses are pri-
filaments. Binding of acetylcholine to receptors on
Chapter 3 Musculoskeletal Structure and Physiology
f
A
H
Actinfilament
Myosinfilament
Relaxed
Muscle
Musclefascicle
(cell bundle)
88888
8888
Muscle
889899098888889999
fiber
Myosinpullsactininward
688888
A band
Iband
Myofibril
Hzone
Zline
Contracted
Zline
Sarcomere
Figure 3.7 Contraction of skeletal muscle occurs due to
ATP-dependent conformational changes of the globular
Figure 3.6 Hierarchical organization of skeletal muscle.
heads of myosin proteins that cause myosin to slide along
Reproduced by permission of Toll et af. (2010).
adjacent actin filaments.
Reproduced by permission of Toll et af. (2010).
the surface of the myofiber sets off a cascade of
upon ATP hydrolysis, and generation of ATP is a
intracellular signaling events resulting in calcium
key rate-limiting step in muscle contractility. This
release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Intracel-
is discussed in more detail in Chapter 4.
lular free calcium interacts with troponin C which
Skeletal muscle performance is dependent on
is bound to the actin, troponin complex (I, C, and
fiber type. The traditional classification system is
T), and tropomyosin (Figure 3.8). This interaction
type I (oxidative) and type II (glycolytic). This clas-
drives a conformational change in the tropomyo-
sification is based
1 on mitochondrial enzymatic
sin, allowing exposure of a groove that allows
 machinery and ATPase staining in acidic and alka-
myosin heads to interact with the actin filament.
line conditions. ATPase staining is commonly used
This interaction causes the adenosine triphosphate
to differentiate these fiber types in histologic sec-
(ATP) bound to the myosin head interacting with
tions and is based on myosin isoform ATPase activ-
the actin to undergo hydrolysis (Moczydlowski &
ity as being either slow (oxidative—type I) or fast
Apkon, 2009). Adenosine diphosphate (ADP) is
(glycolytic
-type II) (Armstrong et al., 1982). Pos-
then released from the myosin head, allowing
a
tural muscles like the quadriceps femoris contain
conformational shift in the myosin head from an
highly oxidative type I fibers that generate slow
 open to a closed position leading to a shortening
pue
sustained contraction. In contrast, muscles
of the myofiber Muscle contraction is dependent
adapted to rapid and forceful contractions such as
42Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Myosin
TroponinC
Troponinl
Sarcoplasmic
Reticulum
a-Actin
Tropomyosin
Figure 3.8 Calcium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum binds to troponin C, triggering myosin-actin interaction through
conformational changes in tropomyosin.
Reproduced by permission of Toll et af. (2010).
the gracilis contain higher proportions of type II
Greyhounds are sprinters unlike the majority of
fibers. Several forms of type II fibers have been
other breeds. Litle work has been performed
described that reflect amino acid sequence differ-
across breeds to examine the energetics of muscle
ences in sarcomeric myosin ATPase. The type IIC
and how training affects performance.
isoform is commonly expressed in canine muscle
and represents a capacity for oxidative metabolism
Hypertrophy and sarcopenia
that is intermediate between type I and type IIB
fibers. However, this fiber type difference is of low
Muscle mass is governed by a complex combina-
functional sigrificance as the metabolic capability
tion of mediators, including insulin, insulin-like
of the differing type II fibers is not dramatically
 growth factors, androgens, myostatin, cytokine/
different. In general, canine skeletal muscle has
myokines, and plasma amino acids (Solomon &
high mitochondrial density and oxidative capacity
Bouloux, 2006; Spangenburg, 2009). From a veteri-
 and is adapted to endurance activities (Wakshlag
nary perspective, muscle hypertrophy has been
et al., 2004).
-rojad pue ammone u adouaud panisap e
 Overall muscling and fiber type differences have
 mance arenas. Selective breeding has perpetuated
been observed between breeds of dogs; these are
a genetic mutation in the myostatin gene that is
exemplified by the observed differences between
 associated with constitutive muscle hypertrophy.
Greyhounds and other breeds. The Greyhound has
Myostatin is a negative regulator of myofiber dif-
approximately 15% more muscle mass and higher 
ferentiation, satellite cell maturation and muscle
overall muscle to bone ratios than other breeds
biosynthetic activity and its inactivation leads to
(Gurn, 1978b). Greyhounds also have unique fiber
hypertrophy (Bradley et al., 2008). Heterozygotes
type distributions with approximately
75-100%
for the myostatin loss-of-function mutation have
type II fibers in the semitendinosus, while other
shown improved racing performance that has led
breeds typically have fewer than 50% type II fibers
to perpetuation of this trait within the Whippet
(Gurn, 1978a). These differences explain
why
population (Mosher et al., 2007).
Chapter 3 Musculoskeletal Structure and Physiology
4
Androgens and other anabolic mediators such as
effects (Pedersen et al., 2007). The effects of cyto-
growth hormone play a role in the control of muscle
kines upon skeletal muscle homeostasis are medi-
mass; however, the effects of these compounds on
ated by complex and highly integrated intracellular
musculoskeletal homeostasis are highly species-
signaling, transcriptional, and translational pro-
specific. Normal physiologic concentrations of
cesses within the myofiber. These dynamic signal-
canine gonadal steroids may augment the stimula-
 ing systems are further influenced by a wide range
tory effects of exercise on skeletal myofiber synthe-
 of mechanical stimuli, pharmacologic agents, and
sis; however, their impact on the development and
diet (Sakamoto & Goodyear, 2002; Tisdale, 2007).
maintenance of overall muscle mass is less pro-
Exercise leads to enhanced skeletal muscle myo-
 nounced than in other species (West & Phillips,
fibril deposition and hypertrophy (Miyazaki &
 2010). While banned within some organized canine
Esser, 2009; Gundersen, 2011). This involves mech-
athletics, exogenous anabolic steroids and growth
anoreceptor stimulation, but also relies on increased
hormone can induce supraphysiologic
muscle
insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) expression,
hypertrophy In combination with appropriate con-
decreased myostatin synthesis, and enhanced sat-
ditioning, this may confer some
performance
ellite cell differentiation. Exercise increases insulin
advantage to canine athletes involved in resistance
independent glucose transport and insulin sensi-
events such as weight pulling or sprinting. How-
tivity, which in turn leads to myofibril protein syn-
 ever, augmentation of muscle mass is unlikely to
thesis (Spangenburg, 2009). Exercise also stimulates
be beneficial in canine endurance activities.
the production of myokines. The myokine IL-15
Sarcopenia refers to the progressive decrease in
has received considerable attention due to its
 muscle mass and strength that occurs with aging.
ability to abrogate myofibril proteolysis maintain-
 Sarcopenia reflects loss of myofibers due to apop-
ing the myofiber in a hypertrophic state (Argiles
tosis, as well as decreases in myofiber size. Overall
et al., 2009). IL-15 also enhances skeletal muscle
muscle circumference is often maintained during
energetics through stimulation of lipolysis in both
 early sarcopenia, as lost myofibers are replaced
muscle and adipose tissue. The anabolic effects of
with adipose and fibrous tissue (Freeman, 2012).
IL-15 on muscle and adipose tissue metabolism
Declining performance may be the only early
suggests the activity of this cytokine may open an
cinical indicator of this condition. Muscle loss
 interesting pharmacologic avenue for improving
becomes measureable as sarcopenia progresses
lean body mass (LBM), especially in age-related
 and is common in the geriatric population. Con-
sarcopenia.
centric, but not eccentric, exercise can retard sarco-
Cytokines play a key role in the repair and
 penia. Concentric activity includes weight training
 and isometrics. Aquatic therapy, limb weighting,
acute traumatic injury such as strain or laceration,
and balance board exercises emphasize concentric
skeletal muscle has a strong capacity for regenera-
activity and are useful components of rehabilita-
tion; however, this is dependent upon the nature
tion and fimess programs for elderly
 sarcopenic
and duration of the postraumatic inflammatory
animals.
response as well as the mechanical strains present
at the site. The inflammatory response that occurs
-I  eq) oiseudiq si Amui aosn Suimo
Cytokines and skeletal muscle
lalta, 2010). The initial phase is an innate immune
Skeletal muscle is highly responsive to a wide
 response characterized by infiltration of damaged
variety of cytokines, chemokines, and growth
muscle by neutrophils and proinflammatory M1
factors, and the prevailing milieu of biological
macrophages that elaborate classic Th1 cytokines
 mediators controls many aspects of muscle growth,
such as TNFα and IFNy. Production of oxidants by
repair, and adaptation. Infiltrating leukocytes, par-
leukocytes during this phase leads to additional
ticularly macrophages, are an important source of
secondary muscle injury. During the early inflam-
many cytokines that influence muscle homeostasis.
matory phase, local satellite cells become activated
Myofibers produce a variety of cytokines, termed
and begin to proliferate. Approximately 24 hours
myokines, that exert local autocrine and paracrine
post-injury, M1 macrophages begin gradually to be
44   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
replaced by a second population of counterinflam-
Bone
matory M2 macrophages that downregulate the
acute inflammatory process through production of
Structural and functional organization of bone
cytokines such as interleukin-4, interleukin-10, and
interleukin-13. Many mitogenic and differentiating
Bone is a complex and highly dynamic tissue that
signals are produced during this later phase,
serves many functions throughout the body. The
including hepatocyte growth factor, IGF-1, fibro-
bony skeleton provides a mechanical frame that
blast growth factors, and vascular endothelial
supports locomotion by organizing and directing
growth factor. These sigmals can stimulate the
the forces of muscular contraction. In the adult,
 Expression of myogenic transcription factors within
hematopoiesis takes  place  primarily  within  a
proliferating satellite cells, marking the onset of
 highly specialized bone marrow niche, and is regu-
myoblastic differentiation (Ten Broek et al., 2010).
lated by resident bone cells. Bone is also a store-
Myostatin is also upregulated during this phase,
house for calcium and other minerals as well as fat,
which slows proliferation of satellite cells and pro-
and plays important roles in mineral homeostasis
motes differentiation of regenerating myoblasts.
and energetics.
Low-grade mechanical strains are stimulatory for
Cortical bone has a dense structure and is made
 early myogenic differentiation and muscle regen-
up of overlapping Haversian units or osteons. The
eration. However, loss of the endomyseal and peri-
 basic Haversian unit has a cylindrical organization
myseal ECM leaves healing muscle fragile
pue
with a central vascular channel (central or Volk-
 susceptible to reinjury. Aggressive early stretching
mann's canal) surrounded by several layers of con-
of injured muscles, or rapid return to high-intensity
activity after muscle injury commonly leads
to
lamellae) populated by osteocytes (Figure 3.9). Tra-
 reinjury and reinitiation of an acute inflammatory
 becular or cancellous bone is present only within
response. Recurrent or sustained monocytic infil-
the medullary cavity and consists of an intercon-
tration of injured or diseased muscle ultimately
nected system of thin bony shelves and struts
 triggers fibroblast activation, collagen deposition,
called trabeculae. Trabecular bone has an extensive
 and excessive fibrosis, leading to permanent loss of
surface area and is organized into a vast number
muscle function.
of microcompartments that contain fat and islands
Haversiansystem
Trabecular bone
Circumferential
osteonal lamellae
Endostealvasculature
Centralcanals
Figure 3.9 Structural organization of bone.
Chapter 3 Musculoskeletal Structure and Physiology
45
other collagen types (types Il and V), a variety
of PGs, several bone-specific proteins such as
bone sialoprotein and osteocalcin, and a variety
of growth factors elaborated during osteogenesis
that are immobilized through their association
with other components of the bone matrix (Kim
et al., 2011).
The major cells in bone include osteoblasts,
osteocytes, and osteoclasts. Osteoblasts are osteo-
genic cells that reside within periosteal and end-
osteal membranes. They are a heterogeneous
population of cells representing various stages of
differentiation, including mesenchymal stem cells,
 osteogenic progenitors, preosteoblasts, and osteo-
blasts. Mesenchymal stem cells and osteogenic
progenitor cells are capable of self-replication,
which is important for maintenance of a pool
Figure 3.10 Cancellous bone is composed of thin bony
of progenitors that can participate in osteosynthe-
sis during growth, physiologic remodeling, and
shelves, or trabeculae (T) covered with an endosteal
membrane (E).
healing of bone. Osteoblasts are responsible for
biosymthesis, deposition, and mineralization of
bone matrix, as well as synthesis and secretion of
of hematopoietic cells (Figure 3.10). The external
growth factors and biological mediators that are
and medullary surfaces of a bone are covered by
deposited within the matrix during bone forma-
thin periosteal and endosteal membranes, respec-
tion. Osteocytes are terminally differentiated bone
tively. These membranes are highly vascular, richly
cells that form as osteoblasts become surrounded
innervated  and populated by  osteoblasts
pue
by bone matrix during osteosynthesis. In mature
smaller numbers of osteoprogenitor cells.
The
bone, osteocytes reside within lacunae within the
ECM of the peri- and endosteal membranes con-
concentric lamellae of a Haversian unit. They com-
tains primarily type I collagen, large amounts of
municate with neighboring osteocytes and osteo-
elastin, and a variety of PGs. Bone can also be clas-
blasts by direct contact via long cytoplasmic
sified according to the organization of the type I
projections that extend through canaliculi within
collagen fibrils within the matrix. Woven bone is
the bone matrix. Osteoclasts are multinucleated
an intermediate form of bone with random orienta-
cells derived from hematopoietic precursors that
tion of collagen fibrils that occurs during the initial
resorb bone matrix.
phase of endochondral ossification or fracture
 The tightly packed crystalline organization of
healing. Lamellar bone is a mature form of bone
 bone mineral imparts high stiffness and strength.
with greater density in which the collagen fibrils
 Bone is nevertheless a highly anisotropic material
 are deposited in a highly ordered multidirectional
that is able to withstand large compressive loads
layered pattern. Mature cortical bone is a form of
but that is comparatively weak when subjected to
lamellar bone.
tensile stress. Compressive loads are borne by
The chemical composition and molecular orga-
the mineral component of the ECM while tensile
nization of bone is highly conserved. Living bone
stresses are resisted by the organic component of
%02 o dn ‘ena %oz Apaewxondde s
the bone matrix, primarily the collagen fibrils
 organic matrix, and 5-10% water. Bone mineral
(Currey, 2008). The walls of cellular lacumae and
is primarily calcium hydroxy-apatite (Case[PO4]
canaliculi as well as the interfaces between indi-
[OH]). Other minerals such as magnesium,
vidual lamellae of osteons are important sites of
carbonate, and phosphate are present in small
stress concentration within cortical bone. Most
amounts. The organic matrix is made up of 90%
fractures are thought to develop as tensile stresses
type I collagen. The remainder is composed of
within the bone matrix lead to delamination of
46   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
osteonal lamellae, and subsequent propagation
systems that are transduced by osteocytes into bio
and expansion of cortical microcracks.
- A e o os seis l
nected cellular network and communicate both
Bone remodeling
with adjacent osteocytes and with nearby endos-
 teal or periosteal osteoblasts through gap junctions
Bone is a dynamic tissue that undergoes continual
as well as through release of soluble mediators.
turnover throughout life. This remodeling process
Physiologic S
strains are trophic for osteocytes
and elicit release of the osteocyte-specific protein
resorption of existing bone and deposition of new
sclerostin (Robling et al., 2008). Sclerostin is an
bone (Sims & Gooi, 2008). Adaptive remodeling is
 mhibitory mediator that downregulates the activ-
the process by which the morphology and mechan-
ity of osteoblasts. The remodeling process is trig-
ical properties of a bone are adjusted in response
gered by the loss of osteocytes. This may occur
to regional mechanical strains. Adaptive remodel-
through direct trauma. Osteocytes may also be
ing of bone is often referred to as Wolff's law.
lost by apoptosis, which is triggered by supra-
 Bone remodeling involves the coordinated activ-
physiologic strains, or by conditions of very low
ities of osteocytes, osteoclasts, and osteoblasts
strain such as occur with disuse and immobi-
(Figure 3.11). This triad of cells is termed the basic
lization. Loss of osteocytes facilitates activation,
 multicellular unit (BMU). Osteocytes are the primary
proliferation, and differentiation of osteoblasts.
mechanosensors within bone. Mechanical strains
Activation of osteoblasts involves expression of
within the bone matrix cause pressure changes
mediators such as monocyte colony-stimulating
and fluid flows within the canaliculi of Haversian
factor (MCSF) and the receptor activator of NFkB
Activation
Resorption
Reversal
Deposition
Termination
M-CSF>
RANK
Bone lining cell
Osteocyte
Osteomac
Reversal cell
Osteoclast precursor
 Osteoblast
R Osteoclast
。
Sclerostin
sasnen aewep xew uoene suna 'uj oi al wo panidap) saseyd any ui spaaoid suapowai auog ll'e aun
recruitment and differentiation of osteoclast precursors. During resorption, mature osteoclasts demineralize and hydrolyze
bone matrix within a compartment lined by specialized mononuclear cells called osteomacs. Reversal involves enzymatic
Mau ym poaap auog aui lg siselgoaiso uosodap una sin isaaai ag jid udiosas aui jo aens aui jo uoeo
lining cells and osteoblasts.
Chapter 3 Musculoskeletal Structure and Physiology4
47
ligand (RANKL) that cause recruitment and dif-
forming a new Haversian system. Cutting cones
ferentiation of osteoclastic precursors (Sims &
play a major role in the remodeling of fracture
Gooi, 2008). Osteoclasts home to a target region
callus into mature cortical bone, as well as in direct
and their activity leads to the formation of a resorp-
healing of rigidly stabilized fractures.
tion pit, or Howship's lacuna. During resorption,
numerous growth factors are released from the
Bone healing
matrix and further stimulate biosynthetic activity
 of osteoblasts. Osteoclasts ultimately undergo
Fracture healing is a regenerative process in which
apoptosis, and the lacuna is then filled in with new
the original morphology and mechanical proper-
bone by osteoblasts. As osteoblasts become encased
ties of a fractured bone can be fully reestablished.
 in new osteoid, they differentiate into osteocytes
Two basic forms of bone healing are recognized.
 and reestablish their inhibitory effects upon nearby
Primary or direct healing occurs when a fracture
 osteoblasts, thereby ending the remodeling cycle.
is anatomically reduced and rigidly stabilized.
Most remodeling occurs on the surfaces of tra-
 Primary healing may also occur in some stable
becular bone. However, a similar process of re-
hairline fractures. Direct interfragmentary contact
modeling also occurs within cortical bone. Here,
and rigid stabilization of fragments subverts the
 osteoclasts are recruited to areas of osteocyte loss
normal stimulus for intermediary callus formation
through the vasculature of the Haversian systems.
and the remodeling response dominates the healing
Several osteoclasts advance as a unit through the
process. Cutting cones traverse the fracture site
cortical matrix forming a cutting cone, and creating
-isodap poaip Aq Aimuuon Auoq usqeisaan pue
a longitudinal tunnel of resorption (Figure 3.12). In
tion of mature lamellar bone. Gap healing is a
the wake of the osteoclasts, ostoblasts line the
Ana m   aoq  jo 
tunnel and deposit concentric layers of osteoid
Bone lining cell
Osteoclast
Osteocyte
Osteoblast
Figure 3.12 Cutting cones consist of small clusters of osteoclasts that create longitudinal resorption tunnels within cortical
bone. New Haversian systems are formed in the wake of a cutting cone through the deposition of concentric layers of bone
matrix by osteoblasts.
48Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
filled with woven bone before being remodeled to
lamellar bone by the activity of cutting cones. Lack
of interfragmentary motion is a prerequisite for
both forms of primary healing.
 Bone healing as it occurs in the absence of surgi-
cal intervention is referred to as secondary, or indi-
rect healing, and occurs in several overlapping
phases. The initial injury causes soft tissue damage
and acute hemorrhage and results in the formation
of a fracture hematoma that fills the fracture site
and that may encompass displaced fragments.
Within several hours, an acute inflammatory
response develops and the area is infiltrated by
neutrophils and macrophages. Following the clear-
ance of necrotic tissue debris, the reparative phase
begins, marked by capillary outgrowth from sur-
rounding soft tissues and vascularization of the
fracture hematoma. Vascularization converts the
fracture hematoma to granulation tissue and forms
the extraosseous blood supply of healing bone. This
is a critical step in the initiation of secondary
healing, and preservation of this developing blood
juweu leu a u leo nofe e si Aiddns
 of fractures. Proliferation and influx of progenitor
Figure 3.13 Radiographic appearance of a distal radial
cells from the soft tissue envelope surrounding the
fracture in a dog (A) and mineralized callus of secondary
fracture occurs. Periosteum and muscle are major
bone healing bridging the fracture site 7 weeks after
 sources of mesenchymal stem cells that undergo 
repair (B).
chondroblastic and osteoblastic differentiation in
response to the growth factor milieu within the
 granulation bed at the fracture site. Mechanical
 ECM containing type I collagen, elastin, variable 
strains within the granulation tissue of the fracture
amounts of type I collagen, and a diverse array of
site elicit the deposition of chondroid matrix and
PGs. The three basic forms of cartilage, hyaline,
woven bone in a disorganized fashion, resulting in
fibrocartilage, and elastic cartilage, differ in com-
the formation of softcallus. This occurs over several
position and organization of the ECM and are
weeks. Mineralization of this early matrix produces
 adapted to specific roles and mechanical environ-
hard callus, which is the earliest radiographically
ments within the body. Hyaline cartilage forms
detectable phase of secondary healing (Figure 3.13).
the contact surface of synovial joints (Figure 3.14).
 Bridging of the fracture gap with mineralized hard
Fibrocartilage is a tougher form of cartilage with a
callus reestablishes bony continuity and marks the
dense ECM that is adapted to resist compressive
 transition from the reparative phase to the remodel-
stress. Fibrocartilage is found in menisci, the
 ing phase. During remodeling, the woven bone of
anmulus fibrosis of intervertebral disks, and occurs
the callus is gradually resorbed and replaced with
as a specialization within some regions of tendon
more dense and organized lamellar bone, and the
that experience high compressive loads (Figure
medullary compartment is also reformed.
3.14). Elastic cartilage is a flexible and elastin-rich
cartilage found in the larynx, epiglottis, and pinna.
Elastic cartilage is not a significant component of
Cartilage
the musculoskeletal system.
Articular cartilage is a smooth and translucent
Cartilage is an avascular connective tissue com-
tissue with high water content (approximately
posed of chondrocytes suspended in a specialized
70%) and a delicate collagen fibrillar network. It
Chapter 3 Musculoskeletal Structure and Physiology 49
Case Study 3.1 Delayed union
Signalment: 7 y.o. M/C terrier mix. Presented for evalu
Treatment: Fixator was remroved. Fracture ends were
ation of nonhealing fracture of right radius
debrided to reopen medullary cavity. Autogenous can-
cellous bone graft was placed at fracture site. Ring
History: Original fracture occurred 4 years prior, re-
paired successfully with plate and screw fixation. Three
intensive rehabilitation was designed to promote limb
years later, draining tract appeared on distal aspect of
use. Eight weeks postoperatively, radiographs demon-
nght antebrachiumt. Culture yielded methicillin-resistant
strated bridging osteosynthesis at fracture site (Figure
Staphyfococcus pseudintermedius. Plate was removed.
B3.1C). Circular external fixation technique allows axial
Six months later, radius refractured at original site. Type
interfragrmrentary micromotion, which is highly stirrula-
Il external fixator was applied. After 12 weeks of fixation,
tory for mechanosensitive osteoblasts. Successful healing
fracture site was not healed (Figure B3.1A). Patient was
in this case was attributed to the combined effects of
referred for second opinion.
bone graft, fixation method, and a rehabilitation program
emphasizing rapid return to function
Examination: Patient bearing minimal weight on right
forelimb. Disuse atrophy of right forelimb musculature.
Copious drainage frorr proximal pin tracts.
Figure B3.1  Delayed union. A. After 12 weeks of fixation, fracture site not healed. B. An autogenous cancellous bone
gaft was placed at fracture site, and a ring fixator was applied. C. Eight weeks postoperatively. radiographs demonstrated
bridging osteosynthesis at fracture site.
consists of approximately 50% collagen and 35%
The collagen in articular cartilage is predomi-
PG on a dry weight basis. The remaining 10% nantly type I, which forms a complex 3-Dnetwork
 includes nonstructural proteins and glycoproteins,   within the ECM and accounts for the tensile
cytes account for approximately 10% of the volume
gating PG aggrecan is the most abundant PG
of articular cartilage.
in articular cartilage on a dry weight basis. The
50Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Zonel
ZonelIl
ZoneIll
Tidemark
ZoneIV
Cementline
ZoneV
Figure 3.14 Gross (A) and histologic (B) appearance of normal articular cartilage with zonal labeling, and histologic
appearance of meniscal fibrocartilage (C).
    s   
 bolic enzymes that can degrade ECM components.
approximately 240kDa. Monomers are rich in
This degradative process is normally counterbal-
chondroitin sulfate and keratan sulfate side chains
anced by production of enzyme inhibitors and ana-
 -Aqoqres %06 Apaiexoidde jo dn apew a1e pue
bolic growth factors. Imbalance between anabolic
drate. Many aggrecan monomers may be linked to
and catabolic functions of the chondrocyte can
a single backbone molecule of HA, generating
molecular complexes that may reach 2 x 10 kDa in
and loss of mechanical integrity of the ECM. This
weight. Articular cartilage also contains several
basic imbalance underlies most processes of joint
species of SLRPs, including decorin, biglycan, and
degeneration. Loss of moderate amounts of PG
fibromodulin (Roughley, 2006). SLRPs make up a
from cartilage ECM can be restored by de novo bio-
small proportion of the PG mass of articular carti-
synthesis; however, extensive loss of PG, or break-
lage; however, due to their small size, they can be
down of the collagen network is irreversible and
abundant on a molar basis. The functions of articu-
invariably leads to progressive joint degeneration.
lar cartilage SLRPs are not completely understood.
Articular cartilage is a heterogeneous tissue the
SLRPs bind many components of the ECM, includ-
 organization of which differs between joints, as
 ing collagen and fibronectin, and play roles in col-
well as between different contact regions within a
lagen and elastin fibrillogenesis as well as serving
given joint. Articular cartilage is subdivided into
 to sequester growth factors within the ECM.
five discrete zones (Figure 3.14). Zones I through III
Chondrocytes make up a small proportion of
are the more superficial and unmineralized zones.
articular cartilage yet they are responsible for the
Zone IlI is separated from the calcified cartilage of
biosynthesis, maintenance, and tumover of the
zone IV by the tidemark. The deep limit of the
entire ECM compartment throughout life. Colla-
articular cartilage is the cement line that forms at
gen within canine articular cartilage is extremely
the conclusion of endochondral ossification of the
stable and most lasts for the life of the individual.
 articular portion of the epiphysis. Zone I (tangen-
 In contrast, the rate of turnover of cartilage PG is
tial) chondrocytes have flattened morphology and
more rapid (approximately 300 days) (Maroudas,
are oriented parallel to the articular surface. Zone I
1980). Under normal conditions, chondrocytes
(transitional) chondrocytes assume a more globoid
maintain a highly regulated balance of matrix bio-
shape. Zone IlI (radiate) cells become oriented with
synthesis and degradation that is precisely adjusted
their axes perpendicular to the articular surface.
to meet functional requirements of the tissue. ECM
The chondrocytes within articular cartilage are
turnover is influenced by the prevailing mechani-
 arranged in close coordination with the orientation
cal environment, along with a plethora of cyto-
 of the collagen fibrils within the matrix. Fibril orga-
kines and growth factors produced by leukocytes,
 nization varies with different regions of the tissue,
synovial lining cells, and chondrocytes. Mechani-
m accordance with the local mechanical stresses
cal load and cytokines elicit the production of cata-
that are generated by joint loading. In Zone I,
Chapter 3 Musculoskeletal Structure and Physiology  51
Loading
Chondrocyte
Chondrocyte
Unloading
collagen
Proteoglycan
·Water
Figure 3.15 Loading of articular cartilage causes displacement of water from highly anionic aggregating proteoglycans. Upon
release of load, the hygroscopic proteoglycans draw water into the matrix. Load-induced bulk flow of water through the
matrix is a major mechanism by which nutrients are delivered to chondrocytes.
stresses develop parallel to the plane of the articu-
in dymamic improvements in joint stability and
lar surface, and collagen fibrils here are largely par-
reduced stress per unit area of the articular surface.
allel or tangential to the articular surface. Zones II
In addition, cartilage surface deformation drives
and IIl experience complex patterns of shear,
fluid away from compressed regions into adjacent
tension, and compression, and collagen fibrils in
regions of matrix, as well as into the surrounding
these zones are arranged in a 3-D cross-linked
synovial fluid (Figure 3.15). This bulk exchange of
isotropic web adapted to resist multidirectional
fluid between the cartilage matrix and the synovial
fluid is a major route by which nutrients are deliv-
eredtothe(
chondrocyte and underscores the
 in diameter and, asin bone, mineralization enhances
importance of early joint mobilization and con-
the ability of the tissue to withistand compressive
trolled cartilage loading during rehabilitation from
stress. Collagen concentration is highest at the
joint trauma or surgery. Compressive loads applied
to articular
and decreases within the deeper layers of the carti-
different components of the matrix. The osmotic
lage. In contrast, PG concentration in articular
properties of the highly hydrated aggregating PGs
 establish a relatively incompressible fluid compart-
decreases toward the articular surface.
 ment that resists volumetric compression. Collagen
Articular cartilage undergoes significant defor-
fibrils resist tensile stresses, and tether the PGs
mation during normal activity, but these strains are
within the matrix. In healthy cartilage, the hydrau-
elastic and fully reversible. As a composite tissue,
lic swelling pressure of the aggregating PGs is
articular cartilage has overall low modulus of elas-
finely balanced by the tensile resistance of the col-
ticity (stiffness); its deformability enhances both
lagen network. Swelling pressure varies with the
the congruity and the contact area of opposing
density and distribution of the charged GAG side
articular surfaces during joint loading. This results
 chains of the PGs. The magnitude of the resisting
52Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Synovium
The synoviae form the capsular enclosures of diar-
throdial joints, as well as tendon sheaths and the
walls of bursae (Figure 3.16). All synovial mem-
branes share a common histologic structure and
consist of a thin lining of intimal synovial cells
supported by a vascular fibroelastic subintima. The
synovial lining is a discontinuous layer of two
types of synovial cells. Type B symoviocytes are
fibroblastic cells with a slightly flattened morphol-
npond rog aqisuodsan Ad ane pue Aoo
Figure 3.16  Histologic appearance of normal synovial
of HA, PGs, surfactants, and matrix metallopro-
membrane. The synovial cells (open arrow) overlie a richly
teinases. Type A synoviocytes are intimal macro-
vascularized and innervated fibroelastic subintima (closed
phages that form within the bone marrow and
arrow).
 traffic to the joint. They are responsible for immune
surveillance within the joint and phagocytosis of
intra-articular debris. Both cell types communicate
tensile counterforce depends in turn on the stiff-
continuously with chondrocytes through the elab-
ness and strength of the collagen network. Imbal-
oration of cytokines, growth factors, and other
ance between the osmotic and tensile components
mediators into the synovial fluid that reach the
of the cartilage matrix leads to compromises in the
chondrocyte by diffusion through the matrix. The
mechanical integrity of the cartilage and results in
 synovial lining lacks a basal lamina. The synovium
cartilage degeneration, osteoarthritis (OA), and
is therefore an inefficient barrier, and the traffick-
decreased joint function (Lai et al., 1991).
ing of cells and mediators between the subintimal
Fibrocartilage is made up of chondrocytes sus-
vasculature and the symovial fluid, or between
 pended in an ECM that is denser than that of artic-
periarticular tissues and the joint space, is rela-
ular cartilage. The ECM of fibrocartilage is rich in
tively unconstrained. Hence, periarticular tissues
type I collagen and contains smaller quantities of
pue oonoyed juo Ared Aq pasae uao ane
PGs. Like articular cartilage, fibrocartilage contains
likewise, periarticular lesions can cause significant
 appreciable quantities of elastin. Fibrocartilage is a
bystander-type joint injury.
tough and flexible tissue with a rubbery consis-
The subintima is a richly vascularized and inner-
tency. The collagen fibrils in fibrocartilage have a
vated tissue that forms the fibrous component of
variable orientation that is specifically suited to an
joint capsules. Normal subintima is a highly flexi-
individual tissue. For example, the circumferential
ble tissue that helps guide and constrain joint
orientation of fibrils in the peripheral regions of
- uae m aa A j pue uonu
menisci is adapted to accommodate the hoop
 ments. It often forms extensive villi and areolar
stresses that concentrate in these tissues in response
folds that project the synovium deep into the joint
to compressive loads (Masouros et al., 2008). Like-
space in close proximity with the surface of the
wise, fibrocartilage develops within the pulley
articular cartilage. The margins of diarthrodial
regions of certain tendons where compressive
joints are delineated by the enthesial attachments
stresses become concentrated within the ECM
of fibrous capsules to adjacent bone.
(Benjamin et al., 2008). Disorganized fibrocartilage
develops readily as a sequel to the degeneration or
 healing of many musculoskeletal tissues, including
Synovial joint degeneration
 bone, tendon, and ligament. It also forms following
Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most prevalent musculo-
vascularization of naturally occurring or iatrogenic
skeletal disease in dogs and is a significant cause
articular cartilage defects that communicate with
of decreased performance in canine athletes. OA is
the trabecular bone subjacent to the subchondral
 often considered to be primarily a disease of articu-
boneplate.
lar cartilage. However, current thinking recogmizes
Chapter 3 Musculoskeletal Structure and Physiology5
5
the diarthrodial joint as an organ, and describes
Chondrocytes are sensitive to the mechanical
uano jo uioy e se uogenauasap junof aaissanond
properties of the matrix, and changes in matrix
failure (Loeser et al., 2012). Thus, while mechanical
structure are detected by chondrocytes as altered
failure of articular cartilage is a defining element
patterns of force. Chondrocytes initially respond
of OA, the trajectory of cartilage loss is affected by
to matrix disruption by upregulating anabolic
concurrent maladaptive changes involving both
activities and increasing biosynthesis of collagen
 synovium and subchondral bone.
and PGs. This represents a reparative response;
Cartilage damage may occur in normal joints as
however, the regenerative capabilities of cartilage
a result of either traumatic injury or chronic
are limited, and abnormal loading ultimately shifts
overuse. Cartilage injury may also occur when
the chondrocyte toward a catabolic phenotype
physiologic loads are placed upon a joint that
(Goldring, 2006). This involves elaboration of a
suffers from inherent anatomic incongruity, such
cadre of proinflammatory mediators and matrix
that the applied force is concentrated upon a small 
metalloproteinases. Proinflammatory mediators can
contact area. The latter scenario occurs in dogs
feed back in an autocrine or paracrine manner
with developmental joint disease such as elbow
to further augment catabolic activity of chondro-
incongruity or hip dysplasia. Cartilage overload-
cytes. They may also be released into the synovial
ing can lead to death of chondrocytes and rupture
fluid where they can activate the symovium. Enzy-
of the collagen network of the matrix. This can
matic digestion of collagen and PG components of
result in loss of PGs by diffusion into the synovial
the matrix by metalloproteinases leads to further
fluid and matrix collapse. Once the mechanical
 mechanical compromise, and can lead to a progres-
 properties of the matrix are compromised, cartilage
sive cascade of matrix collapse (Kurz et al., 2005).
becomes less capable of withstanding load, and
The ability of articular cartilage to withstand
-ns rag asnin sn sassas oonoisaud uaaa
physiologic loading is dependent upon the compli-
tural matrix damage. At the histologic level, this is
ance of the subchondral bone (Goldring, 2006).
manifest as irregularity and fissuring of the articu-
Primary diseases or remodeling processes of bone
lar surface, cartilage thinning, mineralization of the 
that affect the stiffness of subchondral bone can
intermediate zones, and ultimately, complete carti-
lead to stress concentration within overlying carti-
lage loss and exposure of the subchondral bone
 lage and can render the matrix susceptible to injury
(eburnation) (Figure 3.17).
even under physiologic conditions. Conversely, as
cartilage matrix is lost, altered patterns of loading
are experienced by the subchondral bone itself,
which can lead to secondary maladaptive remodel-
ing and loss of underlying trabeculae. This inter-
play between cartilage and subchondral bone can
establish an independent self-perpetuating cascade
of joint degeneration.
The synovium is highly responsive to changes in
the cartilage and may affect cartilage degeneration
at several levels (Sellam & Berenbaum, 2010).
Inflammatory diseases of the joint involve rapid
activation of the synovium and typically lead to
joint effusion and intra-articular recruitment of leu-
kocytes. Matrix metalloproteinases released by leu-
kocytes and synovial cells may initiate a cascade of
cartilage degradation by direct attack upon matrix
components. Release of proinflammatory cyto-
kines by the synovium may also enhance the cata-
Figure 3.17
 Gross appearance of end-stage synovial joint
degeneration showing severe capsular fibrosis (open arrow)
bolic activities of chondrocytes. Degradation of
and subchondral bone eburnation and sclerosis (closed
cartilage matrix causes the release into the synovial
arrow).
fluid of small proteolytic fragments of many matrix
54   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
components, including collagen, fibronectin, PG
structures (e.g., insertional aponeuroses of the
core and link proteins, and many others. These
abdominal wall muscles).
fragments can function as potent biological media-
Ligaments are connective tissue bands with
tors. Matrix fragments (or matrikines) bind 
to
Asid pe pue suonnasu pue suaio snoasso
symovial cell surface receptors and can alter pat-
cross a joint. Some ligaments (e.g., the transverse
terns of synovial fluid production, elicit the pro-
acetabular ligament) originate and insert on the
duction of proinflammatory mediators and growth
same bone. Ligaments function primarily to stabi-
factors, and increase production of matrix metal-
lize joints and direct and constrain joint motion.
loproteinases by the synovium.
Two basic forms of ligaments are recognized.
The complex interplay that develops between
 Capsular ligaments (e.g., collateral ligaments of
cartilage, synovium, and subchondral bone leads
ot e jo san u-anon are (s so
to synovial hyperplasia and villous hypertrophy.
capsule. Intra-articular ligaments (e.g., the round
sustained decreases in the quality of synovial fluid,
 ligament of the femoral head) cross joints within
sclerosis of subchondral bone, and persistent
 synovial compartments. Intra-articular ligaments
capsular inflammation and fibrosis. Alterations in
 are surrounded with a thin epiligament that merges
the thickness and compliance of the joint capsule
with the periosteum at both origin and insertion.
 lead to joint stiffness and loss of range of motion
Tendons and ligaments have similar histologic
(ROM) (common clinical manifestations of pro-
structure and biochemical composition (Figure
 gressive OA) and also may contribute to OA pro-
3.18). Both contain small numbers of fibroblastic
 gression by further altering patterns of cartilage
cells that are aligned with the direction of the col-
loading.
lagen fibrils. The ECM is rich in type I collagen and
contains a variety of PGs and variable quantities of
elastin. The diameter of collagen fibrils within
Tendons, ligaments, and entheses
tendons and ligaments is usually bimodally dis-
tributed (Frank et al., 1999). Larger diameter fibrils
Tendons are bands of collagen-rich tissue that link
 provide higher tensile strength, while small diam-
muscle to bone and that transfer forces of muscle
eter fibrils increase the overall fibrillar surface area.
contraction to the skeleton. Several forms of tendon
A bimodal distribution of fibril diameters leads to
are recogmized. Positional tendons (e.g., the tendon
of origin of the biceps brachialis) are dense cord-
like structures with discrete sites of osseous attach-
ment and are primarily involved in muscular
control of joint position. Positional tendons are fre-
quently contained with a fluid-filled sheath that
provides for low-friction sliding motion. Wrap-
around tendons (e.g., digital extensor tendons) are
direction as they cross a joint. They often pass
through specialized bony grooves that function as
pulleys during joint motion. The portion of a wrap-
around tendon that traverses a joint is usually sta-
bilized by a fibrous retinaculum, and the tendon
itself may contain fibrocartilage that provides resis-
tance to the compressive stresses that concentrate
at the site of the pulley. Energy-storing tendons
(tarsal extensors and carpal flexors) are adapted to
weight bearing and maintenance of posture, and
Figure 3.18 Histologic appearance of canine cranial
contain higher concentrations of elastin than other
cruciate ligament. Organized fascicles of collagen fibers (C)
tendon types. Aponeuroses are flattened sheet-like
are covered by a thin synovial epiligament (E). Tendons
structures that often link muscles to other fascial
have a similar structure and histologic appearance.
Chapter 3 Musculoskeletal Structure and Physiology5
55
Stress
Rupture
Microscopicdamage
/1
Toe
region
Strain
→
Straighteningof fibrillarcrimps
B
Figure 3.19 Stress-strain relationships of tendons and
ligaments. Initial elongation at the toe region reflects
straightening of the crimped collagen fibrils. Irreversible
deformation at the yield point occurs due to interfibrillar
shear. Failure involves loss of interfibrillar adhesion and
pullout of collagen fibers.
Figure 3.20 Histologic appearance of a fibrocartilagenous
increased density of fibril packing within a given
enthesis. Collagen fibers within the body of the tendon (T)
tendon cross-sectional area and allows the mechan-
transition through a zone of fibrocartilage before
ical properties of a tendon to be fine-tuned through 
intercalating into the collagen structure of the bone matrix
variations in interfibrillar cross-linking as well as
(B). Multiple tidemarks (open arrow) and chondrocytes
isolated with lacunae (closed arrow) are present within the
the composition of the interfibrillar matrix.
fibrocartilage zone.
Tendons and ligaments are highly anisotropic
and viscoelastic. They have high strength and stiff-
ness when loaded in tension but buckle readily
when loaded in compression. The stress-strain rela-
Two basic forms of entheses are recognized. Fibrous
tionships in tendons and ligaments have been well
entheses occur where muscles attach directly to
characterized (Figure 3.19). The initial elongation at
 diaphyseal bone. Fibrous entheses are made up of
the toe region of the curve results from the straight-
collagen fibers (Sharpey's fibers) that blend with
 ening of fibrillar crimps. The linear elastic region 
the periosteum and are anchored directly into cor-
describes reversible elongation that occurs due to
tical bone.
Fibrocartilaginous entheses contain a
direct fibrillar elongation or interfibrillar shear;
zone of fibrocartilage at the tendon or ligament
rapid loading causes fibrillar elongation, while
attachment site that serves as a transition zone
slow or sustained loading results in interfibrillar
between the parallel collagen fibers of the tendon/
shear and either stress relaxation or creep. The yield
ligament and the bone matrix (Figure 3.20). As in
point represents rupture of interfibrillar bonds
the deeper zones of articular cartilage, enthesial
and permanent distortion of collagen alpha-helices.
fibrocartilage contains deep mineralized and more
Macroscopic failure of atendon orligamentinvolves
proximal nonmineralized regions that are sepa-
complete mechanical disruption of the interfibrillar
rated by a tidemark. The interface between the
matrix and radical interfibrillar shear with pullout
bone matrix and the deep mineralized zone of the
of individual fibers (Benjamin et al., 2008).
 enthesial fibrocartilage has an irregular and wavy
 Entheses are specialized structures at the attach-
configuration that presents an extensive surface
ment sites of tendons or ligaments upon bone
 area along which collagen fibrils cross to merge
(Benjamin et al., 2006; Shaw & Benjamin, 2007).
with the bone matrix.
56   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Entheses form a transition between two struc-
or osteoligamentous interface. The complex pat-
tures (tendon/ligament and bone) that differ
terms of loading and high-intensity stresses that
greatly in mechanical properties and that are
occur at many entheses during locomotion under-
adapted to resist different forms of loading (tensile
lie the susceptibility of these structures to both
loads for tendon/ligament, and compressive loads
-g y meus) Aod snu pue Am ane
for bone) (Thomopoulos et al., 2003). Entheses are
jamin, 2007; Slobodin et al., 2007).
also subjected to multidirectional stresses since
conditions of load are often present throughout
the full ROM of an associated joint. The structure
References
of fibrocartilagenous entheses in particular has
evolved to dissipate the complex stresses that
would otherwise concentrate at the osteotendinous
AMBROSIO, F., WOLF, S.L., DELITTO, A., FITZGER-
ALD, G.K.,BADYLAK, S.F, BONINGER, M.L.,&
RUSSELL, A.J. 2010. The emerging relationship
between regenerative medicine and physical thera-
peutics. Phys Ther, 90, 1807-1814.
ARCHER, C.W,DOWTHWAITE, G.P, & FRANCIS-
Case Study 3.2 Calcanean tendon repair
WEST, P. 2003. Development of synovial joints. Birth
Defects Res Part C Embryo Today, 69, 144-155.
Signalment: 4 y.o. F/S Chesapeake Bay Retriever. Pre-
ARGILES,JM.,LOPEZ-SORIANO,F.J.,&BUSQUETS,S.
sented for evaluation of right pelvic limb lamreness.
2009. Therapeutic potential of interleukin-15: a
Klisodipe pue Susem aiosnu u paaroaui auoaul
 History: Patient showed intermittent performance defi-
Drug Discov Today, 14, 208-213.
ARMSTRONG, R.B., SAUBERT, C.W.T., SEEHERMAN,
cits while hunting for 3 months; lameness worsened
acutely during recent training
H.J, & TAYLOR, C.R. 1982. Distribution of fiber
types in locomotory muscles of dogs. Arm / Anat, 163,
Examination: Il-lll/V right pelvic limb lame with plan-
87-98.
tigrade stance, 17o-degree standing angle at stifle.
BENJAMIN, M. & RALPHS, JR. 1995. Functional and
developmental anatomy of tendons and ligaments. In:
Right calcanean tendon was thick and mildly painful
Gordon, S.L., Blair, S.J., & Fine, L.J. (eds.), Repetitive
on palpation just proximal to insertion. Ultrasono-
Motion Disorders of the LIpper Extrermity. Rosermont, IL:
graphic examination: Fiber disorganization consistent
American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons.
with tendon rupture and enthesiopathy.
BENJAMIN, M., TOUMI, H., RALPHS, JR., BYDDER
G., BEST, T.M., & MILZ, S. 2006. Where tendons and
Treatment: Surgical reattachrment of tendon to calca-
neus. For 12 weeks postoperatively, tarsus was main-
ligaments meet bone: attachment sites ("entheses") in
tained in extension with dynamic supportive bracing.
relation to exercise and/or mechanical load. / Anat,
The patient received regular hydrotherapy. Site treated
208, 471490.
daily with low-level laser. Low-intensity pulsed ultra-
BENJAMIN, M., KAISER, E., & MILZ, S. 2008. Structure-
sound treatment q3d. Local injections of platelet-rich
function relationships in tendons: a review. / Arat,212,
211-228.
plasma performed at 1, 2, and 4 weeks postoperatively.
Six months postoperatively. the patient's function
BLACK, L.L., GAYNOR, J., GAHRING, D., ADAMS, C.,
ARON, D., HARMAN, S., GINGERICH, D.A.,&
inmproved; however, larreness developed consistently
after moderate exercise. Standing angles of stifle and
HARMAN, R. 2007. Efect of adipose-derived mesen-
chymal stem and regenerative cells on lameness in
tarsus were 162 and 129 degrees, respectively. The
 gastrocnemius insertion remained palpably thick.
dogs with chronic osteoarthritis of the coxofemoral
This case highlights the extraordinary difficulty asso-
joints: a randomized, double-blinded, multicenter,
controlled trial. Vet Ther, 8, 272-284.
ciated   with  managerment  of  enthesial  disruptions.
Fibrocatilaginous entheses  are highly  specialized
BLACK, L.L., GAYNOR, J., ADAMS, C., DHUPA, S.,
structures that dissipate multidirectional stresses at
SAMS,A.E., TAYLOR, R.,HARMAN, S., GINGERICH,
osteotendinous junctions.  Surgical reattachment of
D.A., & HARMAN, R. 2008. Effect of intraarticular
injection of autologous adipose-derived mesenchymal
tendons  produces  a  mechanically inferior  fibrous
enthesis that is incapable of resisting large and complex
stem and regenerative cells on clinical signs of chronic
osteotendinous loads
osteoarthritis of the elbow joint in dogs. Vet Ther, 9,
192-200.
Chapter 3 Musculoskeletal Structure and Physiology 57
BONEWALD, L.F. 2006. Mechanosensation and trans-
HULMES, D.J. 2002. Building collagen molecules,
duction in osteocytes. Bonekey Osteovision, 3, 7-15.
fibrils, and suprafibrillar structures. / Struct Biot, 137,
BRADLEY, L., YAWORSKY, PJ., & WALSH, FS.2008.
2-10.
Myostatin as a therapeutic target for musculoskeletal
INDIK, Z., YEH, H., ORNSTEIN-GOLDSTEIN, N.,
disease. Cell Mol Life Sci, 65, 2119-2124.
KUCICH, U., ABRAMS, W., ROSENBLOOM, J.C., &
 CHAPMAN, J.A. 1989. The regulation of size and form
ROSENBLOOM, J. 1989. Structure of the elastin gene
in the assembly of collagen fibrils in vivo. Biopolymers,
and altermative splicing of elastin mRNA: implications
28, 1367-1382.
for human disease. Am ∫ Med Genet, 34, 81-90.
CHI, S.S.,RATTNER, J.B.,SCIORE, P., BOORMAN,R.,&
ITANO, N. & KIMATA, K. 2002. Mammalian hyaluronan
LO, 1.K. 2005. Gap junctions of the medial collateral
synthases. ILIBMB Life,54, 195-199.
ligament: structure, distribution, associations and
KADLER, K.E., HOLMES, D.F, TROTTER, JA.,&
function. / Anat, 207, 145-154.
CHAPMAN, JA. 1996. Collagen fibril formation.
CIVITELLI, R. 2008. Cell-cell communication in the
Biochem §, 316(Pt 1), 1-11.
osteoblast/osteocyte lineage. Arch Biochern Biophys,
KEELEY, F.W., BELLINGHAM, C.M., & WOODHOUSE,
473, 188-192.
K.A. 2002. Elastin as a self-organizing biomaterial: use
 CURREY, J. 2008. Collagen and the mechanical proper-
 of recombinantly expressed human elastin polypep-
ties of bone and calcified cartilage. In: Fratzl, P. (ed.),
tides as a model for investigations of structure and
Collagen: Structure and Mechanics. New York: Springer
self-assembly of elastin. Philos Trars R Soc Lord B Biot
Science+Business Media.
Sci, 357, 185-189.
ELLIOTT, D.M.,ROBINSON, PS.,GIMBEL, J.A.,
KHAN, 1.M., REDMAN, S.N., WILLIAMS, R., DOWTH-
SARVER, JJ, ABBOUD, JA., IOZZO, R.V., & SOS
WAITE,G.P,OLDFIELD,S.F.,&ARCHER,C.W.2007.
LOWSKY, L.J. 2003. Effect of altered matrix proteins
79, 136.
mouse tail tendons. Arr Biomed Eng, 31, 599-605
KIM, S.H., TURNBULL, J., & GUIMOND, S. 2011. Extra-
FAN, J., VARSHNEY, R.R., REN, L., CAI, D., & WANG,
cellular matrix and cell signalling: the dynamic coop-
D.A. 2009. Synovium-derived mesenchymal stem
eration of integrin, proteoglycan and growth factor
cells: a new cell source for musculoskeletal regenera-
receptor. /Endocrinot, 209, 139-151.
tion. Tissue Eng Part B Reo, 15, 75-86.
KJAER, M. 2004. Role of extracellular matrix in adapta-
FRANK, C.B., HART, D.A., & SHRIVE, N.G. 1999. Molec-
tion of tendon and skeletal muscle to mechanical
ular biology and biomechanics of normal and healing
loading. Physiot Reu, 84, 649-698.
ligaments—a review. Osteoarthr Cartil, 7, 130-140.
KO, K.S. & MCCULLOCH, C.A. 2001. Intercellular
FREEMAN, L.M. 2012. Cachexia and sarcopenia: emerg-
mechanotransduction: cellular circuits that coordi-
12/ f sies pue ssop u aoueroduni jo sauoipus Su
nate tissue responses to mechanical loading. Bioche
Interr Med, 26, 3-17.
Biophys Res Commun, 285, 1077-1083.
GOLDRING, M.B. 2006. Update on the biology of the
KURZ, B., LEMKE, A.K., FAY, J., PUFE, T., GRODZIN-
chondrocyte and new approaches to treating cartilage
SKY,A.J., & SCHUNKE,M. 2005. Pathomechanisms of
diseases. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol, 20, 1003-1025.
cartilage destruction by mechanical injury. Arn Anat,
GUERCIO, A., DI MARCO, P, CASELLA, S., CAN-
187,473-485.
NELLA, V., RUSSOTTO, L., PURPARI, G., DI BELLA,
LAI, W.M., HOU, J.S., & MOW, V.C. 1991.A triphasic
S., & PICCIONE, G. 2012. Production of canine mes-
theory for the swelling and deformation behaviors of
enchymal stem cells from adipose tissue and their
articular cartilage. ∫ Biormech Eng, 113, 245-258.
application in dogs with chronic osteoarthritis of the
LIM, LH., BOOZER, L., MARIANI, C.L., PEDRAHITA
humeroradial joints. Cell Biol Int, 36, 189-194.
J.A., & OLBY, N.J. 2010. Generation and characteriza-
GUNDERSEN, K.2011. Excitation-transcription coupling
tion of neurospheres from canine adipose tissue-
in skeletal muscle: the molecular pathways of exercise.
derived stromal cells. Cell Reprogram, 12, 417-425.
Biol Reu Camb Philos Soc, 86, 564-600.
LOESER, R.F., GOLDRING, S.R., SCANZELLO,C.R., &
GUNN, H.M. 1978a. Differences in the histochemical
GOLDRING, M.B. 2012.Osteoarthritis: a disease of the
properties of skeletal muscles of different breeds of
joint as an organ. Arthritis Rheum, 64, 1697-1707.
horses and dogs. / Arat, 127, 615-634.
MACKEY, A.L., HEINEMEIER, K.M., KOSKINEN, S.O.,
GUNN, H.M. 1978b. The proportions of muscle, bone
& KJAER, M. 2008. Dynamic adaptation of tendon and
and fat in two different types of dog. Res Vet Sci, 24,
muscle connective tissue to mechanical loading.
277-282.
Connect Tissue Res, 49, 165-168.
HARDINGHAM, T.E. & FOSANG, A.J. 1992. Proteogly-
MAROUDAS,A. 1980. Metabolism ofCartilaginous Tissues:
cans: many forms and many functions. FASEB ∫,6,861-
A Quartitative Approach. Tunbridge Wells, England:
870.
Pitman.
58   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
MASOUROS, S.D., MCDERMOTT, 1.D., AMIS, A.A., &
SELLAM, J. & BERENBAUM, F. 2010. The role of syno-
BULL, A.M. 2008. Biomechanics of the meniscus-
vitis in pathophysiology and clinical symptoms of
meniscal ligament construct of the knee. Knee Surg
osteoarthritis. Nat Rev Rheumatol, 6, 625-635.
Sports Traurmatol Arthrosc, 16, 1121-1132.
SHAW, H.M. & BENJAMIN, M. 2007. Structure-function
MITHIEUX, S.M. & WEISS, A.S. 2005. Elastin. Ado Protein
relationships of entheses in relation to mechanical
Chem, 70, 437-461.
load and exercise. Scand } Med Sci Sports, 17, 303-
MIYAZAKI, M. & ESSER, K.A. 2009. Cellular mechanisms
315.
regulating protein synthesis and skeletalmuscle hyper-
SILVER, FH. & SIPERKO, L.M. 2003. Mechanosensing
trophy in animals. / App! Physiol, 106, 1367-1373.
and mechanochemical transduction: how is mechani-
MOCZYDLOWSKI, E. & APKON, M. 2009. Cellular
cal energy sensed and converted into chemical energy
physiology of skeletal, cardiac, and smooth muscle. In:
in an extracellular matrix? Crit Rev Biormed Eng, 31,
Boron, W.F. & Boulpaep, E.L. (eds.), Medicat Physiology:
255-331.
A Cellular and Molecular Approach, 2nd ed. Philadel-
SIMS, N.A. & GOOI, J.H. 2008. Bone remodeling: multi-
phia: Saunders-Elsevier.
ple cellular interactions required for coupling of bone
MOMBERGER, T.S.,LEVICK, JR., & MASON, R.M.
formation and resorption. Sermtin Cell Dev Biol, 19,
2005. Hyaluronan secretion by synoviocytes is mecha-
444-451.
nosensitive. Matrix Biot, 24, 510-519.
SLOBODIN, G., ROZENBAUM, M., BOULMAN, N., &
MOSHER, D.S., QUIGNON, P, BUSTAMANTE, C.D.,
 ROSNER, 1. 2007. Varied presentations of enthesopa-
SUTTER, N.B., MELLERSH, C.S., PARKER, H.G., &
thy. Semirn Arthritis Rheum, 37,119-126.
OSTRANDER, E.A. 2007. A mutation in the myostatin
SOLOMON, A.M. & BOULOUX, PM. 2006. Modifying
 gene increases muscle mass and enhances racing per-
muscle mass—the endocrine perspective. / Enudocrinol,
formance in heterozygote dogs. PLoS Genet, 3, e79.
191, 349-360.
PEDERSEN, B.K.,AKERSTROM, T.C.,NIELSEN,A.R.,&
SPANGENBURG, E.E. 2009. Changes in muscle mass
FISCHER, C.P. 2007. Role of myokines in exercise and
with mechanical load: possible cellular mechanisms.
metabolism. / Appl Physiol, 103, 1093-1098.
Appl Physiol Nutr Metab,34, 328-335.
POWNALL, M.E., GUSTAFSSON, M.K., & EMERSON,
TAPP, H., HANLEY, E.N., Jr., PATT, J.C., & GRUBER,
C.P, Jr. 2002. Myogenic regulatory factors and the
H.E. 2009. Adipose-derived stem cells: characteriza-
specification of muscle progenitors in vertebrate
tion and current application in orthopaedic tissue
embryos. Annu Reu Cell Dev Biot, 18, 747-783.
repair. Exp Biot Med (Maywood), 234, 1-9.
RAMAGE, L., NUKI, G., & SALTER, D.M. 2009. Signal-
TEN BROEK, R.W., GREFTE, S.,& VON DEN HOFF, J.W.
ling cascades in mechanotransduction: cell-matrix
2010. Regulatory factors and cell populations involved
interactions and mechanical loading. Scand ∫ Med Sci
in skeletal muscle regeneration. ∫ Cell Physiol, 224,
Sports, 19, 457-469.
7-16.
REICH, C.M., RAABE, O., WENISCH, S., BRIDGER, PS.,
THOMOPOULOS, S., WILLIAMS, G.R., GIMBEL, JA.,
KRAMER, M,& ARNHOLD, S. 2012. Isolation,
FAVATA, M., & SOSLOWSKY, L.J. 2003. Variation of
culture and chondrogenic differentiation of canine
biomechanical, structural, and compositional proper-
adipose tissue- and bone marrow-derived mesenchy-
ties along the tendon to bone insertion site. ∫ Orthop Res,
mal stem cells—a comparative study. Vet Res Commun,
21,413419.
36, 139-148.
TIDBALL, J.G. & VILLALTA,S.A. 2010. Regulatory inter-
ROBLING, A.G., NIZIOLEK, PJ, BALDRIDGE, L.A.,
actions between muscle and the immune system
CONDON, K.W.,ALLEN, M.R.,ALAM, 1., MANTILA,
during muscle regeneration. Am ∫ Physiot Regut Integr
S.M.，
GLUHAK-HEINRICH,
J.,E
BELLIDO, T.M.
Comp Physiot, 298, R1173-R1187.
HARRIS, S.E., & TURNER, C.H. 2008. Mechanical
TISDALE, M.J. 2007. Is there a common mechanism
stimulation of bone in vivo reduces osteocyte expres-
 linking muscle wasting in various disease types? Curr
sion of Sost/sclerostin. / Biol Chem, 283, 5866-5875
Opin Support Palliat Care, 1,287-292.
ROUGHLEY, P.J. 2006. The structure and function of car-
TOLL, PW., GILLETTE, R.L., HAND, M.S. 2010. Feeding
tilage proteoglycans. Eur Cell Mater, 12, 92-101.
working and sporting dogs. In: Hand, M.S., Thatcher,
SAKAMOTO, K. & GOODYEAR, L.J. 2002. Invited
C.D., Remillard, R.L., Roudebush, P, Novotmy, B.J.
review: intracellular signaling in contracting skeletal
(eds.), Small Animal Clinicat Nutrition, 5th ed. Topeka,
muscle. / Appl Physiot, 93, 369-383.
KS: Mark Morris Institute, 327.
SCHAEFER, L. & IOZZO, R.V. 2008. Biological functions
VIERCK, J., O'REILLY, B., HOSSNER, K, ANTONIO, J.,
of the small leucine-rich proteoglycans: from genetics
BYRNE, K., BUCCI, L., & DODSON, M. 2000. Satellite
to signal transduction. } Biol Chem, 283, 21305-
cell regulation following myotrauma caused by resis-
21309.
tance exercise. Cell Biot Int, 24, 263-272.
Chapter 3 Musculoskeletal Structure and Physiology   59
VRHOVSKI, B.& WEISS, A.S. 1998. Biochemistry of tro-
growth hormone and testosterone. Phys Sportsmed, 38,
poelastin. Eur ∫ Biochem, 258, 1-18.
97-104.
WAKSHLAG, J.J, COOPER, B.J., WAKSHLAG, R.R.,
WU, Y., WANG, J., SCOTT, PG., & TREDGET, E.E. 2007.
KALLFELZ, FA., BARR, S.C, NYDAM, D.V,&
 Bone marrow-derived stem cells in wound healing: a
DIMAURO, S. 2004. Biochemical evaluation of mito-
review. Wound Repair Regen, 15(Suppl. 1), S18-S26.
chondrial respiratory chain enzymes in canine skeletal
ZHANG, G., YOUNG, B.B, EZURA, Y., FAVATA, M.,
muscle. Am / Vet Res, 65, 480484.
SOSLOWSKY, L.J., CHAKRAVARTI, S., & BIRK, D.E.
WALL, M.E. & BANES, A.J. 2005. Early responses to
 2005. Development of tendon structure and function:
mechanical load in tendon: role for calcium signaling,
regulation of collagen fibrillogenesis. ∫ Musculoskelet
 gap junctions and intercellular communication. / Mus-
Neuronal Interact, 5,5-21.
culoskelet Neuronal Interact,5, 70-84.
WEST, D.W. & PHILLIPS, S.M. 2010. Anabolic processes
in human skeletal muscle: restoring the identities of
The Role of Nutrition in Canine
Performance and Rehabilitation
Joseph J. Wakshlag, DVM, PhD, Dipl ACVN, Diplomate, American
College of Veterinary Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Summary
Nutrition plays an integral role in sports performance and rehabilitation. Sporting dogs have
a multitude of different activities that likely require dietary modifications for optimal perfor-
mance that revolve around substrate uti lization. Sprinting dogs require more carbohydrate,
while endurance athletes require fat as the major fuel for exercise. These principles are best
employed in a well-trained, fit athlete in optimal body condition which varies slightly depend-
ing on the athletic endeavor; however, many athletes regardless of the task are kept lean to
include the use of homemade dog food as a portion of the ration, there are risks of vitamin
and mineral imbalances that performance canine owners need to be aware of. These concepts
and others are covered extensively in this chapter.
Rehabilitation, on the other hand, often employs dietary principles that revolve around
nutritional adequacy for wound healing and maintenance of lean body mass. The concepts
of lean body mass and protein consumption are fundamental to obesity management, which
can be a component of rehabilitation and gerontology as well. Additionally, the use of long-
chain omega-3 fatty acids and other nutraceuticals for their anti-inflammatory properties and
ability to dampen chronic inflammation and improve mobility in dogs with osteoarthritis, a
common sequela to many orthopedic procedures, is discussed.
In canine performance, many variables, such as
conformation, genetics, and behavioral drive, are
 limited physiologic understanding of the require-
major determinants for success, yet environmental
 ments for the numerous activities in which dogs
variables such as training and nutrition are impor-
 partake. There are considerable nutritional physi-
tant as well. Athletic canine venues and events
 ology data on the two athletic extremes: endurance
@2013 John Wiley &t Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
60
Chapter 4 The Role of Nutrition in Canine Performance and Rehabilitation  61
Acetyl coA
NADH
CO
Oxaloacetate
Citrate
NADH
CO2
NADH
CO
FADH2
GTP
Figure 4.1  The citric acid cycle showing acetyl CoA entry and the formation of NADH and FADHz with the liberation of
CO, and GTP. NADH and FADH, then enter the electron transport chain.
dogs (sled dogs) and sprinting dogs (Greyhounds).
deotide (FADHz) in the citric acid cycle within
Nutritional studies for more popular activities,
mitochondria. The citric acid cycle is a complex of
  a 's    e s
 many enzymes that convert the by-products of
igmored, leading to attempts to translate endurance 
glucose, protein, and fat degradation as pyruvate
and sprinting knowledge into sound nutritional
(glucose and some amino acids) and acetate (fatty
principles for all sporting dogs. These principles 
acids and some amino acids) into covalently bound
are addressed here, focusing on three areas: ener-
CoA moieties to make acetyl CoA, the major entry
getics, nutrition for performance, and nutrition
point substrate for the citric acid cycle (Figure 4.1).
during rehabilitation.
No matter where substrates enter the citric acid
cycle, they are eventually turned into carbon
dioxide, with oxygen as the reactant in the process
Energetics and the myofiber
for generating ATP (Shulman & Petersen, 2009).
Conversion of substrate to energy
Glycolysis and beta oxidation of fatty acids
The generation of ATP is a universal process in all
cells that occurs through the enzymatic machinery
ATP generation occurs through beta-oxidation of
 of the mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC).
fat and glucose oxidation through glycolysis, both
In short, the ETC utilizes free hydrogen to create an
of which lead to acetyl CoA production. Beta-
electrochemical gradient between the inner and
oxidation of fat is a critical process to normal daily
 outer mitochondrial membrane that generates a
 energy metabolism, as fat is considered the pre-
covalent bond between ADP and inorganic phos-
ferred fuel during rest. Glycolysis is a complex
phate to make ATP as the storage form of energy.
process that begins with fructose conversion to
ATP generation and hydrolysis becomes a central
glucose or glucose immediate entry into the glyco-
theme to create appropriate muscle contraction.
lytic pathway. This breakdown of glucose results
ATP is ultimately formed from the generation of
in one 6-carbon molecule, generating two 3-carbon
hydrogenated nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
precursors, which eventually generate 2 NADH
(NADH) and dihydrogenated flavin adenine dinu-
 and 4 ATP and 2 pyruvate molecules (Figure 4.2).
62   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Glucose
ATP
ADP
ATP
ADP
1.6
Phospho
Phospho
glyceralde
glyceraldehyde
NAD/NAD
ATP
ATP
ATP
ATP
NADH/NADH
Pyruvate
Pyruvate
Toacetyl CoA,
citricacidcycle
acetyl CoA for entry into the citric acid cycle. Note that two ATP are utilized, but four ATP are made in the reaction to
provide quick anaerobic energy.
ATP is produced rapidly and does not require
moiety into the mitochondria. The fatty acid
Oxygen, which is the rate-limiting step in the citric
becomes conjugated to acetyl CoA again, and then
acid cycle, making glycolysis a preferred system to
carnitine undergoes reverse transportation back to
generate ATP quickly and anaerobically. The excess
the cytoplasm (Shulman & Petersen, 2009).
pyruvate is converted to lactate under anaerobic
 metabolism. Glycogen stores for ATP generation,
unlike fat in most cases, are limited.
Energetics of substrates
Glycolysis occurs in the cytoplasm of all cells.
 During rest, glycolysis is inhibited, causing a flux
 The unit of energy generated by metabolism of
of glucose toward eventual glycogen formation
protein, carbohydrate, and fat, is the calorie or
(Figure 4.3). In times of need, increased glycogen
 joule. The kilocalorie (kcal) is the unit referred to
phosphorylase activity induces glycogenolysis and
 in lay terminology when talking about calories,
generation of glucose 6-phosphate for glycolysis
 and is equivalent to 4.16 kJ. One gram of protein
and entry into the citric acid cycle. Beta-oxidation
placed in a bomb calorimeter generates approxi-
 of fat occurs in the mitochondria, and transport
mately 5.24kcal. Fat generates 9.16kcal/g and car-
of free fatty acid into the inner mitochondria is
bohydrate 4.26kcal/g. This is the gross energy
required. Carnitine is bound to the carboxyl termi-
(GE) of the substrate and does not take into account
nus of the free fatty acid in exchange for coenzyme
the energy lost in feces due to incomplete diges-
A (Figure 4.4). Once the camitine is bound, the
 tion. This loss is reflected in the digestible energy
fatty acid is transported across the outer mitochon-
(DE). Metabolizable energy (ME) as reported on
drial membrane by carnitine acyl transferase I to
u iso aua junoe ou san saqe pooy iad
the inner compartment, and then carmitine palmi-
urine, digestion, and gases. ME is assumed to be
toyl transferase II transports the fatty acid carnitine
significantly less than the GE or DE. Protein and
Chapter 4 The Role of Nutrition in Canine Performance and Rehabilitation  63
Glucose
Glucose
ATP
Glucose
Hexokinase
Glucose
ADP
Glycogen
Glucose-6-
Synthase
phosphate
UDP-
UDP
Phospho-
Glucose
Glucose
glucomutase
Uridyl
Tansferas
PPi
Glucose
phosphate
UTP
Figure 4.3 Glycogenolysis occurs when excessive glucose is taken into cells as reserve glucose stores, and is eventually
broken down for glucose when needed.
carbohydrate are  generally  given  a  value  of
4kcal/g, and fat 9kcal/g as calculated by the
requirements (MER) for active pet dogs. These
Atwater equation when evaluating human foods
equations are starting points for patients undergo-
(Table 4.1). This equation is modified to adjust for
 ing rehabilitation. When integrating exercise into a
slightly less digestible ingredients in a manufac-
therapeutic plan, 20-30 minutes of rehabilitation
tured pet food, making protein and carbohydrate
activity three to four times a week would likely
approximately 3.5kcal/g. and fat 8.5kcal/g (Na-
result in a negligible energy increase. This should
tional Research Coumcil, 2006a, 2006b).
 be recognized when making a diet plan for a dog
undergoing rehabilitation.
Increasing physical activity and the effects of
 training have been extensively studied in dogs
Body condition and energy utilization at
during treadmill exercise. The maximum oxygen
rest and during exercise
consumption during exercise (VOz max) reflects
the energy that can be generated via oxygen utili-
The National Research Council (NRC) has set forth
 zation in the mitochondrial ETC. An average 20-kg
energy and nutrient requirements for dogs. Two
 Foxhound or Alaskan sled dog working at maximal
 equations are used to represent resting energy
requirement (Table 4.2). The linear equation closely
 700-900 kcal/h of work based on the experimental
mimics the results obtained from the exponential
conditions set forth in simulated treadmill exercise
equation until the patient weight reaches 25kg,
(Ordway et al., 1984; Musch et al., 1985; Reynolds
 when the linear equation diverges, overestimating
et al, 1999). This oxygen consumption is directly
the energy requirements needed at rest. A multi-
related to skeletal muscle mitochondrial density
plication factor of 1.0-2.0 is applied to the linear
and volume. In the field, there are many other
equation's initial calculation of (30 x kilogram
factors to take into consideration, such as external
body weight) + 70 which is considered
lresting
temperature, thermal regulation, variability in ter-
energy requirement (RER) based on activity. The
rain, and incline versus decline. Treadmill exercise
results in a loss of efficiency in energy utilization
multiplied by 70, which is considered the RER. For
with increased incline; the need for vertical rise
activity, this multiplication factor is increased up to
increases overall kcal expenditure. Larger dogs
64   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Table 4.1  Atwater's formula and modified Atwater's
equations
Fatty acid
Atwater's formula
Cytosol
 Fatty acyl-CoA
COA
Protein = 4kcal/g × 24 = 84 kcal
Fat = 9 kcal/g × 12 = 108 kcal
7
Carbohydrate = 4 kcal/g × 50 = 200kcal
Carnitine
Acyl carnitine
Total kcal = 404kcal
 Modified Atwater's formula
Carnitine-acyl transferase I /
Protein = 3.5kcal/g × 24 = 84 kcal
/Carnitine-acyl transferaseII
Fat = 8.5 kcal/g × 12 = 102 kcal
Carbohydrate = 3.5 kcal/g × 50 = 175kcal
Total kcal = 361 kcal
Carnitine
 Acyl carnitine
The above formulas demonstrate use of Atwater's Formula
and Modified Atwater's Formula to calculate kilocalories in
Acyl-CoA
CoA
%05 pue 1ey %21 'uiai1d %t j s1sisuo heyt po0y ad e
carbohydrates on a dry matter basis in 1 00g Note the
NADH
modest differences between the two equations.
Oxidative
β-Oxidation
phosphorylation FADHz
The modified Atwater's equation is used to calculate most 
commercial pet foods and can potentially undercalculate the
Mitochondrial
number of kilocalories in highly digestible foods.
Acetyl-CoA
matrix
ATP
Table 4.2 Calculations for resting and active energy
requirements
"00
TCA cycle
ATP
 Linear equation for a 30-kg dog
H2O
Resting energy requirement = 30 × BW (kg) + 70 
= 970kcal
 Active maintenance energy requirement = 2[30 (kg)
Figure 4.4  Fatty acid entry into the mitochondria is
+ 70} = 1940kcal
depencent on carnitine-mediated transport through both the
outer and inner mitochondrial membranes via carnitine
 Exponential equation for a 30-kg dog
palmitoyltransferase 1 and carnitine acylcarnitine
translocase. After fatty acid transport, carnitine is recycled
Resting energy requirement = 70 × BW × BW (kg)0.75
through actions of carnitine palmitoyltransferase 2. Fat
= 897kcal
within the mitochondria will then undergo beta-oxidation
 Active maintenance requirement = 140 × Bw (kg)0.75
and entry of acetyl CoA into the citric acid cycle.
= 1794 kcal
Reproduced by permission of Hand et af. (2010).
need to exert more energy to break the fall that
2160 kcal/day. These studies take into account the
occurs on decline (Taylor et al., 1972; Ordway et al.,
typical training regimen for a racing Greyhound,
1984; Schmidt-Nielsen, 1984; Reynolds et al., 1999).
which includes being penned or caged with daily
 Uneven footing or poor footing (snow and sand),
sprint training in enclosed paddocks for approxi-
Kraua paseau un ssai ueq peo se am se
mately 30 minutes and two races a week (Hill et al.,
expenditure (Taylor, 1957).
1999, 2000). These findings translate to approxi-
Field studies examining energy expenditure of
working Greyhounds have shown that the average
MER may be a reflection of the increased muscle
32-35 kg Greyhound expends approximately 2050-
mass in Greyhounds.
Chapter 4 The Role of Nutrition in Canine Performance and Rehabilitation  65
Interestingly, studies by Hill and colleagues
 suggested that feed restriction during racing from
weight down to a restricted regimen of only
137kcal/kg?7s resulted in decreased racing times,
making mild feed restriction advantageous (Hill
et al., 1999). There are numerous reports of caloric
intake in racing sled dogs. Decombaz et al. sug-
gested an intake of only 2100kcal/day when dogs
kga.7), while Orr suggested an intake of approxi-
mately 4400 kcal when dogs were pulling a heavy
load over ice 32km/day (270 kcal/kg*") (Orr, 1966;
Figure 4.5 Appropriate body condition for a working sled
 Decombaz et al., 1995). These discrepancies appear
dog, current BCS 4 of 9. Note that the musculature is
significant and may be related to climate, housing.
defined and ribs are visible to the eye, which may not be
and activity in and outside of the kennel. Addition-
the case in heavier coated dogs.
ally, these estimates did not factor in changes in
lean and fat mass during these activities.
Two studies used water double-labeled with
 deuterium and O'8 (heavy oxygen) to assess total
are easily palpable, there is an obvious abdomen
 oxygen loss via urine versus that generated and
tuck, and when viewed and felt from the top, a
lost through respiration as CO2. This technique
waist can be seen and the spinous processes can be
allows calculation of relative COz loss, which is a
felt. In athletic dogs, particularly Greyhounds, field
rough estimate of total kilocalories consumed,
trial, hunting, and sprint sled dogs, it may be more
since the only route for COz generation is the ETC.
desirable to have a BCS between 3 and 4. In this
Dogs running an average of 79km/day over 8 days
paradigm, ribs can be visualized in shorter haired
dogs, the spinous processes and wings of the ilea
the conditions and temperature during the field
 are prominent, but ample paralumbar musculature
experiment were not reported (Decombaz et al.,
extends between the wings of the ilea so that the
1995). A second study by Hinchliff and colleagues
sacral spinous processes can be localized, but do
 in extreme racing conditions with dogs running at
not protrude. Dogs in sprinting and intermediate
 -rdde mou ue u Apaeuxndde jo pads e
activity (10-30 minutes) need to be lean to achieve
mately 14h/day over 5 days (total 490 km) at tem-
ideal performance (Figure 4.5), and restricted meal
peratures between -10 and -35°C suggested the
feeding is common. In endurance activities where
average kcal expenditure in 18 dogs averaged
speed is not as important, and there is a greater
1052 ± 192kcal/kgo7s /day (Hinchcliff et al., 1997b).
chance for body condition loss during extended
Metabolically, these dogs would need approxi-
activity, a BCS of 4-5 may be ideal before competi-
mately 10,000kcal/day to maintain body weight,
tion due to the potential for weight loss during
Aeu suonpuon asau ui ssop Aueu Sunsasans
competitive racing (Hinchcliff et al., 1998).
utilize body reserves to meet the caloric demands
since maintaining adequate intake is difficult.
Most performance dog owners are acutely aware
Nutrition for performance
of their animals' body condition scores (BCSs) and
competitive body weights. The traditional body
Dietary protein: beyond energy
condition scoring methods use a 5- or 9-point
system. The 9-point system has been validated
Although they must ingest essential amino acids
through comparison to dual X-ray absorptiometry
(Table 4.3), dogs can synthesize nonessential amino
analysis (Laflamme, 1997) and is preferred by the
acids through amidation, deamination, and car-
author (Purina, 2012). Typically, performance dog
boxylation reactions that convert carbon precur-
owners keep their dogs at a 45/9 BCS where ribs
sors and essential amino acids into nonessential
66  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Table 4.3  Essential and nonessential amino acids
approximately 60km in fieldwork per week, plus
treadmill training each week, on four diets com-
 Dietary essential amino
Dietary nonessential
prising 18% ME protein (48g/1000 kcal), 24% ME
acids
amino acids
protein (60g/1000kcal), 30% ME
protein (75g/
Isoleucine 
Alanine
1000kcal), and 36% ME protein (90g/1000kcal)
Leucine
Tyrosine
 %  j   1 w
Lysine
 Aspartic acid
 protein were examined. After 12 weeks of feeding
Methionine
Asparagine
each diet, routine complete blood counts, serum
 Phenylalanine
Glutamine
chemistries, VO max, and physical assessment
Tryptophan
Glutamic acid
were performed. Six of eight dogs in the lowest
Valine
Glycine
Histidine
Serine
protein diet (18% ME) sustained musculoskeletal
Threonine
Cysteine
 injuries and showed a 25% drop in VO, max. Dogs
Arginine
Proline
in the highest protein groups displayed a 10%
increase in plasma volume, and there was a linear
correlation between hematocrit, hemoglobin, and
 total blood volume and protein intake (Reynolds
et al., 1999). Querengaesser and colleagues exam-
amino acids. Nitrogen retention studies rely on
ined diets of approximately 72 and 85g/1000kcal
nitrogen balance as the measure of adequacy;
and showed that there was no difference in the
however, most canine nitrogen retention studies
hematocrit decline over a 6-month period of train-
have never examined the consequences on lean
ing, but the higher protein group had elevated
mass. The NRC states that only 20g/1000kcal of
postexercise hematocrit, further suggesting that
 protein is required for maintenance, equating to
protein may affect parameters associated with per-
Aip [eid e ui uaod apni %l kaerxodde
formance (Querengaesser et al., 1994). An inter-
commercial product.
esting study of mixed breed dogs exercised 4h/
 Dietary protein helps maintain muscle integrity
 day at 12km/h compared soy protein versus fish-
 and appropriate total protein, albumin, and red
blood cell status. The hematocrit and
1serum
35% of the ME. After 3 weeks, there was decreased
albumin tend to decrease with training and racing;
hematocrit and increased red blood cell fragility in
this appears to be a result of overtraining syn-
the soybean-meal-fed dogs (Yamada et al., 1987).
drome (Kronfeld et al., 1989; Wakshlag et al., 2010).
These data suggested that endurance dogs should
 This syndrome can be correlated to the acute phase
receive a minimum of 70g/1000kcal (approxi-
 response whereby the liver changes its protein pro-
mately 26% of ME) of highly digestible animal-
1 profile to 
proteins such as haptoglobin
 source protein with no upper limit yet defined.
and c-reactive protein, possibly at the expense of
s aq A and a 'sop s u
albumin (Wakshlag et al., 2010; Kenyon et al., 2011).
different as Hill and colleagues performed studies
 The mechanism for these changes is poorly under-
 suggesting that racing Greyhounds perform better
stood, but is thought to be due to acute inflamma-
on lower protein diets of 63g/1000kcal versus
tion caused by exercise with potential cytokine
106g/1000kcal (Hill et al, 2001b). These diets
 alterations resulting in decreases in red blood cell
substituted carbohydrates for the protein in an iso-
counts (Kronfeld et al., 1989; Wakshlag et al., 2010;
caloric  exchange  of 
nutrients; therefore, the
Kenyon et al., 2011). Adequate protein intake may
enhanced performance may have been due to the
be helpful in ameliorating this condition.
increased carbohydrate in the diet, not the lack of
Studies examining protein consumption and its
protein.
. Though it appears that approximately
role in maintaining red blood cell counts and
60g/1000kcal may be adequate for racing Grey-
hematocrit in training sled dogs
have
postu-
hounds, further decreases in protein have not been
lated that approximately 30% of the ME (70-80g
evaluated and are very contrary to current feeding
protein/1000kcal) should come from highly digest-
practices.
5. Most Greyhounds are provided 0.25
ible animal-based
 protein (Kronfeld et al., 1989).
0.5kg of meat mixed with dry commercial dog
 Four groups of sprint racing sled dogs exercising
food, approaching 106g/1000kcal to meet their
Chapter 4 The Role of Nutrition in Canine Performance and Rehabilitation  67
energy requirements (Hill, 1998; Kohnke, 1998).
studies have laid the groundwork for our under-
The differences noted in sprinting dogs and endur-
standing of oxygen consumption, showing that
ance dogs may be related to overall muscle turn-
when dogs utilize up to 40% of their VO, max, they
over rates, as exercise leads to increased protein
primarily utilize fat for energy, while between 40%
turnover, and increased muscle inflammation is
 and 70%, they utilize a mixture of glucose and fatty
observed with increased duration of exercise (Was-
acids. Once an animal reaches 70% or higher
serman et al., 1988, 1989, 1991; Wakshlag et al.,
Oxygen consumption, they utilize primarily glucose
2002a). Without firm recommendations or studies
for energy (Toll et al., 1992; Reynolds et al., 1995)
in sprinting dogs, a reasonable recommendation is
(Figure 4.6).
Animals working at maximal speed during the
receive minimally 60g/1000kcal consumed (22-
first few seconds of exercise rely upon immediate
24% ME).
erates ATP through shuttling inorganic phosphate
to ADP. Glycogenolysis soon ensues, generating
Dietary fat and carbohydrate: energy
energy for only a few minutes. Generation of pyru-
and demands
vate and eventually lactic acid predominates if gly-
colysis is maintained, leading to pH alteration and
The respiratory quotient (RQ) is the ratio of oxygen
intracellular dysfunction. Pyruvate incorporation
consumed to CO2 generated. If the RQ is close to
into the citric acid cycle (carbohydrate oxidation)
0.7, primarily fat is being consumed for COz pro-
becomes a major source of energy for long-term
duction, while if the RQ is closer to 1, primarily
 exercise (from 20 minutes to 2 hours) as long as
glucose is being consumed (Figure 4.6). Early in
glycogen is present for glycogenolysis. Eventually.
 exercise (the first 20-30 minutes), protein oxida-
 protein oxidation will take place if glycogen
is
tion is minimal; therefore, substrate utilization and
depleted in endurance exercise. As glycogen is
changes in oxygen consumption can be examined
when feeding differing carbohydrate and fat diets
consumption above 50-60% of VO, max. Fatty acid
(Toll & Gillette, 2010). A significant amount of work
oxidation begins to rise by 30 minutes of continu-
has been performed examining gradation of exer-
 ous exercise and will be sustained at an oxygen
cise and duration as they relate to VO max and RQ
consumption rate of between 30% and 50% of
values (Wagner et al., 1977; Granjean, 1998). These
the maximum as the primary fuel. This provides
acetyl CoA production for the citric acid cycle at a
steady rate, allowing some dogs to exercise at this
120-
 low to moderate oxygen consumption rate for mul-
VOmaximum
100
tiple hours (Reinhart, 1998; Toll & Gillette, 2010)
nsumptio
maximum
(Figure 4.7).
80
High intensity
This understanding provides the basis for fat
60
use as a major form of energy in canid diets, which
is contrary to recommendations in human endur-
40
Moderate intensity
ance exercise, which focuses on carbohydrate
20
Low intensity
loading (Hargreaves et al., 1984). It has been shown
that time to exhaustion during low-intensity exer-
cise did not correlate with glycogen depletion in
D
20
40
60
80
100
 Running speed (% maximum)
dogs (Downey et al., 1980). The generation of
energy from fat is up to 70% of the ME during
Figure 4.6  Depiction of running speed versus the maximal
long-duration exercise, suggesting a propensity
oxygen consumption. Note that the VO max is reached
for fat utilization that may be due to the dog's
well before maximal speed is reached reflecting anaerobic
high aerobic activity in skeletal muscle and
s a o   a pn  si
increased mitochondrial density as compared to
for short periods of time. VOz max is often reached at
between 65% and 75% of maximal running capacity.
humans (Wakshlag et al., 2004). Beagles running at
Reproduced by permission of Hand et af. (2010).
low to moderate intensity increased their time to
68   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
200-
Cr-P
studies, it is advised to introduce fats to the diet
Glycolysis
slowly. Adaptation to high-fat diets will take
150-
Carbohydrate oxidation
approximately 8-12 weeks to allow for mitochon-
Fat oxidation
drial and metabolic adaptation (Reynolds et al.,
100
1994; Reinhart, 1998). This will help to prevent ste-
VO2
atorrhea, which is a common occurrence when
50-
feeding high-fat diets. Excess fat in the diet may
also require an increase in divalent cation nutrients
(calcium, iron, zinc, copper, and manganese) due
2
4
6
8103090150210270
to soap formation with free fatty acids chelating
Duration of exercise (min)
these cations, making them less available for
Figure 4.7 The graph depicts the VO, max based on
absorption, particularly calcium.
duration of exercise. Note that initially, VO, max is above
The amount of fat in the Greyhound diet is
100% reflecting anaerobic energy generated by creatine
highly debated as studies by Toll and colleagues
phosphate reserves and glycolysis which eventually plateaus
have shown that Greyhounds on a high carbohy-
in 2-4 minutes with carbohydrate oxidation. As glycogen
drate diet (46% ME vs. 6% ME) were 0.4km/h
stores are depleted, beta oxidation of fat occurs and sustains
faster (Toll et al., 1992). The high-carbohydrate
the exercise period somewhere around 60-90 minutes,
diets contained only 31% ME fat, while the high-fat
making fat the primary fuel for exercise in the endurance
diet consisted of 75% ME as fat. Hill and colleagues
athlete.
Reproduced by permission of Mand et at. (2010).
showed slightly different results, suggesting that
Greyhounds fed 25% ME protein, 32% ME fat, and
43% ME carbohydrate performed better than those
exhaustion by approximately 25% when provided
on a higher carbohydrate diet (21% ME protein,
diets with 55-81g/1000kcal of fat versus 33g/
25% ME fat, and 54% ME carbohydrate) (Hill et al.,
1000kcal (Downey et al., 1980). Kronfeld, Hammel,
1999). These results taken together with previous
and colleagues showed that dogs performed
 reports suggesting that higher carbohydrate diets
equally well on diets containing absolutely no car-
bohydrate compared to two diets with increasing
30% ME fat and 24% ME protein with the remain-
carbohydrate content (Hammel et al., 1977; Kro-
 ing ME from carbohydrate seems adequate for
nfeld et al., 1977). Further studies in trained and
racing Greyhounds. Surprisingly, this type of
untrained sled dogs showed that when comparing
dietary breakdown results in a product that would
a high-carbohydrate (162g/1000kcal; 59% ME)
be approximately 24-28% dry matter protein, 12-
low-fat (18g/1000kcal; 14% ME) diet to a high-
14% dry matter fat, and 45-50% carbohydrate,
fat (70g 1000kcal; 58% ME) low-carbohydrate
which is similar to many commercial adult pet
(43g/1000kcal) diet, there was no difference in
foods on the market.
muscle glycogen storage (Wagmer et al., 1977).
Very little information regarding optimal dietary
Interestingly, the dogs on the high-fat diet showed
fats for canine athletes is available, but there has
diminished glycogen consumption with exercise.
 been some speculation that chain length and satu-
In endurance,
huskies racing
approximately
ration can affect a variety of issues from inflamma-
100km/day over 5 days showed immediate glyco-
tion to oxidative potential during exercise (Bauer,
gen depletion, with an increase in skeletal muscle
2006). Medium-chain triglycerides when digested
glycogen and gradual depletion (Reynolds et al.,
liberate 8-12 carbon fatty acids that umdergo some
1995) of skeletal muscle triglyceride further sug-
direct absorption into the bloodstream and are
gesting that the longer these endurance dogs run,
 transported via albumin to cells for metabolism
the more they adapt to fat utilization,
,sparing
(Table 4.4). This hasled to speculation that medium-
muscle glycogen (McKenzie et al., 2008).
chain triglycerides in the form of coconut and palm
Fat consumption can supply approximately 60-
oils can be utilized more rapidly at the initiation
70% of the ME, and in times of extreme demand,
of exercise leading to further glycogen sparing
fat may supply up to 85% of the ME, particularly
(Hawley, 2002; Jeukendrup & Aldred, 2004). This
in endurance sled dogs. Based on the previous
does not appear to be the case in other species, and
Chapter 4 The Role of Nutrition in Canine Performance and Rehabilitation  69
Table 4.4Differences between medium- and long-chain triglycerides
Medium-chain triglycerides
Long-chain triglycerides
 Chain length
10-14 carbons long
16-22 carbons long
Kilocalories per gram
Approximately 7kcal
Approximately9kcal
Primary Gl absorption
 Direct enterocyte to portal blood
Synthesis into chylomicrons
Transport in blood 
Carried via albumin
Chylomicrons and lipoproteins
Cell absorption
Diffusion
Lipase dependent absorption
one pilot study in athletic dogs showed limited
Carbohydrate loading is a principle used in
utility; thus, it cannot currently be recommended
human athletics, which can translate into the
as a strategy in fat adaptation (Reynolds et al.,
canine arena. It may be beneficial for sprinting and
1998). Discussion of polyunsaturated fatty acids
intermediate athletes, particularly over multiple
will be reserved for rehabilitation where their
day events, where muscle glycogen is depleted
 influence on inflammation may be more pertinent.
daily and needs to be replenished (Reynolds
Since many performance animals including fox-
et al., 1997; Wakshlag et al., 2002b; McKenzie et al.,
hounds, hunting dogs, and service dogs rely on
2008). Studies performed in sled dogs have defini-
detection capabilities, the potential use of polyun-
tively shown that postexercise supplementation
saturated fatty acids in olfaction is of interest.
with a maltodextrin supplement at 1.5 gm/kg BW
A small study using only four dogs in a Latin
within 30 minutes of exercise increases skeletal
square design showed that olfactory performance
muscle glycogen within 4-24 hours (Hinchcliff
appeared to be enhanced when dogs were pro-
et al., 1997a, 1997c). In both studies, it was evident
that this dosing returned muscle glycogen
1to
switched from animal-based fat to corm oil-based
baseline concentrations before exercise the follow-
fat. Com oil has extremely high concentrations of
ing day, while without supplementation, skeletal
the polyunsaturated fatty acid linoleic acid, which
muscle glycogen content was only 50% of baseline
 may enhance olfactory capability in scent-trained
concentrations (Reynolds et al., 1997; Wakshlag
Labradors (Altom et al., 2003). Another study
et al., 2002b). Based on this information, postexer-
 examining hunting dogs suggested that a diet with
cise carbohydrate repletion is recommended in
 dogs rurming anywhere between 5 minutes and
bird find rates (Davenport et al., 2001). Whether
this was due to the altered substrates, differences
perform activities that will facilitate carbohydrate
 in ingredients, or long-chain polyunsaturated fat 
oxidation similarly the following day. The effec-
errichment could not be determined based on the
am saaa amua u aens s o ssaa
experimental design.
dogs are rurning at a slower pace for extended
periods of time is unknown, so this strategy is not 
routinely recommended.
Carbohydrates: timing and strategy
In the human athletic arena, protein with car-
bohydrate is often provided postexercise. The
The use of carbohydrates as a major dietary sub-
protein is thought to help curb skeletal muscle pro-
strate makes sense in sprinting animals like Grey-
teolysis after intermediate exercise (Betts & Wil-
hounds with approximately 40-50% of the ME in
xa a nu su ye s (ioz 's
the diet as highly digestible carbohydrates. Endur-
in the canine performance arena. In human athlet-
 ance sled dogs need less than 10% of the ME as
ics, the use of whey-based protein in young ath-
carbohydrates, as there are no definitive carbohy-
letes postexercise appears to help in retention of
drate requirements in these dogs (Reinhart, 1998;
-aldai uasosklo saaondu Aiqissod pue sseu uea
Hill et al., 2001b).
tion in some situations (Betts & Williams, 2010), but
70   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
firm recommendations in performance dogs cannot
Table 4.5  Essential major and trace minerals
be given at this time.
Major minerals
Trace minerals
Potassium
lron
Dietary fiber
Calcium
Zinc
Phosphorus
Copper
Dietary fiber, regardless of its form, leads to fecal
Sodium
Manganese
Chloride
bulk. This increase in fecal bulk can lead to inap-
lodine
 Magnesium
Selenium
propriate defecation during competition and extra
weight carried by the competitor, which may be
negative. Fiber comes in two forms; insoluble (non-
fermentable) and soluble (fermentable). Insoluble
fiber results in fecal bulk and acts as a binding
Electrolytes, minerals, and the
 agent that can improve fecal quality when diarrhea
canine athlete
is a problem. Soluble fiber has the capacity to alter
the large intestinal microflora and potentially
Minerals can be classified into major minerals and
increase the absorptive surface of the small and
trace minerals (Table 4.5). The major minerals are
large intestine through villous hypertrophy. This
 of most importance since deficiencies in dogs
has been used strategically in canid athletes with
fed nontraditional diets (meat base without bone)
stress-related diarrhea. Soluble fiber tends to be
have been observed. If meats are being used, it is
a matrix on which certain bacterial families, in-
often advised to have the bones ground into the
cluding Bifidobacteria, Lactobacillus, and Strep-
meat supply to improve the calcium and phospho-
tococcus, thrive (Wakshlag et al., 201l; Gagné
rus balance. Calcium should be between 0.6%
et al., 2013). These bacterial families ferment soluble
and 1.2% dry matter, with similar amounts of
fiber sources and liberate volatile fatty acids
 phosphorus to maintain calcium homeostasis for
(acetate, butyrate, propionate) that promote colo-
structural integrity of bone and appropriate cellu-
nocyte regeneration and may improve recovery
lar signaling and buffering capacities (National
from diarrhea (Whelan & Schneider, 2011). Many
Research Council, 2006c). Magnesium is also a
of the enteric formulas of commercial dog food use
concern when bone is not a constituent in a non-
small amounts of gums, soy fiber, fructooliogsac-
 traditional diet, and commercial feed is not being
charides, other oligosaccharides, and mixed insol-
used. Deficiency can manifest in exercising dogs as
uble and soluble fiber sources, to improve fecal
hyperextension of the carpus; this has been
quality and intestinal absorptive capabilities. The
observed in endurance huskies. Deficiencies of the
amount of soluble fiber added is generally less
 other major minerals including sodium, potas-
than 2% of dry matter in the diet since overfermen-
sium, and chloride have never been observed in
tation can result in deteriorating fecal quality
 adult working dogs; however, nonclinical hypona-
(Beloshapka et al., 2011). Mixed soluble and insol-
tremia has been observed in endurance huskies
uble sources commonly added to commercial dog
during
 races and simulated endurance races
foods to improve fecal quality are chicory root, beet
(Hinchcliff et al., 1993, 1997a, 1997c; McKenzie
pulp, tomato pomace, and psyllium.
In many
et al., 2007). It is believed that due to the high
instances, the addition of psyllium husk powder to
calorie meat consumption and high water turnover
feed is used in exercising canines to improve
rate during these strenuous exercises, sodium con-
exercise-related stress diarrhea. Psyllium husk
servation is heightened by increases in the renin/
fiber is umique since it is a mucilage with water
aldosterone/ angiotensin system, as well as modest
 binding properties, and much like insoluble fiber,
sodium loss causing a mild hyponatremia (Hinch-
provides a modest fermentation substrate. It is
cliff et al., 1997a, 1997c). This chronic hyponatremia
often recommended to start with approximately 4 g
was observed in the Yukon quest in 1992 and simu-
of psyllium (1 rounded teaspoon of fine powder)
lated endurance events in dogs from a specific
per day, titrating upward, not exceeding
16g/day
kennel (Hinchcliff et al., 1997a, 1997c; McKenzie
in a typical 20-30kg canine athlete (Leib, 2000).
et al., 2007). Studies examining this phenomenon in
Chapter 4 The Role of Nutrition in Canine Performance and Rehabilitation 
three teams participating in the Race to the Sky in
Table 4.6 Essential water-soluble and fat-soluble vitamins
2006 suggest that each team responded differently
with one team showing no signs of subclinical
Water-soluble vitamins
Fat-soluble vitamins
hyponatremia (Wakshlag et al., 2010). This suggests
Thiamin (B1)
Vitamin A
that these shifts in sodium retention may be directly
Riboflavin (B2)
Vitamin D
related to dietary sodium availability rather than
Niacin (B3)
Vitamin E
being a unique phenomenon in endurance sled
Pantothenic acid (B5)
Vitamin K
dogs. These findings do not warrant use of electro-
Pyridoxine (B6)
lyte mixtures to sustain dogs that are eating com-
Folic acid
 mercial rations since the only studies using such
Cobalamin (B12)
Choline
mixtures have shown no beneficial effects and/or
potential gastrointestinal upset (diarrhea) after a
day of activity (Young et al., 1960; Mazin et al.,
2001). Most importantly, if providing sufficient
commercial dog food, supplementation with any
to be fairly rich in these vitamins. Most commercial
of these major minerals is not necessary. Further-
pet food will contain 2-10 times the minimum
more, it should be noted that calcium availability
requirement since the water-soluble vitamins have
will be hindered when providing fat at over 60%
large margins of safety. Vitamin C is the most abun-
of the ME in a feed. Competitions where aggressive
dant water-soluble antioxidant found in the mam-
fat supplementation is used are often short dura-
malian body, and dogs sustain their requirements
tion events and should not affect long-term calcium
through hepatic synthesis; however, dogs may not
homeostasis.
synthesize as much as other species (Chatterjee ef
 Trace mineral intake (Table 4.5) will increase pro-
al., 1975). Lack of high hepatic synthesis, in addi-
portionally with intake of commercial dog food
tion to the fact that serum ascorbic acid concentra-
 and will also increase to a lesser degree when using
tions decreased more than 50% after an undefined
meat to supplement commercial diets. To date,
race distance of 1.5-hour duration, has led experts
 there has not been an observed clinical deficiency
to speculate that supplementation may be useful
 in copper, zinc, iron, manganese, iodine, or sele-
(Kronfeld et al., 1989). Similar decreases have been
nium in athletic canines fed traditional commercial
observed  in unsupplemented exercising  Grey-
dog foods or commercial dog food/meat mixes.
hounds (1.8-2.8mg/L) (Marshall et al., 2002; Scott
This is likely due to the fact that the amounts of
et al., 2002). Supplementation of 1g of ascorbic acid
trace minerals incorporated into most pet foods are
a day returns serum concentrations closer to what
 greater than the minimum amount legislated by
is
 considered a normal baseline concentration
the Association of American Feed Control Officials
(5-6 mg/L), but similar supplementation in Grey-
(AAFCO), and also that athletic dogs have increased
 hounds for 4 weeks resulted in slower racing times
intake of food. Currently, it is unknown whether
by 0.3km/h. Therefore, vitamin C supplementa-
supplemental  trace minerals
are needed,
or
tion, having shown no definitive benefit for athletic
whether the amounts deemed sufficient for normal
canines, is not routinely recommended at this time,
dogs will meet the demands of performance canids.
 particularly for racing Greyhounds.
Fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, and K) have
smaller margins of safety and are more concerning.
Vitamins/antioxidants and the canine athlete
Sufficient vitamin K is synthesized by indigenous
bacteria in the gastrointestinal tract of normal
Vitamins are classified as either fat or water soluble
dogs. Vitamin A may be of concern if organ meats
(Table 4.6). Water-soluble vitamins are involved
are used as a portion of the diet; they should not
 in metabolism as intermediates and coenzymes
exceed 15% of any meat mix used to feed because
within the citric acid cycle or as carriers and coen-
of the high concentration of vitamin A found in
zymes for carbon transfer. Sufficient quantities of
liver. Excess vitamin A consumption may manifest
these vitamins are absolutely required for metabo-
as poor
r coat quality, perturbed bone mineraliza-
lism. Many commercial dog foods and meats tend
tion, and hepatic damage. In general, however,
72Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
dogs are very tolerant to high dietary vitamin A
Some
hypothesizet
that antioxidant cocktails
(Morris et al., 2010). Vitamin D is also found in
have the ability to quench free radical damage
organ meats, particularly liver, making small 
more effectively than single agents, and there have
se jeau Suisn J alqeiisap jeaw uesio jo jumoue
been two separate studies examining this concept.
part of the diet. Many commercial dog foods have
The first study used a mixture of 475IU of alpha
at least twice the cholecalciferol needed in the diet,
tocopherol, 706mg of vitamin C, and 5.1 mg of
so with the increased energy consumption required
beta carotene per kilogram of food for 3 weeks.
by athletic dogs, the amount of cholecalciferol con-
The other study used 400IU of alpha tocopherol,
sumed is usually adequate.
3mg of beta carotene, and 20mg of lutein per
Vitamin E is suficient in commercial pet food,
kilogram of food for 4 weeks (Baskin et al., 2000;
and most manufacturers add significantly more
Piercy et al., 2000). Both studies found no associa-
than the requirements, making vitamin E defi-
tion with decreased muscle damage as evaluated
ciency unlikely. Deficiency has been observed in
by creatine kinase and limited antioxidant poten-
hunting dogs fed an all-meat diet and was associ-
tial during recovery, while serum concentrations
ated with retinal degeneration (Davidson et al.,
increased for all of the supplemented antioxidants.
1998). Vitamin E has been examined extensively in
 Other single agent studies examining astaxanthin
endurance sled dogs, and low serum vitamin E
(a carotenoid) and blueberries (flavonoids) have
was associated with an increased risk of being
shown increased antioxidant potential in serum
dropped from the Iditarod. Additionally, serum
with no association with improved performance
vitamin E dropped after a single day of endurance
(Dunlap et al., 2006; Reynolds et al., 2010). Based on
activity in two separate studies (Kronfeld et al.,
the limited information and lack of benefits for
1989; Piercy et al., 2001a, 2001b). Increased serum
performance,
supplementation is not recom-
creatine kinase was never directly correlated to low
mended at this time.
vitamin E concentrations in dogs exhibiting exer-
tional rhabdomyolysis (Piercy et al., 200la). Simi-
larly, decreased serum vitamin E concentrations
Feeding strategies in canine athletes
have been observed in Greyhounds racing 500 m
(Scott et al., 2001). These finding suggested that
Feeding patterns can affect performance. Fre-
supplementation might be beneficial. A consensus
quency and time of feeding become important to
statement made by the Iditarod trail committee
not only decrease fecal bulk, but also maximize
in 1996 stated that endurance sled dogs should
metabolites that are typically used for the activity.
be supplemented with 400IU of vitamin E daily
Sprinting dogs running for less than 10 minutes
during training and racing in an effort to reduce
 during a single bout of exercise will benefit from
exertional rhabdomyolysis; however, there appears
modest feed restriction 24 hours prior to exercise
to be no decrease in the incidence of exertional
(decreasing total meal by 20%) during single day
rhabdomyolysis (Iditarod Veterinary Trail Com-
events to decrease fecal bulk. Although some advo-
mittee, pers. comm.). More compelling evidence
cate small carbohydrate meals before exercise to
for not supplementing vitamin E was provided
provide glucose as fuel for impending exercise,
when Scott and colleagues and Hill and colleagues
there are few data to support this strategy in dogs
showed that supplementing 100-1000IU raised
(Hawley et al., 1997). Sprinting and intermediate
serum tocopherol concentrations, but that dogs
athletes, particularly agility and field trial dogs, for
receiving 10ooIU had slowed racing times (Hill
example, that perform multiple bouts of exercise in
et al., 2001a; Scott et al., 2001). Tocopherol supple-
 a day, may benefit from immediate postexercise
 mentation is not recommended in sporting dogs
carbohydrates in small amounts immediately after
as long as they are being fed sufficient complete
a bout of exercise when expected to undertake
and balanced dog food, while vitamin E supple-
another bout within 2-3 hours. If repetitive bouts
mentation (200-400IU for a typical athletic 20- to
are close to together, this may not be advised to
40-kg dog) should be considered for dogs being fed
avoid vomiting or regurgitation (Hill, 1998). During
nontraditional diets (primarily meats) to prevent
multiple days of competition, postexercise glyco-
deficiency.
gen repletion is advised within 30 minutes of the
Chapter 4 The Role of Nutrition in Canine Performance and Rehabilitation  73
last bout of exercise for the day to replenish muscle
carbohydrate is not a primary fuel for exercise in
glycogen.
these athletes, postexercise carbohydrate supple-
Intermediate athletes exercising once a day for
mentation for glycogen repletion is not recom-
oi yoq uo Aan Aei san 0-0
mended. Foxhounds that course through fields
and fat for energy generation; therefore, it is recom-
every day and pointing dogs asked to hunt for
mended that they be fed diets moderate in fat (50%
multiple hours may benefit from postexercise car-
of ME) and carbohydrate (20% ME), and high in
bohydrates since they will rest for sigrificant times
protein (30% ME). This diet allows adequate
(greater than 8 hours) between exercise bouts.
muscle glycogen repletion during training and
 Feeding primarily meat is not routinely recom-
helps increase mitochondrial volume. Fat will be
mended for dogs due to the incomplete nature of
 used as a primary fuel at rest and within 20 minutes
this food, yet it is commonly practiced and is likely
 of exercise allowing for glycogen sparing when
not detrimental for short periods of time (1-2
these athletes are asked to run above 60% of VO2
weeks). Typically, meat is provided raw, but most
max. These athletes will benefit from postexercise
veterinary professionals recommend cooking the
carbohydrate supplementation to restore muscle
meat. Cooking does not appear to decrease digest-
glycogen concentrations particularly during mul-
ibility significantly (Kerr et al., 2012). The major
tiple day events (Reynolds et al., 1997; Wakshlag
biologic difference between raw and cooked meat
et al., 2002b). In an effort to promote fat use and
is pathogen contamination that can cause detri-
lipolysis, feeding a single meal each day may be
mental health effects in owners and dogs when
advantageous with that meal being fed about 2
feeding raw meat (Chengappa et al., 1993; Morley
hours postexercise. Modest feed restriction (20% of
et al., 2006; Kukanich, 2011). Studies examining
meal) the day before racing will prevent defecation
therapy dogs in Ontario have revealed that zoo-
during exercise, promote lipolysis, and decrease
-aas Aanexodde si st amsodxa uaoed oou
fecal bulk (Hill et al., 1999; Toll & Gillette, 2010).
enfold higher for salmonella and 14 times higher
Care should be taken to not feed larger meals
for enterogenic antibiotic-resistant Escherichia coli
immediately after exercise particularly in larger
species (Lefebvre et al., 2008). This risk has pre-
deep-chested breeds prone to gastric dilatation and
vented raw-fed therapy dogs from being certified
volvulus.
by the Delta Society at the time of writing. In addi-
Endurance athletes (i.e., foxhounds and sled
tion to the zoonotic risk, the effects of high salmo-
dogs) tend to be fed one or two large meals each
 nella burden have led to the demise of Greyhound
day during training, which will typically need to
 puppies and increased the risk of diarrhea in adult
Greyhounds when using poor quality raw meats
training (Ordway et al., 1984; Musch et al., 1985;
(Chengappa et al, 1993). There have also been sal-
Decombaz et al., 1995; Hinchcliff et al., 1997b).
monella outbreaks associated  with  commercial
These meals should be approximately 30% ME
foods (Schotte et al., 2007; Behravesh et al., 2010),
protein, 60-70% ME fat, and negligible carbohy-
but the relative risk and level of contamination is
drate (less than 10% ME). The ration will likely
far greater in raw meats; therefore, cooking is
comprise over 50% commercial dog food, with the
advised (Freeman & Michel, 200l; Weese ef al.,
rest as high-fat meat. This is necessary to achieve
2005).
the caloric density and digestibility needed for
competitive racing and hunting. As training inten-
sifies, there will be back-to-back runs of 60 mi or
 greater on different terrains thus increasing caloric
Nutrition and rehabilitation
demands, which are often met with high-fat meats
 in small chunks during rest periods on the trail;
There are three major areas of concern to the canine
little is known about the nutrient composition,
rehabilitation patient, including obesity manage-
but these tactics appear successful during com-
ment, maintaining lean body mass (particularly
petitive endurance sled dog training and racing.
geriatric rehabilitation patients with sarcopenia),
During racing, dogs will be fed significantly larger
and decreasing chronic inflammation associated
 meals during 4- to 8-hour or longer rest stops. Since
with orthopedic disease.
74   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
(Wakshlag et al., 2012). It has been well documented
Case Study 4.1  Hitting the wall
that weight loss of as little as 11% of body weight
History: A highly cormpetitive sled dog team racing in
-osse sis ieru to joed aaisod e aaer u
open sprint races ranging from 16-30mi over 2- or
ated with osteoarthritis (Impellizeri et al., 2000).
3-day heats was very successful. The teart competed
There are many company-related resources, publi-
in two longer races near the end of the season and
cations, and nutrition texts for weight manage-
placed disappointing fifth and seventh places when
ment plans (Wakshlag et al., 2012).
expected to be within the top three, based on previous
The ideal diet for achieving appropriate weight
 performances. Track times for various points along the
loss is one that helps to maintain lean mass at
trail for the race in which they placed seventh showed
the expense of fat mass and creates some level
an average of approximately 19mi/h for the 20-mi
of satiety to prevent excessive begging or food-
heats on each of days 1 and 2. The tearr was in third
place by day 2 with its day 1 time being better than 
seeking behaviors. Two major strategies are uti-
lized,including
day 2. The team initially performed very well on day 3
increased fiber intake and
maintaining a speed of 18mi/h for the first 22 mi of a
high-protein diets that promote lean body mass
30-mi heat. Their speed for the last 8mi of the race
retention. Fiber has been utilized and is seen as an
dropped to 13 mi/h, dropping the team into seventh 
efficacious way to decrease the caloric density of
place overall.
food, while maintaining gastric fill. Unfortunately.
it induces only short-term satiety (Butterwick &
Examination of Feeding Practices: High-quality cort-
Markwell, 1997; Weber et al., 2007). More impor-
 mercial kibble and fresh meat with an ME of approxi-
tantly, the use of high-fiber diets (>12% dry matter)
mately 32% protein, 62% fat, and 8% carbohydrate.
allows owners to feed more volume. This can also
They did not use postexercise carbohydrate repletion
supplements. This poor performance was assumed to
be achieved by switching from dry food to wet
food since most low-calorie, high-fiber dry foods
be due to skeletal muscle glycogen depletion during
days 1 and 2, so that by day 3 the dogs could work at
have a higher caloric density per cup than the
only 50-60% of their VO, max late in the race due to
average low-calorie, high-fiber therapeutic wet
lack of carbohydrate oxidation capabilities. The follow-
food. High-protein diets (>30% dry matter) may be
ing year, this team altered the diet to contain 30%
beneficial in maintaining lean body mass when fed
protein, 50% fat, and 20% carbohydrate ME and used
during weight reduction. Additionally, dogs fed
postexercise carbohydrate supplementation on days 1
higher protein appear to lose more weight. Whether
and 2 of racing. and again became competitive in
this is due to the increase in lean body mass allow-
longer distance sprint racing in Alaska.
ing for better fat utilization or other alterations in
metabolism has not been determined, but this
appears to be an effective strategy for improving
weight loss (Diez et al., 2002; Bierer & Bui, 2004;
Weber et al., 2007).
Obesity and rehabilitation
Obesity is the leading disease of dogs in western
Diet and rehabilitation in the geriatric dog
aro aq sop go % A m ao
to obese.
.The exact reasons are multifaceted,
It has been fairly well documented that aging dogs
including overfeeding, lack of exercise, and mis-
jso Aq uopuon Apoq aedondde jo uondauon
mass known as sarcopenia (Freeman, 2012). This,
dog owners (Laflamme, 2006). Obesity as a disease
 or as a complicating factor to orthopedic injury
dogs, leads to a thin body condition warranting
requires attention. In many situations, the orthope-
rehabilitation to help preserve lean body mass and
dic injury may lead to a sedentary lifestyle increas-
increase mobility. Many senior dog foods restrict
ing the predisposition toward obesity, but recent
fat and protein as preemptive measures to decrease
evidence suggests that owner activity patterns are
obesity. For most geriatric rehabilitation patients
directly correlated to dog activity and changing
with lean body mass deterioration, these low-
those exercise patterns in owners can be difficult
protein and kilocalorie diets are inappropriate.
Chapter 4 The Role of Nutrition in Canine Performance and Rehabilitation 
175
Due to the decrease in digestive capabilities in
Feeding to mitigate inflammation and
most lean aging dogs, the need for higher calorie
joint disease
and protein foods during the rehabilitative process
is warranted. Studies in young versus old dogs
Orthopedic surgical patients or patients with
suggest that the need for protein to maintain
chronic joint pain due to early or chronic osteoar-
 hepatic and skeletal muscle protein turnover may
thritis are commonly prescribed rehabilitation to
double from 2.5 to approximately 5 g of protein per
improve muscle tone and mobility. These patients
kilogram body weight (Wannemacher & McCoy,
should usefoods with additionallong-chain omega-
1966). Unfortunately, evidence-based medicine
3 fatty acids. The most common sources of fat
regarding the effects of rehabilitation and diet
in commercial dog foods come in the form of
 in geriatric canine patients is lacking. Based on
present information, the geriatric rehabilitation
fatty acids (Figure 4.8). The polyunsaturated fatty
canine patient should receive approximately 5g/
acids come from plant, animal, or marine sources.
kg body weight in high-quality protein. This trans-
 Plant sources supply either linoleic acid, an omega-
lates into a moderate fat food (14-18% dry matter)
6 fatty acid, or c-linolenic acid, an omega-3 fatty
containing approximately 26-30% dry matter
acid. The canine body has the ability to elongate
protein, making normal adult canine food or
these 18 carbon fatty acids into 20 carbon fatty acids,
even performance rations the preferred choice
including arachidonic acid (AA) or eicosapentae-
when feeding the sarcopenic geriatric rehabilita-
noic acid (EPA) (Figure 4.9). AAis a precursor to the
tion patient.
normal production of eicosanoids (prostaglandin E2
and leukotriene Ba) through the cyclooxygenase
and lipoxygenase enzymes, which are involved in
the inflammatory response as well as maintenance
of mucosal integrity. Therefore, if EPA or its slightly
longer omega-3 counterpart docosahexaenoic acid
Case Study 4.2  Rehabilitation optimization
(DHA) is substituted for AA in the diet, there is less
production of the proinflammatory eicosanoids
Signalment: 12 y.o. M/N 26kg Siberian Husky in g0od
such as PGEz and LTB4 (Figure 4.9). This results in
body condition (5/9) with a right cranial cruciate
rupture for over 19 months. Left cranial cruciate liga-
less cartilage degradation due to lower metallopro-
tease and local cytokine production, allowing
ment ruptured recently, and owner agreed to bilateral
tibial tuberosity advancement (TTA) surgery. Right stifle
for better glycosaminoglycan and collagen produc-
had chronic progressing severe osteoarthritis.
tion (Budsberg & Bartges, 2006). This supplementa-
tion of long-chain omega-3 fatty acids results in
Evaluation for Rehabilitation: Diet history noted that
improved clinical outcomesin osteoarthritis(Fritsch
patient has been eating 3.5 cups of a senior dog food
et al., 2010; Roush et al., 2010). The form of omega-3
with 18% protein, 12% fat, and 375 kcal/cup. Ingredi-
fatty acid used is important since the shorter chain
ent list shows a chicken meal base with rice, barley.
omega-3 fatty acid often supplemented as C-
canola oil, and animal fat. Diet evaluation reveals that
linolenic acid (flaxseed oil) may not exert the
the patient is getting only 3.0g of protein per kilogram
body weight, and has no glucosamine or omega-3 fatty
same anti-inflammatory effects as the longer chain
acids. Owner resisted using therapeutic food due to
omega-3 fatty acids (EPA, DHA) found in marine
cost, so rehabilitation therapist looked to commercial
oils (Bauer, 2006). The dose of fish oil in these cases
over-the-counter products and supplermentation. Ther-
may be more than what is traditionally used in over-
the-counter commercial dog foods. Evidence sug-
apist found a food that has 32% protein, 16% fat, and
405kcal/cup. Feeding the patient approximately 3
gests that a total dose of approximately 1 g of EPA/
cups/day provides 4g of protein per kilogram body
DHA per 10kg body weight is effective (Fritsch
weight. Additional supplementation for inflammatory
et al., 2010; Roush et al., 2010). Many owners will
joint disease was instituted by adding fish oil at 2.5 tsp/
s a  u m sns cn raa
day and 1ooomg of glucosamine/chondroitin sulfate
and number of capsules needed differs tremen-
mix daily during initiation of this patient's rehabilita-
dously, so regular strength liquid white fish
tion plani.
101
salmon oil that provides approximately 250 mg of
76   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
 Saturated
Seed/vegetable oi
18:2n-6 (LA)
18:3n- 3{ALA]
D6 and D5 desaturase and
HOOO
elongase enzymes produce
Palmitic acid (16:0)
intermediates leading to AA
and EPA
 Monounsaturated
Animal sources
22:4n -6
20:4n - 6 (AA
20:5n-3{EPA
22:4n-6(DHA)
10
COOH
Cell type
6
dependent
Oleic acid (18:1n - 9)
Thromboxane A2
synthase
Thromboxane Ag
Prostaglandln E2
activities
Prostaglandln Es
Polyunsaturated
Leukotrlene B4
Leukotrlene Bs
>>->"
Proinflamm atory
Inert to mild 
vasodilation
vasodilation
910
COOH
Linoleic acid (18:2n -6)
Fgure 4.9 Schematic of omega-3 (right column) and
omega-6 (left column) sources and their elongation and
13
15
17
conversion into bioactive molecules during the inflammatory
response. Note that the omega-3 fatty acids become odd
series eicosanoids (ie., PGEs) that are inert and that can
6
HOOO
inhibit the proinflammatory actions of the omega-6 fatty
5
acid-generated eicosanoids designated by even numbers
Alpha-linolenic acid (18:3n - 3)
(i.e., PGEz) LA, linoleic acid; ALA, alpha linolenic acid; AA,
arachidonic acid; EPA, eicosapentaenoic acid; DHA,
17
19
docosahexaenoic acid.
67
91012131516
COOH
achieve the dose needed for joint inflammation.
Arachidonic acid (20:4n - 6)
Each teaspoon of fish oil contains approximately
45kcal, and the food provided should be adjusted
Figure 4.8 Fats are classified as saturated,
appropriately to avoid weight gain. Additionally.
monounsaturated, and polyunsaturated. These categories are
divided into omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids based on
this dilutes the nutrient content of the food pro-
where the first double bond is found from the omega carbon
vided; therefore, a higher protein food (>28% dry
labeled as 1 in this diagram.
matter) is recommended.
Reproduced by permission of Hand et af. (2010).
Freeze-dried perna canmaliculus, also known as
New Zealand green lipped mussels (GLM) con-
 tains glucosamine, chondroitin sulfate, and long-
EPA and DHA per gram is advised. One teaspoon
chain omega-3 fatty acids. Two clinical studies
contains approximately 1 g of EPA/DHA mixture.
performed using a food ernriched with GLM found
 Dogs eating a typical over-the-counter adult non-
improvement of joint crepitus and joint pain,
fish-based commercial dog food should receive
m srs  p  u nan
about 1tsp of fish oil per 10-kg body weight to
evaluated by veterinary surgeons (Bui & Bierer,
Chapter 4 The Role of Nutrition in Canine Performance and Rehabilitation  77
2001; Pollard et al., 2006). GLM can be found in a
exercise on odorant-detecting ability of canine ath-
variety of supplements. However, it is commonly
letes. Res Vet Sci, 75, 149-155.
thought that freeze-dried GLM is superior as this
ARAGON, C.L., HOFMEISTER, E.H., & BUDSBERG,
process preserves the fatty acid component. A clini-
S.C. 2007. Systematic review of clinical trials of treat-
cally effective dose of GLM has not been eluci-
ments for osteoarthritis in dogs. / Arn Vet Med Assoc,
230, 514-521.
dated, but based on data of GLM incorporated into
BASKIN, C.R., HINCHCLIFF, K.W., DISILVESTRO, R.A.,
a commercial pet food, 75-100 mg/kg body weight
REINHART, G.A., HAYEK, M.G., CHEW, B.P., BURR,
may be an appropriate dose (Pollard et al., 2006).
J.R., & SWENSON, R.A. 2000. Effects of dietary anti-
Glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate (a larger
oxidant supplementation on oxidative damage and
conglomerate of glucosamine molecules) have
resistance to oxidative damage during prolonged
been extensively studied in human clinical trials
exercise in sled dogs. Am / Vet Res, 61, 886-891.
for osteoarthritis. The outcomes have been varied,
BAUER, J.E. 2006. Facilitative and functional fats in diets
 and the largest clinical trial in stifle osteoarthritis
of cats and dogs. / Armt Vet Med Assoc, 229, 680-684.
 in did not reveal any benefits in joint pain or range
BEHRAVESH, C.B., FERRARO, A., DEASY, M., 3rd,
of motion, except for chondroitin sulfate in the
DATO,V.,MOLL,M.,SANDT,C.,REA,N.K.,
most severe cases of stifle osteoarthritis (Towheed
RICKERT, R., MARRIOTT, C., WARREN, K., URDA-
et al., 2005; Hochberg & Clegg, 2008; Sawitzke et al.,
NETA,V., SALEHI, E.,VILLAMIL,E.,AYERS, T.,
HOEKSTRA, R.M., AUSTIN, J.L., OSTROFF, S.,&
2010). This suggests that once osteoarthritis is
WILLIAMS, I.T. 2010. Human Salmonella infections
 present, supplementation has no bearing on pro-
linked to contaminated dry dog and cat food, 2006-
gression of the disease. Due to some evidence that
2008. Pediatrics, 126, 477483.
glucosamine diminishes cartilage degeneration
BELOSHAPKA, A.N., WOLFF, A.K., & SWANSON, K.S.
over time, it may still be prudent to initiate glucos-
2011. Effects of feeding polydextrose on faecal charac-
amine and/or chondroitin sulfate treatment early
teristics, microbiota and fermentative end products in
in the disease process and continue it indefinitely
healthy adult dogs. Br I Nutr, 16, 1-7.
 as it has been proven safe (Sarzi-Puttini et al., 2005;
BETTS, J.A. & WILLIAMS, C. 2010. Short-term recovery
Aragon et al., 2007). The only clinical study examin-
from prolonged exercise: exploring the potential for
ing its use in osteoarthriis was a study using
protein ingestion to accentuate the benefits of carbo-
hydrate supplements. Sports Med, 40, 941-959.
NSAIDs in conjunction with glucosamine and
BIERER, T.L. & BUI, L.M. 2004. High-protein low-
chondroitin sulfate, and this addition was no better
carbohydrate diets enhance weight loss in dogs.
than with the use of NSAIDs alone (McCarthy
/Nutr, 134, 2087S-2089S.
et al., 2007). In the age of evidence-based medicine,
BUDSBERG, S.C. & BARTGES, J.W. 2006. Nutrition and
there is no clinical evidence for its use; however,
osteoarthritis in dogs: does it help? Vet Clin North Am
many orthopedists and rehabilitation therapists
Small Anim Pract, 36, 1307-1323, vii.
are proponents of its use. A range of other nutra-
BUI, L.M. & BIERER, R.L. 2001. Influence of green lipped 
ceuticals including elk velvet, resin, curcumin, and
mussels (Perma canaliculus) in alleviating signs of
hyperimmunized cow protein isolates that have
arthritis in dogs. Vet Ther, 2, 101-111.
some clinical evidence supporting their use have
BUTTERWICK, R.F. & MARKWELL, PJ. 1997. Effect of
amount and type of dietary fiber on food intake in
been reviewed elsewhere (Aragon et al., 2007).
energy-restricted dogs. Am / Vet Res, 58, 272-276.
CHATTERJEE, 1.B., MAJUMDER, A.K., NANDI, B.K., &
SUBRAMANIAN, N. 1975. Synthesis and some major
Webliography
functions of vitamin C in animals. Arn N Y Acad Sci,
258, 2447.
Purina (2012) Understanding your dog's body condition.
CHENGAPPA,
M.M,STAATS, J,OBERST, R.D.
Purina.com. Accessed October 23, 2012. www.purina.
GABBERT, N.H., & MCVEY, S. 1993. Prevalence of
com/dog/weight-and-exercise/bodycondition.aspx
-Aar Suei jo sap u pasn peau men u aons
hounds. / Vet Diagn Invest, 5, 372-377.
DAVENPORT, G.M., KELLEY, R.L., ALTOM, E.K., &
References
LEPINE, A.J. 2001. Effect of diet on hunting perfor-
mance of English pointers. Vet Ther, 2, 10-23.
ALTOM, E.K, DAVENPORT, G.M., MYERS, L.J., &
DAVIDSON, M.G., GEOLY, FJ., GILGER, B.C, MCLEL-
CUMMINS, K.A. 2003. Effect of dietary fat source and
LAN, G.J., & WHITLEY, W. 1998. Retinal degeneration
78   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
associated with vitamin E deficiency in hunting dogs.
HAWLEY, J.A. 2002. Effect of increased fat availability on
IAm Vet Med Assoc, 213, 645-651.
metabolism and exercise capacity. Med Sci Sports Exerc,
DECOMBAZ, J., JAMBON, M, PIGUEET, C., THELIN,
34, 1485-1491.
A., & BELLEVRE, O. 1995. Energy intake and expen-
HAWLEY, JA.,
SCHABORT, E.J, NOAKES, T.D,
diture of sled dogs during the Alpirod race 1995. In:
& DENNIS, S.C. 1997. Carbohydrate-loading and
Grandjean, D. & Vanek, J. (eds.), Second Arrual Inter-
exercise performance: an update. Sports Med, 24,
rutional Sted Dog Veterinary Medical Association Sympo-
73-81.
sium. Reims, France: ISDVMA, 113-118. September
HILL, R.C. 1998. The nutritional requirements of exercis-
18-19.
ing dogs./Nutr,128,2686S-2690S.
DIEZ, M., NGUYEN, P, JEUSETTE, 1., DEVOIS, C.
HILL, R.C., LEWIS, D.,SCOTT, K., RANDELL,S.,SUND
ISTASSE, L.,& BIOURGE, V. 2002. Weight loss in
STROM, D., SPEAKMAN, J., & BUTTERWICK, R.
obese dogs: evaluation of a high-protein, low-
1999. Mild food restriction increases the speed of
carbohydrate diet./Nutr,132,1685S-1687S.
racing Greyhounds. Vet Intern Med, 13,281.
DOWNEY, R.L., KRONFELD, D.S.,& BANTA, C.A. 1980.
HILL, R.C., BLOOMBERG, M.S., LEGRAND-DEFRETIN,
Diet of Beagles affects stamina. ∫ Arm Arim Hosp Assoc,
V, BURGER, 1H., HLLOCK, S.M., SUNDSTROM,
16,273-277.
D.A., & JONES, G.L. 2000. Maintenance energy
DUNLAP, K.L., REYNOLDS, A.J., & DUFFY, L.K. 2006.
requirements and the effect of diet on performance of
Total antioxidant power in sled dogs supplemented
racing Greyhounds. Ar ∫ Vet Res, 61, 1566-1573.
with blueberries and the comparison of blood param-
HILL, R.C., ARMSTRONG, D., BROWNE, R.W, LEWIS,
eters associated with exercise. Cormp Biochem Physiol A
D.D., SCOTT, K.C., SUNDSTROM, D., & HARPER, J.
Mol Integr Physiol, 143, 429-434.
2001a. Chronic administration of high doses of vitamin
FREEMAN, L.M. 2012. Cachexia and sarcopenia: emerg-
E appears to slow racing greyhounds. FASEB J, 15,
 ing syndromes of importance in dogs and cats. / Vet
A990.
Intern Med, 26, 3-17.
HILL, R.C., LEWIS, D.D., SCOTT, K.C., OMORI, M.,
FREEMAN, L.M. & MICHEL, K.E. 2001. Evaluation of
JACKSON, M., SUNDSTROM, D.A., JONES, G.L.,
raw food diets for dogs. ∫ Am Vet Med Assoc, 218,
SPEAKMAN, J.R., DOYLE, C.A., & BUTTERWICK,
705-709.
RF. 2001b. Effect of increased dietary protein and
FRITSCH, D., ALLEN, T.A., DODD, C.E., JEWELL, D.E.,
decreased dietary carbohydrate on performance and
SIXBY, K.A., LEVENTHAL, PS., & HAHN, K.A. 2010.
body composition in racing Greyhounds. Am / Vet Res,
Dose-titration effects of fish oil in osteoarthritic dogs.
62, 440447.
Vet Intern Med, 24, 1020-1026.
HINCHCLIFF, K.W., OLSON, J, CRUSBERG, C.,
GAGNE, J., WAKSHLAG, J., SIMPSON, K., LATCH-
KENYON, J., LONG, R., ROYLE, W., WEBER, W.,&
MAN, S., BROWN, D., BROWN, K., SWANSON, K.,
BURR, J. 1993. Serum biochemical changes in dogs
FAHEY, G., & DOWD, S. 2013. Effects of a synbiotic
competing in a long-distance sled race. ∫ Arn Vet Med
on fecal quality, short-chain fatty acid concentrations,
Assoc, 202, 401-405.
and the microbiome of healthy racing sled dogs. ∫ Ar
HINCHCLIFF, K.W., REINHART, G.A., BURR, J.R., SCH-
Physiot An Nutr (in press).
REIER, C.J., & SWENSON, R.A. 1997a. Effect of racing
GRANJEAN, D. 1998. Nutrition for sled dogs. In: Bloom-
on serum sodium and potassium concentrations and
berg, M.S., Dee, J.F., & Taylor, R.A. (eds.), Carine Sports
acid-base status of Alaskan sled dogs. ∫ Am Vet Med
 Medicine and Surgery. Philadelphia: Saunders-Elsevier,
Ass0c, 210, 1615-1618.
336-347.
HINCHCLIFF, K.W., REINHART,G.A., BURR, J.R.,SCH-
HAMMEL, E.P, KRONFELD, D.S., GANJAM, VK.,&
REIER, C.J., & SWENSON, R.A. 1997b. Metabolizable
DUNLAP, H.L., Jr. 1977. Metabolic responses to
energy intake and sustained energy expenditure of
exhaustive exercise in racing sled dogs fed diets con-
Alaskan sled dogs during heavy exertion in the cold.
taining medium, low, or zero carbohydrate. Ar / Clin
Armt  Vet Res, 58, 1457-1462.
Nutr, 30, 409418.
HINCHCLIFF, K.W., REINHART, G.A., BURR, J.R., &
HAND, M.S., THATCHER, C.D., REMILLARD, R.L.
SWENSON, R.A. 1997c. Exercise-associated hypona-
ROUDEBUSH, P, & NOVOTNY, B.J. 2010. Small
tremia in Alaskan sled dogs: urinary and hormonal
Animal Clinical Nutrition. Topeka, KS: Mark Morris
responses. | Appl Physiot, 83, 824-829.
Institute.
HINCHCLIFF, K.W., SHAW, L.C., VUKICH, N.S., &
HARGREAVES, M., COSTILL, D.L.,COGGAN,A.,FINK,
SCHMIDT, K.E. 1998. Effect of distance traveled and
W.J., & NISHIBATA, 1. 1984. Effect of carbohydrate
azua unias pue jubtam Apoq uo Suroei jo paads
feedings on muscle glycogen utilization and exercise
activity of sled dogs competing in a long-distance race.
performance. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 16, 219-222.
IAm Vet Med Assoc, 213, 639-644.
Chapter 4 The Role of Nutrition in Canine Performance and Rehabilitation  79
HOCHBERG, M.C. & CLEGG, D.O. 2008. Potential
MARSHALL, R.J., SCOTT, K.C., HILL, R.C., LEWIS,
effects of chondroitin sulfate on joint swelling: a GAIT
D.D, SUNDSTROM, D., JONES, G.L., & HARPER, J.
report. Osteoarthr Cartil, 16(Suppl. 3), S22-S24.
2002. Supplemental vitamin C appears to slow racing
IMPELLIZERI, J.A., TETRICK, M.A., & MUIR, P. 2000.
greyhounds. / Nutr, 132, 1616S-1621S.
Effect of weight reduction on clinical signs of lameness
MAZIN, R.M., FORDYCE, H.H., & OTTO, C.M. 2001.
in dogs with hip osteoarthritis. ∫ Am Vet Med Assoc,
Electrolyte replacement in urban search and rescue
216, 1089-1091.
dogs: a field study. Vet Ther, 2, 140-147.
 JEUKENDRUP,A.E. & ALDRED,S. 2004. Fat supplemen-
MCCARTHY, G., O'DONOVAN, J., JONES, B., MCAL-
tation, health, and endurance performance. Nutrition,
LISTER,H.,SEED,M.,& MOONEY, C.2007.Ran-
20,678-688
domised double-blind, positive-controlled trial to
KENYON, C.L., BASARABA, R.J., & BOHN, A.A. 2011.
assess the efficacy of glucosamine/chondroitin sulfate
Influence of endurance exercise on serum concentra-
for the treatment of dogs with osteoarthritis. Vet J, 174,
tions of iron and acute phase proteins in racing sled
54-61.
dogs. / Am Vet Med Assoc, 239, 1201-1210.
MCKENZIE, E.C., JOSE-CUNILLERAS, E., HINCH-
KERR, K.R., VESTER BOLER, B.M., MORRIS, C.L., LIU,
CLIFF, K.W., HOLBROOK, T.C., ROYER, C., PAYTON,
K.J., & SWANSON, K.S. 2012. Apparent total tract
M.E., WILLIAMSON, K., NELSON, S., WILLARD,
energy and macronutrient digestibility and fecal fer-
M.D., & DAVIS, M.S. 2007. Serum chemistry altera-
mentative end-product concentrations of domestic
tions in Alaskan sled dogs during five successive days
cats fed extruded, raw beef-based, and cooked beef-
of prolonged endurance exercise. ∫ Arn Vet Med Assoc,
based diets.Anim Sci, 90,515-522.
230, 1486-1492.
KOHNKE, J.R. 1998. Nutrition in the racing Greyhound.
MCKENZIE, E.C., HINCHCLIFF, K.W., VALBERG, S.J.,
In: Bloomberg, M.S., Dee, J.F., & Taylor, R.A. (eds.),
WILLIAMSON, K.K., PAYTON, M.E., & DAVIS, M.S.
Canine Sports Medicine and Surgery. Philadelphia:
2008. Assessment of alterations in triglyceride and gly-
Saunders-Elsevier, 328-336.
 cogen concentrations in muscle tissue of Alaskan sled
KRONFELD, D.S., HAMMEL, E.P., RAMBERG, C.F, Jr.,
dogs during repetitive prolonged exercise. Ar ∫ Vet
& DUNLAP, H.L., Jr. 1977. Hematological and meta-
Res, 69, 1097-1103.
bolic responses to training in racing sled dogs fed diets
MORLEY, PS., STROHMEYER, R.A., TANKSON, J.D.,
containing medium, low, or zero carbohydrate. Ar 」
HYATT, D.R., DARGATZ, D.A., & FEDORKA-CRAY,
Clin Nutr, 30, 419430.
P.J.2006. Evaluation of the association between feeding
KRONFELD, D.S., ADKINS, T.O., & DOWNEY, R.L.
raw meat and Salmonella enterica infections at a Grey-
1989. Nutrition, anaerobic and aerobic exercise and
hound breeding facility. ∫ Arm Vet Med Assoc, 228,
stress. In: Burger, I.H. & Rivers, J.PW. (eds.), Nutrition
1524-1532.
of the Dog and Cat: Waltham Symposium. New York:
MORRIS, P, SALT, C., RAILA, J., BRETEN, T., KOHN,
Cambridge University Press, 133-145.
B., SCHWEIGERT, F., & ZENTEK, J. 2010. The effects
KUKANICH, K.S. 2011. Update on Salmonella spp con-
of feeding vitamin A to puppies up to 52 weeks of age.
tamination of pet food, treats, and nutritional prod-
The Wattham International Science Symposium: Pet
ucts and safe feeding recommendations. ∫ Am Vet Med
Nutrition-Art or Science? Cambridge, UK, 52.
Ass0c, 238, 1430-1434.
MUSCH, T.1., HAIDET, G.C., ORDWAY, G.A., LONG-
LAFLAMME, D.P. 1997. Development and validation of
HURST, J.C., & MITCHELL, J.H. 1985. Dynamic exer-
a body condition score system for dogs. Carine Prac
cise training in foxhounds: I. Oxygen consumption
tice, Vol. 22. Santa Barbara, CA: Veterinary Practice
and hemodynamic responses. J Appl Physiol, 59,
Publishing Co., 10-15.
183-189.
 LAFLAMME, D.P. 2006. Understanding and managing
National Research Council. 2006a. Comparative diges-
obesity in dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
tive physiology of dogs and cats. Nutrient Requirerments
Pract, 36, 1283-1295, vii.
of Dogs and Cats. Washington, DC: National Academies
LEFEBVRE, S.L., REID-SMITH, R., BOERLIN, P, &
Press, 5-21.
WEESE, J.S. 2008. Evaluation of the risks of shedding
National Research Council. 2006b. Energy. Nutrient
Salmonellae and other potential pathogens by therapy
Requirerments of Dogs and Cats. Washington, DC: The
dogs fed raw diets in Ontario and Alberta. Zoonoses
National Academies Press, 2948.
Public Health, 55, 470480.
National Research Council. 2006c. Minerals. Nutrient
LEIB, M.S. 2000. Treatment of chronic idiopathic large-
Requirerments of Dogs and Cats. Washington, DC:
bowel diarrhea in dogs with a highly digestible diet
National Academies Press, 145-192.
and soluble fiber: a retrospective review of 37 cases.
ORDWAY, G.A., FLOYD, D.L., LONGHURST, J.C., &
Vet Interr Med,14,27-32.
MITCHELL, J.H. 1984. Oxygen consumption and
80   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
hemodynamic responses during graded treadmill
REYNOLDS, A.J., REINHART, G.A., CAREY, D.P., SIM-
exercise in the dog. I Appt Physiol, 57, 601-607.
MERMAN, D.A., FRANK, D.A., & KALLFELZ, FA.
ORR, N.W. 1966. The feeding of sledge dogs on Antarctic
1999. Effect of protein intake during training on bio-
expeditions. Br / Nutr, 20, 1-12.
chemical and performance variables in sled dogs. Am
PIERCY, R.J., HINCHCLIFF, K.W., DISILVESTRO, R.A.,
Vet Res,60, 789-795.
REINHART, G.A., BASKIN, C.R., HAYEK, M.G.
REYNOLDS, A.J., JACKSON, J, WALDRON, M.E.,
BURR, J.R., & SWENSON, R.A. 2000. Effect of dietary
LEAVITT, YE.,BAILEY, K.K., MILBURY, PE., &
supplements containing antioxidants on attenuation
BLUMBERG, J. 2010. Comparison of astaxanthin,
of muscle damage in exercising sled dogs. Am ∫ Vet
alpha tocopherol and placebo treatments on post exer-
Res, 61, 1438-1445.
cise indices of oxidative stress in dogs. Nestle Purind
PIERCY, R.J., HINCHCLIFF, K.W., MORLEY, PS, DISIL-
Nutrition Forum-Adoances in Nutrition, 74.
VESTRO, R.A., REINHART, G.A., NELSON, S.L, Jr.,
ROUSH, JK., CROSS,A.R., RENBERG,W.C.,DODD,
SCHMIDT, K.E., & CRAIG,A.M. 2001a. Vitamin E and
C.E., SIXBY, K.A., FRITSCH, D.A., ALLEN, T.A.,
exertional rhabdomyolysis during endurance sled dog
JEWELL, D.E, RICHARDSON, D.C., LEVENTHAL,
racing. Neuromuscut Disord,11,278-286.
PS., & HAHN, K.A. 2010. Evaluation of the effects of
PIERCY, R.J., HINCHCLIFF, K.W., MORLEY, PS., DISIL-
VESTRO, R.A., REINHART, G.A., NELSON, S.L.
acids on weight bearing in dogs with osteoarthritis.
SCHMIDT, K.E.,& MORRIE CRAIG, A.2001b.
Am Vet Med Assoc, 236,67-73.
Association between vitamin E and enhanced athletic
SARZI-PUTTINI, P, CIMMINO, M.A., SCARPA, R.,
performance in sled dogs. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 33,
CAPORALI, R., PARAZZINI, F, ZANINELLI, A.,
826-833.
ATZENI, F, & CANESI, B. 2005. Osteoarthritis: an
POLLARD, B., GUILFORD, W.G., ANKENBAUER-
overview of the disease and its treatment strategies.
PERKINS, K.L., & HEDDERLEY, D.2006. Clinical
Semin Arthritis Rheum,35, 1-10.
efficacy and tolerance of an extract of green-lipped
SAWITZKE,A.D.,SHI, H., FINCO, M.F.,DUNLOP, D.D.,
mussel (Perna canalicutus) in dogs presumptively diag-
HARRIS, C.L.,SINGER, N.G.,BRADLEY, J.D., SILVER,
nosed with degenerative joint disease. N Z Vet §, 54,
D., JACKSON, C.G., LANE, N.E., ODDIS, C.V,
114-118.
WOLFE, F., LISSE, J., FURST, D.E., BINGHAM, C.O,
QUERENGAESSER, A., IBEN, C., & LEIBETSEDER, J.
REDA, D.J., MOSKOWITZ, R.W., WILLIAMS, H.J., &
1994. Blood changes during training and racing in sled
CLEGG, D.O. 2010. Clinical efficacy and safety of glu-
dogs. / Nutr, 124, 2760S-2764S.
cosamine, chondroitin sulphate, their combination,
REINHART, G.A. 1998. Nutrition for sporting dogs. In:
celecoxib or placebo taken to treat osteoarthritis of the
Bloomberg, M.S., Dee, J.F, & Taylor, R.A. (eds.), Canine
kmee: 2-year results from GAIT. Ann Rheum Dis, 69,
Sports Medicine and Surgery. Philadelphia: Saunders-
1459-1464.
Elsevier, 348-356.
SCHMIDT-NIELSEN, K. 1984. Scaling, Why Is Animal Size
REYNOLDS, A.J., FUHRER, L., DUNLAP, H.L, FINKE,
 So Important? Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
M.D., & KALLFELZ, FA. 1994. Lipid metabolite
Press.
responses to diet and training in sled dogs. ∫ Nutr, 124,
SCHOTTE, U., BORCHERS, D., WULFF, C., & GEUE, L.
2754S-2759S.
2007. Salmonella Montevideo outbreak in military
REYNOLDS, A.J., FUHRER, L., DUNLAP, H.L., FINKE,
kenmel dogs caused by contaminated commercial
M., & KALLFELZ, F.A. 1995. Effect of diet and training
feed, which was only recognized through monitoring.
s  n p s o  
Vet Microbiol, 119,316-323.
dogs. I Appl Physiol, 79, 1601-1607.
SCOTT, K.C., HILL, R.C, LEWIS, D.D., BONING, A.J.,
REYNOLDS, AJ., CAREY, D.P, REINHART, G.A.,
Jr.,& SUNDSTROM, D.A. 2001. Effect of alpha-
SWENSON, R.A., & KALLFELZ, FA. 1997. Effect
tocopheryl acetate supplementation on vitamin E con-
of post exercise carbohydrate supplementation on
centrations in Greyhounds before and after a race. Am
muscle glycogen repletion in trained sled dogs. Arm ∫
Vet Res,62,1118-1120.
Vet Res,58, 1252-1256.
SCOTT, K.C., HILL, R.C., LEWIS, D.D., GRONWALL, R.
REYNOLDS, A.J,HAYEK, M.G.,LEPINE, A.J,&
SUNDSTROM, D.A., JONES, G.L., & HARPER, J.
SUNVOLD, G.D. 1998. The role of fat in the formula-
2002. Serum ascorbic acid concentrations in previ-
tion of performance rations: focus on fat sources. In:
ously unsupplemented greyhounds after administra-
Carey, D.P. & Reinhart, G.A. (eds.), Recent Adoances in
tion of a single dose of ascorbic acid intravenously or
Canine and Feline Nutrition:1998 lams Nutrition Sympo-
per os.|Anim Physiol Anim Nutr, 86, 222-228.
sium Proceedirngs, Vol. I. Wilmington, OH: Orange
SHULMAN, G.1. & PETERSEN, K.F. 2009. Metabolism.
Frazer Press, 277-281.
In: Boron, W.F. & Boulpaep, E.L. (eds.), Cellular Medica!
Chapter 4 The Role of Nutrition in Canine Performance and Rehabilitation  81
Physiotogy: A cellutar and Molecular Approach, 2nd ed.
WAKSHLAG, J.J., STOKOL, T., GESKE, S.M., GREGER,
Philadelphia: Saunders-Elsevier.
C.E., ANGLE, C.T., & GILLETTE, R.L. 2010. Evalua-
TAYLOR, C.R., CALDWELL, S.L., & ROWNTREE, V.J.
tion of exercise-induced changes in concentrations of
1972. Runming up and down hills: some consequences
of size. Science, 178, 1096-1097.
sled dogs completing a long-distance endurance race.
TAYLOR, R.J. 1957. The work output of sledge dogs.
Am ∫ Vet Res, 71, 1207-1213.
∫ Physiol, 137, 210-217.
WAKSHLAG, J.J., STRUBLE, A.M, WARREN, B.S.,
TOLL, PW. & GILLETTE, R.L. 2010. The canine athlete.
MALEY, M., PANASEVICH, M.R., CUMMINGS, K.J.,
In: Hand, M.S., Thatcher, C.D., Remillard, R.L., Roude-
LONG, G.M., & LAFLAMME, D.E. 2012.Evaluation
bush, P, & Novotmy, B.J. (eds.), Small Animal Clinical
soop ut Airauoe teotsAyd pue axeu Asaua Areap go
Nutrition, 5th ed. Marceline, MO: Mark Morris Insti-
udergoing a controlled weight-loss program. ∫ Am
tute, 323-357.
Vet Med Assoc, 240, 413419.
TOLL, P.W., PIESCHL, R.L., & HAND, M.S. 1992. The
WANNEMACHER, R.W., Jr. & MCCOY, J.R. 1966. Deter-
effect of dietary fat and carbohydrate on sprint perfor-
mination of optimal dietary protein requirements of
mance in racing greyhound dogs. Proceedings of the 8th
young and old dogs. I Nutr, 88, 66-74.
International Racing Greyhound Symposium,North Amer
WASSERMAN, D.H., WILLIAMS, PE.,
，LACY, D.B.,
ican Veterinary Conference, Gainesville, FL: North
GREEN, D.R., & CHERRINGTON,A.D. 1988. Impor-
American Veterinary Conference, 1-3.
 tance of intrahepatic mechanisms to gluconeogenesis
TOWHEED, T.E., MAXWELL,L.,ANASTASSIADES
from alanine during exercise and recovery. Am ∫
T.P, SHEA, B., HOUPT, J., ROBINSON, V., HOCH-
Physiot, 254, E518-E525.
BERG, M.C., & WELLS,G. 2005. Glucosamine therapy
WASSERMAN, D.H., SPALDING, J.A., LACY, D.B.,
for treating osteoarthritis. Cochrane Database Syst Reu,
COLBURN, C.A.,{
GOLDSTEIN, R.E.,& CHER-
CD002946.
RINGTON, A.D. 1989. Glucagon is a primary control-
WAGNER, J.A., HORVATH, S.M., & DAHMS, T.E. 1977.
ler of hepatic glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis
Cardiovascular, respiratory, and metabolic adjust-
during muscular work. Am I Physiot, 257, E108-E117.
ments to exercise in dogs. / Appl Physiol, 42, 403-407.
WASSERMAN, D.H., GEER, R.J., WILLIAMS, PE.,
WAKSHLAG, J., STRUBLE, A., SIMPSON, K., & DOWD,
BECKER, T., LACY, D.B., & ABUMRAD, N.N. 1991.
S. 20ll. Negative fecal characteristics are associated
Interaction of gut and liver in nitrogen metabolism
with pH and fecal flora alterations during dietary
during exercise. Metabotism, 40, 307-314.
change in dogs. Int I Appl Res Vet Med, 9, 278-283.
WEBER, M., BISSOT, T, SERVET, E., SERGHERAERT, R.,
WAKSHLAG, J.J, KALLFELZ, F.A., BARR, S.C.
BIOURGE, V.,& GERMAN, A.J. 2007.A high-protein,
ORDWAY,G.,HALEY,N.J.,FLAHERTY,C.E.,KELLEY,
high-fiber diet designed for weight loss improves
R.L., ALTOM, E.K., LEPINE, A.J., & DAVENPORT,
satiety in dogs. ∫ Vet Intern Med, 21, 1203-1208.
G.M. 2002a. Effects of exercise on canine skeletal
WEESE, J.S.,ROUSSEAU, J.,& ARROYO,L.2005.Bacte-
muscle proteolysis: an investigation of the ubiquitin-
riological evaluation of commercial canine and feline
proteasome pathway and other metabolic markers. Vet
raw diets. Can Vet §, 46, 513-516.
Ther, 3, 215-225.
WHELAN, K. & SCHNEIDER, S.M. 2011. Mechanisms,
WAKSHLAG, JJ.,
SNEDDEN, K.A., OTIS, A.M.,
prevention, and management of diarrhea in enteral
KENNEDY, C.A., KENNETT, T.P, SCARLETT, JM.
mutrition. Curr Opin Gastroenterol, 27, 152-159.
KALLFELZ, F.A., DAVENPORT, G.M., REYNOLDS,
YAMADA, T., TOHORI, M., ASHIDA, T., KAJIWARA,
A.J., & REINHART,G.A. 2002b. Effects of post-exercise
N., & YOSHIMURA, H. 1987. Comparison of effects
supplements on glycogen repletion in skeletal muscle.
of vegetable protein diet and animal protein diet on
Vet Ther, 3, 226-234.
the initiation of anemia during vigorous physical
WAKSHLAG, JJ, COOPER, B.J., WAKSHLAG, R.R.,
training (sports anemia) in dogs and rats. ∫ Nutr Sci
KALLFELZ, FA., BARR, S.C.,
NYDAM, D.V.,&
Vitaminol, 33, 129-149.
DIMAURO, S. 2004. Biochemical evaluation of mito-
YOUNG, D.R., SCHAFER, N.S., & PRICE, R. 1960. Effect
chondrial respiratory chain enzymes in canine skeletal
of nutrient supplements during work on performance
muscle. Armt I Vet Res, 65, 480484.
1  s   su 
5
Introduction to Canine Rehabilitation
Shari Sprague, MPT, CCRT
Summary
Canine rehabilitation reguires advanced knowledge and understanding of physical rehabilita-
tion and the science behind it. Rehabilitation professionals must be able to process informa-
tion related to how the musculoskeletal and nervous systems work and affect function. They
must be able to perform a thorough evaluation, effectively identifying impairments that are
contributing to the functional limitations. Understanding biomechanics, which involves the
study of forces in movement and at rest, is crucial. This includes recognizing the five types
of loads—compression, tension, torsion, sheer, and bending that create forces on biological
tissues. Depending on the forces applied to the body, musculoskeletal tissues will have dif-
ferent responses. Arthrokinematics and osteokinematics have a direct effect on biomechanics
and the body's ability to generate movement or maintain postures. Part of the therapist's
evaluation includes measuring osteokinematic motion using a goniometer to gain objective
information on the patient's passive range of motion. Arthrokinematic motion cannot be
 motion is limited, joint mobilizations are applied. These mobilizations are also beneficial in
treating joint pain and muscle guarding. Girth measurements provide objective information
regarding muscle circumference and/or swelling. If muscle atrophy or weakness is found,
liea aun aupuishapun pandde aq ueo sanbiuuoan luuautuans suoos! nopue siawos!
cycle allows the therapist to identify dysfunction during gait at different speeds, leading to a
more accurate assessment of impairments.
Carine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation, First Edition. Edited by M. Christine Zink and Janet B. Van Dyke.
@2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
82
Chapter 5 Introduction to Canine Rehabilitation  83
What is canine rehabilitation?
this during the examination and evaluation process.
A physical therapy exam will encompass identify-
Many people believe that canine rehabilitation con-
ing functional limitations and disabilities and the
sists mainly of laser therapy and an underwater
related impairments contributing to those func-
treadmill. In addition, the notion that this field
tional  limitations
s (American Physical Therapy
would be easy to grasp, with intuitive reasoning 
Association, 2010). The following is a list of terms
and litle training, has led many to attempt to
used within the disablement model as defined by
add rehabilitation to their veterinary practices. In
the World Health Organization, International Clas-
reality, canine rehabilitation is an involved science
sification of Diseases (Levine et al., 2004):
that requires great skill, problem-solving abilities,
and knowledge. Fancy equipment is a luxury but
Active Pathology: The interruption of or interfer-
not necessary. The greatest asset for effective reha-
ence with normal processes and the simultane-
bilitation is an educated clinician with a pair of
 ous efforts of the organism to restore itself to a
highly trained hands.
normal state by mobilizing the body's defense
Physical therapists are rehabilitation specialists
and coping mechanisms (Jette, 1994).
who have a defined role in the current medical
Functional Limitation: The restriction of the ability
model under the World Health Organization.
to perform a physical action, task, or activity in
All physical therapists entering the field today
an efficient, typically expected, or competent
graduate from an accredited college or university
manner at the level of the whole organism or
 program with a doctoral-level degree and must be
person (Jette, 1994).
licensed in their respective state in order to practice
Impairment: Any loss or abnormality of ana-
    
tomical, physiological, mental, or psychological
Association, 1999). In practice, physical therapists
structure or function (Jette, 1994). For a patient
focus on the disablement model rather than the
recovering from a cruciate repair, examples of
medical model of disease (World Health Organi-
impairments might  include abnormal motor
zation, 1997). This allows the therapist to base
planning and coordination, disuse atrophy,
interventions upon their impact on conditions
muscle tightmess, and balance deficits. Due to
affecting function rather than on a certain disease
any of these, the patient may be functionally
diagnosis. The disablement model focuses on the
limited. An example would be an impairment of
factors affecting an individual's ability to perform
quadriceps weakness resulting in the functional
daily tasks that are usual, customary, essential, and
difficulty of rising from sit to stand. In rehabilita-
desirable to that being.
tion, the impairment is addressed with the intent
Application of the disablement model to canine
to improve functional abilities. Not all impair-
rehabilitation emphasizes the functional status of a
ments are functionally limiting or lead directly
dog rather than a specific disease or pathology. The
to disability. Loss of full elbow flexion range of
 advantage to this approach is that animals differ in
motion (ROM) may be a functional limitation for
their presentation, regardless of having the same
a search and rescue dog, but a rather minor limi-
pathoanatomical diagnosis or medical condition.
tation for the house pet.
Physical therapists learn about pathophysiology
Disability: An inability to perform or a limitation
ndde a raamou saseasip pue suaiss jo
in the performance of routine actions, tasks,
of this knowledge is geared toward resolving the
behaviors, and activities in the manmer or range
patient's function and response to rehabilitation
considered normal for that individual, resulting
rather than the patient's disease status. For example,
from an impairment (Jette, 1994).
 a patient with a spinal disk herniation can present
along a continuum of functional capacity from
In our example of two patients with disk hernia-
completely paralyzed to weakly ambulatory. The
tion at T12-13, each has an active pathology, func-
 e s pr  si r 
tional limitations, impairments, and disabilities
more involved functional status than the ambula-
(Table 5.1). The rehabilitation professional needs
tory patient despite the same diagmosis of IVDD at
to perform an
examination and evaluation to
T12-13. The rehabilitation professional recognizes
identify the:
84   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Table 5.1 Two contrasting cases of disk herniation at T12-13.
Patient 1
Patient 2
Diagnosis
Disk herniation T12-13
Disk herniation T1 2-13
 Disabilities
Unable to stand, unable to perform lie-to-stand
Unable to climb stairs without assistance from
transfers, unable to roll, unable to sit, dependent on
owner, unable to ambulate on uneven
bowel and bladder management
surfaces without loss of balance, unable to
maintain squat position for >10 seconds for
toileting
Functional
Eats in lying position
Demonstrates unsteady gait on level surfaces
limitation
 and worsens on uneven or slippery terrain
Impairments
Flaccid muscle
Muscle weakness in the pelvic limbs,
diminished proprioception, shortened hip
flexor musculature
Goals
1.
Stand for 1 minute with minimum assistance
1.  Ambulate independently on all terrain >5
2.
Transfers with minimum assistance
minutes without loss of balance or nail
3.
Owner to be able to express dog's bowel and
scraping
bladder two to four times per day
2.
 Independently maintain squat position for
4.
Maintain sit posture >30 seconds with minimum
toileting
to moderate assistance
3.
Ambulate up 3 steps independently to get
into house
Interventions
Neuromuscular electrical stimulation (NMES),
Massage, stretching, cavaletts, supported
neurofacilitation techniques, protection for skin
uneven terrain walking, resistance band work,
breakdown, simulated patterning of transfers, owner
sit to stands, therapy ball or peanut work,
education, bowel/bladder elimination schedule,
diagonal leg lift standing, underwater
supported standing and weight shifting activities
treadmill, sidestepping, side crunches,
laser therapy, passive range of motion (PROM).
backward walking, rocker board, cookie
water work, massage, etc.
stretches, etc.
（1)
 Functional limitations and/or disabilities
Physical therapy principles
(2)
Impairments that are contributing to the func-
and terminology
tional limitations and/or disabilities
3)
 Interventions that will appropriately address
Biomechanics
the functional limitations and resolve the
functional limitations and /or disabilities.
Mechanics is the study of forces and their effects
(O'Sullivan & Schmitz, 1994). Biomechanics in-
Interventions designed to improve basic functions
volves the application of these mechanical prin-
would be performed with the paralyzed patient,
ciples to human and animal bodies in movement
while interventions to improve higher level func-
and at rest, combining engineering with anatomy
tioning would be performed with the ambulatory
and physiology (TenBroek, 2005). The study of
patient.
mechanics covers statics, the study of bodies while
 Rehabilitation professionals must also under-
at rest, and dymamics or the study of moving
stand comorbidities. For example, if the patient
 bodies. Dymamics can be subdivided into kinemat-
also has congestive heart failure, the therapist
ics and kinetics. Kinematics is the science of motion
understands that the intensity of exercise must be
as it includes descriptions of motion without
modified.
regard for the forces producing the motion. Kinet-
Chapter 5 Introduction to Canine Rehabilitation  85
ics is the study of the forces producing motion or
 occur when bodies experience more than one type
maintaining equilibrium (Paris & Loubert, 1990).
of stress simultaneously.
Compression loads in biological tissues occur
due to the forces of gravity and muscle contraction.
Forces
When load is applied to produce compression, the
Forces on biological tissues are defined as actions
structure shortens and widens. Compression is
that result in tissue deformation causing a change
always greatest on a plane perpendicular to the
in length, shape, or orientation. A force will result 
load. Usually, the greatest exposure to compression
in acceleration, deceleration, or deformation of the
loads comes from muscles. Bone is often exposed
tissues to which it is applied. Forces on biological
to compression and is by far the best biological
tissues have a magnitude, direction, line of applica-
tissue at tolerating compression loads. Compres-
tion, and point of application.
sion will occur on the concave side of a long bone
during bending (Jette, 2006). Compressive loads
 applied to cartilage will result in deformation that
Types of forces
 gradually increases with constant loading over a
period of time.
by direct physical contact and are produced by
Tensile loads are common in the body and are
external or internal influences. Extemal forces are
most often seen at the musculotendinous umits. In
a result of contact or collision, such as the ground
this area, the tissues react to strain elicited by the
reaction force observed during the initial contact
 muscle contraction. Tension may also occur in liga-
phase of gait when a limb first strikes the ground.
ments and can be extremely high (Benjamin et al.,
 Internal forces are generated by muscle contrac-
2006). Bone may be exposed to tensile loads, espe-
tion. Both forces will result in one of five types of
cially where tendons and ligaments attach, or in
loads:
conjunction with bendingloads with tension occur-
ring on the convex side of the bending. When
Compression
forces exceed the tensile limit of the bone, avulsion
Tension
fractures can occur. These are more commonly seen
Torsion
in developing bony tissues where the attachment
 Shear
sites of tendons and ligaments may still be soft.
Bending
 Repetitive or high tensile forces from strong muscle
contractions can result in tissue failure.
Forces influencing loads are
Torsional loads involve twisting. They occur as
Electrical, mechanical, and electromagmetic
a result of a torque and can result in compression,
●Reaction
tension, and shear stresses. Bone absorbs most of
the torsional loads to which the body is exposed.
To understand the effects of these forces on biologi-
Shear loads occur at right angles to the long axis
cal tissues, an understanding of stress and strain
of a structure. Tissues are more vulnerable to a
relating to biological tissues is necessary. As dis-
shear than any other type of load. Shear load expo-
cussed in Chapter 3, stress is defined as the resis-
sure on the body is generally relatively low.
tance of internal forces acting against deformation
 Bending loads are common and are most signifi-
caused by external forces. Strain is the measure of
cant in bone. At least three forces are required to
deformation that occurs as a result of external
create a bending load, and one must oppose the
forces. Stresses are categorized as normal, shear, or
other two.
combined. Normal stress occurs perpendicular to
 Electrical, magnetic, and electromagmetic forces
the plane of the cross section of a tissue. This stress
are nonmechanical forces that are relevant to phys-
consists of compression, bending, and tension.
ical therapy in the context of the electronically
Shear stress occurs parallel to the plane of the cross
 based physical agents that are used.
section of the tissue when a load is applied perpen-
Reaction forces occur when a force is imposed
dicular to fiber alignment. Torsion is also consid-
 on a system or body. Newton's third law states: For
ered a type of shear stress. Combined stresses
 every force there is an equal and opposite force
86   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
(Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., 2012b). Reaction
motion relative to the glenoid, and stifle osteokine-
forces are the resistance of the body to the deforma-
matics refers to the relationship between the femur
tion or acceleration caused by the applied force.
and the tibia. Osteokinematic motion is measured
Two types of reaction forces are discussed in physi-
to evaluate quantitative information of joint mobil-
cal therapy ground reaction forces and joint reac-
ity or ROM.
tion forces.
The following terms refer to movement of limbs
rather than joints:
Application of forces to the body.
f.The behavior of
Flexion and extension take place in the sagittal
biological tissue responding to loads can be defined
plane around a mediolateral axis (Tortora &
by the amount of deformation that occurs. Biologi-
Grabowski, 1993; Muscolino, 2011).
cal tissues are pliable and have elastic properties.
Abduction and adduction take place in the
Elasticity can be described as the ability of a tissue
frontal/coronal
 plane around a sagittal axis
 to return to its original state following deformation
(Tortora & Grabowski, 1993; Muscolino, 2011;
caused by load (Lipowitz, 2010). Stiffness is the
Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., 2012a).
resistance to deformation caused by external loads.
Rotation in limbs occurs in a transverse plane
 The degree of stiffness and amount of elasticity can
around a frontal axis, and in the spine occurs in a
be illustrated in a stress-strain curve of biological 
frontal plane about a transverse axis. In the canine
tissues (see Chapter 3). Loads applied in the elastic
spine, side bending occurs in the transverse plane
region will allow the tissue to return to its original
(Tortora & Grabowski, 1993; Muscolino, 2011;
state. Loads that carry into the plastic region will
Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., 2012a).
cause permanent deformation. In the plastic region,
strain will continue to progress without the addi-
Diagonal movements
tion of further stress. The point at which this begins
is called the yield point. If stress continues to be
The body does not always move in orthogonal
applied, failure will eventually occur. If the strain
planes about fixed axes; rather, it often moves on
is held constant, then the stress decreases with
diagonal planes about moving axes. Even small
time. This is relaxation.
amplitude movements tend to be more diagonal
Biological tissues are subject to the process of
than orthogonal (Tortora & Grabowski, 1993; Mus-
hysteresis, which is energy loss that occurs when a
colino, 2011; Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., 2012a).
tissue is repetitively loaded and unloaded. This
Arthrokinematics is the study of motion that takes
energy loss is expressed as heat. This concept may
place between articular surfaces and related joint
be of value when applying a mobilization force to
structures during osteokinematic motion (Mosby's
stiff joint tissues. Repetitively loading and unload-
Inc, 2009). As a joint moves, causing opposition or
separation of the long bones comprising the joint,
a mobilization techmique will cause energy loss to
specific translatory and/or angular movements
occur. Forces are going into the biological tissue, no
 occur between the joint surfaces. Osteokinematics
deformation occurs, and energy is lost in the form
is concerned primarily with limb motion whereas
of heat. Heating the joint tissues in this way lowers
arthrokinematics is concerned with movements
the stress-strain curve of the joint capsule, enhanc-
that take place within joints.
ing the stretch by allowing for higher strain under
Arthrokinematic movements occur as roll, glide,
less stress and an easier reach into the plastic zone
or spin, and there are two types of arthrokinematic
where changes occur, improving joint mobility
motions—joint play and component motions.
Joint play motions are not under voluntary
control and occur only in response to an outside
Dynamics and kinematics
force. Examples are the additional passive range
that exists at the end of all active ranges or when
Osteokinematics is the study of joint motion in rela-
the cdlinician performs a cranial glide of the tibia.
tion to the osseous structures involved in move-
Component motions take place in a joint to facili-
ment (Lipowitz, 2009-2010). For example, shoulder
tate a particular active movement. For example,
osteokinematics involves the study of humeral
with stifle extension, there is an associated cranial
Chapter 5 Introduction to Canine Rehabilitation  87
glide of the tibia. Osteokinematic motions do not
tant in determining prognosis and treatment (Mac-
occur normally without their corresponding com-
 Conaill, 1951). The following are the three normal
ponent movements.
end feels.
 Manual interventions designed to improve joint
mobility are selected based upon the assessment of
Bone-to-bone
these component motions. Theoretical constructs
of normal component motions of peripheral joints
A hard, unyielding sensation that is painless. An
are based upon the convex-concave rules originally
 example of normal bone-to-bone end feel is elbow
developed by MacConail and later popularized
extension.
clinically by Kaltenbourn (Jonas, 2005; Mosby's
Inc, 2009). Component motions in the spine are
Soft-tissue approximation
based upon studies of coupled motion that occurs
with normal movement of the spine. Coupled
A soft, yielding compression sensation that stops
motion refers to obligate motions that occur
further motion. An example is stifle flexion limited
 by the soft tissues of the gastrocnemius contacting
together in the spine due to normal forces and the
anatomical features of the facet joints. For example,
the hamstring muscles.
rotation in the cervical spine is coupled with side
bending to the same side. Understanding how
Tissue stretch
component motions influence normal joint move-
ment allows the clinician to choose manual tech-
tance, or give, toward the end of the available
niques to improve joint mobility.
range. This elastic sensation depends on the thick-
To obtain clinically relevant information regard-
ness of the tissue and can vary from highly to
ing component motions, these motions must be
slightly elastic. An example is the end feel with
tested. This is accomplished by examination proce-
normal carpal flexion. Injury to ligaments often
dures designed to evaluate the availability of trans-
causes a softer end feel until tension is taken up by
latory motion in a joint. The amount of motion is
other structures (Kaltenborn, 1989). This is the
tested by gliding one joint surface using a transla-
most common type of end feel.
tory or rotary force and critically evaluating how
the joint responds to those forces. One of three
There are five abnormal end feels (Kaltenborn,
findings can be expected: normal, hypomobility, or
1989).
hypermobility. If a joint moves less than expected,
pue quasad aq a Aqodu ro usan e
stretching or mobilization is indicated. If a joint
Muscle spasm
moves more than expected, a hypermobility
or
This is caused by movement, with a sudden arrest
instability may be present, indicating the need for
of the movement, often accompanied by pain. It is
xa r s r asaxa  s 
dramatic and hard. It is usually seen with inflam-
stability via bracing.
mation or instability and the resulting irritability
 The quality of resistance a joint tissue provides
created by the movement.
at the extreme of each passive movement, both
osteokinematically and arthrokinematically, has
been termed an end feel by Cyriax (MacConaill,
Capsular
1951). End feels transmit specific sensations to the
This is similar to tissue stretch but does not occur
examiner's hands depending on the source of a
where one would expect it. It is a soft and boggy
joint's stiffness at the end ROM.
 sensation. The ROM is reduced, and it is hypoth-
esized that a tight capsule is at fault.
End feels
Bone-to-bone
Assessing end feels properly can give information
This is similar to the normal bone-to-bone sensa-
as to the type of pathology present which is impor-
fion, but the restriction occurs before normal joint
88   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
end range should occur. An example may be osteo-
muscles without assistance. Active ROM can be
arthritic changes in a joint such as the hip causing
limited due to weakness, pain, swelling, or tight
decreased ROM.
structures.
Passive ROM is motion performed on the individ-
Empty
ual by an external force. The subject's muscles
 are relaxed, and no contraction is generated. This
Considerable pain ceases the movement with no
passive production of osteokinematic motion
true mechanical restriction being detected. Exam-
may be limited due to an intra-articular lesion,
a juof tm paeiosse ud apnui san
pain, swelling, and a shortened joint capsule.
with acute bursitis or neoplasm. No muscle spasm
Resisted ROM is motion performed independently
is involved.
through all or part of the range by the power of
the individual's muscles against a force.
Springy block
This is similar to a tissue stretch but occurs where
Goniometry
not expected. There is a rebound effect before
The goniometer is an instrument used for the
the normal end of range, usually indicating an
internal derangement within the joint, such as a
precise measurement of angles created by joints. It
is used to gain objective measurement of joint
torn meniscus.
degrees and use specific bony landmarks for each
Range of Motion
joint (Table 5.2; Figure 5.1, Figure 5.2, Figure 5.3,
Figure 5.4, Figure 5.5, Figure 5.6, and Figure 5.7).
Assessment of active, passive, and resisted motions
The goniometer's three parts are the stable or prox-
provides valuable information by isolating the
imal arm, the fulcrum or axis, and the moving or
source of the patient's symptoms and evaluating
distal arm. The axis is placed over the center of the
the functional status of the tissues and structures.
joint. The proximal arm is placed over the proximal
segment, aligned with a proximal landmark, and
Active range of motion (ROM) is motion performed
the distal arm is placed over the distal segment,
independently by the power of the individual's
aligned with a distal landmark.
Table 5.2Landmarks for goniometry
Joint 
 Proximal arm
Axis
Distal arm
 End feel
Shoulder flexion/extension
 Spine of the scapula
Acromion
Lateral humeral
Soft or firm/firm
(Figure 5.1)
epicondyle
Shoulder abduction
Spine of the scapula
Greater tubercle
Bisecting the
Firm
(Figure 5.2)
lateral humerus
Elbow flexion/extension
Greater tubercle
Lateral epicondyle
Lateral styloid 
Soft or firm/hard
(Figure 5.3)
pocess
Carpal flexion/extension
Radial head
Lateral styloid
5th Metacarpal
Firm/firm
(Figure 5.4)
bone
Hip flexion/extension
 Bisecting the ilial
Greater trochanter
Lateral femoral
Soft or firm/firm
(Figure 5.5)
wing
condyle
Stifle flexion/extension
Greater trochanter
Lateral femoral condyle
Lateral malleolus 
Soft or firm/firm
(Figure 5.6)
Tarsal flexion/extension
Fibular head
Lateral malleolus
5th Metatarsal
Firm/firm
(Figure 5.7)
bone
Chapter 5 Introduction to Canine Rehabilitation  89
Figure 5.1 A. Measuring shoulder flexion. B. Measuring shoulder extension.
readers can affect reliability. There are different
 methods for taking girth measurements depending
 on the goal of the measurement. If measuring
swelling, the girthometer is usually placed around
the affected area. If measuring for body composi-
tion or muscle girth, consistent landmarks are
important to increase reliability. One method is to
snug the girthometer as high into the groin or axilla
as possible and hold it in place using the fifth digit
(Figure 5.8). However, this method may not be
completely reliable as the tape can slip and there-
fore not be in the exact same place as a previous
Figure 5.2 Measuring shoulder abduction.
measurement.
 The author prefers to use a method incorporat-
ing the same landmarks each time for improved
Intrarater reliability, which is better than inter-
accuracy. For example, when measuring thigh
rater reliability, even when using the same tech-
muscle bulk, the girthometer is placed at the
nique, has a 1-5 degree margin of error.
Girth measurements are circumferential measure
around the thigh as proximally as possible, and the
ments at standard anatomical sites around the
tape ending at the greater trochanter (Figure 5.9).
body, measured with a tape measure. They are
 This technique can be reproduced, using the acro-
used to determine muscle size, body composition,
mion, for forelimb measurement. The measure-
and swelling, and to monitor changes in these
ment is rechecked for accuracy, compared to the
objective measurements. The amount of tension on
 opposite leg, and the patient's position (recumbent
the tape, correct use of landmarks, and changes in
vs. weight bearing) is documented.
Figure 5.3 A. Measuring elbow flexion. B. Measuring elbow extension.
Figure 5.4 A. Measuring carpal flexion. B. Measuring carpal extension.
06
Figure 5.5 A. Measuring hip flexion. B. Measuring hip extension.
Figure 5.6 A. Measuring stifle flexion. B. Measuring stifle extension.
P
Figure 5.7 A. Measuring tarsal flexion. B. Measuring tarsal extension.
Figure 5.8
 Girthometry of the pelvic limb muscles:
Option 1.
Figure 5.9 Girthometry of the pelvic limb muscles:
Option 2.
92
Chapter 5 Introduction to Canine Rehabilitation  93
Flexibility
Joint mobilizations
Flexibility refers to the length of a muscle.
Mobilizations are skilled passive movements of a
 Decreased flexibility results from tight muscle(s),
joint that address arthrokinematic component
and can affect ROM of a joint especially when the
 motions. The effects of mobilizations can be psy-
muscle crosses two joints.
chological, mechanical, and neurophysiological.
They are performed to restore accessory motion
or to minimize pain. Psychologically, the placing
of skilled and confident hands on a patient pro-
Proprioception
vides reassurance that something good will result.
Maitland describes four methods or grades of
Proprioception is the ability of the body to sense
oscillations that have become standard when per-
movement and position (Anderson et al., 1994).
This is accomplished via afferent pathways origi-
forming, recording, and describing mobilization
techniques (MacConaill, 1951; Kaltenborn, 1989;
nating from mechanoreceptors found in joint
Paris & Loubert, 1990):
tissues, ligaments, tendons, and fascial and dermal
layers. These receptors provide constant monitor-
Grade I
ing of positional information, allowing the CNS to
Small amplitude movement performed at the
respond efferently with active muscle contractions.
beginming of the range.
These contractions elicit righting and equilibrium
responses to assist with safe and efficient move-
Grade II
ment through space or to maintain static position-
 Large amplitude movement performed within the
ing. Proprioception is hindered following injury
 range but not reaching the end of the range.
and in the presence of pain and swelling, and can 
Grade III
be improved with targeted exercises. Learning a
 Large amplitude movement performed up to the
end of the range.
tive senses first.
Grade IV
Small amplitude movement performed at the end
of the range.
Neuromuscular response to injury
Applying a force at the end of an ROM will
 Disability commonly occurs following an injury or
mechanically elongate joint tissues producing
surgical intervention. Much of the associated dis-
plastic elongation. This is accomplished by per-
ability can be found in neuromuscular alterations
forming Grades IIl and IV joint mobilization, which
that occur in uninjured musculature around the
assist in correcting the causative dysfunction asso-
 injured site. This is believed to occur through alter-
ciated with a painful presentation. Grades I and II
ations in central and peripheral processes, caused 
-ens anoe roy reaaq aq Ae suonezqo
by the influence of joint effusion and pain. Muscu-
tions, or when Grades I and IV mobilizations
lar inhibition is observed when effusion and/or
 are not tolerated. This is a gentle method of firing
pain are present. This inhibition may occur at 
both type I postural and type II dynamic mechano-
the spinal cord level and in the brain. Return to
 receptors, reducing muscle guarding and associ-
preinjury neuromuscular functioning is not auto-
ated pain.
matic. Left unattended, the neuromuscular changes
will lead to biomechanical alterations and subse-
effect by firing articular mechanoreceptors, and
 quent aberrant forces on the injured tissues. Long
cutaneous and muscular receptors. In addition, it
term, this leads to further injury or contributes to
 decreases nociception and relaxes muscle holding.
the degenerative process. Rehabilitation can assist
Distraction, sometimes referred to as traction, is
 in the restoration of normal neuromuscular func-
the separation of joint surfaces that does not create
tioning following injury or surgery (Soderberg.
 a change in position. Distraction can be applied
1986).
manually or by an outside force. Kaltenborn
94   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
imposed on the tissues during passive motion.
Gradel
 Noncontractile tissues are those incapable of a con-
X
traction or of producing their own internal load;
rather, the load must be passively applied by an
extermal force. These tissues are the ligaments,
GradeIl
nerves, fascia, joint capsule, bursa, bone, blood
X
vessels, dura mater, and articular cartilage.
A motor neuron delivers the stimulus that causes
 muscle fiber to contract. The motor neuron plus all
GradeIll
the muscle fibers it stimulates form a motor unit
X
(Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., 2012d). Small, sus-
 tained muscle contractions give firmmess or muscle
Figure 5.10 Kaltenborn's distraction grading system.
tone to a relaxed skeletal muscle. At any given
Adapted from Paris, S. & Loubert, P. 1990. FCO Foundations
moment, a few muscle fibers are contracting while
of Clinicat Orthopaedics, St. Augustine, FL, Institute Press,
most are relaxing. This small amount of contraction
p. 278.
firms a muscle without producing movement and
 is crucial for maintaining posture. Hypotonia refers
to a decrease or loss of muscle tone (Mosby's Inc,
created a grading system to assist in performing,
2009). Flaccid muscles are loose and appear flat-
describing, and documenting
distraction tech-
tened, rather than rounded (Tortora & Grabowski
niques (Paris & Loubert, 1990):
1993). Certain disorders of the nervous system may
result in flaccid paralysis, usually characterized by
Grade I
loss of muscle tone, loss or reduced tendon reflexes,
The joint surfaces are barely un-weighted.
and atrophy of muscles.
Hypertonia is an increase in muscle tone and
Grade II
The slack of the capsule is taken up.
is characterized by either spasticity or rigidity.
Spasticity is an increase in muscle tone associated
Grade III
with increased or pathological tendon reflexes.
 The capsule and ligaments are stretched (Figure
Rigidity refers to increased muscle tone, with
5.10).
reflexes unaffected.
Muscle contraction terminology
Types of muscle contractions
Isometric contraction of a muscle generates force
 The ultimate purpose of muscle tissue is to create
without movement of the body part through any
efficient and smooth movements of the body (Wiki-
portion of its ROM (Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.,
media Foundation, Inc., 2012c). By contracting or
2012c).
contracting and relaxing, muscle tissue produces
Isotonic contractions occur through partial or full
motion, provides stability, and generates heat. In
ROM against constant resistance throughout the
addition to producing movement, skeletal muscles
 range, and can be concentric or eccentric. Con-
maintain the body in stable positions such as sitting
centric contraction results in movement of the
and standing. As muscles contract to
perform
muscle from a lengthened to a shortened posi-
 work, a by-product is heat or thermogenesis. Much
tion. Eccentric contraction results in movement
of this heat is used to maintain normal body
from a shortened to a lengthened position.
temperature.
Contractile tissues make up the myotendinous
unit and its attachments, specifically tendon,
Open and closed packed positions
muscle, and periosteum. The tissues can elicit pain
when internal tension is produced by an active or
Open packed refers to joint positions in which the
resisted muscle contraction, and by the stretch
tension of the passive restraints exerts the least
Chapter 5 Introduction to Canine Rehabilitation  95
amount of force (Threlkeld, 2002). This is the posi-
Foot flat/loading response. The body is accelerating
tion of least stability in a joint. The greatest amount 
forward over the limb and the paw is flat on the
of joint play is in this position. Therefore, assess-
ground.
ments of arthrokinematic motion, and in most situ-
ations, mobilizations, should be done with the joint
Midstance.
.The body is directly over the support-
 in an open packed position.
ing limb.
Closed packed positions refer to positions of
joints in which the passive restraint systems of the
Terminal stance. The stance leg is unloading the
joint are maximally taut, providing the most stable
weight of the body and transfering it to other
position for that joint. Typically in clinical practice,
limbs, preparing it for swing phase.
ligamentous stress tests should be performed in
the closed packed position since the ligaments are
Toe-off/pre-swing. The limb is off weighted and
in their most stable position
ready for swing phase.
Kinetic chains
Swing phase
When the paw is not in contact with the ground
A kinetic chain refers to a series of linked segments
and is off weighting the limb.
 of a body and movement in response to external or
internal forces (O'Sullivan & Schmitz, 1994). The
Acceleration/initial swing. The point where the
entire canine body or any part containing one or
paw leaves the ground and begins to accelerate
more joints should be considered a kinetic chain.
forward.
There are two types of kinetic chains: closed and
open. A closed kinetic chain occurs when the distal
Midswing.
.The limb is at the midpoint in the gait
end of the chain is fixed, such as during the weight-
cycle directly below the body.
bearing phase of gait, while an open kinetic chain
occurs when the distal end of the chain is freely
Deceleration/terminal swing. The limb is decelerat-
a o si med au uam se uns aoeds ui Suaou
ing to prepare to accept weight for initial contact.
ground.
Weight-bearing terminology
Gait analysis
The terms used in this text will include
Gait cycle
The movement of one foot from initial contact with
● Full weight bearing (FWB)
the ground until it contacts the ground again
●Partial weight bearing (PWB)
(Schneck & Bronzino, 2002)
Toe-touch weight bearing (TTWB)
 Touch-down weight bearing (TDWB) or feather
weight bearing (FeWB)
Phases of gait
●Nonweight bearing (NWB)
Stance phase and swing phase.
Stance phase
Functional impairments
When the paw is in contact with the ground and
Functional impairments are the result of disease or
weight bearing occurs.
insult, and consist of specific alterations in physi-
ologic, anatomic, or psychologic structures or func-
Initial contact. The weight acceptance period of
tions. For a patient recovering from a cruciate
the stance leg when it initially hits the ground force
repair, impairments that are the direct result of
96   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Case Study 5.1  First rib malposition
Signalment: 1 year, 9-month old, 93.5 Ib M/N Rottweiler.
ROM: WNL except mild discomfort with L elbow
flexion/overpressure of left elbow flexion.
Presenting Complaint: 5 weeks unresolved left front
limb lameness. No history of trauma. Recently diagnosed
Palpation: No tenderness/pain in cervical spine, left
with hyperadrenocorticismt.
limb, shoulder girdle muscles/tendons. Very painful reac-
tion to Spring Test (the therapist's attempts to spring. or
Radiographs: Normal left shoulder with mild OA left
gently rock in a cranio-caudal direction) on the left first
elbow.
rib (Nomden et af., 2oo5). No muscle atrophy noted.
Current Treatment: Carprofen 100 rmg BID and restricted
Balance: Normal
activity. Owner has not been compliant with cage
confinemrent.
Proximal Forelimb
Rehabilitation Evaluation
Girth Measurements: 46 cm bilaterally with acromion as
landmark
Home Environment: Tile and lamrinate flooring through-
out home, one other Rottweiler, two children
Special Tests: Conscious proprioception intact, shoulder
abduction normal
History: Very playful dog enjoyed romping with house-
mate. Walked with owner 20-30 minutes 2-3 times/
Joint Mobility: Left first rib positioned cranial to the
week.
normal position and more cranially than the right first
rib. Left first rib hypomobile upon therapist's attempt to
Gait: Larme left front, worse at faster speeds. Decreased
motion caudally  with  pain reaction upon mobility
stance time, obvious head bob.
assessment
Posture/Appearance: Off-weights LF in standing. BCS
See Table 5.3 for case summary.
5/9. Well-muscled and fit.
Table 5.3 Summary for Case Study 5.1
 Diagnosis
Left first rib hypomobility and cranial slip
 Disabilities
Unable to function at prior level
 Functional limitation 
Unable to play with housemate, unable to go for walks with owner
Impairments
Loss of normal gait due to pain, possible muscle inhibition due to pain, hypomobile left first
rib
Goals
(1)  Normalize first rib position to return ambulation to pain-free 100% of the time
[2}
 Be able to cease medications
[3}
Educate owner
Rehabilitation plan
(1}
 First rib mobilizations to address dysfunction
[2)
 Owner education regarding diagnosis, treatment plan, and importance of rest as
 healing is occurring.
 Laser therapy for pain, inflammation and muscle guarding
（4}
 Cold therapy for pain, inflammation, and muscle guarding
(5)   Monitor left elbow osteoarthritis
Chapter 5 Introduction to Canine Rehabilitation 97
pathology might include abnormal motor planning
monitoring, prioritizing, progressing, and measur-
and coordination, disuse atrophy, muscle tight-
ing the effectiveness of the current treatments. It is
ness, and balance deficits.
a difficult process, requiring skill in the interpreta-
tion of evaluation data, professional judgment, and
skill in facilitating patient participation in the
Disability
process. The functional deficits and impairments
present during the initial evaluation of the canine
According to the World Health Organization's
 patient guide the process of setting appropriate
abilities, and Handicaps (ICIDH) (World Health  cations and precautions, the patient's age, prior
Organization, 1997), disability is defined as the 
 level of function, and comorbidities are also con-
inability to perform an activity in the manner or
sidered when formulating goals.
range considered normal for that individual, result-
Goals should be timely, measurable, functional,
 ing from an impairment.
 meaningful, and realistic. An example of an appro-
priately written goal is this: Within 4 weeks the
patient will be able to transfer from sit to stand
Canine evaluation from the physical
independently 100% of the time.
therapy perspective
There are three purposes for musculoskeletal
Designing a treatment plan of care
assessment: (1) to identify the source responsible
for the patient's pain and/or functional impair-
The plan of care is desigmed to meet both short-
ments, (2) to assess the performance and integrity
and long-term goals, and is revised at each visit.
of the involved tissues and structures, and (3) to
Establishing a treatment plan should be based on
 determine the patient's functional ability during
the patient's functional deficits and impairments
daily activities.
noted during the initial evaluation and subsequent
 Pain is frequently the primary reason a client
treatments. It is important to push the patient
seeks treatment. The initial goal is to identify the
without overdoing it. Being able to proficienly
specific lesion causing the pain. This is done by
 desigm and progress treatment plans takes skill and
performing precise tests on isolated tissues and
practice.
structures known to be capable of creating the
patient's symptoms.
The goal of rehabilitation is to restore a patient's
Owner compliance
maximal functional capacity as permitted by the
integrity and performance of tissues and struc-
Owner /handler compliance is crucial for a patient's
tures. As these components ultimately combine to
recovery. Patients with involved owners/handlers
 permit integrated function, each must be examined
tend to improve more rapidly. The owmer /handler
thoroughly to develop an accurate prognosis and
can do a great deal at home to complement the
to determine the progression of treatment.
rehabilitation treatment plan. They should be in-
cluded in setting goals. For instance, if the patient
 is overweight, a weight loss program is critical to
Goal setting
decrease joint stresses and improve tissue healing
and speed of return to function. It may be difficult
The emphasis in rehabilitation therapy is on
for an owner to make changes to the patient's
meeting goals that are functional and realistic
feeding regimen, but it is the clinician's ethical
for the patient. The goals of rehabilitation include 
duty to address all issues affecting the patient's
the restoration, maintenance, and promotion of
 rehabilitation potential. Putting the responsibility
optimal function and quality of life as they relate
on the owner/handler to assist in the patient's
 to movement disorders. Determining appropriate
treatment goals assists the clinician in planning.
 overall compliance.
98   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Case Study 5.2  Stifle hypomobility post TTA
Signalment: 11 y.o. M/N Cocker Spaniel
Transfers: Slow to rise. Decreased use of LR.
History: Right TTA 7 months prior. Left TTA 2 weeks
ROM: Left stifle flexion 65 degrees, stifle extension 155
ago. Rehabilitation started 1 week postoperatively
degrees, tarsal flexion 55 degrees
Right stifle flexion 40 degrees, stifle extension 160
 Home Environment: Stairs with baby gate, Runners On
 degrees, tarsal flexion 39 degrees.
tile floors.
Flexibility: Tight L harmstrings
Examination
 Palpation: tight/tender left hamstrings, quadriceps, sar-
Gait: PwB LR 10o% of the tire at walk and trot
torius, and latissimus. Tight thoracic paraspinal muscles
BCS 7/9. Stands Toe-touch→non-weight-bearing LR.
bilaterally. Hypomobile left stifle cranial/caudal.
Sits with LR limb abducted, stifle extended, and weight
shifted to right.
See Table 5.4 for case summary.
Table 5.4 Summary for Case Study 5.2
Diagnosis
1 week P.O. Left TTA
 Disabilities
Unable to function at prior level
Functional limitation
Unable to do stairs, go for walks, use left pelvic limb for transfers sit to stand
Impairments
Loss of normal gait and possible muscle inhibition due to pain. Hypomobile left stifle,
decreased ROM left stifle and tarsus, decreased flexibility, muscle tenderness; decreased 
balance, loss of proper weight bearing LR
Goals
(1}
 Owner compliance with home exercise program within 1 week
[2)
 BCS to 5/9 within 6 weeks
[3}
 PROM stifle flexion increased by 20 degrees, tarsal flexion increased by 15
degrees within 4 weeks
[4}
 Sit→>Stand transfers using left pelvic limb 100% of the time within 6 weeks
（5)
Ambulate >20 minutes with symmetrical gait 100% of the within 6 weeks
(6)}
 Palpable tenderness resolved within 6 weeks
 Rehabilitation plan
(1}
 Owner education
(2)
Laser; cold therapy for pain and inflammation
Joint mobilizations to improve ROM and joint hypomobility
[4)
NMES to improve muscle timing, contraction strength, and stifle stability
(5)
PROM, massage, and stretching to improve ROM and flexibility.
(6}
 Progressive strengthening exercises to address muscle weaknesses and decreased
weight bearing
[7)
 Weight mana gement/nutr itional education
(8) Balance and proprioception exercises
Webliography
PM. (ed.), Osteopathic Approach to Lumbo-Peloic
Dysfunctions in Canines. Web. Accessed October 23,
American Physical Therapy Association (2010) Who Are
2012. www.orthopt.org/downloads/8767.pdf
Physicat Therapists and What Do They Do? Guide to Phys-
LIPOWITZ, A. (C2009-2010) Biomechanical Consider-
ical Therapist Practice. APTA.org, 2nd ed., pp 7-50.
ations of Fractures and Fracture Repair. PDFio.com.
Accessed May 29, 2012. www.mhprofessional.com/
Shared by dengdaoye733 on Aug 1, 2011. Accessed
downloads/products/0071486410/dutton_ch01_
May 29, 2012. www.pdfio.com/k-729417.html
0071486410.pdf
MUSCOLINO,J. (2011) Know the Body Muscle, Bone, and
LEVINE, D.L., MILLIS, D., & MARCELLIN-LITTLE, D.J.
Palpation Essentials. LearmMuscles.com. Accessed Oc-
(2004) Proposed fuctional stifle scale. In: Kortekaas,
tober 23, 2012. www.learmmuscles.com/KTB/ktb.pdf
Chapter 5 Introduction to Canine Rehabilitation   99
TENBROEK, T. (2005) Introduction KIN335 Biomechan-
JONAS,W.B.2005.Mosby's Dictionary of Complementary
ics Spring 2005. ASU.edu. Accessed October 23, 2012.
and Alternative Medicine. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier
www.asu.edu/courses/kin335tt/Lectures/
Mosby.
 Introduction/Introduction.pdf
KALTENBORN,FM.1989.Manuat Mobilization ofExtrem-
Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. March 12, 2012a. "Anatomi-
ity foints: Basic Examination. Minneapolis, MN: Ortho-
cal terms of motion." Wikipedia, The Free Encyclope-
 pedic Physical Therapy Products.
dia.Web. Accessed May 29, 2012. en.wikipedia.org/
LIPOWITZ, A.J. 2010. Biomechanical Considerations of
wiki/ Anatomical_terms_of_motion
Fractures and Methods of Fracture Repair. Diplomate,
Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. April 11, 2012b. "Newton's
 American College of Veterinary Surgeons.
laws of motion." Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia.
MACCONAILL, M.A. 1951. The movements of bones
Web. Accessed October 23, 2012. en.wikipedia.org/
 and joints; the mechanical structure of articulating car-
wiki/Newton%27s_laws_of_motion
tilage. ∫Bone foint Surg Br, 33B, 251-257.
Wikimedia Foundation,Inc. May 26, 2012c.“Muscle
Mosby's Inc. 2009. Mosby's Medical Dictionary, 8th ed. St.
contraction." Wikipedia, The Free EncyclopediaWeb.
Louis, MO: Mosby-Elsevier.
Accessed October 23, 2012. en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
NOMDEN, J.G., SLAGERS, A.J., BERGMAN, G.J.D.,
Muscle_contraction
WINTERS,J.C.,KROPMANS, T.J.B.,& DIJKSTRA, PU.
Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. June 1, 2012d. "Motor
 2009. Interobserver reliability of physical examination
neuron." Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Web.
of shoulder girdle. Man Ther, 14, 152-159.
Accessed October 23, 2012. en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
O'SULLIVAN, S.B.& SCHMITZ, T.J.1994. Physical Reha
Motor_neuron
blitatior: Assessment and Treatment, 3rd ed. Philadel-
phia: F.A. Davis, Chapters 1, 5, 10 & 11.
PARIS, S. & LOUBERT, P. 1990. FCO Foundations of Clini-
References
al Orthopaedics, Part I and II, 2nd ed.St. Augustine,FL:
Institute Press.
American Physical Therapy Association. 1999. Guide to
SCHNECK, D.J. & BRONZINO, J.D. 2002. Biomechanics:
Physical Thermpist Practice, 2nd ed. Alexandria, VA:
Principles and Applications. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press,
APTA, Chapter 1.
131-139.
ANDERSON, K., ANDERSON, L.E., & GLANZE, W.D.
SODERBERG, G.L. 1986. Kinesiology: Application to Path-
1994. Mosby's Medical, Nursing and Allied Health Dic
ological Motion, 7th ed. Baltimore, MD: Williams &
tionary, 4th ed. St. Louis, MO: Mosby.
Wilkins.
BENJAMIN,M., TOUMI,H., RALPHS, IR., BYDDER,G.,
THRELKELD, A.J. 2002. Basic structure and function of
BEST, T.M., & MILZ, S. 2006. Where tendons and liga-
the joints. In: NEUMANN, D.A. (ed.), Kinesiotogy of the
ments meet bone: attachment sites ("entheses") in rela-
Musculoskeletat System:Foundations for Physical Reha-
tion to exercise and/or mechanical load. § Anat, 208,
bilitatior. Philadelphia: Mosby, 25-40.
471490.
TORTORA, G.J. & GRABOWSKI, S.R. 1993. Principles of
JETTE, A.M. 1994. Physical disablement concepts for
Aratomy and Physiology, 7th ed. New York: Harper
physical therapy research and practice. Phys Ther, 74,
Collins College.
380-386.
World Health Organization. 1997. International Classifica-
JETTE, A.M. 2006. Toward a common language for func-
tion of Diseases, 9th ed. New York: WHO.
tion, disability, and health. Phys Ther, 86, 726-734.
Manual Therapy
Judy C. Coates, MEd, MSPT, CCRT
Summary
Specialized manual skills are used extensively in both evaluating and treating the canine
patient. Manual techniques are used in an assessment to identify sof tissue abnormalities,
muscle length tightness, limitations in passive range of motion (PROM), and restrictions in
arthrokinematic motion. Soft tissue palpation requires the ability to distinguish between
normal and pathological tissue characteristics. Flexibility is assessed with particular sensitivity
to multijoint muscles. PROM provides information regarding quality and quantity of joint
range of motion (ROM) with the use of end-feels and goniometry. Joint play is used to assess
accessory joint motion. Identification and interpretation of abnormal findings will direct the
 therapist in determining the most appropri ate and most efficient treatment techniques. Manual
treatment involves a variety of soft tissue techniques, specific stretching techniques, PROM
with overpressure, and joint mobilization, including glides and traction. Sof tissue techniques
are designed to address a specific tissue type and pathology. Techniques used to increase
circulation are different from techniques used to reduce adhesions or eliminate trigger points.
Decreased flexibility is treated with direct and nondirect stretching techniques designed to
optimize patient tolerance and effectiveness. Treatment of limited PROM depends on infor-
mation gathered from end-feel assessment. Motion limited by a firm, elastic end-feel will
require treatment techniques different from motion that is limited by a boggy end-feel. Finally,
joint mobilization consists of glides and traction. Different grades and techniques of mobiliza-
A!gowodsu snsaa uied pean or pasn aue uo
Carine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation, First Edition. Edited by M. Christine Zink and Janet B. Van Dyke.
@2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
100
Chapter 6 Manual Therapy 101
Manual skills are critical to successful evaluation
tion, the most effective soft tissue treatment tech-
 and treatment of the canine rehabilitation patient.
 nique can be chosen.
Manual techniques are used in assessment and
 Soft tissues are evaluated by palpation of specific
treatment of soft tissue abnormalities, osteokine- 
 tissues and structures. A variety of techniques
matic and arthrokinematic dysfunction, and pain.
 are used to assess soft tissue depending on tissue
In this chapter, manual skills are divided into four
 type. For example, fascial restrictions are evaluated
categories: soft tissue mobilization (STM), passive
using techniques quite different from those used
range of motion (PROM), stretching, and joint
for muscle or tendon. It is important to be cogni-
mobilization.
zant of the properties of each type of tissue, under-
standing that normal muscle feels different from
normal tendon, ligament, or fascia. The contralat-
STM
eral side is used for comparison. Documentation
includes a description of the tissue that can be
Soft tissue mobilization (STM), or massage, is the
characterized by texture, shape, tone, and density.
systematic application of manual pressure and
Abnormal soft tissue can be described as thick,
movement of soft tissues, including skin, tendons,
soft/firm, boggy, tight, tender, in spasm, warm/
ligaments, fascia, and muscle. Soft tissue treatment
cold /clammy, or as having crepitus.
techniques have been used for medical conditions
since the 1800s; however, STM has been a source
Assessing swelling
of some controversy, as its value has not been well
documented (Hertling & Kessler, 1990). One must
The terms edema and swelling are often used inter-
be diligent in determining the rationale for its use.
changeably. In the strict sense, however, swelling
Treatment techniques must be based on an accepted
does not include pitting. Swelling is the abnormal
physiologic basis. Each technique must clearly
build up of fluid in tissues (intracellular, extra-
support the specific treatment objectives as well as
cellular, intracapsular, and extracapsular). When
the predetermined goals and plan for resolving the
 pressure is applied to a swollen area and an inden-
pathologic state.
tation remains once the pressure is removed, it is
When pressure is applied to soft tissues, the
referred to as pitting edema (Table 6.1).
 tissue layer interfaces glide and separate, creating
Resolution of swelling is a common treatment
 physiological effects. STM is presumed to create
goal, as swelling will retard the recovery process.
circulatory effects that drive fluid from the intersti-
Swelling can result in pain, loss of ROM and reflex
tial space to the vessels with movement toward the
inhibition of the surrounding muscles, leading to
lymph nodes and heart (Millis et al., 2004). Mobili-
atrophy and weakness. Swelling can be measured
zation of connective tissue is used to increase the
with a Gulick girthometer and documented in
extensibility of the tissue and to prevent or reduce
centimeters (Figure 6.1) or it can be palpated and
adhesion formation. Soft tissue techniques can be
documented as minimal, moderate, or severe.
s) (o) uoo jo auei aseanu ch pasn
et al., 2011), promote healing (Zusman, 2011), and
reduce pain (van den Dolder et al., 2010; Sefton
et al., 2011).
Table 6.1 Characteristics of swelling
Soft tissue assessment
Type of swelling 
Characteristic
To determine the appropriateness of STM as a
Fluid swelling
Soft and mobile
treatment, a careful evaluation of the soft tissues
Edematous synovial
Boggy
must be performed. A thorough soft tissue assess-
swelling
ment will identify the presence of soft tissue
 Pitting edema
Thick and slow moving
pathology, swelling, and pain. With this informa-
102 Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Figure 6.2 Effleurage to the gluteal muscles.
Figure 6.1  Measurement of stifle joint swelling using a
Gulick girthometer and documented in centimeters.
Soft tissue treatment
Varying physiologic states are treated using differ-
ent STM techniques. For example, effusion is most
effectively treated  with longitudinal strokes of
moderate pressure, whereas a muscle spasm will
respond better to ischemic compression. Once the
goal of your soft tissue treatment is established, the
Figure 6.3 Petrissage (skin rolling) of the paravertebra
most appropriate technique(s) can be applied.
muscles.
Treatment goals:
Techniques
 Treatment goals would include the following:
The choice of technique for a particular condition
will depend upon the goal of treatment; the size
 Increase circulation
and shape of the muscle, tendon, ligament, or
 Decrease swelling
fascia; and the pathological state of the tissue.
 Increase tissue extensibility
Reduce adhesions
Effeurage consists of long slow strokes, generally
Increase scar mobility
light to moderate pressure, usually parallel to
 Eliminate trigger points or tender points
the direction of the muscle fibers (Figure 6.2).
Promote tendon and ligament healing
Petrissage involves short, brisk strokes, moderate to
 Increase ROM
deep pressure, parallel, perpendicular, or diago-
 Decrease pain
nally across the direction of the muscle fibers. It
 Decrease muscle spasm
 may include kneading, wringing, or skin rolling
Facilitate or inhibit neuromuscular activity.
(Figure 6.3).
Chapter 6 Manual Therapy
103
such a way that the finger does not slide across
the skin, but rather takes the skin with it. In
so doing, the force is transmitted directly to
 deeper tissues. Cross-friction massage is com-
monly used on tendons, ligaments, and well-
healed scars to realign noncontractile fibers.
Cross-friction massage was made popular by
one of the foremost specialists in the diagnosis
and treatment of musculoskeletal injury and
pain syndromes, British physician James Cyriax.
He believed that proper remodeling could be
stimulated by manually manipulating the tissues
to both break down the scar tissue and promote
circulation.
Ischemic cormpression is performed by applying sus-
tained moderate to deep pressure to an area
of localized hyperactivity. It is a therapeutic
technique in which blood flow to a local area is
 intentionally blocked. It is believed that a resur-
gence of local blood flow will occur upon release.
Once discomfort is reduced, increased pressure
is applied. Ischemic compression is thought to
Figure 6.4Tapotement to the triceps muscle.
restore circulation, inhibit the muscle, reduce
muscular tension, and promote healing.
Sidde snoa s nsd od ia
gentle digital pressure to a trigger point. It is
based on the extensive work of Janet Travell,
MD, and colleagues. Travell defined a trigger 
s n ns a , s ( 
muscle that is associated with a hypersensitive
palpable nodule in a taut band. The spot is
tender when pressed and can give rise to char-
acteristic referred pain, motor dysfunction, and
autonomic phenomena" (McPartland, 2004). In
1999, Travell and Simons recommended treating
trigger points with gentle digital pressure rather
than the previously proposed ischemic compres-
, aan mau n pau a us
point pressure release" (Simons et al., 1999),
Figure 6.5 Cross-friction massage of the supraspinatus
identified common trigger point locations and
tendon.
linked them to specific referral patterns. Deacti-
vation of these points can be achieved by manual
-aa Aap ans pe Aerds 'asaan pod ra
Tapotement is rhythmic, brisk percussion often
dling, or injection (McPartland, 2004). Treatment
administered with the tips of the fingers, primar-
is designed to alleviate referred sensations as
ily used as a stimulating stroke to facilitate a
well as localized pain.
weak muscle (Figure 6.4).
Positional Release Therapy/Strain-Counterstrain (SCS)
 e sa ssu sso
is a technique based on the identification and
pressure perpendicularly across the desired
resolution of tender points. A tender point is dis-
tissue (Figure 6.5). Pressure is maintained in
tinguished from a trigger point in that it elicits
104   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Table 6.2  Treatment guidelines by goal
lbocal pain only. The patient is placed in a position
in which the origin and insertion of the hyper-
Goals
Techniques
tonic muscle are brought close to one another.
This position is held for 90 seconds (3 minutes
Increase circulation
Effleurage, petrissage,
for the neurological patient). The process is com-
tapotement
au Suuan Aaaissd pue Aimons Aq paand
Decrease swelling
Effleurage; lymphatic
patient to an anatomically neutral  position
drainage
without firing of the muscle spindle.
Increase soft tissue
Effleurage, petrissage,
extensibility
cross-friction massage,
The technique is based on SCS techniques devel-
positional release, trigger
oped by Lawrence Jones, DO, in the 1950s. He
point release, MFR
believed that SCS inhibited the muscle spindle acti-
Reduce adhesions
Cross-friction massage
vation, thereby decreasing the amount of afferent
impulses to the brain and thus, efferent impulses
Increase scar mobility
Cross-friction massage, MFR
to the same muscle. By interrupting this pathway,
Eliminate trigger or
Trigger point release,
the patient's muscle is allowed to relax and assume
tender points
positional release, ischemic
a normal resting tone (Kuchera, 2008).
 compression
Additional manual techniques that are outside
Promote tendon and
Cross-friction massage
the scope of this text but merit acknowledgement
ligament healing 
are as follows:
Increase ROM
All of the above
Myofascial release (MFR) addresses myofascial con-
Decrease pain
Effleurage, petrissage.
Cross-fiber massage, trigger
nective tissue restriction with the intention of
point release, MFR,
eliminating pain and restoring motion. Elonga-
ischemic compression
tion of restricted fascial tissue is achieved by
Decrease muscle
Ischemic compression,
applying a slow, low load (gentle pressure) to the
 spa sm
efleurage, petrissage.
target viscoelastic medium (fascia). The load is
tapotement
applied in three planes of motion using either
direct or indirect techniques. This technique
requires advanced training from a therapist spe-
calizing in MFR.
It is important that the underlying cause of the soft
Acupressure is based on the ancient healing art of
 tissue abnormality be addressed for long-standing
acupuncture. Using the same pressure points
resolution of the problem to occur.
 and meridians, acupressure employs finger pres-
 For example, upper trapezius or scalene muscle
 sure rather than needles to specific points on the
pain is a common complaint in human medicine.
body.
Upon evaluation, trigger points, tenderness, and
Manual lymphatic drainage (MLD) therapy focuses
decreased flexibility are noted. Soft tissue tech-
 on specific lymph nodes and the natural flow of
 niques will likely provide temporary relief at best.
the lymphatic system. Given that the lymphatic
 The underlying cause of the overused muscles
system does not have its own pumping mecha-
must be determined to fully resolve the issue. A
nism, lymphatic drainage therapy
(LDT)
is
possible cause may be poor posture while working
intended to promote free flowing lymphatic
on the computer. Thus, complete resolution will
drainage. The technique uses specific rhythmic
require changing the gravitational effect on this
hand strokes taught by an MLD therapist.
muscle with postural correction and exercise. A
similar canine example would be the patient with
Treatment design
an iliopsoas strain secondary to lumbosacral insta-
bility. The muscle can be treated with manual
With knowledge of the above treatment techniques,
therapy, creating a temporary improvement in the
one can determine which technique(s) will most
patient's status, but symptoms will reoccur until
effectively address the patient's issues (Table 6.2).
the lumbosacral instability is addressed.
Chapter 6 Manual Therapy 105
Case Study 6.1  Manual therapy for postoperative FHO
Signalment: 9y.o. MN Brittany Spaniel
 Inadequate weight bearing
O Altered gait.
Presenting Complaint: 1 mronth postoperative L FHO
with decreased ROM, weight bearing, and weakness
Goals: Symmetrical walking gait in 6 weeks
Symmetrical sit-to-stand transfers in 6 weeks
Evaluation: Physical exam WNL except:
Ability to walk on stairs without difficulty in 8 weeks
 Return to 1-hour hikes in 10 weeks.
Cait: (Walk) PWB LR, decreased L stride length and
sance time, compensatory spinal side bend
Treatment: Modalities: Laser to L iliopsoas
 Palpation: Decreased STM, trigger point and tenderness 
Manual Therapy: Passive stretch of L iliopsoas with STM
at L psoas
trigger point release L iliopsoas
PROM: Hip extension L 125, R 150
PROM: Hip extension with STM of sartorius, rectus
 Flexibility: L psoas moderately tight; R NL
femoris, iliopsoas
Atrophy: Moderate+ at L gluteals, moderate at L ham-
Therapeutic Exercise:
strings, and quadriceps
Weight bearing: weight-shifting exercises, slow
Srength: 3-leg strength test: fair (3/5);: diagonal limb
walking
strength test: poor (<3/5)
 Strengthen: 3-leg stands, CCW circles, sit to stands
Home exercise program (HEP): PROM into hip exten-
Assessment: 1 mronth postoperative L FHO with expected
sion; exercises per above
limitation in ROM, flexibility, and strength
 Problem list: Limited L hip extension
Tight L psoas
RH weakness
There are a few contraindications to STM. Pa-
cult to stabilize, often requiring splinting or surgery.
tients with mast cell tumors, phlebitis, or infectious/
Therefore, it is important to thoroughly assess
parasitic dermatitis in the affected area should not
ROM and treat accordingly to establish normal
be treated with this technique. With these precau-
mechanics of the joint and soft tissues. Normal
tions in mind, the therapist can determine the best
ROM varies considerably among breeds and is
techniques to apply to the patient, based upon the
affected by age and other factors. Norms for
indicated treatment goals.
average ROM for all joints have not been well
established for the canine population; therefore,
comparison to the contralateral side is required.
ROM
Normal ROM is required for normal function.
PROM
When ROM is compromised, the body naturally
compensates by increasing movement at another
Passive range of motion (PROM) is used as an
Ae juaas ao i qody 'snu aas
assessment tool as well as a treatment technique.
PROM is passive, osteokinematic movement of
Hypermobility can lead to abnormal localized
bony segments around a joint axis performed by
stress, causing pain and, eventually, laxity. Al-
the practitioner The patient is noncontributory.
though there are numerous effective options for
Normally, PROM is slightly greater than active
- aq tn Aqoay oy aua
range of motion (AROM) because each joint has a
106   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
small amount of involuntary, end-range joint play
Table 6.3 Characteristics of different types of end-feel
motion that the therapist can create with overpres-
sure (Norkin & White, 1985). Joint PROM is the
End-Feel/Block
Sensation
ability of the joint to move through its normal
Soft tissue approximation
Soft, yielding.
ROM without restriction of muscles that cross two
Muscle/tendon
Firm, slight give, elastic
or more joints. Therefore, an assessment of passive
Capsule
Very firm
joint ROM is distinguished from an assessment
 Muscle spasm
Abrupt stop, hard
 of muscle flexibility or joint arthrokinematics. If
Edema
Soft and boggy
PROM is restricted, it is important to identify the
Bone
Hard, unyielding
Empty
Pain before resistance
limiting structure in order to direct the treatment
Springy
Rebound
appropriately. This is accomplished by noting
end-feel.
End-feel
 The restriction to further motion as perceived by
line measurement from which the effectiveness of
the therapist is called end-feel. It is the sensation 
the treatment can be determined. If the contralat-
in the therapist's hands when overpressure is
eral side is without pathology, its ROM can be used
applied at the end range of osteokinematic motion.
as normal.
End-feel is assessed by passively moving the joint
A goniometer (see Chapter 5) consists of a
-ou uidde aios o aae sh rnr
fulcrum, a proximal arm (stable arm), and a distal
erate ouerpressure at the end range, and noting
arm (moving arm). When measuring the quantity
the feel of the resistance. PROM can be limited
of joint ROM, the fulcrum is lined up with the
by pain or swelling as well as musculotendinous
 approximate joint axis, the proximal arm is lined
tissue, bone, joint capsule, muscle spasm, fascial
up with a specific proximal bony landmark, and
tissue, soft tissue approximation, or intra-articular
the distal arm is lined up with a specific distal bony
derangement. Each structure has a characteristic
landmark. Each joint has specific bony landmarks
feel that can be detected by the examiner (Norkin
to insure reproducibility.
See Chapter 5 for the
& White, 1985). Practice is necessary to develop the
landmarks for each joint.
ability to sense the different characteristics of the
limiting structure. A pathologic end-feel is the
Technique
presence of restriction prematurely in the range of
motion.
 When assesing PROM, the proximal bony segment
 By identifying the limiting structure, the treat-
 is stabilized, and the distal bony segment is mobi-
ment can be designed to affect the particular char-
lized. For the measurement to be accurate, the
acteristics of that structure. For example, if joint
patient's muscles must be relaxed. The limb is posi-
ROM is restricted by joint capsule, the treatment of
tioned such that joint motion is not restricted by
choice will be joint mobilization. However, if ROM
multijoint muscle tightmess. For example, shoulder
is restricted by muscle spasm, the treatment of
flexion ROM must be performed with the elbow in
choice may be a soft tissue technique such
as
flexion. If the elbow were extended, ROM would
ischemic compression. Table 6.3 lists end-feels with
be limited by the biceps muscle becoming taut.
their associated sensation (Magee, 1992).
Proper sequencing for PROM includes moving the
joint through the available PROM, applying over
pressure, noting the end-feel, and measuring ROM
Assessment of PROM
with a goniometer (Figure 6.6). Once end-feel is
In addition to end-feel, assessment of PROM pro-
determined, the goniometer is placed on the limb,
vides the examiner with information about the
and the angle is measured. The therapist must be
quantity of joint osteokinematic motion. Quantity
careful not to block motion with the stabilizing or
of motion is measured with a goniometer and doc-
mobilizing hand. If a restriction is noted, the con-
umented in degrees. Goniometry provides a base-
tralateral side is measured.
Chapter 6 Manual Therapy 107
Figure 6.7  Biceps brachii muscle stretch.
muscle being tested. For example, the actions of the
biceps brachii muscle are to extend the shoulder
and flex the elbow. Therefore, moving the shoulder
Figure 6.6 Measurement of the shoulder in flexion. The
joint is moved through the available PROM noting the
into flexion and the elbow into extension tests
end-feel. The goniometer is then placed on the limb and the 
biceps flexibility (Figure 6.7). Documentation of
angle is measured.
abnormal flexibility can be noted as minimally,
moderately, or severely restricted or can be mea-
sured with a goniometer.
Treatment of limited PROM
As a treatment, PROM is used as a general tech-
Treatment of decreased flexibility
nique to maintain or increase ROM. The assess-
ment and treatment techniques are identical except
 Increasing muscle extensibility is accomplished
that during treatment the end range of the move-
by stretching the tight muscle. Stretching can be
ment is held for 10-20 seconds and repeated 3-5
 performed passively, in combination with STM,
times. With proper owner instruction, this treat-
or actively with specific exercises. Similar to the
 ment can be added to the home program.
muscle flexibility assessment position, a passive
stretch is performed with the limbs placed in a
position that is opposite to the actions of the
Flexibility
muscle. Typically, the origin of the muscle is stabi-
 lized and the insertion is moved away from the
Flexibility refers to muscle length and should not
be confused with joint PROM. It is assessed sepa-
 origin. The stretch should be moderate (palpable
 muscle tension) and within the patient's comfort
rately and is an important component of a thor-
range. The stretch must be effective but not painful.
ough musculoskeletal exam. Clinically, two-joint 
 If pain is produced, the patient will splint (invol-
or multijoint muscles are most commonly tight 
untary rigid contraction of the muscles in response
and /or injured.
to pain), resulting in a shortening of the muscle
fibers. Human research has shown that carryover
Assessment of muscle flexibility
is more effective with a 30-second passive, static
 stretch than a 15-second stretch. Gains with an
Muscle flexibility is assessed by placing the limb in 
 additional 30 seconds (60 seconds total) were
the position that is opposite of the action(s) of the  shown to be minimal (Bandy & Irion, 1994). For
108   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
added effectiveness, the stretch can be combined
uol jo pnaa Ared e je sisans yoieasan
with STM of the muscle being stretched. A muscle
 mobilization is enhancement of the sensorimotor
can also be stretched dymamically. This is per-
system (Maitland, 1977; Kaltenborn et al., 1999).
formed by instructing the patient to actively move
The following discussion of joint mobilization
into a position that stretches the muscle. Dynamic 
 principles and techniques is based on the teachings
stretching may not be as effective as static stretch-
 of Freddy Kaltenborn, a Norwegian physical thera-
 ing in increasing flexibility (O'Sullivan et al., 2009)
 pist who specialized in orthopedic manipulative
but may be more effective in increasing athletic
therapy (OMT). He was certified in the United
performance (McMillian et al., 2006).
States as an instructor of Orthopedic Medicine by
James Cyriax, the British physician and Professor
of Osteopathy. Additionally, Kaltenborn was an
Joint mobilization
instructor of chiropractic in Germany. He was the
first clinician to integrate the theory and practice of
Attention to the intrinsic movement of joints
 orthopedic medicine with the practice of osteopa-
reaches back to the days of Hippocrates (460-355
thy, and he authored severalbooks related to manual
BC). Joint manipulation, referred to as bone setting.
techniques of the peripheral joints and spine.
spread in Europe between the seventeenth and
early twentieth centuries; however, no formal
training was established until Andrew Still founded
Assessing joint play
the first school of osteopathy in 1874. Physical
therapists began studying joint mobilization and
Joint play is evaluated with an assessment glide.
manipulation in manual therapy programs estab-
Kaltenborn defines a glide as the movement that
lished by leaders in the field, Freddy Kaltenborn,
occurs when the same point on one surface of
Geoffrey Maitland, and Stanly Paris in the early
the joint comes into contact with new points of
1960s. Research has demonstrated both biome-
its opposing surface (Figure 6.8) (Kaltenborn et al.,
chanical and neurophysiological effects of joint
1999). The purpose of the assessment glide is to
 mobilization; however, the mechanism of change
evaluate the quantity (amount of translation) and
is still under scrutiny (Brantingham et al., 2009;
quality of joint accessory motion. It is an advanced
Zusman, 2010).
skill requiring a thorough understanding of joint
 Joint play (or joint mobility) is passive, involun-
anatomy and mechanics. Tightening or injury of
tary arthrokinematic motion that occurs between
the capsule and/or its associated ligaments can
two joint surfaces during movement. It is required
limit joint play.
for normal osteokinematic motion. Joint play con-
sists of two passive movements: traction/ separation
and translatoric gliding, both of which are required
to prevent compression and/or subluxation of a
 joint (Kaltenborn et al., 1999). Loss of joint play may
be the result of capsular tightness that blocks the
normal arthrokinematic gliding within the joint.
 Capsular tightmess can be identified by assessing
the end-feel during PROM and by assessing joint
play.
The goals of joint mobilization are to increase
arthrokinematic range of motion, improve joint
alignment and tracking, decrease pain, and reduce
muscle spasm by stimulating articular sensory
receptors (Maitland, 1977). Joint mobilization has
been shown to have mechanical effects on the joint
capsule (i.e., stretch the capsule) that correspond
Figure 6.8 Motion involved in a joint glide.
with improved ROM (Landrum et al., 2008). Some
Adapted from Kaltenborn et af. (1999)
Chapter 6 Manual Therapy  109
A
B
Figure 6.9 The glide is performed by applying slow, steady
pressure along the treatment plane. The treatment plane
(blue line) lies across the concave articular surface.
Adapted from Kaltenborn et al. (1 999).
Figure 6.10  Assessment glide—caudal glide of the talus
with stabilization of the distal tibia and fibula.
Technigue: assessment glide
The assessment glide is a single translatoric glide
possible. Assessment glides can be performed in
in which one bony surface is stabilized and the
multiple directions (caudal, cranial, dorsal, ventral,
other is mobilized. It is performed close to the joint
medial, and lateral). The glide must be pain-free as
line so thiat a pure translatory motion occurs
splinting in reaction to pain will skew the results.
without compression. The glide is performed in the
Quantity of motion is compared to the contralat-
loose-packed or resting position. This is the posi-
eral side.
-el paieiosse pue amsdes puol a yonm un uo
Assessment glides are graded on a 0-6 scale
ments are most relaxed and the most amount of
(Kaltenborn et al., 1999):
joint play is possible (Kaltenborn et al., 1999). If this
 position is unattainable due to pain or pathology.
0-
no movement (ankylosis)
the position of greatest comfort is used.
1-
severely restricted
The angle of the glide is determined by the posi-
2-
-moderately restricted
tion of the joint surfaces and is referred to as
3-
normal
the treatment plane. The treatment plane "passes
4-
-moderately hypermobile
through the joint and lies at a right angle to a line
5-
-severely hypermobile
rurming from the axis of rotation (in the convex
-complete instability.
 bony partner) to the middle of the contacting artic-
ular surface" (Figure 6.9) (Kaltenborn et al., 1999).
The treatment plane lies across the concave articu-
Joint mobilization (treatment)
lar surface and moves with the concave joint
partmer (Kaltenborn et al., 1999).
Joint mobilization is a passive therapeutic tech-
The glide is performed by applying slow, steady
nique intended to increase arthrokinematic motion
pressure along the treatment plane (Figure 6.10).
and to relieve pain. When ROM is limited by
Movement is continued until a barrier (or restric-
capsular tightening, joint mobilization is the treat-
tion) is appreciated and no further translation is
ment of choice.
110  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Because joint surfaces are rounded, physiologi-
cal movement occurs around several axes simulta-
neously. Although a predominant movement plane
is noted (sagittal, frontal, or transverse), osteokine-
matic motion is not pure and occurs in more than
one mov ement plane. Mechanics of the convex and
concave joint surfaces moving on one another
Fixed
Mobile
involves rotational and translatory movements
that coincide with rolling and gliding of the bony
 segments. The more congruent the surfaces are, the
 greater the amount of glide. Conversely, the more
incongruent they are, the more rolling is required
to avoid joint compression or subluxation. The
direction of rolling and gliding depends on which
surface is moving, the convex or concave. Under-
standing the convex-concave rule is important for
Fixed
Mobile
 proper use of joint mobilization techniques. This
rule states that when a concave surface moves on
a stabilized convex surface, the arthrokinematic
glide will occur in the same direction as the osteo-
kinematic movement of the bony segment. For
example, during osteokinematic stifle extension,
the shaft of the tibia moves cranially. Arthokinema-
Figure 6.11  The convex-concave rule states that when a
tically, the concave proximal tibia (concave menisci)
concave surface moves on a stabilized convex surface (small
will move in the same cranial direction on the sta-
solid arrow), the arthrokinematic glide will occur in the
bilized convex distal femur. Conversely, if a convex
same direction as the osteokinematic movement of the bony
segment (small dashed arrow). The opposite is true when a
surface moves on a stable concave surface, the
convex surface moves on a fixed concave surface. (Large
arthrokinematic glide will occur in the opposite
arrows represent the direction of force applied by the
direction of the osteokinematic movement of the
therapist.)
bony segment. For example, during osteokinema-
Adapted from Kaltenborn et af. (1999).
tic shoulder extension, the shaft of the humerus
moves cranially, while arthrokinematically, the
tained pull (Figure 6.12). The direction of the glide
 convex surface of the humerus moves in the oppo-
will depend on the specific restriction of the joint.
site direction (caudally) on the stabilized concave
 The grade of mobilization will depend on the
glenoid fossa. (Figure 6.11)
 goal of your treatment (pain management versus
In summary, the therapist moves a bone with a
mobility).
convex joint surface opposite to the direction of
the restricted bone movement, and a concave joint
Treatment glide
surface in the same direction as the direction of the
restricted bone movement (Kaltenborn et al., 1999).
A treatment glide is essentially a graded assess-
Treatment variables include (1) position of joint,
ment glide that is performed in the treatment plane
(2) type of mobilization (3) direction of mobiliza-
(parallel to the joint line). Grade I and II glides are
tion and (4) grade of mobilization. As with the
used to treat pain. Grade IHI-IV glides are used to
assessment glide, treatment is initiated with the
increase or maintain motion. All grades are used
joint in the loose-pack or resting position. There are
to stimulate mechanoreceptors and proprioceptive
two types of mobilizations-
-a glide or oscillation
fibers. Grading is outlined in Table 6.4.
and a sustained traction. A glide is performed par-
Geoffrey
Maitland proposed
that different
-so papeia sasn pue aueld puauneani au oh lae
 grades of mobilization produce selective activation
lations, while traction is performed perpendicular
of different mechanoreceptors in the joint (Mait-
to the treatment plane and involves a graded sus-
land, 1977).
Chapter 6 Manual Therapy
1 11
Glide
Table 6.5 Grading of traction
Grade
Characteristics
No appreciable joint separation; eliminates
compression forces
Plane
 Slack is taken up, ligaments and capsule are
Traction
taut
Treatment
Slack has been taken up and more traction
force is applied; surrounding tissues are
90
stretched
will affect type II mechanoreceptors to a greater
extent.
Grade Ill is similar to grade I but selectively acti-
vates more of the muscle and joint mechanore-
Figure 6.12  Glides are performed parallel to the treatment 
 ceptors as it goes into resistance, and less of the
plane. Traction is performed at a right angle to the treatment
cutaneous ones as the slack of the subcutaneous
plane.
tissues is taken up.
Adapted from Kaltenborn et af. (1 999).
Grade IV has a more sustained movement at the
end of range and thus activates the static, slow
 adapting type I mechanoreceptors whose resting
Table 6.4 Grading of treatment glides
 discharge rises in proportion to the degree of
Grade
Characteristics
change in joint capsule tension.
Small amplitude, fast oscillations
Traction
performed at the beginning of the
availablerange
Traction is a sustained force that separates joint
Large amplitude, slow oscillations
surfaces. It is performed at a right angle to the
performed throughout the first half of the
treatment plane. It is considered a more general
availablerange
technique than glides since it has a global effect
 on the capsule rather than affecting a particular
Large amplitude, slow oscillations
performed throughout the second half of
aspect of the capsule. Grades I and II tractions are
the available range
used for treating pain; grade II is used to stretch
IV
Small amplitude, fast oscillations
the surrounding tissues. Kaltenborn recommends
performed at the end of the available
intermittent traction with 10-second holds and a
range
rest between each repetition. Another publication
proposes maintaining the traction for 20-30 seconds
(Kaltenborn et al., 1999). Grading of traction is
showm in Table 6.5.
Grade I activates type I mechanoreceptors with a
The technique for performing glides or traction
low threshold that respond to very small incre-
 involves starting with the joint in a position of
 ments of tension. This grade will activate cutane-
maximal comfort in order to minimize muscle
 ous mechanoreceptors. Oscillatory motion will
tension. This is the resting position. The therapist
selectively activate the dynamic, rapidly adapt-
places the stabilizing hand on the nonmoving part
ing receptors (i.e., Meissner's and 
1Pacinian
(usually the proximal segment) as close to the joint
corpuscles).
 space as possible. The mobilizing hand is on the
Grade II activates some type I mechanoreceptors.
joint partner to be moved, generally as close to the
By virtue of the large amplitude of movement, it
joint space as possible, though in some traction
112  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Table 6.6  Determination of treatment grades
Table 6.7 Technique for caudal mobilization of shoulder
 Problem
Treatment
Grade
Goal
To increase shoulder extension, decrease pain
 Patient 
Lateral recumbency; shoulder in resting position
 Pain
Traction
Grades I, II
Glide
Grades I, II
Therapist
Stabilizing hand: thumb on caudal aspect of the
Hypomobility
Traction
Grade III
acromion. Mobilizing hand: index finger on the
Glide
Grades IlI, IV
cranial aspect of the proximal humerus
techniques, a longer lever arm will be used, neces-
sitating moving the mobilizing hand more distal
on the limb.
Treatment direction depends upon the technique
to be performed. Traction techniques are performed
 perpendicular to the treatment plane (grades I-I),
while gliding techniques are performed parallel
to the treatment plane (grades I-IV). The specific
direction of the glide (dorsal, ventral, cranial,
caudal, medial, or lateral) will depend on the par-
ticular restriction determined by the assessment
glide (arthrokinematic motion) and corresponding
PROM/AROM (osteokinematic motion) limita-
tions. Understanding the convex-concave rule
allows the therapist to determine the best direction
of the treatment glide. Treatment grade is based on
Figure 6.13 Caudal glide of the proximal humerus with
the goal of the treatment (to decrease pain or to
scapular stabilization at the caudal aspect of the acromion.
increase mobility) (Table 6.6).
Treatment example
Table 6.8  Technigue for caudal mobilization of
tibiofemoral joint
Kaltenborn's techniques are based on an under-
standing of normal joint arthrokinematics. For
Goal
To increase stifle flexion, decrease pain
example, glenohumeral extension is associated
Patient
Lateral recumbency; stifle in resting position
with a caudal glide of the humeral head, whereas
Therapist
Stabilizing hand: web space (between
glenohumeralabductionisassociatedwith
a
thumb and 2nd metacarpal) at caudal distal
 medial glide of the humeral head. The arthrokine-
femur. Mobilizing hand: web space on
matic motion is opposite to the osteokinematic
tibial tuberosity
motion because the convex surface of the humeral
head is moving on the concave surface of the
scapula. Therefore, limited shoulder osteokine-
matic ROM into extension is associated with a
Applying the convex-concave rule at the tibio-
restricted caudal assessment glide of the humerus
femoral joint,
due to a tight caudal capsule. Therefore, the ap-
propriate treatment for restricted shoulder exten-
A caudal glide will promote stifle flexion.
sion that is limited by capsular tightmess is a grade
A cranial glide will promote stifle extension.
II or IV caudal glide of the humerus (Table 6.7;
Distraction promotes general joint mobility.
Figure 6.13) and that for caudal mobilization of
the tibiofemoral joint is provided in Table 6.8
When using joint mobilization to increase ROM,
(Figure 6.14).
consideration must be given on how to maximize
Chapter 6  Manual Therapy  113
the treatment. This may include preparing the
tissues. If the goal is to increase the extensibility of
the capsule, warming the joint tissues may be an
effective precursor to joint mobilization. Exercise is
most the effective means of warming the tissues;
however, modalities may be used if the patient
carmot tolerate exercise. Once joint mobilization is
performed and improved PROM is noted, it is
important that the patient actively use the newly
achieved ROM when possible. This can be accom-
plished with an exercise prescription that uses the
new ROM. For example, in the case above where
the treatment goal was to increase stifle flexion, the
over high cavaletti poles in order to use the newly
acquired ROM.
Conclusion
Our hands are our most important rehabilitation
Figure 6.14  Caudal glide of the tibia with femoral
tools. Using manual techniques to resolve soft
stabilization.
Case Study 6.2  Manual therapy for postoperative TPLO
Signalment: 4 y.o. F/S Labrador
Flexibility: Moderately tight R hamstrings., iliopsoas,
sartorius
Presenting Complaint: 8 weeks postoperative R TPLO
Joint Play: Caudal tarsal glide—grade 2 hypomobility
with decreased ROM and weakness; radiographs reveal
good bone healing.
Atrophy: Moderate at R gluteals and quadriceps, mroder
 ate at R hamstrings
Evaluation Reveals: Physical exam WNL except:
Strength:
Function: Standing PwB RH (approximately 40%)
 3-leg standing test: good (3+/5)
Sitting RH hip abducted/externally rotated; decreased
Diagonal leg standing test: fair (3/5)
stifle and tarsal flexion
Cait: Walk: PWB (approximately 65%), 100% of time;
Assessment: 2 months postoperative R TPLO; behind
schedule regarding ROM and weight bearing
minimally plus shortened stride length and stance time
 Palpation: mild swelling at ventromedial and ventrolat-
Problem list:
 eral stifle joint
Swelling
 Decreased weight bearing
PROM:
Asymmetrical siting position
Limited R stifle extension and flexion
Stifle extension
L 165
R 150
Limited R tarsal flexion
L 40 
R 50
Tight R harmstrings, quadriceps, sartorius 
Stifle flexion
L 40
RH weakness-moderate
Tarsal flexion 
R 55
Asymmetrical gait
(Continued)
114  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Goals: In 4 weeks
Joint Mobilization: Grade IV, caudal tarsal glide followed
 Normal sitting posture
by sitting practice
Normal ROM
PROM: Stifle flexion and extension, tarsal flexion
Normal flexibility
FWB
Passive stretch: hamstrings, quadriceps, Sartorius
In 8 weeks
 Symmetrical walking gait
Therapeutic Exercise: (See Chapter 8)
Gradual return to off leash activities
Weight-bearing exercises such as clockwise circles and
Owner independent in HEP
cavalettis
RH strengthening such as proper sit to stands on flat and
Manual Therapy: Joint Compressions: Grade I-ll at stifle
in standing position 
incline; slow uphill walking: horizontal hill walking
tissue and joint issues will expedite the rehabilita-
MAITLAND, C. 1977. Peripheral Maripulation, 2nd ed.
 tion process and allow the therapist to progress to
Sydney, Australia: Butterworths.
the therapeutic exercise stage of the rehabilitation
MCMILLIAN, D.J., MOORE, J.H., HATLER, B.S., &
TAYLOR, D.C. 2006. Dynamic vs. static-stretching
program.
warm up: the effect on power and agility performance.
IStrength Cond Res, 20, 492-499.
References
molecular and osteopathic perspectives. / Ar Osteo-
path Ass0c, 104, 244-249.
BANDY, W.D. & IRION, J.M. 1994. The effect of time on
MILLIS, D.L.,LEVINE, D.,& TAYLOR,R.A.2004. Canine
static stretch on the flexibility of the hamstring
Rehabilitation & Physicat Therapy. St. Louis, MO: W.B.
muscles. Phys Ther, 74, 845-850; discussion 850-852.
Saunders.
BRANTINGHAM, J.W, GLOBE, G., POLLARD, H.,
NORKIN, C.C. & WHITE, D.J. 1985. Measurerment of Joint
HICKS,
M.,
Motion: A Guide to Goniometry, 1st ed. Philadelphia:
KORPORAAL, C., & HOSKINS, W. 2009. Manipula-
Davis.
tive therapy for lower extremity conditions: expansion
O'SULLIVAN, K., MURRAY, E., & SAINSBURY, D. 2009.
of literature review.  Maripulative Physiol Ther, 32,
The effect of warm-up, static stretching and dynamic
53-71.
    o 
HERTLING, D.& KESSLER, R.M. 1990. Maragement
injured subjects. BMC Musculoskelet Disord, 10, 37.
of Cormon Musculoskeletal Disorers: Physical Ther
SEFTON, JM., YARAR, C., CARPENTER, D.M.,&
apy Principles and Methods, 2nd ed. Philadelphia:
BERRY, J.W. 2011. Physiological and clinical changes
Lippincott.
after therapeutic massage of the neck and shoulders.
KALTENBORN, FM.,EVJENTH,O.,& BALDAUF
Man Ther, 16, 487-494.
KALTENBORN, T. 1999. Manual Mobilization of the
SIMONS, D.G., TRAVELL, JG., & SIMONS, L.S. 1999.
foints: The Kaltenborr Method of foint Exaruination and
Travell & Sirons'Myofasciat Pain and Dysfunction:The
Treatment: Votume 1, The Extrermities, 5thed. Minneapo-
Trigger Point Marual, 2nd ed. Baltimore, MD: Williams
lis, MN: Orthopedic Physical Therapy Products.
& Wilkins.
KUCHERA, M.L. 2008. Clinical application of counter-
VAN DEN DOLDER, P., FERREIRA, P, & REFSHAUGE,
strain. ∫ Am Osteopath Ass0c, 108, 267-268.
K 2010. Is soft tissue massage an effective treatment
LANDRUM, E.L., KELLN, C.B., PARENTE, W.R.
for mechanical shoulder pain? A study protocol. / Mar
INGERSOLL, C.D., & HERTEL, J. 2008. Immediate
Manip Ther, 18, 50-54.
-qo juo! Teiniooien roiaisod-or-rotaure jo sioae
ZUSMAN, M. 2010. There's something about passive
movement. Med Hypotheses, 75, 106-110.
liminary study. ∫ Man Manip Ther, 16, 100-105.
ZUSMAN, M. 2011. Mechanism of mobilization discus-
MAGEE, D.J. 1992. Orthopedic Physical Assessment. Phila-
sion paper; Curtin University, Perth, WA, Australia.
delphia: W.B. Saunders.
Phys Ther Rev, 16, 233-236.
7
Rehabilitation Physical Modalities
Krista Niebaum, MPT, CCRT
Summary
Physical modalities can be used to complement a patient's rehabilitation treatment plan and
achieve the therapeutic goals. Physical modalities can be used to address pain, muscle weak-
ness, and decreased flexibility and joint range of motion, as well as to promote tissue healing.
thereby improving a patient's ability to participate in other aspects of treatment (e.g., thera-
peutic exercise and functional mobility retraining). A general overview of the physical modali
ties most commonly used in canine rehabilitation is presented with a goal of assisting the
therapist in determining if and when their use may improve treatment outcome. The modali-
ties discussed are cryotherapy and superficial heating (superficial thermal agents), neuromus-
cular electrical stimulation (NMES), transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS),
therapeutic ultrasound, low-level laser therapy (LLLT), and extracorporeal shock wave therapy
(ESWT). The fundamentals of each modality are covered including mechanisms of action,
evidence supporting their use, and recommendations regarding clinical applications includ-
ing indications and contraindications. Two case studies are also included to illustrate the
importance of thorough assessment and re-assessment of the patient throughout the treatment
Course to ensure appropriate use of physical modalities. Patients affected by orthopedic and
neurologic injuries, working and sporting dogs, and the geriatric population can all benefit
from use of physical modalities at some point during rehabilitation.
Introduction
of methods including therapeutic exercises, manual
 techniques, functional mobility retraining, and use
The primary goal of any rehabilitation treatment
 of assistive devices. Several physical modalities
program is to maximize each patient's functional
are available to augment and complement the treat-
recovery. This may be achieved through a variety
ment plan. Their use rarely comprises the bulk of
Carine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatiorn, First Edition. Edited by M. Christine Zink and Janet B. Van Dyke.
@2013 John Wiley &t Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
115
116Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
a treatment plan. Used with an understanding of
Stravino, 1972). A resultant reduction in blood flow
the effects each has on different tissues, these tools
to the area occurs (Weston et al., 1994). This can be
can be effective in reducing pain, facilitating muscle
 useful when treating superficially located muscles,
strengthening, improving flexibility, and support-
tendons (Knobloch et al., 2007), and joints (Cobbold
ing tissue healing, thereby maximizing the patient's
& Lewis, 1956). Of note, cooling tissues for an
ao wo aaq pue u adind on A
extended time, or to sigrificantly lower tempera-
aspects of the treatment plan.
tures (less than 10°C), can result in cycles of arterio-
The decision to use any physical modality must
lar vasodilation, often referred to as the hunting
be based on a thorough assessment of the patient's
 response. This may be avoided by cyling cold
status. Frequent reassessment will also help 
to
application (e.g., 20 minutes on, 10 minutes off, 10
 progress the use of a modality, transition between
minutes on) (Karunakara et al., 1999). When treat-
modalities, or discontinue use altogether at the
ing injured tissues, some evidence has been found
appropriate time.
 sa oz isean ie ioy asn Adeaon je
This chapter presents a general overview of the
lead to dilation of local venules, which may addi-
physical modalities most commonly used in canine
tionally contribute to edema reduction (Smith et al.,
rehabilitation. Each section reviews the basic
1993). Regardless of the mechanism, a reduction in
 mechanisms of action, some of the evidence sup-
swelling has been demonstrated when cryotherapy
 porting its use, and recommendations regarding
is used after tissue trauma.
clinical application of each modality.
Cold application after injury can reduce tissue
The scope of this chapter does not permit a
metabolism (Albrecht et al., 1996). This decreases
detailed explanation of the physics of each modal-
cellular oxygen demands and may diminish sec-
ity, nor does it provide a comprehensive list of
-ap Apns 90oz y Xmfu reman pxody A1epu
the research related to each. Textbooks dedicated
onstrated this with three 20-minute cryotherapy
to physical modality use in rehabilitation medicine
sessions immediately following trauma to muscle
 are available and should be referenced for addi-
tissue (Oliveira et al., 2006).
tional information (Michlovitz & Nolan, 2005;
When considering the effects of cryotherapy on
Cameron, 2008).
peripheral nerves, sufficiently lowering tempera-
tures can decrease both sensory and motor nerve
conduction velocities (Greathouse et al., 1989; Dio-
Superficial thermal agents: cold and heat
szeghy & Stalberg, 1992). Caution should be exer-
Superficial thermal agents are used to decrease
superficially located nerves as neuropraxia or axo-
 pain, reduce swelling, promote healing, and im-
notmesis is a risk (Bassett et al., 1992; Moeller et al.,
prove flexibility. They are often the most conve-
1997).
nient modalities as they are readily available,
 Frequently, a primary goal with cryotherapy is
involve minimal expense, and are frequently safe
pain reduction. This may occur through the
 to use as part of a home treatment program.
decreased nerve conduction velocity mentioned
above. Analgesia may also result via the gate
control theory of pain with overstimulation of cold
Superficial cold: cryotherapy
receptors blocking the transmission of pain signals
to higher centers. Furthermore, a 2007 study dem-
Cryotherapy is the use of cold to remove energy
onstrated that cold application can increase both
from tissues in the form of heat. Cold application
pain threshold and pain tolerance (Algafly &
can provide tissue cooling 2-4cm deep (Nadler
George, 2007). Studies have shown that human
et al., 2004).
patients who receive cryotherapy following ortho-
pedic surgery often require less analgesic medica-
Evidence supporting cryotherapy use
tion (Ohkoshi et al., 1999).
 Cold has been shown to temporarily reduce the
The initial physiologic response to cryotherapy is
cutaneous blood vessel vasoconstriction (Olson &
lesions. A number of studies (Knutsson, 1970;
Chapter 7  Rehabilitation Physical Modalities 117
Allison & Abraham, 2001) have demonstrated this
Cold packs can be made in the clinic with crushed
with a resultant greater ease of movement.
ice or by freezing a combination of three parts
Cryotherapy can be used to reduce muscle
water to one part alcohol in a sealable bag. A
spasm. This may be related to a decreased firing
thin damp towel should be placed between the
rate of muscle spindle and Golgi tendon organ
pack and the patient unless the hair coat is thick.
receptors (Mense, 1978). A reduction in EMG activ-
The depth of target tissue, duration of cold applica-
ity following cryotherapy has been demonstrated,
tion (Figure 7.3), ability of surrounding tissues to
thought to indicate a reduction in muscle spasm
conduct heat (Bierman & Friedlander, 1940), and
(Prentice, 1982)
temperature of the agent compared to the target
Finally, short periods of cryotherapy may
tissue temperature should be considered.
increase muscle force production, possibly due to
increased muscle blood flow or motor nerve activ-
ity (McGown, 1967; Knutsson & Mattsson, 1969).
This may be useful to stimulate activity of weak
muscles. Longer periods of cold application,
however, can decrease muscle strength (Johnson &
Leider, 1977).
Considerations for clinical application of
cryotherapy
 Most commonly, cryotherapy is provided with
cold packs and ice massage. When determining
which method to use, the size and accessibility of
the treatment area should be considered as well
as the patient's tolerance. Cold packs can include
 gel packs, crushed ice packs, and water-alcohol
slushes. Gel packs can be purchased in various
sizes to fit different body parts, and they often
include a sleeve to protect the skin (Figure 7.1).
Figure 7.2 Cold packs can be purchased that are fited to
 Cold packs designed to fit specific parts on the dog
specific anatomical structures.
are also available (Figure 7.2).
Image courtesy of Caninelcer.com.
2
Muscle(at 4cm)
20
Subcutaneous
Skin
30
60
90
120
Time (minutes)
Figure 7.3
Temperature changes at different tissue depths
during cryotherapy to the calf.
Figure 7.1 Various types of cold packs, including different
Adapted from Bierman, W., and Friedlander, M. 1940. The
sized sleeves to wrap different anatomical sites.
penetrative effect of cold. Arch Phys Ther, 21, 585.
118Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Precautions and contraindications
 Caution should be used when applying cold over
superficial peripheral nerves, areas of decreased
sensation, or open wounds. Cryotherapy should
not be used over areas of compromised circulation
or in patients with thermoregulatory disorders or
cold sensitivities. Patients should be monitored for
signs of cold-induced injuries. Furthermore, areas
previously affected by frostbite should not receive
cryotherapy.
 One final consideration: a cooled area can require
an extended period of time to return to baseline
temperature (Myrer et al., 1998). Cold can also
Figure 7.4 Using frozen water in a paper cup for
increase joint stiffness (Uchio et al., 2003). These are
cryotherapy.
important considerations when treating sporting
or working dogs that will retum to activity soon
after treatment.
 Deeper tissues require additional treatment time
(Merrick et al., 2003). In addition, animals with
more adipose tissue (a poor conductor of heat)
Superficial heat
will require increased treatment time to cool
tissues that are deep to the layer of fat (Otte et al.,
 Superficial heat is used to reduce pain, promote
2002). Finally, colder agents (ice versus cold water)
relaxation, increase blood flow, and improve joint
will lead to greater cooling (Herrera et al., 2010).
 mobility and connective tissue flexibility. During
Treatment time can range from 10 to 60 minutes
the postacute and chronic stages of healing, heat
(Otte et al., 2002), depending largely on the inten-
may also reduce remaining inflammation through
sity of the cold modality. Drygas et al. found that
increased blood flow. Superficial heating modali-
the combination of cold with intermittent com-
ties are used to increase tissue temperature up to
pression decreased signs of pain, swelling, and
3cm below the skin's surface (Draper et al., 1998)
lameness, and increased stifle joint ROM in dogs
although the greatest effects occur in the first
during the first 24 hours after TPLO (Drygas
1-2 cm. Temperatures of the target tissue must be
et al., 2011).
increased by 1-4°C to result in therapeutic effects
 For smaller treatment areas, ice massage is useful.
(Draper et al., 1995).
It can be particularly effective prior to manual
therapy techniques that may be uncomfortable. Ice
Evidence supporting the use of superficial heat
massage is easily provided by freezing water in a
paper cup, and tearing the paper away as the ice
Cutaneous blood flow is increased with superficial
melts (Figure 7.4). Ice popsicles can also be made by
heat. Temperature changes are therefore most sig-
placing a handle, such as a tongue depressor, into
nificant within 1cm of the skin's surface. Vaso-
the water before freezing. The general recommen-
dilation occurs due to several mechanisms. When
dation for treatment duration is 5-10 minutes (Way-
superficial tissue temperatures rise, chemical me-
lonis, 1967).
diators are released that cause vasodilation. Cuta-
neous thermoreceptors release bradykinin, which
Indications
relaxes smooth muscle walls. Finally, a reduction
in sympathetic activation via spinal dorsal root
Cryotherapy is most often recommended during
 ganglia also decreases smooth muscle contraction.
the acute stage of injury, but it can be effective
Of note, superficial heat modalities do not signifi-
throughout rehabilitation to reduce exercise-related
cantly affect blood flow to skeletal muscle. Active
 inflammation and to treat arthritic joint pain.
exercise has a much greater effect. Superficial
Chapter 7  Rehabilitation Physical Modalities 119
(sw)
Latency
Temperature (°C)
Figure 7.5 Change in action potential of sural sensory
nerve.
Figure 7.6 Use of a clay heat pack over the lumbar area.
Adapted from Greathouse et al. 1989. Electrophysiologic
responses of human sural nerve to temperature. Phys Ther,
69, 919. (With permission from the American Physical
Therapy Association. This material is copyrighted, and any
further reproduction or distribution requires written
permission from the APTA.)
heating also increases the metabolic rate. When
tissues are heated to within a safe range, oxygen
uptake increases, accelerating healing (Halvorsen,
1990).
 Increased tissue temperatures can increase nerve
conduction velocity and decrease latency time for
both sensory and motor nerves (Greathouse et al.,
1989; Dioszeghy & Stalberg, 1992; Notermans et al.,
Figure 7.7 Heat pack on the caudal lumbar paraspinals.
1994) (Figure 7.5) and lower stimulus threshold
for muscle spindle activity (Mense, 1978). These
changes may promote an increased pain threshold
moist heat packs, gel packs warmed in hot water
(Lehmann et al., 1958) and help to relieve muscle-
or a microwave, or clay packs (Figure 7.6). When
 guarding spasm.
using a hot pack, the patient should be positioned
 Finally, heat increases the viscoelastic properties
to encourage relaxation while permitting access to
 of connective tissues. Superficial heating can there-
the treatment area (Figure 7.7). If needed, addi-
fore promote improved flexibility and joint range
tional padding should be placed between the
of motion (ROM) if the restricted ligament, tendon,
patient and the pack, and the skin should be
or joint capsule is located superficially In humans, 
checked frequently. Treatment duration is often
use of superficial heat combined with stretching
15-30 minutes and is typically performed before
can be more effective than stretching alone (Rob-
stretching or active exercise.
ertson et al., 2005).
Indications
Considerations for application of
superficial heating
Superficial heat can be indicated after tissue healing
has progressed to the subacute or chronic stages
The most commonly used superficial heating agent
 and the patient demonstrates decreased flexibility
in canine rehabilitation is a hot pack, including
 or joint ROM, pain, or chronic edema.
120  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Precautions and contraindications
Parameters of treatment
Caution should be used over areas of decreased
Amplitude, or intensity, describes the total magni-
circulation, open wounds, or when treating se-
tude of the electrical wave and is measured in
dated animals or those with decreased sensation.
milliamperes (mA). Increased amplitude results
Contraindications include acute inflammation,
in a stronger contraction as more muscle fibers
active bleeding, fever, and applying heat over a
are recruited.
maligmancy.
Pulse duration, or pulse width, is the time of one
pulse and is measured in microseconds (μus).
Larger pulse durations can require less current
Electrical stimulation
amplitude to achieve muscle contraction but
may also stimulate more pain fibers.
The most commonly used forms of electrical
Frequency, or pulse rate, is the number of pulses per
stimulation (ES) in canine rehabilitation are neuro-
second and is measured in hertz (Hz). Strong
muscular electrical stimulation (NMES) and trans-
muscle contractions are often elicited with fre-
cutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS).
quencies of 60-100Hz. Higher frequencies tend
to increase muscle fatigue, however, and may
limit the ability to participate in active exercise
NMES
following NMES.
On/off cycle describes the time that current is being
Neuromuscular electrical stimulation is often used
delivered and the time that current is stopped.
to address muscular weakness. It can cause a
 Both are usually measured in seconds. The duty
muscle contraction by depolarizing the motor
cycle is the ratio of on time to the total cycle
nerve with an external electrical current. The two
time. As the on-time lengthens, muscle fatigue
common types of NMES units are portable, battery
becomes more likely.
 operated units and electric line-powered units. For
Ramp is the time during which the current is gradu
 most canine rehabilitation applications, portable
ally increased or decreased to improve patient
units can provide sufficient output to achieve the
comfort. It is usually measured in seconds.
desired therapeutic effect (Figure 7.8). Regardless
of the type, most NMES units offer the same
parameters of treatment although the terms used
to describe each may vary.
Evidence supporting the use of NMES
for strengthening
Neuromuscular electrical stimulation is used to
facilitate muscle strengthening and to retard disuse
 atrophy in patients who are unwilling or unable
to actively contract a muscle. It is often noted that
because NMES recruits muscle fibers in an order
opposite to voluntary contraction (type Ⅱ fast 
twitch before type I slow twitch), the muscle con-
traction will not be as strong as a maximal volur-
tary contraction in healthy individuals (Knaflitz
et al., 1990). Many canine patients may not be able
to maximally contract a muscle after injury or
surgery. In these cases, an electrically induced
muscle contraction may produce greater torque
and therefore greater strength gains—than if NMES
were not used (Fitzgerald et al., 2003). Clinically,
Figure 7.8 Portable NMES units applied to the hamstring
there is evidence that NMES use following ortho-
group of muscles.
pedic surgery results in decreased muscle mass
Chapter 7  Rehabilitation Physical Modalities  121
Figure 7.9 Example of a TENS unit.
loss, increased muscle strength, and improved
fumctional muscle use (Snyder-Mackler et al., 1991).
Figure 7.10 Examples of various ES electrodes.
TENS
ment areas (Figure 7.10), but can cause discomfort
When used for pain relief, ES is referred to as
with higher amplitudes due to the greater current
TENS. Most commonly, TENS is used to provide
density. The electrodes used should be as large as
sensory-level stimulation, known as conventional
possible to maximize comfort while avoiding over-
TENS, to stimulate sensory nerves rather than
flow of current to other muscles. The electrodes
motor nerves (Figure 7.9). This is believed to reduce 
should also not contact each other, nor should their
pain perception through the gate theory of pain
coupling medium, as this will result in the current
inhibition. This may then enable patients to partici-
flowing directly from one electrode to the other
 pate more fully in their rehabilitation program.
instead of into the patient's tissues.
However, pain relief is provided only during
During initial treatments with NMES, the patient
stimulation. Overall, research results have been
may be more comfortable in a relaxed position.
mixed regarding the ability of TENS to effectively
As the dog becomes more familiar with the sensa-
reduce pain.
tion, using NMES in a functional position (e.g.
[onuon ronou paaond u nmsan Aeu (lupus
(Figure 7.11).
Considerations for the clinical application of ES
Recommended NMES parameters for muscle
 Safety should always be considered when working
strengthening are as follows (Millis et al., 1997):
with animals. Muzzling may be recommended, at
least for the first ES treatment to allow assessment
Frequency between 25 and 50 Hz
of the patient's tolerance for the modality.
Pulse duration between 100 and 400μs
 The general technique for providing NMES is to
Ramp up and dowm of 2-4 seconds
place the electrodes over the muscle(s) to be stimu-
On/off time ratio of 1:3 to 1:5 (a longer off time
lated (Figure 7.8). A coupling medium is needed
is used with weaker muscles to avoid fatigue)
to transmit the current from the electrode to the
 Frequency of treatment of three to seven ses-
tissues; some electrodes are coated with a conduc-
sions per week
tive polymer, while carbon silicon-rubber elec-
Amplitude sufficient to cause a strong contrac-
trodes are used with an aqueous gel. Especially in
tion is required to produce strength gains
dogs with thicker coats, the hair may need to be
(Snyder-Mackler et al., 1994).
clipped to improve transmission. The size of the
electrodes should fit the target muscle. Small elec-
For TENS treatments, the electrodes are often
trodes are available to accommodate small treat-
placed over the area of pain. They can also be
122Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Figure 7.12 NMES applied to the lumbar area.
the electrodes need to be securely affixed to the
 patient to prevent slippage.
Figure 7.11   NMES being applied in a functional position.
Precautions and contraindications for ES
Precautions for ES include use over areas of
placed over the peripheral nerve or spinal nerve
decreased sensation, directly over wounds or skin
roots that innervate the painful area, or over
irritation, in patients with osteoporosis (because of
acupuncture points. Placements may be trialed to
fracture risk), and obesity (because fat is a poor
conductor of current).
determine the best effect.
Recommended parameters for TENS are as
Contraindications include stimulation directly
follows (Nolan, 2005):
 Over the heart, in patients with pacemakers, in areas
 of infection or cancer, over the trunk during preg-
 Frequency between 30 and 150Hz
 nancy, over areas of thrombosis or thrombophlebi-
 Pulse duration between 50 and 100μs
tis, over the carotid sinus or pharymgeal area, in
Amplitude to elicit a comfortable 
 patients with seizure disorders, or any time active
sensory
response
movement of the body part is contraindicated.
 Duration of treatment varies according to the
activity.
Therapeutic ultrasound
Indications for ES
Therapeutic ultrasound (TUS) uses sound energy
at frequencies greater than 20,000Hz to affect bio-
When muscle strengthening is a treatment goal,
 logical tissues. As the sound waves move through
NMES can be appropriate following both orthope-
tissues, absorbed energy is converted into kinetic
dic and neurologic injury (Figure 7.12). When pain
 energy. Absorption is greatest in tissues with high
reduction is needed to improve participation in
 protein content.
treatment, TENS can be considered. TENS can be
especially useful when a patient cannot tolerate
pain-reducing medications. It is important to recall
Therapeutic effects of TUS: thermal
that the effects of conventional TENS occur only
and nonthermal
while current is being delivered. TENS may help
decrease pain during passive activities such as
Therapeutic ultrasound is the modality of choice
joint ROM exercises. For use during active exercise,
for deep heating (Figure 7.13); TUS can heat tissues
Chapter 7  Rehabilitation Physical Modalities  123
1cm
2cm
Temperature
3cm
End
Ultrasound
一
ar
ns
S
Begin Ultrasound
Time(minutes)
(1, 2, and 3 cm) of the caudal thigh muscle of the dog with
3.3 MMz ultrasound.
Adapted from Levine et al., 2001.
Figure 7.13Example of an ultrasound unit.
also used when TUS is applied around a bony
prominence to avoid periosteal pain.
Intersity, measured in watts per centimeter squared
3-5cm deep without causing thermal damage to
(W/cm²), affects the degree and rate of tem-
more superficial tissues. However, TUS provides
perature increase. Higher intensities will cause
both thermal and nonthermal effects.
greater and more rapid elevations of tempera-
Therapeutic  L
ultrasoumd thermal
effects
are
SnL uo punoy asun Asuu reid v am
similar to those of superficial heating agents but at
units is 0.25-3.0 W/cm².
 greater depths. Through increased tissue tempera-
Continuous and pulsed modes are the two modes gen-
tures, TUS can increase blood flow, collagen exten-
erally available for providing TUS. Continuous
sibility, metabolic rate, and pain thresholds. It can
mode refers to a constant flow of energy. Pulsed
 also decrease muscle guarding and spasm.
 mode has regular breaks in energy flow and is
The nonthermal, or mechanical, effects of TUS
described by its duty cycle, the percentage of
are thought to include microstreaming and cavita-
time that ultrasound is being emitted during one
tion. Microstreaming, or acoustic streaming, refers
pulse period. Most TUS units provide duty
to small-grade pressure waves in the fluids around
 cycles from 5% to 50%. Pulsed mode is usually
cells in the area.
Cavitation is the compression
chosen when only minimal heating effects or the
 and expansion of small gas bubbles in body fluids.
nonthermal effects of TUS are desired.
Both may modify cellular function and membrane
permeability.
Evidence supporting the use of TUS
Parameters of treatment
Because of its ability to heat deeper tissues, TUS is
often used when the target tissue is muscle (Levine
Frequency, measured in hertz, determines the depth 
et al, 2001) (Figure 7.14), tendon, ligament, or
of sound energy penetration. Most TUS units
nerve. When providing thermal effects, TUS can
offer two frequencies: 1MHz and 3MHz. One
improve muscle flexibility (Knight et al., 2001). Fol-
megahertz provides heating to a depth of 2-5 cm.
lowing muscle injury, there is evidence that pulsed
The 3MHz setting is selected when heating is
TUS may provide some protection from secondary
desired within 1-2 cm of the skin surface. It is
oxidative stress (Freitas et al., 2007).
124Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
When treating connective tissues, TUS has been
nique may be preferred when treating areas not
shown to improve the tensile strength of injured
 easily addressed using the direct coupling tech-
tendons as compared to nontreated controls (En-
 nique, temperature increases with the submersion
wemeka, 1989). TUS can also provide sufficient
 technique are significantly less (Forrest & Rosen,
heating to enable effective stretching of tendons;
1989; Draper et al., 1993) than with direct coupling
during the final minutes of TUS and immediately
techniques.
 following are the best times to apply stretch (Chan
To ensure adequate energy delivery, the treat-
et al., 1998).
ment area should not exceed a size of two to three
m 's ueau rans m se isn
times the size of the transducer head. Treatment
used for its heating effects, TUS can cause local
 duration of 5-10 minutes is generally required to
vasodilation (Noble et al., 2007).
achieve therapeutic heating.
Therapeutic ultrasound can
1increase both
 pmous juawaaow peay rasnpsuen jo paads au
sensory and motor nerve conduction velocities
 also be considered. As the distribution of energy
(Kramer, 1987) and the nonthermal effects of TUS
is not uniform under the transducer head, main-
may also improve nerve healing—a 2005 study
taining the head in one location can lead to devel-
demonstrated improved nerve fiber density and a
opment of hot spots and possible tissue damage.
greater number of Schwann cell nuclei in treated
When the transducer head is moved slowly and
injured rat sciatic nerves as compared to those not
 evenly, a better energy distribution is delivered.
treated (Raso et al., 2005).
Finally, the direction of the ultrasound beam
should be monitored. The transducer head should
be positioned directly over the target tissue and
Considerations for the application of TUS
perpendicular to the skin. If the angle of delivery
moves beyond 75°, the beam will travel along the
When using TUS on canine patients, it should be
skin rather than into the target tissue, rendering the
recalled that energy absorption is greatest in tissues
treatment ineffective (Michlovitz & Nolan, 2005).
with high protein content. For this reason, a dog's
hair coat can significantly reduce the penetration
of energy to the underlying tissues (Steiss &
Indications for TUS
Adams, 1999) and should therefore be clipped.
 Sound energy does not transmit well through
When providing thermal effects, TUS can be effec-
air; a coupling medium is required to deliver ultra-
 tive in addressing scar tissue, joint restriction asso-
 sound energy into tissues. There are direct and
ciated with periarticular structures, muscle spasm,
indirect coupling methods. The technique selected
and nonacute soft tissue injuries. When nonther-
is often based on the size and contours of the body
 mal effects are used, TUS can facilitate healing
part being treated. The direct method is used when
of acute soft tissue injuries and peripheral nerve
the treatment area is relatively smooth and larger
injuries.
than the transducer head. Some TUS units are
equipped with several sizes of transducer heads. A
water-soluble gel is typically used as the coupling
Precautions and contraindications
medium and is applied on the treatment area. The
transducer head then maintains contact with the
Caution should be used when applying TUS
gel throughout treatment.
over a bone fracture, in areas of decreased circula-
 Indirect coupling methods may be selected when
 tion, over areas of decreased pain and/or tempera-
the treatment area is irregularly shaped, is smaller
ture sensation, and on sedated or anesthetized
than the transducer head, or if the pressure of
animals
direct coupling will cause discomfort. The most
Therapeutic ultrasound use should be avoided
commonly used indirect method is submersion.
over cardiac pacemakers, the lower trunk during
 The body part is placed into a container of water
pregnancy, the eyes or testes, open epiphyseal
and the transducer head is held approximately
plates, or the spinal cord after laminectomy, as well
1-2cm from the skin's surface. While this tech-
 as in areas of malignancy, infection, or bleeding.
Chapter 7  Rehabilitation Physical Modalities  125
Low-level laser therapy (LLLT)
 including laser pointers, are in the visible spectrum
and pose litle threat of eye damage. Class 3A
lasers (1-5 mW) produce visible light and are used
stimulated emission of radiation" and produces
 in therapy setings. Class 3B lasers (5-500mW) are
electromagnetic radiation that is monochromatic,
also used in rehabilitation and produce nonvisible
coherent, and collimated. These qualities allow
light—these lasers can cause eye injury. Class 4
laser light to penetrate tissues.
lasers (>500 mW) are surgical lasers but can be used
in rehabilitation as well. Most lasers used in reha-
bilitation are low power (or cold) lasers and typi-
Classes of lasers
cally have a power of 500mW or less. Their use is
kmown as LLLT. LLLT influences cellular processes
Lasers are classified according to their power and
through photobiomodulation and will be the focus
wavelength. Power, measured in watts (joules/
of the remainder of this section (Figure 7.15).
second), is the rate of energy production. Dosage
is determined by multiplying power by time. The
energy provided can then be determined in power
Evidence supporting the use of LLLT
auL (u/ Aisuap A1aua 1o (suo/ M) Asuap
wavelength of laser light determines the depth of
) sarouo Aq paqrosqe st Aiaua ua
penetration (Cameron et al., 1999). Longer wave-
absorbing molecules found in the cell mitochon-
iengths tend to penetrate better as they are more
dria) causing a number of biologic effects including
resistant to scattering.
 Oxygen production, ATP production, and changes
 Lasers are also categorized based on their poten-
in cell membrane permeability (Passarella et al.
tial for causing harm. Class 1 lasers, such as CD
1984; Karu, 1988). LLLT may also facilitate collagen
players, are very mild. Class 2 lasers (<lmW),
synthesis (Abergel et al., 1984), growth factor release
Case Study 7.1 Post-TPLO rehabilitation—physical modalities
Signalment: 4y.o., MN Boxer, left cranial cruciate
therapies.  Discontinued   when  patient  tolerated
upture stabilized via TPLO. Began rehabilitation 5 days
manual work without significant discomfort.
postsurgery.
NMEs, left quadriceps and hamstrings (frequency:
35 Hz; pulse duration: 100μs;: 2 seconds ramp: 20
Initial Evaluation Findings:
seconds on, 10 seconds off; amplitude to patient
● Cait: Left pelvic limb toe-touch weight bearing
tolerance for 10 minutes). Discontinued when patient
was able to produce strong voluntary muscle
(TTWB)
Left stifle ROM: Flexion 5o% of normal, extension
contractions.
TUS, left sartorius (mode: continuous; frequency:
75%
3 MHz; intensity: 1.0W/cm?; duration: 5 minutes),
Muscle atrophy: Left hamstrings and quadriceps
 Flexibility: Left sartorius moderately tight due to
gentle stretch applied during the last 2 minutes. Dis-
muscle guarding
continued when muscle guarding resolved, flexibility
 Palpation: Significant swelling. moderate warmth
regained.
Cryotherapy, left stifle, 10 minutes at end of sessions.
around the left stifle (no signs of infection).
Used throughout rehab course to decrease inflarmma-
tion and minimize postexercise discomfort.
Treatment Plan: In addition to manual therapies, thera
Low-level laser therapy (LLLT), stifle joint line,
peutic exercises, and continual instruction in appropriate
4J/cm2, increasing to 6])/cm? as therapy progressed.
home exercises, the following physical modalities were
Used throughout rehab course to promote healing.
included in the treatment plan:
● TENS around left stifle (frequency: 5oHz; pulse dura-
At 10 weeks postsurgery, the patient had regained full
tion: 75μs; amplitude to patient tolerance for 5
ROm, near-normal muscle mass, and near-normal gait
minutes). Used to irmprove tolerance for manual
mechanics at a walk and controlled trot.
126   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Figure 7.16 LLLT to the elbow joint.
probe is indicated when treating over dark-colored
Figure 7.15 Example of a LLLT unit
hair or skin to avoid burns, and tattoos should not
be lasered. Topical medications should be washed
(Yu et al., 1994), and stimulation of fibroblast devel-
off, and the clinician should wear protective
opment (Pourreau-Schneider et al., 1990), all pro-
eyewear Cryotherapy before LLLT can cause vaso-
moting
tissue repair.
LLLTmay
increase
constriction, thereby maximizing absorption by
angiogenesis and therefore the formation of new
the target tissue. When treating joints, they should
capillaries in injured tissues (Corazza et al., 2007).
be placed in the open-packed position to maxi-
Indeed, evidence has been found that LLLT can
 mize energy delivery to the joint surfaces (Figure
lead to more rapid closure (Hopkins et al., 2004),
7.16). Finally, aseptic technique should be used
increased tensile strength (Vasilenko et al., 2010),
ra Suidde raa Aq spum Sun uam
and greater collagen content during wound healing
e u aq ro ad a ao dm n
(Medrado et al., 2003). LLLT has also shown an
distance of approximately 1cm from the wound
ability to affect the healing of nerves (Gigo-Benato
surface.
et al., 2004), connective tissues, such as ligament
Two techniques are commonly described for
(Fung et al., 2002), and may have positive effects on
LLLT. With the first technique, gridding, the treat-
injured cartilage (Guzzardella et al., 2000, 2001).
-de suoas ou papiaip insia si eare jua
Additionally, LLLT may assist in pain reduction
proximately the size of the probe head and each is
through increased metabolism of endogenous 
treated for the specified dosage. The second tech-
opiates, change in the conduction latencies of
nique, surround, is primarily used with wounds;
nerves (Snyder-Mackler & Bork, 1988; Lowe et al.,
the periphery of the wound is treated. Specific
1994), or through stimulation of acupuncture or
recommendations have not yet been fully estab-
muscle trigger points (Snyder-Mackler et al., 1989).
lished regarding dosages and treatment frequen-
The effects of LLLT are dose-dependent in that
cies; refer to the manufacturer's recommendations
low doses appear to stimulate healing while higher
for each unit.
doses may inhibit it (Huang et al., 2009).
Indications for use of LLLT
Considerations for the clinical application
of LLLT
Conditions for which LLLT may be beneficial
 include wounds, connective tissue injuries (sprains
When using LLLT, recommendations include clip-
and strains), musculoskeletal injuries, inflamma-
ping or parting the hair to maximize skin contact
tory conditions, and arthritic conditions. There is
with the probe. More frequent movement of the
also evidence that LLLT may promote healing fol-
Chapter 7  Rehabilitation Physical Modalities  127
Case Study 7.2   Hip dysplasia—physical modalities
Signalment: 11 y.o. F/s Colden Retriever
seconds on, 10 seconds off; amplitude to patient
tolerance for 10 minutes). Used throughout rehab
History: Referred for pain and weakness associated with
in progressively more functional positions (sternal,
hip dysplasia and severe DjD. Receiving nonsteroidal anti-
sanding, during sit-to-stand transition, etc.).
inflarmmatory drug (NsAlD). Tolerating two 10-minute
Hot packs, bilateral hips during NMES before active
walks per day; difficulty negotiating the stairs at home.
exercise, 10 minutes
TUS, bilateral iliopsoas (mode: continuous; fre-
quency: 1MHz; intensity: 1.0W/cm?: duration: 7
Initial Evaluation:
minutes), gentle stretch applied during last 2 minutes.
Gait: Lack of active hip extension, increased weight
shifted onto forelimbs
Discontinued when flexibility and comfort suffi-
 Hip ROM: Extension 75% of nommal bilaterally
ciently improved.
Cryotherapy, bilateral hips, 10 minutes at end of ses-
Muscle atrophy: Significant atrophy of bilateral harm-
sions. Used throughout rehab course to decrease pain
string and gluteal groups
and inflammation.
 Flexibility/palpation: Bilateral iliopsoas tight and
LLLT, bilateral hips, 5 J/cm?, increasing to 7 J/cm? as
tender.
therapy progressed. Used throughout rehab course
for pain control.
Treatment Plan: In addition to manual therapies, thera
aedoidde ui uonsui lenuuos pue 'sasieiaxa ynd
With 12 weeks of therapy, the patient regained func-
home exercises, the following physical modalities were
tional hip extension range, increased muscle mass,
included in the treatment plan:
improved active hip extension and control during gait,
NMEs, bilateral gluteals, and hamstrings (frequency:
and was able to easily complete two 30-minute walks
25 Hz; pulse duration: 100μs; 2 seconds ramp: 30
per day and negotiate the stairs at home.
lowing spinal cord and nerve injuries (Rochkind
ingly used to treat a variety of musculoskeletal
et al., 2001).
conditions in humans and veterinary patients
(Rompe et al., 1996; Schaden et al., 2001; Laverty &
McClure, 2002; Dahlberg et al., 2005; Sems et al.,
Precautions and contraindications
2006; Mueller et al., 2007). Benefits include increased
bone, tendon, and ligament healing, accelerated
LLLT is not recommended for use in patients with
wound healing, antibacterial properties, and pain
relief (Rompe et al., 1996; Laverty & McClure, 2002;
 gonads. Contraindications include treatment over
Sems et al., 2006). The exact mechanism of action
the cormea, over the endocrine glands, in areas of
of ESWT has yet to be fully elucidated; however,
o pue snan puad a aao upaaq aan
the mechanical stimulation of cells is hypothesized
neoplasia.
to result in increased expression of cytokines and
growth factors (Sems et al, 2006). High-energy
focused sound wave therapy applied to an area of
Extracorporeal shock wave
chronic inflammation may enable release of inflam-
therapy (EsWT)
 matory mediators, facilitating appropriate progres-
sion of healing (Sems et al., 2006). The mechanism
Extracorporeal shock wave therapy (ESWT), also
behind the pain-relieving function of ESWT is
kmown as high-energy  focused sound  wave
thought to be due to increased serotonin activity in
therapy, was first introduced in the early 1980s as
the dorsal horn, and descending inhibition of pain
a noninvasive method for treating kidney stones
signals (Rompe et al., 1996; Sems et al., 2006). ESWT
(Sems et al., 2006). This modality has been increas-
has been used clinically for the treatment of painful,
128Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
chronic musculoskeletal conditions such as tendi-
extracorporeal shockwave therapy in naturally occur-
 nopathies, delayed and nonunion fractures, chronic
ring osteoarthritis of the stifle joint in dogs. Vet Comp
wounds, and the pain associated with osteoarthri-
Orthop Traumatot, 18, 147-152.
DIOSZEGHY, P & STALBERG, E. 1992.Changes in
tis (Rompe et al., 1996; Schaden et al., 2001; Laverty
& McClure, 2002; Dahlberg et al., 2005; Sems et al.,
motor and sensory nerve conduction parameters with
temperature in normal and diseased nerve. Electroen-
2006; Mueller et al., 2007).
cephalogr Clin Neurophysiol,85,229-235.
DRAPER, D.O., SUNDERLAND, S., KIRKENDALL
D.T., & RICARD, M. 1993. A comparison of tempera-
References
ture rise in human calf muscles following applications
of underwater and topical gel ultrasound. ∫ Orthop
ABERGEL, R.P, MEEKER, C.A., LAM, T.S., DWYER,
Sports Phys Ther, 17, 247-251.
R.M., LESAVOY, M.A., & UITTO, J. 1984. Control of
DRAPER, D.O., CASTEL, J.C., & CASTEL, D. 1995. Rate
connective tissue metabolism by lasers: recent devel-
opments and future prospects. J Am Acad Dermatot,11,
1MHz and 3MHz continuous ultrasound. ∫ Orthop
1142-1150.
Sports Phys Ther, 22, 142-150.
ALBRECHT,S., LE BLOND, R., CORDIS, R., KLEIHUES,
DRAPER, D.O., HARRIS, S.T., SCHULTHIES, S.,
H., & GILL, C. 1996. Effects of continuous cryotherapy
DURRANT, E., KNIGHT, K.L., & RICARD, M. 1998.
on the surgically traumatized musculoskeletal system.
Hot-Pack and 1-MHz ultrasound treatments have an
Perioperative Cryotherapy Study Group. Linfatichirur-
additive effect on muscle temperature increase. / Ath!
gie, 22, 168-175.
Train, 33, 21-24.
ALGAFLY, A.A.& GEORGE, K.P. 2007. The effect of
DRYGAS, K.A., MCCLURE,S.R., GORING, R.L., POZZ1
Cryotherapy on nerve conduction velocity, pain thresh-
A., ROBERTSON, S.A., & WANG, C. 2011. Effect of
old and pain tolerance. Br ∫ Sports Med, 41, 365-369;
cold compression therapy on postoperative pain,
discussion 369.
ALLISON, S.C. & ABRAHAM, L.D. 2001. Sensitivity of
plateau leveling osteotomy in dogs. f Am Vet Med
Assoc, 238, 1284-1291.
clinical treatment with cryotherapy. Int ∫ Rehabil Res,
ENWEMEKA, C.S. 1989. The effects of therapeutic ultra-
24, 15-24.
sound on tendon healing: a biomechanical study. Am
BASSETT, F.H.,3rd, KIRKPATRICK,J.S., ENGELHARDT,
Phys Med Rehabit,68,283-287.
D.L., & MALONE, T.R. 1992. Cryotherapy-induced
FITZGERALD, G.K., PIVA, S.R., & IRRGANG, J.J. 2003.
nerve injury. Am  Sports Med, 20,516-518.
A modified neuromuscular electrical stimulation pro-
BIERMAN, W. & FRIEDLANDER, M. 1940. The penetra-
tocol for quadriceps strength training following ante-
tive effect of cold. Arch Phys Ther, 21, 585-592.
rior cruciate ligament reconstruction. ∫ Orthop Sports
CAMERON, M.H. 2008. Physical Agents in Rehabilitation:
Phys Ther, 33, 492-501.
From Research to Practice, 3rd ed. St. Louis, MO: Else-
FORREST, G. & ROSEN, K. 1989. Ultrasound: effective-
vier Health Sciences.
ness of treatments given under water. Arch Phys Med
CAMERON, M.H., PEREZ, D., & OTANO-LATA,S. 1999.
Rehabil,70,28-29.
Electromagnetic Radiation. Physical Agents in Rehabilita-
FREITAS, L.S., FREITAS, T.P, SILVEIRA, PC., ROCHA,
tion: From Research to Practice, lst ed. Philadelphia:
L.G., PINHO, R.A., & STRECK, E.L. 2007. Effect of
W.B. Saunders.
therapeutic pulsed ultrasound on parameters of oxi-
CHAN, A.K., MYRER, J.W., MEASOM, G.J., & DRAPER,
dative stress in skeletal muscle after injury. Cell Biol
Int, 31, 482-488.
tendon in response to therapeutic ultrasound. ∫ Ath!
FUNG, D.T., NG, G.Y., LEUNG, M.C., & TAY, D.K. 2002.
Train, 33, 130-135.
Therapeutic low energy laser improves the mechani-
COBBOLD,A.F. & LEWIS,O.J. 1956. Blood flow to the
cal strength of repairing medial collateral ligament.
knee joint of the dog; effect of heating, cooling and
Lasers Surg Med, 31, 91-96.
adrenaline. / Physiol, 132, 379-383.
GIGO-BENATO,D,GEUNA,  S.,DE CASTRO
CORAZZA,A.V.,JORGE,J.,KURACHI,C.,& BAGNATO,
RODRIGUES, A., TOS, P, FORNARO, M., BOUX, E.,
V.S. 2007. Photobiomodulation on the angiogenesis of
BATTISTON, B., & GACOBINI-ROBECCHI, M.G.
skin wounds in rats using different light sources. Pho-
2004. Low-power laser biostimulation enhances nerve
tormed Laser Surg,25,102-106.
 repair after end-to-side neurorrhaphy: a double-blind
DAHLBERG, J., FITCH, G., EVANS, R.B., MCCLURE,
randomized study in the rat median nerve model.
S.R., & CONZEMIUS, M. 2005. The evaluation of
Lasers Med Sci, 19, 57-65.
Chapter 7  Rehabilitation Physical Modalities  129
GREATHOUSE, D.G., CURRIER, D.P, JOSEPH, B.S.
KNUTSSON, E. & MATTSSON, E. 1969. Effects of local
SHIPPEE, R.L., & MATULIONIS, D.H. 1989. Electro-
physiologic responses of human sural nerve to tem-
Rehabil Med, 1, 126-132.
perature. Phys Ther, 69, 914-922.
KRAMER, J. 1987. Sensory and motor nerve conduction
GUZZARDELLA, G.A., MORRONE, G., TORRICELLI
velocities following therapeutic ultrasound. Aust ∫
P,ROCCA, M, TIGANI, D, BRODANO, G.B.,
Physiother, 33, 235-343.
FERRARI, D., FINI, M., & GIARDINO,R. 2000. Assess-
LAVERTY, P & MCCLURE, S. 2002. Initial experience
ment of low-power laser biostimulation on chondral
with extracorporeal shock wave therapy in six dogs-
lesions: an "in vivo" experimental study. Artif Cells
part 1. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol, 15, 177-183.
Blood Substit Immobil Biotechnol,28,441-449.
LEHMANN, JF., BRUNNER, G.D., & STOW, R.W. 1958.
GUZZARDELLA, G.A., TIGANI, D, TORRICELLI,
 Pain threshold measurements after therapeutic appli-
P,FINI, M,MARTINI, L.,MORRONE, G.,&
cation of ultrasound, microwaves and infrared. Arch
GARDINO, R. 2001. Low-power diode laser stimula-
Phys Med Rehabil, 39, 560-565.
tion of surgical osteochondral defects: results after
LEVINE, D., MILLIS, D.L., & MYNATT, T. 2001. Effects
24 weeks.Artif Cells Blood Substit Immobil Biotechnol,
of 3.3-MHz ultrasound on caudal thigh muscle tem-
29,235-244
perature in dogs. Vet Surg, 30, 170-174.
HALVORSEN, G. 1990. Therapeutic heat and cold for
LOWE,A.S.,BAXTER, G.D.,WALSH,D.M.,&ALLEN,
athletic injuries. Phys Sportsmed, 18, 87-94.
JM. 1994. Effect of low intensity laser (830rm) irradia-
HERRERA, E., SANDOVAL, M.C., CAMARGO, D.M., &
tion on skin temperature and antidromic conduction
SALVINI, T.F. 2010. Motor and sensory nerve conduc-
latencies in the human median nerve: relevance of
tion are affected differently by ice pack, ice massage,
radiant exposure. Lasers Surg Med, 14, 4046.
and cold water immersion. Phys Ther, 90, 581-591
MCGOWN, H.L. 1967. Effects of cold application on
HOPKINS, JT, MCLODA, T.A., SEEGMILLER, J.G., &
maximal isometric contraction. Phys Ther, 47, 185-
DAVID BAXTER, G. 2004. Low-level laser therapy
192.
facilitates superficial wound healing in humans: a
MEDRADO, A.R.A.P, PUGLIESE, L.S., REIS, S.R.A., &
triple-blind, sham-controlled study. ∫ Athl Train, 39,
ANDRADE, Z.A. 2003. Influence of low level laser
223-229.
therapy on wound healing and its biological action
HUANG, YY,CHEN, A.C.，CARROLL,J.D.,&
upon myofibroblasts. Lasers Surg Med, 32, 239-244.
HAMBLIN, M.R. 2009. Biphasic dose response in low
MENSE, S. 1978. Effects of temperature on the discharges
level light therapy. Dose Response, 7, 358-383.
of muscle spindles and tendon organs. Pflugers Arch,
JOHNSON, D.J. & LEIDER, FE. 1977. Influence of cold
374, 159-166.
bath on maximum handgrip strength. Percept Mot
MERRICK, M.A., JUTTE, L.S., & SMITH, M.E. 2003. Cold
Skills, 44, 323-326.
 modalities with different thermodynamic properties
KARU, T. 1988. Molecular mechanism of the therapeutic
 produce different surface and intramuscular tempera-
effects of low intensity laser radiation. Lasers Life Sci,
tures. Athl Train, 38, 28-33.
2,53-74.
MICHLOVITZ, S.L.& NOLAN, T. 2005. Modalities
KARUNAKARA, R.G., LEPHART, S.M., & PINCIVERO,
for Therapeutic Intervention. Philadelphia: FA. Davis
D.M. 1999. Changes in forearm blood flow during
Co.
MILLIS, D., LEVINE, D., BRUMLOW, M., & WEIGEL, J.
Sports Phys Ther, 29, 177-180.
KNAFLITZ, M., MERLETTI, R., & DE LUCA, C.J. 1990.
 Inference of motor unit recruitment order in voluntary
in dogs. Scientific Presertation Abstracts: The Seventh
and electrically elicited contractions. / App! Physiol, 68,
Annual American College ofVeterinary Surgeons Sympo-
1657-1667.
sium. Orlando, FL, Blackwell Publishing Ltd., 26(5),
KNIGHT, C.A., RUTLEDGE, C.R., COX, M.E., ACOSTA,
434.
M., & HALL, S.J. 2001. Effect of superficial heat, deep
MOELLER, J.L., MONROE, J., & MCKEAG, D.B. 1997.
heat, and active exercise warm-up on the extensibility
Cryotherapy-induced common peroneal nerve palsy.
of the plantar flexors. Phys Ther, 81, 1206-1214.
Clin ∫ Sport Med, 7,212-216.
KNOBLOCH, K., GRASEMANN, R.,SPIES, M., & VOGT,
MUELLER, M., BOCKSTAHLER, B., SKALICKY, M.,
PM. 2007. Intermittent KoldBlue cryotherapy of 3 × 10
MLACNIK, E.,& LORINSON, D. 2007. Effects of
min changes mid-portion Achilles tendon microcircu-
saop go uoouny qur au uo Aderaul aaemoous tepet
lation. Br I Sports Med, 41, e4.
with hip osteoarthritis. Vet Rec, 160, 762-765.
KNUTSSON, E. 1970. Topical cryotherapy in spasticity.
MYRER, J.W., MEASOM, G., & FELLINGHAM, G.W.
Scand  Rehabitl Med, 2, 159-163.
Sup at ry aul ui suro aaan s6l
130  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
and after two methods of cryotherapy. / Ath! Train, 33,
deep and superficial heating. Arch Phys Med Rehabil,
25-29.
86, 819-825.
NADLER, S.F., WEINGAND, K., & KRUSE, R.J. 2004.
ROCHKIND, S., NISSAN, M., ALON, M., SHAMIR, M.,
The physiologic basis and clinical applications of cryo-
& SALAME, K. 2001. Effects of laser irradiation on the
therapy and thermotherapy for the pain practitioner.
spinal cord for the regeneration of crushed peripheral
Pain Physician, 7,395-399.
nerve in rats. Lasers Surg Med, 28, 216-219.
NOBLE, JG., LEE, V., & GRIFFITH-NOBLE, F. 2007.
ROMPE, J.D., HOPE, C., KULLMER, K., HEINE, J., &
Therapeutic ultrasound: the effects upon cutaneous
BURGER, R. 1996. Analgesic effect of extracorporeal
blood flow in humans. Lfltmsound Med Biot, 33,
shock-wave therapy on chronic tennis elbow. ∫ Bone
279-285.
foint Surg Br,78,233-237.
NOLAN, T. 2005. Electrotherapeutic Modalities: Electro-
SCHADEN, W., FISCHER, A., & SAILLER, A. 2001.
therapy and lontophoresis. Modalities for Therapeutic
 Extracorporeal shock wave therapy of nonunion or
Itervention, 4th ed. Philadelphia: FA Davis Company.
delayed osseous union. Clin Orthop Relat Res, 387,
NOTERMANS, N.C., FRANSSEN, H., WIENEKE, G.H.
90-94.
& WOKKE, J.H. 1994. Temperature dependence of
SEMS,A., DIMEFF, R., & IANNOTTI, J.P. 2006. Extracor-
nerve conduction and EMG in neuropathy associated
 poreal shock wave therapy in the treatment of chronic
with garmmopathy. Muscte Nerve, 17, 516-522.
tendinopathies.∫ Am Acad Orthop Surg, 14, 195-
OHKOSHI, Y, OHKOSHI, M., NAGASAKI, S., ONO
204.
A.,HASHIMOTO, T.，& YAMANE, S. 1999. The
SMITH, T.L., CURL, W.W.,SMITH, B.P., HOLDEN, M.B.,
effect of cryotherapy on intraarticular temperature
WISE, T., MARR, A., & KOMAN, L.A. 1993. New skel-
- ani a ane a aaidisod p
etal muscle model for the longitudinal study of altera-
ment reconstruction. Am } Sports Med, 27, 357-
tions in microcirculation following contusion and
362.
Cryotherapy. Microsurgery, 14, 487-493.
OLIVEIRA, N., RAINERO, E., & SALVINI, T.2006. Three
SNYDER-MACKLER, L. & BORK, C.E. 1988. Effect of
intermittent sessions of cryotherapy reduce the sec-
Arosuas tenadiad uo uonepei iaset uoaur-unu
ondary muscle injury in skeletal muscle of rat. / Sports
nerve latency. Phys Ther, 68, 223-225.
Sci Med, 5, 228-234.
SNYDER-MACKLER, L., BARRY, A.J., PERKINS, A.1., &
OLSON, J.E. & STRAVINO, V.D. 1972. A review of cryo-
SOUCEK, M.D. 1989. Effects of helium-neon laser
therapy. Phys Ther, 52, 840-853.
irradiation on skin resistance and pain in patients
OTTE, J.W., MERRICK, M.A., INGERSOLL, C.D., &
with trigger points in the neck or back. Phys Ther, 69,
CORDOVA, M.L. 2002. Subcutaneous adipose tissue
336-341.
thickness alters cooling time during cryotherapy. Arch
SNYDER-MACKLER, L., LADIN, Z., SCHEPSIS, A.A., &
Phys Med Rehabil, 83, 1501-1505.
YOUNG, J.C. 1991. Electrical stimulation of the thigh
PASSARELLA, S., CASAMASSIMA, E., MOLINARI, S.,
muscles after reconstuction of the anterior cruciate
PASTORE, D., QUAGLIARIELLO, E., CATALANO,
 ligament. Effects of electrically elicited contraction of
I.M., & CINGOLANI, A. 1984. Increase of proton elec-
the quadriceps femoris and hamstring muscles on gait
trochemical potential and ATP synthesis in rat liver
and on strength of the thigh muscles. / Bone foint Surg
mitochondria irradiated in vitro by helium-neon laser.
Am, 73, 1025-1036.
FEBS Lett,175,95-99.
SNYDER-MACKLER, L., DELITTO, A., STRALKA,
POURREAU-SCHNEIDER, N., AHMED, A., SOUDRY
S.W., & BAILEY, S.L. 1994. Use of electrical stimulation
M., JACQUEMIER, J., KOPP, F., FRANQUIN, JC., &
to enhance recovery of quadriceps femoris muscle
MARTIN, PM. 1990. Helium-neon laser treatment
force production in patients following anterior
transforms fibroblasts into myofibroblasts. Am / Pathot,
cuciate
137, 171-178.
901-907.
PRENTICE, W.E. 1982. An electromyographic analysis of
STEISS, J.E. & ADAMS, C.C. 1999. Effect of coat on rate
the effectiveness of heat or cold and stretching for
of temperature increase in muscle during ultrasound
inducing relaxation in injured muscle. ∫ Orthop Sports
treatment of dogs. Amt ∫ Vet Res, 60, 76-80.
Phys Ther, 3, 133-140.
UCHIO, Y., OCHI, M., FUJIHARA, A., ADACHI, N.,
RASO, VV., BARBIERI, C.H., MAZZER, N., & FASAN,
IWASA, J, & SAKAI, Y. 2003. Cryotherapy influences
V.S. 2005. Can therapeutic ultrasound influence the
joint laxity and position sense of the healthy knee
regeneration of peripheral nerves? ∫ Neurosci Methods,
joint. Arch Phys Med Rehabitl, 84, 131-135.
142, 185-192.
VASILENKO,T.,SLEZAK, M.,KOVAC,1.,BOTTKOVA,
ROBERTSON, VJ., WARD, A.R., & JUNG, P 2005. The
Z., JAKUBCO, J., KOSTELNIKOVA, M, TOMORI,
 effect of heat on tissue extensibility: a comparison of
Z., & GAL, P. 2010. The effect of equal daily dose
Chapter 7  Rehabilitation Physical Modalities   131
achieved by different power densities of low-level
cold gel pack application to traumatized ankles.
laser therapy at 635 and 670nm on wound tensile
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther, 19, 197-199.
strength in rats: a short report. Photormed Laser Surg, 28,
YU, W., NAIM, J., & LANZAFAME, R. 1994. The effects
281-283.
of photo-irradiation on the secretion of TGF and
WAYLONIS, G.W. 1967. The physiologic effects of ice
PDGF from fibroblasts in vitro.Armerican Society
massage. Arch Phys Med Rehabil, 48, 37-42.
for Laser Medicine and Surgery Fourteenth Annuat
WESTON,M.,TABER,C.,CASAGRANDA,L.,&CORN-
Meeting. Toronto, Ontario: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
WALL, M. 1994. Changes in local blood volume during
15(S6),8.
8
Therapeutic Exercise
Laurie McCauley, DVM, CCRT, CVA, CVC, and Janet B. Van Dyke,
DVM, Diplomate, American College of Veterinary Sports Medicine
and Rehabilitation, CCRT
Summary
The application of therapeutic exercise can benefit the postoperative patient, the geriatric OA
patient, and the elite athlete looking for peak performance. Therapeutic exercise programs
Patient evaluation is vital as program design depends upon the current status as well as the
expectation for return to work and/or sport. This evaluation will lead the therapist to create
short-, medium- and long-term goals that are reassessed on each visit. Therapeutic exercise
programs contain five variables: frequency, intensity, duration, environment, and impact. The
owner/handler must be well educated on the exercise program, especially the home exercise
program (HEP). Therapeutic exercise equipment includes physioballs, cavaletti rails, balance
blocks and discs, weights, tunnels, rocker boards, wobble boards, and treadmills. Patient
considerations such as motivation, footing, assistive devices, and leash/harness control
must be assessed prior to beginning any exercise program, and therapist/handler body
mechanics must be monitored to prevent injury. Exercises are designed to address specific
impairments. Each is described with a goal, a technique, and a progression. The therapist
must be prepared to choose from a variety of exercises, environments, and equipment
o asuodsan suaied uodn spuadap sasiohaxa jo uoissanaoid uoeaow juaed ueruie c
each session. Categories of exercises include proprioception, balance, speed, endurance,
focal strength, pelvic limb-specific, forelimb-specific, neurorehabilitation, and land treadmill
endurance training.
Carine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation, First Edition. Edited by M. Christine Zink and Janet B. Van Dyke.
@2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
1 32
Chapter 8 Therapeutic Exercise 133
Overview
excursion length. The mobilizers are more superfi-
cial, generally have longer bellies and tendons,
The principles of exercise physiology have been
creating a longer lever arm and excursion, and they
well described in Chapter 3. The goal of this chap-
 have more type II fibers. Stabilizer muscles are less
ter is to introduce the concepts of therapeutic exer-
commonly diagnosed with strain injuries than
cise as applied to the injured patient, as well as 
their mobilizer counterparts (Newsholme et al.,
to the canine athlete needing to refine fitmess.
1988; Latorre et al., 1993), but in the author's (L.M.)
Once the athlete is discharged from the therapeutic
       
exercise program, it will progress to a condition-
 myofascial trigger points leading to diminished
ing or reconditioning program as described in
function and  altered  active range of motion
Chapter 10. This chapter begins by reviewing
(AROM). A lack of harmony between the stabiliz-
 human therapeutic exercise research, progresses to
ers and the mobilizers can result in muscle imbal-
application of these techniques to the canine
 ances and injury.
patient, and finally describes techniques that have
provided patients with successful return to inde-
pendence, competition, and work. In addition to
Need for exercises
improving general conditioning for any patient,
therapeutic exercise provides the often-overlooked
All healthy working dogs, including competitive
potential benefit of strengthening the human-
sporting, hunting, and service dogs need regular
animal bond.
Exercise to maintain optimal health. Even confor-
The basic principle of pain leading to muscle
mation dogs need regular controlled exercise for
atrophy that, in turn, causes instability and pro-
success in the show ring. Noncompetitive pet dogs
gressive pain is well understood. What are the
can benefit from regular, focused exercise pro-
techniques that can be applied to the aging or
 grams for general as well as emotional health. This
debilitated canine patient to prevent or reverse
is particularly true for geriatric dogs, which can
this cycle?
 benefit from a daily routine of gentle exercise to
 Therapeutic exercise programs focus on proprio-
prevent disuse atrophy with progressive loss of
ception and balance, weight shifting, muscle
independence.
strengthening, reeducation of normal posture, and
In addition to the commonly recognized use of
gait training. Proprioception and balance work is
 therapeutic exercise for orthopedic and neurologic
important for puppies, athletes, and for the neuro-
disorders, regular therapeutic exercise is recom-
n us m d p a
mended for those patients that might not show
is used postinjury or postoperatively, initially
overt musculoskeletal abnormalities. These include
 training the patient to use the affected limb, and
later encouraging appropriate weight distribution
loskeletal disorders such as hip laxity and those
during activities of daily living. Strengthening can
with nonorthopedic disorders such as diabetes,
 focus on an isolated muscle, limb, or body region.
hypothyroidism, and heart disease.
Posture reeducation addresses the static postures
(stand, sit down) as well as the transitions between
these postures. Gait retraining addresses the
Evaluation
patient that does not properly use one or more
limbs or that has developed an abnormal gait
In addition to assessing the patient for specific
behavior or pattern.
areas of weakness, the rehabilitation therapist must
When planning therapeutic exercise programs, it
evaluate the patient's emotional and intellectual
is important to be aware of the differences between
abilities. Is this patient able to follow commands?
two types of muscles: those that stabilize joints and
 Is he able to focus for long enough to learn new
those that create motion. The former tend to be
skills? Is he willing to please or is he obstinate or
shorter bellied muscles that are deeper than mobi-
aggressive? Finally, what is the patient's job or
lizers and insert close to the joint line. Stabilizers
sport? The rehabilitation therapist must also assess
have more type I fibers, and have relatively short
the owner/handler. What is his or her ability to
134   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
understand the patient's issues and our goals?
has been resolved, to increasing stride length in the
How much time can he or she commit to complet-
racing dog.
ing a planned program? His or her physical
 In the human clinical setting, care plans are often
strength must match the home exercise plan for the
developed on functional progressions, including
patient. One must also take into account the
specific adaptations to imposed demands (SAID),
owmer/handler's experience and skills. Is this a
and manipulating workout variables (frequency.
trained professional with experience  (athletic
intensity, time/duration, type/mode, and rate
trainer, physical therapy professional) or a well-
of progression [FITTR]) (Chu & Shiner, 2007).
 meaning layperson? Finally, what are the owner/
 Progression from rehabilitation to performance
 handler's expectations for return to function?
conditioning for the injured canine athlete is no
Evaluating the athlete is particularly challenging
different.
for the rehabilitation therapist, as in addition to
overt injury, this group of patients will present
with very subtle impairments leading to dimin-
Variables
ished performance. This evaluation requires tests
specific and sensitive enough to find weaknesses
Each therapeutic exercise program described here
in otherwise very fit individuals. The authors fre-
will have five variable parameters:
quently identify subtle patterns of impairments
 and behaviors in this group of patients, including
（1)
 Frequency of working (daily, multiple times
per day, weekly)
evidence of overtraining, residual impairments
(2)
Speed/intensity (rate of completing a repeti-
from previous injuries, fatigue or poor condition-
tion while maintaining proper form)
ing of paraspinal muscles, and poor balance.
3)
Duration of work (time or distance traveled)
（4)
 Environment (terrain, footing, substrate)
Setting goals
(5）
 Impact (no impact; low impact; high impact).
As pointed out in the speed/intensity variable, the
The therapist should establish both short- and
effectiveness of a workout should not be measured
long-term goals for each patient, based upon the 
 by patient fatigue. It should focus on the quality of
 patient's age, life stage, and progress since injury,
the movements. The exercise-to-fatigue approach
and the owner/handler's commitment to the
may lead to overtraining, exercise-related pain,
program. If the owmer/handler's expectation for
and even overuse injuries.
complete recovery seems unrealistic, short-term
 and intermediate goals should be set, with prog-
ress assessed at each visit.
Getting started
Goals should also be set for each component of
the program. Proprioception goals range from
The authors coach the owner/handler and the
decreasing ataxia in the neurologic patient to
patient simultaneously when starting any new
increasing body awareness in the immature athlete
exercise that will be applied to the home exercise
in an effort to prevent injuries. Strength goals for
 program (HEP). It is most effective to train the
 an athlete may be to carry a dumbbell over a jump,
patient how to perform an exercise before demon-
while those for the geriatric patient may be to
strating it to the owmer/handler. The owner/
climb stairs and to get on the bed. Endurance goals
handler is then asked to attempt the exercise with
for a hunting dog may be to complete five 150-yard
the patient. His or her available time and likely
retrieves in water while the endurance goal for the
compliance are taken into account when creating
Schutzhund III dog may be to run 5 miles; for the
the HEP.
 pet dog, the goal may be to walk around the block
The patient's willingness to work with both ther-
with the owner. Examples of gait training goals
apists and the owner/handler must be assessed.
include eliminating a crabbing gait in the confor-
Dogs are smart enough to find many ways to avoid
mation dog, correcting persistent pelvic limb cir-
doing difficult exercises correctly. The therapist
cumduction in the dog whose lumbosacral pain
 must be aware of the common avenues for evading
Chapter 8 Therapeutic Exercise 135
work in order to be prepared for the behavior and
tion is to find the least expensive option for each
to correct or prevent it. For instance, a common
of these pieces of equipment. The emphasis should
exercise used to strengthen the gluteals, adductors,
instead be on safety for the patient as well as the
 and hamstring muscles involves training the dog
handler. Each piece of equipment will be described,
to do sit-to-stand movement on a hill, facing per-
pendicular to the slope. This activity isolates and
chapter.
strengthens the muscles in the downhill leg. The
patient will evade by positioning himself more
parallel to the slope, with the forelimbs downhill,
Physioballs
taking the load off of the affected limb. To prevent
this, the therapist stands uphill of the dog in a posi-
Also known as Swiss balls or exercise balls, these
tion that discourages this behavior. Clients can
come in a variety of shapes and sizes. A peanut ball
evade too, so clear communication is essential.
is shaped like a peanut, and has two points of
contact with the ground eliminating side-to-side
motion (Figure 8.1). This is the most stable ball, so
Rules
it is used for most new patients. A physio roll is
similarly stable to the peanut, but does not have
There are several rules that help achieve success
the gutter in the middle to help support the patient.
with therapeutic exercise programs:
Egg-shaped balls have some side-to-side motion
(1)  Always start within the animal's comfort zone,
making exercises on them more difficult than on
gradually increasing the intensity until goals
the peanut or roll. The most challenging shape is
are met. If the goal is to complete 10 repetitions 
the round ball that moves in all directions.
(reps) of an activity in good form, the therapist
Regardless of the shape of the ball, all physioball
starts with three to four reps. As the patient
 work is initiated with the ball less inflated to create
approaches the ability to complete 10 good
more contact area with the ground. This makes the
reps, the exercise is changed or progressed.
 ball more stable. A progression for the patient that
This may involve changing to a more challeng-
is becoming stronger is to add air to the ball, then
ing movement or to doing the same movement
to progress to the more challenging shape(s).
 in a more challenging environment.
Patients that are afraid of the ball can be calmed by
(2)  Strength work is generally done three to five
 gently bouncing the patient on the ball. This should
times per week with days off alternating with
training days. The dog's motivation to carry
out the exercises must be maintained, and
overtraining can quickly lead to a loss of
motivation.
(3)  Some owner/handlers will insist on working
their dogs every day despite clear instructions.
For this group, exercises focusing upon the
forelimb can be performed one day, the trunk
the next day, and the pelvic limb the next day.
-uaao pioae cn sdau ,auun hds, su
ing and gives the muscles time to recover.
 Daily stretching routines are advised (see
Chapters 6 and 10).
Tools of the trade
Figure 8.1  The patient is asked to balance on the peanut
This section describes the commonly used equip-
ball with varied amounts of stabilization support. It can be
 ment in canine rehabilitation practice. The tempta-
placed next to the wall for added support.
136   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
be used only during the initial session with the
Planks
ball. Once the patient is confident that the ball will
not hurt him, the instability of the ball helps to
As shown in Figure 8.3, 2"× 8"and 2"× 10" planks
strengthen muscles.
in 10-ft lengths can be placed on cinder construc-
tion blocks. Patients work on balance and proprio
ception by walking along these elevated platforms.
Cavaletti
 Progression from plank walking involves work
m warped planks, narrower planks, and higher
Cavaletti poles have been used for equine exercise
elevation.
for many years. Patients are asked to step over
cavaletti poles without touching them for the
 purpose of enhancing proprioception, strengthen-
Blocks
ing flexors, and elongating stride length. Poles can
be spaced evenly as well as in more challenging
Having the patient stand on sets of 2", 4", and 6"
patterns (Figure 8.2). Cavaletti poles used for
tall blocks (4"x 6" surface area with a nonslip top
canine therapeutic exercise are commonly made of
surface) can be used to strengthen trunk muscles
PVC pipe or wood. The author (L.M.) uses 2" × 2",
in patients that are too weak for more active
2"× 4", and 2"× 6" planks in 3-ft lengths that fit
strength work (Figure 8.4). This emphasizes stabi-
into a standard home hallway or 3-ff long PVC
lizer muscles. Many variations are possible includ-
 pipe sections that can be supported on smali jump
 ing placing different height blocks under front and
standards or on genly crushed aluminum cans.
 rear paws or placing only the diagonal paws on the
When the patient progresses to needing higher
blocks.
cavaletti poles, traffic pylons (cones) with holes
drilled at 2" intervals can be used to support the
poles. Cones can also be used to create obstacle
Land treadmill
courses (weave poles and figure-8s). This work can
be used to train weight shifting, balance, and uni-
When shopping for a treadmill, belt length is a
lateral side strengthening.
key component. Human belts are generally 4-5 ff
long. Small dogs can get by with this length, but
 large dogs require the minimum 6-ft belts that are
Figure 8.3 This patient walks on a 2" x 8" × 10" plank
Figure 8.2 The cavaletti poles are spaced so that each paw
working on his balance. He is then challenged, having to
steps only once in each space. The height of the pole
step over blocks while walking on the plank. The last
dictates how much flexion will be needed to get through the
challenge is to use a warped board to make it wobble while
poles cleanly.
he is walking.
Chapter 8 Therapeutic Exercise 137
Figure 8.4  The patient's diagonal limbs are placed on the
blocks to work on balance and improve trunk strength.
Figure 8.6  Patient is standing with his front paws on a
chair and his rear paws on a disc. This, in contrast to the
rear paws on the ground and the front paws on the ball,.
uses the same body posture but requires greater effort
enhancing stability of the pelvic limbs.
Balance discs
Figure 8.5 Healthy dog trotting on the land treadmill.
Inflatable discs are used as low, unstable surfaces.
The patient is asked to balance with one or more
found on treadmills desigmed specifically for dogs
paws on the disc. This is used to improve balance
(Figure 8.5). One downside to the canine treadmills
and strengthen stabilizer muscles and is easier than
is that belt width is narrower so a handler cannot
 standing on a ball. Once a patient is able to stand
walk on the belt with the patient. Incline and or
on the ground with its front paws elevated on a
decline capability is important. The ability to go in
chair it can progress to standing with its rear paws
reverse is nice, but not vital, as the dog can be
on the disc (Figure 8.6).
placed on the belt facing the opposite direction and
the machine turned to replicate the belt moving in
reverse. The limitation to using this method is that
Tunnels
it is not possible to have the pet walk backward on
an incline. The belt should start with a simple one-
Turnels can be created using children's tunnels,
button push or turn, rather than the patient having
agility turmels, a line of chairs, or cavaletti poles
to start walking before settings can be altered, and
attached to adjacent cones. Tunnels are used to
it should have a starting speed less than 0.4 mi/h.
Encourage the patient to crouch or crawl, strength-
aed a ie yns aq jsnu ponuo paads a
ening the forelimbs, trunk, and pelvic limbs pri-
cannot speed the belt by rurming faster.
marily through eccentric contractions (Figure 8.7).
138   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Figure 8.8 Weights can be used to entice a patient to lift
the weighted limb higher than normal for the purpose of
exaggerated movement of the limb and to extended
weight-bearing times on the contralateral limb.
Figure 8.7 A children's tunnel can be used to have a
patient lower its center of gravity before the dog is strong
enough to crouch all the way to the floor.
Air mattresses
Air mattresses are used to enhance proprioception
and balance. Initial work is done with the patient
standing on the mattress while it is fully inflated.
Difficulty progresses as air is removed until the
 patient can begin to make contact with the floor.
Weights
Figure 8.9 The patient stands with rear paws on the rocker
Weights are most often used to create an annoy-
board. The therapist stands with her legs on either side of
 ance on one limb, encouraging weight shift to the 
the paws, but does not allow the patient to touch or lean on
contralateral limb. These weights can be anywhere
her legs. The motion should be irregular and the therapist
from 2oz to 1lb depending upon the size of the
should have control of the patient via the collar or harness.
 patient (Figure 8.8). The lowest weight that brings
about the desired effect should be used.
Patient considerations
Rocker boards and wobble boards
Fatigue
Rocker boards and wobble boards differ in that a
A key concern while performing therapeutic exer-
rocker board offers unidirectional movement over
cises with canine patients is to watch for subtle
a rail (Figure 8.9) while a wobble board sits atop a
 signs of fatigue. These include excessive panting.
hemisphere, creating multidirectional movement.
 a spade-shaped tongue (Figure 8.10), elevated
Chapter 8 Therapeutic Exercise
5EL
Figure 8.11  Reins are used to prevent the patient from
pulling. The leash must come across the chest plate not
touching the shoulders or throat.
Figure 8.10 As a dog's body temperature rises, the tongue
widens and curls to create more surface area for evaporation
and cooling.
harness. Harnesses must never restrict shoulder
motion. A 6-ft or longer leash can be wrapped in a
way to create dog reins (Figure 8.11) or a "suitcase"
heart rate, a drooping tail and/or ears, trembling
harness, in which the handler stands beside the
muscles, a change in gait (shortened stride in one
patient with the cranial hand holding the leash just
or more limb or change from trot to pace or amble),
above the collar. The rest of the leash extends cau-
or refusal to continue. When a patient refuses to
dally, is looped around the patient's caudal
continue, the therapist should always ask for one
abdomen with care taken not to have it overlie the
more rep to preclude an avoidance behavior devel-
penis in male dogs, and is held in the therapist's
 oping in the patient. Finally, the patient's behavior 
caudal hand. This gives the handler the ability
should be assessed the next day. If he is stiff or sore,
to drive the patient forward, sideways, or back-
this is noted in the record, and the intensity or
ward without the patient being able to spin away
 duration of the program is decreased in the follow-
(Figure 8.12). The collar is used as a form of com-
ing session.
munication with the patient, allowing the therapist
to gently direct the patient's movement by subtle
Footing
hand motions.
Weak or debilitated patients require special surface
Supportive and assistive devices
considerations. Flooring should be nonslip and the
surface should be soft to prevent injury if falls
Slings can be used for support allowing for proper
occur. Regular hospital flooring can be modified
 posture in the patient that is incapable of support-
using yoga mats or stall mats. The home environ-
 ment can be modified using nonslip throw rugs, or 
ing full weight. Boots can be used to prevent scuff-
ing of the paws of ataxic or nonambulatory patients,
if weather permits, the exercises can be done out-
 or to prevent slipping in the weak patient or self-
doors on a grass or sand surface.
mutilation in patients with dysasthesias. Many
harnesses are available to assist the therapist and
Control
nursing staf to support the weak or minimally
ambulatory patient. These can also be used as a
For the safety of the patient, the therapist must
 form of communication with the patient during
always have control by way of a leash and or a exercises.
140   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Figure 8.12 The suitcase harness helps maintain control of
both the front and rear quarters of the dog, and can aid in
balance or weight support if needed.
 Patient motivation
Figure 8.13 Peanut butter slathered on the inside of a mug
Dogs are generally very treat motivated, but the
and frozen makes a long-lasting treat for dogs that need to
therapist must have a high-value treat to moti-
have their head moved into a specific position or just to
vate the patient to truly work. Much like human
distract a dog while it stays in a certain position.
patients, our canine athletes can become tired of
certain motivators. Timing of delivery of the treat
is critical. This must be done immediately upon the
important to demonstrate correct body mechanics
patient demonstrating the correct behavior. Ini-
as an example for the owner/handler, correcting
tially, this is done at each correct behavior. Gradu-
their posture as needed when they practice the
ally, the treats can be given less often as the patient
exercises with their dog. Proper body mechanics
masters the new skill. Small individual treats are
nclude keeping the elbows close to the body;
used during the training phase. For some exercises,
avoiding full flexion or extension of any joint
where constant attention is desired, a frozen peanut
 including the spine; it may include using tools such
butter mug is employed. Peanut butter is smeared
as stools or scooters to prevent excessive spinal
 around the inside of a container that is an appro-
flexion/extension or side bending. Personal body
priate size for the patient's muzzle. This container
posture may go unnoticed by the client as they
is stored in the freezer. The container is held so that
focus on the challenge of the exercise, so it is
the patient can lick the inside, working continu-
 important for the rehabilitation team to point out
s uons asiiaxa ue Sump preman e pag ci Aisno
 any dangerous or inappropriate posture through-
standing on a physioball. A variety of sizes of
out the exercise.
peanut butter containers can be kept in the freezer
so that they are readily available for the next patient
(Figure 8.13).
Creating the treatment calendar
A treatment calendar is created for the owner/
Therapist body mechanics
 handler that is very specific, spelling out what they
are to do each day of the week. Owner/handlers
The therapist must maintain correct body posture
 have time constraints that must be accommodated.
to protect against work-related injuries. It is also
 For those with a tight work schedule, assigmments
Chapter 8 Therapeutic Exercise 
141
are limited to those key exercises that will keep
When to progress
the patient progressing appropriately. For the
client with a lot of available time, boundaries must
The decision to increase the challenge of the thera-
be set to prevent potential overtraining issues.
peutic exercise program is made at each assess-
Some owner/handlers are weekend warriors,
ment of the patient. The frequency of assessments
wanting to accomplish all treatments in two con-
depends upon the individual patient. Neuroreha-
secutive days. Here, splitting the workout into
bilitation patients might make daily progress while
 body zones will prevent excessive soreness in any
in hospital, and are reassessed at each return visit.
muscle group.
The postoperative orthopedic patient is generally
Except for the stretching routine, patients start
reassessed every 2-4 weeks. The high-end athlete
with three to four repetitions of each exercise if they
might take months to move to the next level.
are able, with the goal of working up to 10 quality
When it is clear that the current level of work is
repetitions. Once the patient can complete 10 repe-
easy for the patient, it is time to progress. The
titions with ease, the exercise is made more chal-
patient may be tired when it gets done, but if
lenging. Strength work is done 3-5 days/week. For
it is ready to play 30 minutes later, the therapist
a 3-day program, training is undertaken every
can increase its activities. If the patient seems
other day. For a 5-day program, the 2 days off
tired during the rest of the day, the current level
should not be consecutive. Proprioception work,
 of work should be maintained. If the dog is stiff or
weight shift exercises (isometrics), balance work,
sore the next day, or hesitant to work, the level of
and stretching can be done daily. Endurance and
intensity should be cut in half and the challenge
cardiopulmonary work, when indicated, are gener-
slowly increased. Immediately after an exercise,
ally done every other day, alternating with strength
the patient's posture and transitions should the
work. The high-end athlete can do some endurance
same or better than they were before the exer-
work daily, but cross training is suggested.
cise. If performing the exercise creates a negative
Case Study 8.1  Cranial cruciate ligament insufficiency
Signalment: 3y.o. M/l Pitbull. Presented 4 days post
Week 4—Walks of 2-3 blocks twice daily with sit-to-
TTA, right pelvic limb.
sand exercises before and after crossing each street; 3
sets of 45 seconds on rocker board
Qinical  Findings: Significant  swelling  with  heat/
Week 5—Walks of 4 blocks BlD with 2 sit-to-stand exer-
inflammation and restricted flexion, stifle; restricted
cises before and after crossing each street, continued
flexion, tarsus; 2-cmr discrepancy in muscle mass with
cker board, added cavaletti pole exercises (2" x 2"
nght thigh smaller, feather weight bearing stance, right.
planks).
Week 6—Walks of 20 minutes B1D, 3 reps of 1-minute
Goals: Eliminate swelling, normal ROM stifle and tarsus,
on rocker board, 3 sit-to-stand exercises each side of
even muscle mass, full weight-bearing right pelvic lirmb.
the street, cavaletti poles (2" x 4" planks), and weave
poles 30" apart.
Therapy: Cryotherapy and passive range of motion
Week 8—Walks of 30 minutes BID; front feet on chair,
(PROM) utilized to attain first two goals. Therapeutic
rear feet on cushion (with perturbations), 4 reps of 1
exercises used to attain last two goals. Changes in status
minute, 5 sit-to-stand exercises each side of the street,
are noted in records.
weave poles 24" apart, continue cavaletti poles, add
3 ft on wobble board and right rear stabilizing balance
Week 1—Leash walks in yard to elirinate QID.
(3 reps of 45 seconds).
Week 2—Toe touch weight bearing: 3- to 5-minute
Week 10—Continue walks, weaves, sit-to-stands, wobble
walks BID-QID with leashed activity in  yard to
board, and cavaletti poles; front feet on ball controlling
eliminate.
ball position 3 reps of 1 minute.
Week 3—Increased weight bearing: added 1-2 sit-to-
Week 12—Normal ROM, even muscle girth, no visible
stand exercises to each leash walk, diagonal leg leff
lamreness, normal postures and transitions. Discharged
weight-shifting exercises, and rocker board: 3 sets of
frorm rehabilitation.
30 seconds BID.
142   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
change in posture, ability, or transition, the exercise
proprioception while postural control requires the
should change, decreasing the repetitions or the
 integration of visual, vestibular, and propriocep-
frequency of exercise or changing to a less chal-
tive inputs (Ghez, 1991; Shumway-Cook & Wool-
lenging exercise.
lacott, 1995). Any disruption in mechanoreceptor
input that affects proprioception will negatively
affect dynamic joint stability and therefore posture.
Specific exercises
In this section, exercises are described, each with a
Mechanoreceptors
goal, a technique, and a progression.
Mechanoreceptors (articular receptors, cutaneous
receptors, and muscle receptors) are located in con-
Walking
nective tissues throughout the body. Golgi tendon
organ-like receptors are the largest of the articular
For the patient that is postinjury or postoperative,
mechanoreceptors. They are slow to respond to
-lodu sou ai si huuien yiem radord suenu
stimuli, have a high activation threshold, and
tant and the easiest first step to take.
are active only during dynamic joint states, thus
Goal: Maintain a correct gait pattern throughout
sensing the extremes of the joint's normal move-
ment range (Zimny, 1988). The role of cutaneous
the exercise.
Technique: The cardiac patient may simply go
receptors in initiating reflexive responses, such as
the flexion withdrawal reflex in response to poten-
an yo ponad pas e roy rapa pue s ch imo
while the metabolically healthy patient may be
tially harmful stimuli, is well established (Hulliger
asked to maintain a speed walking pace. Progres-
et al., 1979). The muscle spindle and the Golgi
sion involves changing the terrain (ramps and
tendon organ (GTO) are the two primary types of
muscle receptors (Hulliger et al, 1979). Sensory
hills), or substrate (sand and gravel) and/or
increasing speed. The typical postoperative stifle
output from the muscle spindle senses joint posi-
tion throughout the range of motion (ROM) (Mat-
patient is started with short toileting leash walks,
BID-TID for the first week, then advanced by
thews, 1981; Caraffa et al., 1996). The GTO is located
at the musculotendinous junction. During a muscle
adding 1 block (approximately 0.1mi) for each
contraction, this junction is stretched, distorting
week after surgery for up to 6-8 weeks.
the receptor endings of the GTO-afferent neurons.
Activation of the GTO afferents leads to inhibition
Proprioception
of the motor neurons to the stretched muscles and
excitation of the motor nerves to the antagonistic
For the healthy canine athlete, high levels of pro-
muscles. This feedback loop is referred to as the
prioception can enhance neuromuscular control
 inverse myotactic reflex.
and functional joint stability, thus decreasing the
 In human sports medicine, several propriocep-
risk for injury. For the injured canine patient,
aq on umous uq ae sueird Sun a
proprioception work is vital to ward off repeat
effective in reducing injury rates (Caraffa et al.,
injury. For this reason, it is imperative that the
1996; Hewett et al., 1999; Wedderkopp et al., 1999;
rehabilitation therapist be well versed on the
Heidt et al., 2000; Myklebust et al., 2003). These
science of proprioception. Sherrington described
programs incorporate several steps to retraining
the proprioceptive system as "the afferent infor-
the injured athlete, as described by Caraffa et al.
mation from proprioceptors (mechanoreceptors)
(1996). Their perturbation-training program for
located in the proprioceptive field that contributes
 nonsurgical ACL patients involves an early phase,
to conscious sensations, total posture, and segmen-
exposing the athlete to perturbations in all direc-
tal posture" (Sherrington, 1906; Lephart et al., 2000).
 tions, with the goal of eliciting an appropriate
Hewett, et al. expanded the definition to include the
 muscular response to applied perturbations (no
complex interaction between the afferent and effer-
 rigid co-contraction). The middle phase introduces
ent systems (Hewett et al., 2002). Dynamic joint
 light sport-specific activity during perturbation
stability is the result of neuromuscular control and
techniques,
, with the goal of improving athlete
Chapter 8 Therapeutic Exercise 143
accuracy in matching muscle responses to pertur-
the therapist creates designs and patterns for them
bation intensity, direction, and speed. The late
to navigate.
phase involves increased intensity of perturbations
 Progression: Move the poles closer together so
by using sport-specific stances. The goal here is to
 that the patient needs to decide whether to step
obtain accurate, selective muscular responses to
between or over two poles. Next, create patterns
 perturbations in any direction and of any intensity,
on a hill, then patterns on a hill with the poles at
magnitude, or speed.
different heights.
Zigzag walhing on a hill
Proprioception training exercises
Goal: Walk across the slope of a hill alternating
The authors use four basic proprioception retrain-
angles to the right and left while maintaining a
ing exercises. The goal with each is to stimulate
 coordinated gait. This challenges the propriocep-
mechanoreceptors at all three levels (articular,
a uo rau laay jana uau Aq waiss aa
cutaneous, and muscle).
slope in each direction (Figure 8.15).
Technique: Traverse the hill at a 10- to 80-degree
Cavaletti poles in designs
angle to the slope. Turn every two to eight strides
Goal: Navigate an obstacle course without touch-
 keeping the same angle but walking in the oppo-
ing the poles.
site direction.
Technique: First the patient is taught the game.
Progression: Change directions more frequently
They must walk over poles without touching any
and with a steeper angle.
pole (Figure 8.14). They are given a treat for each
 positive result. Once they understand the game,
Rocker/wobble board
Rocker Board Technique: Starting with the
patient's two front or pelvic limbs on the ground
and the other two on the board, the therapist con-
trols the board. The motion applied to the board
should be nonrhythmic from the start to prevent
the patient from riding the board.
Progression: A higher board can be used. More
sudden movements can be applied. The stable
 paws can be placed on a surface above the board.
Figure 8.14 Cavaletti poles on a hill, in a pattern, and with
different size boards, are very mentally and physically
challenging exercises. The closer the boards are together,
the harder it is for the patient,as they have to decide the
Figure 8.15 Trotting in a zigzag pattern up and down a hill
spaces in which to step to avoid hitting the boards.
144  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
The front and rear paws can both be on unstable
Ouerall Progression for Proprioception
surfaces.
Progression: Once the patient can navigate each of
Wobble Board: The wobble board is desigmed to
the proprioception activities, the exercise is pro-
move in all directions whereas the rocker board
 gressed to a circuit: multiple exercises done con-
moves in just one plane. As the wobble board
secutively using some or all of the exercises listed.
forces more engagement of the proprioceptive
This can be made more challenging by including
system than the rocker board, the authors prefer to
 multiple repetitions of the entire circuit.
use it for early neurological patients.
Goal: Patient should be able to maintain balance
while therapist applies nonrhythmic perturbations
Balance and weight shifting
to the board.
Goal of all exercises: Work on balance with per-
Technique: Place the weakest legs on the board
whether forepaws, rear paws, or in small to
turbations as well as on isometric contractions.
medium size patients, all four paws. The therapist
Balance beam
can control the patient using a harness if needed.
As much as possible, prevent the patient from
Technique: Using the planks described above,
leaning on the therapist. The therapist applies non-
the patient is encouraged to walk along a plank
rhythmic movements to the board, forcing the
without stepping off.
patient to maintain balance.
Progression: Anarrower or warped plank can be
 Progression: Paws that are not on the board are
used and obstacles can be placed on the plank.
placed onto an elevated and or unstable surface
(disc or noodle), shifting the weight onto the weak
Balance blocks
limbs on the board. This advances the work from
Technique: Starting with four paws on four blocks
simple balance to balance and strength. When mul-
in an appropriate standing position, the patient is
tiple reps of this exercise are easy, the patient is
asked to hold this posture for gradually longer
provided with more challenging land exercises
periods of time.
such as weaves.
 Progression: The blocks are brought closer to the
midline, creating a narrow-based stance, until both
Weaves
front paws are on one block and both rear paws are
on one block (Figure 8.16).
Goal: Walk through the pattem in a coordinated
manner (good body posture) including accom-
 plishing a rapid pivot at each end of the pattern.
Technique: Use a minimum of six traffic cones
set 18-48" apart, depending upon patient's size
and current level of ability (more closely placed
cones are more difficult). The patient must com-
plete gentle weaves with the handler staying
outside of the pattern. The patient should pivot at
 each end to work on balance during sharp turns.
To work on improving flexibility or proprioception
on one side of the patient, use an odd number of
cones. This means that the patient will always turn
 in the same direction at the end of the row of cones.
Bilateral work requires an even number of cones.
Agility dogs should not do this exercise because it
interferes with their sport by training a similar but
different skill to the weave poles.
Progression: More tightly spaced cones; faster
Figure 8.16 The patient's limbs are placed on blocks to
reps.
enhance balance and proprioception.
Chapter 8 Therapeutic Exercise
This progresses to the therapist adding rhythmic
Burst exercises (intervals)
and then nonrhythmic stabilization perturbations
Technique: The patient is first warmed up through
to the patient (see later in the chapter).
walking and trotting exercises appropriate to their
level of fimess. Sprints are added. These may
involve throwing a ball or other rapid acceleration
Trampoline, air mattress, soft cushions
activity. Two to ten repetitions are completed, fol-
Technique: After introducing the patient to this
lowed by a slight cool down, and more sprints. The
unstable surface, the therapist gradually increases
number of intervals and length of exertion periods
the challenge to the patient's balance by having
 are increased based upon patient ability. Patients
the patient stand still while the therapist moves the
 generally start with two to three intervals of two to
surface, or having the patient move around on
five bursts. The high-end athlete will complete five
the surface with or with out the therapist manipu-
sets of 10 repetitions. The therapist must monitor
lating it.
for signs of fatigue or sore muscles after this work.
Progression: Starting with two paws on the
When working with the high-end athlete that is
unstable surface and two paws on a stable sur-
training for competition, the goal is to replicate the
face, the therapist allows the patient to find their
movements they will do in competition. For early
 own balance. Once this is achieved, the patient is
work with a new athlete, skills are trained once or
asked to stand on the surface with all four feet.
twice per week. For the seasoned athlete, the train-
Next, perturbations of the unstable surface are
ing will focus on sprints and endurance, with
added. The closer the perturbation is to the patient,
minimal attention paid to skill training.
the more challenging it will be. Next the patient's
front paws can be placed on one air mattress with
the rear paws on another, with perturbations added
Endurance work
when appropriate. For the athlete working on
Walking, rurning, and swimming are used to con-
high-end balance, the patient stands with rear
paws on a balance disc and front paws on a phys-
dition patients whose jobs require long duration
running and /or troting.
ioball. Increasing the height difference between
front and rear increases the difficulty.
Goal: Increase the duration and intensity of
training as the patient's fitmess improves. A condi-
tioned police dog may run on the treadmill with
the incline at near maximum levels for up to 60
Speed work
minutes. Retrievers may practice five to six water
 retrieves of up to 150 yards or sprint work involv-
Goal of all exercises: Improve the patient's stride
 ing 30 to 50 ball retrieves. The therapist should
length, efficiency, and burst speed.
emphasize cross training on all endurance skills to
opanoq se llam se Amju Sunuiennaao juaaand
and frustration for the patient.
Cavaletti poles for stride length
The stabilizer muscles also require training to
e Aq paedas snod a im us anbna
improve stamina. This is where physioball work
distance equal to the patient's height at the greater
comes in. The first technique is termed walking-
tubercle, and monitoring the patient's comfort to
forward-with-the-ball. The patient's front paws are
ensure it can do this without stutter stepping or
placed on the ball, with the patient in control of the
stepping over more than one pole, the patient is
ball. As the therapist encourages the patient to
trotted through a set of six to eight poles.
move forward, the patient's rear paws walk
Progression: The distance between the poles is
forward while the front paws must walk backward
slowly increased, encouraging the patient to
to keep ball in control and rolling forward. This
increase forelimb reach and pelvic limb drive. This
 exercise is progressed to backward-walking-with-
 is done until the patient is incapable of progress-
the-ball. With the patient in the same position on
ing. The height of the poles remains approximately
the ball, the therapist rolls the ball, encouraging the
2" throughout this exercise.
patient to walk backward with the rear paws. This
146   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
requires that the patient walk forward with the
three limbs, and to walk sideways. This is done by
front paws on the ball. The next step is to have the
 pushing, not pulling the patient.
patient circle the ball while keeping the front paws
on the ball. The pelvic limbs walk in a clockwise
Leg lifts
or counterclockwise direction around the ball.
Technique: While the dog is standing square, the
These three ball exercises work the abductors,
therapist tickles the toes of the limb to get the
adductors, and joint stabilizers in all four limbs
patient to move in the desired direction, adduction,
and the trunk.
abduction, full limb flexion, or upper joint exten-
sion with flexion of the two lower joints.
Unilateral or focal strengthening
Therapy band
The goal is to increase weight bearing on the
affected limb to cause a relative increase in strength
Technique: The band is positioned around the
on that side. These exercises are for the patient
affected limb during a square stand. Tension is
applied in the direction opposite the action of the
the limb, but that requires focal work to attain
 muscle that is to be strengthened.
symmetry.
Hill walking perpendicular to the slope
Exercises for orthopedic disorders
Technique: The therapist walks the dog in patterns
Spinal/neurological impairments
across the hill so that the affected limb is con-
sistently on the uphill side and thus is working
Stand with ball support
harder than the contralateral limb. This exercise
Purpose: Engage limb muscles before the patient
works the uphill legs, as they have to push off
is able to support full weight.
and resist gravity to a greater extent than the
Goal: Minimize atrophy and stimulate strong
dowmhill legs.
contractions.
Technique: For patients unable to support full
Hill sit-to-stand or push-ups
weight, stand them over a round or peanut ball
 Technique: The patient is oriented perpendicular
with their weight supported through their chest
to the slope with the affected limb downhill. Ini-
on the ball. This allows them to contract limb
tially, the patient is asked to maintain a square sit,
muscles through rocking and perturbations. The
resisting the tendency to slip downhill, for 30
patient will reach out to support itself, causing
seconds.
muscle contractions in the limbs.
Progression: The patient is asked to perform
 Progression: Have the patient stand unassisted
repetitive sit-to-stand exercises for pelvic limb
 on the ground. Next have it support itself with
strengthening or push-ups (down-to-sits) for fore-
either the front or pelvic limbs on a cushion.
limb strengthening.
Ball or cushion work
Three legs on a wobble board
Purpose 1: Strengthen stabilizer muscles of the
This technique is used to strengthen the limb that
limbs.
is not on the board.
Goal: Strong contractions of the limb and trunk
Progression: The therapist adds perturbations to
muscles.
the board and/or uses the wobble board progres-
Technique: For ataxic patients, stand the patient
sion discussed earlier
on a cushion. This encourages the patient to work
to maintain balance. Once the patient is stronger,
Hemi-stand and hemi-walk
the therapist can cause perturbations of the cushion.
Technique: The therapist lifts one or two of the
 Purpose 2: Strengthen neck muscles. We call this
patient's legs, and asks him to stand on two to 
 exercise head-in-a-box.
Chapter 8 Therapeutic Exercise 
147
Figure 8.17 In head-in-a-box, the patient is tempted with
 Figure 8.18 The tall sit can be made more challenging by
food to place its head in all possible positions to strengthen
adding perturbations.
the neck muscles. This exercise also strengthens forelimbs,
pelvic limbs, and trunk by maintaining balance while
constantly shifting weight.
Technique: This exercise can be used for neuro-
logical patients as follows: For the patient that is
Goal: Increase the time that the patient is able to
unable to support its weight but can lie sternally
move his head while keeping his balance with his
in a sphinx position, apply gentle perturbations
front paws on a chair or ball.
challenging the patient maintain this position. As
Technique: The patient stands with his front
the patient is able to support itself in sitting, have
 paws on a cushion, ball, or chair while the therapist 
 it sit tall (Figure 8.18) and repeat the same move-
moves a cookie around the patient's head to get
 ments. Next, with the patient standing, perform
him to move his head in all directions. The name 
 the movements. Finally, progress to doing the exer-
implies the imagery of the patient's head sur-
cise with the patient standing on an unstable
rounded by a box. The cookie is moved to all areas
surface.
of the box, causing the patient to fully use the neck
muscles in AROM. No resistance is used at this
Sit-up-and-beg and beg-to-stand
point (Figure 8.17).
Purpose: Strengthen trunk, and with progressions,
strengthen pelvic limbs.
Rhythmic stabilization
Goal: Complete the exercise without falling.
Rhythmic stabilization, as explained in Chapter 5,
Swaying is okay.
is alternating isometric contractions of opposing
Technique: The patient is encouraged to sit
(agonist and antagonist) muscles.
squarely to prevent putting abnormal stress on the
Purpose: Strengthen the stabilizer muscles of the
stifles. The therapist asks the patient to sit up. For
limbs and trunk
the patient that is unstable, the therapist can assist
Goal: The muscles of the trunk engage without
by supporting one paw. Note: Holding the paw
the patient taking a step.
higher gives more support to the patient. As the
148Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
forelimbs and without thoracolumbar flexion.
Technique: The patient is asked to stand on the
pelvic limbs with the forepaws on an elevated
surface high enough for the forelimbs to be ex-
 tended, the thoracolumbar spine in a neutral posi-
tion, and the hips comfortably extended (Figure
8.20A,B). As the patient gains strength and confi-
dence in the exercise, the surface under the fore-
paws can be raised.
 Progression: Front or rear paws are placed on an
unstable surface such as a cushion, progressing to
a ball.
Snoopy exercises
Purpose: Strengthen the trunk muscles without
causing any compression or loading to the spine.
 Goal: The patient engages the trunk muscles to
the point of starting to sway.
Technique: With the patient standing squarely
om all four paws, one front paw is lifted and placed
mn a block. Next, the diagonal rear paw is lifted,
Figure 8.19 A patient learning to beg. A patient doing
placing it on a similar size block.
sit-up-and-beg needs to sit squarely with their body weight
almost entirely over the pelvic limbs. The patient that
Note: The limbs must be elevated in a straight
cannot sit squarely for any reason should not perform this
anterior/posterior direction rather than allowing
exercise as it will put abnormal forces on the pelvic limb
 abduction of the limbs leading to spinal rotation.
joints.
The patient is observed for any trunk sway, indicat-
ing that the exercise is challenging. If the patient
 does not sway, progress to standing with elevated
patient grows stronger, the paw can be lowered,
legs on higher blocks, with the height of the blocks
encouraging him to hold the beg position alone.
 never exceeding the height of the patient's stifle.
Patients with strong legs and weak cores will
 Next, with the patient standing on the ground, the
attempt to stand up on their hind limbs rather than 
therapist lifts the limbs with minimal support,
holding the beg position.
using two fingers rather than the entire hand, to
Progression: To strengthen trunk and pelvic
 the height of the carpus, gradually increasing the
limbs: Start in beg position (Figure 8.19), then
extension of each limb until sway is observed
Encourage the patient to stand on the pelvic limbs,
(Figure 8.21).
gradually returning to the beg position without
 Final progression: Add rhythmic stabilization
allowing the front paws to touch the floor. The
while maintaining full extension.
standing exercise involves concentric contractions,
so is relatively easy for the patient. The return to
Goosing
beg position requires eccentric contractions that are
Purpose: Strengthen abdominal musculature in
significantly more challenging.
patients with lordosis. This is contraindicated in
 patients with kyphosis.
Dance
Goal: Visibly lift the thoracolumbar spine.
  q d a  
Technique: With the patient standing squarely,
muscles.
the therapist tickles the ventral chest, ventral
Goal: Strong contractions of the muscles of the
abdomen, or caudal thigh area to create contraction
trunk and pelvic limbs without the patient pulling
of the abdominal musculature leading to thoraco-
forward to support the majority of weight on the
lumbar flexion. This position is maintained for
Chapter 8 Therapeutic Exercise 149
B
Figure 8.20 A. The patient's front limbs are placed on the ball with the weight shifted to the rear. The patient must use all
four limbs and trunk muscles to maintain balance and control of the ball. Peanut butter is a great training tool. B. Incorrect
position. This patient is leaning forward, placing too much weight on the front legs and stressing the trunk. The position can
be adjusted by moving the peanut butter mug to shift the dog's weight toward its rear.
3-20 seconds depending on the patient's ability.
Within 3-5 weeks of daily work, a significant
improvement is expected in the topline.
Coohie stretches
Purpose: Stretch the paraspinal muscles. This exer-
cise is also used to assess spinal flexibility and pain
in the associated musculature.
Goal: Full cervical and thoracic lateral spinal
flexion; full cervical and thoracic flexion; full cervi-
cal, thoracic, and lumbar extension; and moderate
cervical and thoracic rotation.
Technique: The patient must be food motivated,
or the therapist must find a treat of significantly
high value to the patient to make this exercise
Figure 8.21Snoopies or diagonal leg lifts can be done with
blocks or by lifting the limbs, making certain to not let the
work. In addition, the treat must be durable enough
patient lean on the therapist to support their balance.
for the patient to nibble on it as he performs the
exercise. The therapist stands behind the patient
150Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Goal: Full abduction and adduction with the
paws crossing over.
Technique: With the patient standing perpen-
dicular to the therapist's path, the collar is held in
one hand while the other hand controls the oppo-
site hip. Alternatively, one can use the suitcase
harness described earlier, as this gives the handler
the ability to drive the patient sideways without
his being able to spin away. The therapist steps
forward gradually taking equidistant steps to keep
the pelvis square so as not to stress the therapist's
lower back, encouraging the patient to step
sideways.
Figure 8.22 The headstand position of the cookie stretch
may be the hardest to learn. The cookie has to be kept close
Sit-to-stand
to the floor for this to be a feasible stretch.
Purpose: Strengthen the hamstring and gluteal
muscles.
Goal: Sit squarely and use only pelvic limbs in
transitioning to stand.
that is standing squarely. The patient's caudal
Technique: The patient is asked to sit squarely
thighs are against the therapist's leg, preventing
from a square stance. While holding the collar to
stepping aside to avoid completing the stretches.
prevent the patient from stepping forward, the
 The cookie is first moved to the point of one shoul-
therapist tickles the abdomen to encourage the
der to initiate cervical side bending and flexion.
 patient to stand by extending only the pelvic limbs.
Next, the cookie is moved slowly, in a straight line
 If the patient places a pelvic limb laterally, the
from the shoulder to the hip, along the body wall 
 therapist tickles the paw to encourage its return to
to encourage thoracic stretching. Some patients can 
 a square position. The therapist should not move
reach their nose to their tuber ischium. Next, the
 the paw for the patient, as this will not change the
cookie is moved to the rear paw to engage spinal
 behavior To strengthen one side more than the
rotation. The second stretch begins with the cookie
 other, when asking the patient to rise, the therapist
at the manubrium. It is then moved to the floor
 gently moves the collar to the affected side. Though
between the front paws, gradually moving cau-
 this is a simple exercise, like human sit-ups or
dally along the floor with the goal of reaching a
push-ups, many repetitions can quickly lead to
point where the top of the patient's head is parallel 
increased strength.
to the floor (Figure 8.22). The third exercise requires
that the front paws be on an elevated surface (at
least as high as the patient's withers). The cookie
Backward walking
is held above the patient's eyes, encouraging the
nose to be held perpendicular to the floor creating
Purpose: Strengthen hamstrings, gluteals, and
triceps.
cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spinal extension
noted by thoracolumbar concavity.
Goal: Step back with full extension of hip, stifle,
 and tarsus rather than squating or hopping.
Technique 1: With the patient standing squarely,
Pelvic limb exercise
 and the therapist standing in front of the dog facing
Side stepping
it, a cookie is held to the thoracic inlet while the
therapist walks toward the patient, asking it to
Purpose: Strengthen the abductor and adductor
back up.
muscles, particularly for the hips (gluteals and pec-
Technique 2: With the patient standing parallel
tineus) and forelimb (pectorals).
to a wall and the therapist standing at his side,
Chapter 8 TherapeuticExercise
151
one hand is used to prevent stepping away from
the wall, while gently guiding the patient to step
backward.
Technique 3: Using the suitcase harness with
equal pressure in each hand, guide the patient
backward.
Technique 4: (For the obedience trained dog)
With the patient standing in a heel position,
the therapist walks backward quickly enough to
prevent the patient from sitting or crouching with
the pelvic limbs.
Sitting on a hill
Purpose:S
 Strengthen  gluteal  and  hamstring
Figure 8.23  This patient is learning to crawl by using
muscles.
cones and PVC poles. Initially, treats are placed under the
Goal: Maintain patient's body perpendicular to
 poles to make this a fun game.
the slope or parallel while facing uphill.
Technique: With the patient facing perpendicu-
lar to the slope, the therapist asks for a square sit,
not allowing the hips to slide downhill or the front
Technique: With the patient in square sit, the
paws to point downhill. With the patient facing
therapist holds a cookie in front of the patient's
uphill, the therapist asks for a square sit without 
nose and lowers it slowly until close to the floor
the patient pulling weight forward onto his fore-
 before slowly sweeping it forward, encouraging
limbs or letting his hips slide downhill. The patient
the patient to take very small steps with the fore-
will attempt to face downhill to evade the effort
limbs as it transitions into a sphinx position. The
required.
therapist uses the cookie in the reverse direction
to encourage small forelimb steps back into a
square sit.
Forelimb exercises
Crawling
Wheelbarrow
Purpose: Strengthen forelimb, trunk, and pelvic
Purpose: Strengthen the forelimbs and trunk.
limb musculature.
Goal: Good contractions of trunk and forelimb
Goal: Patient is able to reach and push with all
muscles.
four limbs keeping the trunk close to the floor.
Technique: The therapist lifts the patient by the
Technique: On a nonslip, nonabrasive surface,
caudal abdomen until the pelvic limbs are 1-3" off
 a tunnel is created using cavaletti poles inserted
the ground. The therapist observes for contractions
into cones or using a line of chairs. The higher the
of trunk and or forelimb muscles. This can be a
tunnel's ceiling, the easier this exercise is for the
stationary exercise, or the patient can be asked to
patient. The patient lies down in front of the tunnel
walk forward on the forelimbs.
and treats are placed at intervals throughout,
Contraindications:
Carpal
hyperextension,
encouraging the patient to crawl though the tunnel
shoulder impairment, or pain on spinal extension.
(Figure 8.23). Verbal cues are given during the
crawl. Once the patient has learned this command,
the exercise can be completed without the tunnel
Push-ups
by simply holding the treat close to the ground in
Purpose: Strengthen the forelimb muscles.
s wim dn qoean oh juaned a saroy e Aem e
Goal: Controlled movement throughout, using
nose, giving the verbal cue to crawl while the
the forelimbs rather than the trunk muscles.
cookie is advanced.
152Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Neurological rehabilitation
The goal with neurological patients is to chal
lenge them, pushing them to their limits but
 ending on a positive note with lots of praise and
encouragement.
For the patient that is unable to support weight,
gentle joint compressions (described in Chapter 6)
are used initially.
 Purpose: Stimulate proprioceptive fibers; en-
 courage joint fluid circulation; and enhance circu-
lation to adjacent tissues. This can be accomplished
 in multiple positions for each joint.
Tickling
Purpose: Minimize atrophy of flexors and exten-
sors of the limbs.
Goal: Cause flexion of entire limb by stimulating
the toes. In the pelvic limb, stimulate suficiently
to cause not only flexion, but also a secondary
kicking of the limb into extension.
Technique: Tickle or pinch toes, pads, or fur
Figure 8.24 With Hi 5s at an angie, the pectoral,
between the pads until desired effect.
rhomboidius, and trapezieus muscles are strengthened along
with the supraspinatus and biceps brachii.
Sphinx lying
This is a transition posture between lateral recum-
bency and sitting.  Neurological patients may
present with restrictions in multiple joints and
High fives
spasticity or weakness. Cervical patients often
present with forelimb extension and weakness in
Purpose: Strengthen muscles of shoulder exten-
shoulder flexors.
sion, abduction, and adduction as well as forelimb
 Purpose: Encourage appropriate posture early in
advancement.
neurological rehab to allow for more normal transi-
Goal: The patient touches one front paw to the
tions as function returns.
therapist's correct hand. The patient must learn that
Goal: Achieve a posture with elbows caudal to
his right paw must reach for the therapist's left
shoulders and full hip, stifle, and tarsal flexion.
hand (or vice versa) no matter where the hand is
Technique: Position the patient in this posture,
placed.
supporting him as needed.
Technique: The therapist shakes a cookie in a
Progression: Add rhythmic stabilization.
closed hand until the patient paws at the hand, the
hand opens and the patient is rewarded. Next, the
Tall sits
patient is rewarded only when he uses the correct
paw. Once the patient understands the game, the
Purpose: Strengthen the trunk muscles.
cookie is no longer needed, and the therapist can
Goal: Achieve a normal-posture sit with carpi
place their hand in any position, encouraging
under shoulders, paws appropriately positioned
extension, abduction, or adduction, and encourag-
on the floor, spine and trunk in a normal orienta-
ing the patient to reach with the appropriate paw
tion (not leaning in either direction and showing
to complete the exercise (Figure 8.24).
no kyphosis).
Chapter 8 Therapeutic Exercise 153
B
Figure 8.25 A. An unbalanced sit puts abnormal stresses on the joints of the pelvic limbs as well as the pelvis and spine.
B. A square sit is maintained by having the hips, stifles, and tarsi in a straight line with the shoulders over the carpal joints.
The spine should be straight as well. The tall sit can be made more challenging by adding perturbations.
Technique: Position the patient into a square sit
Goal: Independent and appropriate transitions.
with carpi directly under the shoulders, not allow-
Technigue: Once the patient can hold a posture,
ing the paws to slide forward or to collapse into
the transition movement into this posture is trained.
carpal flexion. Encourage him to hold this posture
Lateral to sphinx: With the patient in lateral recum-
for as long as possible (Figure 8.25A,B).
bency, a cookie is moved toward the shoulder to
Progression: Add rhythmic stabilization.
encourage lifting the head. The toes of the down
forelimb are pinched to encourage shoulder and
Standing
 elbow flexion. The toes of both rear paws are then
 Purpose: Reeducate normal posture.
pinched to create flexion in both pelvic limbs while
Goal: Stand in square position, supporting full
tickling the chest and body wall on the down side
to encourage lifting away from the floor.
weight independently.
Progression: For the patient that can hold the
Technique: With the patient in a square stand,
sphinx position, transition from sphinx to tall sit.
stimulate muscle groups that appear weak. For
While an assistant kneels behind the patient to
instance, if the patient has lordosis, goose the
prevent slipping back or falling to one side, the
abdomen; if leaning, tickle the side; if collapsing a
therapist holds a cookie to the patient's nose, lifting
joint, stimulate the extensors.
it over the nose while pinching the front toes to
Progression: Add rhythmic stabilization.
encourage stepping backward until a proper sitting
position is attained. The carpal joints may need to
Transitions
be supported once this position is reached.
Purpose: Reeducation of movements from lateral
Progression to stand: With the patient in a tall
recumbency to a standing posture.
sit, the therapist moves a cookie forward from the
154   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
nose while tickling the pubic bone area to encour-
Technigue: With the patient in stand, the thera-
age hip, stifle, and tarsal extension. In the begin-
pist moves each paw through the full stride, incor
ning, this exercise is usually done with two people.
porating the stance and swing phases. The proper
footfall for walk is RR to RF to LR to LF. This is
repeated 10 times before the patient is encouraged
Weight shifting
to walk. The patient may be supported with an
Purpose: Strengthen the stabilizer muscles to
assistive device, allowing weight shifting away
improve posture during ambulation.
from and stimulation of the next limb to move.
 Goal: Achieve proper balance while standing on
Most neurological patients have increased tone in
two to three limbs.
the adductors, so the therapist stimulates the cau-
Technique: The therapist lifts each limb just off
domedial aspect of the limb, encouraging move-
the ground using two fingers to minimize assis-
ment away from the stimulation, thus avoiding
tance, observing for muscle contraction. Swaying
 crossing over. This exercise is used before doing
indicates challenge. The paw is lowered when
 any ambulation work in those patients that do not
fatigue is evident. Rotate through all four paws.
yet have an appropriate gait pattern.
Progression: Lift two paws (diagonal or ipsilat-
 Progression: Speed is increased to the appropri-
eral), and repeat as above.
ate speed for walk, and assistance is decreased. The
next step is adding weaves (from gentle to tight),
hills (straight up and down, adding zigzags to chal-
lsometrics
lenge proprioception), and stepping over cavaletti
Purpose: Strengthen postural muscles.
poles. Note: Each time the patient is worked, the
Goal: Patient is able to resist loading over the
therapist uses muliple exercises that challenge
 scapulae or pelvis without collapsing.
transitions, then balance, then pattern, finally
Technique: With the patient in a square stand,
 putting it all together in ambulation. Different exer-
the therapist places a palm over the dorsal aspect
cisescan be used each time to keep the work fresh for
of the scapulae or pelvis, applying gentle down-
the patient, always focusing upon where he has
ward pressure with even distribution left to right.
weakness. Progression is focused upon avoiding
During pelvis work, the abdomen is tickled so the
 any area where there may be pain due to prior work.
 patient does not think he is to sit.
Land treadmill
Wobble board
The authors employ the land treadmill for neuro-
Purpose: Strengthen stabilizer muscles, and
lbogical patients, any patient needing endurance
enhance balance and proprioception.
work, patients requiring pelvic limb strengthening
Goal: Patient is able to maintain balance while
and weight shifting to rear, especially pelvic limb
 therapist applies nonrhythmic perturbations to the
postoperative patients that habitually transfer
board.
weight to the forelimbs. The treadmill encourages
Technique: Balance section (see Specific Exer-
rebalancing during ambulation. It can be used in
cises section of this chapter)
am sad oas rn a te u r asraaa
the focus is on hamstring and or gluteal strength.
Lauer et al. found that a 5% incline increased the
Relearning how to walk
electromygraphic activity of the hamstring muscle
Purpose: Helping the neurological patient that has
 group in dogs walking on treadmills (Lauer et al.,
initiated the progression through transitions from
2009).
lateral recumbency to stand to develop an appro-
The treadmill should be placed so that it faces
priate gait pattern as well as balance and transi-
something that the patient would like to walk
tions in dynamic movement.
toward, rather than a wall. If using a human tread-
Goal: Normal or close to normal ambulation.
mill, a sidewall is needed on each side, or the tread-
Gait patterming is a manner of moving the paws,
mill can be placed against a wall on one side, to
and the pattern of footsteps at various speeds.
prevent patients from stepping off.
Chapter 8 Therapeutic Exercise 
155
Getting started. Training the patient to use the
Case Study 8.2  Hemilaminectomy
treadmill is simple if a few important steps are fol-
Signalment: 5 y.o. F/s Dachshund. Imrmediate P.O.
lowed. A harness and/or a nonchoke collar with a
leash are used, with the handler holding the
L2-3 hemilaminectory with fenestrations, cranial and
caudal.
harness or leash so that the patient has approxi-
mately one foot of play forward and backward.
Qinical Findings: Left pelvic limb: No CP, diminished
The patient is walked over the stationary tread
deep pain, intact superficial pain, minimal voluntary
three times from back to front. Each time the patient
motion. Right pelvic limb: No CP, present deep and
completes this action, he is given lots of praise and
superficial pain, diminished voluntary motion. No
a treat for positive reinforcement. On the third
ROM, joint, or muscle abnormalities found.
pass, the patient is asked to sit or lie down on the
belt, then get off for the reward. On the fourth pass,
Goal: Normal neurological status and ambulation
with the patient standing, the tread is started,
Therapy: Throughout therapy, mhassage of the mruscles.
getting it to the appropriate walk speed for this
 PROM, and joint compressions were done. Exercises
patient within 1-2 seconds. If this is done too
were performed in a certain orderto turn on the nervous
slowly, it is confusing for the patient. Done too
and musculoskeletal systems, with armbulation at the
quickly, the patient will panic and crouch onto the
conclusion
tread, risking falling off the back of the belt. The
Initial exercises, performed while patient needed
handler must have a cookie available at all times
assistance rising and ambulating. started with transi
to encourage the patient to rise if he is starting
tions fro lateral recumbency to sternal to sit to stand,
with facilitation used on whichever muscle groups
to crouch. Goal: The patient should move in
a proper walk, amble, or trot, not a pace. (See
were not firing appropriately. Square sit-to-stand exer-
Chapters 2 and 10 for more on this.) If the patient
cises, weight shifting to the left rear paw by diagonal
 paces at what should be a trot speed, the handler
and then contralateral leg lits, standing alone, fol-
lowed by standing with rhythmic stabilizations, pat-
should tug gently on the collar, causing a brief
terning of each limb in the proper order (10 reps), and
 balance change that will generally create a transi-
finally, ambulation exercises making sure each foot
tion to trot.
l4aiam aiog pue aouanbas ui Alaleudoidde paddar
correctly.
Belt speed. Neurological patients are generally
Once patient could rise unassisted and ambulate, but
with moderate ataxia and frequent falling. different
started using a slow belt speed of 0.1-0.5mi/h.
exercises, again in a specific order, to work on balance
The therapist sits on a stool at the end of the tread-
and trunk strength, were initiated. Sit-to-stands; stand-
mill while the belt moves just fast enough to
ing with rhythmic stabilization; single pelvic limb ele-
@mcourage a walk. If a treadmill is not available, the
vation to make patient balance on one pelvic limb at
therapist uses a scooter or leans over the patient
a time; rear paws on rocker board; front feet on pool
while moving the paws in a proper pattern (Figure
noodle; low cavaletti poles 1.5 times patient body
8.26). For neurologically intact patients, the speed
length apart; hill walking; widely spaced weave poles;
3" high steps.
should allow for a comfortable walk with no
As patient progressed to mild ataxia, exercise regimen
pauses in footfalls. As the speed increases, the
included circuit course of cavaletti poles in increas-
patient will go through an amble to the trot. The
ingly difficult patterns and, later, patterns on a hill; front
appropriate trotting speed is a function of the
feet on peanut ball walking forward and backward;
patient's body type. A Dachshund may trot well at
sanding on peanut ball; tightly spaced weaves; 3"
1.2-1.5 mi/h while a Golden Retriever will trot at
steps; balance bearr. As patient progressed, small
doser to 4-5mi/h. Border Collies are often not
cbstacles were placed on beamt for her to step over.
comfortable at a walk and may trot at slower than
Coal was successfully attained.
expected speeds.
Endurance work.  Endurance work on a treadmill
should not begin before the patient has reached
skeletal maturity. Additionally, warm up and cool
156Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
References
CARAFFA,A.,CERULLI,G.,PROJETTI, M.,AISA,G.,&
RIZZO, A. 1996. Prevention of anterior cruciate liga-
of proprioceptive training. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol
Arthrosc, 4, 19-21.
CHU, D.A. & SHINER, J. 2007. Plyometrics in rehabilita-
tion. In: Donatelli, R. (ed.), Sports-Specific Rehabilitation.
St. Louis, MO: Churchill Livingstone-Elsevier, 233.
GHEZ, C. 1991. Posture. In: Kandel, E., Schwartz, J., &
Jessell, T. (eds.), Principles of Neural Science. New York:
Elsevier, 533-547.
HEIDT, R.S, Jr., SWEETERMAN, L.M., CARLONAS,
Figure 8.26 Mand position is important when assisting a
RL., TRAUB, J.A., & TEKULVE, FX. 2000. Avoidance
patient to ambulate on the treadmill. The therapist must
of soccer injuries with preseason conditioning. Am ∫
assist without impeding motion and stimulate the motions
Sports Med,28, 659-662.
that the patient has the hardest time performing.
HEWETT, T.E., LINDENFELD, T.N., RICCOBENE, J.V,
& NOYES, FR.1999. The effect of neuromuscular
training on the incidence of knee injury in female
athletes. A prospective study. Arm ∫ Sports Med, 27,
down periods of 2-5 minutes each are incorpo-
699-706.
rated into any endurance work on the treadmill.
HEWETT, T.E., PATERNO, M.V., & MYER, G.D. 2002.
Strategies
forenhancing
Exercises start within comfortable parameters for
proprioception and
neuromuscular control of the knee. Clin Orthop Retat
the patient. For an athlete, the walk work can be
Res, 402, 76-94.
done at a fast speed at the highest incline, usually
HULLIGER, M., NORDH, E., THELIN,A.E.,& VALLBO,
11 degrees on canine treadmills. This patient can
A.B. 1979. The responses of afferent fibres from the
start with three sets of 3- to 5-minute sessions,
glabrous skin of the hand during voluntary finger
progressing to two sets of 10-15 minutes, then to
movements in man. / Physiot, 291, 233-249.
one set of 20-30 minutes. When the patient can
LATORRE, R., GIL, F, VAZQUEZ, JM., MORENO,
work at this pace and incline for 20-30 minutes,
F，MASCARELLO， F，& RAMIREZ, G.1993.
Skeletal muscle fibre types in the dog. / Anat, 182,
the progression includes adding two to three sets
 of 1-2 minutes at a working trot. Progression is
329-337.
based upon the patient's reaction on getting off of
LAUER,S.K.,HILLMAN, R.B., LI, L.,& HOSGOOD,G.L.
2009. Effects of treadmill inclination on electromyo-
the treadmill as well as tongue shape, facial
 u s q p pe ae oe
Expression, and tail posture during the exercise.
hounds at a walk. Am  Vet Res, 70, 658-664.
Heart rate monitors can be used on these patients
LEPHART, S., REIMANN, B.,& FU, F. 2000. Propriocep-
to mirror interval training in human patients. An
tion and Neuromuscular Control in foint Stability, lst ed.
athlete can do this exercise three to five times per
Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
week. Progression ends when the patient can
MATTHEWS, PB. 1981. Evolving views on the intermal
spend 30 minutes on the treadmill, doing a
operation and functional role of the muscle spindle.
2-minute warm up, a fast trot for 26 minutes, and
 Physiot, 320, 1-30.
a 2-minute cool down. To keep the patient chal-
MYKLEBUST, G., ENGEBRETSEN, L., BRAEKKEN, 1.H.,
lenged, one can add reverse walking, gradually
SKJOLBERG, A., OLSEN, O.E., & BAHR,R. 2003. Pre-
vention of anterior cruciate ligament injuries in female
increasing this to 6-8 minutes of walking back-
team handbal players: a prospective intervention
ward. As always, the therapist must be prepared
study over three seasons. Clin ∫ Sport Med, 13, 71-78.
with plans to change the exercise duration, envi-
NEWSHOLME, S.J., LEXELL, J., & DOWNHAM, D.Y.
ronment, or equipment as needed to keep the
1988. Distribution of fibre types and fibre sizes in the
patient/athlete motivated and progressing toward
tibialis cranialis muscle of beagle dogs. ∫ Anat, 160,
short- and long-term goals.
1-8.
Chapter 8 Therapeutic Exercise 157
SHERRINGTON,C.S.1906. The Integrative Action of the
of injuries in young female players in European team
Neroous System. New Haven, CT: Yale University
handball. A prospective intervention study. Scand 」
Press.
Med Sci Sports, 9, 4147.
SHUMWAY-COOK, A. & WOOLLACOTT, M. 1995.
 ZIMNY, M.L. 1988. Mechanoreceptors in articular tissues.
Motor Controt: Theory and Practical Applications. Balti-
Am I Anat, 182, 16-32.
more, MD: Williams & Wilkins.
WEDDERKOPP, N., KALTOFT, M., LUNDGAARD, B.,
ROSENDAHL, M., & FROBERG, K. 1999. Prevention
9
AquaticTherapy
Jody Chiquoine, MSN, FNP, CCRT, Laurie McCauley, DVM, CCRT,
CVA, CVC, and Janet B. Van Dyke, Dvm, Diplomate, American College
of Veterinary Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation, CCRT
Summary
-aua slenbe ue u paaldwos Adelaut ienuew lo asiohaxa Aue sassedwooua Adenaut senby
ronment. The benefits of aquatic therapy include the ability to offer prescriptive exercise that
is functional without being painful. Balance exercises can be completed safely in an aquatic
environment well before they can be attempted on land. Elevated metabolism resulting from
uans alosnw auseaoui alum ssi rueiam paads ot sdiay latea Aa papiaaid aoueisisal au
Underwater treadmill (UWTM) work adds the benefits of weight bearing while giving the
properties of water, including buoyancy, hydrostatic pressure, viscosity, fluid dynamics, and
resistance make aquatic training efficient for achieving rehabilitation and maintaining
'-ous jo warsss awes aut uisn pauaisap ane sweaond suiwims snadenaul 'ssau eo
middle-, and long-term goals described in Chapter 8. Swim sets are interspersed with rest
sets during which manual therapies can be applied. Program goals include improving flexibil-
ity, strength, balance, coordination, postural awareness, speed, and endurance. Weekly
u pasn suaudinbg weaoud yea jo uoissaond jo aen au auwaap shisa puawsassa
therapeutic exercise includes life vests, harmesses, slings, balance equipment, leg weights,
resistance mits, and pool noodles. There are some breed-related swimming and UWTM
characteristics about which the therapist must be aware before initiating a training session.
UWTM variables include water temperature, tread speed, water depth, resistance, and dura-
tion. Assistive and resistive devices and techniques are employed, including balloons, flip
pers, and elastic hair bands, gait patterning, tail work, and facilitation.
Carine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation, First Edition. Edited by M. Christine Zink and Janet B. Van Dyke.
@2013 John Wiley &t Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
158
Chapter 9  Aquatic Therapy  159
Aquatic therapy introduction
ate muscle fibers. Human studies demonstrate
improvement in lean body mass (especially lean
Benefits
leg mass), decreased body fat, and reduced waist
to hip ratio when using an underwater treadmill
Today, therapists, sports coaches, and trainers
(UWTM) rather than a land treadmill (Greene et al.,
understand the many benefits of aquatic therapy.
2009).
Scientific research regarding the physiology of
Passive range of motion (PROM) in man is
human immersion in water and applying the
 improved in water compared to onland (Ruoti & Al,
kmowledge of water properties to aquatic treat-
1997a). Marsolais et al. reported that active range of
ment has revolutionized sports medicine (Thein &
 motion (AROM), especially in the pelvic limbs, is
McNamara, 1992; Ruoti & Al, 1997g).
greater with swimming and with water walking
Pain is a central and consistent symptom for
than with land walking (Marsolais et al., 2003).
many canine patients and contributes to the cycle
of disuse atrophy and progressive disability. Water-
based therapies help to make movement more
Precautions
comfortable, offering prescriptive exercise that is 
functional, mechanically correct, and muscularly
Sutures and staples are generally removed prior to
initiating aquatic therapy. Occasionally, with the
environment (86-94 degrees) offers muscle relax-
surgeon's approval, the advantages of early therapy
ation that is soothing for many conditions. This is
outweigh the risks of aquatic therapy prior to
enhanced by hydrostatic pressure causing a swad-
suture removal. A precautionary treatment plan
dling effect on immersed body parts (Thein &
should be devised for patients with respiratory
McNamara, 1992; Ruoti & Al, 1997d; Jadelis et al.,
problems such as laryngeal paralysis or exertional
2001).
dyspnea and those with behavioral issues such as
Aquatic therapy challenges balance and coordi-
mild aggression or dislike of water. Swimming
nation. Balance exercises can be attempted earlier
 during pregmnancy can be offered if discussed with
 Suiaond pue uo u raem u Aiaes arou pue
 the primary veterinarian and exertion is minimal.
early opportunities for limb, trunk, and postural
Toy breed puppies and seniors must be kept warm
 training, resulting in improved strength, balance,
throughout the session.
and coordination (Ruoti & Al, 1997d; Jadelis et al.,
2001; Stager & Tanner, 2004).
Aquatic therapy raises metabolism and can help
Physical properties of water relevant to
with weight loss, decreasing fat, strengthening
canine sports medicine
muscles, and reducing the deconditioning effects
of immobility (Lavoie & Montpetit, 1986; Ruoti &
The inherent properties of water make aquatic
Al, 1997d). Slow, steady swimming burns a higher
training efficient for achieving rehabilitation and
percentage of fat than fast swimming in humans.
maintaining total fitmess (Bishop et al., 1989; Thein
Fast swimming uses carbohydrates and burns 500-
& McNamara, 1992).
700 cal/h. Swimming, whether slow or fast, can
(see Webliography at the end of the chapter) (Stager
Buoyancy
& Tanner, 2004).
 Swimming uses the body's muscles more com-
Archimedes’ principle states that when a body is
pletely than other activities such as running.
-adxa i 'm e u pasra Ard ro Aoum
Heredity influences the distribution of muscle fiber
ences an upward thrust equal to the weight of the
types, making some breeds great sprinters and
displaced fluid. As water depth increases, weight
others slow steady swimmers (Stager & Tanner,
bearing decreases, thus reducing the compressive
2004). The therapist must desigm a
 combined
forces on joints (Bates & Hanson, 1992d).
aquatic therapy
/ program that focuses on t
the
Due to buoyancy, PROM is greater in water than
patient's specific needs and targets the appropri-
on land (Figure 9.1) (Thein & McNamara, 1992).
160  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Figure 9.1  PROM in pool increases stretching by using the
properties of water.
Hydrostatic pressure
Pascal's law states that fluid pressure is exerted
equally on all surfaces of an immersed body at rest
at a given depth; this pressure increases with
the density of the fluid and depth of submersion.
Figure 9.2 Turbulence using resistance jets increases
Hydrostatic pressure reduces limb edema and
strength training and cardiopulmonary workout.
daap pue jeadns u pooq pue pmu jo Suood
tissues thereby encouraging healing and reducing
complication rates. Hydrostatic pressure causes a
1997f). Viscosity helps weak canine patients to
decrease in nociceptor sensitivity resulting in pain
stand and walk before they can do so on land.
reduction (Bates & Hanson, 1992e; Ruoti & Al,
1997e).
The hydrostatic effects on the cardiopulmonary
Fluid dynamics
[andnad au jo s enuan e u imsan waisss
blood volume (Arborelius et al., 1972). This results
Hydrodymamic forces impact any object in water.
in increased diuresis so patients may urinate
These forces include laminal flow, frontal resis-
large quantities shortly after swimming. Due to
tance, and drag. Laminal and turbulent flow affect
hydrostatic pressure, dogs with chest expansion
effort. Laminal flow is the straight flow of water
 problems related to congestive heart failure or pul-
particles moving at one speed and in one direction.
 monary disease need careful monitoring.
Resistance to movement increases with the velocity
of flow. Turbulent flow is the interrupted flow
 of water particles in all directions, creating more
Viscosity
dramatic pressure differentials. Here, resistance
increases exponentially with velocity. These fluid
Viscosity is the frictional resistance created by
dynamic principles have clinical application when
cohesiveness of fluid molecules. Water is 15 times
designing swimming or UWTM programs (Ruoti
more viscous than air, thus requiring more effort to
& Al, 1997f). In swimming, friction and turbu-
move through it. Water walking for humans, with
lence are the dominant resistive factors (Hall et al.,
the water at shoulder height, requires 65% more
 1990; Ruoti & Al, 1997f). Faster swimming or water
effort than walking on land (Greene et al., 2009).
walking creates greater turbulence, resistance, and
Working
againstviscosityi
increases
muscle
friction, and therefore increases exertion (Figure
strength, tone, and cardiac fitness (Ruoti & Al,
 9.2). This is advantageous for patients needing an
Chapter 9  Aquatic Therapy   161
intense workout but disadvantageous for patients
Designing a conditioning program for the
that are anxious, thrashing, or deconditioned.
canine athlete
Swimming or UWTM sessions will vary based on
patient aptitude, comfort level, condition, and
Canine athletes use swimming for effective reha-
fitmess.
bilitation treatment after injury or surgery and for
When applying these fluid dynamic principles to
cross training (Zink, 1997; Millis et al.,2004). Service
dogs as they swim, the hydrodynamic forces create
dogs, search and rescue dogs, and K-9 corps
a pressure differential between the front (high
members benefit from the physical and psycho-
pressure) and pelvic (low pressure) limbs. Result-
logical advantages of swimming. Conformation
ing eddies create tail suction, skin friction, and
 dogs benefit with improved muscle tone and better
 drag on the pelvic limbs. The pelvic limbs must
emdurance.
The following is a list of advantages of cross
 Pressure differentials and turbulence challenge
training for canine athletes (Zink, 1997):
the postural muscles and balance mechanisms.
This is advantageous for patients with balance and
Utilizes commonly used performance muscle
coordination impairments or those needing para-
in a different way
spinal muscle strengthening.
 Increases use of muscles that are used mini-
 mally on land
 Increases joint flexibility due to greater PROM/
Resistance
AROM
Eliminates concussive forces to reduce joint
Resistance is controlled by speed, but surface area
compression/stress
and equipment can also contribute (Abidin et al.,
Maximizes cardiac output and pulmonary
1988; Bates & Hanson, 1992f; Ruoti & Al, 1997b,
conditioning
1997f). The speed of water flow is controlled
 Provides a mental/psychological break from
with resistance jets (pool) or tread speed (UWTM).
land training
Surface area is controlled by water depth and
Maintains high training levels off season
equipment such as life vests, resistance mitts, and
Allows return to performance sport with
leg weights. Increased speed maximizes the plane
minimal training time
effect when swimming, decreasing surface area in
Reduces
injury
risk
at
early
season
the water, and therefore decreasing resistance.
competitions
Allows for intense exercise during warm,
humid weather with no risk of overheating.
Therapeutic swimming
Muscles are used differently when swimming than
Getting started
when weight bearing on land (Bates & Hanson,
1992c, 1992e). The authors have observed greater
The canine rehabilitation professional should first
AROM of canine shoulders and elbows in swim-
obtain a subjective history that includes the
ming when compared to land walking. Aquatic
patient's comfort in water. Medical, surgical, and
therapy increases the comprehensive challenge to
sports injury history, including comorbidities,
coordination, balance, and kinesthetic movement
medications, and supplements are obtained from
mechanisms (Bates & Hanson, 1992e). Stimulating
the referring veterinarian. The objective findings
neuroreceptors with swimming enhances early
are formulated during physical evaluation. All
land walking in human patients (Bates & Hanson,
subjective and objective information is integrated
1992c; Grosee, 2009). The authors believe that these
to formulate a clinical assessment and aquatic
kinesthetic movement mechanisms also apply to
therapy plan. Measurable outcome goals are es-
m ranem un puis en soop pnanedenan 'soop
tablished with the owner. Overall condition and
minimal assistance or can swim using multiple
body condition score (BCS) are noted. The duration
limbs before they are able to stand or walk on land.
 of disability and degree of muscle atrophy are
162   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
considered. The owner's ability to transport the
Table 9.1  Assessment of anxiety and fatigue when
dog to sessions is also considered. Each therapeutic
swimming
aq ouues pue paziienpiaipul aq isnu weiaond
Anxiety
Fatigue
standardized or preformulated.
Anxious facial expression (lips
Tired body posture
pulled back)
Program progression
Rapid breathing/pulse
 Deep or irregular
breathing
Preoperative planning
Thrashing forelimbs
 Slowed swim pace
Preoperative swimming allows the patient to
Inability to rest
Reluctance to Swim
become familiar with the pool and aquatic environ-
Attempting to exit the pool
Change in tongue
ment, reducing the incidence of postoperative
color/shape
mishaps at pool entry or exit, thrashing while
swimming, and inability to rest quietly between
sessions. The preoperative visit allows for client
et al., 1990; Bates & Hanson, 1992b; Ruoti & Al,
education and the opportunity for the owner to
1997a, 1997c).
observe the progress of other patients with similar
conditions.
Program goals, principles, and exercises
Aquatic therapy programs use the same rehabilita-
Factors to consider
tion principles and goals as land-based programs.
Aquatic therapy is started conservatively, and
The pool becomes the gym, so a myriad of exer-
increased according to the patient's comfort and
cises are offered. The primary goals for aquatic
ability. Most patients initially need body contact
exercises are flexibility, strength, balance, coordina-
with the therapist in the pool. The amount of phys-
tion, postural awareness, movement, speed, and
ical contact and bonding depends on the patient's
endurance (Bates & Hanson, 1992c; Grosee, 2009).
comfort level and can be gradually reduced.
Owners can be poolside to offer encouragement.
Flexibility
Teaching pool commands such as "Rest" enhances
Flexibility is improved with PROM and joint mobi-
responsiveness.
lization provided during rest periods. Traction is
Swimming 1 minute in a therapeutic pool, with
also effectively applied. Hanging traction, which
current (resistance and turbulence) and a warm
can be uncomfortable or impossible for large breed
water environment (88-90 degrees) is strenuous. A
dogs on land, is tolerated very well in water (Figure
cool water pool with no resistance jets will allow
9.3). Hanging traction, in which the dog is sus-
for longer swim sets, while a warm water thera-
 peutic pool with varying current requires shorter
pended vertically with the head and shoulders
held above the water, maximizes hip and spine
swim sets due to greater effort and likely fatigue
(Bates & Hanson, 1992b). Vital signs are monitored
stretch and can aid paraspinal relaxation.
pe sd 1ain rdseed aseaa ol aesse
by checking pulse, tongue color size and shape, ear
tail-pulls in water improve spinal mobility.
temperature, and facial expression as well as alter-
ations in swimming speed and emotional state
Active exercises that improve flexibility include
(Table 9.1).
using food lures for lateral cervical and thoraco-
 During a 30-minute treatment, swim sets include
lumbar stretching while standing or luring the
aadias ao 'szz 'sai n u ums  sp
multiple swim/rest cycles. As confidence and
stamina increase, the swimming duration is length-
patterns.
ened and intensified, and rest periods are short-
Strength
ened. During rest cycles, the therapist provides
treatments such as massage, standing exercises,
Strength is improved with exercises that initially
joint mobilizations, bodywork, and PROM (Hall
consist of slow swimming sets with low or no
Chapter 9  Aquatic Therapy 
16
Figure 9.3 Hanging traction safely stretches spine and hips.
Figure 9.4 Using wide stairs in the pool allows a safe entry
and exit.
current. Circle swimming increases the workout
Balance
for the legs on the inside of the circle. Resistance
Balance is improved, especially for the neurologi-
can be applied by holding the harness or life vest
 cally impaired patient, with water-standing exer-
while the dog swims. Standing exercises such as
rhythmic stabilization and cross-leg or three-leg
cises. Swimming, especially in current (turbulence),
 standing can be effectively done in water. Dancing
requires body stabilization, which improves bal-
 ance. Patients under 40 lb can stand on a floating
is performed with the patient standing on the
kick board (seepool equipment) to improve balance.
 pelvic limbs while the front limbs rest on the pool 
edge or stair. This can be done safely in water
before attempting the same exercise on land.
Coordination
As strength improves, games are added, includ-
Coordination is improved with stationary and
ing multiple rapid ball chasing sprints. Quick
 swimming exercises. Early limb movement from
repetition of swimming into high current is excel-
-juanbas jaaordu pue paads cisdauums
lent for progressing strength training. Throwing
ing on land (Lavoie & Montpetit, 1986, Bishop et al.,
a ball off a backdrop encourages treading water,
1989). Backward walking or lateral stepping is per-
and is an intense strengthening workout. These
formed on the bench or stair to enhance coordi-
games are good strength-training exercises for
nation (Figure 9.4). Shaking water from the coat
the rehabilitating canine athlete, when vigorous
after swimming helps to improve balance and coor-
land exercise or training is otherwise restricted.
 dination during early neurologic recovery.
They also assist in preparing for returning to sports
that require quick responsiveness, rapid accelera-
tion, and speed while rurming and jumping. Leg
Postural awareness
weights and swim mitts (see Equipment Used with
Postural awareness is improved during early neu-
Therapeutic Swimming) can be added to increase
 rologic recovery with exercises such as pendulum
resistance.
swings, turning or circling on the bench, or sit-to-
164Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
stand exercises performed while on the step or
Equipment used with therapeutic swimming
bench. Many of the proprioceptive neuromuscular
facilitation (PNF) exercises that are performed
Specific aquatic equipment is used to improve
 shenbe Surmp paalduos Arajes aq ues pue uo
swimming and facilitate accomplishment of reha-
therapy sessions. During swimming, especially
bilitation goals (Abidin et al., 1988; Bates & Hanson,
with turbulent current, the trunk and core muscles
1992f; Ruoti & Al, 1997b).
work to stabilize posture. Swimming in tight
circles, figure-8s, and zigzags further increase pos-
tural challenges.
Life vests
A life vest provides control, improves leveling, and
Speed
builds patient confidence. The life vest must be
nonrestrictive to allow for complete motion of the
As conditioning improves, the swimming speed
shoulders and hips, and it must be easy to put on
increases with enthusiastic coaxing and the addi-
and take off.
tion of lures and games. Water speed, managed
with resistance jets, is also slowly increased to add
the challenges of turbulence and resistance.
Harnesses
Harnesses are used on canine athletes that have
Endurance
 prior pool experience and dogs that no longer need
a life vest. Harnesses must exhibit the same quali-
Endurance improves via increased duration of
ties as the life vest.
swimming sets. Initially, swimming sets may be
as short as 1 minute. Each set is followed by a
rest period, and the cycle is repeated four to
slings
 six times, depending on tolerance. The therapist
Slings are used for safe transitions into and out of
the pool. The sling reduces potential injury from
the duration of swimming time, reducing rest
slipping or struggling at the pool stairs. Once the
periods. Physical and emotional factors are consid-
patient is comfortable with transitions into and out
ered including pulse, respiration, and evidence of 
of the pool, sling use can be discontinued.
anxiety. Progressively lengthened sets are espe-
apa ot suuman soop rog eauaq A
sports that involve long distance rurming or sus-
Head wraps
tained activities.
 Head wraps or snoods reduce the amount of head
shaking by preventing water from entering the
Assessment of progress
ears (Figure 9.5). Lamb's wool (not cotton) contains
 lanolin and repels water The wool can be applied
Weekly review with the owner/handler identifies
 to the ear canal and secured with the head wrap.
 progress throughout the phases of aquatic therapy
with the treatment plan and goals adjusted accord-
Balance equipment
ingly. Written progress notes, including functional
status, muscle circumference, PROM, gait status,
Balance equipment increases coordination, balance,
BCS, treatment summary, adjusted goals and plan,
and muscle strength (Abidin et al., 1988; Bates &
are sent to the referring veterinarian monthly.
Hanson, 1992f; Ruoti & Al, 1997b). A floating foam
 An aquatic therapy maintenance program can be
kickboard is used on the water to accomplish
started once aquatic rehabilitation is completed or
effects similar to those of a balance board on land
can be used for cross-training exercise. Mainte-
(Figure 9.6). This floating balance board has advan-
 nance programs are generally provided by a thera-
 tages over land-based balance equipment, as it can
pist, but some facilities offer self-swim programs
be used sooner in therapy and, should the patient
for patients. Owners of performance dogs often
fall off, they fall safely into water. These boards can
desire self-swim programs.
be used for dogs that weigh 40lb or less.
Chapter 9  Aquatic Therapy   165
Figure 9.5 A snood prevents water in ears and is helpful to
Figure 9.7  Leg weights used while swimming increase
reduce head shaking.
affected limb strength.
Figure 9.8 Swim mitts increase resistance during the pull
phase of the swim stroke.
Figure 9.6  A floating balance board in the pool increases
limb and core muscular effort.
s e uim ouaq Aqesip jo aaap p
weight and slowly increasing as strength improves.
Wet hair is slippery, and hydrostatic pressure com-
Leg weights
presses the tissue so the wrap must be snuggly
Leg weights are effective for building muscle and
 applied while the dog is dry.
 can increase proprioceptive input (Figure 9.7). Leg
weights are used once pain has resolved (Ruoti &
Al, 1997b). Initially, the weight is used during 15-
Resistance swim mitts
30% of the swim session. If there is no soreness, the
Resistance swim mitts can be used in aquatic reha-
duration of leg weight use is slowly increased. The
bilitation to build muscle and exaggerate range of
amount of weight is determined by patient size
motion (Figure 9.8) (Abidin et al., 1988; Bates &
166  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Food
Food is used only if toys and voice encouragement
are not sufficient to motivate swimming. Treats
such as oyster crackers are best as they float and
are easily eaten.
Therapeutic pool guidelines
Written guidelines should be reviewed arnually
Figure 9.9 A pool noodle helps the patient to maintain
with staff (Bates & Hanson, 1992a). Guidelines
buoyancy until they are able to do so unassisted.
 include emergency policies and procedures, a pro-
tocol for safe pool entry and exit, a guideline for
assessment of anxiety and fatigue, a policy for
Hanson, 1992f; Ruoti & Al, 1997b). Mitts are effec-
monitoring vital signs while in the pool, a protocol
tive for forelimb issues because they increase resis-
for pool treatment for vomit or feces, and a daily
 tance during the pull phase of the stroke. The work
 pool chemical checklist.
of the carpal flexors and extensors is increased due
 Policies and procedures for pool emergencies
to resistance and viscosity. The mitt is initially used
 nclude the procedure for dealing with dog and/
 for 15-30% of the swim session. If there is no pain
or human injuries that are pool related. Examples
or soreness, the duration of mitt use is gradually
include falls, bites, lacerations, chemical spills/
increased.
splashes, and cardiac arrest. Emergency phone
 numbers must be posted clearly in the treatment
Foam pool noodles
areas.
 The protocol for pool entry and exit includes
A foam pool noodle can be placed under the belly
safe techniques for using slings or lifts and expec-
to assist buoyancy (Figure 9.9) (Bates & Hanson,
 tations of staff during pool transfers. Pools without
1992f; Ruoti & Al, 1997b). This helps the patient
stairs require a mechanical lift. Knowledge of this
plane out when the pelvic limbs sink. Once the
equipment and its proper use and maintenance is
patient learns to swim properly, the noodle is
 imperative. Staff should be trained and periodi-
removed.
cally reminded to use proper body mechanics
during transfers. Staff should know that many
 patients need encouragement before stepping onto
Toys
submerged stairs. Colored markings on stairs are
Toys offer chasing games that encourage swim-
helpful to increase visible contrast, and some
ming. These games also provide fun physical and
heavy-coated patients need time to shed the weight
mental activity when vigorous land play is re-
a   a i  p 
stricted. Assorted sizes, shapes, and textures of
of stairs because the weight (8 Ib/gal) adds to the
objects are provided. Toys with long loops of rope
effort of exiting.
should not be used because the front legs can get
A guideline for the assessment of anxiety and
caught in the loop. Toys should be checked regu-
fatigue raises staff awareness that patient anxiety
larly to prevent aspiration of broken pieces. Intense
is allayed by increased physical contact with the
swimmers should use balls or decoys with center
therapist as well as owner assurance. It should
holes to allow the patient to breathe more easily
explain that multiple short swim sets decrease
while swimming with the object in the mouth.
anxiety and quickly build confidence and muscle.
Patients that readily destroy toys often enjoy a stick
When fatigue is identified, the therapist must
with the bark removed, a plastic water-ski handle,
immediately alter the treatment session by reduc
 or 12-18" of garden hose with wooden plugs in
ing the swim time per set, increasing the rest time
the ends.
and decreasing the intensity (Figure 9.10).
Chapter 9  Aquatic Therapy 
16/
A daily pool chemical checklist includes record-
ing the free chlorine, bromine, or saline levels, pH,
total alkalinity, total hardness, and cyanuric acid.
The checklist helps to identify trends in chemical
variations and serves as a public health record
should documentation be required.
Breed characteristics related
to swimming
While each dog is an individual, there are some
breed-related swimming characteristics. Labrador
Retrievers and Spaniels like games based on repeti-
Golden Retrievers like toys and slow swimming.
 and can be timid in high currents.
 Pointer types may not initially like toy games.
Later, they play but become bored with repetition.
Varying the game facilitates their swimming.
Figure 9.10 When fatigue is identified, the therapist must
German Shepherds and Belgian Tervurens and
immediately alter the treatment session by reducing the
Malinois like swimming against the highest current
swim time per set, increasing the rest time and decreasing
 and being lured with large sticks. They need a
the intensity.
release command. Games should be fast but
controlled.
Sighthounds are not motivated to retrieve or lure
 in water, and do best swimming in place facing
A policy for monitoring vital signs while in the
their owner. Whippets tend to be anxious initially
pool should identify the frequency of taking vital
but become excellent swimmers and like games.
signs, especially for high-risk patients. Respira-
Nonswimming working breeds (i.e., Great Pyre-
tions are monitored for quality and rate.
nees, Malamutes) become excellent swimmers.
A protocol for pool treatment for vomit or feces
Mol rajaid Kau pue Xpeais pue mols si aoed inau
 is required. Vomiting rarely occurs if feeding is
current. Newfoundlands are exceptional swim-
avoided within 3 hours of therapy. Excessive drink-
mers, using a slow, steady pace in low or high
ing of pool water can cause vomiting. When this
current.
 occurs, the patient is removed from the pool and
Border Collies and Jack Russell Terriers have
assessed. Particulate matter is quickly removed
a a ln e u Ana u Aouaxa
from the pool with the skimmer. If the vomitus is
fast fetch and lure games. Imposed short rest
copious, the pool is treated with a quick acting
periods are imperative as they can swim to ex-
 oxidizing shock and vacuumed. No patient can
haustion. Vital signs in these patients should be
return to the pool for at least 20 minutes.
a spaaa s pue Aon 'pano Aemsan
Patients with fecal incontinence may defecate in
ss  ' Asa tn inq sams qans
the pool. Anxiety contributes to defecation by
and evidence of shivering must be monitored.
 incontinent patients. Swim diapers help to prevent
They do best in low current or on the floating
defecation and contain stool. If defecation occurs,
balance board.
the patient should immediately be removed from
 Pitbull types are excellent swimmers although
the pool. Solid stool can be removed with a
some become anxious in water When anxious, fre-
skimmer, and any particulate waste vacuumed. An
 netic behavior manifests. Due to their high prey
oxidizing shock must be applied. During the shock
drive, extreme caution must be used when employ-
period, therapy can continue on land.
ing toys and luring games.
168   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Pool types
Smaller (500-900 gal) pools can be customized.
Many large pools (>3000 gal) are designed for
Aquatic therapy pools vary widely, and a complete
therapy and feature whirlpool, benches for resting.
description is beyond the scope of this text. In
multiple levels of current, in-pool treadmill, and
- r ssi a s m
adjustable water depth. Therapeutic canine pools
crete) or aboveground (nylon) outdoor swimming
are sanitized with bromine or chlorine and use
pools are commonly used. In cold regions, smaller
larger than normal filters (Bates & Hanson, 1992a).
indoor resistance pools are used. Small indoor
The author (J.C.) finds that the best filters are dia-
pools are advantageous because of limited space,
tomaceous earth or sand.
heating, dehumidification, and ventilation needs.
 Any pool can be converted to salt water. These
Large indoor facilities often provide aboveground
 pools need careful monitoring of sodium and cyan-
pools for nontherapeutic/fun swimming, but these
uric acid levels to assure the water is sanitized.
Thorough sanitation may be an issue in high
levels.
volume centers. All pools, regardless of type, need
Case Study 9.1 Hydrotherapy for fibrocartilaginous embolus (FCE) with complications
Signalment: 7 y.o. M/N retired racing Greyhound.
included four 5-minute swimr sets interspersed with four
2-minute rest periods. Rest periods included more
History: Diagnosed with cervical FCE. Family unable to
advanced exercises including independent position tran-
provide physical care as patient tetraparetic and incon-
sitions from sit to stand and sphinx lie to stand on pool
tinent. Requested inpatient rehabilitation with aquatic
stairs or backing up on pool bench. The decubiti healed
therapy.
completely within 14 days. Ability to participate with
land exercises was expedited due to early swimming
Examination: Left lateralizing tetraparetic,
，laterally
and aquatic therapy. For example, patient could perform
 recumbent, unable to independently turn or change/hold
sit-to-stand exercises 3 weeks sooner in water than
positions. CP deficits all limbs. Evidence of neurogenic
on land.
atrophy and decreased superficial pain sensation all four
limbs, worse on left. Mild urine scald and stage two
decubitus ulcer left shoulder.
Primary Goals: Improve limb muscle strength, espe-
cially left; improve trunk and core strength; improve
proprioception and enhance position awareness; assure
skin integrity with turning schedules and pressure-relief
mattress; add diaper syster to wick urine fromr skin;
provide decubitus care.
Aquatic Treatment and Outcome: Initially treated in
pool four times per week for 20-30 minutes (Figure
B9.1). Sessions included six 45-second to 1-minute swim
sets interspersed with four 3- to 5-minute rest periods.
Therapy during rest periods included whirlpool, PROM,
spinal mobilizations, traction, massage with trigger point
release, PNF patterns, assisted sit-to-stand exercises.
Patient moved all four limbs in water, although left fore
and pelvic limbs weaker than right and sequencing of
 pelvic limbs to forelimbs poor. Sequencing and strength
 steadily improved.
Figure B9.1   Early pool work consisted of six 45-second
Over 4 weeks, swimming reduced to three times per
to 1-minute swim sets interspersed with four 3- to
week with increased duration and intensity. Sessions
5-minute rest periods.
Chapter 9 Aquatic Therapy
169
Table 9.2 Comparison between swimming and underwater
trained as both swimming and treadmill work can
treadmills
be accomplished in one unit.
 Use of the UWTM assists or speeds gait retrain-
 Swimming in therapeutic
 ing and sequencing, especially in the neurological
pool
Underwater treadmill
patients. A large percentage of the authors' neuro-
Totally NWB
Partial weight bearing
logical patients will walk in water before they will
on land. Work on the UWTM improves AROM
Maximum AROM of
Improved AROM
because of increased step height (Jackson et al.,
joints
compared to land
2002). It also allows for careful exercise of over-
Nonambulatory patients
Proprioceptive gait
with paraparesis/paralysis
training
weight patients with respiratory issues as the
water is cooling, the buoyancy diminishes the
Improved core and trunk
Improved balancewhile
effort required, and unlike swimming, the UWTM
 strength
walking
gives the handler rapid control over the situation,
Cardiopulmonary
Cautious fracture
allowing the patient to rest as needed.
conditioning
loading
The UWTM is advantageous over the land tread-
Endurance for cross
Builds lean muscle in
mill in that increasing water levels will reduce
training
limbs
weight bearing on painful limbs. The amount of
Fun for swimming
Helps nonswimmers get
reduction in weight bearing has been documented
patients
started
for mesomorphic dogs (Levine et al., 2010).
Facilitates PROM/all body
Speeds gait retraining
work
UwTM variables
Temperature
All dogs working on a UWTM at temperatures
careful attention to daily management. The amount
ranging from 30 to 34.4°Celsius (86-94°F) had
of fur, skin oils, and coat dirt create management
gradual increases in heart and respiratory rates,
challenges that are dramatically different than pool
rectal temperature, and perceived exertional score,
management for humans. In the authors' experi-
but there were no differences between dogs work-
ence, a conservative estimate is that the impact of
ing at different temperatures (Utter et al., 2002;
one dog is equal to that of 25-30 people in a pool.
Dunning et al., 2003). Therefore, any temperature
between 86 and 94°F is considered safe for working
with canine patients. The authors prefer using
Pool versus UwTM
warmer temperatures in the winter and cooler tem-
peratures in the summer, as it is more comfortable
There are advantages for both the UWTM and
for the patients and the handlers.
swimming as aquatic treatment modalities (Table
9.2). Whenever possible, the therapist selects the
best modality or combines these modalities based
Water depth
on the patient's needs. The remainder of this
chapter will focus on the UWTM.
Carpal height water causes increased flexion of all
The UWTM can help to eliminate the fear that
joints without the resistance of water (Figure 9.11).
e u pasau Anon Suaq u mous soop aos
This height is also used for those patients that
prefer to float (lifting their legs to avoid working).
bearing on the treadmill encourages 
 increased
Elbow-height water is used for patients that are
bone strength over swimming alone. When work-
athletes, as there is minimal buoyancy advantage
ing with canine athletes, the therapist can change
 at this height. Just above-shoulder (or greater tro-
the level of the workout by decreasing the water
chanter) height water provides for maximal buoy-
height and altering the level of incline and
or
ancy without altering the gait pattern. Water levels
 speed. Small to medium patients can be cross-
higher than this lead to a stilted gait, as the patient
170   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Figure 9.11  Water at carpal height enhances carpal flexion
Figure 9.13 This patient is trotting in the water at 5.4 mph
but diminishes resistance as most of the motion is done
at elbow height. Maximal resistance with minimal buoyancy
outside of the water.
creates a truly athletic workout.
Speed
Calibration of speed in UWTMs is not consistent.
Two UWTMs from the same manufacturer may
move at different speeds, despite both monitors
reading 1.0 mph. If more then one UWTM will be
used for the same patient, the therapist needs to
calibrate the belt laps per minute. Neurological
patients are started at the slowest available speeds
(usually 0.1-0.4 mph) to give them time to place
 their paws. For all other patients, the belt should
start at a comfortable walk speed. If the belt moves
Figure 9.12 When the water is too high, above the shoulder
too slowly, it is confusing for the patient. Short-
joint, the gait is stilted and range of motion and flexion are
legged patients, such as Dachshunds, require slow
greatly reduced. With the water at the level halfway between
nitial belt speeds (0.5-0.8 mph). Average size
the elbow and the shoulder, a good workout with
patients start at approximately 1.2-1.5mph, while
significantly decreased joint load can be achieved.
giant breeds can start at 2.2-2.5 mph for a comfort-
able walk. Trot speeds average as follows: small
will take short strides with extended limbs to keep
breeds 2.0-2.2 mph; medium breeds 2.5-5.3mph;
the nose above water (Figure 9.12).
large breeds up to 6.0mph. Patients may avoid
Patients with minimal to moderate DJD are
breaking into a trot. If they attempt to pace, the
worked with the water midway between the shoul-
handler should cause a brief perturbation, such as
der and elbow, providing some buoyancy. As they
a quick forward tug on the leash causing them to
become stronger, the level can be lowered for a
break into a trot.
workout with resistance (controlled by speed) and
diminished buoyancy (Figure 9.13). More pro-
foundly arthritic patients initially start with water
Duration
levels just over shoulder height. As the patient
 pram aq  ram  ans so
The authors use the following plan with all patients.
halfway between shoulder and elbow, the speed
 Patients are started at a walk with two to three reps
and time can be increased, and jets or surface area
of set periods of time. An old patient may start
resistance can be added.
with two to three 45-second reps with 2-minute
Chapter 9  Aquatic Therapy  171
breaks. An athlete can start with three 3-minute
Breed tendencies
reps with 2-minute breaks. Progression involves
 gradually working up to fewer, longer reps. Breaks 
 Large, overweight, trusting breeds such as Golden
are always 2 minutes. Once the patient can do one Retrievers tend to float rather than walk on the
solid interval of 25 minutes at a fast walk, short  tread. These patients are started with carpus height
speed intervals are added. This starts with the  water The assistant can tug on the harness, provid-
patient doing two to three sets of troting for 1  ing lots of verbal praise. Dobermans and Great
 no ps ch sq r pnpe in pun sa  a rg pa sn aas m is a a
first and final 2 minutes, and the remaining minutes stationary edges. The assistant places hands on the
s lonuon oh apmous io/pue sialad sluaned  shuaned aul ron e oi dn paaou Aenpeno ar
perceived exertion during and after exercise is  For very large patients, two people may be needed
evaluated, and this is used to determine the level
 on the first visit. Shelties and Collies in their first
 of work for the next session.
visit tend to fall forward into the water as the tread
pulls their paws behind them. Before they can fall,
the assistant pulls the harness vertically so that the
forelimbs can move. Some patients want to ride to
Resistance technigues
the back of the tread. If the assistant pulls on the
harness, the patient will act like donkey, leaning 
Tread speed can be used to increase resistance due
 into the harness. This is corrected using gentle tugs
to higher viscosity. Jets can also be used for resis-
 On the harness with lots of verbal encouragement.
tance through turbulence. The therapist can adjust
Some dogs (especially working dogs) do not like
the velocity of water flow and the amount of air
 having anyone behind them. The assistant or
moving through the jets. Some treadmills allow the
 owmer/handler should stand beside the tank,
therapist to choose between jets positioned at dif-
asking the patient to heel, or stand in front, encour-
ferent heights.
aging them to come forward.
Starting the new patient
Assistive and resistive devices
Balloons
Preparation
Balloons can be attached to the limbs to increase
Patients with urinary incontinence must have their
bladders expressed prior to going into the UWTM.
resistance due to increased surface area (Figure
9.14). The balloon, not fully inflated, is tied off,
Patients that are fecally incontinent, but with anal
squeezed, and twisted once in the middle, then
tone, can be stimulated to defecate with a cotton
swab. Patients with poor anal tone and those with
bent into a circle with the knot end tied to the
diarrhea in the past 24 hours are not allowed in the 
nipple at the balloon's tip. It must be tight enough
UWTM.
to fit snugly on the patient's leg so it will not float
up or down. Balloons can be doubled on large
patients. The balloon also causes increased buoy-
ancy, requiring more muscular effort to get the paw
Motivation
 to the tread. When used just above the tarsus, stifle
flexion increases due to added buoyancy at the
Food such as peanut butter smeared inside a cup
initial swing phase.
 or frozen yogurt in a small plastic cup works well
to motivate most patients. Treats can be stacked in
front of the patient where they can see it, reward-
Flippers
ing their effort every 30-60 seconds. Some patients
like to bite splashing water, so the assistant or
One author (L.M.) uses a device to create tarsal
owmer/handler can splash the water gently.
flexion with digital extension for patients too weak
172   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Figure 9.14 Clown baffoons make great tools as they
increase surface area, increasing resistance, and they
increase limb buoyancy, which enhances flexion of the
stifle.
to accomplish this movement. A hook-and-loop
strap with four holes is placed around the patient's
limb. Rubber bands run from the holes to toe nails
(Figure 9.15). If this works for the patient, a more
durable device can be created for long-term use,
weaning off of its use as the patient gains strength.
Figure 9.15 Flippers are devices used as tarsal flexion
assistance devices. As they put strain on the toe flexor
muscle and tendons, the rubber bands should come off of
Hair bands
the toes when the flippers are not being used. The tarsus
piece can stay on the patient between exercises.
 Hair bands can be used to increase proprioception
input for patients that knuckle, drag, or slide their
paws. The type of band, from tiny soft bands to
bumgee cord can be attached to front of the harness
large fluffy ones, is determined by the size of the
(Figure 9.13).
patient and degree of desired skin contact. Bands
can be placed above the paw, twisted into a figure-
8 with the smaller ring around middle two toes, or
Reins
the pads can be incorporated, so the band is
between the toe pads and central pad (Figure 9.16),
A leash can be draped across the thoracic inlet and
or above the central pad. If the patient grows
held like reins in two hands to prevent patient
accustomed to the band, a new configuration
lunging and pulling.
is used.
Assistive techniques
Harnesses
Patterning
Almost all patients wear harnesses in the UWTM
for control without putting tension on the neck.
 Neurologic patients that have difficulty walking or
Patients that like to lean forward can be pulled
that need to relearn the pattern of walking can be
straight back, forcing them to use their pelvic 
 assisted by the use of patterning as described
limbs better. For patients that lag back, a leash or 
in Chapter 8. This is best done with the patient
Chapter 9  Aquatic Therapy 173
Figure 9.17 Tail work is applied to the proximal tail,
moving distally until the desired effect is achieved.
this is not successful, the direction of stroking can
be reversed, possibly increasing stimulation to the
piloerector muscles. Finally, scratching the sides of
the tail generates movement in some patients. The
therapist should avoid scratching the ventral
surface of the tail as this can stimulate defecation.
Figure 9.16 To enhance proprioception when just an
Facilitation
elastic band around the foot is not enough, the band can be
addeim pue 'g-anly e oun pasmt 'looy aun lao paeid
The authors application of stimulatory techniques
around the two middle toes.
to encourage motor function is based upon the con-
cepts of facilitation, defined as "the enhancement
 or reinforcement of a reflex or other nerve activity
standing in water to provide buoyancy. The thera-
by the arrival of other excitatory impulses at the
anuanbas radoid a yonoru smed au saaou isid
reflex center" (American Heritage Medical Dictionary,
of steps for the walk, repeating this pattern 10
2004).
times before turming on the treadmill.
The following techniques are done with the
 patient in the UWTM at the terminal stance phase
 of the stride to initiate a proper stepping action in
Tail work
that leg. The therapist stimulates the paw from the
lateral side to the area between the central pad and
For patients that are not yet using their pelvic
 toe pads, stimulating until paw lift occurs (Figure
limbs, the authors have found that tail work is 
9.18). The calcanean tendon can be quickly rolled
quite beneficial. It is believed that stimulating
between the thumb and fingers to initiate with-
the nerves of the tail causes stimulation of central
drawal and paw lift. Stroking the cranial tibial
pattern generators in the spine (see Chapter 16).
muscle belly from ventral to dorsal at terminal
The therapist uses a thumb to apply firm pressure
stance initiates tarsal flexion and paw lift. For
to the top of the tail in a circular pattern, starting
patients that tend to adduct the pelvic limbs, the
approximately one-third of the way down the tail.
therapist can tap the gluteal muscles at terminal
If there is no response, the thumb moves distally
stance to encourage abduction. Some patients
and tries again until a response is achieved (Figure
respond well to the same stimulus on subsequent
9.17). The tail can be stroked with a hand circling
days, others require that the therapist change the
the entire tail, and stroking from top to bottom. If
stimullus.
174Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Massage
The authors recommend completing the UWTM
workout with a 2-5 minute vigorous massage,
using jets as well as manual techniques. This is
done while the patient is still in the warm water.
 Patients and owners express gratitude for this posi-
tive final note to the workout.
Webliography
Figure 9.18 The therapist stimulates the paw from the
lateral side to the area between the central pad and toe
BARLOWE, B. (2010) Physiology of exercise for swim-
pads, stimulating until paw lift occurs.
ming. LiveStrong.com. Accessed October 31, 2012.
www.livestrong.com/article /207790-physiology-of-
exercise-for-swimming/#ixzzliWSOvNby
Case Study 9.2  UWTM for postoperative MPL
BARLOWE, B. (201l) How much fat & calories does
swimming burm? LiveStrong.com. October 31, 2012.
www.livestrong.com/article /237878-how-much-fat-
Signalment: 4 y.o. F/s Toy Poodle. Presenited 4 weeks
calories-does-swimming-burm/#ixzzliWQG6Q00
post MPL repair.
LOKKEN, B. (2011) Fitmess testing assigmment: swim-
ming. Curtin University, School of Physiotherapy.
Clinical Findings: Patient NwB right pelvic limb at all
Physiotherapy.Curtin.edu. Accessed October 31, 2012.
gaits. PROM is normal, patella location is normal, no
physiotherapy.curtin.edu.au/resources/educational-
pain on palpation.
resources/exphys /98 /swimming.cfm
Goal: Normal weight bearing, ambulation, and transi-
POTTS, A. (2010) Sport Science. The benefits of swim test
sets. USASwimming.org. October 31, 2012. www.
tions using right pelvic limb.
usaswimming.org/DesktopDefault.aspx?TabId=1685
&Alias=rainbow&Lang=en
Therapy: Therapeutic exercises and UWTM (q3d).
Before starting treadmill work each visit, joint compres-
sions perforrmed on right pelvic limb joints, weight shift
References
training done to shift weight onto right pelvic limb,
followed by gait patterning. With water at shoulder
height and a fast-paced walk speed initiated, patient
ABIDIN, M.R., THACKER, J.G., BECKER, D.G., SAUN-
toe touches as treadmill starts, slowly, as other limbs
DERS,J.C.,NAYAK,S.,BACCHETTA,S.F.,& EDLICH,
became tired, patient progressively uses right pelvic
RF. 1988. Hydrofitness devices for strengthening
limb. Carryover right pelvic limb weight bearing lasted
upper extremity muscles. The fournal of Burn Care &
longer after each session. By the eighth session, patient
Rehabilitation, 9, 199-202.
used right pelvic limb on all surfaces except occasion-
The American Heritage Medical Dictionary. 2004. Houghton
 ally when walking in wet grass. Verbal cues used to
Mifflin Harcourt.
remind patient to "Use that leg" worked well. By the
ARBORELIUS, M., JR., BALLIDIN, U.1., LILJA, B.,&
twelfth session, owner reports patient using the limb
LUNDGREN, C.E. 1972. Hemodynamic changes in
therapy with long-term home exercise program (HEP).
Aerospace Medicine, 43, 592-598.
BATES, A. & HANSON, N. 1992a. The principles and
properties of water In: Aquatic Exercise Therapy. Phila-
Some patients struggle with trunk strength and
delphia: W.B. Saunders, 24.
BATES, A. & HANSON, N. 1992b. Aquatic equipment.
tend to move with the spine curved to one side.
In: Aquatic Exercise Therapy. Philadelphia: W.B. Saun-
Here, the therapist can stimulate the trunk: on the
ders, 41.
convex side, stimulating the paraspinal muscles to
 BATES, A. & HANSON, N. 1992c. Aquatic equipment.
Encourage them to fire. This can be done at any
In: Aquatic Exercise Therapy. Philadelphia: W.B. Saun
time in the gait cycle.
ders, 29-32.
Chapter 9 Aquatic Therapy 175
BATES, A. & HANSON, N. 1992d. What is therapeutic
 u uem pe Srms Sp qui pu
exercise? and Introduction to aquatic rehabilitative
 dogs and dogs with surgically corrected cranial cruci-
exercises. In: Aguatic Exercise Therapy. Philadelphia:
ate ligament rupture. fourral of the American Veterinary
W.B. Saunders, 7 & 40.
Medical Ass0ciation,222,739-743.
BATES, A. & HANSON, N. 1992e. What is therapeutic
MILLIS, D., LEVINE, D., & TAYLOR, R. 2004. Physical
exercise? In: Aquatic Exercise Therapy. Philadelphia:
rehabilitation for geriatric and arthritic patients. In:
W.B. Saunders, 6-8 & 41.
Taylor, R., Millis, D., Levin, D., Adamson, C., Bevan,
BATES, A. & HANSON, N. 1992f. Designing an effective
J., Taylor, R., & Marcellin-Little, D. (ed.), Canine Reha-
aquatic exercise therapy program. In: Aquatic Exercise
bilitation and Physical Therapy, lst ed. St. Louis, MO:
Therapy. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 11-19.
W.B. Saunders, 423.
BISHOP, PA., FRAZIER, S., & SMITH, J. 1989. Physio-
RUOTI, G.R. & AL, E. 1997a. Aquatic rehabilitation of the
  m e  o s o
athlete. In: Tiermey, T. (ed.), Aquatic Rehabilitation. Phil-
Physician and Sportsmedicine,17,87-94.
adelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 211-225.
DUNNING, D., MCCAULEY, L., & KNAP,K. 2003. Effect
RUOTI, G.R. & AL, E. 1997b. Physiologic responses to
of water temperature on heart and respiration rate,
water exercise. In: Cureton, K.J. (ed.), Aquatic Rehabili-
rectal temp and perceived exertional score in dogs
tation. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers,
exercising on an UWTM. Proceedings of the 3rd Interna-
39-40.
RUOTI, G.R. & AL, E. 1997c. Aquatic rehabilitation of
in Veterinary Medicine. Raleigh, NC, p. 217.
clients with spinal cord injury. In: Aguatic Rehabilita-
GREENE, N.P, LAMBERT, B.S.,(
GREENE,
E.S.
tion. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 134.
CARBUHN,A.F., GREEN, J.S.,& CROUSE,S.F.2009.
RUOTI, G.R. & AL, E. 1997d. Aquatic rehabilitation of
Comparative efficacy of water and land treadmill
clients with spinal cord injury. In: Aquatic Rehabilita-
training for overweight or obese adults. Medicine and
tion.
Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers,
Science in Sports and Exercise, 41, 1808-1815.
135.
GROSEE, S.J. 2009. Aquatic progressions: the buoyancy
RUOTI, G.R. & AL, E. 1997e. Physiologic effects of
of water facilitates balance and gait. Rehab Manage-
immersion at rest. In: Bookspan, J. (ed.), Aguatic Reha-
ment, 22(3), 25-27.
bilitation. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers,
HALL, J., BISSON, D., & O'HARE, P. 1990. The physiol-
20-23.
ogy of immersion. Physiotherapy, 76, 517-521.
RUOTI, G.R. & AL, E. 1997f. Exercise equipment in the
JACKSON, A.M.,MILLIS, D.L.,
STEVENS, M.,&
aquatic environment. In: Fuller, C.S. (ed.), Aquatic
BARNETT, S. 2002. Joint kinematics of dogs walking
Rehabitlitation. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publish-
on ground and aquatic treadmills. Proceedings of the
er's, 391-402.
2nd International Symposium on Rehabitlitation and Physi
RUOTI, G.R. & AL, E. 1997g. Physiologic responses to
al Therapy in Veterirary Medicine. Knoxville, TN, p.
water exercise. In: Cureton, K.J. (ed.), Aguatic Rehabili-
191.
tation.
 Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers,
JADELIS, K., MILLER, M.E., ETTINGER, W.H., Jr., &
44-45.
MESSIER, S.P. 2001. Strength, balance, and the modi-
STAGER, J.M. & TANNER, D.A. 2004. Swimming: Hand-
fying effects of obesity and knee pain: results from the
book of Sports Medicine and Science. Oxford, UK: Black-
Observational Arthritis Study in Seniors (oasis).
well Science.
fournal of the American Geriatrics Society,49,884-891.
THEIN, L. & MCNAMARA, C. 1992. Aquatic exercise in
LAVOIE, J.M. & MONTPETIT, R.R. 1986. Applied physi-
rehabilitation and
1training. Orthopaedic Physical
ology of swimming. Sports Medicine, 3, 165-189.
Therapy Clinics of North America, 1, 191-205.
LEVINE, D., MARCELLIN-LITTLE, D.J., MILLIS, D.L.,
UTTER, A.C., ROBERTSON, R.J, NIEMAN, D.C., &
TRAGAUER, V., & OSBORNE, J.A.2010. Effects of
KANG, J. 2002. Children's OMNI scale of perceived
oean punara teqiaa uo iaem ut uosiau iered
exertion: walking/running evaluation. Medicine and
forces and weight distribution in dogs.
American
Science in Sports and Exercise, 34, 139-144.
fourrnat of Veterinary Research, 71, 1413-1416.
ZINK, C. 1997. Peak Performance-Coaching the Canine
MARSOLAIS, G.S., MCLEAN, S., DERRICK,
T.，&
Athlete. Baltimore, MD: United Book Press, 118-
CONZEMIUS, M.G. 2003. Kinematic analysis of the
122.
10
Conditioning and Retraining
the Canine Athlete
M. Christine Zink, DVM, PhD, Dipl ACVP, Diplomate, American
Summary
Exercise has significant physical and psychological benefits for dogs. One of the most impor-
tant is extension of healthspan, the length of time that a dog remains healthy and active.
Rehabilitation professionals are frequently asked to design tailored conditioning programs for
young dogs before starting athletic training. for adult canine athletes that need a more com-
prehensive, sports-specific conditioning program, and for dogs recovering from injuries or 
surgery. There are two components of conditioning after an injury or surgery: the initial
youm duuienan shods pue 'ssau laaal-iad on sop au sunan peu poad uoneqeuan
wo pue Ainuian luuaaand am uiee uoadwo oaue ot sop aun sanedand Alnyaes
pensatory overuse.
To design an appropriate conditioning program, the rehabilitation profession must first
evaluate the dog's structure, informing the owner/handler of the dog's structural strengths and
weaknesses and current fitness level so that the conditioning program can target specific areas
that need improvement.
A balanced exercise program includes strength (anaerobic) training that targets the fore-
limbs, pelvic limbs and/or core body muscles, endurance (aerobic) training, proprioception
and balance, preparation and recovery (stretching and flexibility), and skill training. The
program should balance duration, frequency, and intensity of training while avoiding
overtraining.
 A sports retraining program requires thatthe rehabilitation professional have an understand-
ing of the training requirements for the sport(s) in which the dog participates and provide
specific guidance to the owner/handler as to what exercises and activities should be trained
in what order and on what time schedule so that the dog is gradually and safely prepared to
compete again.
Carine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation, First Edition. Edited by M. Christine Zink and Janet B. Van Dyke.
@2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
176
Chapter 10 Conditioning and Retraining the Canine Athlete
177
Benefits of conditioning
(2)
）Rehabilitation professionals often are con-
sulted by owner /handlers with actively com-
Exercise has proven to have both physical and psy-
peting canine athletes or working dogs to
chological benefits in people, including the exten-
dsa jo ose inq 'ds a jo Ao jou os
 gram for the active adult dog to ensure that
(the length of time that an individual remains
the dog is best prepared for its various activi-
healthy and active) (Maitland, 2012; Mason & Holt,
ties and to help prevent or reduce the severity
2012; Vina et al., 2012). In fact, the psychological
of injuries.
effects of exercise are so powerful that at least one
(3) Canine athletes and working dogs that are
study suggests that exercise should be considered
recovering from injuries need to undergo a
 a psychoactive drug (Vina et al., 2012). Because of
rehabilitation and retraining program that has
the similarities in the musculoskeletal, cardiovas-
tWo components: (a) the initial rehabilitation
cular, and nervous systems in dogs to those of
period that helps the dog return to pet-level
humans, the same benefits of exercise are afforded
fitmess, where it is able to carry out all the
to dogs. Dogs that exercise have better body con-
functions of daily living, and (b) a subsequent
dition scores and cardiovascular function than
rehabilitation program that helps move the
more sedentary dogs, and experience the same
dog to competition-ready condition. Much
psychological benefits (Menor-Campos et al., 2011;
of this second stage of the rehabilitation
Warren et al., 2011; Bauer et al., 2012; Raichlen et al.,
 program will be in the hands of the client,
2012). Rehabilitation professionals working with
who needs and wants to follow a detailed
canine athletes have observed that appropriately
retraining program for the canine athlete or
-d sp uom pue aad puo
working dog.
form better and are less likely to suffer injuries.
When injuries do occur, they tend to be less severe,
Communication with the owner /handler is key. It
and recovery is faster. In addition, fit working
carmot be overemphasized how important it is to
dogs suffer less stress, which translates to greater
spend time providing the details that will allow the
-m 1sop m  Aan p s
win situation for both dog and handler.
optimally. In general, this type of appointment
Most of the conditioning that a canine athlete
takes 1-2 hours and might include several follow-
experiences is provided at home by the owner/
up appointments to monitor the owner/handler's
handler, rather than in the clinic. The rehabilitation
activity and the response of the canine athlete
professional can have a significant impact on a
to the exercises and to modify the prescribed
canine athlete's career by providing specific guid-
 EXercises accordingly. To develop a sports-specific
ance to the owner/handler regarding the most
 conditioning program, it is essential that the re-
habilitation professional understand the require-
There are several points in a canine athlete's
ments of the sports or working functions in which
 career at which experienced rehabilitation profes-
the dog participates (see Chapter 1).
sionals may be consulted regarding conditioning
programs:
Evaluating canine structure and fitness
(1) Owner /handlers will frequently ask rehabili-
tation professionals who understand canine
Before establishing a conditioning program for a
structure and the requirements of the various
canine athlete or working dog, or a dog destined
canine performance events or working activi-
to become one, the dog should be given a full clini-
ties to evaluate their young dog's structure
cal examination including complete blood count
and provide them with a tailored exercise
and serum chemistry screen. The dog should be
adodde ue pe mo Aaul oid
evaluated structurally (see Chapter 1) and its struc-
m Sop SunoA e 1oy wenaoid Suuonpuos
tural strengths and weaknesses for the specific ath-
yield benefits once the dog is old enough to
letic activities planned discussed with the client.
compete.
This is important so that a conditioning and/or
178   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Every performance and working dog should be
advantage of the dog's strengths and mitigates its
screened for genetic and developmental problems.
weakmesses.
For example, all dogs should be screened for hip
 For example, German Shepherd Dogs generally
dysplasia, since this condition is common and can
have abundant pelvic limb angulation. This gives
occur even in the very small breeds. All dogs over
them a very long stride, allowing them to jump
30lb should be screened for elbow dysplasia, which
high and long, which can be an advantage in pro-
often occurs even in purebred dogs whose ances-
tection and police work. On the other hand, the
tors have been shown to be free of the condition.
same laxity of tendons and ligaments that results
Elbow dysplasia significantly affects the perfor-
in such abundant pelvic limb angulation also
 mance of working dogs. In addition, dogs should
-i raua e aaeu paanq st jo soop ie suea
be screened for breed-specific disorders that can
dence of hip dysplasia and frequently experience
affect performance, including musculoskeletal, car-
hyperextension/hyperflexion of various joints,
diovascular, hematological, and ocular disorders.
particularly the toes, carpi, and tarsi. As a result,
they frequently experience trauma to their tarsi,
which can hit the ground when the dog is rurning
Five components of a balanced
and jumping. In contrast, Belgian Malinois tend to
exercise program
have straighter front and rear assemblies, that is,
reduced angles at the shoulder, elbow, stifle, and
Imagine a football player who practiced with his
tarsus. This gives these dogs tremendous agility
team, but never lifted weights to increase his
they are known for their rapid acceleration and
strength or did any aerobic exercise to increase
ability to turn sharply. They tend to suffer a differ-
his cardiovascular system's ability to oxygenate his
ent subset of injuries such as soft tissue injuries of
blood. He would never make it to the top of his
the shoulder due to reaching the end range of
game. Many owners/handlers spend the majority.
motion more frequently. These differences in struc-
if not all of their training time, practicing the skills
ture and their potential effects on the dog's perfor-
 of their chosen sport(s) with their dogs, but many
op um ro aae ue se a e a
 do not have a comprehensive training program
e Suonaaap uam poe ou uaen aq pmous 
that makes time for targeted strength, endurance,
conditioning program and should be discussed
 balance, body awareness, and flexibility training. It
with the owner /handler.
is important to explain to clients that to maximize
Next, the dog should be evaluated for overall
performance and minimize the likelihood and
muscle fitmess. One of the best ways to evaluate
severity of injuries, they should have a long-term
 general fimess is to feel the size and tone of the
plan for overall conditioning that includes all of the
 core (paraspinal and abdominal) and pelvic limb
components of a balanced regimen.
muscles. The core body muscles are important
for coordination of spinal and limb movements
and are critical when immediate responses of the
Strength (anaerobic) training
limbs are necessary. Since the front legs generally
bear two-thirds of the dog's weight and all the
The most common form of strength-building activ-
weight of the dog plus the effects of gravity when
ity is resistance training. In resistance training, the
a dog is jumping, cantering, or galloping, the front
dog's muscular effort is performed against an
limbs get more exercise than the pelvic limbs
 opposing force. In other words, the movement of a
during routine daily activities and performance
body part is opposed and made more difficult by
training/competition. As a result, clients with
a force generated by some additional stressor-
canine athletes, particularly those that are continu-
accelerating
 upward against gravity, moving
ing to compete after their prime years, should
against inertia, braking against momentum, or
place special emphasis on exercises to keep the
pushing against friction or an elastic band that is
pelvic limb and core muscles toned. The 
edog's
designed to contract to a relaxed state. Resistance
body condition score (see Chapter 4) also should
exercise is used to develop the strength and size of
be recorded.
skeletal muscles. Properly performed, resistance
Chapter 10 Conditioning and Retraining the Canine Athlete 
179
training can provide sigrificant fumctional bene-
basic principle of strength training to achieve over-
fits and improvement in overall health and well-
load involves a manipulation of the types of exer-
being.
cises, the number of repetitions of a given exercise,
Strength-building exercises are isotonic if a body
the number of sets (each set consisting of a number
part is moving against the force. Isotonic exercises
of repetitions), and tempo, or how quickly the exer-
strengthen the muscle throughout the entire range
cise is performed.
of motion of the exercise used. Exercises are isomef-
Whereas humans can lift free weights or use resis-
ric if a body part is holding still against the force.
tance machines, dogs most often use their bodies as
 In isometric exercise, the joint angle and muscle
ma ouao Aq qhuans pmq pue juiam a
length do not change during contraction. Isometric
bodies over short distances with bursts of muscular
 exercises are opposed by a force equal to the force
energy. Strength can also be built by having a dog
output of the muscle, and there is no net move-
pull an object over the ground (dragged against fric-
ment. This mainly strengthens the muscle at the
tion) or push against an elasticband such as a Thera-
specific joint angle at which the isometric exercise
Band° (Thera-Band, Akron, OH).
occurs.
Strength training exercise is primarily anaerobic
The goal of resistance training is to gradually and
(Kraemer, 2003). Even while training at a lower
 progressively overload the musculoskeletal system
intensity, anaerobic glycolysis is still the major
so that it gets stronger (Kraemer, 2003). Compared
source of power, although aerobic metabolism
with low-intensity exercise, moderate and high-
makes a small contribution (Knuttgen, 2003).
intensity resistance exercises are potent stimuli for
It is helpful to categorize the different canine
increases in muscle protein synthesis (MacDougall
strength exercises as targeting the forelimbs, pelvic
et al., 1995; Phillips et al., 1997) and satellite cell
limbs, or core body muscles, although many exer-
activity (Hawke & Garry, 2001; Harridge, 2007) and
cises target more than one area to varying degrees
decreases in proteolysis (Louis et al., 2007). The
(Table 10.1). Converiently, many excellent strength
Table 10.1Strength training exercises
Indoors
Outdoors
Main target:
Main target:
Forelimbs
 Core muscles
Pelvic limbs
Overall strength
 Pelvic limbs
Wave
Beg
Beg/stand/beg
Hiking over varied
Running up hills (straight 
terrain
or angled ascent)
Wheel barrow
Beg/wave
Jumping vertically
Jump chutes
Sledding
Migh-five
Crawl
Pulling forward against
Retrieving over short
Weight pulling
a therapy band or
distances on land or
Cart-pulling
 stretchy leash
water
Handstand
Diagonal-leg
Tugging high
Trotting over cavaletti
standing
Backing up stairs
 Stand/down/stand
Tugging low
Backing up stairs
Ball-pushing
Roll over/roll up an
Digging
incline
Wobble board
Ball-pushing
180 Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
exercises can be performed in very small spaces
indoors in air-conditioned comfort with minimal
physical effort on the part of the owner/handler.
Canine athlete owmers/handlers are proficient at
training dogs to perform various physical activi-
ties, so their dogs will be capable of being trained
to perform a very wide variety of strength exer
cises. Further, these owners/handlers have signifi-
cant financial and time investments in the patient
and most are strongly committed to gaining and
maintaining their dogs’ strength, understanding
that it means health, longevity, and athletic success.
 One more point: Strength training needs to be
jsou aul oop au pue uosiad a qoq 1oy umy
important point to stress is that an exercise routine
 must be enjoyable for the dog performing it. If a
dog does not enjoy the activity that it is being
asked to perform, its focus will drift, and its move-
ments will cease to be purposeful. So strength-
building activities should be those for which the
Figure 10.1  A dog waving with the paw raised and held
dog is predisposed by genetics or for which it
above head level.
shows clear signs of excitement.
Indoor strength exercises
Forelimb strengthening exercises
Wave. The dog should be taught to wave each
front paw separately, holding the paw higher
than the head for as long as possible, preferably
more than 5 seconds (Figure 10.1).
Wheelbarrow. The dog's pelvic limbs are grasped
at the tarsus and the rear is raised off the ground,
flexing the legs at the pelvis, stifle, and tarsus
(Figure 10.2). The higher the rear is raised, the
more difficult the exercise. The dog can be
walked forward and turned to the right and left.
To increase difficulty, the dog can be walked over
the rungs of a ladder, up an incline, and eventu-
ally up stairs.
High-Five. The dog is asked to place each paw
Figure 10.2 A dog practicing the wheelbarrow. The owner/
amht pu s, ray a ise Aaerdas
10.3). The handler can have the dog aim its paws
handler holds the rear limbs flexed and elevated.
at various locations, high or low, abducted or
adducted, depending on which muscles are
being targeted (see Chapter 8).
left along the wal. This exercise strengthens the
Handstand. The dog is trained to back up to a wall
muscle groups that are used when agility dogs
and raise its pelvic limbs up along a wall until it
 stop with two feet on the ground and two feet
is doing a handstand (Figure 10.4). The dog can
on the A-frame or dogwalk obstacles, referred to
then be taught to move sideways to the right and
as a "2-on, 2-off contact."
Chapter 10 Conditioning and Retraining the Canine Athlete 181
Figure 10.5 Dog tugging. When the tug object is held low,
the forelimbs are targeted. when the tug object is held
higher, weight is taken off the forelimbs and the pelvic limbs
are worked.
Figure 10.3 A dog demonstrating the high-five. The owner/
handler can have the dog aim its paws at various locations:
high or low, abducted or adducted, depending on which
muscles are being targeted.
Figure 10.6  Dog digging in sand to exercise the forelimbs
and core.
Photo by Roseann Baars.
Tugging. Playing tug is a favorite activity of many
performance dogs (Figure 10.5). When the
 owner/handler holds the tug object low, the dog
pushes with the front feet and can be encouraged
to move its body from side to side. This exer-
cise strengthens the stabilizer muscles of the
Figure 10.4  Dog demonstrating the handstand.
forelimbs.
 Digging. Dogs can be taught to dig in soil or sand
by hiding a food-filled plastic bag for them
to
discover (Figure 10.6). This exercise also
strengthens the core muscles.
182Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
to develop enough strength to proceed through
all of these stages. This exercise is very difficult,
but owners/handlers should be encouraged to
keep working on it, since attempting and failing
means that the muscles are working to overload,
which is necessary to build strength.
Owners/handlers with chondrodystrophic
dogs such as Dachshunds or Corgis frequently
are told not to let their dogs beg because of a
 m  ds jo  
careful progression, this exercise can actually
 strengthen the core muscles, thus helping protect
against the hyperflexion and hyperextension of
the vertebrae that is thought to contribute to disk
degeneration and spondylosis. The only caution
for this exercise is that it should not be under-
taken by dogs with acute back pain or chronic
back pain of unknown origin.
Crawl. The dog is lured to crawl under PVC poles
that are inserted into traffic cones with holes
drilled at various heights (see Chapter 8).
Stand/Down/Stand. The dog is placed in a square
stand with the feet under the trunk, then asked
Figure 10.7 Dog demonstrating the beg. Once the dog can
to lie down and stand back up without moving
remain in this position for 15 seconds, the owner/handler
the feet (Figure 10.8). This exercise is hardest for
can push on the dog's shoulders, chest and back to
off-balance the dog, causing it to work the core muscles to
dogs with abundant rear angulation and/or
stabilize itself in the beg position.
straight front limb angulation.
Backing Up Stairs. The dog is taught to stand on
the ground facing away from a set of three to five
stairs, then rewarded for backing the pelvic
limbs up onto the lowest step, then the next step
Core strengthening exercises
up for a larger dog (Figure 10.9). Incrementally,
Beg. While sitting on a firm, nonslip surface, food
the dog is encouraged to back up the steps one
is used to lure the dog onto its haunches with the
at a time. Eventually, the dog is able to slowly
 front legs in the air (Figure 10.7). Once the dog
back up an entire flight of stairs.
is able to stay in this position for 15 seconds,
Roll Over. Most dogs will begin to roll over if they
rhythmic then nonrhythmic perturbations can be
are lying down and a treat is placed on the shoul-
applied by pushing on the back, shoulders, or
der near the top of the scapula, but in a position
chest to place the dog off-balance. In addition,
that allows the dog to nibble on it (Figure 10.10).
if the dog already knows how to wave or high-
As the dog's nose reaches toward its shoulder,
five, placing the front paws at different locations,
the food is moved closer to the dog's spine and
these exercises can be added to the beg exercise
the dog naturally rolls over Dogs should be
to off-balance the dog. The exercise is then made
taught to roll in both directions. To increase the
more difficult by sequentially having the dog
difficulty of this exercise, the dog can be taught
perform the exercise on a soft surface (bed,
to roll up an incline. This is another exercise that,
couch, air mattress), then on hills (facing the dog
like begging, requires significant strength to
up, down, or sideways in each direction), and
complete. Clients might need to try for several
finally on an egg-shaped physioball with the
weeks before the dog is strong enough to roll
client moving the ball rhythmically, then non-
over completely and certainly to roll up an
rhythmically. Most dogs require several months
incline.
Chapter 10 Conditioning and Retraining the Canine Athlete 1 83
Figure 10.8  Dog demonstrating the down-stand-down. The dog moves between the stand and down without moving its feet
Figure 10.10  In the early stages of training a dog to roll
 over, food is held at the dog's shoulder to encourage it to
roll over.
Figure 10.9 Backing up the stairs. The owner/handler Can
start with a short set of steps and proceed to a full flight.
it goes. To use this exercise to build forelimb
strength, the ball should be no higher than the
dog's manubrium. For strengthening the core
the dog can push a larger, round, or peanut-
Wobble Board. Dogs can be encouraged to sit,
stand, or lie down with their forelimbs, pelvic
shaped physioball (Figure 10.12).
Diagonal Leg Standing (Snoopies). (See Chap-
limbs, or both on a wobble board and to switch
ter 8).
between these positions (Figure 10.11). Once
the dog is confident on the board, playing a
game of tug increases the strength component
Pelvic limb strengthening exercises
considerably.
Beg/Stand/Beg. By far the best indoor exercise for
Ball Pushing. The dog is trained to stand with its
strengthening the pelvic limbs is to have the dog
front feet on a physioball or solid plastic ball and
first sit in the beg position then raise itself to a
then walk with its hind legs, pushing the ball as
stand, standing as still as possible for 15 seconds,
184Canine Sports Medicine andRehabilitatior
Figure 10.11A dog standing on a wobble board with the front or rear feet.
potential for shoulder and/or elbow trauma
with repeated landings.
Pushing Against a Therapy Band. With the dog
on a nonslip surface, the owmer/handler stands
behind the dog and slings a therapy band around
the front of the dog's chest, holding one end with
each hand near the dog's pelvis like a set of reins.
The dog is asked to lean forward to get a treat or
its dinner (Figure 10.14). This works best if the
food is placed in a bowl elevated to the dog's
chest height. Alternatively, the dog can be placed
in a nonrestrictive harness (one that leaves the
 forelimbs free to extend forward) and a bungee 
cord attached to the harness instead of a leash.
Figure 10.12 A dog demonstrating pushing a peanut-
The dog uses its pelvic limbs to pull against the
shaped physioball.
bungee cord toward the food.
Tugging. By elevating the tug toy, the dog's weight
and then lowering back down to the beg position
shifts to the rear to build strength there.
without letting the front legs touch the ground
(Figure 10.13). As with the simple beg, this exer-
Outdoor strength exercises
cise is made significantly more difficult by per-
forming it on a soft surface, then hills, then on a
The options for outdoor exercises are limited only
physioball. The dog should be limited to raising
by the owner/handler's imagination. Hiking over
itself three times from the beg position in any
varied terrain, especially over hilly terrain, is one
given session. This exercise should not be per-
of the best ways to strengthen all the muscles in a
formed by dogs with acute or ongoing injuries
dog's body. Playing chase and dodge or wrestling
to the rear limbs or spine.
with another dog also builds strength. Another
Jumping Vertically. A small dog can be encour-
-iaqo pu Ae ui uas lnaao pimq o Aem
aged to jump on a couch or bed, and a larger dog
ence dogs that already know how to jump is to
em Suuiejan e onuo 1o Ans ue opui dunf uen
 have the dog jump over a series of jumps set up in
Note, however, that dogs should be gently
a straight line (jump chutes) or in a large circle at
lowered to the ground, not allowed to jump 
 umeven distances apart. Retrieving objects on land
dowm from these higher heights because of the or in water over distances up to 50 yards is another
Chapter 10 Conditioning and Retraining the Canine Athlete1 85
Figure 10.13 The beg-stand-beg. Using food the dog is lured from a beg into a stand, and back into the beg position without
putting its front feet on the ground.
Photos by Sandra Murley.
Figure 10.14Dog pulling against a bungee cord to get to
Aeuipand sgull sei aue syiom asiaxa sul o s!m
Figure 10.15  Retrieving short distances in the water is an
Photo by Roseann Baars.
excellent exercise as the dog gains strength pushing against
thewater.
excellent outdoor strength exercise (Figure 10.15).
The latter exercise can be made more difficult by
the dog's height at the withers (Figure 10.16). In
having the dog run through cover of varying
Chapter 2, use of low cavaletti was described for
depths and densities and over/across obstacles
gait training. To add a significant strength-training
such as creeks, low fences, or ditches.
component, the height of the cavaletti can be
Another way to build overall strength is to have
increased to 1-1.5 times the distance from the
the dog trot over cavaletti—ground poles placed
ground to the dog's carpus.
186  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
diminished results. One way to deal with this is to
use split training. This involves fully exhausting
individual muscle groups during a workout, then
allowing several days for the muscle to fully
recover. Muscles are worked roughly twice per
week and allowed roughly 72 hours to recover
(Kraemer & Zatsiorsky, 2006). Recovery of certain
 muscle groups is usually achieved on days while
training other groups. For example, an owner/
handler can train forelimb exercises on Mondays
and Thursdays, core muscles on Tuesdays and
sam  sasxa q a  'se
and Saturdays, taking a break on Sundays. In this
way, all muscle groups are allowed the necessary
Figure 10.16  Trotting over cavaletti spaced about as far
recovery.
apart as the dog's height at the withers is an excellent
overall strengthening exercise.
Endurance (aerobic) training
Endurance training generally involves training the
 aerobic system as opposed to the anaerobic. Endur-
ance training modifies both the cardiovascular and
musculoskeletal systems. Long-term endurance
training induces many cardiovascular adaptations
in the dog, including decreasing heart rate and
increasing interventricular septal thickness and
heart weight (Stepien et al., 1998). Skeletal muscle
and the neurological system also adapt to exercise,
with changes in the molecular structure of muscle
fiber types (Seene et al., 2009) and the strengthen-
ing of connections between neurons with enhanced
firing frequency and spinal reflexes (Folland & Wil-
Figure 10.17 Weight-pulling predominantly strengthens the
liams, 2007). Additional goals of endurance train-
ing are to increase the lactate threshold in the
rear limbs.
Photo by Debbie Maicach.
muscles (the exercise intensity at which lactic acid
starts to accumulate in the blood stream) and VO2
max (maximal oxygen consumption—the point
Having a dog retrieve an object rurning up pro-
during exercise at which oxygen consumption
gressively steeper hills is an excellent way to target
remains at a steady state despite an increase in
the pelvic limbs for strengthening. The pelvic limbs
workload) (Hiruntrakul et al., 2010). For more
can also be strengthened by having a dog pull
information on the physiology of exercise, see
weights (Figure 10.17) or pull a sled over snow or
Chapter 3.
a wheeled cart over the ground. The rougher the
Endurance or aerobic exercise can be achieved
surface, the greater the friction, and the more work
by having a dog trot for at least 20 minutes con-
involved.
tinuously on land or swim continuously for at least
After a muscle is fatigued, its overworked fibers
5 minutes in water. The most typical endurance
need time to rest and rebuild themselves before
exercise is roadwork, in which the trotting dog is
they can be productively stressed again. The failure
accompanied by the owner/handler, who can run
to allow for adequate rest in between strength-
alongside (Figure 10.18), use inline skates, a bike,
training sessions can lead to muscular injuries and
 a human- or electric-powered scooter, and so on. It
Chapter 10 Conditioning and Retraining the Canine Athlete 187
Figure 10.19  Dog exercising on a land treadmill. This
treadmill is just large enough at 2.5 times the length of the
dog's body.
Figure 10.18 Dog doing roadwork accompanied by owner/
handler.
 mushing, field trials, and herding trials. They can,
however, be an outstanding alternative during
is always best for the dog to be in the trot gait for
inclement weather and can provide variety in
these exercises, as this is the only gait that exercises
training.
both sides of the dog's body equally and requires
Underwater treadmills can add a significant
each leg to function alone without assistance from
amount of resistance to the training regimen of a
the contralateral limb. If a dog is going to do road-
 canine athlete. As with land treadmills, the dog
work at high frequency or duration, an effort
should predominantly be gaited at a trot, although
should be made to have the dog work on a forgiv-
 bursts of faster speeds can be added for variety. See
ing surface such as a dirt or wood chip path, rather 
 Chapter 9 for more information on the use of
than on concrete or asphalt.
umderwater treadmills.
Dogs can be induced to swim around the edge
 of a pool by using treats that float on water (many
Balance between strength and
dry dog biscuits do). Trained retrievers can be sent
endurance training
to retrieve a planted bumper at distances of 200
 yards or more (referred to as a blind retrieve). Dogs
Dogs should receive strength and endurance train-
can also be encouraged to follow a kayak or canoe
 ing in proportion to the amount of each type of
by using verbal praise and treats.
activity the dog is required to perform in its sport(s)
 Land treadmills can be used for endurance con-
or job. Figure 10.20 shows a continuum between
ditioning as long as the treadmill is at least 2.5
endurance and strength sports in dogs and the
times the length of the dog's body from the manu-
points on that continuum at which the most
brium to the ischial tuberosity. Unfortunately, this
common canine performance events lie. Perfor-
rules out the use of treadmills designed for humans
mance events that require mainly endurance
with most larger dogs (Figure 10.19). Because trot-
include mushing, herding, and field trials. Perfor-
ting on a treadmill does not exercise as many
mance events that have both endurance and
muscles as trotting over ground, and because
strength components include upper level hunt
having the legs pulled out from under the body is
tests, tracking and lure coursing. Performance
thought to have an effect on the musculature dif-
 ev ents that require predominantly strength include
ferent from using the limbs to power across the
flyball,
, obedience, agility, and weight-pulling
ground, treadmills should not constitute the main
trials.
method for endurance conditioning in canine ath-
Most of the clients that rehabilitation profession
letes that specialize in endurance events such as
 als see in a typical practice wil be participating in
188   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
sports that involve predominantly strength. Like-
Note: Endurance should not be mistaken for
wise, the vast majority of working dogs perform 
 stamina. Stamina is the ability to keep working at
activities that require strength rather than endur-
 a job (whether it involves strength or endurance
ance. Nonetheless, dogs that compete only in 
 activities) for long periods of time. Endurance
strength-type activities such as obedience or flyball
 implies increased oxidative capacity and muscular
still benefit from some endurance training—a
 adaptations  for performing  long-term aerobic
 minimum of three 20-minute trots a week is a good
activities. For example, a person who can work out
starting place.
on weights for an hour might have exceptional
Case Study 10.1 Obedience dog with performance decline
Signalment: 5 y.o. MN Colden Retriever that competes
changes of the palmar sesamoid of P2 of the left front
in obedience (has Utility Dog title) and hunt tests
foot (Figure B10.2).
(working on Senior Hunter title).
Recommendations:
 History: The patient is a very stable, consistent competi-
Three weeks rest, with two 10-minute on-leash walks
tor. The owner is in her 7os and has arthritis, so she trains
per day to maintain fitness and no training or cort-
 and competes in obedience with the patient only indoors
petition. Gradually increased exercise thereafter.
(usually on rubber mats on concrete) so that she can
Rehabilitation consisting of focused high-energy
move around more easily. The patient has been slowing
sound wave therapy, laser, joint mobilizations.
down on his approach to the jumps in obedience and
Heat and massage treatments daily with 30 minutes
limping for a few steps when getting up from a rest, but
rest afterward.
otherwise seems healthy. The owner noticed that the
Rx: NSAIDs for 10 days then as needed before and
patient's feet have developed bumps (Figure B10.1). The
after periods of intense training and competition,
patient is fed high-quality grain-free dry dog foods and
supplement with joint-protective nutraceuticals for
receives no supplements.
remainder of life.
 Train and compete only at venues with appropriate
Clinical Examination: The patient was larme on the left
footing. Train at full jump height only 30% of the
forelimb after resting and more so after holding the left
timre. Remainder of the tirme train at 50% and 75%
forelimb (including the toes) in flexion for a full minute
 jump heights.
before troting. Swellings on the foot were firm and
painful on hyperflexion or hyperextension of the affected
Outcome: The patient showed no evidence of lamreness
joints. There was pain on palpation of the palmar sesa-
after the first week of therapy. By 4 weeks after diagnosis,
moid of the metacarpophalangeal joint of the left fore-
the swellings in the feet had reduced in size by about
limb P5. VD, lateral and oblique radiographs showed
50% and the patient was much more active. The owner
arthritic changes in the metacarpophalangeal joints of P2
elected to train and compete with the dog only minimally
and P5 on both front feet and the distal interphalangeal
because of her lack of mobility, and the dog remained
joint of P2 of the right front foot and degenerative
comfortable after a year of follow-up.
Figure B10.1  Patient's front feet at 18 months of age (A) and at 5 years of age (B)
 Photos by william Huffman.
Chapter 10 Conditioning and Retraining the Canine Athlete 1 89
pue zd jo siuio! jeasueleydodieseaw aui u! salueyo 2tyne suimous sydeisoipei anbilgo pue lelaiel 'oa z'ota auna
P5 on both front feet and the distal interphalangeal joint of P2 of the right front foot and degenerative changes of the
palmar sesamoid of P2 of the left front foot.
The Strength-Endurance Continuum
ENDURANCE
STRENGTH
Long Distance Mushing
Tracking
Sprint Mushing
Field Trials/Hunt Tests
Herding
Greyhound Racing
Lure Coursing
Agility
WhippetRacing
Conformation
Raly
Obedience
Flyball
Earthdog Tests
Carting
Weight Pulling
 pe is l  uo ane uenua uie anban  suad nnu aunua-rs  oot an
that require mainly strength are on the right.
stamina, but might not have the aerobic capacity
term (>30 minutes) and short-term (<15 minutes)
to run for more than 40 seconds. From that point
durance capacity in both well-trained indi-
 of view, ideally all performance and working dogs
viduals and highly trained top-level endurance
should have stamina.
athletes, especially with the use of high-volume,
Certainly, there is significant overlap between
heavy-resistance strength training protocols. The
strength and endurance training, and athletes
enhancement in endurance capacity appears to
benefit from experiencing both forms of exercise.
involve training-induced increases in the propor-
For example, a study in human athletes showed
tion of type IIA muscle fibers as well as gains
that strength training can lead to enhanced long-
in maximal muscle strength and rapid force
190   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
characteristics (rate of force development), while
cular function (Aagaard & Andersen, 2010).
Proprioception and balance
Proprioception is the ability to sense the spatial
 orientation of various parts of the body, including
the head, legs, and feet and to make movement 
adjustments accordingly. The proprioceptive sense
is thought to be provided by information from
sensory neurons located in the inner ear (informa-
Figure 10.21Body awareness can be improved by having
-danan yas pu (uouao pue uoou uo o
a dog walk slowly over a ladder. Poles can be used instead
 tors located in the muscles and the joint-supporting
of a ladder, as shown here.
 ligaments (information on stance). There are spe-
cific nerve receptors for this form of perception
called proprioreceptors. Messages from these re-
ceptors are sent up the spinal cord and are read and
interpreted by the brain, allowing the dog to make
coordinated movements such as landing from a
jump, climbing over debris, or grasping an object
in the jaws. Just like all nerves, those that govern
proprioception can be trained. In other words,
can be strengthened and their number of synapses
increased. With practice, dogs can improve their
proprioceptive abilities, making them less suscep-
tible to injury and able to work on complex tasks for
longer periods of time without tiring.
One of the best and most deceptively simple
Figure 10.22 By stepping over randomly oriented poles on
body awareness exercises is to have the owner/
the ground, dogs can improve the awareness of foot
handler walk the dog over a ladder placed on the
placement.
 ground (Figure 10.21). It is best for the dog to move
quite slowly, which gives it time to think about
up over various terrain such as sand, wood chips,
the placement of the feet. Once the dog can walk
and deep grass. The use of rocker boards and
forward without touching the edges or the rungs,
wobble boards to improve balance is discussed in
the dog can be moved forward then immediately
Chapter 8.
backward. Another variation is to have the dog
step sideways with only the front feet or only the
rear feet stepping between the rungs. To increase
Preparation and recovery (stretching and
the difficulty, the ladder can be placed on an
flexibility)
uneven or soft surface like an air mattress or placed
on a hill either facing up and down or sideways.
-rad saaond asiraxa Cn rond dn Suem
 Search and rescue dogs can benefit from practicing
mance (Fradkin et al., 2010; Huang et al., 2011),
stepping on (rather than between) the rungs of a
flexibility (Zakas et al., 2006), and proprioception
ladder that is elevated off the ground.
(Magalhaes et al., 2010). Appropriate warm-ups
 Other proprioceptive exercises include having a
before sports are also thought to reduce the inci-
 dog step over PVC poles scattered randomly over 
dence and severity of injuries (Bien, 2011; Samu-
the ground (Figure 10.22), and having dogs back
kawa et al., 2011), although it is also clear that not
Chapter 10 Conditioning and Retraining the Canine Athlete 
191
all warm-ups are helpful (Stojanovic & Ostojic,
in performance events. Owners/handlers will
2011). Warm-ups should include movements that
 know more than you about the specifics of training
recapitulate what the athlete will do when per-
their dogs. However, it is important to remind
forming, so warm-ups should be different for dogs
them that skill training should not be the only form
with different performance expectations or jobs
 of fitmess training that their dogs receive. For dogs
(Amiri-Khorasani et al., 2011). In a large meta-study
 s r    o  
of dynamic (in which the body is moved through
important to provide as detailed information as
the motions that will occur during the sport or job)
possible regarding how the owner/handler should
versus static (in which the limbs are passively
retrain the dog for the specific requirements of the
moved into a stretched position) stretching
in
sporting event in which it will participate (see
human athletes (Simic et al.,2012), it was concluded
Retraining the Canine Athlete).
that static stretching should be avoided as the sole
 activity in a warm-up routine. In another study,
dynamic stretching was shown to be superior
Overtraining
 to static stretching for improving athletic perfor-
mance in sports that involved flexibility and
Canine athletes can be overtrained, just as human
 jumping (Perrier et al., 2011).
athletes can. In human athletes, overtraining leads
 A good warm-up for dogs preparing to partici-
paradoxically to reduced fimess, poorer athletic
pate in events requiring jumping and active move-
performance, an increased chance of injuries,
 ments that put the joints through full flexion and
reduced resistance to infection, and depression
extension cycles, such as agility, flyball, retrieving.
(Purvis et al., 2010; Winsley & Matos, 2011). Over-
and so on, might include the following: 2-3 minutes
training syndrome also occurs in sport horses,
of walking then troting, some dodging from side
resulting in sustained loss of performance despite
to side and/or tugging, followed by dynamic
a heavy training program (Rivero et al., 2008).
stretching using gradually more active movements
The same problems can occur in dogs that are
such as wave, bow, spin, and beg that recapitulate
overtrained.
the flexion and extension that the dog will use in
 Three important variables of strength training
the activity.
are intensity, volume, and frequency. Intensity
A good cool-down consists of gradually reduced
refers to the amount of work required to achieve
exercise, such as a little trotting followed by
the activity and is proportional to the mass of the
walking, then a brief whole-body rubdown, and
weights being lifted. Volume refers to the number
passive range of motion. One of the easiest ways
 of muscles worked, exercises, sets, and reps during
to explain passive range of motion to owners/
a single session. Frequency refers to how many
handlers is to tell them to have the dog in lateral
a uaano e un panopad ane suoissas Sunien
recumbency and move the dog's legs as if they
period.
were recapitulating the typical walking stride. This
These variables are important because they are
will provide the dog with adequate passive range
all interrelated, as the muscle has only so much
of motion for a cool-down period.
strength and endurance and takes time to recover
Often, working dogs such as police dogs are not
after significant use. Increasing one of these com-
able to warm up before they engage
ein sudden
ponents by any significant amount might necessi-
activity. In this case, it is important to provide the
tate decrease of the other two. For example,
dog with a cool-down period and watch carefully
increasing the height at which a dog jumps should
for signs of injury such as stiffness during the cool-
be accompanied by a reduction of the number of
down or when moving again after a rest period.
 reps, and might require more recovery time and
therefore fewer workouts per week. Trying to push
too much intensity, volume, and frequency at the
Skill training
same time will result in overtraining, and eventu-
ally lead to injury and other health issues such
Skill training consists of the specific training that is
as chronic soreness and general lethargy, illness,
required to teach the dog to successfully compete
 or even acute trauma such as avulsion fractures
192   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
(MacKinnon, 2000). A high-medium-low formula
The detraining period consisted of cessation of the
can be used to avoid overtraining, with intensity,
 strength training protocol, while continuing daily
volume, or frequency being high, one of the others
activities of living. The results showed that the
being medium, and the other being low (Coutts
strength gains established during the training
et al., 2007).
period diminished only minimally during the first
To help prevent overtraining owners/handlers
12 weeks of detraining, but declined more between
should be encouraged to:
12 and 31 weeks of detraining (Lemmer et al., 2000).
Together, these studies suggest that continued
(1)
Vary the duration, frequency, and intensity of
exercise, even of a relatively gentle nature, is essen-
training throughout the week.
tial to maintain levels of fitmess that will shorten
(2)
Give the dog 1 day of from training every
the length of time for recovery from an injury and
week.
return to competition sports
③)
Give the dog a month (30 consecutive days)
 iaaa ua pe un w 
The dog should undertake no skill training
Age-appropriate conditioning
during this time and only mild to moderate
and sports training
strength and endurance training. This last
suggestion can be dificult for some owner/
Young, growing dogs undergo significant physical
handlers to comply with.
changes, especially during the first 12-18 months
of life before the physes have closed. This means
they have different capabilities for, and adapta-
Effects of detraining
tions to, exercise. For this reason, training pro-
grams for young canine athletes should not
Canine athletes frequently take substantial breaks
be just scaled-down versions of adult training pro-
 from competition, and it is of interest to know what
grams. There are marked differences in coordina-
effects those breaks might have on conditioning
fion, strength, and stamina between puppies and
and a dog's aerobic capacity. There are few studies
adults. Puppies have lower anaerobic capabilities,
of detraining in dogs, but studies in horses and
are less metabolically efficient, and have less effi-
humans can provide us with clues as to the poten-
cient thermoregulatory mechanisms (Bright, 2001).
tial effects of detraining in dogs. In one study, eight
For long-term health in canine athletes and
Canaan dogs were exercised on a treadmill until
working dogs, it is important to avoid intense
they achieved a level of fitness that allowed them
training until the physes are closed. The physes of
to run 8.7km/h at 10 degrees incline for an hour
different bones close at different ages (Table 10.2).
without their temperature elevating above 40°C or
The larger the breed, the later the physes close. In
their heart rate above 250bpm. They then were put
addition, it is well established that the physes of
on a program of complete cage rest. Within 3-5
weeks, there was a significant loss in their fitmess
Table 10.2 Ages at which the physes close
(ability to perform the above exercise) (Sneddon
et al., 1989).
 Physis
Closure-range (months)
 In another study, yearling Thoroughbred horses
were trained for 6 months, and then placed on
Forelimb
Tuber scapulae
4-7
pasture for 8 hours a day and stall rest at night for
10 weeks. The exercise that they obtained on
Proximal humeral physis
9-15.5
Proximal radial physis
4.5-11
pasture was sufficient to maintain the gains in VO2
max, cardiac output, and stroke volume that were
 Pelvic Limb
Femoral head
4.5-18
established during training (Mukai et al., 2006).
Tibial condyles
4.7513.75
In a study of the effects of detraining in humans,
Tibial tuberosity
4.7514.5
 men and women underwent strength training for
9 weeks, then experienced detraining for 31 weeks.
Adapted from (Newton and Nunamaker, 1985)
Chapter 10 Conditioning and Retraining the Canine Athlete 
193
dogs that are spayed or neutered prior to puberty
taught the appropriate skills, are provided with a
experience delayed closure (Salmeri et al., 1991).
well-controlled, progressive program, and are not
The best way to know whether the physes of a
subjected to repetitive stresses.
 gonadectomized dog are closed is to radiograph
 For endurance training such as long-distance
the femoral heads and tibial tuberosities, which are
running, the story may be a bit different. Rurning
the last physes in the body to close.
depends on aerobic power—the ability to transport
The difference in texture between the calcified
oxygen from the air to produce energy in the
bone and the uncalcified physes makes the physes
muscle cells. Endurance training can increase
susceptible to injury. The physis is the weakest area
aerobic power in adults by up to 30%. But in chil-
of the growing skeleton, weaker than the nearby
dren, the maximum increase, even with very hard
 ligaments and tendons that connect bones to other
 training, is only about 10% (Borms, 1986; Zauner
bones and muscles (Shire & Shultz, 200l). In a
et al., 1989). The cardiovascular system of a preado-
growing dog, a serious injury to a joint is more
 lescent youngster is simply not mature enough to
likely to damage a growth plate than the ligaments
-u jo ssas [einoisud a cn m idepe 
that stabilize the joint. An injury that would cause
distance rurning.
e ul sisAud au amfui ues Sop impe ue ui uieids e
Furthermore, while long-distance rurning does
young dog. If a physis is injured, it can prematurely
not seem to harm the cardiopulmonary systems of
close, resulting in a shortening or malformation of
children, overuse or repetitive trauma injuries rep-
the leg. This can limit or abrogate the dog's ability
resent approximately 50% of all pediatric sports-
to have a performance or working career (Harasen,
related injuries (Valovich McLeod et al., 2011).
2003)
Again, maturity is at issue. Up to about age 16, the
While physeal injuries can be caused by an acute
growing cartilage in the long leg bones and sur-
event, such as a fall or a blow to a limb, chronic
rounding the joints is relatively soft. Continuous
injuries to the physes also can occur from overuse
foot-to-road pounding can easily injure the carti-
of young growing bones. Canine sports medicine
lage during miles of training (Loud et al., 2005). In
and rehabilitation professionals have observed that
addition, a child's leg bones can grow very rapidly.
agility dogs that are taught to weave or jump at a
'sdu s uam ann p Ae
 Sumoe atm Aaagnadai pauien are pue ase Sumon
the muscles and tendons that span the joints
have an increased risk of chronic injuries, particu-
stretch, rather than grow. As a result, the tissue can
larly to the spine, later in life. Agility dogs, particu-
 get very tight, like taut elastic bands, increasing the
larly those of larger, more heavy-set breeds such as
risk of injuries.
Golden Retrievers, that present with career-ending
 There are psychological considerations as well.
lumbosacral disease frequently have a history of
For many children, intense training can lead to
being eager, fast weavers that were overtrained as
problems like anxiety and chronic fatigue (Winsley
young dogs. This condition appears to be much
& Matos, 2011). Such problems can easily take the
less common in dogs that begin intensive agility
fun out of the activity and could foster an umhealthy
training when physically mature. Overuse
or
attitude toward sport, exercise, and physical fimess
repetitive trauma injuries represent approximately
 in general.
50% of all pediatric sport-related injuries (Valovich
 Bones grow and function the same, whether they
McLeod et al., 2011). There is a significant need for
make up the skeleton of a child or a dog. We can
research to increase our understanding of the
learn a great deal from studies that have been
effects of physically taxing sports
LO
canine
performed in human athletes because people can
athletes.
u    p m  
 Research on the effects of resistance training on
and can verbalize their emotions about training.
young human athletes suggests that moderate
Hopefully, more studies in dogs will be performed
strength training can be beneficial in children
in the future.
(Fedewa & Ahn, 2011; Gunter et al., 2012). Coaches
Guidelines for the types of exercise to which
that place young athletes on strength-training pro-
puppies and growing dogs can be exposed are
grams must ensure that the athletes are properly
 provided in Table 10.3. These guidelines err on the
Young puppies should
 be exercised with
reasing strength or
endurance. Much of
until the physes have
 self-directed play.
ale s8op 'a2e s!u1 1g
should be delayed
relatively immature
duration, frequency
ligh impact and
and intensity of 
exercise should 
fully closed.
Comments
incr
fully
they :
6
Skill training, such as sit, down,
strides, how to use lead legs, etc.
Begin repetitive flyball box work
no higher than carpus height.
carpus to elbow height. Jump
 Suien alod aeam Ale on
gradually
Increase jumps to competition
that causes the spine to flex
 collect and extend
that causes the spine to flex
stand, stay, and touch.
Jump training using &
Low teeters
laterally
distance,
laterally
height 
 Skills 
Wobble boards
Ladder work on 
Ladder work
All of the above, 
 soft surfaces, 
Side-stepping
 Perch work
 All of the above
 Proprioception
Over ladder
and L 
Back up
hills 
:sn|d
exercise with three
endurance training.
 Begin aerobic
istances/times
Table 10.3 Age-appropriate conditioning and sports training
duration of 
week and
Swimming
Endurance
None
None
+
dragged on the ground
Beg and beg/stand/beg
on hard & soft surfaces
Tugging high and low
three to four times a week
 Short walks or hikes
appropriate-sized dog
All of the above, plus:
the above, plus:
Jump chutes
 physioball
Activities
Strength
Wave
Crawl
Under 6 
6 Months
months
closure
closure
Age
194
Chapter 10 Conditioning and Retraining the Canine Athlete 
195
side of caution, preventing young dogs from expe-
sports retrainer can provide a detailed program of
riencing extremes of physical activity because of
progressive at-home exercises and sport-specific
the problems that can develop in young adult and
 training advice to help the dog regain its competi-
middle-aged dogs that are trained and exercised
-jdandde a uo uen pue uonpuon lenisaud aan
excessively prior to the closure of growth plates.
 ate obstacles in the appropriate order to continue
Some dogs are driven to exercise even at young
Amfuan jua aaid pue ssanoid Suruasuans au
ages and will push themselves beyond the limits
The retraining program should begin with the
of safety. Be sure to set boundaries for your clients'
 components of the dog's work that are least stress-
dogs with the goal of increasing their longevity in
ful to the body and best protect the dog from rein-
performance.
jury, then gradually progress to more complex
physical requirements of the sport/job. For EX-
ample, agility dogs that have had surgery for CCL
insufficiency should start retraining in that sport
Retraining the canine athlete
 using low jumps and straight-line sequences. Then
they can gradually progress to tighter turns and
The primary goal of physical rehabilitation is to
higher jumps. Obstacles like the weave poles,
heal and then to strengthen the affected limb/
which apply significant torque to the stifle joint,
muscles while making sure to support the rest of
should be the last skills to retrain.
the body through the healing and strengthening
In addition, the owner/handler should be
advised how to monitor the dog to determine
complete diagmosis, not just a veterinary diagnosis
whether the retraining program needs to be modi-
that addresses the major problem, but also a list
aap os ane je soop m uaddeq us siui pa
of secondary problems that might accompany the
to work that they risk reinjury, because the dog is
 presenting problem or follow as a result of the
just progressing more slowly than expected, or
because other injuries surface that were masked by
 include any or all of manual therapy, modalities
the more urgent injury. Depending on the injury,
such as therapeutic ultrasound, transcutaneous
it takes weeks to months of retraining (three to
electrical neuromuscular stimulation (TENS), laser,
four training sessions a week) to go from pet-level
neuromuscular electrical stimulation (NMES),
fitmess to working dog fitmess, although this is
and /or magmetic field therapy as well as underwa-
highly variable depending on the dog's injury, pre-
ter treadmill, swimming, and therapeutic exercises.
injury fimess level, its age, size, the compliance and
However, it should be a unified process that takes
training experience of the client, and other factors.
into account the dog's structure, fitmess level,
It is essential that a canine sports retrainer be
and planned performance/working activities.
kmowledgeable about and have significant experi-
Once the dog has reached pet-level fimess, the
ence with the following:
canine athlete or working dog will need to begin
to retrain in the activities that it has to undertake
 Exercise physiology and nutrition for the canine
to perform its sport(s) or job. Sports retraining is
athlete
the process of training the canine athlete to go from
Developmental conditions that affect a dog's
functional to competitive. A human athlete might 
 performance, such as hip or elbow dysplasia,
rae Araaona ui diay ch isidera [eisaud e aa
osteochondrosis
an injury or surgery, but will need the help of a
Injuries that can occur in the canine athlete,
sports medicine specialist to decide what exercises
such as cranial cruciate ligament insufficiency,
as well as how much and in what order they should
iliopsoas strain, medial shoulder instability,
 be used to get back into condition for competition.
uo os pue
Likewise, an agility dog that has had surgery for a
Various surgical techniques that are used for
fragmented medial coronoid process, for example,
repair, such as the comparative risks and ben-
will engage in a period of rehabilitation
to
efits of TPLO, TTA, and extracapsular tech-
strengthen the leg muscles and regain full flexion
niques for repair of cranial cruciate ligament
and extension of the elbow joint. At that point, a
insufficiency
196   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Principles of canine rehabilitation for develop-
?
 The sports in which the dog competes and the
mental conditions, injuries, and surgical repair
particular levels (e.g., what tiles does the dog
in the canine athlete
have?) or the specific tasks that a working dog
：
 Drugs that can affect a dog's performance
must undertake
 The sports in which dogs compete. It is particu-
The owner/handler's goals in each sport
larly important that the sports retrainer be
● The dog's structure, including angulation front
actively observing or competing in canine
and rear, length of body relative to height at the
sports and be familiar with curent training
withers, amount of bone, and so on
techniques since they can impact a dog's return
● The dog's current level of fitmess (muscle size
 to competition or the potential for later reinjury.
(auo pue
In addition, the sports retrainer should be very
● The kinds of strength and endurance exercises
familiar with the muscles that are used for dif-
the owmer/handler worked on with the dog
ferent aspects of the various canine sports.
when it was healthy
 Previous injuries or illnesses the dog has expe-
 The length of the sports retraining period depends
rienced, including stresses on other parts of
 on many factors, including
the body due to compensation for the current
condition
 The dog's age. Older dogs take a little longer to
The food, supplements, and medications that
regain their competition condition.
the dog is receiving.
The dog's level of fitmess when first entering
rehabilitation. Canine athleteshave an edge over
Sports retraining programs should address the
the average pet dog because they usually are in
same categories of conditioning that were dis-
better muscular condition when injured. This is
cussed in detail earlier: strength training, en-
a significant advantage in rehabilitation that
durance training. proprioception and balance,
 generally shortens the sports retraining period.
 preparation and recovery, and skill training.
 The nature of the injury/surgery/illness. For
The sports retrainer should look at the client's
example, a dog that has just been diagmnosed
dog holistically. In addition to providing informa-
with Addison's disease might see a canine sports
tion on fitmess exercises and sports-specific train-
retrainer to get a plan for training and compet-
 ing, the sports retrainer should advise the owner/
ing in agility that will help minimize stress while
handler on the following if appropriate:
 maximizing muscle strength and overall fimess.
This dog will likely be able to compete within
weeks of diagnosis. In contrast, a dog that has
●The patient's diet and any changes that might
had surgery for medial shoulder instability will 
be made to improve healing and promote
require very specific, progressive exercises to
muscle strength. For example, the sports
gradually increase weight bearing and loading
retrainer may advise the client on levels and
of the shoulder joint in the context of the specific
digestibility of proteins and fats in the patient's
sport(s) in which the dog competes to protect the
diet to help provide the building blocks for
shoulder from reinjury. The sports retraining
healing and energy for exercise.
period for this dog would be 2-3 months or
 Nutritional or other supplements that might
longer depending on its progress.
aid in healing or prevent additional injury. A
sports retrainer might provide advice on
When designing a sports retraining regimen, it
whether the patient should be administered
is important to take into account the following
joint-protective nutraceuticals, for example, as
factors:
well as which ones are best and what dose is
appropriate for the patient.
The age of the dog
 Body work, such as massage, heat/ice treat-
Whether it is spayed/neutered and, if so, at
ments, and so on, that should be provided to
what age
promote healing and prevent reinjury.
Chapter 10 Conditioning and Retraining the Canine Athlete 197
Sports retraining for agility
Twisting the spine, such as happens with dogs
that do fast, one-footed weaves.
The components of agility that produce the most
stress on an injured canine body are
It is important to also be aware of the potential for
 Sudden stops, such as fast 2-on, 2-off contacts
obstacle-associated reinjury, such as falling off the
(where the dog is trained to land with the two
dogwalk or having one foot slip off the teeter or
front feet on the ground and the two rear feet
dogwalk.
on the obstacle), particularly on the A-frame,
The case study provided in this chapter is an
which meets the ground at a more acute angle
example to provide the reader with basic princi-
than the other contact obstacles
 ples. The specific exercises and their progression
 Sharp turns such as threadles, serpentines, tight
should be individualized for each dog depending
pinwheels, 180 degree and 270 degree turns
on the many factors listed earlier.
Case Study 10.2  Agility dog—-post shoulder rehab retraining program
Signalment: 6 y.o. 35-lb. intact male Border Collie.
(3)  Wheelbarrowing, gradually lifting the pelvic limbs
higher to place mrore weight on the front. Note:
History: The patient is one of the top five Border Collies
Retrieving as a form of exercise will be avoided
in the county based on the AKC point system. He had
initially due to the potential for sudden shoulder
a 3-month history of progressive left forelimb lameness
abduction.
and was diagnosed with moderate medial shoulder insta-
bility by arthroscopic examination. He underwent radio
Endurance Exercises. Begin with a 10-minute trot every
frequency therapy followed by 2 months of rehabilitation
ather day at a moderate speed. Increase to 15 minutes
three times a week. The rehabilitation therapist feels that
in 2 weeks, then 20 minutes at 4 weeks. Patient can
it is time for the patient to continue the rehabilitation
swim 5 minutes every other day, swimming continu-
program at horme and to begin to retrain in preparation
cusly rather than jumping in and out of the pool
for agility cormpetition
Increase by a minute a week to 1o minutes a session.
Physical Examination: The patient is in good physical
 Proprioception Exercises. Focus on retraining proprio-
condition and has not been allowed to gain weight
ception of the front legs. Exercises include ladder
during rehabilitation. Measurements of foreleg circum-
work, walking forward, backward, and sideways with
ference 3 in. proximal to the olecranon process reveals
the forelimbs in the ladder.
equal circumference of both forelimbs. Abduction of the
left forelimb with the patient in a standing position is
Skill Training. The patient will start agility training. intro-
approximately 22 degrees on the left and 30 degrees on
ducing the obstacles in the following order (Table
the right. No pain or discomfort can be elicited.
10.4):
 Sraight lines of widely spaced tunnels and chutes
Sports Retraining Plan:
ending at a low table
Straight line of jumps at 8in. plus the above.
 Strength  Exercises. Three  stationary  exercises 
are
Wide circle of jump, tunnels, chutes, tables, and the
assigned.
teeter
(1)  Sit-stand-sit exercises, progressing to down-stand-
Large figure eight-shaped sequences (inside diameter
 down exercises without moving the position of the
of loops is 2oft;) using the above obstacles. Increase
feet.
jump height to 12 in.
(2)
Wave with patient holding the left forelimb in the
Sequences with 90-degree turns on the flat, but not
air for increasing lengths of tirme.
nght after landing from an obstacle. Increase jump
(Continued)
198   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
height to 16in. Add the dogwalk and 2-on, 2-off
massage treatments followed by passive range of
contacts only if the patient does them gently. If the
motion exercises should be performed daily, not
 patient continues to run to the bottom of the obstacle
within 2 hours of exercise and icing.  The patient
and stop abruptly in a 2-on, 2-off position, switch to
should be given appropriate levels of protein (for tissue
using  a  quick  release  or running  contacts if
repair), fat (for energy and to provide a balance of
possible.
omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids for their anti-
Add the A-frame if the patient has running contacts.
inflammatory activity), and calciumr (see Chapter 4).
 Increase the jump height to 20in.
 Patient should be taking high-quality joint-protective
Add weave poles
nutraceuticals and balanced antioxidants. Discuss the
potential use of chiropractic adjustments and acu-
Additional Notes. The patient's shoulder should be iced
 puncture. Discuss ways to monitor the patient's prog-
for 20 minutes after exercise, whether skill training.
ress including time to fatigue, muscle size and tone,
competing. or fitrness training.  At-home heat and
evidence of favoring the leg.
Algeisu! japinous lepaw joy Aasins woy Sujaaonai op Ale ue joy weisond Suuienai e jo aldwex3 tot ajgel
Max. no.
Amount of
Weeks
Obstacles
obstacles 
Sequence characteristics
 Jump heights
training
1 and
Jumps,
8
Straight lines only, with
 Small
Tall 
Three to four
2
tunnel,
turns accomplished by
4"
sessions per week
table
 running through
maximum 10
rounded tunnels or after
minutes per
a stop on the table
session
3 and
Add tire
10
Add gradual curves, no
6"”
12"
Three to four
4
and teeter
less than 30' in diameter
 sessions per week
maximum 15
minutes per
 session
5 and
Add low
12-14
Add wide pinwheels
8"
16"3
16b
16"
 Four to five
6
dog walk
- 20' inside diameter
sessions per week
and A-frame
maximum 15
minutes per
session
7 and
Medium
16-18
 Add right angled turns,
8"d
10e
16”
20"
20"
Four to five
8
height dog
tighter pinwheels
sessions per week
walk and
maximum 15
A-frame
minutes per
session
pue 6
Add weave
18-20
Add 180 and 270
8"
12"
16"
20"
24"
Four to five
10
 poles, dog
degree turns in
sessions per week
walk and
sequences
maximum 20
A-frame at
minutes per
full height
 session
*For dogs that will jump 16" in competition.
*For dogs that will jump 20" in competition.
For dogs that will jump 24" in competition.
 dFor dogs that will jump &" in competition.
*For dogs that will jump 12" in competition.
Chapter 10 Conditioning and Retraining the Canine Athlete
66
References
HIRUNTRAKUL, A., NANAGARA, R., EMASITHI, A.,
& BORER, K.T. 2010. Effect of once a week endurance
exercise on fitmess status in sedentary subjects. ∫ Med
AAGAARD, P. & ANDERSEN, J.L.2010. Effects of
Assoc Thai, 93, 1070-1074.
HUANG, JS., PIETROSIMONE, B.G., INGERSOLL,
endurance athletes. Scard ∫ Med Sci Sports, 20(Suppl.
C.D., WELTMAN, A.L., & SALIBA, S.A. 2011. Sling
2), 3947.
exercise and traditional warm-up have similar effects
AMIRI-KHORASANI, M., ABU OSMAN, N.A., &
on the velocity and accuracy of throwing. ∫ Strength
YUSOF, A. 2011. Acute effect of static and dynamic
Cond Res, 25, 1673-1679.
stretching on hip dynamic range of motion during
KNUTTGEN, H.G. 2003. What is exercise? A primer for
instep kicking in professional soccer players. ∫ Strergth
practitioners. Phys Sportsmed, 31, 31-49.
Cond Res, 25, 1647-1652.
KRAEMER, W.J.2003.Strength training basics: designing
BAUER, N.B., ER, E., & MORITZ, A. 2012. Effect of sub-
workouts to meet patients' goals. Phys Sportsmed, 31,
maximal aerobic exercise on platelet function, platelet
3945.
activation, and secondary and tertiary hemostasis in
KRAEMER, W.J. & ZATSIORSKY, V.M. 2006. Science and
dogs. Armt / Vet Res, 73, 125-133.
Practice of Strength Training, 2nd ed. Champaign, IL:
BIEN, D.P. 2011. Rationale and implementation of ante-
Human Kinetics Publishers.
-Ord dn-uiem uoquaaaid Ainlu juauegt aeionis rol
LEMMER, IT., HURLBUT, D.E., MARTEL, G.F., TRACY
grams in female athletes. J Strergth Cond Res, 25,
B.L., IVEY, FM., METTER, E.J., FOZARD, J.L., FLEG,
271-285.
J.L., & HURLEY, B.F. 2000. Age and gender responses
BORMS, J. 1986. The child and exercise: an overview.
to strength training and detraining. Med Sci Sports
ISports Sci, 4, 3-20.
Exerc, 32,1505-1512.
BRIGHT, J.M. 2001. The cardiovascular system. In:
LOUD, K.J., GORDON, C.M., MCHELI, L.J., & FIELD,
Hoskins, J.D. (ed.), Veterinary Pediatrics: Dogs and
A.E. 2005. Correlates of stress fractures among pre-
Cats from Birth to Six Months, 3rd ed. Philadelphia:
adolescent and adolescent girls. Pediatrics, 115,
W.B. Saunders.
e399-e406.
COUTTS, A., REABURN, P, PIVA, T.J., & MURPHY, A.
LOUIS,E., RAUE, U.,YANG,Y.,JEMIOLO,B.,& TRAPPE,
2007. Changes in selected biochemical, muscular
 S. 2007. Time course of proteolytic, cytokine, and myo-
strength, power, and endurance measures during
 u asxa a ane srxa a ui
aneat Aqinr ur suadei pue uuoeaiaao aeap
skeletal muscle. ∫ Appl Physiol, 103, 1744-1751.
players. Int / Sports Med, 28, 116-124.
MACDOUGALL, J.D., GIBALA, M.J., TARNOPOLSKY,
FEDEWA, A.L. & AHN, S. 2011. The effects of physical
M.A., MACDONALD, JR, INTERISANO, S.A., &
activity and physical fitmess on children's achievement
YARASHESKI, K.E. 1995. The time course for elevated
and cognitive outcomes: a meta-analysis. Res Q Exerc
muscle protein synthesis following heavy resistance
Sport,82,521-535.
exercise. Can / Appl Physiot, 20, 480-486.
FOLLAND, J.P. & WILLIAMS, A.G. 2007. The adapta-
MACKINNON, L.T. 2000. Special feature for the Olym-
tions to strength training: morphological and neuro-
pics: effects of exercise on the immune system: over-
logical contibutions to increased strength. Sports Med,
training effects on immunity and performance in
37, 145-168.
athletes.Immunol Cell Biot,78,502-509.
FRADKIN, A.J., ZAZRYN, T.R., & SMOLIGA, J.M. 2010.
MAGALHAES, T.,RIBEIRO,F, PINHEIRO,A.,&
-As e aueroad Tetsd uo dn-uuem jo sio
OLIVEIRA, J. 2010. Warming-up before sporting activ-
tematic review with meta-analysis. / Strength Cond Res,
ity improves knee position sense. Phys Ther Sport, 11,
24, 140-148.
86-90.
GUNTER, K.B., ALMSTEDT, H.C., & JANZ, K.F. 2012.
 MAITLAND, M.E. 2012. Purposeful exercise, including
Physical activity in childhood may be the key to opti-
  r r s  a
mizing lifespan skeletal health. Exerc Sport Sci Rev, 40,
Med, 22, 292-293.
13-21.
MASON, O.J. & HOLT, R. 2012. Mental health and physi-
HARASEN, G. 2003. Common long bone fractures in
cal activity interventions: a review of the qualitative
small animal practicepart 1. Can Vet §, 44, 333-334.
literature.  Mert Health, 21, 274-284.
HARRIDGE, S.D. 2007. Plasticity of human skeletal
MENOR-CAMPOS,
D.J, MOLLEDA-CARBONELL,
muscle: gene expression to in vivo function. Exp
J.M., & LOPEZ-RODRIGUEZ, R. 2011. Effects of exer-
Physiot,92,783-797.
Sop e u aram iee uo jous uy pe as
HAWKE, T.J. & GARRY, D.J. 2001. Myogenic satellite
shelter. Vet Rec, 169, 388.
cells: physiology to molecular biology. / Appl Physiol,
MUKAI, K.,OHMURA, H., HIRAGA, A.,ETO, D.,
91, 534551.
TAKAHASHI, T., ASAI, Y., & JONES, J.H. 2006. Effect
200   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
of detraining on cardiorespiratory variables in young
Pediatrics: Dogs and Cats frorm Birth to Six Months, 3rd
thoroughbred horses. Equine Vet I Suppl, 36, 210-213.
ed. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 402.
NEWTON, C.D. & NUNAMAKER, D.M. 1985. Textbook
SIMIC, L., SARABON, N., & MARKOVIC,G.2012. Does
of Smalt Animat Orthopedics, 1st ed. Philadelphia: Lip-
 pre-exercise static stretching inhibit maximal muscu-
pincott Williams & Wilkins.
lar performance? A meta-analytical review. Scand {
PERRIER, E.T., PAVOL, M.J., & HOFFMAN, M.A.
Med Sci Sports, Epub ahead of print.
2011. The acute effects of a warm-up including static
SNEDDON, JC., MINNAAR, PP., GROSSKOPF, J.F., &
cr dynamic stretching on countermovement jump
GROENEVELD, H.T. 1989. Physiological and blood
height, reaction time, and flexibility. ∫ Strength Cond
biochemical responses to submaximal treadmill exer-
Res, 25, 1925-1931.
cise in Canaan dogs before, during and after training.
PHILLIPS, S.M., TIPTON, K.D., AARSLAND, A., WOLF,
I S Afr Vet Assoc, 60, 87-91.
S.E., & WOLFE, R.R. 1997. Mixed muscle protein sym-
STEPIEN, R.L., HINCHCLIFF, K.W., CONSTABLE, PD.,
thesis and breakdown after resistance exercise in
& OLSON, J. 1998. Effect of endurance training on
humans. Am / Physiot, 273, E99-107.
cardiac morphology in Alaskan sled dogs. ∫ Appl
PURVIS, D., GONSALVES, S, & DEUSTER, PA. 2010.
Physiot,85,1368-1375.
Physiological and psychological fatigue in extreme
STOJANOVIC, M.D. & OSTOJIC, S.M. 2011. Stretching
conditions: overtraining and elite athletes. PM R, 2,
-oadsiad puaino eqoog u uoguaaand Ainfu pu
442450.
tives. Res Sports Med, 19, 73-91.
RAICHLEN, D.A., FOSTER, A.D., GERDEMAN, G.L.,
VALOVICH MCLEOD, T.C., DECOSTER, L.C., LOUD,
SEILLIER, A., & GIUFFRIDA, A. 2012. Wired to
KJ., MCHELI, L.J., PARKER, J.T., SANDREY, M.A., &
run: exercise-induced endocanmabinoid signaling in
WHITE, C. 2011. National Athletic Trainers' Associa-
humans and cursorial mammals with implications for
opad jo uouaand uaaies uonisod uon
the "runmer's high". ∫ Exp Biot, 215, 1331-1336.
overuse injuries. / Atht Train, 46, 206-220.
RIVERO,J.L.,VANBREDA,E.,ROGERS,C.W.,LINDNER,
VINA, J., SANCHIS-GOMAR, F., MARTINEZ-BELLO,
A., & VAN OLDRUITENBORGH-OOSTERBAAN,
V, & GOMEZ-CABRERA, M. 2012. Exercise acts as a
M.M. 2008. Unexplained underperformance syndrome
drug; the pharmacological benefits of exercise. Br ∫
in sport horses: classification, potential causes and rec-
Pharmacol, 167, 1-12.
ognition. Equine Vet J, 40, 611-618.
WARREN, B.S., WAKSHLAG,J.J., MALEY,M., FARRELL,
SALMERI, K.R., BLOOMBERG, M.S.,SCRUGGS, S.L., &
T.J.,STRUBLE, A.M., PANASEVICH, M.R.，&
SHILLE, V. 1991. Gonadectomy in immature dogs:
WELLS, M.T. 2011. Use of pedometers to measure the
effects on skeletal, physical, and behavioral develop-
relationship of dog walking to body condition score in
ment. / Am Vet Med Assoc, 198, 1193-1203.
obese and non-obese dogs. Br J Nutr, 106(Suppl. 1),
SAMUKAWA, M., HATTORI, M., SUGAMA, N., &
S85-S89.
TAKEDA, N. 2011. The effects of dynamic stretching
WINSLEY, R. & MATOS, N. 2011. Overtraining and elite
on plantar flexor muscle-tendon tissue properties.
young athletes. Med Sport Sci, 56, 97-105.
Mar Ther, 16, 618-622.
ZAKAS,A.,DOGANIS,G.,ZAKAS,N.,&VERGOU,A.
SEENE, T., KAASIK, P., & UMNOVA, M. 2009. Structural
2006. Acute effects of active warm-up and stretching
Sunsan pue sheredde aoeuos ut siuauaue.liean
on the flexibility of elderly women. / Sports Med Phys
skeletal muscle remodelling: effect of exercise training.
Fitress, 46,617-622.
ISports Med Phys Fitress, 49, 410-423.
ZAUNER, C.W., MAKSUD, M.G., & MELICHNA, J.
SHIRE, P.K. & SHULTZ, K.S. 2001. The skeletal system in
1989. Physiological considerations in training young
veterinary pediatrics. In: Hoskins, J.D. (ed.), Veterinary
athletes. Sports Med, 8, 15-31.
11
Assistive Devices, Orthotics
Prosthetics, and Bandaging
llaria Borghese, MS, MA, OTR/L, Lisa Fair, BS, CCRA,
Martin Kaufmann, C-Ped, BSBA, and Patrice M. Mich,
DVM, MS, Dipl ABVP, Dipl ACVA, CCRT
Summary
Veterinary sports medicine/rehabilitation therapists have at their disposal an increasingly large
selection of bandage alternatives, coaptation devices, and assistive aids to improve their
patients' healing and function. Bandages are most often circumferential applications that are
used to support a healing structure or stabilize a body part. They should be monitored care.
fully and changed regularly to avoid complications such as swelling, abrasions, joint laxity.
and contracture. Coaptation devices include orthoses, splints, and soft supports. Orthoses are
Used to stabilize a limb and assist with ambulation. They are made from a cast of the affected
limb using high-temperature plastics and metal hinges. Prefabricated, off-the-shelf splints and
soft supports come in numerous styles and sizes. Customized splints used for joint immobi-
lization are made of low-temperature thermoplastics, which are molded directly onto the
affected limb. Custom soft supports are made of malleable and versatile materials, and fab-
ricated using measurements of the affected area. The advantages of customized devices
include the reduction of pressure sores, improved biomechanics, increased tolerance, and
gait, and functional mobility, and include dynamic spl ints, harnesses, and carts. The rehabili-
tation therapist plays an integral part in determining the appropriate device, ordering and
fitting the device, and assisting with patient acclimati zation and gait re-training. Client educa
tion includes goal-setting, proper donning/doffing techniques, wear schedule, care of device,
oe ues auapuadapu! ieuoung 'eunen anssi leuanod so ped Apoq jo luouow pue
be gained with environmental modifications such as elevated feeders, block steps, and ramps.
Carine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation, First Edition. Edited by M. Christine Zink and Janet B. Van Dyke.
@ 2013 John Wiley &t Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
2 01
202   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Historical perspective and the advent of
anticipate the need for such rehabilitation. How-
veterinary orthotics and prosthetics
ever, in modern practice, it is clear a mechanical
device must be coupled with rehabilitation to max-
The use of orthotics and prosthetics to assist
imize its use and the patient's success. The main
humans in ambulation and functional indepen-
aim of rehabilitation is to restore and preserve
dence was first recorded in 2700 BC (Seymour,
maximum independence of action and functional-
2002). In the past century, veterinary medicine has
ity (Geertzen et al., 2001). With respect to veterinary
advanced in technology and sophistication co-
patients, an additional aim is to prolong active and
incident with the increasing value and importance
comfortable life to prevent premature euthanasia.
of companion animals. State-of-the-art veterinary
Rehabilitation is a medical specialty concerned
health care now includes a new industry called
with the prevention, diagnosis, treatment, and
veterinary orthotics and prosthetics (V-OP). The
management of disabling diseases, (
disorders,
acronym distinguishes it from the human specialty
 and injuries typically of a musculoskeletal, cardio-
referred to as Human Orthotics and Prosthetics
vascular, neuromuscular, or neurological nature
(H-OP).
by physical means. Biomechanics encompasses
The techniques and materials used in H-OP are
easily translated into V-OP with specific modifica-
ics, physics, and mathematics (Bedoto, 2006).
tions to account for quadruped ambulation and
Pathomechanics deals with the abnormal effect of
the significantly greater magnitude of force gen-
static and dynamic forces on the body as a result
erated by veterinary patients relative to humans.
of neurologic, muscular, and skeletal disorders.
V-OP applies the use of veterinary specific hinges,
Pathomechanics provides understanding of the
uderlying cause of gait deviation and the implica-
tics, titanium, carbon fiber, custom prosthetic paws,
tion of forces acting on the injured body during
and dynamic motion-assist mechanics to the grow-
movement: ground reaction force, inertia, and
 ing understanding of the intricacies of quadruped
gravity. The specialty of orthotics and prosthetics
biomechanics (Adamson et al., 2005). The advan-
addresses pathomechanics through the use of cor-
tages afforded by custom orthoses and prostheses
rective forces including alignment of body posi-
include prevention of cast-related wounds; man-
tion, muscular control, and external mechanical
paeiosse sroenauag ued Kred jo juaase
systems (Bedotto, 2006). A complete discussion of
with functional impairments; improvement
of
the physics of V-OP design is beyond the scope of
 biomechanics, allowing for greater activity and a
this chapter.
significant decrease in compensatory pain; return
The addition of an orthosis or prosthesis adds
to active lifestyle, resulting in decreased obesity
additional challenge to rehabilitative manipulation
and associated comorbidities; improvement in
of movement.
 Comprehensive treatment of a
 quality of life and functional independence, pre-
aap e jo asn mban Amu na
venting the premature decision to euthanize; and
involves marrying the mechanics of the device
the availability of treatment options where none
with the mecharics of the body; the device must
existed before.
become part of the biomechanical system. The
rehabilitation therapist plays an integral part in
uniting the mechanics of body (muscle and nerve
activation, and integration patterns) and device
Biomechanics and pathomechanics: the
into the complex biomechanics of locomotion. In
interrelationship between rehabilitation
this paradigm, the therapist provides physical
and V-OP
treatment, and the prosthetist/orthotist provides
the device or mechanical treatment. The goal of
The application of mechanical devices is not a
this united effort in human practice is to allow the
panacea and not without challenges. Return to
patient to ambulate in a safe, efficient, and func-
functional independence requires reeducation of
tional manner (Bechtol, 1967).
the body as a whole, including muscles, nerves,
Moderm technology has advanced the sophisti-
and the mind. Early pioneers of H-OP did not
cation of veterinary orthotics and prosthetics. What
Chapter 11 Assistive Devices, Orthotics, Prosthetics, and Bandaging 203
is lacking are device-specific rehabilitation pro-
poor quality of life, and premature euthanasia.
grams to enable veterinary patients to fully realize
With these sigrificant consequences in mind, alter-
device potential on par with human patients. The 
 native approaches such as subtotal or elective level
veterinary rehabilitation therapist must have a
amputation coupled with application of prostheses
basic understanding of the purpose, mechanics,
become more appealing. Human medical practice
 and limitations of the device. They must recognize
provides perspective: preservation of normal prox-
complications in a timely manner to prevent injury
imal limb segments is paramount and amputation
and limit time out of the device. Likewise, the V-OP
higher than is absolutely necessary is untenable. A
 professional must understand short- and long-
comparable example is the Symes’ amputation
term rehabilitation goals, the biomechanics 
of
technique for the human foot (Shur & Cook, 1990).
therapeutic exercises, and the limitations of reha-
The structural consequences of a missing
or
bilitation. Ultimately, shared information and
non-weight-bearing thoracic limb in the veterinary
diverse expertise leads to intervention, device
patient have not been adequately characterized.
 modifications, or rehabilitation strategies that max-
The typical 60:40 weight distribution of the quad-
imize patient comfort, endurance, and overall
ruped may significantly increase the severity of
function (Pomeranz et al., 2006).
these consequences. Importantly, body condition
and type become critical factors because obesity
and heavy body type affect the thoracic limbs to a
Implications of limb loss or dysfunction
greater extent than the pelvic limbs. With loss of a
single thoracic limb or limb segment the following
Knowledge of the components of normal quadru-
compensatory adjustments may be seen during
ped gait guides treatment of pathomechanical defi-
ambulation: ventral displacement of the head and
ciencies (see Chapter 2). Quadrupeds who suffer
neck during the weight-bearing phase of gait;
loss of limb function or loss of limb are biome-
explosive thrust of the neck, trunk, and remaining
chanically distinct from bipeds with similar loss.
thoracic limb for propulsion of the cranial half of
Asymmetrical loading of the remaining limbs
the body during the swing phase; medially dis-
and functional deficiencies such as loss of plantar
placed remaining thoracic limb, disproportionate
 and palmar flexor power in propulsion have not
 s aq paons sseu apoq jo auarad
 been quantified in veterinary patients. Conversely,
(>30%), and absorption of the full concussive force
kinetic and kinematic compensations in human
of landing; and kyphosis of the lumbar spine with
amputees have been extensively studied.
：Am-
ventral rotation of the pelvis about the sacrum as
putation causes disruption of the human mus-
body mass is distributed over remaining three
culoskeletal system resulting in asymmetrical
limbs (Figure 11.1).
biomechanics (Nolan & Lees, 2000; Nolan et al.,
 A missing or non-weight-bearing pelvic limb
2003; Kent & Franklym-Miller, 2011; Schoeman ef
an as m saanasn rs aau 
αl., 2011). Mechanical alterations of amputees have
aspects. During ambulation, the propulsive thrust
implications for mobility and for the long-term
of the caudal half of the body is dependent on a
health of joints, muscles, and spine. Both human
single pelvic limb and increased reliance on the
 and veterinary patients develop compensations for
spinal and core muscles to propel the body forward.
functional deficiencies to maintain balance and
Tail movement is altered for balance, the head is
locomotion (Prinsen et al., 201l). However, such
ventrally displaced altering the center of gravity,
compensatory movements are not necessarily effi-
and body mass is shifted onto the forelimbs (>60%)
cient and frequently lead to short- and long-term
(Figure 11.2). In many cases the pelvis is tilted to
complications.
the side of the missing limb with concomitant
The biomechanical implications of limb dysfunc-
rotation of the lumbar spine. Pelvic asymmetry
tion or limb absence include intact limb breakdown
alters spinal aligrment and lumbar epaxial muscle
and the development of pathology associated with
tension. Hypermobility of the lumbar spine in the
myofascial tissue, joints, and spine by virtue of
sagittal, frontal, and transverse planes may increase
altered gait and structural support. In veterinary
the potential for altered kinematics and back pain
patients these pathologies lead to chronic pain,
(Landman et al., 2004; Gomez-Alvarez et al., 2008).
204  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
A
B
Figure 11.1Below carpus prosthesis for amelia of the right
Figure 11.2 Below tarsus prosthesis for traumatic tarso-
thoracic limb distal to the radius and ulna. The
metatarsal amputation. The pathomechanical consequences
pathomechanical consequences of thoracic limb loss (A) can
of pelvic limb loss (upper) can be mitigated with the use of
be mitigated with the use of a properly fitted prosthesis (B).
a properly fitted prosthesis (lower). (Figures are derived from
(Lower figure is derived from video.)
videos.)
Orthoses
Splinting and bracing are described as passive
immobilization to rest a limb segment in a fixed
position (Heijnen et al., 1997). In contrast, an ortho-
sis is any medical device attached to the body to
support, align, position, prevent or correct defor-
mity, assist weak muscles, or improve function
(Deshales, 2002). These dynamic devices provide
 protected motion within a controlled range, prevent
 Or reduce severity of injury, prevent or relieve con-
tracture, allow lax ligaments and joint capsules to
shorten and approach normal distensibilty, and
provide functional stability for an unstable limb
segment (American Academy of Orthopaedic Sur-
geons, 1987; Prokop, 2006) (Figure 11.3).
Surgical management of many orthopedic con-
ditions in veterinary species remains the standard
Figure 11.3 Bilateral double articulating carpus/paw
orthoses stabilize biplanar carpal instability (hyper-extension
of care and the preferred therapeutic choice.
of the radiocarpal joint and valgus due to medial collateral
 The term coaptation refers to approximation and
ligament injury). With proper rehabilitation a normal trot 
involves transmitting compressive or corrective
can be achieved.
Chapter 11 Assistive Devices, Orthotics, Prosthetics, and Bandaging 205
Table 11.1 Orthopedic conditions amenable to veterinary orthotic devices
Common conditions amenable to thoracic limb orthoses:
Elbow
Instability and osteoarthritis
Carpus
Hyperextension
Bi-or triplanar instability
Collateral ligament injury
Arthrodesis postsurgical support
Arthrodesis failure
Prophylactic support for contralateral limb amputation
Paw
Injuries including tendon laceration and digit amputation
Other
Peripheral neuropathy
Brachial plexus distal neuropathy
Common conditions amenable to pelvic limb orthoses:
Stifle
 Cranial cruciate ligament rupture
Patellar luxation (grades 1 and 2)
Collateral ligament injury
Tarsus
Hyperextension
Collateral ligament injury
Failed Achilles tendon repair
Achilles tendon rupture or avulsion postoperative support
Achilles tendon sprain (nonsurgical) without rupture or avulsion
Achilles tendon chronic plantigrade stance
Sciatic neuropathy (tarsal collapse)
Paw
Paw injuries including tendon laceration and digit amputation
Other
Degenerative myelopathy
 Peripheral neuropathy
Sciatic nerve trauma secondary to pelvic fracture/repair
IVDD, spinal canal stenosis, cervical spinal instability
Fibrocartilagenous embolus (FCE)
forces through skin to the boney structures beneath.
Custom extemal coaptation can be used to provide
of surgery, a number of patients are not surgical
 dau pue rdan iems aroaq Amas
prevent
candidates. Until recently, veterinarians had no
wounds or surgical failures caused by splinting.
viable option for these patients. V-OP provides
wet bandages, splint material fatigue /breakdown,
choices using customized, articulated (as needed),
and lack of patient tolerance of a splint. As a
extermal coaptation in the pre- or postoperative
general rule, molded external coaptation devices
periods, as well as in lieu of surgical intervention
(custom) are more efficient stabilizers of bones and
(Table 11.1). Rehabilitation for these nonsurgical
joints than are premade devices (Piermattei et al.,
patients is as critical to successful outcomes as it is
2006). In closely approximating the patient's indi-
for surgical patients (Figure 11.4 and Figure 11.5).
vidual topography and dispersing corrective forces
 over a larger surface area fewer soft tissue prob-
lems arise, and custom devices are better tolerated
Prosthetics
(Piermattei et al., 2006).
At the same time and for a variety reasons
In general, it is advantageous to reestablish a
including financial, personal preference, advanced
normal quadruped structure whenever possible.
patient age, perceived increased anesthetic risk,
Fortunately, veterinary patients are amenable to
206   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Figure 11.4  Use of the physioball to encourage stretch,
balance, and proper weight bearing in a dog with moderate
carpo-metacarpal hyperextension.
Figure 11.6 Dogs acclimate well to prosthetics as seen in
this quad-prosthetic patient whose limbs were severely
damaged by frostbite-induced vasculitis and necrosis at 6
weeks of age.
prosthetic limbs and adapt readily especially
when coupled with prosthetic-specific rehabilita-
tion (Figure 11.6). Congenital defects and traumatic
injuries can be successfully managed with custom
prostheses. In the case of distal limb pathology
such as neoplasia, necrosis, or nonunion fractures,
careful surgical plarning provides the opportunity
 to preserve the functional proximal limb segments.
So-called elective level or subtotal amputation
is preferable therapy to traditional tofal limb
amputation.
At the time of this writing, to suspend a pros-
thetic on the thoracic limb, preservation of 40% of
the radius and ulna is required; for the pelvic limb
the medial and lateral malleoli must be preserved
at minimum. Technological advances such as
 osteointegration and implantable bone topograph-
ical segments may alter these level limits in the
Figure 11.5  Orthosis for stabilization of the cranial cruciate
deficient stifle. Rehabilitation is similar to that required for
patients requires adaptability in socket desigm,
post surgical patients. This dog demonstrates proper weight
 components, and mechanics to accommodate dif-
bearing and balance at the walk.
ferences in injury level, body type and condition,
Chapter 11 Assistive Devices, Orthotics, Prosthetics, and Bandaging 207
Table 11.2 Orthopedic conditions amenable to veterinary prosthetic devices
Thoracic limb prosthetics
Sub-total amputations
Midshaft radius/ulna amputation (40% antebrachium retention required)
Radial-carpal disarticulation
Inter-carpal disarticulation
Carpal-metacarpal disarticulation
Midshaft metacarpal amputation
Amelia
 Congenital limb derangements
Traumatic limb amputation
Pelvic limb prosthetics
Sub-total amputations
Tarsal crural disarticulation
Intertarsal disarticulation
Tarsal-metatarsal disarticulation
Metatarsal amputation
Amelia
Congenital limb derangements
Traumatic limb amputation
species, breed, size, lifestyle, sport/activity, and
●Lifestyle, environment, family dymamic, sport
terrain (Table 11.2).
 or activity.
The use of prosthetics and prosthetic-specific
rehabilitation can improve functional outcomes
and quality of life by guiding intact and prosthetic
limb use. Rehabilitation goals include acclimatiza-
(1)  Observing
the
patient  in 
stance and
tion to the device, balance and proprioception
locomotion
 training, core and appendicular strengthening,
(2)  Defining the primary deficiency in all planes
gait reeducation, and overcoming compensatory
(sagittal, frontal, and transverse)
pathomechanics.
(3)  Identifying compensatory movements.
Specific therapeutic goals (mechanical and physi-
V-OP evaluation, objectives,
cal) must be established based on client goals
 and goal setting
and evaluation findings. Goals must be aligned
with device functionality, purpose, and intended
outcome (i.e., short- or long-term device use).
ing five distinct examinations: general wellness,
Device design is predicated on the evaluation and
orthopedic (skeletal/joint), myofascial (muscle),
these goals. Therefore, this information must be
biomechanical (how joints and muscles work
clearly communicated to the V-OP fabrication lab.
together), and neurologic. The purpose of the eval-
Custom devices are fabricated from a cast mold of
uation is to fully define
the affected limb. Proper casting and device design
are beyond the scope of this chapter. However, it
 Injury or deficit
 should be noted that the quality of the mold along
 Functional and mechanical impairment and
with clear information regarding the case as noted
 implications
above dictate the fit and functionality of the device.
●Comorbidities or complicators
The best outcomes are achieved with close
208   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
communication between the owner, the referring
The FIM is the most widely utilized functional
veterinarian, the V-OP specialist, and a certified
performance assessment tool in human reha-
rehabilitation professional.
bilitation setings (Jensen et al, 2005). The FIM
 Device delivery and follow-up appointments
measures the patient's ability to independently
are needed to ensure proper fit and function and
perform everyday tasks—-Activities of Daily Living
should include
(ADLs)—and purposeful activities—Instrumental
Activities of Daily Living (IADLs). In dogs, ADLs
(1) Assessment of fit
include basic transitions (e.g., sit-to-stand), ambu-
(2) Training of client on proper donning and
lation, toileting, and eating, while IADLs include
doffing of device
purposeful tasks such as stair-climbing, transition-
(3)  Training on proper care of the device and mon-
ing to and from a vehicle, play, and those related
itoring of the limb for potential skin trauma
to service, sport, and work.
associated with improper fit, use, or patient
The FIM and its supplements, rate ADLs and
behavior
IADLs on a 7-point scale ranging from "fully depen-
(4) Initial break-in schedule
dent" (1) to "independent with no aids" (7) (Table
(5)  Initial rehabilitation assessment and plarming
11.3). These scales help to determine the level of
(6)Recheck scheduling.
assistance the animal requires and they help define
the roles of the caretaker. Braces, splints, assistive
Rehabilitation of the V-OP patient requires diagmo-
aids, and environmental modifications can gradu-
sis; assessment; progmosis; a goal-oriented, device-
ate a fully dependent animal to one that that needs
specific treatmentplan; and outcomes measurement
mly minimal assistance (e.g, with orthosis, patient
to determine efficacy of the plan. Veterinary ortho-
bears weight > 75% time with minimal tactile cues)
ses and prostheses are considered durable medical
or is independent with modifications (e.g., with
devices. As such they should never be prescribed
ramp, patient can access the home independently).
or dispensed without client training and a compre-
 hensive follow-up plan. V-OP patients should be
assessed at least armually. Device adjustment and
Definitions
refurbishment are expected in order to continue
meeting therapeutic goals.
For the purpose of uniformity in this section, a
brace is defined as a durable device used for immo-
bilizing a body part. It renders the body part static,
Improving independent functional
rigid, and fixed.
performance through the use of braces,
01 jed Apoq Aue ot patldde aniaap e st uds v
splints, assistive devices, and
environmental modifications
-rojap yaio/uaaad mu-arAmu sure
mity, and/or assist with function. A splint is light-
Measuring functional independence
weight, easy to apply and remove, and adaptable.
It can be static or dynamic, rigid or flexible (Figure
For an injured or otherwise compromised pet,
11.7), and can be used as a coaptation device or
limited functional independence may be restored
 solely for therapeutic purposes (Figure 11.8).
with the use of braces, splints, assistive aids, and/
An assistive aid is a device that facilitates func-
or environmental modifications. To determine
tion, most often transitions, gait, and functional
which device or modification will yield the great-
mobility. Assistive aids can be used independently
est success, fumctional outcomes can be mea-
by the patient (e.g., cart) or managed by the care-
sured in various ways. Several scales have been
taker (e.g., harness).
adapted from human rehabilitative medicine to
assess a pet's functional gains and prognosis.
One such scale is the Functional Independence
Standard and semi-custom splints and braces
Measure (FIM*; Uniform Data System for Medical
With regard to braces and splints, customization is
Rehabilitation).
critical. Years of human intervention have yielded
Chapter 11 Assistive Devices, Orthotics, Prosthetics, and Bandaging 209
Case Study 11.1  Nonsurgical management of Achilles tendon injury
Signalment: 6 y.o. MC Labrador Retriever
History: Right pelvic limb (RPL) lameness occurred after
chasing a squirrel 2 days prior to presentation.
Diagnosis: Common calcaneal tendon sprain grade llc
with associated stretch of the superficial digital flexor
(SDF) tendons
 Presented to V-OP clinic for possible management of
Achilles tendon injury with an orthosis rather than
tenorrhaphy.
Evaluation: Ambulatory x 4. BCS: 5.5/9. Crade 3/5 RPL
lameness. Warm, painful, swelling palpable at the inser-
tion of the Achilles complex on the calcaneal tuberosity.
RPL digits contracted resulting in weight bearing on the
distal aspect of the digital pads. Standing goniometry:
Stifle (right 155°, left 145e); Tibiotarsal joint (right 1279,
left 140%); Metatarsal-phalangeal joints (right 120°,
left 95°)
Figure B11.1  Three configurations of a double articulating
tarsal/paw orthosis for the surgical or nonsurgical
Ultrasonographic Findings: diffusely thickened common
mana gement of Achilles tendon injury. Motion limiter
calcaneal tendon with 0.5 cm core lesion 1cm proximal
locked at 170° extension (left); motion limiter released to
allow 10? of flexion (middle); motion limiter released to
to the calcaneus. Tendon sheath intact. SDF tendon
allow up to 40° of flexion and paw segment removed after
unrermarkable.
full rehabilitation of digital flexor tendons (right).
V-OP Goals:
Rigid fixation of the tarsus in 170? extension for 10
(1) Immobilize tibiotarsal joint to facilitate healing of
weeks with transition to gradual reloading of the tendon
common calcaneal tendon injury.
(articulation with incremental alteration in range of
(2) 
 Controlled, gradual reloading of healed common
motion [ROM[) over additional 6 weeks based on ultra-
calcaneal tendon to facilitate tendon fiber alignment
sonographic evidence of healing. No weight bearing out
 and strengthening.
of the device at any time.
(3)
 Controlled stretching of SDF tendon to allow normal
Gradual reduction of heel height coupled with manual
tendon glide and permit normal weight bearing over 
stretching to stretch and release adhesion of the SDF over
entire plantar paw surface (dorsiflexion).
4 weeks. Paw segrmrent rermoved at 4 weeks to allow full
(4)
Provide a sports/support orthosis to be used after
weight bearing on all pads. Therapeutic exercises focus-
healing is coplete.
ing on controlled eccentric loading and progressing to
active eccentric exercises.
Case Management: Rx: Double articulating tarsus/paw
orthosis with dynamic motion limiters and heel wedge.
Case Follow-Up: use of sport brace during vigorous
(Figure B11.1)
activity required for at least 2 years.
greater variability in the shape and size of the
sized brace to fit a toy breed is demanding since
canine species than any other mammal. Fitting a
the limb's small surface area does not allow ade-
dog with a standard-sized product (e.g., Small,
quate prehension. Similarly, the canine elbow has
 Medium, Large) often is an impossible task. In
little proximal room to anchor a device, and the
addition, the canine patient's limb size and shape
 conical shape of the canine stifle can cause a device
present specific challenges. Finding a standard-
 to slip or drift downward with the animal's normal
210  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Table 11.3 Functional Independence Measure (FlM)
7-point scale rating system
Level of
Number
dependence
Description
7
Complete
Fully independent
independence
Modified
Requiring the use of a
independence
device but no physical
assistance
Supervision
Requiring only standby
assistance or verbal
prompting for safe use of
device
Minimal
Requiring incidental
assistance
physical assistance;
Figure 11.8 Static-progressive device used to reduce soft
patient performs over 75%
tissue shortening in this dog with carpal flexor contracture.
of the task
(Courtesy of Jeffrey Flocker).
E
Moderate
Patient performs 50-75%
assistance
of the task
2
Maximal
 Patient contributes
movement. If not customized, these braces and
assistance
25-49% of the effort
splints often need to be anchored using
a
body harness and/or the contralateral limb. Cus-
Total
Patient contributes < 25%
of the effort or is unable
tomization ensures a more intimate fit, thus
assistance
decreasing slippage and the incidence of pressure
to perform the task
sores while improving patient compliance.
Uniform Data System for Medical Rehabilitation (UDSMR)
Though customized products are ideal, they can
(1993). Guide for the uniform data set for medical
 be expensive and not readily available. In response
rehabilitation. Buffalo, NY: UB Foundation Activities.
 to these challenges, some manufacturers of animal
medical devices have developed standard-sized
products that can be modified to better accommo-
date both the animal's structure and needs. These
products are relatively easy to order and fit, come
 m numerous sizes, can be stocked for quick access,
and are less expensive than their customized cour-
terparts. By being well versed in the availability
and conformability of these products, a practitio-
ner can save valuable time and resources. Being
familiar with the materials and makeup of a pre-
fabricated accessory enables the therapist to adapt
the device for use in a manner other than that for
which it was originally intended. A prefabricated
support can act as a foundation to build upon or
modify (add or remove components) to meet spe-
dific needs.
Standard-sized braces and splints are available
Figure 11.7 Flexible carpal supports provide comfort and
for almost every part of the body including paws
protection during periods of activity. (Courtesy of Deb
(e.g., Thera-Paw Boots, www.therapaw.com), distal
Pierce and Joe Camp.)
extremities (e.g., Jorvet Pet Brace, www.jorvet.com),
Chapter 11 Assistive Devices, Orthotics, Prosthetics, and Bandaging 211
proximal extremities (e.g., Hip Hound), and spine
hinges, internal padding, and hook-and-loop or
(e.g., MB Spinal Brace, www.mbspinalbrace.com).
clip straps (see Orthoses section).
Standard carpal splints are the most prevalent, as
Custom splinting using low-temperature ther-
carpal injuries are common due to the lack of mus-
moplastics (LTTs) has been common practice
cular support and natural protection in that area
in human rehabilitative medicine since the 1960s
(Jaeger & Canapp, 2008). To accommodate the
and has recently gained wide acceptance in veteri-
diverse canine population, standard splints are
nary practice. In general, LTTs are formulated
available in numerous sizes, and some can be mod-
from a combination of rubber and plastic compo-
ified further for greater adaptability. For example,
nents and compressed into flat sheets. When heated
width and height of a splint can be trimmed,
pue
in hot water, the thermoplastic sheet becomes mal-
support can be upgraded or downgraded (e.g.
leable. It is then transferred and draped over the
Carpo-Flex-X,
www.therapaw.com,
Tarso-Flex,
identified body part, setting within minutes into a
www.therapaw.com). In all cases, the devices are
custom-fitted splint. To manage weight, durability,
 easy to apply and remove for inspection of the limb
and flexibility, LTTs can be purchased in sheets of
and rehabilitation.
differing thicknesses, and are either solid or perfo-
A hybrid of the customized and standardized
rated. Thermoplastic components such as rods and
 apparatus is one that is semi-custom, where com-
pellets can be heated in water and adhered to the
ponents are available as stock items and assem-
LTT splint to create molds, outriggers, or reinforce-
bled depending on the patient's requirements (e.g,
ments. Once the splint is formed on the animal, it
ShoulderStabilization
System, www.dogleggs.
is held in place with hook-and-loop straps, making
com). Some ambulation assistive aids such as the
it easy to don/doff to inspect the limb and for
Dorsi-Flex Assist and the Biko Physio Brace
 therapeutic intervention.
(www.biko.co.at) have prefabricated components
There are many brands of LTTs, each with
that are uniquely assembled to provide a better fit
unique (
characteristics (e.g, strength, drape/
and function. These products are often an economi-
contour, working time, surface self-adherence).
cal alternative to fiing an animal with custom-
Two different LTTs are recommended for canine
designed equipment.
applications: (1) For small dogs and toy breeds, a
solid (nonperforated) sheet of 1/16" thick thermo-
plastic with a high degree of drape is used to
contour discreet areas. (2) For medium-to-giant
Custom braces and splints
-sedoa xt ,8/1 jo paaus pos e sop paang
 Custom fabrication becomes essential when a stan-
tic that is strong, with moderate drape, and has
dard or semi-custom product
surface-adhering properties to affix reinforcing
components is employed.
(1)  Is not available in the correct size
Custom LTT splints are advantageous when a
(2)
 Does not meet the specific needs of the patient
short-term bracing solution is needed. Splints are
(3)
)Cannot be altered to meet the patient's needs
made in the clinic, directly on the patient, and can
（4)
 Incorporates a joint or joints not affected by
be modified as needed. LTT materials are relatively
the condition
inexpensive, making them a cost-effective alterna-
(5)  Simply does not exist.
tive to orthoses.
 Customized soft supports are used as postsurgi-
There are three custom choice categories; (1) ortho-
cal reinforcement, as transitional coaptation devices
ses, (2) low-temperature thermoplastic splints, and
post cast removal, and as stabilizing agents follow-
(3) soft supports.
ing Grade 1 and 2 ligament sprains (Jaeger &
Custom orthoses are employed when a durable,
Canapp, 2
 2008). Light and more flexible wraps
heavy-duty, long-term device or graded / controlled
are used to offload painful arthritic joints and for
movement increments are required. Orthoses are
proactive
protection.S
Supportive wraps allow
fabricated from a cast of the animal's body part,
 partial weight bearing so that soft tissue and recov-
using
high-temperature
thermoplastics,
metal
ering structures can gradually adapt to loading.
212Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Figure 11.10 Soft, tarsal support wrap with caudally-based,
elastic, extension-asstive straps to asst in maintaining
tarsal extention.
Figure 11.9 Soft, carpal support wrap with LTT splint
overlay.
ized soft supports can incorporate assistive compo-
 Customized wraps can be made from a variety of
nents that mimic the actions of an injured tendon/
materials including but not limited to neoprene,
 ligament. For example, a neoprene tarsal wrap
nylon, rubber, leather, sheepskin, and moleskin.
can be outfitted with caudally placed extension-
These flexible materials sigrificantly reduce the
assistive straps to aid in maintaining tarsal exten-
incidence of pressure sores, and their malleability
sion in a dog with an Achilles tendon injury (Figure
makes customized soft supports the most versatile
11.10).
choice for splinting. For example, a custom neo-
 prene carpal wrap can be splinted over with LTTs,
to yield an immobilizing brace (Figure 11.9). The
Determining the appropriate device
LTT splint/carpal support combination can be
used when the dog is outdoors or engaged in activ-
With the growing number of choices, it can be
ities that place high stress on the limb/joint. When
difficult to determine which device is most ap-
the dog is indoors or more sedentary, the LTT
 propriate. Though patient history, diagnosis, and
splint can be removed, leaving the animal with
 prognosis are important, of fundamental concern is
lighter, more comfortable protection.
the dog's present level of function. The FIM can be
Soft supports made of loop neoprene are advan-
used to assess the dog's physical abilities and the
 tageous in that they allow adherenice of nylon hook
amount/level of assistance needed to perform daily
straps. These nylon straps come in varied widths
tasks. Short-term goals can then be set to measure
and thicknesses, and when strategically adhered to
 gains. For example, if the short-term goal is
the outer neoprene wrap, can produce a stabilizing
effect. For example, nylon straps adhered in an "X"
（1)
 To prevent re-injury, the device should sup-
formation on the caudal aspect of the neoprene
 port healing structures and protect the joint or
carpal wrap will provide greater stability for a dog
body part
aare sns  sxaau rei m
(2）
To aid in skeletal alignment or correct a defor-
layered for increased rigidity or removed for
 mity, the device should influence the direction
 greater flexibility as needed. In addition, custom-
 of skeletal growth or healing
Chapter 11 Assistive Devices, Orthotics, Prosthetics, and Bandaging 213
(3)
 To prevent or correct a contracture, the device
A
should reduce soft tissue shortening and pre-
B
serve or increase joint motion
（4）
 To assist with functional ambulation or for
therapeutic exercise, the device should act as
a substitute for weak structures and /or loss of
sensory awareness.
There may be multiple goals for an individual
patient, and more than one device may be required.
In human rehabilitation, the use of multiple devices
is common practice. For example, a patient who
suffered a stroke may be outfitted with a functional
splint to assist with ADLs, a dynamic splint for
therapeutic exercises, and a resting splint for night-
time use to protect the sensory-impaired limb from
injury.
Figure 11.11 A. Mock-up of the Dorsi-Flex Assist.
B. Mock-up of the Biko Physio Brace using cohesive wrap
 and elastic tubing.
Ordering a device
 When ordering a custom-made brace or splint, the 
m Arna sampanord Suapno pue puaanseau
ling gait, one may question whether the patient
each manufacturer, and deserve consideration. For
requires a device that provides distal assistance for
example, some devices are ordered via measure-
 dorsi-flexion or one that affords more proximal
ment forms while others require that radiographs
control to advance the whole limb. Both assists can
be sent to the manufacturer. Also, the timing of
be mocked-up in-house using cohesive wrap and
 delivery may affect a product's ability to support
elastic tubing (Figure 11.11). Taking the time to
the patient's short-term goals. While most devices
roughly duplicate a device will ensure that the
have a short turnaround fabrication time (1-2
 most effective support or assist is ordered for the
days) some may require weeks.
patient.
The patient's individual characteristics  also
influence the device's effectiveness. These include
the patient's age, activity level, size and weight,
Carts and harnesses
other orthopedic and/or neurologic conditions
affecting function, circulatory issues, skin sensi-
Functional independence can also be approxi-
tivity/integrity, and activities and environment
mated with the use of carts or harnesses. Beyond
where the device will be used (e.g., device to be
aiding with ambulation, carts and harnesses can
used in the underwater treadmill). The owner's/
provide beneficial therapeutic exercise. Though
handler's motivation and compliance are equally
typically recommended for dogs with neurological
important. For example, a client with rheumatoid
impairments, carts and harnesses can improve
arthritis or otherwise impaired hand function will
mobility in those suffering from a variety of condi-
need an easy dorning/doffing system so that they
tions including but not limited to severe arthritis
can successfully apply and remove the patient's
and obesity. Additionally, carts and harnesses may
splint.
be used in combination with other devices (e.g
 If unsure whether a device will be useful or suf-
 protective boots) to ensure the patient's success.
ficient to meet the patient's goal, creating a rough
Cart companies have significantly expanded
replica of the device can help. Many devices can be
their product lines to offer a variety of support
mocked-up directly in the clinic. For instance, in a
systems and features. Carts can be ordered for the
dog with limited pelvic limb function and knuck-
paraplegic (pelvic or thoracic limb support carts)
214Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
and tetraparetic patient. Similarly, harmess compa-
manufacturers have brought about numerous posi-
nies provide an ample assortment of supportive
 tive changes in our ability to care for our pets. The
equipment for assistance with transitions and
 challenge for rehabilitation therapists is to apply
ambulation. As with carts, there are harnesses that
a r c nd go rqu a a
offload the pelvic and thoracic limbs indepen-
animal patient base. Doing so requires creativity,
dently, and those for whole body support (e.g.
 a thorough understanding of the available devices.
Help 'Em Up Harness).
 and some trial and error. New devices and bracing/
When determining the most appropriate cart or
splinting methods continue to be developed,
harness, consider the size and weight of the dog, the
and their thoughtful application will result in
amount of support needed, the dog's residual
improved quality of life for both the pet and
strength and mobility, and the caretaker's physical
 owner /handler.
abilities (Doyle, 2010). Though harnesses are readily
accepted by the patient, most animals require a
period of adjustment to use a cart effectively.
Select orthopedic bandages and
no-bandage alternatives
Environmental modifications can make
Introduction
a "disabled" pet "abled"
Many articles, chapters, and entire books have
Beyond assistivedevicesand transition/ambulation
been written describing bandaging techniques.
Aq paiqe, apeu aq ues jad ,paiqesip, e 'spie
Two excellent sources are Veterinary Surgery: Small
 modifying their lifestyle and environment. Adding
Animal (Elsevier, 2012) and Small Animal Bandaging,
a ramp to eliminate stair-use or jumping to/from
Casting,and Splinting Techniques (Wiley-Blackwell
a vehicle can help an animal maintain indepen-
2011). Because bandaging can affect ROM of the
dence without assistance. Dogs need to be accli-
 joints, rehabilitation therapy following coaptation
mated to using ramps in both directions. Wide,
 is beneficial. No-bandage alternatives, when avail-
gently sloping, sturdy ramps with textured sur-
able, are noted here. No-bandage alternatives can
faces are most inviting and safest.
reduce risk of complications, allow for improved
ADLs can also be facilitated with in-home modi-
monitoring of wounds, improve patient comfort,
fications. A large breed dog with spinal or balance
 and allow ongoing rehabilitation therapy.
issues can benefit from eating and drinking from an
elevated feeder. An unstable pet can maintain better
balance on a rubberized or carpeted floor and block
steps. Pet gates can be used to deny stairway access
Complications
and prevent accidental falls in a physically compro-
Successful use of bandages and their no-bandage
counterparts rely on appropriate case selection,
therapeutic activities can be adapted for a dog with
-uu asen radoid pue uogenndde aoraap radoid
limited function. For example, a swim in the pool
agement (Oakley, 1999). Despite appropriate device
can still enjoyed with use of a life vest. There are
 numerous websites that cater to special-needs pets,
selection and expert application, complications can
occur. Mild complications such as superficial rub
with devices and ideas to promote functional inde-
sores are not uncommon. When complications
 pendence (e.g., www.handicappedpets.com).
escalate, severe, even limb- and life-threatening,
issues can arise very quickly. Diligent case manage-
ment is imperative to early detection and treat-
Conclusion
ment of complications. Most bandages should be
changed weekly or more often as dictated by the
The combined efforts of the veterinary community
 injury, device, patient temperament and owner
including rehabilitation professionals and product
compliance.
Chapter 11 Assistive Devices, Orthotics, Prosthetics, and Bandaging 215
Case Study 11.2  Subtotal amputation and below-carpus prosthesis
Signalment: 2 y.o. M/C Yorkshire terrier
History: Patient suffered a catastrophic injury to right
thoracic paw after being bitten by another dog. Digits
2,4, and 5 were amputated initially. Patient remains
unwilling to use the right thoracic limb (RTL); remaining
digit is painful on palpation.
Evaluation: Ambulatory 3x. BCS of 4.5/9. Grade 5/5 RTL
lameness. Excellent ROM of remaining joints of the RTL;
good function of contralateral limb. Neurologic exami-
nation unremarkable. Cervical, epaxial, shoulder, ilio-
 pSOas, and thigh muscle sensitivity with restriction likely
causing compensatory gait.
V-OP Goals:
(1)  Weight bearing RTL by providing extension to the
ground to accommodate limb length discrepancy
and align shoulders in frontal plane.
(2)  Allow as much passive range of motion (PROM) and
active range of motion (AROM) as possible for RTL
Figure B11.2  Thoracic limb below carpus prosthesis
proximal joints
with weight shifted onto the prosthetic limb during
rehabilitation session. Postoperative subtotal amputation at
Case Management: Rx: Below carpus prosthesis. (Figure
the level of the carpo-metacarpal joints (inset).
B11.2)
 Subtotal amputation of the right paw via disarticulation
of the carpometacarpal joint preserving the accessory
carpal bone and pad. Suture line placed caudally. Anti-
stage 2 prosthesis at 2 months (10 weeks post amputa-
tion). Fitting of stage 2 permanent prosthesis. Continued
tin prescribed to manage inflammatory and neuropathic
 rehabilitation and comfort management.
pain. Cast molding of residual limb performed 2 weeks
post amputation to allow edema and pain to resolve.
Follow-Up 3 Months Post Trauma: Patient returned to
Fitting of stage-1 prosthesis (socket check) 10 days later.
full activity. Ambulatory using all four limbs. Myofascial
Rehabilitation including acclimatization, gait reeduca-
pain reduced significantly. Posture and gaiting improved
tion, strength, balance, and coordination work. Assess-
with pelvic limbs repositioned beneath the pelvis and
ment over 2 months for pain management; socket
weight bearing more evenly dispersed over all four limbs.
comfort and fit (muscle volume loss with atrophy); appro-
Twice yearly evaluations and device refurbishment as
priate length of extension to the ground; and appropriate
needed.
 prosthetic paw design for her environment. Casting for
Potential complications include
●Growth deformity (with prolonged immobili-
zation in immature animals).
 Swelling and edema
 Interdigital dermatitis and maceration
 Rub sores and abrasions
Client information
 Pressure sores and ulcerations
 Joint laxity or alternatively, joint stiffness and
Owners/handlers must be provided thorough
contracture (with prolonged immobilization)
written instructions outlining proper management
216  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
of the patient and coaptation device. The device
should be kept clean and dry. Instructions should
include twice daily monitoring for:
Toe swelling, warmth, or discharge
 Bandage integrity (slipping.
shifting
or
bunching)
 Moisture, odor, or strikethrough
Patient comfort (i.e., licking or chewing at
bandage, decreased limb use, distressed behav-
ior, depression, or inappetence).
No-bandage alternatives must be checked at the
skin-device interface for any evidence of irritation
or skin breakdown.
Taste deterrents and/or an Elizabethan collar
may be needed to prevent mutilation. Owners are
advised to seek veterinary care if any of the above
Figure 11.12 Carpal flexion bandage. The carpus is
is noted.
aepueg uoixal ledien aul uoixalg aeapow u! pauieuieu
is used to prevent weight-bearing and allow healing of a
paw pad wound.
Carpal flexion bandage
The carpal flexion bandage (Figure 11.12) prevents
 Management of paw pad wounds (Swaim et al.,
weight bearing of the forelimb by immobilizing
2011)
and maintaining the carpus in moderate flexion
 Postoperative management of selected humeral
(DeCamp, 1983; Simpson et al., 2001; Swaim et al.,
and elbow fractures (Simpson et al., 2001)
2011; Canapp et al., 2012). Motion of the shoulder 
 Prevention of forelimb weight-bearing without
 and elbow joints is not restricted (Canapp et al.,
 restriction of the shoulder and elbow (DeCamp.
2012). This bandage is primarily used as protection
1983; Simpson et al., 2001; Swaim et al., 2011;
following flexor tendon repairs but is also useful
Canapp et al., 2012).
to prevent weight-bearing in the forelimb follow-
 ing other orthopedic procedures (DeCamp, 1983;
 Canapp et al., 2012). Decreased ROM is often noted
Modified Robert Jones bandage
following removal of the bandage and may require
rehabilitation therapy to resolve (Canapp et al.,
The Robert Jones bandage (Figure 11.13) and its
 2012). Permanent contracture can occur with pro-
modifications are the most common bandages
longed use (4 weeks or more) (DeCamp, 1983;
applied following orthopedic injury or treatment
Canapp et al., 2012). Therefore, limited extension
(Canapp et al., 2012). The Robert Jones bandage
should begin as early as possible. This bandage can
-is jo poau Arenodan e se pasn Aied si
also be useful to encourage weight bearing in the
lzation for fractures or dislocations at or distal to
contralateral  forelimb
the stifle or elbow (DeCamp, 1983; Canapp et al.,
therapy Prior to application, the patient must be
2012). The less bulky modified Robert Jones
assessed to ensure that carpal flexion is comfort-
bandage, or soft padded bandage, is most com-
able (Swaim et al., 2011). If it is not, alternative
monly used following surgical intervention to limit
bandaging must be considered.
swelling and edema (Canapp et al., 2012). It pro-
vides light compression and partial immobiliza-
tion of the limb (Canapp et al., 2012). This bandage
Indications for use
 is not appropriate for injuries requiring rigid stabil-
 Postoperative management for flexor tendon
ity (DeCamp, 1983; Simpson et al., 2001; Canapp
injuries (DeCamp, 1983; Simpson et al., 2001)
et al., 2012).
Chapter 11 Assistive Devices, Orthotics, Prosthetics, and Bandaging 217
Figure 11.14  The reinforced Robert Jones bandage
incorporates a prefabricated or custom made splint within
the secondary layer of the bandagehere casting tape has
been used to create a custom splint.
porates a rigid material within the secondary layer.
Figure 11.13  Modified Robert Jones bandage applied to
This bandage provides improved immobilization
the forelimb following a mass removal to reduce swelling
and support to the limb and joints (Canapp et al.,
and edema and protect the incision.
2012). It is often used for carpal and tarsal injuries
either as conservative management following mild
Indications for use
sprain/strain injuries or for more severe injury,
until definitive surgical intervention can be per-
●Protection of wounds and skin grafts (Swaim
formed or a long-term support or orthotic device
et al., 2011)
can be created for the patient. Sufficient padding
1
 Dynamization following removal of orthopedic
or donuts should be applied to bony prominences
 devices or reinforced Robert Jones bandage
to prevent rub sores and ulcerations.
(Canapp et al., 2012)
 Protection against swelling and edema follow-
 ing orthopedic or soft tissue injury or surgery
Indications for use
(DeCamp, 1983; Simpson et al., 2001)
Temporary stabilization of fractures distal to
uonzqou puo! ienred pue joddns pin 
the elbow or stifle (DeCamp, 1983; Oakley,
following orthopedic or soft tissue injury or
1999; Canapp et al., 2012)
● Postoperative support following internal repair
 of fractures, luxations and soft tissue injuries
No-bandage alternatives
(DeCamp, 1983; Oakley, 1999; Canapp et al.,
Custom sized carpal and tarsal supports are
2012)
available. Most allow the rehabilitation therapist
 Primary fixation for stable fractures in imma-
to dictate the degree of support/joint mobility
ture animals (Canapp et al., 2012)
●Support for carpal or tarsal instability or soft
through variation in the thickness of the material
used to manufacture the support, detachable straps
tissue injury (Swaim et al., 2011)
● Joint immobilization when necessary for wound
and/or thermoplastic inserts or attachments.
management (Oakley, 1999; Swaim et al., 2011).
Reinforced Robert Jones bandage
No-bandage alternatives
The reinforced Robert Jones bandage (Figure 11.14)
Thermoplastic can be added to the simple no-
is similar to the modified Robert Jones but incor-
bandage alternatives. Prefabricated and custom
218   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Figure 11.15 Spica splint—A splint rod or casting tape is
applied from the toes extending over the scapula or hip to
the dorsal midline. Spica splint applied immediately
following shoulder reconstruction.
veterinary splints are readily available. When long
term coaptation is needed, an orthotic device may
Figure 11.16 DogLeggs Shoulder Stabilization System
be a superior alternative.
(forelimb hobbling system) prevents abduction of the
forelimbs and limits extension and flexion of the shoulders.
Forelimb hobbling system used in conjunction with
Spica splint
rehabilitative therapy for conservative management of MSl.
Spica splints (Figure 11.15) are used primarily
● Management of wounds over the olecranon
to immobilize the shoulder, humerus and elbow
(Swaim et al., 2011)
following internal repair. Pelvic limb use is
 Postoperative support following certain shoul-
umcommon.
der reconstruction procedures.
Indications for use
No-bandage alternatives
 Temporary support of humeral and femoral
A vest with a spica splint cover is available. This
fractures (DeCamp, 1983; Canapp et al., 2012)
 garment also allows for forelimb hobbling in con-
Adjunctive stabilization after internal fixation
junction with or following removal of the spica
of humeral, elbow and femoral fractures
splint. (See manufacturer details for indications of
(Canapp et al., 2012), and elbow luxations
use and application.)
(Swaim et al., 2011)
 Stabilization of greenstick fractures of the
humerus or femur in young animals (DeCamp.
Hobbles
1983; Canapp et al., 2012)
 Conservative management of certain scapular
Forelimb
fractures (Swaim et al., 2011)
Postreduction or postoperative support 
of
Forelimb (Figure 11.16) hobbling allows weight
shoulder luxations (Swaim et al., 2011)
bearing with limited abduction of the forelimb and
Chapter 11 Assistive Devices, Orthotics, Prosthetics, and Bandaging 219
flexion and extension of the shoulder while provid-
ing access for rehabilitation therapy.
Indications for use
● Conservative or postoperative management
 of medial shoulder instability (MSI) (Canapp
et al., 2012)
● Conservative or postoperative management of
certain scapular fractures
 Postoperative management of certain shoulder
luxation repairs
●Management of swimmer puppy syndrome.
Pelvic limb
Pelvic limb hobbles are applied around tarsal or
stifle joints to prev ent limb abduction. They are not
indicated for use with ataxic patients as they often
cause further difficulty for the patient. Patient
 monitoring is essential.
Figure 11.17 Tarsal hobbles prevent abduction at the
Indications for use
tarsus. Tarsal hobbles applied following a tenuous
acetabular repair.
Tarsal hobbles.
●Provide mild support (Figure 11.17) following
certain pelvic injuries or fracture repairs
 dorsal coxofemoral luxation. Here, the limb is posi-
(Canapp et al., 2012)
tioned with the hip intermally rotated and limb
● Management of swimmer puppy syndrome.
abducted (DeCamp, 1983; Simpson et al., 2001;
Kerwin, 2007; Swaim et al., 2011; Canapp et al.,
Stifle hobbles.
● Provide support following closed reduction or
2012) (Figure 11.18).
internal repair of caudoventral  coxofemoral
luxations (Canapp et al., 2012)
Indications for use
● Post (closed or open) reduction of craniodorsal
No-bandage alternatives
coxofemoral luxation (DeCamp, 1983; Simpson
au e si ss  qarn a
et al., 2001; Kerwin, 2007; Swaim et al., 2011;
garment consisting of sleeves and a hobble strap.
Canapp et al., 2012)
No-bandage tarsal hobbles, made of neoprene
 Postoperative management of certain acetabu-
cuffs with an adjustable hobble strap, are also
lar and femoral fracture repairs (DeCamp, 1983;
available.
Simpson et al., 2001; Canapp et al., 2012)
 Prevention of quadriceps tie-down following
intemal fixation of femoral shaft, supracondy-
Ehmer sling
lar, or distal physeal fractures in immature
animals (Canapp et al., 2012).
Ehmer slings prevent weight bearing in the pelvic
limb. The no-bandage alternative Ehmer sling can
 be used in conjunction with rehabilitation therapy
No-bandage alternative
to encourage weight-bearing in the contralateral
A vest with a detachable Ehmer sling is available.
limb. Both the bandage and no-bandage version
The design allows for flexibility in limb position
are commonly used following reduction of cranio-
 and can be used for either pelvic limb.
220  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Figure 11.19 The Velpeau sling prevents weight bearing in
the thoracic limb. Care must be used during application to
avoid compression of the thorax or flexed carpus. Velpeau
Sling applied following closed reduction of a shoulder
lu xation.
Figure 11.18 The Ehmer sling maintains the limb in a
No-bandage alternatives
flexed position with limb abduction and internal rotation of
the hip joint.
A vest incorporating a forelimb in a flexed position,
immobilizing the shoulder is available.
Velpeau sling
Helpful websites
 The Velpeau sling (Figure 11.19) maintains flexion
and prevents weight-bearing of the thoracic limb
www.dogleggs.com for Shoulder Stabilization System.
and is primarily used to immobilize the shoulder
www.handicappedpets.com for products for special-
needs pets.
joint (Canapp et al., 2012). Because the forelimb
www.helpemup.com for Help Em Up Harmess.
joints are maintained in flexion within the bandage,
www.jorvet.com for Jorvet Pet Brace and MB Spinal
decreased ROM may be noted, requiring rehabilita-
Brace.
tion therapy to restore full and comfortable motion.
www.orthodog.com for Hip Hound.
www.therapaw.com for Thera-Paw Boots, Carpo-Flex-X,
Indications for use
Tarso-Flex, and Dorsi-Flex Assist.
Www.udsmr.org Uniform Data System for Medical
 Post (closed and open) reduction of medial
Rehabilitation.
shoulder luxation (Kerwin, 2007; Swaim et al.,
www.vetinst.com for Biko Physio Brace.
2011; Canapp et al., 2012)
 Primary management for minimally displaced
scapular and
proximal humeral
1 fractures
Prefabricated and custom carpal and
(DeCamp, 1983; Canapp et al, 2012)
tarsal supports
Postoperative management of scapular frac-
tures (Oakley, 1999; Kerwin, 2007; Canapp et al.,
Canine IcerTM, Charlottesville, VA. www.canineicer.com
2012)
DogLeggsTm, Reston, VA. www.dogleggs.com
 Postoperative management of shoulder recon-
OrthoVet, Vancouver, WA. www.orthovet.com
struction (Canapp et al., 2012).
Thera-PawTm, Lebanon, NJ. www.therapaw.com
Chapter 11 Assistive Devices, Orthotics, Prosthetics, and Bandaging 221
Orthotics
10 year literature review. Prosthet Orthot Int, 25,
14-20.
ACE Ortho Solutions, Benkelman, NE. www.
GOMEZ-ALVAREZ, C.B., BOBBERT, M.F., LAMERS, L.,
aceorthosolutions.com
JOHNSTON, C., BACK, W., & VAN WEEREN, PR.
Animal OrthoCare, Chantilly, VA. www.
2008. The effect of induced pelviclimb lameness on
thoracolumbar kinematics during treadmill locomo-
animalorthocare.com
K-9 Orthotics & Prosthetics, Beaver Bank, NS, Canada.
tion. Equine Vet §, 40, 147-152.
www.k-9orthotics.com
HEIJNEN, L., ROOSENDAAL, G., & HEIM, M. 1997.
OrthoPets, Denver, CO. www.orthopets.com
Orthotics and rehabilitation for chronic hemophilic
synovitis of the ankle. An overview. Clin Orthop Relat
Res, 343, 68-73.
JAEGER, G.H. & CANAPP, S.O. 2008. Carpal and tarsal
No-bandage hobbles, spica splint, Ehmer
injuries. Clear Rur, 14(5), 74-76. South Hadley, MA:
sling and Velpeau sling
Clean Run Productions, LLC.
JENSEN, M.P, ABRESCH, R.T., & CARTER, G.T. 2005.
DogLeggs, Reston, VA. www.dogleggs.com
The reliability and validity of a self-report version of
the FIM instrument in persons with neuromuscular
disease and chronic pain. Arch Phys Med Rehabil, 86,
References
116-122.
KENT, J. & FRANKLYN-MILLER, A. 2011. Biomechani-
cal models in the study of lower limb amputee kine-
ADAMSON, C., KAUFMANN, M., LEVINE, D., MILLIS,
matics: a review. Prosthet Orthot Int, 35, 124-139.
D.L.,& MARCELLIN-LITTLE, D.J. 2005. Assistive
KERWIN, S.C. 2007. Today's casting and bandaging.
devices, orthotics, and prosthetics. Vet Clin North Am
Western Veterinary Conference Proceedings.Las Vegas,
Small Arim Pract, 35, 1441-1451, ix.
NV.
American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons. 1987. The
LANDMAN, M.A., DE BLAAUW, J.A., VAN WEEREN,
use of knee braces. Position Statement 1124. Rose-
PR., & HOFLAND, L.J. 2004. Field study of the preva-
mont, IL: AAOS.
lence of lameness in horses with back problems. Vet
BECHTOL, C.O. 1967. The fitting of a lower-extremity
Rec, 155, 165-168.
prosthesis in the immediately postamputation period:
NOLAN, L. & LEES, A. 2000. The functional demands on
a new challenge in rehabilitation. Arch Phys Med
the intact limb during walking for active trans-femoral
Rehabil,48,145-146.
and trans-tibial amputees. Prosthet Orthot Int, 24,
BEDOTTO, R.A. 2006. Biomechanical assessment and
117125.
 treatment in lower extremity prosthetics and orthotics:
NOLAN, L., WIT, A., DUDZINSKI, K., LEES, A., LAKE,
a clinical perspective. Phys Med Rehabil Clin N Am, 17,
M., & WYCHOWANSKI, M. 2003. Adjustments in gait
203-243.
CANAPP, S.O.J., CAMPANA, D., & FAIR, L.M. 2012.
trans-ibial amputees. Gait Posture, 17, 142-151.
Orthopedic coaptation devices and small-animal pros
OAKLEY, R.E. 1999. Extermal coaptation. Vet Clin North
thetics. In: Tobias, K.M. & Johnston, S.A. (eds.), Veteri-
Am Small Anim Pract,29, 1083-1095.
rary Surgery: Small Animal. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier,
PIERMATTEI, D., FLO, G., & DECAMP, C. 2006. Frac
628-646.
tures: classification, diagnosis, and treatment. In: Pier-
DECAMP, C.E. 1983. Extermal coaptation. In: Slatter, D.H.
mattei, D., Flo, G., Decamp, C., & Brinker, W. (eds.),
(ed.), Textbook of Small Animal Surgery. Philadelphia:
Handbook of Small Animal Orthopedics and Fracture
W.B. Saunders, 1835-1848.
Repair, 4th ed. St. Louis, MO: Saunders-Elsevier,
DESHALES, L.D. 2002. Upper extremity orthoses. In:
25-159.
Trombly, C.A. & Radomski, M.V. (eds.), Occupational
POMERANZ,B.,ADLER,U.,SHENOY,N.,MACALUSO,
Therapy for Physical Dysfunction, 5th ed. Baltimore,
C., & PARIKH, S. 2006. Prosthetics and orthotics for
MD: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 313-349.
the older adult with a physical disability. Clin Geriatr
DOYLE, N. August 6, 2010. Back to the basics: canine
Med, 22, 377-394, ix.
carts.Internatioral Association of Veterinary Rehabilita
PRINSEN, E.C., NEDERHAND, M.J., & RIETMAN, J.S.
tion and Physical Therapy Symposium Proceedings.
Aubum, AL.
 patients with a transtibial or transfemoral amputation
GEERTZEN, J.H., MARTINA, J.D., & RIETMAN, H.S.
during level walking: a systematic review. Arch Phys
2001. Lower limb amputation. Part 2: rehabilitation: a
Med Rehabil, 92, 1311-1325.
222  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
PROKOP, L.L. 2006. Upper extremity orthotics in per-
Prosthetics & Orthotics. Norwalk, CT: Appleton and
forming artists. Phys Med Rehabil Clin N Am, 17,
Lange,53-82.
843-852.
SIMPSON, A., RADLINSKY, M., & BEALE, B. 2001. Ban-
SCHOEMAN, M., DISS, C.E.,& STRIKE, S.C.2011.
daging in dogs and cats: extermal coaptation. Comp
 Kinetic and kinematic compensations in amputee ver-
Cont Educ Pract,23,157-163.
tical jumping. /Appl Biomech, 28,438-437.(Epub).
SWAIM, S., RENBERG, W.,& SHIKE, K. 2011. Smal!
SEYMOUR, R. 2002. Introduction to Prosthetics and Orthot-
Arimat Bandaging.Casting.and Splinting Techniques.
ics. Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins.
 Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell Publishing.
SHURR, G.& COOK, T. 1990. Below knee amputations
and prosthetics. In: Shur, D.G. and Ccok, T.M. (eds.),
12
Disorders of the Canine
Forelimb: Veterinary Diagnosis
and Treatment
Sherman O. Canapp, Jr., DVM, MS, Dipl ACVS, Diplomate, American
College of Veterinary Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation, CCRT, and
Kristin Kirkby, DVM, MS, PhD, Dipl ACVS, CCRT
Summary
Shoulder conditions are common causes of forelimb lameness in dogs, particularly perfor-
mance dogs. Given the intricacy of shoulder motion and the stress placed on the shoulder
joint for routine maneuvers involved in most canine sports, this is not surprising. The authors
have found subscapularis tendinopathy (a component of medial shoulder syndrome), supra-
spinatus tendinopathy, biceps tendinopathy, and infraspinatus myopathy to be the most fre-
quently diagnosed conditions, respectively. The etiologies of these conditions are not fully
understood but appear to be related to repetitive strain injuries. Rest and NSAIDs are typically
prescribed at initial presentation but are largely ineffective, resulting in continued or recurring
presentation, diagnostic modalities, and treatment for these conditions. Elbow dysplasia
pue (dvn) ssasond (eauooue panunun '(doe) ssaooid piouoios (epaw pauaweeny sapniou!
osteochondrosis (OC). The exact pathogenesis of these disorders is not known, but hereditary.
dietary and environmental factors appear to contribute to abnormal growth and development
of the elbow joint. Treatment of each condition typically involves a combination of surgical
and nonsurgical management, and osteoarthritis is an expected sequela regardless of interven-
tion. Physical rehabilitation is crucial for optimal postsurgical, nonsurgical, and long-term
management of dogs with elbow dysplasia. Ununited medial epicondyle, incomplete ossifica
tion of the humeral condyle and radius curvus are additional developmental disorders of the
elbow discussed in this chapter. Carpal injuries, though less common than those of the
shoulder and elbow, can have devastating effects upon the canine athlete. Carpal fractures,
luxations, sprains, and strains are described here
Carine Sports Medicire and Rehabilitation, First Edition. Edited by M. Christine Zink and Janet B. Van Dyke.
@2013 John Wiley &t Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
223
224  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Shoulder disorders
Supraspinatus tendinopathy
Introduction
Several degenerative disorders of the human and
canine supraspinatus tendon have been identified,
Shoulder conditions are common causes of canine
mcluding rotator cuff tears, calcifying tendonitis or
sports-related issues in both dogs and people.
tendinosis (microtears), and tendinosis as a result
Although both species have a complex shoulder
of overuse (Fransson et al., 2005). Tendinopathy has
musculoskeletal system, a recent study showed
been adopted as a generic descriptive term for the
that the structural and biomechanical characteris-
dlinical conditions in and around tendons arising
tics of the joints of quadruped animals are too dif-
from overuse (Sharma & Maffulli, 2005).
ferent to be useful as a model for human shoulder
Degeneration of the supraspinatus tendon is
 injury (Sager et al., 2009). Therefore, we cannot
thought to be a factor in the development of rotator
extrapolate from the human literature regarding
cuff tears in humans (Danova & Muir, 2003). That
the pathophysiology, biomechanics or treatment
overuse is likely an important factor in this disor-
options for sports related shoulder injury in the
 der has been supported in animal models. In these
canine.
models of repetitive activity, the mechanical prop-
With the coordinated action of over 25 muscles
erties of supraspinatus tendons deteriorated as
required for shoulder motion, the ensuing action
noted by a decreased modulus of elasticity and
is complex, with the limb undergoing flexion,
decreased maximum stress of failure in the tendon
extension, rotation, abduction, and adduction
(Carpenter et al., 1998; Soslowsky et al., 2000).
(Marcellin-Litle et al., 2007). The potential for
Supraspinatus tendinopathies can be difficult to
 muscle and tendon injuries causing performance
 treat and often require lengthy management (Car-
issues and lameness is significant when all mus-
penter et al., 1998; Soslowsky et al., 2000).
cular contributions to the joint are considered
Affected tendons contain discontinuous, dis-
(Figure 12.1). The author's (SC) case database
 organized fibers, and typically, no acute inflam-
reveals the most common muscle and tendon
mation is detected, explaining the often-noted
sports related injuries in the canine include sub-
lack of response to NSAIDs. Affected tendons
scapularis tendinopathy (a component of medial
that contain discontinuous, disorganized fiber
shoulder syndrome), supraspinatus tendinopathy,
patterns as noted on musculoskeletal diagnostic
-donur sneudsejut pue '(ia) Auedoupuat sda
ultrasound are seen as hypoechoic foci or core
athy, respectively.
lesions (Schramme et al., 2010). This term is now
used for similar canine tendon lesions seen on
diagnostic musculoskeletal ultrasound.  A rap-
-sens a um sdoaaap apou urm a
natus tendon in chronic cases, compressing the
biceps tendon and causing pain (Lafuente et al.,
2009).
Cause
It appears that repeated strain injury is an underly-
ing cause of this condition. In performance dogs,
repeated strain can result from hitting the ground
or agility contacts on an outstretched forelimb,
quick turns and repetitive eccentric contractions as
Figure 12.1(
Golden Retriever performing the weave
well as concentric contractions with the muscle in
poles demonstrating significant shoulder abduction,
a lengthened state. Slipping, overstretching and
biomechanically stressing the medial compartment.
Overuse of the muscle can also contribute.
Chapter 12 Disorders of the Canine Forelimb: Veterinary Diagnosis and Treatment 225
TIR
Figure 12.2  Lateral shoulder radiograph showing
mineralization within the supraspinatus tendon (arrow).
Figure 12.3 Short T1 inversion recovery (STIR) transverse
image revealing a proliferative inflammatory nodule of the
Diagnosis
supraspinatus tendon (top arrow) causing flattening of the
biceps tendon (bottom arrow).
Patients with supraspinatus tendinopathies present
with varying degrees of lameness, from a short-
 ened stride length to a significant weight-bearing
lameness. The lameness worsens with activity and
 directly evaluated via arthroscopy, a supraspinatus
is resistant to treatment with rest and NSAIDs.
bulge causing biceps tendon contact/compression
Atrophy of the supraspinatus muscle may be noted
and a biceps tendon kissing lesion is commonly
as well as pain on direct palpation over the tendon
found (Figure 12.5).
during flexion of the shoulder. Concurrent biceps
tendinopathy or medial shoulder syndrome (MSS)
Treatment
may also be present.
Mineralization within the tendon or bony remod-
Acute cases can be treated with conservative
eling on the point of insertion on the greater tuber-
medical management consisting of NSAIDs, con-
cle or along the region of the scapular notch to the 
supraglenoid tubercle may be noted radiographi-
therapy, modalities, ROM with progression to
 cally in chronic cases (Figure 12.2). Although MRI
stretching and strengthening exercises). However,
is an excellent diagnostic modality for acute and
these cases rarely present in the acute phase. Treat-
chronic cases (Figure 12.3), musculoskeletal ultra-
ment for subacute and chronic cases is dictated by
sound can be a rapid, inexpensive means of diag-
the findings of advanced diagnostics (ultrasound
nosis in the hands of experienced operators (Figure
or MRI).
12.4). Musculoskeletal ultrasound allows for a
 An inflammatory response is needed to jump-
definitive diagmosis as well as serial evaluations to
start the healing process. Reinitiating the inflam-
assess response to treatment.
matory process increases circulation to the tendon.
Arthroscopic exploration is often performed to
For this reason, NSAIDs and intra-articular corti-
evaluate the shoulder for concurrent conditions.
costeroids are contraindicated. Rehabilitation ther-
MSS is frequently noted and although the supra-
apies include STM, heat, ultrasound therapy and
spinatus tendon is extracapsular and cannot be
 pain-free ROM/stretching. Shock wave therapy
226  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
SUPRA
tendon
Greater
tubercleof
humerus
Mixedechogenicity
representing
Joint capsule
tendinopathy
Biceps,
tendon
RIGHT SHOULDER
2.7
Figure 12.4  Ultrasound image demonstrating supraspinatus tendinopathy
 good results using ultrasound-guided injections of
platelet rich plasma (PRP) and cultured adipose
derived progenitor cells into core lesions (Canapp.
 2011). Surgically excising or debulking the supra-
spinatus nodule has been reported as a treatment
option (Lafuente et al., 2009). Surgical treatment
should include arthroscopic exploration to evalu-
ate and treat concurrent MSS if indicated.
大
Infraspinatus myopathy
Contracture of the infraspinatus muscle is uncom-
mon. However, it is one of the two most frequently
reported contractures in the dog along with quad-
riceps contracture (Fossum, 2002; Harasen, 2005)
Unilateral contracture of the infraspinatus muscle
is most common; however, bilateral contractures
Figure 12.5 Arthroscopic view of a compressed biceps
have been reported (Leighton, 1977; Slatter, 1985;
tendon (asterisk) secondary to a supraspinatus bulge
Dillon et al., 1989). It is most commonly seen
(diamond).
in large-breed dogs, particularly working (i.e.,
aanoe Araa raqo pue ssop (supiau pue Suqumu
may also be considered (Danova & Muir, 2003).
dogs (Pettit, 1980). Most present with an acute
Further details are provided in Chapter 13.
onset of shoulder lameness with work or exercise
Regenerative medicine or surgical intervention
(Leighton, 1977; Slatter, 1985; Carberry & Gilmore,
may be considered for dogs that do not respond
1986; Dillon et al., 1989; Dermy, 1993; Siems et al.,
to rehabilitation therapy. The author (SC) has had
1998; Fossum, 2002).
Chapter 12 Disorders of the Canine Forelimb: Veterinary Diagnosis and Treatment 227
Case Study 12.1  Bilateral fragmented medial coronoid processes
Signalment: 8 month-old F/l Labrador Retriever. Pre-
Right. Small fissure, nondisplaced fragment of medial
sented with 2-month history left forelimb lameness,
coronoid; grade 2 cartilage pathology distal medial
worse after exercise. Previously diagnosed: panosteitis
humeral condyle.
Examination: BCs 7/9. Cait: Weight bearing lameness
Diagnosis: Bilateral   fragmented   medial   coronoid
left forelimb at walk and trot.
processes
Posture. Stands and sits with both front paws externally
rotated, weight shifted to pelvic limbs
Treatment: Bilateral  arthroscopic  debridement  and
Palpation.  Well-developed  pelvic limb mrusculature
curettage.
relative to forelimbs. Normal PROM all joints. Mild
discomfort with full extension of left elbow. No pain
Adipose derived stem cell therapy—injected into both
over long bones or nutrient foramina. Radiographic
elbows 2 days post arthroscopy. Laser, cryotherapy and
findings: Left and right elbows: Moderate sclerosis
manual therapy for 3 days, 2 weeks of limited activity.
ulnar subchondral bone without significant periarticu-
 PROM, isometric exercises.
lar remodeling.
 Enrolled in rehabilitation program with goals: preserve
CT findings. Left elbow: Moderate to large bone frag-
elbow RoM, increase forelimb muscle mass/strength,
ment associated with cranial and axial aspect of
improve core strength and proprioception, achieve
medial coronoid process. Moderate sclerosis of ulnar
weight loss and general conditioning. Change to adult
subtrochlear bone and medial coronoid process. Right
dog food, limit caloric intake to achieve weight loss/body
elbow: Moderate sclerosis of ulnar subtrochlear bone
condition score of 4/9. Begin injectable and oral chon-
and medial coronoid process. No apparent coronoid
droprotective agents.
fragrmrentation.
Arthroscopy: Left Large, loose fragmented medial coro-
noid process; grade 3-4 Modified Outerbridge cartilage
pathology distal medial humeral condyle.
Cause
ment over a period of 14 weeks; however, signs
C saep [enaaas uim readde Ae aoenuon jo
Repetitive micro trauma, blunt trauma, and osteo-
weeks after the initial trauma (Carberry & Gilmore,
fascial compartment syndrome have been reported
1986). The initial injury to the infraspinatus muscle
to cause this problem (Pettit et al., 1978; Matava
 is not commonly recognized.
et al., 1994). Early treatment is focused on surgical
Affected patients typically present with no signs
decompression by fasciotomy; however, if contrac-
 of systemic illness. With a mature contracture, adhe-
tion has already occurred, tenectomy or myectomy
sion of the tendon of insertion of the infraspinatus
may be necessary (Roe, 1998).
muscle to the adjacent joint capsule occurs. Patients
The hypothesis that an acute traumatic event
have a weight bearing lameness with circumduc-
with an incomplete rupture of the infraspinatus
tion of the affected forelimb and a characteristic
muscle leads to fibrosis and contracture is sup-
flip-like action of the paw when placing the foot
ported by the histological findings of degeneration
(Slatter, 1985; Carberry & Gilmore, 1986; Dillon
and atrophy of skeletal muscle with fibrous tissue
et al., 1989; Denny, 1993; Siems et al., 1998). The
replacement (Roe, 1998).
affected forelimb is held with the shoulder exter-
nally rotated and the elbow in adduction against
the thoracic wall (Siems et al., 1998). The distal fore-
Diagnosis
limb and carpus is externally rotated and held in
The patient may present with a painful, non-
abduction (Slatter, 1985; Carberry & Gilmore, 1986)
weight-bearing shoulder lameness. The shoulder
The patient is typically not painful on palpation and
may be swollen. The initial pain and lameness
manipulation of the limb (Carberry & Gilmore,
usually resolve with rest and/or supportive treat-
1986; Siems et al., 1998). The remaining shoulder
228   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Scapula
Supraspinatus
muscle
Biceps
brachii
tendon
Figure 12.6 Dog with severe contracture of the
Medial
infraspinatus tendon.
glenohumeral
ligament
muscles, primarily supraspinatus and deltoid
,Biceps
muscles, display disuse atrophy or may be con-
Jointcapsule
brachii
tracted (Carberry & Gilmore, 1986; Dillon et al.,
muscle
1989; Denny, 1993; Fossum, 2002). A sigmificantly
decreased range of motion (ROM) will be noted in
the shoulder (Carberry & Gilmore, 1986). When the
patient is placed in lateral recumbency with the
affected limb up, a true infraspinatus contracture 
will cause the distal forelimb to remain in an
Figure 12.7 Anatomy of the canine shoulder. (llustration
abducted and externally rotated position off the
by Marcia Schlehr.)
floor (Leighton, 1994) (Figure 12.6).
 Siems et al. reported a series of ultrasonographic
findings of two traumatized infraspinatus muscles
(Slatter, 1985; Carberry & Gilmore, 1986; O'Neill &
in the same dog at the same time, one of which
Innes, 2004). This treatment carries an excellent
resolved without any complications, while the
 prognosis (Slatter, 1985; Carberry & Gilmore, 1986).
other progressed to contracture (Siems et al., 1998).
Adhesions to the infraspinatus tendon and joint
 The ultrasonographic description of a contracted
capsule are commonly found and once dissected
infraspinatus muscle is increased echogenicity
away seldom cause further issues (Pettit et al., 1978;
when compared to the normal muscle (Slatter, 1985;
Carberry & Gilmore, 1986). Rehabilitation therapy
Derny, 1993). MRI may be useful for diagnosing the 
is started prior to suture removal to prevent
 condition in both the acute and chronic phases.
the formation of further adhesions (Carberry &
Gilmore, 1986).
Treatment
 In acute and subacute infraspinatus tendinopa-
Biceps tendinopathy
thies, rehabilitation including therapeutic ultra-
sound and stretching may help prevent contracture
Biceps tendinopathy (BT) was once thought to be
by maintaining the length and flexibility of the
the most common shoulder condition seen in per-
affected tissues.
formance dogs. However, through the use of
Surgical release is required in mature contrac-
advanced diagnostics and improved palpation
tures. Tenotomy of the tendon of insertion with
techniques, BT is often a secondary finding (i.e.,
release of capsular adhesions is most commonly
impingement and compression from a supraspina-
performed. Complete transection of the infraspina-
tus tendon nodule or referred elbow pain at the
tus tendon with partial tenectomy is required to
point of insertion).
restore motion in the affected limb and most often
When BT is the primary diagnosis, it most often
proves curative with an immediate release of con-
 involves the biceps brachii muscle and its tendon
tracture and return to function of the shoulder joint
where it crosses the shoulder joint (Figure 12.7).
Chapter 12 Disorders of the Canine Forelimb: Veterinary Diagnosis and Treatment 229
The actions of the biceps are elbow flexion, shoul-
der extension, and stabilization of the shoulder
regarding performing two-on/two-off contacts
during standing and the weight-bearing phase of 
 and knocking bars with their forelimbs.
locomotion (Evans, 1993).
Patients often have a shortened stride and a
weight-bearing
g lameness that can range from
subtle to severe. The lameness worsens with activ-
Cause
ity. Direct palpation over the biceps tendon may
The cause of injury in performance dogs appears
elicit a pain response. Pain and spasm may be
to be repeated strain injury, including two-on/two-
 noted when performing the biceps stretch (flexing
off contacts in agility, landing vertically on the fore-
the shoulder with the elbow in extension) (Gilley
limbs following a misjudged jump, overstretching
et al., 2002) (Figure 12.8). A bony avulsion may be
the muscle, quick turns and repetitive contractions
detected radiographically. Chronic
casesmay
of the muscle with the shoulder flexed and/or
reveal mineralization of the tendon or sclerosis
elbow extended. The tendon can be injured via
within the bicipital grove (Gilley et al., 2002). MRI
strain from overloading, leading to degeneration,
and ultrasound may be used to identify acute and
or disruption (Wernham et al., 2008). Disruption
chronic cases (Figure 12.9) (Gilley et al., 2002;
can occur from a single less-than-maximal load
that injures some fibers without complete failure of
the tendon. Because the blood supply to the tendon
is poor, healing time is protracted (Sharma & Maf-
fulli, 2005). Degeneration of the tendon may be
initiated by repetitive strain (Sharma & Maffulli,
2005). Continuous reinjury of the biceps tendon
ing tendons become inflamed and/or develop
microtears, ultimately leading to shoulder joint
instability (Gilley et al., 2002).
Diagnosis
Complaints of difficulty with quick turns and
Figure 12.8
 Example of a passive biceps stress (shoulder
      
flexion with elbow extension).
BICEP
Abnormal fibroustissue
Disruptedhypoechoic
biceps tendon fibers
Humerus
Supraglenoid
Bicepstendon
fibers
tubercle
Figure 12.9  Ultrasound image demonstrating disrupted hypoechoic biceps tendon fibers.
230Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Medial shoulder syndrome (MSS)
One of the most common causes of forelimb gait-
related issues and lameness in performance,
working and active dogs is medial shoulder syn-
drome (MSS). This condition is similar to rotator
cuff injuries in people and can include ligament
disruption, tendinopathy, and labral and capsular
tears or disruption. These shoulders are not unsta-
ble, instead showing evidence of sprain and strain
injury leading to discomfort and dysfunction. Sub-
scapularis tendinopathy is the most common com-
ponent of MSS.
 The human thrower's shoulder must be lax
enough to allow extremes of motion but secure
enough to provide the stabilization of the shoulder
(Slatter, 1985; Arrington & Miller, 1995). The same
is true for the canine athlete, which performs many
Figure 12.10  Arthroscopic image of severe bicipital
extremes of ROM and requires appropriate stabili-
tenosynovitis (arrow).
zation. Signs of MSS can range from performance-
related problems such as refusing tight turns to
a frank, weight-bearing lameness. MSS involves
multiple components of the shoulder joint and
Wernham et al., 2008). Shoulder arthroscopy is an
requires a thorough evaluation to confirm. It is
excellent diagmostic modality as well as therapeu-
 important to identify and treat this condition early
tic tool, if indicated (Figure 12.10) (Wernham et al.,
to obtain the best long-term results, and to prevent
2008).
further sprain and strain injury that can lead to
shoulder instability and progression of OA.
Treatment
Cause
Conservative medical management and rehabilita-
MSS is believed to be related to chronic strain and
tion therapy are recommended for acute cases.
sprain due to repetitive activity or overuse rather
 Conservative medical management should include
than simply trauma. Repetitive activities such as
controlled activity, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
jump-turm combinations and weave poles are per-
 drugs (NSAIDs), and cryotherapy. Intra-articular
formed regularly during agility practice and at
injections including hyaluronic acid, cortisone,
trials. These routine maneuvers place the shoulder
platelet rich plasma (PRP), or stem cell therapy
near its end range of abduction (Figure 12.11) and
(SCT) may also be considered (Cookson & Kent,
stress the soft tissue of the medial shoulder
1979; Gilley et al., 2002; Marcellin-Little et al., 2007;
Ais ro paa  u s xa
Wernham et al., 2008). If a core lesion is noted,
slipping on wet surfaces can also contribute to the
ultrasound guided regenerative medicine treat-
trauma inflicted on the shoulder. The cumulative
ment (PRP, SCT or combination therapy) may be
effects of the micro trauma occurring to the shoul-
considered.
der structures can lead to performance problems,
Surgical treatment is recommended for biceps
discomfort and lameness. Overuse of the shoulder
 avulsions/tears and for cases that are nonrespon-
support structures can lead to degeneration of the
sive to medical management and rehabilitation
tissues, reducing tensile strength and predisposing
therapy. Surgical treatment includes arthroscopic
them to fraying, disruption and eventually com-
 reattachment for bony avulsions or an arthroscopic
plete breakdown (Maganaris et al., 2004; Marcellin-
release for severe tendinopathies or tears.
Little et al., 2007). When instability, subluxation, 0r
Chapter 12 Disorders of the Canine Forelimb: Veterinary Diagnosis and Treatment 231
Case Study 12.2  Regenerative medicine for supraspinatus tendinopathy
Signalment: 7 y.o. F/S Labrador Retriever (Field Trial).
(shoulder) injection of ADPC and autologous condi-
Presents for chronic left forelimb lameness. Nonrespon-
tioned serum (ACS).
 sive to rest, NSAIDs, and rehabilitation therapy.
 Enrolled in rehabilitation program 7 days following
injections.
Examination: Cait: Shortened stride and weight-bearing
Diagnostic ultrasound, objective gait analysis and
larreness left forelimb at walk and trot.
physical examination rechecks performed  every  four
weeks postoperatively.
Objective gait analysis. Decreased pressure and stride
length left forelirmb cormpared to right.
4 weeks. Diagnostic ultrasound: Decreased inflamma-
left shoulder palpation. Moderate discomfort and
tion and improved homogenous fiber pattern within
spasm of supraspinatus on shoulder flexion. Extension
supraspinatus. Mild biceps impingement.
and abduction within normal limits. Increased sensitivity
 8 weeks. Diagnostic ultrasound: Improved homogenous
at biceps tendon on direct pressure and with biceps
fiber pattern within supraspinatus. Inflammation and
stretch test.
enlargement of supraspinatus resolved. No impinge-
Radiographs. Left shoulder and elbow: WNL. Diag-
ment of biceps tendon.
nostic ultrasound left shoulder: Hypoechoic foci (core
Objective gait analysis. All pararmeters significantly
lesion) within supraspinatus tendon. Secondary biceps
improved.
tendon corpression.
 Palpation. Improved comfort on shoulder ROM.
Arthroscopy left
shoulder. Supraspinatus  bulge
12 Weeks. Diagnostic ultrasound: Normal fiber pattern 
causing biceps compression and secondary biceps
within supraspinatus. No biceps impingement.
kissing lesion. Mild inflammation of subscapularis tendon
Objective gait analysis. Forelirmbs show equal pres-
and cranial joint capsule.
sure and stride length. Palpation: Shoulder ROM WNL.
16 Weeks. Field Trial retraining initiated.
Treatment: Ultrasound-guided  injections of  adipose-
6-, 12- and 18-months. No reports of lameness or
derived progenitor cells (ADPC) and plasma rich platelets
performance-related issues.
(PRP) into supraspinatus tendon, and intra-articular
luxation occurs, a diagnosis of medial shoulder
instability (MSI) is made.
Diagnosis
Presenting history will vary from avoiding tight
turns during performance to intermittent forelimb
lameness that worsens with exercise and heavy
activity. In some cases a severe weight-bearing
lameness may be noted. A history of a lack of
response to rest and NSAIDs is also common.
Patients present with a unilateral lameness
ranging from a mildly shortened stride in the
affected forelimb at a walk or trot to a significant
Figure 12.11  Maneuvers such as repeated jump turn
combinations and performing the weave poles at fast speeds
weight-bearing lameness (Marcellin-Little et al.,
place stress on the soft tissues of the medial shoulder. (Photo
2007). In chronic cases, atrophy may be noted with
by Rich Knecht Photography.)
forelimb circumference decreased in the affected
232  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
limb as compared to the contralateral limb (Figure
level of the acromion process, and the elbow and
12.12). Decreased shoulder extension is common.
 shoulder must be placed in full extension with con-
Shoulder spasm and discomfort on abduction are 
 current abduction of the forelimb. In severe cases,
consistent findings. To achieve a passive stretch of 
 a slight thud or subluxation may be felt when
the craniomedial shoulder components, the scapula
 abducting the shoulder. If a concurrent supraspi-
must be stabilized with the evaluator's hand at the
natus tendinopathy is present, pain may be noted
when placing the shoulder into flexion (direct
edied poanp uo ro (snudserns a jo ynans
 of its tendon and/or point of insertion.
The shoulder abduction test (Cook et al., 2005a),
although originally described with patients under
sedation in lateral recumbency, may be performed
with similarly consistent results on awake and
standing patients. A goniometer is held with the
stable arm parallel to the spine of the scapula, the
center of rotation over the shoulder joint, and the
free arm extending over the axis of the humerus in
contact with the skin. With the elbow and shoulder
held in extension, the forelimb is abducted to its
physiologic limit and the measurement obtained as
shown in (Figure 12.13). The same technique is
applied to the contralateral shoulder for compari-
son. Using this palpation technique, it has been
reported that a normal mean shoulder abduction
angle is approximately 30 degrees (Cook et al.,
2005a). Although this report revealed that dogs
with medial shoulder instability had abduction
angles sigrificantly larger than 30 degrees, a more
recent study showed an inconsistent correlation
between abduction angles and medial compart-
ment pathology identified arthroscopically (Cook
Figure 12.12
2Measurement of forelimb muscle mass using
et al., 2005a; Devitt et al., 2007). Patients with MSS
a Gulick tape measure.
rarely show evidence of instability but rather show
Figure 12.13
Two different ways to measure shoulder abduction.
Chapter 12 Disorders of the Canine Forelimb: Veterinary Diagnosis and Treatment 233
Figure 12.14  Arthroscopic image of a disrupted medial
Figure 12.15 Arthroscopic image demonstrating mild to
glenohumeral ligament and subscapularis tendon. Arrow
indicates a severely disrupted medial glenohumeral
neovascularization of the subscapular tendon (mild Mss).
ligament.
signs of dysfunction and pain associated with cra-
results of the orthopedic examination, abduction
niomedial pathology including varying degrees of
 angle tests, and arthroscopic scoring.
subscapular tendinopathy, medial glenohumeral
ligament (MGL) disruption, craniomedial capsular
Mild Mss
lesions, and labral tears. The contralateral shoulder
usually does not show signs of dysfunction, pain
Mild pathology includes inflammation without
 or spasm on abduction.
fraying, disruption, or laxity of the MGL, subscap-
A complete work-up includes history, sigmal-
ularis tendon and joint capsule. Patients with mild
ment, gait analysis, orthopedic and neurologic
 MSS are put in shoulder support system/hobbles
Examinations, abduction angle tests, hematology.
 and placed in a rehabilitation therapy_ program
biochemical profile, urinalysis, arthrocentesis, and
(Marcellin-Litfle et al., 2007) (Figure 12.15).
imaging modalities. Arthroscopy allows for direct
observation of the major intra-articular structures
Moderate MSS
with magnification, dynamic evaluation of tissues
during shoulder range of motion tests, and palpa-
Most MSS cases in performance, working, and
tion of intra-articular tissues using arthroscopic
active dogs are moderate. Arthroscopic findings
instrumentation. Arthroscopic exploration with
include subscapularis tendinopathy (disruption,
evaluation of intra-articular structures provides a
 fraying, core lesion), medial glenohumeral liga-
definitive diagnosis of MSS as shown in Figure
ment pathology (fraying or disruption), craniome-
12.14 (Devitt et al., 2007; Sager et al., 2009).
 or disruption, and labral pathology (fraying, dis-
ruption or tears; Figure 12.16). In some cases where
Treatment
 there is a concurrent supraspinatus tendinopathy.
Patients are placed into one of three treatment cat-
a bulge of the supraspinatus tendon with im-
egories (mild, moderate, or severe), based on the
 pingement on the biceps tendon may be found.
234   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Figure 12.16 Arthroscopic image of moderate disruption of
the subscapularis tendon (moderate MSS)
Arthroscopic treatment will vary depending on the
tissues involved and the severity of disease. Treat-
Figure 12.17 A dog with MSs in a forelimb hobble system.
ment may include radiofrequency-induced thermal
capsulorraphy (RITC), suture imbrications, or sta-
bilization using a fiber band and buttons technique
(Abrams, 2001; O'Neill & Innes, 2004; Cook et al.,
2005b; Marcellin-Litle et al., 2007; Sager et al.,
rounding uninjured tissue (Miniaci & Codsi, 2006).
 2009). The current technique for radiofrequency
 Dogs are placed in a shoulder support system/
treatment has been altered sigmificantly since the
hobbles (Figure 12.17) for three months while par-
 previous report for the treatment of MSI in dogs
due to the detrimental effects that can occur with
-ond suuausuans iapmous e 'asuamsan juaaand
aggressive application (Cook et al, 2005b). A single
ae wuenooid anuuauu aanuaaand pue wena
pass striping technique, based on current applica-
employed.
tions in humans, is currently used instead of the
During the initial phases of the postoperative
previous multipass paint brush technique (Abrams,
period, treatment to the shoulder is minimal. Fol-
 2001). The radiofrequency energy delivered during
lowing radiofrequency treatment the tissues must
treatment causes the collagen to denature and the
be allowed to heal. Modalities or medications that
capsule or tendon to shrink and tighten. Optimal
shrinkage without necrosis of the tissue occurs
the inflammatory process is required as part of the
between 65 and 75 degrees centigrade (Abrams,
healing process.
2001).
For the initial 2 weeks following treatment, the
Severe MSS & MSI
mechanical stiffness of the tissue is significantly
decreased. The mechanical properties return to
Severe MSS is often associated with trauma.
near normal by 6 to 12 weeks, after the tissues have 
 Patients typically have signs of craniomedial com
umdergone active cellular repair from the sur- 
 partment laxity with shoulder abduction angles
Chapter 12 Disorders of the Canine Forelimb: Veterinary Diagnosis and Treatment 235
greater than 65 degrees. Complete tears of the
1986; Schulz & Krotscheck, 2003; Trostel et al.,
 medial glenohumeral ligament and severe disrup-
2003a). Other developmental conditions of the
tion of the subscapularis tendon, joint capsule,  
elbow that are not classically included in the defini-
and labrum may be noted on arthroscopic evalua-  fion of ED include incomplete ossification of the
compartment by direct tissue reapposition using
condyle (UME) (Marcellin-Little et al., 1994; de
synthetic capsulorraphy, bone/soft tissue anchors
Bakker et al., 2011).
and/or fiber band and buttons technique is indi-
cated (Figure 12.18). Postoperative management
consists of a spica splint for two weeks followed
by application of a shoulder support system for
two to three months. Rehabilitation therapy is
required for four to six months.
Elbow disorders
Elbow dysplasia
The term dysplasia means an abnormality in devel-
opment (Blood & Studdert, 1999). Elbow dysplasia
(ED) encompasses 3 distinct symdromes that result
from abnormal growth and development: ununited
anconeal process (UAP; Figure 12.19), fragmented
medial coronoid process (FCP), and osteochondro-
sis (OC) (Wind & Packard, 1986; Schulz & Krots-
check, 2003; Trostel et al., 2003a). The pathogenesis
responsible for these growth disturbances is not
completely understood, but is thought to be due to
Figure 12.18 Postoperative radiograph of a shoulder
asynchronous growth of the radius and ulna with
reconstruction using prosthetic ligament and anchor system
 genetic and nutritional origins (Wind & Packard,
(severe MSl).
Figure 12.19 Radiographic image of an ununited aconeal process.
236  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
UAP
imaging is not necessary to diagnose UAP;
Pathophysiology
however, CT and arthroscopy may be performed
to evaluate for concurrent conditions as radio-
 graphs have been shown to miss the concurrent
umderstood. Several theories have been proposed,
diagnosis of FCP in 50% of dogs with UAP (Meyer-
including nutritional deficiency, trochlear notch
Lindenberg et al., 2006).
dysplasia, trauma, osteochondrosis, metabolic
deficiencies and hormonal effects (Corley et al.,
Treatment
1968; Krotscheck et al., 2000; Schulz & Krotscheck,
2003; Trostel et al., 2003a). Evidence suggests that
 Several surgical treatment options have been rec-
 incongruous growth of the radius and ulna, such
 ommended for UAP (Krotscheck et al., 2000; Pettitt
that the radius is relatively longer than the ulna,
et al., 2009). Osteotomy of the proximal ulna is
results in abnormal pressure on the ossification
intended to relieve the excessive pressure of the
center of the anconeal process, leading to failure
humeral condyle on the anconeus. Performed
of the anconeal process to fuse to proximal ulna
alone, it has been shown to result in radiographic
(Wind & Packard, 1986; Schulz & Krotscheck,
union of the anconeal process in 12-100% of dogs
 2003). The anconeal process normally fuses with
(Pettitt et al., 2009). Lag screw fixation of the anco-
the ulna by 20 weeks of age (Corley et al., 1968).
neal process has also been recommended, alone
A genetic basis for UAP has been postulated and
and in combination with proximal ulnar osteotomy
German Shepherd Dogs are over-represented, with
(Krotscheck et al., 2000; Pettitt ef al., 2009). One
an incidence of 18-30% reported (Wind & Packard,
study suggested the best outcome with combined
1986). Other large, giant and chondrodystrophic
lag screw fixation and proximal ulnar osteotomy
breeds can commonly be effected as well (small
(Pettitt et al., 2009). If the diagnosis of UAP is made
breed dogs do not have a separate center of ossifi-
after maturity and adequate compression of the
cation at the anconeal process) (Wind & Packard,
 processes can notbe achieved, excision of the anco-
1986; Trostel et al., 2003a). Male dogs may be pre-
 neal process is advised, if clinically warranted, and
disposed, and the condition is bilateral in up to
 can result in excellent long-term function (Roy
30% of dogs (Wind & Packard, 1986; Trostel et al.,
et al., 1994).
2003a). Other developmental conditions of the
 Postoperative care and rehabilitation is similar
elbow do not commonly occur in conjunction with
to treatment of all elbow conditions and is dis-
UAP; although one study found that 16% of dogs
cussed elsewhere in this text.
with UAP also had FCP (Meyer-Lindenberg et al.,
2006).
FCP
Diagnosis
Pathophysiology
 Ununited anconeal process cannot be diagnosed
Fragmentation of the medial coronoid process
until a dog is older than 20 weeks (Corley et al.,
(FCP) of the ulna is the most commonly diagmosed
1968). Most dogs present for progressive and inter-
developmental disorder of the elbow (Trostel et al.,
mittent forelimb lameness at 5-12 months of age
2003b; Temwichitr et al., 2010). There is substantial
(Wind & Packard, 1986; Trostel et al., 2003a). Physi-
evidence to show a genetic component to the dis-
cal exam findings include moderate to severe
order, with particular over-representation in Lab-
weight-bearing  lameness (typically unilateral),
rador Retrievers, Bernese Mountain Dogs and
pain and crepitus on palpation and passive ROM
Rottweilers (Trostel et al., 2003a, 2003b; Temwichitr
of the elbow, and palpable effusion, sometimes
et al., 2010). The incidence of FCP in Labradors is
marked, of the lateral aspect of the humeroulnar
18-50% (Temwichitr et al., 2010). The exact mode
joint (Wind & Packard, 1986; Trostel et al., 2003a).
of inheritance has not been determined but there is
 Flexed lateral radiographs reveal the UAP (Cook
a strong familial association. A sex predilection has
& Cook, 2009). A full series of elbow radiographs
 been reported with a male to female ration of 2:1
of both limbs should be obtained. Advanced
to 3:1 (Trostel et al., 2003b). FCP occurs bilaterally
Chapter 12 Disorders of the Canine Forelimb: Veterinary Diagnosis and Treatment 237
in 50-90% of dogs and concurrent OC has been
two (Trostel et al., 2003b; Fitzpatrick & Yeadon,
reported in up to 60% of cases (Trostel et al., 2003b).
2009).
The pathogenesis of FCP is not completely
A series of elbow radiographs is recommended
understood (Danielson et al., 2006). Several theo-
 initially; however, discrete visualization of a frag-
ries have been investigated including defective
mented coronoid process is not possible (Moores
osteochondral ossification, abnormalities of the
et al., 2008; Punke et al., 2009; Cook & Cook,
trabecular bone of the coronoid process, and bio-
2009). Rather, secondary signs such as sclerosis of
mechanical influences including radio-ulnar incon-
the subchondral bone at the semilunar notch and
gruity (Trostel et al., 2003b; Danielson et al., 2006;
enthesiophyte formation on the dorsal anconeal
Temwichitr et al., 2010). A wide spectrum of FCP
process are seen (Danielson et al., 2006; Cook &
can be seen ranging from large, discrete osteochon-
Cook, 2009). Studies have shown radiographs to be
dral fragments to small cartilage fissures that are
highly insensitive to diagnosing FCP and therefore,
advanced imaging should be recommended (Dan-
pathology (Danielson et al., 2006; Fitzpatrick &
ielson et al., 2006; Moores et al., 2008; Cook & Cook,
Yeadon, 2009). Regardless of the underlying etiol-
2009; Punke et al., 2009).
 Ogy, FCP inevitably results in the development and
CT is very effective for diagnosing and charac-
 progression of OA, particularly within the medial
terizing FCP (as well as OC) but is not capable of
compartment, or humeroulnar articulation, of the
evaluating the articular cartilage (Moores et al.,
elbow (Clements et al., 2006; Fitzpatrick & Yeadon,
2008; Cook & Cook, 2009). Arthroscopy is recom-
2009).
mended alone or in combination with CT to assess
the integrity of the articular cartilage as well as
radioulnar congruity (Moores et al., 2008; Punke et
Diagnosis
al., 2009). MRI can be used to evaluate the elbow
Dogs commonly present at 4-12 months of age,
and is more sensitive thian CT for evaluating the
although some may not show clinical signs until
surrounding soft tissues, subchondral and medul-
later in life after degenerative joint disease becomes
lary bone, cartilage and bone-cartilage interface
severe (Trostel et al., 2003b; Fitzpatrick & Yeadon,
(Cook & Cook, 2009; Baeumlin et al., 2010).
2009). Juvenile dogs with FCP typically have an
 insidious onset of mild to severe weight bearing
lameness that is aggravated by activity. Often, they
Ireatment
will shift weight to the unaffected or less severely
There is not a clear consensus with regard to the
affected limb, with the affected limb held with the
optimal treatment recommendation for FCP (Evans
elbow adducted and paw abducted or extemally
et al., 2008; Fitzpatrick & Yeadon, 2009; Burton ef
rotated (this is commonly confused with a valgus
al, 2011). Surgical removal of a fissured or frag-
limb deformity) (Trostel et al., 2003b). There may
mented CP is advised with the proposed goal
be muscle atrophy, and some patients may have
"taking the pebble out of the shoe" (Evans et al.,
the appearance of over-developed hindquarters
2008; Fitzpatrick & Yeadon, 2009). Burring of chon-
due to increased weight bearing through the pelvic
dromalacic cartilage and micropicking can also be
limbs. Joint effusion is rarely appreciated with FCP
performed to stimulate fibrocartilage growth (Fitz-
 or OC. Pain can be elicited with supination of the
patrick & Yeadon, 2009). Evans, et al. performed a
 antebrachium with the elbow in flexion or exten-
systematic analysis and review of surgical and
sion (Trostel et al., 2003b; Fitzpatrick & Yeadon,
nonsurgical methods for treating FCP (Evans et al.,
2009). Deep palpation over the biceps brachii inser-
2008). Their results yielded only four studies that
tion near the medial coronoid commonly results in
 compared medial arthrotomy to nonsurgical man-
a pain response (Fitzpatrick & Yeadon, 2009). As
agement or arthroscopy. The conclusion of this
degenerative changes of the joint develop, fibrous 
review was that arthroscopy is more likely to result
thickening of the medial compartment, crepitus,
 in a positive outcome compared to medical man-
and loss of ROM can be appreciated. These clinical
 agement or medial arthrotomy, although in this
findings are identical to those seen with OC, and
review, there were no studies that actually com-
clinical exam alone is unlikely to differentiate the
 pared arthroscopy to medical management (Evans
238  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
et al., 2008). Burton, et al. compared nonsurgical
studies (Conzemius,2
2009). Conzemius, et al.
management (NSAIDs and controlled exercise)
showed that good long-term outcomes are possi-
with arthroscopy for the treatment of unilateral
ble with a nonconstrained total elbow replace-
FCP (Burton et al., 2011). Twenty dogs were pro-
ment (Conzemius, 2009). Partial joint replacement
spectively evaluated using objective gait analysis,
(Canine Unicompartmental Elbow, CUE) is in clini-
and at 4 and 8 weeks, dogs treated surgically had
cal trials and long-term results are not available
significantly worse limb function compared to the
(Cook, 2012a).
control group. At 6 and 12 months, there was no
significant difference between groups, suggesting
that nonsurgical management was superior to sur-
Osteochondrosis/osteochondritis dissecans
gical intervention in this group of dogs (Burton ef
(OC/OCD)
al., 2011). This study examined only 20 dogs total
Pathophysiology
 in both groups, however The authors of this study
postulate that exposure of the subchondral bone
Osteochondrosis is defined as the failure of endo-
with surgical debridement results in increased
chondral ossification resulting in a discrete lesion
release of pro-inflammatory cytokines and exacer-
 of thickened and degenerative cartilage (Trostel
bation of the osteoarthritic process (Burton et al.,
et al., 2002). Mild forces on the abnormal cartilage
2011).
can result in shearing of the cartilage flap from the
 When significant (>4 mm) radioulnar incongru-
umderlying bone, referred to as osteochondrosis
ity is detected arthroscopically, an ulnar osteotomy
dissecans (OCD). The flap of cartilage can remain
may be performed to facilitate the development
attached to the defect or can become dislodged into
of congruency (Fitzpatrick & Yeadon, 2009). Some
the joint. OC /OCD can occur in the shoulder, stifle,
qns e Sunoad roy paienoape aaeu suoasms
tarsus, and elbow. Within the elbow the most
total coronoidectomy (SCO) (Fitzpatrick & Yeadon,
common location for OC to develop is the distal
2009). The biceps ulnar release procedure (BURP),
medial humeral condyle (Trostel et al., 2002; Fitz-
in which the insertion of the biceps brachii on the
patrick et al., 2009c).
 medial ulna is transected, has been suggested as a
The underlying cause of OC has not been firmly
method of decreasing excessive rotational stress on
established, but may be related to over-nutrition,
the medial coronoid process (Fitzpatrick & Yeadon,
rapid growth, excess dietary calcium, ischemia,
2009). Long-term results of SCO and BURP are not
hormonal influences or trauma. A genetic com-
available at this time.
 ponent is also likely. The condition is most com-
 Despite surgical intervention, patients with FCP
 monly seen in large and giant breed male dogs
will develop degenerative joint disease (DJD)/
such as Bernese Mountain Dogs and Labrador
 osteoarthritis (OA) of the medial compartment of
Retrievers. Bilateral disease occurs in 20-50% of
the elbow (Fitzpatrick & Yeadon, 2009; Fitzpatrick
dogs and OC and FCP commonly occur within the
et al., 2009b; Burton et al., 2011). Surgical techniques
same joint (Trostel et al., 2002; Fitzpatrick et al.,
continue to be investigated as means of long-term
2009b, 2009c).
 treatment of medial compartment diseases. Sliding
humeral osteotomy (SHO) involves a transverse
Diagnosis
osteotomy of the humeral diaphysis with the distal
humerus translated medially and stabilized with
The clinical history and physical exam findings of
a plate. The aim of this procedure is to transfer
dogs with OC/OCD is similar to that of FCP
biomechanical load from the medial to lateral
(Trostel et al., 2002; Fitzpatrick & Yeadon, 2009).
 compartment. Preliminary clinical results show
 Four-view radiographs of the elbow are often suf-
promising short-term outcomes (Fitzpatrick et al.,
ficient to diagmose OC where the lesion is seen as
2009b).
a lucency of the distal medial humeral condyle
Total elbow joint replacement (TER) has been
(Cook & Cook, 2009). Advanced imaging tech-
investigated for many years. There has been diffi-
niques such as CT, MRI and arthroscopy are often
culty in designing the optimal implant system, and
used to evaluate for concurrent FCP and to evalu-
significant morbidity has been reported in initial
ate the articular cartilage (Cook & Cook, 2009).
Chapter 12 Disorders of the Canine Forelimb: Veterinary Diagnosis and Treatment 239
Treatment
middle age (Paster et al., 2009). Surgical resection
of the ossified bodies has been recommended;
Surgical removal of the OC/OCD fragment is rec-
however, little evidence exists regarding long-term
ommended (Trostel et al., 2002; Fitzpatrick &
Yeadon, 2009; Fitzpatrick et al., 2009c). After frag-
results of surgical intervention. Importantly, it has
 ment removal, curettage and osteostixis of the sub-
been showm that UME is not associated with the
development of radiographic signs of OA (Paster
 chondral bone is performed to encourage ingrowth
of fibrocartilage (Fitzpatrick & Yeadon, 2009).
et al., 2009). Rather, it is an extra-articular condition
and carries a better prognosis than other disorders
Long-term OA is expected. Osteochondral auto-
 grafts and allografts have been used to replace the
of the elbow.
OC defect with hyaline cartilage (Fitzpatrick et al.,
2009c). Fitzpatrick, et al. showed promising short-
Incomplete ossification of the
term results using the osteochondral autograft
humeral condyle
transfer (OAT) system (Fitzpatrick et al., 2009c).
Sliding humeral osteotomy, TER and CUE may
also be used in the long-term management of
Incomplete ossification of the humeral condyle
(IOHC) is a developmental condition that primar-
medial compartment disease secondary to OC/
ily affects spaniel breeds, with a reported poly-
OCD (Fitzpatrick & Yeadon, 2009; Cook, 2012b).
genic recessive mode of inheritance (de Bakker
et al., 2011; Hattersley et al., 2011). Labrador Retriev-
Long-term management of ED and OA
ers and Rottweilers are also over represented. The
underlying pathophysiology is a failure of the two
Nonsurgical or complementary therapy for the
ossification centers of the humeral condyle to fuse
long-term management of patients with ED
 involves a multi-modal approach including weight
(de Bakker et al., 2011; Hattersley et al., 2011). Nor-
mally, complete fusion should occur by 70 ± 14
management, activity modification, chondropro-
tectants, pain management, omega 3 fatty acids,
days of age (de Bakker et al., 2011; Hattersley et al.,
2011). IOHC occurs bilaterally in approximately
therapeutic modalities, therapeutic exercises, acu-
90% of dogs and male dogs are most commonly
puncture, manual therapy and regenerative medi-
cine (Canapp et al., 2009).
affected (de Bakker et al., 2011; Hattersley et al.,
 2011). Concurent FCP has been reported in 25-
56% of spaniels with IOHC (de Bakker et al., 2011).
IOHC can be diagnosed on plain radiographs
Ununited medial epicondyle
 using a 15-degree craniomedial-caudolateral view;
however, CT has been shown to be more sensitive
Ununited medial epicondyle is not considered to
and specific (Farrell et al., 2011). The condition
be a component of ED but is a developmental con-
is most commonly diagnosed when a patient
dition of the canine elbow. The etiology of UME is
presents for a lateral humeral condylar fracture
thought to be either failed fusion of the ossification
following minimal trauma; however, a history
center of the medial humeral condyle or osseous
of lameness prior to fracture is not uncommon
metaplasia of the flexor tendon origins (Paster
(Hattersley et al., 2011).
et al., 2009). The condition occurs in Labrador
It is reasonable to recommend prophylactic
 Retrievers, with a prevalence of 15% (Paster et al.,
 screening of predisposed breeds after 6 months of
2009). German Shepherd Dogs and English Setters
 age, particularly those who will be participating in
are also frequently affected. UME is generally uni-
 sporing events. If IOHC is diagnosed prior to
lateral; however, histological studies suggest that
humeral condylar fracture, a lag screw can be
a q sie   a
placed across the condyles to help prevent future
(Paster et al., 2009). Patients present with a history
fracture, although this procedure may be associ-
of lameness and pain localized to the elbow, and
ated with significant morbidity (Hattersley et al.,
UME is often an incidental finding. Craniocaudal
2011). Furthermore, it is important that these dogs
radiographs demonstrate the lesion although the
are removed from the breeding pool and that care
condition may not be evident until dogs reach
is taken to avoid high impact activities.
240  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Jump down syndrome (traumatic
Diagnosis
fragmented medial coronoid process)
Patients with TFMCP present with a history of
Introduction
subtle intermittent lameness to significant unilat-
 eral lameness. Bilateral presentation is uncommon.
Traumatic fragmented medial coronoid process
The lameness is exacerbated with increased activ-
(TFMCP) appears to occur commonly in perfor-
ity and exercise. Onset is insidious, although on
mance, working and active dogs with no limita-
 occasion, acute onset following a jump down may
tions of age, size or breed.
be reported. Severity of the lameness may be pro-
gressive. Affected dogs gait in a manmer consistent
Cause
with elbow pain. A lack of response to rest and
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) is
There is no definitive etiology for TFMCP, though
three theories exist. The first suggests microfrac-
Discomfort is elicited on direct palpation of the
tures of the bone below the cartilage (subchondral
medial compartment of the elbow joint, specifically
 fractures) result from abnormal repetitive loading.
the medial coronoid process. Patients are reluctant
such as landing from jumps, or hitting contacts or
to allow full elbow flexion and discomfort is noted
flyball boxes (Bottcher et al., 2009). The second
on hyperflexion. In chronic cases, full flexion may
theory contends that increased repetitive load
not be obtained. Crepitus is rare. Carpal flexion
arises from the force generated by contraction of
with external rotation while extending the elbow
the biceps/brachialis muscle complex. This force
may exacerbate the pain response. Joint effusion
rotates the medial coronoid into the radius. It is
distal to the lateral or medial epicondyle of the
theorized that as a result of this repetitive loading.
humerus may be detected.
microcracks develop, disturbing the mechanical
Misdiagnosis as BT is common, based on the
 properties of the bone (fatigue microdamage), and
pain response to shoulder extension or the biceps
if proper healing does not take place, fatigue frac-
stretch test. This pain response may be due to the
tures of the subchondral trabecular bone eventu-
simultaneous hyperextension of the elbow when
ally occur (Danielson et al., 2006). Further, loss of
the shoulder is placed in extension. Elbow exten-
osteocytes, indicated by decreased
losteocyte
sion causing tension in the biceps/brachialis
density, has been strongly linked with the presence
muscle complex may exert pressure on the medial
of microdamage after fatigue loading, and may
coronoid and inflamed joint capsule creating a pain
play an important role in the pathogenesis of
response. A similar response is noted during the
TFMCP (Verborgt et al., 2000). A third theory specu-
biceps stretch test in which the shoulder is flexed
 lates that these dogs are predisposed due to under-
and the elbow is extended. Direct palpation of the
lying elbow dysplasia, in particular, incongruency.
 proximal biceps tendon as well as other shoulder
Elbow incongruity such as radioulnar step defects,
 assessment tests are necessary to rule out shoulder
humeroulnar  incongruency/conflict,
and varus
conditions.
deformity of the humerus causes abnormal contact
Radiographs are often unrewarding (Cook &
patterns in the elbow, specifically at the coronoid-
Cook, 2009). In chronic cases, radiographs may
trochlear articulation, which is theorized to increase
reveal secondary evidence of bony remodeling and
the load on the medial coronoid process (Punke
 in particular, sclerosis of the ulnar notch is a highly
et al., 2009).
sensitive indicator of suspected FMCP (Danielson
Secondary osteoarthritis will progress if left
et al., 2006)
untreated. Damage to the cartilage such as soften-
Advanced diagnostic imaging modalities such
ing, fibrillation, fissuring, erosions and additional
as CT, MRI, nuclear scintigraphy, and arthroscopy
 subchondral bone microcracks and fragmentation
may confirm the diagnosis (Cook & Cook, 2009; J.L.
may occur. Over time, frictional abrasion (kissing
Cook & Cook, 2009). Arthroscopic evaluation offers
lesions) may occur as a result of free fragments
 the advantage of magnified direct observation of
disrupting opposing surfaces including the medial
the major intra-articular structures, dynamic eval
aspect of the humeral condyle and radial head.
uation of the tissues during ROM and palpation of
Chapter 12 Disorders of the Canine Forelimb: Veterinary Diagnosis and Treatment 241
Figure 12.20 Arthroscopic image of a traumatic fragmented
medial coronoid process (arrow)
Figure 12.21   Arthroscopic image of traumatic fragmented
medical coronoid process, showing removal of the fragment
(arrow) with a grasper.
intra-articular tissues using arthroscopic instru-
mentation to make a definitive diagnosis as well as
allowing for treatment with one anesthetic event
discomfort. Twice weekly intramuscular injections
(Figure 12.20) (Fitzpatrick et al., 2009a). In a small
 of PSGAGs are prescribed for four weeks. Oral
percentage of cases, advanced imaging may indi-
joint protective agents such as glucosamine, chon-
cate fragmentation of the MCP not found on 
droitin sulfate and avocado/soybean unsaponifi-
arthroscopic observation. In these cases, the fis-
 ables(ASU) are recommended asa daily supplement
sures are believed to be beneath the cartilage
for life. Prospects of returning to normal activity
surface of the coronoid process (Fitzpatrick et al.,
and competition are improved with early detection
2009a).
 and treatment.
Treatment
Radius curvus
Arthroscopy may include a combination of tech-
niques such as fragment removal, debridement
Proper development and alignment of the forelimb
of diseased tissues, abrasion arthroplasty, micro-
 and elbow require that the radius and ulna grow
fracture, and subtotal coronoid ostectomy as dic-
at a synchronous rate. The distal physis of the
(1z'Zl amli) Aaaas pue uoissaigoid Aq paiel
 radius is responsible for 60-70% of the bone's
(Fitzpatrick et al., 2009a). Arthroscopic treatment is
overall length, whereas the distal ulnar physis is
believed to cause less soft tissue trauma, reduce
 responsible for 85% of the ulna's length (Carrig.
surgery time, decrease the risk of infection, and
1975). The conical shape of the distal ulnar physis
speed recovery time as compared to the traditional
makes it susceptible to Type V Salter-Harris frac-
arthrotomy (Hoelzler et al., 2004).
tures following minimal trauma (Fox, 1984).
Postoperative bandaging is not suggested as
Hypertrophic osteodystrophy and retained carti-
passive range of motion (PROM) and early return
laginous core can also lead to premature closure of
to function are recommended. NSAIDs are pre-
this physis (Fox, 1984). When distal ulnar growth
scribed for 14 days to decrease inflammation and   is arrested during the critical period of growth
242   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Figure 12.23 Radiographs of a dog with radius curvus.
Figure 12.22 A Shih Tzu with radius curvus.
(<8 months of age), valgus limb deformity, or
patient at the time of growth arrest and surgeon
radius curvus occurs (Figure 12.22) (Carrig, 1975;
preference (Boudrieau, 2003). When closure of the
Fox, 1984).
distal ulnar physis is diagnosed prior to significant
 The primary mechanism for the resulting defor-
radial deformity, and substantial growth of the
mity is the constrained, or bow-string effect of the
limb remains, a distal ulnar ostectomy can be
ulna on the radius as it continues to grow. This
performed to remove the tethering effect of the
leads to cranial and medial bowing of the radius,
ulna (Boudrieau, 2003). After radial deformity has
 hyperextension and subluxation of the carpus, and
occurred, a dynamic or static corrective ostectomy/
external rotation of the paw (Fox, 1984). The most
osteotomy of the radius can be performed along
clinically significant effect of this deformity is the
with ulnar ostectomy (Boudrieau, 2003). If consid-
 development of elbow incongruity, and in extreme
erable length discrepancy exists between the limbs,
cases, luxation of the proximal ulna (Boudrieau,
distraction osteogenesis can be performed along
2003).
with correction of the deformity (Boudrieau, 2003).
 Diagnosis of radius curvus is based on physical
examination and radiographs (Figure 12.23). Char-
acterization and quantification of the deformity
Carpal injury
can be made by comparing radiographs or CT
images of the affected and nonaffected limbs
Introduction
(Crosse & Worth, 2010),
The decision to intervene surgically depends on
Injuries of the carpus, less common than those of
the patient's functional mobility and degree 
of
the shoulder or elbow in performance dogs, are
elbow incongruity, which will lead to OA despite
just as challenging to diagnose and treat. The
surgery (Boudrieau, 2003; Crosse & Worth, 2010).
 carpal joint, with its fibrous, ligamentous and ten-
The surgical technique depends on the age of the
dinous components, acts as a shock absorber for
Chapter 12 Disorders of the Canine Forelimb: Veterinary Diagnosis and Treatment 243
Figure 12.25 Stress radiograph of a dog with carpal
hyperextension injury.
Figure 12.24A dog with carpal hyperextension injury.
nosis is based on a comprehensive evaluation
and imaging techniques. Palpation may reveal soft 
the forelimb during weight bearing, and due to the
tissue swelling, discomfort, crepitus, decreased
lack of muscular support is prone to injury.
ROM, or instability when stressed (flexion, exten-
sion, medial or lateral stress). Palpation of the con-
tralateral nonaffected joint can be helpful in
Cause
determining abnormal motion.
 Radiographic changes are often limited to non-
specific changes, such as soft tissue swelling within
to be acute traumatic events, including jumping
the region of injury. Stress radiographs may reveal
down from heights (Kapatkin et al., 2012). Chronic
 evidence of medial or lateral joint space widening
repetitive sprains and strains to the supportive
 or carpal hyperextension (Figure 12.25). Radio-
structures of the joint occur over time, but do not
graphs of the contralateral nonaffected carpal joint
usually cause significant acute lameness.
should be obtained for comparison. MRI or ultra-
Many variations of carpal injury can occur
sound are often required for a definitive diagnosis
including hyperextension (Figure 12.24) with dis-
for certain conditions, such as flexor carpi ulnaris
ruption of the palmar ligaments with or without
(Figure 12.26).
disruption of the joint capsule, hyperflexion with
rotation (dorsal ligaments and collateral ligaments
with or without disruption of the joint capsule),
Injuries
and medial or lateral collateral ligament injuries or
degeneration of carpal ligaments as a result of
Carpal injuries can be classified into sprains,
disease processes (i.e., immune mediated disease,
strains, luxations, fractures, or a combination of
metabolic disease, etc.). Flexor carpi ulnaris (FCU)
these injuries. A sprain is an injury to a ligament
injuries can range from strains to core lesions or
that can occur in the midportion of the ligament or
complete disruption and avulsion.
at its attachment to the bone. Sprains can be clas-
sified into three grades of severity (Canapp et al.,
2012). Grade 1 sprains are mild and described as
Diagnosis
an overstretching of the ligament without disrup-
tion or loss of function of the ligament (Canapp
Diagnosing carpal injures can be challenging, espe-
et al., 2012). Grade 2 sprains are moderate in se-
cially for mild sprain and strain conditions. A diag-
 verity and are described as a partial tear of the
244Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
FCU strains may be the result of acute tendi-
T1
Trans
nitis, implying an inflammatory condition from
acute traumatic tendon fiber tearing, or chronic
tendinosis.
Most chronic FCU tendinopathies are the result
of overuse and a dysfumctional repair response. In
these conditions, breakdown of the collagen matrix
is involved and there is no inflammation within the
tendon (Dirks & Warden, 2011). High-level or pro-
longed periods of tensile stress due to repetitive
intense activities can lead to collagen breakdown.
Because of the lack of inflammatory activity in
 these conditions, most patients are unresponsive to
rest and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs). Although it seems counterintuitive, ini-
tiating an inflammatory response is necessary to
 activate the healing process.
Figure 12.26 MRl of flexor carpi ulnaris strain. Arrow
shows disruption of the flexor carpi ulnaris tendon.
Treatment
There are numerous treatment options for carpal
ligament (Canapp et al., 2012). The general continu-
sprains and strains; however, a definitive diagnosis
ity of the ligament is intact though the strength of
is warranted to determine the best course of treat-
the ligament is significanly reduced (Canapp et al.,
ment. Mild to moderate ligament sprains (Grade 1
 2012). Grade 3 sprains are severe and result from
and 2) are amenable to external support from spe-
complete disruption or tearing of the ligament
cialized support wraps, (Figure 12.27) orthotics
resulting in instability of the joint (Canapp et al.,
(Figure 12.28) or extermal coaptation with a splint
2012). Since ligaments have a poor blood supply
for 6 to 8 weeks along with rehabilitation therapy.
and require the formation and organization of col-
External support allows for immobilization of the
lagen for their repair, ligament healing times can
-ea paoae a cn Amfu ramy suuaaand puo
be quite lengthy (Dirks & Warden, 2011). Studies
ment and so that healing can occur. Specialized
show that damaged ligaments regain between 50%
support wraps and orthotics can be designed and
to 70% of their original strength after 1 year (Woo
 manufactured for the individual to ensure accurate
& Buckwalter, 1988; Bishop & Bray, 1993; Frank,
and comfortable fit. For more severe cases, a func-
1996; Frank et al., 1999). If a gap forms or is present
tional hinged brace may be used, allowing for con-
at the junction of the ligament ends during healing,
trolled ROM (see Chapter 11).
permanent ligament elongation and subsequent
Severe sprains or luxations resulting in instabil-
instability may result even if an intact ligament
ity usually require surgical intervention. Surgical
reforms (Hildebrand & Frank, 1998).
options include primary repair of the torn liga-
Luxations involve the disruption of multiple
ment, placement of a prosthetic ligament to replace
ligaments as well as the joint capsule and most will
the injured ligament when primary repair carmot
require surgical intervention consisting of a pan-
be performed, or partial or complete arthrodesis.
carpal arthrodesis (Kapatkin et al., 2012).
 Luxations of the middle carpal or carpometacarpal
 Common fractures associated with carpal inju-
joint, or disruption of the palmar ligaments can be
ries in sporting dogs include the attachment sites
stabilized with a partial arthrodesis. This allows
for the collateral ligaments (avulsion fractures) and
for stabilization of the joint while maintaining the
compression or shear fractures. Fractures of these
majority of joint motion. When there is instability
sites result in joint instability when stressed on pal-
of the radiocarpal joint, complete arthrodesis is
 pation or during weight bearing.
usually indicated (Figure 12.29). Arthrodesis can
Chapter 12 Disorders of the Canine Forelimb: Veterinary Diagnosis and Treatment 245
be performed by long-term stabilization with an
6 to 8 weeks. Fractures warrant open surgical
external skeletal fixator, plate and screws or inter-
reduction and internal fixation. Internal fixation of
nal pins and wire. Surgical reconstruction or inter-
fractures of carpal bones can be difficult due to the
nal arthrodesis requires adjunctive support from
small irregular size and shape of the bones involved
an external bandage, splint or orthotic for at least
(Kapatkin et al., 2012).
Figure 12.27 Carpal support wrap (dog with Grade Il
Figure 12.28 Clamshell carpal orthotic (conservative
Carpal sprain).
management of dog with severe carpal hyperextension
injury).
injury).
246Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Grade 1-2 FCU strains are treated with orthotics,
CANAPP,S.,CAMPANA, D.,& FAIR, L.2012.Orthpedic
rest, NSAIDs, cryotherapy and rehabilitative
coaptation devices and small-animal prosthetics. In:
therapy. The author (SC) has had good results
Tobias, K. & Johnston, S. (eds.), Veterinary Surgery:
 treating core lesions using regenerative medicine
Small Animal. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier, 641.
CANAPP, S.O. August 18-20, 2011. Supraspinatus tendi-
treatments, including a combination of cultured
nopathy: regenerative medicine for supraspinatus ten-
adipose derived progenitor cells with platelet rich
dinopathy, update on canine orthopedic devices.
plasma ultrasound guided into the core lesion. Fol-
Veterinary Arthrology Adoancerment Association (VA3)
lowing injections, patients are placed in hinged
Anrual Symposium. Bonita Springs, FL.
functional orthotics that are dynamized over time.
CARBERRY, C.A.& GILMORE, D.R. 1986. Infraspinatus
 Rehabilitation therapy is performed for 3 to 4
muscle contracture associated with trauma in a dog.
months. Severe ruptures or avulsions require sur-
Am Vet Med Assoc,188,533-534.
gical treatment consisting of tenorrhaphy or reat-
CARPENTER, J.E., FLANAGAN, C.L., THOMOPOU-
tachment followed by orthotic and rehabilitative
LOS, S., YIAN, E.H.,& SOSLOWSKY, L.J. 1998. The
therapy.
effects of overuse combined with intrinsic or extrinsic
alterations in an animal model of rotator cuff tendino-
sis. Am / Sports Med, 26, 801-807.
CARRIG, C. 1975. The effects of asynchronous growth of
References
the radius and ulna on the canine elbow joint follow-
ing experimental retardation of longitudinal growth of
ABRAMS, J.S. 2001. Thermal capsulorrhaphy for instabil-
the ulna. / Am Anim Hosp Assoc, 1l, 560.
ity of the shoulder: concerms and applications of the
CLEMENTS, D.N.,CARTER, S.D.,INNES, JF.,&
heat probe. Instr Course Lect, 50, 29-36.
OLLIER, W.E. 2006. Genetic basis of secondary osteo-
ARRINGTON, E.D. & MILLER, M.D. 1995. Skeletal
arthritis in dogs with joint dysplasia. Amt ∫ Vet Res, 67,
muscle injuries. Orthop Clin North Am, 26, 411-
909-918.
422.
CONZEMIUS, M. 2009. Nonconstrained elbow replace-
BAEUMLIN, Y.,DE RYCKE, L., VAN CAELENBERG,A.,
ment in dogs. Vet Surg, 38, 279-284.
VAN BREE, H., & GIELEN, 1. 2010. Magnetic reso-
COOK, C.R. & COOK, J.L. 2009. Diagnostic imaging
nance imaging of the canine elbow: an anatomic study.
of canine elbow dysplasia: a review. Vet Surg, 38,
Vet Surg, 39, 566-573.
144-153.
BISHOP, P.B. & BRAY, R.C. 1993. Abnormal joint mechan-
COOK,J. 2012a. Canine Unicompartmental Elbow (CUE)
ics and the proteoglycan composition of normal and
arthroplasty, initial clinical results. Procedings BVOA
healing rabbit medial collateral ligament. / Maripula-
Spring Meeting. Birmingham, UK.
tive Physiol Ther,16,300-305.
COOK, J. 2012b. Sports medicine for the canine elbow:
BLOOD, D.C.& STUDDERT, V.P. 1999.Saunders Compre-
what really helps? Proceedings. 28th Anruat Inter-
hensive Veterirary Dictionary, 2nd ed. London, UK:
rational Canine Sports Medicine Symposium.Orlando,
W.B. Saunders.
FL.
BOTTCHER, P., WERNER, H., LUDEWIG, E., GREVEL
COOK, J.L. & COOK, C.R. 2009. Bilateral shoulder and
V, & OECHTERING, G. 2009. Visual estimation
of radioulnar incongruence in dogs using three-
diagnostic findings and treatment outcomes. Vet Surg,
dimensional image rendering: an in vitro study based
38, 224-232.
'8 ns ia/ hubeu oqdeouon panduos uo
COOK,JL.,RENFRO, D.C.，TOMLINSON, J.L,，&
161-168.
SORENSEN, J.E. 2005a. Measurement of angles of
BOUDRIEAU, R. 2003. Fractures of the radius and ulna.
abduction for diagnosis of shoulder instability in dogs
In: Slatter, D. (ed.), Textbook of Small Animal Surgery,
using goniometry and digital image analysis. Vet Surg.
3rd ed. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 1965-1972.
34, 463-468.
BURTON, N.J., OWEN, M.R., KIRK, L.S., TOSCANO,
COOK, J.L., TOMLINSON, J.L., FOX, D.B., KENTER, K.,
M.J., & COLBORNE, G.R. 2011. Conservative versus
& COOK, C.R. 2005b. Treatment of dogs diagnosed
arthroscopic management for medial coronoid process
with medial shoulder instability using radiofrequency-
  i odd e o  
induced thermal capsulorrhaphy. Vet Surg, 34, 469-
Surg, 40, 972-980.
475.
CANAPP, S., ACCIANI, D., HULSE, D., SCHULZ, K., &
COOKSON, J.C. & KENT, B.E. 1979. Orthopedic manual
CANAPP, D. 2009. Rehabilitation therapy for elbow
therapy—an overview. Part I: the extremities. Phys
disorders in dogs. Vet Surg, 38, 301-307.
Ther, 59, 136-146.
Chapter 12 Disorders of the Canine Forelimb: Veterinary Diagnosis and Treatment 247
CORLEY, E.A., SUTHERLAND, T.M., & CARLSON,
ment of medial compartment disease of the canine
W.D. 1968. Genetic aspects of canine elbow dysplasia.
elbow. Vet Surg, 38, 261-278.
IAm Vet Med Assoc, 153, 543-547.
FITZPATRICK, N., YEADON, R., & SMITH, T.J. 2009c.
CROSSE, K.R. & WORTH, A.J. 2010. Computer-assisted
Early clinical experience with osteochondral autograft
surgical correction of an antebrachial deformity in a
transfer for treatment of osteochondritis dissecans of
dog. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol, 23, 354-361.
the medial humeral condyle in dogs. Vet Surg, 38,
DANIELSON, K.C., FITZPATRICK, N., MUIR, P, &
246-260.
MANLEY, PA. 2006. Histomorphometry of frag-
FOSSUM,T. 2002. Small Animat Surgery,2nd ed.St. Louis,
mented medial coronoid process in dogs: a compari-
MO: Mosby.
son of affected and normal coronoid processes. Vet
FOX, S. 1984. Premature closure of distal radial and ulnar
Surg, 35, 501-509.
physes in the dog 1. Pathogenesis and diagnosis. Corp
DANOVA, N.A. & MUIR, P 2003. Exracorporeal shock
Cont Educ Pract Vet,6,128-139.
wave therapy for supraspinatus calcifying tendinopa-
FRANK, C.B. 1996. Ligament healing: current knowledge
thy in two dogs. Vet Rec, 152, 208-209.
and clinical applications. ∫ Am Acad Orthop Surg, 4,
DE BAKKER, E., SAMOY, Y., GIELEN, 1, & VAN
74-83.
RYSSEN, B. 2011. Medial humeral epicondylar lesions
FRANK, C.B.,HART, D.A., & SHRIVE, N.G. 1999.
in the canine elbow. A review of the literature. Vet
Molecular biology and biomechanics of normal and
Comp Orthop Traumatol, 24, 9-17.
healing ligaments—a review.Osteoarthritis Cartilage,7,
DENNY, H.R. 1993. A Guide to Canine and Feline Ortho-
130-140.
puedic Surgery, 3rd ed. Boston: Blackwell Scientific
FRANSSON, B.A., GAVIN, PR., & LAHMERS, K.K. 2005.
Publications.
Supraspinatus
s tendinosis associated with biceps
DEVITT, C.M., NEELY, M.R., & VANVECHTEN, B.J.
brachii tendon displacement in a dog. / Arm Vet Med
2007. Relationship of physical examination test of
Ass0c, 227, 1429-1433, 1416.
GILLEY, R.S., WALLACE, L.J., & HAYDEN, D.W. 2002.
Vet Surg, 36, 661-668.
Clinical and pathologic analyses of bicipital tenosyno-
DILLON, E.A., ANDERSON, L.J., & JONES, B.R. 1989.
vitis in dogs. Am / Vet Res, 63, 402-407.
Infraspinatus muscle contracture in a working dog. N
HARASEN, G. 2005. Infraspinatus muscle contracture.
Z Vet §, 37, 32-34.
Can Vet I, 46, 751-752.
DIRKS, R.C. & WARDEN, S.J. 2011. Models for the study
HATTERSLEY, R., MCKEE, M., ONEILL, T., CLARKE,
of tendinopathy. ∫ Musculoskelet Neuronal Interact, 11,
S., BUTTERWORTH, S., MADDOX, T., OWEN, M.,
141149.
LANGLEY-HOBBS, S.J., & COMERFORD, E. 2011.
EVANS, H.E.1993.Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 3rd ed.
Postoperative complications after surgical manage-
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.
ment of incomplete ossification of the humeral
EVANS, R.B., GORDON-EVANS, W.J.,& CONZEMIUS,
condyle in dogs. Vet Surg, 40, 728-733.
M.G. 2008. Comparison of three methods for the man-
HILDEBRAND, K.A. & FRANK, C.B. 1998. Scar forma-
 agement of fragmented medial coronoid proces in the
tion and ligament healing. Car ∫ Surg, 41, 425-429.
dog. A systematic review and meta-analysis. Vet Cornp
HOELZLER, M.G., MILLIS, D.L., FRANCIS, D.A., &
Orthop Traumatol, 21, 106-109.
WEIGEL, J.P. 2004. Results of arthroscopic versus open
FARRELL,M.,TREVAIL,T., MARSHALL, W.,YEADON
arthrotomy for surgical management of cranial cru-
R.,& CARMICHAEL,S. 2011. Computed tomographic
cate ligament deficiency in dogs. Vet Surg, 33,
documentation of the natural progression of humeral
146-153.
intracondylar fissure in a cocker spaniel. Vet Surg, 40,
KAPATKIN, A., GARCIA-NOLEN, T., HAYASHI, K.
966-971.
2012. Carpus, metacarpus, & digits. In: Tobias, K. &
FITZPATRICK, N. & YEADON, R.2009. Working algo-
Johnston, S. (eds.), Veterinary Surgery: Small Animal. St.
rithm for treatment decision making for developmen-
Louis, MO: Sauders, 785-800.
tal disease of the medial compartment of the elbow in
KROTSCHECK, U., HULSE, D., BAHR, A., & JERRAM,
dogs. Vet Surg,38,285-300.
R 2000. Ununited anconeal process: lag-screw fixation
FITZPATRICK, N., SMITH,
T.J, EVANS, R.B.,
with proximal ulnar osteotomy. Vet Comp Orthop Trau-
O'RIORDAN, J., & YEADON, R. 2009a. Subtotal coro
matot,13,212-216.
noid ostectomy for treatment of medial coronoid
LAFUENTE, M.P, FRANSSON, B.A., LINCOLN, J.D.,
disease in 263 dogs. Vet Surg, 38, 233-245.
MARTINEZ, S.A., GAVIN, PR., LAHMERS, K.K., &
FITZPATRICK, N., YEADON, R., SMITH, T., & SCHULZ
GAY, J.M. 2009. Surgical treatment of mineralized and
K 2009b. Techmiques of application and initial clinical
nonmineralized
supraspinatus
tendinopathy
1m
experience with sliding humeral osteotomy for treat-
twenty-four dogs. Vet Surg, 38, 380-387.
248  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
LEIGHTON, R. 1994. Contracture of the muscles. In:
PUNKE, J.P, HULSE, D.A., KERWIN, S.C., PEYCKE
Unger, J. & Mcdowell, D. (eds.), Small Animal Orthope-
L.E., & BUDSBERG,S.C. 2009. Arthroscopic documen-
dics. St. Louis, MO: Mosby, 7.7-7.8.
LEIGHTON, R.L. 1977. Tenotomy for infraspinatus
callameness withoutchanges on standard radiographic
muscle contracture. Mod Vet Pract, 58, 134-135.
projections. Vet Surg, 38, 209-212.
MAGANARIS, C.N., NARICI, M.V., ALMEKINDERS
ROE, S.C. 1998. Injury and diseases of tendons. In:
L.C., & MAFFULLI, N. 2004. Biomechanics and patho-
Bloomberg, M., Dee, J., Taylor, R., & Gannon, J. (eds.),
physiology of overuse tendon injuries: ideas on inser-
Carine Sports Medicine and Surgery. Philadelphia: W.B.
tional tendinopathy. Sports Med, 34, 1005-1017.
Saunders, 93-99.
MARCELLIN-LITTLE, D.J., DEYOUNG, D.J., FERRIS
ROY, R., WALLACE, L, & JOHNSTON, G. 1994.A retro-
K.K., & BERRY, C.M. 1994. Incomplete ossification
spective long-term evaluation of ununited anconeal
of the humeral condyle in spaniels. Vet Surg, 23,
excision on the canine elbow. Vet Comp Orthop Trauma-
475487.
tol, 7, 94-97.
MARCELLIN-LITTLE, D.J., LEVINE, D., & CANAPP,
SAGER, M., HERTEN, M., RUCHAY, S., ASSHEUER, J.,
S.O., JR. 2007. The canine shoulder: selected disorders
KRAMER, M., & JAGER, M. 2009. The anatomy of the
and their management with physical therapy. Clin Tech
glenoid labrum: a comparison between human and
Small Anim Pract, 22, 171-182.
dog. Comp Med, 59, 465-475.
MATAVA, M.J, WHITESIDES, T.E., JR., SEILER, JG.
SCHRAMME, M.,KEREKES, Z.,I
HUNTER,S.,&
3RD, HEWAN-LOWE,K.,& HUTTON, W.C. 1994.
LABENS, R. 2010. Mr imaging features of surgically
Determination of the compartment pressure threshold
induced core lesions in the equine superficial digital
of muscle ischemia in a canine model. ∫ Traurma, 37,
flexor tendon.Vet Radiol Lfttrasound,51,280-287.
50-58.
SCHULZ, K.& KROTSCHECK, U. 2003. Canine elbow
MEYER-LINDENBERG,A.,FEHR,M.,& NOLTE,1. 2006.
dysplasia. In: Slatter, D. (ed.), Textbook of Srmall Anirmal
 Co-existence of ununited anconeal process and frag-
Surgery, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 1927-
mented medial coronoid process of the ulna in the
1952.
dog. ISmall Anim Pract, 47, 61-65.
SHARMA, P. & MAFFULLI, N. 2005. Tendon injury and
MINIACI, A. & CODSI, M.J. 2006. Thermal capsulorrha-
tendinopathy: healing and repair. / Bore foint Surg Am,
phy for the treatment of shoulder instability. Am ∫
87,187-202
Sports Med, 34, 1356-1363.
SIEMS, J.J., BREUR, G.J., BLEVINS, W.E., & CORNELL,
MOORES, A.P., BENIGNI, L., & LAMB, C.R. 2008. Com-
KK. 1998. Use of two-dimensional real-time ultras0-
puted tomography versus arthroscopy for detection of
nography for diagnosing contracture and strain of the
canine elbow dysplasia lesions. Vet Surg, 37, 390-398.
infraspinatus muscle in a dog. / Ar Vet Med Assoc,212,
O'NEILL, T. & INNES, J.F. 2004. Treatment of shoulder
77-80.
instability caused by medial glenohumeral ligament
SLATTER, D. 1985. Textbook of Small Animal Surgery, 2nd
rupture with thermal capsulorrhaphy. ∫ Small Arim
ed. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.
Pract, 45, 521-524.
SOSLOWSKY, L.J, THOMOPOULOS, S., TUN, S.,
PASTER, E.R., BIERY, D.N., LAWLER, D.F., EVANS,
FLANAGAN, C.L., KEEFER, C.C., MASTAW, J., &
R.H., KEALY, R.D., GREGOR, T.P., MCKELVIE, PJ., &
CARPENTER, J.E. 2000. Overuse activity injures
SMITH, G.K. 2009. Un-united medial epicondyle of
-osl e iapou tee ue un topuat seudseadns a
the humerus: radiographic prevalence and association
logic and biomechanical study. / Shoulder Elbow Surg,
with elbow osteoarthritis in a cohort of labrador
9, 79-84.
retrievers. Vet Surg, 38, 169-172.
TEMWICHITR, J., LEEGWATER, PA., & HAZEWIN
PETTIT, G.D. 1980. Infraspinatus muscle contracture in
KEL, H.A. 2010. Fragmented coronoid process in the
dogs.Mod Vet Pract,61,451-452.
dog: a heritable disease. Vet §, 185, 123-129.
PETTIT, G.D., CHATBURN, C.C., HEGREBERG, G.A., &
TROSTEL, C., MCLAUGHLIN, R., & POOL, R. 2002.
MEYERS, K.M. 1978. Studies on the pathophysiology
 Canine Lameness cause by developmental orthopedic
of infraspinatus muscle contracture in the dog. Vet
diseases: osteochondrosis. Compend Contin Educ Pract
Surg, 7, 8-11.
Vet, 24, 836-854.
PETTITT, R.A., TATTERSALL, J., GEMMILL, T., BUT-
TROSTEL, C., MCLAUGHLIN, R., & POOL, R. 2003a.
TERWORTH, S.J., O'NEILL, T.J., LANGLEY-HOBBS,
Canine elbow dysplasia: anatomy and pathogenesis.
S.J., COMERFORD, E.J., & INNES, J.F. 2009. Effect of
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet,25,754-762.
surgical technique on radiographic fusion of the anco
TROSTEL,C., MCLAUGHLIN, R., & POOL, R. 2003b.
neus in the treatment of ununited anconeal process.
Canine lameness caused by developmental orthopedic
Small Anim Pract,50,545-548.
diseases: fragmented medial coronoid process and
Chapter 12 Disorders of the Canine Forelimb: Veterinary Diagnosis and Treatment 249
ununited anconeal process. Compend Contin Educ Pract
WIND, A.& PACKARD,M. 1986. Elbow incongruity and
Vet, 25, 112-120.
 developmental elbow diseases in the dog: part II. J Am
VERBORGT, O., GIBSON, G.J., & SCHAFFLER, M.B.
Anim Hosp Assoc, 22, 725-730.
2000. Loss of osteocyte integrity in association with
WOO, S.L.& BUCKWALTER, J.A.1988. Injury and repair
microdamage and bone remodeling after fatigue in
of the musculoskeletal soft tissues. AAOS 1987. ∫
vivo. Bone Miner Res,15, 60-67.
Orthop Res, 6, 907-931.
WERNHAM, B.G., JERRAM, R.M., & WARMAN, C.G.
2008. Bicipital tenosynovitis in dogs. Corpend Contin
Educ Vet,30,537-552.
13
Evaluation and Rehabilitation
Options for Orthopedic
Disorders of the Forelimb
Sasha A. Foster, MSPT, CCRT, Judy C. Coates, MEd, MSPT, CCRT, and
Debra Canapp, DvM, Diplomate, American College of Veterinary
Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation, CCRT, CVA
Summary
Rehabilitation assessment of orthopedic conditions involves capturing subjective data includ-
ing history of present condition, client's goals for their animal, thorough medical history, and 
objective data including posture, gait, functional activities, strength, palpation, passi ve range
of motion (PROM), muscle flexibility, joint play, and special tests. Findings from the evalua-
tion are placed on a problem list and are critically analyzed by the therapist to develop a
working rehabilitation diagnosis. The working rehabilitation diagnosis is an expansion of the
primary orthopedic diagnosis and includes the sequelae of the primary diagnosis as well as
other underlying physical limitations that may not be associated with the orthopedic condi-
adi ansst sisouep ueqeuan Arewud au uo paseq padoaaap ane sueid suawneanl o
and the chronicity of the injury. Treatment plans for tissue types including muscle, ligament,
joint capsule, intra-articular structures (carti lage and meniscus), and bone direct treatments
for common front limb diagnoses including biceps tendonitis, biceps tendinosis, carpal
tracture, medial shoulder instability, osteochondrosis dissecans, peripheral nerve injuries,
supraspinatus tendinitis, teres major strain, and ununited anconeal process. Treatment inter-
ventions may include modal ities, manual treatments, therapeutic exercise, and neurological
reeducation, all of which should include intensity, frequency, and duration of treatment
intervention. Reassessment of treatment interventi ons should be completed during a treatment
session and at the beginning of each follow-up treatment allowing modifications to the plan
of care for the most effective outcomes.
Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatiorn, First Edition. Edited by M. Christine Zink and Janet B. Van Dyke.
@2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
250
Chapter 13 Evaluation and Rehabilitation Options for Orthopedic Disorders of the Forelimb 251
Overview of orthopedic rehabilitation
capturing subjective data and medical history. The
objective evaluation begins with the hands-off ele-
Rehabilitation assessment of orthopedic conditions
ments including posture, gait, and functional activ-
involves capturing subjective data from the client,
ities. If the patient is provided with rewards in the
including history of present condition and the cli-
form of food or toys during the initial phases of the
ent's goals for their animal. The therapist must also
assessment, they may be more agreeable during
obtain a thorough medical history from the refer-
the manual portions of the exam which include
ring veterinarian and capture objective data includ-
palpation, flexibility, PROM, joint play, and special
ing posture, gait, functional activities, strength,
tests. Patient preference for body position (stand-
palpation, passive range of motion (PROM), muscle
 ing, sitting, or lying) and order of manual exam
flexibility, joint play, and special tests. Findings
elements is respected. To avoid pain and fear
from each of these areas are placed on the problem
responses early in the examination, the involved
list and are critically analyzed by the therapist to
limb is typically evaluated last.
develop a working rehabilitation diagmnosis.
s.The
working rehabilitation diagnosis is an expansion
of the primary orthopedic diagnosis and includes
Forelimb assessment
the sequelae of the primary diagnosis as well as
other underlying physical limitations that may not
Consideration of anatomy, osteokinematics, and
be associated with the orthopedic condition. The
arthrokinematics during each objective test will
problem list is then prioritized based on the client's
guide the therapist to a deeper understanding of
 goals for the patient, and a treatment plan is devel-
the injury location and tissue type. A thorough
oped for the prioritized findings based on anatomi-
assessment includes observation of muscle origins
cal, biomechanical, and physiological principles.
and insertions and their impact on normal osteo-
The rehabilitation plan, including a home exercise
kinematic movement including scapular protrac-
program, is completed following principle-based 
tion (scapula moves away from midline) and
frequency, intensity, and duration for each treat-
retraction (scapula moves toward midline); gleno-
ment. Treatment efficacy is reassessed frequently in
humeral flexion, extension, abduction, adduction,
the rehabilitation process, allowing for interven-
internal and external rotation; elbow flexion and
tion modifications within a session and over a
extension; and carpal flexion, extension, supina-
course of treatment to ensure treatment effective-
tion, and pronation. Normal osteokinematics
ness. When assessment reveals that the patient has
demands normalized arthrokinematics at each
reached their rehabilitation goal, they are dis-
joint which include glenohumeral joint cranial,
charged to a health maintenance program.
caudal, medial, lateral, internal, and external rota-
tion glides; elbow cranial and caudal glides; and
carpal cranial, caudal, medial, and lateral glides.
Each of these arthrokinematics requires joint
Sequencing the orthopedic assessment
capsule stability, which is maintained via the inher-
ent integrity of the joint capsule as well as liga-
Proper sequencing of objective data collection pro-
mentous stability providing additional resistance
motes a lasting therapeutic relationship with the
to external forces. Ligamentous stability in the
patient. At the initial meeting, the therapist should
forelimb includes the medial collateral ligament of
 a  m e u p a a
the glenohumeral joint, which prevents excessive
taking breed-specific preferences for patient inter-
medial glide of the humerus in the glenoid fossa,
action into consideration, initially avoiding direct
and the medial and lateral collateral ligaments of
eye contact and physical interaction with fearful
the elbow and carpus, which counteract varus or
and dominant patients. The therapist then leads
valgus forces through each of these joints. Keen
the client and patient into the therapy room, allow-
observation of anatomy, osteokinematics and
ing the patient the freedom to become familiar
 arthrokinematics in each of the following objective
with the new setting. As the patient explores the
tests will assist with development of the rehabilita-
environment, the therapist interviews the client,
tion diagnoses.
252  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Posture
Gait
 The purpose of postural objective data is to deter-
Gait assessment is used to capture data regarding
mine positional inequities that may lead the thera-
kinematic quality. Decreased quality of move-
pist to further assessment of a particular area of the
ment including gross lameness, decreased weight
body. Posture is assessed with the patient in a
bearing, and unequal stride length provide obser-
natural static standing position observed from the
vational
data that guide the therapist to an in-
front, side, back, and top. The therapist first takes
depth evaluation of specific areas. For example,
into consideration head position relative to back
observation of right front limb decreased stride
height and midline. Due to a number of multijoint
length may lead the therapist to a detailed assess-
muscles including brachiocephalicus and
omo-
ment of the cervical spine, bilateral front limbs, and
 s  d 'sn
thoracolumbar spine. See Chapter 2
of the front limb can affect neck posture which in
turn can affect the posture of the entire body, pre-
Function
disposing the front limbs, back, and pelvic limbs to
compensatory injuries. Position of the scapulae on
The purpose of the functional assessment is critical
the thorax should then be reviewed, taking into
analysis of movement inequities that may indicate
consideration  breed-specific  angulation 
(visit
primary or secondary physical limitations. Func-
www.akc.org for breed-specific angulation). Ineq-
tional assessment should, at a minimum, include
uities in scapular position can indicate tightmess,
lateral
1 recumbency-to-sit, sternal-to-sit, sit-to-
weakness, or injury to the muscles that attach the
stand (Figure 13.3), stand-to-sit, and movement on
scapula to the thorax including serratus ventralis
 curbs, ramps, stairs, and into and out of the client's
cranial and caudal fibers, rhomboids, and cranial
 primary vehicle. Movement abnormalities during
and caudal heads of trapezius. Standing angle of
each of these functional tests can provide impor-
the glenohumeral, elbow, and carpal joints relative
tant information regarding injury location. For
to the contralateral limb and relative to each other
example, refusal to assume and maintain a sternal
 are captured. Abnormal standing angles or inequi-
 recumbent position may indicate decreased gleno-
ties from side to side can indicate a primary injury
humeral or elbow joint flexion. Further evaluation
such as increased elbow flexion due to osteoar-
of both of these joints is indicated to determine
thritis or a compensatory strategy such as elbow
arthrokinematic quality, osteokinematic quality,
hyperextension due to carpal flexor strain. Compare
 and muscle extensibility. Glenohumeral joint hy-
Figure 13.1 of a young, injury-free dog to Figure
pomobility, as is seen with biceps tendinosis, or
13.2 of a geriatric patient.
hypermobility, as is seen with medial shoulder
A
B
Figure 13.1 Postural assessment from the side and front of a young. injury-free dog. A. Side view. B. Front view. Note the
position of the scapula on the thorax, the angulation of the front limb joints, and the position of the head and top line in
comparison to those of the geriatric patient in Figure 13.2.
Chapter 13 Evaluation and Rehabilitation Options for Orthopedic Disorders of the Forelimb 253
A
B
Figure 13.2  Postural assessment from the side and front of a geriatric patient with a medical diagnosis of hip osteoarthritis.
A. Side view. B. Front view. Physical therapy postural assessment reveals scapulae dorsally positioned on thorax, extension of
shoulder and elbow joints, and hyperextension of carpal joints (likely to utilize the passive tension of flexor carpi ulnaris), all
of which help maintain a passive energy-efficient standing position. Head and topline positions indicate offloading of the
pelvic limbs, increasing weight through the front limbs.
A
B
Figure 13.3 Functional assessment of the front limb requires observation of the primary functional activities needed for daily
living. Here a dog is attempting to stand by first (A) swinging the head in preparation for standing and (B) struggling to extend
the pelvic limbs and elevate the pelvis. As this geriatric patient with a medical diagnosis of hip osteoarthritis moves from sit to
stand, the cranial placement of the paws and the extended position of the elbows indicate likely caudal shoulder muscle
concentric contraction pulling the body to stand. This posturing decreases the need to actively flex the shoulder and elbow
joints indicating possible arthrokinematic issues that need to be assessed in the evaluation. (lmages derived from video.)
instability (MSI), and elbow joint hypomobility, as 
forces and distributing loads (Hill, 1950). The
is seen with osteoarthritis, may impact the patient's
purpose of strength testing is to determine baseline
ability to comfortably assume and maintain a
force-producing capacity of a particular skeletal
sternal recumbent position.
muscle group and to analyze, in the problem list,
whether more strength is required to meet the
goals for the patient. Prior to strength testing,
Strength
quality of muscle bulk must be observed to deter-
Skeletal muscle provides strength to maintain
 mine if atrophy is present. If atrophy is noted, limb
 posture and move joints while absorbing external
circumference is measured with a Gulick tape
254Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Figure 13.4  The canine manual muscle test (C-MMT) allows the therapist to determine baseline isometric strength in this
case of the right forelimb in a functional standing position. A. The patient is placed in a standing position, and the
contralateral limb is lifted into a non-weight-bearing position. The therapist observes changes in the position of the scapula on 
the thorax and changes in joint angle as the contralateral limb is lifted. Inability to maintain scapular and joint angles
indicates a strength score of <3/5. If the patient is able to maintain the position, further testing ensues as described in B. B.
s uo aui uo sueag-slam suiseanoui snul 'xog e uo sgl iad aui ym uosod supuens e ui paeld s! luaed aul
The contralateral limb is lifted into a non-weight-bearing position. The therapist observes changes in the position of the
scapula on the thorax and changes in joint angle as the contralateral limb is lifted. Inability to maintain scapular position and
joint angles indicates a strength score of 3/5. Ability to maintain the position indicates a strength score of 3+/5.
measure, taking particular note of the area mea-
tion; 3/5 (fair), the muscle group is able to provide
sured to allow for valid remeasurements. Limb
 the force required to maintain a static standing
circumference is assessed throughout the course of
position; 3+/5 (good), the muscle group is able to
 treatment to determine if muscle bulk is returning
 provide more force than is required to maintain a
within an expected time frame. Muscle strength
static standing position.
-    s  
 For C-MMT strength testing, a stifle height box
ence is not directly correlated with muscle torque
 or step is required (Figure 13.4). Initially, the dog
(Stevens et al., 2004). See Chapter 5 for detailed
is asked to stand on the floor. The limb opposite
description of Gulick measurements
the limb to be tested is lifted into a non-weight-
 In human physical therapy, strength has been
bearing position, and the therapist observes the
determined with a manual muscle test (MMT), a
testing limb. If the limb is unable to maintain the
 1-5 rating scale requiring volitional open-chain
position as observed by increased dorsal glide
muscle contraction through full joint range of
of the scapula (weakness of serratus ventralis),
motion (Perry et al., 2004). In the canine patient, the
 increased shoulder flexion (weakness of biceps and
traditional MMT cannot be utilized. To test strength
supraspinatus), increased elbow flexion (weakness
in the canine patient, closed-chain contractions
of triceps), increased carpal extension (weakness of
 must be observed in a functional standing position
carpal flexors), or any combination of these or
and the data captured using the canine manual
other signs of weakness, the strength score is <3/5.
muscle test (C-MMT). The C-MMT is used by the
The test is then completed on the opposite side. If
author (SF) as a repeatable objective measure. It
the dog is able to maintain an upright position
requires repeated testing to assure validity. Three
without compensatory movements, the score is at
categories of strength are defined in this test: <3/5
 least 3/5, and the limb can then be tested to deter-
(poor), the muscle group is unable to provide the
mine whether the strength is >3/5. To do this, the
force required to maintain a static standing posi-
 patient's pelvic limbs are placed on a box or a step.
Chapter 13 Evaluation and Rehabilitation Options for Orthopedic Disorders of the Forelimb 255
B
Figure 13.5 A. Manual palpation of the latissimus dorsi muscle challenges the muscle tissues along the ventral border of the
muscle from origin to insertion feeling for tissue changes including edema, heat, tone, pain, and muscle spasm. B. Manual
palpation of the latissimus dorsi also challenges tissues in the central portion of the muscle belly paying particular attention to
areas of pain and tightness that may indicate trigger points.
increasing the weight on the front limbs. The test
 example, during evaluation of the front limb, pal-
is repeated with the therapist observing if the limb
pation assessment of the latissimus dorsi requires
is able to maintain the position. If the patient is
 pressing the fingertips into the muscle tissue along
unable to maintain the position, the strength score
the ventral boarder of the muscle from origin to
is 3/5. If the patient is able to maintain the position,
insertion and through the muscle belly from the
the strength score is 3+/5. When completing the
 proximal caudal border of the humerus into the
C-MMT, attention must be given to musculoskel-
thoracodorsal fascia (Figure 13.5). A positive
etal issues that may interfere with the test like facet
response to palpation, including the subjective
joint dysfunction that would prevent the patient
feeling of edema, heat, and tone, as well as visible
from comfortably placing the pelvic paws on the
 pain or muscle spasm, leads the therapist to further
box.
assess the scapulothoracic, glenohumeraljoint, and
More objective strength test scores may be
thoracolumbar areas. Thorough objective palpa-
obtained with surface electrode electromyography
tion includes all joints, muscles (Table 13.1), and
(EMG). Clinical limitations include time con-
bony landmarks of the front limb.
 straints, the need to shave each muscle group, and
the paucity of research directly correlating canine
Passive range of motion (PROM)
EMG measures and muscle force production.
Further studies are required to develop canine
Objective assessment of PROM guides a therapist
objective strength measures that are valid as well
to a deeper understanding of primary or secondary
as interrater and intrarater reliable.
injuries of the articular surfaces and joint capsule.
For the highest quality measurements, the nonaf-
fected side is measured first. The joint is gently
Palpation
 moved into the range of motion, and overpressure
By manually challenging the tissues, palpation
 is applied to assess for pain and capsular restric-
assessment provides the therapist with informa-
 tion. Overpressure should not be applied to a joint
tion regarding the specific tissue type that is
that is hypermobile or has an empty (painful) end-
involved and the location of edema, heat, pain,
 feel. When end range is determined, the goniom-
tone, and tightmess. Palpation findings help specify
eter is placed over the joint with the stationary arm
the anatomical structure and chronicity of a
 on the proximal bony landmark, the point of rota-
primary  or  secondary orthopedic  injury.
：For
tion over the joint, and the movable arm on the
256
6Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Table 13.1  Muscle open-chain actions from an anatomically neutral position
Muscle
Actions
Rhomboids
Scapular dorsal glide
Trapezius, cranial head
Scapular dorsocranial glide
Trapezius, caudal head
Scapular dorsocaudal glide
 Omotransversarius
Scapular cranial glide + cervical spine side bending
Subscapularis
Glenohumeral adduction + flexion
 Serratus ventralis, cranial fibers
Scapular ventrocranial glide
 Serratus ventralis, caudal fibers
Scapular ventrocaudal glide
Supraspinatus
Glenohumeral extension
 Infraspinatus
Clenohumeral abduction
 Biceps brachii
Glenohumeral extension + elbow flexion
 Brachiocephalicus
Cervical spine side bending + glenohumeral extension + elbow flexion
Deltoids
Glenohumeral flexion + abduction
Latissimus dorsi
Glenohumeral internal rotation and flexion 
 Superficial pectoral
Glenohumeral adduction
 Deep pectoral
Glenohumeral flexion + internal rotation
Teres major
Glenohumeral flexion + internal rotation
Triceps
Elbow extension + shoulder flexion
Brachialis
Elbow flexion
Carpal flexor muscle group
Carpal and digit flexion
Carpal extensor muscle group
Carpal and digit extension
distal bony landmark (Figure 13.6). The measure-
range of motion in a session and from one session
ment is recorded. It is important to be sure that
to the next will lead a therapist to reassess the
all muscles surrounding the joint are on slack
juaeann iau aueu pue uonoinsar a jo asnen
ensuring a valid joint measurement. Some single-
plan accordingly. See Chapter 6 for detailed infor-
joint muscles may still affect range of motion
mation on PROM measurements.
measurements, as is the case with glenohumeral
joint flexion, which stretches the supraspinatus,
Flexibility
 and glenohumeral joint abduction (with the joint
in extension), which stretches the subscapularis.
Objective assessment of flexibility allows the thera-
Range of motion testing takes into consideration
pist to determine baseline passive muscle extensi-
 possible muscular involvement—-decreased range
bility. The patient is placed in relaxed lateral
of motion caused by adaptive shortening of the
recumbency Slowly, the therapist guides the limb
muscle unit or increased range of motion caused
 into the position opposite the concentric action of 
by a muscle strain.
the muscle, feeling for the quality of extensibility
When measuring
 range of motion, the same
throughout the stretch and subjectively feeling for
bony landmarks are used from one session to the
 maximal extensibility at end range. Careful consid-
next to improve intrarater reliability. An increase
eration is given to multijoint muscles, as they
or decrease in PROM from the nonaffected side to
require precise hand placement to stabilize the
the affected side, and from one session to the next,
origin or insertion of the muscle while manually
leads a therapist to further assess the affected joint.
moving multiple joints to place the muscle on
For example, a limitation in elbow flexion on the
stretch. For example, stretching the brachiocephali-
affected side may lead the therapist to carefully
cus muscle requires elbow extension, shoulder
assess joint play to determine if the articular sur-
flexion, cervical spine side bending, and atlanto-
faces, joint capsule, or both are causing the limita-
occipital
 joint flexion (Figure 13.7). Outcomes
tion. After treatment, the joint will be remeasured
from flexibility testing provide the therapist with
to determine whether the treatment improved the
information about primary injuries as well as com-
joint's range of motion. A lack of improvement in
pensatory
y issues such as decreased extensibility
Chapter 13 Evaluation and Rehabilitation Options for Orthopedic Disorders of the Forelimb 257
Figure 13.7 Passive stretch assessment of the
brachiocephalicus muscle requires stretching the distal
insertion of the muscle with the elbow extended and the
shoulder flexed. This position is then maintained or
stabilized, allowing the therapist to assess the quality and
amount of muscle extensibility as the cervical spine is
guided into side bending and the atlanto-occipital joint is
moved into flexion.
of the latissimus dorsi decreasing the excursion
 of glenohumeral joint extension and external rota-
tion as well as thoracic and lumbar facet joint
flexion. Thorough objective assessment of front
limb muscle flexibility includes all muscles listed
in Table 13.1.
Joint play
The purpose of joint play assessments of the front
limb is to determine arthrokinematic quality, quan-
Figure 13.6 A. When completing the goniometric
s um  as   
measurement for flexion of the glenohumeral joint, the
therapist must keep in mind that range of motion limitations
one side of the joint and mobilizing the other, the
may be due to joint capsule involvement, joint play
therapist feels for abnormal joint surface qualities
restrictions, or musculotendinous involvement. B. when
such as crepitus, decreased quantity of bone-on-
completing the goniometric measurement for glenohumeral
bone movement, and joint capsule hyper- or
joint extension, the therapist carefully stabilizes the scapula
hypomobility that may be affecting range of motion
to ensure assessment of joint end-feel. Without stabilization,
and therefore osteokinematics. For example, de-
the scapula glides on the thorax creating a false-positive
creased cranial glide of the humeral head in the
hypermobility measurement. C. When completing the
goniometric measurement for glenohumeral joint abduction,
glenoid fossa may be limiting shoulder joint flexion
the therapist carefully stabilizes the scapula against the
(Figure 13.8).
The therapist must determine
thorax to prevent a false-positive hypermobility
whether this limitation is due to joint surface
measurement. The therapist also is careful to prevent
abnormalities, joint capsule restrictions, or muscu-
unintentional external rotation of the joint, which may
lotendinous restrictions of biceps (with tendon
involve subscapularis tendon.
fibers in the glenohumeral joint capsule) or su-
praspinatus. Determination of joint play requires
 Extensive manual therapy training as subjective
capture of joint movement quality and quantity is
a learned skill, and incorrect application of manual
258Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
capsule, cartilage, or bone. Acuity of injury must
be determined for each impairment location and is
defined as acute, subacute, or chronic. The outcome
of this critical analysis will lead the therapist to a
working rehabilitation diagnosis that may or may
not be directly related to the primary diagnosis. For
example, a primary diagnosis may be "Left gleno-
humeral joint osteochondritis dissecans (OCD)
lesion with surgical excision," and the rehabilita-
uol [eraumqouano al, aq Aeu sisouoep uon
acute pain due to postoperative edema with com
Figure 13.8 If, during the course of range of motion
pensatory pain in left biceps at musculotendinous
assessment, a restriction in glenohumeral joint flexion is
junction, left latissimus dorsi mid-muscle belly,
noted, the therapist will assess joint glides. Assessment of
and bilateral paraspinals T6-L2." Analysis of the
the cranial glide requires stabilizing the scapula then gliding
problem list will often reveal complex iterations of
the head of the humerus cranially, the arthrokinematic
movement associated with glenohumeral joint flexion. If 2
restriction is noted during joint play, the therapist carefully
apist to carefully consider treatment options for the
captures manual assessment data including joint surface
 most efficacious interventions.
quality and end-feel, the outcomes of which will guide the
treatment plan.
Development of the treatment plan
forces through a joint can be injurious. See Chapter
Using the rehabilitation diagnosis as the template,
6 for further discussion of joint play techniques.
a treatment plan is developed to maximize func-
tional mobility of the patient. Optimization of
movement is achieved through the continual reas-
Special tests
sessment of the rehabilitation diagnosis, proper
Special tests for the front limb consist primarily of
 application of treatments, and continual reevalua-
ligament stress tests to determine baseline joint sta-
tion of treatment outcomes. Each treatment in
bility. Special tests of the front limb include the
the plan of care includes intensity, frequency and
medial shoulder instability (MSI) test, elbow varus
duration, and dosing parameters that are based on
and valgus stress tests, and carpal varus and valgus
anatomical, physiological, and biomecharical prin-
stress tests. All tests are completed in a closed-pack
ciples. The therapist takes due consideration to the
position (the position in which articulating bones
need to modify treatment parameters throughout
have their maximum area of contact with each
the plan of care since the acuity of the injury has a
other—-usually weight-bearing) with the ligaments
profound impact on intensity, frequency, and dura-
positioned for highest tensile resistance.
tion of all types of treatment interventions.
Development of the rehabilitation diagnosis
Types of treatment interventions
At completion of assessment data capture, the
Treatment interventions can be divided into three
 problem list is critically analyzed taking particular
categories: modalities, manual techniques, and
note of the location, tissue type, and acuity of each
therapeutic exercise. Modalities are the application
physical finding. Location is described as precisely
 of technologies that effect cellular physiology in
as possible, and described in such specific anatomi-
well-defined ways to diminish pain, promote soft
cal terms that a second therapist could immedi-
tissue healing, improve muscle extensibility, and
ately locate the injury. Tissue type is delineated
facilitate muscle strengthening. See Chapter
7
in very clear terms differentiating muscle belly,
 for details. Manual techniques are the application
 musculotendinous junction, tendon, ligament, joint 
 of hands-on treatments that mechanically and
Chapter 13 Evaluation and Rehabilitation Options for Orthopedic Disorders of the Forelimb 259
B
Figure 13.9 Therapeutic exercise planning takes into consideration the origin and insertion of the muscle, the type of muscle
contraction required, and the intensity, frequency, and duration of the exercise. This exercise demonstrates concentric
contralateral limb. This exercise may be appropriate for the strengthening (chronic) phase of treatment for medial shoulder
instability. (lmages derived from video.)
physiologically affect tissues to decrease pain,
ligament, intra-articular structures (meniscus and
increase circulation, reduce swelling, increase soff
cartilage), joint capsule, and bone. A comprehen-
Though modalities can generally be safely per-
nisms of healingfor each tissue mustbe incorporated
formed with minimal education, the application of
into the treatment plan, allowing the therapist to
manual treatments requires extensive training, as
determine whether the course of healing is follow-
incorrect application of mechanical forces through 
 ing a normal physiological path or if reassessment
soft tissue can be detrimental. See Chapter 6 for
a pamban st und juaean ui asuuo pe
details. Therapeutic exercise is the application
 Chapter 3 for more details. Table 13.2 provides an
 of precise movements to recruit specific skeletal
outline of diagnoses and the tissue types affected,
 muscles in functional ways and includes balance,
and Table 13.3 gives treatment guidelines.
strength, and endurance exercises (Figure 13.9).
Proper application of therapeutic exercise requires a
thorough understanding of muscle origins and
Muscle injuries
insertions, type of muscle contractions, muscle fiber
Muscle is composed of a contractile component-
type, motor recruitment, and motor timing. See
the muscle fibers—and an elastic component con-
Chapter 8 for details. Application of exercises
sisting of connective tissues and tendon. When
withoutconsideration of muscleanatomy and phys-
the muscle voluntarily contracts, the connective
iology can, at minimum, prevent return of function,
tissues absorb and dissipate the energy of the con-
and at worst, exacerbate an underlying condition
traction, allowing for smooth and supple move-
ment (Nordin & Frankel, 1989). When the muscle
passively elongates, the elastic components elon-
Common injuries by tissue type
gate first followed by the musculotendinous junc-
tion (Wright et al., 1982). Understanding these
There are five types of tissues that may sustain
 mechanical properties of muscle assists a thera-
injury and can be treated by the therapist: muscle,
 pist in determining whether one or both of the
260  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Table 13.2 Common front limb diagnoses and tissue types
decrease edema. Subacute treatment includes
involved
modalities to increase circulation and promote
tissue healing followed by scar massage to cor-
Diagnosis
Primary injury tissue type
rectly aligm collagen fibers. Chronic treatment
Biceps tendonitis
Muscle, elastic components
requires returning the soft tissues to their previous
strength while addressing compensatory issues
Biceps tendinosis
Muscle, elastic and contractile
related to the primary injury.
 components
External injuries to muscles in the form of loads
Carpal
Muscle, elastic and contractile
Exceeding the inherent force of the muscle causing
hyperextension
 components
strain injuries can affect the contractile or elastic
Carpal bone
Ligament
components. Differentiating the components re-
subluxation
quires assessment of active muscle contraction
Fragmented
Bone
in descending order of muscle tension produced
coronoid process
Intra-articular cartilage
(Norkin & Levange, 1983) concentrically, isometri-
(FCP)
cally, and eccentrically with observation of joint
Joint capsule
position that may place the elastic components on
Muscle, elastic components
stretch. For example, assessment of possible biceps
 Infraspinatus
Muscle, elastic and contractile
injury may test a paw shake (concentric), single
contracture
components
limb stance (isometric), and push-up (eccentric) to
 observe if increasing muscle tension increases pain.
Medial shoulder
Ligament; grade I, Il, or Ill
Close observation of pain response during this test
instability
Intra-articular cartilage
is essential. Passive muscle extensibility is tested as
Osteochondrosis
it helps differentiate if contractile or elastic compo-
dissecans (OCD)
Joint capsule
nents are painful. For example, beginning the
Supraspinatus
Muscle,elastic components
biceps stretch with the glenohumeral joint in
neutral and very slowly stretching the biceps
tendinopathy
T'eres major
allows the therapist to note quality of extensibility
Muscle, elastic and contractile
strain
 components
and onset of pain response. Further assessment
with palpation is then needed to determine the
Ununited
Bone
precise location of injury.
anconeal process
Intra-articular cartilage
(UAP)
Treatment of strain injuries must follow a precise
Joint capsule
course of treatment to promote tissue healing and
 prevent muscle cells from adaptive shortening pre-
Muscle, elastic components
disposing the patient to chronic tendinosis injuries.
Acute injuries require immediate resolution of
edema with modalities and pain-free active con-
muscle components is involved in the injury.
tractions to prevent collagen misalignment and
Treatment is initiated on the correct muscular
disuse atrophy.
. The subacute phase of healing
component(s) with the treatment plan including
Su as u sseanu a-d sanmba
rehabilitation of the entire muscle and all compen-
intensity while preventing re-exacerbation of the
 satory issues related to the primary injury.
Three types of muscle injuries are 
commonly
centric contractions. The chronic phase of healing
seen—surgical injuries, strain injuries (i.e., tendini-
demands return of strength using eccentric con-
tis), and chronic extensibility injuries (i.e., tendino-
tractions, which promote tissue extensibility while
sis). Surgical incisions may cause damage to the
producing the highest loads through the muscle
contractile component or the elastic component of
tissues (Verrall et al., 2011). Throughout the course
the muscle. Determining which tissue is involved
of treatment, reassessment is required to determine
requires an anatomic understanding of the surgery.
whether tissues are following a normal course of
Acute treatment of surgical incisions
includes
healing. Patients that do not follow a normal course
modalities and soft tissue retrograde massage to
of healing are reassessed to determine the correct
Table 13.3 Primary tissue injuries and treatment guidelines by acuity
Type of tissue
Acuity
Common problem list 
 Possible treatments
Muscle
Acute
1. Pain due to inflammation
1. Modalities
contractile
2. Decreased extensibility
 2. Modalities and stretching
 components
3. Decreased strength
 3. Pain-free isometric strengthening
Subacute
1. Pain due to tissue injury
1. Modalities
2. Decreased extensibility
 2. Modalities and stretching
3. Decreased strength
 3. Pain-free concentric strengthening
Chronic
1. Decreased extensibility
1. Modalities and stretching
2. Decreased strength
2. Eccentric strengthening
Muscle elastic
Acute
1. Pain due to inflammation
1. Modalities
components
 2. Decreased extensibility
 2. Modalities, stretching, and manual therapy
Subacute
1. Pain due to tissue injury
1. Modalities
2. Decreased extensibility
2. Modalities, stretching, and manual therapy
Chronic
1. Decreased extensibility
1. Modalities, stretching, and manual therapy
Ligament,
Acute
1. Pain due to inflammation
1. Modalities
 grades I and II
2. Joint instability
 2. Stabilization with bracing and pain-free isometric
muscular stabilization
Subacute
1. Pain due to inflammation
1. Modalities
2. Joint instability
2. Stabilization with bracing and pain-free concentric/
eccentric muscular stabilization
Chronic
1. Joint instability
1.Grade I—concentric/eccentricmuscular stabilization
2. Grade Il—-bracing and concentric/eccentric
 muscular stabilization
Ligament,
Acute
1. Pain due to inflammation
1. Modalities
grade III
2. Joint instability
2. Stabilization with bracing and isometric muscular
stabilization
Subacute
1. Pain due to inflammation
1. Modalities
2. Joint instability
2. Stabilization with bracing and muscular stabilization
Chronic
1. Joint instability
oezges neinosnm pue luieeng yii uoezens 'l
 Joint capsule
Acute
1. Pain due to inflammation
1. Modalities and joint mobilizations
2. Joint hypomobility
2. Joint mobilizations
Subacute
1. Joint hypomobility
1. Modalities and joint mobilizations
Chronic
1. Joint hypomobility
1. Modalities and joint mobilizations
Intra-articular
Acute
1. Pain due to inflammation
1. Modalities and joint mobilizations
cartilage
 2. Joint hypomobility
 2. Joint mobilizations including compression
Subacute
1. Joint hypomobility
1. Modalities and joint mobilizations
Chronic
1. Joint hypomobility
1. Modalities and joint mobilizations
Peripheral
Acute
1. Pain due to inflammation and 
1. Modalities
 nerves
nerve damage
2. Atrophy prevention
 2. Modalities including electrical stimulation
Subacute
1. Pain due to nerve damage
1. Modalities
2. Atrophy prevention
2. Modalities including electrical stimulation
1. Decreased connective tissue
1. Modalities and stretching
Chronic
extensibility
2. Weakness
2. Therapeutic exercise
For joint hypermobility, see Ligament.
261
262 Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
rehabilitation diagmosis and/or the treatment plan
eccentric strengthening exercises to returm the
is modified to promote healing and avoid re-
muscle to full strength (Table 13.3) (Verrall et al.,
exacerbation.
2011).
The underlying mechanism of chronic muscle
extensibility injuries is adaptive cellular changes in
Ligament and joint capsule injuries
both contractile and elastic fibers that histologi-
cally have little or no evidence of inflammation
Ligaments are composed of nonextensible parallel
(Khan et al., 1999). Unlike tendinitis injuries where
collagenous fibers with minimal vascular supply.
the acute treatment goal is to decrease inflamma-
Their purpose is to stabilize joints preventing
tion, treatment of chronic adaptive shortening
excessive motion. When the external forces on a
requires instigating an inflammatory response to
ligament exceed the physiologicalload, fiber failure
 coax the tissues into a healing phase that allows
occurs in the form of fiber disruption. Grade I liga-
the therapist to complete soft tissue work, includ-
ment injuries are micro tears that will present as
ing  cross-friction  massage and  stretching
to
pain without joint instability. Grade II tears produce
modify adaptively shortened tissues. As the tissues
remodel, gentle strengthening, motor timing (the
Grade II tears are severely painful at onset with
sequencing of a type of muscle contraction), and
 decreasing pain following the injury and gross
motor control exercises (the graded intensity of a
joint instability (Nordin & Frankel, 1989). The joint
muscle contraction) are initiated to return the
instability of grade II and II tears allows for
muscle to pain-free functional contractions. Com-
increased displacementof thejoint surfaces causing
pletion of the healing phase of treatment includes
further ligament fiber disruption, excessive pres-
Case Study 13.1  Acute-on-chronic biceps tendinosis
Signalment: 10 y.o. F/S Labrador Retriever
Assessment: Rehabilitation diagnosis is likely acute-on-
chronic biceps tendinosis including decreased muscle
Diagnosis: Radiographic right glenohumeral joint OA
extensibility and concentric muscle contraction  with
adaptive shortening of cranial joint capsule exacerbating
underlying glenohumeral joint OA with compensatory
 Subjective Findings: Right fore limb (RFL) head-bobbing
overuse pain and tightness in latissirmus dorsi and teres
lameness, significantly worse upon waking. improves
throughout the day, much better after evening 30-minute
major.
walks.
Plan of Care: Acute phase:
1.
 Decrease edema. Laser 4.0J/cm? to target tissues
Objective  Findings:  Posture—right  scapula   cranial-
including glenohumeral joint, supraspinatus and
dorsal positioning: gait—RFL decreased stride length;
biceps tendon.
function—refusal to maintain sternal position, very hesi-
2.
Decrease acute pain. TEN 5 Hz, 60 μs pulse width,
tant down stairs with occasional refusal; strength—<3/5
20 minutes, nerve roots of musculocutaneous nerve
(poor) strength right isometric contraction; palpation-
(C 6, 7, 8) (Aarskog et al., 2007).
heat and pain at medial glenohumeral joint line; heat
3.
Begin reversal of adaptive shortening of joint
and pain in supraspinatus, pain at origin of biceps brachii
capsule. Grades I-IV cranial joint glides (Vermeulen
tendon, pain and twitch in latissimus dorsi and teres
et af., 2006)
major; range of motion—glenohumeral joint flexion—70
4.
Begin reversal of decreased extensibility of muscle
degrees, empty end-feel, extension—150 degrees with
tissue. Soft tissue mobilization  and stretching
hard capsular end feel, abduction 40 degrees with hard
(Bakhtiary et af., 2011).
capsular end feel; flexibility—decreased excursion of
5
Implement home exercise program. Slow walking
right supraspinatus, biceps, omotransversarius, rhom-
daily 10 minutes followed by biceps and supraspi-
boids; joint play—2/6 cranial glide of humerus on
natus pain-free stretches held for 30 seconds
glenoid fossa.
(O'Sullivan et af., 2009) (Table 13.3).
Chapter 13 Evaluation and Rehabilitation Options for Orthopedic Disorders of the Forelimb 263
sure to the joint capsule, increased force on tendons
content, placing older patients at higher risk for
and abnormally high stresses on articular cartilage.
ligament injuries. Overall body condition and
In the canine model, this has been shown to modify
fitmess should meet or exceed the physical activi-
forces through the joint structures and cause dete-
ties of patients. This is particularly true in older
rioration of articular cartilage (Marshall & Olsson,
patients who may be completing activities (i.e.,
1971).
long distance hiking) that exceed the abilities
Multiple factors affect the biomechanical proper-
of their muscles to protect the joints, placing the
ties of ligaments, including aging, pregnancy and
stabilizing ligaments at risk for injury. Pregnancy
postpartum, mobilization and immobilization.
and the postpartum period see a release of relaxin,
These factors are considered as they impact the
which increases the distensibility of ligaments
course of treatment and anticipated physiological
(Goldsmith et al, 1994). In the dog, mobilization
outcomes.Aging causes a decrease in tensile
and exercise increased the tensile strength of liga-
strength of the ligament due to declining collagen
ments, while in the primate model, immobilization
Case Study 13.2 T8 facet joint and rib dysfunction
Signalment: 3 y.o. F/l Border Collie, training for national
deceleration (Carrier et af., 2008) for glenohumeral
agility team. Began knocking bars in training 3 weeks
joint extension required for jumping, daily, 10 repeti-
ago. No qualifying runs three weekends in a row.
tions; stretches of lattisimus dorsi and serratus ventra-
lis daily after exercise, one repetition, 30 seconds.
Medical Diagnosis: Back pain. T/L and coxofemoral
No agility training or jumping until follow-up
radiographs negative.
appointment in 3 days.
Objective Findings: Palpation—spinalis and longissimus
Subacute: Reassess and modify plan of care as needed.
spasm, pain and twitch T6 to Iliac crest, iliocostalis lum
If facet and rib mobility rermain normalized, begin sub-
 borum pain right; T8 facet joint pain and right restriction
acute treatment. If joint mobility is not normalized, treat
with dorsoventral pressure; right rib 8 pain with dorso-
with joint mobilizations again and reassess HEP.
ventral pressure; Stretch—decreased extensibility of right
Strength training HEP. Continue concentric spine
latissirus dorsi and serratus ventralis.
extension exercises adding rotation and side bend-
ing with spine extension, q2d, 15 repetitions (deter-
Assessment: Precipitous decline in jump quality of
mined in treatment session); eccentric latissirmus
unknown etiology beginning 3 weeks ago. Likely T8
dorsi exercises with spine in extended position to
facet joint and rib dysfunction with hypomobility causing
prepare for jump training. q2d, eight repetitions
bilateral spinalis and longissimus and right iliocostalis
(determined in treatment session); continue passive
lumborum pain and spasm.
stretches of latissirmus dorsi anid serratus  ventralis
daily after exercise, one repetition, 30 seconds.
Plan of Care
 Resurme agility with lower jump height until follow-
up appointment in 1 week.
Acute:
1.
Regain mobility of T8 facet joint and rib. Grades Ill
Chronic: Reassess and modify plan of care as needed.
and IV mobilizations (Bronfort et af., 2004) which
If  joint mobility remains nommalized, begin  chronic
should restore normal muscle tone if muscle pain is
treatmrent.
secondary to joint dysfunction.
1. 
 Resume physical therapy-based conditioning pro-
 Return extensibility of latissimus dorsi and serratus
gram continuing eccentric latissimus dorsi exercises
ventralis. Laser 8]/cm? to motor points followed by
with the spine extended.
stretches.
 Educate client to palpate for paraspinal pain, which
3.
Joint mobility home exercise program (HEP). Con-
may indicate a joint mobility issue and need for
centric spine extension exercises (Powers et af.,
follow-up treatment.
2008) to maintain facet and rib mobility: Mobiliza-
3
Return for conditioning progra upgrade in 8
tions daily, 10 repetitions; eccentric latissimus dorsi
weeks.
exercises (Verrall et af., 2011: 7) to promote natura
264Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
for 8 weeks decreased the tensile strength of liga-
Peripheral nerves
ments by up to 39%. The same study showed a
Each
component of peripheral
1 nerves—nerve
reconditioning program of 12 months was re-
fibers, connective tissues, and vascular structures
quired to reach preimmobilization tensile strength
has specific biomechanical properties that are con-
(Noyes, 1977). Biomechanical properties of liga-
sidered when developing a treatment plan for
ment and factors affecting ligament integrity,
-ma Aiaa are auole suoxy Xmfu aarau leraudiad
including fiber alignment for optimal force resis-
tance and decreased vascularity, are
nerable to compression and stretching
considered
injuries
(Rydevik & Nordborg, 1980). Three layers of con-
when creating a treatment plan. Treatment plans
first consider the grade
nective tissues, endoneurium, perineurium, and
of ligament
rupture.
 Conservative nonsurgical approach of ligament
epineurium provide resistance to compression and
stretch. The thickness of connective tissue can
sprains greater than grade I require external stabi-
lization of the joint with bracing such as a hobble-
increase or decrease along a single nerve (Topp &
Boyd, 2012). For example, where a nerve passes
type support for the glenohumeral joint with MSI.
 Course of treatment includes edema management
over bone, the connective tissues may be thicker,
 providing a measure of protection.
with modalities and manual therapy in the acute
Treatment of peripheral nerve injuries takes into
phases followed by graded return of strength in the
consideration the cause of the injury—compression,
muscles supporting the hypermobile joint such as
stretching, or vascular compromise. Compression
subscapularis and superficial pectoral strengthen-
ing for MSI (Table 13.3).
injuries can cause numbness, pain, and muscle
weakness (Sunderland, 1978). Stretching injuries
 can cause severe functional deficits as axons rup-
Intra-articular injuries
ture before cornective tissues can resist the stretch
force (Lundborg & Rydevik, 1973). Such functional
Articular cartilage, by virtue of the viscoelastic
deficits can be seen in diagnoses such as brachial
characteristics, distributes loads through the joint
plexus avulsions. Vascular injuries are often due to
and allows for smooth arthrokinematics. In canine
insult to the highly vascular connective tissues
subjects, exercise groups (running 1 hour of 15%
resulting in interstitial pressure changes causing
incline 5 days per week for 15 weeks) showed an
axon damage (Spencer et al., 1975). Treatment of
increase in stifle cartilage thickness compared to
peripheral nerves addresses the cause of the injury
crated controls (Kiviranta et al., 1988). Lubrication
and is chosen to best promote the body's natural
is diminished with injury to the articular cartilage.
healing process for the highest level of functional
as stress and strain forces are not distributed evenly
during loading. Studies with dogs have shown that
return. Acute treatment emphasizes edema control,
immobilization-induced atrophy of cartilage does
pain management, and atrophy prevention. Sub-
acute treatment uses modalities to promote nerve
not improve after 50 weeks of activity resumption
healing while beginning pain-free functional
(Kiviranta et al., 1994; Haapala et al., 1999). Impair-
ment of force distribution causes compensatory
strengthening to prevent atrophy and promote
nerve healing. Chronic phase treatment empha-
changes in osteokinematic movement; therefore,
sizes continued modalities for nerve healing as well
any impairment of articular cartilage can have a
as therapeutic exercises to return to the highest
deleterious effect on all aspects of function and
level of function. Care is taken to ensure pain man-
movement. Treatment plans consider the biome-
agementis provided throughout the course of treat-
chanical properties of cartilage including the need
ment as healing nerves often temporarily increase
for manual compression forces to normalize inher-
nerve pain and sensory anomalies (Table 13.3).
ent viscoelasticity of remaining healthy cartilage
(Kiviranta et al., 1987) and the limited capacity for
regeneration of damaged cells. Treatment plans
Treatment efficacy and modifications
also consider the spectrum of musculoskeletal
compensatory changes related to arthrokinematic
Throughout the treatment plan, reassessment of
 anomalies (Table 13.3).
treatment efficacy is completed, and the treatment
Chapter 13 Evaluation and Rehabilitation Options for Orthopedic Disorders of the Forelimb 265
interventions are modified as needed. Because
files/Dose_table_780-860nm_for_Low_Level_Laser_
each tissue follows a physiological process and
Therapy_WALT-2010.pdf
 timeframe for healing, these parameters are used
as guidelines to determine treatment effectiveness.
Healing that appears to be too rapid may be a
transition from the subacute to chronic phase of
References
 healing, and not true physiologicalhealing. Healing
that takes longer than the natural timeframe may
AARSKOG, R.,JOHNSON, M.I., DEMMINK, J.H.,
indicate incorrect rehabilitation diagnosis, inaccu-
LOFTHUS, A., IVERSEN, V, LOPES-MARTINS, R.,
rate application of modalities, misuse of manual
JOENSEN, J., & BJORDAL, JM. 2007. Is mechanical
techniques, or incorrect therapeutic exercise pre-
pain threshold after transcutaneous electrical nerve
stimulation (TENS) increased locally and unilaterally?
scription. Complete tissue healing should occur
within a normal physiological timeframe and is
Arandomized placebo-controlled trial in healthy sub-
jects.Physiother Res Int,12,251-263.
followed by a home health maintenance program
BAKHTIARY, A.H., FATEMI, E., KHALILI, M.A.,&
to maintain strength, balance, and endurance
GHORBANI, R. 2011. Localised application of vibra-
 gained in the rehabilitation process.
tion improves passive knee extension in women with
Treatment efficacy is a response to thorough
apparent reduced hamstring extensibility: a ran-
evaluation, development of the problem list, and
domised trial. / Physiother, 57, 165-171.
implementation of the treatment plan. The reha-
BRONFORT, G., HAAS, M., EVANS, R.L., & BOUTER,
bilitation process requires continual reassessment
L.M. 2004. Efficacy of spinal manipulation and mobi-
to determine whether progress is being made
s e d u  d q m r 
within a normal physiological timeframe. Because
review and best evidence synthesis. The Spine fourral,
4(3),335-356.
of the myriad of internal and extemal factors affect-
CARRIER, D.R, DEBAN, S.M., & FISCHBEIN, T. 2008.
ing the healing process including, but not limited
Locomotor function of forelimb protractor and retrac-
to, response to medication, diet, comorbidities,
tor muscles of dogs: evidence of strut-like behavior at
home environment, activity restriction, or home
the shoulder. The fournat of Experimentat Biology, 21l(Pt
exercise compliance, reassessment is required at
1), 150-162.
each follow-up visit to determine whether new
GOLDSMITH, L.T., LUST,G.,& STEINETZ, B.G.1994.
limitations should be added to the problem list and
 i siq   a go sn
whether the current plan of care requires modifica-
offspring via suckling. Biol Reprod, 50, 258-265.
tion. After reassessment and treatment plan modi-
HAAPALA, J., AROKOSKI, J.P, HYTTINEN, M.M.,
fications, portions of treatments can be delegated
LAMMI, M., TAMMI, M., KOVANEN, V.,HELMINEN,
 to support staff such as application of modalities,
H.J., & KIVIRANTA, 1. 1999. Remobilization does not
fully restore immobilization induced articular carti-
therapeutic exercises, and stretching. Because
of
lage atrophy. Clin Orthop Retat Res,362,218-229.
the need for continual reassessment, protocols, as
HILL, A.V. 1950. The series elastic component of muscle.
developed by the team of veterinary specialists
Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci, 137,273-280.
including a physical therapist, should be used as
KHAN, K.M., COOK, J.L., BONAR, F, HARCOURT, P,
treatment guidelines and not as treatment plans.
& ASTROM, M. 1999. Histopathology of common ten-
 Using a problem-based, critical thinking process 
dinopathies: update and implications for clinical man-
throughout the rehabilitation plan of care will
agement.Sports Med,27,393-408.
ensure the most eficacious outcomes.
KIVIRANTA, 1., JURVELIN, J., TAMMI, M, SAA-
MANEN, A.M, & HELMINEN, H.J. 1987. Weight
bearing controls glycosaminoglycan concentration
 and articular cartilage thickness in the knee joints of
Webliography
young beagle dogs. Arthritis Rheum, 30, 801-809.
KIVIRANTA, 1., TAMMI, M., JURVELIN, J., SAA-
World Association for Laser Therapy (2010) Dosage Rec-
MANEN, A.M., & HELMINEN, H.J. 1988. Moderate
ommendations. Dose table 780-860rmm for Low Level
running exercise augments glycosaminoglycans and
Laser Therapy WALT 2010. WALT.nu. Accessed
thickness of articular cartilage in the knee joint of
November 7, 2012. www.walt.nu/images/stories/
young beagle dogs. J Orthop Res, 6, 188-195.
266   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
KIVIRANTA, 1., TAMMI, M., JURVELIN, J., AROKOSKI,
RYDEVIK, B. & NORDBORG, C. 1980. Changes in nerve
J.,SAAMANEN, A.M., & HELMINEN, H.J. 1994.
function and nerve fibre structure induced by acute,
Articular cartilage thickness and glycosaminoglycan
graded compression. / Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry,43,
distribution in the young canine knee joint after remo-
1070-1082.
bilization of the immobilized limb. / Orthop Res, 12,
SPENCER, PS., WEINBERG, H.J, RAINE, C.S.,&
161-167.
PRINEAS, J.W. 1975. The perineurial window—a new
LUNDBORG, G. & RYDEVIK, B. 1973. Effects of stretch-
model of focal demyelination and remyelination. Brain
ing the tibial nerve of the rabbit: a preliminary study
Res,96,323-329.
of the intraneural circulation and the barrier function
STEVENS,JE., WALTER, G.A.,OKEREKE, E., SCAR
of the perineurium. / Bore foint Surg Br, 55, 390401.
BOROUGH, M.T., ESTERHAI, J.L., GEORGE, S.Z.
MARSHALL, J.L. & OLSSON, S.E. 1971. Instability of the
KELLEY, M.J., TILLMAN, S.M.,GIBBS, J.D., ELLIOTT,
knee: a long-term experimental study in dogs. ∫ Bone
M.A., FRIMEL, T.N., GIBBS, C.P., & VANDENBORNE,
Joint Surg Am, 53, 1561-1570.
K. 2004. Muscle adaptations with immobilization and
NORDIN, M. & FRANKEL, V.H. 1989. Basic Biomechanics
rehabilitation after ankle fracture. Med Sci Sports Exerc,
of the Musculoskeletal System, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lip-
36, 1695-1701,
pincott Williams & Wilkins.
SUNDERLAND,S. 1978. Nerve and Nerve Injuries, 2nd ed.
NORKIN, C.& LEVANGE, P. 1983. Joint Structure &
Edinburgh, Scotland: Churchill Livingstone.
Functior: A Comprehensive Analysis. Philadelphia: F.A.
TOPP, K.S. & BOYD, B.S. 2012. Peripheral nerve: from the
Davis Company.
microscopic functional unit of the axon to the biome-
NOYES, F.R. 1977. Functional properties of knee liga-
chanically loaded macroscopic structure. / Hand Ther,
ments and alterations induced by immobilization: a
25, 142-152.
 correlative biomechanical and histological study in
VERMEULEN, H.M, ROZING, PM., OBERMANN,
primates. Clin Orthop Retat Res, 123, 210-242.
W.R., LE CESSIE, S., & VLIET VLIELAND, T.P. 2006.
O'SULLIVAN, K., MURRAY, E., & SAINSBURY, D. 2009.
Comparison of high-grade and low-grade mobiliza-
The effect of warm-up, static stretching and dynamic
tion techniques in the management of adhesive cap-
stretching on hamstring flexibility in previously
sulitis of the shoulder: randomized controlled trial.
injured subjects. BMC Musculoskelet Disord, 10, 37.
Phys Ther, 86, 355-368.
PERRY, J., WEISS, W.B., BURNFIELD, J.M., & GRONLEY,
VERRALL,G.,SCHOFIELD,S.,& BRUSTAD，T.
J.K. 2004. The supine hip extensor manual muscle test:
2011. Chronic Achilles tendinopathy treated with
a reliability and validity study. Arch Phys Med Rehabil,
eccentric stretching program. Foot Ankle Int, 32, 843-
85,1345-1350.
849.
POWERS, C.M., BENECK, G.J., KULIG, K., LANDEL,
WRIGHT,S., NEIL, E., & JOELS,M. 1982. Muscle and the
R.F., & FREDERICSON, M. 2008. Effects of a single
nervous system. In: Keele, C.A. & Neil, E. (eds.),
session of posterior-to-anterior spinal mobilization
requnt pue asuodsan ued uo asioiaxa dn-ssard pue
UK: Oxford University Press, 248-259.
spine extension in people with nonspecific low back
pain. Physical Therapy, 88(4), 485-493.
14
Disorders of the Pelvic Limb:
Diagnosis and Treatment
Peter J. Lotsikas, DVM Dipl ACVS, Sherman O. Canapp, Jr., DVM, MS,
Dipl ACVS, Diplomate, American College of Veterinary Sports Medicine
and Rehabilitation, CCRT, Jonathan Dyce, MA, VetMB, MRCVS, DSAO,
Dipl ACVS, Kristin Kirkby, DVM, MS, PhD, Dipl ACVS, CCRT, Scott
Christopher, VMD, CCRP, and Patrick A. Ridge, BVSc, Cert VR, Cert
SAS, MRCVS
Summary
Orthopedic conditions of the pelvic limb are some of the most frequently diagnosed causes
uans anoe uouedwos aoe aut se llam se sop suods aue ul sop aut ui ssauawel jo
induced muscle disorders are common occurrences, and are often under-, or misdiagnosed.
strains. It then addreses the primary arthropathies of the pelvic limb including hip dysplasia,
hip luxation, and conditions of the stifle including cranial cruciate disease, meniscal injury.
and patellar luxation. For these conditions, both medical and surgical management are dis-
cussed, as well as prognosis and appropriate recovery time to return to function. The chapter
concludes with descriptions and treatment options for common tendon injuries of the pelvic
limb including calcanean tendon injury and luxation of the superficial digital flexor tendon.
therapy for these tendon disorders is also discussed. While this chapter is intended to be an
abbreviated explanation of various pelvic limb conditions, it should provide the sports
medicine clinician with critical and pertinent information necessary to manage these common
diseases and injuries.
Carine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatiorn, First Edition. Edited by M. Christine Zink and Janet B. Van Dyke.
@ 2013 John Wiley &t Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley &r Sons, Inc.
267
268  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Introduction
muscles combine and have a common insertion on
the lesser trochanter of the femur. The action of this
Orthopedic conditions of the pelvic limb are some
 muscle is hip flexion with external femoral rotation
of the most frequently diagnosed causes of lame-
and lumber flexion (Evans, 1993a).
ness in the dog. As our understanding of rehabili-
conditions are being identified, and new means of
Pathophysiology
 treatment are being used. This chapter offers a brief
overview of the more common pelvic limb condi-
Iiopsoas muscle strains are believed to occur
tions. Knowledge of pertinent anatomy, physical
during eccentric contraction, when the muscle is
examination findings, and appropriate diagnostic
contracting while lengthening (Breur & Blevins,
tools allows for an accurate diagnosis and proposal
1997; Nielsen & Pluhar, 2005). The weakest area
of treatment options. Insight with respect to prog-
and therefore where strains most often occur is the
nosis and expected recovery is discussed for indi-
 muscle-tendon junction near the insertion on the
vidual procedures. More in-depth discussion of
lesser trochanter of the femur. The strain may be a
these conditions is readily available elsewhere.
primary injury or secondary to an underlying
 orthopedic or neurological condition. Slipping into
abduction, jumping out of a vehicle, aggressive
lliopsoas strain
training, and roughhousing with other dogs may
be precipitating events.
Anatomy
The iliopsoas muscle represents the fusion of the
Diagnosis
psoas major and iliacus muscles (Figure 14.1). The
psoas major arises from the transverse processes of
 Lameness ranges from subtle intermittent offload-
L2 and L3 and the bodies of L4-7. The iliacus arises
ing to continuous significant lameness and is exac-
from the ventral surface of the ilium. The two
erbated by activity. Performance-related issues
such as knocking bars, taking wide sweeping
competition are common complaints from clients.
Tightess, discomfort, and spasm may be noted
on direct palpation of the myotendinous unit
Psoasminor
(Figure 14.2), or when stretching the muscle by
placing the hip in extension with abduction and
Psoasmajor
internal rotation of the limb (Figure 14.3).
Pelvic radiographs are generally unremarkable.
Avulsion of the lesser trochanter may be noted
with acute traumatic events, and mineralization
Iliacus
within the tendon or at the tendinous insertion
 may be seen with chronic cases. Advanced diag-
nostics may be used to confirm the diagmosis.
Ultrasonography is an excellent modality to diag-
nose strains and allows for monitoring the response
to treatment.
Treatment
Figure 14.1 Illiopsoas muscle anatomy. The iliopsoas
muscle represents the fusion of the psoas major and iliacus
Conservative medical management and rehabilita-
muscles. (lllustration by Faith Lotsikas.)
 tion therapy are recommended for acute iliopsoas
Chapter 14 Disorders of the Pelvic Limb: Diagnosis and Treatment 269
Figure 14.3 Tightness, discomfort, and spasm may be
noted when stretching the muscle by placing the hip in
Figure 14.2 Tightness, discomfort, and spasm may be
extension with abduction and internal rotation of the limb.
noted on direct palpation of the myotendinous unit of the
iliopsoas.
strains. Medical management includes nonsteroi-
dal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), muscle
relaxants, cryotherapy, and restricted activity. Sur-
paunnem aq Ae Anoua Aq paean t
when there are irreversible changes to the myoten-
dinous unit that are nonresponsive to medical
Pectineus
 management and rehabilitation therapy.
muscle
Sartoriusmuscle
Adductor
Gracilis and semitendinosus/
muscle
semimembranosus myopathy
Semimembranosus
muscle
Introd uction
Gracilis muscle
Myopathy of the gracilis, semitendinosus, or semi-
membranosus may occur individually or concur-
rently. There is usually no definitive episode
 reported by the owner/handler. There does appear
Semitendinosu
muscle
to be some breed and age predilection, with highly
active German Shepherd Dogs and related breeds
between the ages of 3 and 7 years overrepresented
(Vaughan, 1979; Lewis et al., 1997; Steiss, 2002).
Figure 14.4 The gracilis, semitendinosus, and
Anatomy
semimembranosus muscles form an extensive broad
muscular sheet that is found superficially in the caudal
portion of the inner thigh. (lllustration by Marcia Schlehr.)
The gracilis, semitendinosus, and semimembrano-
sus muscles form an extensive broad muscular
sheet that is found superficially in the caudal
portion of the inner thigh (Figure 14.4). The gracilis
270  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
arises from the pelvic symphysis and inserts on the
increased angulation (flexion) at the stifle (Steiss,
proximal medial tibia. An aponeurosis extends to
2002).
the crural fascia and from its caudal border sends
 a well-developed reinforcing band to the calcanean
tendon, which attaches to the tuber calcaneus.
Diagnosis
This muscle is responsible for thigh adduction,
hip extension, stifle flexion, and tarsal extension
 Presentation of gracilis, semitendinosus, or semi-
(Evans, 1993b).
membranosus contracture is very unique and con-
 sistent in appearance. The diagnosis can be made
with a thorough history, observation of gait, and
 physical examination (Figure 14.5). Affected dogs
Pathophysiology
have a pelvic limb gait abnormality characterized
by a shortened stride with a rapid, elastic medial
In most cases, the etiology of gracilis / semitendino-
rotation of the paw, intermal rotation of the tarsus
sus/semimembranosus myopathy is unknown.
with external rotation of the calcaneus, and inter-
Numerous theories exist, including acute trauma,
nal rotation of the stifle during the mid-to-late
chronic repetitive trauma, autoimmune disease,
swing phase of protraction.
drug reaction, infection, neurogenic disorders, and
A taut, firm band is palpable in the caudomedial
vascular abnormalities (Taylor & Tangmer, 2007).
aspect of the thigh. Pain and spasm may be noted
Ischemia secondary to indirect trauma may also
when performing a stretch of the gracilis-
lead to fibrosis and contracture (Taylor & Tangner,
semitendinosus muscle complex (hip flexion, stifle
2007). Histologically, the affected muscle is replaced
extension, and limb abduction; Figure 14.6). In
by dense, collagenous connective tissue (Taylor &
severe cases, the stifle carmot be fully extended
Tangner, 2007).
(Figure 14.7).
 A 2002 study involving canine athletes suggests
that excessive activity can lead to muscle strains
resulting in inflammation, edema, localized hem-
Treatment
orrhage, and eventually, fibrosis (Steiss, 2002).
Jo xs raieana e aq Ae sao piaudaus ua
For acute cases, conservative management and
 muscle strain during physical activity due to the
rehabilitation therapy consisting of NSAIDs, re-
A
B
Figure 14.5 Dogs with gracilis myopathy have a pelvic limb gait abnormality characterized by a shortened stride with a
rapid, elastic medial rotation of the paw, internal rotation of the tarsus with external rotation of the calcaneus, and internal
rotation of the stifle during the mid-to-late swing phase of protraction. A. Elastic medial rotation of the left pelvic limb paw
and external rotation of calcaneus. B. 0.5 seconds later, the paw has rotated laterally and the calcaneus medially. (Images
derived from video.)
Chapter 14 Disorders of the Pelvic Limb: Diagnosis and Treatment 271
stricted controlled activity, cryotherapy, manual
 therapy, and modalities is recommended.
Treatment options are limited for chronic cases.
Eighteen dogs with gracilis or semitendinosus
myopathy were treated with various methods
(Lewis et al., 1997). Eight received medical manage-
-de ou sem arau Aiabms ol rond 1o auoe juau
m paean anam shop ua sudsa uardn
one or more surgical procedures. Lameness
resolved following transection, partial excision or
complete resection of the affected muscle. However,
lameness recurred 6 weeks to 5 months following
surgery. Adjunctive medical treatment did not
change the outcome. Myectomy of the entire graci-
Figure 14.6 In dogs with gracilis myopathy, pain and
lis muscle is no more successful as the gait abnor-
spasm may be noted when performing a stretch of the
mality may returm within three to 5 months due to
gracilis-semitendinosus muscle complex (hip flexion, stifle
semitendinosus involvement (Lewis et al., 1997).
extension, and limb abduction).
At present, long-term rehabilitation therapy is
the treatment of choice. Therapy may include
chronic treatment with continuous ultrasound
therapy, manual therapy, and a home therapeutic
exercise program. Unfortunately, it is rare for reha-
bilitation therapy to completely resolve the clinical
 signs. With continued rehabilitation therapy and
dedication to the home maintenance program,
working dogs with this condition can remain
active.
Hip dysplasia (HD)
Pathophysiology
Hip dysplasia (HD) can be defined as abnormal
development of the hip joint, resulting in coxo-
femoral laxity due to decreased coverage of the
femoral head by the acetabulum and ineffective
soft tissue stabilization of the joint (Demko &
McLaughlin, 2005; Lopez, 2012). Abnormal kine-
matics result in joint capsule stretching, cartilage
erosion, subchondral bone fracture, periarticular
fibrosis, and new bone formation (Dassler, 2003).
 Disease progression results in degenerative and
inflammatory changes characteristic of osteoarthri-
tis (OA) (Dassler, 2003).
Hip dysplasia is the most common developmen-
tal orthopedic condition in dogs and is highly
Figure 14.7 In severe cases of gracilis myopathy, the stifle
breed dependent (Witsberger et al., 2008; Smith
cannot be fully extended.
et al., 2012). Despite attempts at eradication of the
272  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
condition through selective breeding programs,
with a history of decreased activity or reluctance
m q Aa sua H jo ad a
to jump or climb stairs, bunny-hopping gait, under-
certain breeds (Coopman et al., 2008; Witsberger
 developed pelvic limbs with a narrow stance, and
et al., 2008; Smith et al., 2012). A review of over 1.2
pain or vocalization with manipulation (Dassler,
million dogs between 1964 and 2003 reported the
2003; Demko & McLaughlin, 2005). Mature dogs
prevalence and risk factors for HD in over 50
with symptoms related to OA of the hips show
breeds (Witsberger et al., 2008). Newfoundlands,
varying degrees of lameness that are worse after
 Rottweilers, German Shepherd Dogs, and retriev-
rest and heavy exercise. They also are reluctant to
ers are among the most commonly affected breeds
 jump, and have pelvic limb atrophy and behavioral
with prevalence up to 17% (Witsberger et al., 2008).
changes associated with pain (Demko & McLaugh-
Smith et al. followed a colony of Labrador Retriev-
lin, 2005).
ers over their life span and found that despite
The diagnosis of HD is based on physical exami-
breeding for an expected HD incidence between
nation and radiographic findings (Demko &
 26% and 51%, in fact, 98% of the dogs had evidence
McLaughlin, 2005). Passive hip laxity can be pal-
of HD at the time of death (Smith et al., 2012). These
pated in young dogs using the Ortolani maneuver
studies highlight the fact that HD is a complex
(Demko & McLaughlin, 2005; Gatineau et al., 2012)
condition with many factors involved in the de-
(Figure 14.8). This test may be inaccurate in dogs
velopment, progression, and recognition of the
younger than 4 months, as maximal laxity is
disease.
Hip dysplasia is a polygenic, heritable condition,
enced by reproductive status, age, body condition
and conformation, diet and other environmental
factors (Spain et al., 2004; Demko & McLaughlin,
2005; Witsberger et al., 2008; Smith et al., 2012).
Castrated male dogs are significantly more likely
to be effected by HD, and an association has been
 shown between gonadectomy at <5 months of age
and the development of HD in both males and
females (Spain et al, 2004; Witsberger et al., 2008).
Kealy and Smith et al. found that the develop-
ment and progression of HD was significantly
delayed or decreased in dogs maintained at a lean
body condition through caloric restriction com-
pared to litter-matched pairs of a higher body con-
dition score (Kealy et al., 2002; Smith et al., 2012).
When all dogs in this study were pooled, a linear
relationship was seen between age and prevalence
 of HD. A conclusion of this study was that selecting
'ae Sumos) adijouaud uo paseq ssop Suspaanq
lean body condition) does not ensure elimination
of the HD genotype (Smith et al., 2012).
3.
Diagnosis
Dogs with HD often show clinical signs following
a bimodal curve: 4 months to 34 years, and >7
Figure 14.8 Passive hip laxity can be palpated in young
years of age (Witsberger et al., 2008; Smith et al.,
dogs using the Ortolani maneuver.
jasand (H ym shop Suno pue saiddn (Z1oz
Illustration by Marcia Schlehr.
Chapter 14 Disorders of the Pelvic Limb: Diagnosis and Treatment 273
present between the ages of 2-6 months (Smith
et al., 1998; Gatineau et al., 2012).
The sensitivity and specificity of a positive Orto-
lani sigm detected at 6 months for development of
hip OA at 2 years have been shown to be 100% and
50%, respectively (Gatineau et al., 2012). In other
-isod e pey sieaA z ie vO diu yim saop Ie 'spiom
tive Ortolani at 6 months, and half of the dogs with
a positive Ortolani showed radiographic signs of
OA at 2 years. Furthermore, a negative Ortolani
sign at 6 months is significantly predictive of lack
of OA at 2 years (Gatineau et al., 2012).
 In mature dogs with HD, physical exam findings
typically include uni- or bilateral weight-bearing
pelvic limb lameness, pelvic limb muscle atrophy
 and gluteal weakness, prominence of the greater
trochanter consistent with femoral head sublux-
ation, decreased passive and active extension of
hip, and core muscle weakness (Demko &
McLaughlin, 2005; Bockstahler et al., 2012).
Figure 14.9 For radiographic diagnosis of hip dysplasia,
the standard ventrodorsal (VD) extended limb view is widely
There are several radiographic views used to
used, and is the view required by the Orthopedic
assess hip conformation and secondary OA(Powers
Foundation for Animals (OFA) for breed screening.
et al., 2010; Gatineau et al., 2012; Verhoeven et al.,
2012). The standard ventrodorsal (VD) extended
limb view is widely used, and is the view required
dated as a reliable screening tool in dogs as young
by the Orthopedic Foundation for Animals (OFA)
as 6 months (Powers et al, 2010). When compared
for screening (Figure 14.9).
directly, OFA underestimates the susceptibility to
There are several limitations to the VD view and
 OA compared to PennHIP (Powers et al.,2010). The
the OFA screening methodology. Positioning for
 Norberg angle, dorsal acetabular slope (DAS), and
this view underestimates the degree of joint laxity.
dorsolateral subluxation view (DLS) are other
Additionally, radiographs are given a subjective
objective methods of evaluating HD (Gatineau
rating based on assessment of joint conformation,
et al., 2012; Verhoeven et al., 2012).
laxity, and degenerative changes in dogs at least 2
years of age. Lastly, submission of radiographs to
OFA by breeders and veterinarians is optional; con-
Nonsurgical management
sequently, underestimation of the prevalence of
HD is likely (Powers et al., 2010; Gatineau et al.,
Nonsurgical management involves a multimodal
2012; Verhoeven et al., 2012).
approach including activity modification, pain
 Other radiographic views have been developed
management, maintenance of a lean body condi-
to objectively diagnose HD earlier in the disease
tion, pharmacologic modulation of joint disease,
process (Powers et al., 2010; Gatineau et al., 2012;
therapeutic modalities, physical rehabilitation, and
Verhoeven et al., 2012). PennHIP% (PennHIP, Phila-
regenerative and complementary medicine.
delphia, PA) measures joint congruity by calculat-
A systematic review of the veterinary literature
ing the relative displacement of the femoral head
regarding nonsurgical management of HD found
from the acetabulum during coxofemoral distrac-
high levels of evidence in support of weight
tion, thus accounting for passive joint laxity
management through dietary restriction, paren-
(Powers et al., 2010). The calculated distraction
teral administration of polysulfated glycosamino-
index (DI) predicts the likelihood of the dog devel-
glycans (PSGAGs), and adipose-derived stem cell
oping OA compared to other dogs of the same
therapy (Kirkby & Lewis, 2012). Additional tech-
breed (Runge et al., 2010). PennHIP has been vali-
niques that have been shown to be effective include
274Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
acupuncture, extracorporeal shock wave therapy
Juvenile pubic symphysiodesis (JPS)
(ESWT), and omega 3 fatty acid supplementation
 Juvenile pubic symphysiodesis (JPS) causes pre-
(Roush et al., 2010).
 mature closure of the pubic symphysis. This pro-
 At the time of this publication, scientific evalua-
cedure results in ventral rotation of the dorsal
tion of the efficacy of physical rehabilitation,
including therapeutic exercise and hydrotherapy.
acetabular rim as the remaining growth plates con-
tinue to grow. This technique will reduce the risk
in the management of HD and OA in dogs has not
 of progression of HD in cases of mild to moderate
been investigated. However, considering the role
 aaa ss a si a  
of passive joint laxity in the pathogenesis of HD, it
addressing more severe laxity. In puppies with
is logical to assume that strengthening of the soft
more severe laxity, the progressive correction of
tissue support structures of the hip would be ben-
acetabular orientation would fail to capture the
eficial. In fact, German Shepherd Dogs are more
femoral head. JPS should be performed before 16
 likely to develop hip OA at a lower DI (less passive
n As d aa on a po sa
laxity) than more well-muscled breeds such as
et al., 2002; Bernarde, 2010). Consequently, JPS is
Rottweilers (Gatineau et al., 2012). Initiation of a
Aue aaeu on Aaun are pe sop u papuaoan
comprehensive rehabilitation program for a dog
contemporary disability from HD. Dymamic
imaging of the hips to demonstrate laxity (e.g., hip
or complementary to surgical intervention.
distraction with PernHip) should guide selection
or exclusion of the individual dog as a candidate
for JPS.
Surgical management
Joint preservation procedures
Triple pelvic osteotomy (TPO) and double pelvic
csteotomy (DPO)
Greater degrees of hip laxity correlate with an
increased likelihood of secondary OA but not nec-
Triple pelvic osteotomy (TPO) and double pelvic
essarily clinical disability. There are two surgical
 osteotomy (DPO) aim to increase dorsal acetabular
procedures that aim to improve the clinical sigms
 rim coverage of the femoral head. This is achieved
associated with coxofemoral laxity in skeletally
by making two or three osteotomies around the
immature dogs.
acetabulum, manually rotating the acetabulum
Case Study 14.1 Medial patellar luxation (MPL) and HD
Signalment: 2 y.o F/s French Bulldog, BCS 6/9
home exercise program (HEP) and weight loss plan. After
2 weeks, the crying episodes stopped. Intermittent right
Presenting Complaint: Boarded for 1 week. Intermittent
 pelvic limb lameness became evident.
vocalization since home. No lameness or history of
trauma.
Further  Treatment: Bilateral  MPL surgery including
block trochleoplasty, antirotational suture, and capsular
Orthopedic Exam: Grade Ill right MPL, Grade 2 left
imbrication. Surgical recovery uneventful. Rehabilitation
 MPL, no cranial drawer. No pain on orthopedic exam.
 program (q3d) and HEP instituted for 3 months. Another
Neurologic exam normal. During hospitalization, epi-
episode of crying out occurred. Surgical sites nonpainful
sodes of crying out, nonresponsive to injectable opioids.
and patellae could not be luxated. Source of pain iso-
lated and attributed to right hip subluxation/HD. Long-
Diagnostics: Magnetic resonance imaging (MRl) of the
termt mu ltimodal management of HD and associated OA
spine revealed no evidence of spinal cord compression.
instituted, including continued weight loss, oral and
Ortolani exam performed under anesthesia positive
injectable chondroprotectants, laser therapy, and thera-
bilaterally.
peutic exercises. Owner counseled on potential need for
surgical intervention (femoral head and neck ostectomry
Initial Treatment: Pain management with NSAlDs and
[FHO[) if pain continued despite cormprehensive nonsur-
tamadol. Activity restrictions for 2 weeks followed by
gical efforts.
Chapter 14 Disorders of the Pelvic Limb: Diagnosis and Treatment  275
Figure 14.10 Triple pelvic osteotomy (TPO) aims to increase dorsal acetabular rim coverage of the femoral head. This is
achieved by making two or three osteotomies around the acetabulum, manually rotating the acetabulum over the femoral
head, and stabilizing it with a plate and screws. Pre-operative (A) and post-operative (B) radiographs.
over the femoral head, and stabilizing it with a
patients that already have damage to the round
plate and screws (Figure 14.10). It is ideally per-
ligament or cartilage (Holsworth
1etal.,2005;
formed in dogs less than 5-8 months of age with
Manley et al., 2007) (Figure 14.11).
an angle of relocation < 25-30° and a quality of
acetabular rim. Dogs with clinical lameness are less
Salvage procedures
likely to be optimal candidates for TPO/DPO, but
Total hip replacement (THR)
there is understandable reluctance to perform cor-
rective osteotomy on dogs with hip laxity that is
Total hip replacement (THR) is routinely used to
an incidental finding on physical examination.
target lameness caused by HD/OA that is refrac-
Patients typically bear weight on the surgical leg
tory to medical management. THR involves surgi-
immediately following surgery. The most common
cal removal of the patient's acetabulum and femoral
complication with this procedure is implant loos-
head and replacement with a polyethylene cup and
ening and pelvic canal narrowing (Whelan et al.,
metallic stem and head. The expected outcome is
2004; Doornink et al., 2006). The recent use of
restoration of normal hip function, range of motion,
locking implants has decreased the complication
and pelvic and crural muscle bulk. It is unusual
rate with this procedure (Rose et al., 2012). Postop-
that osteoarthritic degeneration will preclude THR.
erative exercise restriction is imperative until
However, there is an increased complication rate
radiographic evidence of bony union is present, at
and degree of difficulty associated with THR per-
which time therapy aimed at building muscle mass
formed in patients with chronic dorsal luxation
can be initiated. Range of motion is typically pre-
secondary to HD. In such cases, the window of
served with this procedure, though gait kinematics 
opportunity for routine THR may be short.
reveals a base narrow stance that is usually
Selection criteria for THR are stringent, and
permanent.
common contraindications to THR include obe-
The progression of OA remains possible with
sity, bacterial pyoderma, other clinically sigmnifi-
both the JPS and TPO procedures, particularly in
 cant orthopedic disease, neurological impairment,
276  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Figure 14.11 The progression of OA remains possible with
both the JPS and TPO procedures, particularly in patients 
that already have damage to the round ligament or cartilage.
Figure 14.12 Hip replacement using a cementless system.
infective arthritis, immunosuppression, and poly-
arthropathy. Resolution of some of these condi-
tions is practical and may allow THR at a later date
if necessary.
There are currently two categories of hip replace-
ment. One involves the use of bone cement, which
binds the implant to the bone. The other is a
cementless system that requires bone integration
 or growth into the implant (Figure 14.12). Patients
may also benefit from a hybrid hip, which is a
combination of a cementless acetabular cup with a
cemented stem (Figure 14.13).
The primary advantage of the cemented system
is that it offers maximum strength shortly after
implantation. It is ideal for patients with more
brittle bone or straight shaft femurs, as seen typi-
cally in the older shepherd breeds. It can also be
used successfully in small dogs and cats (Liska,
2010). With time, the cement mantle can separate
from the bone (aseptic loosening), which can be
caused by inflammation at the bone-cement inter-
face, or less commonly, at the cement-implant
interface (Finkelstein et al., 1991; Edwards et al.,
1997). The risk of infection is higher, as bacteria can
sequester in the cement.
Figure 14.13 Hip replacement using a hybrid hip, which is
 Cementless hip systems rely on bone ingrowth
a combination of a cementless acetabular cup with a
or ongrowth of the implants for long-term stability.
cemented stem.
Chapter 14 Disorders of the Pelvic Limb: Diagnosis and Treatment 277
Cementless systems theoretically offer a long-term
advantage of decreased aseptic loosening and
carry a smaller risk of infection. However, periop-
erative complications are reported to be higher
than with a cemented hip, and long-term data are
currently not available to document the true life
span of these implants (Guerrero & Montavon,
2009; Lascelles et al., 2010).
Postoperative management. Most patients will bear
weight on the operated limb within 24 hours of
surgery. The first 4-6 weeks postsurgery are the
most critical. During this time, the joint capsule is
healing, and in a cementless hip, osteointegration
is taking place. Patients are prone to coxofemoral
luxation and subsidence during this time. Rehabili-
tation therapy is not recommended until radio-
graphs demonstrate stable implants 1 month
following surgery. Off-leash activity is not recom-
 mended until 12 weeks following surgery.
Figure 14.14 Femoral head and neck ostectomy (FHO) is a
FHO
salvage procedure in which the head and neck of the femur
Femoral head and neck ostectomy (FHO) is a
are removed, eliminating the bone on bone contact of the
femoral head and acetabulum.
salvage procedure in which the head and neck of
the femur are removed, eliminating the bone-on-
bone contact of the femoral head and acetabulum
(Figure 14.14). This procedure relies on periarticu-
is recommended starting 2-3 weeks following
 lar fibrosis and muscle to support the body weight
 surgery. Swimming tends to be less beneficial in
of the patient. There are few perioperative compli-
these cases, as patients are often hesitant to fully
cations, as no implants are present (Dueland et al.,
engage the surgical limb. Recovery is usually
1977). Patients may have a residual gait abnormal-
longer than that experienced with a THR, typically
ity, but are usually perceived as pain free by their
16-20 weeks until optimal function is achieved.
owners, and can maintain an acceptable level of
The most predictable outcome with this procedure
activity (Off & Matis, 2010).
occurs with a thin, well-conditioned patient.
Postoperative management. Functional shortening
of the limb associated with dorsal displacement of
Coxofemoral luxation
the femur, failure to recover normal muscle mass
and decreased range of hip motion are likely causes
Anatomy
of poor outcome with the FHO. Most patients will
not bear weight on the limb for 3-5 days following
The coxofemoral joint derives most of its stability
surgery. Rehabilitation therapy is imperative for a
from the round ligament of the femoral head, the
fumctional outcome. Long-term administration of
joint capsule, and the dorsal acetabular rim. The
analgesic medication and early therapy (5-14 days
joint also receives ancillary stabilization from
following surgery) aim to improve comfort and
the ventral labrum, surounding musculature and
preserve range of motion of the hip (Grisneaux
the adhesion-cohesion relationship of the joint
et al., 2003). Once the patient is adequately bearing
surfaces and synovial fluid. Disruption of two or
weight, strength training is initiated. Underwater
 more primary stabilizers results in luxation of the
 pue aaq aanxa aq t dea a
hip (Holsworth & DeCamp, 2003)
278  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Pathophysiology
current injuries commonly seen with traumatic
events.
Hip luxation is most often due to a traumatic event,
such as vehicular trauma (Bone et al., 1984; Basher
et al., 1986; Demko et al., 2006). This results in dis-
Treatment
ruption of the round ligament of the femoral head
and joint capsule, with ensuing luxation of the hip.
Treatment options include closed or open reduc-
The gluteal and iliopsoas muscle groups act upon
tion. For closed reduction, the patient is placed
the greater and lesser trochanters, causing the
under general anesthesia and a series of traction
femoral head to move in a craniodorsal direction
maneuvers are employed to replace the head of the
(Basher et al., 1986). Ventralluxation isless common,
 femur into the acetabulum. Once in place, the limb
and is usually a result of a slip or fall causing the
is immobilized in an Ehmer sling for 10-14 days
stifle to be abruptly abducted. Underlying HD is a
(Fox, 1991; McLaughlin, 1995). Commercially avail-
predisposing factor for both types of luxation
able Ehmer slings (Figure 14.16) allow for decreased
(Herron, 1979).
skin irritation and cutaneous vascular compro-
mise. The ability to reattach the device allows for
passive range of motion (PROM) on the unaffected
Diagnosis
joints during the convalescent period. Patients
with ventral luxation should be placed in hobbles
The affected patient is often nonweight bearing.
following reduction (see Chapter 11).
with external rotation of the stifle and adduction
With closed reduction, hip stability is reestab-
of the lower limb. The affected limb appears
 lished by joint capsule healing, production of scar
shorter, with a prominent hard swelling (the greater
tissue, and the surrounding musculature. Once the
trochanter) palpable above the coxofemoral joint.
capsule is sealed, the fluid returns to the joint,
 Diagnosis is made upon examination and palpa-
adding additional stability. The ligament of the
tion, and is confirmed with radiographs (Figure
 femoral head never heals. Closed reduction is suc-
14.15). The patient is thoroughly evaluated for con-
cessful in approximately 50% of first attempts
(Bone et al., 1984; Basher et al., 1986; Demko et al.,
2006). It is most effective if performed within the
first 12-24 hours following the traumatic event.
 Closed reduction is not an appropriate treatment
option if bone fragments are present within the
joint, as occurs with avulsion of the ligament.
Figure 14.15 Radiograph showing typical appearance of
coxofemoral luxation.
Figure 14.16 Commercially available Ehmer sling.
Chapter 14 Disorders of the Pelvic Limb: Diagnosis and Treatment 279
8-12 weeks following surgery to allow for the joint
capsule and surrounding musculature to heal.
encouraged. Initially, static weight-bearing exer-
cises are introduced along with short leash walks
 on even terrain. Hill work and greater intensity
strength training is reserved until sufficient healing
occurs, usually 6-8 weeks following repair. The
patient can return to full activity level once range
of motion of the hip joint and muscle mass of the
limb return to normal.
Repeat luxation is the most common complica-
tion. Until recently, this rate has been cited as 11--
25% (Duff & Bennett, 1982; Bone et al., 1984; Evers
et al., 1997; Demko et al., 2006). Advances in suture
material has reduced reluxation rate following
toggle rod stabilization to less than 5% (Kieves
Figure 14.17 This is an example of one of the most
common techniques for repair of hip luxation
et al., 2011a, 2011b; Ash et al., 2012).
reconstruction of the joint capsule with suture and bone
anchors, or use of a synthetic material to replace the
ligament of the femoral head, termed toggle rod
Cranial cruciate ligament
stabilization.
(CCL) insufficiency
Anatomy
When closed reduction fails, if immediate weight 
The CCL is composed of two bands, the smaller
bearing is necessary, or if there are concurrent 
craniomedial band that is taut in all phases of
orthopedic injuries, surgical intervention is war-
flexion and extension of the stifle, and the caudola-
ranted. If the hip joint conformation is normal,
teral band that is taut in extension, but lax in flexion
 open reduction with stabilization is recommended.
(Figure 14.18). Together, these bands limit hyperex-
If the hip is severely dysplastic, a THR or FHO is
tension, cranial tibial translation, and internal rota-
advised.
tion (Arnoczky & Marshall, 1977). The caudal
 Numerous techniques for open reduction and
cruciate is the primary restraint against caudal
stabilization of the hip have been described. These
tibial translation and also helps limit internal rota-
can be extra-articular or intra-articular repairs. The
tion of the tibia (Arnoczky & Marshall, 1977;
most common techniques are reconstruction of the
Heffron & Campbell, 1978; Kowaleski et al., 2012).
joint capsule with suture and bone anchors, or use
The medial and lateral collateral ligaments serve to
of a synthetic material to replace the ligament of
limit intermal and external rotation.
the femoral head, termed toggle rod stabilization
The menisci are crescent-shaped, cartilaginous
(Figure 14.17). Both surgeries provide immediate
tissues that partially divide the articular surfaces
stability to the hip. However, long-term stability is
of the joint (Figure 14.19). Menisci distribute load
achieved from joint capsule healing and periarticu-
during weight bearing and provide structural
lar fibrosis, as all synthetic materials will eventu-
integrity to the stifle as it undergoes tension and
ally break
 torsion. The menisci also play an important role in
joint nutrition and lubrication. Both menisci are
anchored to the tibial plateau. The medial menis-
Postoperative care and prognosis
cus has a firm attachment to the tibia and medial
collateral ligament, while the lateral meniscus has
Limb use following surgical repair is often imme-
a loose attachment to the tibia and an additional
diate. However, restricted activity is mandatory for
attachment to the femur. As a result, the medial
280  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Patellarligament
Caudal
cruciate
ligament
Femur
Cranial
cruciate
ligament
Meniscus
Lateralmeniscus
Medial/
meniscus
Tibia
Figure 14.19 The menisci are crescent-shaped,
cartilaginous tissues that partially divide the articular
surfaces of the joint.
Figure 14.18 The cranial cruciate ligament (CCL) and the
caudal cruciate ligament restrict cranial and caudal
translation, respectively, of the tibia on the femur. The
cranial cruciate also resists hyperextension and internal
tibia is displaced forward, as the femur slides
rotation and is the most commonly damaged stifle ligament
down the slope of the tibia. The steeper the angle
in dogs.
present, the more significant the resultant force
Illustration by Marcia Schlehr.
acting upon the CCL.
meniscus is more vulnerable to injury with cruciate
Pathology
deficiency.
Traumatic rupture of a healthy CCL is typically
caused by hyperextension and excessive internal
Kinematics of the cranial cruciate
rotation. More often, CCL injuries occur when
deficient stifle
normal force is exerted on an abnormal or de-
generative joint. Proposed underlying etiologies
While standing, the canine stifle is flexed, resulting
include biological and biomechanical factors. Bio-
in continuous loading of the CCL. This load varies
 logical factors include development, genetics, met-
depending on activity level and contraction of
abolic function, hormonal influences, infection,
various muscle groups. The sloping articular
immune-mediated processes, and inappropriate
surface of the tibia is called the tibial plateau. The
cellular production and turnover. Biomechanical
angle at which the plateau meets a line drawn per-
components include muscular function and forces,
pendicular to the long axis of the tibia is referred
alignment, conformation, movement, and joint
to as the tibial plateau angle (TPA). TPA reference
contacts and pressures (Reif et al., 2002; Morgan
ranges have been documented in four common
et al., 2010). Because cranial cruciate disease is gen-
canine breeds, although this slope can vary signifi-
 erally degenerative, a patient with a ruptured CCL
cantly between individual patients (Guastella et al.,
has a 50-60% chance of rupturing the opposite
 2008). When the canine stifle is bearing weight, the
CCL (Buote et al., 2009).
Chapter 14 Disorders of the Pelvic Limb: Diagnosis and Treatment 281
Predisposition
Cranial cruciate ligament disease can affect dogs of
any breed, sex, or age, although a higher incidence
is reported for large breed and overweight dogs
(Duval et al., 1999). Ligament degeneration is also
associated with aging, occurring earlier in large
breeds. The Labrador Retriever, Newfoundland,
Rottweiler, Mastiff, American Staffordshire Terrier,
Akita, Boxer, and Bulldog are overrepresented,
supporting the likelihood of a genetic component
(Duval et al., 1999). To date, the Newfoundland is
the only breed in which chromosomal abnormali-
ties associated with cruciate disease have been
identified (Wilke et al., 2006, 2009). Certain confor-
sniea paxew no auis nldn ue) sad uoe
of the pelvic limbs) predispose dogs to CCL disease.
Neutered males and spayed females are also at an
increased risk (Duval et al., 1999).
Figure 14.20 Arthroscopic image showing a partial CCL
tear (arrow).
Clinical presentation
A cruciate rupture due to a traumatic event will
Diagnosis
initially cause sigrificant stifle effusion, and the
 patient will be toe-touching to non-weight-bearing
Some dogs with chronic cranial cruciate disease
lame. In chronic cases, a precipitating event may
 or partial CCL tears do not have significant pal-
be associated with an acute notable change in limb
pable stifle instability (cranial drawer or tibial
use; however, there is often a history of intermit-
thrust test). Additional diagnostic tests, such as
tent lameness over a period of several weeks to
arthrocentesis, MRI, and/or arthroscopy may be
months. Common findings include the patient
recommended.
sitting with the affected limb extended or posi-
Arthroscopy is a minimally invasive technique
tioned laterally rather than tucked under the body,
that allows for magnified high-resolution assess-
shifting weight off the affected limb when stand-
ment of the structures within the stifle joint (Figure
ing, and displaying stiffness upon rising. Concur-
14.20). The entire joint can be examined via two or
rent meniscal injury can cause an audible click
three stab incisions. This not only increases the
when walking or flexing the stifle.
accuracy of a diagnosis, but also reduces the mor-
 Partial CCL tears typically present with a com-
bidity and infection rate associated with joint
 plaint of a mild weight-bearing lameness following
-[ao) Aoonre uado cn panduon se puassasse
heavy exercise, or stiffness following prolonged
zler et al., 2004; Pozzi et al., 2008).
periods of rest. Patients with bilateral disease may
shift weight back and forth between the pelvic
limbs when standing, shift weight to the forelimbs,
have difficulty or be slow in sitting and rising, and
Surgical treatment
may be exercise intolerant. In some cases, the
 patient may be umable or unwilling to bear weight
Three categories of surgical stabilization exist:
 in either pelvic limb, leading to possible misdiag-
intra-articular grafting, extracapsular repair, and
noses as a neurological condition or HD.
corrective osteotomies. The grafting technique has
282   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
dogs but have been reported in both medial and
lateral menisci (Ridge, 2006; Williams, 2010).
Stabilization techniques
Extracapsular technigues
Variations of extracapsular repair are among the
 most popular CCL procedures to date. These tech-
niques passively stabilize the stifle by neutralizing
Canial drawer via the formation of periarticular
fibrosis. The most frequently performed extracap-
sular technique is the lateral fabellar repair. This
technique involves passing a nonabsorbable syn-
thetic suture external to the joint capsule in either
a figure-8 or loop pattern around the lateral fabella,
and through a hole made in the tibial crest. A knot
or a stainless steel crimp clamp is used to hold the
suture material taut. While the suture material will
Figure 14.21
Severe cartilage erosion (arrow) in a dog with
CCL rupture.
eventually stretch or break, it is meant to provide
temporary stabilization to the stifle until the body
can form organized scar tissue around the suture
 material that ultimately provides the long-term,
functional stability. The major limitations of this
lost popularity, and a study concluded this tech-
technique are that the monofilament has relatively
nique to have inferior results; thus, it will not be
low tensile strength and a fair amount of creep, and
covered in detail (Conzemius et al., 2005). Of the
the points of implantation are nonisometric to the
remaining techniques, no one technique has proven
cruciate ligament. These factors can lead to joint
to be superior to another in terms of technical ease,
laxity during the initial 4-8 weeks of healing that
complication rates, or long-term outcome.
may result in either too much scar tissue formation,
 The patient's age, size, conformation, activity
which decreases functional range of motion of the
level, and concurrent medical conditions are con-
stifle, or too little scar tissue, which can lead to
sidered when selecting the surgical procedure. A
persistent instability. These limitations become
thorough evaluation of the joint must be performed
 more obvious in large, giant, and active perfor-
at the time of surgery, regardless of the type of
mance dogs.
stabilization performed (Figure 14.21).
The TightRope? CCL (Arthrex, Naples, FL)
(Figure 14.22) technique differs from conventional
extracapsular stabilization in that it can be per-
formed in a minimally invasive manner, provides
Meniscus
bone-to-bone stabilization, and more accurately
A thorough evaluation of the meniscus with a
 mimics the natural orientation of the CCL, using a
probe is performed (Thieman et al., 2006; Pozzi
suture material that is stronger and has less creep
et al., 2008; Cook et al., 2010a). Missed meniscal
than conventional suture. (Burgess et al., 2010).
damage is the most common cause of procedural
Using specific landmarks, bone tunnels are drilled
failure in one report (Thieman et al., 2006). The
through the femur and tibia. The material is passed
damaged portion of the meniscus is excised, with
through the tunnels and is secured using stainless
an attempt to preserve as much of the meniscal
steel buttons. The procedure relies on the forma-
rim as possible. If the rim is damaged, a caudal
tion of organized scar tissue around the implant for
pole hemi meniscectomy or meniscal release is
 long-term function. Early literature would suggest
performed. Isolated meriscal lesions are rare in 
a high level of success with a relative low level of
Chapter 14 Disorders of the Pelvic Limb: Diagnosis and Treatment 283
Figure 14.22 The TightRope CCL technique differs from
conventional extracapsular stabilization in that it can be
performed in a minimally invasive manner, provides
bone-to-bone stabilization, and more accurately mimics the
natural orientation of the CCL, using a suture material that is
stronger and has less creep.
Figure 14.23 The TPLO is the current procedure of choice
for active, larger, and giant breeds of dogs with ruptured
CCL.
dures (Cook et al., 2010b; Christopher & Cook,
2011).
This procedure can be used in any size dog with
Corrective osteotomies
any TPA; it has a highly reproducible outcome, and
Tibial plateau leveling osteotomy (TPLO).The TPLO
because it relies on bone healing, is easily assessed
 is a commonly used procedure for active, large,
radiographically. The procedure may also have a
and giant breed dogs (Priddy et al., 2003; Lazar
slower progression of OA than the lateral fabellar
et al., 2005; Cook et al., 2010b; Kowaleski et al.,
suture procedure (Lazar et al., 2005). Limitations
2012). The procedure involves making a curved
include the high learning curve for the surgeon, the
osteotomy through the proximal tibia (Figure
potential for serious complications, and the lack of
14.23). The articular component of the tibia is
suitability in geriatric patients or those with poor
rotated to achieve a lower TPA. The amount of
bone quality (Priddy et al., 2003; Lazar et al., 2005;
 rotation is based on measuring the TPA using pre-
Boudrieau, 2009; Christopher & Cook, 2011).
 operative radiographs. After rotation, a plate and
screws are applied to hold the osteotomy in posi-
Tibial tuberosity advancement (TTA).  TTA involves
tion. This procedure alters the biomechanics of the
a linear osteotomy caudal to the tibial tuberosity
stifle, placing additional reliance on the caudal cru-
(Figure 14.24). The tibial tuberosity is advanced
ciate ligament and active muscle stabilizers of the
umtil the patellar tendon is perpendicular to the
stifle.
tibial plateau. The advanced portion of bone is held
284   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
(Boudrieau, 2009). There can be issues with preop-
erative plarming for appropriate cage size selection
(Cadmus et al., 2011). The advancement of the tibia
can change the external appearance of the tibia,
a disadvantage in the show ring. The TTA also
carries a risk of major complications. Infections
of the spacer cage, although uncommon, can be
extremely challenging to resolve.
Patellar luxation
Anatomy and pathophysiology
Congenital patellar luxation occurs when one or
several structures that comprise the quadriceps
 mechanism are misaligmed, resulting in partial or
complete deviation of the patella from the trochlea
(L'Eplattenier & Montavon, 2002b; Bevan & Taylor,
2004; Alam et al., 2007).
 Medial patellar luxation (MPL) is a very common
developmental orthopedic condition and occurs
Figure 14.24 TTA—this procedure involves a linear
sigrificantly more frequently than lateral patellar
osteotomy caudal to the tibial tuberosity. The tibial
luxation in all dogs (Alam et al., 2007). Small breed
tuberosity is advanced so that the patellar tendon is
dogs are most commonly affected by MPL, and
perpendicular to the tibial plateau.
the condition is considered heritable in some
breeds (Alam et al., 2007). Large breed dogs are
also commonly affected with MPL, with Labra-
 in place with a titanium cage (that acts as a spacer
 dor Retrievers being overrepresented (Gibbons
between the two bones) and plate (Kowaleski et al.,
et al., 2006). Patellar luxation occurs bilaterally in
2012). A graft is applied to the space between the
50% of affected dogs, with females affected more
bones to promote bone healing. The procedure
commonly than males (L'Eplatternier & Montavon,
relies on neutralizing tibial thrust by changing the
2002b; Gibbons et al., 2006; Alam et al., 2007).
force through the stifle to be parallel to the patellar
Patellar luxation is divided into four grades
tendon (Kowaleski et al., 2012). TTA provides
based on the severity of the luxation (L'Eplattenier
a biomechanical advantage to the quadriceps
& Montavon, 2002b; Bevan & Taylor, 2004) (Table
muscles and subsequently stabilizes the stifle. Bio-
14.1). MPL predisposes dogs to cranial cruciate
ligament rupture (CCLR) and the higher the grade
ize the forces exerted on the stifle and preserve the
of MPL, the higher the incidence of concurrent
contact mechanics of the stifle better than TPLO
CCLR (Campbell et al., 2010). One study found that
(Kim ef al., 2009, 2010; Guerrero ef al., 2011).
40% of dogs with MPL had concurrent CCLR
However, poststabilization meniscal tears are
(Campbell et al., 2010)
reported more commonly with TTA than with
TPLO (Lafaver et al., 2007; Stein & Schmoekel,
2008; Christopher & Cook, 2011; Hurt et al., 2011).
Diagnosis
This procedure is less technically demanding than
the TPLO, perhaps reducing the risk of surgical
Intermittent hopping or skipping and reluctance to
error. The TTA is best used in patients with a
jump are typical historical findings in dogs with
low TPA and no tibial angulation abnormalities
 grades I-III patellar luxation. Grade IV MPL is gen-
Chapter 14 Disorders of the Pelvic Limb: Diagnosis and Treatment 285
Case Study 14.2
 Traumatic CCL rupture with concurrent lateral collateral ligament rupture
Signalment: 8 y.o. M/l, New Zealand Huntaway (Figure
periarticular new bone formation. DDx: traumatic CCL
B14.1)
rupture with concurrent lateral collateral ligamrent rupture
(Figure B14.2).
Presenting Complaint: Acute non-weight-bearing left
 pelvic limb lameness 
Treatment: Partial meniscectomy and CCL remnants
resected. Lateral collateral ligarment reconstructed with
Physical Examination: Marked soft tissue swelling left
suture anchor in origin of the lateral collateral. Free end
stifle with cranial drawer and varus instability
of the fiber wire passed through bone tunnel created in
fibular head (Figure B14.3). Extracapsular stabilization
 Diagnostics: Radiographs: Stifle effusion with widening
was achieved utilizing the TightRopeIm procedure.
 of lateral femorotibial joint space on varus stress. No
Postoperative Care: Rehabilitation started 1 day postsur-
gery with operative site cryotherapy QID x 4 days.
Centle passive flexion and extension after cryotherapy.
and lead-controlled toilet walks QlD. Lead-controlled
exercise slowly increased to 5 minutes BID, gradually
building to QID over another 4 weeks. Static sit-to-stand
exercises commeniced at this stage.
6 Weeks PO. Full stifle PROM, moderate quadriceps
atrophy. Mildly weight-bearing larme at walk. Lead-
controlled exercise slowly progressed over 6 weeks to
20 minutes TID.
12 Weeks PO. Exercising with no lameness. Cradual
reintroduction to active work with livestock allowed
Figure B14.1 The New Zealand Huntaway is a sheep
after 16 weeks and returned to full unrestricted work
herding breed.
at 20 weeks.
Figure B14.3 The free end of the fiber wire was passed
Figure B14.2 Stress radiography of a dog with traumatic
through a bone tunnel created in the fibular head.
cranial cruciate ligament rupture and concurrent rupture of
Extracapsular stabilization was achieved using the
the lateral collateral ligament (arrow).
TightRope Procedure.
286  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Table 14.1 Grades of patellar luxation
Grade
Features
Patella can be manually luxated but is
reduced when released.
Patella can be manually luxated or it can
spontaneously luxate with flexion of the
tifle joint. The patella remains luxated until
it is manually reduced or until the dog
extends the joint and rotates the tibia in the
direction opposite the luxation.
Patella remains luxated most of the time but
can be manually reduced with the stifle in
extension. Flexion of the stifle results in
reluxation of the patella.
IV
Patella is permanently luxated and cannot
be manually repositioned. There may be up
to 90° of rotation of the proximal tibial
plateau. The femoral trochlear groove is
shallow or absent, and there is displacement
of the quadriceps muscle group in the
direction of luxation.
erally associated with a significant limb deformity
and moderate to severe lameness is common (Alam
Figure 14.25 CT is useful to assist with surgical planning in
et al., 2007). An acute exacerbation of lameness in
dogs with severe conformational deformities.
dogs with MPL should raise suspicion for CCLR
(Campbell et al., 2010).
 Patellar luxation is diagnosed by physical exami-
and decrease the abnormal biomechanical stresses
nation. Radiographs are often recommended to
 placed on the patella have been developed (Johnson
-neaa ch pue aseasip suof aagerauasap roy ssasse
et al., 2001;L'Eplattenier & Montavon, 2002a;
ate bony conformation for surgical planming
Arthurs & Langley-Hobbs, 2006; Swiderski &
(L'Eplattenier & Montavon, 2002b). Computed
Palmer, 2007; Langenbach & Marcellin-Little, 2010;
tomography (CT) is useful to assist with surgical
Yeadon et al., 2011). Often several techniques are
planning in dogs with severe conformational
employed in combination.
deformities (Towle et al., 2005) (Figure 14.25).
Trochleoplasties
Treatment
The most frequent skeletal abnormality in dogs
with patellar luxation is a shallow trochlear groove.
Nonsurgical management is recommended  for
Wedge or block trochlear recession can be per-
animals with grade I and asymptomatic grade
formed to deepen the sulcus Johnson et al., 2001;
Ⅱ patellar luxation (L'Eplattenier & Montavon,
LEplattenier & Montavon, 2002a) (Figure 14.26)
2002a). The decision to pursue surgery is based
upon frequency and severity of lameness, func-
Tibial tuberosity transposition
tional limitations, and the opportunity to decrease
the likelihood of CCL tears. Several surgical tech-
 Internal rotation of the tibia is common in dogs
niques that realign the quadriceps mechanism
with MPL (extermal rotation with lateral patellar
Chapter 14 Disorders of the Pelvic Limb: Diagnosis and Treatment 287
Block
recession
Femoral
condyle
Figure 14.26 Block trochlear recession. Note that the
patella is well seated within the surgically deepened groove.
Illustration by Marcia Schlehr.
Figure 14.27 Tibial tuberosity transposition. This procedure
luxation). Transposition of the tibial tuberosity by
involves an osteotomy of the tibial tuberosity and placement
several millimeters has been shown to sigmificantly
of orthopedic implants (K-wires ± cerclage wire) to secure
the tuberosity in the transposed location.
decrease the incidence of reluxation following sur-
gical correction (Arthurs & Langley-Hobbs, 2006).
This procedure involves an osteotomy of the tibial
tuberosity and placement of orthopedic implants
Soft tissue reconstruction
(K-wires ± cerclage wire) to secure the tuberosity
in the transposed location (L'Eplattenier & Mon-
Surgical release of the tight tissues and imbrication
tavon, 2002a) (Figure 14.27).
of the loose tissues can be performed along with
 selected procedures to help maintain the patella
within the trochlear groove (L'Eplattenier & Mon-
Antirotational suture
tavon, 2002a).
A lateral fabellar-tibial suture can be placed to
reduce internal tibial rotation. This is the same
technique used for extracapsular repair of CCL
tears, and is commonly employed in dogs that
Concurrent MPL and CCLR
have concurrent MPL and CCL tears (L'Eplattenier
Medial patellar luxation has been shown to predis-
& Montavon, 2002a).
pose dogs to rupture of the CCL (Campbell
et al., 20i0). When the two conditions are diag-
nosed concurrently, surgical treatment is de-
Distal femoral osteotomy (DFO)
sigmed to address both biomechanical deficiencies
A mq   is m s
(L'Eplattenier & Montavon, 2002a; Langenbach &
benefit from a corrective osteotomy to help realign
Marcellin-Little, 2010; Yeadon et al., 2011). In addi-
the quadriceps mechanism. DFO has been shown
 tion to antirotational suture (extracapsular stabili-
to be effective when combined with other proce-
zation), modifications of the TPLO and TTA
dures in treating MPL in large breed dogs (Swid-
procedures have been shown to effectively treat
 erski & Palmer, 2007). Delayed bone healing and
concurrent MPL/CCLR (Langenbach & Marcellin-
implant failure are potential complications.
Little, 2010; Yeadon et al., 2011).
288 Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Superficial digital flexor (SDF)
Treatment
tendon luxation
The torn retinaculum is imbricated with nonab-
Anatomy
sorbable suture and in some cases may require
alternative anchoring such as screws or bone
The SDF tendon is one component of the common
tunnels. A 6% recurrence rate requiring a second
calcanean tendon. Originating on the lateral supra-
 surgery has been reported (Bernard, 1977; Mauterer
condylar tuberosity of the femur, it has two inser-
et al., 1993; Reinke & Mughannam, 1993; Hoscheit,
tions, via retinaculae, onto the lateral and medial
 1994). Chronic tendonitis and bursitis can decrease
surfaces of the tuber calcaneus, before continuing
 the likelihood of a good surgical outcome (Raes
distally to the phalanges (Dyce et al., 1996). The
et al., 2011). Nonsurgical management can yield
calcaneal bursa lies deep to the SDF tendon at the
adequate function, especially in less active patients.
level of the tuber calcaneus.
Pathophysiology
Postoperative care
Luxation of the SDF tendon can be seen in either
Immobilization of the tarsus was traditionally rec-
ommended for 2-4 weeks after surgery (Piermattei
the medial or lateral direction; however, lateral
et al., 2006). Rehabilitation therapy in these patients
luxation is more common due in part to the less
well-defined medial retinaculum (Mauterer et al.,
focuses on maintenance of range of motion as well
1993). Following retinacular tearing, fibrosis of the
as static and dynamic weight-bearing exercises to
torn retinaculum and secondary bursitis may
regain strength in the postsurgical limb.
develop.
 The high prevalence in Shetland Sheepdogs and
Collies suggests a hereditary basis (Gough &
Achilles tendon injuries
- s sss ss a o 
somal recessive method of inheritance (Solanti et al.,
Anatomy
2002). Proposed risk factors for SDF tendon luxation
include obesity (Bernard, 1977; McNicholas et al.,
The Achilles tendon is made up of three compo-
2000), trauma (Bennett & Campbell, 1979), and con-
nents: the gastrocnemius tendon, the common cal-
formational abnormality (Solanti et al., 2002)
caneal tendon (the combined tendons of the biceps
femoris, gracilis, and semitendinosus), and the
SDF tendon (Dyce et al., 1996). The blood flow to
Clinical presentation
the common calcaneal tendon arises predomi-
nantly from the caudal saphenous artery. The mid-
Patients present with intermittent or continuous,
body of the tendon has the poorest blood supply
low-grade, uni- or bilateral pelvic limb lameness,
while the calcaneal insertion has the most vascular-
usually before 1.5 years of age (Solanti et al., 2002).
ity (Gilbert et al., 2010); however, there are five
Findings include swelling present on either side of
avascular fibrocartilaginous zones located in the
the calcaneus as well as a distinct popping of the
distal tendon (Jopp & Reese, 2009). These fibrocar-
SDF tendon as it luxates when the tarsus is flexed.
 tilaginous zones are thought to be an adaptation to
Discomfort is present on direct palpation of the
 pressure and are not considered pathologic (Till-
tuber calcaneus. Patients with accompanying bur-
mann & Koch, 1995; Benjamin & Ralphs, 1998).
sitis may have swelling over the tuber calcaneus.
Diagnostics
Pathophysiology
Radiography, ultrasound, and MRI may be used to
Achilles tendon rupture is a common tendon injury
confirm physical exam findings.
in veterinary medicine. Laceration of the Achilles
Chapter 14 Disorders of the Pelvic Limb: Diagnosis and Treatment 289
may occur, and in some cases, a skin lesion may
Diagnostics
 not be evident. More often, avulsion of the gastroc-
nemius tendon is seen after heavy activity in
Radiography may demonstrate soft tissue swelling
mature sporting and working breeds. Labrador
at the level of the injury with possible avulsion of
Retrievers and Doberman Pinschers appear to be
bone fragments and/or mineralization of the
 overrepresented (Corr et al., 2010).
tendon (Figure 14.29). Diagnostic ultrasound can
An underlying degenerative process is sus-
identify partial tears and be used to monitor
pected; however, the definitive cause is not known.
healing (Kramer et al., 2001). MRI, commonly used
Both human and canine Achilles tendon ruptures
 to diagnose human Achilles tendon injuries (Sch-
tend to occur in the area of the fibrocartilaginous
weitzer & Karasick, 2000), is gaining favor in vet-
zones, which are thought to be areas of increased
 erinary medicine.
stress loading (Tillmarn & Koch, 1995; Benjamin &
Ralphs, 1998). Some drugs and disease processes
such as diabetes, endogenous or exogenous ste-
Treatment
roids (Hossain et al., 2008), and fluoroquinolones
(Lim et al., 2008) have been implicated.
Surgical correction is recommended for all Achilles
tendon avulsions and lacerations. Primary repair
 of gastrocnemius tendon avulsions is accomplished
via bone tunnels through the calcaneus and spe-
Clinical presentation
cialized suture patterms with nonabsorbable suture.
Additional support can be provided with mesh
Patients with acute gastrocnemius avulsion present
grafts as well as muscle and fascial flaps (Baltzer
non-weight-bearing to toe touching lame with
& Rist, 2009).
swelling at the calcaneus. Chronic injuries may
present with a weight-bearing plantigrade stance.
There may be digital flexion present due to
increased stress on the intact SDF tendon (Figure
14.28). Palpation may identify a fibrous thickening
at the site of injury.
Figure 14.28 This patient with chronic gastrocnemius
Figure 14.29  Achilles tendon avulsion—radiography may
avulsion presents with a weight-bearing plantigrade stance
demonstrate soft tissue swelling at the level of the injury
and digital flexion due to increased stress on the intact
with possible avulsion of bone fragments and/or
superficial digital flexor tendon.
mineralization of the tendon.
290  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
References
ALAM, M.R., LEE, J.1., KANG, H.S., KIM, 1S., PARK,
S.Y., LEE, K.C., & KIM, N.S. 2007. Frequency and dis-
0) saseo st :shop u uonexnt reiied jo uounq
to 2005). Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol, 20, 59-64.
ARNOCZKY, S.P. & MARSHALL, J.L. 1977. The cruciate
ligaments of the canine stifle: an anatomical and func-
tional analysis. Am ∫ Vet Res, 38, 1807-1814.
ARTHURS, G.1. & LANGLEY-HOBBS, S.J. 2006. Compli-
cations associated with corrective surgery for patellar
luxation in 109 dogs. Vet Surg, 35,559-566.
ASH, K., ROSSELLI, D., DANIELSKI, A., FARRELL, M.,
HAMILTON, M., & FITZPATRICK, N. 2012. Correc-
tion of craniodorsal coxofemoral luxation in cats and
small breed dogs using a modified Knowles technique
with the braided polyblend TightRope systems. Vet
Comp Orthop Traumatol, 25,54-60.
BALTZER, W.1. & RIST, P. 2009. Achilles tendon repair in
dogs using the semitendinosus muscle: surgical tech-
nique and short-term outcome in five dogs. Vet Surg,
Figure 14.30 Achilles tendon avulsion—a hinged tarsal
orthotic can be custom molded following surgery.
38,770-779.
BASHER, A.W.P, WALTER, M.C., & NEWTON, C.D.
1986. Coxofemoral luxation in the dog and cat. Vet
Surg, 15, 356-362.
BENJAMIN, M. & RALPHS, J.R. 1998. Fibrocartilage in
tendons and ligaments—-an adaptation to compressive
Postoperative immobilization of the joint is
load. / Anat, 193, 481494.
essential for several weeks to relive stress on the
BENNETT, D. & CAMPBELL, JR. 1979. Umusual soft
tendon and allow adequate healing. Immobiliza-
tissue orthopaedic problems in the dog. ∫ Small Anim
tion is performed with the tarsus in an extended
Pract, 20, 27-39.
position using a cast, splint, external skeletal fixa-
BERNARD, M.A. 1977. Superficial digital flexor tendon
tion, or transcalcaneal screw (Braden, 1974; Nielsen
injury in the dog. Car Vet §, 18, 105-107.
BERNARDE, A. 2010. Juvenile pubic symphysiodesis
& Pluhar, 2006). Alternatively, a hinged tarsal
orthotic can be custom molded following surgery
and juvenile pubic symphysiodesis associated with
-sAp 9 u aono ai-lous :noaul snauoad
(Figure 14.30). This allows for a gradual increase in
the range of motion of the tarsus following surgical
plastic puppies. Vet Surg, 39, 158-164.
BEVAN, JM. & TAYLOR, R.A. 2004. Arthroscopic release
repair. Function following surgical repair is gener-
of the medial femoropatellar ligament for canine
ally very good, despite the lack of normal tendon
medial patellar luxation. § Am Anim Hosp Assoc, 40,
architecture (Kramer et al., 2001).
321-330.
Tendon injuries with core lesions or incomplete
BOCKSTAHLER, B., KRAUTLER, C., HOLLER, P,
tears can be treated with conservative manage-
KOTSCHWAR, A., VOBORNIK, A., & PEHAM, C.
2012. Pelvic limb kinematics and surface electromyog-
ment. This may include physical rehabilitation and
raphy of the vastus lateralis, biceps femoris, and
immobilization, as well as regenerative medicine
(Chen et al., 2012). Ultrasound has been shown to
gluteus medius muscle in dogs with hip osteoarthritis.
Vet Surg, 41, 54-62.
increase tendon healing via increased expression of
BONE, D.L., WALKER, M., & CANTWELL, H.D. 1984.
COX-2, TGF-beta 1, collagen I, and collagen II
(Kosaka et al.,2011). Mesenchymal stem cell therapy
Traumatic coxofemoral luxation in dogs results of
repair. Vet Surg, 13, 263-270.
and/or platelet-rich plasma therapy has also
BOUDRIEAU, R.J. 2009. Tibial plateau leveling osteot
shown promising results in improving tendon
omy or tibial tuberosity advancement? Vet Surg, 38,
healing (Nourissat et al., 2010; Chen et al., 2012).
1-22.
Chapter 14 Disorders of the Pelvic Limb: Diagnosis and Treatment 291
BRADEN, T.D. 1974. Musculotendinous rupture of the
of hip dysplasia, elbow dysplasia and humeral head
exy ieuiau Susn redan pu sreedde sa
osteochondrosis in dog breeds in Belgium. Vet Rec,
only. Vet Med Small Arim Clin,69, 729-735.
163,654-658.
BREUR, G.J. & BLEVINS, W.E. 1997. Traumatic injury of
CORR, S.A., DRAFFAN, D., KULENDRA, E., CARMI-
the iliopsoas muscle in three dogs. / Am Vet Med Assoc,
CHAEL, S., & BRODBELT, D. 2010. Retrospective
210, 1631-1634.
study of Achilles mechanism disruption in 45 dogs.
BUOTE, N., FUSCO, J.,& RADASCH, R. 2009.Age, tibial
Vet Rec, 167, 407411.
plateau angle, sex, and weight as risk factors for con-
DASSLER, C. 2003. Canine hip dysplasia: diagmosis and
tralateral rupture of the cranial cruciate ligament in
nonsurgical treatment. In: Slatter, D.H. (ed.), Textbook
Labradors. Vet Surg, 38, 481489.
of Small Anirmal Surgery, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: W.B.
BURGESS, R., ELDER, S., MCLAUGHLIN, R., & CON-
Saunders, 2019-2020.
STABLE, P. 2010. In vitro biomechanical evaluation
DEMKO, J. & MCLAUGHLIN, R. 2005. Developmental
and comparison of FiberWire, FiberTape, OrthoFiber,
orthopedic disease. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
 and nylon leader line for potential use during extraar-
Pract, 35, 1111-1135.
ticular stabilization of canine cruciate deficient stifles.
DEMKO, J.L., SIDAWAY, B.K., THIEMAN, K.M., FOX,
Vet Surg, 39, 208-215.
D.B., BOYLE, C.R., & MCLAUGHLIN, R.M. 2006.
CADMUS, J.M, PALMER, R.H, & DUNCAN, C.G. 2011.
-gx juof d jo puaa rog uoezqeis por atason
The effect of preoperative planning method upon the
tion in dogs: 62 cases (2000-2005). / Am Vet Med Ass0c,
recommended tibial tuberosity advancement cage
229, 984-989.
size. Proceedings of the 38th Arnual Conference of the
DOORNINK, M.T, NIEVES, M.A., & EVANS, R. 2006.
Veterirary Orthopedic Society. March 5-12, 2011, Snow-
Evaluation of ilial screw loosening after triple pelvic
mass, CO, p. 43.
osteotormy in dogs: 227 cases (1991-1999). J Am Vet
CAMPBELL, C.A., HORSTMAN, C.L., MASON, D.R., &
Med Ass0c, 229, 535-541.
EVANS, R.B. 2010. Severity of patellar luxation and
DUELAND, R., BARTEL, D.L., & ANTONSON, E. 1977.
frequency of concormitant cranial cruciate ligament
 Force plate technique for canine gait analysis: prelimi-
rupture in dogs: 162 cases (2004-2007). ∫ Arm Vet Med
nary report on total hip and excision arthroplasty Ipro-
Ass0c, 236, 887-891.
ceedings]. Bull Hosp foint Dis, 38, 35-36.
CHEN, L., DONG, S.W., LIU, J.P., TAO, X., TANG, K.L.,
DUFF, S.R. & BENNETT, D. 1982. Hip luxation in small
& XU, J.Z. 2012. Synergy of tendon stem cells and
animals: an evaluation of some methods of treatment.
platelet-rich plasma in tendon healing. / Orthop Res,
Vet Rec, 111, 140-143.
30,991997
DUVAL, J.M., BUDSBERG, S.C., FLO, G.L., & SAM-
CHRISTOPHER, S.A.& COOK, J.L., 2011. Long-term
MARCO,J.L. 1999. Breed, sex, and body weight as risk
follow-up of cranial cruciate ligament techniques. Pro-
ceedings of the 38th Anrual Conference of the Veterinary
young dogs. I Arm Vet Med Assoc, 215, 811-814.
Orthopedic Society. March 5-12, 2011, Snowmass, CO,
DYCE,K.M.,SACK, W.O.,& WENSING,C.J.G.1996.The
p.55.
locomotor apparatus. In: Dyce, K.M., Sack, W.O.,
CONZEMIUS, M.G., EVANS, R.B., BESANCON, M.F.,
Wensing, C.J.G. (eds.), Textbook of Veterinary Anatomy,
GORDON, W.J., HORSTMAN, C.L., HOEFLE, W.D.,
2nd ed. Philidelphia: W.B. Saunders, 31-98.
NIEVES, M.A., & WAGNER, S.D. 2005. Efect of surgi-
EDWARDS, M.R., EGGER, E.L., & SCHWARZ, P.D. 1997.
cal technique on limb function after surgery for
Aseptic loosening of the femoral implant after
rupture of the cranial cruciate ligament in dogs. ∫ Am
VetMedAss0c,226,232-236.
10 dogs (1991-1995). f Am Vet Med Assoc, 211,
COOK, J.L., KUROKI, K.,VISCO, D., PELLETIER, J.P,
580-586.
SCHULZ, L., & LAFEBER, F.P. 2010a. The OARSI his-
EVANS, H.E. 1993a. Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 3rd ed.
topathology initiativerecommendations for histo-
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 349.
logical assessments of osteoarthritis in the dog.
EVANS, H.E. 1993b. Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 3rd ed.
Osteoarthritis Cartilage, 18(Suppl. 3), S66-S79.
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 364.
COOK, J.L., LUTHER, J.K., BEETEM, J., KARNES, J., &
EVERS, P, JOHNSTON, G.R., WALLACE, L.J., LIPOW-
COOK, C.R. 2010b. Clinical comparison of a novel
ITZ, A.J., & KING, V.L. 1997. Long-term results of
extracapsular stabilizationprocedure and tibialplateau
treatment of traumatic coxofemoral joint dislocation in
leveling osteotomy for treatment of cranial cruciate
dogs: 64 cases (1973-1992). / Arnt Vet Med Assoc, 210,
ligament deficiency in dogs. Vet Surg,39,315-323
59-64.
COOPMAN, F, VERHOEVEN, G.,S
SAUNDERS,
J
FINKELSTEIN, JA., ANDERSON, G.I., RICHARDS,
DUCHATEAU, L., & VAN BREE, H. 2008. Prevalence
R.R., & WADDELL, J.P 1991. Polyethylene synovitis
292   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
 following canine total hip arthroplasty: histomorpho-
HOLSWORTH, 1.G.,SCHULZ, K.S.,KASS, P.H., SCHER-
metric analysis. / Arthroptasty, 6(Suppl.), S91-S96.
RER, W.E., BEALE, B.S., COOK, J.L., & HORNOF, W.J.
FOX, S. M. 1991. Coxofemoral luxations in dogs. Compend
2005. Comparison of arthroscopic and radiographic
Contin Educ Pract Vet,13,1175-1196.
abnormalities in the hip joints of juvenile dogs with
GATINEAU, M., DUPUIS, J., BEAUREGARD, G., CHA-
hip dysplasia. / Am Vet Med Assoc, 227, 1087-1094.
RETTE, B.，BRETON，L.,BEAUCHAMP, G.，&
HOSCHEIT, L.P 1994. Luxation of the tendon of the
D'ANJOU, M.A. 2012. Palpation and dorsal acetabular
superficial digital flexor muscle in two dogs. Can Vet
rim radiographic projection for early detection of
∫ 35, 120-121.
 rs ia ps aaoadsoid e eisedsp d auu
HOSSAIN, M.A., PARK, J., CHOI, S.H., & KIM, G. 2008.
42-53.
 Dexamethasone induces apoptosis in proliferative
GIBBONS, S.E., MACIAS, C., TONZING, M.A.,
canine tendon cells and chondrocytes. Vet Comp Orthop
PINCHBECK, G.L.,& MCKEE, W.M. 2006. Patellar
Traumatol,21,337-342.
luxation in 70 large breed dogs. / Small Anirm Pract, 47,
HURT, R.J., MCABEE, K., & CAVANAUGH, R. 2011. Inci-
3-9.
 dence and risk factors of postliminary meniscal injury
GILBERT, PJ., SHMON, C.L., LINN, K.A., & SINGH, B.
following tibial tuberosity advancement in 116 dogs.
2010. Macroscopic and microvascular blood supply of
Proceedings of the 38th Annual Conference of the Veteri
the canine common calcaneal tendon. Vet Comp Orthop
rmry Orthopedic Society. March 5-12, 201l, Snowmass,
Traumatol, 23, 81-86.
CO, p. 44.
GOUGH,A.& THOMAS,A.2004.Breed Predispositions in
JOHNSON,A.L.,PROBST,C.W.,DECAMP,C.E.,ROSEN-
the Dog and Cat. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing.
STEIN, D.S, HAUPTMAN, JG., WEAVER, B.T.,
GRISNEAUX, E., DUPUIS, J., PIBAROT, P, BONNEAU,
& KERN, T.L. 2001. Comparison of trochlear block
N.H., CHARETTE, B., & BLAIS, D. 2003. Effects of
recession and trochlear wedge recession for canine
postoperative administration of ketoprofen or carpro-
patellar luxation using a cadaver model. Vet Surg, 30,
fen on short- and long-term results of femoral head
140-150.
and neck excision in dogs. ∫ Ar Vet Med Assoc, 223,
JOPP, 1. & REESE, S. 2009. Morphological and biome-
1006-1012.
chanical studies on the common calcaneal tendon in
GUASTELLA,D.B.,FOX,D.B.,&COOK,J.L.2008.Tibial
dogs. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatot, 22, 119-124.
plateau angle in four common canine breeds with
KEALY, R.D., LAWLER, D.F., BALLAM, JM, MANTZ,
 cranial cruciate ligament rupture, and its relationship
S.L., BIERY, D.N., GREELEY, E.H., LUST, G., SEGRE,
to meniscal tears. Vet Comp Orthop Traurmatol, 21,
M., SMITH, G.K., & STOWE, H.D. 2002. Effects of diet
125-128.
restriction on life span and age-related changes in
GUERRERO, T.G. & MONTAVON, PM. 2009. Zurich
dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc, 220, 1315-1320.
cementless total hip replacement: retrospective evalu-
KIEVES, N.R., LOTSIKAS, PJ., & CANAPP, S.O. 2011a.
ation of 2nd generation implants in 60 dogs. Vet Surg,
Hip toggle stabilization using the TightRope system
38, 70-80.
in 9 dogs. Proceedings of the 38th Anrual Conference of
GUERRERO, T.G., POZZI,A., DUNBAR, N., KIPFER, N.,
the Veterinary Orthopedic Society. March 5-12, 2011,
HAESSIG, M., BETH HORODYSKI, M., & MON-
Snowmass, CO, p. 64.
TAVON, PM. 2011. Effect of tibial tuberosity advance-
KIEVES, N.R., LOTSIKAS, PJ., & SHULZ,K.S.2011b. Hip
ment on the contact mechanics and the alignment of
  s o   s 
the patellofemoral and femorotibial joints. Vet Surg,
dogs. Proceedings of the 2011 American College of Veteri-
40, 839-848.
mry Surgeons Veterinary Symposium.Chicago, IL,p.e33.
HEFFRON, L.E. & CAMPBELL, J.R. 1978. Morphology,
KIM, S.E.,POZZI, A., BANKS, S.A., CONRAD, B.P, &
 histology and functional anatomy of the canine cranial
LEWIS, D.D. 2009. Effect of tibial tuberosity advance-
cuciate ligament. Vet Rec, 102,280-283.
ment on femorotibial contact mechanics and stifle
HERRON, M.R. 1979. Coxofemoral luxation in small
kinematics. Vet Surg, 38, 33-39.
animals. f Vet Orthop, 1, 30.
KIM, S.E., POZZI, A., BANKS, S.A., CONRAD, B.P., &
HOELZLER, M.G., MILLIS, D.L., FRANCIS, D.A.,&
LEWIS, D.D. 2010. Effect of cranial cruciate ligament
WEIGEL, J.P. 2004. Results of arthroscopic versus
deficiency, tibial plateau leveling osteotomy, and tibial
open arthrotomy for surgical management of cranial
tuberosity advancement on contact mechanics and
       
alignment of the stifle in flexion. Vet Surg, 39,
146-153.
363-370.
HOLSWORTH, 1.G.& DECAMP, C.E.2003. Coxofemoral
KIRKBY, K.A. & LEWIS, D.D.2012. Canine hip dysplasia:
luxation. In: Slatter, D. (ed.), Textbook of Small Animal
 reviewing the evidence for nonsurgical management.
Surgery, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 2002
Vet Surg, 41, 2-9.
Chapter 14 Disorders of the Pelvic Limb: Diagnosis and Treatment 293
KOSAKA, T., MASAOKA, T., & YAMAMOTO, K. 2011.
MANLEY, PA., ADAMS, W.M., DANIELSON, K.C.,
Possible molecular mechanism of promotion of repair
DUELAND, R.T, & LINN, K.A. 2007. Long-term
of acute Achilles tendon rupture by low intensity-
outcome of juvenile pubic symphysiodesis and triple
pulsed ultrasound treatment in a rat model. West
pelvic osteotomy in dogs with hip dysplasia. ∫ Arn Vet
Indian Med },60,263-268.
Med Ass0c, 230, 206-210.
KOWALESKI, M.P., BOUDRIEAU, R.J., & POZZI, A.
MAUTERER, J.V, Jr., PRATA, R.G., CARBERRY, C.A., &
2012. Stifle joint. In: Tobias, K.M. & Johnston, S.A.
SCHRADER, S.C. 1993. Displacement of the tendon of
(eds.),Veterinary Surgery Small Animatof Smalt Animat
the superficial digital flexor muscle in dogs: 10 cases
Surgery. St. Louis, MO: Saunders-Elsevier, 906-
(1983-1991).  Am Vet Med Ass0c, 203, 1162-1165.
998.
MCLAUGHLIN, R.M., Jr. 1995. Traumatic joint luxations
KRAMER, M., GERWING, M.,MICHELE, U., SCHIMKE,
in small animals. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract,
E., & KINDLER, S. 2001. Ultrasonographic examina-
25, 1175-1196.
tion of injuries to the Achilles tendon in dogs and cats.
MCNICHOLAS, W.T., Jr., WILKENS, B.E., & BARSTAD,
Small Anim Pract,42,531-535.
RD. 2000. Luxation of the superficial digital flexor
L'EPLATTENIER, H. & MONTAVON, P 2002a. Patellar
tendon in a cat. / Am Anim Hosp Assoc, 36, 174-176.
-uaaid pue juauseueu :sies pue shop u uonexn
MORGAN, J.P., VOSS, K., DAMUR, D.M., GUERRERO,
tion. Compendium,24, 292-299.
T., HAESSIG, M., & MONTAVON, PM. 2010. Correla-
L'EPLATTENIER, H. & MONTAVON, P 2002b. Patellar
tion of radiographic changes after tibial tuberosity
luxation in dogs and cats: pathogenesis and diagnosis.
advancement in dogs with cranial cruciate-deficient
Compendium,24,234-239.
stifles with functional outcome. Vet Surg, 39, 425-432.
LAFAVER, S., MILLER, N.A., STUBBS, W.P, TAYLOR,
NIELSEN,C. & PLUHAR,G.E.2005. Diagmosis and treat-
R.A., & BOUDRIEAU, R.J.2007.Tibial tuberosity
'sop zz ut sanfu uens aiosnu quni pu jo jua
advancement for stabilization of the canine cranial
Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol,18,247-253.
NIELSEN, C. & PLUHAR, G.E. 2006. Outcome following
nique, early results, and complications in 101 dogs. Vet
surgical repair of Achilles tendon rupture and com-
Surg, 36,573-586.
parison between postoperative tibiotarsal immobiliza-
LANGENBACH, A. & MARCELLIN-LITTLE, D.J. 2010.
tion methods in dogs: 28 cases (1997-2004). Vet Comp
Management of concurrent patellar luxation and
Orthop Traumatol, 19, 246-249.
cranial cruciate ligament rupture using modified tibial
NOURISSAT, G., DIOP, A., MAUREL, N., SALVAT, C.,
plateau levelling. I Smatl Anim Pract, 51, 97-103.
DUMONT, S., PIGENET, A., GOSSET, M., HOUARD,
LASCELLES, B.D., FREIRE, M., ROE, S.C., DEPUY, V.,
X., & BERENBAUM, F. 2010. Mesenchymal stem cell
SMITH, E.,& MARCELLIN-LITTLE, D.J. 2010. Evalu-
uoounf uopuan-auoq aaneu aul saeauasan Adeau
ation of functional outcome after BFX total hip replace-
after surgical repair in a degenerative rat model. PLoS
ment using a pressure sensitive walkway. Vet Surg, 39,
ONE, 5, e12248.
71-77.
OFF, W. & MATIS, U. 2010. Excision arthroplasty of the
LAZAR, T.P., BERRY, C.R., DEHAAN, J.J., PECK, JN., &
hip joint in dogs and cats. Clinical, radiographic, and
CORREA, M. 2005. Long-term radiographic compari-
son of tibial plateau leveling osteotomy versus extra-
VeterinaryFacultyof the Ludwig-Maximilians-
     
University of Munich, Germany, 1997. Vet Comp Orthop
rupture in the dog. Vet Surg, 34, 133-141.
Traumatol, 23, 297-305.
LEWIS, D.D., SHELTON, G.D., PIRAS, A., DEE, JF.,
PATRICELLI, A.J, DUELAND, R.T., ADAMS, W.M.,
ROBINS,G.M., HERRON, A.J., FRIES, C., GINN, PE.
FIALKOWSKI, J.P, LINN, K.A., & NORDHEIM, E.V.
HULSE, D.A., SIMPSON, D.L., & ALLEN, D.A. 1997.
2002. Juvenile pubic symphysiodesis in dysplastic
Gracilis or semitendinosus myopathy in 18 dogs. / Am
puppies at 15 and 20 weeks of age. Vet Surg, 31,
Anim Hosp Assoc, 33, 177-188.
435-444.
LIM, S., HOSSAIN, M.A., PARK, J., CHOI, S.H., & KIM,
PIERMATTEI, D.L., FLO, G.L., & DECAMP, C.E. 2006.
G. 2008. The effects of enrofloxacin on canine tendon
Handbook of SmallArimalOrthopedicsandFracture
cells and chondrocytes proliferation in vitro. Vet Res
Repair, 4th ed. St. Louis, MO: Saunders-Elsevier.
Commun,32,243-253.
POWERS, M.Y, KARBE, G.T., GREGOR, T.P., MCKEL
LISKA, W.D. 2010. Micro total hip replacement for dogs
VIE, P, CULP, W.T., FORDYCE, H.H., & SMITH, G.K.
and cats: surgical technique and outcomes. Vet Surg,
2010. Evaluation of the relationship between Orthope-
39,797-810
dic Foundation for Animals' hip joint scores and
LOPEZ, M.J. 2012. Advances in hip dysplasia. Vet Surg,
PennHIP distraction index values in dogs. ∫ Am Vet
41, 1.
Med Ass0c, 237, 532-541.
294   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
POZZI,A., HILDRETH, B.E.,3rd, & RAIALA-SCHULTZ
tion of the superficial digital flexor tendon in Shetland
PJ. 2008. Comparison of arthroscopy and arthrotomy
sheepdogs. Vet Ther, 3, 97-103.
 for diagnosis of medial meniscal pathology: an ex viv0
SPAIN, C.V., SCARLETT, JM., & HOUPT, K.A.
study. Vet Surg, 37, 749-755.
2004. Long-term risks and benefits of early-age
PRIDDY, N.H.,2nd, TOMLINSON, J.L., DODAM, J.R., &
gonadectomy in dogs. f Am Vet Med Assoc, 224,
HORNBOSTEL, J.E. 2003. Complications with and
380-387.
owner assessment of the outcome of tibial plateau lev-
STEIN, S. & SCHMOEKEL,H. 2008. Short-term and eight
eling osteotomy for treatment of cranial cruciate liga-
to 12 months results of a tibial tuberosity advancement
ment rupture in dogs: 193 cases (1997-2001). / Am Vet
as treatment of canine cranial cruciate ligament
Med Ass0c, 222, 1726-1732.
damage. / Small Anim Pract, 49, 398-404.
RAES, E.V, BERGMAN, E.H., VAN DER VEEN, H.,
STEISS, J.E. 2002. Muscle disorders and rehabilitation in
VANDERPERREN, K., VAN DER VEKENS, E., &
canine athletes. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract,
SAUNDERS, J.H. 2011. Comparison of cross-sectional
32, 267-285.
anatomy and computed tomography of the tarsus in
SWIDERSKI, JK. & PALMER, R.H. 2007. Long-term
horses. Am ∫ Vet Res, 72, 1209-1221.
outcome of distal femoral osteotomy for treatment of
REIF, U.,HULSE, D.A., & HAUPTMAN, J.G. 2002. Effect
combined distal femoral varus and medial patellar
of tibial plateau leveling on stability of the canine
luxation: 12 cases (1999-2004). / Armt Vet Med Ass0c,231,
cranial cruciate-deficient stifle joint: an in vitro study.
1070-1075.
Vet Surg, 31, 147-154.
TAYLOR, J. & TANGNER, C.H. 2007. Acquired muscle
REINKE, J.D. & MUGHANNAM, A.J. 1993. Lateral luxa-
contractures in the dog and cat. A review of the litera-
tion of the superficial digital flexor tendon in 12 dogs.
ture and case report. Vet Comrp Orthop Traumatol, 20,
IAm Anim Hosp Assoc, 29, 303-309.
79-85.
RIDGE, PA. 2006. Isolated medial meniscal tear in a
THIEMAN, K.M., TOMLINSON, J.L., FOX, D.B., COOK,
Border Collie. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol, 19, 110-
C., & COOK, J.L. 2006. Effect of meniscal release on
112.
rate of subsequent meniscal tears and owner-assessed
ROSE, S.A., BRUECKER, K.A., PETERSEN, S.W., &
outcome in dogs with cuciate disease treated with
UDDIN, N. 2012. Use of locking plate and screws for
tibial plateau
1 leveling osteotomy. Vet Surg, 35,
triple pelvic osteotomy. Vet Surg, 41, 114-120.
705-710.
ROUSH, JK., CROSS, A.R., RENBERG, W.C., DODD,
TILLMANN, B. & KOCH, S. 1995. Functional adaptation
C.E., SIXBY, K.A., FRITSCH, D.A., ALLEN, T.A.,
 processes of gliding tendons. Sportoerletz Sportschaden,
JEWELL, D.E., RICHARDSON, D.C., LEVENTHAL,
9,44-50.
PS., & HAHN, K.A. 2010. Evaluation of the effects of
TOWLE,H.A., GRIFFON, D.J.,THOMAS, M.W.,SIEGEL,
dietary supplementation with fish oil omega-3 fatty
A.M., DUNNING, D., & JOHNSON, A. 2005. Pre- and
acids on weight bearing in dogs with osteoarthritis.
postoperative radiographic and computed tomo-
IAm Vet Med Assoc, 236,67-73.
 graphic evaluation of dogs with medial patellar luxa-
RUNGE,J.J., KELLY, S.P., GREGOR, T.P., KOTWAL, S.,&
tion. Vet Surg,34, 265-272.
SMITH, G.K. 2010. Distraction index as a risk factor
VAUGHAN, L.C. 1979. Muscle and tendon injuries in
for osteoarthritis associated with hip dysplasia in four
dogs. / Small Anim Pract, 20, 711-736.
large dog breeds. } Small Anim Pract, 51, 264-269.
VERHOEVEN, G., FORTRIE, R., VAN RYSSEN, B., &
SCHWEITZER, M.E. & KARASICK, D. 2000. MR imaging
COOPMAN, F. 2012. Worldwide screening for canine
of disorders of the Achilles tendon. A§R Am ∫ Roent-
hip dysplasia: where are we now? Vet Surg, 41,
genot,175,613-625.
10-19.
SMITH, G.K., HILL, C.M., GREGOR, T.P, & OLSON, K.
WHELAN, M.F., MCCARTHY, R.J., BOUDRIEAU, R.J., &
1998. Reliability of the hip distraction index in two-
KRAUS, K.H. 2004. Increased sacral screw purchase
month-old German shepherd dogs. ∫ Am Vet Med
 minimizes screw loosening in canine triple pelvic oste-
Ass0c, 212, 1560-1563.
otomy. Vet Surg, 33, 609-614.
SMITH, G.K., LAWLER, D.F, BIERY, D.N., POWERS
WILKE, V.L., CONZEMIUS, M.G., KINGHORN, B.P,
M.Y,SHOFER,F,GREGOR,TP,KARBE,G.T,MCDONALD-
MACROSSAN, P.E., CAI, W., & ROTHSCHILD, M.F.
LYNCH, M.B., EVANS, R.H., & KEALY, R.D. 2012.
 2006. Inheritance of rupture of the cranial cruciate liga-
Chronology of hip dysplasia development in a cohort
ment in Newfoundlands. § Am Vet Med Assoc, 228,
of 48 Labrador retrievers followed for life. Vet Surg, 41,
61-64.
20-33.
WILKE, V.L., ZHANG, S., EVANS, R.B., CONZEMIUS
SOLANTI, S., LAITINEN, O., & ATROSHI, F. 2002.
M.G., & ROTHSCHILD, M.F. 2009. Identification of
 Hereditary and clinical characteristics of lateral luxa-
chromosomal regions associated with cranial cruciate
Chapter 14 Disorders of the Pelvic Limb: Diagnosis and Treatment 295
ligament rupture in a population of Newfoundlands.
YEADON, R., FITZPATRICK, N., & KOWALESKI, M.P.
Am / Vet Res, 70, 1013-1017.
2011. Tibial tuberosity transposition-advancement for
WILLIAMS, R.A. 2010. Isolated lateral meniscus tear in
treatment of medial patellar luxation and concomitant
a boxer. Vet Rec, 167, 419-420.
cranial cruciate ligament disease in the dog. Surgical
WITSBERGER, T.H., VILLAMIL, J.A., SCHULTZ, L.G.,
technique, radiographic and clinical outcomes. Vet
HAHN, A.W., & COOK, J.L. 2008. Prevalence of and
Comp Orthop Traumatot, 24, 18-26.
risk factors for hip dysplasia and cranial cruciate liga-
ment deficiency in dogs. ∫ Am Vet Med Assoc, 232,
1818-1824.
Evaluation and Rehabilitation
15
Options for Orthopedic
Disorders of the Pelvic Limb
Judy C. Coates, MEd, MSPT, CCRT
Summary
A comprehensive evaluation from a physical therapy perspective requires keen observational
and manual skills. Assessment of the pelvic limb entails careful examination of the toes, tarsus,
stifle, and hip as well as a scan of the spine to rule out referred pain. Elements of the exam
special tests. Abnormal findings are used to create a problem list. Interpretation of the history
and objective exam are considered in developing an assessment and physical therapy working
diagnosis. Functional and measurable goals are established and are used as benchmarks of
progress. Finally, a treatment plan is formulated to addresses the stated abnormal findings
relative to the preset goals. The plan will include frequency and duration of treatment as well
as the specific elements of the treatments. Treatment may include manual techniques such
as soft tissue techniques and joint mobilization, modal ities such as laser and electrical stimu-
lation, and therapeutic exercise such as proprioceptive and strengthening exercises. Frequent
reassessment is necessary in order to determine the effecti veness of the plan.
Evaluation of the pelvic limb
the owner provides information regarding the
 mechanism of injury (MOl) if applicable, aggravat-
A rehabilitation orthopedic assessment includes a
ing or relieving activities and observed functional
thorough patient history and a detailed examina-
deficits.
tion. The examiner must be aware of the patient's
 Achieving an accurate diagnosis requires 
past medical history, results of imaging, current
 strong knowledge of anatomy, fine-tuned manual
medications, and treatment to date. Subjectively,
 skills, keen observational skills, and a good under-
Carire Sports Medicine aned Rehabilitation, First Edition. Edited by M. Christine Zink and Janet B. Van Dyke.
@2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
296
Chapter 15 Evaluation and Rehabilitation Options for Orthopedic Disorders of the Pelvic Limb 297
(see Chapter 2). The hands-on elements of the exam
are performed next and include passive range of
motion (PROM), flexibility, palpation, joint play,
 and special tests. The exam can be performed with
the patient in lateral recumbency or in standing
depending on patient preference. Ideally, the
involved limb is evaluated last.
Posture
 Posture is observed in standing and sitting posi-
tions. Observing the patient in standing position,
the therapist should note foot placement, top line
(lordosis or kyphosis), head and tail position,
balance of weight bearing (WB) (weight shift
forward or backward, left or right), and any off-
weighting of a limb (Figure 15.1). WB can be clas-
sified as nonweight bearing (NWB), toe-touch
weight bearing (TTWB), partial weight bearing
(PWB), or full weight bearing (FWB). Amount of
Figure 15.1  Abnormal weight bearing. Dog is off-loading
WB can also be documented with an approximate
the right pelvic limb.
percentage (e.g., PWB, approximately 60%). The
patient is observed for the symmetry of the sitting
posture, with a normal sit considered "square."
standing of biomechanics. When examining the
Positioning of all limbs, range of motion (ROM) of
pelvic limb, it is important to scan the spine and
the pelvic limbs and WB are noted. For example, a
pelvis to rule out referred pain from these proximal
 patient with a stifle injury will commonly sit with
segments. A brief scan will include spinai AROM,
the involved limb in hip abduction and external
assessment of pelvic aligmment, soft tissue palpa-
rotation, and decreased stifle and/or tarsal flexion
tion, and joint provocation testing. Additionally,
(Figure 15.2).
conscious proprioception is tested, and gait is
observed for possible neurologic signs.
Function
A functional assessment examines the patient's
Elements of an orthopedic exam of the
activities of daily living. The assessment will
pelvic limb
depend on the patient's job and condition. There-
fore, the components included in assessment of a
Organizing the exam
tetraparetic patient will be quite different than
those of a postsurgical cranial cruciate ligament
Sequencing of the exam is driven by patient comfort.
(CCL) patient or an agility patient with postevent
At the first appointment, building trust is essential.
lameness. Function is assessed by observation of
Relaxed, friendly commurication with the owner
specific activities. Analysis of the movement re-
will help put the patient at ease. The patient is free 
quires a good understanding of functional anatomy
to explore the new surroundings while the thera-
and biomechanics. Elements of a functional exam
pist obtains historical information from the owner.
may include stand-to-sit, sit-to-down, and sternal-
This author prefers to begin the exam with the
to-lateral recumbency transfers as well as the
hands-off elements of the evaluation, allowing
reverse of each. Proper sequencing, timing, ROM,
the patient additional time to gain trust of the
and strength are required to complete each transi-
examiner. These elements indlude observation of
a m ssm pu un aeddde u
 posture, functional transfers, strength, and gaiting
reflected in compensations.
298Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Figure 15.3 Three-legged standing test for general strength
of the right pelvic limb.
against manual resistance. Isolating specific mus-
cles, as done in the human assessment, is not pos-
sible with the canine patient; however, specific
 groups of muscles can be assessed. Canine strength
Figure 15.2  Abnormal sitting posture. Dog is sitting with
is tested by placing the patient in specific test posi-
left stifle extended and abducted.
tions of varying difficulty. Grading the test depends
on the patient's ability to maintain a static, sym-
Gait analysis
metric posture. The therapist makes note of com-
The difference between a lameness exam and gait
pensatory movement related to weakness or pain.
 si a u aq s sie
Information regarding specific muscle function is
 obtained by palpating individual muscle groups
evaluates gait with an eye for functional impair-
for intensity of contraction while the test is being
ments and compensatory movement. The patient
Ja roy aiendoidde se) neo yoea u paaiasqo si
performed. Strength tests are performed bilaterally
for comparison. For accurate, reproducible testing.
current condition), as well as on stairs, inclines,
declines, and while moving in circles in both direc.
 it is essential that the patient's head be positioned
tions. The patient is viewed from the front, the
appropriately. In the case of pelvic limb testing.
back, and each side. The stance and swing phases
treats are offered such that the head is elevated and
of gate are observed for appropriate ROM at each
the weight is shifted to the hindquarters. Strength
joint, proper muscle firing, and for compensatory
 can be graded and documented as poor (inability
movement. For example, if a patient is limited in
to maintain the standard test position), fair (ability
stifle extension on the right pelvic limb, the ipsilat-
to maintain the standard test position), and good
eral swing phase of gait will be decreased. The
(ability to maintain the advanced test position).
One example is the three-leg stand (Figure 15.3).
side bending to the right in the patient's attempt to
To test the general strength of the right pelvic limb,
lengthen the swing phase. Further evaluation is
the therapist unweights the left pelvic limb by
necessary to determine if the stifle is limited by
holding the dorsal surface of the pes. The patient's
swelling, muscle, joint capsule, or nerve.
head must be elevated to insure WB in the hind-
quarters. The therapist will observe for the patient's
ability to maintain normal aligrment of the stand-
Strength
ing leg. Specific muscles are palpated, such as ham-
Strength testing in humans is performed by asking
 strings, quadriceps, and gluteals, noting the extent
uoisod siads e ui qul e piou oi juaed a
of contraction.
Chapter 15 Evaluation and Rehabilitation Options for Orthopedic Disorders of the Pelvic Limb 299
Figure 15.5  Measuring the circumference of the thigh
using a Gulick tape.
PROM
Restricted ROM at one segment often leads to com-
pensatory increased ROM at a related segment. As
Figure 15.4  Diagonal leg standing test.
discussed in Chapter 6, the options for treating
hypermobility are fewer and less desirable than the
options for treating hypomobility. Therefore, it is
Diagonal leg standing is a more challenging test
important to identify hypomobility in its early
for the patient who demonstrates good strength on
 stages before resulting compensatory hypermobil-
the three-leg stand. The assistant unweights a diag-
ity occurs. Thisis accomplished by assessing PROM.
onal pair of legs, encouraging the patient to support
PROM is performed by moving the joint through
full body weight through the standing limbs
its available ROM, adding overpressure and deter-
(Figure 15.4). To ensure that the pelvic limbs spe-
 mining the end-feel. If a restriction is noted, ROM
cifically are being assessed, the patient is offered a
is measured with a goniometer and compared to
treat to elevate the head and shift the weight to the
the contralateral side. The measurement of the
pelvic limbs. The therapist observes alignment,
uninjured limb is used as normal for that patient.
palpates each muscle group, and documents find-
The end-feel of the restricted joint is determined.
ings as above. With different head positioning
 This information is used to identify the limiting
(head pointing down), this test can also be used to
structure. The therapist can then choose the proper
 assess front limb strength and core stability.
treatment to affect that particular structure.PROM
Because atrophy may be associated with weak-
is assessed throughout the toes, tarsus, stifle, and
ness, additional information regarding strength
hip. Except for the hip, flexion and extension are
can be obtained with girth measurements.
A
the primary motions to be evaluated. At the hip.
Gulick is used to measure the circumference of
internal and external rotation and abduction and
both thighs (Figure 15.5). This baseline information
adduction can be examined. For more detailed
provides the therapist with a means of monitoring
descriptions of assessment of PROM, refer to
progress. Gulick measurements can be performed
Chapter 5 and Chapter 6.
in a weight-bearing or non-weight-bearing posi-
tion. Because thigh circumference measurements
Flexibility
vary according to the test position, the therapist
must use the same test position for follow-up
Movement can be limited by muscle tightmess;
measurements.
therefore, it is important to assess flexibility and
300  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Table 15.1 Flexibility testing
Table 15.2 Hind limb joint play assessment
Muscle(s)
Stretched position
Joint
Assessment glides/traction
Gluteal 
Hip and stifle flexion
Coxofemoral joint
Distraction
Stifle: Tibiofemoral joint
Illiopsoas
Caudal, cranial, distraction
Hip extension and internal
Tarsus: Talocrural joint
Caudal, cranial, distraction
rotation
Pes: Phalangeal joints
Dorsal, ventral, distraction
Biceps femoris
Hip flexion and adduction,
stifle extension, tarsal flexion
Semimembranosus/
Hip flexion with slight 
semitendinosus
abduction, stifle extension
ity is compared to the contralateral side. Important
structures to assess include the gluteal, piriformis,
Gracilis
Hip flexion with abduction,
 tensor fascia latae, iliopsoas, sartorius, quadriceps,
stifle extension
hamstring, gracilis, adductor, pectineus, gastrocne-
Sartorius/rectus
Hip extension, stifle flexion
mius, superficial digital flexor, deep digital flexor,
femoris
and cranial tibial muscles, as well as the sacrotu-
Adductor/pectineus
Hip abduction
berous ligament, stifle medial collateral ligament
Quadriceps
Stifle flexion
(MCL) and lateral collateral ligament (LCL), pop-
liteal lymph node, patellar ligament, parapatellar
Gastrocnemius/
Stifle extension, tarsal
region, stifle joint line, possible medial buttress,
calcaneal tendon
flexion
calcaneal tendon, long digital extensor tendon,
Superficial digital
Stifle extension, tarsal
tarsal MCL and LCL, sesamoids, and digital joints.
flexor
flexion, digital extension
Joint play
It is beyond the scope of this chapter to train
determine whether it is contributing to the loss of
 motion. Muscle flexibility is assessed by placing
 the reader to perform arthrokinematic assessment
glides, as they require hands-on training. These
the limb in the position opposite to the action(s) of
glides are used to assess for normal joint play
 the muscle being tested. Results are documented
movement at each joint. Normal arthrokinematic
as normal or minimally, moderately, or severely
motion is required for normal osteokinematic
restricted. A goniometer can be used to quantitate.
This technique is described in detail in Chapter
motion to occur. If a restriction is noted, it is docu-
mented on a 0-6 scale. The reader is referred to
6. Pelvic limb muscles that should be evaluated
Chapter 6 for a detailed description of joint play
include the gluteals, iliopsoas, sartorius, ham-
assessment. Table 15.2 provides a list of the most
 string group (biceps femoris, semimembranosus,
commonly used assessment glides for the pelvic
semitendinosus, gracilis), sartorius, quadriceps,
limb. Figure 15.6 shows an example of a cranial
adductor,
pectineus,
 gastrocnemius/calcanean
glide of tibia on stabilized femur.
tendon, and superficial digital flexor muscle (Table
15.1).
Special tests
Palpation
In addition to the special tests described for each
Palpating for abnormal or painful tissues is per-
the following tests.
formed after PROM and flexibility testing have
been completed. For patient comfort, it is impor-
The McMurray test
tant to palpate with the pads rather than the tip of
the fingers. In a thorough palpation exam, the ther-
The McMurray test is a human evaluative tech-
apist assesses muscles,
, ligaments, tendons,
pue
nique used to assess for meniscal tears. The action
joint lines for pain, heat, swelling, tone,
texture,
of this test is designed to compress a potential
and trigger points (see Chapter 6). Any abnormal-
 meniscal tear, with a positive result indicated by
Chapter 15 Evaluation and Rehabilitation Options for Orthopedic Disorders of the Pelvic Limb 301
limb disorders in canine patients. The goal of
physical therapy is to maximize function. Normal
musculoskeletal function requires normal ROM,
flexibility,
strength, and muscle recruitment
in the absence of pain. Rehabilitation treatment
techniques address one or more of the following
conditions: pain (inflammation), hypomobility,
hypermobility, and weakmess or altered muscle
recruitment. There are many options for address-
ing each of these conditions; thus, skilled treatment
 lies in the nuance of introducing and discharging
the most efficient treatment techniques according
to the stage of recovery and the individual response.
Keys to successful outcomes are
Figure 15.6  Cranial glide of the tibia on a stabilized femur.
（1）
The ability to extrapolate the why behind the
abnormal findings
pain, a springy end-feel, and/or an audible clunk.
(2)
 The art of configuring the most effective treat-
To test the medial meniscus, the therapist starts
ment elements for the particular stage of
with the stifle in flexion. The stabilizing hand is on
recovery and patient needs
the stifle, palpating the joint line, and the other
（3）
 The skillful delivery of manual techniques,
hand grasps the tarsal-metatarsal region. The distal
therapeutic exercise, and modalities
hand is used to externally rotate the tibia. While
(4)T
 The ability to change or advance the treatment
maintaining tibial external rotation, the proximal
plan in accordance with patient response on
hand applies a valgus stress to the stifle as the joint
 ongoing reassessment
is moved into extension. This can be reversed to
(5)
 Owner education and home exercise program
test the lateral meniscus.
(HEP).
Long digital extensor subluxation
Prior to initiating treatment, a problem list is devel-
oped consisting of the abnormal findings uncov-
Long digital extensor subluxation is tested by pal-
ered in the examination. A working diagnosis is
pating the tendon of origin while flexing and
 determined, and clearly stated functional goals are
extending the stifle. This disorder can be mistaken
established. Treatment is directed toward resolving
for patellar luxation, as the patient will present
the issues on the problem list as they relate to
with an intermittent skipping gait.
the functional goals and the working diagnosis.
 Success is measured by achieving objective prog-
Superficial digital flexor tendon luxation
ress toward the goals.
Superficial digital flexor tendon luxation is tested
As mentioned in Chapter 13, physical therapy
by flexing the tarsus while palpating the tuber cal-
treatment employs the use of manual techniques,
caneus. A positive test reveals a popping or sliding
therapeutic exercise, and modalities. Initially, pain
of the tendon to the medial or lateral aspect of the
 must be addressed, allowing the patient to tolerate
tuber depending upon which retinaculum has
progression of the treatment plan. Pain reduction
been stretched or ruptured.
may involve medical management, modalities, or
increasing ROM and/or flexibility. Because the
ultimate goal is to maximize function, the thera-
Treatment options for disorders of the
pist must walk the fine line of increasing the dif-
pelvic limb
inflammation. Speed of recovery often depends
This section will describe the physical therapist's
 on the efficiency with which the therapist initi-
approach to treating commonly diagnosed pelvic
 ates and discharges elements of the treatment.
302  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Table 15.3 Therapeutic exercise variables
Common findings on physical therapist's
evaluation
Amount of weight
NWB, PWB, FWB
bearing
 Tenderness to palpation of hip musculature
 Overactive (hypertonic) pectineus muscle
Type of contraction
Isometric, concentric,
Decreased/painful hip extension
eccentric
Decreased flexibility—iliopsoas, pectineus
Treatment plane
Sagittal, frontal, transverse
Atrophy of gluteals and thigh muscles
Effect of gravity
Assisted, neutral, resisted
Altered transfers and gait
Adults may appear slow to rise from lateral
Surface
Flat, unstable, uneven,
inclined, declined
recumbency or sitting, using the forelimbs to
pull themselves into the standing position;
Resistance
None, weights, therapy
during gait, diminished stride length and
band 
stance time is noted on the involved side(s).
Intensity,frequency.
Number of repetitions,
how often, for how long
 Transfers, gait, and activity may be painful
and duration
 Puppies may require multiple attempts to get
from sit to stand and display poor muscle
control in transitioning between gaits
Coxofemoral joint laxity (puppies)
A reassessment at each visit is necessary to deter-
Positive hip subluxation test(s) (puppies).
mine the appropriate blend of modalities, manual
work, and therapeutic exercise for the patient on
that particular day. Every element of the treatment
Treatment goals: Adult
plan must be justified for the patient at the specific
Decrease pain
time of treatment.
 Decrease hypertonicity of pectineus
As pain and mobility issues are resolved, thera-
Maintain/improve ROM
peutic exercise becomes the primary focus. Impor-
Increase flexibility—iliopsoas, pectineus
tant considerations for initiating and progressing a
 Increase strength—gluteals and thigh
strengthening program are listed in Table 15.3.
 Increase joint proprioception
The following section includes treatment infor-
 Improve core stabilization
mation for several common pelvic limb orthopedic
conditions. Rather than offering treatment proto-
 Manage weight
Develop HEP.
cols for the conditions below, it is the author's
 intent to highlight the clinical findings and treat-
-nadsiad Adena reisud e w areunn pua 
Treatment
tive. With this information, the therapist can create
Treatment options will depend on patient age,
an individualized treatment plan on a per case
current level of function, and extent of arthritis.
basis. Detailed techniques and exercises will be
provided for the first diagmosis only. Thereafter,
additional techniques specific to each disorder will 
Treatment rationale
be mentioned.
● Puppy. Slow the progression of growth and
weight gain, modify activities, and strengthen
Hip dysplasia
hip stabilizers and core musculature. Address
pain, if present.
 Adult. Address pain. Modify activities, weight
This commonly diagnosed, multifactorial disease
management, strengthen hip stabilizers and
is well described in Chapter 14. The techniques for
core musculature; maintain/improve ROM and
applying manual therapies, physical modalities,
flexibility.
therapeutic exercises, and aquatic therapy
are
described in detail in the respective chapters earlier
A multimodal approach to the osteoarthritis (OA)
in this text.
patient should be established and  frequently
Chapter 15 Evaluation and Rehabilitation Options for Orthopedic Disorders of the Pelvic Limb 303
reevaluated. Human research emphasizes the
Joint Mobilization. Coxofemoral joint distrac-
 importance of skilled manual work, suggesting
tion traction; grade III.
that it is more effective than exercise in treating hip
function and pain (Hoeksma et al., 2004). The
Increase flexibility
authors of this study correlated high intra-articular
 Passive Stretch. liopsoas and pectineus
pressure due to restriction of the joint capsule in
 STM. Cross fiber and effleurage to iliopsoas
OA with pain intensity and reduced hip ROM.
Their study found manual therapy (manipulation
and pectineus
and stretching) aimed at increasing the elasticity of
Increase strength
the joint capsule and surrounding muscles most
'NOy luseau pue ued Sonpan u aannaa
Neuromuscular
ElectricalS
Stimulation
Additional research in humans showed that aquatic
(NMES). Gluteals, quadriceps, hamstrings
therapy had some short-term benefits for the OA
Therapeutic Exercise. Gluteals, quadriceps,
patient but no long-term effects were demonstrated
hamstrings, core stabilization
(Bartels et al., 2009). Therefore, aquatic therapy
Starting with low-level, low-impact exercises
may be best used in the early stages of rehabilita-
for short periods of time (such as partial sit-to-
tion. An individualized approach to treatment of
stands or isometric therapy band exercises);
this common condition must entail frequent modi-
increase intensity of the exercise as tolerated.
fication as the animal progresses through the treat-
Aquatic Therapy. See Chapter 9.
ment process.
Treatment by goal
● Joint Compressions. Emphasis on the hip joint
in NWB and WB positions
See the chapters covering Modalities (Chapter 7),.
Proprioception Exercises. Wobble board exer-
saa pue (g ad) A i
cises or walking over ground poles, increasing
Exercise (Chapter 8) for details regarding imple-
the difficulty level as strength permits.
mentation of the following treatments.
Reach functional goals per individual patient's needs
Pain management
 Rehabilitation programs vary greatly according to
●Laser
the specific needs and goals of the individual
●
Heat
 patient and the patient's response to therapy. Long-
鲁
 Joint compressions at hip performed in slight
term functional goals are broken down into their
hip abduction and flexion
 integral components and addressed in small incre-
 Grades I, Ⅱ coxofemoral joint distraction
ments. For instance if the long-term goal is to walk
Transcutaneous electrical neuromuscular stim-
up four steps to get into the house, the therapist
ulation (TENS).
must consider the amourt of ROM and the particu-
lar muscle flexibility required at each joint in order
Decrease hypertonicity of pectineus
to accomplish the task. Additionally, the specific
muscular demands of key muscle groups must be
Ischemic compression
analyzed and addressed. In this case, the gluteals
 and quadriceps must contract concentrically as the
Maintain/improve range of motion
patient lifts the body weight onto a step. Accord-
● PROM. All motions; emphasis on hip exten-
ingly, the therapist will design a program that
sion as tolerated
emphasizes concentric use of these muscles in an
● Soft Tissue Mobilization (STM). To promote
 environment that is less challenging. An example
circulation, increase ROM restricted by soft
would be sit-to-stand exercises on level ground
tissues, with particular attention to the gluteals
with the assistance of NMES, followed by sit-to-
quadriceps, hamstrings, and paraspinals; ad-
stand exercises on an incline, followed by walking
dress trigger points and myofascial restrictions
uphill and performing small step-ups.
304   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Weight management
on pelvic limbs, no jogging until growth plates
This is a common issue with this patient group.
have closed, and minimize stair climbing). Other
recommendations would include providing a soft
 Techniques for weight management are discussed
surface for sleeping and creating surfaces with
in Chapter 4.
traction (carpeting) to prevent falls.
An HEP is designed for each patient. Pictures
Home program
and written instructions of the HEP are provided
for the owner. It is extremely important for the
 Owner education will include lifestyle manage-
therapist to not only instruct the owner in the
 ment information such as weight management and
home program, but to observe the owner practic-
 activity counseling (no jumping up, no standing up
 ing the program while still in the clinic.
Case Study 15.1 Hip pain with secondary muscle impairments
Signalment: 6 y.o. F/S Colden Retriever
Goals:
Presenting complaint: RH lameness; refuses to jump
 Improved symmetry in gait in 6 weeks
into car or onto bed.
Symmetrical sit-to-stand transfers in 6 weeks
 Ability to walk up 10 stairs with minimal difficulty in
Physical Exam WNL Except:
8 weeks
Gait. Shortened stride length and stance tirme of RPL on
Return to 1-hour hikes in 10 weeks
moderate incline and clockwise circles; patient stops
frequently to sit down
Transfers. Appears mildly painful and slow with sit-to-
Treatment:
stand and recumbent-to-sit
(1)Modalities
Atrophy. Minirmal to moderate R gluteals and thigh
Laser to R gluteal region, coxofemoral joint
muscles
region, and pectineus
Palpation. Tender  R middle gluteal and pectineus
(2)  Manual Therapy
muscles
Crade Ill coxofemoral joint distractions
PROm. R hip extension 135°
 Passive stretch of R iliopsoas, pectineus, sarto-
Hexibility. Moderate tightness of the iliopsoas, pectin-
rius, and medial harmstrings muscles with sirmul-
eus, sartorius, and medial hamstrings
taneous STM of the muscle
 Strength. Fair grade with three-leg stand test with inad-
 STM throughout hip and thigh
equate contraction of gluteals, quadriceps, and ham-
 Centle hip extension PROM
 strings; poor grade with diagonal leg lift
(3)
 Therapeutic Exercise:
Joint Play. Grade 2+ R coxofemoral hip traction
Hip strengthening (gluteals, biceps femoris,
quadriceps)
Assessment:
Ermphasize UwTM for first 2-3 weeks, and then
R hip pain, restriction, and weakness likely due to
 progress to land-based exercise.
early onset R hip OA
Include isometric, concentric, and eccentric
exercises, gradually increasing the level of dif-
Problem List:
ficulty, frequency, and intensity.
Decreased R hip extension
(4)  HEP
Tenderness at middle gluteal and pectineus
 Instruct owner in gentle PROM and stretching
Tight R iliopsoas and pectineus 
exercises as well as a detailed progressive
Weak R gluteals, quadriceps, harmrstrings
strengthening programt.
WB senisitive
● Initiate core stabilization as tolerated.
Decreased endurance
Chapter 15 Evaluation and Rehabilitation Options for Orthopedic Disorders of the Pelvic Limb 305
Femoral head ostectomy
Backward walking
 Side stepping
Common findings on physical
 Incline and zigzag walking
therapist's evaluation
OStep-ups.
●Atrophy throughout the gluteal muscles, ham-
strings, and quadriceps
Patellar luxation: Grades I-Il medial
 Decreased and painful hip extension PROM
luxation; nonsurgical
Decreased
flexibility
(iliopsoas,
sartorius,
hamstrings)
Common findings on physical
● Altered gait (PWB, decreased stance phase of
therapist's evaluation
 gait, difficulty with circle walking).
●
 Abnormal patellar stability test
pe d ou aal uo ro/pue  auddis
Treatment rationale
stifle extension
Encourage immediate postoperative WB.
Thigh atrophy
 Emphasize hip extension ROM, proprioceptive
 Compensatory tightmess of sartorius, quadri-
training, and hip and core strengthening.
ceps, hamstrings, hip flexors 
?
 Compensatory posture (increased flexion of
lumbosacral, coxofemoral, and stifle joints).
Treatment goals
● Decrease pain
Treatment rationale
Promote WB
 Increase hip PROM
Treatment will emphasize stretching of the medial
 Improve proprioception
soft tissues and strengtherning of the lateral muscu-
 Increase strength of hip musculature
lature in an effort to redirect the pull on the patella.
 Core stabilization.
Treatment goals
Treatment by goal
 Decrease pain
unas eiseldsap du rad-ued aseana 
Increase flexibility of the medial soft tissues
 Promote WB. For example:
 Joint compressions (WB and NWB positions)
tors, sartorius, and iliopsoas)
Weight-shifting exercises
a go ouans aseau 
lateralf
thigh
Slow walking
musculature
 Cavaletti walking
 Normalize gait
●Increase hip extension PROM
 Develop home program.
 PROM into hip extension with STM of the
 rectus femoris, sartorius, and iliopsoas
Treatment by goal
● Improve proprioception. For example:
Pain management
Ladder walking
As per hip dysplasia section.
 Wobble board, fit disc, cushion (front limbs
on piece of equipment)
Increase flexibility
●Increase strength of hip
musculature. For
example:
●Passive stretch and STM of the sartorius, medial
NMES
quadriceps, medial hamstrings, adductor, and
 Three-leg stands
iliopsoas with manual stabilization of the
 Therapy band exercises
patella.
306   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Case Study 15.2  Medial patellar maltracking with secondary muscle impairments
Signalment: 2 y.o. F/N Jack Russell Terrier; Agility
●Atrophy/weakness L thigh
competitor
● Tight L semimembranosus, gracilis
Presenting Complaint: LPL hiking gait lamenes; hesi-
Goal:
tant to jump into car or onto bed.
Normal gait within 6 weeks
Evaluation: Physical exar WNL except for:
Treatment:
1ll sapeiel isal Alaeis iellaied aaisod "sisal leioads
(1)  Manual Therapy
medial laxity)
 Passive stretch with STM at semimembranosus,
Gait. Intermittent skipping noted particularly with clock-
gracilis, adductors
wise and counterclockwise walking and in transitions
 Passive stretch of the sartorius with manual
from trot to canter
patellar stabilization 
Atrophy. Minimal to moderate at L quadriceps and ham
STM with lateral strokes to the patellar ligarmrent
strings: Culick measurement: LPL 24.5 crr; RPL 25 cm
and the musculotendinous junction of the
Hlexibility. Moderate tightness of L sermimembranosus,
quadriceps
gracilis, sartorius
(2)
 Therapeutic Exercise
 Progressive strengthening exercises of the hip
Assessment: Patellar maltracking (medially) with associ-
abductors such as side stepping in varying
 ated flexibility and strength issues. Treatment will focus
 degrees of front-end elevation
on stretching the mredial stifle mrusculature and strength-
(3)
HEP
ening the lateral musculature.
 Instruct owner in treatment described above.
Problem list:
 Patellar maltracking
128 8uddis
●Passive stretch and STM of the patellar liga-
treated surgically; however, some owners opt for
ment and musculotendinous junction of quad-
conservative management due to health and finan-
riceps, mobilizing tissues laterally.
cial concerns. The success of conservative manage-
ment depends on the extent of the tear and whether
Increase strength
or not the meniscus is involved.
 Lateral thigh musculature (e.g., side stepping
Stiflejoint biology and biomechanics are key con-
tributors to CCL disease and must be addressed in
on flat and elevated surfaces)
rehabilitation. Specifically,jointbiologyisad dressed
with modalities to decrease pain, promote tissue
HEP
healing, and reduce inflammation and swelling.
 Owner is instructed in performing the stretching
 Laser, TENS, and grades I-II joint compressions are
and strengthening exercises.
effective tools for achieving these goals. Biome-
addressed with therapeutic exercises to strengthen
Cranial cruciate ligament
the dynamic stabilizers of the stifle and the core
(CCL) insufficiency
stabilizers. Retraining the proprioceptive feedback
 loop is essential after disruption of a ligament.
Disruption of the CCL is the single most common
Treatment goals for surgical and nonsurgical
canine orthopedic injury. The condition can be
CCL rehabilitation are generally quite similar with
either acute or chronic. Typically, CCL tears are
the exception of important differences during the
Chapter 15 Evaluation and Rehabilitation Options for Orthopedic Disorders of the Pelvic Limb 307
early stages of rehabilitation. With post-TPLO and
Normalize ROM. Grade III stifle joint distraction,
TTA surgeries, early treatment must allow for
Grades III-IV caudal glide of the talus, PROM
proper bone healing by promoting WB in the sagit-
(emphasis on stifle flexion and extension and tarsal
tal plane, and promoting healing with the use of
flexion), walking over high cavaletti poles per-
modalities and activity restriction. Early rehabilita-
formed at mid-tibial height
tion of the nonsurgical case will depend on the
aq u aixa onaa mui a jo mo
Normalize flexibility. Muscle stretching with si-
accelerated as long as pain and inflammation are
not increased.
multaneous STM of the muscle being stretched
(hamstrings, gastrocnemius, sartorius, iliopsoas)
Nonsurgical rehabilitation
Achieve FWB fait. A few examples of progressive
Common findings on physical therapist's eualuation
exercises are
Positive cranial drawer and/or cranial tibial
Joint compressions (NWB and WB positions)
thrust test
Weight-shifting exercises
NWB-PWB gait
Low cavaletti walking
Abnormal sitting posture (hip abducted and
Slow walking with head elevated
stifle partially extended)
Swelling
Circle walking (involved leg to the inside)
Three-leg stands; lifting the uninvolved pelvic
ROM limited and painful at end range stifle
limb; head must be elevated
flexion and extension
 Balance activities such as placing front legs on
Compensatory tightmess of gastrocnemius,
a wobble board.
hamstrings, sartorius, and iliopsoas
Disuse atrophy throughout the involved pelvic
limb.
Muscle strengthening. Initial use of NMES for
muscle reeducation of the quadriceps, glu-
Treatment goals
teals, and hamstrings performed in NWB or WB
positions.
● Decrease pain and inflammation
Example exercises:
 Normalize ROM
Normalize flexibility
● Gluteals, quadriceps, and hamstring muscles:
鲁
Achieve FWB gait
 Sit-to-stand transfers while facing uphill, back-
 Strengthen quadriceps, hamstrings, gluteals
ward walking up an incline, and step-ups.
 Promote core stabilization
●Core stabilization: Diagonal leg lifts with and
 Develop HEP.
without perturbations, side sit-ups, and weave
pole walking.
Treatment rationale
●Reflexive hamstring training: Perturbations
with the involved limb on a fit disc with the
A nonsurgical, partially torn CCL warrants par-
 front limbs elevated, and backward walking on
ticular attention to reflexive training of the ham-
 a foam mattress.
strings with advanced proprioceptive work. In so
●Advanced proprioceptive training: Walking
doing, the hamstrings can substitute for the dys-
backward over a ladder, side stepping over
functional CCL.
cavaleti poles, and standing on a physioball.
Treatment by goal
Develop home exercise program (HEP).
Decrease pain and inflammation.
●
 Per stage of recovery
Ice, laser, NMES, TENS, joint compressions,
Weight management
STM
●Modified activity.
308  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Surgical rehabilitation
Table 15.4   Classification of Achilles injuries
Initial stages of postoperative rehabilitation will
Type
  Pathological change   Clinical signs
focus on controlling swelling, encouraging ROM,
promoting WB, initiating muscle reeducation and
 Complete tendon
Plantigrade stance;
educating the owner regarding activity modifica-
rupture
palpable tendon defect
tion. Protecting the joint for proper bone healing
lla
Musculotendinous
Increased tarsal flexion;
must be emphasized with osteotomies. Preventing
rupture
inflammation at
falls or slips is important and can be avoided with
musculotendinous
the use of nonskid throw rugs or mats for stable
junction
footing. Crate confinement when unsupervised is
llb
Tendon rupture
Increased tarsal flexion;
suggested.
with paratenon
tense paratenon
intact
palpable
Common findings on physical therapist's evaluation
IIc
Gastrocnemius
Increased tarsal flexion;
tendon avulsion,
excessive flexion of
NWB-PWB gait
with intact SDF
digits
Ad ans pe panpqe d m s
define
extended
T'endinosis and/or
 Swelling
Normal stance;
peritendinitis
thickened Achilles
 ROM limited and painful at end-range stifle
tendon
flexion and extension
Compensatory tightmess of gastrocnemius,
hamstrings, sartorius, and iliopsoas
 Strengthen
thigh,
gluteal,
Disuse atrophy.
and
core
musculature
 Develop HEP.
Treatment rationale
This depends on the type of surgery performed.
Treatment by goal
For example, a primary concern post-osteotomy
Same as nonsurgical goals with the exception of
is activity modification that ensures good bone
 greater activity restrictions for bone healing.
healing. Human research supports the use of
 NMES in early stages of rehabilitation as a means
of preventing muscle atrophy and weakness
Gastrocnemius avulsion/calcaneal
(Hasegawa et al., 2011). Early use of eccentric
tendon injury
muscle contractions (as compared to a standard
strengthening protocol) was shown to increase
A gastrocnemius avulsion is often the result of an
quadriceps and gluteus maximus muscle mass
acute event; however, chronic degenerative calca-
and function over a 1-year period of time (Gerber
et al., 2009). Additionally, the use of perturba-
neal tendinopathy is common. Classification of
calcaneal tendon lesions per Meutstege is shown in
tion exercises has been shown to enhance re-
Table 15.4 (Meutstege, 1993).
covery by improving coordinated muscle activity
(Chmielewski et al., 2005; Risberg et al., 2007).
Common findings on physical
Treatment goals
therapist's evaluation
These are the 
sameaswith
1nonsurgical
 Partial Rupture
rehabilitation.
 Standing posture reveals tarsal hyperflexion
 Decrease pain and inflammation
PWB/antalgic gait with shortened stance phase
Normalize ROM
 Tenderness to palpation of the calcaneal tendon
Normalize flexibility
Thickened calcaneal tendon
Achieve FWB
Pain on stretch of the gastrocnemius
Chapter 15 Evaluation and Rehabilitation Options for Orthopedic Disorders of the Pelvic Limb 309
Gastrocnemius Rupture with Intact Superficial
Minimize adhesion formation
Digital Flexor
●Gentle friction massage
 Plantigrade stance, with stifle extension, and
flexion of the two proximal phalangeal joints
Gradually increase ROM
●Toe-down weight bearing (TDWB) to PWB.
 Progressive tarsal PROM
● Progressive AROM exercises such as walking
Complete Rupture
and sit to stands.
●NWB
Gradually progress muscle strengthening
● In the subacute phase of healing, initiate eccen-
Treatment rationale
tric exercises such as backward walking, and
 progress to backward walking downhill.
Efforts are focused on soft tissue nutrition and
Progressive gastrocnemius strengthening (con-
 managing the delicate balance between protecting
im n pue sn-dais se rns (arenuan
the tendon and minimizing the damaging effects
of immobilization. Gentle tensile force is used to
promote collagen fiber realignment and healing
Conclusion
and to minimize adhesion formation (Lake et al.,
2009). In human medicine, there has been a shift
In conclusion, the effectiveness of a rehabilitation
program depends on several key components.
effort to increase blood supply, improve ROM,
First, a skilled and thorough evaluation must be
and decrease atrophy (Sorrenti, 2006). Animal
performed. A solid understanding of anatomy and
studies have shown that early motion can safely
biomechanics is required for accurate interpreta-
begin at the end of fibroplasia or about 14-21
tion of the data. Creative problem solving will
days postoperatively (Sivacolundhu et al., 2001).
direct the treatment plan. Successful treatment is
Gentle eccentric exercises are introduced in the
based on knowledge of soft tissue physiology and
subacute phase of healing (Cook et al., 2002; Pull &
joint mechanics, superb manual skills, a solid
Ransonb, 2007):
uderstanding of modalities and their effect, and a
methodical approach to therapeutic exercise. Con-
Gently increase ROM
● Gradually progress muscle strengthening.
stant reevaluation and modification of the treat-
ment plan is necessary to maximize the efficiency
of recovery.
Treatment by goal
Decrease pain and suwelling
References
Ice, laser, NMES, TENS, joint compressions,
STM
BARTELS, E.M, LUND, H., HAGEN, K.B., DAGFIN-
RUD, H.,CHRISTENSEN, R.,& DANNESKIOLD-
SAMSOE, B. 2009.Aquatic Exercise for the Treatment of
Promote sofft tissue nutrition
Knee and Hip Osteoarthritis (Review). Frederiksberg,
Massage gastrocnemius muscle belly with
Denmark: John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
CHMIELEWSKI, T.L., HURD, W.J., RUDOLPH, K.S.,
strokes toward the tendon for increased
AXE, M.J., & SNYDER-MACKLER, L. 2005. Perturba-
circulation
 tion training improves knee kinematics and reduces
muscle co-contraction after complete unilateral ante-
Promote fiber realignment
rior cruciate ligament rupture. Phys Ther, 85, 740-749;
discussion 750-754.
 Gentle friction massage
COOK, J.L., KHAN, K.M., & PURDAM, C. 2002. Achilles
 Gentle PROM into tarsal flexion.
tendinopathy. Man Ther, 7, 121-130.
310  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
GERBER, LP, MARCUS, R.L., DIBBLE, L.E., GREIS, PE.
 mechanical properties of human supraspinatus tendon
BURKS, R.T., & LASTAYO, PC. 2009. Effects of early
under longitudinal tensile loading. / Orthop Res, 27,
 progressive eccentric exercise on muscle size and func-
1596-1602.
tion after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: a
MEUTSTEGE, FJ. 1993. The classification of canine
1-year follow-up study of a randomized clinical trial.
Achilles' tendon lesions. Vet Comp Orthop Traurmatol, 6,
Phys Ther, 89, 51-59.
53-55.
HASEGAWA, S., KOBAYASHI, M., ARAI, R., TAMAKI,
PULL, M.R. & RANSONB, C. 2007. Eccentricmuscle
A., NAKAMURA, T., & MORITANI, T. 2011. Effect of
actions: implications for injuryprevention and reha-
early implementation of electrical muscle stimulation
bilitation. Phys Ther Sport, 8, 88-97.
 to prevent muscle atrophy and weakness in patients
RISBERG, M.A., HOLM, 1., MYKLEBUST, G.,& ENGE-
after anterior cuciate ligament reconstruction. / Elec-
BRETSEN, L. 2007. Neuromuscular training versus
tromyogr Kinesiot,21,622-630.
strength training during first 6 months after anterior
HOEKSMA, H.L., DEKKER,
J,RONDAY, H.K.,
cuciate ligament reconstruction: a randomized clini-
HEERING,A.,VAN DER LUBBE,N.,VEL,C., BREED-
cal trial. Phys Ther, 87, 737-750.
VELD, FC., & VAN DEN ENDE,C.H. 2004. Compari-
SIVACOLUNDHU,R.K., MARCHEVSKY, A.M., READ,
son of manual therapy and exercise therapy in
RA., & EGER, C. 2001.Achilles mechanism recon
 osteoarthritis of the hip: a randomized clinical trial.
struction in four dogs. Vet Comp Orthop Traurmatol, 14,
Arthritis Rheum, 51, 722-729.
25-31
LAKE, S.P, MILLER, K.S., ELLIOTT, D.M., & SOS-
SORRENTI, S.J. 2006. Achilles tendon rupture: effect of
LOWSKY, L.J. 2009. Effect of fiber distribution and
early mobilization in rehabilitation after surgical
realignment on the nonlinear and inhomogeneous
repair. Foot Ankle Int, 27, 407-410.
Diagnosis of and Treatment
16
Options for Disorders
of the Spine
H. Steven Steinberg, VMD, Dipl ACVIM (Neurology), CCRT, and
Joan R. Coates, DVM, MS, Dipl ACVIM (Neurology)
Summary
Almost all of the attention directed toward disorders of the spine involves its role in protecting
the spinal cord. Certainly, damage to the spinal cord can be devastating, but the demands
placed upon the canine athlete highlight the functional aspects of the spine as a structure
independent of the nervous tissue it protects. The spine is the scaffold that integrates the
propulsive forces of the entire animal. Besides propulsion, the spine maintains the head in
its most versatile position while preserving energy expenditure in doing so. The vertebrae are
similar but change in conformation determined by their position and function in relation to
the rest of the body. The forces placed upon the various components of the individual ver-
tebrae have been studied in discourses on phylogeny as have the effects of bone density
studies as they relate to pathology in humans. The soft tissue structures of the spine include
ligaments, tendons, muscles, joint capsules, and the intervertebral disks. Although poorly
studied, they all add flexibility, strength, and protective forces to many movements. Degen-
erative, traumatic, pathologic, and congenital malformations impact normal function and
have not been studied in relation to the performance of the canine athlete. Surgical and
nonsurgical considerations might vary depending upon the type of performance of a particular
canine athlete, and our standards of care should be reevaluated in light of the demands
anticipated.
The spine's role in normal gait
movement, and be flexible to a limited extent,
while all the time protecting an extremely delicate
The requirements that determine the anatomy of
structure, the spinal cord (Figure 16.1).
the spine are diverse and complex. The spine must 
 Most veterinary descriptions of the spine are
support the head, support the abdominal contents,
about mechanical failures of the spine that result
allow  for propulsion while coordinating limb
 in spinal cord injury. The canine athlete is so
Carine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation, First Edition. Edited by M. Christine Zink and Janet B. Van Dyke.
@2013 John Wiley &t Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
311
312 Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
dependent upon the spine working properly that
This chapter concentrates on the functions of the
the structural functions assigned the vertebrae
 spine specifically. Spinal cord conditions are dis-
and the associated soft tissue cannot be ignored.
cussed in general terms. Detailed descriptions of
Although there is a large body of literature about
spinal pathology affecting the spinal cord and
the workings of the canine spine, the focus has
spinal cord diseases are readily available in numer-
been almost exclusively toward applications for
ous veterinary publications (Birchard, 2006; Dewey.
spinal conditions in humans.
2008; Jaggy, 2010).
Interactions of the head, thoracic limbs,
and pelvic limbs
The head
The head, in upright, bipedal primates is a rather
large heavy structure whose weight is carried by a
stack of relatively thin vertebrae. It is interesting to
Vertebr
note that in bipeds, in which the head is not sus-
pended cranial to the body, the thoracic dorsal
spines are small. In the dog, however, the head is
cantilevered away from the body and needs to be
Nerve
suspended by structures over the forelimbs, which
root
thus carry more weight than the pelvic limbs.
Numerous spinal components are necessary to
support this load efficiently. The nuchal ligament 
is a thick band of elastic fibers that help support
the head with minimal expenditure of energy.
The nuchal ligament extends cranial to a large
spinous process of the second cervical vertebra and
Figure 16.1   Cross section through the spine showing the
relationship between the vertebra, intervertebral disk, nerve
attaches caudally to the most dorsal portions of the
roots, and spinal cord.
dorsal spines of the first few thoracic vertebrae
Illustration by Marcia Schlehr.
(Figure 16.2). The fibers of the nuchal ligament
spine needed to support the head (B). Illustration by Marcia Schlehr.
Chapter 16 Diagnosis of and Treatment Options for Disorders of the Spine  313
Figure 16.3 A. Photograph of the base of the skull showing the large occipital condyles that attach the skull to the cervical
spine and the broad nuchal crest that is an important muscular attachment. B. The first (atlas) and second (axis) cervical
vertebrae disconnected to demonstrate how C2 fits into and joins C1. C. An end-on view of the most rostral cervical spine
demonstrating the C 1-C2 articulation and the large atlanto-occipital joint.
actually can be followed caudally into the liga-
 as their removal does not significantly affect the
ments that attach to the dorsal prominence of
biomechanics of the neck (Crisco et al., 1990).
each vertebral body's dorsal spine. This ligamen-
 The head initiates all purposeful movement not
tous continuation of the nuchal ligament is called
qonor Aanne pasodod a ouaap Aq Ao
the supraspinous ligament. The thoracic spines
mentation, but also by determining the position
are attached to each other by way of the interspi-
 that the body occupies in space through the ves-
nous ligaments. They allow the force of the weight
a ana,  a um se r
of the head to dissipate through the dog's body
 head goes, the body must follow" is a common
but still maintain a level of flexibility. These
phrase among rehabilitation therapists. It is under-
nonmuscular components form a very efficient
stood that head position and movement initiates
system where muscular energy is conserved. The
 the next body movement and allows for appropri-
cervical vertebrae are large and proportional to the
 ate body mechanics. Visual and olfactory input as
weight of the head. The forces required to suspend
well as reflex modification are important but are
the head are complemented by absorption of com-
not critical for the vestibular system to perform its
pressive forces placed upon the cervical interverte-
duties, but may be critical for developing training
bral disks.
routines. Better understanding of how the neural
The first and second cervical vertebrae have
feedback loops initiate, maintain, and protect pro-
rather unique conformations that serve two signifi-
pulsion and, in this case, spinal-related structures,
cant purposes. As the nuchal ligament is attached
is critical to attain peak performance.
to the second cervical vertebra's large and wide
dorsal spine, the forces required to keep the head
in various positions require these forces to be dis-
The thoracic limbs
sipated over a large surface. Fan-shaped muscles,
predominately the splenius, attach to the nuchal
The thoracic vertebrae, as previously stated, play a
crest of the caudal skull and, like the nuchal liga-
major role in maintaining the head's normal posi-
ment, arise from the cranial thoracic vertebrae's
tions in space. The most cranial thoracic vertebrae
dorsal spines. This conformation also acts as a can-
with their large dorsal spines form the anchor that
tilever allowing the head to rotate and be sup-
allows the head to be suspended at some distance
ported by the compressive forces placed upon the
from the body (Figure 16.4). These cranial thoracic
atlanto-occipital joint (Figure 16.3).
vertebrae are supported directly by the thoracic
The joints and articular facets of the C3-C7 cervi-
 limbs. The weight of this entire unit is supported
cal vertebrae are quite large and play a sigrnificant
by the forelimbs, and it is often noted that this
role in controlling fine movement of the head and
represents 60% of the body weight of the animal.
 neck in three planes. Their role in support of the
Considering the tremendous variation in confor-
neck is unknown, but they may play a minor role,
 mation that exists from breed to breed and from
314 Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Figure 16.4  Lateral view of the cervical and rostral
thoracic vertebrae demonstrating the functional anatomy
described.
Figure 16.5 Ventrodorsal radiograph of the pelvis and
individual to individual, this would have to be a
femurs showing the box-like nature of the pelvis and the
very rough estimate.
ball and socket joints of the femurs.
The thoracic limbs do not have bony or ligamen-
tous attachments to the spine. The extrinsic fore-
limb muscular apparatus attaches the forelimb to
The tail, like the head, is cantilevered from the
the thoracic body wall, allowing for freedom of
body. The apparatus necessary to carry this weight
movement that permits extreme changes in
 is not extensive, but the tail has a role in balance
direction while protecting the spinal column's
and fine movement that has been extremely
rigidity throughout the area of the rib cage.
well documented in the cat (Walker et al., 1998).
Although not as well studied, the canine tail also
serves to help with balance during locomotion
The pelvic limbs
(Wada et al., 1993).
The pelvic limbs are responsible for carrying the
weight of the caudal portion of the body. The pelvic
Conformational considerations
limbs interact with the body in a completely differ-
ent manner from the thoracic limbs (Figure 16.5).
Each vertebra interlocks with the adjacent vertebra
The coxofemoral joint transmits forces to the caudal
canial and caudal to it. Except for the first and
spine through the sacroiliac joint. Although the
second cervical vertebrae (Figure 16.3B), the com-
boxlike structure formed by the pelvis has less flex-
ponents of each individual vertebra are similar, but
ibility than the muscular attachment of the forelimb
each varies as the morphology of that site is deter-
to the body wall, there is a significant rotational
mined by its functional requirements (Figure 16.6).
advantage afforded by the range of motion (ROM)
The first few thoracic vertebrae have the tallest
of the ball and socket joints. This also allows the
dorsal spines, as they are the scaffold that carries the
pelvic limbs to move far forward under the body
weight of the head. These forces are transmitted
producing significant forward propulsion. When
 through the vertebral joint, muscle, and ligamen-
turning, a great deal of the actual body movement 
tous structures. The lowest point of the thoracolum-
has been committed by the trajectory of the head,
 bar spine is usually at the point at which the tenth
and the actions of the forelimbs and thoracic cavity.
 and eleventh thoracic dorsal spines meet. At this
The limited flexibility of the spine allows for fluid
site, the dorsal spines acutely reverse direction from
movement once propulsion is initiated.
a caudal sweep (T10) to a dorsal sweep (T11). The
Chapter 16Diagnosis 0
Treatment Options for Disorders of the Spine  315
Figure 16.6 From left to right, a photograph of a cervical, thoracic, and lumbar vertebra showing the tremendous variation in
conformation in the same animal.
Figure 16.7 Photograph of several lumbar vertebrae showing how they articulate and the appearance of the joint surfaces
when disarticulated.
anticlinal vertebra is the one where this change
(MRI). With motion, the gel becomes compressed at
occurs and is usually but not always T11. A fibrous
the sideof narrowing of the disk space and expanded
ring, the fibrous arnulus, which is composed of
at the side that widens as the spine routinely and
strong cross fibers that firmly attach one vertebra to
regularly changes from one angleto another through
another, interconnects the vertebral bodies. The
all gaits. Faster gaits will also involve greater
central portion of this ring is filled with a gelatinous
changes in dorsoventral movements as the pelvis is
substance, the nucleus pulposus, a remnant of the
alternately tilted to gain more distance with each
phylogenetically primitive notochord. The nucleus 
stride. This spinal flexibility is dramatically demon-
pulposus absorbs forces created between the verte-
strated in the canter and gallop gaits.
bral endplates and dymamically transfers those
The interspinous ligaments stabilize the dorsal
forces to the surrounding fibrous ring in response to
spines of the vertebrae. The articular surfaces,
dorsoventral and lateral movements of the spine.
which are extensions of the dorsal lamina of each
We do not usually appreciate the dynamic nature of
vertebra, form joints with the vertebra both cranial
these structures as they are often viewed through
and caudal. The cranial articular surface is ventral
still-motion studies such as radiography, computed
to the caudal articular surface of the vertebra
tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging
 cranial to it (Figure 16.7). All of these intervertebral
316Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Figure 16.8 Lateral radiograph of the thoracic spine showing the ribs and chest wall that give it its rigidity.
articulations allow for a sigrificant but limited
that all of these activities occur while the spinal
motion that permits the spine to bend in all planes.
cord remains protected.
 The sacral vertebrae are fused and have the least
Very little attention has been paid to the actual
flexibility in any plane. The thoracic wall and
 conformational variation that occurs among breeds
rib attachments limit the mobility of the thoracic
and between individuals within a specific breed
vertebrae (Figure 16.8). The chest wall, which con-
(Figure 16.9). Small dogs have large cervical spinal
sists of the interconnecting vertebrae, ribs, and
canals with what seems to be relatively thinner
associated soft tissue, forms a stable element that
dorsal lamina for their size. The relative sizes of the
serves to anchor the more flexible and mobile cer-
spinal canal from L4 to the sacral vertebrae can
vical and lumbar regions of the spine. The increased
vary tremendously. Sacralization of the last lumbar
mobility at the cervicothoracic, thoracolumbar,
vertebra and lumbralization of the first sacral ver-
and lumbosacral junctions in comparison to other
tebra are very common. The tremendous variation
spinal segments is quite significant. The forces
evident in spines of our canine population makes
it difficult to provide generalizations about func-
sponsible for a higher degree of degeneration at
tion. Breeding for desirable conformations and
these sites.
developing training regimens for canine athletes
The atlanto-occipital and atlanto-axial joints are
should take into account these variations.
unique and allow for tremendous freedom of
 movement of the skull. This is critical so that the
extremely important special senses are able to
Forces that affect the spine
harness information from the widest possible area.
Head mobility is extremely important, as the
It is quite obvious that the spine can rotate on one
mouth is the dog's main means of defense. The
axis and move in all planes and in more than one
occipital condyles are extremely large and allow
plane at the same time at different points along its
for considerable dorsoventral ROM of the head.
length. Although these motions are critical for day-
The odontoid process, bound to the floor of the
to-day activities, very little information is available
atlas, and the joints formed by the articular surface
about the actual forces involved and the limits nec-
of the atlas and axis permit considerable rotation
essary to protect spinal structures, including the
of the head in relation to the neck (Figure 16.3)
spinal cord, from damage.
The muscles that act upon the spine are too
A biomechanical evaluation of L3-L4 in canine
 Extensive and numerous to enumerate here. They
cadavers (Figure 16.10) where most extrinsic soft
are classified as intrinsic muscles thiat help with the
tissue structures had been removed from the ver-
stability of the spine, such as the multifidus mus-
tebrae was performed (Smith & Walter, 1988).
culature, and extrinsic muscles that help in more
- snoudsrau pe snoudsns a jo uisix
complex motions within the axial skeleton or in the
ments yielded a decrease in stiffness in flexion,
appendicular skeleton such as the iliopsoas muscle.
an increase in the ROM of the interspace, and a
 One overriding factor that must be kept in mind is
decrease in the ultimate flexion bending strength
Chapter 16 Diagnosis of and Treatment Options for Disorders of the Spine  317
Figure 16.9 A. Lateral radiograph of a normal lumbar spine. B. Normal lumbar spinal column and sacrum.
Wood et al. found that while walking, the dog's
L2-L3
3vertebrae became 2-3degrees more
kyphotic compared to the standing position, and
the average excursion between opposing facets
was 3.4 ± 1.3mm (Wood et al., 1992). Although it
is well recognized that these motions and their
limits protect the spine from excessive flexion and
torsion, and help to stabilize the spine, the actual
forces involved have not received much attention.
Butterman et al. were the first to measure actual
loads on the facet joint in vivo. They determined
the load on the articular joint surface of the L3
Figure 16.10 Lumbar vertebrae 3 and 4 demonstrating the
cranial articular facet (Buttermann et al., 1992).
actual joints of the vertebral experiments described.
 Using strain gauges, Butterman et al. measured
the forces of the right L3 articular surface of five
mixed-breed dogs in  various positions and
by 62%. Panjabi et al. studied the in vivo affects of
performing various activities. They verified their
transecting the supraspinous and interspinous
findings using two in vitro studies. A newton (N)
ligaments in the cervical spine at C4-C5 (Panjabi
is an internationally accepted unit of force that
et al., 1988). In the cervical spine, this injury caused
represents the force necessary to provide a one-
a decreased ROM. It is, however, difficult to
kilogram mass with an acceleration of 1 m/s.
compare these two studies as one involved cadav-
Their results demonstrate the relative forces
ers with most soft tissues removed and the other
placed upon the facets under varying conditions.
examined live dogs.
Remember, only the right L3 cranial facet is being
 There are numerous publications examining the
measured.
forces placed upon the articular facets and inter-
vertebral disks of the canine lumbar spine. These
(1) While siting, the range of forces among the
studies were intended to study the effects that
five dogs was 10-65N
these forces might have upon the human spine,
(2)While lying, it was 045N
and many conclusions were found to be applicable
(3)When flexing the head to get a treat from
to both species.
between the forelimbs while standing: 0-65 N
318  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
（4)
 Sitting while having the forelimbs held in
extreme extension of the spine or the intervertebral
the air and then turning (torsion) to the left:
disk had been compromised.
0-40N. This activity unloads the forces on
Breit followed up on this study by comparing
that particular right facet.
the facet geometry of the canine thoracolumbar
(5)
 Sitting while having the forelimbs held in the
spine using three distinct groups of dogs (Breit,
 air and then turning (torsion) to the right:
2002). Breit divided his 140 dogs into three groups:
65-130N
large, chondrodystrophic, and small breeds. His
(6)
 Walking while having the forelimbs held off
findings increase our awareness of the variations
the ground: 65-140N
 between breeds and individuals. Torsional strain
(7)
 Climbing up stairs: 105-170N
between vertebrae is determined by the transverse
(8)
 Climbing down stairs: 100-120N
distance between the articular surfaces (Figure
(9)
Turning right: 45-135N
16.11). In small breed and chondrodystrophic dogs.
(10)
 Turning left: 0-80N
thie transverse distance was very consistent when
(11)
Sit to stand: 65-110 N.
adjustments were made for size. In these cases, the
facets consisted of a lateral and a ventral compo-
 To put these numbers in perspective, the force mea-
nent that made the joint surfaces rather flat. In all
sured from a human prosthetic hip while walking
large breeds, the transverse distance was consider-
is 800-2200N. Comparing the force per unit area of
ably less, adjusted for size, and these joints were
the human coxofemoral joint, the measurement
completely different in conformation. All of the
would convert to 1-6MPa (megapascals). Since the
large breeds had a caudal facet component that
facet joint is considerably smaller, the forces over
made their articular joints virtually ball and socket
the L3 articular surface convert to a maximum of
joints. This design would be abie to handle the
2MPa (megapascals). A megapascal is 10° N/M2. It
much greater forces that their increased mass
is worth noting that although the joint forces on the
would absorb. Interestingly, none of the small
cartilaginous structures in humans and dogs are in
breeds had caudal facet components but some
the same range per unit area, the cartilage in the
chondrodystrophic breeds did. The increased sta-
dog is considerably thinner. Although we do not
usually consider joint function in terms of newtons
and megapascals, these relationships provide start-
ing points from which to consider improving treat-
ment and training outcomes and considerations for
the causes of spinal degeneration
In the Buttermann et al. (1992) study, there was
considerable variability between individuals. The
authors believe this was due to differences in
anatomy, muscle mass and distribution, motion
patterns, and individual animals’ motivation to
perform the tasks.The variations between indi-
vidual dogs, which affected the results of that
study, are often reflected in the training of dogs to
complete tasks and to successfully compete. These
individual variations require our attention if we
are going to train the successful athlete or
competitor.
Several other interesting points were noted. The
force on the joint surface remained virtually con-
stant regardless of the speed with which the subject
was walking. The results were similar to the find-
Figure 16.11 Third lumbar vertebra. Arrow indicates the
ings of in vitro studies. The caudal portion of the
transverse distance between joint surfaces, which plays a
joint surface was rarely loaded unless there was
major role in many of the force mea surements referenced.
Chapter 16 Diagnosis of and Treatment Options for Disorders of the Spine 319
bility of this conformation might be a desirable
occasion, the anticlinal vertebra is not T11 but one
trait that could be heritable.
of the neighboring vertebrae.
Lastly, there are several studies using the dog as
 a model that evaluate the mechanical properties of
Spina bifida
the intervertebral disk. Most of these have been in
vitro studies and most have examined the mid-
Spina bifida is an uncommon malformation of the
spine that is frequently an incidental finding. Spina
lumbar vertebrae. Unfortunately, routine interver-
bifida is an interruption of or incomplete fusion of
tebral diskfailureleadingto spinal cord compression
the dorsal spinal arches. This can occur at several
is not nearly as common in the mid-lumbar spine as
in the thoracolumbar region.
vertebral sites but is most often recogmized at the
 Zimmerman et al. determined mechanical prop-
level of the sacrum and sometimes involves L7.
erties of the canine intervertebral disk at two sites,
Spina bifida is most common in the screw-tailed
L2-L3 and L5-L6. Compressive stiffness varied at
breeds: Boston Terriers, French Bulldogs, English
Bulldogs, and others. This malformation is some-
each site requiring 717.8N/mm at the L2-L3 inter-
times associated with incomplete formation of the
 neural tube causing dysplasia of the spinal cord
(Zimmerman et al., 1992). Torsional stiffness also
varied in each case. At the L2-L3 interspace, it was
and protrusions of the meninges alone and occa-
1.04Nm/degree and at L5-L6 it was 1.72Nm/
sionally the spinal cord. Dogs in which the sacral
degree. Axial or compressive stress on the interver-
segments of the spinal cord are malformed are
tebral disk at L2-L3 was 14.03MPa and at L5-L6 it
often presented for a lack of urinary and/or fecal
was 16.30MPa. Adjusting for size, these forces are
control.
similar to what is seen in people and the differ-
ences reflect the fact that the caudal lumbar spine
Caudal occipital malformation syndrome
plays a greater role in spinal stabilization. Interest-
Caudal occipital malformation syndrome (COMS)
ingly the torsional stress measured in the dog at
has been described (Churcher & Child, 2000; Rus-
both sites was considerably higher than in people
bridge et al., 2000; Rusbridge & Knowler, 2003). In
at 30.8 MPa for L2-L3 and 26.17MPa for L5-L6.
 Unfortunately, results of studies using the dog
this condition, there is crowding of the cerebellum
within the caudal fossa of the skull. This malforma-
spine as a model for understanding and treating
tion often leads to a fluid-filled tubular structure,
human spinal conditions have not been incorpo-
 a syrinx, forming within the cervical spinal cord,
rated into specific requirements for our canine ath-
a s si sdao sas  n 
letes. They have dramatically illuminated the
16.12). Flow dynamics and the Venturi effect are
differences in breeds and among individual dogs
suspected of being responsible for the syrinx for-
within breeds, however.
mation. These fluid-filled tubes can occur when the
The sum of these studies clearly demonstrates
 dogs are very young or develop as the dog ages.
that specifics about spinal conformation can be
 d au m sad  sp pn
 measured and through genetics, specific training.
tetraparesis frequently affecting the forelimbs to a
and attention to detailed anatomy, better function-
 greater extent than the pelvic limbs. A peculiar
ing spines are possible.
obsessive scratching of the neck area is a common
occurrence. This disease is more prevalent in
certain breeds such as the Cavalier King Charles
Congenital predispositions
Spaniel and Brussels Griffon and in toy breeds,
although occurrence in other breeds has been
Malformations
described.
Spinal anomalies are usually considered incidental
Atlanto-axial instability
findings. Additional ribs and absence of ribs as
well as additional lumbar vertebrae are probably
The second cervical vertebra, C2, is held in place
the most common vertebral anomalies. Occasion-
by several ligamentous structures. The bony
ally, a lack of a transverse spine is noted and on
projection, the odontoid process or dens, of C2
320   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Figure 16.13 Lateral radiograph of an atlanto-axial
subluxation. Notice the tilt (arrow) of C2 away from C1 and
the odontoid process (dens) riding up into the spinal canal.
Figure 16.12 Lateral MRl of a Cavalier King Charles
Spaniel with caudal occipital malformation syndrome
(COMS). Note the syrinx in the center of the spinal cord
(arrow). The white color denotes fluid, as this is a T2 image.
attaches to the ventral floor of C1 and allows for
rotation of the head within limits in each direction.
Dogs that have atlanto-axial subluxations usually
have a hypoplastic dens or aplasia of the dens. This
iature breeds, and in most cases, clinical signs
occur when the dogs are young. The spine of C2 is
displaced caudally at an angle leading one to con-
clude that the nuchal ligament is what is giving the
C2  subluxation its characteristic radiographic
appearance (Figure 16.13).
Figure 16.14  Lateral thoracic radiograph demonstrating
hemi or blocked vertebral abnormalities in this French
Hemi or block vertebra
Note the shortening and malformation of the vertebral
Hemi or block vertebrae are usually incidental
bodies leading to shortening of the dorsal intercostal spaces
 findings seen on radiography involving the mid-
as well as malformations of the dorsal spines and lamina
(oval). These are all common, usually incidental, findings.
thoracic vertebrae in the screw-tailed breeds
(French Bulldogs, English Bulldogs, Pugs, etc.).
These vertebrae are malformed and can have quite
Congenital stenosis
an anomalous conformation (Figure 16.14). They
ue asnes uano pue pasny io padeus aapam aq uen
Within the spinal column, there are two abrupt
extreme angle to the spine. The vertebrae are fore-
transitions of spinal mobility. These areas probably
shortened and cause crowding of the ribs. The
have the greatest forces placed upon them.
spinal alignments often are severe, but the dogs
 Advanced imaging of these areas in affected indi-
usually do not manifest clinical signs of spinal cord
viduals seems to reveal a smaller spinal canal than
dysfunction.
is normal for the diameter of the spinal cord and
Chapter 16 Diagnosis of and Treatment Options for Disorders of the Spine  321
associated nerve roots (Fourie & Kirberger, 1999;
conditions are often overlooked when only static
Drost et al., 2002; da Costa et al.,2006). These
 representations such as radiographs are evaluated
changes are present from a very early age. At the
Jones & Inzana, 2000).
level of C6-T1, many large and giant breed dogs
[ds ra pe aeds a raa aaey on waas
cords. A similar loss of spinal canal area is seen
Breed-specific intervertebral disk disease
in many breeds of dogs at the level of L5-S1. If
the spinal canal is pathologically narrowed in
When Hansen first described disk degeneration, he
younger animals, clinical signs usually occur before
made a distinction between the chondrodystrophic
1 year of age. These relatively stenotic spinal canals
 breeds and nonchondrodystrophic breeds (Hansen,
predispose affected animals to spinal cord com-
1951). The degeneration that occurs in both groups
 pression. In large breeds that have stenosis in the
 of dogs appears similar, but disk degeneration
caudal cervical spinal canal, abnormal gaits and
 in the chondrodystrophic breeds usually begins
postural deficits can be seen in dogs as young as
pauag e sey uogerauasap aui 'ae jo rea I anojaq
12 weeks of age. Although several names describe
predisposition in the chondrodystrophic breeds,
caudal cervical spinal cord impingement, stenosis
and virtually all of the disks deteriorate. The col-
 of the spinal canal underlies these pathologic
lagen components of the nucleus pulposus and
conditions.
anmulus fibrosus change. This has a fairly complex
 On rare occasion, dogs present at less than 1 year
epidemiologic/genetic distribution because while
of age with severe signs from lumbosacral nerve
the Beagle is not a chondrodysplastic breed, their
root entrapment. More typically, these dogs
disks deteriorate in a similar manner and time-
develop nerve root entrapment at various adult
frame as those of chondrodystrophic breeds. Like-
ages due to encroachment caused by degeneration
wise, Russell Terriers that are chondrodystrophic
and proliferations of the surrounding ligamentous
do not seem to have a high incidence of interver-
and sometimes bony structures that further com-
tebral disk disease.
promise an already stenotic spinal canal.
An excellent review by Bergknut of interverte-
Many of these conditions are highlighted by
bral disk degeneration is available online (see
dynamic advanced imaging (Figure 16.15). These
Webliography).
A
B
Figure 16.15 A. Transverse CT with contrast of the C6 vertebra. Note the large amount of space surrounding the spinal cord
(normal). B. Transverse CT with contrast of the C6 vertebra in a different dog. Note that there is no room around the spinal
cord, and the spinal cord appears flattened (asterisk). Both figures are at approximately the same level of the spine and both
dogs' heads were positioned similarly. The dog in part B had significant clinical signs.
322Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Figure 16.16 Lateral radiograph of the lumbar spine. The exostoses of the vertebral bodies (arrows) are spondylosis. They
arise from the ventral ridges of bone cranial and caudal to the disk space. These changes are common and most often are said
asaui jo jayiia jayaym bop s!yl u! sianey jeine aui jo uoeaualap snopuaan ayi osje alon supuy leuapiui ag ol
changes would cause serious limitations in the active dog is not known.
Degenerative and stress-related
brae, following the course of the ventral longitudi-
conditions of the spine
nal ligament (Figure 16.17).
 The causes of these conditions are unknown, and
Spondylosis deformans and diffuse
neither condition has a strong association with
idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH)
intervertebral disk disease. Both conditions can
occur concurrently.
Spondylosis deformans and DISH are distinctly
 Kranenburg et al. have published a retrospective
different diseases. These conditions are often con-
study of 2041 dogs outlining the variations and
fused but have been shown to be quite distinct in
breed specificity of these conditions (Kranenburg
people (Resnick, 1985).
et al., 2011). There is a strong potential for DISH
Spondylosis is the very common bony produc-
having a genetic predisposition as the prevalence
tion at the ventral endplates of the vertebrae pre-
in the canine purebred population is 3.8%, yet it is
senting as simple prominences to actual bony
 seen in 40.6% of Boxers (Hansen, 1951; Kranenburg
fusions without evidence of inflammation (Figure
et al.,2010). DISH is easy to diagnose radiographi-
16.16). There is very litle evidence that spinal cord
 cally, and the inherent decreased spinal flexibility
or nerve root pathology occurs as a result of this
can be clinically significant, affecting gait, posture,
condition.
 and performance.
 Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH)
describes excessive ossification of the spine that
occurs along the juncture of the ventral longitudi-
Trauma
nal ligament. This poorly understood ossification
can occur at numerous places where ligament,
Spinal fractures are the result of the load exceeding
tendon, or muscle attach to bone (entheses) but is
the bone's strength (Figure 16.18). Luxations of the
most often appreciated on the spine. DISH can
vertebrae without fractures occur when external
readily be distinguished from spondylosis in that
forces exceed the strength of soft tissues holding
with DISH there is sigmificant bony production
the vertebrae in place (Figure 16.19). Combinations
along the entire length of the vertebral body
of both types of spinal injuries are common.
and intervertebral spaces along contiguous verte-
 In everyday veterinary practice, the vast majority
Chapter 16 Diagnosis of and Treatment Options for Disorders of the Spine  323
Figure 16.17  Lateral radiograph of the lumbar spine demonstrating severe diffuse idiopathic skeletal hypersotosis (DISH;
arrows). Although this condition is not supposed to be associated with intervertebral disk disease, this dog had multiple disk
prolapses. This dog was only 2 years old at the time of these radiographs, but was extremely limited by this condition. These
changes resulted in the dog being euthanized at 4 years of age.
Ainju! allgowoine ue oi Aiepuosas Sop Sunox e jo aneldpua ayi ysnoiyi anpen leuids e jo ydeisoipel lejaiel 8L'gl aunby
of these fracture/luxations occur from severe
external trauma that is most often from automobile-
induced injuries. The second most common cause
of fracture/luxations is weakening of the spinal
structures through internal processes such as neo-
plasia or infection or rarely osteoporosis. Fractures
related to these internal complications are gener-
ally grouped together as pathologic fractures
(Figure 16.20).
In the canine athlete, the injury most likely to
 am dss e si a s e a
sanau sdord a suanoaun puapiooe ue io paads je
Figure 16.19 Lateral radiograph demonstrating a luxation
without any fracture. Some such injuries will demonstrate
sary for the activity being performed. Muscle
woy sem Ainlui siyl dunsew! paoueape ym sainpe
damage and joint capsule tears involving the para-
running at speed into a tree.
spinal soft tissue are very likely to occur with or
324Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
three of these biomechanical modalities can be
 improved upon, but bone remodeling must occur
at a rate that keeps up with the forces placed upon
 it. The ability to resorb and replace bone in response
to stress-related injuries is well documented in
shop impe ui paipns lam ssal inq saop iasunos
The potential for bone repair in relation to age in
dogs is not known.
Genetic factors may have significance in deter-
mining susceptibility to bony fractures. There
seems to be a strong correlation between bone
mineral density (BMD) and bone strength. Rats of
specific strains have a higher BMD and are less
Figure 16.20 Lateral radiograph of a pathologic fracture of
prone to fractures (Turner, 2002). In a study of
a thoracic vertebra. Although there is significant destruction
twins, it was found that BMD is genetically based
of the entire vertebra, many of these patients present as
 and a genetic association is particularly strong
apparent acute injuries rather than the slowly, progressive
within the spine for BMD specifically (Pocock et al.,
course we would expect with neoplasia.
1987).
Nutrition is also a significant factor in maintain-
Aod Aiaa uaaq aau inq susa Auoq inom
 ing normal BMD and therefore preventing poten-
documented. Localized pain secondary to soft
tial fractures. Dogs maintained on a low calcium
tissue paraspinal injury is gathering more and
diet had a decrease in their BMD. Bone strength
more attention, but these types of injuries related
measured in the L2 vertebra, femoral neck, and
to spinal soft tissue structures have not yet been
midfemur were reduced in dogs fed calcium-
studied in a well-organized manner.
restricted diets (Motoie et al., 1995).
At the junction of a very flexible spine to a rather
In 1946, EJ Slijper in his seminal work defined the
 inflexible spine, there is a greater chance of exceed-
moment of resistance (MoR) as a way to determine
ing the ultimate force of the bony structures or
the spine's ability to resist bending (Slijper, 1946).
joints. The vast majority of spinal fractures occur
The MoR is calculated by multiplying the trans-
at the thoracolumbar junction or at the lumbosacral
verse diameter of the vertebra by the square of the
junction (Feeny & Oliver, 1980; Zotti et al., 2011).
height of the caudal surface of each vertebra (Figure
 Complete dislocations without fractures, growth
16.21). Zotti et al. determined that the MoRis similar
plate luxations in the young dog (Figure 16.18),
across various breed conformations (Zotti et al.,
and body and facet fractures all occur at these
2011). They also confirmed, by taking the BMD into
sites. With the advent of CT, multiple smaller frac-
account, that most fractures occur between T9 and
tures that were not evident with radiographs
L7 as has been determined clinically by retrospec-
alone are now appreciated. Although cervical
tive studies. The vertebral column's chief structural
 spinal fractures are much less frequently reported,
function is to resist dorsal and lateral bending.
-  a ar  i aq As A 
Ventral bending is resisted predominately by the
patible with life as they can catastrophically affect
abdominal musculature. This knowledge should
respiration.
 direct appropriate physical training based upon the
The biomechanical parameters that determine
anticipated fumctional results. Soft tissue elements
the likelihood of a spinal fracture are well known,
are critical support structures. Muscular develop-
and a great deal of the work defining these has
ment and ligamentous strength can decrease the
been done in rodents (Kranenburg et al., 2010). The
forces placed upon the spine. This may limit bony
ultimate breaking force of a bony structure is a
vertebral strength and development, yet still be
simple measure of its strength. The ultimate dis-
protective. The exact combination of bony develop-
placement of a bony structure is the reciprocal
ment and soft tissue development is unknown
of its brittleness. The work-to-failure defines the
and would be specific for the movements being
ability of a bony structure to absorb energy. All
attempted. Obviously, special attention needs to be
Chapter 16 Diagnosis of and Treatment Options for Disorders of the Spine 325
Lee et al., 2003). These microfractures accumulate
and are known to decrease the stiffness of the bone
and its ability to absorb additional stress (Burr
et al., 1998). Healing of microfractures initiates with
resorption of surrounding bone matrix and may
decrease the ability of the bone to handle addi-
tional stress until healing is complete (Carter &
Hayes, 1977). Microfractures are cumulative and
their ability to repair is decreased with age in
people. The association of bone failure and micro-
fractures is not linear with the stress placed upon
the bone. The ability of the bone to withstand com-
pressive forces is also dependent upon the bone
volume fraction (bone volume/total volume) of
the structure being tested. Microfractures start to
accumulate only when the there is a stiffness loss
 in the bone of approximately 15% (Burr et al., 1997).
healing by pharmacologic administration (Flora
Figure 16.21 Lumbar vertebra. Arrows demonstrate the
et al., 1981) or endocrine manipulation (Norrdin
measurements used by Slijper to determine the moment of
et al., 1990) developed pathologic fractures. Com-
resistance.
pressive strength was decreased in the lumbar and
thoracic vertebrae even though the bone volume
was normal. Hasegawa et al. determined that surgi-
given to core strength specifically to protect the
cal damage to the intervertebral disks in dogs also
T9-L7 region (Zotti et al., 2011).
increased  the  accumulation  of  microfractures
within the vertebrae (Hasegawa et al., 1995).
Several important considerations come out of
Repetitive motion conditions
these studies. Developing strong bones necessary
to handle the stresses placed upon them should
In the canine athlete, practice and competition has
be part of the training procedures necessary to
been directed to learning a complicated and often
produce long-lasting successful canine athletes.
forceful set of movements that can cause damage
Strong soft tissue components involving core
 as the work-to-failure ability of the soft tissues or
strength can protect forces placed on the bones and
bones cannot absorb the repeated stresses that
joints. Attention to bone and soft tissue strength
 Occur without significant healing, remodeling, and
should be directed to vertebrae T9-L7 specifically.
recovery. Dogs that do not have obvious spinal
Adequate time between rigorous activities has to
cord issues have been characterized as having sore
be a consideration. There is a period of time when
backs or sore necks. With the wide availability of
bones are particularly prone to stress once the
CT, degenerative bony conditions can be described
 microfractures have occurred, and the remodeling
in detail, yet these changes have not been corre-
process further decreases bone strength, as bone
lated to performance.
resorption is the initial step in healing. Whether
 Soft tissue damage to the paraspinal structures
these changes in bone strength and remodeling
and joints in many cases may be the source of
forces are responsible for so-called sore backs or
spinal pain or poor performance. These changes
are in fact responsible for any of the osteoarthritic
can be appreciated oftentimes with MRI but few
changes noted in spinal studies is an area that
studies have evaluated this potential source of
requires further investigation. In addition, there
spinal pain.
are numerous circumstances where intervertebral
Repetitive stress to bones creates failures in the
disk degeneration is diagnosed with conventional
bone matrix known as microfractures (Frost, 1960;
radiography or advanced imaging. In those cases,
326   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
even when there are no overt neurologic deficits,
(Godde & Steffen, 2007). It has been noted that
the biomechanics of the spine are compromised
larger dogs have a cranial articular process that,
(Burr et al., 1997).
with degeneration and osteophyte formation, is
likely to impinge on the L7 nerve root and/or gan-
glion. Furthermore, the decreased impact surface
Common compressive spinal
provided by the L7 endplate makes larger dogs
cord conditions
more prone to osteophyte formation. Breit et al.
 noted that these changes are likely to be more sig-
Age-related conditions
nificant in the athletic canine (Breit & Kunzel, 2001).
Age-related degenerative conditions of the spine
are common and often are unrecognized and
Intervertebral disk disease
underdiagnosed. Conditions include enlargement
of the articular processes, proliferation of the dorsal
Dogs of any breed can have intervertebral disk
longitudinal ligament, proliferation of the yellow
degeneration with similar pathologic processes as
ligaments that connect the neural arches, and
 described above. Conventional radiography for
bulging of the intervertebral disk. These space-
diagnosis of intervertebral disk disease has been
replaced with advanced imaging procedures.
limited space surrounding the spinal cord in pre-
Unfortunately, the study of the dynamic nature of
disposed breeds (Burbidge et al., 1999). The lower
intervertebral disk pathology has been limited.
cervical spine and lumbosacral region are most
When looking at static evaluations of interverte-
commonly affected. Spinal cord and nerve root
bral disk disease, it is common to find a poor asso-
compressions are often accompanied by denerva-
ciation between the extent of the clinical signs and
 tion and muscle atrophy In the forelimb, the triceps
the disease determined by imaging particularly
muscle group is most commonly affected. The
when the signs are less severe (Adams et al., 1995).
elbows tend to flex more than necessary during the
 It is reasonable to assume that dynamic studies will
walk as the antagonist muscles, the triceps group,
determine potential and actual compressive condi-
do not resist the agonists, the elbow flexors. In the
 tions with greater accuracy in the future.
pelvic limbs, the biceps femoris and cranial tibial
 Video fluoroscopy and kinematic studies allow
muscles are often affected. These dogs tend to
 one to appreciate the forces involved and the
 stand base-wide and do not flex their stifles during
dynamic ranges of not only the intervertebral disks
gait. In most cases, nerve root entrapments of the
but the spinal cord as well (see Webliography). A
cauda equina significantly decrease tail strength
 general overview of intervertebral disk disease in
and movement. Spinal cord or nerve root compres-
the dog is available elsewhere (Coates, 2000).
sion at both of these sites is extremely common in
older dogs, but the severity of gait alterations is
variable (Figure 16.15).
Trauma
Bulging of the annulus fibrosus into the spinal
canal in older dogs has been incriminated often as
 The most common traumatic injury to the spinal
a source of spinal cord compression, although the
cord is acute intervertebral disk hermiation. The
dynamics of this pathology have not been studied,
second most common is blunt trauma to the spine,
and it is often difficult or impossible to prove that
most often the result of an automobile-related
the bulging disk alone is the cause of any dysfunc-
njury. The treatment protocols are similar based
tion or pain (Mayhew et al., 2002).
-nau pue sisoueip aemnne ue uo Aiaeuopand
A well-documented nerve root entrapment or
rologic evaluation.
foraminal stenosis has been reported in dogs with
In the veterinary literature, traumatic injuries to
lumbosacral stenosis. It is difficult to diagnose as
the spine are most often assigned severity based
the dogs present with intermittent lameness. Ava-
upon the spinal cord damage imposed by that
lanche rescue dogs may be more prone to this con-
 mjury. Very little attention has been given to liga-
dition although other breeds have been diagnosed
mentous,
, muscular, and paraspinal
1 structural
Chapter 16 Diagnosis of and Treatment Options for Disorders of the Spine  327
damage that leads to decreased performance in the
eight cases could be found (Westworth & Sturges,
absence of neurologic deficits. Although rest, re-
2010).
habilitation modalities, core strengthening, and
 Hematomyelia is a poorly understood condition
stretching would seem to be therapeutic, there is
 that describes hemorrhage within the spinal cord.
litle hard evidence promoting any one treatment  In dogs, hematomyelia is often secondary to
course or program. Based on the previous discus-  trauma, is poorly understood, and may be due to
sion and the type of activity being performed,  primary hemorrhage or release of vasoactive sub-
special attention needs to be directed to prevention
 stances causing vascular collapse. Experiments
and rehabilitation in the area from T9-L7 across
 with injections of blood into rat spinal cords do not
breed conformations (Kranenburg et al., 2011).
seem to simulate the total liquefaction of the spinal
cord that is the hallmark of hematomyelia (Leep
Hunderfund & Wijdicks, 2009). In most cases, the
cranial and caudal dissemination of the spinal cord
Neoplastic disease
hemorrhage and destruction occurs at or near the
time of injury and at the trauma site. There have
Neoplasms of the vertebrae fall within similar cat-
egories as those seen elsewhere in the body. Primary
been circumstances where the process of hemato-
myelia begins days after the initial trauma,
bone tumors such as osteosarcoma can affect the
vertebrae. They do not seem to be as aggressive as
however.
The most common spinal cord vascular event is
those affecting the long bones. Histiocytic sarco-
a spinal cord embolic phenomenon called fibrocar-
tilaginous embolization (FCE). Although the origin
multiple myelomas are commor soft tissue neo-
of the fibrocartilage is unknown, it is suspected the
plasms that can also affect the vertebrae. CT and
source is from the nucleus pulposus. More than 35
MRI each have their own advantages and disad-
years after this condition was first described, we
vantages, and at times both are necessary to make
still do not have clear understanding of how the
an accurate diagnosis. Treatment is based on a his-
topathologic diagnosis. The biological behavior
material gets into the arterial vasculature of the
spinal cord (Zaki & Prata, 1976). Dogs with sus-
of these neoplasms and the results of various
 pected FCE usually recover adequate function, so
combinations of treatments are becoming better
understood
The hallmark of this disease is an acute onset of
Treatment protocols for neoplasms within the
spinal cord dysfunction usually during activity.
spinal canal involving the spinal cord are based on
The signs are often asymmetric, rapidly progres-
whether the neoplasm causes compression and/or
 invades the neural tissue and whether it is primary
sive, and usually not associated with hyperpathia
(De Risio & Plat, 2010). Transient hyperalgesia at
 or metastatic. Routine survey imaging of the chest
the onset of the signs is common but short in dura-
and abdomen for metastatic disease are part of a
tion. Most dogs return to normal function over a
thorough  evaluation.  Surgical  decompression,
6- to 8-week period dependent upon the amount
/pue Aderau uoneipen Ksdonq io uognasan roum
 of ischemic damage. Intact pain sensation and
or chemotherapy all have their successes and fail-
signs of motor recovery within 2 weeks after onset
ures. It is difficult to guide a decision because of a
 of signs indicate a favorable recovery.
lack of statistically relevant studies.
Degenerative conditions of the spinal cord
Common noncompressive spinal
cord conditions
Sporadic and rare degenerative conditions of the
 spinal cord have been recorded over many decades.
Vascular disease of the spinal cord
Consideration should be given to these disorders
Vascular anomalies have been reported in the dog,
onset, and breed predilection. The classification
but they are extremely rare. In one review, only
 scheme for the degenerative spinal cord disorders
328  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Case Study 16.1   Acute onset tetraparesis
Signalment: 12 y.o. M/N Australian Shepherd presented
Discussion: The acute nature of this incident makes an
as an acute asymmetric, severely tetraparetic emergency.
infarction or intervertebral disk prolapse most likely.
Although the patient did not seem to be in any discom-
History: Patient is an active swimmer. Was swimming
fort, he did resist mroverment of his head and neck to the
in the owner's pool when he cried out and was taken
left. The decrease in the withdrawal response and the
from the water by owners.
lateralization of these clinical signs would make one
consider a lesion most likely localized to the left side
Examination: Patient bright and alert and not in signifi-
of the cervical intumescence. Horner's syndrome is
cant discomfort. Paresis very lateralized to the right,
more commonly seen with acute spinal cord disease,
involving right pelvic limb and left pelvic limb to a much
 with severe spinal cord compression or intramedullary
greater degree than left forelimb although all four limbs
disease.
were weaker thar expected and patient unable to stand.
 The acute nature and severity of the clinical signs
 demand a specific diagnosis.
Neurologic Examination: Bright and alert
All cranial nerve reflexes wNL
Outcome: This patient had an osteosarcoma of the
 Tetraparetic with right side weaker than left
second thoracic  vertebra. This was an unexpected
Knuckling of paws evident in both pelvic limbs but
outcome as the signs were acute, and the dog was not
neither forelirmb
in very much pain. The localization was slightly more
 Right-sided sympathetic palsy, Horner's syndrome
 caudal than would have been expected, and there was
Increased tone in both forelimbs
likely a shift of soft tissue (neoplasm) that occurred while
Stretch reflexes present and symmetrical in all four
swimming. There was no obvious pathologic fracture.
limbs
The neoplasm was surgically rermoved and followed with
Response to noxious stimuli symmetrical and appro-
chemotherapy.
priate in the pelvic limbs including perception and 
Osteosarcoma of the axial skeleton is often not as
withdrawal
aggressive as the same neoplasm affecting the limbs. The
 Perception of noxious stimuli present in forelimbs but
author (Hss) has had cases of histologically diagnosed
withdrawal diminished
spinal osteosarcoma that have survived up to 4 years. All
have had surgical decompression and follow-up chemo-
Neuroanatomic localization: C6 to T2
therapy (Figure B16.1).
Figure B16.1   A. CT with contrast shows the spine at the level of T1 of a dog that became acutely tetraparetic while
swimming. B. CT with contrast shows T2 of the same dog. Although his signs were acute, this osteosarcoma clearly caused
destruction of the vertebra over some period of time.
Chapter 16 Diagnosis of and Treatment Options for Disorders of the Spine 329
when dogs are at least 8 years or older with a mean
age of onset at 9 years. There is no sex predilection.
The pathologic features of DM include axonal
degeneration with secondary demyelination and
astroglial proliferation (sclerosis) in all spinal cord
funiculi, but consistently most severe in the dorsal
portion of the lateral funiculus and in the dorsal
columns of the middle to lower thoracic region
(Averill, 1973; Griffiths & Duncan, 1975; Braund &
Vandevelde, 1978; March et al., 2009). Neuronal cell
body degeneration or loss in the ventral horn of
the spinal cord is not a prominent histopathologic
finding.
 In 1975, Griffiths and Duncan published a series
 p sis r rs  ss jo
p oe a r a  u s
Figure 16.22 Tissue section from a dog's spinal cord
hyporeflexia and nerve root involvement, and they
showing gray matter destruction from a fibrocartilaginous
embolus. The area with a diffuse lighter pattern has been
termed the condition chronic degenerative radicu-
damaged by a lack of perfusion.
lomyelopathy (Griffiths & Duncan, 1975). Recent
histopathologic studies of dogs in the late disease
stage with lower motor neuron (LMN) signs have
of animals is further described in Table 16.1. Breed
documented denervation atrophy in muscle, nerve
predispositions suggest that many of these disor-
 fiber loss with axonal degeneration, and secondary
ders have an inherited basis. Initial clinical signs 
 myelin loss in myelinated fibers of peripheral
 often are worse in the pelvic limbs but then prog-
 nerves (Awano et al., 2009). The clinical spectrum
ress to involve the thoracic limbs and possibly the
of DM has now been broadened to involve both the
brainstem and forebrain. Definitive diagnosis of
 UMN and LMN systems and is considered a mul-
these diseases is usually determined by histopa-
tisystem disease to involve central and peripheral
thology of the affected tissues. Degenerative spinal
 axons (Johnston et al, 2001; Coates & Wininger,
-oxe pue Auedouaau Suaioau siaprosp pron
2010).
-oedoisty a uo paseq parssen are Auedou
 Since most of the dogs in these initial reports
 logic features. Canine degenerative myelopathy
were German Shepherd Dogs, the disease also was
(DM), the most common degenerative spinal cord
 called German Shepherd Dog myelopathy (Braund
disorder, is covered in the next section. A more
& Vandevelde, 1978). However, in these same
extensive list of degenerative conditions and the
reports, other breeds were represented (Zaki &
breeds they affect can be found in The Handbook
Prata, 1976; Braund & Vandevelde, 1978; De Risio
of Veterinary Neurology, 5th edition (Lornez et al.,
& Platt, 2010). Canine DM is now recognized as a
2010).
common problem in a number of pure breeds and
mixed breeds with an overall prevalence of 0.19%
(Coates et al., 2007; Awano et al., 2009).
Degenerative myelopathy
History, signalment, and epidemiology
Pathophysiology
Canine DM was first described by Averill in 1973
The cause underlying canine DM has been enig-
as an insidious, progressive, general propriocep-
matic for many years. Recently, Awano et al. identi-
tive (GP) ataxia and upper motor neuron (UMN)
fied a c.118G>A transition in the SOD1 gene that
spastic paresis of the pelvic limbs ultimately
predicted an E40K missense underlying canine
leading to paraplegia and necessitating euthanasia
DM (Awano et al., 2009). In this initial study,
(Averill, 1973). The earliest clinical signs begin
there was a highly significant association between
330  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Table 16.1 Classification of myelin, axonal, and neuronal disorders of the CNS (spinal cord) and peripheral nervous system
(PNS)
Neuroanatomic Pathology
Specific Description
CNS—Myelopathy/Encephalomyelopathy
Myelinopathy
Hypomyelination
Dysmyelination: leukodystrophy; myelinolytic disorders
Leukomyelopathy
Leukoencephalomyelopathy
Spongy degeneration
Myelin vacuolation
Neuronal vacuolation
Axonopathy—Wallerian degeneration, distal axonopathy
Central axonopathy 
(dying-back neuropathy), segmental degeneration
Central-peripheral axonopathy
Central-peripheral distal axonopathy
Neuroaxonal dystrophy
Axonal transport disorder
Multisystem degeneration
Axonopathy,neuronopathy and neuropathy
PNS—Neuropathy
Neuronopathy - degeneration and loss of neurons,
Motor neuronopathy
neurofibrillary accumulations in neurons
Sensory neuronopathy
Myelinopathy
Segmental demyelination
Hypomyelination
Axonopathy
Sensory-motor neuropathy: distal sensorimotor;
central-peripheral distal axonopathy
Sensory neuropathy
Metabolic neuropathy
Autonomic neuropathy
homozygosity for the SOD1:c.118A allele and the
of muscle movements, difficulty in speaking
DM phenotype in Pembroke Welsh Corgis and
and swallowing, muscle atrophy, and severe
also in four other dog breeds: Boxers, Chesapeake
weakness.
Bay Retrievers, German Shepherd Dogs, and
 In dogs, not all SOD1:c.118A homozygotes
Rhodesian Ridgebacks. Mutations in the SOD1
develop clinical signs. DM appears to be an incom-
gene are known to cause some forms of familial
pletely penetrant autosomal recessive disease;
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS—Lou Gehrig's
whereas most human SOD1 mutations are autoso-
disease) in humans. ALS, the most common adult
mal dominant. Thus, homozygosity for the E40K
motor neuron disease, is characterized by loss
mutation is a major risk factor for canine DM.
of motor neurons causing stiffness and slowing
The DM-associated SOD1:c.118A allele has been
Chapter 16 Diagnosis of and Treatment Options for Disorders of the Spine 331
detected in more than 100 different dog breeds
drawal) reflexes may also be normal or show
(Coates, JR., pers. comm.). The mutant allele
crossed extension (suggestive of chronic UMN
appears to be very common in some breeds, and
dysfunction).
DM is considered a recognized health issue by the
breed club health committees (see AKC Canine
Health Foumdation website). Recently, another
Late disease (LMN signs)
mutation in the SOD1 gene has been discovered in
If the DM-affected patient is not euthanized early,
a DM-affected Bernese Mountain Dog (Wininger
clinical signs will progress to LMN paraplegia and
et al., 2011). This finding serves as a reminder that
ascend to affect the thoracic limbs within 18-24
direct DNA tests indicate the presence or absence
 months. LMN sigms emerge as hyporeflexia of the
of disease-causing alleles but cannot be used to
patellar and withdrawal reflexes, flaccid paralysis,
rule out a diagnosis because other sequence vari-
and widespread muscle atrophy begirning in the
ants in the same gene or in a different gene might
pelvic limbs as the patients become nonambu-
produce a similar disease phenotype.
latory (Matthews & de Lahunta, 1985; Awano
et al., 2009). The paresis becomes more symmetrical
and progresses to flaccid tetraplegia. Widespread,
Clinical spectrum
severe loss of muscle mass occurs in the axial and
 appendicular musculature. Most previous reports
Dogs with DM follow a predictive pattern of clini-
attributed loss of muscle mass to disuse but flac-
cidity in patients with protracted disease suggests
 N  saq   s l
denervation. Cranial nerve signs include dyspha-
limb paresis and GP ataxia to progress to LMN
gia and inability to bark. Onset of urinary and fecal
paraparesis and then spreads to involve the tho-
incontinence is variable but is frequently reported
racic limbs and brainstem. The clinical course of
at the time of paraplegia.
DM can vary after the presumptive diagnosis with
a mean time for disease duration of 6-12 months
in larger dog breeds, when dogs become nonam-
Diagnosis
bulatory. Pet owners usually elect euthanasia when
their dogs can no longer support weight in their
Accurate antemortem diagnosis is based on pattern
pelvic limbs. The pet owner can care for smaller
recogmition of the progression of clinical signs sup-
dog breeds over a longer time. The median disease
duration in the Pembroke Welsh Corgi was 19
-soueip Areuoisnxa pue Areuoisniu Aq panod
tic testing. A careful neurologic examination
is
months (Coates et al., 2007).
fundamental to developing a diagnostic approach.
 Lack of paraspinal hyperesthesia is a key clinical
Early disease (UMN signs)
feature of DM that distinguishes it from other com-
pressive myelopathies. An antemortem diagnosis
The earliest clinical signs of DM are GP ataxia and
of canine DM is based on ruling out other spinal
mild spastic paresis in the pelvic limbs. Wom nails
cord compressive diseases. A presumptive diagno-
sis of DM often is made based on lack of clinically
lameness are common. At disease onset, asymme-
relevant compressive myelopathy as determined
 try of signs and spinal reflex abnormalities consis-
by MRI. If MRI is unavailable, CT/myelography
tent with UMN paresis (T3-L3 spinal segments)
also can be performed. Often imaging reveals
are commonly reported. Patellar reflexes may be
disk protrusions that can confound a diagnosis
normal or exaggerated to clonus; however, hypo-
of DM. Ultimately, the clinician must be guided
reflexia early in the course of the disease has also
by clinical experience to evaluate for rapidity of
been reported (Griffiths & Duncan, 1975). Involve-
disease progression, presence of paraspinal hyper-
ment of the dorsal roots of the femoral nerve may
esthesia, and amount of spinal cord compression
inhibit sensory impulses from stretch receptors
to account for the significance of the compressive
located in the quadriceps muscle. Flexor (with-
myelopathy.
332Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Electrodiagnostic testing is useful for detecting
-d a (sp 9 = u) Adsud cu
evidence of neuromuscular disease. Early in the
therapy regimen consisted of active and passive
 progression of DM, when UMN signs predomi-
exercises without taking into account disease
 nate, electromyography (EMG) and nerve conduc-
stage or UMN/LMN
J signs. Although  study
tion studies are within normal limits. Later in
limitations included lack of randomization and
the disease course, with emergence of LMN signs,
definitive diagnosis, small group size, and bias
EMG reveals multifocal :
spontaneous activity,
from owner perception, results warrant further
fibrillation potentials, and positive sharp waves in
investigation into the efficacy of rehabilitation
the appendicular musculature. Recordings of com-
 in DM-affected dogs. Caution must be taken
pound muscle action potentials (M waves) from
when rehabilitation, especially therapeutic exer-
stimulation of mixed nerves have shown decreases
cise, is considered as these dogs can be easily
in amplitudes consistent with axonopathy, and
exhausted, and return on effort, without care, can
temporal dispersion and decreased motor nerve
be counterproductive.
conduction velocities that also signify demyelin-
In the face of inevitable gradual progression,
ation (March et al., 2009).
regardless of various therapeutic modalities, it is
A DNA test based on the SOD1 mutation is com-
 important to realize the emotional support a pet
mercially available and can assist in the diagnosis
owner can provide to maintain quality of life for
of DM. Dogs homozygous for the mutation are at
their pet. As a DM-affected dog progresses through
risk for developing DM and will contribute one
the disease stages, the pet owner encounters the
chromosome with the mutant allele to all of their
challenges of at-home management and providing
ofspring. The heterozygotes are DM carriers and
 appropriate daily care for their pet. Ultimately, the
are less likely to develop clinical DM but could
pet owmer will need to make the decision for
pass on a chromosome with the mutant allele to
humane euthanasia, which often is guided with
half of their offspring. The normal homozygotes
assistance from their veterinarian.
are unlikely to develop DM and will provide all of
their offspring with a protective normal allele. A
 test result that indicates a dog is at risk can support
Surgical and nonsurgical options for
 a presumptive diagnosis of DM in light of typical
spinal cord conditions
 clinical signs and normal findings on neuroimag-
ing and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis. The
Surgical considerations
 SOD1 DNA test is of potential use to dog breeders
wishing to reduce the incidence of DM in the breed 
Almost all surgical interventions of the spine
or line.
involve decompression of the spinal cord and/or
stabilization of the spine for realignment and pre
Management overview
 In those cases where spinal cord integrity is pre
 sumed intact, determined by the animal's response
Pharmacotherapies including drugs and nutri-
to noxious stimuli, the results are often favorable.
tional supplements for canine DM have been
 This is true even though a wide choice of surgical
empiric with lack of evidence-based medicine
approaches for determining efficacy. The long-term
mendous amount of plasticity in the neural tissues,
 prognosis of DM is poor. To date, no prospective
and even in the face of significant permanent spinal
studies have established whether exercise has a
cord damage, an acceptable recovery can occur.
beneficial effect in DM-affected dogs. Kathmann ef
Successful outcome is related to the rapidity of
al. reported survival data from 22 DM affected
the spinal cord compromise, the amount of spinal
dogs that received varying degrees of physiother-
cord compression, and the chronicity of spinal cord
apy (Kathmann et al., 2006). Dogs that received
compression. This was first clearly demonstrated
intensive physiotherapy had significantly longer
by the balloon compression experiments per-
survival times (mean = 255 days) compared
to
formed by Tarlov in the 1950s (Tarlov, 1954). These
dogs that received moderate (mean = 130 days) or
variables do not determine successful outcomes
Chapter 16 Diagnosis of and Treatment Options for Disorders of the Spine 333
Case Study 16.2 Degenerative myelopathy
Signalment: 9 y.o. M/N German Shepherd Dog with
common spinal cord disorder in older dogs. Due to the
 progressive asymmetric incoordination of pelvic limbs.
progressive and insidious nature of a disk protrusion.
spinal hyperesthesia may or may not be a clinical sign.
History: Dragging toenails for about 1 month. Difficulty
 Degenerative conditions, such as degenerative myelopa-
nsing fromt sit and down positions.
thy should also be considered a differential in patients
with progressive paraparesis. It is important to perform
Examination: Patient bright and alert. Incoordination
thorough cross-sectional imaging of the spine to diag-
and worn nails evident in both pelvic limbs
nose extradural compression or intrarmedullary disease
A presumptive diagnosis of degenerative myelopathy is
Neurologic Examination: Bright and alert
based on ruling out these causes of acquired myelopathy.
Cranial nerves wNL
which may be treatable. Degenerative myelopathy can
CP ataxia present both pelvic limbs. Worse left
only be definitively diagnosed based on microscopic
Paw replacement deficits evident both pelvic limbs
examination of the spinal cord tissue.
Worse left
 Hopping responses reduced both pelvic limbs.
Outcome: The DNA test for the SOD1 mutation was
Stretch reflexes present and symmetrical all four limbs
homozygous (at risk) for the mutant allele. Since the test
Response to noxious stimuli symmetrical and appro-
result only reveals a risk factor, the owner wanted to rule
priate in pelvic limbs
out a treatable cause. A spinal MRl from T3 to the sacrumt
Crossed-extensor reflex elicited on left when flexor
was performed and revealed a mild disk protrusion at the
reflex performed on right
lumbosacral disk space. Since there were no supportive
 No spinal hyperesthesia
clinical signs of degenerative lumbosacral stenosis, the
most likely presumptive diagnosis was degenerative
Neuroanatomic localization: T3-L3
myelopathy.
The owner opted to have the patient monitored
Discussion: Chronic
progressive
presentation
monthly by her veterinarian and pursued physical reha-
 absence of paraspinal hyperesthesia establishes a unique
bilitation  including  underwater treadmill  therapy.
list of differentials. This patient manifested paraparesis
cavaletti, cone weaving, and RoM exercises. Six months
with intact spinal reflexes, typical for UMN signs in the
after diagnosis, patellar and flexor reflexes became
pelvic limbs. This provides localization cranial to the
reduced. The patient also was becoming more fatigued
lumbosacral intumescence (cranial to L3). Forelimb func-
with exercises. It was opted to continue only with the
tion was nommal, placing the lesion caudal to the cervi-
underwater treadmill therapy and focus on massage and
cothoracic inturmescence (caudal to T3). A key finding is
passive range-of-motion exercises
the lack of paraspinal hyperesthesia, ruling out involve-
The patient became nonambulatory paraparetic 10
ment of pain-sensitive tissues (e.g., nerve root, disk, peri-
 months after diagnosis, and muscle wasting was evident
csteum, joint, muscle). A neoplastic mass within the
in the pelvic limbs. The patient developed urinary incon-
spinal cord is very plausible because of lesion asymme-
tinence. A cart to support the pelvic limbs was recom-
ty. The lack of spinal hyperesthesia would be consistent
mended to enhance mobility. However, the owner felt
since there are no nociceptive fibers in the spinal cord
 her dog's desire and attitude was diminishing. and she
tissue. Hansen type ll intervertebral disk protrusion is a
opted for euthanasia.
based on absolutes, and many dogs have recovered
whose performance is beyond that of the standard
full function unexpectedly over time.
pet may not recover enough function to perform at
An issue that has not been given adequate atten-
the same level. Will a spinal surgery absorb the
tion is determining prognosis in the recovery
shock of a dog hitting the flyball box? Will he
process of the canine athlete or working dog. These
handle the turn? It is difficult to assure a police
dogs depend upon complete recovery to an extreme
officer that his canine parmer will be completely
level of performance. The author's (HSS) experi-
 dependable when the officer's life is on the line.
ence with determining prognosis in working dogs
Following changes in ROM of experimentally
has been complicated by the fact that the dog
produced surgical injury to the cervical spine of
334Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
mixed-breed dogs produced interesting results
have been experimentally transected make the best
(Panjabi et al., 1988). A sham surgery, which con-
 recovery when rehabilitation is immediate (Chau
sisted of a skin incision and reflection of the paraspi-
 et al., 1998). Whether there is a best middle ground
nal musculature and periosteum was compared to
 for these two extremes is a currently unexplored
territory. Anecdotal recommendations abound.
(1)   Cutting of the supra- and infraspinous liga-
It is hard to give a well-desigmed program once
ments at C4-C5
patients progress beyond the acute phase as indi-
(2)
 C4 laminectomy
vidual patients take to their exercise programs dif-
(3) C4 laminectomy and facetectomy.
ferently. Usually by week 8, patients can start
training for their particular event. The goal is to
ROM was compared at the levels of C3-C4, C4-C5,
keep the exercises below full exertion for at least
and C5-C6.
12 weeks. There is no standard, as often we do not
In injury (1) and (2), the ROM was increased
kmow whether the back pain is from bone, disk,
compared to the sham procedure for about 2 weeks.
muscle, joint, or ligament.
In injury (3), the ROM was actually decreased for
This is similar to the standard treatment for sci-
atica in people. The specific cause of this particular
about 6-8 weeks. The differences in ROM were
only appreciated during the healing phase, but
condition is poorly understood, yet stretching and
were significant. At 25 weeks, all animals exhibited
strengthening done slowly usually works. Conser-
the same ROM as the sham control. This does give
vative therapies are usually applied after the acute
episode subsides.
us some guideline as to when to expect complete
recovery. A similar study concludes that ROM
Amju e u (o eimsaid) [eou ci suma
studies when evaluating flexion-extension, lateral
New approaches to spinal
movement, and rotation after 6 months of healing
cord rehabilitation
(Crisco et al., 1990). ROM does not equate with
strength, but return of strength in the face of full
It has been known for almost a half century that
ROM might mean that spinal surgery may not limit
subprimates are less dependent than primates on
a canine athlete's ability to compete. More scien-
intracranial centers to walk (Grillner, 1975; Kiehn,
tific information on how to get the best return to
2006). The typical hemiplegia seen in severe intra-
normal function is sorely needed.
ranial stroke victims is virtually unheard of in
dogs. There is significant evidence that the dog
does not have separate right brain, left brain
Conservative therapy
functions as occurs in man (Springer & Deutsch)
1997). With extensive hemispheric damage, the
Very little scientific evidence is available about the
dog quickly learns to compensate. The locomotion
treatment or prevention of spinal injuries in the
generators that are located within the spinal cord
canine athlete.
ps u p Aads q qea uad oi
Cage confinement with spinal injuries treated
with the other limbs is well developed in the dog
conservatively is still very popular but has changed
(Handa et al., 1986). The reflex arcs so eloquenly
dramatically from the 12 weeks common in the
described by Sherrington modify this locomotion
1970s to the 24 weeks we currently recommend.
so that it is appropriate to the environment without
This kind of extreme confinement is very often suc-
having to draw much cortical attention. Grillner
cessful when the patient is recovering from an
has extensively reviewed the history of these dis-
acute episode of spinal discomfort. We use pain
coveries (Grillner, 1975). An animal with a com-
medication judiciously, and walks are for defeca-
plete spinal cord transection at T13 not only walks
tion and urination only. Many physical therapists
very well on the treadmill but can adjust its speed
believe that cage confinement is likely to be detri-
to that of the changing treadmill. This animal has
mental as the experience in people shows that early
formed new connections within its spinal cord.
therapy works best. Animals whose spinal cords
Afferent neurons that originally were part of the
Chapter 16 Diagnosis of and Treatment Options for Disorders of the Spine 335
reflex pathway now initiate movement by way of
BIRCHARD, S. 2006. Disorders of the spinal cord. In:
new connections to the pattern generators (Cote &
BIRCHARD, S. & SHERDING, R. (eds.), Saunder's
Gossard, 2004). Turbes showed that virtually any
Manual of Small Anirmal Practice, 3rd ed. St. Louis, MO:
neural information that spans the gap of a spinal
Saunders-Elsevier, 1294-1303.
cord defect could initiate good movement (Turbes,
BRAUND, K.G.& VANDEVELDE, M. 1978. German
 Shepherd dog myelopathy—a morphologic and mor-
1997). These discoveries are not new, but the
phometric study. A I Vet Res, 39, 1309-1315.
massive locomotion literature has had very little
BREIT, S. 2002. Functional adaptations of facet geometry
impact on the way we treat the canine spinal
in the canine thoracolumbar and lumbar spine (Th10-
 patient. By encouraging new cormections and
L6). Arr Anat, 184, 379-385.
retraining lost motions, the plasticity of the canine
BREIT, S. & KUNZEL, W. 2001. Breed specific osteologi-
spinal cord is likely to outperform any recovery
cal features of the canine lumbosacral junction. Anr
expected in man. It behooves us to look into this
Anat, 183, 151-157.
rich literature. Getting spinal transected animals to
BURBIDGE, H.M., PFEIFFER, D.U., & GUILFORD, W.G.
walk on a treadmill works best under a series of
1999. Presence of cervical vertebral malformation in
 prescribed circumstances, and these are most defi-
 Dobermann puppies and the effects of diet and growth
rate. Aust Vet J, 77, 814-818.
nitely considerations that should bear fruit for
those working with the spine and its functions in
BURR, D.B.,FORWOOD, M.R., FYHRIE, D.P., MARTIN,
R.B.,SCHAFFLER, M.B.,& TURNER, C.H.1997. Bone
the canine athlete.
microdamage and skeletal fragility in osteoporotic
and stress fractures. ∫ Bore Mirer Res, 12, 6-15.
BURR, D.B., TURNER, C.H., NAICK, P, FORWOOD,
Webliography
M.R., AMBROSIUS, W., HASAN, M.S., & PIDAPARTI,
R 1998. Does microdamage accumulation affect the
Bergknut, N. (March 15, 2011) Intervertebral disc degen
mechanical properties of bone? / Biormech, 31, 337-345.
eration in dogs. Vetscite.org. Accessed November 8,
BUTTERMANN, G.R., SCHENDEL, M.J., KAHMANN,
www.vetscite.org/publish/articles/000102/
R.D., LEWIS, J.L.,& BRADFORD, D.S.1992. In vi70
2012.
facet joint loading of the canine lumbar spine. Spine,
index.html
Medical Legal Art (October 27, 2009) Cervical spine and
17, 81-92.
intervertebral disc anatomy—female version. Youtube.
CARTER, D.R. & HAYES, W.C. 1977. The compressive
MEDICALLEGALART.com. Accessed Novemebr 7,
behavior of bone as a two-phase porous structure.
2012. www.youtube.com/ watch?v=RMZ0dSJUzTg&f
I Bone foint Surg Am, 59, 954-962.
eature=fvsr
CHAU,C., BARBEAU,H.,& ROSSIGNOL, S. 1998. Early
locomotor training with clonidine in spinal cats. / Neu-
rophysiol, 79,392-409.
CHURCHER, R.K. & CHILD, G. 2000. Chiari 1/
References
syringomyelia complex in a King Charles Spaniel.
Aust Vet }, 78, 92-95.
ADAMS, W, DANIEL, G., PARDO,A., & SELCER, R.
COATES, J.R. 2000. Intervertebral disk disease. Vet Clin
1995. Magnetic Resonance imaging of the caudal
North Am Small Anim Pract,30,77-110, vi.
humbar and lumbosacral spine in 13 dogs (1990-1993).
COATES, J.R. & WININGER, FA. 2010. Canine degen-
Vet Radiol Lltrasound,36,3-13.
erative myelopathy. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
AVERILL, D.R., Jr. 1973. Degenerative myelopathy in the
Pract, 40, 929-950.
aging German Shepherd dog: clinical and pathologic
COATES, J.R., MARCH, PA., OGLESBEE, M., RUAUX,
findings. / Arm Vet Med Assoc, 162, 1045-1051.
C.G., OLBY, N.J., BERGHAUS, R.D., O'BRIEN, D.P,
AWANO, T, JOHNSON, G.S., WADE, C.M., KATZ, M.L.,
KEATING, J.H., JOHNSON, G.S., & WILLIAMS, D.A.
JOHNSON,G.C.,TAYLOR, J.F.,PERLOSKI, M., BIAGI,
2007. Clinical characterization of a familial degenera-
T., BARANOWSKA, 1, LONG, S., MARCH, PA.,
tive myelopathy in Pembroke Welsh Corgi dogs. / Vet
OLBY, N.J., SHELTON, G.D., KHAN, S., O'BRIEN,
Interr Med, 21, 1323-1331.
D.P, LINDBLAD-TOH, K.,& COATES, JR. 2009.
COTE, M.P. & GOSSARD, JP. 2004. Step training-
Genome-wide association analysis reveals a SOD1
 dependent plasticity in spinal cutaneous pathways.
mutation in canine degenerative myelopathy that
Neurosci, 24, 11317-11327.
resembles amyorophic lateral sclerosis. Proc Natt Acad
CRISCO, J.J., PANJABI, M.M., WANG, E., PRICE, M.A.,
Sci LI S A, 106, 2794-2799.
& PELKER, R.R. 1990. The injured canine cervical
336  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
spine after six months of healing. An in vitro three-
centrations in German shepherd dogs with chronic
dimensional study. Spine, 15, 1047-1052.
degenerative radiculomyelopathy. Vet Rec, 148,
DA COSTA, R.C, PARENT, J., DOBSON, H., HOLM-
403407.
BERG, D., & PARTLOW,G.2006.Comparison of mag-
JONES, JC. & INZANA, K.D. 2000. Subclinical CT
Sl u Aydenaonau pue Qubeu aoueuosan oau
abnormalities in the lumbosacral spine of older large-
 Doberman pinscher dogs with cervical spondylomy-
breed dogs. Vet Radiol Lltrasound, 41, 19-26.
elopathy. Vet Radiot LIttrasound,47,523-531.
KATHMANN, 1., CZINAUSKAS, S., DOHERR, M.G.,
DE RISIO, L.& PLATT, S.R. 2010. Fibrocartilaginous
STEFFEN, F., & JAGGY, A. 2006. Daily controlled
embolic myelopathy in small animals. Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract,40,859-869
suspected degenerative myelopathy. ∫ Vet Interr Med,
DEWEY, C.W. 2008. A Practical Guide to Canine and Feline
20, 927-932.
Neuotogy, 2nd ed. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell.
KIEHN, O. 2006. Locomotor circuits in the mammalian
DROST, W.T., LEHENBAUER, T.W., & REEVES, J. 2002.
spinal cord. Annu Rev Neurosci, 29, 279-306.
Mensuration of cervical vertebral ratios in Doberman
KRANENBURG,H.C., WESTERVELD, L.A.,VERLAAN,
pinschers and Great Danes. Vet Radiot LIltrasound, 43,
JJ., ONER, FC, DHERT, WJ., VOORHOUT, G.,
124-131.
HAZEWINKEL, H.A., & MEIJ, B.P 2010. The dog
FEENY, D.A. & OLIVER, J.E. 1980. Blunt spinal trauma
61 ‘ auis ing 2HsI 1og iapo reue ue s
in the dog and cat: insight into radiographic lesions.
1325-1329.
IAm Anim Hosp Assoc, 16, 885-890.
KRANENBURG, H.J., VOORHOUT, G., GRINWIS,G.C.,
FLORA,L.,HASSING,G.S.,CLOYD,G.G.,BEVAN,J.A.,
HAZEWINKEL, H.A., & MEIJ, B.P. 2011. Diffuse idio-
PARFITT, A.M., & VILLANUEVA, A.R. 1981. The
pathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH) and spondylosis
long-term skeletal effects of EHDP in dogs. Metab Bone
deformans in purebred dogs: a retrospective radio-
Dis Retat Res, 3, 289-300.
graphic study. Vet J, 190, e84-e90.
FOURIE, S.L. & KRBERGER, R.M. 1999. Relationship of
LEE, T.C., MOHSIN, S., TAYLOR, D., PARKESH, R.,
 cervical spinal cord diameter to vertebral dimensions:
GUNNLAUGSSON, T, O'BRIEN, F.J., GIEHL, M., &
a radiographic study of normal dogs. Vet Radiol Lfltra-
GOWIN, W. 2003. Detecting microdamage in bone. f
sound, 40, 137-143.
Anat,203,161-172.
FROST, H.M. 1960. Presence of microscopic cracks in viv0
LEEP HUNDERFUND, A.N. & WIJDICKS, E.F. 2009.
in bone. Herry Ford Hosp Med Bull, 8, 25-35.
-  p s 
GODDE, T. & STEFFEN, F. 2007. Surgical treatment of
elia). Rev Neurol Dis, 6, E54-E61.
lumbosacral foraminal stenosis using a lateral
LORNEZ, M., COATES, J.C., & KENT, M. 2010. Handbook
approach in twenty dogs with degenerative lumbosa-
gf Veterinary Neurotogy,5thed.St. Louis, MO:Saunders-
cral stenosis. Vet Surg, 36, 705-713.
Elsevier.
GRIFFITHS, 1.R. & DUNCAN, 1.D. 1975. Chronic degen-
MARCH, PA., COATES, J.R., ABYAD, R.J., WILLIAMS,
erative radiculomyelopathy in the dog. ∫ Srmrall Anim
D.A., O'BRIEN, D.P., OLBY, N.J., KEATING, JH, &
Pract, 16, 461471.
OGLESBEE, M. 2009. Degenerative myelopathy in
GRILLNER, S. 1975. Locomotion in vertebrates: central
18 Pembroke Welsh Corgi dogs. Vet Pathol, 46,
mechanisms and reflex interaction. Physiot Rev, 55,
241-250.
247-304.
MATTHEWS, N.S. & DE LAHUNTA, A. 1985. Degenera-
HANDA, Y., NAITO, A., WATANABE, S., KOMATSU,S.
tive myelopathy in an adult miniature poodle. ∫ Am
& SHIMIZU, Y. 1986. Functional recovery of locomo-
Vet Med Assoc, 186, 1213-1215.
tive behavior in the adult spinal dog. Tohoku ∫ Exp Med,
MAYHEW, PD., KAPATKIN, A.S., WORTMAN, J.A., &
148, 373-384.
VITE, C.H. 2002. Association of cauda equina com-
HANSEN, H.J. 1951. A pathologic-anatomical interpreta-
  s asa   s
tion of disc degeneration in dogs. Acta Orthop Scand,
signs in dogs with degenerative lumbosacral stenosis.
20, 280-293.
Am Anim Hosp Assoc,38,555-562.
HASEGAWA, K., TURNER, C.H., CHEN, J., & BURR
MOTOIE, H., NAKAMURA, T., O'UCHI, N., NISHI-
D.B. 1995. Effect of disc lesion on microdamage accu-
KAWA, H., KANOH, H., ABE, T., & KAWASHIMA,
 mulation in lumbar vertebrae under cyclic compres-
H. 1995. Effects of the bisphosphonate YM175 on bone
sion loading. Clin Orthop Retat Res, February(311),
mineral density, strength, structure, and turmover in
190198.
ovariectomized beagles on concomitant dietary
JAGGY,A.2010.Attas and TextbookofSmallArimal Neurol-
calcium restriction. / Bone Miner Res, 10, 910-920.
ogy. Hannover, Germany: Schlutersche.
NORRDIN,
R.，
ROBINSON，H.,POWERS,B.，&
JOHNSTON, PE, KNOX, K, GETTINBY, G,&
HISTAND, B. 1990. Evaluation of microdamage in
GRIFFITHS, 1.R. 2001. Serum alpha-tocopherol con-
canine trabecular bone in hyperadrenocorticism and
Chapter 16 Diagnosis of and Treatment Options for Disorders of the Spine  337
radiation injury. In: 22nd International Workshop on
TURNER, C.H. 2002. Biomechanics of bone: determi-
Hard Tissue Biology. Sun Valley, Idaho.
nants of skeletal fragility and bone quality. Csteoporos
PANJABI, M.M., PELKER, R., CRISCO,J.J., THIBODEAU,
Int, 13, 97-104.
L., & YAMAMOTO, 1. 1988. Biomechanics of healing
WADA, N., HORI, H., & TOKURIKI, M. 1993. Electro-
 of posterior cervical spinal injuries in a canine model.
myographic and kinermatic studies of tail movements
Spine, 13, 803-807.
in dogs during treadmill locomotion. J Morphol, 217,
POCOCK, N.A., EISMAN, JA., HOPPER, J.L., YEATES
105-113.
M.G., SAMBROOK, PN., & EBERL, S. 1987. Genetic
WALKER, C., VIERCK, C.J, Jr., & RITZ, L.A. 1998.
determinants of bone mass in adults. A twin study.
Balance in the cat: role of the tail and effects of
∫Clin Invest, 80, 706-710.
sacrocaudal transection. Behav Brain Res, 91, 41-
RESNICK, D. 1985. Degenerative diseases of the verte-
47.
bral column. Radiotogy, 156, 3-14.
WESTWORTH, D.R. & STURGES, B.K. 2010. Congenital
RUSBRIDGE, C.& KNOWLER, S.P 2003. Hereditary
spinal malformations in small animals. Vet Clin North
aspects of occipital bone hypoplasia and syringomy-
Am Small Anim Pract, 40,951-981.
elia (Chiari type I malformation) in cavalier King
WININGER,FA., ZENG, R., JOHNSON, G.S., KATZ,
Charles spaniels. Vet Rec, 153, 107-112.
M.L., JOHNSON, G.C., BUSH, W.W., JARBOE, J.M.,&
RUSBRIDGE, C., MACSWEENY, JE., DAVIES, J.V.,
COATES, J.R. 2011. Degenerative myelopathy in a
CHANDLER, K., FITZMAURICE, S.N., DENNIS, R.,
Bermese Mountain Dog with a novel SODl missense
CAPPELLO,R.,& WHEELER,S.J. 2000.Syringohy-
mutation. ∫ Vet Intern Med, 25, 1166-1170.
dromyelia in Cavalier King Charles spaniels. ∫ Am
WOOD, K.B., SCHENDEL, M.J., PASHMAN, R.S., BUT-
Anim Hosp Assoc, 36, 34-41.
TERMANN, G.R.,LEWIS,J.L.,OGILVIE,J.W.,&
SLIJPER, E.J. 1946. Comparative Biological-Anatomicat
BRADFORD, D.S. 1992. In vivo analysis of canine
Investigations on the Vertebral Cotumn and Spinat Mus-
intervertebral and facet motion. Spine, 17, 1180-
culature of Mammals. Cormell University, NY: North-
1186.
Holland Publishing Co.
 ZAKI, F.A. & PRATA, R.G. 1976. Necrotizing myelopathy
SMITH, G.K. & WALTER, M.C. 1988. Spinal decompres-
secondary to embolization of hermiated intervertebral
sive procedures and dorsal compartment injuries:
disk material in the dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc, 169,
 comparative biomechanical study in canine cadavers.
222-228.
ArmVet Res,49,266-273
ZIMMERMAN,
M.C.,
VUONO-HAWKINS,
M.,
SPRINGER, S. & DEUTSCH, G. 1997. Left Brain, Right
PARSONS, J.R., CARTER, F.M., GUTTELING, E., LEE,
Brain: Perspectives from Cognitive Neuroscience, 5th ed.
C.K., & LANGRANA, N.A. 1992. The mechanical
New York: W.H. Freeman and Company.
properties of the canine lumbar disc and motion
TARLOV, I.M. 1954. Spinal cord compression studies. II1.
segment. Spine, 17,213-220.
Time limits for recovery after gradual compression in
ZOTTI, A., GIANESELLA, M., GASPARINETTI, N.,
dogs. AMA Arch Neurot Psychiatry, 71, 588-597.
ZANETTI, E., & COZZI, B. 2011. A preliminary inves-
TURBES, C.C. 1997. Peripheral nerve (PNS) spinal cord
o p, a maq dsia a jo o
anastomoses bridging spinal cord
transection-
resistance" of the canine spine, and the frequency of
 enhancement of central neurons (CNS) axonal regen-
traumatic vertebral lesions at different spinal levels.
eration. Biomed Sci Instrum, 33,326-331.
Res Vet Sci, 90, 179-184.
17
Common Medical Disorders That
Can Affect Performance
H. Steven Steinberg, VMD, Dipl ACVIM (Neurology), CCRT
Summary
Peak performance in the canine athlete reguires a level of health that is quite different from
the sedate dog. For there to be success, many physiologic parameters have to be normal and
well integrated with an overwhelming number of interacting organ systems. Changes in the
nw e ane Aua ja ansem aaowan pue 'aaua Alddns suawusnou Aues ot Alqe s,apog
lous integration of thousands of biochemical reactions. Many substances respond to disease
states by increasing or decreasing their quantity per unit volume, which in turn can have
 profound effects on performance. Too much serum insulin or too little, poor intestinal absorp-
tion, and dehydration can all play a role in affecting serum glucose levels, raising or lowering
it out of the normal range and yet, in each case, decreased performance might be the only
clinical sign. Some diagnoses are harder to make and the signs themselves may be subtle.
Patients with hypoadrenocorticism often have an atypical form of this disease, and both
sodium and potassium values may be normal. Many of these patients are treated for gastro-
intestinal maladies, which then are blamed for the athlete's poor performance. Electrolyte
imbalances, endocrinopathies, failure to maintain adequate tissue oxygen, vascular abnor-
malities, inadequate nutrition, and nerve and muscle disorders are just some of the patholo-
gies that can mildly to severely affect performance. A thorough and complete examination
as well as appropriate preventi ve medicine and diagnostic testing are exceptionally important
to guarantee that an athlete is going to perform at their best.
Carine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation, First Edition. Edited by M. Christine Zink and Janet B. Van Dyke.
@2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
8EE
Chapter 17 Common Medical Disorders That Can Affect Performance 339
Electrolyte imbalances
 Serum calcium
 Serum glucose
Hypoadrenocorticism
 Blood urea nitrogen BUN
 Resting cortisol level
Hypoadrenocorticism, commonly called Addison's
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stimula-
disease is a failure of the two outer zones of the
tion test.
adrenal cortex to produce adequate amounts
of either mineralocorticoids or glucocorticoids or
Common clinical sigms:
both. In classic hypoadrenocorticism the mineralo-
corticoid and glucocorticoids are deficient, produc-
Lethargy
ing deficiencies of potassium and sodium exchange.
Weakness
Sodium is lost while potassium is retained produc-
Bradycardia
 ing an abnormal sodium :potassium ratio. Sodium
 Radiographic evidence of microcardia
and potassium are critical for maintaining an elec-
 Dehydration, vomiting, and diarrhea.
trical differential across cell membranes. The con-
centrations of these two electrolytes are the basis
 Clinical signs of hypoadrenocorticism are often
for nerve conduction and muscle contraction.
vague and may be inconsistent. Gastrointestinal
Atypical forms of this disease are becoming more
(GI) disease and overall weakness are common. In
frequently recognized.
most cases replacement hormone therapy is suc-
Diagnostic tests commonly recommended:
cessful and usually lifelong. There is a genetic pre-
disposition in the Bearded Collie, Standard Poodle,
 Serum sodium
Portuguese Water Dog, and Nova Scotia Duck
●
 Serum potassium
Tolling Retriever.
Case Study 17.1  Athlete with progressive lethargy and Gl upset
Signalment: 9 year-old M/N Labrador x Poodle mtixed
 Three months previous
breed.
 Sodium 149mEq/L
 Potassiur 4.7 mrEq/L
History: Rapid decline in activity. Had been an active
Urine specific gravity 1.048.
disc dog showing no signs of slowing down 1 year before
presentation. Owner describes patient becoming lethar-
Discussion: Any case requires the clinician to first ask
 gic rapidly, starting -1 year prior to presentation. when 
whether all of the clinical signs and laboratory findings
moving quickly, he stumbled and showed very little
can be explained by a single coherent diagnosis. The
interest in play. Difficult Cl upset, R/O food allergies.
cardiovascular changes, Cl disease, and generalized
Diets and medications had not helped.
nonspecific weakness could occur with numerous condi-
tions but with borderline sodiumr and potassiurr values,
it is reasonable to consider hypoadrenocorticism. ACTH
Examination: Crades lI/Vl systolic murmur, point of
stimulation test is an easy way to confir this, and with
maxirmum intensity: L 4th intercostal space, heart sounds
a 24-hour turnaround time, it was decided to start there.
bounding, pulses extremely thready and weak. No neu-
Resting cortisol was <0.7μg/dl and poststimulation
rologic deficits.
was <0.7 μg/dl, confirming a diagnosis of hypoadreno-
corticism.  Prestimulation  resting  cortisol  should be
1-5 μg/dl. The patient's cortisol levels did not change
Pertinent Laboratory Findings: Six months previous
with ACTH administration. Patient had not been on any
corticosteroids that might make the test results invalid.
Sodium 144mEq/L
This is usually a very treatable disease although treatment
Potassium 5.0mEq/L
is lifelong. It is rather common to have this condition
Sodium/potassium ratio 29 (normal >30)
with sodiumt and potassium that are not out of the normal
Normal abdominal ultrasound examination.
ranges, as was the case here.
340   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Hypocalcemia and hypercalcemia
The diagnosis of hypocalcemia is critical as the
dinical signs are serious and can progress quite
Calcium is critical for muscle contraction to occur.
quickly. Calcium replacement therapy is usually
Abnormal calcium levels have profound effects
very successful.
upon muscle function. Total calcium concentra-
tions are the sum of the ionized and nonionized
fractions. To determine the actual physiologic
Hypercalcemia
calcium level, one must know the ionized value
specifically.
Hypercalcemia in dogs is most commonly the
Calcium availability is extremely complicated.
sequela of a neoplastic process. In several cancers,
Sources of calcium, phosphorus, and Vitamin D
parathyroid hormone (PTH), parathyroid hor-
are in a constant state of flux. Parathormone over-
mone-related protein (PTHrP), cacitrol, and other
sees the absorption of calcium from the bone to
tumor-produced hormonal factors will raise serum
maintain normal serum calcium levels, and is con-
calcium levels. Parathyroid neoplasm(s) can pro-
trolled through a feedback loop determined by the
duce excess parathormone. Chronic renal disease
calcium levels in the serum. Vitamin D is critical
 in promoting calcium absorption in the intestines,
Some home-cooked diets and some commercial pet
but it is also involved in maintaining normal
foods may have excessive levels of Vitamin D
calcium and serum phosphorous levels for bone
 leading to hypercalcemia (Dr. Tina Conway, pers.
production.
comm.).
 Diagmostic tests commonly recommended:
Hypocalcemia
 Routine hemogram
 Routine serum chemistries
Hypocalcemia is actually quite uncommon, though
Routine urinalysis
hypocalcemia secondary to birthing and nursing is
Serum calcium
well documented. The most common cause of
Ionized calcium
hypocalcemia is iatrogenic, secondary to thyroid or
?
Parathyroid hormone
parathyroid surgery. Hypocalcemia can be caused
 Parathyroid hormone-related protein
by a lack of Vitamin D in the diet, leading to nutri-
 Radiographs
OAbdominal ultrasound.
Naturally occurring hypocalcemia secondary to
primary hypoparathyroidism is quite uncommon.
Common clinical sigms:
Hypocalcemia is quite devastating as so many
neuromuscular functions depend critically upon
●Polydypsia, polyuria
calcium.
鲁
Reluctance to exercise
 Diagnostic tests commonly recommended:
鲁
 Depression
●
 Inappetance
 Total calcium
●Weakness
 lonized calcium
●Stilted gait.
Parathyroid hormone
Vitamin D level.
 Common clinical sigms:
Hypokalemia
Seizures
Hypokalemia is common with excessive body
Muscle tremors
fluid loss. Vomiting and/or diarrhea are the most
Cramping
common causes of hypokalemia as potassium in
Aggression
the GI fluid is lost. At the same time, animals fre-
Facial rubbing.
quently have a decreased intake during GI mala-
Chapter 17 Common Medical Disorders That Can Affect Performance 341
dies. Any condition causing polyuria, such as renal
Hormone imbalances
disease or hyperadrenocorticism, can decrease the
serum potassium level.
Diabetes mellitus
 As potassium is a critical ion in maintaining
healthy cell membranes, weakness and cardiac
The most common cause of canine diabetes melli-
arrhythmias are commonly associated with its
tus is a lack of insulin secretion from the pancreatic
deficiency.
beta cells. Insulin is necessary for effective man-
 Diagnostic tests commonly recommended:
agement of glucose, the main source of energy
throughout the body. The neurologic component
●Routine hemogram
of long-standing or poorly controlled diabetes
●Routine serum chemistries, including electro-
mellitus is of potential importance to the canine
lytes
athlete. People commonly develop peripheral, par-
 Routine urinalysis
ticularly sensory, neuropathies in association with
 Serum potassium
their diagnosis of diabetes mellitus. Although the
EKG
nervous system does not require insulin to the
Radiography
same degree that other organs do to maintain
●Abdominal ultrasound.
normal health, the neuropathies are hard to avoid.
Some motor neuron neuropathies are seen in dogs
Common clinical signs:
with uncontrolled diabetes mellitus.
Diagmostic tests commonly recommended:
●Weakness
 Cardiac arrhythmias.
Fasting glucose
 Routine urinalysis
Glucose curve (while developing a treatment
Hypernatremia
plan).
Common clinical signs:
Increases in serum sodium are usually from exces-
sive loss of fluid (water) or excessive salt intake.
●Hind limb weakness
Because dogs control temperature through respira-
tion, increased panting without adequate replace-
ment of fluid losses can also deplete total body
Hyperadrenocorticism
water leading to dehydration. Diabetes insipidus
caused by CNS-driven excessive thirst is rare, but
Hyperadrenocorticism in dogs has a large number
also has been associated with hypernatremia.
of associated clinical signs, the severity of which
As sodium is extremely important for healthy
cell membranes, intracranial signs including sei-
varies widely. The condition is designated Canine
Cushing's Syndrome to distinguish it from the
zures and disorientation can occur
human disorder. All of the clinical signs of Canine
Diagnostic tests commonly recommended:
Cushing's Syndrome are the result of an excess
of circulating corticosteroids. The adrenal glands
 Routine hemogram
that produce corticosteroids are under a feedback
Routine serum chemistries
loop mechanism with a stimulating hormone,
Routine urinalysis
ACTH, produced in the pituitary gland. Pituitary-
 Serum sodium.
dependent hyperadrenocorticism occurs when too
much ACTH is produced. Excess ACTH produc-
Common clinical signs:
tion can occur from a large neoplasm of the pitu-
itary gland called a macroadenoma or a microscopic
Abnormal mentation
 group of cells called a microadenoma. In some nec-
Seizures
ropsies, neither can be found. A much less common
Weakness.
鲁
cause of Canine Cushing's Syndrome is an adrenal
342Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
tumor. Dogs are placed on corticosteroids orally or
 problems (Jaggy et al., 1994). One specific periph-
by injection for a large number of conditions. If
 eral neuropathy, degeneration of the recurrent
these doses exceed normal physiologic limits, iat-
 larymgeal nerves, causes decreased size and insuf-
rogenic hyperadrenocorticism can occur. Canine
ficient opening of the glottis. This condition is
Cushing's Syndrome has a propensity for smaller
called larymgeal paralysis. The association between
dogs but all breeds are at risk.
laryngeal paralysis and hypothyroidism is not
 Diagnostic tests commonly recommended:
straightforward, but there are quite a few refer-
ences to it (Braund et al., 1989; MacPhail & Monnet,
 Routine serum chemistries
2001).
Urinalysis
 Diagnostic tests commonly recommended:
ACTH stimulation test
 Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test
Basal thyroid hormone concentration
Urine cortisol: creatinine ratio
Free thyroxine concentration
 High-dose dexamethasone suppression test
 Serum endogenous canine thyroid-stimulating
Endogenous ACTH concentrations
hormone concentration
Radiography
Thyroid-stimulating hormone stimulation test
Abdominal ultrasonography
Thyrotropin-releasing  hormone  stimulation
 Magmetic resonance imaging.
test
Antithyroglobulin antibodies
Common clinical sigms:
Thyroid hormone autoantibodies.
 Increased appetite
Common clinical signs:
Polydypsia, polyuria
Hair loss
Dermatopathies
 Pendulous abdomen
Lethargy
Enlarged liver
Weight gain
Polyphagia
 Polyneuropathy including laryngeal paralysis.
Muscle weakness.
 Diagnosis of hypothyroidism is usually not a chal-
Hyperadrenocorticism is a very common disease,
 lenge as long as suspicion is raised. The diagnosis
and the clinical signs usually occur gradually and
cannot be made on a single T4 value as this is
are slowly progressive. It can be difficult to diag-
not an accurate reflection of the patient's thyroid
aaey aaesn uouuos uI sisal aul jo Aueu se asou
status. Replacement therapy is generally successful
 an incidence of false negatives and false positives.
although it can take months for the clinical signs
Medical management, radiation therapy, and
to resolve.
surgery are all possible treatments depending
upon an accurate diagnosis.
Insufficient oxygenation
Hypothyroidism
Anemia
Hypothyroidism is very common in dogs and
Anemia refers to the lack of adequate red blood
is the result of idiopathic atrophy or immune-
cells in the peripheral blood. Anemia is usually the
mediated thyroiditis. Dermal manifestations, such
result of one of three occurrences:
as alopecia, dry scaly skin, and hyperpigmentation
are most commonly recognized. Although there
（1）
 The red blood cells are not being produced in
has been a long-standing concern that hypothy-
adequate quantity to replace the ones lost to
roidism is associated with neuropathies, these
senescence.
findings have been very inconsistent, and replace-
(2)
The red blood cells are being lost to hemor-
ment therapy often does not resolve the neurologic
rhage or sequestration.
Chapter 17 Common Medical Disorders That Can Affect Performance 343
(3)  The red blood cells are being destroyed by
same time, the patient's fluid intake is usually
some active process.
compromised.
Blood volume loss is almost always associated
The clinical signs are related to the rate of the red
with bleeding secondary to a trauma or pathologic
cell volume loss and the body's ability to compen-
organ rupture. Fluid can be lost through meta-
sate for that loss through reticulocytosis. Several
bolic pathways such is seen with hypoadrenocorti-
disease processes produce anemia by more than
cism. The previously mentioned sodium loss is
 one mechanism.
often associated with concomitant water loss and
 Dogs with slowly progressive blood loss have
a decrease in fluid volume that can also cause
the ability to compensate within a certain range.
a decrease in perfusion pressure. Large quantities
Many of these dogs seem depressed, weak, and
of fluid can seep into the GI system. That may not
 may have an increased resting respiratory and/or
be obvious on cursory examination. Increased uri-
heart rate.
nation can overwhelm the system to the point
Dogs with an acute abdominal bleeding event,
where fluid intake cannot keep up, leading to
such as rupture of a splenic or hepatic mass, often
dehydration and,in severe conditions,system
 present for acute hind limb weakness.
collapse.
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia, the most
Fluids are held within the cellular and vascular
common cause of red blood cell destruction, often
 compartments by the osmotic pressure of dissolved
 presents with generalized weakness and collapse.
particles. In some cases, particularly when the pro-
 Diagnostic tests commonly recommended:
teins are low, fluids can collect within body cavities
in quantities that can be life threatening. Severe
：
 Routine hemogram
burn victims lose fluids where the integument has
 Pathology review of blood smear
been disrupted and can no longer stop surface
Reticulocyte count
fluid loss. Hypovolemia can present with severely
 Routine serum chemistries
compromised performance.
 Routine urinalysis
Diagmostic tests commonly recommended:
 Bone marrow evaluation
Clotting profile
 Routine hemogram
 Tick-borne disease profile
 Pathology review of blood smear
Radiographs
 Reticulocyte count
 Abdominal ultrasound
Routine serum chemistries
 Abdominocentesis
Routine urinalysis
Thoracocentesis
Clotting profile
Fecal evaluation.
Radiographs
Abdominal ultrasound
Common clinical sigms:
Abdominocentesis
Thoracocentesis
 Pale or icteric mucous membranes
Colonoscopy
Tachycardia with weaker than normal or
Endoscopy.
 bounding pulses 
Weakness
Common clinical signs:
●Exercise intolerance.
 Pale or icteric mucus membranes
 Tacky or dry mucus membranes
Hypovolemia
Increased heart rate with weaker than normal
 or bounding pulses
Fluid loss can occur through several mechanisms
Weakness
and the effects of that loss are dependent on the
Exercise intolerance
contents of the fluid. Vomiting and diarrhea are
 Distended abdomen
the most common causes of fluid loss. At the
● Dull lung sounds
344   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
 Significant respiratory effort
a direct relationship with the amount of lost
Fluid wave palpated in the abdomen.
function.
Inadeguate circulation
Myocardial disease
 Dilated cardiomyopathy is a degeneration of the
The heart as a circulating pump has several func-
heart muscle that is poorly understood. There are
tions to play. It must contract with enough force to
breed predilections. The weakness of the heart
move the blood forward to reach the end organs
muscle itself may lead to a dilation of the ventricles
for oxygen exchange and must be able to receive
and decreased propulsion pressures. American
enough returning blood volume to repeat the
Cocker Spaniels, English Cocker Spaniels, Dalma-
process dozens of times every minute. Many con-
tians, Doberman Pinschers, Great Danes, Irish
genital defects and acquired defects do not disrupt
Wolfhounds, Newfoundlands, and Portuguese
these functions adequately to affect normal day-to-
st jo Aouanbaiy paseaioui ue aaeu e soop ratem
day activity. Whether this is true or not for the
athlete certainly has not been studied in any detail.
Being able to look at real-time heart function by
The only canine athlete that has had extensive
echocardiography has markedly changed the way
studies performed on heart function is the Grey-
we determine, treat, and monitor heart disease.
hound. The racing Greyhound may have the
 Auscultation, radiography, and EKGs are still valu-
able ancillary diagnostic tests.
pue uaduouou SunoA a uaaa nq ‘e
Genetic predisposition requires serious consid-
retired animals have more efficient hearts than
eration when acquiring a new dog.
comparably sized nonathletic canines (Gurn, 1989;
 Diagnostic tests commonly recommended:
Marin et al., 2007). Genetics plays a significant role
in preparing the Greyhound's heart for competi
Auscultation
tion (Herrmann, 1926; Schoning et al., 1995).
Electrocardiogram
Thoracic radiographs
Cardiac echocardiography
Congenital cardiac disease
●Systolic blood pressure.
Various congenital defects have been described in
Common clinical signs:
at least 33 different breeds (Ettinger & Feldman,
2010). Many of these have known genetic predis-
Exercise intolerance
positions. Parentage and breed histories should be
Coughing
Examined closely when obtaining a new dog.
鲁
Weakness
 Poor or abnormal pulses
● Poor mucosal perfusion or pale or cyanotic
Acquired cardiac disease
coloration.
Valvular disease
The most common acquired cardiac disease is
Acguired vascular disease
thickening of the atrioventricular valve. There is a
direct correlation with age, and virtually 75% of
The only common vascular obstructions that
dogs over the age of 16 are affected. Valve leakage
have been routinely reported until the advent of
is recognized by the presence of a heart murmur
advanced imaging are obstructions of intraspinal
usually best appreciated on the left side of the
arteries first described as fibrocartilaginous emboli
thorax. With time, the murmur will grow in inten-
(FCE) in 1976 (Zaki & Prata, 1976). FCE is described
sity, but the intensity of the murmur may not have
in more detail in Chapter 16.
Chapter 17 Common Medical Disorders That Can Affect Performance 345
Arterial emboli affecting the trifurcation of the
use, including portosystemic shunts, cirrhosis, and
aorta are most common. This phenomenon, com-
hunting dog hypoglycemia.
-sosan uaaq sey ,'snqurorun aippes, e panles Auou
Diagnostic tests commonly recommended:
nized for decades, and its etiology is not well
 Fasting serum glucose
understood. The sigms are usually acute with a
 Fasting serum insulin
guarded prognosis. Clinically, the circulation to
●
Glucose :insulin ratio
one or both hind limbs is dramatically compro-
Abdominal ultrasonography
mised, and the limb or limbs become cold, anoxic,
Postprandial bile acids level.
and the paws may have a cyanotic hue.
Occasionally, we see embolic phenomena in
 other vessels that can cause lameness or weakness.
Arterial obstruction in dogs with protein-losing
Malabsorption and maldigestion
 nephropathies is well documented.
There is a large number of less common conditions
Diagnostic tests commonly recommended:
that have been recognized when certain nutritional
 Systolic blood pressure in both hind limbs
factors are not adequately absorbed or digested.
These can be vitamins or proteins or even carbohy-
Abdominal ultrasonography
drates. Adequate transit times and abnormal intes-
Routine hemogram
 Routine serum chemistries
tinal function can lead to nutritional deficiencies.
This group of diseases is beyond the scope of this
Serum creatine kinase
Urine protein: creatinine ratio.
book and is described in commonly available vet-
 erinary texts (Birchard & Sherding, 2006; Ettinger
Common clinical signs:
& Feldman, 2010).
Some of these have been listed and described by
 Severe hind limb pain and dysfunction
Braund (2002b). Those described are
Loss or decrease of hind limb pulses
 Cobolamine deficiency
Cyanosis of the paw pads and nail beds
Hypervitaminosis A
Hind limb edema
Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism
Sepsis.
Thiamine deficiency
?
Vitamin E deficiency.
 Management of the most common digestive disor-
Inadequate nutritional resources
ders is summarized by Carciofi & Brunetto (2009).
These include
The nutritional requirements of canine athletes
performing specific tasks have been studied (Hill,
Gastroenteritis
1998) and are covered in Chapter 4. Some common
鲁
 Protein-losing enteropathy
deficiencies are described here, as they are medical
 Pancreatitis and exocrine pancreatic insuf-
conditions that can affect performance.
ficiency
 Chronic diarrhea
 Small intestinal bowel overgrowth
Hypoglycemia
Food intolerances or hypersensitivity
Adjuvant diet therapy.
Hypoglycemia is almost always associated with
either excessive displacement of glucose from the
serum secondary to an insulin-secreting neoplasm
Peripheral neuropathies,
or a defect in the liver that will not allow it to store
junctionopathies, and myopathies
adequate glycogen for times of increased demand.
Many dysfunctions of the liver can decrease the
Many of these conditions present with similar
liver's ability to store adequate glycogen for later
 signs, although on closer evaluation, there are
346   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
often some distinguishing characteristics (LeCou-
present differently. Myasthenia gravis is signifi-
teur, 2005; Dewey, 2008).
cantly more common than the other two diseases.
Dogs with botulism are almost always extremely
sick with associated GI signs. Dogs with tick paral-
Neuropathies
ysis have an ascending flaccid paralysis. In the
United States, tick paralysis seems to be extremely
 Although several breed-specific and in some cases
rare and often nonfatal. This may not be the case
inheritable neuropathies have  been  described
in other countries where the ticks may have a much
(Shell, 2005), they are uncommon. Polyradiculo-
more potent toxin (Hall-Mendelin et al., 2011).
neuritis or polyradiculoneuropathy is a group of
probably unrelated diseases that present with a
similar clinical course. The paresis that these dogs
Myasthenia gravis
develop is often ascending the hind limbs being
Myasthenia gravis is a junctionopathy in which
affected before the forelimbs. Many times, these
acetylcholine is unable to bind with adequate
dogs are presented for a hind limb paresis alone as
numbers of muscle receptors to allow muscle con-
the forelimbs are affected but not as severely. In
traction to proceed. There are two forms. By far, the
most cases, the sensory component of the examina-
most common form of myasthenia gravis is the
tion is normal. The stretch reflexes of the hind
acquired form. In this particular condition, muscle
limbs seem to be affected at a very early stage in
acetylcholine receptors are blocked by antibodies.
the development of this disease.
This is most often a self-limiting disease, but
Generally, the theory is that something stimu-
it takes several weeks for the antibodies to be
lates the body to produce antibodies against the
purged from the system. Medications aimed at
peripheral nerve myelin, leading to a demyelinat-
decreasing the degradation of acetylcholine can be
 ing process. The loss of myelin then leads to nerve
effective. As this is an immune-mediated disease,
dysfunction, but in the reversible forms of this
corticosteroids have been used in managing the
disease, the nerves can remyelinate, and recovery
symptoms, while waiting for recovery. Thymomas
of fumction can occur.
and megaesophagus have been associated with
Coonhound paralysis and a form that resembles
this condition, with megaesophagus often the most 
Guillain-Barre syndrome in humans have been
life-threatening component due to the potential for
 reported, and recovery is common in 6-12 weeks.
regurgitation and aspiration pneumonia. All dogs
There is also a relapsing form of this disease
 with a megaesophagus whether showing signs of
(Northington & Brown, 1982).
weakness or not should be tested for myasthenia
A form that is reasonably common in older, large
gravis (Figure 17.1). An extremely accurate anti-
breed male dogs seems to be on the increase. This
body serum test has been available for many years.
is a much more severe condition as its response to
The hereditary form of this condition is much
therapy is poor, and progression over several
less common. Fox Terriers, Jack Russell Terriers,
months is common. With time, the nerves them-
Miniature Dachshunds, Samoyeds, and English
selves do deteriorate.
Springer Spaniels have all been reported to have
Certain digested or absorbed toxins as well as
the congenital form. In most cases, it has been
Araa e asnen uen shuae onnaderaouau lenaaas
shown to be an autosomal recessive trait. The anti-
similar
presentation.
Polyradiculoneuropathies
body test cannot be used in the hereditary form as
can also be the sequelae of
paraneoplastic
synl
the cause is not from antibodies but from a lack of
dromes. Various neoplasms have been implicated.
receptor sites,
Junctionopathies
Myopathies
Three junctionopathies are often grouped together:
 There are a large number of breed-related myopa-
myasthenia gravis, tick paralysis, and botulism.
thies that have been reported. Some of these have
Although they are similar in description, they often 
kmown hereditary associations (Shelton, 2005).
Chapter 17 Common Medical Disorders That Can Affect Performance 347
Case Study 17.2  Exercise intolerance with hypersalivation
Signalment: 6 y.o. F/s Colden Retriever presented for
A thoracic radiograph demonstrated a dilated esopha-
exercise intolerance of 2 weeks duration.
gus or megaesophagus.
History: Owner describes patient walking for only about
Discussion: Exercise-related  weakness  and   mega-
50 ft and then wanting to sit down. After a few minutes,
esophagus are indicators of the most common of the
the patient gets up and continues, but this keeps recur-
junctionopathies, myasthenia gravis. The blood test for
ring. Patient showed a lack of interest in playing but was
acytelcholine receptor antibodies is extremely accurate.
bright and alert. Patient also had peculiar bouts of hyper-
The results in this case were 7nmol/l, normal being
salivation and was less interested in food than normal
<0.6nmol/l (results frorr Cormparative Neurouscular
Laboratory, San Diego, CA). Note that although this is a
Examination: Patient bright and alert. Physical exarina-
junctionopathy. profound weakness and loss of stretch
tion, including a neurologic examination, was within
reflexes are uncommon. Excessive salivation is quite
normal limits. Patient seemed be salivating much more
common with megaesophagus. Although the acquired
thar one would expect, and the breath had a putrid odor.
form is often self-limiting, the megaesophagus can be life
 Examination of the throat and mouth were normal except
threatening as these dogs can aspirate undigested or par-
there was a foul odor and the back of the throat was
tially digested food into the lungs. Feeding fromr a height
heavy with saliva. when walking, the patient would
 and adjusting the food consistency are the main therapies
readily exhibit the behavior the owner had described
while waiting for the signs to abate. Use of corticoste.
roids is usually successful although anticholinesterase
Accompanying Laboratory Findings: All were within
drugs are often used.
 normal limits, including a hemograrm, serum chemistries.
and urinalysis.
Unfortunately to this point in time, attention
attention has been focused on advanced diagmostic
has been focused upon orthopedic injuries to a
techniques and treatments (Nielsen & Pluhar, 2005).
 samu ressnu u jaxa raean yon
The canine athlete is prone to muscle injuries
the canine athlete. Muscle strains are much more
that occur secondary to the stress of performance.
likely to occur with extreme athletics and very little
These occur from stress injuries secondary to poor
conditioning, improper muscle use, or inadequate
recovery times. Warm-up and cool-down recovery
has been stressed for the small number of condi-
tions that have been recognized. Fibrotic myopathy.
coccygeal muscle damage (limber tail), infraspina-
tus contracture, illiopsoas tears, and supraspinatus
contracture have all been described, and overviews
of their rehabilitation are available (Steiss, 2002;
Braund, 2002a) in addition to the details provided
in this text.
Inflammatory myopathies may be more common
than the literature reveals as they are not often
reported or may be difficult to recognize. Polymyo-
sitis is often associated with immune-mediated
diseases. It is associated with immune-mediated
polyarthritis and has been described in the para-
 neoplastic syndrome complex.
Polymyositis can also be caused by the parasitic
Figure 17.1  Chest radiograph of a dog with
megaesophagus. Note the width of the esophagus indicated
causes clinical signs that are very similar, and they
by the arrows.
are usually tested together.
348   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
References
HILL, R.C. 1998. The nutritional requirements of exercis-
ing dogs. / Nutr, 128,2686S-2690S.
BIRCHARD, S.J. & SHERDING, R.G.2006. Saunders
JAGGY,A.,OLIVER,J.E.,FERGUSON, D.C.,MAHAFFEY
Marual of Small Animal Practice, 3rd ed. St. Louis, MO:
E.A., & GLAUS, T., Jr. 1994. Neurological manifesta-
Saunders-Elsevier.
tions of hypothyroidism: a retrospective study of 29
BRAUND, K. 2002a. Myopathic disorders. In: Vite, C.H.
dogs. I Vet Intern Med, 8, 328-336.
(ed.), Clinicat Neurology in Smatl Animats: Localization.
LECOUTEUR, R. 2005. Neuropathies,junctionopathies &
Diagrosis and Treatment. Ithaca, NY: Intermational Vet-
myopathies of dogs and cats. 2rd Arnual Veterinary
erinary Information Service.
Neurology Symposium. University of Califormia Davis.
BRAUND, K. 2002b. Nutritional disorders. In: Vite, C.H.
MACPHAIL, C.M. & MONNET, E. 2001. Outcome of and
(ed.), Clinical Neurology in Small Animals: Localization,
Diagrosis and Treatment. Ithaca, NY: Intermational Vet-
gical treatment of laryngeal paralysis: 140 cases (1985-
erinary Information Service.
1998). / Amt Vet Med Assoc, 218, 1949-1956.
BRAUND,K.G., STEINBERG,H.S.,SHORES,A.,STEISS,
MARIN, L.M., BROWN, J., MCBRIEN, C., BAUMWART,
J.E., MEHTA, JR., TOIVIO-KINNUCAN, M., &
R, SAMII, V.F., & COUTO, C.G. 2007. Vertebral heart
AMLING, K.A. 1989. Laryngeal paralysis in imma-
size in retired racing Greyhounds. Vet Radiol Lttra-
ture and mature dogs as one sign of a more diffuse
sound,48, 332-334.
polyneuropathy. ↓ Am Vet Med Assoc, 194, 1735-
NIELSEN,C. & PLUHAR, G.E.2005. Diagmosis and treat-
1740.
 ment of hind limb muscle strain injuries in 22 dogs.
CARCIOFI, A.& BRUNETTO, M. 2009. Nutritional man-
Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol, 18, 247-253.
agement of the most common digestive diseases in
NORTHINGTON, J.W. & BROWN, M.J. 1982. Acute
dogs and cats. Proceedings of the 34th World Small
canine idiopathic polyneuropathy. A Guillain-Barre-
Animat Veterinary Congress. Sao Paulo, Brazil: Interna-
like syndrome in dogs. / Neurol Sci, 56, 259-273.
tional Veterinary Information Service.
SCHONING, P, ERICKSON, H.,& MILLIKEN, G.A.
DEWEY, C.W. 2008. Functional and dysfunctional neuro-
1995. Body weight, heart weight, and heart-to-
       
body weight ratio in greyhounds. Am ∫ Vet Res, 56,
C.W.(ed.), A Practical Guide to Carine and Feline Neurol-
420422.
ogy, 2nd ed. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell, 43.
SHELL, L. 2005. Peripheral nerve disorders. In: Birchard,
ETTINGER, S.J. & FELDMAN, E.C. 2010. Textbook of Vet-
S.(ed.), Saunders Manuat of Small Anirmal Practice, 3rd
erinaryIntemal Medicine,7thed.St.Louis,MO:Saunders-
ed. St. Louis, MO: Saunders-Elsevier, 1306-1309.
Elsevier.
SHELTON, G. 2005. Disorders of the muscle and neuro-
GUNN, H.M. 1989. Heart weight and runming ability.
muscular junction. In: Birchard, S.J. (ed.), Saunders
Anat,167,225-233.
Marual of Small Animal Practice,3rd ed. St. Louis, MO:
HALL-MENDELIN, S., CRAIG, S.B.,
HALL,R.A.
Saunders-Elsevier, 1316.
O'DONOGHUE, P., ATWELL, R.B., TULSIANI, S.M.,
STEISS, J.E. 2002. Muscle disorders and rehabilitation in
& GRAHAM, G.C. 2011. Tick paralysis in Australia
canine athletes.Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract,
caused by Ixodes holocyclus Neumann. Ann Trop Med
32, 267-285.
Parasitot, 105, 95-106.
ZAKI, F.A. & PRATA, R.G. 1976. Necrotizing myelopathy
HERRMANN, G.R. 1926. The heart of the racing grey-
secondary to embolization of hermiated intervertebral
hound. Hypertrophy of the heart. Proc Soc Exp Biol
disk material in the dog. / Am Vet Med Assoc, 169,
Med, 23, 856-857.
222-228.
18
Rehabilitation for
Geriatric Patients
Lisa Starr, DVM, CCRP, CVA, CVSMT
Summary
Gerontology is the study of aging. As veterinary patients age, they experience senescence or
decreased function and degeneration of their organ systems. These changes lead to clinical
issues such as decreased proprioception and muscle atrophy. Common medical issues
encountered in geriatric patients include obesity, neoplasia, degenerative joint disease (DJD),
and loss of sensory acuity. A comprehensive medical evaluation is an important component
their physical limitations and how they will respond to physical rehabilitation. In addition to
a thorough medical evaluation, a nutritional assessment and evaluation of the patient's pain
level are important in guiding therapy. Owners are often concerned with quality of life issues
such as mobility, pain level, fecal and urinary continence, appetite, and maintenance of
human and pet interaction within the household. These issues can be further complicated by
behavioral changes or cognitive dysfunction. Physical rehabilitation for the geriatric patient
tualed suiuieruiew pue suppaq aenbape gupiaoud se yons) sanss! aueo guisinu pue eoipau
 Cleanliness in the household). Creating a geriatric wellness program may be beneficial in the
interested in maintaining quality of life for their elderly pets, patients with DjD, patients with
neurogenic issues, and those in need of hospice care.
Carine Sports Medicire and Rehabilitation, First Edition. Edited by M. Christine Zink and Janet B. Van Dyke.
@2013 John Wiley &t Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
349
350  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Defining the geriatric patient
sis declines. Cellular metabolism releases reactive
Oxygen species that cause free radical or oxidative
Identifying the geriatric patient
damage (Figure 18.1). Oxidative damage reduces
mitochondrial function, which affects the normal
 In human and veterinary patients alike, the body
mechanisms of cell differentiation and apoptosis
endures physiological changes as it ages. It can be
(Johnson et al., 1999). In the case of cancer, it is
edas oiae ooads e uisse oi Arenqre seumaos
suspected that normal apoptosis is interrupted,
rate geriatric patients from their younger counter-
and rapidly dividing cells or cells with mutations
parts. The World Health Organization considers
propagate.
pase asou pue Aapia se rapro pue gg pase uau
80 and older as the oldest-old (or aged) (Beaglehole
Musculoskeletal changes
et al, 2001). Due to the difference in body size and
 mass in breeds of dogs, there is generally a sliding
As the body ages, lean body mass including muscle,
scale for assigning age group labels based on dogs
bone, and cartilage declines (Metzger, 2005). These
body weights. A study from the United Kingdom
changes are often seen as muscle atrophy, which
reinforced previous reports stating that giant dog
may be secondary to loss of muscle fibers them-
breeds lived shorter median life spans than small
selves, reduced oxygenation of the muscles, or
and toy breed dogs (Adams et al., 2010). The 2006
fibrosis developing within the muscles (Goldston,
Demographic Survey of U.S. Pet Ownership by the
1995). Muscle atrophy leads to loss of strength in
AVMA reported 29.8% of the canine pet population
the tendons. Decreased support for the joints to
was aged 6-10 years old and 14.1% was aged 11
combat weight-bearing forces leads to increased
years and older (American Veterinary Medical
stress on the bone and cartilage. Studies have
Association, 2007). Extrapolating from Table 18.1,
shown a decline in the number of chondrocytes of
between 14.1% and 43.9% of the pet population is
aging patients due to cell senescence and decreased
moving into the second half of their life span.
ability to respond to growth factors. Additionally,
 Understanding aging is important so that adjust-
the water content of the cartilage declines with age,
ments can be made to accommodate for physio-
logic changes that occur in older patients.
and Buckwalter, 2003; Loeser, 2010). Age-related
thinning of cartilage and increased stress on the
 joints due to loss of muscle strength predispose the
The physiologic changes of aging
geriatric patient to eburnation of subchondral bone
and the onset of osteoarthritis, one of the most
Aging is a complex process that occurs at the
 common musculoskeletal conditions seen in geri-
genomic, cellular, and organ level. Each organ
atric patients.
system experiences decreased function and degen-
While we do not recognize osteoporosis as a
eration with aging, known as senescence. Suscep-
common condition in dogs, their bones can become
s,Apoq a se ae im saseaioun aseasip oi A
more brittle with age due to infiltration of fat into
ability to respond to stress and maintain homeosta-
the bone marrow and thirning of the cortex (Bea-
 glehole et al., 2001). Consequently, fracture healing
is often slower in geriatric patients as it is more
difficult for bone callous to form. Aging patients
Table 18.1
Ages at which dogs may be considered
geriatric
lose lean body mass while body fat increases, often
leading to obesity (Figure 18.2). Both obesity and
Dog size
Body weight (lb)
Age (mean ± SD)
brittle bones can exacerbate the symptoms and rate
of progression of degenerative joint disease (DJD).
Small
0-20
11.48 ± 1.86
Medium
21-50
10.19 ± 1.56
Large
51-90
8.85 ±1.38
Neurologic changes
Giant
>90
7.46 ± 1.27
Coordination and proprioception decline in older
Adapted with permission from Goldston (1995)
patients, leading to ataxia. Combined lack of
Chapter 18 Rehabilitation for Geriatric Patients 351
Case Study 18.1 Geriatric patient with multiple progressive issues
Signalment: 19 y.0. F/S mixed breed dog
Goniometry: Hip flexion/extension: LR 48%/114°, RR
499/151°;
History: One year progressive pelvic limb weakness;:
cccasional knuckling, dragging. Trouble rising, going up
carpal flexion/extension: LF 29°/198°, RF 219/2009
stairs. Less interested in play, walks. Appetite waxing/
Neurologic Exar: WNL except
waning for last month. Bilateral extracapsular cranial
Cuciate ligament (CCL) repair 6 years ago.
  7   t  t   
LR 1, RR 2
Physical Examination: Cataracts OU, mild dental tartar,
gade 3/5 systolic heart murmur (previously undiag-
Assessment and Plan: Primary objectives:
nosed), mucous membranes slightly dry and light pink,
R/O medical issues. CBC, serum biochemistry, and
CRT < 2 seconds, lungs clear, eupneic, abdomen com-
urinalysis. Thoracic radiographs and evaluation by
pliant, BCs =2.5/5, pain score = 1/4 (Colorado State
cardiologist. Hip radiographs.
University [CsU[ scale)
Increase pain control. lncrease omega-3 and anti-
oxidants. Add glucosamine/chondroitin and con-
Rehabilitation Examination:
sider injectable polysulfated glycosaminoglycan
Posture: Crouched in pelvic limbs; sinks when standing
(PSCAC). Add analgesic pending lab work. Discuss
Gait: Grade 3/5 lame, stiff gait in pelvic limbs, occasion-
acupuncture, laser, passive range of motion (PROM),
massage with client.
ally scuffs LR
3.
 Nutrition. Review  dietary  protein  and  calorie
Transitions: Slow to rise, pulls forward to stand; occa-
content, increase palatability for patient. Consider
sional knuckling LR
grain-free diet to possibly reduce inflammation.
Palpation: Moderate pelvic limb and paraspinal atrophy?
4.
Improve mobility. If workup WNL, 3-5 minute leash 
walks BID-TID, hydrotherapy q3d. Discuss bedding.
worse left pelvic limb; tight quadriceps, pectorals, triceps.
traction on floors, assistive devices to improve center
nght gracilis; restricted, tender hip extension; mild carpal
hyperextension; mild heat/tenderness: T12-L1.
of balance. Consider chiropractic treatment.
5.
Maintain and improve strength. If doing well, start
Culick: LR 21.5 cm, RR 25.5 cm
light home exercise progrart.
Figure 18.2 Obesity exacerbates lameness and discomfort
in patients with degenerative joint disease.
Figure 18.1 Oxidative stress is one hypothesis for the
graying of the coat that occurs in most older dogs.
352  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
proprioception, loss of muscle 
strength, and
encompasses loss of hair cells, neural loss, and
postural instability contribute to falls in elderly
strial or cochlear audio-conductivity loss), drug
humans. Awareness of joint movement (kinesthe-
ototoxicity, or trauma (Shimada et al., 1998).
sia) and where the body is in space (joint position
 Cognitive decline is seen along with several neu-
sense) contribute to proprioception, which, along
a   a u sa aaao
with sensory factors such as vision and vestibular
 dogs. Documented changes in the brain include
input, is important for maintaining balance.
oxidative stress, deposition of β-amyloid plaques
Mechanoreceptors innervated by large myelin-
(as seen in human patients with Alzheimer's
ated nerve fibers provide input necessary for pro-
disease), DNA fragmentation or damage, and
prioception. Themusclespindleisa stretch-sensitive
 changes in intracellular signaling leading to a loss
mechanoreceptor that provides input on joint posi-
of neurotrophic factors (Dimakopoulos & Mayer,
tion and facilitates coordinated movement. With
2002). Grossly, cortical atrophy and increased
aging, muscle spindle cells become less sensitive,
ventricular volume have been noted in the aged
joint and tendon mechanoreceptor volume declines,
canine brain, along with reduced neurogenesis
myelinated nerve fibers decline, tactile sensitivity
in the hippocampus, which is responsible for learn-
decreases at a greater rate in distal extremities, and
 ing and memory (Head, 2011). Cognitive dysfunc-
nerve conduction velocity slows in the advanced
tion syndrome (CDS) is a diagnosis of exclusion
elderly, presumably all contributing to a decline in
when signs such as change in sleeping habits,
proprioception (Figure 18.3) (Shaffer & Harrison,
lack of recognition of the environment, decreased
2007).
interaction with other pets and people in the
 Aging patients experience sensory losses includ-
house, restlessness, apathy, anxiety, altered appe-
ing decreased vision and hearing leading to lack of
tite, aggression, or vocalization develop.
awareness of their environment. Vision can be
affected by trauma, corneal issues such as kerato-
Metabolic changes
conjunctivitis sicca (KCS), lens issues such as cata-
racts or lens luxation, and retinal issues such as
a sad  a ui sar q
 degeneration and detachment secondary to hyper-
decreased metabolic rate and immune compromise
tension. Hearing can decline due to sensorineural
(Goldston, 1995). Maintenance energy require-
changes known as presbycusis in people (which
ments (MERs) in older dogs decline by approxi-
mately 20% as compared to young adult dogs.
Serior diets are commonly restricted in calories due
to reduced caloric needs in an attempt to prevent
weight gain. However, they should provide an
increased percentage of highly digestible protein,
with a total of at least 25% (Laflamme, 2005).
Proficiency of the bone marrow declines with
age. A study in Beagles showed that the phagocytic
ability of neutrophils declined by about 39% in
10-year-old dogs (Hall et al., 2010). Another study
in German Shepherds showed decreased white
blood cell and peripheral lymphocyte counts in
older dogs. However, it contradicted the more
recent study in Beagles and did not detect a
difference in phagocytic ability of the polymor-
phonuclear cells (Strasser et al., 2000). Lymphocytic
proliferative responses  to  mitogenic 
stimula-
tion decline with age, and CD4:CD8 (or helper
 T cell:cytotoxic T cell) ratios decline, indicating
Figure 18.3  Geriatric patient with a polyneuropathy and
 impairment of cell-mediated immunity. Geriatric
peripheral sheath tumor in the right pelvic limb
demonstrating pelvic limb weakness due to neurogenic
dogs maintain humoral immune responses allow-
muscle atrophy.
ing t
them to respond to vaccines and novel
Chapter 18 Rehabilitation for Geriatric Patients 353
antigenic stimulation. Further research is war
ranted to investigate the effect chronic antigenic
exposure has on low-level inflammation in the
body and the relevance it has to the development
of inflammatory disease later in life (Day, 2010).
 Other changes associated with aging
The stability of the cardiovascular system should
be evaluated in the geriatric rehabilitation patient.
d aa u s rore
include declining cardiac output, decreased elas-
ticity with concurrent fibrosis of the pulmonary
tissue, and decreased cough reflexes. Pulmonary
secretions often have decreased viscosity, leading
to difficulty expelling air and reduced resistance to
respiratory disease (Goldston, 1995).
Behavioral issues may develop in geriatric
patients, including decreased interaction with the
owner, house soiling, altered sleep cycles, restless-
Figure 18.4  Geriatric patient with pelvic limb paresis
ness, disorientation, anxiety, and aggression. All of
preparing to be assisted onto a well-padded area of the car
these issues can have individual causes, medical
by means of an assistive harness and a ramp with extra
causes, or can also be related to CDS.
traction provided by a yoga mat.
modate for medical issues to avoid compromising
Owner concerns for the geriatric patient
the patient's condition when providing treatment.
Owmer concerns when presenting a geriatric dog
include reduced mobility (trouble rising, inability
Metabolic, endocrine, and
to use the stairs and get in or out of the car, and
hematologic disorders
decreased willingmess to go on walks), increased
pain, urinary or fecal incontinence, changing appe-
Older patients can have issues with lethargy, weak-
tite, and decreased mental alertmess or interaction
ness, wound healing, change in quality of hair coat,
with the family. The goal for rehabilitation thera-
urinary habits, body weight, and general immune
pists is to improve functional ability in the home
resistance to infection. Proper diagnosis of condi-
environment, to improve quality of life and inter-
 tions that contribute to these issues is important
action with the owner, and to assist the owner to
to allow patients to tolerate and receive more
y pasudon saned a e
treatment and to protect them from exposure
(Figure 18.4).
to other patients in the physical rehabilitation
environment.
Medical Issues commonly encountered
Hypothyroidism
in geriatric patients
The most common causes of primary hypothyroid-
Physiologic changes in the body due to aging lead
ism in the dog are lymphocytic thyroiditis and
to decreased reserves in the organ systems. Routine
idiopathic atrophy of the thyroid parenchyma.
screening for medical conditions with more fre-
 Secondary hypothyroidism due to a dysfunction
quentphysical examinations and diagnostic testing
 in the pituitary gland can occur, leading to lack
should be encouraged. Physical rehabilitation in
 of thyroid-stimulating hormone. Skin issues that
geriatric patients often must be tailored to accom-
 may develop in hypothyroid patients include
354Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Figure 18.5Hypothyroid patient with complaint of
frequent panting that is overweight due to decreased
metabolism receiving postoperative treatment for cranial
cruciate ligament rupture.
Figure 18.6 Geriatric patient with pelvic limb paresis
secondary to a combination of degenerative joint disease in
the stifles and a polyneuropathy being assisted to stand.
seborrhea, hyperpigmentation, secondary pyo-
derma, and otitis externa. These issues can impede
treatment choices, including use of electrical stimu-
cocorticoid secretion, and is often due to an
lation over compromised skin or the ability to use
immune-mediated destruction of the adrenal
hydrotherapy.
gland. Lethargy and weakness are the most
 Hypothyroidism should be considered in pa-
common clinical signs affecting the rehabilitation
tients exhibiting muscle atrophy or neurologic
 patient. Addisonian patients should be monitored
signs such as weakness, knuckling, ataxia, seizures,
for response to stress during visits to the rehabilita-
vestibular signs, or facial nerve paralysis (Figure
-osonio jeope paau Aeu pue Aey uon
18.5). Thyroid supplementation can help resolve
coid supplementation.
most of the clinical signs associated with this endo-
crine disorder.
Diabetes mellitus
 Patients with diabetes mellitus may present for
Hyperadrenocorticism
signs of peripheral neuropathy such as scuffing,
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's disease) leads to
dropped tarsi (a plantigrade stance more common
pituitary-dependent, adrenocortical, or iatrogeni-
 im cats), or other issues related to weakness (Figure
cally induced excess cortisol in the blood. Cush-
18.6). Secondary complications include cataracts
ing's patients can exhibit skin issues such as
 and poor wound healing. Adequate diabetic control
a a sn sis p na
 is necessary when treating these patients to ensure
predisposed to obesity, a pot-bellied appearance,
progress with therapy is not hindered.
muscle wasting, and neurologic signs such as
 ataxia and circling.
Anemia
Anemia is decreased red blood cell mass in the
Hypoadrenocorticism
body and often presents as pallor and weakness.
Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease) is char-
 Some causes of anemia are irreversible, so rehabili
acterized by lack of mineralocorticoid and glu-
tation should be pursued more cautiously with
Chapter 18 Rehabilitation for Geriatric Patients 355
these patients to prevent depleting their energy
due to poor perfusion of oxygen to the tissues.
Immune compromise
Immune compromise may be secondary to dis-
eases such as neoplasia, iatrogenic drug suppres-
sion, or resistant infections. Routine screening with
lab work and urine cultures should be pursued,
and these patients should receive appropriate anti-
biotic therapy if warranted.
Obesity
Obesity is exacerbated by poor metabolism sec-
ondary to some of the medical issues mentioned
above. Fat tissue contains leptin, a hormone that
promotes the release of inflammatory mediators
such as tumor necrosis factor-α. (TNF-α), interleu-
kin (IL)-1β, IL-6, and C-reactive protein (Laflamme,
Figure 18.7 Obese geriatric patient unable to rise
2005). Increased inflammation in the body and con-
independently.
cussive forces on the joints due to carrying more
body mass predispose obese patients to more
severe osteoarthritis.
lymphadenopathy, or enlargement of the abdomen
A study published in 2002 showed that food-
is recommended. Many of the modalities used
restricted dogs had longer median life spans
 in physical rehabilitation are contraindicated over
and delayed onset of chronic disease (Kealy et al.,
areas of malignant tumors as they increase re-
2002). Weight reduction (11-18% of body weight)
gional blood flow. Patients receiving chemother-
decreased hind limb lameness in dogs with radio-
 apy should be monitored for nadirs in white blood
graphic evidence of hip osteoarthritis in one study,
cell counts, which may warrant postponing thera-
while another showed weight loss (6.10-8.85% of
pies such as hydrotherapy until their blood counts
body weight) decreased lameness and improved
stabilize.
-n wim sop u saros sisiee ho sau
 graphic evidence of elbow or hip osteoarthritis
(Figure 18.7) (Impellizeri et al., 2000; Marshall et al.,
Cardiopulmonary disease
2010). Yet another study showed intensive physio-
therapy in addition to caloric restriction provided
Cardiovascular and respiratory conditions more
improved weight loss, mobility, and ground reac-
commonly encountered in geriatric patients include
tion forces in dogs with osteoarthritis over caloric
endocardiosis, cardiomyopathy, arrhythmias, pul-
restriction alone (Mlacnik et al., 2006).
monary fibrosis, laryngeal paralysis, neoplasia,
pneumonia, and bronchitis. Symptoms of cough-
ing, abdominal swelling (due to ascites), exercise
Neoplasia
intolerance, syncope, dyspnea, or cyanosis are all
indications of cardiac disease.
In a survey of breed clubs in the United Kingdom
Parenchymal pulmonary conditions that may be
in 2004, the most common cause of death was
encountered in  geriatric  rehabilitation patients
cancer (27% of patients surveyed) (Adams et al.,
include pulmonary fibrosis, pneumonia, or neopla-
 2010). Aging increases the risk of patients develop-
sia. Pulmonary fibrosisis an interstitiallung disease
ing cancer.  Monitoring for rapid  weight loss
 Overrepresented in West Highland White Terriers
(cachexia), muscle wasting, dyspnea, peripheral
(Norris et al., 2005). Exercise intolerance, coughing,
356Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
and dyspnea are the most common clinical signs.
healthy renal glomeruli decline with age (Goldston,
 Pneumonia often has an infectious (viral or bac-
1995). Patients with compromised renal reserves
terial) origin, and can be incited by aspiration.
 are more sensitive to insults such as dehydration
Chronic bronchitis, most commonly seen in older 
 and should not be overworked in the physical
small breed dogs, is characterized by exercise intol-
rehabilitation environment.
erance and a slowly progressive cough.
m puasad  siieed rie ym so
stridor, respiratory distress, or changes in bark.
Urinary and fecal incontinence
Paralysis of the recurrent laryngeal nerve, which
innervates the muscles that abduct the arytenoid
Urinary and fecal incontinence may occur second-
cartilages, results in upper airway obstruction.
Caution should be used with these patients in the
thies, reduced sphincter control, or hormonal
underwater treadmill to avoid compromising air
 imbalance. Neurologic conditions often have side
exchiange secondary to exertion or excitement.
effects of loss of urinary and anal sphincter control.
Laryngeal paralysis is often idiopathic, but poly-
Sanitary concerns should be addressed in these
neuropathy, hypothyroidism, and neoplasia should
patients when determining appropriate treatments.
be considered when patients present with signs
Many rehabilitation facilities will not allow incon-
of this condition. One study documented denerva-
 tinent patients in the underwater treadmill or pool.
tion of muscles in the larynx and pelvic limbs
These patients should be evaluated for urine scald
(associated with the recurrent laryngeal and sciatic
or irritation of the perineal area. Laser therapy
 nerves) in 11 laryngeal paralysis cases, supporting
is useful in treating compromised skin. Owners 
evidence of polyneuropathy with this condition
can learn how to express the urinary bladder or
(Thieman et al., 2010).
stimulate bowel movements (e.g., cotton swabbing
the rectum) to maintain a sanitary elimination
schedule.
Megaesophagus
Megaesophagus in an older dog is acquired esoph-
Resistant urinary tract infections
ageal weakness, due to primary idiopathic causes
or secondary to a neuropathy, myopathy, or junc-
 Patients that are unable to fully empty their urinary
tionopathy. Most patients present for regurgitation,
 bladder are predisposed to urinary retention and
and a common complication of the disease is aspi-
subsequent urinary tract infections. Dogs with
ration pneumonia. Treatment of underlying dis-
spinal cord injuries are at risk for compromise of
eases such as myasthenia gravis, hypothyroidism,
the nerves supplying the bladder sphincter and
or hypoadrenocorticism can be beneficial in con-
can be susceptible to resistant urinary tract infec-
 trolling megaesophagus, so a diagnostic workup
tions. Multidrug-resistant Escherichia coli as well as
should be recommended in patients with regurgi-
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus pseudinterme-
tation. A recent study found all dogs enrolled with
dius (MRSP) and methicillin-resistant Staphylococ-
idiopathic laryngeal paralysis (n = 32) also had
cus schleiferi (MRSS) are being encountered more
esophageal dysfunction. Of 24 dogs that were eval-
commonly in recumbent geriatric patients due to
uated at 1 year, 100% of the subjects had developed
the tendency to develop antibiotic resistance as
neurologic signs including ataxia, weakness, con-
they age (Hoekstra & Paulton, 2002). The cause of
scious proprioceptive deficits, or muscle atrophy
antibiotic resistance may be inappropriate drug
while only 25% of the subjects exhibited some form
use, such as underdosing the patient or not treating
of these signs at enrollment (Stanley et al., 2010).
an infection for an adequate duration. One study
of dogs with multidrug resistant extraintestinal E.
coli and Enterobacter spp. infections found the
Renal disease
urinary tract to be the most common infection site
(62%) with predisposing factors including prior
Chronic renal disease is commonly encountered in
antimicrobial use, increased duration of hospital-
older patients. Renal blood flow and the reserve of
 ls rod e ro (sp z ue ao) u
Chapter 18 Rehabilitation for Geriatric Patients  357
cedure. As is common in human patients, urinary
oral antibiotics and laser therapy to promote local
catheterization is a predisposing risk factor (Gibson
blood supply and wound healing.
et al., 2008).
Regular urinalyses and urine cultures should be
performed to evaluate appropriate antibiotics to
Deafness
treat urinary tract infections while aiming
to
prevent the development of antibiotic resistance. It
Hearing and vision loss are common in elderly
is prudent to avoid putting patients with resistant
patients. Deaf patients will be limited in ability to
urinary tract infections in the underwater treadmill
respond to verbal commands or comforting words
or therapy pool.
during treatment. When doing therapeutic exercise
with deaf patients, the patient's sense of smell or
sight can be used to motivate them.
Decubital ulcers
 Decubital ulcers or pressure sores occur as a result
Blindness
 of unrelieved pressure on the skin over bony prom-
 inences. Loss of blood supply to the tissue and
Blind patients may be tentative in accepting treat-
necrosis of the subdermal tissue occurs. The skin
ment and will respond better to a soothing touch
initially becomes erythematous, alopecic, and
and verbal reassurance. These patients will be
thinner, and later appears darker in color. Recum-
bent patients with thin body condition and poor
unable to effectively perform exercises that require
visual input, such as stepping over cavaletti poles.
muscle mass are at greatest risk for decubital ulcers
(Figure 18.8). These patients should not go in the
underwater treadmill or therapy pool without a
waterproof seal over the wound. The decubital
Musculoskeletal
ulcer should be cultured to determine appropriate
J paaaar aq pmous amssand dera onoque
The most common musculoskeletal issue encoun-
possible, and the wound should be cleaned regu-
tered in geriatric rehabilitation patients is DJD,
larly. Topical therapy may be used in addition to
 often secondary to a congenital condition such as
elbow or hip dysplasia, an injury, or excessive wear
and tear. Symptoms include discomfort, lameness,
restricted mobility, and muscle atrophy. Muscle
atrophy may be present due to disuse secondary to
pain from orthopedic causes such as DJD or an
injury. Neurogenic muscle atrophy occurs more
rapidly than disuse atrophy due to poor inner-
vation of the muscle (Figure 18.9). Conditions
causing neurogenic atrophy include intervertebral
disk disease, fibrocartilaginous embolism, or more
peripheral conditions such as diffuse lower motor
neuron disease.
Neurologic conditions
Neurologic conditions encountered in geriatric
patients include vascular events, vestibular dis-
Figure 18.8  Decubital ulcer over the greater trochanter
ease, neoplasia, seizures, and degenerative issues.
with stay sutures for a tie-over bandage being prepared for
Degenerative neurologic conditions commonly
debridement of necrotic tissue.
seen include chronic intervertebral disk disease,
358Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
breathing. Patients should be screened for hypo-
thyroidism, myasthenia gravis, and laryngeal
paralysis within a comprehensive workup, with
 possible referral to a neurologist.
Seizures
Differential diagnoses for seizures in a geriatric
patient include metabolic imbalances (e.g., enceph-
alopathy from hepatic disease or hypoglycemia
 from diabetes mellitus), toxic insults, neoplastic or
 inflammatory processes in the brain, and vascular
events such as infarction. Knowing the underlying
cause of seizures is essential in determining prog-
nosis for the patient and how well they may toler-
ate modalities and exercises.
Cognitive dysfunction
patients due to loss of senses and development of
Figure 18.9 A patient with a combination of degenerative
aaenauasapomau aaissanoid e si Sao axe
neurologic and orthopedic issues enjoying a walk in a quad
disorder associated with cognitive and behavioral
cart.
changes. Symptoms include decreased awareness,
confusion, vocalization, altered relationships with
degenerative myelopathy (see Chapter 16), and
people and other pets, hyperactivity or apathy,
degenerative lumbosacral stenosis.
anxiety, decreased memory for learned tasks,
altered sleep cycles, house-soiling, change in appe-
tite, and occasional irritability. Therapy for CDS
Degenerative lumbosacral stenosis
 includes antioxidant therapy (vitamin B, C, and E,
Patients with degenerative lumbosacral stenosis
 fruits and vegetables), fatty acid supplementation,
often present with a combination of orthopedic
mitochondrial cofactor  supplementation  (carni-
and neurologic sigms such as caudal lumbar pain,
tine, alpha lipoic acid, and coenzyme Q10), phos-
being slow to rise and climb stairs, decreased tail
phatidylserine  (a phospholipid that  improves
wag, and possible fecal or urinary incontinence.
cognitive deficits and memory), ginkgo biloba
Large breed dogs, working dogs, and German
(a monoamine oxidase [MAO]-A and MAO-B
 Shepherds have a higher incidence of this disease,
inhibitor) to increase dopamine levels and protect
-uon se yons Suaeui panueape armban Aeu youm
'piowe-g Aq paonpu sisoidode jsuese suomau
puted tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance
and drug therapy with selegiline (an MAO-B
imaging (MRI) for diagnosis. Surgical correction is
inhibitor) (Landsberg, 2006).
often indicated for these patients, but mild cases
- ud wm Aanarsn pau aq A
agement and rehabilitation including
controlled
Recommended evaluation for the
exercise and hydrotherapy (Worth et al., 2009).
geriatric patient
Polyneuropathies
Frequent examinations (at least every 6 months)
are recommended for geriatric patients. A compre-
Peripheral  neurologic  conditions  secondary
to
hensive physical examination should include eval-
polyneuropathy are characterized by symptoms
uation of dental health, mammary glands, and a
including weakness, knuckling, muscle atrophy.
 rectal in addition to evaluating muscle mass and
hyporeflexia, change in bark, and stridorous 
 body condition score. Any new masses should be
Chapter 18 Rehabilitation for Geriatric Patients  359
documented and aspirated. When discussing
diet (including supplements and treats). Metabolic
patient history with an owner, nutrition and behav-
 energy requirements decline with age so geriatric
ioral issues should be reviewed.
patients may require fewer calories in their diet. If
caloric content is restricted, it is important to ensure
good quality ingredients are still present in the diet
Diagnostics
(proteins, carbohydrates, and fats). Ahigher protein
Annual lab work including a complete blood
diet may be warranted. It is important to encour-
count, serum biochemistry, thyroid panel, urinaly-
age maintenance of a lean body condition, and diet
sis, and fecal flotation is recommended. Thoracic
recommendations should be geared toward achiev-
radiographs may be considered as well as an elec-
ing optimal body weight.
trocardiogram, intraocular pressure, and blood
pressure evaluation. If abnormalities are noted on
initial lab work, more extensive investigation such
Quality of life assessment
as liver function testing (bile acids, ammonia
When evaluating quality of life, the concept of
levels), adrenal profiles, a full thyroid panel, and a
whether the patient is having more good days
urine culture may be performed.
thian bad is often used. Assessments of pain,
appetite, mobility, independence, interest and
interaction with other people and pets, general
Nutritional evaluation
cleanliness, and hydration status are important.
A nutritional assessment should include evalua-
The HHHHHMM Scale adapted by Dr. Villalobos
tion of the patient's body weight, body condition
can be utilized to assist owners struggling with
 score, and muscle mass in addition to discussing
quality-of-life decisions (Table 18.2) (Villalobos &
Table 18.2Quality of life scale
Quality of Life Scale: The HHHHHMM Scale
Score
 Criterion
1-10d 
Hurt—Adequate pain control, including breathing ability, is first and foremost on the scale. Is the patient's
pain successfully managed? Is oxygen necessary?
1-10
jagn supaaj e aiinban juajed ayi saoa idjay suipaaj puey saoa tysnoua Suea juaed ayi sl-aluny
1-10
Hydration—ls the patient dehydrated? For patients not drinking enough, use subcutaneous fluids once or twice
daily to supplement fluid intake.
1-10
Hygiene—The patient should be brushed and cleaned, particularly after elimination. Avoid pressure sores and
keep all wounds clean.
1-10
Happiness-Does the patient express joy and interest? Is the patient responsive to things around it (family.
toys, etc.)? Is the patient depressed, lonely, anxious, bored, or afraid? Can the patient's bed be close to the
family activities and not be isolated?
1-10
Mobiity—Can the patient get up without assistance? Does the patient need human or mechanical help (e.g. a
cart)? Does the patient feel like going for a walk? Is the patient having seizures or stumbling? (Some caregivers
feel euthanasia is preferable to amputation, yet an animal that has limited mobility but is still alert and
responsive can have a good quality of life as long as caregivers are committed to helping the patient.)
1-10
More Cood Days Than BadWhen bad days outnumber good days, quality of life might be compromised.
When a healthy human-animal bond is no longer possible, the caregiver must be made aware the end is near.
T'he decision needs to be made if the patient is suffering. If death comes peacefully and painlessly, that is okay.
Total
u pamaaai siaeed au uo pase al jo Aenb algedane ue susaidai suiod o jo ino s lao en
this scale.
*1 is poor, 10 is good.
Adapted from Villalobos & Kaplan (2007). This material is reproduced with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
360   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Kaplan, 2007). While this scale can be used as a
rated fatty acids including eicosapentaenoic acid
guideline, the therapist is obligated to assist owners
(EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) decrease
in evaluating these parameters and to help improve
production of proinflammatory mediators such as
comfort, mobility, and happiness, if possible.
IL-1 and IL-6 and decrease expression of mRNA for
inflammatory mediators including MMP-13, MMP-
3, COX-2, 5-lipoxygenase, TNFα, IL-1α, and IL-1β
Rehabilitation options for the
(Curtis et al., 2002; LeBlanc et al., 2008). Improved
geriatric patient
 mean peak vertical force and subjective lameness
scores were noted in 82% of osteoarthritic dogs fed
Rehabilitation objectives for the geriatric patient
a diet containing omega-3 fatty acids in one study
include managing pain, improving mobility and
(Roush et al., 2010).
strength, providing appropriate assistive devices
to promote independent ambulation, and modify-
ing the patient's home environment to provide
Laser
 adequate traction, bedding, and obstacle-free space
Laser therapy is an excellent tool for decreasing
for ambulation.
pain. Low-level laser therapy stimulates local
blood flow to help flush out inflammatory media-
tors including TNFα, IL-1β, and COX-2, and
Pain management
releases endorphins. Laser therapy decreases
edema, and decreases neutrophil influx and cell
Multimodal pain management is a critical compo-
apoptosis (Bjordal et al., 2006). Laser therapy is
nent of the rehabilitation protocol in achieving
indicated for DJD, intervertebral disk disease,
owmer compliance and patient cooperation. The
 muscle strains and sprains, and wound healing.
Colorado State University produced a pain scale
Refer to Chapter 7 for more information on laser
that the International Veterinary Academy of Pain
and other physical modalities.
Management has adopted as the standard for acute
pain scoring. Validated chronic pain scales still
need to be developed in dogs. See Chapter 19
Acupuncture
for a discussion of multimodal pain management
Table 18.4 offers commonly used acupuncture
options for rehabilitation patients.
points in geriatric patients. See Chapter 22 for more
details on the use of acupuncture in canine patients
Pain scale
(Figure 18.10).
See Table 18.3 for a scale that can be used to assess
the level of pain in canine patients.
Chiropractic and massage
See Chapter 23 and Chapter 6, respectively, for
Supplements and nutraceuticals
more information on canine chiropractic and
massage therapy (Figure 18.11).
Supplements can augment  pain  management
and improve the health of the tissues in the body.
Thermotherapy
Consideration should be given to chondroprotec-
tive agents such as PSGAGs, glucosamine, and
See Chapter 7 for information on thermotherapy.
chondroitin sulfate for osteoarthritis. Glucosamine
Regenerative medicine
chondroitin sulfate decreases degradation of the
cartilage, and PSGAGs reduce production of deg-
Regenerative medicine is being researched exten-
radative enzymes such as metalloproteinases. In
sively in regard to tissue healing and regeneration,
addition to improving the health of cartilage, chon-
as well as pain amelioration. At minimum,
 a  s an
 it appears that stem cell therapy provides a local
associated with osteoarthritis (Taylor et al., 2004;
anti-inflammatory effect at the site where it is
Laflamme, 2005). Long-chain omega-3 polyunsatu-
injected. Adjunctive biologic agents to improve
Chapter 18  Rehabilitation for Geriatric Patients  361
Table 18.3 Adaptation of CSU acute pain scale
Pain score 
Dog's posture
Psychological and behavioral
Response to palpation 
Body tension
0
 Comfortable at rest
●Not tender to
Minimal
 Happy, content 
palpation
Interested in surroundings
Content to slightly unsettled or
Reacts by looking
Mild
restless
around, flinching,
Distracted easily by surroundings
or whimpering
2
Uncomfortable at rest
Flinches,
Mild to
Whimpers, cries, licks painful area
whimpers, cries,
moderate
Droopy ears, worried facial
or guards/pulls
expression
away
Reluctant to respond
Not eager to interact with
surroundings
 Unsettled, crying, groaning, biting/
Increased
Moderate
chewing painful area 
breathing
Limps, shifts weight 
 Cries, growls
 Unwilling to move
●
 Bites or pulls 
away
1
Constant groaning or screaming
Cries at gentle
Moderate to
 Biting/chewing painful area 
palpation
severe
Unwilling to move
Might react
 Potentially unresponsive to
aggressively
surroundings
Difficult to distract from pain
Adapted from Hellyer et af. (2006), CSU Canine Acute Pain Scare, Vol. 2, with permission granted by Drs. Hellyer and
Robinson. Illustrations by Marcia Schlehr.
stem cell differentiation and proliferation are
Improving mobility
added to stem cell injections to improve efficacy
and longevity of treatments. Platelet-rich plasma is
After pain has been managed, the next step in the
 a biologic adjunct that improved stem cell chon-
physical rehabilitation plan is to improve mobility,
 drogenic differentiation in vitro in one study and
as it is critical for quality of life. Increasing daily
 appears to have great promise in this field (Mishra
 exercise in moderation will start to improve cardio-
et al., 2009).
vascular fitmess and endurance.
362  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Table 18.4 Useful acupuncture points in geriatric patients
Acupuncture
point
Traditional Chinese medicine indication
Western medicine indication
ST36
Master point for abdomen/Gl
Digestion
Strengthens stomach and spleen
Weakness
Tonifies qi and blood
Anemia
 Chronic illness
L14
Master point for face/mouth
Pain in neck, front leg, head, and mouth
Clears heat and wind
Reduces fever
Tonifies qi
Immunostimulation
LI11
Clears heat, wind, and damp
Reduces fever
Builds wei qi
Immunostimulation 
Regulates blood and qi
Pain in elbow/front leg
SP6
Master point for caudal abdomen and urogenital system
Pain in abdomen, back, and stifle
Tonifies spleen and kidneys
T'reats dysuria/UTI
Tonifies qi, blood, and yin 
Immunostimulation
Weakness, fatigue
GV20
Quiets spirit and shen
Anxiety, seizures
PC6
 Master point for chest/cranial abdomen 
Cardiac disorders
Calms shen
Nausea
Moves qi and heat
Seizures, anxiety
Pain in elbow/front leg
BL17
Influential point for blood
Immunostimulation 
Tonifies qi, blood, and yin
 Supports blood flow
Clears heat
Fatigue
BL23
Tonifies kidney
Pain in back, hips/stifles
Tonifies qi and essence
Kidney issues
Weakness
 Strengthens mind
Seizures
Adapted from Schoen (2001) and Bierman (2008-2009). Readers may reference Schoen (2001) for diagrams of acupuncture
point locations.
Assistive devices
prevent snow from forming ice between the paw
 pads and to prevent salt from irritating them.
Some geriatric patients may need assistance with
 mobility, for walking, rising, or maneuvering in
Slings and harnesses
their home environment.
After traction has been addressed, strength and
Footing
ability to rise independently should be evaluated.
 Patients with severe DJD may lack range of motion
Frequent nail trims and keeping the hair between
 in the affected joints, inhibiting ability to transition
the paw pads short can aid traction on slippery
Aeu Audone asnn ‘uonsod Supueis e ou
floors. Yoga mats or runners can be placed over
contribute to incoordination and inability to rise.
slippery floors. Paw waxes or sprays promoting
 Patients needing assistance to rise benefit from
traction are available to help prevent slipping.
devices that aid elevation from the floor such as
Canine-specific booties are helpful in winter 
to
slings under the belly, chest harnesses, or harnesses
Chapter 18 Rehabilitation for Geriatric Patients 363
Figure 18.10 Acupuncture is a valuable tool for pain
Figure 18.12 Boots can provide protection from cold
management in patients with degenerative lumbosacral
stenosis or lumbar spondylosis in this case.
climates.
Figure 18.13 Patient demonstrating a harness that assists in
lifting through both the chest and pelvis.
thatlift under the pelvis. These devices also provide
balance support for ambulation (Figure 18.12 and
Figure 18.13).
Carts
Figure 18.11 Massage is a gentle method of addressing
Wheelchairs or carts provide mobility for patients
muscle soreness and relieving pain in anxious older patients.
with severe paresis or plegia. Carts allow patients
to maintain an exercise schedule, to interact with
owners and other pets, and to eliminate in a more
sanitary marner if they carnot support themselves
independently (Figure 18.14).
364Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Figure 18.15   Providing soft bedding that is supportive of
prominent bony protuberances, yet easy to rise from, is
helpful in maintaining mobility and preventing decubital
ulcers in geriatric patients.
Figure 18.14 Carts can provide improved mobility and
quality of life for patients with paresis due to neurologic
injury.
Bedding
Patients with muscle atrophy are susceptible to
cold temperatures and pressure sores. Comfortable
Figure 18.16  Passive range of motion for dogs with
padding helps keep these patients warm and pro-
restricted mobility can decrease pain, improve lubrication
tects their skin (Figure 18.15). Frequent turning
of the joints, and decrease stiffness.
every 24 hours should be employed if patients do
pue siseioalae juaaand cn umo a uo os op iou
excessive pressure on bony points.
Improving strength
 After pain managementand mobility are ad dressed,
Passive range of motion (PROM)
the next step in the physical rehabilitation plan is
Passive range of motion (PROM) assists in main-
to promote increased strength in the geriatric
taining comfort and mobility. It is important for
 patient. Increased muscle mass will help maintain
patients that are recumbent or restricted in joint
comfort by acting as a shock absorber for concus
motion secondary to neurologic or orthopedic
sive forces and provide more padding for recum-
conditions to maintain joint lubrication and mech-
bent patients. Muscle has a higher metabolic rate
anoreceptor stimulation. PROM improves extensi-
than fat and will help to maintain a more lean body
bility of the soft tissues such as muscle and the
weight in these patients.
joint capsule to prevent adhesions from forming in
restricted joints (Figure 18.16). A study of dogs
Hydrotherapy
receiving tibial plateau leveling osteotomy (TPLO)
for CCL rupture found that loss of more than 10°
Hydrotherapy provides buoyancy, decreasing con-
of flexion or extension increased lameness scores,
cussive forces on potentially painful or arthritic
supporting the need to restore as much range of
-un lepu roy suaaos (6 radeu aas) su!
motion as possible after injury or surgery Jandi &
tions is important to ensure the geriatric patient
Schulman, 2007).
will be able to tolerate the warmth and moisture of
Chapter 18  Rehabilitation for Geriatric Patients  365
Figure 18.19 Weave cone exercises can improve balance
Figure 18.17 Geriatric patients benefit from the
and proprioception in geriatric patients with weakness in
cardiovascular benefits of aerobic exercise in a lower impact
their core muscles.
environment with hydrotherapy.
patterning for patients that are too weak to stand
independently or those with severely compro-
mised mobility (Figure 18.17).
Therapeutic exercises
Therapeutic exercises for the geriatric patient may
focus on improving coordination, proprioception,
and strengthening the stabilizer muscles (see
Chapter 7). Cookie stretches and spinal flexion can
 be helpful in improving flexibility and comfort in 
stiff patients (Figure 18.18). Cavaletti poles help
improve proprioception and coordination (pre-
suming the patient does not have visual deficits).
More stable cavaletti poles can be provided with a
serpentined garden hose, while softer foam poles
may prevent tripping in a weak patient that scuffs
its paws. Backward walking and side stepping can
 address hamstring and gluteal muscle atrophy in
patients with hind limb weakness secondary to
neurologic conditions or DJD. Exercises such as
Figure 18.18 Therapeutic exercises such as cookie
rocker board and weave poles improve balance
stretches and lateral bending can improve spinal flexibility
and lateral stability for patients that are prone
and balance.
to falling (Figure 18.19). Focusing on abdominal
muscle strength with core exercises such as
crunches, goosing, cookie stretches, and leg lifts is
the water as well as the stress and exertion en-
helpful in decreasing stress and discomfort on the
countered with hydrotherapy. Providing shorter
spine in lordotic patients.
hydrotherapy sessions with more breaks may be
beneficial for a weakened geriatric patient. The
Neuromuscular electrical stimulation (NMES)
buoyancy of the water may allow the therapist to
perform standing therapeutic exercises such as
 Targeted muscle strengthening with NMES can
rhythmic stabilization, joint compressions, and
assist patients with severe muscle atrophy. In
366   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Case Study 18.2  Geriatric patient with suspected polyneuropathy
Signalment: 11 y.o. M/N Labrador Retriever
 3. Discuss supplements for DjD and polyneuropa-
thy. Injectable PSCACs q3d for 1 month, then taper
History: Unable to walk mrore than one block without
to q2wk; omega-3s, antioxidants, glucosamine/
lying down, some scuffing of rear toes for 3 months, slow
chondroitin, whitefish derivative to maintain lean
to rise, no longer jumping on furniture, noisier breathing.
muscle mrass.
and hoarse bark.
Improve mobility. Discuss home environment
bedding. traction, assistance on stairs; recommend
Previously Diagnosed Medical Conditions: Laryngeal
daily PROM, massage q2-3d, short frequent walks to
paralysis, moderate coxofemoral D)D, mild carpal DJD,
patient tolerance; hydrotherapy q3d.
hypothyroidism, suspected polyneuropathy  due  to
5.
 Maintain and improve strength. Therapeutic exer-
increasing hyporeflexia, muscle atrophy, and weakness
cises: cavaletti poles to improve proprioception,
in pelvic limbs. Advanced imaging has been declined.
cookie stretches to improve spinal flexibility and
balance, side stepping to strengthen gluteal muscles,
Rehabilitation Plan (no new issues found on examination):
partial sit to stands to strengthen quadriceps and
1. 
Improve pain management. Acupuncture for 3
gluteals and improve transitional ability; hydrother-
weeks, tapering as able; chiropractic monthly: laser
apy q3d.
of hips and carpi twice weekly for eight visits, then
Reassess patient response to treatment in 3-4
reassess; teach owner massage and PROM; discuss
weeks. Consider pulsed electromagnetic therapy or
thenmotherapy: ice/heat/ice prior to massage and
regenerative medicine and adjusting analgesics if
PROM and ice after exercise.
pain not managed. Consider NMEs if muscle atrophy
 Assess nutritional status. Discuss optimal diet with
and weakness not irmproving.
owner.
weakened patients, NMES activates muscles that
(American Veterinary Medical Association, 2007).
can be targeted later with therapeutic exercise.
Those viewing them as family may be willing to
NMES can be done two to three times a week in
invest more money to ensure maintenance of a
the practice for patients with mild to moderate
good quality of life and to foster their longevity.
muscle atrophy, or taught to capable owners so
that it can be done three to five times a week at
home for patients with neurogenic or severe muscle
Arthritic patients
atrophy.
-ipuon aaissansoid e si aseasip jurof aageiauasa
tion that responds well to maintenance rehabilita-
The market for geriatric rehabilitation
tion. Goals for the arthritic patient include pain
management, maintaining or improving range of
Geriatric patients offer the opportunity for a long-
term relationship with physical rehabilitation facil-
 mass. Hydrotherapy sessions twice a week can be
ities. Owners have established a close bond with
pue sinena aosaq Aau au au Aq soop rna
exercise program, PROM, and massage can be
often view them as part of the family. The 2006
Aemai auop aq ues 1o enoid awou e se june
AVMA U.S. Pet Ownership Survey indicated that
in the practice. Laser therapy and acupuncture
53.5% of dog owners considered their dogs to be
may be useful in pain management in addition to
family members, 45.1% viewed them as pets or
some of the other modalities that have been
 companions, and 1.3% viewed them as property
discussed.
Chapter 18  Rehabilitation for Geriatric Patients  367
Degenerative neurologic conditions
Creating a geriatric management program
Many neurologic conditions require maintenance
 A geriatric wellness program involves routine vet-
therapy to prevent regression in the patient's con-
 erinary examinations, at least bianmual diagnostics,
dition. The goals of a maintenance program are to
 nutritional counseling, consideration for a dis-
maintain strength, proprioception, mobility, and 
 counted package making frequent visits more
pain management. Therapies for these patients 
 affordable, and hospice services for terminal
often include acupuncture, hydrotherapy.
pue
 patients. Training support staff to provide owner
therapeutic exercise among other modalities.
education and nursing care for geriatric patients
creates an outlet for owners to express concerns.
Maintaining a spreadsheet to monitor body weight,
Hospice care
body condition score, muscle mass, and pain scores
 can be helpful in providing objective assessments
of how the patient is progressing over time.
End-of-life issues are very difficult for owners. The
 rehabilitation facility provides an important source
of owner education on pain management, nutri-
Webliography
tion, and nursing care issues associated with termi-
nal or recumbent patients. Teaching owners to
keep these patients well padded, hydrated, ade-
Hellyer, PW., Uhrig, S.R., & Robinson, N.G. (2006)
quately fed, and how to express their urinary
Colorado State University, Veterinary Medical Center,
Canine Acute Pain Scale v.2. IVAPM.org. Accessed
bladder and bowels is often indicated. Laser
November8,2012. www.ivapm.org/attachments/097
therapy for pain management and wound healing
CSU%20Acute%20Pain%20Scale%20-%20Canine%20
and massage and PROM to maintain flexibility and
v.2.pdf
comfort in the joints are all beneficial. Discussing
parameters that detract from an acceptable quality
m dsan a u rea paemoa st a jo
References
owners of hospice patients so they can remain
more objective. Encouraging them to write down
ADAMS, V.J., EVANS, K.M, SAMPSON, J., & WOOD,
how much they are willing to assist their pet and
J.L. 2010. Methods and mortality results of a health
what level of dysfunction or loss of independence
survey of purebred dogs in the UK. J Small Anim Pract,
they are willing to accept can be a valuable ref-
51, 512-524.
erence once decisions about end of life are
 American Veterinary Medical Association. 2007. Ll.S. Pet
necessary.
Ownership & Dermographics Sourcebook. Schaumburg,
IL: AVMA Membership & Field Services.
BEAGLEHOLE, R., LUNENFELD, B., & KALACHE, A.
2001. Men, Ageing and Heatth: Achieving Heatth across
Marketing to geriatric pet owners
the Life Span. Geneva: World Health Organization, 63.
 BIERMAN, N. 2008-2009. A TCM perpective on geriatric
Owners of geriatric patients can be contacted to
medicine in a basic course in veterinary acupuncture
educate them about the services that the rehabilita-
notes. Intermational Veterinary Acupuncture Society.
tion professional can provide. Clients that pur-
San Diego, CA.
chase nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories, thyroid
BJORDAL,J.M, JOHNSON, M.1.,IVERSEN,V.,AIMBIRE,
supplementation, urinary incontinence medica-
F., & LOPES-MARTINS, R.A. 2006. Low-level laser
tion, chemotherapy, medications prescribed for
aaissod jo maaar sueuashs e ed ainoe u Aderau
mechanisms of action and clinical effects in random-
 ized placebo-controlled trials. Photormed Laser Surg, 24,
patients (based on age) are good candidates to
158-168.
receive educational materials about geriatric well-
CURTIS, C.L., REES, S.G., LITTLE, C.B., FLANNERY,
ness or hospice programs offered by the rehabilita-
C.R., HUGHES, C.E., WILSON, C., DENT, C.M.,
tion practice.
OTTERNESS, 1G., HARWOOD, J.L., & CATERSON,
368   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
B. 2002. Pathologic indicators of degradation and
LEBLANC,C.J,1
HOROHOV, D.W.,BAUER, JE.
inflammation in human osteoarthritic cartilage are
HOSGOOD, G.,& MAULDIN, G.E. 2008.Effects of
abrogated by exposure to n-3 fatty acids. Arthritis
dietary supplementation with fish oil on in vivo pro-
Rheum, 46, 1544-1553.
duction of inflammatory mediators in clinically
DAY, M.J. 2010. Ageing, immunosenescence and inflam-
normal dogs. Am / Vet Res, 69, 486493.
mageing in the dog and cat. ∫ Cormp Pathol, 142(Suppl.
LOESER, R.F. 2010. Age-related changes in the musculo-
1), S60-S69.
skeletal system and the development of osteoarthritis.
DIMAKOPOULOS, A.C. & MAYER, R.J. 2002.Aspects of
Clin Geriatr Med, 26,371-386.
neurodegeneration in the canine brain. ∫ Nutr, 132,
MARSHALL, W.G., HAZEWINKEL, H.A., MULLEN
1579S-1800S
D., DE MEYER, G., BAERT, K., & CARMICHAEL, S.
GIBSON, J.S., MORTON, J.M., COBBOLD, R.N., SIDJA-
2010. The effect of weight loss on lameness
in
BAT, H.E, FILIPPICH, L.J, & TROTT, D.J. 2008.
obese dogs with osteoarthritis. Vet Res Commun, 34,
Multidrug-resistant E. coli and enterobacter extraintes-
241-253.
tinal infection in 37 dogs. ∫ Vet Interr Med, 22,
MARTIN, J.A. & BUCKWALTER, J.A.2003. The role of
844-850.
 chondrocyte senescence in the pathogenesis of osteo-
GOLDSTON, R.T. 1995. Introduction and overview of
arthritis and in limiting cartilage repair. ∫ Bone foint
geriatrics. In: Goldston, R.T. & Hoskins, J.D. (eds.),
Surg Am, 85, 106-110.
Geriatrics & Gerontology ofthe Dog and Cat, 1st ed. Phila-
 METZGER, F.L. 2005. Senior and geriatric care programs
delphia: W.B. Saunders, 1-9.
for veterinarians. Vet Clin North Am Srull Anim Pract,
HALL, J.A.,CHINN, R.M.,
VORACHEK,
W.R.,
35, 743-753.
GORMAN, M.E., & JEWELL, D.E. 2010. Aged Beagle
MISHRA,A.,TUMMALA,P., KING,A., LEE, B., KRAUS,
dogs have decreased neutrophil phagocytosis and
M., TSE, V., & JACOBS, C.R. 2009. Buffered platelet-
rich plasma enhances mesenchymal stem cell prolif-
younger dogs. Vet Immunol Immunopathol, 137, 130-
eration and chondrogenic differentiation. Tissue Eng
135.
Part C Methods, 15, 431-435.
HEAD, E. 2011. Neurobiology of the aging dog. Age, 33,
MLACNIK, E., BOCKSTAHLER, B.A., MULLER, M,
485496.
TETRICK, M.A., NAP, R.C., & ZENTEK, J. 2006. Effects
HOEKSTRA, K.A. & PAULTON, R.J. 2002. Clinical prev
 of caloric restriction and a moderate or intense phys-
alence and antimicrobial susceptibility of Staphylococ-
-laao u ssauauet jo juaua rog ueaoid Aderauon
Cus aureus and Staph. intermedius in dogs. f Appl
weight dogs with osteoarthritis. ∫ Arnt Vet Med Assoc,
Microbiol, 93, 406413.
229, 1756-1760.
IMPELLIZERI, J.A., TETRICK, M.A., & MUIR, P. 2000.
NORRIS, A.J., NAYDAN, D.K., & WILSON, D.W. 2005.
Effect of weight reduction on clinical signs of lameness
Interstitial lung disease in West Highland White Ter-
in dogs with hip osteoarthritis. ∫ Arn Vet Med Assoc,
riers. Vet Pathol, 42, 35-41.
216, 1089-1091.
ROUSH, J.K., CROSS, A.R., RENBERG, W.C., DODD,
JANDI, A.S. & SCHULMAN, A.J. 2007. Incidence of
C.E., SIXBY, K.A., FRITSCH, D.A., ALLEN, T.A.,
motion loss of the stifle joint in dogs with naturally
JEWELL, D.E, RICHARDSON, D.C., LEVENTHAL,
occurring cranial cruciate ligament rupture surgically
PS., & HAHN, K.A. 2010. Evaluation of the effects of
treated with tibial plateau leveling osteotomy: longi-
dietary supplementation with fish oil omega-3 fatty
tudinal clinical study of 412 cases. Vet Surg, 36,
acids on weight bearing in dogs with osteoarthritis. ∫
114-121.
Am Vet Med Assoc,236,67-73.
JOHNSON, FB., SINCLAIR, D.A., & GUARENTE, L.
SCHOEN, A.M. 2001. Veterinary Acupuncture: Ancient Art
1999. Molecular biology of aging. Cell, 96, 291-302.
to Modern Medicine, 2nd ed. St. Louis, MO: Mosby, Inc.
KEALY, R.D., LAWLER, D.F., BALLAM, J.M., MANTZ,
SHAFFER, S.W. & HARRISON, A.L. 2007. Aging of the
S.L., BIERY, D.N., GREELEY, E.H, LUST, G., SEGRE,
M., SMITH, G.K., & STOWE, H.D. 2002. Effects of diet
Phys Ther, 87, 193-207.
restriction on life span and age-related changes in
SHIMADA,A., EBISU, M., MORITA, T., TAKEUCHI, T.,
dogs. / Am Vet Med Assoc, 220, 1315-1320.
& UMEMURA, T. 1998. Age-related changes in the
LAFLAMME, D.P 2005. Nutrition for aging cats and
cochlea and cochlear nuclei of dogs. ∫ Vet Med Sci, 60,
dogs and the importance of body condition. Vet Clin
41-48.
North Am Small Anim Pract, 35,713-742.
STANLEY,B.J.,HAUPTMAN,J.G.,FRITZ,M.C.,ROSEN-
LANDSBERG, G. 2006. Therapeutic options for cogniti ve
STEIN, D.S., & KINNS, J. 2010. Esophageal dysfunc-
decline in senior pets. f Am Anirm Hosp Assoc, 42,
tion in dogs with idiopathic laryngeal paralysis: a
407413.
controlled cohort study. Vet Surg, 39, 139-149.
Chapter 18  Rehabilitation for Geriatric Patients  369
STRASSER, A., TELTSCHER, A., MAY, B., SANDERS,
THIEMAN, K.M., KRAHWINKEL, D.J., SIMS, M.H., &
C.,& NIEDERMULLER, H. 2000. Age-associated
SHELTON, G.D. 2010. Histopathological confirmation
changes in the immune system of German shep-
herd dogs. I Vet Med A Physiot Pathol Clin Med, 47,
∫Am Anim Hosp Assoc,46, 161-167.
181-192.
VILLALOBOS,A.& KAPLAN, L. 2007. Canine and Feline
TAYLOR, R.A., MILLIS, D.L., LEVINE, D., ADAMSON,
Geriatric Oncology: Honoring the Humun-Animat Bond.
C.P, BEVAN, J., & MARCELLIN-LITTLE, D. 2004.
Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing.
Physical rehabilitation for geriatric and arthritic
WORTH, A.J., THOMPSON, D.J., & HARTMAN, A.C.
patients. In: Millis, D.L., Levine, D., & Taylor, R.A.
2009. Degenerative lumbosacral stenosis in working
(eds.), Canine Rehabilitation & Physical Therapy. St.
dogs: current concepts and review. N Z Vet ∫, 57,
Louis, MO: Saunders-Elsevier, 411-425.
319-330.
19
The Prevention and Management
of Pain in Dogs
Mark E. Epstein, DVM, Dipl ABVP (C/F), CVPP
Summary
Undermanaged acute and chronic pain can lead to a cascade of negative physiological,
medical, and emotional consequences. Fortunately, there are many pain-management tools
available to the veterinarian to mitigate these effects and improve not only patient comfort, but
overall recovery and quality (and in some case, length) of life. Unfortunately, it can be a chal-
lenge to know which treatment plan can best——and most safely—meet the needs of our patients,
a matter made more difficult for veterinarians, as animals cannot self-report their pain. This
chapter is a succinct overview of the multimodal approach to the prevention and treatment of
pain in dogs, utilizing evidence-based veterinary medicine (EBVM) insofar as possible, and a
consensus of expert opinion otherwise. Drug classes and modalities discussed include nonste-
roidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), opioids, alpha-2 agonists, locoregional anesthesia,
subanesthetic ketamine, and a variety of other pain-modifying analgesic drugs (PMADs) in
common use (e.g., tramadol, gabapentin, amantadine, and others). The discussion also includes
tips for practical clinical use, with an emphasis on safe and responsible use of the various drug
Classes. In addition, descriptions of other drugs possibly on the horizon for veterinary use (based
 on use in human medicine) are included. Lastly, evidence-based approaches to managing
postsurgical and different varieties of chronic pain (osteoarthritis, osteosarcoma, and nonin-
flammatory) are described, with sample cases to illustrate.
Introduction
cology, and most drug doses. An emphasis is
placed on practical and evidence-based approaches,
This chapter explores the fundamentals of acute
 with attention to safe and responsible drug use.
and chronic pain management in dogs. The reader
We must be mindful that there is relatively little
is directed to more comprehensive resources for
evidence-based veterinary medicine (EBVM), thus
discussions of pain neurobiology, neuropharma-
 guidance with regard to complex dlinical choices is
@2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
370
Chapter 19 The Prevention and Management of Pain in Dogs 371
Pain elicits a cascade of debilitating neurohor-
monal effects that includes hypertension, catabo-
Individual
Best
lism,
immunosuppression, and worse. With
Clinical
Extemal
Expertise
udermanaged pain, surgical patients heal and
Evidence
Evidence
recover more slowly, and may develop chronic
Based
pain states and even severe, life-threatening com-
Medicine
plications (Anand & Hickey, 1992). Chronic pain in
humans is associated with cognitive impairment
(Kreitler et al., 2007) and is comorbid with clinical
 depression. In dogs, underrecognized, underat-
tended, undermanaged pain can become a crite-
Client Values
& Expectations
rion for euthanasia.
 We know much about optimal pain management
in animals, but what we think we know is dwarfed
Figure 19.1 In veterinary medicine, the competing values
by what we do not. Literature must be read criti-
of a best-evidence approach, personal experience, and
cally, and any recommendations about protocols,
including those in this chapter, must be considered
when it comes to choosing the best drugs for pain
analytically, with an open mind toward the view-
management.
points of others and a commitment to continued
learning.
 in short supply. It is both the blessing and the curse
The multimodal approach to
of contemporary medicine that there exists an
pain management
 impressive array of tools in the pain management
toolbox.
The principle is simple: Relying upon one modality
 apro jm un 2asn am leus (s)np eum
or drug requires higher doses and/or more fre-
       
quent and/or prolonged administration to achieve
what dose? For how long? For these and many
the desired effect, while minimizing the potential
 other variables, there are no simple answers in
benefit and maximizing the possibility of ADEs
 the veterinary literature. The competing values of
(Figure 19.2). With multiple modalities, each affect-
 a best-evidence approach, personal experience,
ing different aspects of pain processing, require-
and client values (preferences) will always be in
 ments for each drug are reduced while achieving
dynamic tension (Figure 19.1; Sackett et al., 1996).
superior effect and minimizing ADEs. Although
Pain is further complicated for veterinarians, as
difficult to study, there is growing evidence in the
 our patients are nonverbal, mirroring the challenge
veterinary literature that this principle applies in
 in human medicine with nonverbal subpopula-
both acute (Brondani et al., 2009) and chronic pain
tions: neonates (Schechter, 1989), the cognitively
(Fritsch et al., 2010) settings.
impaired (Cook et al., 1999), and the elderly
(Lovheim et al., 2006). In verbal patients, pain is
what the patient says it is; in nonverbal patients,
Neuropharmacology: The tools in
pain is what we say it is.
the toolbox
 Clinicians often limit pain medications for fear
 of adverse drug effects (ADEs) or interactions. Yet
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
we must also consider the harm to the patient if
drugs (NSAIDs)
pain is inadequately managed. We have an ethical
obligation to minimize pain in our patients, and to
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
recognize negative medical, physiological, emo-
are the most commonly used modality to manage
tional, and even cognitive consequence that are a
pain, and for good reason: they are highly effective,
direct result of undermanaged pain.
commonly available, licensed for use in dogs, and
372   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Perception(cerebralcortex)
Perception:
-Anesthetics
third-order neuron
-Opioids
-α2Antagonists
-Benzodiazepines
Modulation:
-Phenothiazines
dorsal horn of spinal cord
-NSAIDs
Modulation(spinalcord)
Localanesthetic
-Tricyclicantidepressants
-Cholinesteraseinhibitors
-NMDAantagonists
-Opioids
-NSAIDs
-α2Antagonists
-Anticonvulsants
Transmission (sensory nerves)
uSehienr
-Localanesthetics
-α2Antagonists
Transmission:
first-order neuron
Transduction (sensory nerve endings, nociceptors)
(primary afferent)
-Localanesthetics
Transduction
-Opioids
-NSAIDs
-Corticosteroids
Figure 19.2 Multimodal approach to pain management. With multiple modalities, each affecting different aspects of pain
processing, requirements for each drug are reduced while achieving superior effect and minimizing adverse drug effects.
Illustration by Marcia Schlehr.
safe with proper use. Because inflammation is a
All veterinary NSAID products are effective,
prime pain-generating physiologic mechanism,
ul sonap quejrodul isou au Suoue ate sIvSN
main limitation is the potential for ad verse effects.
the veterinarian's arsenal.
COX enzymes are crucial to the production of
 Their primary mode of analgesic action is to
cyto-protective prostaglandins(COX-1 especially in
the gastrointestinal (GI) tract and renal tubules,
that metabolizes arachidonic acid and results in
COX-2 in the renal tubules), so the primary ADEs of
the production of proinflammatory and vasoactive
NSAIDsinclude gastroduodenalerosion/ulceration
prostaglandins. NSAIDs also appear to inhibit
and nephrotoxicity. Additional concerns include
rare i
idiosyncratic hepatotoxicity and effects on
-1 (oo "o ga ) sm ussaaxa a
tissue healing and platelet function. Evidence sug-
chidonic acid is also metabolized by lipooxygenase
 gests that NSAID ADEs may be less dependent on
to produce leukotrienes, which attract PMNs and
longevity of use than on biologic predisposition and
promote their adherence to endothelium. The rela-
 improper use. The single greatest variable in pre-
tive roles and molecular dynamics of COX and
venting NSAID-related ADE is the veterinarian,
lipooxygenase (LOX) enzyme variants are still
who must be aware of concurrent drug use and
-XOo pue -xol lewndo a pue 'patepionpa Suaq
patient risk factors, and ensure proper use, patient
selective/sparing effect that maximizes effective-
monitoring.
and client education. Seventy-five
ness and limits toxicity remains unclear.
 percent of individuals reporting adverse NSAID
ze  soa ui uied po juawaeue pue uouasaid ayl bl ladeyo
events to the FDAhotline feel thattheir veterinarian
may inhibit COX-2-mediated production of PGE2
did not inform them adequately of possible side
(Lee et al., 2007b). Its postoperative pain-modifying
effects and /or failed to give the client the drug infor-
(and possible anti-inflammatory) effects have been
mation sheets (Hampshire et al., 2004).
demonstrated in dogs (Mburu et al., 1988). While
the drug is cleared more slowly in dogs than in
Tips for NSAID use
humans (Plumb, 2011), there is no toxicity data to
suggest unusual tenderncy toward adverse effects
     a  a 
in dogs with judicious use. Chronic use cannot be
 NSAID studies goes to preoperative use (Lascelles
 advocated in dogs as long-term safety has not been
et al., 1998). Systematic reviews in humans suggest
established (and based on experience in humans,
safety of preoperative NSAIDs (Lee et al., 2007a),
is probably suspect).
as do studies in healthy dogs even with moderate
intraoperative hypotension (Bostrom et al., 2002). It
is axiomatic that patients undergoing general anes-
Tips for use
thesia should have the benefit of intravenous fluid
Acetaminophen can be alternated with NSAID, but
support.
with a maximum frequency of BID, maximum dose
 of 325 mg even for the largest dogs, and maximum
duration of administration of 5 days. Acetamino-
New drugs in class
phen is contraindicated in dogs with liver disease
Robenacoxib (Onsior*; Novartis Animal Health,
or exposed to other hepatotoxic or methemoglobin
Greensboro, NC) (Sackett et al.,1996) is a unique
inducing drugs or toxins.
COX-2 selective (King et al., 2010) approved for
canine and feline use in Europe, and approved
in the United States for perioperative pain in
Opioids
cats. It has a short plasma half-life yet accumu-
lates in inflammatory exudates for an extended
 Synthetic opioids are powerful tools to manage
time (King et al., 2009).
pain because receptors for naturally occurring
 Mavacoxib (Trocoxcil, Europe only; Pfizer,
opioids (endorphins, enkephalins) are distributed
Paris) is a sustained-release NSAID approved
throughout the body and can be found in both
for chronic pain in dogs. Pharmacokinetics are
central  and  peripheral tissues. Several  opioid
established (Cox et al., 2010), but there is no
 receptor types and subtypes have been isolated,
peer-reviewed literature regarding efficacy.
each with a variant effect.
Nitronaproxen  (Naproxcinod,
Europe
for
 Activation of a mu-opioid receptor inhibits pre-
humans only; NiCox, Sophia Antipolis, France)
synaptic release of and postsynaptic response
is a cyclooxygenase-inhibiting nitric oxide-
to excitatory neurotransmitters (especially in the
donating drug (CINOD) that appears to have
 dorsal horn of the spinal cord), hyperpolarizing
the analgesic efficacy of the parent NSAID
second-order neurons (Barkin et al., 2006). Activa-
(Geusens, 2009) but with a greatly reduced inci-
tion of kappa receptors promotes the release of
dence of gastropathy (Fritsch et al., 2010)
inhibitory
neurotransmitters
(predominantly
●Meloxicam: New formulation for dogs, pro-
gamma-aminobutyric acid [GABA]).
vided as an oral transmucosal spray (OroCAM;
Abbott Animal Health, Abbott Park, IL, labeled
Pure mu agonists
in U.S. for chronic pain associated with osteo-
arthritis; and RevitaCAM°; Abbott Animal
Morphine remains the prototype opioid and the
Health, labeled in UK/EU for acute and chronic
one in widest use; it has no ceiling effect on anal-
musculoskeletal disorders).
gesia or respiratory depression, elicits histamine
release, and in nonpainful dogs (e.g., as a premedi-
Acetaminophen may elicit some of its analgesic
 cant) causes vomiting.
effects by inhibiting one or more centrally acting
Oxymorphone (Numorphan; Endo Health Solu-
COX variants (Kuo, 2006). Studies suggest that it
tions Inc., Chadds Ford, PA), and hydromorphone
374   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
(Dilaudid°; Purdue Pharma, Stamford, CT, and
sustained-release
buprenorphine formulations
also available as a generic form) do not elicit
are available for use in dogs, but they are not
 histamine release, produce somewhat less nausea,
FDA-approved products nor are kinetics well
and have a shorter duration of action than
established.
morphine.
Oral transmucosal bioavailability is low in
 Methadone may be a parenteral opioid alterna-
dogs (approx 40%; Abbo et al., 2008). Commercial
tive in animals, in part due to its additional effect
 buprenorphine patches (e.g., BuTrans%; Purdue
as an N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) antagonist.
Pharma, Stamford, CT) have compared favorably
 Some veterinarians favor it as a premedication due
 in dogs to IV buprenorphine in a thermal threshold
to its effectiveness, nice sedation, and low ADE
 model (Pieper et al., 2011) and using pain scores
profile (minimal if any nausea, no histamine
postovariohysterectomy (Moll et al., 2011).
release) (Ingvast-Larsson et al., 2010).
Fentanyl (Sublimaze) is a potent, short-acting
Kappa agonist/mu antagonist
opioid preparation most often used as an intrave-
nous constant rate infusion (CRI). A transdermal
Butorphanol will weakly block the mu opioid
 patch (Duragesic°; Sandoz Corp, East Hanover, NJ,
receptor, but its kappa agonism will promote the
 and other manufacturers) has been used in dogs
release of inhibitory neurotransmitters such as
although a number of studies have demonstrated
GABA. It has a ceiling effect and a very short dura-
wide kinetic variability (Kyles et al., 1996). The
tion of, and effect on, visceral analgesia in the dog
potential liability with human ingestion, especially
(approx. 30-40 minutes) (Sawyer et al., 1991; Grimm
children (deaths have occurred), must also be con-
et al., 2000), making it a poor choice in this species
sidered. More recently, an extended duration (4
for any kind of significant or prolonged pain states.
days) transdermal fentanyl preparation was FDA-
It does have utility in select situations and as an
approved for the control of postsurgical pain in
adjunct with other medications such as alpha-2
dogs (RecuvyraTM; Elanco, Greenfield, IN)
agonists.
Oral opioids experience a robust first-pass effect
in dogs (KuKanich et al., 2005), but they are not
without utility. Oral hydrocodone in dogs has a
Mu antagonist
bioavailability of approximately 50% of that found
Naloxone (Narcan; Amphastar Pharm, Rancho
 in humans (KuKanich & Paul, 2010), and codeine,
Cucamonga, CA, and other manufacturers) is a
while it does not convert in dogs to morphine,
potent mu-opioid receptor antagonist, tradition-
appears to make another highly bioactive
mu-
ally used to achieve rapid and complete reversal of
agonist metabolite (KuKanich, 2010). Rectal sup-
 opioid overdose or severe ADE. However, micro-
 positoryopioid formulationsmay alsobe prescribed
doses (as low as 0.01-0.05mcg/kg IV) have been
but appear to provide little advantage in bioavail-
used to improve the analgesia provided by
ability over the oral route in dogs (Bamhart et al.,
buprenorphine (La Vincente et al., 2008) and mini-
ae pue ‘snip I ssei are snip asau "(oo0z
mize adverse effects of IV morphine (Cepeda et al.
available as separate drugs or combined with
2004).
acetaminophen.
 New developments in other long-acting opioids
 including novel formulations and delivery systems
may overcome the need for, and limitations of,
 Partial mu agonist
opioid intravenous CRI, patches, and PO adminis-
tration. Opioids, despite their effectiveness, may
Buprenorphine (generic buprenorphine; American
create clinical challenges as well. In the acute
Regent, Shirley, NY, and other manufacturers) is a
 setting, opioid-induced dysphoria, hyperalgesia,
and respiratory depression may be encountered
phine, and it has a ceiling effect. Wide variation of 
(McNicol & Carr, 2007). Having strategies for
onset and duration appears to exist in the dog
recognizing and counteracting these signs will
(even when administered IV) (Krotscheck et al.,
minimize
complications.
With
chronic
use in
2008) and may be dose-dependent. Compounded
humans, the most commonly reported opioid ADE
Sze  soa ui uied po juawaeue pue uouasaid ayl bl ladeyo
is constipation. New peripherally acting mu opioid
without a Nat influx, neurons may not depolarize.
receptor antagonists alvimopan (Entereg°; Cubist
The effect is complete anesthesia to a site rather
Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Lexington, MA) and meth-
 than analgesia. Different LAs will have variable
ylnatrexone(
(Relistor°; Salix Pharmaceuticals,
 onsets, durations of action, and toxicities.
Raleigh, NC) permit the central analgesic effect
This modality is limited only by the clinician's
of opioids but block their effect on GI motility
ability to learn various techniques and anatomic
(Gevirtz, 2007).
landmarks. Blocks include local, line, or parainci-
sional, 
 subcutaneous infiltrative, intrapleural,
Tips for use of opioids
intra-abdominal, retrobulbar, intratesticular, intra-
articular, carpal ring, epidural, dental (orofacial),
Preoperatively, opioids are combined with an anx-
 brachial plexus, intercostal, paravertebral, and use
iolytic (tranquilizer/sedative) to create a pro-
of wound diffusion catheters. Ultrasound and
foundly relaxed, stress-free, and anesthetic-sparing
 nerve electrolocator devices enhance the precision
state. The choice of opioid, route, dose, and dura-
 and dose in perineural delivery. Descriptions of the
tion of administration is dependent upon clinical
techniques are available (Campoy et al., 2008).
preferences and patients' individual needs.
Anecdotally, the most commonly encountered
Tips for use
opioid adverse effect in dogs is dysphoria (Epstein,
2012). Treatment strategies include using buprenor-
The edge in efficacy goes to preoperative use
phine (displaces pure mu agonists off the receptor),
(Savvas et al., 2008), but infiltration of LA postinci-
butorphanol (antagonizes the mu receptor but acti-
sionally can be effective. To minimize the sting of
vates kappa receptor), or a microdose of dexme-
administration in awake patients, the LA (Hogan
detomidine;  all  will diminish dysphoria while
et al., 2011) is warmed to body temperature and
 maintaining some degree of analgesia.
injected slowly. Diluting the LA (with saline to
Oral opioids are recommended for many chronic
increase volume for large infiltrative areas) will
 pain conditions in humans including osteoarthri-
slow onset and shorten duration of action. The
tis (OA) (American Pain Society, 2002). Intermit-
duration of activity may be doubled with small
tent, judicious use of oral opioids (+/- combined
amounts of an opioid (Bazin et al., 1997).
with acetaminophen) can be considered for dogs
Toxicity is most likely when administration
experiencing breakthrough pain in OA and other
Aisnouaaenul ro/pue sasop aoiel Aiaa je simooo
chronic pain states, and /or as palliative end-of-life
(which must be avoided with the potentially car-
care.
diotoxic bupivacaine). LA can result in motor as
well as sensory blockade (a special consideration
with epidurals). There is little clinical evidence to
Locoregional anesthesia
 support the belief that local anesthetics impair
wound healing.
Local anesthetics (LAs) are a principal means to
 To facilitate catheter placement or other minor
reduce pain, general anesthetic and concurrent
skin procedures, a transdermal lidocaine/prilo-
analgesic requirements, and even inflammation
caine ointment formulation (eutectic mixture of
and microbial activity (Cassuto et al., 2006; Johnson
local anesthetics, EMLA°; AstraZeneca, London,
et al., 2008). They are considered quite safe at cus-
also available as a generic) is placed on a shaved
tomary doses. Most techniques are easily mastered
area and covered with a bioadhesive dressing or
and inexpensive. There no longer exists a rationale
other nonporous wrap (e.g., foil). Although pene-
against local/regional anesthesia as part of every
tration has been reported to be time-dependent
surgical intervention (Jones, 2008).
. The Interna-
(Wahlgren & Quiding, 2000), 20 minutes appears
tional Veterinary Academy of Pain Management
sufficient in canine patients.
(IVAPM) adopted this position in a 2012 Consen-
Commercial 5% lidocaine patches (Lidoderm;
sus Statement.
Endo Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Chadds Ford, PA) are
Local anesthetics bind to a hydrophilic site
within sodium channels thus blockading them;
(shingles) and also have been described for
376   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
postoperative paraincisional analgesia in dogs
time and frequency, thus reducing Cat2 ion influx
(Weil et al., 2007), with minimal systemic absorp-
 and dampening secondary intracellular signaling
tion noted (Weiland et al., 2006). The adhesive
 cascades. It appears to be protective against hyper
patches can be cut to the desired size and shape.
 algesia and central hypersensitization in the post-
One cautionary note is that an entire patch contains
 operative setting in humans and dogs (Slingsby &
700 mg of lidocaine, a toxic dose if ingested; there-
Waterman-Pearson, 2000; Hocking et al., 2007), and
fore, adequate precautions must be taken.
the evidence in humans is strong for its pain-
preventive effects when given IV CRI at subanes-
thetic doses. Ideal subanesthetic ketamine plasma
Intravenous lidocaine
concentrations in the dog have been reported at
2-3 mcg/mL, which can be achieved by adminis-
There is evidence in humans for the anesthetic-
tering ketamine IV CRI at 10 mcg/kg/min (Boscan
et al., 2005). The IVAPM adopted a position/
sparing effect of intravenous lidocaine (IVL) and
its ability to speed the return of bowel function,
consensus statement that clinicians should con-
 sider the modality as part of a multimodal approach
decrease postoperative pain, minimize opioid con-
sumption, and shorten the hospital stay after
to transoperative pain management.
abdominal surgery (Groudine et al, 1998). Evi-
dence in dogs is somewhat weaker at this point
(MacDougall et al., 2009), although there may be a
Tips for use
synergistic effect with other drugs. Formulas for a
The recommended intraoperative rate can be
combination morphine, lidocaine, and ketamine IV
accomplished by placing 60mg (0.6mL of 100 mg/
CRI have been described for dogs (Muir et al.,
mL stock) ketamine in 1L of fluids administered
2003). The combination is profoundly analgesic,
at intraoperative rates of 10 mL/kg/h. Postopera-
fairly sedating, and superior for the most painful
tively, the rate can be reduced to maintenance rates
postoperative states. IVL also elicits a sustained
of 2mL/kg/h, which administers the ketamine
effect on neuropathic pain in humans (Cahana
CRI at 2mcg/kg/min. A loading dose of 0.25-
et al., 1998).
0.5mg/kg ketamine IV is recommended prior to
the initiation of the CRI in order to rapidly achieve
plasma levels.
Other drugs in class
 Mexilitine is an oral sodium-charnel blocker, often
Alpha-2 agonist
called oral lidocaine and labeled for use as a cardiac
anti-arrhythmic. It has also been used to treat
Medetomidine and dexmedetomidine bind to
chemotherapy-induced neuropathic pain states in
opioid-like receptors on C- and A-delta fibers,
humans (Egashira et al., 2010). Its utility for chronic
especially in the central nervous system (CNS).
 pain conditions in dogs has not been established.
Binding presynaptically, norepinephrine (NE) pro-
 duction is reduced and sedation occurs; binding
postsynaptically, analgesia is produced, and is pro-
Subanesthetic ketamine constant
foundly synergistic with opioids. Binding also
rate infusion
blocks NE receptors on blood vessels, resulting in
vasoconstriction; the resulting hypertension para-
NMDA receptor antagonism remains a research
 sympathetically induces bradycardia, which is
focus for pain in humans (Fisher et al., 2000). Ket-
 extended by a subsequent direct decrease in sym-
amine is a dissociative anesthetic that binds to a
 pathetic tone. Cardiac index is decreased; however,
phencyclidine receptor inside the NMDA receptor;
 central perfusion is maintained. Many uses are
that is, the calcium channel would already have to
described for the perioperative setting, usually in
be open and active for ketamine to exert its effect.
 combination with opioids and at doses much lower
 Once bound, it decreases the channel's opening
 than suggested by the manufacturer.
Zze  soa ui uied po juawaeue pue uouasaid ayl bl jadeyo
Tips for use
et al., 2010). It has become a popular adjunct to
chronic pain management in humans (Wilder-
Intravenous  microdoses  of  dexmedetomidine
Smith et al, 2001) and dogs, but there is only one
 intra- and postoperatively at 0.25-1.0 mcg/kg can
address rocky anesthetic episodes, postoperative
unpublished abstract that suggests effectiveness
of tramadol as an adjunct to NSAID in canine
pain, or dysphoria. This calculates to tiny volumes
 OA (Lambert et al., 2003). The incidence of depen-
even in large dogs, and although the effect at these
dence in humans may be substantially higher
doses may last only 10-15 minutes, it may be
re-dosed to effect (constant-rate infusion doses
than previously suspected (Shaya & Ke, 2007), so
the drug may move to a controlled status in the
are also described; Valtolina et al., 2009). If a con-
future.
cerning degree of bradycardia occurs, anti-
cholinergics (atropine, glycopyrolate) should be
avoided as they will increase heart rate, but against
Tips for use
tremendous vascular resistance with potentially
ADEs for Tramadol can include GI and extrapyra
serious consequences. Instead, atipamezole is used
midal effects.
to reverse.
Other drugs in class
Other drugs in class
●Tapentadol (Nucyna%; PriCara Pharmacology.
Jansenn Pharmaceuticals, Titusville, NJ) is a
●Tizanadine (Zanaflex; Acorda Therapeutics,
centrally acting analgesic with a dual mode of
 Inc, Ardsley, NY, and also available in generic
action similar to tramadol: mu-opioid receptor
form) is an oral, centrally acting alpha-2 agonist
agonism and inhibition of NE reuptake. It is the
used in humans primarily as a skeletal muscle
parent compound, not a metabolite, that causes
relaxant to treat muscle spasticity, and the
both of these effects, so this drug may offer
resulting pain, in multiple sclerosis and 
a
an alternative superior to tramadol in dogs.
variety of other painful conditions. Its utility in
Unfortunately, recent data from the United
dogs is unknown.
States reveal low bioavailability in dogs and
● Clonidine is a centrally acting alpha-2 agonist
poor performance on a tail-flick analgesia
that can be administered systemically via oral,
model (see Webliography). A more recent study
IV, SC, IM, transdermal, and epidural routes.
under review reveals a significant analgesic
 Indicated in humans as antihypertensive agent
effect in the canine tail-flick model.
and to treat ADHD, new uses are being found
See Figure 19.3 for cautions regarding possible
for its antinociceptive effects (Neil, 2011)
serotoninergic drug interactions.
Pain-modifying analgesic drugs (PMADs)
Gabapentin
Tramadol (Ultram; Jansenn Pharmaceuticals,
Gabapentin is labeled as an anticonvulsant drug.
Titusville, NJ, and also available in generic form)
 yet has become a popular in human medicine for
is a popular analgesic that in humans combines a
many chronic and neuropathic pain conditions
highly active mu-agonist opioid (M1) metabolite
(Backonja & Glanzman, 2003). While structurally
along with serotonin and NE (inhibitory neu-
similar to GABA, it is not a direct agonist; it appears
rotransmitters) agonism. However, dogs produce
toexert its effect mostly by downregulating
very little of the M1 metabolite, and what little they
voltage-gated calcium channels (Longmire et al.,
make has a very short half-life (1.7 hours)
2006a). Its utility in the transoperative setting
(KuKanich & Papich, 2004). Nevertheless, recent
 is supported by a number of systematic reviews
studies have demonstrated the clinical usefulness
(Clivatti et al., 2009; Dauri et al., 2009). Pharmaco-
of tramadol in dogs (Seddighi et al., 2009; Martins 
 kinetic studies in dogs reveal that it has a half-life
378   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Potential Serotoninergic,Monoamine Drug Interactions
Analgesics:
·tramadol
·tapentadol
Other Dopaminergics:
TricyclicAntidepressants:
·amantadine
·amitriptyline
·metaclopropamide
·clomipramine
MonoamineOxidase
Tetracyclic
Inhibitors:
Antidepressant:
selegiline/l-deprenyl
·mirtazapine
·amtiraz
SelectiveSerotonin/Norepinephrine
Supplement:
Reuptake Inhibitors:
·S-adenosylmethionine(SAMe)
·duloxetine
·fluoxetine
Figure 19.3 Many compounds and chemicals may involve serotoninergic-monoaminergic (especially dopamine)
mechanisms, and caution and or judicious use should be exercised when using them in combination.
of 3-4 hours (Vollmer et al., 1986), suggesting TID
Other drugs in class
administration. The primary adverse effect in dogs
 Pregabelin (Lyrica; Pfizer, Inc. New York, NY),
and humans appears to be sommolescence.
 There is no literature to support gabapentin as
a gabapentin-like compound, is labeled for use
 an adjunctive treatment for OA in dogs or humans.
in diabetic neuropathy and postherpetic neu-
ralgia, with a superior kinetic profile in humans
Yet such literature does exist in rodents, and this
(does not require dose escalations). Its utility in
and anecdotally successful use for OA in dogs.
dogs remains unknown, but it would be
expected to have a similar, if not more predict-
Interestingly, a gabapentin analog reduced the
able, effect to gabapentin
development of experimental OA in rodents
Topiramate (Topamax°; Ortho-McNeil Neuro-
(Boileau et al., 2005). Gabapentin should be consid-
ered for other maladaptive and neuropathic pain
logics, Titusville, NJ, also available in generic
form) is an anticonvulsant drug in common use
states encountered in veterinary medicine.
for chronic migraine headaches in humans,
 and with evidence of efficacy for other chronic
pain conditions such as lower back pain (Mue-
Tips for use
hlbacher et al., 2006). Studies have established
To avoid drowsiness, a starting dose of 3-5 mg/kg
the pharmacokinetics in dogs, but it is not cur-
B-TID is recommended for chronic pain. As the
rently in clinical use with this species.
patient acclimates, the dose is increased gradually
Ziconotide (Prialt°; Jazz Pharmaceuticals,
to a target of 10-20mg/kg BID. For surgical pain,
Dublin, Ireland) is a voltage-gated calcium
/ nn 'anexa rog au ane ssop urss
channel blocker but designed for intrathecal
with one dose administered preoperatively and
use only. It represents a new class of drug
 one to three doses administered in the postopera-
and therapeutic intervention for long-standing
tive period; slight drowsiness does not seem to
severe neuropathic pain in humans (Schmidtko
impede appetite or other daily functions.
et al., 2010).
Chapter 19 The Prevention and Management of Pain in Dogs 379
Amantadine
Other drugs in class
Cyclobenzaprine (Flexeril; McNeil Consumer
Amantadine is an antiviral compound with weak
 and Specialty Pharmaceuticals, Washington,
dopaminergic effects and is reported to exert an
 PA, also available in generic form) is a muscle
-oue roidasan vaNN uno ioaa oisaee
relaxant with a chemical structure similar to
nism (Plumb, 2011). One canine OA study demon-
 TCAs, and is used in humans for fibromyalgia
strated improved pain scores when an NSAID was
and pain associated with muscle spasm and
combined with amantadine, versus an NSAID
myofascial trigger points.
alone (Lascelles et al., 2007). Toxicity and kinetic
studies have been performed in humans (Vernier
See Figure 19.3 for cautions regarding possible
et al., 1969) but not in dogs.
serotoninergic drug interactions.
Tips for use
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SsRI),
selective serotonin norepinephrine reuptake
The customary dose in dogs is 3-5mg/kg SID. Agi-
inhibitors (SSNRIs)
tation, tremors, and diarrhea are adverse effects
reported anecdotally.
 Serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors
come in various degrees of selectivity for these
inhibitory neurotransmitters. Most are labeled as
Other drugs in class
antidepressants, revealing the shared pathways
 Orphenadrine, an anti-Parkinson's NMDA-R
and well-established comorbidity of depression
antagonist, blocks voltage-gated sodium chan-
and chronic pain. Newer SSRIs and SSNRIs such
 nels in the dorsal root ganglion and has dem-
as milnacipran (Savella°; Forest Pharmaceuticals,
 onstrated analgesic action in chronic pain states
New York, NY) and duloxetine (Cymbalta°; Eli
(Desaphy et al., 2009). Experience in animals is
Lilly, Indianapolis, IN) have been developed for
limited.
chronic neuropathic pain states in humans. Dulox-
 etine recently expanded its label from treatment of
See Figure 19.3 for cautions regarding possible
diabetic neuropathy, postherpetic neuralgia, and
 monoamine drug interactions.
fibromyalgia to include OA and low back pain.
While no studies exist regarding use in canine OA,
it certainly holds promise in that area. Fluoxetine
Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs)
(Prozac°; Eli Lilly, Indianapolis, IN, also available
 in generic form), an SSRi, reveals a less robust
TCAs exert their analgesic activity by blocking NE
 impact on chronic pain in humans, suggesting that
and serotonin (5-HT) reuptake in the dorsal horn,
it is the noradrenergic effect that elicits the most
allowing these inhibitory neurotransmitters to
significant pain modifying effect. Some studies
exert a prolonged and more pronounced effect.
suggest the possible efficacy of fluoxetine for OA
As clinical depression is also partially mediated
 in humans (Chappell et al., 2011), and its relative
through NE and serotonin, patients may experi-
-xon axeu Ae asuadxa mol pue uaiu Aiajes
 ence the benefits of TCAs from these coexisting
etine a consideration in some dogs with OA or
mechanisms. Additional effects include interaction
other chronic pain states. As veterinarians can
with NMDA activity and sodium channel block-
neither classify nor diagnose clinical depression in
ade. As a class, TCAs are a first-line medication for
neuropathic pain in humans (Finnerup et al., 2005)
response might be attributed to improved comfort
Amitriptyline is the most commonly used TCA
versus improved state of mind or both.
 in humans (primarily for diabetic neuropathy)
(Longmire et al., 2006b) and animals (primarily
Other drugs in class
for chronic feline interstitial cystitis) (Chew et al.,
1998). Despite their efficacy, the adverse effect
● Trazadone (many trade names) is an antide-
 profile of TCAs often limits their use in humans.
pressant serotonin antagonist and reuptake
380   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
inhibitor (SARl) gaining some utility as an
kown bleeding dyscrasias; some clinicians dis-
adjunct to SSRIs, opioids, and anticonvulsants 
continue use prior to surgical procedures. Common
 for an enhanced pain-modifying and relaxant
offlabel applications include chronic use and
effect (Calandre et al., 2011).
administration via the subcutaneous route allow-
ing it to be dispensed for administration at home;
See Figure 19.3 for cautions regarding possible
this improves acceptance by decreasing cost and
serotoninergic drug interactions.
inconvenience.
Anxiolytics
Other investigative drug and targets
Anxiety contributes directly to the hyperalgesic
● Capsaicin (AdleaTM; Anesiva Inc., San Fran
state through cholecystikinin-mediated nocebo
effect (Benedetti et al., 2006). Many studies support
cisco, CA, also available in generic form) is
used as a neuroablative in humans with intrac-
the clinical relevance of this in humans, and in
table pain conditions (Karai et al., 2004). Studies
animals as well where restraint, social defeat, and
 of this modality have also been undertaken in
rotation of medical caregivers, creating a lack of
dogs with osteosarcoma (Brown et al., 2005).
personal attention for the patient (all common vet-
 Carmabinoid receptor agonists administered
gesia (Martenson et al., 2009). The first leg of a
via a transdermal patch were approved for dogs
 in 2011 (TetracanTM; Medical Marijuana Deliv-
strong transoperative pain management protocol
ery Systems LLC, Seattle, WA) but are not yet
involves the use of anxiolytics, thatis, tranquilizers/
available commercially.
sedatives. Clinicians may choose between pheno-
● Substance P/neurokinin-1 (NK-1) antagonist,
thiazines (e.g., acepromazine), benzodiazepines
maropitant (Cerenia; Pfizer Inc., New York,
(midazolam or diazepam), or alpha-2 agonists
u asn ioy paaoidde sgauanue ue '(AN
(dexmedetomidine /medetomidine), with addi-
 dogs, was recently established to be minimum
tional mindfulness toward patient setting, the
alveolar concentration (MAC)-sparing and to
influence of noise, and the benefit of human voice
have a visceral antinociceptive effect equiva-
and touch.
lent to morphine in dogs undergoing ovario-
hysterectomy (Boscan et al., 2011; Alvillar et al.,
Disease-modifying osteoarthritic
2012)
●Glial inhibitors: minocycline, the + enantiomer
agents (DMOAAs)
of nalaxone, and ibudilast have glial inhibitory
effects. Glial inhibition may become an essen-
Disease-modifying osteoarthritic agents may not
tial adjunct to opioid therapy to minimize toler-
have a primary analgesic mechanism of action, but
ance, reduce adverse effects, and enhance
still have a positive influence on OA in terms of
reducing pain and slowing the progression of the
potency.
disease. The only veterinary FDA-approved drug
in this category is Adequan? (Luitpold Pharmaceu-
ticals, Shirley, NY), a polysulfated glycosamino-
Acute pain
glycan (PSGAG). PSGAGs inhibit degradative
enzymes such as collagenase and metalloprotein-
Ouerview: There exists a general consensus, sup-
ases (MMA), and reportedly promote the forma-
ported by best evidence, for the four basic elements
tion of fibrocartilage (Altman et al., 1989).
that contribute to optimal patient management
for the prevention and treatment of postopera-
Tips for use
tive pain. Thereafter, clinicians employ an array of
adjunctive pain-modifying pharmacologic inter-
The molecule is distantly related to heparin and
 ventions, each with evidence to make them worthy
should be administered cautiously in patients with
 of clinical consideration.
Chapter 19 The Prevention and Management of Pain in Dogs 381
(3(
 Cryotherapy: The beneficial effects of cooling
Case Study 19.1 Forelimb amputation
damaged tissue should not be underesti-
Signalment: 4 y.o. M/C 20-kg Labrador mix undergo
mated. Cooling diminishes inflammation and
ing forequarer amputation due to ischemic injury:
-qoau pasodond jo Aanrea e yonor ued
nisms. Even modest application to injured
(1) A
 Already on NsAID from previous injury, morning
soft tissue has been shown to reduce pain and
dose administered preadmission, along with gaba-
speed return to function (Drygas et al., 2011).
pentin 100 mg PO
(4)  PMAD: For patients whose procedure may
(2)
Morphine-acepromazine SC premedication; cath-
generate more significant pain or those who
eter IV area clipped and topical EMLA applied
experience unexpected pain:
(3)
IV catheter placed; IV bolus of ketamine 5mg IV
(a)
 tramadol
and Normosol-R w/ 60mg/L ketamine adminis-
tered 200mL/h
(b)
gabapentin
 Propofol induction, isoflurane maintenance
(c)a
 acetaminophen+hydrocodone or codeine.
(4)
(5)
Brachial plexus block w/ nerve locator: 25rmg of
0.5% bupivacaine (5 mL) + 0.1 ml morphine
After armputation, placement of 5 Fr diffusion cath-
Chronic pain
(6)
eter SC, exiting dorsal to incision line
Osteoarthritis
Postoperative:
Ouerview: The most common chronic-pain condi-
 Cold compression applied to incision site
tion recogmized in dogs, OA also presents one
(2)
IVF w/ketamrine CRl 50mL/h x 24 hour
of the greatest challenges to treatment because of
[3)
Bupivacaine   0.5%   5mL + 0.1ml  morphine
its progressive pathology and difficulty in early
through diffusion catheter Q 8 H for 32 hours
(removed prior to discharge at end of day 1
recognition. OA is increasingly recogmized as a
postoperative)
maladaptive if not abjectly neuropathic pain state
(4)
Cabapentin 100mg PO Q H 8 x 3 days
(25% of human knee OA patients; Hochman et al.,
2011).
NSAID continued for 7 days.
 The pain of OA is not only felt at the articular
surfaces, but in the periarticular structures: an
inflamed synovium, tension on a fibrotic joint
capsule, and exertion on weakened ligaments,
 The four basic elements are:
tendons, and muscle. OA is a disease of the entire
joint organ, and treatment has to be targeted
(1)
 anxiolytics
accordingly.
(2)
 NSAIDs
Given the variable biologic nature of OA, the
(3)
spiordo
paucity of properly designed multimodal treat-
(4)  local anesthetics.
l juasraaip Aapim pue 'soop u sanpns jua
and veterinarian values, difficulty exists in formu-
lating a standard approach. Yet it is possible to
The best of the rest
a pue isauons si anuapiaa a araum ine pd
neurophysiologic/pharmacologic rationale
the
(1)
Topical dermal/epidermal local anesthetic:
most compelling.
Transdermal  prilocaine/lidocaine (IV
catheter placement)
(1)
 NSAIDs—An abundance of literature in
(b) Lidoderm? patch (Endo Pharmaceuti-
 humans and dogs, as well as two systematic
cals, Chadds Ford, PA) applied para-
reviews of treatments for canine OA reveal
incisionally to especially painful sites for
this class of drug to be, by far, the most pre-
up to 5 days; bandage well to prevent
dictably effective therapy.
 ingestion.
(2]
PSGAG (Adequan) and/or nutraceuticals
(2)  Subanesthetic ketamine CRI
(see Chapter 4)
382  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Case Study 19.2  Geriatric patient with CHD and OA
Signalment: 12 y.o. F/S, 40-kg Labrador Retriever w/
(3)   Further taper Adequan to frequency based on
BCS 7/9, bilateral hip dysplasia and clinical signs of OA
patient's needs
Continue oral neutraceuticals and adjunctive PMAD
First 30 days:
medication but with dose/schedule adjustments:
(a)
amantadine: attempt frequency decrease to
(1)NSAID
EOD
(2) Weight loss diet/program
(b)
gabapentin: may need to taper dose upward to
(3)
Adequan  SC (off-label  route)  induction  period:
target of 300-600mg PO B1D
twice weekly x 4 weeks
Day 90+: if patient has responded well:
Day 30: Reevaluate and
 Continue EPA-rich diet
(1)
Attermpt modest (25%) reduction of NSAID dose
Continue Adequan on lowest-frequency basis
(2)
 Continue with weight loss diet/program
continue oral neutraceuticals and adjunctive
[3)
 Taper frequency of Adequan (off label), targeting
PMAD medications but with dose/schedule
once monthly
adjustrments
If patient making inadequate progress, consider
(b)
amantadine: attempt frequency decrease to
addition of
EOD
(a) Adjunctive PMAD: gabapentin (200mg PO
(c)
gabapentin: can attermpt dose or frequency
BID) or amantadine (200mg PO SID)
reduction 
(b) Oral nutraceuticals (that include ASU, MSM,
(3)
 NSAID: can attempt another dose reduction, or
etc.)
attermpt to trial EoD, pm, or withdrawal
Days 60-90: Reevaluate and
(1)  If adequate weight loss, switch to EPA-rich diet
(2)
Attermpt another 25% dose reduction of NsAID
(3)Diet
(6)
 New drugs to consider
(a)
 Weight loss: Imperative if the patient is
(a)
duloxetine
overweight. The role of adipose tissue as
(b)
tapentadol
a mediator of systemic inflammation, the
(c)
 acetaminophen + hydrocodone
or
CO-
contribution of central obesity to chronic
deine (breakthrough pain only).
pain in humans (doubling the risk for it;
Ray et al.,2011), and the primacy of weight
loss (just5% in dogs) to diminish OA pain
is established (Marshall et al., 2010). With
Other noncancer chronic pain
an overweight patient, both the clinician
and owner are wasting time, energy,
Overview: Many non-OA, noncancer chronic pain
and money on other interventions until
conditions exist in dogs, and most cause, or are
weight loss is achieved.
likely to cause, neuropathic pain (Mathews, 2008).
（4）
Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA)-rich diet if/
These include CNS iesions of any type (includ-
when normal weight.
 ing trauma, intervertebral disk disease, neoplasia,
 PMAD—one or more
congenital defects, and meningoencephalitides);
(a)
 amantadine
peripheral nerve injury (trauma, amputation, frac-
(b)
 gabapentin or pregabelin
ture), as well as inflammatory bowel disease, and
(c)
tramadol.
pancreatitis.
Chapter 19 The Prevention and Management of Pain in Dogs 383
As inflammation is a component of the underly-
 pain management medications over the hypotheti-
ing pathology activating nociceptive pathways,
cal of ADE in palliative care situations.
NSAIDs can be considered first-line drugs. How-
A recent review in human literature using a
ever, in a neuropathic state, NSAIDs may be 
Number Needed to Treat:Number Needed to
expected to contribute a less robust analgesic effect,
Harm ratio (NNT:NNH) cited gabapentin, prega-
leaving room for other classes of pain-modifying
 belin, and strong opioids as the most effective and
drugs to occupy a more central treatment role.
best tolerated drugs in cancer-related pain, while
Systematic reviews of neuropathic pain
in
amitriptyline, tramadol, and NSAID elicited more
humans recommend a treatment algorithm, regard-
minor effects or an unfavorable safety profile (Tas-
less of etiology, that includes as first choice drugs.
sinari et al., 2011).
TCAs, gabapentin/pregabelin, and opioids. These
 papers are drawn mainly from trials involving dia-
（1)
NSAIDs: The antineoplastic effects of certain
betic neuropathy and postherpetic neuralgia,
NSAIDs in humans (Gupta & Dubois, 2001)
leaving the relevance in animals uncertain.
and in dogs (Knapp et al., 1994) have been
well established and appear to be mediated
(1)Pain-Modifying Analgesic Drugs (PMADs):
through the upregulation of the COX-2
(a)
 gabapentin or pregabelin
enzymes in some neoplasms of these species
(b)
TCA (e.g, amitriptyline)
(Mohammed et al., 2004).
(c)
tramadol
(2）
 Opioids: Fentanyl (Duragesic) and buprenor-
(P)
 amantadine
 phine (e.g., BuTrans) patches are labeled for
(e)
 New drugs to consider
use in cancer breakthrough pain in humans.
i.
duloxetine
While the long-term use of oral opioids in
ii.
tapentadol
animals is currently limited, they would be
f)
acetaminophen + hydrocodone
or
indicated in this patient population.
codeine (breakthrough pain only)
(3)PMAD
(2)NSAID
(a)
 gabapentin or pregabelin
(b)
TCA (e.g., amitriptyline)
(c)
 tramadol
Cancer pain
(P)
amantadine: although not studied in
humans for cancer pain, its NMDA-R
Ouerview: Osteosarcoma and any cancer metastatic
antagonist activity
makes it worth
 to bone are among the most painful chronic pain
 consideration
conditions a dog may encounter. This is due to a
(e)
rapisuon oi sonip MaN
 combination of unique factors including upregula-
i.
duloxetine
tion of COX enzymes, osteoclast-induced necrosis,
i.
tapentadol
lymphatic obstruction, and bioactive, proinflam-
iii.
 mexilitine:
for
chemotherapy-
matory cytokines that sustain and enhance the
 induced neuropathic pain
nociceptive pathways in ways distinct from other
（4)
Acetaminophen +/- hydrocodone or codeine
chronic inflammatory conditions. When owners
(5)
Bisphosphonates: Compounds that may pal-
have opted for palliative care, it is likely that the
liatively alleviate OSA-related pain by de-
patient's pain will be the most important issue to
 creasing osteoclast activity, with pamidronate
manage terminally. For this reason, it is warranted
in most common use for dogs (Fan et al., 2005).
to access the entire pain-modulating arsenal. The
 IV infusions are administered in patients not
prospect of drug ADE and interaction exists, but
undergoing amputation and chemotherapy.
since the risk of undermanaging the diseases' pain
Anecdotally, 60% of dogs will respond within
is death (euthanasia), aggressive multimodal poly-
a week, and about half of those responses will
pharmacy pain management is warranted. The
be durable, that is >4 months; it appears most
IVAPM adopted a position/consensus statement
effective when administered as part of multi-
supporting the primacy of wise, rational use of
modal therapy (Lorimier, September 2007).
384Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
Nephrotoxicosis is reported to be a limiting
BARKIN, R., IUSCO, M., & BARKIN, S. 2006. Opioids
adverse effect.
used in primary care for the management of pain: a
(6)
Lidoderm*
patch: Used with
anecdotal
pharmacologic, pharmacotherapeutic, and pharmaco-
success; considered safe due to very little sys-
dynamics overview. In: Boswell, M.V., Cole, B.E., &
temic absorption; however, must be secured
Weiner, R.S.(eds.), Weiner's Pain Management: A Practi
ml Guide for Clinicians, 7th ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC
 properly to prevent ingestion.
Press-Taylor & Francis, 791.
BARNHART, M.D., HUBBELL, J.A., MUIR, W.W., SAMS,
RA., & BEDNARSKI, R.M. 2000. Pharmacokinetics,
Webliography
pharmacodynamics, and analgesic effects of morphine
after rectal, intramuscular, and intravenous adminis-
tration in dogs. Am ∫ Vet Res, 61, 24-28.
Therapeutic Goods Administration. (February, 2011)
BAZIN, J.E., MASSONI, C., BRUELLE, P, FENIES, V,
Australian Public Assessment Report of Tapentadol.
GROSLIER,D.,&SCHOEFFLER,P.1997.The addition
Table l: Minimal efficacious doses in various animal
of opioids to local anaesthetics in brachial plexus
pain models, p. 9. TGA.gov.au. Accessed November
block: the comparative effects of morphine, buprenor-
12,
2012.
www.tga.gov.au/pdf/auspar/auspar-
phine and sufentanil. Anaesthesia, 52, 858-862.
palexia.pdf
BENEDETTI, F, AMANZIO, M., VIGHETTI, S., &
Young, K. (November 20, 2008) FDA Center for Drug
ASTEGGIANO, G. 2006. The biochemical and neuro-
 Evaluation and Research: Tapentadol, Application No.
endocrine bases of the hyperalgesic nocebo effect.
22-304. Section 3.3.5 Metabolism, Pp. 60-62. Access-
Neur0sci, 26,12014-12022.
Data.FDA.gov. Accessed Novermber 12, 2012. www.
BOILEAU, C.,MARTEL-PELLETIER, J, BRUNET, J,
accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/nda/2008/
TARDIF, G., SCHRIER, D., FLORY, C., EL-KATTAN,
022304s000_PharmR_P2.pdf
A., BOILY, M., & PELLETIER, J.P. 2005. Oral treatment
with PD-0200347, an alpha2delta ligand, reduces the
development of experimental osteoarthritis by inhibit-
ing metalloproteinases and inducible nitric oxide syn-
References
thase gene expression and synthesis in cartilage
chondrocytes.Arthritis Rheum,52,488-500.
ABBO, L.A., KO, JC., MAXWELL, L.K., GALINSKY,
BOSCAN, P, PYPENDOP, B.H., SOLANO, A.M.,&
R.E., MOODY, D.E., JOHNSON, B.M., & FANG, W.B.
ILKIW, J.E. 2005. Cardiovascular and respiratory
 2008. Pharmacokinetics of buprenorphine following
effects of ketamine infusions in isoflurane-anesthetized
intravenous and oral transmucosal administration in
dogs before and during noxious stimulation. Arm ∫ Vet
dogs. Vet Ther, 9, 83-93.
Res, 66, 2122-2129.
ALTMAN,R.D.,DEAN,D.D.,MUNIZ,O.E.,& HOWELL,
BOSCAN, P, MONNET, E., MAMA, K., TWEDT, D.C.,
D.S. 1989. Therapeutic treatment of canine osteoarthri-
CONGDON,J.,& STEFFEY, E.P.2011. Effect of maropi-
tis with glycosaminoglycan polysulfuric acid ester.
tant, a neurokinin 1 receptor antagonist, on anesthetic
Arthritis Rheum, 32, 1300-1307.
requirements during noxious visceral stimulation of
ALVILLAR, B.M., BOSCAN, P, MAMA, K.R., FER-
the ovary in dogs. Am ∫ Vet Res, 72, 1576-1579.
REIRA, T.H., CONGDON, J, & TWEDT, D.C. 2012.
BOSTROM,
1.M.,NYMAN，
G.C,，LORD,PE.,
Effect of epidural and intravenous use of the
HAGGSTROM, J., JONES, B.E., & BOHLIN, H.P. 2002.
neurokinin-1 (NK-1) receptor antagonist maropitant
Effects of carprofen on renal function and results of
on the sevoflurane minimum alveolar concentration
serum biochemical and hematologic analyses in anes-
(MAC) in dogs.Vet Anaesth Analg,39,201-205.
thetized dogs that had low blood pressure during
American Pain Society. 2002. Guideline for the Management
anesthesia. Armt / Vet Res, 63, 712-721.
ofPain in Osteoarthritis,Rheumatoid Arthritis,and fuve-
BRONDANI, J.T., LUNA, L.S.P, BEIER, S.L, MINTO,
nile Chronic Arthritis, 2nd ed. Glenview, IL: APS.
B.W, & PADOVANI, C.R. 2009. Analgesic efficacy of
ANAND, K.J.S. & HICKEY, PR.1992.Halothane
perioperative use of vedaprofen, tramadol or their
morphine compared with high-dose sufentanil for
combination in cats undergoing ovariohysterectomy.
JFeline Med Surg, 11, 420-429.
cardiac surgery. N Engt I Med, 326, 1-9.
BROWN, D.C., IADAROLA, M.J., PERKOWSKI, S.Z.,
BACKONJA, M. & GLANZMAN, R.L.2003.Gabapentin
ERIN, H., SHOFER, F., LASZLO,K.J., OLAH, Z.,&
 dosing for neuropathic pain: evidence from randon-
MANNES, A.J. 2005. Physiologic and antinociceptive
ized, placebo-controlled clinical trials. Clin Ther, 25,
effects of intrathecal resiniferatoxin in a canine bone
81-104.
cancer model. Anesthesiology, 103, 1052-1059.
Chapter 19 The Prevention and Management of Pain in Dogs 385
CAHANA，
A., SHVELZON， V, DOLBERG, O.,
GEORGE, A.L., Jr., & CAMERINO,D.C. 2009. Involve-
MAGORA, F., & SHIR, Y. 1998. Intravenous lignocaine
ment of voltage-gated sodium channels blockade in
for chronic pain: an 18-month experience. Harefuah,
the analgesic effects of orphenadrine. Pain, 142,
134, 692-694, 751, 750.
225-235.
CALANDRE, E.P, MORILLAS-ARQUES, P, MOLINA-
DRYGAS, K.A., MCCLURE, S.R.,GORING, R.L., POZZI,
BAREA, R., RODRIGUEZ-LOPEZ, C.M, & RICO-
A., ROBERTSON, S.A., & WANG, C. 2011. Effect of
VILLADEMOROS, F. 2011. Trazodone plus pregabalin
cold compression therapy on postoperative pain,
combination in the treatment of fibromyalgia: a two-
 swelling, range of motion, and lameness after tibial
phase, 24-week, open-label uncontrolled study. BMC
plateau leveling osteotomy in dogs. ∫ Arn Vet Med
Musculoskelet Disord,12,95.
Ass0c, 238, 12841291.
CAMPOY, L, MARTIN-FLORES, M, LOONEY, A.L.,
EGASHIRA, N., HIRAKAWA, S, KAWASHIRI, T.,
ERB, H.N., LUDDERS, JW., STEWART, JE., GLEED,
YANO, T., IKESUE, H., & OISHI, R. 2010. Mexiletine
R.D., & ASAKAWA, M. 2008. Distribution of a
reverses oxaliplatin-induced neuropathic pain in rats.
lidocaine-methylene blue solution staining in brachial
Pharmacol Sci, 112,473-476.
plexus, lumbar plexus and sciatic nerve blocks in the
EPSTEIN, M. 2012. Opioids: a practical guide and new
dog.Vet Anaesth Analg,35,348-354.
developments. North Armerican Veterinary Conference
CASSUTO, J., SINCLAIR, R., & BONDEROVIC, M. 2006.
Proceedings. January 18, 2012, Gainesville, FL.
Anti-inflammatory properties of local anesthetics and
FAN, T.M., DE LORIMIER, L.P., CHARNEY,S.C.,& HIN-
their present and potential clinical implications. Acta
TERMEISTER, J.G. 2005. Evaluation of intravenous
Anaesthesiol Scand,50,265-282.
pamidronate administration in 33 cancer-bearing dogs
CEPEDA,M.S.,ALVAREZ,H.,MORALES,O.,&CARR
D.B. 2004. Addition of ultralow dose naloxone to post-
Intern Med, 19, 74-80.
operative morphine PCA: unchanged analgesia and
FINNERUP, N.B., OTTO, M., MCQUAY, H.J., JENSEN,
opioid requirement but decreased incidence of opioid
T.S., & SINDRUP, S.H. 2005. Algorithm for neuro-
side effects. Pain, 107, 41-46.
Tesodond paseq aouaiaa ue uaean ued snd
CHAPPELL, A.S., DESAIAH, D., LIU-SEIFERT, H.,
Pain, 118, 289-305.
ZHANG, S., SKLJAREVSKI, V., BELENKOV, Y,&
FISHER, K., CODERRE,T.J.,& HAGEN,N.A.2000.Tar
BROWN, J.P. 2011. A double-blind, randomized,
geting the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor for chronic
placebo-controlled study of the efficacy and safety of
 pain management. Preclinical animal studies, recent
duloxetine for the treatment of chronic pain due to
clinical experience and future research directions.
osteoarthritis of the knee. Pain Pract, 11, 3341.
Pain Symptom Manage,20,358-373.
CHEW, D.J., BUFFINGTON, C.A., KENDALL, M.S.
FRITSCH, D.A., ALLEN, T.A., DODD, C.E, JEWELL,
DIBARTOLA, S.P, & WOODWORTH, B.E. 1998.
D.E., SIXBY, K.A., LEVENTHAL, PS., BREJDA, J., &
Amitriptyline treatment for severe recurrent idio-
HAHN, K.A. 2010. A multicenter study of the effect of
pathic cystitis in cats. ∫ An Vet Med Assoc, 213,
dietary supplementation with fish oil omega-3 fatty
1282-1286.
acids on carprofen dosage in dogs with osteoarthritis.
CLIVATTI, J., SAKATA, R.K., & ISSY, A.M. 2009. Review
|Am Vet Med Assoc,236,535-539.
 of the use of gabapentin in the control of postoperative
GEUSENS, P. 2009. Naproxcinod, a new cyclooxygenase-
pain. Rev Bras Anestesiol, 59, 87-98.
inhibiting nitric oxide donator (CINOD). Expert Opin
COOK, A.K.,NIVEN, C.A.,& DOWNS, M.G. 1999.
Biol Ther, 9, 649-657.
Assessing the pain of people with cognitive impair-
GEVIRTZ,C.2007. Update on the management of opioid-
ment. Int ∫ Geriatr Psychiatry, 14, 421425.
induced constipation. Top Pairn Manag, 23, 1-5.
COX, S.R.,LESMAN, S.P,BOUCHER, JF,KRAUT-
GRIMM, K.A., TRANQUILLI, W.J., THURMON, J.C., &
MANN, M.J., HUMMEL, B.D.,SAVIDES, M.,MARSH,
BENSON, G.J. 2000. Duration of nonresponse to
S., FIELDER, A., & STEGEMANN, M.R. 2010. The
noxious stimulation after intramuscular administra-
pharmacokinetics of mavacoxib, a long-acting COX-2
tion of butorphanol, medetomidine, or a butorphanol-
uod ia  'ssop Aropeoqet anpe SunoA un romau
medetomidine
combination
 during
isoflurane
macot Ther, 33,461-470.
administration in dogs. Arm ∫ Vet Res, 61, 42-47.
DAURI, M., FARIA, S., GATTI, A., CELIDONIO, L.,
GROUDINE, S.B., FISHER, H.A., KAUFMAN, R.P, JR.
CARPENEDO, R., & SABATO,A.F. 2009. Gabapentin
PATEL, M.K, WILKINS, L.J., MEHTA, S.A., & LUMB,
 and pregabalin for the acute post-operative pain man-
PD. 1998. Intravenous lidocaine speeds the returm of
agement. A systematic-narrative review of the recent
bowel function, decreases postoperative pain, and
clinical evidences. Curr Drug Targets, 10, 716-733.
shortens hospital stay in patients undergoing radical
DESAPHY, JF, DIPALMA, A.,1
DE BELLIS,
M.
retropubic prostatectomy. Anesth Analg, 86, 235-
COSTANZA, T., GAUDIOSO, C., DELMAS,
，P.,
239.
386Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
GUPTA, R.A. & DUBOIS, R.N. 2001. Colorectal cancer
KREITLER, S., NIV, D., & CARR, D.B. 2007. Cognitive
 prevention and treatmentbyinhibitionof cyclooxy genase-
impairment in chronic pain. Internationat Association
2. Nat Reu Cancer, 1, 11-21.
for the Study of Pain:Pain Clinical LIpdates XV(4), 14.
HAMPSHIRE, V.A., DODDY, F.M, POST, L.O.,
KROTSCHECK, U., BOOTHE, D.M., & LITTLE, A.A.
KOOGLER, T.L., BURGESS, T.M, BATTEN, PO.,
 2008. Pharmacokinetics of buprenorphine following
HUDSON, R., MCADAMS, D.R., & BROWN, M.A.
intravenous administration in dogs. Am ∫ Vet Res, 69,
2004. Adverse drug event reports at the United States
722-727.
Food And Drug Administration Center for Veterinary
KUKANICH, B. 2010. Pharmacokinetics of acetamino-
Medicine. ∫ Arm Vet Med Assoc, 225, 533-536.
phen, codeine, and the codeine metabolites morphine
HOCHMAN, J.R., GAGLIESE, L., DAVIS, A.M., &
and codeine-6-glucuronide in healthy Greyhound
HAWKER, G.A. 2011. Neuropathic pain symptoms in
dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther, 33, 15-21.
a cormmunity knee OA cohort. Osteoarthritis Cartilage,
KUKANICH, B.& PAPICH, M.G. 2004. Pharmaco
19, 647-654.
kinetics of tramadol and the metabolite O-desmethyl-
HOCKING, G., VISSER, E.J., SCHUG, S.A., COUSINS
tramadol in dogs. ∫ Vet Pharmacol Ther, 27, 239-246.
M.J., & CARR, D.B. 2007. Ketamine: does life begin at
KUKANICH, B. & PAUL, J. 2010. Pharmacokinetics of
40?International Association for the Study of Pain:Pain
hydrocodone and its metabolite hydromorphone after
Clinical LIpdates XV(3), 1-6.
oral hydrocodone administration to dogs. American
HOGAN, M.E., VANDERVAART, S., PERAMPALADAS
College of Veterinary Intermal Medicine, June 9-12,
K., MACHADO, M., EINARSON, T.R., & TADDIO,A
2010, Anaheim, CA.
2011. Systematic review and meta-analysis of the effect
KUKANICH, B., LASCELLES, B.D., & PAPICH, M.G.
 of warming local anesthetics on injection pain. Anr
2005. Pharmacokinetics of morphine and plasma con-
Emerg Med, 58, 86-98.
centrations of morphine-6-glucuronide following
INGVAST-LARSSON, C., HOLGERSSON, A., BONDES-
morphine administration to dogs. / Vet Pharmacot Ther,
SON, U., LAGERSTEDT, A.S., & OLSSON, K. 2010.
28, 371376.
Clinical pharmacology of methadone in dogs. Vet
 KUO, G. 2006. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. In:
Anaesth Aralg,37,48-56.
Boswell, M.V., Cole, B.E., & Weiner, R.S. (eds.), Wein
JOHNSON, S.M., SAINT JOHN, B.E., & DINE, A.P. 2008.
r's Pain Management:A Practical Guide for Clinicians,
Local anesthetics as antimicrobial agents: a review.
7th ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press-Taylor & Francis,
Surg Infect (Larchmt),9,205-213
774.
JONES, R.S. 2008. Combining local and general anaesthe-
KYLES, A.E, PAPICH, M., & HARDIE, E.M. 1996. Dis-
sia for better pain relief in dogs and cats. Vet J, 178,
position of transdermally administered fentanyl in
161-162.
dogs. Arm I Vet Res, 57, 715-719.
KARAI, L., BROWN, D.C., MANNES, A.J., CONNELLY,
LAMBERT, C., BIANCHI, E., KEROACK, S., GENEVOIS
S.T, BROWN, J., GANDAL, M., WELLISCH, O.M.,
J.P, SOLDANI, G.,& TRONCY, E. 2003. Reduced
NEUBERT, J.K, OLAH, Z., & IADAROLA, M.J. 2004.
dosage of ketoprofen alone or with tramadol for long-
term treatment of osteoarthritis in dogs. &th World
     ud ro su jae
Congress of Veterinary Anesthesia. September 16-20,
13441352.
2003, Knoxville, TN, p. 157.
KING, JN., DAWSON, J., ESSER, R.E., FUJIMOTO, R.,
LASCELLES, B.D.,CRIPPS, PJ.，JONES, A.，&
KIMBLE,E.F,MANIARA,W, MARSHALL, PJ.,
WATERMAN-PEARSON, A.E. 1998. Efficacy and
O'BYRNE, L., QUADROS, E., TOUTAIN, P.L., & LEES,
kinetics of carprofen, administered preoperatively or
P. 2009. Preclinical pharmacology of robenacoxib: a
postoperatively, for the prevention of pain in dogs
novel selective inhibitor of cyclooxygenase-2. ∫ Vet
undergoing
Pharmacol Ther, 32, 1-17.
568-582.
KING, J.N, RUDAZ, C.,
BORER, L.,JUNG, M.,
LASCELLES, B.D.X., GAYNOR, J, & SMITH, E.S. 2007.
SEEWALD, W, & LEES, P. 2010. In vitro and ex
Evaluation of Amantadine as part of a multimodal
vivo inhibition of canine cyclooxygenase isoforms by
analgesic regimen for the allviation of refractory
robenacoxib: a comparative study. Res Vet Sci, 88,
canine osteoarthritis pain. World Srmall Anirmal Veteri-
497-506.
rury Association Worid Congress Proceedings. Sydney,
KNAPP, D.W., RICHARDSON, R.C., CHAN, T.C.
Australia.
BOTTOMS, G.D., WIDMER, W.R., DENICOLA, D.B.,
LA VINCENTE, S.F., WHITE, JM., SOMOGYI, A.A.,
TECLAW, R.,BONNEY, PL.,& KUCZEK, T.1994.
BOCHNER, F, & CHAPLEO, C.B. 2008. Enhanced
Piroxicam therapy in 34 dogs with transitional cell
buprenorphine analgesia with the addition of ultra-
carcinoma of the urinary bladder. ∫ Vet Intern Med, 8,
low-dose naloxone in healthy subjects. Clin Pharmaco!
273-278.
Ther, 83, 144-152.
Chapter 19 The Prevention and Management of Pain in Dogs 387
LEE, A., COOPER, M.G., CRAIG, J.C., KNIGHT, J.F., &
MCNICOL, E. & CARR, D.B. 2007. Opioid side effects.
KENEALLY, JP 2007a. Effects of nonsteroidal anti-
Internationat Associationforthe Studyof Pain:Pain Clini-
inflammatory drugs on postoperative renal function
al LIpdates XV(2), 1-6.
in adults with normal renal function. Cochrane Data-
MOHAMMED, S.I., KHAN, K.N., SELLERS, R.S.
base Syst Reu,CD002765.
HAYEK, M.G., DENICOLA, D.B., WU, L., BONNEY,
LEE, YS., KIM, H., BRAHIM, JS., ROWAN, J., LEE, G.
P.L., & KNAPP, D.W. 2004. Expression of cyclooxygen-
& DIONNE, R.A. 2007b. Acetaminophen selectively
ase-1 and 2 in naturally-occurring canine cancer. Pros-
suppresses peripheral prostaglandin E2 release and
taglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids,70,479-483.
increases COX-2 gene expression in a clinical model of
MOLL, X.,FRESNO, L., GARCIA, F., PRANDI, D.,&
acute inflammation. Pain, 129, 279-286.
ANDALUZ, A. 20l1. Comparison of subcutaneous
LONGMIRE, D.R., JAY, G.W., & BOSWELL, M.V. 2006a.
and transdermal administration of buprenorphine for
Neuropathic pain. In: Boswell, M.V. & Cole, B.E. (eds.),
Weiner's Pain Management:A Practical Guide for Clini-
ovariohysterectomy. Vet J, 187, 124-128.
cians, 7th ed. Boca Raton, FL: Taylor & Francis, 305.
MUEHLBACHER, M., NICKEL, M.K., KETTLER, C.,
LONGMIRE, D.R., JAY, G.W., & BOSWELL, M.V. 2006b
TRITT,K., LAHMANN,C., LEIBERICH, PK.,NICKEL,
Neuropathic pain. In: BOSWELL, M.V. & COLE, B.E.
C.,KRAWCZYK,J., MITTERLEHNER,F.O.,ROTHER,
(eds.), Weiner's Pain Management:A Practical Guide for
W.K., LOEW, T.H., & KAPLAN, P. 2006. Topiramate in
Clinicians, 7thed. Boca Raton, FL: Taylor & Francis,300.
 d  m   s o p
LORIMIER, L.P. September 2007. RE: H6pital Vetérinaire
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study.
Rive-Sud (Brossard, Quebec). Louis-Philippe de Lor-
Clin Pain,22,526-531.
inmier, personal communication..
MUIR, W.W., 3rd, WIESE,A.J., & MARCH, PA.2003.
LOVHEIM, H., SANDMAN, PO., KALLIN, K., KARLS-
Effects of morphine,
lidocaine, ketamine,
，and
 SON, S., & GUSTAFSON, Y. 2006. Poor staff awareness
morphine-lidocaine-ketamine drug combination on
of analgesic treatment jeopardises adequate pain
minimum alveolar concentration in dogs anesthetized
control in the care of older people. Age Ageing, 35,
with isoflurane. Am ∫ Vet Res, 64, 1155-1160.
257-261.
NEIL, M.J. 2011. Clonidine: clinical pharmacology and
MACDOUGALL, L.M, HETHEY, JA., LIVINGSTON,
therapeutic use in pain management. Curr Clin Phar-
A.,
CLARK,C.，S
SHMON，C.L.，&
DUKE-
mucol, 6, 280-287.
NOVAKOVSKI, T. 2009. Antinociceptive, cardiopul-
PIEPER, K, SCHUSTER, T., LEVIONNOIS, O., MATIS
monary, and sedative effects of five intravenous
U.,& BERGADANO, A.2011. Antinociceptive efficacy
infusion rates of lidocaine in conscious dogs. Vet
and plasma concentrations of transdermal buprenor-
Anaesth Analg,36,512-522.
phine in dogs. Vet J, 187, 335-341.
MARSHALL, W.G., HAZEWINKEL, H.A., MULLEN, D.,
PLUMB, D.C.2011. Plumb's Veterinary Drug Handbook, 7th
DE MEYER,G.,BAERT, K.,& CARMICHAEL,S. 2010.
ed. Stockholm, WI: Phrma Vet-Wiley Publishing.
The effect of weight loss on lameness in obese dogs
RAY, L., LIPTON, R.B., ZIMMERMAN, M.E., KATZ, M.J.,
with osteoarthritis. Vet Res Commun,34,241-253.
& DERBY, C.A. 20l1. Mechanisms of association
MARTENSON, M.E., CETAS, JS, & HEINRICHER,
between obesity and chronic pain in the elderly. Pain,
M.M. 2009. A possible neural basis for stress-induced
152,53-59.
hyperalgesia. Pair, 142, 236-244.
SACKETT, D.L.,I
ROSENBERG，W.M.，GRAY,J.A.,
MARTINS, T.L., KAHVEGIAN, M.A., NOEL-MORGAN,
HAYNES, R.B, & RICHARDSON, W.S. 1996. Evidence
J., LEON-ROMAN, M.A., OTSUKI, D.A.,& FANTONI,
based medicine: what it is and what it isn't. BMj, 312,
D.T. 2010. Comparison of the effects of tramadol,
71-72.
codeine, and ketoprofen alone or in combination on
SAVVAS,
，1.,PAPAZOGLOU,L.G,KAZAKOS, G.,
postoperative pain and on concentrations of blood
ANAGNOSTOU, T., TSIOLI, V., & RAPTOPOULOS,
glucose, serum cortisol, and serum interleukin-6 in
 D. 2008. Incisional block with bupivacaine for analge-
dogs undergoing maxillectomy or mandibulectomy.
sia after celiotomy in dogs. ∫ Am Arim Hosp Assoc, 44,
Am  Vet Res, 71, 1019-1026.
60-66.
MATHEWS, K.A. 2008. Neuropathic pain in dogs and
SAWYER, D.C., RECH, R.H., DURHAM, R.A., ADAMS,
cats: if only they could tell us if they hurt. Vet Clin
T., RICHTER, M.A., & STRILER, E.L. 1991. Dose
North Am Small Anim Pract, 38, 1365-1414.
response to butorphanol administered subcutane-
MBURU, D.N., MBUGUA, S.W, SKOGLUND, L.A., &
ously to increase visceral nociceptive threshold in
LOKKEN, P. 1988. Effects of paracetamol and acetyl-
dogs. Am  Vet Res, 52, 1826-1830.
salicylic acid on the post-operative course after experi-
SCHECHTER, N.L. 1989. The undertreatment of pain in
mental orthopaedic surgery in dogs. ∫ Vet Pharmacol
children: an overview. Pediatr Clin North Am, 36,
Ther, 11, 163-170.
781-794.
388  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
SCHMIDTKO, A., LOTSCH, J., FREYNHAGEN, R., &
logic and pharmacologic properties of amantadine
GEISSLINGER, G. 2010. Ziconotide for treatment of
hydrochloride. T
Toxicol Appt " Pharmacol, 15, 642-
severe chronic pain. Lancet, 375, 1569-1577.
665.
SEDDIGHI, M.R., EGGER, C.M., ROHRBACH, B.W.,
VOLLMER, K.O, VON HODENBERG, A., & KOLLE,
COX, S.K., & DOHERTY, T.J. 2009. Effects of tramadol
E.U. 1986. Pharmacokinetics and metabolism of gaba-
 on the minimum alveolar concentration of sevoflurane
pentin in rat, dog and man. Arzneirmittelforschung, 36,
in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg, 36,334-340.
830-839.
SHAYA, FT. & KE, X. 2007. DEA takes another look at
WAHLGREN, C.F. & QUIDING, H. 2000. Depth of cuta-
tramadol: rate of dependence and abuse could be 200
neous analgesia after application of a eutectic mixture
Jo ato au u palrodan Aisnoand ueu ia sa
of the local anesthetics lidocaine and prilocaine (EMLA
Cox-2 inhibitors in therapy: an Epi-clinical approach.
cream). |Am Acad Dermatot, 42,584-588.
Topics in Pain Management, 22(9), 8-10.
WANG, X.M., WU, T.X., HAMZA, M., RAMSAY, E.S.,
SLINGSBY, L.S. & WATERMAN-PEARSON, A.E. 2000.
WAHL, S.M., & DIONNE, R.A. 2007. Rofecoxib
The post-operative analgesic effects of ketamine after
canine ovariohysterectomy—a comparison between
clinical model of acute inflammatory pain. Pain, 128,
 pre- or post-operative administration. Res Vet Sci, 69,
136-147.
147-152.
WEIL, A.B., KO, J., & INOUE, T. 2007. The use of lido-
TASSINARI, D., DRUDI, F, CARLONI, F., POSSENTI,
caine patches. Compend Contin Educ Vet, 29, 208-
C., SANTELMO, C.,& CASTELLANI, C. 2011. [Neu
216.
   a   d sd
WEILAND, L., CROUBELS, S., BAERT, K., POLIS, 1., DE
practice]. Recenti Prog Med, 102, 220-227.
BACKER, P, & GASTHUYS, F. 2006. Pharmacokinet-
VALTOLINA, C.,
ROBBEN, JH., UILENREEF,
ics of a lidocaine patch 5% in dogs. / Vet Med A Physiot
MURRELL, J.C., ASPEGREN, J., MCKUSICK, B.C., &
Pathol Clin Med,53,34-39.
HELLEBREKERS, L.J. 2009. Clinical evaluation of the
WILDER-SMITH, C.H,HILL,L.,SPARGO, K.,&
efficacy and safety of a constant rate infusion of dex-
KALLA, A. 2001. Treatment of severe pain from osteo-
arthritis with slow-release tramadol or dihydroco-
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg, 36, 369-383.
deine in combination with NSAID's: a randomised
VERNIER, VG, HARMON, JB., STUMP, JM., LYNES,
study comparing analgesia, antinociception and gas-
T.E., MARVEL, J.P., & SMITH, D.H. 1969. The toxico
trointestinal effects. Pain, 91, 23-31.
20
Imaging in Canine
Sports Medicine
Jennifer Brown, DVM, Dipl ACVS, CCRT, and Kimberley Elizabeth
Henneman, DVM, FAAVA, DABT, CVA, CVC
Summary
Diagnostic imaging is an important component of evaluating the sports medicine and reha-
bilitation patient for injuries to the musculoskeletal system. While the physical examination
Aew jeum auiwatap lauuny ot pasn aq pinous sallepow sueewi areudoudde 'dars isly aut s!
be causing the signs and to determine severity of the injury. Imaging techniques can also be
used to screen for areas that may be of concern in the future for an individual patient. This
helps both the sports medicine and rehabilitation specialist and the owner/handler determine
and design appropriate exercise and conditioning programs. In addition, it provides a baseline
advanced imaging modalities has grown in the past several decades and is now more widely
avai lable beyond research and university settings. These advanced imaging modalities include
computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), diagnostic ultrasonography,
nuclear scintigraphy, electrodiagnostic testing (EMG and nerve conduction, etc.), and ther-
mography. Due to costs associated with the equipment, MRl, CT, and nuclear scintigraphy
may remain in referral settings, but are perhaps the most valuable to comprehensively assess
soft tissue and bone-related injuries in the canine athlete. Diagnostic ultrasonography, elec-
trodiagnostic testing, and thermography are affordable and potentially valuable in-clinic
adjuncts to radiography. This chapter reviews the basics of the most common and useful
imaging modalities for canine sports medicine and rehabilitation.
Introduction
patient. Imaging techniques can be used to screen
for areas of future concern and can help guide
Diagnostic imaging is an important component of
 rehabilitation. For example, screening radiographs
the evaluation of injuries to the musculoskeletal
 of a sound canine athlete might show mild degen-
system in the sports medicine and rehabilitation
 erative changes in a joint. This information can
Carine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatiorn, First Edition. Edited by M. Christine Zink and Janet B. Van Dyke.
@2013 John Wiley &t Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
686
390   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
help the sports medicine specialist and owner/
handler determine an appropriate conditioning
 program to protect the joint from further damage.
and to provide a baseline for long-term monitor-
ing. This chapter reviews the basics of the most
common and useful imaging modalities for canine
sports medicine and rehabilitation.
Radiography
Radiography is the foundation of musculoskeletal 
imaging and is a basic component of a thorough
 musculoskeletal evaluation. Typical radiographic
images include lateral and dorsal (dorsoventral,
dorsopalmar/plantar, craniocaudal) projections. In
most circumstances, these views will provide sig-
 nificant information. Subtle lesions in performance/
working dogs may require additional views, in-
cluding the dorsopalmar/plantar medial to lateral
Figure 20.1  Computed tomographic image of a cross-
oblique (DPMLO) and dorsopalmar /plantar lateral
sectional slice through the elbow joint. Arrow indicates a
to medial oblique (DPLMO). Oblique views will
fragmented coronoid process
reveal surfaces obscured by superimposition on
Image courtesy of Toby Gemmill, Willows Referral Service,
orthogonal views.
UK.
Additional views include the skyline or tangen-
tial view of the shoulder, used to visualize the
-eidns aiequarap ot pue aaoong remoraqnira
superimposition of structures that complicate
spinatus and biceps tendon mineralization (Flo
diagnosis in standard radiography. The CT scanner
& Middleton, 1990). Osteochondritis dissecans
has an X-ray generator and an X-ray detector. The
lesions on the lateral trochlear ridge of the talus
 X-ray generator moves around the patient generat-
are best viewed with flexed skyline and DMPLO
ing X-rays at multiple projection angles that are
images (Gielen et al., 2005).
I dais-dois e u roap rx a Aq dn paid
Stressed views can provide critical information
uit, after projections are acquired, the patient is
about soft tissue injury to the supporting structures
advanced to obtain the next slice along the longi-
of a joint. Stressed views can also help evaluate
tudinal (z-) axis. Most modern units are helical or
the degree of instability in the joint, which assists
spiral scanners that allow for continuous move-
in determining a treatment plan.
ment of the patient through the scanner. This
Placing the limb in a stance position while apply-
creates a more contiguous scan image and volu
ing pressure to mimic body weight can simulate
 metric information for three-dimensional recon-
weight bearing. Evaluation of carpal hyperexten-
struction. Images are generated through processing
sion includes stressed views to determine the level
of the attenuation information from the X-ray
of the injury and assist with treatment options
detectors that is filtered and back-projected to form
(Piermattei et al., 2006).
the digital image. The digital image is then con-
verted to a grayscale analog image.
Computed tomography images are not limited
Computed tomography (CT)
to two planes. This is a significant diagnostic
advantage when evaluating for fracture configura-
Computed tomography (CT) is a complex X-ray
tion, osteochondral fragmentation, or joint incon-
modality that creates multiplanar two-dimensional
gruity. CT is commonly used to detect abnormalities
cross-sectional images (Figure 20.1). This allows for
associated with elbow dysplasia that can be diffi-
evaluation of the area in slices and eliminates
cult to assess with standard radiography (Reichle
Chapter 20 Imaging in Canine Sports Medicine 391
Figure 20.3 Sagittal T1-weighted image of the shoulder
joint. T1 -weighted images provide excellent anatomic detail.
Image courtesy of Dr. Pat Gavin.
Figure 20.2 Three-dimensional rendering of the radius and
ulna including the humeroradial and radiocarpal joints.
Image courtesy of Dr. Sherman Canapp.
detail, especially of soft tissue structures (Figure
20.3). MRI relies on physical and chemical interac-
tions between atomic nuclei, in particular the
et al., 2000; Gemmill et al., 2006; Moores et al., 2008;
hydrogen atom (Berry, 2002; Cerezal et al., 2008).
Bottcher ef al., 2009; Cook & Cook, 2009; House
 The magmetic resonance unit produces a sigmal sec-
et al., 2009). In addition to viewing the individual
 ondary to changes in hydrogen atoms induced
slices for pathology, three-dimensional rendering
by the application of the magmetic field and radio-
can be performed (Figure 20.2) (House et al., 2009;
frequency pulses. These signals, utilizing Fourier
Dernison et al., 2010)
 transformation, generate a three-dimensional image
Although particularly valuable for osseous
through computer processing. The images are pro-
injury, CT can be used to evaluate softtissue lesions.
duced in high-resolution gray scale with increased
CT has a low-contrast resolution and through
signal appearing white and decreased signal black.
manipulation of the window and CT number
(Houndsfield Units), visualization of soft tissue
gen ions, so most of the signal acquired is from
structures can be optimized. CT is commonly used
these components.
for injuries to the spine (Rossmeisl et al., 2004;
Multiple image sequences are obtained. T1-
Newcomb et al., 201l). It has also been used to
weighted, T2-weighted, and Short T1 Inversion
evaluate soft tissue pathology of the canine stifle,
Recovery (STIR) are the foundation magnetic reso-
iliopsoas muscle, and upper airway (Gavin &
nance sequences (Berry, 2002). The sequences
Bagley, 2009; Sami et al., 2009; Stadler et al., 2011).
selected depend on the type of unit (high field
vs. low field), area being studied, and suspected
pathology. In T1-weighted images, fat has an
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRl)
increased or hyperintense signal and water a rela-
tively decreased sigmal. Anatomic detail is superior
Magmetic resonance imaging is superior for
in T1-weighted images because of reduced tissue
providing exquisite three-dimensional anatomic
contrast. In T2-weighted images, water has an
392   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
increased signal and fat a hypointense sigmnal.
transducer. Images depend upon the wavelength.
T2-weighted images are best for visualizing patho-
 frequency, and velocity of the sound waves through
logical changes, but provide less anatomic defini-
the tissue (Drost, 2002; Nyland et al., 2002). These
tion. Increased fluid signal on MRI, a result
tof
 sound waves are reflected back to the transducer
inflammation, edema, or hemorrhage, is a hall-
 as echoes that are converted to an electrical signal
mark of tissue damage. STIR suppresses the fat
 to produce a grayscale image. The image produced
signal within tissues and is often used to confirm
is a real-time, anatomical picture of the area to
or identify pathological changes in bone where
which the ultrasonography transducer is being
there can be increased signal due to the fat in bone
applied (Figure 20.4).
marrow. Sclerosis within bone is seen as decreased
Acoustic impedance is the reflection characteris-
'saseui anuanbas passarddns-iej-uou u [eueis
tic of the tissues through which the sound waves
Gadolinium-based contrast agents can be used
travel. The acoustic impedance of soft tissue falls
to enhance magnetic resonance sequences. They
between that of air and bone, making ultrasonog-
are commonly used to improve visualization in
raphy good for the evaluation of soft tissues, but
angiography and in studies of neoplasia and cere-
 poor for air-filled structures and pathology beneath
brospinal disease. Indirect (performed by intrave-
the surface of or behind bone.
nous injection of the contrast agent prior 
 Utrasonography is not yet commonly used in
obtaining the desired MRI sequence) and direct
diagnostic imaging of canine musculoskeletal inju-
ries. In equine practice, diagnostic ultrasonogra-
are considered the gold standard for magnetic res-
phy plays a principal role in the diagnosis of
onance evaluation of human joints (Applegate
musculoskeletal damage, particularly of tendons
et al., 1993; Vahlensieck et al., 1996; Waldt et al.,
 and ligaments. The reluctance to use ultrasonogra-
2007; Jung et al., 2009; Pozzi et al., 2009; Van Dyck
phy in canine practice might be due to the need to
et al., 2009; Rakhra, 2011). Differences in specificity
acquire and evaluate images in real time, and the
amdsensitivity between these two techniques
lack of education on its use. Increasing recognition
appear minimal, with the biggest disadvantage
of soft tissue injuries in the canine athlete is making
being lack of joint distention using indirect ar-
ultrasonography increasingly popular.
thrography (Pozzi et al., 2009; Schaefer et al., 2010;
Ultrasonographic appearance of normal canine
 Rakhra, 2011). Direct magnetic resonance arthrog-
anatomy and normal and pathological canine con-
raphy has been used to enhance evaluation of
ditions have been documented (Kramer et al., 1997,
canine stifle and shoulder joints (Banfield & Mor-
1999, 2001; Long & Nyland, 1999; Gnudi & Bertoni,
rison, 2000). In the stifle, soft tissue structures were
2001; Knox et al., 2003; Lamb & Wong, 2005; Nielsen
 more readily identifiable, and in a group of mili-
& Pluhar, 2005; Vandevelde et al., 2006; Liuti et al.,
tary working dogs, some pathological changes
2007; Canmon & Puchalski, 2008; Cogar et al., 2008;
were only visible with direct contrast arthrography
Arnault et al., 2009; Caine et al., 2009; Cook & Cook,
(Fitch et al., 1997; Pujol et al., 2011).
2009; Seyrek-Intas et al., 2009; Turan et al., 2009;
While the focus of most canine magnetic reso-
Marino & Loughin, 2010; Piorek & Adamiak, 2010;
nance studies has been joints, there is increasing
Hittmair et al, 2012). Ultrasonography is most
interest in imaging soft tissues, and reports include
useful for evaluating pathological changes in extra-
examination of the gastrocnemius, supraspinatus,
articular soft tissue structures including tendons,
and iliopsoas muscles, and the long digital exten-
muscles, and ligaments (Breur & Blevins, 1997;
sor tendon (Berry, 2002; Drost, 2002; Murphy et al.,
Gnudi & Bertoni, 2001; Kramer et al., 2001; Nielsen
2008; Lafuente et al., 2009; Stahl et al., 2010).
& Pluhar, 2005; Vandevelde et al., 2006; Cogar et al.,
2008; Arnault et al., 2009; Cook & Cook, 2009;
Seyrek-Intas et al., 2009; Hittmair et al., 2012). It is
Ultrasonography
less useful when evaluating bone, and intra-
articular structures such as cruciate ligaments and
Diagmostic ultrasonography generates an image
merisci. In two studies assessing the value of ultra-
through use of high-frequency sound waves that
are pulsed through tissue from an ultrasound
rupture (CCL), only 19.6% and 15.4% of dogs with
Chapter 20 Imaging in Canine Sports Medicine 393
R TRICEPS
LTRICEPS
fiber pattern of the triceps tendon when compared to the normal left tendon.
CCL rupture were identified (Gnudi & Bertoni,
for localizing occult lameness, diagnosing medial
2001; Arnault et al., 2009). This low sensitivity is not
coronoid disease, and localizing occult bone inju-
surprising considering the location of the cruciate
ries in racing Greyhounds (Tobin et al., 2001;
ligament and the physics of ultrasonography Bone 
Schwarz et al., 2004; Van Bruggen et al., 2010).
fragments, osteochondral lesions, and fragmented 
 Nuclear scintigraphy creates a visual representa-
medial coronoid process are difficult to evaluate
ar ue ue rauei sassaoid soosud jo uon
for similar reasons (Cook & Cook, 2009; Seyrek-
of an anatomical structure. After intravenous in-
Intas et al., 2009).
jection of a radiopharmaceutical (Technitium99-
 Diagnostic ultrasonography can be performed
MDP) that targets phosphate in bone, a gamma
in the awake or lightly sedated patient, and the
 cost of equipment is significantly less than mag-
"(egooz aal) agew ue saonpoid pue adojosi
netic resonance, making it more widely accessible
Technetium-99 is the most common isotope used in
to the sports medicine specialist. Though it is
bone scintigraphy due to itsideal half-life and ability
used primarily to assess and identify musculoskel-
to bind to diphosphate salts. The diphosphate salts
etal injuries, it can be used to monitor healing.
localize to bone by binding to hydroxyapatite crys-
Whereas multiple MRI exams are impractical,
tals that are exposed during bone remodeling
ultrasonography can be offered quite reasonably
(Driver, 2003b). Increased uptake reflects increased
for recheck examinations.
energy, usually due to blood flow and osteoblastic
activity. This can be observed before bone changes
are apparent radiographically.
Nuclear scintigraphy
Nuclear scintigraphy is not yet common in
small animal practice, due in part to availability of
 Nuclear scintigraphy can be used to identify bone
alternative imaging techniques such as CT and
MRI. Unlike CT and MRI, however, scintigraphic
not able to be localized, and in cases where mul-
Exams can be performed in the awake animal
tiple lesions exist. Studies of dogs with inconclu-
under light sedation, and the entire skeleton can
sive radiographs highlight this clinical application
be quickly imaged (Schwarz et al., 2004). Use and
394   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
handling of radiopharmaceuticals and the patient
A complete workup includes electromyography,
postinjection have made it impractical for many
 peripheral motor and sensory nerve conduction,
facilities to offer the procedure. Despite these limi-
evaluation of nerve root function with F waves,
tations, scintigraphy is a viable option for use in 
 cord dorsum potential, and H reflex studies, and
canine diagnostic imaging, especially in occult or
assessment of the neuromuscular junction with
complex lameness.
supramaximal repetitive nerve stimulation and
stimulated single-fiber electromyography (Cud-
don, 2002). Electromyography and motor nerve
Electrodiagnostic testing
conduction studies are the most commonly per-
formed electrodiagnostic studies in human and vet-
Electromyography and nerve conduction studies
erinary medicine.  Additional  information  on
are used in conjunction with a complete neurologic
electrodiagnostic testing is available elsewhere
exam to test function of the muscles and nerves.
(Cuddon, 2002).
 Case Study 20.1  Hunting retriever with waxing and waning forelimb lameness
Signalment: 5 y.o. F/l Labrador Retriever. Competes in
MRl: Tear in the supraspinatus tendon at insertion on the
hunting retriever tests. Presented for waxing and waning
greater tubercle and fatty replacement at the myotendi-
left forelimb lameness.
causing compression of the biceps tendon. Following
Physical Exam: Sensitive to manipulation of left shou lder
MRl, ultrasonographic exam was used to evaluate and
in flexion and extension, and biceps stretch. Painful on
documrent the pathology noted on MRl.
 direct palpation of supraspinatus tendon at insertion.
Radiographs: No   significant   abnommalities  (Figure
B20.1).
dinous
junction
Figure B20.2 T2-weighted sagittal image of the shoulder.
The yellow arrow indicates the tear in the supraspinatus
tendon at the insertion. The red arrow indicates fatty
Figure B20.1  Lateral radiograph of the shoulder. No
replacement of normal tendon at the myotendinous
significant abnormalities were noted.
junction. (lmage courtesy of Dr. Pat Gavin.)
Chapter 20 Imaging in Canine Sports Medicine 395
Ultrasonographic Findings: Marked enlargement of the
supraspinatus tendon  with  cross-sectional  area  of
0.92 cm? apparently causing compression on the biceps
tendon in cross-sectional and longitudinal views. Signifi-
cant disruption of normal tendon fiber pattern and
hypoechoic lesion were present, indicating tear within
the tendon. Multiple hyperechoic areas noted within
tendon at dorsal-medial aspect, indicating fibrosis or
mineralization of tendon in that area (Figure B20.3).
Treatment: Patient  started 
 intensive    rehabilitation
program with changes in supraspinatus tendon moni-
tored ultrasonographically. Initial irmprovement observed
in the first 8 weeks, with filling of the hypoechoic defect
with tendon fibers and a decrease in cross-sectional area
of the tendon. By 12 weeks, the tendon fibers began to
show a more normal and homogenous fiber pattern
Figure B20.3  Cross-sectional image of the supraspinatus
tendon at the insertion on the greater tubercle. The
tendon is enlarged at 0.92 cm? in cross-sectional area.
Enlargement of the tendon is causing compression of the
biceps tendon within the bicipital groove (blue arrow). The
hypoechoic tear is indicated by the red arrow.
Hyperechoic area of mineralization or fibrosis is indicated
by the yellow arrow.
Electromyography
muscle returns to rest. Incomplete relaxation and
Electromyography evaluates the insertional, spon-
voluntary contractions produce characteristic elec-
trical activity that returns to zero upon complete
taneous, and voluntary electrical activity of the
relaxation. Abnormalities produce specific wave-
 muscle cell membrane in the motor unit (Chrisman
et al., 1972; Brown & Zaki, 1979). By recording
forms and sounds.
changes in the electrical potential of the muscle cell
 membrane, electromyography can help differenti-
Motor nerve conduction
ate between primary myopathy and neuropathy.
identify lesion location, and determine severity of
Motor nerve conduction studies focus on the func-
injury to a nerve (Chrisman et al., 1972; Brown &
tion of the peripheral nerves. The integrity of a
Zaki, 1979; Cuddon, 2002).
nerve is evaluated by calculating the speed of an
Electrode needles are placed in the muscle unit
electrical signal through a muscle innervated by
to be evaluated and connected to an amplifier that
the nerve.
.Nerve conduction studies are used
enhances the electrical sigmal from the muscle cell
to differentiate between disuse and denervation
membrane. Electrical activity is shown on an oscil-
atrophy, as well as to detect axonal loss in periph-
 loscope and projected through a speaker providing
eral nerves. These studies are commonly per-
both visual and auditory information.
formed in conjunction with electromyography.
Characteristic visual and auditory sigmals are
Using
electromyography equipment  and
a
 produced by normally and abnormally functioning
nerve/muscle stimulator, electrodes are placed
motor units. At rest, muscle is electrically silent.
proximally and distally on the motor unit to be
Upon insertion of the electrode needle, there is a
tested. The compound muscle action potential
sharp spike in electrical activity that should return
amplitude, duration, and area are all measured and
to zero once the insertion is complete and the
the velocity of the electrical signal from the anode
396Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
to cathode is measured after stimulation is applied.
and footfall pattern and thermoregulation in sled
 Nerve conduction velocity is then calculated using
dogs wearing booties.
the following equation (Chrisman et al., 1972;
Cuddon, 2002):
How thermography works
Nerve conduction velocity = Distance between
 Thermal imaging is a noninvasive, nonradiating.
points/(Proximal conduction latency - Distal con-
physiologic diagmostic tool (Jiang et al., 2005) that
duction latency).
dependson radiant heat from metabolism. Vasocon-
striction from increased sympathetic tone decreases
Normal values for conduction velocity have
been determined for many of the peripheral nerves
regional blood volume and therefore temperature;
vasodilation from decreased sympathetic tone or
(Browm & Zaki, 1979; Cuddon, 2002). Data acquired
 inflammation increases local temperature. By cor-
from motor nerve conduction study can be com-
relatingpatternchangesin temperature with various
pared to normal values or to values from the unaf-
 diseases, degeneration, or injury processes, ther-
fected limb, with decreased velocities indicative of
 mography may provide a reproducible diagnostic
pathological changes.
tool (Uematsu et al., 1988; Ring, 2004; Diakides &
Bronzino, 2008). Thermal images provide absolute
Thermography
temperatures (aT), and differences in temperatures
of similar areas or tissues (AT) are noted. A differ-
Ence of more than 1°C between areas is considered
Thermal imaging may identify soft tissue changes
sigrificant (Turner et al., 1986).
involved in subtle performance and gait abnor-
Thermal imaging cameras use high-resolution
malities, and may be used to monitor rehabilitation
lenses that gather infrared photon energy packets
progress or to evaluate training stressors before
they create injury.
Thermography provides a mechanism to capture
plane array detectors (Volmer & Mollman, 2010).
Images are stored as digital jpeg and video files.
radiant energy in a clinical setting (Ring et al.,2004;
Kaplan, 2007). Interpretation and standardization
Using thermography
criteria for the use of thermal imaging have been
published (Ring & Ammer, 2012). Current human
 Thermal imaging does not replace, but rather aug-
applications include orthopedic trauma and disease
ments a thorough physical examination. Though
identification (Varju et al., 2004; Spalding et al.,
-d ai Aa sis or n 
2008), identification of tissue ischemia (Kulis et al.,
ological changes, cool areas also can indicate
 2012), response to physical therapy (Lee & Cohen,
 abnormalities (Figure 20.5) (Devereaux et al., 1986).
2007; Barker et al., 2012), fimess evaluation and
Environmental factors such as radiant heat
identification of soft tissue stress in sports medicine
sources, lights, and exposure to either direct or
(Ferreira et al., 2008; Castro, 2010; Hildebrandt et al.,
indirect sun, as well as coats, collars, and harnesses
2010), infectious disease management (Hidalgo,
 must be controlled during thermal imaging. Fans,
2010;Hewlett et al., 2011), and breast cancer detec-
breezes, water, topical medication, or uneven hair
tion and surgical management (Brioschi et al., 2010;
thickness can create artifacts. Dampness can cause
Wishart et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2011).
evaporation artifact for several hours after a bath.
Initial use of thermal imaging to detect soff
If the environmental temperature is similar to
tissue trauma in horses (Purohit & McCoy, 1980;
the temperature of the dog, it will be impossible
Turner et al., 1986; Turner, 1991) expanded into uses
to discern usable heat patterns. In very extreme
for pregmancy assessment (Bowers et al., 2009), con-
cold, thermoregulatory vasoconstriction may mask
ditioning (Turner, 2006), lesion localization and
all but the most severe inflammatory changes
characterization in neurology (Neimann, 2010),
(Figure 20.6).
and hoof vascularity (Van Hoogmoed & Snyder,
Thermal imaging is used to assess for soft tissue
2002). Canine thermal imaging has been 
docu-
injuries including muscle strains, sprains, tendi-
mented only recently (Henneman, 2011a, 2011b;
 nopathies, and arthritis (Figure 20.7). Thermogra-
Marino, 2011). Thermal imaging has been used to
phy may identify functional problems with harness
evaluate harness fit in avalanche and sled dogs,
fit (Figure 20.8).
8
94
94
3/12/08
1:07:44pe=1.00
3/ 5/10 8:52:50 p e = 1.00
Figure 20.5 Lateral thermal image of an agility Doberman
Figure 20.7Cranial forelegs of a distance sled racing dog
recently involved with a collision with another dog and
during race check-in; the dog was not lame. Thermography
 demonstrating pain to touch in the thoracolumbar region.
was used to evaluate extent of medial right carpal
The range of temperatures read in any scan is shown on the
inflammation discovered on physical exam. Inflammation of
right side of the image. The greener areas in the dorsal,
right front medial digits and left front lateral digits was also
lumbar areas were edematous and painful to touch,
found by thermography and confirmed by palpation. The
indicating probable subcutaneous bruising.
handler opted not to have the dog continue in the race
based on physical and thermographic findings.
FLIR
73.3
°F
90
80
66
65
1/29/09 11:04:34e = 0.94
3/3/10 12:21:17 p e=1.00
Figure 20.6 Cranial forelegs of avalanche search-and-
Figure 20.8 Dorsal lumbosacral view of distance sled
rescue dog demonstrating environmental vasoconstriction
racing dog with mild back tenderness (head is to left). The
(thus colder temperatures) from mid-radius to paws. Lighter
dog had been out of the harness for over 12 hours. The
blue color of cranial-lateral right carpus is in area that
focal red area in mid-top of image is the dog's right ilial
showed discomfort on flexion. Water artifact can also
crest, which showed marked sensitivity on palpation;
 appear similar to this due to evaporative cooling at the skin
additionally, the heat pattern along the entire dorsal spine
surface.
was asymmetrical and a deviation from the normal canine
back thermal pattern. The X-back harness pattern can still be
seen as well as possible compensatory heat along the dog's
right (top of image) lateral gluteal area.
266
398  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
References
CHRISMAN,C.L., BURT,J.K., WOOD,PK.,& JOHNSON,
E.W. 1972. Electromyography in small animal clinical
neurology. / Arm Vet Med Assoc, 160, 311-318.
APPLEGATE, G.R., FLANNIGAN, B.D., TOLIN, B.S.
COGAR, S.M., COOK, C.R., CURRY, S.L., GRANDIS, A.,
FOX, J.M., & DEL PIZZO, W. 1993. MR diagnosis of
& COOK, J.L. 2008. Prospective evaluation of tech-
recurrent tears in the knee: value of intraarticular con-
niques for differentiating shoulder pathology as a
trast material. A/R Am ∫ Roentgenot, 161, 821-825.
a pu na u sun quanng jo ananos
ARNAULT, F., CAUVIN, E., VIGUIER, E., KRAFT, E.,
breed dogs. Vet Surg,37,132-141.
SONET, J., & CAROZZO,C. 2009. Diagnostic value of
COOK, C.R. & COOK, J.L. 2009. Diagnostic imaging
Jalje saop ur suoisat aus ssasse ol Aydergouose.nm
of canine elbow dysplasia: a review. Vet Surg, 38,
cranial cruciate ligament rupture: 13 cases. Vet Comp
144-153.
Orthop Traumatot, 22, 479485.
CUDDON, PA. 2002. Electrophysiology in neuromus-
BANFIELD, C.M. & MORRISON, W.B. 2000. Magnetic
cular disease. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract,32,
resonance arthrography of the canine stifle joint: tech-
31-62.
nique and applications in eleven military dogs. Vet
DENNISON,
S.E.,DREES,R.,RYLANDER, H.,
Radiot Lltrasound, 41, 200-213.
YANDELL, B.S., MILOVANCEV, M., PETTIGREW, R.,
BARKER, L.E., MARKOWSKI,A.M., & HENNEMAN, K.
& SCHWARZ, T. 2010. Evaluation of different com-
2012. Digital infrared thermal imaging following ante-
rog Aydeonaau pue sanboal Aydeouon paind
rior cruciate ligament reconstruction. ∫ Orthop Sports
the diagnosis of acute canine myelopathy. Vet Radiot
Phys Ther, 42, 292.
Lltrasound,51,254-258.
BERRY, C.R. 2002. Physics of computed tomography and
DEVEREAUX, M.D., PARR, G.R., LACHMANN, S.M.,
magnetic resonance imaging. In: Thrall, D.E. (ed.),
THOMAS, D.P., & HAZLEMAN, B.L. 1986. Thermo-
Textbook of Diagnostic Veterinary Radiology, 4th ed. Phil-
graphic diagnosis in athletes with patellofemoral
adelphia: W.B. Saunders, 28-35.
arthralgia. / Bone foint Surg Br, 68, 42-44.
BOTTCHER,P.,WERNER,H.,LUDEWIG,E.,GREVEL,
DIAKIDES, N.A. & BRONZINO, J.D. 2008. Medical Infra-
V., & OECHTERING, G.2009. Visual estimation of
red Imaging. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
radioulnar incongruence in dogs using
three-
DRIVER, A.J. 2003a. Equine Scintigraphy. Cambridgeshire,
dimensional image rendering: an in vitro study based
UK: Equine Veterinary Jourmal.
on computed tomographic imaging. Vet Surg, 38,
DRIVER,A.J. 2003b. Equine Scintigraphy.Cambridgeshire,
161-168.
UK: Equine Veterinary Jourmal.
BOWERS, S., GANDY, S., ANDERSON, B., RYAN, P., &
DROST, W.T. 2002. Ultrasound physics. In: Thrall, D.E.
WILLARD, S. 2009. Assessment of pregnancy in the
(ed.), Textbook of Diagnostic Veterinary Radiotogy,4th ed.
late-gestation mare using digital infrared thermogra-
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 20-28.
phy. Theriogenology, 72,372-377.
FERREIRA, JJ., MENDONCA, L.C., NUNES, L.A.,
BREUR, G.J.& BLEVINS, W.E.1997. Traumatic injury of
ANDRADE FILHO, A.C., REBELATTO, JR.,&
the iliopsoas muscle in three dogs. ∫ Am Vet Med Assoc,
SALVINI, T.F. 2008. Exercise-associated thermographic
210, 1631-1634.
BRIOSCHI, M.L., MATIAS, J.E.F., & TEIXEIRA, M.J.
Eng, 36, 1420-1427.
 2010. Automated computer diagnosis of IR medical
FITCH,R.B., WILSON, E.R., HATHCOCK,J.T.,& MONT-
imaging. Inframation 2010, Proceedings, Vol. 1l, PP.
GOMERY, R.D. 1997. Radiographic, computed tomo-
115-124.
graphic and magnetic resonance imaging evaluation
BROWN, N.O.& ZAKI, FA.1979. Electrodiagnostic
of a chronic long digital extensor tendon avulsion in a
testing for evaluation of neuromuscular disorders in
dog. Vet Radiot LIlttrasound, 38, 177-181.
dogs and cats. ∫ Am Vet Med Assoc, 174, 86-90.
FLO, G.L. & MIDDLETON, D. 1990. Mineralization of
CAINE,A.,AGTHE,P,POSCH, B.,& HERRTAGE, M.
the supraspinatus tendon in dogs. / Arm Vet Med Assoc,
2009. Sonography of the soft tissue structures of the
197, 95-97.
canine tarsus. Vet Radio! Lttrasound,50,304-308.
GAVIN,P.R.& BAGLEY, R.S.2009.Practical Small Arimal
CANNON, M.S. & PUCHALSKI, S.M. 2008. Ultrasono-
MRI. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell.
graphic evaluation of normal canine iliopsoas muscle.
GEMMILL, T.J., HAMMOND, G., MELLOR, D., SULLI-
Vet Radiol Lltrasound, 49,378-382.
VAN, M., BENNETT, D., & CARMICHAEL, S. 2006.
CASTRO, J. 2010. Thermal imaging and fitness. Inframa-
Use of reconstructed computed tomography for the
tion 2010, Proceedings, Vol. 11, 321-324.
assessment of joint spaces in the canine elbow. / Srmall
CEREZAL, L., LLOPIS, E., CANGA, A., & ROLON, A.
Anim Pract,47,66-74.
2008. MR arthrography of the ankle: indications and
GIELEN, 1., VAN RYSSEN, B., & VAN BREE, H. 2005.
techmique. Radiot Clin North A,46,973-994, v.
Computerized tomography compared with radiogra-
Chapter 20 Imaging in Canine Sports Medicine 399
phy in the diagnosis of lateral trochlear ridge talar
tion of injuries to the Achilles tendon in dogs and cats.
osteochondritis dissecans in dogs. Vet Cormp Orthop
I Small Anim Pract, 42, 531-535.
Traumatot, 18, 77-82.
KULIS, T., KOLARIC, D., KARLOVIC, K., KNEZEVIC,
GNUDI, G. & BERTONI, G. 2001. Echographic examina-
M., ANTONINI, S., & KASTELAN, Z. 2012. Scrotal
tion of the stifle joint affected by cranial cruciate liga-
infrared digital thermography in assessment of
ment rupture in the dog. Vet Radiot Llttrasound, 42,
varicocele pilot study to assess diagnostic criteria.
266-270.
Andrologia, 44(Suppl. 1), 780-785.
HENNEMAN, K. 201la. Canine thermal imaging: case
LAFUENTE, M.P, FRANSSON, B.A., LINCOLN, J.D.,
studies. Ohio State Lniversity Annual Thermat Imaging
MARTINEZ, S.A., GAVIN, PR., LAHMERS, K.K.,&
Cornference. Columbus, OH.
GAY, J.M. 2009. Surgical treatment of mineralized and
HENNEMAN, K. 2011b. Thermography in small animals.
nonmineralized
supraspinatus
tendinopathy
in
Ohio State LIniversity Annuat Thermat Imaging Confer-
twenty-four dogs. Vet Surg, 38, 380-387.
ence. Columbus, OH.
LAMB, C.R. & WONG, K. 2005. Ultrasonographic
HEWLETT, A.L., KALIL, A.C., STRUM, R.A., ZEGER,
anatomy of the canine elbow. Vet Radiot Lfttrasound, 46,
W.G., & SMITH, PW. 2011. Evaluation of an infrared
319-325.
thermal detection system for fever recognition during
LEE, M.H.M. & COHEN, JM. 2007. Rehabilitation
the H1Nl influenza pandemic. Infect Control Hosp Epi-
Medicine and Thermography. Wilsonville, OR: Impress
demiol,32,504-506.
Publications.
HIDALGO, J.C. 2010. Detecting a H1N1 in Tocumen
LIUTI, T., SAUNDERS, J.H., GIELEN, 1., DE RYCKE, L.,
Intermational Airport in Panama. Inframution 2010, Pro-
COOPMAN, F, & VAN BREE, H. 2007. Ultrasound
ceedings, Vol. 11, pp. 361-368.
 approach to the canine distal tibia and trochlear ridges
HILDEBRANDT, C., RASCHNER, C., & AMMER, K.
of the talus. Vet Radiot Lfttrasound, 48, 361-367.
2010. An overview of recent application of medical
LONG, C.D. & NYLAND, T.G. 1999. Ultrasonographic
infrared thermography in sports medicine in Austria.
evaluation of the canine shoulder. Vet Radiot Lttra-
Sensors (Basel), 10, 4700-4715.
sound, 40, 372-379.
HITTMAIR, K.M., GROESSL, V., & MAYRHOFER, E.
MARINO, D.J. 2011. Veterinary thermography (medical
2012. Radiographic and ultrasonographic diagnosis of
infrared imaging). Proceedings of North American Veteri-
stenosing tenosynovitis of the abductor pollicis longus
rary Conference (Small Arimal Orthopedics). Gainesville,
muscle in dogs. Vet Radiot Lttrasound, 53, 135-141.
FL.
HOUSE, M.R., MARINO, D.J., & LESSER, M.L. 2009.
MARINO, D.J. & LOUGHIN, C.A.2010.Diagnostic
Effect of limb position on elbow congruity with CT
imaging of the canine stifle: a review. Vet Surg, 39,
evaluation. Vet Surg, 38, 154-160.
284-295.
JIANG, L.J., NG, E.Y., YEO, A.C., WU, S., PAN, F., YAU,
MOORES, A.P., BENIGNI, L., & LAMB, C.R. 2008. Com-
W.Y, CHEN, J.H., & YANG, Y. 2005. A perspective on
puted tomography versus arthroscopy for detection of
medical infrared imaging. ∫ Med Eng Technotl, 29,
canine elbow dysplasia lesions. Vet Surg, 37, 390-
257-267.
398.
JUNG, J.Y., YOON, Y.C., YI, S.K., YOO, J., & CHOE, B.K.
MURPHY, S.E., BALLEGEER, E.A., FORREST, L.J., &
2009. Comparison study of indirect MR arthrography
SCHAEFER, S.L. 2008. Magmetic resonance imaging
and direct MR arthrography of the shoulder. Skeletat
findings in dogs with confirmed shoulder pathology.
Radiot, 38, 659-667.
Vet Surg, 37, 631-638.
KAPLAN, H. 2007. Practical Applications of Infrared
 NEIMANN, N. 2010. Neurology and thermology in the
Thermat Sensing and Imaging Equipment, 3rd ed. Bell-
horse. Ohio State Lniversity Annual Thermat Imaging
ingham, WA: SPIE Publications.
Conference. Columbus, OH.
KNOX, V.W.T., SEHGAL, C.M., & WOOD, A.K. 2003.
NEWCOMB, B., ARBLE, J., ROCHAT, M., PECHMAN,
Correlation of ultrasonographic observations with
R., & PAYTON, M. 2011. Comparison of computed
anatomic features and radiography of the elbow joint
 tomography and myelography to a reference standard
in dogs. Am / Vet Res, 64, 721-726.
of computed tomographic myelography for evalua-
KRAMER, M., GERWING, M., HACH, V., & SCHIMKE,
tion of dogs with intervertebral disc disease. Vet Surg.
E. 1997. Sonography of the musculoskeletal system in
Epub ahead of print.
dogs and cats. Vet Radiol Lttrasound, 38, 139-149.
NIELSEN,C. & PLUHAR,G.E.2005. Diagnosis and treat-
KRAMER, M., STENGEL, H., GERWING, M.,SCHIMKE,
'ssop z ut saninut uens aiosnu qu pu yo juau
E., & SHEPPARD, C. 1999. Sonography of the canine
Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol,18,247-253.
stifle. Vet Radiol LIttrasound, 40, 282-293.
NYLAND, T.C., MATTOON, JS., HERRGESELL, E.J., &
KRAMER, M., GERWING, M., MICHELE, U., SCHIMKE,
WISNER, E.R. 2002. Small Animal Diagrostic LIfttra-
E., & KINDLER, S. 2001. Ultrasonographic examina-
sound, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders.
400  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
PIERMATTEI, D., FLO, G., & DECAMP, C. 2006. Hand-
SEYREK-INTAS,D.,MICHELE,U.,TACKE,S.,KRAMER,
bokof Small Animal Orthopedics and Fracture Repair,4th
M.,& GERWING, M. 2009.Accuracy of ultrasonogra-
ed. St. Louis, MO: Saunders-Elsevier.
phy in detecting fragmentation of the medial coronoid
PIOREK, A. & ADAMIAK, Z. 2010. Ultrasonography of
process in dogs. IAm Vet Med Assoc, 234, 480-485.
the canine shoulder joint and its pathological changes.
SPALDING,S.J.,KWOH,C.K., BOUDREAU,R., ENAMA,
Pol I Vet Sci, 13, 193-200.
J., LUNICH, J., HUBER, D., DENES, L., & HIRSCH, R.
POZZI, G., STRADIOTTI, P, PARRA, C.G., ZAGRA, L.,
 2008. Three-dimensional and thermal surface imaging
SIRONI, S., & ZERBI, A. 2009. Femoro-acetabular
produces reliable measures of joint shape and tem-
impingement: can indirect MR arthrography
be
perature: a potential tool for quantifying arthritis.
considered a valid method to detect endoarticular
Arthritis Res Ther, 10, R10.
'16-9e '61 'uj d Xp4s Aruad y aeu
STADLER, K., HARTMAN, S.,MATHESON, J.,&
PUJOL, E., VAN BREE, H., CAUZINILLE, L., PONCET,
O'BRIEN, R. 2011. Computed tomographic imaging of
C., GIELEN, 1., & BOUVY, B. 2011. Anatomic study of
dogs with primary laryngeal or tracheal airway
the canine stifle using low-field magnetic resonance
obstruction.Vet Radiol Lttrasound,52,377-384.
imaging (MRI) and MRI arthrography. Vet Surg, 40,
STAHL,C.,WACKER,C.,WEBER,U.,FORTERRE,F,
395-401.
HECHT, P, LANG, J., & GORGAS, D. 2010. MRI fea-
PUROHIT, R.C. & MCCOY, M.D. 1980. Thermography in
tures of gastrocnemius musculotendinopathy
in
the diagnosis of inflammatory processes in the horse.
herding dogs. Vet Radiol LIltrasound, 51, 380-385.
Armt / Vet Res, 41, 1167-1174.
TOBIN, E., WEAVER, M., SKELLY, C., & MCALLISTER,
RAKHRA, K.S. 2011. Magnetic resonance imaging of
H. 2001. Bone scintigraphy in racing Greyhounds.
acetabular labral tears. ∫ Bone foint Surg Am, 93(Suppl.
Annuat meeting of the European Association ofVeterinary
2), 28-34.
Diagnostic Imaging and the European Collegeof Veterinary
REICHLE, J.K., PARK, R.D., & BAHR, A.M. 2000. Com-
Diagnostic Imaging. fuly 18-21, Vol. 42. Paris, France:
puted tomographic findings of dogs with cubital joint
Vet Radiol Ultrasound, p. 393.
lameness. Vet Radiol LIttrasound, 41, 125-130.
TURAN, E., OZSUNAR, Y, & YILDIRIM, 1G. 2009.
RING, E.F. 2004. The historical development of thermal
 Utrasonographic examination of the carpal canal in
imaging
in medicine. Rheurutotogy (Oxford), 43,
dogs. / Vet Sci, 10,77-80.
800-802.
TURNER, T. 2006. Observational study of equine swim-
RING, E.F. & AMMER, K. 2012. Infrared thermal imaging
ming for conditioning and physiotherapy at Canter-
in medicine. Physiol Meas, 33, R33-R46.
bury Park. Vetet Annuat Thermal Imaging Conference.
RING, E., AMMER, K., JUNG, A., MURAWSKI, P,
San Luis Obispo, CA: Vetel Diagnostics.
WIECEK, B., ZUBER, J, ZWOLENIK, S., PLASS-
TURNER, T.A. 1991. Thermography as an aid to the clini-
MANN, P., JONES, C., & JONES, B.F. 2004. Standard-
cal lameness evaluation. Vet Clin North Am Equine
ization of infrared imaging. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med
Pract, 7,311-338.
Biot Soc, 2, 1183-1185.
TURNER, T., PUROHIT, R.C., & FESSLER, JF. 1986.
ROSSMEISL, J.H., JR., ROHLEDER, JJ., HANCOCK, R.,
Thermography: a review in equine medicine. Comp
& LANZ, O.1. 2004. Computed tomographic features
Cont Educ Pract Vet, 8,855-862.
of suspected traumatic injury to the iliopsoas and
UEMATSU,
S.,  EDWIN,
D.H.,
JANKEL,
W.R.,
pelvic limb musculature of a dog. Vet Radiol Lttra-
KOZIKOWSKI, J., & TRATTNER, M. 1988.Quantifica-
sournd, 45, 388392.
tion of thermal asymmetry. Part 1: Normal values and
SAMII, VF, DYCE, J, POZZI, A., DROST, W.T.,
reproducibility. / Neurosurg, 69, 552-555.
MATTOON, JS., GREEN, E.M., KOWALESKI, M.P.,&
VAHLENSIECK, M., PETERFY, C.G., WISCHER, T.,
LEHMAN, A.M. 2009. Computed tomographic
SOMMER, T., LANG, P, SCHLIPPERT, U., GENANT,
arthrography of the stifle for detection of cranial and
H.K., & SCHILD, H.H. 1996. Indirect MR arthrogra-
 caudal cruciate ligament and meniscal tears in dogs.
 phy: optimization and linical applications. Radiology,
Vet Radiol LIlttrasound, 50, 144-150.
200, 249-254.
SCHAEFER, S.L.,BAUMEL,C.A.,GERBIG,JR.,&
VAN
BRUGGEN,
L.W.,
HAZEWINKEL，
H.A.
FORREST, L.J. 2010. Direct magmetic resonance
WOLSCHRIJN, C.F., VOORHOUT,G., POLLAK, Y.W,
arthrography of the canine shoulder. Vet Radiol Littra-
& BARTHEZ, PY. 2010. Bone scintigraphy for the
sound, 51, 391396.
diagnosis of an abnormal medial coronoid process in
SCHWARZ, T., JOHNSON, VS., VOUTE, L., & SULLI-
dogs. Vet Radiol Lltrasound, 51, 344-348.
VAN, M. 2004. Bone scintigraphy in the investigation
VANDEVELDE, B., VAN RYSSEN,B.,SAUNDERS, J.H.,
of occult lameness in the dog. ∫ Small Anim Pract, 45,
KRAMER, M., & VAN BREE, H. 2006. Comparison of
232-237.
the ultrasonographic appearance of osteochondrosis
Chapter 20 Imaging in Canine Sports Medicine 401
lesions in the canine shoulder with radiography,
WALDT, S., BRUEGEL, M., MUELLER, D., HOLZAP-
arthrography, and arthroscopy. Vet Radiol LIttrasound,
FEL, K, IMHOFF, A.B., RUMMENY, E.J,
&
47, 174-184.
WOERTLER, K. 2007. Rotator cuff tears: assessment
VAN DYCK, P, GIELEN, J.L., VERYSER, J., WEYLER, J.,
with MR arthrography in275 patients witharthroscopic
VANHOENACKER, FM., VAN GLABBEEK, F, DE
correlation. Eur Radiot, 17, 491498.
WEERDT, W., MAAS, M, VAN DER WOUDE, H.J., &
WANG, J., SHIH, T.T., YEN, R.F., LU, Y.S., CHEN, C.Y.,
PARIZEL, PM. 2009. Tears of the supraspinatus
MAO,T.L., LIN,C.H., KUO, W.H., TSAI, Y.S.,CHANG,
tendon: assessment with indirect magnetic resonance
K.J, & CHIEN, K.L. 20ll. The association of
arthrography in 67 patients with arthroscopic correla-
infrared imaging findings of the breast with hormone
tion. Acta Radiol, 50, 1057-1063.
receptor and human epidermal growth factor recep-
VAN HOOGMOED, L.M. & SNYDER, J.R. 2002. Use of
tor 2 status of breast cancer. Acad Radiol, 18, 212-
 reed pue suooalut paiap ot Auderouiau pare.nru
219.
digital neurectomy in horses. Vet J, 164, 129-141.
WISHART,
G.C.,
CAMPISI,M.,
BOSWELL，
M.,
VARJU,G., PIEPER, C.F., RENNER, J.B., & KRAUS, V.B.
CHAPMAN, D., SHACKLETON, V, IDDLES, S.,
2004. Assessment of hand osteoarthritis: correlation
HALLETT, A., & BRITTON, PD. 2010. The accuracy of
between thermographic and radiographic methods.
digital infrared imaging for breast cancer detection in
Rheumatotogy (Oxford),43, 915-919.
women undergoing breast biopsy. Eur ∫ Surg Oncol, 36,
VOLMER,M.&MOLLMAN,K.P.2010. Infrared Thermal
535-540.
Iraging: Fundamentats, Research and Applications. Wein-
heim, Germany: Wiley-VCH.
21
Emergency Medical
Considerations in Sports
Medicine and Rehabilitation
Cynthia M. Otto, DVM, PhD, Dipl ACVECC, and
Jennifer Brown, DVM, Dipl ACVS, CCRT
Summary
Working dogs and elite canine athletes are at risk for injuries or illness associated with per-
formance and training. The basic approach to emergency stabilization is to address the most
life-threatening problems first: airway, breathing, and circulation. Many of the problems that
result in acute emergencies in these dogs will be the result of the environment in which the
dog is working or performing. Traumatic injuries occur frequently and range from mild to life
threatening. Any trauma warrants a medical assessment. Prompt management of head trauma,
ocular trauma, and musculoskeletal trauma is needed to optimize the chance for return to
performance. Heat stroke is a life-threatening condition resulting from environmental expo-
sure, an inability to eliminate heat or excessive heat production from work or seizures.
Prevention or early recognition is preferred; however, rapid cooling and advanced veterinary
care are required for dogs that develop heat stroke. Other environmental factors that pose
threats include toxins and envenomation. The stressful environment of work or performance
may lead to mild or severe gastrointestinal distress that could predispose to dehydration. Large
breed, deep-chested dogs are at risk of gastric dilatation and volvulus leading to cardiovas-
cular collapse and respiratory compromise. Although field first aid may be beneficial for many
minor conditions, early transportation of injured or ill dogs to a fully equipped veterinary
hospital is critical for optimal care.
General first aid
deployment and relies on the basic ABC (airway,
breathing,  circulation)  principle  of  emergency
Field care, involving critical assessment and stabi-
 assessment (Table 21.1). Mild conditions including
lization, may be performed by a veterinarian or
allergic reactions, some toxin exposures, mild
layperson at a performance event or working dog
 dehydration, diarrhea, minor cuts and abrasions,
Carine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation, First Edition. Edited by M. Christine Zink and Janet B. Van Dyke.
@2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
402
Table 21.1  Principles of first aid for the layperson—is it an emergency?
(1)Airway/Breathing
a. Respiratory rate
i.
<12 Is the animal breathing? Is there an airway obstruction?
1.
Clear the airway (see text)
2.
 Consider rescue breaths
li1. 
12-30—normal at rest, evaluate effort
li.
>30—evaluate for effort
iv.
 Panting—may be normal or, if excessive, evaluate for increased temperature
b. Respiratory effort
i.
Normal—evaluate circulation
1i.
Increased inspiratory effort
1.
Noisy respirations?
Clear the airway (see text)
Evaluate temperature
Seek veterinary care immediately
●Provide supplemental oxygen if available
2.
Normal sounding respirations
Seek veterinary care immediately
●F
 Provide supplemental oxygen if available
(2)Circulation
a. Evidence of bleeding
1.
Apply direct pressure
ii.
 Consider topical hemostatic agents (not silver nitrate/QuikStop unless it is a torn toenail)
li.
Seek veterinary care for lacerations requiring sutures or for unstoppable bleeding
b.Meart rate
i.
<60—ls this an athletic dog at rest? If not, the heart rate may be dangerously low and should be evaluated. Dogs
with very low heart rates may become weak or collapse.
11.
 >140 at rest, this is a sign that the body needs more oxygen delivered, and can result from:
1.
Exercise
2.
Pain
3.
Low blood oxygen
 Poor lung function
Anemia
4.
 Shock
The heart not pumping properly
Not enough circulating blood (hypovolemia from blood or fluid loss)
●Anaphylaxis (acute allergic reaction) or sepsis (systemic infection)
C. Heart rhythm
i.
Regular
1i.
Irregular
1.
Varies with breathing—regularly speeds up and slows down (sinus arrhythmia)—this is normal
2.
saau pue waigoid aaas e po uis aui ag pino siuiseag seinsaii aui oi uaed aigead on 
veterinary evaluation
d.
Mucous membrane color
The color of the gums, prepuce, vagina, or membranes around the eyes should be pink
11.
Seek veterinary care if they are:
1.
 Blue—provide oxygen if possible, transport 
2.
 Dark red—check the temperature, cool if appropriate, transport
3.
White—control any external bleeding, transport
4.
Yellow—seek veterinary care
5.
Brown—provide oxygen if possible, transport
6.
 Gray—provide oxygen if possible, transport
e. Capillary refill time
 Press on the gums. The time for the pink color to return should be between 1 and 2 seconds
1.
If <1 second—check the temperature, cool if appropriate, transport
2. If >2 seconds, control any external bleeding, provide oxygen if possible, transport 
(Continuea)
403
404   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Table 21.1 (Continueo)
(3)Mental State
a.
 Normal is bright, alert responsive
b.
 Abnormal
Dull
1. Evaluate other vitals, consider veterinary assessment
Barely rousable
1.
 Transport
i1i.
Unable to rouse (coma)
1.
 Ensure airway/breathing and transport
iv.
Seizures
1.
Protect from injury
2.
Consider Karo syrup on the gums
3.
Transport
V.
Hyperexcitable
1.
 Protect from injury, transport
Note: Evaluate vital signs within the context of the situation (work vs. rest).
Table 21.2 Basic components of a handler first aid kit
lbcalization of the cause of respiratory distress.
Table 21.4 provides an outline of the typical clinical
HO, to induce emesis
signs of shock. Table 21.5 provides details on the
Diphenhydramine (2 mg/kg PO)
assessment of mucous membranes
Styptic powder
Gloves
Betadine solution (small bottle for cleansing wounds)
Alcohol or antiseptic wipes (in individual packets)
Airway
Antibiotic ointment
Saline eye flush
Upper airway obstruction
Bandaging material (nonadherent dressing, gauze wrap.
cohesive bandage material)
Complete airway obstruction can be functional
Tape
(laryngeal paralysis)  or mechanical (ball/toy).
Multitool, or bandage scissors, forceps
Some foreign bodies can be dislodged by the Heim-
Thermometer
lich maneuver. For large dogs this involves locking
Light
both hands together in a fist under body where the
Pen/pad
 rib cage meets the abdomen and pressing up and
forward 4-5 times (Figure 21.1). For small dogs,
 kmeel down, sitting back on your feet. Place the dog
and some ocular injuries may be treated in the field
on its back resting in the gap between your legs
(Table 21.2), but anything that may compromise
with its head near the floor and its rear legs in one
the return to work or performance of these athletes
hand. With the other hand thrust the heel of your
warrants rapid transportation to a referral facility.
Field care or first aid should not delay transporta-
palm into the dog's rib cage just where it meets the
abdomen several times. Functional obstructions or
tion for definitive veterinary care.
foreign bodies that cannot be removed may neces-
sitate a tracheostomy. Table 21.6 provides a list of
Emergency assessment and stabilization
actions and equipment needed for field treatment
of acute airway obstruction.
The basic emergency  examination  assessment
involves checking airway, breathing, and circula-
Breathing
tion. Guidelines for triage and primary survey of
a u  aq n ad a a
 Dogs exercising in extremely cold or dry environ-
texts (see Beal, 2011). Table 21.3 is a guide for the
ments may develop bronchospasm and cough.
Table 21.3Localization of respiratory distress
Location 
Respiratory pattern 
Dyspnea
 Physical findings
 Differentials
Upper airway
Slow/deep
Inspiratory—nares to
 Stridor, physical
Trauma, foreign
Panic induces
thoracic inlet
compromise
body, allergic"
inefficient rapid
Expiratory—thoracic
reaction, acute
shallow respirations
inlet to carina
edema
Completeobstruction—
no respirations
Lower airway
 Pleural space
Rapid shallow
Inspiratory
Dull lung sounds,
Fluid, air,
abnormal percussion
diaphragmatic
hernia, mass
Small airways
Rapid shallow
Inspiratory or
Rales and rhonchi
Bronchitis
expiratory
Lung parenchyma 
Rapid shallow
Inspiratory
Harsh lung sounds,
Hemorrhage,
crackles, may have
cardiogenic edema,
 decreased lung sounds
 noncardogenic
if consolidated
edema, pneumonia
Chest wall (rib
 Rapid shallow
Inspiratory
Chest wall injury.
Trauma, abdominal
cage or
abdominal distension
disease
diaphragm)
Nonpulmonary
Rapid
+/-
Other signs of
Anemia, acidosis,
systemic disease
hyperthermia, pain
neurologic disease
Table 21.4 Typical clinical signs of shock
Hypovolemic
Distributive (septic/anaphylactic)
Cardiogenic
Heart rate
>140
>140
>140 +/ murmur
Respiratory rate
Increased
Increa sed 
Increased
 Pulse quality
Weak
Bounding
Weak, +/- irregular
Mucous membranes/capillary
 Pale/>2
Red/<1
Pale/>2
refill time
Temperature
Normal to low
 Normal to high
Normal to low
Extremities
Cool
Warm
Cool
Other findings
Fluid loss:
Source of infection:
Forward failure:d
Vomiting/diarrhea
Peritonitis
Heart failure
Heat stress
Pneumonia
Arrhythmia
Blood loss
Infected wounds
1
Diastolic failure
 Internal
Anaphylaxis
External
Third spacing
Ascites
Reduced cardiac output leading to decreased tissue perfusion.
405
406
6 Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Table 21.5 Assessment of mucous membranes
Color
Interpretation
Possible causes
Pink
Normal
White
 Poor perfusion or anemia
Cardiogenic shock, hypovolemic shock, blood loss
Red
Hyperdynamic
Sepsis, heatstroke
Blue
Cyanosis
Hypoxemia, pulmonary dysfunction
Brown
Methemoglobinemia
Toxins
Yellow
Icterus
Hemolysis, liver disease, biliary obstruction
 Petechia
Thrombocytopenia, thrombocytopathia
Immune, infectious, drug/toxin
(Payungporn et al., 2008). Dogs participating in
flyball competitions experience canine influenza
virus (CIV) exposure similar to that in the general
canine population at <3% (Serra et al., 2011). Aspi-
ration pneumonia was reported as a cause of unex-
pected deaths in racing sled dogs (Dennis et al.,
2008). Treatment of infectious/inflammatory respi-
ratory diseases is based on the etiology and sever-
ity of signs. Supportive care, appropriate use of
antibiotics, oxygen therapy, gastric ulcer prophy-
laxis, and isolation from naive populations should
be considered.
Traumatic
Pulmonary trauma can result from blunt trauma,
emei Kmju Suenauad ro Xmu aaissnuon
 patients should be evaluated for penetrating inju-
ries, chest wall discontinuity, pleural space disease,
Figure 21.1   Technique for administering the Heimlich
maneuver to a large breed dog.
and pulmonary contusions. Once stabilized, these
patients should be transferred for advanced diag-
nostics and monitoring (Table 21.7).
Inhalation of smoke or other irritants can cause
similar signs. Oxygen therapy should be provided
Respiratory arrest
(Figure 21.2).
Intubation is the preferred route of providing arti-
ficial respiration. Breaths should be provided at a
Infectious/inflammatory
rate of 10 breaths per minute (Figure 21.3) (Boller
ef al., 2012). Chest compressions should not be
Although human responders to the site of the
interrupted for ventilation. If one person is attempt-
attack on the World Trade Center, September 11,
ing cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), give 2
2001,
， suffered various respiratory(
disorders
breaths for every 30 compressions or rely on chest
(Moline et al., 2006), the canine responders had
compressions to provide ventilation (Boller et al.,
minimal evidence of respiratory disease (Fox et al.,
2012).
2008; Otto et al., 2010). Respiratory irritants, exer-
cise in extreme conditions, travel stress, and expo-
sure to other dogs, may contribute to infectious
Circulation
respiratory diseases in working and performance
dogs. Canine influenza has been reported as a
Tachycardia, tachypnea, and altered mental status
are common to most forms of shock.
Chapter 21  Emergency Medical Considerations in Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation  407
Table 21.6 Field treatment of acute airway obstruction/respiratory arrest
Purpose
Action
Equipment
Dislodge a complete obstruction?
Heimlich maneuver
Determine whether there is a foreign
Oral pharyngeal exam (may
Gauze, laryngoscope
body
require sedation)
Initial treatment of hyperthermia
External cooling
IV fluids, transport
Treatment of acute allergic reaction
Intramuscular injection
Diphenhydramine (2 mg/kg IM)
Treatment of allergic and other
Intramuscular injection
Glucocorticoids (0.1-0.5 mg/kg IM
causes of edema
dexamethasone)
T'reatment of partial obstruction (for
Needle tracheostomy
Clippers, scrub, needle, through-the-needle
military working dogs or intractable
catheter
dogs that require muzzling)
Delivery of large volumes of air/
Intubation
IV catheter, injectable anesthetics,laryngoscope,
oxygen
endotracheal tubes, gauze to secure the tube,
syringes to inflate the tube, ambu bag to deliver
breaths, anesthesia once dog is intubated
Delivery of large volumes of air/
Emergency tracheostomy
IV catheter, injectable anesthetics, clippers and
oxygen when there is upper airway
scrub, surgical blade, forceps, suture material,
obstruction
trach tube, umbilical tape to secure the tube
Treatments are listed in increasing levels of intensity.
*Sedation is often indicated for the dog with a partial airway obstruction to relieve anxiety and return to a more effective
aaldwos e u! linsal Aew salosnw jeasulieyd aui jo uojexelal paieiosse ayi se pasn ag pinoys uoney uaned Aiojendsal
obstruction and the sedation may complicate any circulatory compromise associated with the condition.
Hypovolemic shock
early institution of appropriate antibiotics and
fluid therapy to maintain adequate perfusion and
Acute external hemorrhage is treated by direct
oxygenation.
pressure or use of hemostatic agents; tourniquets
are not recommended. Emergency treatment of
hypovolemic and distributive forms of shock are
CPR
based on fluid resuscitation (for more detail see
Aldrich, 2009). In hypovolemic and cardiogenic
Only 3-6% of reported cases of CPR in dogs result
shock states, compensatory peripheral vasocon-
in retum of circulation; however, performance and
striction will lead to cool extremities and shunting
working dogs with acute causes of cardiac arrest
of blood away from the skin and rectum, and low
(electrocution, drowning, airway obstruction) may
rectal temperature.
be better candidates for CPR. Effective CPR relies
on continuous chest compressions at a rate of
100 to 120 compressions/minute, a compression:
Cardiogenic shock
decompression ratio of 1:1, and sufficient force of
Most forms of cardiogenic shock result from sys-
compression (Figure 21.4) (Boller et al., 2012). For
tolic failure and mandate fluid restriction, diuret-
the latest understanding of veterinary CPR, refer
ics, and potentially inotropic support.
to the 2012 special issue of the Journal Veterinary
Emergency and Critical Care which contains a com-
Distributive shock
Veterinary Resuscitation: Evidence and Knowl-
Distributive shock may result from sepsis or
edge Gap Analysis on Veterinary CPR" (issue
anaphylaxis.  Initial supportive  care 
includes
22(Suppl. 1): S1-S131).
408  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Common emergencies in
abrasions, gastrointestinal distress (e.g., diarrhea,
working/performance dogs
hematochezia, and vomiting), hemorrhagic cysti-
tis, dehydration (ranging from mild to severe),
At Ground Zero after the attack on the World Trade
ocular irritation, ear infections, and lameness
Center, September 11, 2001, veterinary support
(Slensky et al., 2004). In the response to the earth-
provided peace of mind and involved wellness
quake in Haiti, dehydration and wounds were
assessments, evaluation of minor lacerations or
the most common ailments among search dogs
(Gordon, 2012). Other common injuries in working
and performance dogs include lameness, lacera-
tions, toenail avulsions, burns, bite wounds, foreign
bodies (oropharyngeal,
1, gastrointestinal, ocular,
nasal, aural, and impalements), exposure to ven-
omous snakes and insects, and toxins.
Dehydration
Dehydration was commonly reported by handlers
at the World Trade Center and in Haiti (Slensky
et al., 2004; Gordon, 2012). Intensity and duration
of activity, and ambient environmental factors
likely contribute to dehydration. Treatment is pro-
vided via oral, subcutaneous, or intravenous fluid
 therapy, depending on severity and etiology.
Gastrointestinal
Vomiting/diarrhea
 In a wide array of seings (working police and
farm dogs, disaster response, and sled racing),
gastrointestinal distress is commonly reported
(Marlow J. Penn Vet Working Dog Conference,
Figure 21.2 Administering oxygen and IV fluids to a search
2011) (Slensky et al., 2004; Cave et al., 2009; McKen-
and rescue dog.
zie et al., 2010; Marlow, 2011). Acute hemorrhagic
Table 21.7 Field treatment of respiratory distress
Action
Equipment
 Pain control
 Pain medications
Treat suspected cardiogenic edema
Furosemide (2 m/kg IV or IM)
Treat general respiratory disorders while establishing the
Supplemental oxygen for general respiratory
etiology
disorders while establishing the etiology
Treat life-threatening pleural space disease (e.g., tension
Clippers, scrub, butterfly needle or 1.5 inch
pneumothorax). Field thoracocentesis for moderate pleural space 
hypodermic with extension tubing, 3-way stopcock,
disease and associated respiratory distress should be performed
syringe
prior to transport if definitive care is not immediate.
 Initial treatment of shock
IV catheter, IV fluids as appropriate
Chapter 21  Emergency Medical Considerations in Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation  409
Figure 21.3 Rescue breaths—after evaluating for airway
obstruction, extend the neck in a straight line, cup your
hands around the dog's mouth and nose and provide rescue
Figure 21.4  Intubation—-use gauze to open the jaws,
breaths through the nostrils at 10 breaths per minute or if
a laryngoscope will facilitate rapid intubation; once the
performing CPR, 2 breaths every 30 compressions. (Photo by
placement is confirmed visually or manually, secure the
Marcy Burke.)
tube with the gauze and inflate the cuff. Be prepared to
remove the tube or maintain sedation if indicated.
diarrhea can lead to rapid volume depletion war-
etrating injuries (puncture, foreign body, or dog
ranting aggressive intravenous fluid therapy. Vom-
bite). Less common, but of greater risk, are pene-
iting and diarrhea can complicate or lead to
trating wounds to body cavities, fractures, disloca-
dehydration, pose a risk of zoonotic disease trans-
tions, burns, and head trauma. Risk of ocular and
mission, and impair performance.
oral injuries will depend on the work or athletic
- Arpuoas no Ared e aq Ae u
 activities in which the dog participates. Any of
plaint. Stress ulcers in sled dogs contribute to mor-
these injuries may remove the dog from the work
bidity and mortality (Davis et al., 2003).
cycle or competition. Foot injuries, pad lacerations,
and nail avulsions are the most common injury
in working dogs (Figure 21.5) (Slensky et al., 2004;
Gastric dilatation and volvulus (GDV) and
Fox et al., 2008; Houlton, 2008; Cave et al., 2009;
acute abdomen
Gordon, 2012). Soft tissue injuries (especially of the
'ssop urey Suom pe shop Sunom Areu u
shoulder and back) are common in agility dogs
GDV is one of the most common treatable causes
(Levy et al., 2009). Typically, only severe wounds
of death (Moore et al., 2001; Cave et al., 2009).
are brought to veterinary attention. In one study,
Outcome is adversely influenced by the delay
approximately one quarter of gun dogs had lame-
 between presentation and surgery, emphasizing
ness or lacerations, only half of which received
importance of rapid transportation for definitive
veterinary evaluation (Houlton, 2008).
care. Stabilization prior to transportation includes
fluid resuscitation. For gastric distension that com-
 Penetrating injuries and lacerations
promises respiration or perfusion, gastric decom-
pmu lennun rae panapisuon aq pmous uoissand
Emergency management and the need for referral
resuscitation.
depend on location and severity of injury. Large
full-thickness wounds, those with significant hem-
Musculoskeletal trauma
ture, and those involving a tendon or ligament
should be referred immediately.
Injury to the musculoskeletal system is common
Triage should include cleaning and flushing of
 and will include lameness and mild to severe pen-
gross contamination, taking care not to flush into
410  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Case Study 21.1   Working dog with GDV
Signalment: 6y.o. M/l Cerman Shepherd police dog.
Point of Care Testing: PCV 45%
Developed  increased  respiratory  effort  and tense
Total protein 8.4 g/dL
abdomen. Several nonproductive attempts to vomit 19
pH7.196
 hours postprandial
Na 150mEq/L
K 4.78mEq/L
Glucose 138mg/dL
Initial Vital Signs: HR: 200
Lactate 9.0mmol/L
RR: 60
BUN 13 mg/dL
Temperature: 100.6°F
 Pulses: weak, irregular
MM: gray
Physical Findings wNl Except: Lung sounds harsh all
fields, no murmurs. Abdomen distended and tympanic
Capillary refill time: 3.5 seconds
Mental status: depressed, recumbent
BCS: 5/9
Treatment: Following initial fluid bolus, stomach tro-
charized via 18ga over-needle catheter into the tym-
Doppler blood pressure 70mm Hg
 panic region dorsal and caudal to 13th rib (Figure B21.2).
Initial Treatment: IV catheter, 5mL/kg 7.5% saline in
Transport for Definitive Care:
hetastarch (Figure B21.1).
Right lateral abdominal radiograph (Figure B21.3)
Repeat boluses of 10mL/kg balanced electrolyte
Coagulation profile, blood type, Chemistry screen,
solution 
Electrocardiogram
 Oxygen therapy
Surgical assessment of CDV (Figure B21.4)
Figure B21.1  Initial treatment of a GDV involves rapid
Figure B21.2 Decompression of the dilated stomach.
treatment of the associated cardiovascular collapse with
After initiating fluid therapy, the gas-distended stomach
fluid therapy. Fluids are delivered with the assistance of a
can be decompressed by trocharization; insertion of an 
pressurized bag via a large bore catheter in the cephalic
18-ga over the needle catheter into the tympanic area just
vein.
caudal to the 13th rib.
Chapter 21  Emergency Medical Considerations in Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation  411
Figure B21.4  Surgical appearance of a torsed stomach at
Figure B21.3  Right lateral radiograph of a patient with
the time of laparotomy.
GDV.
Progression: Improved mentation, heart rate returned to
ated antibiotics, lidocaine, plasma. Surgery: passed oro-
120, pulse quality improved, developed; hypertension
gastric tube, de-rotated stormach, no resection required,
(208mm Hg Doppler), drop in PCV (31%), prolonged
splenectomy and gastropexy performed.
PTT, ventricular premature contractions. Confirmed
Recovery uneventful. Returned to work 14 days
 gastric dilatation/volvulus, suspect hemoabdomen. Initi-
postoperatively.
 open synovial structures. Bandaging will help
 prevent further contamination and injury and min-
imize swelling. When hemorrhage is significant,
compression bandages should be placed to control
 bleeding and should not be removed until defini-
tive care is reached. If there is bleed-through, an
additional compression bandage should be placed
over the top of the first. Tourniquets are not
recommended.
Penetrating injuries, gunshot wounds, impale-
 ment, and bite wounds can cause significant inter-
nal injury and infection (Figure 21.6). An impaled
foreign body should be left in place until definitive
care is provided.
Fractures
As fractures are high-impact injuries, the ABCs
should be addressed first, followed by pain man-
agement and, depending on location, immobiliza-
Figure 21.5 Pad laceration in a working dog.
tion of the fracture. Open wounds should be
covered with a padded compression bandage and
412Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitatior
without obstructing jugular flow can facilitate cere-
bral perfusion. In humans with brain injury, thera-
peutic hypothermia holds promise, but there are
 no studies in clinical veterinary patients; however,
preventing increases in temperature may be benefi-
cial. Pain control is an important part of initial
 treatment. There is no evidence for benefit of glu-
cocorticoids in brain injury, and they are not
currently recommended (Syring, 2011). Ongoing
monitoring and critical care is essential. For details
on the pathophysiology and treatment of head
trauma, see Sande & West (2010) and Syring
(2011).
Figure 21.6 Bite wound to the groin. Performance and
Ocular
see Aens woy spunm ang jo y!l le ane s uiom
and other working/performing dogs. Bite wounds often result
Field management of ocular emergencies warrants
pue Suiddo aaldwoy uopaju! pue Ainjui daap snoes u
assessment for foreign bodies and periocular inju-
exploration of bite wounds is warranted for evaluation of
ries, and corneal staining for ulcers.
underlying soft tissue damage.
Corneal ulcers are acutely painful and associ-
ated with blepharospasm, epiphora, miosis, and
redness. Copious lavage with saline is indicated
diau Aeu pue Amj [eonauo paoadsns Aue 1o
all splint materials applied over bandages. Sus-
remove foreigm bodies. Ulcers should be treated
pected spinal injuries should be immobilized only
with topical antibiotics and mydriatics. Self-trauma
if doing so does not cause patient stress.
should be prevented. Deep ulcers and descemeto-
celes require more advanced care.
Burns
 Ocular foreign bodies can lodge in the conjunc-
tiva, behind the nictitans, or in the cornea, or can
Within 30 minutes of injury, burned areas should
penetrate into the globe. Topical anesthesia and
be covered with cold, wet material (Garzotto,
 2009). Chemical contact burns should be lavaged
sedation may be necessary to remove superficial
corneal and conjunctival foreign bodies. Topical
thoroughly to avoid further damage to the affected
antibiotics are indicated for superficial corneal and
tissues.
conjunctival injury. Foreigmn bodies that require sur-
gical removal or penetrate into the anterior chamber
should be referred.
Head and neck trauma
Head trauma
Dental trauma
Bradycardia along with altered mental status or
For dogs that rely on bite work, broken teeth can
cranial nerve abnormalities is highly suggestive of
be devastating. Patients with recent tooth fractures
increased intracranial pressure (ICP) and warrants
should be placed on oral antibiotics and scheduled
emergency treatment. Normovolemic head trauma
for dental procedures as soon as possible. An
-s pe 'ais i ar s
avulsed intact tooth should be reimplanted within
tion is directed at preventing secondary brain
15-20 minutes. If this is impossible, the tooth
 injury by maintaining brain perfusion and oxygen-
should be placed in fresh milk and implanted
ation. Supplemental oxygen and ventilation may
within 6 hours (Reiter & Lewis, 2011). A tape
-ladu pue uogeuaaod yoq se Anessanau aq
muzzle should be placed to prevent further dis-
ventilation contribute to secondary brain injury.
 placement and injury, pending referral (Reiter &
Raising the head on a 15- to 30-degree incline 
Lewis, 2011)
Chapter 21  Emergency Medical Considerations in Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation  413
Collapse
results in EIC-related collapse (Patterson et al.,
2008; Minor et al., 2011). Typically, affected dogs
Heat and humidity contribute to collapse in the
 are youmg (12-17 months old) and acutely collapse
athlete and can impact working capacity. Poorly
after a short-duration exercise (<20 minutes) (Minor
acclimatized or overworked dogs are susceptible
et al., 2011). The episodes are characterized
to heat-related injury and collapse. Anatomical
by pelvic limb paresis that may progress to the
dysfunction or genetic disorders may also contrib-
front limbs. Full recovery is generally within 30
ute to susceptibility.
minutes of rest. Emergency treatment is support-
ive. It may be difficult to differentiate EIC from
other causes without advanced diagnostics and
Exertional heat stroke (EHS)
genetic testing.
Heat stroke is defined as a core body temperature
of greater than 106°F (41.1°C) with a history of
 environmental exposure and no other reason for
Exertional rhabdomyolysis
hyperthermia (Flournoy et al., 2003). In the canine
athlete or working dog, work-related elevations in
Most common in racing sled dogs and racing Grey-
body temperature (up to 104.9°F [40.5°C] or rarely
hounds, exertional rhabdomyolysis is related to
107.2°F [41.8°C]) can represent a normal physio-
high-intensity activity that leads to muscle break-
logic response. Core body temperature should
down. Severe myonecrosis can result in significant
return to normal within 30 minutes after exercise
muscle pain with reluctance to move or weakness
(Matwichuk et al., 1999; Ferasin & Marcora, 2009).
that may appear like collapse. Muscle groups
The relationship between normal exertional hyper-
become rigid and painful to palpation. Initial treat-
thermia and clinically relevant EHS is not well
ment is supportive care. Definitive care is impor-
 defined. Collapse, weakness, and disorientation or
lack of recovery from exercise as demonstrated by
tant as severe cases can lead to acute renal failure
and death.
excessive panting may indicate heat stroke.
 If EHS is suspected, commence immediate and
rapid cooling and refer for definitive care. In an
experimental model of canine heat stroke (Maga-
Hypothermia
zanik et al., 1980), use of tap water, cold water,
or ice water did not alter the rate of cooling. Ice-
Dogs working in cold temperatures are often
bath cooling is, in theory, contraindicated due
adapted to the environment. Hypothermia becomes
to peripheral vasoconstriction and effects on pe-
 a significant risk when the work cycle stops, in
ripheral blood flow, hypothermia, and reflex shiv-
 prolonged cold water immersion, and when normal
ering (Flournoy et al., 2003); however, documented
thermoregulatory mechanisms are overwhelmed.
adverse effects are lacking. In humans, cold-water/
No studies document the incidence of hypother-
ice bath immersion is the most efficient and rapid
 mia from environmental exposure in dogs. Much
form of cooling and leads to sigrificantly more
 of the clinical information has been extrapolated
successful outcomes than other methods (Casa 
from human literature. Hypothermia is catego-
et al., 2005; McDermott et al., 2009).
rized as mild—90-99°F (32.2-37.2°C), moderate
82-90°F (27.7-32.2°C), or severe—less than 82°F
- 1o s   ) ()
Exercise-induced collapse (EIC)
mia progress as body temperature decreases. Initial
Exercise-induced collapse (EIC) is an autosomal
signs include shivering, bradycardia, hypoventila-
recessive genetic disease of Labrador Retrievers
tion, and changes in mentation. Collapse typically
from a mutation in the dynamin 1 (DNM1) gene
occurs with body temperatures below 93°F (33.9°C).
(Patterson et al., 2008). Although primarily recog-
 Further decreases lead to loss of consciousness and
nized in Labrador Retrievers, the mutation has
cardiac arrest. Core body temperature below 75°F
been identified in several other breeds (Minor et al.,
(23.9°C) leads to irreversible physiologic changes
2011). Only the homozygous DNM1 mutation
(Ford et al., 2006).
414  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Figure 21.7  Lateral radiograph of a dog with acute pelvic limb paralysis following trauma (hit by car). Subluxation of T13-L1
with approximately 50% narrowing of spinal canal and fracture of cranioventral aspect of L1 vertebral body are evident.
Emergency treatment will depend on the stage
supportive care, and antidotes if available. Hyper-
of hypothermia. In mild cases, passive rewarming
thermia and rhabdomyolysis may result from
by removing the patient from the cold environ-
 excessive seizure activity in the dog.
 ment and wrapping in blankets is usually sufficient.
ooidde aaissare arou e 'sases aierapo u
should be taken with active heat transfer to the
Toxin exposure
patient focusing on the core areas (trunk) (Todd
& Powell, 2009). In severe hypothermia, active
General
rewarming should be directed at the core through
warmed intravenous fluids and peritoneal lavage.
There are several reports of toxic ingestion includ-
ing drugs and explosives in detection dogs
(Bruchim et al., 2005; Llera & Volmer, 2006; Fishkin
et al., 2008). Search dogs are at risk of toxin expo-
Neurologic
sure based on the search environment (Murphy
et al., 2003; Wismer et al., 2003). Exposure can occur
Acute paresis/paralysis
via inhalation, ingestion, or absorption. The most
 Neurologic emergencies including acute paresis or
common route of toxin exposure is direct ingestion
paralysis can result from trauma (Figure 21.7),
or ingestion following self-grooming of contami-
spontaneous or traumatic rupture of an interverte-
 nated fur. The goals when treating intoxications are
bral disk, fibrocartilaginous embolism, hemor-
to reduce exposure, enhance elimination, and
 rhage, or acute formation of a space-occupying
 provide supportive care and antidotes if available
mass. Lower motor neuron disease can result
(Figure 21.8). The induction of emesis in dogs is
from infectious agents or toxins causing flaccid
generally effective in reducing exposure. Contrain-
paralysis.
dications include abnormal consciousness, and
ingestion of petroleum distillates, acids, alkalis, or
sharp objects.
Seizures
Acute management of seizures depends on whether
the problem is intracranial (e.g., epilepsy, space-
Decontamination
occupying lesion, inflammation) or extracranial
Appropriate personal protective equipment should
(e.g., metabolic, toxic). Metabolic causes of seizures
be worn to prevent intoxication or injury to the
require treatment of the umderlying derangement.
decontamination team (Murphy, 2009). The envi-
Toxin-induced and intracranial causes of seizures
ronmental impact should be considered. Dry
need to be managed acutely with anticonvulsants,
 powders may be brushed off or thoroughly rinsed.
Chapter 21  Emergency Medical Considerations in Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation   415
Contact poison control
Exposure to toxin
Known toxin?
yes
Antidoteavailable?
noi
Within4-6hrs?
Administerantidote
Contraindications to emesis:
Patient:dyspnea,bradycardia,abnormal
mental state
Supportive care:
Toxin:caustic,acid,petroleum based,
fluids
sharp, advised against by poison
specificmedications
control
Induce emesis:
Monitoring
a) apomorphine IV ar conjunctival tablet
b) hydrogen peroxide PO
Contraindicationstoactivatedcharcoal?
Activated charcoal PO
Figure 21.8 Algorithm for toxin exposure. At each branch point bold solid lines represent a "yes" answer, dark dashed lines
represent a "no" answer, and gray-dotted lines represent a continuation of care.
Dawn TM (Procter & Gamble, Cincinnati, OH) deter-
Cnitical Care Medicine. St. Louis, MO: Saunders-
gent is one of the safest soaps to remove topical
Elsevier, 276-280.
hazards, particularly oil-based hazards. Adhesive
 BEAL, M.W. 2011. Associated musculoskeletal injury to
the head. In: Drobatz, K.J., Beal, M.W., & Syring, R.S.
agents like tar can be clipped or emulsified with
(eds.),Maruat of Trauma Management in the Dog and
oil. Treatment of inhaled toxins requires removal to
a clear environment and supportive care that may
Cat. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell.
include oxygen.
BOLLER, M, BOLLER, E.M., OODEGARD, S., & OTTO,
C.M. 2012. Small animal cardiopulmonary resuscita-
tion requires a continuum of care: proposal for a chain
Envenomation
of survival for veterinary patients. Am Vet Med AssoC,
240, 540-554.
 A risk to dogs, particularly those working or per-
BRUCHIM, Y,S
SARAGUSTY, J.,WEISMAN, A.,&
forming outdoors, is envenomation from the bite
STERNHEIM, D.2005. Cyclonite (RDX) intoxication in
of snakes or sting of insects (Kremer & Schaer,
a police working dog. Vet Rec, 157,354-356.
1995; Cordeiro et al., 2006; Peterson, 2006). Treat-
CASA,
D.J,
ARMSTRONG,L.E.,(
GANIO,
M.S.
ment of snakebites depends on the type of snake;
& YEARGIN, S.W. 2005. Exertional heat stroke in
for all cases, keeping the dog quiet, treating shock,
competitive athletes. Curr Sports Med Rep, 4, 309-
and transporting to a veterinary hospital are vital
317.
(Gilliam & Brunker, 2011). The insect class hyme-
CAVE, N.J.,BRIDGES,J.P.,COGGER, N.,& FARMAN,
 R.S. 2009. A survey of diseases of working farm dogs
noptera (i.e., bees, wasps, hornets) can induce
in New Zealand. N Z Vet J, 57, 305-312.
severe local inflammation and allergic reactions.
CORDEIRO, FF,SAKATE, M.,FERNANDES,V.,&
Cool compresses and antihistamines may be suf-
CUYUMJIAN, PR. 2006. Clinical and cardiovascular
ficient for treatment.
alterations produced by scorpion envenomation in
dogs. f Verom Anim Toxins, 12, 1943.
DAVIS, M.S., WILLARD, M.D., NELSON, S.L., MAND-
References
SAGER, R.E., MCKIERNAN, B.S., MANSELL, J.K., &
LEHENBAUER, T.W. 2003. Prevalence of gastric
ALDRICH, J. 2009. Shock fluids and fluid challenge. In:
lesions in racing Alaskan sled dogs. / Vet Interr Med,
Silverstein, D.C. & Hopper, K. (eds.), Small Animal
17, 311-314.
416  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
DENNIS, M.M., NELSON, S.N., CANTOR, G.H.
MARLOW, J. 2011. Defining, developing and document-
MOSIER, D.A., BLAKE, J.E, & BASARABA, R.J. 2008.
ing success in working dogs. Pern Vet Working Dog
Assessment of necropsy findings in sled dogs that
Conference, September 7-9, 2011, Pearl River, NY.
died during Iditarod Trail sled dog races: 23 cases
MATWICHUK, C.L., TAYLOR, S., SHMON, C.L., KASS,
(1994-2006). / Am Vet Med Ass0c, 232, 564-573.
PH., & SHELTON, G.D. 1999. Changes in rectal tem-
FERASIN, L. & MARCORA, S. 2009. Reliability of an
perature and hematologic, biochemical, blood gas,
incremental exercise test to evaluate acute blood
and acid-base values in healthy Labrador Retrievers
lactate, heart rate and body temperature responses in
before and after strenuous exercise. Ar ∫ Vet Res, 60,
Labrador retrievers. / Comp Physiot B, 179, 839-845.
88-92.
FISHKIN, R.A., STANLEY, S.W., & LANGSTON, C.E.
MCDERMOTT, B.P, CASA, D.J., GANIO, M.S., LOPEZ,
 2008. Toxic effects of cyclonite (C-4) plastic explosive
RM., YEARGIN, S.W., ARMSTRONG, L.E.,&
ingestion in a dog. / Vet Emerg Crit Care, 18, 537-540.
MARESH, C.M. 2009. Acute whole-body cooling for
FLOURNOY, W.,MACINTIRE,D.,& WOHL, J. 2003.
exercise-induced hyperthermia: a systematic review. ∫
 Heatstroke in dogs: clinical signs, treatment, progno-
Atht Train, 44, 84-93.
sis, and prevention. Conpend Contin Educ Pract Vet, 25,
MCKENZIE, E., RIEHL, J., BANSE, H., KASS, PH.,
422-431.
NELSON, S., JR., & MARKS, S.L. 2010. Prevalence of
FORD, R.B., MAZZAFERRO,E.M,KIRK, R.W.,&
 diarrhea and enteropathogens in racing sled dogs. ∫
BISTNER, S.1. 2006.Kirk ard Bistrer's Handbook of Vet-
Vet Intern Med,24,97-103.
erinary Procedures and Emergency Treatment. St. Louis,
MINOR, K.M., PATTERSON, E.E., KEATING, M.K.
MO: Saunders-Elsevier.
GROSS, S.D., EKENSTEDT, K.J., TAYLOR, S.M.,&
FOX, PR., PUSCHNER, B., & EBEL, J.G.2008.Assess-
MICKELSON, J.R. 2011. Presence and impact of the
ment of acute injuries, exposure to environmental
exercise-induced collapse associated DNM1 mutation
toxins, and five-year health surveillance of New York
in Labrador retrievers and other breeds. Vet §, 189,
Police Department working dogs following the Sep-
214-219.
tember 11, 2001, World Trade Center terrorist attack. ∫
MOLINE, J., HERBERT, R., & NGUYEN, N. 2006. Health
Am Vet Med Ass0c, 233, 48-59.
consequences of the September 11 World Trade Center
GARZOTTO, C.K. 2009. Thermal burm injury. In: Silver-
attacks: a review. Cancer Invest, 24, 294-301.
stein, D.C. & Hopper, K. (eds.), Small Animal Critica!
MOORE, G.E., BURKMAN, K.D., CARTER, M.N., &
Care Medicine. St. Louis, MO: Saunders-Elsevier.
PETERSON, M.R. 2001. Causes of death or reasons for
GILLIAM, L.L. & BRUNKER, J. 2011. North American
-5661) sas 6 :shop Suom Areu u eiseuyna
snake envenomation in the dog and cat. Vet Clin North
1996). Am Vet Med Assoc, 219,209-214.
Am Small Anim Pract,4l, 1239-1259.
MURPHY, L.A., GWALTNEY-BRANT, S.M., ALBRET-
GORDON, L.E. 2012. Injuries and illnesses among urban
SEN, J.C., & WISMER, T.A. 2003. Toxicologic agents of
search-and-rescue dogs deployed to Haiti following
concerm for search-and-rescue dogs responding to
the January 12, 2010 earthquake. / Arm Vet Med Assoc,
wrban disasters. / Am Vet Med Assoc, 222,296304.
240,396-403.
MURPHY, L.P. 2009. Basic veterinary decontamination.
HOULTON, J.E. 2008. A survey of gundog lameness and
In: Wingfield, W.E., Palmer, S.B., & Veterinary E. &
injuries in Great Britain in the shooting seasons
Critical Care S. (eds.), Veterinary Disaster Response.
2005/2006 and 2006/2007.Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol,
Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell, 231-238.
21, 231-237.
OTTO, C.M., DOWNEND,A.B., MOORE,G.E., DAGGY
KREMER, K.A. & SCHAER, M. 1995. Coral snake (Micru-
J.K., RANIVAND, D.L., REETZ, J.A., & FITZGERALD,
rus futvius fulvius) envenomation in five dogs: present
S.D. 2010. Medical surveillance of search dogs
and earlier findings. ∫ Vet Emerg Crit Care, 5, 9-15.
deployed
to
LEVY, M., HALL,C., TRENTACOSTA, N., & PERCIVAL,
the World Trade Center and Pentagon: 2001-2006.
sainfut o Aaans aaoadsonar Areuuard y 'bno 
Enoiron Heath,73,12-21.
 i    s  
PATTERSON, E.E., MINOR,
.K.M., TCHERNATYNS-
Comp Orthop Traumatol, 22,321-324.
KAIA, A.V., TAYLOR, S.M., SHELTON, G.D., EKEN-
LLERA, R.M. & VOLMER, PA. 2006. Toxicologic hazards
STEDT, K.J., & MCKELSON, JR. 2008. A canine
for police dogs involved in drug detection. ∫ Am Vet
 DNMl mutation is highly associated with the syn-
Med Ass0c, 228, 1028-1032.
drome of exercise-induced collapse. Nat Genet, 40,
MAGAZANIK,A.,EPSTEIN,Y.,UDASSIN,R.,SHAPIRO,
1235-1239.
Y, & SOHAR, E. 1980. Tap water, an efficient method
PAYUNGPORN, S., CRAWFORD, PC., KOUO, T.S.,
for cooling heatstroke victims—a model in dogs. Aviat
CHEN, L.M, POMPEY, J., CASTLEMAN, W.L.,
Space Environ Med,51,864-866.
DUBOV1, E.J., KATZ, J.M., & DONIS, R.O. 2008. Influ-
Chapter 21  Emergency Medical Considerations in Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation   417
enza A virus (H3N8) in dogs with respiratory disease,
SLENSKY, K.A., DROBATZ, K.J., DOWNEND, A.B., &
Florida. Emerg Infect Dis, 14, 902-908.
OTTOC.M.2004.Deploymentmorbidityamongsearch-and-
PETERSON, M.E. 2006. Black widow spider envenom-
rescue dogs used after the September 1l, 2001, terrorist
ation. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract,21, 187-190.
attacks. ∫ Amt Vet Med Assoc, 225, 868-873.
REITER, A.M. & LEWIS, JR. 2011. Trauma-associated
 SYRING, R.S. 2011. Traumatic brain injury. In: Drobatz,
musculoskeletal injury to the head. In: Drobatz, K.J.,
K.J., Beal, M.W., & Syring, R.S. (eds.), Marual of Trauma
Beal, M.W., & Syring, R.S. (eds.), Manual of Trauma
Management in the Dog and Cat. Chichester, UK: John
Maragement in the Dog and Cat. Chichester, UK: John
Wiley & Sons Ltd, 386-439.
Wiley & Sons Ltd, 716-783.
TODD,J. & POWELL, L.L. 2009. Hypothermia. In: Silver-
SANDE, A.& WEST, C.2010. Traumatic brain injury:
stein, D.C. & Hopper, K. (eds.), Small Anirmal Critical
Care Medicine. St. Louis, MO: Saunders-Elsevier.
Emerg Crit Care, 20, 177-190.
WISMER, T.A., MURPHY, L.A., GWALTNEY-BRANT,
SERRA, V.F.,STANZANI, G., SMITH,G.,& OTTO, C.M.
S.M., & ALBRETSEN, J.C. 2003. Management and
2011. Point seroprevalence of canine influenza virus
soop anosan-pue-uoras u sasooon no uoguaaad
u puanon eqA e u Suedinred shop u sNeH
responding to urban disasters. ∫ Arm Vet Med Assoc,
Penmsylvania. J Am Vet Med Assoc, 238, 726-730.
222,305-310.
22
The Role of Acupuncture in
Canine Rehabilitation
Carolina Medina, DVM, CVA, CVCH, CCRT
Summary
Acupuncture is defined as the insertion of thin, sterile needles into specific points, based on
anatomical structures, which leads to a physiologic response. These physiologic responses
are due to stimulation of the nervous system and lead to a release of endogenous substances
such as β-endorphins, dynorphins, enkephalins, serotonin, epinephrine, gamma-aminobutyric
acid (GABA), cortisol, and various hormones. There are about 360 acupuncture points located
ane anaul 'swashs ueano pue jaan uied uo shoedwi snoea aaey reu Apog aut inouanout
a variety of ways to stimulate acupuncture points to create an effect; these include dry needle,
electroacupuncture, aquapuncture, acupressure, laser acupuncture, moxibustion, hemoacu-
puncture, pneumoacupuncture, and gold implantation. The selection of which acupuncture
points to use is critical to the success of treatment and is based upon the clinical condition.
the temperament of the patient, and the goal of treatment. Acupuncture has therapeutic clini-
endurance enhancement, and nerve regeneration. Although acupuncture is relatively safe, it
is imperative that the veterinarian performing the treatment is aware of its cautions, contra-
indications, and limitations; they therefore should seek clinical training in the field prior to
use of acupuncture in patients.
Acupuncture overview
and peripheral nervous systems. Acupuncture
stimulation releases endogenous substances such
Acupuncture is the insertion of fine, sterile needles
 as β-endorphins, dynorphins, enkephalins, sero-
into specific acupuncture points subsequently cre-
 tonin, epinephrine, gamma-aminobutyric  acid
ating a physiologic response. These physiologic
(GABA), cortisol, and various hormones. The earli-
responses are due to stimulation of both the central
 est scientific studies done on acupuncture focused
@2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
418
Chapter 22 The Role of Acupuncture in Canine Rehabilitation 419
on its analgesic effects. In the late 1970s, research-
structures. Type I (motor points) make up 67% of
ers discovered that acupuncture stimulation led to
all points, and are located in areas where nerves
an increased concentration of endogenous opioids
penetrate a muscle. For example, SI-9 is located at
in the serum and cerebral spinal fluid (Pan et al.,
the junction of the deltoideus and the long head of
1984; He, 1987). Additional studies showed that
the triceps brachii, where the axillary and radial
naloxone, an opioid antagonist, blocked the effects
 nerves emerge. Type II (midline) points are located
of acupuncture and decreased the pain threshold
 on the superficial nerves on dorsal and ventral
in acupuncture subjects (Mayer et al., 1977). These
midlines. For example, Bai-hui lies in the depres-
were the first studies showing that endogenous
sion between the spinous processes of the 7th
opioids played a role in the mechanism of action
lumbar and the 1st sacral vertebrae on the dorsal
of acupuncture analgesia.
midline and it is supplied by the dorsal branch of
Acupuncture stimulation increases the blood
the 7th lumbar nerve. Type IIl (nerve or nerve
 concentration of the serotonin precursor free tryp-
plexus) points are located at high-density loci of
tophan (Costa et al., 1982). Others have shown an
 superficial nerves and nerve plexuses. For example,
increase in serotonin in the central nervous system
GB-34 is the point where the common peroneal
after acupuncture stimulation (Zhong, 1989).
B-
nerve divides into the deep and superficial
Endorphins stimulate serotonergic nerves within
branches. Type IV (muscle-tendon junction) points
the descending tract to release serotonin (He, 1987).
are located at muscle-tendon junctions where Golgi
It is speculated that acupuncture analgesia involves
tendon organs exist. For example, BL-57 is located
serotonergic neurons since acupuncture releases
at the junction of the gastrocnemius muscle and the
β-endorphins, which in turn induce release of
common calcanean tendon (Gunn ef al., 1976;
serotorin.
Gurn, 1977).
Acupuncture analgesia may be related to one
 Most acupuncture points are located in areas of
or more of the four phases of pain perception:
low electrical resistance and high electrical conduc-
insult from a noxious stimulus, transduction of the
tance (Brown et al., 1974; Reichmanis et al., 1975;
painful stimulus via electrical signals, transmission
Urano & Ogasawara, 1978). Histological studies
of the painful stimulus into the spinal cord, and
reveal that acupuncture points are located in areas
perception of pain by the higher brain centers and
where there are free nerve endings, arterioles, lym-
somatosensory cortex. One hypothesis proposes
phatic vessels, and aggregations of mast cells (Pan
that acupuncture stimulation can block perception
et al., 1986). Due to their anatomical location, many
of pain before it reaches the central nervous system.
different local effects occur with acupuncture point
This is based on Wall and Melzack's gate control
stimulation. These include an increase in local
theory of pain perception. Acupuncture stimulates
 blood flow and circulation; release of Hageman's
A-beta and A-delta fibers to rapidly carry informa-
Factor XII, which activates the clotting cascade,
complement cascade, and release of plasminogens
interneurons to close the gate before ascending
and kinins; mast cell degranulation, which releases
pain impulses arrive from the C fibers. This pre-
histamine, heparin, and proteases; release of bra-
vents pain impulses from reaching the higher brain
dykinin, which leads to vasodilation; and produc-
centers and blocks conscious perception of pain.
tion of local prostaglandins, which leads to smooth
Regional acupuncture analgesia is also speculated
muscle relaxation (Omura, 1975; Kendall, 1989a).
as A-delta fibers are transmitted cranially and cau-
The vasoactive effects that occur with acupuncture
dally within spinal segments before entering the
stimulation follow a specific sequence. There is an
dorsal horn gray matter (Smith, 1994b).
initial short vasoconstriction phase (lasting 15-30
seconds), followed by a quasi-control state (lasting
from 10 seconds to 2 minutes), and a final vasodila-
Acupuncture points
tion phase (lasting from 2 minutes to 2 weeks)
(Omura, 1975). This results in an enhanced local
Dogs have approximately 360 acupuncture points
tissue immune status, improved local tissue per-
located throughout the body. There are four types
fusion, and muscle and tissue relaxation. Pain
of points depending on their associated neural
relief occurs as a result of improved perfusion and
420   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
reduction of muscle spasms caused by local effects
Moxibustion is performed using the dried herb
of acupuncture stimulation and somatovisceral
Artemisia rolled into a cigar shape and burned 1/2'
reflexes (Smith, 1994a).
over the acupuncture point without touching the
skin. This stimulates acupuncture points through a
warming technique and is typically used
on
Methods of acupuncture point stimulation
 patients with chronic arthritis that is worse in cold
weather.
There are nine ways to stimulate acupuncture
Hemoacupuncture has two forms of stimulation.
 points: dry needle, electroacupuncture, aquapunc-
The first form involves the withdrawal of a small
ture, acupressure, laser acupuncture, moxibustion,
amount of blood from acupuncture points located
hemoacupuncture, pneumoacupuncture, and gold 
 directly on blood vessels. For example, Tai-yang is
implantation (Xie & Preast, 2007). Dry needle is
located on the transverse facial vein just lateral to
defined as the insertion of acupuncture needles into
the lateral canthus of the eye. This technique is
 acupuncture points. These needles vary in length
primarily used for febrile diseases. The second
(1/4, 1/2, 1, 1.5, and 2") and gauge (28, 30, 32, 34,
form involves the injection of the patient's blood
and 36 gauge), and they are typically left in place for
 into acupuncture points. This technique is used for
psu a si aaau A san o aexe
autoimmune diseases.
commonly used acupuncture technique in dogs.
 Pneumoacupuncture is the injection of air into
Electroacupuncture is the attachment of elec-
the subcutaneous space in areas where there is
trical leads to dry needles and connection to an
 muscle atrophy. The theory behind this technique
electroacupuncture unit. The unit can be set to
is that the air puts pressure on the acupuncture
-s Aouanbany qoea pue sanuanbany jo Aianrea e
 points and stimulates them until the air is absorbed.
ulates a different pathway in the nervous sys-
Gold therapy is the injection of sterile gold, in
tem. Low-frequency (1-20 Hz) electroacupumcture
the form of a small wire or bead, directly into acu-
predominantly
stimulates A-delta fibers and
 puncture points. The gold creates an ionic change
releases β-endorphins and met-enkephalins. High-
in the tissues that stimulates the points for a pro-
frequency (100Hz) electroacupuncture predomi-
longed period of time.
nantly stimulates C fibers and releases dynorphins.
Even higher frequency (200Hz) electroacupunc-
ture stimulates the serotonergic fibers and releases
Acupuncture point selection
serotonin and norepinephrine (Melzack & Wall,
1965; Kendall, 1989b). Canine patients are fre-
 Local points are those located directly in the area
quently treated with a combination of dry needle
to be treated, and they are selected largely to treat
and electroacupuncture.
pain. For example, ST-36 is a local point for the
Aquapuncture is the injection of a sterile liquid
stifle as it is located just distal to the tibial plateau
directly into acupuncture points. The pressure
in the cranial tibial muscle. Distal points are located
of the liquid induces stimulation of acupuncture
either distal or caudal to the area to be treated, and
points until it is absorbed. The most commonly
they are selected for the patient that feels too much
used injectable liquids include saline, vitamin B12
pain at the local site and/or to draw edema or
and lidocaine.
swelling from the local site. For example, LIV-3 is
Acupressure is the application of manual pres-
located between the 2nd and 3rd metatarsals proxi-
sure on acupuncture points for a period of 1-5
mal to the metatarsophalangeal joint, so quite
minutes per point. This is a safe and easy technique
distal to the stifle and is commonly used to treat
 to demonstrate and instruct owners to perform at
stifle pain. Another option is to select points
home.
 proximal/cranial and distal/caudal. For example,
 Low-level laser therapy can be applied directly
a patient with intervertebral disk disease (IVDD)
on acupuncture points to induce stimulation of the
at T13-L1 can be treated with BL-20 (lateral to the
points. Treatment can be done with either a Class
caudal border of the dorsal spinous process of T12)
3B or a Class 4 therapeutic laser at routine settings
and BL-23 (lateral to the caudal border of the dorsal
for the individual body region.
spinous process of L2).
Chapter 22 The Role of Acupuncture in Canine Rehabilitation 421
Table 22.1Acupuncture points for specific conditions
Clinical condition
Acupuncture point selection
General pain
LIV-3, GB-34, BL-60, SI-9
Hip pain
BL-54, GB-29, GB-30, fian-jiao, BL-40, BL-23, LIV-3
Stifle pain
ST-36, GB-33, GB-34, SP-9, SP-10, BL-40, LIV-3
Hock pain 
BL-60, KID-3, ST-41, KID-6, LIV-3
Shoulder pain
LI-15, TH-14, SI-9, LU-1
Elbow pain
LI-10, LI-11, LU-5, HT-3, PC-3
Carpal pain
HT-7, LU-7, LU-9, TH-4, PC-7
Intervertebral disk disease (IVDD)
Local, cranial, and caudal BL points to the site of IVDD, KID-1, Liu-feng
Wobbler's syndrome
fing-jia-ji, Ll-4, SI-16, Sl-3
Degenerative myelopathy
ST-36, LI-10, BL-23, Bai-hui, BL-54, BL-40, KID-1, Liu-feng
Vestibular disease
GB-20, GB-21, GV-20, TH-21, SI-19, GB-2, An-shen
Urinary incontinence
BL-39, KID-3, KID-6, SP-6, CV-1
Fecal incontinence
GV-1, BL-25, ST-36, ST-37, LI-10
Appetite stimulation
BL-20, BL-21, Shan-gen, fian-wei
Adapted from Xie & Preast (2007).
It is important to know the anatomical location
Haber, 1992). Treatment is typically performed 2-5
and clinical indication of acupuncture points to
days before a competition. Acupuncture is also
make an appropriate therapeutic point selection.
useful after a competition to alleviate pain or stress
on the musculoskeletal system. It is important for
points, there are many options for point selection
the athlete to be cooled dowm and relaxed before
for individual conditions. Points that are most
doing an acupuncture treatment. Generally, acu-
commonly used in veterinary medicine are selected
 puncture is done approximately 2-4 hours after
for their acceptance by animal patients (Table 22.1)
performance; however, it is still effective if initiated
and their ease of anatomical location (Table 22.2)
the day after a competition. Acupuncture points
(Xie & Preast, 2007). Points along the neck, back,
used for performance enhancement include ST-36,
hips, and shoulders are commonly used in dogs as
LI-10, CV-4, CV-6, BL-24, BL-26, LI-4, and LIV-3.
ae u u a t an paert am are a
Acupuncture is a useful modality to integrate
muscle groups. Points located in areas with smaller
 into a rehabilitation program due to its analgesic
muscles, such as the elbows and feet, are less well
properties and nerve stimulation effects. Many
tolerated by the canine patient.
patients that receive rehabilitation therapy have
d on  r r i p 
physical activity. By decreasing or eliminating pain,
acupuncture allows more aggressive rehabilita-
Integrating acupuncture into sports
tion treatments to be instituted. Acupuncture
medicine and rehabilitation therapy
can be administered as the final step in the reha-
bilitation program. For example, a patient with
Acupuncture has many applications in sports med-
cranial cruciate ligament rupture might receive
icine practice including its use for performance and
laser therapy, massage, underwater treadmill, and
endurance enhancement, as well as treating con-
exercises such as sit to stands. This patient would
ditions to which canine athletes are prone such
benefit from acupuncture therapy at the end of the
as muscle spasms, trigger points, osteoarthritis,
exercises once they have cooled off. For these
IVDD, and nerve damage. Acupuncture improves
patients, acupuncture therapy can be given once to
endurance and physical performance, and helps to
twice a week. A patient with IVDD would likely
regulate heart rate and blood pressure (Ehrlich &
 receive a rehabilitation program including physio
Table 22.2 Anatomical locations of acupuncture points
Acupuncture point
 Anatomical location
BL-20
Lateral to the caudal border of the dorsal spinous process of T12
BL-21
Lateral to the caudal border of the dorsal spinous process of T13
BL-23
Lateral to the caudal border of the dorsal spinous process of L2
BL-24
Lateral to the caudal border of the dorsal spinous process of L4
BL-25
Lateral to the caudal border of the dorsal spinous process of L5
BL-26
Lateral to the caudal border of the dorsal spinous process of L6
BL-27
Lateral to the caudal border of the dorsal spinous process of L7
BL-28
Lateral to the caudal border of the dorsal spinous process of S1
BL-39
BL-40
In the center of the popliteal crease
BL-52
Lateral to the caudal border of the dorsal spinous process of L2 and lateral to BL-23
BL-54
 Dorsal to the greater trochanter
BL-67
At the nail bed of the lateral aspect of the 5th digit of the pelvic limb
CV-1
Between the external genitalia and the anus
CV-2
On the ventral midline at the cranial border of the pubis
CV-3
On the ventral midline 3/4 distance from the umbilicus to the pubis
CV-4
On the ventral midline 2/3 distance from the umbilicus to the pubis
CV-5
On the ventral midline 1/3 distance from the umbilicus to the pubis
CV-6
On the ventral midline 1/4 distance from the umbilicus to the pubis
GB-2
Ventral to the tragus
GB-20
Caudal and lateral to the occipital protuberance
GB-21
In the groove cranial to the scapula halfway between the C7-T1 junction and the acromion
GB-29
Cranial to the greater trochanter
GB-30
Caudal to the greater trochanter
65-85
On the pelvic limb, proximal to the lateral femoral epicondyle
GB-34
Cranial and distal to the head of the fibula
GV-1
Between the tail base and the anus
GV-17
On the dorsal midline of the head at the level of the caudal rim of the ears
GV-20
On the dorsal midline of the head at the level of the ear canals
GV-21
On the dorsal midline of the head at the level of the cranial rim of the ears
E-LH
Cranial to the medial epicondyle of the humerus
HT-7
On the transverse crease of the carpal joint lateral to the flexor carpi ulnaris tendon
KID-1
Under the central pad of the pelvic limbs
KID-3
Proximal to the medial malleolus
KID-6
Distal and plantar to the medial malleolus
422
Table 22.2 (Continued)
Acupuncture point
Anatomical location
LI-4
Between the 2nd and 3rd metacarpals proximal to the metacarpophalangeal joint
LI-10 
1/6 of the distance between the elbow and the carpus between the extensor carpi radialis and
the common digital extensor
LI-11
Between the biceps tendon and the lateral epicondyle of the humerus
LI-15
Cranial and distal to the acromion
LIV-3
Between the 2nd and 3rd metatarsals proximal to the metatarsophalangeal joint
LU-1
In the superficial pectoral muscle medial to the greater tubercle of the humerus
LU-5
In the cubital crease lateral to the biceps tendon
LU-7
Proximal to the styloid process of the radius
LU-9
Distal to the styloid process of the radius
PC-3
In the cubital crease medial to the biceps tendon
PC-7
Proximal and medial to the accessory carpal pad
SI-3
Proximal and lateral to the metacarpophalangeal joint
S1-9
Between the deltoid and triceps at the level of the shoulder joint
SI-16
On the dorsal border of the brachiocephalicus at the level of C2-C3
SI-19
Rostral to the tragus
SP-6
On the medial/caudal aspect of the tibia, distal to the saphenous vein
SP-9
On the medial pelvic limb, distal to the medial condyle of the tibia
SP-10
On the medial pelvic limb, proximal to the medial femoral condyle between the two heads of
the sartorius
ST-36
Just distal to the tibial plateau in the cranial tibial muscle
ST-37
Distal to ST-36 in the cranial tibial muscle
ST-41
On the cranial aspect of the hock
TH-4
At the radiocarpal joint cranial to the common digital extensor tendon
TH-14
Caudal and distal to the acromion
TH-21
Dorsal to the tragus
An-shen
In the large depression behind each ear
fian-jiao
 On the dorsolateral aspect of the hip in a depression ventral to the cranial dorsal iliac spine
fian-wei
1/3 way down the lateral neck between the jugular groove and the lateral process of the cervical
vertebrae
fing-jia-ji
Dorsal and ventral to the lateral processes of each cervical vertebrae (28 points)
Liu-feng
4-5 (total of 12 points)
Shan-gen
On the dorsal midline of the nose between haired and nonhaired junction
Yan-chi
 At the dorsolateral caudal lumbar region
Adapted from Xie & Preast (2007).
423
424  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
ball work, isometric contractions, assisted walking
Acupuncture is not only beneficial for pain man-
with slings, toe pinches, ear scratches, neuro-
agement and nerve regeneration, but it also has
muscular electrical stimulation, and underwater
calming/sedating effects which are useful for
 treadmill. Because acupuncture can promote nerve
patients that need to be cage-rested (Kim, 2006).
regeneration (La et al., 2005), it is indicated for
Acupuncture points used for their calming/
these patients, and it is commonly used 1-5 days
sedating effects include GV-17, GV-20, GV-21, An-
per week depending on the grade of disk disease.
shen, and, HT-7.
Case Study 22.1  Postoperative care of C5-C6 hemilaminectomy
Signalment: 5 y.o. F/s Doberman. Presented for acute
pain-relieving properties, respectively. ST-36 and Ll-10
 paralysis. MRI revealed type I IVDD at CS-C6. Treated
were used to improve stamina and energy. fing-jia-jf, BL-
surgically with dorsal hemilaminectomy shortly after
10, and Sl-16 are cervical points used for IVDD. CB-21
presentation.
is a shoulder point that addresses referred pain from the
cervical lesion. The combination of 20 Hz and 80-120 Hz
Postoperative   Examination: Extrerrely  painful   and
was selected to stirmulate the release of β-endorphins
reluctant/unable to move neck.
and dynorphins, respectively, to address pain relief and
nerve stimulation. Patient received daily acupuncture in
Treatment: Received acupuncture 2 days postopera-
addition to rehabilitation therapy. Rehabilitation therapy
tively consisting of combination dry needle and elec-
consisted of neurormuscular electrical stirmulation, laser
troacupuncture (Figure B22.1). Dry needle at CV-20,
therapy, physio ball work, sensory input exercises.
Sl-3, BL-60, BL-62, LIV-3, ST-36, and Ll-10. Electroacu-
underwater treadmill, and swim therapy (Figure B22.2).
puncture at fing-jia-j, BL-10, Sl-16, CB-21 at 40 Hz for
10 minutes and 80-120 Hz for 10 minutes.
 Results: Patient able to move neck 1 day after starting
CV-20 was selected for its calrming effects and was the
treatment, sit sternal within 3 days of treatment, stand
first needle placed at the beginning of each treatment.
within 5 days of treatment, walk with assistance within
 Sl-3 and BL-62 are distal points, on the carpus and tarsus
8 days of treatment, and walk without assistance within
respectively, chosen because their meridians/channels
10 days of treatment. Patient experienced complete
cross the neck and therefore alleviate neck pain. BL-60
recovery of ambulation within 2 weeks of the initial
and LlV-3 were chosen for their anti-inflammatory and
presenitation
Figure B22.1 Five-year-old Doberman, 2 days after dorsal
hemilaminectomy surgery, receiving electroacupuncture
Figure B22.2  Patient swimming as part of rehabilitation
and laser therapy for treatment of IVDD at C5-C6.
therapy for treatment of IVDD at C5-C6.
Chapter 22 The Role of Acupuncture in Canine Rehabilitation 425
Cautions and contraindications
erinary Medicine. TCVM.org. Accessed November 8,
2012. www.tcvm.com/Program/program_master.htm
There are numerous acupuncture points located
Chi Institute of Chinese Medicine, Inc. (founded 1998)
Traditional Chinese Veterinary Medicine. TCVM.com.
around the eyes, which should be used with
Accessed November 8, 2012. www.tcvm.com
caution so as not to puncture the globe. Points
CVMA (2011) Colorado Veterinary Medical Association
located along the lateral thorax and abdomen
Homepage. COLOVMA.org. Accessed November 8,
should be inserted at an oblique angle to avoid
2012. colovma.com
entering the pleural or abdominal cavities. It is
IVAS (2012) Intermational Veterinary Acupuncture
imperative to note that electroacupuncture is con-
Society Homepage. IVAS.org. Accessed November 8,
traindicated in patients with a history of seizures,
2012. www.ivas.org
epilepsy, cardiac arrhythmias, and those that have
a pacemaker; and it should be used with caution
References
in patients with neoplasia and congestive heart
failure (Altman, 1994). Acupuncture should never
ALTMAN, S. 1994. Techniques and instrumentation. In:
be performed directly into or around a tumor, into
Schoen,A.M. (ed.), Veterinary Acupuncture: Ancient Art
open wounds or scar tissue, or directly into skin
to Modern Medicine.St. Louis, MO: Mosby, 86-97.
that has severe dermatitis. There are certain acu-
BROWN, M.L., ULETT, G.A., & STERN, JA. 1974.
puncture points that cause uterine contraction and
 Acupuncture loci: techniques for location. Am / Chin
induce parturition; therefore, these points are con-
Med,2,67-74.
traindicated in preterm pregnancy. Points contra-
COSTA,C., CECCHERELLI, F., AMBROSIO,F., BARON,
indicated in pregnancy include LI-4, SP-6, BL-23,
P, DE ANTONI, A., VANZAN, S., ALLEGRI, G.,&
BL-24,BL-25, BL-26,BL-27, BL-28, BL-40, BL-52,
MANANI, G. 1982. The influence of acupuncture on
BL-60,BL-67,ST-36,CV-2,CV-3,CV-4,CV-5,CV-6,
-Un Aue u uondan jo siaat uias po
and Yan-chi (Xie & Preast, 2007).
teers subjected to ketamine anesthesia. Acupurct Elec-
trother Res, 7, 123-132.
EHRLICH, D. & HABER, P. 1992. Influence of acupunc-
ture on physical performance capacity and haemody-
Training and certification
namic parameters. Int / Sports Med, 13, 486491.
GUNN, C.C. 1977. Type IV acupuncture points. Am ∫
In most states, only licensed veterinarians can
Acupunct, 5,51-52.
 perform acupuncture. Before engaging in the prac-
GUNN, C.C, DITCHBURN, FG, KING, M.H., &
tice of acupuncture, successful completion of a cer-
RENWICK, G.J. 1976. Acupuncture loci: a proposal for
tified veterinary acupuncture training program
their classification according to their relationship to
 is required. Institutions that offer veterinary acu-
kmown neural structures. Am / Chirn Med, 4, 183-195.
HE, L.F. 1987. Involvement of endogenous opioid pep-
puncture training programs in the United States
tides in acupuncture analgesia. Pain, 31, 99-121.
include the Chi Institute of Chinese Medicine, the
KENDALL, D.E. 1989a. Part I: a scientific model of acu-
International Veterinary Acupuncture Society, and
puncture.Am}Acupunct,17,251-268.
 Medical Acupuncture for Veterinarians. In addi-
KENDALL, D.E. 1989b. Part II: a scientific model of acu-
tion, there is a unique opportunity to receive a
puncture. Am | Acupunct, 17, 343-360.
 master's degree in Traditional Chinese Veterinary
KIM, M.S. 2006. Evaluation of sedation on electroenceph-
Medicine (TCVM) through China's Southwest Uni-
versity. This is a chance for veterinarians certified
by acupuncture at GV20 or Yingtang and sedative
 in basic acupuncture to pursue a greater under-
combination. Acupunct Electrother Res,31, 201-212.
standing of veterinary acupuncture and Chinese
LA, J.L., JALALI, S., & SHAMI, S.A. 2005. Morphological
herbal medicine.
studies on crushed sciatic nerve of rabbits with elec-
troacupuncture or diclofenac sodium treatment. Am /
Chin Med, 33, 663-669.
MAYER, D.J., PRICE, D.D., & RAFII, A. 1977. Antago-
Webliography
nism of acupuncture analgesia in man by the narcotic
antagonist naloxone. Brain Res, 121, 368-372.
Chi Institute of Chinese Medicine, Inc. (founded 1998)
MELZACK, R. & WALL, PD. 1965. Pain mechanisms: a
Master Degree of Science in Traditional Chinese Vet-
new theory. Science, 150, 971-979.
426  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
OMURA, Y. 1975. Pathophysiology of acupuncture treat-
hre Ancient Art to Modern Medicine. St. Louis, MO:
ment; effects of acupuncture on cardiovascular and
Mosby, 45.
nervous systems. Acupunct Etectrother Res, 1, 51-140.
SMITH, F.W.K. 1994b. The neurophysiologic basis of acu-
PAN, C.,ZHAO,A.,& ZHANG, X.1986.Research on
puncture. In: SCHOEN, A.M. (ed.), Veterinary Acu-
Acupuncture,Moxibustion and Acupuncture Anesthesia.
puncture:Ancient Art to Modern Medicine.St.Louis,
New York: Springer-Verlag.
MO: Mosby, 36-38.
PAN, X.P, ZHANG, B.H., WANG, D.L., GAO, H, DU,
URANO, K. & OGASAWARA, S. 1978. A fundamental
G.Z., CHEN, B.Y, & ZHENG, L.F. 1984. Electro-
study on acupuncture points phenomena of dog body.
acupuncture analgesia and analgesic action of Naga. ∫
Kitasato Arch Exp Med, 51, 95-109.
Tradit Chin Med, 4, 273-278.
XIE,H.&PREAST,V.2007.Xie's Veterinary Acupuncture.
REICHMANIS, M., MARINO, A.A., & BECKER, R.O.
Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing, 129-234, 245-246 &
1975. Electrical correlates of acupuncture points. IEEE
333-335.
Trans Biomed Eng, 22,533-535.
ZHONG, X.H. 1989. Correlation between endogenous
SMITH, F. W.K. 1994a. The neurophysiologic basis of acu
opioid-like peptides and serotonin in laserpuncture
puncture. In: Schoen, A.M. (ed.), Veterirary Acupunc-
analgesia. Am ∫ Acupunct, 17, 39-43.
The Role of Physical
23
Manipulation (Chiropractic)
in Canine Rehabilitation
Christine Jurek, DVM, CCRT, CVA, CVC
Summary
Spinal manipulative therapy (SMT or chiropractic) can be a valuable modality for the reha-
bilitation therapist. It can help to improve spinal mobility in patients with clinical problems
and can be used to maintain spinal health in athletes and working dogs. Chiropractic is a
via manual manipulation. Knowledge of anatomy is crucial to proper therapy. Bony structure
is supported by soft tissues (tendons, ligaments, and muscles) that contain many nerve recep-
tors responsible for maintaining proper posture, balance, and mobility. When these receptors
fire abnormally, spinal mobility and function are impaired. Restoration of proper segmental
function is called an adjustment (high velocity, low amplitude thrust) and is only done on
shdasan asal ueo pue sdsusuoelan auoq ladond saoisan suawrsnpy suawsas allqowodau
back to a healthy firing frequency. Treating patients with primary spinal disorders such as
intervertebral disk disease (IVDD) can help to improve mobility, assist neurologic healing.
and rebalance proper muscle tone and function while also reducing pain. Problems such as
chronic lameness can result in improper spinal biomechanics, and this secondary issue can
be addressed with chiropractic. Though complications are rare, care must be taken to avoid
treating areas of instability, severe pain or inflammation, infection, and neoplasia. Because
animal chiropractic is a medical intervention, it should be performed only by a licensed
veterinarian or chiropractor. Courses leading to certification are available to educate profes-
sionals and ensure that they have adequate knowledge to treat animal patients.
Carine Sports Medicire and Rehabilitation, First Edition. Edited by M. Christine Zink and Janet B. Van Dyke.
@2013 John Wiley &t Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
427
428   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Introduction
chiropractic and founded the American Veterinary
Chiropractic Association in 1989.
The spine is a central stabilizing structure in any
mammal. All appendages are connected to it via
bony or soft tissue attachment. Chiropractic, or
Animal chiropractic as a profession
spinal manipulative therapy (SMT), can be a pow-
erful tool in restoring the body to its proper
Animal chiropractic is not legally recognized as a
mechanical and neurophysiologic state after injury
uique profession. Both veterinarians and chiro-
or disease, and can assist with maintainance of
practors have opportunities for advanced training
health of canine patients. This chapter reviews the
and certification. Much progress has been made
history, theory, and terminology of animal chiro-
with respect to understanding biomechanics and
practic; gives a general overview of adjustment
neurophysiology, resulting in a more scientific and
and techniques; reviews common indications and
evidence-based modality. To distinguish it from
precautions; discusses anatomy, biomechanics, and
practice on humans, the term veterinary spinal
functional neurology; and finally, discusses educa-
 manipulative therapy (VSMT) is used.
tional opportunities and legal issues. Although
manipulative therapy can be applied to any acces-
sible joint in the body, the focus of this chapter will
Chiropractic theory
be on the spine.
 Evolution of chiropractic theory
Animal chiropractic history
As the profession grew, so did the desire for a more
thorough understanding of the process by which
Early history
dysfunction occurs and why manual therapy is
effective (Figure 23.1). Today, many theories are
Chiropractic originated with D.D. Palmer in 1895.
being investigated, including nerve compression,
Believing that the spine was the key to all disease
spinal cord compression, axoplasmic aberration,
and disorders, he used chiropractic as an entire
somatoautonomic dysfunction, and facilitation
system of medicine, and started the first school of
(Leach & Phillips, 1986). Central to these theories
chiropractic, now known as the Palmer School of
is the concept of subluxation.
Chiropractic. His son, B.J. Palmer, took over the
school and promoted the newly developed profes-
sion. He was reputed to have treated animals as
Segmental spinal dysfunction or subluxation
well as people at the school. Many individuals
trained by the Palmers went on to develop their
The word chiropractic is derived from the Greek
own theories and techniques.
roots, cheir (the hands) and praxis (to practice).
Initially, D.D. Palmer believed that a bone out of
 place was the cause of a number of clinical sigmns
The 1980s
n his patients. He termed this abnormal rela-
 tionship between two adjacent vertebrae a sub-
In the 1980s, the field of animal chiropractic came
luxation. The signs that he attributed to the
 into being when Sharon Willoughby, DVM, began
subluxation were metabolic and neurologic as well
to apply this medical system to her patients. After
as musculoskeletal.
 practicing general medicine for several years, she
The term subluxation is the hallmark of chiro-
enrolled at the Palmer School and studied the dif-
practic theory and practice. Many individuals have
ferences between human and animal anatomy.
sought to define it, leading to over 100 synony-
Tom Offen, DC, mentored her work adapting chi-
mous terms (Gatterman, 1995). The Consortium
ropractic to animal patients, and she went on to
for Chiropractic Research defines it as "a motion
finish her Doctor of Chiropractic (DC) degree. Dr.
 segment in which alignment, movement integrity,
Willoughby established the first course in animal
 and/or physiologic function are altered though
Chapter 23 The Role of Physical Manipulation (Chiropractic) in Canine Rehabilitation 429
TreatmentModel
1895
Misaligned
Compresses
Interferes
with innate
Disease
Adjustment
vertebra
nerve
inteligence
Misaligned
Interferes
Compresses
Disease/
withnerve
Adjustment
vertebra
nerve
function
disorder
1940-60
Causes
Misaligned
soft tissue
dysfunction&
Manipulation
Vertebra/
Symptoms
pain&nerve
&?
joint pain
dysfunction?
Causes
soft tissue
Manipulation,
Joint
dysfunction&
Modalities,
1980's
dysfunction
pain&nerve
Rehabilitation
dysfunction?
Wellness
Manipulation,
Clinical
Modalities,
2000's
Symptoms
categories
Rehabilitation
Wellness
Figure 23.1  Evolution of subluxation theory. Subluxation theory has grown and developed since the early days of
chiropractic, reflecting a more thorough understanding of complexity in both pathophysiology and treatment.
Adapted from Vernon (201 0).
contact between the joint surfaces remains intact"
and is composed of two adjacent vertebrae and
(Gatterman, 1995).
all of the associated structures. These structures
include muscles, tendons and ligaments, joints,
nerves and vessels, and the contents of the in-
Subluxation and other chiropractic
tervertebral foramen (IVF). The relationship be-
terminology
tween the two vertebrae is anatomically and
neurologically complex. When there is a minute
To better understand the concept of subluxation, it
alteration in this relationship, the body responds
is important to be familiar with basic chiropractic
with numerous mechanisms designed to maintain
terminology (Table 23.1).
homeostasis.
The motion segment
The IVF
The motion segment (Figure 23.2) is generally
The IVF is the communication portal of the nervous
accepted as the smallest unit of motion in the spine
system (Willoughby, 1998). Foramina are found at
430  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Table 23.1 Chiropractic terminology
Term
Definition
Subluxation
Dysrelationship between two vertebral segments;: may be anatomic but is often a subtle
functional dysrelationship.
Motion segment
Two adjacent vertebra and all of the associated structures (muscles, ligaments, vessels, and the
contents of the intervertebral foramen).
Intervertebral
Space between vertebrae through which the spinal nerves and associated structures pass.
foramen
Adjustment
High velocity, low amplitude manipulation (thrust) delivered to a specific hypomobile motion
segment using a specific force and depth. Used to restore mobility to that segment.
Contact point
The part of the chiropractor's hand that is used to deliver the adjustment. There are many
possible contact points, but most often the "v-trough" (between the thumb and second
metacarpal) or supported thumb is used.
Segmental contact
The part of the vertebra that the chiropractor uses to adjust the segment. Contact points vary
point 
with spinal regions as well as extremities. The points typically used include spinous processes,
transverse processes, mammillary processes, lamina, and other bony prominences (tuber
sacrale).
Line of correction
The direction of the manipulative thrust, along the plane of the zygapophysial joint which is
restricted. Subtleties vary from segment to segment, as with joint mobilization.
Zygapophysial joint
Joint formed by the cranial and caudal articular processes of adjacent vertebrae. Also known
(Z joint)
as a facet joint. See anatomy section for detailed description.
Static palpation
Assessment of positional symmetry or dysrelationships without regard to mobility.
 Motion palpation
Assessment of functional mobility without regard to static position.
each spinal segment from C2 through the sacrum.
The boundaries of the IVF include the vertebral
notches and facet joint capsules on either side,
 intervertebral disk (IVD) ventrally, and ligamen-
tum flavum dorsally. The primary content is
the spinal nerve, surounded by the cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) and supported by a dural extension
that eventually blends with the epineurium, the
recurrent meningeal nerve that supplies the IVD
(and other areas), the dorsal longitudinal ligament,
meninges, spinal artery, intervertebral veins, lym-
phatics, and connective tissue that serves as a
shock absorber to protect the delicate structures
within.
K
Figure 23.2 The motion segment consists of two adjacent
The vertebral subluxation complex (VSC)
vertebrae and all associated structures. A. Dorsal spinous
processes. B. Vertebral bodies. C. Transverse processes. D.
The VSC is a model used to describe the interrela-
Articular facets. E. Supraspinous ligament. F. Interspinous
tionship of clinical signs associated with segmental
ligament. G. Ligamentum flavum. H. Dorsal longitudinal
dysfunction in the spine. Rather than defining a
ligament. 1. Ventral longitudinal ligament. J. Joint capsule.
distinct subluxation, it describes a more general
K. Intervertebral disk. L. Intervertebral foramen.
Adapted from Jurek & McCauley (2006).
view of the complexity of alteration in spinal
motion. The VSC consists of nine components of
Chapter 23 The Role of Physical Manipulation (Chiropractic) in Canine Rehabilitation  431
Kinesiopathology
Vascularpathology
Myopathology
Connective tissue
Neuropathology
pathology
Inflammatory response
Pathoanatomy
Pathophysiology
Pathobiochemistry
segment) are intimately involved in development of kinesiopathology and incur pathologic changes as a result. The sequela to
this pathology is inflammation eventually leading to tissue damage.
Adapted from Lantz (1995)
pathology that can occur individually, but more
 soft tissue of the cranium is also noted (Figure
often collectively, when a vertebral subluxation
23.5). Any signs of segmental dysfunction (pain,
occurs, with kinesiopathology as the central factor
excessive tightening or spasm of muscles, heat, and
around which all other changes occur (Figure 23.3).
reduced or increased mobility) are noted. Neuro-
logic assessment is completed to establish a base-
line, and radiographic evaluation is performed as
Clinical procedure
indicated.
The chiropractic examination
Adjustment or spinal manipulation
The chiropractic examination is not sigrnificantly
different from a thorough rehabilitation evalua-
An adjustment is defined as a high velocity, low
tion. It begins with attaining a signalment and
amplitude thrust directed at a specific spinal
thorough history followed by assessment of general
segment with a specific force and depth. It is syn-
physical health. Particular emphasis is placed on
 onymous with a grade 5 joint mobilization. Grades
posture (Figure 23.4) and gait analysis as well as
14 joint mobilizations deliver intervention via low
palpation of the spine and extremities.
velocity motion with increasing amplitude (lowest
Abnormalities in static alignment, muscle tone/
for grade 1, highest for grade 4) within the passive
strength/symmetry, and range of motion are noted
 range of motion. Initial models described an adjust-
for each vertebral segment, each extremity joint,
 ment as going beyond normal passive range of
the temporomandibular joint (TMJ), and often the
 motion into a paraphysiologic space. This is where
ribs, sternum, and tail. Symmetry in the bones and
 the spring occurs with overpressure in a normal
432   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Figure 23.4 A. Normal posture. Note the squarely placed limbs, level topline, and smooth muscle outlines in this dog. B.
Abnormal posture. This geriatric canine exhibits pelvic limbs held forward under her body and a slightly kyphotic topline.
There is some loss of the secondary curvature in the lower cervical spine, resulting in low head carriage.
THERAPEUTICPRESENTATION
EFT
RIGHT
100%
100%
Anatom
NEUTRAL
Anatamic
imit
Limit
72% PH
Range
70%P
65%AC
Abnormal orDysfunctional Joint
Figure 23.6  Model of mobility in a dysfunctional joint.
AC = active range of motion. P = passive range of motion.
PH = "paraphysiologic space."
Adapted from Vernon & Mrozek (2005).
tion of full range of motion after manipulation
(Figure 23.7).
The setup involves finding the line of correction
Figure 23.5 A Papillon is examined for symmetry in the
across the plane of the joint and placing the contact
head, static alignment, and anterior/posterior motion of the
point of the therapist's hand (most frequently the
at la s.
supported thumb) on the segmental contact point
(muscles over a bony prominence, most often
dorsal spinous, transverse, or mammillary process
joint. Manipulations are performed only on hypo-
in the thoracolumbar spine, lamina/pedicle junc-
mobile joints. Vernon proposed a new model that
tion in the cervical spine, and various contact
more rationally describes the adjustment as occur-
points in the pelvis and extremities).
 Initially, the joint is taken to tension (developing
before the end limit of this range (Figure 23.6)
 a preload force). A rapid thrust is applied in a spe-
(Vernon & Mrozek, 2005). This results in restora-
 cific direction (line of correction) along the plane of
Chapter 23 The Role of Physical Manipulation (Chiropractic) in Canine Rehabilitation   433
the hypomobile joint to provide gapping in the
Commonly used technigues
joint. This may produce an audible sound due to
fluid cavitation (Brodeur, 1995) although other
 Because philosophies differ regarding the primary
 mechanisms have been proposed.
or root issue contributing to dysfunction, over
Follow-up is generally recommended based on
100 different techniques have been developed to
the degree of pathology and the likelihood of the
 address spinal subluxations, including
reoned e rog puasnipe a ouiou juaned
length of time. For patients with sigrificant pathol-
Gonstead
 ogy, a second adjustment may be recommended
 Diversified
in 2-3 days. For those with many compensatory
Logan basic
issues, repetition may initially be done weekly.
Sacro-occipital
Therapy is tapered as the patient improves. For
 Applied kinesiology
?
maintenance of health, intervals from monthly to
业
Activator
every few months may be appropriate. Sporting
Network
dogs at major competitions may be treated daily to
Thompson.
optimize performance.
Directional and anatomical
descriptions, listings
THERAPEUTICPRESENTATION
LEFT
RIGHT
100%
50%1.ACandP
100%
 The language that is used when recording findings 
Anatomic
52%
Anatomic
Limit
Limit
 and documenting therapy is relative to human
2.PH
anatomy (e.g., anterior, superior) (Table 23.2). This
is referred to as a listing and is written in the form
of an abbreviation. Because motion tends to be
complex, the listing is based on the predominant
restriction (Table 23.3).
Spinal Manipulation
ofaSingle Spinal Joint:
Indications and precautions
1.Active and Passive(ACand P) Premanipulative“Setup
2.Manipulative Thrust (PH)
Indications
Figure 23.7 Model of mobility in manipulation.
AC = active range of motion. P = passive range of motion.
PH = "paraphysiologic space."
Any disorder that results in abnormal musculosk-
Adapted from Vernon & Mrozek (2005).
eletal or neurologic function is an indication for
Table 23.2 Directional and anatomic abbreviations and terms
Abbreviation
Human term
Veterinary term
P
Posterior
Dorsal
A
Anterior
Ventral
S
Superior
Cranial
Inferior
Caudal
PSIS
 Posterior superior iliac spine
Tuber sacrale
ASIS
 Anterior superior iliac spine
Tuber coxae
TMJ
Temporomandibular joint 
Temporomandibular joint
434   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Table 23.3 Listings
Abbreviation
Segment(s)
With respect to...
Examples
Occiput
Atlas
OSR—occiput superior right
A
Atlas
Occiput
APL—atlas posterior left
C2-C7
Cervical
Vertebral body (B)
C3BR—C3 body right
T1-T13
Thoracic
Dorsal spinous process
T9PL—T9 posterior left
L1-L7
Lumbar
 Dorsal spinous process
L6P—L6 posterior
8S
Sacral base (S1)
Ilium
SBPL—sacral base posterior (dorsal) left 
SA
Sacral apex (S3)
Midline
SAR—sacral apex right
 PSIS
Tuber sacrale
Sacrum
RP|—right tuber sacrale posterior inferior
Table 23.4  Indications for chiropractic intervention
Nonprimary problems resulting in
spinal hypomobility
sapios!p uio! lenaydjad pue jeuids Aiewd 
Many other musculoskeletal diseases result in
Spondylosis
o nmsan e se o hns  sa
Facet joint osteoarthritis
increased stress or imbalance in the body. Chronic
Intervertebral disk disease
lameness typically results in abnormal position of
 Fibrocartilagenous embolus
Lumbosacral stenosis
the spine at rest and/or in motion. Muscle tight-
Cervical vertebral instability/stenosis
-jmsap leuaas u imsan uen wseds pue ssau
Discospondylitis
tion and pain. Immobility from enforced rest
Degenerative myelopathy
(crating) or nonspinal paresis (i.e., Coonhound
Muscle pathology in the lumbar spine (iliopsoas
paralysis, diabetic neuropathy) can lead to signifi-
strain)
cant dysfunction and loss of segmental mobility.
Spine and neck trauma (only when stability present)
Overuse injury can contribute to subluxation, with
Temporomandibular joint pain
 Rib injuries
athletic patients at higher risk. This is especially
Osteoarthritis
true of those who undergo chronic repetitive pat-
 Fibrosis/adhesion
terns of stress, such as working dogs and those
competing in flyball and agility.
application of chiropractic. This includes an almost
exhaustive list of problems when considering the
Precautions and risks
complexity of the nervous system and potential for
modulation. Many studies have established effi-
The benefits of chiropractic can be profound, but
 cacy of chiropractic in humans, principally related 
the risks also must be taken into account. The most
to back and neck pain (Bronfort et al., 2004).
notable risks in humans include cauda equine sym-
drome resulting from lumbar manipulation (Shek-
elle ef al., 1992) and vertebrobasilar accidents
Primary spinal or joint disorders
following cervical manipulation (Hurwitz et al.,
With the exception of treating contraindicated
1996). The incidence of complications remains
areas (such as painful intervertebral disk disease
quite small (1 per 100 million and 5-10 per 10
-qou aaoidun uen Adera aaemdu (laa]
million adjustments, respectively) compared to
ity, assist neurologic healing, and rebalance muscle 
procedures that we consider routine, such as vac-
 tone and function while reducing pain. Table 23.4
cination (38.2 per 10,000 dogs vaccinated; Moore
lists common disorders that may improve with
et al., 2005). Chiropractic must be performed by
chiropractic.
omnly well-trained professionals.
Chapter 23 The Role of Physical Manipulation (Chiropractic) in Canine Rehabilitation   435
Pain
Anatomy and biomechanics
Although muscle spasm and hypertonicity of an
The canine vertebral column
intrinsic spinal muscle can cause significant pain,
 it is important to determine whether the degree of
pain is appropriate to the clinical signs. Abnormal
The canine spine articulates in a manner that pro-
motes proper stability as well as mobility in the
stresses on joint capsule, tendons, and ligaments
body. It functions to protect the spinal cord and
can generate pain, and it can be referred from other
nerves and serves as a central axis of stability as
areas (several segments above and below). Address-
 ing muscle spasm and pain in the course of therapy
well as motion for the body.
may result in complete resolution and may restore
functional biomechanics and neurologic input.
Typical vertebra
Adjusting an area of reduced mobility where other
Canine vertebrae are considered irregular bones,
pathology (IVDD, discospondylitis) exists could
defined by their prominent protuberances where
result in damage to the surrounding tissues. The
tendons and ligaments attach.
prudent therapist manipulates a  painful 
area
A typical vertebra has a distinct structure related
only when the source of pain can be confidently
to its function (Figure 23.8). The body is the main
determined.
bony structure with a cranial (convex) and caudal
(concave) articular surface. A vertebral arch con-
Acute injury/postsurgical areas/instability
sisting of a lamina (dorsal) and pedicle (lateral) on
each side lies dorsal to the body. This forms a pro-
In the acute phase of injury, there is often consider-
tective housing for the spine, with the opening
able edema and inflammation (and possibly hem-
kmown as the vertebral foramen. Collectively, these
orrhage), so an area that is actually unstable may
foramina are known as the vertebral canal.
appear to be hypomobile. Any area that is unstable
At the dorsal surface, the laminae unite to form
and any adjacent areas should not be adjusted due
the dorsal spinous process. The transverse pro-
to the risk of creating further instability and tissue
cesses occur where the pedicles join the vertebral
damage. Once the affected area has stabilized, it
body. Mammillary processes are vertical projec-
may be manipulated, beginning with gentle proce-
tions from the dorsal aspect of the transverse pro-
dures and progressing as needed based on the
cesses (thoracic spine) or cranial articular processes
stage of healing and tissue pliability.
(lumbar spine).
Neoplasia
 Extreme caution must be used when manipulating
Spinousprocess
patients with neoplasia. Neoplastic tissue is abnor-
Mammillary
mal and reactive by nature, and caution must be
process-
used to avoid increasing blood flow and resultant
Caudalarticular
circulation of neurotransmitters that may be stimu-
Cranial articular-
process
latory to cancer cells. Areas adjacent to cancerous
surface
-Accessory
tumors should not be adjusted due to concerns for
Cranialarticular
process
pain and inflammation, potential instability, and
process
the potential to stimulate metastasis.
Vertebral
foramen
Infection/fever
Transverseprocess
Body
Spinal manipulation has the potential to increase
Figure 23.8 Typical vertebral structure, L1. Note that the
circulation and lymphatic flow to and from a site
accessory process is typically found only from T1112 to 
of infection. If the infection is local, this may result
L4-5.
 in dissemination.
Adapted from Miller et af. (1979).
436   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Articular
disc
Eralligament
Adapted from Miller et af. (1979).
Two articular processes are present, one on each
and the dens that articulates with the atlas. This
side of the cranial and caudal surfaces of the ver-
articulation is in axial rotational motion.
tebra. The cranial articular surface lies craniodor-
C3-C5 are similar in structure with short dorsal
sally or medially, and the caudal is caudoventral or
spinous processes and a prominentlaminar surface.
 lateral. They form facet joints with adjacent seg-
The plane of the articular facets moves at approxi-
ments. Vertebral notches are indentations on the
mately 45° from cranial to caudal, dorsal to ventral,
pedicles that provide space between segments for
and lateral to medial. C6 and C7 are transitional,
the spinal nerve (among other components) to pass
with increasing height of the dorsal spinous pro-
through. This space is known as the IVF.
cesses, a more narrowed transverse process, and
primarily lateral to medial motion at the facets.
The skull and TMj
The thoracic spine T1-T13
The canine skull is composed mainly of flat bones
that articulate by fibrous joints called sutures.
The thoracic vertebrae are typical in structure with
These joints have litle mobility in the adult. The
some variation in length and direction of the dorsal
TMJ (Figure 23.9) is a synovial joint with a condylar
spinous processes (T1-T10 have longer dorsal
Iam se Suno pue Sups roy sumone amionns
spinous processes projecting caudally; T11, known
as flexion and extension.
 as the anticlinal vertebra, is shorter and projects
almost directly dorsally, and T12-T13 project
slightly cranially). The transverse processes are
The cervical spine C1-C7
short and have articular surfaces for attachment of
the ribs. Mammillary processes begin to appear in
The cervical spine consists of seven bones in a
this region. Facets in the more cranial region are
sigmoid conformation. The atlas, or C1, has a
coronal in orientation, transitioning to sagittal near
-od asiasun quud Ara poq pa
the lumbar spine. Segmental motion is primarily
cesses known as wings, and lacks a dorsal spinous
lateral
bending
craniallyand
1dorsiflexion/
process. It articulates with the occipital condyles of
extension caudally.
the skull cranially, with motion primarily in flexion
Costovertebral joints are present between the
and extension, though some lateral bend and slight 
ribs and transverse processes of the thoracic verte-
axial rotation is also present. The axis, or C2, has a
brae. These are symovial joints with significant liga-
very prominent elongated dorsal spinous process
 mentous support (Figure 23.10).
Chapter 23 The Role of Physical Manipulation (Chiropractic) in Canine Rehabilitation 
437
Crest ofiliun
Wingof iliun
ligament
Dorsal satroilia
ellow ligarment
Budy ofiliun
Lamina of
Costotransversejcintcovered
vertebra
bycostotransverseligament
schiatic spine
Tubercle
Articularcap
ofrib
ligarment
Ischial tubero
Cbturator forar
Symphysis pubis
Headof-
rib
Costovertebral
Symphysis ischi
joint
Intercapital
Dorsallongitudinal
Figure 23.11
Bones and ligaments of the pelvis—dorsal
ligament
ligament
aspect.
Intervertebral
Adapted from Miller et af. (1979).
disc
Figure 23.10 Costovertebral joint and associated ligaments.
for adjusting. The ilium articulates with the wing
Adapted from Dyce et al. (1 987).
of the sacrum at the sacroiliac joint, which moves
primarily in a dorsal to ventral manner though
some translational anterior to posterior motion can
The lumbar spine L1-L7
also occur.
The lumbar vertebral bodies are longer than the
thoracic bodies, with wider dorsal spinous
pro-
The coccygeal spine Cd1-Cd18
cesses and longer wider transverse processes.
.The
articular processes take on a sagittal configuration.
The tail consists of an average of 18-22 vertebrae
Thus, the lumbar spine is more efficient at flexion
with heavier muscle structure at the base and more
 and extension than lateral bending.
ligamentous structure distally.
The sacral spine S1-S3
Associated muscles and ligaments
The sacrum is fused in the adult dog, forming a
bony arch with very small fused dorsal spinous
Muscles and ligaments play a crucial role in
processes. The craniodorsal portion is known as
 support and biomechanics as well as in the patho-
the base and the caudal portion the apex. The
physiology of subluxation. Intrinsic spinal muscles
sacrum articulates with the ilium in a symchondro-
sis with a synovial margin (Figure 23.11)
(co-contraction) and motion (unilateral contrac-
tion). The muscles on the dorsal surface of the
trunk, the epaxial muscles, function as spinal
The pelvis
extensors or create lateral flexion/bend if fired uni-
The pelvis consists of a pair of three flat, irregular
laterally.
. They appear regionally but tend to
bones that serve as a base of support for the pelvic
 overlap. The hypaxial muscles occur on the ventral
limb as well as a translational means for locomo-
surface of the spine and act as spinal flexors (Table
tive propulsion. The pubis articulates at the midline
23.5). All of the surrounding spinal musculature
pubic symphysis that may be slightly mobile in
acts to stabilize the spine during co-contraction
juveniles but fuses in adulthood. The ischium and
(Figure 23.12 and Figure 23.13).
ilium are the bases of attachment for pelvic stabi-
Some extremity muscles also affect motion and
lizer muscles and have several bony contact points
stability in the back and neck. For example, the
438  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
omotransversarius originates on the spine of the
are the interspinous, intertransverse, and interar-
scapula and inserts on the cervical spine, and the
cuate ligaments (Table 23.6). Ligaments of the
brachiocephalicus  originates  on  the clavicular
 pelvis and ribs also provide support.
tendon and inserts on the nuchal crest and skull.
They laterally bend the cervical spine as well as
advance the thoracic limb. The piriformis muscle
Typical articulations
originates on the lateral surface of the sacral and
caudal vertebrae and inserts on the greater tro-
The intervertebral joint
chanter. It acts as a hip extensor.
(vertebral endplate joint)
 Numerous ligaments support the spinal columm 
(Figure 23.14). Some traverse many segments, pro-
The intervertebral joint is the articulation be-
tween two vertebral bodies and is considered a
viding global support (long column) while others
are confined to two or three adjacent vertebrae,
providing segmental support (short column). Long
Multifidus and
column ligaments include the nuchal ligament,
sdss
supraspinous ligament, and dorsal and ventral
Longissimus and
longitudinal ligaments. Short column ligaments
iliocostalis
Lastrib
Table 23.5Muscles that support and move the vertebrae
Right crus of
Intrinsic muscle 
Hypaxial
diaphragm
Epaxial muscle
sdnoi8
sdno8
muscle groups
Multifidus
Longissimus
Longus
Aorta
Rotatores
T'ransversospinalis 
Quadratus
 Interspinalis
Iliocostalis
lliopsoas
Figure 23.13
T'ransverse section of L1 and surrounding
Intertransverserii
(Abdominals)
sructure.
Adapted from Dyce et af. (1987).
Multifidus thoracis
Multifduslumborum
Multifidus cervicus
cervicis
Supraspinous
Interspinales
Rotatores
ligament
//longi
Rotatores
brevi
Intertransversari ventrales
cervicis
Figure 23.12  Intrinsic spinal muscles.
Adapted from Miller et arf. (1979).
Interspinous ligament
Supraspinous ligarment
Spinous process
Interarcuate ligament
Dorsal
longitudinal ligament-
Intervertebralforamen
Intervertebral
Ventrallongitudinal
ligament
Figure 23.14 Ligaments of the vertebral column, paramedian section of lumbar segment.
Adapted from Dyce et af. (1 987).
Table 23.6Ligaments that support the vertebral column
Ligament
Attachments
Function 
Other 
 Nuchal ligament
Occiput to dorsal spinous
Suspends head
Heavy, elastic band 
process of T1 or T'2
Supraspinous
Dorsal spinous processes
Suspends TL spine, limits
Heavy band
ligament 
dorsiflexion
Interspinous
Dorsal spinous process of 
Limits dorsiflexion
ligaments
adjacent vertebrae
Intertransverse
Transverse process of lumbar
Limits lateral flexion of
ligaments
spine
 adjacent segments
Ligamentum flavum
Laminae of adjacent vertebrae
 Limits dorsiflexion 
 Blends with joint capsule of
Z joints; rich in pain fibers
Dorsal longitudinal
 Dorsal surface of vertebral
Limits dorsiflexion
Contains pain fibers; attached
ligament
bodies from C1 to coccygeals
to dorsal surface of
 intervertebral disc
Ventral longitudinal
Ventral surface of vertebral
Limits extension
Attached to ventral surface of
ligament
bodies from C1 to coccygeals
intervertebral disc; site of
calcification (spondylosis)
Intervertebral disk
 Between vertebral bodies
Binds and stabilizes spinal
Outer annulus fibrosis and
(IVD)
from C2-C3 caudally
column, distributes pressure
inner nucleus pulposus
evenly
Interarcuate
Vertebral arches of adjacent
Stabilizes
Sheet-like elastic structure
ligaments
segments
Intercapital
Crosses from one rib head to
Stabilizes
Passes ventral to dorsal
ligament 
contralateral rib head
longitudinal ligament;
 contains slips that anchor to
the intervertebral disc
439
440  Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Case Study 23.1   Agility dog with pelvic discomfort
Signalment: 4 y.o. F/S Shetland Sheepdog. Competitive
palpation: ASR, C5BR, C6BR, T9PR, T11PR, L3PR, L4PR,
in agility.
RPI (Table 23.3).
History: Several months history (nonprogressive) of right
Assessment: Several areas of discormfort in pelvic region.
hip hanging when turning right over jumps, knocking
Suspect primary pelvic chiropractic issue due to lack of
bars. No lameness. Training several tirmes weekly.
other clinical signs. Cannot R/O iliopsoas strain or hip
disease.
Exam: Posture square at down, sit, stand. No apprecia-
ble weight shift. Active spinal range of motion (ROM)
Ix Advised: VSMT to improve pelvic and peripheral
(cookie reaches) good in all directions (extension, flexion,
joint mobility. Treatment of iliopsoas pending post-VSM
lateral bend, coupled rotation). Gait fluid and even.
findings (laser  therapy if  discomfort  and  abnormal
Ambles at faster walk but appropriately transitions to trot.
jumping are not resolved.)
Video Review: Adequate propulsion on takeoff over
Results: Subluxations and tenderness in shoulder exterl-
jump with reduced hip and lumbar extension bilaterally.
sion and hip rotation resolved, and pelvic symmetry
worse on right. Hanging right leg on right turns over or
returned with therapy. Tenderness in iliopsoas, right semi-
immediately after jumps
membranosus, and left quadriceps resolved. Sorme tight-
Tenderness on palpation of left quadriceps femoris,
 ening in deltoids and righttriceps remained. Pectorals, left
right semirmembranosus, and right iliopsoas (on direct
 gracilis, quadriceps, and semimembranosus more pliable.
palpation and stretch). Excessive tightening on palpation 
 of bilateral deltoids and pectorals, right triceps and semi-
Plan: Avoid training and rigorous activity for 2 days.
membranosus, and left gracilis and quadriceps femoris.
Return to training with close monitoring by instructor.
Muscle girth symmetrical (Gulick) at mid-femur.
Discontinue agility training if symptoms return. Recheck
Tenderness at end range extension both shoulders and
recommended in 1 week.
right hip internal and external rotation. Neurological
Follow-Up: Patient trained 2 days later with complete
examination: WNL
resolution of jumping problem. Competed successfully
Chiropractic Exam: Tenderness at T11. Static palpation
in a trial the following weekend with no dropped bars.
revealed slight pelvic asymmetry with right posterior
A repeat chiropractic exam was done and no major
superior iliac spine (PsiS) (tuber sacrale) dorsal to left.
subluxations were found. Patient maintained problerm-
Restricted motion at left TM). Subluxations on motion
free jumping through 6-month follow-up.
fibrocartilaginous symphysis joint. The central
elastic, middle vascular, and inner synovial mem-
structure of the joint is the IVD. It consists of a
brane); and symovial folds called menisci that are
tough, outer annulus fibrosis and a softer inner
mvaginations of the joint capsule. These menisci
nucleus pulposus. The armulus is a vascular and
contain large numbers of nociceptive fibers (Giles
well-innervated tissue that acts as a modified joint
& Taylor, 1987). Many sensory receptors (Pacinian
capsule. The nucleus is gelatinous and functions as
corpuscles and types I, II, and IV mechanorecep-
a center of motion for the motion segment.
tors) are also found within the joint capsule (Wyke,
1985; Pickar & McLain, 1995).
The zygapophyseal joints (Z joints)
Synonymous with facet or interlaminar joints, the
Spinal biomechanics
zygapophyseal joints are the primary targets of
spinal adjustment due to their increased suscepti-
Spinal curvature
bility to fixation or hypomobility (Cramer et al.,
2004). Zjoints are small synovial joints that consist
Abnormalities in curvature can significantly hinder
of a cranial and caudal bony articular process; a
normal stance and mobility, even when good motor
joint capsule with three layers of tissue (outer fibro-
function is present. The cervical spine should have
Chapter 23 The Role of Physical Manipulation (Chiropractic) in Canine Rehabilitation  441
a sigmoid curve, with the primary curvature result-
ing in slight flexion in the upper cervical spine. The
secondary curve in the lower cervical spine is lor-
dotic and develops over 2-3 weeks as a puppy
begins to raise its head. The curve then regains a
slight kyphosis in the cervicothoracic transition to
the thoracolumbar spine.
Vertebral movement
Vertebral movement is crucial to the health of any
vertebrate. Minute motion as a result of respiration
constantly takes place, allowing CSF to flow and
distribute to spinal nerves, maintaining autonomic
homeostasis. Disturbance in this motion may be
small, with one segment affected, but more often
several adjacent segments are affected, and com-
pensations occur due to homeostatic mechanisms
in the body.
Figure 23.15 Coupled motion in the spine. A dog does a
Segmental vertebral motion is dependent on
cookie reach to the rear toes, exhibiting flexion, lateral
several variables. First, the plane of facet joint
bend, and rotation.
motion dictates an anatomic end point. Planes
differ slightly from one segment to the next and
may vary greatly depending on the region. In the
of the bend. Axial rotation involves movement
cervical region, the facet joints have a 45° orienta-
about the z-axis (y-axis in humans) with no change
tion in a cranial to caudal as well as lateral to
in vertebral distance. Compression (vertebral
medial direction. This gives flexion/extension
bodies drawn together) and tension (vertebral
coupled with lateral bend. In the thoracic spine,
 bodies drawn apart) occur as translation along the
mobility is primarily in lateral motion. The lumbar
y-axis. In addition to normal spinal motion, patho-
spine moves in a more classic flexion and extension
logic shear (translation along a horizontal or verti-
with minimal lateral bend. Ligaments provide firm
cal axis) may also occur (Figure 23.16).
support, with many limiting dorsiflexion and some
responsible for protection from hyperextension
and excessive lateral bend. Muscles provide more
Functional neurology: Beyond bone out
flexible support, and can limit as well as aid motion.
of place
They are the most sensitive to external stimuli and
thus function as a sentinel for spinal mobility
Chiropractic is a receptor-based therapy. Every
problems.
intervention has neurological consequences, and
 Global spinal motion is quite complex. Rarely is
uderstanding the potential impact on the patient
there pure motion about a single axis, but rather
as a whole is crucial to the therapist's ability to
motions tend to be coupled (Figure 23.15). The
effect a positive outcome.
visible motion described tends to be the predomi-
nant one. Flexion/extension is movement about
the x-axis. Flexion involves closing the space at the
Neural integration
ventral portion of the column while opening
the space at the dorsal portion. Extension does
-ssia e, se ads a saqsap Annaod ou
 the opposite. Lateral bend is movement about the
elastic system of linkages that are mechianically
y-axis (z-axis in humans due to bipedal stance),
coupled" (Triano, 2001). Motion segments are sta-
with closure of the intervertebral space on the side
 bilized by ligaments and muscles and moved by
442   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
Xaxis
Figure 23.17 The sensory pathways involved in 
motorneuron discharge. Muscle spindles as well as small
diameter type Ill and IV mechanoreceptors affect descending
input to the  motorneurons.
Adapted from Pickar (2002).
Yaxis
 response to stretch. Golgi tendon organs are located
Figure 23.16 Axis of motion. End on view of a lumbar
im the tendons near the musculotendinous junc-
vertebra with schematic of x-,y-, and z-axis. The x-axis is
tion, and respond to tension on the tendon when
horizontal, the y-axis is perpendicular to the ground, and
the muscle is contracted. Joint kinesioreceptors
the z-axis is planar (parallel to the vertebral bodies of the
hosod pue uonou juof supisan jndu apiaond
lumbosacral spine).
from the joint capsule of articular facets (Figure
Photo courtesy of Dr. Pedro Rivera.
23.17)
The stability of a joint is determined by the fre-
muscle contraction, both segmentally and globally.
quency of firing of the spindle cells and Golgi
Within these supportive structures are propriocep-
tendon organs in the surounding muscles and
tive, nociceptive, and stretch receptors as well as
tendons. When these cells fire at a normal rate, the
 motor nerve synapses. When the relationship of
joint remains stable and ready to adapt to stresses
two adjacent vertebrae is changed, the nervous
placed upon it. If there is a change in neurologic
system changes as a result.
 input, the frequency of firing and thus the stability
In simplified terms, the nervous system has three
 of the joint will change (DeStefano, 2011). The
actions. It receives sensory input, processes and
o  as aa  a
interprets it, and responds to the input.
The
excitatory motor neurons, or decreased firing of
complexity lies in the interconnectivity. A multi-
 mhibitory neurons, resulting in too much tension
tude of stimuli are concurrently being processed at
moso osie Ae ahsoddo aul luiof e jo eare auo u
 any given time, resulting in an integrated response.
When a muscle becomes hypotonic or hypertonic,
the joint surface becomes relatively incongruent,
and normal motion is altered. The degree of change
Receptors
is determined by the summation of input to the
Receptors receive information and transmit it to
motor neurons (Figure 23.18)
 the spinal cord. There are many different types of
receptors, classified by the stimuli that trigger
Nociceptors and pain
them, where they are located, and by their ana-
tomic structure. Mechanoreceptors
6respond
to
Pain is one of the primary reasons that clients
stimuli related to proprioception (stretch, compres-
seek rehabilitation for dogs. Pain is transmitted by
sion, posture, and acceleration). Muscle spindle 
 nociceptors, which signal through type IIl and IV
cells
6  are specialized mechanoreceptors
found
fibers (first-order neurons) to the spinal cord. They
throughout skeletal muscle tissue.
.They fire in
synapse with second-order neurons that travel the
Chapter 23 The Role of Physical Manipulation (Chiropractic) in Canine Rehabilitation   443
Structural dysrelationship
adjusting has on the body are not fully understood.
but recent research has proposed some mecha-
nisms by which these occur (Figure 23.19) (Cramer,
erload
2010a).
 A primary mechanism is creation of a gap or
Paraspinal sensory
Nerveroots in
opening in the zygapophyseal joints. The Z joint
receptors
intervertebral foramen
has several internal structures that are affected by
 Stimulated by and/or sensitized to
adjustment. Rather than the cartilaginous menisci
vertebral motion, compression, and endogenous metabolies
found in the stifle, the Z joint menisci are histologi-
Group I and Il afferents
Group Ill and IV afferents
cally synovial folds that contain nociceptive fibers
and have some attachment to the joint capsule
(Giles & Taylor, 1987). Giles and Taylor surmised
3
Central faclitation
that Zjoint pain can occur as a result of compressed
W
synovial folds without traction on the joint capsule.
Pain,tendermess,
They concluded that the gapping effect of an
Alteredparaspinal muscle tone,
adjustment might lead to reduced compression of
 altered vertebral movement 
and
the menisci and therefore pain relief.
abnormal reflexes responses
Mechanoreceptors are also present in the Z
Somalo-visceral reflexe
joints. In humans, Pacinian corpuscles as well as
4
Somato-somaticreflexes
5
sensory receptors have been documented. Wyke
Figure 23.18 Pickar's model of the neurophysiology
1985) found that Type I, continuous firing recep-
involved with spinal dysfunction and chiropractic
tors, Type II, motion-triggered receptors, and Type
adjustment. The neurophysiological effects of spinal
IV, slow-conducting nociceptors all occur in the 
manipulation can be mediated at any of the numbered
joint capsule. Firing of these mechanoreceptors
boxes.
Adapted from Pickar (2002)
may contribute to pain relief and create a reflexo-
 genic effect (Wyke, 1985) resulting in normaliza-
tion of intrinsic musculature on either side of the
spine extending to several segments cranial and
ascending lateral spinothalamic tract to the thala-
caudal to the adjustment. This may also be the
mus, synapsing with a third-order neuron. The
mechanism by which autonomic function is
signal arrives at the cerebral cortex where it is pro-
affected via ascending pathways (Pickar & McLain,
cessed as pain. After this, a descending motor
1995)
 pathway response is initiated.
Itra-articular adhesions can form within the Z
Due to the complexity of the sensory system,
joints, typically as a result of hypomobility (Cramer
 there are many ways to inhibit pain. Blocking any
et al., 2007). These adhesions can be broken by the
 of the pathways may be an effective means of con-
gapping created by adjustment.
 auueu siu ul ioe sonip Aueu pue 'ued suon
Several studies have shown reduced inflamma-
 Because the nervous system can respond to a finite
tion within the IVF and normalization of neural
number of stimuli at one time, the methods of
activity mediated by structures within the IVF as a
reducing pain often involve stimulation of other
result of spinal adjustment in subjects with known
 pathways that will overload the processing of pain.
pathology (Floman et al., 1997; Song et al., 2006).
The IVD contains pressure receptors and noci-
ceptors. Increased pressure within the structure,
Impact of adjusting the spine
particularly in the case of a disk bulge, may
Spinal adjustment is often thought of as moving
be relieved by placing traction on the adjacent
 bony structures back into place or restoring mobil-
segments using a flexion/distraction procedure
ity and the relationship between two vertebrae. It
(Gudavalli & Triano, 1999),
is a much more complex procedure when soft
In addition to affecting structures intrinsic to the
tissue structures and the impact on the nervous
motion unit, the surrounding connective tissues
system are considered. The far-reaching effects that
(fascia and muscles) are affected by an adjustment.
444   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
1. Z joints become hypomobile
for a variety of reasons
2. Hypomobility results in degenerative
changes and adhesions of the Z joints
3. Adjusting gaps the joints
Paths NOTmutually exclusive
a.Neurophysiological Effects
b.Anatomic/Biomechanical Effects
(steps 1 and 2 may not be necessary
for neurophysiological effects)
4b. Gapping breaks up adhesions
4a. Gapping/movement stimulates
and restablishes joint motion
mechanoreceptors in either the
Z joint capsule and/or
small muscles of the spine
 5b. Increased joint motion to normal
↑
ranges slows (or reverses)
degenerative changes
5a.Afferents to spinal cord and higher
centers decrease pain and
influence somatic and/or visceral
efferents, improving function
Figure 23.19
 Model of beneficial effects of chiropractic adjustment.
Adapted from Cramer (2010b).
The fast stretch provided by this type of manipula-
and horses as a large animal model. Introductory
 tion can relieve muscle spasm and relieve myofas-
courses for new therapists give basic knowledge
cial tension (Cramer, 2010a).
and tools to prepare for certification. Some also
The complex cascade of events that can lead to
offer continuing education with advanced course-
segmental dysfunction, or subluxation, in the spine
work and seminars.
apessen xalduos Aenba ue Aq pasiaaan aq uen
Because of the vast amount of knowledge and
of neuronal
1 resetting
via
receptor
stimulation
skill required to safely and effectively treat animal
and biomechanical restoration. Ongoing research
patients with manipulative therapy, certification
should improve the ability to effectively treat
 programs are available only to licensed veterinar-
patients with more specific interventions through
ians and chiropractors. The following educational
 better understanding of the interconnected web
 programs are recognized by the Animal Chiroprac-
that is the nervous system.
tic Certification Commission (ACCC) of the Ameri-
can Veterinary Chiropractic Association (AVCA)
and the College of Animal Chiropractors (CoAC):
Education and legal issues
Healing Oasis Wellness Center
(Wisconsin,
Educational opportunities and
USA): www.healingoasis.edu
professional organizations
Options for Animals (Kansas, USA): www.
animalchiro.com
There are several schools that teach veterinarians
Parker College of Chiropractic (Texas, USA):
and/or chiropractors the proper practice of SMT
www.parker.edu/ animal-chiropractic-program.
 on animals. Most use dogs as a small animal model
aspx
Chapter 23 The Role of Physical Manipulation (Chiropractic) in Canine Rehabilitation  445
Veterinary
Chiropractic
Learming Centre.
pists have adopted the term Veterinary Spinal
(Ontario, Canada): www. veterinarychiropractic.
Manipulative Therapy (VSMT).
ca/
●BackBone Academy for Veterinary Chiropractic
and Healing Arts (Kalbe, Germany): www.
Conclusion
backbone-academy.com/
Chiropractic offers rehabilitation therapists an
The certification process involves a minimum 210
opportunity to improve posture, mobility, flexibil-
hours of coursework followed by a competency
ity, proprioception, strength, and balance in their
examination involving both written and practical
patients. It complements other modalities and can
clinical material. Continuing education is required
facilitate other interventions by balancing
the
to maintain status as a certified doctor. This con-
central integrative state of the patient, making the
sists of 30 hours of approved coursework every 3
nervous system more responsive to our rehabilita-
years.
tive efforts.
The AVCA and CoAC are professional organiza-
tions of veterinarians and chiropractors that seek
to establish standards and promote animal chiro-
References
practic to fellow professionals and to the public.
The European counterpart is the International Vet-
BRODEUR, R. 1995. The audible release associated with
erinary Chiropractic Association (IVCA)
joint manipulation. ∫ Manipulative Physiol Ther, 18,
155-164.
BRONFORT, G., HAAS, M., EVANS, R.L., & BOUTER,
Legalities of practice
L.M. 2004. Efficacy of spinal manipulation and mobi-
 e     s m  
 Because animal chiropractic is not a separate pro-
review and best evidence synthesis. Spine I, 4,
335-356.
fessional entity recognized by most state licensing
CRAMER, G.D. 2010a. The clinical anatomy of spinal
boards, no universal standards of practice have
manipulative therapy. In: RIVERA, PL. (ed.), Course
been established outside of voluntary certification
programs. Each state has its own regulations and
Module I and I1, January 6-10, February 10-14, 2010,
great variance exists in practice acts.
Sturtevant, WI.
Most states allow a licensed veterinarian, a
CRAMER, G.D. 2010b. Model of beneficial effects of chi-
licensed chiropractor, or a member of either profes-
ropractic adjusting. In: RIVERA, PL. (ed.), Course
sion to treat animal patients. There are no states at
notes, Veterinary Spinal Manipulative Therapy Basic
this time that allow veterinary technicians or phys-
Module I and I1, January 6-10, February 10-14, 2010,
Sturtevant, WI, 5.
ical therapists to perform joint manipulations that
CRAMER, G.D., FOURNIER, JT., HENDERSON, C.N.,
include an adjustive thrust. The veterinarian is rec-
& WOLCOTT, C.C. 2004. Degenerative changes fol-
ognized as the primary care provider and often
lowing spinal fixation in a small animal model. ∫
holds responsibility for care whether directly or by
Maniputative Physiot Ther, 27, 141-154.
referral. In many states, veterinary supervision
CRAMER, G.D., LITTLE, J.W., HENDERSON, C.N.R., &
from direct on-site presence to availability to
DALEY, C. 2007. Zygapophysial (Z) joint adhesions
consult by phone is required.
folowing induced segmental hypomobility in the rat.
 Terminology referring to spinal manipulation
Proceedings ofthe Experimental Biology Anrual Meeting,
can be a legal issue. Many states prohibit the use
April 28-May 2, 2007. Washington, DC.
DESTEFANO, C.J. 2011. Neurology for the common Joe/
of the term chiropractic by veterinarians because
the term is understood to refer to treatment of
 Jane: there and back again in functional neurology. In:
humans. There are a variety of appropriate ways
RIVERA, P.L. (ed.), Proceedings, Healing Oasis Wellress
Center 2011 Annual Continuing Education Meeting,
to describe the act of spinal manipulation includ-
November 11-13, 2011. San Juan, PR.
ing adjustment, manual therapy, and mobilization,
DYCE, K.M., SACK, W.O., & WENSING, C.J.G. 1987.
though the latter two are not as specifically descrip-
Textbook of Veterinary Anatomy. Philadelphia: W.B
tive. Because of these legal challenges, many thera-
Saunders.
446   Canine Sports Medicine and Rehabilitation
FLOMAN, Y., LIRAM, N., & GILAI, A.N. 1997. Spinal
MAN, L.T. 2005. Adverse events diagnosed within
 manipulation results in immediate H-reflex changes in
three days of vaccine administration in dogs. / Am Vet
patients with unilateral disc hermiation. Eur Spine §, 6,
Med Assoc, 227, 1102-1108.
398-401.
PICKAR, J.G. 2002. Neurophysiological effects of spinal
GATTERMAN, M.1. 1995. Foundations ofChiropractic: Sub-
manipulation. Spine ↓, 2, 357-371.
luxation. St. Louis, MO: C. V. Mosby.
PICKAR, J.G. & MCLAIN, R.F. 1995. Responses of mech-
GILES, L.G. & TAYLOR, JR. 1987. Human zygapophy-
anosensitive afferents to manipulation of the lumbar
seal joint capsule and synovial fold innervation. Br §
facet in the cat. Spine, 20, 2379-2385.
Rheumatol,26,93-98.
SHEKELLE, PG.,ADAMS, A.H.,CHASSIN, M.R.,
GUDAVALLI, M.R. & TRIANO, JJ. 1999. An analytical
HURWITZ, E.L., & BROOK, R.H. 1992. Spinal manip-
 model of lumbar motion segment in flexion. ∫ Manipu-
ulation for low-back pain. Ann Interr Med, 117,
lative Physiol Ther, 22, 201-208.
590-598.
HURWITZ, E.L., AKER, PD., ADAMS, A.H., MEEKER,
SONG,X.J.,GAN,Q.,CAO, J.L.,WANG,Z.B., & RUPERT,
W.C., & SHEKELLE, PG. 1996. Manipulation and
RL. 2006. Spinal manipulation reduces pain and
 mobilization of the cervical spine. A systematic review
hyperalgesia after lumbar intervertebral foramen
of the literature. Spine, 21, 1746-1759; discussion
inflammation in the rat. ∫ Maripulative Physiol Ther, 29,
1759-1760.
5-13.
JUREK, C.& MCCAULEY, L. 2006. Nursing concepts in
TRIANO, J.J. 2001. Biomechanics of spinal manipulative
altermative medicine. In: Mccurmin, D.M. & Bassert,
therapy. Spine /, 1, 121-130.
J.M. (eds.), Clirical Textbook for Veterinary Techricians,
VERNON, H. 2010. Historical overview and update on
6th ed. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier.
subluxation theories. ∫ Chiropr Humanit, 17, 22-32.
LANTZ, C.A. 1995. The vertebral subluxation complex.
VERNON, H. & MROZEK, J. 2005. A revised definition
In: Gatterman, M.1. (ed.), Foundations of Chiropractic. St
of manipulation. ∫ Manipulatioe Physiot Ther, 28,
Louis, MO: Mosby.
68-72.
LEACH, R.A. & PHILLIPS, R.B. 1986. The Chiropractic
WILLOUGHBY, S. 1998. Chiropractic care. In: Schoen,
Theories: A Synopsis of Scientific Research, 2nd ed. Balti-
A.M. & Wynn, S.G.(eds.), Complementary and Alterna-
more, MD: Williams & Willkins.
tive Veterinary Medicine: Principles and Practice.St.
MILLER, M.E., CHRISTENSEN, G.C., & EVANS, H.E.
Louis, MO: Mosby, 185-200.
1979. Miller's Anatory of the Dog, 2nd ed. Philadelphia:
WYKE, B. 1985. Articular neurology and manipulative
W.B. Saunders.
therapy. In: Glasgow, E.F, Twomey, L.T., Scull, E.R., &
MOORE, G.E., GUPTILL, L.F, WARD, M.P, GLICK
Kleynhans,A.M.(eds.),Aspects of MariputativeTherapy,
MAN, N.W., FAUNT, K.K., LEWIS, H.B., & GLICK-
 2nd ed. London, UK: Churchill Livingstone.
Note: Page numbers in italics represent figures; those in bold, tables.
Abdomen, acute, 409
Addison's disease, 354
Abduction
Adduction, 86
dynamics of, 86
Adenosine diphosphate (ADP), in skeletal
measurement of shoulder, 232, 232
muscle, 41
Acetaminophen, 373, 383
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP), in skeletal muscle,
Achilles tendon injuries
41
anatomy of, 288-290,289,290
Adherens, 33
dlassification of, 308
Adverse drug effects (ADEs), 371
 nonsurgical management of, 209, 209
NSAID, 372
Active range of motion (AROM), 133
opioid, 375
Activities of Daily Living (ADLs), 208
Agility, 5-6, 6
Acupressure, 104, 420
injuries associated with, 6, 7
Acupuncture, 418-419
'1ods
in canine rehabilitation, 418
sports retraining for, 197
case history, 424, 424
Aging. See also Geratric patients
cautions and contraindications, 425
common compressive conditions, 326
methods of stimulation, 420
metabolic changes, 352-353
for pain management in geriatric patients, 360,
musculoskeletal changes, 350, 351
362,363
neurologic changes, 350, 352, 352
points, 419-420
physiologic changes, 350, 351
point selection, 420-421, 421,
Air mattresses, 138, 145
422-424
Airway, emergency assessment of, 404-406, 405,
training and certification, 425
406
Carine Sports Medicire and Rehabilitation, First Edition. Edited by M. Christine Zink and Janet B. Van Dyke.
@2013 John Wiley &t Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
447
448Index
Amble, 24
Assistive devices
American Kennel Club (AKC), agility events of,
custom, 207-208
6,6
defined, 208
American Veterinary Chiropractic Association
determining appropriate, 212-213
(AVCA), 444
to improve mobility, 362
Amino acids, in nutrition for performance,
ordering, 213
65-66,66
Athletes, canine, 1, 2
Amputation, forelimb, 381
history-taking for, 17
Amputee, double, 204
 noncompetition, 9
Analgesia, acupuncture, 419
Athletic/working events, in patient history, 17
Anatomical structure
Atlanto-axial instability, 319-320, 320
dewclaws, 15
Atlanto-axial joint, 316
forelimb structure, 11-15, 12-14
Atlanto-occipital joint, 316
 overall body type, 9-10
Atwater's Formula, 64
pelvic limb structure, 10, 10-11, 11
Axonopathy, 330
tail, 15
Anemia
Backing up stairs, 182, 183
in geriatric patient, 354-355
Balance, therapeutic exercise for, 144-145
and performance, 342-343
Balance equipment, 135-138
Anesthesia, locoregional, 375-376
for therapeutic swimming, 164, 165
Animal Chiropractic Certification Commission
Balloons, in therapeutic swimming, 171, 172
(ACCC), 444
Bandages, 201, 214
Antioxidant cocktails, 72
carpal flexion, 216, 216
Antioxidants, in nutrition for performance,
client information for, 215-216
71-72
complications with, 214-215
Antirotational suture, in patellar luxation, 287
no-bandage alternatives, 214, 216, 217-218,
Anxiolytics, 380
219
Aquapuncture, 420
 Bandaging techniques, 214
Aquatic therapy, 158. See also Swimming.
Basic multicellular unit (BMU), 46
therapeutic
Bedding, for geriatric patient, 364, 364
benefits of, 159
Begging exercise, 182, 182
physical properties of water in, 159-161
Beg-stand-beg exercise, 183, 185
and pool types, 168, 168-169, 169
Behavioral drive, 60
precautions for, 159
Bending loads, 85
Arthrodesis, 244-245,245
Biceps tendinopathy, 228-230, 229, 230
Arthrokinematics
Biceps tendon kissing lesion, 225, 226
 component motions, 86-87
Biomechanics, 202
defined, 86
of chiropractic, 435-439, 435-441
 joint play in, 86
 of repetitive motion conditions, 325-326
Arthroscopy
of spinal fracture, 324
of compressed biceps tendon, 225, 226
Bisphosphonates, for cancer pain, 383
of disrupted medial glenohumeral ligament,
Blindness, in geriatric patient, 357
233,233
Blocks
of moderate disruption of subscapularis
balance, 144, 144
tendon, 234
for exercise, 136, 137
 of severe bicipital tenosymovitis, 230, 230
Body condition scores (BCSs), 65, 161
for shoulder conditions, 225, 226
Bone
of TFMCP, 241
cancellous, 44-45, 45
Assistive aids, 201
chemical composition of, 45
Index449
cortical, 44
Carpus
healing, 47-48, 48, 49, 49
arthritis of, 16-17
molecular organization of, 45-46
contracture of, 210
remodeling, 46, 46-47, 47
goniometry of, 90
structural organization of, 44, 4445
hyperextension injury of, 243, 243
trabecular, 44-45, 45
injury to, 242-246, 243-245
Bone marrow, and aging, 352
range of motion of, 28-29, 29
Bone mineral density (BMD), and bone strength,
strain, 12
324
Carpus/paw orthoses, 204
Botulism, 346
Carpus prosthesis, 204
Braces
Cartilage
custom,211-212,212
articular
customization of, 208-210
chondrocytes in, 50
defined, 208
collagen in, 49-50
standard-sized, 210
deformation of, 51, 51-52
 Brachiocephalicus, passive stretch assessment of,
loading of, 51, 51
256, 257
and physiologic loading, 53
Breathing, assessment of, 404, 408
properties of, 48-49
Buprenorphine (Buprenex), 374
zones of, 50, 50-51
Burns, 412
basic forms of, 48, 50
Burst exercises, 145
Carts
Butorphanol, 374
for functional independence, 213-214
Bystander-type joint injury, 52
to improve mobility, 363, 363
Caudal cruciate ligament, 280, 280
 Calcaneal tendon injury, rehabilitation options
Caudal occipital malformation symdrome
for,308-309
(COMS), 319, 320
Cancer, pain of, 383-384
Cavaleti poles, 136, 136, 143, 143, 145, 185,
Canine manual muscle test (C-MMT), 254, 254
186
Cannabinoid receptor agonists, 380
 Central nervous system (CNS), myelin, axonal
Canter
and neuronal disorders of, 330
evaluation of, 23, 23, 24
Cervical spine, in chiropractic, 436
rotary, 23, 23,24
Chiropractic, 427
transverse, 23, 23
anatomy
Capsaicin, 380
articulations, 438, 440
Carbohydrates
canine vertebral column, 435-437, 435-437
as dietary substrate, 69-70
muscles and ligaments, 437-438, 438, 438,
in human athletes, 69
439
in nutrition for performance, 67, 67-69, 68, 69
beneficial effects of, 444, 445
Carbon dioxide, calculating loss of, 65
dinical procedure
Cardiac disease
adjustment or spinal manipulation, 431-433,
acquired
432,433
myocardial disease, 344
commonly used techniques, 433
valvular disease, 344
directional and anatomical descriptions, 433,
congenital, 344
433
Cardiopulmonary disease, in geriatric patient,
examination, 431, 432
355-356
listings, 433,434
Carnitine, in beta oxidation of fatty acids, 62, 64
educational opportunities, 444
 Carpal supports, 210
functional neurology in, 441-444, 442, 443
Carpal support wrap, 244, 245
history of, 428
450Index
Chiropractic (continued)
Conformation, 60
ndications for, 433-434, 434
Congenital stenosis, of spine, 320-321, 321
IVF in, 429430, 430
 Connective tissue, 32. See also Cartilage
legal issues in, 445
Cookie stretches, 149-150, 150
for pain management in geriatric patients, 360
Coonhound paralysis, 346
precautions and risks, 434-435
Coordination
professional organizations, 444-445
effect of aging on, 350, 352
spinal biomechanics in,440-441,441
in therapeutic swimming, 163, 163
terminology in, 429, 430
Core strengthening exercises, 182, 182-183
theory, 428, 429
Costovertebral joint, 436, 437
VSC in, 430-431, 431
Coxofemoral luxation, 277, 278, 279
Chondrocytes
CPR, 407-408,409
articular, 33, 50
Cranial cruciate deficient stifle, kinematics of,
in synovium, 53
280
Chondroitin sulfate, 77
Cranial cruciate ligament (CCL)
Circulation, inadequate, 344
anatomy of, 279-280, 280
Citric acid cycle, 61, 61, 67
rupture of, 285
Clamshell carpal orthotic, 245, .245
 traumatic rupture of, 280
Clonidine, 377
Cranial cruciate ligament (CCL) disease
Coaptation
clinical presentation of, 281
devices for, 201
diagnosis of, 281, 281, 282
use of term, 204
predisposition for, 281
Coccygeal spine, in chiropractic, 437
surgical treatment for, 281-284
Cognitive dysfunction, in geriatric patients,
evaluation of meniscus in,282
358
stabilization techniques, 282-284, 283, 284
Cold packs, 117, 117
Cranial cruciate ligament (CCL) insufficiency, 141,
Collagen
279-284, 280, 281-284, 306-307
 m articular cartilage, 49-50
Crawling exercise, 150, 151, 182
biosynthesis of, 34
Cross-friction massage, 103, 103
fibers of, 34
 Cross training, swimming for, 161
properties of, 33
Cryotherapy, 116
College of Animal Chiropractors (CoAC), 444
clinical application of, 117, 117-118, 118
Companion events, 3, 4
contraindications, 118
agility, 4, 5-6, 6
effects of, 116
flyball, 4, 7, 7-8
 evidence supporting, 116-117
obedience, 4, 6, 7
indications for, 118
Compression loads, 85
precautions, 118
Computed tomography (CT), 237, 390, 390-391,
primary goal of, 116
391
and tissue depths, 117, 118
 Conditioning, benefits of, 177
Cutting cones, in bone healing, 47, 47
 Conditioning program, 133
Cyclobenzaprine (Flexeril), 379
age-appropriate, 192, 192-193, 194, 195
Cytokines, and skeletal muscle, 43-44
designing, 176
Endurance (aerobic) training in, 186-190, 187
Dance exercises, 148, 149
overtraining, 191-192
 Deafness, in geriatric patient, 357
preparation and recovery in, 190-191
Decontamination, 414-415
proprioception and balance in, 190, 190
 Decubital ulcers, in geriatric patient, 357
skill training, 191
 Degenerative joint disease (DJD), 350, 351
strength (anaerobic) training, 178-186, 179,
and obesity, 351
180-186
rehabilitation for, 366
Index451
Degenerative myelopathy (DM), 329
Ebow disorders
case study, 333
elbow dysplasia, 235, 235
clinical spectrum of, 331
FCP, 236-238
conservative therapy, 334
incomplete ossification of humeral condyle,
diagmosis of, 331-332
239
management of, 332
 nonsurgical management of, 238
pathophysiology of, 329-331
osteochondrosis/osteochondritis dissecans,
prognosis for, 333
238-239
Degenerative neurologic conditions, 367
UAP, 236
 Detraining, effects of, 192
uunited medial epicondyle, 239
Dewclaws
Electrical stimulation (ES), 120
functioning of, 15-16, 16
dlinical application of, 121
removal of, 15
contraindications to, 122
Diabetes mellitus, 341, 354, 354
 ndications for, 122
Diagnostic imaging, 389. See also Computed
NMES, 120, 120-121
tomography; Magnetic resonance imaging:
precautions for, 122
Radiography
TENS, 120, 121, 121, 121-122
Diagonal leg lift exercises, 148, 149
Electroacupuncture, 420
Diagonal leg standing test, 299, 299
Electrolyte imbalance
Diarrhea, 408-409
hypercalcemia, 340
Diet, in client history, 17. See also Nutrition
hypernatremia, 341
 Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH),
hypoadrenocorticism, 339
322,323
hypocalcemia, 340
 Digestible energy (DE), 62
hypokalemia, 340-341
Digestive disorders, 345
Electrolytes, in nutrition for performance, 70,
Digging strengthening exercise, 181, 181
70-71
 Digital flexor tendon luxation, testing of,
Electromyography, 28, 395
301
Emergencies
Disability, defined, 83, 97
assessment and stabilization in
Disablement model, in canine rehabilitation, 83
airway, 404-406, 405, 406
 Disease-modifying osteoarthritic agents
circulation, 406,406-407
(DMOAAs), 380
head and neck trauma, 412
 Distal femoral osteotomy (DFO), in patellar
collapse, 413
luxation, 287
general first aid in, 402-404, 403-404
 Dog-handler teams, 5-6
neurologic, 414
Double pelvic osteotomy (DPO), 274-275, 275
respiratory arrest, 406, 408, 408
Dynamics
toxin exposure, 414-415, 415
of joint motion, 86
trauma, 406, 408, 408
of spine, 315
 in working/performance dogs, 408
Dysfuction, limb, 203
dehydration, 408
Dysfunctional joint, model of mobility in, 432
gastrointestinal, 408-409, 410, 410,
432
411
musculoskeletal trauma, 409, 411,
Effleurage, 102, 102
411-412
Ehmer sling, 219, 220, 278, 278
End feels
 Elastic cartilage, 48
abnormal, 87-88
Elastin
assessing, 87
function of, 34
normal, 87
properties of, 35
n PROM, 106
Elbow, goniometry of, 90
types of, 106
452Index
Endurance
patient considerations
 in therapeutic swimming, 164
control, 139, 139, 1140
Us. stamina, 188
fatigue, 138-139, 139
Endurance (aerobic) training, 186-190,
footing, 139
187
motivation, 140, 140
 Endurance dogs, 60-61
supportive and assistive devices, 139
feeding strategies for, 73
program variables for, 134
nutrition for performance for, 66
progression in, 141-142
Energetics
for proprioception, 142-144, 143, 144
beta oxidation of fatty acids, 61, 62, 64
rules for, 135
conversion of substrate to energy, 61, 61
setting goals for, 134
glycolysis, 61-62, 62, 63
speed work, 145
and RER, 63
and therapist's body mechanics, 140
of substrates, 62,64
treatment calendar for, 140-141
Entheses
variables in, 302
forms of, 55
walking, 142
structure of fibrocartilagenous, 55, 56
Exercise-induced collapse (EIC), 413
Envenomation, 415
Exercise program, balanced, 176, 178
Environmental modifications, 214
Exertional heat stroke (EHS), 413
Esophagus, dilated, 347, 347
Extracapsular repair, in CCL disease, 282-283, 283
Evidence-based medicine, 75, 77
Extracellular matrix (ECM), 32-35
Evidence-based veterinary medicine (EBVM),
Extracorporeal shock wave therapy (ESWT),
370-371, 371
127-128
Exercise
Eye, trauma to, 412
benefits of, 176
 in client history, 17
Facet joint dysfunction, 263
 energy utilization during, 63-65, 64
Facilitation, in therapeutic swimming, -174, 174
need for, 133
 Exercise, therapeutic, 132. See also Orthopedic
classification of, 75,76
disorders
in commercial dog foods, 75-76, 76
for balance, 144, 144-145
 as major form of energy, 67-68
endurance work, 145-146
in nutrition for performance, 67, 67-69, 68, 69
equipment for, 135
Fatigue, sigms of, 138-139, 139
air mattresses, 138
Fatty acids
balance discs, 137, 137
beta oxidation of,61,62,64
blocks, 136, 137
during inflammatory response, 75, 76
Cavaletti poles, 136, 136
polyunsaturated, 69
physioballs, 135, 135-136
in rehabilitation nutrition, 75, 76
planks, 136, 136
Fecal bulk, 70
rocker boards, 138, 138
 Feeding practices, for sled dogs, 74
treadmill, 136-137, 137
 Feeding strategies, in canine athletes, 72-73
tumnels, 137-139, 138
Femoral head ostectomy (FHO), 277, 277
weights, 138,138
postoperative, 105
evaluation of patient for, 133-134
PT evaluation in, 305
focal strengthening in, 146
treatment goals for, 305
focus of, 133
Fentanyl (Sublimaze°), 374
for geriatric patients, 365, 365
Fiber, dietary, 70
land treadmill in, 154-156, 156
Fibrocartilage, 48, 50
for neurological rehabilitation, 152-154,
disorganized, 52
153
properties of, 52
Index453
Fibrocartilaginous embolization (FCE), 327
Forelimb exercises, 151, 151-152, 152, 180-181,
hydrotherapy for, 168
180-181
Field trials, 8, 8
Fractures
First aid
 delayed healing of, 49, 49
general, 402
in emergencies, 411-412
principles of, 403-404
healing of, 47
First aid kit, basic components of, 404, 404
spinal, 322-325, 323, 324
Fish oil, in commercial dog food, 76
Fragmentation of medial coronoid process (FCP),
Fimess
236-238
evaluating canine, 177-178
Functional independence, measuring, 208
muscle, 178
Functional Independence Measure (FIM),
Flexibility
210
 in CCL insufficiency, 307
Functional limitation, defined, 83
defined, 93
Functional progressions, care plans for, 134
in forelimb assessment, 256-257, 256257
in hip dysplasia, 303
Gabapentin, 377-378
in patellar luxation, 305
Gait
of pelvic limb, 299-300, 300
assessment of, 252
and therapeutic swimming, 162
 m CCL insufficiency, 307
treatment of decreased, 107-108
 n gracilis myopathy, 270, 270
Flexor carpi ulnaris (FCU) injuries, 244, 244-246
normal
 Flippers, in therapeutic swimming, 171, 172
amble, 24
Fluid dynamics, in aquatic therapy, 160, 160-161
canter, 23,23,24
Flyball, 4, 7, 7-8
gallop, 23-24, 24, 25
Footing, assistance with, 362, 363
pace, 25, 25
Forces
trot, 21, 21-22, 22
applied to body, 86
walk, 20, 20-21, 21, 21
influencing loads, 85-86
phases of, 95
types of,85
spine's role in, 311-312, 312
Forelimb. See also Carpus; Elbow disorders;
types of, 20
Shoulder disorders
Gait analysis, 27
amputation of, 381
 2-D computer-assisted videographic, 30
assessment of, 251
with electromyography, 28
flexibility,256-257,256257
kinematic, 28-30, 28-30
function, 252-253,253
of pelvic limb, 298
gait, 252
temporal analysis, 27-28
joint play, 257-258, 258
terminology for, 95
palpation, 255, 255, 256
Gait cycle, defined, 95
posture,252, 252,253
Gait training/retraining, 25-27
PROM, 255-256, 257
trot, 26, 26
special tests, 258
Gallop
strength, 253-255, 254
canine rotary, 24, 25
common diagnoses of, 260, 260
evaluation of, 23-24, 24, 25
fumctional assessment, 252-253, 253
Gap healing, 47-48
lameness of, 394-395
Gap junctions, 33
rehabilitation for disorders of (see
Gastric dilation and volvulus (GDV), 409, 410,
Rehabilitation, forelimb)
410, 411
structure, 11-12
Gastrocnemius avulsion, 289, 289, 308-309
angle of scapula, 12, 12-13, 13
General proprioceptive (GP) ataxia, 329
length of humerus, 13, 13-14, 14
Genetics, 60
454Index
Geriatric patients
Gonadectomy status, in patient history, 17
blindness in, 357
Goniometry, 88
cardiopulmonary disease in, 355-356
of carpus, 90
deafness in, 357
of elbow, 90
 decubital ulcers in, 357
of glenohumeral joint, 257
evaluation for, 358-360
of hip, 91
functional assessment of, 252, 253
 intrarater reliability, 89
immune compromise in, 355
landmarks for, 88
imcontinence in, 356-357
of shoulder, 89
medical issues in, 353-355, 354
of stifle, 91
megaesophagus in, 356
of tarsus, 92
with multiple progressive issues, 351
Goosing exercises, 148-149
musculoskeletal conditions in, 357, 358
Gracilis muscle
neoplasia in, 355
anatomy of, 269,269-270
neurologic conditions in, 357-358
myopathy of, 269-271, 269-271
nutritional evaluation for, 359
Green lipped mussels (GLM), New Zealand
nutrition and rehabilitation for, 74
76-77
obesity in, 355, 355
Greyhounds
owmer concerns for, 353, 353
 energy expenditure of working, 64
owmers of, 367
exertional rhabdomyolysis in, 413
with polyneuropathy, 366
fat in diet of, 68
postural assessment of, 253
FCE in, 168
quality of life assessment for, 359, 359-360
feeding strategies for, 73
rehabilitation for, 349, 353, 353
gait of, 20
 rehabilitation options for, 360-361
heart of, 344
improving mobility, 361-364,363, 364
musculoskeletal system of, 42
improving strength, 364-366, 365
nutrition for performance for, 66-67
pain management, 360,361, 362, 363
Growth plates, 192, 193
renal disease in, 356
Gulick tape measure, 232, 232, 253-254, 299, 299
Geriatric rehabilitation, market for, 366-367
Gerontology, 349
Hair bands, in therapeutic swimming, 172, 173
Girthometry, 92
Handstand strengthening exercise, 180, 181
 GI upset, and electrolyte imbalance, 339
Harnesses, 139, 140
 Glenohumeral joint, goniometric measurement of,
for functional independence, 213-214
257
to improve mobility, 362-363, 363
Glial inhibitors, 380
 in therapeutic swimming, 164, 170, 172
Glide, assessment
Haversian system, 44, 44, 46, 46-47
defined, 108
Head
graded, 109
interaction with spine of, 312, 312-313, 313
motion involved in, 108
trauma to, 412
technique, 109,109
Head-in-a-box exercise, 147, 147
Glide, treatment
Head wraps, for therapeutic swimming, 164, 165
defined, 110
Healthspan, extending, 177
 grading of, 110-111, 111
Heat, superficial
Glucosamine, 77
application of, 119
Glycogenolysis, 67
evidence supporting, 118-119, 119
Glycolysis, 61-62, 62, 63
indications for, 119
Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs)
Heat stroke, 413
chemical composition of, 36
Heimlich maneuver, 406
properties of, 35-36
Hematomyelia, 327
Index455
Hemispheric damage, 334
Hypothyroidism, 342, 353-354, 354
Hemoacupuncture, 420
Hypovolemia, 343-344
Herbal medicine, 425
Hysteresis, 86
High-five exercise, 152, 152, 180, 181
Hind limb, joint play assessment of, 300, 300, 301.
 Ice massage, 118
See also Pelvic limb
Iiopsoas muscle
Hip, goniometry of, 91
anatomy of, 268,268
Hip dysplasia
strain, 268-269, 269
diagrnosis of, 272, 272-273, 273
Imaging, diagnostic, 389-390
nonsurgical management of, 273-274
electrodiagnostic testing, 394-396
pathophysiology of, 271-272
MRI, 391, 391-392, 394
PT evaluation of, 302
nuclear scintigraphy, 393-394
radiographic diagnosis of, 273, 273
radiography, 390, 394
surgical management of
thermography, 396, 397
joint preservation procedures, 274-275, 275
ultrasonography, 392-393, 393, 395
salvage procedures, 275-277, 276, 277
Immobilization, passive, 204
treatment goals in, 302, 303
Impairment
treatment rationale, 302-303
defined, 83
Hip joint, angles of excursion of, 29, 29
functional, 95, 96
Hip pain, with secondary muscle impairments,
 Implantable bone topographical segments,
304
206
Histology, of acupuncture points, 419
Incomplete ossification of humeral condyle
Hobbles, 218,218-219, 219
(IOHC),235, 239
Home exercise program (HEP), 134, 301
Incontinence, in geriatric patient, 356-357
in CCL insufficiency, 307
Inflammation, feeding strategies in, 75-76
 in hip dysplasia, 304
Infraspinatus myopathy, 226-228, 228
in patellar luxation, 306
Instability, postsurgical, and chiropractic, 435
Hormone imbalance
Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADLs),
diabetes mellitus, 341
208
hyperadrenocorticism, 341-342
Intervertebral disk disease, 321, 326
hypothyroidism, 342
Intervertebral foramen (IVF), 429-430, 430
Horner's symdrome, 328
Intervertebral joint, 438, 440
Hospice care, 367
Intra-articular injuries, of forelimb, 261, 264
Humerus, length of, 13, 13-14, 14
 Ischemic compression
Hunt tests, 8, 8
 m hip dysplasia, 303
Hyaline cartilage, 48, 50
performing, 103
 Hydrostatic pressure, in aquatic therapy, 160
Isometrics, 154
Hydrotherapy, for geriatric patients, 364-365,
365
Joint mobilization
Hyperadrenocorticism, 341-342, 354
assessing joint play, 108, 108
Hyperalgesia, transient, 327, 329
goals of, 108
Hypercalcemia, 340
in hip dysplasia, 303
Hypernatremia, 341
of shoulder, 112, 112, 112
Hypertonia, defined, 94
traction, 111-113, 112, 112
Hypoadrenocorticism, 339, 354
treatment, 109-111, 110, 111, 111
Hypocalcemia, 340
Joint pain, feeding strategies in, 75
Hypoglycemia, 345
Joint play
Hypokalemia, 340-341
n forelimb assessment, 257-258, 258
Hyponatremia, chronic, 70
of pelvic limb, 300, 300, 301
Hypothermia, 413
Joint proprioception, in hip dysplasia, 303
456Index
Jump down syndrome, 240-241
Lower motor neuron (LMN) signs, 329, 331
Junctionopathies, 346
Low-level laser therapy (LLLT)
 Juvenile pubic symphysiodesis (JPS), 274
clinical application of, 126, 126
contraindications, 127
 Kaltenborn's distraction grading system, 93-94,
 evidence supporting, 125
94
indications for, 126-127
Kaltenborn's techniques, 112
precautions, 127
Kinematic analysis, of gait, 28-30, 28-30
Low-temperature thermoplastics (LTTs), 211
Kinematics
Lumbar spine, in chiropractic, 437
defined, 84
Lumbosacral stenosis, degenerative, 358
osteokinematics, 86
Luxations. See also Patellar luxations
Kinetic chains, 95
carpal, 244
Kinetics, defined, 84
coxofemoral, 277,278,279
Kinetic systems
medial patellar, 174, 274, 287
limitations of, 30
measurement of, 29-30, 30
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 391, 391-392,
394
Lameness
Maintenance energy requirement (MER)
detection of, 22
calculation of, 63
in MSS, 231-232
in Greyhounds, 64
Land treadmill, 136-137, 137
Malabsorption, 345
for endurance training, 187, 187
Maldigestion, 345
in therapeutic exercise, 154-156, 156
 Manual lymphatic drainage (MLD) therapy, 104
Laryngeal paralysis, 342
Manual muscle test (MMT), 254
LASER acronym, 125
 Manual therapy, 100
Lasers, classes of, 125. See also Low-level laser
flexibility in, 107, 107-108
therapy
joint mobilization, 108
ROM, 105
patients, 360
STM, 101, 101-105, 102, 103, 104
Lean body mass (LBM), 43
Massage
Leg weights, in therapeutic swimming, 165, 165
 in aquatic therapy, 174
Lethargy, and electrolyte imbalance, 339
cross-friction, 103, 103
Lidocaine
ice, 118
intravenous, 376
 for pain management in geriatric patients, 360,
patches, 375-376
363
Lidoderm? patch, 384
Mavacoxib (Trocoxcil), 373
Life span, extending, 177
 Maximum oxygen consumption (VOzmax), 63
Life vest, 164
and duration of exercise, 67, 68
Ligaments
during exercise, 63
embryology of, 38
McMurray test, to assess merniscal tears,
function of, 54
300-301
histologic structure of, 54, 54-55
 Meat, in feeding strategy, 73
of vertebral column, 438, 439
 Mechanoreceptors, and proprioception training
Limb loss
exercise, 142-143
biomechanics of, 203
Media glenohumeral ligament (MGL) disruption,
pathomechanical consequences of, 203, 204
233, 233
Local anesthetics (LAs), 375-376
Medial patellar luxation (MPL)
Locomotion, 19. See also Gait
and HD, 274
 Long digital extensor subluxation, testing.
and rupture of CCL, 287
301
UWTM for postoperative, 174
Index  457
Medial patellar maltracking, with secondary
entheses, 55, 55-56
muscle impairments, 306
m geriatric patient, 357, 358
Medial shoulder instability (MSI), 234-235, 235
ligaments, 54-55
Medial shoulder syndrome (MSS), 230-235,
mechanical properties of, 39
231-235
ontogeny of, 36-39,37,39
mild, 233, 233
skeletal muscle, 40-44, 41, 42
severe,234-235
stress-strain relationships in, 39, 3940
Megaesophagus, 347, 347, 356
symovium,52,52-54,53
Meloxicam, 373
tendons, 54, 55
Menisci, 279
viscoelasticity of, 40
Mesenchymal stem cells, 38-39, 39
Myasthenia gravis, 346, 347
Metabolizable energy (ME)
Myelinopathy, 330
calculation of, 62
Myoblast determination protein (MYOD), 38
and role of fat, 68
Myocardial disease, 344
Methadone, 374
Myofascial release (MFR), 104
Mexilitine, 376
Myogenic factor 5 (MYF5), 38
Minerals
Myopathies, 346-347, 347. See also Degenerative
in nutrition for performance, 70, 70-71
myopathy
trace, 70
Myostatin, 42, 44
Mobilization
defined, 93
Naloxone (Narcan), 374
grades of, 93-94, 94
Neoplasia
Modified Atwater's Formula, 64
and chiropractic, 435
Moment of resistance (MoR), and spinal trauma,
m geriatric patient, 355
324, 325
of spine, 327, 328, 328
Monocyte colony-stimulating factor (MCSF), 46
Nerves, peripheral, in forelimb injuries, 264
Motivation, for therapeutic exercise, 140, 140
 Neurological impairments, exercise for, 146-150,
Motor nerve conduction studies, 395-396
147-150
Motor neuron, 94
 Neurological rehabilitation, 152-154, 153
Motor unit, of spine, 429, 430
 Neurologic conditions, in geriatric patient,
Moxibustion, 420
357-358
Mucous membranes, assessment of, 406
Neurology
Muscle atrophy neurogenic, 352, 352
neural integration, 441-442
Muscle contractions
nociceptors and pain, 442-443
 terminology for, 94
receptors, 442, 442,443
types of, 94
Neuromuscular electrical stimulation (NMES),
Muscle injuries
120
acuity of, 261
 dlinical application of, 121, 122
of forelimb, 259-260, 260, 262
evidence supporting, 120-121
Muscles
for geriatric patients, 365-366
effect of aging on, 350, 351
parameters for, 120, 121
intrinsic spinal, 437, 438
portable units for, 120
open-chain actions of, 256
Neuronopathy, 330
Muscle-specific regulatory factor-4 (MRF-4), 38
Neuropathies, peripheral, 346
Musculoskeletal anatomy, horse vs. dog, 19-20
Neuropharmacology
Musculoskeletal system, 32
alpha-2 agonists, 376-377
bone, 44-49, 44-49
anxiolytics, 380
cartilage in, 48-52, 50, 51
 disease-modifying osteoarthritic agents,
cellular components of, 33
380
embryology of, 37, 37-38
gabapentin, 377-378
458Index
Neuropharmacology (continued)
pelvic limb, 205
locoregional anesthesia, 375-376
tarsal/paw, 209
NSAIDs, 371-373
thoracic limb, 205
opioids, 373-375
Orthotics
 pain-modifying analgesic drugs, 377, 378
specialized
subanesthetic ketamine constant, 376
clamshell carpal, 245, .245
tricyclic antidepressants, 379-380
hinged tarsal, 290, 290
Nitronaproxen (Naproxcinod°), 373
veterinary, 202
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs),
Ortolani maneuver, 272, 272
371-373, 383
Ostectomy/osteotomy, 242
Nuclear scintigraphy, 393-394
Osteoarthritis (OA), 52, 77
Nutraceuticals, 77, 360
geriatric patient with, 382
 Nutrition, 60. See also Feeding strategies
and MSS, 230
and normal BMD, 324
pain management for, 381-382
and rehabilitation, 73
secondary, 240
in geriatric dog, 74-75
Osteoblasts, 45, 46, 46-47
obesity, 74
Osteochondrosis/osteochondritis dissecans (OC/
Nutritional evaluation, for geriatric patient, 359
OCD), 238-239
Nutritional resources, inadequate, 345
Osteocytes, 45, 46, 46, 46-47, 47
Nutrition for performance
Osteointegration, 206
antioxidants, 71-72
Osteokinematics, defined, 86
carbohydrates, 69-70
Osteosynthesis, 45
dietary fiber, 70
Osteotomies, corrective, 283, 284
electrolytes, 70-71
Overtraining, 191-192
fat and carbohydrate, 67, 67-69, 68, 69
Oxidative stress, and aging, 351
minerals, 70-71
 Oxygen, calculating loss of, 65
protein, 65-67, 66
Oxygenation, insufficient
vitamins, 71, 71-72
anemia,342-343
hypovolemia, 343-344
Obedience, 4, 6, 7
inadequate circulation, 344
Obesity, 351
 Oxygen consumption, during exercise, 63. See also 
 in geriatric patient, 355, 355
Maximum oxygen consumption
and rehabilitation, 74
Oxymorphone (Numorphan), 373-374
Opioids
for cancer pain, 383
Pace, evaluation of, 25, 25
oral, 374
Pain
preoperative, 375
and chiropractic, 435
synthetic,373
undermanaged, 370
Orphenadrine, 379
 Pain management, 370-371, 371. See also 
Orthopedic disorders, exercises for
Neuropharmacology
forelimb exercises, 151, 151-152, 152
acute pain, 380-381
pelvic limb exercise, 150-151
cancer pain, 383-384
spinal/neurological impairments, 146-150,
chronic pain, 381-382
147-150
 in hip dysplasia, 303
Orthopedic Foundation for Animals (OFA),
multimodal approach to, 371, 372
273
of noncancer chronic pain, 382-383
Orthoses
 in patellar luxation, 305
carpus/paw, 204
 Pain-modifying analgesic drugs (PMADs), 377,
for cranial cruciate deficient stifle, 206
378,383
custom, 211, 212
Pain scale, 360, 361
Index459
Palpation
Penetrating injuries, 409, 411, 412
of forelimb, 255, 255, 256
Performance, and medical disorders, 338
of pelvic limb, 300
Performance events, 3, 4-5
Pancarpal arthrodesis, 245
in client history, 17
Paresis/paralysis, acute, 414, 414
field trials/hunt tests, 8, 8
Passive biceps stress, 229, 229
Performance/working dogs, gaits used by, 20
Passive range of motion (PROM), 100, 105-106,
Peripheral nerves, in forelimb injuries, 264
159-160, 160
 Peripheral nervous system, myelin, axonal and
assessment of, 106
neuronal disorders of, 330
end feel, 106
Perna cannaliculus, freeze-dried, 76-77
in forelimb assessment, 255-256, 257
Petrissage, 102, 102
for geriatric patient, 364
Physes, 192, 193
in hip dysplasia, 303
Physical modalities, 115
of pelvic limb, 299
electrical stimulation, 120-122, 120-122
technique, 106
extracorporeal shock wave therapy, 127-128
treatment of limited, 107
low-level laser therapy, 125-127, 126
Patellar luxation
thermal agents, 116-120, 117-119
anatomy and pathophysiology of, 284
Physical therapists, 83
diagnosis, 284-286, 286
Physical therapy
grades of, 284, 286
and canine evaluation
PT evaluation of, 305
 goal setting, 97
treatment for, 286-288, 287
 owner compliance, 97
treatment goals for, 305-306
treatment plan, 97
 Pathology, active, 83
principles of
Pathomechanics, 202
biomechanics, 84, 86
 Patterning, in aquatic therapy, 172-173
diagonal movements, 86-87
Pelvic limb.
disability, 97
disorders of, 267
dymamics, 84, 86
evaluation of, 296-297
end feels, 87-88
function of, 297
flexibility, 93
girthometry of, 92
functional impairments, 95, 96
interaction with spine of, 314
gait analysis, 95
orthopedic conditions of, 267
goniometry, 88-89
Achilles tendon injuries, 288-290, 289, 290
joint mobilizations, 93-94, 94
CCL insufficiency, 279-284, 280, 281-284
kinetic chains, 95
coxofemoral luxation, 277, 278, 279
muscle contraction, 94
 gracilis and semitendinosus/
neuromuscular responbse to injury, 93
 semimembranosus myopathy, 269-27
open and close packed positions, 94-95
hip dysplasia, 271-277, 272, 273, 275-277
proprioception, 93
iliopsoas strain, 268-269, 269
ROM, 88
patellar luxation, 284,286, 286,286-288,287
weight-bearing, 95
rehabilitation options for, 296
Physioballs, 135, 135-136, 206
superficial digital flexor (SDF) tendon
Planks, for exercise, 136, 136
luxation, 288
Plantigrade stance, weight-bearing, 289
orthopedic exam of, 297-299, 297-301, 300, 301
Pneumoacupumcture, 420
treatment options for disorders of, 301-302, 302
Polymyositis, 347
Pelvic limb exercises, 150-151, 183-184, 185
Polymeuropathy, 358
Pelvic limb paresis, in geriatric patient, 354, 354
 geriatric patients with, 366
Pelvic limb structure, 10, 10-11, 11
Polysulfated glycosaminoglycans (PSGAGs), in
Pelvis, in chiropractic, 437
hip dysplasia, 273-274
460Index
Pool noodles, in therapeutic swimming, 166, 166
elbow, 237
 Positional release therapy/strain-counterstrain,
of hip dysplasia, 273
103-105
Radius curvus, 241, 242
Postural awareness, in therapeutic swimming.
Range of motion (ROM), 100, 105. See also Passive
163-164
range of motion
Posture
assessment of, 88
assessment of, 252,252, 253
 in experimentally produced spinal injury.
in chiropractic exam, 431, 432
333-334
of pelvic limb, 297, 297, 298
 in gastrocnemius avulsion, 309
Pregabelin (Lyrica°), 378
 in hip dysplasia, 303
O 'siieue he ioy suass suddr amssa
joint mobilization to increase, 112
Pressure sores, in geriatric patient, 357
loss of, 54
Prophylactic screening, for IOHC, 239
resisted, 88
Proprioception
Reaction forces, 85-86
defined, 93, 190
Receptor activator of NFkB ligand (RANKL),
effect of aging on, 350, 352
46-47
Proprioception exercises, 142-144, 143, 144, 190,
Reconditioning program, 133
190
Regenerative healing, 37
Prosthetics
 Regenerative medicine, for pain management in
adaptation of dogs to, 205-206, 206
geriatric patients, 360-361
below carpus, 204, 215, 215
Rehabilitation, canine, 82, 202
below tarsus, 203, 204
acupuncture in, 418
orthopedic conditions amenable to, 207
defining, 83-84
pelvic limb, 207
device-specific, 203
 and rehabilitation goals, 207
disablement model in, 83
 and therapeutic goals, 208
for geriatric patients, 349, 353, 353
thoracic limb, 207
goal of, 115
veterinary, 202
integrating acupuncture into, 421
Protein, dietary
neurological, 152-154, 153
 in human athletes, 69
postoperative, 308
 im nutrition for performance, 65-67, 66
post-TPLO, 125
Proteoglycans (PGs)
spinal cord, 334-335
basic structure of, 35, 35-36
and V-OP, 202
dlasses of, 36
Rehabilitation, forelimb, 250, 251
synthesis, 36
assessment for, 251-258, 252-255,256, 257-258,
 Pushing exercise, 184, 185
259
Push-ups, 151
common injuries of
Pyruvate, in citric acid cycle, 67
intra-articular, 261, 264
of ligaments and joint capsules, 262-264
Quad cart, 358
muscle injuries, 259-260, 260, 261, 262
Quadruped, weight distribution of, 203
 peripheral nerves, 264
Quality of life assessment, for geriatric patient,
diagnosis in, 258
359,359-360
treatment efficacy, 264-265
treatment interventions, 258-259, 259
Radiofrequency-induced thermal capsulorraphy
treatment plan, 258
(RITC), 234
Rehabilitation, geriatric, market for, 366-367
Radiography
 Rehabilitation options, for geriatric patient,
 in acute pelvic limb paralysis, 414
360-361
of dog with GDV, 411
Rehabilitation professionals, 177
Index  461
Rehabilitation program, 37
Shear loads, 85
canine athletes and working dogs in, 2
Shock
effectiveness of, 309
cardiogenic, 406, 407
Reins
 dlinical signs of, 405
reason for using, 139
distributive, 406, 407
in therapeutic swimming, 170, 172
hypovolemic, 406, 407
Renal disease, 356
Short T1 inversion recovery (STIR), 225, 225
 Research, in canine sports medicine, 2-3
Shoulder
Resistance training
anatomy of, 228
effects of, 193
caudal mobilization of, 112
goal of, 178, 179
goniometry of, 89
Respiratory arrest, field treatment of, 407
measurement of, 107
Respiratory distress
Shoulder abduction test, 232
field treatment of, 408
Shoulder angulation, 12, 12-13, 13
localization of, 405
Shoulder disorders, 224
Respiratory quotient (RQ), 67, 67
biceps tendinopathy, 228-230, 229, 230
 Resting energy requirement (RER), calculations
nfraspinatus myopathy, 226-228, 228
for, 63, 64
medial shoulder syndrome, 230-235, 231-235
Retraining programs, 176, 195-197
potential for, 224, 224
Retrieving exercises, 184-185, 185
supraspinatus tendinopathy, 224-226, 225,
 Rhabdomyolysis, exertional, 413
226
Rhythmic stabilization, 147, 147
Show dogs, costs for campaigning of, 3
Rigidity
Side stepping, 150
defined, 94
Sitting on hill exercise, 151
of spine, 316, 316
Sit-to-stand exercise, 150
Roadwork, 186-187,187
Sit-up-and-beg exercise, 147-148, 148
Robenacoxib (Onsior), 373
Skeletal muscle
Robert Jones bandage
cytokines and, 43-44
modified, 216-217,217
hierarchical organization of, 41
reinforced, 217,217-218
hypertrophy of, 42-43
Rocker boards, 138, 138, 143-144
motor activity of, 40-51, 41, 42
 Rolling over exercise, 182, 183
organization of, 40, 41
performance of, 41
Sacral spine, in chiropractic, 437
sarcopenia of, 43
Salter-Harris fractures, 241
Skill training, 191
Scapula, angle of, 12, 12-13, 13
Skull
Seizures
base of, 313, 313
emergency, 414
m chiropractic, 436, 436
 in geriatric patient, 358
Sled dogs
Selective serotonin norepinephrine reuptake
caloric intake in, 65
inhibitors (SSNRIs), 379
 Exertional rhabdomyolysis in, 413
 Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs),
feeding practices for, 74
379
Slings
Semimembranosus muscle
Ehmer, 219, 220
anatomy of, 269,269-270
to improve mobility, 362-363, 363
myopathy of, 269-271, 269-271
for therapeutic swimming, 164
Semitendinosus muscle
Velpeau, 220, 220
anatomy of, 269,269-270
Small leucine-rich proteoglycans (SLRPs), in
myopathy of, 269-271, 269-271
articular cartilage, 50
462Index
Snakebites, 415
spondylosis deformans, 322, 322
Snoods, for therapeutic swimming, 164, 165
trauma,322-325,323,324
Snoopy exercises, 148, 149
degenerative myelopathy
SOD1 mutations, 330, 332
history of, 329
Soft supports, customized, 211-212, 212
pathophysiology of, 329-331, 330
Soft tissue mobilization (STM), 101
disorders of, 311
m hip dysplasia, 303
forces affecting, 316-319, 317,318
swelling assessment, 101, 101, 102
hypermobility of lumbar, 203
tissue assessment, 101
impact of adjusting, 443-444
treatment, 102, 102-104, 103
interaction with head of, 312, 312-313, 313
treatment design, 104, 104-105
interaction with pelvic limbs of, 314
Spasticity, defined, 94
interaction with thoracic limbs of, 313-314, 314
Speed, in therapeutic swimming, 164
lumbar, 316, 317,437
Sphinx lying, 152
motor units of, 429, 430
Spica splint, 218, 218
in normal gait, 311-312, 312
Spina bifida, 319
sacral, 437
Spinal cord
thoracic, 316,436,437
degenerative conditions of, 327, 329
Splints
myelin, axonal and neuronal disorders of, 330
custom, 211-212, 212
plasticity of canine, 335
customization of, 208-210
rehabilitation, 334-335
defined,208
surgical considerations for, 332-334
spica, 218, 218
vascular disease of, 327
standard-sized, 210
Spinal impairments, exercise for, 146-150,
Spondylosis deformans, 322, 323
147-150
Sports, canine
Spinal manipulative therapy (SMT), 427. See also
companion activities, 3, 4
Chiropractic
performance activities, 3, 4-5
Spine
Sports medicine, canine
anatomy of, 312
emerging specialty of, 1-2, 2
biomechanics of
integrating acupuncture into, 421
spinal curvature, 440-441
Sports training, age-appropriate, 192, 192-193,
vertebral movement, 441, 441
194, 195
cervical, 436
Sprains, carpal, 244, 245
coccygeal, 437
19-09 'soop Suuds
 common compressive conditions
feeding strategies for, 72
age-related conditions, 326
nutrition for performance for, 66-67
intervertebral disk disease, 326
Stabilizer muscles, 133, 145
neoplastic disease, 327, 328, 328
Stamina, vs. endurance, 188
trauma, 326-327
Stand down stand exercise, 182, 183
vascular disease, 327
Standing exercises, 153
conformational considerations of, 313, 314-316,
Stem cells, of musculoskeletal system, 38-39, 39
315,316,317
Stem cell therapy, in hip dysplasia, 273-274
 congenital predispositions
Stenosis, spinal, 320-321, 321
 breed-specific intervertebral disk disease,
Stifle joint swelling, measurement of, 102
321
Strain injuries
malformations, 319-321, 320, 321
carpal, 244
degenerative and stress-related conditions of
supraspinatus tendinopathy, 224-226, 225, 226
diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis, 322,
Strength
322
assessment of forelimb, 253-255, 254
repetitive motion conditions, 325-326
in hip dysplasia, 303
Index  463
 in patellar luxation, 306
Tape measure, Gulick, 232, 232, 253-254, 299, 299
of pelvic limb, 298-299, 299
Tapentadol (Nucytna°), 377
and therapeutic swimming, 162
Tapotement, 103, 103
Strength-endurance continuum, 187, 189
Tarsal/paw orthosis, 209
Strengthening
Tarsal support wrap, 212, 212, 213
 in CCL insufficiency, 307
Tarsus, goniometry of, 92
in gastrocnemius avulsion, 309
Tarsus prosthesis, 203, 204
Strength training, 178-180, 179
Teeth, trauma to, 412
indoor exercises, 180-184, 180-185
Temporal analysis of gait, 27-28
outdoor exercises, 184-186, 185, 186
Temporomandibular joint (TMJ), in chiropractic,
Stress, defined, 85
436, 436
Stress-strain relationships, 39, 3940
 Tendinosis, acute-on-chronic biceps, 262
 Subluxation, in chiropractic theory and practice,
Tendon repair, case study, 56
428-429, 429
Tendons
Substance P/neurokinin-1 (NK-1), 380
contracture of infraspinatus, 228, 228
Superficial digital flexor (SDF) tendon luxation,
degeneration of supraspinatus, 224
288, 301
embryology of, 38
Supplements
forms of, 54
in client history, 17
histologic structure of, 54, 54-55
for geriatric patient, 360
stress-strain relationships of, 55
Supraspinatus tendinopathy, 224-226, 225, 226,
Tensile loads, 85
231
Therapeutic ultrasound (TUS), 122
Swelling, characteristics of, 101, 101
dinical application of, 124
Swimming, therapeutic, 158, 159, 161
contraindications, 124
assistive and resistive devices for, 171-172,
evidence supporting, 123-124
172
ndications for, 124
assistive techniques in, 172-174, 173, 174
parameters of treatment for, 123
and breed characteristics, 167
precautions, 124
and breed tendencies, 171
therapeutic effects of, 122-123
 compared with underwater treadmills, 169,
Therapy band, 146
169
Thermal agents, superficial
equipment used with, 165,166, 166
cryotherapy, 116-118
motivation for, 171
heat, 118-120, 119
pool guidelines for, 166-167, 167
Thermography, 396, 397
preparation for, 171
 Thermotherapy, for pain management in geriatric
program progression in, 162, 162-164, 163
patients, 360
 Swim mitts, in therapeutic swimming, 165,
Thoracic limbs, interaction with spine of, 313-314,
165-166
314. See also Forelimb
Synovial hyperplasia, 54
Thoracic spine, 436, 437
Synovium
Three-legged standing test, 298, 298
as barrier, 52
Tibia, caudal glide of, 112, 113
and changes in cartilage, 53-54
Tibial plateau angle (TPA), 280
histologic structure of, 52, 52
Tibial plateau leveling osteotomy (TPLO), 283,
synovial joint degeneration, 52-54, 53
283-284, 364
manual therapy for postoperative, 113-114
Tail
rehabilitation following, 125
docked, 15, 16
Tibial tuberosity advancement (TTA), 98, 283-284,
function of, 15
284
Tail work, in therapeutic swimming, 173, 173
Tibial tuberosity transposition, in patellar
Tall sit exercise, 147, 147,152, 153
luxation, 286-287,287
464  Index
Tickling. 152
Tugging strengthening exercise, 181, 181
Tick paralysis, 346
Turnels, for exercise, 137-138, 138
Titles achieved, in patient history, 17
Tizanadine (Zanaflex*), 377
Ulcers, decubital, in geriatric patient, 357, 357
Tocopherol supplementation, 72
Ultrasonography
Topiramate (Topamax), 378
diagmostic,392-393,393,395
Torsional loads, 85
of disrupted biceps tendon fibers, 229, 229
Total elbow joint replacement (TER), 238
supraspinatus tendinopathy, 226
Total hip replacement (THR), 275-277, 276
Ultrasound, therapeutic, 122-125, 123
Toxin exposure, 414-415, 415
Underwater treadmill (UWTM), 158
Toys, in therapeutic swimming, 166, 166
pool versus, 169
Traction
speed for, 170, 170
defined, 111-113, 112, 112
temperature for, 169
grading of, 111, 112
treatment plan for, 170-171
Traditional Chinese Veterinary Medicine (TCVM),
water depth for, 169-170, 170
425
workout, 174
Training, injuries associated with, 3
Ununited anconeal process (UAP), 236
Tramadol (Utram°), 377
Ununited medial epicondyle (UME), 235, 239
Trampoline, 145
Upper motor neuron (UMN) paresis, 329, 331
Transcutaneous electric nerve stimulation (TENS),
Urinary tract infections, resistant, 356-357
121, 121-122
application of, 121-122
Valvular disease, 344
parameters for, 122
Vascular disease, acquired, 344-345
Transitions, in therapeutic exercise, 104
Velpeau sling, 220, 220
Trauma
Vertebrae
dental, 412
anatomy of,312,312-313,313
head, 412
cervical, 313,313, 314
ocular, 412
in chiropractic, 435, 435-436
 pulmonary, 406
hemi or block, 320, 320
to spinal cord, 326-327
lumbar, 315, 324,325
to spine, 322-325, 323, 324
 muscles supporting and moving, 437, 438, 438
 Traumatic fragmented medial coronoid process,
thoracic, 315
240-241
Vertebral endplate, 438, 440
Trazadone, 379
Vertebral experiments, 316-317, 317, 318-319
Treadmill, 136-137, 137. See also Land treadmill;
Vertebral subluxation complex (VSC), 430-431,
Underwater treadmill
431
Tricydlic antidepressants (TCAs), 379-380
Veterinary orthotics and prosthetics (V-OP), 202
Trigger point (TrP), 103
environmental modifications, 214
Triglycerides
evaluation of patient in, 207
in fatty acid metabolism, 68
orthoses in, 204, 204-205, 205, 206
medium- and long-chain, 69
prosthetics in, 205-207, 206, 207
Triple pelvic osteotomy (TPO), 274-275, 275
rehabilitation in, 202, 208
 Trochleoplasties, in patellar luxation, 286, 287
Veterinary spinal manipulative therapy (VSMT),
Tropomyosin, 41, 42
428
Troponin C, 41, 42
Viscosity, in aquatic therapy, 160
Trot
Vitamin C, 71
evaluation of, 21, 21-22, 22
Vitamin D, 72
training dog for, 26, 26
Vitamin E, 72
Tugging exercise, 184
Vitaminn K, 71
Index  465
Vitamins
Weight management, in hip dysplasia, 304
fat-soluble, 64
Weight-pulling exercise, 186, 186
 in nutrition for performance, 71, 71-72
Weights, 138, 138. See also Leg weights
VOmax. See maximum oxygen consumption
Weight shifting, in therapeutic exercise, 104, 154
Vomiting, 408-409
Wellness program, geriatric, 367
Wheelbarrow exercise, 151
Walk, evaluation of, 20, 20-21, 21, 21
Wobble board exercise, 183, 183
Walking
Wobble boards, 138, 138,144, 154, 246
backward, 150-151
Working companions, dogs as, 1
hill, 146
relearning, 154
gaits used by, 20
zigzag,143,143
mjuries and disorders of, 9
Wave strengthening exercise, 180, 180
types of, 8
Weave cones, 365
 in veterinary medicine, 8-9
Weaves, 144
Websites, canine sports, 4-5
Ziconotide (Prialt), 378
Weight-bearing, terminology for, 95
Zygapophyseal joints (Z joints), 440, 443