HANDBOOK OF
Zoonoses
IDENTIEICATION
ANDPREVENTION
JOANN L.COLVILLE
DAVIDL.BERRYHILL
MOSBY
With'a foreword byDennis MMcCurnin
ELSEVIER
HANDBOOK OF
Zoonoses
IDENTIFICATION
AND PREVENTION
JOANn L. COLvILlE, DVm
North Dakota State UIniversity, retired
Fargo, North Dakota
DAVID L. BERRYHILL, PHD
Director of Special Programs
College of Agriculture, Food Systems, and Natural Resources
Associate Professor, Department of Animal and Range Sciences
North Dakota State University
Fargo, North Dakota
With 60 illustrations
MOSBY
ELSEVIER
MOSBY
ELSEVIER
11830 Westline Industrial Drive
St. Louis, Missouri 63146
HANDBOOK OF ZOONOSES:
ISBIN: 978-0-323-04478-3
IDENTIFICATION AND PREVENTION
Copyright  2007 by Mosby, Inc., ann affiliate of Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system,
without permission in writing from the publisher.
Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier's Health Sciences Rights Department in Philadelphia, PA, USA:
phone: (+1) 215 239 3804, fax: (+1) 215 239 3805, e-mail: healthpermissions@elsevier.com. You may also
complete your request on-line via the Elsevier homepage (http:// www.elsevier.com), by selecting'Customer
Support' and then'Obtaining Permissions'
Notice
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience broaden
our knowledge, changes in practice,treatment and drug therapy may become necessary or appropriate.
Readers are advised to check the most current information provided (i) on procedures featured or (i) by the
manufacturer of each product to be administered, to verify the recommended dose or formula, the method
and duration of administration, and contraindications. It is the responsibility of the practitioner, relying on
their own experience and knowledge of the patient, to make diagnoses, to determine dosages and the best
treatment for each individual patient, and to take all appropriate safety precautions. To the fullest extent of the
1o suosiad on saewep ao/pue Aanfui Aue aoy Aage! Aue awnsse snoyany ayn sou nausqnd ayn aupiau me
property arising out of or related to any use of the material contained in this book.
The Publisher
Library of Congress Control Number: 2007925084
Acquisitions Editor: Teri Merchant
Publishing Serrires Manager: Pat Joiner
Projert Manager: Gena Magouirk
Corer Design Diretion: Paula Ruckenbrod
Working togcthcr to grow
Interior Design: Paula Ruckenbrod
librarics in devcloping countrics
www.c.scvier.com |ww.bookaid.org |www.sabrc.org
FLSEVIER
BOOKAID
Sabre Foundation
Printed in the UInited States of America.
lcrtatioal
Last digitisthe print number:98765432I
foreword
This book is written by a clinical veterinarian and clinical microbiologist and
specifically designed for veterinarians, veterinary technicians, professional stu-
dents, and healthcare professionals to help them understand and manage
zoonotic diseases. The topic of zoonoses can be ripped from the current news
headlines with such examples as West Nile virus, avian flu, E. coli gastro-
enteritis, toxoplasmosis, and anthrax, to name a few. Anthrax has received
special attention in the news recently because of the possible use as a biolog-
ical warfare agent. Veterinarians and technicians play a special role in the
dissemination of current reliable veterinary medical information.
The general public has become dependent on the veterinary medical
profession for the most current and accurate information on zoonoses. There
are more than 150 diseases that are known to be zoonotic. This book provides
a condensed source of clear, accurate, and easily accessible information about
diseases that could potentially spread between patients, clients, and staff in a
veterinary practice.
morbidity, mortality, etiology, hosts, transmission, virulence factors, clinical signs
boxes in Chapter One provide a quick reference to zoonotic diseases by etiology
(viral, bacterial, fungal, parasitic) and zoonotic diseases by host (human, dogs,
cats, cattle, horses, swine, sheep, goats, birds, rodents, snakes, and fish).
To be able to provide current zoonotic information to clients, staff, health
care professionals, professional students, and the general public, this handbook
is your reliable, quick resource to commonly sought-after information. This
book provides current information on the hot topic of zoonoses in both
veterinary medicine and human medicine.
Dennis M. McCurnin, DVM, MS, DACVS
Professor of Surgery
School of Veterinary Medicine
Louisiana State UIniversity
Baton Rouge, Louisiana
preface
We wrote this handbook to provide a source of basic information about
zoonotic diseases—diseases that are transmitted from animals to humans. It is
meant to be an easy-to-read and easy-to-understand handbook for quick
reference and not an all-inclusive textbook about zoonoses. This handbook is
intended for use by healthcare students and personnel on both the veterinary
and human sides of medicine, but it is appropriate for those who are not in the
healthcare industry as well.
Healthcare providers need this easy-to-use reference when presented with
o pue suny uaamaq laaen Aeaod ke er saseasip inoqe suonsanb
animals. There is common misinformation about some zoonotic diseases and
a general lack of knowledge about other zoonotic diseases, especially diseases
that have recently emerged. This book provides a clear, accurate, and easily
accessible source of information about diseases that could potentially spread
between veterinary patients, clients, and staff. The large body of knowledge
about zoonoses has been carefully distilled down to the important nuggets of
information that healthcare providers and the animal-owning public need to
protect themselves, their patients, their clients, and their animals.
We have concentrated on how a zoonotic disease affects hosts, how it is
spread, and what healthcare professionals need to know to provide correct
information,
For readers who may not be familiar with some of the medical terms used,
we have included a glossary. The diseases are listed in alphabetical order so
they can be found easily. There are two boxes included that list the diseases by
etiology and by host and a table that lists diseases by means of transmission.
The diagrams that accompany some of the diseases illustrate how the diseases
travel from infected animals to humans. For parasitic diseases, we have omitted
parts of the parasitic life cycle in order to simplify the diagrams. Specific treat-
ment regimens have not been included because there may be many treatments
available for a single disease, and the drug(s) of choice for treatment of a
disease may change.
A word of caution about quick references: The World Wide Web has
XPREFACE
imaginable. Anyone can post information on a website, but the information
isn't always accurate. We have gone through many reference books, textbooks,
and websites to gather the information included in this handbook. To the best
of our knowledge, all of the information included is accurate.
Joann L.Colville
David L. Berryhill
To Tom, my "idea guy,”who was always there with comments and
suggestions, and to Audra, my“memory chick,”who kept me on track
when I would have gone elsewhere
JLC
To my parents
DLB
2PRINCIPLES OF ZOONOSES
INTRODUCTION
When people think about diseases they can get from animals, probably one of
the first diseases that comes to mind is rabies. Indeed, rabies is a serious
disease that has been around since before recorded history, but the chances of
someone in North America developing rabies is pretty low. There are far more
 generate headlines as does rabies. Cat scratch fever affects over 20, 000 people
per year in the United States. Between 4% and 20% of children in America are
infected with roundworms that have been transmitted from small animals.
each year. Granted, unprotected people will die if they develop rabies, but cat
scratch fever and roundworms can also cause death and have serious economic
effects.
contents
1Principles of Zoonoses,1
Introduction,2
Zoonotic Diseases,3
Hosts,7
Modes ofTransmission.8
Preventing Zoonotic Diseases,11
About the Diseases,12
Morbidity and Mortality,13
2 ZoonoticDiseases,15
Anthrax,16
Babesiosis,22
Botulism,28
Bovine SpongiformEncephalopathy(Mad CowDisease),35
Brucellosis,38
Campylobacteriosis(Vibriosis),44
Cat ScratchDisease,49
Colibacillosis,54
Cryptosporidiosis(Crypto),59
Dermatomycosis,64
EasternEquine Encephalitis,73
Ehrlichiosis、77
Giardiasis (Giardia),83
HantavirusPulmonarySyndrome,87
Hookworms,91
Influenza,96
La Crosse Encephalitis,100
Leptospirosis,103
Listeriosis,108
LymeDisease,114
Lymphocytic Choriomeningitis,120
Mycobacterium Infections(Tuberculosis),123
Pasteurellosis,127
XIICONTENTS
Plague,130
Psittacosis,135
QFever,139
Rabies,142
Rat-Bite Fever,148
Rocky MountainSpottedFever,150
Roundworms,155
St.Louis Encephalitis,163
Salmonellosis,167
Scabies,173
Staphylococcosis,179
Tapeworms(Cestodes),182
Toxoplasmosis,193
Trichinosis,200
Tularemia,205
Vibriosis,211
WestNileVirusInfection,215
WesternEquine Encephalitis,219
Yersiniosis,223
Appendix1
LifeCycleofa Tick,227
Appendix2
IdentificationofTicks,228
Appendix3
HowtoProtectYourselfAgainstTicks,229
Appendix4
TickRemovalProcedure,230
Appendix5
The4CsofFoodSafety,231
Glossary,233
ZOONOTIC DISEASES 3
ZOONOTICDISEASES
Zoonoses (singular: zoonosis; adjective: zoonotic) are diseases transmitted among
humans and other vertebrates. The key word here is among. Zoonotic diseases
can be transmitted from nonhuman animals (henceforth referred to as animals)
to humans or from humans to animals. In this book the term zoonotic disease
will refer to diseases transmitted from animals to humans.
Zoonotic diseases are not rare:
·All known microbial and parasitic categories include at least one zoonotic agent.
From the smallest virus to the largest parasitic worm, there are many agents
of disease, called pathogens, that can pass among people and animals (Box 1).
      sss se e   
150 diseases that are known to be zoonotic.
 Many human diseases probably started out as zoonotic diseases. Although we
cannot be sure which diseases made the leap from animals to humans, there
is evidence that measles, smallpox, and diphtheria came to us from animals.
There is also compelling evidence that AIDS started in monkeys.
* About three quarters of emerging diseases are zoonotic, and when they
City in the United States in 1999 and moved through the country in the
summer of 2002, causing human and equine disease and death.
· Most of the animals we come in contact with every day can be sources of
zoonotic diseases (Box 2)
Reverse zoonoses are diseases that people can give to animals. Among the
more common diseases are Staphylococcus aureus infection, Streptococcus infec
tion, and tuberculosis.
There are diseases that people and animals share but that they do not get
from each other. For example, blastomycosis and coccidioidomycosis are
nonzoonotic mycotic (fungal) diseases that people and animals develop from
exposure to contaminated soil but not from exposure to each other.
And then there are the diseases that people think they can get from
animals, but it just does not happen. These pseudozoonotic diseases include feline
leukemia; feline immunodeficiency disease, also known as feline AIDS; pinworms;
colds; and sore throats.
4 PRINCIPLES OF ZOONOSES
Box 1.
 Zoonotic diseases grouped by etiology
VIRAL DISEASES
Staphylococcosis
 Eastern equine encephalitis
Tularemia
 Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome
Vibriosis
Influenza
Yersiniosis
La Crosse encephalitis
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis
FUNGAL DISEASE
Rabies
Dermatomycosis
 St. Louis encephalitis
West Nile virus infections
PARASITIC DISEASES
Western equine encephalitis
Arthropod infestation
Scabies
BACTERIAL DISEASES
Protozoan infections
Anthrax
Babesiosis
 Botulism
Cryptosporidiosis
Brucellosis
Giardiasis
Campylobacteriosis
Toxoplasmosis
Cat scratch disease
Round worm infections
Colibacillosis
Cutaneous larva migrans
Ehrlichiosis
Heartworm infection
Leptospirosis
Hookworm infection
Listeriosis
Roundworm infection
Lyme disease
Trichinellosis
Mycobacterial infections
Visceral larva migrans
Pasteurellosis
Tapeworm infections
Plague
Diphyllobothriasis
Psittacosis
 Dipylidiasis
Q fever
Echinococcosis
Rat-bite fever
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
PRION DISEASE
Salmonellosis
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy
ZOONOTIC DISEASES
5
Box 2.
 Zoonotic diseases grouped by host
DoGs
Colibacillosis
Brucellosis
Q fever
Campylobacteriosis
Rabies
Cryptosporidiosis
Ringworm infection
Giardiasis
Salmonellosis
Hookworm infection
Leptospirosis
HORSES
Lyme disease
Campylobacteriosis
Q fever
Cryptosporidiosis
Rabies
Leptospirosis
Ringworm infection
Rabies
Roundworm (Toxocara) infection
Ringworm infection
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Salmonellosis
Salmonellosis
Tapeworm (Dipylidium) infection
SwINE
Q fever
CATS
Ringworm infection
Campylobacteriosis
Yersiniosis
Cat scratch disease (Bartonella
henselae infection)
SHEEP AND GOATS
Cryptosporidiosis
Anthrax
Hookworm infection
Q fever
Leptospirosis
 Plague (Yersinia pestis infection)
BIRDS
Q fever
Campylobacteriosis
Rabies
Psittacosis (Chlamydophila psittaci
Ringworm infection
infection)
Roundworm (Toxocara) infection
Salmonellosis
Salmonellosis
Tapeworm (Dipylidium) infection
RODENTS
Toxoplasmosis
Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis
CATTLE
Rat-bite fever
Anthrax
Salmonellosis
 Bovine spongiform encephalopathy
Brucellosis
SNAKES
Campylobacteriosis
Salmonellosis
Cryptosporidiosis
Continued
6PRINCIPLES OF ZOONOSES
Box 2.
 Zoonotic diseases grouped by host——-cont'd
FISH
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis
Salmonellosis
Plague (Yersinia pestis infection)
Rabies
WILDLIFE
Roundworm infection, racoon
Anthrax
(Baylisascaris infection)
Brucellosis
Tuberculosis (Mycobacterium infection)
Giardiasis
Tularemia (Francisella tularensis
Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome
infection)
HosTs7
SISOH
People are often accidental and dead-end hosts for zoonotic diseases.
The definitive host of a pathogen is also the natural host of the pathogen. In the
case of zoonotic diseases, the definitive hosts are animals. Sometimes definitive
hosts become ill from the pathogens, and sometimes they do not. If the animal
does not become ill but is still capable of transmitting the disease to people, it
such as water or food.
8PRINCIPLES OF ZOONOSES
MODES OF TRANSMISSION
There are a number of methods used to transmit diseases from animals to
p uisssen pn are uisss jo saoa roe om au adod
indirect transmission (Table 1)
DIRECT TRANSMISSION
Contact between the infected animal and the susceptible person can result
in direct transmission of a zoonotic disease. This can take place by touching the
animal or from droplet infection through the animal's coughing or sneezing.
TABLE 1.
Zoonotic diseases identified by typical means
of transmission
BITE/
INSECT
DISEASE
SCRATCH
CONTACT
INGESTION
INHALATION
VECTOR
Anthrax
X
X
X
Babesiosis
X
Botulism
X
 Bovine spongiform
X
encephalopathy
Brucellosis
X
X
Campylobacteriosis
X
X
Cat scratch disease
X
Colibacillosis
X
Cryptosporidiosis
X
Dermatomycosis
X
Eastern equine
X
encephalitis
Ehrlichiosis
X
Giardiasis
X
Hantavirus pulmonary
X
Hookworm infection
X
X
Influenza
X
X
MODES OF TRANSMISSION
9
TABLE 1.
Zoonotic diseases identified by typical means
of transmission—cont'd
BITE/
INSECT
DISEASE
SCRATCH
CONTACT
INGESTION
INHALATION
VECTOR
La Crosse encephalitis
X
Leptospirosis
X
X
Listeriosis
X
Lyme disease
X
Lymphocytic
X
X
X
choriomeningitis
Mycobacerium infection
X
X
X
(Tuberculosis)
Pasteurellosis
X
Plague
X
X
X
Psittacosis
X
Q fever
X
Rabies
X
Rat-bite fever
X
X
Rocky Mountain
X
spotted fever
Roundworm infection
X
St. Louis encephalitis
X
Salmonellosis
X
Scabies
X
Staphylococcosis
X
Tapeworm infection
X
Toxoplasmosis
X
Trichinosis
X
Tularemia
X
X
X
X
Vibriosis
X
X
West Nile virus
X
infection
Western equine
X
encephalitis
Yersiniosis
X
10 PRNCIPLES OF ZOONOSES
A person must be within 1 meter in front of an animal for direct droplet trans-
mission to occur. The pathogen may stay on the person's skin, enter the body
through breaks in the skin or mucosal surfaces, be ingested, or be inhaled.
Plague is an example of a disease contracted via direct transmission.
INDIRECT TRANSMISSION
Indirect transmission includes any method of transmission in which the infected
animal and susceptible person do not actually come in direct contact. Some of
these methods include:
object known as a fomite. Animals contaminate objects with pathogens, and
people become infected when they come in contact with the contaminated
objects. One example is dermatophytes, fungi that cause skin infections that can
tools, etc. Another example is dust particles contaminated with a pathogen
that can enter a person through the respiratory tract, such as with Hantavirus
infection. As with direct transmission, any pathogen acquired through indirect
transmission may stay on the person's skin, enter the body through breaks in
the skin or mucosal surfaces, be ingested, or be inhaled. Examples of fomites
include grooming utensils, blankets, clothing, toys, and dust particles.
· Indirect transmission can also involve vectors. There are two types of
vectors——biological vectors and mechanical vectors:
of its life cycle before being passed on to a person. Examples of biolog-
ical vectors are fleas, ticks, flies, and mosquitoes. They can be reservoir
hosts for a pathogen, as in babesiosis.
· Mechanical vectors are animals that carry pathogens to people but are not
themselves affected by the pathogens. Examples of mechanical vectors
are mosquitoes, ticks, flies, and pets. Yes, insects and arthropods can be
either biological or mechanical vectors. They can also be carrier hosts for
 a pathogen. For example, flies can spread salmonellosis with their feet.
* Vehicles of transmission are neither fomites nor vectors. They are substances
that are normally brought into the body upon which a pathogen has hitched
a ride. Vehicles include water, air, and food. When water is a vehicle of trans-
mission, it is usually contaminated with feces from an infected animal, as in
giardiasis. Air can be a vehicle if the person is standing more than 1 meter
away from an infected animal when it sneezes or coughs and the pathogen
becomes airborne on dust particles or in droplets. Food transmission usually
results in food poisoning.
PREVENTING ZOONOTIC DISEASES11
PREVENTING ZOONOTIC DISEASES
Except for smallpox vaccination, few tools for protecting people and animals
from zoonotic diseases were available before the early 1900s. Methods such as
thoroughly cooking meat, boiling milk, and quarantining sick animals were
used to control diseases. In the 1920s commercial pasteurization became an
effective way to prevent zoonotic diseases that are spread through raw milk or
products made from raw milk. Insecticides came into use in the 1940s and
helped protect against vector-borne diseases. Vaccines are available to protect
animals and people against some zoonotic diseases but not all of them. In the
1950s, the United States started mandatory vaccination of dogs for rabies, and
that has been a primary contributing factor in the decline in the number of
rabies cases seen in people.
12PRNCIPLES OF ZOONOSES
ABOUT THE DISEASES
 In the next section of this book, you will be introduced to many of the known
zoonotic diseases. The diseases are listed in alphabetical order by their most
commonly used names. Sometimes that means using a common name (cat
scratch disease) instead of the etiologic name (bartonellosis). Other times we
use the etiologic name (listeriosis) rather than the common name (silage dis-
ease) because it is more frequently used. Each disease section contains a
description of the disease's etiology; its hosts; its mode(s) of transmission;
 methods for diagnosis, treatment, and prevention; and other useful information.
MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY 13
MORBIDITYANDMORTALITY
At the beginning of each disease section, a scale of 1 to 4 plus marks (+ to
++++) indicates the morbidity and mortality for the disease. The morbidity is
the likelihood that a person will contract the disease. The mortality is the
likelihood that a person who has developed the disease will die as a result.
16ZOONOTIC DISEASES
ANTHRAX
from anthrax and contaminated the soil with spores. Outbreaks of anthrax
are most often associated with warm weather seasons, heavy rains, and/or
droughts.
MORBIDITY: +
MORTALITY:+ TO++++
ETIOLOGY: BACTERIAL
Anthrax is caused by Bacillus anthracis, a gram-positive, encapsulated, spore
uf aa aun sy o u sisixa sno ai on re u
which causes disease, and the sporulated form, which is dormant. Oxygen is
needed for sporulation (development from the vegetative state into spores).
Spores are usually found in the soil and can lay dormant for decades.
HOSTS
Most mammals, including humans, are susceptible to anthrax infection to
some degree. Ruminants such as cattle, sheep, and goats are most commonly
infected soil. Other herbivores like horses and pigs may also be infected.
Anthrax has been reported in dogs and cats but is rare in these animals.
TRANSMISSION
handling contaminated carcasses, wool, hide, or hair (Figure 1). When a
aua saods aun 'oalo paneuuruoo e sureu ynou paoajui st uosiad
through preexisting skin cuts or abrasions. Direct person-to-person spread
of anthrax is extremely rare. Communicability is not a concern in managing
or visiting with patients with inhalational anthrax.
In animals, the most common form of transmission is ingestion of anthrax
spores. The spores in the soil are ingested when environmental conditions
are right. Periods of heavy rain can wash the spores into low-lying areas, where
they are exposed to oxygen as they are brought to the surface, and animals
ANTHRAX17
Contaminated
Infected
environment
animal
Spores on 
Spores on
Contaminated
ground
carcass, wool, hide
meat
Spores
Spores enter body
Ingestion
inhaled
through preexisting
wounds/breaks
in skin
Human
Human
Human
inhalation
cutaneous
intestinal
anthrax
anthrax
anthrax
FIGURE 1.
Anthrax
 grazing in these areas ingest the spores. Drought conditions, in which pastures
have little plant growth, can also be a contributing factor. Animals graze closer
to the ground than they normally would and may ingest spores. Biting flies
can, but rarely do, transmit B. anthracis from one animal to another. Outbreaks
in pigs have been associated with feed containing meat and/or bone meal from
infected carcasses. Wild animals or other scavengers become infected by
feeding on infected dead animals.
VIRULENCEFACTORS
All virulent strains of B. anthracis form a nontoxic capsule that functions to
protect the organism against the bactericidal components of plasma and
phagocytes and against destruction by gastric juices.
An exotoxin plays a major role in the pathogenesis of anthrax. One com-
 ponent of the anthrax toxin has a lethal mode of action that is not understood
at this time. Death is apparently due to oxygen depletion, secondary shock,
and respiratory and cardiac failure. Death from anthrax in humans or animals
frequently occurs suddenly and unexpectedly
18ZOONOTIC DISEASES
ANTHRAX IN ANIMALS
CATTLE, SHEEP, AND GOATS
Anthrax in ruminants may cause a peracute (very sudden) disease, in which
the animals are found dead, having shown no clinical signs before death. The
carcasses are bloated, with little or no rigor mortis and bloody discharges
 xen jo sas a ao poq oy  no ou op re
associated with sudden illness, characterized by high fever, localized edema
(in more longstanding cases), decreased or absent rumination, decreased milk
production with blood-tinged or yellow-colored milk, excitement followed
by depression, difficult breathing, convulsions, bleeding that does not clot
coming from body openings, and death. Anthrax can cause abortion. The incu-
bation period is 1 to 3 days following exposure, with death usually occuring
in 2 to 3 days.
HORSES
Horses can become infected with anthrax either through ingestion or through
the bite of an insect. If a horse is infected through ingestion, the resulting
disease is sudden and is characterized by loss of appetite, colic, bloody diarrhea,
fever, and death in 2 to 4 days. Insect bites produce localized swelling around
the bite wound and edema in the lower parts of the body
PIGS
Pigs are relatively resistant to anthrax infection, but when infected will most
often develop edema in their throats and subsequently suffocate. Some animals
will recover in a couple of days.
CATS AND DOGS
Anthrax is rarely reported in cats and dogs because they seem to be relatively
resistant to infection. When anthrax is seen, it is most often the gastrointestinal
form of the disease resulting from eating infected meat or hides. Cats can become
infected by grooming themselves if their fur is contaminated with spores.
Ulcers may form in the mouth and throat, and edema may develop around the
head and neck regions. The incubation period may be as long as 2 weeks. Some
animals die suddenly without exhibiting any clinical signs.
ANTHRAX IN HUMANS
Three forms of anthrax are seen in humans.
ANTHRAX19
CUTANEOUS FORM
The cutaneous form is the most common, accounting for nearly 95% of all
human anthrax cases. The incubation period is 1 to 12 days, and the disease is
characterized by what initially looks like an insect bite. Localized, painless
ulceration with a central black scab (Figure 2); fever; and headache develop
rapidly. These symptoms may be followed within a few days by septicemia and
meningitis. There is a 20% fatality rate if the disease is left untreated.
PULMONARY OR INHALATION FORM
The pulmonary, or inhalation, form (also known as woolsorter's disease) is caused
by inhalation of spores from contaminated carcasses, wool, hide, or hair. The
spores may also be found on brush bristles, after grooming an animal with
e pue yuou e on dn 'shep s ot I sl pojad uogeqnour au1 imy paneujureuon
half. The disease may initially present as a cold or the flu. It is characterized
by fever, sore throat, nonproductive cough, diffculty breathing, muscle aches
respiratory failure, and usually death within 24 hours. Mortality can reach 95%
if treatment is not started within 2 days.
FIGURE 2. Cutaneous anthrax with central dark scab. (Courtesy Public Health
Image Library, PHIL 2033, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta
1962, James H. Steele.)
20 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
INTESTINAL OR GASTROINTESTINAL FORM
The intestinal or gastrointestinal form results from ingestion of contaminated
meat. This form is rare in the United States. The incubation period is 12 hours
to 5 days. Fever, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea are followed by intes-
tinal pain and vomiting blood. Mortality averages around 50% if untreated.
DIAGNOSIS
A tentative diagnosis in some animals, primarily ruminants, can be made from
the physical signs found on a carcass; the sudden death, accompanied by bloody
discharges that do not clot coming from body openings; and incomplete or no
rigor mortis. Sputum, blood, or tissue can be Gram stained to look for gram
positive rods. Culture on blood agar yields nonmotile, nonhemolytic, bacterial
colonies. Antibody titers will be elevated. Chest radiographs are taken in
people suspected of having inhalation anthrax.
TREATMENT
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved penicillin,
ciprofloxacin, and doxycycline for treatment of anthrax in humans. Penicillin
and tetracycline are used in animals. There are different strains of B. anthracis;
some strains will be resistant to one antibiotic but not another. Resistant strains
of B. anthracis could be developed and manufactured as biological weapons.
PREVENTION
An anthrax vaccine is available for livestock, but none has been approved for
use in cats and dogs. Animal vaccines cannot be used in humans.
An anthrax vaccine has been licensed for use in high-risk humans. The
vaccine is reported to be 93% effective if boostered annually. Pregnant women
should be vaccinated only if absolutely necessary.
CONTROL
Anthrax in both animals and humans is a reportable disease in the UInited States.
Infections must be reported to local, state, and federal animal health officials
If you are submitting samples to a diagnostic laboratory, ask the laboratory
what samples are required and be sure to inform the laboratory of a possible
anthrax infection.
ANTHRAX21
If an animal is found dead or dies following treatment and anthrax is
suspected, leave the carcass alone. Do not touch it, and do not open it for
a necropsy. Doing so will release vegetative B. anthracis that will convert to
spores when exposed to the air and contaminate the immediate environment.
In humans this may result in an inhalation or cutaneous anthrax infection.
Notify a veterinarian who will dispose of the carcass. Carcasses will be burned
where they are found and/or buried at least 4 feet deep (some states require
burying 10 feet deep) and covered with lime. The soil directly under the
carcass will be burned and buried also.
If an animal is diagnosed with anthrax, the herd from which it came will
be quarantined. Exposed animals that look healthy will be vaccinated. Animals
that appear sick will be isolated and treated. The pasture where the animals are
feeding will be abandoned if possible. Animals that have recently left the herd
will be located, and the premises where they currently reside quarantined.
When the disease is under control, the premises need to be cleaned.
Preventing cats and dogs from scavenging on carcasses, especially if the
cause of death is unknown, will prevent them from getting infected.
ANTHRAX AND BIOLOGICAL WARFARE
The possibility of creating aerosols of anthrax spores has made B. anthracis a
potential biological weapon. Spores of B. anthracis can be produced and stored
 in a dry form, and they remain viable for decades in storage or after release.
A cloud of anthrax spores could be released at a strategic location and
inhaled by the individuals under attack. An infection of local animal popula
tions could follow the attack. Infected animals could then transmit the disease
to humans through cutaneous, intestinal, or inhalation routes.
HISTORICAL NOTE
In 1877, B. anthracis was the first bacterium shown to be the cause of a disease.
Robert Koch grew the organism and injected it into animals, and the animals
developed anthrax.
22ZOONOTIC DISEASES
BABESIOSIS
Babesiosis is a parasitic infection of red blood cells that is spread by a tick
bite. The disease is also known as piroplasmosis (pirum means pear in Greek)
because the parasite appears pear-shaped in red blood cells. Human babesiosis
is also known as Nantucket fever because the disease was first diagnosed after an
outbreak on Nantucket Island, Massachusetts.
MORBIDITY: +
MORTALITY: +
ETIOLOGY: PARASITIC
Babesia microti causes most human infections in North America. B. gibsoni and
B. canis cause babesiosis in dogs, and in horses B. equi and B. caballi are the
causative species. B. gibsoni, B. canis, and B. equi have been identified in rare
name is still commonly used.
Babesia organisms invade red blood cells, causing their destruction when
the Babesia organisms multiply within those cells.
HOSTS
The white-footed mouse is the primary host for B. microti, the species that most
often infects people. This species has also been found in field mice, voles, rats,
chipmunks, and cottontail rabbits. Horses are the host for B. equi and B. caballi.
Dogs are the host for B. gibsoni and B. canis. In all cases a tick is the vector,
meaning it is infected but not affected by the organism.
TRANSMISSION
Hard-bodied, or ixodid, ticks are vectors for babesiosis. The black-legged deer
tick is the primary vector for B. microti, and the brown dog tick is the vector for
B. gibsoni and B. canis. Many hard ticks can act as vectors for equine babesiosis
Ticks ingest Babesia while feeding off of an infected host, and the parasite
enters the tick's digestive system, where it multiplies within the tick's intes-
tinal wall. The parasites then travel to the tick's salivary glands, where they are
passed to another host when the tick takes its next meal. Transmission can
occur via the larva, nymph, or adult tick.
BABESIOSIS 23
The deer tick life cycle takes an average of 2 years to complete. Female
y spring. By summer, eggs hatch into
, other small mammals, and birds in the
summer and early fall. They will then molt into nymphs and become inactive
until spring(
Cold weather
(near or below freezing) inhibits tick activity.
During the following spring and summer, nymphs will feed on white-footed
mice or other rodents, birds, and other small mammals, and in the fall they
will molt into adults. Most pec
ople are infected by nymphs. The adult ticks
prefer to feed and mate on large animals, such as whitetail deer, in the fall and
early spring. Female ticks then drop off of these animals and lay eggs on the
 ground, and a new life cycle begins (Figure 3).
After being deposited in a new host, the parasites invade red blood cells,
multiply, and eventually rupture the membranes of infected red blood cells
and invade other red blood cells (Figure 4).
With B. microti, the tick larvae and nymphs feed primarily on the white-
footed deer mouse. The adult ticks feed on whitetail deer, which do not
Infected rodent
+
Tick larva or nymph attaches to
 infected animal and ingests organism
A
Tick larva or nymph detaches
from infected animal
Infected larva or nymph
attaches to human
1 1-2 days
usually
i required
Babesia organisms deposited
into bloodstream and
enter red blood cells
Human babesiosis
FIGURE 3. Babesiosis.
24  ZOONOTIC DISEASES
9900
FIGURE 4. Babesia organisms in red blood
cells. (Frorm Harvey JW: Atlas of veterinary
hematology: blood and bone marrow of
domestic animals, St Louis, 2001, Saunders.)
become infected with B. microti. The adult ticks mate while they are feeding
on the deer, so even though the deer do not become infected, they allow the
 yu on r y sassd asrd a an on an a jo aoh a
adult tick as the tick matures. Human infections are accidental occurrences.
Person-to-person infections, via blood transfusions and transplacental infection,
have been reported.
BABESIOSIS IN ANIMALS
DOGS
Babesiosis in dogs is a cyclical disease, in that recovery from the initial infection
shows variable and unpredictable periods of illness, alternating with apparently
healthy periods.
The clinical signs vary, depending on the stage of the disease and the age
and immune status of the dog. Young animals are more severely affected than
older animals. A tick must be attached to a susceptible host for 2 to 3 days before
Babesia organisms are passed to the host. There can be three phases to canine
babesiosis: acute, subclinical, and chronic.
The acute phase is the initial infection and usually lasts a short time. It is
characterized by hemolytic anemia, enlarged lymph nodes, enlarged spleen.
vomiting, lethargy, and fever. Most dogs recover after treatment.
The subclinical phase can last months or years. It is characterized by a
balance between the Babesia organisms and the immune system of the host,
so there is little clinical evidence of disease. The balance can be upset by stress,
concurrent infections (especially ehrlichiosis), immunosuppression, removal
of the spleen, surgery, or extreme exercise. During this phase, the dog may
show only an intermittent fever and anorexia. When the balance is upset, the
BABESIOSIS25
Babesia organisms will begin to increase in number, and the dog will move into
the next phase. Greyhounds are frequently subclinical carriers of babesiosis,
and they can spread the disease through blood transfusions or to their puppies
transplacentally.
sllao pooiq pau au reao on alqeun st bop aup jl suaq aseud oquonuo au
containing the Babesia organisms from circulation. This phase is characterized
by a cycle of lethargy, anorexia, and a gradual loss of body condition, seen
most obviously along the spine and around the eyes. Other symptoms include
coughing or labored breathing, vomiting, constipation or diarrhea, sores in the
mouth, edema, abdominal swelling, a rash or bleeding under the skin, blood
clotting problems, swollen joints, seizures, weakness, enlarged lymph nodes,
enlarged spleen, and depression.
In rare cases, the central nervous system can be involved, resulting in
weakness, incoordination, and seizures.
HORSES
B. caballi causes a less severe disease, because only about 1% of the red blood
cells are infected. Infections may not be apparent but can persist 1 to 4 years
before they are completely eliminated from the horse. B. caballi can be associated
with anorexia, poor performance, and weight loss.
B. equi infects up to 20% of red blood cells, leading to more severe clinical
signs including fever, anemia, jaundice, increased respiratory and heart rates,
and an enlarged spleen. The parasites destroy red blood cells, resulting in
hemolytic anemia. The hemoglobin released from the red blood cells may
cause jaundice and dark urine. Colic, constipation followed by diarrhea, and
swelling of the legs can occur. Foals can be infected transplacentally and can be
aborted or born anemic and weak.
Subclinically infected animals can be carriers of the organism. Subclinical
babesiosis may negatively affect the animal's performance. Strenuous exercise,
such as racing, can cause subclinical infections to become acute. Geographic
movement of apparently healthy horses may help spread Babesia.
BABESIOSIS IN HUMANS
Most people who are infected with Babesia never develop clinical disease.
An infected tick must be attached to a person for at least 1 to 2 days before
Babesia organisms are transmitted. Babesiosis will develop most often in people
who are immunocompromised, have had their spleens removed, or are elderly
The spleen is one of the organs that is responsible for removing infected red
26ZOONOTIC DISEASES
blood cells from circulation, so if it is missing, the infected red blood cells
stay in circulation, where the organism can infect more cells. Clinical signs
of babesiosis will appear 1 to 4 weeks following a tick bite. They begin with
flulike symptoms including fever, chills, and headache and progress to fatigue,
anorexia, and muscle pain. Hemolytic anemia may develop, along with an
enlarged liver and/or spleen. The hemolytic anemia may result in dark urine.
The number of platelets circulating in blood may also be decreased, potentially
causing bleeding disorders. Babesiosis in humans is rarely fatal, but death is
seen more often in people who have had their spleens removed.
DIAGNOSIS
Diagnosis can be made by microscopic examination of stained blood smears
to identify the organisms in red blood cells. Serological tests are available
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a test that may also be used to detect
blood into hamsters or gerbils may also assist in diagnosis. Animals inoculated
with infective blood typically develop parasites in their red blood cells within
1 to 4 weeks.
TREATMENT
In humans, a combination of antimalarial drugs and antibiotics is used to treat
babesiosis, along with symptomatic care. Dogs are treated with antibiotics.
In all cases, the sooner treatment is begun, the more effective it will be.
PREVENTION
Tick and rodent control is the best approach to prevention. Avoiding endemic
regions during the peak transmission months is especially important for people
who have had their spleens removed or for immunocompromised persons, in
whom babesiosis can be a devastating illness.
Tick-control products, such as tick collars, should be used on dogs that
could possibly be exposed to ticks. This will help protect them from possible
Babesia infection and will help decrease the number of ticks the dogs could
possibly bring into a house, where people could be exposed to the ticks.
Decrease exposure to ticks by following these guidelines:
*Avoid areas where vector ticks thrive as much as possible. May, June, and July
are the months when ticks are still immature and are harder to see because
BABESIOSIS27
of their light color. These are also the months when people are most active
outdoors.
* Ticks have to live where their hosts live, so areas where white-footed mice and
whitetail deer live are where ticks are found. These places can include lawns,
 gardens, wooded areas, overgrown brush, tall grass, woodpiles, and leaf litter.
* Wear light-colored clothing when entering an area that may be a habitat for
ticks. This will make the adult ticks easier to see and remove before they
become attached.
· Wear long-sleeved shirts and long pants tucked into socks so the ticks cannot
s as an  r e  soq  rt aa  n pa
· Walk in the center of a trail to avoid vegetation, where ticks are lurking.
Ticks cannot fly, jump, skip, or hop, so they must come in direct contact
p are sn a 'saas e u aa aoaq isoq e 
hiding in the shade, in moist areas. Adult ticks cling to grass, bushes, and
shrubs and wait for a host to come by.
* Exposed skin and clothing can be protected with insect repellents con-
taining N, N-diethyl-m-toluamide (DEET). Clothes, but not exposed skin,
can be protected with insect repellents containing permethrin, which kills
ticks on contact.
* Check often for ticks while outside. Black-legged ticks are tiny and easy to miss.
· Do not sit on the ground or on stone walls, where ticks abound.
ticks like to attach, such as behind the ears, at the back of the neck, in the
armpits, behind the knees, and in the groin area. Bathing will remove crawling
ticks but will not detach ticks already attached. Daily tick checks and prompt
removal of an attached tick are vital to reducing the risk of transmission.
· Wash outdoor clothing in hot water and dry at high temperatures after use.
* Remove ticks as soon as they are found. Remember it takes up to 2 days
after a tick becomes attached before it starts transmitting Babesid.
To remove a tick, use fine tweezers, grasp the tick as close to the skin as
possible, and pull straight back with a slow, steady force. Avoid crushing the
tick's body. Kill the tick by dropping it in alcohol. Save the tick in alcohol as a
 possible diagnostic aid.
NOTE
Co-infection with Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease) and B. microti may be
relatively common in endemic areas of the United States. Co-infection with
Ehrlichia species may also be seen.
28ZOONOTIC DISEASES
BOTULISM
Among its more common names, botulism is also known as limberneck in birds
and shaker foal syndrome in horses. Botulism is caused by the toxins (byproducts
of bacterial growth) of Clostridium botulinum. The disease is characterized by
paralysis can eventually affect cardiac and respiratory muscles, resulting in death.
While the disease is relatively rare, the outcome can be devastating. The
C. botulinum toxins are some of the most deadly poisons known. They could be used
in a bioterrorist attack by aerosol dispersal or food and/or water contamination.
One gram of crystallized C. botulinum toxin is enough to kill a million people
MORBIDITY: +
MORTALITY: + TO ++++
ETIOLOGY: BACTERIAL NEUROTOXIN
Botulism is caused by toxins that attach themselves to the ends of nerves
and interfere with the ability of the nerve to send impulses to muscles. The
 si n  s i  a  a s
toxins are produced by the bacterium C. botulinum, an anaerobic, gram-positive,
in oxygen. If this condition is not available it produces spores, a dormant form
of the organism that can survive in soil for a long time. When conditions are
right, the spores will germinate and start growing, producing toxins. There are
seven distinct toxins produced by C. botulinum that are designated by the first
seven letters of the alphabet.
HOSTS
Many species of mammals, fish, and birds may be hosts.
sam Apsou punoy st y adi 'sueuny ui saseasip asneo I pue '3 'd 'y sadi *
of the Mississippi River, type B is found in eastern states, and type E is found
in Alaska and in the Great Lakes area.
* Type A is used to manufacture Botox for cosmetic and therapeutic purposes.
· Type B can cause disease in horses and cattle.
· Type C is the most common toxin to cause disease in animals. It is found
most often in the western UInited States.
BOTULISM29
· Type D can cause disease in cattle and dogs. It is seen most often in South Africa,
South America, and Australia.
* Types A and E are found in birds and mink.
· Type G rarely causes disease, but it has been associated with disease in humans.
TRANSMISSION
C. botulinum and C. botulinum spores are found in soil worldwide, in the intes-
tinal tracts of mammals and fish, and in the gills and internal organs of shell-
fish. Transmission occurs when animals (including humans) ingest the toxins
preformed by the bacteria or ingest the bacteria, which then start to produce
toxins. Preformed toxins are found in decaying carcasses; decaying vegetable
matter; and improperly home-canned foods (especially vegetables with low
acid content, such as asparagus, green beans, beets, and corn) and fruits. They
can also be found in improperly cooked beef, pork, poultry, and milk prod-
ucts. Transmission can also occur through a wound infection. Botulism is not
spread directly between animals by casual contact, but an infected dead animal
can be toxic if ingested by another animal. Maggots feeding on an infected
carcass can also be a source of infection, if eaten by another animal.
BOTULISM IN ANIMALS
Botulism is seen most commonly in wild birds, domestic poultry, cattle, sheep,
soq on yuensisai Alaanelai are saop pue sald 'ush jo saads auos pue 'sas.ou
There have been no reported cases of botulism in cats.
  n    s s  
toxins that cause a progressive paralysis, resulting in a lack of muscle tone. The
symptoms appear anywhere from 2 hours to 2 weeks after infection, but most
often within 24 hours. Clinical signs include difficulty chewing and swal-
lowing, visual impairment, and generalized weakness. The paralysis eventually
may affect the muscles of the heart and lungs, resulting in death. A form
of botulism called toxicoinfectious botulism results from eating the C. botulinum
CATTLE
Botulism in cattle is usually associated with eating preformed toxins in
contaminated feed. If small animals (mice, snakes, etc.) or animal carcasses are
baled into hay or packed into silage, they could be a source of C. botulinum
toxins at a later time, when the cattle are fed the hay or silage. Botulism is
30ZOONOTIC DISEASES
sometimes seen when cattle that are lacking phosphorus or protein in their
diets eat carcass bones, with attached bits of meat, or soil to supply the lacking
mutrients. Both the bones and the soil could be contaminated with C. botulinun
toxins. Clinical signs of botulism include drooling and tongue paralysis, resulting
drooping eyelids; and lying down in a sternal position (lying on the chest).
Weakness starts in the back legs and moves toward the head. If the animal goes
into lateral recumbency (lying on its side), it is near death.
SHEEP
Clinical signs of botulism include drooling, clear nasal discharge, incoordination,
and stiffness.
HORSES
Botulism in horses is similar to botulism in cattle. Horses can develop three
types of botulism:
* Forage poisoning from ingestion of preformed C. botulinum toxins
· Toxicoinfectious disease from ingestion of the C. botulinum organism
· Wound botulism from wound infection
Clinical signs of botulism include restlessness, incoordination, tongue
paralysis, and sternal recumbence. The muscle paralysis usually starts in the
back legs and progresses to the front legs, neck, and head. Shaker foal syndrome
is a condition seen in foals less than 4 weeks old. The foal may be found dead
without having exhibited any clinical signs of illness. If clinical signs are present,
they show up as a progressive, symmetrical paralysis, accompanied by a stiff gait,
muscle tremors, and the inability to stand for more than 4 to 5 minutes. The foal
may have difficulty eating, constipation, dilated pupils, and frequent urination.
Death usually occurs 24 to 72 hours after the appearance of clinical signs.
BIRDS
In both domestic poultry and wild fowl, botulism is seen as paralysis of the
legs, wings, neck, and eyelids. Water birds with paralyzed necks (hence the
name limberneck) can drown. Some domestic broiler chickens have developed
toxicoinfectious disease, from ingestion of the C. botulinum organisms. These
birds will have diarrhea.
PIGS
Pigs are relatively resistant to botulism. If they get sick, the symptoms include lack
of appetite, lack of desire to drink water, vomiting, dilated pupils, and paralysis
BOTULISM31
DOGS
Although dogs are relatively resistant to botulism, they can come in contact
with the C. botulinum toxin if they are allowed to eat infected, dead animals.
The amount of toxin ingested will determine the severity of the disease. The
most obvious clinical sign is extreme weakness, seen from a few hours to sev.
eral days after ingestion of the toxin. The dogs cannot stand, but they are alert
and can wag their tails.
BOTULISM IN HUMANS
There are three forms of botulism in humans: foodborne botulism, wound
botulism, and infant botulism. In foodborne botulism, toxins are preformed in
contaminated food and ingested when the food is eaten. In both wound botulism
and infant botulism, the C. botulinum organism is present in a wound or in the
large intestine of an infant and produces the toxin in vivo. All three forms can
 be fatal. If botulism is suspected, it should be treated as a medical emergency.
FOODBORNE BOTULISM
About one fourth of the cases of botulism reported annually in the United
States are foodborne. The most common source of foodborne botulism is
home-canned food that is not adequately heated during the canning or food
preparation process. Adequate heat is necessary to kill the spores of C. botu-
linum so they cannot germinate and produce toxins in the canned foods. The
clinical signs of foodborne botulism usually appear within 12 to 36 hours
following ingestion of the toxin in contaminated food. The incubation period
may be as long as a week or more. There is no fever associated with foodborne
botulism, but nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramping, and diarrhea may appear
before the neurological signs. When the neurological signs appear, they start
in the cranial nerves and descend to include the entire body. The initial neuro
logical signs include double vision, loss of pupillary response to light, drooping
eyelids, difficulty eating, slurred speech, and dry mouth. The weakness and
paralysis descend to the trunk and extremities and eventually involve respira-
tory muscles. The mortality rate for foodborne botulism is about 5 to 15%.
Death is usually due to respiratory failure.
WOUND BOTULISM
Most cases of wound botulism occur when an anaerobic wound is contami-
nated with C. botulinum, primarily from the soil. The gastrointestinal signs seen
32ZOONOTIC DISEASES
and the wound may produce an exudate (pus). Wound botulism resembles
foodborne botulism in terms of incubation period and neurological signs.
INFANTBOTULISM
Infant botulism is the most commonly reported form of botulism in the
United States and is usually the result of type A or B toxins. It usually affects
babies less than 6 months old, although it may also be seen in older infants.
Infant botulism results from ingestion of C. botulinum spores that grow in the
gastrointestinal tract and produce toxins. This differs from foodborne botulism
in adults, where the preformed toxin is ingested. The source of the spores is
usually unknown, but could include soil, household dust, or vacuum cleanel
dust. Some cases have been traced to ingestion of honey that contains the
spores. For this reason it is recommended that children under 1 year old
should not be given any honey, not even a little bit on a pacifier to sweeten it.
The initial sign of infant botulism, in over 90% of cases, is constipation.
This is followed by general weakness, poor feeding with swallowing difficulty
a weak or abnormal cry, and poor head control. Signs of infant botulism can
appear as soon as 6 hours following ingestion, and can progress over the next
1 to 4 days. The signs may include progressive muscle weakness that eventually
involves respiratory muscles, resulting in respiratory failure. Severity of
Aqeq Addou, anaaas e on Aquo uogensuo Plu e uoy Xrea lm suods
syndrome" to possible death. In some instances the death is so sudden that it
is mistakenly reported as sudden infant death symdrome (SIDS). There is no
fever associated with infant botulism.
DIAGNOSIS
Diagnosis of botulism in animals is difficult and is often based on ruling out
other diseases that present with similar clinical signs. A definitive diagnosis can
be made if the toxin is found in the food, feces, vomitus, stomach or intestinal
contents, or blood. The toxin is found in blood only in the very early stages of
the disease. In the toxicoinfectious form of botulism, in which the animal has
acquired the C. botulinum organism instead of the toxin, the organism can be
cultured from tissue. If the animal has died, stomach or rumen contents and
feces should be submitted to a diagnostic laboratory. Feed from the past 2 to
5 days should also be submitted for analysis.
In people, diagnosis of botulism is based on history, clinical signs, and
detection of C. botulinum or its toxin in feces or serum. Infants with botulism
rarely have toxins in the serum, so the feces must be tested. In the case of
BOTULISM33
wound botulism, fluid from the wound is tested for the presence of organisms
or toxins. The clinical signs of botulism are not unique to botulism and can
be seen in many other diseases. This is why a laboratory must confirm the
presence of C. botulinum or its toxin to make a correct diagnosis
Diagnostic tests are performed by state health department laboratories,
or by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
TREATMENT
If botulism is suspected, immediate treatment is essential. Patients with
respiratory distress may be put on a respirator for several weeks. Antitoxins
are available for types A, B, and E from the CDC, but can be obtained only by
a healthcare provider in health departments if botulism is suspected or con-
firmed. The antitoxin reduces the severity of the disease if it is given early.
When treated early enough, most patients recover. Infants with botulism are
not given the antitoxin because of the risks involved. Supportive care in a
i aq r s p a nn  ar t es
thoroughly, usually surgically, to remove the bacteria.
PREVENTION IN ANIMALS
Prevention in animals involves, primarily, good husbandry. Avoid feeding
spoiled or contaminated feed, implement rodent control, and properly dispose
of dead animals. Do not allow animals to feed on dead animals or decaying
carcasses. In some areas where botulism is common, vaccines are available
for horses, cattle, sheep, goats, mink, and pheasants.
PREVENTION IN HUMANS
There is no vaccine to prevent botulism in humans. Foodborne botulism can
be prevented if proper home-canning methods are used. Wash all foods well
before processing them. The U.S. Department ofAgriculture (USDA) Extension
Service (http:/ / www.uga.edu/nchfp/publications/publications_usda.html)
provides current guidelines for processing home-canned meats and vegetables.
Local county agents can also usually provide this information.
Before eating home-canned foods, examine the container and the food.
A bulging lid or leaking jar indicates food spoilage. Spurting liquid when you
open the container, along with an "off" odor and mold, also indicates spoilage.
 Do not eat these foods. Cook home-canned vegetables and meats before eating
34ZOONOTIC DISEASES
them by boiling them for at least 10 minutes. If the foam has an odor, or the
food looks spoiled, discard it. Do not discard food where children or animals
can eat it.
Honey should not be fed to children under 1 year old because it may
contain spores of C. botulinum.
All wounds or cuts should be cleaned well and properly bandaged if necessary.
Some unusual and uncommon sources of botulism that have been reported
include chopped garlic in oil, chili peppers, tomatoes, and improperly handled
baked potatoes wrapped in aluminum foil.
HISTORICAL FACT
Foodborne botulism was first associated with sausage in Europe during the
1880s. There was no refrigeration available to store the meat, which was
sem abesnes peq Sugeg 'axous pue nes yim paaasaad Alenred Aquo Aiqeqond
associated with the disease that came to be known as botulism, after the Latin
word for sausage, botulus.
BOVINE SPONGIFORM ENCEPHALOPATHY (MAD COW DISEASE) 35
BOVINE SPONGIFORM ENCEPHALOPATHY
(MAD COW DISEASE)
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), or mad cow disease, is a progressive,
neurological disorder of cattle. It was first discovered in the United Kingdom
in 1986. It has been suggested that BSE is a mutated form of scrapie, seen in
sheep and goats, which has been around for centuries. The appearance in cattle
may be related to feeding contaminated sheep and/or goat-derived protein
supplements to cattle. The word “spongiform" in the name refers to the fact
that when an animal dies of BSE its brain is full of holes, like a sponge.
MORBIDITY: +
MORTALITY:++++
ETIOLOGY: PRION
BSE is caused by a poorly understood protein called a prion. When BSE prions
are transmitted to humans, the resulting disease is known as variant Creutzfeldt-
Jakob disease (vCJD). Different prions cause scrapie in sheep and goats, chronic
wasting disease in mule deer and elk, feline spongiform encephalopathy, and
other neurological diseases in humans.
A prion cannot be classified as bacterial or viral. It is a modified form
of a normal component of a cell surface, known as a prion-related protein,
or Prp. Prion diseases, as a group, are also known as transmissible spongiform
encephalopathies (TSEs) because they cause a variety of diseases, all character-
ized by progressive, degenerative, neurological disorders that are always fatal.
Prions appear to multiply by converting normal protein molecules into
pathogenic ones by inducing the normal molecules to change their shape.
Prion diseases are distinguished by incubation periods measured in years, char
acteristic spongiform changes in the brain, and lack of an inflammatory response.
TRANSMISSION
Transmission of prions from one animal to another and from animals to
humans is not well understood. Evidence points to ingestion of food contam-
inated with tissues containing the prions. In animal-to-animal transmission,
rendered BSE-infected tissues from an infected animal. Tissues that have been
found to contain BSE prions are the brain, spinal cord, retina, bone marrow,
36ZOONOTIC DISEASES
and distal ileum. People can become infected by eating beef that has been con-
taminated with BSE prions during slaughter of infected animals and packaging
of beef products from these animals.
DISEASE IN CATTLE
After a lengthy incubation period, infected cattle begin to show apprehension,
excitability, fixed staring, incoordination, and muscle tremors and fall down.
They become hypersensitive to light and touch. Death is inevitable, and most
often occurs in less than 2 weeks, although some cases have been known to
linger for a year.
DISEASE IN HUMANS
In its progression, vCJD follows a course similar to BSE, affecting predomi-
mood swings,"“pins and needles"or pains in the limbs and feet, bad headaches,
cold extremities, rashes, and short-term memory loss. These symptoms
after 6 months. The median duration of vCJD is 14 months.
DIAGNOSIS
There are no clinical, serological, or immunological tests available for diagnosis
of BSE or vCJD. Diagnosis is tentatively based on clinical signs and history, and is
confirmed by studying a microscopic section of the brain after death. In humans,
diagnosis is aided by eliminating other causes of encephalopathies.
TREATMENT
until the patient dies.
PREVENTION
BSE
Cattle should not be fed ruminant-derived protein supplements. Since 1997
the USDA has banned any materials that could be infected with BSE prions
from cattle feed. Public health control measures have been instituted in many
BOVINE SPONGIFORM ENCEPHALOPATHY (MAD COW DISEASE) 37
countries to prevent potentially prion-infected tissues from entering the human
food supply. For instance, the United Kingdom excludes all animals more than
30 months old from being used for human food or animal feed supplies.
VCJD
Travelers to countries that have reported cases of BSE can avoid eating beef
pe jo saoaid pos Auo jea on aa Pinom aaneuane aui 'shonoid jaaq pue
muscle, such as steaks and roasts, which have a lower risk of being infected
with BSE prions. Avoid brain or mixed beef products, such as hamburger or
sausage, which have a higher risk of being infected with BSE. There is no
evidence that milk or milk products transmit BSE prions.
38 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
BRUCELLOSIS
Brucellosis, also known as Bang's disease in animals and as undulant fever or Malta
fever in humans, can cause abortion in both cattle and humans. The disease has
been around a long time. Descriptions of what sounds like brucellosis can be
by Sir David Bruce, a Scottish physician. The genus is named after him.
MORBIDITY: +
MORTALITY:+ TO +++
ETIOLOGY: BACTERIAL
Brucellosis is caused by bacteria belonging to the genus Brucella. They are
small, gram-negative coccobacilli. The five species of Brucella most commonly
associated with brucellosis are B. abortus, B. ovis, B. suis, B. melitensis, and B. canis
B. melitensis is not found in the LInited States.
HOSTS
Brucellosis has been identified in cattle, sheep, goats, pigs, dogs, horses, bison,
elk, reindeer, caribou, many species of deer, camels, foxes, hares, mice, rats,
ticks, and fleas. Brucellosis has also been found in seals, otters, and dolphins.
Humans can be infected by many of the species of Brucella.
B. abortus primarily infects cattle, but is also found in bison, camels, deer,
dogs, horses, sheep, and humans.
B. ovis is responsible for testicular inflammation in rams and occasionally for
abortion in ewes but does not infect other animals or humans. Goats are sus-
ceptible to this species by experimental (deliberate or intentional) infection.
B. suis covers a wider host range than most other Brucella species. Pigs, wild
hares, reindeer, wild caribou, and rodents are some of the varied hosts of this
species.
B. melitensis causes a highly contagious disease in sheep and goats, although
cattle can also be infected. B. melitensis is the most important species in human
infection, but is not found in the United States.
B. canis causes testicular inflammation in the male dog and abortion and
uterine infection in the female. It has been reported in no other animal species
except humans.
BRUCELLOSIS 39
TRANSMISSION
In animals, transmission is by direct contact with an infected animal, or by
coming in contact with blood, urine, vaginal discharges, placentas, or aborted
fetuses from infected animals. During the period of the Brucella life cycle when
the bacteria are found in the blood, blood-sucking arthropods may transmit
the organism. Domestic and wild canines can spread brucellosis to uninfected
herds by dragging dead or aborted fetuses and placentas from the infected herd
to the uninfected herd.
 Most transmission to humans occurs in one of three ways:
milk, especially soft cheeses. When cattle, sheep, goats, and camels are
infected, the Brucella organism is found in their milk. Pasteurizing milk will
kill the organisms. This is a problem more often for those traveling in coun
tries where there are not effective public health and animal health programs.
* Coming into direct contact with placental tissues or vaginal secretions
from infected animals. The Brucella organism will most often enter the
human body through a wound. This is especially a hazard to people working
in the veterinary profession, ranchers, hunters, and people working in
slaughterhouses.
· Inhaling an aerosol, which occurs primarily in laboratories where Brucella
organisms are grown.
Transmission has also been reported through breast milk from an infected
mother to her child and through a contaminated tissue transplant. Sexual
transmission has also been reported. These cases are extremely rare.
BRUCELLOSIS IN ANIMALS
In animals, brucellosis is usually associated with late-term abortions in females
and inflammation in the male reproductive tract.
CATTLE
In cattle, brucellosis is called Bang's disease, after Bernhard Lauritz Frederik
Bang, a Danish veterinarian, who discovered B. abortus as the cause of conta-
of the placenta, leading to late-term abortion. In bulls it causes testiculal
inflammation and sometimes arthritis. Transmission can be through ingestion
of the organism or as a sexually transmitted disease (STD). The incubation period
can be as short as 2 weeks, or as long as a year or more.
40ZOONOTIC DISEASES
SHEEP AND GOATS
B. melitensis is associated with late-term abortions in sheep and goats or weak
lambs or kids. It also causes mastitis, especially in goats. Transmission is through
ingestion of the organism. B. melitensis is not found in the United States.
B. suis is a problem in rams, where it causes testicular inflammation. It
rarely causes abortion in sheep and goats.
PIGS
B. suis causes abortion at any time during pregnancy in sows, weak or stillborn
piglets, and testicular inflammation in boars. Transmission is through ingestion
or as an STD.
DOGS
B. canis causes late-term abortion in bitches, early death of puppies, and testic-
ular or scrotal inflammation in stud dogs. Transmission is as an STD. Dogs can
become infected with other Brucella species if they eat placentas from infected
farm animals. Dogs can also develop infection of the spinal discs, leading to
CATS
Cats are resistant to Brucella infections.
HORSES
B. abortus has been identified as one of the causes of fistulous withers, or poll evil,
which results in abscess formation in the area of the withers (the area of the neck
between the shoulder blades) or poll (the area behind the ears and just to the rear
of the skull). The abscesses may burst and drain on their own, or they may be
surgically opened to allow them to drain. The pus from these abscesses contains
the B. abortus organism and is a source of infection to humans. Infected horses
have a history of contact with infected cattle. B. abortus has been identified as the
cause of late-term abortion in a mare, but this is an unusual occurrence.
BRUCELLOSIS IN HUMANS
Brucellosis in humans is also known as Malta fever (because it was first identi-
fied on the island of Malta) or undulant fever (because of the waves of rising and
falling body temperature). The incubation period is usually 1 to 2 months.
of clinical signs may be sudden, or they may come on slowly.
BRUCELLOSIS41
Brucellosis first presents with flulike symptoms, such as vomiting, diarrhea.
constipation, headaches, chills, weakness, painful muscles, loss of appetite, and
weight loss.
 In more prolonged cases, patients develop recurrent or undulating fever
that spikes in the night (night sweats), extreme fatigue, and arthritis. Men may
develop testicular inflammation, and pregnant women could suffer a sponta-
neous abortion. These signs may last for 2 to 4 weeks, after which the person
recovers spontaneously. In other people, the clinical signs seem to appear and
disappear in 2- to 14-day intervals. These people can spontaneously recover in
3 to 12 months. Rarely, the disease becomes chronic, with depression, arthritis,
and chronic fatigue recurring months after apparent recovery. Death is rare,
but when it happens, it is usually associated with an inflammation of the inner
lining of the heart (endocarditis).
DIAGNOSIS
ANIMALS
In most animals, serological antibody testing is the most reliable diagnostic test
for brucellosis. In the early stages of the disease, the Brucella organisms are
found in the blood and bone marrow. These fluids may be cultured, but this is
not a reliable diagnostic test. Organisms can also be found in the placenta and
in the lungs and stomach contents of aborted fetuses.
In pigs, cattle and goats, the tests are done to detect brucellosis in a herd,
so not every animal is tested. In sheep it is usually the ram that is tested.
In dogs the most reliable diagnostic test is culturing blood, milk, semen, vaginal
discharges, aborted fetal tissue, or placenta to isolate B. canis.
HUMANS
In humans, an initial diagnosis is based on history and clinical signs. The diagnosis
lds peqaran 'sapou yd moru auoq poq suno aq paun aq u
fluid, or abscesses. Serological tests are more commonly used to confirm brucel-
losis. Cholera, tularemia, E. coli, Salmonella spp., and Pseudomonas spp. can cause
 Cross-reactions in some serological tests, resulting in a false-positive reaction.
TREATMENT
ANIMALS
There is no effective treatment for brucellosis in most species. Infected animals
are removed from the herd. In dogs, infected animals are neutered and no
42ZOONOTICDISEASES
longer used for breeding purposes. In horses, treatment of fistulous withers
and poll evil is attempted in some cases. The treatment involves antibiotics and
supportive care and is a long process. Extreme care must be taken to prevent
human infection from the exudate of the abscesses. For this reason many
veterinarians recommend euthanasia of infected horses.
HUMANS
Treatment for brucellosis in humans involves combination antibiotic therapy
for up to 6 weeks.
PREVENTIONAND CONTROL
ANIMALS
In domestic animals, control is based on identification, segregation, and elim-
ination of infected breeding animals. Since 1951, there has been a joint state
and federal cooperative domestic livestock brucellosis eradication program in
the United States. It is based on surveillance testing on farms, at stock markets,
and at slaughterhouses. Infected animals are traced back to their herd of origin,
and the entire herd is quarantined and brucellosis tested. Sometimes entire
herds must be destroyed.
Vaccines are available for uninfected herds. The eradication program,
along with vaccinations, has nearly eradicated brucellosis in cattle in the
United States.
HUMANS
People who travel to countries where brucellosis is prevalent should be careful
to not drink unpasteurized milk or eat products made from unpasteurized
milk. Hunters should wear rubber gloves when handling the viscera of animals.
People who work in veterinary practices, laboratories, stockyards and slaugh-
terhouses should wear protective gear when handling suspect animals, tissues,
or fluids. Farmers or ranchers should wear rubber or plastic gloves when
assisting calving or aborting animals and should wash and disinfect all poten-
tially contaminated areas when they are finished.
There is no vaccine available for the general public. Immunocompromised
people (e.g, cancer patients, HIV-infected individuals, organ transplant patients)
should not handle infected dogs.
Brucella organisms can survive up to 6 weeks in dust and up to 10 weeks
 pe ss o  pl sa are   p ps u
including sunshine.
BRUCELLOSIS43
All cases or suspected cases of brucellosis must be reported to the local
health department, who will notify the state health department, Federal Bureau
of Investigation (FBl), and local law enforcement. The state health department
will notify the CDC.
HISTORICAL NOTE
In 1999 it was taken off the list of organisms considered likely biologic threats
for terrorism, in part because of the long incubation period and the low
mortality of infected people. It has since been put back on the list.
44 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
CAMPYLOBACTERIOSIS (VIBRIOSIS)
MORBIDITY: +++
MORTALITY: + TO +++
ETIOLOGY: BACTERIAL
There are several zoonotic species of Campylobacter, but C.jejuni and C.fetus are
the most pathogenic. C.jejuni and C.fetus cause two specific diseases in humans
and animals, so they will be discussed separately. Campylobacter spp. are spiral
or curve-shaped, motile, gram-negative rods. The genus Campylobacter was
previously known as Vibrio.
CAMPYIOBACTER JEJUNI
C.jejuni causes gastroenteritis (stomach and intestinal inflammation).
HOSTS
Mammals, the intestinal tracts of birds, and raw poultry meat are the primary
reservoirs of the bacteria.
TRANSMISSION
Most human cases of campylobacteriosis are transmitted through handling
raw poultry or eating raw or undercooked poultry meat. Poultry meat
becomes infected when birds are slaughtered and feces from the intestines
contaminate the meat. Cross-contamination of other foods can occur in the
kitchen if the raw poultry or poultry juices come in contact with other food.
Campylobacter can also be transmitted by direct exposure to infected animal
feces. Animals that shed C. jejuni in their feces don't have to be clinically sick
to pass the bacteria to humans. Person-to-person infection is possible, espe
cially in adults caring for children with voluminous diarrhea. People with
compromised immune systems (from HIV, organ transplants, or cancer treat
ment) are more susceptible to Campylobacter mfection and its complications.
C. jejuni can also be transmitted through drinking raw or unpasteurized
milk or feces-contaminated water.
Animals are infected most often by eating feces-contaminated food, under-
cooked poultry, and drinking feces-contaminated water. Infected children may
transmit the disease to puppies and kittens, which can in turn infect others.
CAMPYLOBACTERIOSIS (VIBRIOSIS) 45
CAMPYIOBACTER JEJUNI IN ANIMALS
Young animals are more susceptible to campylobacteriosis.
DOGS AND CATS
Suiuoa apnu pue sua pue saiddnd u aiaaas aiou are sutis jeuo au
and diarrhea. Pet owners can become infected by coming in contact with
contaminated feces.
CATTLE
Calves infected with C. jejuni may show clinical signs, including fever and
diarrhea with blood or mucus present. The disease can last up to 2 weeks.
C. jejuni has been shown to cause mastitis in cows, which can be a source of
infection to humans and animals who drink the raw milk.
SHEEP
C. jejuni causes abortion in sheep, which will occur late in pregnancy.
An infected ewe may deliver a full-term lamb that will be dead or weak and
that may die within a couple of days.
POULTRY
Poultry are reservoirs for C. jejuni, and shed the organism in their feces. They
do not naturally become clinically ill.
CAMPYIOBACTER JEJUNI IN HUMANS
Campylobacteriosis is one of the most common diarrheal diseases in the
United States and is seen most often in the summer months. Clinical signs
appear 2 to 5 days after exposure and include nausea, vomiting, watery diarrhea,
bloody diarrhea, abdominal cramping, and fever.
Guillain-Barre syndrome, a nervous system disorder that can lead to
paralysis when the body is triggered to attack its own nerves, is a rare compli-
cation of C. jejuni infection. It will appear about 2 weeks after the appearance
of clinical signs and will last several weeks.
DIAGNOSIS
Diagnosis is based on serology (checking the serum for the presence of
antibodies against the C. jejuni organism). Multiple samples must be tested
46ZOONOTIC DISEASES
to follow the level of antibodies as the disease progresses. Many apparently
diagnostic.
TREATMENT
Most cases of campylobacteriosis are self-limiting and do not require any
specific treatment. Keeping the patient hydrated when diarrhea is present is
important. In some cases, antibiotics may be necessary to decrease the severity
of the disease, especially if there is a high risk of human exposure.
CONTROL
Campylobacteriosis is difficult to control in animals because of widespread
reservoirs in wild animals. In humans, strict personal hygiene when in
contact with people or animals with diarrhea is essential. Avoiding raw
milk, contaminated drinking water, undercooked or raw poultry meat,
and cross-contamination of other foods will also decrease the chance
of becoming infected. Freezing reduces the number of C. jejuni organisms
on meat,
CAMPYIOBACTERFETUS
C. fetus causes vibriosis, also known as bovine venereal campylobacteriosis, or BVC.
The disease is characterized by infertility, fetal death, and abortion.
HosTS
Cattle and sheep are hosts. Humans are rarely infected.
TRANSMISSION
O slnq iatiren paoajun Aq peaids are suonnajun 'aeo u ais ue st siu
susceptible cows during mating.
In sheep the transmission is oral, from ingestion of aborted fetuses,
placentas, or vaginal discharges.
 In humans transmission is not well understood. It may involve ingestion of
infected animals.
CAMPYLOBACTERIOSIS (VIBRIOSIS)47
CAMPYIOBACTER FETUS IN ANIMALS
Infertility, early embryonic death, and abortions result from C. fetus infections.
CATTLE
In cows, C. fetus causes endometritis (inflammation of the lining of the uterus)
and salpingitis (inflammation of the fallopian tubes) that can last 3 to
4 months. A cow becomes infected when she is bred with an infected bull.
Most bulls are asymptomatic and recover spontaneously due to natural immu-
nity. Some bulls carry the organism for years and can be an unsuspected
source of infection.
An infected cow will come back into heat after she is bred, indicating she
Aleuaaa yeyn smon panoagul jo Xipaeadar uaddey uen stui 'sueuard pou s!
become pregnant, 5 to 10% will abort between 4 and 8 months. Other infected
cows will eventually recover and have a normal pregnancy. Some cows will
retain the organism and pass it back to the bull during the next breeding cycle
After an infection, cows can become naturally immune to further infection.
Some cows will not develop sufficient natural immunity and may become
infected again.
C. fetus can also be transmitted by contaminated equipment and instruments
used in artificial insemination.
SHEEP
C. fetus, along with C. jejuni, causes fetal death and abortion during late pregnancy.
Full-term lambs may be born dead or so weak that they die within a couple of
days. Ewes can develop endometritis and septicemia (bacterial infection in
the blood), which can be fatal. Ewes develop natural immunity after infection
 a  l t  a 'sa a n 's  o  ns  n
bladder and be shed in feces. Because transmission is oral, this is not an STD in
sheep.
CAMPYIOBACTER FETUS IN HUMANS
 In humans, C. fetus appears to be an opportunistic organism that usually mani-
fests itself in people who are already ill. It rarely causes enteritis cormparable
to that caused by C.jejuni.
In men, C. fetus causes septicemia that usually occurs as a secondary
infection to an already existing primary infection. If septicemia develops, the
mortality rate can reach over 40%.
48ZOONOTIC DISEASES
 In pregnant women, the clinical signs are seen after the fth month of preg-
nancy and include fever, diarrhea, miscarriage, or premature births. Premature
and full-term babies can die from the infection, which is characterized by inflam-
mation of the central nervous system. The mortality rate in babies is 50%.
DIAGNOSIS
Diagnosis is initially based on a herd history of infertility and abortion. C.fetus
organisms are very fragile and are quickly destroyed by heating, drying, and
exposure to the atmosphere. Without preservation in special media, they must
be cultured within a couple of hours of collection. For this reason culture is
not a reliable diagnostic test. Antibodies against C. fetus may be detected in
vaginal mucus from females, washings from the prepuce of males, and tissue
from aborted fetuses. These tests must be done in a diagnostic laboratory.
In men with septicemia, the C. fetus organism is usually an unsuspected
finding when the blood is cultured. When central nervous system (CNS) signs
(headache, back pain, fever, weakness, sensory loss, stiff neck, nausea, paralysis,
seizures, coma, or disorientation) are present, the organism can be found in
the cerebral spinal fluid. Culturing the organism from vaginal fluid is difficult
and requires repeated cultures in special media.
TREATMENT
Antibiotics can be infused into the uterus of females and the sheath of males
Most animals recover spontaneously. Finding animals to treat can be difficult
because many animals show no physical signs of disease.
CONTROL
Vaccines are available for cattle and sheep and must be administered before the
breeding season.
Artificial insemination will eliminate the spread of C. fetus from the bull to
cows. Equipment and instruments must be cleaned between each use to pre-
vent infection from infected cow to uninfected cow through contamination.
Because of oral transmission in sheep, control also involves good sanita-
tion, such as prompt removal of aborted fetuses and placentas. Ewes that have
aborted should be isolated from the rest of the herd. Some ewes will shed
C. fetus in their feces and contaminate grazing areas. Clothing and tools that
are contaminated with C. fetus can also be a source of infection.
CAT SCRATCH DISEASE 49
CAT SCRATCH DISEASE
Cat scratch disease (CSD) is also called cat scratch fever. It is also knowm as regiona!
lymphadenopathy, or lymphadenitis. Even though the disease has been described
since 1889, the causative agent was not positively identified until 1992.
MORBIDITY: ++
MORTALITY: +
ETIOLOGY: BACTERIAL
CSD is caused by Bartonella henselde, a small, gram-negative rod. The disease is
seen worldwide and is most commonly diagnosed during the fall and winter
months, possibly because this is when cats spend more time indoors.
HOSTS
Cats are the primary reservoir of B. henselae for human infection.
TRANSMISSION
B. henselae is transmitted from cats, primarily kittens less than 1 year old, to
humans by a bite, lick, or scratch. There are a number of theories about how
cats are originally infected. One theory suggests that the cat is a mechanical
vector for the organism that is spread from cat to cat by fleas. The organism
in the flea feces is picked up in the cat's mouth when it bathes and is dis-
tributed to the cat's feet during subsequent baths. The incidence of CSD
commonly in warmer climates, where the number of fleas is greater than in
cooler climates.
Another theory states that B. henselae may be part of the normal flora in a
cat's mouth that is spread to the cat's feet when it bathes.
B. henselae is found in an infected kitten's bloodstream on a recurring,
cyclical basis that may be short-lived or can last for months or years. B. henselde
can be transmitted from one cat to another through blood transfusion, but not
transplacentally from mother to kittens, and not sexually.
CSD is not contagious from human to human or from human to cat. Fleas
with CSD does not have to be isolated from the rest of the family
50ZOONOTIC DISEASES
CAT SCRATCH DISEASE IN CATS
Cats rarely get clinically ill from B. henselae infection. Many adult cats have
antibodies to B. henselae in their blood, indicating a previous exposure to the
organism.
CAT SCRATCH DISEASE IN HUMANS
CSD in humans is usually self-limiting, without any permanent damage. Most
cases are seen in people under 21 and those in the veterinary profession. There
is usually, but not always, a history of a cat scratch or bite. Letting a cat lick
an open wound can also result in CSD. A small pustule resembling an insect
ui 'syaam 7 ot I ui (s aimy) shep oi on e uym anis ayp ne sdoaaap ay
(edouapeul) iured pue uanloms auooaq lm eare au reau sapou
 o ose lm  a da om ao a r  a
headache, mild fever, and lethargy. The lymph nodes of the neck and extremi-
ties are most often affected because most cat bites and scratches occur on the
arms and legs. The lymphadenopathy is unilateral, on the side where the infec-
tion occurred. Nearly a quarter of infected patients will develop very painful,
FIGURE 5. Enlarged lymph nodes in a person with cat scratch disease. (From
Greene CE: Infectious diseases of the dog and cat, ed 3, St Louis, 2006, Saunders.)
CAT SCRATCH DISEASE 51
11 uu-as s a yonor uaag (snuapeyda) spou ydul paly-snd
can take up to 3 weeks for the lesion at the site of infection to heal and several
months for the lymph nodes to return to their normal size. In mild cases, treat-
ment is usually not required.
ou are oum aldoad ul uaas uaaq aaeu aso jo saouanbasuon jeordhpe auos
in good health, or people with compromised immune systems. These include
bacillary angiomatosis, which results in many blood-filled cysts on the skin, and
Parinaud's oculoglandular syndrome, which resembles pink eye (conjunctivitis).
Only one eye may be involved and shows signs that include a soft granuloma
(polyp) developing on the palpebral conjunctiva (the mucous membrane lining
the inner surface of the eyelid). The lymph nodes in front of the ear become
swollen and painful. The patient usually does not recall being scratched or
bitten by a cat. It is possible that the organism is found in cat saliva that stays
on the fur after a cat bathes. The patient becomes infected after petting the
cat, then rubbing the eye, thus transmitting the organism from the fur to the
conjunctiva,
Another atypical condition, seen less frequently, is encephalitis (inflammation
of the brain) resulting in seizures.
These abnormal signs and syndromes are also self-limiting, although it
may take up to a year for them to resolve.
DIAGNOSIS
CATS
Diagnosis of B. henselae infection in cats can be difficult. Five tests are available,
but none is better than the others.
* Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), immunofluorescence assay
(IFA), and Western blot tests detect the presence of antibodies against
B. henselae in blood. A positive test indicates that the cat has been exposed to
B. henselae at some time during its life. It does not indicate an active infec-
tion. It has been shown that over 10% of the B. henselae organisms in blood
will not stimulate antibody production, so these cats will test negative even
though there are organisms present.
in the blood 100% of the time, rather than appearing and disappearing on a
repeating, cyclical basis. A positive culture would provide a definitive diag-
nosis because the organisms themselves were in the blood when the sample was
was not present in the blood when the sample was taken.
52ZOONOTIC DISEASES
*Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) detects the presence of B. henselae DNA in
the blood, but the same drawback exists for PCR as for blood culture. PCR
will detect the DNA only if the organism is circulating in the blood at the
time the sample is taken.
HUMANS
Most cases of CSD in humans are based on clinical signs, along with a history
of a cat bite or scratch. The same tests used to diagnose B. henselae infection in
cats can be used for confirmation of the diagnosis in humans.
TREATMENT
Cats rarely show clinical signs of illness due to B. henselae infection, so treatment
is rarely implemented. A 3-week regimen of specific antibiotic treatment
may rid the cat of the organism and eliminate the cat as a source of infection.
This is not done on a routine basis.
Human cases of CSD usually resolve themselves without treatment.
In more severe cases, treatment with an antibiotic may shorten the course of
the disease. Symptomatic treatment of fever and pain with over-the-counter
medications will reduce discomfort but will not affect the course of the
disease. The atypical manifestations of CSD are most often treated with antibi-
otics, though the patient will most likely recover without treatment.
PREVENTION AND CONTROL
One episode of CSD usually results in lifetime immunity from further
infections. The following are some guidelines for decreasing exposure
to CSD:
* Keep cats indoors.
* Avoid playing rough with kittens who like to bite and scratch when they play.
hydrogen peroxide to the wound after scrubbing.
· If you have open wounds on your hands and arms, wear gloves when handling
cats.
· Do not allow a cat to lick an open wound.
· Keep the cat's claws trimmed. Declawing is not necessary.
* Control fleas with approved flea-control products.
* Teach people not to pick up strange cats.
· Routinely wash hands after handling or playing with cats.
CAT SCRATCH DISEASE 53
IMMUNOCOMPROMISED PEOPLE AND
CAT SCRATCH DISEASE
Immunocompromised people may develop more severe, but usually not life
threatening, cases of CSD, so some precautions should be taken. They should
than pick up a stray cat or kitten. Kittens are more likely to be infected with
 B. henselae. A cat with suspected B. henselae infection does not have to be given
to another home or euthanized if proper precautions are taken as previously
described.
HISTORICAL NOTE
"Cat Scratch Fever" is also a song, written and performed by Ted Nugent.
54 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
COLIBACILLOSIS
Colibacillosis is a disease caused by the bacterium Escherichia coli. Colibacillosis is
also known as hemorrhagic colitis. Other names associated with colibacillosis are col-
ibacteriosis, colitoxemia, and enteropathogenic diarrhea. We will concentrate on E. coli
O157:H7, which has emerged as a significant cause of food poisoning in people.
MORBIDITY: ++
MORTALITY: + TO ++
ETIOLOGY: BACTERIAL
Colibacillosis is caused by E. coli, which is a facultative anaerobic (can grow
both aerobically and anaerobically), gram-negative, rod-shaped bacterium that
ferments sugar, which results in gas production. The gas is released from the
body as flatulence. E. coli is one of several bacteria normally found in the intes-
tines of humans and animals.
There are hundreds of strains of E. coli. Most of the strains are essential for
normal food digestion and do not cause disease as long as they stay in the intes-
in other organs. For example, if E. coli from the intestines gets into the urinary
system, it can cause cystitis. In fact, E. coli is the primary cause of cystitis.
The strains that cause intestinal diseases are grouped into six categories.
The three most important categories are enterotoxogenic E. coli (ETEC),
enteroinvasive E. coli (EIEC), and enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC).
The ETEC strains produce toxins that cause profuse watery diarrhea, abdominal
cramping, dehydration, and possibly vomiting. The EIEC strains invade intestinal
lining cells and cause a mucoid diarrhea that may become tinged with blood.
The EHEC strains are the most zoonotic and pathogenic strains. They attach
to intestinal wall cells and produce strong toxins. E. coli O157:H7 is the strain
that has emerged as a significant cause of food poisoning in people. When E. coli
O157:H7 enters the intestinal tract of a person, it produces a powerful toxin
that damages the wall of the intestines, resulting in bloody diarrhea.
HOSTS
The most common reservoir of E. coli O157:H7 is cattle. Other animals that have
been identified as sources of human infection are deer, swine, and (rarely) dogs
and horses. None of these animals gets sick from harboring E. coli O157:H7.
COLIBACILLOSIS 55
When E. coli O157:H7 enters the intestinal tract of a human it becomes
pathogenic and may cause severe disease. The organism is passed in human
feces and is infective to other people.
TRANSMISSION
Transmission of E. coli O157:H7 is by the fecal-oral route. E. coli O157:H7 is
passed in the feces of infected animals, primarily cattle. When people put any-
thing in their mouths that has been in contact with the infected feces, they may
become infected. An infected person can also infect other people (Figure 6)
The most common method of transmission is eating undercooked, con-
taminated ground beef. Meat can be contaminated with feces on its surface
Animal carrier
￥
Feces
Human carrier
Water 
Soil
Contaminated
Feces
meat at
slaughter
Fruits and
vegetables
 Poor hygiene and
grown in
inadequate hand
contaminated
washing
soil
Improper
Inadequate
cleaning
cooking
or cooking
Consumed by
humans and
toxins produced
Human colibacillosis
FIGURE 6.
Colibacillosis.
56 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
during the slaughtering process. When ground beef is made, the surface E. coli
O157:H7 is mixed throughout the meat. Infected meat looks and smells
normal, but must be adequately cooked to kill the E. coli O157:H7. Other cuts
of meat, such as roasts, may be contaminated only on the surface, but must also
be adequately cooked to kill the organism. Salami and sausage that might contain
infected ground beef will also become infective if not cured or cooked properly.
Water can become contaminated when infected feces are washed into lakes.
rivers, ponds, streams, or municipal water sources. Drinking this untreated
water can lead to illness. Increased contamination is often seen after heavy rain
showers, when feces are washed into the water source, or in the spring, when
melted snow runoff enters the water.
Alfalfa sprouts, spinach, radish sprouts, and lettuce have been sources of
infection. Any raw fruit or vegetable has the potential to be infected with
E. coli O157:H7 if it comes in contact with infected feces. This is especially
true if it is grown in soil fertilized with raw cattle manure or irrigated with
contaminated water.
If infected feces get on the udder of a dairy cow, the E. coli O157:H7
organism may contaminate the milk from that cow. The raw milk will be infec-
tive, so it must be pasteurized to kill the organism. The same is true for dairy
products made from the infected milk.
Improperly processed apple cider and apple juice have been identified as
sources of infection. Any fruit juice must be pasteurized to kill the E. coli
O157:H7 organism.
 Person-to-person transmission occurs when good sanitation procedures
are not followed. Not washing hands with warm soapy water after using the
toilet, changing diapers, or handling raw meat has led to transmission of E. coli
O157:H7 to other people.
COLIBACILLOSIS IN ANIMALS
Animals, especially cattle that harbor E. coli O157:H7, do not get sick.
Other strains of E. coli have been associated with calf scours (diarrhea),
mastitis, abortion and early foal death in horses, neonatal enteritis in newborn
pigs, gut edema in older suckling pigs, and inflammation of numerous tissues
and organs in poultry.
COLIBACILLOSIS IN HUMANS
typically start showing clinical signs within 3 to 9 days. Abdominal cramping
COLIBACILLOSIS57
and pain is followed in about a day with diarrhea. Initially the diarrhea will be
watery, but then becomes bloody. Patients sometimes vomit, but rarely have
a fever. People who are otherwise healthy will recover without treatment in
5 to 10 days.
 Some people, especially children under 5 years old and adults over 65 years
old, may develop one of two serious complications to E. coli O157:H7 infection:
· Hemolytic uremic symdrome (HUS) is characterized by destruction of
red blood cells, kidney failure, decreased platelet formation, and some
 st snh nds supad a si amy euay 'suis geononau
principal cause of kidney failure in young children in the United States. HUS
can be followed with long-term complications, and it can be fatal in 3% to
5% of cases.
· Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) is characterized by the same
symptoms as HUS, only the neurological signs, such as seizures, strokes,
and coma, predominate. This syndrome is seen most often in elderly people
and can be fatal up to 50% of the time.
DIAGNOSIS
Diagnosis of E. coli O157:H7 is based on finding the bacterium in feces by
culturing the feces in a special medium. This medium is not normally used to
culture E. coli, so it has to be specially requested. Any person developing
sudden watery or bloody diarrhea should be tested for E. coli O157:H7.
TREATMENT
Most people who develop only diarrhea will recover without specific treatment,
which would include antibiotics, in 5 to 10 days.
Treatment for HUS and TTP includes dialysis, transfusions, and sup-
portive care.
PREVENTION
Prevention of E. coli O157:H7 infection is based on good sanitation procedures
and common sense:
* Cook all ground beef to a core temperature of at least 160° F.
* Keep raw meat away from foods that will be eaten raw. Wash counters,
utensils, and hands in warm soapy water after working with raw meat.
* Drink only pasteurized milk, fruit juices, and apple cider. Most commercially
available products have been pasteurized.
58ZOONOTIC DISEASES
·Wash all food that will be eaten raw.
* Drink only safe water. Municipal water systems treat water for E. coli using
chlorine, ozone, or ultraviolet light. When camping, treat water by boiling
or filtering before brushing teeth, washing dishes, or making beverages such
as coffee or tea.
*People with diarrhea should avoid public swimming places. They should also
avoid sharing baths and preparing food for others.
*Avoid swallowing swimming pool or other water where people are swimming.
· If children are allowed to touch animals, especially cattle, at farms, petting
zoos, or fairs, make sure they wash their hands with warm, soapy water after-
ward, Watch children to make sure they do not put dirty hands in their mouths.
* People with diarrhea, especially children, must wash their hands with warm,
soapy water following every bowel movement and every time they change a
diaper.
CRYPTOSPORIDIOSIS (CRYPTO) 59
CRYPTOSPORIDIOSIS (CRYPTO)
Cryptosporidiosis is one of the most common forms of waterborne diarrhea
in the United States. Although it has been a veterinary problem for quite a
while, it was not identified in humans until 1976.
MORBIDITY: +++
MORTALITY: +
ETIOLOGY: PARASITIC
Cryptosporidium spp.
HoSTS
Cryptosporidium spp. can infect mammals, reptiles, fish, and birds. C. parvum is the
species that most often infects humans, pets, and domestic and wild animals.
TRANSMISSION
Cryptosporidiosis is spread by the fecal-oral route. This means people or animals
can get cryptosporidiosis when they put anything in their mouths that has been
in contact with the feces of an infected animal or human. The most common
sources of infection are direct contact with infected feces, water contaminated
with infected feces (human or animal), and food contaminated by infected feces
(Figure 7).
 Infective organisms called oocysts are passed in the feces of an infected host.
Oocysts have thick, protective outer shells and can live in a moist environment
for up to 6 months. When the oocysts are ingested by the next host, they lose
their thick outer shells and enter the epithelial cells of the gastrointestinal tract
of the host. In these cells, they undergo an asexual multiplication and a sexual
multiplication, which result in oocyst production. The oocysts leave the cells
and are passed in the feces.
A second, uncommon route of transmission is through the respiratory
tract. In this instance the oocysts become airborne on feces, such as when a
calf with diarrhea swishes its tail or when a high-pressure washer is used to
clean up feces. When this method of transmission occurs, respiratory signs,
along with intestinal signs, may result.
Transmission does not occur through contact with blood.
60 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
Infected animal
Feces
Water
Food
Direct contact
withfeces
Consumed
 Poor hygiene and
 by humans
 inadequate hand 
washing
Human
cryptosporidiosis
FIGURE 7. Cryptosporidiosis.
CRYPTOSPORIDIOSIS IN ANIMALS
Cryptosporidiosis in animals affects mainly very young animals or immuno-
compromised animals. Calves 1 to 3 weeks old and lambs appear to be the most
uncommon in these species.
Clinical signs of cryptosporidiosis appear after a 4-day incubation period.
to defecate when there are no feces to pass; and weight loss. Cryptosporidiosis
may be worse in immunocompromised animals.
ss lu  xa inm pa aq  sie 
These animals will still shed oocysts and will be a source of infection to other
animals.
 Cryptosporidiosis is self-limiting in otherwise healthy animals. Mortality is
very low in animals that develop cryptosporidiosis. Neonates and immunocom-
CRYPTOSPORIDIOSIS IN HUMANS
Anyone can get cryptosporidiosis. In humans, as in animals, cryptosporidiosis
affects primarily young children and immunocompromised people, such as
CRYPTOSPORIDIOSIS (CRYPTO)  61
those receiving chemotherapy, kidney dialysis, or steroid therapy, and people
with HIV/AIDS or Crohn's disease. Cryptosporidiosis may linger longer and
may, in some cases, be fatal in these people. Dehydration is a common sequel
to diarrhea. Pregnant women are more susceptible to dehydration when they
have cryptosporidiosis.
The clinical signs of cryptosporidiosis in humans appear after a 2- to 7-day
incubation period. They include watery diarrhea, nausea with or without
vomiting, abdominal cramping (especially on the right side), mild fever, loss
of appetite, and headache. The disease is self-limiting in 1 to 2 weeks in other-
wise healthy people. During that time, the signs may come and go in a cyclical
manner.
 Some people will be infected with Cryptosporidium spp. and show no clinical
signs. These people can be a source of infection for other people or animals.
Although anyone can get cryptosporidiosis, there are certain groups of
people who are at increased risk of becoming infected:
* Veterinarians and veterinary technicians who work around young animals,
especially calves and lambs
* Dairy farmers, cattle ranchers, and their families
* People who are immunocompromised
· People exposed to human feces during sexual contact
* Children in childcare facilities who come in contact with diaper-age children
· People who work in childcare facilities
· Parents of infected children
· Caregivers working with people with diarrhea
* People who go camping, hiking, or backpacking and drink contaminated
water from lakes, streams, rivers, ponds, or shallow wells
* People who swallow water from swirmming pools, lakes, rivers, or ponds
contaminated with infected feces
DIAGNOSIS
Cryptosporidiosis is diagnosed by identifying oocysts in fecal samples.
Sometimes multiple samples will have to be analyzed to find the oocysts
because they are so small and may be shed in cycles.
TREATMENT
There is no specific treatment for cryptosporidiosis in otherwise healthy people
at this time, although there is a drug that has been approved for use in people with
62 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
healthy immune systems. Supportive therapy, mainly to prevent dehydration,
 is given to patients exhibiting clinical signs.
 u aas t i sus A o nusisan si uniiosndhi
adequately chlorinated swimming pool for several days. Moist heat (65° C for
30 minutes), steam, freezing, or thorough drying are the best ways to destroy
PREVENTION
There are no vaccines available for protection against cryptosporidiosis.
Prevention of cryptosporidiosis is based on good hygiene.
ANIMALS
* Raise animals, especially newborns, in a clean, dry environment.
* Separate healthy animals from sick animals. Caretakers should take care of
the healthy animals first or have a separate caretaker for sick animals.
* Rotate areas where animals are confined so there is a time when their cages
can be cleaned and disinfected.
* Clean up feces every day. The cocysts are infective when they are passed in
the feces.
PEOPLE
· Wear gloves when working around animals with diarrhea, especially young
animals. If there is a danger of being hit in the face with feces, as with a
swishing tail, wear a surgical mask or face shield.
animal with diarrhea, even if gloves were worn.
· Do not eat or drink in an animal facility. Wash hands before eating or
drinking after working with animals.
· Wash hands thoroughly with warm water and soap after using the toilet,
before handling food, or after changing diapers.
neq se yons 'sanag yim preun ul aoo ke yeu saoens le reai -
fixtures, diaper pails, changing tables, and toys (human and animal).
* Do not drink untreated water from lakes, ponds, streams, rivers, swimming
pools, shallow wells, hot tubs, or Jacuzzis. Water can be treated by boiling
it for 2 to 3 minutes, or by using a filter with a pore size of no bigger than
1 micron that has been rated for cyst removal.
·Wash in safe water and/or peel all fruits and vegetables before eating them.
CRYPTOSPORIDIOSIS (CRYPTO)63
* UIse safe water to wash dishes, brush teeth, and make ice cubes.
· Do not eat or drink unpasteurized dairy products; they may have been
contaminated with feces.
· Be especially careful when traveling to developing countries. Cryptosporidiosis
is found worldwide.
* Avoid fecal exposure during sexual activity, especially anal-oral activity.
The cases of reported cryptosporidiosis rose dramatically in the early 1980s,
along with the HIV/ AIDS epidemic.
64ZOONOTIC DISEASES
DERMATOMYCOSIS
A dermatomycosis is a highly contagious skin disease caused by fungi. It affects
both people and animals. Other names for a dermatomycosis are tinea, ring-
worm, jock itch, and athlete's foot. There are three groups of fungi that can cause
dermatomycosis:
*Anthrophilic fungi use humans as their primary reservoir.
· Geophilic fungi live in the soil and cause ringworm in people and animals.
· Zoophilic fungi live on animals other than people, but can be transferred to
people.
We will deal only with zoophilic fungi that are transmitted from animals
to people.
MORBIDITY: +
MORTALITY: +
ETIOLOGY: FUNGAL
Two genera of zoophilic fungi, Microsporum and Trichophyton, are responsible
for nearly all cases of dermatomycosis that are zoonotic. The spores of these
fungi are able to survive in the environment, in protected areas, for 18 months
or more. They rely on keratin, a protein found in the outer layer of the skin,
hair, feathers, nails, and hooves, for survival. They thrive when on a person
or animal, on shed hair, or on dead skin cells.
HoSTS
Dermatomycosis in animals is called ringworm. Cats, dogs, cows, horses, sheep,
and rodents are the most common sources of zoonotic dermatomycoses.
The following zoophilic fungi are responsible:
Microsporum canis is carried by cats and dogs and causes the most common form
of ringworm in these animals. It is transmissible to people (Figures 8 and 9).
Trichophyton mentagrophytes causes ringworm in rodents, cats, dogs, horses,
cattle, and pigs. It is transmissible to people (Figure 10).
Trichophyton equinum is found on horses and rarely on people (Figure 11).
* Trichophyton verrucosum is carried primarily by cattle, but can be found on
people, horses, and sheep (Figures 12 and 13).
* Microsporum nanum causes ringworm in pigs. It is rarely found on people.
DERMATOMYCOSIS65
FIGURE 8. Microsporum infection in a human. (Courtesy Public Health Image
Library, PHIL 3968, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, 1959.)
TRANSMISSION
Not every person or animal that comes in contact with these fungi will develop
asymptomatic. Young animals and children are most often affected because
suppressed immune systems, such as people with HIV/AIDS, those receiving
chemotherapy, and organ transplant recipients
Animal dermatomycosis is transmitted by direct contact with an infected
animal or with items contaminated with fungal spores. Grooming equipment,
brushes, blankets, bedding, tack, carpeting, furniture, air filters, shed hair,
or any other item that comes in contact with an infected animal can become
contaminated with spores. Spores can survive in a boarding facility or any
place an infected animal has visited, including veterinary facilities.
The incubation period varies in animals and people but is usually a few
days to a few weeks.
66ZOONOTIC DISEASES
FIGURE 9. Microsporum canis in a cat: the alopecia and erythema of the lateral digit
are typical of nail bed infections caused by M. canis. (From Medleau L,
Hnilica KA: Small animal dermatology: a color atlas and therapeutic guide,
ed 2, St Louis, 2006, Saunders.)
FIGURE 10. Trichophyton infection in a dog. (Photograph by Annette Loeffler,
with permission. From Gaudiano F, Curtis C: Vterinary dermatology:a manual for
nurses and technicians, London, 2005, Elsevier.)
DERMATOMYCOSIS67
B
FIGURE 11. Trichophyton infection in a horse. A, Ringworm: diffuse infection with
Trichophyton in the girth and chest wall areas due to infection from contaminated
girths and riding boots. B, Ringworm: generalized infection with Frichophyton in a
6-month-old foal. (From Pascoe RRR, Knottenbelt DC: Manual of equine dermatology:
London, 1999, Saunders.)
DERMATOMYCOSIS IN ANIMALS
Many animals carrying the fungal spores that cause ringworm will show no
clinical signs. Young animals are most likely to develop ringworm lesions.
The lesions typically seen with ringworm usually begin with scaly patches
 u pe a aq  seare aui 'sh uaq ur
swollen, and crusty. In some animals the lesions are not well-defined and may
be more diffuse. In these cases, the animal shows areas of alopecia that may
   e ss    s  a   s
common problem with ringworm,
68ZOONOTICDISEASES
FIGURE 12. Trichophyton infection in a cow. Note irregularly ovoid, hairless areas
with mild surface crusting (Courtesy Dr. H. Denny Liggitt. From McGavin MD,
Zachary JF: Pathologic basis of veterinary disease, ed 4, St Louis, 2006, Mosby.)
FIGURE 13. Trichophyton infection in a human. (Courtesy Public Health Image
Library, PHIL 2938, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, 1964.)
DERMATOMYCOSIS 69
CATS AND DOGS
M. canis is the most common cause of ringworm in cats and dogs. T. mentagro-
phytes is a less common cause. Other geophilic fungi can also cause ringworm.
Kittens are most likely to show clinical signs. Lesions are found on the face.
ears, and paws. Nearly 90% of infected, asymptomatic cats carry M. canis. Most
people who develop ringworm will do so from contact with infected cats or
kittens. Dogs usually develop the typical circular lesions associated with ring-
worm. The lesions can be found anywhere on the body and initially look like
shaved areas. Pustules may develop in the lesions.
RODENTSANDLAGOMORPHS
tion. The lesions are white and scabby and are seen on the head and trunk.
T. mentagrophytes is transmissible to dogs and cats as well as people. Most rodents
are asymptomatic carriers.
HORSES
Ringworm lesions caused by T. equinum are found mainly where saddles and
 e ssl a  y s u ose t h ss a a ssss
exudative patches, where the hair sticks together because of the sticky pus
present on the skin. When these clumps fall off or are pulled away, they leave
behind areas of alopecia. The skin becomes thickened. Itching is a problem
only in the initial stages. Transmission to people occurs but is rare.
CATTLE
Ringworm in cattle, also known as barn itch, is caused by T verrucosum. In range
cattle, it is seen during the winter months, when cattle are more likely to come
in contact with one another because they are confined to barns or feedlots. The
lesions are seen mainly on the face (especially around the eyes, ears, and
muzzle) and neck but also appear on the flanks and legs. They are white, dry
areas containing broken hairs. Initially the lesions may look like warts. Some
lesions are very small (1 centimeter), and others are quite extensive. A scab
develops that eventually falls off, leaving behind an area of alopecia. Cattle
ringworm is transmissible to people.
SHEEP AND GOATS
uaaq sey snbunf quni qnp se umoux uonipuo v 'sheog u aren st uromuy
recognized since the late 1980s. This is a form of ringworm that develops in sheep.
mainly lambs, that are taken to shows, exhibitions, sales rings, or any place lambs
70 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
from different herds are brought together. It has also been knowm as woolrot and
humpy wool. Frichophyton has been identified as the causative fungus. Close shearing,
repeated washings, and stress make the lambs more susceptible to infection. The
lesions appear on the head, neck, and back. They initially appear as thick, red,
cozing, circular areas that later become crusty.The wool may appear clumped, and
hairs at the center of the lesion break off easily. Transmission to people can occur.
PIGS
M. nanum is classified by some as a geophilic fungus because it is found in soil
where pigs are raised and is seldom spread to people. The lesions in pigs are
wrinkled areas of skin covered by a thin scab that is easily removed.
DERMATOMYCOSIS IN HUMANS
It is important to remember that animals are a minor source of dermato-
mycosis in people. In healthy people, lesions stay on the keratinized layers of
skin and hairs, but in people with suppressed immune systems, the infection
can go deeper and become systemic. Fungal skin infections in people are
named by where they are found on the body:
· Tinea corporis is seen on the skin.The lesions appear as small, red spots that
grow into large rings on the arms, legs, or chest.
maq uaq ansn suisl au ofsaa se uo ose si siad r .
the toes, where the skin is moist. They become red and itchy and have a
unnbun pau sauooaq it 'slreuaon au on speaids snuny aut Jl 'anejms jam
The toenails become thick and crumbly. Scratching the area can spread the
infection to hands and fingernails.
· Tinea cruris, also known as jock itch, is caused by fungus growing in the moist,
warm area of the groin. The lesions are found most often in men who
frequently wear athletic equipment.
· Tined capitis, also known as ringworm,is found on the head. The lesions begin
as itchy, red areas where eventually the hair is destroyed, leaving bald
patches. Ringworm is the most common dermatomycosis in children.
DIAGNOSIS
Beyond the clinical signs, there are three methods used to diagnose dermatomycosis:
·  The Woods lamp is a special blacklight that emits filtered ultraviolet light.
When exposed to a Woods lamp, many but not all fungi will fluoresce
present. Dander and certain topical medications will also fluoresce.
DERMATOMYCOSIS 71
* Hair is pulled from the outer edges of the lesion, where the fungi are still
active. The hairs are placed on a microscope slide in a KOH (potassium
hydroxide) solution to make the spores more visible. They are then exam-
ined under a microscope for the presence of spores on the hair shaft. This
method of diagnosis is useful up to 70% of the time.
· For identification of the specific fungus causing the dermatomycosis, hair
from the edge of the lesion must be cultured on specialized media in a
specific environment. Growth can take up to several weeks, and each fungus
 grows in uniquely appearing colonies on the media.
TREATMENT
inhibits the lesions from spreading, but medical treatment can lessen the
severity of the disease and decrease the possibility of it spreading to other
animals or people. Both topical and oral medications are available, some of
them over the counter. Topical medications include creams, ointments, sprays,
shampoos, and dips. Anyone who has had to suffer the smell of lime sulphur
better than treatment. Treatment may last a long time, even after the animal or
eq umoia sey arey au iane uaaa ureuai ueo snuny au ranaq sreadde uosiad
PREVENTION
There is only one vaccine available in North America against ringworm in cats
caused by M. canis. No other vaccines are available for people or other animals.
Prevention is based on limiting exposure to infected animals or people and
anything with which they might have come in contact. This is difficult because
the fungal spores can survive in the right environment for up to 18 months
or longer. Some precautions that will help limit the exposure of people to
infected animals follow:
* Screen new animals introduced into a herd or colony.
· Maintain hygienic living conditions for animals. Reduce crowding as much
as possible to avoid direct contact.
* Open sores, scratches, and other skin lesions may enhance the development
en poalqo dreus Aue on amsodxa azjuuu os 'jeuue ue u unomau jo
may cause injury.
* When infected animals are present, clean all bedding, toys, tack, carpeting,
furniture, kennels, stalls, barns, or anywhere the animal has been. The spores
72ZOONOTIC DISEASES
are killed by sunlight, a 1:10 household bleach solution (1 part bleach to
10 parts water), and strong detergents. Vacuuming will remove the spores,
but remember to destroy the vacuum bag afterward.
* Disinfect all grooming equipment after each use. Commercial fungicides are
available for this purpose.
* Be cautious when taking animals to fairs, shows, boarding kennels, grooming
facilities, and veterinary facilities. Look for animals with obvious lesions and
avoid them and the places they inhabit.
· Healthy, well-nourished animals and people are more resistant to dermato-
mycosis.
· Since fungi prefer moist areas for growth, keep kennels, barns, and other
living quarters as dry as possible.
* Wear gloves when handling potentially or obviously infected animals.
EASTERN EQUINE ENCEPHALITIS73
EASTERN EQUINE ENCEPHALITIS
MORBIDITY: +
MORTALITY: +++
ETIOLOGY: VIRAL
Eastern equine encephalitis virus (EEEV) is an arbovirus (arthropod-borne
virus) that causes eastern equine encephalitis (EEE). Other important encephalitis
arboviruses include the western equine encephalitis virus, St. Louis encephalitis
virus, West Nile virus, and La Crosse encephalitis virus.
HoSTS
Hosts are vertebrates, especially birds, humans, and horses.
TRANSMISSION
EEEV is seen primarily east of the Mississippi River. The natural hosts for
EEEV are passerine birds, such as blackbirds, finches, jays, sparrows,
and warblers. The virus is found mainly in or near swampy areas or wetlands
and is transmitted through the bite of an infected mosquito. Horses and
humans are infected when a mosquito takes blood from an infected bird and
subsequently takes blood from a horse or human and deposits the virus at the
site of the bite. Horses and humans do not develop a significant enough
viremia, or virus level in the blood, to be a source of infection to other
animals via a mosquito bite; they are, therefore, considered dead-end hosts
(Figure 14).
 EEE is indirectly zoonotic, meaning humans and horses cannot be infected
directly, from one another, or from birds. Mosquitoes act as vectors that
transmit the virus. EEE occurs most commonly during late summer and coin
cides with mosquito activity.
EASTERN EQUINE ENCEPHALITIS IN HORSES
EEEV in horses causes a central nervous system (CNS) disease. An infected
horse either dies suddenly or shows progressive signs of CNS deterioration,
with death 2 to 3 days after the onset of clinical signs. Mortality can reach 75%
to 90% in infected animals. Mildly infected horses may recover over a 2-week
74ZOONOTIC DISEASES
Infected bird
Mosquito takes blood
Mosquito takes
meal from infected bird
blood meal
from
uninfected 
bird and 
Infected mosquito takes
deposits virus
blood meal from human
and deposits virus
into bloodstream
Human eastern 
equine encephalitis
FIGURE 14. Eastern equine encephalitis.
period but are left with some degree of permanent brain damage. All equines
(e.g, mules and donkeys) are susceptible to EEEV infection. Birds such as
ostriches, emus, quails, turkeys, and pheasants are also susceptible to EEEV
infection.
The first clinical sign of EEE is a fever, seen a day after infection and lasting
a day. This sign is often overlooked. The second phase of clinical signs is seen
4 to 6 days after infection and includes a second episode of fever; depression;
anorexia with difficulty swallowing; flaccid lips; teeth grinding; staggering
gait; stumbling; walking in circles; paddling when down; a “sawhorse” stance
with splayed, stiff legs; head pressing; sensitivity to light; blindness; convul-
and the mortality rate is higher than with western equine encephalitis or West
Nile encephalitis.
EASTERN EQUINE ENCEPHALITIS IN HUMANS
In humans, EEE first presents with flulike symptoms, somewhere
between 4 and 15 days after being bitten by an infected mosquito. These
symptoms include fever, vomiting, fatigue, headaches, neck stiffness, and
EASTERN EQUINE ENCEPHALITIS 75
ssnd m sdus au 'aldoad aos un ued aposnu panau
to seizures and possibly coma. If CNS signs develop, mortality can reach
35%. If a person recovers from an EEEV infection that has progressed to
CNS signs, there is about a 30% chance that permanent brain damage
will remain. EEE is seen less often than western equine encephalitis or
St. Louis encephalitis, but it causes a more severe disease with a higher
mortality rate.
DIAGNOSIS
A specific diagnosis is made by isolating EEEV from the brain tissue of humans
or horses who have died from EEE. An initial diagnosis is based on clinical
signs, season, and geographic location. A final diagnosis can be made by virus
isolation or by serologic testing of the affected patient for the presence of
antibodies against EEEV.
TREATMENT
There is no specific antiviral drug treatment for EEE. Supportive therapy such
as administration of medications to decrease brain swelling, nutritive fluids,
and antibiotics to treat or prevent secondary bacterial infections may make the
patient more comfortable.
PREVENTION
HORSES
Prevention of EEE in horses involves vaccination and decreased exposure to
mosquitoes. There is no evidence that EEE can be transmitted directly between
horses, between humans, or between horses and humans.
Reducing exposure to mosquitoes involves the following steps:
* Drain areas of standing water. These are mosquito breeding sites.
· Keep horses inside during peak mosquito activity (early evening until after
dawn).
· Keep the lights off in stables during the night. Mosquitoes are attracted to
incandescent lights.
* Put screens on stable windows and keep fans blowing to prevent mosquito access.
· Place incandescent lights around the outside of the stable, to attract the
mosquitoes away from the horses.
· Fog the stable with an approved pesticide in the evening.
76 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
* Use mosquito repellents intended specifically for horses.
Vaccines are available for protection against EEEV infection and should be
administered either before mosquito season begins in colder climates or when a
foal reaches 3 months of age in areas where mosquito activity is nearly constant.
Initial vaccination requires multiple injections followed by yearly boosters.
HUMANS
Prevention of EEE in humans involves decreased exposure to mosquitoes.
There is no vaccine available.
Reducing exposure to mosquitoes involves the following steps:
* Drain areas of standing water. These are mosquito breeding sites.
· Reduce outdoor activities during peak mosquito activity.
· Wear protective clothing when mosquitoes are most active, especially in the
early evening and early morning. Protective clothing includes light-colored,
long-sleeved shirts and long pants.
· Use insect repellent containing DEET on exposed skin.
· Make sure window screens fit properly and do not have any holes to decrease
mosquito access to building interiors.
EHRLICHIOSIS77
EHRLICHIOSIS
Ehrlichiosis is a group of tick-borne diseases that attack white blood cells.
It is a seasonal disease that corresponds to the months when ticks are active.
In dogs the disease is also known as tracker dog disease, canine hemorrhagic fever.
or canine typhus.
MORBIDITY: +
MORTALITY: +
ETIOLOGY: BACTERIAL
Ehrlichia spp. are small, gram-negative, obligate intracellular coccobacilli that
cause ehrlichiosis. There are many species that cause disease in various animals,
but the zoonotic species are E. chaffeensis, E. ewingii, Anaplasma phagocytophilum
(formerly E. equi and E. phagocytophila), and Neorickettsia sennetsu (formerly
E. risticii). E. canis may be zoonotic, but confirmation has not been completed.
Ehrlichia bacteria must infect white blood cells to multiply. Within the cells.
stained blood smear. The white blood cells are responsible for protection of the
body from outside invaders, so damage to these cells and their consequent
removal from circulation can make the host more susceptible to developing
diseases.
HoST
The host for ehrlichiosis depends on the species of Ehrlichid.
TRANSMISSION
Ixodid (hard) ticks are vectors for ehrlichiosis. The Lone Star tick is the
primary vector for E. chaffeensis and E. ewingi. A. phagocytophilum is transmitted
by black-legged ticks. The vector for N. sennetsu is unknown. The organisms
are transmitted from host to host by tick feedings. Ticks at all stages of the tick
life cycle (Appendix 1) can become infected when they feed on an infected
host (Figure 15).
person-to-person or person-to-animal transmission does not occur.
78  ZOONOTIC DISEASES
 Infected animal
Tick larva, nymph, or
Tick larva,
adult takes blood
nymph, or adult 
meal from infected
 takes blood
animal and ingests
meal from
organism
infected animal and
deposits organism
Tick larva, nymph, or
adult attaches to human,
takes blood meal, and
deposits Ehrlichia organism
into bloodstream
Ehrfichia organisms enter
white blood cells
Human ehrlichiosis
FIGURE 15. Ehrlichiosis.
EHRLICHIOSIS IN ANIMALS
E. chaffensis has been identified in dogs, coyotes, red foxes, deer, goats, and
lemurs. The primary reservoir hosts are deer. E. ewingi causes disease in dogs;
dogs are also the primary reservoir hosts. Anaplasma phagocytophilum is found
in dogs, horses, deer, bison, elk, rodents, llamas, cats, cattle, sheep, goats, and
nonhuman primates. The primary reservoir hosts are deer, elk, and rodents.
Neorickettsia sennetsu is still a mystery. It causes a mild disease.
Ehrlichiosis in animals is named by which white blood cells are infected.
Monocytic ehrlichiosis is characterizedby infection of monocytes and
macrophages. If granulocytic white blood cells, primarily neutrophils, are
infected, then the disease is granulocytic ehrlichiosis.
EHRLICHIOSIS 79
DOGS
Monocytic ehrlichiosis and granulocytic ehrlichiosis present similar clinical dis
 o   t i      ss
for granulocytic ehrlichiosis, it is 1 to 14 days after a tick bite. Dogs usually
present with fever, lethargy, anorexia, swollen lymph nodes, enlarged spleen,
and weight loss. They may also develop vomiting, diarrhea, lameness, edema in
the hind legs, coughing, diffculty breathing, and discharges from the eyes and
mose. The acute phase lasts up to 4 weeks, and many times dogs will recover
ueuai Keu op e aseud peouoqns au Suma 'aseasip leouoqns e dolaaap
symptom-free, clear the bacteria from its body, or develop chronic ehrli-
chiosis. Chronic ehrlichiosis is characterized by anorexia; chronic weight loss;
fever; depression; weakness; edema in the hind limbs, scrotum, and tail;
bleeding disorders; pale mucous membranes; nose bleeds; blood in the urine;
or blood in the feces. Many of these signs are attributable to decreased
numbers of not only white blood cells but also red blood cells and platelets.
 sisa  m sp u  a s si sr
with monocytic ehrlichiosis.
HORSES
Equine granulocytic ehrlichiosis can progress from a mild disease to a severe
 gressing to incoordination, depression, jaundice, reluctance to move, and edema
of the hind limbs.
CATTLE AND SHEEP
lambs born in tick-infested areas or introduced to older animals are usually
more often infected than older sheep. A sudden fever that lasts 4 to 10 days can
be accompanied by weight loss, lethargy, coughing, and increased respiratory
and heart rates. In older animals abortion may occur, and the quality of semen
may be reduced.
Dairy cattle recently turned out to pasture are most commonly affected by
tick-borne fever. The clinical signs include depression, anorexia, decreased
milk production, coughing, abortions, and decreased semen quality. Abortion
accompanied by decreased milk production and respiratory disease are the two
most common syndromes seen.
Most ruminants recover spontaneously within 2 weeks, but relapses brought
on by stress can occur. Infections can last up to 2 years after initial recovery.
80ZOONOTICDISEASES
EHRLICHIOSIS IN HUMANS
which white blood cells are infected. If the monocytes and macrophages are
infected, it is called human monocytic ehrlichiosis (HME). When the granulocytic
white blood cells are infected, it is called human granulocytic ehrlichiosis (HGE).
The clinical signs of HME and HGE are virtually the same. Because human
graphic distribution, the same tick vector, and present very similar clinical pic-
tures, ehrlichiosis has sometimes been referred to as spotless Rocky Mountain
spotted fever. The rash associated with RMSF is rarely seen with ehrlichiosis.
Ehrlichiosis in people varies, from asymptomatic to a nonspecific disease
to a potentially fatal disease. The usual incubation period is 5 to 14 days, but
symptoms may not appear for up to a month. It starts with flulike symptoms
including fever, chills, headache, muscle pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, joint
se pou nq ‘ua.piyo ul dopaap Keu ysen e Ajarey 'ured peujuopqe pue 'ured
specific a rash as seen with Lyme disease, which may be associated with a very
specific appearing rash. The rash usually involves the trunk, legs, arm, and face
but spares the hands and feet.
More severe clinical signs, seen more often in immunocompromised people
and those who have had their spleens removed, include prolonged fever; kidney
failure; secondary infections; heart disease; multiorgan failure; and central nervous
system involvement, including seizures and coma. The spleen is one of the organs
that filters blood to remove abnormal blood cells. If the spleen is removed, many
of the infected white blood cells stay in circulation. In some cases ehrlichiosis can
be confused with infectious mononucleosis, which is characterized by fever,
lethargy, anorexia, swollen lymph nodes, and enlarged liver and spleen.
DIAGNOSIS
Initial diagnosis is based on patient history of a tick bite, clinical signs, and
laboratory tests. Serologic testing will confirm the disease. Morulae are occa-
sionally found in the white blood cells on a stained blood smear (Figure 16).
TREATMENT
Antibiotics are used in the treatment of ehrlichiosis. Early treatment will result
in better results; if treatment is not started right away, the course of the disease
as well as the treatment may be more prolonged.
EHRLICHIOSIS  81
FIGURE 16. Ehrlichia organisms in a white
blood cell. (From Harvey JW: Atlas of
veterinary hematology: blood and bone
marrow of domestic animals, St Louis,
2001, Saunders.)
PREVENTION
Tick and rodent control are the best approach to prevention. Avoiding
endemic regions during the peak transmission months is especially important
for people who have had their spleens removed or for immunocompromised
persons.
 Decrease exposure to ticks by following these guidelines:
* Avoid areas where ticks thrive as much as possible. Ticks have to live where
their hosts live, so areas that are endemic for specific ticks are where specific
species of Ehrlichia will be found.
· Wear light-colored clothing when entering an area that may be a habitat for
ticks. This will make the ticks easier to see and remove before they become
attached.
· Wear long-sleeved shirts and long pants tucked into socks so the ticks cannot
crawl under clothing; wear high rubber boots and a hat for the same reason.
·Walk in the center of trails to avoid vegetation where ticks are lurking. Ticks
cannot fly, jump, skip, or hop, so they must come in direct contact with a
host before they can attach themselves. Immature ticks are found hiding in
the shade in a moist area. Adult ticks cling to grass, bushes, and shrubs and
wait for a host to come by.
° Exposed skin and clothing can be protected with insect repellents containing
DEET. Clothes, but not exposed skin, can be protected with insect repellents
containing permethrin, which kills ticks on contact.
· Check often for ticks while outside. Black-legged ticks are tiny and easy to
miss.
· Do not sit on the ground or on stone walls, where ticks can abound.
82ZOONOTIC DISEASES
*Make daily checks of the entire body for ticks. Look especially in areas where
ticks like to attach, such as behind the ears, the back of the neck, in the armpits,
behind the knees, and in the groin area. Bathing will remove crawling ticks
but will not detach ticks already attached. Daily tick checks and prompt
removal of attached ticks are vital to reducing the risk of transmission.
Removing a tick within 24 hours of attachment will greatly reduce the
possibility of Ehrlichia transmission.
· Wash and dry outdoor clothing in hot temperatures after use.
To remove a tick, use fine tweezers, grasp the tick as close to the skin as
possible, and pull straight back with a slow, steady force. Avoid crushing the
tick's body. Kill the tick by dropping it in alcohol. Save the tick in alcohol as a
possible diagnostic aid.
Tick-control products such as tick collars should be used on dogs that
could possibly be exposed to ticks. This will help protect them from possible
Ehrlichia infection and will help decrease the number of ticks the dogs could
possibly bring into a house, where people could be exposed to them.
Grazing ruminants on relatively tick-free pastures will reduce the number
of cases of tick-borne fever
There are no vaccines available to protect against ehrlichiosis.
NOTE
Co-infection with Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease), Babesia sp., or other
organisms that share the same tick vectors may also be seen.
GIARDIASIS (GIARDIA)83
GIARDIASIS (GIARDIA)
Giardiasis is the second most common cause of parasitic human diarrhea in
     s   n  
Giardia is the most common cause of water-borne disease. Giardiasis is found
in all regions of the UInited States and has been called back-packer's disease, beaver
disease, and traveler's diarrhed.
MORBIDITY: ++
MORTALITY: +
ETIOLOGY: PARASITIC
Giardiasis is caused by a microscopic, single-celled, protozoan parasite,
G. intestinalis, also known as G. lamblia. There have been other Giardia species
identified, but G. intestinalis is considered the primary cause of giardiasis in
humans and warm-blooded animals.
G. intestinalis has a two-stage life cycle. In the first stage, the disease-
causing trophozoite stage, G. intestinalis is found in the small intestine.
In the second stage, the cyst stage, the organism is passed in the host's
feces. At this stage, it can remain
viable in a moist environment for
several months because of its thick protective capsule. The cysts can even
withstand short-term freezing.
Cysts present in the environment are
swallowed when a potential host eats feces-contaminated food, drinks
feces-contaminated water, or puts any feces-contaminated object in its
mouth. The protective capsule is removed by the acid in the stomach,
and two trophozoites are formed. The trophozoites are carried to the first
part of the small intestine, where they attach to the intestinal wall
and reproduce by binary fission. Some of the trophozoites will encyst
and pass in the feces. Some unencysted trophozoites will also pass in the
feces (Figure 17).
HOSTS
Giardiasis is found in humans and a wide variety of domestic and wild animals
including dogs, cats, cattle, sheep, horses, pigs, guinea pigs, chinchillas, deer,
mice, beavers, bears, and muskrats. Theoretically, any warm-blooded animal,
domestic or wild, could be susceptible.
84ZOONOTICDISEASES
Infected animal
Feces
Water
Food
Inanimate
object
Consumed
Inadequate
by humans 
handwashing or
object put directly
into mouth
Human giardiasis
FIGURE 17.  Giardiasis.
TRANSMISSION
Giardiasis is spread by the fecal-oral route and can be very contagious. The host
must ingest feces contaminated with G.intestinalis cysts via food, water, hands, or
an inanimate object. When the cysts are passed in the feces of an infected host they
are immediately infective, and it takes very few ingested cysts to cause infection.
Outbreaks of giardiasis have been seen where municipal water treatment
plants have failed to filter G. intestinalis out of contaminated water.
0n uosiad 'jeuue on leuure 'uos.iad on uos.iad uoy aq uen uoissusuei
animal, or animal to person. Giardia is not transmitted through blood.
GIARDIASIS IN ANIMALS AND HUMANS
Giardiasis is the same in animals and humans. The disease is more often seen
in young animals and children, probably because they are more apt to put
contaminated items in their mouths.
The symptoms of giardiasis appear 7 to 10 days after ingestion of the cysts.
They include severe, foul-smelling diarrhea; nausea; abdominal cramps; gas;
fatigue; and weight loss in the presence of a normal appetite and normal food
intake. There is usually no fever and no blood in the diarrhea; feces are usually
formed, not watery, and are mixed with mucus. The symptoms usually last
GIARDIASIS (GIARDIA)85
about 2 weeks but may last as long 2 months or even as long as a year. Some
cases are fatal. In young animals, growth may be retarded.
Some people are exposed to giardiasis more than others. They include
people who work with animals, those living in crowded living conditions with
poor sanitation, people who work in child care facilities, young children in
child care facilities, people exposed to human feces by sexual contact, people
who travel to developing countries, and people who spend time in the wilder-
ness and drink untreated water from streams or lakes.
People and animals who are immunocompromised may develop more
severe symptoms when infected with G. intestinalis.
       a   
Not all people or animals who are infected with G. intestinalis will develop symp-
toms of disease. They can, however, be a source of infection to others.
DIAGNOSIS
Diagnosis of giardiasis is based on finding cysts or, less frequently, trophozoites
in fecal samples. Because the cysts and trophozoites are shed intermittently,
it is necessary to examine a series of at least three fecal samples. A history of
recent travel to developing countries, hiking, camping, and drinking untreated
water from streams or lakes can be helpful in establishing a diagnosis.
Serologic tests have been developed to detect the presence of Giardid
antigens in blood.
TREATMENT
Giardiasis is treated with appropriate antibiotics. Some people and animals
recover without treatment. Bathing an infected animal and disinfecting the
animal's environment with a quaternary ammonium-based disinfectant is also
recommended.
PREVENTION
ingestion of any feces-contaminated food, water, or object.
The following recommendations will help campers and hikers prevent
giardiasis:
lq, nso lm sred as s 'aes s yup nos am au as a -
water" warnings. If in doubt, boil water for 3 to 5 minutes. Bottled water is
86ZOONOTIC DISEASES
aun turduen roh 'sisoso asaaan yono passaond uaaq seu h jl ares
are filters available that will remove Giardia; read the label to make sure.
Chemical purification will also destroy Giardid.
*Do not make ice cubes from untreated water.
* Use treated water when brushing teeth, rinsing food that will not be cooked.
washing dishes, and making coffee or baby formula.
*  Avoid drinking water that may be contaminated with animal or human feces.
· Dispose of waste materials in such a way that they cannot contaminate
surface or ground water.
The following recommendations will help everyone practice good sanitation:
diapers, gardening, handling animals, or dealing with animal feces.
* Do not drink unpasteurized milk or eat unpasteurized dairy products; they
may have been contaminated with feces.
* Do not go into swimming pools, hot tubs, Jacuzzis, fountains, rivers, springs,
ponds, lakes, or streams if you have diarrhea. Avoid swallowing any water
from any of these sources.
* Do not prepare food for others if you have diarrhea.
· Teach children how to wash their hands after using the toilet or handling
animals.
·Wash all foods to be eaten raw with safe water.
· Wash surfaces that may have come in contact with feces, such as changing
tables, diaper pails, bathroom fixtures, dog toys, kennels, pens, or any other
animal housing facility.
· Do not drink untreated water during a municipal outbreak.
Vaccines are available for dogs and cats.
HANTAVIRUSPULMONARY SYNDROME87
HANTAVIRUS PULMONARY SYNDROME
Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS) was first identified in the United
States in 1993, though it has probably been around a lot longer. It is character-
ized by a severe lung disease for which there is no cure.
MORBIDITY: +
MORTALITY:+++
ETIOLOGY: VIRAL
The virus that causes HPS belongs to a group of viruses of the genus Hantavirus.
There are many hantaviruses, and each species has a specific rodent or group
of rodents as its main reservoir. In Europe and Asia, Hantavirus causes hemor-
rhagic fever with renal syndrome and is usually not fatal. In North America,
Hantavirus attacks the respiratory system causing HPS, which has a nearly 50%
fatality rate.
HOSTS
Four rodents that have been identified as reservoirs for the HPS virus are the
deer mouse, found throughout North America; the cotton rat, found primarily
in the southeastern UInited States, in areas overgrown with shrubs and tall
grasses; the rice rat, found in marshy and semiaquatic areas of the southeastern
United States; and the white-footed mouse, found in all of the United States
q ueo anq seare papoom pue ysnrq ajaad seue asa 'pueug man ndaoxa
found in more open areas. The deer mouse was the frst rodent identified as a
reservoir.
Common house mice and common rats have not been associated with HPS.
TRANSMISSION
The most common method of HPS virus transmission to humans is when
people breathe air that contains aerosolized, fresh rodent urine, feces, or saliva
(Figure 18). Aerosolization occurs when dust or nesting materials are stirred
up and tiny droplets containing the virus become airborne. Other methods
of transmission that have been identified or suspected are direct transfer,
as when a rodent bites a person, or indirect transfer, as when people touch
something that has been contaminated with infected rodent excrement and
88ZOONOTICDISEASES
Infected rodent
(Urine,feces, saliva)
Dust and
Food
Rodent
bedding
bite
Virus
Consumed
becomes
 by humans
aerosolized
during
sweeping
Inhaled
by humans
Human
hantavirus
infection
FIGURE 18.
Hantavirus.
then touch their noses or mouths or when people eat food contaminated by
rodent excrement.
Transmission occurs anywhere there is an active rodent population. Some
of the more common places are homes, summer cottages that have been shut
up all winter, barns, sheds, warehouses, storage facilities, restaurants, office
become infected if they stay in rodent-infested shelters or pitch tents in
rodent-infested habitats.
HANTAVIRUSPULMONARYSYNDROMEINANIMALS
HPS is not a problem in animals. Rodents carrying Hantavirus do not get sick.
Pets, domestic animals, and wild animals have not been identified as victims
of HPS.
HANTAVIRUS PULMONARY SYNDROME 89
HANTAVIRUS PULMONARY SYNDROME IN HUMANS
HPS is a rare disease. Since its discovery in 1993, fewer than 400 cases have
been reported. Not all people who are exposed to Hantavirus get sick. For
those who do get sick, HPS starts with flulike symptoms that progress to
respiratory failure, which can lead to death. Lnlike many other diseases that
primarily attack people with weakened immune systems, HPS seems to attack
healthy people. The incubation period has not been determined, but it appears
to be between 1 and 5 weeks. Initial symptoms include fever, fatigue, muscle
aches, headaches, dizziness, chills, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal
pain. These symptoms are not specific to HPS and may be mistaken for the flu.
The patient begins coughing and experiencing shortness of breath as the lungs
fll with fluid, 4 to 10 days after the early signs appear. This happens because
the virus damages the capillary walls in the lungs, allowing fluid to enter air
spaces. If no supportive therapy is provided, a patient may suffocate from the
fluid in the lungs.
DIAGNOSIS
Early symptoms are not specific to HPS, so it is often only when the patient
starts experiencing respiratory distress that HPS is considered. Serologic tests
are available for the detection of antibodies in infected people. A history of
exposure to rodent urine, feces, or saliva is helpful.
TREATMENT
There is no treatment for HPS. Suspected patients are placed in intensive care
and put on respirators to help them breathe. The longer the time between the
a ar aaisuu u suaned  jo puaased a pe sdus jo auereade
more likely HPS will be fatal. HPS will be self-limiting if the patient can be
kept alive long enough.
PREVENTION
or decreasing exposure to fresh rodent urine, feces, and saliva. The virus can
live only a few days in the environment, so there has to be an active rodent
infestation. Signs of active infestation include:
· Wild rodents in the house. Rodents are more active at night.
90ZOONOTIC DISEASES
* Rodent droppings. Look under sinks, where food is stored, in cupboards, on
beams, in old furniture, inside boxes, and in drawers.
* Rodent nests. They will be in protected areas, near food and water sources.
They will be found in the types of areas where droppings are found.
· Boxes, containers, and foods that appear nibbled.
* Rodent feeding stations, where there is more evidence of excrement, plus
areas where leftover food trash, such as paper, plastic, or cockroach carcasses,
accumulates,
* Evidence of gnawing on wood or other hard materials. Rodent teeth grow
continuously, so rodents must gnaw on hard surfaces to keep them short.
*Closed rooms with a stale, musty smell.
 If rodents are found, they must be eliminated. If no rodents are found, they
must be prevented from entering the area. Some of the ways to do this follow:
Keep houses clean. Do not let foods, including pet food, sit around uncovered.
Dispose of garbage in containers with tight-fitting lids. Wash dishes, coun-
ters, and floors. Set covered bait station traps or spring-loaded traps if you
nns axe 'apisino has aq osie uen sdein 'asnou au u are suaoi ioadns
pets and children cannot come in contact with traps.
q leas 'sem no suaans u anap ul yut t/ ueu agrel sanou le ieas *
inside and outside walls. Look for and seal gaps under doors, around vents
and pipe openings, around fireplaces, around windows and doors, behind
appliances, and under kitchen and bathroom sinks.
· Keep areas around houses and other buildings free of brush, overgrown
· Put metal flashing around the base of wooden, adobe, or earthen buildings.
The flashing should go 12 inches up from the ground and be set 6 inches
under ground.
* Elevate feed, hay, woodpiles, and garbage cans at least 12 inches off the ground.
* Spray any rodent feces, rodent nests, dead rodents, or materials that look
like they have been infested with rodents with disinfectant before handling
them. Commercial disinfectants will work if they are labeled as disinfectants.
A homemade disinfectant solution (1.5 cups of household bleach to 1 gallon
of water) can be used instead of a commercial disinfectant.
· Wear a respirator, gloves, overalls, and boots when sweeping out buildings
that show any evidence of rodent infestation. Spray the area with a disinfectant
before and after sweeping.
* When cleaning a building that has been closed for a while and is infested
with rodents, let the building air out for at least 30 minutes before cleaning
it. Stay out of the building while it is airing out.
HOOKWORMS 91
HOOKWORMS
Hookworms belong to the phylum Nematoda, which contains worms that
are round and unsegmented. Members of this phylum are called nematodes.
There are thousands of species of nematodes, but only seven are of zoonotic
importance in North America. These are Ancylostoma braziliense, A. caninum,
A. tubaeformis, Uncineria stenocephala, Toxocara canis, Toxocara cati, and Baylisascaris
procyonis.
T. canis, T. cati, and B. procyonis are nematode parasites that are discussed
under roundworms.
MORBIDITY: +
MORTALITY: +
ETIOLOGY: PARASITIC
A. braziliense, A. caninum, A. tubaeformis, and U. stenocephala are all capable of
infecting dogs and cats. When the immature larvae of these parasites are found
in atypical or dead-end hosts, a disease called cutaneous larva migrans (CLM) or
creeping eruption develops. The most severe cases of CLM are associated with
A. braziliense infection,
HoSTS
A. braziliense is the hookworm of dogs and cats, seen primarily in the south-
eastern United States. A. caninum is the most common hookworm of dogs in
tropical and subtropical areas, A. tubaeformis is the most common hookworm of
cats in tropical and subtropical areas, and U. stenocephala is the hookworm of
dogs and cats in cooler regions of the UInited States and Canada. Humans are
considered atypical or dead-end hosts.
TRANSMISSION
Adult hookworms are found attached to the wall of the small intestine. They
feed on the host's blood. During the normal life cycle of hookworms, eggs are
passed by adult females in dog or cat feces and hatch as larvae on the ground.
In 1 to 3 weeks they become infective larvae. The infective larvae are found in
shady, moist, sandy soil. The larvae infect the host either by being ingested or
by penetrating the host's skin (Figure 19).
92 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
Infected animal
Feces containing
hookworm eggs
Eggs hatch to
Larvae are
larvae on ground
ingested or
penetrate skin
of uninfected
animal
Larvae penetrate skin
of humans and migrate
through tissue
率
Human cutaneous
larva migrans
FIGURE 19.Cutaneous larva migrans
Larvae that enter the host through minute breaks in the skin migrate to the
lungs via the bloodstream. Once in the lungs, they break out of the blood ves-
sels and enter the alveoli, then crawl up the respiratory tree to the trachea,
where they cause a mild irritation that makes the host cough. Coughing brings
the larvae to the mouth, where they are swallowed and travel to the small
intestine, attach to the wall, and mature to adulthood.
 If the larvae are ingested, they travel directly to the small intestine. Some
of the larvae stay there, and some burrow through the intestinal wall and travel
to the lungs through tissues. Once in the lungs, they follow the same path as
tissue encyst and stay in the tissue, until the (female) host becomes pregnant.
Near the end of the pregnancy, these encysted larvae become active, and either
finish their migration to the lung and on to the intestines, or they travel to the
mammary glands, where they congre
regate and are passed in the milk to the
newborn offspring
 If the infective larvae accidentally penetrate the skin of a human through
minute breaks, they are unable to penetrate any further than the outer layer
HOOKWORMS93
of the skin. They cannot penetrate into blood vessels and travel to the lung.
Humans are considered atypical or dead-end hosts. Many people are infected
by walking barefooted on beaches, where dogs and cats have been allowed to
roam freely and contaminate the sand with infected feces.
HOOKWORMS IN ANIMALS
In dogs and cats, adult hookworms attach to the small intestine and suck
blood. Heavy infections can lead to severe anemia and sudden death, especially
in young puppies and kittens and in animals that are weak or malnourished.
Milder infections can manifest as anemia, diarrhea with bloody feces, and a
slow progressive wasting disease.
Because some larvae become encysted in the mother and are activated
during pregnancy, newborn puppies and kittens can become infected when
they start nursing. In these cases, the mother could test negative for hook-
worm eggs in the feces because the activated larvae travel to the mammary
glands, not through the lungs and into the intestines. The damage caused by
adult hookworms will begin early in the life of a newborn host.
HOOKWORMS IN HUMANS
When the infective larvae of hookworms (especially A. braziliense) penetrate
through minute breaks in the skin of humans, they are unable to complete their
KauI 'uys jo iakel siuuapida au u padde.n are pue sauml au on uone.au
 migrate around under the skin in a random fashion. This migration of larvae
causes CLM or creeping eruption (Figure 20).
FIGURE 20. Cutaneous larva migrans (creeping eruption) in the sole of a man's
foot. (From Hendrix CM, Robinson E: Diagnostic parasitology for veterinary
technicians, ed 3, St Louis, 2006, Mosby.)
94ZOONOTIC DISEASES
The migration starts at the point of entry, which is frequently in the area
between the toes. Symptoms usually appear within 2 weeks of being exposed
to the larvae. Patients have often just returned from a tropical area where they
were exposed to the larvae. The larval migration appears as a serpentine or linear,
single, inflamed, track line. The larvae can travel quickly, often 1 to 2 centime-
ters per day. Sometimes the larvae will disappear and reappear in another
location. Itching may occur, and the patient might also experience pain, local
swelling, and sometimes fever. Vesicles containing serous fluid often appear
along the tracks. Secondary bacterial infection is common. Eventually the
CLM is seen most often in children, utility workers who must enter crawl
spaces, gardeners, travelers to tropical regions, sunbathers who may become
sand contaminated with cat and dog feces.
DIAGNOSIS
DOGS AND CATS
Hookworms are diagnosed by microscopic examination of feces that contain
hookworm eggs.
HUMANS
CLM is diagnosed based on lesions and the patient's history.
TREATMENT
Dogs and cats are treated with antiparasitic drugs to rid them of hookworms.
CLM is often successfully treated with a single dose of an antiparasitic
drug, Antibacterial ointments can be used to control the secondary bacterial
infection that may develop.
PREVENTION AND CONTROL
hookworms and controlling access to areas contaminated with hookworm eggs
and larvae.
For pets, this involves the following steps:
* Deworm pets on a regular basis. Most veterinary clinics have a protocol that
includes treatment or prevention of hookworm infection.
HOOKWORMS95
· Puppies and kittens should be examined for hookworms and treated, if
 necessary, when they are very young. Again, most veterinary clinics will have
a protocol for this, usually associated with the vaccination schedule.
· Keep areas where pets defecate clean. Feces should be removed at least once
a week and disposed of where animals and people cannot come in contact
with them. Feces can be buried or bagged and disposed of with the regular
garbage. Freezing will kill the larvae, as will hot, dry conditions.
· Kennels can be cleaned with a solution of 3 cups of household bleach to a
gallon of cool water. Remove all fecal material and either spray or mop the
solution on the kennel floor.
* Limit the amount of contact your pet has with other animals or animal feces.
Keep pets on a leash. With the advent of dog parks, this is becoming more
difficult, especially if pet owners do not pick up after their dogs.
 Prevention of CLM is based on good hygiene and common sense:
* Do not let children play where dogs and cats may have defecated. Do not let
children go barefoot in these areas.
· Wash hands after playing and before eating.
* Do not allow cats to use sandboxes, flower beds, or gardens as litter boxes.
Keep the sandboxes covered when not in use.
· Put something between you and the sand when sunbathing. Wear footwear
when walking on the beach.
· Keep dogs and cats off beaches as much as possible.
· Clean up dog feces on a regular basis.
· Keep dogs and cats on a regular, preventive worming schedule.
96 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
INFLUENZA
Influenza viruses are usually quite host specific, and as such, are not considered
Aq aldoad Suoue peaids aseasip Aroenndsan e st ezuanu ueunh 'onouooz
aerosol droplets containing the influenza virus or by contact with surfaces
contaminated with the virus. Wild migratory birds carry the virus but do not
seem to become ill. Avian influenza is spread among domesticated birds, such
as chickens, ducks, and turkeys that come in contact with secretions and excre
tions from infected migratory birds. From time to time, the avian influenza
virus will mutate into a virus that can infect people and be spread from person
MORBIDITY: +
MORTALITY: + TO +++
ETIOLOGY: VIRAL
All viruses have only one purpose: to replicate. To do this they must invade a
host cell and take over the genetic machinery. This allows the virus to replicate
until the cell becomes filled with the virus. The newly created viruses then
escape from the host cell, destroying the cellin the process, and find their way
to other host cells to repeat the process. While in a host cell the virus may
undergo minor mutations that make it look different. The mutation results in
a new antigenic strain that the host's immune system cannot recognize, even
if it was able to recognize the original virus. This is called antigen drift and
is the reason new flu vaccines have to be created annually. The mutations dc
not inhibit the virus's pathogenicity. Each strain must have a specific vaccine
produced to protect people from infection.
More than one virus can infect the same host cell. When this happens
sna leuao yoea jo suaodo aay ney readde Aeu sasn mau Alarnua
For example, if an avian influenza virus and a human influenza virus co-infect
the same host cell, portions of the two viruses can reassort to create an entirely
new virus, not just a new strain. This is called antigen shijt, and the results are
much more serious than those seen with antigen drift. The host species has no
previous immunity to this new virus. The dangerous part of this new creation
is that it may have the pathogenicity of the avian influenza virus and the ability
of the human influenza virus to pass from person to person. This may happen
in swine and is how a pandemic could begin (Figure 21).
INFLUENZA97
Bird virus
Human virus
Bothviruses
entera
pig
Antigen
shift
Human infection from pig
Virus
Imutation
Human Pandemic
FIGURE 21.
Influenzavirus
antigen shift.
 Influenza viruses are divided into three types: A, B, and C. Type A has been
identified in animals and people. Types B and C have been identified in humans
threat,
The type A influenza virus is divided into subtypes based on the presence
of two antigens imbedded on its surface. These antigens create spikes, or
protrusions, all over the surface of the virus that allow it to attach to a host
cell. The H (hemagglutinin) antigen enables the virus to attach to the host cell,
and the N (neuraminidase) antigen allows it to escape from the cell once the
98 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
virus has replicated many times. Since 16 different H antigens and 9 different
H and N antigens. Subtypes are named for the H and N antigens present.
For example, the H1N1 influenza virus was responsible for the Spanish Flu
pandemic that killed millions of people between 1918 and 1919.
The potential of the H5N1 avian influenza virus to cause a pandemic has
been a concern since the mid-1990s. Three conditions must be met before a
pandemic can begin:
1. The virus must be in a form for which humans have no inherent immunity.
 2. The virus must be pathogenic enough to cause serious illness and death in
humans.
3. The virus has to be easily transmitted from person to person.
S      a  s  a  s
of H5N1 infection have been relatively low in number and limited to Asia,
Africa and Europe, it could be only a matter of time before infections arrive in
North America. The mortality rate of H5N1 infection in people is about 70%.
HOSTS
Avian influenza virus subtype A/ H5N1 is found mainly in birds.
TRANSMISSION
Transmission of all avian influenza viruses begins with wild birds that carry the
o osa 't  is a o p an n sasn  un s
especially chickens, ducks, and turkeys, are susceptible to infection and may
become ill when infected. Transmission to domestic fowl occurs by exposure
to secretions and excretions contaminated with the virus, exposure to surfaces
contaminated by infected birds, or by direct contact with infected birds.
Rarely, people can become infected by direct contact with an infected
bird through handling, slaughtering, defeathering, or preparing the bird for
consumption.
H5N1 INFLUENZA IN ANIMALS
So far the H5N1 influenza virus has been confined mainly to birds. The resulting
respiratory disease can be so mild as to go unnoticed or so severe that it results
farm to farm by contaminated vehicles, feed, cages, equipment, or clothing.
INFLUENZA99
Pigs are susceptible to both avian and human influenza viruses. If a pig is
infected with both an H5N1 avian virus and a highly contagious human
influenza virus, the pig could act as a mixing vessel resulting in a new virus
through antigen shift. This resulting virus could be an H5N1 strain in pigs that
abai pi au suprd snu ruosiad on uosiad uoy panusue.n Apeai stn
 ment for a pandemic to occur. People may then become infected by handling
the infected pigs.
H5N1 INFLUENZA IN HUMANS
The first case of H5N1 influenza infection in humans was reported in Hong
Kong in 1997, with 18 confirmed cases and 6 deaths. The clinical signs appear,
on average, 7 days after exposure to the virus. Patients will develop lower
respiratory tract symptoms, characterized by dyspnea, a hoarse voice, and
Crackling sounds when they inhale. Most patients will develop pneumonia
and multiorgan infection and will deteriorate rapidly. Many patients will die.
DIAGNOSIS
Diagnosis of H5N1 influenza virus infection must be done by virus isolation in
a laboratory. The clinical symptoms can resemble the common flu.
TREATMENT
There are four antiviral drugs available, but so far the H5N1 virus has been
resistant to two of them. Supportive treatment and treatment of any secondary
infections are necessary.
PREVENTION
There is no vaccine available for protection against H5N1, because a strain that
will easily spread from person to person has not yet developed. Because we
can't predict the make-up of the potential pandemic H5N1 strain, production
of a vaccine cannot begin until this strain has been created and the pandemic
has begun.
100ZOONOTIC DISEASES
LA CROSSE ENCEPHALITIS
La Crosse encephalitis is a mosquito-borne, viral disease with the potential
'I apun uaipiuo Aensn 'suny un uass snoaiau jenuan au sunnaju jo
The disease is named for La Crosse, Wisconsin, where it was first identified
in 1963.
MORBIDITY: +
MORTALITY: +
ETIOLOGY: VIRAL
La Crosse encephalitis virus (LCEV) is an arbovirus that causes La Crosse
encephalitis (LCE). Other important encephalitis arboviruses include the
eastern equine encephalitis virus, St. Louis encephalitis virus, West Nile virus,
and western equine encephalitis virus.
HoSTS
Woodland mammals, especially chipmunks and tree squirrels, are the natural
hosts for LCEV.
TRANSMISSION
LCE is seen primarily in upper Midwestern, mid-Atlantic, and Southeastern
states. LCEV is passed from one woodland mammal to another by the bite of
a treehole mosquito. This mosquito breeds in treeholes (the area between the
two main trunks of trees with two or more trunks) when rainwater collects
there. It also breeds in man-made containers such as old tires, buckets, toys,
cans, or anything that can hold water. The treehole mosquito is also found
oy sprek ooz ueu arou k hou op Aaun rsea.re papeus ro sisaioy snonpioap u
where they were born. UInlike most other mosquitoes, treehole mosquitoes
bite during the day.
When a mosquito ingests blood from an infected mammal, the virus
replicates in the mosquito and moves to other locations in the mosquito's
body, including the salivary glands. When the mosquito takes its next
meal on an uninfected mammal, it deposits a small drop of saliva at the
bite, which acts as an anticoagulant. The saliva contains the virus, which
enters the mammal, replicates, and becomes a source of virus for other
LA CROSSE ENCEPHALITIS101
mosquitoes that come for a meal. Once infected, the mosquito is infected for
life (Figure 22).
 Once a mammal is infected, the virus replicates and a viremia develops,
making the virus available to mosquitoes. Chipmunks and squirrels are considered
amplifiers of LCEV, because one animal can potentially infect many mosquitoes.
tion of mosquitoes. Mosquito eggs are laid in treeholes or other man-made
has accumulated to cover the eggs with water. This can happen several times a
LCE is transmitted to people by a mosquito that has previously bitten an
transmission does not occur.
LA CROSSE ENCEPHALITIS IN ANIMALS
Woodland mammals and mosquitoes infected with LCEV do not develop any
clinical signs of disease. No animals other than humans seem to be affected
by LCEV.
Infected animal
Treehole mosquito
Treehole mosquito
takes blood meal
takes blood meal
containing virus
from uninfected 
 from infected animal
 animal and 
deposits virus
Treehole mosquito
takes blood meal
from human and
deposits virus at
bite site
Human La Crosse
encephalitis
FIGURE 22.
La Crosse
encephalitis.
102 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
LA CROSSE ENCEPHALITIS IN HUMANS
Many people, especially adults, who become infected with LCEV do not
develop clinical signs of illness. In mild encephalitis cases, people may have a
fever, headache, nausea, vomiting, mental confusion, and lethargy. This form of
LCE is self-limiting within a few days.
In more severe cases, usually seen in children, the virus can enter the
central nervous system resulting in more severe signs of encephalitis. This can
produce sudden seizures, paralysis, mental confusion, muscle tremors, coma,
and brain damage that may be long lasting.
LCE is seen midsummer through early fall. The incubation period is 5 to
15 days. People most at risk for developing LCE are children, people who live
in or visit wooded areas, and people who work in wooded areas. People who
have containers of standing water on their property may also be at increased
risk. The mortality rate is 1 to 3%o, and fatalities are seen most often in children.
DIAGNOSIS
Diagnosis is based on the presence of antibodies against LCEV in serum.
TREATMENT
There is no specific drug to combat LCE. Supportive care and management of
neurological symptoms are the only medical care available.
PREVENTION
There is no vaccine available for protection against LCE in humans. Prevention
centers on decreased exposure to treehole mosquitoes.
Reducing exposure to mosquitoes involves the following steps:
· Drain standing water in old tires, cans, buckets, and other containers,
especially after rainfall or watering. These are favorite breeding sites for
treehole mosquitoes.
· Reduce forest activities during daytime hours, which are peak hours for
treehole mosquito activity.
· Wear protective clothing when going into forests during daytime hours,
when the mosquitoes are biting. Protective clothing includes long-sleeved
shirts and long pants.
* UIse insect repellent containing DEET on exposed skin.
LEPTOSPIROSIS 103
LEPTOSPIROSIS
in the world. In humans, it is also known as Weil's disease, swineherd's disease, rice-
field disease, swamp fever, and mud fever. In horses, it can cause a condition known
as periodic ophthalmia, or moon blindness In dogs it is known as canicola disease.
MORBIDITY: +
MORTALITY: +
ETIOLOGY: BACTERIAL
l 'puidsdan snat au on uonaq zeun eanoeq Aq pasne st sisonrdsondan
Leptospira are spirochetes (slender, spiral, motile bacteria) that coil around a
central axis. They are aerobic gram-negative organisms. They are motile
because they are flexible and able to bend and wriggle. They prefer to live in
an alkaline environment.
There are two species of Leptospira recognized today: L. interrogans and
L. biflexa. L. interrogans is pathogenic to humans and animals. L. biflexa is
nonpathogenic and is free-living in water. L. interrogans has over 200 different
strains, or serovars (species variants), some of which are host-species specific
and others that can infect a variety of host species. All of the serovars look
identical. Each serovar has a particular host species it prefers, but some of
the serovars will infect other species, too. For example, L. interrogans serovar
canicola is found primarily in dogs but will also infect cattle.
HOSTS
susceptible to leptospirosis.
TRANSMISSION
Leptospira organisms are passed in the urine of an infected host and are
transmitted to another host through mucous membranes and skin lesions.
been contaminated with infected urine. The most common mode of transmis.
sion is by drinking contaminated water. Catching and eating infected rodents
and eating grass and food contaminated with urine are other common modes
104ZOONOTIC DISEASES
of transmission among animals. Animals and humans can become infected by
touching placentas, aborted fetuses, and related tissues (Figure 23).
When the organism enters the host's body, it enters the blood stream and
is distributed throughout the body. Organisms are found in all tissues initially,
but eventually primari
in the kidney, liver,
en, respiratory tract, central
genital tract,
where
theylive andreproduce.
illaries. Eventually,
, the organism will be removed from most organs by the host's
immune system, but some organisms may remain in the kidneys, eyes, central
capillaries in the kidney
y are damaged, so blood leaks into the urine and the host
passes bloody urine. The liver is the second most commonly affected organ. Liver
damage is characterized by jaundice (yellowing of skin and mucous membranes).
Infected animal
Urine
Aborted fetus
+
Water
Soil
Direct
contact
Food grown
 Poor hygiene
in contaminated
 or improper 
soil and not
hand washing
properly washed
Consumption or skin
exposure by humans
Human
leptospirosis
FIGURE 23. Leptospirosis.
LEPTOSPIROSIS  105
LEPTOSPIROSIS IN ANIMALS
Many cases of leptospirosis in animals are subclinical. Some animals, like
rodents, carry Leptospira organisms and do not become ill but become carrier
animals. Some animals that survive leptospirosis will also become carriers.
Some host species develop host-adapted serovars, which means they will not
become sick when infected with a specific serovar.
In all animals, the state of the immune system and age play important roles
in determining which animals will become infected. Young animals at or near
weaning time are the most susceptible. In pregnant animals the Leptospird
organisms may cross the placenta and cause abortion, still births, or weakened
babies. The severity of leptospirosis in animals depends on which serovar is
involved. Animals can become infected with more than one Leptospira serovar,
each of which will produce different degrees of disease.
DOGS
Initially, dogs with leptospirosis will exhibit several days of fever, abdominal
pain, vomiting, depression, muscle pain, anorexia, bloody urine, and diarrhea
These are nonspecific signs, but as the disease progresses, kidney failure and
dehydration will develop. Liver damage is indicated by jaundice and bilirubin in
the urine. Dogs may stand or walk with a hunched back because of kidney pain.
CATS
Cats rarely show symptoms of leptospirosis, even though many of them have
antibodies to the Leptospira organism that would indicate prior disease or
vaccination,
CATTLE
Some serovars produce few clinical signs in cattle; others are very pathogenic
When there is a pathogenic serovar present, there are two forms of leptospirosis
that can manifest in cattle: acute and chronic.
The acute form strikes young calves and is characterized by anorexia,
fever, hemoglobinuria, anemia, and pulmonary congestion, leading to difficult
breathing
The chronic form strikes older cattle and is characterized by abortion,
still births, or births of premature, weak calves. Abortions are most common
during the third trimester of pregnancy. In dairy cows, there is usually a
sudden drop in milk production in infected animals. The milk becomes thick
and yellow, with blood tinges.
106 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
SHEEP
Leptospirosis in sheep in similar to that in cattle, only less severe.
PIGS
Leptospirosis in pigs is characterized by late-term abortions, occurring some-
time during the last month of pregnancy. Piglets that are carried full-term may
be born dead or so weak that they die soon after birth. Carrier boars play an
important role in transmitting Leptospira organisms to sows during mating.
HORSES
Leptospirosis in horses can cause abortion and still births. Kidney failure is
rare. Some horses will develop a recurrent uveitis (inflammation in the
middle layer of the eye), also known as periodic ophthalmia, or moon blindness.
In such cases the eye is painful, is sensitive to light, may water excessively,
and is subject to eyelid muscle spasms, called blepharospasms, that keep the
eye closed.
LEPTOSPIROSIS IN HUMANS
Most leptospirosis outbreaks are associated with exposure to contaminated
water. Most cases occur during the warm, moist, late summer and early fall
lakes, and streams; damp, alkaline soil found around river banks; and mud.
Humans are susceptible to all serovars that infect animals but are consid
ered dead-end hosts. The incubation period is somewhere between 2 days and
4 weeks following exposure to a contaminated source. People at risk for infec-
Aa  s s s s a ra oa s  
technicians; people who work outdoors or in areas where animals frequently
urinate, such as workers on farms and in kennels and pet shops, sewer
workers, professionals who work in crawl spaces, and people in the fishing
industry; and people who are in and around contaminated water, such as trav
elers to developing countries or tropical areas, hikers, campers, backpackers,
and people who engage in water sports.
The initial sigmns of leptospirosis resemble the flu and are characterized by
fever, chills, vomiting, diarrhea, headache, and muscle aches. The patient may
appear to recover and then become sick again. With treatment the disease will
last for a few days to 3 weeks. Without treatment it may take months to recover
Because the signs are not specific for leptospirosis, cases are often wrongly diag.
nosed and underreported. The liver and kidney are not visibly affected in this
LEPTOSPIROSIS107
mild form, and no jaundice is visible. If women are infected during the early
months of pregnancy, there is a high rate of spontaneous abortion.
 In about 10% of cases, the patient may become seriously ill, with the signs
listed above, as well as liver failure, kidney failure, or meningitis. Jaundice
 au an m pou nnq sissdal o uo s a puee s
The symptoms come on suddenly and are severe. Other tissues that might be
 involved include skeletal muscle, the respiratory system, the heart, and the eyes.
This more severe form of leptospirosis is known as Weil's disease. Weil's disease is
a more serious problem in the elderly; the mortality rate can be up to 10%.
DIAGNOSIS
A tentative diagnosis can be made with the patient history and serological
 media. This is sometimes difficult, because the organism has strict growing
conditions and grows slowly
TREATMENT
Leptospirosis is treated with antibiotics. The earlier the treatment is started,
the more successful it will be. Periodic ophthalmia in horses is treated topically
and systemically. Supportive treatment for other signs, such as dehydration,
pain, vomiting, and diarrhea, is also employed.
PREVENTION
There is no vaccine to protect humans or horses against leptospirosis. There are
multivalent vaccines available to protect cattle, pigs, and dogs. A multivalent
vaccine protects against more than one serovar but not all of them. An animal
is still susceptible to infection by a serovar not included in the vaccine.
108ZOONOTIC DISEASES
LISTERIOSIS
Ay sm aq s u prn a s ss sol a l
in people. In animals listeriosis is also known as circling disease or silage disease.
MORBIDITY: +
MORTALITY: ++
ETIOLOGY: BACTERIAL
Listeriosis is caused by Listeria monocytogenes, a gram-positive, motile, very
resistant coccobacillus, or oval-shaped rod. It can grow in a wide range of
temperatures, from 39° to 111° F. Because it tolerates cooler temperatures,
listeriosis is seen more often in temperate and cooler climates. The normal
reservoirs of L. monocytogenes are soil and the gastrointestinal tracts of mam-
mals. The organism can be killed by pasteurization or cooking, but it can grow
in food stored in a refrigerator, in food with a high salt content, and in an acid
environment.
HoSTS
L. monocytogenes has been found in mammals, birds, fish, insects, crustaceans,
water, milk, cheese, deli meats, hot dogs, sewage, silage, feces, genital secre-
tions, nasal discharges, and soil. In humans, groups that are most affected
are pregnant women, newborns, people with compromised immune systems,
elderly people, and those taking steroids. These groups are considered high-
risk groups. In animals, adult ruminants seem to be most commonly affected.
Healthy people and animals rarely get sick if infected with L. monocytogenes but
can pass the organism in their feces.
TRANSMISSION
L. monocytogenes is spread from animal to animal via the fecal-oral route.
An infected animal passes L. monocytogenes in its feces, which contaminates veg-
etation. A susceptible host eats the vegetation and becomes infected. Animals
also get infected by eating contaminated silage and hay or by drinking contam-
inated water. People usually become infected with L. monocytogenes by eating
food or drinking water that has been contaminated with feces that contain
LISTERIOSIS 109
the organism. Some ready-to-eat foods become infected after they have been
heat processed (Figure 24).
LISTERIOSIS IN ANIMALS
The most frequently seen form of listeriosis in animals is encephalitis, seen in
adult ruminants and, rarely, in adult pigs. Sheep and goats are most susceptible
to L. monocytogenes infection. The disease is one of winter and spring, because
this is a time when animals are confined and fed silage or hay. If either the
silage or hay has been contaminated with L. monocytogenes, it could be a source
of infection to the animals.
Infected animal
Feces
Meat
Water
Soil
Cow udder
Food grown
Contaminated
in contaminated
 milk if udder
soil and not
is not cleaned
properly washed
before milking
 Unpasteurized milk 
Improper
or food made from
cooking
unpasteurized
milk
Consumption by humans
Human listeriosis
FIGURE 24.
Listeriosis.
110ZOONOTICDISEASES
The organism enters the body through abrasions in the mouth and travels
to the brain, where it causes unilateral encephalitis. The incubation period is
about 10 days. The signs exhibited by an infected animal include depression,
fever, and incoordination. Infected animals will segregate themselves into
mfected animal may start circling in one direction. The direction is deter-
mined by the side of the brain affected (Figure 25). If the facial nerve is
affected, it will be unilateral and will be seen as a drooping ear, drooping
eyelid, dilated nostril, drooping lower lip, tongue protrusion, excessive sali-
vation, and difficulty eating As the disease progresses, the animal becomes
progressively paralyzed, willfall down on its side and paddle its legs as if run-
ning, enter into a coma, and eventually die. The mortality rate can be as high
as 70% in sheep. Cattle seem to be a bit more tolerant, but the mortality rate
can still reach 50%.
Three other, less common forms of listeriosis in animals are septicemia in
monogastric animals and young ruminants, abortion or stilbirths in all animals,
and mastitis in ruminants.
The septicemia in monogastric animals has been seen in pigs, dogs, cats,
rabbits, and young ruminants, before the rumen is functional. The clinical signs
to death. These animals are infected by ingesting or inhaling the organism.
FIGURE 25. Listeriosis in a sheep showing unilateral facial paralysis. (From
Quinn PJ et al: Clinical veterinary microbiology, London, 1994, Mosby.)
LISTERIOSIS111
After the organism gets to the intestines, it migrates through the wall and
enters the blood stream, where it is distributed throughout the body. The liver
is the principal organ involved.
L. monocytogenes can infect any pregnant animal. It causes fetal deaths,
abortions, stillbirths, and death of newborns. Most abortions occur in the last
trimester of pregnancy and happen without warning. In this form of listeriosis,
the animals are infected by ingesting or inhaling L. monocytogenes. After inges
tion the organism travels to the uterus, crosses the placenta, and infects
the fetus. The organism can be shed in milk and vaginal secretions for up to
2 months following the abortion.
In cattle, mastitis is rarely seen with L. monocytogenes infection. When it does
occur, it is seen in one quarter only and is not responsive to antibiotic treatment.
LISTERIOSIS IN HUMANS
Healthy adults and children rarely become clinically ill with L. monocytogenes
infection, though the organism can be found in the feces of healthy individuals.
Pregnant women, newborns, elderly people, and people with compromised
immune systems are most susceptible to L. monocytogenes infection. L. monocyto
genes most often affects the pregnant uterus, central nervous system, and blood.
People become infected by eating food or drinking water that has been con
taminated with L. monocytogenes. The foods most commonly ineriminated are raw
vegetables grown in soil that has been fertilized with contaminated manure;
umpasteurized milk or products made from raw milk; uncooked meats; and foods
contaminated after processing, such as soft cheese, deli meats, and hotdogs.
The average incubation period is 3 weeks. The clinical signs of listeriosis in
humans include initial flulike symptoms of fever, sore muscles, nausea, and
diarrhea. If the organism spreads to the central nervous system, these symp-
toms can be followed by headache, stiff neck, confusion, incoordination, and
convulsions. Abscesses can form in the brain. In adults the clinical signs will
depend on which organs are affected. Meningitis, pneumonia, abscesses, skin
lesions, heart disease, and conjunctivitis have been reported.
The organism can also cross the placenta and infect the fetus, resulting in
abortion if the infection occurs in early pregnancy, or stillbirths and babies
who are born with listeriosis if the infection occurs later in pregnancy. Babies
who are infected near term or at birth do not eat, are lethargic, become jaun
diced and may vomit and develop skin lesions and meningitis. They have a
nearly 50% mortality rate. Some babies do not show signs for about a week.
In these later-developing cases, meningitis is the most common manifestation
112 ZoONOTIC DISEASES
of listeriosis. If babies survive the infection, they may have long-term
neurological problems and may not develop normally.
DIAGNOSIS
The only way to definitively diagnose listeriosis is to culture and identify
L. monocytogenes. In humans, the tissues cultured include blood, cerebral spinal
fluid, and feces. In aborted fetuses, the placenta, feces, and gastrointestinal
contents may be cultured. In animals, the preferred samples are brain tissue
or aborted fetuses and associated tissues. Suspect food can also be cultured.
L. monocytogenes is difficult to grow and requires special culture media. Faster
methods of diagnosis are being investigated.
TREATMENT
Listeriosis is treated with antibiotics. The earlier the treatment is started, the
more effective it will be, but even if treatment has been started, death can
occur. In people, this is especially true in the elderly, fetuses and newborns,
and people with compromised immune systems. Supportive treatment is also
administered and is determined by the signs and symptoms being exhibited.
PREVENTION
 s       si  
recommendations for listeriosis in humans are generally the same as for any
food-borne disease. These recommendations include:
* Cook all meat thoroughly.
· Thoroughly wash foods that will be eaten raw.
* Separate raw meats from other food.
* Do not drink unpasteurized milk or eat food made from unpasteurized milk
· Wash cutting boards, knives, utensils, and hands after handling raw meat or
other uncooked foods.
* High-risk individuals should not eat hotdogs, deli meat, or luncheon meats
unless they have been heated until steaming hot; salads at a salad bar and
foods with a high water content should also be avoided.
· High-risk individuals should not eat soft cheeses, unless such cheeses are
specifically labeled as made from pasteurized milk.
L. monocytogenes can grow at refrigerator temperatures.
LISTERIOSIS113
*High-risk people should not eat refrigerated smoked meats, often labeled as
lox, smoked, jerky, kippered, or nova-style.
· People who are working around aborted fetuses, or those who perform
animal autopsies, called necropsies, should handle tissue carefully. Pregnant
women should avoid handling such tissues altogether.
In animals, the best prevention is to minimize the chance of infection.
Sick animals should be isolated as soon as clinical signs appear. Dead animals
 s l  d a   a s
affected animals have lived should be cleaned and disinfected, and any
contaminated silage.
114ZOONOTIC DISEASES
LYME DISEASE
Lyme disease is a bacterial infection that affects many systems in the body. It is
transmitted by tick bites and has become the most common arthropod-borne,
human disease in the United States.
MORBIDITY: +
MORTALITY: +
ETIOLOGY:BACTERIAL
Borrelia burgdorferi is the bacterium responsible for Lyme disease. It is a spiro
chete, which means it is a spiral-shaped bacterium that is longer than it is wide.
B. burgdorferi has very specific growth requirements in the laboratory, so it is
not routinely cultured.
HOSTS
whitetail deer. Even though the ticks bite the deer, the deer do not become
'sh aun rog uogenodsue.n pue ja.ms jo suea se aaas Aaun anq 'paoaju
Humans and other animals, such as dogs, cats, horses, and cattle, can also
become infected with B. burgdorferi,
TRANSMISSION
Ticks transmit B. burgdorferi through their bites, from one host to another.
The organism lives in the intestinal tract of the tick and can be passed from
host to host when the tick feeds. It takes 24 to 36 hours after a tick becomes
attached to its host before it starts releasing B. burgdorferi.
The tick life cycle has three active stages after the egg hatches: larva,
nymph, and adult (see Appendix 1). The larva must have a blood meal before
it can molt to the nymph stage, and the nymph must have a blood meal before
it can molt to the adult stage. A tick at each active stage can become infected
when it takes a blood meal. The bacteria stay with the tick when it molts to the
next stage. As it feeds before molting, a tick at each stage can infect another
animal by depositing B. burgdorferi at the site of its bite. Typically the larva will
feed on small rodents, like the white-footed mouse. If the mouse was infected,
LYME DISEASE  115
the larva becomes infected. Nymphs prefer feeding on many animals, such as
small rodents, dogs, cats, horses, cattle, and humans. Similarly, if any of these
animals were infected, the nymph would become infected. Adult ticks prefer
  'o   a s  al     e 
feed on people at any of the three stages (Figure 26)
Two ticks that can transmit Lyme disease to humans have been identified:
the black-legged deer tick, Ixodes scapularis, in the northeastern and north
central United States, and the western black-legged tick, Ixodes pacificus, on
the Pacific coast of the UInited States. The larvae of both black-legged ticks are
the size of a pin head and are tan colored. The nymphs are the size of a poppy
seed and are beige or semitransparent. The adults are about the size of an apple
Infected animal
 Tick larva feeds on infected animal
during summer and ingests organism
Borrelia organism stays with tick as it
molts to nymph and remains
dormant through fall and winter months
Infected nymph feeds on mice, birds,
 and other small mammals in spring
Borrelia organism stays with nymph
as it molts to adult
Infected adult tick feeds on human
during fall months and -
deposits Borrelia organism
2-2.5
days
Human Lyme disease
FiGURE 26. Lyme disease.
116 Z0ONOTIC DISEASES
Adult
Adult
female
male
Nymph
Larva
FIGURE 27. Adult female
deer tick on a finger.
seed and are black or reddish (Figure 27). For Lyme disease to occur, there
must be B. burgdorferi, white-footed mice, and whitetail deer in an area.
aldoad on kpap n lajsure.n souueo pnq aseasip auT pag teo speo pue sao
They can, however, transport ticks into a home, yard, kennel, or veterinary facility.
Not all black-legged ticks are infected with B. burgdorferi. In some areas less
than 1% of the ticks are infected, but in other areas over 50% are. B. burgdor-
feri can infect other species of ticks, but none of them have been shown to
transmit Lyme disease to humans.
LYME DISEASE IN ANIMALS
Many animals infected with B. burgdorferi do not develop clinical signs. If they
do develop an illness, it may be a long time after the initial infection.
CATS
Cats that develop Lyme disease usually display fever, anorexia, lethargy, lame.
t nun sds asa noqe Suou st aaui suarq rena pue 'ssa
specific to Lyme disease, so many cases will go undiagnosed.
DOGS
Dogs develop a lameness that shifts from one leg to another, fever, anorexia,
kidney damage, heart problems, and possibly central nervous system involve-
 ment expressed as aggression, seizures, or mental confusion. Transplacental
transmission has been documented.
CATTLE
Cattle frequently do not exhibit any signs of Lyme disease when they become
infected. They may develop lameness, laminitis, fever, and swollen joints.
A rash may develop on the udder. B. burgdorferi has been found in colostrum,
LYME DISEASE117
blood, milk, symovial fluid, and aborted fetal tissue in cows. Freezing does not
kill the organism, but pasteurization does.
HORSES
Horses will develop lameness, laminitis, painful or stiff joints, and anorexia.
encephalitis are sometimes reported. The central nervous system may become
involved, resulting in difficulty swallowing, head tilt, or aimless wandering
Transplacental transmission has been reported.
LYME DISEASE IN HUMANS
Most cases of Lyme disease in people occur during the spring and summer
months. The disease follows a predictable progression. If not diagnosed and
treated early in its course, it becomes a three-stage disease.
s a a ss  h s  a a   s
followed by a rash developing 3 days to 1 month after infection. The rash, known
as erythema migrans (EM), starts at the site of a tick bite. It can be a solid, red rash
uan e se Bureadde aoue.readde zabap .io afa-s,linq e uo axen ues hl lo 'spuedxa yeu
tral red spot, surrounded by normal skin that is surrounded by an expanding red
rash (Figure 28). The rash can remain small, or it can spread to an area the size
(From Murray PR et al: Medical microbiology, ed 4, St Louis, 2002, Mosby.)
118ZOONOTIC DISEASES
of a person's back. In dark-skinned people, the rash resembles a bruise. The
B. burgdorferi spirochetes can be isolated from the leading edge of the rash. This
distinctive rash is unique to Lyme disease, but does not develop in some cases.
The rash should not be confused with the allergic reaction that sometimes
develops from tick saliva at the site of a tick bite. The allergic reaction occurs
within a few hours, does not spread, and will disappear in a few days.
Stage two is the early, disseminated stage. During this stage, which begins
2 weeks to 3 months after infection, the bacteria enter the bloodstream and
are spread to various sites in the body. Symptoms that may be seen during this
stage are fever, sore throat, fatigue, enlarged lymph nodes, tingling or numb-
ness in the extremities, stiff neck, headache, migrating joint pain, mild
nervous system involvement, and rashes beyond the site of the bite. Facial
paralysis that resembles Bell's palsy, a condition that causes the facial muscles
to weaken or become paralyzed due to cranial nerve trauma, may develop.
Stage three is the persistent infection stage. If Lyme disease is not diagnosed in the
earlier stages, stage three will occur any time from weeks to years after infection.
Symptoms include arthritis, especially in the knees, which manifests as brief
episodes of pain and swelling, and nervous system involvement which may include
numbness, meningitis, or severe headache. Irregular heart rhythms may develop.
DIAGNOSIS
Diagnosis is based on the distinctive rash that appears up to a month after a tick
bite. If the rash does not develop, diagnosis must be based on the history and
evidence of a tick bite. In some cases in which the rash does not develop, the
first sign of Lyme disease may be arthritis or nervous system disorders.
Serological tests are not valid until 1 month after infection.
TREATMENT
Antibiotics are used to treat Lyme disease. Starting the treatment early will
result in higher success rates. In the early stage, oral antibiotics are admin
istered for 3 to 4 weeks, and recovery is usually complete and uneventful.
If diagnosis is not made until later in the disease process, the treatment may
have to include intravenous antibiotics, will probably have to last longer, and
will probably have a lower success rate.
PREVENTION
There is a vaccine available for dogs but not for humans.
LYME DISEASE 119
Tick control products, such as tick collars, should be used on pets that can
possibly be exposed to ticks.
The best prevention is to decrease exposure to ticks by following these
guidelines (see Appendix 2):
* Avoid areas where ticks thrive as much as possible. May, June, and July
are months when ticks are still immature and harder to see because of
their light color. These are also the months when people are most active
outdoors.
· Ticks have to live where their hosts live, so areas where white-footed mice
and whitetail deer live are where ticks are found. These places can include
lawns, gardens, wooded areas, overgrown brush, tall grass, woodpiles, and
leaf litter.
·  Wear light-colored clothing when entering an area that may be a habitat for
ticks. This will make the adult ticks easier to see and remove before they
become attached.
· Wear long-sleeved shirts and long pants tucked into socks so the ticks
cannot crawl under clothing; wear high rubber boots and a hat for the same
reason,
· Walk in the center of trails to avoid vegetation where ticks are lurking. Ticks
cannot fly, jump, skip, or hop, so they must come in direct contact with a
host before they can attach themselves. Immature ticks are found hiding in
the shade in a moist area. Adult ticks cling to grass, bushes, and shrubs and
wait for a host to come by.
* Exposed skin and clothing can be protected with insect repellents containing
DEET. Clothes, but not exposed skin, can be protected with insect repel-
lents containing permethrin, which kills ticks on contact.
* Check often for ticks while outside. Black-legged ticks are tiny and easy to miss.
· Do not sit on the ground or on stone walls, where ticks can abound.
* Make daily checks of the entire body for ticks. Look especially in areas
where ticks like to attach, such as behind the ears, the back of the neck, in
the armpits, behind the knees, and in the groin area. Bathing will remove
Crawling ticks but will not detach ticks already attached.
* Wash and dry outdoor clothing in hot temperatures after use.
* Remove ticks as soon as they are found. It takes 24 to 36 hours after a tick
becomes attached before it starts releasing B. burgdorferi.
· To remove a tick, use fine tweezers, grasp the tick as close to the skin as
possible, and pull straight back with a slow, steady force. Avoid crushing
the tick's body. Kill the tick by dropping it in alcohol. Save the tick in alcohol
as a possible diagnostic aid.
120ZOONOTIC DISEASES
LYMPHOCYTIC CHORIOMENINGITIS
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis (LCM) is a viral disease spread from rodents
to other rodents and humans. LCM can have serious effects on human fetuses
during the first two trimesters and on people with suppressed immune
systems.
MORBIDITY: +
MORTALITY: +
ETIOLOGY:VIRAL
LCM is caused by the lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV)
HoSTS
The natural host for LCMV is the wild house mouse. Other rodents become
infected by exposure to the house mouse. Pet mice, hamsters, and guinea
ssa doad ron uonau jo saos se p uaq oe ar sid
pue 'sid 'ssop 'shqqen 'spen seyouyo are sieuue pannaju Auouuon
primates.
TRANSMISSION
LCMV is found in the feces, urine, saliva, semen, milk, and blood of infected
rodents. It is also found in their nesting or bedding materials. Rodents and
people become infected by coming in contact with any of these excretions.
Transmission can occur through inhalation of aerosolized virus on dried
material, by consumption, or through direct contact with the excretions.
No person-to-person transmission has been documented, except for vertical
transmission from mother to fetus. There has been one case reported of four
people developing LCM after receiving organ transplants from a single donor
who had purchased a pet hamster just before he died.
LYMPHOCYTIC CHORIOMENINGITIS IN ANIMALS
Most rodents infected with LCMV are lifetime carriers and are not clinically
affected by thevirus.
LYMPHOCYTIC CHORIOMENINGITIS   121
LYMPHOCYTIC CHORIOMENINGITIS IN HUMANS
As more people adopt small pets called pocket pets (because many of them will
fit in a pocket), there are more pet rodents ending up in households.
Many healthy people, nearly one-third of those infected with LCMV, will not
develop any symptoms of illness. For healthy people who do become ill, nearly
half of them will develop only mild symptoms, with no neurological involvement.
People who become more ill with LCM will develop a two-phase disease.
The first phase is called the initial viremia stage. Symptoms appear 1 to 2 weeks
after exposure to LCMV and include nonspecific, flulike symptoms, such as
fever, lethargy, muscle pain, nausea and vomiting, headache, sore throat, and a
nonproductive cough. This phase lasts up to a week.
The second phase of LCM is called the secondary viremia stage, which develops
as the patient seems to recover from the first phase. It is characterized by a
 more severe headache, a stiff neck, and encephalitis, which is characterized by
drowsiness, fever, confusion, nausea, and/ or paralysis.
LCM has been associated with a buildup of fluid on the brain, leading to
hydrocephalus, which requires surgical release.
Women who become infected with LCMV during the first two trimesters
of pregnancy can pass the virus to the fetus. This can result in fetal death or
congenital problems such as hydrocephalus, microcephaly, or chorioretinitis.
 People with suppressed immune systems, including people with HIV /AIDS,
people receiving chemotherapy, organ transplant recipients, and people using
Some patients have a prolonged recovery, which may last several months.
During this time they may experience headaches, fatigue, and dizziness.
DIAGNOSIS
The diagnosis of LCM is based on a patient history of rodent exposure in the
previous 1 to 2 weeks and serum immunological testing to identify antibodies
against LCMV.
TREATMENT
There is no specific treatment for LCM. Hospitalization may be required,
during which supportive therapy, based on the symptoms and the severity of
the symptoms, will be administered.
122ZOONOTIC DISEASES
PREVENTION
LCM is best prevented by taking precautions around wild and pet mice:
* Block any access areas wild mice have to the home.
· Set mouse traps for wild mice. Wear gloves when handling dead (or live)
mice.
·Protect food from wild mice.
· Do not provide convenient nesting places for wild mice. Keep pet food in
secure containers.
*Have wild mice professionally removed if the infestation is great.
· Wipe up mouse droppings by first wetting them down with a dilute bleach
solution (/4 cup bleach in a gallon of water). Do not sweep or vacuum the
droppings, as this may release aerosolized virus particles. Wipe up the wet
droppings with disposable towels.
* Clean bedding, cages, dishes, toys, and water bottles used by pet rodents on
a regular basis. Wear rubber gloves. If you have more than one cage to clean,
disinfect the rubber gloves between each cage.
 auu pou op 'suapoi ad jo areo ao ue aro aaq nok fl -
spreading from one rodent to another.
* Do not clean cages or other equipment used by pet rodents in the kitchen
or any place food is prepared.
* Disinfect any sink or tub used for cleaning cages or equipment with a mild
bleach solution when cleaning is cormpleted. Make sure the room is well
ventilated.
· Prevent pet mice or other rodents from coming in contact with wild mice
or wild mice secretions.
* Diligently wash hands with warm soapy water, or a hand sanitizer if no soap
is available, after handling pet rodents or any of their cages, food dishes, etc.
Teach children to wash their hands after playing with pet mice, hamsters,
and guinea pigs.
MYCOBACTERTUMINFECTIONS(TUBERCULOSIS)123
MYCOBACTERIUMINFECTIONS
(TUBERCULOSIS)
Tuberculosis (TB) is the most common bacterial cause of death in the world.
Worldwide, it is the leading cause of death in HIV/AIDS patients. In the
United States cases of TB have decreased to an all-time low, but cases are
reported every year.
Other names for TB include consumption (the disease seemed to consume
people from within), red death (for the bloody vomiting often seen), wasting
disease, white plague (infected people become very pale), prosector's wart (skin
TB, transferred by contact with contaminated carcasses), and Koch's disease
(named for Robert Koch, who discovered the TB organism). Edgar Allen Poe
wrote a short story, "The Masque of the Red Death, which deals with TB.
MORBIDITY: +
MORTALITY: +
ETIOLOGY: BACTERIAL
Bacteria belonging to the genus Mycobacterium are responsible for TB. The three
most important species are M. bovis (reservoirs are cattle, dogs, and pigs)
M. avium (reservoirs are birds, pigs, and sheep), and M. tuberculosis (human
reservoir). Nonzoonotic Mycobacterium leprae causes human leprosy.
aerobic bacilli.
HOSTS
Humans are the ultimate reservoir for M. tuberculosis, but other animals, such
as nonhuman primates, cattle, dogs, pigs, and psittacine birds, can become
infected by a process known as reverse zoonosis. Cattle will test positive for TB
when infected with M. tuberculosis, but generally will not become clinically ill.
Pigs can become infected by eating table scraps from the table of an infected
person. Granulomatous lesions develop in the gastrointestinal tract and asso-
ciated lymph nodes. Dogs can develop granulomas in any part of the body,
but if the pharymx is infected, the organism can be transferred back to people.
Birds develop skin granulomas when infected with M. tuberculosis. Asian
elephants in the United States have tested positive for M. tuberculosis and are
124  ZOONOTIC DISEASES
presumably infected by their handlers. Elephants and handlers have to be
tested annually.
M. avium is becoming a concern because of its increased appearance in
immunocompromised people, especially HIV/AIDS patients. Birds, pigs and
sheep are naturally susceptible to M. avium infection. Cattle, dogs, and cats
appear to be resistant.
M. bovis is found primarily in cattle and buffalo, but will infect dogs, pigs,
and humans.
TRANSMISSION
The Mycobacterium species that cause TB are spread by aerosol droplets, contact
with infected animals, contact with contaminated surfaces, and ingestion.
M. bovis can be transmitted to people through unpasteurized milk and products
made with unpasteurized milk. Aerosol droplets can be dispersed through
talking, singing, laughing, coughing, or sneezing.
TUBERCULOSIS IN ANIMALS
Bovine TB (M. bovis) is seen more often in other parts of the world, but despite
an eradication program, cases are still being reported in the United States and
Canada. In cattle TB can be a chronic, debilitating disease or an acute, rapidly
progressing disease. It all depends on the health of the animal's immune system
and the dose of bacterium. The early stages of TB are usually asymptomatic,
but the later stages are characterized by a low fever, decreased milk produc-
tion, progressive emaciation, weakness, and anorexia. With respiratory
involvement there will be a moist cough that is worse in the morning, during
exercise, or during cold weather. Dyspnea and tachypnea may also be evident.
Lymph nodes may become swollen, and in some cases, rupture. Enlarged
lymph nodes can obstruct blood vessels, the digestive tract, or airways, leading
to further complications.
s  s p  s a  s s
TUBERCULOSIS IN HUMANS
TB was a common disease in people before the advent of pasteurization.
Pasteurization kills the TB organisms, so now only sporadic cases are seen in
North America. If people are infected via the aerosol droplet mode, signs
include a productive cough, fever, cachexia, bloody sputum, and chest pain
MYCOBACTERTUM INFECTIONS (TUBERCULOSIS) 125
If infection outside the respiratory system (extrapulmonary infection)
occurs, clinical signs will reflect the organs involved. The central nervous
system and blood vascular system are sometimes affected with extrapul-
monary TB. People at risk of developing TB are those who are caring
for infected animals, those who perform necropsies on animals that died
of TB, HIV/AIDS patients, and those who consume unpasteurized milk or
dairyproducts.
 Some people who are exposed to TB organisms do not become ill because
 st s  o eq a nand sss a 
as latent TB. The organisms are not eliminated from the body, just put in a state
of hibernation. Some time later in life, the organisms may become virulent
 ss a au a ud n s ' a nn pe 
compromised.
Nonhuman primates can develop TB. They may die suddenly, while
appearing to be in good condition, or they may develop classic signs of TB.
DIAGNOSIS
Diagnosis in cattle and people is based on the TB skin test. This is usually
performed by injecting a small amount of tuberculin (a sterile liquid con
taining a nonpathogenic derivative of the Mycobacterium bacterium used in the
diagnosis of tuberculosis) under the superficial layers of the skin. After 48 to
72 hours, the site is examined. A positive skin test results in a raised bump at
the point of injection. The size of this spot determines whether the skin test
is considered significant,
 a         s
However, there is a difference between being infected with TB organisms and
having TB disease. A person may have been exposed to the TB organisms but
developed a latent infection. The immune system is preventing the organisms
from multiplying, and the person is not clinically ill. While the immune system
keeps the organisms in check, these people cannot spread TB. Someone with
the clinical disease may be able to spread the disease to other people or
animals. A positive skin test must be followed up with further tests (e.g., chest
radiographs, sputum tests) in people. Advanced TB or HIV / AIDS may cause
the skin test to read falsely negative. Treatment may be necessary.
Cattle that test positive are either isolated or culled from a herd. All other
animals that had contact with the infected animal must also be tested.
All cases of bovine TB must be reported to local, state, and federal health
departments.
126 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
TREATMENT
In most cases treatment using a combination of approved antimicrobials is
successful; treatment can last up to 6 months. Untreated cases of TB can
be fatal.
PREVENTION
There is a human vaccine available to protect people against TB, but it does not
provide 100% protection in adults. If it does provide protection, the protec-
tion lasts only about 15 years. The vaccine also can interfere with the skin test.
 People at high risk for being exposed to or developing TB can take a drug
that will prevent active disease. It is given every day for 6 to 12 months.
Control measures include:
* Educating the public about transmission methods and prevention.
* Not drinking unpasteurized milk or eating products made from unpasteurized
milk.
· Wearing protective clothing when handling suspect animals or carcasses.
* Working in a controlled environment when working with Mycobacterium
organisms in a laboratory setting.
* A regular surveillance program to identify infected people and animals.
* Isolation and quarantine of suspect animals.
· Providing adequate ventilation in areas where TB is known to exist.
 Using ultraviolet light to sanitize the air in hospitals where TB patients are
housed. Special respirators and masks must be used by individuals at risk,
and TB patients must be isolated in special rooms with controlled ventilation
to prevent spread of the organisms.
PASTEURELLOSIS127
PASTEURELLOSIS
Animal-bite pasteurellosis is an acute wound infection resulting from exposure
to Pasteurella multocida. There have been more than 130 disease-causing organ
isms identified from infected animal bites in people. Pasteurellosis is the most
common bite-associated infection,
MORBIDITY: ++
MORTALITY: +
ETIOLOGY: BACTERIAL
Animal-bite pasteurellosis is caused by P multocidd, a small, gram-positive
Coccobacillus. There are other Pasteurella species that cause various diseases
in animals, but P multocida is the most common zoonotic species.
HoSTS
P multocida is part of the normal flora in the respiratory and digestive tracts
of many warm-blooded animals. The presence of P multocida in these animals
usually does not cause illness. Cats and dogs are the most common source of
animal-bite pasteurellosis. Some rats also carry P multocida in their mouths,
which can cause wound infection.
TRANSMISSION
P multocida is usually transferred from the mouth of a cat or dog through a bite
wound or contact of the animal's saliva with broken skin (e.g, scratch, abrasion,
cut). Cat bites account for around 90% of infected bites because their sharp
teeth puncture the skin more deeply, making the wound harder to clean and cre-
ating an environment that favors bacterial growth. Dogs have a more crushing
bite that does not result in such a deep bite wound. Animal-bite pasteurellosis
has also been caused by contact with saliva from rabbits, cattle, sheep, and rats.
PASTEURELLOSISINANIMALS
Pasteurella spp. are part of the normal flora of the respiratory and digestive
tracts of many species of warm-blooded animals. They do not cause illness
in healthy animals. When an animal becomes stressed, the nonpathogenic
128ZOONOTIC DISEASES
organisms can sometimes become pathogenic, causing primarily respiratory
infections from fighting with other animals.
PASTEURELLOSIS IN HUMANS
Animal-bite pasteurellosis is an acute infection. It is characterized by signs
of inflammation around a bite wound or broken skin 2 to 12 hours after
exposure if the wound is not properly cleansed. The infected area becomes
red, swollen, and painful. There may be a clear or bloody discharge present,
and abscesses may develop. Some infected wounds heal slowly.
Most animal bites are found on the hands, arms, neck, face, and legs. Cat
and tendons are close to the skin and are more susceptible to puncture injury
from a bite. When this happens, serious complications such as septic arthritis
or osteomyelitis can occur. Dog bites to the face and neck area can cause bone
fractures. This can lead to central nervous system infections.
If animal-bite pasteurellosis develops and is not treated right away, the
r siui poq aun nounou an aun jo are aun woy peaids ue uonnau
cause serious complications such as abscesses, arthritis, and meningitis.
Anyone can develop animal-bite pasteurellosis if a wound is not properly
cleansed. People who are most at risk for developing an infection are young
children; the elderly; those with circulatory problems or liver disease; those
who have had their spleens removed; or immunocompromised people such as
or those on long-term steroid therapy.
DIAGNOSIS
The initial diagnosis of animal-bite pasteurellosis is based on a history of animal
exposure and an acute inflammatory response at the site of exposure, usually
a bite wound or a scratch or cut that has been licked by an animal. If the inflam
mation appears more than 24 hours after exposure, a different organism is
probably involved. A definitive diagnosis is based on wound culture to identify
P multocida. Samples for culture must be taken before drug therapy is started.
TREATMENT
Treatment starts with thoroughly cleansing the wound. It is important to
scrub the wound several times, over a period of several minutes, using soap
PASTEURELLOSIS129
under warm, running water. Use a scrub brush if one is available; this will get
rid of as much of the bacteria-laden saliva as possible. Follow the scrubbing with
an antiseptic solution, such as iodine or Betadine (povidone-iodine solution).
 If inflammation develops in spite of a thorough cleansing, an appropriate
antibiotic can be administered. The appropriate antibiotic is determined by
wound culturing and by an antibiotic sensitivity test of the bacterial isolates by
placing antibiotic impregnated disks on the culture medium to determine
which antibiotics will inhibit bacterial growth.
A tetanus booster should be given if the patient is not currently protected.
If a person was bitten by a wild, stray, or unvaccinated animal, the possibility
of rabies must be considered.
PREVENTION
There is no vaccine available to protect against animal-bite pasteurellosis.
To avoid getting bitten, use proper restraint methods when handling
animals. In a veterinary clinic or hospital setting, it is unwise to let owners
restrain their animals during any procedure. Avoid contact with stray animals
which may be more likely to bite when provoked or handled, and take time to
thoroughly cleanse every wound from an animal bite.
PSITTACOSIS 135
PSITTACOSIS
Psittacosis is a bacterial disease transmitted from bird to bird and from birds
to humans. It is also known as ornithosis, parrot fever, chlamydophilosis, and
chlamydiosis (not the sexually transmitted chlamydiosis).
MORBIDITY: +
MORTALITY: ++
ETIOLOGY: BACTERIAL
Psittacosis is caused by Chlamydophila psittaci (formerly Chlamydia psittaci),
a coccoid, gram-negative, obligate intracellular (it must be inside a cell to
reproduce) bacterium. C. psittaci can survive, and stay infective, outside of a
host in the environment for several months.
HOSTS
se uns) spq auoesd Aadsa 'spiq iad ane yrnsd ' og sisou oaiasar au
parrots, parakeets, cockatiels, and macaws) from tropical and subtropical regions,
and pigeons. C. psittaci has also been found in mynah birds, doves, canaries, birds
of prey, shore birds, and domestic turkeys and ducks but only rarely in chickens.
 It has been found in more than 100 species of birds, but the most common
sources of infection for people are pet psittacine birds and domestic turkeys.
TRANSMISSION
Transmission of C. psittaci is usually by inhalation. The organism is shed in fecal
and nasal discharges of infected birds. When these discharges, especially the
feces, dry, C. psittaci becomes airborne on fine, dried particles that can be
inhaled by people or other birds. Other means of transmission include handling
the plumage of infected birds and beak-to-mouth transmission. For this reason,
owners should not kiss their pet birds. Rarely, a person with psittacosis may
Buno palonuoun uapo ynor uosiad iaoe on ynsd  susu.nn
PSITTACOSIS IN BIRDS
 sisosisd yi spiq aos spiq sue snou Ary st sisos
136 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
birds developing clinical signs of psittacosis. Poor diet, overcrowding, poor
sanitation, shipping, chilling, breeding, and relocation are some of the more
important stressors that can cause a latent illness. In a latent illness, the bird
has a C. psittaci infection, but shows no clinical sign of the disease until it is
stressed. It may or may not be shedding C. psittaci during the latent period,
which may last several years.
aeeadde au pue ponsd  on ansodxa uaamaq potad uogeqnou au
of clinical signs is 3 days to several weeks. When clinical signs appear, they can
include lethargy and depression, ruffled feathers with shivering, anorexia,
ocular and nasal discharges, respiratory distress, diarrhea, yellowish to dark
green droppings, decreased egg production, emaciation, and death.
PSITTACOSIS INHUMANS
People at risk for developing psittacosis are those who are exposed to birds,
such as pet shop employees, pet bird owners, veterinarians and veterinary
technicians, farmers, wildlife rehabilitators, zoo workers, and workers in
poultry slaughterhouses. Even casual exposure to birds can result in infection.
Infected people frequently acquire the C. psittaci infection by inhaling dust
from dried droppings in birdcages. The incubation period, from exposure to
clinical illness, is 4 to 15 days.
 Psittacosis is primarily a lung disease. It begins with flulike symptoms that
include fever, chills, headache, lethargy, sensitivity to light, and anorexia.
A nonproductive cough that is accompanied by difficult breathing and tightmess
in the chest may develop. Severe pneumonia that will require hospitalization
and intensive, supportive care may also develop.
Occasionally the infection spreads beyond the lungs to affect the heart,
liver, kidney, or brain. When this happens, hepatitis, endocarditis, and neuro
logical signs may develop that require more intensive, supportive therapy.
The fever will last 2 to 3 weeks. Without treatment, uncomplicated
psittacosis can be fatal; with treatment it rarely is.
DIAGNOSIS
Diagnosis in birds can be based on clinical signs and serologic testing. A posi-
tive serologic test result indicates that the bird was infected with C. psittaci at
some point but does not confirm that the bird has an active infection.
In people, diagnosis begins with a history of exposure to birds, their
plumage, or dried discharges. The clinical signs are nonspecific, but the
PsITTACOSIS  137
respiratory involvement should point to psittacosis. Serologic testing can be
helpful in establishing a diagnosis, but some tests are not highly specific.
C. psittaci may be found in a patient's sputum, fluid from the thorax, or blood
at the beginning of the infection, but culturing the organism is difficult and
dangerous, so very few laboratories will do it.
Human cases of psittacosis must be reported to state public health offcials.
TREATMENT
In birds treatment must last 45 days. Specific antibiotics can be given in food,
d  s  p  a l  a
but many birds are returned to normal health if treatment is continued for
the entire 45 days.
Treatment for psittacosis in people involves specific antibiotics. They are usually
administered orally, but can also be given intravenously in severe cases. Treatment
must continue for at least 2 weeks after the fever is gone. When treated most people
recover without incident. Without treatment, the disease may become severe Or
Adeau anap aaneuane ambar uaom puuard pue uapi jere
PREVENTION
involves minimizing exposure to C. psittaci:
· Keep stress in birds as low as possible to prevent any latent diseases from
developing. This will help minimize C. psittaci shedding in the feces.
* Sick birds should be isolated from healthy birds to prevent spread.
* On the advice of a veterinarian, healthy birds may be put on medicated feed
or water as a prophylactic measure.
· Keep birds and bird cages clean to prevent buildup of dried fecal
material.
· Imported psittacine birds must be quarantined when entering the
United States. During the quarantine period, they are given antibiotics to
help prevent psittacosis. Buying illegally imported birds increases the risk
of C. psittaci infection.
* In a pet shop or any flock situation, newly arrived birds should be isolated
from resident birds.
* Keep circulation of dust and feathers at a minimum. When cleaning rooms
where birds are kept, moisten the floor first with a disinfectant solution.
138ZOONOTICDISEASES
Wear a face mask when cleaning cages and floors. Clean the cages with a
Susppe kq apeu uognos yoeana pioysnoy oori y uonnios sueoauis
2 tablespoons of bleach to a gallon of water, works well. Lysol, Roccal-D,
or Zephiran solutions also are effective disinfectants. Follow the disinfectant
with a wash of warm, soapy water and a clean water rinse.
· Clean cages and rooms where sick birds are kept after cleaning cages or
rooms where healthy birds are kept. This will help prevent accidental spread
of psittacosis from sick birds to healthy birds.
Q FEVER139
Q FEVER
Q fever can be a chronic, debilitating, possibly fatal infection. It is transmitted to
birthing fluids and placenta, of cattle, sheep, and goats."Q"is for"query," because
the people who first recognized the disease did not know what caused it.
MORBIDITY: +
MORTALITY: +
ETIOLOGY: BACTERIAL
e st aung  'seue pue aldoad u aaay  o alqisuodsai s aunq p
small, gram-negative coccobacillus that lives and multiplies in the monocytes
and macrophages in the host. As the organism multiplies, it destroys the host cell
and moves on to live in other cells. Q fever is unique in that it does not require
a tick bite to transfer the bacteria from host to host, although tick bite transmis-
sion has been seen in animals. C. burnetii can survive outside of a host in the
environment for weeks to months. A single C. burneti organism can cause disease.
HoSTS
Cattle, sheep, and goats are the most common reservoirs of C. burneti. It has also
been found in dogs and cats. Some ticks have been shown to carry C. burneti.
TRANSMISSION
C. burneti is shed primarily in the birthing fluids of cattle, sheep, and goats.
It is also found in milk, urine, and feces and is transmitted to people and other
animals through inhalation of C. burneti in fine-particle aerosols. Rarely, trans-
mission can occur from ingestion of contaminated, unpasteurized milk or
other dairy products. Contaminated bedding materials, such as straw used as
packing materials, can transmit Q fever long distances.
Q FEVERIN ANIMALS
Animals are primarily asymptomatic carriers that act as reservoirs of C. burneti
for people and other animals. Rarely, abortion, still births, and difficult deliv-
eries may occur in infected ruminants.
140ZOONOTIC DISEASES
Q FEVER In HumANS
Q fever in humans is mostly an occupational hazard for people who may be
exposed to aerosolized C. burneti from birthing fluids. This group includes veteri-
narians, veterinary technicians, livestock farmers, dairy workers, slaughterhouse
workers, and researchers at facilities where ruminants are housed. C. burneti
infection in people results in clinical illness in about half of the people who
become infected. Clinical signs appear 1 to 3 weeks following infection, and the
disease initially presents like the flu, with fever, sore throat, chills, headache,
lethargy, muscle pains, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, night sweats, and abdominal or
chest pains. Some people will develop mental confusion, hepatitis, or endocarditis,
mflammation of the lining of the heart. About a third of the patients showing clin-
ical signs will develop pneumonia. The fever can last up to 2 weeks, and without
treatment, the patient may recover to normal health over several months.
 If the infection lasts over 6 months, or reappears after apparent recovery,
it is considered chronic Q fever. Fewer than 5% of people who have acute
Q fever will develop chronic Q fever. Sometimes a person recovers from acute
Q fever only to develop the signs of chronic Q fever up to 20 years later.
The most significant sign of chronic Q fever is endocarditis, which may
affect the heart valves. Hepatitis and arthritis are also sometimes seen with
chronic Q fever.
DIAGNOSIS
In humans, Q fever is diagnosed using serologic tests to detect antibodies
against C. burneti. A history of exposure to birthing fluids and tissues may help
in establishing an initial diagnosis, but the clinical signs of acute Q fever are too
nonspecific to be diagnostic.
In animals, serologic testing is not as useful for diagnosis, because high
serum antibodies can mean the animal has been exposed to C. burneti, but they
do not necessarily mean the animal is a current source of infection to other
animals or people.
 Serologic tests performed on a pooled milk sample is used to detect C. burneti
infection within a herd.
TREATMENT
In humans, treatment consists of long-term therapy including antibiotics and
antimalarial drugs. Some patients will recover without treatment.
Q FEVER141
Treatment in animals is questionable because most animals are asympto-
 matic. If C. burneti infection is known to exist in a herd, an antibiotic may be put
in the water for several weeks before the beginning of the birthing season to
decrease the number of C. burneti organisms in the placenta and birthing fluids.
PREVENTION
No vaccine against C. burneti imfection is commercially available in the UInited States.
 The best prevention in people is to reduce possible exposure to infected
tissues and fluids. This includes properly disposing of all birthing products and
aborted fetuses, disinfecting birthing areas if possible, consuming only pasteur-
ized milk and dairy products, educating at-risk people about the signs of Q
fever, and encouraging them to seek medical treatment as soon as possible if
they think they are infected.
In animals, minimizing their exposure to birthing tissues and fluids
through proper disposal and sanitation is the best prevention.
142ZOONOTIC DISEASES
RABIES
Rabies is probably one of the best known and deadliest zoonotic diseases in the
world. It has been around for thousands of years and strikes fear in people
everywhere.
MORBIDITY: +
MORTALITY: ++++
ETIOLOGY:VIRAL
Infection with the rabies virus results in acute encephalitis in most mammals,
including humans. Without treatment before signs and symptoms appear, the
outcome is almost always fatal.
HoSTS
The vast majority of rabies cases reported to the CDC each year occur in
wild animals such as raccoons, skunks, bats, and foxes. Domestic animals
account for less than 10% of reported rabies cases, with cats, cattle, and
dogs most often affected. Although all species of mammals are susceptible
to rabies virus infection, only a few species are important as reservoirs for
the disease.
In North America, several distinct rabies virus variants have been identi-
fied in terrestrial mammals, including raccoons, skunks, foxes, and coyotes.
 In addition to these terrestrial reservoirs, several species of insectivorous bats
are also reservoirs for rabies. Rodents and lagomorphs, like rabbits and hares,
are unlikely to have rabies.
TRANSMISSION
      ss  se 
contamination of mucous membranes, aerosol transmission, and organ and
tissue transplants. The most common mode of rabies virus transmission is
through a bite wound contaminated with virus-containing saliva from an
infected animal. The virus cannot penetrate intact skin. Under refrigeration or
during colder winter months, the virus can live from 4 weeks up to several
months in dead animals. The virus will no longer be infective after a couple of
hours in dried blood or other secretions.
RABIES143
THE DISEASE
Following infection, the virus enters an eclipse phase, during which it cannot
be easily detected within the host. During the eclipse phase, the host's immune
defenses may stimulate a cell-mediated immunity against the rabies virus
antigen. About 20% of people exposed to the virus develop rabies when the
cell-mediated immunity does not neutralize the virus.
The uptake of virus into peripheral nerves is important for infection to
occur. After uptake into peripheral nerves, the rabies virus is transported to
the central nervous system. Typically this occurs by way of the sensory and
motor nerves at the initial site of infection.
The incubation period may vary, from a few days to several years, but is typ-
ically 1 to 3 months. There is a direct relationship between the location of the
bite and the length of the incubation period. Bites on the head, neck, and arms
progress most quickly, because of the close proximity of the central nervous
system to these locations. The amount of virus received is also significant. A bite
which could reduce the number of viruses that enter the bite wound.
The virus spreads rapidly within the central nervous system. Active cere-
bral infection is followed by spread of the virus back to the peripheral nerves.
This may lead to viral invasion of highly innervated sites, including the salivary
glands.
RABIES IN ANIMALS
During the period of cerebral infection, the classic behavioral changes associ-
ated with rabies develop. Rabid animals of all species exhibit signs typical of
central nervous system disturbance.
The clinical course, particularly in dogs, can be divided into three phases:
the prodromal, the excitative, and the paralytic. The term furious rabies refers to
cases in which the excitative phase is predominant. Dumb or paralytic rabies refers
to cases in which the excitative phase is short or absent. The disease progresses
quickly to the paralytic phase, characterized by flaccid paralysis that leads to
eventual death due to respiratory and/ or cardiac failure.
d a u as r saqe j sis p ns a r ae 
stage. These signs can include a change in behavior, which may be indistin-
guishable from a variety of other disorders, such as gastrointestinal disorder,
injury, a foreign body in the mouth, poisoning, or an early infectious disease.
  o  s p is  i   o
144ZOONOTIC DISEASES
be noted. Animals usually stop eating and drinking and may seek solitude.
Frequently, the urogenital tract is irritated or stimulated, resulting in frequent
urination, erection in the male, and signs of increased sexual desire.
After the prodromal period of 2 to 4 days, animals either become vicious
sanu pue sasou Aleuoisenno pue 'said 'saioajure 'sishje.red jo susis mous no
bite other animals or people at the slightest provocation. Cattle may butt
any moving object. Rabid domestic cats and bobcats attack suddenly, biting
and scratching viciously. Rabid foxes frequently invade yards or even houses,
attacking dogs and people. Rabid foxes and skunks are responsible for most
pasture cattle losses from rabies and have even attacked cattle in barns.
A rabid raccoon is characterized by a loss of fear of humans, frequent
aggression and incoordination, and abnormal activity during the day (raccoons
are predominantly nocturnal animals). In urban areas, rabid skunks and raccoons
often attack domestic dogs. Skunks are the leading reservoir of rabies in large
areas of the United States. Bats flying in daytime are probably rabid.
The disease progresses rapidly after the onset of paralysis, and death is
virtually certain within 10 days of the first clinical signs
RABIES IN HUMANS
The first signs and symptoms of human rabies may be flulike and include
malaise, fever, or headache, which may last for days. There may be discomfort
or tingling at the site of initial exposure, developing within days to symptoms of
cerebral dysfunction, anxiety, confusion, and agitation, progressing to delirium,
abnormal behavior, hallucinations, and insomnia. Attempts at drinking cause
 up on sasnan suaed a en os 'sss gern urd axas
leads to the historical name for rabies, hydrophobia.
Several factors may affect the outcome of rabies exposure. These include
the virus variant, the dose of virus received, and the type and location of
exposure, as well as individual host factors, such as age and immune defenses.
Although rabies among humans is rare in the United States, every year an
-ppe ue pue 'sixelydoid ansodxaard saiqei aianai aldoad ooo't I paensa
tional 40,000 receive postexposure prophylaxis.
DIAGNOSIS
humans; no single test is sufficient. Saliva, serum, skin biopsy specimens, and
spinal fluid can be tested for various indicators of the presence of the rabies virus.
RABIES145
The standard test for rabies is a postmortem test, based on the presence
of rabies virus protein, or antigen, in nervous tissue, especially the brain. Other
diagnostic tests are also available
Animals with a current rabies vaccination history may be quarantined for
observation for 10 days after biting a human, to see if clinical signs of rabies appear.
Animals with an unknown rabies vaccination history are euthanized immediately
after biting a human. The brains of these animals are examined for rabies antigen.
A thorough history of the bite event is critical.
TREATMENT
Once clinical signs of rabies appear, the disease is nearly always fatal, and
treatment is typically supportive.
There is no sanctioned treatment for rabies after signs and symptoms
of the disease appear. However, there is an extremely effective rabies vaccine
regimen that provides immunity to rabies when administered after an exposure
or for protection before an exposure occurs.
Treatment of a person who has been exposed to the rabies virus is entirely
prophylactic, so postexposure prophylaxis includes both immune globulin
(passive antibody) and vaccine. To date, only six documented cases of human
survival from clinical rabies have been reported.
PRE-EXPOSUREVACCINATION
such as veterinary technicians, veterinarians, animal handlers, and some labo.
ratory workers. Other people whose activities bring them into frequent
contact with the rabies virus or potentially rabid bats, raccoons, skunks,
cats, dogs, or other species at risk of having rabies should also consider
pre-exposure vaccination. In addition, international travelers likely to come in
contact with animals in areas of enzootic dog rabies and who lack immediate
The purpose of pre-exposure vaccinations is to protect the recipients
against the full effects of the rabies virus if they are exposed to the virus.
Although pre-exposure vaccination does not eliminate the need for additional
medical attention after rabies virus exposure, it simplifies therapy by elimi-
nating the need for human rabies immune globulin (RIG) and decreasing the
number of postexposure vaccine doses needed. Pre-exposure vaccination
consists of three intramuscular doses of rabies vaccine, given on day O (the day of
the first vaccine injection), day 7, and either day 21 or day 28. The effectiveness
146 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
of the preexposure vaccination is measured by checking the recipient's blood
titer (amount of antibodies present) on a regular basis. If the titer gets too low,
the vaccine is readministered.
POSTEXPOSURE PROPHYLAXIS
Postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) is indicated for anyone who has possibly been
exposed to a rabid animal. Possible exposures include animal bites or mucous
membrane contamination with infectious tissue, such as saliva. PEP should
begin as soon as possible after an exposure. There have been no vaccine failures
 in the United States when PEP was given as soon as possible and appropriately
after an exposure.
Administration of PEP is a medical urgency, not a medical emergency.
Physicians evaluate each possible exposure to rabies and may consult with local
or state public health officials regarding the need for rabies prophylaxis.
In the United States, PEP consists of a regimen of one dose of human RIG
(approximately half of the dose is infused around the wound, with the rest
administered intramuscularly at some point distant from it) and five doses of
human diploid cell vaccine (HDCV; a rabies vaccine made from a specific cell
culture of human cells) over a 28-day period. The vaccine is given as five intra
muscular injections, at day 0 (the day of the first injection), day 3, day 7, day 14,
and day 28 after exposure. RIG and the first dose of HDCV should be given as
soon as possible after exposure. The injections are no longer given in the
abdominal area, where they were very painful.
If you are exposed to a potentially rabid animal, wash the wound thor-
oughly with soap and water, encourage bleeding from the wound, and seek
medical attention immediately. The following information will help the health
care provider assess risk:
·The geographic location of the incident
· The type of animal involved
· How the exposure occurred (provoked or unprovoked)
* The vaccination status of the animal
· Whether the animal can be captured safely and observed or tested for rabies
PREVENTION
People need to be responsible animal owners. Rabies vaccinations should be
kept up-to-date for all dogs, cats, and ferrets. This is important, not only
uogoanord jo iarireq e apord on osje inq 'saiqeu Sunag uo.y shad daax o
for owners, veterinary and medical personnel, and anyone else who comes
RABIES147
in contact with animals bitten by a rabid wild animal. Each state determines
how often rabies vaccine must be administered to animals living in that state.
The following are ways to minimize the risk of exposure to rabies:
* Spaying and neutering pets helps reduce the number of unwanted pets that
may not be properly cared for or regularly vaccinated.
· Avoid direct contact with unfamiliar animals, including stray animals. Calls
about stray animals should be referred to the local animal control agency so
the animals can be removed from the neighborhood. These animals may be
never to approach or handle unfamiliar animals, wild or domestic, even if
adioud poos e st auole siauo aaeal umo mok aaoi, Aipuay readde Kau
for children to learn.
· Pet owners should keep their pets under direct supervision so they do not
come in contact with wild animals. Enjoy wild animals from afar.
* Do not handle, feed, or unintentionally attract wild animals with open
garbage cans or liter. Never adopt wild animals or bring them into homes.
· Prevent bats from entering living quarters or occupied spaces in homes,
churches, schools, and other similar areas, where they might come in contact
with people and pets.
· When traveling abroad, avoid direct contact with animals. Be especially
careful around dogs in developing countries, where rabies control or imme-
diate medical treatment might not be available.
HISTORICAL NOTE
Rabies has been known as a lethal, infectious disease of the central nervous
system as far back as 2300 BC. Before 1885 a bite from a rabid animal meant cer-
tain death. On July 6, 1885, Louis Pasteur heralded the modern era of immu
mization when he injected the first of 14 daily doses of rabbit spinal cord
a 9-year-old boy who had been bitten by a rabid dog 2 days earlier. Joseph made
a total recovery and remained healthy for the rest of his life. He returned to the
Pasteur Institute as an employee, where he served for many years as gatekeeper.
In 1940, 55 years after his treatment for rabies that made medical history, and
45 years after Louis Pasteur died, Joseph was ordered by the German occupiers
of Paris to open Pasteur's crypt. Rather than comply, he committed suicide!*
*From a lecture presented by David V. Cohn, School of Dentistry, University of
Louisville, Feb. 11, 1996.
148 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
RAT-BITE FEVER
Rat-bite fever (RBF) is an uncommon bacterial infection that results from
exposure to infected rodents, usually through a bite or scratch wound. It is also
known as Haverhill fever, streptobacillary fever, and epidemic arthritic erythema.
MORBIDITY: +
MORTALITY: +
ETIOLOGY: BACTERIAL
RBF is caused by Streptobacillus moniliformis, a gram-negative bacillus.
HoSTS
S. moniliformis is found in the mouth, nasopharynx, nasal and ocular discharges,
feces, and urine of laboratory and wild rodents. It has also been found in pet
rats. All appear to be healthy carriers.
TRANSMISSION
RBF is transmitted to people from the mouth of an infected rodent through a
bite or scratch wound; through ingestion of food, water, or milk contaminated
with feces or urine; or through contact with ocular or nasal discharges of an
infected rat. RBF is not transmitted from person to person.
RAT-BITE FEVER IN ANIMALS
Wild and laboratory rodents appear to be reservoirs of S. moniliformis, but are
not affected by the organism. Immunodeficient mice and rats may develop
polyarthritis, gangrene, and loss of limbs.
RAT-BITE FEVER IN HUMANS
Clinical signs of RBF appear 2 to 10 days after exposure to S. moniliformis.
By this time the original bite wound, if one was present, has healed. RBF
begins with an acute fever and chills, followed by flulike symptoms including
nausea, vomiting, lethargy, headache, joint pain, back pain, and muscle pain.
In another 2 to 4 days, a rash of tiny red bumps appears on the palms of the
hands and soles of the feet, and some larger joints become inflamed.
RAT-BITE FEVER149
People most susceptible to S. moniliformis infection are those who work in
laboratories or people in poor living conditions, where rat infestations are
more prevalent. Children living in poor conditions are especially susceptible
to RBF because they are more often bitten. Infected pet rats can transmit
S. moniliformis through bites or scratches.
If RBF is not treated, serious complications such as heart valve infection,
endocarditis, pericarditis, pneumonia, meningitis, or organ abscesses may
result.
DIAGNOSIS
Initial diagnosis is based on a history of rodent exposure and clinical signs
Blood or joint fluid can be cultured, but S. monilijformis is difficult to grow.
Noninfected rats can be inoculated with fluid from an infected person to see iff
infection develops. Serologic tests can detect the presence of S. moniliformis
antibodies in infected people.
TREATMENT
Thoroughly clean any wound or scratch from a rodent. It is important to scrub
the wound several times, over a period of several minutes, using soap under
warm, running water. Use a scrub brush if one is available; this will get rid of
as much of the bacteria as possible. Follow the scrubbing with an antiseptic
solution, such as iodine or Betadine (povidone-iodine solution).
Antibiotic therapy is administered to prevent serious, possibly fatal,
complications.
A tetanus booster should be given if the patient is not currently protected.
PREVENTION
There is no vaccine available to protect against RBF. Follow these safeguards to
mimimize exposure:
* Avoid contact with wild rats or rat-contaminated environments.
* Do not eat food or drink water or milk that may be contaminated with rat
feces or urine.
· Wear gloves and protective clothing when working with rats or other
rodents in a laboratory.
*After handling rodents, wash hands thoroughly.
* Take time to thoroughly cleanse every wound or scratch from a rat or other
rodent.
150 ZoONOTIC DISEASES
ROCKY MOUNTAIN SPOTTED FEVER
Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF) is the most severe and most commonly
reported tick-borne rickettsial disease in the United States. RMSF has been
reported in every state but occurs more frequently in the south-Atlantic states.
Jo saiads suaap Ag pasneo 'sasasip spanods, snoanu are arau
Rickettsia, but only RMSF occurs in the United States.
MORBIDITY: +
MORTALITY: +
ETIOLOGY: BACTERIAL
Rickettsia rickettsii is the bacterium responsible for causing RMSF in people. It is
a gram-negative, obligate intracellular bacterium. In the case of RMSF, the cells
invaded initially are the cells that line small- to medium-size blood vessels.
When R. rickettsi multiplies, it kills the cells, causing blood to leak out of the
vessels into the surrounding tissue. Since blood vessels are virtually everywhere
in the body, R. ricketsi can cause blood seepage into just about any tissue. This
makes RMSF a potential multiorgan disease. The leakage also causes a rash, or
spotted fever, to develop in 85% to 90% of people who become ill.
HOSTS
Ticks are both reservoirs and vectors for RMSF. Hard, or ixodid, ticks spread
the disease to humans. So far the American dog tick (Dermacentor variabilis) and
the Rocky Mountain wood tick (Dermacentor andersoni) are the most common
culprits in the United States. The brown dog tick (Rhipicephalus sanguineus),
which transmits RMSF more commonly in Mexico, has been implicated in an
RMSF outbreak in Arizona. These ticks do not feed exclusively on people,
so R. rickettsii is found in many vertebrates.
TRANSMISSION
People are infected primarily by the bite of a tick. Rarely, people become
infected by crushing an infected tick with their fingers, allowing tick fluids to
enter through cuts or broken skin.
The tick life cycle has three active stages after the egg hatches: larva,
nymph, and adult (Appendix 1). The larva must have a blood meal before it can
ROCKY MOUNTAIN SPOTTED FEVER 151
molt to the nymph stage, and the nymph must have a blood meal before it can
molt to the adult stage. The tick becomes infected when it takes blood from an
infected animal or person. The bacteria stay with the tick when it molts to the
next stage. As it feeds before molting, and at any stage, it can infect another
animal or person by depositing R. rickettsi when it bites. Ticks in all three
stages feed on people. A tick needs to be attached to a person for at least
6 hours before R. rickettsi is transmitted (Figure 30).
Once infected, a tick can carry R. rickettsi for its entire life. Female ticks
can also become infected when male ticks transmit the organism through body
fluids or spermatozoa. The female tick can pass R. rickettsi to her eggs through
transovarian transmission.
ROCKY MOUNTAIN SPOTTED FEVER IN ANIMALS
A  r so       ae r s
nonhuman animal that will show clinical signs of RMSF. The clinical signs are
similar to those found in humans.
Infected animal
Larva, nymph, or adult tick takes
blood meal from infected animal
and ingests organism
★
Larva, nymph, or adult tick
detaches from infected animal
Larva, nymph, or adult tick
attaches to human and deposits
organism at bite site
Human crushes
tick, and organism
6 hours
 enters body through
i usually
breaks in skin
!required
Human Rocky Mountain
spotted fever
FiGuRE 30.Rocky Mountain spotted fever
152ZOONOTIC DISEASES
ROCKY MOUNTAIN SPOTTED FEVER IN HUMANS
In people, RMSF develops about 5 to 10 days after a tick bite. Many times
people do not even remember being bitten. The early signs are not specific
for RMSF and may include fever, chills, muscle aches, and headache. Nausea,
vomiting, anorexia, lethargy, edema in the extremities, and swollen joints
may also be seen. About 2 to 5 days after the fever develops, a rash appears in
85% to 90% of the patients showing clinical signs (Figure 31). The rash begins
as nonitchy, flat, pink spots on the wrists, forearms, palms, ankles, and soles.
The spots are called macules. From there, they spread toward the trunk; the
face is spared in most cases. When pressed, the spots blanch (turn white).
srss e sueal inoum readdesp pue pn xep u Aau Aeuaag
 People who do not develop the rash are said to have Rocky Mountain spotless
fever. These people tend to suffer more severe forms of the disease.
As RMSF develops, organ and tissue damage begins. This happens rapidly.
Many people will be so severely affected that they will require hospitalization.
The systems most often affected are the central nervous system, respiratory
system, renal system, hepatic system, and gastrointestinal tract. Clinical signs
FIGURE 31. Rocky Mountain spotted fever in a human. (Courtesy Public Health
Image Library, PHIL 1962, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta.)
ROCKY MOUNTAIN SPOTTED FEVER153
Long-term complications may follow an acute case of RMSF. They include
partial paralysis; hearing loss; loss of bladder or bowel control; or gangrene
that may lead to amputation of fingers, toes, arms, or legs. These complications
are most often seen in patients who have survived a more severe case of RMSF
and have been hospitalized for a long time.
DIAGNOSIS
When diagnosing RMSF, physicians or veterinarians look for what they call the
triad of clinical findings, which includes fever, rash, and a history of tick bite.
The rash may not have developed when the patient first seeks medical help, so
often the fever and a history of a tick bite are the bases of diagnosis. If a person
 does not remember being bitten by a tick, RMSF may go undiagnosed during
 yrum un 'sop aos og as aun aq osie pinon sui 'uogeunexa jenui ue
tick that would aid diagnosis is not found.
Serologic testing can confirm a diagnosis, but it is based on finding the
antibodies against R. rickettsii in two separate blood samples taken after the
patient begins to recover.
TREATMENT
Treatment must begin as soon as possible to be effective. Appropriate antibiotics
twice as likely to die as younger ones. Treatment cannot wait until laboratory
tests confirm RMSF
PREVENTION
There is no vaccine available to protect against RMSF. The best prevention is
to avoid areas where ticks are most active during the months when they are
prevalent, typically April through September. When entering tick-infested
:(7 xipuaddy) ainsodxa aseaioap diau lm sdans Sumolloy an 'seare
* Avoid areas where ticks thrive as much as possible. April through September
are the months when ticks are most active.
*Wear light-colored clothing when entering an area that may be a habitat for
ticks. This will make the adult ticks easier to see and remove before they
become attached.
· Wear long-sleeved shirts and long pants tucked into socks so the ticks cannot
crawl under clothing; wear high rubber boots and a hat for the same reason.
154 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
· Walk in the center of trails to avoid vegetation where ticks are lurking, Ticks
cannot fly, jump, skip, or hop, so they must come in direct contact with a
host before they can attach themselves. Immature ticks are found hiding in
the shade in moist areas. Adult ticks cling to grass, bushes, and shrubs,
waiting for a host to come by.
* Exposed skin and clothing can be protected with insect repellents containing
DEET. These repellents must be reapplied every few hours. Clothes, but
not exposed skin, can be protected with insect repellents containing per-
methrin, which kills ticks on contact. These repellents stay on clothes for
several days.
* Check often for ticks while outside.
* Do not sit on the ground.
* Make daily checks of the entire body for ticks. Look especially in areas
where ticks like to attach, such as behind the ears, at the back of the neck,
in the armpits, behind the knees, and in the groin area. Bathing will remove
Crawling ticks but will not detach ticks already attached.
* Wash and dry outdoor clothing after use using high temperatures.
* Remove ticks as soon as they are found. Remember, it takes 6 hours after a
tick becomes attached before it starts releasing R. rickettsii.
· To remove the tick, use fine tweezers; grasp the tick as close to the skin as
possible, and pull straight back, with slow, steady force. Avoid crushing the
tick's body. Kill the tick by dropping it in alcohol; save the tick in alcohol as
a possible diagnostic aid.
Anoun pue uao aue yauo os sad aq au e out paren aq ue sroi 
if they have been in tick-infested areas. UIse tick collars or other medications
to prevent ticks from attaching to pets.
° Ticks can also transmit RSMF to dogs, so it is especially important that dogs
be checked thoroughly and often for ticks.
ROUNDWORMS155
ROUNDWORMS
Roundworms belong to the phylum Nematoda, which contains worms that
are round and unsegmented. Members of this phylum are called nematodes.
There are thousands of genera of nematodes, but only five are of zoonotic
importance in North America: Toxocara canis, T. cati, Baylisascaris procyonis,
Ancylostoma braziliense, and Trichinella spp. A. braziliense is a nematode parasite
that is discussed under Hookworms. Trichinella spp. are discussed under
trichinosis.
MORBIDITY: +
MORTALITY:+ TO ++++
ETIOLOGY: PARASITIC
T canis, T. cati, and B. procyonis are roundworms of zoonotic importance when
the infective eggs of these parasites are ingested by abnormal, or atypical, dead-
end mammalian hosts, such as people.
HoSTS
T. canis is the roundworm of dogs, T. cati is the roundworm of cats, and B. pro-
cyonis is the roundworm of raccoons. Other mammals, including humans, are
abnormal or suboptimal hosts.
TRANSMISSION
Adult roundworms live in the intestines of their hosts. Transmission starts with
annpoid ueo aleuay siuno I aluis y 'saoay au ui saa urompunoi jo sessed
0 dn aonpoud ueo aleuay sjuofooud g albuis e :Kep iad sssa 0oo'0ol on dn
45 ,000, 000 eggs per day. If the host is harboring hundreds of roundworms, the
potential exists for the production of millions of infective eggs in a single day.
Roundworm eggs can become infective within 2 weeks and can remain infec-
tive in the environment for years. Eggs often live in soil, and the next host is
After ingestion the eggs hatch, and the larvae are released into the intestinal
tract. They burrow through the intestinal wall and into a blood vessel, where
they are then carried on a circuitous journey through the host's body.
Eventually they end up back in the host's intestines when they are ready to
156ZOONOTIC DISEASES
become adults. The cycle begins again after the adult female roundworms
produce eggs, which are then passed in the host's feces (Figure 31).
ingested by atypical or suboptimal hosts, such as people. The eggs still hatch in
the intestine, and the larvae will enter the blood stream to begin migration
routes that are abnormal because the larvae are in an atypical host. These
abnormal migration routes do not lead back to the intestines, but along the
way the larvae are deposited in various tissues in the body, causing tissue
damage as they continue to migrate through the tissue.
ROUNDWORM INFECTIONS IN ANIMALS
saddnd 'sieue sunos un uaas uao jso si suomunon on anp ae
can be infected with T. canis before they are born, through the mother's milk,
or by ingesting infective eggs. Sometimes migrating larvae in a bitch will go
dormant in tissue until she becomes pregnant. If she has been treated for
roundworms, she most likely is not shedding roundworm eggs in the feces, so
she appears to be roundworm-free. The pregnancy activates the larvae to finish
the life cycle, and they find their way back to the intestines, where they mature
and produce eggs. Puppies can thus become infected from a mother that
appears roundworm-free.
Kittens are not infected with T. cati before they are born, but are most likely
to be infected through the mother's milk and through ingestion of infective eggs.
Adult worms absorb nutrients from the host's intestines. Because of
their large size, they can interfere with digestion and may even damage the
intestinal wall. In large numbers they can cause intestinal obstruction and con.
stipation. Animals with low numbers of adult worms may show no roundworm-
specific clinical signs. Puppies with heavy infections will be thin, but will have
a potbelly. They may vomit or have diarrhea in which adult worms may be
present. Adult worms may also be passed in the puppy's normal feces. Puppies
with heavy infections do not do well, and often act as though they are in pain.
T canis and T. cati larvae migrate through the lungs, causing a dry cough.
The life cycle of B. procyonis is similar to the life cycles of T. canis and T. cati.
The adult worms do not seem to do much damage in raccoons.
LARVA MIGRANS IN HUMANS
When people swallow roundworm eggs, they can develop diseases known as
visceral larval migrans, ocular larva migrans, or neural larva migrans (Figure 32).
ROUNDWORMS 157
Infected animal
Feces containing
roundworm eggs
Human ingests material contaminated with feces
containing infective roundworm eggs
Larvae released when eggs hatch
in human's intestines
Larvae leave intestines and migrate to other
areas in body where they will eventually die
Human
Human
Human
visceral
ocular
neural
larva
larva
larva
migrans
migrans
migrans
FIGuRE 32. Visceral, ocular, and neural larva migrans.
As with animals, most of the damage seen with T. canis, T. cati, or B. procyonis
infection in people occurs in young children. Most infections happen
when children play in areas contaminated with infective roundworm eggs.
Children like to put interesting things in their mouths, including dirt, dirty
toys, or dirty hands, all of which may have been contaminated with infec-
hatch as usual in the intestine, and the
which carries them to various parts of the body, depositing them in tissues.
The larvae can remain alive
for
many weeks in the tissues, where they
migrate around causing tissue
 damage and destruction. This is known as
visceral larva migrans (VLM). The
tissues most often affected are the liver
lungs, eye, and brain. The damage caused by the migrating larvae is permanent
158  ZoONOTIC DISEASES
and can result in severe visual, respiratory, or neurological conditions.
The degree of damage or destruction is dependent on the number of
larvae meandering through the tissue. Eventually the larvae die, and small
abscesses or granulomas may form around them. In people, the larvae never
fully mature.
People infected with few roundworm larvae may show no clinical signs
because the tissue damage is minimal. The presence of clinical signs also
depends on which tissues are affected. People with heavier infections of larvae
will show clinical signs, based on which tissues are infected.
When the larvae travel to the eye they can cause inflammation and
scarring of the retina, which can lead to permanent, partial blindness. This
condition is known as ocular larva migrans (OLM).
B. procyonis larvae are more harmful to people for two reasons. First, the
B. procyonis larvae continue to grow as they migrate through the tissue, so they
cause more tissue damage because of their larger size. Second, the B. procyonis
larvae are more likely to migrate to the spinal cord and brain, causing neural
larva migrans (NLM) (Figure 33). The NLM that results from B. procyonis larvae
infection is often fatal. Even if a patient recovers there are lingering neurological
problems including blindness, seizures, paralysis, mental retardation, and
physical retardation.
Direct contact with dogs, cats, or raccoons that have roundworms cannot
lead to infection, because roundworm eggs need to mature in soil before they
become infective. One possible exception is B. procyonis eggs, which are
covered with a sticky substance that may allow them to stick to the hair on a
raccoon. If the eggs stay on the hair long enough to become infective, a person
could become infected by handling the raccoon. Roundworm infection cannot
be spread from person to person.
DIAGNOSIS
In dogs, cats, and raccoons, a definitive diagnosis of roundworm infection is
Sometimes diagnosis is based on seeing adult worms passed in feces or
vomited material
Serologic tests are available for diagnosis of T. canis larval infection in
people. However, no serological test is widely available or commonly used
for B. procyonis diagnosis. Diagnosis of B. procyonis infection is based on clinical
Asdoiq au asneaq isaq ie aagenuat sl Asdoiq anssi Xsdoiq anssn pue subis
must include a cross-section of the larvae, which can be difficult to obtain.
ROUNDWORMS 159
Infected raccoon
 Feces containing eggs
Eggs develop to infective
 stage and contain larvae
 Humans ingest infective eggs 
in contaminated material
Eggs hatch and release larvae
in human's intestines
Larvae migrate out of intestines and
travel to central nervous system
Human
neural
larva
FIGURE 33.Neural larva migrans
 migrans
associated with Baylisascaris.
Even then there are other larvae that can be found in tissue, so the next hurdle
is to confirm the identification of the larvae as B. procyonis.
TREATMENT
Dogs and cats are treated with antiparasitic drugs to rid them of roundworms.
Raccoons, because they are wild animals, are not normally treated but could
be if necessary
In the case of T. canis or T cati, VLM in people is treated with antiparasitic
to the eye. There is no effective treatment for NLM caused by B. procyonis.
NLM can result in sudden death or prolonged neurological problems for
which there are no treatments.
160 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
PREVENTION
I. CANIS AND I. CAT!
Prevention of roundworms in pets is based on eliminating the roundworms
For pets this involves the following precautions:
protocol that includes treatment or prevention of roundworm infection.
 Puppies and kittens should be examined for roundworms and dewormed if
necessary when they are very young Again, most veterinary clinics will have
a protocol for this, usually associated with the vaccination schedule.
* Keep areas where pets defecate clean. Feces should be removed at least once
a week and disposed of where they will not come in contact with other
animals and children. Feces can be buried or bagged and disposed of with
the regular garbage.
· When away from home, limit the amount of contact your pet has with other
animals or animal feces. Keep pets on a leash. With the advent of dog parks,
this is becoming more difficult, especially if pet owners do not pick up after
their dogs.
In people the following precautions can be taken:
* Keep pets free of roundworms.
· Do not allow children to play in areas that contain animal feces. Keep play
areas, sandboxes, gardens, and lawns feces-free by regularly disposing of
feces. Keep sandboxes covered when they are not in use. Watch children
closely when they are in a dog park where animal feces may accumulate.
* Develop good sanitation habits when working or playing in areas where
pet feces may accumulate. Flower beds, sandboxes, gardens, and lawns are
areas where feces may lay long enough for the eggs to become infective.
Always wash your hands and the hands of children after outdoor activities
where animal feces may be present.
· Teach children why it could be dangerous to eat dirt.
SPECIAL B. PROCYONIS CONSIDERATIONS
With the spread of urbanization into normal rural raccoon habitats, it is
important to understand some B. procyonis facts:
harbor many adult worms, and each female worm can shed as many as
45,000,000 eggs a day, for months or years.
RoUNDWORMS 161
· The eggs of B. procyonis are covered with a sticky substance that allows them
to stick to fur and skin. A person could potentially become infected by
to remove them is to wash the skin with bleach. This removes the sticky
substance, which will allow the eggs to fall off but does not kill them.
· Raccoons form latrine sites where they repeatedly defecate. In parks and
wooded areas, these sites are commonly found on raised, horizontal surfaces
such as stumps, logs, limbs, and forks or bases of trees. In urban and
suburban areas, latrines also have been found in woodpiles; on roofs of
houses, sheds, decks; and in sandboxes, patios, attics, chimneys, garages, and
haylofts. A latrine site can be a source of infection for B. procyonis. Other
sources are vegetation, bark, sand, and stones that have been contaminated
with raccoon feces.
· It takes 3 to 4 weeks for B. procyonis eggs to become infective. By that time the
fecal material is disintegrating and may be less obvious in the environment.
B. procyonis eggs can survive for years in the environment and are resistant to
heat, freezing, and all common disinfectants.
* B. procyonis eggs are difficult to kill. Bleach will remove the sticky sub-
stance on the surface of the eggs but will not kill the eggs. Extreme heat
in the form of boiling water, steam, or a flame from a propane torch will
kill the eggs. Wood, wood chips, or straw that may have contacted the eggs
should be burned, not spread in other areas where contamination could
occur.
material as possible. On the ground, 2 to 3 inches (5 to 7.5 cm) of soil
should be removed and discarded or burned. Do not put the soil where it
could contaminate another area. If the latrine area was in a fireplace, remove
the latrine and build a hot fire.
PREVENTING B. PROCYONIS INFECTION
susceptible to rabies infection.
* Avoid direct contact with raccoons and their feces. Do not feed them or
encourage them to hang around.
· Discourage raccoons from living in and around your home or parks.
*Prevent access to food. Do not leave pet food or other foodstuffs unattended
outside. Raccoons like the easy source of food.
· Close off access to attics, chimneys, and basements.
162ZOONOTIC DISEASES
· Keep sandboxes covered at all times so they do not become latrines.
* Remove fish ponds. Raccoons eat the fish and drink the water.
* Eliminate easy-access water sources where raccoons may come to drink.
· Remove bird feeders. Raccoons eat seeds.
* Keep trash containers tightly closed to eliminate easy access to food.
· Clear brush so raccoons are not likely to make a den on your property.
· Stay away from areas and materials that might be contaminated by raccoon feces.
Decontaminate potentially contaminated areas appropriately, and
remove latrines carefully. Wear protective clothing and footwear when
working with or around raccoons or their latrines. Make sure the clothing and
footwear are disposable or can withstand washing in boiling or near boiling
water. If working around straw or wood, where there is a lot of dust, wear a
dust mask.
ST. LOUIS ENCEPHALITIS  163
ST. LOUIS ENCEPHALITIS
St. Louis encephalitis is a mosquito-borne viral disease with the potential of
infecting the central nervous system of people. It is the most commonly
reported variety of viral encephalitis in the United States, but is not nearly as
common in Canada.
MORBIDITY: +
MORTALITY: + TO ++
ETIOLOGY: VIRAL
St. Louis encephalitis virus (SLEV) is an arbovirus (arthropod-borne
virus) that causes St. Louis encephalitis (SLE). It is closely related to the
West Nile virus. Other important encephalitis arboviruses include the eastern
equine encephalitis virus, western equine encephalitis virus, and La Crosse
encephalitis virus. SLEV was named for St. Louis, Missouri, where the first
and largest epidemic occurred in 1933.
HoSTS
The natural hosts of SLEV are birds such as finches, sparrows, blue jays, cardinals,
mockingbirds, blackbirds, robins, and doves.
TRANSMISSION
SLEV is passed from one bird to another by the bite of a mosquito. When a
mosquito bites an infected bird, the virus replicates in the mosquito and moves
to other locations in the mosquito's body, including the salivary glands. When
the mosquito takes its next meal from an uninfected bird, it deposits a small
drop of saliva where it bites to act as an anticoagulant. The saliva contains the
virus, which enters the bird, replicates, and becomes a source of virus for
other mosquitoes. Birds are considered amplijfiers of SLEV, because one bird can
potentially infect many mosquitoes (Figure 34).
Once a bird is infected, it replicates the virus for only a couple of days
infection. As the number of immune birds increases, the number of birds
that can pass the virus to mosquitoes decreases. This is one way nature controls
outbreaks of SLE.
164 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
Infected bird
Mosquito takes
Infected mosquito
blood meal from
takes blood
infected bird and
meal from
ingests virus
uninfected bird
and deposits virus
Virus replicates
in mosquito
Infected mosquito
takes blood meal
from human and
deposits virus at
bite site
Human St. Louis
encephalitis
FIGURE 34. St. Louis encephalitis.
Mosquitoes replicate the virus for their entire lives, but they live only a
few days. Not all mosquitoes can transmit SLEV to people; only mosquitoes
that feed on birds and mammals can transmit SLEV to people.
infected birds. People are dead-end hosts; person-to-person transmission does
not occur.
ST. LOUIS ENCEPHALITIS IN ANIMALS
Birds and mosquitoes infected with SLEV do not develop any clinical signs of
disease. No nonhuman animals seem to be affected.
ST. LOUIS ENCEPHALITIS 165
ST. LOUIS ENCEPHALITIS IN HUMANS
Many people who become infected with SLEV do not develop clinical signs
Aq pou nsn si sna au poq suosad e u auo 'ssaul jo
macrophage cells, especially in the liver, spleen, and lymph nodes, which
are filtering organs. Before clinical signs can develop, the virus level has
will show symptoms resembling the flu, including headache, fever, nausea,
and vomiting.
In more severe cases, the virus can enter the central nervous system,
resulting in encephalitis. The early signs are lethargy, fever, sore throat, and
coughing; these are followed by headache, nausea, vomiting, confusion and
disorientation, double vision, muscle tremors, neck stiffness, and spastic
paralysis. Convulsions may occur in infants.
SLE is seen year-round in the southern United States and from late
summer to early fall in the more temperate areas further north. The incuba-
tion period can be anywhere from 4 days to 3 weeks. People most at risk for
developing SLE are the young, the elderly, people who live in crowded or
unsanitary conditions, and people who work or play outdoors where SLE is
common. Men are more commonly affected. The mortality rate is 3 to 30%
and increases with the patient's age. People over 60 have the highest mortality
rate. About 20% of survivors will have lingering memory loss, seizures, motor
deficits, and irritability.
DIAGNOSIS
Diagnosis is based on the presence of antibodies against SLEV. The virus can be
isolated from tissue, blood, or cerebral spinal fluid.
TREATMENT
As with most viral diseases, there is no specific drug to combat SLEV.
Supportive care and management of neurological symptoms are the only treat-
ments available.
PREVENTION
There is no vaccination available for protection against SLE in people.
Prevention centers on decreased exposure to mosquitoes.
166 Z0ONOTIC DISEASES
Reducing exposure to mosquitoes involves the following precautions:
· Drain areas of standing water, especially after rainfall or watering. These are
mosquito breeding sites.
· Reduce outdoor activities during peak mosquito activity, from dusk to
dawn.
· Wear protective clothing when mosquitoes are most active, especially in the
early evening and early morning. Protective clothing includes long-sleeved
shirts and long pants.
* Use insect repellent containing DEET on exposed skin.
· Make sure screens fit properly and are free from holes to decrease mosquito
access to building interiors.
SALMONELLOSIS 167
SALMONELLOSIS
Salmonellosis is a bacterial infection of the gastrointestinal tract that is usually
associated with eating feces-contaminated food.
MORBIDItY: ++
MORTALITY: +
ETIOLOGY: BACTERIAL
Salmonellosis is caused by many serotypes of the Salmonella bacteria, which are
 gram-negative and facultatively anaerobic, meaning they live in the presence or
absence of oxygen. Salmonella live in the intestinal tracts of people and animals;
Ss  n  a  q  s m s
seen in the UInited States are S. enteritidis and S. typhimurium (causes typhoid
fever, a human-only disease, so it will not be discussed here). Nontyphoidal
salmonellosis is caused by S. enteritidis and results in the disease we associate
with food poisoning. This serotype, and most others, are passed in the feces of
an infected animal or person,
Some serotypes of Salmonella are species-specific and will not easily be
spread to other species. Other serotypes are not species-specific, and these
are the serotypes related to species-to-species spread, including the spread
to people.
HOSTS
Salmonella resides in the intestinal tracts of both warm-blooded and cold-
blooded animals. In people, anyone who is infected with the Salmonella
organism can get sick, but it most commonly affects children under 5, elderly
people, and people with compromised or weakened immune systems.
Not every person or animal infected with Salmonella will become ill. Salmonella
carriers often appear healthy.
TRANSMISSION
 ua Aq suso u m pn anaq aoad u
taminated food, such as chicken, raw eggs, beef, milk, milk products, and
vegetables (Figure 35). One outbreak of salmonellosis was caused by raw
alflfa sprouts, grown in contaminated soil. Any food of animal origin can be
168 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
Infected animal
Milk
Feces, blood,
Direct
tissues
contact
Water
Soil
Food
Unpasteurized
Food
milk or milk
grown in
products
contaminated
Poor
Poor
soil
hygiene
hygiene
or improper
or improper
food preparation
hand washing
Human
consumption
Human
salmonellosis
FIGURE 35.
Salmonellosis.
a potential source of infection to people. Salmonella can be found in feces,
unpasteurized milk, blood, and body tissues.
Livestock can become infected during transport, at fairs, and at auctions,
if they come in contact with infected animals. The newly infected livestock will
then carry the Salmonella, either to their final destination or back home, where
they will become a new source of infection to other animals or people.
 Pets, especially those with diarrhea, can pass Salmonella in their feces.
Transmission to people occurs when people do not wash their hands after
coming in contact with the feces.
Reptiles, like snakes, iguanas, and turtles, commonly shed Salmonella;
people need to wash their hands after handling any reptile, even the healthy
looking ones.
SALMONELLOSIS  169
 Person-to-person transmission can occur if infected people do not wash
their hands after using the bathroom and then handle food.
Cross-contamination can result when uncontaminated food is placed on a
surface previously used for contaminated food.
Flies can transmit Salmonella on their feet as they travel from contaminated
food to uncontaminated food.
SALMONELLOSIS IN ANIMALS
re sieue aos uardde aq nou Ke no Ke sjee un sisonlauos
carriers that shed Salmonella at various intervals. Shedding may be brief, or it
 may occur over a long time. Other animals may develop a latent infection, in
which the Salmonella organisms enter the blood system and travel to lymph
nodes, where they lie dormant. Stress will most commonly cause the dormant
organisms to become active.
Because salmonellosis is a disease of the gastrointestinal tract, diarrhea,
sometimes bloody, is the most common clinical sign observed.
RUMINANTS
Salmonellosis affects calves primarily and is stress-related, with a high mor-
tality rate. Adult cattle also can be affected. The clinical signs start with high
fever, followed by severe diarrhea and abdominal pain. Abortion may occur.
Carrier animals shed Salmonella in feces and milk. Salmonellosis is not
common in sheep and goats in the LInited States.
PIGS
From Salmonella, pigs develop necrotic enteritis, which is usually brought on
by stress and willead to bloody diarrhea. In young pigs, the stress of weaning
and vaccination, along with an unsanitary environment, can cause salmonel-
losis. Contaminated pork is a common source of infection for people.
HORSES
Salmonellosis in horses can cause late abortion in mares, arthritis in colts, and
enteritis in all horses. Horses are not a common source of infection for people
in the UInited States.
DOGS AND CATS
Dogs and cats can be carrier animals or can become clinically ill with a Salmonelld
infection. Dogs transmit salmonellosis to people more often than cats do.
170 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
FOWL
Chickens, turkeys, and ducks are some of the most important sources of human
salmonellosis. Raw eggs can also be a source of Salmonella. The outside shell can
become contaminated with infected feces, and the interior can become infected
before the shell is formed. Some foods that may not obviously contain raw eggs
are usually the homemade variety of hollandaise sauce, Caesar salad dressing,
ice cream, mayonnaise, cookie dough, eggnog, and frostings.
SALMONELLOSIS IN HUMANS
Not everyone exposed to Salmonella will become ill. When illness does occur,
it will manifest itself as diarrhea, possibly bloody, abdominal cramps, and fever
between 12 and 72 hours after infection. Other clinical signs may include
headache, vomiting, and muscle aches. Without treatment most people will
recover within a week. It may take some people months before their bowel
movements are completely back to normal.
 In some cases, the organism may pass into the blood stream and be distrib-
uted throughout the body, causing organ damage and possibly death.
A few people who seemingly recover from salmonellosis will develop
Reiter syndrome, which affects the joints, eyes, and urogenital tract. The syn-
drome can last for months or years and usually affects the knees, ankles, and
feet, causing pain and swelling at the point where the tendons attach to the
bones. It can also affect the lower-back joints. The conjunctivae of the eyes
will become inflamed, as will the organs of the urogenital system, in both
men and women. Salmonella is not the only organism that may result in Reiter
syndrome. Chlamydia is the most common cause, but Shigella, Yersinia, and
Campylobacter may also give rise to Reiter syndrome.
DIAGNOSIS
In people, salmonellosis is diagnosed through laboratory tests that include cul-
turing the feces of sick people. Serologic testing is also used. Once salmonellosis
has been diagnosed, further testing to identify which serotype is involved will
help determine which antibiotic can be used, if treatment becomes necessary.
 In animals, diagnosis is based on fecal culture and serologic testing.
TREATMENT
Treatment for salmonellosis is usually not needed; most people and animals
SALMONELLOSIS 171
those with diarrhea. People should not take antidiarrheal medication, because
that can prolong the disease. Antibiotics may become necessary in severe cases
Extremely ill people and animals may have to be hospitalized.
PREVENTION
There is no vaccine to protect against salmonellosis. Because Salmonella bacteria
are so widespread, it is virtually impossible to make all food free from contam.
ination. The best prevention is to limit possible exposure. This is best accom-
plished by observing the basic rules of food safety:
Wash hands thoroughly with warm water and soap after using the bathroom,
changing a diaper, or contact with animals; always wash hands before
handling food.
* Wash hands thoroughly after handling pets or their feces. Make sure children
also wash their hands.
Aapia 'uaipiuo Sunok are aaun jt Aleoadsa 'sad se salndau daay you oa ·
people, or people with compromised immune systems present. If reptiles
are present, wash hands thoroughly after handling them.
* Consider all meat, poultry, vegetables, and milk or milk products contami-
nated, and handle them accordingly.
'sssa pue peau panoadsut pue 'shonpoid ylu pue yu pazumaised Ajuo Ang ·
 Do not eat foods containing raw or undercooked eggs.
* Wash and properly store all vegetables and fruits.
* Wrap meats in plastic bags to prevent the juices from dripping on other food.
*Refrigerate foods promptly.
* Thaw frozen foods in the refrigerator.
·Avoid cross-contamination from contaminated food to uncontaminated food.
* Avoid eating raw or undercooked meats and poultry. Cook poultry to an
internal temperature of 170° to 180° F; use a meat thermometer to be
certain foods are properly cooked.
* People with diarrhea should not prepare or serve food to others.
* People with diarrhea should not swim in public pools or lakes.
In animals, prevention is more difficult, and includes the following
precautions:
·Carrier animals must be identified and eliminated from a herd or flock.
* Food handling must be controlled to avoid contamination.
* Animal food that contains bone, meat, or fish meal should be avoided, as it
can be a source of infection.
· Vaccines are available for a few serotypes but do not offer protection for all
the zoonotic serotypes.
172ZOONOTIC DISEASES
NOTE
Since 1976 it has been against the law to sell or distribute turtles with a shell, or
carapace,less than 4 inches long. The passage of this law followed a fad of buying
baby turtles for children as small, easy-to-care-for pets. A turtle, shallow water
dish, and plastic palm tree were sold as an inexpensive package by distributors
and pet stores. Many people, especially children, developed salmonellosis from
these turtles, because the turtles were small and could easily be placed in a
child's mouth or because people did not wash their hands after handling the
Pip aldoad asneaq otl rau sem sapm aun rog aen An au 'sa.m
would soon outgrow the snmall bowl and would have to be moved to a larger
aquarium. The law has been largely forgotten, and some tourist places are again
selling baby turtles or giving them away free when the bowl and food are
purchased.
SCABIES173
SCABIES
Scabies is a skin disease caused by mites. It is also known as sarcoptic mange,
ss um st se saads pee ue i 'y a au e o odois
of mite that causes scabies, and other animal species, including humans, are not
affected by that particular species of mite. In other words, it is not a zoonotic
problerm. However, when people come in repeated or prolonged, close contact
with an animal with scabies, temporary pseudo-scabies may develop.
MORBIDITY: +
MORTALITY: +
ETIOLOGY: PARASITIC
Scabies is caused by Sarcoptes scabiei. Animals and people are infested by their
own subspecies of S. scabiei, which prefer to live on a specific type of host
animal. Human scabies is caused by S. scabiei var. hominis. Some of the other
sarcoptic mites that can be found on other animals, and temporarily on people,
are S. scabiei var. canis (dogs), S. scabiei var. bovis (cattle), S. scabiei var. equi
(horses), S. scabiei var. caprae (goats), and S. scabiei var. suis (pigs).
A different mite, Notoedres cati, causes a disease similar to scabies in cats.
This mite may also temporarily infest humans or other animals.
S. scabiei females make tiny burrows into the skin in which to lay their eggs.
After about 3 weeks the eggs hatch, and the immature mites come to the
opening of the burrow, mature, mate, and move on to make other burrows
(Figure 36). The presence of the mites, mite eggs, and mite waste materials
causes an allergic reaction in the host, which results in intense itching. Tiny red
blisters or bumps develop on the skin, which is also inflamed.
It is while the adult mites are on the skin, rather than in the burrows, that
they can be transferred to other animals or people. From a zoonotic standpoint.
it is also at this time that the mites may be transferred to an atypical host, such
as a person. The mites make their burrows, and the atypical host has an allergic
reaction, but the mites die in a couple of days, and the itching goes away.
N. cati has a similar life cycle, but it is the immature mites that are trans-
ferred to other animals or people.
HOSTS
S. scabiei is found on warm-blooded animals. The mites tend to be host specific,
with little transmission to other animal species or people.
174Z0ONOTIC DISEASES
Infected animal
Mites on skin of
Direct contact
infected animal
with uninfected
animal
年
Prolonged or repeated
direct human contact
Human scabies
FIGURE 36. Scabies.
TRANSMISSION
Scabies is transmitted from an animal or person with an S. scabiei infestation to
another animal or person by direct contact. Casual contact, such as shaking
hands, does not transmit scabies. Most transmission occurs among animals of
like species. Occasionally, people who have repeated, close, prolonged contact
with an infested animal may be infested by mites from that animal. Dogs are a
common source of this type of transmission.
SCABIES IN ANImALS
Scabies caused by S. scabiei is a disease characterized by intense, persistent
itching. With dogs being the one exception, lesions start in areas that have little
or no hair in all other common domestic animals, usually around the face, neck,
ears, and shoulders. In dogs, the lesions start on the ventral abdomen, chest,
ears, and legs (Figure 37)
Scabies in cats caused by N. cati looks the same as sarcoptic mange in other
animals.
SCABIES IN HUMANS
Scabies occurs in all people, regardless of their social status, hygiene, or
environment. Because S. scabiei is transmitted by direct contact, scabies is seen
more often in crowded situations, like hospitals and nursing homes. Like most
SCABIES175
diseases, it most often affects the elderly, young children, and people with
compromised immune systems.
S. scabiei prefers warm, protected places, so they make their burrows in
areas between the fingers, at the belt line, under the nails, in skin folds, and in
the groin area (Figures 38 and 39). They also like the skin under bracelets,
rings, and watches. Adult female mites are just barely visible without any
magnification. They are about the size of the period at the end of this sentence.
The burrows are also very small and measure about 2 to 3 mm long.
B
FIGuRE 37. Scabies in dogs. A, Generalized alopecia with a crusting popular
dermatitis affecting the head and neck of a young adult dog. B, Generalized alopecia
and crusts affecting a puppy.
Continued
176ZOONOTICDISEASES
FIGURE 37, cont'd. C, Alopecic ear margins, characteristic of scabies. (From
Medleau L, Hnilica KA: Small animal dermatology:a color atlas and therapeutic guide,
ed 2, St Louis, 2006, Saunders.)
A relentless, intense itching gradually develops over a matter of weeks, as
more mite eggs are hatched and young mites emerge from the burrows. The
itching reportedly worsens at night, but that may be because there is not as much
to distract the person from the itch at that time. Tiny, red bumps that look like hives
appear, an allergic reaction to the mites, mite eggs, and mite waste material.
DIAGNOSIS
Diagnosis of scabies, in all animals and people, is based on the clinical signs,
e pu isn a ura  uisd au  as a ans
SCABIES177
Back
Front
Areas where human scabies
is most commonly manifested
FiGuRE 38. Areas where scabies is most commonly manifested.
magnifying glass to see the mites on the skin. A skin scraping of the affected
area may produce mites, but because so few mites can cause the clinical
signs, it's easy to miss them. Repeated skin scrapings might be necessary to
find mites.
TREATMENT
ss  siee p aoad o rg anr sa are a
 In many cases everyone who has close, prolonged contact with the infested
178ZOONOTIC DISEASES
FIGURE 39. Scabies in a human. (Courtesy Public Health Image Library, PHIL
3972, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, 1975.)
an exterminator to get rid of mites in a house, kennel, stable, or barn because
the mites do not survive off-host for very long. All bedding and linens must be
washed,
If the treatment is effective, the mites will be dead within 24 to 48 hours,
and the person or animal will no longer be contagious. The itching, however,
may take weeks longer to resolve.
PREVENTION
For people, the best way to prevent being infested with S. scabiei from
animals is to have any animal that develops an intense, persistent itch checked
by a veterinarian. If scabies is diagnosed, the animal must be treated. During
the treatment avoid prolonged, close contact with the infested animal.
STAPHYLOCOCCOSIS 179
STAPHYLOCOCCOSIS
Staphylococcus aureus causes a variety of diseases. In people it is the cause of skin
infections, eye infections, toxic-shock symdrome, and food poisoning. In fact,
it is responsible for one of the most common forms of food poisoning in people.
In animals it has been associated with skin infections and abscesses in a variety
of species; tonsillitis in dogs; septicemia in poultry; and mastitis in cattle.
ewes, nanny goats, and sows. We will focus on human staphylococcal food
poisoning and the role animals play in its development.
MORBIDITY: ++
MORTALITY: +
ETIOLOGY: BACTERIAL
S. aureus is a gram-positive bacterium that is found on the skin, in the nose, and in
the throat in about one third of the human population, as well as in a wide variety
of mammals and birds. It can also be found on surfaces, such as food preparation
and serving areas, cooking utensils, and milking machines. Sewage and water can
also be contaminated. S.aureus can live in high salt and sugar concentrations where
other bacteria would not survive. It grows best between 68° and 99° F.
Some strains of S. aureus produce toxins that are ultimately responsible for
clinical signs associated with food poisoning. If the food is contaminated with
one of the toxin-producing strains of S. aureus, the organism multiplies, and
eventually starts producing one of seven toxins. These toxins are extremely
heat-resistant and cannot be inactivated by boiling or pasteurization, even
though the bacteria that produced the toxins will be killed.
S. aureus is commonly found in cuts, pimples, and abscesses in both people
and animals.
HoSTS
 S. aureus is found in and on people and many other mammals and birds. Most
people who carry S. aureus appear healthy.
TRANSMISSION
Humans are the primary source of S. aureus in food poisoning that arises from
contamination by S. aureus toxins. The most common mode of transmission
180ZOONOTIC DISEASES
occurs when food is prepared by someone with a skin infection or when
food is stored at room temperature. The most susceptible foods are those
prepared by hand, which require a lot of handling such as chopping or mixing,
and that are not cooked. Bacteria can live and produce toxins in these foods.
Common foods in this category are puddings, cream-filled pastries, custards,
salads (especially if they contain mayonnaise), sandwich fillings, egg products,
milk, dairy products, cream pies, cold meats, and baked goods. There is an
increase in the incidence of staphylococcal food poisoning during warm
months, because food is often served outdoors and not kept at the proper
temperature.
Transmission can also occur when unpasteurized milk or cheeses made
from unpasteurized milk are ingested. Even if the milk is pasteurized, S. aureus
toxins present in the milk before it was pasteurized will survive the pasteur-
numbers of living bacteria that can produce toxins. Once produced, the
toxins can withstand temperatures higher than the bacteria that produced
them. Ham is one of the most common sources of infection because the S. aureus
survives the salty curing process. Sneezing on food can also cause S. aureus
contamination,
STAPHYLOCOCCAL INFECTIONS IN ANIMALS
Animals do not appear susceptible to S. aureus food poisoning. S. aureus
infections are commonly associated with skin diseases, mastitis, sep
ticemia, and abscess formation in many species of animals. Unpasteurized
milk and the cheeses made from the unpasteurized milk of cows, ewes, and
nanny goats has been the source of the toxin in a number of human infec
tions. In these cases, the S. aureus was transmitted to people either through
handling the animals or eating contaminated dairy products.
STAPHYLOCOCCAL FOOD POISONING IN HUMANS
Staphylococcal food poisoning in people has an extremely short incubation
period; although some will get ill within 30 minutes, the usual range is from
1 to 6 hours. The time of onset of symptoms depends on the person's suscep-
tibility to the S. aureus toxin, how much food was eaten, and how much toxin
was in the food.
Clinical signs include nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramping, and diarrhea,
with a mild fever, or no fever at all. The vomiting can last up to 24 hours.
STAPHYLOCOCCOSIS  181
DIAGNOSIS
Diagnosis of staphylococcal food poisoning is based on history and physical
signs. Often one food dish will make many people acutely ill. Fecal samples can
be cultured for S. aureus, if necessary.
TREATMENT
Most people will recover within 2 to 3 days, without medical intervention. In most
cases people just need to keep themselves hydrated during recovery. Some people
will become so dehydrated from vomiting and diarrhea that they will have to be
hospitalized to restore hydration. Antibiotics are not indicated in the treatment of
staphylococcal food poisoning because it is caused by the presence of S. aureuu
toxins, not the actual bacteria. The antibiotics would have no effect on the toxins.
PREVENTION
There is no vaccine to protect against staphylococcal food poisoning. Because
staphylococci are so widespread, it is imperative that people preparing and
serving food take precautions to keep food safe. This is best accomplished by
observing the basic rules of food safety, as follows:
* Wash hands thoroughly with warm water and soap before and after handling
food and after using the bathroom or changing diapers.
* When buying refrigerated foods, get them home and properly store them
as soon as possible. Food should be cooked, refrigerated, or frozen within
2 hours. Wrap meats in plastic bags to keep meat juices from dripping onto
other foods. Keep refrigerator temperature set at, or under, 40° F.
* Buy only pasteurized milk and dairy products.
* Cool leftovers in the refrigerator, partially covered. Cover completely once
they are thoroughly cooled.
* Cook foods to recommended temperatures. Leftovers should be heated to
at least 165′ F.
beef, fish, clams, and oysters.
· When serving food, keep hot foods at 165° F or above and cold foods at
40° F or colder.
uoguane Ked pooy aions pue asn on mou uo uogeuojul aoexoed molloh ·
to expiration dates. Contaminated food does not always smell or look bad,
so “when in doubt, throw it out."
182 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
TAPEWORMS (CESTODES)
Tapeworms are flat worms that live in the intestinal tracts of their hosts. Adult
tapeworms cause little damage to their hosts beyond robbing the host of some
micronutrients, such as vitamins. Adult tapeworms are visible to the naked eye
and range in size from 0.04 inches to 50 feet long. An infection of tapeworms
is called cestodiasis.
MORBIDITY: +
MORTALITY: +
ETIOLOGY: PARASITIC
Adult tapeworms are found in the intestinal tracts of their definitive, or final, hosts.
Each adult tapeworm consists of a head (scolex), which attaches the tapeworm to
the intestinal wall, neck, and various numbers of segments, developing from the
neck region. As new segments are formed at the neck, older segments are pushed
back. Tapeworms are hermaphroditic; each segment has two sets of male and
female reproductive organs, which will fill the segment with fertile eggs as the
segment is pushed back from the neck. When the segment is full of eggs, it
detaches itself from the adult tapeworm and is passed in the feces (Figure 40).
Increasingly mature segments
Most
immature 
segments
Mature segment
containing eggs
Head
FIGURE 40. Tapeworm morphology.
TAPEWORMS (CESTODES)183
Each genus and species of tapeworm has at least one intermediate host,
which ingests the tapeworm eggs. After the eggs hatch, the immature tape.
worms migrate out of the intestine of the intermediate host and travel to var-
ious tissues in the body, depending on the genus of tapeworm. The immature
tapeworm enters tissue in the intermediate host and is enclosed in a cyst, in
which young tapeworms develop to an infective stage. Definitive hosts are
infected by eating the cystic tissues of intermediate hosts infected with imma-
ture tapeworms.
There are three tapeworms of zoonotic importance in North America:
DIPYLIDIUMCANINUM
Dipylidium caninum is also known as common dog tapeworm,flea tapeworm, cucumber
seed tapeworm, and creeping seeds.
HOSTS
The definitive hosts for D. caninum are dogs, cats, foxes, and sometimes humans.
The intermediate host is a flea or a louse.
TRANSMISSION
Adult tapeworm segments are passed in the host's feces (Figure 41). These
segments look like cucumber seeds or grains of rice and are sometimes seen
around the anus of the host or in the feces. After the segments are passed,
ai 'saxoed Sa asealau pue dn Kip Aenuaaa Kaui 'punore aaou ueo Ka
egg packets are then eaten by flea or louse larvae, and hatch in the larvae's
small intestines. The larval form of the tapeworm then penetrates the intestinal
wall of its tiny host and forms cysts in the body cavity. As the flea or louse
matures, the tapeworm larva matures, to an infective, cystic stage. The final
host is infected by eating a flea or louse infected with immature tapeworms
(Figure 42).
DISEASE IN ANIMALS
Dogs, cats, and foxes are usually not much affected by the presence of tape-
worms. Dogs may “scoot" or drag their hindquarters to relieve irritation when
there are segments stuck to the anal region.
184
ZOONOTIC DISEASES
FIGURE 41.
 Tapeworm segments in dog feces. (From Hendrix CM, Robinson E:
Diagnostic parasitology for veterinary technicians, ed 3, St Louis, 2006, Mosby.)
Infected animal
 Feces containing mature tapeworm
segments or tapeworm egg packets
Egg packets ingested by flea larvae
 Eggs hatch in flea larvae intestines and
release tapeworm larvae
Tapeworm larvae migrate out of flea larvae
intestines and become encysted in flea body
as it develops into adult flea
 Infected adult flea
ingested by human
Human Dipylidium
tapeworm infection
FIGURE 42.
Dipylidium
infection.
TAPEWORMS (CESTODES)185
DISEASE IN HUMANS
 D. caninum infection is seen most often in children. The only way a person can
become infected with D. caninum is to eat a flea or louse larva. Most people
with D. caninum infection do not exhibit any clinical signs. Some may develop
diarrhea, abdominal pain, and perianal itching from the presence of segments.
DIAGNOSIS
Diagnosis of D. caninum infection is based on finding tapeworm segments that
look like cucumber seeds or grains of rice under an animal's tail, around the
anus, or on feces passed by the animal. Because the eggs are released in packets,
they might not be found on a routine microscopic fecal examination unless the
egg packet has broken.
Children infected with D. caninum will pass segments in their stool or have
segments, which are irritating and cause itching, stuck to the skin around
the anus.
TREATMENT
Drugs are available to kill adult tapeworms in both animals and humans. After
tapeworms have been killed, they are usually digested by the host, so there may
be no adult tapeworms passed in the feces.
PREVENTION
The best prevention is parasite control. Without fleas and lice, there can be no
D. caninum. If tapeworms are detected in pets, have them treated. Clean up
after pets, especially if they defecate in public areas such as parks or near
sidewalks. Do not let children play around areas soiled with dog or cat feces.
Make sure children wash their hands after playing with dogs and cats or when
they come in from playing outdoors.
It is important to note that sometimes the presence of D. caninum is the
DIPHYLIOBOTHRIUMLATUM
Diphyllobothrium latum is also known as the broad fish tapeworm. At one time
infection with D. latum was known as Jewish or Scandinavian housewife's disease
186ZOONOTIC DISEASES
because these women were known to taste gefilte fish, or fish balls, before
they were fully cooked. This is rarely seen today. Recent cases of D. latum
infestation have been associated with eating sushi and sashimi, and in partic
ular, salmon. D. latum is a large tapeworm that can reach lengths of up to
32 feet in humans.
HOSTS
The definitive hosts for adult D. latum tapeworms are fish-eating mammals,
such as bears, cats, dogs, wolves, raccoons, otters, and humans. The interme-
diate hosts are tiny aquatic crustaceans and fresh water fish, such as minnows,
trout, perch, walleyed pike, and salmon. Humans are infected only if they eat
raw, infected fish.
TRANSMISSION
The host passes infected feces into bodies of fresh water. The eggs hatch, and the
sassrn onbe   psan st maden a jo ans  s
These immature tapeworms migrate to the body cavities of the crustaceans,
which become food for small freshwater fish, such as minnows. The minnows?
flesh becomes infected with immature tapeworms, and a final host could become
fish, the flesh of those fish becomes infected. The final host becomes infected from
eating the infected fish, either raw or undercooked. Immature tapeworms mature
in the intestines of the final host and pass eggs in the host's feces (Figure 43).
DISEASEINANIMALS
ayen 'sa asneaq yua.redde you Aensn s unpi Q yim uonsaju 'siad ul
 aen pasan are sg passed are 'sas aqis issora u
segments that do not break off from the adult tapeworm. Intermittently,
several segments that have discharged their eggs may break off from the adult
tapeworm and be passed in the feces. These are grossly visible but may be
missed by the owner.
DISEASE IN HUMANS
D. latum is the largest parasite found in humans in North America. Infection
with D. latum is usually not associated with any clinical signs. Rarely, an infected
TAPEWORMS (CESTODES)187
Infected animal
Feces containing eggs
deposited in water
Eggs hatch and develop to
firstimmature tapeworm stage
年
Ingested by small crustacean
 Immature tapeworm migrates to body
cavity of small crustacean and develops
to second immature tapeworm stage
 Infected small crustacean eaten by
small freshwater fish
Immature tapeworm develops to
infective stage in small freshwater fish
Predator fish eats infected
freshwater fish
Human eats fish
率
Human Diphyllobothrium
 tapeworm infection 
FIGURE 43.
Diphyllobothrium infection.
188ZOONOTIC DISEASES
person may complain of diarrhea, abdominal pain, vomiting, fatigue, dizziness,
and numbness in fingers and toes. Intestinal obstruction is possible when many
large tapeworms are present. The adult tapeworm utilizes the host's vitamin
Bt2, which can lead to a deficiency. Vitamin Bl is necessary for red blood cell
formation, and a deficiency can lead to anemia.
DIAGNOSIS
Diagnosis of D. latum infection is based on finding eggs in a microscopic
fecal examination. Occasionally strips of segments also may be found in
feces.
TREATMENT
Drugs are available for animals and humans that will kill adult tapeworms.
PREVENTION
Cook all fish thoroughly. Freezing fish for at least 24 hours or pickling the fish
will kill the infective larvae. Smoking the fish may not kill all the larvae.
ECHINOCOCCUS GRANUIOSUS AND
MULTIOCULARIS
Echinococcus spp. are the most important zoonotic tapeworms in humans.
Echinococcosis in humans is called hydatid disease or cystic hydatid disease if it is
caused by E. granulosus and alveolar hydatid disease if it is caused by E. multiocu-
laris. Hydatid disease is seen in sheep-raising areas of the United States,
especially in Utah, California, Arizona, and New Mexico. Alveolar hydatid
 o o   'ss n ge  a un ais si as
in Alaska and Canada.
HOSTS
Dogs and other canines are the definitive hosts for E. granulosus. Many warm-
blooded vertebrates, including cattle, sheep, and goats, are the intermediate
hosts. Dogs, wild foxes, coyotes, and cats are the definitive hosts for E. multiocu-
laris. Rodents, such as voles, shrews, and lemmings, are the intermediate hosts.
TAPEWORMS (CESTODES)
189
TRANSMISSION
 Echinococus spp. life cycles are typical of other tapeworm life cycles (Figure 44).
The tapeworm eggs are passed in the feces of the final host and are ingested by
the intermediate host. E. granulosus eggs are passed in canine feces and ingested by
an intermediate host. Dogs are reinfected when they eat the infected tissues of
cattle, sheep, or goats. Humans are considered dead-end hosts for E. granulosus.
Humans and rodents become intermediate hosts infected with E. muitioc-
ularis by eating anything
contaminated with the definitive host's feces.
 Infection can come from ingesting food contaminated with feces from dogs,
aon sey reyn bop o pen e Sumad Aq panoajul aq ueo aldoad 'Plm aun uoy
small and stick to anything they come in contact with. If a dog did a "scent roll'
Infected canine
Feces containing eggs
Direct
Food
contact
contamination
Poor hygiene
Poor hygiene
or improper
or improper food
hand washing
preparation
Human consumption
HumanEchinococcus
tapeworm infection
(hydatid disease)
FIGURE 44. Echinococcus
infection (hydatid disease).
190ZoONOTIC DISEASES
in infected feces, the eggs could stick to the dog's coat and be transferred to
anyone who pets it. People could become infected by not washing their hands
after petting the animal and then transferring the eggs to their mouths.
DISEASEINANIMALS
The adult Echinococcus tapeworm is small (3 to 5 mm), so it causes little
damage in the definitive host. Once the eggs are ingested by the intermediate
host, they hatch in the intestines. The larvae penetrate the intestinal walls and
migrate to specific tissues in the intermediate host. E. granulosus larvae migrate
primarily to the liver, where they become enclosed in a cyst called a hydatid
cyst. The larvae also migrate to the lungs, spleen, and other organs, where they
also form hydatid cysts. E multiocularis larvae migrate to the liver, lungs, brain,
many infective, immature tapeworms, which will become many adult tape-
worms in the definitive host when the cysts are ingested. The damage done by
the hydatid cyst in the intermediate host depends on the size of the cyst and
the tissue in which it is located. Many animal intermediate hosts are not
affected by the hydatid cysts.
DISEASE IN HUMANS
The damage done by hydatid cysts in body tissues depends on the size of the
cyst and the tissue in which it is located. Alveolar hydatid disease (AHD),
a au u Areud sisho pnepay Aq pasneo si 'siuninsonu 7 Aq pasne
(Figure 45) but also in other tissues, including the brain. Because of the
potential brain involvement, infection with E. multiocularis is more likely to
Smons-mois are ssho pnepay au1 'snsonu z ueq sueny on peney aq
so clinical signs may not become evident until many years following initial
infection.
DIAGNOSIS
Echinococcosis is diagnosed by finding eggs in the feces of the definitive host.
In the intermediate host, there are blood tests that detect antibodies against
immature tapeworms. CAT scans and MRI scans are also used to detect the
presence of hydatid cysts.
TAPEWORMS (CESTODES)191
FIGURE 45. Hydatid cysts in the liver.
(From Knottenbelt DC, Pascoe RR: Color
atlas of diseases and disorders of the horse,
London, 1994, Mosby.)
TREATMENT
There are drugs available to control adult tapeworms in definitive hosts.
In humans, the treatment of choice for hydatid cysts is surgery. There are
newer drugs available that can be used in conjunction with the surgery or alone
if surgery is not an option.
PREVENTION
Echinococcosis can be controlled by preventing dogs and cats from eating
intermediate hosts. Animals should not be fed uncooked meat or viscera. Also,
rodent populations should be controlled. People who are at higher risk for
becoming infected with Echinococcus spp. are hunters, trappers, veterinarians,
veterinary technicians, and others who might have contact with wild animals
or their feces. Prevention includes the following precautions:
· Wear gloves when handling foxes, coyotes, or wild canines, whether they
 are dead or alive. Hunters should wear gloves when cleaning animals.
* Wild animals should not be kept as pets, nor should they be encouraged to
hang around a home.
* Cats and dogs should not be allowed to wander freely, where they can eat
rodents.
192 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
· People should wash their hands after handling pets.
* Fence in gardens to keep out wild animals that might defecate on growing
plants.
· Wash all wild-picked food before eating it. Do not eat food directly from the
ground.
INTERESTING NOTE
The “Hollywood Tapeworm Diet" was supposedly used by actors and models
as a means of losing weight. It was thought that if a person was intentionally
ents and cause the person to become thinner. This is not likely to happen
because a tapeworm will normally absorb micronutrients that are usually not
needed by the person. This is an interesting if not somewhat bizarre diet that
has been classified as a true urban legend.
TOXOPLASMOSIS193
TOXOPLASMOSIS
Cats have gotten a bad rap about how they transmit toxoplasmosis to humans
and how they cause spontaneous abortion in women and blindness and mental
retardation in newborns and older children. While it is true that cats are the
only definitive host for the infective stage of the Toxoplasma organism, they are
not the most cormmon source of human infection. The most efficient way to get
toxoplasmosis from a cat is to eat the cat undercooked!
MORBIDITY: +++
MORTALITY: +
ETIOLOGY: PARASITIC
Toxoplasmosis is caused by Toxoplasma gondii, a microscopic, intracellular pro-
tozoan. Its life cycle has a sexual phase and an asexual phase. The sexual phase
takes place only in the walls of the small intestines of wild and domestic cats,
resulting in oocysts that are passed in the cats' feces. A cat will shed millions
of oocysts per day, for about 2 to 3 weeks, and is then done shedding oocysts-
for life.
The asexual phase occurs when the oocysts become infective, or sporulate,
P e  so s se e  ss a   s s  
environmental conditions and can remain infective for over a year. When the
sporulated oocysts are ingested by an animal, they go to the animal's small
n n pe 'lem ieun au anenaad as zysm au iaua aunsa
other parts of the body in lymph and blood. During this stage, tachyzoites
rapidly multiply in the cytoplasms of monocytes and macrophages. The tachy.
zoite (asexual) stage, which is called the active or acute phase, lasts until the
host's immune system produces some immunity——about 2 weeks. Once the
bradyzoites, which accumulate in the cytoplasm of tissue cells and form cysts.
The cysts can be found anywhere in the body, but are most commonly seen
in skeletal muscle, myocardium, and brain tissue. The bradyzoite (asexual) stage
is the inactive phase. Cysts can remain in the host for the rest of its life. If
the host's immunity is somehow suppressed, the bradyzoites can become
rapidly multiplying tachyzoites again, resulting in a latent or chronic infection
(Figure 46).
194ZOONOTIC DISEASES
Infected cat
2-3 week period
 once in cat's life
Oocysts in feces
Litter pan
Soil
At least 1-2 days
Food
Birds and
needed to
become infective
grown in
 grazing
contaminated
livestock
soil
become
infected 
Inadequate
 hand washing
Inhaling
Inadequate
Inadequate
or inhalation
aerosolized
washing
 cooking of 
oocysts or
meat
inadequate
hand washing
after working
in soil
Human consumption
Human toxoplasmosis
Transplacental
transmission
to fetus
FIGURE 46.
Toxoplasmosis.
HOSTS
   s  s    n   a  
animals that harbor the organism during the organism's sexual, adult phase.
 Other animals, including people, that become infected with T gondi are con-
sidered intermediate hosts. Most species of warm-blooded animals and birds
are susceptible to T. gondii infection.
TOXOPLASMOSIS 195
TRANSMISSION
with sporulated Toxoplasma oocysts. The oocysts can be found where cats
defecate, such as moist soil, litter boxes, sand boxes, flower beds, and
gardens. Rodents, birds, and other small animals can become infected and
e 'se ui aho al aue saenadiad si 'aun uo aard peue she an na
also can become infected by coming in direct contact with the feces from
other infected cats.
oocysts while they are grazing. Their meat (skeletal muscle) will then become
infected with T. gondii cysts that can be transmitted to people or other carnivores
and scavengers, including cats, that eat the meat raw or undercooked.
Undercooked meat, especially lamb, beef, or pork, is the most common source
of T. gondi infection in people.
Once ingested by any susceptible animal other than a cat, the
Toxoplasma organisms are released in the intestines, develop to the tachy-
zoite stage, and go through the migration into body tissues as previously
described.
If a cat eats the infected tissues, some of the released Toxoplasma organisms
stay in the cat's intestines to go through the sexual phase, releasing oocysts
in the feces. Other released Toxoplasma organisms will develop to the tachy-
zoite stage, penetrate the intestinal wall, and eventually become bradyzoites
encysted in body tissues.
Rarely people can become infected directly from cats if they ingest or
breathe in the sporulated oocysts from an infected cat. This can happen when
hands becorme contaminated while changing a litter box or if the litter is dusty
enough to allow the oocysts to ride on the dust and be inhaled. Working in soil
without gloves and playing in a sandbox are other methods of direct infection
from cats. Infection can also occur after eating unwashed vegetables from
gardens or after drinking contaminated water. Oocysts can be carried on the
wind or in water to distant places.
Transmission can also occur transplacentally in people if a mother is
infected near the time she becomes pregnant or soon after. This results in
congenital toxoplasmosis, which is the least common but most severe form
of toxoplasmosis in people. Congenital toxoplasmosis is also seen in goats
and sheep.
Transmission among people can occur through blood transfusions and
organ donation.
196 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
TOXOPLASMOSIS IN ANIMALS
q uoau u  on annassns are spr pe sie jo sods 
clinical disease is rare.
In sheep and goats, congenital toxoplasmosis can cause abortion and
disease in newborn lambs. Adult sheep and goats rarely develop clinical signs.
Dogs are commonly infected but rarely become ill. When clinical disease
develops, it resembles canine distemper, which is characterized by fevel
and respiratory congestion that may develop into bronchitis, pneumonia, and
gastroenteritis.
Remember, cats shed oocysts only once in their lives, for a period of 2 to
3 weeks. Many cats are infected with T. gondi as kittens or young adults. Most
of them will be asymptomatic and immune to repeat infections as adults.
severity. Other signs are nonspecific and include fever, depression, anorexia,
and lethargy. Hepatitis may develop. The eyes and central nervous system can
be affected, which might be manifested by retinitis, abnormal pupil size, blind-
ness, incoordination, circling, personality change, ear twitching, difficulty
chewing and swallowing, and loss of control of urination and defecation.
TOXOPLASMOSIS IN HUMANS
Of the world population, 30% to 50% has been infected with T. gondi. In
North America, 10% to 20% of the population harbors T gondii cysts. An esti-
mated 60 million people in the United States are currently infected with
T. gondi, but 80% to 90% of them will never develop clinical signs or will
become only mildly ill if they have healthy immune systems. These numbers
are important because if the immune system of any of these people becomes
suppressed—as in people
ewithHIV/AIDSorpeople
undergoing
chemotherapy, on stercids, or taking immunosuppressants after organ trans-
plantsthe bradyzoites in tissue cysts may become activated tachyzoites,
resulting in latent toxoplasmosis. Every year in the United States, 3000 babies
are born with congenital toxoplasmosis.
Unlike congential toxoplasmosis, toxoplasmosis acquired after birth most
often goes undetected or is characterized by mild, flulike or mononucleosis-like
symptoms, including swollen lymph nodes in the head and neck, headache,
sore throat, and muscle pain that lasts for a few days to a month or more. The
incubation period is 1 to 2 weeks. In most cases the disease is self-limiting
TOXOPLASMOSIS197
because it is controlled by the immune system. Severe toxoplasmosis, however,
can result in lesions in the eyes and central nervous system.
 Latent toxoplasmosis, brought on by immunosuppression, is characterized
by central nervous system lesions that result in headache, confusion, seizures,
and other neurological signs. If the retina becomes inflamed, blurred vision will
result. A fever is usually present, and lymph nodes are enlarged. Respiratory
disease and heart disease will commonly develop. In people with HIV / AIDS
repeat infections are common, and the mortality rate is high.
Congenital toxoplasmosis is the most devastating form of the disease in
people. Infections that occur in early pregnancy will result in fewer but more
severe cases of toxoplasmosis. Infections that occur later in pregnancy will
result in more infections but a less severe disease. It is important to note that
if a fetus becomes infected, it is asymptomatic at birth most of the time. Most
babies infected with congenital toxoplasmosis will show symptoms weeks,
months, even years after birth. Even though very few infected babies show
signs of toxoplasmosis at birth, some infected babies may already have suffered
serious eye or brain damage.
Clinical congenital toxoplasmosis is characterized by central nervous
system and ocular disorders. These disorders include mental retardation,
hydrocephalus, convulsions, deafness, blindness, or cerebral palsy. Ocular tox.
se sdolaaap t 'sisouseldoxot leuauon jo aouanbasuon rayoue st sisouseldo
chorioretinitis during a person's 20s and 30s.
DIAGNOSIS
Patient history, clinical signs, and the results of diagnostic tests can lead to a
presumptive diagnosis of toxoplasmosis.
There are a number of diagnostic tests available to isolate and observe
the parasites in patients. They include lymph node biopsy, examination of res-
piratory fluid, examination of the retina, and injecting mice with patient blood
or other body fluids to see if the mice develop an infection. These tests are
complex and are not very reliable.
Serologic testing to determine if the patient has antibodies against T. gondii
will indicate whether the patient has ever been infected with T. gondi
The presence of antibodies can be a good thing, because most animals and
people are immune to toxoplasmosis if they've been previously infected.
Women who are pregnant or trying to conceive and who have had contact with
cats who may have had acute toxoplasmosis may want to have serology testing
198 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
to see if they have antibodies against T. gondii. If they do have the antibodies,
it greatly reduces the chances of congenital toxoplasmosis developing in
the fetus.
TREATMENT
Most people and animals are not treated for toxoplasmosis because the clinical
signs resolve on their own when immunity has developed. There are drugs avail-
ss aunu passaiddns ym aoad ui se yons pauerem st yuauean ji ale
tems or for women who are pregnant and test negative for T gondi antibodies.
Cats in the acute phase of toxoplasmosis can receive drugs that inhibit
T. gondii reproduction,
PREVENTION
There are no vaccines currently available for toxoplasmosis.
Women who are pregnant and people who are immunosuppressed do not
have to get rid of their cats. However, it may be unwise for these people to adopt
kittens or young adult cats, because these are most likely to shed the oocysts.
Steps that can be taken to prevent toxoplasmosis in people include the
following:
· Exclude raw and undercooked meat from the diet. Cooking meat to an
internal temperature of 158? F (70° C) for at least 15 minutes will kill
the cysts. There is some disagreement about whether freezing meat before
eating it will kill the cysts. Pickling, salting, or smoking meat will not destroy
the cysts.
are sish rap aun uoy shonpoid Kiiep pue yluu pazinasedun apnioxg *
sometimes passed in the milk, especially goat milk.
· Do not drink untreated water from streams, lakes, or rivers.
· Wash hands, cutting boards, and utensils in warm, soapy water after handling
raw meat.
· Wear gloves when working in potentially infected soil in gardens and flower
beds. Wash hands after removing gloves.
· Keep sandboxes tightly covered when children are not playing in them to
prevent cats from using them as litter boxes.
Suiq uoy uau juaaand on sioout uau Sundaax Aq Aueay sien daay *
exposed to other cats or from eating prey that may be infected.
* Remove feces from litter boxes every day. Remember, it takes oocysts 1 to
 5 days to sporulate after being passed in cat feces.
TOXOPLASMOSIS199
·* Do not feed cats raw or undercooked meat. Feed only commercial cat food.
This will reduce the possibility of cats becoming infected.
* Some people may prefer to wear gloves when cleaning the litter box. Even
so, wash the hands after removing the gloves.
* Pregnant women may feel more comfortable having someone else clean the
litter box, even though the chances of becoming infected in this way are slim.
200 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
TRICHINOSIS
Trichinosis, also known as trichinellosis, is a food-borne disease caused by a
small parasite living in muscle tissue and eaten in raw or undercooked meat.
The disease has traditionally been associated with eating undercooked pork,
but strict federal regulations and education have greatly reduced the incidence
of pork-related trichinosis in North America.
MORBIDITY: +
MORTALITY: +
ETIOLOGY: PARASITIC
n u ds  a sd   ps t sis
America the three most common species involved are T spiralis (found in pigs
and rats), T. murrelli (found in wild game in temperate regions), and T. nativa
(found in cold climate-adapted animals such as fox, wolf, walrus, and bear).
Adult Trichinella worms mate in the small intestine of a host. Instead of
hatching from eggs, the young parasite develops in the adult female parasite
until it reaches the larval stage; these larvae are then passed by the adult
female. The male dies after mating; the female dies after passing larvae. Both
are then passed in the feces. The larvae penetrate the intestinal wall, enter the
lymph and blood systems, and are carried to various tissues throughout the
body, including the striated muscles (meat). In the muscles larvae curl up,
and an individual cyst is formed around each larva. In the cysts the larvae lie
dormant until they are liberated by gastric juices when the meat is eaten by
another host. Once the larvae are freed from their cysts by the digestion
process, they are carried to the smmall intestine of the new host, where they
mature to adults, mate, produce more larvae, and die.
If the meat containing encysted larvae is never eaten, the larvae will even-
tually die, and the cysts will become calcified. This is what happens in people
and in animals that are not on the menu for human or animal consumption.
Encysted larvae in pigs have been known to live 11 years.
HOSTS
Carnivores and omnivores are most susceptible to developing trichinosis
because they are most apt to eat infected meat. Herbivores, such as horses,
o  s so  ae a     
TRICHINOSIS201
infected meat. Some animals that can be sources of infection are pigs, wolves,
ground squirrels, bears (grizzly, polar, and black), walruses, seals, whales,
dogs, cats (wild and domestic), rats, foxes, and horses. In the past pigs were
the primary sources of infection, because their diet consisted of uncooked
garbage containing raw, infected meat. Today, packing plants are federally
inspected, and it is against the law to feed raw garbage to pigs intended
for market. Homegrown pigs fed raw garbage and never passing through a
federally inspected packing plant can still be a source of infection.
TRANSMISSION
  so s    sisi o s n
animal or a person eats raw or undercooked meat from an infected animal. The
dormant larvae that were encysted in the muscle tissue (meat) are released
from their cysts by stomach juices when they are ingested. From there they
complete their life cycles and infect the muscles of the new animal or human
host (Figure 47). In North America, people are usually dead-end hosts, as are
some animals, such as dogs and horses, as they are not eaten on a regular basis.
Not thoroughly cleaning a meat grinder after grinding infected meat may
result in subsequently ground meat becoming infected. If not properly
cleaned, other equipment also can harbor infected meat scraps and act as a
source of infection.
Transmission from person to person or from person to animal does not occur.
TRIChINOSIS In ANImALS
Animals with trichinosis look healthy and do not usually become clinically ill
This is especially significant in wild animals killed for their meat. Every wild
animal should be considered potentially infected.
TRICHINOSIS IN HUMANS
Most people who become infected with Trichinella will never become clinically
ill or will exhibit only mild signs that are often mistaken for the flu. The
disease is more common in rural, areas where pigs are raised for personal,
not commercial, use.
Trichinosis in humans occurs in two stages. When the adult worms are in
the intestines mating and producing larvae that invade the intestinal walls,
people will suffer intestinal signs such as diarrhea, abdominal pain, fever,
202 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
Infected animal
Trichinellalarvae
in striated muscle (meat)
 Improper cleaning of
food grinder or other food
 preparation equipment 
Cross-contamination
of other food
Human consumption
 of raw or undercooked
meat or contaminated food
Human trichinosis
FiGURE 47. Trichinosis
panoajut Sunea iange shep 7 ot I readde subis asau1 X8.reqal pue Sunuoa
 meat. The severity of the signs depends on how many parasites are present
the more parasites, the more severe the signs.
As the larvae migrate through the body, finding their way to muscles and
other body tissues, the second round of symptoms appears, 7 to 11 days later
The larvae seem to prefer certain muscles, which results in some specific
signs. For instance, infection in the muscles around the eyes results in swelling
of the eyelids; this is considered a hallmark sign of trichinosis. The diaphragm,
biceps, and muscles of the jaw, lower back, and neck are other favored
muscles. Other signs include bleeding into nail beds, swollen face, bleeding
into retinas and sclerae, high fever, chills, cough, joint pain, nonitchy rash,
muscle pain and tenderness, weakness, headaches, and sensitivity to light.
The symptoms are at their worst about 3 weeks after infection.
Most cases of trichinosis are self-limiting. After the symptoms reach their
peak, they gradually begin to subside. This can take several months. The muscle
pain and fatigue can last several months beyond the resolution of the other signs.
TRICHINOSIS 203
In severe cases the larvae may cause pneumonia, encephalitis, and heart
failure, all of which can be fatal.
DIAGNOSIS
A patient history of eating raw or undercooked meat is the place to start when
diagnosing trichinosis. Serologic testing can be used to detect antibodies
against the parasite. The migrating larvae cause a sensitivity reaction that results
in an increased number of eosinophils in peripheral blood. A blood sample can
be examined for this eosinophilia. A muscle biopsy can be examined for the
presence of encysted larvae, but the test can be painful and is often unre-
is not a diagnostic test for trichinosis, because the adults and larvae are seldom
seen in feces.
TREATMENT
Drugs are available to treat the parasites only when they are in the intestines.
Once they encyst in muscles and tissues, the medication cannot reach them.
This makes treatment difficult, because the intestinal phase of trichinosis resem-
bles many gastrointestinal diseases. Symptomatic treatment, with painkillers
and steroids, is the only treatment option in many cases.
PREVENTION
The only way to prevent trichinosis in people is to cook all meat thoroughly
before eating it:
· Cook meat, including wild game, to an internal temperature of 170° F
(77° C), or until the juices run clear.
·Freezing meat less than 6 inches thick at 5° F (—15° C) for 20 days will kill
T. spiralis but not necessarily T. nativa, which is found in cold climate-adapted
animals. Freezing may not kill all T. murelli larvae in wild game.
· Cook all meat fed to pigs.
* Do not allow pigs to eat uncooked carcasses of other animals.
* Clean meat grinders and other equipment after each use.
· Smoking, drying, curing, and pickling meat will not kill all of the Trichinella
larvae in infected meat,
* Microwaves do not heat meat consistently, so do not rely on them to kill
Trichinella larvae.
204ZOONOTIC DISEASES
Trichinosis is still a problem in other countries, so people traveling abroad
should be careful about eating raw or undercooked meat, especially pork. It is
still common to feed pigs raw garbage in developing countries.
NOTE
Trichinosis has been a reportable disease in the UInited States since 1966. Cases
of human or animal trichinosis must be reported to local, state, and federal
health officials.
TULAREMIA205
TULAREMIA
Tularemia is a bacterial infection, commonly known as rabbit fever or deer tick
fever. The disease is endemic to certain areas of the United States and is highly
aerosol form. As few as 10 organisms can cause disease.
MORBIDITY: +
MORTALITY:++
ETIOLOGY: BACTERIAL
Tularemia is caused by Francisella tularensis, a small, gram-negative coc-
cobacillus. The bacterium has a capsule that allows it to survive for several
months in water, mud, and decomposing materials, including carcasses.
HoSTS
F tularensis has been found in over 200 species of vertebrates and inver-
tebrates. The most important hosts in North America are wild rabbits,
hares, rodents, pheasants, quail, ticks, and deer flies. Humans are not a
natural host. Every state in the United States except Hawaii has reported
tularemia. Most cases occur in rural areas in south-central and western
states,
TRANSMISSION
Transmission occurs through direct contact with an infected animal, from
insect or arthropod bites, or by ingestion of the organism in contaminated
food or water. Hunters may come in contact with F tularensis when skinning or
dressing infected rabbits or other wild animals.
Ticks have become the most important vector for transmission of tularemia to
one geographic area or group of animals to another. Exposure to infected rabbits
is the second most common source of tularemia. Horse flies, biting flies, sucking
lice, and mosquitoes are other vectors, but not as important as ticks (Figure 48).
F tularensis can also be aerosolized by riding on particles of dust or mist
and can be inhaled. This happens most often during gardening, landscaping,
construction, or any activity that disturbs soil. Another less common mode of
206 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
Infected animal
Direct
Insect or arthropod
Feces, blood, body tissues
contact
 becomes infected
whilefeeding
on infected animal
Bacteria enter
Infected insect
Contaminates
Bacteria are
human body
or arthropod
food or water
aerosolized
through breaks
 bites human 
in dust, soil,.
in skin
and deposits
 or mist
bacteria at
bite site
+
Human
Human
consumption
inhalation
Human tularemia
FIGURE 48. Tularemia,
transmission is handling infected animals or tissues in a laboratory. Person-
to-person transmission does not occur.
TULAREMIA IN ANIMALS
Tularemia is more common in wild animals than domestic ones, and is more
often fatal in wild animals. Domestic animals are usually considered accidental
hosts for F tularensis. Some species are more susceptible than others to devel-
oping clinical disease. The incubation period is 1 to 10 days.
WILD RABBITS, HARES,AND RODENTS
Wild rabbits, hares, and rodents are very susceptible to F tularensis infection
and are often found dead, having exhibited no observable clinical signs. When
clinical signs are present, they include depression, anorexia, incoordination,
TULAREMIA207
roughened hair coat, and huddling. Pet rabbits and rodents rarely develop
tularemia if they are kept indoors.
SHEEP
Tularemia in sheep can be fatal. It shows up as a seasonal disease that coincides
with tick season. The clinical signs include fever, diarrhea, weight loss, dyspnea,
polyuria (excessive urination), rigid movements, and isolation from the rest of
the flock. Mortality is greatest in lambs, and ewes may abort.
CATS
Cats vary in their susceptibility to F tularensis infection. Some infections are
inapparent; others result in septicemia and death. Clinical signs include fever,
depression, jaundice, anorexia, weight loss, pneumonia, abscesses, mouth ulcers,
splenomegaly (abnormally enlarged spleen), and hepatomegaly (abnormally
enlarged liver).
HORSES
Clinical signs of tularemia in horses also coincide with tick season. A heavier
tick infestation results in a more severe disease. Affected horses display
fever, dyspnea, depression, and incoordination. Tularemia is not common in
horses.
DOGS
 Dogs are usually not seriously affected by F tularensis infection. When clinical
signs appear,they include fever, mucopurulent (part mucus, part pus) discharge
from the eyes and nose, pustule formation at the site of a tick bite, enlarged
sisuaupinn y ioy suoalasai se aalas klqeqoid saoa 'eixaioue pue 'sapou ydul
 and are maintenance hosts for tick vectors.
CATTLE
Cattle seem to be resistant to clinical disease resulting from F tularensis
infection.
TULAREMIA IN HUMANS
Tularemia is a disease primarily of rural areas, where people and animals are
more likely to come in contact with ticks and infected animals. A majority
 are sr pe 'usas an np us are sasn r jo
infected. Veterinarians, veterinary technicians, farmers, foresters, and wildlife
208ZOONOTIC DISEASES
specialists who work directly with wildlife are also at increased risk for devel-
opingtularemia.
Most people who are exposed to F tularensis become sick in 3 to 5 days,
but it can take up to 2 weeks for the clinical signs to appear. There are six types
of tularemia, but two of the types are responsible for nearly 100% of tularemia
cases. How a person is infected usually determines which form of tularemia
will develop.
Ulceroglandular tularemia is by far the most common form. It begins when
an ulcer forms at an inoculation site, usually where the person was bitten by
an insect or animal (Figure 49). Bacteria then spread from the inoculation site
to regional lymph nodes, which become painful and swollen; fever, chills,
headache, and lethargy soon develop.
Typhoidal, or septicemic, tularemia is the next most common form. Ullcers
and enlarged lymph nodes do not develop, but pneumonia does.This makes diag-
nosis difficult. Also seen are fever, chills, myalgia, lethargy, and weight loss. The
mode of transmission is not confirmed, but ingestion is commonly suggested.
iui a are un ao yn are n s mg o an
form (no ulcer forms), oculoglandular form (F tularensis enters through the eye)
FIGURE 49. Tularemia in a human, showing ulceration at the site of the bite.
(Courtesy Public Health Image Library, PHIL 1344, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, Atlanta, 1964.)
TULAREMIA209
oropharyngeal form (from ingesting undercooked infected meat, typically
rabbit), and the pneumonic form (F tularensis is inhaled).
The clinical signs observed correlate to the route of infection. For example.
 o aod dn un ss  'pst si s i 
tularemia through inhalation can develop chest pain, dyspnea, bloody sputum,
and respiratory failure. Infection through the eye results in a reddened con-
junctiva with purulent exudates, corneal ulcers, and enlarged lymph nodes
in the head and neck. Complications that have been reported in severe cases
of tularemia are meningitis, pericarditis, and osteomyelitis. Of these three,
meningitis is the most life-threatening if not treated promptly.
DIAGNOSIS
Serologic tests can detect antibodies against F tularensis. Diagnosis of tularemia
in animals is often done at necropsy. Animals or specimens of blood, biopsies,
or exudates that are submitted to a diagnostic or reference laboratory must be
labeled as potentially tularemia-infected to prevent laboratory personnel from
accidentally becoming infected.
F tularensis in their blood. F tularensis can be cultured, but it is difficult to do.
and colonies take a long time to grow—-up to 3 weeks. Clinical signs, and a
history of exposure to ticks or potentially infected rabbits aid in diagnosis.
TREATMENT
Tularemia can be fatal if not treated. Antibiotics and supportive treatment are
usually successful, especially if started early.
PREVENTION
There is no vaccine available to prevent tularemia in animals or people. Tick
control has become the most important preventive measure in people and
animals. Other precautions follow:
* Stay away from areas where ticks are commonly found.
* Use insect repellent containing DEET on exposed skin. Follow the instruc-
tions on the repellent container carefully. Wear long pants and long-sleeved
shirts. Tuck pants into socks and tuck shirts into pants. Treat clothing with a
head and neck.
210 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
* Protect pets from tick and fly bites. Flea and tick collars might help.
· Do not let pets or livestock eat parts of diseased animals, especially rabbits.
og sapoq aiua sue hau pue umo an pnads Pinous aldoad d
ticks.
· Properly remove any ticks found; this means wearing gloves or using a tissue
while grasping the tick close to the skin and pulling it out. Do not use lighted
cigarettes, matches, alcohol, or petroleum jelly. Do not squeeze the tick. Sometimes
there is a large, blood-engorged female tick and a smaller, male tick at the
same site. Be sure to remove both ticks.
Properly dispose of ticks by flushing them down the toilet. These ticks don't
need to be saved in alcohol for diagnosis.
· Thoroughly clean the area where a tick was removed, and wash hands with
warm, soapy water.
*Protect hands with gloves when skinning or dressing rabbits, hares, rodents,
pheasants, and quail. Keep hands away from the eyes and wash hands well
when finished.
· Clean all instruments and equipment used on potentially infected
animals.
* Disinfect surfaces where potentially infected animals have been. Use one
part household bleach to nine parts water, and let the solution sit on the
surface for 30 minutes.
· Cook rabbit and other wild game thoroughly. Never eat it raw or
undercooked.
* Do not drink untreated water, especially in endemic areas where tularemia.
is more common.
* Consider wearing a face mask and gloves when working in soil, mowing the
lawn, clearing weeds, or excavating construction sites.
* Discourage children from touching dead rabbits or other wild animals.
HISTORICAL NOTE
Though the disease had been identified in 1837, it was not given the name
tularemia until 1911, when a plaguelike disease infected ground squirrels living
in Tulare County, California. Dr. Edward Francis subsequently worked with
the organism that eventually bore his name.
VIBRIOSIS 211
VIBRIOSIS
Eating raw, undercooked, or improperly refrigerated shellfish can lead to vib-
riosis, a bacterial disease most commonly seen in areas near the sea. Vibriosis
can also occur as a result of wound contamination with seawater.
MORBIDITY: +
MORTALITY:+ TO ++++
ETIOLOGY: BACTERIAL
Vibrio parahaemolyticus and Vibrio vulnificus are the two organisms responsible
for most cases of vibriosis in people. They are curved gram-negative rods that
require salt water to survive (halophiles). They are found as natural residents
in seawater along the Atlantic coast up to Cape Cod, the Gulf of Mexico coast,
and the entire Pacific coast. Vibrio grows best during the warmer months of
summer when water is warmer.
HOSTS
V parahaemolyticus and V vulnificus have been isolated from shellfish (including
crustaceans, such as lobsters, crabs, and shrimp); mollusks (such as oysters,
clams, scallops, cockles, and mussels); fin fish (such as mackerel, tuna, and
sardines); seawater; sediment; and plankton.
TRANSMISSION
Oysters are the most common shellfish involved in infection in people. People
become infected with V parahaemolyticus and V vulnificus when they eat shellfish
that has not been properly stored or cooked. If shellfish are not cleaned and
cooled immediately after catching them, the bacteria will multiply rapidly.
Even if the shellfish were cooled properly, they can still be infected and must
be cooked thoroughly to prevent human infection. The Vibrio organisms adhere
so tightly to the shellfish intestinal tract that washing the shellfish does not
remove them. Freezing does not kill the organisms, and the bacteria can live
for several months in frozen seafood.
 Person-to-person transmission has not been documented. The presence of
Vibrio spp. in seawater does not indicate fecal contamination of the water.
212ZOONOTIC DISEASES
Existing wounds can become infected with contaminated seawater, or new
se ons 'sioalqo dreys yim Apoq aup jo yred Aue unino Aq msso ueo spunom
fishhooks or coral. The new wounds can also become infected.
VIBRIOSISINANIMALS
ls jo uogeuueuoo ogeuoduse asneo snoiuina a pue sniouyuod a
fish and some fin fish. The presence of V parahaemolyticus and V vulnificus is not
apparent because the organisms do not affect the smell, appearance, or taste of
the shellfish or fish.
VIBRIOSIS IN HUMANS
Vibriosis that results from eating improperly stored or cooked shellfish is char-
acterized by profuse, watery diarrhea that starts on average 12 to 24 hours after
consumption. Fever, nausea, abdominal cramps, chills, and headaches can
accompany the diarrhea. The diarrhea is a result of damage to the intestinal wall.
The disease is self-limiting in 2 to 3 days or up to a week in immunocompetent
people. V parahaemolyticus causes severe gastroenteritis and is more likely to be
associated with outbreaks involving numerous people who ate infected shellfish.
V vulnificus is associated more with individual cases of vibriosis in which
the gastroenteritis is not as severe. However, the organism can penetrate the
intestinal wall and get into the blood stream, causing septicemia. In immuno-
competent people, this can result in skin lesions characterized by erythema.
edema, and pain. The lesions do not spread, and necrosis and gangrene are
seldom a problem.
In people with certain preexisting conditions, V vulnificus infection can
lead to a life-threatening disease, characterized by septic shock, cellulitis, and
blistering skin lesions, most often on the legs and arms, and particularly on the
palms, fingertips, and soles of the feet (Figure 50). The painful lesions resemble
necrotizing fascitis and spread rapidly. Necrosis and gangrene may follow, neces-
sitating amputation to stop the spread of the lesions.
If V vulnificus enters through a wound, the skin around the wound can
break down, causing the same skin lesions as with ingestion.
without rapid and aggressive treatment can result in a mortality rate of 50%
in people with preexisting conditions such as liver disease (e.g, hepatitis C),
hemochromatosis, kidney disease related to transplants, diabetes mellitus,
cancer (lymphoma, leukemia, and Hodgkin's disease), stomach disorders, or a
VIBRIOSIS213
FIGURE 50. Blistering lesions caused by Vbrio vulnificus. (Courtesy C Samlaska,
MD. From James WD, Berger TG, Elston DM: Andrews? diseases of the skin clinical derma-
tology, ed 10, Philadelphia, 2006, Saunders.)
suppressed immune system. In inmmunocompetent people there are usually no
lasting complications once the disease has resolved itself.
DIAGNOSIS
Diagnosis starts with a history of eating shellfish, mollusks, fin fish, or a wound
exposed to seawater and the clinical signs and history. Vibrio spp. can be cultured
from feces, blood, or fluid from skin lesions.
TREATMENT
Uncomplicated V parahaemolyticus infection in immunocompetent people
usually does not require medical intervention as the vibriosis resolves.
ou op snotque 'sueodu si eaurp ym aldoad un spm unureuren
seem to lessen the severity of the diarrhea or shorten the recovery period.
V vulnificus septicemia infections need to be treated with antibiotics
immediately to increase the chances of patient survival. The wounds must be
aggressively debrided. Amputation may be necessary to stop the spread of
50% in people with preexisting conditions.
214ZOONOTIC DISEASES
PREVENTION
There is no vaccine for vibriosis prevention. There is no way to eliminate the
au jo jred are Kau asneoaq susuearo snoyiuina A pue snojouayund A
normal marine environment. Cooking shellfish thoroughly and avoiding
saltwater areas when wounds are present are two of the best ways to prevent
vibriosis. Other important precautions follow:
* Do not eat oysters or other shellfish raw.
* Boil shellfish until the shells open, and then 5 minutes more.
* Steam shellfish until the shells open, and then 9 minutes more.
* Do not eat shellfish that do not open during cooking.
*Boil shucked oysters for at least 3 minutes.
* Fry shucked oysters in oil at least 10 minutes.
* Fry fish until the thickest part is opaque.
· Do not eat raw fish. Even though most cases of vibriosis result from ingesting
contaminated shellfish, precautions should be taken when eating raw fish,
especially with the current popularity of sushi and sashimi.
* Do not cross-contaminate other food with raw shellfish juices or raw seafood.
· Wear gloves when handling raw shellfish or seafood.
* Do not expose open wounds, broken skin, or burns to warm seawater.
* Keep raw shellfish and seafood away from open wounds and broken skin.
WEST NILE ViRUS INFECTION 215
WEST NILE VIRUS INFECTION
West Nile virus (WNV) infection is more widespread throughout North
America than any of the other equine encephalitides. WNV was originally
identified in Europe, Africa (Uganda), the Middle East, and western Asia.
s pun au u paoda sm uogoul An jo aseo isiy a 6hh u
How it got to North America is unknown.
MORBIDITY:+
MORTALITY: ++
ETIOLOGY: VIRAL
WNV is the arbovirus (arthropod-borne virus) that causes WNV infections.
Other arboviruses include the eastern equine encephalitis virus, western
equine encephalitis virus, La Crosse encephalitis virus, and St. Louis
encephalitis virus.
HOSTS
Hosts include vertebrates: over 100 species of birds, horses, and humans.
TRANSMISSION
Migratory birds play an important role in the spread of the virus. Common
sparrows are resistant to the effects of WNV and are therefore considered
natural reservoirs for the virus. Crows and blue jays are severely affected
by the virus, and the presence of dead crows or blue jays may indicate the
presence of WNV in an area. WNV is spread by the bite of an infected
mosquito (Figure 51). Horses and humans are infected when a mosquito
takes a meal from an infected bird and subsequently bites a horse or human.
Horses, humans, and other mammals do not develop a level of virus in
the blood that is significant enough to make them a source of infection to
other animals via a mosquito bite; they are, therefore, considered dead-
end hosts.
WNV infection is indirectly zoonotic, meaning humans and horses cannot
be infected directly from one another or from birds. The mosquitoes act as
vectors that transmit the virus. WNV infection occurs most commonly from
late spring through early fall, when mosquitoes are most active.
216 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
Infected bird
Mosquito takes
Mosquito takes
blood meal from
blood meal from
infected bird and
uninfected bird
 ingests virus
and deposits virus
率
Mosquito takes blood meal
from human and deposits
virus at bite site
Virus invades human
nervous tissue
W
Human West
Human West
Nile fever
 Nile encephalitis
FiGuRE 51. West Nile virus infection.
 ana jo uisss jo sasn ai uaq a aar sn um
organ transplants, blood transfusions, breast feeding, and through the placenta
during pregnancy.
WESt NILe VIRUS INFECtION In HORSES
Most infected horses will not become clinically ill. If an infected horse
becomes clinically ill, the signs are related to the inflammation in the brain, or
encephalitis, caused by the virus. These include nonspecific signs such as loss of
appetite, depression, and fever. The encephalitis can be manifested by difficulty
swallowing, weakness or paralysis of a hind limb, impaired vision, incoordina
tion, head pressing, aimless wandering, walking in circles, excitability, convul-
sions, coma, and death. These signs will usually appear between 5 and 15 days
after infection. Animals usually recover in 4 to 7 days and do not show any signs
of permanent brain damage. The mortality rate in horses can be up to 33%.
West NIle Virus InfectIon  217
Not all animals showing clinical signs of encephalitis are infected with
WNV. Other diseases associated with encephalitis include rabies, botulism, and
eastern and western equine encephalitis.
WEST NILE VIRUS INFECTION IN HUmANS
WNV infection in humans will usually be asymptomatic or will only cause
mild symptoms. About 20% of the people infected will develop a mild illness
kmown as West Nile fever. West Nile fever is characterized by fever, headache.
fatigue, muscle aches, and sometimes a rash on the chest, stomach, and back.
The incubation period is from 5 to 15 days, and the illness lasts 3 to 6 days
 In less than 0.02% of people infected with WNV, a severe and sometimes
fatal neuroinvasive infection will develop. It can involve only the membranes
covering the brain (meninges), or it can involve the entire brain (encephalitis).
Meningitis is characterized by headaches, high fever, and neck stiffness
disorientation, muscle tremors, blindness, numbness, paralysis, convulsions,
coma, and death. The encephalitis is more severe in people over 50. Symptoms
can last several weeks, and if the person recovers, there may be permanent
brain damage. Over half the people who die from the encephalitis are more
than 77 years old.
DIAGNOSIS
S siso p v ae go an pe sis pu to pase st sisop an
made by virus isolation, from the brain tissue of dead humans or animals, and
serologic testing.
TREATMENT
There is no specific antiviral drug treatment for WNV infection. Supportive
therapy, such as administration of nutritive fluids, medications to decrease brain
swelling, and antibiotics to treat or prevent secondary bacterial infections, may
make the patient more comfortable.
PREVENTION IN HORSES
Prevention of WNV infection in horses involves vaccination and decreased
q t uo an ne aa ou st aa saobso o asodxa
218ZOONOTIC DISEASES
transmitted directly between horses, between humans, or between horses
and humans.
Reducing exposure to mosquitoes involves the following precautions:
· Drain areas of standing water. These are mosquito breeding sites.
* Keep horses inside during peak mosquito activity, from early evening until
after dawn.
· Keep lights off in stables during the night. Mosquitoes are attracted to incan-
descent lights.
· Put screens on stable windows and keep fans blowing to prevent mosquito
access.
* Place incandescent lights around the outside of the stable to attract mosqui-
toes and keep them away from horses.
· Fog the stable with an approved pesticide in the evening.
· Ulse mosquito repellents intended specifically for horses.
A number of vaccines are available that protect against WNV infection;
these should be administered by a veterinarian, following the manufacturer's
guidelines. Horses that have been vaccinated against eastern and western equine
PREVENTION IN HUMANS
Prevention of WNV infection in humans involves decreased exposure to
mosquitoes. There is no vaccination available for protection against WNV
infection in humans.
 Reducing exposure to mosquitoes involves the following precautions:
· Drain areas of standing water, especially after rainfall and watering. These
are mosquito breeding sites.
* Reduce outdoor activities during peak mosquito activity.
· Wear protective clothing when mosquitoes are most active, especially in the
early evening and early morning. Protective clothing includes long-sleeved
shirts and long pants.
* Use insect repellent containing DEET on exposed skin.
*Make sure screens fit properly and do not have any holes to decrease mosquito
access to building interiors.
WESTERN EQUINE ENCEPHALITIS219
WESTERN EQUINE ENCEPHALITIS
Western equine encephalitis is a viral disease of horses and humans. It is seen
mostly west of the Mississippi River in the United States and in corresponding
provinces in Canada.
MORBIDITY: +
MORTALITY: +
ETIOLOGY: VIRAL
Western equine encephalitis virus (WEEV) is an arbovirus (arthropod-borne
virus) that causes Western equine encephalitis. Other important encephalitis
arboviruses include the eastern equine encephalitis virus, St. Louis encephalitis
virus, La Crosse encephalitis virus, and West Nile virus.
HOSTS
hosts for WEEV are passerine birds, such as blackbirds, finches, jays, sparrows,
and warblers.
TRANSMISSION
WEEV is found mainly in or near farmland or irrigated fields and is trans-
mitted through the bite of an infected mosquito (Figure 52). Horses and
humans are infected when a mosquito takes a meal from an infected bird and
subsequently bites a horse or human. The mosquito deposits the virus in the
blood when it feeds. Horses and humans do not develop a level of virus in the
blood significant enough to make them a source of infection to other animals
via a mosquito bite; they are, therefore, considered dead-end hosts.
WEE is indirectly zoonotic, meaning humans and horses cannot be infected
directly from one another or from birds. The mosquito acts as a vector, trans-
mitting the virus. WEE occurs most commonly from late spring through early
fall, when mosquitoes are most active.
WESTERN EQUINE ENCEPHALITIS IN HORSES
WEE is a central nervous system disease in horses, but the disease is not as
severe as the one caused by EEEV. The clinical signs of WEE, seen from 5 days
220 ZOONOTIC DISEASES
Infected bird
Mosquito takes
Mosquito takes
blood meal from
blood meal from
infected bird and
uninfected bird
ingests virus
and deposits virus
Mosquito takes blood meal
 from human and deposits
virus at bite site
Human western
equine encephalitis
FIGuRE 52.  Western equine encephalitis.
to 3 weeks after infection, include fever, depression, anorexia, sensitivity to
ight, staggering, circling, disorientation, paralysis, and death. Even though
showing clinical signs can reach 20% to 50%. Animals that are not severely
affected by WEE recover in a couple of weeks, but permanent brain damage,
especially abnormal reflexes, may remain.
WESTERN EQUINE ENCEPHALITIS IN HUMANS
Human WEE cases are usually first seen in June or July. In most WEE cases,
the infections are either asymptomatic or cause a mild, nonspecific disease.
Clinical signs include fever, headache, stiff neck, nausea, vomiting, anorexia,
and fatigue, followed by central nervous sytem signs that may include paralysis,
abnormal reflexes, coma, and death. Children under 1 year old and young adults
are more severely affected than other age groups. Recovery may be accompa
nied by permanent brain damage in 5% to 30% of young patients. Most adults
recover in 7 to 10 days without permanent brain damage. The mortality rate
in infected humans is 3% to 15%
WESTERN EQUINE ENCEPHALITIS221
DIAGNOSIS
Initially diagnosis is based on clinical signs, season, and geographic location.
A final diagnosis is made by virus isolation from the brain tissue of dead horses
or humans or serology testing for the presence of antibodies against WEEV.
TREATMENT
There is no specific antiviral drug treatment for WEE. Supportive therapy,
such as administration of nutritive fluids, medications to decrease brain
swelling, and antibiotics to treat or prevent secondary bacterial infections, may
make the patient more comfortable.
PREVENTION IN HORSES
Prevention of WEE in horses involves vaccination and decreased exposure to
mosquitoes. There is no evidence that the WEEV can be transmitted between
horses, between humans, or between horses and humans.
 Reducing exposure to mosquitoes involves the following precautions:
* Drain areas of standing water. These are mosquito breeding sites.
· Keep horses inside during peak mosquito activity, from early evening until
after dawn.
· Keep lights off in stables at night; mosquitoes are attracted to incandescent
lights.
* Put screens on stable windows, and keep fans blowing to prevent mosquito access
· Place incandescent lights around the outside of the stable to attract mosqui
toes and keep them away from horses.
* Fog stables with an approved pesticide in the evening.
* Use mosquito repellents intended specifically for horses.
Vaccines are available for protection against WEEV infection and should be
administered in the spring. Initial vaccination requires multiple injections,
which are followed by annual boosters.
PREVENTION IN HUMANS
Prevention of WEE in humans involves decreased exposure to mosquitoes.
There is no vaccination available to prevent WEE in humans.
Reducing exposure to mosquitoes involves the following precautions:
* Drain areas of standing water. These are mosquito breeding sites.
222ZOONOTICDISEASES
· Reduce outdoor activities during peak mosquito activity.
· Wear protective clothing when mosquitoes are most active, especially in the
early evening and early morning. Protective clothing includes long-sleeve
shirts and long pants.
* Use insect repellent containing DEET on exposed skin.
· Make sure screens fit properly and do not have any holes. This will decrease
mosquito access to building interiors.
YERSINIOSIS 223
YERSINIOSIS
Yersiniosis is a bacterial disease that usually affects the intestinal tract. The dis
ease is seen most often in young children and during the cooler months of the
Krenue[ yono.u laquaaoN Aensn 'reak
MORBIDITY: +
MORTALITY: +
ETIOLOGY: BACTERIAL
 'a  ' a e q n si sioi
readers may recognize the genus name from Yersinia pestis, the causative agent
of the plague. These two bacteria belong to the same genus but cause different
diseases.
Y. enterocolitica needs iron to survive, so the more iron a person has in the
blood, the more Y enterocolitica may grow. This becomes important in diseases
that are characterized by elevated iron levels, such as hemochromatosis, sickle
cell disease, and thalassemia.
Y. enterocolitica grows best in an environment that is slightly alkaline.
People taking antacids that reduce stomach acidity are creating more alkaline
environments in their intestinal tracts, which creates more favorable growing
conditions for Y enterocolitica.
Cool temperatures favor the growth of Y enterocolitica, which is why
yersiniosis is seen more often during the cooler, winter months.
HOSTS
Y enterocolitica is found in the feces of many animals. Pigs are the most common
r asas tnq asnn un je suens ao uoaun ru jo anmos
found in dogs, cats, rodents, rabbits, horses, cattle, and sheep. Once infected,
a person will shed the Y. enterocolitica organism.
TRANSMISSION
Most people will get infected by eating feces-contaminated food or by drinking
contaminated milk or water. Undercooked or raw pork is a common source of
infection. Preparing chitterlings, made from the small intestines of pigs, can be
especially dangerous.
224ZOONOTIC DISEASES
Unpasteurized milk and dairy products and untreated water can also be
contaminated with Y enterocolitica. The organism has also been found in cold
cuts, ice cream, tofu, and shellfish from contaminated water, lakes, and streams
Infants can be infected if caregivers are not meticulous about washing their
hands after handling raw meat or after using the bathroom. The organism can
be passed from the caregiver to anything infants put in their mouths, which
could be just about anything within reach.
Other sources of Y enterocolitica can include produce contaminated
with raw manure containing Y. enterocolitica, direct contact with infected
animals, and cross-contamination of food preparation utensils and cutting
surfaces.
YERSINIOSIS IN ANIMALS
Most animals that shed Y enterocolitica appear clinically healthy. Some animals
will have mild diarrhea or frequent stools covered with mucus or blood.
Many cases of yersiniosis may go undiagnosed because veterinarians are not
looking for the disease and because laboratories do not routinely culture for
Y enterocolitica unless it's specifically requested.
YERSINIOSIS IN HUMANS
Yersiniosis in people can range from an asymptomatic disease to overwhelming
septicemia and death. Adult patients seem to develop a less severe disease.
Young children will usually develop a fever, accompanied by abdominal
pain and diarrhea with or without mucus or blood. The incubation period is
4 to 7 days. Most children will recover without treatment in 1 to 3 weeks
In severe cases, the bacteria may pass through the intestinal wall and enter the
blood stream, producing septicemia. These cases usually require hospitalization
and antibiotic treatment.
Older children and young adults frequently develop the same symptoms.
The abdominal pain is more acute in the lower right abdominal quadrant and
is often confused with appendicitis.
In rare cases in older patients, complications can arise when infections are
found outside the intestines. There may or may not be septicemia associated
with these infections. The most common complications are skin rash, which is
 more common in women, and joint pain, especially in the knees. These condi-
dn reapo Aensn pue uonoajul jenjut au ianje yuou e on dn readde ueo suon
without treatment.
YERSINIOSIS 225
DIAGNOSIS
Yersiniosis is diagnosed by culturing a stool sample for the presence of Y. ente-
rocolitica. Laboratories must be asked specifically to culture for the Y enterocoliticd
organism, which has also been found in the throat, lymph nodes, joint fluid,
urine, bile, and blood.
Serologic testing can detect the presence of antibodies against Y enterocoliticd.
TREATMENT
Treatment is usually not necessary unless severe septicemia develops. The
most important aspect of recovery is to keep patients hydrated while they have
diarrhea. Y. enterocolitica is susceptible to many antibiotics. Some patients have
mistakenly had their appendix removed based on the acute, abdominal pain on
the right side.
PREVENTION
Yersiniosis can be prevented by following these precautions:
· Thoroughly cook all meat, especially pork, before eating it.
* Observe all"keep refrigerated,"sell by,” and"use by" warnings on food labels.
· Wash hands, cutting surfaces, and utensils that come in contact with raw meat.
* Drink only pasteurized milk or products made from pasteurized milk.
*Avoid feces-contaminated water.
·Wash all produce before eating it.
* Meticulously wash hands after handling raw meat, especially pork. This is very
important when making chitterlings. Hands and fingernails need to be scrubbed
thoroughly after handling pig intestines. It would probably be wise to have
someone not involved in chitterling preparation care for infants.
*Wash hands after using the bathroom or changing diapers.
· Wash hands after handling animals. This is very important if the animal has
diarrhea.
* Properly dispose of animal feces.
appendix one
Life Cycle of a Tick
C
eggsafterblood
mammals
5.Nymph takes
poolc
larger
227
appendix two
Identification of Ticks
LARVAE
NYMPH
ADULT
DEER TICK
WESTERN BLACK-LEGGED TICK
BLACK-LEGGED TICK
LONE STAR TICK
AMERICAN DOG TICK
PACIFIC COAST TICK
228
appendix three
How to Protect Yourself
Against Ticks
DONT
DO
· Go bareheaded
· Wear a hat
· Wear a tank top
 or tee shirt
· Wear a long-
sleeved shirt
· Wear dark
clothing
· Wear light-colored
clothing
·Wear shorts
· Wear long pants
·Wear suntan
· Spray tick repellant on 
lotion to improve
shoes and clothes
your tan
· Tuck your pants
into long socks
· Go barefooted or
wear sandals
· Wear shoes
· Walk in tall grasses
·Walk in the middle of the
trail away from bushes
229
appendix four
Tick Removal Procedure
Figure A-1
Figure A-2
Figure A-3
1. Grasp the tick with pointed tweezers as close to the skin as possible (Figure A-1)
2. Using slow, steady, firm force, pull the tick in the reverse direction in which it is
inserted (Figure A-2).
3. Maintain pressure until the tick can be pulled from the skin. This may take some
time. Do not pull back quickly or with jerky movements (Figure A-3). This could
the skin. If this happens, remove the head like you would a splinter.
4. Don't squeeze the tick while it's still attached. This could force more infective fluid
into the wound.
lents, pesticides, or a lighted match to an attached tick. They may irritate the tick
to force more liquid into the wound, and they are ineffective tick removal methods.
6.Place the tick in a small, clean container that contains alcohol. Seal the
has to be identified later.
 s   A   s     s
wound.
NoTe: The preserved ticks can be discarded after 1 month. All known tick-borne
diseases will display symptoms within a month.
+ It can take hours to days before pathogens are transmitted from the tick to the
host, so ticks should be removed as soon as possible.
+For optimum safety, latex gloves should be worn for tick removal.
230
appendix
five
The 4 Cs of Food Safety
1. Clean
·Cleanhandsalwayswashyourhandswithwarmsoapywaterbefore
handling food.
● Clean utensils and preparation surfaces—wash all utensils, cutting boards, or
other surfaces with warm soapy water if they come in contact with raw food.
This means any raw food, not just meat.
· Clean raw vegetables and fruits before eating them.
2.Cook
·Cookmeat thoroughly.Ideally thereshould benopinkin themiddle.
· Cook leftovers until they are hot throughout.
3.Cover
· Cover food when it is not being served or eaten.
● Partially cover leftover food and put it in the refrigerator to cool.
+ Cover leftovers when they cool.
4. Chill or Heat
● Food poisoning bacteria grow best
212°F/100°C
between 41° F (5° C) and 140° F (60° C).
High temperatures
 Perishable food needs to be kept
destroy most bacteria
outside this danger zone toprevent
food poisoning.
165°F/73°C
Low cooking and holding
temperatures prevent growth
but allow some bacteria to live
140°F/60°C
DANGER ZONE:
Rapid growth of bacteria;
some will produce toxins
40° F/4.44° C
32°F/0°C
Water freezes
0°F/-18°C
Freezer setting
231
glossary
u aq paudoe snd jo ugennnne - ssasq
alopecia - loss of hair
anorexia - loss of appetite
arbovirus - arthropod-borne virus
bradyzoite - slowly growing stage in the growth of some parasites
cachexia - weight loss and wasting of muscle
cellulitis - inflammation of the subcutaneous or connective tissue
chorioretinitis - inflammation of the choroid membrane and retina
congenital - present at birth
conjunctivitis - inflammation of the conjunctiva (mucous membrane of
eyelid and eyeball)
dyspnea - difficulty breathing
edema - accumulation of fluid in tissues
encephalitis - inflammation of the brain
endocarditis - inflammation of the lining of the heart
enteritis - inflammation of the intestinal tract, especially the small intestine
eosinophilia - increased number of eosinophils in blood
erythema - redness of the skin, often a sign of inflammation or infection
eschar - dry scab on the skin
gastroenteritis - inflammation of the mucous membranes of the stomach
and intestines
hemoglobinuria - hemoglobin in the urine
hepatomegaly - enlarged liver
hydrocephalus - accumulation of fluid in the ventricles of the brain
jaundice - yellowish discoloration of eyes, skin, and mucous membranes;
icterus
laminitis - inflammation of tissue in the hoof of a horse
233
234GLOSSSARY
lethargy - sluggishness, apathy
lymphadenopathy - enlargement of lymph nodes
malaise - vague feeling of discomfort, unease
mastitis - inflammation of the udder
meningitis - inflammation of the membranes covering the brain and spinal
chord
microcephaly - smaller than normal head
myalgia - muscular pain or tenderness
necropsy - autopsy of a dead animal
necrosis - death of tissue
necrotizing fasciitis - death of skin and muscle due to bacterial toxins
ophthalmia - inflammation of the eye, especially the conjunctiva
osteomyelitis - inflammation of bone and bone marrow, usually due to
infection
PCR - polymerase chain reaction; a means of detecting specific kinds of
DNA or RNA
paresthesia - tingling, burning, or itching skin sensation with no apparent cause
pericarditis - inflammation of the membrane covering the heart
polyuria - excessive production and passing of urine
purulent - having, discharging, or causing the production of pus
pustule - small swelling of skin, such as a pimple or blister
toxins
splenomegaly - enlarged spleen
tachypnea - rapid breathing
tachyzoite - rapidly multiplying, asexual stage of some parasites
viremia - presence of virus in the blood
Index
A
Animal
Abortion
bite as cause of pasteurellosis, 127
anthrax causing, 19
disease from, 2
brucellosis causing, 39
quarantining for rabies, 145
E. coli causing, 56
zoonotic disease of, 5b-6b
leptospirosis as cause of, 107
Animal-bite pasteurellosis
Listeria monocytogenes as cause of, 111
characteristics of, 128
salmonellosis causing, 169
as infection from exposure to
Accidental host, 7
Pasteurella multocida, 127
Adult tick
Animal dermatomycosis, 65
feeding on whitetail deer, 23-24
Antacid, 223
transmission of Babesia, 22
Anthrax
Aerobic rod, 16
in animals, 18
Aerosolization, 87
creating spores, 21
AIDS, 3
etiology of, 16
Air, 10
in humans, 18-20
Alopecia
morbidity and mortality
in cat with Microsporum
of, 16
canis, 66f
transmission of, 8t,
as caused by ringworm, 70
16-17, 17f
as characteristic of scabies, 174,
virulent factors of, 17
175f, 176f
Antigen drift, 96
Alveolar hydatid disease, 188
Antigen shift, 96
American dog tick, 150
Antiviral drug, 99
Amplifier, 163
Arbovirus, 73
Anaplasma phagocytophilum,
Arthrophilic fungi, 64
77,78
Arthropod-borne virus, 73
Athlete's foot, 64, 70
Avian influenza virus, 96, 99
235
236INDEX
B
Bacterial disease—cont'd
Babesia caballi,22, 25
Rocky Mountain spotted fever as,
Babesia canis, 22
150-154
Babesia DNA, 26
salmonellosis, 167-172
Babesiα equi,22,25
staphylococcosis as, 179-181
Babesia gibsoni, 22
tularemia,205-210
Babesia microti
types of, 4b
feeding on whitetail
vibriosis, 211—214
deer, 23
yersiniosis, 223-225
 infecting humans, 22
Bang, Bernhard Lauritz
Babesiα organism
Frederik, 39
passing to host, 24
Bang's disease, 38
in red blood cell, 24f
Barn itch, 69
types of, 22
Bartonella henselae. See Cat scratch
Babesiosis, 10
disease
in animals, 24—25
Baylisascaris procyonis.
in humans, 25-26
 See Roundworm
life cycle of tick, 23f
Beaver disease, 83
as parasitic infection, 22
Beef
transmission of, 8t, 22-24, 23f
 bovine spongiform
Bacillary angiomatosis, 51
encephalopathy and
Bacillus anthracis
as method of transmission
antibiotics for, 20
of E.coli,55
as cause of anthrax, 16
Biological vector, 10
virulent factors of, 17
Biological warfare
Back-packer's disease, 83
anthrax as, 21
Bacterial disease
brucellosis as, 43
anthrax as, 16-21
plague as, 130
botulism as, 28-34
tularemia as, 205
brucellosis as, 38-43
Bird
campylobacter as, 44-48
as amplifier of St. Louis
cat scratch disease as, 49-53
encephalitis, 163
colibacillosis as, 54-58
botulism in, 30
ehrlichiosis as, 7782
as host of zoonotic disease, 5b
leptospirosis as, 103-107
influenza virus and, 96, 98
listeriosis, 108-113
psittacosis and, 135-136
Lyme disease, 114-119
West Nile virus and, 215
Pasteurellosis as, 127-129
Bite, 8t-9t
plague as, 130-134
Black death, 130
psittacosis, 135-138
Black-legged deer tick, 22,
Q fever, 139-141
115-116
rat-bite fever, 148-149
Blastomycosis, 3
INDEX237
Blepharospasm, 106
Campylobacteriosis——cont'd
Borrelia burgdorferi
campylobacter jejuni as species of,
 as bacterium causing Lyme disease,
44-46
114
transmission of, 8t, 44, 46
co-infection with, 27
See also Vibriosis
transmission of, 114-116
Campylobacter jejuni, 44-46
Botulism
Canicola disease, 103
in animals, 29-31
Canine babesiosis, 24-25
characteristics of, 28
Canine hemorrhagic
diagnostic tests for, 32-33
fever, 77
prevention of, 33-34
Canine typhus, 77
three forms in humans, 31-32
Carcass disposal, 21
transmission of, 8t, 29
Carrier
types of, 28-29
of disease, 7, 10
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy
of ringworm, 65
in cattle, 36
characteristics of, 35
anthrax in, 18
in humans, 36
dermatomycosis in, 69
transmission of, 8t, 35-36
hookworm infecting, 91
Bovine tuberculosis, 124, 125
as host of zoonotic
Bovine venereal campylobacteriosis
disease, 5b
(BVC), 46
infestation of hookworms, 94
Brown dog tick, 22, 150
leptospirosis in, 105
Bruce, Sir David, 38
Lyme disease in, 116
Brucella organism
pseudozoonotic disease in, 3
transmission to humans, 39
ringworm in, 64
types of, 38
salmonellosis in, 169
Brucellosis
scabies in, 174
in animals, 3942
toxoplasmosis and, 193, 195
characteristics of, 38
tularemia in, 207
in humans, 40-42
Cat scratch disease (CSD)
reporting to health
atypical consequences of, 51
department, 43
in cats, 50-51
transmission of, 8t, 39
decreasing exposure to, 52
Bubonic plague, 130, 132
enlarged lymph nodes in person
Bull's-eye rash, 117, 117f
with, 50f
in humans, 50, 52
C
in immunocompromised people
Campylobacter fetus, 46-48
and, 53
Campylobacteriosis
number of people
campylobacter fetus as species of,
affecting,2
46-48
transmission of, 8t, 49
238INDEX
Cattle
Consumption, 123
anthrax in, 18
Contact, 8t-9t
botulism in, 29-30
Cough
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy
as method of disease
in,35
transmission, 8
brucellosis in, 39
pathogen becoming airborne, 10
Campylobacter fetus in, 47
Cow. See Cattle
dermatomycosis in, 69-70
Coxiella burnetii, 139-141
diagnosis of tuberculosis, 125
Creeping eruption, 91, 93f
ehrlichiosis in, 79
Cryptosporidiosis (Crypto)
as host for E. coli, 54
in animals, 60
as host of zoonotic disease, 5b
in humans, 60-61
leptospirosis in, 105
prevention of, 62-63
Lyme disease in, 116
transmission of, 8t, 59, 60f
ringworm in, 64
Cryptosporidium parvum, 59
salmonellosis in, 169
Cryptosporidium spp, 59
Trichophyton infection in, 68f
Cutaneous anthrax, 19, 19f
Central nervous system (CNS) disease,
Cutaneous larva migrans (CLM)
48,73-74,75
in cats and dogs, 94
Cestodiasis, 182
development of, 91
Chipmunk, 100
in humans, 94
Chlamydophila psittaci, 135-138
life cycle of hookworm, 92f
Chronic ehrlichiosis, 79
migration of hookworm larvae, 93
Chronic wasting disease, 35
prevention of, 95
Ciprofloxacin, 20
in sole of foot, 93f
Circling disease, 108
Cystic hydatid disease, 188
Clinical toxoplasmosis, 196, 197
Cystitis, 54
Clostridium botulism toxin.
See Botulism
D
Club lamb fungus, 70
Dead-end host, 7
Coccidioidomycosis, 3
Deer tick
Coccobacillus, 108
on finger, 116f
Cold, 3
life cycle of, 23, 23f
Colibacillosis
Deer tick fever, 205
in animals, 56
Dermacentor andersoni, 150-151
etiology of, 54
Dermacentor variabilis, 150-151
in humans, 56-57
Dermatophyte, 10
prevention of, 57-58
Dermatomycosis
transmission of,8t, 55-56,55f
in animals, 67,69
Colitoxemia, 54
as contagious skin disease, 64
Congenital toxoplasmosis,
in humans, 70
196, 197
methods for diagnosing, 70-71
INDEX239
Dermatomycosis——cont'd
Echinococcus granulosus, 188-192, 189f
Microsporum infection in human, 65f
Echinococcus multiocularis, 188-192,189f
transmission of, 8t, 65, 67
Ehrlichia chaffeensis, 77, 78
Diarrheal disease, 45
Ehrlichia ewingi, 77, 78
Diphyllobothrium latum, 185-188, 187f
Ehrlichia organism, 77, 81f
Diphtheria, 3
Ehrlichiosis
Dipylidium caninum, 183-185, 184f
in animals, 78-80
Direct transmission, 8, 10
babesiosis and, 24
Disease
characteristics of, 77
direct transmission of, 8, 8t-9t, 10
decreasing exposure to, 81-82
indirect transmission of, 8
in humans, 80
morbidity of, 13
infecting white blood cells, 78
mortality of, 13
transmission of, 8t, 77, 78f
types of, 4b
Encephalitis arbovirus
zoonotic, 3
in horses, 216-217
Dog
types of, 73
anthrax in, 18
Endometriosis, 47
Babesiosis in, 24—25
Enteropathogenic diarrhea, 54
botulism in, 31
Epidemic arthritic erythema, 148
brucellosis in, 40
Equine granulocytic ehrlichiosis, 79
dermatomycosis in, 69
Escherichia coli
ehrlichiosis in, 79
infecting humans, 55, 56-57
hookworm infecting, 91
prevention of, 57-58
as host of zoonotic disease, 5b
strains of, 54
infestation of hookworms, 94
Exotoxin, 17
leptospirosis in, 103, 105
Lyme disease in, 116
F
ringworm in, 64
Feces
salmonellosis in, 169
contaminating food, water and
scabies in, 174, 175f
objects, 83-84
toxoplasmosis in, 195
contaminating sand, 93
Trichophyton infection in dog, 66f
contaminating water, 10, 56
tularemia in, 207
diagnosing giardiasis, 84
Dog tick, 150
roundworm in, 158-159
 Doxycycline, 20
shedding C. jejuni, 46
Dust, 10
spreading cryptosporidiosis, 59
Feline AIDS, 3
E
Feline immunodeficiency, 3
Eastern equine encephalitis virus (EEEV)
Feline leukemia, 3
clinical signs of, 74
Feline spongiform
in humans, 74-75
encephalopathy, 35
transmission of, 8t, 73, 74f
Fish, 6b
240INDEX
Flu
Hantavirus pulmonary
as initial sign of leptospirosis, 107
syndrome-
-cont'd
as initial sign of listeriosis, 111
eliminating rodents as prevention
Fly, 10
of, 89-90
Fomite transmission, 10
in humans, 88
Foodborne botulism, 31
rodents as reservoirs for, 87
Food poisoning, 10
transmission of,8t, 87-88,88f
E. coli as cause of, 54
Hard-bodied tick, 22, 150
Salmonella as cause of, 167
Hare, 206-207
staphylococcus as cause of, 179
Haverhill fever, 148
Fowl, 170
Hemagglutinin (H) antigen,
Francisella tularensis. See Tularemia
97-98
Fungal disease
Hemolytic anemia, 26
causing dermatomycosis, 64
Hemorrhagic colitis, 54
from contaminated soil, 3
Hollywood Tapeworm Diet, 192
types of, 4b
Honey, 34
Fur, 18
Hookworm
Furious rabies, 143
in cats and dogs, 94
elimination of, 94-95
5
in humans, 91, 93, 94
Gastrointestinal anthrax, 20
life cycle of, 91-92, 92f
Geophilic fungi, 64, 69, 70
migration of, 93-94
Giardia organism, 83
transmission of, 8t, 91, 92f
Giardiasis (Giardia)
types of, 91
in animals, 83, 84-85
Horse
characteristics of, 83
anthrax in, 18
in humans, 84-85
babesiosis in, 25
prevention of, 85-86
botulism in, 30
transmission of, 8t, 84, 84f
brucellosis in, 40
Girth itch, 69
dermatomycosis in, 69
Goat
Eastern equine encephalitis virus
brucellosis in, 40
(EEEV), 73-76
as host of zoonotic disease, 5b
ehrlichiosis in, 79
Listeria monocytogenes in, 109
as host of zoonotic disease, 5b
toxoplasmosis in, 195
leptospirosis in, 103, 106
Gram stain, 20
Lyme disease in, 116-117
Granulocytic ehrlichiosis, 78, 79
ringworm in,64
Guillain-BarrE syndrome, 45
salmonellosis in, 169
Trichophyton infection in, 67f
H
tularemia in, 207
Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS)
West Nile virus causing death, 3
in animals, 88
West Nile virus in, 216-217
INDEX241
Host
Inhalational anthrax
people as, 7
characteristics of, 19
 zoonotic disease grouped
communicability, 16
by, 5b-6b
diagnosis of, 20
Human
Insecticide, 11
causing disease, 3
Insect vector, 8t-9t
as dead-end host for
Intestinal anthrax, 20
hookworm,91
Iron, 223
as dead-end host for
Ixodid tick
leptospirosis, 106
as vector for babesiosis, 22
disease from animals, 2
as vector for ehrlichiosis, 77
infection from hookworm, 93
as vector for Rocky
leptospirosis in, 103
Mountain spotted
ringworm in, 64, 69
fever, 150
Trichophyton infection
in,68f
J
types of anthrax in, 18-20
Jock itch, 64,70
Human babesiosis, 22
Human granulocytic ehrlichiosis
K
(HGE), 80
Keratin, 64
Human influenza virus,
Koch, Robert, 21
96, 99
Koch's disease, 123
Human monocytic ehrlichiosis
(HME), 80
L
Hydatid disease, 188, 191f
La Crosse encephalitis virus (LCEV)
Hydrophobia, 144
in animals, 101
as encephalitis arbovirus, 73
√
in humans, 102
Indirect transmission, 10
mosquito as vector for, 100
Infant botulism, 32
reducing exposure to, 102
 Influenza virus
replication of virus, 101
in animals, 98-99
transmission of, 9t, 100, 101f
etiology of, 96
Lagomorph, 69
in humans, 99
Larvae tick
reassortment of, 97f
feed of, 23
subtypes of, 97-98
transmission of Babesia, 22
transmission of, 8t, 98
Larva migrans
Type A,97
cutaneous, ocular, and
Ingestion, 8t-9t
neural, 157f
as method of disease
in humans, 156-158
transmission, 10
Latent toxoplasmosis, 197
Inhalation, 8t-9t, 10
Leptospira biflexa, 103
242INDEX
Leptospira interrogans, 103
M
Leptospira organism
Macule,152
in animals, 105-106
Mad cow disease. See Bovine
migration of, 111
spongiform encephalopathy
transmission of, 103-104
Malta fever, 38, 40
Leptospirosis
Measles, 3
in animals, 104-106
Mechanical vector
in humans, 106-107
examples of, 10
transmission of, 9t, 103-104, 104f
Meningitis, 19
yaccination against, 107
Microsporum, 64
Lesion,69
Microsporum
Lice,130
infection in human, 65f
Listeria monocytogenes, 108
Microsporum canis
Listeriosis
as cause of ringworm in cats and
in animals, 109-111
dogs, 64, 69
culturing Leptospira organism, 112
infection in cat, 66f
etiology of, 108
Microsporum nanum, 64, 70
in humans, 111-112
Migratory bird
prevention of, 112-113
as carrier of influenza, 96, 98
in sheep showing facial
spreading West Nile virus, 215
paralysis, 110f
Milk, raw, 11
transmission of, 9t,
Monocytic ehrlichiosis, 78, 79
108-109,109f
Mononucleosis, 80
Lone Star tick, 77
Moon blindness, 103
Lumpy wool, 70
Morbidity, 13
Lyme disease
Mortality, 13
in animals, 116-117
Morulae,77
co-infection with, 27
Mosquito
decreasing exposure to ticks, 119
reducing exposure to, 102
rash typical of disease, 117f
replicating St. Louis encephalitis
stages of, 117-118
virus, 163-164
tick as vector for
spreading Western equine
transmission of, 9t,
encephalitis, 219
114-116, 115f
spreading West Nile virus, 215
Lymphadenitis, 49
as vector for encephalitis, 73
Lymphadenopathy, 49, 50
as vector for La Crosse
Lymph node, 50f
encephalitis, 100
 Lymphocytic choriomeningitis (LCM)
Mouse
in animals, 120
as host for Lymphocytic
in humans, 121
choriomeningitis, 120
prevention of, 122
See also White-footed mouse
transmission of, 9t, 120
Mucosal surface, 10
INDEX243
Mud fever, 103
Parasitic disease——cont'd
Mycobacterium avium,123,124
tapeworm (cestode) as,
Mycobacterium bovis, 123, 124
182-192
Mycobacterium infection
toxoplasmosis as, 193-199
(Tuberculosis)
trichinosis as, 200-204
in animals, 124
types of, 4b
as cause of death, 123
Parasitic worm, 3
in humans, 124-125
Parinaud's oculoglandular
testing for, 125
syndrome, 51
transmission of, 9t, 124
Pasteurella multocida, 127
vaccination for prevention of, 126
Pasteurellosis
Mycobacterium leprae, 123
animal bites causing, 127
Mycotic disease, 3
in animals, 127-128
in humans, 128
N
transmission of, 9t,127
Nantucket fever, 22
Pasteurization
Nematode phylum, 91
killing E. coli organism, 56
Neorickettsia sennetsu, 77, 78
preventing zoonotic disease, 11
Neural larva migrans (NLM), 156,
Pathogen
157f, 159f
as agent of disease, 3
Neuraminidase (N) antigen, 97-98
contaminating objects with, 10
Notoedres cati, 173
direct transmission of, 10
Nymph tick
host for, 7
infecting humans, 23
Penicillin, 20
transmission of Babesia, 22
People. See Human
Periodic ophthalmia, 103
0
Pig
Ocular larva migrans (OLM),
anthrax in, 18
156,157f
botulism in, 30
Oocyst
brucellosis in, 40
characteristics of, 59, 193
as cause of trichinosis, 201-203
identifying in fecal sample, 61
as host of zoonotic disease, 5b
Oxygen, 16
influenza virus in, 99
leptospirosis in, 106
P
ringworm in, 64
Parasitic disease
salmonellosis in, 169
babesiosis as, 22-27
trichinella worm in, 200
cryptosporidiosis as, 59-63
Pinworm, 3
giardiasis as, 83-86
Piroplasmosis, 22
hookworm as, 91-95
Plague
roundworm as, 155-162
in animals, 131-132
scabies as, 173-178
characteristics of, 130
244INDEX
Plague—cont'd
Rabbit fever, 205
controlling rodent population,
Rabies
133-134
animals commonly infected
direct transmission of, 10
with, 142
in humans, 132-133
clinical stages and signs in animals,
as method of disease
143-144
transmission, 130
the disease, 143
transmission of, 9t, 130-131, 131f
euthanization, 145
Pneumonic plague, 130, 131, 132-133
exposure to rabid animal, 146
Poison
in humans, 144
Clostridium botulism toxin as,28
minimizing risk of, 147
 See also Food poisoning
transmission of, 9t, 142
Poll evil, 40
vaccination against, 11
 Polymerase chain reaction (PCR), 26
Rabies immune globulin, 146
Post-exposure prophylaxis, 144, 147
Rash
Pre-exposure prophylaxis, 144,
associated with RMSF, 80
145-146
typical of Lyme disease, 117f
Prion, 35
Rat-bite fever (RBF), 9t, 148-149
Prion disease, 4b
Raw milk, 11
Prion-related protein (PrP), 35
Red blood cell
Prosecutor's wart, 123
 Babesia organism in, 24f
Pseudo-scabies, 173
parasite invasion of, 23
Pseudozoonotic disease, 3
parasitic infection of, 22
Psittacosis
Red death, 123
characteristics of, 135
 Regional lymphadenopathy, 49
in humans, 136-137
Reservoir host
minimizing exposure to C. psittaci,
of disease, 7
137-138
examples of, 10
transmission of, 9t, 135
Reverse zoonosis, 3
Pulmonary anthrax, 19
Rhipicephalus sanguineus, 150-151
Ricefield disease, 103
Q
Rickettsia rickettsii. See Rocky Mountain
Q fever
spotted fever
in animals, 139
Ringworm, 69-70
characteristics of, 139
animals as common source for, 64
in humans, 140
in the head, 70
reducing exposure to, 141
Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF)
transmission of, 9t, 139
 in animals, 151
in humans, 152-153,152f
R
minimizing risk of, 153-154
Rabbit
tick as reservoir and vector
ringworm in, 69
of, 150
tularemia in, 206-207
transmission of, 9t,150-151, 151f
INDEX245
Rocky Mountain wood tick, 150
Scabies
Rodent
alopecic ear margins, 176f
 controlling population of,
in animals, 174
133-134
areas of manifestation, 177f
dermatomycosis in, 69
clinical signs of, 176-177
as host for Lymphocytic
in dog, 175f
choriomeningitis, 120
in humans, 174-176, 178f
as host of zoonotic disease, 5b
prevention of, 178
 as reservoir for HPS virus,
subspecies of, 173
87,88
transmission of, 9t, 174, 174f
as reservoir for Y. pestis, 130-131
Scrapie, 35
ringworm in, 64
Scratch, 8t-9t
 transmisson of plague, 131f
Septicemia
tularemia in, 206-207
campylobacter fetus and, 48
Roundworm
as form of listeriosis, 110
in animals, 156
as symptom of anthrax, 19
children infected by, 2
Septicemia tularemia, 208
diagnosing from feces, 158-159
Septicemic plague, 133
larva migrans in humans,
Serovar, 103, 105
156-158
7-year itch, 173
life cycle of, 155-156
Sheep
prevention of, 160-162
botulism in, 30
transmission of, 9t,
brucellosis in, 40
155-156,157f
Campylobacter fetus in, 47, 48
Ruminant
ehrlichiosis in, 79
ehrlichiosis in, 79
as host of zoonotic disease, 5b
listeriosis in, 109
leptospirosis in, 106
salmonellosis in, 169
Listeria monocytogenes in, 109
listeriosis in, 110f
S
ringworm in, 64
Samonella organism.
toxoplasmosis in, 195
See Salmonellosis
tularemia in, 207
Salmonellosis
Shellfish, 211—212, 214
in animals, 168-170
ShigellaYersinia, 170
flies spreading, 10
Silage disease, 108
in humans, 170
Skin
limiting exposure to, 171
areas of scabies
serotypes of, 167
manifestation, 177f
transmission of, 9t, 167-169
hookworm penetrating, 92
Salpingitis, 47
infection by dermatophyte, 10
Sarcoptes scabiei. See Scabies
pathogen entering body by, 10
Sarcoptic itch, 173
scabies as disease of,
Sarcoptic mange, 173, 174
173-178
246 INDEX
Skin test
TB vaccine interfering with, 126
Tapeworm (Cestode)
for tuberculosis, 125
Diphyllobothrium latum,185-188
Smallpox
Dipylidium caninum, 183-185
transmission of, 3
morphology of, 182, 182f
vaccination against, 11
segments in dog feces, 184f
Snake, 5b
transmission of, 9t, 186, 187f
Sneeze
types of, 183
as method of disease transmission, 8
Target rash, 117, 117f
pathogen becoming airborne, 10
Tetanus booster, 129
Soil contamination, 3
Tetracycline, 20
Sore throat, 3
Theileria equi, 22
Spanish flu, 98
Tick
Spore
control of, 26-27
of Clostridium botulism, 29
decreasing exposure to, 81-82,
creating aerosols of, 21
119, 153-154
for dermatomycosis, 67
feeding on white-footed
in fur, 18
mouse,23
oxygen and, 16-17
feeding on whitetail deer, 23-24
Spotless Rocky Mountain spotted fever
life cycle of,23, 23f, 114,
(RMSF), 80
150-151
Spotted fever, 150
tularemia and, 207
St. Louis encephalitis virus
as vector for babesiosis, 22
in animals, 163-164
as vector for ehrlichiosis, 77
 decreasing exposure to mosquitos,
as vector for Lyme disease, 82
165-166
as vector for plague, 130
as encephalitis arbovirus, 73, 100
as vector for Rocky Mountain
in humans, 165
spotted fever, 150
transmission of, 9t,
Tick-borne disease, 77
163-164, 164f
Tick-borne fever, 79
Staphylococcus
Tinea, 64
as cause of food poisoning, 179
Tinea capitis, 70
in humans, 180
Tinea corporis, 70
prevention of, 181
Tinea cruris, 70
transmission of, 9t, 179-180
Tinea pedis, 70
Staphylococcus aureus, 3
Tinea unguium, 70
Streptobacillary fever, 148
Toxin,28-29
Streptobacillus moniliformis, 148-149
Toxocara canis. See Roundworm
Streptococcus, 3
Toxocara cati. See Roundworm
Swamp fever, 103
Toxoplasma gondii
 Swine. See Pig
life cycle of, 193
Swineherd's disease, 103
See also Toxoplasmosis
INDEX247
Toxoplasmosis
Tularemia—cont'd
in animals, 195, 196
in humans, 207-209,208f
diagnosis of, 197
prevention of, 209-210
in humans, 195, 196-197
transmission of,9t,205-206,206f
steps to prevent, 198-199
Turtle, selling baby, 172
Toxoplasma gondi as cause of, 193
Typhoidal tularemia, 208
transmission of, 9t, 194f, 195
Typhoid fever, 167
Tracker dog disease, 77
Transmissible spongiform
n
encephalopathy (TSE), 35
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
Transmission
(FDA), 20
See also specific diseases
Ulcer, 18
of zoonotic disease, 8-10
Ullceroglandular tularemia, 208
Traveler's disease, 83
Undulant fever, 38, 40
Treehole mosquito, 100, 101f
Tree squirrel, 100
V
Triad of clinical findings, 153
Vaccination
Trichinella organism.
for anthrax, 20
See Trichinosis
for Campylobacter fetus, 48
Trichinosis (trichinellosis)
for EEE infection, 76
in animals, 200-201
for leptospirosis, 107
cause of, 200
for listeriosis, 112
in humans, 201-203
for plague, 134
prevention of, 203-204
 preventing zoonotic
transmission of, 9t, 201, 202f
disease, 11
Trichophyton
 prevention of tuberculosis, 126
as genera of zoophilic
for rabies, 145-147
fungi, 64
for ringworm in cats, 71
infection in cow, 68f
virus mutations and, 96
infection in dog, 66f
Variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
infection in horse, 67f
(vCJD),35,36,37
infection in human, 68f
Vector
Trichophyton equinum, 64, 69
lice as, 130
Trichophyton mentagrophytes, 64, 69
as method of disease transmission,
Trichophyton verrucosum, 64,69
8t-9t
Tuberculosis
tick as, 22, 77
as reverse zoonosis, 3
types of, 10
 See also Mycobacterium
Vector-borne disease, 11
infection
Vegetative Bacillus anthracis, 21
Tularemia
Vehicle of transmission, 10
in animals, 206
Vibrio parahaemolyticus.
forms of, 208-209
See Vibriosis
248 INDEX
Vibriosis
W
in animals, 212
Wasting disease, 123
blistering lesions, 213f
Water, 10
cause of, 211
Waterborne diarrhea, 59
in humans, 212-213
Weil's disease, 103-107
prevention of, 214
Western equine encephalitis virus
transmission of, 9t,
as encephalitis arbovirus, 73, 100
211-212
in horses, 219-220,221
See also Campylobacteriosis
in humans, 220,221-222
Vibrio vulnificus. See Vibriosis
mortality rate of, 74
Viral disease
transmission of, 9t, 219, 220f
Eastern equine encephalitis
West Nile virus (WNV)
virus as, 74-76
as encephalitis arbovirus, 73, 100
Hantavirus pulmonary
in horses, 216-217,217-218
syndrome as, 87-90
in humans, 217,218
Influenza virus as, 96-99
mortality rate of, 74
La Crosse encephalitis virus as,
origin of, 3
100-102
transmission of, 9t, 215-216
lymphocytic choriomeningitis as,
White blood cell
120-122
Ehrlichia organism in, 81f
rabies as, 142-147
ehrlichiosis attacking, 77
St. Louis encephalitis virus,
White-footed mouse
163-166
as host for Babesia organism, 22
types of, 4b
as host for Lyme disease, 114
Western equine encephalitis
tick feeding on, 23
virus, 73,74,100,
White plague, 123
219-222
Whitetail deer
West Nile virus as, 3, 73, 74,
as host for Lyme disease, 114
100,215-218
tick feeding on, 23
Viremia, 73
Wildlife, 6b
Virus
Wild migratory bird
 Eastern equine encephalitis
as carrier of influenza,
virus (EEEV),
96,98
73-76
spreading West Nile
Influenza, 96-99
virus, 215
La Crosse encephalitis virus
Woodland mammal, 100
(LCEV), 100-104
Woods lamp, 70
replication of, 96
Wood tick, Rocky
transmitting disease, 3
Mountain, 150
Visceral larval migrans (VLM),
Woolrot, 70
156,157f
Woolsorter's disease, 19
INDEX249
Worm
Z
parasitic,3
Zoonotic disease
See also Hookworm; Roundworm;
anthrax as, 16-21
Tapeworm
direct transmission of, 8,
Wound botulism, 31-32
8t-9t, 10
grouping by etiology, 4b
人
grouping by host, 5b-6b
Yersinia enterocolitica. See Yersiniosis
host for, 7
Yersinia pestis. See Plague
morbidity of, 13
Yersiniosis, 223
mortality of, 13
in animals, 224
prevention of, 11
in humans, 224
transmission of, 3
prevention of, 225
Zoophilic fungi, 64
transmission of, 9t, 223-224