Victoria Aspinall
Melanie
Cappello
SECOND
EDITION
INTRODUCTIONTO
VETERINARYANATOMY
Physiology
TEXTBOOK
AND
ForewordbyAndreaJeffery
ACCESS
ONLINEA
evolve
BUTTERWORTH
HEINEMANN
Thie
ELSEVIER
Introduction to Veterinary Anatomy and Physiology Textbook
Commissioning Editor: Rita Demetriou-Swanwick, Robert Edwards 
Development Editor: Louisa Welch
Project Manager: Andrew Palfreyman
Desigher: Stewart Larking
Illustrations Manager: Merlyn Harvey
SECOND EDITION
INTRODUCTION TO
Veterinary Anatomy
Physiology
AND
TEXTBOOK
Victoria Aspinall, BVSc, MRCvS
Principal, Abbeydale Vetlink Veterinary Training Ltd
Gloucester, UK
Melanie Cappello, BSc(Hons) Zoology PGCE VN
East Grinstead, West Sussex, UK
Contribution by
Sally Bowden, VN
Lecturer, Canterbury, New Zealand
Foreword by
Andrea Jeffery, MSc DipAVN(Surg) Cert Ed RVN
 Programme Director, Veterinary Nursing,
 Department of Clinical Veterinary Science,
University of Bristol, Bristol, UK
Illustrations by:
Antbits Illustrations, Saffron Walden, UK
BUTTERWORTH
HEINEMANN
ELSEVIER
BUTTERWORTH
 HEINFMANN
FISFVIER
Butterworth Heinemann
An Imprint of Elsevier Ltd.
 2004, 2009, Elsevier Limited. All rights reserved.
 No part of this publication may be reproduced or trarnismifted in any form or by any
means, electroric or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any informa-
tion storage and retrieval system, without permission in wrifing from the publisher.
239 3804 (US) or (+44) 1865 843830 (UK); fax: (+44) 1865 853333; e-mail: healthpermis-
sions@elsevier.com. You may also complete your request on-line via the Elsevier website
at hftp: //www.elsevier.com/permissions.
First published 2004
 Second edition 2009
ISBN: 978-0-7020-2938-7
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
Notice
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constanfly changing. As new research and
 experience broaden our knowledge, changes in practice, treatment and drug therapy may
become necessary or appropriate. Readers are advised to check the most current informa-
tion provided (i) on procedures feafured or (i) by the manufacfurer of each product to be
administered, to verify the recommended dose or formula, the method and duration of
 administration, and contraindications. It is the responsibility of the practitioner, relying
on their own experience and knowledge of the pafient, to make diagnoses, to determine 
dosages and the best ftreafment for each individual pafient, and to take all appropriate
safety precautions. To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the Editors
assumes any liability for any injury and /or damage to persons or property arising out of
or related to any use of the material contained in this book.
Neither the Publisher nor the Editor assume any responsibility for any loss or injury
and/or damage to persons or propertfy arising out of or related to any use of the mate-
rial contained in this book. It is the responsibility of the treating practitioner, relying on
independent expertise and knowledge of the patient, to determine the best treaftment and
method of applicafion for the patient.
The Publisher
your source for books,
ELSEVIER
journals and multimedio
 in the health sciences
www.elsevierhealth.com
Working togcthcr to grow
libraries in developing countries
www.lsevier.cou | www.bxookil.org | www.salr.orzg
FL SEVIER
BOOK AIL)
 Sabre Foundation
The
publishers
 policy is to use
paper manufactured
from sustalnable forests
Printed in China
Contents
Foreword.
Vii
Preface.
ix
About the authors..
XI
 Acknowledgements .
X
SECTIONI
The dog and. cat........
Chapter 1
Principles of Cell Biology...
.3
Chapter 2
Tissues and Body Cavities.....
.15
Chapter 3
Skeletal System...
... 2.9
Chapter 4
Muscular System...
Chapter 5
Nervous System and Special Senses ...
..53
Chapter 6
Endocrine System.....
..71
Chapter 7
Blood Vascular System..
..77
Chapter 8
Respiratory System...
..89
Chapter 9
Digestive System...
...9.7
Chapter 10
Urinary Syster...
.111
Chapter 11
Reproductive System.....
..123
Chapter 12
Common Integument..
...143
SECTION 2
Exotic species
.149
Chapter 13
Birds.
..151
Chapter 14
Mammals...
...163
Chapter 15
Reptiles and Fish.
..1.77
Chapter 16
The Horse...
..189
References and recommended reading.
.207
Appendix 1
Introduction to Anatomical Terminology..
.09
Appendix 2 
Multiple Choice Questions.....
..213
Multiple Choice Answers....
..2244
Index....
.225
This page intentionally left blank
Foreword
The second edition of the Introduction to Veterinary Anatomy
The authors have presented the information using a variety of
and Physiology comes five years after the successful first ediftion.
methods including text, bullet points, tables, and clearly labelled
 The content has been developed and enhanced with new images
 diagrams and radiographs supporting the main part of the text.
and radiographs to further support the text. The book now incor
There is a continuity of style throughout the book with the use of
porates a chapter on Equine anatomy which will be a parficularly
italics highlighting key words within the text and a 'key points'
useful addition to allow for comparatives to be made between the
 section at the end of each chapter. A useful MCQ self-test appen-
horse and the dog and cat. This book is an eminently suitable text
dix will enable students to check their learning.
for certificate and undergraduate level veterinary nurses sfudy-
 I congratulate the authors on writing this Introduction to
ing via the small arimal and equine routes as well as a useful
Veterinary Anatomy and Physiology as it is a timely addition to
revision aid for those embarking on their Advanced Diploma. In
the veterinary textbooks currenfly available. I am sure that nurses
addition ift will be of huge value to those studying animal science
will remember this as the textbook that helped them succeed in 
programmes.
their anatomy and physiology examinaftions.
One very important feafure of the book is that if clearly relates
Bristol 2009
the anatomy and physiology to clinical cases seen within practice,
Andreajeffrey
which will enable sfudents to see the relevance of the subject that
they are being taught as it puts it into a clinical context.
This page intentionally left blank
Preface
Since its original publication five years ago Introduction to
Throughout this edition, in the boxed fragments, there is
Veterinary Anatomy and Physiology has become the standard text-
 emphasis on clinical conditions related to the anatomy and phys-
book for sfudent veterinary nurses sfudying for their NVQ Level
iology and these provide the reader wifh an insight into how the
2 qualification. Although the anatomy and physiology sylla-
patient is affected and the rafionale behind the freafment regime.
a s pre pa s so ss Aa a rg s
The book now includes new illustrations, both transmission
been reduced in the past few years, it is still important to real-
ize that when an animal is ill a basic knowledge of anatomy
radiographs, all of which help the student's understanding of the
 and physiology greatly facilitates the understanding of the dis-
subject.
 ease process and for this reason this textbook will continue to be
We felt justifiably proud of the first edition of Introduction to
essenfial reading for veterinary nurses.
Veterinary Anatomy and Physiology but now feel that the new addi-
Introduction to Veterinary Anatomy and Physiology is also used
tions to the text have resulted in a book that provides the reader
on many other animal science and animal care courses and in the
with increased informafion in an even more accessible format.
2nd edition we have widened its scope still further. Fundamental
We hope that all this will ensure fhe confinuing success of this
genetics has been added to the chapter on the reproductive sys-
textbook in the future.
tem and there is now a chapter on equine anatomy included in
VictoriaAspinall
Section 2. This chapter is based on the fact that many of the ana-
MelanieCappello
tomical systems of the horse are similar to those of the dog and
Gloucester and East Grinstead 2008
       e  
The chapter describes these systems in detail and describes the
key differences in the other systems.
This page intentionally left blank
About the authors
Victoria Aspinall BVSc MRCVS qualified from Bristol Uriversity
Melanie Cappello (O'Reilly) BSc(Hons) Zoology PGCE VN
in 1974 and went into small animal practice in Kings Lynn,
started out as a veterinary nurse, qualifying in 1990, and work-
Norfolk with her husband, who is also a vet. Affer five years,
ing in both mixed and small animal pracfice, before working at
the Royal Veterinary College (RVC) from 1991-1993. She then
set up a small animal practice in Gloucester. In 1991 Vicky was
left to undertake a degree in Zoology at University College
employed to help start the new Animal Care department at
London, where she graduated with honours in 1996. Affer
Harfpury College, Gloucester, and in 1993 was appointed Head
taking a break to start a family, Melanie then went into teach-
 Of Animal Care and Veterinary Nursing. In 1999 she started
Abbeydale Veterinary Training above her husband's practice and
nurses from 1998-2004, at the College of Arimal Welfare's RVC
is now a director of Abbeydale Vetlink Veterinary Training Ltd.
site. During this time she completed a Postgraduate Certificate
       -  s 
in Education.
 parents into the profession!
In June 2004 Melanie took up a post as Clinical Skills Tutor in
In the last few years, Vicky has wriffen arficles on veteri-
the RVC's new Clirical Skills Centre, which was the first of its
nary nursing subjects for the Veterinary Nursing Journal and the
kind in a UK veterinary school. She became parficularly inter-
Veterinary Nursing Times. She has also been responsible for a series
ested in the educafional aspects of clinical skills teaching and this
 -uos e uaaq seu pue AsoqoisAud pue Auojeue uo sNO I Jo
prompted her to pursue a Research Fellowship in the RVC's LIVE
tributor to several major veterinary nursing textbooks, includ-
Centre. She is now engaged in validating clinical skills teaching
ing BSAVA Textbook of Veterinary Nursing, 4th edifion. Vicky has
methods in veterinary educafion.
also acted as editor for Clinicai Procedures in Veterinary Nursing
Melanie has wriften a chapter on the evolution of the wolf
and The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing and has wriften
and the domestication of the dog for the Lltimate Dog Care
the companion to this book, Essentials of Veterinary Anatomy and
 Book and has co-authored (with Victoria Aspinall) the chapter
Physiology.
On anatomy and physiology in the BSAVA Textbook of Veterinary
Nursing, 4th edition.
This page intentionally left blank
Acknowledgements
The completion of this book would not have been possible with-
the chapter on The Horse and the many colleagues who have lent
out the continuing support of all the members of our respective
us material, in particular Panagiotis Mantis and Richard Aspinall 
families, including Richard, Polly, Charlie, William, Nico, Evelyn,
for the radiographs. Finally we would like to thank the team at
Ken, Sebastian, Elizabeth Matilda, Alexander and Rodolfo, who
Elsevier including Rita Demetriou-Swanwick, Joyce Rodenhuis
put up wifh starvafion and neglect, obsession wifth hiffing dead-
and Louisa Welch and everyone in fhe production team who have
lines, and our grumpiness!
been urfailingly helpful through all the good and bad times!
We would also like to thank Rachael Cook and Catherine
Phillips from Hartpury College in Gloucester who have wriften
SECTION
The dog and cat
Principles of cell biology 3
2
Tissues and body cavities 15
3
Skeletal system 29
Muscular system 45
5
Nervous system and special senses 53
Endocrine system 71
Blood vascular system 77
mm
Respiratory system 89
9
Digestive system 97
10
Urinary system 111
二
Reproductive system 123
12
Common integument 143
 This section describes the anatomy and physiology of the two
the dog and cat. Following an introduction to cell biology, each
body system is covered separately.
This page intentionally left blank
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
CHAPTER
Principles of cell biology
KEY POINTS
 All living organisms can be classified into different
 Cells grow and divide by means of mitosis. Each
orders, classes and families linked by certain common
mitotic division results in the production of two
characteristics. These groups can be further divided
 identical daughter cells containing the diploid (or
into a genus and species which describes an individual
normal) number of chromosomes.
type of organism.
The healthy body contains 60-70% water, distributed
The body is made up of a number of systems, each of
into two principal fluid compartments - the 
which has a specific function. These systems form the
extracellular fluid (surrounding the cells) and the
structural framework of the body or lie within one of
 intracellular fluid (within the cells).
three body cavities.
 Body fluids move between these compartments
 Each system consists of a collection of tissues and
and this movement is controlled by the chemical
organs which are comprised of the smallest units of
constituents of the fluid and the physical processes of
the body - the cells.
diffusion and osmosis.
 Cells can only be seen under the microscope and
 Body fluids contain inorganic and organic compounds.
all have a basic structure with certain anatomical
The structure and percentage of all of these is
 differences which adapt them to their specific function.
fundamental to the balance and normal function of
Each structure within the cell plays a vital part in 
the body. Within the body there are many systems
the normal function of the cell and therefore in the
 involved in maintaining a state of equilibrium - this is
normal function of the body system.
 known as homeostasis.
Anatomy and physiology are scientific terms used to describe
- sapads pue snuas e Aq pauapi are susnreio Sua ison
the study of the structure of the body (anatomy) and how the
a method known as the binomial system and invented by the
body actually 'works' (physiology). In this section, we will study
Swedish scienfist Carl Linnaeus.
the anatomy and physiology of the dog and cat. In Section 2, the
All the species wifhin the animal kingdom are divided into
anatomy and physiology of some of the most commonly kept
those with backbones - the vertebrates - and those that do not
exotic species and of the horse are covered. We start by look-
have backbones - the invertebrates, e.g. insects, worms, etc. The
ing at the basic urit of the body - the cell - and then work our
vertebrates are divided into eight classes. The classes that are of
way fhrough the tissues, organs and systems until the picfure is
the most veterinary imporfance are:
complete.
+ Amphibia - approximately 3080 species
Animal classification
● Aves or birds - approximately 8500 species
 au o ped st h ao yo padse Aue Supns um
● Mammalia - approximately 4070 species.
basic understanding of the classification system used to group
These classes are then further divided into orders, and so on, until
animals. How the species that one may meet in a veterinary prac-
a species is idenfified, as in Table 1.1.
fice fit into this classificafion system should also be understood.
 Most of this secfion of the book concerns the mammals, because
the majority of animals seen in veterinary practice will be from
groups, depending on how closely they are related in terms of
this class. The distincfive feafures of mammals are the production
their evolufion, strucfure and behaviour. The science of classifica-
of milk by the mammary glands and the possession of hair as a
tion is known as taxonomy.
body covering. Examples of mammalian orders include:
If orgarisms have certain basic feafures in common they are
+ Insectivores, e.g. shrews, moles
grouped together into a kingdom. For example, if an organism is
· Rodents, e.g mice, rats
composed of more fhan one cell, ie. it is multicellular, and obtains
+ Lagomorphs, e.g. rabbits, hares
its food by ingestion, it is placed in the animal kingdom. Other
· Carnivores, e.g. cats, dogs, bears, seals
kingdoms include plants and fungi. The animal kingdom is then
● Ungulates, e.g. cows, sheep, horses 
further subdivided, based upon similarifties of orgarisms, into
a hierarchical system (Table 1.1). This narrows the classificafion
+ Cetaceans, e.g. whales, dolphins
down until we evenfually reach a particular genus and species.
+ Primates, e.g. monkeys, apes.
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
Table I.l Classification of the domestic dog and cat
● Median plane - divides the body longitudinally into
symmefrical right and left halves, i.e. if can be described
Taxonomic
Dog
Cat
group
as 'the line down the middle of the animal' from nose to tail
+ Superficial - near to the surface of the body
 Kingdom
 Animal 
 Animal 
● Deep - closer to the centre of the body
Chordata (Vertebrate)
Chordata (Vertebrate)
● Cranial/anterior - towards the front of the animal, i.e. towards
the head
Class
Mammalia (Mammal)
Mammalia (Mammal)
● Caudal/posterior - towards the rear end or tail of the animal,
ie. away from the head
 Order
Carnivora
Carnivora
● Medial - structures that lie towards or near the median plane,
Canidae
 Felidae
i.e. closer to the middle of the arimal
Family
● Lateral - strucfures that lie towards the side of the animal,
snuag
Canis
Felis
i.e. away from the median plane
● Dorsal - towards or near the back or vertebral column of the
Species
familiaris
catus
animal and the corresponding surfaces of the head, neck and tail
Common name
op nsawoa
Domestic cat
● Ventral - towards or near the belly or lowermost surface of the
body and the corresponding surfaces of the head, neck and tail
● Rostral - towards the nose; this is used to describe the position
of structures on the head
Generally speaking, all mammals have a similar basic structural
● Proximal - strucfures or parf of the strucfure that lie close
plan in terms of anatomy and physiology, but each species has
to the main mass of the body, e.g. the 'top' of the limb that
been modified to suit its specific lifestyle. In other words, mam-
aftaches to the body; this is also used to describe parts that lie
mals have become specialised for activities such as running, dig-
 ging, gnawing, jumping and eating specific foods.
near the origin of a strucfure
● Distal - structures or part of the strucfure that lie away from the
 main mass of the body or origin, e.g. the free end of the limb
Anatomical definitions
● Palrmar - the rear surface of the fore paw that bears the
 When studying anatomy and physiology it is important to under-
footpads; the opposite surface (ie. the front surface of the
stand the terms that are used to describe where strucfures lie in
 paw) is the dorsal surface
relation to one another. These are illustrated in Figure 1.1 and
● Plantar - the rear surface of the hind paw that bears the
named as follows:
foofpads; the opposite surface (as above) is the dorsal surface.
Caudal
Median plane
Cranial
Caudal
Rostral
Dorsal
Dorsal
Proximal
plané
Ventral
Dista
Transverse_
Palmar
planes
Plantar
 xpoq aut ui sannis jo uoisod aelau aue aquosap ot pasn san pora pue saued peeu ii a
MO, p 3.)
Chapter 1  Principles of cell biology
The basic plan of the body
+ Organelles:
O Mitochondria
The body is made up of a number of systems and each of them
O Ribosomes
has a specific job, enabling the body to function effectively. These
O Rough endoplasmic reticulum
systems can be placed in one of three groups depending on thein
O Smooth endoplasmic reticulum
function:
O Golgi apparafus
● Structural systems - provide the basic'framework' and
transport system for the body
O Lysosomes
+ Coordinating systems - the control mechanisms of the body
O Centrosome.
● Visceral systems - includes all the basic functional systems that
Cell membrane
 do the general duties for the body; found within one of the
three body cavities: thoracic, abdominal and pelvic.
The cell membrane covers the surface of the cell and may also be
called the plasma membrane. It is responsible for separating the
cell from its environment and controls the passage of substances
Structura! systems
in and out of the cell. Carbohydrates are found on fhe surface of
● Skeletal systerm - the supporting frame upon which the body is
the cell membrane and it is believed that these help cell recog-
built, i.e. the bones and joints
 s n    e -  
contact with another cell of the same type. The cell membrane of
 moved to bring about locomofion (this relates to skeletal muscle
a mammalian cell is composed of a phospholipid bilayer (Fig. 1.4).
orly, the other categories of muscle are considered separately)
This is a double layer of phospholipid molecules and has protein
● Integument - the covering of the body, i.e. skin and hair
molecules embedded wifhin it.
● Cardiovascular system - transports the blood around the body.
The nafure of its strucfure means that the cell membrane is
 selectively permeable, allowing some substances to pass through
Coordinating systems
it while others may either be excluded or must travel across the
● Nervous system - carries information to and from the central
membrane by means of specialised transport systems. These
'control station' of the body, i.e. the brain; it controls and
include:
monitors the internal and external environment of the body
● Pores in the cell membrane - small molecules can pass through
● Endocrine system - controls the body's functions via a
these pores
communication system of chemical messengers or hormones.
● Simple diffusion - molecules that are soluble in lipids (or fats)
will passively dissolve in the lipid part of the cell membrane
Viscera! systems
 and diffuse across it; oxygen and water enter the cell in this
● Digestive systerm - responsible for taking in food and breaking it
way
down to its basic components so that the body can utilise them
● Facilitated diffusion - this is another type of passive diffusion,
● Respiratory system - responsible for taking in oxygen and
i.e. where the substance is moving down a concentration
 removing carbon dioxide
gradient, but the substance erlists the help of a carrier protein
to help ift across the membrane; glucose uses this method to
● Lrinary system - responsible for eliminating waste and toxic
enter the cell
substances from the body
● Active transport mechanisms - substances are usually being
● Reproductive system - responsible for producing offspring.
Each system of the body is made up of a collection of specific
concentraftion, i.e. they are travelling against a concentration
types of tissue arranged as organs. Each tissue is composed of a
gradient. This is like going up a steep hill - it is hard work
specialised type of cell (the smallest unit of the body).
transport mechanisms to cross the cell membrane use a carrier
protein to fransport them across. The 'cost for this service is
The mammalian cell
, s a qps st pue ar s a e
currency' - molecules of adenosine triphosphate (ATP).
Cells are the minute units of a tissue that can only be seen under a
 Sodium enters the celthis way.
microscope. Cells can be considered to be the basic strucfural and
functional unit of an organism. In fact they are like lile bodies'
Cytoplasm
fhemselves because they carry out a number of basic functions such
This is the fluid that fills the interior of the cell, providing it
as taking in nutrients and excreting waste, respiring or 'breathing'
with support. The nucleus and organelles are found within the
cytoplasm, along with solutes such as glucose, proteins and
ous strucfures that make up the cell - mainly by the organelles, or
ions.
liftle organs', that float within the cytoplasm of the cell.
Nucleus
Cell structure and function
The nucleus is the informafion cenfre of the cell. It is sur-
rounded by a nuclear membrane and contains the chromosomes.
The components of a cell are shown in Figures 1.2 and 1.3 and are
as follows:
which carries fhe informafion for protein synthesis. DNA is
· Cell membrane
the ‘set of instructions' that tells the cell how to function, and
●Nucleus
these instructions are then passed on to the cell's descendants.
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
Centrioles
Flagellum
Freeribosomes
Nuclear envelope
Nucleus
Nucleolus
Cillia
Mitochondrion
Ribosomes
Lysosome-
Centrosome
Cell membrane
 Rough endoplasmic
reticulum
 Smooth endoplasmic
reticulum
Fig. I.2 Components of the mammalian cell. With permission from Colville T, Bassett JM 200l Clinical anatomy and physiology
for veterinary technicians. Mosby, St Louis, MO, p I1.)
The nucleus also contains several nucleoli, where the ribosomes
● Ribosomes - these float free in the cytoplasm and are the site
(see below) are manufactured.
for protein synthesis within the cell.
● Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) - this is a network of membrane-
Organelles
lined interconnected tubes and cavifies wifhin the
● Mitochondria - these are responsible for cellular respiration and
cytoplasm of the cell. There are fwo types of endoplasmic
reficulum:
are the site where energy is extracted from food substances
and stored in a form fhat the cell car use: ATP Adenosine
O Rongh endoplasmic reticulum (Fig 1.3) is so called because it
has numerous ribosomes aftached to its surface and thus
and a highly folded inner membrane, which increases the
 adossnut e run pama uam yn, sreadde
surface area on which ATP production can take place (Figs
been synthesised by ribosomes. Some of these proteins 
1.2, 1.3). Mifochondria are found in abundance in cells that
are very active in terms of energy consumption, e.g. skeletal
are not required by the cell in which they are made but 
muscle. When a cell requires energy if uses its store of ATP
are 'exported' outside the cell, e.g. digestive enzymes and
molecules. The energy itselfis stored in the bond that connects 
hormones.
the phosphate group to the rest of the molecule (Fig. 1.5). If one
O Smooth endoplasmic reticulum is so called because it does
of these phosphate groups is 'snapped off the molecule, the
 not have ribosomes on its surface; its functions include the
bond is broken and energy is released. The remaining molecule
synthesis and transport of lipids and steroids.
is now called adenosine diphosphate (ADP), because it now
· The Golgi apparatus or body - this is a stack of flattened sacs
( =   = ) o pe so adsd om A s
within the cytoplasm (Fig. 1.2). Its function includes the
However, the cell needs only to re-aftach another phosphate
modification of some of the proteins produced by the cell
group (carried out as part of the cell's metabolic processes) and
(adding a carbohydrate component) and it plays a part in the 
energy can be stored once more as ATP.
formafion of lysosomes.
 Chapter 1 Principles of cell biology
Fig I.3 Transmission electron micrograph of a plasma cell showing extensive rough endoplasmic reticulum and scattered
St Louis, MO, p 86.)
Carbohydrate
Globular protein molecules
Phospholipid molecules
Pore
P
8nm
Fig. I.4 Structure of the cell membrane showing the phospholipid
Energy
bilayer This structure is also known as the fluid mosaic model'.
● Lysosomes - these are membrane-bound sacs that contain
lysozymes or digestive enzymes. Their function is to digest
 materials taken in by the cell during the process of phagocytosis
or endocytosis (Fig. 1.6). Lysosomes also destroy worn ouft
C
Organelles wifthin the cell and, in some cases, the cell itself.
Fig. I.5 The conversion of ATP to ADP to release energy.
+ Centrosome and centrioles - the cenfrosome contains a pair of
AThe ATP molecule has three phosphate groups (P) attached by
 rod-like structures called centrioles. These lie at right angles to
chemical bonds; energy is stored within the bonds. B One of the
each other and are involved in cell division (see mitosis).
phosphate groups is 'snapped off, releasing energy. C The remaining
● Cilia and flagella - these are extensions of the plasma
molecule (ADP with two phosphate groups) goes back into the
membrane seen on some cells of the body. Cilia are found
metabolic cycle and has a phosphate group reattached, becoming
in large numbers on the outer surface of the cells and are
ATP again.
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
G
-Particle
membrane (Fig. 1.6). The pocket seals off, forming a vesicle that
contains the material being brought into the cell. This separates
Cell membrane
from the cell surface, moves into the cell's interior and fuses with
a lysosome, containing lysozymes, which digest the vesicle con-
tents. The process of phagocytosis is also used to remove foreign
-Nucleus
particles such as invading bacteria (see blood cells).
Cell division
 The cells of the body are classified into two types:
● Somatic cells - these include all the cells of the body except
G
Vesicle
those involved in reproduction. Somafic cells divide by mitosis
and contain the diploid number of chromosomes.
● Germ cells - these are the ova (within the ovaries) and fhe
spermatozoa (wifhin the testes). Germ cells divide by meiosis
and contain the haploid number of chromosomes.
Mitosis
The fissues of the body grow, particularly when the animal is
young, and are able to repair themselves when damaged. This is
achieved by the process of mitosis in which the somaftic cells of
the body make idenfical copies of themselves. The cells replicate
by dividing into two - a process called binary fission. However,
before they can do this they must first make a copy of all the
order to function normally. This information is carried in the
O
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) of the chromosomes within the
nucleus of the parent cell. The normal number of chromosomes
is described as fhe diploid number and before cell division takes
place fhe chromosomes are duplicated (Fig. 1.7).
Mitosis can be divided into four active stages, followed by a
'resting' stage (called interphase), during which the new daugh-
ter cells grow and prepare for the next division. Interphase is
not actually a resting stage because it is during this stage that
the DNA replicates in preparation for the next mitosis. The
centrioles have also replicated by the start of the new mitotic
division. The four active stages of mitosis are:
I. Prophase - the nuclear membrane breaks down and the
chromosomes confract and become shorter, fafter and
more distinct. The idenfical pairs of chromosomes have
not yet separated and are referred to as the chrormatids.
The chromatids are held together at a region called the
Fig. I.6 Phagocytosis. A A small particle (e.g. bacterium) is present
centromere. The centrioles are now found at the opposite
outside the cell. BThe cell membrane invaginates and starts to enclose
poles or ends of the cell and spindle fibres start to form.
the particle. C The cell membrane completely surrounds the particle
These are 'threads' passing from the centriole at one pole to
and seals it offin a vesicle. D The vesicle detaches from the membrane
the centriole at the other pole.
and enters the cel.E A lysosome, containing digestive enzymes, fuses
with the phagocytic vesicle containing the particle and the particle is
2. Metaphase - the chromosomes line up in the middle of the cell
 (known as the equator) and the chromatids draw apart at the 
destroyed.
cenfromere.
3. Anaphase - the chromosomes aftach to the spindle fibres
responsible for creating a wave-like mofion that moves fluid
and as fhese confract it moves the chromatids towards the
such as mucus and debris over the cell surface. Flagella are
opposite poles of the cell.
usually single and longer than cilia and move the cell along
4. Telophase - the chromatids will be the chromosomes of the
by undulating movements. The only example of a flagellum in
daughter cells. The spindle fibres break down and the nuclear
mammals is the tail of a spermatozoon.
membrane reforms. The cell starts to constrict across fhe
Materials can either be taken into the cell or exported out of if.
middle and continues until it is divided into fwo. Each of
These processes are called endocytosis and exocytosis respectively.
a a, ro sird a go sa omi are 
parent cell, and both contain the full set of chromosomes,
and pinocytosis or 'cell drinking'. During both these processes fhe
known as the diploid number The chromosomes then
cell surface folds to make a small pocket that is lined by the cell
unravel and the cell refurns to interphase.
 Chapter 1  Principles of cell biology
Interphase
Prophase
Nuclear
Centromere
Four different
membrane
chromosomes
Nuclear membrane
Cell membrane
begins to break down
Cytoplasm
 Chromosomes become visible and cell prepares
Each chromosome replicates, forming two chromatids
 s
 joined at the centromere
Metaphase
Anaphase
Fibrous
 Chromosomes or chromatids become arranged
Chromatids separate and move along
along the equator of the cell 
the spindl to opposite poles of the cell
Nuclear
membrane
Telophase
forms
Daughter cells
Cytoplasm begins to divide and nuclear
Two identical daughter cells, each containing the
 membrane begins to reform
diploid number of chromosomes, are produced
Fig. I.7 Mitosis - the cell division seen in somatic cells.
The resting cell is in interphase before meiosis begins. The
Mitosis results in the production of two identical daughter cells, each
eight stages are as follows (see also Fig. 1.8):
of which is identical to the parent cell and contains the diploid number 
 of chromosomes.
I. Prophase - this takes longer than prophase in mitosis.
The homologous (idenfical) chromosomes lie side by
side and duplicate; each pair is joined at the centromere.
These chromosomes may become entangled and pieces of
Meiosis
one chromosome may become aftached to another - this
This is the process by which the germ cells divide within the
     s, s m si ss
 Ovary of the female and the testis of the male. Meiosis results in
characteristics of the offspring.
the production of ova or sperm containing half the normal num-
ber of chromosomes (the haploid number). Meiosis must occur
2. Metaphase I - the homologous pairs of chromosomes come
before fertilisation, when a sperm penetrates the ovum and
to lie along the line of the equator of the cell and the fibrous
the fwo nuclei fuse. If those two nuclei had the diploid num-
spindle starts to form.
    s n  s  
3. Anaphase I- the pairs separate and the chromatids
would have twice the normal number and abnormalifies would
 migrate along the spindle fibres towards the poles of 
develop.
the cell.
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
10
4. Telophase I- the cytoplasm begins to divide but the nuclear
7. Anaphase II - the chromafids pull apart and migrate towards
membrane does not reform. In some cells, the cytoplasm does
the poles of the cells.
not divide completely and a dumb-bell shaped cell is seen -
8. Telophase II - the cytoplasm begins fo divide, the
fhis is known as a syncytium. Telophase Iis the first meiotic
nuclear membrane reforms and four identical daughter
division.
cells are formed. Telophase II is the second meiotic division.
5. Prophase II - this may be fransitory as there is no need to
replicate the chromosomes.
Meiosis results in the production of four identical daughter cells, each of 
which is non-identical to the parent cell and contains the haploid number
6. Metaphase II - the chromosomes arrange themselves along the
 of chromosomes.
equator and the spindle fibres appear.
Interphase
Prophase
Metaphase I
Cell
Fibrous
membrane
spindle
Nuclear
membrane
Cytoplasm
Two pairs of identical chromosomes
Each chromosome replicates;
 Chromatids arrange in pairs along
 Anaphase I/Telophase I
crossing-over may occur
the equator of the cell 
XX
First
XX
meiotic division
Syncytium
Chromatids migrate to the poles and the cell starts to divide
Two identical daughter cells, each containing the diploid number
of chromosomes
 Prophase Il - transitory - no chromosome replication
Metaphase Il
Anaphase Il
Chromosomes arrange themselves along the equator of the 
Chromatids migrate to the poles
 cell and the fibrous spindle forms
Telophase Il
0000
Second
meiotic division
Nuclearmembrane
 Each cell divides and the nuclear membrane begins to reform
 Four identical cells, each containing the haploid number of
 chromosomes. These cells are not identical to the parent cell
Fig. I.8 Meiosis - the cell division seen in the germ cells.
Chapter 1  Principles of cell biology
Plasma takes up about 5% of body weight. It forms the medium
The chemistry of the body
in which the blood cells are transported wifhin the blood-vascular
system. It is rich in proteins, termed plasma proteins. Transcellular
The cells, and therefore the tissues and organs, which are all made
fluid is formed by active secretory mechanisms and its volume
of cells, are composed of chemicals. It is important to be able to
varies. It is considered to take up about 1% of body weight and
it includes fluids such as cerebrospinal fluid, digestive juices and
 part wifhin the body. Chemical compounds can be divided into
lymph. Interstitial fluid takes up 15% of body weight and lies out-
two groups:
side the blood vascular system, surrounding the cells. It is formed
+ Organic compounds are those that contain the element
from the blood by a process of ultrafiltration - small molecules
carbon
and ions are separated from larger molecules and cells. The
● Inorganic compounds are all those compounds that do not
pressure in the blood vascular system forces the fluid through
contain carbon.
fhe walls of the capillaries. This acts like a sieve, holding back
Both groups are found in the body, but let us first look at the most
the large plasma protein molecules and the cellular components
of the blood and allowing everything else to go through. Thus,
interstifial fluid is similar to plasma but without the blood cells
(H,O).
and protein molecules. Interstiftial fluid is the mediuum in which
the cells are bathed and from it the cells extract all that they need,
Water content of the body
pm  re go p j a su pe x se ns
An individual mammalian cell contains approximately 80%
waste products into it.
Water or fluid provides the medium in which all the body's
water. In fact, 60-70% of the whole body's weight is water, which
biochemical reactions take place and is thus essential to maintain
is divided into two main body compartments: intracellular and
the body's internal environment in a state of balance - this is a
extracellular water.
process known as homeostasis. Body water and the chemical sub-
stances wifhin it constanfly move around the body. The biologi-
Intracellular fluid (ICF) is that which is found inside the cells of the
 cal processes that are responsible for this movement are diffusion
body and can be subdivided into the fluid within the blood cells and
and osmosis.
the fluid in all other cells. ICF takes up 40% of total body weight.
Diffusion
Extracellular fuid (ECF) is that which lies outside the cells, i.e. the
surrounding environment of the cells. ECF takes up 20% of total
Diffusion (Fig. 1.9A) is the movement of molecules of a liquid
body weight and includes the fluid in which the blood cells are
or a gas down a concenfrafion gradient, i.e. from a region where
suspended (the plasma), the fluid within the lymphatic system and the
they are at a high concenfrafion to a region where they are at a
cerebrospinal fluid (the transcellular fluid), and the fluid that surrounds
lower concenfrafion. Diffusion will occur until an equilibrium is
all the other cells of the body (the interstitial or tissue fluid).
reached, i.e. until the concentration equalises out. Diffusion takes
place where there is no barrier to the free movement of molecules
A
Fig. I.9A Diffusion. Molecules in solution are active and constantly collide into one another With time, they become evenly
distributed throughout the liquid, having moved down concentration gradients from areas of high concentration to those of
low, until equilibrium is reached. Diffusion occurs when there is no barrier to free movement and it occurs more rapidly in
asa lallio wo uoissad ye sanadwatauay re are aow ae sanoalo se sauo pio ui ueue sinbilro
JM 200 I Clinical anatomy and physiology for veterinary technicians. Mosby St Louis, MO, p 24.)
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
12
Higher concentration
Higher concentration
Volume
Volume
of solution such as HO
of solute such as salt
decreases
increases
pressure
Semipermeable
membrane
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
B
Step I
Step 2a
Step 2b
Fig. I.9B Osmosis. Step I: Smaller molecules of solution in side (a) can pass through the semi-permeable membrane into
apis jo awnjon aut (q) apis ot (e) apis wouy sanow uonjos s# :oz dans rouuen ainjos jo sainzalow Jauel aut inq (q) aps
oely kq paslaaau aq uen sisows :az dans sapis yioq uo awes aut si ainios jo uoeuauon aut lun saseauoui (a)
(e) apis ot aueqwaw aqeawad-was aut yanouut yoeq uonios saoy sul (a) apis uo paoed si anssaud ymnepky uaum
MO, p 25.)
or ions and is very important in their movement in and out of cells.
Fluid balance
However, it can only occur if the particle size is small enough to
Water is constantly moving within the body, e.g. from the intersti-
 pass through the cell membrane. If the molecules are too large,
tial fluid into the cells, from the plasma to the tissue fluid, etc., but
then anofher process takes place in order to achieve equilibrium
it is also continually lost from the body and must be replaced to
- this is known as osmosis.
is lost through the respiratory system (expired air contains water
Osmosis
vapour), and in the urine and faeces. Dogs and cats do not sweat
s        (  s
appreciably but do lose heat and water through panting. Water is
 permeable membrane from a fluid of low concentration to one of a
also lost in the tears, which are produced constanfly to moisten
higher concentration, which continues until the fwo concentra-
the eye, and in vaginal secrefions. Water is taken into the body
tions are equal. The water can be considered to be diffusing along
through drinking fluids and from the water content of food.
a concenfration gradient. A semi-permeable membrane allows
 Fluid losses may be increased in sick or injured animals, e.g.
some substances through but not others. Osmosis is responsible
for water movement from the interstifial fluid into the cells.
metra) or blood loss. This can lead to dehydration, which may have
 A solution consists of the molecules of one substance (the sol-
serious consequences such as reduction of the circulating blood
ute) dissolved in another substance (the solvent). In the body, the
volume, known as hypovolaemic shock. In a normal adult animal,
 n          
about 60% of the total bodyweight is water. This percentage will be
nance of the fluid volume wifhin the body fluid comparfments.
slightly lower if the animal is old or very obese (faffy tissue con-
A solution can be described as having an osmotic pressure. This
tains little water) and slightly higher in young or thin arimals.
is the pressure needed to prevent osmosis from occurring and is
dependent on the number of parficles, both dissolved and undis-
solved, in the solution; e.g. if the osmotic pressure of the plasma is
Typical daily water loss is: 20 ml per kg bodyweight in the urine; 1 0-20mL
high, water will flow into the blood to equalise the concenfration;
per kg bodyweight in the faeces;: and 20 ml per kg bodyweight through the
if the osmotic pressure of the plasma is low, water will flow out of
loss of water vapour in expired air and panting and in body secretions - a
the blood into the tissue spaces.
total of 50-60mL of water per kg of bodyweight daily Thus an adult healthy
animal should take in 50-60mL of water per kg bodyweight per day to
 balance the normal fluid loss, e.g an animal weighing 20kg will need
The osmotic pressure or tonicity of a rehydrating fluid is described
1000-1200mL of water each day.
relative to the osmotic pressure of blood plasma as follows:
 Isotonic - fluid has the same osmotic pressure as plasma
 Hypotonic - fluid has a lower osmotic pressure than plasma
Inorganic compounds
 Hypertonic - fluid has a higher osmotic pressure than plasma.
This is important in selecting fluids for rehydration therapy - most 
There are a number of other inorganic compounds that are also
 fluids used are isotonic. The replacement fluid must be as close as
essential to the functions of the body: minerals, acids and bases.
possible in tonicity and electrolyte content to what has been lost
It is important to be familiar with some basic chemical defiritions
from the body.
when considering these substances. Everything is composed
of atoms, and an elerment is a substance that is composed of
Chapter 1  Principles of cell biology
13
only one kind of atom, e.g. the element oxygen consists only of
Organic compounds
Oxygen atoms. Molecules consist of two or more atoms linked by a
chemical bond. A substance whose molecules contain more than
These are compounds that are based on fhe element carbon. The
one type of atom is called a cormpound.
other main elements found in organic compounds are oxygen
When dissolved in water, fhe molecules of many substances
   s    o 
break apart into charged particles, called ions. This charge may
orgaric compounds found in the body are carbohydrates, pro
eifher be negative or posifive: ions with one or more posifive
teins and fats.
charges are called cations and ions with one or more negative
charges are called anions.
Carbohydrates
An electrolyte is a chemical substance that, when dissolved in
 Carbohydrates contain carbon, hydrogen and oxygen and are also
water, splits into ions and is thus capable of conducting an elec-
pue Aiaua jo amos jueodu ue are srens srens se umo
tric current. Sodium chloride (NaCl) is an example of an electro-
the most common simple sugar in the body is glucose (Fig. 1.10).
lyte in the body, its ions being sodium (Nat) and chloride (Cl-) in
 Simple sugars can join together to form more complex carbohy-
solution.
ride, e.g. glycogen - which is the form in which glucose is stored
Minerais
in the body. Carbohydrates are obtained from food and are then
 The principal cations in the body are sodium (Nat), potassium
 broken down during digestion into simple sugars so that they can
(K+), calcium (Ca?+) and magnesium (Mg2+). The principal anions
 be absorbed through the mucous membrane of the digestive sys-
include chloride (Cl-) and bicarbonate (HCO,-). These ions are
tem into the blood and utilised by the body.
essenfial to the functions of the body and it is vital that they are
present in sufficient and balanced quanfifies. Sodium and chlo
Lipids
ride are mainly found in the exfracellular fluid, while potassium
Lipids include the fats, which are compounds of fafty acids and
is mainly found in the infracellular fluid (i.e. inside the cells). The
glycerol (Fig. 1.11) and are also made up of carbon, hydrogen and
concentraftion of these ions is important in the regulation of fluid
Oxygen. Fafty acids are the main form in which fats are trans-
balance between the intracellular and extracellular fluid. This bal
ported in the blood after the breakdown of lipids obtained from
ance is maintained by special 'pumps' in the cell membrane. An
food. Although carbohydrates provide the most direct source of
imbalance will lead to significant problems; e.g. sodium affects
energy for the body, fats can also yield a large amount of energy.
the osmotic pressure of the blood and so influences blood volume
 oq n   a     a 
and pressure; a high concenfration of potassium in the exfracel-
lular fluid can disrupt heart function.
Calcium, phosphorus and magnesium are important min-
CH,OH
erals that are found in storage in bone fissue. Calium is
contraction, nerve conducfion and blood clofting. Iron and copper
are also essential to normal body function, iron being an essenfial
component of the haemoglobin in red blood cells.
H
Acids and bases
OH
An acid is a compound that can release hydrogen ions when dis-
OH
solved in solution. Compounds that can accept or take in hydro
gen ions are called bases or alkalis. The acidity of a solution is
expressed as its pH, which is the measure of the hydrogen ion
 concentration. The pH scale is from O-14, with a pH of 7 being
H
OH
neutral. A solution wifh a pH less than 7 is acidic (the lower the
number the higher the acidity, i.e. the greater the concenfration of
Fig. I.10 Chemical structure of a simple carbohydrate -the sugar
hydrogen ions). A solution with a pH above 7 is basic or alkaline
gucose.
(the higher the number the more alkaline the solution).
The pH of body fluids is 7.35 and it is important that the body maintains
this level. Within the respiratory system and kidney there are homeostatic
 processes to maintain the correct acid/base balance.
H
HO
When the normal pH of the body is disrupted the animal may
H
OH
show an acidosis, i.e. a decreased blood pH, or an alkalosis, ie. an
increased blood pH. A respiratory acidosis may develop if the animal
 holds its breath, allowing carbon dioxide levels to rise and oxygen
H
OH
levels to fall; a respiratory alkalosis occurs during rapid panting.
which lowers carbon dioxide levels. A metabolic acidosis may occur
as a complication of diabetes mellitus and a metabolic alkalosis as a
H
result of excessive vomiting and diarrhoea.
Fig. I.II Chemical structure of glycerol.
14
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
form that it can use - ATP. Energy cannot be created or destroyed,
if is just moved around or else changes its form; for example, elec
 trical energy can be converted to heat energy or it can be stored
as potential energy that is released when the compound in which
the energy is stored is broken down. In the body of an arimal,
 energy comes from the oxidation of glucose, i.e. a reaction involv-
ing oxygen and glucose.
HQ
Lel
AsP
H
Arg)
Amino group
Acid group
Ala
Fig. I.12 General structure of an amino acid. The 'R' group varies from
amino acid to amino acid.
Primary structure
the linear sequence of ar
eptide
used when required. Other functions of lipids include insulation
of the body itself and of nerves, and in the formafion of cell mem-
branes and synthesis of steroids.
Proteins
Proteins are built up from subunits called amino acids (Fig. 1.12).
Proteins differ from carbohydrates and lipids in that they always
contain nitrogen in addifion to carbon, hydrogen and oxygen.
They may also contain other elements such as sulphur, phos-
Secondary structure
phorus and iodine. When fwo amino acids are joined together
the repeating pattern in the
by a peptide link they form a dipeptide. The addition of more
e.g. an αx-helix
amino acids (a process called polymerisation) leads to the forma-
tion of a polypeptide. A protein consists of one or more polypep-
tide chains, which are then coiled and folded to give the specific
strucfure of a particular protein (Fig. 1.13).
 Proteins generally fall into one of two groups:
● Globular - the functional proteins. These are associated
with cellular chemical reacfions and include hormones and
enzymes
● Fibrous - the strucfural proteins. These are insoluble and are
 part of the composition of various structures in the body. They
include keratin, collagen and elastin.
By means of digestive enzymes the body breaks down the pro-
Tertiary structure -
teins acquired from the diet into their constifuent amino acids,
the three-dimensional folding
ondary structure
which can then be absorbed through the mucous membrane of
the digestive system into the blood.
Chemica! reactions in the body
 Most of the chemical reactions that take place in the body require
the presence of a functional protein compound called an enzyme.
 g  d s n ss   s
cal reacfions in the body. Enzymes are involved in the breakdown
of food in the digestive system but are also involved in the many
metabolic processes that are carried out within cells.
 A chemical reaction that requires an input of energy is called an anabolic
Quaternary structure -
reaction. A chemical reaction that releases energy is a catabolic reaction.
the three-dimensional arrangement of more than one tertiary
The sum of the energy use, i.e. the gain and loss is the total metabolism.
polypeptide
Fig. I.l13 The structure of a protein. It is not only the sequence of
 All animals require energy and this is provided by raw materi-
amino acids, but also the arrangement of the polypeptide chains, which
als obtained from food. This is then converted by the body into a
determines the characteristics of a protein.
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
CHAPTER
2
Tissues and 
cavities
KEY POINTS
 The cells of the body are arranged into four basic tissue
smooth muscle within the internal organs of the body
types: epithelial, connective, muscle and nervous tissue.
and cardiac muscle found only in the myocardium of
 Epithelial tissue covers the outside of the body and
 the heart wall. Control of striated muscle is voluntary.
lines all the body cavities and the structures within 
while that of smooth and cardiac muscle is involuntary
them. Its primary function is to protect but in some 
and brought about by branches of the autonomic
areas it may also be absorbent or secretory. Secretory
nervous system.
epithelial tissue forms glands.
 Nervous tissue is found all over the body and
 Connective tissue is found in varying forms such as
its function is to conduct nerve impulses to and from
blood, fibrous connective tissue, cartilage and bone.
 parts of the body and the central nervous system.
Its main function is to connect and support the parts 
The body is divided into three body cavities, which
 of the body, but it also carries nutrients to the tissues
contain the visceral systems. The thoracic and
and conducts waste material away.
abdominal cavities are lined with a single layer of
Muscle tissue brings about the movement of the body.
serous epithelial tissue, which is named according to
It is found as striated muscle attached to the skeleton,
 its location within the cavity.
Within the body individual cells are grouped together to form
external surfaces of the body. Its main function is to protect delicafe
fissues and organs. Thus:
structures lying beneath it but in some areas the epithelium may
● A tissue is a collection of cells and their products in which one
be secretory, e.g. glands, or absorbent, e.g. in the small intestine.
 a r    s   a s
● An organ is a collection of tissues forming a structure within
blood vessels and lymph vessels is referred to as endothelium.
 an animal that is adapted to perform a specific purpose,
Epithelium may be described according to the number of
e.g. liver, larynx, kidney
layers of cells, i.e. its thickness:
● A system is a collection of organs and tissues that are related
● If an epithelium is one cell thick it is said to be simple (Fig. 2.1)
by function, e.g. the respiratory system.
● If there is more fhan one layer it is said to be stratified or
cormpound (Fig. 2.1).
The thickness of the epithelium reflects its ability to protect: the
Body tissues
more layers of cells, the more protection is provided. The epifthe-
 Each tissue type consists of three main components:
protection when walking on rough surfaces, while the epithe-
● Cells - one fype forms the majority of the cells and gives the
lium over the abdominal wall is only a few cells thick and addi-
tissue type its name, e.g muscle tissue consists mainly of
tional protection is provided by fur. Further protection may be
muscle cells
provided by the presence of the protein keratin. The epithelium is
● Intercellular products - these are produced by the cells and lie
described as being a keratinised stratified epithelium and this type
 in the spaces between them
can be seen in claws and nails.
● Fluid - interstitial fluid flows through specialised channels
 Epithelium may also be described according to the shape of
running through the tissue.
the cells within it (Fig. 2.1). There are three basic shapes of epi
thelial cell:
There are four main types of tissue:
● Epithelial - protects the body; may also be secretory and
+ Squamons cells - flaftened in shape
absorbent
+ Cuboidal cells - square or cube-shaped
● Connective - binds the tissues together
+ Columnar cells - column-shaped (the height is greater than fthe
● Muscle - brings about movement
width) (Fig. 2.2).
● Nervous - conveys nerve impulses from one area to another
The full classification of the type of epithelium is based upon the
 and coordinates the response.
shape of the cell and the number of layers present. There are a
number of different types of epithelial tissue in the body, these
Epithelial tissue
include:
● Simple cuboidal epithelium - this is the least specialised type of
Epithelial fissue or epitheliurm covers the surface of the body and
epithelium. It is one cell thick and the cells are cube-shaped.
fhe organs, cavifies and tubes within it - it covers the internal and
Cuboidal epithelium lines many of the glands and their
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
16
Simple cuboidal
● Simple columnar epithelium - this has tall narrow cells and is
Free surface
one layer thick. Generally, simple columnar epithelium lines
organs that have an absorptive function, e.g. the small and
(Fig. 2.2).
· Ciliated epithelium - this is a more specialised epithelium
consisting of a single layer of column-shaped cells (Figs
2.1, 2.3). The free surface of the cells has tiny hair-like
Nucleus
projections called cilia whose function is to 'waft' foreign
Basement membrane
particles along the epithelial surface and out of the body.
Cytoplasm
it helps to trap solid particles that have been inhaled,
 Simple squamous
respiratory system. The uterine tubes are also lined with
ciliated epithelium, which helps to move the fertilised egg
Simple columnar
along the reproductive tract.
of cells and is thicker and tougher than the other types of
epithelium. It is found in areas that are subjected to wear and
to friction and shearing forces, e.g. the epidermis of the skin.
(see p. 44). Pseudostratified epithelium (Fig. 2.3) appears to be
Ciliated
multilayered because of the irregular positioning of the nuclei
but is acfually a single layer of cells. This may be found in
areas such as the frachea.
· Transitional epithelium - a type of specialised stratified
epithelium found lining parts of the urinary system,
i.e. sfrucfures and fubes that are capable of considerable
distension and variafions in internal pressure and capacity,
such as the bladder and ureters. The cell are able to change
Glandular
 appearance varies with the degree of distension of the
strucfure.
Glands
Mucus-secreting
Glandular tissue is a modification of epithelial tissue. The epifhe-
Stratified
cell
lium, in addition to its protective function, may also be a secretory
membrane. Glands are either:
● Lnicellular glands - these have individual secretory cells that
are interspersed throughout the tissue. The most common
type is the goblet cell (Fig. 2.4), which secretes clear sticky
mucus direcfly on to the membrane surface. The epifthelium
 is known as a mucous membrane. Mucus traps paricles,
providing extra protection, and also lubricates the epithelial
surface. Mucous membranes are found covering the oral
cavify, lining the vagina and the trachea and in many other
parts of the body.
Formative layer
of cells at base
● Multicellular glands - these consist of many secretory cells
folded to form more complex glands. They vary in shape and
Fig. 2.I The different types of epithelium found in the body.
intricacy relafing to their position and function in the body.
 Examples of some of the types of gland found in the body
are shown in Figure 2.5.
ducts. This type of epithelium has an absorptive or secretory
function depending on its location in the body, e.g. lining the
renal fubules.
Glands may be categorised as either:
 Exocrine glands - these have a system of ducts through which their
● Simple squamous epithelium - this type has flaftened cells and
secretory products are transported directly to the site where they will 
 is one layer thick. Simple squamous epithelium is thin and
delicate and is found in areas of the body where the covering
be used 
 Endocrine glands - do not have a duct system (ductless glands) and
surface needs to be easily permeable to molecules such as
their secretions,known as hormones, are carried by the blood to their
 Oxygen, e.g. lining the blood vessels and the alveoli of the
target organ,which may be some distance away (see Ch. 6).
lungs.
Chapter 2 Tissues and body cavities
Fig. 2.2 Light micrograph of the mucosa
of the small intestine showing a simple
columnar epithelium with a border of
microvilli that increase the surface area for
absorption. (Taken from D. Samuelson.
Textbook ofVeterinary Histology.
Saunders. 2007, p 42.)
Fig. 2.3 Photomicrograph of the lining of
the trachea showing a pseudostratifed cili-
ated columnar epithelium (Taken from
D. Samuelson.Textbaok of Veterinary Histology.
Saunders. 2007, p 43.)
Connective tissue
4. Adipose or fatty tissue
 5. Fibrous connective tissue or dense connective tissue
Connective fissue is responsible for supporting and holding all
the organs and tissues of the body in place. It also provides the
6. Cartilage
transport system within the body, carrying nutrients to the tis-
7. Bone.
sues and waste products away. Connective fissue consists of cells
embedded in an exfracellular matrix or ground substance. The
properties of this ground substance depend on the type of con-
Blood
nective tissue. There are many types of connective tissue which,
Blood is a specialised connecfive fissue fthat circulates
in order of increasing densify are:
through the blood vessels to carry nutrients and oxygen to the
1. Blood
sists of a number of different types of blood cell wifthin a fluid
2. Haemopoietic tissue
ground substance - the plasma. (This is covered in more detail
3. Areolar tissue or loose connective tissule
in Ch. 7).
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
18
Fig. 2.4 Photomicrograph of goblet cells
within a pseudostratifed ciliated columnar
epithelium (Taken from D). Samuelson. Text-
book of Veterinary Histology. Saunders, p 64.)
Haemopoietic tissue
fibrous fissue linking muscles to bone; and ligaments, which
This jelly-like connective fissue forms the bone marrow within
link bone to bone
the long bones and is responsible for the formafion of the blood
● Irregularly interwoven fibres - this is seen in the dermis of the
cells (see Ch. 7).
skin and in the capsules of joints, as well as in organs such as
the testes and lymph nodes. Irregular dense connective tissue
Areolar tissue
is often found in sheets and forms the basis of most fascias
9 s) anss aos aso rn (ss S) re
and aponeuroses.
2.7) is the most widely distributed type of connective tissue
Cartilage
and is found all over the body, e.g. beneath the skin, around
 blood vessels and nerves, between and connecting organs and
between muscle bundles. The ground substance contains a loose
ible and resilient and is able to bear weight (Fig. 2.10). It is com-
weave work of two types of protein fibre: collagen fibres, with a
posed of cells (known as chondrocytes) and fibres within a gel-like
high tensile strength secreted by the main cell type (the fibro-
 ground substance. Cartilage has no blood supply and its nutri-
blast) and elastic fibres, which enable the fissue to stretch and
    s   s sn 
 refurn to its former shape. Fat cells may be present in varying
surrounds it.
quantities depending on location and the degree of obesity of
fhe animal. Macrophages, cells which are capable of phagocyto-
sis, are also present.
There are three types of cartilage:
 Hyaline cartilage - this has a translucent, bluish-white appearance.
Adipose tissue
The randomly aranged collagen fibres are not easily visible under
Adipose fissue (Fig. 2.8) is similar to areolar tissue but its matrix
the microscope as they have the same refractive index as the gel
contains mainly fat-filled cells, closely packed together, giving if
fhe name fatty tissue. These fat cells act as an energy reserve and,
body,and forms the articular surfaces of joints and provides support
in the dermis of the skin, the tissue insulates the body to reduce
in the nose, larynx, trachea and bronchi. It also forms the skeleton 
heat loss. In some areas, such as around the kidney, adipose tissue
of the embryo before it becomes ossified by the process known as
provides a protective layer.
endochondral ossification.
 Elastic cartilage - this has chondrocytes within a matrix and numerous 
Dense connective tissue
elastic fibres. Elastic cartilage occurs in places where support with
Dense or fibrous connecfive tissue consists of densely packed col-
flexibility is required, e.g. the external ear and epiglottis.
lagen fibre bundles with relatively few fibroblasts and other cells in
 Fibrocartilage - this has a similar basic structure but has a higher
between them (Fig. 2.9). The fibres may be arranged in two ways:
 proportion of collagen fibres giving it great strength, e.g. in the
intervertebral discs and in the menisci of the stifle joint. It also attaches
● Parallel arrangement - this is known as regular fibrous
the tendons and ligaments to bone.
connective tissue, e.g. tendons, which are strong bands of
Chapter 2 Tissues and body cavities
19
 Shape of gland
Type of gland
Location of gland
Tubular (single,
Simple tubular
Stomach, intestine
straight)
Tubular (coiled)
Smple coiled
 Sweat glands
tu bular
Tubular (multiple)
 Simple branched 
Stomach, mouth,
tubular
tongue, oesophagus
Alveolar (single)
Simple alveolar
 Sebaceous glands
 Alveolar (multiple)
Branched alveolar
Sebaceous glands
(acinar)
Tubular (multiple)
Compound tubular
 Bulbourethral glands,
mammary glands,
kidney tubules, testes, 
mucous glands of 
the mouth
 Alveolar (multiple)
 Compound alveolar
 Mammary glands 
(acinar)
 Some tubular; 
Compound 
 Salivary glands, pancreas,
some alveolar
tubuloalveolar
respiratory passages
Fig. 2.5 The different types of gland found in the body.
Bone
Together, these form osteoid, within which crystals of insoluble
 Bone is a living tissue that is capable of remodelling and repair-
calcium phosphate are deposited as the bone tissue becomes
ing itself when damaged. It is a specialised type of connective
calcified. Calcification gives bone its characteristic rigidity and
fissue, which provides the rigid supportive framework of the
hardness. As the ground substance becomes calcified the bone
body and forms a system of levers for locomofion.
 cells or osteocytes are trapped in spaces called lacunae. Running 
 Bone consists of an extracellular matrix or ground sub-
through the bone matrix are fine channels, called Haersian
canals, which carry fhe blood vessels and nerves of the bone
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
20
：
 Panosteitis is a condition that occurs in young dogs. It is an idiopathic
 inflammation of all bone tissues and presents as pain in the long
bones.
Muscle tissue
 Muscle tissue is responsible for organised movement in the
body.
Skeleta! or striated muscle
 This type of muscle is found attached to the skeleton and brings
about movement (Fig. 2.13). It is under voluntary or conscious
control, i.e. an animal uses its brain to move its limbs.
Fig. 2.6 Composition of areolar tissue. A Collagen fibres: flexible but
The muscle cells or fibres are long and cylindrical and lie par-
very strong and resistant to stretching. B Ground substance:this contains
allel to each other. Each individual muscle fibre is composed of
the different fibres and cells of the tissue. C Fibroblast: long, flat cell that 
bundles of microfilaments known as myofibrils that are made of
 produces collagen and elasticfbres. D Mast cell secretes an anticoagulant.
two confractile proteins called actin (thin filaments) and myosin
E Fat cell stores fat. F Macrophage: large cell capable of phagocytosis of
(thick filaments). It is their highly regular arrangement that gives
foreign particles. G Elastic fibres: form a loose and stretchable network.
fhe muscle its striated or striped appearance when viewed under
a microscope. Each fibre has several nuclei, which lie on the outer
surface of the cell as the presence of the myofibrils pushes all the
(Figs 2.11, 2.12). Each Haversian canal is surrounded by a series
cell strucfures to the outer margins.
of concentric cylinders of mafrix material called lamellae and the
The muscle fibres are grouped together in bundles or fascicles
osteocytes within fheir lacunae. Each series of these cylinders,
         
together with the canal, is called a Hwersian system (Figs 2.11,
by connective tissue and form a large muscle. The whole muscle
2.12). A fibrous membrane, the periosteum, covers the outer sur-
is surrounded by fhe muscle sheath, which is continuous wifh the
face of all types of bone.
tendons that cornect the muscle to a bone.
Smooth muscle
There are two types of bone tissue:
Smooth muscle is also called unstriated, involuntary and visceral
Compact bone - this is solid and hard and is found in the outer layer
muscle. It is found in regions of the body that are under involun-
or cortex of all types of bone. The Haversian systems of compact 
tary control, e.g. in the walls of the blood vessels, digestive tract,
bone are densely packed together.
 Cancellous or spongy bone - this consists of an internal meshwork of
respiratory tract, bladder and uterus. It is therefore responsible
bony'struts' or trabeculae with interconnected spaces between flled 
for moving food through the digestive system, controlling the
with red bone marrow. Cancellous bone is found in the ends of long
flow of blood through blood vessels, and other unconscious pro-
 bones, and in the core of short irregular and flat bones.
cesses. Smooth muscle is confrolled by the autonomic nervous
systerm.
Fig. 2.7 Light micrograph of loose
connective or areolar tissue showing a.
delicate network of collagen and elastic fibres
in a piece of mesentery. {Taken from 
D. Samuelson. Textbook of Veterinary
Histology Saunders, p 92.)
Chapter 2 Tissues and body cavities
Fig. 2.8 Light micrograph of adipose tissue. (Taken from
Textbook ofVeterinary Histology D. Samuelson. Saunders,
p 98.)
Fig. 2.9 Transmission electron micrograph
(×25 000) of collagen fibres. (Taken from
Textbook ofVeterinary Histology. D. Sarmuelson.
Saunders, p 87.)
 The cells of smooth muscle are long and spindle-shaped (Fig.
life. This inherent confractibility is increased or slowed down
2.14) and are surrounded by small amounts of connective tissue
by nerves supplying the heart according to the requirements of
that bind the cells into sheets, or layers. The nucleus in each cell
the body. Control of cardiac muscle is therefore involuntary or
 lies in its centre. Smooth muscle does not appear 'striped' when 
unconscious.
viewed under the microscope - hence its name.
Cardiac muscle cells are striated and cylindrical in shape (Fig.
2.15). Unlike the cells of striated muscle, they branch to create
Cardiac muscie
a network of fibres, which are linked by intercalated discs. These
    n    s  n  
  se      
myocardium. It is responsible for the rhythmic and automatic
extremely quickly, producing a rapid response to the changing
contraction of the heart that confinues throughout an arimal's
needs of the body.
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
22
Perichondrium
 Articular cartilage
Blood vessel
Collagen fibres
Nutrient arteriole
Haversian canal
Collagen fibres in
matrix of the cartilage
Compact bone
Chondrocyte
Periosteum
00
Lacuna
0
Lacunae containing
8
osteocytes
o
00
Q
Hyaline matrix
Marrow cavity
11
Metaphyseal artery
Region of
Nest of cells
epiphyseal plate
(metaphysis)
Fig. 2.10 The structure of hyaline cartilage.
Fig. 2.II The structure of compact bone.
Nervous tissue
increases the speed of transmission of nerve impulses from one
place fo another.
The main cell of nervous tissue is the neuron (Fig. 2.16), whose
function is to transmit nerve impulses from one area to another.
Dendrons and axons are referred to as nerve fibres and the whitish
Each neuron consists of a cell body, containing the nucleus, sev-
structures identified by the naked eye as 'nerves' within the body are
eral short processes known as dendrons and one long process
 collections of large numbers of nerve fibres.
 sn      s 
e in  e n  x n m o 
Nerve impulses are fransferred from one neuron to another
towards its destinafion. Many axons within the body are covered
by means of bufton-like structures known as synapses. All nerve
in faffy material known as myelin. This is secreted by special-
pathways consist of neurons and synapses. (Nervous fissue is
ised cells wrapped around each axon - the Schwann cells - and if
covered in more detail in Ch. 5.)
Chapter 2 Tissues and body cavities
23
Fig. 2.12 Light micrograph (×100)
of compact bone showing Haver-
sian canals (CC) surrounded by 
lamellae of osteocytes (O) within 
their lacunae. Taken from
D. Samuelson.Textbook of
Veterinary Histology. Saunders,
p 122.)
Fig. 2.I3 A Skeletal muscle, as found attached to the bones. It
 is voluntary and consists of striped (striated) cells, which are long
and cylindrical in shape. Each cell has several nuclei.
B. Light micrograph (×l000) of skeletal muscle showing char-
acteristic bands and lines and nuclei located at the edges of the
fbres. (Taken from D. Samuelson. Textbook ofVeterinary Histol-
ogy Saunders, p I65.)
Muscle
A
fibre
Nuclei
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
24
Fig. 2.14 A Smooth muscle, as found in the gastrointestinal
tract and other viscera. It is involuntary and consists of small
spindle shaped cells without striations (hence 'smooth'). Each cell
has one nucleus in the centre. B. Light micrograph (xl 00O) of
smooth muscle cells showing the long spindle shaped cells with 
 no striations. {Taken from D. Samuelson. Textbook ofVeterinary
Histology. Saunders, p I 61.)
Smooth
Amuscle cell
Nuclei-
Fig. 2.15 A Cardiac muscle, found in the heart It is involuntary
and consists of striated, cylindrical cells. Cells are connected by 
intercalated discs. B. Light micrograph (×I 0OO) of cardiac muscle 
cells. Arrow indicates intercalated discs. (Taken from D. Samuelson.
Textbook ofVeterinary Histology. Saunders, p 173.)
Intercalated
disc
Nucleus
Chapter 2 Tissues and body cavities
25
Dendrons,dendrites
and synaptic ending 
from other neurons
Cell body
Nucleus
Axon hillock
Layers of
myelin sheath 
Schwann cell-
Node of Ranvier
Axon
Axon
Neuromuscular
junction
Muscle fibre
Fig. 2.16 A.The structure of a neuron (nerve cell). B Light micrograph of nervous tissue. (Taken from D. Samuelson.
Textbook ofVeterinary Histology. Saunders, p 182.)
There are fhree body cavities:
The body cavities
+Thoracic
+Abdominal
The body is divided into separate areas referred to as the body
+ Pelvic.
cavities (Fig. 2.17). They are described as ‘potential' spaces
because, although they are completely filled with the visceral
The thoracic cavity
 organs and fluid, there is only a very small amount of free
space. All the body cavifies are lined with a serous mermbrane
The thoracic cavity (Table 2.1) contains the heart, lungs and other
or endothelium, which is a single continuous layer of epifhe-
        s 
lium that produces a watery or serous lubricafing fluid. This is
different from the thicker, more proteinaceous secretion mucus,
thoracic cage consisting of the ribs, thoracic vertebrae and ster-
num. The'enfrance' into the cavity is known as the cranial thoracic
which has a protecfive function. Serous fluid acts as a lubricant
between the surfaces of the cavity and the organs and struc-
ribs and the manubrium. The exit or caudal border is filled by the
fures within it.
diaphragm.
The serous membrane lining the thoracic cavity and covering
the organs within it is called the pleura (Fig. 2.18). The parietal
 Each part of the serous membrane is a continuous layer,named according
pleura lines the inside of the thoracic cavity but is named accord-
to its position within the cavity:
ing to which part of the walls it covers, ie. the diaphragmatic
 Parietal describes the serous membrane that lines the boundaries or
 pleura covers the diaphragm and the costal pleura covers the ribs.
 sides of the cavity 
Visceral describes the serous membrane that covers all the organs
The thoracic cavity is divided into two pleural cavities by a con-
within the cavity.
tinuation of fhe parietal pleura. Each cavity contains one of the
lungs and serous pleural fluid. The lungs themselves are covered
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
26
Diaphragm
 Pelvic cavity
Fig. 2.17 Longitudinal section through the body to show the
three body cavities.
Thoracic cavity
Abdominal cavity
Table 2.I Summary of the boundaries of the body cavities
Anatomical
Thoracic cavity
Abdominal cavity
Pelvic cavity
boundary
Craniat
Thoracic inlet
 Diaphragm
Pelvic inlet (continuous with abdominal
cavity)
ppno
Diaphragm
 Pelvic inlet (abdominal and pelvic cavities 
Pelvic outlet
 are not separated by a physical barrier?
 Dorsal
 Thoracic vertebrae and hypaxial
 Lumbar vertebrae and hypaxial muscles 
Sacrum
muscles
Ventrat
Sternum 
 Muscles of ventral abdominal wall
Hoor of pelvis
Lateral
 Ribs and intercostal muscles
Muscles of lateral abdominal wall
Lateral wall of pelvis
in visceral pleura, called the pulrmonary pleura. Between the fwo
supply these systems. The abdominal cavity is bounded crani-
pleural cavifies, the thorax is divided into right and left sides by a
ally by the diaphragm and caudally by the pelvic inlet (there is
vertical connective fissue sepfum called the mediastinum, which is
no acfual physical division between the abdominal and pelvic
covered in the mediastinal pleura. The mediastinum is the potenfial
cavifies). Dorsally, the boundary is the lumbar vertebrae and the
space formed by the double layer of parietal pleura that separates
hypaxial muscles. The muscles of the abdominal walls form the
fhe fwo pleural cavifies. It contains the pericardial cavify, contain-
dorsolateral, venfral and lateral limits.
ing the heart, aorta, trachea, oesophagus and the thymus gland in
The internal surface of the abdominal cavity is lined wifh a
young animals.
serous membrane called the peritoneum (Fig. 2.19). This is a con-
The pericardial cavity lies wifhin the mediastinum in the tho
tinuous sheet that forms a closed cavity, the peritoneal cavity. The
  s p n  n      
peritoneal cavity is the potenfial space between the parietal peri
is contained within the pericardium, which is a double-layered
toneum that lines the abdominal walls and the visceral perito-
membranous sheath that completely surrounds it. Between the
neum that covers the organs. The periftoneal cavify contains only a
fwo layers of membrane is serous fluid that acts as a lubricant,
small volume of lubricating serous fluid known as peritoneal fluid,
enabling the heart to beat freely.
which allows friction-free movement of the organs and prevents
adhesions forming befween the organs and the peritoneum.
The abdominal cavity
The visceral peritoneum is folded on itself in a way that keeps
the organs separate, suspending the organs within the abdominal
The abdominal cavity (Table 2.1) lies caudal to the thoracic cav-
cavity and carrying the various vessels and nerves that serve the
ify and contains the abdominal viscera (Fig. 2.17). These include
viscera. This area of peritoneum is collectively known as the rmes-
the organs of the digestive system and related glands, the uro
entery. The folds of mesentery have different names depending
genital system and all the associated vessels and nerves that
on their posifion, e.g. the mesentery suspending the duodenum
Chapter 2 Tissues and body cavities 
27
Mediastinal pleura
Fig. 2.18 The anatomy of the thoracic
cavity, showing the mediastinum and
pleura.
Mediastinum
Trachea
Right and left 
 principal bronchi
Costal parietal
pleura
Visceral (pulmonary)
pleura
Collapsed lung
Expanded lung
Surface of lung
Mediastinal pleura
Right and left
pleural cavities
Diaphragmatic parietal pleura
Diaphragm
Lesser omentum
Pancrea:
ansversemesocolon
Fig. 2.I9 Sagittal section through the abdominal cavity to
Coronary ligament
Lymph nodes
Great mesentery
show the reflections (folds) of the peritoneum.
 Descending colon
Uterus
Diaphragm
Bladder
Omental bursa
Symphysis
of pubis
Greater omentum
Liver
Stomach
Transverse colon
is called the mesoduodenum, while the one suspending fhe ovary is
reproductive organs. There is no physical separafion between
the mesovarium. The ormentum is a mobile fold of peritoneum that
the fwo as there is between the thoracic and abdominal cav-
contains a “lacy’ network of fine vessels and fat and is divided
ifies. The cavity is bounded cranially by the pelvic inlet and
into the greater omentum, arising from the greater curvafure of the
caudally by the caudal pelvic aperfure. The sacrum and the
stomach, and the lesser omentu, arising from the lesser curvafure
first few coccygeal vertebrae form the dorsal boundary and the
of the stomach.
pubis and ischium form the floor of the cavity. The walls are
formed by muscles and ligaments. A continuaftion of the peri-
The pelvic cavity
toneum extends into the cranial parts of the cavity and covers
The pelvic cavity (Table 2.1) lies caudal to the abdominal cavity
the organs which lie in both cavities, e.g. bladder and reproduc
(Fig. 2.17) and contains the urinary bladder, the recfum and the
tive tract.
This page intentionally left blank
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
CHAP
TER
3
skelet
KEY POINTS
 The skeletal system provides a supporting framework
 Each part of the skeleton consists of many bones,
for the body a firm base to which the muscles of
each of which plays an important part in the function 
locomotion are attached, and proterts the softer
of the skeletal system.
tissues enclosed within the framework.
 Bones are covered in 'lumps, bumps and holes'. Each
 The skeleton can be considered to be made up of
has a specific descriptive name and a function, which
three parts:
 contributes to movement, i.e. muscle attachment, or
· Axial skeleton, forming the central axis of the animal
to maintaining the health of the tissue, i.e. blood or
and comprising the skull, vertebral column and the
nerve supply.
rib cage
 Bones are linked together by means of joints.
 Appendicular skeleton, comprising the fore and hind
 Joints can be classified according to the type of
limbs and the limb girdles which attach them to the
tissue from which they are made, e.g. fibrous,
body
 cartilaginous or synovial joints, or according to the
· Splanchnic skeleton, which in the dog and cat
 type of movement they allow, e.g. hinge or gliding
 consists only of the os penis found within the soft
joints.
tissues of the penis.
The skeletal system is the ‘framework' upon which the body is
● Flat bones - these have ar outer layer of compact bone with
built - it provides support, protection and enables the animal to
a layer of cancellous or spongy bone inside; there is no
move (Fig. 3.1). The joints are considered to be an integral part of
medullary cavity, e.g. flat bones of the skull, scapula and ribs
the skeleton. The skeletal system is made of the specialised con-
● Short bones - these have an outer layer of compact bone with
 nective tissues, bone and cartilage.
a core of cancellous bone and no medullary cavity, e.g. carpal
The funcfions of the skeletal system are:
and tarsal bones
I. Support - ift acts as an internal 'scaffold' upon which the body
● Irregular bones - these have a similar strucfure to short bones
is built
but a less uriform shape; they lie in the midline and are
unpaired, e.g. vertebrae.
 2. Locomotion - it provides affachment for muscles, which
operate a system of levers, i.e. the bones, to bring about
Some specialised types of bone are:
movement
● Sesarmoid bones - these are sesame-seed-shaped bones that
 3. Protection - it protects the underlying soft parts of the body,
develop within a tendon (and occasionally a ligament) that
e.g. the brain is encased in the protective bony cranium of the
runs over an underlying bony prominence; they serve to
change the angle at which the tendon passes over the bone
skull
and thus reduce 'wear and tear', e.g. the patella associated
4. Storage - it acts as a store for the essenfial minerals calcium
with the stifle joint (Fig. 3.1)
and phosphate
● Pneumatic bones - these contain air filled spaces known as
 5. Haermopoiesis - haemopoietic tissue forming the bone marrow
sinuses that have the effect of reducing the weight of the bone,
 manufacfures the blood cells.
e.g. maxillary and frontal bones
+ Splanchnic bone - this is bone that develops in a soff organ and
is unattached to the rest of the skeleton, e.g. the os peris (the
Bone structure and function
bone within the penis of the dog and cat).
Bone shape
Development of bone
 Bones can be categorised according to their shape:
The process by which bone is formed is called ossification and there
● Long bones - these are typical of the limb bones, e.g. femur,
humerus, and also include bones of the metacarpus/
The cells responsible for laying down new bone are called
metafarsus and phalanges; long bones have a shaft containing
osteoblasts; fhe cells fhat destroy or remodel bone are
a medullary cavity filled with bone marrow (Fig. 3.2)
called osteoclasts.
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
30
Cl, atlas
C2, axis
TI, first
LI, first
Sacrum
thoracic
lumbar vertebra
vertebra
Cdl, first
caudal
C7, last
vertebra
(coccygeal)
cervical
vertebra
Oscoxae
endess
(pelvis)
Cranial end
of sternum
(manubrium)
Femur
Humerus
Patella 
Olecranon
(point of elbow)
Radius
Tibia
Fibula
UIna
Caudal end
Tarsal bones
Calcaneus
(xiphoid) of
(point of hock)
Carpal bones
sternum
Metatarsal
Proximal, middle,
Metacarpal bones
bones
 and distal phalanges
Fig. 3.I The skeleton of the dog showing the major bones. (With permission from Colville T, Bassett JM 200l Clinical anatomy and 
physiology for veterinary technicians. Mosby St Louis, MO, p I 02.)
which allows the bone to lengthen while the animal is
 Intramembranous ossification - this is the process by which the
 growing. Eventually, when the animal has reached its final
flat bones of the skull are formed. The osteoblasts lay down bone
size, this will be replaced by bone and growth will no
between two layers of fibrous connective tissue.There is no cartilage
longer be possible. The epiphyseal plate is then said to have
template.
Yoea ioy juaramp st suaddeu h unm je au aut pue pasop.
 Endochondral ossification - this type of ossification involves the
type of bone.
replacement of a hyaline cartilage model within the embryo by bone.
The process starts in the developing embryo but is not completed 
aul'pasean sey ymoa pue Aunpeu paupeau sey ieuue aut lun Ainy
long bones of the limb develop by this method.
 Rickets is a disease of young growing animals caused by a nutritional
deficiency of vitamin D or phosphorus. The bones fail to calcify
and become bowed, and the joints appear swollen because of
Endochondral ossification
enlargement of the epiphyses. Any animal kept permanently inside
The process of endochondral ossification (Fig. 3.3) is as follows:
 at risk of developing rickets because vitamin D is formed by the 
action of ultraviolet light on the skin.
I. A cartilage model develops within the embryo.
 2. Primary centres of ossification appear in the diaphysis or shaft
 of the bone. The cartilage is replaced as the osteoblasts lay
The skeleton
 down bone, which gradually extends towards the ends of the
bone.
The skeleton (Fig. 3.1) can be divided into three parts.
 3. Secondary centres of ossification appear in the epiphyses or
I. Axial skeleton - runs from the skull to the fip of the tail and
ends of the bone, confinuing the bone development.
includes the skull, mandible, vertebrae and also the sternum
4. Osteoclasts then start to remove bone from the cenfre of the
2. Appendicular skeleton - the pectoral (front) and pelvic (hind)
 diaphysis to form the marrow cavity, while the osteoblasts 
limbs and the shoulder and pelvic girdles that aftach (or
 continue to lay down bone in the outer edges.
append) them to the body
 5. Between the diaphysis and epiphyses a narrow band of
3. Splanchnic skeleton - in the dog and cat, this is represented by
cartilage persists. This is the growth plate or epiphyseal plate,
the os penis within the tissue of the penis.
Chapter 3 Skeletal system 
31
Articular cartilage
When sfudying the anatomy of the skeletal system it is helpful to
understand the terms that are used to describe the various pro
im pure uo punoy are jeu suoissardap pre sasessed suooa!
Head
bones.
Blood supply to bone:
nutrient arteriole
 Tuberosity/trochanter/tubercle - protuberances on bones, which are 
entering nutrient
usually for the attachment of muscles 
foramen
 Trochiea - bony structures through or over which tendons pass they
are usually grooves in the bone and allow tendons to act as pulleys 
 Condyle - a rounded projection on a bone, usually for articulation with 
another bone
 Epicondyle - a projection of bone on the lateral edge above its
Compact bone
condyle
 Foramen (pl. foramina) - an opening or passage into or through a
Cortex of compact
bone, e.g. to allow the passage of blood vessels and nerves
Shaft
bone covered by
 Fossa - a hollow or depressed area on a bone
periosteum
Head, neck and shaft are used to describe parts of a long bone (Fig.
Periosteum
3.2)
Tendon-
 connects muscle to bone
 connects one bone to another bone 
Medullary cavity
The axial skeleton
The skull
Neck
Trabeculae of
The bones of the head include the skull, nasal chambers, mandible
spongy bone
or lower jaw and hyoid apparatus. The functions of the skull are:
I. To house and protect the brain.
 2. To house the special sense organs - eye, ear, nose and tongue.
3. To house and provide aftachment for parts of the digestive
Fig. 3.2 Structure of a typical long bone.
system - teeth and tongue, etc.
Fig. 3.3 Stages of endochondral ossification. A A cartilage 
model of the bone exists in the embryo. B Ossification begins
from the primary ossification centre in the shaft (diaphysis).
C Secondary ossification centres appearin the ends of the bone
(epiphyses). D Ossification continues in primary and secondary
centres; osteoclasts start to break down bone in the shaft,
Cartilage
Secondary
lapow
ossification
ossification
 creating the marrow cavity. E The first growth plate fuses and
a.ua
centre
 growth is now only possble at the proximal growth plate; the
medullary cavity extends into the epiphysis. F The proximal
growth plate fuses and bone growth ceases.
plate still open
Growth plates or
epiphyseal plates
Medullary
cavity
Mature bone
Distalgrowth
 pasnj azed
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
32
4. To provide aftachment for the hyoid apparatus and the
numerous muscles of mastication and facial expression.
Incisive bone
 5. To provide a bony cavity through which air can enter the
body.
6. To commuricate - the muscles of facial expression are found
 on the head and are an imporfant means of communication.
Maxilla
Cranium
The caudal part of the skull that provides the bony 'case' in which
the brain sits is called the cranium (Figs 3.4, 3.5). The bones of the
cranium include:
Palatine bone
● Parietal - forms much of the dorsal and lateral walls of the
cranium
● Termporal - lies below the parietal bone on the caudolateral
Zygomaticarch
surface of the skull. The most ventral part of the temporal
bone forms a rounded prominence called the tympanic bulla,
which houses the strucfures of the middle ear. There is an
opening into the tympanic bulla, called the external acoustic
meatus, which in life is closed by the tymparic membrane or
 eardrum. The cartilages of the external ear canal are aftached
to this region
+ Frontal - forms the front aspect of the crarium or 'forehead'.
Contains an air-filled chamber called the frontal sinus, which
 connects to the nasal chamber
Jugular process
● Occipital - this lies at the base of the skull on the caudal aspect.
 Occipital condyle
 In this region there is a large hole called the foramen magnum,
Occipital
through which the spinal cord passes. On either side is a pair
bone
 Foramen magnum
of bony prominences, the occipital condyles. These arficulate
with the first cervical vertebra or aflas (Fig. 3.1). At the side of
Fig. 3.5 Ventral view of the dog skull showing main bony features.
the occipital condyles are the jugular processes, which are sites
for muscle aftachment
+ Sphenoid - this lies on fhe venfral aspect of the skull, forming
Nasa! chambers
the floor of the cranial cavify. It is penetrated by many small
The most rostral part of the skull carries the nasal charmber, the sides
foramina through which nerves and blood vessels pass
of which are formed by the maxilla and the roof by the nasal bone.
● Sagittal crest - a ridge of bone on the dorsal midline surface of
The nasal chamber is divided lengthways into two by a cartilagi-
the skull, which can be prominent in muscular dogs
nous plate called the nasal septum. Each of the chambers is filled
● Zygormatic - the zygomatic arch is an arch of bone that projects
with delicate scrolls of bone called the nasal turbinates or conchae.
laterally from the skull, forming the 'cheekbone'
These are covered in ciliated mucous epifhelium (see Ch. 8). Af the
● Lacrimal - lies at the base of the orbit, which houses the eye,
back of the nasal chamber, forming a boundary befween the nasal
and is the region through which the tears drain from the eye
and cranial cavifties, is the ethmoid bone. In the cenfre of this bone
into the nose.
is the cribriform plate - a sieve-like area perforated by numerous
Fig. 3.4 Lateral view of the dog skull showing main bony
Frontal bone
features.
Orbit
Parietal bone
Lacrimal bone
Nasal bone
Incisive
bone
Occipital
bone
Occipital
condyles
External
auditory
Maxilla
Zygomatic
Sphenoid
Temporal
meatus
bone
complex
bone
Chapter 3 Skeletal system
33
foramina through which the olfactory nerves pass from the nasal
Coronoid
mucosa to the olfactory bulbs of the brain (see Ch. 5).
process
The roof of the mouth is called the hard palate and is formed
from three bones on the ventral aspect of the skull: the incisive
Mandibular
Condylar
bone or premaxilla, part of the maxilla and the palatine. The
notch-
process
incisive bone is the most rostral and carries the incisor teeth
(Fig. 3.5).
Canine tooth
    e s  r s  r 
Premolars
Molars
joints called sutures (p 41). Sufures are firm and immovable
Incisors
joints but allow for expansion of the skull in a growing animal.
Mandible
The mandible or lower jaw is comprised of two halves or den-
Masseteric
Angular
taries, joined together at the chin by a cartilaginous joint called the
A
fossa
process
the body, and a vertical part, the ramus (Fig. 3.6). The body car-
ries the sockets or alveoli for the teeth of the lower jaw. The ramus
Condylar
articulates with the rest of the skull at the temporomandibular joint
process
Ramus
via a projection called the condylar process. A rounded coronoid pro-
cess, which projects from the ramus into the temporal fossa, is the
point to which the temporalis muscle aftaches (Fig. 3.6). There is a
First molar
depression on the lateral surface of the ramus, the masseteric fossa,
in which the masseter muscle lies.
Hyoid apparatus
  s  a  si s  
e a  sr pe sq a yo q e o sis
arrangement that resembles a frapeze (Fig. 3.7). The hyoid appa-
Body
Mandibular
ratus is the means by which the larynx and tongue are suspended
symphysis
Fig. 3.6 Lateral (A) and medial (B) views of the dog mandible.
of the skull in a carfilaginous joint.
Skull shopes
The shape of the skull varies between species. In the domestic cat
The shape of the skull particularly in brachycephalic breeds such as
the skull is much more rounded or 'apple-shaped' than it is in the
the bulldog, can lead to a variety of clinical conditions, e.g. snoring
dog, and there is little difference between the various cat breeds. In
respiration, diffculty in breathing. The relative size of the head can
the dog, although the basic anatomy remains the same, the overall
also cause difficulties with whelping. Breeds with a mesaticephalic
appearance differs greatly between the different breeds (Fig. 3.8).
shape of skull are much less likely to exhibit these conditions.
Three morphological forms of dog skull are recognised:
Fig. 3.7 The trapeze-like hyoid apparatus suspended from the
(op) In
Epiglottis
Hyoid apparatus
Cranial part
of larynx
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
34
Brachycephalic
Mesaticephalic
Dolichocephalic
Maxillary sinus
Frontal sinus
Fig. 3.8 The three basic shapes of the dog skull seen in common breeds. Also shows the positions of the maxillary and
frontal sinuses.
Basic plan of a vertebra
 Dolichocephalic - the head, particularly the nose, is long and narrow.
The vertebrae within all regions of the vertebral colurmn are basi-
e.g. Greyhound, Borzoi, Afghan hound 
cally similar in structure, although each region shows slight dif-
 Mesaticephalic - (mes meaning 'middle') is the'normal' or average 
shape of the dog skull,e.g. Beagle, Labrador, Pointer
 of a roughly cylindrical ventral body with a convex cranial end
 Brachycephalic - the cranium is often more rounded and the
nose is short and may be pushed in, because of shortening of
and a concave caudal end. This arrangement enables the bod-
the nasal chambers, hard palate and mandible, e.g. Bulldog. Pekinese.
ies to fit fogether, creafing a flexible rod. The body is topped
Boxer, Pug.
by an arch, called the vertebral or neural arch, which forms a
The vertebrae
Spinous process
The vertebral column is comprised of a number of bones arranged
in a series along the midline of the body and extending from the
    n e   e    r 
into regions depending upon their position in the body:
● Cervical (C) - neck region
Cranial articular surface
●Thoracic (T) - thoracic region
Mamillary process
● Lumbar (L) - lower back or abdominal region
Neural arch
● Sacral (S) - croup or pelvic region
+ Caudal (Cd) or coccygeal - in the tail.
Each species has a characteristic number of vertebrae within each
region, which is wriften as a formula. In the dog and cat this for-
mula is: C7, T13, L7, S3, Cd20-23 (Fig. 3.1).
Transverse
Costal fovea of
The functions of the vertebral column are:
process
transverse process
I. To stiffen the body axis and help maintain posture
2. To enclose and protect the spinal cord
Body of vertebra -
Vertebral
foramen
3. To shield and protect the soffer underlying structures of the
 neck, thorax, abdomen and pelvis.
Fig. 3.9 Basic structure of a typical vertebra.
Chapter 3 Skeletal system
35
funnel-like vertebral foramen through which the spinal cord passes.
ventral and dorsal arch. The second cervical vertebra or axis
When linked together, the vertebral foramina constitute the spinal
is also unusual and has an elongated, blade-like spinous
canal.
process, which serves as a point of affachment for neck
The neural arch has a dorsal projection called the spinous pro-
muscles. A strong ligament, called the nuchal ligament, also
cess or neural spine, which varies in height and size from one
aftaches to the spinous process and extends from the axis
region of the vertebral column to another. On either side of the
to the first thoracic vertebra. On the cranial aspect of the
vertebra there are laterally projecting processes, the transverse pro-
axis, a projection of bone called the dens or odontoid process
cesses, which also vary in shape and size between regions. The
fits into the vertebral foramen of the aflas and serves as a
transverse processes divide the muscles of the vertebral column
pivot around which the aflas can be rotated. The remaining
into dorsal or epaxial and ventral or hypaxial divisions (see mus-
cervical vertebrae (C3-C7) follow the basic vertebral plan,
cles of the trunk, p 48).
and get progressively smaller as they advance towards the
On the cranial and caudal edges of the arch of each vertebra
junction with the thoracic vertebrae.
there are cranial and caudal articular processes. These form a syn-
● Thoracic vertebrae (Fig. 3.11B). There are usually 13 thoracic
ovial joint with fhose of the adjacent vertebrae, creating a flexible
vertebrae. Their distinguishing feafure is their tall spinous
rod running in the midline of the body. There are also a number
processes and short bodies. They articulate with the ribs at
 Of other processes, which are sites for muscle attachment. Lying
fwo sites: the costal fovea, which forms a synovial joint with
 between the bodies of each pair of vertebrae is a fibrocartilagi-
the head of the rib, and the transverse fovea, which forms a
nous intervertebral disc, which acts as a 'shock absorber', prevent-
synovial joint with the tubercle of the rib. The height of the
ing damage to the spinal cord (Fig. 3.10). The intervertebral disc is
composed of a tough fibrous connective tissue outer area, called
the lumbar region.
fhe annulus fibrosus, and a core of gelatinous material caled the
● Lumbar vertebrae (Fig. 3.11C). There are usually seven lumbar
nuclens pulpos us.
vertebrae. These vertebrae have large bodies and long
The vertebrae are linked by ligaments that run between them
lumbar muscles affach.
● Cartilaginous - between the bodies of each vertebra
● Synovial - between the cranial and caudal articular processes.
The synovial joint between the atlas (Cl) and the occipital condyles
of the skullallows nodding movements of the head, and the synovial 
In the case of a 'slipped disc', the annulus fibrosus ruptures and
joint between the atlas and axis (CI -C2) allows a pivotal movement
the pulpy centre of the disc protrudes outward. This puts pressure
so that the head can turn in all directions.
either on the spinal cord or on the associated nerves leaving the
cord, causing the animal to show symptoms ranging from pain to
 paralysis due to the loss of motor function.
● Sacral vertebrae (Fig. 3.11D). These three vertebrae are fused
together to form the sacrum in the adult dog and cat. The
sacrum forms a fibrosynovial joint with the wing of the ilium
Regional variations
of the pelvic girdle: the sacroiliac joint.
● Cervical vertebrae (Fig. 3.11A). There are always seven
cervical vertebrae in the neck of all mammals. The first 
and shape according to the length of the tail. The first few
cervical vertebra or atlas has a urique and distinctive shape.
resemble the lumbar vertebrae, but they get progressively
The atlas does not have a body or a spinous process, but
smaller and simpler throughout the series. The last few caudal
consists of two large wing-like lateral masses joined by a
vertebrae are reduced to litfle rods of bone.
Fig. 3.10 The intervertebral disc, positioned between verte-
Neural spine
brae and acting as a'cushion'.
Neural arch
Dorsal longitudinal ligament
Spinal canal
Annulus fibrous
-Nucleus pulposus
Intervertebral
disc
Body of vertebra
 Ventral ligament between
bodies of vertebrae
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
36
Cervical
Wing
Spinous process
Atlas
of atlas
Axis
Caudal
articular process
Transverse
Vertebral
Dens
process
foramen
Fifth cervical
vertebra
Transverse
Body-
process
A
Thoracic
Lumbar
Spinous process
Mamilary
Mamillary process
process
Spinous
Neural arch
process
Caudal articular
Cranial articular
Transverse.
process
process
process with
Accessory
costal fovea
Caudal
Transverse
process
articular
process
Caudal
process
vertebral
C
notch
Body
Sacrum
Caudal (coccygeal)
-thréé
Spinous process
fused sacral
vertebrae
Vertebralforamen
Transverse
process
Body
D
E
Fig. 3.II Variations in the shape of vertebrae. A Cervical. B Thoracic. C Lumbar: D Sacral (the three sacral vertebrae are
fused into one bone). E Caudal/coccygeal.
The ribs and sternum
The costal cartilage arficulates with the sternum, either directly
 The ribs form the walls of the bony thoracic cage that protects the
or indirectly. The first eight pairs of ribs aftach direcfly to the ster-
num and are called the sternal ribs. The ribs from pairs 9-12 are
organs of the chest. There are 13 pairs of ribs in the dog and cat,
called asternal or 'false' ribs, and they aftach via their costal car-
which arficulate with the thoracic vertebrae (Fig. 3.12). A rib is a
tilages to the adjacent rib, forming the costal arch. The last ribs
flat bone consisting of compact bone on the outside packed with
(pair 13) have no attachment at their cartilaginous ends, which
cancellous bone on fhe inside. Each rib has a bony dorsal part and a
lie free in the abdominal muscle - this pair are called the floating'
cartilaginous venfral part - the costal cartilage. The most dorsal part
ribs. The space befween each successive pair of ribs is called the
of the bony rib has fwo projections: the head, which arficulates wifh
 intercostal space and is filled by the intercostal muscles of the trunk
fhe costal fovea of the vertebra, and the tubercle or neck, which articu-
lates with the transverse fovea of the appropriate thoracic vertebra.
(Fig. 3.13).
The sternum forms the floor of the thoracic cage (Fig. 3.13)
and is composed of eight bones, the sternebrae, and the inter-
During parturition, under the influence of the hormone relaxin, the
sternebral cartilages. The most cranial sternebra is the manu-
sacroiliac ligament relaxes and softens so that the pelvis can stretch,
brium, which projects in front of the first pair of ribs and forms
enabling the fetuses to pass out through the birth canal.
part of the cranial thoracic inlet. Sternebrae 2-7 are short cylin-
drical bones. The last sternebra is longer and dorsovenfrally
Chapter 3 Skeletal system 
37
Tubercle
Manubrium
Thoracic
Frstrib
vertebra
Head
Neck
Sternebra
Angle
Costochondral
junction
Tubercle
Body
Xiphoid
process
Head.
Vertebra
of same
number
Xiphoid
as rib
cartilage
Intervertebral
disc
Costal
arch
Costochondral
 junction
Floating'rib
Costal cartilage
Fig. 3.13 The rib cage of the dog showing sternal asternal and floating'
Fig. 3.12 Structure of the canine rib. A Caudal view. B Lateral view
showing articulation with a thoracic vertebra. (Vith permission from
rbs. (With permission from Colville T, Bassett JM 200l Clinical anatomy
and physiology for veterinary technicians. Mosby, St Louis, MO, p I12.)
technicians. Mosby St Louis, MO, p II1 2.)
● Scapula - also called the shoulder blade (Fig. 3.14). It is a
flattened and is called the xiphoid process. Aftached to the xiphoid
large, flat bone found on the lateral surface of the frunk af
process and projecting caudally is a flap of cartilage called the
the junction of the neck and ribs. It has a prominent ridge
xiphoid cartilage. The linea alba aftaches to this. Between each
Or spine rurning down the middle of its lateral surface. This
pair of sternebrae are cartilaginous discs called the interstern-
divides the lateral surface into two regions: the supraspinous
ebral cartilages.
fossa and infraspinous fossa. On the distal end of the spine
there is a bony projection called the acrormion. At the distal
end of the scapula the bone narrows at the neck and there
The appendicular skeleton
is a shallow articular socket, called the glenoid cavity, which
forms the shoulder joint with the head of the humerus.
The medial surface of the scapula is flat and comparafively
limb and the pelvic (or hind) limb and the shoulder and pelvic
smooth.
girdles that aftach these to the body. The forelimb has no bony
● Humerus - this is a long bone forming the upper forelimb (Fig.
connection to the trunk, only being aftached by muscles. This
3.15). It articulates proximally with the scapula at the shoulder
absorbs the 'shock' at the point when the limb takes the animal's
joint, and distally with the radius and ulna at the elbow joint.
weight in four-legged animals or running quadrupeds. This dif-
The proximal end of the humerus consists of a large rounded
fers from primates, which generally walk on their hind legs and
projection, the head. Cranial and lateral to the head there is a large
so have evolved a pectoral girdle with a clavicle. However, fhe
prominence, called the greater tubercle. Another prominence, the
hindlimb does have a bony arficulation in the pelvic girdle, which
lesser tubercle, lies medial to the head. Both of these are sites for
forms the platform for fhe muscles that provide the propulsive
force as the animal is running.
to the head is the neck, aftached to the slightly twisted shaft of
the bone. On fhe distal end of the humerus are the medial and
Bones of the forelimb
lateral epicondyles,between which is the condyle. Just proximal to
this is a deep hollow called the olecranon fossa. This receives the
The bones of the forelimb (Fig. 3.1) are:
anconeal process of the ulna. There is also a hole in fhe cenfre
● Clavicle - frequently absent in the dog. When present, it is
of the condyle called the supratrochlear foramen. N.B. There is no
just a remnant of bone that lies in the muscles crarial to the
supratrochlear foramen in the cat.
shoulder joint - it is described as being vestigial. The clavicle
● Radius and ulna - these are both long bones that lie side by
is normally present in the cat but does not articulate with
side in the forearm (Fig. 3.16). At the proximal end of the ulna
other bones.
is a projection known as the olecranon, which forms the point 
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
38
of the elbow (Fig. 3.17). In front of this is a crescent shaped
Infraspinous
concavity called the trochlear notch, which articulates with the
fossa
distal humerus. At the top of the frochlear notch is a beak-like
Spine
projection called the anconeal process, which sits within the
olecranon fossa of the humerus when the elbow is extended.
Distally, the ulna narrows to a point called the lateral styloid
process. The radius is a rod-like bone, shorter fhan the ulna
(Fig. 3.16). At the proximal end is a depression, the fovea
capitis, which articulates with the humerus. At the distal end
Supraspinous
of the radius there is a pointed projection called the medial
fossa
styloid process.
Neck
Olecranon
Supraglenoid
Anconeal
Glenoid
tubercle
Acromion
Trochlear
process
cavity
notch
Lateral and medial
coronoid processes-
Olecranon
Fig. 3.14 The dog scapula. A Lateral view. B Ventral view.
Head
Greater tubercle
Medial styloid
process
Lateral styloid
process
Fig. 3.16 AThe dog radius. B The dog ulna (cranial and lateral views).
Supratrochlear foramen
Olecranon fossa
(8op)
Medial epicondyle
Lateral epicondyle
Condyle
Fig. 3.17 Lateral and craniocaudal views of the canine elbow. (Courtesy
Fig. 3.15 The dog humerus. (Cats do not have a supratrochlear foramen.)
of Panagiotis Mantis.)
Chapter 3 Skeletal system 
39
● Metacarpus - this is composed of five small long bones (Fig.
The shaft of the humerus has a slight twist on it. If the humerus is
3.18). In the dog and cat the first metacarpal bone (I), i.e.
broken, the resulting fracture is often in the form of a spiral and may
the most medial, is much smaller than the other metacarpal
affect the radial nerve that runs within the spiral causing temporary
bones (II-V), and is non-weight bearing. This forms part
or permanent radial nerve paralysis. This is indicated by the animal
of the dew claw. The metacarpals arficulate proximally
'knuckling' over on its lower forelimb.
with the distal row of carpal bones and distally with the
phalanges.
● Digits - these are composed of the phalanges, which are long
Elbow dysplasia is a common condition of the heavier breeds of
bones (Fig. 3.18). Each digit has three phalanges, except digit
dog, e.g. Newfoundland, St Bernard, Rottweiler, Basset hound. It
I - the dew claw - which has orly two. The proximal phalanx
encompasses a number of developmental conditions, such as an
 arficulates with a metacarpal bone. The middle phalarx
ununited anconeal process and detached olecranon process, which
arficulates with the phalanx above and below it. The distal
result in instability of the elbow joint, leading to osteoarthritis. The
disease can be inherited and there is a BVA/KC scheme to identify
the claw.
affected individuals and to help breeders select the most suitable
● There are pairs of small sesamoid bones behind the
dogs for breeding.
 metacarpophalangeal joints and the distal joints between the
phalangeal bones.
● Carpus - this is composed of seven short bones, the carpal
Bones of the hindlimb
bones, arranged in two rows (Fig. 3.18). The proximal row has
three bones, the most medial being the radial carpal bone,
The bones of the hindlimb (Fig. 3.1) are:
● Pelvis - this is the means by which the hindlimb connects
bone articulates proximally with the ulna. The accessory
to the body (Fig. 3.19). It consists of two hip bones or ossa
carpal bone lies on the lateral edge and projects caudally.
coxarum, which join together at the pubic symphysis. They
Distally, the first row of carpal bones articulates with the
form a firm articulation with the sacrum at the sacroiliac
second row of four carpal bones. The carpal bones also
joint. Each hip bone is formed from three bones - the ischinm,
arficulate wifh each other wifthin the row.
ilinm and pubis - grouped around one very small bone called
Radius
Ulna
Medial styloid ~
Lateral styloid
process
process
 Radial carpal -
bone
UInar carpal
Sesamoid bone
bone
- CIV
CI
 Base
CIl
MCII
MCIV
CII
MCI
MCV
xpog
MCII
Head
Proximal
 phalanx
Middle
phalanx
DigitV
Distal phalanx
Fig. 3.18 A Bones of the distal forelimb in the dog. Cl, Cll, etc. = carpal bones I, 2, etc. MC = metacarpal bones.
Metacarpal bone I is the dew claw. B Lateral and dorsopalmar views of the canine carpus and distal forelimb.
(Courtesy of Panagiotis Mantis.)
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
40
Median   
Wing
Sacroiliac
sacral
of the
lliac crest
joint
crest
sacrum
Illiac wing
Gluteal
surface of
the ilium
Body of-
Sr.
Illium
the sacrum
Greater ischial
Illiac shaft
(sciatic) notch
Ischiatic
-lliopubic
spine
eminences
Pubi:
Lesser ischial
Symphysis
(sciatic) notch
pubis
Obturator
Pubic
Ischium-
Symphysis
foramen
ischii
symphysis
Ischial-
tuberosity
Ischial arch
A
Fig. 3.I9 A Bones and bony features of the dog pelvis. BVentrodorsal view of the canine pelvis. (Courtesy of Richard Aspinall.)
the acetabular bone. The largest of these bones is the ilium,
which has a broad crarial expansion called the wing. The
Head
Greater
ischium has a prominent caudal projection called the ischial
trochanter
tuberosity. The ilium, ischium and pubis meet each other at
the acetabulum, which is the arficular socket in which the head
Neck ~
of the femur sits, forming the hip joint. The hip joint is a ball-
and-socket joint.
Lesser
trochanter
Hip dysplasia is an inherited condition that affects a range of larger
breeds of dog e.g. Labradors, Retrievers, German Shepherds. It
 caused by malformation of the femoral head and/or a shallow
or malformed acetabulum, resulting in subluxation of the hip joint
Femoral
leading to osteoarthritis. There is a BVA/KC scheme to help identify
shaft
affected dogs and to advise breeders on the choice of breeding stock.
 s e aq d   si   r  a o
as the teres or round ligament, which aftaches to a non-articular
area within the joint cavity called the acetabular fossa. On
eifther side of the pubic symphysis is a large hole called fhe
Medial
obturator forarmen that serves to reduce the weight of the pelvic
epicondyle
Lateral
girdle and to provide exfra surface area for the aftachment of 
epicondyle
 muscles and ligaments.
● Femur - this is a long bone and forms the thigh (Fig. 3.20).
Medial femoral
Lateral femoral
 On the proximal femur the arficular head faces medially to
condyle
condyle
arficulate with the acetabulum of the pelvis. The head is joined
to the shaft by a neck. Lateral to the head is a projection called
Trochlea
the greater trochanter and on the medial side is another smaller
Fig. 3.20 The dog femur.
projection called the lesser trochanter. Both of these are sites
for muscle affachment. The femur has a strong shaff and on
its distal extremity it has fwo caudally projecting condyles: the
in the origin of the gastrocnermius muscle. They articulate with
medial condyle and the lateral condyle, which arficulate with the
the condyles of the femur.
tibia at the stifle joint (Fig. 3.21). The patella runs between these
● Tibia and fibula - these long bones form the lower leg
condyles in the trochlea groove.
(Fig. 3.22). The tibia and fibula lie parallel to each other, the
● The patella is a sesamoid bone found within the tendon of
more medial bone, the tibia, being the much larger of the fwo.
inserfion of the quadriceps femoris muscle, which is the main
The tibia is expanded proximally where it arficulates with the
extensor of the stifle (see Ch. 4 and Fig. 3.21). Two more
femur. On the dorsal surface there is a prominence called the
sesamoid bones, called the fabellae are found behind the stifle
tibial crest for attachment of the quadriceps femoris muscle.
Chapter 3 Skeletal system 
41
Tibial plateau
forming the proximal row, the talus and calcaneus, arficulate
with the distal end of the tibia and fibula at the hock joint
Cranial
lntercondylar
(Fig. 3.23; see also Fig. 3.25). The talus, or tibial tarsal bone,
intercondylar area
eminence
is the most medial and has a proximal trochlea, which is
shaped to fit the end of the tibia. The calcaneus, or fibular
Lateral tibial
Medial tibial
condyle
condyle
tarsal bone, is posifioned laterally and has a large caudal
projection known as the tuber calcis, which forms the 'point'
Fibular head
of the hock.
Tibial tu berosity
Cranial tibial border
In some small breeds of dog, e.g. Yorkshire Terrier, the patella may
(tibial crest)
slip out of place, causing extreme pain and difficulty in extending the
stifle joint. This is an inherited condition and is due to malpositioning
Extensor groove
of the tibial crest or too shallow a trochlear groove on the distal end
 of the femur.
● Metatarsus and digits - these closely resemble the paftern of
the metacarpus and digits in the forepaw. The metatarsus is
 Tibial shaft
composed of four metatarsal bones, although some breeds
possess five, having a small metatarsal I or hind dew claw
(Fig. 3.23).
Fibular shaft
Splanchnic skeleton
This is composed of the splanchnic bones. A splanchnic bone is
a bone that develops in soff ftissue and is unafftached to the rest
Lateral malleolus
 Medial malleolus 
of the skeleton. The only example of a splanchric bone in the
dog and cat is the bone of the peris, the os penis. The urethra
lies in the urethral groove, on the ventral surface of the os penis
Fig. 3.21 Lateral view of the canine stifle joint. (Courtesy of Richard
in the dog. In the cat the urethral groove is on the dorsal surface
Aspinall.)
of the os penis, because of the different orientation of the penis
(see Ch. 11).
The cow has a splanchric bone in its heart, called the os cordis,
while birds have splanchnic bones forming a rim around the eye
to provide strength to the large eyeball (see Ch. 13).
Joints
When one bone connects to anofher they form an articulation,
 also known as an arthrosis or joint. Joints allow variable degrees
of movement and can be categorised into one of three groups:
● Fibrous joints
+ Cartilaginous joints
+ Synovial joints.
Fibrous joints
Fibrous joints are immovable joints and the bones forming them
are united by dense fibrous connective tissue, e.g. in the skull
fibrous joints urite the majority of the component bones and are
called sutures. The teeth are aftached to the bony sockets in the
Fig. 3.22 The dog tibia and fibula.
jaw bone by fibrous joints.
Fibrous joints are also classed as synarthroses, i.e. a type of joint
that permits liffle or no movement. Some cartilaginous joints also
Distally, the tibia has a prominent protrusion, the medial
fall into this category.
malleolus, which can be palpated on the medial aspect of the
hock. The fibula is a thin long bone lying laterally to the tibia.
Cartilaginous joints
It ends in a bony point called the lateral malleolus.
● Tarsus - this is formed from seven short bones, fhe tarsa!
bones, arranged in three rows (Fig. 3.23). The two bones
 and are united by cartilage, e.g. the pubic symphysis connecting the
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
42
 Medial
Lateral
Tibia
Fibula
Groove for peroneus
longus tendon
Head of talus-
Calcaneus
Central tarsal bone 
TIV
TII
TIII
TI
MTV
MTIV
MTI
MTIII
MTII
Proximal
 phalanx
Second digit
Middle
 
 phalanx
Distal
phalanx
Fig. 3.23 A The dog tarsus or hindpaw. TI,Tll, etc. = tarsal bones I, 2, etc. MT = metatarsal bones. B Lateral and
dorsoplantar views of the canine tarsus and distal hindlimb. (Courtesy of Panagiotis Mantis.)
two hip bones and the mandibular symphysis joining the fwo halves
 ssis e iar  so s 
 of the mandible. Both these joints are also classed as synarthroses.
thickened ligaments within the fibres of the joint capsule. These
Some cartilaginous joint may also be classed as amphiarthroses,
are most commonly found on either side of the joint, where
which allow some degree of movement between the bones, e.g.
they are called collateral ligaments. However, other synovial
between the bodies of the vertebrae, allowing for limited flexibil-
joints have stabilising ligaments attached to the articulating
ify of the spinal column.
bones within the joint - fthese are known as intracapsular liga-
ments and examples include the cruciate ligaments within the
Synovial joints
stifle joint (Fig. 3.25).
     s   n
Synovial joints or diarthroses allow a wide range of movement.
fibrocartilaginous discs or menisci within the joint cavity. These
In synovial joints, the bones are separated by a space filled
are found in the stifle joint - it has two crescent shaped menisci
with synovial fluid known as the joint cavity (Fig. 3.24). A joint
 a miq   a   
capsule surrounds the whole joint; fhe outer layer consists of
and the skull. These strucfures help to increase the range of
fibrous tissue, which serves as protection, and the joint cavity is
movement of the joint and act as 'shock absorbers', reducing
lined by the synovial membrane, which secretes synovial fluid. This
wear and tear.
lubricates the joint and provides nutrition for the hyaline articular
 Synovial joints allow considerable freedom of movement
cartilage covering the ends of the bone. Synovial fluid is a straw-
between the articulating bones, the extent of which depends
upon the type of synovialjoint. The movement allowed by a syn-
in large joints, especially in animals that have a lot of exercise.
ovial joint may be in a single plane only, or in multiple planes.
Chapter 3 Skeletal system 
43
The range of movements that are possible in synovial joints is:
 Flexion/extension - these are antagonistic movements of a joint.
 Flexion reduces the angle between two bones, i.e. bends the limb 
 Extension increases the angle between two bones i.e. straightens 
the limb
 Abduction/adduction - these movements affect the whole limb:
Abduction (meaning to 'take away") moves a body part away
Joint capsule
 from the median plane or axis, e.g moving the leg out sideways
Fibrous layer
 Adduction moves a body part back towards the central line or axis 
of joint
 of the body, e.g. moving the leg back to standing position 
 ansdea
 Rotation - the moving body part 'twists on its own axis, i.e. it rotates
Articular 
Ligament
cartilages
 Circumduction - the movement of an extremity, i.e. one end of a bone,
Synovial
in a circular pattern 
Subsynovial
 Gliding/stiding - the articular surfaces of the joint slide over one
Meniscus
tissue
 another
not present in
 Protraction - the animal moves its limb cranially, i.e. advances the limb 
 all joints
forward,as when walking
 Retraction - the animal moves the limb back towards the body.
Bone
Fig. 3.24 Structure of a typical synovial joint.
Synovial joints can be further classified into subcategories
based upon the types of movement that they allow (Table 3.1).
Fibula
Tibia
Humerus
Olecranon
Talus
Calc
Collateral
ligament 
Radiu
Ulna
Femu
Trochlea-
Patella
(patella removed)
Lateral and
Fabella
medial menisci
Collateral
Cruciate
ligaments
ligaments
Patellar.
Patellar ligament
ligament
(folded back)
Fibul
Tibia
c
Cranial view
Medial view
Fig. 3.25 AThe elbow joint, lateral view. BThe tarsus or hock joint, lateral view. C The stifle joint, cranial and
medial views.
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
44
Table 3.I Properties of different synovial joint types
Type of synovial joint'
Description
Example of joint
Plane/gliding
Allows sliding of one bony surface over the other
Joints between the rows of carpal and tarsal
bones 
Hinge
Allows movement in one plane only, i.e. flexion and extension
 Elbow; stifle 
Pivot
Consists of a peg sitting within a ring; allows rotation
 Atantoaxial joint (between Cl and C2)
Consists of a convex surface (condyles) that sits in a corresponding 
Hock or (tarsus)
 concave surface; allows movement in two planes (flexion, extension
 and overextension)
Ball and socket
 Consists of a rounded end or ball, sitting within a socket or cup;
Hip; shoulder
 allows a great range of movement
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
CHAP
TER
Muscular system
KEY POINTS
 The muscular system comprises striated or skeletal
animal is alert or frightened and decreases when it is
muscle, i.e. muscle which is attached to the skeleton
relaxed or asleep.
and brings about movement of a region.
 All muscles consist of a central belly and, at the point
 Each striated muscle fibre is flled with myofibrils 
of attachment to a bone, an origin (often called the 
made of two contractile proteins, actin and myosin.
head), and an insertion.
 At the cellular level, muscle contraction results from
 Skeletal muscles may be either:
the formation of cross-bridges between the actin and
 Extrinsic, i.e. attached from one major structure,
myosin molecules.
such as the trunk, to another structure, such as a
 Muscle fibres are stimulated to contract by nerve
limb. These muscles bring about movement of the
impulses carried by nerve fibres. The number of muscle
whole limb in relation to other body parts
fibres supplied by a single nerve fibre is called a motor
 Intrinsic, i.e. attached at both ends within the one structure,
unit. In muscles which perform accurate and delicate
such as a limb. These muscles bring about movement
movements, a nerve fibre wilsupply a few muscle
within the individual limb, e.g bending an elbow.
fibres, but in muscles which perform less accurate
Each area has a range of specialised muscles designed
movements a nerve fibre wil supply many muscle fibres.
to bring about the specifi types of movement 
 Muscle tissue is always under a degree of tension,
necessary for the animal's normal function.
known as muscle tone. The tone increases when an
The muscular system includes all the skeletal or striated muscles
 one nerve fibre will vary depending on the type of movement for
within the body. Striated muscle is that fissue aftached to the skel-
which the muscle is responsible. If it is a delicate movement then
 eton that is under voluntary or conscious control (for microscopic
a nerve fibre may only innervate a small number of muscle fibres.
structure see Ch. 2).
 However, in larger movements, such as those made by the mus-
cles of the limbs, one nerve fibre may supply 200 or more mus-
e   e       
Muscle structure and function
supplies is called a motor unit.
Contraction
Muscle tone
Muscle is stimulated to contract when it receives a nerve impulse
Many of the skeletal muscles in the body are always in a slight
from the cenfral nervous system. Each striated muscle fibre is
state of tension, known as muscle tone. Even when an animal is at
composed of myofibrils made of thin actin filaments and thick
rest, muscles, such as those responsible for maintaining posfure,
myosin filaments. These fibres overlap in such a way that under
will not be truly relaxed. Muscle tone is achieved by a propor
   e  s   
tion of the motor units within the muscle being activated so that
and dark bands or striations. These bands are separated into units
some of the muscle fibres are confracting while others are relaxed.
called sarcormeres, which are the units of confraction.
The nervous system can adjust this, and the number of motor
During contraction, the actin and myosin filaments slide over
units stimulated will increase when the animal is in an anxious
one another and cross-bridges form between the heads of the myo-
state, i.e. the muscles become 'twitchy' or jumpy'. Thus, muscles
sin filaments and the heads of the actin filaments. The cross-bridges
undergo two types of contraction:
swing through an arc, pulling the thin filaments past the thick ones,
and the sarcomere shortens. Once this movement is completed the
 Isometric contraction - when tension is generated in the muscle, i.e.
cross-bridge detaches itself from the thin filament and reaftaches
muscle tone is increased, but the muscle does not shorten
itself further away - in other words, the cross-bridges befween the
 Isotonic contraction - the muscle actually moves or shortens.
ening the muscle (Fig. 4.1). This process requires energy input,
which is provided by adenosine triphosphate (ATP) molecules; cal-
The more a muscle is used or exercised, the larger it will become -
cium ions are also essenfial to the process of muscle confraction.
it is said to be hypertrophied. However, if a muscle is not used for
The nerve fhat stimulates fhe muscle to confract enters fhe
 e n a ss n  o  a n 
muscle and then splits up into many fibres to innervate the bun-
recumbent, or if a limb is in a cast, ift will wifther or shrink in size -
dles of muscle fibres. The number of muscle fibres supplied by
it is said to be atrophied.
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
46
Stretched
Thick filaments
Thin filaments
Origin
A
L
Light band Hzone Light band
 Muscle belly
Contracted
Connective tissue
between muscle fibres
Thin actin filament
Cross-bridge
Tendon
Thick myosin filament
Insertion
Fig. 4.2 Basic structure of a muscle. The connective tissue between the
muscle fibres is continuous with that of the tendon.
 in some cases tendons are far longer than the muscle itself e.g.
c
 flexor and extensor tendons running over the digits.
Fig. 4.I The 'ratchet mechanism' involving actin and myosin within
Not all muscles take the 'classical' shape described above.
 striated muscle fibres. A Muscle before contra.ction (shortening).
Somefimes fhey are present in flat sheets, in which case fhe
B When the muscle shortens, the thick and thin flaments slide in
tendon is also drawn out into a flat sheet of connecfive tissue -
between one another.The dark bands remain the same width in the
this type of arrangement is called an aponeurosis, e.g. the mus-
shortened (contracted) muscle but the light bands and 'H zones get
 cles of the abdominal wall. Some muscles form a circular ring 
narrower. C Close-up view of the 'ratchet mechanism', showing
and serve to control the entrance or exit to a structure, e.g. the
cross-bridges between the thin actin and thick myosin filaments.
stomach and fhe bladder. These are called sphincter muscles.
A bursa is a connective tissue saclined with synovial membrane
and filled with synovial fluid. These typically develop between
a bony prominence and a tendon, ligament or muscle and their
 Muscle atrophy or wasting may be the result of many factors, e.g.
function is to reduce friction between the associated strucfure and
lack of use as a result of lameness, fracture, denervation (injury to
the bone. Sometimes a bursa completely wraps around a tendon
the nerve that supplies it) or a generalised disease condition, such 
forming a synovial or tendon sheath (Fig. 4.3).
as neoplasia. Muscle enlargement or hypertrophy may result from
The skeletal muscles of the body can be classed as eifher
overexercise or overuse. This may be seen where a patient has
intrinsic or extrinsic:
fractured a limb and the muscles in the other limb must work harder
to support it.
 Intrinsic muscies lie completely within one region of the body where
they have their origin and insertion. They act on the joints in that part
only; for example,when a dog bends its elbow it is using the intrinsic 
Anatomy of a muscle
muscles of the forelimb.
 Extrinsic muscles run from one region of the body to another and
 alter the position of the whole part, e.g. alimb, in relation to the
A 'classically’ shaped muscle (Fig. 4.2) has a thick, fleshy cen-
other.The muscles that attach the foreleg of the dog to the trunk
tral part called the belly and tapers at each end - the head. Here,
are extrinsic muscles; they move the whole foreleg in relation to the
fhe connective tissue muscle sheath is continuous wifh the dense
trunk.
fibrous connective tissue of the tendon fhat aftaches the muscle
to a bone. A muscle is affached to a bone at fwo points: its starf-
ing point is called its origin; this moves least during contraction.
The opposite end, where the muscle inserts on the bone, is called
The skeletal muscles
the insertion. However, a muscle can have more than one belly, all
inserting at one point, in which case the muscle is said to have
a number of heads, e.g. the biceps muscle has two heads. The
To simplify the sfudy of these muscles we can look at one area of
length of the tendon aftaching the muscle to a bone will vary, and
the body at a time.
Chapter 4 Muscular system 
47
Fibrous tissue
origin is the jugular process of the occipital bone and it inserts
Tendon
on the angle and ventral surface of the mandible
● Masseter - this muscle closes the jaw and lies lateral to
Bursa - filled 
the mandible. It originates from the zygomatic arch and
with synovial fluid
inserts on the masseteric fossa on the lateral surface of the
mandible
● Temporalis - this muscle also closes the jaw and is the largest
Bone
and strongest muscle of the head. It covers much of the
 dorsal and lateral surfaces of the skull. It fills the temporal
fossa of the skull and inserts on the coronoid process of the
mandible
● Medial and lateral pterygoids - these are deep muscles that lie
Fibrous tissue
medial to the mandible. They aid the temporalis and masseter
 r  e a n   a   s
Tendon
side to side movements of the mouth.
Synovial sheath
The tone in the muscles of the jaw responsible for closure, i.e. the
enclosing tendon
temporalis and the masseter, are what keeps the mouth closed
when it is not in use.
Bone
Muscles of the eye
The extrinsic muscles of the eye (Fig. 4.5), also called the extraocu-
lar muscles, are responsible for moving the eye within its bony
socket. These muscles are:
Fig. 4.3 A Structure of a bursa. B Structure of a synovial sheath.
● Four RECTuIS muscles: dorsal rectus, ventral rectus, medial
rectus, lateral rectus - these four muscles all insert on fhe
sclera of the eyeball near the 'equator', at the surface that
corresponds to fheir name, ie. the dorsal recfus muscle inserts 
Muscles of the head
 On the upper part of the sclera. Their name also reflects their 
action - the dorsal rectus muscle turns the eye upwards;
Muscles of facia! expression
the venfral recfus furns the eye downwards; the medial
The muscles of facial expression are intrinsic muscles that move
rectus furns the eye inwards; the lateral muscle furns the eye
the lips, cheeks, nostrils, eyelids and external ears. A number of
oufwards
muscles are responsible for these movements, all of which are
·Two OBLIQuE muscles: - dorsal oblique and ventral oblique
innervated by the facial nerve (cranial nerve VII).
these fwo muscles are posifioned as their name describes and
they act to rotate the eye about its visual axis
Muscles of mastication
The main muscles responsible for the masticatory or 'chewing'
action of the jaw (Fig. 4.4) are:
Dorsal rectus
● Digastricus - this muscle opens the jaw, aided by gravity, and
is located on the caudovenfral surface of the mandible. Its
Trochlear
nerve
Retractor
Temporalis
bulbi
Dorsal
oblique
Lateral
Medial
rectus
rectus
Optic
nerve
Ventral
anb!gog
Digastricus
Ventralrectus
Masseter
Fig. 4.5 The positions of the extraocular muscles, viewed from behind
Fig. 4.4 The muscles of mastication.
the eyeball.
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
48
● Retractor bulbi - this muscle forms a muscular cone around the
The diaphragm
optic nerve at the back of the eye and its action is to pull the
 The diaphragm is the sheet of muscle that separates the thoracic
eye deeper into the socket.
and abdominal cavifies (Fig. 4.7). It consists of a central tendon
and a muscular periphery that arises from the lumbar vertebrae,
Other muscles of the head
caudal ribs and sternum. The lumbar porfion of the muscle con-
These incude
sists of thickened muscular bundles called the right and left crura
● Intrinsic and extrinsic muscles in the tongue, which enable the
(sing. crus).
 tongue to carry out a wide range of delicate movements
The diaphragm is the main muscle of inspiration. When it con-
● Many muscles are found in the pharynx, larynx and soff
tracts, the lungs expand and draw in air (see Ch. 8). In the cen-
palate, which enable these strucfures to carry out their specific
tre of the diaphragm there are three openings that allow through
functions, e.g. swallowing and sound production
strucfures that pass from the thoracic region into the abdomen.
These openings are:
● Extrinsic muscles aftach the head to the neck and move it in
relation to the neck.
● Aortic hiatus - this fransmits the aorfa, azygous vein and
thoracic duct
· Oesophageat hiatus - transmits the oesophagus and vagal nerve
Muscles of the trunk
trunks
Muscles of the vertebra! column
● Caval foramen - lies within the central tendon and transmits
Groups of muscles lie above and below fhe vertebral column
the caudal vena cava.
(Fig. 4.6). These are:
Abdomina! muscies
● Epaxial muscles - this group lie dorsal to the transverse
 processes of the vertebrae, ie. they are above the vertebral
The abdominal wall on each side of the body is composed of four
muscles, which form broad, flat sheets (Fig. 4.8). Their fibres run
column. The epaxial muscles are numerous and are arranged
 in three longitudinal groups, which together span the length 
in all directions, which gives the abdominal wall great strength.
of the vertebral column. Their functions are to support the
Their function is to protect the organs and strucfures of the abdo
spine, extend the vertebral column and allow lateral flexion
men. The muscles of the abdominal wall are:
● Hypaxial rmuscles - this group lies ventral to the transverse
● External abdominal oblique - the most superficial of the lateral
 processes of the vertebrae, ie. they are below the vertebral
abdominal muscles. It originates from the lateral surfaces of
the ribs and lumbar fascia. It terminates in a wide aponeurosis
column. One region is associated with the neck, another with
the back. The hypaxial muscles flex the neck and tail, and
in the midline known as the linea alba.
contribute to flexion of the vertebral column.
● Internal abdominal oblique - the intermediate muscle of
 the lateral abdominal wall, which also terminates in an
Muscles of the thorax
aponeurosis on the linea alba.
The muscles of the fhoracic wall are mostly involved in respira-
tion. The main muscles are:
● External intercostals - the most superficial, which originate
Vertebra
from the caudal border of one rib and inserf on fhe cranial
Right crus
Left crus
border of the rib behind it. Thus, each muscle is confined to
one intercostal space. These muscles assist in inspirafion
● Internal intercostals - lie below the external intercostals within
the intercostal spaces and originate from the cranial surface of
Caudal
one rib and insert on the caudal border of the rib in front of it.
vena cava
These muscles assist in expiration, which is a largely passive
(caval foramen)
movement.
Aorta
(aortic hiatus)
Epaxial muscles
sngeydosao
(oesophageal
Spinous process
hiatus)
of vertebra
Sternal par
Vertebralbody
of diaphragm
Sternum
Hypaxial muscles 
Rib
Fig. 4.6 The positions of the muscles around the vertebral column.
Fig. 4.7 Structure of the diaphragm.Viewed from abdominal side.
Chapter 4 Muscular system 
49
Fig. 4.8 The abdominal muscles
and position of the linea alba.
External
abdominal oblique
Transversus
abdominis
Internal abdominal-
oblique (cut edge)
Aponeurosis of the
Rectus abdominis
transversus abdominis
Area of deep
Transversalis fascia
Su euingu!
Linea alba
Prepubic tendor
● Transversus abdorminis - the deepest of the lateral abdominal
● Trapezius - this is a friangular sheet of muscle that originafes
muscles which also terminates in an aponeurosis on the linea alba.
from the dorsal midline from C2 to C7 and inserts on the spine
● Rectus abdominus - this is a broad band of muscle on each
of the scapula
side of the linea alba that forms the floor of the abdomen. The
ACTION - draws the leg forward and profracts the limb
 is p q s an  s se s
● Pectorals - these muscles run from fhe ribs and sternum and
inserts on the pubis by means of the prepubic tendon.
insert on the humerus
The linea alba, or white line, is the combined aponeuroses of fhe fhree
 ACTION - adduct the limb and hold the forelimb against the
lateral abdominal muscles and it extends along the ventral midline
body wall
from the xiphoid process of the sternum to the pubic symphysis.
● Latissimus dorsi - this is a large, fan-shaped muscle, which has
a very broad origin on the thoracic spine and inserts on the
humerus
The linea alba can easily be seen when a vet makes a midline incision
ACTION - retracts the forelimb
in the abdomen, e.g. during a bitch spay or any type of laparotomy.
● Brachiocephalicus - this muscle runs from the base of the skull
 Because it is tough, it provides a good tissue in which to place
to an inserfion on fthe cranial aspect of the humerus
 sutures without the risk of them pulling out.
ACTION - when the limb is on the ground, it flexes the
neck and bends the neck laterally; when the limb is not tak-
The inguinal ring is a slit-like opening in the aponeuroses of
ing weight, it draws the foreleg forwards or profracts the
the abdominal muscles, in the region of the groin. This allows the
limb.
 passage of vessels from the abdomen to the external geritalia and
mammary glands, and transmits the structures of the spermafic
cord to the scrofum. Occasionally the inguinal ring is damaged
Intrinsic group
causing it to enlarge and allow strucfures such as a piece of intes-
The intrinsic muscles of the forelimb all originate and insert on
tine or a pad of fat to pass through, forming an inguinal hernia.
the forelimb. They include:
● Supraspinatus - arises from and fills the supraspinous fossa
Muscles of the forelimb
of the scapula and inserts on the greater fubercle of the
humerus
The muscles of fhe forelimb can be divided into extrinsic and
ACTION - extends the shoulder and stabilises the shoulder
intrinsic muscles.
joint
● Infraspinatus - arises from and fills the infraspinous fossa
Extrinsic group
 of the scapula and inserts on the greater tubercle of the
The extrinsic muscles of the forelimb (Fig. 4.9) aftach the forelimb
humerus
to the trunk forming a synsarcosis (the aftachment of a structure to
ACTION - helps to stabilise fhe shoulder joint and flexes the
fhe skeleton by muscles instead of the more convenfional joint).
shoulder joint.
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
50
peziu:
oraspinatus
Infraspinatus
Infraspinatus
Supraspinatus
Biceps brachii
Triceps
Brachiali
A
B
Fig. 4.9 Muscles of the upper forelimb. A Superficial muscles. B Deep muscles.
Elbow region (Fig. 4.10)
● Triceps brachii - this muscle has four heads with separate origins.
Three of the heads originate from the proximal humerus and
the fourth head originates from the scapula. However, they all
Biceps brachi
share a common inserfion on fhe olecranon of the ulna. A bursa
 lies between the bone and the tendon to prevent friction 
ACTION - extends the elbow joint
scapula and inserts on the radius and ulna
Triceps brachii
ACTION - flexes the elbow joint
+ Brachialis - this muscle originates from the humerus and
Extensor carpi
inserts on fhe radius and ulna
radialis
ACTION - flexes the elbow joint
ulnaris
Common digital
Carpus and digits
extensor
There are many muscles responsible for flexing and extending the
Flexor ulnaris
lateralis
carpus and the digits. The muscle bellies are grouped around the
radius and ulna and commuricate wifh the digits by means of
long tendons.
The main flexors and extensors are:
Lateral digital
s pe sau a u se - siosua di o e
extensor
on the carpals; they run in front of the lower limb and foot
● Two digital extensors - originating from the humerus and
inserting on the third phalanx; they run in front of the lower
limb and foot
● Two carpal flexors - run behind the carpus and foot
●Two digital flexors - the superficial digital flexor inserts on the second
phalanx and the deep digital flexor inserts on the third phalanx.
Fig. 4.I0 Some of the muscles of the lower forelimb.
Chapter 4 Muscular system 
51
Muscles of the hindlimb
● Quadriceps femoris - this large muscle runs down the cranial
aspect of the thigh. It consists of four parts, all of which insert
The hindlimb is aftached to the pelvic girdle by a mobile ball and
at the same point on the tibial tuberosity or crest. The tendon
socket joint, the hip joint. The sublumbar hypaxial muscles of the
of this muscle contains the patella, which arficulates with the
vertebral column are extrinsic muscles aftached to the vertebral
femur at the stifle joint
column and to the pelvic girdle.
ACTION - extends the stifle joint 
The intrinsic muscles of the hindlimb all insert on fhe hindlimb
● Adductor muscles - lie on the medial aspect of the thigh and
itself or on the pelvic girdle and are described below.
hold the limb close into the body (Fig. 4.12):
Muscles of the thigh
The tendon of the pectineus muscle is sometimes transected 
These originate on the pelvic girdle and insert on the femur.
to relieve pressure on the hip joint of dogs with hip dysplasia.
· Gluteals - three muscles, the superficial, middle and deep gluteals,
 Pectineotomy does not cure the problem but may provide a degree
and the tensor fascia latae form the curve of the rump and are
 of pain relief.
 powerful extensors of the hip joint 
O Hamstring group - form the caudal aspect of the thigh and
O Pectineus - this muscle runs from the pubis to the distal femur
ACTION - adducts the limb
(Fig. 4.11). They provide the main propulsive force of the
O Sartorins - inserts on the cranial border of the fibia with the
animal and consists of three muscles:
gracilis muscle
 O Biceps femoris - is the most lateral muscle in this group
ACTION - adducts the limb
(Fig. 4.11). It originates from the pelvis and runs over the
O Gracilis - forms the caudal half of the medial surface of the
femur to the tibia and inserts on the calcaneus of the hock
thigh
ACTION - extends the hip, flexes the stifle and extendls the hock
 ACTION - adducts the limb
O Semitendinosus - runs from the pelvis and inserts on the tibia
and calcaneus
Muscles of the lower hindlimb
ACTION - extends the hip, flexes the stifle and extendls the hock
These muscles act mairly on the hock joint (Fig. 4.13). They
● Semimembranosus - is the most medial muscle of the hamstring 
include:
 group. It runs from the pelvis to the femur and tibia
● Gastrocnemius - this muscle originates from the caudal aspect
ACTION - extends the hip and flexes the stifle
of the femur and inserts on the calcaneus of the hock. The
Middle gluteal-
Superficial gluteal
Fig. 4.I I Superficial muscles of the left lateral thigh area.
(aponeurosis cut)
Quadriceps
Semimembranosus
femoris
Semitendinosus
Cranial belly
of sartorius
-Biceps femoris
Tensorfascialata
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
52
Fig. 4.12 Muscles of the medial aspect of the left thigh.
Superficial inguinal ring
Rectus femoris
Borders of the
femoral triangle
Adductor
Gracilis-
Vastus medialis
Pectineus
Semimembranosus
Sartorius, cranial part
Semitendinosus
artorius, caudal part
Gastrocnemius
+ Achilles tendon - this is the large, strong tendon that runs
Gastrocnemius
down the back of the leg to the point of the hock. It includes
the tendons of inserfion of the gastrocnemius, biceps femoris
and semitendinosus, all of which insert on the calcaneus, and
Superficial digital
also of fhe superficial digital flexor muscle, which continues 
Fibularis longus
flexor
over the point of the hock and down to its inserfion on
the digits. There is a bursa at the point of inserftion on the
calcaneus.
 Deep digital flexor
Anterior tibial
The popliteal lymph node lies within the fibres of the gastrocnemius
Tuber calcis
muscle and can be palpated just caudal to the stifle joint. Normally it
Long digital
is about 2 em long but if it is enlarged it may indicate some form of
extensor
 infection (or tumour) in the distal extremity.
Muscles of the hock and digits
As is seen in the forelimb, there are a number of muscles respon-
sible for flexing and extending the hock and the digits:
● Anterior tibialis - runs from the proximal end of the tibia to the
tarsus
Fig. 4.13 Muscles of the lower left hindlimb.
ACTION - flexes the hock and rotates the paw medially
● Three digital extensors - run in front of the hock and foot
tendons of this muscle contain fwo small sesamoid bones or
fabellae that arficulate wifh the caudal aspect of the stifle joint
flexor runs from the femur to the phalanges and is one of the
ACTION - extends the hock and flexes stifle
 components of the Achilles tendor.
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
CHAPTER
5
Nervous system and special
senses
KEY POINTS
The functional unit of the nervous system is the
fluid. In addition, every blood vessel entering the
neuron. Neurons connect with each other by
brain is wrapped in a layer of protective cells forming
 synapses to create a complex network that conveys
the blood-brain barrier, which prevents potentially
electrical impulses all around the body. The function
harmful substances reaching the brain tissue.
 of this system is to take in information from the
The whole body is supplied by the peripheral nerves.
external and internal environments and to initiate an
These are given off as cranial nerves from the brain
appropriate response.
pos jeuids ayl woy saaau jeuids pue
 The brain and spinal cord form the control centre of
There are five special senses, each of which is vital for
this network and consist of dense accumulations of
the survival of the individual.
nervous tissue.
External stimuli, e.g. sight and sound, are perceived
The brain can be seen to be divided into fore, mid and
by specialised receptor cells located within the special
hindbrains. Each part of the brain performs a different
sense organs.
function and is vital for the survival of the animal.
 Information from the receptor cells is transmitted
 To ensure that the brain functions normally it is
by nerve impulses to the brain by cranial nerves. It is
 protected externally by a bony cranium and three
interpreted within specific centres in the brain and a
response is initiated.
system consisting of canals filled with cerebrospinal
The presence of a nervous system allows an arimal to respond, in
synapses. All nerve pafhways are made up of neurons and syn-
a coordinated manner, to both the demands of the external envi-
apses. Complex nervous tissue, such as that of the brain and spi-
nal cord, is made of neurons supported by cornective tissue and
of the nervous system are:
neuroglial cells, whose function is to supply nutrients to and carry
● To receive stimuli from the external and internal environment
waste materials away from the neurons.
● To analyse and integrate these stimuli
 Each neuron consists of the following parts:
● To bring about the necessary response.
+ A cell body containing a nucleus
Although the nervous system works as a well-integrated com-
● Several short processes called dendrons, which are formed
from many finer dendrites. These carry nerve impulses towards
posite unit within the body, for descriptive purposes, it can be
divided into:
the cell body. A single cell body may receive as many as 6000
dendrons from other neurons
● Central nervous system (CNS) - the brain and spinal cord
+ One long process called arn axon. These carry nerve impulses
● Peripheral nervous system - this consists of all the nerves
away from the cell body. The axon leaves the cell at a point
given offrom the CNS:
known as the axon hillock.
O Cranial nerves - leaving the brain.
 Nerve impulses from the dendrons are directed across the cell
O Spinal nerves - leaving the spinal cord
body towards the axon hillock and confinue down the axon, reach-
O Autonomic nervous system - this comprises nerves which
ing their final destination very rapidly. The speed of transmis-
supply the viscera and it can be further divided into:
sion along the axon is increased by the presence of a myelin sheath.
■ sympathetic nervous system
Myelin is a lipoprotein material made by Schwann cells surround-
■ parasympathetic nervous system.
ing the axon. Its whitish appearance contributes to the colour of
the more visible nerves in the body and to the white mafter of the
CNS. The myelin sheath is interrupted at intervals of about 1mm
Nervous tissue
by spaces known as the nodes of Ranvier and it is through these
that the axon tissue receives its nutrient and oxygen supply. Non-
Neuron structure
myelinated fibres are embedded within the Schwann cells (Fig.
5.1) and despite their name are acfually covered in a single layer
The main cell of the nervous system is the neuron (see Ch. 2,
of myelin. Totally uncovered fibres are rare and may be found in
Fig. 2.16). Neurons are responsible for the transmission of nerve
areas such as the cornea of the eye.
impulses throughout the nervous tissue. Nerve impulses pass
Neurons vary in size - the diameter of the axons and den-
  sd  a p si m e aq  s
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
54
Cytoplasm of Schwann cell
but others found in the body include adrenaline (epinephrine),
serotonin and dopamine.
As the nerve impulse fravels down the axon, the vesicles
drift towards the presynaptic mermbrane (Fig. 5.3) and release
 Non-myelinated nerve
the transmitter into the synaptic cleft. It diffuses rapidly across
fibres embedded within
Schwann cell
this gap and combines with the postsynaptic membrane, making
the membrane more 'excitable' and allowing the transmission
of the nerve impulse to confinue on down the nerve fibre. The
        e s
that destroy any acetylcholine remaining in the synaptic cleft -
and the synapse refurns to its resting state ready for the nexf
Nucleus of Schwann cell
nerve impulse. Effective transmission of a nerve impulse across
Fig. 5.I Cross-section through a Schwann cell showing non-myelinated
the synapse will only occur in the presence of calcinm ions.
 nerve fibres embedded within the cytoplasm.
The nervous symptoms of eclampsia in the bitch and milk fever in
destination of the nerve fibre. This may be anything from a few
the cow are caused by low levels of calcium in the blood, affecting
millimetres to more than a metre long. Neurons also vary in shape
the transmission of nerve impulses.
(Fig. 5.2).
Generation of a nerve impulse
Synapses
Each axon terminates in a structure called a synapse (Fig. 5.3).
Nerve impulses transmitted along axons and dendrites can be
      sn   m
considered to be electrical phenomena. An impulse changes
synapse is referred to as a neuromuscular junction and the nerve
the electrical charge of the neuron by altering the relationship
impulse stimulates confraction of the muscle fibre. Within the
between the negafive charge of the cell contents and the posifive
button-like presynaptic ending are vesicles containing chemical
charge of the cell membrane. This results from a change in the
transmifter substances. The most common chemicalis acetylcholine
permeability of the cell membrane fo sodium and potassium ions,
Dendrites
Dendrites
Dendron
Dendron
Cell body
Cell body
Axon
Axon
 Direction
of impulses
Synaptic
Direction of
endings
impulses
 Synaptic
endings
A
Dendrites
Dendrites
forming a
Dendrons
fat fan
Cell body
Cell body
Collateral
Direction
Axon
Axon
of impulses
Direction
of impulses
 Synaptic
Collateral
endings
c
D
Fig. 5.2 The variation in shape of neurons. A Bipolar neuron. B Pseuda-unipolar neuron, e.g. a sensory neuron. C Multipolar
 neuron, e.g. a motor neuron. D Multipolar neuron, e.g. Purkinje cellfrom the cerebellum of the brain.
Chapter 5 Nervous system and special senses
55
-30
Repolarisation
-Depolarisation
 Nerve impulse
90
Threshold
120
 Resting
Hyper polarisatior
potential
Na
Terminal branch of an axon
Kt
Na
↑ stimulation
Fig. 5.4 The alterations in electrical charge that occur in an axon as a.
nerve impulse travels along it from right to left The charge differences are
Neurofibrils
brought about by moverment of sodium and potassium ions across the
axon membrane.
● The number of neurons activated by a single stimulus - a strong
weak stimulus produces activity in a small number
● The type of neuron stimulated - some have an excitatory effect
Mitochondrion
while others have an inhibitory effect.
Classification of nerves
Peripheral nerves can be classified according to their function
and to the structures they supply.
Synaptic vesicles
Sensory nerves - carry impulses towards the CNS
Motor nerves - carry impulses away from the CNS
Mixed nerves - carry both sensory and motor fibres.
Presynaptic
membrane
An intercalated neuron is one that lies between a sensory neuron
  sme   s    e p
Synaptic cleft
within a nerve pathway.
 Transmitter substance
 Afferent nerves - carry impulses towards a structure, usually in
diffusing across the cleft 
the CNS
 Efferent nerves - carry impulses away from a structure ,usually
in the CNS 
Afferent and efferent are also terms used within other systems,
    n s r  e as
 capillaries going to and leaving organs.
Nerve fibres may be further classified according to the organ
Fig. 5.3 The structure of a synapse.
with which they are associated.
causing an exchange of ions between the inside and the outside of
 Visceral sensory and motor nerves - nerves that are associated with
the neuron (Fig. 5.4).
the visceral body systems, i.e. the heart, digestive, respiratory, urinary
For a short time affer the impulse has passed, the nerve fibre
 and reproductive systems. Stimuli are carried by visceral sensory
becomes refractive, ie. it cannot be reactivated by another impulse
nerves from blood vessels, mucous membranes and the visceral
until the permeability of the cell membrane refurns to normal. This 
 organs to the CNS. Impulses are transmitted from the CNS by
ensures that the flow of impulses travels only in one direction.
visceral motor nerves to smooth muscle and glandular tissue, where
 A nerve impulse is an all-or-nothing phenomenon - the nerve is
they initiate a response.
either stimulated or it is not; there is no gradation of impulse. A
 Somatic sensory and motor nerves - nerves that are associated with
particular neuron will always fransmit with the same power or the
the somatic structures in the body, i.e. receptors in the skin, muscles.
joints and tendons and in specialised somatic organs such as the ear
same speed. The different effects of the nervous system depend on:
and eye. Stimuli are carried by somatic sensory nerves towards the
● The number of nerve impulses transmitted per second - a weak
CNS and nerve impulses are carried by somatic motor nerves to 
stimulus produces few impulses at long intervals, while a
skeletal muscles, where they initiate a response.
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
56
The tissue of the cerebral hemispheres consists of:
The central nervous system
containing milions of cell bodies of neurons. Deeper in the
During embryonic development of the CNS, a hollow neural
brain are groups of cellbodies forming centres or nuclei, which
tube forms from the ectodermal layer of the inner cell mass
act as relay stations collecting information and sending out
 of the embryo. This neural tube runs along the dorsal surface of
impulses to a variety of areas
fhe embryo and, as ift develops, nerve fibres grow out laterally
● An inner layer of white matter made of tracts of myelinated
extending to all parts of the body and eventually forming the
nerve fibres linking one area to another. Histologically the
peripheral nervous system. The anterior end of the fube becomes
the brain and the remaining tube becomes the spinal cord. The
tissue appears white because of the high proporfion of the
white lipoprotein myelin.
brain and spinal cord are hollow and are filled wifh cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF).
The thalamus is found deep in the fissue of the posterior part of
the forebrain. Its function is to process informafion from the sense
The brain
organs and relay it to the cerebral cortex.
The hypothalarmus lies venfral to the thalamus and has several
The funcfion of the brain is to control and coordinate all the activ-
functions:
ifies of the normal body. The brain is a hollow, swollen structure
I. It acts as a link between the endocrine and nervous systems
lying within the crarial cavity of the skull, which protects it from
by secreting a series of releasing hormones that are then
mechanical damage. In many species, thre distinct areas can
 stored in the pifuitary gland
be identified - these are the forebrain, midbrain and hindbrain.
 o  q  e   n
2. It helps to control the autonomic nervous system by
 influencing a range of involuntary actions such as sweating.
because the right and leff cerebral hemispheres of the forebrain
are enlarged and overlie the midbrain (Fig. 5.5).
shivering, vasodilation and vasoconstriction
 3. It exerts the major influence over homeostasis in the body by
Forebrain
influencing osmofic balance of body fluids, the regulation of body
 This consists of the cerebrum, thalamus and hypothalamus.
temperature, and control of thirst and hunger centres in the brain
 The cerebrum - or right and left cerebral hemispheres - takes up
On the ventral surface of the forebrain (Fig. 5.6) the following
the greater part of the forebrain and contains up to 90% of all the
strucfures can be seen:
neurons in the entire nervous system (Fig. 5.5). The right and leff 
sides are linked by the corpus callosum. This consists of a tract of
● Optic chiasma - nerve impulses, carried by the opfic nerve
(cranial nerve I) from the right eye pass to the right side of the
white mafter whose nerve fibres run across the brain between the
right and left hemispheres. It is found in the roof of the third ven-
brain and to the left side via the optic chiasma (and similarly
for the leff eye). This ensures that information from each eye
tricle, which is part of the hollow ventricular system inside the
brain and contains CSF.
reaches both sides of the brain
The surface of the hemispheres is deeply folded, which enables
● Pituitary gland - an endocrine gland aftached below the
a large surface area to be enclosed within the small cranial cavify
hypothalamus by a short stalk (see Ch. 6)
and allows nutrients in the CSF to reach the cell bodies of neu-
● Olfactory bulbs - these are a pair of bulbs which form the most
rons lying deep inside the brain tissue. The folds are known as
rostral part of the brain They are responsible for the sense of
 gyri (upfolds), sulci (shallow depressions) and fssures (deep crev-
smell or olfaction. Their size is determined by the sense of smell
      s   s
Each cerebral hemisphere consists of four lobes each of which
and hence an excellent sense of smell, while humans have very
contains specific centres or nuclei with specific functions related to
small olfactory bulbs. The cat has larger olfactory bulbs than the
conscious thought and action.
dog as, in fact, cats have a much befter sense of smell.
Cerebral hemisphere
Cerebellum
Cerebellum
Olfactory
Cerebral
bulb
hemisphere
vagusnerve
Accessory nerve
Spina
Olfactory bulb
Hypoglossal nerve
First
cord
Pons
Vestibulocochlear nerve
cervical
Optic nerve
nerve
Trigeminal nerve
Facial nerve
Optic chiasma
IIIIA
Fig. 5.5 Let lateral view of the canine brain.
Fig. 5.6 View of the ventral surface of the canine brain.
Chapter 5 Nervous system and special senses
57
Midbrain
This is a short length of brain lying between the forebrain and the
Lateral ventricles
hindbrain. It is overhung by the cerebral hemispheres and is not
sa ron Aemed e se se i rauads sso a u s o Asea
running from the hindbrain to the forebrain carrying the senses
 of hearing and sight.
Hindbrain
Forebrain
This consists of the cerebellum, pons and medulla oblongata.
 Third ventricle
The cerebellum lies on fhe dorsal surface of the hindbrain
(Fig. 5.5). Its name means liffle brain' as if was originally thought
to be a smaller version of the cerebrum. It has a globular appear-
ance and is covered in deep fissures. In cross-section, the tissue is
Midbrain
Cerebral aqueduct or
aqueduct of Silvius
inner layer of white matter. The grey matter consists of numerous
 Purkinje cells (Fig. 5.2), each of which forms thousands of syn-
apses with other neurons.
The cerebellum controls balance and coordinafion. It receives
 Fourth ventricle
informafion from the semicircular canals of the inner ear and
Hindbrain
muscle spindles within skeletal muscles. Voluntary movements
are initiated by the cerebrum and fine adjustments are made and
coordinated by the cerebellum.
The pons lies venfral to the cerebellum and forms a bridge of
Central canal
nerve fibres befween the cerebellar hemispheres. It contains cen-
Spinal cord
tres that control respirafion.
The medulla oblongata extends from the pons and merges into
the spinal cord (Fig. 5.5). It contains cenfres responsible for the
Fig. 5.7 Dorsal view of the ventricular system of the brain and its
 control of respiration and blood pressure.
relationship to the areas of the brain (not to scale).
Injury or malformation of the cerebellum results in incoordination
and spasticity. Kittens whose dam was infected with the feline
outside of the brain, lying in the subarachnoid space (Fig. 5.8).
enteritis virus during pregnancy may be born with cerebellar
CSF is secreted by nefworks of blood capillaries known as chor-
hypoplasia (underdevelopment) and will never be able to walk in a
oid plexuses lying in the roofs of the ventricles. It is a clear fluid,
normal coordinated fashion.
resembling plasma, but has no protein in it - if is an example of a
transcellular fluid. The function of CSF is to protect the CNS from
 damage by sudden movement or knocks and to provide nutrients
The medulla oblongata and the pons form part of the brain stem
to the nervous tissue of the brain and spinal cord.
that is responsible for the vital control of respiration and blood
 pressure. f the brain stem is damaged, e.g. by brain stem herniation
Samples of CSF can be collected from the cisterna magna, lying
through the foramen magnum, which may occur if the brain swells
 as a result of inflammation or traumatic damage, then respiration 
between the cerebellum and the medulla oblongata. The patient is
and blood pressure will be affected and the animal will die - often
anaesthetised and restrained in sternal or lateral recumbency, with
 described as being 'brain stem dead'.
its chin touching its chest. A spinal needle is slowly advanced into the
space until CSF begins to drip from the hub.
Protection of the brain
Meninges
Normal brain function is essenfial for the maintenance of an ani-
The meninges (Fig. 5.8) consist of three protective layers around
mal's life. If it is damaged mechanically or chemically, function
the brain and spinal cord. From the outermost layer inwards, they
will be impaired and the animal may die. Several structures have
are:
evolved within the brain to protect it from harm.
1. Dura mater - a tough fibrous layer of connective fissue. In the
Cranial cavity it is continuous with the periosteum of the skull
Cranium
bones; in the vertebral canal there is a space befween the dura
This bony strucfure forms a tough outer shell to protect the soff
mater and the surrounding vertebra: this is the epidural space
 brain tissue from physical damage.
and is filled with fat and blood capillaries
Ventricular system
 2. Arachnoid mater - a nefwork of collagen fibres and larger
 blood vessels that supply the adjacent area of nervous tissue
The ventricular system (Fig. 5.7) is derived from the hollow neural
with nutrients. Below the arachnoid mater is the subarachnoid
fube of the embryo. The lumen of this tube develops into a series
 space,in which the CSF flows
 of interconnecting canals and cavifies or ventricles found inside
the brain and spinal cord. The ventricles and the central canal
3. Pia rmater - a delicate membrane that closely adheres to the
are filled with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). This also surrounds the
brain and spinal cord and follows all the gyri and sulci.
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
58
Suture between bony
plates of skull
Bones of skull
Blood sinus
Dura mater
Subdural space
 Subarachnoid space (filled
with CSF)
Arachnoid~
mater
Grey matter (cortex)
Pia mater
White matter
Fig. 5.8 Cross-section through the cerebral hemispheres to show the meninges of the brain.
Blood-brain barrier
of neurons and non-myelinated nerve fibres. Most of the
This is a modification of the neuroglial tissue that connects and
synaptic contact in the cord occurs in the grey mafter
supports all the neurons within the nervous tissue. Different
● White matter - surrounds the grey mafter and is coloured
types of neuroglial cells surround the blood capillaries, creating
white by the myelin around the nerve fibres. It is organised
an almost impermeable layer, to protect the brain from substances
into tracts of fibres carrying informafion towards the brain
that are harmful to or not needed by the brain. These include urea,
(ascending tracts) or away from the brain (descending tracts).
certain proteins and antibioftics. Ofher materials such as oxygen,
Each tract has an origin and a destinafion, which ensures
sodium and potassium ions and glucose can pass rapidly through
 that transmission of nerve impulses is efficient and very
fhe barrier to be used for brain metabolism.
rapid.
The action of general anaesthetic agents relies on their ability to pass
The peripheral nervous system
through the blood-brain barrier and affect the neurons in the brain.
Drugs that affect the brain must be in a lipophilic form, i.e. soluble
as pidoydsoyd ayl yanouyi ssed oi alqe ale Aayt zeyi os 'spid u!
The peripheral nervous system consists of all the nerves given off
 membranes of the neuroglial cells.
from the central nervous system. These are:
● Cranial nerves - leaving the brain
· Spinal nerves - leaving the spinal cord
The spinal cord
● Autonomic nerrous system - contains some nerve fibres from
the brain, but most nerves arise from fhe spinal cord.
The spinal cord is a glistening white tube running from the
medulla oblongata of the brain to the level of the sixth or seventh
lumbar vertebra, where if breaks up into several terminal spinal
Cranial nerves
nerves forming a strucfure known as the cauda equina (Fig. 5.9).
It leaves the skull through the largest foramen in the body, the
The 12 pairs of crarial nerves arise from the brain (Fig. 5.6) and
foramen magnum, and runs through the vertebral canal formed by
leave the crarial cavity by various foramina. The majority of
the interlinking vertebrae that protect it. The cord decreases in
these nerves supply strucfures around the head and are relaftively
short, but some supply structures at some distance from the point
size from its crarial to caudal end, but in fhe caudal cervical and
midlumbar regions it may be thicker as these correspond to areas
at which they leave the brain, e.g. the vagus nerve (cranialnerve X),
which is the longest nerve in the body.
where collections or plexuses of nerves leave the spinal cord to
Crarial nerves are referred to by their name and by a Roman
 supply the fore and hindlimbs.
numeral (Table 5.1). They may carry:
The spinal cord develops segmentally in the embryo and,
although this is difficult to see in the adult, each segment corre-
+ Orly sensory fibres - from the organs to the brain
sponds to a different vertebra and gives off a pair of spinal nerves --
● Only rmotor fibres - from the brain to the organs 
one to the right and one to the leff. The spinal nerves leave the
● Both sensory and motor fibres-these are mixed nerves.
vertebral canal through the appropriate intervertebral forarmen.
In cross-section (Fig. 5.10) the spinal cord consists of:
Spinal nerves
+ Central canal - leading away from the ventricular system of the
brain and containing CSF
As the spinal cord passes down the vertebral canal each segment,
+ Grey matter - forms a 'butterfly'-shaped core of tissue
corresponding to a vertebra, gives off a pair of spinal nerves - one
 surrounding the central canal. It consists of the cell bodies
to the right side and one to the left (Fig. 5.9). These nerves are
Chapter 5 Nervous system and special senses
59
Cranial
White matter
Cervical
Ventral root
Dorsal root
Central canal
Grey matter
Spinal nerve
Cervical
Dorsal branch
Dorsal root ganglion
enlargement
of spinal cord
Cranial
Ventral branch
Thoracic
Lumbar
Lumbar
enlargement
of spinal cord
Sympathetic trunk
Ramus communicans
Ventralrootlets
Sympathetic trunk
ganglion
Cauda equina
Sacral
Caudal
Fig. 5.9 View of the spinal cord of the dog with vertebrae removed.
numbered according to the number of the spinal vertebra in front.
 root ganglion. The efferent fibres from the cell bodies run into
However, there are eight cervical nerves but orly seven cervical
e ar a u asdeus pue pros peuds a
vertebrae - the first cervical nerve (Cel) leaves the spinal cord
● A ventral root carries motor fibres away from the spinal cord.
in front of C1; Ce7 leaves in front of C7 and Ce 8 leaves behind
There are no ganglia outside the cord - the ganglia of the 
it. From then on, each nerve leaves from behind the appropriate
ventral root are in the grey matter of the cord.
vertebra.
In some nerve pathways, there may be one or more intercalated neu-
 Each spinal nerve consists of two components (Fig. 5.10):
rons lying in the grey mafter between the sensory and motor neu-
● A dorsal root carries sensory fibres towards the spinal cord.
    n       
 Several millimetres from the cord is a small swelling
 containing the cell bodies of the sensory neurons - the dorsal
via the relevant intervertebral foramen as a mixed nerve (Fig. 5.9).
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
60
White matter
the spinal cord. It is formed by the spinal nerves from C6, C7, C8,
T1 and T2, which combine to form various named nerves wifhin
Skin
the limb.
● Radial nerve - this is the largest nerve of the brachial
 plexus. It runs laterally from the brachial plexus and
Dorsalroot
follows the musculospiral groove of the humerus. At the
Afferent
level of the lateral head of the triceps it divides into deep
neuron
Ventral root
and superficial branches. Before it divides it supplies the
Dorsal-
extensors of the elbow and after it divides it supplies the 
root
extensors of the carpus and digits. The superficial branch
ganglion
carries sensation from the dorsal surface of the forepaw and
Central canal-CSF
lower forelimb.
Intercalated
Efferent-
neuron
neuron
If an animal damages the radial nerve in its forelimb it will knuckle 
Muscle
over on its forepaw leading to excessive wear of the skin on
the dorsal surface of the paw - the ventral surface is protected 
Reflex arc
from normal wear by the pads. This occurs because the animal
is unable to use the extensor muscles that bring the limb into
Fig. 5.I0 Transverse section through the spinal cord showing reflex arc.
its normal position. The damaged nerve may recover but if it
has been severed the only treatment may be to amputate the
Examples of major peripheral nerve pathways
forelimb.
within the limbs
● Median nerve - this runs caudal to the brachial artery and vein
Pectoral limb
on the medial side of the forelimb. It supplies the flexors of the
Most strucfures within the pectoral limb are supplied by the bra
carpus and digits and carries sensafion from the joint capsule
chial plexus, which lies above the area of the axilla and just below
of the elbow.
Table 5.1 Cranial nerves
Cranial nerve
Type of nerve fibre
Function
IOlfactory
Sensory
Carries the sense of smell or olfaction from the olfactory bulbs to the brain
IIOptic
 Sensory
Carries information about sight from the eyes to the brain; some nerve fibres from each eye cross
over, via the optic chiasma, to the opposite side of the brain - in this way each side of the brain 
receives information from both eyes
II Oculomotor
Motor
Supplies the extrinsic muscles of the eye, enabling the eye to make minute, delicate movements;
accurate movement of the eye is essential for survival
 IV Trochlear
Motor
 Supplies the extrinsic muscles of the eye
V Trigeminal
Mixed 
Sensory fibres are carried from the skin around the eye and the face; motor fibres supplied to the
muscles of mastication - mainly the temporal and masseter
VI Abducens
Motor
 Supplies the extrinsic muscles of the eye
Vll Facial
Motor
Supplies the muscles of facial expression including those associated with the movement of the lips,
 ears and skin around the eyes
VIll Vestibulocochlear 
Sensory
Vestibular branch carries the sensation of balance from the semicircular canals of the inner ear;
(one)
 cochlear branch carries the sensation of hearing from the cochlea of the inner ear
IX Glossopharyngeal
Mixed 
Carries the sensation of taste from the taste buds on the tongue and pharynx; supplies motor
fibres to the muscles of the pharynx
XVagus
Mixed 
au yo san au oi sau aoo saddns xuaii pue xuseud au woy saay aosuas saais
larynx; parasympathetic visceral motor fibres to the heart and various thoracic and abdominal 
organs including the gastrointestinal tract down to the descending colon 
XI Accessory (spinal 
Motor
Supplies the muscles of the neck and shoulder
accessory}
Xll Hypoglossal 
 Motor
 Supplies the muscles of the tongue
Chapter 5 Nervous system and special senses
61
● Llnar nerve - this shares some fibres with the median
it to the muscle fibres of the quadriceps femoris, causing
 nerve and for much of its length it follows its route. It also
contraction
supplies the flexors of the carpus and digits but carries
4. This extends or kicks out the leg, completing the reflex arc.
sensafion from the caudolateral parts of the lower forelimb
and the paw.
This is an example of a monosynaptic reflex as there is only one
set of synapses. A polysynaptic refex, e.g. the withdrawal reflex,
involves one or more intercalated neurons and several synapses
Pelvic limb
within the grey matter.
Strucfures within the hind limb are supplied by nerves from the
 A reflex is unconscious and will still occur even if the spinal
lumbosacral plexus formed by the spinal nerves from L3, L4,
cord has been severed. However, if the web of the dog's foot is
L5, L6, L7, S1 and S2. These combine to form the various named
pinched and it withdraws its foot and then yelps or bites you, this
nerves of the hind limb.
indicates that if has felt pain. There is conscious perception, involv-
● Femoral nerve - this is the main nerve of the hind limb and
ing the fransmission of impulses up the fracts of white mafter of
is the equivalent of the radial nerve in the fore limb. Affer
the spinal cord to the brain and back to the muscles of the jaw, as
leaving the plexus it runs deep within the tissue of the
well as along the pathway of the reflex arc. A conscious response
quadriceps femoris muscle, which makes if less prone to
indicates that the spinal cord is intact.
traumatic damage. It supplies the extensors of the stifle joint.
 Reflexes may be described as being:
● Saphenous nerve - this is given off by the femoral nerve and is
● UInconditional - these are unconscious and automatic (the type
more superficial. It supplies the sartorius muscle (adductor)
already described). They cannot be overcome
and carries sensafion from the dorsomedial aspect of the
● Conditional - these can be overcome by conscious thought,
thigh, stifle and lower limb.
e.g. keeping your hand on a hot iron requires a determined
● Sciatic nerve - this is the largest nerve of the lumbosacral
effort to prevent your muscles confracting and pulling the
plexus. It leaves the plexus running over the ischium and
hand away. The phenomenon known as Pavlov's dogs is
along the lateral surface of the thigh deep within the biceps
an example of a condifioned reflex. In this experiment the
femoris. It supplies the muscles of the hamstring group,
Russian physiologist Ivan Pavlov (1849-1936) observed that
i.e. extensors of the hip and flexors of the stifle, and carries
his dogs salivated at the sight and smell of food. He started
 sensafion from the caudolateral regions of the thigh.
to ring a bell every time he fed the dogs and over a period of
● Tibial nerve - this is given off by the sciatic nerve and supplies
weeks he found that if he rang the bell the dogs would salivate
the flexor muscles on the caudal surface of the lower limb and
even if no food was offered. He had modified the salivafion
the plantar surface of the hind foot.
reflex by altering the stimulus.
Conditioned reflexes are the basis of toilet training and of obedi-
ayl Aq paddns seane ayt ui uojesuas uied sadw! ,eyeips, wual ayl
ence training using 'clickers'.
sciatic nerve, i.e. the caudolateral regions of the thigh
Reflex arcs
Autonomic nervous system
 A reflex arc is a fixed involuntary response to certain stimul. The
This can be considered to consist almost entirely of visceral
response is always fhe same. If is rapid and aufomatic and involves
motor nerves supplying cardiac muscle, smooth muscle and
only nerve pathways in the spinal cord, using the appropriate spinal
glandular tissue (including the liver and pancreas) of all the
nerve. Reflex arcs are a means of protection and produce a prompt
 internal organs and of blood vessels. Control of the system is
objects.
intestine or constrict its blood vessels by conscious fhought
Common reflexes observed in the dog and cat are:
(Fig. 5.11).
● Withdrawal or pedal reflex
The autonomic nervous system can be divided into two parts:
+Anal reflex
the sympathetic nervous system and the parasympathetic nervous sys-
● Patellar reflex
tem. The division is based on fhe anatomical derivafion of the spi-
● Panniculus reflex
pdns are suer s sa   u pe sara e
+ Palpebral reflex.
by both types and confrol involves a balance between the two
(Table 5.2).
Using the patellar reflex as an example, we can follow the path-
way taken by the nerve impulse (Fig. 5.10). The tendon of the
quadriceps femoris muscle passes over the patella as the straight
Special senses
mal tibia. Within the muscle fibres are stretch receptors known as
The special senses are:
Taste
nerve pathway is as follows:
+ Smell
I. When the tendon is lightly tapped, the muscle fibres stretch
·Sight
2. This initiates a response in the muscle spindles and a nerve
·Hearing
impulse passes along the sensory nerve to the spinal cord
●Balance.
 3. Within the grey mafter of the spinal cord, the sensory nerve
 Specialised receptor cells are adapted to respond to a particular
Sue sassed andu ue pue aarau nou au um sasdeus
stimulus and convey fhe information to the CNS. Informafion is
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
62
 Parasympathetic
Sympathetic
Midbrain
Eye,tear
glands,and
Pons
salivary glands
Medulla
Eye, tear glands
and salivary glands
Heart
Hea
Lungs and
bronchioles
TV
Lungs and
bronchioles
Stomach
Abdominal
viscera
Coeliac
ganglion
Small
ntestine
(Cat has T13)
TI2
Cranial
mesenteric
LI
ganglion
Large
intestine
Caudal
mesenteric
ganglion
Bhdder
Urogenital organs
and largeintestine
(in part)
52
53
54
chain
physiology for veterinary technicians. Mosby St Louis, MO, p 156.)
in moist muicous membrane. Taste buds are chemoreceptors stim-
ated. Mammals have evolved specialised organs in which to
ulated by the chemicals responsible for smell dissolved in the
house the receptor cells - these are the special sense organs.
mucus around the oral cavity.
Each taste bud consists of receptor or gustatory cells sur-
Taste buds - taste
rounded by sustentacular or supporting cells. Projecting from
the upper surface of each taste bud are hair-like processes. Fine
The sensation of taste is known as gustation and the organs used
nerve fibres which are branches of the facial (VIl), glossopharyn-
to detect it are the taste buds (Fig. 5.12) found on the dorsal sur-
geal (IX) and vagus (X) nerves conduct impulses away from the
face of the tongue, the epigloffis and the soff palate and covered
gustatory cells towards the brain, where they are interpreted as
Chapter 5 Nervous system and special senses
63
Table 5.2 The autonomic nervous system
Sympathetic system
Parasympathetic system
 Origin of nerve fibres
Vertebrae TI to L4 or L5
Cranial nerves Ill, Vll, IX, X; vertebrae SI, S2
Preganglionic nerve fibres 
Short; each nerve leads to a ganglion containing cell bodies
Long; ganglia lie close to the organ they supply;
and lying close under the vertebral column; there is a chain
there is no chain of ganglia
of ganglia - the sympathetic chain- one on each side of the
vertebral column 
 Postganglionic nerve fibres
Long; lead away from the sympathetic chain and travel
Short; fibres run a short distance from the
towards the organ it supplies - usually follow the path
ganglion to the organ
of blood vessels
 Areas supplied
Viscera in thorax, abdomen and pelvis; also supply sweat
Structures in the head including the eye and
 glands, blood vessels and piloerector muscles associated with
salivary glands; vagus (X) supplies the heart,
hair folicles. Most ganglia are paired, but three are unpaired:
lungs, stomach, smal intestine, pancreas and
I. Coeliac - supplies stomach, small intestine, pancreas, large
large intestine
 intestine and adrenal medulla
 2. Cranial (superior) mesenteric - supplies large intestine 
 3. Caudal (inferior) mesenteric - supplies bladder and 
genitals
Transmitter substances:
A. Within the system, i.e. between
Acetylcholine
Acetylcholine
cell body and dendron
B. At the terminal synapses, i.e.
Noradrenaline (norepinephrine)
Acetylcholine
between the axon and the 
effector organ
General effect
 Prepares the body for fear,flight, fight'; heart and respiratory
Animal is more relaxed; heart rate is
 rates are increased, blood vessels to skeletal muscle are dilated,
 slowed, respiratory bronchioles constrict,
blood glucose levels rise, piloerector muscles to the hairs 
 gastrointestinal tract activity increases -
contract so hackles are raised, gastrointestinal tract activity
digestive juices and salivary secretion increases,
decreases
peristalsis increases 
fion - the fwo sensafions often work together. The receptor cells
is thought to be directed more towards selecting tastes that are
are rod-shaped bipolar neurons which are distributed through-
harmless or harmful to them rather than to enjoyment or dislike,
out the mucosa covering the caudal part of the nasal cavifies and
as in humans.
the turbinate bones. The axon leaving each receptor cell combines
with other axons to form the olfactory nerve fibres (I). Chemicals
Nasal mucosa - smell
responsible for smell dissolve in the mucus of the nasal cavity
The sensation of smell is known as olfaction. The receptor cells are
mifted along the olfactory nerve fibres, through the cribriform
plate of the ethmoid bone (dividing the nasal and cranial cavities)
and into the olfactory buibs of the forebrain, where they are inter-
preted as smell.
Surface of tongue
The eye and sight
Sensory hairs
The eye is the organ of sight. Photoreceptor cells adapted to respond
to the stimulus of light are found in the innermost layer of the
 eye - the retina. All mammals have a pair of eyes, each of which
Supporting cell
lies within a deep bony cavity of the skull known as the orbit.
Gustatory cell
Each eye lies rostral to the cranial cavity, lateral to the nasal cavi-
ties and dorsal to the mouth. The dog and the cat are predatory
species and their eyes point forwards (Fig. 5.13). This provides a
wide area of binocular or 3D vision, enabling them to pinpoint 
Nerve fibres
to brain
bit or the mouse have prominent eyes set on the sides of the head.
Fig. 5.12 Cross-section through a taste bud.
These provide a wide area of monocular or 2D vision, which
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
64
Posterior chamber
Eyelid and eyelashes
Ciliary body
Retina
Iris 
Choroid
Conjunetiva
Cornea
Selera
Field of view
from one eye
Pupil 
Anterior
Area of binocular
chamber
A
or 3D vision
Blind spot
Lens
Blind spot or
Ciliary muscles
Suspensory
Vitreous
optic dise
Fornix
ligament
humour
Fig. 5.14 Structure of the canine and feline eye.
Wide area of
monocular or
2D vision
● Sclera - covering of the eyeball, the sclera is dull white in
colour. It consists of dense fibrous connective fissue and elastic
fibres into which the extrinsic muscles insert. Its function is
to protect the delicate internal strucfures of the eye and to
maintain the eye shape.
The junction between the cornea and sclera is known as the lim-
Narrow area of
B
bus. This is the drainage point for the aqueous humour of the
binocular vision
 anterior chamber of the eye.
Fig. 5.13 Felds of vision. A Predator animal, e.g dog. B Prey animal,
e.g.rabbit.
Uvea
The uvea, a vascular pigmented layer, is firmly aftached to the
enables the animal to see the predator but not to fix its position -
sclera af the exit of the optic nerve but is less well affached in
other areas (Fig. 5.14). It is made up of the following parts:
Aeme sumu peumure Aaid au yeu pue Aqreau
● Choroid - the darkly pigmented vascular lining of the eye
Each eye consists of three main parts: the eyeball, the extrinsic
which takes up approximately two-thirds of the uvea. It
muscles and the eyelids.
 contains the blood vessels supplying allthe internal structures
The eyeball
through the eyeball.
● Tapetum lucidum - a triangular area of yellow-green
The eyeball (Fig. 5.14) is a globe-shaped structure made of three
iridescent light-reflecting cells lying dorsal to the point
layers:
at which the optic nerve leaves the eye (Fig. 5.15). Its
1. The sclera
function is to reflect light back to the photoreceptor cells
of the retina, making use of low light levels and improving
2. The nvea
right vision. The tapefum lucidum is well developed in
3. The retina.
carrivores but is present in most mammals except humans
and pigs.
Sclera
The sclera forms the fibrous outer covering of the eye, in conjunc-
 centre of the eye. It contains smooth muscle fibres - the
tion with the cornea.
ciliary muscle - that control the thickness and shape of the
lens.
+ Cornea - covering of the eyeball, the cornea forms the
 transparent anterior part of the eye and bulges slightly
● Suspensory ligament - a continuation of the ciliary
Jo lajauad au punore uoddns renors e Suu Apoq
outwards from the orbit. It has a poor blood supply but is
the lens.
well supplied with sensory nerve fibres. The outer surface is
covered in a layer of squamous epithelium, the conjunctiva.
● Iris - an anterior continuation of the ciliary body containing
The cornea is the first part of the eye to be hit by rays of light
both radial and circular smoofh muscle fibres (Fig. 5.14). Its 
and is involved in focusing these on to the refina.
free edge forms the hole in the cenfre, the pupil. The dog has a
Chapter 5 Nervous system and special senses
65
Arteriole
● Photoreceptor cells - named according to their shape:
 O Rods - sensitive to low light levels but not to colour; providle
Tapetum
Venule
black and white and right vision
lucidum
O Cones - sensiftive to bright light; provide colour vision
The photoreceptor cells of dogs and cats are made up of 95%
rods and 5% cones. This means fhat they see different degrees
of light and shade, but colour vision is poorly developed
● Bipolar neurons - gather information from the rods and cones
and transmit it to the next layer
● Ganglion cells - may be as many as 1x10 cells. Their axons
travel across the surface of the retina towards the optic disc,
where they form the opfic nerve (Il). At this point there are no
rods and cones and for this reason it is also known as the blind
spot (Fig. 5.14).
Optic disc
Within the cenfre of the eye is the lens - a transparent biconvex
disc surrounded by the suspensory ligament and the ciliary body
Nontapetal fundus
(Fig. 5.14). The fissue of the lens is crystalline and elastic, and its
shape is altered by the confraction of the ciliary muscles around
Fig. 5.15 The retina of the canine eye, showing the area of the tapetum
it. This enables the lens to focus rays of light on to the retina.
lucidum.
The iris divides the anterior part of the eye into fwo
chambers:
in the iris give it a characteristic range of colours. The nerve
● Anterior charmber - lies between the iris and the cornea. It
contains a clear watery fluid known as aqueous humour, which
supply to the iris is from the oculomotor nerve (l) and it also
receives sympathetic and parasympathetic nerve fibres. The
is secreted by the ciliary body and drains out of the eye via fhe
function of the iris is to regulate the amount of light entering
limbus
the eye.
● Posterior charmber - lies between the iris and lens and also
contains aqneous humour.
Retina
The posterior part of the eye lying between the lens and the retina
is known as the vitreous chamber. This occupies 80% of the volume
The retina is the innermost layer of the eye. Light is focused onto
of the eye and contains a clear, jelly-like substance known as vit-
the photoreceptor or light sensifive cells of the retina by the lens
and informafion is transmifted to the brain via the optic nerve (II).
reous humour.
 The function of both the aqueous and vitreous humours is to
The retina is made of several layers (Fig. 5.16). Light travels
provide nutrients for fhe strucfures wifhin the eye and to main-
through the outer layers before it stimulates the deeper photore-
tain the shape of the eye.
ceptor cells.
From the layer closest to the choroid the retina layers are as
The extrinsic muscles
follows:
The eyeball is well supplied with extrinsic muscles (see Ch. 4,
Fig. 4.5). These originate on the connective tissue of the sclera
This augments the effect of the pigments cells within the
and insert on the periosteum of the bones forming the orbit of
choroid.
fhe skull. They are essential for the fine movements of the eye-
balls, which must be coordinated so that the eyes work together
Choroid
to achieve accurate binocular or 3D vision. The nerve supply to
Pigmented layer
the extrinsic muscles is via the oculomotor (l), trochlear (IV) and
of retina
abducens (VI) nerves.
Fibres to
Cone
Rod
In some medical conditions, e.g. diabetes mellitus, or as a result
aul 'oii e doaaap Aew sual ayl 'soiey aauae io ae pio jo
lens becomes opaque, which interferes with the passage of light
rays to the retina, and the animal becomes blind. In some cases, the
Direction
condition may be able to be treated by removal of the lens but the
of light
animal will then only have distance vision.
Glaucoma, or an increase in intraocular pressure, results if there
Bipolar
Lighe-
is overproduction of aqueous humour or blockage of the fluid 
Ganglion
nerve cells
sensitive cell s
drainage point at the limbus of the eye. It may also be a symptom of
 hypertension, as seen in cats with chronic renal failure. Intraocular 
Secti on of the retina
 pressure is measured using a tonometer.
Fig. 5.16 Structure of the retina (cross-section).
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
66
The eyelids
The surface of the cornea is kept moist and protected from
damage by the lacrimal gland, a modified cutaneous gland lying
The bony orbit of the skull protects the majority of the eye-
 On the dorsolateral surface of eyeball beneath the upper eyelid
ball but the anterior third is soft, relatively protuberant and at
(Fig. 5.17). This produces secreftions known as tears which flow
risk from mechanical damage. It is protected by a set of eye-
over the anterior surface of the eye and drain into two small
lids and associated glands. Each eye has an upper and lower
p suado asau s reau au o ere a u suado
eyelid joined at the medial canthus adjacent to the nose and af
into the nasolacrimal duct, which leaves the bony orbit and runs
the lateral canthus (Fig. 5.17). The upper eyelid is more mobile
than the lower one. Each eyelid is covered by hairy skin on fhe
outer surface and lined by a layer of mucous membrane on the
The Harderian glands lie underneath the third eyelid and contribute
inner surface. This layer is confinuous with the conjunctiva cov-
to the lubricating and protective function of tears. In some dogs.
ering the cornea. The poinf where it reflects back is known as
particularly in brachycephalic breeds such as the bulldog, the 
the fornix (Fig. 5.14). The inner surface of the eyelids is protected
Harderian glands may become enlarged and protrude from under
and lubricated by the Meibomian glands. Growing from the outer
the third eyelid. Thisis a condition often referred to as 'cherry eye'
edge of the upper eyelids are well-defined cilia, resembling
 because the inflamed gland resembles a cherry. The treatment may
human eyelashes. These may be present but less obvious on the
aaowau oi jo p!aka aul puaq ypeq puel? aun ysnd oi idwane oi a
lower lids. Associated with these are sebaceous and rudimen-
it completely.
tary sweat glands.
Formation of an image
In the dog, the following conditions associated with the eyelashes
may be inherited characteristics:
The function of the eye is to conduct rays of light from an object
· Entropion- the edge of the eyelids turn inwards, causing the 
and form an image on the retina (Fig. 5.18). This occurs in the fol-
eyelashes to scratch the cornea; seen in the Labrador, Cocker
lowing stages:
Spaniel and Sharpei
I. The light rays pass through the cornea, which plays some part
 Ectropion - the edge of the eyelid droops down revealing an area
in directing them on to the retina.
of mucous membrane, which becomes dry and inflamed; seen in
 2. The light rays pass through the pupil. The size of the pupil is
 soft-eyed breeds such as the St Bernard and Bloodhound
 Distichiasis - extra or ectopic eyelashes grow along the margin of
controlled by the iris in response to the intensity of the light -
the eyelids and scratch the cornea.
Within the fissue of the eyelids are the palpebral muscles respon-
sible for eyelid movement. The palpebral or blink reflex protects
the eye from damage and is a useful means of assessing the depth
of anaesthesia - it disappears as the level of anaesthesia deepens.
Deep to the upper and lower eyelids, and lying in the medial car-
thus of each eye, is the third eyelid or nictitating membrane. In the
dog, it is a T-shaped piece of hyaline cartilage and smooth mus-
cle; in the cat it is made of elastic cartilage and smooth muscle.
The third eyelid is covered on both sides by mucous membrane,
which is continuous with the liring of the eyelids and the cornea.
It is supplied with glandular and lymphoid tissue to protect the
eye and keep it moist. Nerve supply to the third eye is via the
sympathetic system.
B
Upper eyelid
upil
crimal gland
Medial canchu
Fig. 5.18 Formation of the visual image. A Light rays from close objects
are diverging (spreading out) as they reach the eye.The light is focussed 
by contraction of the ciliary muscles, which causes the lens to shorten
Nasolacrimal
and flatten, bending the light on to the retina. B Light rays from distant 
ower eyelid
objects are effectively parallel as they reach the eye. These rays are
focussed by relaxation of the ciliary muscles, which causes the lens to
Third eyelid
elongate and thin. C The image on the retina is upside down when it
forms; the brain inverts this, allowing normal perception of the image the
Fig. 5.17 External anatomy of the left eye.
correct way up.
Chapter 5 Nervous system and special senses
67
this is the pupillary reflex. Constriction and dilation of the
annular cartilage. This in furn arficulates with the external acous-
pupil are controlled by the autonomic nervous system.
fic process of the tympanic bulla, forming a series of interlinking
3. The light rays strike the lerns. The curvafure of the lens is
altered by the ciliary muscles and the rays converge to a sharp
waves.
point on the retina - they are said to be focused.
Both sides of fhe auricular cartilage are covered in hairy
  n  s  e n s s   
skin - in most breeds fhe outer side is more hairy fhan fhe
cells until they hit the photoreceptor cells. These are stimulated
inner side. The covering of skin continues into the external
and send nerve impulses along the nerve fibres which form
auditory meafus where there are fewer hair follicles; the
the optic nerve (Il). Informafion is carried to the visual cortex
Poodle is parficularly noted for its hairy ear canals. The skin
 Of the cerebral hemispheres and is interpreted as an image.
is well supplied with ceruminous glands - modified sebaceous
glands that secrete wax and protect the ear canal from dlamage
The image formed on the retina is inverted but the brain
and infection.
processes the informaftion making use of other sensations and
interprets it as the correct way up.
● The external auditory meatus - this may also be called
the external ear canal. The opening of the canal faces
5. Some of the light is reflected back to the photoreceptor cells
dorsolaterally; it runs verfically down the side of the skull -
by the tapetum lucidum. This makes optimum use of lower
light levels.
the vertical canal - and then furns inwards to run horizontally -
the horizontal canal. The canal ends at a delicate sheet of tissue
 The ability to accomrmodate, or change the shape of the lens to
known as the tympanic membrane or ear drum.
focus on near and far objects, develops soon affter birth. As the
lens ages and becomes less flexible, the time taken for accom-
Otitis externa, or infection of the ear canal, is a common condition
modafion increases - in man this can be corrected by the uise of
in dogs and cats. It may be caused by a variety of microorganisms,
glasses but animals must learn to adapt their behaviour to cope
such as ear mites (Otodectes cynotis), bacteria and fungi, such as
with this 'old age' change.
Malassezia pachydermatis. The shape of the pinna and the presence
of hair may predispose to infection by creating a hot airless 
environment within the ear canal. Infection results in pain, aural
The ear - hearing and balance
discharge, self-trauma and, in some cases, aural haematoma.
 The ear is the organ of hearing and balance. Receptor cells
The middle ear
body are located within the inner ear. All mammals have a pair
of ears located on fhe dorsal part of the head. Each ear can be
The middle ear (Fig. 5.19) consists of:
divided into three parts:
●Externalear
the petrous temporal bone of the skull It is lined with ciliated
● Middle ear
columnar mucous membrane and is filled with air In the
· Inner ear.
dorsal part of the cavity are the auditory ossicles. Opening into
the cavity is the Eustachian or auditory tube. This is a short
canal that connects the nasopharynx to the middle ear and
The external ear
whose function is to equalise air pressure on either side of the
This consists of the following structures:
tymparic membrane.
● The tympanic membrane or ear drum forms the boundary
● The pinna - a furnel-shaped plate of cartilage whose functions
between the external and middle ears at the end of the
are:
external auditory meafus. It is a thin, semi-transparent, oval
O To guide sound waves picked up from the external
membrane whose function is to convey the vibrafions cauised
by sound waves from the external auditory meafus to the
tymparic membrane (ear drum)
auditory ossicles.
O To act as a means of facial expression and communication
● The auditory ossicles are three small bones forming a flexible
betweern animals of the same species. Pinnae are used in
chain that connect the tympanic membrane to the oval
conjunction with other parts of the body, e.g. the eyes and
window of the inner ear. The bones are lirked by synovial
tail, to communicate dominance, fear, acceptance, etc.
joints and are known as:
The pinna varies in size and shape befween breeds and has
O Malleus, or hammer
been altered by generations of selective breeding, leading to the
O Incus, or anvil
development of characteristics many of which predispose to ear
○ Stapes, or stirrup.
disease. The original wolf-like dog, from which all breeds are
thought to be derived, has upright V-shaped ears - this is still
 The function of the ossicles is to transmit the vibrafions caused
seen in German Shepherds, Chows and Huskies. All cats have
by sound waves across the middle ear to the inner ear.
upright pointed ears that, until the recent introduction of the
Scoffish Fold with its twisted, flaftened ear pinnae, have been left 
The inner ear
untouched by selection.
Each pinna is formed from a sheet of elastic cartilage known
The inner ear (Fig. 5.19) consists of:
as the auricular cartilage. This continues as an incomplete fube
● The bony labyrinth, which lies within the petrous temporal
known as the external auditory meatus linked at the base to the
bone. It is divided into three areas - the bony cochlea, bony
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
68
Auditory ossicles
Ear pinna
Malleus
 Incus 
Stapes
Semicircular canals
Utricle
Perilymph
External auditory meatus
(vertical canal)
Vestibulocochlear
 nerve carries information
to the brain
External auditory meatus
(horizontal canal)
Saccule
Cochlea containing
Tympanic
endolymph
membrane
Oval window
Round window
Eustachian tube
Fig. 5.19 Section through the canine or feline ear.
vestibule and bony semicircular canals - each of which
function is to detect sound. Projecting from each receptor cell
is a sensory hair and af fhe base is a nerve fibre fhat is part of
It contains perilymph which flows around the outside of the
the cochlear branch of the vestibulocochlear nerve (VII).
membranous labyrinth. The bony labyrinth is linked to the
middle ear by two membranes:
O Round window - also called the vestibular window lies
 Perception of sound. Sound waves, picked up by the pinna and transmitted 
between the bony cochlea and the centre of the tympanic
across the ear by the tympanic membrane and auditory ossicles to the
cavity
uaun pue yduruad au u! psay salddu io suogeqi dn jas mopuim leno
the endolymph. These ripples move the sensory hairs of the receptor cells 
O Oval window - also known as the cochlear window
in the organ of Corti, and this sends nerve impulses along their associated 
lies between the bony vestibule and the dorsal part of
nerve fibres. The impulses are carried by the cochlear branch of the
the tympanic cavity; the stapes is in contact with this 
vestibulocochlear nerve (Vll) to the auditory cortex of the cerebral
membrane.
hemispheres, where they are interpreted as sound.
● The mermbranous labyrinth is a system of interconnecting fubes
filled with a fluid known as endolymph. Inside the strucfure
 are sensory receptor cells adapted to respond to sound
O Mermbranous vestibule - this is made of two sac-like
and movement. The shape of the membranous labyrinth
strucfures, the utricle (Fig. 5.20) and saccule, which connect 
corresponds to the bony labyrinth but does not completely fill
with the cochlea and the semicircular canals and are filled
it. There are three parts:
with endolymph. Both these structures contain areas of
O Membranous cochlea - this has a similar shape to a snail's
sensory hair cells known as maculae, surrounded by jelly-like
shell. It forms a blind-ending venfral spiral and is filled
 material containing calcium carbonate particles or otoliths.
with endolymph. Within the cochlea are a group of sensory
The function of these strucfures is to mainfain balance when
receptor cells forming the spiral organ of Corti, whose
the animal is standing still.
Chapter 5 Nervous system and special senses
69
Wall of utricle
Endolymph
Static baiance. When an animal is standing still, the head still makes minute
movements. The pull of gravity moves the jelly-like material within the
maculae of the utricle and saccule. This moves the sensory hairs, which
-Otolith
transmit nerve impulses to the brain via the vestibular branch of the 
vestibulocochlear nerve (Vll).The brain interprets this information in
 terms of the position of the body in relation to the space around it.
O Membranous semicircular canals - these are three canals,
filled with endolymph, each of which describes fwo-thirds
 of a circle. The plane of each circle is approximately at right 
Macula~
angles to the other fwo - in this way, the three dimensions 
Sensory
of movement are moritored. Each canal is connected to the
projections
utricle by a swollen area known as an ampulla. Inside each
 ampulla is a cone-shaped projection or crista containing
Receptor
neurons
Receptor cell
sensory hair cells embedded in a jelly-like cupula. The
function of these structures is to maintain balance during
A
movement.
Dynamic balance. As the animal moves, the endolymph in the semicircular
canals moves and stimulates the cristae within the ampulle. Nerve 
 impulses are transmitted by the hair cells to the brain via the vestibular
 branch of the vestibulocochlear nerve (Vll). Within the brain, they are 
 passed to the cerebellum, where the information is coordinated.
B
Fig. 5.20 Simplified section through a utricle. A With the head upright,
there is no pull on the sensory projections of the utricle. B When the 
head is tilted or upside down, the otoliths fall away from the macula. The
sensory projections become stretched and this causes impulses to be set
up in the receptor cells. These are transmitted to the brain in the recep-
tor neurons, giving information about the orientation of the head.
This page intentionally left blank
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
CHAP
TER
Endocrine system
KEY POINTS
 The endocrine system is part of the regulatory
 Hormonal secretion is controlled by different
system of the body and works in conjunction with
mechanisms, e.g. levels of a chemical in the blood, or 
the nervous system. The nervous system produces
by a feedback loop.
an immediate response while the endocrine system
 Each hormone has a specific effect and many
produces a slower but longer-lasting effect.
interrelate with other hormones to create a complex
 Endocrine glands secrete hormones, which are carried
network that acts to maintain the body in a state of
by the blood to specific target organs.
eq uilibrium.
 Each target organ responds only to a particular
hormone or to a group of hormones and is
unaffected by other hormones.
Basic functions and hormones
● Feedback loops, which prevent oversecretion or reduce
secretion once the effect has been achieved, e.g. oestrogen
from the ovarian follicles prevents further secrefion of follicle-
The endocrine system forms part of the regulatory system of the
 body and works in conjunction with the other regulatory mech-
stimulating hormone from the anterior pifuitary gland, so
anism, the nervous system. A series of endocrine glands secrete
preventing further follicular development (see Fig. 6.4).
chemical messengers known as hormones, which are carried by
 a - s o  p a s ne ro
the blood to their target organs. These may be some distance away
produced from tissue within another organ, including:
from the gland. In contrast, exocrine glands produce secretions
● Gastrin - produced by the wall of the stomach. As food enters
'sero roa nn ot aso a pe sionp e pasear are jel
the stomach via the cardiac sphincter, gastrin stimulates the
e.g. sweat glands, gastric glands.
release of gastric juices from the gastric glands and digestion
Chemically, hormones may be steroids, proteins or amines
begins.
(derived from amino acids). They regulate the activity of the tar-
● Secretin - produced by the wall of the small intestine. As food
get organ, which responds to that particular hormone. All other
enters the duodenum from the stomach, secretin stimulates
si sauuu aq pannd suodsar au paaeun are senn
the secretion of intestinal and pancreafic juices which continue
slower and lasts longer, and complements the rapid and rela-
the process of digestion.
tively short-lived responses produced by the nervous system.
 The endocrine glands are distributed throughout the body and
ectodermal layer of the chorion surrounding the conceptus. It
may secrete more than one hormone (Fig. 6.1).
helps to maintain the corpus luteum in the ovary throughout 
 The glands are:
gestation.
+ Pituitary gland
+ Thyroid gland
 ux po yo sa m oi assr  A  aq
● Parathyroid glands
stimulates the bone marrow to produce erythrocytes or red
+ Pancreas
blood cells.
+ Ovaries
+Testes
Endocrine glands
+ Adrenal glands.
Secretion of a hormone occurs in response to a specific stimulus
Pituitary gland
(Table 6.1). Stimuli may be:
● Nerve impulses, e.g. adrenaline (epinephrine) is released from
This is a small gland lying ventral to the hypothalamus in the fore-
the adrenal medulla in response to nerve impulses from the
brain (Fig. 6.1). It is also known as the hypophysis and is divided
sympathetic nervous system.
into two lobes, each of which acts as a separate gland. The pifu-
● A stimulating or releasing hormone, e.g. TSH (thyrotrophic/
itary gland is often referred to as the 'master gland’ as its hormones
thyroid-stimulating hormone) from the anterior pituitary
control the secrefions of many of the other endocrine glands.
 gland activates the thyroid gland.
● Levels of certain chemicals in the blood, e.g. raised blood
Anterior pituitary gland
gluicose levels stimulate the release of insulin from the pancreas.
Also known as the adenohypophysis, this produces:
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
72
Fig. 6.1 Locations of important endocrine glands in
Pituitary
the cat. (Vith permission from Colville T, Bassett JM
aa  oisd pe e e l
gland
Kidney-
technicians. Mosby St Louis, MO, p 290.)
Adrenal
gland-
Ovar
Parathyroid
pue
-Testis
gland
● Thyrotrophic/thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) - stimulates the
● Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) - also called vasopressin. This
thyroid gland.
hormone alters the permeability of the collecting ducts of the
+ Growth hormone or somatotrophin - confrols the rate of growth
kidney to water. It is secreted in response to the changing volume
in young animals by:
of extracellular fluid (ECF) and helps maintain homeostasis (see
O Contfrolling the rate of growth at the epiphyses of the bones
Ch. 10).
O Being involved in protein production from amino acids
● Oxytocin - this has two effects:
 O It acts on the mammary glands during late pregnancy and
 O Regulating the use of energy during periods of poor food
supply. Glucose is conserved for use by the nervous system
causes the milk to be released or 'let down' in response to
and fat is broken down to be used as a source of energy by
suckling by the neonate
the rest of the body
O At the end of gestation, oxytocin causes the contraction of
● Adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) - stimulates the adrenal
the smooth muscle of the uterus, resulting in parfurifion
 cortex. Oversecretion may cause the symptoms of Cushing's
and delivery of the fefuses.
disease.
Thyroid glands
● Prolactin - stimulates the development of the mammary
glands and the secretion of milk during the lafter half of
These lie in the midline on the ventral aspect of the first few rings
 pregnancy. The milk cannot be released unless oxytocin is
of the trachea (Fig. 6.1). They are controlled by TSH from the ante-
produced at the end of the gestafion period.
rior pifuitary gland and secrete three hormones:
● Follicle stimulating horrmone (FSH) - at the start of the oestrous
● Thyroxin (or Ta) and tri-iodothyronine (or T) - have a similar
cycle, or at puberty, external factors, e.g. day length (photoperiod),
effect. Tri-iodothyronine contains a high proportion of the
temperafure or pheromones secreted by the male or other females,
trace element iodine - a lack of iodine in the diet can have a
affect the hypothalamus. This secretes gonadotrophin-releasing
dramatic effect. Both hormones affect the uptake of oxygen by
hormone which stimulatesthe anterior pifuitary gland to secrete
all the cells in the body and are essential for normal growth.
FSH. FSH stimulates germ cells in the ovary to develop into
follicles, each containing an ovum Fig. 6.4.
 Undersecretion - hypothyroidism - is more common in dogs. In young 
● Luteinising hormone (LH) - secretion is stimulated by the
animals, hypothyroidism causes dwarfism (stunted growth). In older
presence of oestrogen in the blood. LH stimulates the
animals, the condition is known as myxoedema: the dog becomes fat and
ripe follicles in the ovary to rupfure and release their ova
suggish, alopecic, the skin feels cold and clammy and the heart rate slows -
(ovulation). The remaining tissue becomes luteinised’ to form
all due to a reduced metabolic rate.
the corpus luteum Fig. 6.4.
Oversecretion - hyperthyroidism - is more common in old cats. The
affected animal isthin active, often aggressve,has a good appetite and a
● Interstitial cell stimulating hormone (ICSH) - stimulates the
fast heart rate - all due to a raised metabolic rate.
interstitial cells or cells of Leydig in the testis to secrete
testosterone. This is the male equivalent of FSH.
● Calcitonin - lowers the levels of blood calcium by decreasing the
Posterior pituitary gland
 rate of bone resorption. When levels of blood calcium are high,
 The posterior pituitary gland is also known as the neurohypophy-
e.g. if a calcium rich diet is eaten, calcium is deposited in the
 sis. The hormones associated with this part of the pifuitary gland
bone and acts as a reservoir for later use (Fig. 6.2). Calcitonin has
are secreted by the hypothalamus and only stored here. They are:
an opposite effect to parathormone but is of less imporfance.
Chapter 6 Endocrine system 
73
Table 6.1 Endocrine glands and their associated hormones
Endocrine gland
Hormone(s)
Stimulus for secretion
Main actions
 Pituitary - anterior
1. TSH
 Hypothalamus 
 Stimulates release of thyroid hormone
 2. Growth hormone (somatotrophin)
 Hypothalamus
 Controls epiphyseal growth and protein
 production; regulates the use of energy
 3. Adrenocorticotrophic hormone
 Hypothalamus
Controls release of adrenocortical hormones
(ACTH)
4. Prolactin
 Stimulates development of mammary glands
 and secretion of milk 
5. Folicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
 Photoperiod, environmental
 Stimulates development of follicles in the
temperature and pheromones all 
ovary
affect the hypothalamus 
6. Luteinising hormone (LH)
 Oestrogen secreted by the
 Causes rupture of the follicles (ovulation) and
ovarian follicles
 development of the corpus luteum 
 7. Interstitial-cell-stimulating hormone 
 Stirmulates secretion of testosterone from
(ICSH). Male equivalent of FSH 
 interstitial cells of the testis
 Pituitary - posterior
1. Antidiuretic hormone (ADH)
Status of extracellular fluid and
 Acts on collecting ducts of the kidney - alters
 plasma
 permeability to water
2. Oxytocin
 Stimulates uterine contractions during
parturition; millk let down'
1. Thyroxin
TSH
 Controls metabolic rate and is essential for
 normal growth 
2. Calcitonin
 Raised blood calcium levels
 Decreases resorption of calcium from the bones 
Parathyroid
Parathormone
 Lowered blood calcium levels 
 Stimulates calcium resorption from bones;
 promotes calcium uptake from intestine 
Pancreas
1. Insulin
Raised blood glucose levels -
sais isin au oui ason jo adn saseail
particularly after feeding
excess glucose as glycogen in the liver
2. Glucagon
Lowered blood glucose levels
 Release of stored glycogen from the liver to
 be converted into glucose 
3. Somatostatin
 Mild inhibition of insulin and glucagon; prevents 
wild swings in blood glucose levels 
Ovary:
 A. Follicle 
Oestrogen
FSH
 Signs of oestrus; preparation of the 
 reproductive tract and external genitalia for
 sn4103
 B. Corpus luteum 
I. Progesterone
LH
 Preparation of reproductive tract for
 pregnancy; development of mammary glands;
 maintains the pregnancy
 2. Relaxin
Released during late pregnancy; causes
 relaxation of pelvic ligaments prior to birth
Testis
Testosterone
ICSH
 Male characteristics and behaviour; sperm
development
 Adrenal:
A. Cortex
Glucocorticoids
ACTH
 Raises blood glucose levels; reduces the
 inflammatory response 
 Mineralocorticoids - aldosterone
Status of ECF and plasma
Acts on distal convoluted tubules of the
 kidney - regulates uptake of sodium and
 hydrogen ions
 Sex hormones
 Small quantities 
 B. Medulla 
Adrenaline (epinephrine) and 
 Sympathetic nervous system
 Fear, fright,flight syndrome
 noradrenaline (norepinephrine)
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
74
Fig. 6.2 Control of blood calcium levels by calcitonin and
parathormone.
Blood
 Parathormone
Calcitonin
(from parathyroid)
(from thyroid)
resorbs calcium
deposits calcium
from the bone
in the bone
Bone
Parathyroid glands
Lack of insulin leads to a condition known as diabetes melitus, in which
These glands lie on either side of the thyroid gland and secrete
the animal suffers from hyperglycaemia and glucosuria (the presence of
the hormone parathormone (Fig. 6.1). Secretion is dependent on
glucose in the urine). If left untreated, the condition may progress to a
fhe levels of calcium in fhe blood - if levels are low, calcium is
stage where the body uses its protein and fat stores as a source of energy.
   n s p sq   
 Daily insulin injections and dietary control are necessary to control the
intestine is increased (Fig. 6.2).
condition.
Oversecretion (hyperparathyroidism) occurs in:
·Primary hyperparathyroidism - due to neoplasia of the
● Glucagon (from the alpha cells) - secreted in response to low
parathyroid glands. This causes bone resorption, bone
blood glucose levels. Glucagon raises blood glucose levels by
weakness and pathological fracfures.
breaking down the glycogen stores in the liver. Conversion
● Secondary hyperparathyroidism - as seen in chronic renal
of glycogen to glucose occurs by a process known as
failure. The calcium:phosphate ratio in the blood is altered
glycogenolysis (Fig. 6.3).
by impaired kidney function. This leads to increased output
● Sormatostatin (from the delta cells) - this is mildly inhibitory
to the secretions of insulin and glucagon and prevents wild
bone in an effort to maintain blood calcium levels. There
fluctuations in blood glucose levels, which may damage the
is preferential resorption from the mandible and maxilla,
tissues. It also decreases gut motility and the secreftion of
Mel aut - ,mel raqqnr, se umou uoprpuos e Supnpoid
digestive juices, which serve to reduce the efficiency of the
becomes pliable and fragile and the teeth may fall out.
digestive and absorptive processes.
● Nutritional hyperparathyroidism - results from feeding low
calcium diets, e.g. an all-meat diet. Parathormone is produced
The ovary
in an aftempt to raise the blood calcium levels by bone
resorpfion.
Female mammals have fwo ovaries, which lie one on each side of
the dorsal abdominal cavity caudal to the kidneys. At the onset
 of sexual mafurity, the two ovaries become capable of secreting
Pancreas
two hormones:
● Oestrogen - produced by the walls of the developing ovarian
The pancreas is a pinkish lobular gland lying in the loop of
follicles. Development of germ cells in the ovary into ripe
the duodenum in the abdominal cavity (Fig. 6.1). It has an
follicles is the result of the secrefion of FSH from the anterior
 exocrine part and an endocrine part and is described as being
pifuiftary gland. Oestrogen causes the behaviour associated
a mixed gland. The exocrine secretions, which are digestive
with the oestrous cycle and prepares the reproductive tract
 juices, enter the duodenum via the pancreatic duct (see Ch. 9).
and external genitalia for mating (see Ch. 11). Oestrogen
The endocrine secretions are produced by discrete areas
also exerts negative feedback on the anterior pituitary gland,
of tissue within the exocrine tissue, known as the islets of
prevenfing further secretion of FSH and further follicular
Langerhans.
development (Fig. 6.4).
 The islets of Langerhans secrete three hormones, each from a
● Progesterone - secreted by the corpus luteum, which develops
different type of cell:
from the remaining follicular fissue after the follicle has
● Insulin (from the beta cells) - secreted in response to high
ovulated. The corpus luteum develops as a result of
 blood glucose levels. Insulin lowers blood glucose levels by:
 the production of LH from the anterior pituitary gland.
O Increasing the uptake of glucose into the cells, where it is
 Progesterone prepares the reproductive tract for pregnancy
metabolised to provide energy
and maintains the pregnancy (see Ch. 11). During pregnancy,
O Storing excess glucose as glycogen in the liver. Conversion
 progesterone exerts negative feedback on the hypothalamus
of glucose to glycogen occurs by a process known as
glycogenesis (Fig. 6.3).
so prevents further oestrous cycles until parfurifior occurs.
Chapter 6 Endocrine system
75
Insulin - lowers
O Development of spermatozoa
+ Oestrogen - produced in small quantifies by the Sertoli cells in
the seminiferous fubules of the testes.
Crossescell
membranes to
Glycogenesis
provide energy
Adrenal glands
for the cell
Glucose
Glycogen
There is a pair of adrenal glands, one lying close to the cranial
(taken in food)
stores in the liver
pole of each kidney (Fig. 6.1). Each gland has an outer cortex and
an inner medulla. There is no connection between the two parts
Glycogenolysis
and they can be considered as fwo separate glands.
Glucagon - raises
asonβ poolq
Adrenal cortex
The hormones produced are known as steroids and have a similar
Fig. 6.3 Control of blood glucose levels.
structure based on lipid. There are three groups, each one being
secreted by a different layer:
 It also causes development of the mammary glands during
+ Glucocorticoids - secretion is regulated by ACTH from 
pregnancy (Fig. 6.4).
 the anterior pituitary gland. The hormones are known as
In the later stages of pregnancy, the corpus luteum also secretes
corticosteroids; the most important are cortisol and corticosterone.
a hormone known as relaxin. This causes fhe sacroiliac and other
In the normal animal they are present in low levels but
ligaments around the birth canal to soften and relax in prepara-
increase in response to stress. They have fwo main actions:
tion for parfurifion.
 O They increase blood glucose levels by reducing glucose 
uptake by the cells, increasing the conversion of amino acids
The testis
to glucose in the liver (a process known as glhuconeogenesis)
and mobilising fafty acids from the adipose tissue ready for
Male mammals possess a pair of testes, which are carried external
conversion to glucose
to the abdominal cavity wifhin fhe scrofum. At the start of sexual
inflammatory reaction, which delays healing and repair.
● Testosterone - produced by the interstitial cells or cells of Leydig
 This property is used therapeutically to reduce swelling and
in response to the secretion of ICSH from the anterior pifuitary
inflammafion.
 gland. Testosterone is responsible for:
 O The development of male characteristics such as penis
 Oversecretion of glucocorticoids, or hyperadrenocorticalism, leads
development, development of the barbs on the feline penis,
 to symptoms of Cushing's disease. These include polydipsia, polyuria,
muscle development, jowls on the face of a tomcat, size
 polyphagia and bilateral symmetrical alopecia.
territorial behaviour, courtship displays and mating
behaviour
● Mineralocorticoids - the most important is aldosterone. This acts
External factors,
on the distal convoluted fubule of the kidney where if regulates
e.g. day length, temperature, pheromones
acid-base balance of the plasma and ECF by excretion of H+ ions
and also controls the excretion of Na+ and K+ ions (see Ch. 10).
● Adrenal sex hormones - both male and female animals
produce all types of sex hormones. They are secreted in
insignificant quantities but may be the reason why some
Gonadotrophin
animals show a certain level of sexual behaviour despite
releasing hormone
being neutered.
Adrenal medulla
Anterior pituitary gland
This produces fwo hormones with similar actions: adrenaline (epi-
Positive
nephrine) and noradrenaline (norepinephrine). These hormones
feedback
 prepare the body for emergency action, known as the 'fear, flight,
Follicle stimulating
Luteinising
fight syndrome, and are controlled by the sympathetic nervous
DE
hormone
hormone
system. Their actions are to:
(FSH)
(LH)
· Raise blood glucose levels by the breakdown of glycogen
品
stored in the liver - glycogenolysis. This increases the body's
energy levels
● Increase the heart rate and the rate and depth of respirafion --
this increases the amount of oxygen reaching the tissues
Follicle
Corpus luteum
● Dilate fhe blood vessels of the skeletal muscles - this enables
the supply of glucose and oxygen to reach the areas where it
is needed
Oestrogen
Progesterone 
+ Decrease the activity of the gastrointestinal tract and the
Fig. 6.4 Inter-relationships between the female reproductive hormones.
bladder - in an emergency their functions are less important.
This page intentionally left blank
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
CHAPTER
Blood vascular system
KEY POINTS
The blood vascular system consists of the blood,
Arteries have thick walls and carry oxygenated blood
heart, circulatory system and lymphatic system.
under pressure away from the heart. The exception
 Blood is the liquid connective tissue that carries
is the pulmonary artery, which carries deoxygenated
 oxygen and nutrients to the tissues and returns waste
 blood from the heart to the lungs.
 products produced by the tissues during metabolism 
Veins have thinner walls and carry deoxygenated
to the lungs, kidneys and liver.
blood towards the heart. The exception is the
 Blood is made up of a liquid part, plasma, containing
 pulmonary vein, which carries oxygenated blood from 
all the dissolved substances carried around the body.
the lungs to the heart.
and a cellular part. There are several types of blood
All mammals have a double circulation - the systemic
cell, each of which differs in appearance and function.
and the pulmonary circulations. Blood passes through
The blood is pumped around the body by a four
the heart twice during one complete circuit of the
chambered muscular structure, the heart.
body.
The right side of the heart sends blood into the
 The lymphatic system collects excess tissue fluid or
pulmonary circulation, i.e. the lungs, and the left side 
lymph in a network of lymphatic vessels and returns it
of the heart sends blood into the systemic circulation,
to the circulatory system close to the heart.
ie. the rest of the body.
 As the lymph is carried along the vessels it passes
 The right and left atria of the heart receive blood from the
 through a series of lymph nodes, which filter out any
lungs or the rest of the body while the right and left ventricles
foreign particles or pathogens. These are 'monitored'
pump blood out to the lungs or the rest of the body.
 by lymphocytes within the lymphoid tissue and the
The circulatory system consists of a network of
 immune system produces a specific response to
arteries, capillaries and veins that supply every tissue
combat any potential threat to the health of the
and organ of the body.
animal.
The blood vascular system is made up of four parts:
Transport
1. Blood - a fluid connective tissue that transports oxygen
+ Gases in solution - blood carries oxygenated blood from the
and nutrients around the body and collects waste products
lungs and delivers the oxygen to the tissues where it is used.
produced by the tissues
It then collects deoxygenated blood containing carbon dioxide
produced by the tissues during fheir metabolic processes,
2. The heart - a hollow, muscular, four-chambered organ
and carries it back to the lungs, where the carbon dioxide is
responsible for pumping blood around the body
exchanged for oxygen in the inspired air.
3. The circulatory system - a nefwork of arteries, veins and
+ Nutrients - blood transports nutrients, e.g. amino acids, fafty
capillaries in which the blood flows around the body
acids and glucose, which result from the process of digestion,
4. The lymphatic system - a nefwork of lymphatic vessels that
from the digestive system to the liver and to the tissues where
transports lymph or excess tissue fluid around the body and
they are needed.
is responsible for refurning if to the circulation.
● Waste products - blood collects the waste products resulting
from metabolism in the tissues and transports them to the
kidney and liver where they are excreted from the body.
Blood
● Hormones and enzymes - blood transports enzymes and
Blood is a highly specialised fluid connective tissue (see Ch. 2),
consisting of several types of cell suspended in a liquid medium
Regulation
called plasma. Blood makes up about 7% of the total body weight
and has a pH of about 7.4. (7.35-7.45).
r q si   p e sd 
· Volume and constituents of the body fluids - blood carries water
Functions
in the form of plasma to the tissues and is responsible for
maintaining the osmotic balance of the fluids and the cells.
Blood has many functions within the body but they can be broadly
 The presence of plasma proteins, particularly albumin
in the blood, controls the flow of fluid between the fluid
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
78
compartments and is responsible for maintaining blood
Composition of blood
volume and blood pressure.
● Body temperature - blood conducts heat around the body to
Blood is a red fluid that is carried by the blood vessels of the cir-
the body surface where if necessary if is lost by peripheral
culatory system. It is composed of a fluid part, the plasma, and a
vasodilafion.
solid part, the blood cells (Fig. 7.1). Plasma forms part of exfracel-
lular fluid (ECF) (see Ch. 1). Each constifuent of the blood plays a
● Acid-base balance - blood maintains a constant internal pH in
the body by the presence of buffers, e.g. bicarbonate, which
specific part in the overall function of blood.
are able to absorb H+ ions when the blood is acid (low pH)
Plasma
(d  ae s pq au  s + n aa e
In this way, all the processes of the body are able to function
 Plasma is the liquid part of the blood that separates out when
effectively.
a blood sample is spun in a centrifuge. The main constituent is
● Defence against infection - blood helps to prevent infection
water (about 90%) in which are a number of dlissolved substances
 re on q a rn d  u pos 
through the action of the white blood cells, which are part
of the body's immune system. It also carries antibodies and
include carbon dioxide in solution, nutrients such as amino acids,
poq a pe ss a a  prd sx
glucose and fafty acids, waste materials such as urea, hormones,
 enzymes, antibodies and antigens.
● Blood clotting - the clotting mechanism prevents excessive
In addition to these, plasma contains:
blood loss from wounds and other injuries and prevents the
entry of infection.
● Mineral salts - the main mineral salts found in exfracellular
fluid are sodium and chloride, but potassium, calcium,
magnesium and bicarbonate are also present. The functions of
these mineral salts include maintaining osmotic balance and
Oedema is an abnormal accumulation of fluid in the cavities
maintaining pH by acting as buffers. Calcium has a number
and intercellular spaces of the body. When oedematous fluid
accumulates in the peritoneal cavity it is described as ascites.
contraction and nerve function.
Oedema occurs when there is an imbalance between osmotic
pressure and hydrostatic pressure. lt can be caused by a number
of the blood because they are too large to pass out of the
of factors, e.g anything that increases osmotic pressure outside the
circulation. This has the effect of retaining fluid in the blood
 blood vessels, such as inflammation, or reduces osmotic pressure in
by osmosis, i.e. ift prevents too much water from leaking' out
the blood, such as hypoproteinaemia. Increased hydrostatic pressure
into the exfracellular spaces. If this did occur then the volume
inside blood vessels resulting from heart failure may also cause
of the blood would decrease and the blood pressure would fall
oedema.
with serious consequences. The most important proteins are:
Blood
Plasma (55-70%)
Formed elements (cells)
Fibrinogen
Leucocytes
 Serum
Erythrocytes
(WBC)
Platelets
(RBC)
Granular leucocytes
Agranular leucocytes
(granulocytes)
(agranulocytes)
 Neutrophils
Eosinophils
Basophils
Lymphocytes
Monocytes
Fig. 7.I The composition of blood
Chapter 7 Blood vascular system
79
O Albumin: helps to maintain the osmotic concentration of the
Red blood cells
Platelets
blood, i.e. holds the water in the blood
(erythrocytes)
(thrombocytes)
 O Fibrinogen and prothrormbin: involved in the clotting
mechanism of the blood
O Immunoglobulins: these are the antibodies produced by the
immune system of the body.
Albumin, fibrinogen and prothrombin are produced by the liver,
but the immunoglobulins are produced by the cells of the immune
system.
White blood cells
Blood cells
(leucocytes)
The blood cells (Fig. 7.1) make up the solid component of blood
and can be divided into three types:
Granular leucocytes
● Erythrocytes - the red blood cells
● Leucocytes - the white blood cells
● Thrombocytes - the platelets, which are cell fragments.
Before sfudying the different types of blood cell it is useful to
understand a number of terms.
 Basophil
Neutrophil
Eosinophil
Haemopoiesis - the formation of all types of blood cell
 Erythropoiesis - the formation of red blood cells or erythrocytes
Nongranular leucocytes 
Lymphoid tissue - found in the lymph nodes and spleen and produces
agranular leucocytes, i.e. lymphocytes and monocytes
 Myeloid tissue - found in the red bone marrow and responsible for 
 the formation of erythrocytes and granular leucocytes, i.e. neutrophils,
eosinophils and basophils
 Serum - plasma minus the clotting factors fibrinogen and
Small lymphocyte
Large lymphocyte
Monocyte
prothrombin. It can be obtained by allowing a blood sample to
clot naturally.
Fig. 7.2 The cellular components of blood. (With permission from
Colville T Bassett JM 200l Clinical anatomy and physiology for veterinary
technicians. Mosby St Louis, MO, p 197.)
Erythrocytes (or red blood celis)
Erythrocytes are the most numerous blood cell - there are about 6-8
A circulating erythrocyte has a lifespan of about 120 days, affer
million per cubic millilitre of blood (Fig. 7.2). Their function is to
which it is destroyed in the spleen or lymph nodes. The iron from
transport oxygen and a small proportion of carbon dioxide around
the haemoglobin is recycled back to the bone marrow and the
the body (most carbon dlioxide is carried in solution in the plasma).
Mafure erythrocytes are biconcave circular discs about 7μm
 and excreted in bile.
in diameter. Erythrocytes contain a red pigment called haemo-
The production of red blood cells is controlled by a hor-
globin, which is a complex protein containing iron. They are the
mone called erythropoietin (see Ch. 6), which is released by cells
only cells in the body without a nucleus, which allows a greater
in the kidney in response to low oxygen levels in the tissues.
amount of haemoglobin to be packed into a relatively small cell
Erythrocytes are surrounded by a thin, flexible cell membrane,
produce more erythrocytes.
and thin cell membrane gives them a large surface area for gas-
Leucocytes (or white blood celis)
eous exchange and allows oxygen to diffuse across into the cell,
Leucocytes are much less numerous than red blood cells and the
where it combines with the haemoglobin to form oxyhaemoglobin.
 cells contain nuclei. Leucocytes can be classified as either granu-
Erythrocytes are formed from undifferentiated stem cells within
a u po o iaum udn uuadp su r sa
is a sisiodoia se umo ssaid e Aq moireu auq an
visible granules in their cytoplasm when stained and viewed
cells change into erythroblasts, which have a nucleus. The cell
under a microscope (Fig. 7.2). The function of leucocytes is to
begins to acquire haemoglobin and its nucleus shrinks -it is now
 defend the body against infection.
known as a normoblast. As the cell develops further it becomes
a reticulocyte, af which point the nucleus consists only of fine
Granulocytes
threads in the cytoplasm known as Howell-Joly bodies. Eventually,
This type of leucocyte is produced within the bone marrow and
the nucleus disappears and the mafure erythrocyte is released
they make up approximately 70% of all leucocytes. They have
into the circulation. This process takes 4-7 days.
 granules within their cytoplasm and have a segmented or lobed
-Ad se o paai are Au ades  Area re ym sna
or iron-deficiency anaemia, reticulocytes are also released into
the circulation to help make up the deficit. These can be seen on
They can be further classified according to the type of stain they
a blood smear stained with methylene blue, which is a specific
take up, ie. neutral, basic or acidic. There are three types of
stain for reticulocytes.
granulocyte:
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
80
● Neutrophils - take up neutral dyes and the granules stain
1. Platelets stick to the damaged blood vessel and to each
 purple (Fig. 7.2). Immature neutrophils have a nucleus 
other to form a seal. The platelets release an enzyme called
fhat looks like a curved band and are known as band cells.
thromboplastin
Neutrophils are the most abundant of the leucocytes,
2. In the presence of thromboplastin and calcium ions, the
forming about 90% of all granulocytes. They are able to
plasma protein prothrormbin is converted to the active
move through the endothelial lining of the blood vessels into
enzyme thrombin (vitamin K is essential to the blood
the surrounding tissues and engulf invading bacteria and
clotfing mechanism and is required for the manufacfure of
cell debris by phagocytosis, thus helping to fight disease. A
prothrombin in the liver)
neutrophilia or raised numbers of neufrophils indicates the
presence of an infective process while a neutropenia or lack of
 3. Thrombin then converts the soluble plasma protein fibrinogen
white cells may be characteristic of certain viral infections.
into a meshwork of insoluble fibres called fibrin. The presence
● Eosinophils - these take up acidic dye and the granules in
of calcium is an essenfial factor
their cytoplasm stain red (Fig. 7.2). They are involved in the
4. The fibrin fibres form a nefwork across the damaged area that
regulation of the allergic and inflammatory processes and
traps blood cells and forms a clot. This seals the vessel in what
secrete enzymes that inactivate histamine. Eosinophils play a
is often called a'scab' and further blood loss from the wound
major role in controlling parasific infestation. An cosinophilia or
is prevented.
raised numbers of eosinophils occurs in response to parasific
The normal clotting time in a healthy animal is 3-5 minutes but
infestation.
if may be affected by a number of factors. It may be reduced
● Basophils - these take up basic or alkaline dyes and the
by:
granules in the cytoplasm stain blue (Fig. 7.2). Basophils
● Surface contact wifh materials that will act as foundafion for
secrete histamine, which increases inflammation, and heparin,
the clot, e.g gauze swabs
which is a nafural anticoagulant preventing the formation of
● Raising the environmental temperature - keeping the animal
unnecessary blood clots. Basophils are present in very small
 in a warm kennel.
numbers in normal blood.
Clofting time may be increased by:
Agranulocytes
● Lack of vitamin K, which is needed by the liver to form
prothrombin in the blood (seen in warfarin poisoning, which
Agranulocytes have a clear cytoplasm. There are two types:
interferes wifh levels of vifamin K)
● Lymphocytes - this is the second most common type of
● Liver disease - the liver manufactures the plasma proteins
white blood cell, forming 80% of all agranulocytes (Fig. 7.2).
 involved in clotting
Lymphocytes are the main cell type of the immune system and
are forrmed in lymphoid tissue although they originate from
+ Genetic factors, e.g. haemophilia, which affects the availability
of some cloffing factors
for the specific immune response, and fhere are two different
● Systemic diseases such as anfhrax, canine infectious hepaftiftis
types: the B lymphocytes, which produce antibodies and are
and viral haemorrhagic disease all cause subcutaneous
involved in humoral immunity, and the T lymphocytes, which
haemorrhages due to interference with blood cloffting
are involved in the cellular immune response.
● Thrombocytopenia - lack of platelets may be seen in some
● Monocytes - these have a horseshoe-shaped nucleus and are
forms of leukaemia
the largest of the leucocytes, although they are only present in
● Lack of blood calcium - this feafure is used in the lab to
small numbers (Fig. 7.2). They are phagocytic cells and when
prevent blood samples clotting. Chemicals such as EDTA
they migrate to the tisstes they mafure and become known as
(ethylene diamine tetra-acetic acid), cifrate and oxalate all
macrophages.
combine with calcium in the blood and prevent it being
involved in the clotting process.
Thrombocytes
The body has its own natural anticoagulant, called heparin, which
Thrombocytes, or platelets, are cell fragments formed in the bone
 prevents unwanted clots forming in the blood vessels and organs.
marrow from large cells called megakaryocytes. They are small
If part of a clot, referred to as an embolus, detaches, it may be car-
discs with no nuclei and are present in the blood in large quanti-
ried around the body and block any of the vital blood vessels,
ties. Platelets are involved in blood clotting.
killing the animal.
Blood clotting
The heart
            
defence mecharisms in the body. It means that injured blood
The heart is a muscular organ that contracts rhythmically, pump-
vessels can be sealed and excessive blood loss can be prevented.
 ing the blood through the blood vessels and around the body (Fig.
Blood cloffing is essential for wound healing and also prevents
7.3). The heart is enclosed within a double-layered serous sac, the
pericardium. This lies in the mediastinum - the space that separates
mation of a blood clot is complicated and involves a number of
the two pleural cavities of the thorax (see Ch. 2).
different chemical factors in the blood. It is described as a cascade
The heart is conical in shape and lies slightly to the left of
mechanism because one step leads on to another in a similar way
the midline. It lies obliquely in fhe thorax, with its afftached
to a cascade of water.
To simplify fhe process we will orly consider the main steps.
portion or apex, which lies close to the sternum at the level of
 When a blood vessel or a tissue is damaged the following happens:
the caudal surface of the sixth rib. The heart has four chambers
Chapter 7 Blood vascular system 
81
Aorta
Right pulmonary
artery
To lungs
Left pulmonary
artery
From bod
Aortic valve
Cranial vena cava
Left atrium
From fungs
fungs
Left pulmonary
Right pulmonary
veins
veins
From fungs
Frorm fungs
Right atrium
Left atrioventricular
Pulmonic valve
valve
Chordae tendineae
Right atrioventricular
Left ventricle
valve
Caudal vena cava
Ventricular septum
Papillary muscle
From body
Right ventricle
Fig. 7.3 The structure of the heart and direction of blood flow.
Heart valves
right side of the heart pumps blood into the pulmonary circu-
lation; the left side of the heart pumps blood into the systemic
Within the chambers of the heart, there are fwo sets of valves that
circulation.
prevent backflow of blood from the atria to the ventricles as it cir-
culates through the heart:
● Right atrioventricular (AV) or tricuspid valve - this lies between
The two upper chambers are the right and left atria (sing. atrium).
the right atrium and right venfricle and is composed of three
These receive blood from the veins of the systemic and pulmonary
fibrous flaps or cusps that attach to a fibrous ring encircling the
circulations.
opening to the right ventricle
The two lower chambers are the right and left ventricles. These pump 
● Left atrioventricular (AV) or bicuspid or mitral valve - this lies
out blood from the heart into the arteries of the pulmonary and 
between the leff atrium and leff ventricle and is composed of
systemic circulations.
fwo cusps.
The free edges of the afrioventricular valves are aftached to the
papillary muscles of the walls of the ventricles by fibrous threads
The walls of the ventricles have a thicker muscle layer or myocar-
called the chordae tendineae (Fig. 7.3). The afrioventricular valves
dium than the atria, to assist them in pumping the blood into the
open to allow the blood to fill the ventricles from the atria; when
arteries. The myocardium is thickest in the leff ventricle, as this
fhe ventricles are full they close to prevent backflow of blood into
chamber must pump the blood into the aorta and all around the
the afria. The chordae tendineae prevent the valves everfing as
body in the systemic circulation. The wall of the heart consists of
blood is pressed against them when the ventricles begin to con-
fhree layers:
tract. It is the closing of the AV valves that causes the first hearf
1. The inner layer (endocardinm) is continuous with the
 sound - 'lub'.
endothelial liring of the blood vessels
          
 2. The middle layer (myocardium) is made of cardiac muscle
fwo more sets of valves, the semilunar valves, which prevent
the flow of blood from the vessel back into the ventricle. They
(see Ch. 2)
are composed of three half-moon-shaped cusps and when they
 3. The outer layer (epicardium) forms the serous inner layer of
shut if causes fhe second heart sound -'
'dub'. The semilunar
the pericardium.
valves are:
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
82
● Pulmonary valve - lies at the base of the pulmonary artery as it 
leaves the right ventricle
Any form of structural or functional defect in the heart valves
will interfere with normal blood flow through the heart. This will
● Aortic valve - lies at the base of the aorta as it leaves the leff
create a turbulent flow, which may be audible and detectable by
ventricle.
auscultation with a stethoscope. This condition is described as a
heart murmur.
One of the most common causes of congestive heart failure in the
dog is mitral vave insufficiency. A damaged or poorly developed 
The conduction system of the heart
mitral valve results in alteration to the normal blood flow through
the heart. This causes backing up of the blood in the left atrium
The myocardium of the heart is composed of a highly specialised
and increased pressure in the pulmonary vein that drains into it.
type of muscle tissue - cardiac muscle (see Ch. 2). It is able to con-
 Oedematous fluid accumulates in the lung tissue, causing a 'heart
tract rhythmically and automafically wifhout nervous input, i.e.
cough'.
it has an inherent contractibility. In order to satisfy the changing
 requirements of the body,e.g. when running or sleeping, the heart 
rate (the number of beats per minute) must be able to alter rapidly
Circulation of blood through the heart
and this is brought about by nerve impulses from the autonomic
nervous system which override the inherent rate. The mecharism
Deoxygenated blood refurning from around the body is carried
that is responsible for initiating and coordinating the heartbeat is
to the right side of the heart by the major veins: the cranial vena
called the conduction system (Fig. 7.4).
cava and caudal vena cava (Fig. 7.3). The blood enters the right
afrium, which, when full, confracts and forces the blood into the
right ventricle via the right atrioventricular valve. When the right
ventricle is full it confracts and pumps the blood out of the hearf
The heart rate or pulse is the number of heartbeats per minute. It
into the pulmonary artery, via fhe pulmonary valve. The blood
6 measured by palpation of an artery and can be felt most easily
is now within the pulmonary circulation and is carried to the
in areas where a superficial artery runs over a bone, e.g. femoral,
lungs, where it picks up oxygen from the inspired air - it becomes
 brachial or coccygeal artery.
oxygenated.
 From the lungs, the oxygenated blood is carried in the pulmo
nary veins back to the left side of the heart. The blood enters the
The sequence of this mechanism and the specialised strucfures
leff atrium, which confracts when full, forcing the blood through
involved are as follows:
the left atrioventricular valve into the lefft ventricle. When the left
1. The heartbeat begins in the sinoatrial node, which is referred to
ventricle is full it confracts and pumps the blood into the main
artery of the body, the aorta, via the aortic valve. The blood is
as the pacermaker of the heart. The sinoafrial node is an area of
now in the systemic circulation and travels around the body in
modified cardiac muscle cells in the wall of the right atrium,
the arteries. Oxygen is given up to the tissues and carbon dioxide
 near its junction with the cranial vena cava. It is here that
is collected from the tissues - the blood is said to be deoxygen-
the autonomic nerves have their effect and the impulse to
 ated. Deoxygenated blood returns to the heart in the veins.
contract arises. The wave of confraction then spreads across
It is imporfant to note that both afria contract at fhe same time,
both atria - atrial systole.
followed by the ventricles: the cardiac cycle consists of the con-
2. The myocardium in the walls of the ventricles is not in
traction and relaxation of the two atria followed by the confrac
electrical confinuity with that of the atria so the nerve
tion and relaxafion of the two ventricles. Within the cardiac cycle,
 impulse must now pass through another specialised group
the period of contraction is called systole and the period of relax-
Of cardiac muscle cells called the atrioventricular node at the
ation is called diastole.
top of the interventricular sepfum. When this node is excited
Sinoatrial node
(pacemaker)
Bundle of
His fibres
Atrioventricular
Bundle
node
branches
-Purkinje
fibres
Right
Left
Right
Left
Right
Left
A
B
c
Fig. 7.4 The conduction mechanism of the heart. A The heart at rest. BThe sinoatrial node fires and impulses spread across the atria, which contract.
CThe atrioventricular node fres, sending impulses along conducting fbres into the ventricles, causing them ta contract.
Chapter 7 Blood vascular system
83
 it sends impulses along a specialised bundle of fibres, called
Arteries
the bundle of His, which runs down the interventricular
Arteries carry blood away from the heart under pressure. The
sepfum.
majority of the arteries transport oxygenated blood to the cap-
3. Af the boffom of the interventricular sepfum, the bundle of
illary beds within the tissues. The exception is the pulmonary
His divides into right and leff branches, which spread into
fhe two ventricles. These branches connect with a nefwork
have relatively thick walls which are composed of three layers:
of specialised neurons, the Purkinje fibres, which spread out
1. Tunica intima - consists of an endothelial lining, which is
through the ventricular muscle.
confinuous throughout the entire circulatory system and is
 4. The wave of contraction starts in the myocardium at the apex
also confinuous with the endothelial covering of the heart
of the heart (i.e. the bofftom of the venfricles), and spreads
valves
upwards through the muscle of the ventricles, pushing the
 2. Tunica media - consists of smooth muscle and elastic tissue
o pe eoe au pue Arae Ared au spremo dn poo
Of the heart - ventricular systole.
3. Tunica adventitia - the fibrous outer coat of fhe vessel.
The elastic nafure of the walls allows them to dilate or constrict
and enables arteries to withstand blood under high pressure as if
Blood pressure is a measurement of the fore that pushes blood
leaves the heart.
through the arterial circulation. t is governed by the heartbeat, the
As the arteries enter the tissues they give off side or collateral
blood volume and the elasticity of the blood vessel walls. Blood 
vessels, which link up with each other to form a nefwork or anasto-
pressure is at its highest during systole and lowest during diastole
mosis. If any of the branches should become obstructed the blood
and the measurement is an average of the two values.
has an alternative route through the tissue and the cells will still
 receive oxygen and nutrients. Some tissues or organs, e.g. brain,
kidney and heart, do not have this system of collateral vessels but
have end arteries as their sole blood supply. These form a paftern
Circulatory system
similar to the branches of a tree - they branch but never join up
The circulatory system consists of a network of blood vessels
drop in blood pressure, but if an end artery is occluded, e.g. by
whose function is to transport blood around the body. All mam-
 a blood clot, there is no alternative supply and the result may be
mals have a double circulation, which consists of:
fatal.
● Systemic circulation - carrying blood from the heart around the
As the distributing arteries branch off in the tissues they
 majority of the body and back to the heart
become smaller and narrower and are called arterioles. Their func-
tion is to regulate the blood flow to the capillary beds.
 lungs and back to the heart.
Capillaries
The division of the circulafion into two separate circuits allows
Capillaries are small, thin-walled, permeable vessels consisting
the rapid distribution of oxygenated blood under high pres-
 Of a single layer of endothelial cells. It is here that the exchange
sure, which is essenfial in an acfive endothermic animal. Blood
passes through the heart twice during one complete circuit of
   e     e s 
the body.
waste products take place. As the capillaries have a small diame-
ter, blood flows slowly through them, allowing substances to dif-
fuse between the blood and the tissues. The capillary beds are the
Blood vessels
networks of capillaries that extend between the arterioles and the
There are three types of blood vessel forming acontinuous network
venules (small veins) wifhin the tissues.
throughout the body: the arteries, capillaries and veins (Fig. 7.5).
Veins
Veins carry blood towards the heart. They have relatively thin
Outer layer:Tunica adventitia
walls and carry deoxygenated blood under low pressure. The
(collagen and elastic fibres)
 exception is the pulmonary vein, which carries oxygenated blood
Artery
 from the lungs to the heart. Veins have a similar general structure
 Middle layer:Tunica media
(smooth muscle
to arferies but they have fewer smooth muscle and elastic fibres.
and elastic fibres)
Some veins carrying blood against the pull of gravity, e.g. fhose
 in the legs, possess semilunar valves to prevent the backflow of
 Inner layer: Tunica intima
(endothelil lining)
blood. As the walls of the veins are compressible the action of the
skeletal muscles around them helps to 'squeeze' the blood along.
Selection of a suitable site for venepuncture (puncture of a vein for
Vein
Capillar
intravenous injection or collection of a blood sample) depends on
common veins used in the dog and the cat are the cephalic vein on
the dorsal surface of the lower forelimb, the loteral sophenous vein
Fig. 7.5 The structure of blood vessels. Note that, in veins, the tunica.
running on the lateral side of the hock and the jugular vein running
media is thinner and contains fewer smooth muscle and elastic fibres
down either side of the neck in the jugular furrow.
 than in arteries. Capillaries only consist of a tunica intima.
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
84
The smallest veins are called venules, and these collect the
● The venous refurn from the heart itself is by the coronary veins;
 deoxygenated blood from the capillary beds in the tissues and
these join to form the coronary sinus, which then empfies into
refurn if to the heart in the veins.
the right atrium.
The systemic circulation
The hepatic porta! system
Within the systemic circulation is a modified circulation system
Arteria! circulation (Fig. 7.6)
called the hepatic portal system. This takes blood straight from the
 Oxygenated blood leaves the left ventricle in the aortic arch, which
is the origin of the main artery of the body, the aorta. This gives off
 be processed immediately (Fig. 7.6). The liver therefore has tw0
branches as follows:
pe (oa pax au a a u ao dns po
● Two coronary arteries to supply the tissues of the heart with
one from the hepatic portal vein. The veins that drain the digestive
Oxygenated blood
tract, e.g. stomach, intestine, pancreas, drain into the hepatic por-
● The brachiocephalic trunk, which supplies blood to the head through
tal vein. The route to the heart taken by blood within the hepatic
the common carotid arteries and also gives off the right subclavian
portal system is slightly different from that of the other parts of the
artery, which supplies the right forelimb and continues as the right
axillary artery and then the right brachial artery within the limb
refurning to the heart - one in the strucfures of the digestive sys-
tem and another in the liver. The venous blood from the liver then
● The left subclavian artery, which winds around the first rib to
drains into the hepatic veins, which join the caudal vena cava.
enter the left forelimb through the axilla; it becomes the left 
axillary artery and then the left brachial artery to supply blood to
the left forelimb
A portosystemic shunt is a congenital malformation in the blood
● The aorta confinues through the thorax giving off paired spinal
supply to the liver in which the venous blood coming from the
arteries to supply the various structures and muscles of the
digestive system bypasses the liver and does not enter the hepatic
vertebral column and thorax
portal system. This resuts in raised levels of ammonia in the
● The aorta passes into the abdomen and gives off a number of
blood causing a number of clinical signs, e.g. stunted growth and 
paired arteries. These include:
neurological dysfunction (hepatic encephalopathy).
 O The renal arteries, supplying the kidneys
 O The ovarian or testicular arteries, supplying the female or
male gonads
Fetal circulation
O Three large unpaired branches of the abdominal aorta,
The fetal circulation differs from that of the neonate/adult mam
which supply the abdominal viscera: these are the coeliac
mal. During gestation, the placenta carries out the roles that are
artery, supplying the stomach, spleen and liver; the cranial
later performed by the lungs, kidneys and digestive tract. Blood
mesenteric artery, supplying the small intestine; and the
circulating through the placenta provides oxygen and nutrients
caudal mesenteric artery, supplying the large intestine
and removes waste products.
● The principal artery of the hindlimb is the external iliac artery,
Blood is conducted to and from the placenta in the umbilical
which arises close to the termination of the aorfa and branches
arteries and the umbilical vein. The umbilical vein carries oxy-
into the femoral artery, supplying each of the hindlimbs
· The internal iliac artery is the branch of the aorta that supplies
passing to the fetal liver The paired umbilical arteries carry deoxy-
the pelvic viscera.
genated blood, containing waste products, from the fefus back to
the placenta and so to the circulation of the dam.
Venous circulation (Fig. 7.6)
As gaseous exchange and nutrient transfer take place in the
 placenta, blood flow through the lungs and liver of the fetus is not 
The major veins that drain blood into the right atrium of the hearf
as important and there are a number of shunts or bypasses:
are:
+ Cranial vena cava - this vein refurns deoxygenated blood from
the head, neck and forelimbs. The cranial vena cava receives
blood from:
Sl y haye yado yewai Ae aeao uaweoy au 'sases a u
O The jugular veins, which run down either side of the ventral
surface of the neck in the jugular furrow and drain the head
Because of the greater pressure in the left ventricle, oxygenated blood
O The subclavian veins, which collect blood from the veins of
passes through the defect from the left to the right side of the heart and
the forelimb - the main ones being the brachial vein from the
pressure builds up on the right side (venous) of the systemic circulation.
deeper tissues and the cephalic vein from the superficial tissues
The animal shows symptoms of right-sided congestive heart failure.
● Caudal vena cava - this vein returns deoxygenated blood from
the pelvic region, hindlimbs and abdominal viscera. Many of
the veins that join the caudal vena cava have the same name
● Foramen ovale - this is an opening in the sepfum between the
as the artery that supplies that region, e.g. renal vein, hepatic
right and left atria and ventricles. Blood passes from the right
vein, external iliac vein
ventricle to the leff ventricle and into the systemic circulation,
● Azygous vein - this vein arises in the abdomen and runs
bypassing the lungs. The foramen ovale closes shortly after
birth and the circulation becomes 'adult'.
thorax it runs dorsally and either joins the cranial vena cava or
● Ductus arteriosus - this is a vessel that forms a connection
 drains directly into the right atrium. The azygous vein drains
between the pulmonary artery and the aorta. Blood flows
venous blood from the thoracic body wall
from the pulmonary artery to the aorta, bypassing the lungs.
Chapter 7 Blood vascular system
85
Puimonary circuiation
Lungs
Pulmonary artery
 Pulmonary veins
Cranial vena cava
forelimbs
Carotid arteries
to head
Brachial arteries
toforelimb
Right atrium
Left atrium
Caudal vena cava
Aorta
Left
ventricle
Hepatic vein
Hepatic artery
Right/
ventricle
Hepatic portal vein 
Liver
Cranial and caudal
 mesenteric arteries
Intestines
Renalartery
Renal vein 
Kidneys
Veins have thin,
 All arteries have a
thick,muscular
non-muscular
walls, but contain 
elastic wall but
semilunar valves to
contain no valves.
prevent backflow of
Systemic circuiation
The pulse can be 
low-pressure blood
felt where an artery
Other organs
crosses a bone
Capillaries are present in all organs/tissues and are the sites
of exchange between blood and tissue fluid 
Fig. 7.6 Crculation of blood around the body.
This closes shorfly after birth as fhe lungs expand but remains
The pulmonary circulation
as the ligamentum arteriosus.
Deoxygenated blood is pumped from the right ventricle of the
● Ductus venosus - this is a venous shunt wifhin fhe liver fhat
heart in the pulmonary artery. Within the tissue of the lungs car-
connects the umbilical vein to the caudal vena cava. The
bon dioxide diffuses from the blood in the thin-walled capillaries
nutrient and oxygen laden blood in the umbilical vein passes
into the alveoli of the lungs. It then leaves the body in the expired
direcfly to the caudal vena cava and so to the fetal tissues
air. Oxygen diffuses from fhe inspired air in the alveoli into the
instead of going through the fetal liver (the maternal liver has
blood in the lung capillaries. These eventually combine to form
already metabolised the nutrients). This closes over at birth
the pulmonary veins, which carry oxygenated blood to the left
but remains as the falciform ligament.
atrium of the heart (Fig. 7.6).
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
86
In rare cases, the ductus arteriosus does not close at birth (patent
ductus arteriosus). As pressure in the aorta is greater than in the
pulmonary artery, blood is diverted back into the lungs, avoiding the
systemic circulation. The lungs become overperfused with blood and
the animal shows symptoms of left-sided congestive heart failure and
Pair of tracheal
may have a 'machinery' heart murmur.
Right lymphatic.
ducts
duct
The lymphatic system
The lymphatic system is part of the circulatory system of the body
and is responsible for returning the excess tissue fluid that has
Thoracic duct
leaked out of the capillaries to the circulating blood. The fluid
within fhe system is called lymph and is similar to plasma but
Cisterna chyli
without the larger plasma proteins. However, lymph contains
more lymphocytes than are present in the blood. The lymphatic
system is composed of both lymphatic vessels and lymphoid tis-
Lymph nodes
sue, which are found in all regions of the body with a few excep-
tions such as the cenfral nervous system and bone marrow.
 The functions of the lymphatic system are:
● To refurn excess tissue fluid that has leaked out of the
capillaries to the circulating blood
● To remove bacteria and other foreign particles from the lymph
 in specialised filtering stations known as lymph nodes
Fig. 7.7 Location of the lymphatic vessels and lymph nodes.
● To produce lymphocytes, which produce antibodies; the
lymphatic system may also be considered as part of the
immune system
● The right lymphatic duct - this is the smaller of the two major
● To transport the products of fat digestion and the fat-
ducts and drains lymph from the right side of the head, neck
soluble vitamins from the lacteals of the intestinal villi to the
and thorax, and right forelimb. It empties into the right side of
circulation.
the heart via eifther the right jugular vein or crarial vena cava.
 The lymphatic system consists of the following parts:
· The thoracic duct - this is the main lymphatic duct and collects
blood from the rest of the body. It arises in the abdomen,
+ Lymphatic capillaries
where it is called the cisterna chyli, and receives lymph from the
+ Lymphatic vessels
abdomen, pelvis and hindlimbs. As it passes through the aortic
+ Lymphatic ducts
hiatus of the diaphragm and enters the thorax, it becomes
+ Lymph nodes
known as the thoracic duct and receives lymph from the left side
+ Lymphatic tissues.
of the upper body and left forelimb. The thoracic duct empties 
into eifther the jugular vein or cranial vena cava, near the heart.
Lymphatic capillaries
● There is also a pair of tracheal ducts that drain the head and
neck and empty either into the thoracic duct or one of the
Excess tissue fluid is collected up by the smallest of the lymphatic
large veins near the heart.
vessels, the lymphatic capillaries. These are thin-walled, delicate fubes,
which form networks within the tissues. In the villi of the small
Lymph nodes
intestine the lymph capillaries are called lacteals and are responsible
for collecting up the products of fat digestion (see Ch. 9).
The lymph nodes (Fig. 7.8) are masses of lymphoid tissue sifu-
ated at intervals along the lymphaftic vessels (Fig. 7.7). They are
Lymphatic vessels
bean-shaped and have an indented region, called the hilus, where
the lymph vessels leave the node. A number of affrent lymphatic
- du r  u o ai sde ed a
   r        m
sels, which have a similar strucfure to veins and possess numer
its convex surface. The lymph leaves the node at the hilus in the
ous closely spaced valves. Lymph flow is mainly passive and
single efferent vessel.
relies on the contraction of the surrounding muscles to move the
Each node is surrounded by a fibrous connective tisse cap-
lymph along. The valves prevent backflow and pooling of lymph
sule. Inside, a network of tissue, called trabeculae, extends from the
in the vessels.
capsule and provides support for the entire node. The fissue of
the node is divided into cortical and medullary regions. The cor-
Lymphatic ducts
tex contains the germinal centres or lymph nodules that produce
the lymphocytes, which play an important part in the immune sys-
The lymphatic vessels enter the larger lymphatic ducts (Fig. 7.7)
tem. The medulla is comprised of a reficular framework contain-
 pe p a o   p n   m
ing many phagocytic cells. Lymph flows through spaces or sinuses
refurn if to the circulation. The major lymphatic ducts are:
within the tissue of the node.
Chapter 7 Blood vascular system 
87
Afferent lymph vessels
● Superficial inguinal nodes - two nodes on each side lying in the
carrying lymph to the node
 groin, between the thigh and the abdominal wall, dorsal to the
mammary gland or peris
Connective tissue trabecula
· Popliteal node - lies within the tissue of the gastrocnemius
covered in lymphoid tissue 
muscle, caudal to the stifle joint.
Lymphatic tissues
 These include organs that contain lymphoid tissue and play an
important part in the body's defence system.
Spleen
Lymph
Capsule
          s 
within the greater omenfum closely aftached to the greater curva-
ou sh e ro o ar  e s h s n go a
essential for life. The spleen has a number of functions:
I. Storage of blood - it acts as a reservoir for red blood cells and
platelets
Efferent lymph vessel - may
 2. Destruction of worn out red blood cells - the phagocytic cells 
divide into several vessels - carries
engulf and destroy the erythrocytes and preserve their iron
Hilus
lymph away from the node
content for re-use in haemoglobin synthesis
3. Removal of parficulate mafter from the circulation - it 'filters'
Fig. 7.8 Structure of a lymph node.
out foreign particles and bacteria and the phagocytic cells
destroy them
All lymph must pass through at least one lymph node before
4. Production of lymphocytes - it produces lymphocytes for use
being returned to the circulation. Each node acts as a mechani-
in the immune system.
cal filter, trapping particles such as bacteria within the meshwork
of tissue. The parficles are then destroyed by phagocytic cells.
Thymus
 Lymph nodes are distributed throughout the body and range in
This is of the greatest importance in the young animal. The thy-
size. They can become enlarged during infection and are an indi-
mus lies in the crarial thoracic inlet and cranial part of the thorax.
peaal e u a ap a  ssd ass e po 
It is active in late fetal and early postnatal life and is responsi-
ble for the production of T lymphocytes that give rise to the cell-
Some lymph nodes are superficial and can be palpated
    sn  s  is  
(Fig. 7.9). These include:
 puberty and may evenfually almost disappear.
● Submandibular nodes - two to five nodes in a group, lying at the
edge of the angle of the jaw
Tonsils
● Parotid node - lies just caudal to the temporomandibular joint
These form a ring of lymphoid tissue around the junction of the
 of the jaw
pharynx with the oral cavity. They can be seen, especially when
● Superficial cervical nodes also called the prescapular nodes - two
reddened and enlarged, on either side of the pharynx at the root
 On each side lying just in front of the shoulder joint, at the base
    i,  s     
of the neck on the crarial edge of the scapula
garisms that enter the mouth.
Retropharyngeal
Parotid lymph node
Fig. 7.9 Major lymph ducts and nodes. Some of the nodes are
/lymph nodes
easily felt (see text).
Thoracic duct
Tracheal duct
Cisterna chyli
-Mesenteric
Submandibular
 ymph node
Superficial
Prescapular
ydwi leuingu!
aou yd
nodes
Axillary
Bronchial
ymph node
ymph nodes
Popliteal
ymph node
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
88
The immune system
The main type of cell in the immune system is the lymphocyte
and there are fwo types of specific immune response:
The body has a number of nafural defence systems such as the
· Humoral (antibody-mediated) immune response - this involves
 phagocytic blood cells that engulf and destroy invading bacteria, the
the production of antibodies or immunoglobulins by
inflammatory response, and the ability of the blood to form a clot
the B lymphocytes. When a particular type of antigen (a
s0 preventing blood loss and repairing damage. In addition to the
 phagocytic cells in the blood, there is a system of phagocytic cell dis-
an immune response) enters the body, it stimulates
tributed around the body in the tissues known as the reticuloendothelial
system. These phagocytic cells are macrophages (agrarnular leucocytes)
called an antibody, which combines with the antigen and
'neutralises' it.
are found, e.g. in connective tissue they are called histiocytes.
● Cell-mediated immune response - this type involves the use of
 These defence mechanisms are all non-specific and the response
 T lymphocytes, which recognise and help in the destruction
is the same no mafter what the stimulus, e.g. wounding, trauma
of non-self cells (i.e. cells that do not belong to the body), or
 or invading pathogen. However, the body also has a sophisti-
any of the body's own cells that have been altered by virus
cated immune system that provides a more specific response to a
infections.
 particular pathogen.
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
CHA P
TER
8
stem
KEY POINTS
 External respiration is the gaseous exchange between
Oxygen diffuses from the inspired air into the blood 
the air and the blood. Internal or tissue respiration 
 and carbon dioxide, formed by the tissues during
is the gaseous exchange between the blood and the
 metabolism, diffuses from the blood into the expired
tissues.
air.
 The function of most of the respiratory tract is to
 Alltissues need oxygen to produce energy. As the
conduct inspired and expired gases into and out of
needs of the body tissues change during their
the body.
 normal daily function, the respiratory system must
 Air containing oxygen is inspired and expired by the
 be able to respond rapidly to supply varying amounts
respiratory muscles, which form the walls of the
 of oxygen.
 thorax and diaphragm and bring about changes in 
 A complex control system exists within the hindbrain
the volume and hence the internal pressure of the
and within the peripheral blood system to monitor
thoracic cavity.
the status of respiratory gases and to maintain the
 The pulmonary membrane within the alveolis the
 body in a balanced state.
only area where gaseous exchange takes place.
The function of the respiratory system is to conduct inspired air
a ss pns n n  e r si
containing oxygen along the respiratory passages to the areas
which is heavily pigmented and well supplied with mucous and
where gaseous exchange takes place and to conduct the expired
sweat glands - this is known as the rhinariurm and it is penetrated
air containing carbon dioxide out of the body.
by the fwo curved nares (Fig. 8.1). The epidermis on a dog's nose
Respiration is the gaseous exchange between an organism and
has a unique pafterning that is much like a human fingerprint'.
its environmenf. All animals require oxygen to carry out the
 The right and leff nasal chambers are filled with fine scrolls of
bone called turbinates or conchae (Fig. 8.2). The chambers and the
the cells to obtain energy from raw materials derived from food.
furbinates are covered by a ciliated mucous epithelium, which is
This process involves the oxidation of glucose to yield energy
well supplied with blood capillaries. The turbinates arising from
in the form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) (see Ch. 1). Water
- s e  Aeson pa A s a y pd ra a
and carbon dioxide are produced as byproducts of this reaction.
bous swelling visible through the nostril - the alar fold.
Respiration can be considlered to occur in two stages:
Towards the back of the nasal chambers, the mucous epithe-
1. External respiration is the gaseous exchange between the air
u Arss j Ans  e s si a  n
 and the blood - this occurs within the lungs
 o  si s -   e  n s
These nerve fibres pass through the cribriform plate of the eth-
2. Internal or tissue respiration is the gaseous exchange between
moid bone to reach the olfactory bulbs of the forebrain (see Ch. 5).
the blood and the tissues - this occurs in the tissues.
 The remainder of the mucous membrane is the respiratory region.
The respiratory system consists of:
The function of the furbinates and their ciliated mucous epi-
 thelium covering is to warm and moisten the incoming air as it 
● Nose - the nasal cavify and the paranasal sinuses
●Pharynx
fthat are present in fhe inspired air and waff them to the back of the
+ Larynx
+ Trachea
The inspired air is therefore warm, damp and free from harmful
● Bronchi and bronchioles
particles, protecting the lungs from any form of damage.
+Alveoli.
Paranasal sinuses
A sinus is an air-filled cavify wifhin a bone. Within the respiratory
Structure and function
system, they are referred to as the paranasal sinuses and lie wifhin
the facial bones of the skull (Fig. 8.2). They are lined wifh cili
ated mucous epifhelium and commuricate with the nasal cavity
Nose
through narrow openings.
Inspired air enters the respirafory system through the nostrils or
 Maxilary sinus - this is not a true sinus in the dog but a recess at the
external nares leadingintothe nasal cavity, whichis divided by a carfi-
laginous septum into the right and left nasal chambers. The entrance
caudal end of the nasal cavity.
 Frontal sinus - this sinus lies within the frontal bone of the skull.
to the nasal cavity is protected by a hairless pad of epidermis
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
90
Nosepad or
the nasopharynx conducts inspired air from the nasal cavity
rhinarium
from the mouth, e.g. during 'mouth breathing'.
Alar fold
 Mouth breathing may occur during strenuous exercise to enable
a greater volume of air to enter the lungs. It may also be seen in
External narés
conditions that impair the flow of air through the nasal chambers,
e.g. foreign bodies, tumours; orif the lung capacity is reduced, e.g.
Philtrum
 pneumothorax, haemothorax, pneumonia.
A pair of Eustachian or auditory ftubes also opens into the
pharynx and connects the pharynx to each of the middle ears (see
Fig. 8.I The dog's nose - anatomical landmarks.
pressure on eifher side of the ear drum.
It is thought that the function of the paranasal sinuses is to
Larynx
lighten the weight of the skull, allowing the areas of the skull
used for muscle aftachment to be larger. This is evident in those
The inspired air enters fhe arynx, which lies caudal to fhe
species that have large, heavy skulls, such as the horse, which has
pharynx in the space between the two halves of the mandible
numerous large paranasal sinuses. The paranasal sinuses also act
(Fig. 8.2). The function of the larynx is to regulate the flow of
as areas for heat exchange and as sites for mucus secretion.
than gases from entering the respiratory tract.
Pharynx
The root of the tongue is attached to one side of the hyoid
From the nasal cavity, the inspired air passes into the pharynx, a
region at the back of the mouth that is shared by the respiratory
apparatus and the larynx to the other When intubating a dog or cat,
pulling the tongue forward will also pull the larynx forward and the 
and digestive systems. The pharynx is divided into the dorsal
nasopharynx and the ventral oropharynx by a musculomembranous
epiglottis will fall downwards, opening the glottis so that the tube 
partition called the soft palate (Fig. 8.2). The soft palate extends
can be placed correctly.
caudally from the hard palate and prevents food from entering
the nasal chambers when ar animal swallows (see Ch. 9). The
The larynx is suspended from the skull by the hyoid appara-
oropharynx conducts food from the oral cavity to the oesophagus;
tus (see Ch 3), which allows it to swing backwards and forwards
Nasopharynx
Fig. 8.2 Longitudinal section to illustrate the
upper respiratory tract of the dog. (With 
Pharynx
 permission from Colville T, Bassett JM 200I
Frontal sinus
Clinical anatomy and physiology for veterinary
Nasal cavity
technicians. Mosby St Louis, MO, p 222.)
Turbinates-
Hard palate
Soft palate
Oropharynx
Tongue-
Epiglottis
Larynx
Trachea
Oesophagus
Chapter 8 Respiratory system
91
(Fig. 8.3). The hyoid apparafus is a hollow, box-like structure con-
allow movement of the head and neck. The cartilage rings are
sisting of a number of cartilages connected by muscle and con-
connected by fibrous fissue and smooth muscle fibres.
nective tissue. The most rostral of these cartilages, the epiglottis, is
The trachea is lined with ciliated mucous epithelium. The surface
composed of elastic cartilage and is responsible for sealing off the
 layer of mucus traps any foreign particles and the cilia 'sweep'
entrance to the larynx or glottis when an animal swallows. This
the particles and mucus upwards to the pharynx, where they are
spat out or swallowed. In some cases, such as in a dusty or smoky
ing the animal to choke. When the larynx returns to its resting
atmosphere, the production of mucus may increase. This mucus
position affter swallowing the epiglottis falls forward, opening the
irritates the fracheal lining and causes the animal to cough. The
glottis and thus allowing the passage of air to resume.
coughing reflex serves to expel substances such as excess mucus
and dust particles from the respiratory tract, preventing them
Areud sjeue an jo jred si pue shun au Saua u
Laryngeal paralysis is a condition seen in older dogs, often of larger
defence system.
breeds, e.g. Labradors. The vocal folds hang within the lumen of the
larynx and are unable to move out of the flow of air. This results in
interference with the passage of air down the larynx and trachea,
Tracheal collapse may be seen in some small breeds of dog, e.g.
which could result in asphyxiation during exercise. t also causes a
Yorkshire Terriers, and causes a chronic *honking cough. There
constant 'roaring' sound as the dog breathes.
 is a risk that during strenuous exercise the trachea may flatten,
preventing the flow of inspired air. This causes the dog to collapse
suddenly. During the period of unconsciousness, the trachea relaxes,
Within the larynx is a pair of vocal ligarments. The mucous mem-
air begins to flow again and the dog recovers.
brane covering the inner surface of the vocal ligaments forms the
vocal folds, which project bilaterally into the lumen of the larynx.
When air moves past the vocal folds they vibrate and sound is
Bronchi and bronchioles
produced. These sounds can be modified by factors such as the
size of the gloffis and the tension of the vocal folds, resulting in a
The trachea divides (or bifurcates) into the right and left bronchi
characteristic range of sounds, e.g growling, barking, purring.
(sing. bronchus), entering each of the lungs respectively. As they
s pe rs o r  a ss  a r
Trachea
branches, like a free. This arrangement is therefore known as the
bronchial tree. The point at which each bronchus enters the lung is
From the larynx, air enters the trachea. This is a permanenfly open
known as the root of the lung.
The bronchi are supported by complete rings of cartilage but,
8.4). It lies on the venfral aspect of the neck, i.e. below the oesoph-
 as the branches become smaller, the cartilaginous support gradu-
agus and slightly to the right of it, and extends the length of the
ally diminishes, and then disappears completely, af which point
neck, passing through the cranial thoracic inlet. In the thoracic
the passages are called bronchioles. The bronchioles continue to
 h s  r sissd s  
above the heart.
smallest diameter branches are known as the alveolar diucts and
The lumen of the frachea is kept open by a series of C-shaped
lead to the alveoli.
rings of hyaline cartilage. These prevent the trachea from col-
The walls of the bronchi and bronchioles contain smooth mus-
lapsing when the thoracic pressure falls and the incomplete rings
cle, which is under the control of the autonomic nervous system.
allow food boluses to pass down the oesophagus unimpeded by
The respiratory passages are able to dilate to enable a greater
the tracheal cartilages. The strucfure of the trachea is flexible to
volume of air to reach the lungs, e.g. during exercise, or constrict
 to their original size during 'normal breathing.
Alveoli
The alveolar ducts end as the alveolar sacs, which resemble
bunches of grapes. Each alveolar sac consists of a large num-
ber of alveoli, which are small, thin-walled sacs surrounded
by capillary networks (Fig. 8.5). The epithelial lining of the
alveolus is called the pulmonary membrane, and is very thin to
allow gaseous exchange with the blood to take place. Oxygen
in the inspired air diffuses across fhe pulmonary membrane
of the alveolus into the blood within the capillaries of the
pulmonary circulation. Simultaneously, it is exchanged for
carbon dioxide in the blood, which is to be excreted in the
expired air from the lungs (Fig. 8.6). There are millions of
-ses ioy eare aeymns srel e Supraoid suni qoea ul oaa
eous exchange.
- u poa ou are jeu pe endsr al jo sred a
eous exchange, i.e. all but the alveoli, are referred to as the dead
Fig. 8.3 Lateral view of dog's laryngeal area, showing the cartilages of
space. Their function is to conduct gases to and from the area of
the hyoid apparatus as they appear on X-ray.
gaseous exchange.
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
92
Nasal cavity
Costal arch
Larynx
Nostril
Trachea
Lung
Median line 
of diaphragm
Fig. 8.4 Diagram illustrating the tra.chea and lung positions.
Terminalbronchiole
Trachea
Walls of the
thoraciccavity
Mediastinum
Pulmonary arteriole
Pulmonary
pleura-
visceral pleura
 Pulmonary venule
Bronchioles
Bronchus
Alveolar duc
Capillaries
Mediastinal
pleura
Alveolar
sac
Costal pleura-
parietal pleura
Pleural cavity
or sac
Thoracic cavity
Lung tissue
Diaphragmatic pleura
B
Alveoli
Fig. 8.5 The lungs within the thoracic cavity. A The pleural membranes. B The terminal air passages. (Part B with permission from Colville T, 
Chapter 8 Respiratory system
93
e paleul
Alveolar
capillary
Alveolus
Low O2
High CO2
70 481H
Low CO2
Direction of
blood flow
A
Low O2.
High O2
High O2
High CO2
Low CO2
Low CO,
Direction of
Mol pooq
B
Fig. 8.7 Ventrodorsal radiograph of a dog's thorax. The lungs are full of
 air and appear dark on the X-ray.
The lungs are divided into well-defined lobes by deep fissures
(Fig. 8.9). The lef lung is divided into three lobes; the right lung
has four lobes. The lobes are referred to as the cranial or apical,
middle or cardiac, and caudal or diaphragmatic. The fourth lobe of
the right lung is the accessory lobe; this is small and lies on the
 medial surface of the caudal lobe of the right lung.
Lower O2
Higher CO2
Thoracic cavity
Direction of
The thoracic cavity or thorax is divided into the right and left pleu-
moJ pooq
ral cavities by a double layer of pleura known as the mediastinum.
Each pleural cavity is lined by a single layer of serous membrane,
the pleural membrane (Fig. 8.5). This secretes a small amount of
C
serous or watery fluid whose function is toreduce friction befween
the pleural surfaces as the lungs move during respiration.
Fig. 8.6 The exchange of gases within the alveoli. A Inspiration: the air
contains high levels of oxygen and low levels of carbon dioxide. Blood 
If the pleural cavity becomes occupied by anything other than a
entering the alveolar capilary contains low levels of oxygen and high lev-
vacuum, e.g. air (pneumothorax), blood (haemothorax) or pus
els of carbon dioxide. B Gas exchange occurs: oxygen diffuses from air
(pyothorax), the ability of the lung to inflate fully will be impaired 
 in the alveolus, where its level is high, into blood in the alveolar capillary.
and the animal will show signs of respiratory distress (dysproea).
where its level is low. Carbon dioxide does the reverse, diffusing from 
alveolar capillaries into the alveolus. C Expiration: exhaled air contains
All the strucfures lying in the pleural cavifies are covered in
less oxygen and more carbon dioxide than are present in room air: Next
the pleural membrane and it is named according to the strucfures
breath brings in a fresh supply of high oxygen air (With permission from
  e n i       
Colville T, Bassett JM 200l Clinical anatomy and physiology for veterinary
pleural membranes and contains a vacuum and a small volume
technicians. Mosby St Louis, MO, p 233.)
of pleural fluid (Fig. 8.5A).
Lungs
Type of pleura
Structures covered
The right and left lungs lie within the thoracic cavity on eifher
 Diaphragmatic
 Cranial aspect of the diaphragm 
side of fhe double layer of connective fissue known as fhe medi-
 Pulmonary or visceral
 Right and left lungs - outlines each
astinum (Figs 8.7, 8.8). Each lung consists of the air passages (only
lobe
the most proximal parts of the bronchi are outside of the lung),
 Costal or parietal
Inner side of the ribs
blood vessels and surrounding connective fissue, all enclosed
 Mediastinal 
 Mediastinum
within a membrane called the pimonary pleura (Fig. 8.5A)
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
94
Fig. 8.8 Lateral radiograph of a dog's thorax. The lungs
appear dark on the X-ray due to air and allow the other
structures to be visualised.
carried out by muscles. This brings about the alternate expansion
and reduction in the volume of the thoracic cavify.
Left
Right
The lungs are suspended within the thoracic cavity, which
is divided into the right and left pleural cavities by fhe pleural
membranes. The pleural cavities contain a vacuum and, as they
are totally enclosed, any increase in their volume will result in
negafive pressure and air will be sucked into the lung fissue.
Apical
Conversely, if the volume of the pleural cavity decreases, fhe
lobe
increase in pressure will push air out. This is the principle behind
inspiration and expiration.
Three sets of muscles are responsible for respiration:
Cardiac
I. Diaphragm - this is a dome-shaped muscular structure that
lobe
forms the boundary between the thoracic and abdominal
cavifties (see Ch. 4). It is innervated by the phrenic nerve, which
arises from the cervical spine. When the diaphragm contracts,
Accessory
it flaftens and increases the volume of the thoracic cavity.
lobe
2. External intercostals - these fill the intercostal spaces and
are innervated by the intercostal nerves (see Ch. 3). As
increasing the volume of the thoracic cavity.
Diaphragmatic
lobe
3. Internal intercostals - these fill the intercostal spaces and
lie deep to the external intercostal muscles. They are also
Fig. 8.9 The division of the lungs into lobes by deep fissures.
innervated by the intercostal nerves and their action is
mainly passive, but during forced expiration they confract in
Most of the organs in the thorax lie in the space between the
conjunction with the abdominal muscles to force air out of the
two layers of mediastinal pleura, ie. the heart and its associated
lungs.
blood vessels, trachea and oesophagus (Fig. 8.10). The mediasti-
-q aad e s pe y am si eo pre op a go 
rier befween the fwo pleural cavifies. If one side is damaged or
 Inspiration (or inhalation) - the diaphragm and external intercostal muscles 
 contract and the volume of the thoracic cavity increases.The pressure 
intact, the effect is limited to that side and the other lung can con-
in the pleural cavity falls, the lungs are pulled outwards and air is sucked
tinue to function normally.
down the trachea and into the lung tissue.
 Expiration (or exhalation) - this is a passive process. The diaphragm
The mechanics of respiration
relaxes and regains its dome shape, the external intercostals relax and
the ribs drop downwards. The volume of the thoracic cavity decreases.
the pressure in the pleural cavity rises, the lungs collapse and air is 
Respiration, which may also be referred to as breathing or pul-
 pushed up and out of the trachea.
 monary ventilafion, is achieved by a coordinafed series of actions
Chapter 8 Respiratory system
95
Thoracic
vertebra
Thoracic
Brachiocephalic
vertebra
trunk (artery)-
Oesophagus
Aorta
Trachea
Oesophagus
Cranial
-Trachea
vena cava
-Body wall
Lung
Parietal
-Body wall
pleura
Visceral
pleura
Parietal
pleura
Mediastinum
Visceral
Parietal
pleura
pericardium
Mediastinum
Visceral pericardium
-Thymus
Sternum
Sternum
Thoracicvertebra
Aorta
Body wall
Parietal
pleura
Visceral
pleura
Oesophagus
Mediastinum
Caudal
vena cava
Right phrenic
C
nerve
Fig. 8.I0 Cross-section of the thorax at three different levels, showing the positions of major structures. A Section taken cranial
to the heart. B Section taken through the heart. C Section taken caudal to the heart. (With permission from Colville T, Bassett JM
200l Clinical anatomy and physiology for veterinary technicians. Mosby, St Louis, MO, p 230.)
Control of respiration
The rate and depth of respirafion is controlled by receptors
within the body:
During normal life, the changing metabolic needs of the body
make demands on the respiratory systerm. As the ftissues are
● Stretch receptors - lie within the walls of the bronchi and
remote from the organs involved in the intake and expulsion of
bronchioles and monitor the degree of stretching of the
bronchial tree. When the lung is distended they send impulses
Within the pons and medulla of the hindbrain there are respira-
Via the vagus nerve to the inspiratory centre of the brain.
tory centres responsible for the confrol of inspiration and expira-
Further inspiration is inhibited and expiration is stimulated
tion. They are the pneumotaxic and apneustic centres, which control
via the apneustic cenfre. This is known as the Hering-Breuer
 reflex and prevents overinflation of the lungs.
expiration, and the inspiratory centre, which confrols inspiration.
Impulses from the inspiratory cenfre travel to the diaphragm via
·Chemoreceptors:
the phrenic nerve and to the intercostal muscles via the intercostal
nerves and bring about inspiration. Expirafion is mainly passive
in the walls of the aorta, close to the heart) and the carotid
but impulses from the expiratory centres may assist in expirafion.
bodies (located in the walls of the carotid artery).
These cenfres inhibit each ofher and cannot work simultaneously.
O Central - found in the medulla of the brain. This is the major
They are responsible for the basic rhythm of respiration.
 area for sensing carbon dioxide levels in the blood.
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
96
respiration - this addifional amount of air is called the expiratory
the pH of the blood, e.g. high levels of carbon dioxide in the blood
reserve volume. However, even after the most forced exhalation
lower the pH, i.e. the blood becomes more acidic. This change
there is always some air left in the lungs and airways (otherwise 
in pH is detected by the chemoreceptors, which stimulate an
they would collapse) - this is called the residual volume.
increase in fhe rate and depth of respirafion. The carbon dioxide
The total amount of air that can be expired after a maximum
is expelled and the pH refurns to normal.
inspiration is called the vital capacity. The amount of air that is leff
The interrelationship between the confrol cenfres in the brain
in the lungs after normal expiration is called the fiunctional residual
and the chemoreceptors in the peripheral circulation enable the
capacity and it is this that allows gaseous exchange to take place
during expiration. The total lung capacity is the sum of the resid-
body.
ual volume, expiratory reserve volume, tidal volume and inspira-
tory reserve volume. Much of the air drawn in at each breath is
Respiratory definitions
exhaled again before it reaches the alveoli (i.e. it is not involved in
 gaseous exchange) - this is equal to the volume of the conducting
  an sn ) A  st   
system and is called the dead space.
air that passes into and out of the lungs during each respiraftion
is called the tidal volume. However, this is only a fraction of the
The respiratory rate is the number of breaths per minute.ln the dog the
acfual lung capacity and more air can be inhaled during forced
resting respiratory rate is 10-30 breaths per minute; in the cat it is 20-30
inspiration - this is the inspiratory reserve volume. Conversely, if is
breaths per minute.
possible to forcibly exhale more air than is expired during normal
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
CHAP
TER
err
KEY POINTS
 The digestive system of the carnivore is described as
 Digestive juices containing enzymes are secreted by
monogastric. The tract is relatively short, as meat is
intrinsic exocrine glands in the stomach and small
easy to digest, and the stomach is simple.
 intestine and by extrinsic glands such as the pancreas
 The teeth of the carnivore are sharp, pointed and 
 and gall bladder.
powerful and the jaw has a scissor-like action. This
 Digestion results in the production of soluble
enables meat to be cut and torn off the bones of
molecules that can pass through the epithelium of the
prey.
small intestine into the blood capillaries (amino acids 
 The majority of the tract is a long tube of varying
and monosaccharides) or lacteals (fatty acids and
 diameter. Each part has a similar structure but shows
glycerol).
functional adaptations.
 The products of digestion are carried around the
 Food passes down the tract and is mixed with
 body where they are metabolised and used by the
digestive juices by coordinated muscular movements
tissues.
known as peristalsis and rhythmic segmentation.
 Any unwanted or indigestible food remains are
 Digestion occurs by the action of enzymes, each of 
excreted in the faeces.
which is specific to a particular food type.
The maintenance of life depends on a constant supply of energy.
The oral cavity
to extract it from the nutrients taken into the body and then to
The oral cavity (Fig. 9.3) is also known as the mouth or buccal
excrete the indigestible remains. The digestive process occurs in
cavity and contains the tongue, teeth and salivary glands. The
several stages:
function of the oral cavity is as follows:
● Ingestion - the process of taking food into the body; this takes
I. To pick up the food - this is known as prehension and involves
 place in the mouth
the use of the lips and tongue
+ Digestion - the process of breaking down the food into small
chemical urits; this occurs in the stomach and small intestine
2. To break up the food into small boluses to aid swallowing 
this is known as mastication or chewing and involves the use
● Absorption - the process whereby the chemical units pass into
the blood and are carried to the liver; this occurs in the small
of the tongue, cheeks and teeth
intestine
 3. Lubrication of the food with mucus and saliva making if
● Metabolism - the process in which the chemical units are
easier to swallow
   s  e q    o 
4. In omnivores and herbivores, digestion of carbohydrates
this takes place mainly in the liver
begins in the mouth with the secretion of salivary enzymes.
● Excretion - the removal of any remaining indigestible material.
This does not occur in carnivores, e.g. dog and cat, as food is
The digestive system (Figs 9.1, 9.2) consists of the following
held in the mouth for a very short time before it is swallowed.
parts:
The oral cavity is formed by the following bones of the skull:
● Oral cavity or mouth - lips, tongue, teeth
● The incisive bone and the maxilla form the upper jaw
●Pharynx
● The palatine bone forms the roof of the mouth - the hard palate
·Oesophagus
 l sapeu paed au mel namo a su aauu au o
+ Stomach
the midline at the mandibular symphysis.
● Small intestine - duodenum, jejunum, ileum 
The mandibles arficulate with the termporal bones of the skull
● Large intestine - caecum, colon, rectum, anus.
forming the temporomandibular joint. In carnivores the action of
 There are also several accessory glands, without which the diges-
the joint is scissor-like to shear flesh offthe bones of their prey.
five process carnot be completed:
The upper and lower jaws are linked by skin, forming fhe
+ Salivary glands
cheeks, under which lie the muscles of mastication (see Ch. 4). These
●Pancreas
muscles lie over the temporomandibular joint and give strength to
the biting action. The entrance to the mouth is closed by the lips,
+Gall bladder
composed of muscle covered in skin. The upper lip is split verti-
+ Liver.
cally by a division known as the philtrum (see Ch. 8, Fig. 8.1).
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
98
Transverse
Duodenum
colon
Gall bladder
,Descending
colon
Stomach
Rectum
Oral cavity
Anal canal
Oesophag
Diaphragm
Pancrea
Liver
Ascending
colon
Jejunum
and ileum
Fig. 9.I Organs of the digestive system of the dog, left lateral view.
The entire oral cavify is lined by a layer of mucous membrane.
It is reflected on to the jawbones, forming the gums. The mucous 
In an anaesthetised animal, the sublingual vein, running under the
membrane covers the hard palate and extends over a flap of soff
tongue, may be used for intravenous injections or for collecting
tissue at the back of the oral cavity - this is the soft palate, which
blood samples, while the sublingual artery may be used for
extends caudally between the oral and nasal cavifies and divides
monitoring the pulse rate.
the pharynx into the oropharynx and nasopharynx (Fig. 9.3) (see
also Ch. 8).
The tongue is covered in mucous membrane. The dorsal sur-
face is thicker and arranged in rough papillae, which assist in con-
The tongue
trol of the food bolus and in grooming. Some papillae are adapted
The functions of the tongue are:
to form taste buds, mairly found at the back of the tongue. Taste
buds are well supplied wifh nerve fibres, which carry information
I. To aid the ingestion of food
about taste to the forebrain (see Ch. 5). Rurning along fhe under-
 2. To carry the receptors (taste buds) for the sensation of taste or
side of the tongue are the paired sublingual veins and arteries.
gustation
Sumoems i Aper soq poo e jo uoeu au u dia o 's
The teeth
4. To groom fhe fur, particularly in cats
The teeth are hard strucfures embedded in the upper and lower
5. To assist thermoregulation - the tongue is used to apply
jaw. Each jaw forms a dental arch or dentary - there are four den-
saliva to the fur, which smoothes it down into a thinner and
tal arches in total. The teeth pierce the gums to sit in sockets or
cooler layer; in dogs, panfing, during which saliva evaporates
alveoli. The membrane covering the gums is known as the gingival
from the tongue, helps to cool the body
membrane or periodontal membrane.
6. To produce vocalisation - production of sound involves
Structure
complicated movements of the tongue and lips.
All teeth have a basic structure (Fig. 9.4). In the centre of each tooth
The tongue lies on the floor of the oral cavity and is made of stri-
is a pulp cavity. This contains blood capillaries and nerves, which
ated muscte fibres running in all directions. This enables the tongue
 supply the growing tooth. In young animals the cavity is relatively
to make delicate movements. The muscles are affached at the root
large but, once the tooth is fully developed, it shrivels and contains
of the tongue to the hyoid bone (see Ch. 8) and to the sides of the
only a small blood and nerve supply. Affer a tooth has stopped
 mandibles. The tip of fthe tongue is unattached and very mobile.
Chapter 9 Digestive system 
66
Pyloric
Fig. 9.2 The digestive tract removed from the body.
sphincter
Oesophagus
Cardiac
Duodenum
sphincter
Spleen
Gall bladder
(lying between
lobes of the liver)
Pancreas
Common bile duct
Ileumandjejunum
(not drawn to scale)
Pancreatic duct
Transverse
Ascending-
colon
colon
lleocaecal-
 junction
Descending
Caecum
colon
Rectum
Anus
Fig. 9.3 Lateral view of the dog's head to show the oral cavity/
digestive system.
Hard palate
Mouth or oral cavity
Soft palate
Nasopharynx
Pharynx
Incisor teeth
Oesophagus
Tongue
Mandible
Oropharynx
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
100
tubercules
 Enamel - shiny white 
outer covering
Crown
Dentine - forms the main
part of the tooth
Gingival
membrane
Gum
Cement - holds the tooth
firmly in the gum
Root
 Pulp cavity - contains blood
 capillaries and nerve fibres
Roots
A
B
Fig. 9.4 A Shape and features of incisor and canine teeth. B Shape and features of premolar, molar and carnassial teeth.
Function
Dentition
The teeth of a carnivore are adapted to shearing and tearing the
+ Deciduous dentition - also called the milk or temporary teeth.
which are classified by their shape and posifion in the jaw (Fig.
9.5). This is summarised in Table 9.1.
the gums) as fhe arimal grows. They are usually smaller and
whiter fhan the permanent teeth and fall out as the adult teeth
begin to erupt.
Infection of the roots of the upper carnassial teeth is known as a
·Permanent dentition - also called the adult teeth. These are
molar abscess. The abscess bursts through the bone and the skin to
discharge pus just below the eye.
larger than milk teeth and as fhe arimal ages they show signs
Of wear. They last a lifetime.
species of animal and are summarised in Table 9.2.
2 Molars
Dental formulae
Each species has a characteristic dental formula and this enables
4 Premolars
the veterinary surgeon to moritor the numbers of teeth lost as a
result of disease or ageing. Each type of tooth is referred to by its 
ICanine
initial letter: Iis for incisor, etc. The following numbers show how
many teeth of each type there are in the upper and lower jaws on
one side of the head. The numbers are then multiplied by two to
3Incis
 give the total number of teeth in the mouth.
Dog dentat formula
 Permanent: I3/3, C1/1, PM4/4, M23×2 = 42 teeth
Deciduous: I3/3, C1/1, PM3/3×2 = 28 teeth
Cat dental formula
Permanent: I3/3, C1/1, PM3/2, MI/l ×2 = 30 teeth
Deciduous: I3/3, C1/1, PM3/2x2 = 26 teeth
Salivary glands
3 Incisors
4 Premolars
3 Molars
These are paired glands lying around the area of the oral cavity.
Their secretions, known collectively as saliva, pour into the cavity
I Canine
Carnassial
via ducts. Saliva contains 99% water and 1% mucus - there are no
Fig. 9.5 Skull of an adult dog showing the permanent dentition.
enzymes in the saliva of the dog and the cat (Fig. 9.6).
Chapter 9 Digestive system
101
Table 9.1 Tooth types and functions
Type
 Position and shape
Function
Incisor (l)
Lie in the incisive bone of the upper jaw and in the mandible 
 Fine nibbling and cutting meat; often used for
of the lower jaw; small, pointed with a single root
 delicate grooming 
Canines (C) - 'eye teeth'
 One on each corner of the upper and lower jaws; pointed,
 Holding prey firmly in the mouth 
with a simple curved shape; single root deeply embedded in
the bone
Premolars (PM) - 'cheek teeth'
 Flatter surface with several points known as cusps or
 Shearing flesh ofthe bone using a scissor-ike action; 
tubercles; usually have two or three roots arranged in a
flattened surface helps to grind up the flesh to
triangular position to give stability in the jawbone 
faclitate swallowing and digestion 
Molars (M) - 'cheek teeth'
 Similar shape to premolars; usually larger with at least 
 Shearing and grinding meat - NB There are no
three roots
 molars in the deciduous dentition 
Carnassials
Largest teeth in the jaw; similar shape to other cheek
Very powerful teeth sited close to the angle of the 
teeth; these are the first lower molar and the last upper
lips; this type is only found in carnivores 
premolar on each side
Table 9.2 Eruption times
The function of saliva is:
Dog
1. To lubricate the food, so making mastication and swallowing
Tooth type
Cat
easier
 Deciduous dentition
 2. Thermoregulation - evaporation of saliva from the tongue
Incisors
3-4 weeks 
 Entire dentition starts
during panting or from the fur when applied during.
to erupt at 2 weeks 
grooming causes cooling of blood in the underlying blood
 and is complete by
capillaries; this reduces the core temperature of the body
4 weeks
 3. In omnivores and herbivores, secretions from the parotid
Canines
5 weeks
gland contain amylase, which begins carbohydrate digestion.
 Premolars 
48 weeks
Pharynx
Molars 
 Absent 
The pharynx forms a crossover point between the respiratory and
 Permanent dentition
digestive systems. It is a muscular fube lined with mucous mem-
Incisors
3.5-4 months
12 weeks 
brane, cornecting the back of the nasal and oral cavities with the
oesophagus and the larynx and trachea. The soft palate extends
Canines
5-6 months
 s  x  r sa  smn 
Premolars
Ist premolars 4-5
Variable; full 
pharynx into the nasopharynx and oropharynx (Fig. 9.3; see also
months; remainder
dentition present
Ch.8). The walls of the pharynx contain diffuse areas of lymphoid
5-7 months 
by 6 months
tissue known as the tonsils. Their function is to protect the animal
Molars
5-7 months
Zygomatic
Parotid
The posiftions of the glands are:
● Zygomatic - close to the eyeball within the orbit
● Sublingual - medial to the mandible, under the mucosa
covering the underside of the fongue
● Mandibular - caudal to the angle of the jaw; can be palpated
but may be mistaken for the mandibular lymph nodes, which
 are in this area
● Parotid - between the base of the ear and the mandibular
 glands; can be palpated.
 Production of saliva is continuous but may be increased by such
factors as the sight and smell of food (particularly in dogs), fear,
-sudoueio se uns sieu iao io sases pue pue ued
Sublingual
Mandibular
phates. Salivation also often occurs just prior to vomiting and
 may be a warning sign to the owner!
Fig. 9.6 Location of the salivary glands in the dog.
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
102
against disease (see Ch. 7). The most obvious are the palatine ton-
heart base and between the fwo lungs. The oesophagus enters the
sils lying one on each side of the pharynx in a shallow recess. The
abdominal cavity via the oesophageal hiatus of the diaphragm,
Eustachian or auditory tube connects the pharynx to the middle ear.
which separates the thorax and abdomen.
It enables the air pressure on either side of the tympanic mem-
The walls of the oesophagus are lined with stratified squamous
 brane to equalise and thus maintains the flexibility and function
epithelium arranged in longitudinal folds. This protects against
of the ear drum (see Ch. 5).
 damage by food and allows for widthways expansion as the
The pharynx conveys food from the mouth into the oesopha-
boluses pass down. Within the walls are circular and longitu-
gus by means of a process known as deglutition or swallowing
dinal bands of smooth muscle fibres. Contraction of these mus-
(Fig. 9.7). This occurs in the following stages:
dles brings about a series of peristaltic waves that force the food
I. The food is rolled into a bolus by the tongue and cheeks and
along the tube (Fig. 9.8). Food can pass in the reverse direction -
is passed to the back of the mouth by the base of the tongue.
antiperistalsis - seen during vomifing. The average fime faken
s snq spuosas oe-st si snseudosao au umop ssed ot pooy noy
2. The pharyngeal muscles confract and force the bolus towards
depends on the type of food: liquids take a shorter time than
the oesophagus.
dry foods.
3. At the same time, the epigloffis closes to prevent food
 entering the larynx.
Diagnosis of conditions of the digestive tract may be helped by the
4. A wave of muscular contraction - peristalsis - pushes the food
use of a 'barium meal or barium series. Liquid barium sulphate is 
down the oesophagus.
administered orally and a series of radiographs are taken over a
5. When the food has passed through the pharynx, the epigloffis
period of several hours. Figure 9.9 shows the result of the use of
falls open and respiration starts again.
barium as a contrast medium and illustrates the anatomy of the
canine digestive tract.
Oesophagus
This is a simple tube that carries food from the pharynx to the
The abdominal part of the digestive system
stomach (Figs 9.1, 9.2). In the neck, the oesophagus lies dorsal
  s      n as    o
The majority of the digestive tract lies wifhin fhe abdominal
thoracic cavify, running within the mediastinum, dorsal to the
cavity and can be divided into three parts:
Fig. 9.7 Function of the pharynx. A Positions of structures during
swallowing of food. B Position of structures during nose breathing.
Hard palate
Nasal cavity
Softpalate
Oral cavity
Epiglottis
Oesophagus
- Larynx and trachea
Hard palate
Nasal cavity
Softpalate
Oral cavity
Epiglottis
Oesophagus
B
Larynx and trachea
Chapter 9 Digestive system
103
Gastric dilatation and volvulus (GDV) is a condition of large breeds
of dog, such as the German Shepherd. It occurs when the stomach
distends with gas and half-fermented food, becomes unstable and
twists around on itsef. preventing the escape of the gas. The dog
Contracted
suffers extreme discomfort and may go into shock and die if not 
Direction of
muscle
teated to relieve the distension. In such cases, the stomach feels
food movement
tight and drum-like and may fill half the abdomen.
Structure of the stomach wal!
The stomach can be divided into three regions: the cardia, fiundus
Food bolus
and pylorus. Most of the gastric glands lie wifhin the fundic region
of the stomach. The walls of the stomach are lined wifh mucous
mermbrane,the gastric mucosa. This is thrown into deep longitudinal
folds known as rugae which flaften out when the stomach fills with
food. Within the mucosa are the gastric pits (Fig. 9.10),consisting of
three types of cellresponsible for the secretion of gastric juices:
Relaxed muscle
● Goblet cells - found in all parts of the stomach. They secrete
mucus to lubricate the food and to protect the stomach wall
from damage by digestive enzymes (antodigestion)
● Chief cells - found within the fundus. They secrete pepsinogen,
the precursor to the active enzyme pepsin; pepsin breaks
 down proteins to peptides
Fig. 9.8 Representation of peristalsis. Muscular contraction within the
● Parietal cells - found within the fundus. They secrete
tube forces the food bolus along.
hydrochloric acid (HCl); this creates an acid pH which enables
pepsin to work effectively.
Food enters fhe stomach via the cardiac sphincter. Distensiorn of
the stomach stimulates the secretion of the hormone gastrin from
the stomach walls, which initiates the production of the gastric
● Stomach - used to store and mix ingested food
juices. Two types of muscular movement of the stomach break up
and mix the food wifh the juices:
● Small intestine - the main site for enzymic digestion and the
absorption of nutrients
● Peristalsis - pushes the food through the stomach (Fig. 9.8) and
contributes to the rumbling of an empty stomach
● Large intestine - the site for absorption of water, electrolytes
● Rhythmic segmentation - breaks up and mixes the food boluses
 and water-soluble vitamins; any indigestible remains pass out
Of the anus as faeces.
(Fig. 9.11).
Gastric emptying
Stomach
 Food in the stomach is broken up and partially digested, resulting
The stomach of the dog and cat is described as being simple and
in a soup-like liquid with an acid pH known as chyme. Chyme is
digestion is said to be monogastric. The functions of the stomach
released in spurts through the pyloric sphincter into the duodenum,
where digestion continues. The time taken for food to pass through
are:
the stomach depends on the type of food - liquids may take about
I. To act as a reservoir for food - wild carnivores (particularly
half an hour, while more fafty or solid foods take about 3 hours.
dogs) may only eat every 3-4 days and then rest while food
slowly digests
2. To break up the food and mix it with gastric juices
Vomiting is the 'return of ingesta and fluids against the normal direction
3. To begin the process of protein digestion.
of swallowing and peristalsis'. This is a very common presenting sign and
there are three types:
The stomach is a C-shaped, sac-like organ lying on the left side
of the cranial abdomen. Food enters from the oesophagus via the
True vomiting - preceded by salivation and a feeling of nausea, followed
by active abdominal contractions and expulsion of the vomitus. This 
cardiac sphincter and leaves from the pyloric sphincter (Fig. 9.2). The
may be caused by viral or bacterial infections, gastric irritation, foreign
inner curve of the sac is called the lesser curvature and the outer
 bodies, travel sickness, endoparasites, abdominal neoplasia and many 
curve the greater curvature. The enfire organ is covered in a layer
metabolic diseases.
of visceral peritoneum or mesentery, as are all the organs in the
 Passive vomiting or regurgitation - caused by overflow of
abdominal cavity. The mesentery aftached to the inner curvafure
gaseydosao ue do 'sngeydosaoeaa 3'a 'sjuajuon leaseydosao
is called the lesser omentum, while that aftached to the greater cur-
foreign body.
vafure is called fhe greater ormenturm. The spleen lies within the lay-
 Prajectile vomiting - a violent ejection of stomach contents. This is
ers of the greater omenfum. The walls of the stomach are thick
characteristic of pyloric stenosis, a condition seen in neonates. It occurs
and easily distended by food. When empty, the stomach lies
when the muscle of the pyloric sphincter is overdeveloped and restricts
under the ribs but when full the stomach may occupy a third of
the passage of chyme out into the duodenum.
the abdomen.
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
104
Fig. 9.9 Barium X-ray series illustrating the diges-
tive tract. AThe barium (radio-opaque white mate-
nial) is in the oesophagus after being swallowed. B
Barium enters the stomach. C Barium starts to leave
the stomach and enter the duodenum.
Chapter 9 Digestive system
105
Fig. 9.9—cont'd D Most of the barium is now in
the small intestine (a small amount remains in the
stomach and some has entered the large intestine).
E Barium in the colon and rectum applied by enema.
Small intestine
two parts. They constifute a long fube with no fixed posifion
The small intestine is the major site of enzymic digestion and
as the mesojejunum and mesoileum are long, allowing the tract
absorption. It is a long, relatively narrow tube and may be up to 3.5
to fill any available space in the peritoneal cavity. Within the
e s s a e sssd   oq an s
walls are digestive glands known as the crypts of Lieberkihn.
 is mixed with digestive juices by peristalsis and by rhythmic seg-
The ileum ends at the ileocaecal junction, where it joins the
mentation. It is divided into three parts, each of which has a similar
caecum.
strucfure but shows functional adaptations (Figs 9.2, 9.9):
● Duodenum - a U-shaped tube with the pancreas lying in the
Structure of the intestina! wal!
loop of the 'U'. The duodenum lies in a fixed position as the
Each part of the small intestine has a similar structure (Fig. 9.12).
mesentery, the mesoduodenum, is short. The pancreatic duct
The epifthelial layer is folded into millions of tiny, leaf-shaped
leading from the pancreas and the common bile duct from the
folds called villi (sing. villus). Their funcfion is to increase the sur-
gall bladder open into it. Within the walls are glands, known
as Brunner's glands, that secrete a mixfure of digestive
enzymes known as succus entericus. The duodenum leads into
is a border of tiny microvilli, which form a 'brush border' to fur-
the jejunum.
ther increase the surface area. (see Ch. 2, Fig. 2.2)
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
106
Fig. 9.10 A Structure of the stomach. B Enlargerment to show a
Oesophagus
gastric pit.
Cardiac sphincter
Pyloric
Lesser
sphincter
curvature
Cardiac region
Internal surface
folded into deep
rugae
Fundus
Duodenum
Greater
Pyloric regi
curvature
A
Goblet cells
Gastric
mucosa
Chief cells and
parietal cells
Gastric pit
Cut section of
coiled gastric
pueβ
Inside each villus is:
+ A network of blood capillaries that convey small molecules
from the breakdown of carbohydrates and proteins to the liver
via the hepafic portal vein
· A lymphafic capillary known as a lacteal. Each lacteal carries
chyle, a milky fluid resulting from fat digestion, from the
small intestine to the cisterna chyli in the dorsal abdomen.
The pancreas
The pancreas is a pale pink, lobular gland lying in the 'U' of the
 duodernum, whose secretions are essential to the digestive pro-
cess. It lies outside the digestive tract and is described as an extrin-
sic gland. The pancreas has an endocrine part (see Ch. 6) and an
exocrine part and is classed as a mixed gland. The exocrine part
secretes digestive enzymes and bicarbonate into the duodenum
via the pancreatic duct (Fig. 9.2).
The goll blodder
The gall bladder lies within the lobes of the liver and is a reser-
voir for bile, produced by the liver. Bile contains bile salts needed
for fat digestion and is stained yellow-green by bile pigment or
Fig. 9.II Rhythmic segmentation within the gastrointestinal tract serves
bilirubin produced from the breakdown of old erythrocytes. It is
 to break up and mix food boluses.
secreted into the duodenum via the common bile duct.
Chapter 9 Digestive system
107
Mesentery
 Longitudinal smooth muscle
Intrinsic gland,
e.g. Brunner's glands
Circular smooth muscle
Nerve plexuses
Epithelial layer
Lamina propria
Lumen
Muscularis mucosae
Submucosa
Serosa
Villus
Lacteal
Extrinsic gland,
(absorbs chyle)
e.g. pancreas
 Epithelial layer with 
A
mucus-secreting cells
Capillary network
(leads to the hepatic
portal vein)
Submucosa
Gobletcellssecretemucus
'Brush border
Columnar epithelium
of microvilli
Fig. 9.12 A Cross-section through an area of intestine to show structure. B Enlargement to show the villi and absorptive
epithelium.
Digestion
An enzyme is a protein that acts as a catalyst, increasing the speed of a
ro (sado) sad yo  a  ps s po
reaction. Some enzymes may be produced in an inactive form, known 
drates (polysaccharides) and fats (lipids). For food to be a useable
as a precursor which must be converted to the active form by another 
source of energy, if must be broken down into soluble molecules that
enzyme before they can work
are small enough to be absorbed through the wall of the small intes-
ftine and into the bloodstream - fhis is digestion. In mammals this
process occurs by the use of chemicals called enzymes. Each enzyme
is designed to act on a specific material or substrate, and not on any
There are four sources of digestive juices containing the
other. They are usually named affer the substrate on which they act,
e.g. lipase acts on lipids (fats); maltase acts on maltose.
juices. Digestion in the carnivore begins in the stomach.
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
108
Gastric juice
Protein (polypeptides) converted to→ amino acids
This is secreted by the gastric pits in response to production of the
 Carbohydrates (polysaccharides and disaccharides) converted ta→
hormone gastrin from the stomach wall (see Ch. 6). It contains:
Glucose and other simple sugars (monosaccharides)
● Mucus - secreted by goblet cells to lubricate the food and
Fats converted to→> Fatty acid and glycerol (monoglycerides)
protect the gastric mucosa from autodigestion
● Hydrochloric acid - secreted by parietal cells. This denafures or
breaks down proteins, making digestion easier. It creates an
The result of the digestive process is that the basic constifu-
acid pH of 1.3-5.0, which facilitates protein digestion
ents of food are converted into small molecules that can now be
● Pepsinogen - secreted by chief cells. It is converted to the active
absorbed.
enzyme pepsin by hydrochloric acid
Absorption
● Pepsin - converts protein molecules to peptides (smaller
molecules) by a process known as hydrolysis.
The main site for absorption is the villi of the small intestine. The
 The liquid food resulting from this process of gastric juice diges-
efficiency of the absorptive process is increased by:
tion is known as chyme.
● The long length of the small intestine
● The internal surface area (increased by the presence of the villi)
Pancreatic juice
· The fact that each villus is well supplied with blood capillaries
This secretion is produced by the exocrine part of the pancreas
and lacteals.
and occurs in response to the hormones cholecystokinin and secre-
During absorption amino acids and simple sugars are absorbed
tin (from the wall of the duodenum) and gastrin (from the stom-
by the blood capillaries and are carried by the hepatic portal vein
ach wall), and stimuli from the autonomic nervous system (see
to the liver. Fafty acids and glycerol are absorbed by the lacteals.
Ch. 6). It contains:
They form a fatty milky liquid known as chyle, which is carried
● Bicarbonate - neutralises the affects of the acid in the chyme,
to the cisterna chyli, lying in the dorsal abdomen (see Ch. 7, Fig.
allowing other enzymes to work
7.7). Here it is mixed with lymph and carried to the heart by the
● Digestive enzymes - many are inactive precursors, which
thoracic duct, where it joins the blood circulation.
prevent autodigestion and destruction of the pancreas
Large intestine
● Proteases - act on proteins and include:
O Trypsinogen, converted to active frypsin by another enzyme,
This is a short tube of a wider diameter than the small intestine.
enterokinase, present in succus entericus
Each part has a similar structure to that of the small intestine.
O Trypsin, which activates ofher enzyme precursors. It acts
However, in the lumen there are no villi and no digestive glands,
on peptides and ofther proteins to produce amino acids. A
but there are more goblet cells. These secrete mucus, which
lubricates the faeces as it passes through. The large intestine is
divided into:
● Lipases - activated by bile salts. They convert fats to fatty acids
· Caecum - a short, blind-ending fube joining the ileum at its
and glycerol
junction with the ascending colon: this is the ileocaecal junction
●Amylases - act on starches, a form of plant carbohydrate, and
(Fig. 9.2). In carnivores it has no significant function
convert them to maltose.
· Colon - divided into the ascending, transverse and descending
colon (Fig. 9.1) according to the relative position in the
Bile saits
peritoneal cavity, but all are a confinuation of the same
The presence of chyme in the duodenum causes the gall bladder
organ. The descending colon is held close to the dorsal body
to confract and produce bile. Bile emulsifies fat globules so that
wall by the mesocolon. Within the color water, vitamins and
fhey have a larger surface area on which enzymes can act, and
electrolytes are absorbed, ensuring that the body does not lose
 also activates lipases.
excessive water and become dehydrated
● Rectum - the part of the colon running through the pelvic
Intestina! juice
cavity. It is held close to the dorsal body wall by cornective
Secretion of intestinal juice is stimulated by the hormone secretin
tissue and muscle (Fig. 9.9)
● Anal sphincter - this marks the end of the digestive tract. It is
a muscular ring that controls the passage of faeces out of the
ric sphincter (see Ch. 6). The intestinal juices are produced by:
body. It has fwo parts:
● Brunner's glands in the duodenum - the secretions are known
as shuccus entericus
O Internal anal sphincter: inner ring of smooth muscle; control
is involuntary
+ Crypts of Lieberkihn in the jejunum and ileum.
 O External anat sphincter: outer ring of striated muscle; control
d o  m n  sd  s n r 
is voluntary
duced by the pancreas:
● Maltase converts maltose to glucose
The lumen of the sphincter is constricted and lined with deep
longitudinal folds of mucous membrane that stretch to allow the
● Sucrase converts sucrose to glucose and fructose
 passage of bulky faeces.
+ Lactase converts lactose to glucose and galactose
Defaecation
● Aminopeptidase converts peptides to amino acids
       ss s  
+ Lipase converts fats to fafty acids and glycerol.
 peristalsis, antiperistalsis, rhythmic segmentation and infrequent
Chapter 9 Digestive system 
109
but strong contractions known as mass movements. These move-
Histologically, the liver consists of thousands of cells known as
ments are involuntary but, as the faecal mass enters the pelvic
hepatocytes (Fig. 9.13). These are responsible for all the many func-
cavity, stretching of the rectal wall stimulates voluntary strain-
tions of the liver. The hepatocytes are arranged in hexagonal liver
ing brought about by abdominal contractions. The anal sphinc-
lobules surrounded by connective tissue. Running through the
ter, which is normally held tightly closed, relaxes, the abdominal
lobules between the hepatocytes are minute blood sinusoids car-
muscles confract and the mass is forced out.
rying blood from the hepatic portal vein. Each hepatocyte is bathed
in plasma, which percolates across the lobule to drain into the cen-
Composition of faeces
tral vein. The central veins flow into the hepatic vein and so to the
Normal faeces have a colour and smell that is characteristic of the
caudal vena cava. Thus the products of digestion are carried from
species. They are described as being 'formed' - the water contenf
the small intestine by the blood to every hepatocyte where they
is such that the faeces keep their shape (watery faeces do not).
are used for metabolism. The liver tissue receives arterial blood
Normal faeces contain:
in the hepatic artery.
● Water and fibre
 Between the hepatocytes are tiny channels known as bile canali-
culi, into which bile is secreted. The canaliculi form an intercon-
● Dead and living bacteria - normal commensals of the large
intestine, which may contribute to the smell
necting nefwork that evenfually drains into the gall bladder. There
is no direct connection between the sinusoids and the canaliculi.
● Sloughed intestinal cells
The liver has many functions and is essenfial to normal
●Mucus
health.
+ Contents of anal sacs
 1. Carbohydrate metabolism - glucose is a source of energy for the
· Stercobilin - a pigment derived from bile that gives faeces
body but if can orly be used by the cells in the presence of the
their colour.
hormone insulin, secreted by the pancreas. Excess glucose is
Lying between the two anal rings, in the *20 to 4' position, are the
down to release glucose (glycogenolysis) when blood glucose
anai sacs. These are modified sebaceous glands, which vary from pea
levels are low. In this way, the liver keeps blood glucose levels
to marble size depending on the species and breed of animal. Their 
within a narrow range (see Ch. 6 Fig. 6.3).
secretions coat the faeces as it passes out and the characteristic 
 smellis used by the animal for territorial scent marking, particularly
2. Protein metabolism - the liver has several important roles
uo pay saop u! walqoud e aq Aew soes jeue paioedwl 'saioads plm u!
here:
 softer diets.
O Formation of plasma proteins: Albumin maintains the
balance of fluids in the body; fibrinogen and prothrombin
are involved in the blood cloffting mechanism; globulins 
form part of the immune mechanism
The sequence of muscle contraction and nervous control involved
O Regulation of amino acids: there are 20 amino acids that are
in defaecation requires coordination by the nervous system. Any
essenfial to form body protein. The liver cells use these
damage to the spinal cord, e.g. disc prolapse or severe trauma, may
amino acids to make new proteins and as the building
result in faecal incontinence or faecal retention.
blocks' of other organic compounds. Amino acids that are
not essential may be converted into more useful ones by a
process known as transamination
O Production of urea: surplus amino acids cannot be stored in
Diarrhoea is frequent evacuation of watery faeces'. This is a
the body and are converted by the liver to ammoria and
common presenting sign. It may be acute or chronic and is an
then to urea. This process is known as deamination. Urea is
indication of some form of intestinal disturbance, e.g. maldigestion,
excreted in the urine.
malabsorption, increased peristalsis or gastrointestinal irritation.
 3. Fat metabolism - fat is a source of energy for the body. The
However the most common cause of diarrhoea, in dogs especially.
liver converts fafty acids and glycerol into phospholipids,
is dietary mismanagement. This can be easily corrected by starvation
for the formation of cell membranes, and to cholesterol for
for 24 hours followed by a light diet of fish or chicken and rice for a
bile salts. Excess fat is stored in deposits around the body.
further 24 hours.
4. Formation of bile - stored in the gall bladder.
 5. Destruction of old red blood cells - haemoglobin is excreted as
The liver
bilirubin in the bile.
6. Formnation of new red blood cells - the liver carries out this task
The liver is the largest gland in the body and lies in the cranial
only in the fefus.
abdomen. The cranial aspect is convex and is in confact with the
 7. Storage of vitamins - mainly the fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E
diaphragm. The caudal aspect is concave and is in contact with
the stomach, duodenum and right kidney (Fig. 9.1). The liver
and K, but some water-soluble ones may also be stored.
is deep red in colour as ift has a large volume of blood flowing
8. Storage of iron
through it. It is divided into several large lobes, in the centre of
9. Regulation of body temperature and production of heat
which is the falciform ligament. This is the remains of fetal blood
vessels from the umbilicus and is of liftle significance in the adult
10. Detoxification of certain substances - e.g. alcohol
animal (see Ch. 7). The gall bladder lies between the lobes in the
11.
Detoxification and conjugation of steroid hormones.Fig.
centre of the caudal aspect. It stores bile, which pours into the
9.13 Structural organisation of the liver
duodenum via the common bile duct.
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
110
Network of bile
canaliculi between
Sinusoidsradiating
hepatocytes
from central vein
Bood flow to
hepatic vein
Central vein
 Branch of bile duct
Interlobular vein
(branch of hepatic portal
vein)
Branch of hepatic artery
Blood flow
into lobules
Fig. 9.13 Structural organisation of the liver.
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
CHAPTER
10
Urinary system
KEY POINTS
 The functional unit of the kidney is the nephron; each
volume of urine is significantly reduced and reflects
kidney contains many thousands of nephrons.
the status of the extracellular fluid (ECF) of the body.
 Each nephron is made of several parts, each of which
 The function of the kidney is to regulate the volume 
has a role in modifying the glomerular filtrate.
and the osmotic concentration of the body fluids
Wwithin the glomerular capsule of the nephrons, blood
 so that they remain constant - this is one of the
passes over a fine fiter Water and very small particles
homeostatic mechanisms of the body and is essential
are removed - this is known as ultrafiltration and
 if the body is to function normally.
forms what is known as the glomerular filtrate.
 The kidney is also responsible for the excretion of
Large particles such as red blood cells and plasma
nitrogenous waste in the urine.
 proteins remain in the blood.
 Urine is stored in the bladder and removed from the
 The very dilute glomerular filtrate passes down the
body via the urethra.
nephrons and undergoes a series of modifications 
 Urine samples can provide useful diagnostic
which result in the formation of urine. The final
information.
If the metabolic processes of the body are to function effectively.
on the left side of the abdomen, pushing the left kidney out of
fhe chemical composifion and volume of the tissue fluid must be
posifion. Lying close to the cranial pole of each kidney are the
kept constant. The most important function of the urinary system -
ovaries of the female and the adrenal glands (Fig. 10.2).
and principally that of the kidney - is to maintain this constant
internal environment, described as homeostasis.
Macroscopic structure
The urinary system lies in the abdominal and pelvic cavifies.
It is anatomically linked with the genital or reproductive sys-
The kidneys of the cat and dog have a characteristic bean shape
tem and may be referred to as the urogenital system. Both systems
and the indented area is known as the hilus. This is the point af
share the urethra which runs through the peris of the male and
which blood vessels, nerves and the ureters enter and leave the
joins the vagina of the female.
kidney. The kidneys are normally a deep reddish-brown but the
The parts of the urinary system are:
s   s   e   m
· A pair of kidneys
  u e qe a e ador e e 
be seen to be equivalent in size to approximately 2.5 vertebrae
+ A pair of ureters
(Fig. 10.3). The outer surface may be surrounded by a layer of
● Bladder
fat, which acts as an energy reserve and protects the kidney from 
+ Urethra.
 external damage.
The functions of the urinary system are:
When examining the cut surface of a normal kidney cut longi-
● To regulate the chemical composifion and volume of the body
fudinally, it is possible to see four layers (Fig. 10.4). From the out-
fluids - osmoregulation
side inwards these are:
● To remove nitrogenous waste products and excess water from
1. Capsule - protective layer of irregular dense fibrous
the body - excretion
connective tissue closely aftached to the cortex. This can be
+ To act as an endocrine gland by the secrefion of the hormone
easily peeled away from a healthy kidney but any adhesions
erythropoietin (see Ch. 6).
 may indicate previous infection or damage
2. Cortex - dark red outermost layer of the kidney containing the
The kidney
renal corpuscles and convoluted tubules of the nephrons
 3. Medulla - slighfly paler than the cortex and it may be possible
to see the triangular-shaped pyramids, which contain the
There are ftwo kidneys lying in the cranial abdominal cavity, one
 On each side of the midline ventral to the lumbar hypaxial mus-
collecting ducts and, between them, tissue containing the
cles (Fig. 10.1). Each kidney is closely aftached to the lumbar
loops of Henle of the nephrons
4. Pelvis - this is basin-shaped and made of fibrous connective
enteric aftachment, as seen in other abdominal organs, and the
tissue which gives it a whitish appearance. Urine formed by
kidney is described as being retroperitoneal. The right kidney lies
the nephrons drains into the pelvis and out of the kidney via
slighfly cranial to the leff because the stomach has evolved to lie
a single ureter.
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
112
Right kidney
Left kidney
Ureters
Rectum
Urinary bladder
Vagina
Urethra
Urethral orifice
Fig. Io.I The position of the urinary system in the bitch.
Right adrenal gland
Left adrenal gland
Fig. I0.2 Ventrodorsal view of the urogenital system of the
bitch.
Right kidney.
Commontrunkofthe
caudal phrenic and
cranial abdominal artery
and vein
Ovarian artery
Left renal artery
and vein
and vein 
Left kidney
Right ovary-
Caudal
Aorta
vena cava
Left ureter
Right-
Descending colon
uterine horn
Uterinebody
Urinary bladder -
flipped forward
Chapter 10 Urinary system
113
Fig. I0.3 Radiograph of the kidney area. The bladder has been
waas aq ueo (souue) kaupi aut pue iseuoo joy e ym pateu!
to measure about 2.5 times the length of the lumbar vertebrae.
- Fibrous tissue capsule
Fig. I0.4 Parasagittal section through the dog kidney.
Pelvis
 Arcuate artery and vein
Medulla
Interlobar artery and vein
Cortex
Renal artery
 Renal vein
Hilus
Renal pyramid
Ureter
Blood supply
and fhe production of urine. Each nephron is a long fubule
Arterial blood is carried from the aorta in a single renal artery
divided into several parts:
to each kidney (Fig. 10.4). This carries 20% of cardiac outpuf.
● Glomerular capsule - a cup-shaped strucfure enclosing a network
Within the fissue of the kidney, the renal artery divides into sev-
of blood capillaries called the glomerulus (Fig. 10.6). The capsule
eral interlobar arteries, which pass between the renal pyramids
may also be known as Bowman's capsule. The capsule and the
and into the cortex. Here capillaries supply the renal tubules and
glomerulus form the renal corpuscle. The basement membrane
also give off numerous capillary networks known as glomeruli
of the inner surface of the capsule, which is in close contact
(sing. glomerulus) (Fig. 10.5). Each glomerulus supplies an indi-
with the endothelium of the glomerular capillaries, is lined by
vidual nephron. The capillaries then recombine to form interlobar
podocyte cells betweern which are tiny pores (Fig 10.6). These
veins, which enter the single renal vein. This carries venous blood
pores are of such a size that they will allow the passage of fluid
to the caudal vena cava.
and small molecules, but restrict the passage of larger molecules.
 Blood entering the kidney carries oxygen, nutrients and waste
The outer surface of Bowman's capsule is continuous with the
products from the tissues of the body; blood leaving the kidney
epithelium of the proximal convoluted tubule. Fluid filtered by
carries carbon dioxide produced by the kidney tissues, but the
the capsule drains into the space befween the fwo layers and
 nitrogenous waste products have been removed via the glomerul.
continues into the next part of the nephron.
● Proximal convoluted tubule - a long, twisted tube leading from the
Microscopic structure
neck of the capsule and lying in fthe renal cortex (Fig. 10.5). The
tubules are lined in simple cuboidal or columnar epithelium. The
The functional urit of the kidney is the nephron (Fig. 10.5). Each
side of the epithelium directed towards the lumen of the tubule
kidney contains about a million nephrons, which are closely
packed together. They are responsible for the filtration of blood
the surface area for fhe reabsorption of water and electrolytes.
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
114
Branch of renal artery
Branch ofrenal vein
Afferent arteriole
Efferent arteriole
Glomerulus
Pressure-
filtration
Glomerular
capsule
Proximal convoluted~
Cortex
tubule
Collecting
Medulla
duct
Flow of filtrate
Bood flow
 Descending limb
Urine passes
to tip of kidney
Loop of-
Henle
pyramid
Ascending limb-
Bood capillary
network
Fig. I0.5 A renal nephron.
● Loop of Henle - a U-shaped part of the tube leading from the
Renal function - the formation of urine
proximal convoluted tubule and dipping down into the renal
medulla. The tubule is lined in simple squamous epifhelium which is
thicker in the ascending loop than in the descending loop (Fig. 10.5).
goes a series of modifications within the renal tubules to produce
● Distal convoluted tubule - a short but less fwisted part of fhe fube
urine. This urine is very different in composition and volume
fhan the proximal convoluted tubule. It lies in the renal cortex 
from the original filtrate. For every 100L of fluid filtered from
and is lined in cuboidal epithelium without a brush border.
the blood only 1L is produced as urine - 99% of the original fil-
● Collecting duct - each duct receives urine from several
trate is reabsorbed back into the blood. The changes made to the
nephrons and conducts it through the pyramids into the renal
filtrate reflect the stafus of the extracellular fluid (ECF) and in
pelvis. The ducts are lined in columnar epithelium.
particular that of the blood plasma.
Chapter 10 Urinary system
115
Outer layer of capsule
Fig. I0.6 Structure of the basement membrane of the
Capsular space
 Podocyte cells of 
glomerular capsule.
inner layer of capsule
Glomerular capillaries
Afferent
vessel
Tubular cells
Blood flow
Lalnnuin
Efferent
vessel
Glomeruar fitrate
flows down proximal
convoluted tubule
 Endothelial membrane
of capillary - the pores
are large enough
to let all the blood
 contents through apart
from the cells
 Basement membrane of
Pedicels of podocytes - the 
 capillary - the site of
slits are large enough to let all
ultrafiltration as plasma
the blood contents through
 proteins cannot pass
apart from the cells and protein molecules
through this membrane 
Glomerulus
The physiological processes occurring in the renal nephrons are:
 Osmosis - passage of water from a weaker to a stronger solution 
Blood pressure within each glomerulus is high because:
across a semi-permeable membrane 
● The blood has come straight from the renal artery and the
Mol e ol uoejuanuon yaly e woy aueisgns e jo aessed - woisnia 
aorta, both of which carry blood under high pressure
concentration
● The smooth muscle in the walls of the efferent arteriole
 Reabsorption - passage of a substance from the lumen of the renal
leaving the glomerulus is able to constrict, under the confrol of
tubules into the renal capillaries and so back into the circulation; this is
the hormone renin, and thus regulate the pressure of blood in
 an active process and requires energy
the glomerulus.
 Secretion - passage of chemical substances from the renal capillaries
High pressure in the glomerulus forces fluid and small mole-
into the lumen of the tubules and out of the body in the urine; this is 
    s n      s
 an active process and requires energy.
brane into the capsule lumen. Larger-sized parficles such as red
 blood cells, plasma proteins and any substance bound to protein 
 Blood enters the kidney and is carried to the capillaries form-
molecules, e.g. hormones are retained in the blood. This pro-
 ing the glomeruli.
cess is known as ultrafiltration and the filtrate is referred to as the
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
116
The glomerular filtrate 
passes down the nephron
Na+
Glucose
Bloodflow
Certain drugs
Cortex
and toxins
+HN
 H2O
Na+
Na+
Medulla
HOi1
+ Na+
Na+1
+ H2O
H2O
+ Na+
Za+1
+t H2O
* Na+
H2O1
 H2O
Increasing concentration
+ Na+
of Na+ ions
+EN
H2O
Urine is produced and
is stored in the bladder
Fig. I0.7 Diagrammatic representation of the processes occurring in the different parts of the nephron.
glomerular fitrate or primitive urine. The glomerular filtrate is very
● Concentration of nitrogenous waste - the main waste product
dilute and contains 99% water and 1% chemical solutes.
is urea, produced as a result of protein metabolism by fhe
liver. Water reabsorpfion concenfrates the levels of urea in the
Proxima! convoluted tubule
tubules.
Approximately 65% of all the resorptive processes take place here
● Secretion of toxins and certain drugs - these are actively secreted
(Fig. 10.7). These are:
into the filtrate. Penicillin and its more modern derivafives,
● Reabsorption of water and sodium - sodium (Na+) and chloride
 given therapeutically, are secreted from the blood and carried
(Cl-) ions are actively reabsorbed from the filtrate into the
to the bladder in the urine. It is therefore a useful antibiofic for
blood. Water is reabsorbed by osmosis in response to the
the treatment of bladder infections.
movement of Na+ ions. 80% of all the Na+ and Cl- ions in the
filtrate are reabsorbed at this point.
In cases of diabetes melitus, there is too much glucose in the blood
● Reabsorption of glucose - in the normal animal the glomerular
(hyperglycaemia). This overflows into the glomerular fltrate and the 
filtrate contains glucose which is all reabsorbed back into
tubules reabsorb it up to the limit of the renal threshold. The excess
the blood, so normal urine does not contain glucose. This
 passes on down the tubules and out in the urine - glucosuria is a
reabsorption occurs up to a certain level referred to as the renal
diagnostic sign of diabetes mellitus.
threshold.
Chapter 10 Urinary system
117
Loop of Henle
● If the animal is dehydrated, the volume of the plasma
The function of the loop of Henle is to regulate the concentration
and ECF will be reduced. ADH will be produced and
and volume of the urine according to the stafus of the ECF. The
the permeability of the collecting ducts to water will be
glomerular filtrate flows first into the descending loop and then into
increased. Water will be drawn through the walls by the
fhe ascending loop, both of which lie in the medulla (Fig. 10.7).
high concentration of Na+ ions in the surrounding medullary
tissue (secreted by the ascending loop of Henle), and into the
● Descending loop of Henle - the walls of the tubule are permeable
plasma and ECF (Fig. 10.7).
to water but do not contain the mechanism to reabsorb Na*.
Water is drawn out of the fubule by osmosis - pulled by the
As a result of the above processes, the ultrafilfrate that passed
concenfration of Na+ ions in the surrounding medullary tissue.
 a m s  r  
The filtrate becomes more concenfrated as it passes down the
urine by the repeated effects of reabsorpfion and secretion.
loop and reaches maximum concentration at the tip.
● Ascending loop of Henle - the walls are irmpermeable to water
Osmoregulation - control of renal function
but contain sodium pumps that actively reabsorb Na+ into
Osmoregulation ensures that the volume of the plasma and the
the medullary fissue and capillaries. This draws water
from the descending loop. Water carnot be drawn from the
concentration of dissolved chemicals in the plasma and other
ascending loop as if is impermeable. The filtrate becomes less
tissue fluids remains constant. Homeostasis is maintained and
the body can function normally. Several factors are involved in
concenfrated because fhe Na+ ions have been removed.
the control of osmoregulafion (Table 10.1) and it is achieved in
The net result of this mecharism is that the filtrate is the same
two ways:
concenfrafion when if enters the loop of Herle as it is when if
leaves and passes into the distal convoluted tubule, but it is
+ Control of the amount of water lost from the body
reduced in volume as water has been removed. This water is
+ Control of the amount of salt (NaCl) lost from the body.
reabsorbed into the blood - ift has been conserved for use by the
body. If the animal is dehydrated, more water is reabsorbed; if it 
Control of water loss
is overhydrated, more water will be lost in the filtrate.
Water is lost by the healthy animal in urine, faeces, sweat and
in respiration. Very small amounts may also be lost in vaginal
Dista! convoluted tubule
   n  e e      
Table I0.1 Factors involved in osmoregulation
stifuents of the urine in response to the stafus of the ECF. This is
Controlling factor
Function
achieved by:
● Reabsorption of sodiurm (Na+) and secretion of potassium (K+) - the
 Renin (hormone)
 Produced by the glomeruli of the
amount of reabsorption of Na+ is much smaller than occurs
kidney in response to low arterial
in the proximal convoluted fubules. Reabsorpfior of water
pressure
by osmosis as a result of reabsorption of Nat, varies and is
Angiotensinogen (plasma protein)
 Converted to angiotensin by the
action of renin
glands. K+ is excreted into the urine to replace the Na+ ions
(Fig. 10.7).
Angiotensin (protein)
 Causes vasoconstriction;
●Regulation of acid/base batance by the excretion of hydrogen (H+)
 stimulates the release of
ions - the normal pH of blood is 7.4.
aldosterone from the adrenal 
cortex 
● If pH falls, i.e. the blood becomes more acid due to excess H+
ions, the kidney excretes H+ ions into the urine via the distal
 Aldosterone (hormone
Secreted by the cortex of the
convoluted fubule. The pH of the blood refurns to normal.
mineralocorticoid)
adrenal gland; acts mainly on the
● If pH rises, i.e. the blood becomes more alkaline due to
distal convoluted tubules but has
reduced amounts of H+ ions, the kidney stops excreting H+
a lesser effect on the collecting
ions, retaining them in the blood. The pH of the blood falls
 ducts; regulates the reabsorption
of Na+ ions
to normal.
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH or
 Secreted by the posterior
Collecting duct
vasopressin)
pituitary gland; mainly affects the
Here fhe final adjustments are made to the volume of water in
collecting ducts by changing their
the urine in response to the stafus of the ECF (Fig. 10.7). The hor-
 permeability to water; also has
mone antidiuretic hormone (ADH), produced by the posterior pifu-
an effect on the distal convoluted
itary gland, is able to change the permeability of the duct walls
tubules
to water.
Baroreceptors
 Found in the walls of the blood
vessels; monitor arterial blood
pressure
Diuretics are drugs used to increase the volume of urine produced
and so reduce the volume of fluid in the body. One of the most 
Osmoreceptors
 Found in the hypothalamus;
commonly used -furosemide - is a “loop diuretic', which acts on 
monitor the osmotic pressure 
ou si Jaie os teN yo uodiosgea shuaaaid l 'auah yo sdool au
of the plasma; affect the thirst
centre of the brain and influence
resorbed by osmosis and remains in the urine as it flows through the
the secretion of ADH
tubules.
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
118
secrefions and tears. If this water loss is not replaced by food and
Raised blood pressure will result in the opposite effect, and the
drink, or if the water loss is excessive, e.g. in vomifting, diarrhoea
animal will produce increased quanfifties of more dilute urine.
 or haemorrhage, the total volume of ECF falls and the animal is
described as being dehydrated.
Control of sodium leveis
Sodium is taken into the body in the form of salt (NaCl) in
food. It is lost in sweat, faeces and urine. Sodium is found in
 A dehydrated patient will show:
the ionised form Na+ in all the body fluid compartments and
 Lowered blood pressure - a fall in the volume of ECF results in a fall in 
plays a fundamental part in determining arterial blood pres-
 blood plasma volume and consequently a fall in blood pressure
sure. High Na+ levels in the diet draw water into the plasma by
 A rise in osmotic pressure - a fall in plasma volume results in a rise in
osmosis. This raises blood volume and blood pressure also rises.
the concentration of Na+ ions in the blood and as a result a rise in the
Conversely, if an animal has a low level of Nat, less water is
 osmotic pressure of the blood.
drawn into the plasma and blood volume falls - this lowers fhe
Note: Osmotic pressure is the pressure needed to prevent osmosis
from occurring. It is dependent on the number of particles of undissolved
steps to correct this, resulting in a compensatory rise in blood
molecules and ions in a solution. Blood pressure is the pressure exerted 
pressure (Fig. 10.9).
on the inside of the walls of the arterial blood vessels by the blood. It is
Regulation of Na+ in the plasma occurs mairly in the distal
detected by baroreceptors in the walls of the vessels.
 convoluted tubule and is controlled by the hormone aldosterone,
secreted by the cortex of the adrenal gland (see Ch. 6).
 In dehydration, osmoregulatory mecharisms will start to work
Excretion
(Fig. 10.8). The fall in blood pressure and rise in osmotic pressure
ultimately result in an increase in the reabsorption of water from
Excretion is the removal of waste products from the body. These
the collcting ducts, under the control of the hormone ADH (see
are formed within the tissues as a result of metabolic processes
Ch. 6). The osmoreceptors also stimulate the thirst centre in the
and are useless, surplus to the requirements of the body or poten-
brain and the animal feels the need to drink. Both of these path-
tially harmful to the body tissues. Excretion by the kidneys
ways result in a rise in plasma volume and an increase in arterial
removes:
● Water - in varying amounts dependent on the volume of the
blood pressure. Dehydrated animals should be given fluid par-
ECF and controlled by osmoregulatory processes
enterally (intravenously) or, in less severe cases, provided with
assaid sou au u spuadp yunue au - su suioui 
access to drinking water. They will excrete reduced quantities of
of the blood and other body fluids and is confrolled by
concentrated urine.
osmoregulatory processes
Fig. I0.8 Mechanism controlling the amount of water lost from
Low blood pressure
Increased osmotic pressure
the kidney.
Detected by baroreceptors
Detected by osmoreceptars
Thirst centres in brain
Increased ADH secreted by
the posterior pituitary gland
activated
 Permeability of the collecting
ducts is increased
Increased reabsorption of water
from the ducts into the medulla
and associated blood vessels 
Volume of ECF including
 blood plasma increases
Rise in blood pressure
Chapter 10 Urinary system
119
Low Nat levels in the plasma
Fig. I0.9 Mechanism controlling sodium (and therefore blood
pressure) in the kidney.
Low arterial blood pressure
Release of renin from the
 gomeruli in the kidneys 
Angiotensinogen
Angiotensin
Vasoconstriction
Aldosterone released from
adrenal cortex
Blood pressure rises
 Acts on distal convoluted
tubules
Stimulates increased Na+
reabsorption
Water reabsorbed by osmosis
and enters blood vessels
Blood pressure rises 
● Nitrogenous waste products - these result from the metabolism
 Other parts of the urinary system
 of protein taken into the body in food. Protein is broken down
by the process of digestion into amino acids which are carried
The ureters
to the liver by the blood and converted into body protein.
 Surplus amino acids cannot be stored by the body so undergo
Urine formed by the nephrons leaves each kidney by a single ure-
a process of deamination in which they are broken down.
ter at a point known as the hilus (Fig. 10.4). Each ureter is a nar-
Ammonia, which is extremely toxic to the cells, especially
row muscular tube runring caudally towards the bladder, one on
those of the nervous system, is formed as a by-product. Within
each side of the midline in the dorsal abdomen (Figs 10.2, 10.3).
the liver ammoria combines wifh carbon dioxide in a series of
Each ureter is suspended from the dorsal body wall by a fold of
reactions known as the ornithine cycle and urea is formed:
visceral peritoneum, the mesoureter.
CO + 2NH = CO(NH) + HO
d q r a smn  a e p si a
[urea]
staltic waves brought about by contraction of the smooth mus-
 Urea passes into the circulation and is carried to the kidney where
cle fibres forming the ureter walls. Transitional epithelium lines the
it is excreted in the urine.
ureters and allows for expansion as urine passes along.
Kidney disease can present in many forms and the symptoms are 
The bladder
related to the fact that all kidney functions are affected and the
homeostatic mechanisms cease to work. Chronic renal failure 
Each ureter enters the single bladder close to the neck. The ureters
commonly occurs in older cats and dogs and develops when the
underrun the bladder mucosa for a short distance before open-
nephrons are gradually replaced by fibrous connective tissue as a
ing into the lumen at an oblique angle. This area, known as the
normal 'old age' change. Symptoms, many of which are related to
trigone, acts as a valve preventing the backflow of urine along the
rising levels of urea in the blood, develop when 75% of the nephrons
ureter (Fig. 10.2).
have ceased to function.
The bladder is a pear-shaped hollow organ. The rounded end
points cranially, while the narrow end or neck points caudally and
● Products of detoxification - hormones, certain drugs and poisons
usually lies within the pelvic cavity. Its function is to collect and
 are inactivated within the liver and excreted by the kidney.
store urine. When full, the bladder extends into the abdomen,
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
120
pulling the neck venfrally over the edge of the pelvic brim with
from the prostate gland and two are from the deferent ducts
the ventral surface of the bladder touching the abdominal floor;
or vas deferens (one from each testis). The urethra runs
when empty most of the bladder lies in the pelvic cavity.
In cross-section, the bladder consists of an inner lining of tran-
ischial arch where it is joined by erectile tissue to form the
sitionat epithelium, which enables the walls to expand when filling
peris. The perile urethra opens to the outside at the tip of
with urine. A submucosal layer of elastic tissue and smooth muscle
the penis.
is arranged in folds to allow expansion. The smooth muscle fibres
● Tomcat (see Ch. 11, Fig. 11.2). There is a short length of urethra,
are confinuous with those of the internal bladder sphincter. The
cranial to the openings from the prostate gland and the
deferent ducts, known as the preprostatic urethra, which is not
the cranialend lying in the abdomen. Allorgans in the pelvic cav-
found in the dog. The urethra confinues caudally and opens
ity are surrounded by connective tissue and muscle and are not
to the outside in the perineal area, venfral to the anus. There
covered in peritoneum.
is no penile urethra lying outside the pelvic cavity. Close
to the end of the urethra are the openings from the paired
Urolithiasis is the formation of mineral 'stones' known as uroliths
bulbourethral glands.
or calculi in the bladder These may cause a blockage in the urinary
From the point at which the deferent ducts join it, the urethra con-
tract. The most common site for blockage in the cat is at the tip of
veys both urine and sperm to the outside of the body.
the penis; the most common site in the male dog is as the urethra
 bends over the ischial arch and as it passes through the os penis.
 Blockage is rare in the female animal because the urethra is shorter
Micturition
and more distensible.
Micfurifion (offen incorrecfly referred to as urinafion) is the act of
expelling urine from the bladder. It is normally a reflex activity
The neck of the bladder ends in the bladder sphincter, whose
but can be overridden by voluntary control from the brain. The
function is to confrol the flow of urine out of the bladder and
steps involved are:
down the urethra. It consists of fwo concenfric parts:
● Bladder distends with urine formed by the kidneys
●Internal sphincter - made of smooth muscle; under involuntary
● Stretch receptors in the smooth muscle of the bladder wall
control
are stimulated and send nerve impulses to cenfres in the
● External sphincter - ring of striated muscle; under voluntary
appropriate segment of the spinal cord
control.
· Nerve impulses are fransmifted via parasympafhetic nerves
back to the smooth muscle, and iniftiate confraction
The urethra
● Nerve impulses also stimulate relaxation in the internal
bladder sphincter and urine is expelled.
The urethra is a tube which conveys urine caudally from the blad-
If it is inappropriate for the animal to micturate, the brain over-
rides the reflex pathway and prevents the bladder sphincter from
according to the sex of the animal, and in the case of the male ani-
relaxing. Af a more appropriate time, the brain stimulates both the
mal, between cats and dogs.
external and internal sphincters: they relax and urine is released.
● Fermale - the urethra is a short tube, opening into the floor of
u - smeu reue Sun ai se sdoaap lou Are
the reproductive tract at the junction of the vagina and
 puppies and kiftens it is not fully developed until the animal is
vestibule. The opening is known as the external urethral orifice
about 10 weeks old.
and is located in the centre of a small ridge, the urethral
 tubercle. This is a useful landmark when catheterising a bitch
Urinalysis
 and can be seen when using a speculum.
● Male - the urethra is divided into two parts: the pelvic urethra
Urine is derived from the ultrafiltrate of plasma so ift reflects fhe
and the penile urethra. There is a difference between the dog
health stafus of the whole animal. The analysis of urine, or urinal-
and the tomcat:
ysis, is a useful diagnostic fool. Normal urine contains only wafer,
● Dog (see Ch. 11, Fig. 11.1). Close to the neck of the bladder,
salts and urea. The clirical parameters used to evaluate a sample
there are three openings into the urethra - one of these is
Of urine are shown in Table 10.2.
Chapter 10 Urinary system
121
Table I0.2 Normal values shown by the urine of the dog and cat
Clinical parameter
Normal value
Comments
 Daily volume
Dog: 20-100 ml/kg body weight
 Polyuria - increased volume of urine
Oliguria - reduced volume of urine
Cat: 10-12 ml /kg body weight
Anuria - absence of urine
Appearance
Clear, yellow, characteristic smell
Tomcat urine has an unpleasant strong smell; old 
 samples smell ammoniacal
pH
5-7
 Carnivorous diet produces acid urine; herbivorous 
diet produces alkaline urine
Specific gravity (s.g.)
Dog: 1.016-1.060
 Reflects the concentration of urine; exercise, high
environmental temperatures and dehydration will
Cat: 1.020-1.040
 cause a rise in specific gravity
 Protein
None 
 Proteinuria - presence of protein.
May indicate damage to nephrons, chronic renal
failure, inflammation of the urinary tract 
Bood 
None
Haematuria - presence of blood 
 Haemoglobinuria - presence of haemoglobin, due to 
rupture of red cells 
May indicate damage or infection to the urinary
tract.
Glucose
None
Glucosuria - presence of glucose 
May indicate diabetes mellitus; levels of glucose in 
the filtrate exceed the renal threshold and excess is
 excreted in the urine
 Ketones
None
Ketonuria - presence of ketones
May be accompanied by acid pH and smell of 
'peardrops' in urine and on the breath 
Bile 
None
Bilirbinuria - presence of bile 
 Indicator of some form of liver disease 
Crystals and casts
In small quantities, these may be considered to be normal
Crystalline or colloidal material coalesce to form a
cast of the renal tubules and are flushed out by the 
urine; in large quantities crystals may form calculi or
uroliths and block the tract
This page intentionally left blank
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
CHAPTER
11
Reproductive system
KEY POINTS
 The male gonad is the testis, responsible for
 The extra-embryonic membranes and the embryo
spermatogenesis and the secretion of testosterone.
develop from different parts of the rapidly dividing
The male reproductive tract conducts the sperm from
ball of cells derived from the original fertilised ovum.
the testis into the female reproductive tract during
 Genetics is the science of inheritance and is the
mating.
 method by which characteristics are passed from one
The female gonad is the ovary, responsible for the
generation to another.
production of ova and the secretion of oestrogen and
 Information about these characteristics is carried on
progesterone.
the genes within the nucleus of every cell.
 The release of ova from the ovary is associated with a
 Genes pass from parent to offspring by means of
regular cycle of interrelated homonal changes in the
 germ celdivision by meiosis, ferilisation to form a
ovary and the reproductive tract and in the animal's 
 Zygote and celldivision to form an embryo and then 
 behavioural patterns - this is known as the oestrous cycle.
a fetus.
+ Fertilisation of the ovum by one spermatozoon,
 The activity of genes within the individual follows
occurs in the uterine tube and the developing
Mendel's laws of inheritance which enable the
embryos implant in the wall of the uterine horns.
outcome of selective animal matings to be predicted.
Reproduction is the means by which a species is able to perpefu-
The testis
ate itself. If animals lived for ever, fhere would be no need for
another generation to take over from previous ones; in reality, all
The testis is the male gonad, with functions as follows:
animals become old or 'worn ouft' and die and must be replaced if
1. To produce spermatozoa (sperm) by the process of
the species is not to become extinct.
spermatogenesis; these fertilise the ova produced by the female
All species of mammal have evolved separate sexes and they
reproduce sexually. This is in confrast to less highly evolved spe-
 2. To produce a litfle fluid to transport the sperm from the testes
cies, which may reproduce asexually - producing offspring that 
into the female tract and to aid their survival
are idenfical to the parent. Sexual reproduction involves the trarns-
 3. To secrete the hormone testosterone which influences
spermatogenesis, the development of male secondary sexual
matozoa from the male and ova from the female - fuse to form a
characteristics and male behaviour paffterns (see Ch. 6).
single-celled zygote. The zygote undergoes cell division to form
There is a pair of testes, which, in the adult animal, lie outside the
body cavity in the scrotum. - a sac of relatively hairless and offen
pigmented skin. Spermatogenesis occurs most efficiently at tem-
peratures below that of the core body temperature, so the testes are
urinary system and the combined systems may be referred to as
carried outside the body cavity in acooler environment. In the dog,
the urogenital system.
fhe scrofum lies between the hind limbs; in the cat it is aftached to
the perineum, ventral to the anus. Internally, the sac is divided
Male reproductive system
into two, each part containing one testis;the left testis often hangs 
lower than the right one. Within the wall of the scrofum is the dar-
The male dog is known as a dog; the male cat is known as a tom-
tos muscle. In cold weather this confracts and thickens the scrotal
skin, raising the temperature; in warm weather, the muscle relaxes
cat. The reproductive system of the dog and the tomcat are gener-
ally similar - any differences will be described where appropriate
and the scrotum becomes thinner and thus cooler. A constant tem-
(Figs 11.1, 11.2). The parts of the male reproductive tract are:
perafure for spermatogenesis is therefore maintained.
 Each testis is an oval-shaped structure wrapped in a double
+ Testis
layer of perifoneum known as the tunica vaginalis (Fig. 11.3). The
● Epididymis
testicular fissue consists of numerous blind-ending fubules known
● Deferent duct, also called the vas deferens
as seminiferous tubules which are lined by two types of cells:
·Urethra
● Spermatogenic cells - these divide by meiosis to produce
+ Penis
● Prostate gland - an accessory gland 
haploid number of chromosomes (see Ch. 1)
● Bulbourethral gland - an accessory gland seen only in the
● Sertoli cells - these secrete oestrogen and nutrients which
tomcat.
prolong the survival of the sperm.
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
124
Prostate
 Outline of pelvic girdle
Ureter
Bladder
Anus
Os penis
Root of penis
Urethra
Urethra
Glans penis
Epididymis
Prepuce
Testis in scrotum
Deferent duct
Os penis
Bulb of glans penis
Glans penis
Fig. Il.I Reproductive system of the dog.
Ureter
 Preprostatic urethra Prostate gland
Urethra
Bulbourethral gland
Testis in
scrotum
Bladder
Deferent duct
Pubic symphysis
 Glans penis covered in papillae
Epididymis
Fig. Il.2 Reproductive system of the tomcat.
Chapter 11  Reproductive system
125
Spermatic cord
(deferent duct, blood vessels and nerves)
Skin of the scrotur
Blood and lymph
vessels and nerves
(Pampiniform plexus)
Deferent duct
Epididymis
Testis
Parietal layer of
tunica vaginalis
Visceral layer of
A
tunica vaginalis
Lumen of seminiferous tubule
Sertoli cells
Spermatogenic cells
Cells of Leydig - interstitial cells
Fig. II.3 A Testis within scrotum. B Scrotum removed. C Cross-section through the seminiferous tubules.
Lying between the tubules are the cells of Leydig or interstitial cells
As it enters the scrofum, the testicular artery runs alongside the
They secrete testosterone and are under the control of interstitial
epididymis and then divides to form the convoluted pampiniform
cell stimulating hormone (ICSH) (see Ch. 6), produced by the ante-
plexus. This complicated capillary nefwork ensures that the blood
rior piftuitary gland.
is cooled before it enters the testicular tissue.
The coiled seminiferous tubules make up most of the testicul-
lar tissue and evenfually combine to form slightly larger efferent
Testicular descent
ducts. These drain into the epididymis, lying along the dorsolateral
 In the early embryo, the undifferentiated gonads develop inside
border of the testis. The canda epididymis or tail is aftached to the
the abdomen close to the kidney. In the male, the gonad becomes
caudal extremity of the testis and is the point at which the tem-
the testis and a band of tissue known as the gubernaculum forms
perafure of the testis is lowest. It is here that sperm are stored and
and runs from the caudal end of each testis to the inside of the
undergo a period of mafuration ready for fertilisation (Fig. 11.4).
developing scrotal sac. During late gestaftion, the testes are pulled
 The blood supply to the testis is via the testicular artery. This
 leaves the aorta in the abdomen, just caudal to the renal artery.
through the abdomen. The testes leave the abdominal cavity via
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
126
Deferent duct
Acrosome
The epididymis confinues as the deferent duct (also called the vas
Head
deferens or ductus deferens; Figs 11.1, 11.2), which passes out of the
scrofum into the abdominal cavity via the inguinal canal within
Neck
the spermatic cord. The spermatic cord is wrapped in the furica
vaginalis and also contains the testicular artery and vein and the
testicular nerve. Lying within the cord is a strip of muscle derived
 Midpiece
from the internal abdominal oblique muscle and known as the
crermaster muscle. Confraction of this muscle raises the testis closer
to the body in response to cold and works in conjunction with the
Dartos muscle to maintain a constant temperafure for the festes.
During ejaculation, the sperm and fluid produced in the semi-
niferous fubules are propelled along the epididymis and up fhe
deferent duct, which joins the urethra. At this juncfion, the walls
of the deferent ducts are thickened and glandular; the whole area
is surrounded by the prostate gland (Figs 11.1, 11.2).
The penis
Tail
The functions of the penis are to:
● Convey sperm and fluids from the testis into the female
reproductive tract during mating
+ Convey urine from the bladder to the outside via fhe urethra.
The urethra runs through the centre of the penis and extends
 oq q ps si i  a r d a o r a 
reproductive and urinary systems (see Ch. 10). The penis of the
dog and the cat are anatomically different.
The dog
The peris runs from fhe ischial arch of the pelvis, passes cranio
Fig. Il.4 A normal spermatozoon. The acrosome protects the head
ventrally along the perineum and between the hind limbs (Fig.
of the sperm and contains enzymes which aid penetration of the ovum.
11.5). The urethra lies in the centre and is surrounded by a layer
The head contains the haploid number of chromosomes. The midpiece
of cavernous erectile tissue known as the corpus spongiosurm penis.
This is expanded proximally into the bulb of the penis and, towards
The tail produces a powerful propulsive force.
the tip, as the glans penis. Surrounding this and serving to aftach
the penis to the ischial arch is a pair of erectile tissue crura (sing.
crus), known as the corpus cavernosum penis. These form the root of
the inguinal canal - a channel between the fibres of the external
the penis at its attachment to the ischial arch. The urethra runs in
abdominal oblique muscle in the groin or inguinal area (see Ch. 4).
a groove between the two crura.
As each testis with its associated blood capillaries, nerve and def-
becomes wrapped in a double fold of peritoneum which forms
Cavernous erectile tissue is made of connective tissue perforated
the funica vaginalis (Fig. 11.3).
by 'caverns lined by endothelium. During sexual excitement these
The testes begin their descent into the scrofum during early
 cavernsfll with blood under pressure and the tssue becomes 
neonatal life and should be palpable within the scrofum by 12
weeks of age in the puppy and 10-12 weeks in the kiften. Failure
engorged and erect.
of the testes fo descend is described as cryptorchidism; the testes
may be retained in the abdomen or wifthin the inguinal canal.
Within the tissue of the glans peris is a funnel-shaped bone,
the os penis, whose function is to aid enfry of the penis into the
vagina of the bitch during the early stages of mating when erec-
Retention of the testis may be a hereditary condition and affected dogs
tion is only partially complete. The canine os peris lies dorsal to
should not be used for breeding. Bilaterally cryptorchid dogs are usually
the urethra, which runs through the 'funnel in the bone. At this
sterile but may have normal sexual libido (desire). As the dog grows older 
point the urethra carnot expand and this can be a common sife
the retained testis is more likely to develop a Sertoli cell tumour
for urethral blockage with urinary calculi.
a4t jo spueia suesugni ayt jo uosaju! ue dojaaap shop Aue
prepuce. This is known as balanitis or bolanoposthitis and it results in
a greenish-yellow discharge. The condition is so common that it is 
 Monorchid - term used when one testis is retained.
considered almost normal and is usually only treated if the mucous
 Bilateral cryptorchid - term used when both testes are retained.
 membrane becomes ulcerated or smelly.
Chapter 11  Reproductive system
127
Ureters
Fig. II.5 Structure of the penis in three layers, with trans-
verse sections through the urethra. A Shows the urethra only.
B Shows the urethra with the layer of cavernous erectile
tissue surrounding it: the corpus spongiosum penis. C Shows
the corpus cavernosum penis, which forms the two crura and
attaches the penis to the ischial arch.
Bladder
Pelvis
Penile part
of urethra
Pelvic part of
urethra
T.S.of the urethra
A
Corpus spongiosum
penis
Ischial
arch
Bulb of
the penis
Corpus spongiosum penis
surrounding the urethra
B
Corpus cavernosum penis
Glans penis
Body of the penis
Corpus cavernosum penis
Crus
c
The distal part of the peris is contained wifhin a sheath of
The tomcat
hairy skin known as the prepuce. This is suspended from the ven-
The main parts of the penis are similar to those of the dog, except
tral abdominal wall and covers and protects the penis. It is lined
that fhe cat peris is shorter and points backwards - the external
with mucous membrane and is well supplied with lubricating
opening is ventralto the anus (Fig. 11.2). The glans penis is covered
glands. During mating, the prepuce is pushed back to reveal the
with tiny barbs, which elicit a pain reflex as the male withdraws
glans penis. Afferwards, the retractor penis muscle pulls the penis
from the female after mating. This stimulates the nerve path-
back into the prepulce.
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
128
36 hours later - known as induced ovulation. The os penis lies ven-
Ovary and oviduct
tral to the urethra in the cat. During sexual excitement, the penis
in the ovarian bursa
 in cats is similar to that seen in the dog.
Infundibulum
Accessory glands
Uterine tube
The function of the accessory glands is to secrete seminal fluids
Ovary
which:
+ Increase the volume of the ejaculate to aid the passage of
Uterine
horn
sperm into the fermale tract
● Provide the correct environment for sperm survival
Ureters
● Neutralise the acidity of the urine within the urethra.
There are two types of gland (Figs 11.1, 11.2):
Urinary bladder.
● Prostate gland - the gland is bilobed and lies on the floor of
the pelvis, surrounding the urethra. In the dog, if is close to
the neck of the bladder; in the cat, there is a short preprostatic
urethra cranial to the gland (see Ch. 10). Enlargement of the
Body of uterus
the recfum, which lies dorsal to the gland within the pelvic
cavity.
· Bulbourethral glands - found only in the tomcat. They lie on
either side of the urethra, cranial to the ischial arch
Cervix
(Fig. 11.2).
Vagina
Female reproductive system
Urethral
orifice
The female dog is known as a bitch; the female cat is known as a
 queen. The parts of the female reproductive system are:
Qitoris
+ Ovary
Vulva
● Uterine fube, oviduct or Fallopian tube
Fig. I1.6 Dorsal view of the reproductive system of the bitch. (With
● Uterus - uterine horns and body
permission from Colville T, Bassett JM 200l Clinical anatomy and physiol-
+Cervix
ogy for veterinary technicians. Mosby St Louis, MO, p 330.)
·Vagina
+Vestibule
+Vulva.
The fissue of the ovary consists of a framework of connective
The reproductive tract of the bitch and queen are similar and
tissue, smooth muscle and blood capillaries, within which are a
large number of germ cells and developing follicles (Fig. 11.8). In
vary only in size (Fig. 11.6). The tract is designed to carry sev-
eral fefuses during a single pregnancy and is said to be bicornuate
an immafure animal, each ovary is oval with a smooth outline
(two horns). The bitch and the queen bear lifters of young: they
but, as sexual maturity approaches, the ovary becomes nodular
 as the follicles enlarge.
are multiparous.
The ovary
The uterine tube
The ovary is the female gonad. The functions of the ovary are:
This is also known as the oviduct or Fallopian tube (Fig. 11.6). The
● To produce ova or eggs ready for fertilisation by the sperm of
functions of the uterine tubes are:
the male
● To collect ova as they are released from the Graafian follicles
+ To act as an endocrine gland, secreting the hormones
● To convey the ova from the ovaries to the uterine horns
Destrogen and progesterone.
● To provide the correct environment for the survival of both the
There is a pair of ovaries, one lying on each side of fhe dorsal
ova and sperm.
abdominal cavity, caudal to the kidney (see Ch. 10, Fig. 10.2). The
Each uterine fube is a narrow convoluted struicture lying close to
ovary is held close to the kidney by the ovarian (suspensory) lig-
fhe ovary (Fig. 11.7). The open end is funnel-shaped and known
ament (Fig. 11.7). The ovary is suspended from the dorsal body
as the infundibulum. It is fringed with finger-like processes
wall by part of the visceral peritoneum called the mesovariurn,
 known as fimbriae, which spread over the surface of the ovary to
which also encloses the infundibulum of the uterine fube. Parf
capfure ova as they are released. The ova pass down the lumen
of the mesovarium forms a pocket-like strucfure known as the
of the fube, which is lined with ciliated columnar epithelium. The
ovarian bursa, which completely covers the ovary. Within this is a
cilia propel the ova along the fube towards the uterine horns.
 small opening allowing ova to leave the ovary - this is a potential
The uterine fube is suspended by part of the visceral peritoneum
 means of entry of infection into the peritoneal cavity.
known as the mesosalpinx.
Chapter 11  Reproductive system 
129
Suspensory ligament
of the ovary
 Descending uterine tube
Ascendinguterinetube
Mesosalpinx
Ovary
Opening of the
Mesovarium
ovarian bursa
Ovarian ligament
Left uterine horn
Uterine horn
Mesometrium
Round ligament
of the uterus
A
Fig. II.7 Anatomy of the ovarian region of the bitch. A Lateral view. B Medial view.
The uterus
The uterus consists of fwo parts. A pair of uterine horns lead
from the uterine fubes. Each horn is about five times the length
The uterus is a Y-shaped strucfure lying in the midline of the dor
 of the uterine body and, during pregnancy, contains the devel-
sal abdomen (Fig. 11.6). During pregnancy, the weight of the con-
oping embryos. The fwo horns join to form a short cenfral
cepfuses pulls the uterus ventrally and at full term it occupies the
body.
greater part of the abdomen. The function of the uterus is:
The wall of the uterus has three layers:
· To provide a receptacle in which the embryos can develop into
1. Endometrium - lining of columnar mucous membrane,
full-term fefuses
 glandular tissue and blood vessels. During pregnancy
● To provide the correct environment for the survival of the
this thickens to provide nutrition for the embryo before
embryos
implantation and to support the developing placenta.
● To provide the means whereby the developing embryos can
 2. Myometrium - layers of smooth muscle which produces strong
receive nufrients from the dam - this is made possible by the
confractions during parturifion.
placenta.
Fig. Il.8 Longitudinal section through an ovary to show ovar-
ian activity.
oo
Primary follicles
Ovarian artery
and vein 
Corpus albicans
o
Maturing follicles
Retrogressive
corpus luteum
Graafian follicle
(oestrogen)
Corpus luteum
(progesterone)
Ruptured follicle
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
130
3. Mesometrium or broad ligament - this fold of the visceral
The vulva
peritoneum suspends the uterus from the dorsal body wall
and is confinuous wifth the mesovarium and mesosalpinx.
 The vulva marks the external opening of the urogenital tract. It
consists of two parts:
The cervix
● The labia - two vertical lips joined dorsally and ventrally; the
vertical slit between them is known as the vulval cleft. They are
The cervix is a short, thick-walled muscular sphincter that con-
normally held closed to prevent the entry of infection. During
nects the uterine body with the vagina (Fig. 11.6). Running
pro-oestrus and oestrus in the bitch, the labia enlarge, but this
through the centre is a narrow cervical canal, which is normally
is not seen in the oestrous cycle of the queen.
 s p essd an e on A s e ps 
● The clitoris - a knob-like strucfure of cavernous erectile fissue
fetuses. During pregnancy, the canal is blocked by a mucoid plug.
lying in the clitoral fossa just inside the venfral angle of the
which protects the conceptuses from infection. In the non-preg-
vulval clefft. It is the equivalent of the male penis.
nant animal, the cervix lies in the pelvic cavity but during preg-
nancy the weight of the concepfuses pulls the cervix crarially and
The mammary glands
ventrally over the edge of the pelvic brim.
Although fhese are not strictly part of the reproductive fract,
they are essential to reproduction in the mammal. The presence
 Ovariohysterectomy more commonly clled'spaying, is performed
of mammary glands is the defining characteristic of the class
by the veterinary surgeon to prevent unwanted pregnancies and
Mammalia. All mammals feed their young on milk produced by
oestrous cycles. The surgical procedure involves the complete removal
the glands during a process known as lactation.
of the reproductive tract from the ovaries to a point just cranial to the
 Mammary glands are modified cutaneous glands. In the dog 
cervix. Ligation of the major blood vessels is essential, particularly if the
male. The glands lie externally on the ventral wall of the abdo-
procedure is performed during oestrus or pregnancy as the vessels may
be extremely well developed.
men and thorax, on eifher side of the midline.
 The bitch has five pairs of mammary glands
Blood supply to the reproductive tract
 The queen has four pairs of mammary glands.
The blood vessels run within the mesovarium, mesosalpinx and
mesometrium. They are:
Each gland consists of glandular tissue embedded in connective
+ Ovarian artery - arises from the aorta just caudal to the
fissue and lined by a secretory epithelium (Fig. 11.9). The milk pro-
renal artery and supplies the ovary, uterine fube and
duced drains through a network of sinuses that eventually form
uterine horn
teat canals. These open on to the surface of each teat, known as a teat
● Lterine artery - anastomoses with the ovarian artery and
orifice. Each gland has one teat but each teat has several orifices.
supplies the caudal part of the tract. It can be seen as a
relatively large artery running on either side of the cervix.
Lactation
 This is the production of milk and normally occurs during preg-
The vagina and vestibule
nancy It is influenced by three hormones:
● Progesterone - secreted by the corpus luteum within the ovary and
 causes enlargement of the mammary glands during pregnancy
 opening of the reproductive tract - the vulva. The vagina leads
● Prolactin - secreted by the anterior pifuitary gland in the last
from the cervix to the external urethral orifice - the point at which
 third of pregnancy and stimulates the production of milk
the urethra joins the reproductive tract. The vestibule leads from
● Oxytocin - secreted by the posterior pituitary gland during the
the external urethral orifice to the vulva and is shared by both the
last hours of pregnancy and enables the glands to release or
urinary and reproductive tracts.
"let down' the milk in response to suckling by the neonate.
m a  ps   e  a
undergoes hormonal changes during the oestrous cycle. The
lining epithelium is folded longitudinally to allow widthways
Composition of milk
expansion during parfurition and is surrounded by layers of
This varies befween different species and is an important consid-
smooth muscle. These are very strong and during canine mating
 n   s  n a 
they fighten on the penis of the male and maintain the 'tie'.
the bitch and the queen is more concenfrated and contains more
 protein and twice as much fat as cow's milk. The average compo-
siftion of milk is shown in Table 11.1.
 The epithelial cells lining the vagina undergo hormonal changes
The first milk secreted by the dam following parfurifion is
during the oestrous cycle. These changes may be used as an aid
known as colostrum. It is rich in maternal antibodies, which provide
to the correct timing of mating. The technique, known as vaginal
the neonafe with immurity to diseases to which the dam has been
exfoliative cytology, involves making smears from vaginal swabs 
exposed. It is essential that the neonate takes in colostrum within
taken every other day during pro-oestrus and early oestrus. The
the first 24 hours of life. During this time, the protein antibodies can
smears are then stained and examined microscopically looking for
be absorbed by the small intestine without being digested. After 24
diagnostic changes in the cells that provide an indication of the
hours, normal protein digestion starts and the antibodies are bro
 stages of the cycle.
ken down and destroyed. After a few days, production of colos-
trum stops and the composifion of the milk remains constant.
Chapter 11  Reproductive system 
131
For the oestrous cycle to achieve the aim of a fertile mating, the
fiming of all interrelated components must coincide. The pat-
tern and timing of the oestrous cycle varies between species -
the cycle shown by the bitch is different from that shown by the
Mammary gland
queen.
 Each cycle is divided into phases of varying lengths. These
are:
Secretory tissue
I. Pro-oestrus - period in which the reproductive tract is under
Gland sinus
the influence of oestrogen
 2. Oestrus - period during which the female will allow herselfto
Teat sinus
be mated
 3. Metoestrus - also called dioestrus; period during which the
Teat
 tract is under the influence of progesterone
 4. Anoestrus - period between cycles during which there is litle
Teat canal
Teat orifices
or no ovarian activity.
 During the oestrous cycle simultaneous changes occur in:
Fig. Il.9 Section through a mammary gland.
● The ovary and reproductive tract - includes ovulafion
● The endocrine system - interaction between the hormones 
oestrogen, progesterone, follicle stimulating hormone and
luteinising hormone
Table II.I Average composition of milk
● The animal's behavioural pafterns.
Constituent
Quantity (%)
Ovary and reproductive tract
Water
70-90
At birth, the ovary contains all the germ cells that animals will
Fat
0E-0
develop. At the onset of puberty or sexual maturity, serveral pri-
Protein
1-15
mary follicles develop to form ripe Graafian follicles. In multipa-
Carbohydrate
3-7
rous species, there will be many follicles, divided between fhe fwo
ovaries, but not necessarily equally. Each Graafian follicle consists
 Minerals
1.5-1: calcium phosphate,
 of an ovum formed by the process of meiosis and containing the
 magnesium, sodium, potassium
haploid number of chromosomes (see Ch. 1). This is suspended
and chloride
in fluid and surrounded by an outer layer of follicular cells. The
 Millk is deficient in iron and
Graafian follicle secretes the hormone oestrogen (Fig. 11.8).
copper; traces of iodine,
When the follicle has reached full size, it ruptures to release the
cobalt, tin and silica are present
Ovum - the process of ovulation. The ovum passes down the uter-
Vitamins
A, Bz, Bs, E, K
ine fube and the remaining follicular fissue becomes reorganised
Milk is low in vitamins C and D
to form fhe corpus luteum. The corpus luteum secretes the hormone
progesterone.
NB. Milk from a cat contains the amino acid taurine, as cats have a specific
Within the reproductive tract, the uterine walls become thick-
requirement for this.
ened and more glandular to create a suitable environment for
implantation of the fertilised ova. The vaginal epifhelium also
changes and the bloodstained discharge seen in pro-oestrus in the
bitch comes from the lining of the vagina.
The oestrous cycle
Hormonal changes
Ovulation and fhe oestrous cycle are associated with a cycle of
The oestrous cycle is the rhythmic cycle of events that occurs in
Ard noaue pe reao  sue ru ea
sexually mafure non-pregnant female mammals and includes
gland (see Ch. 6, Fig. 6.4):
tion of the oestrous cycle is:
1. External stimuli such as increasing daylength or a rise in
environmental temperafure stimulate the hypothalamus in
● To produce ova ready for fertilisation by the male
the forebrain. This releases gonadotrophin releasing horrmone
spermatozoa
(GRH), which acts on the anterior pituitary gland.
● To prepare the female reproductive tract to receive the
fertilised ova
 2. The anterior piftuitary secretes follicle stimulating hormone
· To initiate behavioural pafterns in the female that indicate to
(FSH), which stimulates a few primary follicles in the ovary to
 the male that she is receptive to mating
ripen into Graafian follicles.
● To stimulate the female to stand still and allow the male to
 3. The ripening follicles secrete increasing levels of oestrogen,
mate with her.
which:
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
132
 O Produces the behaviour of the female seen during pro
Day 10 - ovulation
oestrs
Day I
 O Prepares the reproductive tract for mating
9days
 O Stimulates the secretion of luteinising hormone (LH) from
the anterior pituitary gland
O Inhibits further secretion of FSH.
4. As a result of FSH inhibifion, oestrogen levels begin to fall.
 LH acts on the ripe follicles and brings about ovulation.
Affer the release of the ovum, the remaining follicular fissue
becomes luteinised, i.e. converted into the corpus luteum.
 5. The corpus luteum begins to secrete progesterone. The
 increasing levels of progesterone and the decreasing levels of
Oestrogen stimulate mating behaviour in the bitch - she will
allow the male to mount her.
 6. Progesterone is the dominant hormone during pregnancy. It:
O Prepares the reproductive tract to receive the fertilised ova
O Causes enlargement of the mammary glands
O Inhibits the secretion of GRH from the hypothalamus,
which inhibits FSH output and prevents the development
Pro-oestrus - approx. 9 days
Oestrus -approx. 9 days
on heat'or'in season
of any more follicles.
Metoestrus I - approx. 20 days
If the animal has not conceived, the corpus luteum regresses and
1Metoestrus Il- approx. 70 days
the cycle begins again.
 Anoestrus - wide variation
Pseudopregnancy (false pregnancy or pseudocyesis) is linked to the
Fig. Il. I0 Phases of the oestrous cycle of the bitch.
fact that the corpus luteum of the bitch remains in the ovary for
about 6-7 weeks whether she is pregnant or not. Progesterone levels 
● Oestrus - this lasts for about 9 days. The vulva remains
remain high and produce symptoms such as maternal behaviour. 
erlarged but the discharge becomes straw-coloured. The
enlargement of mammary glands and lactation. Progesterone levels
'flirty' excitable behaviour continues and if a male dog
are normally high in all bitches but clinical signs only occur in certain
aftempts to mount the bitch she will stand still, put her tail to
 bitches.
one side and allow mating. Ovulation takes place on day 10 of
the complete cycle (the first day of pro-oestrus is counted as
day 1) but there is no external sign.
The hormonal cycle of the queen is slightly different. As the queen is an
● Metoestrus - this can be divided into fwo phases:
induced ovulator,progesterone secreted by the corpus luteum will only
be present if she is mated.
vaginal discharge dries up, the swollen vulva shrinks and the
bitch's behaviour returns to normal. At the end of this phase,
the bitch appears to be back to normal, but internally the
Behavioural changes and external signs
corpus luteum in the ovary continues to secrete progesterone.
O Metoestrus I: lasts for approximately 70 days. There are no
The bitch
external signs, but the corpus luteum secretes progesterone,
 Bitches usually have one or two oestrous cycles a year and during
which causes the body to remain in an almost
the period of oestrus they are described as being 'in season' or 'on
pregnancy-like state. In some biftches this causes overt
heat'. The bitch is rmonoestrous, ie. during each period of ovarian
symptoms of a false pregnancy or pseudocyesis.
acfivify there is only one period of oestrus, and there is no rec-
● Anoestrus - this lasts for 3-9 months. The behaviour and
ognised breeding season - bitches may come into season at any
appearance of the bitch are normal and there is almost no
time of the year. The bitch is a spontaneous ovulator, i.e. ovulafion
occurs without the stimulus of mating and takes place around the
primary follicles will begin to develop and secrete oestrogen
tenth day of the cycle (Fig. 11.10).
 and the cycle begins again.
 Bitches reach sexual maturity or puberfy at about 6 months but
 fhere is wide variation between breeds - larger breeds mafure sig-
The queen
nificanfly later than smaller breeds. Puberty is marked by the onset
The queen is seasonally polyoestrous. This means that she has sev-
of the first season. The phases of the oestrous cycle are as follows:
eral periods of oestrus or receptivity to the male during her breed-
● Pro-oestrus - this lasts for about 9 days. The vulva becomes
ing season, which is typically from January to September. Cats are
 enlarged and there may be a bloodstained vaginal discharge.
 ‘long day breeders', stimulated to start cycling by the increasing
The bitch may urinate more frequently, which serves to
adverfise the fact that she is in season. She will be excitable
domestic cats come into season all the year round as they live
and flirtatious with males and may try to escape to find them.
under the influence of cenfral heating and electric light.
However, if a male tries to mount her she will growl and
The queen is an induced ovulator, ie. ovulafion occurs in
u yd  d  o    de
response to mating. The tip of the tomcat's penis is covered in tiny
Chapter 11  Reproductive system
133
barbs, which, when the penis is withdrawn at the end of mafing,
increases, follicular development starts and the breeding
cause the queen a moment of pain. This starts a nerve pafhway to
season begins again.
the hypothalamus in the brain, and ultimately to the ovary, result-
 ing in ovulation within 36 hours of mating.
Young queens become sexually mafure in the spring after they
Embryonic and fetal development
        n  s  s
young as 4 months at the time of the first season in January/
The gestation period is the interval between fertilisafion of the
February. The phases of the oestrous cycle (Fig. 11.1l) are as
 OVum and the birth of the offspring. In the bitch and the queen,
follows:
the gestation period is approximately 63 days, although there
is both individual and breed variation. During gestation, com-
False pregnancies can occur in the cat but are very rare. If the
plex changes occur to the zygote that result in a viable neonate 9
queen is mated but does not conceive, a corpus luteum develops
weeks later.
in the ovary and secretes progesterone, which switches off further
follicular development. After about 36 days, the corpus luteum 
Definitions
 regresses and the cycles start again. There are rarely any clinical signs
It is important to understand the terminology applied to the dif-
 associated with this phenomenon in cats.
ferent stages of embryonic and fetal development.
 Ermbryology - the study of the development of the embryo 
+ Oestrus - this lasts for 4-10 days but is very variable. There
 are no physical signs but the queen's behaviour includes
Gamete - the male or female germ cells, i.e. spermatozoa (sperm) or
rolling, rubbing against objects and lordosis (putting the rump
ova
in the air and the tail to one side). She will also 'call' - a loud
 Zygote - the fertilised ovum
 Ermbryo - the stage during which the major organs are forming
persistent yowling sound - to inform all the tomcats in the
 Fetus - the stage at which formation of the major internal and 
area fhat she is recepfive. If a tomcat approaches she will
external structures is complete until the time of parturition
crouch down and allow mating to take place. As the queen
is an induced ovulator, oestrus may confinue unfil mating
Conceptus - the embryo or fetus, the extra embryonic membranes 
and the placenta
occurs. However, queens kept isolated from tomcats will 
evenfually go into the next phase.
 Neonate - a newborn animal.
● Dioestrus - lasts for about 14 days. The queen's behaviour
refurns to normal and the ovary remains inacfive for a short
period. New follicles will begin to develop towards the end
Fertilisation and cell division
of this period and the cycle will begin again a few days later.
● Anoestrns - lasts for about 4 monfhs and falls befween
Each ovum released from the ovary during ovulation is covered
 September and January. During this period the ovary remains
in an outer protective layer of follicular cells known as the corona
inactive and the queen is a 'normal' cat. As the day length
radiata and has an inner layer of glycoprotein known as the zona.
Fig. Il.lI Schematic of the oestrous cycle in the cat.
Dioestrus
14 days
Oestrus
4-10 days
Mating
No conception
36 days
 Pseudo-
pregnancy
Conception
63 days
Pregnancy
Anoestrus 4 months
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
134
pellucida. The bitch and the queen are multiparous species, i.e. lit-
mass becomes the embryo and, in the early stages, is a flat plate of 
cells. The trophoblast becomes the extra-embryonic membranes.
the infundibulum of the uterine fube and are fransported down
the uterine fube by muscular contractions and by the movements
differentiate into parts of the embryo and the different membranes:
 Of the cilia of the epithelial lining.
· The inner cell mass divides into:
 After mating, sperm from the male travel up the female tract and
 O An outer layer or ectoderm - forms the skin and nervous
fertilisation takes place within the upper part of the uterine fube. It
system
is thought that sperm may live for as long as 7 days within the tract,
O A middle layer or mesoderm - forms the musculoskeletal
relying on the correct environment within the uterine tube to sur-
system and other internal organs
vive. During this period the outer acrosorme of the sperm (Fig. 11.4)
O An inner layer or endoderm - forms the lining of the
releases enzymes, which are able to break down the zona pellucida
      s     
digestive fract and other visceral systems.
results in afertilisation reaction, prevenfing fertilisation by any other
Cells from fhe endoderm spread around to line the tro-
sperm (Fig. 11.12). The fertilised ovum is now referred to as a zygote
phoblast and form the yolk sac. In mammals this does not
and cell division begins within a few hours of fertilisation.
 contain yolk but in birds and reptiles the yolk sac is the
Cell division occurs by mitosis (see Ch. 1): one cell divides into
 source of nutrition for the embryo developing in the egg
two, two into four, and so on. The stage in which the cells are
· The trophoblast lies around the outer part of the cavity
too numerous to count is called a morula. A fluid-filled cavify
(Fig 11.13). Between the yolk sac and the trophoblast,
develops inside fhe morula and the strucfure becomes a blasto-
mesodermal cells split into fwo layers, between which is another
cyst. During this time the ball of cells is free-floating, surviving on
cavity: one layer lies close to fhe trophoblast and later becomes
fluids within the lumen of the uterine tract, and it moves slowly
the chorion; fhe other lies close to the endoderm/yolk sac.
 down the tract towards the uterine horns.
The innercell mass begins to curl around and enclose the endodermal
and mesodermal cells, which form the internal organs, leaving the
Implantation
yolk sac and trophoblast to form the extra-embryonic membranes.
Once in the uterine horns, fhe blastocysts arrange themselves af
equal distances along the horns and may even cross from one horn
Development of the extra-embryonic
- se u sd e -eds en e on e 
ine migration. They then atach to the wall of the horns by invading
membranes
and partly destroying the hypertrophied endometrium, so that they
The extra-embryonic membranes surround and protect the
embryo but do not form the embryo itself:
 Ovulation in the bitch and 11-16 days after ovulation in the queen.
● Yolk sac - formed from the endodermal cells, but shrivels to
Development of the germ cell layers
nothing some time before birth (Fig. 11.13)
● Chorion - formed from the trophoblast and the outer layer of
Within the fluid-filled blastocyst, most of the cells come tolie on one
mesodermal cells
side, forming the inner cell mass. A thinner layer of cells surround-
● Amnion - the trophoblast and mesoderm expand, and
ing the fluid cavity form the trophoblast (Fig. 11.13). The inner cell
 oqua Sudoiaaap au punoins pue dn ysnd Aenuaaa
Female nucleus
Fig. Il.12 Fertilisation of the ovum. A Spermatozoa approach
Male nucleus
Ovum. B One sperm penetrates the ovum. C, D Cell division
occurs by mitosis.
Zona-
Zona pellucida
pellucida
becomes
Ovum
impermeable
to other sperm
 Sperm tail
left outside
A
the ovum
R
D
Chapter 11Reproductive system
135
Mitosis
Mitosis
A
Inner cell mass
Ectoderm
Endoderm
Ectoderm-
Mesoderm
Ectoderm
(inner cell mass)
Endoderm-
Mesoderm
Endoderm
(yolk sac)
D
Chorion
Amniotic cavity
Ectoderm
Amnion
Mesoderm
 Primitive gut tube
Yolksa
Allantois
Yolksac
Endoderm
Villi of the placenta
(yolk sac)
Amnion
Amniotic cavity
 Primitive gut tube
Allantois
Chorioallantois
H
Fig. Il.13 Early embryonic development (see text also). A The fertilised cell divides by mitosis to form a ball of
cells, the morula (B). The morula develops a cavity and is known as the trophoblast (C). A layer of endodermal
cells starts to line the trophoblast (D) and forms the beginning of the yolk sac {E). Blocks of mesoderm start to
oy aeds sauouy  waposa ohqwa aue wo ot jo pauuid aq oi sers ssw in lauui aut se wog
from the primitive gut tube, this is the allantois (G) and the yolk sac begins to regress. Developing villi form a band
around the extra-embryonic membranes (H).
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
136
This forms a fluid-filled cavity around the embryo - the
amniotic cavity - which is entirely separate from all the other
cavifies. The outer layer is called the amnion and is the sac in
which the fefus is delivered
● Allantois - a balloon-like diverficulum starts to develop from the
endodermal cells forming the primitive gut. It pushes out from
the caudal end of the embryo and lies beside the yolk sac (Fig
Fig. Il. I4 The zonary placental attachment seen in dogs and cats.
11.13). This is the allantois, which collects urine from the fetal
(With permission from Colville T, Bassett JM 200l Clinical anatomy and 
kidneys via a fube leading from the fetal bladder, the urachus.
physiology for veterinary technicians. Mosby St Louis, MO, p 338.)
During development, the allantois continues to expand with
fetal urine and evenfually encircles fhe fefus. Its inner surface
becomes part of the amnion, while its outer surface fuses with
The placenta
the chorion and becomes the chorioallantois. During parfurifion,
the chorioallantois may be identified as the 'water bag', which
The placenta is a thickened vascular band that develops from the
rupfures to release the fefus within the amrion.
allantochorion around the centre of the conceptus. The allantocho
rion produices small, finger-like villi that burrow into the endome-
trium of the uterine horn. Blood capillaries covering fhe membrane
Development of the embryo
extend into the villi and come into close apposifion with the blood
 capillaries of the endometrium. These form the maternal and fetal
As the inner cell mass grows, the cells begin to curve underneath
 parts of the placenta, which are not continuous with each other.
and the head and trunk are formed. Inside, the main body cavify
The villi develop into broad bands running around the 'waist' of 
or coelorm is formed and later it is divided into thorax and abdo
the conceptus. Nutrients and oxygen pass from the dam across the
men by the diaphragm. All the internal organs are developed by
placenta and into the fefus via the umbilical blood vessels; waste
35 days - this process is known as organogenesis. After this, the
products pass in the opposite direction. The umbilical cord contains
the umbilical artery and vein, the remnants of the yolk sac and the 
final size prior to birth.
stalk of the allantois connected to the urachus (see Ch. 7).
The later stages of development in a medium-sized breed of
The placenta of the dog and cat is restricted to one zone and is
 dog are summarised in Table 11.2. Kiftens are often slightly in
therefore described as being a zonary placenta (Fig. 11.14). Other
advance of puppies of the same stage.
 species have more diffuse types of placenta. Between the placenta
and the membranes, at the edge of the placenta, is an area where
blood has escaped from broken blood capillaries and become
Table II.2 The developmental stages of the canine
trapped. This is the marginal haematorma and it stains the parturi-
embryo and fetus
ent discharges green in bitches and brown in queens. This dis-
Timescale
Stage of development
colouration is normal!
3 weeks
5 mm long; fore and hindlimbs are small
buds sticking out from the trunk; amnion
Fundamental genetics
 is complete and the allantois is formed
Genetics is the science of inheritance and is the method by which
4 weeks
20 mm long: limbs are small cylinders
characteristics or traits are passed from one generation to another.
with evidence of a paw shape; eyes are
pigmented; external ear has a ridge of 
These characteristics may be visible, e.g. eye or coat colour but
visible skin
also may be the less obvious but vital characteristics such as blood
grouping or metabolic pathways in the liver - the formation of
 5 weeks
 35 mm long; ear flap is distinct; eyelids
         
 partly cover the eyes; digits can be seen
 The information that determines these characteristics is carried
on the paws; external genitalia are near
by structures known as genes. Genes are arranged in long chains
to final positions; tactile (sinus) hairs 
known as chromosomes, which are found within the nucleus of
are present on the upper lip; formation
every cell in the body (see Ch. 1).
 of internal organs (organogenesis) is
complete
Chromosomes
6 weeks 
60 mm long; prominent scrotal or vulval
tissues; digits widely spread; eyelids are
Chromosomes are made of the protein deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA),
 fused; hair follicles and tactile follicles
which consists of two parallel unbranched strands fwisting
 present on the body; claws present;
around each other in a double helix. The strands are formed by
 ossfication of skeleton at 45 days
a series of four amino acids - adenine, thymine, guanine and cyto
sine - arranged in a varying sequence. The amino acids, which are
7 weeks
100 mm long; body hair and colour
 also called bases or nucleotides, form cross-links with the oppo-
 markings are developing
sife strand to create a ladder-like structure (Fig. 11.15). Each base
 only forms a cross-link with a specific other base, i.e. adenine only
8 weeks
150 mm long; hair covering is complete;
 pads have developed
links with thymine and cytosine only links with guanine. These
are then referred to as base pairs. The sequence of bases on one
9 weeks
Ready for birth
 strand determines the sequence of bases on the opposite strand
and this sequence or genefic code determines the makeup of each
Chapter 11 Reproductive system 
137
 Base pair adenine
and thymine
T
20
2
2
00
7
Base pair cytosine
n
 auuen pue
0
0
0
nn
00
0
n
00
00
nn
Fig. Il.15 The double-helical structure of DNA.
AA
gene along the chromosome. The genetic code within each gene
vv
In a resting cell the helical structure of each chromosome is 
WA
AA
AA
AA
tightly coiled within the nucleus so that when fhe nucleus is seen
under a light microscope it appears very dense. The chromo-
0
cell division by mitosis or meiosis (see Ch. 1).
Chromosomes are always considered in pairs - one of each pair
Fig. Il.l6 Metaphase spread and karyotype of a dog. The dog has a
is received from each parent. Each species of animal has a char-
total of 78 chromosomes in each cell. This chromosome spread is from a.
acteristic number of pairs of chromosomes within the nucleus of
at yo peaisui (paxoa) sawosowouo xas xx aeu pinom alewal 'aeu
every cell (Table 11.3). The total complement of chromosomes is
X and Y chromosomes. (WVith permission from Long S 2006 Veterinary
known as the diploid number. This becomes halved to the haploid
 genetics and reproductive physiology. Butterworth-Heinemann,
Edinburgh, p 27.)
formed by meiosis contains the haploid number. After fertiliza-
tion, during which the nucleus of the ovum fuses wifh the nucleus
chromosomes in the cell are referred to as the antosormes and they
of the sperm, the resulting zygote contains the diploid number of
influence all the characteristics that are not concerned with sex
 chromosomes and cell division to form the embryo begins.
determinafion.
Within the majority of chromosome pairs the chromosomes are
identicalto each other and they are described as being hormologous
Sex determination
(Fig. 11.16). Within each cell there is one pair of chromosomes that 
may not be homologous - these are the sex chromosormes. The other
Within each cell one pair of the total complement of chromosomes 
is the sex chromosomes, which are concerned with the determina-
tion of the sex of the animal. These are given the lefters X and Y.
Table I I.3 Characteristic number of chromosomes
 The Y chromosome is small and carries the genes that determine
in the nucleus of a range of species
 male characteristics; there is very liftle room for any other genes.
No. of pairs
 Total number of
 n   s   e  x s
Species
(diploid number)
chromosomes
female characteristics, although it may carry other genes as well.
 In the mammal the female has fwo X chromosomes while the
Dog
39
78
male has an X and a Y, which means that the female has more
 space for genes than the male. To compensate for this, one of the
Cat
19
38
X chromosomes of the female is inacfivated and becomes con-
Human
23
46
tracted, forming a Barr body.
The male mammal is responsible for determining the sex of his
Horse
32
64
 offspring. During meiosis (see Ch. 1) within the ovary or testis 
four daughter cells are produced - these are either sperm or ova,
 Sheep
27
54
known as the germ cells. The germ cells will be identical to each
30
other but different from the parent cells. Al the pairs of chromo-
Ox
60
somes split up and each one of a pair goes into the newly formed
19
38
   x aa   as a s s 
Pig
somes while the ova will only contain X chromosomes. During
Kangaroo
6
12
fertilization the sperm cell fuses with the ovum to produce a
Zygote which will be either XY or XX, ie. male or female.
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
138
A parficular gene will always be found at the same site on a par-
XX × x = aleuay x ale 'a!
ticular chromosome - this site is referred to as its locus (pl. loci).
X
Y
 s  e e pe si   r sd a
X
X X
XY
every gene on every chromosome in the cell. As chromosomes are
X
XX
XY
thought of in homologous pairs it follows that there will be another
 gene at the identical locus - this gene is referred to as its allele.
This resuilts in fwo male offspring (XY) and two female (XX) offspring.
Genes at the same locus affect the same characteristic but they
ie. there is a 50% chance of producing either sex at each mafting.
may affect eye colour but one may instruct the cells to make blue eye
Genes
pigrment while the other produces brown pigment. Genes at the same
Genes are the urits of inherifance. They are short sections of the
apnaaafipe anaid je s aures au je saua ozouu
base pairs making up the strands of DNA that are the chromo-
 One blue eyes and one brown eyes, are said to be heterozygous.
 somes. The sequence of base pairs within the gene provides the
When a gene produces a characteristic effect it is said to be
code for each characteristic in the cell and hence the entire indi-
expressed. If orly one of a pair of heterozygous genes is expressed the
vidual. Each gene influences one characteristic, although each
gene is described as being dorminant and the gene that is not expressed
characteristic may be influenced by several genes. These are
is described as being recessive. Dominant genes override the effect
 known as potygenic characteristics.
of recessive genes and the recessive genes are only expressed when
 In order to be able to describe genes and the way in which they
fhere is no dominant gene to override it, ie. when they are homozy-
function it is necessary to learn a new set of terms (Table 11.4).
gous. Occasionally there are cases where alleles giving different
instructions for the same characteristic are both expressed, e.g. blood
groups in humans. Such genes are described as being co-dominant.
Table I1.4 Genetic terminology
The majority of genes act independenfly of each other but
Term
Definition
some genes can suppress the activity of genes at the same loci.
These genes are said to exhibit epistasis. Epistasis is seen in albino
 Diploid number
Number of chromosomes found in a
animals and occurs when the albino gene suppresses all other
 normal cell 
genes associated with coat colour, resulting in a colourless or
white coat.
Haploid number
Number of chromosomes found in a
An animal may have an external appearance that is differ-
germ cell (ovum or sperm). This is half
the diploid number and results from 
ent from what would be predicted by its genetic makeup. The
meiosis
external appearance of an arimal is known as the phenotype. The
aq Ao u sn pue adpou au se umo si dnax oas
Gamete
Ether the ovum or the spermatozoon.
 Contains the haploid number of 
oe Aq q s a aq Ao yu p s ree e no a
dhromosomes
by environmental factors such as diet, disease and exercise. This
Zygote
 Results from fusion of the ovum with the
example of this might be a fat whippet - this breed is naturally
 sperm and contains the diploid number of
 )
chromosomes
eating (environment).
 Mitosis
Method of cell division occurring in
somatic cells, i.e. all the cells of the body
Mutations
except the germ cells 
Meiosis
 Method of cell division occurring in the
 and wil pass unchanged from generation to generation. The only
germ cells
d   ss      n  
sn3o7
 The position of a gene on a chromosome
 genes from another germ cell, i.e. after division by meiosis fol-
 Allele 
 Agene on the same locus of a pair of
homologous chromosomes
tion does occur but this is usually a random chance mutafion or
the result of chemical change or damage, e.g. by radiation. These
Homozygous gene
 Identical genes on the same locus 
 changes will then pass into the next generation. Mutations may
Heterozygous gene
result in a harmful condifion that could kill the affected individ-
 Non-identical genes on the same locus
ual, e.g. development of cancer cells, and then the gene will die
Dominant gene
Agene that overrides its allele
Out on the death of the affected individual. However it might pro-
duce a characteristic that gives the animal an advantage that could
Recessive gene
 A gene whose characteristic is not 
enhance its chances of survival, e.g. a change of coat colour, which
expressed when paired with a dominant
might provide camouflage. The affected animal would then repro-
 gene but will be expressed with an
duce and pass its beneficial gene on to the next generation.
identical recessive gene
Phenotype
The outward appearance of an individual
Genetic nomenclature
Genotype
The genetic makeup of an individual
The language of genetics can be expressed using a system of let-
ters, which can then be used to predict the outcome of mating or
Chapter 11  Reproductive system
139
e iue o ada reed e m ue a 
 include the genes for haemophilia, colour-blindness and orange
with a different genotype.
coat colour in cats. These characteristics are almost always associ
+ Genes are always expressed in pairs, one of which comes from
ated with males, although they may occasionally affect females.
the male parent and the other from the female parent.
The mechanism of inheritance is:
● The individual genetic characteristics are given a relevant
● If a male animal carries a sex-linked gene on his X
letter of the alphabet.
chromosome if will be expressed because the Y chromosome
● The dominant characteristic is wriften as a capital letter and
has no effect on if.
the recessive characteristic is given as a lower case lefter.
● If a female animal carries a sex linked gene on one of her X
● Thus, for coat colour in the Labrador, where black colour is
chromosomes but not on the other, ie. she is heterozygous for
dominant over chocolate, one could use the lefters B (Black)
the gene, if will not be expressed because the gene is recessive
and b (Chocolate).
and requires fwo genes to be expressed. However she may pass
if on to her offspring and she is described as being a carrier.
e   r s h a  a a   o
would have the phenotype of a black coat.
● If a female arimal has a sex linked gene on both of her X
● A dog with the genotype Bb is heterozygous for that gene and
chromosomes, i.e. she is homozygous for the gene, if will be
would have the phenotype of a black coat.
expressed.
Sex-limited genes
would have the phenotype of a chocolate coat.
These are genes that influence a characteristic that is seen in only
one sex. These genes are switched on by reproductive hormones
Mendel's laws of inheritance
produced by the animal at the onset of puberty, ie. oestrogen or
testosterone. Examples of sex-limited genes include breast size in
For many years scientists were unaware of the method by which
women and milk yield in cows.
characteristics were passed fromone generationto another although
Lethal genes
fhey recognised that children bore a certain resemblance to their
parents. In the mid-19th century an Austrian monk called Gregor
These are genes that are incompatible with life. An animal that
Mendel (1822-1884), while working in the gardens of his monas-
expresses a lethal gene will die from its effects sooner or later.
observatiors over many years he developed his laws of inheritance,
 s  s       s
which led him to be able to predict the outcome of various crosses.
● Classical lethal - affected individuals may die in the uterus or
● Mendel's first law of inheritance states that There are factors
very soon affer birth. An example is absence of a tail - a form
that control development and these factors retain their
of spina bifida in cats. Manx cats are heterozygous for the
individuality from generation to generation'. This is known
gene and only lack a tail
as the law of segregation and ift may also be expressed as 'alleles
● Delayed lethal - affected individuals will die from a progressive
separate to different gametes'. The factors are the strucfures
condition later in life. Examples include polycystic kidneys in 
that we now know as genes and the law means that genes
Persian cats and hypoplastic kidneys in a range of species
at the same locus on homologous chromosomes separate af
● Semi-lethal - these produce mild abnormalities that may not
 meiosis to go into different germ cells.
necessarily kill the animal. An example is haemophilia, which
●Mendel's second law of inheritance states that 'Each pair of genes
may be treated by blood transfusions or synthetic clotting
is inherited without being influenced by the presence of other
factors.
 genes'. This is known as the law of independent assortment and it
means that at meiosis each gene behaves independenfly as fhe
Selective breeding
Selective breeding is the term used to describe the selection of cer-
Ch. 1). This law is frue in most instances but there are examples
tain individuals as stud animals for breeding rather than allowing
 of linked genes that do not behave independently. These genes
all animals to breed randomly. In theory this means that benefi-
cial or desirable characteristics will be passed on to the next gen-
so at meiosis they are likely to pass into the germ cells aftached
eration while harmful or deleterious characteristics will be bred
to each other. An example of this are fhe genes for blue eyes and
Out, but in fact if selective breeding is carried out incorrectly it can
white coat colour - white animals often have blue eyes.
create even more problems. Using one's knowledge of genetics
it is possible to predict the outcome of crossing one animal with
Specialized types of gene
another and so create an individual that is a perfect representa-
tion of its breed and is not afflicted by any inherited condiftions.
Most genes follow Mendel's laws and are passed on predictably;
n sa      sd  are ar 
Monohybrid crosses
are less predictable.
Matings in which only one characteristic is identified and followed
Sex-linked genes
through the generations are described as monohybrid crosses.
Genes that are located on one of the sex chromosomes, ie. X or
For example: spot colour in Dalmafian dogs. There are fwo
Y, are therefore most commonly associated wifh one or other
variations in the spot colour - black, which is more common, and
of the sexes. Most sex linked genes are found on the X chromo
liver. The gene for black spots is dominant while the gene for liver
some as it is larger than the Y chromosome and has more space to
 spots is recessive.
carry genes. Sex-linked genes are usually recessive and examples
Let the gene for black spots be represented as the lefter B
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
140
Let the gene for liver spots be represented as the lefter b
Let the gene for PRA be s
1. Mate a homozygous black-spotted dog to a homozygous liver-
Thus dogs with:
 spofted bitch
+ the genotype SS will have normal sight
ie.BB x bb.
o s t Aq q  pue v au mm ss ad au o
Using a grid known as a Punnett square we can work out the geno-
● the genotype Ss will have normal sight but will be carriers of 
this recessive gene.
Genes from the male (in the sperm)
The suspect bitch under investigation could have the genotype
B
B
Ss or SS
b
Bb
Bb
b
Bb
Bb
1. Suppose the suspect bitch is Ss
Genes from the female (in the ova)
     n        
have the genotype ss.
The Fl generafion will consist enfirely of puppies with the Bb
The F1 generation will be:
5
5
       
S
Ss
Ss
black-spofted bitch
5
SS
S5
ie. Bb x Bb.
 The F1 generation will be:
The puppies will be 2Ss, i.e. carriers of the gene but unaffected:
2ss, i.e. affected by the condiftion.
B
b
B
BB
Bb
2 Suppose the suspect bitch is SS
b
Bb
bb
Mate her to the known affected dog ss.
The genotypes will be 1BB:2Bb:1bb
The F1 generation will be:
The phenotypes will be three black-spofted puppies to one liver-
5
5
spofted puppy.
S
Ss
Ss
There is a 1 in 4 chance of producing the double-recessive indi-
S
Ss
Ss
vidual when you use a monohybrid cross. When crossing fwo ani-
All the puppies will have the genotype Ss, i.e. they will be unaf-
mals that are heterozygous for any characteristic you will always
fected by PRA but as they will be carriers of the gene they would
get the same ratio of genotypes of 1:2:1. Statistically if you use a
have to be neutered and not used for breeding.
large sample of animals you are more likely to achieve this ratio.
In this example if a bitch produces puppies that are not affected you
 In a litter of four puppies you might not breed the liver-spotted
can be sure that she is homozygous for normal sight; if she produces
au aaordu non saiddnd oot paonpord noA j iaaamou Addnd
heterozygous bitch was mated to an uridentified heterozygous dog
the F1 generation would produce genotypes in the rafio of 1SS:2Ss:1ss,
ie. there is a 1 in 4 chance of producing an affected puppy.
spotted bitch
ie. bb x Bb.
It is essential to identify carriers of harmful genes but in prac-
 The F1 generation will be:
ftice test matings are expensive and take time. Analysis of pedi-
grees may be helpful, assuming they are correct, but nowadays
b
b
DNA analysis may be much quicker and much more accurate.
B
Bb
Bb
b
bb
bb
 The genotypes will be 2Bb:2bb
Dihybrid crosses
The phenotypes will be two black-spotted puppies to two liver-
A dihybrid cross is one in which two characteristics are identified.
spotted puppies - there is an equal chance of producing black- or
Each gene obeys Mendel's second law of independent assortment
liver-spotted puppies.
and will move independently. It may be paired with any other
gene, resulting in a wide variation of genotypes and phenotypes.
Back-crossing to the recessive
This can appear very complicated but, as in fhe previous monohy-
 brid cross, if you cross two animals that are heterozygous for both
This is a technique using test mafings to ascertain whether an ani-
  jo o ad e  d pua n sre
mal is carrying a particular recessive gene. This may be a gene
this case of 9:3:3:1 (compared to 1:2:1 for a monohybrid cross) and
-sid seas aa  se ns us m e ss je
the chances of producing an animal that is recessive for both char-
 sive retinal atrophy or, in more minor cases, an unwanted coaf
acteristics is 15:1 (compared to 3:1 for a monohybrid cross).
colour. A recessive gene will only be expressed if an animal is
If you expand this idea to crossing individuals with three char-
homozygous for that gene. If the animal is heterozygous, the gene
acteristics if is known as a trihybrid cross. When you cross fwo
will not be expressed but the animal will carry the gene and may
animals that are heterozygous for all three characteristics the pre-
pass it on to its offspring.
dicted ratios of the genotypes are 27:9:9:9:3:3:3:1 and the chances
 For example: progressive retinal atrophy (PRA) is a condition
 of producing the one individual that is homozygous for all three
sen in breeds such as Labradors, Golden Retrievers, Collies and
recessive characteristics is 63:1.
Spariels. It causes gradual deterioration of the retinal blood ves-
This theory is extremely important when afftempting to breed
sels and results in blindness by the time the dog is about 18 months
the perfect example of a parficular species or breed or just a
old. It is important to identify carriers of the gene so that they do
 e  s e    
not pass ift on to their puppies.
for beneficial characteristics without achieving homozygosity
 Let the gene for normal sight be S
for harmful characteristics. It is important to understand the
Chapter 11  Reproductive system
141
 reducing chances of producing an individual that is homozygous
each other and their parents. Mongrels are offen assumed to
 for large numbers of characteristics.
be free from inherited abnormalities.
● Line breeding - the mafing of two individuals that are
Breeding strategies
more closely related than those in oufbreeding but less
closely related than in those in inbreeding, e.g. mother to
Hundreds of years of selective breeding of cats and dogs
 grandson or mating second cousins. This strategy is the most
have led to the development of distinct breeds. A breed may
be defined as 'a group of animals of the same species linked
commonly used in selective breeding because, although it
fixes the characteristics more slowly and the offspring are
by a set of common characteristics'. When an animal of one
less predictable, if has none of the problems associated with
breed is crossed with another animal of another breed the
inbreeding depression.
result is a crossbreed or mongrel, which is a normal fertile
animal that is capable of reproducing and passing on the
characteristics of both breeds to the next generation but will
Congenital and inherited defects
bear very liftle resemblance to its parents. The advantage of
Selective breeding aims to fix desirable characteristics but it can
crossing fwo animals of the same breed is that you can pre-
also result in the fixing of harmful genes. These are associated
dict what the offspring will look like. When crossing fwo
with poor health and in some cases eventual death. Animals may
mongrels the assortment of the genes may be completely
be born with a variety of harmful condifions but these need not
random and the outcome unpredictable. The skill of breed-
necessarily be caused genefically.
ing lies in understanding Mendel's laws and in selecting the
correct animals to be mated to each other. Random selection
+ Congenital defects - these are present in the animal at the time
could result in a Crufts champion but it would be very, very
of its birth. They may be caused by damage to the embryo
lucky.
or fetus during fhe gestafion period or during parfurition,
 The aim of selective breeding is to achieve homozygosity for
all the genes which control the desirable characteristics.
For example: Supposing an animal that is homozygous for gene Z
infectious enterifis virus during gestation. As congenital
 is mated to an animal that is heterozygous for gene Z
condiftions are not carried by the genes an affected animal may
 produce healthy offspring.
ie. ZZ x Zz.
Then the F1 generafion will be:
+ Inherited defects - these are carried on the genes. They
are inherited from the parents and may be passed from
Z
generation to generation. Most inherited defects are caused
Z
ZZ
ZZ
Zz
Zz
animal is homozygous for that gene. Breeders of any
If one of the homozygous individuals is then crossed back to one
defects exist in their chosen breed or species. They should
of the parents, i.e. ZZ x ZZ, then the offspring of the F2 genera-
be able to identify affected individuals and prevent them
tion will all be homozygous. The parents of the F2 generation are
 from breeding so that the genes are not passed to their
described as breeding 'true' for that characteristic and the outcome
offspring.
Examples of inherited defects in dogs and cats include:
is described as beingfixed in the breed. In aftempting to reach this
sifuation breeders will use a range of breeding strategies.
● Hip dysplasia - seen in larger breeds of dog, e.g. Labradors,
Golden Retrievers and German Shepherds. Malformafion
● Inbreeding - the mating of two individuals that are more
 closely related than the population as a whole, e.g. brother to
of the acetabulum or femoral head that form the hip
joint causes laxity in fhe joint, which evenfually causes
   s s o  e  s on   i
osteoarthritis. The Kennel Club (KC) and the British
homozygosity to fix the characteristic in as few generafions
 as possible. If the inbreeding strategy is followed for too
Veterinary Association (BVA) have a monitoring scheme to
 many generations, harmful genes may be fixed as well as the
identify affected animals. Dogs with a high hip score should
 not be used for breeding.
● Eibow dysplasia - seen in a range of dog breeds, e.g. Bassett
depression. This produces weak, unhealthy examples of the
breed, so inbreeding is not recommended.
Hounds, Golden Retrievers, Labradors and Newfoundlands.
Various anomalies affect the elbow joint, resulting in
· Outbreeding - the mating of two individuals that are less
instability when weight-bearing. This causes lameness,
closely related than the population as a whole, e.g. father to
osteoarthritis and pain. A KC/BVA monitoring scheme
great-granddaughter or to fifth cousin. This strategy may be
idenfifies affected individuals.
used to counteract the effect of inbreeding depression. As the
 animals used are only distantly related, the offspring are likely
to be heterozygous for both desirable and harmful genes.
atrophy, collie eye anomaly and hereditary cataracts. The
KC/BVA/International Sheepdog Society run a monitoring
Any recessive genes will not be expressed in the genotype,
producing a healthier stronger individual - a condition known
scheme to idlentify affected individuals.
as hybrid vigour or heterosis. This breeding strategy leads to
● Entropion - infurning eyelashes that scratch the cornea causing
much slower fixing of genes and it is less easy to accurately
conjunctiviftis and keratitis. Has fo be freated surgically.
predict the outcome of a mating. An extreme version of
This is a polygenic characteristic occurring in breeds such as
Sharpeis, Roffweilers and Labradors.
e.g. a German Shepherd with a Dachshund. The appearance of
+ Ectropion - lower eyelids droop downwards, exposing the
the resulting mongrel puppies cannot be predicted, although
conjunctiva below the eye, which becomes dry and inflamed.
they will be perfectly healthy and will all be different from
Has to be treated surgically. This is a polygenic characteristic
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
142
A
B
Fig. II.17 Two breeds of cat that originally resulted from a genetic abnormality A Manx cat. B Scottish
Fold.
seen in breeds characterized by their soft, droopy eyes,
● Flat-chested kittens - autosomal recessive gene. Seen in
e.g. Bloodhounds, Basseft Hounds and St Bernards.
Burmese kittens. Affected animals have dificulty in breathing
● Cryptorchidism - retained testes - may be bilateral or
and do not thrive.
urilateral. The retained testis will be infertile and may be
+ Folded ears in cats - incomplete dominant gene.
more likely to develop a Sertoli cell tumour in later life.
 Heterozygous form has folded ears and this is the basis of
● Deafness - linked to blue eyes and a white coat. Offen seen in
the Scoffish Fold breed of cat. Homozygous form has painful
white cats and Dalmatians.
swollen joints and pain on movement (Fig. 11.17).
● Haemophilia - a defective cloffing mechanism associated
● Polydactyly - multiple toes, seen in cats. Often referred to as
mainly with male animals. Known as von Willebrand's disease
'witches' cats'. Causes few problems but affected cats have
in dogs.
very large feet.
● Taillessness in cats - recessive gene. Homozygous form causes
a form of spina bifida and results in the death of fetal kiftens.
Heterozygous form results in varying degrees of taillessness,
which is the basis of the Manx breed of cat (Fig. 11.17).
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
CHAPTER
12
common integument
KEY POINTS
 The common integument is the outer covering of the
 Other glands in the body, e.g. mammary glands and
body and includes the skin, hair, pads and claws.
anal glands, are also modified skin glands.
 The skin covers the entire body and provides a
The skin of the dog and cat is covered in hair, which
protective layer.
 is derived from epidermal cells. The function of hair is
 The skin consists of two layers: the epidermis and
to protect, to insulate and to communicate.
 dermis, under which is the hypodermis or subcuticular
The underside of the foot is hairless and protected by
layer. This basic structure is also seen in footpads and 
the footpads, also derived from modified epidermis.
claws.
The ends of the digits are protected by hard
. Within the skin are a range of glands, the secretions 
epidermal structures known as claws.
of which contribute to the overall function of the skin.
The term common integument refers to the outer covering of the
4. Production - ultraviolet light from the sun converts
body. It is said to be the largest organ of the body and, because it
7-dihydrocholesterol present in sebum into vitamin D. This
has a variety of component parts, it has a range of functions. The
is activated within the kidney and liver and increases the
integument includes:
uptake and metabolism of dietary calcium.
·Skin
●Hair
Dogs, cats and other species of animal that are kept indoors without 
● Footpads
access to sunlight may suffer from skeletal problems caused by the
·Claws.
lack of vitamin D in their bodies. This is then reflected in the levels
of calcium in the bones and tissues.
The skin
5. Storage - fat is stored under the skin as adipose tissue or
 The skin covers the external surface of the body, forming a com-
subcufaneous fat. Fat is an energy store and also acts as a
plete barrier against the external environment. It is perforated
thermal insulating layer.
e 's an p  n a 'sado  sa 
6. Thermoregulation - the skin prevents heat loss by diverting
blood away from fhe surface by vasoconstriction, by erecting
 openings. The functions of the skin are:
the hairs to trap a layer of insulating air, and by having an
1. Protection - it protects the underlying structures of the body
insulating layer of fat. Heat can be lost from the body when
and, in specialised thickened regions of the skin, e.g. pads of
required, e.g. by the production of sweat. However,the skin
the feet, it gives added protection against physical trauma. It
only plays a minor role in heat loss in the dog and cat as they
only have active sweat glands in their footpads and nose.
 Most of the dissipation of excessive body heat in dogs and
sebum on to the surface. The skin also acts as a waterproof
cats occurs via panting.
barrier; ift is almost impermeable to water, preventing the
7. Communication - production of pheromones, which are
 body from drying out or from becoming waterlogged, e.g.
nafural scents used for intraspecific communication.
Other 'scents' produced for commuricafion are those of
against damage from ultraviolet radiation.
the circumanal glands and glands of the anal sacs. The
2. Sensory - the surface of the skin is well supplied with
integument also provides a means of visual communication,
many types of sensory nerve ending to detect temperafure,
 e.g. a dog raises its hackles when threatened, which is seen as
pressure, touch and pain. This assists the body in monitoring
a warning of possible aggression.
its external environment.
3. Secretion - a range of glands wifhin the skin produce secretions
Skin structure
directly on to the skin's surface. These include sebum -
produced by sebaceous glands; sweat - in the cat and dog
The skin is composed of two layers: the epidermis or superficial
sweating only occurs from active sweat glands of the footpads
layer and the underlying dermis (Fig. 12.1). The hypodermis lies
and nose; pheromones - produced by specialised skin glands.
beneath the skin.
144
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
- Stratum corneum -
keratinisation complete
Stratum lucidum -
loss of nuclei
Stratum granulosum -
cells start to flatten
 Stratum germinativum -
with melanocytes
between cells
Hairshaft
Epidermis
Sebaceousgland
Sensory nerve
Arrector
Dermis
pili muscle
Motor nerve
Sweat gland
Vein
Artery
Adipose tissue
Hypodermis
(Subcutaneous
layer)
Fig. I2.I Structure of the skin.
Epidermis
4. Stratum corneum - the most superficial of the epidermal
The epidermis is composed of stratified squamous epithelinm and
layers. The cells have no nuclei and are dead; they are fully
    e     
keratinised and flaftened in shape.
cells are produced in the deepest layers of the epidermis and are
The whole of the epidermis is avascular and receives its supply of
pushed upwards to the surface as a result of mitosis below (see
nutrients from blood vessels within the dermis.
Ch. 1). The surface cells are continually lost and these dead cells
Or squames are seen as scurf in fhe animal's coat. This process
Dermis
replaces the cells that are lost due to friction and wear. The layers,
The dermis is the deep layer of the skin, upon which the epider-
Or strata, of the epidermis are, from deep to superficial:
mis sits (Fig. 12.1). It is composed of dense cornective fissue wifth
irregularly arranged collagen and elastic fibres. The dermis has a
The colour of the skin and overlying hair may not necessarily be the
generous supply of blood vessels, nerves and sensory nerve end-
same and this may be noticed when clipping an area for a surgical
ings. The hair follicles, sebaceous glands and sweat glands also lie
operation. It is interesting to note that the skin of polar bears is
within the dermis but are formed from epidermal cells.
black but the fur is white!
Hypodermis
The hypodermis, or subcutis or subcuticular layer, is not acfu-
1. Stratum basale or germinativum - consists of a single layer of
dividing cells, ie. where the new cells are 'manufactured'.
ally part of the skin, but is a layer of loose connecfive tissue and
Pigmented cells or melanocytes, which contain granules of the
fat lying beneath the dermis. It also contains elastic fibres, which
gives the skin its flexibility. This is evident when we grasp a fold
pigment melanin, may also be present in areas such as the
 nose pad or foofpad or in coloured areas of the body.
of skin on the neck of a dog or cat to 'scruff them. It is the hypo-
dermis into which subcutaneous injections are given.
 2. Stratum granulosum - the cells are flattened and the process
 of infiltration of the cells by the strucfural protein keratin
Skin glands
(known as keratinisation) begins in this layer. Keratin provides
protection in layers that get extra wear, e.g. footpads.
Within the dermis are a range of glands producing secretions
3. Stratum lucidum - the cells lose their nuclei and become clearer.
directly on to the skin surface:
Chapter 12 Common integument
145
Sebaceous glands
Sweat glands
 These are alveolar or saccular glands whose ducts open into the
 Also called sudoriferous glands. These are coiled glands found in
base of the hair follicles. They secrete an oily substance called
the dermis, which are only active on the nose and footpads of
sebum, which forms a waterproof layer on the skin and coat, giving
dogs and cats.
fhe coats'sheen' and making the skin supple.Sebum has an antisep-
fic quality that controls bacterial growth on the skin surface. Some
Mammary glands
of the modified sebaceous glands produce secretions that influence
These are greatly modified, enlarged sweat glands, which secrete
fhe behaviour of another animal. These are known as pheromones
milk for nourishment of the young (see Ch. 11).
and are the'scents' that dogs and cats produce as a means of com-
muricating with other members of their own species.
In areas of the body that are covered in hair, the epidermis of the skin
Modified sebaceous glands include:
may only be a few cells thick, e.g. the skin over the abdomen. However
● Tail glands - these are found on the dorsal surface of the base
in areas unprotected by hair, e.g. the footpads, the epidermis is much
of the tail. Their funcfion is believed to be concerned with
 thicker. This can easily be seen when examining a cut pad.
 individual recognition and identificafion
· Circumanal glands - these are located around the entire
circumference of the anus. They drain into special sweat 
Hair
glands and their secretion is thought to contribute to the
individual smell of a dog
The possession of hair or fur is a distinctive characteristic of
● Anal glands - these lie within the walls of the paired spherical
mammals. It covers the entire body of the dog and cat except
anal sacs, located on eifher side and just below the anus. They
in areas such as the nose and footpads. In other areas, such as
the scrofum and around the ripples, the hair covering is much
 defecation, coating the faeces and serving as a territorial
sparser.
marker
 A hair is a keratinised structure and is produced by a hair fol-
● Circumoral glands - these glands are found on the lips of cats
licle. The visible part of the hair, above the skin's surface, is called
and their secretion is used for territorial marking. This can be
the hair shaft and the part of the hair that lies within the follicle is
observed when a cat rubs its face on objects such as furnifure
called the hair root.
and its owner's legs!
The hair folicle originates from a peg of epidermal cells
● Ceruminous glands - found in the external ear canal, they
that grows down into the underlying dermis, where it forms
secrete cerumen or ear wax
a hair cone over a piece of dermis called the dermal papilla
● Meibomian or tarsal glands - these open on to the eyelids and
(Fig. 12.2). The papilla provides the blood and nerve supply for
 produce the fatfy component of the tear film that moistens the
the growing hair. From the hair cone, the cells keratinise and form
eye.
a hair. As the hair grows up through the epidermis to the skin's
Epidermis
Fig. I2.2 The formation of hair: A Development of the hair
Hair cone
papilla and hair cone. BThe follicle starts to develop.
C Sebaceous gland develops and the developing hair breaks
 Hair papilla
through the skin. D A mature hair follicle with arrector pili muscle.
pue
-Arrector pili muscle
c
D
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
146
surface, the cells at the point of the cone die, forming a channel -
Wool hairs - these form the innermost, soff undercoat. They
the hair follicle. The hair continues to grow until it evenfually dies
are thinner, soffer and shorter than guard hairs and more
and becomes detached from the folicle. Hair growth is cyclical
numerous. Their number flucfuates, especially in winter, as 
and once the hair is shed a new hair follicle develops and a new
they serve to keep the body warm by providing an insulating
hair will start to grow.
layer. The thickness of the wool hairs varies between breeds.
For example, Huskies have a very thick undercoat and are
Moulting
well adapted to extremely cold temperafures; Dobermanns
have a very short outer coat and no undercoat and have poor
The shedding of hair or mon Iting is influenced by the arnual sea-
tolerance of cold weather. There may be a number of wool
sons, particularly the environmental temperafure and day length.
hairs growing from one follicle and these are associated with
Most dogs moult more heavily in the spring and aufumn, while
one guard hair (Fig. 12.3).
cats orly moult heavily in spring, followed by a lighter loss of
● Tactile hairs or vibrissae - these are the 'whiskers'. They are
hair throughout the summer and aufumn. However, pet cats and
dogs are usually kept inside centrally heated houses wifth electric
beyond the rest of the coat. They are specialised hairs that
lighting and this confuses the natural seasonal triggers. Moulting
 s n n   sin  a
can therefore occur to some extent all year round.
follicle is surrounded by nerve endings that are responsive to
mechanical stimuli such as touch or movement and provide
Hair types
sensory informafion from the environment. Tactile hairs are
mostly found on the face, principally on the upper lip and
 There are three major types of hair:
near the eyes. However, they are also found in other areas,
● Guard hairs - these are the thick, long and stiffhairs that form
which vary between species, e.g. the cluster of tactile hairs
the outer protective coat of the animal. They lie closely against
on the carpus of the cat and the tuft of whiskers on a dog's
the skin and sweep uniformly in broad tracts, giving the coat
cheek.
pren8 aun jo amyeu aul auereadde uoouus sh jeo io Sop e jo
hairs gives the coat its waterproof quality. Water 'runs off' the
coat unless the animal is submerged in water for a long fime.
Footpads
This prevents water from penetrating the coat, making the
animal cold
The function of the footpads or digital pads is to protect the
One guard hair grows from each follicle and associated with it
underlying joints and to act as shock absorbers as fhe animal
is a sftrand of smooth muscle called the arrector pili muscle (Fig.
walks or runs. They are covered by thick, pigmented, kerafinised,
12.3). The function of this muscle is to raise the hair from its
hairless epidermis. The surface of the dog's footpads are rough-
resting posiftion, trapping a layer of insulating air. The muscle is
ened by conical papillae, which provide traction during walking.
stimulated to confract by cold temperafures, but the hairs of the
The pads of the cat are much smoother Inside the pad, a digital
neck and back (hackles) in the dog, or those of the tailin the cat,
cushion formed from thickened dermis and faffy vascular tissue
can be raised in response to threat. (In humans, the effect of the
absorbs the impact of the foot hitting the ground at speed. Sweat
arrector pili muscle is seen as 'goosebumps' on the skin.)
glands open to the surface of the pad.
Fig. I2.3 A guard hair and wool hairs in a hair follicle
Sebaceous gland
Arrector pili muscle
Several wool hairs
Follicle of a guard hair
Chapter 12 Common integument
147
The dog and the cat have seven pads on each forepaw (Fig.
Claws
12.4). These are:
Claws are composed of modified keratinised epidermis and form 
including one associated with the dew claw
the horny outer covering of the distal or third phalanx of each
● Metacarpal pad - covering the phalangeal-metacarpal joint; this is
 heart-shaped in the dog and round in the cat 
(Fig. 12.5). Their function is to protect the distal phalanges during
● Carpal pad - or stopper pad; this lies just distal to the carpal
walking and weight bearing and to provide grip. The claws of the
 bones and protects this area when arn animal is rurning at high
dog are thick and strong while those of the cat are finer but much
speed.
sharper and are used as weapons of offence. At rest, the claws of a
pe ped gera  ao - sped aa Ano su md p au
cat are refracted into pockets of skin by elastic ligaments that run
four digital pads (Fig. 12.4).
from the second and third phalanges. When the cat unsheathes its
A Forelimb
B Hindlimb
Fig. I2.4 Footpads on the fore (A) and hindlimb (B) of the dog.
There is no tarsal equivalent of the carpal pad.
Digital pads -
Digital
pads
Metacarpal-
pads
Metatarsal
pad
Digital-
ped
Carpal -
pad
Proximal phalanx
Ungual crest
Fig. I2.5 Structure of a claw.
Claw fold
Dermis
-Coronary
border
Wall
Middle.
phalanx
Ungual
Distal.
process
phalanx
Epidermis-
Sole
Wall
Digital cushion
Distal phalanx
Sole
SECTION 1 The dog and cat
148
in the elastic ligaments.
The claw grows continuously and normal 'wear and tear' usually
 Each claw grows from a specialised region of epidermis
prevents them from growing too long. However, in many dogs the
called the coronary border, which lies underneath a fold of skin
claws can become overgrown and, if left, they can curl round and 
called the claw fold. The claw consists of two hard, laterally com-
 penetrate the pads. Special care should be taken with dew claws, if
 pressed wals with a ventral groove between them filled with
 present, because they are not in contact with the ground and do not
softer horn known as the sole. The vascular dermis or quick lies at
get worn down by walking.
the base of the claw and bleeds if you cut the claws too shorf.
SECTION2
Exotic species
13
Birds 151
14
Mammals 163
15
Reptiles and fish 177
16
The horse 189
This section describes the anafomy physiology of some of the less
common species of animal kept as pets, and of the horse. In some
cases there may be less detail than in Section 1. It is assumed that,
having sfudied the anatomy and physiology of the dog and cat
in details, the sfudent will be able to apply this knowledge and
appreciate both the similarifies and the differences between the
various species.
This page intentionally left blank
SECTION 2 Exotic species
CHAPTER
13
Birds
The birds are a urique group of vertebrates. There are about 8500
● The number of joints in the body is reduced. This is parficularly
known species in the world, all belonging to the class Aves. They
seen in the vertebral column and results in a rigid trunk to
are considered to have evolved about 150 million years ago from
support the action of the flight muscles.
the thickly feathered Archaeopteryx, which links reptiles to birds.
● The neck is long and mobile and contains more cervical
Birds and reptiles have much in common, such as fhe ability to
vertebrae fhan fhe 7 seen in all mammals - there may be as
lay eggs, but no other class of animal has feathers. The posses-
many as 25 in the swan. A long neck makes up for the lack
sion of feathers, and in the majority of species the ability to fly, is
of flexibility in the body and enables the bird to turn its head
the reason for their success. Flight allows them to colonise new
right round, creating the wide range of vision necessary for
habitats, find new sources of food and escape predators. Much
survival, to catch food and to preen all parts of its body.
● The number of caudal vertebrae are reduced and fused
the air.
forming the tail or pygostyle. Some flight feathers are attached
to the tail and play an important part in flight, balance and
Musculoskeletal system
which is essenfial for keeping feathers oiled and healthy.
The skeleton of the bird (Fig. 13.1) is unlike that of any other
● There is a single body cavity, i.e. birds have no diaphragm
dividing the thorax and abdomen.
group of animals and it has developed from the evolution of pow-
ered flight. A combination of a reduction in the total number of
● There is no floor to the pelvic cavity, which makes the pelvis
bones and the fusion of many joints has resulted in a skeleton thaf
more distensible to facilitate the passage of eggs to the outside.
provides a strong base for the aftachment of the flight muscles.
Egg laying enables birds to reproduce without the need to
Although the skeleton must be light enough to enable the down-
carry the developing fetus around internally. This would
ward force of the wing to liff the bird into the air and to keep if
increase the body weight and severely restrict the ability to fly.
airborne, when compared to mammals of a similar size birds are
not exceptionally light.
Head (Fig. 13.3)
·● A lightweight beak covering the mandible replaces the teeth
Main features
and reduces the weight of the skeleton. Each species has a
characteristic beak shape, which is adapted to its eating habits.
Bone structure
● Befween the mandible and skull is the quadrate bone, which
● To lighten the skeleton the cortex of the bone is much thinner
 makes dislocation of the jaw very unlikely.
than in mammalian bones and many long bones are hollow.
● Many birds also have a joint known as the craniofacial hinge
Internally, lightweight struts create a honeycombed interior
between the upper beak and the skull. This increases the
and reinforce the bones (Fig. 13.2).
mobility of the beak during feeding.
 pe s an  o emn e  si ho a 
with air contained in membranous air sacs fhat connect with
the respiratory system. These cut down the weight of the
with visual information, the eyes connect with large optic
skeleton and so aid flight. The number of pneumatic bones
lobes in the brain.
 is reduced in diving birds as they restrict the ability to stay
under water.
Leg and foot
● Some of the bones are fused, forming a tibiotarsus and a
Skeleta! modifications
tarsometatarsus, but the stifle joint is similar to that seen in
● The sternum is extended into a laterally flatftened kee!
 mammals.
(Fig. 13.1), which provides a large surface area for the
● Most of the muscles of the leg lie high up on the leg or on
aftachment of the major flight muscles. These are the pectora!
the body itself and control movements by means of long
muscles responsible for the powerful down stroke and the
tendons.
supracoracoid muscle responsible for the upstroke. Flighfless
● A digital flexor tendon (Fig. 13.4) runs in a funnel behind
birds, e.g. ostriches and emus, do not have a keel.
the intertarsal joint and supplies each of the digits. It is
● To counteract the action of the flight muscles and to support 
 responsible for bringing about the perching reflex, seen when a
the wings a large bone, the coracoid, lies between the keel and
bird lands on a branch: the toes automatically flex and tighten
each shoulder joint (Fig. 13.1).
 On the branch, preventing the bird from falling off.
SECTION 2 Exotic species
152
Alula (first digit)
Major metacarpal
Orbit
Second digit
Upper mandible
Lower mandible
Wlna
Radius
Cervical vertebrae
Coracoid
Thoracic vertebrae
Uncinate process
Synsacrum
Sternum
Coccygeal
vertebrae
Pygostyle
Complete rib
Ischium
Tibiotarsus
Pubis
Femur
Hallux
Fig. I3.I Skeleton of a typical bird (hawk). (VWith permission from Colville T, Bassett JM 200l Clinical anatomy
and physiology for veterinary technicians. Mosby St Louis, MO, p 355.)
● Most birds have three toes pointing forwards and one
pointing backwards; however, parrots have two toes pointing
Wing
forwards and two backwards.
● The bones of each forelimb (Fig. 13.5) are reduced to a
· The shape of the feet reflects the lifestyle of the species: e.g.
humerus, a separate radius and ulna, fused carpal and
 ducks have webbed feet for swimming; raptors have strong
metacarpal bones and two digits:
 talons for catching and killing their prey.
O Digit 3: the main digif is affached to the fused metacarpal
bones and carries the primary feathers
Cortex
O Digit I: forms the alula or bastard wing and carries a few
Hollow centre
feathers. It is essential for controlling take-off and landing.
● Most of the wing muscles are found on the body or at the
Bony struts
proximal end of the wing and long tendons aftached lower
down the wing control movement. If the flight muscles were
Fig. I3.2 Longitudinal section through an avian long bone. The bony
 struts serve to strengthen the bone.
flight.
Chapter 13 Birds
153
Frontal area
the vane consists of barbs and interlocking barbules. These hook
together to form a flaftened, wind-resistant surface.
les5N
/lnterorbital
The feathers must be kept clean in order to function effectively.
aperture
septum
Birds constantly groom themselves to 'zip up' the barbules and to
which keeps the feathers waterproof.
Parietal
 There are several types of feather (Fig. 13.6):
Maxilla
area
● Flight feathers - long rigid feathers attached to the wing and
the tail:
Occipital
O Primaries: aftached to digit 3 and to the fused metacarpal
area
bones (Fig. 13.5). Usually 11 feathers but number varies
with species; provide the major thrust during flight
O Secondaries: aftached to the ulna; shorter than the primaries
Middle ear
● Contour or covert feathers - cover the rest of the wing and the
area
outermost layer of the body to produce a smooth outline;
shorter and more flexible; the lower part of the vane (closest to
Dentary
Zygomatic arch
Quadrate
the skin) is fluffy.
Fig. I3.3 The anatomy of the bird skull (barn owl).
● Filoplume and down feathers - lie close to the body underneath
the contour feathers, forming an insulating layer; they have
 no barbs so they are fluffy. Filoplume is designed to break up,
● In cross-section the wing is slightly curved from front to back
creating dust that absorbs sweat and dirt and keeps the bird
forming an 'aerofoil' shape. This creates lift as the bird flaps its
clean.
wings.
Feathers
Birds always shed dust from their feathers and this may be a source
of pathogens. The zoonotic respiratory disease psittacosis is caused
Feathers are the distinctive feafure of members of the class Aves.
by the microorganism Chlamydophila (formerly Chlarmydia) psittaci
They develop from epidermal cells in a similar way to the hairs of
and is spread by feather and faecal dust. Avoid inhaling dust from
mammals and the scales of reptiles. Feathers are made of keratin
 suspected cases.
and create a strong but lightweight covering over the wing and
the body.
Moulting
All feathers have a similar strucfure (Fig. 13.6). The cenfral shaft
 Adult birds moult once a year, usually after the breeding season.
or rachis is filled with blood capillaries during growth but later, as
the feather mafures, it becomes hollow. On either side of the shaft,
The old feathers are lost over a period and during this time the
 birds are vulnerable: flight is affected and processes such as egg
  n    s   
ment, increases. Any nutritional deficiency may result in stunted
feather growth or poor colouration. Feathers are used for flight,
Tibiotarsus
for insulation and, in some species, for display. Captive birds may
 be kept for their beauty and for showing.
-Digital flexor
tendon
When handling birds it is essential that the feathers are not damaged.
They are only replaced at the next moult so the ability to fly may 
be seriously impaired, while the owner may be annoyed that their
appearance has been affected.
When preparing birds for surgery, avoid plucking the feathers as this
will affect the bird's ability to keep warm until the next moult. Damp the
feathers with water or spirit and part them to reveal the skin.
Flight
Most of the surface of the wing is covered with flight feathers,
Iarsometatarsus
 a s s si h as s  e 
sal surface being longer and convex and the venfral surface shorter
 and more concave. This aerofoil shape generates maximum liff
and minimum drag as the wing moves through the air. Air pass-
ing over the dorsal surface has to travel faster than the air passing
Fig. I3.4 Intertarsal joint in the avian leg. The digital flexor tendon runs
under the wing, resulting in lower pressure over the dorsal sur-
 in a tunnel within the metatarsal bone. It attaches to the caudal aspect of
face, which generates liff. The lift force must equal the weight of
the digits and is important in the perching reflex
the bird if flight is to occur.
SECTION 2 Exotic species
154
Phalanges
Primary wing
feathers
Radius
Ulna
Feather shafts
Humerus
Secondary wing
Coracoid
feathers
Clavicle
Contour feathers
<eel (sternum)
Ribs
Fig. I3.5 Bird in fight showing the structure of the wing (forelimb)
In gliding flight the wing is held still and at a low angle so that
 of the wing and the formation of slots between the feathers, e.g.
the bird gradually loses height. Birds such as the albatross acfu-
 separation of the primary feathers and the alula allows some air
ally lose very litfle height because of the size and shape of the
through, which maintains a smooth air flow on the dorsal surface,
wing and because they make constant adjustments to the angle
thus increasing lift. If the angle of tilt is greater than 15° then lift
of the leading edge. Species suich as the vulfure and the buzzard
is reduced and the bird stalls or falls out of the sky.
make use of thermals or upwards warm air currents which allow
Wing shape affects the type and speed of flight. Soaring birds
them to soar and gain height.
 such as the albatross or buzzard have broad wings that maximise
In flapping or powered flight the bird's body is held almost
 liff while the wings of many garden birds are short and allw
stationary and the wings are moved rhythmically up and down
rapid bursts of flapping flight. The wings tips of the buzzard are
 to generate forward thrust as well as lift. The main power is pro-
 slotted to reduce turbulence while the feathers on the edge of a
 vided by the large pectoral muscles, which extend from the keel
barn owl's wing are fringed to reduce the noise of the wingbeat as
to the humerus and make up to 20% of the body mass. In strong
the bird approaches its prey.
fliers such as the pigeon the muscles are deep red because of
Chapter 13 Birds
155
Barb
Hooklet
Rachis
Barbule
Vane
A
Fig. I3.6 A General structure of a feather: B Four types of feather: I Primary and contour; 2 Down; 3 Filoplume. (Adapted with permission from
Colville T, Bassett JM 200l Clinical anatomy and physiology for veterinary technicians. Mosby St Louis, MO, p 347.)
their high myoglobin content and their good blood supply. In
and the hind- and midbrains are similar to those of mammals.
species such as the domestic fowl and the turkey the muscles
The parts of the forebrain differ because the bird needs a different
are almost white and are capable of producing powerful bursts 
of flight that only last for a short time.
centres for sight (optic lobes) and hearing (cerebellum) are well
At take-off maximum lift is helped by running or by launching
developed while those for touch, smell (olfactory bulbs) andl taste
 from a branch. To land the tailis used as a brake and the wings are
are small and underdeveloped.
extended into the stall posifion. The legs are extended to absorb
the force of the impact and in perching birds the flexor tendons
Main features
confract as the foot grasps the branch.
Sight
Special senses
This is a highly developed sense and is essenfial if the bird is
 going to be able to fly at high speed and/or altitude, search for
The avian brain is larger in proportion to its body than that of
food, escape from predators and find a mate. The optic lobes are
large and occupy the majority of the midbrain (Fig. 13.7) and
all other vertebrates except mammals (Fig. 13.7). The basic divi-
much of the skullis adapted to housing and protecting the large
sion of the brain into fore-, mid- and hindbrain can be identified
 eyes. The orbits determine the shape of the eye, which in diur-
nal species can be round, e.g. in hawks, or flat, e.g. in swans. In
Olfactory
Cerebral hemisphere
bulb (olfactory
nocfurnal species, the eye may be tubular and the pupil is larger
control centre)
in relation to the refina, enabling more light to be gathered af
night.
The eyes fill the orbits, leaving room for few eye muscles
associated with movement. Birds have to move their heads
Cerebellum
the eyes on the head varies according to feeding habits: pred-
ators such as owls and hawks have forward-pointing eyes
centre)
 producing binocular vision but a reduced size of visual field,
 e      
monocular vision but a wide visual field in which to locate
 predators.
Optic nerve -
The strucfure of the eye (Fig. 13.8) is similar to that of mam-
mals but wifh a few differences:
Optic lobe
(vision control
Medulla
1. The sclera forms the outermost protective layer and continues
centre)
in the front of the eye as the transparent cornea. At the
Fig. I3.7 Lateral view of a bird's brain. (VVith permission from Colville T.
junction of the cornea and sclera is a ring of small bones
known as the sclerotic ring, which reinforces the relatively
dans. Mosby St Louis, MO, p 359.)
large circumference of the eye.
SECTION 2 Exotic species
156
Hearing
In some species of diving bird, the nictitating membrane has a clear
'window' in its centre. This is thought to act as a form of 'contact
The strucfure of the ear is simpler than in the mammal. The ears are
lens' to aid vision under water.
found on the sides of the head just behind and slightly below the eyes.
There are no external ear pinnae in any species - birds such as the eagle 
owl that appear to have ears actually only have fufts of feathers
The ear consists of the external ear, which collects sound and
 As birds can control the size of the pupil voluntarily, the pupillary
carries it to the middle ear This is a single bone, the columella,
light response or pupilary reflex is not a good diagnostic indicator of
which transmits sound to the inner ear. The inner ear is simi
 brain or eye function.
lar to that of mammals and comprises the membranous canals
responsible for balance and the cochlea responsible for hearing.
 2. The cornea is protected by an upper and lower eyelid and
Nocfurnal species have an extremely well-developed sense
a nictitating membrane, similar to the third eyelid seen in
fhe dog and cat. This is thin and transparent and washes
ness. Barn owls, Tyto alba, in particular, have asymmetrical exter-
nal ear openings (which help in the vertical location of sound),
 striated muscle so the bird is able to move the membrane
large eardrums, columellae and cochleae and a large acoustic cen-
voluntarily.
tre in the hindbrain.
 3. The iris is formed by striated muscle in confrast to the smooth
Taste
muscle of the mammalian iris. This enables the bird to confrol
the size of the pupil voluntarily.
This is a poorly developed sense in birds and experiments have
 4. The vitreous humour in the posterior chamber of the eye is
species-specific. There are relatively few taste buds and they are
similar to that of mammals but contains a ribbon-like strucfure
distributed around the sides of the tongue and soft palate.
aftached to the retina known as the pecten (Fig. 13.8). This is
 fhought to provide nutrition for the inner strucfures of the eye.
Smel!
5. The retina contains photoreceptor cells - rods for night vision
Litfle is known about the avian sense of smell but it is thought to
 and cones for day and colour vision. Nocturnal birds have
vary between species. In passerines and birds of prey it is very
more rods than diurnal birds. Avian vision is superior to that 
 of mammals for several reasons:
 odour that stimulates the males to breed. Other species, e.g. quail
O The photoreceptor cells are much thicker than those of any
and albafross, lse the sense of smell to locate food.
ofher vertebrate and result in a much more highly defined
Touch
image
The skin is supplied with sensory nerve endings fhat are sensi-
O In mammals, each nerve cell is connected to several
tive to heat, cold, pain and touch. Touch may be used to find
connected to an individual bipolar nerve cell so that each
food and touch-sensifive endings are found around the beak and
rod or cone is represented individually in the brain
mouth. Others are found at the base of the feathers and enable
 O The retina has a relatively poor blood supply, as blood
the bird to respond to the smallest movement of its feathers.
vessels interfere with the passage of light to the retina.
Respiratory system
The respiratory system of birds (Fig. 13.9) is very different from
Cornea-
that of mammals and is thought to be 10 times more efficient. Ift
Anterior chamber-
-Lens
is adapted to meet the needs of the bird when flying at speed and
Posterior chamber-
Iris
at high altitudes, where oxygen levels are low, without the bird 
losing consciousness. There are three main feafures:
Ciliary body-
● There is no diaphragm dividing the body cavity into thorax
Sclerotic
and abdomen
ring
e wm  Aau se puedxa jou op pue pro Aey are sum au 
● All free spaces in the body cavity and within the major bones,
e.g. femur and humerus, are filled with membranous air sacs
Sclera
connected to the respiratory system.
Choroid
Retina
   s  s  d e    s 
nasal cavity, and also through the mouth. Some birds have a cleff 
Pecten
in the hard palate known as the choana connecting the oral and
Vitreous
nasal cavifies. The nasal cavifies contain several muicosa-covered
conchae, which help to warm and filter the inspired air.
Opticnerve
Central fovea
Some diving birds do not have external nares as this would allow
water to enter the airways during diving. They normally rely on
Fig. I3.8 Structure of the avian eye. (With permission from Colville T,
mouth breathing. If the beak is tied to prevent the bird from pecking
Areuaa jo oosud pue kwoeue reu lo wf nassg
during treatment, there is a risk of asphyxiation.
technicians. Mosby St Louis, MO, p 360.)
Chapter 13 Birds
157
Syrinx
Lung
Air sac
Trachea
Cervical air sac
Interclavicular air sac
Syrinx
Air sac in hu
Anterior
Posterior thoracic air sac
Abdominal air sa
Fig. I3.9 The respiratory system of the bird in situ (A) and removed from the body (B)
 A d n r o n  s  n ssd 
into a complex larynx. It travels down the trachea to the point
 Birds are easily intubated for anaesthesia as the glottis at the base
where the trachea divides into right and leff primary bronchi. At 
of the tongue is easy to see. Always use an urcuffed tube to prevent
this point there is a swelling known as the syrinx, whose size and
rupture of the incomplete tracheal rings. The caudal air sacs may
shape varies with the species. The combined effect of air pass-
also be intubated after induction by injection or by mask, in cases 
where oral or beak surgery is to be performed.
sounds associated with the species.
SECTION 2 Exotic species
158
The primary bronchi lead into the relatively dense lungs.
 As their respiratory system is so effcient, birds react rapidly to
closely applied to the dorsal body wall. Within the lung tissue the
 inhalation anaesthetics and anaesthesia may lighten or deepen much
bronchi divide into further smaller bronchi and into cylindrical
parallel tubes known as parabronchi. Air capillaries surrounded
more quickly than is expected.
by pulmonary blood capillaries perforate the walls of the para-
 bronchi and it is here that gaseous exchange takes place. This pro-
● Inspiration - air passes through the lungs and either enters:
cess is the same as occurs in mammals.
 O The caudal air sacs and inflates them, or 
 Leading from various bronchi wifhin the lungs are thin-walled
O The parabronchi, where gaseous exchange takes place; this
air sacs. Most birds have nine air sacs, which penetrate the spaces
air then passes into the cranial air sacs and inflates them.
 of the body cavity and the inside of many bones (Fig. 13.9). They
·Expiration
 are not involved in gaseous exchange and they are thought to act
 O The abdominal muscles contract, squeezing air from the
 as a reservoir of air and to have a bellows-effect, pushing air back
caudal air sacs back into the parabronchi, where further
through the lungs. They also lighten the weight of the skeleton
gaseous exchange takes place
and so aid flight.
O Air in the cranial air sacs passes straight through the lungs
and out.
Respiration
During respiration air circulates continuously and passes
Circulatory system
        
Occurs during the second passage. This system ensures that the
The circulatory system follows a similar plan to that of the mam-
mal. In order to provide for the high metabolic rate of the bird,
efficiency.
the heart in parficular must be able to pump the blood to deliver
Lung
Fig. I3.10 Diagram to show the passage of air through the
lungs and air sacs during respiration. A Inspiration. B Expiration.
Paleopulmonic
Neopulmonic
parabronchi
parabronchi
Cranial
air sacs
Caudal
Primary bronchi
air sacs
Trachea
passing through lung
A
Lung
Paleopulmonic
 Neopulmonic
parabronchi
parabronchi
air sacs
Caudal
Primary bronchi
air sacs
Trachea
passing through lung
B
Chapter 13 Birds
159
oxygen and nutrients to the tissues quickly and efficiently. In a
waste products, or into the caudal vena cava and so to the
resting chicken blood takes only 6 seconds to travel around the
heart
body.
● There is a large blood supply to the flight muscles and wings
via the pectoral and brachial arteries
Main features
● Heat loss from the legs and feet of many terrestrial and aquatic
species is reduced by a counter-current system of blood vessels
Heart
in the lower limbs. Body heat in the arteries of the limbs is
This is a four-chambered pump lying in the cranial part of the
transferred to the blood refurning to the heart in the veins,
thoracoabdominal cavify. It is covered in a pericardial sac fhat 
which lie paralll to the arteries. This means that the legs and
sticks to some of the internal surfaces to hold the heart in place.
feet are kept cool, reducing the temperafure gradient between
the blood and the external air, so less heat is lost from areas
Circulation
that are not insulated by feathers.
The arrangement of the arteries, veins and capillaries (Fig. 13.11)
is similar to that of mammals wifh the following differences:
Intravenous injections or blood sampling can be carried out using the
● Renal portal system - valves at the junction of the iliac veins
brachial or basilic vein on the medial side of the wing close to the
with the caudal vena cava can divert blood refurning from the
elbow joint, the jugular vein in the neck and the medial metatarsal
 caudal end of the body either into the kidneys, so excreting
vein on the caudal aspect of the leg (Fig. 13.1 2).
Carotid artery
Jugular vein
Brachiocephalic artery
Subclavian artery
Pectoral artery
Subclavian vein
Brachial artery
Pectoral vein
Ulnar artery
Radial artery
Aorta
Coeliac artery
Anterior vena cava
Anterior mesenteric artery
Renal artery-
Hepatic vein
Gastric vein
Femoral artery
Anterior
mesenteric vein
Common
iliac vein
Posterior
mesenteric
vein
Exterioriliacartery
Ischiatic artery
Interior
iliac vein
Pudendal artery-
Sacral vein
Fig. I3.I I The avian circulatory system.
160
SECTlON 2 Exotic species
Oesophagus
Live
Crop
Proventriculus
Spleer
Bile ducts -
Gizzard
Pancreas
Pancreatic
sionp
Fig. I3.12 Extended wing of a bird showing the brachial or basilic vein
 on the medial side of the wing.
Blood
Caecum
Intestine
different from those of mammals but similar to those of reptiles.
Digestive system
Cloaca
The basic paftern of the digestive tract is much the same between
Fig. I3. 13 Digestive system of the pigeon.
species of birds and the upper part shows adaptaftions for flight (Fig.
13.13). The majority of the tract is suspended between the wings in
fhe body cavity to centralise the weight, enabling the bird to keep its
 balance and remain stable in flight without the use of a long tail.
Stomach
Food passes into the stomach, which has two parts:
Main features
1. Proventriculus - lined by gastric glands which secrete pepsin,
Oral cavity
hydrochloric acid and mucus. Here food is stored and mixed
with these digestive juices.
The teeth, heavy jaw bones and muscles have been replaced by a
beak and lighter bones and muscles. Birds are unable to chew their
2. Gizzard (ventriculus) - thick-walled muscular organ in
food but can manipulate it and break it into small pieces using the
which mechanical digestion occurs. By means of powerful
beak and the tongue. The shape of the beak varies according to spe-
contractions the food is ground up and mixed with the
cies and is suited to the particular food type (Fig. 13.14). Salivary
digestive juices. The presence of grit in the diet helps the
glands are present in most species and the saliva contains mucus.
physical break-up of the food. In species that feed on softer or
liquid foods the gizzard is mainly a storage organ.
enzyme amylase. Taste buds are found towards the back of the oral
cavify and their strucfure is similar to those in other species.
Oesophagus and crop
Food passes down the oesophagus on the right side of the neck
into the crop (Fig. 13.13). The oesophagus is thin-walled and dis-
tensible to allow the passage of relatively large pieces of food. The
crop is a diverfticulum of the oesophagus, lying outside the body
cavity on the right side of the crarial thoracic inlet. It varies in size
and shape according to the diet of the species - grain-eating birds
  s e s  am o p a a
may be rudimentary or absent.
 The crop is principally a storage organ but in some species, e.g.
doves and pigeons, the epithelial lining proliferates and sloughs
under the influence of the hormone prolactin to produce ‘crop
 milk. This is rich in proteins and fat and is used to feed the young
for the first few days affter hatching.
Fig. I3.I4 Differences in beak shape between species.
Chapter 13 Birds
161
Small intestine
 Ruptured
Food leaves fhe gizzard by the pylorus and enters the small
ovarian follicle
Immature ovum
intestine, which consists of a duodenum and ileum (Fig. 13.13).
of ovary
Beyond this there is no clear delineation into different parts. The
pancreas, consisting of three lobes, lies in the duodenal loop and
pours its secretions into the duodenum via three ducts. The liver
is bilobular and relatively large and some species, e.g. chickens,
Infundibulum or
funnel of oviduct
ducks and geese, have a gallbladder.
Aquatic species of bird that ingest slippery fish have relatively poorly
developed salivary glands while those species eating a dry diet have 
well-developed glands.
Magnum
Lorge intestine
Qf the small and large intestines, a rectum and a cloaca. Bacterial diges-
     e     s 
sthmus
rous and granivorous species and owls but are rudimenfary or absent 
in carnivorous and nectivorous species, e.g. hawks and parrots.
The recfum is short and terminates at the cloaca - the common
exit from the body cavity shared with the urinary and reproduc-
tive systems.
Uterus
Urinary system
This consists of a pair of symmetrical kidneys lying in a depres-
sion of the fused pelvic bones (Figs 13.15, 13.16). A pair of ureters
Vagina
carries urine to the outside via the cloaca. There is no bladder in
 the bird. The kidneys are relatively larger than those of mammals 
and occupy about 2% of body weight.
 Birds excrete nitrogenous waste resulting from protein metab-
olism in the form of uric acid and urates. This is similar to reptiles
Opening of oviduct -
but different from mammals, which excrete nitrogenous waste as
into cloaca
urea. The waste materials are suspended in urinary water result-
ing from glomerular filtration and the resulting semi-solid urine
Fig. I3.15 Reproductive tract of the hen.
leaves the kidneys via the ureters. In the cloaca it mixes with fae-
cal material from the digestive tract. The material then moves
by refroperistalsis into the recfum where further reabsorpfion of
 Domestic poultry have been selectively bred to lay eggs over
water takes place, eventually producing a small volume of 'drop-
e A m snq m ra iad sam ot r en - sad 
pings'. Normal bird droppings (Fig. 13.17) consist of white ura-
clutch of eggs of a size appropriate to their species and then begin
tes and greeny-brown faeces surrounded by clear urine.
incubation.
The ovum is carried away down the left oviduct by peristal-
Many species of marine bird have a solt glond that enables them to deal 
tic contractions. The oviduct is divided into distinct regions, each
with a salt water environment. In most birds it is located above the
one of which contributes to the final egg:
eye and secretes large quantities of sodium chloride. In this way the
1. Infundibulum - the funnel-shaped end of the oviduct that
osmotic concentration of the body fluids is maintained within normal
engulfs the ovum, prevenfting it from falling into the body
limits. Terrestrial species rely on the kidneys to regulate salt levels.
cavify. Fertilisation takes place here and the first layer of
albumen is added.
 2. Magnum - the largest and most glandular part of the oviduct.
Reproductive system
The majority of the albumen is added here.
 3. Isthmus - the walls consist of a thick layer of circular muscle.
Female
Inner and outer shell membranes are formed here.
4. Shell gland or uterus - the walls consist of longifudinal muscle
The tract comprises a pair of ovaries and oviducts leading to the
lined with goblet cells. The egg takes up salts and water into
cloaca (Fig. 13.15). However, in many species it is only the leff
side that is fully developed and functional, the right side being
the albumen and the shell membranes become calcified.
Calification occurs over about 15 hours and pigmentafion is
vestigial. Ova develop within the ovarian fissue and consist of an
added during the final 5 hours.
 s  s s q s    
the breeding season one ovum is released af approximately 24
The completed egg passes through a sphincter muscle into the
hour intervals until the clutch is complete.
vagina and then to the outside via the cloaca.
SECTION 2 Exotic species
162
Male
The tract comprises a pair of testes, each one connected to the clo-
Testis
aca by a vas deferens (Fig. 13.16). The testes lie inside the body cav-
ify and are aftached to the body wall cranial to the kidneys. In
seasonal breeders, the size and weight of fhe testes may increase
during the active breeding season.
Kidney
Spermatozoa are produced within the seminiferous tubules of
the testes and pass through a series of convoluted tubules to the
ductus deferens, where they are stored. Mafure sperm are trans-
 ported to the cloaca by a vas deferens leading from each testis.
Within the cloaca is a modified area of tissue forming a phal-
Ureter
during mating. In many species semen is transferred into the
the everted cloaca of the female. Species such as ducks, geese,
ostrich and rhea have a well-developed phallus that is capable
Ductus
of erection to introduce sperm directly into the female cloaca.
deferens
Sexual differentiation
It is not always easy to differentiate between the sexes of birds
but in some cases, e.g. captive breeding programmes for endan-
Seminal vesicle
gered species, if may be important to be able to do this. The value
mox Aq pasearo aq Aeu 'soed are 8'a 'spads auos go
Cloaca
the sex of an individual.
There are several methods available, which depend on fhe
species:
Fig. I3.I6 Urogenital system of the male bird.
● Sexual dimorphism, i.e. the two sexes exhibit a different coloured
plumage. This differenfiation is only possible in some species:
O Sexually mafure female budgerigars have a pinky-brown
cere above fheir beaks while the cere of the male is blue
 O Female cockatiels have horizontal bars on the underside of
the tail; the male loses these at about 1 year old
 O Mallard drakes have an iridescent blue-green head and a
Faeces (dark green-brown
maroon breast; the female's head is brown and her feathers
but may vary)
are a speckled brown with a blue wing patch 
O The adult male pheasant has a red face, green head and a
long pointed tail; the female is smaller with mottled brown
plumage
● DNA testing - using a blood sample or cells taken from a
WWhite and semi-solid urates
growing feather
● Surgical sexing - the gonads within the body cavify are
Urine (clear liquid may
anaesthetic, it is less frequently performed than DNA testing.
absorb into substrate)
 It is the female bird that determines the sex of the offspring rather
Fig. I3.17 Components of bird droppings.
than the male as in mammals.
SECTION 2 Exotic species
CHAPTER
14
Mammals
The rabbit (Oryctolagus cunniculus)
claw, those of the hind feet being long and straight. The feet are
entirely covered in fur and there are no foofpads.
 Rabbits belong to the mammalian order Lagormorpha. They were
When fhe rabbit is at rest, the enfire plantar surface of the
hind limb from toes to hock rests on the ground. When grazing.
originally classified wifh species such as rats, mice and ham-
among a group of rabbits there will always be one or two stand-
sters as members of the order Rodenfia because they all have
 ing upright on their hind legs, watching for predators. If danger
chisel-shaped incisors that are open-rooted and continue to grow
m on  a u s p  d m  sn
throughout the arimal's life. However, rabbits have fwo pairs of
the others. Both of these behavioural pafterns can be seen in pet
upper incisors while rodents have orly one pair, leading to the
reclassification of rabbits (and the related hares and pikas) as lag-
rabbits. Rabbits have short fluffy tails wifh white undersides. As
the rabbit runs the white colourafion 'flashes' to warn the rest of
omorphs. Rabbits are burrowing herbivorous animals that live in
the group of possible danger.
 Aq n prd Aai ae Au 's o a
and much of their anatomy is adapted to sensing danger and
making a rapid escape.
Musculoskeletal system
Tables 14.1 and 14.2 give physiological and reproductive
The skeleton of the rabbit (Fig. 14.1) is delicate and makes up only
parameters for rabbits.
7-8% of the body weight. This is in confrast to the skeleton of the
cat, which makes up 12-13% of body weight. The cortex of the
Morphology
caged rabbits may additionally develop osteoporosis from lack of
The wild European rabbit, Oryctolagus cuniculus, from which all
exercise and low calcium intake.
our modern breeds are derived, weighs about 2.5kg and is cov-
ered in brown ticked fur, often described as agouti-coloured. This
colouration creates a dappled effect, which breaks up the outline
When handling all rabbits, particular care must be taken to prevent
and helps camouflage the individual. Selective breeding has led
struggling which may result in fractured limbs or spine.
to the development of about 50 breeds of domestic rabbit ranging
in weight from 1-8kg, with a variety of fur texfures and colours,
The number of vertebrae in each part of the vertebral column
many of which would be unsuitable for life in the wild.
is: C7, T12-13, L7, S4, Cd16.
The head is rounded, with long, black-tipped upright ear pin-
nae set high on either side. They are large, representing approxi-
There are a few differences between the skeleton of the rabbit
and that of the cat:
mately 12% of the body surface, and very vascular, which enables
● The scapula is more sharply triangular and has a pronounced
fhem to be used as a means of thermoregulation. The pinnae are
hook-shaped suprahamate process on the acromion (Fig. 14.2)
exfremely mobile and are designed to pick up sounds of danger.
The lop breeds of rabbit have been developed to have ears that
● The acetabulum or socket of the hip joint comprises the ilium,
hang downwards.
ischium and an accessory bone, the os acetabuli. The pubis is
The eyes are protuberant and set on either side of the head,
not involved in the formation of this socket, as is seen in the caf
providing a wide range of monocular vision to detect predators.
● In the forelimb the radius and ulna are completely fused; in the
Rabbits are crepuscular, ie. active at dawn and dusk, and their
cat they are separate bones
● In the hindlirmb the fibula is half the length of the tibia and is
fused with it; in the cat they are separate bones
trum, which enables the rabbit to nibble grass very short.
● Rabbit muscle is also a much paler pink than the muscle of
Mafure female rabbits develop a large fold of skin under the
cats.
chin known as the dewlap from which they pull fur to line their
nests before giving birth. The skin of the rabbit is well supplied
Digestive system
be found under fhe chin, at fhe anus and on either side of the
Rabbits are herbivorous and have been likened to liffle horses' in
perineum.
that both the rabbit and the horse are hindgut fermenters, i.e. the
The forelegs are relatively short and used for digging, while the
main chamber for the breakdown of plant material is part of the
hind legs are longer and provide the propulsive force for the char-
large intestine. Urlike the horse, however, the digestive system
acteristic hopping method of locomotion. They also kick the earth
 of the rabbit allows for rapid passage of food through the tract
away when the rabbit is digging its burrow. There are five toes on
and rapid elimination of fibre. This has enabled the body size and
each forepaw and four on each hind foot. Each toe ends in a sharp
weight of the rabbit to remain small, which allows the animal to
SECTION 2 Exotic species
164
Table I4.1 Physiological and behavioural parameters of rabbits and small rodents
Rabbit
Chinchilla
Chipmunk
Gerbil
Guinea pig
Golden
Mouse
Rat
hamster
 Average lifespan 
6-8
10
2-6
5-5
4-8
2-3
2-3
314
(years)
Adult weight (g)
1000-8000
400-600
70-120
50-60
750-1000
100
20-40
400-800
 Body temp. (°C)
38.3
38.0-39.0
38.0
37.4-39.0
38.6
36.2-37.5
37.5
38.0
 Respiratory rate
35-60
40-80
70
90-140
90-150
74
100-250
70-150
(breaths/min)
Pulse rate (beats/
220
100-150
120
250-500
130-190
280-412
500-600
260-450
min)
 Dietary habits 
Herbivorous;
Herbivorous;
Omnivorous;
Omnivorous;
Herbivorous; 
Omnivorous;
Omnivorous;
Omnivorous;
coprophagic
coprophagic
coprophagic
coprophagic
 needs vitamin 
 coprophagic
coprophagic 
coprophagic
C; coprophagic
Natural behaviour  Social; 
 Social;
Social; diurnal
Social;
Social; diurnal
 Solitary;
 Social;
 Social;
 crepuscular
 nocturnal
nocturnal
nocturnal
 nocturnal
Table I4.2 Reproductive data relating to rabbits and small rodents
Rabbit
Chinchilla
Chipmunk
Gerbil
Guinea pig
Golden
Mouse
Rat
hamster
 Reproductive 
No true
 Seasonally
 Seasonally
 Polyoestrous 
Polyoestrous
Polyoestrous 
 Polyoestrous
 Polyoestrous
 pattern 
cestrous
 polyoestrous:
 polyoestrous:
 breeds from 
 breeds from 
November to
March to
March
 September 
Length of 
Every 4
30-35 days
skep t1
46 days
15-16 days
Every 4 days
45 days
4-5 days
sAep
cycle
Type of
Ihduced:
Spontaneous
 Spontaneous 
 Spontaneous 
 Spontaneous
 Spontaneous
 Spontaneous 
 Spontaneous
 ovulation
oCcurs
within 10
hours of
ma ting
Gestation
28-32
28-32
24-26
15-18
19-21
20-22
(skep) pouad 
Average litter
2-7
2-3
2-6
3-6
2-6
3-7
6-12
6-12
size
Type of
 Altricial 
Precocial
 Altricial
 Altricial
 Precocial
 Altricial
Altricial
 Altricial
 young at birth 
Weaning age
46
618
6-7
314
314
314
18 days
3
(weeks)
Age of sexual
5-8
8months
12 months 
10-12 weeks
6-10 weeks
6-10 weeks
3-4 weeks 
 5-6 weeks
 months 
Chapter 14 Mammals
165
Triangular scapula
Skull
Femui
Mandible
 Suprahumate process
Pelvis
Humerus
Acetabulum
 Fused radius and ulna
 Fused fibula and tibia
Short fibula fused to tibia
Fig. I4.I Skeleton of the rabbit showing main features.
show the speed and agility necessary to escape predators. By con-
Oral cavity
trast, in the horse, fibre remains in the gut for some time, neces-
 The opening of the mouth is small, the tongue is relatively large
sitating the evolution of a large-volumed fermentation chamber
and the oral cavity is long and curved, making examination of
and consequenfly a large body size (see Ch. 16). The digestive fract
of the rabbit (Fig. 14.3) is relatively long and makes up 10-20% of
teeth (Fig. 14.4) are open-rooted and grow continuously through-
body weight.
out life. They must be kept worn down by hard or fibrous food
materials. The dental formula is:
Rabbit
Cat
[12/1, C0/0, PM3/2, M3/3] × 2 = 28 total.
Scapula spine
If the teeth are misaligned or the diet does not include sufficient
fibrous material, the teeth will not wear properly and the rabbit 
will suffer from a range of malocclusion problems (Fig. I 4.5).
Malocclusion is one of the most common reasons for rabbits
being presented to vets but it can be prevented by including large 
 quantities of good quality hay in the diet.
The incisors have enamel only on fhe outer surface, which wears
more slowly than the inner surface, creating the characteristic
 chisel shape needed for nibling plant material. In the upper
Suprahumate process
jaw the second pair of incisors are vestigial pegs and lie behind
        a  s 
Fig. I4.2 The scapula of the rabbit compared to that of the cat.
the incisors and fhe cheek teeth is known as the diastema.
SECTION 2 Exotic species
166
Maxillary cheek teeth
Ist maxillary incisor
2nd incisor
Oesophagus
2-3molars
3premolars
(y00, 3d)
Stomach
Pancreas
3 molars
2 premolars
 Mandibular incisor
Duodenum
Jejunum and
ileum
Mandibular cheek teeth
Fig. I4.4 Normal dentition of the rabbit.
Appendix
Caecum
Lorge intestine
The caecum is the largest organ in the abdominal cavify and
lies on the right side. It is blind-ending, thin-walled and sac-
 culated and coils around the other organs, folding in on itself 
Sacculus
three times. It terminates in a vermiform appendix, which con-
rotundus
tains abundant lymphoid tissue. Food passes on into the colon,
Colon
(transition
which is also sacculated but shorter, with a smaller-diameter
of ileum 
lumen.
into caecum)
Digestion
 Rabbits are herbivorous, monogastric, hindgut fermenters. The 
o ossad aq y a ump sssed pee d pas
tractions and undergoes enzymic digestion in the stomach and
Anal glands
small intestine. The partially digested material enters the caecum,
Rectum
Fig. I4.3 Digestive system of the rabbit.
The prermolars and molars - cheek teeth - are flatftened table teeth
for grinding food. The jaw moves in a circular fashion to force the
food against their roughened surfaces. The lower teeth grow at a
faster rate than the upper teeth.
Stomach
This is a simple, thin-walled chamber which acts as a reser-
voir for food and which is never truly empty. There are well
developed cardiac and pyloric sphincters. Rabbits are unable to
vomit because of the arrangement of the cardia in relation to the
stomach.
Small intestine
The duodenum and ilenm are long and have a relafively small
humen. The ileum terminates at the caecum, where there is a
rounded structure, the sacculus rotundus. Inside this the mucosa
is arranged in a network of lymph follicles and this area is offen
known as the ileocaecal tonsil.
Fig. I4.5 Incisor malocclusion in a rabbit.
Chapter 14 Mammals
167
where if mixes with colories of microorgarisms responsible for
Right kidney
Left kidney
the fermentation and breakdown of cellulose found within plant
cell walls.
The now semi-liquid material passes into fhe colon.
Confractions here pass fluid back into the caecum for re-use in
the fermentation process and also separate fibrous from non-
fibrous material, resulting in the production of two types of
faeces:
● Hard fibrous pellets - produced wifhin 4 hours of eating. Fibre
passes rapidly through the digestive tract and is essential for
the stimulation of gut function but has no nutrifive value
● Soft pellets or caecotrophs - produced within 3-8 hours of
eating, often at night. They are covered in mucus, greener,
Ureter
low in fibre and high in protein, vitamins B and K and volatile
fafty acids. Caecotrophs are eaten direcfly from the anus -
a process known as caecotrophy or coprophagia. They are
swallowed without chewing. The mucoid covering protects
them from the stomach acid and facilitates absorption of the
Bladder
nutrients in the small intestine.
     s a s 
made available to the rabbit. Food material passes through the
 digestive system twice in 24 hours.
Seminal
vesicle
deferens
Respiratory system
The rabbit is an obligate nose breather, i.e. it must breathe through
Epididymis
Vesicular
its nose. (Mouth breathing is often a poor prognostic sign.) The
gland
        s s
anaesthesia. The glotfis is small and difficult to see as the view
is impaired by the relatively large tongue. This can make infu-
Testis
bation difficult and precautions must be taken to avoid reflex
laryngospasm.
Prostate gland
 The thymus gland remains a considerable size into adult life.
Urethra
It lies venfral to the heart and runs crarially to the fhoracic inlet.
Bulbourethral
Glans penis
The thoracic cavify is quite small and breathing mainly involves
gland
the diaphragm. The lungs have three lobes on each side; the
Fig. I4.6 Urogenital system of the male rabbit.
cranial lobes are small.
Urinary system
Female
The female rabbit is known as a doe. The reproductive tract of the
The kidneys are unipapillate, ie. a single medullary pyramid
doe is bicornuate, ie. it has fwo separate uterine horns designed to
drains into the renal pelvis and ureter. In the doe the ureters drain
hold lifters of young (Fig. 14.7). There is no uterine body and each
into the bladder, which is tough but thin-walled, and the urethra
horn has its own cervix opening into the vagina. The mesometrium is
empties into the ventral wall of the vagina; in the buck the ureters
a major fat storage organ. The doe has four or five pairs of nipples.
drain low down on the neck of the bladder.
The female rabbit is an induced ovulator and does not have a
well-defined oestrous cycle. There are periods of sexual recepfiv-
Urine
ity every 4-6 days. Ovulation occurs within 10 hours of coifus.
In the normal healthy rabbit this can vary in colour from deep
The age of sexual mafurity varies with the breed: small breeds
red to yellow or white. It may also vary in furbidity from clear to
are mafure at about 5 months while larger ones matfure as late as
 8 months. The young are altricial, i.e. they are born hairless, deaf
main route for the excrefion of calcium, and serum levels depend
and blind and are totally dependent on their mother for the first
on dietary intake - excessive intake may cause calcificafion of the
few weeks of life. They are protected from the envirorment and
 aorta and kidneys.
predators by a warm, fur-lined nest but if disturbed the dam may
eat them.
Reproductive system
Sexua! differentiation
Male
This can be difficult in young rabbits and is easier affer the testes
The male rabbit is known as a buck. There are fwo testes which in
of the male descend into the scrotum (Fig. 14.8).
the adult male lie in two almost hairless scrotal sacs cranial to the
● Male - the penis can be easily extruded and has a pointed end.
peris (Fig. 14.6). The testes descend at about 12 weeks of age buf
Bucks over about 5 weeks have large relatively hairless scrotal
the inguinal canal remains open; there is no os penis. The buck
sacs containing the retractable testes. They lie lateral and cranial
has no ripples.
to the penis.
SECTION 2 Exotic species
168
Right kidney
Small rodents
Left kidney
This group includes the small animals that are among the most
popular children's pets: rats, mice, gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs,
Single renal papilla
chinchillas and chipmunks. They all belong to the order Rodenfia -
characteristic of which is that they have prominent, yellow-
the teeth continue to grow throughout the animal's life and to
Ureter
maintain them at a normal length the animal must gnaw on hard
 or fibrous food material.
The Rodentia is one of the largest orders and comprises 40% of
Mesometrium
Cervices
Uterine horn
all mammals. They can be divided into three main groups:
● Myomorphs - the mouse-like rodents. They are all omnivorous
and can be further subdivided into:
 O Mouse and rat: surface-living rodents
O Gerbil and hamster: burrowing rodents
● Sciuromorphs - the squirrel-like rodents. They are omnivorous
and the group includes the chipmunks
● Hystricomorphs - a term related to the mode of reproduction.
This group includes guinea pigs and chinchillas. They both
 unoa renooand anpoid pue potad uoeis Sun e aa
Ovarian
fat body
they are herbivorous.
Urethra
 Tables 14.1 and 14.2 give physiological and reproductive param-
eters for small rodents.
Bladder
Vagina
Fig. I4.7 Urogenital system of the female rabbit.
Myomorph group
● Fermale - the opening to the vulva is slit-like. Only the doe has
Morphology
teats, usually 8 pairs, which lie along the venfral thoracic and
abdominal body wall.
Mouse (Mus musculus)
The mouse is the most familiar and widely distributed rodent in
 In the majority of placental mammals the scrotum lies caudal to the
 the world. The house mouse is about 6-8cm in length, excluding 
penis. However in marsupials and in the rabbit the scrotum lies
pue Apoq aul se youal aus au Aensn sh m ey o sh
cranial to the penis.
weighs about 20-40 g. It has a small head wifh a pointed nose and
are sdi naddn au jo eare au punre pasuey 'di iaddn sds e
several long, thin whiskers, which help the mouse to find its way
When a caesarean section is performed on a doe, a separate incision
around in the dark. The ears are very delicate, short and rounded.
must be made in each uterine horn. The conceptuses cannot be
The eyes are large, dark and profuberant and provide a wide
pushed from one horn into another as the presence of a cervix at
range of monocular vision. Their sight is poorly developed and
the base of each horn blocks their passage.
they are photophobic. The long prehensile tail is almost hairless
and covered in visible scales. Mice have four toes on the front feet
Scrotal sa
Urogenital orifice
Prepuce
A
B
Fig. I4.8 Sexing a rabbit. (VWith permission from O'Malley B 2005 Clinical anatomy and physiology of exotic species. Elsevier
Saunders, Edinburgh.)
Chapter 14 Mammals
169
     s    e   
characteristic jumping motion. The female gerbil has four pairs of
 n    e    s   
teats but they are absent in the male. The male has a scent gland
 The natural colour of the mouse is greyish brown with a
lighter underside. However, as a result of selective breeding, pet 
the ground to mark territorial boundaries.
mice, known as fancy mice, can be found in a wide range of coat
The nafural colour is reddish brown with dark guard hairs.
lengths and texfures, colours, colour combinations, and with red
This agouti colouration breaks up the animal's outline and
or black eyes.
camouflages it in the desert environment. The gerbil's under-
side is a lighter brown or cream, which serves to reflect heat
Rat (Rattus norvegicus)
from the hot sand. Pet gerbils can now be obtained in vary-
The genus Rattus contains about 80 species of rat but it is the brown
ing coat and eye colours, although pafterned gerbils are less
rat that has been developed into the pet or laboratory rat. They
common.
weigh from 400-800g, adult males being much larger than the
females. The body shape of the rat is similar to that of the mouse
Digestive system of myomorphs
  h n d     se 
rasp-like and covered in scales. As in mice, rats have four toes on
All these rodents are omnivorous and their teeth and digestive
the forefeet and five on the hindfeet, each ending in a small claw.
tract reflect their ability to eat a wide range of food material. In
 Female rats have five pairs of teats but they are absent in males.
particular it is the ability of the mouse and the rat to eat almost
 Rattus norvegicus is naturally brown but selective breeding has
 anything that has enabled them to adapt to and survive in most
produced fancy rats with a wide range of coat colours, pafterns
of the worldl's habitats.
and eye colours.
Dentition
Hamster (Mesocricetus auratus)
The myomorphs have a common dental formula:
The most common type of hamster kept in captivity is the golden
[ll /l, C0/0, PM0/0, M3/3] × 2 = 16 total.
or Syrian hamster which, when adult, measures 12-15cm in
length and weighs about 100 g. The head and body merge into
The incisors are yellow-orange-stained, wifh the chisel shape nec-
one another, creating a rounded, stocky shape. The nose is
essary for gnawing and ribbling hard food materials. They are
pointed with a divided upper lip. The eyes are dark and protu-
open-rooted, which enables them to grow continuously through-
berant and the delicafe ears are large, rounded and erect. Sight is
Out the animal's life. The molars are flaftened table teeth used for
poor in bright light and is adapted to the low light levels associ-
grinding food material. Once the permanent dentition is in wear
ated with their nocturnal behaviour. Hamsters have large cheek
the pulp cavity closes over so the molars do not continue to grow.
pouches extending from the oral cavity and reaching as far as the
The space befween the incisors and the molar teeth is the diastemd
scapula in which they carry food to their larders. The tail is shorf
and is occupied by the cheek tissue.
and insignificant. There are four toes on the forefeet and five on
the hindfeet, each ending in a small claw. The female hamster has
Digestive tract
six pairs of teats but they are absent in the male.
The stomach is simple and digestion is monogastric. The lining
The nafural colour of the golden hamster is a rich golden-
epithelium is mainly non-glandular in rats, mice and gerbils.
     m   n    
 There is a ridge between the oesophagus and the cardiac region of 
side. There is offten a darker patch on fhe cheeks. The fur is shorf
the stomach, which makes regurgitation of food material almost
   a s a d  si e n e
 impossible. The intestine is relatively long, which allows time for 
rights of the Syrian desert. There is a scent gland on each flank,
which is most prominent in fhe male and is used to mark ter-
cally adapted organ for fhe microbial breakdown of cellulose, as
ritory. Pet hamsters can be found in a variety of coat colours,
is seen in herbivores. However, the hamster has a distinct fore-
texfures and lengths and a variety of eye colours.
a  siad se ida  ose  ras p sads ia
pose; the contents of this chamber have a high pH and are rich in
the Chinese hamster, Cricetulus griseus, and the Russian hamster,
microorganisms. There is no gall bladder in the rat.
Phodopus sungorus. They are smaller, often sold as 'dwarf' ham-
sters, and have a light grey back with a black stripe along the
spine and a white underside.
Problems with overgrown incisors are the most common reason
for small rodents to be presented to the vet. Symptoms include
Gerbil (Meriones unguiculatus)
éxcessive salivation, clawing at the mouth and difficulty in eating. The
 The gerbil belongs to a family of burrowing rodents often called
treatment is to clip the incisors or reduce them with a surgical burr.
sand rats. The most common species kept as a pet is the Mongolian
The condition can be prevented by providing food which must be
gerbil. When adult it can reach 8-10cm from nose to the base of
gnawed.
e p p e vm   p p  sh n a n a
is usually about the same length as the body. An adult gerbil will
weigh 50-60 g. The body is short and thick and at rest the gerbil
sits upright with its forelegs off the ground. The head is broad
It is unnecessary to starve small rodents prior to anaesthesia - the
with black protruding eyes and the ears are small, rounded and
 stomach is impossible to empty as it usually contains ingested faecal
covered in fur. The forelegs are short with five-clawed toes and
 pellets. Regurgitation and choking is unlikely to be a significant risk.
 m         on 
Rodents have a high metabolic rate so starvation may result in a fatal
     e   n n 
hypoglycaemia.
gerbil to stand firmly in the sand of the desert and to move with a
170
SECTION 2 Exotic species
All the myomorphs show varying degrees of coprophagia, i.e.
Male
eating their own faeces, which is a nafural behaviour paftern. The
faecal pellets may contribute a significant proporfion of nutrients
to the diet and are rich in vitamin B, produced by microorganisms
living in the colon.
Penis
Reproductive system of myomorphs
Ano-genital
distance
Male
Anus
The adult male of this group has fwo testes in an external scrotum. In
many species the inguinal canal remains open, allowing the testes to
 Scrotum
shrink and return to the abdomen during the non-breeding season.
containing testes
The testes of the Chinese hamster, Cricetulus griseus, remain internal.
A
 The reproductive tract is complex and comprises several large acces-
Female
 SOry glands. An os penis lies within the tissue of the penis.
Female
Females in this group have a bicornuate uterus, wifh a pair of long
uterine horns and liftle or no uterine body. This arrangement has
evolved to contain large numbers of developing embryos. The
Vulva
Ano-genital
stages of the rodent oestrous cycle can be ascertained by microscopic
distance
examination of vaginal smears (exfoliative vaginal cytology). The
Anus
female hamster may produce copious amounts of vaginal discharge,
B
 particularly around day 2 of the oestrous cycle. Mating may be con-
firmed by the presence of a'copulatory plug'. This is a creamy gelati-
Fig. I4.9 General method of sexing rodents. The anogenital distance is 
nous plug formed from the secretions of the male accessory glands;
larger in males than in females.
it remains in the vagina or may fallon to the cage floor.
     q d  s  
The females of all these species of rodent are polyoestrous and
spontaneous ovulators. Specific details are mentioned in Table 14.2.
dark prominent eyes are set on either side of the head and are out-
Myomorphs are sexually mature at a young age, e.g. the mouse
the ear. The small, furry ears have rounded tips and are set high
reaches sexual mafurity at 3-4 weeks, and produce large lifters of
on the head. Runring along the back from the nape of the neck
young. Both of these feafures confribute to the success of rodents
to the base of the tail are five dark stripes with four lighter ones
in creafing 'population explosions' over a short period. The neo-
in between. The tail is covered in chestnut grey hairs tipped with
nates are altricial, i.e. they are totally dependent on the mother for
 several weeks and are born hairless, blind and deaf. At this stage
feet and uses the forelimbs for holding food, similar to the famil-
they are very vulnerable and are kept hidden in some form of
nest. If disturbed, the mother may exhibit cannibalism.
from the oral cavify that are used to carry food gathered from
Sexua! differentiation of myomorphs
the woodland floor to storage chambers wifthin their nests. The
female has four pairs of teats but these are absent in the male.
As a general rule, the anogenital distance, ie. the distance
between the opening of the anus and the opering of the genital
Digestive system
tract (penis or vulva), is longer in the male than in the female (Fig.
14.9). There are no teats in the male. There are also some species-
The chipmunk is an omnivore and has a similar denfifion and
specific indicators of sex:
type of digestive tract to that seen in the myomorphs.
I. Adult male hamsters have large external testes, which are retained
Reproductive system
in the scrotum by a pad of fat in the inguinal canal. This makes
Female chipmunks are seasonally polyoestrous and spontaneous
fhe rear outline of the male conical when viewed from above. The
ovulators. The breeding seasonis between March and September.
female has no scrofum so the rear outline is more rounded.
The testes of the male descend into the scrofum in January and
 2. Newly weaned male gerbils have a pigmented scrotum.
begin spermatogenesis. The female advertises her willingness
 3. Sexually mafure male gerbils have a prominent ventral
to mate by a persistent chipping noise on the second day of her
abdominal scent gland.
3-day oestrous cycle. The reproductive tract of both sexes fol-
lows a similar paftern to that of the myomorphs (Table 14.2).
Sciuromorph group
Hystricomorph group
Chipmunk (Tamias sibiricus)
Guinea pig (Cavia porcellus)
Morphology
Morphology
The most common of the 24 species of chipmunk to be kept as
a pet is the Siberian chipmunk. Adults reach 12-19cm in length
The guinea pig, also called the cavy, originated from South
8 0-0z uotam pue u Ll Aiajeuxoidde yo ire, Ausnq Suole um
America, where it is still used for food. Adults measure from
Chapter 14 Mammals
171
20-35cm, the males being larger than the females, and weigh
The oral cavity is small and narrow and contains the relatively
750-1200 g. The body is short and stocky with short legs and no
large tongue. There are four pairs of salivary glands, which empty into
tail. There are four toes on each forefoot and three on the hind-
fhe oral cavity near the molars. The soft palate is confinuous with the
feet, each ending in a short, sharp claw. The nose is rounded and
base of the tongue and the oropharynx connects with the rest of the
 a n m  d d s e m s sn  
 pharynx via a hole in the soft palate known as the palatal ostium.
sensiftive whiskers. The ears are small, very delicate and virfually
The stomach (Fig. 14.11) is simple and is lined by a glandular
hairless. Guinea pigs have a good sense of hearing and can detect
epithelium. Gastric emptying takes about 2 hours. The intestinal
tract measures approximately 2m. The small intestine lies mainly
are prominent and sifuated on eifher side of the head. They have
on the right side of the abdominal cavity while the much longer
 keen eyesight with the excellent peripheral vision necessary to
u qe a yo sred  pe enao  s auai a
spot predafors. They also have an excellent sense of smell.
most sigrificant organ is the caecum, measuring 15-20cm, which is
The natural coat of the guinea pig is short and smooth with
thin walled and sacculated with many lateral pouches created by
dark brown ticked or agouti-coloured hairs providing the cam-
thick bands of smooth muscle. Af any one time it may contain 65%
ouflage needed for life on open plains. Selective breeding has
of the gut contents. The caecum contains microorganisms that are
resulted in a variety of coat lengths, colours and pafterns. The skin
has an abundant supply of sebaceous glands along the dorsal sur-
and for the addition of certain nutrients such as vifamin B.
face and around the anus. The rump may be rubbed against the
 ground as a means of marking the territory. Both male and female
When attempting to pass a feeding tube through the palatal ostium 
guinea pigs have a pair of long inguinal nipples.
into the oesophagus of the guinea pig, make sure it does not slip to
Skeleta! system
one side and damage the surrounding vascular soft palate.
Guinea pigs have large tympanic bullae, which can be palpated
at the base of each ear. They have 32-36 vertebrae: C7, T13-14,
L6, S2-3, Cd4-6. There are 13-14 ribs of which the last fwo are
   s on     n 
cartilaginous. A small clavicle aftaches between the scapula and
tract is approximately 20 hours but it may take as long as 66
fhe manubrium. In the female the pubic symphysis remains fibro
cartilaginous until about 1 year old. Ater this time it becomes
  a n s    o  on
ossified, making normal parfuriftion difficult in an elderly primi-
mucoid caecofrophs direct from the anus between 150 and 200
fimes a day. The liver has six lobes and there is a well-developed
r siss  smo   mo (  p
gall bladder.
Digestive system
The guinea pig is a monogastric herbivore with a large cae-
cum for microbial fermentafion of plant material. The dental
formula is:
Oesophagus
[1l /l,C0/0, PMI/1, M3/3] × 2 = 20 total.
Gall bladder -
Both the incisors and the cheek teeth (premolars and molars) are
open-rooted and continue to grow throughout the animal's life
Liver
Bile duct
(Fig. 14.10). This can lead to dental problems if they are not worn
down by the appropriate fibrous food. The incisors are normally
white. The space between the incisors and the cheek teeth is called
Pancrea
the diastema and is filled wifh the cheek tissue.
Pancreatic duct
Stomach
 In guinea pigs with malocclusion, the molars in the lower jaw tend to
Duodenum
 grow medially and lacerate the side of the tongue, while those in the 
Iransverse
colon
upper jaw grow laterally and lacerate the inside of the cheek. Both 
result in excessive salivation and dysphagia.
Mesentery
Small
intestine
Caecur
Ascending-
-Descending
colon
colon
Rectum
Fig. I4.10 Radiograph of a guinea pig's skull showing dentition.
Fig. I4.1I The digestive system of the guinea pig.
SECTION 2 Exotic species
172
 supported by its large hindfeet and uses its forepaws for holding
 The liver of the guinea pig is unable to synthesise vitamin C and
food. They have four clawed toes on each fore and hind paw and
deficiencies may occur if the animal does not receive a daily dietary
fhe palmar and planfar surfaces of the feet are hairless.
 source in the form of fresh greenery or synthetic supplements.
The natural colour of the fur is blue-grey. The fur is soft and
Symptoms include a dull rough coat, stiff gait and lameness, pain on
very dense, which is due to the fact that as many as 60 hairs may
 movement, diarrhoea, anorexia and general lethargy.
to be quite large but under the fur the skeleton is relatively small.
Urinary system
Selective breeding has produced a range of other colours.
Each kidney has a relatively large renal pelvis with a single papilla.
The urine produced by the guinea pig is alkaline, thick and often
Digestive system
a cloudy white or yellow. The presence of crystals in urine is a
Like the guinea pig, chinchillas are monogastric herbivores with a large
normal finding.
caecum for the breakdown of cellulose. The dental formula is:
Reproductive system
[1 /l, c0/0, PMI /1, M3/3] × 2 = 20 total.
● Male - known as a boar. The two testes are able to be retracted
    a    a  r  
through the inguinal canal, which remains open throughout
cheek teeth (prermolars and molars) are opern-rooted and grow con-
life. In mature breeding boars the large testes lie in the
tinuously throughout the chinchilla's life. The chisel-shaped inci-
scrofum on either side of the genital opening. Internally there
sors, which are yellower than those of the guinea pig, have been
are several accessory glands - the long, coiled vesicular glands,
reported as growing as much as 6cm in a year. The cheek teeth
prostate, coagulating glands and the bulbourethral glands.
are flaftened table teeth for grinding fibrous plant material. The
Suado enam au o euaapnes pue suad so ue si ar
space between the incisors and the cheek teeth is known as the
is a pouch containing fwo horny styles or projections, which
diastema. As with all species of rodent, dental problems are one of
evert externally during erection of the penis.
the most common conditions seen by veterinary surgeons.
● Female - known as a sow. The uterus is bicornuate and consists
The oral cavity is small and narrow. Like guinea pigs, the base
 of two long uterine horns, a short body and a cervix leading
of the tongue is continuous with the soff palate and the enfrance
into the vagina.
to the pharynx is via a small hole, the palatal ostium.
     e  i s s 
The female guinea pig is polyoestrous and a spontaneous ovulator.
Details can be found in Table 14.2. The gestation period is 63 days,
and has evolved to digest plant material. The caecum is long and
which is long compared to that of other rodents, and the young
coiled and holds a smaller percentage of the total intestinal contents
than in the guinea pig or rabbit. The colon is sacculated. Microbial
fermentafion occurs within the caecum, resulting in the formafion
and can be independent of their mothers. This enables them to eat
of caecotrophs, which are rich in nutrients such as vitamin B. The
solid food almost immediately affer birth, although for the first
chinchilla exhibits coprophagia but digestive sfudies show that,
few weeks they also suckle from the mother. They are born in the
while the guinea pig ingests both caecotrophs and faecal pellets at
 n   n   e   o
intervals throughout the day, the chinchilla only consumes faecal
predators if necessary.
Sexua! differentiation
Guinea pigs are easy to sex and this can be done almost from birth.
The chinchilla has evolved to survive on the relatively poor but
● Male - mafure boars have clearly defined testes. The penis can
highly fibrous diet of grasses found high up in the Andes. A healthy
diet for a chinchilla should therefore include high levels of fibre
be prolapsed by applying gentle pressure at its base, crarial to
the urethral opening.
and protein. Treats such as apples, figs and sultanas must be given
in moderation. It is not uncommon for chinchillas to die from
● Fermale - the perineal tissues form a Y-shaped depression. The
constipation or diarrhoea caused by an over-indulgent owner.
vulval opering lies at the intersection of the Y, with the anus 
at the base of the Y. If pressure is applied cranial to the vulval
opering, there will be no perile prolapse.
Reproductive system
 Both sexes of guinea pig have a pair of inguinal nipples
● Male - there is no true scrofum. The testes remain in the open
inguinal canal or in the abdomen. On either side of the anus
Chinchilla (Chinchilla lanigera)
are fwo postanal sacs in which the caudal epididymis can lie.
In the presence of a female the testes swell and become very
Morphology
obvious. The penis, which may be 1.5 cm long in the adult, is
        s
easily visible below the anus, from which it is separated by a
were imported into the UK to be bred for their fur. Nowadays,
small area of hairless skin. It is supported by the presence of a
with a change in affifude towards the wearing of fur, chinchil-
small bone known as the baculum.
las are mainly kept as pets. Chinchillas are almost extinct in the
● Fermale - the uterus consists of two long uterine horns, each
wild and the only species likely to be found in captivity is C. lani
of which terminates in a cervix. This is similar to the rabbit
gera. They have a compact body with short limbs and a short,
but different from the structure seen in the guinea pig. The
bushy tail. They weigh 400-500g and the females are larger than
two cervices then lead into the single vagina. Both male and
fhe males. The nose is pointed and there are long, sensifive whis-
female chinchillas have three pairs of mamrmary glands - one
kers on the divided upper lip. They have dark, prominent eyes
inguinal pair and two lateral thoracic ones. The teats tend to
protrude sideways, allowing the young to sit beside the dam
and large, round, delicate ears. At rest the chinchilla sits upright
and suckle.
Chapter 14 Mammals
173
The female chinchilla is seasonally polyoestrous and a spontaneous
sis os - aso a  r ae e n sdo g as
ovnlator. Details can be found in Table 14.2. The gestation period
must be taken to prevent escape! The neck is long and muscular
is 111 days, which is exceptionally long for a member of the rodent
and of approximately the same diameter as the rest of the body.
family. The young are precocial, i.e. they are born fully furred and
The head is relaftively small with small ears set wide apart on fhe
capable of living an independent life. However, they confinue to
crown. The eyes point forward and are also set wide apart, pro-
suckle from the dam until they are weaned at about 6-8 weeks.
viding binocular vision. However, ferrets' eyesight is poor and
adapted to the low light levels found in tunnels.
Sexua! differentiation
The legs are short and used for digging and traction, but the
Chinchillas are quite easy to sex and this can be done at birth.
ferret is also able to climb and may scale great heights. There
● Male - as wifth many rodent species, the anogerital distance is
are five toes on each foot, ending in non-refractable claws; in
longer in the male than it is in the female (Fig. 14.8). There is a
working ferrets these are kept long. The first digit on each foof
hairless band befween the penis and the anus. The penis can
has only two phalanges while the remainder of the digits have
 be extruded by genfle pressure at its base.
three.
● Fermale - fhe anogerital distance is shorter. A relatively large
The skin of the ferret is thick, especially over the neck and
 urinary papila lies close to the anus and can be mistaken for
shoulders where it provides protection against bites. It is well
a penis; however, there is no hairless band between it and the
supplied with sebaceous glands, which are the main source of
anus. The opening to the urethra is on the tip of this papilla and
the ferret's body odour. Ferrets also have a pair of well devel-
the opening to the slit-like vulva is immediately caudal to it.
oped anal glands, which produce a yellow serous secretion with a
strong smell. The fur is thick and in the past this has led to ferrets
being used in the fur trade. The natural colour is a cream under-
The ferret
on the face. This is the colouration of the polecat and in the ferret
The domestic ferret, Mustela putorius furo, is a member of fhe
is known as 'fitch'. Other nafurally occurring colours are albino
order Carnivora and the family Mustelidae. Ofher related spe-
and sandy or cinnamon. Selective breeding of pet ferrets has led
cies include badgers, ofters, stoats and weasels, all of which are
to the development of about 30 other colour variafions. Ferrets
long-bodied, agile creafures capable of producing a characteristic
moult in the spring and aufumn and the fur may vary befween
pungent smell from their anal glands.
the seasons: it may be shorter and darker in the summer months
Ferrets are most closely related to the European polecat,
and longer and lighter in the winter.
 Mustela putorius, found in parts of the UK and northern Europe.
It is almost certain that the Egyptians domesticated the polecat
to produce the modern ferret. Although working ferrets are still
Musculoskeletal system
used for hunting rabbits and rats, nowadays ferrets are becoming
more popular as pets and in the USA there may be as many as
The general paftern of the skeleton is shown in Figures 14.12 and
7 million pet ferrets!
14.13. The vertebral formula is C7, T15, L5-6, S3, Cd18. The spine
is exfremely flexible and allows the ferret to bend at an angle of af
Morphology
least 180°. Ribs 1-10 aftach to fhe sternum and the remainder form
the costal arch. The thoracic inlet is very small and the presence
The ferret has a flexible, fubular body with short legs and a long.
of any abnormal mass here may interfere wifth swallowing and
fhick tail. This shape enables it to go down rabbit holes and to
respiration.
Lumbar vertebrae
Thoracic yertebrae
Cervical vertebrae
Coccygeal
ertebrae
Skull
Scapula
Patella
-Radius
Sternum
-Tibia
UIna
-Fibula
J-shaped os penis
Hock
Fig. I4.12 The skeleton of the ferret.
174
SECTION 2 Exotic species
Fig. I4.13 Whole body radiograph of a male
ferret.
Digestive system
the base of the bladder and the adjacent urethra are surrounded
by the prostate gland.
The ferret is a true carnivore and this is reflected in the anatomy
of its dentition and digestive tract (Fig. 14.14). As in ofher carni-
vores, the teeth are very sharp and are adapted for shearing flesh
Reproductive system
off bone. The dental formula is:
● Male - known as a hob. The male ferret has a J-shaped os penis
[13/3, CI/1, PM3/3, MI/2] × 2 = 34 total.
lying within the caudal section of the peris and dorsal to the
 penile urethra (Fig. 14.12). The two testes are carried externally
The incisors are prominent, the upper incisors being slightly lon-
in the scrofum. Sexual mafurity is usually reached during
ger and covering the lower ones. The canines are large and the
the first spring after birth, at about 4-8 months of age. Once
roots are longer than the crown - they may be visible when the
mouth is closed. The third upper premolars are the largest cheek
the testes have descended the inguinal ring closes and they
teeth and are known as fhe carnassiais. The deciduous teeth erupt
are not able to be retracted. Spermatogenic activity increases
at 20-28 days and the permanent teeth at 50-74 days.
wifthin the semiriferous fubules of the testes from December to
 July and the testes become noticeably enlarged in preparation
In common with other carnivores, the length of the digestive
for the breeding season from March to August. The opening
tract (Fig. 14.14) is short; this results in a short gastrointestinal
of the prepuce is on the ventral abdomen in a similar posifion
transit time of 34 hours in the adult animal. The stomach is sim-
 ple and smal but capable of enormous distension to hold a large
to that seen in the dog. The male ferret has teats. A castrated
male ferret is known as a hobble.
amount of food prior to its digestion. The pylorus is well devel-
 Oped. The stomach lies within a curve of fthe six-lobed liver in the
● Fermale - known as a jill. The uterus consists of a pair of long
pue iappa n pades-read e se janan au uauqe roae
uterine horns with no uterine body, i.e. a typical bicornuate
its pancreas has two limbs that are connected close to the pylorus.
uterus, adapted to produce lifters of young. The average lifter
Ferrets are able to vomit.
size is 8-10 kits but lifters as large as 18 have been reported.
The vulva lies on the perineum, ventral to the anus. During
 the non-breeding season, it is small and slit-like, but during
consists of a duodenum, ileum and jejunum, which are almost
 s   a sa  
oestrus it becomes swollen and resembles a small doughnut.
The female ferret is seasonally polyoestrous and an induced ovulator.
valve.
If the jill is mated, ovulation occurs within 30 40 hours of coifus.
The gestafion period is 42 days.
Urinary system
If not mated, the jill will remain in oestrus for the enfire breed-
The leff kidney lies caudal to the right and both lie within the ret-
bone marrow depression and anaemia. This usually corrects itself
roperitoneal fat. The cranial end of the left kidney is covered by
 at the end of the breeding season but if it recurs for several years
fhe caudate lobe of the liver. The bladder is small and in the male
in succession it may result in death.
Chapter 14 Mammals 
175
Larynx
Trachea
Right lung
Left lung
Heart
caudalvenacava
Diaphragm
Aorta
Liver
Duodenum
Stomach
Left kidney
Colon
Ovary
Uterus
Jejunoileum-
Ureter
Ureter
Uterus
Bladder
Badder
(pulled
forward)
Fig. I4.I4 A Internal anatomy of the female ferret. B Digestive tract removed.
This page intentionally left blank
SECTION 2 Exotic species
CHAPTER
15
otiles and fish
reptiles but because they lack a diaphragm they lack an acfive,
REPTILES
expulsive cough reflex and fhese infecfions can be severe or
even fatal.
The class Reptilia includes about 6500 species, all of which breed
on land. The class is divided into four orders of which only two
Digestive system
are significant as far as exofic pets are concerned. The four orders
The more specific feafures of the digestive system of lizards,
are:
 snakes and chelonians are covered separately. However, in gen-
● Rhynchocephalia - includes the fuatara; very rare and unlikely
to be kept in captivity
aca, consisting of three parts: the coprodeurm collects the faeces,
● Crocodilia - includes the crocodiles and alligators
the urodeum collects urinary waste and the proctodeum is the final
+ Chelonia - includes tortoises, terrapins and furfles
chamber that acts as a collecting area prior to the eliminafion of
the waste.
● Squarmata - includes suborder Sauria (19 families of lizards),
suborder Serpentes (11 families of snakes) and suborder
Urinary system
Amphisbaena (one family, not kept in captivity).
The paired kidneys consist of nephrons without loops of Henle.
These animals share many anatomical and physiological fea-
tures so general reptilian anatomy and physiology will be dis-
   d Ao A m 's   s
cussed first, and any specific adaptafions will be menfioned in the
their body weight. Not alllizards have bladders, although a blad-
subsequent sections on lizards, snakes and the shelled reptiles.
 der is present in the green iguana (Iguana iguana). Snakes do not
have bladders. The urine may change wifhin the bladder so uri-
General anatomy
nalysis in reptiles may not be an indicafion of kidney function, as
it is in mammals.
Skeleta! system
Reptiles are vertebrates and have an internal bony skeleton fhat,
Reproduction
to some extent, shares the basic skeletal plan exhibited by mem-
Reptiles are oviparous, ie. they lay eggs. The yolk of the egg pro-
bers of the class Mammalia. However, fhere are distinctive modi-
vides the nourishment for the developing young, in contrast to
ficafions in the skeleton of the snakes, tortoises and furtles that
mammals where the young are nourished directly by the mother
will be discussed later.
via the placenta. Some reptiles are ovoviviparous or ‘live-bear-
ing' - they retain the developing young within the egg, which
Cardiovascular system
remains in the oviducts, and appear to give birth to live individu-
The heart has fhree chambers rather fhan four. There is a right
als. However, the nufrients are still obtained from the yolk of the
and leff afrium but only one ventricle. The venfricle is function-
egg inside which the young develop.
ally, but not anatomically, divided into three subchambers and
receives blood from both the right and left atria. Deoxygenated
blood from the right atrium is directed towards the pulmonary
Dystocia or 'egg-binding' is commonly seen in reptiles. It can occur
artery, but the oxygenated blood refurning from the lungs to the
for a number of reasons, such as lack of a suitable nesting place,
stress, calcium deficiency and infection.
circulation again.
A significant feafure of a reptile's peripheral circulation is the
renal portal system, which transports blood from the hindlimbs and
For a few days before and after ecdysis, reptiles can be easily
tail direcfly to the kidneys. This has clirical implicafions when
damaged and handling should be kept to a minimum. Changes in
 injecting into the caudal half of the body, as some of the drug may
the normal shedding pattern may be an indication of poor health in
be excreted in the urine before reaching the systemic circulation.
some species.
Respiratory system
The integument
Gaseous exchange occurs in the same way as it does in mam-
mals but the most significant difference in the anatomy of the
The skin of reptiles is thick and kerafinised and is protected by
respiratory system of reptiles compared to that of mammals is
scales or horny plates. Reptiles grow by a process known as ecdy-
that reptiles lack a diaphragm. As in the bird, the body cavity
sis, during which they shed or slough the old skin. Beneath this is
is not divided into fwo. Respiratory infections are common in
a new layer, which, to start with, is quite soft and easily damaged.
SECTION 2 Exotic species
178
Ecdysis varies with species and may be partial shedding, as seen
Digestive system
in lizards, or entire, as seen in snakes.
Chelonians do not have teeth and depend on their horny beak to
cut off pieces of food. They have large, fleshy tongues that can-
Thermoregulation
not protrude from the mouth. The oesophagus runs down the left 
Reptiles are ectothermic, ie. they are unable to regulate their inter-
side of the neck and joins the stomach, which lies transversely
  n     an n
across the body (Fig. 15.2). The small intestine is relatively short
to raise the body temperafure and increase their metabolic rate. To
(compared to mammals) and the colon ends in the cloaca, which
sq o'a suaed pennaq ro raqumu e Aoda Aau sn o
is the common chamber into which the urogenital and digestive
ing in sunlight or spreading themselves as flat as possible in order
systems empty.
to increase the surface area exposed to the sun. Each species has a
preferred body temperafure (PBT). This is the body temperafure af
which the reptile functions most efficiently. Below the PBT diges-
Stomatitis or 'mouth rot' is an infection of the oral cavity and is a
tion is impaired and the immune system does not function so that 
very common condition of chelonians and snakes. This condition is
reptiles kept at low temperafures are more likely to become ill.
often triggered by factors such as stress, trauma, malnourishment
and poor husbandry. It is commonly seen in chelonians following
hibernation and is often the cause of post-hibernation anorexia
Tortoises, terrapins and turtles
syndrome.
Tortoises, furfles and terrapins are members of the order Chelonia
Urogenita! system
(N.B. in the USA all shelled reptiles are referred to as furfles).
They are characterised by a hard outer shell consisting of a domed
In chelorians the ureters conduct relafively unconcentrated urine
upper part called the carapace and a flatter ventral part called the
from the kidneys into a thin-walled urinary bladder (Fig. 15.2).
Male chelonians possess a single, large penis that protrudes from
plastron (Fig. 15.1). The shell forms a bony 'box' that protects the
the floor of the cloaca.
soft internal parts of the body. The shell is covered wifh horny
plates or scutes, which are named according to the most adja-
Sexua! differentiation
cent part of the body. The scutes grow from the outside so that
Most species of Chelonia are sexually dimorphic: there are visible
an annual ring develops along the periphery of each one, making
differences in external feafures such as colouration, tail length,
 e   s     o 
be used to estimate age.
shell size and shape. Feafures include:
● Male tortoises have longer tails than females (Fig. 15.3)
Anatomical features
● The plastron of the male is concave to enable him fo mount the
domed carapace of the female
Skeleton
● The caudal scute of fhe female may be curved upwards to
Chelorians are vertebrates and their skeleton resembles fhat of
 allow her to elevate her tail during mating
other vertebrates. However, the pectoral and pelvic girdles are
● The male terrapin has long front claws wifh which he 'fickles'
within the rib cage and are orientated vertically to buttress the
the chin of the female.
shell (Fig. 15.1). The ten vertebrae form part of the under surface
of the carapace.
Lizards
When handling reptiles you should be aware that the slow, sluggish
creature that you take out of the cage will soon warm up in your
Lizards belong to the suborder Sauria, which includes about 3750
hands and may suddenly have the energy to make a dash for
different species classified into 19 families.
freedom!
Anatomical features
Cardiovascular system
Skeleton
Chelonians possess the normal reptilian three-chambered heart
The skeleton of the lizard follows the basic vertebrate plan, but
and renal portal system. The outer shell of chelorians makes alls-
there is no sternum (Fig. 15.4). Most lizards have four legs and
cultation of the heart difficult, but it may be aided by putting a
most species take their weight on all their legs, however some
 damp towel around the shell.
species, e.g. the basilisk, can run on fwo legs. The anatomy of the
limbs indicates the mode of locomofion.
 Respiratory system
 The rigid outer shell of chelonians prevents the body wall from
 Many species of lizard show autotomy. This is the ability to shed
expanding during breathing. Respiration is accomplished with
their tail as a defence against predators. Once shed, the tail keeps 
fhe aid of limb and head movements, which move in and out and
squirming and distracts the predator while the lizard runs away!
alter the internal pressure in the body cavify. Chelorians breathe
A replacement tail may grow but it is often a different colour
through their external nares or nostrils, so mouth breathing may
and may be shrunken; internally the replacement vertebrae are 
indicate a respiratory problem. The glottis lies at the base of the
cartilaginous rather than bony. If a lizard is stressed or if the tail is
tongue, and the trachea is short, which allws the tortoise to
damaged it may fall off -this must be considered when handling or
 breathe when the neck is withdrawn. The lungs are positioned
injecting into the tail muscle. As a result of autotomy the tail muscles
dorsally, below the carapace, and aid buoyancy in aquafic species
go into spasm and prevent excessive blood loss.
(Fig. 15.1).
Chapter 15 Reptiles and fish
179
Caudal end
Anal-
Femoral
Vertebrals (5)-
Inguinal
Abdominal
Pleurals (4)
Supra-
marginals (9)
Marginals (12)
Marginal
Axillary
umeral
Gular
Carpals
Coracoid
Metacarpals
Phalanges
process
Acromion
process
omacl
Scapula
Wlna
Radius
Tarsals
Metatarsals
Phalanges
Scapula
Acromion
process
Coracoid
process
D
Projected position of kidney (lateral view)
Fig. I5.I Anatomy of the tortoise {Testudo spp.). A Carapace. B Plastron. CVentral view of skeleton. D Left side view of skel-
eton. E First part of intestinal tract. F Position of the kidneys.
Integument
Gekkonidae - the geckos - are characterised by having layers of
Lizards have thick, scaly skin and grow by shedding the skin
 Overlapping scales or lamelle on the underside of their feet. This
(ecdysis). In lizards the skin comes off in pieces and some species
enables them to grip on to apparenfly smooth surfaces such as
will eat the sloughed pieces. The family Skinkidae - the skinks -
glass.
shed their skin in one piece; they are covered in scales that fit
Special senses
species of lizard, e.g. chameleons, are able to change the colour
 The ear is responsible for both hearing and balance. The tympanic
of their skin. This is due to the presence of chromatophores in the
membrane is easily visible in a shallow depression on the side
skin and helps fo camouflage the lizard. Members of the family
of the head and is covered by a thin layer of skin that is shed
SECTION 2 Exotic species
180
Gall bladder
Liver
Colon
Testes
 Stomach
Kidney
Lungs.
Oesophagus-
Ureter
Coprodeum
Urinary bladder
Pelvis
Trachea
Spleen
Heart
Urodeur
Pancreas
Proctodeum
Tail
 Small intestine
Vent
Fig. I5.2 Internal anatomy of the tortoise.
Cervical
vertebrae
Ulna
Thoracolumbar
vertebrae
Sacrum
Caudal
vertebrae
Fig. I5.3 Determining the sex of chelonians. A Female. B Male. The tail
of the male is longer the plastron is concave and the cloacal opening is 
 further down on the tail.
Fig. I5.4 Skeleton of a lizard.
Chapter 15 Reptiles and fish
181
periodically with the rest of the skin. The eye is protected by an
Snakes
eyelid in most species of lizard and in some species the lower lid
is fransparent to allow vision even when the lids are closed.
Snakes belong to the suborder Serpentes which includes around
Cardiovascular system
2400 species divided befween 11 different families.
Anatomical features
the renal portal system as previously described. They have a
large ventral abdominal vein and care must be taken when
making a midline incision. The venfral tail vein may be used
Skeleton
for venepuncfure but should not be used in species that are able
Snakes are legless and have an elongated body (Fig. 15.9). They
to shed the tail. In larger species the cephalic vein on the fore-
have a complex skull, which is described as being kinetic - this
lmb may be used.
means that the bones of the jaw are loosely connected and the fwo
halves of the mandible are joined by an elastic ligament to allow
Respiratory system
wide separation (Fig. 15.10). These features enable the snake to
 The diaphragm is absent and breathing is accomplished by expan-
 s    o s   sn  s
sion and confraction of the ribs.
a few possess vestigial pelvic limbs, seen as external spurs in the
pelvic region of species such as boas and pythons.
Digestive system
The snake has many vertebrae - numbers vary from 150 to over
Most lizards possess teeth that are aftached to the sides of the
400 - all with a similar shape. Each vertebra gives off a pair of
mandible and not in sockets as seen in mammals. These feeth are
ribs, which are fused to the vertebra but are not joined in the ven-
 regularly shed and then replaced. In some families of lizard, e.g.
tral midline, i.e. there is no sternum.
chameleons, the teeth are aftached to the biting edges of the jaw
Integument
and these are not shed. The tongue is used to 'taste' the environ-
ment in conjunction with Jacobsen's organ (see p. 182) in the roof
 The epidermal scales of the integument show differences according
of the mouth.
to the region of the body. In the dorsal and lateral parts of the body
The digestive tract of lizards varies depending on the type of
the scales are small and on the ventral surface they are larger and
diet, which may be insectivorous, carnivorous, herbivorous or
fhicker. The tough, smooth skin of the snake does not grow with the
 snake but is shed periodically, usually in one piece to reveal a new
skin underneath (ecdysis). At the time of shedding the snake skin
cies. The digestive tract terminates in the typical reptilian cloaca.
may have a dull appearance due to the liffing of the old outer layer
 of skin Snakes do not have moveable eyelids, as are seen in mam-
Urogenita! system
mals, but the upper and lower eyelids are fused together to form
Most species of lizard possess a urinary bladder (Fig. 15.5). Male
lizards possess paired copulatory organs called hemipenes (Fig.
 is also shed. Just before shedding the snake may be withdrawn and
15.6). Each hemiperis is a hollow strucfure with a closed end
anorexic and handling should be kept to a minimum.
that lies invaginated in the base of the tail, posterior to the clo-
Special senses
of the tail. Only one hemipenis is used during copulation and is
The eyes are protected by the spectacle lying over the surface of
erected by filling with blood. It is then inserted into the cloaca of
the cornea. Tear-like secrefions are produced between the cornea
 and spectacle. The ear of the snake has no tympanic membrane
Fermale lizards lay eggs. They have a pair of ovaries and oviducts
and no middle ear cavity. Some species of snake, e.g. members
but there is no uterus. The eggs pass out of the body via the clo
Of the family Boidae - the boas - have heat-sensiftive pits on the
aca (Fig. 15.7)
upper jaw that are used to detect their prey. These are so sensitive
'ooo yo sau ye dn id res Aau je
Some species of lizard consist entirely of females and reproduction is by
Cardiovascular system
means of parthenogenesis in which the young develop from an unfertilised 
Snakes possess the typical reptilian heart, and have both renal and
 egg - they are all female.
 hepatic portal circulations. The heart is generally located at about
one third of the length of the body (Fig. 15.11).
Sexua! differentiation
Respiratory system
The method of determining fhe sex of a lizard is dependent on
In most snakes the left lung is greatly reduced in size oreven absent
the species.
(Fig 15.11). Orly the anterior part of the lung is functional for gas-
eous exchange. The posterior parf is avascular and functions as an
and colour befween the fwo sexes. Males may also show
air sac that may act as a reserve during periods of apnoea.
display pafterns such as flashing colours or the use of
erectable crests to affract the female.
Digestive system
● Base of the tail - males may have a more swollen base to their
Snakes are totally carrivorous and possess six rows of undiffer-
tail, inside which lie the hemipenes.
enfiated teeth, which are replaced confinuously (Fig. 15.10). Some
● Presence of femoral or preanal pores (Fig. 15.8) - different species
species may have modified fangs and some are able to produce
show various patterns of pores on the inner surface of the
venorm from special glands that lie above the oral cavity. The venom
inguinal region.
is delivered to the prey by the fangs. The tongue is thin, forked and
SECTION 2 Exotic species
182
Trachea
Parathyroids
Leftlung
Right lung~
Thyroid
Right atrium
Left atrium
Ventricle
Stomach
Liver
ancreas
Gall bladder
 Adrenal glands
Small intestine
Testes
Ductus deferens
Spleen
Kidney
Colon
Hemipenissac
Fig. I5.5 Internal anatomy of a lizard.
mobile and is able to protrude some distance out of the mouth.
Urogenita! system
   s,  e -  r  e 
There is no urinary bladder in snakes and the ureters empty into
roof of the moufh and informafion is conveyed by a branch of the
the urodeum secfion of the cloaca. Male snakes possess invaginated
olfactory nerve to the brain. As the body of the snake is long and
hermipenes that lie in the base of the tail just caudal to the vent.
thin the organs are arranged along its length rather than across the
The hemipenis evaginates into the cloaca of the female to trans-
body (Fig. 15.11). The stomach is elongated but the intestines are
 mit sperm during copulation. Females of very slender species of
relatively short, reflecting the carnivorous diet.
 snake have only one oviduct and ovary.
Chapter 15 Reptiles and fish
183
Testis
Oviduct
Right efferent
renal vein
2
Spermatic
duct
Ovary
W
Bladder-
Kidney
Urinary
bladder
Ureter
Cloaca
Kidney
Ureter
Fig. I5.7 Urogenital system of a female lizard.
Cloaca
are two groups of jawed fish: the cartilaginous fish (sharks and rays)
and the bony fish, which includes all the ornamental fish likely to
  d  sh  q n    i s
the teleosts, which comprises 20 000 species divided into the lower
Hemipenis
Teleosts, e.g. carp, salmon and catfish, and the higher teleosts, e.g.
perch, sticklebacks and mackerel. They are found in a wide range
of habitats all over the world. Many groups of fish kept in captiv-
Fig. I5.6 Urogenital system of a male lizard.
ity have been selectively bred, e.g goldfish, which has led to the
 development of an enormous range of fins, eyes, colour, tails and
size. All teleosts have a similar general structure.
Sexua! differentiation
The method used to determine fhe sex of a snake depends on its
General anatomy
species.
● Sexual dirmorphism - in some species it is possible to differenfiate
Musculoskeleta! system
between the sexes by looking at the colour and the markings.
 The fiusiform shape of a fish makes it streamlined for swimming.
● Tail length - the tail is measured from the vent (the exit of the
Locomofion is facilitated by muscle blocks or myomeres arranged
cloaca) to the tip of the tail. The male usually has a longer
on either side of the axial skeleton (Fig. 15.12). This enables the
tail than the female and the area around the vent may be
body to bend laterally and generate the propulsive force to move
forward. The cranium is rigid and articulates with the bones of the
● Size - in some species the female is larger than the male.
jaws and opercula apparafus. The number of vertebrae varies; ribs
● Use of α probe - this requires experience and great care. A well
 in the thoracic region arficulate with the vertebrae and support 
hubricated blunt-ended rod is carefully introduced into fhe cloaca
the lateral walls of the body cavity.
pointing towards the tail. In the male, the probe will travel a
Fish possess fins, which are responsible for the fish's ability to
longer distance down the cloaca than it does in the female.
manoeuivre and remain stable in the water. The fins consist of tis-
  pe s iq  m sr q pas as
soft with many articulations (Fig. 15.13). The fins are aftached to
Fish
small muscles, which fold or extend the fins to produce rapid pre-
cise movements. The shape of the caudal fin or tail provides an indi-
Fish are ectothermic vertebrates that live and breafhe in water and
cation of the swimming habits of the fish, e.g. a forked tail enables
move with the aid of fins. There are over 30 000 species of fish,
the fish to swim at confinuous high speeds, while a truncated tail is
which makes them the most numerous of vertebrates. They range
seen in slow-moving species and allows them to make fast dashes.
in size from the finy Philippine Island goby, which measures less
Buoyancy in the water is achieved by a gas-filled swim bladder in
fhan 1 cm, to the whale shark, which measures up to 16m. There
the body of the fish, below the vertebral column (Fig. 15.14). The
SECTION 2 Exotic species
184
 Swim bladder problems are relatively common in aquarium fish.
 They present as an inabilty to float upright, to manoeuvre or to
Preanalpo
swim below the surface. Unfortunately there is very little treatment
for the condition.
Integument
Cloacal vent
Fish have a scaly skin covered by a layer of mucus, which has a fun-
gicidal and bacteriocidal function. Damage to the mucus covering
can lead to skin infections and to the formafion of ulcers. This layer
  h  x    s n r 
through the water by reducing frictional drag. The scales are flexible
bony plates on fhe skin and are arranged like overlapping roof tiles.
Special senses
Teleost fish have the same special senses as mammals, i.e. vision,
Cloacal vent
smell, taste, hearing and balance. They also have a lateral line sys-
二
term (Fig. 15.13). This consists of a series of shallow channels run-
ning over the surface of the body along the lateral midline. At
intervals along the line are small clumps of hair cells with tips
Femoral pores
that are embedded in a gelatinous cup or cupula. If these hair
cells are moved by outside vibrations they transmit the informa-
tion to the brain of the fish, which brings about the appropriate
response. The function of the lateral line is to detect disturbance
or vibrations in the water caused by objects such as other fish; the
lateral line therefore provides a 'touch at a distance' sense. This
Cloacal vent
aids the fish in both the detection of prey in the water and in the
avoidance of predafors and is thought to be involved in the abil-
je An je os Asns a on seus sr jo A
behave as one large orgarism.
Respiratory system
One of the most remarkable feafures of fish is their ability to
breathe in water - this is achieved using a specialised system of
gills (Fig. 15.15).
The gill system involves five lateral gill slits on each side of the
Cloacal vent
D
ing highly vascularised gill filaments. Projecting from these are
Fig. I5.8 Sexual differentiation in lizards. A, B Geckos: males have anal or
fine secondary filaments or larmellae. At the point where the gill
saod eowa aeu sae swe a' uoia peuinu al ui saod euead
slits open into the pharynx are stiff elongated projections from
 on  e s   'a  s   i 
the delicate gills from parficles thaf could damage them. The gills
specific gravity of the teleosts is greater than that of the surround-
are covered by protective flaps called the opercula (sing. opercit-
ing water so there is a tendency to sink if they remain staftionary. By
lum). Water is taken in through the mouth and passes over the
altering the volume of air in the swim bladder the fish can rise and
gills, where gaseous exchange takes place, after which the water
remain in one place - they achieve neutral buoyancy despite pres-
is forced out through the opercula.
sure changes in the water. The swim bladder has evolved from the
 primitive lung of the lower teleosts and is a thin-walled diverticu-
Circulatory system
The heart is a long, folded organ consisting of an atrium and a ven-
● Lower teleosts - the swim bladder is linked via a pneumafic
tricle. The circulation is described as being single (the marmmalian
duct to the foregut and is described as being physostormous.
circulation is double) because the blood passes through the heart
This type occurs mainly in shallow freshwater species. The
once per circulation. Blood leaves the ventricle and is pumped
 swim bladder is refilled by rising to the surface and taking
  x dsd h am s a oi se  n
a mouthful of air. In boftom-living species the swim bladder
tinues around the body through the other organs where it picks up
may be reduced, enabling them to feed on the river bed.
nutrients and delivers oxygen and nutrients to the tissues.In return
● Higher teleosts - there is no connection between the foregut and
it collects carbon dioxide and carries this to the gills where it is elim-
the swim bladder and the bladder is said to be physoclistous.
inated. Waste products are also collected and excreted via the kid-
The swim bladder is filled during larval development, when
neys. The blood then flows to the atrium of the heart in the veins.
be filled by a gas gland within the cells of the sac. The gas,
Digestive system
which consists mainly of carbon dioxide, is retained in the sac
The digestive system of teleost fish varies according to the type of
for life by its impermeable walls.
diet (Fig. 15.14). The method of ingestion depends largely upon
Chapter 15 Reptiles and fish
185
Vertebrae
Ribs
Fig. I5.9 Skeleton of a typical snake
suction facilifated by profrusion of the jaws. However, predatory
into the body fluids through the gills. The kidney compensates
fish have teeth on the front of their jaws and the roof of the mouth
for this and prevents the fish from 'bursting' by excreting large
and also throat teeth just in front of the oesophagus. These are
volumes of dilute urine. In the marine environment, the sifuafion
used for catching and holding their prey, which is usually swal-
is reversed - the surrounding water is hypertonic, so water is lost
lowed whole and head first. The gill rakers on the inner surface
from the body by passive diffusion through the gills. To conserve
of the gills prevent the food from exifing the mouth through the
normal amounts of water within the body the kidney excretes
opercula. Food passes into the stomach, which is tube-like, and
small volumes of concenfrated urine.
fhen into the intestine, which is a simple fube of a uniform dliam-
Nitrogenous waste is excreted by fish in the form of ammonia.
eter. The length and structure of the digestive tract varies greatly
          s
in a watery envirorment, which dilutes if. The most important
'sds s  n ads qia   h n
site of nitrogenous excretion in fish is the gill and not the kidneys
Waste materials are evacuated from the rectum and anus.
as in mammals.
Urinary system
Reproductive system
The kidneys lie ventral to the spine and in some species they may
The majority of teleosts have separate sexes, however there is
sit like a saddle on the swim bladder (Fig. 15.14). They have a
wide diversifty in the reproductive pafterns and some species may
number of funcfions including excrefion, haemopoiesis and the
secretion of hormones.
may be:
Osmoregulation varies between freshwater and marine fish. In
● External - the female lays her eggs in the water and they are
freshwater, the surrounding water is hypotonic so water passes
fertilised by the male sperm or milt; this rifual is known as
spawning. Very large numbers of eggs are produced because so
Orbit
many are lost to predators and in the moving water. The eggs
Cranium
may be scaftered, deposited in nests or buried in the mud af
the boftom. Mouth brooders collect the fertilised eggs in their
Squamosal
mouth until they hatch, affer which the young may use the
open mouth as a refuge.
Quadrate
● Internal - this is seen in live-bearing species such as guppies,
Fang
platies and swordtails. The male possesses a copulatory organ,
usually a modified anal fin, to introduce his sperm into the
female, which retains the fertilised eggs in her body. The
modified fin is known as a gonopodinm and is a means of
idenfifying the male. The female stores the milt in her oviduct
for several months and several broods can be produced from a
single mating. The young may be nourished within her body
Lower jaw
al are SunoA aa au pue ye Aeu sssa au no (snouudiai)
Fig. I5.l0 The bones of a snake skull.
expelled (oviviparous).
Trachea
Heart
Right lung 
Left lung
Oesophagus
Cloaca'
Left kidney
Ureter
Liver
Stomach
Small intestine
Right kidney
Spleen
Gallbladder
Pancreas
Testes
Fig. I5.II Internal anatomy of a snake.
Fin ray support
Backbone
Spiny fin rays
Gill cover
Gill cover support
Soft fin rays
Brain case
Upper jaw
Softfin
Rib
Lower jaw
Soft fin rays
Anal spine
Fin ray support
Pelvic spine
Pectoral girdle
(fin support)
 Pelvic' girdle
(fin support)
Fig. I5.12 Skeletal structure of a fish.
Chapter 15 Reptiles and fish
187
Dorsal fin
Lateral line
Operculumorgill cover
Nostril
Caudal or tail fin
Anal fin
Barbel (paired)
Pelvic fin (paired)
Pectoral fin (paired)
Fig. I5.13 External anatomy of a bony fish.
Swim bladder
Stomach
Kidney
Spinal cord
inside vertebrae
Brain
Gill arch
Urine bladder
Vent (anus)-
Spleen-
Oesophagus
Ovary-
Liver
Heart
Intestine-
Pyloric pouches-
Fig. I5.14 Internal anatomy of a bony fish.
SECTION 2 Exotic species
188
Gill raker
Gill filaments
Operculum
Water flow
Gill arch
Afferent and
efferentbloodvessels
Secondary lamellae
Gill skeleton
Gill filaments
(primary lamellae)
Gill arch
Water flow
Opercular cavity
Waterflo
-Mouth
Buccal cavity
Gill arch
Gillfilament
Gill slit
Operculum
Opercular cavity
Fig. I5.15 The gill systerm of a fish. A Head with the operculum removed. B
Structure of a single gill. C Horizontal section to show direction of water flow 
through the buccal cavity.
SECTION 2 Exotic species
CHAPTER
16
The horse
Rachael Cook
Catherine Phillips
 The horse appeared in its earliest form 55 million years ago as
● The appendicular skeleton comprising the bones that form the
limbs and including the pelvis, which aftaches the hindlimb,
toes on the fore limb and three on the hind limb and a weight-
and the scapula, which affaches the forelimb.
bearing pad under the central toe on each foot. Its teeth were capa-
The funcfion of the skeleton is to provide a rigid framework for
ble of chewing succulent leaves. During its evolution over a period
support, protection and movement. It also provides a storage
of many millions of years the number of toes reduced arnd the cen-
facility for minerals, principally calcium and phosphorus.
 s s r s e   q n pe s
sequenfially replaced by several others with similar skeletal struc-
The skull
 tures and increasingly efficient teeth suitable for eating grass.
During the Lower Pliocene period 10 million years ago,
The equine skull(Fig. 16.2) is made up of approximately 37 fused
 Pliohippus, a fully hoofed animal three times the size of the origi-
   e s    ss
nal Eohippus, emerged and, by the time Homo sapiens had evolved,
only moving part is the temporo-mandibular joint, which is
essential for chewing. The major components of the skull are:
originally come from North America and then migrated south-
● Mandible - forms the lower jaw
● Maxilla - forms the upper jaw
extinct in the Americas 8000 years ago and the different species of
● Incisive bone or pre-maxilla - houses the incisor teeth of the
Equus developed in Asia, Africa and Europe as a result of the dif-
ferent climates and terrains.
upper jaw
● Orbit - the eye socket, formed by contributions from several
The domestic horse Equus caballus is a sociable or herd-living
animal, which, as its wild ancestors might have fallen prey to many
bones
different carrivorous species, still retains its primitive instinct to
● Frontal bone - forms the forehead
run The horse has the ability to move very fast, an aspect fhat has
● Nasal bones - forms the nasal cavity.
been further developed by selective breeding. Much of its muscu-
The functions of the skull are:
digit where weight is born on the toe, the well-developed muscles
I. To protect the soff tissues of the head, i.e. brain, eye and inner
high up on the hind quarters and the sequences in which the feet
ear
are lifted from the ground to bring about the different speeds of
 2. To provide attachment for the hyoid apparatus, which
locomotion. As a herd of horses must always be prepared for sud-
suspends the tongue and the larynx
den flight they are reluctant to lie down to sleep and this has led to
'sheredde Aess pue Arosuadsns aut go uognoaa au
3. To provide support for the dentition
Horses evolved to roam large areas in search of food. This was
4. To provide aftachment for the muscles of facial expression
mainly poor-quality grass, which was eaten constantly (grazed) and
 5. To form an opening for the entry of air and food.
digested slowly. The flattened table teeth, which grind the grass
into boluses that can be easily swallowed, the long length of intes-
 fine providing room for the slow digestive progress of tough fibrous
The vertebral column
ingesta and the large caecum and colon designed to provide a cham-
ber for the microbial breakdown of cellulose in the plant cell walls all
The vertebral column extends from the base of the skull to the fip
enabled the horse to colonise and survive in its ecological niche.
of the tail and consists of approximately 54 individual vertebrae
Much of the anatomy and physiology is similar to that of the
(Fig. 16.1).
dog and this chapter is designed to highlight the differences
The function of the vertebral column is:
I. To form a stiff but flexible rod to support the body
tious detail.
2. To house and protect the spinal cord
The skeletal system
 3. To provide sites of inserfion for muscles
4. To provide a means of aftachment for the pelvis and ribs.
 The equine skeleton (Fig. 16.1) consists of two separate sections:
The vertebrae in the horse (Fig. 16.3) are grouped into regions as
● The axial skeleton comprising the skull, vertebral column, ribs
they are in the cat and the dog, although the numbers of each ver-
and stermum
tebrae may be different.
190
SECTION 2 Exotic species
Cervical vertebrae
Thoracicvertebrae
Lumbar vertebrae
Sacrum
Skull
Coccygeal vertebrae
 Scapula
Femur
Humerus
Fibula
UIna
Tibia
Radius
Sternum
Rib
Pelvis
Patella
Tarsal bone
Carpus
 Accessory carpal bone
Metacarpus
Metatarsal
Proximal phalanx (P1)-
Proximal sesamoid
PI
Middle phalanx (P2)
P2
Distal phalanx (P3)
Distal sesamoid
P3
Fig. I6.I The skeleton of the horse. (With permission from Aspinall V 2006. The complete textbook of veterinary nursing. Butterworth-
Heinemann, London, p 134.)
● Lumbar vertebrae (5-7; normally 6) - 1located in the loin area
Vertebral formula for the dog and cat: C7,T13, L7, S3, Cd 20-23
and play a role in the protection of the kidneys. The vertebrae
Vertebral formula for the horse: C7,T18, L6, S5, Cd15-20 
possess large transverse processes, which restrict lateral
The vertebrae Fig. 16.3 in each region vary in size and shape,
those of the thoracic vertebrae; however dorsoventral flexion
which relates to their movement and function.
still remains limited.
● Cervical vertebrae (7) - found in the neck. The first two are the
● Sacral vertebrae (5 fused to form the sacrum) - found in the
atlas (C1), distinguished by its large, wing-shaped processes,
croup area at the root of the tail. Fusion of the vertebrae in this
and the axis (C2), distinguished by a prominent cranial
area means that movement is highly restricted. The pelvis is
 process known as the dens. These vertebrae have a large range
aftached to the sacrum by an interosseous ligament, which
of mofion as they are not inhibited by spinous or transverse
forms the sacroiliac joint.
processes. The remaining vertebrae (C3-C7) all follow a
● Coccygeal or caudal vertebrae (15-20; average 18) - the coccygeal
similar basic paftern (see Ch. 3).
vertebrae have a basic shape with very small spinous and
● Thoracic vertebrae (18) - these form the dorsal boundary of
transverse processes. Towards the end of the tail the vertebrae
the thoracic cavity. The first 7-8 vertebrae are covered and
are liffle more than rods, which allows great mobility of the tail.
protected by the scapula. The thoracic vertebrae have large 
spinous processes, of which T4-T9, make up the withers of the
The ribs and sternum
horse. The transverse processes have small accommodating
facets allowing for the connection of the ribs. The spinous
The horse has 18 ribs, although this may vary in some individuals
 processes make dorsoventral flexion restricted and lateral
(Fig. 16.1). The ribs play an essenfial role in housing and protect-
flexion minimal. It is the thoracic vertebrae in combinafion wifh
ing the vital internal organs of the thorax. The ribs may be sepa-
the muscles that lie beneath that support the rider's weight.
rated into two groups:
Chapter 16 The horse
191
Coronoid process
Zygomatic
Zygomatic
arch
process
Parietal bone
Temporal bone
Infraorbital foramen
Incisive bone
Nuchal crest
Orbit
Maxilla
Occipital condyle
Ramus
Temporomandibular joint
Premolars
Molars
Incisors
Tush
Mental foramen
Mandible
Zygomatic  Orbit
Zygomatic
Facial crest
bone
arch
facial crest
Nasomaxillary notch-
Maxilla
Occipital bone
 Frontal
Nasal
bone 
Parietal
Incisive
bone
bone
Superior
foramen
nuchal line
Lachrimal
bone
 Parietal crest
Body of
Nasal process
Interparietal bone
incisive bone
of incisive bone
Infraorbital
Squamous temporal
B
foramen
 Supraorbital foramen 
bone
Fig. I6.2 The equine skull. A Lateral view. B Dorsal view. (VWith permission from Aspinall V 2006. The com-
plete textbook of veterinary nursing. Butterworth-Heinemann, London, p 135.)
● The first eight ribs are the 'true' or 'sternal' ribs, i.e. those that
 at which it lies allows for great shock absorption during
are aftached directly to the sternum
 movement (Fig. 16.1). The humerus is one of the strongest 
● The final ten ribs are the 'false' or 'asternal' ribs, i.e. those
bones in the equine body.
a o ae a ynl r ar e e are je
● Radins and uina - in the horse fhese fwo bones are fused. All
sternum. These form the costal arch.
digit of the primordial pentadactyl limb. The weight is then
 The appendicular skeleton
carried up the strong, single fused bone. The olecranon
process at the proximal end of the ulna forrms the point of the
The forelimb
elbow. The radius, which lies on the medial side of the fused
Like the dog, the horse has no clavicle or bony connection between
bone, bears most of the weight (Fig. 16.4).
the thorax and the forelimbs, which are merely aftached by mus-
● Carpus (Fig. 16.5) - known as the knee and made up of eight
cular slings, allowing for shock absorption during locomotion.
The bones of the forelimb (Fig. 16.4) are:
assists in the absorption and distribution of the concussion that
● Scapula - a large, flat, triangular bone. The scapular spine
travels up the horse's forelimb. The carpus is the equivalent of 
divides the bone down the middle, each side allowing for
the human wrist and fhe bones are arranged as follows:
 the insertion and aftachment of the supraspinatus and
O Llpper row - running from the medial to lateral surfaces
infraspinafus muscles. A wing of cartilage lies af the proximal
radial carpal, intermediate, ulnar and accessory carpals. The
end, allowing for further aftachment of muscle and connection
accessory carpal bone lies behind the ulnar carpal and does
with the thoracic sling. The scapula meets with the humerus to
not directly bear weight.
form the shoulder joint.
O Lower row - these bones simply relate to the metacarpals
● Humerus - articulates with the scapula and the radius and
which lie distal to them and are numbered from II to IV
ulna at the shoulder and elbow joint respecfively. The angle
rurring from medial to lateral.
SECTION 2 Exotic species
192
A Atlas (CI)
 Scapular cartilage
Tuberosity of scapular spine
Scapular
Scapular spine
B Axis (C2)
 Supraglenoid tubercle
Glenoid cavity
Head of humerus
Humerus
Deltoid tuberosity
Olecranon fossa
Olecranon
C 3rd to 7th cervical
UIna
Dens
Condyle
vertebrae
Tubercle for lateral
collateral ligament
Radius
-Interosseous space
D
Thoracic
vertebra
Lateral styloid process
Transverse
Accessory carpal
foramen
 Proximal and distal row
E Lumbar
Proximal phalanx
of carpal bones
vertebra
-Cannon bone
Costal fovea
Middle phalanx
Splint bone
Distal phalanx
 Proximal sesamoid bones
Fig. I6.4 The equine forelimb. (With permission from Aspinall V. 2006.
The complete textbook of veterinary nursing. Butterworth-Heinemann,
London, p 136.)
the back of the metacarpophalangeal or fetlock joint and the distal
sesamoid or navicular bone lies at the back of the pedal bone
 ro ssed e suut a r uass Ad e se jpe oi st
Fig. I6.3 The shape of each vertebral type. AAtlas - Cl.B Axis - C2.
thus reducing friction and improving efficiency of movement.
C C3-C7. DThoracic vertebra. E Lumbar vertebra. F Sacrum.
The hindlimb
The bones of the hindlimb (Fig. 16.6) are:
● Metacarpals - there are fhree metacarpal bones in the horse,
 which may be numbered 2-4. Of these the third or large
Pelvis
metacarpal, also referred to as the cannon bone, is fully
The pelvic girdle (Fig. 16.7) links the spine and the hindlimb and
developed and is the weight-bearer. Metacarpals 2 and 4 are
much smaller and lie on either side of the cannon bone. They
is composed of three large flat bones the pubis, the ischium and
fhe ilium. The pubis forms the floor of the pelvis with the ischium
are referred to as the splint bones.
● Phalanges (pasterns and pedal bone)- the horse takes its
lying caudal to it. The fuber ischii can be felt at fhe point of but-
tock. The ilium is the largest bone in the pelvis and is the upper,
almost verfical portion. The wings or tubera sacrales of the ilium can
weight on digits 2-5 - digit 1 being the dew claw). Three
 be felt at the croup and the tuber coxae forms the points of the hip.
phalanges form the digit. Starting from the proximal end,
the first (proximal) phalanx is known as the long pastern,
All three bones meet to form the acetabulum or hip socket. The hip
the second (distal) phalanx is the short pastern and the third
(middle) phalanx is the pedal bone, which is encased in the
● Femur - a large strong bone that provides a large area for the
hoof. Vital ligaments and tendons run down and around
 attachment of major muscles of the hind limb. These are largely
 these bones providing movement and support (Fig. 16.9).
 responsible for generating power and locomotion in the horse.
O Fetlock joint - lies between the cannon bone and the long
pastern.
 pulley for the tendons that run over the stifle joint between
O Pastern joint - lies between the long and the short pastern.
the femur and the tibia. The stifle joint is formed by the distal
O Coffin joint - lies befween the short pastern and the pedal
femur, proximal tibia and patella.
 bone and incorporates the navicular bone.
● Tibia and fibula - the tibia runs down diagonally from the femur
● Sesamoids (proximal and distal) - there are three sesamoid bones
to the hock and is the larger of the two bones allowing for the
in the lower leg. There are fwo proximal sesamoids located at
affachment of the major muscles responsible for the movemenf
Chapter 16 The horse
193
Radiu
Radius
 Intermediate carpal bone
 Intermediate carpal bone
 Accessory carpal bone 
 Radial carpal bone
Ulnar carpal bone
Unar carpal bone
Ill carpal bone
Il carpal bone
Ill metacarpal
 bone.
(canon)
IV carpal bone
IV carpal bone
Ill metacarpal
 IV metacarpal Il metacarpal bone
IV metacarpal bone
bone
bone
(medial splint)
(lateral splint)
A
B
Fig. I6.5 The equine carpus. (With permission from Aspinall V. 2006. The complete textbook of veterinary
nursing. Butterworth-Heinemann, London, p I 36.)
row is made up of the first and second tarsal bone, which are
Sacral tuber
fused, and the third tarsal bone. Finally, the fourth tarsal bone
Coxal tuber
is housed in spaces in the middle and lower rows. The body
of the calcaneus is extended at its proximal end to form the
Hip bone
tuber calcis or point of the hock, to which the Achilles tendon is
aftached.
Head of femur
● Metacarpals, phalanges and sesamoids - the arrangement of the
Ischial tuber
bones distal to the hock follows the same paftern as in the
forelimb.
Femur
Patella-
The muscular system
Femoral condyle
The muscular system is made up of striated muscle fhat is
Fibula
aftached to the skeleton and is under voluntary control. The func-
tion of muscle is to bring about movement.
Tibia
The arrangement of the superficial muscles covering the neck,
thorax and abdomen (Fig. 16.8) is similar to that in the dog and
cat, wifth the obvious difference fhaf many are befter developed to
Calcaneous
Central tarsal
 bring about the rapid locomofion characteristic of the horse.
Talus
The limbs of the horse are superbly adapted for speed, although
 at rest both the fore- and hindlimbs support the body. The fore-
Fourth tarsal
Third tarsal
limbs, which should be more or less straight, carry about 60%
Metatarsal IV (lateral splint bone)
of the weight and absorb most of the shock during locomofion,
especially when landing from a jump. The hindlimbs are more
Metatarsal Ill (cannon bone)
angled and provide the main propulsive force. Details of the most
sigrificant muscles are shown in Table 16.1.
The hamstring group of muscles, i.e. biceps femoris, semiten-
Proximal sesamoid bones
dinosus and semimembranosus, create the well-rounded croup
Proximal, middle and distal
area of the body. Their action is to extend the hip and flex fhe
phalanges
stifle, which provides the main forward thrust and is responsible
for the speed of the animal.
Fig. I6.6 The equine hindlimb.
Soft tissues of the equine lower leg
of the lower leg. The fibula is much smaller and thinner and
lies along the lateral border of the tibia It tapers to a point at
The horse is a prey animal and during its evolufion it has devel-
fhe lower fhird of the tibia where if is fused to the tibia.
oped the furn of speed necessary to escape predators. To reduce
● Tarsus (hock) - composed of six small bones, sometimes seven.
weight and bulk and improve manoeuvrability there is liffle or
 The bones are arranged in three rows, which are tightly bound
no muscle below the knee (carpus) and hock (tarsus). The lack of
by ligaments. The bones of the upper row are the talus and the
 muscle as a protective layer suggests that these structures will be
calcanens; the central tarsus makes up the middle row; the fhird
vulnerable to stress and trauma.
SECTION 2 Exotic species
194
Tuber sacrale
Sacral spines
Crest of ilium
Tuber sacrale
Tuber
coxae
llium
Ischium
Acetabulum
Tuber coxae
ischii
Pubis
Tuber ischii
A
Ischial arch
Fig. I6.7 The pelvic girdle of the horse. A Right lateral view. B Dorsal view. (WWith permission from Sisson S 1953 Anatomy of the domestic anirmals
4th edn. VB Saunders, Philadelphia, PA, p I 05.)
19
20
Fig. I6.8 Superficial muscles of the horse. I, Rhomboideus; 2, splenius; 3, sternocephalicus; 3', jugular vein; 4,
brachiocephalicus; 5, cutaneous colli; 6, omotransversarius;: 7, serratus ventralis; 8, trapezius; 9, subclavius; 10,
simus dorsi; 14, cephalic vein; 15, external abdominal oblique; 16, stump of cutaneous trunci forming flank fold;
17, sheath; 18, medial saphenous vein; 19, tensor fasciae latae; 20, gluteus superficialis; 21, biceps femoris; 22,
3rd edn. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, PA, p 570.)
Chapter 16 The horse
195
Table I6.1 Important muscles of the horse
Muscle
Action
Origin
Insertion
 Brachiocephalicus
 Movement of head and neck.
Wing of atlas (first cervical
 Humerus and shoulder
 Protracts forelimb and extends shoulder
vertebra)
 Sternocephalicus
 Movement of head and neck forwards and 
 Sternum
Mandible 
Rhomboideus
 Raises shoulder
 Nuchal ligament and occipital
Scapular (cartilage at
bone
 proximal end)
Splenius 
 Bevates and flexes the neck
 Behind the poll (at the base
Beginning of the trapezius muscle (start
of the skull}
of thoracic vertebrae)
 Trapezius
 Bevates and moves shoulder
 Occipital bone, last cervical
Spine of the scapula
vertebra (C7) and first 10
thoracic vertebrae (T10)
 Longissimus dorsi
Fexes the back and trunk, supports the
 llium, sacrum and thoracic 
Thoracic vertebrae, last few cervical
head and neck (supports the rider's weight)
vertebrae
vertebrae (C4-7), lumbar vertebrae and 
ribs
Latissimus dorsi
 Retracts forelimb and flexes shoulder
Thoracic and lumbar
Humerus 
vertebrae
Deltoid 
 Abducts forelimb, flexes shoulder
Spine of scapula
 Proximal humerus 
Pectoral
 Protracts and retracts forelimb.
Sternum 
Humerus and scapula 
Abducts limb 
Supraspinatus
Extends forelimb
 Scapular spine and cartilage
 Proximal humerus, point 
of shoulder
 Infraspinatus
Abducts and rotates forelimb
 Scapula, caudal aspect
Humerus 
Triceps
Extends elbow
 Scapula and humerus 
 Olecranon process of the ulna
 Superficial gluteals
 Fexes and extends hip, pulls hindlimb 
Tuber coxae of the pelvis
 Proximal end of the femur
 towards the body
 Biceps femoris
 Extends the hip, flexes the stifle and 
Sacroiliac joint and tuber
 Femur, patella and proximal tibia
 extends the hock
ischi of the pelvis 
 Semitendinosus
 Extends the hip, flexes the stifle and 
Tuber ischi of the pelvis 
Proximal tibia
 extends the hock
 Semimembranosus 
 Extends the hip and flexes the stifle 
Pelvis
 Distal femur and tibia
Gastrocnemius
 Fexes the stifle and extends the hock
 Femur
Hock
The horse has evolved from a three- to four-toed, dog-like ani-
Important tendons found within the lower leg (Fig. 16.9)
mal into the large animal taking its weight on one digit that we rec-
include:
ognise today. The cenfral digit is encased in a hoof while the outer
● Deep digital flexor tendon - runs from the deep digital flexor
muscle down the back of the limb, over the cannon bone and
 ground. This arrangement adds to the horse's ability to run fast.
the proximal and distal sesamoids. It aftaches to the third
phalanx (P3 or fhe pedal bone). Its function is to flex the foe
Ligaments and tendons
·Superficial digital flexor tendon- runs from the superficial
digital flexor muscle down the back of the limb, passes over
Tendons, formed from dense connective tissue, affach muscle to
the cannon bone and proximal sesamoids and then splits into
bone. Their function is to harness the pull from muscle confrac-
two with one branch aftaching to P1 and the other to P2. Its
tion that brings about movement. They are less elastic than mus-
funcfion is to flex fhe pastern joint 
cle fibre and have a poor blood supply, which may have an effect
● Common digital extensor tendon - runs from the common digital
 on healing.
extensor muscle down the front of the limb over the cannon
SECTION 2 Exotic species
196
● Suspensory ligament - this very important structure is often
referred to as a modified muscle, as it is slightly more elastic
than other ligaments and tendons because of the presence
of some muscle tissue. The suspensory ligament runs down
Large metacarpal
Carpal check
the back of the limb close to the carnon bone to the level of
ligament
(cannon bone)
the proximal sesamoids, where it splits in to two. The fwo
 Small metacar pal 
branches run either side of the fetlock joint to the front of
Suspensory ligament
the limb, connecting with the extensor tendon at the level of
(splint bone)
P1 (Fig. 16.9). The function of the ligament is to support and
Common digital
suspend the fetlock and prevent over-extension.
extensor tendon
Deep digital flexor
● Check ligarments - there are several in both the fore and hind
tendon (DDFT)
limb. They are:
Lateral digital 
Superficial digital
 O Carpal check ligament
extensor tendon
flexor tendon (SDFT)
 O Radial check ligament
O Tarsal check ligament.
Fetlock joint
Check ligaments connect ligament to tendon and their func-
Annular ligament
tion is to prevent strain or over-extension of the joint. The car-
Ist phalanx
pal check ligament lies just below the carpus and aftaches the
(long pastern)
Branch of suspensory
dleep digital flexor tendon to the suspensory ligament, which
ligament
in turn is aftached to the back of the carpus (Fig. 16.9). The
Pastern joint
tarsal check ligament occupies a similar posifion on the tarsus.
The radial check ligament lies higher up the forelimb on the back
2nd phalanx
of the distal radius.
(short pastern)
The ligaments and tendons in the lower fore- and hindlimbs work
Coffin joint
in conjunction with a variety of muscles to form the suspensory
Distal sesamoid
seredde Arosuadsns an go uosuny au (tit ) snundde
3rd (distal) -
(navicular)
phalanx (pedal
aard pe po! yoan pue qu an padsns pue joddns o s
bone)
Over-extension and collapse of the limb. It consists of the suspen-
sory, intersesamoidean, collateral sesarmoidean and distal sesamoidean
Fig. I6.9 Lateral view of the lower forelimb showing bones, joints,
ligaments, which are aftached to the proximal sesamoid bones.
tendons and ligaments.
 In addition, the suspensory apparatus also contributes to the
bone and inserts on P1, 2 and 3. Its function is to extend the
various muscles, ligaments and tendons in both the fore- and
 pastern joint and the toe
hindlimbs which lock the limbs and joints into position, enabling 
● Lateral digital extensor tendon - lies on the lateral side of the
the horse to rest and sleep in a standing position. The stifle joint 
common digital extensor tendon, running down the limb over
 of one limb becomes fully locked when most of the body weight
the cannon bone and aftaching to P1. Its function is to assist in
   r    sn     q  
the extension of the pastern joint.
  e        s
Ligaments aftach bone to bone and are similar in structure to ten-
weight to the other limb when the muscles begin to tire. This trait
dons. They are relatively less elastic than tendons and, as fhey
is unique to the horse and has evolved because, as a prey ani-
also have a poor blood supply, healing can be prolonged.
mal, the wild horse must be able to make a rapid escape from
Femur.
Superficial digital
Patella 
flexor tendon
Superficial digital
Stifle
Patella ligaments
flexor tendon
joint
Tibia
Deep digital
flexor tendon
Hock
Peroneus
joint
Suspensory ligament
Fig. I6.10 The stay apparatus and suspensory apparatus of the hindlimb. (With permission from AspinallV 2006. The
complete textbook of veterinary nursing. Butterworth-Heinemann, London, p 141.)
Chapter 16 The horse
197
predators but still must be able to rest. Lying down to sleep would
It consists of the following parts:
make it more vulnerable to aftack.
in blood circulafion, absorption of concussion and to a certain
Structure of the foot and hoof
extent grip
● Sole - should be concave in shape and support and protect
The equine foot is a complex and important structure. There is a
the structures within the foot. The thickness of the sole
saying within the equine industry: 'No foot no horse' - if the foot
varies from horse to horse but generally the horn of the sole
is injured the horse will not be able to work and there will be no
is less thick than the horn of the hoof wall and is therefore
point in keeping it! Knowledge of the anatomy of the foot and its
 susceptible to bruising
care is extremely important.
● Bulbs of heel - located at the back of the foot and work with the
Externa! structures
frog and sole to assist with circulation and expansion of the
foot when it makes contact with the ground
The internal structures of the foot are surrounded by a protec
● Seat of corn - the point on the sole where the bars make an
five external capsule called the hoof (Fig. 16.11). This is a tough
angle with the wall of the hoof (Fig. 16.11C)
Outer covering of epidermal tissue known as horn, which is insen-
sitive and overlies the sensitive dermis. The insensitivity of horn
● Bars - allow for expansion of the foot and provide strength
● Coronet or coronary band - the point from which the horn tissue
and to wear shoes held in place by nails knocked into the wall of
 grows and extends. Horn can take 9-12 months to grow down
the hoof. The hoof provides grip, absorbs concussion and pro-
from the coronet to the tip of the toe on the ground surface.
motes circulation.
The hoof wall is slightly thicker at the toe than the heel
Perioplic corium
Coronary corium
Laminar corium
Solar corium
Perioplic sulcus
Coronary
Corium of
the frog
sulcus 
Frog stay
Stratum medium
of the hoof
wall -
Epidermal
laminae
Internal surface of the sole
B
Metacar pal I-
Toe
Proximal
Water line
sesamoid bone
White line
Superficial digital
-Point of frog
flexor tendon
Quarters
Frog
Extensor tendon
Sesamoidian
ligaments
Sole
Deep digital
Bars
flexor tendon
Heel-
Seat of corn
Hoof wall
Distal sesamoid
(angle of heel)
P3
(navicular bone)
Cleft
Buttress of heel
White line
Digital cusion
or frog
Commissures
c
Bulbs
Fig. I6.II Parts of the equine foot. A Lateral view of the distal part of the forelimb. B Dissected view of the relationships of the hoof to the
underlying regions of the corium. C Weight-bearing surfa.ce. (With permission from Aspinall V 2006. The complete textbook of veterinary nursing.
 Butterworth-Heinemann, London, p I38.)
198
SECTION 2 Exotic species
● White line - marks the boundary between the internal and
● Corium - this is continuous with the skin of the lower leg at
external strucfures of the foot. The white line is used as a
the coronet and is the sensiftive modified vascular dermis of
guide by the farrier when nailing shoes on to the hoof. It is
the foot, which is named according to the insensitive parts of
sensitive and, if it is penefrated or pinched by an incorrectly
the hoof that it underruns (Fig. 16.11B):
posifioned nail, the horse will become lame
O Perioplic corium - supplies the periople with nutrients
● Periople - forms an outer layer to protect the hoof and
O Coronary corium - produces and nourishes the hoof wall
maintain moisture levels, which prevent the hoof from
O Laminar corium - consists of the sensitive laminae aftached
becoming dry and briftle.
to the periosteum of the pedal bone. These interlock with
the insensitive laminae of the hoof wall It supports the
Interna! structures
pedal bone and therefore the weight of the horse
Inside the hoof are the more sensitive tissues (Fig. 16.11). These
O Sole corium - aftaches the sole of the pedal bone to the horny
consist of:
sole of the foot
● Bones - rurning from the proximal end to the ground surface
 O Frog corium - provides nourishment to the digital cushion
these are the short pastern or second phalanx, the pedal bone
 and functions with the frog.
or third phalanx, and the navicular bone or distal sesamoid
(Fig. 16.11A)
Locomotion
● Digital cushion- this wedge-shaped structure sits just above
the frog and fills the space above the heel of the foot (Fig.
The sequence in which a horse lifts its feet from the ground is
 n s   ae   si q se p
16.11C). It assists with the absorption of concussion and
which define the speed at which the horse moves (Fig. 16.12):
encourages circulation around the tissues of the foot and
lower limb every time the foot impacts with the ground
●Walk - this is the slowest gait, during which each foot comes
● Lateral cartilages - two curved discs of cartilage aftached to the
down separately and weight is taken equally on all four feet,
 pedal bone that can be felt just above the coronet band. They
which are lifted one at a time
work with the digital cushion to assist with the circulation in
● Trot - the body is altermately balanced on diagonally opposite 
the foot and to absorb shock. In younger horses the cartilages
feet, i.e. left fore foot with right hind foot and right fore foot
with left hind foot
fibrous. In cases of extreme trauma and prolonged concussion
au um u aud Suofe st arau doe e Sup - do o
they may calcify, causing problems wifh soundness
of the feet are on the ground and they are gathered under the
Walk: right hind, right fore, left hind, left fore.
RH
vith left hind.
RH
Gallop:therei
RF
Floating phase
Canter
RH
RF
Floating phase
Fig. I6.12 The gaits of the horse. A Walk. B Trot. C. Gallop. D Canter.
Chapter 16 The horse
199
body. When the horse is galloping there are never more than
The eye
two legs on the ground at the same time. A canter is a slower
form of the gallop in which both hind feet are still on the
The eye is the organ of sight located within the orbital cavity of
 ground when the first fore foot returns to the ground.
the skull and supplied by the optic nerve (Il), which carries nerve
 r n    n s    s
The nervous system
eyeball is compressed from front to back and is wider than it is
high. It is proportionally larger in relation to its size than the eye
of other species. Each eyeball is prominent and sits high up on the
The nervous system of the horse responds to external and internal
 side of the head, a posiftion also seen in other prey animals such
stimuli and works closely with the ofher body systems, particularly
as the rabbit and the sheep. This gives the horse a wide range of
monocular vision and allows it to put its head down to eat while
The strucfure and function of the nervous system, which is
keeping watch for predators (Fig. 16. 13). There is only a small
largely the same as that in the dog and cat, can be broken down
area of binocular or 3D vision in front of the head, which allows
 into several component parts:
● Brain - housed within the cranium of the skull
and shape of the muzzle.
● Spinal cord - housed within the central canal of the vertebrae
The basic structure of the eye is similar to that in the dog and
● Peripheral nerves - located throughout the body tissues
cat, with the following differences:
 extending to the peripheral and distal anatomy.
+ The cornea is relatively small and oval
 For further details of nervous system structure and function, see
● The choroid contains a tapefum lucidum that lies dorsal to the
Chapter 5.
optic disc and is bluish green in colour
● The ciliary muscle, which is responsible for altering the
The special senses
 shape of the lens to focus images on to the retina, is poorly
developed and weak, which means that the equine lerns is
lunable to accommodate as efficiently as those of the dog and
The horse is an animal of flight, relying heavily on all its senses to
the cat
survive. The special senses are closely linked to the behavioural
responses and it is important to remember that no amount of
● The iris is generally dark brown and the pupil within it is
training can remove the natural flight response, which makes the
a horizontal oval shape but becomes more rounded as if
horse a volatile patient to handle and nurse.
contracts. Newborn foals have a rounded pupil
● On the margins of the iris, particularly on the upper part, there
The ear
is a curly, fan-shaped structure called the corpora nigra which
is thought to provide additional shading for the retina to limit
-e  sqeua um Apoq a jo u pre ue si ea a
the entry of light
mal to hear and provides ift with the sersation of balance. The organ
is divided into external, middle and inner parts. The external and
middle sections are responsible for fhe collection and trarsmission
of sound waves to the inner ear, which fransforms them info nerve
Blind spot
impulses to be interpreted by the brain. The middle and inner ear is
enclosed within the temporal bone of the skull and only the pinna
and the external part of the auditory canal are acfually visible. The
 pinna or ear flap istriangular and rolled distally into a funnel shape.
In the horse if is quite mobile and can be furned in the direction of
sounds. It also plays an important part in the facial expression of the 
animal, allowing the veterinary nurse to understand the behavioural
and emotional state of the pafient and predict any response to exter-
nal stimuli.
The guttural pouch lies within the skull of the horse and is a thin
mucosal caudovenfral pocket or diverficulum of the Eustachian
Wide range
(auditory) tube that connects the nasopharynx to the middle ear.
of 2D or
 There is one pouch on each side of the head and each may be
monocular vision
found between fhe base of the skull and the aflas (C1) and the
pharynx and the beginning of the oesophagus. There are many
important strucfures that lie very close to the guffural pouch
including the carofid artery and cranial nerves IX, X, XI and XII.
Regular endoscopy of the guttural pouches is recommended to
check their health and that the vital structures lying close to these
delicate structures are not being damaged by infection. Conditions
Xueduk (pall-snd) ewaldwa apnpu! saysnod jeunng ayt jo
(air-filled and distended), mycosis (fungal infection) and neoplasia
Narrow range of 3D
Xew ynba inba snoondans Ag pasnes saeuenns 'erewouelau se yons
 or binocular vision
also involve the guttural pouches.
Fig. I6.13 Range of vision seen in the horse.
SECTION 2 Exotic species
200
● The retina is offen described as being a ramp retina. The
Puse rate is measuedbyappling gentle digtalpressure to the focial arery
compressed shape of the eyeball means that all parts of the
retina are not equidistant from the lens. The upper or dorsal
as it curves upwards over an area just rostral to the angle of the jaw.
 part of the retina is further away and is used for near vision
Venepurcture is achieved by using the large external jugular veirn
as it runs down the neck. This can be raised by occluding it in the
 si   a o  si d a  r a 
for far vision. This makes up for the weakness of the ciliary
ventral part of the jugular groove.
muscle.
+ Lymphatic system - this system is responsible for returning
The position of the eyes on the head, the compressed shape of the
excess tissue fluid in the form of lymph from the tissues to
eyeball and the weakness of the ciliary muscles means that the horse
the circulation. It also monitors the presence of any foreign
does not locate and focus images on the retina as readily as some
material in the lymph by passing it through the lymph
predator species. This is not a problem for a prey species that does
nodes scattered along the course of the lymphafic vessels.
not need to catch its food. However when a horse is being ridden
Some superficial lymph nodes can be palpated as a part of a
and is expected to jump obstacles at speed it must be allowed to
normal health check. The parotid lymph nodes are not usually
see the obstacle from a distance using its binocular facility. As it
palpable but there are numerous mandibular nodes arranged in
gets closer to the jump, the jump goes out of focus and it has to
a forward-pointing V and lying within the intermandibular
remember the details. It then has to adjust the carriage of its head to
space. The retropharyngeal nodes are arranged in groups within
locate the image on the appropriate part of its retina.
the pharyngeal wall and drain all structures within the upper
part of the head. In cases of equine strangles, abscessation of
these nodes may lead to infection of the gutfural pouches.
The blood vascular system
The respiratory system
As in the dog and cat the blood vascular system is divided into
four main parts:
The respiratory system provides the strucfure and mecharism for
 Oxygen within atmospheric air to be taken into the lungs for effec-
● Blood - very similar in strucfure and function, although the
tive gaseous exchange and for carbon dioxide produced during
 diagnostic parameters, which are beyond the remit of this text,
cell metabolism to be expelled via the lungs. The parts of the sys-
are different.
tem are similar to those in the dog and cat.
The muzzle of the horse is large but the two nasal cham-
Neonatal isoerythrolysis is a blood condition affecting neonatal
bers within are much less spacious than might be expected, as
foals. The maternal antibodies transferred via the colostrum attack
the reserve parts of the cheek teeth and the extensive parana-
 the foal's erythrocytes and cause anaemia and jaundice. In severe
sal sinuses occupy a considerable amount of space. Air passes
cases this may result in the foal's death. A blood transfusion may be
into the chambers via two large flexible nostrils or external nares,
necessary and a gelding may be used as the blood donor.
which are able to dilate during periods of extreme exercise to
increase the volume of inspired air. The alar fold forms the ventral
margin of each nostril while the dorsal margin leads into a blind-
ending pouch called the false nostril. Each nasal chamber contains
larger part lying on the leff of centfre. The size varies with the
dorsal and venfral ethmoturbinates or conchae, which are delicate,
size of the horse and its function - the heart of a fhoroughbred
coiled bones covered by olfactory mucosa. The ethmoturbinates
is larger than fhat of a draff horse. This is a result parly
warm, filter and humidify the air before it reaches the frachea and
of inheritance and partly of training, but it may affect the
are important in the detection of smell. The right and leff nasal
arrangement of the organs around it. The heart usually extends
chambers extend caudally and communicate with the pharynx.
from the second to the sixth intercostal space. Apart from its size
The rosfral part of each nasal chamber is divided into three areas
there is liftle to distinguish it from the canine or feline heart.
called the dorsal, middle and ventral meatus.
The most common arrhythmia of the horse is atrial fibrillation,
Ethmoidal haematomata may develop in the ethmoturbinate region.
which is characterised by an increased resting heart rate. Horses
These lesions affect the performance of the horse and are usually
diagnosed with this condition may be brought back to normal sinus
accompanied by a nasal discharge and respiratory noise. They may be
rhythm by the use of quinidine sulphate.
 removed surgicall or by laser ablation via the frontomaxillary opening.
+ Circulation - this ensures a continuous flow of blood to all
the body cells to deliver nutrients and oxygen and to remove
The head of the horse has an extensive system of air-filled para-
waste products. It comprises many vessels, some of which
nasal sinuses, which commuricafe with the nasal chambers. Their
have more clinical significance for the veterinary nurse than
function is to warm, filter and humidify the inspired air but they
also help to reduce the weight of the skull. They consist of:
animal body.
● Frontal sinus - lies in the dorsal part of the skull medial to the
orbit. There is an opening into the maxillary sinuses via the
 Normal heart rate in the horse ranges from 25-42 beats per minute
frontomaxillary opening in the floor of the sinus
laddn aut go uoiodoid aree Adnsoo - sasmus Auxu om e
at rest.
The horse is able to increase the rate to 220-240 beats per
jaw. The caudal cheek teeth are embedded within them. There
minute during extreme exercise.
is a natural slit-like nasomaxillary opening into the middle
meafus of the nasal chamber.
Chapter 16 The horse
201
The larynx is suspended from the skull by the hyoid apparatus,
The sinus system of the head is susceptible to infection, which may
which allows it to swing backwards and forwards during respira-
spread from the nasal chambers or from tooth abscesses. Under
fion and swallowing. Within the lumen of the larynx are fhe vocal
normal circumstances the sinuses should drain freely into one
folds, which are the edges of the mucosal oufpouchings known as
another and then into the nasal chambers but if infected they may
the lateral ventricles.
become filled with discharge and drainage and /or irrigation may
be necessary. Access to the roots of the teeth may also be gained
 through the appropriate sinus.
Laryngeal hemiplegia - usually left-sided - may occur in some larger
horses. Affected animals may be referred to as 'roarers', as they
produce a strident noise at inspiration. The sound is produced by
the passage of air over the passive vocal folds, which results from 
The size of the maxillary sinuses changes as the horse ages. They
 paralysis of certain muscles. If left untreated, air flow into the 
enlarge considerably after birth as the cheek teeth erupt. This 
respiratory tract is affected, which may affect the performance of
 process continues as the teeth migrate forwards and come into wear.
the horse. Treatment as in the dog is by means of a tie-back Old-
fashioned alternatives included eversion and excision of the affected
lateral ventricle by means of an operation known as a Hobday after
The pharynx is divided into three parts:
 Sir William Hobday, who pioneered the technique.
● Nasopharynx - located at the caudal part of the nasal cavity
above the soff palate. The openings to the gutftural pouches
are in the lateral walls
The lower respiratory tract, comprising the trachea, bronchi
+ Oropharynx - located at the caudal part of the oral cavity
 and lung tissue, is similar in structure and function to that in the
below the soft palate
dog and cat.
● Laryngopharynx - extends from the oropharynx to the opening
 of the oesophagus.
The digestive system
The larynx in the horse is an important structure that offen fails to
funcfion normally (laryngeal hemiplegia) during exercise, neces-
an o aqe aq is pe saads Aaid snrqia e si aiu au
sitating surgicalintervenfion in the performance horse. This struc-
fure forms the opening for the frachea. The larynx is comprised of
  n         
areas in search of food, which largely comprised poor-quality fibrous
four cartilages, which form a rigid, box-like structure:
vegetafion that would be eaten constantly and digested slowly. The
● Epiglottis - a flap lying on the rostral part of the larynx that
 anatomy and physiology of the digestive tract (Fig. 16.14) reflects
covers the glottis and confrols the flow of gases into the
both these fundamenfal facts. The parts of the tract are similar to
respiratory tract
those of the dog and cat; however, the tract is proportionally much
·A pair of arytenoid cartilages
longer, as fibre takes longer to breakdown. The horse is classed as a
+ Cricoid cartilage - forms the ventral floor
hindgut fermenter, i.e.the caecum and colon are adapted to provide
+ Thyroid cartilage.
a chamber in which microbial fermentation of food takes place.
Fig. I6.14 Lateral view of the equine digestive tract.
(With permission from Aspinall V 2006. The complete
textbook of veterinary nursing. Butterworth-Heine-
Stomach
Small
mann, London, p 142.)
Diaphragm
Kidney
colon
Rectum
Oesophagus
Trachea
Lungs
Heart
Liver Spleen
Large Small
colon intestine
SECTION 2 Exotic species
202
The oral cavity
· Canines - these are rudimentary teeth and offen fail to erupt
in mares, although they may develop in 25%. In stallions
The muzzle and lips of the horse are highly mobile and sensifive.
these tushes develop at around the age of 5 years and cause
The whiskers located around the muzzle area are used to feel for
no problem. They erupt in the space, known as the diastema,
and assist in the selection of suitable vegetaftion. The lips are then
between the incisors and cheek teeth, closer to the corner
used to gather the food into the horse's mouth ready for mastica-
incisors than to the premolars (Fig. 16.15)
fion. The tongue is long and very supple. Its upper surface is cov-
● Premolars and molars (cheek teeth) - flattened teeth primarily
ered in a velvet-like layer of delicate papillae. The larger papillae
used for chewing and grinding up the food into particles
and six molars. In addition wolf teeth (Fig. 16.15) may develop
Dentition
at between 18 months and 5 years of age. These are small,
The dentition of the horse is clearly adapted to the mecharical
vestigial teeth that develop in front of the premolars, usually
breakdown of fibre. The horse has large, flat 'table' teeth and a
in the upper jaw but sometimes in both the upper and lower
huge mandible that plays a major role in mastication. The tem-
jaws. They are offen removed as they can cause pain and
poromandibular joint has a rotational movement, which allows
interference wifh the bit.
the teeth to grind the food between them.
Equine teeth are described as being hypsodontic, i.e. they do not
Horses have two sets of teeth during their lifetime:
have a layer of enamel over the top or occlusal surface. The enamel
● Deciduous or milk teeth - 24 in total; gradually discarded over
casing of the sides is folded, which increases the amount of hard,
the first five years of life
wearable material. During life the enamel and the softer dentine
● Permanent teeth - these begin to erupt from the age of 2%2. The
 provide an efficient grinding surface, which wears down as the
full set will be fully erupted and 'in wear' by the age of 6 years
teeth grow and the animal ages. These changes are described var-
(Fig. 16.15). The adult horse has between 36 and 44 teeth - the
iously as marks, stars and grooves and they can be used to give an
total number depends on the sex of the individual.
indication of the age of an individual horse, although this should
Dental formula for the adult male horse (with no wolf teeth):
never be considered to be enfirely accurate (Fig. 16.16). Each tooth
[13/3, C1/1, PM3/3, M3/3]×2 = 40.
tinuously while the occlusal surfaces are worn down by as much
 Dental formula for the adult female (with no wolf teeth):
as 2-3mm a year by the mastication process.
While in the mouth, the food is mixed with saliva to lubricate
[I3/3, C0/0, PM3/3, M3/3]×2 = 36.
 and stick the food together to form it into a bolus. The bolus is
The tooth types are:
formed as the food particles are chewed by the molar teeth and
  n e  p n a  
● Incisors - located at the rostral end of the upper and lower jaw and
Once sufficiently masticated the bolus is passed to the back of
responsible for cutting grass as it is taken into the mouth There
the mouth, towards the fhroat ready for swallowing. The process
of swallowing involves the rising of the soft palate to allow fhe
to their posifion as cenfrals, laterals and corners (Fig. 16.15)
bolus to travel towards and through the pharynx; the epiglot-
tis then closes over the trachea to prevent any food items from
entering the lungs and causing the horse to choke. The bolus then
M3
-VI
begins its journey to the stomach via the oesophagus.
2
M2
V
MI
IV
Central cement-
P4
-I
Enamel
2
External cement-
P3
Cement
Infundibulum
P2
Cement-
Cup
PI-
Dentine
(wolf teeth)
Dentine
*3 years of age
Diastema
Secondary
→5 years of age
dentine
→6 years of age
Infundibulum
→9 years of age
Pulp cavity
(tusk)
A
-Enamel spot
16years of age
13
Di3
-Corner
Dental star
12
(pulp cavity)
12
11
Lateral
Incisors
Central
-Dental star
(pulp cavity)
Upper jw
Lower jav
Fig. I6.16 A Longitudinal section through an incisor tooth. B Cross-
Fig. I6.15 Teeth in the upper and lower jaw of a 4/-year-old horse.
sections indicate the appearance of the occlusal surface as the tooth
With permission from Aspinall V 2006. The complete textbook of
wears down. (With permission from Aspinall V 2006. The complete 
veterinary nursing. Butterworth-Heinemann, London, p 136.)
textbook of veterinary nursing. Butterworth-Heinemann, London, p I 35.)
Chapter 16 The horse
203
Oesophagus
Small intestine
 The oesophagus is a muscular tube that extends from the throat 
The small intestine is divided into three sections of varying
to the horse's stomach; its length will vary in relation to the size
length, although it is difficult to tell where each one ends and the
of the horse, the average being 1.5m. The bolus is pushed along
next begins:
the oesophagus by a wave of muscular contraction known as
● Duodenum - approx. 1 m in length 
peristalsis.
● Jejunum - approx. 20m in length
● Ileum - approx. 1.5m in length
Stomach
The total length may range from 20-27m depending upon the
The stomach (Fig. 16.17) of the horse is described as being simple
size of the horse, and the diameter is just wider fhan that of an
and is similar to that of the cat, dog and rabbit but very different
average garden hose. The small intestine ends at the ileocaecal
from the compound stomach of ruminants, e.g. cow and sheep.
junction. Digestion and absorption of soluble foodstuffs take
s ano a su si eo pue op an  se us
place within this area.
evolved as a trickle feeder, eating liftle and offen. The stomach
is relatively small in comparison to the size of the animal, hold-
Large intestine
ing 7-14litres, and is approximately the size of a rugby ball when
empty. Food passes from the oesophagus into the stomach via
The large intestine accounts for 65% of the volume of the diges-
the cardiac sphincter, which prevents food from being regurgi-
tive fract and it is here that microbial digestion of cellulose (com-
tated. Any ingested toxins are difficult to get rid of and often pass
plex carbohydrates) takes place (Fig. 16.16). This occurs mainly
through the whole system. They may be responsible for induc
in the caecum and colon and the process is similar to that seen
ing colic, which is potenfially life-threatering. The stomach emp-
in rabbits. Mammals are unable to produce the enzymes nec-
ties when it is two-thirds full so food spends a relatively short
essary to break down cellulose found in plant material so they
amount of time here, resulting in minimal digestion. Food passes
rely on the presence of microorganisms to do it. The microorgan-
isms, consisting mainly of bacteria and protozoa, are specific to
intestine and is now referred to as chyme.
the horse's diet and horses are highly sensifive to dietary change.
 Ascending mesocolon
Pelvic flexure
 Cranial mesenteric artery
Transverse colon
Left ventral flexure
Left dorsal colon
cending (small) colon
Ascending duodenum
Right dorsal colon
Caecum
Dorsal diaphragmatic flexure
Kect
lleum
 Descending duodenum
Right ventral colon
Stomach
Jejunum
Fig. I6.17 Diagrammatic representation of the equine digestive tract. (With permission from AspinallV 2006. The complete
textbook of veterinary nursing. Butterworth-Heinemann, London, p I 43.)
SECTION 2 Exotic species
204
Any changes to the diet should be introduced gradually. Volatile
The kidney
faffy acids resulting from the process are absorbed into the blood-
 stream and used as energy. In addition, microbial digestion also
The fwo kidneys are located in fhe abdomen, one on either side
produces heat, which keeps the animal warm.
of the midline close to the diaphragm. The right kidney lies ven-
The large intestine is divided into three sections:
tral to the last two or three ribs and the first transverse process.
● Caecum - a large, sacculated, blind-ending sac running along
The leff kidney lies caudal to the right and is located venfral to
the ventral part of the abdomen. It is approximately 1 m long
and can hold up to 35 litres of ingesta. The material contains
In confrast to other species, the kidneys are not the same shape.
about 90% water but by the time it reaches the colon about
The right kidney is heart-shaped while the left kidney is more
30% has been reabsorbed through the caecal walls.
bean-shaped. Both kidneys are smooth in appearance with a deep
notch at the renal pelvis. Each kidney weighs approximately
● Colon - it is here that the majority of microbial digestion
Occurs. The colon can be divided into:
400-600 g, depending upon the size of the horse.
Internally each kidney shows a unipyramidal design, ie. the
O Large colon - this is approximately 4m long and may
 pyramids of the medulla are fused to form one and their apices
contain up to 100 litres (Fig. 16.17). Food remains here for
are fused to form a common renal crest (Fig. 16.18).
36-65 hours. In order to allow the organ to sit comfortably
A ureter carries urine from each kidney to the bladder. Each
within the abdominal cavity it is folded up, giving rise fo
  o       a sh 
four distinct but continuous areas. The right ventral colon
bend caudally as they leave the kidneys and follow a twisting
runs from the ileocaecal junction crarially towards the
course over the dorsal abdomen to reach the bladder wall close
sternum, where it makes a furn at the sternal flexure and
to its neck.
then becomes the left ventral colon. This runs back towards
the pelvis and then makes another furn at the pelvic flexure.
From here the left dorsal colon runs back cranially towards
During foaling there is a risk of rupturing the bladder of the foal
the diaphragm and furns again at the diaphragmatic flexure
as it is delivered. The affected foal will appear normal after birth
but soon afterwards it will cease suckling and fail to produce urine.
before becoming the right dorsal colon, which then fravels
across the abdomen as the transverse colon. These bends
Within 36 hours the abdomen distends and the foal may suffer from 
can cause impaction of waste food materials, parficularly
respiratory distress. The defect must be repaired surgically.
at the pelvic flexure, as at this point the diameter is
dramafically reduced from 25 cm to about 5 cm while
Urinalysis
undergoing a 180° turn.
Horses produce approximately 20mL/kg/ day of urine. It is us-
The structure of the large colon is designed to slow down the
ally pale yellow in colour and may be clear or cloudy depend-
passage of food to provide sufficient time for microbial digestion.
ing on the amount of calcium carbonate being excreted. The urine
This works well for horses kept outside and eating grass but stabled
is normally alkaline (pH >9) because of the high potassium con-
horses may be fed on a much drier diet and are unable to move
tent of fresh vegetation. Stabled horses may produce urine with a
 around as freely, which can lead to impactions, particularly at the
slightly lower pH.
pelvic flexure, and subsequently colic.
O Small colon - this leads from the transverse colon and is
Capsule
equivalent to the descending colon of the dog It is narrower
Cortex-
but is similar in length. Microbial digestion is of less
significance but the passage of ingesta slows and further
Medulla
water is absorbed giving rise to relatively dry faeces.
● Rectum - this continues on from the small colon and is a short
Pelvis
storage area for faeces, which accumulate before passing out
of the anus. Its length is approximately 30 cm.
Although the microorganisms found within the caecum and colon 
produce added nutrients such as amino acids, horses, unlike other
hindgut fermenters such as the rabbit, do not normally practice
coprophagia (eating their own faeces). Foals may eat the faeces of
adult horses but this is probably an attempt to colonise their own
brge intestines with appropriate microorganisms.
Ureter
?
Interlobar
The urinary system
arteries
Renal artery
The parts of the urinary system of the horse are the same as those
in any other mammal and the system carries out the same func
Fig. I6.18 Dorsal section through the equine kidney - semi-schematic.
tions, playing an important role in homeostasis by maintaining
(Redrawn from Dyce KM, Sack WO, Wensing CJG 2002 Textbook of
water and electrolyte balance
veterinary anatomy 3rd edn. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, PA, p 542.)
Chapter 16 The horse
205
Seminal
Prostate
Bulbourethral
 Urinary tract obstruction may occur in the horse and is a result of
vesicle
gland
gland
calculi formed from calcium carbonate crystals. Affected individuals
may show haematuria after exercise. Diagnosis is confirmed by rectal
 palpation of the bladder or by ultrasonography. The calculi may be
removed surgically or in the mare this may be done manually.
The reproductive system
Male
Crus
The parts of the reproductive tract of the male horse or stallion
Bladder
(Fig. 16.18) and its associated hormones are similar fo those seen
in the male dog and cat.
Vas deferens
Testis
Urethra
 In the normal stallion there are fwo testes present within the scro-
tum, which is located between the hind legs. They are egg-shaped
Cavernous
and reach their full size of 8-12cm at approximately 2 years of
erectile tissue
age. Once the testes are mafure they are responsible for the pro
Body of penis
duction of spermatozoa (sperm) and of the male hormone testos-
terone. Sperm are conducted from the testis up the epididymis
-Testis within tunica vaginalis
and vas deferens during ejaculation and enter the urethra just
Glans penis
caudal to the neck of the bladder. They are then deposited in the
Fig. I6.19 The reproductive organs of the stallion. (Redrawn from
 reproductive tract of the mare by the urethra running within the
Dyce KM, Sack WO,Wensing CJG 2002 Textbook of veterinary anatomy.
penis.
3rd edn. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, PA, p 561.)
The testes of the colt foal may be present in the scrofum at birth
Or may descend within the first 2 weeks of life.
Female
Accessory glands
The accessory glands are responsible for the production of semi-
The parts of the reproductive system of the female horse or mare
nal fluid, whose function is to provide nourishment and an effi-
(Fig. 16.20) and their associated hormones are the same as those
          
 in the female dog and cat.
glands:
● Prostate - parfially surrounds the crarial end of the urethra
Ovary
 at its junction with the neck of the bladder. It secretes a clear
 There are fwo ovaries lying one on either side of the midline in
fluid that cleans the urethra and neufralises the acidity of any
the dorsal abdomen and ventral to the area of the fiffh lumbar
remaining urine prior to ejaculation. The prostatic secretions
vertebra. In comparison to other species, the ovaries of the mare
make up the bulk of the seminal fluid.
are quite large - those of a larger mare may be 8-10cm long.
● Serminal vesicles or vesicular glands - these are a pair of smooth-
Although their shape is basically bean-shaped, the free border
 surfaced, pear-shaped glands located on either side of the
 m  ss o,   in p a s
bladder. Their fluid is infroduced into the ejaculate in the same
mafure follicles ovulate. The developing follicles and corpora
point at which the vasa deferentia enter the urethra.
lutea develop deep within the ovarian fissue and are surrounded
● Bulbourethral gland - these are paired glands that lie just
by a vascularised layer. This means that they are not parficularly
dorsal to the urethra as ift passes over the ischial arch, leaves
prominent and may be difficult to idenfify by rectal palpafion.
the pelvis (Fig. 16.19) and becomes surrounded by erectile
The ovaries are largely inactive until the mare reaches sexual
tissue.
 mafurity at around 1-2 years of age.
Penis
Uterine tube
 The penis is the male organ of copulation which in the stallion
This is also referred to as the oviduct or Fallopian fube. Ova
lies ventral to the abdominal body wall between the hind legs
expelled from the ovarian follicles are initially caught by a fun-
(Fig. 16.19). It consists of cavernous erectile tissue surrounding
nel-shaped infiundibulum on the end of the uterine tube. They
fhe urethra and is supported by a pair of muscular crura that
then fravel down the fubes, which are about 5mm in diameter
aftach it to the ischial arch. The glans penis or the free end has a
and 10 cm long. Fertilisation occurs within the uterine fubes and
distinctive mushroom shape. The widest part or corona is some
only fertilised ova pass through the uterofubular junction into the
distance from the apex, through which the urethra projects within
lterus; unfertilised ova are reabsorbed.
a central fossa. The body of the penis is long and capable of con-
siderable extension during erection. When not erect the penis is
Uterus
 housed within a prepuce for protection. At rest this is thrown into
The mare is uriparous, i.e. nafurally gives birth to one foal at a
nmerous folds, which allows for fhe erection of the penis. There
fime. This is reflected in the shape of the uterus in that if has a
is no os penis in the stallion.
large body and two short, divergent uterine horns (Fig. 16.20).
SECTION 2 Exotic species
206
Uterine horn
cervix projects into the vagina and has a lobed appearance that is
affected by the changing hormones of the oestrous cycle.
Vagina
 u g aqn renu sela e si areu a yo e a
 and approximately 15cm in diameter The distal end is recogn-
ised as the vestibule, marked by the urethral opening at the cra-
Right
rial end and the clitoris within the vulva at the caudal end.
ovary
Vulva
Mesometrium
This is fhe visual external part of the mare's reproductive fract.
The vulval lips sifuated just below the anus form a final seal to the
Uterine body
tract. The clitoris is very prominent in mares in oestrus.
Mammary glands
Cervix
 The two mammary glands or udders of the mare are small and lie
on the venfral surface of the caudal abdomen and crarial part of
the pelvis. They may be hidden by the hindquarters. Each gland
Vagina
The skin is well-supplied with sebaceous and sweat glands.
The oestrous cycle
The onset of sexual mafurity in the mare occurs in the spring
following her birth so there is a wide range of onset from 12-18
months of age. The mare is described as being a long-day breeder,
ie. her reproductive cycle is switched on by increasing hours of
daylight, which affect the hypothalamus of the brain, which in
Vulval labiae
furn begins to secrete the same controlling hormones that occur
in the cat and dog (see Ch. 11). The breeding season runs from
Clitoris
mare's oestrous cycle can be manipulated to start breeding much
Fig. I6.20 Dorsal view of the reproductive organs of the mare.
earlier in the year. Within the breeding season the mare will have
(Redrawn from Dyce KM, Sack WO, Wensing CJG 2002 Textbook of
many periods of oestrus or recepfivity to the stallion and is there-
fore described as being seasonally polyoestrous. The mare is also a
spontaneous ovulator, ie. she will ovulate without the stimulus of
 mating and always at approximately the same time of the cycle.
Compare fhis fo the bicornuate uterus exhibited by multipa-
The oestrous cycle lasts 17-21 days, although some mares may
rous or lifter-bearing species such as the dog, cat and rabbit 
have a cycle that lasts as long as 35 days - there is individual
(see Fig. 11.6). The embryo will develop in one of the horns and
variafion.
may migrate from one horn to the other up to the time it finally
 During this period there are two distinct phases:
implants in the uterine wall at about 40 days. After this the devel-
oping foal will gradually occupy space in the body of the uterus
I. Oestrus - often described as being 'in season' or 'on heat'. This
lasts for approximately 3-5 days. The mare is receptive to.
as if grows.
the stallion and willindicate this by raising her tail, standing
The shape of the equine uterus means that the mare is not adapted
frequently, and in the presence of a stallion or a 'teaser' she
to producing more than one foal at a time. If two ova are fertilised 
there is insufficient room for them both to grow to full term. If the 
which is known as 'winking'. Ovulation occurs during this
 phase, usually on the penultimate or last day.
veterinary surgeon is able to palpate two embryos per rectum, he/
she will take steps to abort one of them to avoid the possible death
2. Dioestrus - this lasts for 14-16 days and during this phase the
 of both foals later on.
mare is non-recepfive and behaves normally. Towards the end
of dioestrus new follicles start to develop in the ovary and to
secrete the hormone oestrogen. When oestrogen in the blood
Cervix
reaches high enough levels to stimulate the behavioural signs 
The cervix forms a tight, muscular seal between the uterus and the
 of oestrus the mare progresses into oestrus again.
vagina that only relaxes during oestrus and parfurifion. The cervix
During the shorter daylight hours of the winter months the
is 7cm in length and 4cm in diameter and when sealed it plays a
oestrous cydles cease and the mare is described as being
crucial role in preventing uterine infection. The caudal part of the
anoestrous.
References and recommenc
rea
Long, S. (2006) Veterinary Genetics and Reproductive Physiology. Oxford:
References
Butterworth Heinemann.
McArthur, S. (1996) Veterinary Management of Tortoises and Turtles. Oxford:
Adams, D.R. (1986) Canine Anatomy. Ames, IA: Iowa State University
Blackwell Science.
Press.
Mader, D.R. (1996) Reptile Medicine and Surgery. Philadelphia, PA: W.B.
Aspinall, V. (2001) Anatomy and Physiology for Veterinary Nurses.Stroud,
Saunders.
Glos: Keyskills Co. Ltd.
Meredith, A. & Redrobe, S. (eds) (2002) Manual of Exotic Pets, 4th edn.
Aspinall, V. (2006) The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing. London:
Qued geley, Glos: British Small Animal Veterinary Association.
Butterworth-Heinemann.
Michell, A.R.& Watkins, PE.(1989) An Introduction to Veterinary Anatomy
Beaver, B.V. (1992) Feline Behaviour. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders.
and Physiology.Cheltenham, Glos: British Small Animal Veterinary
Beynon, P. (ed.) (1996) BSAVA Manual of Psittacine Birds. Cheltenham,
Association.
Glos: British Small Animal Veterinary Association.
Okerman, L. (1994) Diseases of Domestic Rabbits. Oxford: Blackwell Science.
Beynon, P & Cooper, J.E. (eds) (1992) Manual of Exotic Pets. Cheltenham,
Phillips, W.D. & Chilton, T.J. (1989) A-Level Biology. Oxford: Oxford
Glos: British Small Animal Veterinary Association.
University Press.
Beynon, P., Lawton, M.PC. & Cooper, J.E. (1992) BSAVA Marual of Reptiles.
Pickering, W.R. (1996) Advanced Human Biology. Oxford: Oxford
Cheltenham, Glos: British Small Animal Veterinary Association.
University Press.
Bowden, C. & Masters, J. (eds) (2001) Pre-Veterinary Nursing Textbook.
Reece, W.O.(1991) Physiology of Domestic Animals. Philadelphia, PA. Lea
Oxford: Butterworth Heinemann.
& Febiger.
Boyd, J.S. (2001) Colour Atlas of Clinical Anatomy of the Dog and Cat, 2nd
Roberts, M.B.V. (1986) Biology - A Functional Approach, 4th edn. Walton-
edn. London: Mosby.
on-Thames, Surrey: Nelson.
Budras, K.-D., Sack,W.O. & Rock, S. (2003) Anatomy of the Horse, 4th edn.
Roberts, R.J. (ed) (2001) Fish Pathology, 3rd edn. Philadelphia, PA: W.B.
Hanover: Schlutersche.
Saunders.
Butcher, R.L. (ed.) (1992) Manual of Ornamental Fish. Cheltenham, Glos:
Ruckebusch, Y, Phaneuf, L-P & Dunlop, R. (1991) Physiology of Smalland
British Small Animal Veterinary Association.
Large Animals. Philadelphia, PA: B.C. Decker.
Colville, T. & Bassett,J.M.(2002) Clinical Anatomy and Physiologyfor
Samuelson Don A. (2007) Textbook of Veterinary Histology. St Louis, MO:
Veterinary Technicians. St Louis, MO: Mosby.
Saunders-Elsevier.
Cooper, J.E. (2002) Birds of Prey - Health and Disease. Oxford: Blackwell
Shively, M.J. & Beaver, B.G. (1985) Dissection of the Dog and Cat. Ames, IA:
Science.
Iowa State University Press.
Coumbe, K. (2001) The Eguine Veterinary Nursing Manual. Oxford,
Silver, C. (1990) Guide to the Horses of the World. London: Treasure Press.
Blackwell Science.
Smith, B.J. (1999) Canine Anatomy. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams
Dyce, K.M., Sack, W.O. & Wensing. C.J.G. (1996) Textbook of Veterinary
& Wilkins.
Anatomy, 2nd edn. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders.
Sturkie, PD. (ed.) (1976) Aoian Physiology. New York: Springer Verlag.
Evans, H.E. (1993) Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 3rd edn. Philadelphia, PA:
Turner, T. (1994) Veterinary Notesfor Dog Oumers. London: Popular Dogs.
W.B.Saunders.
Warren Dean, M.(1995) Small Animal Care and Managerment. New York:
Evans, J.M. & White, K. (1988) The Book of the Bitch. Guildford: Henston.
Delmar Publishers.
Flecknell, P. (ed) (2000) BSAVA Manual of Rabbit Medicine and Surgery.
Quedgeley, Glos: British Small Animal Veterinary Association.
Frandson, R.D. & Spurgeon, T.L. (1992) Anatomy and Physiology of Farm
Recommended reading
Animals. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger.
Freeman, W.H. & Bracegirdle, B. (1966) Atlas of Histology. London:
Aspinall V. (2006) The Complete Textbook of Veterinary Nursing. London:
Heinemann.
Butterworth-Heinemann.
Fullick, A. (2000) Biology. Oxford: Heinemann.
Aspinall V. (2008) Clinical Procedures in Veterinary Nursing. London:
Harvey Pough, F., Heiser, J.B. & McFarland, W.N. (1993) Vertebrate Life,
Butterworth-Heinemann.
3rd edn. Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Boyd, J.S. (2001) Colour Atlas of Clinical Anatomy of the Dog and Cat, 2nd
Hillyer, E.V. & Quesenberry, K.E. (1997) Ferrets, Rabbits and Rodents-
edn. London: Mosby.
Clinical Medicine and Surgery. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders.
Colville, T. & Bassett,J.M.(2002) Clinical Anatomy and Physiology for
King, A.S. & MeClelland, J. (1984) Birds - Their Structure and Function.
Veterinary Technicians. St Louis, MO: Mosby.
London: Bailliere Tindall.
Dyce, K.M., Sack, W.O. & Wensing, C.J.G. (1996) Textbook of Veterinary
Laber-Laird, K., Swindle, M.M. & Flecknell, P. (eds) (1996) Handbook of
Anatomy, 2nd edn. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders.
Rodent and Rabbit Medicine. Oxford: Pergamon.
Lane, D.R. & Cooper, B. (eds) (2007) Veterinary Nursing, 4th edn. Oxford:
Lane, D.R. (1991) Jones' Animal Nursing, 5th edn. Oxford: Pergamon.
Butterworth Heinemann.
Lane, D.R. & Cooper, B. (eds) (1999) Veterinary Nursing, 2nd edn. Oxford:
Smith, B.J. (1999) Canine Anatomy. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams
Butterworth Heinemann.
& Wilkins.
This page intentionally left blank
APPENDIX
ntroduction to anat
termin
Many of the words used in anatomy and physiology will
A suffix is found at the end of a word, e.g. cyte in osteocyte.
be unfamiliar to you and may often appear rather daunt-
Suffixes also have a general meaning, e.g. cyte means 'cell, but
ing. However, if you become aware of the concept of break-
ing down a word into its component parts then the word can
'bone cell'. Suffixes are given in Table A.2.
be 'dissected' to discover its meaning. This technique is use-
The root of a word is the essence of its meaning, e.g. pericar-
ful when trying to understand the veterinary 'jargon' used
dium. The root often refers to the organ, strucfure or disease in
by vets as well as wifhin the broader context of anatomy and
question; the root cardium relates to the heart. It can be consid-
physiology.
ered as the 'word element', which is often derived from a Latin
A prefix is found at the beginning of a word, e.g. peri in
or Greek word. Roots are given in Table A.3.
 pericardium. The prefix itself has a general meaning, e.g. peri
Other words simply have a meaning that can be used within
a word, e.g. genesis means 'creation' or 'origination'. Thus,
 a specific meaning: pericardium meaning literally 'around the
carcinogenic means that something ‘creates’ cancer; similarly,
heart'. Prefixes are given in Table A.1.
Table A.I Common prefixes
Prefix
Meaning
Examples
A-
Without; not
Avascular - without a blood supply
Anti-
Siu - auun ianea jo yrmoa siu-ndasun rsuanue sasenau -apogus uneauno isuee uuo
the effects of histamine
Ante- (also Pre-)
Before
Anterior- structures at the front of the body; antenatal - before parturition; prepubic - in
front of the pubis
Brady-
Slow
Bradycardia - slow heart rate; bradypnoea - slower than normal breathing
Cyto-
Acell
Cytotoxic - something that has a damaging effect on cells (e.g. cytotoxic drugs)
Dys-
 Difficult; impaired 
Endo-
Within
Endometrium - the inner lining of the uterus; endothelium - the layer of epithelial cells that 
lines the inside of the heart and blood vessels
Epi-
Upon; outside of
Epidermis - the outermost layer of the skin; epiglottis - cartilaginous structure that guards the
 entrance to the larynx
Eryth(ro)-
Red
Erythrocyte - red blood cell; erythema - redness of the skin
Hyper-
Excessive; increased
ueblo lo anss e jo azis au u aseau!-Audaady aunssad pooq ylu - anisuaadh
Hypo-
 Decreased; deficient; beneath 
Hypothermia - low body temperature; hypodermis - the subcutis that lies beneath the skin
Peri-
Around; in the region of
 Periosteum - the connective tissue that surrounds a bone; perianal- around the anus
Poly-
Many; much 
Polyoestrous - having more than one oestrous cycle a year; polyarthritis- inflammation of
several joints; polypeptide - a compound containing three or more linked amino acids
Post-
After; behind
 Postmortem - after death; postoperative - after a surgical operation; posterior- towards the
rear
Pyo-
snd
Pyometra - presence of pus in the uterus; pyoderma - bacterial infection of the skin
Tachy-
Rapid
Tachycardia - elevated heart rate
210
APPENDIX 1
Table A.2 Common suffixes
Suffix
Meaning
Examples
-aemia
Relates to the blood
Ischaemia - reduced or deficient blood supply; viraemia - the
 presence of virus particles in the bloodstream
-cyte (cyto-is the prefix used)
A cell
Erythrocyte - red blood cell; chondrocyte - cartilage cell; hepatocyte -
liver cell
-ectomy
Surgical removal of
Thyroidectomy- removal of the thyroid gland
-genic
Giving rise to; causing
 Pathogenic- causing disease; carcinogenic- causing neoplasia or
cancer
-ia/-iasis
Condition or state
Hypoplasia - incomplete development of an organ or tissue;
distichiasis - presence of a double row of eyelashes
-itis
Inflammation 
Arthritis - inflammation of a joint; hepatitis - inflarmmation of the liver;
conjunctivitis - inflarmmation of the conjunctiva of the eye
2wo-
Tumour, neoplasm 
 Sarcoma - malignant tumour; lipoma - benign tumour of adipose
tissue
-osis
Disease order or state
 Osteochondrosis - a developmental disease of articular cartilage
-ostomy
 Surgical opening
Tracheostomy - opening into the trachea; colostomy - opening into the
colon
Table A.3 Common roots of words
Root word
Meaning
Examples
Arthr(o)
Joint; articulation
Arthrodesis - surgical fusion of a joint; arthritis - inflammation of a
joint
Cardi(o)
Heart 
Cardiology - the study of the heart and its function; myocardium -
muscle layer of the heart
Chondr(o)
Cartilage
Chondrocyte - cartilage cell; perichondrium - membrane that covers
cartilage
Cyst(o)
Badder
urinary bladder
Derm(ato)
Skin
Dermatitis - inflammation of the skin
Gloss(o) (also lingual)
ansuol
Hypoglossal - situated below the tongue (also sublingual)
Haem(ato/o)
Blood 
Haematemesis- vomiting blood; haemorrhage - the escape of
 blood from a ruptured vessel
Hepat(o)
Liver
Hepatocyte -liver cell; hepatic arery- artery that supplies blood to
the liver
Hist(io/o)
ansse
Histology- the study of tissues
Mamm(o)(also mast(o)
 Breast; mammary gland
 Mammogram -radiograph of a mammary gland; mastectomy -
surgical removal of mammary gland
Metr(a/o)
Uterus
 Endometrium - lining of the uterus; metritis - inflammation of the
uterus
My(o)
Muscle
 Myositis - inflammation of a voluntary muscle
Neur(o)
Nerve
 Neuraigia - pain in a nerve; neuron - nerve cell
Ophthalm(o)
Eye
Ophthaimoscope - instrument used to examine the interior of the
eye
Orchi(d)
Testis (testicle)
 Orchitis- inflammation of a testis; cryptorchid - having an
undescended testicle
Oste(o)
Bone
 Osteomyelitis- inflammation of bone
Appendix 1 Introduction to anatomical terminology
211
Root word
Meaning
Examples
Pneum(o)
Air or gas; lung
Pneumonia - inflammation of the lung tissue; pneumothorax- the
 presence of free air in the thorax
-pnoea
Respiration; breathing
Apnoea - temporary cessation in breathing 
Ren-
Kidney
Renal artery- the artery that supplies the kidney with blood
Rhin(o)
Nose
Rhinitis - inflammation of the mucous membrane of the nose 
()
Hair
   e o o    s
(o)seA
Vessel; duct
Vascular- pertaining to blood vessels; vasoconstriction - decrease
in the diameter of a blood vessel; vasectomy - excision of the vas
deferens (deferent duct)
This page intentionally left blank
APPENDIX
2
iltiple choice questions
and answers
 These multiple choice questions are based on the facts in the
book, so why not test your understanding of what you have read?
There is one correct answer to each question. The answers can be
found on page 224.
I.7 Fluid that has a lower osmotic pressure than that of
Section I The dog and cat
plasma is said to be:
a. hypotonic
1. Principles of cell biology
b. isotonic
c. hypertonic
I.I The cell membrane is mainly composed of:
d. isometric
 a. a single layer of protein molecules
b. a protein bilayer 
I.8 Which of the following cations is in a relatively higher
c. a phospholipid bilayer
concentration in the intracellular fluid than in the
 d. a polysaccharide bilayer
extracellular fluid?
a. potassium
I.2 Which of the following is not found in the nucleus of the
b. iodine 
cell?
c. sodium
a. centrioles
d. chloride
b. chromosomes
c. DNA
I.9 Which of the following is not an example of a structural
d. nucleoli
protein?
a. collagen
I.3 Which organelle is the site for ATP production?
b. enzymes
a. nucleolus
c. elastin
b. mitochondrion
d. keratin
c. Golgi complex
d. ribosome
I.I0 Which of the following statements is the least accurate?
a. an acidic solution has a pH of below 7
I.4 What is the function of the rough endoplasmic reticulum
b. the pH scale is a measure of a solution's hydrogen ion content
in the mammalian cell?
c. an alkaline substance releases hydrogen ions when
a. storage of lysosomal enzymes
dissolved in a solution
 b. synthesis and transport of proteins
d. the pH of body fluids is 7.35
c. synthesis of glucose
d. production of ATP
2. The tissues and body cavities
I.5 During which stage of mitosis do the chromosomes line
2.I Which of the following is not a connective tissue?
up in the middle of the cell?
a. bone
 a. prophase
b. cartilage
b. anaphase
c. muscle
c. metaphase
d. blood
d. telophase
2.2 Which type of tissue covers the external and internal
I.6 When does 'crossing-over' take place during meiosis?
surfaces of the body?
 a. metaphase
a. connective
b. prophase
b. skin
c. anaphase
c. areolar
d. telophase
d. epithelial
214
APPENDIX 2
2.3 Where would you find simple cuboidal epithelium?
c. os penis
a. lining the bladder
d. calcaneus
b. lining the upper respiratory tract
c. lining the renal nephron
 3.2 Where do the primary centres of ossification appear in a
d. in the epidermis
long bone?
a. the diaphysis
2.4 What type of epithelium lines the ureters?
b. the ends
a. simple squamous
c. the epiphyses
b. ciliated columnar
 d. the epiphyseal plate
c. transitional
d. stratified squamous
3.3 Which bone of the skull lies at the base of the orbit and
is the region through which the tears drain into the nose?
 2.5 Which of the following is an example of a simple coiled
a. sphenoid
gland?
b. ethmoid
a. salivary
c. occipital
b. sweat
d. lacrimal
c. duodenal
d. sebaceous
 3.4 Which of the following joints is an example of an
amphiarthrosis?
 2.6 Which type of cartilage is found in the epiglottis?
a. the temporomandibular
a. hyaline
b. sufures of the skull
b. fibrous
c. between the bodies of the vertebrae
c. elastic
d. between the skull and the aflas
d. globular
 3.5 Which part of the mandible articulates with the temporal
 2.7 Which type of bone tissue is found in the cortices of all 
region of the skull?
types of bone?
a. masseteric fossa
a. spongy
b. condylar process
b. cancellous
c. coronoid process
c. hyaline
d. occipital condyle
d. compact
 3.6 Which part of a thoracic vertebra articulates with the
 2.8 The contractile protein that makes up the thin filaments 
tubercle of a rib?
 of a muscle fibre is:
a. the spinous process
a. actin
b. the costal fovea
b. elastin
c. the transverse fovea
c. collagen
d. the neural arch
d. myosin
3.7 How many sternebrae is the sternum made up of?
2.9 What is the name given to the serous endothelium that
a.7
lines the inside of the thoracic cavity?
b. 13
 a. parietal peritoneum
c. 3
b. parietal pleura
d. 8
 c. visceral peritoneum
d. mediastinum
3.8 The olecranon fossa receives which part of the ulna
during extension of the elbow?
2 I0 What is found within the peritoneal cavity?
a. olecranon
 a. pleural fluid
b. anconeal process
b. the pericardium
c. coronoid process
c. peritoneal fluid
d. styloid process
 d. the mediastinum
3.9 On which bone would you find the medial malleolus?
3. The skeletal system
a. tibia
b. fibula
3.I Which of the following is a splanchnic bone?
c. femur
a. tuber calcis
d. radius
 b. patella
Appendix 2 Multiple choice questions and answers
215
3.10 How many short bones are found in the tarsus?
c. semitendinosus
a.5
d. quadriceps femoris
b. 7
c.3
4.9 Which muscle flexes the hock?
d. 2
a. gastrocnemius
b. biceps femoris
4. The muscular system
c. anterior tibialis
d. pectineus
4.I What is the unit of contraction in a muscle called?
a. motor unit
4.10 Which of the following muscles is not a component of
b. sarcomere
the Achilles tendon?
c. origin
a. semimembranosus
d. insertion
b. biceps femoris
c. semitendinosus
4.2 Which of the following muscles protracts the forelimb
d. superficial digital flexor
and bends the neck laterally?
a. brachialis
5. The nervous system and special senses
b. biceps brachii 
c. brachiocephalicus
5.I Which of the following structures is not part of the
d. biceps femoris
 peripheral nervous system?
a. cranial nerve V
4.3 Which muscle inserts on the coronoid process of the
b. spinal nerves supplying the intercostal muscles
mandible?
c. hypothalamus
a. temporalis
d. a neuromuscular junction
b. masseter
c. digastricus
 5.2 Which of the following carry nerve impulses towards the
d. pterygoid
cell body of a neuron?
a. axons
4.4 Where do the extraocular muscles insert?
b. nodes of Ranvier
a. linea alba
c. myelin
b. optic foramen
d. dendrons
c. fhe orbit
d. fhe sclera
5.3 Which of the following statements is folse?
a. Sensory nerve fibres carry information towards the
4.5 Through which of the openings in the diaphragm does
central nervous system.
the thoracic duct pass?
 b. Most nerve fibres within the grey matter of the brain are
a. oesophageal hiatus
myelinated.
c. A ganglion is a collection of nerve cell bodies.
b. aorfic hiafus
c. inguinal ring
d. The autonomic nervous system consists mainly of
d. caval foramen
visceral motor nerves.
4.6 Which of the following muscles does not insert on the
5.4 The pons, medulla and cerebellum together form the -
a. forebrain
linea alba?
b. midbrain
a. external abdominal oblique
c. hindbrain
b. transversus abdominis
c. recfus abdominis
d. cerebral hemispheres
 d. internal abdominal oblique
5.5 Working from the outer surface of the brain to the
inside, the meningeal layers are:
4.7 Which muscle inserts on the spine of the scapula?
a. pia mater, arachnoid mater, dura mater
a. trapezius
b. dura mater, arachnoid mater, pia mater
b. infraspinafus
c. pectoralis
c. arachnoid mater, dura mater, pia mater
d. dura mater, pia mater, arachnoid mater
d. latissimus dorsi
5.6 The aqueduct of Silvius lies within which part of the
4.8 The patella is found in the tendon of insertion of which muscle?
central nervous system?
a. biceps femoris
b. gastrocnemius
a. midbrain
216
APPENDIX 2
b. hindbrain
6.4 Which of the following hormones is secreted by the
c. spinal cord
 posterior pituitary?
d. forebrain
a. ACTH
b. TSH
 5.7 Which of the cranial nerves is responsible for
c. ADH
gustation?
d. FSH
a. olfactory
b. glossopharyngeal
 6.5 Which of the following hormones has an efect on the kidney?
c. optic
a. ADH
d. trochlear
b. oxytocin
c. TSH
5.8 Which of the following statements is true?
d. calitonin
a. The photoreceptor cells wifhin the back of the eye and
known as rods are responsible for colour vision
6.6 Which of the following is not secreted by the adrenal cortex?
b. The pupil of the cat is rounded
a. aldosterone
c. Aqueous humour lies within the posterior chamber of
b. corfisol
the eye
c. oestrogen
d. The cells of the tapefum lucidum reflect light back to the
d. adrenaline
photoreceptor cells of the retina
6.7 When an animal is very frightened and likely to attack you,
 5.9 Which of the following reflexes is routinely used to test
which of the following is happening inside the animal?
for the level of anaesthesia?
a. salivary secretion increases so the animal dribbles
a. palpebral
b. blood glucose levels rise
b. panniculus
c. respiratory rate slows down
c. anal
d. levels of cortisol and corticosterone in the blood decrease
d. patellar
6.8 Polydipsia, polyuria, polyphagia and bilateral symmetrical 
5.10 Which structure is used to monitor balance?
alopecia are symptoms of:
a. organ of Corti
a. diabetes mellifs
b. tympanic membrane
b. diabetes insipidus
c. malleus
c. Addison's disease
d. utricle and saccule
d. Cushing's disease
6. The endocrine system
6.9 Testosterone is secreted by which cells?
 6.1 The chemical messengers sent out by the organs of the
a. islets of Langerhans
endocrine system are:
b. Sertoli cells
a. glcose
c. Brunner's glands
b. enzymes
d. cells of Leydig
c. hormones
d. nerve impulses
6.10 Hypoglycaemia or lowered blood glucose willstimulate
the secretion of which pancreatic hormone?
6.2 Which of the following statements is false? Endocrine
a. glucagon
:spuel
b. insulin
 a. may be controlled by levels of chemicals or other
c. antidiuretic hormone
hormones in the blood
d. somatostatin
Aq suero jaren ra o ap so aanas q
means of a duct
7.The blood vascular system
c. secrete hormones that are designed to specifically affect
the target orgar and no other
7.I Which of the following statements is true?
d. secrete hormones directly into the bloodstream
 a. Blood entering the right atrium is well oxygenated
 b. The right ventricle pumps blood into the systemic
6.3 Which of the following are classed as endocrine glands?
circulation via the pulmonary vein
a. ovary
c. Blood returning to the heart enters the left atrium via the
 b. pancreas
crarial and caudal venae cavae
c. thyroid gland
d. The right ventricle pumps blood into the pulmonary
d. all of the above
circulation via the pulmonary artery
Appendix 2 Multiple choice questions and answers
217
 7.2 Which branch of the aorta transports oxygenated blood
b. B lymphocyte
to the kidneys?
c. neutrophil
 a. renal vein
d. T lymphocyte
b. hepatic artery
c. renal artery
d. hepatic portal vein
 8. The respiratory system
8.I What prevents food from entering the nasal chamber
7.3 The fibrous threads that attach the mitral valve to the
when an animal swallows?
papillary muscle of the ventricular wall are known as:
a. nasal sepfum
a. Purkinje fibres
b. soff palate
 b. chordae tendineae
c. epiglottis
c. bundle of His
d. collateral ligaments
d. nasal conchae
7.4 Which granulocyte produces histamine?
8.2 Which part of the respiratory system is also responsible
for the production of sound?
a. basophil
b. eosinophil
a. hyoid apparafus
c. neutrophil
b. eustachian fube
d. macrophage
c. pharynx
d. larynx
7.5 Which of the following are essential to the blood clotting
8.3 Which type of epithelium lines the trachea?
mechanism?
a. ciliated columnar
a. potassium and vitamin D
b. simple squamous
b. calcium and vitamin K
c. stratified squamous
c. sodium and vitamin C
d. iron and vitamin B
d. transitional
8.4 Which of the following statements is true? The route
7.6 The area of modified cardiac muscle cells in the wall of the
 taken by the inspired air from the pharynx into the
right atrium that initiates the heartbeat is referred to as the:
lungs is:
a. afrioventricular node
a. trachea, larynx, bronchi, bronchioles, alveolar ducts,
b. Purkinje fibres
alveolar sacs
c. bundle of His
 b. larynx, bronchi, trachea, bronchioles, alveolar sacs,
d. sinoatrial node
alveolar ducts
c. larynx, trachea, bronchioles, bronchi, alveolar sacs,
7.7 In the fetal circulation, the shunt that connects the
alveolar ducts
pulmonary artery and aorta is called the:
d. larynx, trachea, bronchi, bronchioles, alveolar ducts,
a. ducfus venosus
alveolar sacs
b. foramen ovale
c. ducfus arteriosus
 8.5 Where does gaseous exchange take place in the
d. falciform ligament
respiratory system?
a. bronchioles, alveolar ducts and alveoli
7.8 What is the name of the main lymphatic duct that arises
b. alveoli only
in the abdomen?
 c. respiratory bronchioles only
a. tracheal duct
d. alveolar ducts and alveoli
b. cisterna chyli
 c. right lymphatic duct
8.6 What is the fourth lobe of the right lung of a dog called?
d. cisterna magna
a. apical lobe
b. cardiac lobe
7.9 Which of the following is not a function of the spleen?
 c. the right lung does not have a fourth lobe
 a. production of thrombocytes
d. accessory lobe
 b. storage of blood
c. destruction of worn out red blood cells
8.7 Which muscle is responsible for increasing the volume of
d. production of lymphocytes
the thoracic cavity during inspiration?
a. diaphragm
7.10 Which of the following cells is involved in the humoral
b. hypaxial
immune response?
c. external oblique
a. macrophage
d. epaxial
218
APPENDIX 2
8.8 Which reflex prevents over-inflation of the lungs?
 9.6 The chief cells in the gastric mucosa produce which part
a. Howell-Joly
of the gastric juices?
b. Hering-Breuer
a pepsin
c. cough
b. pepsinogen
d. Flehman's
c. hydrochloric acid
d. mucus
8.9 The chemoreceptors that monitor oxygen levels and the 
 pH of the blood are located in the:
9.7 Which salivary gland lies within the orbit of the skull?
 a. bronchi and bronchioles
a. parotid
b. alveoli
b. sublingual
c. aortic and carotid bodies
c. mandibular
d. jugular vein
d. zygomatic
8.10 The air left in the airways and lungs after a forced
9.8 Food resulting from digestion in the stomach is:
expiration is referred to as the:
a. chyme with an acid pH
a. residual volume
b. chyle with a neutral pH
b. dead space
c. chyme with an alkaline pH
c. vital capacity
d. bile with a neutral pH
d. tidal volume
9.9 Which of the following is not a function of the liver?
9. The digestive system
 a. production of plasma proteins
b. storage of iron
9.1 The process of breaking food down into small, soluble
c. regulation of fluid volume in the fluid compartments
units is known as:
d. formation of red blood cells in the fefus
a. ingestion
b. digestion
9.10 Amino acids resulting from the digestion of protein are
c. absorption
carried to the liver by the:
d. excretion
a. lacteals
 b. hepatic portal vein
9.2 The cleft in the upper lip is known as the:
c. hepatic vein
 a. soft palate
d. hepatic artery
b. carnassial
c. philtrum
10. The urinary system
d. tubercle
10.I Which of the following statements is folse?
9.3 The formula for the deciduous dentition in the cat is:
 a. The posifion of the kidney in the abdomen is described as
a. [I3/3, C1/1, PM 3/2] x2 = 26
being retroperitoneal
b. [I3/3, C1/1, PM 3/3] x2 = 28
 b. The right kidney is caudal to the left kidney
c. [I3/3, C1/1, PM 4/4, M 2/3] ×2 = 42
c. The kidneys lie in the cranial abdomen closely aftached
d. [I3/3, C1/1, PM 3/2, M 1/1] x2 = 30
to the lumbar hypaxial muscles
d. The ovaries and the adrenal glands lie close to the cranial
9.4 Which of the following is not part of the small intestine?
 pole of each kidney
a. stomach
b. duodenum
10.2 The basin shaped structure in the centre of the kidney is
c. jejunum
called the:
d. ileum
a. cortex
b. hilus
 9.5 Food passes through the parts of the large intestine in
c. pelvis
which order?
d. medulla
a. ascending colon, descending colon, transverse colon,
caecum, rectum
10.3 The loop of Henle of each nephron:
b. descending colon, transverse colon, ascending colon,
a. lies wifhin the medulla and is lined with simple
rectum, caecum
 squamous epithelium
C. caecum, ascending colon, descending colon, transverse
b. lies in the cortex and is lined wifh cuboidal epithelium
colon, recfum
c. lies in the medulla and is lined with columnar epithelium
 d. caecum, ascending colon, transverse colon, descending
 d. lies in the kidney pyramids and collects urine from
colon, recfum
several nephrons
Appendix 2 Multiple choice questions and answers
219
10.4 Which of the following does not occur in the proximal
b. transportation of urine from the bladder to the outside of
convoluted tubule?
the body
a. secretion of penicillin
 c. production of fluids to wash the sperm into the female
b. reabsorption of glucose
c. confrol of acid-base balance
d. production of sperm to fertilise the ova of the female
 d. reabsorption of water
Il.2 At what age would you expect to find the testes in the
10.5 Which of the following staterments is false?
op aue jo mos
a. Aldosterone is secreted by the anterior pifuitary gland at
a. 12 weeks post-parfum
the base of the brain
b. 35 weeks of gestation
b. Aldosterone acts mainly on the distal convoluted tubules
c. just prior to parfurifion
and controls the reabsorption of sodium
d. 6 months post-partum
c. ADH is secreted when an animal is dehydrated
 d. The release of aldosterone is stimulated by angiotensin
I1.3 Which of the following are seen in the cat and not in the
3op
10.6 Which of the following hormones does not have an effect
 a. bulbourethral glands
on the kidney?
b. preprostatic urethra
a. renin
c. barbed glans peris
b. aldosterone
d. all of the above
c. anfidiuretic hormone
d. erythropoietin
II.4 The os penis of the dog lies:
10.7 If an animal is over-hydrated which of the following will
a. venfral to the urethra
b. dorsal to the urethra
happen?
c. caudal to the prostate
a. Blood pressure will fall and will be detected by
d. in the cenfre of the urethra
baroreceptors in the blood vessel walls
b. Osmotic pressure will rise and the osmoreceptors will
stimulate the thirst cenfre
II.5 Spermatozoa are produced:
c. Secretion of ADH will decrease and a large volume of
a. by mitosis and contain the diploid number
of chromosomes
dilute urine will be excreted
d. Water will be resorbed into the capillaries of the medulla
b. by meiosis and contain the haploid number of
from the loops of Henle
chromosomes
c. by binary fission and confain the haploid number of
10.8 If an animal is fed on a high salt diet which of the
chromosomes
following will not happen?
d. by meiosis and contain the diploid number of
chromosomes
a. The osmotic pressure of the blood will increase
b. Water will be drawn into the circulation by osmosis,
II.6 The bitch and the queen are described as:
increasing the circulating blood volume
c. The animal will become hypertensive
 a. primigravid
d. Aldosterone secretion will rise and sodium will be
b. uniparous
c. multigravid
resorbed from the distal convoluted tubules
d. multiparous
10.9 The bladder is lined by which type of epitheliumi
a. squamous
II1.7 Pseudocyesis is better known as:
b. ciliated columnar
a. pregnancy
c. transifional
b. fertilisafion
d. cuboidal
c. false pregnancy
d. ovulation
10.10 Normal urine contains:
a. glucose, water and urea
I1.8 The fold of peritoneum supporting the uterus within the
b. water, salts and urea
 peritoneal cavity is the:
c. protein, amino acids and water
a. broad ligament
d. urea, crystals and glucose
b. mesosalpinx
c. mesovarium
Il. The reproductive system
d. mesocolon
II.I Which of the following is not a function of the male
II.9 The queen is described as being:
reproductive tract?
 a. secretion of hormones to produce the secondary sexual
a. a spontaneous ovulator and seasonally polyoestrous
 b. an induced ovulator and monoestrous
characteristics
220
APPENDIX 2
c. an induced ovulator and seasonally polyoestrous
c. carpal flexor muscle
d. a spontaneous ovulator and monoestrous
d. carpal extensor muscle
II.I0 Within the inner cell mass of the developing embryo the
I2.8 Which part of the distal phalanx is covered by the claw?
ectoderm forms:
a. anconeal process
a. the lining of the digestive tract
b. sole
b. the trophoblast
c. ungual process
c. the skin and nervous system
d. claw fold
d. the musculoskeletal system 
12.9 Where are sudoriferous glands found in the dog?
12. The common integument
a. at the base of the tail
b. on the nose and foot pads
I2.1 In which layer of the epidermis are new cells
c. associated with each hair follicle
manufactured?
d. in the ear canal
 a. strafum granulosum
b. strafum germinativum
I2.10 Which of the following is not a function of the integument?
c. strafum lucidum
a. secretion of pheromones
d. strafum corneum
b. production of vitamin E
c. protection from invasion by bacteria
12.2 In which layer of the skin are the sensory nerve endings
d. thermoregulation
found?
a. hypodermis
Section 2 Exotic species
b. epidermis
c. dermis
d. subcutis
13. Birds
I3.1 Which of the following characteristics is possessed only
I2.3 Where do the ducts of the sebaceous glands open into?
by the class Aves?
a. fhe surface layer of the epithelium
a. ability to fly
b. the hair follicle
b. feathers
c. the sweat glands
c. ability to lay eggs
d. the hypodermis
d. warm blood
I2.4 Where are ceruminous glands found?
13.2 The sternum of the bird is extended into a flattened:
 a. opening onto the eyelids
a. coracoid
b. around the circumference of the anus
b. quadrate
c. associated with each hair follicle
c. keel
d. in the external ear canal
d. pygostyle
12.5 Which of the following statements is the most
13.3 Which of the following statements is false?
accurate?
a. Some of the bones of the skeleton are filled with sacs full
 a. Each hair follicle contains one guard hair and several
 Of air to reduce the weight
wool hairs
b. There are always seven cervical vertebrae in the neck no
b. Each hair follicle contains a wool hair only
 matter how long the neck
 c. Each hair follicle contains one wool hair and several
c. At the base of the tail is a preen gland whose secretions
guard hairs
are vital for the health of the feathers
 d. Each hair follicle contains several guard hairs and many
 d. There is no diaphragm to divide the body cavity into
wool hairs
 thorax and abdomen
I2.6 How many pads are found on the hind paw of the dog?
13.4 The feathers attached to the ulna of the wing are the:
a.7
a. contour feathers
b. 4
b. filoplume
c. 5
c. primaries
d. 6
d. secondaries
I2.7 Which muscle unsheathes the claws of a cat?
13.5 Which is the most developed special sense in the bird?
a. digital extensor muscle
a. sight
b. digital flexor muscle
b. touch
Appendix 2 Multiple choice questions and answers
221
c. smell
c. I1/1, C0/0, PM1/1, M 3/3 x2 = 20
d. taste
d. I3/3, C1/1, PM3/3, M 1/2 x2 = 34
I3.6 Which of the following statements is folse?
I4.4 The space between the incisors and the cheek teeth of
rabbits and rodents is known as the:
is the most efficient
a. diastema
b. Many thin-walled air sacs lead out of the lungs and
 b. philtrum
occupy most of the body cavity
c. dewlap
c. The lungs are large, flexible and spongy and lie close to
d. acromion
 the ventral body wall
d. There is no diaphragm separating the thorax from the
14.5 Young that are born blind, deaf, hairless and totally
abdomen
dependent on the mother are described as being:
a. precocial
13.7 The passage of food down the digestive tract is:
b. nidicolous
a. crop, proventriculus, gizzard, duodenum, jejunum
c. altricial
b. oesophagus, stomach, duodenum, jejunum
d.nidifugous
c. gizzard, proventriculus, crop, duodenum, ileum
d. oesophagus, crop, gizzard, proventriculus
14.6 Which of the following species gives birth to precocial
young?
13.8 In the bird, the principal excretory product is:
a. Mustela putorius furo
a. lrea
b. Oryctolagus cuniculus
b. ammonia
c. Mus musculus
c. urates
d. Chinchilla lanigera
d. bile
I4.7 Which of the following species is an induced ovulator?
13.9 Which part of the female reproductive tract is
a. the ferret
 responsible for the addition of albumen to the bird's egg?
b. the mouse
a. magnum
c. the guinea pig
b. isthmus
d. the chipmunk
c. shell gland
d. vagina
14.8 Which of the following statements is foalse?
a. Jill ferrets can suffer from a fatal anaemia if not allowed
13.10 By which method could you identify the sex of a budgerigar?
to breed at regular intervals
a. DNA testing
b. The jill is a sponfaneous ovulator and ovulation occurs
b. surgical sexing
on the tenth day of the season
c. sexual dimorphism
c. Ferrets are true carnivores and belong to the family
d. by listening to the birdsong
Mustelidae
 d. The male ferret has a J-shaped os penis which lies in the
14. Mammals
caudal portion of the penis
I4.9 The males of which of the follwing species have teats
14.I Members of the order Lagomorpha can be distinguished
on the ventral body wall?
 from members of the order Rodentia by examination of:
a. Rattus norvegicus
a. ears
b. Tamias sibiricus
b. genitalia
c. Cavia porcellus
c. teeth
d. Mesocricetus auratus
d. cheek muscles
I4.10 The gestation period of the chinchilla is:
14.2 The digestive tract of the rabbit and the herbivorous
a. 111 days
rodent has an enlarged:
b. 9 weeks
a. stomach
c. 28-32 days
b. spleen
d. 15-18 days
c. jejunum
d. caecum
15. Reptiles and fish
14.3 The dental formula of the rabbit is:
I5.I Tortoises and terrapins belong to the order:
a. I1/1, C0/0, PM0/0, M 3/3 x2 = 16
a. Rhynchocephalia
b. I2/1, C0/0, PM3/2, M 3/3 x2 = 28
b. Crocodilia
222
APPENDIX 2
c. Chelonia
15.9 The ability of shoals of fish to move simultaneously is
d. Squamata
thought to be linked to the presence of:
a. the lateral line
15.2 Which of the following statements is false?
 b. chromatophores in the skin which change colour
a. The body cavity of the reptile is not divided into fwo by a
c. the presence of the glycocalyx, which reduces friction
diaphragm
d. coordinated movements of the tail fins
b. In the peripheral circulation of the reptile a renal portal
15.10 The function of the gill rakers projecting from the gill
directly to the kidney
arches is to:
c. Reptiles do not possess a bladder for the storage of
 a. extract oxygen from the water passing over them
urine
b. prevent damage to the gills by food particles taken into
d. Reptiles may be oviparous (egg layers) or oviviparous
the mouth cavity
(live bearers)
c. prevent damage to the gills from objects in the water
d. support the gill arches
15.3 The sex of a tortoise can be determined by examining:
a. the tail length - males have longer tails
16. The horse
b. the plastron - that of the female is convex and of the male
is concave
I6.1 The horse has evolved to take weight on which digit of
c. fhe caudal scute - in the female it may curve upwards
the pentadactyl limmb?
d. all of the above
a. 1
b. 2
15.4 The ability of some species of lizard to shed the tail and
grow a new one is known as:
d.4
a. ecdysis
b. autotomy
16.2 The vertebral formula of the horse is:
c. caecotrophy
a. C7 T18 L6 S5 Cd15-20
d. mutation
b. C7 T12 -13 L7 S4 Cd16
c. C7 T13 L7 S3 Cd20-23
I5.5 Jacobsen's organ, located in the mouth of some reptiles,
d. C7 T15 L5-6 S3 Cd 18
is associated with which sense?
I6.3 The joint between the short pastern bone and the pedal
a. smell
b. sight
bone is known as the:
c. hearing
a. pastern
d.touch
b. knee
c. fetlock
15.6 Which one of the following statements is folse?
d. coffin
 a. Snakes do not have eyelids but have a transparent
spectacle over the eye
I6.4 The full set of permanent teeth is present in the jaw and
b. Some snakes show evidence of vestigial legs
is in wear by what age?
c. All species of snake have external ears which they use to
a. 4 years
detect their prey
b. 5 years
 d. Some snakes lay eggs while others bear live young
c. 6 years
d. 7 years
15.7 Which body system does not open into the cloaca of the
snake?
I6.5 The sesamoid bone housed within the hoof is known
a. digestive
as the:
b. urinary
a. navicular
c. reproductive
b. pedal
d. circulatory
c. coffin
d. fabella
15.8 In fish a physostomous swim bladder is refilled with
air by:
16.6 Which statement best describes the function of the
 a. a gas gland lying in the wall of the bladder
splenius muscle?
b. swimming to the surface and taking a mouthful of air
a. It abducts the forelimb and flexes the shoulder
c. excretory gases formed by the gut
b. It extends the hip, flexes the stifle and extends the hock
 d. descending to the bottom and increasing the air
c. It elevates and flexes the neck
pressure
d. It profracts the forelimb and extends the shoulder
Appendix 2 Multiple choice questions and answers
223
I6.7 From which point on a horse's foot does horn grow?
b. right dorsal colon, right ventral colon, left dorsal colon,
a. The sole
leff ventral colon
b. The coronet
c. left ventral colon, right venfral colon, right dorsal colon,
c. The periople
left dorsal colon
  
 d. right ventral colon, left ventral colon, left dorsal colon,
right dorsal colon 
I6.8 The normal resting heart rate of the horse is:
16.10 Which of the following most accurately describes the
a. 120-180 beats per minute
reproductive pattern of the mare?
b. 80-120 beats per minute
a. The mare is a short-day breeder, seasonally polyoestrous
c. 25-42 beats per minute 
and an induced ovulator
d. 130-325 beats per minute
 b. The mare is a long-day breeder, seasonally polyoestrous
and a spontaneous ovulator
16.9 Food passes through the large colon in the following
c. The mare is a long-day breeder, monoestrous and an
order;
induced ovulator
a. right dorsal colon, left dorsal colon, leff ventral colon,
d. The mare is a short-day breeder, monoestrous and a
 right ventral colon
sponfaneous ovulator
APPENDIX 2
224
Multiple choice answers
5
9
13
1. 1
C
5.1
C
9.1
b
1 3.1
b
1.2
5.2
P
9.2
13.2
1.3
b
5.3
b
9.3
a
13.3
b
1.4
b
5.4
3
9.4
a
13.4
p
1.5
C
5.5
b
9.5
d
13.5
a
1.6
b
5.6
a
9.6
b
13.6
C
1.7
a
5.7
b
9.7
p
13.7
a
1.8
a
5.8
p
9.8
a
13.8
1.9
5.9
a
9.9
13.9
a
1.10
5.10
P
9.10
b
13.10
2
6
10
14
2. 1
C
6.1
C
10.1
6
14.1 
C
2.2
p
6.2
b
10.2
C
14.2
p
2.3
C
6.3
d
10.3
a
14.3
b
2.4
C
6.4
C
10.4
C
14.4 
a
2.5
b
6.5
a
10.5
a
14.5
2.6
C
6.6
P
10.6
P
14.6
p
2.7
p
6.7
b
10.7
C
14.7
a
2.8
a
6.8
P
10.8
d
14.8
b
2.9
b
6.9
d
10.9
14.9
C
2.10
C
6.10
a
10.10
6
14.10 
3
7
15
3. 1
C
7.1
d
11.1
b
15. 1
C
3.2
a
7.2
C
11.2
15.2
C
3.3
p
7.3
b
11.3
p
15.3
p
3.4
C
7.4
a
11.4
b
15.4
b
3.5
b
7.5
b
11.5
b
15.5
a
3.6
C
7.6
P
11.6
P
15.6
C
3.7
p
7.7
11.7
C
15.7
p
3.8
b
7.8
b
11.8
a
15.8
b
3.9
7.9
a
11.9
C
15.9
a
3.10
7.10
b
11.10
C
15.10
6
b
4
8
12
16
4. 1
b
8.1
b
1 2. 1 
b
16.1
C
4.2
C
8.2
d
12.2
C
16.2
a
4.3
a
8.3
a
12.3
16.3
p
4.4
p
8.4
P
12.4 
d
16.4
L
4.5
b
8.5
b
12.5
..
16.5
a
4.6
8.6
P
12.6
3
C
16.6
C
4.7
a
8.7
a
12.7
b
16.7
b
4.8
d
8.8
b
12.8
C
16.8
C
4.9
C
8.9
C
12.9
16.9
d
4.10
a
8.10
a
12.10 
16.10 b
NB: All entries refer to the dog and caf urless otherwise stated. Page numbers in bold refer to figures and tables.
Allele, 138
Apical (cranial) lobe, 93, 94
A
defined, 138
Apneustic centre, 95
Abdomen
Altricial young
Aponeurosis, 46
digestive system and, 102-110
myomorphs, 170
Appendicular skeleton, 30, 37-41
muscles of, 48-49, 49
rabbits, 167
equine, 191-192,192
Abdominal cavity, 26-27,26
Alula, avian, 152
Aqueous humour, 65
Abdominal oblique muscle, internal, 48 
Alveolar ducts, 91
Arachnoid mater, 57
Abduction, 43
Alveoli, 91, 92, 93, 98
Areolar tissue, 18,20
Absorption, 97
Amino acids, 14, 14, 108, 136
Arterial circulation, 84, 85
Accessory carpal bone, 39
deamination of, 119
Arteries, 83, 84, 130
Accessory glands, 128
regulation of, 109
avian, 159
equine,205
Aminopeptidase, 108
Arterioles, 83
guinea pigs, 172
Ammonia
Arytenoid cartilages, equine, 201
Accessory lobe, 93, 94
fish, 185
Asexual reprod uction, 123
Acetabular bone,40
levels, 84
Asternal ribs, 36,37
Acetabular fossa, 40
Amnion, 134
equine, 191
Acetabulum, 40
Amniotic cavity, 136
Atlas (first cervical vertebra), 35, 36
rabbits, 163
Amphiarthroses, 42
Atoms, 12-13
Acetycholine, 54
Ampulla, 69
Atrial fibrillation, equine, 200
Achilles tendon, 52
Amylases, 101, 108
Atrial systole, 82
Acid-base balance, 78
Anaesthesia
Atrioventricular node, 82-83
regulation of, 117
avian, 157
Atrophied muscle, 45-46
Acids, 13
general, 58
Auditory ossicles, 67
Acromion, 37
myomorphs, 169
Auditory tube, 67, 102
Acrosome, 134
Anal glands, 145
Auricular cartilage, 67
Actin, 45
ferrets, 173
Autodigestion, 103
Adduction, 43
Anal pores, geckos, 184
Autonomic nervous system, 61, 62, 63
Adductor muscles, 51
Anal sacs, 109
Autotomy, lizards, 178
Adenohypophysis, 71-72
Anal sphincter, 108
Axial skeleton, 30, 31-37
Adenosine diphosphate (ADP), 6
Anaphase
Axis (second cervical vertebra), 35,36
conversion from ATP, 7
meiosis, 9, 10, 10
Axon, 22, 53, 55
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP), 5, 6, 14, 45
mitosis, 8, 9
Axon hillock, 53
 conversion to ADP, 7
Anastomosis, 83
Axtin, 20
Adipose tissue, 18, 21
Anatomical directions, 4, 4
Azygous vein, 84
Adrenal cortex, 75
Anatomical planes, 4
Adrenal glands, 75
Anatomical terminology, 211-213
Adrenal medulla, 75
B
Anconeal process, 38
 Adrenal sex hormones, 75
Angiotensin, 117
Back-crossing to recessive, 140
Adrenaline, 54, 71, 75
Angiotensinogen, 117
Baculum, equine, 205
Adrenocorticotrophic hormone
Annular cartilage, 67
Balance, 67-69
(ACTH), 72, 75
Annulus fibrosus, 35
Balanitis (balanoposthitis), 126
Afferent lymphatic vessels, 86
Anoestrus, 131, 132, 133
Barium meal, 102
Afferent nerves, 55 
equine,208
Barium X-ray, 104-105
Agamas, 184
Anterior tibialis, 52
Barn owls (Tyto alba), 156
Agranular leucocytes, 88
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH), 72, 117,
Baroreceptors, 117
Agranulocytes, 79, 79-80, 79
117, 118
Barr body, 137
Air sacs, avian, 157, 158, 158
Antigens, 88
Bars, equine, 197
Alar fold, 89
Antiperistalsis, 102
Bases, 13
equine,200
Aorta, 84
base pairs, 136
Albumin, 79,109
Aortic arch, 84
Basilic vein see Brachial vein
Aldosterone, 75, 117
Aortic bodies, 95
Basophils, 79, 80
Alkalis, 13
Aortic hiatus, 48
Beak, avian, 151, 153
Allantois, 136
Aortic valve, 82
shapes, 160, 160
226
Index
Bicarbonate, 108
Blood-brain barrier, 58
Caecum, 105,108
Biceps brachii, 50
Body cavities, 25-27, 26
equine,204
Biceps femoris, 51, 51
abdominal, 26-27,26
guinea pigs, 171
Bicornuate uterus, 128, 131
key points, 15
lizards, 181
chinchillas, 172
pelvic, 26, 27
Calcaneus, 41
ferrets, 174
questions/answers, 215-216, 226
equine,193
guinea pigs, 172
thoracic, 25-26, 26, 27
Calcification, 19
myomorphs, 170
see also Oral cavity
Calcitonin, 72, 74
rabbits, 167
Body chemistry, 11-14
Calcium, 13,54,74
Bicuspid valve, 81
Body fluids, 77-78
in blood, 74, 80
Bifurcation of trachea, 91
Body temperature, 78
ions, 54 
Bilateral cryptorchid, 126
regulation of, 109
Cancellous bone, 20
Bile
Body tissues see Tissues
Canines, 100
canaliculi, 109
Boidae (boas), 181
equine, 202
formation of, 109
Bones, 19-20, 22,23
ferrets, 174
salts, 108
categories, 29
Capillaries, 83
in urine, 121
equine, 198
Capsule
Bile duct, common, 105, 106
forelimb, 37-39,38,39
of kidneys, 111
Bilirubin,79, 106
equine,196
tissue, 86
Binary fission, 8
hindlimb, 39-41,40,41
Carapace, chelonia, 178
Binocular vision, equine, 199,200
pneumatic, avian, 151
Carbohydrate metabolism, 109
Bipolar neurons, 54, 65
shape, 29
Carbohydrates, 5, 13, 13, 107, 108
Birds, 151-162
structure, avian, 151, 152
Cardia, 103
circulatory system, 158-160, 159
terminology, 31
Cardiac lobe, lung, 93, 94
digestive system, 160-161, 160
Bony fish, 183
Cardiac muscle, 21, 24, 82
diving, 156
Bony labyrinth, inner ear, 67-68
Cardiac sphincter, 103
droppings, components, 161, 162
Bowman's capsule, 113
rabbits, 166
handling, 153
Brachial arteries
Cardiovascular system, 5
musculoskeletal system, 151-155
avian, 159
chelonia, 178
questions/answers, 222-223, 226
left, 84
lizards, 181
reproductive system, 161-162, 161
Brachial vein, 84
reptiles, 177
respiratory system, 156-158,
avian, 159,160
snakes, 181
157,158
Brachialis, 50
Carnassials, 100
special senses, 155-156
Brachiocephalic trunk, 84
ferrets, 174
urinary system, 161,161, 162
Brachiocephalicus, 49
Carotid bodies, 95
urogenital system, 162
Brachycephalic breeds, 66
Carpal bones, 147
Bladder, 119-120
skull shape, 33,34, 34
Carpal check ligament, equine, 196
Bladder sphincter, 120
Brain, 56-57, 56
Carpal pad, 147
Blastocyst, 134
avian, 155, 155
Carpus, 39, 39
Blind spot, 65
equine,199
equine, 191,193
 Blood vascular system,7-88
protection of,57-58
muscles of, 50
blood, 17,77-80
ventricular system, 57
Cartilage, 18
avian, 160
Brain stem herniation, 57
Cartilaginous fish, 183
calcium, 74, 80
Breeding strategies, 139,141
Cartilaginous joints, 35, 41-42
chemicals, 71
 Broad ligament (mesometrium), 130
Cascade mechanism, 80
clotting, 78, 80
Bronchi, 91
Cataracts, 65
composition, 78-80, 78
avian, 157
Cations, 13
equine,200
Bronchial tree, 91
Cauda epididymis, 125
functions, 77-78
Bronchioles, 91
Cauda equina,58
glucose levels, 74, 75
Brunner's glands, 105, 108
Caudal air sacs, avian, 157
pH, 96
Bulb of heel, equine, 197
Caudal articular processes, 35
pressure,83, 118
Bulb of penis, 126
Caudal fin (tail), fish, 183
regulation, 77-78
Bulbourethral glands, 120, 128
Caudal lobe, lung,93, 94
in urine, 121
equine,205
Caudal mesenteric artery, 84
circulatory system,-86
Bundle of His, 83
Caudal vena cava, 81,82, 84
blood vessels, 83-84, 83
Buoyancy fish, 183
Caudal vertebrae,35,36
 pulmonary,85, 85
Bursa, 46,47
equine,190
systemic,84-86,85
Caval foramen,48
equine, 200
Cavernous erectile tissue, 126
heart, 82
c
Cell biology, 3-14
key points, 77
Caecotrophy
animal classification, 3-5, 4
lymphatic system, 86-88
 guinea pigs, 171
body chemistry, 11-14
questions/answers,218-219, 226
rabbits, 167
germ,8,131, 134
Index
227
Cell biology (Continued)
Ciliary body, 64
Condylar process, 33,33
goblet, 16,18,103
Ciliary muscle, 64
Condyle, 37
interstital, 75, 125
equine,199
defined, 31
key points, 3
Ciliated epithelium, 16, 16, 17
femur,40
questions/answers, 215,226
muico11s, 91
Cones, 65
see also Mammalian cells
Circulatory system, 83-86, 83, 85
Congenital defects, 141
Cell-mediated immune response, 88
avian, 158-160,159
Congestive heart failure, 82,84,86
Cells of Leydig, 75, 125, 125
equine,200
Conjunctiva, 64
Central canal, spinal cord, 58
fish, 184
Connective tissue, 17-20
Central chemoreceptors, 95-96
Circumanal glands, 145
Conscious perception, 61
Central nervous system (CNS), 56-58
Circumduction, 43
Coprodeum, reptiles, 177
Central tarsus, equine, 193
Circumoral glands, 145
Coprophagia
Central veins, lobules and, 109
Cisterna chyli, 86
equine, 204
Centrioles, 7
Classes, vertebrates, 3
guinea pigs, 171
Centrosome,7
Classification, animal, 3-5, 4
myomorphs, 170
Cephalic vein, 83, 84
Clavicle,37
rabbits, 167
Cerebellar hypoplasia, 57
guinea pigs, 171
Copulatory organ, fish, 185
Cerebellum, 57
Claws, 39, 147-148, 147
Copulatory plug, myomorphs, 170
Cerebral cortex,56
fold,148
Coracoid bone, avian, 151
Cerebral hemispheres, 56
Clitoris, 130
Corium, equine, 198
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), 57
Cloaca
Cornea, 64
Cerebrum,56
avian, 161
avian, 156
Ceruminous glands, 67, 145
snakes, 182
equine,199
Cervical canal, 130
Coccygeal (caudal) vertebrae, 35, 36
Corona radiata, 133
Cervical vertebrae, 35, 36
equine,190
Coronary arteries, 84
equine,190
Cochlear window, 68
Coronary band, equine, 197
Cervix, 130
Coeliac artery, 84
Coronary border, 148
chinchillas, 172
Coelom, 136
Coronary corium, equine, 198
equine,207
Coffin joint, equine, 192
Coronary sinus, 84
rabbits, 167
Collagen fibres, 21
Coronary veins, 84
Chambers
bundles, 18
Coronet, equine, 197
of eye, 65
Collateral ligaments, 42
Coronoid process, 33,33
of heart, 80-81
 sesamoidean, equine, 196
Corpora nigra, equine, 199
Chameleons, 179
Collecting duct, kidneys, 114, 117
Corpus callosum, 56
Check ligaments, equine, 196
Colon, 104, 108
Corpus cavernosum penis, 126
Chelonia, 177, 178, 179, 180
equine, 204
Corpus luteum, 131
Chemicals
Colostrum, 130
Corpus spongiosum penis, 126 
blood, 71
Columella bone, avian, 156
Cortex, kidneys, 111
 reaction, body, 14
Columnar cells, 15
Corticosterone, 75
Chemoreceptors, 62, 95-96
Columnar epithelium, 17, 113, 114
Cortisol, 75
Cherry eye', 66
simple, 16, 16, 17
Costal arch, 36
Chief cells, 103
Common bile duct, 105,106
Costal cartilage, 36
Chinchillas (Chinchilla lanigera), 172-173
Common carotid arteries, 84
Costal fovea, 35, 36
questions/answers, 223, 226
Common digital extensor tendon, equine,
Costal pleura, 25
Chipmunks (Tamias sibiricus), 170
195-196
Coughing reflex, 91
questions/answers, 223, 226
Common integument, 5, 143-148
Cranial (apical) lobe, 93, 94
Chlamydophila psittaci (Chlamydia psittaci),
claws, 147-148, 147
Cranial mesenteric artery, 84
avian, 153
fish, 184
Cranial nerves, 58, 60
Choana, avian, 156
footpads, 146-147,147
Cranial processes, 35
Cholecystokinin, 108
hair, 145-146, 145
Cranial thoracic inlet, 25
Chord ae tendineae, 81
key points, 143
Cranial vena cava, 81, 82, 84
Chorioallantois, 136
lizards, 179
Craniofacial hinge, avian, 151
Chorion, 134
questions/answers, 222, 226
Cranium, 32, 57
Chorionic gonadotrophin, 71
reptiles, 177-178
fish, 183
Choroid, 64
skin, 143-145
Cremaster muscle, 126
equine,199
snakes, 181
Cribriform plate, 32, 63
Choroid plexuses, 57
Communication, skin and, 143
Cricoid cartilage,equine, 201
Chromatophores, chameleons, 179
Compact bone, 20
Crocodilia, 177
Chromosomes, 5, 136-137, 137
structuire, 22,23
Crop, avian, 160, 160
Chronic renal failure, 119
Compounds, 13
Crossbreeds, 141
Chyle, 108
Conchae,32,89
Crura, 126
Chyme, 103,108
avian, 156
Cryptorchidism, 126, 142
Cilia, 7-8, 66
equine,200
Crypts of Lieberkihn, 105, 108
228
Index
Crystals/casts, in urine, 121
digestive tract, 99
ear drum, 67
Cuboidal cells, 15
equine,201, 203
lizards, 179
Cuboidal epithelium, 114
myomorphs, 169-170
equine,199
simple, 15-16, 16
enzymes,108
external ear, 67
Cupula, 69
equine, 201-204,201, 203
folded, 142
Cushing's disease, 75
ferrets, 174, 175
inner ear, 67-69, 68
Cytoplasm, 5
fish, 184-185, 187
lizards, 179
 guinea pigs, 171, 171
middle ear, 58, 67
key points, 97
pinnae,67
D
lizards, 181
rabbits, 163
Dartos muscle, 123
myomorphs,169-170
see also entries beginning Tympanic
 Dead space, respiratory tract, 91
oral cavity, 97-102, 99
Ecdysis
defined, 96
organs of, 98
lizards, 179
Deafness, 142
questions/answers, 220, 226
reptiles, 177-178
Deamination, 119
rabbits, 163, 165-167, 166
 snakes, 181
Deciduous dentition, 100, 101
reptiles, 177
Eclampsia,54
equine,202
snakes, 181-182
Ectothermic species
Deep digital flexor tendon, equine, 195
stages of, 97
fish, 183
Defaecation, 108-109
Digital cushion, equine, 198
reptiles, 178
Deferent duct (vas deferens/ductus deferens),
Digital flexor muscles, 50, 52, 148
Ectropion, 66, 141
120, 126
Digital flexor tendon, avian, 151, 153
Efferent ducts, 125
Deglutition, 102
Digital pads, 147
Efferent nerves, 55
Dehydration, 118
Digits, 39
Efferent vessels, 86
Dendrites, 53
of hind paw, 41, 42
Elastic cartilage, 18
Dendrons, 22,53
muscles of, 50, 52
Elastic tissue, bladder and, 120
Dens, 35, 36
Dioestrus (metoestrus), 131, 132, 133
Elbow dysplasia, 39, 141
Dense connective tissue, 18, 21
equine, 208
Elbow joint, 38, 38, 43
Dental arch (dentary), 98
Diploid number, 137
muscles of, 50, 50
Dental formulae, 100
defined, 138
Electrolyte, 13
Dentition see Teeth
Disaccharides, 108
Elements, 12-13
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), 5, 8, 136,
Discs, synovial joints and, 42
Embolus, 80
137, 138
Distal convoluted tubule, 114
Embryonic development, 123, 133-136, 135
avian testing, 162
Distal sesamoid, equine, 198
definitions, 133
 Dermal papilla, 145
Distal sesamoidean ligament,
Empyema, equine, 199
Dermis, 143, 144, 144
equine, 196
Endoca rdium, 81
Detoxification, 109
Distichiasis, 66
Endochondrial ossification, 29-30, 31
products of, 119
Diuretics, 117
Endocrine system, 5, 71-75
Dew claws, 39, 148
Dolichocephalic shape, 34, 34
basic functions, 71, 73
Dewlap, rabbits, 163
Dominant gene, 138 
endocrine glands, 16, 71-75,72, 73
Diabetes mellitus, 74, 116
defined, 138
key points, 71
Diaphragm, 25, 48, 48, 94
Dopamine, 54 
questions/answers, 218, 226
reptiles, 177
Dorsal (epaxial) muscles, 34, 48
Endocytosis, 8
Diaphragmatic (caudal) lobe, 93, 94
Dorsal meatus, equine, 200
Endoderm, 134
Diaphragmatic flexure, equine, 204
Dorsal roots, 59
Endolymph, 68, 69
Diaphragmatic pleura, 25
Drugs, secretion of, 116
Endometrium, 129
Diaphysis (shaft of bone), 30
Ductus arteriosus, 84-85
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER), 6
Diarrhoea, 109
Ductus deferens (deferent duct/
Enterokinase, 108
Diarthroses see Synovial joints
vas deferens), 126
Entropion, 66, 141
Diastema
avian, 161
Enzymes, 14, 77, 80, 107
chinchillas, 172
Ductus venosus, 85
digestive, 108
rabbits, 165
Duodenum, 104, 105
Eosinophils, 79, 80
Diastole, 82
avian, 161
Epaxial (dorsal) muscles, 35, 48
Diet, chinchillas, 172
equine,203
Epicardium, 81
Diffusion, 5, 11-12, 11, 115
rabbits, 166
Epicondyle, defined, 31
Digastricus, 47, 47
Dura mater, 57
Epidermis, 143, 144,144
Digestive system, 5, 97-110
Dynamic balance, 69
thickness of, 145
abdominal part, 102-110
Dystocia ('egg binding'), reptiles, 177
Epididymis, 125
avian, 160-161,160
Epiglottis, 91
chelonia, 178, 180
equine,201
E
chinchillas, 172
Epinephrine, 54, 71, 75
chipmunk, 170
Ear mites (Otodectes cymotis), 67
Epiphyseal plate, 30, 31
digestion, 97, 107-108
Ears, 67-69
Epiphyses, 30
rabbits, 166-167
avian, 156
Epistasis, 138
Index
229
Epithelium
Footpads, 146-147,147
F
absorptive, 107
Foramen, defined, 31
bladder and transitional, 120
Fabellae, 40
Foramen magnum, 32, 32, 58
columnar, 113, 114
Facial expression, muscles of, 47
Foramen ovale, 84
cuboidal, 114
Facilitated diffusion, 5
Forebrain, 56, 57
 oesophagus and, 102
Faecal incontinence, 109
Forelimb
simple cuboidal, 113
Faeces, 109
bones of, 37-39, 38,39
simple squamous, 16, 16, 114
myomorphs,170
equine, 191-192,192, 196,197
stratified squamous, 102, 130, 144
rabbits, 167
muscles of, 49-50, 50
tissue, 15-17
Falciform ligament, 85, 109
rabbits, 163
types of, 15-16, 16
Fallopian tube, 128
wings, 152-153, 154, 160
 ureter and transitional, 119
False nostril, equine, 200
Fornix, 66
Erythroblasts, 79
False pregnancy, 132, 133
Fossa, defined, 31
Erythrocytes (red blood cells), 78, 79, 79
False ribs, 36
Fovea capitis, 38
avian, 160
equine,191
Frog corium, equine, 198
Erythropoiesis, defined, 79
Fangs, snakes, 181
Frog, equine, 197
Erythropoietic-stimulating factor, 71, 79, 111
 Fat metabolism, 109
Frontal bones, 32,32
Erythropoietin, 71,79,111
Fats (lipids), 13-14, 13, 107, 108 
equine,189
Ethmoid bone, 32, 63
Fatty acids, 13, 108
Frontal sinus, 89
Ethmoidal haematomata, equine, 200
Feathers, 153
equine, 200
Ethmoturbinates, equine, 200
contour (covert), 153, 154, 155
Frontomaxillary opening, equine, 200
Eustachian tube, 67, 102
filoplume/down, 153, 154, 155
Functional residual capacity, defined, 96
Excretion, 97, 111, 118-119
flight, 153, 154, 155
Fundus, 103
hydrogen ions, 117
Feedback loops, 71
Fur, ferrets, 173
Exhalation see Expiration
Feet
Fusiform shape, fish, 183
Exocrine glands, 16
avian, 151-152
Exocytosis, 8
equine, 197-198,197
footpads, 146-147,147
G
Expiration, 94
avian, 158, 158
Femoral artery, 84
Gaits, equine, 198
Expiratory reserve volume, defined, 96
Femoral nerve, 61
Gall bladder, 106, 109
Extension, 43
Femoral pores, lizards, 181, 184
ferrets, 174
Extensors, 60, 61
Femur, 40, 40
myomorphs, 169
External abdominal oblique muscle, 48
equine, 192
Gamete, 137
External acoustic meatus, 32, 32
Ferrets, 173-175, 174
defined, 138
External auditory meatus, 67
internal anatomy, 175
Ganglion cells, 65
 External iliac artery, 84
questions/answers, 223, 226
Gaseous exchange, 89, 91, 93
External intercostal muscles, 48, 94 
Fertilisation, 133-134, 134
Gases, in solution, 77
External respiration, 89
Fetal development, 133-136, 135
Gastric dilatation and volvulus (GDV), 103
External urethral orifice, 120, 130
circulation, 84-85
Gastric juices, 103, 108
Extoderm, 134
definitions, 133
Gastric mucosa, 103
Extracellular fluid (ECF), 11, 78, 114, 117, 118
Fetlockjoint, equine, 192
Gastric pits, 103
Extracellular matrix (ground substance), 17
Fibrin, 80
Gastrin, 71, 103, 108
Extra-embryonic membranes, 134, 136
Fibrinogen, 79, 80, 109
Gastrocnemius muscle, 51-52
Extraocular muscles, 47, 47
Fibrocartilage, 18
Gastrointestinal tract, 106
 Extrinsic gland, pancreas as, 106
Fibrous joints, 41
Geckos, 179, 184
Extrinsic muscles, 46
Fibula, 40-41, 41
Genetics, 136-142, 137, 138
forelimb, 49
equine,192
genes, 136,138,139
head, 48
Fimbriae, 128
nomenclature, 138-140
Eye defects, 141
Fins, fish, 183
terminology, 138
Eyelids, 66,66
Fish, 183-187, 186, 187,188
Genotype, 138
 snakes, 181
questions/answers, 223-224, 226
defined, 138
third,66,156
Fissures, 56
Genus, defined, 3
Eyes, 63-67
Fitch', ferrets, 173
Gerbils (Meriones unguiculatus), 169
avian, 155-156,156
 Flagella, 7-8
Germ cells, 8, 131
equine, 199, 199
Flat bones, 29
layers, 134
eyeball, 64-65
 Flat-chested kittens, 142
Germinativum, 144
fields of vision, 63, 64
Flexion, 43
Gestation period, 133
image formation, 66-67, 66
Flexors, 61
Gill system, fish, 184, 185, 188
lizards, 181
Flight, avian, 153-154, 154
rakers, 184, 185
muscles of, 47-48, 47, 65
Floating' ribs, 36, 37
Gingival (periodontal) membrane, 98
rabbits, 163
Fluid balance, 12
Gizzard (ventriculus), avian, 160
snakes, 181
Foaling, 204
Glands, 16
struicture of, 64, 66
Follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), 72, 131-132
types of, 19
230
Index
Glandular epithelium, 16
Hard palate, 33,97
blood vascular system, 200
Glans penis, 126
avian, 156
digestive system, 201-204, 201, 203
Glaucoma, 65
 Harderian glands, 66
muscular system, 193-199, 194, 195
Glenoid cavity,37
Haversian canals, 19-20, 23
nervous system, 199
Gliding, joint, 43
Head
questions/answers, 224-225, 226
Globulins, 109
avian, 151, 153
reproductive system, 204-208,
Glomerular capsule, 113
muscles of, 47-48
206, 207
Glomerular filtrate, 116
Hearing, 67-69
respiratory system, 200-201
Glomerulus, 113, 115-116, 115
avian, 156
skeletal system, 189-193, 190
Glottis, 91
Heart, 80-83, 81
special senses, 199-200, 199
avian, 157
avian, 159
urinary system, 204, 205
Glucagon, 74
blood circulation, 82
Howell-Joly bodies, 79
Glucocorticoids, 75
conduction system, 82-83, 82
Humerus, 37, 38, 39
Glucogenolysis, 74
equine,200
equine,191
Glucose, 108
murmurs, 82, 86
neck of, 37
diabetes mellitus and, 116
reptiles, 177
Humoral immune response, 88
reabsorption, 116
valves, 81-82
Hyaline cartilage, 18, 22
in urine, 121
Heart rate, 82
Hybrid vigour, 141
Glucosuria,74, 116
normal, equine, 200
Hydrochloric acid (HCl), 103, 108
Gluteal muscles, 51
Heat
Hydrogen ions, excretion of, 117
Glycerol, 13, 13, 108
loss, avian, 159
Hyoid apparatus, 33,33, 90-91, 91
Glycocalyx, fish, 184
production of, 109
equine, 201
Glycogenesis, 74
Hemipenes
Hyoid bone, 98
Glycogenolysis, 75
lizards, 181
Hypaxial (ventral) muscles, 35, 48
Goblet cells, 16, 18, 103
snakes, 182
Hyperadrenocorticalism, 75
Golgi apparatus, 6, 6
Heparin, 80
Hyperglycaemia, 74, 116
Gonad otrophin-releasing hormone
Hepatic artery, 84, 109
Hyperparathyroidism, 74
(GRH), 72, 74, 131-132
Hepatic portal system, 84, 85
Hypertension, 65
Gonopodium, fish, 185
snakes, 181
Hyperthyroidism, 72
Graafian follicles, 131
Hepatic portal vein, 84, 109
Hypertrophied muscle, 45-46
Gracilis muscle, 51
Hepatic veins, 84, 108
Hypodermis, 143, 144, 144
Granulocytes, 79, 79-80, 79
Hepatocytes, 109
Hypothalamus, 56
Greater curvature, stomach, 103
Heterosis, 141
Hypothyroidism, 72
Greater omentum, 27, 103
Heterozygous gene, 138
Hypsodontic teeth, equine, 202
Greater trochanter, 40
defined,138
Hystricomorphs, 170-173
Greater tubercle, 37
Higher teleosts, fish, 183, 184
Grey matter, 56, 58
Hilus, 86, 119
Growth hormone, 72
Hindbrain, 57, 57
Growth plate, 30, 31
Hindlimb
 leocaecal junction, 105, 108
Guard hairs, 146, 146
bones of, 39-41, 40, 41, 42
lleum, 105
Gubernaculum, 125
equine, 192-193, 194
avian, 161
Guinea pigs (Cavia porcellus),
muscles of, 51-52, 51, 52
equine, 203
170-172, 171
rabbits, 163
rabbits, 166
questions/answers, 223, 226
Hindpaw (tarsus), 41, 42
liac artery internal, 84
Gums, 98
Hip dysplasia, 40, 51, 141
llium, 39
Gustation, 62, 98
Hip joint, equine, 192
equine,192
Guttural pouch, equine, 199
Histiocytes, 88
Immune system, 88
Gyri, 56
Hobble (castrated ferret),174
Immunoglobulins, 79
Hobday operation, equine, 201
Implantation, 134
Hock joint see Tarsus
 Inbreeding, 141
H
Hock muscles, 52
Incisive bone, 32, 33, 97
Haemoglobin, 79
Homeostasis, 11, 77
equine, 189
Haemophilia, 142
Homologous chromosomes, 137
Incisors, 100
Haemopoiesis, defined, 79
Homozygosity, 140-141
chinchillas, 172
Haemopoietic tissue, 18
Homozygous gene, 138
equine, 202, 202
Hair, 145-146, 145
defined, 138
ferrets, 174
follicles, 145
Hoof, equine, 197-198, 197
guinea pigs, 171
roots, 145
Hormones, 71, 73, 77
myomorphs, 169
shafts, 145
endocrine glands,71-75, 72, 73
rabbits, 165,166
types, 146
female reproductive, 75
Incus, 67
Hamsters (Mesocricetus auratus), 169
oestrous cycle and, 131-132
Induced ovulators, 128, 132
Hamstring group of muscles, 51, 51
Horn, equine, 197
ferrets, 174
Haploid number, defined, 138
Horses, 189-208
rabbits, 167
Index
231
Infection
Isometric contraction, 45
Larynx, 90-91, 90, 91
defence against, 78
Isotonic contraction, 45
avian, 157
equine, 201
Isthmus, avian, 161
muscles in, 48
Infraspinatus, 49
Lateral canthus, 66
Infraspinous fossa, 37
Lateral cartilages,equine, 198
Infundibulum, 128
Lateral condyle, femur, 40
 Jacobsen's organ
avian, 161
Lateral digital extensor tendon, equine, 196
equine,206
lizards, 181
Lateral epicondyle, 37
Ingestion, 97
snakes, 182
Lateral line system, fish, 184
 Inguinal canal, 126
Jejunum,105
Lateral malleolus, 41, 41
Inguinal ring, 49
equine, 203
Lateral pterygoid, 47
 Inhalation see Inspiration
Joint cavity, 42
Lateral saphenous vein, 83
Inherited defects, 141-142, 142
Joints, 41-44, 43, 44
Lateral styloid process, 38
Inner cell mass, 134
equine,196
Latissimus dorsi, 49
 Inorganic compounds, 12-13
Jugular processes, 32, 32
Law of independent assortment, 139, 140
 Inorganic ions, 118
Jugular veins, 83,84
Law of segregation, 139
 Inspiration, 48, 94
external, equine, 200
Left atrioventricular (AV) valve, 81
avian, 158, 158
Left axillary artery, 84
Inspiratory centre,95
K
Left brachial artery, 84
 Inspiratory reserve volume, defined, 96
Keratin, 144
Left dorsal colon, equine, 204
Insulin, 74
Keratinisation, 144
Left subclavian artery, 84
 Integument see Common integument
Ketones, in urine, 121
Left ventral colon, equine, 204
Intercalated discs, 21, 24
Kidneys,111-119, 113
Legs
Intercalated neurons, 55
blood supply, 113
avian, 151-152, 153
Intercellular products, 15
disease, 119
equine,193-195
Intercostal muscles, 36
ferrets, 173
equine,204,205
internal, 48, 94
excretion, 118-119
 see also Forelimb; Hindlimb
Intercostal nerves, 94
fish, 185
Lens, 65, 67
Intercostal space, 36
Lesser curvature, stomach, 103
guinea pigs, 172
Interlobar arteries, 113
osmoregulation, 117-118, 117
Lesser omentum, 27, 103
 Interlobar veins, 113
Lesser trochanter, 40
reptiles, 177
Interphalangeal joint, 147
Lesser tubercle, 37
structure
Interphase, mitosis, 8, 9
Lethal genes, 139
macroscopic, 111-113
 Intersesamoidean ligament, equine, 196
microscopic, 113-114
Leucocytes (white blood cells), 78, 79-80, 79
Intersternebral cartilages, 37
Ligaments, 31
urine formation, 114-117, 116
 Interstitial cell stimulating hormone (ICSH),
see also entries beginning Renal
equine, 195-197,196
72, 75, 125
Kinetic skull, snakes, 181
 synovial joints and, 42
Interstitial cells, 75, 125
Kingdom, 3
Ligamentum arteriosus, 85
Interstitial fluid, 11, 15
Kittens, 136
Limbus, 64
 Interventricular septal defect, 84
Line breeding. 141
cerebellar hypoplasia and, 57
Intervetebral disc, 35, 35
Linea alba, 48,48-49, 49
Intervetebral foramen, 58
Linnaeus, Carl, 3
L
Intestinal juice, 108
Lipases, 108
Intestines
Labia, 130
Lipids (fats), 13-14, 13, 107, 108
fish, 185
Lachrimal bone, 32, 32
Liver, 84, 109, 110
myomorphs, 169
Lachrimal gland, 66
functions of, 109
snakes, 182
Lactase, 108
 guinea pigs, 172
 Intracapsular ligaments, 42
Lacteals, 86, 106
Lizards, 178-181, 180, 182, 183
Intracellular fluid (ICF), 11
Lacunae, 19,23
Lobes
 Intramembranous ossification, 29-30
Lagomorpha, rabbits and, 163
liver, 109
 Intravenous injections, avian, 159
Lamellae, 20, 23
lungs, 93
Intrinsic muscles, 46
fish, 184
Lobules, liver, 109
forelimb, 49
Laminar corium, equine, 198
Locomotion, equine, 198-199, 198
lons, 13
Large intestine, 108-109
Locus, defined, 138
Iris, 64-65
avian,161
Long bones, 29, 31
avian, 156
equine, 203-204
avian, 151, 152
equine, 199
ferrets, 174
head of, defined, 31
Iron, 109
guinea pigs, 171
neck of, defined, 31
Irregular bones, 29
rabbits, 166
Long pastern, equine, 192
Ischial tuberosity, 40
 Laryngeal hemiplegia,
Longitudinal fissure, 56
Ischium, 39
equine,201
Loops of Henle, 111, 114,117
equine,192
Laryngeal paralysis, 91
reptiles, 177
 Islets of Langerhans, 74
Laryngopharynx, equine, 201
Lower teleosts (fish), 183, 184
232
Index
Lumbar vertebrae, 35, 36
Medial malleolus, 41, 41
Mitosis, 8-9, 9, 134, 144
equine,190
Medial pterygoid, 47
defined, 138
Lungs,25-26, 92,93, 93,94
Medial styloid process, 38
 Mitral valve, 81
avian,158
Median nerve, 60
insufficiency, 82
snakes, 181
Mediastinal pleura, 26
 Mixed glands, 74
Luteinising hormone (LH), 72, 132
Mediastinum, 26, 27, 80, 93-94
Mixed nerves, 55,58, 59
Lymphatic system, 86-88
Medulla, of kidneys, 111
Molars, 100
capillaries, 86
Medulla oblongata, 57
chinchillas, 172
ducts, 86, 86,87
Medullary cavity, 29, 31
equine, 202
functions of, 86
Megakaryocytes, 80
 guinea pigs, 171
immune system, 88
Meibomian glands, 66, 145
myomorphs, 169
nodes, 86-87, 86, 87
Meiosis, 9-10, 10, 123, 137
rabbits, 166
tissues, 87
defined, 138
Molecules, 13
vessels, 86, 86
Melanocytes, 144
Mongrels (crossbreeds), 141
Lymphatic system, equine, 200
Membrane, semi-permeable, 12
Monocytes, 79, 80
Lymphocytes, 79, 80, 86
Membranous cochlea, 68
Monoestrous, 132
888g
Membranous labyrinth, 68
 Monogastric herbivores,
T, 80, 87, 88
Membranous semicircular canals, 69
chinchillas, 172
Lymphoid tissue, defined, 79
Membranous vestibule, 68
Monoglycerides (glycerol), 13, 13, 108
Lysosomes, 7, 8
Mendel's laws of inheritance, 139, 140, 141
Monohybrid crosses, 139-140
Meninges, 57, 58
Monorchid, 126
Menisci, synovial joints and, 42
Monosaccharides, 108
M
Mesaticephalic shape,34,34
 Monosynaptic reflex, 61
Macrophages, 80, 88
Mesentery, 26-27
Morula, 134
Magnum, avian, 161
stomach and, 103
Motor nerves, 55
Malar abscess, 100
Mesocolon, 108
Motor unit, muscle fibres, 45
Malassezia pachydermatis, 67
Mesoderm,134
Moulting,146
Malleus, 67
Mesoduodenum, 27, 105
avian,153
Maltase, 108
Mesoileum, 105
 Mouse see Mice
Mammalian cells, 5-10, 15
Mesojejunum, 105
Mouth breathing, 90
blood, 78,79-80, 79
Mesometrium, 130
Movements, range of, 43
body, 22, 53
Mesosalpinx, 128
Mucous membrane, 16
cells of Leydig, 75, 125, 125
Mesoureter, 119
Muicus, 25, 108
components,6
Mesovarium, 27,128
fish, 184
division, 8-10, 133-134, 134
Metabolism, 97
 Multicellular glands, 16
membrane, 5, 7
Metacarpal pad, 147
 Multiparous species, 128
Purkinje,54,57
Metacarpals, equine,192, 193
Multipolar neuron, 54
Schwann, 22,53, 54
Metacarpus, 39,39
Muscular system, 5, 45-52
Sertoli, 123, 125
Metaphase
anatomy, muscle, 46, 46
spermatogenic, 125
meiosis, 9,10,10
contraction, muscle, 45
structure/function, 5-8, 7, 8
mitosis, 8, 9
divisions, muscle, 35
Mammary glands, 130, 131, 145
 Metatarsal pad, 147
equine, 193-199,194, 195
chinchillas, 172
Metatarsus, 41, 42
eye muscles, 47-48, 47, 65
equine,207
Metoestrus, 131, 132, 133
key points, 45
Mandible,33,33,97
equine, 208
 mastication muscles, 97
equine,189
Mice (Mus musculus), morphology, 168-169
questions/answers, 217, 226
Mandibular glands, 101
Mice (Mus musculus), questions/answers,
sheath, muscle, 20
Mandibular nodes, equine,200
223, 226
skeletal muscles, 46-52
Mandib ular symphysis, 33, 33, 42, 97
Microvilli, 105
structure/function,45-46
Manubrium, 36
kidneys, 113
tissue, muscle, 20-21
Marginal haematoma, 136
Micturition, 120
tone, muscle,45-46
Masseter, 47, 47
Midbrain, 57, 57
Musculoskeletal system
Masseteric fossa, 33
Middle (cardiac) lobe,93, 94
avian, 151-155
Mastication, 97
Middle meatus, equine, 200
ferrets, 173,173
muscles of, 47, 47, 97
Milk, composition, 130, 131
fish, 184, 186, 187
Maxilla, 32-33, 32, 97
Milk fever, 54
rabbits, 163,165
equine,189
Milk teeth, equine, 202
Mutations, 138
Maxillary sinuses, 89
Milt, fish, 185
Mycosis, equine, 199
equine,200,201
Mineral salts, 78
Myelin, 22
Medial canthus, 66
Mineralocorticoids, 75
Myelin sheath, 53
Medial condyle, femur, 40
Minerals, 13
Myeloid tissue, defined, 79
Medial epicondyle, 37
Mitochondria, 6
Myocardium, 21,81,82
Index
233
Myofibrils, 20
Oval window (cochlear window),68
Myomeres, fish, 183
Oblique muscles, 47, 47
Ovarian arteries, 84, 130
Myometrium, 129
Ovarian follicles, 74
Obturator foramen, 40
Myomorphs, 168-170
Ovarian ligament, 128
Occipital bones, 32, 32
Myosin, 20, 45
Ovariohysterectomy (spaying), 130
Occipital condyles,32,32,35
Odontoid process (dens),35,36
Ovary, 74-75, 75, 128, 129, 131
N
equine,206
Oedema, defined, 78
Oesophageal hiatus, 48
Oviduct, 128
Nares, external, equine, 200
 Oviparous reproduction
Nasal bones, 32, 32
Oesophagus, 102, 104, 160, 160
lizards, 181
equine, 189
equine, 203
Oestrogen,74,75, 123,128, 131
reptiles, 177
 Nasal cavity, 89
Ovoviviparous reproduction
Nasal chambers, 32, 89
Oestrous cycle, 130, 131-133, 132, 133
fish, 185
equine, 200
behavioural changes and, 132-133
Nasal mucosa, 63
reptiles, 177
equine, 207-208
Ovulation, 131, 132
Nasal septum, 32
Oestrus, 131, 132, 133
Oxygen, 82, 85,91
 Nasal turbinates, 32
equine, 208
Nasolachrimal duct, 66
Oxyhaemoglobin, 79
Olecranon, 37-38, 38
 Nasomaxillary opening, equine, 200
Oxytocin, 72, 130
Olecranon fossa, 37
Nasopharynx, 90, 98
Olfaction (smell), 63
P
equine,201
avian, 156
Navicular bone, equine, 198
Olfactory bulbs, 56, 63
Pacemakers,82
Neonatal isoerythrolysis, equine, 200
Olfactory region, 89
Palatal ostium
Neoplasia, equine, 199
Omentum, 27, 103
chinchillas, 172
Nephrons, 113
Opercula, fish, 184
guinea pigs, 171
renal, 114, 116
Optic chiasma, 56
Palatine bone, 32, 33, 97
 Nervous system, 5,53-61
Optic disc, 65
Pampiniform plexus, 125
autonomic nervous system, 6l, 62, 63
Oral cavity, 97-102, 99
Pancreas, 73, 74, 105, 106
central nervous system (CNS), 56-58
avian, 160
ferrets, 174
equine,199
chelonia, 178
Pancreatic duct, 105
key points,53
chinchillas, 172
Pancreatic juice, 108
nerve classification, 55
equine,202
Panosteitis, 20
nerve endings, avian, 156
 guinea pigs, 171
Papillae, 98
nerve impulses, 22, 53, 54-55, 55, 71
rabbits, 165-166
Papillary muscles, 81
nervous tissue, 22, 53-55
Orbit
Parabronchi, avian, 157
 peripheral nervous system, 58-61
avian, 151
Paranasal sinuses, 89-90
peripheral nerve pathways, 60-61
equine, 189
equine,200
questions/answers, 217-218, 226
Orders, defined, 3
Parasympathetic nervous system, 61, 63
Neural spine, 35
Organ of Corti, 68
Parathormone, 74, 74
 Neural (vertebral) arch, 34
 Organ, defined, 15
Parathyroid glands, 73, 74, 74
Neurohypophysis, 72
Organelles, 6-8
Parietal bones, 32, 32
Neurological cells, 53
Organic compounds, 13-14
Parietal cells, 103
 Neuromuscular junction, 54
Organogenesis, 136
Parietal membrane, 25
Neurons, 22, 25
Oropharynx, 90, 98
Parotid glands, 101
struicture, 53-54, 54
equine,201
Parotid lymph nodes, equine, 200
Neutrophils, 79, 80
 guinea pigs, 171
Parotid node, 87
 Nictitating membrane (third eyelid), 66
Os cordis, cows, 41
Parthenogenesis, lizards, 181
avian, 156
Os penis, 41, 126, 128
Pastern joint, equine, 192
 Nitrogenous waste
guinea pigs, 171
Patella, 40, 51
concentration of,116, 119
Osmoreceptors, 117, 118
equine, 192
fish, 185
Osmoregulation, 111, 117-118, 117
Patent ductus arteriosus, 86
Nodes of Ranvier, 53
fish, 185
Pavlov's dogs, 61
Noradrenaline, 75
Osmosis, 12,12, 115
Pectineotomy, 51
Norepinephrine, 75
Osmotic pressure, 12, 118
Pectineus muscle,51
Normoblasts, 79
Ossa coxarum, 39
Pectoral arteries, avian, 159
Nose, 89-90, 90
Ossification, 29
Pectoral limb, 60-61
nostrils, 89
Osteoblasts, 29
Pectoral muscles, 49
see also entries beginning Nasal
Osteoclasts, 29
avian, 151
Nuchal ligament, 35
Osteocytes, 19,23
Pedal bone, equine, 192, 198
Nucleus,5-6
Osteoid, 19
Pelvic cavity, 26, 27
Nucleus pulposus, 35
Otitis externa, 67
avian, 151
Nutrients, 77
Otoliths, 68
Pelvic limb, 61
Nutritional hyperparathyroidism, 74
Outbreeding, 141
Pelvic urethra, 120
234
Index
Pelvis, 39-40, 40
Plasma proteins, 78-79
structure, 14
equine, 192,193
formation of, 109
in urine, 121
of kidneys, 111
Plastron, chelonia, 178
Prothrombin, 79, 80, 109
Penile urethra, 120
Platelets (thrombocytes),78,79,80
Protraction, 43
Penis (phallus), 126-128, 127
Pleura, 25,27
Proventriculus, avian, 160
avian, 162
Pleural cavities, 25, 93
Proximal convoluted tubule, 113, 116
chinchillas, 172
 Pleural membrane, 93
Pseudocyesis, 132, 133
equine, 205
Pneumatic bones, 29
Pseudopregnancy, 132, 133
Pepsin, 108
avian, 151
Pseudo-unipolar neuron, 54
Pepsinogen, 103, 108
Pneumotaxic centre, 95
Psittacosis, avian, 153
Perching reflex, avian, 151
Polydactyly, 142
 Pubic symphysis, 39,41
Pericardial cavity, 26
Polygenic characteristics, 138
 guinea pigs, 171
Pericardium, 26, 80
Polymorphonucleocytes (PMNs), 79
Pubis, 39
Perilymph, 68
Polyoestrous ovulators
equine,192
 Periodontal (gingival) membrane, 98 
guinea pigs, 172
Pulmonary circulation, 83, 85, 85
Periople, equine, 198
myomorphs, 170
 Pulmonary membrane, 91 
Perioplic corium, equine, 198
Polypeptides (proteins), 107, 108 
Pulmonary pleura,26,93
 Peripheral chemoreceptors, 95
Polysaccharides, 13, 107, 108
Pulmonary valve, 82
Peripheral nerves, equine, 199
Polysynaptic reflex, 61
Pulmonary vein, 83
 Peripheral nervous system, 58-61
Pons, 57
Pulp cavity, 98
 peripheral nerve pathways, 60-61
Popliteal node, 87
Pulse, 82
Peristalsis, 102, 103, 103
Portosystemic shunt, 84
rate, 98
Peritoneal fluid, 26
Postanal sacs, chinchillas, 172
equine, 200
Peritoneum, 26,27, 120
Postsynaptic membrane, 54
Pupil, 64
 Permanent dentition, 100
Potassium, secretion of, 117
avian, 156
equine,202
Poultry, reproductive system in domestic, 161 
Pupillary reflex, 67
pH
Preanal pores, 181
Purkinje cells, 54, 57
blood,96
geckos, 184
Purkinje fibres, 83
scale, 13
Precocial young
Pygostyle (tail), avian, 151
in stomach, 103
chinchillas, 172
Pyloric sphincter, 103
in urine, 117,121
guinea pigs, 172
rabbits, 166
Phagocytic cells, 80
Preen gland, avian, 151
 Pylorus, 103
Phagocytosis, 8, 8
Preferred body temperature (PBT), reptiles,
Pyramids, kidneys, 111
Phalangeal-metacarpal joint, 147
178
 Phalanges, 39
Prehension, 97
Q
equine, 192, 193
 Premaxilla see Incisive bone
Quadrate bone, avian, 151
Phallus see Penis
Premolars, 100
Quadriceps femoris, 40, 51
Pharynx, 90, 98, 101-102, 102
chinchillas, 172
Quick (vascular dermis), 148
equine, 201
equine, 202
muscles in, 48
guinea pigs, 171
 Phenotype, 138
R
rabbits, 166
defined, 138
Preprostatic urethra, 120, 128
Rabbits (Oryctolagus cunniculus), 163-168
Pheromones, 143
Prepubic tendon, 49
digestive system, 163, 165-167, 166
Philtrum, 97
Prepuce, 127
handling, 163
rabbits, 163
Prescapular nodes, 87
morphology, 163
Phospholipid bilayer, 5
Presynaptic membrane, 54
musculoskeletal system, 163, 165
Photoreceptor cells, 63, 65, 67
Primary follicles, 131
avian, 156
Proctodeum, reptiles, 177
questions/answers, 223, 226
Phrenic nerve, 94
Production, skin and, 143
reproductive data, 164
Physoclistous bladder, fish, 184
Progesterone, 74-75, 128, 130, 131, 132
reproductive system, 167-168, 167, 168
 Physostomous bladder, fish, 184
 Progressive retinal atrophy (PRA), 140
respiratory system, 167
Pia mater, 57
Prolactin, 72, 130
urinary system, 167
Pigmented layer of retina, 65
Pro-oestrus, 131, 132
urogenital system, 167, 168
Pinocytosis, 8
Prophase
Radial carpal bone, 39
Pituitary gland,56,7172,72,73
meiosis, 9, 10, 10
 Radial check ligament, equine, 196
anterior, 71-72
mitosis, 8, 9
Radial nerve, 60
posterior,72
Prostate gland, 120, 126, 128
Radius, 37-38, 38
Placenta, 84, 129, 136, 136
equine,205
equine, 191
zonary, 136
Proteases, 108
Ramp retina,equine, 200
Plasma, 11, 77,78-79
Protection, skin and, 143
Ramus, 33,33
Plasma cell, 7
Protein metabolism, 109
Rat (Rattus morvegicus), 169
Plasma membrane, 5
Proteins, 14, 107, 108
Ratchet mechanism, muscle fibres, 45, 46
Index
235
Reabsorption, 115
reproductive tract, 131
Rotation, 43
glucose, 116
reptiles, 177
Rough endoplasmic reticulum, 6, 7
sodium, 116,117
Reptiles, 177-178
Round (teres) ligament, 40
water, 116
chelonia, 178, 179, 180
Round window (vestibular window), 68
Recessive gene, 138
lizards, 178-181, 180, 182, 183
Rugae, 103
defined,138
questions/answers, 223-224, 226
Rectum, 104, 108
 snakes, 181-183, 186
avian, 161
Residual volume, defined, 96
equine,204
Respiratory system, 5, 89-96
Saccule, 68-69
Rectus abdominis, 49
avian, 156-158, 157, 158
Sacral vertebrae, 35, 36
Rectus muscles, 47, 47
chelonia, 178, 179
equine,190
Red blood cells (erythrocytes), 78, 79, 79, 109
control, 95-96
Sacroiliac joint, 35, 39
avian, 160
definitions, 96
Sagittal crest, 32
 Reflex arcs, 61
equine, 200-201
Salivary glands, 100-101, 101
Reflexes
fish, 184, 188
avian, 160, 161
common, 61
key points, 89
guinea pigs, 171
coughing, 91
lizards, 181
Salt gland, avian, 161
 perching (avian), 151
questions/answers, 219-220, 226
Saphenous nerve, 61
Regurgitation, 103
rabbits, 167
Sarcomeres, 45
Rehydration therapy, 12
reptiles, 177
Sartorius muscle, 51
Relaxin, 75
respiration mechanics, 94-96
Sauria, 178
Renal arteries, 84, 113
avian, 158
Scapula, 37, 38
Renal corpuscle, 113
respiratory centres, 95
equine,191
Renal crest, common, equine, 204
respiratory rate, defined, 96
neck of, 37
 Renal nephrons, 114
snakes, 181
rabbits, 163, 165
processes, 116
structure/function, 89-94
Scent glands, rabbits, 163
 Renal portal system
upper respiratory tract, 90
Schwann cells, 22,53, 54
avian, 159
Reticulocyte, 79
Sciatic nerve, 61
lizards, 181
Reticuloendothelial system, 88
Sciatica, 61
reptiles, 177
Retina, 63, 65, 65
Sciuromorphs, 170
snakes, 181
avian, 156
Sclera, 64
Renal threshold, 116
equine, 200
avian, 155
Renal vein, 113
Retraction, 43
Sclerotic ring, avian, 155
Renin, 115, 117
Retractor bulbi, 48
Scrotum, 123, 125
Reproductive system, 5, 123-142
 Retractor penis muscle, 127
rabbits, 167
avian, 161-162, 161, 162
Retroperitoneal kidneys, 111
Seasonally polyoestrous ovulators, 132
chinchillas, 172
Retropharyngeal nodes, equine, 200
chinchillas, 173
chipmunk, 170
Rhinarium, 89
equine,208
data, reproductive
 Rhynchocephalia, 177
ferrets, 174
rabbits, 164
 Rhythmic segmentation, 103
sciuromorphs, 170
rodents, small, 164
Ribosomes, 6
Seat of corn,equine,197
embryonic/fetal development, 133-136, 135
Ribs, 36-37
Sebaceous glands, 145
equine, 204-208, 206, 207
equine, 190-191,190
ferrets,173
female, 128-131, 128
head of, 36
Sebum,143,145
avian, 161,161
neck of, 36
Secretin, 71, 108
equine, 206-207,207
structure,37
Secretion, 115
myomorphs, 170
Rickets, 30
 potassium, 117
rabbits, 167,168
Right atrioventricular (AV) valve, 81
skin and, 143
ferrets, 174
Right axillary artery, 84
toxins/drugs, 116
fish, 185
 Right brachial artery, 84
Selective breeding, 139
genetics, 136-142, 137,138
 Right dorsal colon, equine, 204
Semilunar valves, 81-82
guinea pigs, 172
Right lymphatic duct, 86
Semimembranosus, 51
key points, 123
Right subclavian artery, 84
Seminal fluids, 128
male, 123-128, 124
Right ventral colon, equine, 204
Seminal vesicles, equine, 205
avian, 162,162
Rodents, small, 168
Seminiferous tubules, 123, 125
equine, 204-206,206
hystricomorphs, 170-173
avian, 162
myomorphs, 170
myomorphs, 168-170
Semi-permeable membrane, 12
rabbits, 167, 167
physiological/behavioural
Semitendinosus, 51
myomorphs, 170
parameters, 164
Senses, special see Special senses
oestrous cycle, 131-133
questions/answers, 223, 226
Sensory function of skin, 143
questions/answers, 221-222, 226
reproductive data,164
Sensory nerves, 55
rabbits, 167-168, 167, 168
sciuromorphs, 170
Septum, 81
236
Index
Serotonin, 54
fish, 184
Spinal canal, 35
Serous membrane, 25
functions, 143
Spinal cord, 58, 59, 60
Sertoli cells, 123, 125
glands, 144-145
equine,199
Serum, defined, 79
reptiles, 177, 177-178
Spinal nerves, 58, 58-59, 59
Sesamoid bones, 29, 39
structure, 143-144, 144
Spinous process, 35
equine,192,193
Skinkidae (skinks), 179
Splanchnic bone,29
Sex chromosomes, 137
Skull, 31-34, 32, 100
Splanchnic skeleton, 30, 41
Sex determination, 137-138
avian,153
Spleen, 87
avian, 162
equine, 189,191
Splint bones, equine, 192
chelonia, 178, 180
guinea pigs, 171
Spongy bone, 20
chinchillas, 173
shapes,33,34
Spontaneous ovulators, 132
 guinea pigs, 172
snakes, 185
chinchillas, 173
lizards, 181, 184
 Sliding, joint, 43
equine, 208
myomorphs, 170, 170
'Slipped disc', 35
guinea pigs, 172
rabbits, 167-168, 168
Small intestine, 104, 105-107
myomorphs, 170
rodents, small, 170
avian, 161
sciuromorphs, 170
snakes, 183
equine, 203, 204
Squamata, 177
Sex-limited genes, 139
ferrets, 174
Squames, 144
Sex-linked genes, 139
gastrointestinal tract, 106
Squamous cells, 15
Sexual dimorphism
guinea pigs, 171
Squamous epithelium
avian, 162
rabbits, 166
simple, 16, 16, 114
lizards, 181
struicture, wall, 105, 107
stratified, 102, 130, 144
snakes, 183
Smell see Olfaction
Stapes, 67
 Sexual reproduction
Smooth endoplasmic reticulum, 6
Static balance, 69
 see Reproductive system
Smooth muscle, 20-21, 24
Stay apparatus, equine, 189,196,196
 Shaft of humerus, 37
bladder and, 120
Stem cells, 79
Shaft of long bone, 29,30
Snakes, 181-183, 185, 186
Sternal flexure,equine, 204
defined, 31
Sodium
Sternal ribs, 36, 37
 Shell gland (uterus), avian, 161
levels, control of,118, 119
equine, 191
Short bones, 29
reabsorption of, 116, 117
Sternebrae, 36
Short pastern, equine, 192, 198
Sodium chloride, avian salt gland
Sternum,36-37
 Shunts (bypasses), 84
and, 161
equine, 190-191,190
Sight see Eyes
Soft palate, 90, 98
Steroid hormones, 109
 Simple cuboidal epithelium, 113
guinea pigs, 171
Stifle joint, 40, 41, 43
Simple diffusion, 5
muscles in, 48
equine, 192
Simple squamous epithelium, 16, 16, 114 
Sole
Stomach, 103, 104, 106
Sinoatrial node, 82
in claws, 148
avian, 160
Sinuses, 29
equine, 197
chinchillas, 172
equine, 201
Sole corium, equine, 198
equine,203,203
paranasal, 89-90
Somatic cells, 8
ferrets, 174
Skeletal system, 5,29-44
Somatic motor nerves, 55
fish, 185
appendicular skeleton, 37-41
 Somatic sensory nerves, 55
gastric emptying, 103
equine, 191-192,192
Somatostatin,74
guinea pigs, 171
avian, 151, 152
Somatotrophins, 72
lizards, 181
axial skeleton, 31-37
Sound, perception of, 68
myomorphs, 169
bone structure/function, 29-31, 30
Spawning, fish, 185
rabbits, 166
chelonia, 178
Special senses, 61-69
snakes, 182
equine, 189-193,190
avian, 155-156
structure, wall, 103
ferrets, 173
equine, 199-200, 199
Stomatitis ('mouth rot'), chelonia, 178
fish, 186
fish, 184
Storage, skin and, 143
guinea pigs, 171
key points, 53
Strangles, equine, 199
joints, 41-44, 43, 44
lizards, 179, 181
Stratified epithelium, 16, 16
key points, 29
questions/answers, 217-218, 226
squamous, 102, 130,144
lizards, 178, 180
snakes, 181
Stratum basale, 144
questions/answers, 216-217, 226
Species, defined, 3
Stratum corneum, 144
rabbits, 165
Spectacle (eyelids), snakes, 181
Stratum granulosum, 144
reptiles,177
Spermatic cord, 126
Stratum lucidum, 144
snakes, 181, 185
Spermatogenic cells, 123
Streptococcusequi eqgui,199
striated muscles, 20, 23, 46-52
Spermatozoa, 123,134
Stretch receptors, 95
Skin, 143-145
Spermatozoon, 126
Striated muscles, 20,23,46-52
avian, 156
Sphenoid bones, 32, 32
fibres, 98
colour, 144
Sphincter muscles, 46
Structural systems, 5
ferrets, 173
Spinal arteries, 84
 Styles, guinea pigs, 172
Index
237
 Subclavian artery, 84
Tarsus (hock), 41, 42, 43, 52
Thyroxin, 72
 Subclavian veins, 84
equine,193
Tibia, 40-41, 41
Sublingual artery, 98
Taste buds, 62-63, 63,98
equine,192
Sublingual glands, 101
avian, 156, 160
Tibial crest, 40
Sublingual vein, 98
Taxonomy, 3
Tibial nerve, 61
Sublumbar hypaxial muscles, 51
Teat canals, 130
 Tibiotarsus, avian, 151, 153
Submandibular nodes, 87
Teat orifice, 130
Tidal volume, defined, 96
Succus entericus, 105,108
Teeth, 98, 100
Tissues, 15-25
Sucrase, 108
equine, 202,202
connective, 17-20
Sudoriferous glands, 145
eruption times, 101
defined, 15
Sulci, 56
fish, 185
epithelial, 15-17
Sunlight, 143
function, 100, 101
key points, 15
Superficial cervical node, 86
guinea pigs, 171, 171
muscle, 20-21
Superficial digital flexor tendon,
lizards, 181
nervous, 22
equine,195
myomorphs, 169
questions/answers,
Superficial inguinal nodes, 87
rabbits, 165, 166
215-216, 226
Supracoracoid muscle, avian, 151
snakes, 181
respiration, 89
Supraspinatus, 49
structure,98,100
Tongue, 90, 98
Supraspinous fossa, 37
Teeth equine, 202
avian, 160
Supratrochlear foramen, 37
Teleosts see Fish
guinea pigs, 171
Surgical sexing, avian, 162
Telophase
lizards, 181
Suspensory apparatus, equine, 189, 196, 196
meiosis, 10,10
muscles in, 48
 Suspensory ligament, 64
mitosis, 8, 9
snakes, 181-182
equine, 196
Temporal bones, 32, 32, 97
Tonsils, 87, 101
Sustentacular cells, 62
Temporalis, 47, 47
Tortoises, 178, 179, 180
Sutures, 33, 41
Temporomandibular joint,33, 97
Total lung capacity, defined, 96
Sweat, 143
Tendon sheath, 46,47
Touch, avian, 156
Sweat glands, 145
Tendons
Toxins, secretion of, 116
Swim bladder,fish, 183184
defined, 31
Trabeculae, 86
Sympathetic nervous system, 61, 63
equine, 195-197,196
Trachea, 90, 90,92
Synapses, 22,53, 54, 55
Tensor fascia latae, 51, 51
Tracheal collapse, 91
Synarthroses, 41, 42
 Teres ligament, 40
Tracheal ducts, 86
Syncytium, 10
Terrapins, 178
Transcellular fluid, 11 
Synovial fluid, 42
Testes, 75, 123, 125-126, 125
Transitional epithelium, 16, 16
Synovial joints, 35, 42, 43
chinchillas, 172
bladder and, 120
properties of, 44
equine, 204-205
ureter and, 119
Synovial membrane, 42
ferrets, 174
 Transport mechanisms
Synovial sheath, 46, 47
retention of, 126
active, 5
Synsarcosis, 49
testicular descent, 125-126
blood and, 77
Syrinx, avian, 157
Testicular arteries, 84, 125
 Transuterine migration, 134
System, defined, 15
Testosterone, 75, 125
Transverse colon, equine, 204
Systemic circulation, 83, 84-86, 85
 Thalamus, 56
Transverse fovea, 35, 36
Systole, 82
 Thermoregulation, 98, 101
 Transverse processes, 35
reptiles, 178
Transversus abdominis, 49
skin and, 143
Trapezius, 49
Thigh muscles, 51, 51, 52
Triceps brachi, 50
Tactile hairs, 146
 Third phalanx, equine, 198
Tricuspid valve,81
Tail
Thoracic cavity, 25-26, 26,27, 83-84, 92,93, 94, 95
 Trigone,119
avian, 151
Thoracic d uuct, 86
Trihybrid cross, 140
fish, 183
Thoracic vertebrae, 35, 36
Tri-iod othyronine, 72
glands, 144
equine,190
Trochanter
length, snakes, 183
Thorax, 93, 94, 95
defined,31
lizards, 178, 181
muscles of, 48
lesser, 40
rabbits, 163
3D vision, equine, 199
Trochlea, defined,31
taillessness, 142
Thrombin, 80
Trochlear notch, 38
Talus, 41
Thrombocytes (platelets), 78, 79, 80
Trophoblast, 134
equine,193
Thrombocytopenia, 80
"True' ribs, equine, 191
Tapetum lucidum, 64, 65, 67
Thromboplastin, 80
Trunk, muscles of, 48-49
equine,199
Thymus, 87
Trypsin, 108
Tarsal bones, 41
 Thyroid cartilage, equine, 201
Trypsinogen, 108
Tarsal check ligament, equine, 196
Thyroid glands, 72, 72, 73
Tuber calcis, 41
Tarsal glands, 145
 Thyrotrophic/thyroid-stimulating
equine, 193
Tarsometatarsus, avian, 151, 153
hormone (TSH), 71, 72
 Tubera sacrales, equine, 192
238
Index
Tubercle,36,37
reptiles, 177
sensory nerves, 55
defined, 31
snakes, 182
Vision
urethral, 120
Urogenital system, 112, 123, 178
equine, 199
Tuberosity, defined,31
avian, 162
fields of, 63, 64
Tubules, 113, 114, 116, 123, 125
lizards, 181, 183
see also Eyes
Tunica adventitia, 83
rabbits, 167, 168
Vital capacity, defined, 96
Tunica intima, 83
snakes, 182
Vitamins, 109
Tunica media, 83
Urolithiasis, 120
vitamin D, 143
Tunica vaginalis, 123
Uropygial gland, avian, 151
vitamin K, 80
Turbinates, 89
Uterine artery, 130
Vitreous chamber, 65
Turtles, 178
Uterine tube, 128
Vitreous humour, 65
Tushes, equine,202
equine, 206
avian, 156
Tympanic bullae, 32, 67
Uterus, 130
Viviparous reproduction, fish, 185
 guinea pigs, 171
avian, 161
Vocal folds, 91
Tympanic cavity, 67
equine, 206,207
equine, 201
Tympanic membrane, 67
horns see Bicornuate uterus
Vocal ligaments, 91
lizards, 179
Utricle, 68-69,69
Vocalisation, 98
Tympany, equine, 199
Uvea, 64-65, 64
Vomiting. 103
von Willebrand's disease, 142
u
Vulva, 130
Ulna, 37-38, 38
equine,207
Vagina, 130
ferrets, 174
equine, 191
avian, 161
Unar carpal bone, 39
rabbits, 167
chinchillas, 172
Unar nerve,61
equine,207
Utrafiltration, 115
rabbits, 167
W
 Umbilical arteries, 84
Vaginal exfoliative cytology, 130
Waste
Umbilical cord, 136
Vas deferens (deferent duct/ductus
fish, 185
Umbilical vein,84
deferens), 120, 126
nitrogenous, 16, 119
Ungual process, 39, 147
avian, 162
products,77
Unicelular glands, 16
Vascular system see Blood vascular system
Water
Uniparous species, equine, 206
Veins, 83-84
body content, 11-12
Urachus, 136
Venepuncture, 83
excretion of, 118
Urea, production of, 109
equine,200
loss
Ureters, 119
Venom, snakes, 181
control of, 117-118, 118
Urethra, 120
Venous circulation, 84, 85
daily, 12
Urethral groove, 41
Ventral (hypaxial) muscles, 35
reabsorption, 116
Urethral tubercle, 120
Ventral meatus, equine, 200
White blood cells (leucocytes), 78, 79-80, 79
Urinalysis, 120, 121
Ventral root, 59
White line, equine, 198
equine,204
Ventrical systole, 83
White matter
Urinary system, 5, 11-121, 112
Ventricular system,brain,57,57
forebrain, 56
avian, 161, 161, 162
Venules,84
spinal cord, 58
equine,204,205
Vertebrae, 34-36
Wings
ferrets, 174
basic plan of, 34-35
avian, 152-153,154, 160
fish, 185
regional variations, 35,36
of ilium, equine, 192
guinea pigs, 172
snakes, 181
Wolf teeth, equine, 202
key points, 111
structure, 34
Wool hairs, 146
kidneys, 111-119, 113
Vertebral column
questions/answers,
equine, 189-190,192
X
220-221, 226
muscles of, 48, 48
rabbits, 167
Vertebral foramen, 35
 Xiphoid cartilage, 37
reptiles,177
Vertebral (neural) arch, 34
Xiphoid process, 37
urogenital system, 12
Vesicular glands, equine,205
Urinary tract obstruction, equine, 204
Vestibular window, 68
人
Urine, 114-117,116
Vestibule, 130
Yolk sac, 134
guinea pigs, 172
Vibrissae (whiskers), 146
primitive, 116
Villi, 105-106, 107
Z
rabbits, 167
Visceral systems, 5
specific gravity, 121
membrane, 25
Zona pellucida, 133-134
Urodeum
motor nerves, 55, 61
Zonary placenta, 136